==PAGE:1==
How to Find the Small Plastic in the Big Sea
-
The Identiﬁcation and Characterisation of Microplastic ≥10 µm from the
Atlantic Ocean
Master Thesis
Authors:
Kristina Enders ∗
Robin Lenz ∗∗
Supervisors:
Torkel G. Nielsen
Colin A. Stedmon
Aﬃliation: Institute of Aquatic Resources, Technical University of Denmark
Correspondence: ∗kren@aqua.dtu.dk, ∗∗roble@aqua.dtu.dk
submitted May 2015
==PAGE:2==
Contents
Summary
i
Acknowledgements
ii
Abbreviations
v
Synopsis
1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
Why Does Microplastic Matter? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
Toxicity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
The Marine Plastic Cycle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
Sources and Sinks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
Vertical Dynamics in the Ocean Reservoir . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
Fragmentation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
Zooplankton Interaction with Small Microplastic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
Available Methods for Small-Microplastic Identiﬁcation and Quantiﬁcation . . . . . . . .
14
Methods and Materials Used in the Present Study
15
Study Area and Oceanography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
Sampling Device and Overview of Procedures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
Sample Processing and Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
Visual Identiﬁcation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
Spectral Analysis via Raman Micro-spectrometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
Objectives and Major Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
Manuscript 1 - Abundance, Size and Polymer Composition of Marine Microplastics
≥10 µm in the Atlantic Ocean and their Modelled Vertical Distribution
M1-1
Manuscript 2 - A Critical Assessment of Visual Identiﬁcation of Marine Micro-
plastic Using Raman Spectroscopy for Analysis Improvement
M2-0
Supplement
S-1
1
Tables for Method Comparison
S-2
1.1
Overview of Sampling Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
S-2
1.2
Overview of Preparation Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
S-3
1.3
Overview of Analysis Methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
S-4
2
Microplastic Sampling Protocol
S-7
3
Microplastic Analysis Preparation Protokoll
S-8
4
Microplastic Analysis Preparation Chart
S-9
5
Microplastic Analysis
S-10
6
Microplastic Identiﬁcation Catalogue
S-11
7
The Raman Eﬀect
S-13
8
Polymer Spectra
S-14
9
Poster - Dansk Havforskermøde
S-18
10 Popular Science Article in Aktuel Naturvidenskab
S-19
==PAGE:3==
MICROPLASTIC IN
THE MARINE EN-
VIRONMENT - We
tried to make it vis-
ible.
The image was modi-
ﬁed to ﬁt the micro-
plastic subject,
the
original was created
by Glynn Gorick.
==PAGE:4==
Summary
Plastic is a pollutant accumulating in our oceans where it is of potential harm to marine biota.
However, conservative estimates on the amount of plastic that has found its way to sea compared
to that reported by studies surveying various ocean compartments and modelling approaches are
largely mismatching. The research community is challenged to investigate upon the underlying
cycling processes, the concentrations marine organisms are exposed to and to answer the question:
where does all this plastic go?
Although conventional plastic is considered non-degradable, it breaks down into micrometre
sized fragments - microplastic. Many studies have been measuring microplastics > 300 µm at the
surface ocean, but little in known about the smaller fraction which is within the food size range
of zooplpankton.
The development of appropriate sampling, sample preparation and analysis
methods in order to particularly investigate upon the small microplastics (10 - 300 µm), constitute
a key element in the present study.
Samples were collected along an Atlantic Ocean transect
from the European coast to the North Atlantic subtropical gyre (NASG). For the sample analysis
we have tested the combined approach of visual microscopy and Raman spectroscopy. We found
microplastic concentrations ranging from 13 to 501 particles m−3. Microplastic was most abundant
near the European Coast and decreased with distance, however concentrations were elevated in
the western part of the NASG.
We found that particles of densities higher than sea water were smaller in size compared to low
density particles. In the region of the NASG the size diﬀerence was signiﬁcant suggesting that size
selective loss terms play a role in ocean plastic cycling. We used a numerical model to investigate
the theoretical distribution of small sized microplastic in the water column. The size-dependent
depth proﬁles of simulated plastic spheres in a range from 10 to 1000 µm show a dispersal below
the mixed layer depth for sizes smaller than approximately 200 µm. Based on the model and ﬁeld
study results we conclude that small microplastic is more evenly distributed in the water column
and has a lower residence time than larger plastic debris in this compartment.
Accurate identiﬁcation of microplastic in the lower micrometre size range is important and
standard visual microscopy fails as a technique to allow unambiguous distinction of microplastics
from similar natural particles. We have applied Raman spectroscopy to analyse visually counted
particles and ﬁbres on a substantial sample set of 1279 suspects. Seventy ﬁve percent of ﬁbres and
sixty four percent of particles were conﬁrmed being synthetic polymers and misidentiﬁcation of
smaller sized objects was signiﬁcantly higher.
Marine microplastics comprise of a mixture of the plastic variety produced and have been
exposed to harsh environmental conditions leading to altered chemical compositions and structural
surface properties from the original polymer. We therefore tested Raman micro-spectoscopy for
its applicability for identiﬁcation of marine MP with respect to varying chemical composition
(additives), diﬀerent degradation states and organic matter coating. The expansion of our spectral
reference database with environmentally aﬀected polymers helped to enhance the probability of
plastic type identiﬁcation. We concluded that Raman spectroscopy is improving visual analysis
results and can be used for developing automated sample analysis by chemical mapping.
i
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
This thesis is part of our master degree in Aquatic Science and Technology from the Technical
University of Denmark (DTU). Prior ﬁeld work was conducted during the Danish Eel Expedition
from Denmark to the Sargasso Sea and back to the Azores from February to April 2014. This
scientiﬁc cruise gave us the opportunity to collect the fundamental dataset to this study, and
further to deeply investigate this new ﬁeld of research. Not least important to us was the inclusion
in a highly motivated and diverse scientiﬁc community onboard. This ’once-in-a-life-time-chance’
we owe to Torkel G. Nielsen, who became our ﬁrst supervisor - wunderschön. Your support and
engagement in this novel branch of research at our institute made us trust in our work from the
beginning. At the same time we experienced freedom and encouragement to seek for alternatives in
instrumentation and expertise and facilitation of many opportunities to communicate our research
to various media, hence to a broader public and research community.
In connection with the cruise, thank you Peter Munk, for managing this great task of being the
cruise leader in the way that everybody knew his or her ﬁeld of responsibility and felt comfortable
with. It was a pleasure to see a harmonic atmosphere in within and between the scientiﬁc and
ships crew. Thank you, Eik E. Britsch and Magnus B. Bohr, for the assistance and operation
of the ﬁlter unit on those legs that we were not physically part of. In the initial phase of the
study we were assisted in developing the ﬁltering device by Hans Hansen and his well-equipped
workshop.
Thomas K. Sørensen, your enthusiastic attitude towards your work made us sharing some
inspiring conversations. A good share of the reason why microplastic has become a research topic
at DTU Aqua is owed to your initiative. Colin A. Stedmon, your enthusiasm and competence
in sharing your knowledge and fascination about ocean science is radiating a good portion of
motivation to your surrounding. Your brisk view on our work was not just once stimulating our
excitement for trying things new ways and made us understand that sometimes you need to work
for a year to know that ﬂipping a coin will tell you all what is needed. It was a pleasure to be your
student and get valuable input on every conversation, inspiring questions and thoughts along the
way - thank you.
For plenty helpful ideas on turbulent diﬀusivity and modelling we thank Ken H. Andersen.
Your aptitude to grasp where we have hit the snag is admiring and has helped us several times
to overcome all the issues of coding or mathematical diﬃculties. We enjoyed learning from your
creative ways of juggling with complex mathematics, ...and if you can’t make a particle ﬂoat you
simply turn the sea upside down. Along that line we thank Thomas Kiørboe and Uﬀe H.
Thygesen for valuable advice on terminal velocities.
We thank Jakob Strand ﬁrst of all for lending out the melting point device and further
for sharing fruitful discussions about microplastics and this researcher’s aspiration to ﬁnd the
answers to the questions. David Mackenzie and Peter Bøggild from DTU Nanotech, thanks
for opening up the great opportunity of giving our research one more dimension using the Raman
micro-spectrometer, we highly appreciate it.
ii
==PAGE:6==
Declaration of Academic Honesty
We hereby declare that this master thesis is our own work and has not been submit-
ted in any form for another degree or diploma at any university or other institute.
Information derived from the published and unpublished work of others has been
acknowledged in the text and a list of references is given in the bibliography.
Copenhagen, 21st May 2015
Robin Lenz
Kristina Enders
iii
==PAGE:7==
Declaration of Collaboration
This thesis builds up on a practical part of which each step, from development to
execution and reporting, was done collaboratively. The contribution of both authors
to the several parts of the project can be seen from the table below.
Kristina [%]
Robin [%]
Work steps of experimental conduct and reporting
Design and construction of equipment and experimental setup
50
50
Sample collection
50
50
Method development for sample processing
50
50
Sample processing
50
50
Visual microscopic data collection
50
50
Spectroscopic data collection
50
50
UV experiment
50
50
Literature research
50
50
Synopsis
50
50
Writing manuscript I
50
50
Visualisation of results manuscript I
50
50
Writing manscript II
50
50
Visualisation of results manuscript II
50
50
Work steps of data analysis and interpretation in manuscript I
Analysis for results on oceanographic microplastic distribution, size and
polymer composition
50
50
Interpretation and discussion of results on oceanographic microplastic
distribution, size and polymer composition
50
50
Modelling and calculation for results on the simulated vertical particle
distribution
25
75
Interpretation and discussion of the simulated vertical particle distribu-
tion
50
50
Work steps of data analysis and interpretation in manuscript II
Analysis of microplastic sample Raman spectra and spectral microplastic
identiﬁcation
50
50
Interpretation and discussion of microplastic sample Raman spectra and
spectral microplastic identiﬁcation
50
50
Analysis of Raman spectra and assignment of chemical properties from
testing for eﬀects of degradation, polymer additive and organic matter
coating on Raman spectra
75
25
Interpretation and discussion of Raman spectra and assignment of chem-
ical properties from testing for eﬀects of degradation, polymer additive
and organic matter coating on Raman signal
50
50
The ﬁrst authorship of manuscript I was credited to Kristina Enders, for taking the
main responsibility on its content. The ﬁrst authorship of manuscript II was credited
to Robin Lenz, for taking the main responsibility on its content. Both manuscripts
are based on mutual discussions and reviews.
iv
==PAGE:8==
Abbreviations
General
L-MP
Large Microplastic (1 mm - 300 µm)
MP
Microplastic
MSFD
Marine Strategy Framework Directive
NASG
North Atlantic Subtropical Gyre
PMD
Plastic Marine Debris
POP
Persistent Organic Pollutants
S-MP
Small Microplastic (1 - 300 µm)
SST
Sea Surface Temperature
Synthetic Polymers
ABS
Acrylonitrile butadiene styrene
EPS
Expanded Polystyrene
EVA
Ethylene-vinyl acetate
PA
Polyamide
PC
Polycarbonate
PE
Polyethylene
PET
Polyethylene terephthalate
PMMA
Poly(methyl methacrylate)l
PP
Polypropylene
PS
Polystyrene
PU
Polyurethane
PVC
Polyvinyl chloride
v
==PAGE:9==
Synopsis
Plastic. With this simple term we summarise a range of artiﬁcial polymeric ma-
terials that ubiquitously aﬀect our life and how we interact with the environment.
Having doubtlessly allowed us vast numbers of new possibilities and inventions,
plastics bear a long tail of legacies and are a testimony of modern societies’ impact
on nature. Recently, catchphrases like "The Plastic Age" [1], "The Plastic Cycle" [2]
or "Plastisphere" [3] have become an expression of the arising awareness of plastic
related issues in the environment throughout scientiﬁc literature and popular media.
Consequently, management plans and policies start to adopt ﬁrst strategies for mit-
igating eﬀects and reducing the entry of plastic litter into the marine environment
[4–7]. The pollution of the ocean with plastic was ﬁrst described in the early 1970’s
[8–10] shortly after incidents of plastic ingestion by Laysan Albatrosses had been
documented [11]. However, only during the last decade has marine plastic litter been
receiving a high public, political and research interest and more and more harmful
eﬀects on various biota have been documented.
Plastic marine debris (PMD) is found in all variations in shape, size and materials
of plastic consumer goods. A recent modelling study indicated, as a conservative
estimate, a total of over 269 thousand tonnes of plastic (ﬁgure 3, more than 5 · 109
single items ≥330 µm) ﬂoating in the ocean surface alone, mainly accumulating in
5 subtropical ocean gyres and semi-enclosed seas (ﬁgure 1). The model results show
that smaller PMD becomes gradually more abundant, a trend which is changing at
a size range of 0.33 - 1.00 mm, suggesting size-selective PMD loss factors from the
surface [12].
Figure 1: Modelled global numerical densities of PMD (pieces km−2; see colour bar) in four size
classes. The increasing trend in abundancy for smaller particles does not hold true for the smallest
size class suggesting speciﬁc loss terms. Data and ﬁgure from [12]
1
==PAGE:10==
Motivation
Reported size ranges span from micrometres [13] to metre scales, thus potentially
aﬀecting all sizes of marine organisms (ﬁgure 2).
10   1
10  0
10-1
10-2
10-3
10-4
10-5
10-6
L e n g t h    s c a l e     [metre]
Figure 2: Interactions between marine life and PMD can be observed at all sizes. A logarithmic
scale bar in the middle ascribes the respective size ranges. On the right, pictures symbolise the
examples of marine plastics from diﬀerent sources and the fragmentation which they are under-
going. The left side shows examples of aﬀected marine biota of various size classes and trophic
levels, from plastic associated bacterial bioﬁlms (lower left corner [3]), over plastic bead ingesting
plankton [14] and ﬁsh to entanglement and strangulation of larger animals. The blue arrows in the
background indicate the directions of material ﬂow, whereas their width symbolises the general
abundance of marine organisms and plastic debris, in the diﬀerent sizes, respectively.
In accordance with the above mentioned model [12], several other studies repor-
ted that microplastic (MP) concentrations close to (but still above) their respective
sampling mesh size were lower than those in mid sampling size ranges [15]. Since
this phenomenon is counter-intuitive under the regard of continuous fragmentation,
a range of size selective removal processes have been proposed (table 3). For instance,
size-dependent turbulent mixing can be one factor that preferentially removes smal-
ler particles from the surface by dispersal, which can be shown in numerical hy-
drodynamic models. It is further possible that the decreasing retention abilities of
ﬁltration techniques for particle sizes close to the mesh size lead to an underrepres-
ented lower size fraction. This is supported by the fact that there is no universal
2
==PAGE:11==
size across studies below which the MP concentrations are decreasing. Instead, it is
changing with the diﬀerent mesh sizes that were used in the respective studies.
In order to better explain this apparent loss of MPs from the ocean surface more
knowledge about concentration and distribution of MPs < 300 µm is needed.
Most microplastic studies use a lower size limit between 300 and 335 µm due to
practicality of sampling (mesh size of zooplankton tow net) and simplicity of visual
analysis. Indeed, analysis of micrometre sized anthropogenic particles becomes non-
linearly more costly and time consuming the smaller the chosen size range. It is
obvious that there will be no single superior sampling method to cover the whole size
spectra of PMD and instead the choice of a sampled size range should be determined
by the stated study question, e.g. relating to the impacts on a certain organism
group. Here we argue for an intensiﬁcation of investigations of MP particles between
10 and 300 µm, as this is in the same size range of phytoplankton, hence the prey
of copepods and other zooplankton groups. Thereby they constitute the entrance
of plastic to the food chain. Accordingly, in the present study our attempt was to
develop and apply a method for sampling and analysis of microplastics larger than
10 µm.
Terminology
It is frequently stated that there is a need of a clear terminology on marine plastics
for comparability of PMD distribution and concentration data [16, 17]. Based on the
size of the plastic items (usually in its single largest dimension) studies commonly
discriminate between microplastic and macroplastic. Although 5 mm [18–21] seems
to be used by the majority of studies now for the upper size limit of microplastic,
there is a large variety: from 0.5 mm [22], 1 mm [17, 23–25], 2 mm [26] to 10 mm
[27, 28] have been used. Furthermore, the terms nano-, meso- and mega- have been
used inconsistently throughout the literature in combination with -plastic(s), -litter
and debris.
In the present study we accept, for descriptive purposes, a terminology that
follows the metric length units so that for instance microplastics are items between
1 and 1000 µm.
For the purpose of this study it becomes necessary to further
diﬀerentiate microplastics in "small microplastics" (S-MP, < 300 µm) and "large
microplastics" (L-MP, > 300 µm).
Why Does Microplastic Matter?
Strangled seals or plastic ingesting seabirds are perceived easily by the broad public
through emotionally charged photographs or personal experiences on beaches all
around the globe. Floating PMD, plastic bags in particular can be mistaken as
jellyﬁsh, the favourite prey of leatherback turtles (among others) and are one of
the recognised stressors leading to their expected extinction [29]. First monitoring
programs [5, 30, 31], beach clean-ups [31, 32], source elimination initiatives [33]
have been established. Societal changes such as consumer behaviour, local bans
of single-use plastic bags or out-phasing of microbeads in personal care products
[34] are being talked of frequently. All together, this increases the acceptance of
allocation of public money on environmental programs targeting bulky plastic litter
problems. In contrast, it is harder to draw attention to possible eﬀects of plastics
on organisms at the bottom of the food web, whose existence and importance most
3
==PAGE:12==
people are barely aware of, simply because we do not easily see them or their role in
the ecosystem. Zooplankton form the link between primary production and higher
trophic level organisms, including commercially important ﬁsh species and therefore
human food resources. Experiments under laboratory conditions have shown that
plastic is being ingested by major zooplankton groups and thereby implies a potential
threat to those organisms [14, 25, 35]. Detailed eﬀects on copepods, a major group
of zooplankton, are elaborated below (page 11). Under natural conditions, however,
the physical and chemical harm of MP on marine biota has not yet been quantiﬁed.
There is evidence for an ubiquitous occurrence of microplastics, either as degrad-
ation products from larger PMD (secondary microplastics) or directly introduced as
microﬁbres, microbeads or plastic resin pellets (primary microplastics), which have
been reported by many studies in marine [21], freshwater [20, 34, 36] and terrestrial
[37] environments. However, due to the often chosen lower size limit of 300 µm
knowledge on distribution of smaller particles is limited. Most studies use a sur-
face skimming technique where a neuston trawl net is towed behind or alongside
a vessel. Collected plastic items are counted, often in numbers per area. Fewer
studies reported numbers per volume some of which are compared in table 1. The
diﬀerences in the reported concentrations remarkably span over 6 orders of mag-
nitude where a strong relation to the used mesh size (ranging from 10 to 450 µm
among the compared studies) is obvious: the smaller the mesh size the higher the
concentration.
Table 1: Reported microplastic concentrations are in strong relation with the used mesh size. Only
studies from the last decade that measured particles per unit volume were included. 1 Data from a
pilot study: approximate numbers include all anthropogenic particles, i.e. ﬁbres and black particles,
likely from rubber and road wear.
2 sampling depth described as "sub-surface".
3 sampling via
plankton net dragged "just below the surface".
Region
Depth [m]
Conc. [m−3]
Mesh [µm]
Reference
Skagerak1
0.1 – 1.5
≈1 000 – 100 000
10
[38]
Baltic, Sweden
0.1 – 0.5
≈30 000
10
[39]
NE Paciﬁc
4.5
8 – 9 180
62.5
[40]
Baltic, Sweden
0 – 0.3
150 – 2 400
80
[41]
English Channel
n/a2
0.24 – 0.33
200
[42]
NE Atlantic
3.0
2.46 ± 2.43
250
[43]
Baltic, Sweden
0.1 – 1.5
≈0 – 10
300
[39]
California, coastal
0, 5.0, 29.8
3.92
333
[44]
NASG
0 – 0.25
0.004 – 0.12
335
[45]
Baltic, Sweden
0 – n/a3
0.01 – 0.14
450
[41]
Bering Sea
0 – 0.15
0.004 – 0.19
500
[46]
Toxicity
Besides the physical jeopardies of marine plastic debris such as entanglement, in-
testinal blockage or drifting alien species [47] also toxicity concerns related to plastic
pollution have received increasing attention over the past years. To assess occur-
rence and relevance of toxic eﬀects of synthetic polymer based materials in the
marine environment it is important to understand the toxicity of plastic particles
themselves, on the one hand [48]. On the other hand, additional toxic eﬀects from
ad-/desorption processes of persistent organic pollutants (POPs) or heavy metals
4
==PAGE:13==
from seawater including possible combining eﬀects of the various contaminants have
to be quantiﬁed. Any toxicity associated with PMD can be attributed to one or
more of the following factors: (a) residual monomers from manufacture present in
the plastic or toxic additives used in compounding of plastic may leach out of the
ingested PMD; (b) toxicity of some intermediates from partial degradation of PMD;
(c) the POPs present in sea water being absorbed by hydrophobic surface attrac-
tion and concentrated in PMD fragments, can be desorbed on ingestion [49]. POP
sorption processes occur on surfaces, wherefore MPs with their relatively large sur-
face to volume ratio carry potentially more POPs compared to macroplastic litter.
Also leaching dynamics are increasing with decreasing fragment size, because "fresh"
polymer material, previously hidden inside the matrix, becomes exposed during frag-
mentation. Leaching of additives from exposed surfaces can happen rapidly as most
additives are not covalently bound to the polymer chain molecules [50]. While most
polymers contain up to 1 % additives, softer once such as PVC holds of up to 50% in
weight [10, 51]. Plastics are associated with at least 61% of environmental toxic sub-
stances listed by the European Union [48]. Among them there are many substances
that have been identiﬁed as endocrine disruptors, e.g. widely used plasticisers like
diethylhexyl phthalate (DEHP) or ﬂame retarding polybrominated diphenyl ethers
(PBDE). A more detailed description of the most common additive chemicals and
their known toxicity is part of our previous report [52].
As waste water treatment plants are considered a contributor of primary micro-
plastics (ﬁgure 5), there is an increased potential that ﬁbres or cosmetic microbeads
can carry pathogens, drugs, hormones or other toxins from municipal or industrial
waste water and become long-lasting transport vectors when ingested by aquatic
biota. Those appear additionally to the already present non-plastic anthropogenic
materials that regularly come from waste water facilities, i.e. dissolved toilet paper
cellulose ﬁbres [39], which have a similar, however, not as persistent carrier potential.
The Marine Plastic Cycle
Intensiﬁed research on especially microplastics as a part of PMD during the last
decade has increased knowledge about its concentrations in various types of ocean
reservoirs, and from that conclusions to the underlying dynamics, sources and sinks
can be drawn. Yet, the quantiﬁcation of these reservoirs and processes driving the
’cycling’ of PMD are poorly constrained and based on single case studies (summar-
ised in [21]), a few time series [45, 53] and modelling approaches of single compart-
ments [12, 54–56]. A qualitative outlining of reservoirs, source and sink ﬂuxes can
be a ﬁrst step to understand the fate of PMD. Numerical estimates for some com-
partments are included in the marine plastic cycle proposal below (ﬁgure 3). From
a biogeochemical perspective the plastic cycle is not to be understood as a usual
element cycle but as part of others, mainly the carbon cycle.
Plastics are man made long chain polymeric molecules made from inorganic and
organic raw materials, such as mainly carbon (C = 62.5-92.3%, except PVC=38.46%
[59]), hydrogen, silicon, nitrogen, oxygen and chlorine [60].
The most common
plastics with its structural formula, density and proportional demand are listed in
table 2.
Synthetic polymer production demands monomers usually extracted from oil,
coal and natural gas [61] which undergo induced polymerisation. About 8% [1] of
5
==PAGE:14==
Figure 3: Proposal for a qualitative marine plastic cycle with PMD reservoirs, transport pathways
and conversions from its raw material to degradation products. Dotted arrows describe ﬂuxes of
CO2 and other greenhouse gases from plastic remineralisation. Known estimates of PMD ﬂuxes
and reservoirs are denoted in the boxes in small letters. 1data for 2013, [57]; 2.[58]; 3 [12]
the total crude oil extraction today is used by the plastic industry to produce resin
pellets, the pre-plastic form of any plastic item. Half of this energy is solely needed
for fuelling its manufacture and subsequent transportation [62]. Besides the polymer
plastic consists of other chemicals that shape the plastic for its intended properties
and use.
Table 2: The most common plastic polymers in Europe with
their structural formulas, density ranges and proportional
demand. About half (PP, PE) of the total plastics are less
dense than sea water [57, 60].
.
These so called additives
include most often plas-
ticizers,
inorganic
ﬁllers
(e.g.
carbon or silica),
ﬂame retardants, surfact-
ants,
thermal
and
UV
stabilizers, pigments, lub-
ricants,
antistatics,
nan-
oparticles
or
nanoﬁbers,
biocides,
and
fragrances
[22].
Some of these com-
pounds are known or sus-
pected
for
their
toxicity
(see page 4) and are used
in large amounts.
Whether plastic is burned
in an incinerator, dumped
on a landﬁll or discarded
into the sea (chronically in-
creasing degradation time) its degradation products, that are mainly carbon diox-
ide and partly methane (under anaerobic degradation) eventually add to the pool
of greenhouse gases accelerating global warming. Plastic production and disposal
constitute a substantial part of the anthropogenic inﬂuences on the global carbon
cycle.
6
==PAGE:15==
Sources and Sinks
Figure 4: Development of global plastic pro-
duction 1950 to 2010.
In comparison to
Europe, in other parts of the world plastic
demand is on much stronger growth [63]
During the last 50 years plastic production
increased strongly (ﬁgure 4), up to 299 mio
t in 2013 [57]. The production can generally
be used as a proxy for the amount of plastic
debris that may end up in the environment
[63]. While in Europe the plastic demand
tends to level out, in developing Asian coun-
tries it is growing rapidly. However, the per
capita amount of plastic used per year in
Europe is more than 4-fold (100 kg in 2005)
that of the Asian countries (excluding Ja-
pan). About 40% of the total plastic pro-
duction comprises disposable packaging ma-
terials which are usually discarded within a
year of manufacture.
Recycling and reuse
Figure 5: Major sources of plastic marine litter. Illegal dumping of litter (A) directly in the sewage
systems or (B) in the nature that through sewage, riverine run-oﬀand wind reaches the sea, (C)
microplastics slipping through water treatment plants (especially synthetic ﬁbres from washing
machines), (D) littering on beaches, (E) the loss and (F) dumping of ﬁshing gear from ships, (G)
the loss of container freight in form of resin pellets or the ready products [at least 1225 containers
lost per year between 1990 to 2005, 64], (H) wind blown landﬁll waste and poor management of
landﬁll sites and (I) intentional or unintentional release of industrial waste, e.g. plastic abrasive
powders. Modiﬁed from Surfer Today [65]
7
==PAGE:16==
diﬀer vastly in within Europe.
North and mid European countries approximate
100% recycling and heat recovery rates whereas southern and eastern Europe still
disposes up to 85% [66]. In developing countries plastic recycling is usually very
rare.
Even harder to manage are the smaller fractions of plastic litter, such as fragmen-
ted particles or microbeads from personal care products. Estimates of per capita
use of microplastic in personal care products (USA) equals 1 g per year. However,
microplastic ﬁbres that originate from washing clothes are excluded in this calcula-
tion although they appear to predominate in wastewater and open ocean samples
[54, 67].
It is estimated that about 4.8 to 12.7 million tons of plastic enter the ocean each
year [58]. PMD sources are shown in ﬁgure 5.
Once in the ocean, plastics are advected with currents, potentially very far from
their source in a short time. Most of the ﬂoating plastics are transported towards
and trapped in one of the ocean gyres. Law et al. [45] demonstrated that PMD items
travelled a distance of over 1000 km in 60 days towards the centre of the NASG.
However, a substantial part of PMD gets washed back ashore where it temporarily
remains outside the ocean repository.
Vertical Dynamics in the Ocean Reservoir
When entering the ocean plastic becomes vertically positioned in the water column
separated by its density diﬀerence to seawater (ρsw= 1.02 – 1.29 g cm−3). Com-
modity plastics such as PE and PP, constituting roughly half of the total plastics
produced, are less dense (table 2) and will therefore remain at the surface and
subsurface depending on dynamics in the ocean boundary layer and plastic-speciﬁc
properties that inﬂuence its advection velocity. PMD with a density higher than
that of seawater such as PS (except positively buoyant expanded polystyrene, EPS),
PVC and PET eventually sink out of the water column. Some of the sinking PMD
is directly deposited on the sea bed where it potentially remains for a very long
time can, thus, be seen as an ultimate sink for PMD [21]. However, the density de-
termined sinking or ﬂoating behaviour is inﬂuenced by the fact that many single use
plastic items that reach aquatic environments are moulded into shapes that readily
allow trapping of air (e.g. bottles, bags, cups), and hence are of a diﬀerent apparent
density than the actual polymer material. Also surface tension forces and oceano-
graphic currents can hold plastic with just small excess density in the surface layer
[54]. This means that also polymers denser than seawater can account for a part of
the surface ﬂoating PMD repository and micrometre sized fragments continuously
shred oﬀby fragmentation will be present in the mixed surface layer. Due to their
small size, sinking rates will also be lower which prolongs the particles’ temporary
stay.
Further, the apparent density of PMD items may change under marine exposure
due to alteration of chemical bonds and groups or by biological activity. The latter
implicates the formation of bioﬁlms that develops via distinct phases: adsorption
of dissolved organic molecules (within seconds), attachment of bacterial cells, later
unicellular eukaryotes and eventually shell-bearing sessile organisms [68].
These
denser conglomerates sink deeper into the water column or eventually deposit on
the sea ﬂoor. This process is also known as biofouling and is however reversible,
8
==PAGE:17==
meaning that an acquired negative buoyancy can switch back unto neutral or positive
buoyancy for instance when organisms die or deliberately detach [69].
Irrespective of density, microplastic, especially S-MP, can reach the sea ﬂoor as
marine snow. These aggregates are ubiquitous in the pelagic oceans, are micromet-
ers to several centimetres in size and consist of various particulate material, from
phytoplankton to organic detritus and clay, of which the majority of the single com-
ponents is within the size range of S-MPs. Marine snow, 15-250 µm in diameter,
averagely sinks with more than 100 m day−1 [70, 71]. Incorporated microplastic can
this way reach the sediments at an accelerated pace or at all.
Conclusively, PMD can vertically cycle through the whole water column (ﬁgure
3), by which detection via current monitoring techniques becomes unlikely, yet in-
feasible due to the unequal but widespread distribution throughout the voluminous
pelagic ocean.
Fragmentation
Estimations on the time span of PMD persistence is on the order of centuries [18].
Hence, plastic litter is often regarded as inert, which is reasonable on human time
scales. However, the polymeric molecular structure of PMD is changing continu-
ously as additives are lost from the matrix or environmental forces change chemical
cohesions. Such conversion processes begin on the ﬁrst contact with the environ-
ment and substantially change the properties of plastic on time scales of months to
decades [45].
Therefore, all plastics undergo a degradation process, which comprises both a
fragmentation of larger to smaller objects and the (much slower) chemical decom-
position of the polymer, leading theoretically to an eventual remineralisation where
inorganic molecular or elemental compounds (e.g. CO2 and H2O in case of poly-
oleﬁnes) remain as degradation products. Polymer degradation is facilitated by a
range of physico-chemical and biological eﬀects, illustrated in ﬁgure 6. Although
here these processes are explained separately, in nature they act cooperatively. It
should be noted that the rate of degradation is strongly dependent on environmental
conditions and that in some places like the deep sea interior, anoxic sediments or
polar regions conditions are likely to lower the rate plastic degradation.
In contrast to natural polymers, e.g.
starch, lignin, cellulose, etc.
for which
microbes have evolved eﬀective exo-enzymatic degradation mechanisms, most com-
mon synthetic polymers (i.e. PE, PP) only become available to rapid biological
degradation when physico-chemical processes have reduced the molecular weight of
the polymer to about 500 g mol−1 [49, 72, 73]. For PE this means oligomers of
less than 20 carbon atoms. At this stage the polymer chains are small enough to
be transported across the cellular membranes and undergo active metabolisation by
microorganisms. For comparison, embrittled plastic material still has a molecular
weight of tens of thousands g mol−1 [49]. Microbial polymer degradation generally
requires the presence of a consortium of several diﬀerent bacterial groups each fa-
cilitating sub-processes such as for instance the breakdown into monomers, usage
of these monomers and excretion of waste products, as well as the usage of these
by-products [60, 74].
Laboratory studies on degradability of synthetic polymers
have identiﬁed some possible key microbial groups involved in those sub-processes
[60, 75, 76]. Whether or not the discovered mechanisms of plastic biodegradation
9
==PAGE:18==
Figure 6: Relevant environmental forces that drive degradation by fragmentation and decompos-
ition. For plastic polymers abiotic pre-degradation is essential for microbial metabolisation. The
slow physical and chemical processes are the time limiting factors in PMD degradation and the
reason for the high persistence of plastic waste. Hydrolytic biodegradation is only relevant for
polymers that are hydrolisable for microbial enzymes (natural polymers and polyesters [72])
.
contribute relevantly to the removal of plastic from nature is still an open question.
Several microbes that inhabit PMD surfaces extracted from the water column as
well as coastal marine sediments have been identiﬁed, some of which are known to
metabolise hydrocarbon [3, 77]. Moreover, PMD speciﬁc assemblages of bacterial
communities, referred to as plastisphere, are very distinct from the surrounding wa-
ter and are likely to change species compositions in beneﬁt of sessile organisms in
originally pelagic habitats, particularly in oligotrophic regions [78].
The size distribution of PMD and therefore the availability for diﬀerent groups of
organisms, depends on the dynamics of those degradation processes which fragment
the present PMD over time into ever smaller microplastic particles.
Several studies have assessed the size distribution and concentration of ﬂoating
PMD [12, 59, 79].
Size distribution analyses from macro- to microplastic show
that numbers are increasing when size decreases, which is intuitive as fragmentation
continuously divides larger pieces into numerous smaller ones.
As a theoretical consideration of the fragmentation process we propose a simple
relationship between the number of approximately spherical fragments N produced
from a plastic object and the particle size, expressed as the equivalent spherical
diameter ESD. The combined volume of all particles must be consistent through
all fragment sizes, so that: N = ESD−3, see ﬁgure 7. Assuming that continuous
break-down is occurring (eventually down to molecular components), implies the
inclusion of intermediate micro- and nanoscale phase with extremely high numbers
of particles [49, 80]. The scaling exponent of 3 assumes that fragmentation happens
in all three spatial dimensions of PMD items. It has been shown on real size data
(> 5 mm,) that an empirical exponents of 2.93 ± 0.08 comes very close [79]. Smaller
sizes, however, are often found to scale with smaller exponents or even decrease in
numbers [15]. Possible explanatory sink terms are suggested (table 3).
10
==PAGE:19==
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
10
1
10
2
10
3
10
4
Figure 7: Theoretical fragmentation of a spherical object visualised as the number of fragments at
any fragment size shown as the average ESD (dotted blue line). Light blue bars show exemplary size
distribution frequently reported in many studies on MP abundances [12, 27, 40, 42, 43, 79]. The
green marked area represents the "missing part" in the MP sizes, possibly caused by size-diﬀerential
sinks from the sampled water layer.
Zooplankton Interaction with Microplastic
Several studies showed that zooplankton, including copepods can ingest micro-
plastics [14, 25]. Copepods represent an excellent model organism for microplastic-
zooplankton interactions due to their global importance and their trophic role of
linking primary producers and higher trophic levels in the ocean. They comprise
the major mesozooplankton biomass in the world’s oceans and the most import-
ant food source for larval and planktivorous ﬁsh [84]. They constitute the entrance
of plastic to the food chain and are susceptibly exposed to microplastics within
their feed size range of approximately 5 to 100 µm for Calanoid copepods, but with
smaller species typically selecting narrower size ranges [85]. As a comparison this
corresponds to a human food size range of a small medical pill. Apart from the tox-
icity originating from additives (see page 4) and residual monomers on MPs, their
relatively large area to volume ratio is more eﬀective in absorbing hydrophobic con-
taminants (such as POPs) from the water [23] that could potentially be transferred
into the organism, although this process is still under debate [86, 87]. Laboratory
studies indicate the risk of bioaccumulation (the up-concentration in organisms) [88]
and biomagniﬁcation (the passing onto higher trophic levels and subsequent magni-
ﬁcation due to the large numbers of lower trophic level organisms taken up and the
potential additional PMD uptake of a broader size range)[89, 90].
Described eﬀects of microplastics on copepod health include the change in feed-
ing capacity and competition with nutritious food and consequent loss of energetic
reserves, as well as reduced reproductive output and a tendency of reduced egg pro-
duction and survival, although not signiﬁcantly [14, 25]. It has been shown that
copepods exposed to MPs (20 µm, 75 PS MP beads ml−1 and algae) consumed only
54% of carbon biomass relative to the control group with a shift to smaller prey
sizes [25]. However, due to missing comprehensive data on S-MPs in this size range
a comparison with "natural" concentrations has not yet been possible.
Carcases and the shed molts of copepodites were found coated with S-MPs, an
eﬀect explained by the hydrophobic and static attractions between the MP beads
and organic material [14]. On alive individuals the adherence of S-MP to swimming
appendages can interfere with locomotion, food encounter and uptake, and mating
11
==PAGE:20==
Table 3: Loss terms to PMD from the ocean surface layer. The contribution of the single processes
to a diﬀerential removal of small microplastics is elucidated with respect to the recently frequently
repeated ﬁnding of a missing fraction of lower size classes in the microplastic size spectrum. Ref-
erenced publications named the respective process as a possible explanation for microplastic loss
from the sea surface layer. *Reference to our own manuscript, page
#
Type
Details
Ref.
i.
(Nano-)
fragment-
ation
Disintegrated PMD may become too small for detection by survey equipment or
method applied. Additionally, particles that are close to the lower size limit of
an applied detection method may be underrepresented due to the slip through via
the smallest dimension (largest dimensions is commonly size determining).
[45,
79]
ii.
Shore de-
position
Loss process to the ocean surface compartment to shore.
Currents and waves
cause vertical mass transport (Stokes drift) with fastest velocities in the upper
layers and decreases non-linearly. Therefore ﬂoating PMD is particularly prone to
shore deposition (see iii.). Here, higher radiation exposure and abrasive forces of
wind and sand movement can contribute to a faster fragmentation (see i.).
[12,
45,
56,
79]
iii.
Subsurface
disper-
sion
Turbulence induced mixing in within the subsurface layer dilutes PMD concen-
tration vertically over a larger volume.
For PMD of equal density, size is the
property that mostly determines its sinking velocity: while larger items sink or
ﬂoat according to their speciﬁc density, small MPs have a slow velocity to coun-
teract turbulent displacements from their neutral buoyancy position. This implies
a relatively increased distribution of smaller MPs throughout the water column*.
Oceanographic processes which may enhance subsurface dispersion include dense
shelf water cascading, severe coastal storms, oﬀshore convection and saline sub-
duction.
[54,
55]
[81]*
iv.
Sinking
of
lower
density
items
For initially buoyant PMD, an eventually greater density than the surrounding
water may result from loss of trapped air through fragmentation, encapsulation
through biofouling or in faecal pellets after ingestion. Additionally, small sized
MPs become more prone to entrainment in conglomerates of detritus, referred to
as marine snow, that over time sink out of the water column.
[18,
45,
54]
v.
Sinking
of higher
density
items
Negatively buoyant PMD can only persist in the surface layer when turbulent
forces counteract the sinking of a particle. The fraction of negatively buoyant PMD
that escapes the surface turbulent zone is lost to the ocean interior or sediment
compartment. Smaller MPs generally have a lower settling velocity than larger
ones of same density and shape.
[18,
45,
54,
82]
vi.
Ingestion
Diﬀerential removal of small PMD particles due to their higher availability to a
large number of organisms. Potential passing on to higher-level predators could
result in a fraction of the PMD pool that is constantly bound in biota and there-
fore removed from the surface water compartment. Ingestion may also contribute
to further microfragmentation due to changed pH and temperature as well as
physical stress in digestive systems. Additionally, organisms can via ingestion and
consequent egestion or death actively facilitate the vertical translocation of PMD
(see iv.).
[45,
79]
vii. Biofouling
Can lead to change of density (see iv. and v.), initialise biodegradation (see viii.)
or mask PMD particles with an organic layer which might facilitate ingestion (see
vi.) but on the other hand could reduce photodegradtion through shading.
[59,
79,
83]
viii. (Bio-) de-
gradation
Photo-, chemical and mechanical degradation contribute to fragmentation and
prepare polymers for better availability to biodegrading microorganisms. Polymer
density can be changed through degradation (with possible eﬀects on buoyancy)
by loss of additives or incorporation of water in between chains. Biodegration may
contribute to reduction of polymer chain length and eventually remineralisation,
however, no signiﬁcant contribution of this process in the aquatic environment has
been described yet.
[12]
12
==PAGE:21==
as a result of that. In a 24 h feeding study (C. helgolandicus) >3000 previously
ingested S-MPs copepod−1 day−1 were found in their faecal pellets. MPs contained
in faecal pellets may alter their density and structural integrity and thereby inﬂuence
marine nutrient cycling as well as the vertical carbon ﬂux with consequences to global
carbon cycling (reviewed in [14]).
Trophic transport of ingested MPs from prey to predator organisms in the plank-
tonic food web has been demonstrated [91].
All these potential impacts of S-MP interaction with copepods are illustrated in
ﬁgure 8. Additionally, the recent observation of feeding marks on PMD suggest,
that copepods and other invertebrates feed oﬀbioﬁlms that cover PMD surfaces,
hence interact with PMD above their food size range [92].
Figure 8: Possible interaction mechanisms of MPs with copepods, the eﬀects on their physiology
and behaviour. Processes marked with a question mark are non-evidenced. Concept based on [93].
The susceptibility of copepods to S-MP uptake varies with species-speciﬁc feed-
ing mechanisms. S-MP intake most likely results from rather indiscriminative feed-
ing modes such as ﬁlter feeding, meaning that particles of equivalent size are non-
selectively ingested. Some copepods continuously ﬁlter feed whereas others (C. pa-
ciﬁcus, A. tonsa) can limit their movement and ﬁltering rates to save energy under
low food concentrations [94]. However, under the presence of algae S-MP uptake
is promoted (for Calanus paciﬁcus and Eucalanus pileatus [95], reviewed in [25]).
The, as a consequence thereof, reduced intake of algae can have particular severe
impacts for copepods with minimal lipid reserves (e.g. Arcatia) potentially resulting
in reduced fecundity and growth and increased lethality (reviewed in [14]). Some
copepods (A. clausi and E. pileatus) are able to reject particles of inappropriate
size or quality that adhere to their mouth parts [95, 96], however in a feeding study
copepods (Calanus paciﬁcus, A. clausi) were not able to discriminate S-MP from
algae of a similar size. Another study [96] showed that copepod A. clausi discrimin-
ated between 14 µm algae and 20 µm latex beads, suggesting postcapture rejection.
Also post ingestion rejection has been described for a species (Eurytemora aﬃnis)
13
==PAGE:22==
when fed upon living and inert particles [97]. Selectivity mechanisms in presence of
MP require further research in order to ﬁnd species speciﬁc ingestion rates.
MP beads used in these studies were all spherical with a smooth surface, whereas
in nature irregular forms such as ﬁbres, sheets or granules could entangle in the
intestinal tract and lead to long term gut blockages, as it has been shown for larger
marine wildlife [98, 99].
To our knowledge no study reported on the eﬀects of
microplastic ﬁbres on copepods, although ﬁbrous forms constitute a great percentage
of marine MPs, clearly prevailing in coastal areas and sediments [41, 54, 67]. It has
been observed (personal communication [100]) for calanoid copepods and Acartia
tonsa that stiﬀﬁbres can penetrated the roof of the mouth and result in the copepods
death (referred to as stabbing).
Available Methods for Small-Microplastic Identiﬁcation and Quantiﬁca-
tion
The variety of methodologies used to assess MP pollution is huge and we have here
collected the most important approaches for comparison. In general MP assessments
consist of three steps as illustrated in ﬁgure 9. As there was no clear division between
macro- and microplastic methodologies some of the described are applicable for both.
The detailed comparison is provided in the three tables 5 – 7 (supplement, see page
S-1, including all references to the compared studies). Here we just provide a short
qualitative summary to ensure a good readability.
The described sampling methods vary with the sampled compartment (i.e. sur-
face, subsurface, sediment, beaches or biota) and with the aimed sizes range. Most
common are ﬁltering techniques, e.g.
net trawls or ﬂow-through devices.
Their
purpose is to concentrate present particles in a small volume or area suitable for
investigation. For monitoring purposes homogeneous methodologies are required in
order to enable meaningful data comparison and implementation into policy mak-
ing processes. Therefore, sampling devices and methodologies should have several
favourable qualiﬁcations: data delivery which improves our understanding of MP
fate and its biological implications, and a broad applicability in terms of vessel type
and globality. In addition, a continuous operation without interfering with other
ship activities is desirable. Sample contamination is a serious risk to consider when
working with MPs and data validity needs to be assured.
Therefore, the water
sampling preferably needs to be taken in front of the ship and must not lie in the
streamlines of greywater outlets. Furthermore, the device itself needs to consist of
non-contaminating material.
Some of the reviewed studies include a step of up-concentration after the sample
collection. Depending on the type of sampling environment and aimed particle sizes
it may become necessary to reduce the amount of unwanted material in the sample.
A variety of density separation procedures like ﬂoatation and elutriation for sediment
samples or digestion techniques in case of ingestate analysis or biota rich samples
have been developed. The overall aim of those preparation methods is a puriﬁcation
of the sample to increase eﬀectiveness and eﬃciency of the subsequent MP analysis.
There is a large number of techniques that have been applied for marine MPs
analysis, where some are suited for quantiﬁcation of MP (i.e. microscopy count-
ing, quantitative imaging approaches, ﬂow cytometry), while others can provide
detailed physical and chemical information of the particles (i.e. FTIR and Raman
14
==PAGE:23==
Figure 9: Steps in MP assessment methods: a summary of the most important techniques which
are further elaborated in table 5 – 7 (supplemented, see page S-1
spectrometry, pyrolysis gas chromatography, electron microscopy). Especially for
quantiﬁcation of S-MP so far only a combination of diﬀerent methods, like micro-
scopic counting assisted by spectroscopic identiﬁcation of polymer particles, can give
reliable results. This is the reason for the labour intensive nature of these analyses.
Methods and Materials Used in the Present Study
Study Area and Oceanography
The sampling area (ﬁgure 10) covers a transect from the European coast, across the
Atlantic Ocean to the Sargasso Sea and on the return passing by the Azores, where
sampling was completed. Thereby we crossed oceanic systems inﬂuenced by diﬀerent
ocean current regimes and with diﬀerent distances to anthropogenic inﬂuences, i.e.
land-based PMD sources.
The three main parts can be geographically separated and are:
• The European coastal waters that are expected to show the highest contamin-
ation rates due to the nearness to land-based source and shore deposition
• The open Atlantic Ocean that are expected to show lowest numbers due to
dilution and the sinking of particles with distance from shore
• The North Atlantic Subtropical Gyre which has been shown to accumulate
PMD due to converging ocean current patterns [45]
With regards to hydrographic properties a more detailed separation into loc-
ally diﬀerent water masses (after SST) can be applied for the gyre system that the
Sargasso Sea is part of. The southern Sargasso Sea is characterised by two main
frontal systems with seasonally varying expansion. In spring (March/April) these
two frontal bands prevailed between 70◦W and 60◦W and dissolve to the east and
west of this area. The Subtropical Convergence Zone (STCZ) separates southern
warm saline subtropical waters from northern cooler less saline water of the North
Atlantic Ocean. Where these water masses meet we observe the formation of meso-
scale eddies seen as the intruding ﬁlaments of the two water masses. On the basis
of data collection along three cross-frontal transects in the Sargasso Sea the relation
between MP concentration and water mass properties is investigated in this study.
Wind can function as a transport vector (carrier) of plastic particles in particular
MPs that enter the oceans eventually. In the sampling area, north easterlies (trade
15
==PAGE:24==
Figure 10: Cruise map showing the transect where the MP sampling for this study took place.
Sea surface temperatures (SST, March 23rd, colour bar to the left) show location of oceanographic
fronts. MP sampling stations marked by numbers (total: 1-83).
winds) in the tropics (0 - 30◦N) and westerlies (30 - 60◦N) are the prevailing wind
pattern. The north east winds carry dust particles (potentially including plastic
particles) from South Europe and Northern Africa. Climatological data shows the
consistency of these wind patterns with only minimal yearly variations.
Sampling Device and Overview of Procedures
We developed a sampling device consisting of a staggered ﬁlter system of a 300
µm followed by a 10 µm mesh sized ﬁlter which was connected to the underway
water intake of the ship (3 m depth). Thereby we target particle sizes relevant to
zooplankton such as copepods.
Figures 11 and 12 show the set-up of the ﬁlter unit when assembled and in
its single components, respectively. The ﬁltering procedure is illustrated in ﬁgure
13. The device is easy to use, runs continuously (up to 12 hours, depending on the
abundance of particulate matter) and without interfering with other ship activities or
ship manoeuvring, which leads to a lower labour and cost intensity than established
methods.
To ensure data quality, sampling guidelines written down in an instruction pro-
tocol (supplement, page S-8) have been followed by all operating personnel. With
the used ﬁlter set up a minor spill of seawater at the inlet was at times unavoidable
due to the increasing pressure inside the ﬁlter unit when the mesh screens were ﬁlling
up with ﬁltered material. The lost volume (in average 5% of the total volume) has
16
==PAGE:25==
been subtracted to calculate the net ﬁltered volume. In a log book it was kept track
of the starting and stopping times, used ﬁlter mesh size, ﬂow rate, spill volume and
operator.
Figure 11: Sketch (left) and photograph (right) of the ﬁlter unit consisting of (A) inﬂux hose, (B)
adapter, (C) lid with handle and stopper screws to precisely ﬁt the round-cut net. The middle
unit (D) holds the two nets in place, 300 µm and 10 µm (or 50 µm) mesh size, respectively. The
following outﬂux compartments (E), (F) and (G) mirror the inﬂux parts in reverse order, which
all ﬁt into each other.
Figure 12: All single compartments of the ﬁlter unit as listed above in ﬁgure 11 with the 300 µm
to the left and the 10 µm to the right of the middle unit (D).
The detailed methodologies including contamination prevention measures are de-
scribed in manuscript I (page M1-3). The relatively long average acquisition time
per sample leads to a large spatial coverage. This implies two advantages of this
sampling method: a large area can be sampled with a low amount of work time
needed and averaging over long distances makes it less prone to local or temporal
concentration minima and maxima.
Sample Processing and Analysis
The preparation and analysis part of the project were conducted separated from the
sampling part and brought to a laboratory on land for the reason of having a better
control over purity conditions and accurate identiﬁcation.
Prior to analysis the samples needed preparation in order to be applicative for
visual identiﬁcation and spectral analysis via Raman microscopy. A followed pro-
tocol (see S-9) ensured data quality and minimum contamination risk. A document-
ing chart can be found in the supplement S-10.
Visual Identiﬁcation
The ﬁrst chosen approach to identify plastic particles in the samples was by visual
inspection under a light microscope based on an extensive training period and a
deﬁned set of criteria that qualify or disqualify an item as plastic. These charac-
teristics are collected in a catalogue including an image and description for each
criterion, which can be accessed in supplement (page S-12). The evaluation was
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 13: Flow chart illustrating the water sampling procedure (from A - F) on board R/V
DANA. Red arrows indicate the direction of the water ﬂow when the ship is going.
18
==PAGE:27==
supported by a melting test in a melting point device. The melting point of com-
modity thermoplastics ranges between 70◦C (PVC) and 265◦C (PA), however this
range broadens when including other plastics such as polyvinyl acetate (PVA) and
Polytetraﬂuorethylen (PTFE, as known as Teﬂon) to 60◦C to 327◦C [101]. Thermo-
plastics melt and deform in a characteristic way, whereas natural polymers burn and
turn into ash without melting. Mineral particles potentially present in the samples
can be distinguished as they will not show any visible changes in the applied tem-
perature range. For methodological details see the method section of manuscript I
(page M1-3).
The visual inspection method is widely used in MP identiﬁcation studies [15, 40,
41, 59], however with decreasing particle size this analysis becomes substantially
more work intensive, contamination aﬀected and prone to identiﬁcation errors [63].
Therefore, it was decided to use a spectroscopic technique due to its high reliability
for the determination of chemical composition of plastics [102].
Spectral Analysis via Raman Microspectrometry
The discrimination between plastic and non-plastic particles in the sample material
can be assisted by information from vibrational spectrometric measurements via
Raman spectrometry. Via detection of the amount of loss or gain in energy of the
laser photon that is scatted by the sampled molecule, a spectrum of bond-speciﬁc
peaks (bands), and thus a unique spectral ﬁngerprint of a molecule can be obtained.
The wavenumber range (Raman shift) of these bands depends on the mass of the
atom, the strength of the chemical bond, and the geometrical conﬁguration of the
molecule [103].
Functional groups can have single or multiple characteristic vibrational bands,
e.g.
one arising from stretching vibrations (stretches) derived from bond length
changes, others from deformation vibrations from bond angle changes of the group.
Stretches that determine functional groups in the molecule, usually occur at higher
frequency ranges above 1500 cm−1, called the group frequency region (ﬁgure 14),
because more energy is required to stretch a group than to deform it. The region
below 1500 cm−1 is called the ﬁngerprint region that only contains few bands ori-
ginating from stretches. Here most bands are due to the backbone of the molecule
and deformation vibrations (bends), such as: twisting, rocking, scissoring, wagging
and breathing in ring molecules [104]. It hast to be borne in mind that the strict
separation of a molecule into groups of atoms is a simpliﬁcation of the true situation
as molecules vibrate as a whole. Available correlation tables based on numerous em-
pirical studies, can be used for the interpretation of Raman spectra of the substance
of investigation. However, these tables are not complete and the interpretation of
spectra usually requires experience, especially when working with impure samples
[105]. As a general rule when interpreting a spectrum one begins at high frequency
ranges. Further, both, the absence and the presence of peaks, referred to negative
and positive spectral interpretation, is of valuable information [104].
Computer-aided Raman spectra interpretation is commonly done by library search-
ing or pattern matching [103]. Freely available libraries of Raman reference spectra
are rare. In the context of this study a self-created library of spectra from most
commonly used post-consumer polymers was established (see supplement, page S-
14).
19
==PAGE:28==
However, spectra of the actual polymer type signal can be masked by e.g. ad-
ditives, often pigments, contained in the polymer matrix or of co-polymeric com-
positions. Moreover, the microplastics sampled from the marine environment have
been exposed to various external conditions that, as a consequence can lead to the
adsorption of chemicals, coverage by an organic matrix and chemical changes due
to degradation eﬀects. Therefore, the computed spectra correlation value must be
cross-checked by visually comparing the sample and reference spectra. A collec-
tion of group frequency bands, and few bends, with relevance to commodity plastic
polymer identiﬁcation was applied and is illustrated in ﬁgure 14. In many polymers
degradation processes are detectable through the formation of hydroxyl and carbonyl
groups. Although they are relatively weakly responsive in Raman spectrometry their
typical bands are included in the chart.
Figure 14: Simpliﬁed correlation chart of the most characteristic molecule vibrations by type for
polymer identiﬁcation in Raman scattering [103, 105, 106].
A detailed description of the spectroscopic methods applied are given in manu-
script II (page M2-2). Details on the theory of the Raman eﬀect as well as ad-
vantages and disadvantages of the applied technique are provided as supplementary
information (page S-14).
Objectives and Major Findings
The overall objective of this Master project was to investigate upon small micro-
plastics to better understand its horizontal and vertical distribution. Knowledge on
abundance and distribution of MP is a prerequisite for understanding its fate and
impact. Recently frequently repeated ﬁndings of a missing size fraction of lower size
classes in ocean surface samples suggest various diﬀerent loss processes, but little is
known about their relevance and underlying mechanism. This is partly because of
the low data coverage of microplastics below 300 µm due to increasing diﬃculties
in sampling and analysis with lower sizes. The development of appropriate method-
20
==PAGE:29==
ologies in sampling, sample preparation and analysis for MP ≥10 µm constituted
the major part of our project.
Questions that have been driving our motivation for this research were:
• What are the MP concentrations present in the open ocean surface layer?
• How is S-MP distributed throughout diﬀerent oceanic regions?
• How do measurements of MP compare between studies using surface and below-
surface sampling approaches and targeting diﬀerent sizes?
• What is the size distribution of S-MP and how does it compare to L-MP?
• How can the lower abundance of smaller sizes – the ’missing fraction’ – be
explained?
Manuscript I studies abundance, size and polymer composition from a transect
from Denmark to the North Atlantic Subtropical Gyre.
For this expedition we
developed and tested a ﬁltering device which continuously ﬁltered via the underway
water intake of the ship. We further developed methodologies for preparation and
analysis of S-MP samples. MP was abundant at all sample stations, ranging from
13 to 501 particles m3.
The overall horizontal distribution pattern was deemed
more dispersed than reported values on L-MP. By means of a numerical particle
distribution model we showed how turbulent diﬀusivity can disperse MP of diﬀerent
size classes vertically over a water column and thus leading to their inaccessibility
to surface sampling methods. The widespread horizontal and vertical distribution
of S-MP suggests that they have a shorter residence time in the surface ocean. The
omnipresence of S-MP throughout the ocean mixed layer enhances their availability
to a broad range of cycling processes and sinks such as marine snow formation and
ingestion by zooplankton.
Manuscript II presents the results from a subset of samples that were simultan-
eously analysed using a standard visual microscopy approach and Raman micro-
spectrometry. Our analysis showed that pure visual identiﬁcation leads to increased
misidentiﬁcations the smaller the MP. Visual analysis is the most applied method
among MP studies. The combination with a spectroscopic method can substan-
tially increase quality of the data. Pigments and ﬁllers added to polymers, as well
as degradation processes during environmental exposure can have an eﬀect on Ra-
man spectroscopic properties. Hence, a library database expanded by spectra of
weathered polymers and various additive classes was successfully used to improve
MP recognition. The manual spectral identiﬁcation was a time consuming step and
we propose the development of automated sample analysis procedures based on Ra-
man chemical mapping, in order to fully harness the capabilities of spectral and
chemometric techniques for future MP research.
21
==PAGE:30==
References
[1]
R. C. Thompson, C. J. Moore, F. S. vom Saal and S. H. Swan. ‘Plastics, the environment and human health:
current consensus and future trends.’ In: Philosophical transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B,
Biological sciences 364.1526 (July 2009), pp. 2153–66. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2009.0053 (cit. on pp. 1, 5).
[2]
K. Enders and R. Lenz. Dynamics of Marine Plastic Pollution Biodegradation: Microbes as a Sink of Plastic.
Tech. rep. April. 2014 (cit. on p. 1).
[3]
E. R. Zettler, T. J. Mincer and L. a. Amaral-Zettler. ‘Life in the "plastisphere": microbial communities on plastic
marine debris.’ In: Environmental science & technology 47.13 (July 2013), pp. 7137–46. doi: 10.1021/es401288x
(cit. on pp. 1, 2, 10).
[4]
United Nations. ‘Resolutions and decisions adopted by the United Nations Environment Assembly of the United
Nations Environment Programme at its ﬁrst session on 27 June 2014’. In: June. United Nations Environment
Assembly. United Nations Environment Assembly, 2014, pp. 1–40 (cit. on p. 1).
[5]
F. Galgani et al. Monitoring Guidance for Marine Litter in European Seas Draft Report. Tech. rep. MSFD GES
Technical Subgroup on Marine Litter (TSG-ML), 2013, p. 120 (cit. on pp. 1, 3).
[6]
E. Hastings and T. Potts. ‘Marine litter: Progress in developing an integrated policy approach in Scotland’. In:
Marine Policy 42 (Nov. 2013), pp. 49–55. doi: 10.1016/j.marpol.2013.01.024 (cit. on p. 1).
[7]
F. Galgani et al. Marine Strategy Framework Directive: Task Group 10 Report Marine Litter. Tech. rep. 31210.
Ispra, Italy: European Commission Institute for Environment and Sustainability, 2010. doi: 10.2788/86941 (cit. on
p. 1).
[8]
E. J. Carpenter, S. J. Anderson, G. R. Harvey, H. P. Miklas and B. B. Peck. ‘Polystyrene spherules in coastal
waters.’ In: Science (New York, N.Y.) 178.4062 (Nov. 1972), pp. 749–50 (cit. on p. 1).
[9]
E. Carpenter and K. Smith. ‘Plastics on the Sargasso Sea Surface’. In: Science 175.4027 (1972), pp. 1240–1241
(cit. on p. 1).
[10]
J. B. Colton, B. R. Burns and F. D. Knapp. ‘Plastic particles in surface waters of the northwestern atlantic.’ In:
Science (New York, N.Y.) 185.4150 (Aug. 1974), pp. 491–7. doi: 10.1126/science.185.4150.491 (cit. on pp. 1, 5).
[11]
K. W. Kenyon and E. Kridler. ‘Laysan Albatrosses Swallow Indigestible Matter’. In: Auk 86.2 (1969), pp. 339–343
(cit. on p. 1).
[12]
M. Eriksen, L. C. M. Lebreton, H. S. Carson, M. Thiel, C. J. Moore, J. C. Borerro, F. Galgani, P. G. Ryan and J.
Reisser. ‘Plastic Pollution in the World’s Oceans: More than 5 Trillion Plastic Pieces Weighing over 250,000 Tons
Aﬂoat at Sea’. In: PLoS ONE 9.12 (Dec. 2014). Ed. by H. G. Dam, e111913. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0111913
(cit. on pp. 1, 2, 5, 6, 10–12).
[13]
R. C. Thompson, Y. Olsen, R. P. Mitchell, A. Davis, S. J. Rowland, A. W. G. John, D. McGonigle and A. E.
Russell. ‘Lost at sea: where is all the plastic?’ In: Science (New York, N.Y.) 304.5672 (May 2004), p. 838. doi:
10.1126/science.1094559 (cit. on p. 2).
[14]
M. Cole, P. Lindeque, E. Fileman, C. Halsband, R. Goodhead, J. Moger and T. S. Galloway. ‘Microplastic ingestion
by zooplankton.’ In: Environmental science & technology 47.12 (June 2013), pp. 6646–55. doi: 10.1021/es400663f
(cit. on pp. 2, 4, 11, 13).
[15]
V. Hidalgo-Ruz, L. Gutow, R. C. Thompson and M. Thiel. ‘Microplastics in the marine environment: a review of
the methods used for identiﬁcation and quantiﬁcation.’ In: Environmental science & technology 46.6 (Mar. 2012),
pp. 3060–75. doi: 10.1021/es2031505 (cit. on pp. 2, 10, 19).
[16]
M. Cole, P. Lindeque, C. Halsband and T. S. Galloway. ‘Microplastics as contaminants in the marine environment:
a review.’ In: Marine pollution bulletin 62.12 (Dec. 2011), pp. 2588–97. doi: 10.1016/j.marpolbul.2011.09.025
(cit. on p. 3).
[17]
M. F. Costa, J. a. Ivar do Sul, J. S. Silva-Cavalcanti, M. C. B. Araújo, A. Spengler and P. S. Tourinho. ‘On
the importance of size of plastic fragments and pellets on the strandline: a snapshot of a Brazilian beach.’ In:
Environmental monitoring and assessment 168.1-4 (Sept. 2010), pp. 299–304. doi: 10.1007/s10661-009-1113-4
(cit. on p. 3).
[18]
D. K. a. Barnes, F. Galgani, R. C. Thompson and M. Barlaz. ‘Accumulation and fragmentation of plastic debris
in global environments.’ In: Philosophical transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological
sciences 364.1526 (July 2009), pp. 1985–98. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2008.0205 (cit. on pp. 3, 9, 12).
[19]
‘Workshop on the Occurrence, Eﬀects, and Fate of Microplastic Marine Debris’. In: Proceedings of the Inter-
national Research Workshop on the Occurrence, Eﬀects and Fate of Microplastic Marine Debris, Sept 9-11,
2008. Ed. by C. Arthur, J. Baker and H. Bamford. January. Tacoma, WA, USA: NOAA Technical Memorandum
NOS-OR&R-30, 2009 (cit. on p. 3).
[20]
C. M. Free, O. P. Jensen, S. a. Mason, M. Eriksen, N. J. Williamson and B. Boldgiv. ‘High-levels of microplastic
pollution in a large, remote, mountain lake.’ In: Marine pollution bulletin 85.1 (June 2014), pp. 156–163. doi:
10.1016/j.marpolbul.2014.06.001 (cit. on pp. 3, 4).
[21]
J. a. Ivar do Sul and M. F. Costa. ‘The present and future of microplastic pollution in the marine environment.’ In:
Environmental pollution (Barking, Essex : 1987) 185 (Feb. 2014), pp. 352–64. doi: 10.1016/j.envpol.2013.10.036
(cit. on pp. 3–5, 8).
[22]
A. L. Andrady. Plastics and the Environment. Ed. by A. L. Andrady. New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,
Hoboken, 2003 (cit. on pp. 3, 6).
[23]
M. Browne, T. Galloway and R. Thompson. ‘Microplastic — an emerging contaminant of potential concern?’ In:
Integrated environmental assessment and management 3.4 (2007), pp. 559–566 (cit. on pp. 3, 11).
[24]
M. Claessens, S. De Meester, L. Van Landuyt, K. De Clerck and C. R. Janssen. ‘Occurrence and distribution
of microplastics in marine sediments along the Belgian coast.’ In: Marine pollution bulletin 62.10 (Oct. 2011),
pp. 2199–204. doi: 10.1016/j.marpolbul.2011.06.030 (cit. on p. 3).
[25]
M. Cole, P. Lindeque, E. Fileman, C. Halsband and T. S. Galloway. ‘The Impact of Polystyrene Microplastics on
Feeding, Function and Fecundity in the Marine Copepod Calanus helgolandicus.’ In: Environmental science &
technology (Jan. 2015). doi: 10.1021/es504525u (cit. on pp. 3, 4, 11, 13).
[26]
P. G. Ryan, C. J. Moore, J. a. van Franeker and C. L. Moloney. ‘Monitoring the abundance of plastic debris in
the marine environment.’ In: Philosophical transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological
sciences 364.1526 (July 2009), pp. 1999–2012. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2008.0207 (cit. on p. 3).
[27]
D. G. Shaw and R. H. Day. ‘Colour- and form-dependent loss of plastic micro-debris from the North Paciﬁc Ocean’.
In: Marine Pollution Bulletin 28.1 (Jan. 1994), pp. 39–43. doi: 10.1016/0025-326X(94)90184-8 (cit. on pp. 3, 11).
[28]
E. R. Graham and J. T. Thompson. ‘Deposit- and suspension-feeding sea cucumbers (Echinodermata) ingest plastic
fragments’. In: Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology 368.1 (2009), pp. 22–29. doi: 10.1016/j.
jembe.2008.09.007 (cit. on p. 3).
[29]
N. Mrosovsky, G. D. Ryan and M. C. James. ‘Leatherback turtles: The menace of plastic’. In: Marine Pollution
Bulletin 58.2 (2009), pp. 287–289. doi: 10.1016/j.marpolbul.2008.10.018 (cit. on p. 3).
[30]
Y. Ogata et al. ‘International Pellet Watch: Global monitoring of persistent organic pollutants (POPs) in coastal
waters. 1. Initial phase data on PCBs , DDTs , and HCHs’. In: Marine Pollution Bulletin 58.10 (2009), pp. 1437–
1446. doi: 10.1016/j.marpolbul.2009.06.014 (cit. on p. 3).
22
==PAGE:31==
[31]
HELCOM. Marine litter in the HELCOM area: sources, monitoring approaches, possible common indicators
and ﬁrst lines of thinking on measures. Tech. rep. April. Oslo: Baltic Marine Environment Protection Commission,
Monitoring and Assessment Group (MONAS), 2014 (cit. on p. 3).
[32]
J. Mouat, R. L. Lozano and H. Bateson. Economic Impacts of Marine Litter. Tech. rep. September. KIMO, 2010
(cit. on p. 3).
[33]
Plastic Industry Associations. The Declaration of the Global Plastics Associations for Solutions on Marine
Litter Progress Report – 2014. Tech. rep. 2014 (cit. on p. 3).
[34]
E. Roex, D. Vethaak, H. Leslie and M. D. Kreuk. Potential risk of microplastics in the fresh water environment.
Tech. rep. STOWA, 2013 (cit. on pp. 3, 4).
[35]
K.-w. Lee, W. J. Shim, O. Y. Kwon and J.-h. Kang. ‘Size-Dependent Eﬀects of Micro Polystyrene Particles in the
Marine Copepod Tigriopus japonicus’. In: Environmental Science & Technology 47.August (2013), pp. 11278–
11283. doi: dx.doi.org/10.1021/es401932b (cit. on p. 4).
[36]
A. Lechner, H. Keckeis, F. Lumesberger-Loisl, B. Zens, R. Krusch, M. Tritthart, M. Glas and E. Schludermann.
‘The Danube so colourful: A potpourri of plastic litter outnumbers ﬁsh larvae in Europe’s second largest river.’ In:
Environmental pollution (Barking, Essex : 1987) 188 (May 2014), pp. 177–81. doi: 10.1016/j.envpol.2014.02.006
(cit. on p. 4).
[37]
M. C. Rillig. ‘Microplastic in terrestrial ecosystems and the soil?’ In: Environmental science & technology (2012),
pp. 6453–6454 (cit. on p. 4).
[38]
F. Norén and L.-J. Naustvoll. Pilot study: Survey of microscopic anthropogenic particles in Skagerrak. Tech.
rep. Klima- og Forurensningsdirektoratet: TA2779/2011. Lysekil, Sweden: N-research and Havforskningsinstituttet,
2011, p. 22 (cit. on p. 4).
[39]
F. Norén, K. Norén and K. Magnusson. Marint mikroskopiskt skräp Undersökning längs svenska västkusten.
Tech. rep. 2014 (cit. on pp. 4, 5).
[40]
J.-P. W. Desforges, M. Galbraith, N. Dangerﬁeld and P. S. Ross. ‘Widespread distribution of microplastics in
subsurface seawater in the NE Paciﬁc Ocean.’ In: Marine pollution bulletin (Jan. 2014). doi: 10.1016/j.marpolbul.
2013.12.035 (cit. on pp. 4, 11, 19).
[41]
F. Norén. Small plastic particles in Coastal Swedish waters. Tech. rep. KIMO, 2007, pp. 1–11 (cit. on pp. 4, 14,
19).
[42]
M. Cole, H. Webb, P. K. Lindeque, E. S. Fileman, C. Halsband and T. S. Galloway. ‘Isolation of microplastics
in biota-rich seawater samples and marine organisms.’ In: Scientiﬁc reports 4 (Jan. 2014), p. 4528. doi: 10.1038/
srep04528 (cit. on pp. 4, 11).
[43]
A. L. Lusher, A. Burke, I. O’Connor and R. Oﬃcer. ‘Microplastic pollution in the Northeast Atlantic Ocean:
Validated and opportunistic sampling’. In: Marine Pollution Bulletin (Sept. 2014). doi: 10.1016/j.marpolbul.
2014.08.023 (cit. on pp. 4, 11).
[44]
G. L. Lattin, C. J. Moore, a. F. Zellers, S. L. Moore and S. B. Weisberg. ‘A comparison of neustonic plastic
and zooplankton at diﬀerent depths near the southern California shore.’ In: Marine pollution bulletin 49.4 (Aug.
2004), pp. 291–4. doi: 10.1016/j.marpolbul.2004.01.020 (cit. on p. 4).
[45]
K. L. Law, S. Morét-Ferguson, N. A. Maximenko, G. Proskurowski, E. E. Peacock, J. Hafner and C. M. Reddy.
‘Plastic accumulation in the North Atlantic subtropical gyre.’ In: Science (New York, N.Y.) 329.5996 (Sept. 2010),
pp. 1185–8. doi: 10.1126/science.1192321 (cit. on pp. 4, 5, 8, 9, 12, 15).
[46]
M. J. Doyle, W. Watson, N. M. Bowlin and S. B. Sheavly. ‘Plastic particles in coastal pelagic ecosystems of the
Northeast Paciﬁc ocean’. In: Marine Environmental Research 71.1 (2011), pp. 41–52. doi: 10.1016/j.marenvres.
2010.10.001 (cit. on p. 4).
[47]
J. G. B. Derraik. ‘The pollution of the marine environment by plastic debris: a review.’ In: Marine pollution
bulletin 44.9 (Sept. 2002), pp. 842–52 (cit. on p. 4).
[48]
C. M. Rochman. ‘Plastics and priority pollutants: a multiple stressor in aquatic habitats.’ In: Environmental
science & technology 47.6 (Mar. 2013), pp. 2439–40. doi: 10.1021/es400748b (cit. on pp. 4, 5).
[49]
A. L. Andrady. ‘Microplastics in the marine environment.’ In: Marine pollution bulletin 62.8 (Aug. 2011), pp. 1596–
605. doi: 10.1016/j.marpolbul.2011.05.030 (cit. on pp. 5, 9, 10).
[50]
J. Hammer, M. H. S. Kraak and J. R. Parsons. ‘Plastics in the Marine Environment: The Dark Side of a Modern
Gift’. In: Reviews of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology. Ed. by D. M. Whitacre. Vol. 220. Reviews of
Environmental Contamination and Toxicology. New York, NY: Springer New York, 2012, pp. 1–44. doi: 10.1007/
978-1-4614-3414-6 (cit. on p. 5).
[51]
J. Oehlmann et al. ‘A critical analysis of the biological impacts of plasticizers on wildlife.’ In: Philosophical
transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological sciences 364.1526 (July 2009), pp. 2047–62.
doi: 10.1098/rstb.2008.0242 (cit. on p. 5).
[52]
R. Lenz and K. Enders. Marine microplastic associated persistent organic pollutants (POPs). Tech. rep. April.
2014 (cit. on p. 5).
[53]
K. L. Law, S. E. Morét-Ferguson, D. S. Goodwin, E. R. Zettler, E. Deforce, T. Kukulka and G. Proskurowski.
‘Distribution of surface plastic debris in the eastern Paciﬁc Ocean from an 11-year data set.’ In: Environmental
science & technology 48.9 (May 2014), pp. 4732–8. doi: 10.1021/es4053076 (cit. on p. 5).
[54]
L. C. Woodall, A. Sanchez-Vidal, M. Canals, G. L. J. Paterson, R. Coppock, V. Sleight, A. Calafat, A. D. Rogers,
B. E. Narayanaswamy and R. C. Thompson. ‘The deep sea is a major sink for microplastic debris’. In: Royal
Society Open Science 1.140317 (2014). doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/rsos.140317 (cit. on pp. 5, 8, 12, 14).
[55]
T. Kukulka, G. Proskurowski, S. Morét-Ferguson, D. W. Meyer and K. L. Law. ‘The eﬀect of wind mixing on the
vertical distribution of buoyant plastic debris’. In: Geophysical Research Letters 39.7 (Apr. 2012), n/a–n/a. doi:
10.1029/2012GL051116 (cit. on pp. 5, 12).
[56]
A. Isobe, K. Kubo, Y. Tamura, S. Kako, E. Nakashima and N. Fujii. ‘Selective transport of microplastics and
mesoplastics by drifting in coastal waters’. In: Marine Pollution Bulletin 89.1-2 (2014), pp. 324–330. doi: 10.
1016/j.marpolbul.2014.09.041 (cit. on pp. 5, 12).
[57]
Plastics Europe. Plastics - the Facts 2014/2015 An analysis of European plastics production, demand and waste
data. Tech. rep. Brussels: The European Plastic Industry, 2015, pp. 1–32 (cit. on pp. 6, 7).
[58]
J. R. Jambeck, R. Geyer, C. Wilcox, T. R. Siegler, M. Perryman, A. Andrady, R. Narayan and K. L. Law. ‘Plastic
waste inputs from land into the ocean’. In: Science January (2015) (cit. on pp. 6, 8).
[59]
S. Morét-Ferguson, K. L. Law, G. Proskurowski, E. K. Murphy, E. E. Peacock and C. M. Reddy. ‘The size, mass,
and composition of plastic debris in the western North Atlantic Ocean.’ In: Marine pollution bulletin 60.10 (Oct.
2010), pp. 1873–8. doi: 10.1016/j.marpolbul.2010.07.020 (cit. on pp. 5, 10, 12, 19).
[60]
A. A. Shah, F. Hasan, A. Hameed and S. Ahmed. ‘Biological degradation of plastics: a comprehensive review.’ In:
Biotechnology advances 26.3 (2008), pp. 246–65. doi: 10.1016/j.biotechadv.2007.12.005 (cit. on pp. 5, 6, 9).
[61]
R. B. Seymour. ‘Polymer Science Before and After 1899: Notable Developments During the Lifetime of Maurits
Dekker’. In: Journal of Macromolecular Science: Part A - Chemistry 26.8 (1989), pp. 1023–1032. doi: 10.1080/
00222338908052032 (cit. on p. 5).
23
==PAGE:32==
[62]
J. Hopewell, R. Dvorak and E. Kosior. ‘Plastics recycling: challenges and opportunities.’ In: Philosophical trans-
actions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological sciences 364.1526 (July 2009), pp. 2115–26. doi:
10.1098/rstb.2008.0311 (cit. on p. 6).
[63]
P. Hollman, H. Bouwmeester and R. Peters. Microplastics in the aquatic food chain; Sources, measurement,
occurrence and potential health risks. Tech. rep. Wageningen, Netherlands: RIKILT Wageningen UR (University
& Research centre), 2013, p. 32 (cit. on pp. 7, 19).
[64]
J. Gabrysch. ‘Containerverluste auf See’. PhD thesis. 2006 (cit. on p. 7).
[65]
Surfer Today. Surfers Against Sewage wants 50% marine litter reduction in the UK. 2014 (cit. on p. 7).
[66]
Plastics Europe. Plastics - the Facts 2013 An analysis of European latest plastics production, demand and waste
data. Tech. rep. Brussels: The European Plastic Industry, 2013 (cit. on p. 8).
[67]
M. A. Browne, P. Crump, S. J. Niven, E. Teuten, A. Tonkin, T. Galloway and R. Thompson. ‘Accumulation
of microplastic on shorelines woldwide: sources and sinks.’ In: Environmental science & technology 45.21 (Nov.
2011), pp. 9175–9. doi: 10.1021/es201811s (cit. on pp. 8, 14).
[68]
D. Lobelle and M. Cunliﬀe. ‘Early microbial bioﬁlm formation on marine plastic debris.’ In: Marine pollution
bulletin 62.1 (Jan. 2011), pp. 197–200. doi: 10.1016/j.marpolbul.2010.10.013 (cit. on p. 8).
[69]
S. Ye and A. L. Andrady. ‘Fouling of ﬂoating plastic debris under Biscayne Bay exposure conditions’. In: Marine
Pollution Bulletin 22.12 (Dec. 1991), pp. 608–613. doi: 10.1016/0025-326X(91)90249-R (cit. on p. 9).
[70]
A. L. Alldredge and M. W. Silver. ‘Characteristics, dynamics and signiﬁcance of marine snow’. In: Progress in
Oceanography 20.1 (1988), pp. 41–82. doi: 10.1016/0079-6611(88)90053-5 (cit. on p. 9).
[71]
J. L. S. Hansen, T. Kiørboe and A. L. Alldredge. ‘Marine snow derived from abandoned larvacean houses: Sinking
rates, particle content and mechanisms of aggregate formation’. In: Marine Ecology Progress Series 141.1-3 (1996),
pp. 205–215. doi: 10.3354/meps141205 (cit. on p. 9).
[72]
S. Bonhomme, a. Cuer, a-M Delort, J. Lemaire, M. Sancelme and G. Scott. ‘Environmental biodegradation of
polyethylene’. In: Polymer Degradation and Stability 81.3 (Jan. 2003), pp. 441–452. doi: 10.1016/S0141-3910(03)
00129-0 (cit. on pp. 9, 10).
[73]
Y. Zheng, E. K. Yanful and A. S. Bassi. ‘A review of plastic waste biodegradation.’ In: Critical reviews in
biotechnology 25.4 (2005), pp. 243–50. doi: 10.1080/07388550500346359 (cit. on p. 9).
[74]
H. Bhardwaj, R. Gupta and A. Tiwari. ‘Communities of Microbial Enzymes Associated with Biodegradation of
Plastics’. In: Journal of Polymers and the Environment 21 (2013), pp. 575–579. doi: 10.1007/s10924-012-0456-z
(cit. on p. 9).
[75]
K. Yamada-Onodera, H. Mukumoto, Y. Katsuyaya, A. Saiganji and Y. Tani. ‘Degradation of polyethylene by a
fungus, Penicillium simplicissimum YK’. In: Polymer Degradation and Stability 72.2 (May 2001), pp. 323–327.
doi: 10.1016/S0141-3910(01)00027-1 (cit. on p. 9).
[76]
M. Sudhakar, M. Doble, P. S. Murthy and R. Venkatesan. ‘Marine microbe-mediated biodegradation of low- and
high-density polyethylenes’. In: International Biodeterioration & Biodegradation 61.3 (Apr. 2008), pp. 203–213.
doi: 10.1016/j.ibiod.2007.07.011 (cit. on p. 9).
[77]
J. P. Harrison, M. Schratzberger, M. Sapp and A. Osborn. ‘Rapid bacterial colonization of low-density polyethylene
microplastics in coastal sediment microcosms’. In: BMC Microbiology 14.1 (2014), p. 232. doi: 10.1186/s12866-
014-0232-4 (cit. on p. 10).
[78]
C. J. Moore. ‘Synthetic polymers in the marine environment: A rapidly increasing, long-term threat’. In: Envir-
onmental Research 108.2 (Oct. 2008), pp. 131–139. doi: 10.1016/j.envres.2008.07.025 (cit. on p. 10).
[79]
A. Cózar et al. ‘Plastic debris in the open ocean’. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111.28
(June 2014), pp. 10239–10244. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1314705111 (cit. on pp. 10–12).
[80]
R. D. Handy and B. J. Shaw. ‘Toxic eﬀects of nanoparticles and nanomaterials: Implications for public health, risk
assessment and the public perception of nanotechnology’. In: Health, Risk & Society 9.2 (June 2007), pp. 125–144.
doi: 10.1080/13698570701306807 (cit. on p. 10).
[81]
K. Enders and R. Lenz. ‘Abundance and Size Composition of Microplastics larger 10 micrometre along a North
Atlantic Transect (in preparation)’. In: (2015) (cit. on p. 12).
[82]
J. Reisser, B. Slat, K. Noble, K. du Plessis, M. Epp, M. Proietti, J. de Sonneville, T. Becker and C. Pattiaratchi.
‘The vertical distribution of buoyant plastics at sea: an observational study in the North Atlantic Gyre’. In:
Biogeosciences 12 (2015), pp. 1249–1256. doi: 10.5194/bg-12-1249-2015 (cit. on p. 12).
[83]
A. L. Andrady and P. O. Box. ‘Weathering of Polyethylene (LDPE) and Enhanced Photodegradable Polyethylene
in the Marine Environment’. In: Journal of Applied Polymer Science 39 (1990), pp. 363–370 (cit. on p. 12).
[84]
T. Kiørboe. ‘Pelagic ﬁsheries and spatio-temporal variability in zooplankton productivity’. In: Nihon Purankuton
Gakkaiho Special Issue (1991), pp. 229–249 (cit. on p. 11).
[85]
C. M. Boyd. ‘Selection of Particle Sizes by Filter-Feeding Copepods: A Plea for Reason’. In: American Society of
Limnology and Oceanography 21.1 (1976), pp. 175–180 (cit. on p. 11).
[86]
A. A. Koelmans, E. Besseling, A. Wegner and E. M. Foekema. ‘Plastic as a carrier of POPs to aquatic organisms:
a model analysis.’ In: Environmental science & technology 47.14 (July 2013), pp. 7812–20. doi: 10.1021/es401169n
(cit. on p. 11).
[87]
A. Bakir, S. J. Rowland and R. C. Thompson. ‘Enhanced desorption of persistent organic pollutants from mi-
croplastics under simulated physiological conditions.’ In: Environmental pollution (Barking, Essex : 1987) 185
(Mar. 2014), pp. 16–23. doi: 10.1016/j.envpol.2013.10.007 (cit. on p. 11).
[88]
A. Wegner, E. Besseling, E. M. Foekema, P. Kamermans and a. a. Koelmans. ‘Eﬀects of nanopolystyrene on the
feeding behavior of the blue mussel (Mytilus edulis L.).’ In: Environmental toxicology and chemistry / SETAC
31.11 (Nov. 2012), pp. 2490–7. doi: 10.1002/etc.1984 (cit. on p. 11).
[89]
E. L. Teuten et al. ‘Transport and release of chemicals from plastics to the environment and to wildlife.’ In:
Philosophical transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological sciences 364.1526 (July 2009),
pp. 2027–45. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2008.0284 (cit. on p. 11).
[90]
R. E. Engler. ‘The complex interaction between marine debris and toxic chemicals in the ocean’. In: Environmental
Science & Technology 46 (2012), pp. 12302–12315. doi: 10.1021/es3027105 (cit. on p. 11).
[91]
O. Setälä, V. Fleming-Lehtinen and M. Lehtiniemi. ‘Ingestion and transfer of microplastics in the planktonic food
web.’ In: Environmental pollution (Barking, Essex : 1987) 185 (Feb. 2014), pp. 77–83. doi: 10.1016/j.envpol.
2013.10.013 (cit. on p. 13).
[92]
J. Reisser, M. Proietti, J. Shaw and C. Pattiaratchi. ‘Ingestion of plastics at sea: does debris size really matter?’
In: frontiers December (2014). doi: 10.3389/fmars.2014.00070 (cit. on p. 13).
[93]
C. Halsband, M. Cole, P. Lindeque, E. Fileman, H. Webb and T. Galloway. Microplastics in plankton-based food
webs. Nordic Marine Litter Workshop Oslo, 2014 (cit. on p. 13).
[94]
R. Lam. ‘Model of Copepod Filtering Response to Changes in Size and Concentration of Food’. In: Limnology
and Oceanography 21.4 (1976), pp. 490–500 (cit. on p. 13).
[95]
G. Paﬀenhofer. ‘The Feeding Response of a Marine Planktonic Copepod to Quantity and Quality of Particles’. In:
Marine Ecology Progress Series 27.1-2 (1985), pp. 55–65 (cit. on p. 13).
[96]
P. L. Donaghay and L. F. Small. ‘Food selection capabilities of the estuarine copepod Acartia clausi’. In: Marine
Biology 52.2 (1979), pp. 137–146. doi: 10.1007/BF00390421 (cit. on p. 13).
24
==PAGE:33==
[97]
D. Powell. ‘Ingestion and Regurgitation of Living and Inert Materials by the Estuarine Copepod Eurytemora aﬁnis
( Poppe ) and the Inﬂuence of Salinity’. In: (1990), pp. 763–773 (cit. on p. 14).
[98]
F. Murray and P. R. Cowie. ‘Plastic contamination in the decapod crustacean Nephrops norvegicus (Linnaeus,
1758).’ In: Marine pollution bulletin 62.6 (June 2011), pp. 1207–17. doi: 10.1016/j.marpolbul.2011.03.032 (cit. on
p. 14).
[99]
C. M. Boerger, G. L. Lattin, S. L. Moore and C. J. Moore. ‘Plastic ingestion by planktivorous ﬁshes in the North
Paciﬁc Central Gyre.’ In: Marine pollution bulletin 60.12 (Dec. 2010), pp. 2275–8. doi: 10.1016/j.marpolbul.
2010.08.007 (cit. on p. 14).
[100]
M. Køie and K. Enders. Microplastic ﬁbre uptake by copepods. 2014 (cit. on p. 14).
[101]
E. Lokensgard. Industrial Plastics: Theory and Applications. Cengage Learning, 2008 (cit. on p. 19).
[102]
J. L. Koenig. Infrared and Raman Spectroscopy of Polymers. Vol. 12. 2. Smithers Rapra Press, 2001 (cit. on
p. 19).
[103]
H. G. M. Edwards. Modern Raman Spectroscopy—A Practical Approach. Vol. 36. 8. 2005, pp. 835–835. doi:
10.1002/jrs.1320 (cit. on pp. 19, 20).
[104]
D. W. Mayo, F. A. Miller and R. W. Hannah. Course Notes on the Interpretation of Infrared and Raman Spectra.
New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, 2003 (cit. on p. 19).
[105]
G. Socrates. Infrared and Raman characteristic group frequencies. 2004, p. 366. doi: 10.1002/jrs.1238 (cit. on
pp. 19, 20).
[106]
J. B. Lambert. ‘Peak Interpretation Lists.pdf’. In: Introduction to Organic Spectroscopy. 1987 (cit. on p. 20).
25
==PAGE:34==
Manuscript I
Abundance, Size and Polymer Composition of Marine Microplastics
≥10 µm in the Atlantic Ocean and their Modelled Vertical Distribu-
tion
M1-1
==PAGE:35==
Abundance, Size and Polymer Composition of Marine Microplastics ≥10 µm in
the Atlantic Ocean and their Modelled Vertical Distribution
Kristina Enders∗and Robin Lenz
National Institute for Aquatic resources, Technical University of Denmark, Kavalergården 6, 2920 Charlottenlund, Den-
mark
Abstract
We studied abundance, size and polymer type composition of microplastic (MP)
down to 10 µm along a transect from the European Coast to the North Atlantic Subtropical
Gyre (NASG). Sampling was conducted via the underway water intake of the vessel. Polymer
type identiﬁcation was examined using Raman micro-spectrometry. Microplastic concentrations
ranged from 13 to 501 particles m−3. Highest concentrations observed were near the European
coast, decreasing towards mid-Atlantic waters. Abundances were elevated in the western part of the
NASG. We observed highest numbers among particles in the smallest size fraction (10 µm), whereas
the volume was highest in the 50 to 80 µm range. Based on a numerical model the size-dependent
depth proﬁles of polyethylene microspheres in a range from 10 to 1000 µm were calculated and
show a strong dispersal below the mixed layer depth for sizes smaller than approximately 200
µm. From the model and ﬁeld study results we conclude that small microplastic is ubiquitously
distributed over the ocean surface layer and has a lower residence time than larger plastic debris
in this compartment.
Keywords: small microplastic, continuous monitoring, horizontal distribution, size-selective vertical distribution,
model
Introduction
The presence of plastic debris in marine en-
vironments has been recognised as a global
problem [1–3]. Predictions of the amount of
plastic ﬂoating in the ocean are on the order
of 250.000 tons [4], which is more than an or-
der of magnitude lower than conservative es-
timates of annual plastic waste input, which
was between 4.8 - 12.7 million tons in 2010 [5].
Given that plastics became a disposable mass
product in the 1950’s and production increased
steadily since, there is a large fraction of plastic
waste which is unaccounted for.
Once
in
the
oceans
plastic
undergoes
gradual degradation into smaller fragments
via physical, chemical and biological processes
[6]. Common terms used to categorise plastic
debris by its size, are macro, meso-, micro-
and nanoplastics. However, no standard ter-
minology has been implemented [6–8]. For mi-
croplastic, many use a lower size limit of ap-
proximately 300 µm [3, 9, 10].
We refer to
this fraction as large microplastic (L-MP) and
to particles smaller than that as small micro-
plastic (S-MP), the latter being the major sub-
ject of the present study. The size distribution
and therefore availability to diﬀerent groups of
organisms depends on degradation and distri-
bution processes.
Plastic partially source of chemical pollut-
ants itself, among others phthalate plasticisers,
polybrominated diphenyl ether ﬂame retard-
ants (PBDE) and bisphenols, can be a trans-
port vector of persistent organic pollutants
(POP) and heavy metals [11].
While large
plastic debris is a concern mainly due to phys-
ical harm, MP fragments additionally have an
increased risk due to their larger surface to
volume ratio.
This results in higher adsorp-
tion capacities [12] which, in combination with
higher bioavailability renders them a poten-
tial carrier of pollutants into the food web
[13]. Several laboratory studies indicate tox-
icological risks of S-MP but concentrations in
nature are not well known and only few stud-
ies exist [14–16]. The S-MP covers the food
size range of zooplankton, where copepods con-
stitute the major group [17]. They form the
link to planktivorous ﬁsh and thereby can be
an entrance for pollutants to the food chain.
Studies demonstrated uptake and a competing
eﬀect of microplastic with nutritious food and
subsequent loss of energetic resources, showing
sub-lethal eﬀects in egg production and repro-
ductive output [18, 19].
The purpose of this study was to investig-
ate the distribution of S-MP from coastal wa-
ters to the open ocean. For future studies on
microplastic - zooplankton interactions, it is
∗Corresponding author: Tel. +45 919 404 67, E-mail: kren@aqua.dtu.dk (K. Enders)
M1-2
==PAGE:36==
essential to know the concentration that or-
ganisms are exposed to in nature. To under-
stand the fate of MP we need to understand
the underlying dynamics in the marine plastic
circulation. The horizontal transport of buoy-
ant plastics is mainly determined by currents,
induced by wind forcing and geostrophic cir-
culation. This becomes obvious from the ob-
servations and model predictions that show
highest concentrations in coastal waters and
the subtropical convergence zones of the sea
surface velocity ﬁeld [9, 20, 21]. In the prac-
tical part of the present study we investigated
the abundance, size and polymer type distri-
bution of microplastics of sizes down to 10 µm
in near-surface waters on a transect through
diﬀerent oceanographic regions:
coastal wa-
ters (Southern North Sea, English Channel,
Celtic Sea), the open ocean (Atlantic) and
gyre system (Sargasso Sea).
It is hypothes-
ised that microplastic concentration is highest
in coastal regions then declines with increasing
distance, but is elevated within the North At-
lantic Subtropical Gyre (NASG). Further, it
is investigated if microplastics are associated
with distinct water masses and therefore diﬀer
across frontal systems. We developed a large-
scale sampling method for microplastic down
to 10 µm which can be conducted continuously
alongside other vessel operations. For the ana-
lysis we conducted a study comparing visual
identiﬁcation with Raman micro-spectrometry,
which is subject of an accompanying paper
[22].
More than half of the produced plastics have
a lower density than seawater which makes
them passively ﬂoating at the ocean’s surface
where they are subjected to mixing within the
surface boundary layer [23]. Vertical distribu-
tion is governed by wind-induced turbulences
such as breaking surface waves, bubble injec-
tion and Langmuir circulations [23].
Stud-
ies investigating the vertical distribution of
plastic have shown that MP mass decays faster
than particle abundance.
This implies size-
selective loss terms that preferentially remove
S-MP [21, 24]. Apart from the extrinsic pro-
cesses named above, the vertical distribution
of plastics also depends on intrinsic factors,
such as the plastic’s density, size and shape,
which all together inﬂuence its advection ve-
locity, and hence, the ability to maintain its
neutrally buoyant position against turbulent
displacement [25].
Therefore, in the present
study we discuss the apparent loss of S-MP
from the ocean surface layer using a numerical
model that describes the size selective ver-
tical distribution of low-density microplastic
particles through turbulent mixing.
Material and Methods
Sample Collection
The sampling was conducted alongside the
Danish ’Eel Expedition’ research cruise on-
board R/V. DANA from February to April
2014. Without inﬂuencing other activities on
board, continuous sampling was carried out via
the vessel’s underway seawater intake connec-
ted to a staggered ﬁltering device inside the
ship. Sample collection was halted when the
vessel stopped for standard cruise sampling
stations, in order to avoid contamination. The
vessels speed during which the pump was run-
ning ranged between 1 - 2 kn when surveying
and 10 - 12 kn when steaming. Across all ana-
lysed stations the average sampling time was
10 ± 5 hours. The sample volume was 2.6 ±
1.3 m3, calculated by ﬂow rate, which was 4.4
± 1.4 l min−1 in average, and sampling time.
In total 60 m3 have been ﬁltered.
The sea-
water intake was located at 3 m below wa-
terline on the forward port side of the ves-
sel.
The greywater outlet is situated at the
aft starboard side of the ship and does there-
fore not aﬀect the water collected. Seawater
was pumped aboard using a Grundfos CRT 02
pump at 0.37 kW power, 50Hz with an av-
erage ﬂow rate of 2.5 m3 per hour.
It is a
vertical non-selfpriming, multistage, centrifu-
gal pump made of titanium and stainless steel.
Due to the wave-induced vertical movements
of the ship and the hydrodynamic turbulence
from the ship bow, the seawater received at the
intake is regarded an integral of the ﬁrst 3 m
of the water column. Through stainless steel
and food grade polyvinylchloride pipes seawa-
ter was directed to the wet laboratory in the
ship where the microplastic ﬁltering device was
connected, parting the water ﬂow before exit-
ing the ship again. The sampling device which
is made of polypropylene pipe modules of 160
mm in diameter containing two round ﬁlter
M1-3
==PAGE:37==
mesh (plankton net, material:
polyamide-6)
of 300 and 10 µm mesh size (ﬁgure 1). High
suspended material content in some regions re-
quired switching to a 50 µm mesh instead in or-
der to prevent clogging of the ﬁlter unit. After
each sampling period the valve to the sampling
device was closed and the two ﬁlter meshes
transferred into individual petri dishes, sealed
and stored in room temperature until analysis.
Figure 1: Sketch of the MP ﬁlter unit consisting of
(A) inﬂow hose, (B) adapter, (C) lid with handle and
stopper screws to precisely ﬁt the round-cut net. The
middle unit (D) holds the two meshes in place, 300 µm
and 10 µm (or 50 µm) mesh size, respectively. The fol-
lowing outﬂow compartments (E), (F) and (G) mirror
the inﬂow parts in reverse order.
The following data was obtained from the
underway ship information system: position
(GPS), sea surface temperature, salinity and
wind velocity. Wind measurements were de-
rived from the shipboard anemometer at 23 m
height above mean waterline.
Contamination Prevention
The sampling device and all ﬁlter meshes
were thoroughly cleaned with deionised and
micro-ﬁltrated water (MilliQ, 1.2 µm) before
use.
At sampling stop the meshes were re-
moved from the ﬁlter cartridge, immediately
folded, transferred to a petri dish and sealed.
In the laboratory, a dress-code of non-plastic
material (lab coat, head cover, nitrile gloves)
and cleaned work surfaces, washed hands and
forearms were measures to prevent contamin-
ation from adhering dirt particles.
Prior to
use, all instruments and vials were cleaned
with MilliQ water. A thorough evaluation of
contamination risk and its importance for in
particular S-MP analysis is highly recommen-
ded [14]. In the present study control samples
were taken in all methodological steps.
The
ﬁrst control was to evaluate contamination
from the ﬁlter unit (from suction) including
ﬁlters, wherefore 30 l of MilliQ water were
ﬁltered in duplicate (control I). When rins-
ing and vacuum ﬁltrating during sample pre-
paration, open petri dishes ﬁlled with MilliQ
water, were placed in direct proximity to the
work area, providing a control of potential air-
borne contamination (control II). During ﬁl-
tration the ﬁltration funnel was covered with
aluminium foil. Additional controls account-
ing for contamination during vacuum ﬁltration
were taken by vacuum ﬁltrating 0.5 l MilliQ
water through the applied membrane ﬁlters
(control III). During analysis in the Raman
microscope the sample is enclosed inside the
instrument’s housing. It is expected that any
system-caused MP contamination would be
noticeable by repetitive occurrence of the same
kind of particles throughout the sample set.
Sample Preparation
The targeted sizes of MP ≥10 µm required
an expeditive method with minimal transfer-
ring steps to reduce contamination time and
prevent loss of particles. In order to be ana-
lysed under the microscope the samples were
upconcentrated and in case of high suspended
material content reduced to subsamples. The
ﬁlter meshes were ﬁrst dried at 60◦C for 24
hours. Each mesh was transferred into a clean
screw-top glass jar containing 150 ml of mi-
croﬁltrated water with added 150 µl sodium
dodecylsulfate solution (SDS, 150 g l−1). The
tenside removes organic materials from the
plastic and prevents adherence to the nylon
mesh or jar. The suspension was subsequently
soniﬁcated for 20 min in an ultrasonic bath
and settled overnight.
The supernatant was
directly vacuum ﬁltered using 10 µm pore
size polyamide or polycarbonate membrane
ﬁlter, 25 mm in diameter. The residues pre-
pared for visual identiﬁcation under the micro-
scope were analysed in the remaining volume.
Whereas for Raman spectrometry prepared
residues were vacuum ﬁltered alike the super-
natant and in case of high material content
reduced using a plankton splitter. For detailed
documentation the reader is referred to our
protocol (supplementary S-8).
The organic
material content of the samples was generally
very low and mostly degraded after a storage
time of several weeks until further processing.
M1-4
==PAGE:38==
Laboratory Analysis
The overall aim in the analysis was to re-
liably discriminate plastic from non-plastic
material, to categorise with respect to mor-
phology and plastic type, and to measure the
size of the present microplastics. A combined
method of visual identiﬁcation and Raman
micro-spectrometric analysis was applied to
minimise false-positive (non-plastics recorded
as MP) misidentiﬁcations. While all samples
were undergoing the criteria-based visual ana-
lysis, a subset (15 out of 23 stations) has been
additionally analysed using Raman. From this
double-analysed data set we grouped similar
items based on characteristic appearance prop-
erties.
Within each of these groups we cal-
culated the ratio between the total number
of visually identiﬁed MPs and the part that
could be conﬁrmed by Raman spectral ana-
lysis [22]. In samples where only visual ana-
lysis was applied, items were grouped into the
same categories and the counted number were
multiplied with the respective ratios. All re-
ported concentrations were Raman-corrected
in that way. Likewise it was necessary to cor-
rect for potentially lost particles from stations
where a 50 µm mesh was applied instead of
10 µm.
The percentage of particles smaller
than 50 µm on all regular 10 µm meshes was
determined.
The amount of particles on 50
µm meshes was subsequently corrected by this
percentage in order to compare data from the
diﬀerent stations.
Light Microscopy
Microplastics were visually identiﬁed using
a Leitz Laborlux 12 for ﬁlters and an inverted
Nikon Diaphot 200 with 10x and 50x object-
ives and 10x oculars. Identiﬁcation was based
on morphological features derived from a pilot-
study on self-made plastic shreds and literat-
ure data [26]. Major plastic features are: the
absence of repetitive structures indicative of
biological origin, homogeneous colouring un-
less due to transparency, and in case of ﬁbrous
forms equal thickness and three-dimensional
bending. For further details see the MP identi-
ﬁcation catalogue (supplementary S-12). The
creation of the MP identiﬁcation catalogue was
based on visual examination and additionally
assisted by the selective conduction of a melt-
ing test with a melting point apparatus using
a temperature range of 150 to 280◦C (Omega
MPS10 Series).
Plastic-typic melting beha-
viour and odour has been observed to identify
uncertain particles. A useful applicability of
the melting test was limited to particles > 50
µm as smaller particles are practically non-
transferable and it becomes impossible to de-
tect melting behaviour or odour.
MP objects were categorised into two ma-
jor groups: ﬁbres and particles. Other studies
used further distinction criteria such as ﬁlms
(or sheets) and expanded foams [27], however,
in the investigated size range of the present
study only ﬁbres were visually distinguishable
from other particles. Transparent and coloured
ﬁlms, sheets or ﬂakes that were present in some
of the samples were included in the group of
particles because the two-dimensional micro-
scopic images did not allow an unambiguous
distinction of these types. For size distribution
analysis particles and ﬁbres were measured in
length, according to the longest dimension,
and width, perpendicular to length. Particle
size distribution were calculated as the geomet-
ric mean of the ﬁrst and the second dimension.
Fibres are reported in length only.
Raman Micro-Spectrometry
Raman spectra were obtained via spectral
measurements on a DXR Raman microscope
(Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc), with a laser dia-
meter of 0.5 µm and a wavelength of 455 nm.
Raman shifted spectra were recorded in the
range of 100 - 3500 cm−1 and with a regular ex-
posure time of 20 s, but up to several minutes
in single cases of particles that gave poor sig-
nal quality.
For Raman micro-spectrometry
each sample was directly searched on the ﬁl-
ter in a grid-like pattern and with 50% ﬁlter
area coverage. For the search and spectra col-
lection 10-fold and 50-fold magniﬁcation ob-
jective (Olympus) were used, respectively. For
each particle suspected of being plastic mul-
tiple measurements at diﬀerent spots on the
particle ensured the prevention of false signals
due to local impurities such as an organic mat-
rix or enclosures of other materials. A library
of all major commodity plastic polymers was
created and used as reference (table 1. Poly-
M1-5
==PAGE:39==
mers of high spectral similarity were treated as
one in the data analysis. See also supplements
S-14 for spectral reference.
Table 1: Names and abbreviations of polymers used in
the spectral identiﬁcation with its respective densities
[28]. Superscript letters indicate polymers that were
treated as one group in this study. The mid-line separ-
ates high density (HD) and low density (LD) polymers
with respect to the density of seawater (1.02 - 1.029 g
cm−3).
Abbr.
Polymer
g cm−3
PP
polypropylene
0.85-0.92
EVAa
ethylene vinyl acetate
0.92-0.95
LDPEa
high density polyethylene
0.94-0.98
HDPEa
high density polyethylene
0.89-0.93
(E)PSb
(expanded) polystyrene
1.04-1.06
ABSb
acrylonitrile butadiene styrene
1.04-1.08
PA
polyamide
1.12-1.15
PMMA
polymethylmethacrylate
1.16-1.20
PCc
polycarbonate
1.20-1.22
PU
polyurethane
1.20-1.26
PETc
polyethyleneterephthalate
1.38-1.41
PESc
group of polyesters
1.10-1.40
PVC
polyvinylchloride
1.38-1.41
PTFE
polytetraﬂuoroethylene
2.10-2.30
All
measured
particles
were
photo-
documented and saved together with their
corresponding spectra. For details of spectral
preprocessing and analysis see the accompany-
ing paper [22].
Hydrography
From the same underway water system
where samples were collected, a surface CTD
system (Seabird SBE 21) provided data on
temperature and salinity. Grouping of oceano-
grahic regions according to hydrographic prop-
erties and geography (ﬁgure 2) allowed spatial
comparison of MP concentrations. Maps were
generated using Ocean Data View [29]. Sta-
tions from coastal European waters across the
Atlantic, European Coastal (E-Co), European
Oﬀshore and Azores (E-Oﬀ-AZ) and Atlantic
Open Ocean (AOO), were characterised by a
steady increase in temperature and salinity
and regions were mainly separated geograph-
ically. The Sargasso Sea as part of the gyre
system was grouped into three separate re-
gions, North-NASG (N-NASG), Mid-NASG
(M-NASG), South-NASG (S-NASG), charac-
terised by distinct temperatures as the North
Atlantic Subtropical Front was crossed. The
strength of the frontal system is varying with
season and had its strongest manifestation dur-
ing the time of the expedition [30]. During the
passage the front was located between 25 ◦and
30 ◦north.
Theoretical Fragmentation Considerations
Assuming a steady disintegration of large
size objects into smaller ones will result in
an equal distribution of the total volume V
over the number of present size classes n [21].
The volume share Vi in each class stays con-
stant and is equal to the product of the single
particle volume and the abundance in a class
Ni. In case of spherical particles with the dia-
meter d it is given by
Vi = V
n = Ni · πd3
6
(1)
The number of fragments in a size class then
depends on the dimensionality of the break
down processes which can be approximated
as being three-dimensional for spherical and
angular shaped particles, two-dimensional for
sheets, ﬁlms or ﬂakes and one-dimensional for
ﬁbres. The numeric distribution of abundance
over i = 1, 2, . . . , n size classes can be calcu-
lated as
Ni = d−λ
i
(2)
where the scaling exponent λ is equal to the
dimensionality of the fragmentation process.
Hence, number of ﬁbres can be expected to
increase inversely with fragment volume, while
ﬁlm and particle abundances scale squared and
cubed, respectively.
Statistical Analysis
The
signiﬁcance
of
diﬀerences
between
groups
was
evaluated
using
the
Mann-
Whitney-U test.
The Spearman’s rank test
was used to investigate for the degree of asso-
ciation. Statistics were performed in Matlab
[31].
Results
Contamination Control
No microplastic particles were found in any
of the control steps described in the meth-
M1-6
==PAGE:40==
Figure 2: (left) Temperature-Salinity plot as basis for regional grouping according to hydrographic properties
and geography. Station 1 and 2 are greyed out as no TS-data was available there. (right) Map of regional
grouping: European Coastal (E-Co), European Oﬀshore and Azores (E-Oﬀ-AZ), Atlantic Open Ocean (AOO),
North-NASG (N-NASG), Mid-NASG (M-NASG), South-NASG (S-NASG).
ods. No particulate plastic resembling mater-
ial could be found on the blank samples. Few
ﬁbres appeared throughout: seven ﬁbres dur-
ing ﬁltration (control I), a total of 28 ﬁbres
were found in control II (number of blanks:
n=10) and two ﬁbres during vacuum ﬁltration
(control III). All ﬁbres were, however, of non-
plastic nature, suggesting to originate from
non-synthetic clothing worn during laboratory
work.
Fibres of similar appearance to those
in controls have been found in several samples
and have been classiﬁed as non-plastic.
Microplastic Abundance
Microplastic was found at all 23 stations
with concentrations ranging from 13 to 501
particles m−3 (ﬁgure 3).
The total transect
length was 4617 km. We observe a strong de-
creasing trend in average microplastic concen-
trations on the transect from the E-Co region
to the AOO. The average concentrations of mi-
croplastic in the E-Co region is signiﬁcantly
higher (p < 0.05), nearly 10 times, than con-
centrations found in the AOO region, which
represent the areas of overall highest and low-
est MP concentrations, respectively (ﬁgure 3).
The region in between, the E-Oﬀ-Az, shows in-
termediate concentrations with signiﬁcant dif-
ferences to the AOO region. E-Oﬀ-Az has a
local maximum at station 8 where concentra-
tions are more than double of the average of
the three other stations in within this region.
From the AOO to the NASG regions the con-
centrations showed a general increase, with a
maximum factor of four comparing AOO to M-
NASG. In the NASG, highest concentrations
were found in the M-NASG region, which is
about 1.7 and 1.3 times the concentrations in
S-NASG and N-NASG, respectively. Among
the three NASG regions, station 23 and 46
showed greatest microplastic abundance, on
average three times higher than the mean of
the surrounding stations.
Approximately 40% of all microplastics
identiﬁed was attributed to ﬁbres.
Fibrous
microplastic concentrations generally follows
particle abundance patterns, however the ﬁbre
to particle ratio is lower in the E-Co and the
M-NASG region with about a third of ﬁbrous
MPs. The region of lowest microplastic abund-
ance, AOO, shows highest proportional ﬁbre
occurrence.
Throughout the transect ﬁbres
show lower spatial ﬂuctuations.
Microplastic Size Distribution
The smallest particle and ﬁbre found were
7 µm and 13 µm in length, the largest one 407
µm and 1 cm, respectively (np=543, nf=340).
Figure 4 and 5 show the normalised size distri-
bution of particles and ﬁbres of the size ana-
lysed subset (n=883). The majority, 63%, of
particles are < 50 µm. The same percentage
for ﬁbres is reached at < 900 µm.
Both particles and ﬁbres were steadily in-
M1-7
==PAGE:41==
Figure 3: (top) Averaged concentrations of microplastic particles and ﬁbres grouped in oceanographic regions
along the Atlantic transect. Regions not sharing the same letter are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent (p < 0.05). (bottom)
Plastic concentrations for particles and ﬁbres at each measured station. Stations are sorted according to regions
in the top panel.
M1-8
==PAGE:42==
Figure 4: Relative microplastic particle size distribution of all analysed stations (np=543). Dark grey bars
represent particles by length. Light grey bars show the size as geometric mean of length and width. The last
bar (right) marked with * represents the average of the given size range. Images show the smallest (left) and
largest (right) MP particles found and conﬁrmed via Raman.
Figure 5: Relative size distribution of microplastic ﬁbres of all size analysed stations (nf=340). The last bar
(right) marked with * represents the average of the given size range.
M1-9
==PAGE:43==
creasing in numbers with decreasing size. The
increase in size was, however, lower than what
could be expected under continuous fragment-
ation.
Particle size distribution ﬁts a power
law regression in the size range from 10 to 110
µm with a scaling exponent of λ = 1.96 with
r2 = 0.76 using the calculated geometric mean
size of length and width. Figure 7 shows the
volume distribution of all particle size classes
from 10 to 110 µm.
Larger size classes had too small n to be
compared. Sizes from ≥50 to 80 µm comprise
half of the bulk plastic volume for particles in
the depicted range.
A power law regression
ﬁtted to the ﬁbre size distribution and scales
with an exponent of λ = 0.999 with r2 = 0.77,
excluding the size range between 10 µm to 100
µm.
Figure 6: Total plastic concentration per station, meas-
ured via underway water sampling, plotted against av-
erage wind speed per station. Data symbols have been
assigned to the oceanographic regions.
Although wind state is known to impact
abundance of L-MP and larger plastics in sur-
face samples, in our data there is no trend ap-
parent, neither in the overall nor in within re-
gions (ﬁgure 6), (Spearman’s rank, r = -0.098,
p = 0.66).
Figure 7: Plastic volume distribution over equivalent
spherical diameter (ESD), approximated by the geo-
metric mean of particle length and width.
Microplastic Characterisation
Approximately half (48 %) of the micro-
plastics found were polyethylene (PE) and
polypropylene (PP), both having a lower dens-
ity than seawater (table 1). The relative con-
tribution of these low density (LD) micro-
plastics show a rising trend with distance from
land (ﬁgure 8).
In the gyre, the mid region M-NASG shows
the highest LD microplastic fraction of approx-
imately 88%. High density (HD) particles such
as PS, PA, PMMA, PU, PVC and PES (table
1) collectively, account for about a quarter of
the total. Their contribution is lowest in the
M-NASG. Most HD microplastics show a de-
crease from E-Co to AOO. As an exception,
PA, which is relatively equally distributed has
its maximum contribution in AOO, the area
furthest away from land and with the lowest
microplastic load. It is, however, low in ab-
solute abundance in the M-NASG. PES only
shows considerable absolute concentrations in
the E-Co and E-Oﬀ-Az region. PU, which fol-
lows a similar but more pronounced decreasing
trend with distance from shore is completely
absent in the AOO region. PS does not show
clear trends in its distribution pattern and is
generally very low in abundance.
A quarter
of the microplastics were assigned to plastic-
like polymers (U1). Obtained spectra showed
highest similarities with pigments commonly
used in textiles and plastics, giving clear in-
dication of their anthropogenic origin. How-
M1-10
==PAGE:44==
Figure 8: Relative abundance of polymer types in the Raman conﬁrmed samples from all stations (left) and as
transition over the oceanographic regions (right).
Figure 9: Distribution of sizes among the oceanographic regions. Particles (top), ﬁbres (bottom). The number
of samples n for each region is written above the plots. Note: the data shown here is only including the subset
of samples that have been Raman analysed and numbers n cannot be related to the total concentrations in
the regions. LD polymers are shown in blue, HD polymers in red, following table 1. The scatter plots (left)
are overlaid by the median of the size distribution as a solid line with .25 and .75 quantiles as areas. Arrows
indicate signiﬁcant diﬀerences. The box plots (right) compare the total size distribution of lighter and denser
polymers. For better visibility y axes were truncated below the maximum outliers.
M1-11
==PAGE:45==
ever, the pigment signal completely overlaid
the plastic type signal so that a precise identi-
ﬁcation was not possible. A very low abundant
group (U2) was slightly but consistently devi-
ating from U1 and therefore treated as an own
group. Properties of these two groups are dis-
cussed in the accompanying manuscript [22].
Microplastic particles of densities lower
than sea water were signiﬁcantly larger (p <
0.001) throughout the transect than those of
higher density as can be seen in ﬁgure 9. This
does not hold true for the two ﬁbre categories.
However, the low sample sizes for LD ﬁbres
question the reliability.
LD particles which
were predominant in numbers in M-NASG
were signiﬁcantly larger (p < 0.05) than in
the coastal region. In this region LD and HD
particles were signiﬁcantly diﬀerent in size (p
< 0.001). The diﬀerences of median sizes were
strongest of all regions in the N-NASG and
M-NASG with 32 and 21 µm, respectively.
Model of Vertical Particle Distribution
The vertical distribution of plastic particles
in a water column is determined by the advect-
ive transport towards neutral buoyancy and
turbulent mixing forces that displace particles
from their neutral buoyant position. Here we
simulate polyethylene with sizes of 10, 100 and
1000 µm.
The rising or sinking velocity de-
pends on the diﬀerence in density of the poly-
mer (ρp = 930 kgm−3) to seawater (ρf = 1025
kgm−3) as well as the size and shape of the
object in decreasing order of inﬂuence [25].
The model results are presented in ﬁgure 10.
The shape was approximated to be spherical
for all particles by using the equivalent spher-
ical diameter. The terminal velocity w for a
sphere with radius r is deﬁned where gravita-
tional force F and the hydrodynamic drag D
are equal.
F = (mf −mp)g
(3)
To account for the force of buoyancy, the mass
was calculated as the diﬀerential mass between
the plastic sphere mp and the water it dis-
placed mf and g is the gravitational acceler-
ation of 9.81 ms−2.
D = 1
2 π CDρfr2w2
(4)
The drag coeﬃcient CD is a dimensionless
number. An empirical expression for CD that
depends on the Reynolds number was used to
calculate the drag force acting on a sphere
which is steadily translating through a ﬂuid
[32].
CD = 24
Re + 5
1
√
Re + 2
5
(5)
with the Reynolds number Re
Re = 2 rw
ν
(6)
where ν is the kinematic viscosity of sea water
(here 1.1·10−6 m2s−1).
Inserting equation 5 and 6 in 4 and setting
equal to 3, we get
mg = 1
2 π
 
12 ν
rw + 5√ν
√
2rw + 2
5
!
ρf r2w2 (7)
from which w was implicitly calculated for the
three modelled particle sizes.
The spatial solution over one dimension was
solved using an implicit up-wind scheme in
closed boundaries according to the partial dif-
ferential equation
∂Pi
∂t = αi
∂2Pi
∂z2 −wi
∂Pi
∂z
(8)
with Pi being the concentration at depth zi
at time t.
The mass diﬀusion coeﬃcient α
for turbulent diﬀusivity was tested in two dif-
ferent cases:
ﬁrstly, a constant value (0.01
m2s−1) and, secondly, a simulated realistic
open ocean diﬀusivity proﬁle was applied. The
latter was obtained from the hydrodynamic
model GOTM [33] using a scenario of ocean
weather station data from "Station Papa" [34].
The applied diﬀusivity proﬁles are shown in
ﬁgure 10d.
Recently an in-situ study demonstrated
that numerical plastic concentrations decrease
exponentially in within the ﬁrst 5 m below the
air-seawater interface [24]. They measured the
rising velocities of MP of 500 µm and larger,
where smaller plastic particles had lower velo-
cities (lowest 10−3ms−1). This empirical value
ﬁts well within the range of the velocities cal-
culated for our model with 5 · 10−6, 4 · 10−4
and 2.2 · 10−2 ms−1 for 10, 100 and 1000 µm,
respectively.
The largest size group is nearly unaﬀected
by turbulent mixing and 98.9% remains in the
M1-12
==PAGE:46==
Figure 10: Modelled vertical distribution of polyethylene MP in 3 sizes, approximated as equivalent spherical
diameter (ESD). Particles were injected at initial conditions in the uppermost vertical layer (modelled domain
depth 250 m, spatial resolution 1 m). Dashed lines represent a model case where a constant diﬀusivity vector
was used. Solid line graphs were produced by using open ocean turbulence conditions, simulated in GOTM. (a-
c) show the converged solutions with numbers normalised to the total number of particles in the water column.
(d) applied diﬀusivity proﬁles. (e) cumulated plastic abundance from surface to possible sampling depths. (f)
total plastic distribution with equal numbers of plastic spheres in each size class. (g) total plastic concentration
with size dependent initial conditions N = ESD−3.
M1-13
==PAGE:47==
Figure 11: (left) Size dependence of the portion of total plastic abundance that is mixed below the surface layer
compartment for 5 diﬀerent layer thicknesses. (right) Péclet number over size and depth. Black line indicates
Pe = 1.
surface metres.
Particles of 100 µm and 10
µm also have their maximum concentration in
the top layer which, however, only account for
4.8% and 1.5% of the total MP abundance in
the simulated domain of 250 m. The smallest
size class shows nearly uniformly high abund-
ances over the upper 55 m, below which a sud-
den drop to zero can be observed.
This co-
incides with the incipient pycnocline from the
simulated hydrodynamic scenario. The total
concentration depth distribution is determined
by the size spectrum present. A case with the
same number of particles for each size class
results in a surface dominated distribution, as
shown in ﬁgure 10f. If a realistic size structure
is applied where particle numbers increase to
the power of 3 with decreasing diameter [21],
the total abundance proﬁle will approximate
the distribution of the dominant smallest MP
classes as shown in ﬁgure 10g. If volume or
mass of plastic were modelled for a pool of frag-
mented particles instead of size, the bulk will
be found accumulating in the surface layer and
the combined depth distribution proﬁle will re-
semble ﬁgure 10f.
Our model shows that there is a funda-
mental diﬀerence between the vertical disper-
sion of small and large MP. Positively buoy-
ant polymers like PE and PP of sizes > 1 mm
are ﬂoating on the surface in the same manner
as the macroplastic debris they had been frag-
mented from. Half of the total S-MP of 100 µm
is expected to be found in the upper 24 m and
there are almost no particles displaced below
56 m (ﬁgure 10e). For 10 µm the respective
depths are 33 and 80 m.
By applying the model to a range of inter-
mediate MP sizes we found a rapid transition
from a buoyancy dominated towards a turbu-
lence dominated distribution. The transition
was fastest between sizes of 200 to 400 µm.
We examined the percentage of particles that
were mixed below a surface layer of varying
thickness as a measure of the turbulence or ad-
vection dominated character (ﬁgure 11). The
calculated Péclet number, which provides an
indication of relative importance of diﬀusivity
and advection, ranged from 10−10 to 6.5, where
only sizes larger 400 µm exceeded Pe ≥1 in
the lower parts of the water column. Although
the Péclet number suggests a dominance of dif-
fusive transport for all three sizes in the mixed
surface layer (Pe ≪1), only a minuscule por-
tion of the 1000 µm particles is dispersed below
the surface.
In addition to the described case the model
was applied to simulate polystyrene spheres
which have a density slightly higher than sea-
water (∆ρ = 25 kg m−3, table 1). While sizes
larger 100 µm settled out of the water column
relatively quickly, sizes of 10 µm remained
mixed throughout the lower half of the mod-
M1-14
==PAGE:48==
elled domain. Particles approached the lower
system boundary asymptomatically over time
and no steady state was observed after a max-
imum simulation length of 40 years.
Discussion
Concentrations found in the present study
are higher than reported for L-MP [35], how-
ever lower in comparison to values found for
the same size class [15, 36]. Our result showed
a comparatively low variation over about 1.5
orders of magnitude.
The large diﬀerences
in MP concentrations between studies cannot
only be related to the levels of plastic pollution
in the investigated regions. Rather it can be
explained by diﬀerent sampling techniques, i.e.
surface micro layer, surface layer or subsurface
layer sampling, and diﬀerent mesh sizes. Also
the highly dynamic character of the ocean sur-
face compartment creating a temporally and
spatially varying patchiness of concentration
distributions may contribute to the observed
diﬀerences.
In oﬀ-shore waters we found similar concen-
tration levels as a study oﬀthe Canadian west
coast [16], however, in our study the maximum
concentrations in coastal waters were an order
of magnitude lower. The averaging eﬀect of our
comparatively long individual sampling tran-
sects (mean 200 km) combined with the fact
that our coastal samples (mid waters of the
English Channel) were further away from shore
may resulted in this diﬀerence. There were no
samples in this study that contained zero mi-
croplastic suggesting that microplastic is om-
nipresent. A study of anthropogenic particles
and ﬁbres in the Skagerak used a similar meth-
odology, where water from 0 - 1.5 m below the
surface was pumped through a 10 µm mesh
[36]. Their reported concentrations were more
than 2 orders of magnitude higher than our
maximum, but included other non-plastic an-
thropogenic ﬁbres (e.g. semi-synthetic regen-
erated cellulosic materials) as well as not fur-
ther speciﬁed black particles.
It was stated
that these can be black carbon, rubber wear
from tires or black minerals misidentiﬁed as
anthropogenic particles. We also found a large
number of black particles that were diﬃcult
to identify visually. Only those that exhibited
clearly identiﬁable structural characteristics of
MP were included in the data set. Raman ana-
lysis of black and transparent particles resul-
ted in a signiﬁcantly higher rejection rate com-
pared to all particles (p < 0.001, [22]).
As a comparison a study collecting MP of
sizes larger than 250 µm in the North East At-
lantic west of Ireland [35] found concentrations
ranging between 0 to 22.5 m−3 with the mean
at 2.5 m−3, whereas our concentrations in the
same size range were substantially higher with
a mean of 44.6 m−3 and a range between 4 to
117 m−3.
Comparing our S-MP dominated data set
to a long-term series (20 years) of L-MP con-
centration measurements in the western part
of the NASG [9] reveals good consistency in
distribution patterns.
In particular the two
stations of highest concentration (St. 23, 46)
were identiﬁed as microplastic (L-MP) hotspot
areas before.
A theoretical Lagrangian drifter model [37]
shown in ﬁgure 12 predicted the accumula-
tion of surface plastic in the NASG with an
east-west expansion throughout the Atlantic
between 25◦N and 40◦N over a timespan of 10
years emerging from an initially homogeneous
state. The maximum MP concentrations in our
study were located about 12◦westward from
the predicted maximum accumulation zones
after 10 years.
Instead, our distribution pattern, shown
in ﬁgure 12a, was better approximated by
the solution after one year where the up-
concentration of MP in the central gyre is not
yet fully developed and two zones of accumu-
lation can be observed: one in the western Sar-
gasso Sea and a weaker one around the Azores
(ﬁgure 12b). On the contrary, the spatial dis-
tribution of L-MP and larger plastic debris in
the Northern Subtropical Atlantic was repor-
ted with maximum concentrations between 39◦
and 55◦W [21]. Comparing their concentra-
tion distribution to the drift model prediction
[37] it obviously is closer to the 10 years scen-
ario (ﬁgure 12c). We argue that these diﬀer-
ences in distribution patterns can be explained
by a shorter residence time of S-MP in the sur-
face layer. The resulting concentration proﬁles
of our water column model supports this idea,
showing an increased vertical distribution of
microplastics with decreasing size, which di-
lutes S-MP abundances in surface ocean wa-
M1-15
==PAGE:49==
Figure 12: Evaluation of the observed North Atlantic MP pattern under the perspective of oceanographic drift.
Total MP concentrations ≥10 µm in the surface (a). Spatial gridded interpolation was created with the DIVA
function in Ocean Data View 4 [29]. Below: maps showing the solution to a drift model simulating the spatial
distribution of oceanic surface drifters: after 1 year (b) and 10 years (c). Maps (b) and (c) modiﬁed from [37].
M1-16
==PAGE:50==
ters.
Fragmented microplastic is expected to ini-
tially occur concomitantly with its macro-
plastic precursors. In addition to this second-
ary microplastic formation in the gyres, coastal
regions were identiﬁed as being a major con-
tributor to fragmentation processes as a res-
ult of size-selective onshore mass transport of
meso- and macroplastics [20]. The formed mi-
croplastics can to a large extent escape the on-
shore Stokes drift, which decays exponentially
with depth, and return back oﬀshore. Estuar-
ies and semi-enclosed coastal regions can also
act as accumulation zones with fragmentation
conditions harsher than in the gyres, due to in-
creased wave action and grinding by sand and
rocks.
Together with primary microplastics
from land or shipping activities the input and
net distribution of microplastics is rather dis-
persed in contrast to more point-like sources of
macroplastic.
Over large spacial scales average micro-
plastic concentrations decrease with distance
from land due to dilution, implying that the
major input comes from land.
Over smaller
scales concentrations are inﬂuenced by local
sources and residence times. Hence, the elev-
ated concentration that we found in the west-
ern part of the gyre may partially be inﬂuenced
from coastal plastic loads from the American
continental coast, which was about 800 km
from our most westward stations.
The local
concentration maximum at station 8 is most
likely due to the proximity to the Azores is-
lands (approx. 100 km) and consequent land
based sources. The region is also characterised
by intensive shipping activities.
In the NASG we measured highest MP con-
centrations in the mid latitudinal region, M-
NASG, which were dominated by LD poly-
mers.
At the same time the contribution of
HD was lowest of all regions.
This is reas-
onable as the water here is considered relat-
ively old in terms of last contact to land-based
sources, thus time long enough for HD particles
to sink out of the upper layer. All stations of
M-NASG were situated in the frontal system.
The northern and southern water masses bor-
dering in this region converge at the frontal
system leading to a downwelling which leaves
behind transported plastic debris that is able
to withstand the downward advection.
This
process would lead to increased plastic accu-
mulation in the sea surface [23, 38] which can
be conﬁrmed here regarding the elevated LD
particle concentrations.
On the other hand
downwelling removes a part of the MP pool,
preferentially small particles and MP of higher
density that could only remain in the surface
through turbulent mixing. In conformity with
this, a study on S-MP in the Northern Pa-
ciﬁc observed the opposite trend for a local up-
welling region [16] concluding that MP abund-
ance is shaped by oceanographic conditions.
Plastic particles with lower density will in av-
erage withstand the removal especially in the
larger size ranges. Our data supports this the-
ory as we ﬁnd the strongest separation between
HD and LD polymers both in concentration
and size in the M-NASG and the neighbouring
N-NASG region.
Although our model did not support to ﬁnd
HD polymers in the surface ocean, they were
present in our ﬁeld samples, which were identi-
ﬁed by Raman spectrometry. Also other stud-
ies reported PS, PES, PVC, and PA in sea
surface or subsurface samples [15, 39, 40]. It
is likely that other factors than terminal ve-
locity and turbulent mixing play a role in the
prevalence of various polymer types in sea sur-
face. Bioﬁlm formation and degradation may
change the apparent density.
Some macro-
plastic debris of heavy polymers may ﬂoat due
to air enclosures, i.e. foamed materials, thus
providing a steady source at the sea surface of
S-MP shred oﬀby fragmenting physical and
chemical forces.
Furthermore, airborne mi-
croplastic can be introduced with dust from
civilised areas. The above mentioned factors
are possible reasons explaining the presence
of higher density polymers as a result from
a steady input over large spatial scales. For
diﬀerent polymers these sources also depend
on their typical applications and areas of use.
It is likely that PA enters the ocean directly
as shreds from ropes and nets used in ship-
ping and ﬁshing industry.
In the M-NASG
region ﬁbrous microplastic was three times as
abundant as particles of which 61% is due to
PA which is a commonly used synthetic textile
ﬁbre. It has been empirically shown that ver-
tical advection velocities are lowest for ﬁbrous
shaped microplastics compared to sheets and
particles with otherwise equal properties [24,
M1-17
==PAGE:51==
25], which contributes to longer residence times
and thereby to more homogeneous concentra-
tions in the upper layers of the water column.
The most produced synthetic ﬁbres are PES
[41]. Yet, it is of overall low numeric abund-
ance (6%, ﬁgure 8) because of its high dens-
ity and has its absolute minimum in the AOO
region.
PS was found equally spread across
regions which might be due its small dens-
ity diﬀerence to that of sea water. Addition-
ally, expanded PS (EPS) can travel far before
trapped air is released due to degradation pro-
cesses, leading to a more dispersed occurrence
PS micro-particles.
The size structure of MP particles was
steadily increasing in numbers towards lower
sizes
and
we
could
not
conﬁrm
reduced
amounts close to the lower sampling size, as
several other studies reported [21, 35, 43]. The
number of particles, however, increased less
than expected for a mass conserving fragment-
ation process, which is in conformity with a
suggested "missing fraction" of small sized MP
[21, 24].
The smaller size classes (10 to 50
µm) therefore comprised a lower fraction of
the total plastic load, compared to those in
mid size range. The power law regressions to
the size distributions suggest that ﬁbres fol-
lowed the expected one-dimensional fragment-
ation.
The group of particles included ﬂat
sheet-like fragments which are expected to in-
crease in numbers squared with the decay of
their size through fragmentation.
However,
the group will be dominated by the three-
dimensional fragmenting objects when frag-
ments become very small and the theoretical
scaling exponent can be expected to be close
to 3 unless ﬂat objects outnumber the three-
dimensional particles, which was not the case
in our samples. The ﬁtted regression for this
group was scaling with an exponent of 1.96, in-
dicating that either fragmentation accelerates
with decreasing size or that there is an eﬀect
of other loss terms, or a combination of both.
In table 2 we summarise the most important
factors that contribute to the apparent loss of
S-MP from the ocean surface layer. In accord-
ance with this, size distribution of ﬁbres found
in the present study showed an abrupt decrease
of sizes smaller 100 µm, which is most likely
due to the fact that most ﬁbres have a diameter
ranging from 8 - 20 µm, which is close to the
sample minimum.
Thus the risk of slippage
through the net is increased the shorter the
ﬁbre. Additionally, ﬁbres of lengths close to
their widths can be easily identiﬁed as particles
instead.
Due to wind-induced mixing in within the
upper layer of the water column, net tow
sampling (usually at 0 - 25 cm depth) var-
ies with strength of wind forcing where lower
surface concentrations are generally associated
with higher wind speeds [23]. Under the lim-
itations of a relatively small sample size no
apparent trend between our plastic concen-
trations and wind speed is evident (ﬁgure 6),
leading to the conclusion that underway water
sampling is relatively insensitive to concentra-
tion under- or overestimation by wind induced
mixing. This supports the assumption that un-
derway water sampling collects a mixture of
the upper water column (3 m), resulting in
an homogeneously distributed sample repres-
entative.
Similarly, plastic type composition
shows a more diverse spectrum including vari-
ous polymers denser than seawater, compared
to net tow sampling activities [20] and studies
investigating on the upper end of the micro-
plastic size spectrum [24].
Given the vertical distribution dynamics,
microplastics reaching greater depth are de-
creasingly inﬂuenced by surface currents and
become subjected to other loss terms than
ﬂoating debris.
Attachment to marine snow
as well as ingestion and subsequent removal
by faecal pellets [18] are processes acting on
an ocean wide scale, potentially leading to an
acceleration of MP sinking rates of up to hun-
dreds of meters per day. For comparison free
2 µm polystyrene beads (ρPS = 1.05 g cm−3)
reach sinking rates of 4 mm day−1 [42].
As
marine snow constitutes the major source of
carbon to ﬁlter feeders, given the higher MP
loading interactions rates of MP to the organ-
ism are likely to increase with increasing S-MP
pollution [42].
Conclusion
Based on the experiences with the applied
sampling and analysis techniques we recom-
mend the further development of ship un-
derway sampling as well as Raman micro-
spectrometry, which both have the potential
M1-18
==PAGE:52==
Table 2: Loss terms explaining the "missing" lower size fraction of MP. References are provided if
loss terms were also discussed in other studies.
Methodo-
Slippage through mesh by shortest dimension
logy
Only reporting of longest dimension shifts size spectrum to larger sizes
Analysis inaccuracies at lower size limit
Diﬀerences in size composition depending on sampling depth
Dynamics
Ingestion by marine biota
[9, 21]
Incorporation in marine snow
[42]
Egested MP in sinking faecal pellets
[18]
Fragmen-
(Nano-)fragmentation below detection size
[21]
tation
Size dependency of fragmentation rates
[21]
to be useful tools in microplastic research es-
pecially when the numerous small sizes are tar-
geted.
Our ﬁeld and modelling results show that,
once microplastic fragmented down to a certain
size, rather dispersed distribution patterns can
be observed, both horizontally as well as ver-
tically. From this ﬁnding we conclude that the
residence time of S-MP in the surface ocean
must be considerably lower.
The primarily
physically and chemically governed processes
of dilution and diﬀusion are accompanied by
biological factors which predominantly act on
small-sized MP and lead to further draw-down
of the polymers into the ocean interior.
As an outlook, plastic marine debris is pre-
dicted to grow by an order of magnitude during
the next decade as the amount of mismanaged
plastics is directly proportional to the grow-
ing world population [5]. This emphasises the
importance to understand load, transport and
degradation of, not only macro-, but micro-
plastics in order to uncover the plastic cycle in
the marine environment.
Acknowledgements
We thank Eik Ehlert Britsch and Magnus Bohr,
which contributed to the sample collection and Peter
Munk for excellent logistics and organisation of the ex-
pedition. Thanks to Jakob Strand from Aarhus Univer-
sity who kindly provided the melting apparatus. The
Raman microscope was provided by David Macken-
zie and Peter Bøggild from DTU Nanotech. We ac-
knowledge the helpful suggestions of Ken Andersen in
the modelling part. The research was funded by DTU
Aqua, Carlsberg Foundation and the Danish Center for
Marine Research.
References
[1]
A. L. Andrady. Plastics and the Environment. Ed. by
A. L. Andrady. New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,
Hoboken, 2003 (cit. on p. M1-2).
[2]
J. a. Ivar do Sul and M. F. Costa. ‘The present and
future of microplastic pollution in the marine environ-
ment.’ In: Environmental pollution (Barking, Essex :
1987) 185 (Feb. 2014), pp. 352–64. doi: 10.1016/j.
envpol.2013.10.036 (cit. on p. M1-2).
[3]
T. Rocha-Santos and A. C. Duarte. ‘A critical over-
view of the analytical approaches to the occurrence,
the fate and the behavior of microplastics in the envir-
onment’. In: TrAC Trends in Analytical Chemistry 65
(Dec. 2014), pp. 47–53. doi: 10.1016/j.trac.2014.10.
011 (cit. on p. M1-2).
[4]
M. Eriksen, L. C. M. Lebreton, H. S. Carson, M. Thiel,
C. J. Moore, J. C. Borerro, F. Galgani, P. G. Ryan and J.
Reisser. ‘Plastic Pollution in the World’s Oceans: More
than 5 Trillion Plastic Pieces Weighing over 250,000
Tons Aﬂoat at Sea’. In: PLoS ONE 9.12 (Dec. 2014).
Ed. by H. G. Dam, e111913. doi: 10.1371/journal.
pone.0111913 (cit. on p. M1-2).
[5]
J. R. Jambeck, R. Geyer, C. Wilcox, T. R. Siegler, M.
Perryman, A. Andrady, R. Narayan and K. L. Law.
‘Plastic waste inputs from land into the ocean’. In: Sci-
ence January (2015) (cit. on pp. M1-2, M1-19).
[6]
A. L. Andrady. ‘Microplastics in the marine environ-
ment.’ In: Marine pollution bulletin 62.8 (Aug. 2011),
pp. 1596–605. doi: 10.1016/j.marpolbul.2011.05.030
(cit. on p. M1-2).
[7]
M. F. Costa, J. a. Ivar do Sul, J. S. Silva-Cavalcanti,
M. C. B. Araújo, A. Spengler and P. S. Tourinho. ‘On
the importance of size of plastic fragments and pellets on
the strandline: a snapshot of a Brazilian beach.’ In: En-
vironmental monitoring and assessment 168.1-4 (Sept.
2010), pp. 299–304. doi: 10.1007/s10661-009-1113-4
(cit. on p. M1-2).
[8]
M. Cole, P. Lindeque, C. Halsband and T. S. Gallo-
way. ‘Microplastics as contaminants in the marine en-
vironment: a review.’ In: Marine pollution bulletin 62.12
(Dec. 2011), pp. 2588–97. doi: 10.1016/j.marpolbul.
2011.09.025 (cit. on p. M1-2).
[9]
K. L. Law, S. Morét-Ferguson, N. A. Maximenko, G.
Proskurowski, E. E. Peacock, J. Hafner and C. M.
Reddy. ‘Plastic accumulation in the North Atlantic sub-
tropical gyre.’ In: Science (New York, N.Y.) 329.5996
(Sept. 2010), pp. 1185–8. doi: 10 . 1126 / science .
1192321 (cit. on pp. M1-2, M1-3, M1-15, M1-19).
[10]
K. Magnusson. ‘Microscopic anthropogenic particles –
methods for monitoring and results from a survey’. 2013
(cit. on p. M1-2).
M1-19
==PAGE:53==
[11]
C. M. Rochman. ‘Plastics and priority pollutants: a mul-
tiple stressor in aquatic habitats.’ In: Environmental sci-
ence & technology 47.6 (Mar. 2013), pp. 2439–40. doi:
10.1021/es400748b (cit. on p. M1-2).
[12]
H. Lee, W. J. Shim and J.-H. H. Kwon. ‘Sorption capa-
city of plastic debris for hydrophobic organic chemicals.’
In: The Science of the Total Environment 470-471 (Feb.
2014), pp. 1545–52. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2013.
08.023 (cit. on p. M1-2).
[13]
C. G. Avio, S. Gorbi, M. Milan, M. Benedetti, D.
Fattorini, G. D’Errico, M. Pauletto, L. Bargelloni and
F. Regoli. ‘Pollutants bioavailability and toxicological
risk from microplastics to marine mussels’. In: Envir-
onmental Pollution 198 (2015), pp. 211–222. doi: 10.
1016/j.envpol.2014.12.021 (cit. on p. M1-2).
[14]
F.
Norén
and
L.-J.
Naustvoll.
Pilot
study:
Sur-
vey of microscopic anthropogenic particles in Skager-
rak. Tech. rep. Klima- og Forurensningsdirektoratet:
TA2779/2011. Lysekil, Sweden: N-research and Havfor-
skningsinstituttet, 2011, p. 22 (cit. on pp. M1-2, M1-4).
[15]
F. Norén, K. Norén and K. Magnusson. Marint mik-
roskopiskt skräp Undersökning längs svenska västkusten.
Tech. rep. 2014 (cit. on pp. M1-2, M1-15, M1-17).
[16]
J.-P. W. Desforges, M. Galbraith, N. Dangerﬁeld and
P. S. Ross. ‘Widespread distribution of microplastics in
subsurface seawater in the NE Paciﬁc Ocean.’ In: Mar-
ine pollution bulletin (Jan. 2014). doi: 10 . 1016 / j .
marpolbul.2013.12.035 (cit. on pp. M1-2, M1-15, M1-
17).
[17]
C. M. Boyd. ‘Selection of Particle Sizes by Filter-Feeding
Copepods: A Plea for Reason’. In: American Society of
Limnology and Oceanography 21.1 (1976), pp. 175–180
(cit. on p. M1-2).
[18]
M. Cole, P. Lindeque, E. Fileman, C. Halsband, R.
Goodhead, J. Moger and T. S. Galloway. ‘Microplastic
ingestion by zooplankton.’ In: Environmental science &
technology 47.12 (June 2013), pp. 6646–55. doi: 10 .
1021/es400663f (cit. on pp. M1-2, M1-18, M1-19).
[19]
M. Cole, P. Lindeque, E. Fileman, C. Halsband and T. S.
Galloway. ‘The Impact of Polystyrene Microplastics on
Feeding, Function and Fecundity in the Marine Cope-
pod Calanus helgolandicus.’ In: Environmental science
& technology (Jan. 2015). doi: 10.1021/es504525u (cit.
on p. M1-2).
[20]
A. Isobe, K. Kubo, Y. Tamura, S. Kako, E. Nakashima
and N. Fujii. ‘Selective transport of microplastics and
mesoplastics by drifting in coastal waters’. In: Marine
Pollution Bulletin 89.1-2 (2014), pp. 324–330. doi: 10.
1016/j.marpolbul.2014.09.041 (cit. on pp. M1-3, M1-
17, M1-18).
[21]
A. Cózar et al. ‘Plastic debris in the open ocean’. In:
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111.28
(June 2014), pp. 10239–10244. doi: 10 . 1073 / pnas .
1314705111 (cit. on pp. M1-3, M1-6, M1-14, M1-15, M1-
18, M1-19).
[22]
R. Lenz and K. Enders. ‘Evaluation of Raman micro-
spectrometry for the Analysis of Marine Microplastic
larger 10 micrometre (in preparation)’. In: (2015) (cit.
on pp. M1-3, M1-5, M1-6, M1-12, M1-15).
[23]
T. Kukulka, G. Proskurowski, S. Morét-Ferguson, D. W.
Meyer and K. L. Law. ‘The eﬀect of wind mixing on
the vertical distribution of buoyant plastic debris’. In:
Geophysical Research Letters 39.7 (Apr. 2012), n/a–n/a.
doi: 10.1029/2012GL051116 (cit. on pp. M1-3, M1-17,
M1-18).
[24]
J. Reisser, B. Slat, K. Noble, K. du Plessis, M. Epp, M.
Proietti, J. de Sonneville, T. Becker and C. Pattiarat-
chi. ‘The vertical distribution of buoyant plastics at sea:
an observational study in the North Atlantic Gyre’. In:
Biogeosciences 12 (2015), pp. 1249–1256. doi: 10.5194/
bg - 12 - 1249 - 2015 (cit. on pp. M1-3, M1-12, M1-17,
M1-18).
[25]
A. Ballent, A. Purser, P. de Jesus Mendes, S. Pando and
L. Thomsen. ‘Physical transport properties of marine
microplastic pollution’. In: Biogeosciences Discussions
9 (2012), pp. 18755–18798. doi: 10.5194/bgd-9-18755-
2012 (cit. on pp. M1-3, M1-12, M1-17).
[26]
F. Norén. Small plastic particles in Coastal Swedish wa-
ters. Tech. rep. KIMO, 2007, pp. 1–11 (cit. on p. M1-5).
[27]
Y. K. Song, S. H. Hong, M. Jang, G. M. Han, M. Rani,
J. Lee and W. J. Shim. ‘A comparison of microscopic
and spectroscopic identiﬁcation methods for analysis
of microplastics in environmental samples’. In: Marine
Pollution Bulletin (2015), pp. 1–8. doi: 10 . 1016 / j .
marpolbul.2015.01.015 (cit. on p. M1-5).
[28]
B. H. Stuart. Polymer Analysis. Sydney, 2002 (cit. on
p. M1-6).
[29]
R. Schlitzer. Ocean Data View, ODV. 2015 (cit. on
pp. M1-6, M1-16).
[30]
D. S. Ullman, P. C. Cornillon and Z. Shan. ‘On the char-
acteristics of subtropical fronts in the North Atlantic’.
In: Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans 112.1 (Jan.
2007), p. C01010. doi: 10.1029/2006JC003601 (cit. on
p. M1-6).
[31]
The MathWorks Inc. MATLAB and Statistics Toolbox.
Natick, Massachusetts, United States (cit. on p. M1-6).
[32]
T. Kiørboe, A. Andersen, V. J. Langlois and H. H.
Jakobsen. ‘Unsteady motion: escape jumps in planktonic
copepods, their kinematics and energetics.’ In: Journal
of the Royal Society, Interface / the Royal Society 7.52
(2010), pp. 1591–1602. doi: 10.1098/rsif.2010.0176
(cit. on p. M1-12).
[33]
L. Umlauf, H. Burchard and K. Bolding. GOTM-
Sourcecode and Test Case Documentation. 2012 (cit. on
p. M1-12).
[34]
H. Burchard, K. Bolding and M. R. Villarreal. GOTM,
a general ocean turbulence model: Theory, implement-
ation and test cases. Tech. rep. EUR 18745 EN, 1999
(cit. on p. M1-12).
[35]
A. L. Lusher, A. Burke, I. O’Connor and R. Of-
ﬁcer. ‘Microplastic pollution in the Northeast Atlantic
Ocean: Validated and opportunistic sampling’. In: Mar-
ine Pollution Bulletin (Sept. 2014). doi: 10.1016/j.
marpolbul.2014.08.023 (cit. on pp. M1-15, M1-18).
[36]
F. Norén and L.-j. Naustvoll. Survey of Microscopic An-
thropogenic Particles in Skagerrak. Tech. rep. Novem-
ber. Flødevigen: Institute of Marine Research, 2010 (cit.
on p. M1-15).
[37]
N. Maximenko, J. Hafner and P. Niiler. ‘Pathways of
marine debris derived from trajectories of Lagrangian
drifters.’ In: Marine pollution bulletin 65.1-3 (Jan.
2012), pp. 51–62. doi: 10 . 1016 / j . marpolbul . 2011 .
04.016 (cit. on pp. M1-15, M1-16).
[38]
L. C.-M. Lebreton, S. D. Greer and J. C. Borrero.
‘Numerical modelling of ﬂoating debris in the world’s
oceans.’ In: Marine pollution bulletin 64.3 (Mar. 2012),
pp. 653–61. doi: 10.1016/j.marpolbul.2011.10.027
(cit. on p. M1-17).
[39]
Y. K. Song, S. H. Hong, M. Jang, J.-H. Kang, O. Y.
Kwon, G. M. Han and W. J. Shim. ‘Large Accumulation
of Micro-sized Synthetic Polymer Particles in the Sea
Surface Microlayer.’ In: Environmental science & tech-
nology 48 (2014), pp. 9014–21. doi: 10.1021/es501757s
(cit. on p. M1-17).
[40]
D.-H. Chae, I.-S. Kim, Y. K. Song, S. Kim and S.-K.
Kim. ‘Development of Analytical Method for Micro-
plastics in Seawater’. In: The Sea 19.1 (2014), pp. 88–98.
doi: 10.7850/jkso.2014.19.1.88 (cit. on p. M1-17).
[41]
L. L. Cho. ‘Identiﬁcation of textile ﬁber by Raman mi-
crospectroscopy’. In: Forensic Sci J 6.1 (2007), pp. 55–
62 (cit. on p. M1-18).
M1-20
==PAGE:54==
[42]
M. Long, B. Moriceau, M. Gallinari, C. Lambert, A.
Huvet, J. Raﬀray and P. Soudant. ‘Interactions between
microplastics and phytoplankton aggregates : Impact
on their respective fates’. In: Marine Chemistry April
(2015). doi: 10.1016/j.marchem.2015.04.003 (cit. on
pp. M1-18, M1-19).
[43]
S. Morét-Ferguson, K. L. Law, G. Proskurowski, E. K.
Murphy, E. E. Peacock and C. M. Reddy. ‘The size,
mass, and composition of plastic debris in the west-
ern North Atlantic Ocean.’ In: Marine pollution bul-
letin 60.10 (Oct. 2010), pp. 1873–8. doi: 10.1016/j.
marpolbul.2010.07.020 (cit. on p. M1-18).
M1-21
==PAGE:55==
Manuscript II
A Critical Assessment of Visual Identiﬁcation of Marine Microplastic
Using Raman Spectroscopy for Analysis Improvement
M2-0
==PAGE:56==
A Critical Assessment of Visual Identiﬁcation of Marine Microplastic
Using Raman Spectroscopy for Analysis Improvement
Robin Lenz∗and Kristina Enders
National Institute for Aquatic Resources, Tech. Uni. of Denmark, Kavalergården 6, 2920 Charlottenlund, DK
Abstract Micrometre sized particles and ﬁbres of synthetic polymers accumulate in the marine
environment. The identiﬁcation and characterisation of MP is a necessary step to evaluate con-
centration levels and chemical composition and interactions. We tested Raman micro-spectoscopy
for its applicability for identiﬁcation of marine MP with respect to varying chemical composition
(additives), diﬀerent degradation states and organic matter coating. Samples of microplastic (MP)
≥10 µm ﬁltered from below the sea surface in the European and subtropical North Atlantic
were simultaneously identiﬁed by microscopic visual identiﬁcation and Raman micro-spectroscopy.
Sixty eight percent of the visually counted MP (n =1279) was spectroscopically conﬁrmed as being
plastic. The percentage conﬁrmed varied with type, colour and size of the MP. Fibres had a higher
success rate (75%) than particles (64%). Particles below 100 µm had a signiﬁcantly lower percent-
age conﬁrmed than larger ones showing that pure visual identiﬁcation is inappropriate for studies
on small microplastics (S-MP). For partially degraded plastics Raman provided identiﬁable spectra
for polymers most common among marine MP, i.e. PE and PP. For future studies we propose the
development of a Raman spectroscopy based chemical mapping procedure that does not require
individual evaluation of MP in samples. In combination with chemometric data analysis methods
a substantially lower processing time can be achieved, increasing both the sample throughput,
quality and reliability of the results.
Keywords: small microplastics, RAMAN, photodegradation
Introduction
The accumulation of plastic waste in the
marine environment has been addressed by nu-
merous studies during the last decade.
Re-
cently the ubiquitous spread of microscopic
small plastic particles has been of high con-
cern as threat to biota. The increasing atten-
tion during the past 10 years is reﬂected by
the publication of more than eighty studies in-
vestigating various impacts of this “invisible”
pollutant, reviewed in [1–5].
Several laboratory studies have observed
the
ingestion
of
micrometre
sized
plastic
particles by suspension feeding organisms such
as copepods [6–9] and mussels [10, 11].
Al-
though, microplastics (MP) and nanoplastics
may inertly pass the digestive system along
with any natural non-digestible matter, their
associated toxic eﬀects can become a relevant
hazard [12]. Through fragmentation of plastic
debris to smaller sizes, the particles’ surface-
to-volume ratio increases, leading to an accel-
erated ad- and desorption of toxic chemicals
like persistent organic pollutants (POPs) [13,
14] or heavy metals [15]. Several POPs and
plastic-associated chemicals are known endo-
crine disruptors, which suggests that sub-lethal
eﬀects and induced community changes could
be a major eﬀect.
The fragmentation of marine plastic litter
through physical, chemical and biological pro-
cesses is constantly adding to the pool of MPs
which become more bioavailable and wide-
spread with decreasing size [16].Assuming that
plastic debris disintegrates in all three spatial
dimensions simultaneously, the number of frag-
ments produced raises to the power of 3 with
decreasing particle diameter.
Despite intensive research it is yet to be
shown if the current and predicted increas-
ing future concentrations of plastic pollution
in the ocean will result in signiﬁcant altera-
tions of marine biota and ecosystems. Know-
ledge of plastic concentrations, spatial and
temporal changes, size and polymer distribu-
tions and fragmentation dynamics are a pre-
requisite for understanding its fate and impact.
Sampling and analysis of MP becomes increas-
ingly more diﬃcult and demanding the smaller
the particles. This is one reason why a major-
ity of microplastic surveys used a size range
from 0.3 to 5 mm [17–20] – a range where
visual sorting is a legitimate and quick ap-
proach. Few studies considered particles smal-
ler than 300 µm [21–23].
These studies de-
∗Corresponding author: Tel. +45 50 130 333, E-mail: roble@aqua.dtu.dk (R. Lenz)
M2-1
==PAGE:57==
veloped or compared methods for MP isolation
[8, 24], and polymer identiﬁcation using vibra-
tional spectrometry [8, 16, 24–26] or electron
microscopy [27–29] in addition to visual quan-
tiﬁcation. The common aims in these method-
ological explorations are (a) to achieve higher
accuracy, precision and certainty of MP identi-
ﬁcation by avoiding false-positive and/or false-
negative misidentiﬁcation, (b) to enhance ana-
lysis results with indication of polymer types
and (c) to transfer work intensive steps from
manual to automated routines [28].
Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) micro-
spectrometry has been applied in this context
and can allow polymer identiﬁcation of single
particles at a minimum spot size of 10 µm
[30]. Similarly, Raman micro-spectrometry re-
veals vibrational information of material and
molecular structure and is complementary to
FTIR measurements; i.e.
Raman provides
a better response of non-polar, symmetric
bonds while FTIR allows clearer identiﬁcation
of polar groups.
An evaluation of FTIR in
comparison to visual microscopy has shown
that misidentiﬁcation of small MP can be re-
duced by a combination of visual search and
FTIR spectral library match [16].
However,
bad spectrum signal qualities can result from
weathered polymers.
Further contaminated
sample surfaces hinder automated identiﬁca-
tion by spectral library search and match func-
tions.
Polymers collected from the marine environ-
ment can be suspected of having been exposed
to a variety of conditions that alter the original
polymer composition.
Among these envir-
onmental parameters are UV-induced photo-
degradation, thermal degradation, and biode-
gradation [31]. A recent study assessing mar-
ine MP particles by means of FTIR reported
that oxidative break-down impeded the poly-
mer identiﬁcation due to spectral changes and
insuﬃcient reference spectra for polymer de-
gradation products [22]. It is important to in-
vestigate the eﬀects of chemically weathered
plastics on vibrational spectral measurements
before spectroscopic methods can be imple-
mented systematically in S-MP surveys. Ra-
man spectroscopy has been routinely used to
study a wide range of polymer properties [32]
also in the context of marine MP identiﬁcation
[24, 33].
In this study we evaluated the applicability
and limitations of Raman micro-spectroscopy
relative to visual identiﬁcation.
Methods
Sampling and Preparation
The samples used in this study originate
from a trans-Atlantic cruise conducted on the
Danish research vessel R/V Dana in March
and April 2014 as shown in ﬁgure 1. Sample
collection was conducted using a closed ﬁlter
unit containing a 10 µm mesh with a preceding
mesh of 300 µm (both polyamide-6). Water
was pumped from an underway water intake
at 3 m depth at the front port side of the ship.
Meshes were replaced in cycles of 10 ± 5 hours
and sealed under clean conditions and trans-
ported back to land for later analysis.
The
sampling and spatial distribution of MP are
reported in an accompanying paper [34]. To
prevent airborne contamination sample expos-
ure time was minimised.
The work environ-
ment and equipment was cleaned with deion-
ised water and detergent before sample contact
and white cotton laboratory coats, hair protec-
tion and nitrile gloves were used. During the
time of sample exposure open water-ﬁlled petri
dishes were placed next to the work area and
later analysed as blank controls. The sample
material was ﬁrst removed from the meshes by
resuspension in 150 ml water with 150 µl so-
dium dodecylsulfate solution (SDS, 150 g l−1)
in closed screw-top glasses in a ultrasonic bath
for 20 min. This step was repeated if neces-
sary until all material had detached from the
ﬁlter. After resuspension the complete sample
content was collected on 10 µm vacuum ﬁlters,
polycarbonate (Whatman, 25 mm diameter)
or polyamide (ﬁlter mesh material).
In case
of high material content samples were reduced
using a plankton splitter.
Microscopic and Spectroscopic Analysis
The vacuum ﬁlters were analysed under a
light microscope coupled to a DXR Raman
spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientiﬁc), with
a 455 nm excitation laser and a grating of 1200
lines per mm using 10x and 50x objectives
(Olympus M Plan, NA=0.25 and LM Plan,
M2-2
==PAGE:58==
Figure 1: Cruise map with grey sections showing the transects where water was ﬁltered from the underway
intake. Plastic concentrations are reported in an accompanying paper [34]. The stations numbered and high-
lighted in blue are the ones that have been used in the present study for the comparison of visual and Raman
identiﬁcation.
NA=0.50). Half of the area of the ﬁlters was
searched for MP. Prior to Raman measure-
ments items on the ﬁlters were either accepted
or rejected as MP suspects based on a cata-
logue of morphological criteria (supplement-
ary S-12).
Each accepted object was classi-
ﬁed as one of two shape categories, ﬁbre or
particle, and subsequently photographed and
measured in length and width. Replicate Ra-
man spectra (n ≥3) were acquired as point
measurements on diﬀerent spots of each accep-
ted particle in order to eliminate the inﬂuence
of local impurities such as organic matter or
mineral particles.
A library of references of the major com-
modity consumers plastic polymers (table 1)
was created and their Raman spectra were
used as reference for identiﬁcation of MP.
To account for a broader range of chemical
composition within the polymer types, several
polymer samples diﬀering in features like ﬂex-
ibility, colour or form, e.g. ﬁbrous, solid, ﬁlm,
foamed, were included in the library. Expected
non-plastic contaminants and organic materi-
als present in the marine environment i.e. cel-
lulose, methylcellulose, cellulose acetate, vis-
cose rayon, keratin and aragonite were also in-
cluded into the reference library to improve
the exclusion of non-plastic (but plastic resem-
bling) particles. The primary reference library
consisted of a total of 52 spectra.
Table 1: Names and abbreviations of polymers used
in the spectral identiﬁcation with number of reference
items included in the library.
Abbr.
Polymer
#
HDPE
high density polyethylene
5
LDPE
high density polyethylene
4
PP
polypropylene
6
PET
polyethyleneterephthalate
5
PS
polystyrene
4
PVC
polyvinylchloride
3
PU
polyurethane
1
PA
polyamide
3
ABS
acrylonitrile butadiene styrene
6
PMMA
polymethylmethacrylate
2
PC
polycarbonate
2
PTFE
polytetraﬂuoroethylene
2
Raman shifted spectra were measured with
a resolution of 0.96 cm−1 in a wavenumber
range of 100 to 3500 cm−1 using an integra-
tion time of 2 seconds averaged over 10 scans.
The excitation power was 3 mW at an es-
timated spot size of 0.5 µm. As ﬂuorescence
can occur as a major source of poor Raman
signal quality the above mentioned standard
M2-3
==PAGE:59==
settings were changed if necessary with respect
to laser power as well as the number and dura-
tion of exposures, to enhance the signal quality
of ﬂuorescent or weak Raman-active materials.
Data Analysis
Measured Raman spectra were compared
against the library by calculating the Pearson
correlation coeﬃcients between each possible
combination of sample and library spectra.
All spectra were preprocessed in the following
order.
The wavenumber range was cropped
to 3400 to 200 cm−1.
Elevated baseline for
instance from ﬂuorescence signals were re-
moved by ﬁtting and subtracting a modelled
baseline curve which was interpolated from
25 local minima based on a shape-preserving
piecewise cubic interpolation.
The spectra
were smoothed using an Savitzki-Golay non-
derivative algorithm on a 28 cm−1 window with
a second order polynomial. Each spectrum was
normalised to the maximum.
After a ﬁrst run of correlations all MP from
samples that matched by 80% or more with one
of the polymer references were individually ex-
amined and, in case of conﬁrmation, used as a
secondary reference for the respective polymer
type. This method allowed to expand the cov-
erage of the spectral library to a larger degree
of chemical variance within the target poly-
mers.
The ﬁnal identiﬁcation of MP was based on
individual evaluation of each spectrum. The
replicates of a sample were plotted with their
best matching library spectra and analysed
together for peak alignment and height. The
pivotal criterion for acceptance was if the char-
acteristic bands of the suspected polymer could
be found in the sample spectrum. The calcu-
lated correlation values r2 were used as an
additional indicator. All spectral processing,
calculations and comparison were conducted in
Matlab [35]. In unclear cases the raw spectra
were revisited and unexplained bands were in-
vestigated by literature [36–38] and compared
against commercial Raman libraries (BioRad-
KnowItAll Informatics System 2014, Raman
ID Expert and Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc Inc.).
Spectral band assignments for chemically de-
graded polymers were taken from [39].
Degradation Eﬀects
To identify photodegraded polymers we ex-
perimentally simulated accelerated weather-
ing. The polymer pieces that had been used
for the library creation were exposed to UV
light in three diﬀerent treatments. For weak
degrading eﬀects samples of LDPE, PA, PET
and PVC were exposed in sealed quartz cu-
vettes ﬁlled with (a) deionised water and (b)
ﬁltered seawater of 32 PSU. The cuvettes were
installed inside a rotating cylinder placed in
front of a UV light source (2 x Q-Lab UV Q-
Panel 80 W). Additionally a third series was
air- exposed to the same UV light source in
close proximity to the panels. Light intensit-
ies were measured using an NIST calibrated
Ocean Optics Jaz spectrophotometer and are
shown in ﬁgure 2.
Figure 2: Spectral intensities in the UVA/B wavelength
range of the UV source used to simulate accelerated
weathering in synthetic polymers exposed in air (grey
dashed) and water (grey dotted).
The black graph
shows the intensity of midday sunlight (clear sky, Den-
mark) in the same wavelength range.
The intensity maximum of the light source
is at 343 nm. The air-exposed samples were
exposed to a 4.6 times higher intensity com-
pared to those in water. The absorbance eﬀect
of water has been accounted for by an attenu-
ation coeﬃcient of µ = 0.2. The temperature
measured at the air-exposed and water sub-
merged samples was approximately 33◦C and
22◦C, respectively.
Statistical Analysis The rates of succes of
the visual identiﬁcation, i.e.
the proportion
of visually identiﬁed microplastics that could
be conﬁrmed being plastic by Raman spectro-
M2-4
==PAGE:60==
scopic analysis, were calculated for diﬀerent
groups of MP size, colour and type. The dif-
ferences between the groups were tested for
statistical signiﬁcance by means of a two-tailed
z-test for signiﬁcance of diﬀerence between two
independent proportions, with p < 0.05 if not
stated otherwise.
Results
Comparison of Visual Microscopy to Ra-
man micro-spectrometry
A total of 452 ﬁbres and 827 particles were
visually identiﬁed as plastic of which 75% and
64% were conﬁrmed by Raman spectra, re-
spectively. The whole MP data set had a suc-
cess rate of 68% (n=1279).
The number of
Raman conﬁrmed MP depended on size frac-
tion. Visually identiﬁed ﬁbres and particles of
larger sizes were conﬁrmed being plastic to a
higher degree than smaller sizes (ﬁgure 3).
Figure 3:
Microplastic particles identiﬁed by visual
microscopy compared to Raman spectroscopy.
The
black graph shows the relative success rate obtained
via Raman approval of the purely visual identiﬁca-
tion. Number of particles compared in each size class:
n<50 = 637, n50−100 = 155, n>100 = 35.
Sixty three percent of particles ≥50µm
were conﬁrmed as plastic whereas in the group
between 50 and 100 µm a slightly higher pro-
portion of 67% was conﬁrmed. They had signi-
ﬁcantly lower success rates than the largest size
class of particles > 100 µm where 83% could be
successfully identiﬁed as plastic. The success
rate of the whole size spectrum was not sig-
niﬁcantly diﬀerent (p=0.54) from that of the
smallest size class, as the particles ≥50µm
contributed over three quarters of total particle
abundance. Fibres showed the same trend as
particles. When grouped into length categories
of < 1000, 1000 - 2000 and > 2000 µm success
rates were 73%, 76% and 90%, respectively.
The success rate of the visual identiﬁca-
tion, was highest for particles of blue colour,
followed by green and red with 86%, 54% and
52%, respectively as shown in ﬁgure 4.
It
could be observed that misidentiﬁcation is
more likely among particles of colours that
appear more frequently among natural or-
ganic matter. Particles of transparent/white
or black/grey colour which have been visually
counted for their having a plastic like appear-
ance were had low conﬁrmation in Raman of
Fibres of all colours had a higher success rate
than particles, which can be attributed to the
fact that ﬁbres often provide more structural
features for identiﬁcation (ﬁgure 4). In con-
trast to particles there was a high conﬁrmation
rate of transparent and black ﬁbres of 85% and
67%, respectively.
Raman Signal Confounding Factors
We tested Raman micro-spectrometry for
its applicability in microplastic identiﬁcation
studies. Plastic is, apart from its basic poly-
mer matrix also composed of a range of addit-
ive compounds. Additionally plastic from the
marine environment can have an altered chem-
ical ﬁngerprint. Here we present the most com-
mon reasons that can lead to a falsiﬁed poly-
mer type signal and must therefore be borne
in mind.
Figure 5 shows the spectra obtained from
diﬀerently coloured ABS samples all from the
same manufacturer.
Blue, white and black
samples (only blue shown) were well correlat-
ing with the spectra of the type reference (ABS
ref.). The most characteristic peaks for ABS
were between 2900 and 3060 cm−1 indicative
of the C −H stretch, at 2236 cm−1 assigned
to the nitrile stretching (C ≡N) and the most
M2-5
==PAGE:61==
Figure 4: MP of diﬀerent colour appearance identiﬁed visually and by Raman. Left: ﬁbres, right: particles.
b./g. = black / grey; t./w. = transparent / white; col. = all colours. Cross marks on top refer to secondary
y-axis (percentages).
Figure 5: Spectra acquired from ABS from the same manufacturer in diﬀerent colours. Reference spectrum
from a diﬀerent product with pale colour. Note the high intensity ranges for yellow and red caused by colour
pigment signal overlays.
M2-6
==PAGE:62==
intense peak at 1001 cm−1 which displays the
vibrational response of the aromatic ring in the
styrene part of the polymer. Red and yellow
ABS show very diﬀerent peaks of noticeably
higher intensities.
These represent a typical
case of a complete overlay of the actual poly-
mer type spectra due to a more intense com-
pound in the polymer matrix such as additives,
in this case colour pigments. The red sample
additionally shows a broad Raman signal in
the range of 2200 to 3200 cm−1 which is due
to ﬂuorescence.
A frequently encountered observation was
that various morphologically discriminative
black particles displayed spectra matching
with the reference spectra obtained from a set
of black rubber of various sources such as from
car or bike tires and tubes (ﬁgure 6). By using
a spectroscopy software (Bio Rad-KnowItAll)
the two bands at 1343 cm−1 and 1581 cm−1
were attributed to carbon by 76%.
Relat-
ive peak height had a small variance among
samples. The particle in (c) highly correlated
with PP which, owed to the morphological sim-
ilarities to (a), gives an indication of the dif-
ﬁculties in purely visual identiﬁcation and the
low success rate obtained in the comparison
study. It is not surprising to ﬁnd the presence
of carbon in our sample set, as carbonaceous
materials are very abundant in nature. How-
ever, black carbon, which exhibits spectra of
the same kind, is used as a ﬁller in rubbers
and to some degree as a black colourant or
dye in other thermoplastics. Given that, black
particles are expected to be generally underes-
timated in MP counting.
Figure 7 shows a spectrum of a polymer
assigned to ethylene vinyl acetate (EVA), a
polymer chemically similar to PE, collected in
the English channel. Due to the incorporation
of titanium dioxide (TiO2) nanoparticles sim-
ultaneously shows the two peaks at 444 and
610 cm−1. TiO2 is added to various polymers
as a material ﬁller, pigment and UV-blocker.
However, the recognition of the actual poly-
mer type is thereby not impeded as its intens-
ity is among that of the polymer and does not
overlay any characteristic peaks. It has to be
expected that a standard library search (one
component matching) will result in a lower cor-
relation.
Marine microplastic has been a substrate
for the growth of organisms of which resid-
uals can remain on the particles’ surface during
spectral analysis. Likewise, MP recovered from
sediments or animal intestines may be covered
by an organic matrix.
High quality Raman
spectra can only be obtained from clean, un-
covered surfaces as can be seen in replicate 3
(ﬁgure 8). The example shows three measured
spots on a piece of plastic debris collected from
Charlottenlund beach, Denmark. Replicate 1
shows a carbon-like band fully overlaying the
polymer type signal due to clear fouling ap-
pearances in this area. For the cleaner replic-
ate 2 the type can be recognised, although the
ﬁngerprint region displays a lifted baseline and
the overall spectrum is more noisy.
UV Degradation Eﬀects on Raman Signals
Figure 9 shows the characteristic peaks of
LDPE at 1063 cm−1, 1130 cm−1, 1296 cm−1,
1418 cm−1, 1441 cm−1 and 1463 cm−1 in the
ﬁngerprint region, normalised to the maximum
peak. The resulting Raman spectra after ex-
posure to UV radiation show a lower intensity
of several characteristic bands (marked with
arrows). Changes occur at 1418 cm−1, which is
assigned to CH2 wagging in crystalline regions,
at 1441 cm−1 corresponding to CH2 deforma-
tion and at 1463 cm−1 due to CH2 bending
from crystalline and amorphous regions. The
peak at 2849 cm−1 with its adjacent minimum
also displays a decreasing trend.
The other
peaks in the ﬁngerprint region do not show
considerable changes.
The Raman spectrum of PVC after photo-
degradation (ﬁgure 10) shows the simultaneous
decrease of the neighbouring peaks at 693 cm−1
and 637 cm−1, which correspond to the char-
acteristic C −Cl bonds in the polymer. The
spectra have been normalised to the peak at
2919 cm−1, which is assigned to C −H stretch-
ing vibrations and considered unaﬀected by de-
gradation [40]. The spectrum with highest UV
exposure (ﬁgure 10f) does not exert this peak,
wherefore the relative intensity of the peaks in
this spectrum cannot be compared. The spec-
trum is characterised by the complete absence
of the double peaks and the de novo appear-
ance of two strong peaks (marked with *, ﬁgure
10) at 1139 cm−1 and 1540 cm−1, assigned to
carbon double bonds (C = C).
M2-7
==PAGE:63==
Figure 6: Two spectra (blue and black) showing the vibrational band of carbon as found for many black
particles of diverse morphologies, (a) and (b). Image (c) which is of very similar morphology as (a) displays a
PP spectrum (red) instead. Scale bars equal 20 µm.
Figure 7: Spectrum of a blue microplastic particle (blue, inset with scale bar 100 µm) matching with the EVA
reference (red) and two additional peaks due to TiO2 (black).
M2-8
==PAGE:64==
Figure 8: Spectra showing the eﬀect of organic matter coating on the polymer matrix, with decreasing eﬀects
from rep. 1 - 3. Images to the right show corresponding degree of plastic surface fouling. Scale bar equals 20
µm.
Figure 9: Comparison of Raman spectra of a photo-exposed LDPE sample (b, c) and an untreated control (a).
Exposure time is given as an equivalent to midday sun hours. The spectra have been intensity normalised and
smoothed by a window width of 24 cm−1.
M2-9
==PAGE:65==
Figure 10: Comparison of Raman spectra of a photo-exposed PVC sample (b - f) and an untreated control (a).
Exposure time is given as an equivalent to midday sun hours. The spectra has been intensity normalised and
smoothed by a window width of 24 cm−1. * new occurrence of peaks.
PA showed a marginal decrease in the vibra-
tional frequency range at 3306 cm−1 assigned
to the amide group in the polymer.
PET
samples did not show any consistently trace-
able spectral changes over the period of the
UV exposure experiment.
Generally we could not observe consistent
diﬀerences between the replicates submerged
in MilliQ water and seawater throughout the
course of the experiment.
Discussion
Applicability of Raman for MP Analysis
Raman microscopy was successfully applied
as a technique for microplastic identiﬁcation
and quantiﬁcation in the present study. Using
a Raman microscope samples can be searched
and measured at the same time resulting in
a higher degree of identiﬁcation certainty at
the cost of approximately double work time
required. Because the microscopic analysis in
this study was a precursor to Raman analysis
the numbers of Raman-conﬁrmed MP cannot
be larger than the numbers of visually identi-
ﬁed plastics, in contrast to a comparable FTIR
study [16].
The application of Raman or any other
spectroscopic method can assist MP identiﬁc-
ation as an extension to normal light micro-
scopy. For this approach the analysis is still
visual but the inclusion or exclusion of doubt-
ful particles can be improved by exemplary
spectroscopic analysis.
However, two major
drawbacks occur using this procedure. Firstly
the spectral quality will not always allow un-
ambiguous decisions, as marine MP comprises
of a complex mixture of biological, synthetic
and inorganic materials.
Secondly, only the
number of false-positive identiﬁed objects can
be minimised, whereas MP that was not de-
tected by visual analysis will remain as a un-
known false-negative fraction unless it is pos-
sible to measure each particle present in the
sample. The latter will, however, become very
costly if a large number of samples were to be
processed.
The success rate of purely visually com-
pared to Raman analysed particles decreased
with size.
For particles < 100 µm the suc-
cess rate falls below 80%, which makes micro-
scopic analysis an inappropriate method. The
reason for the low success rate is not attribut-
able to visibility alone, as it would be possible
to use a higher magniﬁcation.
MP of small
M2-10
==PAGE:66==
sizes are diﬃcult to recognise because decision
criteria are based purely on morphological fea-
tures which diminish with decreasing size. We
show that with increasing particle size recogni-
tion improves because larger particles exhibit
more identiﬁcation criteria, such as hardness
and physical bending, which become of relev-
ance for particles > 1 mm [23]. However, the
size classes investigated in this study were (ex-
cept a few ﬁbres) below this threshold.
Apart from the gain in accuracy of identi-
ﬁcation results by using a spectral analysis
method, the additional information of the
polymer type is useful in regard to environ-
mental impact or risk assessment.
Polymers
diﬀer in sorption capacities and toxicity where-
fore it is valuable to know their respective dis-
tributions [13].
Raman Signal Confounding Factors
Raman spectra of the polymer type can be
overlaid by the signal derived from additives
resulting in a considerable modiﬁcation of the
spectra. These additives are mostly restricted
to ﬁllers, pigments and dyes which usually re-
veal strong Raman scattering.
Many organic colourants, pigments and
dyes strongly ﬂuoresce in visible light and can
thereby hinder spectra acquisition, whereas in-
organic pigments are more likely to change the
displayed peak pattern [41].
In samples ob-
tained from the marine environment it is likely
that in the presence of a very clear dye spec-
trum, the material is of cellulosic origin (cot-
ton, viscose rayon) due to its own weak re-
sponse signal [42]. There is a chance that MP
particles were not recognised or disqualiﬁed if
the overlay of an unknown additive resulted in
a complete masking of the polymer type. This
has to be expected as a drawback of library
matching spectroscopic analysis, as reference
libraries cannot cover the whole variety present
in the marine samples. Spectra recognised to
be only partly overlaid by foreign peaks were
accepted if the underlying polymer type signal
was still clearly present.
Fluorescence is often named as a major
factor of poor Raman signal quality [41, 43].
The light intensities emitted by ﬂuorescence
can be orders of magnitude stronger than the
Raman scattering. Especially measurements of
red and yellow coloured items are known to be
aﬀected [43]. In our samples red and yellow
particles (ﬁgure 4, only red shown) had the
lowest rates of Raman conﬁrmation of all col-
oured. The laser power applied in this study
was in the visible blue range (455 nm).
Al-
though most authors reported that using a
lower wavelength can mitigate ﬂuorescence sig-
nals [41], there is evidence that particularly red
dyes used in textiles can have a ﬂuorescence
minimum at blue excitation wavelengths 458
- 488 nm [44]. The eﬀect of Raman scatter-
ing increases with excitation energy, wherefore
low laser wavelength can be used to improve
detection of weak Raman active compounds
[45]. Improvements of detection may also be
achieved using techniques such as Resonance
Raman, Surface Enhanced Raman (SERS),
Coherent-Anti-Stokes-Raman (CARS, see also
[8]) or Fourier-Transform-Raman (FT-Raman)
which can - in speciﬁc cases - substantially in-
crease signal-to-noise ratios, but come at the
cost of more advanced equipment and / or re-
quired sample preparation [41]. Further invest-
igations have to reveal optimal instrumenta-
tion and excitation wavelengths for the applic-
ation of Raman spectroscopy for marine micro-
plastic analysis.
A quarter of the microplastic data set were
assigned plastic-like polymers giving moderate
match scores with PET, however, missing the
characteristic peak at 1616 cm−1.
Scanning
a number of representatives using the spec-
troscopy software, Bio Rad-KnowItAll, with
a large library of polymeric compounds and
additives, synthetic azo-compounds appeared
among the top scores. However, no single com-
ponent could be attributed to describe this
group which hence was included as anthropo-
genic material of unidentiﬁed polymeric com-
position.
Azo-dyes and pigments are com-
monly used in textiles of cellulosic and syn-
thetic polymers, and to some extent in other
plastic objects as well. Because the azo-group
signal (N = N) is intense in Raman scatter-
ing it partly overlies the actual material type.
Other contemplable compounds that could ex-
plain some of the present spectral bands were
PU and several polyesters.
A minor group
of the analysed MP (1.3%) showed similarit-
ies with the above named group in the region
around the dominant peak of 1593 cm−1. In
M2-11
==PAGE:67==
contrast to the aforementioned group no fur-
ther bands in the ﬁngerprint region were dis-
tinguishable from the background noise. A lib-
rary match revealed a weak correlation with a
spectrum of a LDPE reference which was over-
laid by strong Raman scattering yellow pig-
ment.
Common polymer ﬁllers such as glass, clay
and silica lead to considerable obscuration of
spectra in FTIR, however are poorly Raman-
active because of the low polarisability of Si −
O bonds [42].
Another ﬁller titanium oxide
occasionally observed in our spectra (ﬁgure 7)
gave additional peaks, which however did not
mask the remaining part of the spectrum.
Black polymers that contain carbon ﬁllers
such as carbon black, amorphous coke or
graphite
which
strongly
absorb
the
light
scattered by the polymer can thus exhibit a
spectrum similar to that of pure carbon. By
using a high laser power it is possible to even
burn the sample [42].
Particles originating
from road wear (tires) are therefore not dis-
cernible to other natural carbon-rich sources.
This can be part of the reason why black
particles were sparsely conﬁrmed via Raman
spectrometry (ﬁgure 4). The problem of non-
identiﬁable black particles has been stated in
an earlier study using FTIR [46].
Other additives are poorly documented for
Raman libraries, due to weak Raman scat-
tering and unsatisfactory reproducibility [47].
Nonetheless, these chemicals can lead to par-
tial masking or a decrease of the signal to
noise ratio leading to a lower degree of spectral
matching. On the other hand, most additives
are not covalently bonded to the polymer and
are leaching out during exposure to the marine
conditions such as UV radiation and varying
salinity and temperature [48, 49]. Regarding
the detrimental eﬀect of organic matter coat-
ing (ﬁgure 8) it is helpful to obtain clean MP
surfaces prior to spectral acquisition and rep-
licate measurements of diﬀerent spots on a
particle should be conducted. Several studies
have applied acid, base, oxidant or enzymatic
digestions steps in sample preparation to re-
move natural material and coatings [50]. For
S-MP, however, chemical pre-treatments can
easily result in loss of particles of suscept-
ible polymers even if the bulk polymer can
be regarded as resistant to the reagent.
In
the present study we have applied SDS in the
washing of samples. The surfactant facilitates
the dissolution of coatings from hydrophobic
surfaces.
SDS is known as a strong Raman
scatterer [42], however, can be removed by
thorough rinsing with water. In the spectral
analysis we found no sign of the presence of
SDS in the samples.
UV Degradation Eﬀects on Raman Signals
Photo-oxidation in polyoleﬁn polymers usu-
ally involves reactions due to free radicals res-
ulting in chain cleavage, cross-linking and the
formation of hydroxyl- and carbonyl groups.
The formation of these polar oxidative func-
tional groups can be easily observed via IR
measurements. This is part of the reason why
FTIR obtained spectra of marine plastics often
report considerably high levels of impurity, oc-
casionally impeding accurate spectra acquisi-
tion [16, 51]. This is less of a problem with
Raman spectrometry acquired spectra.
The polyoleﬁns PE and PP are most abund-
ant in the surface of the ocean due to their
lower density than seawater (48% in the
present data set, [34]). Our results on the UV
exposure of various kinds of polymers showed
that Raman polymer identiﬁcation is to a large
extent unaﬀected of UV-induced weathering of
PE and PP. After 1634 hours of simulated sun-
light in air, both PE and PP showed a slight
reduction in intensity of characteristic peaks
(ﬁgure 9).
Correlation to the corresponding
reference spectra were slightly reduced: for PE
by 5.6% ± 2.6% and for PP 8.5% ± 6.4%. The
alteration is small and polymer type recogni-
tion was not impeded. Signs of degradations as
loss of ﬂexibility and embrittlement were also
clearly observable, where especially the invest-
igated PP samples showed cracks covering the
entire polymer which is in consistency with ob-
servations other UV exposure studies [31].
PVC degradation is mostly governed by
the dehydrochlorination reaction, which can be
chemically, thermally or photochemically in-
duced [52]. In contrast to the above discussed
polymers it is free of hydroxilic or carboxylic
group formation. The observed changes in the
investigated PVC spectra with increased UV
exposure can be explained as follows. The ex-
posure to UV radiation initialises the elimin-
M2-12
==PAGE:68==
ation of hydrochloric acid HCl and the sub-
sequent formation of a C = C double bond.
The loss in chlorine is apparent in the shrink-
age of the carbon-chlorine stretching C −Cl
bands as observed in ﬁgure 10a-e. The con-
tinuation of this, known as the ’unzipping’ re-
action, occurs increasingly fast and leads to
the formation of conjugated polyene, which in
the Raman spectra lead to the emergence of
the two intense peaks (ﬁgure 10f). The vibra-
tional bonds of C = C are easy to detect as
they are very intense Raman scatterers. The
intensity of the C = C bands is determined by
the length of the conjugated sequences.
When degradation has reached a certain de-
gree, cross-linking between the highly reactive
polyenes takes place that in turn highly inﬂu-
ences physical and mechanical properties. This
then causes a shortening of the polyenes and
consequently to the elimination of the plasti-
ciser [52]. This then leads to typical weather-
ing eﬀects, such as embrittlement and yellow-
ing, as has been clearly observed for the in-
vestigated PVC sample. Documentation and
quantiﬁcation of the rapid reduction in mech-
anical integrity has been studied before [53].
PVC is, on the one hand, relatively prone
to photo-degradation in the marine environ-
ment as the leakage of the large content of ad-
ditives, such as photo-stabilisers, is enhanced
under high humidity conditions [54]. On the
other hand low water temperatures generally
decelerate reactivity. For polymer identiﬁca-
tion studies via Raman spectrometry we re-
commend to include spectra of degraded poly-
mer stages to the reference library in order
to enhance recognition possibility.
Our res-
ults from the degradation test revealed that
PVC Raman spectra can change to a level
that makes successful identiﬁcation impossible
if based on a virgin PVC reference. For PA
and PET degradation-related spectral changes
are possible in Raman spectrometry [55], al-
though such trends could not be observed to
be strong enough to impede the polymer iden-
tiﬁcation from our data.
It has proven suc-
cessful to extend the used library by second-
arily obtained spectra. We included some of
the sample spectra that had highest matches
to the library base after individual evalu-
ation which substantially increased the cov-
erage of chemical variance for the targeted
plastic types. Additionally, a useful spectro-
scopic library for environmental MP identiﬁca-
tion should include spectra of exemplary addit-
ive groups, as well as degradation products and
intermediate steps of those polymers that are
known to exhibit Raman detectable changes
under exposure conditions.
Library searches
should be performed by multi-component cor-
relations to better identify copolymers and in-
crease matches in case of signal overlays from
additives.
Raman measurements should preferably
take place on a non-Raman-active carrier such
as microscopy glass slides to avoid background
signals. In the present study sample material
was measured on two types of vacuum ﬁlters,
PA and PC. They were deemed suitable due
to their smooth surface and were available in
10 µm pore size, which was set as the lower
size limit of this study. Although Raman has
a high vertical resolution of a few micrometres
[56], scattering eﬀects of underlying or overly-
ing material can be avoided by precise focus-
sing on the particles surface. It is, however,
recommended to use glass ﬁbre ﬁlters if pos-
sible in order to avoid the risk of measuring
scattering of the ﬁlter background. For the de-
velopment of spectral mapping for automated
sample measurements a non-scattering carrier
would be a necessity.
Conclusion and Perspectives
Raman spectrometry provides promising
techniques for the identiﬁcation and chemical
analysis of marine microplastic in the lower
micrometer range. Bench-top Raman micro-
spectrometer can be used by the non-expert
user and relevant chemical information can
be obtained using advanced spectral library
software. Raman signals from photodegraded
samples allowed an extended identiﬁcation for
the most common plastic types in the marine
environment.
We have shown, that pure visual identiﬁca-
tion using morphological criteria led to a misid-
entiﬁcation of a substantial amount of particles
(32%) and ﬁbres (25%), which suggests that
microplastic studies using visual identiﬁcation
only involve a high level of uncertainty of the
reported concentrations.
For future research modern Raman micro-
M2-13
==PAGE:69==
scopes can provide spectral mapping at high
enough speeds to map a whole sample area in
high spatial resolution. In combination with
reliable analysis algorithms a manual invest-
igation on individual particle basis could be
made obsolete for counting, polymer type iden-
tiﬁcation and size determination.
Acknowledgements
We thank Eik Ehlert Britsch and Magnus Bohr,
which contributed to the sample collection and Peter
Munk for excellent logistics and organisation of the ex-
pedition. The Raman microscope was kindly provided
by Peter Bøggild from DTU Nanotech.
We thank
David Mackenzie for the help with Raman spectro-
scopy and spectral analysis. The research was funded
by DTU Aqua, Carlsberg Foundation and the Danish
Center for Marine Research.
References
[1]
V. Hidalgo-Ruz, L. Gutow, R. C. Thompson and M.
Thiel. ‘Microplastics in the marine environment: a re-
view of the methods used for identiﬁcation and quanti-
ﬁcation.’ In: Environmental science & technology 46.6
(Mar. 2012), pp. 3060–75. doi: 10.1021/es2031505 (cit.
on p. M2-1).
[2]
J. a. Ivar do Sul and M. F. Costa. ‘The present and
future of microplastic pollution in the marine environ-
ment.’ In: Environmental pollution (Barking, Essex :
1987) 185 (Feb. 2014), pp. 352–64. doi: 10.1016/j.
envpol.2013.10.036 (cit. on p. M2-1).
[3]
T. Rocha-Santos and A. C. Duarte. ‘A critical over-
view of the analytical approaches to the occurrence,
the fate and the behavior of microplastics in the envir-
onment’. In: TrAC Trends in Analytical Chemistry 65
(Dec. 2014), pp. 47–53. doi: 10.1016/j.trac.2014.10.
011 (cit. on p. M2-1).
[4]
S. L. Wright, R. C. Thompson and T. S. Galloway. ‘The
physical impacts of microplastics on marine organisms:
a review.’ In: Environmental pollution (Barking, Essex
: 1987) 178 (July 2013), pp. 483–92. doi: 10.1016/j.
envpol.2013.02.031 (cit. on p. M2-1).
[5]
M. Cole, P. Lindeque, C. Halsband and T. S. Gallo-
way. ‘Microplastics as contaminants in the marine en-
vironment: a review.’ In: Marine pollution bulletin 62.12
(Dec. 2011), pp. 2588–97. doi: 10.1016/j.marpolbul.
2011.09.025 (cit. on p. M2-1).
[6]
M. Cole, P. Lindeque, E. Fileman, C. Halsband and T. S.
Galloway. ‘The Impact of Polystyrene Microplastics on
Feeding, Function and Fecundity in the Marine Cope-
pod Calanus helgolandicus.’ In: Environmental science
& technology (Jan. 2015). doi: 10.1021/es504525u (cit.
on p. M2-1).
[7]
K.-w. Lee, W. J. Shim, O. Y. Kwon and J.-h. Kang.
‘Size-Dependent Eﬀects of Micro Polystyrene Particles
in the Marine Copepod Tigriopus japonicus’. In: En-
vironmental Science & Technology 47.August (2013),
pp. 11278–11283. doi: dx.doi.org/10.1021/es401932b
(cit. on p. M2-1).
[8]
M. Cole, P. Lindeque, E. Fileman, C. Halsband, R.
Goodhead, J. Moger and T. S. Galloway. ‘Microplastic
ingestion by zooplankton.’ In: Environmental science &
technology 47.12 (June 2013), pp. 6646–55. doi: 10 .
1021/es400663f (cit. on pp. M2-1, M2-2, M2-11).
[9]
O. Setälä, V. Fleming-Lehtinen and M. Lehtiniemi. ‘In-
gestion and transfer of microplastics in the planktonic
food web.’ In: Environmental pollution (Barking, Essex
: 1987) 185 (Feb. 2014), pp. 77–83. doi: 10.1016/j.
envpol.2013.10.013 (cit. on p. M2-1).
[10]
C. G. Avio, S. Gorbi, M. Milan, M. Benedetti, D.
Fattorini, G. D’Errico, M. Pauletto, L. Bargelloni and
F. Regoli. ‘Pollutants bioavailability and toxicological
risk from microplastics to marine mussels’. In: Envir-
onmental Pollution 198 (2015), pp. 211–222. doi: 10.
1016/j.envpol.2014.12.021 (cit. on p. M2-1).
[11]
A. Wegner, E. Besseling, E. M. Foekema, P. Kamermans
and a. a. Koelmans. ‘Eﬀects of nanopolystyrene on the
feeding behavior of the blue mussel (Mytilus edulis L.).’
In: Environmental toxicology and chemistry / SETAC
31.11 (Nov. 2012), pp. 2490–7. doi: 10.1002/etc.1984
(cit. on p. M2-1).
[12]
K. Magnusson and C. Wahlberg. Mikroskopiska skräp-
partiklar i vatten från avloppsreningsverk. Tech. rep.
Svenska Miljöinstitutet, NR B 2208, 2014 (cit. on p. M2-
1).
[13]
H. Lee, W. J. Shim and J.-H. H. Kwon. ‘Sorption capa-
city of plastic debris for hydrophobic organic chemicals.’
In: The Science of the Total Environment 470-471 (Feb.
2014), pp. 1545–52. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2013.
08.023 (cit. on pp. M2-1, M2-11).
[14]
A. Bakir, S. J. Rowland and R. C. Thompson. ‘Enhanced
desorption of persistent organic pollutants from micro-
plastics under simulated physiological conditions.’ In:
Environmental pollution (Barking, Essex : 1987) 185
(Mar. 2014), pp. 16–23. doi: 10.1016/j.envpol.2013.
10.007 (cit. on p. M2-1).
[15]
B. Graca, M. Bełdowska, P. Wrzesień and A. Zgrundo.
‘Styrofoam debris as a potential carrier of mercury
within ecosystems.’ In: Environmental science and pol-
lution research international 21.3 (Feb. 2014), pp. 2263–
71. doi: 10.1007/s11356-013-2153-4 (cit. on p. M2-1).
[16]
Y. K. Song, S. H. Hong, M. Jang, G. M. Han, M. Rani,
J. Lee and W. J. Shim. ‘A comparison of microscopic
and spectroscopic identiﬁcation methods for analysis
of microplastics in environmental samples’. In: Marine
Pollution Bulletin (2015), pp. 1–8. doi: 10 . 1016 / j .
marpolbul.2015.01.015 (cit. on pp. M2-1, M2-2, M2-
10, M2-12).
[17]
C. J. Moore. ‘Synthetic polymers in the marine environ-
ment: A rapidly increasing, long-term threat’. In: Envir-
onmental Research 108.2 (Oct. 2008), pp. 131–139. doi:
10.1016/j.envres.2008.07.025 (cit. on p. M2-1).
[18]
S. Morét-Ferguson, K. L. Law, G. Proskurowski, E. K.
Murphy, E. E. Peacock and C. M. Reddy. ‘The size,
mass, and composition of plastic debris in the west-
ern North Atlantic Ocean.’ In: Marine pollution bul-
letin 60.10 (Oct. 2010), pp. 1873–8. doi: 10.1016/j.
marpolbul.2010.07.020 (cit. on p. M2-1).
[19]
M. Eriksen, N. Maximenko, M. Thiel, A. Cummins, G.
Lattin, S. Wilson, J. Hafner, A. Zellers and S. Rifman.
‘Plastic pollution in the South Paciﬁc subtropical gyre.’
In: Marine pollution bulletin 68.1-2 (Mar. 2013), pp. 71–
6. doi: 10.1016/j.marpolbul.2012.12.021 (cit. on
p. M2-1).
[20]
G. L. Lattin, C. J. Moore, a. F. Zellers, S. L. Moore and
S. B. Weisberg. ‘A comparison of neustonic plastic and
zooplankton at diﬀerent depths near the southern Cali-
fornia shore.’ In: Marine pollution bulletin 49.4 (Aug.
2004), pp. 291–4. doi: 10.1016/j.marpolbul.2004.01.
020 (cit. on p. M2-1).
[21]
J.-P. W. Desforges, M. Galbraith, N. Dangerﬁeld and
P. S. Ross. ‘Widespread distribution of microplastics in
subsurface seawater in the NE Paciﬁc Ocean.’ In: Mar-
ine pollution bulletin (Jan. 2014). doi: 10 . 1016 / j .
marpolbul.2013.12.035 (cit. on p. M2-1).
M2-14
==PAGE:70==
[22]
F. Norén, K. Norén and K. Magnusson. Marint mik-
roskopiskt skräp Undersökning längs svenska västkusten.
Tech. rep. 2014 (cit. on pp. M2-1, M2-2).
[23]
Y. K. Song, S. H. Hong, M. Jang, J.-H. Kang, O. Y.
Kwon, G. M. Han and W. J. Shim. ‘Large Accumulation
of Micro-sized Synthetic Polymer Particles in the Sea
Surface Microlayer.’ In: Environmental science & tech-
nology 48 (2014), pp. 9014–21. doi: 10.1021/es501757s
(cit. on pp. M2-1, M2-11).
[24]
H. K. Imhof, J. Schmid, R. Niessner, N. P. Ivleva and C.
Laforsch. ‘A novel, highly eﬃcient method for the separ-
ation and quantiﬁcation of plastic particles in sediments
of aquatic’. In: Limnology and Oceanography: Methods
10 (2012), pp. 524–537. doi: 10.4319/lom.2012.10.524
(cit. on p. M2-2).
[25]
S. Bonhomme, a. Cuer, a-M Delort, J. Lemaire, M.
Sancelme and G. Scott. ‘Environmental biodegradation
of polyethylene’. In: Polymer Degradation and Stability
81.3 (Jan. 2003), pp. 441–452. doi: 10 . 1016 / S0141 -
3910(03)00129-0 (cit. on p. M2-2).
[26]
M. C. Goldstein. ‘Abundance and ecological implications
of microplastic debris in the North Paciﬁc Subtropical
Gyre’. PhD thesis. University of California, San Diego,
2012 (cit. on p. M2-2).
[27]
F.
Norén
and
L.-J.
Naustvoll.
Pilot
study:
Sur-
vey of microscopic anthropogenic particles in Skager-
rak. Tech. rep. Klima- og Forurensningsdirektoratet:
TA2779/2011. Lysekil, Sweden: N-research and Havfor-
skningsinstituttet, 2011, p. 22 (cit. on p. M2-2).
[28]
A. Vianello, A. Boldrin, P. Guerriero, V. Moschino, R.
Rella, A. Sturaro and L. Da Ros. ‘Microplastic particles
in sediments of Lagoon of Venice, Italy: First observa-
tions on occurrence, spatial patterns and identiﬁcation’.
In: Estuarine, Coastal and Shelf Science 130 (Sept.
2013), pp. 54–61. doi: 10.1016/j.ecss.2013.03.022
(cit. on p. M2-2).
[29]
E. Fries, J. H. Dekiﬀ, J. Willmeyer, M.-T. Nuelle, M.
Ebert and D. Remy. ‘Identiﬁcation of polymer types
and additives in marine microplastic particles using
pyrolysis-GC/MS and scanning electron microscopy.’ In:
Environmental science. Processes & impacts 15.10 (Oct.
2013), pp. 1949–56. doi: 10.1039/c3em00214d (cit. on
p. M2-2).
[30]
R. Bhargava, S.-q. Wang and J. L. Koenig. ‘FTIR Micro-
spectroscopy of Polymeric Systems’. In: Advanced Poly-
mer Science 163 (2003), pp. 137–191. doi: 10 . 1007 /
b11052 (cit. on p. M2-2).
[31]
A. L. Andrady. ‘Microplastics in the marine environ-
ment.’ In: Marine pollution bulletin 62.8 (Aug. 2011),
pp. 1596–605. doi: 10.1016/j.marpolbul.2011.05.030
(cit. on pp. M2-2, M2-12).
[32]
J. L. Koenig. Infrared and Raman Spectroscopy of Poly-
mers. Vol. 12. 2. Smithers Rapra Press, 2001 (cit. on
p. M2-2).
[33]
E. R. Zettler, T. J. Mincer and L. a. Amaral-Zettler. ‘Life
in the "plastisphere": microbial communities on plastic
marine debris.’ In: Environmental science & technology
47.13 (July 2013), pp. 7137–46. doi: 10.1021/es401288x
(cit. on p. M2-2).
[34]
K. Enders and R. Lenz. ‘Abundance and Size Composi-
tion of Microplastics larger 10 micrometre along a North
Atlantic Transect (in preparation)’. In: (2015) (cit. on
pp. M2-2, M2-3, M2-12).
[35]
The MathWorks Inc. MATLAB and Statistics Toolbox.
Natick, Massachusetts, United States (cit. on p. M2-4).
[36]
J. B. Lambert. ‘Peak Interpretation Lists.pdf’. In: Intro-
duction to Organic Spectroscopy. 1987 (cit. on p. M2-4).
[37]
H. G. M. Edwards. Modern Raman Spectroscopy—A
Practical Approach. Vol. 36. 8. 2005, pp. 835–835. doi:
10.1002/jrs.1320 (cit. on p. M2-4).
[38]
G. Socrates. Infrared and Raman characteristic group
frequencies. 2004, p. 366. doi: 10.1002/jrs.1238 (cit.
on p. M2-4).
[39]
J. M. Lagaron, N. M. Dixon, W. Reed, J. M. Pastor and
B. J. Kip. ‘Morphological characterisation of the crystal-
line structure of cold- drawn HDPE used as a model ma-
terial for the environmental stress cracking (ESC) phe-
nomenon’. In: Polymer 40.10 (1999), pp. 2569–2586. doi:
10.1016/S0032-3861(98)00500-X (cit. on p. M2-4).
[40]
M. Gilbert, K. C. Ho, D. J. Hitt and D. Vrsaljko. ‘As-
sessment of PVC stabilisation using hydrotalcites - Ra-
man spectroscopy and other techniques’. In: Polymer
Degradation and Stability 98.8 (2013), pp. 1537–1547.
doi: 10.1016/j.polymdegradstab.2013.04.005 (cit. on
p. M2-7).
[41]
P. Fredericks. ‘Forensic Analysis of Fibres by Vibrational
Spectroscopy’. In: Infrared and Raman Spectroscopy in
Forensic . . . Ed. by J. M. Chalmers, H. G. M. Edwards
and M. D. Hargreaves. Wiley, 2012. Chap. 4.4, pp. 153–
169 (cit. on p. M2-11).
[42]
J. C. J. Bart. Plastics additives : advanced industrial
analysis. IOS Press, 2006 (cit. on pp. M2-11, M2-12).
[43]
G. Jochem and R. Lehnert. ‘On the potential of Raman
microscopy for the forensic analysis of coloured textile
ﬁbres’. In: Science & Justice 42.4 (2002), pp. 215–221.
doi: 10.1016/S1355-0306(02)71831-5 (cit. on p. M2-
11).
[44]
G. Massonnet et al. ‘Evaluation of Raman spectroscopy
for the analysis of colored ﬁbers: a collaborative study.’
In: Journal of forensic sciences 50.5 (2005), pp. 1028–
1038. doi: 10.1520/JFS2004532 (cit. on p. M2-11).
[45]
S. Wartewig. IR and Raman Spectroscopy - Funda-
mental Processing. Weinheim, FRG: Wiley-VCH Ver-
lag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Sept. 2003. doi: 10 . 1002 /
3527601635 (cit. on p. M2-11).
[46]
F. Norén and L.-j. Naustvoll. Survey of Microscopic An-
thropogenic Particles in Skagerrak. Tech. rep. Novem-
ber. Flødevigen: Institute of Marine Research, 2010 (cit.
on p. M2-12).
[47]
D. O. Hummel. ‘Atlas of Plastics Additives Analysis by
Spectrometric Methods’. In: (2002) (cit. on p. M2-12).
[48]
E. L. Teuten et al. ‘Transport and release of chemic-
als from plastics to the environment and to wildlife.’ In:
Philosophical transactions of the Royal Society of Lon-
don. Series B, Biological sciences 364.1526 (July 2009),
pp. 2027–45. doi: 10 . 1098 / rstb . 2008 . 0284 (cit. on
p. M2-12).
[49]
R. E. Engler. ‘The complex interaction between mar-
ine debris and toxic chemicals in the ocean’. In: Envir-
onmental Science & Technology 46 (2012), pp. 12302–
12315. doi: 10.1021/es3027105 (cit. on p. M2-12).
[50]
M. Cole, H. Webb, P. K. Lindeque, E. S. Fileman, C.
Halsband and T. S. Galloway. ‘Isolation of microplastics
in biota-rich seawater samples and marine organisms.’
In: Scientiﬁc reports 4 (Jan. 2014), p. 4528. doi: 10.
1038/srep04528 (cit. on p. M2-12).
[51]
F. Norén. Small plastic particles in Coastal Swedish wa-
ters. Tech. rep. KIMO, 2007, pp. 1–11 (cit. on p. M2-12).
[52]
H. Bowley, D. Gerrard and I. Biggin. ‘The use of
laser Raman spectroscopy to study the degradation of
poly(vinyl chloride)’. In: Polymer Degradation and Sta-
bility 20.3-4 (1988), pp. 257–269. doi: 10.1016/0141-
3910(88)90072-9 (cit. on pp. M2-12, M2-13).
[53]
A. K. Al-Dossary, M. Gilbert and D. Hitt. ‘Evaluat-
ing PVC Degradation Using UV and Raman Spectro-
scopies’. In: Advanced Materials Research 83-86 (2009),
pp. 923–930. doi: 10.4028/www.scientific.net/AMR.
83-86.923 (cit. on p. M2-13).
M2-15
==PAGE:71==
[54]
B. Singh and N. Sharma. ‘Mechanistic implications of
plastic degradation’. In: Polymer Degradation and Sta-
bility 93.3 (Mar. 2008), pp. 561–584. doi: 10.1016/j.
polymdegradstab.2007.11.008 (cit. on p. M2-13).
[55]
S. Neha, B. K. Tripathi, A. K. Shrivastava and R. S.
Chauhan. ‘LASER RAMAN STUDIES OF FIBROUS
POLYMER - A REVIEW’. In: 5.2 (2014), pp. 128–139
(cit. on p. M2-13).
[56]
S. Sasic and Y. Ozaki. Raman, Infrared, and Near-
Infrared Chemical Imaging. Wiley, 2011, p. 319 (cit. on
p. M2-13).
M2-16
==PAGE:72==
Supplement
S-1
==PAGE:73==
Table 5: Overview of sampling methods used for analysis of PMD with emphasis on microplastics. Size refers to as the minimum mesh size applied.
Name
Description
Pro(+) / Con(–)
Size[µm]
Ref
Neuston net sampling
Manta trawl
Skims the surface water, equipped with a ﬂow meter and
ﬂoating ﬁns keep it stable in the surface layer. To be towed
next to or behind the vessel. Conical collection of MP in
the “Codend”. Relatively large–volume sampling.
+ controlled sampling layer depth (surface) and volume
+ easy to apply also by non–scientiﬁc personal/broad range of
boats
– susceptible to high sea states: microplastic concentration in-
ﬂuenced by wind induced turbulences
– unknown contamination risk (no controls taken so far)
+/ – wind–correction possible but extra work
330
[1–4]
Neuston nets
Round or rectangular-framed net that is (sometimes aided
with ﬂoats) towed through the surface layer (half sub-
merged or fully submerged)
– more diﬃcult to control the sampling depth/volume
333
[5–7]
Subsurface net sampling
WP–2
/zo-
oplankton
net
net is towed next to the ship while moving, sample is cap-
tured in the codend, Relatively large–volume sampling.
+ standard, low cost nets – uncontrolled sampling depth
450
[4, 8,
9]
Bongo plank-
ton net
Mid–depth samples, possible to sample two diﬀerent size
fractions and depth layers (closable nets)
+ easy mid–depth sampling (down to several 100m)
– hardly comparable to other data sets (missing standard layers)
333
[10,
11]
Plankton nets
(Continuous
plankton
recorder
–
CPR)
Towed behind the ship at 10m depth. While moving, sea-
water enters the nose of the CPR and is ﬁltered through a
slowly advancing strip of silk mesh, which captures plastic
particles and plankton . Relatively large–volume sampling.
+ less prone to weather conditions
+ easy determination of plankton : microplastic ratio
+ labour in-extensive sampling, continuous
280,
330
[12]
Bulk
water
sampling
followed
by
ﬁltration
Volume water sample that is later on ﬁltered through a
chosen mesh size, e.g. rotating drum sampler: sampling
micro–surface layer (100 µm ); water collection in a con-
tainer executed in 0–0.3 m and 1 m depth. Small–volume
sampling.
– only small sampling volumes possible/no monitoring (<1 m3)
+ easy sample collection
80,
(>1.6)
[8,
13,
14]
Submersible
water
pump
and
ﬁltering
apparatus
Pump connected to a staggered ﬁlter system held outside
using a metal bar at ca. 0.5 m depth. Medium–volume
sampling.
+ contamination–free + applicable on a broad range of ships
+/– prone to high sea states (varying sampling depth)
10,
30
[15]
Underway
water
intake
equipped
with
ﬁltering
device
Staggered ﬁltering device coupled to the underway water
intake at the hull of the ship.
Relatively large–volume
sampling.
+ contamination–free (closed system)
+ work in–extensive, sampling over large distances (continuous)
+ no interference with vessel operation / other activities
– limited to ships with underway water intake
+/-sampling depth integral of 1–5 m , depending on sea state
10,
300
[16–
18]
S-2
==PAGE:74==
Table 6: Overview of preparation methods used before analysis of PMD with emphasis on microplastics.
Name
Chemical
Description
Pro(+) / Con(–)
Application
Ref
Density
separation
(removal
of
high
density
particles)
NaCl
Density of sodium chloride solution = 1.2 g · cm−3, most
often used sediment sample separation technique.
+ cheap
+ environmentally friendly
– density lower than some polymers
Inorganic material rich sedi-
ment samples
[19]
NaI
Density sodium iodine solution = 1.6 g · cm−3, advanced
sediment separation after elutriation.
+ high density, good polymer retrieval
– more expensive reagent
Inorganic material rich sedi-
ment samples
[19]
ZnCl2
Density zinc chloride solution = 1.6–1.7 g·cm−3, advanced
separation used with the Munich sediment separator
+ high density, good polymer retrieval
– more expensive reagent
Inorganic material rich sedi-
ment samples
[20]
Digestion
(removal
of
bio-
logical
fraction)
HCl
Dissolution of natural organic material using hypochloric
acid. Temperatures of 80–90◦C have been used.
+ easily available
– can destroy small particles, i.e. PA
Biota rich water samples or
MP from animal stomachs
[17,
21]
NaOH
Dissolution of natural organic material using Sodium hy-
droxide. Temperatures from 20–60◦C.
+ easily available
– can shrink small MP ﬁbres
Biota rich samples or from
organism tissue
[21]
HNO3
Nitric acid on 60 and 100◦C was compared to base and
hypochloric acid digestion, also in combination with H2O2.
+
higher
MP
recovery
than
other
acid/base digestion
MP from biota (ingestion)
[22]
H2O2
Hydrogen peroxide used to oxidise organic matter. Treat-
ment of density separated sediment samples to dissolve the
organic fraction.
+ no harming eﬀect on tested commercial
polymer particles
– weak reagent, long degradation time
Pretreated
sediment
samples
with
organic
residues
[19]
Proteinase-
K
Enzymatic digestion showed to be least destructive com-
pared to base and acid digestion and revealed highest re-
covery rates. Application temperatures 37–50◦C.
+ especially suitable for very small MP
+ better results than acid or base digestion
– higher price
Biota rich seawater samples
[21]
Staining
(marking
to
ease
sorting)
Nile-
Red
Staining of MP by hydrophobic attraction. Nile Red can
be applied in n-Hexane solution.
+ enhances contrast in light- and ﬂuores-
cence microscopy
Often used in biota tissue
(tissue imaging)
[17,
23]
Oil-
Red-O
Lysochrome diazo dye, can be applied for ﬂow cytometry
of MP particles.
+ stains particularly lipophilic materials
– degraded MP can have lower lipophily
Lipid cell staining, i.e. MP
translocation studies
[24,
25]
Rose
Bengal
Counter
staining
with
4,5,6,7-tetrachloro-2’,4’,5’,7’-
tetraiodoﬂuorescei, dye stains natural organic material in
a sample. Plastic polymer particles remain unstained.
+ MP remain unstained, e.g. for spectro-
scopy
– transparent MP diﬃcult to detect
Samples with mixture of MP
and natural organic debris
[26]
Abrasion
of organic
coating
Ultrasound
Ultrasonication of samples in deionised water or a cleaning
surfactant. Loosens bioﬁlms, crust or inorganic covering.
+ resuspension and cleaning
+ dissolution of cells
– foam formation can impair MP analysis
Samples of MP in lower mi-
crometre range beneﬁt most
[20,
21]
S-3
==PAGE:75==
Table 7: Overview of methods used for analysis of PMD with emphasis on microplastics. Annotations: 1elemental, 2imprecise, *personal estimate
Name
Description
Pro (+) / Con (–)
Type
Size
Ref.
Visual identiﬁcation
Direct
counting
/
manual
sorting
Useful for large macroplastic debris, for instance
at beach litter surveys or quantiﬁcation of ﬂoating
litter from aboard a ship
+ quick results
+ in situ
– work intensive
– limited to large sizes
no
1 cm
[27,
28]
Light micro-
scopy
Most common method for MP identiﬁcation and
quantiﬁcation.
Sample is up-concentrated on a
small area and investigated for MP particles by
looking for deﬁned inclusion and exclusion criteria.
+ equipment inexpensive and available in every lab
+ easy documentation sizing if digital camera attached
– extensive training required to assure data quality
– uncertainties are tremendously increasing in the lower
size ranges and additional methods are required
no
10 µm
[8, 11]
Fluorescence
microscopy
Fluorescence microscopy can help to identify and
exclude ﬁbres of organic origin. If a ﬂuorescent dye
is available that speciﬁcally stain plastic particles
(dyes for lipophilic particles, i.e. Nile-Red and Oil-
Red-O have been tested), ﬂuorescence microscopy
can enhance MP identiﬁcation.
+ easier discrimination of plastic and natural particles
+ simple integration into microscopic MP analysis
– need for pre-treatment
– diﬃcult to ﬁnd dye for all polymer types
– need to avoid staining of other materials in sample
no
10 µm
[8, 29]
PLM
Polarised light microscopy. PLM can make refract-
ing materials/particles visible by only passing light
to the observer when the polarisation is changed
through the sample. Useful to locate MP in tissue
samples.
+ enhances contrast a lot from plastic to background
– also mineral particle can change light polarisation
– no sizing + counting of aggregated particles
no
10 µm
[25]
Auxiliary
methods
to
visual identiﬁcation
Melting
point
ana-
lysis
Doubtful particles are gradually heated in a glass
tube and can be observed for a possible melting
behaviour through an ocular.
+ temperature control: determination of melting point
indicates polymer type
+ easy observation of the melting process
– with decreasing microparticle size limited by handling
abilities of the user
yes2
50 µm
[30,
31]
Burning test
Heating of a single doubtful particle by a ﬂame or
hot needle. Observe melting reaction and smell.
+ simple technique, no special equipment
+ can be conducted under a microscope
– no precise control of temperature
no
500 µm
[32]
Organic
solvents
Aceton or tetrahydrofuran (THF) can be used to
test if a doubtful polymer or oil particle is dissolved.
+ good indication of synthetic polymer properties
– only verify / falsify a suspected polymer (no broad-
band testing)
yes2
500 µm
[30]
Continued on next page. . .
S-4
==PAGE:76==
Name
Description
Pro (+) / Con (–)
Type
Size
Ref.
FTIR
Fourier Transform Infrared Spectrometry. Spectral
infrared absorbance is measured through a sample.
Spectra show characteristic vibrational frequency
bands of the present chemical groups.
+ precise identiﬁcation of polymer type
+ can show eﬀects of degradation
– only for larger plastic pieces, single handling
– only transmissive measurements (plastic ﬁlms)
yes
5 mm
[33]
Manual spectroscopic analyses
ATR-FTIR
Attenuated Total Reﬂectance FTIR, spectra can be
measured from the surface of a single particle being
pressed on a crystal, e.g. Zn-Se.
+ non-transmissive (surface measurements possible)
– not combined with microscope, single particle transfer
yes
50 µm
[34]
FTIR
mi-
crospectro-
metry
An IR laser is integrated into an microscope set-up.
+ using advantages of FTIR on a microscopic scale
– problem identifying black particles
yes
10 µm
[14]
Raman
microspec-
trometry
Raman laser spectroscope coupled to a confocal mi-
croscope. Stokes- and Anti-Stokes Scattering is de-
tected. Usually in combination with a camera sys-
tem operated from a user PC.
+ higher spatial resolution than FTIR microscopy
+ lower disturbance from water
+ no sample preparation needed
+/– pigments + other additives can inﬂuence spectrum
– can be disturbed by ﬂuorescent material
yes
1 µm
[20,
35]
CARS
Coherent anti-Stokes Raman scattering microscopy.
Two exciting laser wavelengths are used to speciﬁc-
ally detect Raman scattering from certain molecule
types.
+ detect known polymers inside cells (ingestion studies)
+ no sample preparation needed
– not practical for unknown environmental samples
yes
1 µm
[36]
VNIR-
SWIR
Visible- and Near Infrared Spectrometry (VNIR)
plus Short Wave Infrared Spectrometry (SWIR)
gives a broad IR spectrum of a sample that allows
analysis of chemical composition by high resolution
reﬂectance spectra
+ identiﬁcation of a wide range of surface materials
+ detection of chemical and physical properties
yes
200 µm
[37]
SEM-EDX
Scanning Electron Microscopy with Energy Dis-
persive X-Ray Spectroscopy.
Used to character-
ise morphological and chemical properties of plastic
particles and analysis of inorganic plastic additives
(ipa).
+ elemental analysis of polymer and additive compounds
– single particle analysis, no high sample throughput
– high vacuum required
yes1
< 1 µm
[15,
38]
eSEM-EDX
Environmental
SEM-EDX.
Surface
morphology
and elemental composition of polymers.
+ elemental analysis of polymer and additive compounds
– single particle analysis, no high sample throughput
+ low vacuum
yes1
< 1 µm
[39]
Continued on next page. . .
S-5
==PAGE:77==
Name
Description
Pro (+) / Con (–)
Type
Size
Ref.
(Semi)-Automated
spectroscopic
analyses
FTIR
ima-
ging
Mapping of an sample area by FTIR. Automated
spectral analysis can be used to overlay an image of
the sampled area with signals of frequencies char-
acteristic for plastic polymers and assist manual
particle identiﬁcation.
+ lower manual work required for sample analysis
+ possible combination with image recognition for auto-
mated batch analysis
– removal of organic matrix important
– long acquisition time (several hours per sample)
– liquid nitrogen cooling needed
yes
10 µm
[39,
40]
Raman ima-
ging
Mapping application using Raman microspectro-
metry. Possible identiﬁcation of single particles on
a sample ﬁlter by polymer type.
+ high degree of automation possible
+ possible combination with image recognition for auto-
mated batch analysis (mapping)
– not yet ready developed for MP analysis
– modern equipment for feasible mapping is expensive
– sample burning risk (non-suﬃcient heat dissipation)
yes
1 µm
[37,
41]
Hyperspectral
imaging
Visible- and Near Infrared Spectrometry (VNIR),
Short Wave Infrared Spectrometry (SWIR). A line
array is sampled at each exposure and split onto
a 2D VNIR and/or SWIR detector showing a high
resolution spectral content of the sampled line.
+ Data acquisition (broadly) applicable on laboratory,
aerial or satellite scale
+ good potential for PMD monitoring (satellite, aerial
mapping)
– not yet ready developed to use for MP analysis
yes
200 µm
[37]
Other techniques
Pyr-GC/MS
Pyrolysis-gas chromatorgraphy coupled to mass
spectrometry (MS). Analysis of polymer type and
associated organic additives/contaminants (opa).
Structural information about macromolecules by
analysing their thermal degradation products.
+ sensitive method for polymer type and additives
+ can sequentially scan additives and polymer pyrolysis
products from one particle
– expensive and rare equipment
– manual particle selection and transfer
yes
50 µm
[38]
Flow-
Cytometry
Detection of ﬂuorescence coloured particles passing
a laser beam with sensors of forward and side scat-
tering and ﬂuorescence.
+ automated identiﬁcation and counting
+ size estimation by forward scattering
– requires staining techniques for all polymers
– upper size limit of about 50 µm
no
0.2 µm
[24]
Beckman-
Coulter
Counter
Particles in electrolyte suspension pass from one
chamber to another through microchannels: meas-
urements of changes in electrical resistance.
+ counting and sizing of particles
– can not be used for MP > 1.5 mm
no
< 1 µm
[42]
(S)TEM
(Scanning)
Transmission
Electron
Microscopy.
Like SEM but on transmission through thinly sliced
samples. Resolution down to atomic structures.
+ high contrast images of biol. samples w/o staining
+ polymer degradation analysis (electronic structure)
– high work eﬀort, single particle analysis
yes1
< 1 µm
[43]
SEM
Scanning Electron Microscopy.
Electron beam
scans surface of a particle and released secondary
electrons from the upper few nm are detected to
form a topographic image
+ high resolution structural images
– single particles, high manual work
– high vacuum, coating required, destructive
– no quantitative sample analysis
no
< 1 µm
[43]
S-6
==PAGE:78==
INSTRUCTIONS
MICROPLASTIC FILTER SYSTEM VIA UNDERWAY WATER INTAKE
General operating manner: When sampling microplastics there is a risk of contamination by small fibres
and particles from the air, clothing and such.
Therefore please:
•
use gloves to transfer the nets without contaminating them
•
seal the petri dishes well with tape
•
avoid equipment getting in contact with dirt or dust
•
wash dirty equipment with milliQ water and / or spray with compressed air (spray can)
•
keep the bags with fresh nets closed with the wood peg
Prepare the filter before 12 hours filtering cycle:
1. Grease the rubber insulation rings (C and E) with silicon fat only if necessary
2. Centre and insert the nets into the filter system (300 µm to C and 10 µm to E) and close 
them as far as the stopper screws.
3. Fix the filter unit with the lashing strap
After 12 hours filtering cycle:
4. Disconnect the filter system from the hose
5.  Always hold the filter system upright with the upper unit upwards (marked with red 
tape).
6. Carefully remove water: can be placed on a vacuum system to suck out remaining water.
7. Loosen/Remove the lashing straps
8. Take off the upper filter cap carefully in order not to drop the net
9. Take out the 300 µm net with gloves on (optionally with tweezers) and transfer it into a petri
dish by folding it, close the lid and seal it with tape once around. Label with permanent 
marker: continuous number and mesh size
10. Repeat 8. and 9. for the 10 µm net and tape it together with the first petri dish
11. Store all filled petri dishes together in the grey box with the lid on
12. Note into the log book: time of filter removal, number on petri dish, mesh size in µm, 
remarks (e.g. net dropped, filter unit opened during operating time, flow rate changed or 
stopped), operator
13. Connect the new prepared filter unit to the hose
14. Note into the log book: date and time of filter insertion
Sketch of filter system: A upper hose, B upper adapter, C upper filter unit, D connector, E lower filter unit, 
F lower adapter, G lower hose
2
Microplastic Sampling Protocol
S-7
==PAGE:79==
MICROPLASTIC SAMPLE PREPARATION PROTOKOL
1. Unseal petri dish (but keep lid on) and dry under 60°C for min.24h  
2. Take out filter (unfolded) with tweezers and transfer into a screw-top jar prepared with 150 
ml MilliQ water and 150 µl SDS
3. Rinse the sample petri dish and add to the jar content
4. Sonificate the jar (closed) for 20 minutes, repeat until all material has been resuspended
5. Place an open petri dish filled with MilliQ water close to working area (blank)
6. Wash filter again over funnel and add to the jar content (operate quickly to minimise sample 
exposure time)
7. Leave the jar content settling overnight (min. 12h)
8. Pipette the supernatant into the vacuum filter equipped with the 10 µm mesh size filter
9. The settled material (residue) is left in the jar for later analysis
9.1
Visual identification: in volume analysis for material rich samples, on vacuum filters 
for sediment poor samples
9.2.
Raman-based analysis: residues are reduced by means of a plankton splitter and the 
fraction is vacuum- filtrated 
10. Place the 10 µm filter in a petri dish 
11. Name (Sample number-mesh size) and seal vacuum filter plus remaining volume (with 
sediments). Naming syntax example: 01300 (station 1, 300 µm filter) 
12. Keep at an undisturbed place
3
Microplastic Analysis Preparation Protokoll
S-8
==PAGE:80==
(A) Drying unsealed 
samples in the 
oven overnight (60°C).
Resuspension: (B) Addition of SDS 
solution and (C) sonification in order 
to disintegrate conglomerates and 
particles adhering to the wall of the 
vessel.
(F) After settling the 
supernatant 
was 
filtered (10 µm mesh 
size) 
directly. 
The 
residue was reduced 
using a (E) plankton 
splitter prior to vacuum 
filtration. (G) Ready for 
analysis 
under 
the 
microscope 
and/or 
Raman spectrometer.
(D) Post-washing of the filter over a 
funnel
A
B
C
B
D
E
F
sonificator
funnel
pump
splitter
G
4
Microplastic Analysis Preparation Chart
S-9
==PAGE:81==
Pic microscope 
with camera set 
up
Microplastic analysis via visual identification using a   
(A) light microscope equipped with a camera at DTU 
Aqua and   elemental    identification      by (B) Raman 
micro-spectrometry situated at DTU Nanotech.
A
B
5
Microplastic Analysis
S-10
==PAGE:82==
Plastic 
Indicators
Non-Plastic 
Indicators
                                         Scale bar : 50µm
Plain  surface,  no 
repetitive 
structures,  uniform 
diameter
Wool/hair:  scaly 
repetitive structure 
Ends of MP fibres 
can be smooth or 
fuzzy:  the  fracture 
does  not  show  a 
composition
 
of 
sub-structural 
fibres
Cotton: ends show 
composition
 
of 
sub-fibrous 
structure
Fibres  with  three-
dimensional 
bending 
(Norén, 2007)
Straight  and  stiff 
fibres
Fibre  is  solid  and 
straight
 
(same 
diameter 
everywhere) 
Fibre
 
appears 
hollow or tube-like, 
has  an  internal 
channel  and  can 
be conical
Cotton:  can  be 
round, flattened or 
oval
Linen:
 
clearly 
segmented, 
exemplary also for 
filamentous algae
6
Microplastic Identiﬁcation Catalogue
S-11
==PAGE:83==
No  shadings  of 
colours,  round  or 
sharp edged
Colour
 
shading 
due  to  nano-
structure diffraction 
or reflection
Colour
 
shading 
only
 
due
 
to 
transparency; 
breaking
 
edges 
with scratch marks 
of
 
wax-like 
appearance
Different  colours 
shadings  in  parts 
of same thickness
Structure
 
of 
particles  appears 
irregular
Regular  patterns 
(e.g.  pores,  cilia) 
and  shadings  of 
natural  colourings 
indicate  biological 
origin
Weathered
 
and 
rounded 
deformation
 
or 
scratch marks
Minerals:  slaty  or 
crystal  structure, 
visible reflection or 
diffraction,  gloss, 
etc.
==PAGE:84==
7
The Raman Eﬀect
When light, or more general electromagnetic radiation, travels through a material the photons interact
with the molecules or atoms of the medium. Energy from the photons and from the chemical bonds of the
material is transformed in various ways, i.e. absorption, reﬂection, transmission and diﬀraction.
The Raman eﬀect, ﬁrst described in 1928 by Sir C. V. Raman and K. S. Krishnan, is a scattering
phenomenon. When an incident photon hits a molecule of the medium, its inherent energy hν0 (with
h being the Planck’s constant and ν the frequency of the photon) excites the molecule by shifting its
vibrational state to a higher level. When the molecule falls back from the excited to an unexcited state a
new photon is emitted in an arbitrary direction. The energy of that photon and therefore the wavelength or
the colour of the emitted light is – in most cases – the same as it was in the original exciting photon, which
is known as elastic or Rayleigh scattering. In some rare cases (about every 10−6th), the scattered photon
has a diﬀerent or shifted wavelength from the exciting light, which is a result of an inelastic interaction.
Two phenomena can be observed here: the scattered photon has a longer wavelength (lower energy), which
is called Stokes shift, or it has a shorter wavelength (higher energy) and is then called anti-Stokes shift.
The vibrational conﬁguration of the speciﬁc molecules that were excited is represented exactly by the
occurrence of bands in the spectrum of scattered light. Therefore, the spectra carry information of both,
the presence of particular chemical groups, e.g. C–C, C=C, –CH3, S–S, as well as ﬁngerprinting signals of
the whole (macro-)molecular and crystalline structure.
Figure 11: Raman scattering. Black arrow
hν0 is the energy of the incident photon.
Left: Stokes shift, right: anti-Stokes shift
S-13
==PAGE:85==
8
Polymer Spectra
Raman spectra of the polymer groups identiﬁed: PE (incl. LDPE, HDPE, EVA), PP, PVC, PS (incl. ABS), PU, PET (incl.
PC), PA, PMMA.
C
H
H
C
H
H




n
PE
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
O
C
O
CH3
H




n




m
EVA
S-14
==PAGE:86==
C
H
H
C
CH3
H




n
PP
C
H
H
C
Cl
H




n
PVC
C
H
H
C
H




n
PS
S-15
==PAGE:87==
C
H
H
C
H
C
H
H
H
C
H
C
H
C
H
H
H
C
H
H
C
CN
H




n




n




n
ABS
R1
O
C
O
N
H
R2
N
H
C
O
O




n
PU
O
C
CH3
CH3
O
C
O




n
PC
S-16
==PAGE:88==
C
O
C
O
O
C
H
H
C
H
H
O




n
PET
R
C
O
N
H




n
PA
C
H
H
C
C
O
O
CH3
CH3




n
PMMA
S-17
==PAGE:89==
 
 
Aim
The aim of this project is to estimate the concentration of microplastics in a depth of 0 - 5 m 
on a transect from European coastal waters, through the open North Atlantic Ocean to the 
Sargasso Sea in sizes down to 10 μm based on a visual identification and Raman 
microspectroscopy. It is hypothesised that microplastic concentration declines with 
increasing distance from land based sources, but remains increased within the NASG (North 
Atlantic Subtropical Gyre).
A numerical particle dispersion model is used to study vertical distribution of fragmented 
microparticles in the water column. 
Scope
Currently, knowledge about concentrations and ecological impacts of microplastic (MP) 
particles < 300 µm is very limited, which is due to the difficulties of handling and identifying 
them. However, the size class of 10-300 µm is of particular relevance, because of the 
potential intake by zooplankton. Especially in the oligotrophic ocean a relatively low 
concentration could have adverse effects on the continuously starved zooplankton.  
Cycling processes break down marine litter to sizes where it becomes available to the 
bottom of the food web and may have severe impact. It is therefore important to better 
understand fragmentation dynamics and design sampling methods accordingly.
Sample Collection
Samples were taken during the Sargasso Sea cruise onboard R/V Dana (DTU) in March/April 
2014 from the Danish Coast through the English Channel, across the North Atlantic to the 
Sargasso Sea (the North Atlantic Subtropical Gyre) and back by passing the Azores (illustrated 
on background map: coloured bars with numbers indicated sampling transects).
The sampling was conducted by a self-designed closed filter system containing a 300 and 10 µm 
mesh connected to the ship's underway water intake (ca. 5 m depth). More than 70 samples 
could be collected, with an average filtered volume of 2.2 m³ per sample. 
 Fig. 1: 
Left: underway 
water intake,
Vessel Dana (DK).
Right: staggered 
MP filter unit.
1
4
8
23
35
37
46
49
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
Station
Concentration [#/m³]
# / L
Max
0.41
Avg
0.21
Min
0.09
English 
Channel
North East
Azores
Sargasso
    Raman microspectrometry
Raman spectra of suspected microplastics or 
doubtful particles are compared to a library of 
collected post consumer polymers (fig. 5) to validate 
visual  identification.
Raman microspectrometric identification accuracy 
declines with increasing degradation state of polymer 
samples (fig. 6) and signals from additives can 
overlay the polymer peak (fig. 7). Consequently, the 
viability of Raman spectrometric identification of 
marine microplastics ≥ 10 µm has to be evaluated for 
its advantages and limitations. 
Raman shift (cm-1)
    Raman Intensity (cps)
Fig 6: Raman spectra of new (blue) and degraded (red) 
HDPE, the latter shows increased noise and changed 
position of peaks.
Fig 7: Left: Suspected plastic particle from sample. Scale bar 500 µm. Laser beam: 1-2 µm. 
           Right: Corresponding Raman spectrum (blue) partially matching polyurethane (red). 
Fig 5: Commodity polymers reference library.
Fig 4: Criteria catalogue. Scale bar = 50 µm.
●MPs present throughout the 
transect
●More than 90% are within the 
size range: 10-100 µm 
●Time consuming analysis, plus 
exponentially higher 
uncertainties for smaller MPs
●Yet, concentrations not 
confirmed by Raman spec.
...ongoing work
Preliminary results of visual identification
Fig 8: countings 
from 8 stations.
Founded by: DTU Aqua, Carlsberg Foundation, Danish Center for Marine Research.
References:
1 Cózar, A et al., 2014. Plastic debris in the open ocean. PNAS, 111(28), 10239–10244. doi:10.1073/pnas.1314705111
2 Eriksen, M et al., 2014. Plastic Pollution in the World’s Oceans. PLoS ONE, 9(12), e111913. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0111913
      
      Marine Microplastics Down to 10 μm    
  from a Cross-Atlantic Transect              
            
DTU Aqua, Nov 2014, Kristina Enders (kren@aqua.dtu.dk) and Robin Lenz (roble@aqua.dtu.dk)                                       
Master thesis project at the Technical University of Denmark, supervised by Colin Stedmon and Torkel Gissel Nielsen                                                    
                Visual Identification
A set of criteria was developed by studying various plastic and non-plastic objects. Samples are 
examined under light microscopy assisted by melting point analysis. 
Plain  surface,
no repetitive structures 
uniform diameter
Ends of MP fibres can 
be smooth or fuzzy: no  
composition of sub-
structural fibres
No shadings of colours, 
round or sharp edged
Colour shading only 
due to transparency;
breaking edges with 
scratch marks 
Development of Analysis Methods
Model
In a one-dimensional water column model the dispersion of positively buoyant plastic particles 
of equal density but different sizes (described as equivalent spherical diameter, ESD) has 
been computed. The numerical model solves implicitly an advection-diffusion equation in 
closed boundaries.
∂Pi
∂t =Dif ∂2 Pi
∂z
2 −wi
∂Pi
∂z
Pi
= MP particles of size i
Dif = turbulent diffusivity
           (constant 5 m²/day)
wi 
= sinking velocity for size i 
ri 
= radius of particle size i
g 
= gravity
η 
= dynamic viscosity
ρ 
= density
z 
= spatial domain (depth)
t 
= temporal domain 
wi=2
9⋅g⋅η
−1⋅ri
2⋅(ρpolymer−ρwater)
Fragmentation Processes
The fragmentation can theoretically be described 
by a power law with a scaling exponent of -3. 
Although smallest microplastics should be present 
in highest numbers, studies frequently report lower 
abundances in the lower MP size ranges1, 2.
Differential loss terms can partly explain a removal 
of the “missing fraction” (green area, fig. 2), 
however we argue that current sampling and 
analysis methods in MP studies are likely a reason 
for an underrepresented microplastic group in 
sizes smaller than 1 mm.
We 
modelled 
the 
size 
dependent 
particle 
distribution as an example to show that often used 
surface sampling techniques (read area, fig. 3) can 
lead to underestimation of small MP. 
Fig. 3: 
Results of the disp-
ersion model. Smaller
particle sizes are mixed
deeper into the water
column.
Fig. 2: 
Numbers 
of 
fragments
with decreasing size (ESD)
originating from degrading
marine plastic. Dotted line:
theoretical curve. Blue bars:
reported 
size 
distribution
from literature (qualitatively).
ESD [arbitrary length unit]
ESD =
    100 µm
ESD =
    300 µm
ESD =
    500 µm
9
Poster - Dansk Havforskermøde
S-18
==PAGE:90==
Aktuel Naturvidenskab 
2 
2015
8
B
illeder af døde havfugle med maven fuld af pla-
stikstykker, kvalte havskilpadder, der forveks-
lede plastikposer med gopler, eller sæler og hvaler, 
der blev fanget i tabte fi skenet og druknede, har sat 
plastikforureningen i havet på mediernes dagsorden.
Forskere fra DTU Aqua har fundet plastikstykker 
på op til en halv centimeter i danske sild og hvilling 
i det nordlige Storebælt. Andre forskere har fun-
det plastik i sandorme, muslinger, torsk og makrel i 
Norsøen og Østersøen. Og i en undersøgelse i Skot-
land af jomfruhummeres maver fandt man plastik-
stykker i 83 % af dyrene, hvoraf de fl este bestod af 
sammenfi ltrede plastiktråde.
For at få mere viden om udviklingen i havene 
omkring Danmark undersøger DTU Aqua nu også 
indholdet af plast i trawlet på de faste moniterings-
togter i Nordsøen og Østersøen.
Mere og mere plastik
I løbet af de seneste 50 år er plastproduktionen ste-
get kraftigt til 299 millioner tons i 2013, specielt i 
Asien. En artikel i Science har netop dokumente-
ret, at mellem 4 og 12 millioner ton plastik ender i 
havet hvert år, og at tallet forventes at blive fordob-
Et hav fuld af 
    mikroplastik
let over de næste ti år. Mens de store stykker plast er 
nemmere at få øje på, er det de små, mikroskopiske 
plaststykker, som der er fl est af i havet.
Det var også, hvad vi i 2014 fandt i en undersøgelse 
på tværs af Atlanterhavet til Sargassohavet syd for 
Bermuda med det danske havforskningsskib Dana. 
På trods af, at vi sejlede igennem de store områder 
med strømhvirvler (de såkaldte “gyres”), hvor der 
efter sigende skulle fi ndes veritable “plastikøer”, så 
vi dem ikke. Til gengæld fandt vi mikroplastpartik-
ler så små, at de bliver overset i mange undersøgel-
ser af plastik i havet.
Hvor kommer plastik i havet fra?
Det meste af det plastik, som fi ndes i havet, kom-
mer fra land, hvorfra det enten er tabt eller blæst 
ud i havet eller udledt via vandløb og spildevand. 
I havet nedbrydes plastik over tid og ender som 
mikroskopisk plast. Flere plejeprodukter som fx 
skrubbecremer og tandpasta indeholder også små 
plastikpartikler. En undersøgelse af spildevandet 
ved to svenske rensningsanlæg har vist, at selv om 
disse anlæg fj erner plastpartiklerne fra vandet, så 
udledes millioner af mikroplastpartikler til havet 
hver time.
Hvad sker der egentlig med de enorme 
mængder af plastik, som ender i havet? 
Et bud er, at det nedbrydes til mikroplastik, 
som måske kan påvirke havets mindste liv 
og dermed grundlaget for alt liv i havet.
Foto: Colourbox
Snigpremiere på
artikel i Aktuel Natur-
videnskab 2-2015
10
Popular Science Article in Aktuel Naturvidenskab
S-19
==PAGE:91==
9
Aktuel Naturvidenskab 
2 
2015
M I L J Ø
En del af havets plastik (20 %) kommer fra mari-
time erhverv, herunder fi skeri. Under fi skeri mister 
fi skerne af og til deres trawl og garn. Sådanne 
mistede redskaber kan være skadelige, da fugle, 
havpattedyr og især fi sk kan sidde fast i dem eller 
kan nedbrydes til mikroplastik over tid. I Dan-
mark har vi ikke overblik over mængden og udbre-
delsen af tabte fi skeredskaber, men i fx Norge har 
man på årlige oprydningstogter langs den norske 
kyst hentet kilometervis af fi skegarn, trawl og tov-
værk op fra havbunden. En anden kilde til pla-
stik i havet er slitage af fi skeredskaber, når disse 
skurrer mod havbunden. DTU Aqua har på togter 
med Dana i Nordsøen undersøgt mængden af syn-
tetiske fi bre fra tovværk, og undersøgelser tyder på, 
at der især i kystzonen potentielt kan være gan-
ske betragtelige mængder af fritfl ydende tovrester 
i vandsøjlen.
Illustration af “plastikkredsløbet” – de processer, der driver plastikaffald rundt i miljøet. Der ikke er balance mel-
lem den mængde plast, der ledes ud i havmiljøet, og det, vi kan genﬁ nde i overﬂ aden. Dvs. der må være en 
række tabsprocesser, vi ikke kender til.
De st ørste kilder til plastikaffald i havet: 
Ulovlig dumpning af affald direkte i 
(A) spildevandssystemer eller 
(B) naturen, hvor fra det transporteres 
af fx ﬂ oder og vind til havet. 
(C) Mikroplastik som slipper gennem 
rensningsanlæg (især syntetiske ﬁ bre 
fra vaskemaskiner), 
(D) affaldsnedkastning på stranden, 
(E) tabt, og (F) mistede ﬁ skeredskaber, 
(G) mistet containerfragt, 
(H) luftbårent deponeringsaffald og 
dårlig forvaltning af lossepladser og 
(I) udslip af industriaffald.
Det er måske ikke det synlige plastik, 
som giver det de største problemer.
Hvor bliver plasten af?
Når plastik ender i havet, bliver det transporteret 
med havstrømme meget langt væk fra dets oprin-
delsessted på meget kort tid. En undersøgelse har 
vist, at plastikstykker på 60 dage kan drive mere 
end 1000 km fra kysten og ud mod midten af 
den Nordatlantiske Subtropiske Hvirvel (NASG 
- North Atlantic Subtropical Gyre), hvor en stor 
del af det fl ydende plastik bliver fanget. Men en 
væsentlig del bliver også skyllet tilbage på land igen, 
hvor det nedbrydes til mindre stykker i standkan-
ten, som igen kan spredes ud i havet.
Omkring halvdelen af det plastik, der forbruges i 
Europa, er Polypropylen (PP) og Polyethylen (PE), 
som er lettere end havvand. Det plast, som ender 
i havmiljøet, vil derfor primært fl yde nær overfl a-
den. De andre plasttyper med en højere massefylde 
Foto: Colourbox
CO2   (CO, N2O, CH4...)
Kystaflejring
Afstrømning
Overfladen
Bundfældelse
Bundfældelse
Begroning
Frie 
vandmasser
Marine 
organismer
Havbunden
Fragmentation
Fotonedbrydning
Termonedbrydning
Hydrolyse
Bionedbrydning
(4,8 til 12,7 mio. t/år)
0,3 mio. t > 300 μm
Fossile brændstoffer
Plastik-
produktion
299 mio. t/år
Losseplads
Forbrændings-
anlæg
Strand
Ocean
Atmosfære
Land
Brug
==PAGE:92==
Aktuel Naturvidenskab 
2 
2015
10
Observeret fordeling i havet
Den stiplede graf viser det teoretisk forventede antal frag-
mentstykker, der kommer ud af fragmentering af et enkelt 
sfærisk objekt. Søjlediagrammet viser den fordeling, man 
ofte observerer i havet. Det grønne område viser den store 
mængder af små partikler, som man ikke ﬁ nder, selv om de 
burde være der.
Numerisk modellering
Resultater af en numerisk modellering af ﬂ ydende plastik-
kugler med en densitet svarende til polyethylen. De tre grafer 
viser fordelingen af plastikkuglerne i en 20 meter dyb vand-
søjle for tre forskellige størrelser efter de har nået “steady 
state” betingelser. Udgangssituationen var en lige koncentra-
tion af 1 partikel pr. meter dybde af alle tre størrelser i hele 
vandsøjlen. Modelleringen viser, at små partikler blandes 
dybere ned end større mikroplastikpartikler.
Foto af vandloppe, som har spist mikroplastik (markeret med grønt) og nærbillede af vandloppe, hvor mikroplastik (markeret 
med rødt) klæber sig til vandloppens krop (th). 
Plastik i sild og hvilling fra Storebælt
Der ﬁ ndes mange undersøgelser af ﬁ sks indtag af plastik, bl.a. 
har man fundet plastik i maverne på 37 % af 504 ﬁ sk fordelt 
på ti arter i den Engelske Kanal. Forskere fra DTU Aqua gen-
nemførte i 2013 et studie af 45 unge sild og hvilling fra Store-
bælt ud for Sejerø Bugt for at undersøge, om også ﬁ sk i dan-
ske farvande spiser plastik. Fiskenes indvolde blev udtaget og 
opløst, og prøverne blev ﬁ ltreret på net med en maskestør-
relse på 250 μm. Forskerne fandt mikroplastik i 31 % af hvil-
lingerne og 27 % af sildene. Bortset fra en enkelt egentlig 
plaststrimmel på ca. 4-5 mm bestod de ﬂ este forekomster af 
1-4 sorte, blå eller røde ﬁ bre på ca. 1-4 mm. Undersøgelsen af 
sild og hvilling viser således, at ﬁ sk i danske farvande indta-
ger plastik. Der er behov for at undersøge dette yderligere i 
andre dele af danske farvande og med fokus på ﬂ ere ﬁ skear-
ter med forskellige fødestrategier, så der tages højde for, om 
ﬁ sk æder fra vandsøjlen, havbunden osv.  
Fotos: Cole, M. et al: Microplastic Ingestion by Zooplankton. Environmental Science and Technology. 
Copyright (2013) American Chemical Society.
==PAGE:93==
11
Aktuel Naturvidenskab 
2 
2015
som polyvinylklorid (PVC) og polyethyleneterepht-
halate (PET, også kendt som polyester) vil deri-
mod synke. Hvor hurtig plastikken synker afhæn-
ger også af andre faktorer som fragmenternes stør-
relse og form.
Adskillige studier af størrelsesfordeling og koncen-
trationen af fl ydende eller bundfældede plastikpar-
tikler har vist, at der er fl est af de mindste partikler. 
En svensk undersøgelse har fx sammenlignet antal-
let af mikroplastik over 300 μm og over 10 μm og 
fandt, at der var omkring 2500 gange fl ere partikler 
i den mindre størrelsesklasse. 
Andre undersøgelser har vist, at man fi nder langt 
mindre mængder af plastik end man “burde” i for-
hold til det, vi ved ender i havet. Det spanske glo-
bale togt Malaspina i 2010 viste, at plastikstyk-
kerne som forventet akkumulerede i de subtropi-
ske hvirvelzoner, men til forskernes store overra-
skelse var koncentrationen tusinde gange mindre 
end forventet ud fra udledningerne. På tilsva-
rende vis så vi på Danas togt til Sargassohavet i 
2014 en højere koncentration af plast i hvirvlerne, 
men mængderne var langt lavere end forventet. Så 
hvor bliver plastikken af? Svaret kan fi ndes hvis vi 
undersøger de processer, plastikken er udsat for i 
havet. 
Langtidsholdbart eller ej?
Plastik er meget holdbart, og man antager, at det 
kan holde i miljøet i århundreder. Imidlertid er den 
molekylære struktur af plastik i miljøet under kon-
stant forandring, fordi tilsætningsstoff er udvaskes 
og påvirkninger fra vand og luft ændrer plastens 
kemiske sammensætning. Disse omdannelsespro-
cesser er relativt hurtige (måneder til år).
Alt plastik gennemgår en nedbrydningsproces, der 
omfatter både en fysisk nedbrydning og en lang-
sommere kemisk nedbrydning af polymeren. Hvor 
hurtigt nedbrydningen foregår afhænger af fakto-
rer som saltholdighed, temperatur og UV-indstrå-
lingen, og der er sandsynligvis steder som dybha-
vet, iltfrie sedimenter eller polarområder, hvor ned-
brydning går overordentligt langsomt. Nedbryd-
ning betyder ikke, at plastikken forsvinder, men 
at det nedbrydes til meget små partikler, som ikke 
kan ses med det blotte øje. Nedbrydningsprocesser 
alene, kan altså ikke forklare det manglende plastik 
i verdenshavene.
En forklaring kan være, at de små plastikpartik-
ler bliver mere tilgængelige for organismerne i havet 
og forsvinder fra overfl aden gennem optag i havets 
fødekæder og/eller via bundfældelse pga. begroning.
Når bakterier og senere også større organismer som 
muslinger og rurer sætter sig på et stykke plastik, 
vil de øge vægten og trække det ned mod bunden. 
Disse begroede plastikstykker vil synke dybere ned 
i vandet eller afl ejres på havbunden, men kan også 
stige op igen, hvis organismerne dør eller løsner 
sig. Derfor kan plastikaff ald cirkulere gennem hele 
vandsøjlen. Derudover har laboratorieforsøg vist, 
at bakterier muligvis kan omsætte visse plastikty-
per. Endelig viser modelleringer, at mindre partik-
ler blandes dybere ned i vandsøjlen end større. Det 
betyder, at små partikler måske ikke fanges i repræ-
sentativt antal af prøvetagningsmetoder, der samler 
plastik fra havoverfl aden.
En samlet forståelse af nedbrydningshastigheden af 
plastik i havmiljøet og betydningen af de forskellige 
miljøpåvirkninger har vi imidlertid ikke. Derfor er 
der behov for nærmere at undersøge, hvor meget 
og hvor hurtig samspillet af de forskellige nedbryd-
ningsprocesser omdanner vores aff ald til mikro- (og 
nano-) meter store plastikstøvpartikler, og hvordan 
disse små plastikpartikler påvirker det omgivende 
havmiljø.
Æder dyreplankton plastik?
Mens de fysiske skader på større dyr forårsaget af 
plastik er meget synlige og veldokumenterede, ved 
man intet om, hvordan mikroplastik påvirker dyr 
som dyreplankton og småfi sk. I de fl este studier 
er mikroplastik defi neret som plastikstykker min-
dre end 5 mm. Mange studier af mikroplastik over-
ser partikler, der er mindre end 300 μm, hvilket er 
dem, som fi ltrerende dyreplankton som vandlop-
per kan æde (10-100 μm). Derfor er det relevant 
at undersøge, om disse mikroplast-partikler kan 
påvirke havets mindste liv, dyreplankton, fi skelarver 
og muslinger, som mange andre dyr lever af. 
Dyreplankton, domineret af vandlopper, er det vig-
tige fødekædeled mellem planteplankton og fi ske-
larver. Man har i laboratoriet vist, at en lang række 
planktondyr æder mikroplastik-partikler, og at 
vandlopper, der fodres med mikroplastik, ændrer 
adfærd. Den hydrofobe mikroplastik kan også 
hæfte sig til vandlopperne, og det kan forstyrre 
deres naturlige svømmeadfærd, fødeoptagelse samt 
parringsadfærd.
Når plastikken optages af dyreplankton kan det 
efterfølgende føres op gennem fødekæden. Men da 
plastikken tilsyneladende ikke optages i dyrenes 
væv, fi nder der ikke en egentlig opkoncentrering af 
plastik sted gennem fødekæden, da plasten udskil-
les igen med dyrenes fækalier.
Nogle af de kemikalier, der tilsættes til plastik 
under produktionen, har hormon-lignende virk-
ning, og de bliver frigivet, når plastikken nedbrydes 
i havet. Derudover kan andre organiske miljøgifte 
som PCB og DDT bindes på plastikkens overfl ade, 
så plastikstykkerne virker som en form for magnet, 
der opsamler miljøgifte fra omgivelserne.
M I L J Ø
Om forfatterne:
Kristina Enders er spe-
cialestuderende i Aquatic 
Science and Technology
kren@aqua.dtu.dk
Robin Lenz er specia-
lestuderende i Aquatic 
Science and Technology
roble@aqua.dtu.dk
Thomas Kirk Sørensen 
er biolog og specialkon-
sulent
tks@aqua.dtu.dk 
Line Reeh er kommunika-
tionsmedarbejder
lre@aqua.dtu.dk
Torkel Gissel Nielsen er 
Professor i Biologisk 
Oceanograﬁ 
tgin@aqua.dtu.dk
Alle ved DTU Aqua
==PAGE:94==
Aktuel Naturvidenskab 
2 
2015
12
På jagt efter mikroplastik
I 2014 var vi med Danmarks største havforskningsskib, Dana, 
i Sargassohavet syd for Bermuda for at undersøge ålens 
gydepladser. I den forbindelse ﬁ k vi mulighed for at udvikle, 
teste og bruge en metode til at undersøge, hvor meget mikro-
plastik, der var i havet på Danas 10 uger lange rute fra Hirts-
hals over Atlanten og tilbage igen. Vores fokus var de helt 
små mikroplastikpartikler på 10 μm.
Til det formål byggede vi et ﬁ ltersystem, som kunne monteres 
på DANA’s saltvandsindtag og kontinuerligt indsamle prøver 
på en 300 μm og en 10 μm ﬁ lterkapsel langs den over 
10.000 km lange sejlrute.
Ruten gik igennem forskelligartede havområder – fra Nord-
søen over det åbne Atlanterhav til Sargassohavet. Og så pas-
serede Dana igennem den Nordatlantiske hvirvel, også kendt 
som “Plastikøen”. Plastikøer fandt vi dog ikke, om end vores 
togt bekræftede, at der var en højere koncentration af plastik 
her end i de andre havområder, som vi sejlede igennem (et 
stykke plastik af ﬂ aske til ﬁ skenet-størrelse blev observeret 
ca. hvert andet minut fra toppen af skibet, som sejlede med 
10-12 knob). Vi udskiftede ﬁ ltrene i vandet fra saltvandsind-
taget cirka hver 12. time og indsamlede i alt omkring 80 prø-
ver.
For at udvikle en standardiseret metode, som på sigt kan 
gøre det muligt at sammenligne data fra forskellige studier, 
har vi brugt DTU Nanotechs Raman mikro-spektrometer. Det 
er et særligt mikroskop, som er udstyret med en laser, der 
kan stimulere enkelte partikler ned til 1 μm størrelse. Afhæn-
gigt af molekylestrukturen af det undersøgte materiale vil 
det sprede lyset i et spektrum, som afslører stoffes kemiske 
sammensætning, så det kan bruges til at bestemme typer af 
plast. Det kræver stadig manuelt arbejde, da man er nødt til 
at fortælle instrumentet, hvilke partikler der skal scannes, 
men nyere versioner vil gøre det muligt at analysere en prøve 
automatisk.
Den foreløbige analyse har vist en lang række typer af mikro-
plastik. Især ﬁ bre af syntetiske tekstiler (ca. 32 %), stykker af 
fx. plastfolie (ca. 46 %) og fragmenter nedbrudt fra større 
plastikgenstande (ca. 22 %). Koncentrationerne var mellem 
100 til 400 partikler pr. kubikmeter vand, men varierede 
betydeligt mellem de enkelte stationer. Vi analyserer i øje-
blikket sammenhængen mellem fragmenteringsprocesserne 
og strømforhold for bedre at forstå spredningen af mikropla-
stik. Størrelsesfordelingen viser langt ﬂ ere af de små partik-
ler end af de større, hvilket stemmer overens med teorien om 
mikro- og nanofragmentering.
Stævnindtag (nederst til højre) på Dana. På grund af bølger og skibets bevægelser var 
vandet, som vi ﬁ ltrerede for mikroplastik, en blanding af vand fra overﬂ aden og op til fem 
meter ned. Øverst til højre ses ﬁ lter i aktion. Foto: Line Reeh
Kort over Danas rute til og fra Sargassohavet, som viser hvor vi tog prøver af mikroplastik. 
Diagrammet i toppen af kortet viser den samlede størrelsesfordeling af plastik. En sam-
menligning af koncentrationer af mikroplastik mellem stationerne vil være det næste trin 
i den igangværende analyse.
Kristina analyserer spektra af potentielle mikroplastik-par-
tikler i Raman-mikrospektroskopet (i baggrunden til højre).
Foto: Kristina Enders


0%
0%
0%
10%
10%
10%
10%
10%
10%
10%
0%
20%
20%
20%
Stø
Stø
t
Stø
Stø
Stø
Stø
t
Stø
Stø
tø
Stø
tø
Større
re
rre
rre
r e
rre
rre
rrrre
rrelslse
lse
lse
lsesgr
sg
sgr
sgr
sg
sgr
sgr
sgr
g upp
upp
upp
upp
pp
upp
upp
pp
pp
pp
ppe [
e [
e [
e [μm]
μm]
μm]
μm]
μ
]
μ
]
μ
]
[%]
[%]
[%]
[%]
[%]
[%]
[%]
[%]
[%]
[%] f
af
af
af
af
af
af
af
af
af
af
af
af
af lalalalalalala lelelelelelelel
10
10
10
10
30
50
50
50
50
50
50
50
50
5
70
70
70
70
70
70
70
7
90 110
110
11
150
190
230
270
t300
00
00
0
30
30
30
300
0
30
