==PAGE:1==
The State of Project Management
- An inductive study of Danish project organizations
MSc. Thesis
January 2016
Christian Holm Christiansen
s103669
DTU Management
Department of Management Engineering
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Management Engineering
Produktionstorvet, Building 424
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
Tel. 45 4525 4800, Fax. 45 4593 3435
www.man.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Christian Holm Christiansen, s103669
The State of Project Management
An inductive study of Danish project organizations
Master Thesis, 28th of January 2016
iii
==PAGE:4==
The State of Project Management, An inductive study of Danish project organiza-
tions
Author:
Christian Holm Christiansen, s103669
Supervisor(s):
Christina Villefrance Møller
Christine Ipsen
DTU Management Engineering
Produktionstorvet
DTU - Building 424
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
www.man.dtu.dk
Tel: (+45) 4525 4800
Fax: (+45) 4525 3435
E-mail: info@man.dtu.dk
Release date:
28th of January 2016
Class:
1(Public)
Edition:
1st
Comments:
This report is a part of the requirements to achieve Master’s degree in
Engineering Management at Technical University of Denmark.
The report represents 30 ECTS points.
Front:
Royalty free illustration from www.stocksnap.io
Rights:
© Christian Holm Christiansen, 2016
iv
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis is a master project developed at The Department of Engineering Management
at The Technical University of Denmark. The thesis finalizes the education and covers
all learning objectives of the Master in Engineering Management.
The information presented in this thesis, serve as case study of the Danish industry
and the current project management practices.
The idea for this thesis comes from
a semester abroad, specifically the United States, where the work ethic and morale is
widely different to the Danish. As such, several questions arose; is the work culture
different too? Are we ahead or behind the current best practices? What can we (in
Denmark) do to become even better?
This report is a qualitative study performed in collaboration with a number of Danish
companies and organizations. As such this report may be used as a basis for further
case studies or deeper research.
If you, the reader, is a manager or a person with insight into a company, this report may
also serve to provide insight into your own organization or serve as inspiration to new
approaches. My hope is that you will find this report interesting and be able to use the
knowledge contained herein.
- Christian Holm Christiansen, 28th of January 2016
v
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank all the participating project managers for their invaluable contri-
butions to this project. Furthermore I would like to thank them for taking time off their
daily schedule to be able to talk to me, especially since I know just how busy project
managers can be.
I would also like to thank my main supervisor Christina Villefrance Møller for her help
with this thesis and all the long discussions we had about the different aspects of project
management, also a thank you to Christine Ipsen, my second supervisor, who helped
keep me on track.
I would like to thank Marina Ejlertsen, Isabel Becker And Pete Scheutzow for helping
me with proofreading this report, and for all the discussions we’ve had regarding the
prospects of writing a thesis.
Acknowledgements goes out to the following companies and project
managers:
Jesper Gottlieb
Marie Hansen
Morten Overgaard
Laurine Mindegaard
Keld Brødsgaard
Maiken Veneman
Nana Markmann
Carsten Hansen
Nadiya
Dolgo-
polenko
Jan Jessen
Frederick Knudsen
vii
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
Abstract
DTU MAN
Department of Management Engineering
MSc. Management Engineering
The State of Project Management
by Christian HOLM Christiansen
This study aims to explore the project management practices of Danish organizations.
The inductive study compares the approaches taken by Danish organization in the IT
and Engineering industry, to the socio-technical system approach to organizational de-
velopment.
This has been done by conducting a case-study of the approaches that
organizations and project managers have implemented. The explorative study also aims
to identify the differences in how organizations approach the concept of project man-
agement and how certifications and project management methodologies are utilized by
the organizations. Additionally this study explores how project managers perceive and
utilize the different paradigms that make up the socio-technical system.
Projects are becoming increasingly complex and the emerging globalisation and pres-
sure to innovate necessitates increased efficiency. The existing literature argues that a
socio-technical approach towards project management will provide additional benefits
to the projects, causing increased success rates. This report reveals the state of project
management in comparison to the approaches that have been identified as significant in
the socio-technical system.
It is indicated by the literature that project management can be perceived from either
a social or a technical perspective. It was indicated by the interviews that Danish orga-
nizations primarily utilized the technical approach while many of the project managers
acknowledge the importance of the social perspective. Similarly, the approaches towards
the use of methodologies were found to be primarily customized, as was also indicated by
the literature to be effective. However many organizations did not employ the social ap-
proaches necessary to become a more mature project organization and while there were
distinct differences in approaches, the findings did not indicate that any organization
fully followed a socio-technical approach to project management
Keywords:
Project Management ◦Knowledge Management ◦Leadership vs. Management ◦Work
Culture ◦Organizational Structures ◦Change Management ◦Work Practices ◦Crowdsourcing
ix
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
Abstrakt
DTU MAN
Department of Management Engineering
MSc. Management Engineering
The State of Project Management
by Christian HOLM Christiansen
Målet med denne afhandling er at udforske de forskelle tilgange til projektledelse som
Danske organisationer har.
Det induktive studie sammenligner de forskellige frem-
gangsmåder i IT- og Maskin-industrien, med den socio-tekniske tilgang til organisa-
tionsudvikling. Dette er gjort ved at gennemføre et casestudie af de tilgange som or-
ganisationerne og deres projektledere har implementeret. Det eksplorative studie sigter
også mod at identificere de forskelle der findes i de forskellige tilgange til projektledelse
som organisationerne har, samt deres brug af projektmetoder. Samtidig forsøger studiet
at undersøge hvordan projektlederne opfatter de forskellige paradigmer der udgør det
socio-tekniske system.
Projekter er på vej til at blive mere komplekse og den spirende globalisering, samt
pres på at innovere, nødvendiggør en højere effektivitet.
Den eksisterende litteratur
argumenterer for, at den socio-tekniske tilgang til projektledelse vil skabe flere fordele i
projekterne, hvilket skaber en større grad af succes. Denne rapport viser den nuværende
status på projektledelse og sammenligner de forskellige tilgange med dem der er blevet
identificeret som signifikante i det socio-tekniske system.
Litteraturen indikerer at projektledelse kan ses både fra det sociale, men også det
tekniske perspektiv. Interviewene indikerede at de Danske organisationer primært fokuserer
på den tekniske tilgang, mens mange af projektlederne anerkendte vigtigheden af det
sociale perspektiv. Det blev ligeledes fundet at brugen af projektmetoder primært var
tilpasset til organisationen, hvilket også blev indikeret af litteraturen til at være en effek-
tiv fremgangsmåde. Dog var der mange af organisationerne der ikke anvendte de sociale
perspektiver, der ville gøre organisationen mere projektmoden. Der blev fundet særskilte
forskelle mellem de forskellige tilgange, men studiet fandt ingen indikationer på at nogen
af virksomhederne fuldstændigt fulgte den socio-tekniske tilgang til projektledelse.
Nøgleord:
Projektledelse ◦Vidensdeling ◦Lederskab vs. Ledelse ◦Arbejdskultur ◦Virksomhedsstruk-
turer ◦Forarndringsledelse ◦Arbejdspraksis ◦Crowdsourcing
xi
==PAGE:12==
==PAGE:13==
Contents
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
Abstract
ix
Abstrakt
xi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background and Context
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Problem Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Assumptions & Scope
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.5
Target Audience
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.6
Content and Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Research Methods
9
2.1
Research Strategy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Research Layout
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Literature Review
15
3.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Project Management Approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3
Project Management Methodologies & Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.4
Project Management as a Socio-Technical System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.5
Project Types and Management Styles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.6
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4
Methodology
35
4.1
Case-Study Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.2
Interview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.3
The Iterative Approach
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.4
Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.5
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5
Analysis
45
5.1
De-Constructed Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.2
Contextual Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.3
The Holistic Perspective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
5.4
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
6
Discussion
65
6.1
Findings & Impact . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
xiii
==PAGE:14==
6.2
Lessons Learned
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
7
Conclusion
71
7.1
Project Management Approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
7.2
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
Appendix A Interview Protocol
85
Appendix B Respondent Matrix
87
Appendix C Respondent Summary
89
Bibliography
92
Back
94
xiv
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 1
Introduction
“If project management were recognized as a profession, and the use of the ti-
tle ‘Project Manager’ restricted to those individuals in possession of related pro-
fessional certiﬁcation, it would help in the selection of project managers, giving
greater conﬁdence in their competence and trustworthiness.”
- Turner, Müller, and Turner, p. 7
Managing a project, i.e.
being a project manager (from hereon abbreviated pm), is
something which is very different from other academic disciplines. The certifications
available for pm’s either require documented experience or none at all, and very rarely
is it possible to become a pm with only the theoretical foundation. Project Management
(PM) is the art of handling changing environments, the complexity of interrelated tasks
and the continued communication to all stakeholders. Though almost anything relating
to temporary work can be considered a project, it is hard to define just what a pm
is. ’Project Manager’ is not a protected title and is not recognized as an established
academic discipline (Turner et al., 2003, Rodney Turner, 2006). When anyone can call
themselves a pm, it can be hard to determine which parts define it. A project, on the
other hand, is defined as a “…temporary organization to which resources are assigned
to do work to bring about beneficial change.” (Turner et al., 2003). In this definition,
the resources may be human, material or financial, but the key here is the definition
of the project as an organization. An organization needs many different kinds of skills
to function, whether it be soft or hard skills, quantitative or qualitative, it is hard to
condense PM into one aspect.
The problem is the fragmented literature which focuses too much on certain aspects
of PM, and the role of the pm, at the expense of the broader picture (Alojairi, 2010).
Furthermore, only a few studies, focusing on the holistic aspects of PM, have been
published (Jugdev K. and Delisle, 2001). There is a gap in the knowledge of how the
different aspects of PM play together (Alojairi, 2010, Mumford, 2000). This thesis will
1
==PAGE:16==
Chapter 1 Introduction
look into the current state of PM in Danish organizations and apply a holistic view to
the different aspects.
1.1
Background and Context
The future organization relies on open innovation, freelancing and outsourcing in general
(Morgan, 2012, 2014, Karkov, Rasmus; Bøtter et al., 2014, Castells, 2010). It cannot
be seen as a single entity, instead it must be seen as a collection of intertwined in-
dividuals working towards the same goal. A project is very much the same. The pm
hires freelancers from the functional departments and outsources work to outsiders while
relying on the project team to work together, sharing ideas and innovate. In fact, Dan-
ish companies are very good at innovating because we employ flat organizations and
manager-less structures (Lindholm, 2009). We also care about our employees first and
customers second - as opposed to American companies who believe in ’The customer is
always right’ (Lindholm, 2009). Scandinavian companies have long been successful in
applying a holistic view on the organization, thus combining both efficiency and democ-
racy (Mumford, 2000). However, only 30% of the Scandinavian companies are actually
considered being this ”modern” (Lindholm, 2009, p. 47). Moreover, many organizations
are still defining project success on the basis of hard metrics such as, KPI’s1 and financial
constraints, at the loss of innovation and long-term benefits to the organization (Aubry
and Hobbs, 2011, Grex, 2011). This leads to a gap in how organizational and project
success is measured, and how it is defined (Cooke-Davies, 2002).
Management and Socio-Technical Systems
Like research, PM can be done quantitatively and qualitatively and up until the 1960’s
the quantitative approach, or ”the scientific method”, was the predominant approach
to management in the same way as Gantt Charts and PERT-analyses was the pre-
dominant approach to PM. But as with socio-technical systems, each practice, whether
it be a management practice or a PM certification, is part of a bigger system. The
term Socio-Technical System (STS) was coined shortly after the Second World War
by members of the Human Relations department of the Tavistock Institue in England.
STS-theory deals with the technical aspects of e.g. PM and the social aspects of work
itself. The socio-technical systems theory derives from complex systems theory which
evolved around the same time and which, at its core, combines problems in mathemat-
ical modelling and philosophical foundations. The idea of understanding organizations
as STS’s came during the shift between the use of scientific management principles to
more humanistic, largely based on Abraham Maslows work regarding the hierarchy of
needs. In the words of Morgan (2006): “…when we choose a technical system, it always
has human consequences, and vice versa.”
1KPI: Key Performance Indicators
Page 2
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 1 Introduction
The 1951 study at the Tavistiock Institute, which is widely regarded as the first study on
STS’s, examined the use of new coal-mining methods (Trist and Bamforth, 1951). What
they found was that new production methods, requiring standardized and routine-based
job functions, caused reduced productivity in the distinct groups working in the coal
mines. They found that: “…the persistence of socially ineffective structures at the coal-
face is likely to be a major factor in increasing labour turnover.” (Trist and Bamforth,
1951, p. 37), i.e. they found that distinct and self-organized groups lacked productivity
and that a social structure would be required to support the productivity of each group.
Interestingly, they also argued for the positive effect of training workers for more than
one role, thus increasing job satisfaction and mutual understanding. The conclusion
was that any technical system would depend on its social construct, delivering higher
productivity, the higher the fit between the technical and social systems.
Management theory has come a long way since basic principles where envisioned by au-
thors like Chester Barnard, Peter Drucker, Henri Fayol, Daniel McCallum, etc. Although
the quantitative notion of scientific management was widely used up until the first half
of the century, the STS principles like motivational theory, which was theorized at the
same time, was not put into use by organizations until later in the century. The theories
of complex socio-technical systems, globalization, motivation, etc. is available to todays
companies, but few are utilizing these ideas to their full potential. In fact, Hamel and
Breen (2007) believes that management innovation is dead. Although not true in the
strictest sense, only few companies have actually managed to reinvent themselves, most
notably Toyota with their ’Toyota Way’ of managing. In 2007 we also saw Holacracy
as a new way of organizing and structuring one’s company. So while management in-
novation isn’t completely dead, very few companies are (successfully) experimenting
with new management methods. Management innovation requires thinking outside the
box and not being limited by legacy strategies or structures. During the past decade
we’ve seen companies like InnoCentive apply crowd-sourcing as a successful tool for in-
novation. We’ve seen Valve employ a manager-less organization, we’ve seen Google’s
results of motivating their employers and we’ve seen Tesla release, or open-source, all
of their patents. These companies are examples of organization 3.0 (Foster, 2013), the
organization of the 21st century. Driven by increased complexity and globalism, these
organizations are characterized by their flatter matrix structures, holacracy-like gover-
nance practices and open innovations systems. While Foster (2013) along with Morgan
(2014) strongly believe the future organization to be of the 3.0 type, they acknowledge
that classical management approaches are still prevalent and will be with us long into
the foreseeable future. So why are more companies not transitioning to organization
3.0? And can something as PM be transitioned too?
Page 3
==PAGE:18==
Chapter 1 Introduction
1.2
Problem Background
This thesis challenges the current project-management concepts and leadership princi-
ples in Danish project organizations. The goal is to asses the current thoughts on PM
from a socio-technical standpoint. Most current approaches are focused on using stan-
dardized PM practices. Practices like PMI, IPMA and PRINCE2® (See table 1.1) have
been popularized as a natural evolution of the earlier PM techniques like Gantt Charts,
The Critical Path Method and PERT analyses.
PMI (Project Management Institute),
IPMA (International Project Management Association),
PRINCE2® (PRojects IN Controlled Environments, version 2)
Table 1.1: Abbreviations of the different PM Methodologies.
However, the same effects that are driving organizations towards 3.0 are influencing PM
practices. Similarly, the freelance-economy is disrupting the way companies organize and
projectize as we’ve seen in e.g. InnoCentive’s crowd-sourcing attempts. The ’freelance-
economy’ is a concept coined by Morgan (2014) that is meant to apply to the ’future
employee’; an average knowledge worker in generation Z, born somewhere between the
mid-late 1990’s and 2010’s, and well versed in social media concepts (Levinsen, 2011).
E.g. the kind of employee having grown up with the Internet alongside social media.
These people have an entirely different mindset to how the work-life balance should
be and they expect one-to-one mentoring, challenges and autonomy (DanskErhverv.dk,
2008). Autonomy and intrinsic motivation are the drivers of the future employee and the
future organizations must account for that if they want to continue being efficient (Pink,
2009). Furthermore, Generation Z employees are networked, collaborative and curious,
something which drives innovation and is a necessary part of the future organization
(Morgan, 2012).
The changes in working culture is affecting organizations and also PM, and should be
considered by any organization that wish to attract and retain future employees.
1.3
Problem Statement
This thesis is focused around the project organization and its problems and opportuni-
ties. As was discussed earlier, PM can be seen as a socio-technical complex system. As
such the modern project organization is not just ’a’ project organization. The term has
become de-contextualized and companies who call themselves project organizations can
be widely different from one another. Some companies primarily utilize standardized
approaches while others adapt their own internal procedures. The outcome of this, is a
Page 4
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 1 Introduction
wide variety of different approaches to the problem, and as such, also different threats
to the project organization. This thesis will compare the standardized project systems
to STS-approaches focusing on a holistic view of PM itself.
The objective of this thesis is reached by way of the following methods:
• A literature review highlighting different perspectives between the standardized
approaches and STS-approaches.
• A theoretical assessment of the different factors influencing modern project man-
agement.
• A case-study of the differences, or similarities, between several types of Danish
organizations.
• A discussion of the findings.
The following statement is the main problem which this thesis is looking into:
How do Danish organizations approach the concept of project management?
Do they manage projects according to the STS-Principles and best-practices?
To help solve and guide the answer to the main question, a series of supplementary
questions are raised below:
• What are the current approaches to PM in Danish organizations?
• Are the approaches customized or based on existing frameworks?
• How is knowledge transferred from project to project?
• Do project organizations employ reflective management practices?
1.4
Assumptions & Scope
There are several ways to define the art of management, subsequently also project man-
agement.
Henri Fayol proposed the five basic managerial functions to be Planning,
Organizing, Commanding, Coordinating and Controlling. Of these functions, different
managerial roles and specific tasks can be defined. Interestingly, as opposed to Freder-
ick Taylor, Fayol acknowledged that workers could be motivated by more than money
and of his 14 principles of management, several relates to motivation. A more modern
view is described in The Future of Management by Hamel and Breen (2007). According
to them, the art of management can be broken down into processes; The recipes and
routines that determine how the work of management gets carried out. These are:
Page 5
==PAGE:20==
Chapter 1 Introduction
• Strategic Planning
• Capital Budgeting
• Project Management
• Hiring and Promotion
• Training and development
• Internal Communication
• Knowledge Management
• Periodic Business reviews
• Employee Assessment and Compensation
On a conceptual level, these elements are found in most organizations, however, break-
ing the organizational work into processes negates the understanding of management in
a socio-technical system. These processes are inter-connected and affected by the inner-
and outer-environment the organization is operating in. While this thesis is looking at
PM in a holistic context, the scope is narrowed by only looking at factors influencing
project management in a STS. This involves several of the processes mentioned above
which is a very wide area to study in-depth. To avoid this situation, none of the pro-
cesses will be discussed in-depth unless specifically relevant to PM in organizations.
Furthermore, the scope is limited to looking at Danish project organizations. - Specif-
ically Danish organizations within the industries of Engineering and IT. The ultimate
purpose of this thesis is to make organizations question their current PM practices and
hopefully improve them with the added benefit of becoming a more modern, attractive
and successful company.
Having talked about what this thesis is about, let me briefly comment on what this
thesis is not about. This is not meant to be and in-depth review of the different PM
practices, these are plentiful already. Instead the goal and scope of this thesis is to
question the current PM approaches in practice and in theory, according to the Danish
organizations. While there is going to be plenty of references to scholars and their best
practices, this thesis is not going to be presenting a summary of best practices. Nor is
it going to present a catch-all solution to managing projects. This thesis will serve to
be an inspiration to further research, going deeper into the different processes.
1.5
Target Audience
The target audience of this thesis is, in part, the pm’s and executive decisions makers of
today’s companies. The goal of this thesis is to make both managers, and management
science researchers, question the current practices of PM and to instil a way of thinking
reflectively upon PM as a practice.
Secondly this thesis may also be of interest for
Page 6
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 1 Introduction
students currently studying PM, as they are the ones who will deal with the future of
PM.
1.6
Content and Structure
This report is structured as 3 parts that, when combined, constitutes the complete thesis
as described in the foreword. The 3 parts are:
• Introduction
• Part I: Theory
• Part II: Empirical
• Part III: Conclusion
The specific content of each chapter is discussed on the next page.
Page 7
==PAGE:22==
Chapter 1 Introduction
Part I
Chapter 1 - Introduction
An introduction to the thesis and the motivation behind it.
The chapter also covers the problem statement which is a transformed version of the
motivation and problem background.
Chapter 2 - Research Methods
Discusses the research method which is followed in this
thesis and establishes a connection between the problem at hand and the philosophy of
science used in the research.
Chapter 3 - Literature Review
Introduces the theories of PM in the context of Danish
organizations. This chapter is a theoretical review of the management practices which
are investigated in part II. and provides the theoretical framework used in the analysis.
Part II
Part II contains chapters regarding the qualitative study.
Chapter 4 - Methodology
Discusses the case-study research processes and the method
for acquiring the primary data.
Chapter 5 - Analysis & Results
Contains the empirical study. Interview responses are
discussed as the primary data and are furthermore related to secondary data obtained
from sources which also will be discussed in the chapter. The empirical data is analyzed
according to the philosophy of science discussed in Part I.
Part III
Part III is the summation of part I and II. It contains a discussion and a conclusion
chapter.
Chapter 6 - Discussion
Discusses the obtained data in relation to the theoretical study
as well as providing a critical reflection on the collected data.
Chapter 7 - Conclusion
Summarizes the findings and presents a collected conclusion
upon the theories and empirical data collected in the thesis.
Page 8
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 2
Research Methods
“Research is to see what everybody else has seen, and to think what nobody else
has thought.”
- Albert Szent-Gyorgyi, Won the Nobel Prize in Physiology in 1937.
As a student at a technical university my educational background is inherently technical.
Although I have been taught about both qualitative and quantitative management prin-
ciples, the PM courses I have had, have primarily been focused on the technical aspects
of PM. The lack of soft skills, in information-system projects, is a strong contributor to
project failure (El-Sabaa, 2001), however these skills are not being emphasized in the ed-
ucational field (Du and Johnson, 2004, Pant and Baroudi, 2008). Pollack (2007) divided
the current literature into Soft- and Hard-paradigms, focusing primarily on the quan-
titative and qualitative aspects of PM. According to him, the hard paradigm approach
is associated with positivism and therefore also deductive and explanatory approaches,
while the soft paradigm is associated with interpretive epistemology, induction and ex-
ploratory approaches.
The hard approach focuses on efficiency and control e.g.
the
classic PM triangle of Time, Cost and Scope. The soft approach is more subjective,
focusing on culture, learning and the social processes of PM. The existing literature fo-
cuses too narrowly on the hard paradigm of PM (Pollack, 2007). The proposed solution
is to view PM as a socio-technical system, but the very definition of this system is its
complex network of actors which in nature, is very hard to control (Alojairi, 2010, Linger
and Owen, 2012).
2.1
Research Strategy
The research philosophies of the two paradigms are widely different from each other,
making it necessary to view the STS in a holistic way.
9
==PAGE:24==
Chapter 2 Research Methods
Research Paradigm
Generally there are 4 different research philosophies; Positivism,
Realism, Interpretivism and Pragmatism (Saunders et al., 2009, ch. 4). This study
focuses on the socio-technical aspects of PM and as explained, it can be divided into
a soft- and hard-paradigm approach, each focusing on the Positivist or Interpretive
research paradigm. One would then assume, that this research took on a Pragmatic
view of the research due to the fragmented approach, but I argue that since the existing
literature focuses on the hard paradigm, the focus of this study should lean towards the
soft paradigm. There are several reasons for this, one being that the study is not meant to
be explanatory in regards to the different organizational approaches to PM. As discussed
in section 1.4, part of the scope is to look at PM’s environmental interplay with other
management principles. This environmental interplay is based on interactions between
functional units and is a human construct that cannot be described or understood by the
positivist paradigm. Similarly, projects are not instrumental processes, they are social
and therefore subject to the interpretive approach (Winter et al., 2006, p. 642). The
main research approach is affected by the interpretive approach taken and the social
science aspect of the study. Since the study is exploratory, a hypothesis has not been
stated and as such the main research approach is induction (Saunders et al., 2009, ch.
4).
Research Strategy
Exploratory studies are subject to a directional change of the en-
quiry (Saunders et al., 2009, ch. 5). As such, the research is initially broad, becoming
more narrow as data is collected. In the words of (Brown, 2006, p. 43); exploratory
studies: “…tend to tackle new problems on which little or no previous research has been
done”. As I already established, the literature on PM as a STS is lacking, thus the basis
for this research is the exploratory study. The inductive approach to data analysis will
ensure the de-contextualization of PM as a practice. This is part of the holistic view
and as such, the deconstruction will ensure a bottom-up understanding of the different
subjects. The de-contextualization and holistic overview of PM may then form the basis
for improved practices or as knowledge towards further improvements.
Choice of (Case-)Study
Yin (2003) identified 3 specific types of case studies: Ex-
ploratory, Explanatory and Descriptive. Since the research strategy is exploratory, the
exploratory case study will also be used for data gathering. Stake (1995) further devel-
oped 3 categories for case studies: Intrinsic, Instrumental and Collective. The categories
are meant to describe the interest in the study from the perspective of the author, which
is also why he argues that the categories are more heuristic than functional. Intrinsic is
when the researcher has a personal interest in the study, but no inherent theory. Instru-
mental is when the case study is used to holistically understand a certain subject, and
a collective case study is when one wants to understand a certain phenomenon better,
possibly with the goal of theorizing it.
Page 10
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 2 Research Methods
This thesis takes on an exploratory and instrumental case study because the main prob-
lem is to apply a holistic understanding of the subject. When a study is holistic and
a deeper understanding of the problem is needed, the case-study methodology is ideal
(Feagin et al., 1991). Since the goal of the study is to asses the state of PM across
several organizations and since the study will be qualitative, the study will employ a
multiple-case, holistic and mono-method case study (Saunders et al. (2009, ch. 5),Yin
(2003, p. 40)). Furthermore, the study follows the recommendation of Yin (2003) who
presented the following stages of a case-study research:
1. Design the case study
2. Conduct the case study
3. Analyse the case study evidence
4. Develop conclusions and discuss implications
These steps are discussed in-depth in chapter 4.
2.2
Research Layout
A complex system like the socio-technical should be understood from the perspective of
the organization. In this context, Harold Leavitt’s diamond model (Leavitt and James,
1962), shown in Figure 2.1a, explains the complex system of an organization and the
changes in it. At its base, the model is used to explain that, changes occurring in one
of the elements, causes or necessitates change of other elements. In Leavitt’s model,
’people’ are not meant to signify the different roles of the employees but rather their
skills, efficiency, knowledge and productivity. Similarly, tasks are not so much considered
to be the result of a certain goal or deliverable as they are considered the means to achieve
them.
Hildebrandt (2011) proposed a variation of the model (Figure 2.1b) which focuses on
knowledge rather than technology, relations rather than structure and attitude rather
than tasks. In his view, knowledge is on a higher level than technology, since knowledge
contains the necessary elements of technology. Structure is replaced by relations between
people; Leavitt also described interpersonal relations in his definition of structure, but
his view was more towards intra-organizational relations rather than the much more
globalized organizations of today. Globalization also affects tasks, which is replaced by
attitude in a way that’s meant to explain the organizations broader goals and its atti-
tude towards them, as opposed to just internal tasks and plans. In today’s corporations,
the core business is not just the product or the service itself, it is also about customer
perception and retainment. A shift in consumer perception has meant that customers
care as much about the organizational image as they do of the product.
Corporate
Social Responsibility of modern organizations affect the classic model, which is why the
emphasis is as much on the organizations external structure as it is on the internal.
Page 11
==PAGE:26==
Chapter 2 Research Methods
a)
Culture
Tasks
Technology
Structure
People
b)
Values
Attitude
Knowledge
Relations
People
Figure 2.1: Harold Leavitt’s (a), and Steen Hildebrand’s (b) revised, diamond
model. Source: Leavitt and James (1962), Hildebrandt (2011).
The shifting consumer perception is a product of globalisation and social media, which
affect the organization whether or not it is networked (Bøtter, 2012). As Foster (2013),
Castells (2010), Morgan (2012), Boas and Thorslund (2013) believe, the future organi-
zation will be more networked and collaborative, creating a need for new management
techniques (Hamel, 2009). I see the revised diamond model as a representation of these,
more networked, organizations, which also match the STS more closely. - The original
diamond model can be used as a tool to see inside the complex system of today’s orga-
nization, while the revised model is used to look at both the internal and the external
factors influencing the socio-technical system that is the modern organization.
Leavitt’s diamond model explains the necessity of seeing the organization as an inter-
dependent collection of systems, where changes occurring in one system will affect the
other. However, as explained, the original model does not address the external environ-
ment. The proposed solution, in open systems theory, is to see organizations as a social
system dependent on input and output with the environment (Katz and Kahn, 1978).
However, a STS in itself is not a representation of a company and cannot be used as such
without loosing the business aspect of the organization. A business is an organization
largely focused around profit. To understand the business processes in the context of a
STS, it is important to understand that most businesses focus on their core business as a
way to streamline the organization. Morgan (2006) have proposed several different ways
to, metaphorically, understand organizations as open-systems. His basic model, shown
in Figure 2.2, is based on the earlier work of Katz and Kahn (1978). The model shows
how the organization is affected by the environment and how it is dependent on input
Page 12
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 2 Research Methods
Human-Cultural
Subsystem
Strategic
Subsystem
Technological
Subsystem
Structural
Subsystem
Managerial
Subsystem
Inputs which
energize the
organization
Organizational
Outputs
Organizational Subsystems
Environmental
Suprasystem
Human, Financial, In-
formational and Ma-
terial Resources
Production of goods
and services at a level
of eﬃciency and ef-
fectiveness that will
inﬂuence future re-
source availability
and systems opera-
tion
Figure 2.2: The concept of the open system shown with organizational subsystems.
Source: Modified version from Morgan (2006, p. 43).
and output from it. As explained by Leavitt and Hildebrandt’s diamond model, changes
in one system necessitates changes in the others. The open-systems model is then used
to explain the co-dependence of the different systems, while Leavitt’s diamond model is
used to explain the relative importance of seeing the organization as an open-system.
However, “…a complex system does not simply function as a collection of subsystems”
(Shenhar and Dvir, 2007, p. 38), which is why the STS theories must be applied holis-
tically.
2.2.1
Summary
In this chapter I discussed the foundation for the choice of the interpretive research
paradigm at the expense of the natural-science targeted positivist approach. As dis-
cussed, the different parts of PM in the view of a STS, are divided between these
paradigms. However, since the existing literature has emphasized the hard positivist
paradigm, and because of the lack of emphasis on soft skills, an inductive approach to
the research is chosen. The inductive, and exploratory approach is a good match when
viewing the organization as an open-system, and as such the open-systems theory will be
used to guide the answer to the problem statement. With the chosen foundation, this re-
search is then qualitative, with an inductive approach to the subject and an interpretive
approach to the context.
Page 13
==PAGE:28==
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 3
Literature Review
“Managing complexity requires ﬂexibility and diversity while proﬁt generation re-
quires eﬃciency and control.”
- Mumford (2000, p. 1) in ’A Socio-Technical approach to Systems Design’
This chapter investigates the different aspects of the PM field. The chapter is struc-
tured so that the first section presents and overview of PM and the different approaches
and methodologies. The second section is divided such that each section corresponds,
roughly, to the open-systems model in Figure 2.2. The third section is devoted to a
holistic view of STS Projects and the social processes that affect it. The structure of
the chapter serves two purposes. The first is to provide an answer to the problem state-
ment in regards to the approaches taken in Danish organizations. The other, and more
important, purpose is to serve as the theoretical framework, laying the foundation for
the analysis. As such, the chapter takes on a descriptive approach at first, moving on
to a holistic perspective in the end.
3.1
Introduction
In the last chapter I discussed how the PM field was divided into two paradigms and how
research in STS’s were only now becoming interesting (Pollack, 2007, Alojairi, 2010). To
aid the literature review I created a model for PM as a socio-technical system, seen in
Figure 3.1. The model is based on Pollack (2007)’s paradigm view of PM and Leavitt and
James (1962), Hildebrandt (2011)’s diamond model as well as Andersen (2014)’s project
division between task and organization. The model is then a symbol for the different
subsystems of the project and organization, and also a division between the system and
the PM methodology. It can be seen how the Soft and Hard paradigm is divided and
how this also applies to the Social and Technical side of PM. The PM Methodologies are
placed in between the paradigms, since these can be thought of as a bridge providing
the structure necessary for connecting one side to the other. PM Methodologies are not
a necessary element of the project, which is why it is shown in between the paradigms,
15
==PAGE:30==
Chapter 3 Literature Review
however it is immensely useful for conducting projects. The model has to be seen in
relation to Figure 2.1 in where the subsystems affect each other. The model presented
here, serves only to distinguish the different parts of PM, even though they affect each
other. The model is not exhaustive and could have continued describing parts of the STS
system in detail. E.g. ’People’ could represent themes such as Experience, Psychology
and Motivation. ’Structure’ could be Teams, Bureaucracy, Collaboration. ’Tasks’ could
be the different pm tasks such as generating the Critical Path, organizing Work Break-
down Structures or risk planning. Technology could represent the use of PM software
or the focus on Critical Success Factors, etc.
”Project”
Technical
Hard
Paragdigm
Technology
Tasks
Social
Soft
Paragdigm
People
Structure
PM
Methodologies
Figure 3.1: Project Management as a socio-technical complex system
Though most literature considers PM methodologies as leaning more towards the hard
paradigm, in this model, and in real applications, the methodologies are the construct
that arranges hard paradigm tasks into a working social structure, or project model. In
this way, the branches of the figure can be also seen as the two PM perspectives of Tasks
and Organization, as identified by Andersen (2015). PM Methodologies and PM Models
are both names that are used interchangeably in the current literature, though they can
be considered referring to slightly different things. In this thesis, the project-model is
a reference to the specific standard utilized. I.e. this could be the waterfall1 approach
or the agile2 approach. In contrast, a project-methodology does, in this thesis, not only
refer to the project model, but also the risk-, change- and quality-management, etc.
aspects of PM. I.e. this could be PRINCE2® , PMI, etc..
1The waterfall model is a sequential project design which iterates through the different project phases.
2The agile model is, in contrast to the waterfall model, a design-process which evolves through the
different phases. It is adaptive and flexible in response to change.
Page 16
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 3 Literature Review
The next section will present an overview of the different approaches to PM. The cate-
gories themselves are not mutually exclusive and serve only to broaden the conceptual
foundation. This approach will help understand each distinct part of PM and thus help
in answering the problem statement. It is important to note that this interpretation
is different to the one taken in the general literature. Many refer to PM approaches
as PM methodologies (As explained above), but I consider the approaches to be the
different functional aspects of how a specific company might conduct PM. This is also
consistent with Figure 3.1 in where companies often undertakes a predominantly soft-
or hard-paradigm approach.
3.2
Project Management Approaches
The nature of PM is such, that the definition of exactly what a project is and what it
constitutes, varies from organization to organization. The definition and exact use is
dependent on a variety of factors including, amongst others, size, business area, culture,
technology maturation, etc. This is something which became clear when I first started
collecting primary data for this Thesis. As such, to introduce the different areas of PM
and to honor the areas shown in Figure 3.1, the following section will briefly discuss the
different approaches to PM that organizations do take.
3.2.1
Hard Paradigm Approaches
Technical
The technical approach to PM has probably been the most widely used
in the industry. The approach is most commonly used with the waterfall model and is
prevalent in mechanistic organizations. Little thought is given to management principles
and the projects are conducted in a fashion, very similarly to the way project software
like MS Project is organized. I.e. based on the project triangle of Time, Budget and
Scope. The technical approach was derived from early techniques used in operations
research and applied mathematics, of which CPM and PERT analysis derived from
(Söderlund, 2004). In this, PM is seen as a tool to plan, organize, monitor, control
and report projects.
Packendorff (1995) further discusses how technical projects are
seen, not as organizations, but as machines. I.e. that the project is a tool to achieve a
higher goal. Unfortunately, PM is considered a general theory by many researchers and
organizations, which leaves no room for the customization of the competence profile of
the pm, the project team or the project model (Packendorff, 1995). Supporters of the
technical approach share the view that the best approach to PM is to “apply quantitative
techniques to achieve desired outcomes” (Alojairi, 2010, p.6).
Technical Approach and Tools
Fortune et al. (2011) and PricewaterhouseCoopers
(2012) found that the most popular technical software approach was Microsoft’s Project
Page 17
==PAGE:32==
Chapter 3 Literature Review
software. Of tools used, Gantt bar charts, Work breakdown structures (WBS), Project
Audits and the Critical Path Method (CPM) were the most popular of the tools used in
77.7% of the projects (Fortune et al., 2011). Though PM software is useful, there have
been criticism as to the usefulness of the tools in complex projects with many strategic
uncertainties (Kidd, 1990). On the other hand, in construction projects, which have less
uncertainty and change but a large number of activities and resources, PM software is
prevalent, with the majority using Primavera as contrast to MS Project (Liberatore and
Pollack-johnson, 2011). Regardless of use, PricewaterhouseCoopers (2012) found that
“…among the highest performing projects, we found that 87% use project management
software…”, similarly they found a correlation between the use of PM software and the
organizations maturity level.
Critical Success Factors and Tasks
There’s an abundance of research on the subject
of failure- and success-factors in the academic literature on PM. Many studies have been
done on, just which factors determines a projects success, but what is clear is that it also
differs hugely just what the factors are between industries (Belassi and Tukel, 1996). A
project may be a success from the viewpoint of the pm as opposed to the stakeholders,
it might be a success from the customers perspective, but not the organization and it
might be a financial success but not from a strategic perspective (Belassi and Tukel,
1996, Freeman and Beale, 1992, Nevan Wright, 1997, Wateridge, 1998). The dominant
factors are of course the classical constraints of Time, Cost and Quality, especially on
construction projects which, as said before, are also the primary users of the technical
approach. This is an objective measurement of a projects success, often also affecting
the pm directly since they are judged on these factors, however it might be a flawed
approach since many factors are indeed subjective (Wateridge, 1998). But since most
projects are unique (at least outside the construction industry), how can the project
be considered a success when subjective criteria are used? According to Shenhar and
Dvir (1996), it is possible to complete a project which meet the success factors but fails
the PM-practices and this might be an even bigger issue than failed projects. Shenhar
and Dvir (2007) describes how a projects success, and its subsequent critical success
factors should be linked to the parent organizations success and well-being over the long
term, however, they also argue that this does not apply solely for short-term definitions
of success as they give several examples of how ’failed’ projects turned out to be huge
successes in the long-run. Long term benefits of the organization is lost when the success
criteria of the project is reduced to financial indicators (Aubry and Hobbs, 2011). There
is an immediate difference between success criteria, by which the project success will be
judged, and success factors, that directly or indirectly affects the success of the project
(Cooke-Davies, 2002).
Page 18
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 3 Literature Review
3.2.2
Soft Paradigm Approaches
Social
The social approach to PM is very different to the technical approach.
Al-
though social approaches include technical elements, researchers of the social approach
believe that PM problems stem not only from technical, but also from the human ele-
ment (Packendorff, 1995, Belout and Gauvreau, 2004). The premises for this approach
is the basic beliefs that work is conducted by humans and that humans are motivated by
different things. The approach is recognized in most managerial aspects and as Kotter
(1996) explains in his book Leading Change, human resource management and culture
is a big part of all change efforts. Subsequently also in all aspects of PM. Google, which
is known for, amongst other things, their radical management approaches, published
a story of how they moved from assembling teams based on technical competences to
looking at the pro-social behaviour of each member and the combined team (Rozovsky,
2015). This is also evident in how many researchers and leaders think that projects
should be paired (Christensen, 2015, El-Sabaa, 2001). Technical skills is not the decid-
ing factors as some projects require a strong political pm, were others require strong
planning skills (Shenhar and Dvir, 1996, El-Sabaa, 2001). However, even though the
social approach has gained interest, there are contradictory findings on how important
it is in actual PM, aside from PM research (Belout and Gauvreau, 2004). Pollack (2007)
found a growing interest in the soft paradigm (social approach) though still with strong
roots in the technical (hard paradigm), while Crawford et al. (2006) found a waning in-
terest in interpersonal issues and quality management and a growing interest in project
evaluation and strategic alignment. - Indicating that there are contradictory trends in
the field of PM.
Experience
Experience, also called ’the cookbook-approach’ is an interesting, yet nat-
ural take on project management. At its core it relies on personal experiences, anec-
dotes and metaphors and less on methodologies, frameworks and theories. Many ’self-
proclaimed’ pm’s are in this category and it could be argued that pm’s in the industry
which do not hold any certifications or training are of this type. Because of the very
definition, there is a lack of academic research on this subject. Kyle (1998), in his book
A non-technical guide to project management, claims that most academic books are ’dry’
and that one will appreciate the alternative approach in the book. The book focuses
on anecdotes and experiences but does not have any conceptual framework, similarly to
many books of this type (Alojairi, 2010). In describing how a project is divided into 4
phases (Initiation, Planning, Execution and Closing), Portny E. (2010) said “No matter
how simple or complex the project is, however, these four stages are the same”, which
true in a holistic sense, underlines the problem of simplifying PM to experience. There
is an abundance of project management tools and techniques purely based on experience
or on approaches taken in companies. Academic credibility is a major issue, but it is easy
to see why one would read a blog-post about PM rather than an journal article. In more
complex projects, the experience based approach were found to be more successfully
Page 19
==PAGE:34==
Chapter 3 Literature Review
in uncovering issues, thus leading to more successful projects, indicating that projects
success is more dependent on experience rather than governance (Williams et al., 2012)
3.2.3
The Socio-Technical Approach
The socio-technical approach to PM is, of course the holistic combination of all the
distinct approaches mentioned above. However looking at PM in a STS perspective is
not enough since the organization itself has to support it. As I briefly mentioned in the
introduction, Trist and Bamforth (1951)’s study on coal-mining was probably the first
study on STS’s. What they found nearly 65 years ago, was that a system purely focused
on technical productivity, produced higher labour turnover and more unhappy workers.
In their words, the total organizational outcome could only be understood when looking
at the social, psychological, environmental and technological approach in a holistic way.
Since then, STS has enjoyed popularity among researchers in the social sciences area,
however Griffith and Dougherty (2001) argues that too many studies focus too much on
the social aspect and not on the technical, thus misunderstanding the point of a STS.
The STS approch is then, not just about merging all the distinct approaches, but also to
understand their interconnectedness in the organization (Griffith and Dougherty, 2001).
However it is somewhat contradicting since technical systems often require efficiency
and a level of control that are not found in social systems, who instead require flexibility
and diversity (Mumford, 2000).
Many studies on STS also focus more on the immediate interrelations between human-
machine systems, i.e. they focus, on a micro-perspective level, on one or more aspects of
the STS. Subsequently there are a lack of studies that focus on the group/organizational
perspective (Alojairi, 2010, p. 30). There are even opposing thoughts as to what exactly
constitutes a STS. As with PM the area is so wide that the terms can be applied to a
lot of cases. Griffith and Dougherty (2001) suggests defining STS’s into three categories
(Technological Determinism, Industrial Efficiency and Rational/Functional Thinking),
each of who require further studies, but which subsequently can be defined to a level
where further research in the subject is testable as a theory (Griffith and Dougherty,
2001, p. 215).
3.3
Project Management Methodologies & Models
As I discussed in the introduction there are conceptual differences between PM Models
and Methodologies. The PM model is basically a model of the project work and includes
the different activities to be conducted and how and when they are to be conducted.
The PM methodology on the other hand is the approach undertaken to control and
steer the activities, stakeholders, risk, etc. The authors of PMI, PRINCE2® , PMP,
etc. seems to think that good PM evolves from the use of project methodologies. Since
the problem statement raises the question as to which, and if so how, the organizations
Page 20
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 3 Literature Review
use the project methodologies, it is interesting to also look at earlier research on PM
Methodologies and its use.
3.3.1
Project Models
As mentioned, there are different project models, which can be categorized as either
sequential or incremental. These are often referenced as either the waterfall approach or
the spiral-model. In software projects, the spiral-model will often be an Agile-approach
such as SCRUM3, XP4 or one of several other methods. Table 3.1 lists the most popular
PM models used in Danish project organizations in 2014. The list is in no way exhaustive
as there exist a large number of different models. However, as per the scope of the study,
only models utilized in Denmark are relevant.
Table 3.1: Most popular project models.
Source: RUC and Mannaz (2014)
Total,
n = 1,132
V-Model
36.7%
Uniﬁed Process
26.6%
Component- or Service Oriented Architecture
11.9%
Short Iterative model
10.9%
Waterfall model
10.4%
Prototyping, then waterfall
2.2%
Prototyping
1.4%
The V-model is an extension of the waterfall model where Unified Process is an iterative,
yet incremental, framework for, mostly, software development.
The Component- or
Service driven approach focuses on recycling elements, thus is highly efficient, while the
Short Iterative and Prototyping models focus more on speed and deliverables.
It is
interesting to see that the majority utilizes the waterfall model, while the more agile
methods come second place. It is important to note, that there is a relative distinction
between iterative and agile methods. As an example, SCRUM and UP are both iterative
processes, but only SCRUM is an agile project model. UP deals with model driven design
while SCRUM is more of a tool than a framework for stringent software development.
SCRUM, and agile methods in general, can be used with frameworks like UP, but there is
a important difference between the two. To sum up, while the study shows which major
frameworks are the most popular in Danish organizations, it does not tell specifically
which, if any, minor project development models like SCRUM, XP, etc. are used in the
industry.
3SCRUM: Scrum is an iterative and incremental process which applies a holistic view upon reaching
a common goal (Takeuchi and Nonaka, 1986).
4Extreme Programming: XP is an agile development process which focuses on fast development
cycles, improved productivity and quality (Copeland, 2001).
Page 21
==PAGE:36==
Chapter 3 Literature Review
3.3.2
Project Methodologies
The project methodology is the framework for the project in a more holistic view. Where
the project model deals with deliverables, deadlines and roles. While they cannot be
compared as such, project methodologies are targeted towards organizational processes
which, among other, involves risk management and stakeholder management. Different
PM methodologies can exist with different PM models, typically seen with the use of
waterfall based models in the construction industry and agile project models in the
software industry. - But both still utilizing e.g. PRINCE2® .
Table 3.2 shows the most popular PM methodologies used by Danish pm’s in 2014. This
is supported by Fortune et al. (2011) who also found the most popular methodology in
Australia, Canada and the UK, to be one developed in-house, followed by PRINCE2®
. Although the numbers indicate that the custom approach is the most widely used,
the answers in Fortune et al. (2011)’s study varied widely from country to country,
indicating that the PM methodology was strongly influenced by culture. Regardless of
the approach used, all methodology frameworks include the same components; Scope,
Time, Budget, Deliverables, Communication, etc. (PricewaterhouseCoopers, 2012).
Table 3.2: Project Methodologies in Danish organizations.
Source: RUC and Mannaz (2014)
Total,
n = 286
Custom Approach
57.3%
PRINCE2®
28%
IPMA
10.5%
PMI
4.2%
RUC and Mannaz (2014), Fortune et al. (2011) found a surprising amount of companies,
not utilizing any PM methodologies. For RUC and Mannaz (2014) it was a little under
50% and for Fortune et al. (2011) it was 6.5% when talking pure methodologies and
24% when asked about the usage of PM methodologies, software and/or PM tools. Sim-
ilarly, PricewaterhouseCoopers (2012) found that 23% did not use any methodologies
while 39% used their own in-house-developed methodology. Similar data were collected
by Boas and Thorslund (2013) who found 49.3% of their respondents not holding a cer-
tificate, while 50.7% did not utilize any methodology and 22.7% using either a custom or
an unknown approach. However, the studies do not clearly define the difference between
in-house-developed and non-methodology approaches. Which, as I already discussed, is
a matter of perception since a PM methodology and a PM approach are sometimes con-
sidered the same. Regardless of definition, the data are still relevant to the problem and
shows that the large majority uses custom approaches, closely followed by PRINCE2®
(In Denmark) with close to a quarter of the companies not using any methodology.
Page 22
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 3 Literature Review
Which of the PM methodologies that are best suited for a given organization can be
very hard to answer, however Shiv and Doraiswamy (2012) proposes the following points
that a methodology must address:
• Team members clearly understand what’s expected to be produced
• A common project language is established and understood by team members
• Cost estimates are complete and fitting
• Executives can track progress objectively
• Each task is completed using a common methodological approach
• Major initiatives are carried out
• The majority of conflicts are spotted and resolved early
• Lessons are learned and knowledge is carried over to future projects
These points are not to be mistaken for the general project processes that each method-
ology addresses, however they can be used to test an existing custom approach or to
adjust one if necessary. These considerations, which should be addressed by the choice
of methodology, are also part of the reflections an organization should make when they
want to improve their project performance. According to PMI North American Congress
et al. (2003), maturity is an expression of performance and to improve that, an organi-
zation must know what goals to aim for.
Organization Maturity
Project Management Institute developed a process maturity
model for project organizations (PMI North American Congress et al., 2003), which was
extended upon by PricewaterhouseCoopers (2012) in a study of Project management
practices of 241 companies around the globe. They developed 5 categories for maturity,
containing similar distinctions between the maturity levels as Shiv and Doraiswamy
(2012) defined: Unreliable, Informal, Standardised, Monitored and Optimised, were
Optimised is at the highest level.
They found that, on average, organisations were
operating between level 2 and 3 (Informal-Standardised) with only 9% operating on the
highest level. This indicates that there is room for improvement and correlates with
the findings of close to a quarter of the companies not utilizing any methodologies. The
systematic approach to, competence matching and stakeholder management as well as
change leadership was noted as being one of the important factors for project maturity
in Danish governmental IT-projects (IT Projektrådet, 2015).
As such, not utilizing a methodology is not inherently a bad sign, however if the approach
followed does not match the general guidelines for methodologies or maturity, as put
forward by PricewaterhouseCoopers (2012), PMI North American Congress et al. (2003),
Shiv and Doraiswamy (2012), then the organization cannot expect to achieve great
performance. The large maturity of organizations using a customized methodology is
Page 23
==PAGE:38==
Chapter 3 Literature Review
then not a cause for concern, however the large majority not utilizing any, is. This could
explain the fact that so few organizations operate on a high maturity level.
Eﬀectiveness of Certiﬁcations
Some pm’s who utilize the ’experience’ approach to
PM argues that certifications, especially those with low entry barriers like PRINCE2®
Foundation, PMI’s CAPM or IPMA’s Level D, are not useful for assessing the effective-
ness of the PM (Haslund, 2013). PRINCE2® and SCRUM certifications do not require
re-certifications, however they do invite practitioners to do so (APMG International,
2016, SCRUM Alliance). On the other hand, PMI and IPMA certifications, which sub-
sequently also requires existing experience, have an expiry period of 3-5 years (Remer
S and Ross M, 2014). As the entry level certification and training only provide the
basic level of understanding and do not require any real world project experience, they
serve only to help with the first job application (Haslund, 2013). According to Shiv and
Doraiswamy (2012) however, certifications are not useless. - The choice of certification
is less important since they all provide the same basic and condensed knowledge on PM.
Though, educating all pm’s in the same certification can be wasteful if the project types
differ across the organization (V., 2015).
Maturity and Certiﬁcations
In contrast to the opinions on basic certifications, (Price-
waterhouseCoopers, 2012, p. 15) found that, 80% of projects classified as successful,
employed certified pm’s. For fully mature organizations this rose to 95% as opposed to
61% in the least mature organizations. This would initially contradict the statements
of the inefficiency of certifications. However, the question is whether or not the orga-
nizations are mature partly because of certifications or if the level of certifications are
a symptom of the maturity. Regardless of the actual case, as Shiv and Doraiswamy
(2012) suggests, one of the measures of a good methodology is that the team members
understand the goal and that they have a common project ’language’ that they can use.
- Low entry barrier certifications as the one’s already mentioned provide exactly these
basic elements, which might also explain why they are prevalent.
Experienced pm’s
In relation to certifications and the predominant approach to using
in-house frameworks, ESI International (2013b) conducted a study on talent drain and
its associated costs for project organizations. They found that it was increasingly hard
to find experienced managers outside of the organization, subsequently it was also more
expensive to hire outsiders.
Investing in the training of junior level pm’s provided
501% ROI, Mid-level 268% ROI and Senior-level 358% ROI. Due to the shortage of
experienced pm’s they concluded that it would be less expensive to train from within
the organization. - On average they found that becoming a Senior-pm took 7 years,
Mid-Level pm’s 4.2 years and Junior-level pm’s 2 years.
Page 24
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 3 Literature Review
3.4
Project Management as a Socio-Technical System
Projects, whether or not you chose to view them as a STS, are subject to a range of
different issues. As I pointed out in chapter 2, the environment is affected by external and
internal factors, as Figure 2.1 and Figure 2.2 shows. Andersen (2014) concluded that two
different main perspectives existed in the field of PM, the Task and the organizational
perspective. The previous sections discussed the tasks and approaches that are used in
PM by different organizations i.e. the task perspective of PM. This section discusses the
organizational perspective and takes on a more holistic view of the different subjects that
affect a project environment. As an introduction to the section, the different challenges
are presented next.
PM Challenges
RUC and Mannaz (2014) found the following challenges for Danish
pm’s in 2014: 1) Getting Adequate funds/resources, 2) Motivating project members,
3) Securing support from all levels of the organization, 4) Handling challenges as they
appear in the project, 5) Keeping the project on schedule, and 6) Communication with
stakeholders. The challenges identified by RUC and Mannaz (2014) are supported by a
study of project organizations in the UK, Canada and Australia by Fortune et al. (2011);
They found nearly the same Critical Success Factors: 1) Clear goals/objectives, 2) Sup-
port from senior management, 3) Realistic Schedules, 4) Adequate funds/resources, 5)
Clear Communication Channels and 6) Effective team-building/motivation. For govern-
mental projects, the challenges are often the same, however due to legislation, especially
in international EU projects, PM is further challenged by hard deadlines and budgets
which then affects the only element left, the scope (IT Projektrådet, 2015, 2014). - As
such usability, and quality, often suffers as we’ve seen in some of the recent cases of
Danish IT-Project failures.
Other challenges identified by both studies, are the lack of project maturity and reflective
practices as well as the fact that projects are becoming increasingly complex. - Though
without specifying the type and level of complexity. Challenges are found both in the
soft- and hard-paradigm which correlates with the STS theory on PM.
3.4.1
Attitude
According to the definition of Leavitt and James (1962) tasks are the means to achieve
a goal, in contrast to the definition of Hildebrandt (2011) who sees Attitude as both
tasks but also the meaningfulness of the goals and the attitude towards achieving them.
Tasks and attitude are both part of the organizational output as shown in Figure 2.2,
and they are both part of the project organization. However, while tasks focus on the
means, attitude also focus on perception. I.e. the perception of the organization as seen
from its customers, clients, etc. The goodwill of an organizations is therefore also part
of the output, as are the goodwill coming out of a project.
Page 25
==PAGE:40==
Chapter 3 Literature Review
One of the problems with tasks, especially in projects and more so in knowledge-work,
is how to track it. In scientific management approaches it was solved, partly, by natural
sciences and thus objectified measurements. However in knowledge work, it is harder to
quantify the work, and thus also to track it. Markowitch (2015) suggest visualising work
as a way to produce overview and a way to show progress. This is very similar to how
SCRUM organizes its daily meetings and delegations of tasks, or how Kanban5 delegates
work packages. A similar problem is correctly estimating time to completion of different
tasks, as either scope creep (the addition of tasks) or critical path drag (the amount of
time a task is adding to the duration) affects the project. Estimation of related tasks
can often be done on experience alone, however for new or unrelated tasks the problem is
harder. Mahnic and Zabkar (2012) showed that both visualization of tasks as well as the
use of planning poker6 increased the accuracy of estimations as well as improving overall
overview of the project. Moløkken-Østvold and Haugen (2007) found similar positive
effects of Planning Poker, which in some cases provided more accurate estimates than
classic PM estimations. A positive side-effect was that the group discussions involved
in the planning poker sessions, in some cases highlighted previously unseen problems.
Part of what makes visualization and planning poker, amongst other tools, so effective
is the degree of empowerment it gives to members of the team, and stakeholders in
general. Empowerment of stakeholders and a general concern for the people involved in
the project has been shown to be a positive factor in PM (Nauman et al., 2010). This
is also described by Pink (2009) who argues that there is a correlation between tangible
rewards and negative outcome. I.e. the expected outcome of extrinsic motivation is not
equal to increased output. This effect is more prevalent in knowledge-based work than
in technical work (Pink, 2009).
On a more holistic level, the attitude towards the tasks among the stakeholders have also
been shown to affect project outcome, especially in large and complex projects (Aramo-
Immonen and Vanharanta, 2009, IDA, 2016). Pm’s of complex projects should, at the
operative level, also have an understanding of the project environment, since inputs from
outside the organization also affect the project. However, the knowledge hereof is often
tacitly bound in the organization and difficult to convey in explicit terms (Nonaka et al.,
2000). This gives merit to the experience based approach, in where knowledge of PM
is often tacitly bound. Williams et al. (2012) even found support for a ”gut feeling”
approach to identifying early warning signs in projects. - Which relates to the findings
from Moløkken-Østvold and Haugen (2007).
5Kanban: Kanban is similar to SCRUM but is focused on just-in-time delivery and flexibility, where
SCUM is focused more on transparency.
6Planning Poker: Also known as SCRUM Poker, is a gamified approach to averaging the estimation
of task durations.
Page 26
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 3 Literature Review
3.4.2
Knowledge
Technology contains the aids and processes, necessary for conducting tasks in the project
and organization. In the revised diamond model, technology is replaced by knowledge
which, understandably, is more fitting in organizations where the primary output is
knowledge. However the distinction is not either or, it can also mean knowledge about
technology. Successful project managers do not only poses great leadership skills, they
also poses the technical competencies necessary to ensure project success (Hyväri, 2006).
However it has been argued that the level of technical competency is only attributive to
success when paired by good leadership skills, and that technical competency alone is not
a contributing factor (Hyväri, 2006, El-Sabaa, 2001, Nonaka et al., 2000). However, too
many PM practitioners are just technicians and the field must evolve from prioritizing
technical knowledge to also include reflective practices (Winter et al., 2006). The reason
being that the role of the pm is more challenging than e.g. a functional manager, which
subsequently requires a more diverse skill-set (El-Sabaa, 2001).
Another issue when it comes to knowledge-based work, is whether it is tacitly or explic-
itly bound to the organization. Tacit knowledge accumulated about the project is useful
only to the pm, while explicit knowledge is useful to the whole organization (Nonaka
et al., 2000). However, few organizations have a structured approach for reflectively giv-
ing feedback on past projects, which subsequent leads to unrealized gains (Rytter et al.,
2015). Similarly, many organizations only evaluate the project based on the product
and not the process, subsequently also shortening the evaluation phase. This leads to
false evaluation in cases where the ’real’ gains emerge long after the evaluation has been
conducted (Rytter et al., 2015). Nonaka et al. (2000) discusses how tacit knowledge ac-
cumulates in the organization through dynamic interactions between the organizational
members. Furthermore the tacit knowledge held by single members of the organization,
is mobilized by the organization through: “…socialisation, externalisation, combination
and internalisation.” (Nonaka et al., 2000, p. 30). I.e. effective knowledge management
necessitates an understanding of how it is created and utilized in the organization. How-
ever, Boas and Thorslund (2013) found a need for Danish organizations to incorporate
reflective practices into the organization. Reflective practices, which shifts the focus
from hard metrics, to also include soft metrics. This requires a new mind-set and a
networked approach to PM, utilizing collaboration and sparring in the organization.
3.4.3
People
People are perhaps the biggest asset in project organizations which is also why almost
all methodologies and certifications, dedicate training to stakeholder management. -
Because project success to a large degree is affected by the stakeholders in the project
(Belassi and Tukel, 1996). The stakeholders are the project members, the employees af-
fected by it (In a functional and matrix organization), as well as several others. Project
Page 27
==PAGE:42==
Chapter 3 Literature Review
members and employees are however subject to the management practices of the orga-
nization, and as Mumford et al. (2000) mentions, project success is partly defined by
the personality and leadership practices of the pm. It is therefore surprising to see,
when people are such a big aspect of the organizational success, that many employees
are subject to managers with an inconsistent fit to the organization or the department
(Kraft and Agertoft, 2015). In regards to projects, Hyväri (2006, p. 218) found that, of
1000 projects “…positive leadership contributed almost 76% to the success of projects”.
A successful leader is not something you just become, and as ESI International (2013b)
found, it is hard to hire experienced people from outside the organization. The training
of the pm must then be done internally, however as I already established, focus has
long been on the hard skills and not the soft. Boas and Thorslund (2013) found that to
become more reflective as a project organization, one area in which Danish organizations
needed to become better in, was mentoring and feedback. Cuddy (2012) talks about
confidence and the effect of Impostor Syndrome7, confidence is important for people
and their trust in you and your mentality as a person, while sparring and mentoring
keeps you on track and adjusts you (Andres-Beck, 2015). Many people, who suffer from
impostor syndrome have one single thing in common. They lack feedback. Andres-Beck,
a long term software developer, talked about his imposter syndrome and how it affected
him. He lacked feedback, fixed the issue, and is now a mentor for other programmers.
His rationale is: ”Imposter syndrome is a rational response to insufficient feedback”.
An emerging pm trait which is currently popular in US is resilience.
According to
Loumann (2015), despite the heavy influence of PM Methodologies like Scrum, PRINCE2®
and Stage-Gate processes in Denmark, resilience is gaining popularity along with other
soft skills in Danish PM Organizations. Resilience in its basic form is just the psychologi-
cal trait of not being let down, i.e. to keep on going despite resistance. This is important
since stressing about deliverables, budget and deadlines can cause one to loose overview
(Loumann, 2015). Müller and Turner (2010) also showed that the psychological profile
of pm’s and its match towards the project type is important for project success. They
found that a high Emotional Quotient (EQ) along with a high IQ were prevalent in suc-
cessful pm’s. The aspect of hiring pm’s for their IQ has been criticized by Christensen
(2015) who believes that current PM education focuses too much on AQ (Administrative
Intelligence). - In his company, the Danish consultancy company Niras, they train all
pm’s in EQ, because the communication with the customer is such an important aspect
that, a high technical competence (IQ) is useless without social competences (EQ).
Relations
Structure and relations are what binds the organization together. The structure can be
seen as primarily ’Hard’ while the relations that bind people together is ’Soft’. As i noted
7Impostor Syndrome: A term coined by psychologists, and meant to apply for people (often successful)
who cannot accept their own accomplishments. Instead they believe they are ’lucky’ or deceitful towards
their accomplishments. Source: Gravois (2007)
Page 28
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 3 Literature Review
in chapter 2, organizations are evolving, just like Leavitt and James (1962)’s model has.
The same is happening for organizations who are becoming more complex and more net-
worked than ever before (Castells, 2010). According to Bøtter (2012), Karkov, Rasmus;
Bøtter et al. (2014), future organizations are networked and subject to a new style of
employees as well as a drastic different way of working. The future organization will
need to rely on freelancers for conducting work and on global collaboration networks
for innovation (Morgan, 2012, 2014). This effect is, in part, due to ’Generation Z’ who
have entirely different work ethics and goals, as well as expectations towards a higher
degree of intrinsic motivation (Arnett, 2015). We are already seeing the symptoms of
this change, one of which is the shift from formal communication to informal communi-
cation. Emailing is a time wasting, inefficient and unorganized way of communicating
and even though it serves its formal purpose, when most of the work-related communi-
cation is semi-informal, mailing just doesn’t cut it anymore (Overgaard, 2015). Mailing,
like posting, has its time and place, but for most on-the-job related communication,
online networks, collaboration platforms and messaging services should be used instead
(Hamel and Breen, 2007, Morgan, 2012).
Another symptom is the move from bureaucracy to ’flatter’ structures (Hamel and Breen,
2007). One example is Google who removed its middle management layer which resulted
in managers with up to 50 direct reports, sometimes 100 (Hamel and Breen, 2007, p.
109-112). Adhocacy, an organizational ’structure’ defined by the lack of formality and
structure, is predominant in complex and uncertain projects (Alojairi, 2010). An ex-
ample of this is Zappo’s approach, Holacracy, which is defined by distributed authority
and ’free-flowing’ roles, which employees define by themselves (Zappos, 2016).
This
approach has also been taken by Valve who successfully removed all management po-
sitions and is now an almost completely self-organized organization (Bernstein et al.,
2014). These companies, dealing primarily with IT, tend to conduct large and complex
projects which might be the reason for the radically different management approaches.
- Alojairi (2010, p. 159) found that, in complex projects, organizational structures re-
semble adhocracy, roles become ambiguous and reliance on PM Software is increased.
In less complex projects the opposite happened, and people relied more on existing rules
and bureaucracy.
A recent study, conducted internally at Google (Rozovsky, 2015), describes how the
diversity in teams is not the deciding factor of team effectiveness. Psychological safety
was the most important outcome with dependability, structure & clarity, meaning of
the work and impact of work coming second. This underlines the fact, that effectiveness
comes from intrinsic motivation and that employees, especially generation Z, are more
effective in work that is organized according to the soft paradigm. Pro-Social motivation
is instead the desire to help team members with the implicit goal of furthering the team
and not the self. In light of Google’s study of the psycho-social needs of high-performing
teams, it is evident that teams need pro-social behaviour (HU and Liden, 2015). It has
also been suggested that the perfect team consists of 5-6 members, since any more than
Page 29
==PAGE:44==
Chapter 3 Literature Review
that will decrease the efficiency due to social loafing8 (The Wharton School, 2006).
3.5
Project Types and Management Styles
PM in a STS perspective is a wide area of study, as such we’ve seen that the literature
acknowledges that different types of projects exists.
Many authors also believe that
different management approaches should exist to complement the different project styles
(Müller and Turner, 2007, 2010, Shenhar and Dvir, 2007, Boas and Thorslund, 2013).
Boas and Thorslund (2013, p. 92) in a study on Danish organizations, found that “The
good project manager fits the tools to the project, not vice versa.”. This was also the
perspective of (Andersen, 2015, p. 62) who found that many pm’s tried to combine the
different perspectives, however as a compromise, suggesting that project managers, in
contrast, tried to fit the project to the tools and not vice versa.
There is a need for adopting project specific approaches in organizations, but because
projects are ’organizations within organizations’ they should be studied separately (Shen-
har and Dvir, 1996). This need is evident in how critical success factors vary between
industries (Belassi and Tukel, 1996). Researchers should then focus on an approach that
takes into account, which methods are useful in which perspectives (Andersen, 2015).
3.5.1
Project Types
Shenhar and Dvir (1996) argues that 4 possible types of projects exist. Type A, B, C
and D. Type A is categorized as a typical construction project, where the end-products
might differ, but where each stage of the project follows the same basic elements. Type B
projects are the development of new products (or services) within the context of already
existing product (or service) lines. Type C and D have the same similar distinction
as A and B but are riskier. Type C are considered radical innovation efforts on the
basis of cutting-edge technology, while type D is the most risky and seeks to develop the
most state-of-the-art end product. - One example of such a program would be the Apollo
program and especially the moon landing (Shenhar and Dvir, 2007, p. 94). As Söderlund
(2004) explains, while projects differ from one-another, some project-types differ more
and subsequently requires a different PM strategy. While it might be perfectly fine to
follow the same PM methodology in a construction firm, a consulting firm with very
different projects might not benefit from having a definitive PM strategy.
On the basis of their earlier work, Shenhar and Dvir (2007) in their book Reinventing
Project Management, presents a framework for classifying the type of project undertaken.
Amongst several other things discussed, they present their Diamond Model for classifying
and structuring projects.
The framework, presented in Figure 3.2, shows the different areas in which projects differ
from one another. The ’diamond’ that is drawn, when one choses a level on each axis,
8Social Loafing: The tendency of members of a group to put in less effort than if they had been alone.
Page 30
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 3 Literature Review
Technology
Pace
Novelty
Complexity
Low-tech
Medium-tech
High-tech
Super-high-tech
Regular
Fast/Competetive
Time-critical
Blitz
Deriative
Platform Breakthrough
Assembly
System
Array
Figure 3.2: The NTCP model. Source: Shenhar and Dvir (2007, p. 47)
presents the project type. For example, Shenhar and Dvir (2007, p. 88) differentiates
between low-tech and super high-tech projects both in Project Management style and in
project-manager style which subsequently requires more technical skilled pm’s. Low- and
Medium-Tech projects require a linear (Waterfall) development approach while High-
and Super-High-Tech projects require a Spiral (Agile) development approach (Shenhar
and Dvir, 2007, p. 92). Fast/Competitive time projects employ a typical balanced-
matrix configuration while time-critical projects often employ a pure project structure
where all team members report directly to the project manager. Members are gathered in
one-location (co-location) and use a skunk9 works structure where members are isolated
from the rest of the organization.
In Blitz10 type projects, this is the only way of
organizing it (Shenhar and Dvir, 2007, p. 133)
The Role of the Project Manager
Classifying the project only matters to the method-
ology aspect of PM, i.e. how the traditional processes should be approached. The pm
should also match the project type and the approach undertaken. Shenhar and Dvir
(2007, p. 32-33) recommends adapting one’s mindset to each project type. I.e. high-
risk, high-uncertainty projects should focus on long-term objectives while low-risk and
difficult projects should focus more on the project triangle. Kotter (1996) suggested the
same thing when managing change projects; to create a burning platform so as to bring
the organization together towards a common goal.
9Skunk Works: A type of project division which is completely self-autonomous, and not constricted
to any bureaucracy.
10Blitz: Projects were the deadline is imperative, typical in natural disasters, or in extreme business
crises.
Page 31
==PAGE:46==
Chapter 3 Literature Review
Figure 3.3 was created based on several different works, all speaking of the same sub-
ject; The personality and managerial style of the pm. The model supports many of the
arguments I have already made, so I will only present the key points. As with Fig-
ure 3.2, each project has a level of complexity that corresponds to 1) The amount of
tasks, and 2) the variety of the tasks. Uncertainty is defined by the level of unresolved
questions at the start of the project, i.e.
uncertainties about market, technology or
even political questions. The construction of a new house is much more certain that the
development of e.g. a new high-tech technology. Disagreement is a bit more complex,
it can relate to authority issues between project members, differences in perception be-
tween the project owner or pm or even customer facing issues. In short it is the level
of disagreement between all stakeholders. As the model shows, disagreement is solved
with a political attitude towards PM, while complexity and uncertainty can be solved
with Agility. However, when an agile project is in need of political intervention, the
simplified roles that makes agile approaches successful, hampers the project and chaos
ensures (Mikkelsen et al., 2015).
Complexity
Uncertainty
Disagreement
Diﬃculty
Plandriven
Agile
Entrepreneurial
Political
Chaos
Figure 3.3: Project types as based on the project definition. Source: Mikkelsen
et al. (2015), Jesper Frederik Gottlieb (2015), Shenhar and Dvir (2007, app. 3A)
One of the changes an organization can make on the road to project maturity, is to
reflectively utilize the methods above. In this regard (Bøtter, 2012, p. 49) proposes the
following 4 management styles that organizations can use, according to the processes
they work with:
• Simple processes, were we can use best practice, or Standard Operating Procedures:
Hierarchical Management without employee interaction
Page 32
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 3 Literature Review
• Complicated processes, were we use our intellect to find the answer: Hierarchical
Management with employee interaction
• Chaotic processes, were none of the parameters are known and we have to use
common sense: Network Management without employee interaction
• Complex Processes, were none or few of the parameters are known and the answer
manifests itself while looking for it: Network Management with interaction between
the employees
These management styles, although not specifically meant for PM, fits the management
style of the project as presented in Figure 3.3. The more complex and uncertain a process
is, the more you need to interact with your stakeholders, this is similar to the political
PM attitude. Less complex processes, as the ones found in the construction industry,
requires less interaction and a higher level of standardization, thus also a more traditional
and plan-driven approach to PM. The key is that, a good manager must understand the
environment in which he operates. If he makes changes in one subsystem, the others
will be affected, as per Leavitt’s model. The same understanding of the environment is
necessary in projects if one is to manage and lead effectively.
3.6
Summary
The literature sees PM as a divison between different managerial skill-sets that can be
seen primarily as targeted towards the soft- or hard-skillset. According to the theory
presented in chapter 2 each part of the STS is affected by the other, resulting in a
complex system. As Shenhar and Dvir (2007) noted, conducting successful PM is not
just about applying a PM Methodology and matching it with a certified pm.
It is
the holistic perspective that emerges when one understands the environment and the
interplay between the different success factors. PM approaches should be customized to
the project and its environment rather than relying on best-cases or existing approaches.
It was also found that mature organizations had more success in projects based on
customized approaches, and amount of certifications (PricewaterhouseCoopers, 2012),
though it wasn’t clear whether the organizations were successful because of the level of
maturity, or mature because of the level of tacit knowledge in the company. - However,
the relationship between the different paradigms indicates that the STS approach is more
successful and that the interplay between the organizational subsystems is a deciding
factor of success.
The idea of perceiving the project as a ’personality’ with different traits and compe-
tences is interesting in the sense that the coupling between the project and the project
manager is then increasingly important. However, PM needs vary between companies
and emphasis on different parts on the PM model will depend on whether you produce
software, products or buildings (Arguimbay, 2015, ch.
2).
Thus the use of existing
Page 33
==PAGE:48==
Chapter 3 Literature Review
certifications and methodologies is suitable as an initial framework, but is not a drop-in
replacement in most organizations.
The challenge for the field of PM is to come up with, and design, an approach suitable
for the given project (Andersen, 2015). This is evident from Shenhar and Dvir (2007)’s
conclusion of the success of the approach and the amount of Danish organizations not
utilizing the approach as data from RUC and Mannaz (2014), Fortune et al. (2011),
PricewaterhouseCoopers (2012), Boas and Thorslund (2013) shows. A similar conclusion
was reached by Andersen (2015), however, as he found, the approach taken was often
based on the perspective of the pm, which supports Mumford et al. (2000) in that pm’s
have different personalities and that the role of the pm should also be matched to the
project.
Page 34
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 4
Methodology
“… the world is becoming too fast, too complex and too networked for any company
to have all the answers inside.”
- Professor Yochai Benkler, Harvard Law Business School
This chapter is concerned with the research approach to data collection and analysis.
As explained in chapter 2 the study employs a holistic multiple-case study with mono-
method data gathering. The aim of the study is to refine and construct questions for
further research (Boyce and Associate, 2006). As such, the study is exploratory and relies
on qualitative data (Bernard, 2011, Namey and Trotter, 1993). The initial 3 phases of
case-study design will be discussed in the following sections, the last conclusive phase is
found in chapter 5.
4.1
Case-Study Design
The case-study is designed to answer the main problem statement. Since the question
is about the different approaches to project management in Danish organizations, the
aim is to explore rather than describe. The context of the case-study was given in chap-
ter 2 and involves seeing the organization as an open system, within the context of the
STS. Since the interview form is the preferred data-collection in exploratory case-studies
(Kvale, 1997, Saunders et al., 2009, Yin, 2003), it will be used to gather data for this
study. Yin (2003) states the importance of generating a theoretical framework to base
the data gathering on. Similarly, replication of cases are important to properly gener-
alize the findings in the context of the study. In multiple-case studies, replication can
consist of literal replication or theoretical replication. Literal replication is appropriate
when one wants to compare cases, while theoretical replication is done on the beliefs
that the research will uncover differences between the cases. Literal replication requires
2 or 3 cases, where theoretical replication requires 6-10 Yin (2003). To ensure validity of
the study, theoretical replication is chosen since the main problem is about differences
in Danish organizations PM approaches. The theoretical framework was constructed
35
==PAGE:50==
Chapter 4 Methodology
in chapter 2 and further in chapter 3, while the case selection will be discussed in the
following section.
4.1.1
Choosing Cases
The different pm’s and organizations that are used as cases in this study, is based on an
initial screening process of relevant candidates. Yin (2003) recommends doing either a
one-stage or second-stage screening process based on how many candidates are identified.
Similarly he argues that a set of operational criteria, of which candidates will be deemed
qualified or not, are developed. The exploratory nature and the subject of the socio-
technical system affected how the criteria where chosen. Candidates were selected and
screened based on the following criteria:
1. Type and size of parent organization
2. Title and work responsibilities
3. Experience
Since the title ’Project Manager’ is used extensively and in different situations, the title
was not a perfect criteria. Coupled with the work responsibilities, however, the criteria
became useful. The type and size of organization were similarly important, since the
study should reflect most Danish Organizations. However the criteria was narrowed to
the Engineering and IT industry. This was mainly to narrow the scope of the study and
to conform with the interests of the author and parent university. Lastly, experience
was a deciding factor. The candidates should have experience in project management,
not necessarily from the parent organization, but also from past work experiences.
A low response rate is expected in studies, and is dependent on the type of study,
data collection method and type of respondent (Robson and Edition, 2002, Malhotra
et al., 2012). To mitigate this, the following approach was used: With the initial set of
criteria, 70 leads were identified. Of those 70, 35 were initially contacted and asked to
participate in the study. The 35 were chosen so that the criteria would be averaged and
provide a valid background for the case-study. Whenever a respondent declined, 5 other
respondents with the same criteria were selected from the remaining pool and contacted.
In total, 47 were contacted, which generated 18 responses, i.e. a response rate of 38%,
resulting in a participation rate of 23%. This approach avoided the problem of a low
response rate, while sustaining the criteria chosen for the case-study.
The interviews were all conducted in a 3-month period between October and December.
At the discretion of the respondent, the interviews were either conducted at the company
or over the phone.
Page 36
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 4 Methodology
4.2
Interview
The are several types of interviews available for the qualitative research interview. They
range from unstructured informal dialogues to structured and formal one-sided inter-
views. Formal interviews, which can be administered as questionnaires, are better suited
for descriptive and explanatory research where the data are objective and statistically
comparable (Bernard, 2011, ch. 9). Conversely, informal interviews give the respondent
free reign over the conversation and may yield new opinions and interesting data not
yet considered. The unstructured and informal dialogue-style of interview is, however,
unfavoured in this study, since the time allotted for each interview is limited. Similarly,
the dialogue style interview yields data which demands a more subjective analysis. The
informal but semi-structured interview form provides the respondent with the ability to
talk more freely while still allowing the interviewer to control the direction of the talk.
Also, the line of questioning is non-standard, but follows a set of pre-determined topics
and questions that may be omitted in certain situations, or when interviewing certain
organizations (Saunders et al., 2009).
Part of the main problem statement was to determine the approach used in organizations
and how they set each other apart. Being unable to know in which area they are different
it was important to be able to explore different topics. The semi-structured interview
was chosen because it allows for a certain amount of topics to be covered in an more
informal way and according to McNamara (2015) it: “…provides more focus than the
conversational approach, but still allows a degree of freedom and adaptability in getting
information from the interviewee.” - An important aspect of collecting exploratory but
still comparable data. Another benefit is the ability to get more personal and in turn,
more descriptive answers. Kvale (2011) describes how managing ones appearance and
building rapport and trust with the interviewee through perception, is a way to assure
a more accurate disclosure from the respondent. The perception of the interviewer is
thus a key step in mitigating research design errors, specifically nonsampling-type errors
relating to the researcher, interviewer and the respondent (Malhotra et al., 2012). The
errors which are accounted for in this thesis are shown in Figure 4.1 and marked in Grey.
4.2.1
Possible errors
The possible errors that can emerge in a study like this are errors stemming from the
researcher, the interviewer or the respondent. Researcher errors are, in this case, mea-
surement errors that can occur when the information sought and the information given
has a bad fit. These are hard to account for and are, to a certain extent, subjective in
nature, but were mitigated by utilizing an interview guide. Interviewer errors are, in
this case; 1) Data analysis errors, occurring when transcribing or noting the interview
erroneously, 2) Questioning errors occurring when the interviewer asks leading questions
Page 37
==PAGE:52==
Chapter 4 Methodology
Total Error
Random Samling Error
Nonsampling Error
Response Error
Reseacher Errors
Interviewer Errors
Respondent Errors
Nonresponse Error
Figure 4.1: Potential sources of error affecting a research design. Source: Malho-
tra et al. (2012)
or when failing to probe topics thus leading to: 3) Recording errors, that occurs due to
misinterpretations, bad recordings or vague answers interpreted as definite answers. 4)
Cheating errors occur when the respondent fabricates answers or lies on certain topics.
These error are extremely hard to prevent but can, to a certain extent, be mitigated
by doing background checks on the organization, department and respondent on e.g.
LinkedIn and the company website. Lastly, respondent errors can occur when the re-
spondents are unable, or unwilling, to answer questions about a certain topic. This
can occur when the topic revolves around business critical information, or information
that might hurt the respondent or the organization. These errors were mitigated by
informing the respondents on the nature of the research and the topics before the inter-
view. Mitigation, however, is not the same as prevention and errors do occur, but the
approaches mentioned will serve to minimize the Total Error component of the analysis.
Bias
The interview data collected are subject to a few biases, of which Kvale (2011)
has described several of. One is The interviewer’s monopoly of interpretation, which
is a social-science reference to the research interviewer being the sole interpreter of the
interview data, especially in informal interviews. This bias was countered by asking
each respondent, when unclear, to verify a short summary of the interview and to ask
permission for direct citations. This approach assured that unclear topics were inter-
preted right and subsequently also the data validity.
4.2.2
Structure
According to Boyce and Associate (2006), preparing for interviews should follow the
same general process as for other research, namely:
1. Plan
2. Develop Guide
Page 38
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 4 Methodology
3. Train interviewers
4. Collect data
5. Analyze data
6. Disseminate findings
Since the research methodology allows for an iterative approach the above steps will
to a certain degree also be iterative. In this case, iterations occurred when the initial
interviews showed that a redevelopment of the interview guide was necessary. Similarly,
due to time constraints, data collection and analysis was not conducted sequentially.
This will be covered in-depth later in this chapter.
The only step widely different from the approach followed in this study is the training of
interviewers. Since the study does not employ external interviewers, training is replaced
by preparation.
Planning of the interview involves the logistics of when, where and
how the interview is to be performed. It can be on-location with the respondent, over
the phone, or via the use of other collaboration platforms. The guide serves to help
the interviewer conduct the semi-structured interview, in a way that covers the chosen
study topics.
Interview Type
As explained earlier, interviews range from unstructured informal to
structured formal dialogues and subsequently also from an exploratory to an explanatory
nature. Since the goal of this thesis is not to conduct explanatory research, and since
definite, yet broad answers are needed, the choice of structure for this research is the
semi-structured or ’standardized and open-ended’ interview. This approach allows flexi-
bility in the interview as well as being able to facilitate faster interviews which are more
easily analysed (McNamara, 2015). The final, argument for choosing a semi-structured
form to interview project managers, is the following citation:
“Semi-structured interviewing works very well in projects where you are dealing
with high-level bureaucrats and elite members of a community — people who are
accustomed to efficient use of their time.”
- Bernard (2011, p. 212)
Characteristics of the semi-structured interview
To help develop the interview-guide
it is important to look at the characteristics of the chosen interview form. According to
Cohen and Crabtree (2006), the characteristics are the following:
• The interviewer and respondents engage in a formal interview
• The interviewer develops and uses an ’interview guide’
• The interviewer follows the guide but is able to follow topical trajectories in the
conversation
Page 39
==PAGE:54==
Chapter 4 Methodology
However the interview form chosen is not strict, thus it draws resemblance to both the
unstructured and structured forms in the sense that:
• Questions tend to be open-ended and express little control over ’informants’ re-
sponses
• The interviewer plays a neutral role and acts casual and friendly, but does not
insert his or her opinion in the interview
4.2.3
Interview Guide
Having chosen the appropriate interview form, the interview guide is the next thing to
construct. Both Bernard (2011, ch. 9) and Saunders et al. (2009, ch. 10) have described
the traits that ensure the proper level of qualitative data. They are the following:
• Use open-ended questions
• Avoid leading questions
• Probe issues in depth
• Let the informant lead
Open-ended questions allow the respondent to answer without presented or implied
choices, often using What, How or Why (Poul Skaldhede, 2015). An example of a closed-
ended question is: ”Do you utilize xy certifications?”, and is more explanatory than
exploratory. Questions should instead be asked in the open-ended way; ”Please describe
your approach towards certifications/training or education?”.
When the respondent
covers one of the topics, probing the subject will allow the interviewer to get an answer
to some of the more specific issues in the interview guide. Probing, should not hinder
the informant in leading the conversation. Some informants will talk more freely than
others and subsequently provide more exploratory information. In these cases, dialogue
will only be used to guide the conversation in the right direction.
The interview is planned in such a way that it takes on the form of a structured at first,
moving on to an unstructured in the end. This approach solves several issues; The first
being that respondents normally open up more towards the end of and interview. For
this reason ice-breakers are normally used to lighten the mood, in this case, factual and
light questions are asked at the start of the interview. The second issue, also related
to asking factual questions in the beginning, is that we want more definite answers to
some of the topics than others. Constructing the interview, so it progresses from one
form to another solves these issues and allow us to cover topics defined in the problem
statement while still allowing for exploratory topics to be asked towards the end.
Interview Topics
Several topics were created to accommodate for differences in the
working methods of the respondent.
Companies tend to have overlapping terms for
Page 40
==PAGE:55==
Chapter 4 Methodology
project manager as well as different work responsibilities. As such, it was important
to be able to ask appropriate questions, in cases were the respondent was a bad fit
in regards to the study.
The topics should reflect the topics of the research layout
while still be able to provide a natural flow in the unstructured-interview.
As such
the topics were chosen to be: Personal, Company, Project Management and Team and
Environment. The Personal topic contains factual questions related to the respondent,
his position and competences as well as customary questions. Company pertains to the
organization, subsequently also to the structure and technology aspect of the research.
Project Management contains probing questions in regards to the answers in the former
category. These questions cover the tasks aspect of the research. Team & Environment
covers people and culture which pertains to the soft skills.
For each category, a series of open-ended questions were prepared.
They were not
meant to be asked specifically but rather serve as inspirations and be of guidance in
the interview. Questions were, when possible, kept free of technical terms or buzzwords
so as to avoid wording that might influence the answer or the respondent itself. This
approach conforms with Turner (2010)’s guide for novice investigators, from the journal
The Qualitative Report.
The full guide is available in English in Appendix A.
4.3
The Iterative Approach
During the study several changes were made to accommodate lessons learned, reflec-
tions upon the process, and the success of the interviews. As with any research, es-
pecially interpretivism due to its subjective and immersive nature (Dudovskiy, 2015),
the researcher learns along the way. My understanding also changed, and as such, the
following section will discuss the different reflections made upon the approach.
Interview Style
After the first couple of interviews, and after interviewing people from
different sectors, it became clear that the initial interview guide needed to be changed.
The differences between each interviewee and their way of responding, made it difficult
to follow the initial guide and as such, get an answer to the relevant problems. It was
determined that the specific areas of interests which were written down in the initial
guide, were too specific and that the respondent, in most cases, covered the subject
anyway, either directly or indirectly. As such, the guide was revised to more closely
resemble the model shown in Figure 3.1. In this way, each subject could be discussed
more freely with the assumption that each respondent would talk about it during the,
now, more informal interview. This change was also, in part, caused by some of the
respondents unwillingness to address more specific questions in fear of mentioning critical
business-, or customer-specific information.
Page 41
==PAGE:56==
Chapter 4 Methodology
Interview Asymmetry
Kvale (2011) described the power asymmetry between the in-
terviewer and the respondent.
One of the issues he discussed was Counter Control.
This happens when the power shifts from the interviewer to the respondent, resulting in
countering questions with questions or discussing the interview itself. Counter control
was experienced in a few occasions, mainly when questions were directed at areas in
where the respondent could not answer, either due to personal or corporate beliefs.
Due to inexperience with the un-structured interview form, in the first couple of occa-
sions, the respondent were allowed to continue his/her line of questioning. Questions
were at-most passive and out of curiosity of the thesis topic itself, however, it caused
loss of direction in the interview and loss of time. Counter Control was later exercised
by politely declining questioning or, depending on the amount of time left, referring to
the allotted time.
4.4
Analysis
The general approach for analysing qualitative data is through the use of conceptualiza-
tion (Saunders et al., 2009, ch. 13). However, conceptualization can be done in several
different ways, Yin (2003) proposed 3 general strategies: Relying on theoretical propo-
sitions, Thinking about rival explanations and Developing a case description. The first,
and most preferred strategy (Yin, 2003, p. 113), is to use the theoretical propositions
which led to the case study, and which provides the framework. This approach uses the
theoretical foundation to guide and organize the analysis. The two other approaches re-
lies on generating rival theories and descriptive frameworks and as such are not suitable
for this study. The analysis then follows the general framework presented in chapter 3
and in particular fig. 3.1.
Analysis occurred both during data-collection as well as after in an iterative approach as
proposed by Kvale (1997). This approach helps refine and uncover emerging themes in
the data. The process was as follows: Immediately after each conversation, the interview
was transcribed into note-form and interesting quotes and citations were marked for
approval. Having summarized the interview, a mail was sent to the respondent with
a short summary of the key points of the interview.
The transcribed interview was
summarized and categorized according to the framework.
4.5
Conclusion
In this chapter, an extension of chapter 2, I discussed the choice of case-study and the
implications for the thesis. The choice of a holistic multiple-case mono-method case
study where chosen due to the exploratory nature of the study. The choice of cases were
based on a judgemental analysis of available case subjects, which where later screened for
fit before arriving at the final 70 leads. Of these, 47 were contacted which generated 18
positive responses in total, of which 15 were scheduled. Rescheduling and cancellations
Page 42
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 4 Methodology
meant that 11 interviews were conducted in total.
However the case pool remained
representative of the industry within the chosen segments. An interview guide based
on the theoretical propositions was developed and structured in such a way that the
interviews were conducted in a semi-structured approach.
Page 43
==PAGE:58==
==PAGE:59==
Chapter 5
Analysis
Facts about the leads:
• 70+ Leads identiﬁed
• 47 Leads contacted
• 18 Responses received
• 15 Accepted
• 11 Conducted
Facts about the respondents:
• 2 From the public sector
• 7 From the private sector
• 1 Freelancer
• 1 Entrepreneur
• Total of 98 years and 11 months of ex-
perience in PM
- Ranging from 3 months to 16.5 years
Up until now, I have presented the open-systems model as a way of modelling organiza-
tions as socio-technical systems. I have presented a theoretical framework for dividing
the organization into subsystems which can be used to understand the interplay between
these, in a holistic way. The literature was analysed based on two themes; one being
general approaches that are taken towards PM, thus answering parts of the supplemen-
tary questions, and two being the managerial interplay between the systems in regards
to PM. Thus, I have established how the literature, and earlier research, view PM in
organizations and what the major approaches are. The main problem and the supple-
mentary questions is then partly answered and this chapter serves as the foundation for
the whole answer. To sum up, the main question was:
How do Danish organizations approach the concept of project management?
Do they manage projects according to the STS-Principles and best-practices?
To answer this, and the supplementary questions the chapter will be divided as such;
The first part will discuss the objectively comparable data that emerged during the inter-
views, this would be the PM Methodology approaches, certifications, practices etc. The
second part will employ the framework I discussed in chapter 2 and further developed as
the theoretical foundation in chapter chapter 3. This part is more subjective, according
45
==PAGE:60==
Chapter 5 Analysis
to the inductive approach, and deals with the themes and categories that emerged in
the informal part of the interviews.
5.1
De-Constructed Analysis
The following table gives a short summary of the key approaches, and differences be-
tween the respondents. A more detailed table, including information about the parent
organizations are available in Appendix B. All following references will be made to Ap-
pendix B.
Table 5.1: Respondent Matrix
✓denotes yes, x denotes no, - Not clear or not applicable
R1
R2
R3
R4
R5
R6
R7
R8
R9
R10
R11
Personal
Certiﬁcations
✓
✓
x
✓
✓
✓
✓
x
x
✓
✓
Reﬂective Thinking
✓
-
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
-
x
✓
✓
Inﬂuence in Org.
x
✓
✓
✓
x
x
✓
x
x
✓
✓
Technical Comp.
✓
x
x
-
✓
x
✓
✓
✓
x
x
Soft Comp.
-
✓
✓
-
✓
✓
x
✓
x
✓
✓
Hard Paradigm
’Hard’ Certiﬁcation
Requirement
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
-
x
’Soft’ Certiﬁcation
Requirement
✓
✓
x
✓
✓
✓
✓
x
x
✓
x
Technical Comp.
x
✓
x
✓
✓
x
✓
✓
x
x
✓
Project Software
-
✓
✓
-
-
-
✓
x
✓
✓
-
Soft Paradigm
Soft Skills
x
x
✓
x
✓
✓
x
x
✓
✓
✓
Reﬂective Practices
x
x
✓
x
x
x
x
x
x
✓
✓
Mentor/Mentee Programs
x
x
-
x
x
✓
✓
x
✓
✓
-
Collaboration Software
x
✓
✓
x
x
-
✓
x
x
-
-
The table is not meant to be descriptive since the underlying analysis of each attribute
most always, is an either/or choice. Each mark is then an indicator of what the organi-
zation is leaning towards.
Definition of Attributes:
Aside from certifications, the denomination of personal attributes relates to the respon-
dents interest in the attribute. I.e. if a respondent considers soft skills as an important
aspect they are marked. For organizational attributes, the denomination is different:
Organization size does not relate to the recommended guidelines as set forth by the
European Commission (European Commision, 2015), as this would put most of the
Page 46
==PAGE:61==
Chapter 5 Analysis
respondents organization in the SME category. Instead, the following is used, designated
by number of employees: >100 = Small, >1000 = Medium, <1000 = Big.
Management type is denoted based on a subjective analysis of the respondents answer
and publicly available information about the company. It reflects the project types in
Figure 3.3.
Structure is an assessment of how the department is structured and how they conduct
projects in the organization.
Project Model is denoted as the main project model the company follows. If it is custom,
the model, if any, that gave inspiration to the approach will be annotated.
The hard certification requirement represents a requirement for a certain certification in
the organization. It does not represent a hiring choice of the organization but rather
the choice of ’mainstream’ certification in the organization.
The soft certification requirement is meant to apply to a general requirement for a
certification, with no specific certification mentioned.
Technical competence denote skills that are related to the project work. I.e. a commu-
nication based educational background, is considered a technical skill in project organi-
zations that deal with information.
Project software denotes the use of general PM software.
Soft competences represent the organizations approach to the importance of soft skills
PM. If a general framework for soft skills exists, they are acknowledged. The same is
true for reflective practices, mentor programs and collaboration software.
All organizations utilized hard metrics (triple constraints) to evaluate the success of the
project, and as such is not represented.
The interview data and transcripts will not be made publicly available, however, for the
purpose of understanding the key points of each interview, and to present the challenges
as defined by each pm, a short summary of each interview is available in Appendix C.
5.1.1
Project Methodologies and Certiﬁcations
One of the supplementary questions that was stated in the problem statement was “What
are the current approaches to PM in Danish organizations?”. While the literature review
already described what other studies uncovered, the following section will present this
study’s findings as a way to answer the supplementary question.
The study showed that certifications are indeed prevalent in organizations. 8 out of 11
held a certification with the majority having a PRINCE2® certification, while the second
most popular certifications were SCRUM and IPMA. Interestingly the 3 respondents not
holding any certifications all worked in organizations which had no soft requirement for
certifications. One of the respondents noted:
Page 47
==PAGE:62==
Chapter 5 Analysis
“If you cannot, in any other way, prove your skills as a project manager, then by all
means a certification is useful.”
- R8 (2015)
The quote fits with the personal profile of the respondent, which articulated a great
interest in both the hard and soft aspect of PM, indicating that certifications are not a
replacement for experience. The respondent was also one of the more experienced pm’s,
which again would indicate that, while experience is more useful than a certification, if
one has little or no experience, then the certification is the only way to validate ones
skills. In fact, the least experienced pm in this study, held several certifications.
Another issue is the type of certification and the level of experience needed to acquire
it. One respondent noted:
“I like the IPMA certification because it actually demands that you have experience.
You have to be a really good project manager to attain the higher level certifications”
- R10 (2015)
In the literature analysis I covered the difference between entry-level certifications that
required no experience and those that did. Since none of the organizations had hard
requirements, the approach towards these requirements could be explained by the fact
that many certifications provide the same basic framework (PricewaterhouseCoopers,
2012, Remer S and Ross M, 2014) and that the organizations thus follow the advice
from V. (2015), Shiv and Doraiswamy (2012).
However, the amount of entry level
certifications could also be explained by the fact that they do not expire, which coupled
with the soft requirements, would mean that many organizations do not emphasize
the possession of a certification. As such the key issue is when the certifications were
acquired and if they are used actively. The issue with certifications is that, while they do
acknowledge that the certificate holder have theoretical experience, only the higher level
certifications require real experience. However, the amount of experienced pm’s holding
an IPMA did not justify the argument towards the usefulness of the certification, which
indicates that the higher the level of experience one has, the less need there is for a
certification.
“Certifications are problematic. Having e.g. a PRINCE2® is fine but it doesn’t
make you a better project manager. Its just a method, a framework that gives you
the basics of a project. How you act as a project manager within this framework is
not addressed by the certification.”
- R5 (2015)
The emerging theme here is that certifications might not be a measure of experience,
however it is a trait of experienced pm’s.
Page 48
==PAGE:63==
Chapter 5 Analysis
Requirements
When asked whether the organization required any certifications from their employees
or new-hires, none had a hard requirement for a certain certification. However, 3 distinct
organizations had requirements for in-house certifications. Only one of them required
all pm’s to take an internal pm certification. The rest had optional training. Again,
only larger organizations employed in-house training and had frameworks in place for
training and development of pm potential.
As one of the respondents said:
“We don’t require certifications when looking for new-hires, as a starting point we
look at seniority and experience.”
- R5 (2015)
While conducting the interviews, a recurring theme emerged in regards to certifications.
As none of the organizations had any hard requirements, it would be interesting to look
at job postings to see if the requirements were expressed in these. During the months
of November and December 2015, I collected biweekly data from 5 major Danish job
sites. First I searched for job postings containing the key word ’Project Manager’ and
then for job postings containing the keyword ’Prince2’, ’IPMA’, ’PMP’, ’PMI’ ’SCRUM’
and ’Junior Project Manager’. The averaged results are represented in Table 5.2. An
insignificant amount of postings contained ’Junior Project Manager’ indicating that
entry-level project management jobs were not prevalent. This effect could be explained
based on ESI International (2013a)’s study on ROI and the benefit of training from
within the organization.
Table 5.2: Popularity of PM Certiﬁcations in Danish job postings
Average Nov-Dec 2015
n = 288
Scrum
56
PRINCE2®
23
IPMA
11
PMI
10
PMP
9
Disregarding SCRUM, the data in Table 5.2 shows the same level of popularity among
certifications as the interviews did.
The irregularities regarding SCRUM can be ex-
plained by the fact that it is not a ’proper’ PM methodology and instead is a project
model, that many software developers are expected to know. Since the information was
collected as a keyword search, with no other modifications to each sites search algo-
rithm, it is possible that both PM postings and software development postings emerged.
Nevertheless the data correlates with the findings of this study and as such also serves
as evidence towards the fact that the cases are representative of the Danish industry.
A Swedish study conducted a more in-depth analysis of job postings and found that
Page 49
==PAGE:64==
Chapter 5 Analysis
PM certifications were only listed in a third of job advertisements during a period from
2010-2013 and required in even fewer cases (Lundqvist and Marcusson, 2014).
This
correlates with the findings on Danish job postings of which 38% contained certification
keywords. The study also argued that certifications did not guarantee project success,
which is in line with the findings of how uncertified and IPMA certified pm’s relied on
experience rather than certifications.
Methodologies
The picture is a bit different when looking at PM Methodologies. Most organizations
used a Stage-Gate process to control their projects.
However, as I talked about in
Chapter 3, the definition between PM methodologies, approaches and models are some-
times misunderstood. The Stage-Gate model is not a project methodology or model
per se, it is instead a macro-level planning and evaluation tool for, primarily, projects
dealing with physical products (Cooper, 2016). When asked about their PM approach,
many respondents articulated that they used the stage-gate process, however due to
the misconception mentioned, the answers given were at times, unclear. Normally, this
would fall under the ’Non-Sampling’ error category since the methodologies could not
be clearly distinguished. However, since most methodologies were, in fact custom, it was
not possible to get a clear answer as to what approach the organization took. Moreover,
if the custom approach undertaken by the organization was not based on any existing
methodologies, then the respondent would not be able to answer the question clearly
anyway.
Of the 9 distinct organizations interviewed, 4 utilized the Stage-Gate model as the
overlying project framework. In all instances, they were custom to the organization and
2 of the respondents acknowledged the influence of IPMA on the models. In 1 instance
the methodology was influenced by PRINCE2® , while the project model was based on
the waterfall approach, as was the others. In another instance the stage-gate model
was inspired by PMI while applying both waterfall and agile approaches to the project
model. It is interesting that most organizations were structured as a balanced-matrix
as well as being part of bigger companies. One organization had a custom approach
to the stage-gate model, with no mentions of inspiration from any methodology. This
organization were: 1) Smaller in size, compared to the other organizations and 2) utilized
a weak matrix structure. It would seem that organizational size correlates with the use
of an overlying framework like the Stage-Gate model. This is not surprising, since larger
organizations often undertake more projects.
Of the remaining 5 organizations, the prevalent model was Agile. R10 (2015) exper-
imented with different methodologies and as such, no distinct answer could be given.
R8 (2015) used an in-house developed approach with no seemingly inspiration from any
particular approaches. Disregarding the use of the stage-gate model, it is evident that
the primary project models are rooted in existing models with an evenly distribution
Page 50
==PAGE:65==
Chapter 5 Analysis
between the use of waterfall and agile approaches, and with a prevalence towards custom
methodologies in larger organizations.
Approaches
Recall the 5 different approaches to PM mentioned in chapter 3, Tech-
nical, CSF, Social, Experience and Socio-Technical. In the interviews I asked how the
organization emphasized Technical and/or Soft skills and if they had reflective prac-
tices. Half of the respondents noted that technical competences were emphasized while
the other half emphasized soft skills. Only R5 (2015) and R11 (2015) emphasized both.
Similarly, very few had reflective frameworks in place although most respondents noted
that they personally did reflect over the projects performance. Of the 5 different main
approaches to PM, disregarding PM methodologies, the organizations primarily em-
ployed either the Technical or the Social approach. While all organizations did employ
the CSF approach to evaluating projects, there was not enough information to safely say
whether or not it was the primary approach. As for the experience based approach, R3
(2015) and R8 (2015) relied on that in combination with the social approach. None of
the organizations employed all attributes and as such no one can safely be categorized
as primarily using the Socio-Technical approach.
Summary
The current approaches to PM in Danish organizations are primarily based
on either the soft or the hard paradigm of PM. While most organizations rely on certifi-
cations and methodologies to provide a general framework for PM, most also customize
their methodology. This corresponds with the findings from RUC and Mannaz (2014)
who also found a large percentage of Danish project organizations utilizing a customized
approach. The certification requirements were also not emphasized and while most or-
ganizations required a form of certification, it was either in cases were the rest of the
team already held a similar certification or when the organization had their own in-
ternal training programs. This approach corresponds with Boas and Thorslund (2013)
who found a need for customized PM approaches and to a lesser extent a need for cer-
tifications and methodologies. However Boas and Thorslund (2013) also found a need
for reflective practices in Danish project organizations, which is something that was not
emphasized by most organizations.
5.2
Contextual Analysis
In the context of the framework I presented in chapter 2, this section will analyse the or-
ganizations in regards to the different subsystems. In doing so, a contextualized theme of
socio-technical approaches emerge. This theme will help deepening the answers already
given to the supplementary questions and will touch upon the socio-technical aspect of
PM in Danish organizations.
Before discussing the subsystems, I present the different challenges as identified by the
respondents:
Page 51
==PAGE:66==
Chapter 5 Analysis
PM Challenges
During the interviews I asked each respondent about the challenges
they faced in their projects. Not necessarily challenges related to the project itself but
also to its environment. The answers varied between the respondents, however the single
most mentioned challenge, either directly or indirectly, was communication. This was
either expressed as a challenge or as a critical success factor of projects. However the
levels and environment in which communications were considered a challenge was less
distinct. For some, communication was a challenge when managing the stakeholders, and
for others it was a challenge to communicate across the functional divisions. Motivation
was also a major challenge, in two distinct ways. One was the issue of motivating team
members, which was an issue when resources, or time, were limited. Another issue was
the motivation of the pm. In organizations were mentor programs did not exist there
were a higher reliance on ones network. Similarly, several respondents acknowledged the
fact that a sparring partner was necessary to keep one on track:
“…Success makes you arrogant and failure makes you question yourself.”
- R3 (2015)
Thus having a partner, or someone in the network to talk to, was vital to the continued
success as a pm. This was also prevalent in less experienced pm’s, as one respondent
said:
“I could use a little more feedback about the expectations for my role, it’s of course
because I am a relatively new project manager… Despite my previous experience,
many projects are very different from one-another and therefore it’s also important
with feedback in new situations.”
- R6 (2015)
Another, and more experienced pm said:
“…Having self-confidence and to believe what you do is the right thing, to trust that
the method you chose is the right one. It is not something I believe you can learn
when you start out, it comes as part of your experience with projects.”
- R5 (2015)
The quote illustrates the need for mentor programs as a way to boost motivation of the
pm. If the pm is supposed to manage and motivate his/her project members, then of
course, it should be expected that the pm also be motivated.
The challenges presented by RUC and Mannaz (2014) and Fortune et al. (2011), while
not entirely identical to the ones identified in this study, do present the same theme
as discussed here. The major issue is communication and motivation, in the sense that
communication in the organization as well as communication with stakeholders are a
problem. This leads to issues such as inadequate resources, unclear goals & objectives
Page 52
==PAGE:67==
Chapter 5 Analysis
and unclear communication channels.
These issues do not seem to be caused by a
certain PM methodology or Model and the answer must be sought elsewhere. Since the
challenges existed regardless of the management type and structure of the organization it
cannot be safely concluded what causes these issues, however it would indicate that the
specific project model, or methodology is not the immediate cause of these challenges.
Attitude
Attitude can be the outcome of the organization, or the outcome of a project, or project
group.
Recall that attitude is both tasks and the attitude towards them as seen in
Hildebrandt’s revised diamond model. The attitude towards solving tasks in projects
is then as important as the means to solving them.
In the interviews I asked the
respondents about their influence in the projects. While the methodology and the project
model dictates the structure and schedule of the tasks, the attitude towards how the
tasks are conducted is interesting. One respondent noted:
“Especially in the last 4-5 years, the requirements for deliverables have been signif-
icantly different. They cannot extend over many half or full years, there has to be
deliveries along the way and there has to be a backup plan. Most companies have a
relatively tight governance around the project, and there is a challenge in bringing
everything together.”
- R11 (2015)
This corresponds with the use of the stage-gate model amongst many of the organiza-
tions. They are under pressure to innovate and at the same time become more efficient.
Launching more projects and cutting potential losses early is one method of doing this.
However as the respondent notes, this is a challenge, especially when governance is
tight. This is evident from the many respondents who noted that communication and
stakeholder management was a challenge. While governance promotes structure, it also
creates bureaucracy which limits communication and complicates stakeholder manage-
ment. Communication is important, as one respondent said:
“If you don’t have support from management, then it doesn’t matter what you do.
It is important to have a dialogue about how, and why certain parts of the project
is to be conducted.”
- R10 (2015)
Since a majority of the responsibility lies on the pm, it is important to be on clear
terms with ones stakeholders, after all the project manager is assigned to manage the
project while the strategic impact of the project is the responsibility of management.
The respondent further said:
“…If I notify my stakeholders about the risks and possible causes of action, then
if the project fails, I do not consider it my fault. I’ve done my job as a project
Page 53
==PAGE:68==
Chapter 5 Analysis
manager. However, if you make the decision yourself, then it is your fault and you
are the only one to blame.”
- R10 (2015)
Communication and the ability to take responsibility of actions is an important trait in
projects, however it is not only between the pm and stakeholders that it is important:
“It is important to articulate the responsibility and roles in the project team. If
they don’t have a designated responsibility, then they wont participate 100% and
they will derogate their responsibility when it is necessary.”
- R10 (2015)
As in the cases of the quoted pm’s, in bigger organizations communication and stake-
holder management is increasingly important (Aramo-Immonen and Vanharanta, 2009).
However as Williams et al. (2012) also acknowledge, established governance frameworks
are coupled with the use of stage-gate procedures, while the identification of risks and
warning signs are coupled with a ”gut-feeling” approach. As R10 (2015) mentioned,
support from management is essential, but in the end, the risks and possible causes of
action are identified by the pm. Williams et al. (2012) acknowledge that dialogue is a key
part of the formal communication, which again is supported by Nonaka et al. (2000)’s
study on how knowledge is tacitly bound and not explicit. This was also evident from
the following quote:
“The ability to dare take risks comes with experience. You achieve a certain intuition
and a better understanding of the different ways things can be communicated.”
- R10 (2015)
While respondents from smaller, and less plandriven, organizations also acknowledge the
fact that communication is important, in most cases the open and more informal culture
made it easier to approach the stakeholders. One respondent said:
“…our department is known for being able to have open discussion and freedom of
speech. …its a political organization, but changes happen fast and we have more
direct communication.”
- R1 (2015)
The most notable difference in organizations attitude towards PM, is then the approach
taken towards stakeholder management. In informal and agile environments, visualiza-
tion and planning poker serves both as tools to plan the project, but also as tools to
incorporate the stakeholders, thus making the communication more explicit. In more
political organizations, stakeholder management is tacitly bound in dialogue and culture
and the approach resembles the experience based PM approach.
Page 54
==PAGE:69==
Chapter 5 Analysis
Knowledge
Knowledge, or technology, can be tacitly or explicitly bound in the organization. One
of the supplementary questions was how knowledge was transferred from project to
project. In organizations who rely on the experienced based approach, the knowledge is
constricted to the persons holding the information, and as such is tacitly bound to them.
If organizations are to increase success of their project approaches, then the challenge
of communication needs to be solved. In the interviews I asked the respondents how
they collaborated internally and if they had reflective practices in place to learn from
past projects. As I already established, all organizations relied on hard metrics to define
project success while only a few had reflective practices in place to measure other metrics
relating to the project.
3 organizations had frameworks in place with the specific goal of assisting collaboration
between employees. One of the respondents said:
“One of the things that you often overlook when you start out as a project manager,
is communication. You tell one person something which another person might have
the benefit off too. If you do not have any governance, it often creates problems.”
- R2 (2015)
Another respondent said:
“The emerging IT Collaboration tools will help with communication internally, and
often also help new employees in quickly finding their way around the organization
and it’s processes.”
- R3 (2015)
While several of the remaining respondents noted that collaboration was something
they actively looked into, none, besides the quoted respondents above, had governance
in place to accommodate collaboration in the organization. Two themes emerged during
the interviews, one being that smaller organizations relied more on direct communication
between stakeholders, while larger organizations relied more on established procedures
to allow communication, i.e. culture. The second theme was that pm’s of larger or-
ganization to a higher degree relied on their internal network of pm’s to collaborate.
However, with the two quoted respondents coming from a big and a small organization
respectively, it cannot be safely concluded that larger organizations are the primary
users of collaboration software.
Winter et al. (2006) stated that the field of PM had to evolve from relying primarily on
technical knowledge, to also include reflective practices. One respondent said:
“On the main level its important to work on the context, but a typical project
manager, which is responsible for deliverables, also has to, to a greater or lesser
extent, relate to the content. Simply to keep in touch with each deliverable, having
an understanding of the team and the parts that have to be delivered.”
Page 55
==PAGE:70==
Chapter 5 Analysis
- R11 (2015)
While reflective practices are important, as evident from the quote below, organizational
gains emerge from the content being produced and not from the context in which they
are produced. R11 (2015) acknowledges that fact, which also gives merit to the idea that
while technical competences are important, they are not the only contributing factor to
success. Leadership skills and team motivation are also among the factors as identified
by Hyväri (2006), El-Sabaa (2001).
“To think reflectively about the process demands a lot of maturity from the organi-
zation…You could learn something during the project, in fact, you usually do!”
- R5 (2015)
In the organizations interviewed, very few had reflective practices in place, and few
actively utilized collaboration platforms to benefit from the tacit knowledge available
in the organization. No theme emerged as to which type of organization utilized what,
which corresponds with Boas and Thorslund (2013) findings on the need for Danish
organizations to employ reflective practices.
People
Project management is as much about managing people as it is about managing projects
(Cornelius Fichtner). In the same way that knowledge is the foundation for technology,
people are also the foundation for PM. The human-cultural subsystem of the organi-
zation is the most important aspect of projects, that is unless ones primary beliefs are
rooted in Taylorism. Packendorff (1995), Belout and Gauvreau (2004) found that project
success did not only stem from the technical approach, but also from the social. The
social effect is rooted in culture, communication, learning, leadership, etc. and especially
in change management. To understand how the soft paradigm was approached by the
organizations I asked the respondents if they personally considered the people element
of management. I also enquired as to whether or not the organization put an emphasis
on soft skills and whether or not they had mentor programs in place.
Of the 11 respondents, 7 expressed that they had soft competences, while only 2 respon-
dents held both technical and soft competences. One said:
“I have a focus on motivating my co-workers and to create a good work-environment,
appreciating their work. It doesn’t need to be much, just a quick pat on the shoul-
der.”
- R8 (2015)
The quote is interesting since the respondent did not hold any certifications, yet had
enough experience with PM to know the importance of both the soft and hard aspect.
Page 56
==PAGE:71==
Chapter 5 Analysis
The respondent also worked in a medium sized organization with a weak matrix struc-
ture. This indicates a lower level of project maturity which might explain why the pm
has diverse competences. The other respondent said:
“It is rare for a project manager to cover all competences. In the sense that men
often focus on the technical aspect while women often focus on the social aspect.
A project manager cannot cover all competences in the socio-technical system and
must rely on his/her network and sparring-partners.”
- R5 (2015)
The quote shows great insight into the strength and weaknesses of PM. The inter-
views showed that, indeed, it is rare for a project manager to cover all competences.
The interviews also showed a prevalence for men to focus on the hard paradigm and
women focusing on the soft. This is not immediately surprising, however the discus-
sion as to why that is, is left out of this study. The respondent also had 3 personal
CSF’s: R5 (2015)’s 3 M’s: ’Motivation’ (Motivation), ’Målrettethed’ (Dedication) and
’Metodestyrke’ (Method strength). A good pm must motivate the team, show dedica-
tion towards the project and possess the right ’methods’ for solving the project. It is
interesting that the 2 respondents, worked in organizations who did not have a mentor
program, yet both acknowledge the importance of having a network and/or a sparring
partner. The 2 organizations were in the medium-big range while the 2 other, and larger,
organizations who emphasized soft skills and had mentor programs in place, employed
either soft skilled or a technical skilled pm’s. This would again suggest that bigger or-
ganizations rely on several pm’s for each role in the STS. Where smaller organizations,
rely on pm’s with a wider array of competences instead. This would indicate that orga-
nizations do employ a custom approach to PM in a STS perspective, in the sense that
both the soft- and hard-paradigm are covered, however in different ways. The question
is whether this is intentional or a coincidence. V. (2015) talks about project maturity
and that more mature organizations often have training programs in place because they
acknowledge that cross-functional competences are important.
A respondent, working in a political environment said:
“Being political correct is hard, but it is necessary in situations where telling the
truth would be in-advisable. In these cases you have to focus on the problem and
not the person, without hanging people out to dry.”
- R10 (2015)
One of the pm’s described a situation in where one of employees were reprimanded by
the CEO and Vice President in public display. This kind of situation should have been
handled through a dialogue, but instead served to create mistrust and de-motivation in
the company. How is the affected employee supposed to go back to his team and lead
them, when his skills are questioned in full publicity? This shows the importance of
being able to navigate in a political environment and to apply soft skills to avoid these
Page 57
==PAGE:72==
Chapter 5 Analysis
situations. This was also acknowledged in the literature by Hyväri (2006), Kraft and
Agertoft (2015). While not prevalent, Table 5.1 shows that soft skills are emphasized
in bigger organizations, which was also true in the case of mentor programs. On the
question of which paradigm where emphasized the respondent said:
“I am a generalist and have a strong humanistic side as well, which is insanely
important. I focus on anything other than the product.”
- R10 (2015)
I was not able to look into the division of responsibility in projects, but it would seem
that larger organizations, with more resources, were able to divide the responsibility in
projects among more members, thus taking advantage of the fact that pm’s tend to be
primarily soft or hard oriented. This was evident in larger organizations who had either,
team leads or secondary pm’s assigned to help track and motivate the members.
In Chapter 3 i also discussed the importance of confidence and the emerging trait of
resilience, as being important traits of the pm. When asked about the approach taken
towards managing stakeholders, one respondent said:
“…having confidence reflects your values and ability to control the project. This
shows your team and steering committee that you are confident in your decisions
and promotes trust.”
- R5 (2015)
Loumann (2015) talked about how soft skills were gaining popularity in Danish project
organizations while Müller and Turner (2007, 2010) concluded that these traits indeed
did affect the project success.
The interviews showed that many organizations did
emphasize the aspect of soft skills, while only a few respondents talked about confidence
as being an important trait. Christensen (2015), the CEO of Niras, which is one the the
organizations in this case study, talked about ones EQ (Emotional Quotient) as being as
important a trait as ones IQ. This trait was also evident in the interviewed respondent
and of course several others, which suggests that Danish organizations do acknowledge
the importance of soft skills. However it could not safely be concluded whether or not
organizations did structure the project team as to include all competences via different
roles, or if the competences were covered via a single pm.
Relations
While structure can both be seen as the physical structures that make up an organi-
zation, it can also be seen as the meta-structures that make up the relations between
people and departments. These relations are affected by culture and work methods,
amongst other things and has, as big an impact on the outcome of projects as do the
other subsystems. Relations are part of the structural subsystem, but can also be seen
Page 58
==PAGE:73==
Chapter 5 Analysis
as an extension of the human-cultural subsystem. To understand how the organizations
approached the concept of PM it was necessary to look at how they structured their PM
and how they dealt with changes. One respondent said:
“High level decision makers in a project can be surprised by the reaction of the
end-user because they often don’t have that direct interaction that would uncover
these needs. This is true both for end-users but also for customers of the project.”
- R4 (2015)
According to R3 (2015), one of the failure reasons for projects is that the team is left
out of the change process. Essentially, the company, pm’s and customer representatives
are notified of changes, but rarely are they communicated to the team who are then
left out of the discussions. One respondent noted how relations between the different
departments were important because the different goals that each department had, would
sometimes cause internal clashes which interfered with the organizations common goal,
i.e. the satisfaction of the customer. Another respondent said:
“There is a difference in personality between a good salesman and a good project
manager. The salesman is a bit of a ’gambler’ while the project manager is more
risk aware. The roles cannot be switched, nothing would be sold and nothing would
be done. However they do tend to complement each other well.”
- R8 (2015)
Having a good relationship with the sales department meant that confusion were less
likely to occur in cases were the salesman would try to upsell a certain product and the
pm subsequently having to deal with scope-creep. A bad relationship, amounting to
bad or less communication between departments causes unnecessary changes that the
pm has to deal with. On the other hand, changes can also come in the form of new
technology trends, which only the team members (Specific to IT projects) are aware
off. This creates the inverse scenario in where the team members control, through their
discussion, the use of specific technologies which may include, or leave out, specific
platforms at the cost of the end-users. This is a danger in projects were the pm does
not hold any technical competences. This is illustrated in Figure 5.1, where changes are
shown to permeate through the different levels of the organization. At each stage, the
changes will go through different organizational ”filters”. This is also evident from the
following citation:
“…Getting the input of the end-user can provide valuable insights to the core busi-
ness. It is important to open up for social-media, blogs, etc. and incorporate the
responses directly into the business, so as to not pass through x amount of artificial
filters before they land on the desk of some manager on a too high level.”
- R4 (2015)
Page 59
==PAGE:74==
Chapter 5 Analysis
Customer
Company
PM
Team
Changes
in
Environment
Changes
in
Technology
Figure 5.1: Change permeability in projects
R4 (2015) Notes that they have their developers communicate directly with the customer
and end-user so as to mitigate the change permeability in projects.
End-users can
also be internal to the organization in cases where a project is conducted for another
department. However the problem with change permeability persists, if communication
is inadequate. The inadequate communication, according to Overgaard (2015), Hamel
and Breen (2007), Morgan (2012), is in part due to the formal communication channels
that many current organizations use. Emails being one of the more formal approaches.
However, as i already discussed, very few of the interviewed organizations did employ
more informal ways of collaborating, with the vast majority preferring to utilize their
personal network. The use of social and networked collaboration platforms, posses the
possibility of in-formalizing communication on a broader level. As one respondent said:
“…Just having somebody sitting on the other side of the table, that you are able to
say ’hey’ to. That you are able to catch a colleague and ask if they have 5 minutes
to discuss some problem. That’s very cool!”
- R6 (2015)
While the above is an example of the informal use of ones network in the company, it
underlines why inter-office relations are important. In complex projects, and organiza-
tions, the structure will resemble adhocracy (Alojairi, 2010), which by the very definition
requires more use of ones network and a more political approach to pm. It was a recur-
ring theme that respondents who dealt with more complex projects acknowledged the
political approach while respondents from less complex organizations acknowledged the
existence of bureaucracy.
5.3
The Holistic Perspective
Lets start of this section with the following quote:
“We should be in a situation where we have a conscience to match the right project-
manager with the right project type.
A project manager has one type of char-
acteristics, and so does the project. Those characteristics should be paired best
possible.”
- R11 (2015)
Page 60
==PAGE:75==
Chapter 5 Analysis
In Section 3.5 i talked about the importance of matching the right type of pm to the
right type of Project. I also discussed how one were to categorize the project type and
management style necessary to achieve project success. The above quote came from a
respondent in one of the more mature organizations that employed in-house certifications
and reflective practices. Although this organization did not classify their projects, two
of the bigger organizations had internal ratings for classifying the type of project and
the risks associated with it. This approach was also acknowledge by Barki et al. (2001)
who found that project success was more likely when risk management in projects were
matched to the risk exposure. 3 organizations in total, had internal PM certifications,
and 2 had certifications that matched their project classifications.
As such, these 3
organizations match the recommendations from Shenhar and Dvir (2007), furthermore
they understood the different management styles as put forward by Mikkelsen et al.
(2015), Shenhar and Dvir (2007). Because they also utilized customized PM approaches
and had training in place, their maturity rating, according to PricewaterhouseCoopers
(2012), is of a higher level than the rest of the organizations.
However, an area in where the organization lacked maturity, was in evaluation of the
projects.
Many of the companies, with the majority being the larger organizations,
employed internal reviews on the pm’s focused around the projects outcome. Several
of the respondents commented on the fact that pm’s could be ’unlucky’ in the sense
that they could be given a ’hard’ project with a higher risk of failing, subsequently
being reviewed on that.
This is troubling, since a project can be a success from a
PM perspective even though the project is not a success from the customers, or the
stakeholders, perspective. This a flawed way of viewing project performance according
to Aubry and Hobbs (2011), Shenhar and Dvir (2007).
This study found the same
prevalence towards utilizing hard metrics as the literature study found, although most
respondents acknowledged that the organization was ’working on something’ none had
reflective governance in place. According to PricewaterhouseCoopers (2012), to become
fully mature (Having optimised project processes) lessons-learned needs to be tracked
and knowledge should be transferable in the organization. However, as evident from the
analysis of the attitude, many did not have governance in place to allow this.
Lessons-learned and reflective practices might not be necessary in plandriven projects,
however reviewing pm’s on the content, rather than the context of the project man-
agement can be considered a flaw since the content is the combined outcome of the
organization, while the context is the work of the pm. As i discussed in Section 3.5, 4
different management styles exists according to Bøtter (2012). Complex projects require
more networking and employee interaction than less projects do, similarly to the adhoc-
racy that emerges in complex project according to Alojairi (2010). While many of the
interviewed organizations had a plan-driven approach to PM, as the de-contextualized
analysis showed, most pm’s understood the importance of applying the right approach
in the right situation, although few had the influence to do anything about it.
Tight governance and an increasing complexity of the projects is something which the
Page 61
==PAGE:76==
Chapter 5 Analysis
Danish IT-Project Council noted in their report about governmental projects (IT Pro-
jektrådet, 2015, p. 3), the same increase in complexity and governance was noted by
the respondents and was also seen as one of the attributes of Organization 3.0 (Foster,
2013). While the plandriven approach taken by many of the organizations is not inher-
ently bad, when coupled with the fact that the wrong metrics are used to evaluate pm’s,
the lack of reflective practices and the lack of proper collaboration platforms, it is clear
that the majority of the interviewed organizations are not as mature as they could be.
- Which corresponds with the findings from Lindholm (2009) who found that only 30%
of Scandinavian organizations could be considered ’modern’.
Shiv and Doraiswamy (2012) proposed 8 points that an appropriate PM methodology
should address. From the interviews, it was found that organizations utilizing custom
approaches did in fact address most of the points. However, as I already pointed out, an
area in where all lacked was the carry over of lessons learned from past projects. Only one
of the interviewed organizations had an evaluation phase extending 6-12 months from
project closure, and even then, only quantitative metrics were tracked. An area in where
most organizations did well was the establishment of a common project language. Almost
all organizations utilized some sort of project model or methodology, with a prevalence
towards more distinct models in larger organizations and less defined in smaller.
As for the choice of methodology:
“Most organizations have some sort of project methodology, the problem is that
many chose a method without realizing if the method fits the organization and
what it takes to make it work. They often ’do what others do’, no matter what the
project results show.”
- V. (2015)
With a large percentage of the organizations utilizing custom approaches, it would seem
that the above statement is incorrect. However, the lack of reflectivity on the project
process is worrying. While some of the respondents acknowledged that they personally
reflected over the process, they organizations did not. This shows how knowledge of PM
is bound to the experience of the pm, and not bound in the organization.
What is good project management?
If you do not work on the maturity of the whole
organization then the pm’s will not have the support necessary to conduct successful
projects.
You will see some projects being a success while others will fail and the
causes will be hard to pinpoint. In these cases, it is the persistence and impact of the
pm that determines the outcome and not the PM framework. As is evident from the
analysis, reviews and evaluation of past projects focuses too much on the hard metrics
thus not appreciating the value of the pm, but rather the outcome of the organization.
If organizations are to be mature, then the development of a project ’personality’ is
essential.
If done correctly it will be easier to pinpoint the cause of failure in the
organization and the evaluation and feedback of the pm will be much more valuable.
Page 62
==PAGE:77==
Chapter 5 Analysis
However, without a general framework, each analysis will emerge without a common
ground and the projects will be incomparable.
Mature organizations know that the
project manager is not a one-man army V. (2015). So why evaluate them as such?
5.4
Conclusion
It is evident that Danish organizations approach the concept of project management in
different ways. As the analysis showed, PM Methodologies and certifications are not un-
known to the organizations and they do receive merit in the daily project work. However,
most methodologies were used for inspiration which, in combination with the standard
project models, became methodologies that to a greater or lesser extent were customized
to the organization. Moreover, while certifications are popular amongst the pm’s, the
vast majority were entry level certifications, with only a few holding experience based
IPMA certifications. As such, certifications seem important for organizations, in the
sense that they provide the basic framework for PM, however not important enough to
warrant a hard requirement. On the topic of challenges, communication was identified as
the single most challenging factor of PM. Communication is a broad term, and the anal-
ysis showed that the challenges emerged both in form of knowledge sharing, but also in
attempts to collaborate. This would be due to different perspectives held by the pm’s,
as argued by Andersen (2014, 2015). The attitude towards stakeholder management
was dependent on the organization size and management type. A prevalence for direct
communication and interactive approaches in less plandriven organizations were found,
while bigger organizations with more complex projects relied more on dialogue and more
culturally established approaches to communication. On the topic of reflectivity in the
projects I found, similarly to Boas and Thorslund (2013), that Danish organizations
do not employ reflective practices to a degree that would shift their PM approach to-
wards the STS perspective. While many respondents acknowledge the importance of
communication and information in the management of projects, few organizations had
a proactive approach towards it. All organizations measured the triple constraints of
the project (the content), whereas only 3 organizations also measured the impact of the
project context. The analysis of the human-cultural subsystems showed that pm’s had
either soft or technical competences, with only 2 respondents having both. Loumann
(2015) also discussed the emergence of the importance of soft skills, which the analysis
also showed a slight prevalence towards. The respondents acknowledged the importance
of having a broad skill set as well as the importance of leadership skills, which the lit-
erature also acknowledged. Only 2 organizations emphasized both skills in their pm’s,
with the rest primarily focusing on either the soft or the hard competences. The anal-
ysis did not conclude how the the organizations emphasized the skills in project teams,
although the literature indicated that the pro-social behaviour, as opposed to the tech-
nical competences, were a success factor. The relations between the different elements of
the project were shown to be an important part of the project success. It was discussed
Page 63
==PAGE:78==
Chapter 5 Analysis
how changes permeate through the organization and how the communication channels
affected this. The importance of the inter-organizational network were important, but
few organizations had collaboration platforms in place. A distinct difference between
project types and the management style was also discussed.
Page 64
==PAGE:79==
Chapter 6
Discussion
“The P in PM is as much about ’people management’ as it is about ’project man-
agement’”
- Cornelius Fichtner (Renowned Project Management Trainer)
The following sections will discuss the findings and implications of the research. The
research generalisability and validity will also be questioned according to the research
method chosen.
6.1
Findings & Impact
The findings that the Danish organizations were not as mature as they could be is not
necessarily bad, since organizational changes towards a better PM structure do result in
increased costs in the short term (Thomas and Mullaly, 2008, p. 34-35). As such it can
be argued that the approach taken towards PM in the organizations, from a strategical
standpoint, is the most cost effective approach. However, as the study showed, there
is great potential for increased project maturity, if organizations were to adopt a more
broad attitude towards the PM approaches. The inclusion of more approaches serve
as a way to become more STS oriented, as opposed to technical oriented, which is the
current state of PM.
One of the findings that could not be generalized was the correlation between reflective
practices from the point of view of the pm and the organization. If one is to believe
Flyvbjerg (2006) and his arguments for Phronesis in place of Epistemology, then the
arguments for experience in PM, specifically soft skills, are such that they cannot be
acquired by epistemic approaches, soft skills must be acquired by experience (Rackham,
1934, ref. 6). It would seem to align with Mintzberg (1990)’s thoughts that management
should be taught through feedback and practice. There was not a clear link between
tacit and explicit knowledge in the organizations. It was found that the more mature
organizations often employed certified and experienced pm’s while also customizing their
65
==PAGE:80==
Chapter 6 Discussion
approach to PM, however it was not clear whether or not this maturity was bound in
the organization explicitly, or tacitly in the pm’s. According to Nonaka et al. (2000),
knowledge has long been considered as primarily explicit in Western epistemic literature.
However, as he argues, tacit knowledge, which is bound to the self and expressed through,
amongst other paths, culture, is as big a part of the knowledge creation process, as
explicit knowledge is. We see this in change processes were changing the culture and
beliefs of employees, is often harder than changing the work flow, which is often described
explicitly. This gives merit to Flyvbjerg (2006)’s arguments towards the tacit nature
of soft skills. The same theme emerged during the analysis, respondents acknowledged
that confidence and communication were important factors of project success.
This
was more prevalent in experienced pm’s and as several said, while the traits are known
by inexperienced pm’s, they demand actual experience to be fully understood.
The
literature and the analysis of job postings, also showed that entry level jobs as a pm
were almost non-existing, which could be caused by the rising popularity of soft skills
as described by Loumann (2015) and also acknowledged in the analysis. In fact a recent
report by World Economic Forum (2016) describes how the fourth industrial revolution
will create the need for more administrative workers, which would cause a third of the
most sought after competences in 2020, to be social. This underlines the importance
of the organizations approach towards a more socially oriented PM approach and the
inclusion of STS principles in their PM.
I will not argue whether or not Shenhar and Dvir (2007)’s approach to customizing PM
is the correct approach or not. However I would like to cite Andersen (2015) who said
the following “The challenge for the field of project management is to come up with an
approach to project management, which takes into consideration different perspectives
and proposes which methods should be used by the different perspectives.”. I believe,
as do he, that further research is necessary in the field of perspective-based PM. Of
particular note was the revelations that almost all respondent cited communication as
one of the major issues, yet very few had a dedicated approach to knowledge sharing
and collaboration. As Bøtter (2012) and Karkov, Rasmus; Bøtter et al. (2014) discusses,
the future organization will employ a larger share of freelancers and collaboration will
exist internally and externally, with a focus on innovation. However the majority of the
organizations emphasized approaches that did not satisfy the needs of the respondents.
There was a common understanding amongst the respondents that soft skills were im-
portant and while most organization heads would probably acknowledge that fact, their
lack of approaches towards structures that support these skills, show a gap between how
pm’s perceive PM and how organizations perceive PM.
Late in the process I was made aware of ’Project Half Double’ (Implement Consulting
Group et al., 2016), a cross-organizational effort in developing a new project methodol-
ogy in Denmark. It is a combined research effort of Aarhus University, The Technical
University of Denmark, Implement Consulting Group and 150+ organizations in Den-
mark, with the main goal of creating a new radical project model. Emphasis is put
Page 66
==PAGE:81==
Chapter 6 Discussion
on 3 subjects, Impact, Flow and Leadership. Impact is meant to replace the focus on
deliverables and instead look at the projects impact during the whole project duration,
i.e. a continuous reflective approach. Flow promotes ’energy’ and ’flow’ in the project
which is meant to break down barriers, i.e. ease communication. Leadership is a focus on
people and relations instead of systems, i.e. a focus on the soft paradigm. The project
is scheduled to end in April 2017 and as such, not much information has been made
available, however the effort highlight many of the same arguments I have made in this
thesis. The project effort shows that many organizations acknowledge the importance
of a new PM approach, similarly to how many respondents said that their respective
organization were working on ’something’.
6.1.1
Generalisability
Due to my inexperience with the different methodologies and approaches, this thesis did
not look into the specific differences of these. While my limited experience with project
management can be argued, I believe that this has left me impartial in the discussion
of the different methodologies. Likewise, without experience, this study has been con-
ducted in a holistic manner, with no subjectivity towards the different methodological
approaches.
The organizations did not disclose information about their approaches other than what
the respondents told me.
As such, all information regarding their PM approaches
were given by each respondent. The information is then skewed towards the subjec-
tive thoughts of each pm. This is also due to the fact that each respondent is part of
a department, which means that the data cannot be generalized to the whole company,
but only to the ’organization’. The organization is then the department or the project
in where the respondent is assigned. However, the data are still valid as a case-study,
thus the reason to anonymise the respondents where in part due to the misconception
that could arise from generalizing the ’organization’ with the ’company’.
While the sample of cases and the analysis of the approaches taken, verify the validity
of the research in comparison with the literature, it is advised to question the general-
isability of the case research. The research should be considered as a whole, and not
through the de-contextualized views presented. The following quote explains why: “A
complex system does not simply function as a collection of subsystems” - Shenhar and
Dvir (2007, p. 38). While I argued that the approach taken towards PM should be
analysed holistically through the organizational subsystems, the conclusion should not.
This research is, as I explained in Section 1.4, not a representation of best-practices or
a catch-all solution to PM. It is however, an extension of existing research, thus pro-
viding knowledge on the primarily qualitative approaches to project management and
reflections thereof. Because the research is based on management processes that exists
in most project organizations, the generalisability of the findings is then applicable to
organizations in the same industries. However, since the case study is instrumental and
Page 67
==PAGE:82==
Chapter 6 Discussion
utilizes theoretical replication, the generalisability is of less concern than the validity of
the study (Saunders et al., 2009, ch.5).
6.1.2
Validity
Yin (2003) argues that, to properly validate a study, multiple data collection methods
should be used, preferably quantitative and qualitative. The validity of this study could
then be questioned based on the one-way approach to data collection. However Snow
and Anderson (1993) argues that the validity of a multiple-method case-study can be
similarly achieved using triangulated research. To quote Snow and Anderson (1993, p.
23): “The logic underlying triangulation is rooted in the complexity of social reality
and the limitations of every research methodology.”. There will always be limitations
in a study and in this particular research study, as with certain projects, time and
resources were limited. The lack of a supportive quantitative study were mitigated by
using theory triangulating, i.e. an extensive literature review so as to grasp the different
aspects of the study subject. However the study validity would benefit from utilizing a
quantitative data collection method, i.e. a survey, to provide substance to the analysis
and the generalisability of the case.
Yin (2003) also argues that the inductive approach is not suitable for the inexperienced
researcher. According to him, this is because inexperienced researchers are more likely
to collect data without applying a general theme. While I consider myself to be inexpe-
rienced, I will argue that the research strategy and theoretical framework provided is a
suitable framework for the chosen study and as such did provide an adequate framework
for analysing emerging themes in the collected data. According to (Saunders et al., 2009,
ch. 13), to mitigate this issue, one could use grounded theory as the general research
methodology, as it provides a more structured approach to analysing the data. The 3
steps of coding, conceptualization and categorization, help identify themes or tendencies
in the data. However, a major issue of this approach is the resource intensive process,
which requires a lengthy amount of time.
Source Criticism
I will attest to the fact that several references are, in fact not aca-
demical in nature. However, if one is to conduct a case study of the ’current’ approaches
then one must also use the ’current’ literature.
As was evident from the literatures
view on PM approaches and the analysis, experience is indeed one approach to PM and
as such, sources bound in this ’experience’ has also been used to describe the different
themes.
6.1.3
Further Research
However the literature as well as the case-study also questions the PM practices in a
one-way perspective. PM has, in the literature as well as in this thesis, been seen as a
Page 68
==PAGE:83==
Chapter 6 Discussion
general theme that organizations employ. However PM practices also include the notion
of Project Management Offices (PMO), Project Portfolio Offices (PPO), the inclusion
of Lean and Kanban practices and more. These have not been discussed, but are as
important to the (bigger) project organizations as is the use of project management
itself. Further research would be necessary to establish a link between the use of these
notions and the maturity of the organizations.
It is also necessary to look at the challenges in organizations and conduct an in-depth
analysis of the challenges in certain organizations with certain pm structures. Since
the pm’s in this study were asked to identify the major challenges they faced, if any,
the responses did not answer to what degree these challenges were affecting the project.
Likewise, I stated that pm’s tended to have different perspectives (Andersen, 2014, 2015)
which again adds to the subjective nature of the study. As such, to safely conclude how
challenges affect the projects and in which way they are affected, an in-depth research
needs to be conducted on challenges and their degree of affection towards the project
structure.
6.2
Lessons Learned
I started this study without any prior experience in PM and primarily with knowledge
of the technical aspects of the project. During the course of the study I found a need not
only for applying a reflective view on the data that I collected, but also the data that
I studied prior to the data collection. The production of a thesis like this, resembles a
project in many ways and similarly to the different paradigms, I had to rely on technical
competences as well as social competences. Technical competences were necessary in the
process of producing the actual paper, while social competences were necessary in the
collection of the data. As such, one could argue that the production of a thesis resembles
the different aspects that make up a socio-technical system. Where I to do it differently,
I would focus more on the correlation between the differentiators of the organizations,
as this is an area in where this study lacks knowledge. The enquiry into certifications
and methodologies could have been wholly supported by secondary data, which would
have left resources available to perceive the soft aspect in more detail. However, this
study is explorative and the very notion of that is the fact that the results might not
amount to what one were looking for. The purpose of this section is then to convert
some of the tacit knowledge that I gained through the process, into explicit knowledge
available for students, or researches, pursuing a similar research study.
Page 69
==PAGE:84==
==PAGE:85==
Chapter 7
Conclusion
“Companies often forget about the culture and ultimately they suﬀer for it because
you can’t deliver good service from unhappy employees.”
- Tony Hsieh (CEO of Zappos)
The aim of this study is to provide an overview of the different approaches towards
project management, taken by Danish organizations. This has been done by exploring
the current field of socio-technical project management. The socio-technical system is
an open-systems theory created to explore the different aspects that affect the project
organization.
The study explores the available literature to provide an overview of
the approaches as well as to serve as the theoretical foundation for the analysis of the
organizations. Interviews were conducted with 11 project managers from 9 Danish com-
panies. They were interviewed on their perspectives towards project management and
the practices that they utilized on a daily basis. Additionally, implications of the differ-
ent approaches and the research paradigms behind them, have been outlined alongside
similar studies and current trends.
This chapter presents the conclusion to the study along with a summary of the results
and answers to the problem statement and supplementary questions.
The aim was not to provide a best-practice approach to project management, but instead
to explore the differences between the organizations as well as the roles that the different
socio-technical paradigms have in project management.
7.1
Project Management Approaches
In the problem statement I presented the following questions that this study sought to
explore:
How do Danish organizations approach the concept of project management?
Do they manage projects according to the STS-Principles and best-practices?
71
==PAGE:86==
Chapter 7 Conclusion
The analysis showed that Danish organizations, to a large degree, approach project
management in the same manner as the literature predicts. The Danish organizations
relied on existing certifications with only 3 of the respondents not holding a certification.
Likewise, all organizations evaluated their projects on hard metrics, based on the triple
constraints. Of the 9 organizations that participated in the study, none required project
managers to hold a specific certification, although 3 organizations had internal training
programs to certify their project managers. 1 of the organizations required all project
managers to take their internal certification.
The amount and level of certifications
held by the respondents, conformed with the findings from earlier studies on project
management in Denmark.
Are the approaches customized or based on existing frameworks?
The methodological approaches to project management were influenced by the common
misconception between methodologies, models and certifications. However the findings
showed that larger organizations controlled the project process through the stage-gate
model and applied frameworks that where either inspired by existing methodologies
or customized to the organization.
The project model was primarily sequential, i.e.
utilizing the waterfall approach. However, agile models were also used in special cases.
For smaller organizations the methodology were primarily affected by common project
management frameworks and certifications held by the project managers. As such, many
respondents noted that while their specific organization did not have any requirements
towards certifications, an effort was made to apply a common project language in the
organization. In these, smaller organizations, the project model was primarily agile with
several organizations working towards the use of SCRUM approaches. In short, project
management approaches are custom, however with a prevalence towards being based on
existing approaches in smaller organizations and more customized in larger. In terms
of business processes, the larger organizations, also evident from the responses, have
more governance surrounding the project and this influences the project structure and
approach.
7.1.1
Socio-Technical principles and best-practices
In this thesis, I focused on de-constructing the socio-technical approach to project man-
agement. The deconstruction showed that several approaches existed and that these to-
gether constitute the socio-technical approach to project management. The approaches
were technical, critical success factors, experience and social. Each approach was affected
by the subsystems in different ways, which also shows that while a deconstruction is use-
ful to create an overview of the subject, the complete system can only be understood
holistically when looking at the interplay between these subsystems.
What are the current approaches to PM in Danish organizations?
Page 72
==PAGE:87==
Chapter 7 Conclusion
The findings indicated that all organizations utilized the technical approach, as they all
evaluated the projects on hard metrics. However, some organizations also utilized the
social approach in their project management, choosing to focus more on team motiva-
tion. Close to a third of the organizations also utilized the experienced based approach,
evident from the lack of certifications held by the respondents. However, while most or-
ganizations utilized hard metrics, the use of the critical success factors approach was not
used since none of the organizations measured factors outside of the triple constraints.
The conclusion is that the organizations differ in their use of approaches, choosing to
support the technical approach with either the CSF, Experience or Social approach. As
such, none of the organizations utilized a socio-technical approach.
How is knowledge transferred from project to project?
Since the social aspect of project management is becoming more relevant, it was neces-
sary to look at how knowledge is transferred in the organization, and how it is transferred
from project to project. While only a subset of the organizations used the social ap-
proach, close to a third had frameworks in place to facilitate collaboration. However,
this collaboration were often superseded by personal networking.
Many respondents
mentioned the importance of being able to talk to colleagues and discuss the topic of
project management with their immediate network. In fact, communication and spar-
ring was some of the most mentioned aspects from the point of view of the project
managers. However, only 4 organizations had mentor programs in place to actively fa-
cilitate sparring. Many project managers instead relied on their project management
colleagues. The analysis showed that lessons learned primarily pertained to the project
managers and that the knowledge subsequently was bound to them and not the orga-
nization. On the topic of context versus content, as one project manager mentioned, it
was found that organizational knowledge of the content being produced was explicitly
bound in the organization, whereas the knowledge of the context were tacitly bound to
the project managers.
Do project organizations employ reflective management practices?
In order to gauge how the organizations were improving upon their own processes, it
was necessary to know how they tracked lessons learned in projects. While many of
the organizations had informal reviews, none had established official frameworks. One
organization had even abandoned their reflective approach to evaluating past projects.
While most project managers I interviewed acknowledged that they themselves were
reflective, only 3 of the organizations had reflective review processes in place. They
were mostly informal, and in one case limited to the project managing group, thus not
in any way an official framework.
Page 73
==PAGE:88==
Chapter 7 Conclusion
7.2
Summary
The study showed that the biggest differentiators between organizations were their size
and thus their approach to project management. None of the organizations followed
the socio-technical approach as set forward by the literature, however some were indeed
more mature than others.
The implications of this are not necessarily grounds for
worry, however with the growing popularity of the social processes, the organizations
will eventually have to address these concerns. The study confirms that most project
managers already know and utilize many of these processes, as such organizations will
only need to look into their own ranks and give more influence to the project managers,
to be able to explore the socio-technical approach.
Page 74
==PAGE:89==
Bibliography
Ahmed Saleh Alojairi. Project Management: A Socio-Technical Perspective. Phd, University of
Waterloo, 2010.
Erling S. Andersen. Two perspectives on project management. In Adv. Res. Proj. Tempor.
Organ., pages 140–149. Copenhagen Business School Press, Copenhagen, 1st edition, 2014.
ISBN 978-87-630-0248-6.
Erling S. Andersen. Do project managers have different perspectives on project management?
Int. J. Proj. Manag., 34(1):58–65, 2015. doi: 10.1016/j.ijproman.2015.09.007.
Beth Andres-Beck. Confidence Through Feedback, or Why Imposter Syndrome is the wrong
Metaphor, 2015. URL http://blog.bethcodes.com/confidence-through-feedback.
APMG International. Frequently Asked Questions | APMG-International, 2016. URL
http://www.apmg-international.com/faq.aspx?category=PRINCE2+FAQs.
Heli Aramo-Immonen and Hannu Vanharanta. Project management: The task of holistic
systems thinking. Hum. Factors Ergon. Manuf., 19(6):582–600, nov 2009. ISSN 10908471.
doi: 10.1002/hfm.20185.
Damián Arguimbay. Få Værdi I Projekter. Forlaget Dyssen, Hellerup, 2 edition, 2015. ISBN
9788799015641.
Jeffrey Arnett. What really motivates workers in their 20’s, 2015. URL
https://hbr.org/2015/08/what-really-motivates-workers-in-their-20s.
Monique Aubry and Brian Hobbs. A fresh look at the contribution of project management to
organizational performance. Proj. Manag. J., 42(1):3–16, 2011. ISSN 87569728. doi:
10.1002/pmj.20213.
Henri Barki, Suzanne Rivard, and Jean Talbot. An integrative contingency model of software
project risk management. J. Manage., 1222(May):37–41, 2001. ISSN 07421222. doi:
10.1080/07421222.2001.11045666.
Walid Belassi and Oya Icmeli Tukel. A new framework for determining critical success/failure
factors in projects. Int. J. Proj. Manag., 14(3):141–151, 1996. ISSN 02637863. doi:
10.1016/0263-7863(95)00064-X.
Adnane Belout and Clothilde Gauvreau. Factors influencing project success: the impact of
human resource management. Int. J. Proj. Manag., 22(1):1–11, 2004. ISSN 02637863. doi:
10.1016/S0263-7863(03)00003-6.
75
==PAGE:90==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
H. Russel Bernard. Research Methods In Anthropology. AltaMira Press, fourth edi edition,
2011. ISBN 978-0759112421.
Ethan Bernstein, Francesca Gino, and Bradley Staats. Opening the Valve: From Software to
Hardware (A). Technical report, Harvard Business School, 2014.
Charlotte Boas and Michael Thorslund. Reflective project management. PhD thesis, Technical
University of Denmark, 2013.
Jacob Bøtter. NQ: Involvering med sociale medier. Wemind A/S, 1 edition, 2012. ISBN
978-87-994151-0-6.
Carolyn Boyce and Evaluation Associate. Conducting in-depth interviews: A Guide for
designing and conducting in-depth interviews. Evaluation, 2(May):1–16, 2006.
Reva Berman Brown. Doing Your Dissertation in Business and Management: The Reality of
Researching and Writing. SAGE Publishing, 2006. ISBN 9781847877970.
Manuel Castells. Conclusion. In Rise Netw. Soc., pages 500–509. Wiley Publishing, 2nd
edition, 2010. ISBN 9781405196864.
Allan J. Christensen. Jeg ansætter kun folk med høj EQ, 2015. URL http://christensen.
blogs.business.dk/2015/11/23/jeg-ansaetter-kun-folk-med-hoj-eq/.
D. Cohen and B. Crabtree. Qualitative research guidelines project, 2006. URL
http://www.qualres.org/HomeSemi-3629.html.
Terry Cooke-Davies. The “real” success factors on projects. Int. J. Proj. Manag., 20(3):
185–190, 2002. ISSN 02637863. doi: 10.1016/S0263-7863(01)00067-9.
Robert G. Cooper. Stage-Gate and Agile Development: Debunking the Myths | Stage-Gate
International, 2016. URL
http://www.stage-gate.com/resources_stage-gate_agile.php.
Lee Copeland. Extreme Programming, 2001. URL http://www.computerworld.com/
article/2585634/app-development/extreme-programming.html.
Lynn Crawford, Julien Pollack, and David England. Uncovering the trends in project
management: Journal emphases over the last 10 years. Int. J. Proj. Manag., 24:175–184,
2006. doi: doi:10.1016/j.ijproman.2005.10.005.
Amy Cuddy. Your body language shapes who you are, 2012. URL
https://www.ted.com/talks/amy_cuddy_your_body_language_shapes_who_you_are.
DanskErhverv.dk. Generation Z, 2008. URL
https://www.danskerhverv.dk/Raadgivning/Uddannelse/ansaettelse-af-elever/
Documents/Fremtidensarbejdskraft-generationz2.pdf.
Sm Du and Rd Johnson. Project management courses in IS graduate programs: What is being
taught? J. Inf. Syst. Educ., 15(2):182–188, 2004.
John Dudovskiy. Interpretivism, 2015. URL
http://research-methodology.net/research-philosophy/interpretivism/.
Page 76
==PAGE:91==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
S El-Sabaa. The skills and career path of an effective project manager. Int. J. Proj. Manag., 19
(1):1–7, 2001. ISSN 02637863. doi: 10.1016/S0263-7863(99)00034-4.
ESI International. Esi international talent drain fact sheet. Technical report, www.esi-intl.com,
2013a. URL http://www.strategyex.com/resources/knowledge-center/
thought-leadership/project-management/$\sim$/media/Files/Public-Site/US/POVs/
ESI14FEB_TalentDrainFactSheet.ashx.
ESI International. ESI Annual Salary Survey. Technical report, ESI International, 2013b. URL
http://www.strategyex.com/$\sim$/media/Files/Public-Site/US/Research-Reports/
ESI-2013-Project-Manager-Salary-and-Development-Survey.
European Commision. What is an SME?, 2015. URL http://ec.europa.eu/growth/smes/
business-friendly-environment/sme-definition/index_en.htm.
Joe Feagin, Anthony Orum, and Ildeon Sjoberg. A Case for the Case Study. UNC Press
Books, 1991. ISBN 0807843210.
Bent Flyvbjerg. Social science that matters. foresight Eur., 2(october 2005 - march 2006):
38–42, 2006.
Joyce Fortune, Diana White, Kam Jugdev, and Derek Walker. Looking again at current
practice in project management. Int. J. Manag. Proj. Bus., 4(4):553–572, 2011. ISSN
1753-8378. doi: 10.1108/17538371111164010.
Philip Foster. Organization 3.0 - The Evolution of Leadership and Organizational Theories
Towards an Open System for the 21st Century. Maximum Change Press, Murfreesboro,
2013. ISBN 06158744x.
Mark Freeman and Peter Beale. Measuring Project Success. Proj. Manag. J., 23(1):8–17, 1992.
ISSN 8756-9728.
John Gravois. You’re Not Fooling Anyone. Chron. High. Educ., 54(11), nov 2007. ISSN
ISSN-0009-5982.
Sara Grex. Arbejde, Innovation og Projekter. PhD thesis, Technical University of Denmark,
Lyngby, 2011.
Terri L. Griffith and Deborah J. Dougherty. Beyond socio-technical systems: introduction to
the special issue. J. Eng. Technol. Manag., 18(3-4):207–218, 2001. ISSN 09234748. doi:
10.1016/S0923-4748(01)00034-0.
Gary Hamel. Moon shots for management. Harv. Bus. Rev., 87(2), 2009. ISSN 00178012.
Gary Hamel and Bill Breen. The Future of Management, volume 14. Harvard Business School
Publishing, Boston, Massachusetts, 2007. ISBN 978-1-4221-0250-3. doi:
10.1057/palgrave.bm.2550064. URL http://www.amazon.com/dp/1422102505.
Alexander Haslund. Denne it-certificering er ikke en bønne værd, 2013. URL http://www.
computerworld.dk/art/224490/denne-it-certificering-er-ikke-en-boenne-vaerd.
Steen Hildebrandt. En Organisationsmodel, 2011. URL
http://www.steenhildebrandt.dk/2011/09/en-organisationsmodel/.
Page 77
==PAGE:92==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Jia I A HU and ROBERT C Liden. Making a Difference in the Teamwork: Linking Team
Prosocial Motivation To Team Processes and Effectiveness. Acad. Manag. J., 58(4):
1102–1127, 2015. ISSN 00014273. doi: 10.5465/amj.2012.1142.
Irja Hyväri. Project management effectiveness in project-oriented business organizations. Int.
J. Proj. Manag., 24(3):216–225, 2006. doi: 10.1016/j.ijproman.2005.09.001.
Ingeniørforeningen IDA. En god styregruppe sikrer succesfulde projekter, 2016. URL https:
//universe.ida.dk/ledelse/en-god-styregruppe-sikrer-succesfulde-projekter/.
Implement Consulting Group, Aarhus University, and DTU. Project Half Double, 2016. URL
http://www.projecthalfdouble.dk/.
IT Projektrådet. Status 1. halvår 2014. Technical report, IT Projektrådet, København, 2014.
URL http://www.itprojektraad.dk/$\sim$/media/Files/Statusrapporteringen/
Statusrapporter/Status1halvaar2014/Statusrapport1halvaar2014.ashx.
IT Projektrådet. Status 1. halvår 2015. Technical report, IT Projektrådet, København, 2015.
URL http://www.digst.dk/$\sim$/media/Files/Styring/Ny-struktur_Marts-2015/
6-Statusrapportering/Nye-projekter/STATUS-1-halvaar-2015.pdf.
Jesper Frederik Gottlieb. Freelance. Interview, 2015.
Thomas J Jugdev K. and C Delisle. Rethinking project management: Old truths and new
insights. Int. Proj. Manag. J., 7(1):36–43, 2001.
Jacob Karkov, Rasmus; Bøtter, Jacob Bøtter, and Rasmus Karkov. Udefra. Gyldendal, 1
edition, 2014. ISBN 978-87-02-15324-8.
Daniel Katz and Robert L. Kahn. The Social Psychology of Organizations. Wiley Publishing,
1978. ISBN 0471023558.
John Kidd. Project management software — are we being over-persuaded? Int. J. Proj.
Manag., 8(2):109–115, 1990. ISSN 02637863. doi: 10.1016/0263-7863(90)90046-E.
J.P. Kotter. Leading change. Harvard Bus. Sch. Press, 1996. ISSN 1071-2984.
Mathias Kraft and Cecilie Agertoft. Ny undersøgelse: Medarbejdere flygter fra dårlige ledere,
2015. URL http://www.avisen.dk/
ny-undersoegelse-medarbejdere-flygter-fra-daarlige-l_359736.aspx.
Steinar Kvale. Interview : En introduktion til det kvalitative forskningsinterview, volume 1.
udgave. Hans Reitzel, 1997. ISBN 8741228162.
Steinar Kvale. The Dominance of Dialogical Interview Research. In Lauge Baungaard
Rasmussen, editor, Facil. Chang., chapter 13, pages 358–372. Polyteknisk Forlag, 1 edition,
2011. ISBN 9788750209973.
Mackenzie Kyle. Making it happen: A non-technical Guide to Project Management. John
Wiley & Sons, 1 edition, 1998.
Harold J. Leavitt and G. March James. Applied organizational change in industry: Structural,
technological and humanistic approaches. Technical report, Carnegie Institute of Technology,
Graduate School of Industrial Administration, Pittsburgh, 1962.
Page 78
==PAGE:93==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Marianne Levinsen. Generation Z - Årtiet hvor børnene fik en selvstændig stemme i
familiedemokratiet, 2011. URL
http://www.fremforsk.dk/vis_artikel.asp?AjrDcmntId=384.
Matthew J Liberatore and Bruce Pollack-johnson. Project Management in Construction:
Software Use and Research Directions. J. Constr. Eng. Manag. ·, 127(April 2001):101–107,
2011. doi: 10.1061/(ASCE)0733-9364(2001)127.
Mikael R. Lindholm. Scandinavian management model makes good bottom lines, 2009. URL
https://www.mm.dk/scandinavian-management-model-makes-good-bottom-lines.
Henry Linger and Jill Owen. The project as social system : Asia-Pacific perspectives on project
management. Monash University, 2012. ISBN 9781921867040.
Metha Loumann. De bløde værdier er på vej ind i projektledelse, nov 2015. URL
http://karriere.jobfinder.dk/artikel/
de-blode-vaerdier-er-pa-vej-ind-i-projektledelse-3770.
Siw Lundqvist and Leif Marcusson. Advertisements for Ict Project Managers Show Diversity
Between Swedish Employers’ and Project Management Associations’ Views of Pm
Certifications. Probl. Manag. 21st Century, 9(1):35–55, 2014. ISSN 20296932.
V. Mahnic and N. Zabkar. Measuring progress of scrum-based software projects. Elektron. ir
Elektrotechnika, 18(8):73–76, 2012. ISSN 13921215. doi: 10.5755/j01.eee.18.8.2630.
Naresh K. Malhotra, David F. Birks, and Peter Wills. Marketing Research : An Applied
Approach. Prentice Hall, 2012. ISBN 0273706896.
Daniel Markowitch. How Visual Systems Make It Easier to Track Knowledge Work, 2015. URL
https:
//hbr.org/2015/09/how-visual-systems-make-it-easier-to-track-knowledge-work.
Carter McNamara. General Guidelines for Conducting Research Interview, 2015. URL
http://managementhelp.org/businessresearch/interviews.htm.
Mogens Mikkelsen, Leading Complex Projects, B Kan, Kompleksitetsteori Ralph Stacy, and
Certainty Matrix. Kompleksitet - Kan du blive i sadlen, hvis projektet sejler? Dansk Proj.,
pages 39–41, 2015.
H Mintzberg. The manager’s job: Folklore and fact. Harvard Bus. Rev. nr 2, 1990.
Kjetil Moløkken-Østvold and Nils Christian Haugen. Combining estimates with planning poker
- An empirical study. Proc. Aust. Softw. Eng. Conf. ASWEC, pages 349–358, 2007. ISSN
1530-0803. doi: 10.1109/ASWEC.2007.15.
Gareth Morgan. Images of organization. SAGE Publishing, 2006.
Jacob Morgan. The Collaborative Organization. McGraw-Hill, 2012. ISBN 9780071782302.
Jacob Morgan. The future of work. John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, 1st edition, 2014. ISBN
978-1-118-87724-1.
Ralf Müller and Rodney Turner. The Influence of Project Managers on Project Success
Criteria and Project Success by Type of Project. Eur. Manag. J., 25(4):298–309, aug 2007.
ISSN 02632373. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.emj.2007.06.003.
Page 79
==PAGE:94==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Ralf Müller and Rodney Turner. Leadership competency profiles of successful project
managers. Int. J. Proj. Manag., 28(5):437–448, 2010. ISSN 0263-7863. doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijproman.2009.09.003.
Enid Mumford. A Socio-Technical Approach to Systems Design. Requir. Eng., 5(2):125–133,
2000. ISSN 0947-3602. doi: 10.1007/PL00010345.
Michael D Mumford, Stephen J Zaccaro, Julie F Johnson, Marisa Diana, Janelle a Gilbert, and
K.Victoria Threlfall. Patterns of leader characteristics. Leadersh. Q., 11(1):115–133, 2000.
ISSN 10489843. doi: 10.1016/S1048-9843(99)00045-4.
Emily E. Namey and Robert T. Trotter. Qualitative Research Methods. In Publich Heal. Res.
Methods, pages 443–483. SAGE Publishing, 1993.
Shazia Nauman, Azhar Mansur Khan, and Nadeem Ehsan. Patterns of empowerment and
leadership style in project environment. Int. J. Proj. Manag., 28(7):638–649, oct 2010. ISSN
02637863. doi: 10.1016/j.ijproman.2009.11.013.
J Nevan Wright. Time and budget: the twin imperatives of a project sponsor. Int. J. Proj.
Manag., 15(3):181–186, 1997. ISSN 02637863. doi: 10.1016/S0263-7863(96)00059-2.
Ikujiro Nonaka, Ryoko Toyama, and Noboru Konno. SECI, Ba and Leadership: a Unified
Model of Dynamic Knowledge Creation. Long Range Plann., 33(1):5–34, feb 2000. ISSN
00246301. doi: 10.1016/S0024-6301(99)00115-6.
Niels Overgaard. Det moderne arbejdsliv er idiotisk, 2015. URL http:
//overgaard.blogs.business.dk/2015/11/06/det-moderne-arbejdsliv-er-idiotisk/.
J. Packendorff. Inquiring into the temporary organization: New directions for project
management research. Scand. J. Manag., 11(4):319–333, 1995. ISSN 09565221. doi:
10.1016/0956-5221(95)00018-Q.
Ira Pant and Bassam Baroudi. Project management education: The human skills imperative.
Int. J. Proj. Manag., 26(2):124–128, 2008. ISSN 02637863. doi:
10.1016/j.ijproman.2007.05.010.
Daniel H. Pink. Drive: The surprising truth about what motivates us. Riverhead Books, 2009.
ISBN 9781594488849. doi: 10.1002/casp. URL
http://book.douban.com/subject/3885056/.
PMI North American Congress, Steve Fahrenkrog, Fred Abrams, Williams Haeck, and David
Whelbourn. PMI Organizational Maturity Model, 2003. URL
http://www.pmi.org/learning/pmi-organizational-maturity-model-7666.
Julien Pollack. The Changing Paradigms of Project Management. Int. J. Proj. Manag., 25(3):
266–274, 2007. doi: doi:10.1016/j.ijproman.2006.08.002.
Stanley Portny E. Project Management for Dummies. Wiley Publishing, 3rd edition, 2010.
ISBN 978-0-470-57452-2.
Poul Skaldhede. Valcon case presentation and consultancy introduction. Valcon business case
presentation at Nova Forum 2015 on 29.9.15 at Ramboll HQ, sep 2015.
Page 80
==PAGE:95==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
PricewaterhouseCoopers. Insights and Trends: Current Portfolio, Programme, and Project
Management Practices. Technical report, PwC, 2012.
R1. Respondent 1. Interview conducted on-site 28.10.15, oct 2015.
R10. Respondent 10. Interview conducted onsite 2.12.15, dec 2015.
R11. Respondent 11. Interview conducted over telephone 7.12.15, dec 2015.
R2. Respondent 2. Interview conducted over telephone 10.11.15, nov 2015.
R3. Respondent 3. Interview conducted onsite 10.11.15, nov 2015.
R4. Respondent 4. Interview conducted onsite 18.11.15, nov 2015.
R5. Respondent 5. Interview conducted over telephone 18.11.15, nov 2015.
R6. Respondent 6. Interview conducted onsite 19.11.15, nov 2015.
R7. Respondent 7. Interview conducted over video-conference 20.11.15, nov 2015.
R8. Respondent 8. Interview conducted over telephone 24.11.15, nov 2015.
R9. Respondent 9. Interview conducted onsite 27.11.15, nov 2015.
H. Rackham. Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics, 1934. URL http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/
hopper/text?doc=Perseus%3Atext%3A1999.01.0054%3Abekker+page%3D1142a.
Donald Remer S and Emily Ross M. Review of Project and Engineering Management
Certifications Offered by Professional Organizations. Eng. Manag. Journal. , Vol. 26 Issue,
9247(December):p3–12., 2014. ISSN 1042-9247. doi: 10.1080/10429247.2014.11432023.
Colin Robson and Second Edition. Real World Research. Wiley, 2002. ISBN 9780631213048.
J. Rodney Turner. Towards a theory of project management: The nature of the project. Int. J.
Proj. Manag., 24(1):1–3, 2006. ISSN 02637863. doi: 10.1016/j.ijproman.2005.11.007.
Julia Rozovsky. The five keys to a successful Google Team, 2015. URL
https://rework.withgoogle.com/blog/five-keys-to-a-successful-google-team/.
RUC and Mannaz. Hvordan går det, ProjektDanmark? Projektlederundersøgelsen 2014.
Technical report, Roskilde Universitet, Roskilde, 2014. URL http:
//www.mannaz.com/da/projektledelse/mannaz-projektlederundersoegelsen-2014/.
Rasmus Rytter, Jesper Krøyer Lind, and Per Svejvig. Gevinstrealisering: Skab mere værdi i
dine projekter. Akademisk Forlag, København, 1st edition, 2015. ISBN 9788750044987.
Mark Saunders, Phillip Lewis, and Adrian Thornhill. Research methods for business students.
Pearson, 5 edition, 2009. ISBN 978-0-273-71686-0.
SCRUM Alliance. FAQ - Scrum Alliance. URL https://www.scrumalliance.org/faqs.
Aaron J. Shenhar and Dov Dvir. Toward a typological theory of project management. Res.
Policy, 25(4):607–632, 1996. ISSN 00487333. doi: 10.1016/0048-7333(95)00877-2.
Page 81
==PAGE:96==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Aaron J. Shenhar and Dov Dvir. Reinventing Project Management: The Diamond Approach to
Successful Growth and Innovation. Harvard Business School Publishing, Boston,
Massachusetts, 1st edition, 2007. ISBN 1591398002.
Premi Shiv and Premanand Doraiswamy. Project Methodology. In 50 Top IT Proj. Manag.
Challenges, chapter Project Me, pages 26–27. IT Governance Ltd, 1 edition, 2012. ISBN
9781849283410.
David A. Snow and Leon Anderson. Down on Their Luck: A Study of Homeless Street People.
University of California Press, 1993. ISBN 0520913019.
Jonas Söderlund. Building theories of project management: past research, questions for the
future. Int. J. Proj. Manag., 22(3):183–191, 2004. ISSN 02637863. doi:
10.1016/S0263-7863(03)00070-X.
Robert E. Stake. The Art of Case Study Research. SAGE Publications, 1995. ISBN
080395767X.
Hirotaka Takeuchi and Ikujiro Nonaka. The New New Product Development Game, 1986.
ISSN 0017-8012.
The Wharton School. Is Your Team Too Big? Too Small? Whats the right number?, 2006.
URL http://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/article/
is-your-team-too-big-too-small-whats-the-right-number-2/.
Janice Thomas and Mark Mullaly. Researching the Value of Project Management. Project
Management Institute, 2008. ISBN 978-1933890494.
E. L. Trist and K. W. Bamforth. Some Social and Psychological Consequences of the
Longxwall Method of Coal-Getting. Hum. Relations, 4(1):3–38, 1951. ISSN 0018-7267. doi:
10.1177/001872675100400101.
Daniel W Turner. Qualitative Interview Design: A Practical Guide for Novice Investigators.
Qual. Rep., 15(3):754–760, 2010. ISSN 10520147.
J.Rodney Rodney Turner, Ralf Müller, and J.Rodney Rodney Turner. On the nature of the
project as a temporary organization. Int. J. Proj. Manag., 21(1):1–8, 2003. ISSN 02637863.
doi: 10.1016/S0263-7863(02)00020-0.
Anette V. Skal – skal ikke – Om certificering af projektledere: Er det unødvendig spild af tid
og penge eller er det dumt at lade være?, 2015. URL
https://xvoto.wordpress.com/2015/09/08/.
John Wateridge. How can IS/IT projects be measured for success? Int. J. Proj. Manag., 16(1):
59–63, 1998. doi: 10.1016/S0263-7863(97)00022-7.
Terry Williams, Ole Jonny Klakegg, Derek H. T. Walker, Bjørn Andersen, and Ole Morten
Magnussen. Identifying and Acting on Early Warning Signs in Complex Projects. Proj.
Manag. J., 43(2):37–53, 2012. doi: 10.1002/pmj.21259.
M Winter, C Smith, P Morris, and S Cicmil. Directions for future research in project
management: The main findings of a UK government-funded research network. Int. J. Proj.
Manag., 24(8):638–649, 2006. ISSN 02637863. doi: 10.1016/j.ijproman.2006.08.009.
Page 82
==PAGE:97==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
World Economic Forum. The Future of Jobs - Employment, Skills and Workforce Strategy for
the Fourth Industrial Revolution. Technical report, World Economic Forum, Geneva, 2016.
URL http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_FOJ_Executive_Summary_Jobs.pdf.
Robert K. Yin. Case Study Research: Design and Methods. SAGE Publishing, 3rd edition,
2003. ISBN 076192552X.
Zappos. Zappos and Holacracy, 2016. URL
http://www.zapposinsights.com/about/holacracy.
Page 83
==PAGE:98==
==PAGE:99==
Appendix A
Interview Protocol
85
==PAGE:100==
Appendix A Interview Protocol
Interview Guide
Respondent
Personal
• Job Responsibilities
• Former Projects
• Competences
• Thoughts on PM
• Quotes
1. Years of experience with PM?
2. Brieﬂy explain current and former project types?
3. Competences acquired, certiﬁcations, PM educa-
tions?
——— Ending Questions ———
4. Your thoughts on current and future PM?
5. Can i quote you?
Company
Structure+Technology
• Project Methodology & Model
• Standards & Requirements
• Project & Company Structure
• Change Management
1. Explain your project methodology or model?
2. What is your company’s view on certiﬁcates and train-
ing?
3. How do your organization- and projectstructure look
like? (Culture?)
4. What is your view on change management in PM?
5. Are your team, or your organization, prepared for
change?
PM
Tasks
• Challenges
• Success & Failure Factors
• PM Approach
• PM Goals and Evaluations
1. How do you deal with unknown tasks?
2. Greatest challenges in PM?
3. CSF and Failure examples?
4. In a typical project, how inﬂuental are you?
5. Which parts of the project are you controlling?
6. How do you measure and evaluate projects?
Team & Environment
People+Culture
• Knowledge Sharing
• Communication
• Reﬂective Practices
• Open Innovation
• Montor Mentee
1. What’s your approach to knowledge sharing?
2. How do you compose your teams?
3. How is the communication in the team/company?
4. Are you proactive in regards to new PM/Management
trends?
5. Open Innovation in the Organization?
6. Do you have a sparring partner/network or mentor?
Page 86
==PAGE:101==
Appendix B
Respondent Matrix
87
==PAGE:102==
Appendix B Respondent Matrix
Appendix B: Respondent Matrix
✓denotes yes, x denotes no, - Not clear or not applicable
R1
R2
R3
R4
R5
R6
R7
R8
R9
R10
R11
Personal
Certiﬁcations
PRINCE2
SCRUM
PRINCE2
P3O
x
IPMA
PRINCE2
PRINCE2
ITIL
IPMA
x
x
IPMA
PRINCE2
SCRUM
PMI
Agile
SCRUM
Reﬂective Thinking
✓
-
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
-
x
✓
✓
Inﬂuence in Org.
x
✓
✓
✓
x
x
✓
x
x
✓
✓
Technical Comp.
✓
x
x
-
✓
x
✓
✓
✓
x
x
Soft Comp.
-
✓
✓
-
✓
✓
x
✓
x
✓
✓
Organization/Department
Size
Small
Big
Small
Small
Big
Big
Big
Medium
Big
Big
Big
Management type
Political
Plandriven
Agile
Political
Plandriven
Political
Plandriven
Plandriven
Plandriven
Entrepre-
neurial
Plandriven
Structure
Pure
Project
Balanced
Matrix
-
Pure
Project
Balanced
Matrix
Pure
Project
Balanced
Matrix
Weak
Matrix
Balanced
Matrix
Strong
Matrix
Balanced
Matrix
Project Model
Agile
Stage-
Gate
(Water-
fall)
Agile
Agile
Waterfall
(PRINCE2)
Stage-
Gate
(-)
Stage-
Gate
(Water-
fall)
Stage-
Gate
(Custom)
Custom
-
Stage-
Gate
(PMI)
In-House training
x
✓
x
x
x
✓
✓
x
✓
-
✓
Hard Paradigm
’Hard’ Certiﬁcation Requirement
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
-
x
’Soft’ Certiﬁcation Requirement
✓
✓
x
✓
✓
✓
✓
x
x
✓
x
Technical Comp.
x
✓
x
✓
✓
x
✓
✓
x
x
✓
Project Software
-
✓
✓
-
-
-
✓
x
✓
✓
-
Soft Paradigm
Soft Skills
x
x
✓
x
✓
✓
x
x
✓
✓
✓
Reﬂective Practices
x
x
✓
x
x
x
x
x
x
✓
✓
Mentor/Mentee Programs
x
x
-
x
x
✓
✓
x
✓
✓
-
Collaboration Software
x
✓
✓
x
x
-
✓
x
x
-
-
Page 88
==PAGE:103==
Appendix C
Respondent Summary
R1 (2015)
noted that the choice of methodology (Agile) was not made on the grounds
of any analysis but was simply chosen since most members of the department knew of
SCRUM. The reason was change management, since the change process was easier. All
pm’s had either a PRINCE2® or a SCRUM certification, however few had any major
technical competences. This was due to the organization being political in nature, which
as R1 (2015) noted “Technical PM can be outsourced, Political PM cannot.”.
Challenges: A structured approach
R2 (2015)
have been in charge of developing the organizations custom stage-gate PM
model based on the PRINCE2® terminology. Since the organization is relatively big,
the projects are under the control of the quality department with the pm’s sharing
his responsibility with different team-leads. The organization utilizes strict governance
which is one of the main reasons for utilizing methodologies and customizing them to
the organization. They also found that existing non-organization communities where
utilized by its pm’s and is working to create an official pm community. According to
the respondent, the parent organization is a bureaucracy, however the local facility is
very forward and open for new suggestions an ideas. - Though they do not employ any
official frameworks for reflectively looking into projects.
Challenges: Communication
R3 (2015)
thinks certifications are ’dangerous’ in the sense that the choice of a common
certification amongst the pm’s is a sign of weakness of the management. I.e. manage-
ment are threatened by new approaches and a different way of thinking so they try to
standardize the process. The agile approach undertaken in the department was due to
its relatively small size and its multi-skilled team members. The respondent argues that
there are 3 different approaches to PM: 1) The technical way, 2) The customer oriented
way and 3) The business oriented way. This demands 3 types of pm’s, which is also why
larger projects need these types and why the title ’project manager’ is dying since so
89
==PAGE:104==
Appendix C Respondent Summary
many different approaches exist. A sparringpartner (Respondent did not like the men-
tor/mentee designation) is helpful because people tend to think one-way. The partner
discussion helps with issues, new ideas and a general streamlining of ones personality.
As the respondent said: “Success makes you arrogant and failure makes you question
yourself.”
Challenges: Makeshift Solutions, Incompatible needs between stakeholders.
R4 (2015)
is a new project leader in the organization and acknowledges the efficiency of
the new organization. As opposed to the old one, the current, wastes very little time on
meetings and concentrates on producing work. However, due to the innovative nature,
discussions have to be limited to the project, otherwise unproductive discussions emerge.
The organization uses qualitative reflection of the projects, however it is on a case by
case basis, so no official framework exists.
Challenges: Getting resources,
R5 (2015)
focuses on the soft aspect of PM, but do have a technical background. The
organization does not employ reflective practices or have a mentor/mentee program in
place.
However they do have a Peer Review Process in place, which evaluates each
project and pm, before launch. Though they only evaluate based on the classic project
triangle. Has a personal set of CSF’s which are 1) Being motivating, 2) Being focused,
i.e. understanding the end-goals of the project and being able to communicate them
and 3) Having strength in methods, ie. to be able to use the right ’tool’ for the right
job and to use ones experience in combination with ones education.
Challenges: Motivation
R6 (2015)
is a new project manager in the department and relies on the colleagues and
mentor programme to learn the organization and business processes. The organization
is openly structured with no particular level of bureaucracy. A reflective framework is
not implemented however reviews are conducted on the projects, but only the triple
constraints are measured. This causes inequality in the review process since one can
be ’lucky’ and get an ’easy’ project, while others can get ’hard’ projects requiring in-
tensive project management. In the end they are reviewed in the same way, - accord-
ing to the customers success and not from the point of view of the project manager.
Knowledge-sharing exists as an official pro-active approach but does not employ any
forms of collaboration software, it is networking only.
Challenges: Communication, Stakeholder Management
R7 (2015)
The organization has a wide-ranging internal PM education, loosely based on
IPMA, which all pm’s are able to participate in. For that reason, no ’hard’ requirement
are put upon new pm’s.
The organizational structure is informal, however there is
Page 90
==PAGE:105==
Appendix C Respondent Summary
bureaucracy relating to governance. The department works with a custom waterfall-
based stage-gate model with some elements being Agile. They use internal PM- and
Collaboration-software, however physical meeting are preferred. There is no reflective
approach to measuring project success and only quantitative KPI’s are collected.
Challenges: Communication, Stakeholder Management
R8 (2015)
Believes that one’s ’track record’ is more useful than a certification. Cer-
tification are thus not prioritized, similarly the organization does not have a dedicated
project methodology, although they do utilize a stage-gate project model. Currently,
an effort is made to develop a dedicated project methodology. Networking is used for
consulting with technical members of the project and other pm’s, however they do not
have any official approach. The biggest issue is the misaligned goals of the sales and PM
department. Sales members will try to up-sell, which causes problems when balancing
the triple constraints. - I.e. they have an issue with ’scope-creep’.
Challenges: Misaligned Goals, Communication between departments
R9 (2015)
The organization has an internal PM education with 4 levels, similar to
IPMA. These levels are used to categorize projects in risks, and a project member of
the same applicable level is assigned to it. On occasion, several pm’s are assigned and
share responsibility within the soft- and hard-paradigm. No reflective practices exists
in regards to project evaluation and triple constraint evaluation is similarly limited.
Evaluation and project success is almost entirely up to the customer. However efforts
are made to improve this.
Challenges: Communication, Balancing Expectations
R10 (2015)
Holds several certifications of varying levels and beliefs strongly in the
effectiveness of certifications as long as they require experience as part of the certification.
Does not hold any technical competences but focuses on the political side of PM with a
reflective approach to the human aspect.
Challenges: Getting appropriate backing from the steering committee
R11 (2015)
The organization has no hard or soft demands for certifications or for
that matter a project methodology. They develop and train their pm’s according to
their internal PM education which is loosely based on PMI. They did have a reflective
approach for project evaluation but the approach was abandonded. They do conduct
de-briefing of project success, however it is not a standardized approach. They are very
focused on balancing the soft- and hard-approaches of project management, however
teams are based purely on technical competences.
Challenges: Motivating the team, Balancing goals
Page 91
==PAGE:106==
==PAGE:107==
==PAGE:108==
Christian Holm Christiansen
MSc. Management Engineering
ChristianHolmChristiansen@gmail.com
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Management Engineering
Produktionstorvet, Building 424
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
Tel. 45 4525 4800
Fax. 45 4593 3435
www.man.dtu.dk
