==PAGE:1==
Master thesis  
Technical University of Denmark 
31-01-2015 
1 
 
Modelling Sensitivities of Optical Components and 
Thermal Expansion in a Laser for Robust Re-Design 
 
Authors:  
Benjamin N. Teinby  
Christian W. Kaiser  
 
 
 
Co-authors:  
Peter M. W. Skovgaard CEO 
Norlase  
Senior researcher DTU 
Photonics Ole B. Jensen  
 
Supervisor  
Associate Professor Thomas 
J. Howard 
PhD Student Simon M. 
Göhler 
Abstract: 
The performance of a laser is highly influenced by thermal expansion caused by temperature changes 
during operation. A high beam pointing stability is a critical parameter that is required for many 
applications.  
 
Presented in this paper, is a methodology for robust optimization and re-designing of an optical product. 
A sensitivity analysis is used to gain detailed insight into the behavior of the system, with the sensitivities 
of optical components mapped using response surface methodology. A thermal displacement analysis is 
used in combination with the sensitivity analysis, to identify how to robustly optimize and redesign the 
product.  
 
A case is presented where the response surfaces revealed interaction effects that resulted in sensitivity 
changes for the optical components. An optimum is found where the position of a single component 
reduces the sensitivities of all previous components. A robust positioning method is presented for 
positioning of key components such that the optimal positions are achieved. 
 
Keywords: Sensitivity analysis, Response surface modeling, Robust optimization, Thermal Analysis  
 
1  Introduction 
 
This paper presents a methodology on how to identify the most critical components of an optical product, 
that is subjected to thermal expansion, for robust optimization and redesign.  
A case will be presented where the methodology is applied and the optical product is optimized and 
robustly redesigned. 
 
When optimizing products, a separation is made between controllable parameters and uncontrollable 
parameters. According to A. Bendell et al. the Taguchi method, states that the controllable parameters are 
factors decided by the designer, while the uncontrollable parameters are noise factors [Bendell et al. 
1989]. The noise factors can be variation in production and operational environment such as the given 
tolerances for a process and thermal expansion. The robust product should ideally be insensitive to this 
variation. 
 
==PAGE:2==
Master thesis  
Technical University of Denmark 
31-01-2015 
2 
 
The expansion or contraction of materials, when heated or cooled, is due to the change in energy level 
among the atoms in the metal. Raising the energy level by heating the metal, will cause the atoms to 
increase the average distance between them. [Padmavathi 2011]  How much a material changes in size 
(the fractional change) per temperature change, is commonly referred to as the material’s coefficient of 
thermal expansion (CTE) [Lauritsen et al. 2007]. If the heated object is restrained, the thermal expansion 
introduces stresses in the material that will cause it to bend and warp.  
 
Optical products, namely those containing a laser, have strict requirements from their customers. A key 
critical parameter is the stability of the laser relative to temperature fluctuations. A laser can be assembled 
at a given temperature, however the cooling systems used by the customers can vary. The temperature 
change causes slight movement of the optical components from their assembled positions. This affects 
both the position of the outgoing laser beam, measured as translational offset, and the angle of the beam, 
measured as angular displacement. The beam pointing stability is commonly defined as µ(10-6)-radians 
per degree Celsius, referring to angular displacement relative to a temperature change. A high beam 
pointing stability corresponds to a low value: low angular displacement during temperature change.  
 
The angular displacement is the most critical factor of the beam displacement, as the beam position 
becomes worse as the distance increases from the laser. If the angle of the laser beam changes while it is 
operational, it becomes a problem for the user, as the equipment has to be adjusted. The translational 
offset of the beam from its nominal position is also important, but unlike angular displacement, this does 
not become worse with an increased distance.  
To indicate the two variables, the stability of angular displacement and translational offset, two quality 
loss functions have been sketched below see figure 1 and 2. 
 
Figure 1           
 
Figure 2 
 
In the Taguchi Method, the loss of quality is related to a loss for the society [Lochner and Matar 1990]. In 
this case, the loss corresponds to customer dissatisfaction with the product.  
The quality loss functions above may not be the same for every optical product, but will look similar. In 
terms of optical components and the quality/loss function, it is important that the product have a stable 
outgoing beam angle and position throughout its entire use-phase.  
==PAGE:3==
Master thesis  
Technical University of Denmark 
31-01-2015 
3 
 
2 Background 
In the literature, there are several cases where optical products have been optimized, [Carlos A et al 2006, 
Chung et al. 2009, Gelman and Maliah 2007, Giesen and Folgering 2003], this is usually done by 
compensating the existing design electronically or mechanically. Other studies show how a sensitivity 
analysis have been applied in order to indicate the most critical components [Carl Blaurock et al. 2005, 
Van Voorhees and Bahill 1995, Lenderink and Stehouwer, 2008]. 
However no study was found that combined the use of a sensitivity analysis and a thermal analysis, to 
robustly optimize and redesign an optical product. 
2.2 Robust Design 
The idea of Robust Design is to design products such that the performance of the product is insensitive to 
variations that may occur during production, assembly and by external loads. [Ebro et al. 2012]. 
According to Taguchi, there is a loss for society when the performance of a function of a product deviates 
from the intended performance. Generally speaking, the more the performance deviates, the bigger the 
loss will be [Lochner and Matar 1990] 
 
Taguchi’s method is in simplified terms, a way of getting the quality early into the design stage instead of 
merely assessing the products in the quality control stage [Wilson et al.1990] 
2.2.1 Design clarity  
The principle of design clarity is among the tools, which can and should be used early on in the design 
phase according to Ebro et al. [Ebro et al. 2012]. 
Design clarity’s principle states that there should be no ambiguity concerning the design of interfaces. 
This means that a higher design clarity is achieved by e.g. having two surfaces touch each other in a point 
rather than the entire surfaces. 
 
Having ambiguity in the design can be a problem when heat is distributed unevenly throughout the part. 
This will make some parts of the product expand (or contract) more than other parts. Holes connecting the 
different parts can be made to fit nominally, but with both product variation and variation in operationg 
environment, stresses at the holes will occur. This can cause warpage, which in turn will affect the 
performance of the product if no compensating initiatives are taken.  
 
Places where two parts has to touch, must be designed so that the contacting points or surfaces are clearly 
defined, while regardless of production (or temperature) variation no performance loss occurs. 
 
2.2.2 Sensitivity analysis 
There are a number of well described methods to doing sensitivity analysis in the literature. For simple 
systems, the method of Design of Experiments (DOE) or Fractional Factorial Design [Lochner and Matar 
1990], reduce the number of experimental runs needed for a traditional Full Factorial Experiment [Box 
and Draper 1987]. However when analyzing complex systems with a high number of variables, and where 
higher order interactions are predicted or are likely to occur, the aliasing or confounding of variables and 
interactions in the Fractional Factorial design becomes a problem to the full understanding of the system. 
Say variable A is confounded with the interaction of variables B and C (BC). If the estimated effects of 
==PAGE:4==
Master thesis  
Technical University of Denmark 
31-01-2015 
4 
 
(A confounded with BC) is of significant size, we will be unable to say whether it is due to the variable A 
or the effects of the BC interaction.   
For a full factorial experiment, all possible combinations of variations, for all variables, are investigated. 
For systems with a high number of variables, a full factorial experiment can require a great deal of 
resources and is generally not preferred. Instead Response Surface Methodology can be used [Box and 
Draper 1987]. 
In the response surface methodology, the experimenter can carefully chose key variables to investigate 
parts of the multi dimensional hyperplane created from the full factorial experiments.   
From the relevant response surfaces, information about how the system response is affected by second 
order interaction effects, is revealed. The experimenter can use this information to optimise the 
investigated system, or product, to where the system has the desired response. 
 
Throughout this paper, the following terminology will be used: 
System response describes how the investigated “output parameter” changes when a change in input 
variables is introduced. 
A Variable is an input parameter that relates the system response. For instance, an optical component can 
have several input variables (e.g. x,y,z,Rx,Ry,Rz positions in the optical system), that may affect the 
optical system’s performance.  
 
2.2.3 Describing the sensitivity relation  
There are several ways of describing the relation between input variation and change in response 
parameter. The literature mentions absolute, relative, and semi relative sensitivity functions [Smith et al. 
2008]. The relative and semi relative sensitivity relations both use percentage changes to input parameters 
When analyzing movements of optical components where the input parameters are the x, y, z coordinates 
along with rotations and tilt of components, which can be zero, a percentage change in input parameter is 
impossible to calculate unless related to an additional parameter. The absolute relation will therefore be 
used as the sensitivity relation through this study. The absolute relation is defined as the change in 
measured system response relative to a change in input parameters [Smith et al. 2008].  
It is important to note that using the absolute relation, the sensitivities of e.g. beam angle stability relative 
to translational input cannot be directly compared with the sensitivities relative to rotational input. 
However, by combining the displacements found in the thermal displacement analysis, with the optical 
components’ sensitivity to displacement, the component’s contribution to the system response is revealed. 
The effectiveness of optimization can thus be seen on e.g. the stability of the system response. 
 
3 Methods 
A three-stage method was developed to be used as an evaluation and design tool for optimization and 
redesign. The method was developed with redesign of optical products in focus. The method can be used 
to analyze and identify key sensitive components, relative to given response parameters. The results from 
the analysis can be combined with the principles of robust design, for robust optimization and redesign. 
  
 
 
==PAGE:5==
Master thesis  
Technical University of Denmark 
31-01-2015 
5 
 
The method of analysis consists of the following stages:  
1. A thermal displacement analysis to understand how the investigated noise factor affects the 
product. 
2. A sensitivity analysis to understand system behavior and identify key sensitive components. 
3. A process of verification and validation of computer models and simulations. 
 
The sensitivities found in the sensitivity analysis can be combined with the displacements found in the 
thermal displacement analysis, to evaluate the effects on system performance. Depending on how the 
interaction-effects affect the system response, the combination of sensitivities and displacements can 
reveal optimums, where the combination of variables produce a desired system response. The information 
can be used by the designer to robustly optimize and redesign the system. 
3.1 Thermal displacement analysis  
To be able to analyze an optical product, e.g. a laser, thermally, detailed knowledge on how much heat is 
transferred and to where, is necessary.  
Commonly used for lasers, are active cooling systems. A potential cooling system has to be specified 
since the light source will generate heat and needs to be cooled in some way. How the product is being 
heated and cooled, determines the temperature distribution and thus how it expands. Once this is known, a 
CAD model of the product can be used to simulate how the heat distributes through the product. The 
result: a temperature distribution of how the heat dissipates throughout the product. 
This result can be transferred to a displacement simulation, simulating the thermal expansion occurring in 
the model, given the temperatures from the previous simulation. The simulation should yield a deformed 
model where the displacements of each optical component can be calculated. These displacements can be 
used as new positions for the optical components, to simulate the effects on beam stability, using ray-
tracing software.  
 
The output of the laser beam gives an indication of how well the product performs under different 
simulated temperatures. This is helpful as a benchmark when making new designs of the product, so that 
it does not become necessary to produce a physical model of each design iteration, to see whether 
performance was improved or not.  
3.2 Sensitivity analysis 
Box and draper discusses, that gaining early understanding of the system variables, can help the 
experimenter narrow down search for the important areas to investigate [Box and Draper 1987]. They 
propose a 2-level factorial experiment, where each variable has only 2 levels. Using 2 incremental steps 
e.g. [0;1] only reveal linear relations between input and output parameters. A variable near a local 
maximum or minimum, will thus appear to be insensitive to variation. However for systems with a high 
number of variables, simple first order experiments can be used, to gain understanding on how each 
variable individually affects the system response. From this, key variables can be identified for a higher 
order analysis, where the interaction effects are investigated by plotting relating response surfaces. 
For optical setups, ray tracing software such as Radiant Zemax® can be used to simulate the system 
responses caused by changes to input variables, e.g. the displacement of components. 
 
==PAGE:6==
Master thesis  
Technical University of Denmark 
31-01-2015 
6 
 
In a first order experiment, each of the variables are moved individually, to 
find the relation between them and the system response, see figure 3. In 
relation to optical setups, the variables, for each of the components, are 
individually moved in all degrees of freedom(x, y, z, Rx, Ry, Rz), using 
several incremental steps, to identify the individual sensitivity of the 
components. This does however not reveal any information about the 
interaction effects between components. A second or higher order analysis 
is needed for this. 
 
Mathematically describing the individual relation between the variables 
and the output parameters, can be combined with the first order sensitivity 
analysis, to identify variables that have negligible effects on the overall system performance. These 
variables can be excluded from the higher order sensitivity analysis. Assumptions must be made here, that 
the excluded variables does not change the sensitivity of the remaining variables. 
 
An example of this is a piece of glass, with smooth parallel surfaces, within an optical laser system. When 
the output parameter considered, is the angle of the outgoing laser beam, the glass has no effect on its 
own. If the surface of the glass is at an angle to the incoming laser beam, the beam will be translated 
parallel to the original direction, but no angle will be introduced. If a lens is situated after the glass, the 
parallel translation of the laser beam will introduce an angle due to the curvature of the lens’ surface. 
However, if the lens has a linear effect on the laser beam, relative to the position of the incoming laser 
beam, then regardless of how the glass is rotated, the glass will not change the sensitivity of the lens. The 
glass can thus be excluded from the higher order sensitivity analysis.    
 
A second order analysis can then be designed for the remaining variables, 
where interaction effects are investigated by varying multiple parameters 
at the same time. From the second order analysis, response surfaces can 
be plotted to reveal how the system response is changed, when multiple 
parameters are changed See figure 4. From the response surfaces, 
decisions for redesign and optimization can be made, where the 
combination of certain variables gives a desired system response. 
 
In relation to the optical laser system, the stability of the laser describes 
how stable the optical system is, during temperature variations. This variation can be attributed to the 
individual movement of the optical components within the laser, which can be measured as a change in 
outgoing laser beam position. Investigating the relevant interaction effects can reveal optimal positions, 
for investigated components, which reduce the overall sensitivity of the system. 
 
To find which variables to optimize for, the sensitivities of each variable can be combined with other 
parameters such as; how severely they are exposed to or influenced by noise factors e.g. thermal 
expansion. Variables may be influenced more or less by noise factors, and it is thus the combination of 
their sensitivities and the exposure to noise, that reveal which variables are most important to optimize 
for. 
 
Figure 3 
Figure 4 
==PAGE:7==
Master thesis  
Technical University of Denmark 
31-01-2015 
7 
 
3.3 Validation  
The validation of the thermal analysis can be done with a simple probe, measuring temperature. 
Temperatures on key points, measured on e.g. a running laser can then be compared to the temperature 
distribution achieved through simulations. Validating the simulated displacements can be difficult when 
the temperature change is small, as the delta change in length is practically immeasurable without highly 
accurate equipment, that might be inaccessible. Instead, the effects of the thermal displacements, on the 
systems performance, can be found through experiments and compared to simulated results. However, 
significant noise factors, e.g. production/assembly variance, are present here which can impact the results, 
and make validation difficult. If inconsistent results are seen, the experimenter must try to identify and 
reduce noise factors, to achieve a cleaner result. 
 
Validating the sensitivities of an optical system can be difficult, as precise positioning, in terms of x, y, z 
coordinates on a physical system, is difficult to measure. Optical components are rarely placed based on 
coordinates, but rather on a rough estimate of where it should be, and then precise adjustments can be 
made until the desired effect is achieved. The result is that important optical components e.g. lenses, 
might be rotated/ tilted slightly or can be translational off by a fraction of a millimeter. This inaccuracy in 
positioning, may give little or no change in the desired effect of the lens, but will have an impact on the 
sensitivities of the components in the setup.  
Instead the components can either be validated individually, or the system can be validated through the 
second order effects. If for instance the second order sensitivity analysis predict that adjusting a given 
component results in certain changes to the sensitivities of other components, the experimenters can seek 
to replicate this effect. If the effects can be replicated, the experimenters must try to measure, in the extent 
possible, the positions of the components at certain sensitivities, i.e. a local minimum or maximum, to 
verify that it matches the simulated positions. 
4. Results 
The authors have developed a methodology for making optical systems more robust, which can be applied 
for most of these types of products. To illustrate this, the methodology is used to increase the stability of a 
Norlase Aps laser system.  
 
4.1 Case: Norlase Aps laser 
4.1.1 Introduction to Norlase Aps laser system 
Norlase Aps is a Danish company designing, developing and producing lasers for several application 
areas. Important to all areas are performance and stability of the lasers. With the current technology used, 
active cooling is a necessity which, depending on the system, can vary the operating temperature of the 
laser. An area that has not yet been investigated by Norlase Aps, is the reason for beam pointing stability 
issues related to running a laser unit, with cooling systems at a wide range of cooling fluid temperatures. 
 
The purpose of the analysis is to increase the angular beam pointing stability of the laser when exposed to 
thermal expansion. This can be done by either reducing the noise factors (reducing the thermal expansion 
or its effect) or reduce the optical systems sensitivity towards thermal expansion.  
 
==PAGE:8==
Master thesis  
Technical University of Denmark 
31-01-2015 
8 
 
 
Figure 5 
 
On figure 5, the representation of optical components used inside the laser can be seen. They are as 
follows: (1) the laser, (2) lens, (3) lens, (4) isolator, (5) mirror, (6&7) double lens, (8) mirror, (9) crystal, 
(10) lens, (11) tilted glass, (12) lens, (13) second tilted glass, (14) exit glass mounted in the lid. 
 
The light produced by the laser(1), or “light source”, is being collimated by the combination of the first 
two lenses(2 and 3). The laser and the lenses 2 and 3, are mounted on a peltier element, which ensures a 
stable temperature, regardless of the cooling system. These 3 components are therefore black boxed as 
one component, with the output being a collimated laser beam. 
 
The combination of the lenses (6&7), (10), and (12) ensures a focus in the middle of the crystal, along 
with adjusting to the desired beam width and collimation of the beam. See appendix 1 for how light is 
refracted through a curved surface. The components (4), (9), (11), (13), and (14) can be regarded as solid 
pieces of glass with smooth parallel surfaces. See appendix 1 for lateral shift through glass with parallel 
plane surfaces.  All the components, except the exit glass (14) is placed on a piece of aluminum, referred 
to as the baseplate.  
 
The ray-tracing software Radiant Zemax® was used to model the optical setup, and to simulate the effects 
of thermal expansion on the system performance.  
 
For the conducted experiments, described further on, as well as for the Radiant Zemax® model, the 
system output response is registered on a “detector surface”: The surface is divided into an x-/y-axis 
coordinate system, that registers the x, y coordinates of the laser beam centroid. For the Zemax® model, 
two surfaces can be used to find the angle of the beam. See appendix 2, for calculation of angular system 
response, and translational offset.  
 
For easy comparison, the measured system response will be referred relative to the “Horizontal” or 
“Vertical” axis on the detectors.  
==PAGE:9==
Master thesis  
Technical University of Denmark 
31-01-2015 
9 
 
 
4.1.2 Thermal and displacement analysis  
To see how the heat dissipated in Norlase’s product when it is switched on, the system was simulated in 
SolidWorks® including the active cooling plate beneath the laser. To get the right conditions, the right 
thermal resistance and convection had to be calculated, see appendix 3 for example of this. The main heat 
source is the laser, which is mounted on a peltier element that transfers the heat to the baseplate. To keep 
the laser at a constant temperature, roughly 40W of heat has to be moved. To simulate this, the 40W is 
applied to the surface in contact with the peltier element. The crystal is also mounted on a peltier element. 
However the crystal has to be kept at a constant temperature of around 60 degrees Celsius. Thus the 
peltier element is cooling the baseplate, of roughly 2W, to heat up the crystal. Several simulations were 
run, using different cooling fluid temperatures, that was then compared to the experimental data, see 
appendix 4. The simulations was then adjusted to make them correspond to the experimental data as good 
as possible.  
 
Figure 6 shows the temperature distribution from a simulation at 28 degrees Celsius. 
 
 
Figure 6 
Following the thermal simulation, a displacement simulation was set up to simulate the movement of the 
components, as a result of the temperature distribution. The results of the displacement simulation, is the 
displaced positions of the components, which were then transferred to Zemax® to see the effect on the 
beam. Figure 7 and 8 show the simulated beam pointing stability based on the simulated displacements. 
 
Figure 7   
 
 
 
 
Figure 8 
==PAGE:10==
Master thesis  
Technical University of Denmark 
31-01-2015 
10 
 
4.1.2.1 Validating displacements through Beam stability experiments 
The displacement simulations were sought to be validated through experiments.  
A fully assembled laser unit were mounted on a cooling plate using a liquid cooling system, and rigged to 
a detector. The effects of changing the cooling fluid temperature, on the angular displacement of the laser 
beam, can then be measured. 
 
A beam stability experiment had been conducted prior to the project by Norlase themselves. A second 
experiment was performed to replicate the results. On figure 9 and 10, the angular beam displacement 
measured for the two experiments, along with the simulated system response, is plotted.  
The curves show the relative displacement at an assumed temperature of around 20 degrees Celsius, of 
the cooling fluid, used during assembly. 
 
At cooling fluid temperatures below 25 degrees Celsius, the performance measured in “Second 
experiment” show roughly the same behavior as the simulated performance in the horizontal axis, though 
the experimental laser is more stable. However not much else lines up. The experimental points on the 
graph are the calculated average based on measurements of centroid positioning of the beam. See 
appendix 4 for more details on the data from the experiments. 
 
Figure 9   
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10 
 
One of the noise factors found to influence the stability of the system, was positioning and adjustments of 
the optical components, made during assembly. The optical components are positioned based on their 
effect on the laser beam: whether the beam is collimated, where the focus is, the size of the desired beam, 
and/or the direction the beam has to go.  
  
Theoretically the optimal positions of the optical components can be calculated very precisely. However 
in reality slight variations in the positions of the optical components occur. If one component is a little 
off, corrections will be made, to bring the laser beam back on track, using the following components to 
adjust with. The actual positions of the optical components mounted on the baseplate can thus differ by 
millimeters or degrees according to Norlase. Errors that are easily correctable using e.g. the mirrors or 
lenses. Different variations within the optical setup were simulated in Zemax®, where components were 
intentionally put slightly off nominal positions, and downstream components were then adjusted to 
correct for new positions, so that the beam is still collimated with the right beam width.  
 
==PAGE:11==
Master thesis  
Technical University of Denmark 
31-01-2015 
11 
 
 
Figure 11 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 12 
 
 
As can be seen on figure 11 and 12, the system stability is highly affected by the component positioning. 
See appendix 5 for further information.  
The next section will explain in detail, the effects of variation in components positioning, and how to use 
this to increase system stability. 
 
4.1.3 Increasing system stability, by reducing component sensitivity  
A first order analysis was conducted to map the individual behavior of each of the components within the 
optical system. The first order analysis showed that the collimated laser, lenses, and mirrors are the most 
sensitive components in the setup. As expected the “glass” components held little responsibility to the 
overall system sensitivity. See appendix 15 for further information and graphs of the first order sensitivity 
of the components. 
Table 1   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 2 
 
 
Table 1 and 2, show the first order sensitivities of the components. 
All of the investigated components, except the crystal (9), are symmetrical orthogonally around the laser 
beam axis, e.g lens 10 and 12’s x-/y-axis, or lens 6&7’s x-/z-axis. Slight deviations are seen though, 
which are the result of computational approximation within Zemax®. The lenses were tested individually 
in Zemax® and found to behave symmetrically. The sensitivities of the symmetrical axis of the 
components will be regarded as symmetrical and the average was used. 
 
It was found that the curved surfaces of the lenses, can be held responsible for the angular displacement 
seen when the components, viewed as pieces of “glass”, are rotated. The parallel offset in beam position 
x
y
z
rx
ry
rz
1 Laser
0,0741
0,0822
0
0,2560
0,2623
0
2 Lens
-
-
-
-
-
-
3 Lens
-
-
-
-
-
-
4 Isolator
0
0
0
0,0348
0,0305
0
5 Mirror
0
0,1020
0,1095
0,2593
0,2222
0
6&7 Lens
0,1847
0,00003
0,1795
0,0134
0,0135
0
8 Mirror
0
0,2725
0,2725
0,0647
0,0403
0
9 Crystal 
0
0
0
0,0752
0,0999
0
10 Lens
0,7564
0,7719
3,80E-05
0,0092
0,0092
0
11 Tilted glass sheet
0
0
0
0,0190
0,0186
0
12 Lens
1,0427
1,0602
4,77E-06
0,0123
0,0123
0
13 Tilted glass sheet 2
0
0
0
0,0000
0,0000
14 Exit glass
0
0
0
0,0000
0,0000
0
Angular beam displacement - Sensitivity Ratio
Average Ratio, response/input
x
y
z
rx
ry
rz
3,3983
3,3505
0
1,1439
1,1532
0
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0
0
0
1,0777
1,0889
0
0
3,3892
3,3676
10,1770
7,0939
0
8,1325
7,06E-05
8,1283
0,2128
0,2130
0
0
4,7277
4,7277
8,3135
5,8164
0
0
0
0
1,3756
1,4015
0
3,7723
3,7509
2,48E-05
0,0088
0,0088
0
0
0
0
0,0182
0,0179
0
0,0134
0,0282
3,91E-06
0,0115
0,0115
0
0
0
0
0,0210
0,0164
0
0
0
0,0117
0,0117
0
Translational beam offset - Sensitivity Ratio
Average Ratio, response/input
==PAGE:12==
Master thesis  
Technical University of Denmark 
31-01-2015 
12 
 
refracts differently, as the beam is no longer being refracted symmetrically around the center of the 
curved surface of the lens. With several lenses used in the system, their effect on the sensitivities of the 
components are thus also determined by the distance between them. The distance between the lenses 
determine how far, from nominal position, an angular displaced laser beam gets before being refracted 
again by the next lens.  It is seen that lens 6&7 show little sensitivity despite having the furthest distance 
to lens 12. The combination of focal length and distance between 10 and 12, is thus correcting for the 
angular displacement introduced by lens 6&7, and components prior to it. 
A hypothesis can then be set up, that the distance between the lenses determines the overall sensitivity of 
this optical system.  A second order analysis was thus conducted to test this hypothesis. The distance 
between the lenses would be varied, and the sensitivities of the lenses and mirrors would then be mapped 
again. Response surfaces could then be plotted. 
 
Figure 13 show the response surface for lens 6&7 as a function of change in lens 12’s position, and lens 
6&7 being moved orthogonally to the laser beam(the X-direction). See appendix 6 for more information. 
 
The “Position of lens 12” refers to the position of lens 
12 in the longitudinal direction of the laser beam. When 
lens 12 is moved, the distance between lens 10 and 12 
changes, e.g at (-1mm) lens 12 is moved 1mm closer to 
lens 10.  It is the effect of this distance change that is 
plotted. The position of lens 12 marked “0”, denotes the 
nominal position optimised for beam size and 
collimation. 
Despite being altered by the positional change of lens 12, 
the output/input relation, for 6&7’s variation in the x-axis, 
remained linear and can thus be viewed 2 dimensionally. 
This linear behavior was seen for all investigated components.  
 
In Figure 14 and 15, the sensitivity ratios of the investigated three lenses and two mirrors are plotted as a 
function of change in lens 12’s position. It was found that the distance between lens 10 and 12 had a huge 
impact on the beam angle sensitivities of the investigated components 
 
 
Figure 14 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 15 
Beam offset sensitivities remained largely unchanged during variation of distance between lenses, see 
appendix 6. Variation in distance between lens 6&7 and 10, had little to no effect, as the sensitivities for 
Figure 13 
==PAGE:13==
Master thesis  
Technical University of Denmark 
31-01-2015 
13 
 
both angle and offset remained unchanged, see appendix 6. The second order effects of orthogonal 
variation of lens 12, relative to the laser beam, was also found to be negligible, see appendix 7. 
By moving lens 12, such that the distance to lens 10 decreases, a possible optimum can be found, where 
the optical system is least sensitive to displacements.  
 
By multiplying the individual component sensitivities, translational [deg/mm] or rotational [deg/deg] with 
the simulated thermal displacements [mm] or [deg] respectively, the component’s contribution to beam 
angular displacement of the laser beam can be plotted, see figure 16 and 17.  See appendix 8 for more 
details.  
Important to remember is, that it is the relative movement between the components that causes angular 
displacements. Therefore the relative movement between components is used 
 
Figure 16 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 17 
 
 
As the contributions to beam angular displacement are now in the same unit for translational and 
rotational contribution, they can be combined and compared. By summing the contributions for each 
position of lens 12, the “optimum” is revealed, where the combined contribution to beam angular 
displacement is the lowest. See figure 18. This shows where the system is least affected by the thermal 
displacement. 
 
It’s important to note that the magnitude of the angular 
displacement only corresponds to the investigated 
components and displacements used. In the full system, 
more components exist and displacements in all 6 degrees 
of freedom contributes to the combined system response.  
To illustrate the effects on the full system, of adjusting lens 
12 to the found optimum (-1mm), the thermal displacement 
simulation results are used. Figure 19 and 20, show the 
original setup vs. the effects of changing the distance 
between lens 10 and 12.  
 
Figure 18 
==PAGE:14==
Master thesis  
Technical University of Denmark 
31-01-2015 
14 
 
 
Figure 19 
 
 
 
 
Figure 20 
See appendix 10 for graphs related to offset stability. 
As can be seen on figure 19 and 20 the found optimum, where lens 12 is moved 1mm closer to lens 10, 
increases the overall system beam pointing stability. In appendix 10, graphs for translational beam offset 
stability can be seen, where the positional change of lens 12 has little to no effect. In table 3, the beam 
stability for each of the curves can be seen.   
 
Table 3 
 
It is seen that the angular beam displacement relative to a temperature change, is reduced for the found 
optimum for the position of lens 12. In the range 20 to 32 degree Celsius for the liquid cooling fluid, the 
system has become almost insensitive to temperature variation, for the found optimum.  
In the range 10 to 16 degrees Celsius, the µ-radians per temperature variation has also been decreased by 
34% from the nominal setup. However, it can be seen that having lens 12 in the nominal position minus 
2mm, the µ-radians per temperature variation can be further reduced. Depending on the temperature used 
in the liquid cooling system, 2 different optimums for the position of lens 12, can be found. When 
combined, in the range 16 to 32 degrees Celsius the 
distance between lenses 10 and 12 (minus one 
millimeter) gives the best beam pointing stability.  
 
The trade-off for the increased beam pointing 
stability, see table 4, is that the angle of divergence 
of the beam is changed, along with changes to beam 
width. Using the found optimum will increase the 
angle of divergence by 0,152milli radians. Whether 
this is acceptable, depends on customer 
specifications. 
 
Beam Pointing Stability - Horisontal axis: [µrad/degree Celsius]
Vertical Axis:
10 to 16 
[deg C]
16 to 20 
[deg C]
20 to 32 [deg 
C]
10 to 32 [deg 
C]
Position of lens 12 + 1mm
7,11
1,25
7,00
0,28
Original nominal positions
5,28
1,42
3,69
0,48
Position of lens 12 -0,5mm
4,44
1,58
2,06
0,59
Position of lens 12 - 1mm
3,50
1,58
0,39
0,70
Position of lens 12 - 2mm
1,67
1,75
2,89
0,90
Cooling fluid temp. Interval: 
[degree Celsius]
Change in angle 
of divergence
[mrad]
Position of lens 12 + 1mm
-0,017
Original nominal positions
0,000
Position of lens 12 -0,5mm
0,058
Position of lens 12 - 1mm
0,152
Position of lens 12 - 2mm
0,403
Table 4 
==PAGE:15==
Master thesis  
Technical University of Denmark 
31-01-2015 
15 
 
An experimental rig was set up, to try and verify if such an optimum did exist. A 3 lens setup was used 
which is a simplified version of the full setup, see appendix 11 for explanation. The experiments showed 
that adjusting the position of lens 12, did in fact alter the sensitivities of the previous components. See 
appendix 11 for details. It was proven that an optimum could be found for the sensitivity of lens 6&7. 
However, the substitute for lens 12 did not behave as predicted in the simulations.  
From the experiment it was found, that an angle introduced by a variation in e.g. lens 6&7’s position, will 
be changed as it refracts through the curved surfaces of the following lenses. How much it is changed, is 
determined by the focal lengths. As the interaction effects between the lenses is determined by the 
combination of focal lengths, a given optimum found for a certain combination of lenses, will therefore 
not necessarily be valid if a lens is swapped and the combination of focal lengths change.  
 
4.1.4 Robust positioning of lenses during assembly 
From the sensitivity analysis and the optimum found for the position of lens 12, a new practical design for 
implementation of this knowledge was developed. The design used Robust design principles to place the 
components at their optimal position, making them the least sensitive towards thermal expansion. The 
design uses individually designed mounts for component 10, 11 and 12 together with holes in the 
baseplate to align them on the same place every time see figure 21.   
 
Figure 21 
When Norlase assemble the optical setup for the laser, the laser has to be ON, which produces heat. This 
means that the components are adjusted for any nominal thermal expansion in the base plate. During 
manufacturing of the base plate, the temperature is different, which means that the holes for the new 
mounts has to be adjusted accordingly.  
 
Norlase currently adjust the positions of lens 10 and 12, to fit any variation in beam direction, caused by 
slight variation in earlier components. The Fixed position of lens 10 and 12, thus require that the laser is 
“aimed” to hit the center of the lenses every time. Two precisely manufactured laser targets with a pinhole 
through each, will be placed in the positioning hole for the mounts, for the lenses. See appendix 12 for 
details and assembly sequence.  
With these in place, when the mirrors are positioned, the laser beam can be aimed to hit through the 
pinholes, and thus hit the center of the lenses every time.  
==PAGE:16==
Master thesis  
Technical University of Denmark 
31-01-2015 
16 
 
 
Production and environmental variation do occur, however with the lenses in their “optimal” positions, 
the sensitivity to such variation is greatly reduced. In figure 22 and 23, simulations of the worst case 
tolerance stack-up scenarios are shown.[See appendix 12 for worst case tolerance stack ups]. It can be 
seen that the worst-case production variation has little effect on the system’s angular beam pointing 
stability, as well as translational beam offset stability. See appendix 16 for graphs and beam pointing 
stability table. 
 
Figure 22 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 23 
 
4.1.5 Redesign by reducing the thermal expansion noise factor 
Reducing the sensitivity of the system is one way of eliminating the effects of noise factors. Another is to 
reduce the magnitude, or eliminate the noise factor altogether. This section presents a solution, where the 
thermal displacement noise factor is reduced, and beam pointing stability is increased with the optical 
setup in its original nominal positions.   
 
The noise from thermal expansion can be compensated for in 3 ways; reduce the material’s CTE, reduce 
the temperature difference, or design the baseplate so that thermal expansion only happens in insensitive 
areas. Multiple new designs were simulated in SolidWorks® to see the effect of isolating the heat and 
preventing it from dissipating throughout the baseplate. The movement of the components found here 
would then be entered in Radiant Zemax® to simulate the effects on beam stability. See appendix 13. 
 
It was found that trying to limit the dissipation of heat, by adding groves or removing material, in a one-
piece baseplate, instead provoked an uneven temperature distribution throughout the baseplate. The 
uneven temperature distribution caused an uneven expansion, that resulted in the base plate bending and 
warping. See appendix 13 for more information.  
The conclusion was that given the current layout of the base plate, and the customer requirements, 
attempts to limit the dissipation of heat produced by the laser, is not the optimal strategy for increasing 
beam pointing stability. See appendix 13 for list of requirements. 
 
A slightly different design was proposed, that showed better beam pointing stability than the original base 
plate design. 
The current baseplate has to transport the heat generated by the laser, to the cooling plate, and thus a high 
thermal conductivity is preferred. Aluminum has a high thermal conductivity, but also a high thermal 
expansion rate. By decoupling the function of transporting heat, with the stability required for the rest of 
the base plate, other materials can be chosen.  
==PAGE:17==
Master thesis  
Technical University of Denmark 
31-01-2015 
17 
 
The solution has been designed according to robust design principles, including axiomatic design, 
tolerance design and design clarity.  
 
 
 
The design utilizes a piece of Controlled Expansion alloy (CE-alloy) [Sandvik] to place the light source 
on, while the rest of the baseplate consists of steel see figure 24. The CE-alloy has the low thermal 
expansion of steel but almost the thermal conductivity of aluminum, making it ideal for this purpose.  See 
appendix 14 for further details on solution, including tolerance chains. This solution did however prove to 
be rather expensive compared to the original design, due to the price of the CE-alloy, see quotation for 
CE-alloy in appendix 9.   
 
Figure 25 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 26 
As can be seen on figure 25 and 26, the proposed design show an increased beam pointing stability, 
compared to the original base plate design. The low thermal conductivity of the steel baseplate meant that 
little heat from the laser was transported to the baseplate. The two part design enabled efficient isolation 
of heat transportation. This combined with the low thermal expansion rate of steel, results in an improved 
beam pointing stability. 
Figure 24 
==PAGE:18==
Master thesis  
Technical University of Denmark 
31-01-2015 
18 
 
5. Discussion of results 
The methodology developed and presented in this paper gives an in depth insight to the most critical 
components of an optical product.  
Much of the literature concerning similar topics is focused on factorial designs, or Fractional Factorial 
designs. However when the system to be analyzed, contains a large number of variables, and are believed 
to be influenced by higher order interaction effects, this method provide an alternative approach that 
enables the designer to gain insights into the system behavior. Based on the experimental data, the 
designer is able to draw conclusions on how best to optimize and redesign.  
 
Combining the thermal displacement simulations with the first order sensitivity analysis, detailed 
information about which components are most severely exposed, can be gained at an early stage. Already, 
this information gives the designer directions for the possible solution space, along with knowledge about 
possible second or higher order interactions effects. The designer is then able to commit resources to 
investigate the interaction effects, with going through every combination.   
 
Few components were identified as the significant cause of performance loss in the presented case. The 
second order response surface analysis showed that optimums do exist, where the combination of 
distances and focal lengths, for the used lenses, results in a low system sensitivity. The distance between 
lens 10 and 12, proved to be the significant parameter to optimize, for a high beam pointing stability.  
 
Through the physical experiments the authors became aware, that unknown noise factors, has a major 
impact on system performance. As was seen in figure 9 and 10 the beam pointing stability, measured in 
the “Second experiment”, only matches the simulated stability, using cooling fluid temperatures in the 
range of 15 to 25 degree Celsius . Furthermore there were large inconsistencies between the two 
conducted experiments. 
It was found that the positional variation of components introduced by necessary adjustments during 
assembly, has a significant impact on beam pointing stability, as was seen in figure 19 and 20: It is 
possible that the two lasers, used for the experiments, had significantly different component positions, 
resulting in the varied performance. 
 
Validating the found optimum and behavior of the components proved difficult. It was not possible to 
build a full replica of the entire system. Instead a 3 lens system, representing a simplified version of the 
full system, were used to prove that an optimum could be found.   
It was found that the lens 6&7 substitute had a similar behavior to that of lens 6&7 used in the real setup. 
Worse was that the lens 10 substitute showed a behavior opposite to that found for the simulated 
substitute lens 10. The cause of the changed behavior has not yet been identified. 
As the focal lengths were different for the substitutes, the optimum found for the substitute lens 6&7, was 
at a different distance between the two substitutes for 10 and 12, than the optimum found for the full 
setup. This suggest that an optimum can be achieved for several combination of lenses, where adjusting 
the last lens will reduce the entire system’s displacement sensitivity.  
 
==PAGE:19==
Master thesis  
Technical University of Denmark 
31-01-2015 
19 
 
6. Conclusion 
In this paper a combination of methods was developed such that detailed insight into system behaviour 
can be gained, without the need for large experimental design schemes.  
 
In the presented case, the response surface analysis revealed an optimum, where a single component 
could be positioned such that the sensitivity of the entire system was reduced. The analysis of the case 
also proved that, necessary adjustments to component positions, made during assembly, can have a large 
impact on angular beam pointing stability.  
 
A method of assembly was developed, where lenses can be positioned such that the optimal distance 
between the lenses is achieved for every produced unit. Tolerance design show, that significant tolerance 
stack-ups can occur. However the effects of production variation is greatly reduced, with the lenses being 
in the optimal positions, and sensitivities reduced. 
 
For the presented test case, it was found that, attempts made to reduce the thermal noise factor, by 
limiting the dissipation of heat, was not sufficient enough and provoked an uneven thermal expansion of 
the baseplate, leading to a performance loss.  A design is presented where decoupling of stability and 
thermal conductivity allowed for better isolation of heat dispersion, and use of materials with lower 
thermal expansion, resulting in an increased angular beam pointing stability. 
The method developed and applied in this paper has shown that through positional adjustments to key 
components, the sensitivities of optical systems can be reduced, thereby increasing the angular beam 
pointing stability.  
 
7. Acknowledgements  
The authors would like to express their gratitude for the assistance during the writing of this paper to the 
following people:  
Anders K. Hansen Postdoc, Professor Ole Sigmund, Associate professor Brian Elmegaard, Professor 
Andy Horsewell, Workers at the DTU machining facility.  
 
8. References 
EBRO, M., HOWARD, T. J., AND RASMUSSEN, J. J., May 21 - 24, 2012 "The foundation for robust design: 
Enabling robustness through kinematic design and design clarity", INTERNATIONAL DESIGN CONFERENCE - 
DESIGN 2012 Dubrovnik - Croatia. 
 
A.BENDELL, J. DISNEY AND W. A. PRIDMORE, 1989“Taguchi methods Applications in World Industry”, IFS 
Publications.  
 
ROBERT H. LOCHNER AND JOSEPH E. MATAR, 1990 “Designing For Quality, an introduction to the best of 
Taguchi and western methods of statistical experimental design”, Chapman and Hall, first edition, . 
 
CARL BLAUROCK, MARK MCGINNIS, KEVIN KIMB, GARY E. MOSIER, August, 2005 “Structural-Thermal-
Optical Performance (STOP) sensitivity analysis for the James Webb Space Telescope” Optical Modeling and 
Performance Predictions II, .  
 
==PAGE:20==
Master thesis  
Technical University of Denmark 
31-01-2015 
20 
 
CARLOS A. CAICEDO, ALLAN WIRTH, GREG LAROSA, ROB COERVER, JOHN WILT, MIKE TAYLOR, 
2006.“Thermal Deformable Mirror”, Adaptive Optics Associates, Proc. SPIE 6272.  
 
TIEN-TUNG CHUNG, CHIN-TE LIN, CHUNG-YUN LEE, KUANG-CHAO FAN, AND SHOU-HENG CHEN, 
2009 “Optimum Design of an 8x8 Optical Switch with Thermal Compensated Mechanisms” World Academy of 
Science, Engineering and Technology 53.  
 
A. GELMAN AND E. MALIAH, October 2007 “Mechanism for Passive Thermal Compensation in Harsh 
Environment”, Optomechatronic Actuators and Manipulation III. 
  
PETER GIESEN, ERIK FOLGERING August, 2003 “Design guidelines for thermal stability in opto-mechanical 
instruments”, Proceedings of SPIE Vol. 5176 Optomechanics. 
 
GRAHAM WILSON, ROBERT M. G. MILLAR AND TONY BENDELL, 1990“Taguchi Methodology within total 
quality” IFS publications.  
 
GEORGE E. P. BOX, NORMAN R. DRAPER, 1987“Empirical model-building and response surfaces” John 
Wiley and Sons. 
 
DEVARAKONDA ANNAPURNA PADMAVATHI, 2011 “Potential Energy Curves & Material Properties” 
Materials Sciences and Applications, 2, 97-104.  
 
AAGE BIRKKJÆR LAURITSEN, SØREN GUNDTOFT AND AAGE BREDAHL ERIKSEN 
2007“Termodynamik” Nyt teknisk forlag.  
 
ERIC D. SMITH, FERENC SZIDAROVSZKY, WILLIAM J. KARNAVAS AND A. TERRY BAHILL, 2008 
“Sensitivity Analysis, a Powerful System Validation Technique” The Open Cybernetics and Systemics Journal, 2, 
39-56.    
 
SANDVIK MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY, CE-Alloys, http://www.smt.sandvik.com/en/products/ce-alloys/ 
[accessed on the 6th. of november 2015.] 
 
F. D. VAN VOORHEES, A.T. BAHILL, 1995 “Sensitivity Analysis by Design of Experiments” The Institute of 
Electrical and Electronics Engineers.  
 
EGBERT LENDERINK AND PETER STEHOUWER, 2008, “Optimization, sensitivity analysis, and robust design 
using response surface modeling”, Illumination Optics, Proc. of SPIE Vol. 7103, 710302 
