==PAGE:1==
 
TECHNICAL UNIVERSITY OF DENMARK, 
DEPARTMENT OF MECHANICAL ENGINEERING 
 
 
 
 
 
MODELLING THE GERMAN SECONDARY RESERVE 
MARKET 
 
 
BÁLINT VASS 
 
MASTER THESIS 
SUSTAINABLE ENERGY 
2015 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Supervisors: 
Benjamin Biegel (Danske Commodities) 
Pierre Pinson (DTU Elektro) 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
1. INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND ............................................................................................................ 3 
1.1. GOAL AND SCOPE ............................................................................................................................................. 3 
1.2. MOTIVATION ................................................................................................................................................... 4 
1.3. ANCILLARY SERVICES .......................................................................................................................................... 5 
1.4. RESERVE MARKETS IN GERMANY ......................................................................................................................... 8 
2. AVAILABLE DATA ........................................................................................................................................ 13 
2.1. HISTORICAL AUCTION RESULTS .......................................................................................................................... 13 
2.2. WEEKLY HISTORICAL FORWARD PRICES ................................................................................................................ 13 
2.3. POWER PLANT DATA ........................................................................................................................................ 14 
2.4. FUEL PRICES ................................................................................................................................................... 15 
2.5. MISCELLANEOUS DATA ..................................................................................................................................... 15 
3. STRUCTURE AND METHODOLOGY .............................................................................................................. 18 
3.1. THE STACK MODEL ........................................................................................................................................... 18 
3.2. THE THEORETICAL MODEL ................................................................................................................................. 22 
3.3. PLAYER BASED APPROACH ................................................................................................................................. 31 
3.4. PRODUCT COUPLING ........................................................................................................................................ 33 
3.5. BENCHMARKING ............................................................................................................................................. 34 
4. FORECAST RESULTS AND DISCUSSION ........................................................................................................ 35 
4.1. THEORETICAL MODEL ....................................................................................................................................... 35 
4.2. PLAYER BASED APPROACH ................................................................................................................................. 39 
4.3. BENCHMARKING RESULTS ................................................................................................................................. 41 
5. CONCLUSION .............................................................................................................................................. 45 
6. BIBLIOGRAPHY ........................................................................................................................................... 48 
==PAGE:3==
3 
1. INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND 
1.1. Goal and Scope 
The goal of this project is to formulate and develop a model of the German ancillary 
(or regulating) power market. The model itself is to – with given inputs – forecast the 
weekly auction results for the four products being traded on this market. 
There are a vast number of modelling approaches, when considering forecasting prices 
on any of the electricity related fields, each with numerous advantages and 
disadvantages (Weron, 2014). As a Sustainable Energy MSc candidate, my approach is 
focused on the agent/player based aspect of the market. 
This paper focuses on a fundamental modelling approach, building up a portfolio of 
players or providers (basically power plants) which are supposedly present on this 
market. This theoretical first version of the model is calibrated and refined afterwards 
with some basic statistical approach. Even though the ancillary power market in 
Germany is coupled with the Netherlands and Switzerland, the model only builds on 
power plants present and active in Germany. 
The model is to predict the maximum accepted bid on the market for different 
products, week-by-week, as accurately as possible. Due the planned structure of the 
model ,other important factors, such as the weighted averages of results are implicitly 
contained within the results as well, since it is built up player by player.  
 
Due to the special nature of power system balancing, power markets, and the pay-as-
bid auction rules, building such model can have great added value to a company 
holding assets eligible for participating in providing reserves – since all selected 
providers have to deliver the same product quality throughout a fixed time spawn. 
However there are no theoretical limits of the difference in the level of compensation 
between the highest and lowest accepted bid, with recorded cases of providers being 
paid a factor of more than 3 for the same delivery as other providers. (Danske 
Commodities, 2014) 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
 
1.2. Motivation 
The regulatory power market has an ever growing importance in today’s power 
industry for two main reasons. As for one, the ratio of “physical providers”, which are 
constrained by external physical factors, such as the wind or cloud covers (e.g. wind 
power plants or PV panels respectively) is growing at a very high rate. The imbalance 
caused by the error of their production forecasts has to be met by controllable, fast 
reacting; mostly conventional power plants. This important necessity leads to the 
second reason, since just because of the increase of these physical providers, who 
generally have a lot lower cost of production than their conventional counterparts 
seem to be running the latter out of business. This leads to a situation where the 
profitability or in many cases the survival of conventional power plants, as an asset, 
relies on successful participation in secondary markets – since they are not able to sell 
their production profitably on regular power markets. 
 
However, successful participation in such markets in a highly competitive fields like 
this can be hard without proper tools, such as forecasting models to support the asset 
managers.  
For the above reasons, participation in the reserve markets is of utmost importance for 
most conventional providers, if they intend to stay on the market. Companies like 
Danske Commodities can help such providers by taking over the management of their 
assets to ensure successful participation.  
A simple yet straightforward model for this could look somewhat like: contracting a 
power provider to manage their power producing asset, and guarantee them some 
benchmark returns (for example the current market average price on the regulatory 
market) in exchange. This highlights the potential in understanding this market and 
having a good forecast for it, because (obviously) the spread between the contracted 
benchmark and the actually achieved result goes to the asset management firm as 
profit. For such, or any similar models, the forecasting should have at least two outputs 
for any of the investigated products: the maximum value of the accepted bid’s capacity 
price, and the average of all accepted bids; as inputs to the firms profit maximizing 
decision making process. 
 
The possibility of huge value creation alone makes for a good motivation to research 
this field. The challenging complexity of power systems and the ancillary markets will 
be summarized in the following to subchapters. 
  
==PAGE:5==
 
1.3. Ancillary Services 
In all power systems, a power balance should be kept at all times, meaning that any 
power consumed has to be produced at the same time. The power balance can be off 
for many factors, which are present in the system and pose uncertainty. Such factors 
include, but are not limited to the weather (weather dependent renewables, weather 
dependant consumers as heating, cooling, lighting), errors of consumption forecasts, 
and unplanned outages on both generation and transmission sides. 
If this equilibrium is broken, a power deviation occurs, and the system frequency will 
be off from its pre-set values (due to the momentum/kinetic energy of rotating 
equipment, generators, connected to the power system). (ENTSO-E, 2009) As of today, 
storing electricity at an industrial scale is very limited, certainly not enough to handle 
the power deviations occurring from imbalances within the power system. The 
reference nominal frequency for the grid of Continental Europe is 50 Hz. 
To ensure that all such imbalances are handled swiftly, without having an impact on 
the network users, a system of ancillary services is in place for any power system. 
Germany belongs to the synchronous grid RG Continental Europe (formerly UCTE). 
Any synchronous grid can be broken down further into transmission system operators 
(TSOs)1, who are responsible for the operation of the transmission grid (considering 
keeping the power balance amongst many other duties as well). An ancillary service 
system has multiple layers to ensure safe operations and cope with the physical 
attributes of a power system. There are services which are interconnected by the laws 
of physics throughout the entire synchronous zone (primary control), and there are 
services which are related to specific TSOs, or as in some cases, as we will see, multiple 
TSOs through cooperation (secondary and tertiary controls). 
 
An overview of the ancillary services system, showing the process and connections of 
different layers of controlling services is presented on Figure 1.  
 
                                                 
1 There is a more detailed hierarchical breakdown, containing Co-ordination Centers, Control Blocks, 
and Control Areas from bottom to top within a synchronous grid, to be more precise.  
==PAGE:6==
 
 
Figure 1 – System Frequency control overview (ENTSO-E, 2009) 
 
THE ROLE OF PRIMARY CONTROL 
 
Primary control is the reserve type which acts automatically in case of a deviation in 
the power balance. This type has the smallest reaction time, activation has to come 
within 15 seconds in each control area, and complete deployment has to take place 
within 30 seconds. This is a proportionate control, which is interconnected to all 
participating parties by the kinetic energy of connected spinning equipment – in other 
words any generator which is in active primary control mode will react to deviations 
in system frequency observed by the rotational speed of the equipment itself. When 
activated, the collective involvement of such parties will ensure that the power balance 
is restored, thus stopping the deviation of system frequency, before it could surpass 
the permissible limits. It is very important to note that activation of primary control 
will result in a new frequency equilibrium, so the nominal frequency of the system is 
not restored. 
 
ENTSO-E regulates the required contribution by each TSO, giving the basis of how 
much of this product should be procured on the ancillary power markets of a given 
country. Primary control, due to the required speed of activation is usually supplied 
by steam-based conventional power plants, where the storage tanks and pipes can 
actually serve as a puffer system if up-regulation (there is a lack of power in the 
system) or down-regulation (there is a surplus of power in the system) is needed. 
However, this steam storing puffer capacity is limited, so activated primary regulators 
==PAGE:7==
 
should be relieved as soon as possible. For the above reasons, it is clear that primary 
control is only served by spinning reserves (ones that are in operation with flexible 
dispatchable capacity). 
 
THE ROLE OF SECONDARY CONTROL 
 
The role of secondary control is to restore the deviated frequency after the primary 
control has restored the power balance, and also to take over primary control units so 
they are able to perform again if necessary. Secondary control, however is acting 
within a given control area, so it will react simultaneously with primary control, if the 
cause for disruption is within the control area. Secondary control will be activated 
automatically in those power plants which are currently actively wired into the control 
loop of the control area. This reserve type has to be able to react to the signal given by 
the control loop within 5 minutes of activation. 
This type of regulatory power is usually provided by conventional thermal power 
plants which are already running. Typical choice would include gas engines, 
combined cycle gas turbines (CCGT) and modern coal power plants. Nowadays, 
power plant pools are more and more common to give secondary control power, 
which means that multiple assets are grouped into one ‘virtual power plant’, so the 
pool operator can dispatch the reserves in the most economical way possible. 
Secondary control is always produced by spinning reserves, except for the case if 
reserve pooling; however, handling virtual power plants is out of scope of this thesis, 
because the structure and other inside information of these pool operators are not 
available. (Consentec GmbH, 2014) 
 
 THE ROLE OF TERTIARY CONTROL 
 
Tertiary control is the last layer of reserves. It is the least regulated of all types, leaving 
room for the TSOs for economic optimization. The main reason behind utilizing 
tertiary reserves is to free the secondary control reserves, which can be considered 
higher quality due to their faster reaction time and the fact that they are imbedded into 
an automatic control loop to ensure economic utilization. If a power deviation is 
expected to be present for a prolonged time, the TSO has the option to manually 
(typically) or automatically redistribute the secondary control power’s duties to 
tertiary providers for the sake of system safety (relieving secondary reserves) and 
optimal system costs. Providing assets have to be able to respond within the 15 
minutes timeframe. 
These reserve providers are usually so called ‘cold reserves’ (instead of spinning 
reserves), meaning that they are usually not in active operation at the time of 
==PAGE:8==
 
activation. Typical tertiary control reserve is provided by open-cycle gas turbines 
(OCGT), which do not have to be running when called upon, due to the fact that they 
can be fired up in a few minutes, a stable steady level of operation from where 
regulation is possible. These reserve providers are usually so called ‘cold reserves’ 
(instead of spinning reserves), meaning that they are usually not in active operation at 
the time of activation. 
 
1.4. Reserve Markets in Germany 
The German Energy Act states that in Germany, the four present TSOs are responsible 
for the task of regulation through the utilization of the ancillary services presented in 
the previous chapter. This utilization consists of analysis of the required control 
reserves to be procured, overseeing their procurement, prequalifying market 
participants for eligibility of taking part in the procurement process, and of course 
operating (setting the control loop parameters, financial settlement with the involved 
party) the balancing system itself. This regulation task is called load-frequency control. 
(Consentec GmbH, 2014) 
 
The four TSOs present in Germany are: TenneT Holding B.V., Amprion GmbH, 50Hertz 
Transmission GmbH and TransnetBW GmbH. The control areas for which these 
companies are responsible for is shown on Figure 2. 
 
==PAGE:9==
 
 
Figure 2 – German TSOs (McLloyd, 2009) 
 
As the TSOs operate the load-frequency control system, arising costs are naturally 
passed on. In order to have a fair re-allocation (the costs are to be covered by the parties 
involved in generating the imbalance itself), so called balancing groups are formed, 
with member groups as traders, producers, suppliers. All inputs (generation, trade) 
and outputs (consumption, trade) are accounted for in such balancing circles, and the 
algebraic sum of these values will serve as the basis of the settlement of imbalance 
power for each balancing period, which is currently quarter hourly (15 min) in 
Germany. The sum of all the balancing circle’s imbalances for a given period makes 
up for the total imbalance to be covered by the ancillary power systems in any given 
control zone.  
 
As far the German transmission system goes, despite the fact that the grid is being 
operated by four independent TSO companies, the German Netzregelverbund (NRV) 
has been established, which stands for German grid control cooperation. This is made 
possible, because there is no transmission capacity “bottlenecks” present in the grid. 
The idea is that in order to achieve cost-optimal dimensioning and operation of the 
reserve market, the TSOs cooperate in the tendering process for the reserves – creating 
a joint market for ancillary services in the entire country, where all participants are 
able to offer their products into any of the four control areas of the country (Consentec 
==PAGE:10==
 
GmbH, 2014). On top of the fact that this leads to a lot more efficient reserve power 
utilization, the volume of controlling power needed to be procured is a lot lower due 
to the so called “portfolio effect” between the control areas (imbalance caused by 
surplus production in one area can be netted out against scarcity in another, resulting 
in only having to call in secondary reserves for the sum of these imbalances, instead of 
paying for it for both directions). 
 
Any participant on this market has to go through a pre-qualification procedure before 
placing a big on the auctions. Each reserve type has different technological 
requirements, mostly related to their activation and reaction speed. After a successful 
pre-qualification, the bidder can enter into the online auctions, where all reserve types 
are procured. The auction type is a pay-as-bid auction, which means that every bidder 
who gets selected will get paid according to his/her bid, contrary to the uniform pricing 
method, where everybody gets paid the uniform settlement price. This auction type 
will lead to an increased strategic behaviour of players (anyone above the highest 
selected price will get zero returns) – but there are arguments on both the positive and 
negative effect of this method when looking and the system level costs. 
 
1.4.1. PRIMARY CONTROL RESERVE 
ENTSO-E currently prescribes 3000 MW of primary control reserve (PCR) to be active 
in the synchronous zone (ENTSO-E Operation Handbook), from which Germany has 
to procure 568 MW of power, but as it was earlier highlighted, Switzerland and the 
Netherlands are also cooperating the TSOs, so an extra 25 MW and 35 MW has to be 
procured on the PCR auctions. 
Primary control reserve is tendered weekly, as a general rule on every Tuesday (except 
if public holiday) before the delivery week. The product which the bidding is for is for 
a 24 hours/7 days commitment for providing PCR on the delivery week, as a 
symmetrical product, meaning that both up- and down-regulation will be required 
from those who are selected in the tendering. The minimum bid is 1 MW with 
increments of also 1 MW. Winners are remunerated for their offered capacity, but not 
for the energy they provide during the delivery period, so only a so called “capacity 
price” has to be formulated in order to enter the online auction. 
==PAGE:11==
 
1.4.2. SECONDARY CONTROL RESERVE 
In Germany, a probabilistic approach is taken to determine the weekly needs of 
secondary control reserve (SCR). This reserve type is procured asymmetrically, 
positive SCR is currently around 2040 MW and negative SCR is around 1970 MW. 
Actual weekly values can be found on ‘www.regelleistung.net’, which also serves as 
the auction platform. SCR is also procured weekly, on Wednesdays before the delivery 
week. 
There is a total of 4 products which are tendered in the process, two for both positive 
and negative directions. In any direction, a “peak” and an “off-peak” product is 
procured. Peak is the time period from Monday-Friday 8:00 a.m. – 8:00 p.m., while off-
peak is the residual period on weekdays and the entire week-end.  The minimum bid 
amount is 5 MW with an increment of 1 MW.  
When entering the auction, a producer has to formulate two bids for any product, a 
capacity price (measured in €/MW of capacity offered for the delivery period), which 
is paid for the availability for the reserve in the given direction and time frame, and an 
energy price (in €/MWh of energy produced), which is paid under the circumstance of 
the reserve being called upon and is the remuneration basis for the actual energy 
produced. The selection of auction winners are based on the capacity price merit order. 
After selection, the actual activation of any needed control power is decided with the 
energy price-merit order. 
1.4.3. TERTIARY CONTROL RESERVE 
The tertiary control reserves (TCR) are procured on a daily basis. TCR is procured day-
ahead, at 10:00 a.m. on the day before the delivery day. The time frame for any days 
consists of six 4 hour blocks, and as a product, TCR is asymmetrical (positive and 
negative direction), just as SCR. The bids volumes start at a minimum of 5 MW and 
have an increment step of 1 MW. The selection process is quite similar to SCR as well, 
capacity price merit order decides who gets selected, and upon actual delivery, if 
needed, produced energy is compensated through the energy price, where the 
cheapest bidder will get called upon first. As with both secondary and tertiary 
reserves, energy prices only matter in the selection procedure itself if there are equal 
capacity prices between two competing bidders. A summary of the ancillary market 
products is collected in Table 1. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:12==
 
Table 1 – Reserve Market Product Summary, based on: (Consentec GmbH, 2014) 
Attribute 
PCR 
SCR 
TCR 
Tender period 
Weekly 
Weekly 
Daily 
Tender time 
Tuesday (week 
before) 
Wednesday (week 
before) 
Day before 
Product time 
frame 
Base load 
Peak / Off-Peak 
6 x 4 hours / 
day 
Product 
Symmetry 
Symmetric 
Asymmetric 
asymmetric 
Minimum Bid 
1 MW 
5 MW 
5 MW 
Bid Increment 
1 MW 
 
 
 
==PAGE:13==
 
2. AVAILABLE DATA  
2.1. Historical Auction Results 
The data of past auctions are available through ‘www.regelleistung.net’. For any week, 
results are available anonymously for capacity/energy price bids and bidden volume, 
but unfortunately, only the winning bids are made public. 
Among with these numbers, the volume to be procured for each product is also 
available in a weekly frame (Figure 3). 
 
 
Figure 3 – Amount of procured reserves in 2014 
2.2. Weekly historical forward prices 
The price of power for the actual delivery for the time frame which the tender is called 
for on the secondary reserve auctions is very crucial in the analysis proposed by this 
paper. Any provider would want to take his options into consideration when deciding 
whether it is worth his efforts to offer a part of his assets’ capacities for ancillary 
services, and if he decides to do so, how much compensation would it require for him. 
This topic will be elaborated later on in Section 3.2.1. 
Danske Commodities has access and provided the weekly forward prices traded on 
EEX (European Energy Exchange) for the ‘peak’ and ‘base products. As for definition, 
the peak product is delivered Monday-Friday 08:00 a.m. – 20:00 p.m., while the base 
product is delivered 0-24 hours Monday-Sunday (European Energy Exchange, 2012). 
==PAGE:14==
 
The important distinction compared to the products procured on the reserve markets 
is that the peak product traded on the EEX is independent from public holidays. 
The data is structure in a way to reflect that a given delivery week’s product was 
traded on multiple days before the delivery – this is used to enable the model to reflect 
upon the event if the tender date was different than normal (because of a holiday on 
Wednesday or similar events). 
2.3. Power plant data 
In order the build a model based on the fundamentals of the market and its players, 
the existing and operating power plants’ basic data is required. There is fairly detailed 
data available of the generation capacities in Germany, listing all power plants over 
10 MWe, broken down to the fuel used for the operation (The Federal Network Agency 
for Electricity, Gas, Telecommunications, Post and Railway, 2014). The list also 
contains the state which the generating unit is located at, making it easy to link it to a 
TSO. This list contains over 1700 power generation units. As the most up to date list 
comes from 2014, that year will have to be the basis when calibrating a model, since 
there were many changes within the plant portfolio during the last few years – 
including some natural fluctuation (plants being decommissioned, temporary 
mothballed, out of use for reconstruction or repowering) and regulatory or policy 
changes (nuclear power plants). 
 
After creating a pre-screened list of active power plants, it is necessary to devise some 
basic technological parameters for each unit, or the category the unit belongs to. These 
parameters are the following: 
 
- 
Efficiency: the percentage of input fuel converted into the final product 
electricity 
- 
Maximum power: the maximum amount of power a unit can deliver 
- 
Minimum load: the technological minimum (expressed in percentage of 
maximum power) where the plant can reach a safe steady state of 
operation 
- 
Available power for secondary reserve: not all of the plant’s capacity above 
the minimum load can be used as secondary reserve. The main reason 
behind this is the technological limitation on the gradient of power 
output change 
 
Unfortunately, data for most of these parameters are hardly available, except the 
maximum power of generating units, which is readily available. The reason behind 
==PAGE:15==
 
this is twofold: technological parameters are usually not made public, and even if they 
were, a short list of the above mentioned power plant portfolio still consists of a couple 
hundred participants, for which one-by-one data collection is hopeless.  
Efficiency can only be found on the internet after a thorough search, and even then, 
only for the largest plants. For the rest of the plants, a set of numbers have been 
generated by normal distribution, using an industry benchmark mean efficiency and 
standard deviation for each technology type. 
As for maximum power and available secondary reserve power, industry standards 
have been used as estimations for each technology type, based on (Büki, 2004). The 
actual data sets are shown and explained in Section 3.1, in Table 7. 
2.4. Fuel prices 
For further analysis of generation units, as market players, their costs of production 
has to be estimated, where the main component is the fuel price. 
Danske Commodities was able to provide fuel prices for natural gas, whereas coal 
prices were accessible through (STATISTIK DER KOHLENWIRTSCHAFT e.V., 2014). 
Natural gas prices were calculated from a month-ahead, TTF indexed data set with a 
yearly distribution. Not using a more detailed breakdown seems reasonable, because 
there is no telling of how hundreds of producers have made their gas procurement 
contracts (time of procurement, terms of the contract, actual delivery prices) and as 
this is highly privileged information in any firm, it is impossible to get a better 
estimation at it. Yearly coal prices for both import hard coal and lignite were readily 
available. Key numbers to estimate different biofuel price were taken from (IEA, 2004). 
The fuel costs to be used in the analysis are collected in Table 2. 
 
Table 2 – Fuel prices, all prices are in €/MWh 
Year Hard Coal Lignite Natural Gas Biomass 
2012 
9,8 
16,8 
26 
12 
2013 
9,8 
17,3 
26,5 
12 
2014 
10 
17,3 
21,8 
12 
2015 
11 
17,3 
21 
21 
2.5. Miscellaneous data  
Other important inputs include the CO2 price, which has to be paid after units of 
pollutant emission, and the CO2 emission factor for the given pollutant. The former is 
traded in emission allowance markets, for which data can be found on (EEX, 2015). 
==PAGE:16==
 
Taking the volume weighted averages of allowance units traded between 2012 and 
2015, the following yearly prices are used within the model (Table 3). 
 
Table 3 – CO2 prices 
Year Carbon allowance unit price [€/t] 
2012 
6 
2013 
4.6 
2014 
5.3 
2015 
6 
 
The CO2 emission factors for a given fuel type is summarized in Table 4. 
 
Table 4 – CO2 emission factors (U.S. Energy Information Administration, 2013) 
Fuel Type 
Emission Factor 
[t/MWhfuel] 
Hard Coal 
0,318 
Lignite 
0,333 
Natural Gas 
0,181 
Biomass 
0 (legally) 
 
Power plants also have to take their start-up costs into consideration, especially when 
participating in the market with peak products, which might require the owner to shut 
down the power plant, if the off-peak time periods are generating losses, and restart 
the plant later next day to be able to provide regulatory power. The specific start-up 
costs are summarized in Table 5, based on a personal conversation (Illés, 2015), who is 
a performance engineer at the 400 MW combined cycle power plant (CCGT) Gönyű, 
and from the study made by (Nikhil, et al., 2012). 
 
Table 5 – Plant start-up costs 
Technology 
Start-up cost [€/MW] 
Large biomass (wood) 
74 
General biomass plant 
30 
Hard coal and lignite 
60 
Combined cycle 
38 
Open cycle gas turbine 
76 
Large conventional natural gas [>50 MW] 
50 
Small conventional natural gas and gas engine 
30 
 
==PAGE:17==
 
The role of public holidays are important as well, not only because the forward prices to 
compare players’ options to will change if the tender is called on another day, but more 
importantly because a public holiday can change the time frame of peak products, 
meaning that fewer days will have to be considered (which could mean fewer plant 
starts, a lower loss or opportunity cost, etc.) 
 
 
 
==PAGE:18==
 
3. STRUCTURE AND METHODOLOGY 
3.1. The stack model 
 
The model is based on a fundamental approach, where the players (generating units) 
are constrained by the technology that they utilize. Based on some further research 
and estimates, the main technology of these generating units can also be discovered. 
 
As stated in Section 1.3, the German power system, thus the procurement of the 
ancillary services can be broken down to the four TSOs present in the country. 
Unfortunately, the process of tendering and auctioning for the reserve capacities is 
subject to strict non-disclosure policies for each of the transmission system operator. 
During the research phase of the thesis, all four of the TSOs, as well as the tendering 
platform operator Regelleistung were reached out to. Unfortunately, only 50Hz 
Transmission GmbH was able to provide some information on the quantities and 
capacity volumes prequalified for providing secondary control. Based on the data 
provided (Bauer, 2014), the calculations made for the ratio of operating built in 
capacity and prequalified capacity are highlighted in Table 6. As far as fuel types are 
concerned (which also somewhat indicates the technology used) – based on the 
available data – it is assumed that the market is governed by the following fuel-base 
technologies: biomass, natural gas, coal (hard coal and lignite) and water2 (pumped 
storage). Fuel oils and other liquid petrol based fuel could be considered as well, but 
based on (Bauer, 2014), their presence in the secondary reserve markets is negligible, 
probably due to the high price of the fuel combined with the low efficiency of such 
units. Based on the above, such technologies are most likely to be utilized on the 
tertiary reserve markets (TRC), where they don’t have to be operating as a spinning 
reserve to be able to provide regulatory power. 
 
 
 
                                                 
2 As pumped storage plants, and generally water-based power production is a very special and sensitive 
case, the first versions of the model does not consider these plants in every case. The reason behind this 
is that without hourly price-curves and proper unit commitment models building on that, the 
implementation of these plants would be based on a really far-fetched estimates. If these plants matter 
in the price formulation of SR reserves, skipping them would in a systematically over-estimation, 
depending on the correlation between pumped storage capacity prices and forward prices.  
==PAGE:19==
 
Table 6 – Prequalified asset data from 50Hz (Bauer, 2014) 
Fuel type 
Total built-in capacity 
[MW] 
Prequalified 
capacity [MW] 
Ratio of 
prequalification  
biomass 
1 765 
218 
12% 
natural gas 
11 529 
1 090 
9% 
coal 
4 125 
901 
22% 
water 
2 674 
2 581 
97% 
 
Based on the ratios observed in the dataset (and considering the lack of input from 
other TSOs), the same values (ratios of prequalification) are assumed for the remaining 
TSOs, and thus their prequalified SCR capacities are extrapolated. 
When building the stack model a narrowed down list based on the aforementioned 
fuel types were created from all of Germany’s active power generating assets, from the 
data described in Section 2.3. The result is over 370 power generating assets. This 
shortlist only contains the power plants that were planned to be on active duty in 2014, 
from the previously listed fuel types, and are not observably part of a third party 
industrial process (e.g. foundry, factory, chemical plant). To be able to reasonably 
handle these hundreds of power plants, further clusters were created within a fuel type 
group, as seen on Figure 4.  
 
 
Each larger player’s available technological data (minimum load, maximum load, net 
efficiency for electricity generation) were identified – if the owner publicly disclosed it 
– for example, all of the assets operated by Vattenfall GmbH have abundant data for 
these parameters (Vattenfall Germany, 2015). As for the smaller players, or where such 
data was not available, general assumptions were made based on generalization of real 
Biomass
Small biomass 
(<50 MW)
Wood 
waste 
(B1)
General 
Biomass 
(B2)
Large 
biomass 
(>50 
MW) 
(B2)
FiT 
biomass 
(B3)
Natural Gas
OCGT 
(N2)
CCGT 
(N1)
Small 
gas 
(<100 
MW) 
(N3)
Large 
gas 
(>100 
MW) 
(N4)
Coal
Hard 
Coal 
(C1)
Lignite
Smal 
Lignite 
(C2)
Large 
Lignite 
(C3)
Water
Pumped 
storage 
(P)
Figure 4 – Power plant clusters 
FiT biomass – feed in tariff, assumed that they don’t participate in reserves 
OCGT – open cycle gas turbine 
CCGT – combined cycle gas turbine 
==PAGE:20==
 
life observations (see Section 2.5), or literature (Hirth & Ziegenhagen, 2013). Because 
of the large number of assets which are building up the stack model, data for efficiency 
was generated through a normal distributions for members of each cluster which 
lacked the factual data (Table 7). 
 
Table 7 – Additional plant data, No 1. 
Cluster type 
Mean 
Efficiency 
[%] 
Standard 
Deviation [%] 
Minimum 
Load [% of 
built in 
capacity] 
Reserve 
restriction [% 
of available] 
CCGT (N1) 
57 
1,5 
35 
80 
OCGT (N2) 
31 
0 
60 
70 
Small gas (e.g. gas 
engines) (N3) 
31 
2 
0,35 
70 
Large gas (e.g. 
boiler) (N4) 
38 
1 
50 
40 
Small biomass (B1) 
28 
2 
50 
70 
Large Lignite(C2) 
37 
1 
50 
10 
Hard Coal (C1) 
38 
1 
45 
20 
Pumped Storage (P) 
75 
0 
0 
10 
 
The minimum load allows to calculate the marginal capacity that is available for 
secondary reserves, without taking further technological restrictions into account, 
such as ramp rate. In order to calculate the available capacity with which the player is 
able to participate in the secondary reserve market, further assumptions are needed, 
which reflect these restrictions. For simplicity, based on (Hirth & Ziegenhagen, 2013), 
it is assumed that the coal based power plants are the less versatile in this area.  
 
Based on the input data presented so far, the following formulas are true for secondary 
positive regulatory power, for any given power plant. 
 
 
𝑃𝑚𝑖𝑛= 𝑃𝑛𝑒𝑡∙𝑥𝑚𝑖𝑛  
Equation 3-1 
 
 
𝑃𝑈𝑃
𝑆𝑅,𝑎𝑣𝑎𝑖𝑙𝑎𝑏𝑙𝑒= (𝑃𝑛𝑒𝑡−𝑃𝑚𝑖𝑛) ∙𝑥𝑟𝑒𝑠 , 
Equation 3-2 
 
where the lower indices are: min – minimum load, net – net build in capacity, 
SR,available – available capacity for providing regulatory power, res – restriction and 
the variables are: P – power, x – constants for ratios. The same approach is shown by 
Figure 5. 
==PAGE:21==
 
 
Figure 5 – Capacity breakdown example for up regulation 
 
Negative regulatory capacities follow the same idea, except that when going into 
negative reserves, the “must run” capacity (the true minimum load of the plant) is 
calculated as  
 
𝑃𝐷𝑂𝑊𝑁
𝑚𝑖𝑛= 𝑃𝑚𝑖𝑛+ 𝑃𝑈𝑃
𝑆𝑅,𝑎𝑣𝑎𝑖𝑙𝑎𝑏𝑙𝑒, 
Equation 3-3 
in order to reflect that to provide a certain amount of down-regulation (𝑃𝑈𝑃
𝑆𝑅,𝑎𝑣𝑎𝑖𝑙𝑎𝑏𝑙𝑒) 
the provider must be running at its technological minimum plus the desired capacity 
to be down-regulated. The capacity types and their connections are shown on Figure 
6. 
 
Figure 6 – Capacity breakdown example for down regulation 
==PAGE:22==
 
3.1.1. MARGINAL COSTS OF PRODUCTION 
Each power plant, based on its technology (efficiency), fuel type (carbon-dioxide 
emissions), fuel costs, and the applied carbon-dioxide taxes has a marginal cost (or 
variable cost) of power production. 
 
 
𝑝𝑚𝑐=
𝑝𝑓𝑢𝑒𝑙[
€
𝑀𝑊ℎ] + 𝑝𝐶𝑂2[
€
𝑡𝑜𝑛𝐶𝑂2] ∙𝑐𝐶𝑂2[𝑡𝑜𝑛𝐶𝑂2
𝑀𝑊ℎ]
𝜂𝑝𝑜𝑤𝑒𝑟
 
Equation 3-4 
, where p – unit price, c – emission coefficient, 𝜂𝑝𝑜𝑤𝑒𝑟 – power plant efficiency, and the 
index mc – marginal cost. 
 
All the data provided in this section will make up the so-called stack model, 
distinguishing between players based on their technology, fuel, costs of production, 
available secondary reserve capacities (theoretical) – a portfolio of players competing 
for being selected in the SCR market. 
3.2. The Theoretical model 
3.2.1. OPPORTUNITY COST 
Any provider will want to consider their options in order to maximize their expected 
profits, when entering the reserve markets.  
To model the fundamental behaviour of the reserve market, each asset owner is 
assumed to rationally evaluate the outcome of their participation in different markets. 
The player is facing a decision right before placing the capacity bids into the market, 
since (s)he is able close the following week on the forward market, by selling the 
plant’s production on the forward market. This transaction in return closes any profits 
which can be made on this horizon. If the balance is positive, then the asset owner 
needs to consider this opportunity cost (which he would forego), should s(he) enter 
the secondary reserve market with the capacity of the power plant. Doing the latter 
would mean that for the volume offered on the reserve market, the plant will not be 
able to produce power, since it has to be readily available if the TSOs exercise their 
option to call on these plants to produce energy in order to keep the power system at 
balance.  
 
For simplicity, the case of providing secondary up regulation via the peak product (5 
weekdays of the week, providing power from 08:00 – 20:00) is elaborated here at first; 
while the other products follow a similar line of thought. 
==PAGE:23==
 
 
When deciding on the cost of the capacity used in the reserve market, a player will set 
its marginal capacity price (the minimum compensation s(he) would accept for staying 
in reserve with that capacity) to reflect the aforementioned opportunity costs. While it 
is true that the power plant could also generate income through actually providing the 
energy during the selected hours (thus earning the energy price on top of the capacity 
price), should it be needed, it is safe to assume that any asset owner would want to 
avoid the risk of not being called upon by the TSOs. For the above reasoning, the model 
is going to assume that when deciding on the capacity prices entered to the weekly 
auction, an owner will calculate as if s(he) had set the energy price to the marginal cost 
of energy production, or in other words, if regulatory power is actually produced, the 
power plant is at the money, earning no margin on it – or from the other way around: 
there is no cost/earning reallocation between capacity-price and energy price, because 
the speculative part would pose a risk too big for the provider. This is currently in line 
with the industry best practice on a theoretical level, according to (Illés, 2015). 
 
If we’re looking at the peak up-regulating product, the following alternatives could be 
considered from a provider’s point of view, when checking for options other than 
going into reserve markets 
 
- 
Sell the entire Pnet on the forward market as base load 
- 
Sell the entire Pnet on the forward market as peak load 
 
 
𝜋𝑓𝑤,𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒= 7 ∙24 ∙(𝑝𝑓𝑤,𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒−𝑝𝑚𝑐) ∙𝑃𝑛𝑒𝑡−1 ∙𝐶𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡 
Equation 3-5 
 
𝜋𝑓𝑤,𝑝𝑒𝑎𝑘= 𝑛∙12 ∙(𝑝𝑓𝑤,𝑝𝑒𝑎𝑘−𝑝𝑚𝑐) ∙𝑃𝑛𝑒𝑡−𝑛∙𝐶𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡 
Equation 3-6 
 
𝜋𝑓𝑤= max⁡(𝜋𝑓𝑤,𝑝𝑒𝑎𝑘, 𝜋𝑓𝑤,𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒, 0) 
Equation 3-7 
 
,where 𝐶𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡 is the start-up cost for the plant, and n is the number of days for operation, 
which is 7 in base load and 5 (or less decided by public holidays) in peak load. Note 
that in case of negative returns on the forward market, the plant operator may choose 
not to run at all. 
 
To operate on the reserve markets, the minimum load / “must run” capacities must be 
sold on the forward markets, which creates a number of additional options: 
 
- 
Sell 𝑃𝑚𝑖𝑛 base load on the forward market 
- 
Sell 𝑃𝑚𝑖𝑛 peak load on the forward market 
- 
Also, sell remaining  𝑃𝑓𝑙𝑒𝑥 flexible capacity on either of these time frames, 
to ensure that when comparing this profit to the opportunity cost, the 
==PAGE:24==
 
possible overlaps are accounted for (as in: despite offering the available 
secondary capacities on the auctions later on, the additional free 
capacities above it (𝑃𝑓𝑙𝑒𝑥) can still be resold on the forward market to 
maximize profits – and thus decrease the opportunity costs) 
 
All things considered, this creates a simple optimization problem, where there is a 
trade-off between generally lower base load prices and the number of starts a power 
plant has to go through. For example, it is possible that a provider will choose to 
sustain a loss by selling his minimum load at base prices lower than the marginal cost 
of production, while still being better off than in a scenario where too many starts and 
stops would mean even higher losses. 
 
For a peak up-regulation product, the following should be considered as possible 
profits: 
 
 
𝜋𝑚𝑖𝑛,𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒= 7 ∙24 ∙(𝑝𝑓𝑤,𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒−𝑝𝑚𝑐) ∙𝑃𝑚𝑖𝑛−1 ∙𝐶𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡 
Equation 3-8 
 
𝜋𝑚𝑖𝑛,𝑝𝑒𝑎𝑘= 𝑛∙12 ∙(𝑝𝑓𝑤,𝑝𝑒𝑎𝑘−𝑝𝑚𝑐) ∙𝑃𝑚𝑖𝑛−𝑛∙𝐶𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡 
Equation 3-9 
 
 
 
𝜋𝑓𝑙𝑒𝑥,𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒= 7 ∙24 ∙(𝑝𝑓𝑤,𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒−𝑝𝑚𝑐) ∙𝑃𝑓𝑙𝑒𝑥 
Equation 3-10 
 
𝜋𝑓𝑙𝑒𝑥,𝑝𝑒𝑎𝑘= 𝑛∙12 ∙(𝑝𝑓𝑤,𝑝𝑒𝑎𝑘−𝑝𝑚𝑐) ∙𝑃𝑓𝑙𝑒𝑥 
Equation 3-11 
 
Selling the flexible capacities (to avoid overlaps when comparing to opportunity costs) 
is only reasonable if it is done at a profit, not a loss. Also, despite which time frame 
does the player sell his minimum load for, flexible capacities could be sold as either 
base or peak load without start-cost restrictions, except for the irrational case where 
the minimum load was sold for peak but the flexible capacities are to be produced as 
base load. 
 
 
𝜋𝑓𝑙𝑒𝑥= max⁡(𝜋𝑓𝑙𝑒𝑥,𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒, 𝜋𝑓𝑙𝑒𝑥,𝑝𝑒𝑎𝑘, 0) 
Equation 3-12 
 
𝜋𝑀𝑅= 𝜋𝑓𝑙𝑒𝑥+ max(𝜋𝑚𝑖𝑛,𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒, 𝜋𝑚𝑖𝑛,𝑝𝑒𝑎𝑘), 
Equation 3-13 
 
Which means that the profits (or losses, this value can be negative!) related to the must 
run in order to be able to provide ancillary services in peak up-regulation is made up 
from the best choice of selling the minimum load either at peak or base, and the 
additional (if any) profits from selling flexible capacities.  
 
The theoretical marginal bid for a power plant for this product is calculated as the 
opportunity costs, if any minus the value of the profits or losses from selling the must 
==PAGE:25==
 
run. Note that if the must run profits are positive, it will actually decrease the marginal 
capacity bid (because some of the opportunity costs are realized, thus no overlapping). 
 
 
𝑀𝐶𝑏𝑖𝑑,𝑝𝑒𝑎𝑘=
|𝜋𝑓𝑤−𝜋𝑀𝑅|
𝑃𝑈𝑃𝑆𝑅,𝑎𝑣𝑎𝑖𝑙𝑎𝑏𝑙𝑒 , in [€/MW] 
Equation 3-14 
 
An example made from the previous calculations can be seen on Figure 7, for an 
example power plant of 100 MW, with 50% minimum load, 40 MW available reserve 
capacity, and 10 MW flexible capacity, a marginal cost of 45 €/MWh, and a start-up 
cost of 5000 €/start, for a 5 day peak product. 
 
Figure 7 – Unit (marginal cost of production: 45 €/MWh) capacity price vs. forward prices, own 
illustration 
 
The situation is a little different for the off-peak product, first shown in the up-
regulation direction. 
The very same opportunity costs arise on the forward market, because despite the fact 
that the player would now like to see what it would cost to opt-in for off-peak 
regulatory power production, he could still choose to sell the whole week’s production 
in either peak, or base. Off-peak of course is also a possibility here, as it would have 
been in the peak-upregulation case as well, but the possibility of the peak price being 
lower than the off-peak is so low that it can be neglected from the model (it would 
never pay off to ignite a power plant’s furnace or turbine for the off-peak period only, 
it surely will make more sense monetarily to keep it running in base then to realize the 
==PAGE:26==
 
same spreads and avoid start-up costs). Entering the off-peak regulatory market will 
open the following possibilities for the provider: 
 
- 
Sell 𝑃𝑚𝑖𝑛 base load on the forward market 
- 
Sell 𝑃𝑚𝑖𝑛 off-peak load on the forward market (even though this is not a 
standard product based on the data received, the off-peak price can be 
combined out of peak and base prices; a provider could sell his 
production as a base load then “buy back” the peak frame of the power 
delivery from the market, thus avoiding having to produce anything 
besides off-peak load. 
- 
Also, sell remaining  𝑃𝑓𝑙𝑒𝑥 flexible capacity on either of these time frames. 
Note that selling the minimum load off-peak does not permit the 
provider to sell the flexible capacity in peak, because the plant wouldn’t 
be running, while selling minimum load for base load does open the 
opportunity to make profits from the flexible capacities at peak times. 
 
 
𝜋𝑚𝑖𝑛,𝑜𝑓𝑓𝑝𝑒𝑎𝑘= (𝑛∙12 + 2 ∙24) ∙(𝑝𝑓𝑤,𝑜𝑓𝑓−𝑝𝑒𝑎𝑘−𝑝𝑚𝑐) ∙𝑃𝑚𝑖𝑛
−𝑛∙𝐶𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡 
Equation 3-15 
, where n is the number of weekdays decided by public holidays, or in other words the 
number of starts required. 
 
𝜋𝑓𝑙𝑒𝑥,𝑜𝑓𝑓𝑝𝑒𝑎𝑘= 𝑛∙12 ∙(𝑝𝑓𝑤,𝑜𝑓𝑓𝑝𝑒𝑎𝑘−𝑝𝑚𝑐) ∙𝑃𝑓𝑙𝑒𝑥 
Equation 3-16 
 
3𝜋𝑓𝑙𝑒𝑥= max(𝜋𝑓𝑙𝑒𝑥,𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒, 𝜋𝑓𝑙𝑒𝑥,𝑝𝑒𝑎𝑘, 𝜋𝑓𝑙𝑒𝑥,𝑜𝑓𝑓𝑝𝑒𝑎𝑘, 0) 
Equation 3-17 
The equation used to calculate the total profit or cost related to the ‘must run’ is the 
same as Equation 3-13. 
 
𝑀𝐶𝑏𝑖𝑑,𝑜𝑓𝑓𝑝𝑒𝑎𝑘=
|𝜋𝑓𝑤−𝜋𝑀𝑅,𝑜𝑓𝑓𝑝𝑒𝑎𝑘|
𝑃𝑈𝑃𝑆𝑅,𝑎𝑣𝑎𝑖𝑙𝑎𝑏𝑙𝑒 , in [€/MW] 
Equation 3-18 
 
As the off-peak prices are usually the lowest, it would make sense for players to choose 
selling their minimum loads (even if at a loss) as a base load, in order to avoid start-up 
costs piling up on their even bigger losses at off-peak. For this reason, in event of a 
positive spread between the marginal cost and the base price, the marginal cost of 
participation in off-peak regulation can be the same (but never lower) than the 
marginal cost for peak-regulation. If the spread is negative at a base load level, off-
peak capacity bids should always be more expensive. Checking a similar example as 
in the previous illustration, it can be said that for the same parameters, off-peak 
products indeed have a higher opportunity cost, thus generally a higher price, as it can 
                                                 
3 Flexible capacity profits for base load and peak load are not possible when selling minimum load in 
off-peak only 
==PAGE:27==
 
be observed on the market as well, meaning that the theory does align with real 
observations, at least to some extent. 
 
When considering down-regulation, the entire process shown so far is repeated, except 
for the difference of how the ‘must run’ capacity is defined (see 𝑃𝐷𝑂𝑊𝑁
𝑚𝑖𝑛 in Equation 
3-3 and Figure 6). Also, some consideration is required when formulating the costs 
associated to the must run capacity. As far as 𝜋𝑓𝑙𝑒𝑥 and 𝜋𝑀𝑅 go, the calculation follows 
the equations shown before, depending on the product (down-peak, down-off peak) 
that is in question. The only major change is that in event of down-regulation the 
marginal bidding cost will be 0, whenever the forward prices are high enough for the 
power plant to break even with the marginal cost of electricity production and the 
appropriate number of start-up costs associated with the product. An example is 
shown on Figure 8, for illustration purposes, with the exact same parameters as in the 
previous examples (MC=45€/MWh, start-up cost=5000 €/start, etc.).  
 
 
Figure 8 – Down-regulation, peak product example 
 
The huge jump in the area of “low peak” and “high base” is associated to the fact that 
in that case, the off-peak opportunity cost would be very high, but since the plant has 
to sell most of his electricity as must run (minimum load + capacity to be 
downregulated) in peak hours, there is no way to recover the high off-peak opportunity 
==PAGE:28==
 
costs. However, this case is highly unlikely and if there are any possibilities for this to 
happen (𝑝𝑓𝑤,𝑝𝑒𝑎𝑘≪𝑝𝑓𝑤,𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒) it can typically be blamed on some kind of market failure 
or critical weather conditions related to intermittent providers, like renewables. Seeing 
the example results, the theory is in line with what we can see on the market, on 
reasonable price ranges, peak load down-regulation market has the potential of closing 
at very low prices, typically averaging below 100 €/MWh. 
 
3.2.2. SPECIAL CASE – PUMPED STORAGE PLANTS 
 
If the power plant is pumped storage technology based unit, then the opportunity loss 
costs are the missed forward profits for the sake of keeping some of the capacity in 
active reserve. As highlighted before, with weekly forward prices, there is a limit to 
what extent is this paper is able to take pumped storage/hydro technology into 
consideration. The ‘value of water’ in power production is a deeply researched area, 
where there are still a lot of question marks even for the most accomplished analysts. 
 
Assuming that most of the pumped storage units in Germany are standard, less 
advanced ones (based on the year of their start of operation this is a fair point to make), 
we can say that they are only able to regulate their power production (turbine mode), 
but not their consumption. In this case, up-regulation can only be provided by letting 
more water flow through the turbine itself. (Chazarra & Pérez-Díaz, 2014) 
 
To consider alternative costs (opportunity costs), in order to be able to offer capacities 
for up-regulation in peak-hours, the unit will be consuming power to fill its reservoir 
in the off-peak hours, and produce power during the high demand peak hours of the 
day. That said, the marginal capacity bid in this case would be calculated with the 
following equation: 
 
 
𝜋𝑓𝑤,ℎ𝑦𝑑𝑟𝑜= 𝑛⁡ ∙12 ∙𝑃𝑆𝑅,𝑎𝑣𝑎𝑖𝑙𝑎𝑏𝑙𝑒∙(𝑝𝑓𝑤,𝑝𝑒𝑎𝑘∙𝜂𝑝𝑜𝑤𝑒𝑟−𝑝𝑓𝑤,𝑜𝑓𝑓−𝑝𝑒𝑎𝑘) 
Equation 3-19 
, where n is the number of days for the peak period. 
 
While the forward peak- and base load price curves are available for any trading week 
(Danske Commodities provided the data for the project), the off-peak prices are not 
directly given, but implicitly contained in the two: 
 
 
𝑝𝑓𝑤,𝑜𝑓𝑓−𝑝𝑒𝑎𝑘= 2 ∙𝑝𝑓𝑤,𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒−𝑝𝑓𝑤,𝑝𝑒𝑎𝑘 
Equation 3-20 
==PAGE:29==
 
 
However, the marginal cost of participations are based on a lot more solid concept on 
conventional power plants in our case, and the first versions of the model will omit the 
hydropower-based reserves for a more simplistic approach and the advice of my 
supervisors. Also, the theory is only available for up-regulation and peak, so for the 
sake of consistency, it also makes sense to leave out pumped storage based reserves, 
as long as no more detailed data is available about them both technologically, and 
marketwise (hourly forward price curves instead of weekly products). 
3.2.3. CLEARING THE MARKET 
Based on the previous section, the marginal capacity prices for all players are available 
for any week, which aggregated by generating units give will yield the supply curve 
for any given week.  
The TSOs procure a known amount of capacity, different in the positive and negative 
direction (up- and down regulation). These capacity volumes to be procured are 
known before the tender. (Regelleistung.net, 2015) – this is the demand side for our 
simulated market. 
 
Since the capacity auctions are pay-as-bid types, as stated in Section 1.4, the market 
needs to be cleared, in order to obtain the forecastable marginal (maximum) accepted 
capacity payment for the system, as follows. 
 
 The power plants are sorted with their marginal capacity costs being taken in an 
ascending order. 
 Starting from the cheapest plant, the available volumes are cumulated. 
 When this aggregate reaches the volume to be procured (demand), the algorithm 
stops. 
 Get the marginal accepted capacity price as the final plant’s price which was 
borderline accepted. 
 
This process is illustrated Figure 9. 
 
In this, fundamental approach, the maximum price will be estimated. All other 
information is implicitly decided by the players building up the merit order gained 
from the stack model (average capacity price, accepted volumes, distribution of prices, 
etc. – because as a fundamental model, it is not building on the auction result facts and 
original distribution of offered capacity volumes and prices). The most important 
==PAGE:30==
 
feature of such a model in this market would be to determine the maximum price at a 
100% accuracy for each weak – in order to be able to create maximum value. 
 
 
Figure 9 – Market Clearing, example illustration 
 
This method can be repeated for the remaining three products with the necessary 
logical changes pointed out in Section 3.1. The gained results shows an outcome where 
every single player calculates his marginal cost of offering a capacity and hands in bids 
according to it. 
3.2.4. FORECAST ERROR 
The goodness of the model results can be estimated with several indicators popular in 
statistics. 
These, in this paper are made up of:  
 
- 
Bias of the forecast 
- 
RMSE (root mean square error) 
- 
MAPE (mean absolute percentage error) 
 
 
𝐵𝑖𝑎𝑠=
𝑌𝑚𝑎𝑥−𝑌̂𝑚𝑎𝑥
𝑚
  
Equation 3-21 
 
𝑅𝑀𝑆𝐸= √
1
𝑚∑
(𝑌𝑚𝑎𝑥−𝑌̂𝑚𝑎𝑥)2
𝑚
𝑖=1
  
Equation 3-22 
 
𝑀𝐴𝑃𝐸=
1
𝑚∙∑
|
𝑌𝑚𝑎𝑥−𝑌̂𝑚𝑎𝑥
𝑌𝑚𝑎𝑥
|
𝑚
𝑖=1
   
Equation 3-23 
All of the above formulas are considered for ‘m’ number of observations. 
==PAGE:31==
 
3.2.5. CALIBRATION OF THE FUNDAMENTAL MODEL 
Based on the forecast error indicators, the fundamental/theoretical model can be 
calibrated. This calibration is based on a non-linear optimization problem, where the 
Stack model’s important input functions are varied with upper and lower bounds, as 
constraints which are still well within the limits of realistic numbers. 
 
The main system wide parameters that had to be roughly estimated and generalized 
for the model were the following: 
- 
xres - the ratio of free capacity actually available for regulation against the 
full free capacity above the technological minimum load 
- 
Cstart, the specific start-up costs for a given power plant type 
  
The peak and off-peak products for up-regulation and their respective MAPE scores 
will be taken as joint objective function (to reflect that a change in these parameters, 
which are then to be used as constants has an effect on the entire system consisting of 
all 4 products which represent the scope of the thesis) that is to be minimalized in order 
to get a more fine-tuned version for the aforementioned two parameter sets (xres and 
Cstart). These are system wide parameters, so their values will not be changes for 
products separately, because that would set the system off without any reasonable 
explanation at hand. Also, for the sake of not getting the goal seeking problem overly 
calculation extensive, the down-regulation products are omitted from this fine tuning 
process. 
3.3. Player based approach 
The model gained from the previously described method – assuming that the input 
parameters and assumptions were correct – can be considered as the ‘theoretical’ 
market model, although it unfortunately has little explanatory power when comparing 
to the true (fact) market outcomes – it needs to be calibrated further in order to reflect 
some kind of competition based / profit maximizing behaviour. 
 
The described ‘theoretical results’ are assumed to be known and available to every 
player on the market, as no privileged or insider information was used during the 
development.  
If the deviation from the factual maximum bid results can be regarded as 0 on the long 
run (for example the bias is near zero), further assumptions can be made in order to 
start reflecting on the competitive nature of these auctions. 
==PAGE:32==
 
Taking a certain time frame, like 1 year will give 52 observations for each player – 
where using the previous theoretical estimates (which are considered as public 
knowledge as described), each player would be able to see their profits realized on the 
market throughout the year – if they have used 𝑌̂𝑚𝑎𝑥,𝑤𝑒𝑒𝑘, their best guess for the 
outcome of the auction. 
Everyone has a marginal capacity bid price for any given week, which is the cost price 
for participation in the reserve market; and between this marginal capacity bid, and 
the estimated market outcome (𝑌̂max⁡), he can realise a certain profit for every week, or 
gain nothing at all, in case the estimation was higher than the outcome. 
 
 
𝜋𝑤𝑒𝑒𝑘= {
0, 𝑌𝑚𝑎𝑥,𝑤𝑒𝑒𝑘< 𝑌̂𝑚𝑎𝑥,𝑤𝑒𝑒𝑘
𝑌̂𝑚𝑎𝑥,𝑤𝑒𝑒𝑘−𝑀𝐶𝑏𝑖𝑑,𝑤𝑒𝑒𝑘, 𝑌𝑚𝑎𝑥,𝑤𝑒𝑒𝑘≥𝑌̂𝑚𝑎𝑥,𝑤𝑒𝑒𝑘
  
Equation 3-24 
where 𝜋𝑤𝑒𝑒𝑘 stands for the achieved specific (offered volume based) profits for one 
player on a given week, in €/MW. 
 
3.3.1. PROFIT MAXIMIZATION 
Should the player deliberately shift his weekly estimation of a maximum price and 
enter the market with that, instead of the original best estimate, he would have a profit 
function dependent on the amount of this shift for the analysed time period. 
 
 𝜋𝑤𝑒𝑒𝑘
∗
= {
0, 𝑌𝑚𝑎𝑥,𝑤𝑒𝑒𝑘< 𝑌̂𝑚𝑎𝑥,𝑤𝑒𝑒𝑘+ 𝜗
𝑌̂𝑚𝑎𝑥,𝑤𝑒𝑒𝑘+ 𝜗−𝑀𝐶𝑏𝑖𝑑,𝑤𝑒𝑒𝑘, 𝑌𝑚𝑎𝑥,𝑤𝑒𝑒𝑘≥𝑌̂𝑚𝑎𝑥,𝑤𝑒𝑒𝑘+ 𝜗  
Equation 3-25 
In these formulas, 𝜗 is the personal calibration factor for every player in order to be 
able to get maximum profits. 
 
The sum of these weekly profits is then to be optimized for every player, in order to 
get a new bid for everybody, yielding a new merit order for every forecast afterwards. 
 
Π =
∑
𝜋𝑤𝑒𝑒𝑘
∗
𝑛
𝑤𝑒𝑒𝑘=1
 
Equation 3-26 
This afterwards is a simple linear optimization problem, where the value of Π is to be 
maximized with respect to 𝜗 for every player. 
 
A sample of this optimization process can be shown here. The function value is 
negative, because the problem was formulated as a minimization of the negative 
Π⁡function. 
 
==PAGE:33==
 
 
Figure 10 – Yearly profit maximization for a player by shifting the estimates 
 
3.3.2. NEW MARKET EQUILIBRIUM 
Now that estimates of all players have been refined based on their own expected profit 
maximum, a new merit order can be built out of all the new bids. After this new supply 
curve is formed, the market can be cleared again. This can be regarded as an iterative 
process, where the new maximum accepted bid 𝑌̂∗
𝑚𝑎𝑥,𝑤𝑒𝑒𝑘 can serve as basis for 
another round of profit maximization for the players by shifting their guesses with 𝜗∗ 
and repeat the loop again until an equilibrium is reached through iteration. In this 
thesis, it is assumed – for simplicity – that this iterative function would not change the 
outcomes of the market in a relevantly big way, so it is omitted from the 
documentation and the results, but the created model is prepared for this function. 
 
3.4. Product coupling 
To make things more complex, the models from the previous processes for all four 
products could be combined, in order to see which player would be more incentivized 
to go into positive and negative reserves. All of this is also necessary, because players 
are required to enter all their bids into the market at the same time, for multiple 
products; keeping in mind that all the bids have a theoretical chance to win, and in 
that case, the provider has to be able to stand with his capacities to the extent of the 
tendered volume he had won. 
Coupling the products could be done by setting up a ranking for each one, with the 
specific profits per MW offered capacity. Any player will first want to participate in 
==PAGE:34==
 
providing the reserve product which offers the highest expected profits. This will give 
the final merit order within the stack model, defining the final maximum capacity bid 
price. Only 2 product pairs need to be analysed coupled to each other, peak-up and 
down regulation as one group, and off-peak with the same directions as the other one. 
The directions are the mutually exclusive qualities here, so if somebody offers full 
capacity for one direction, it would not make sense to go for the other. The rational 
behaviour is to aim for the product where the player expects to be selected (based on 
his expectations of a maximum bid and his own marginal bid) and the highest specific 
profit per volume. However, this expected specific maximum profit is dependent on 
the new market outcome that would actually be formed by players optimizing 
between these mutually exclusive products (not for a provider, but for a unit of 
capacity). The iterative nature and the game theoretic approach that would be 
necessary to handle this problem effectively makes it out of scope for this thesis, so it 
is only mentioned as a theoretical possibility to refine the outcome. 
3.5. Benchmarking 
In order to be able to benchmark the models, a comparison is to be formulated. The 
simplest of all is a persistent AR1 autoregressive model, where the forecast, without 
any further ado, for the maximum capacity bid would be previous week’s fact results. 
The model errors can be calculated and compared to the final model results. As the 
year 2014 stood for the calibration period, the following period up until June 2015 and 
its historical values can be used as benchmark values.  
 
Keeping true to the original goal and problem formulation, assuming the role of an 
asset manager, another benchmark would be whether if such a business model could 
be made profitable with the help of this forecast model. 
In this scenario, the asset manager offers any power plant 90% of the fact market 
average for any given week, if he agrees to enter the tender and provide the requested 
reserves if necessary. Using the final model’s estimates, the remuneration between the 
asset manager and the third party asset holder can be examined for a chosen time 
period, as the benchmarking time frame of the first part of 2015. 
 
𝜆𝑤𝑒𝑒𝑘
𝑠𝑝𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑓𝑖𝑐= {𝑌̌𝑚𝑎𝑥−0.9 ∙𝑌𝑎𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒, 𝑌̌𝑚𝑎𝑥≤𝑌𝑚𝑎𝑥
−0.9 ∙𝑌𝑎𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒, 𝑌̌𝑚𝑎𝑥> 𝑌𝑚𝑎𝑥
  
Equation 3-27 
, where 𝜆𝑤𝑒𝑒𝑘
𝑠𝑝𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑓𝑖𝑐 is the specific profit from the third party. 
 
The total results from this theoretical construction for the first half of 2015 can then 
be compared to the benchmarking model as well to see which performs better. 
 
 
==PAGE:35==
 
4. FORECAST RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
4.1. Theoretical model 
The results of the theoretical model, where all players bids were simulated as their 
estimated marginal cost of participation has – unfortunately, very little explanatory 
power.  
The results for the interval with the first week being 6th January 2014 and the last 
delivery week starting 12th January 2015 are shown on Figure 11 and Figure 12. The one 
year interval looks reasonable because taking a more extended time spawn apparently 
takes the observer to a time where legislation (market setup, nuclear plants) and 
reserve supplying plant parameters (data about shut down or mothballed plants) are 
less known. 
 
  
Figure 11 – Theoretical model results, peak up 
 
Figure 12 – Theoretical model results, off-peak up 
 
 
The error of this forecast method is very significant, as shown by the indicators, even 
in comparison to the simple AR1 benchmark model, which means that further steps 
are definitely needed to refine the model. The dynamics of the model also seem to be 
in flawed, the only positive results are that the completely theoretical based model 
without any scaling or calibration is within the right range of the fact results, and the 
higher off-peak prices are also noted. 
 
When compared to the persistent AR1 model, the bias and deviation of these models 
are also high compared to the lot simpler AR1. 
 
 
==PAGE:36==
 
 
Figure 13 – AR1, Peak-upregulation 
 
Figure 14 – Theoretical model, Peak up-regulaton 
 
A comparison between the AR1 model and the peak up-regulation theoretical model 
is shown in Table 8. 
 
Table 8 – Forecast error indicators 
Indicator 
Theoretical model AR1 benchmark 
Bias [€/MW] 
71,40 
-11,74 
RMSE  
425,54 
176,40 
MAPE [%] 
60,29 
16,40 
 
 
==PAGE:37==
 
Basically, these models only use the forward prices and the fuel/carbon emission price 
inputs as time-dependent parameters, all the other inputs are based on industrial best 
practices and assumptions made based on literature, so in theory, this 2014 period 
could have been used as validation without further benchmarking, but the 
unsatisfying results show the need of additional analysis. The reason behind the 
results is mainly based on two things: error of estimations used in a model built from 
bottom-up, and the real world behaviour of market players, where they deviate from 
their theoretical production costs, when entering the competition. 
 
4.1.1. CALIBRATION OF THE THEORETICAL MODEL 
Since some of the governing parameters were only rough estimates, it makes sense to 
calibrate these (for example the available ratio of secondary capacities, see in Section 
3.2.5) in order to get the smallest possible errors. The ten main plant technology cluster 
types give 10 variables to modify in this process. In order to reflect that these 
parameters are fixed after calibration (e.g. they describe the system itself and are not 
product specific), the objective function will be the combined MAPE of the regulatory 
products. 
 
To have the best chance of avoiding local minimums by the relatively large number of 
variables, a genetic algorithm is being used to minimalize the objective (fitness) function. 
 
The constraints have been set in order to reflect that coal based power plants and larger 
biomass plants are the least flexible, and are not able to offer their entire flexible 
capacity above the minimum load. An upper boundary of 𝑥𝑟𝑒𝑠=0,5 (see Equation 3-2) 
has been set for coal and biomass based power plants. The natural gas based power 
plants are assumed to have a larger mobility, so for the sake of the calibration, their 
upper bound are set to 1, or 100%. The other mentioned parameter set; start-up costs 
were not included in the calibration, because the two input sets used together 
apparently made the optimization problem unfeasible – and when optimums were 
reached, both parameters were well out of the range of an acceptable estimate.  
Each generation will consist of a 100 population, using Matlab’s Optimization Toolbox. 
The results converged after 130 generations, which took 4-5 hours of runtime, mainly 
due to the stack model’s dynamics – which were structured in Microsoft Excel, so an 
active connection was required between Matlab and MS Excel (in order to write the 
members of each population into the worksheet, calculate the results, and read them 
back into Matlab for analysis). 
==PAGE:38==
 
The calibrated model’s results, with the input variables final values can be seen on 
Figure 15. The values are still realistic, as the coal and biomass power plants did not 
reach their upper bound of 50%, while CCGT, as the most flexible power plant among 
all of them for secondary ancillary services is able to use almost all of its free capacities. 
 
 
Figure 15 – Genetic algorithm results.  
Legend: 1 – large biomass plants 2 – small biomass plants 3 – FiT biomass plants (near 0) 4, 5 – lignite and harc 
coal power plants 6 – small lignite units (near 0) 7 – CCGT 8 – OCGT 9,10 – small and large scale conventional 
gas power plants 
 
Results with the calibrated input sets are shown on Figure 16 and Figure 17. 
 
Figure 16 – Calibrated Theoretical Offpeak up 
Figure 17 – Calibrated Theoretical Peak Up 
 
 Calibration also helped to reduce the deviation, as shown on the example of peak up-
regulation. 
==PAGE:39==
 
 
Figure 18 – Calibrated theoretical model, peak upregulation 
 
There is a positive feedback from the side of down-regulation, which is shown on 
Figure 19, where despite the fact that one big peak has been missed, the marginal cost 
and opportunity cost approach is somewhat reflected on the market, by the generally 
lower market outcomes. 
 
Figure 19 – Peak down calibration results 
 
The forecast error indicators are calculated for these new models, but there would be 
no point in validating these models through them, because they have been fit to 
historical data from 2014, so benchmarking back to these numbers would be incorrect. 
4.2. Player based approach 
The theoretical model could not reach the desired level of precision related to the mean 
value of the error of the results for over a year. This could mean that the basic 
estimation method is not symmetrical, meaning that the theoretical market outcome is 
==PAGE:40==
 
biased in some direction. Nevertheless, the methodology described in Section 3.3 is to 
be carried through and the results will be shown here. This also makes sense because 
it seems that the fundamental model with only the forward prices as market based 
inputs is not enough to create a satisfying forecast. Using this one year period 
described earlier, the individual profit-maximizing behaviour forces the players to try 
and balance out the uncertainties of the (calibrated) theoretical model, by looking at 
the past auction results and seeing if a deliberate shift from the forecasted maximum 
market price (which is supposed to be information available for everyone) would help 
them to maximize their profits over time. 
If the participants deliberately shift their future auction bids with this constant (which 
is to be recalculated weekly taking the last year into account) and use this new bid, 
instead of the theoretical forecast, the market would clear at a new price level.  
This procedure can be regarded as an iterative process, but for simplicity, it is assumed 
that the final maximum market price converges fast after the calculations. The players 
are expected to bid lower than the forecasted theoretical maximum if they are 
operating with low marginal costs of participation in order to ensure a steady income, 
while really expensive participants might try to optimize for high capacity bids, trying 
their luck in ‘fishing’ for low probability high income. 
The optimization has been carried out for all the products, the result of peak-up 
regulation can be seen below, on Figure 20. 
 
 
Figure 20 – Player based model for peak-up 
 
==PAGE:41==
 
The forecast shifts above the theoretical model’s forecast for the year 2014 period, yet 
gain, it is not correct to validate this model through 2014’s historical results, since the 
model itself contains information from this time period, which would not be available 
for the forecast. 
 The results here are obviously biased, because the theoretical model had a bias other 
than zero, and even if the expected forecast error would be zero, it would still only get 
participants a 50-50% chance to end up with a bid estimation that is accepted. This fact 
gives importance to profit optimization, as players are motivated to use some kind of 
a strategy based on past observances in order to be able to generate profits. The big 
shift upwards is the result of the heavily biased theoretical model to begin with, 
because players are forced to try and take bigger risk that yield a higher income if the 
forecast itself would be so uncertain. 
The model will be validated with the proposed benchmark scheme, described in 
Section 3.5 earlier. 
 
4.3. Benchmarking results 
Finally, the value creating potential of the created models will be tested. The AR1, the 
calibrated theoretical and the player based model are benchmarked against the 
weighted market average results for any given week of 2015. After this, the specific 
profits are summed, as described in Section 3.5. The peak up-regulation product 
introduced more in-depth than the others, so this will be the starting point. 
 
The results for the set-up benchmark are below expectation for both the player based 
and the original theoretical models. The results of the peak-upregulation are shown on 
Figure 21.  
 
==PAGE:42==
 
 
Figure 21 – Benchmarking peak-upregulation 
 
Both models have a negative expected specific profit when evaluated against the 
proposed benchmark (approximately -5000 €/MW for the theoretical model, and -7000 
€/MW for the player profit based model). The overall high deviation present with all 
the models (the rest of the product) make it hard to rate the theoretical value of the 
player (profit) based optimization. Neither of the four products were able to make it 
past the benchmark of generating positive specific revenues. 
 
Analysing the autoregressive method yields similar results, despite the fact that the 
MAPE and bias scored for AR1 were always a lot better than any of the other models. 
The AR1 counterpart constantly misses the mark of acceptance, though no matter the 
close guesses, it always hits under the mark of acceptance (Figure 22), and finally 
reaches a negative specific profitability of -6100 €/MW. 
==PAGE:43==
 
 
Figure 22 – AR1 benchmark for Y2015 
 
Due to the bottom-up structure of the model, there is one additional information 
contained in any forecast made, which can be used for decision making or value 
creation. When evaluating the calibrated theoretical model’s average bids (the market 
clears at a certain maximum price, and the stack model is able to calculate the volume 
weighted average of all accepted bids, hence the bottom-up structure), profitable 
operation was unfortunately not met. As seen on Figure 23 below, profits are only 
generated when a) the bid is accepted and b) when the accepted bid is above the 90% 
of the true market outcome. 
 
 
Figure 23 – Benchmark results of bidding the average price 
==PAGE:44==
 
Although only the peak-upregulation product has been walked through entirely, 
models are available for all products. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:45==
 
5. CONCLUSION 
 
The fundamental model based on the stack model has been created. For this, 
understanding the power market, the generating assets, and the ancillary services 
markets was required. Trying to figure out basic driving forces of a real world market 
or playground was a really exciting experience. The highest benefit from this thesis, 
apart from a basic framework for a few models and ideas that could be enhanced by 
further development and a lot more in-depth data collection is the relatively thorough 
overview of this end of the power market.  
 
The marginal cost based theoretical model appears to be showing little potential in 
actual value creation through its forecasts, which was somewhat unexpected for me, 
even though the entire problem is obviously a lot more complex and difficult.  
 
There are a number of points which have to be considered in order to uncover the 
possible weaknesses of such a model. I would assume that the basics, to gauge the 
opportunity costs and through that the marginal bidding cost of each player is a valid 
approach to this problem, and it is reassuring that this is used by some larger asset 
owners in everyday life. However, individual generating units or even pools have very 
detailed and up-to date (also, confidential) data about their own possibilities and costs. 
I see this as the main weakness of this model, there is such a vast number of 
participants on this market that it is practically impossible to estimate their parameters 
one by one. For this, rule of thumb numbers were used, and that obviously leads to 
errors on the long run. After technology, the fuel costs themselves were taken from 
traded market averages, but in a lot of cases, this is not the actual cost incurring to the 
asset operator, because there are other costs, such as transaction (e.g. coal) and 
infrastructure based (capacity costs for the usage of the pipe system, e.g. natural gas) 
which in some cases create a large gap between the “molecule price” and the true costs. 
Moreover, every single provider (or group of providers, belonging to the same firms 
or conglomerates) have long term fuel contracts (as in: they are not covering their 
actual fuel needs from the day or month-ahead markets, but possible have take or pay 
contracts dating back months if not years), and all these contracts come with different 
terms, for the better or worse, all of these factors creating a large possible observable 
fluctuation between any two market participants.  
All in all, the estimations and generalizations, together with the lack of pre-
qualification data from all the TSOs, but 50Hz could have easily led to an over-
generalized stack model even with all the input parameters that were introduced. 
 
==PAGE:46==
 
 
All power plants have maintenance schedules throughout the year, which define their 
available capacities in a lot more dynamic way than the yearly updated ‘operational 
or unoperational’ list that is publicly available. On the top of planned maintenances 
and unplanned outages, a lot of power plants have longer term contracts or optional 
capacity contracts with third parties, limiting their true value-creating potential, that – 
even the models within the thesis show it – heavily reflect on the product cost of going 
into reserves. Also, more and more providers enter into regulatory power pools 
(especially smaller players) to be able to participate with better chances or more 
competitively. Unfortunately no data is available of these cooperations.  
 
 
The German power system has abundant combined heat and power (CHP) plants. 
Data is not readily available to filter plants on their CHP abilities, and definitely not 
their specific technological parameters. Depending the heat market they are operating 
on, their income from their secondary product (if heat is considered secondary by 
them) can largely influence their unit cost of power production, which is a very 
important feature in the theory analysed by this thesis. On the top of the uncertainty 
posed by this technological aspect, it is also to be noted that heat markets are very 
seasonal, and the availability (financially viable operation) for these plants in non-
heating seasons are limited, adding an extra factor that was hardly possible to manage 
with the available detail of data. 
 
The role of hydro-power in these markets is also very important. It would be possible 
to give an estimate for the opportunity costs of providing reserves by pumped storage 
plants, if an hourly forward price curve was available to see the optimal dispatch 
schedule for any such plant. While I believe all power plants would have benefited 
from the greater detail that would have been obtainable by such an hourly 
optimization, the simplification for comparing alternative costs with weekly forward 
products was a fair simplification for conventional plants. 
 
If a lot more research would go into data mining, a more accurate theoretical model 
could be made, but the input data would be so robust that it would be nearly 
impossible to be kept up to date, if somebody was to forecast the entire market’s 
behaviour through these fundamental inputs.  
Deviation of course could also come from the fact that an auction system like this 
ensures that strategic behaviour enters the playfield, which was out of scope to model 
within this thesis. Basic attempts were made based on the assumption that all players 
==PAGE:47==
 
could estimate their peers’ marginal costs of participation and possibilities, and could 
refine their betting strategies based on maximizing their own profits. 
 
I believe that the main question related to the future usability of this model is whether 
if it is possible to get a lot more data to fill it with, because if there are no major errors 
made in the assumptions used the system is prepared and operational, with no 
extremely large processing/calculation power or time needed to run it.  
 
The goals set in the first section of this paper, to be able to create value through 
forecasting auction results which are able to beat 90% of the fact weighted market 
average has barely been met my any of the models for any products. None of the 
proposed models aiming to forecast the maximum capacity bids were able to meet this 
challenge, the most promising based on statistical indicators was the simplest AR1 
model which was planned to be used for a benchmark for its very low MAPE scores, 
but as it turns out, due to the ‘unforgiving’ nature of the pay-as-bid system, it is the 
worst performing for all the 4 products. 
 
As of now, the best in every scenario is the calibrated theoretical model. It would be a 
very interesting thing to further research the potentials of the basic stack model, when 
filled up with a lot more and better quality data. The opportunity cost method, despite 
the fact that it was not able to predict the market outcomes with the desired accuracy 
seems to have good potential, if the strategic behaviour of the market players could be 
implemented into it. 
 
 
==PAGE:48==
 
6. BIBLIOGRAPHY 
 
Bauer, H., 2014. Daten zur Regelleistung. Berlin: 50Hertz Transmission GmbH. 
Büki, G., 2004. Erőművek (Power Plants). Budapest: Műegyetem Kiadó. 
Chazarra, M. & Pérez-Díaz, J. I., 2014. Optimal Operation of Variable Speed Pumped 
Storage Hydropower Plants Participating in Secondary Regulation Reserve Markets, Madrid: 
European Energy Market (EEM). 
Consentec GmbH, 2014. Description of load-frequency control concept and market for control 
reserves, Aachen, Germany: s.n. 
Danske Commodities, 2014. Thesis proposal: Modeling regulating power markets in 
Germany, s.l.: s.n. 
EEX, 2015. European Emission Allowances | Global Environmental Exchange. [Online]  
Available 
at: 
https://www.eex.com/en/market-data/emission-allowances/spot-
market/european-emission-allowances#!/2015/06/24 
[Accessed 31 04 2014]. 
ENTSO-E, 2009. Policy 1: Load-Frequency Control - Final version, hely nélk.: ismeretlen 
szerző 
European Energy Exchange, 2012. EEX Product Brochure Power. [Online]  
Available 
at: 
http://www.eex.com/blob/66452/40623f9f22d203a09155547bc84c89f2/konzept-strom-
release-03a-englisch-pdf-data.pdf 
[Accessed 22 april 2015]. 
González, V., Contreras, J. & Bunn, D. W., 2012. Forecasting Power Prices Using a 
Hybrid Fundamental-Econometric Model. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWER 
SYSTEMS, February, 27(1), pp. 363-372. 
Hirth, L. & Ziegenhagen, I., 2013. Balancing Power and Variable Renewables - A Glimpse 
at German Data, Leipzig: University of Leipzig. 
IEA, 2004. Biofuels for Transport - An International Perspective. Paris, France: 
International Energy Agency. 
Illés, Á., 2015. Costs related to power plants [Interjú] (10. 05. 2015). 
McLloyd, F., 2009. Regelzonen deutscher Übertragungsnetzbetreiber. s.l.:s.n. 
Nikhil, K. et al., 2012. Power Plant Cycling Costs. Golden, Colorado U.S.: Intertek 
APTECH. 
Regelleistung.net, 
2015. 
Tender 
overview. 
[Online]  
Available 
at: 
https://www.regelleistung.net/ip/action/ausschreibung/public 
[Accessed 15 february 2015]. 
STATISTIK DER KOHLENWIRTSCHAFT e.V., 2014. Entwicklung ausgewählter 
Energiepreise. 
[Online]  
==PAGE:49==
 
Available 
at: 
http://www.kohlenstatistik.de/files/enpr.xlsx 
[Accessed 20. february 2015.]. 
The Federal Network Agency for Electricity, Gas, Telecommunications, Post and 
Railway, 
2014. 
Power 
Plant 
List. 
[Online]  
Available 
at: 
http://www.bundesnetzagentur.de/SharedDocs/Downloads/DE/Sachgebiete/Energie/
Unternehmen_Institutionen/Versorgungssicherheit/Erzeugungskapazitaeten/Kraftw
erksliste/Kraftwerksliste_2014.xlsx;jsessionid=EF8414FD3F83E838D774CEA2B1C8126
8?__blob=publicationFile 
[Accessed 01 january 2015]. 
U.S. Energy Information Administration, 2013. Carbon Dioxide Emissions Coefficients. 
[Online]  
Available 
at: 
http://www.eia.gov/environment/emissions/co2_vol_mass.cfm 
[Accessed 15 04 2015]. 
Vattenfall 
Germany, 
2015. 
Vattenfall’s 
power 
plants. 
[Online]  
Available 
at: 
http://powerplants.vattenfall.com/#/countries=Germany/view=map/sort=name 
[Accessed 15. february 2015.]. 
Weron, R., 2014. Electricity price forecasting: A review of the state-of-the-art with a 
look into the future. International Journal of Forecasting, 30. kötet, pp. 1030-1081. 
 
