==PAGE:1==
Representing genomic variation in
reference graphs
Johan van Beusekom
s093251
Kongens Lyngby 2015
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
The goal of the thesis is to represent genomic variation using graphs. The thesis
covers the motivation for representing genomes as graphs rather than the classi-
cal linear representation. The thesis also covers the design of the genome graph
and a discussion of suitable technologies that can be used for the construction
of the graph. The thesis discusses how to use the genome graph to sample pub-
licly sharable data from otherwise conﬁdential genetic data by removing rare
genetic variants. The challenge of how to replicate the statistical properties of
the original data in the samples is discussed as part of this thesis. Futhermore
the thesis discusses how the graph can be shared through the Semantic Web. As
part of the thesis, a tool named VGTool has been designed and implemented,
with which genome graphs can be constructed from VCF ﬁles. The tool can
also be used to generate genetic data and share the graph through the Semantic
Web. The tool is discussed in terms of design and implementation choices, and a
series of tests are performed to analyse the performance of the tool. The quality
of the sampled data is also tested, to ensure that the statistical properties of the
original data is present in the sampled data. It is concluded that sampling of
individuals from a genome graph is a feasible way of sharing otherwise conﬁden-
tial information, but also that the statistical properties of the generated samples
are not entirely identical to those of the original data. It is also concluded that
the constructed graph can be extended to function in other use cases.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Summary (Danish)
Målet for denne afhandling er at repræsentere genomisk variation med grafer.
Afhandlingen begrunder motivationen for at repræsentere genomer som grafer
fremfor den klassiske linære repræsentation. Afhandlingen beskriver derudover
designet af en genomgraf og diskuterer egnede teknologier, der kan bruges til
at konstruere grafen. Det diskuteres, hvordan genomgrafen kan bruges til at
generere oﬀentligt delbar data fra fortrolig genetisk data ved at fjerne sjælden
genetisk variation. Udfordringen omkring gengivelse af de statistiske egenskaber
fra den oprindelige data i den genererede data bliver diskuteret som en del af
afhandlingen. Ydermere diskuteres det, hvordan grafen kan deles gennem The
Semantic Web. Som en del af afhandlingen, er et værktøj ved navn VGTool
blevet designet og implementeret, med hvilket genomegrafer kan konstrueres
fra VCF ﬁler. Værktøjet kan også bruges til at generere genetisk data samt
til at dele grafen i The Semantic Web. Værktøjet bliver diskuteret i form af
dets design- og implementationsvalg, og en række test er udført med henblik
på at analysere værktøjets ydeevne. Kvaliteten af det genererede data bliver
også testet for at sikre, at de statistiske egenskaber i den generede data er i
overenstemmelse med den oprindelige data. Det konkluderes, at det genererede
data fra genomgrafen er en mulig måde at dele ellers fortrolig information på,
men også at de statistiske egenskaber for den generede data ikke er helt identiske
med den oprindelige data. Det bliver også konkluderet at den konstruerede graf
kan udvides således, at den kan bruges i andre use cases.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fulﬁlment of the requirements for
acquiring an M.Sc. in Engineering.
The thesis deals with the representation of genetic variation using graphs and the
ability to sample data from the graph as a way of sharing otherwise conﬁdential
information.
The thesis was supervised by Nicola Dragoni with external supervision by Jette
Bork-Jensen and Christian Theil Have.
Lyngby, 09-July-2015
Johan van Beusekom
s093251
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor Nicola Dragoni for giving me important
guidance and advice when I needed it.
I would like to thank Jette Bork-Jensen and Christian Theil Have, who have
guided me in my daily work with the thesis. They have both been available to
me at any time and especially their knowledge of genetics has been an important
resource for me when writing the thesis. The tests of section 6.3.1.6 were done
in collaboration with Christian Theil Have.
I would also like to thank all three, for putting time and eﬀort into providing
me with useful feedback in the writing process of the thesis.
I would like to thank The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Basic Metabolic
Research for providing oﬃce space to me and I would also like to thank the
students, who I have shared my oﬃce with, for their company throughout the
ﬁve months of the thesis.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Summary (Danish)
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation and background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Problem description
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3
Goals & requirements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.4
Contribution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.5
Thesis outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.6
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2
Data representation
9
2.1
Genetics overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Obtaining and using genetic data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Current data representation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.4
Uniﬁed data structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.5
Restriction of scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.6
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3
Genetic variation as graphs
23
3.1
Existing graphs in genetics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2
Genome graphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.3
Use cases for the genome graph . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.4
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
==PAGE:12==
x
CONTENTS
4
Designing the genome graph
37
4.1
Entities
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.2
Building graphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.3
Compression and expansion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.4
Merging graphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.5
Probability trees
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.6
Sampling individuals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.7
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5
Relevant tools and technologies
57
5.1
Graph formats in genetics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5.2
Other graph formats . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5.3
The Semantic Web and Linked Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
5.4
Tools for the Semantic Web . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
5.5
VCF parsers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
5.6
Chosen tools
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
5.7
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
6
VGTool
69
6.1
Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
6.2
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
6.3
Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
6.4
Applicability in case study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110
6.5
Tool summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110
7
Discussion
111
7.1
Genome graphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111
7.2
Choice of technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112
7.3
Computational challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112
7.4
The Semantic Web . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113
7.5
Sampling individuals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113
7.6
Future work & limitations of VGTool . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114
8
Conclusion
117
A Terminology
119
B VGTool source
123
C Using VGTool
125
Bibliography
127
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1
Introduction
In this chapter we will start by giving a brief overview of the motivation for
studying genetics and DNA in the context of a study recently undertaken in
Denmark. We will then give an outline of the problems regarding the current
format in which the collected data is represented. The presented problems will
be used to form a problem description along with goals for this thesis.
Throughout the thesis the reader will be introduced to a number of terms from
biology and bioinformatics which will be brieﬂy explained in order to give the
reader a better understanding of the context of the problem and the motivation
for the thesis. Appendix A contains a collection of these terms.
1.1
Motivation and background
This thesis is motivated by limitations of the current data format in which
genetic variation is expressed. In the following, we will explain brieﬂy how and
why it is important to study genetics.
==PAGE:14==
2
Introduction
1.1.1
Studying genetics
Genes are molecular units that exist within all living organisms and hold infor-
mation of how to build and maintain an organisms cells and pass genetic traits
to oﬀspring. The biological traits of an organism are determined by its genes,
and while some traits, such as eye color or height, are easily visible, other traits
such as blood type or increased risk of speciﬁc diseases are not. The observable
traits of an individual is called the phenotype of the individual.
Phenotype: The observable traits of an organism are called the
organisms phenotype. The phenotype of an organism is inﬂuenced
both by the environment and the genetics of the organism.
Individuals of a species generally have the same collection of genes, but the
particular variants of genotypes can make an individual carry a certain variation
of a trait.
Genotype: A genotype is a part of DNA that determines a spe-
ciﬁc charateristic of the individual. For any position in the DNA,
there is a genotype, but it is possible that two organisms have
diﬀerent genotypes for the same "position", resulting in diﬀerent
phenotypes.
As such there are genetic variation associated with having blue eyes and other
variations associated with brown eyes. The information stored in the DNA of
an organism is present already from birth, and while some genetic traits are
visible, other traits such as an increased risk of cancer for an individual are not,
but could be inferred from studying the genetic patterns of the individual.
DNA (Deoxyribonucleic acid): DNA is a molecule that stores
biological information.
DNA consists of two strands, which are
each made up of sequence of bases.
Base (Nucleobase): A sequence of DNA is made up of the four
bases A (adenine), C(cytosine), G(guanine) and T(thymine).
An early diagnosis of such diseases is desirable because the earlier the diagnosis
is made, the earlier actions can be taken to counteract or mitigate the eﬀects of
==PAGE:15==
1.1 Motivation and background
3
the disease. Making a diagnosis based on a persons genetics involves comparing
an individuals DNA to known DNA patterns, called reference genomes, in order
to ﬁnd similarities and infer the biological eﬀects of these. This process will be
explained in more detail in section 2.2.
Genome & Reference genome: The genome is the entire DNA
sequence of an individual.
A reference genome is the complete
assembled genome of an individual. The term reference comes from
the fact that it is used as a reference to which DNA can be aligned
in order to determine similar regions.
The quality of this comparison relies on genetic similarity between the two DNA
sequences, because it can be hard to determine the similarities if the sequences
diﬀerentiate a lot. In order to be able to choose a suitable reference genome there
is motivation for having a database of DNA that resembles the local population;
this is because people from the same geographical origin are genetically more
similar than people from diﬀerent parts of the world, in the same way that
people who are related to each other are more genetically similar than people
who are not.
1.1.2
Context and case study
Besenbacher et al. [12] covers a large study recently carried out in Denmark in
which a national pan-genome has been created in order to give more insight into
the genetics of the Danish population.
Pan-genome: A pan-genome is a collection of genetic data that
encapsulates the genetic variation of a population.
The study involves the sequencing of a cohort of 50 trios1 in order to create a
database of 150 individuals’ DNA that resembles the danish population as best
as possible.
1A trio is a family of tree; mother, father, and child
==PAGE:16==
4
Introduction
Sequencing: Sequencing of DNA is the process of determining the
precise order of the bases in a DNA stand as explained in section
2.2.2.
Cohort: A group of individuals with a shared characteristic. In
the context of the Danish pan-genome, this characteristic is that
all involved individuals are Danish.
The study is one of the biggest within the ﬁeld of genetics carried out in Denmark
and Scandinavia and aims, as encapsulated by the quote below, to improve our
understanding of the genetics of the Danish population.
"Identiﬁcation of all variants and their frequencies can facilitate
an increased understanding of population-speciﬁc disease suscepti-
bility and will be important for advancing clinical and public health
genetics." [12, p. 6]
However there are restrictions which mean that the collected data cannot be
shared publicly. This of course is a shame because the data is interesting to other
research institutes in Denmark, Scandinavia and even the rest of the world.
Working with the DNA of individuals is a delicate matter in the sense that unless
the individuals agree that the information of their DNA can be shared publicly,
there is a strict requirement to keep the genetic data conﬁdential. Keeping the
data conﬁdential is not a problem from a technical standpoint, but it hampers
the possibility of publicly sharing interesting ﬁndings, allowing researchers in
diﬀerent parts of the world to work with the data. Researching genetics is gen-
erally quite expensive due to the required equipment and because the involved
techniques are in constant development. This means that due to ﬁnancial limi-
tations many researchers are not able to gather data and carry out projects on
the same scale as for example the Danish pan-genome project. For this reason
it would be desireable if the research facilities that have the ﬁnancial backing to
undertake large studies of human genetics were able to share this information
with the rest of the world for them to analyse and work with. The required
anonymity makes it hard to share genetic information seeing as a persons DNA
is like a very detailed ﬁngerprint and therefore could be directly related back to
that person. The consequences of sharing a persons DNA are hard to determine,
but scenarios have been thought of in which for example an insurance company
could refuse to give a life insurance to a person if they were able to tell from
==PAGE:17==
1.2 Problem description
5
the genetic data that the person is likely to develop cancer later in life.
Genotypes are not necessarily statistically independent, but can covary depend-
ing on their position in the genome. This means that "critical" genotypes (in
the sense that they for example are related to the ability to develop cancer) can
be linked statistically with "innocent" genotypes, and revealing the presence of
the latter can be used to infer the existence of the former.
In this thesis we consider the Danish pan-genome a case study for the project.
This is natural, because the presented problems and the motivation for solving
them are a result of the Danish pan-genome project, the limitations of the
current data representation and its inability to be shared. The anonymity of
the individuals involved in this study is a requirement, but there is motivation
for sharing as much information as possible without revealing the identity of
anyone involved.
The approach taken and the achieved results of the thesis
however aim to be of general applicability.
1.2
Problem description
A linear representation of a genome is limited in its ability to express the varia-
tion of a population. The genetic variation of populations is interesting because
it can be used to identify the consequences of having certain genetic variants,
however inidividual level genetic data cannot be published due to ethical rami-
ﬁcations. Sharing beyond summary statistics of single genotypes in a cohort is
problematic because interdependency between rare genetic variation may expose
the identity of involved individuals and their dispositions.
In this thesis we will examine possibilities for creating a data structure that
represents the genetic variation including statistical interdependencies with a
population sample without exposing individual genotypes.
To test the data
structure we implement a tool capable of creating the data structure and sam-
pling data and we evaluate whether it conveys a reasonable statistical reproduc-
tion of the original data. The tool will be designed to be capable of handling
large amounts of data, to integrate with existing resources and formats and
ﬁnally to be extendable in anticipation of future use cases of the data structure.
==PAGE:18==
6
Introduction
1.2.1
The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center
for Basic Metabolic Research
The project has been supervised externally by Jette Bork-Jensen and Christian
Theil Have from The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Basic Metabolic
Research at Copenhagen University. The problems discussed in this thesis are
related to their work with the Danish pan-genome.
1.3
Goals & requirements
The overall goal is to redevelop the data representation for genetic variation
of a cohort in the context of the Danish pan-genome and to create a method
with which this data can be shared while still abiding to the requirements of
anonymity for the involved individuals. This process can be divided into smaller
goals:
• An analysis of the problems with the current data represention of genetic
variation (Chapter 2).
• A discussion of why graphs are suitable data structures for the reprensen-
tation of genetic data and how they can be designed to solve problems of
the current representation (Chapter 3 & 4).
• A review of relevant technologies that allows us to build the graph data
structure (Chapter 5).
• An implementation of the proposed solution with a justiﬁcation of the
approach used and the technologies involved (Chapter 6).
• An evaluation of the implemented solution and a discussion of the achieved
results (Chapter 6, 7 & 8).
1.4
Contribution
The contribution of this thesis is twofold.
Firstly, it provides a motivation for representing genomic data in graphs along
with a discussion of how these can be built and used in diﬀerent scenarios. Along
==PAGE:19==
1.5 Thesis outline
7
with the genome graphs is a proposed solution of how to share person sensitive
genetic data of a cohort by removing rare genetic variation and sampling in-
dividuals with statistical similarity to the original data. This is particularly
interesting in the context of the Danish pan-genome as it provides a way of
sharing otherwise conﬁdential data from an extensive genetics study.
Secondly, a tool named VGTool has been implemented in which graphs can
be built from the genetic variation present within a cohort and with which
invididuals can be sampled in accordance with the method mentioned above.
1.5
Thesis outline
Chapter 2 will explain brieﬂy about genetics, why and how they are studied. It
will then take a look at the current data represention for genetic variation and
the limitations of this. After discussing the limitations, we will reﬁne the scope
of this thesis, as we are not able to attend each of the presented problems.
Chapter 3 discusses the motivation for representing genome data as graphs by
presenting several use cases in which a genome graph would improve upon the
current linear representation.
Chapter 4 presents relevant design decisions for a genome graph. The chapter
also discusses algorithms for using the graph and analyses these in terms of
running time and space complexity.
Chapter 5 provides a review of relevant tools and formats for working with and
storing the genome graph. This review provides a reasoning behind the chosen
technologies such as programming language and storage format for the graph.
Chapter 6 is concerned with the tool developed as part of this thesis.
It is
divided into three sections: In section 6.1 the design of the implemented tool is
discussed in terms of structure, and the implemented algorithms are explained
and analysed in terms of their running time and space consumption. Section
6.2 discusses in more detail the implementation of the tool, with a focus on the
key parts of the code. Section 6.3 contains tests of the implemented tool. The
section is divided into two parts, one for the performance of the tool, and one
for testing the quality of sampled data.
Chapter 7 provides a discussion of the achieved results in relation to the initial
goals set for the thesis as well as suggestions for future work.
==PAGE:20==
8
Introduction
Chapter 8 concludes the overall ﬁndings.
1.6
Summary
In this chapter we have brieﬂy outlined the motivation for studying genetics.
We have also discussed the problematics regarding the sharing of data, here
in the context of the Danish pan-genome.
We used the issues surrounding
the sharability of person speciﬁc genome data as a motivation for the problem
description, which forms the basis of this thesis.
In the next chapter we will take a closer look at how genetics are studied and
represented and analyse the problematics regarding this before we provide a new
genome representation that seeks to solve the found issues in chapter 3.
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 2
Data representation
In the last chapter we brieﬂy discussed what is involved in the analysis of ge-
netics. In this section we will go into more detail of the usage of the collected
genetic information and highlight some of the problematics regarding this. We
will also reﬁne of the scope of the thesis.
2.1
Genetics overview
In the introduction we explained why knowledge of the human genome is im-
portant, why it must be sequenced and what it can be used for.
Because the general topic of this thesis is within Computer Science, this section
will provide an overview that should enable the reader to understand the bio-
logical concepts involved regardless of their background. For a more in depth of
explanatation the concepts mentioned here we refer the reader to Griﬃths [19].
The ﬁrst concept that we should look at is DNA. DNA is a molecule that encodes
genetic instructions used in the development and functioning of all known living
organisms and many viruses. DNA is made up of bases among other things1.
The four bases in DNA; cytosine (C), guanine (G), adenine (A), and thymine
1That are left out of this overview for the sake of simplicity
==PAGE:22==
10
Data representation
(T), appear in sequences of DNA. As mentioned, sequencing of an individual is
the process of determing the exact order of the four bases in the DNA strand.
Chromosomes are long sequences of DNA which come in pairs, as individuals
inherit one chromosome from each parent.
The genome is the collection of
the chromosomes, so when we talk about sequencing DNA, it is the process of
determining the order of the bases of DNA in each chromosome. An overview
of a chromosome is shown in ﬁgure 2.12.
Chromosome: A chromosome is structure that contains DNA. A
human inherits one copy of each the 23 chromosomes from each of
their parents, giving a total of 23 chromosome pairs.
Figure 2.1: Relationship between entities in a chromosome.
2.2
Obtaining and using genetic data
In this section we will look at how genetics are studied. Studying genetics and
the eﬀects of certain genetic patterns is an empirical process in which newly
sequenced DNA of individuals is compared to a reference genome in order to
ﬁnd their similarities. In the next sections we will start by looking at the nature
of genetic variation and then look at how reference genomes are built and then
how they are used to identify genetic variation in individuals.
2Figure from http://groups.nbp.northwestern.edu/science-outreach/genome/DNA.jpg
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Obtaining and using genetic data
11
2.2.1
Genetic variation
Genetic variation is variation of the sequence of bases in DNA from one individ-
ual to another. The consequences of having certain genetic variants can range
from non-existant to causing quite severe genetic disorders.
Identifying the genetic variation is challenging because it can appear in diﬀer-
ent forms such as single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), small insertions and
deletions (indels) and larger structural variants (SVs) in the DNA [12, p. 2].
Structural variants are larger variations between genetic sequences, such as for
example a large insertion of a segment of DNA from one chromosome into an-
other. The simple types of variation are shown in ﬁgure 2.2.
Reference
SNP
Insertion
Deletion
ACTGAACCGT
ACTGTACCGT
ACTGAGCACCGT
ACT - - ACCGT
Figure 2.2: The three simplest types of variation in relation to a reference.
Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP): Pronounced "snip".
Describes genetic variation of one base.
Indel: The term speciﬁes genetic variation that is either a deletion
or an insertion. The reason that one term is used for both types of
variation, is that depending on the frame of reference, an insertion
can also be seen as a deletion and vice versa.
Structural variation: A more complex type of variation that
changes the structure of the genome, for example by inversing a
sequence of DNA.
2.2.2
Sequencing DNA
As mentioned in section 1.1.1, DNA sequencing is the process of determining
the precise order of the bases in a DNA strand. The process is central aspect of
studying genetics. Given the size of the human genome, it is infeasible to read
==PAGE:24==
12
Data representation
an entire chromosome in one go, and it is instead fragmented into reads of small
length, as illustrated in ﬁgure 2.3.
To assemble the original genome, a method called de novo assembly [37], can
be used in which the reads are compared pairwise in order to ﬁnd overlaps
between them. If reads overlap, they can be merged into a longer sequence until
in the end there is only one sequence left for each chromosome which is the
reconstruction of that original genome as illustrated in the ﬁgure 2.3. The read
comparison can be done in parallel to greatly decrease the running time of the
process.
Genome assembly: Genome assembly is the process of assem-
bling the human genome from smaller reads as shown in ﬁgure 2.3.
Figure 2.3: Overview of the sequencing process.
1: The genome as it is in an
individual. 2: The generated reads from the genome. 3: The reads
are aligned to each other by ﬁnding overlapping sequences, however
some reads do not have a perfect overlap, which can be caused by read
errors. Therefore there should be an error margin that allows reads to be
paired even though they are not completely identical. 4: The assembly
is constructed by merging the overlapping reads into one sequence. This
sequence should be close to or identical to the original genome.
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Obtaining and using genetic data
13
Genome assembly is complicated by the fact that the equipment for generating
reads is not perfect, and as such reading errors can occur. This means that
reads covering a particular locus in the DNA may have diﬀerent ideas of what
base it is.
Locus: Locus (plural loci) refers to a speciﬁc position on a chro-
mosome.
Therefore the depth of the sequencing is important for the result, as it describes
how many reads that cover a particular locus. Because errors can occur in the
reads, the consensus among the reads of which base is at given position might
not be in unison, but if sequencing is performed with high depth, a majority
voting scheme can be used to make a qualiﬁed guess of the base.
Depth & Coverage: The coverage of a locus describes the depth
of the sequencing in that locus i.e. how many reads cover the locus.
A high depth is desirable because it reduces the risk of sequencing
errors.
2.2.3
Identifying variation
The previous section described how to create reference structures. In this section
we will look at the usage of these.
Sequencing DNA and building reference structures only solves half the problem
regarding analysis of an individuals genetics. Inferring meaning from genetic
variation is an empirical study in the sense that variation present only for people
with a certain genetic trait can be seen as the cause of the trait. In order to
identify the presence and eﬀects of certain genetic patterns in an individuals
DNA, the process of sequence aligment [37], shown in ﬁgure 2.4, can be used
in which sequences are aligned to a reference genome in order to ﬁnd regions of
structural similarity.
Sequence alignment: Sequence aligment is the process of align-
ing DNA sequences to a reference to identify regions of similarity,
and inferring meaning from these regions, such as for example ge-
netic variation that is related to a certain disease [32]
==PAGE:26==
14
Data representation
Figure 2.4: Overview of the aligment process. 1: The reference genome. 2: The
input reads. 3: The reads are aligned to the reference. The homol-
ogous areas are then identiﬁed. Some areas in the reference genome
are known to be associated with certain traits or diseases, and if the se-
quenced individuals shares this genetic pattern, he/she is likely to have
the trait. As mentioned, if the diﬀerence between reference and reads
is too big, some reads may be unalignable with the reference.
The reference functions as a pattern that the reads should be mapped to, how-
ever there is room for a certain error margin, meaning that the alignment does
not need to be perfect. This is because reads can contain errors, but also because
the reference, as mentioned, is constructed from a diﬀerent individual than the
input and there are therefore bound to be genetic variation between the two.
Once the reads have been aligned, the variation between reference and input can
be determined and analysed. The method works well when the genetic variation
between the sample and reference is small, but for large variations, it can be
hard or impossible to perform the aligment [16, p. 5]. This is a problem that
stems from the fact that the reference genome is essentially the DNA sequence
of another individual, and therefore if the reference is not suitable, the aligment
fails.
Regarding mapping Paten et al. [35, p. 2] lists four problems with the current
approach:
• There is no standard way of mapping newly sequenced DNA bases to
==PAGE:27==
2.2 Obtaining and using genetic data
15
positions in the reference genome, though a number of algorithms are
popular.
• Mapping procedures can suﬀer from the multi-mapping problem where
input can map to several locations in the reference due to the fact that
identical or nearly identical sequences can appear in diﬀerent parts of a
reference.
• All variation is not currently stored together, but instead spread out over
many data bases of genetic variation, both public and private.
• The current format in which a central reference with alternative sequences
is used in mapping is problematic, because if the central reference changes,
the alternative sequences must change coordinates as well.3
Figure 2.5 shows an example of the multi-mapping problem. The problem arises
when several positions on the reference provide equally good results in regards
to the mapping/aligment. In the example, both mappings have 6 elements that
do not match the reference, and as such can be seen as equally good mapping
locations.
Ref:
AAGCTA--CTAG----CT
AAGCTA------CTAGCT
Allele: AAGCTAGACTAGGAAGCT
or
AAGCTAGACTAGGAAGCT
(2 gap opens, 0 mismatch)
(1 gap open, 2 mismatches)
Figure 2.5: An example of the multi-mapping problem as seen in [28].
2.2.4
Population-speciﬁc reference structures
In the introduction we mentioned the recent study carried out on 50 trios in Den-
mark that seeks to provide insight into the genetics of the Danish population.
We also mentioned in the previous section how alignment can be complicated
or impossible to perform when the reads and the chosen reference diﬀerentiate
a lot; this is somewhat like solving a puzzle in which the pieces do not ﬁt to-
gether. A good alignment relies on two things; having a reference genome that
is as similar to the input reads as possible, and having alternative options for
alignment if it is not possible to align the reads to the chosen reference. This is
where a population speciﬁc reference structure comes in. Because having many
sequenced individuals means that there are alternatives for regions where the
3This is because the alternative sequences are mapped to genome coordinates of the refer-
ence, but if the central reference changes, the alternative sequences should have their genome
coordinates updated.
==PAGE:28==
16
Data representation
reads cannot be ﬁtted onto the primary reference.
Currently the process of
mapping reads to a reference still relies on having one primary reference, and
in the case that it is not possible to map reads to this reference the alterna-
tive sequences can be tried. The ideal solution would of course be to have a
data structure that contains all the diﬀerent genetic sequences that have been
observed, so that reads have many options for where to map, and the choice
of reference is always the best possible choice, because it contains all genetic
variation.
Creating a uniﬁed data structure that stores the genetic variation observed in
a group of individuals would also be interesting if it is possible to extend this
structure each time novel variation is discovered. Studies such as Besenbacher
et al. [12] aim to build collections of sequenced DNA in order to create an in-
ventory of genetic variation within a population rather than a single person.
Besenbacher et al. [12] however studies the sequenced data in the classical lin-
ear representation, but highlights the need for uniﬁed genetic data structure as
seen in the following quote:
"Methodological developments in the analysis and representation of
sequence data will oﬀer advantages as well as addressing challenges
such as storing of variant population frequencies and alternative
haplotypes within a reference." [12, p. 6]
2.3
Current data representation
In this section we will take a look at the current representation of sequenced
DNA and some of the problems related to this.
In 2001 the ﬁrst draft of the human genome assembly was presented [26]. The
assembly was monoploid [35, p. 1] which means that the genome in this project
was represented by one single sequence of DNA constructed from one individual.
The current representation of assemblies uses the principle of a central reference
like the one constructed in Lander et al. [26], however with alternative genetic
variations for some regions. Small variations are simple, because they can be
attached to a locus in the reference, but larger structural variants are more
complex and can for example combine one part of a chromosome with another
chromosome. Figure 2.6 shows a conceptualization of how the variation is stored
in the current model. In the next section we will look at how this is represented
the Variant Call Format, which is a ﬁle format for storing genetic variation of a
group of individuals in relation to a reference genome.
==PAGE:29==
2.3 Current data representation
17
Figure 2.6: A conceptualization of a reference genome to which variation is mapped
to positions; for example here is shown a SNP as a T instead of the
A in the reference, an insertion between two endpoints, and some
structural variants where one chromosome is combined with another.
2.3.1
The Variant Call Format
In this section we will look at the Variant Call Format which is a format for
expressing the genetic variation of individuals in a cohort. It is from this data,
that we will build a uniﬁed data structure of genetic variation in order to solve
the problems presented in 1.2.
When genetic information has been collected it can be presented in diﬀerent
formats. The Sequence Aligment/Map4 format is used to specify how well and
where individual reads map to a chosen reference.
Once an individual or a
group of individuals have been successfully mapped to a reference, the Variant
Call Format5 can be used to express the observed genetic variation. The main
purpose of VCF ﬁles is to show how the genetic make up of a cohort diﬀers from
a reference genome. Each line of the ﬁle contains the allele from the chosen
reference genome, its chromosome and locus, and a number of alternative alleles
that have been observed in the cohort.
Allele: An allele is one particular variant of a number of possible
variations for a certain locus. A genotype consists of two alleles.
Furthermore the type of variation is speciﬁed; SNP, indel, or structural variant.
4Full speciﬁcation in [8]
5Full speciﬁcation in [7]
==PAGE:30==
18
Data representation
Along with the general information for each locus, the format also holds infor-
mation speciﬁc to each involved individual; this includes the persons genotype
and phasing information as well as other data such as the coverage of the locus
for the particular individual.
Phasing: Every individual inherits a copy of each chromosome
from both their parents. If a genotype is phased, it means that it
is known which allele of the genotype comes from which parent.
Figure 2.7 shows an example of entries in a VCF ﬁle.
Figure 2.7: Example of a simple VCF ﬁle.
A VCF ﬁle as shown in ﬁgure 2.7 ﬁle begins with a header followed by a number
of entries. In the header there is information about each column of the ﬁle;
there are columns for the chromosome and locus, for the allele stored in the
reference, and for alternative alleles observed among the individuals. There are
also columns with information about the particular position followed by the a
column for each involved individual. In ﬁgure 2.7 there are two individuals with
IDs ’ID1’ and ’ID2’.
Each entry in the ﬁle contains the information speciﬁed by the header. In this
example there are two loci from chromosome 21. At these loci the reference
genome has values T and C respectively, but alternative alleles have been ob-
served among the involved individuals as shown in the comma separated list in
the ’ALT’ which contains the alternative alleles for the locus. In the example,
locus 123 has alternative alleles ’C’ and ’G’ while locus 124 has ’CT’ as an al-
ternative allele.
The value 0|1 for ID1 at locus 123 in the example above means that the indi-
vidual with ID1 at position 123 in chromosome 21 has the genotype T|C in that
position, because 0 corresponds to the value T and 1 corresponds to the value
C. The mapping of numbers to alleles is done in incremental fashion from left
to right, such that allele represented in the reference is always 0. Individual
ID2 has a diﬀerent genotype in this position; 2/0, which corresponds to G/T. ’|’
and ’/’ are used to specify the phasing information of the genotype, ’|’ meaning
phased and ’/’ meaning unphased. The phasing information is interesting be-
cause if we are sure which chromosomes the alleles belong to, we can tell which
DNA sequences come from each chromosome.
In this example each genotype is stored along with the depth of the reads for
==PAGE:31==
2.3 Current data representation
19
each individual; this information can be used to determine if rare variants are
genuine or due to a poor coverage of the reads in the given location.
Figure 2.8: Example of indels and structural variants in VCF.
The format also handles more complex types of variation. Figure 2.8 has ex-
amples of an insertion, a deletion and a structural variant. The ﬁrst line in the
example shows an insertion in which the sequence CGA is inserted after a T.
The next line is a deletion in which the reference has the value GAT while an
alternative allele is the deletion of AT, leaving G. Insertions and deletions can
have arbitrary length. The last type of variant, the structural variant, highlights
the limitation or inconvenience of the VCF format. Structural variants are ge-
netic variations which changes the structure of the genome, this can for example
be a large insertion of a sequence located on another chromosome, an inversion
of a sequence or recombination of two chromosomes. The example above shows
a structural variant in which position 577 on chromosome 21 is followed by a
stretch of DNA from chromosome 22 position 123 onwards; these two loci are
referred to as the break-ends of the structural variant.
Break-end: The break-ends of a structural variation speciﬁes how
two sequences of DNA are connected.
The square brackets determine the direction of this segment ’[’ meaning forward
and ’]’ meaning backwards.
VCF also allows for speciﬁcation of uncertaincy regarding the size of genetic
variation. This means that instead of for example having a constant size for a
deletion, it can be described as an interval of the possible lengths. The same
goes for the size of insertions and the breakends of strucural variants.
The full speciﬁcation of structural variants in VCF can be found in [7, p. 12-20].
The VCF format is quite expressive in terms of the genetic variation and se-
quenced data. It does however suﬀer from the fact that it is closely tied to
the cohort from which it was created due to the detailed information about the
genetics of each involved individual.
==PAGE:32==
20
Data representation
2.3.2
Sharing genetic data
The information stored in VCF ﬁles is, as we have seen, a speciﬁcation of the
observations made for sequenced individuals. This means that the data cannot
be shared freely for reasons we have already discussed. We have also discussed
why there is a motivation to share the collected results.
In Denmark, Danmarks Statistik has decided that genetic variation should be
common enough for summary statistics to not allow for the identiﬁcation of
individuals with the particular genetic variant [39]. Sharing summary statistics
e.g. allele frequencies is desireable to do for the collected data, however a prob-
lem arises when those summary statistics approach individual values i.e. rare
variation.
Allele frequency (AF): AF is an expression of the frequency of
each observed allele for a particular locus.
This means that if rare genetic variation6 is removed, the remaining variation
is free to share publicly. However there is the chance that altering the data set
by removing rare variation renders it unuseable due a skewing of the statistical
properties in the remaining data in relation to the original data. The two pri-
mary properties that should be preserved in the data set are the allele frequency
and the linkage disequilibrium.
LD (Linkage disequilibrium): LD is an expression of alleles at
diﬀerent loci that are linked together statistically in the sense that
they are often both appear together. Figure 2.9 illustrates this.
Imputation: In genetics, imputation is the statistical inference of
unobserved genotypes. [36]
Sampling data from the graph is useful for the purpose of genetic imputation.
Imputation is an essential part of studying genetics, as is a cheaper way of
determining genetic sequences in an individual by using statistics of genetic
patterns and genotypes rather than observing each loci.
6In this thesis rare genetic variation will be genetic variation that is observed in less than
ﬁve individuals of a cohort.
==PAGE:33==
2.4 Uniﬁed data structure
21
CACACGACGATTAGCGATTTAAGGCCTATACGGTTAGGGCGTG
GAGGTGACGTACTCGAAGCCCTCAATCACTACGATGGAACCG
GAGCTGACGTTTGCAGCGGGTAGCGCTCGCGATCGGAGCAG
ACACGGACGTGGCGAAGCACTCGGGAACTAAAGAAGAGCGA
Figure 2.9: If the circled bases in this ﬁgure are in linkage disequilibrum, it means
that if one of them has been observed, then the other is likely to be in
the sequence.
2.4
Uniﬁed data structure
We have now discussed how genetics are studied by using a reference genome to
ﬁnd genetic variation of interest in an individual. We have also explained how
this information can be expressed using the VCF ﬁle format, and the problems
regarding sharing this information.
We propose creating a uniﬁed data source of genetic variation that can solve
the problem of relying on a well chosen reference as discussed in section 2.2.3
by containing all observed genetic variation and thereby providing the best
conditions of a successful mapping. The data source could also be used to express
the genetic variation of a cohort, and to solve the problem of the inability to
share the information of the data structure we propose a scheme for generating
sampled individuals that can be expressed in, and shared using the VCF format.
2.5
Restriction of scope
This thesis will be concerned with the creation of a data structure which contains
the genetic variation of a cohort as mentioned in the problem description of
section 1.2. We have chosen to focus on how this data structure can be used to
sample individuals with the same statistical properties as the original data while
still ensuring the preservation of anonymity for any of the involved individuals.
We will not propose a concrete solution to the mapping problem, although the
proposed data structure should be designed with this use case in mind, as it
could be a future extension.
==PAGE:34==
22
Data representation
2.6
Summary
In this chapter we have looked at how and why genetics are studied. We have
also looked at the current data representation and its limitations. With the
identiﬁed limitations we have proposed using a uniﬁed data structure for genetic
variation. In the next chapter we will look at how the genetic data could be
expressed as a graph.
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 3
Genetic variation as graphs
This chapter contains the motivation for modelling genetic variation as a graph
and discusses why a graph is particularly suited for meeting the requirements
established in the last chapter. As we shall see, the idea of using graphs to
model genetics is not entirely new, and is an intuitive choice of data structure
in genetics as expressed in the following quote:
"The best data representation for capturing genome data is a graph.
Graphs capture the intrinsic connectivity of genome relationships,
and they are a comfortable communication medium for biologists
and computer scientists." [18, p. 7]
3.1
Existing graphs in genetics
Graphs in genetics are not a new concept.
In the sequencing of DNA for a
single individual, graphs have been used for a long time. However the graph
in these processes is only a remedy in the assembly, which in the end produces
a traditional linear DNA sequence. Graphs such as De Bruijn graphs [15] and
breakpoint graphs [29] "of local sequence variation and/or prior knowledge of
==PAGE:36==
24
Genetic variation as graphs
small-scale variants are used to aid read assembly by several variant-calling al-
gorithms" Dilthey et al. [16, p. 2].
In recent years more focus has been put on constructing genome graphs for
multiple genomes to contain the variation of a cohort in a single data structure.
The quote below highlights how the progress in this area:
"... the rapidly growing number of sequenced human individuals
continueously presses for the necessity of a graphical representation
of the existing sequences, which leads to many publications in this
direction, both in biology and in computer science." [28]
An example of one the studies that is concerned with building such a genome
graph is [16], which describes the graph in the following way.
"A population reference graph is a directed acyclic graphical model
for genetic variation that is generated by combining information
about known allelic relationships between sequences." [16, p. 3]
[28] contains a review of related work in regards to containing multiple genomes
in a single data structure, including graphs.
Because genome graphs in genetics and genome graphs are not a new concept,
we can in the following section discuss the motivation for representing genomic
variation in graphs by referring to existing studies as well contribute with our
own motivation.
3.2
Genome graphs
Graphs are datastructures that can be used to show the relationship between
entities. They appear in many places and have many useful properties. In this
section we take a closer look at graphs in the context of DNA and especially
their capability of expressing variation.
Throughout this thesis we will refer to a graph that describes genetics with the
term genome graph.
If we take a look at the representation of assembled sequences explained in
section 2.3, we can see that it resembles a graph. The central reference sequence
can be seen as a linear graph, and the variation as branches in the graph that
==PAGE:37==
3.2 Genome graphs
25
are attached with edges to the start- and end point. Furthermore break-ends
can be represented by edges from the source position to the destination.
Figure 3.1: An example of how reference genomes can be represented as graphs.
The ﬁgure shows a SNP, an insertion, a deletion and a structural
variant.
Figure 3.1 shows and example of how a graph could be used to represent diﬀerent
types of genetic variants.
In the remainder of this section we look at how the nature of genetic variation
can be modelled intuitively using a graph.
3.2.1
Vertices and edges
Graphs consist of two fundamental units; nodes and edges, both of which can
be used to convey information. In a graph model we want to represent bases of
a DNA strand and their relations to each other and we should therefore decide
how this should be modelled in the graph.
In Dilthey et al. [16] the edges
represent bases and the vertices are used to represent a "level", in order to have
an unambiguous understand of "positions" in the graph, and as such a level in
the graph can be seen as the equivalent to a position in a linear sequence. This
concept is shown in ﬁgure 3.2.
To overcome the ambiguity of levels shown in 3.2 where the node with level 10
could also have been at level 6 or 7, due to levels of the predeecing nodes, Dilthey
et al. [16] introduce a gap node "-" that can be inserted to have persistent levels
in the graph.
An example of this model is shown in ﬁgure 3.3. Using this scheme we can
quickly identify the variation at a level in the graph, however the state space of
the graph increases, and it should therefore be determined if the level property
==PAGE:38==
26
Genetic variation as graphs
Figure 3.2: Figure 3.12 shown with edges as bases.
Figure 3.3: Figure 3.2 shown with gap edges to enforce persistent levels.
is an important part of the graph model.
Alternatively we can choose to represent the bases with nodes as shown in ﬁgure
3.1. This concept is used in Paten et al. [35] and in this model edges are used to
represent the relationship between two bases (predecessor/successor). It can be
argued that this model is more intuitive than the one presented in Dilthey et al.
[16], because the nodes of a graph are usually used to represent entities, and
the edges are used to represent relationships. In Paten et al. [35] there isn’t a
notion of "levels" in the graph in the same way as in Dilthey et al. [16], however
because arbitrary information can be attached to nodes, this concept could be
incorporated into the graph, if the need is there.
3.2.2
Break-ends
In regards to structural variation, break-ends are easily expressed in a graph
by connecting end points with edges [35, p. 19].
In section 2.3.1 we brieﬂy
discussed how there can be uncertainty regarding breakends. Modelling these
uncertainties in a graph structure could be done in a relatively simple fashion
where instead of having a one-to-one mapping of end points we can instead
have one-to-many, many-to-many or many-to-one mapping between nodes with
an attached probability of observing each of these edges. The scenario is show
in ﬁgure 3.4.
==PAGE:39==
3.3 Use cases for the genome graph
27
A
T
G
A
T
A
T
C
T
G
G
Figure 3.4: Shows a deletion with uncertainty about the end point resulting in a
one-to-many mapping from the start of the deletion to the uncertainty
interval.
3.2.3
Cycles
We should also consider how to treat cycles in the graph. Cycles can appear if
there is a repetition of identical sequences immediately after each other. Cycles
can be modelled in the graph intuitively by adding an edge from the end to the
beginning of the repeating sequence as shown in ﬁgure 3.5.
Figure 3.5: An example of a cycle in a graph.
This a path in this graph
could correspond to the sequence ATCTGA, ATCTGTCTGA,
ATCTGTCTGTCTGA, and so on.
Repeating sequences could of course also be expressed by branches of diﬀerent
length, which is the case in Paten et al. [35] where the graph is acyclic.
3.3
Use cases for the genome graph
As shown in ﬁgure 3.1, genetic variation can be intuitively represented by using a
graph. The graph makes sense because it simpliﬁces the notion of variation and
there is less need for a distinction between the types of variation. In the current
representation the variation is divided into the groups explained in section 2.3,
but these categories of variation are determined by the relationship between the
reference and the variation sequence, e.g. an insertion in one perspective is the
==PAGE:40==
28
Genetic variation as graphs
same as a deletion in the opposite perspective1.
In a graph all variation is represented in the same way; as branching paths in the
graph. Furthermore Graves [18, p. 5] states that "an advantage of using graphs
for representing concepts is that the deﬁnitions can be slowly reﬁned by adding
to the existing structure without making changes which would aﬀect previously
developed components or queries".
For a graph to be a valid choice for modelling genetic variation, the graph
should have the same functionality as current genetic data representations, but
also provide an improvements in regards to these.
In this section we will justify why a graph is a suitable data structure by dis-
cussing its suitability for solving the presented problems.
3.3.1
Mapping
In section 2.5 we restricted the scope of this thesis to not include mapping as
part of the solution and implemented tool. However we still want to consider
how the genome graph could be used for mapping in the future, and therefore we
will discuss the motivation for mapping to a graph here. The idea of mapping
to a genome graph is considered in Li [28] and Paten et al. [35] as seen in the
following quotes:
"A typical use of the graph is to map the sequences of a new in-
dividual to the existing variations, in particular large variations."
[28]
"To account for natural genetic variation, we consider the more
general case in which a reference genome is represented by a graph."
[35, p. 1]
The ﬁrst thing to note is that if we choose to use a graph as a mapping refer-
ence, the concept of having a central sequence dissapears as the diﬀerent paths
through the graph can represent diﬀerent DNA sequences. If a large enough
graph is built with many branching paths of genetic variation, this could be
used for a more successful mapping of reads as there is a higher chance of paths
in the graph that match the read, and as such a better chance of ﬁnding a
mapping location with few mismatches as explained in ﬁgure 3.6.
1An example of this could be the sequences ’A’ and ’ACT’, where ’CT’ can be seen as
insertion if ’A’ is the reference value, but if ’ACT’ is the reference, then ’A’ is a deletion in
relation to the reference.
==PAGE:41==
3.3 Use cases for the genome graph
29
A
T
G
A
C
T
G
A
T
T
G
T
Figure 3.6: Shows how mapping a read (here shown as the thick black line) to a
graph could work. The paths of the graph give more possibilities of
where to map the read.
A critical part of mapping is to quickly be able to determine if a particular
sequence of DNA is present in the reference structure. The way this is done
currently as explained in Scheibye-Alsing et al. [37, p. 7] is by splitting the
input reads into subsequences of constant length and using a hashing to ﬁnd
out if and where a subsequence is present in the reference genome. However
things get more complicated when working with graphs where the context of a
base is not necessarily a linear sequence of bases in both directions, but rather
trees of contexts. Depending on the number of branches in both direction, the
space complexty of storing the context of a base could increase signiﬁcantly in
a graph compared to a linear reference genome. An example of the context for
a particular locus in a genome graph is shown in ﬁgure 3.7
Figure 3.7: The context of the enlarged node with base value "C" is stored in two
sets L and R (left and right).
As stated in Paten et al. [35, p. 3] "base positions within a reference structure
should have an aspect of permanence and universality". The motivation for this
is that entities of the genome graph should be unambigously identiﬁable, which
is an important feature for communicating positions and entities of the graph.
In the classical model of reference genomes, this is usually done by stating the
position and the chromosome of the base in the reference e.g. [Chr:2 ; Pos:
1000]2. With the genome graph however, there is no central reference, so the
identiﬁer scheme could be deﬁned diﬀerently, for example by using UUIDs3 as
2Meaning chromosome 2, position 1000
3Universally unique identiﬁers
==PAGE:42==
30
Genetic variation as graphs
in [35] or URIs4.
Mapping is a very important issue to consider when designing the graph, because
one of the future goals for the graph structure we want to build, is that it should
be usable in mapping.
3.3.2
Adding variation
Contrary to the classical reference genome, a graph structure does not settle
upon one allele for each locus. This is a feature that can help to improve several
processes regarding the study of genetics, such as for example mapping, as seen
in the previous section. In the graph each locus is a set of alleles which means
that the graph can be extended when novel genetic variation is found, and as
such there should be schemes for how to merge variation into a graph or even
merging two graphs together.
In the context of the earlier mentioned Danish pan-genome in Besenbacher et al.
[12], which seeks to create a reference genome for the Danish population, the
merging of graphs could be interesting if pan-genomes graphs for distinct pop-
ulations could be merged into one to create a graph which contains the genetic
variation of several populations.
We discussed the problematics of sharing genetic data for example in the form
of a VCF ﬁle. A graph that contains the same information as the VCF ﬁles
from which it has been created is of course restricted in its sharability in the
same way as VCF ﬁles, however a subset of the graph containing only common
genetic variation could be shared. As mentioned in 2.3.2, we deﬁne rare genetic
variation as variation observed in less than ﬁve individuals of a cohort. There-
fore a subgraph with the alleles observed in more than ﬁve individuals can be
shared publicly while the complete graph can be stored internally with extra
information such as exactly which individuals have which genetic variants for
example. Figure 3.8 shows the concept of a sharable subgraph.
The merging og graphs and addition of novel variation are both important fea-
tures with regards to the sharing of information because through further obser-
vations of a rare variants, they can become sharable if we at some point reach
the treshold for observations. This principle is shown in ﬁgure 3.9.
4Uniform resource identiﬁers
==PAGE:43==
3.3 Use cases for the genome graph
31
1
2
G
G
T
C
T
A
T
C
T
A
A
G
G
T
T
A
C
T
A
A
Figure 3.8: The graph in 1 has rare alleles shown with the grey nodes. Because the
graph contains these rarely occuring alleles, it cannot be shared, but
the graph in 2 which is the subgraph containing only alleles with an
observation count above a certain treshold would be sharable.
A
G
G
C
T
T
C
T
1
2
3
G
G
G
C
T
T
C
T
A
G
G
C
T
T
C
T
G
Figure 3.9: The graphs in 1 and 2 have rare variation that cannot be shared, spec-
iﬁed by the grey nodes and edges.
3 shows how merging the graph
can make the previously rare variant achieve enough observations to be
sharable.
3.3.3
Extensibility
So far we have discussed the graph in terms of connecting the variation at
diﬀerent loci. The graph structure however is a very ﬂexible format that allows
us to attach diﬀerent kinds of data to the nodes in the graph. For example it
could be interesting to keep a count for the observations of a particular allele in
the graph, deﬁne regions or bases that relate to speciﬁc diseases, or express the
probability of observing a particular genetic sequence in the graph. Figure 3.10
==PAGE:44==
32
Genetic variation as graphs
illustrates how the probabilities of traversing5 an edge in the graph depends on
the history of the genetic sequence.
Figure 3.10: The probability of traversing an edge can be related to the previously
traversed edges of a sequence. In this example if we look at the out-
going edges from the node with an A base, there is equal probability
of traversing the edges to G and T, however if we look at the context,
i.e. the previous variants of the path, the probability distributions can
look diﬀerent.
The motivation for storing additional information such as sequence probabilities
in the graph reveals that there is a need for having more entities than just
bases, and therefore it could be useful to use the entities in the graph for several
purposes. As such a central node representing an base could be connected to
other nodes with information about that particular node as shown in ﬁgure 3.11.
3.3.4
Querying
The ability to link any information to alleles in the graph makes the graph ca-
pable of containing a vast amount of information. For example alleles identiﬁed
to associate with diseases such as diabetes could have edges connecting them
to a node regarding this particular disease. This idea is especially interesting
if the model is queryable, in which case the relevant parts of the graph could
be retrieved through queries such as for example "Select all alleles assosiated
with diabetes", "Select variants present within below 10% of the population" or
"Select alleles assosiated with both obesity and diabetes.".
5Traversing the graph is interesting in regards to sampling, which is discussed in section
3.3.5.
==PAGE:45==
3.3 Use cases for the genome graph
33
Figure 3.11: Shows how nodes and edges in the graph can serve several purposes.
3.3.5
Sampling individuals
As a means of conveying the information stored in the graph, we can use the
aforementioned probabilities to sample individuals.
To do this, we traverse
the graph according to the probabilities assosiated with edges in the graph
and create sampled data that resembles the cohort from which the study was
created. Because a graph format is not yet accepted as the primary format for
representing genetic variation, the sampled individuals can be stored in VCF
ﬁles which can then be shared publicly as they only contain common genetic
variants. A challenge here is to determine how to generate samples that are
statistically similar to the genetics of the cohort, as discussed in 2.3.2, while
also removing rare genetic variation. Figure 3.12 shows how DNA sequences
can be generated by traversing the graph.
The study in Dilthey et al. [16] also discusses using the graph to sample from.
However here the Viterbi algorithm is used, which ﬁnds an optimal traversal
through a graph, and as such the purpose of this study is to express the "average"
individual in terms of genetic variation from a cohort.
3.3.6
Compatibility
A change in the representation of genetic data should be compatible with current
collections of data. In connection with this Dilthey et al. [16, p. 2] lists various
challenges concerning the use of prior information about variation:
==PAGE:46==
34
Genetic variation as graphs
Figure 3.12: Two possible paths in the graph example from ﬁgure 3.1. The two
sequences corresponding to the paths in the graph would then be
ACCAGGTCTT and ACTATT respectively.
To construct the
paths shown here, the probabilities attached to the edges of the graph
as shown in ﬁgure 3.10 could be used.
• There needs to be a data structure for representing genomic variation that
can accomodate multiple sources of information.
• As current methods rely on a single primary reference, there needs to be
a coherent way of projecting information from a variation-aware reference
onto a primary sequence.
• There needs to be methods for validating and comparing output from a
variation-aware reference tool and current approaches that rely on a single
reference.
In order to create a link between the existing data and a genome graph repre-
sentation these criterias should be considered.
3.4
Summary
In this chapter we have looked at how genetic sequences can be represented as
graphs and what can be gained from adopting this idea.
We summarize the features that the genome graph should be have below.
Mapping - Mapping input reads should be possible in the same way it is pos-
sible to map to a reference genome.
Extensibility - Extending the graph with additional information should be
possible, and it should be possible to merge graphs together.
==PAGE:47==
3.4 Summary
35
Sharability - The data structure should be sharable in order to let the public
take advantage of its information. Sampling individuals will be another
way of conveying the data contained in the graph.
Queryable - The graph should support querying to allow for the retrieval of
entities of interest.
Compatibility - The graph should have a scheme for projecting its data onto
a primary reference in order to be usable with the current representation
of genetic variation.
Scalability & performance - There should be an emphasis on constructing
the graph in such a way that algorithms for creating and working with the
graph scale well with the size of the graph. As such the graph and related
algorithms should be analysed in terms of time and space complexity.
Looking back to the problem description of section 1.2 and the restriction of the
scope of section 2.5, we do not intend to realize the mapping mentioned above.
The compatibility will be realized only in the sense that the genetic graphs will
be constructed from VCF ﬁles and as such can be related back to these. There
is not a major focus on querying the graph, but we do intend to realize it in
the implementation. The major focus of the thesis are with the scalability of
the implementation and the sharability of the graph and the quality generated
data.
In the next chapter we look how a genome graph could be designed in order to
serve the established purposes.
==PAGE:48==
36
Genetic variation as graphs
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 4
Designing the genome
graph
In this chapter we will take a closer look at how a genome graph should be
designed in order to fulﬁl the requirements of section 3.4. We will give a brief
overview of the entities contained in the graph, and then look at algorithms for
constructing and using the graph. As we shall see, the genome graphs contain
a lot of data and as such we have an emphasis on reducing both space and time
complexities of the algorithms for handling the graph.
4.1
Entities
There is motivation for containing diﬀerent types of information in the genome
graph, which we discussed in section 3.3.3. Before we go into detail of how to
construct and work with the genome graph, we should explain the entities that
the graph is made up of.
The ﬁrst thing to note is that a graph is constructed for each chromosome.
Chromosomes are separate entities and as such it makes sense from a biological
point of view. As we shall see later this separation also makes sense for process-
ing graphs in parallel.
==PAGE:50==
38
Designing the genome graph
Generally speaking the nodes of the graph are used to represent entities and
edges are used to represent the relationship between them. The basic genome
graph consists of alleles as nodes with edges between them depending on the
locus they belong to as shown in ﬁgure 3.1. This means that at each "position"1
has a number of alleles, which correspond to the observed variation at that po-
sition. As we aim to include more information than just genetic variants in the
graph, we chose to use nodes to represent alleles rather than edges as in Dilthey
et al. [16], because entities representing other information can then be linked by
edges to the alleles for example.
As the graph is generated from a number of inviduals which have diﬀent genomes,
we also chose to store the individuals at each position in the graph, divided into
sets depending on which genetic variation they have at the position. As we shall
see in section 4.5 and 4.6, this information is relevant in regards to sampling
individuals.
4.2
Building graphs
The ﬁrst step for building and using the genome graph is to create the graph. As
mentioned the graphs are built from VCF ﬁles. Building graphs is a sequential
process in which each line of the VCF ﬁle is read and the data it contains is
added to the graph. Each line in the VCF ﬁle contains information about the
observed variation of a locus as well as the genotype for each individual. This
information is added to the graph by constructing position nodes, and for each
of these nodes storing the observed alleles as well as sets of individuals for each
genotype. We have chosen to divide the set of individuals observed for each
genotype into two; one for observations made with suﬃcient depth, and one
for insuﬃcient depth based on a threshold parameter. Having this information
in the data structure can be useful when deciding if rarely occurring genetic
variants are genuine or a result of bad coverage.
In terms of running time, the construction of the initial graph depends on both
the number of lines in the ﬁle e.g. sequenced loci, the total length of genetic
variation at each position as well as the number of individuals.
If n is the
number of positions in the ﬁle, ki is the total length of alleles for position i, and
mi is the number of sequenced individuals for the position we get a runtime of:
O(
nP
i=1
ki + mi) ⇒O(
nP
i=1
mi)
1We will use the term "position" to refer to a particular locus in the graph.
==PAGE:51==
4.3 Compression and expansion
39
Because ki ≤2mi, as the amount of diﬀerent variation at a position is at
most twice the number of individuals, seeing as each invidual has one genotype
consisting of two alleles.
In terms of space complexity we store the genetic variation and the sets of
individuals of each position, giving a total size of the graph is:
O(
nP
i=1
ki + mi) ⇒O(
nP
i=1
mi)
4.3
Compression and expansion
In an eﬀort to decrease the size the graph, which is desireable given the amount
of data involved in sequencing2 we have looked at compression of the graph.
This is a feature that is used in Dilthey et al. [16] for linear parts of the graph,
where the edges along the linear path are merged into one edge for that has a
sequence of DNA bases rather than just one base. This concept is illustrated
with ﬁgure 4.13.
To further compress a node, an algorithm such as Run-Length encoding [38]
could be applied such that repeating sequences of alleles can be expressed by
one instance of the allele, and the number of times it appears. Run-length en-
coding of DNA sequences is discussed in Sirén et al. [38] and concludes that
there is motivation for applying this type of compression on genetic sequences.
In general we should consider lossless compression algorithms as a means of
reducing the space complexity of the graph. We could also choose to use an al-
gorithm like Lempel–Ziv–Welch [40], in which a dictionary of observed patterns
is constructed, such that sequences can be expressed by a single resource.
Compressed nodes should however have the ability to be expanded or split at a
later point in case we discover novel variation that results in a new branch on a
previously linear path. In terms of expanding the graph again, it is important
that any compression performed is lossless. In relation to communication posi-
tions in the graph, it is also important that positions can be found even if they
are part of a compressed stretch.
Another way of compressing the graph, is by collapsing branches that share
subpaths.
The concept is shown in ﬁgure 4.2:1, where two diﬀerent genetic
2Chromosome 21, which is the smallest of the chromosomes has a length exceeding 30
million base pairs [21].
3However with merged nodes instead of edges.
==PAGE:52==
40
Designing the genome graph
Figure 4.1: Figure 3.12 with compressed nodes.
variants originating from the same position in the graph, share a subsequence of
alleles. Here it is obvious that some nodes in the graph can be merged together
to reduce the state space of the graph, and instead of having two similarly
looking, separate branches in the graph, we can instead have nested branches
as shown in ﬁgure 4.2:2.
Figure 4.2: The graph shown in 1 can be collapsed into the graph shown in 2, in
order to reduce the size of the graph.
Of the two types of compression of the graph, we have only chosen to introduce
the compression of linear stretches into the graph. This is due to the nature of
graph, which is generally long and shallow, meaning that branches of genetic
variation rarely overlap. On the other hand, we mentioned that we store the
individuals of the graph for each position, which can be greatly reduced by only
storing the set of individuals once for a compressed linear stretch.
For loci without variation i.e. only one allele, all individuals must have the same
==PAGE:53==
4.3 Compression and expansion
41
genotype as there is only one possibility. This feature allows us to compress lin-
ear stretches, because upon expanding the graph we know which genotypes the
individuals have for each position of the compressed stretch. This is illustrated
in ﬁgure 4.3. A compressed node constructed from a linear stretch is positioned
in the graph at the position of the ﬁrst node of the stretch.
A
G
A
CC
T
S
S
S
S
1
2
A,G,A,CC,T
S
S
1
2
3
4
5
Figure 4.3: The compression of a linear stretch of length ﬁve into a single node. Sets
S1−S5 contain the same individuals, and it is the same individuals that
are contained in the set S for the compressed node.
As mentioned, we also divide individuals for each genotype into sets depending
on the coverage; one for signiﬁcant coverage and one for insigniﬁcant coverage.
This proposes a challenge when compressing, because in order to be able to
compress the graph and expand it later without losing information, the division
of individuals at each position should remain the same.
Therefore an extra
constraint is added such that only stretches where the division of individuals
into the two sets are the same for all positions of the stretch are compressed.
With these constraints, we can ensure that the expansion of a compressed graph
contains the same information as the original graph. The original position of
alleles contained in a compressed node can be inferred from the position of the
compressed node and its internal list of alleles i.e. the reverse process of the
compression shown in ﬁgure 4.3.
The compression of the graph examines all positions in the graph and merges
adjacent positions that contain one allele, which is a runtime of
O(n)
where n is the number of positions in the graph. The best case scenario for the
==PAGE:54==
42
Designing the genome graph
graph compression is that the entire graph is linear, resulting in one compressed
node with n internal nodes and one set of m individuals resulting in a total size
of
O(n + m)
for the graph.
4.4
Merging graphs
In this section we will explain how genome graphs can be merged together.
In section 3.3.1 we discussed the motivation for having a graph with as much ge-
netic variation as possible, because it increases the possibility of mapping reads
successfully. Furthermore in section 3.3.2 we explained how adding observations
of genetic variation can increase the size of the publicly sharable subgraph.
Building the graphs from VCF ﬁles makes the merging of graphs relatively
simple, because VCF ﬁles are constructed in relation to a reference genome.
This means that when merging two graphs we have a unambiguous idea of
positions in the graph as there is a one-to-one mapping from positions in the
graphs to the loci in the reference genome. When merging two graphs, we simply
add the genotypes for a position in one graph to the set of genotypes for the
corresponding position in the other graph, and in the case that a genotype is
already present, we can join the sets of individuals for the genotype in the two
graphs. An example of the merging of two graphs is shown in ﬁgure 4.4. Upon
merging, it must be ensured that the individuals across the two graphs have
unique IDs, as otherwise it would be possible for the same individual to have
more than one genotype per locus.
The running time of merging two graphs involves iterating through each position
of the smallest graph and adding its content to the other graph. This gives a
running time of
O(
min(n1,n2)
P
i=1
ki · m)
where n1 and n2 are the number of positions in the two graphs, ki is the total
length of alleles for position i in the smallest graph and m is the number of
individuals in the smallest graph. In the case that the two graphs do not share
==PAGE:55==
4.5 Probability trees
43
A
T
G
A
C
T
A
G
G
C
T
T
C
A
T
T
G
G
T
C
T
A
T
C
T
A
A
1
2
3
Figure 4.4: 1 and 2 are examples of two distinct graphs for the same set of loci. In 3
the graphs are merged together to form a new graph with the variation
represented in both of the graphs.
The grey edges show sequences
that can be constructed with the graph, but have not been observed in
reality.
any genetic variation, the size of the resulting graph will be the sum of the sizes
of the two graphs:
O(n1 · m1 + n2 · m2)
m1 and m2 being the number of inviduals in graph 1 and 2 respectively, and n1
and n2 are the number of positions in the graphs.
4.5
Probability trees
In regards to sampling individuals and in general conveying information about
the observed sequences in the data we can take advantage of the observed ge-
netic variation to describe the probability distribution of the genotypes for a
position in the graph. To describe these probabilities, we can use the size of the
sets of individuals stored for each genotype in the graph as a measure of the
genotypes "rarity".
In section 4.6 we will discuss how these probabilities can be used to sample indi-
==PAGE:56==
44
Designing the genome graph
viduals as a means of conveying the information stored in the genome graph. Al-
ternatively the probabilities of observing certain genetic sequences in the graph
can be embedded directly into the graph by using probability trees, which we
will explain in this section.
In section 2.3.2 we established that there are two statistical properties we would
like to be able to convey using the graph, and in turn use to sample individuals
with the same statistical properties as the original data.
In each position of the graph there is a number of alleles. The individual of
the graph have genotypes made from a combination of two of these alleles. An
example of the genotypes for a certain locus is shown in ﬁgure 4.5.
A
T
G
C
T|T
C|T
C|C
C/T
T
C
Figure 4.5: Shows the genotypes for a position in the graph with alleles "T" and
"C". Four diﬀerent genotypes have been observed in the individuals in
this example.
The probability tree of a position is instantiated with an unnamed root to which
children are added depending on the observed genotypes for the position. A node
of the tree contains a genotype, the probability of traversing a path from the
root of the tree to the node itself, and the number of individuals that have the
genotype sequence of the path in their DNA. As we shall see later however, there
is a motivation for reducing the space complexity of the probability trees, and as
such the probabilities and numbers for individuals are only stored at the leafs of
the tree. As the trees aim to be part of the publicly sharable data structure, we
do not add rare genotypes. Figure 4.6 the ﬁrst step of constructing a probability
for a position.
We then proceed by adding children to the leafs of the tree by ﬁnding the inter-
section of individuals for the genotypes at the current leafs and the genotypes
of the succeeding position in the graph; again we only add children if the in-
==PAGE:57==
4.5 Probability trees
45
A
T
G
C
T
T|T
C|T
C|C
C/T
C
T|T
C|T
C|C
C/T
Figure 4.6: The root of the probability tree in the ﬁgure has four children, one for
each observed genotype. Each child is connected with the set of indi-
viduals that have the sequence of genotypes from root to leaf; in this
example we have only included the ﬁrst layer of the tree and there-
fore the sets for the paths are identical to the sets for the individual
genotypes.
tersection of the individuals with the genotypes of the path exceed the chosen
threshold. We continue to extend the branches of the tree, as long as the inter-
section of individuals along the path has a size that exceeds the chosen "rarity"
treshold. Figure 4.7 shows an example of this.
In the end we are left with a tree for which each path from root to leaf represents
a sequence of genotypes observed in the original dataset, however without rare
genetic variation. At each leaf we can keep a count of the number of individuals
that have the corresponding sequence of genotypes determined by the path from
root to leaf. The numbers across the leafs can then be used to calculate the
probability of observing the various paths of the tree, as shown in ﬁgure 4.8.
Of course these probabilities are skewed by the fact that rare genetic variation
must be removed from the tree. Later we will test if these trees can be used
to convey the LD and genotype distribution with a satisfying correlation to the
actual distribution.
The probability trees can drastically increase the total size of the graph because
they can span many positions in the graph.
For this reason it makes sense
to prioritize a minimal space consumption at the cost of an increased running
time. The ﬁrst step in doing so, is to only store the number of individuals and
==PAGE:58==
46
Designing the genome graph
A
T
G
C
T
T|T
C|T
C|C
C/T
C
TIT ∩ 
GIG ∩ 
TIT
G|G
G|G
G|G
G|G
T|T
T|T
T|T
T|T
CIC
CIC
CIC
CIC
TIT ∩ GIG 
∩ C|C
CIT ∩ 
GIG ∩ 
TIT
CIT ∩ 
GIG ∩ 
C|C
C|C ∩ 
GIG ∩ 
TIT
C|C ∩ GIG 
∩ C|C
C/T ∩ 
GIG ∩ 
T|T
C/T ∩ 
GIG ∩
C|C
Figure 4.7: An extended version of ﬁgure 4.6 with paths for all combinations of
genotypes across three positions in the graph. The intersection of the
individuals that carry the genotypes of the path is stored at the leafs.
The grey leafs have intersections below the chosen treshold and are
therefore not included in the tree.
the probability of traversing a path from the root of the tree to that leaf only
at the leaf itself. If need be, the number of individuals and the probability of
traversing a path from the root to an internal node in the tree can be calculated
on demand by iteratively adding the values stored at the leafs of the tree in the
above layers.
Another thing that can be done is to compress the tree into a compressed prob-
ability tree. In the following we will explain the process of constructing a com-
pressed probability tree.
Storing a genotype involves storing each of its two alleles and a phasing type. If
all observed alleles and the two phasing types4 are stored centrally a genotype
can be expressed as three resources, one for each allele and one for the phasing
type. However the size can be reduced to one, if instead each observed genotype
is stored centrally and reused in the graph. This concept is shown in ﬁgure 4.9.
Because indels can have an arbitrary size, there is no upper limit on the number
of possible genotypes, however SNPs and short indels are the most common
4phased and unphased
==PAGE:59==
4.5 Probability trees
47
T|T
A|A
C|T
20
C|C
C|T
10
G|C
30
C|C
8
C|C
7
1
T|T
17
17/75
A|A
58
58/75
C|T
20
20/75
C|C
38
38/75
C|T
10
10/75
G|C
30
30/75
C|C
8
8/75
C|C
7
7/75
2
Figure 4.8: 1 shows the initial probability tree with the number of individuals stored
at each leafs. 2 shows how the number of invididuals across all leafs
in the tree can be used as to specify the probability of traversing each
path from root to leaf, and how these values can be accumuluated in
higher levels of the tree.
T|T
A|A
C|T
C|C
C|T
G|C
C|C
C|C
Genotype
T|T
CIT
CIC
AIA
GIC
Figure 4.9: Reusable genotypes.
types of variation, meaning that with a reasonable probability the number of
distinct genotypes observed can be covered with relatively few resources.
The next step of the compression is concerned with decreasing the amount of
nodes in the probability tree. The concept used here is the same as reusing
genotypes, but here we reuse sequences of genotypes rather than genotypes
individually. The idea behind this is that we can identify a sequence of genotypes
of length k with a single global resource. Using this method, the depth of the
compressed tree will be reduced by a factor k, thereby decreasing the amount of
nodes in the tree. Figure 4.10 illustrates the construction of a compressed tree.
==PAGE:60==
48
Designing the genome graph
T|T
A|A
C|T
C|C
C|T
T|T
C|C
C|C
TIT
C|C
C|T
C|C
C|T
C|C
1
4
2
3
2
1
3
3
1
3
2
3
2
3
1#2
4#2
1#3
4#3
1#2
3
1#3
3
1#2
1#3
1
2
3
Figure 4.10: Figure showing the construction of a compressed probability tree from
a normal probability tree. 1 shows the original probability tree, where
each node stores both alleles and the phasingtype. 2 shows the ﬁrst
step of compression where global resources are used to express geno-
types. 3 shows the compressed tree. Here the tree is compressed by a
value of k = 2. A sequence resource is allocated for each color in the
tree.
If we consider the case that all genotypes consist of two basevalues e.g. A|G,
C|A, G/G etc, there would a total number of 32 diﬀerent genotypes5.
The
amount of combinations that can be made with these genotypes for a sequence
of length k increases exponentially such that a sequence of two genotypes could
have 322 = 1024 diﬀerent combinations and a sequence of three genotypes re-
sults in 323 = 32.768 diﬀerent combinations. This coupled with the fact that
the alleles of each genotype can consist of more than one base means that the
combinatorial possibilities of genotypes scale drastically as k increases, and thus
giving a decreased chance of observing the same sequence in diﬀerent locations
of the probability trees, and thereby being able to reuse a previously constructed
resource. On the other hand there is a motivation for increasing the value of
k, because it is this factor that decides how much the probability tree is com-
pressed.
One thing to keep in mind when choosing the value of k is that the paths of
probability trees in the same region of the genome are likely to overlap. For
example choosing a k = 10, means that a path of length 200 can be compressed
into 20 nodes, each identiﬁed by a global resource of 10 genotypes. 19 of these
nodes are likely to be reusable at the tree originating 10 positions later on the
genome, 18 for the tree at 20 positions later and so on as illustrated in ﬁgure
4.11.
5Four diﬀerent base values and two diﬀerent phasing types gives 32 possible genotypes.
==PAGE:61==
4.5 Probability trees
49
In this thesis we have not compressed the probability trees using classical lossless
compression algorithms such as Run-Length encoding or the Lempel–Ziv–Welch
algorithm. The latter however could be interesting for the compression of proba-
bility trees with a large k because it provides a way of expressing long sequences
through combination of shorter sequences. This is a nice feature because the
reuse of shorter sequences in the trees is more probable than larger sequences.
Figure 4.11: Shows how trees at diﬀerent positions in the graph can reuse the com-
pressed edges.
Here a k = 8, means that every tree originating a
multiple of 8 positions later in the graph is likely to reuse the com-
pressed nodes made in an earlier tree. The color of the nodes in the
probability trees specify which nodes have the same sequence of geno-
types, meaning that all nodes of the same colour use the same resource.
This ﬁgure only shows one path for each probability tree.
The worst case for construction of the probability trees in terms of time com-
plexity is that each tree spans all the remaining positions in the graph, which
would give a running time of
O(
nP
i=1
(n −i) · m)
where n is the number of positions in the graph and m is the number of individ-
uals, because for each of the remaining positions the intersection of individuals
must be calculated for the current path and the next genotype.
In regards to space consumption the worst case scenario is that m
t
6, where t is
the threshold for common genetic variation, paths are formed from the root and
each of these paths span the remaining positions in the graph. In this scenario
the total number of nodes across the probability trees would be:
6 m
t is the maximum number of sets that can be constructed from m individuals, such that
each set exceeds the threshold for common genetic variation.
==PAGE:62==
50
Designing the genome graph
O(
nP
i=1
(n −i) · m
t )
The time needed for constructing the compressed trees is linear in relation to
the number of nodes in the original probability tree:
O(
nP
i=1
ci)
Where ci is the number of nodes for the original tree in position i of the graph.
In the worst case, all nodes across the compressed trees are unique, which means
that a resource is constructed for each node (rather than having one resource
for a set of nodes) resulting in a total size of
O(
nP
i=1
ci
k · k)
because the number of nodes in each tree is reduced by a factor k, but each
node has a resource size of k.
4.6
Sampling individuals
In regards to sampling individuals we mentioned earlier that there are two dis-
tributions of the original dataset that should be reproduced in the sampled
individuals, namely MAF and LD.
The study in Dilthey et al. [16] discusses sampling of individuals from a graph
in a similar fashion to this project, however here the Viterbi algorithm is used
to ﬁnd an optimal path through the graph, or in other words, to sample an
individual that has the most common genetic variation of the observed cohort
[16, p. 15-18]. As explained ealier, our motivation for sampling data is that
it is a way of conveying a statistical representation of the collected data in a
common format while still abiding by the ethical constraints set in place to
ensure anonymity.
In this section we propose an algorithm for sampling individuals from a genome
graph by using the probability trees discussed in the previous section.
==PAGE:63==
4.6 Sampling individuals
51
The probability tree is designed such that performing a number of traversals
from root to leaf in accordance with the probabilities assigned to the paths
in the tree, should convey the LD and MAF distributions for the part of the
genome graph that the probability tree covers. As such we can recreate these
distributions by traversing through the genome graph via the probability trees.
This idea is used for sampling individuals. However the probability trees are
unlikely to cover all positions in the graph and as such it is not possible to
generate a sample from only one tree. Instead a scheme must be made for how
and when to change to a new tree during the traversal of the trees.
There is a motivation for traversing deep into a tree because the traversed path
contains information about the likelihood of co-appeareances between genotypes
in diﬀerent positions. However traversing deep into a probability tree is also
problematic because it can create a bias towards certain genetic sequences that
is not a correct representation of the observed genetics. On the other hand,
traversing only short paths of a probability tree means that the history available
in long paths is not used to the fullest. The bias that can come with traversing
deep into a probability tree stems from fact that rare genetic variation is not
present in the data structure.
As explained the paths of a probability tree
are based on sequences of genotypes observed in the individuals of the graph.
However if an individual has a rare genetic variant, the corresponding path will
not be included in the probability tree as explained ealier. This means that the
individual is excluded from the set of individuals that the lower levels of the
tree is built from. As such it is possible to end up with a deep path in the tree
based on only a few individuals, and in the scenario where a tree is traversed
until the leaf is reached, this will create a bias in the genotypes for the covered
positions as shown in ﬁgure 4.12.
In the sampling algorithm we ﬁrst thought of using a FIFO queue of probability
trees, where the tree of each position in the graph was added when the sampling
algorithm reached that position as shown in ﬁgure 4.13.7
Choosing a genotype for a position was then done by traversing an edge in the
current probability tree, however in order to prevent the bias from ﬁgure 4.12
of occuring, a check was made to ensure that possible choices of genotype in the
probability tree were the same as those observed in the graph. If it was not the
case, we retrieved the next tree from the queue and did the same check until the
genotypes of the probability tree were the same as genotypes of the graph. A
problem with this approach was that potentially a lot, or all, of the history was
thrown away if the trees did not contain the right genotypes and furthermore
a strong correlation between genotypes at diﬀerent positions would be wrongly
neglected.
7By reaching the position, we mean that the algorithm reached the point where it should
determine a genotype for that particular position in the graph.
==PAGE:64==
52
Designing the genome graph
20
13
8
5
5
5
5
4
3
2
1
4
20
5
5
5
15
15
15
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Figure 4.12: Bias can occur as shown in this example. The ﬁgure shows the ﬁrst
seven positions of a genome graph and the probability trees for position
1 and 4.
In the nodes of the probability trees here is written the
number of individuals for the path from root to the node. Grey nodes
have been excluded because the number of individuals is below the
chosen threshold. The blue paths correspond to the same sequence of
genotypes. As can be seen, traversing the tree from position 1 always
leads to the blue path, however as can be seen from position 4, it is
not the most commonly observed sequence for the particular region of
the graph.
Tree 1 
Tree 2 
Tree 3 
Tree 4 
Tree 5 
Tree 6
Figure 4.13: Upon traversal of a path in a probability tree, the probabilities for all
the covered positions are added to a queue of trees.
To overcome the problems mentioned above, instead of traversing trees to the
leafs or assuring that the same genotypes occur in the probability tree and the
genome graph, we introduced an aspect of randomization regarding when to
change to a new probability tree.
In this algorithm a contant size FIFO queue of probability trees is used. Trees
are only removed from the queue in the case where the queue has reached the
==PAGE:65==
4.6 Sampling individuals
53
maximum size and a new tree is added meaning that if a tree in the middle of
the queue is currently in use, there is a chance of going back to an older tree
with a more extensive history later on in the sampling. The choice of which
tree to use at each position in the graph is decided by a probability p such that
the head of the queue is chosen with probability p. The general probability of
choosing a tree in the queue is expressed as:
ptreen = (1 −p)n−1 · p
where ptreen is the probability of choosing the tree at index n as shown in ﬁgure
4.14.
Tree 1 
Tree 2 
Tree 3 
Tree 4 
Tree 5 
Tree 6
p
(1-p)
0.4
0.24
0.144
0.086
0.052
0.031
p
(1-p) p
(1-p) p
(1-p) p
(1-p) p
5
2
3
4
Figure 4.14: For each tree in the queue, the probability of choosing the tree is based
on its position in the queue. The probabilities for choosing each tree
when p = 0.4 is shown in the ﬁgure.
Depending on the choice of p we can ensure that with a high probability a tree
with more history is chosen, but we also make it possible to not always rely on
the deepest available tree thereby eliminating bias towards certain sequences of
genotypes.
A key concept of changing to a new tree is to traverse the path according to
the genotypes already determined for the current sample as illustrated in ﬁgure
4.15. This is always possible because the set of individuals in a position in the
graph is a subset of the set individuals in the succeeding position.
==PAGE:66==
54
Designing the genome graph
Tree 1 
Tree 2 
Tree 3 
Tree 4 
Tree 5 
Tree 6
Tree 3 
Tree 4 
Tree 5 
Tree 6
1
2
Tree 1 
Tree 2 
Figure 4.15: The path from 1 is reconstructed in the newly chosen tree in 2. In this
version of the algorithm we only remove trees from the queue when the
maximum size is reached, meaning that a later point we can go back
to using a deeper tree than the current one. Therefore along with the
queue of trees, the traversed path over the corresponding positions is
stored.
As the probability trees are compressed as discussed in the last section, they
have to be expanded each time they are to be used.
Therefore the running
time of the sampling algorithm involves expanding the compressed tree for each
position in the graph, deciding which tree to use and in the case the current tree
is switched, reconstructing the current path in the new tree. In the worst case,
the current tree is switched at each position, alternating between the deepest
and second deepest trees8 in the queue, giving a running time of
O(
nP
i=1
ci · k + l) ⇒O(
nP
i=1
ci · k)
Where n is the number of positions in the graph, ci is the number of nodes in
the compressed probability tree for position i, k is the compression factor of the
probability tree and l is the depth of the new tree. l ≤ci · k is true because the
number of nodes in a tree is at least the same as the depth of the tree.
We propose storing the sampled individuals in a "sampled graph" that is similar
to the genome graph in that it contains alleles and for each position, sets of
individuals according to their genotype. This graph has a size of
O(n · m)
8This is the worst case because when a new tree is chosen, the stored path has to be
traversed in the new tree.
==PAGE:67==
4.7 Summary
55
Where m is the number of sampled individuals and n is the number of positions9.
VCF ﬁles can then be created by iterating through each position of the sampled
graph and writing out a line to the ﬁle with the alleles contained among the
genotypes followed by the genotype for each sampled individual in that position.
4.7
Summary
In this chapter we have discussed the design of the genome graph on a theoretical
level. Making the right design decisions for the graph is important, because
genome data collected in projects such as the Danish pan-genome can reach into
the gigabytes and even terabytes. The quote below highlights this importance:
"In developing any complex, data-intensive system, the most cru-
cial technical decision to make is the choice of data representation.
Data representation aﬀects the ease at which algorithms can be de-
veloped, the eﬃciency at which they perform, the extensibility and
maintenance of the software, the accuracy of the data to be cap-
tured, and the operations which can be performed." [18]
We have therefore discussed which measures can be taken to reduce the size of
the graph. We have also discussed algorithms for using the graph.
In the next chapter we will look at technologies that allow us to construct,
express, work with, and share the genome graph.
9The number of positions in the sampled graph is identical to the number of positions in
the original graph.
==PAGE:68==
56
Designing the genome graph
==PAGE:69==
Chapter 5
Relevant tools and
technologies
In this chapter we will discuss the existing formats for representation of graphs
both in and outside of genetics, and discuss if these formats are suitable for the
requirements established in the last chapter. Along with the discussion of graph
formats, we will also look at relevant tools and programming APIs in regards
to the implementation of the genome graph tool, and based on these dicussions
make a choice of which technology to use.
5.1
Graph formats in genetics
Graphs in assembly of genomes have existed for a long time and is an essential
part of genome assembly. Graphs as reference structures are also gaining more
and more attention, which we discussed in 3.1, but as research in this topic
is in a relatively early stage, the focus currently lies on the theoretical side of
the graphs and their use cases. Although no standard has been decided for the
representation of genome graphs, there are formats which seek to fulﬁl this role.
One format that seeks to capture the graph attributes of genome assemblies
is FASTG [6]. Originally the motivation for creating the FASTG format was
==PAGE:70==
58
Relevant tools and technologies
sparked by the limitations of the FASTA format1:
"This traditional linear representation2, however, has one deep ﬂaw
– it has very limited capacity to express branching that can arise
from allelic polymorphism, intrinsic limitations of the data, or even
limitations of the algorithms used to assemble them." [6]
The key feature of the FASTG format is its ability to express the uncertainty
that can occur in assemblies by allowing the assembly to have alternative branch-
ing paths for regions of uncertainty. Figure 5.1 shows an example of the FASTG
format.
Figure 5.1: An example of of the FASTG format and the corresponding graph as
seen in [6].
In terms of expressing the graph we have discussed in chapter 3, the format
can be used to express the branching nature of the graph, however it is not
ﬂexible in its ability to attach other types of information to the graph such as
for example the probability trees discussed in section 4.5.
Another format that focuses on the representation of genome assemblies as
graphs is the Graphical Fragment Assembly [27]. The format was created in
an attempt to provide a better alternative to the FASTA format [27].
Figure 5.2 shows an entry in the GFA format. We will not go into detail with
the syntax here, but as can be seen it is a format that is designed for solving
one purpose, namely expressing genome assebly graphs, and as such is not easily
extendable with meta information for the graph.
1FASTA is a format that represents linear genome assemblies
2From the FASTA format.
==PAGE:71==
5.2 Other graph formats
59
H
VN:Z:1.0
S
1
2
CGATGCAA
*
L
2
3
5M
S
3
4
TGCAAAGTAC
*
L
3
6
0M
S
5
6
TGCAACGTATAGACTTGTCAC
*
RC:i:4
L
6
8
1M1D2M1S
S
7
8
GCATATA
*
L
7
9
0M
S
9 10
CGATGATA
*
S 11 12
ATGA
*
C
9 11
2
4M
Figure 5.2: An example of a genome assembly expressed in the GFA format as seen
in Li [27].
5.2
Other graph formats
The formats discussed in section 5.1 have certain qualities that are useful in the
context of expressing genomic data as graphs. In terms of expressing alternative
genetic sequences as branches in a graph, the existing formats have the desired
capabilities, even though the motivation for creating them in the ﬁrst place was
to express genome assemblies and the uncertainty involved with such. However
the lacking extensibility of the formats means that they are not particularly
suited for creating a genome reference graph in which we wish to be able to
store other information, and it is therefore natural to look elsewhere for formats
that fulﬁl our requirements.
We established easy extensibility of the graph as one of the main requirements.
The reasoning behind this requirement is that we wish to create a genome
graph that can serve many diﬀerent purposes such as being a mapping reference,
generating sampled individuals from and linking relevant information to loci or
regions of interest on the genome. It is therefore important that we choose a
format in which we can add the needed information to make the graph serve
new purposes and that added information does not change the usability of the
graph in the already established use cases. With this in mind it makes sense to
consider formats where the data itself is represented in a graph where entities
are represented with nodes and relations are represented with edges.
Formats such as GML [24], DOT [17] or GXL [25] are usually used in graph
visualisation. However these formats do allow for the speciﬁcation of meta data
in nodes and edges, and as such could be used to express a graph structure
without being related to its visualisation. These formats come with program-
ming interfaces, and as such it would be possible to work with the graph in a
programming environment and storing it in a graph format.
==PAGE:72==
60
Relevant tools and technologies
It would be possible to express the genome graph in a designated graph format
such as the ones mentioned above, and store the graph persistently in a special-
ized graph database such as Neo4J. Storing genetic graphs in graph databases,
which is discussed in Have and Jensen [22], would allow queries to performed
on the graph, however this approach does not satisfy the needs for sharability
of the graph and integration with other resources. In the next section we will
discuss a format that supports this.
We could consider deﬁning our own graph format, but it is hardly a desirable
solution, as it only limits our possibility of creating an extensible and commonly
used data source and would also require a lot of work to develop.
5.3
The Semantic Web and Linked Data
In the previous sections we have looked at formats that capture the interconnec-
tivity in a graph. Some of the formats are even extensible, platform independent
and suited for representing an arbitrary data structure. In terms of creating a
universally usable genome graph it is desirable that the data structure can be
extended by anyone to suit any purpose. This way, one central data structure
of genomic information can be used in many diﬀerent settings. Furthermore if
the data structure supports querying it would make it easier for users to retrieve
relevant data from the graph depending on their use case.
For this reason it makes sense to look at Linked Data. Linked Data describes
a web of data, the Semantic Web, that is accessible and extensible by anyone.
In the Semantic Web, data available in diﬀerent sources on the web is linked
together in a graph like structure as shown in ﬁgure 5.33.
"Linked Data refers to data published on the Web in such a way
that it is machine-readable, its meaning is explicitly deﬁned, it is
linked to other external data sets, and can in turn be linked to from
external data sets." [14]
The linked nature of the Semantic Web is interesting in several regards when
it comes to the genome graph presented in this project. Firstly it is interesting
because the linkage of information forms a graph structure and is therefore
an intuitive format for describing a graph. Secondly the interconnectivity and
extensibility of the linked data means that the graph can be extended by linking
3As seen in http://linkeddata.org/static/images/lod-datasets_2009-07-14_cropped.png
==PAGE:73==
5.3 The Semantic Web and Linked Data
61
Figure 5.3: The idea behind the semantic web where data available on the web can
be linked together to form a graph of connected data sources.
new information to and from the graph without altering the already existing
nodes and edges of the graph. Lastly the Semantic Web fulﬁls our requirement
of making our data sharable and supports querying.
Sharing and linking data between sources across the net is of course something
that requires a common standard for communication. The discussion of whether
this common standard should be part of the Semantic Web is discussed in Miller
[33] where it argued that the Semantic Web as a concept should be distinguished
from the involved technologies. In this thesis we will not go into the discussion,
but instead discuss the format in which resources are described in the Semantic
Web. In relation to that Berners-Lee [11] lists four principles of Linked Data
and the Semantic Web:
• Use URIs as names for things.
• Use HTTP URIs so that people can look up those names.
• When someone looks up a URI, provide useful information, using the
standards (RDF, SPARQL).
• Include links to other URIs. so that they can discover more things.
In the following we will take a look at the proposed standard for representing
resources on the semantic web, namely RDF.
==PAGE:74==
62
Relevant tools and technologies
5.3.1
Resource Description Framework
RDF is a standard model for data interchange on the web [3]. It links data
through triples which are entities that consists of three resources; a subject, a
predicate and an object. The triple can be seen as directed graph consisting of
two nodes, the subject and object with an edge going from the subject to the
object labelled with the relationship of the two entities as shown in ﬁgure 5.4.
Graph
Chromosome
fromChromsome
Figure 5.4: A triple showing the relationship between a genome graph and a chro-
mosome.
The subject and predicate are URIs and the object can be either a URI or literal.
The smart thing about identifying resources through URIs is that anyone with
access to the internet can look up these resources and other relevant resources
they are linked to. Sometimes a URI is not necessary to represent a resource,
which is why literals can be used instead. Figure 5.5 shows an extension of
ﬁgure 5.4 where the resources are identiﬁed by URIs and literals for simple data
such as names and numbers.
http://example1/
Graph#chr1
http://example2/
Chromosome#chr1
http://example1:fromChromsome
3958
http://example1:
Graph
http://example1:type
http://example1:genes
“Chromosome 1”
http://example2:name
http://example2:length
248,956,422
http://example2:
Chromosome
http://example2:type
Figure 5.5: An RDF graph for the relationship between a genome graph and the
chromosome it is built from.
In the example the resources are located at diﬀerent hosts, http://example1
and http://example2, but because HTTP URIs are used to identify them, it is
possible to link them together. With RDF and the Semantic Web we are able to
==PAGE:75==
5.3 The Semantic Web and Linked Data
63
share our data as part of a bigger context, where relevant parts of the genome
graph can be linked to other sources in the Semantic Web and others can extend
the graph by linking their own data to it. As seen in the following quote, the
current size of the Semantic Web already exceends several billion triples:
"... as of September 2010 there are 28,562,478,988 triples in total
published by data sources participating in the Linking Open Data
Project" [30]
Several serialization formats exist for RDF graphs, which are formats for writing
RDF resources and triples to a ﬁle. In section 6.2.5.2 we will show an example
of the genome graph written in the Turtle serialization.
5.3.2
Integration with the Semantic Web
In order to get the most out of the Semantic Web, the resources should be part
of a context. This means that a clear deﬁnition of the resources themselves
and the relationship they have to other types of resources in the Semantic Web
should be made. Ontologies are used for expressing this relationship between
concepts, and with a clearly deﬁned ontology, the users of the Semantic Web will
know exactly what type of data is linked to the diﬀerent resources. In order to
describe the entities of the genome graph and their relations, we could construct
our own ontology, but seeing as one of the main principles of the Semantic Web
is to reuse existing data, it makes sense to ﬁnd existing ontologies that can be
used and extend these if necessary.
BioInterchange is a modern data processing application that brings genomics
data to the cloud Baran et al. [10], which has a deﬁned ontology of genetic
entities that can be used in the Semantic Web. In the implementation it would
make sense to bind as many of the entities in the graph as possible to concepts
of this ontology as a ﬁrst step of integrating into the Semantic Web.
In this thesis we are mainly concerned with the modelling and usability of the
genome graph, and there is therefore not a major focus on integrating the graph
into the Semantic Web. However in the following we will discuss the choices of
relevant technology that provide the best solution in terms of working with the
graph and sharing it in the Semantic Web.
==PAGE:76==
64
Relevant tools and technologies
5.4
Tools for the Semantic Web
Currently there exists a number of tools regarding working with RDF. For per-
sistent storage there are triple stores which are databases for triples that can
execute semantic queries to retrieve entities of the graph as discussed in Wilkin-
son et al. [41], and alternatively RDF serializations can be used to write resources
and triples to a ﬁle. There also exists a number of Semantic Web frameworks for
diﬀerent programming languages that allow programmers to extract data from
and write to RDF graphs.
5.4.1
Semantic Web APIs
To provide a seamless transition from objects in a programming environment
to RDF graphs we can make use of Semantic Web frameworks. The Semantic
Web of course has many users with diﬀerent backgrounds and therefore there
are many APIs in various diﬀerent programming languages.
Apache Jena is an open source Semantic Web framework for Java. The frame-
work has a number of functionalities that make it possible to work with RDF in
a programming environment. The central object in Jena is the "Model" which
holds the RDF graph and can be sourced with data from ﬁles, databases, URLs
or a combination of these. The Model object can be queried through SPARQL,
a query language for the Semantic Web. The model object can also be easily be
written to ﬁles or databases.
Jena also includes a rule-based inference engine [1] that can perform reasoning
based on Web Ontology Language4[5] and RDFS ontologies which can be used
to infer relationships between entities beyond what is explicitly stated.
Handling triples in Jena can be tedious as shown in the example in listing 5.1
from [2] and instead of thinking in resources, predicates and objects, Jena can
be used along with Jenabean which is a library for persisting JavaBeans 5 to
RDF. This way we can create our graph data structure as Java objects and use
a Bean2RDF writer to convert it to RDF. Likewise Jenabean allows us to create
Java objects from RDF, which means that once the graph has been stored in
RDF, it can be recreated as Java objects.
Sesame [9] is an alternative to Jena, and the two do not diﬀer particularly.
However Sesame does not have support for Web Ontology Language. Like Jena,
Sesame also oﬀers querying and Java binding tools though Alibaba to generate
RDF from Java objects and vice versa.
4Known as OWL.
5JavaBeans are objects that follow a deﬁned design pattern and are easily serializable [20].
==PAGE:77==
5.4 Tools for the Semantic Web
65
JRDF [34] is another Java framework for RDF. It oﬀers query handling, disk
and memory based storage of RDF graphs like Jena and Sesame. However the
framework does not currently support RDF to Java object and Java object to
RDF generation.
More APIs exist in both Java and other programming languages, however we
will not go over all of them here, but instead use the remainder of this section
to motivate a choice of one of the mentioned Java APIs.
1
// some definitions
2
String graphURI
= "http :// somewhere/Graph";
3
String graphName
= "Chr1";
4
int geneCount
= "3958";
5
6
// create an empty Model
7
Model model = ModelFactory.createDefaultModel ();
8
9
// create the resource
10
// and add the properties cascading style
11
Resource genomeGraphChr1
12
= model.createResource(graphURI)
13
.addProperty(GraphOntology.Name , graphName)
14
.addProperty(GraphOntology.GeneCount , geneCount);
Listing 5.1: Jena example inspired by [2].
5.4.2
Persistent storage
"Graphs are ubiquitous in bioinformatics and frequently consist of
too many nodes and edges to represent in random access mem-
ory. These graphs are thus stored in databases to allow for eﬃcient
queries using declarative query languages ..." [22, p. 1]
A crucial part of RDF is how to store the linked data. RDF graphs can become
quite big, and it is therefore important to have persistent storage that scales
well and performs queries eﬃciently. Storing massive RDF data sets is a science
in and of itself as discussed in Luo et al. [30], however we will brieﬂy touch upon
some possible choices here.
The Java frameworks of interest (Sesame and Jena, because JRDF does not
provide Java object to RDF support and vice versa) we have mentioned both
come with triple store solutions6. In Bizer and Schultz [13] an extensive study
can be found for the performance and scalability of the triples stores TDB, SDB
for Jena and the Sesame triple store. The study comes to the conclusion that in
terms of loading triples, Jena TDB is more than one order of magnitude faster
6Sesame, Jena TDB and Jena SDB
==PAGE:78==
66
Relevant tools and technologies
than SDB and Sesame. However in terms of performing queries on the data,
Sesame has the best performance. In terms of scalability TDB demonstrates
the best results.
In this project we have not integrated persistent storage using triple stores, but
it is a priority in the future. Instead we have stored the generated RDF graphs
to text ﬁles by using the RDF serialization formats. Storing the graph in a triple
store makes sense in the future because it is more eﬃcient in terms of disk space
usage than an RDF serialization, and can eﬃciently execute SPARQL queries.
5.5
VCF parsers
We mentioned earlier how we are going to build the genome graph from VCF
ﬁles, and therefore it makes sense to choose a programming language which has
libraries for handling VCF ﬁles. Luckily there exists a number of VCF parsers
in diﬀerent languages such as Java (GATK), Python (PyVCF), C++ (vcﬂib)
and Perl (VCFTools).
5.6
Chosen tools
On the background of the discussed tools, we have found that RDF and the
Semantic Web fulﬁls our needs in terms of providing a format in which we
can easily share the genome graph. It is also appealing that the graph can be
extended by other developers across the world. We have discussed a number
of tools regarding working with RDF. We choose to work with Jena, because
it allows us to work with Java objects and provides well performing persistent
storage through a triple store (which can become relevant given the amount of
data collected in a project like the danish pan-genome). Furthermore the choice
of using Java means that we have access to a VCF parser through GATK.
5.7
Summary
In this chapter we have looked at the possibilities of storing graphs in formats
that are capable of expressing a genome graph which consists of many diﬀerent
entities. A major inﬂuence on the choice of format was its ability to be shared
==PAGE:79==
5.7 Summary
67
easily. The existence of relevant tools for handling and sharing the graph in-
ﬂuenced the choice of technology. For this reason we have chosen to represent
the graph as triples, which can be shared as part of the Semantic Web. Java
has been chosen as the programming language because it provides a number of
useful tools such as a VCF parser, Java object to triple generation and triple to
RDF serialization.
==PAGE:80==
68
Relevant tools and technologies
==PAGE:81==
Chapter 6
VGTool
6.1
Design
We have now discussed the modelling of genetic variation as graphs, the moti-
vation for doing so and some interesting use cases regarding genome graphs in
chapter 3. In chapter 5 we have discussed and decided upon suitable technolo-
gies that will allow us to build an RDF graph from VCF ﬁles, using Java along
with tools for parsing VCF ﬁles and serializing Java objects to RDF.
In this thesis a tool called VGTool has been designed and implemented. In this
chapter we will go over the design of the tool from a structural standpoint, and
then explain more in detail about the design of the implemented algorithms.
A number of decisions have been made in order to make VGTool perform well
when working with large amounts of data. There is also a focus on making the
implementation easily extensible. In the following section we will discuss the
structure of the design and go into detail with some of the main priorities for
the design.
==PAGE:82==
70
VGTool
6.1.1
Tool overview
Figure 6.1 provides an overview of the VGTool and its collaboration with other
technologies.
As can be seen in the ﬁgure, the input to VGTool can either
be VCF ﬁles which are parsed with the GATK Java library, or a previously
constructed VariantGraph loaded from triples. Persistently storing the graphs
can be done with Jena and Jenabean to either a triple store database or through
a serialization of RDF such as for example the Turtle format.
VGTool
VCF
VCF
VCF
Input
VCF
Triplestore
Sampled data
The Semantic Web
GATK
VCF Parser
Parsed input
Bean2RDF
RDF2Bean
VCF
VCF
Turtle
Linked Data
RDF Serialization
Figure 6.1: The diﬀerent technologies of the implementation and their interaction.
Triple store and Semantic Web integration has not been implemented in the
tool in this thesis, but would be an obvious extension for the future.
6.1.2
Design requirements
Before we go into the details of the implementation in chapter 6.2, we can take
a look at the overall design of VGTool. The design of the tool focuses on a few
key points:
Modularization of graph handling features. The motivation for this is to avoid
a tightly coupled system such that the algorithms discussed in chapter 4
can be changed or replaced independently of each other.
Parallelization is a key part of VGTool and working with genome data in
general. The motivation for parallelizing processes comes from the sheer
size of the collected data.
==PAGE:83==
6.1 Design
71
Minimization of memory allocation is important for the same reasons as
parallelization. The highly repetitive nature of the human genome and
DNA in general means that several entities in the genome graph can be
represented using references to global resources.
In the following we will discuss these design requirements further.
6.1.3
Modularization
VGTool has a number of implemented features and has been constructed with
a long term goal of fulﬁlling other purposes such as serving as a read mapping
reference as discussed in 2.2.3. This need for extensibility should be reﬂected in
the implementation and as mentioned there is also a motivation for being able
to easily change and improve the already implemented features. For this reason
the implementation has been modularized such that each feature in regards to
working with the genome graph is a separate module/component. The list below
gives a short description of the diﬀerent components that perform the diﬀerent
functionalities of VGTool.
Graph reader: The component for parsing the input. In case a diﬀerent for-
mat than VCF was to be used, this module could be changed to support
that format.
RDF reader: The component for reading a previously constructed graph stored
as triples.
Graph compresser: The component for compressing a graph in order to re-
duce memory allocation.
Graph expander: The component for expanding a compressed graph.
Graph merger: The component responsible for merging graphs.
Probabilities builder: The component that builds probability trees in a graph.
Individual sampler: The component that can generate sampled individuals
from a graph.
Samples writer: The component that stores the constructed samples to VCF
ﬁles.
RDF writer: The component that serializes entities of the graph and stores
them persistently.
==PAGE:84==
72
VGTool
6.1.4
Parallelization
In chapter 4 we discussed the diﬀerent algorithms for building and using the
genome graph and ensured that both the asymptotic running time and space
complexity of the graph were kept at a reasonable level.
However with the
amount of data involved in studies such as the Danish pan-genome, there is a
clear motivation for increasing the performance of the data handling. In this
section we will discuss how parts of the designed algorithms have been paral-
lelized to improve their performance, and which measures have been taken for
avoiding race conditions when several threads manipulate the graph concur-
rently. Later in section 6.3, we will perform a series of tests to analyse the eﬀect
of the parallelization.
6.1.4.1
Compressing, expanding and writing graphs
The simplest form of parallelization has been performed for the tasks of com-
pressing, expanding and writing graphs to ﬁles.
The parallelization here is
achieved by assigning a thread to each graph object, and have that thread per-
form the chosen task. Remember that we construct distinct graphs for each
chromosome, meaning that a total of 23 sets of graphs can exist at the same
time. Even more graphs can exist, as graphs for the same chromosomes can be
constructed from diﬀerent input, however when more than one graph exists for
a given chromosome, they are automatically merged together.
As we shall see later in section 6.3, neither compression nor expansion are very
time demanding tasks in comparison to the other graph algorithms. For this
reason, we have not chosen to parallelize the tasks further, even though this
would be possible by delegating parts of the graph to diﬀerent threads and have
them perform the task of either compressing or expanding the given subgraph.
As for writing the graph to a ﬁle, we use an external library, and as such do
not have control over the parallelization of the task. With the use of a triple
store however, it would be possible to persistently store and retrieve the genome
graph and its entities in parallel.
6.1.4.2
Merging graphs
Separate graphs are constructed for each chromosome which means that the
graphs for each chromosome can be merged independently of each other. To
take advantage of this fact the merging of graphs is done on separate threads
for each chromosome as shown in ﬁgure 6.2.
==PAGE:85==
6.1 Design
73
Chr
1
Chr
1
Chr
3
Chr
4
Chr
4
Chr
7
Chr
3
Chr
7
Unmerged chromosome graphs
Thread 1
Thread 2
Thread 3
Thread 4
Chr
1
Chr
3
Chr
4
Chr
7
Merged chromosome graphs
Merging
Chr 1
Merging
Chr 3
Merging
Chr 4
Merging
Chr 7
Figure 6.2: Merging diﬀerent chromosome graphs on diﬀerent threads.
Furthermore, if many graphs exist for one chromosome and are to be merged
together into one graph, these graphs could be merged pairwise iteratively on
diﬀerent threads in order to speed up the merging process as shown in ﬁgure
6.3.
G1
Chr1
G2
Chr1
G3
Chr1
G4
Chr1
G5
Chr1
G6
Chr1
G7
Chr1
G8
Chr1
G1,2
Chr1
G3,4
Chr1
G5,6
Chr1
G7,8
Chr1
G5,6,7,8
Chr1
G1,2,3,4
Chr1
G1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8
Chr1
Figure 6.3: Pairwise merge of graphs.
Pairwise merging of graphs has not been implemented, but depending of the
running time of the merging algorithm, there could be motivation to implement
it in the future.
==PAGE:86==
74
VGTool
6.1.4.3
Generating probability trees
A major concern when constructing the probability trees is the time and space
consumption of the process.
For the construction of the trees we can take
advantage of parallelization by dividing the graph into smaller pieces and then
assigning diﬀerent threads to building the probability trees for each part as
shown in ﬁgure 6.4.
Graph without probability trees
Thread 1
Thread 2
Thread 3
Thread 4
Adding
probabilty
trees
Adding
probabilty
trees
Adding
probabilty
trees
Adding
probabilty
trees
Graph with probability trees
Figure 6.4: Parallelization of probability tree construction.
However the entire graph should be available to access for all threads because the
probability trees can span positions exceeding the interval given to the thread.
Fortunately there is no critical section regarding accessing the graph among the
threads, because information is only read from, and not written to the graph.
The process of generating the probabilty trees, or more speciﬁcally, the com-
pressed probability trees on diﬀerent threads proposes two critical sections; the
ﬁrst critical section is concerned with reusing genotypes at the nodes of the
probabilty tree as explained in chapter 4. As several threads are assigned with
constructing trees, and thereby storing unique genotypes, we must ensure that
there is mutual exclusion when writing to the hashmap of genotypes. Here it is
important to remember, that if a genotype has already been stored, retrieving
it is not a critical section. Instead when a thread retrieves a genotype, it ﬁrst
checks if has been stored previously, and if not, it enters the critical section to
save it in the shared hashmap. Upon entrance in the critical section it checks
again that genotype still does not exist, as the current thread could potentially
have been waiting to enter the critical section due to another thread that was
==PAGE:87==
6.1 Design
75
in the process of saving the same genotype.
The other critical section is in regards to storing genotype sequences as central
resources, which allows them to be reused to reduce the space complexity of
the compressed probability trees. The principle is the same as above, where a
global hashset of resources is kept and threads use the hash value of a genotype
sequence to retrieve the global resource.
Deadlocks will not occur as the conditions of hold and wait, resource holding and
circular wait do not hold for the algorithm, which is required for the possibility
of a deadlock occuring as explained in Havender [23].
In section 6.3 we perform tests of how this parallelization aﬀects the performance
of the generation of probability trees. Depending on the outcome of these tests,
there might be a motivation to solve the issue of having a bottle neck in the
shape of a critical section. For this, a scheme could be used where instead of
using one hashmap for storing genotypes and one for genotype sequences, each
of these could be divided into several smaller maps.
For example if we have 100 threads that all work on storing global genotype
references, we could share the genotypes out across 100 hashmaps. Another
hashmap can then be used to point threads to a genotype map, for example
by taking the current genotypes hashvalue modulo 100 to get an even load for
each genotype hashmap. Writing to the map would still be a critical section and
require mutual exclusion of threads, but the probability of threads accessing the
same hashmap could be reduced with this method. This is illustrated in ﬁgure
6.5. In terms of asymptotic time and space complexity, this approach is not
diﬀerent than the single hashmap approach.
0
1
2
3
A/A
A/G
GIA
C/C
T|T
A|T
C|G
T|T
Hashvalue % 4
Figure 6.5: Nested hashing.
To speed up the sampling, a thread is assigned to the creation of each sample.
Because the threads for each sample insert into the same sampled graph, there
is a critical section for which a monitor has been used to ensure mutual exlu-
sion upon insertion. A diﬀerent design here could allow threads to insert more
eﬃciently which we will explain further in section 6.3.1.6
==PAGE:88==
76
VGTool
During the sampling the compressed probability trees explained in section 4.5
are expanded before they can be used. Currently each thread does this indi-
vidually and releases it again when it is no longer relevant. However instead of
letting each thread expand and later release the trees, a scheme could be con-
structed where trees are expanded once, used by all threads, and then released
again once all threads are done using them. For this to work, the threads should
traverse the graph at the same pace, which could be achieved by inserting bar-
riers at ﬁxed intervals in the graph such that no thread traverses too far ahead
of the others as illustrated in ﬁgure 6.6.
Sampling Thread 1
Barrier 1
Barrier 2
Barrier 3
Barrier 4
Sampling Thread 2
Sampling Thread 3
Sampling Thread 4
Sampling Thread 5
Figure 6.6: Barriers to ensure side by side traversal of the genome graph for the
sampling threads.
6.1.5
Minimal memory allocation
We have already touched upon the steps taken to reduce the space complexity
of the graph. In this section we will brieﬂy sum up those steps.
6.1.5.1
Global resources
The genome graph contains many elements that represent entities. As such we
have made an eﬀort to store reusable entities as global resources that can be
linked to any part of the graph. This is the realization of the idea presented in
ﬁgure 3.11. The entities we have chosen to represent as global resources are the
individuals of the graph, the four base values that alleles are made up of and
the observed genotypes. In terms of Semantic Web integration, reusing entities
of the graph as much as possible makes sense, because it allows users of the
Semantic Web to link to those particular entities. For example each of the four
==PAGE:89==
6.1 Design
77
DNA bases1 in the RDF graph could be linked to external data sources with
information of their chemical compound.
6.1.5.2
Compressing
The other aspect of reducing the space complexity of the graph comes from
compression. We have already discussed how compressing linear stretches of the
graph is desirable, because it allows us to express the genetics of the observed
individuals for that part of the graph with only one set rather than a set of
individuals for each position. We also covered how compressing probablity trees
to reduce the amount of nodes in the tree is desirable, because the overlapping
nature of the trees makes it possible to reuse the compressed genotype sequences
in several trees.
As we shall see in the tests of space consumption for genome graphs in section
6.3.1.5, the major source for space allocation is the probability trees. However
in a graph without these trees2, the main part of memory comsumption comes
from the set of individuals that are stored at each position. We therefore propose
a method for storing sets of individuals in a compressed manner, which takes
advantage of their unique IDs. The compressed set of individuals relies on the
individuals being alphabetically sorted according to IDs. This way, a set can be
expressed by the ID of the ﬁrst individual in the set, and a number determining
how many of the next individuals in the sorted individual collection are in the
set, similar to the Run-Length encoding algorithm. Figure 6.7 shows how a set
can be expressed using this method.
{A, B, C, D, E, F, 
G, H, I,
K, L, M, N, O, P}
{A,9,K,6}
Figure 6.7: Expressing a subset of individuals A-Z in a compressed set.
1adenine, cytosine, guanine, thymine
2For an internal version of the graph the probability trees are not strictly necessary, because
we can store the individuals from the original observations instead.
Furthermore a graph
without probability trees could function in other use cases, such as mapping for example.
==PAGE:90==
78
VGTool
6.1.6
Design summary
In this section we have taken a look at the overall structure of VGTool and
its connection to other technologies. We have also discussed some of the key
design focuses that makes the implementation both easily extendable and the
performance of the algorithms well.
In the next section we will take a closer look at the implementation and describe
key parts of the code.
==PAGE:91==
6.2 Implementation
79
6.2
Implementation
In this section we will take a closer look at the implementation of VGTool. We
will provide an overview of the program and look at relevant parts of the code.
Figure 6.8 shows the state space of VGTool.
Idle
Loading graphs 
from VCF
Loading graphs 
from RDF
Expanding graphs
Merging graphs
Compressing 
graphs
Building probability 
trees
Build probability trees
[Graph exists]
Built probability trees
Saving 
graph
Generating 
samples
Saving samples
Save graph
Done saving graph
Load VCF
Done loading
[Graph for same 
chromosome exists] 
/ expand graphs
[No other graphs 
for chromosome] /
Shrink graph
Done expanding / 
Merge graphs  
Done merging / 
Compress graph
Load RDF
Done loading
Done compressing
Sample individuals[Graph with 
probabilities exists]
Done sampling [Save to ﬁle]
Done sampling
Quit
Figure 6.8: State chart showing the various states of the VGTool.
6.2.1
Implementing the graph
In the following we will go over the implementation of the graph structure in the
light of the analysed requirements of chapter 3 and the graph design discussed
in chapter 6.1.
The central object of the implementation is the VariantGraph. A VariantGraph
object is created for each chromosome from the input. The individual chromo-
somes can reach lengths spanning hundreds of millions of positions3. By creating
several graphs instead of one we can easily manipulate one chromosome at a time
or all chromosomes in parallel. Due to structural variants however the graphs
should be able to be linked together.
The structure of the entities contained in the VariantGraph is shown in ﬁgure
6.9.
3For example chromosome 1 has a length of 248,956,422 bases [4].
==PAGE:92==
80
VGTool
VariantGraph
VGChromosome
1
VGPosition
0..*
VGIndividualCollection
1..*
VGIndividual
0..*
VGGenotype
2
VGProbabiltyTree
0..1
VGProbabiltyNode
1..*
VGSequence
1..*
VGAlleleList
VGBaseValue
1..*
1..*
0..*
0..*
chromosome
positions
probability tree
roots
children
VGProbabiltyGenotype
genotype
1
successors
predecessors
allele sequences
alleles
base values
genotypes
individual collections
individuals
0..*
VGSequenceGap
VGProbabiltyTree
compressed probability tree
0..1
CompressedNode
roots
1..*
children
0..*
1
1
VGCompressedIndividualCollection
0..2
compressed sets
Figure 6.9: Class diagram of entities connected to the VariantGraph.
Figure 6.9 shows a class VGSequenceGap which is a subclass of the VGSequence
class. We implemented this class to be able to connect positions in the graph
that are not adjacent. However we do not currently use it in the implementation,
as the sorted list of positions in listing 6.1 can express the same relationship.
1
@Namespace(JenaObject.ns)
2
public class VariantGraph extends JenaObject {
3
private VGChromosome chromosome;
4
5
public ArrayList <VGPosition > positions;
6
public Map <Integer , VGPosition > positionsMap;
7
8
public boolean hasBeenShrinked;
9
public boolean hasProbabilities;
10
11
...
12
13
public VGChromosome getChromosome () {
14
return chromosome;
15
}
16
17
public void setChromosome(VGChromosome chromosome) {
18
this.chromosome = chromosome;
19
}
20
}
Listing 6.1: A selection of the VariantGraph object.
==PAGE:93==
6.2 Implementation
81
Figure 6.9 also shows how a position can contain two types of probability trees;
a compressed and an uncompressed version.
The same principle applies to
the VGIndividualCollected, which can either contain a set of individuals or a
compressed set, which was explained in section 6.1.5.2.
The ﬁelds contained in the VariantGraph object are shown in listing 6.1, and as
can be seen, the graph contains both a list and a map for the positions due to
a need for deterministic iteration through the graph and constant time lookup
of positions. As a graph can also be compressed and extended with probabil-
ity trees, booleans are used to store if this has been done. Each position in
the graph holds information in regards to the observed variation at the posi-
tion, the individuals and their genotype, and also a probability tree which is
built from the position itself and succeeding positions as explained in 4.5. The
VGPosition object used to represent a locus can be seen in listing 6.2. Each
VGSequence in the sequence set speciﬁes distinct allele observed at the position
and for each observed genotype, a set of the individuals with that genotype is
stored. Furthermore a positions probability tree is either represented as a VG-
ProbabilityTree or a VGCompressedProbabilityTree, however only one of these
is allocated at a time and they can be converted to one another.
1
@Namespace(JenaObject.ns)
2
public class VGPosition extends JenaObject implements Comparable <VGPosition > {
3
4
private VariantGraph graph;
5
private int position;
6
7
public Set <VGSequence > sequencesSet;
8
9
private Map <Pair <VGSequence , VGSequence >, VGIndividualCollection >
individualsForGenotypeUnphased;
10
private Map <Pair <VGSequence , VGSequence >, VGIndividualCollection >
individualsForGenotypePhased;
11
12
private VGProbabilityTree probabilityTree;
13
private VGCompressedProbabilityTree compressedTree;
14
15
...
16
}
Listing 6.2: A selection of the VGPosition object.
The variation stored for the positions in the graph is represented by the VGSe-
quence object. The VGSequence object has information about its predecessors
and successors because although we have a sorted collection of positions in the
graph, there is the possibility of structural variation resulting in edges between
non-neighbouring positions. The VGSequence object can also represent com-
pressed parts of the graph as discussed in 4.5, and as such contains a list of alleles
rather just a single allele. Upon expansion these alleles can be reinserted into
the graph in incremental fashion from the origin of the compressed sequence.
==PAGE:94==
82
VGTool
1
@Namespace(JenaObject.ns)
2
public class VGSequence extends JenaObject {
3
4
public List <VGAlleleList > allelesLists;
5
6
public Set <VGSequence > predecessors;
7
public Set <VGSequence > successors;
8
9
VGPosition position;
10
private short i;
11
12
...
13
}
Listing 6.3: A selection of the VGSequence object.
6.2.2
Project settings and global resources
In the implementation we use static globally accessible resources to deﬁne set-
tings such that the implemented algorithms can easily be tweaked.
1
public class Constants {
2
//RDF url prefix
3
public static final String SOURCE = "http ://vg";
4
public static final String NS = SOURCE + "#";
5
6
// Threshold that determines what is good coverage
7
public static int coverageThreshold = 0;
8
9
// Threshold that determines what is rare genetic variation
10
public static int individualsThreshold = 5;
11
12
// Limit of probability trees depth. -1 is no maximum depth.
13
public static int maxDepthForProbabilityTrees = -1;
14
15
//Size of tree queue for sampling
16
public static int treeQueueSize = 20;
17
18
// Probability of choosing head of tree queue.
19
public static float treeChoiceProbability = 0.5f;
20
21
// Should compress
22
public static boolean compressTrees = true;
23
public static boolean compressIndividualSets = false;
24
25
// Persistent storage type. Database or RDF serialization.
26
public static boolean shouldUseDatabase = false;
27
}
Listing 6.4: Settings for the tool
Listing 6.4 shows some of the diﬀerent settings that can be used in the tool, for
example the base URI for resources in RDF.
==PAGE:95==
6.2 Implementation
83
We also use global resources for entities in the graph that should be reused.
Examples of these are the individuals of the graph, the base values of alleles,
genotype IDs and compressed probability paths as shown in listing 6.5.
1
public class GeneticsUtils {
2
3
public enum PhasingType {
4
UNPHASED , PHASED
5
}
6
7
private static HashMap <String , VGBaseValue > baseValues = new HashMap <String ,
VGBaseValue >();
8
private static HashMap <String , List <VGBaseValue >> alleleListHashMap = new
HashMap <String , List <VGBaseValue >>();
9
private static HashMap <String , VGProbabilityGenotype > genotypeHashMap = new
HashMap <String , VGProbabilityGenotype >();
10
11
private static HashMap <String , String > probabilityPaths = new HashMap <String ,
String >();
12
13
private static HashMap <String , Short > uniqueGenotypeMap = new HashMap <String ,
Short >();
14
private static HashMap <Short , String > uniqueIdToGenotypeMap = new
HashMap <Short , String >();
15
16
private static short uniqueGenotypeCount = 0;
17
18
...
19
20
}
Listing 6.5: Some of the global resources used in the graph.
6.2.3
Algorithm components
In section 6.1.3 we discussed dividing the functionality of the program into
several components and listed which parts of the tool could be a seperate com-
ponent. In order to fully utilize this design, a clear deﬁnition of the protocols
for communication with the components should be deﬁned, such that developers
can change a component without aﬀecting other functionalities of the program.
Figure 6.10 shows the components of VGTool along with the input they take
and the output they produce. All that is required for changing a component in
this design is that the new component follows the same speciﬁcation of input
and output.
Some components rely on graphs with certain properties, for example the in-
dividual sampler component requires that the graph which is to be sampled
from has probability trees. Currently it is speciﬁed in the VariantGraph ob-
ject if the graph contains probability trees with a boolean, however we could
consider changing the component protocols to only require speciﬁc types and
as such a new graph object (ProbabilitiesVariantGraph for example) could be
==PAGE:96==
84
VGTool
Input
Component
Output
VCF ﬁle
Graph reader
VariantGraph
VariantGraph
Graph compresser
VariantGraph
VariantGraph
Graph expander
VariantGraph
Set<VariantGraph>
Graph merger
VariantGraph
VariantGraph
Probabilities builder
VariantGraph
(with probability trees)
VariantGraph
#Samples
Individual sampler
SampledGraph
SampledGraph
Samples writer
VCF ﬁle
VariantGraph
RDF writer
RDF graph
RDF graph
RDF reader
VariantGraph
Figure 6.10: The diﬀerent components of the VGTool with a speciﬁcation of the
input and output.
The RDF writer component produces an RDF
graph, which can be written to an RDF serialization format or a triple
store for example.
created, which inherits all the properties of the VariantGraph, but also ensures
that probability trees have been constructed.
6.2.4
Threads and critical sections
Several parts of the implementation have been parallelized to improve perfor-
mance. The ThreadHandler class handles the instantiation and delegation of
tasks to threads. Once threads are started with the purpose of each solving a
small part of a bigger problem, a barrier is put in place such that the execution
of the main thread continues when all threads have ﬁnished their assigned task.
Figure 6.6 shows an example of how the threadhandler instantiates threads to
solve a task4 where each thread is given a list of positions for which it creates
probability trees.
There is a motivation for being able to control the amount of threads, such that
we do not switch between contexts of diﬀerent threads too often. As such it
4Here it is the task building of probability trees in the graph
==PAGE:97==
6.2 Implementation
85
makes sense to not instantiate more threads than there are processors. Tasks
such as compression currently uses one thread per chromosome at maximum,
but the sampling of individuals instantiates threads for each individual concur-
rently, such that for example sampling of 1000 individuals creates 1000 threads.
A future change to the implementation that could result in an improved perfor-
mance could be to have a ﬁxed size threadpool, which is at most equal to the
number of processors.
1
public static void startGraphProbabilityThreadsForGraphs(Set <VariantGraph >
graphSet) throws InterruptedException {
2
3
int splitBy = Runtime.getRuntime ().availableProcessors ();
4
5
for (VariantGraph g : graphSet) {
6
7
List <List <VGPosition >> choppedPositions =
Lists.partition(g.getPositions (), g.getPositions ().size() /
splitBy);
8
9
CountDownLatch latch = new CountDownLatch(choppedPositions.size());
10
11
for (List <VGPosition > positions : choppedPositions) {
12
13
GraphProbabilityInitialiserRunnable runnable = new
GraphProbabilityInitialiserRunnable(positions , latch);
14
Thread thread = new Thread(runnable);
15
thread.start();
16
17
}
18
19
latch.await();
20
latch = new CountDownLatch(choppedPositions.size());
21
22
for (List <VGPosition > positions : choppedPositions) {
23
GraphProbabilityTreesRunnable runnable = new
GraphProbabilityTreesRunnable(positions , g, latch);
24
Thread thread = new Thread(runnable);
25
thread.start();
26
}
27
28
latch.await();
29
30
}
31
}
Listing 6.6: Initialization of threads that build probability trees for diﬀerent
regions of the graph.
In section 6.1.4 we discussed the critical regions that can occur from manipu-
lating the graph in parallel and how mutual exclusion should be achieved for
those regions. One example of this is in the creation of probability trees in the
graph, where each newly observed genotype is assigned an ID. As responsibility
of generating probability trees, and thereby observing genotypes, is delegated
to several threads, the assigning of the genotype IDs is atomized. To avoid a
bottle neck in regards to accessing the shared hashtable of genotypes and IDs,
only the assigning of IDs has been atomized as shown in ﬁgure 6.7.
==PAGE:98==
86
VGTool
1
public class AlleleUtils {
2
3
private static HashMap <String , Short > uniqueGenotypeMap = new HashMap <String ,
Short >();
4
private static HashMap <Short , String > uniqueIdToGenotypeMap = new
HashMap <Short , String >();
5
6
private static short uniqueGenotypeCount = 0;
7
8
public static Short uniqueStringForGenotype(VGProbabilityGenotype genotype) {
9
if (! uniqueGenotypeMap.containsKey(genotype.toString ())) {
10
mapGenotype(genotype);
11
}
12
13
Short id = uniqueGenotypeMap.get(genotype.toString ());
14
return id;
15
}
16
17
private static synchronized void mapGenotype(VGProbabilityGenotype genotype) {
18
if (! uniqueGenotypeMap.containsKey(genotype.toString ())) {
19
uniqueGenotypeMap.put(genotype.toString (), uniqueGenotypeCount);
20
uniqueIdToGenotypeMap.put(uniqueGenotypeCount , genotype.toString ());
21
uniqueGenotypeCount ++;
22
}
23
}
24
25
...
26
}
Listing 6.7: The assigning of IDs to genotypes is a critical section.
The
synchronized method mapGenotype prevents race conditions from
occuring.
6.2.5
RDF and Jena
In this section the use of Apache Jena and Jenabean to work with RDF graphs
in Java will be covered.
6.2.5.1
The JenaObject
Any class that should be part of the RDF graph subclasses the abstract class
JenaObject which is shown in ﬁgure 6.8. This object ensures that an ID, and
thereby a unique URI for the resource is created. The URI is created as con-
catenation of the base url, Constants.NS, the name of class and a unique ID for
the object. The assigning of IDs is particularly important, because a clash of
IDs between objects means that only one will be stored. For example assign-
ing an ID to a VariantGraph object is trivial, as there is only one graph for
each chromosome (if there are more than one, they are automatically merged),
==PAGE:99==
6.2 Implementation
87
but for resources such as the variation of a position, care must be taken when
assigning IDs.
1
@Namespace(JenaObject.ns)
2
public abstract class JenaObject {
3
public static final String ns = Constants.NS;
4
public String id;
5
6
public JenaObject(String id) {
7
setId(id);
8
}
9
10
@Id
11
public String getId() {
12
return id;
13
}
14
public void setId(String id) {
15
this.id = id;
16
}
17
...
18
}
Listing 6.8: The abstract JenaObject.
The general principle that has been used for IDs is that each graph entity uses
the ID of the entity it is contained in with an extension for the object itself. In
an eﬀort to reduce the memory allocation that would occur if every JenaOb-
ject stored its own ID as String object, instead objects are given the minimal
required resources from which the ID can be generated on demand. This means
that if an objects ID is generated as an concatenation of a parent objects ID and
an identiﬁer for the current object, a reference to that parent object is given to
the current object along with the identiﬁer extension.
It is also important here that when for example merging, compressing, or ex-
panding graphs, we are change the entity IDs contained in them, meaning that
some scenarios require a new assigning of IDs.
6.2.5.2
Serialization and storage
Conversion from Java objects to a Jena Model object which contains the triples
of the RDF graph (and in turn can be saved to persistent storage) can be done
with the use of Jenabean. We already discussed how subclassing the JenaObject
ensures that every entity to be stored in RDF is assigned a URI. The triples of
RDF are inferred from beans which have ﬁelds that are other beans or primitive
types and follow a getter/setter pattern. The example in ﬁgure 6.1 shows the
VariantGraph object which has a ﬁeld of type VGChromosome with a getter and
setter. Jenabean interprets this pattern and from it generates the triple that
binds the graph and the chromosome together. Listing 6.9 shows an example of
the triples where VariantGraph is the subject, written in the Turtle format.
==PAGE:100==
88
VGTool
1
<http://vg#VariantGraph/chr1 >
2
a
vg:VariantGraph ;
3
vg:chromosome
<http://vg#VGChromosome/chr1 > ;
4
vg:hasBeenShrinked
true ;
5
vg:hasProbabilities
true ;
6
vg:id
"chr1"^^<http://www.w3.org /2001/ XMLSchema#string > ;
7
vg:positions
[ a
<http://www.w3.org /1999/02/22 -rdf -syntax -ns#Seq > ;
8
<http://www.w3.org /1999/02/22 -rdf -syntax -ns#_1 >
9
<http://vg#VGPosition/chr1 :11905665 > ;
10
<http://www.w3.org /1999/02/22 -rdf -syntax -ns#_2 >
11
<http://vg#VGPosition/chr1 :11905793 > ;
12
<http://www.w3.org /1999/02/22 -rdf -syntax -ns#_3 >
13
<http://vg#VGPosition/chr1 :11906733 > ;
14
] .
Listing 6.9: Triples where a VariantGraph entity is the subject. Here the base
url for the entities in the graph is http://vg.
The Bean2RDF class of the Jenabean library allows a set of related bean objects
to be written to a Jena model easily. This is done by instantiating a Jena Model
object and a Bean2RDF object that writes resources to the model. For writing
objects as triples to the model there are two methods; saveDeep(Object bean)
and save(Object bean). The basic save method writes a single resource to the
model, and the saveDeep method traverses through the graph of JenaObjects
originating from the object that the method is called with, saving all objects as
resources and generates the triples according the relation between the objects.
This traversal depends on whether or not the setter method for a JenaObject
has been used; if the method has not been called, it is assumed that the object
is not instantiated and therefore shouldn’t be written to the ﬁle.
1
public void writeToFile(VariantGraph vg) throws IOException {
2
3
Model m = ModelFactory.createDefaultModel ();
4
m.setNsPrefix("vg", Constants.NS);
5
6
MyBean2RDF writer = new MyBean2RDF(m);
7
8
File file = new File("VCFDataBase/VCF_Files/" + vg.getId () + ".ttl");
9
file.getParentFile ().mkdirs ();
10
if (!file.exists ()) {
11
file.createNewFile ();
12
}
13
14
writer.saveDeep(vg);
15
16
FileOutputStream fop = new FileOutputStream(file);
17
RDFDataMgr.write(fop , m, RDFFormat.TURTLE);
18
}
Listing 6.10: The writeToFile method loads the VariantGraph and related
beans into a Jena Model and saves them to a Turtle ﬁle.
==PAGE:101==
6.2 Implementation
89
However sometimes it is desirable not to keep parts of the graph in memory
at all time, such as for example with probability trees that are only kept in
a compressed version, and therefore the getter method for the probability tree
should generate the tree on demand from the compressed tree. Listing 6.10 and
6.11 shows how the graph can be saved to, and loaded from RDF.
1
public static void readGraphFromFile () {
2
Model m = ModelFactory.createDefaultModel ();
3
RDFDataMgr.read(m, "VCFDataBase/VCF_Files/chr1.ttl", Lang.TURTLE);
4
5
Jenabean b = Jenabean.instance ();
6
b.bind(m);
7
8
Collection <VariantGraph > vgs = b.reader ().loadDeep(VariantGraph.class);
9
for (VariantGraph vg : vgs) {
10
EnclosingModel.putNewGraphForKey(vg.getId (), vg);
11
}
12
}
Listing 6.11: Loading a graph that has been serialized in the Turtle format.
Once the beans have been written to the Jena Model, this model can be saved
to persistent storage, such as a triple store or written to a ﬁle in one of the many
RDF serializations.
6.2.5.3
Querying the model
Once the VariantGraph has been loaded into the Jena Model it is possible to
query it using SPARQL queries. Exposing this functionality through a SPARQL
endpoint means that users of the Semantic Web can perform queries on the
graph. Alternatively it can be used locally in the tool for example for testing
purposes. Listing 6.12 shows how a query is performed using a String.
1
private void performQuery(String queryString) {
2
try {
3
Query query = QueryFactory.create(queryString);
4
QueryExecution qexec = QueryExecutionFactory.create(query , model);
5
ResultSet results = qexec.execSelect ();
6
System.out.println("Rownumber: " + results.getRowNumber ());
7
for (; results.hasNext (); ) {
8
QuerySolution soln = results.nextSolution ();
9
RDFNode x = soln.get("varName");
10
Resource r = soln.getResource("VarR");
11
Literal l = soln.getLiteral("VarL");
12
}
13
} catch (Exception e) {
14
System.out.println("Bad query " + e.toString ());
15
}
16
}
Listing 6.12: Querying the Jena Model.
==PAGE:102==
90
VGTool
6.2.6
Implementation summary
In this section the implementation of VGTool has been covered with a focus
on the overall structure of the implementation and key parts of the code such
as the multithreading, algorithm, entity and RDF implementation. The next
section will test VGTool in terms of its performance, scalability and also with
regards to the quality of sampled data.
==PAGE:103==
6.3 Tests
91
6.3
Tests
We have now covered the design and implementation of VGTool. In order for
VGTool to be usable in real world scenarios, there is however a need for testing
the scalability, performance and correctness of the implementation. For example
the sampling algorithm is constructed from assumptions and intuition by using
the probability trees as discussed earlier, but because the data is altered as a
result of the removal of rare varition we should test if the sampled data correlates
satisfactorily with the actual data.
It is also crucial that the algorithms of the tool scale well given the amount of
data that can be contained in the input VCF ﬁles.
This chapter will be divided into two kinds of tests of VGTool; one for the
scaling and performance of the tool and one for the quality of the sampled data
in relation to the actual data.
6.3.1
Scaling and performance
In this section we will perform a series of tests to analyse the performance of
VGTool and test that the asymptotic running times of chapter 4 are correct.
We will test running time and space consumption for varying sizes of graphs,
as well as how multithreading aﬀects performance for graphs of constant size.
VGTool contains many diﬀerent algorithms, that can be adjusted with diﬀerent
settings, and to limit the amount of tests, we have picked tests that show the
performance of the discussed algorithms of chapter 4.
We also test the I/O
regarding the tool. These things are tested to provide insight into which parts
of the tool that are the bottle necks in regards to performance such that we will
know where future eﬀorts for optimizing the tool should be applied.
Each diﬀerent type of test in the following section has not necessarily been run
on the same machine, so the result of the tests should be viewed in isolation e.g.
the running time of one algorithm should not be compared to the running time
of another algorithm.
For generating test data we wrote a small script which can take VCF ﬁles as
input and modify things such as the number of lines in the ﬁle, i.e. the number of
loci, the phasing of genotypes, the observed alleles for loci or the chromosomes
to which loci belong.
In the tests, a set of ﬁles were created as extracts of
diﬀerent sizes from the same VCF ﬁle.
The ﬁle sizes we used are listed in ﬁgure 6.11.
==PAGE:104==
92
VGTool
File
Size
Rows
Individuals
Variation only
File 1
3.1 MB
5000
150
Yes
File 2
6.5 MB
10000
150
Yes
File 3
67.2 MB
100000
150
Yes
File 4
168.8 MB
250000
150
Yes
File 5
676.1 MB
1000000
150
Yes
File 6
11.6 MB
500
6000
No
File 7
24.3 MB
1000
6000
No
File 8
48.1 MB
2000
6000
No
File 9
123.5 MB
5000
6000
No
File 10
250.4 MB
10000
6000
No
Figure 6.11: The used test ﬁles.
As can be seen in ﬁgure 6.11 we used two types of ﬁles in the testing; ﬁles where
only variation is stored and ﬁles with all observed positions. Which ﬁles have
been used depends on each test, for example compressing graphs requires the
graphs to have linear stretches and therefore ﬁle 6-10 have been used here.
Generally testing the memory allocation of a Java application is hard because
of the automatic garbage collection performed by Java. We therefore tested
the minimal feasible amount of memory to perform a task by decrementing
the maximum heap size until the program gets an OutOfMemoryError or the
garbage collecter uses more than 98% of the CPU cycles, also resulting in an
error.
6.3.1.1
Loading
The loading and construction of the VariantGraph is currently sequential and as
such is not improved by the number of processors available. Figure 6.12 shows
the performance of loading and constructing the initial graph.
As can be seen in ﬁgure 6.12, constructing the graph can be done with a heap
size about 15 times that of the initial ﬁle size. This is for ﬁles that only contain
variation and therefore cannot be compressed. Currently the required heap size
for loading a VCF ﬁle which contains positions without variation would require
similar memory size because the compression is done after the entire graph has
been loaded. Because ﬁles with all variation are signiﬁcantly larger than ﬁles
with only variation, the problem of loading them into memory could be solved
by performing the compression during the loading.
==PAGE:105==
6.3 Tests
93
File
Max heap size
Time
(ms)
Time / ﬁle size
(ms/MB)
Status
File 1
30 MB
N/A
N/A
Out of memory
File 1
40 MB
1800
∼580
Success
File 1
100 MB
800
∼260
Success
File 2
75 MB
N/A
N/A
Out of memory
File 2
80 MB
3000
∼460
Success
File 2
500 MB
1200
∼180
Success
File 3
800 MB
N/A
N/A
Out of memory
File 3
850 MB
17000
∼250
Success
File 3
2 GB
8000
∼120
Success
File 4
2 GB
N/A
N/A
Out of memory
File 4
2,1 GB
45000
∼270
Success
File 4
5 GB
19000
∼110
Success
File 5
8 GB
N/A
N/A
Out of memory
File 5
9 GB
176000
∼260
Success
File 5
14 GB
76000
∼110
Success
Figure 6.12: Performance of the loading process on a single core.
From the ﬁgure we can also see that garbage collection takes up a signiﬁcant
portion of the CPU cycles if the max heap size is close to the minimal possible
heap size. It is therefore important to take this into consideration when running
the program. From the ﬁgure we can infer that the running time is linear in
relation to the ﬁle size5 which corresponds to the analysed running time of
section 4.2.
6.3.1.2
Compression
Determining the gain in memory due to compression of a graph with linear
strecthes is hard because of the limited control over Javas garbage collector.
Recall that the main motivation for compressing graphs was due to the set of
individuals stored for each node in the graph, however of course these individuals
would not be part of the RDF graph and therefore compression should not aﬀect
the disk space to persistently store the graph. Figure 6.13 shows the running
time of the compression for ﬁles with all loci included i.e. not only loci with
variation.
5Given that the max heap size is large enough for garbage collection to not interfere too
much with the running time.
==PAGE:106==
94
VGTool
File
Time
(ms)
Time / ﬁle size
(ms/MB)
File 6
19
∼2
File 7
30
∼1
File 8
50
∼1
File 9
84
∼1
File 10
185
∼1
Figure 6.13: Performance of the graph compression process on a single core.
All tests succeeded and were performed with a 50 GB max heap
size.
As can be seen, the compression of graphs is quite fast.
The running time
corresponds with the asymptotic linear running time of section 4.3, however
because the measured times are so small they are more aﬀected by random
spikes in performance.
6.3.1.3
Expanding
The expansion is the reverse process of compression. This is reﬂected in the
running time, which does not diﬀer much from compression, and also has a
linear asymptotic running time as expected from section 4.3.
File
Time
(ms)
Time / ﬁle size
(ms/MB)
File 6
62
∼5
File 7
81
∼3
File 8
124
∼4
File 9
155
∼1
File 10
194
∼1
Figure 6.14: Performance of the graph expansion process on a single core. All
tests succeeded and were performed with a 50 GB max heap size.
6.3.1.4
Merging
For merging we constructed a new set of ﬁles. These ﬁles are the same as ﬁle
1-5 except that the genotypes for each position have been changed. The ﬁles,
named 1.1, 2.1, 3.1 and so on, have the same sizes as ﬁle 1-5.
We test the
==PAGE:107==
6.3 Tests
95
merging process by merging two ﬁles of the same size with the same loci, but
with diﬀerent individuals and alleles. Memory allocation of the merged graph
should therefore be the sum of the memory allocations for each graph. Figure
6.15 shows that there is a constant overhead with regards to the graph merging,
which aﬀects the running time of smaller graphs more than large graphs, but
from the ﬁgure we can see that the running time for the large graphs correspond
to the analysed linear running time of section 4.4.
Files
Time
(ms)
Time / ﬁle size
(ms/MB)
File 1 & 1.1
187
∼60
File 2 & 2.1
247
∼38
File 3 & 3.1
790
∼11
File 4 & 4.1
1563
∼9
File 5 & 5.1
5872
∼9
Figure 6.15: Performance of the merging process on a single core. All tests
succeeded and were performed with a 50 GB max heap size.
6.3.1.5
Building probability trees
A big challenge in regards to running time and space consumption is the con-
struction and storing of probability trees. In this section we will take a look at
the measures taken to counteract the memory and time needed for constructing
and storing the probability trees by looking at the space needed to store com-
pressed and uncompressed probabilty trees and also at how the multithreading
can improve the running time of the construction of the trees.
Table 6.16 shows the performance for the construction of probability trees on a
single core without compressing the trees.
From ﬁgure 6.16 we can see that the memory usage for the construction of trees
is
150 times the size of the original ﬁle, which is an undesirably high factor.
Considering that the ﬁles we used for testing only contain 150 individuals, it
is likely that ﬁles with more individuals will scale even worse when adding the
trees because the size of the trees are related by the number of individuals on
the branches, which will naturally rise as the total number of individuals in the
tree rises.
From ﬁgure 6.16 it also follows that the performance for constructing the trees
is improved if the max heap is signiﬁcantly larger than the minimally needed
amount for constructing the trees.
From the test it does not look like the
analysed linear running time of section 4.5 was achieved, and as such a review
of the implementation would make sense in the future, as we saw from the
==PAGE:108==
96
VGTool
File
Max heap
size
Time
(ms)
Time / ﬁle size
(ms/MB)
Status
File 1
250 MB
N/A
N/A
Out of memory
File 1
500 MB
29418
∼9500
Success
File 1
10 GB
21181
∼6800
Success
File 2
800 MB
N/A
N/A
Out of memory
File 2
900 MB
78945
∼12000
Success
File 2
10 GB
44208
∼6800
Success
File 3
50 GB
2767987
∼41000
Success
Figure 6.16: Performance of the probability tree generation on a single core
without compression of trees.
analysis of the algorithm that linear time should be achievable. However there
is the chance that the test with File 3 did not have a large enough max heap
size, meaning that the garbage collection aﬀected the running time signiﬁcantly.
Next we test the compression factor of the trees. We discussed in section 4.5
how the compression of trees and the use of globally stored genome sequences
for the trees could help reduce the memory needed to store the trees due to the
overlapping nature of trees in the same region of the graph. The results for the
compression can be seen in ﬁgure 6.17.
Figure 6.17 shows that the memory needed to store the probability trees can
be reduced signiﬁcantly be compressing the trees. For example building trees
for File 1 with a max heap size of 100 MB is not possible when the trees are
uncompressed, and if the trees are compressed by a factor 4, the memory is
still insuﬃcient. At compression factor 8 the trees can be built, but as it is
shown in the ﬁgure, choosing an even higher compression factor improves the
construction time signiﬁcantly. However the gain from compression ﬂattens out
as the compression factor increases. This is likely due to the fact that on average
the probability trees are not as deep as the chosen compression factor, such that
increasing the compression factor does not change the compression of the trees.
As graphs based on more individuals are likely to have deeper probability trees,
it is likely that a higher compression factor is better.
From the results observed in ﬁgure 6.17, we chose a ﬁxed compression factor of
32 for the next test in which we test how the number of threads for generating
the trees aﬀects on the overall performance.
Figure 6.18 shows how increasing the number of threads can improve the run-
ning time of the probability tree construction. The machine which we tested
on had a total of 64 processors. It follows from the ﬁgure that the time is not
==PAGE:109==
6.3 Tests
97
File
Compression
factor
Time
(ms)
Time / ﬁle size
(ms/MB)
Status
File 1
2
N/A
N/A
Out of memory
File 1
4
N/A
N/A
Out of memory
File 1
8
80191
∼26000
Success
File 1
12
29287
∼9500
Success
File 1
16
24634
∼8000
Success
File 1
32
22028
∼7000
Success
File 1
50
23326
∼7500
Success
File 2
4
N/A
N/A
Out of memory
File 2
8
174627
∼27000
Success
File 2
16
51775
∼8000
Success
File 2
32
49103
∼7500
Success
File 2
50
48529
∼7500
Success
Figure 6.17: Performance of the probability tree construction process on a
single core. For ﬁle 1 we used a max heap size of 100 MB, and
for ﬁle 2 we used a max heap size of 200 MB.
File
Threads
Time
(ms)
Time / ﬁle size
(ms/MB)
File 1
1
45257
∼14500
File 1
2
30102
∼9500
File 1
4
16358
∼5500
File 1
8
9629
∼3000
File 1
16
6792
∼2000
File 1
32
6137
∼2000
File 1
64
5815
∼2000
File 3
16
296911
∼4500
File 3
32
210690
∼3000
File 3
64
142423
∼2000
Figure 6.18: Performance of the probability tree construction process on mul-
tiple threads, on a machine with 64 total cores. All tests suc-
ceeded and were performed with a 50 GB max heap size and a
compression factor of 32.
reduced linearly as the number of threads increase. We discussed in section
6.2.4 how there are critical sections involved with the construction of the trees,
as all threads read and write to shared hashmaps of genotypes and strecthes
of genotypes. Therefore increasing the number of threads that generate trees,
==PAGE:110==
98
VGTool
means that more threads access this critical region, which can be the cause for
sub-linear improvement as thread number increases.
To increase the perfor-
mance gain from multithreading, each thread could keep a seperate hashmap in
which they store the compressed sequences because a compression factor of for
example 32 means that the compressed sequences are likely to only be reused
by other trees in the same region, and therefore threads handling diﬀerent parts
of the graph do not need these threads. This would result in a slight memory
allocation increase in the case that the threads observe the same sequences, but
on the other hand would allow each thread to write to its own hashtable without
causing a critical section.
From the testing of the probability tree generation we can see that there is a mo-
tivation for building the trees with a signiﬁcant margin of memory in regards to
the minimally required amount. There is also a motivation for using compressed
trees, as this allows the graph (including probability trees) to be contained in
signiﬁcantly less memory than a graph with uncompressed trees. An increase
in compression factor beyond 16 does not seem to greatly aﬀect the memory
used to store the trees, however as the tested graph contains 150 individual, the
number could be higher for a graph with more individuals. As for parallelization
of the process, there is a motivation for using multiple threads, however it seems
that the performance gain is sublinear in relation to the number of threads used,
which can be caused by the requirement of mutual exclusion for critical regions.
6.3.1.6
Sampling
With the probability trees in the graph it is possible to sample individuals. We
test the sampling in this section in three ways. First we test the running time
of creating samples in a sequential manner using only one thread for a varying
number of samples. Next we test for a ﬁxed number of samples with a varying
number of threads and lastly we test the generation of VCF ﬁles from sampled
graphs.
As can be seen from ﬁgure 6.19, the sampling algorithm is linear both in re-
gards to sampling multiple individuals from the same graph and in regards to
sampling individuals from graphs of diﬀerent sizes which is in accordance with
the analysed running time of section 4.6.
Figure 6.20 shows that performing the sampling of individuals in parallel can
improve the overall running time. However increasing the number of threads
for sampling does not result in a linear decrease in running time.
This has
to do with the shared sampled graph which all threads add the samples to.
To improve upon the overall performance of the sampling, each thread could
==PAGE:111==
6.3 Tests
99
File
Samples
Time
(ms)
File 1
1
6082
File 1
2
12355
File 1
4
22759
File 1
8
41720
File 2
1
12527
File 2
2
24148
File 2
4
46545
File 2
8
91543
Figure 6.19: Performance of the sampling process on a single thread with a
max heap size of 50 GB. All tests succeeded.
Threads
Time
(ms)
Time / samples
(ms/sample)
1
181522
∼5500
2
101481
∼3200
4
63658
∼2000
8
50347
∼1500
16
46886
∼1500
32
45132
∼1500
Figure 6.20: Performance of sampling 32 individuals on multiple threads. All
tests succeeded and were performed with File 1 and a max heap
of 50 GB.
instead have a sampled graph that it can write to without a critical section.
After the construction of the sampled graphs for each thread, these could be
merged together in pairs following the same principle as in ﬁgure 4.4.
Figure 6.21 shows the data structure in which the sampled data is kept, and
which is accessed by the sampling threads. Instead of having a map where for
each position the genotypes and individuals are stored, the data structure could
be changed to a map where the positions and genotypes are stored for each
individual, thus mimicking the principle of a seperate sampled graph for each
thread. This would allow threads to iterate the graph and generate the sampled
individual without critical sections.
Another major inﬂuence on the running time is the fact that each thread expands
the compressed tree of every position in the graph, when it is used. We discussed
in 4.6 how a scheme could be constructed, such that trees are only expanded
once and used by every thread. When all threads are done using it, it can then
==PAGE:112==
100
VGTool
1
//<Position <Genotype , <Individual , Phased >>>
2
public Map <Integer , Map <String , Map <SampledIndividual , Boolean >>>
genotypeIndividualsFirst;
3
public Map <Integer , Map <String , Map <SampledIndividual , Boolean >>>
genotypeIndividualsSecond;
Figure 6.21: The sampled graph.
be released from memory again.
Time
(ms)
Samples
Time / samples
(ms/sample)
551
1
∼550
448
2
∼225
535
4
∼550
431
8
∼130
644
16
∼40
1040
32
∼30
1994
64
∼30
3747
128
∼30
Figure 6.22: Performance of the VCF writing process. All tests succeeded and
were performed with File 2 and a max heap of 50 GB.
Next, we test the performance for generation of VCF ﬁles from a sampled graph.
This process writes to a ﬁle and as such is single threaded.
From ﬁgure 6.22 we can see that the time for writing the sampled graph to a
VCF ﬁle is mainly aﬀected by the meta data columns mentioned in 2.3.1, such
as the position, variation ID and sequencing depth, which are contained in every
line (for generated VCF ﬁles the two latter are hardcoded). However once the
number of samples increase, it aﬀects the running time such that it approaches
a linear time for the saving.
6.3.1.7
RDF
In order to persistently store the created graph, Jenabean can convert Java
objects and their relations to resources and triples in the Jena model. This
model can then be written to a triple store or an RDF serialization. In this
section we will test the performance of the I/O of VGTool.
Figure 6.23 shows the performance of writing the graph to a ﬁle in the RDF
serialization format Turtle.
==PAGE:113==
6.3 Tests
101
File
Time
(ms)
With
trees
RDF ﬁle
size
Zipped
ﬁle size
File 1
9893
No
6.7 MB
287 KB
File 1
41660
Yes
634.5 MB 37.2 MB
File 2
29906
No
13.9 MB
593 KB
File 2
99337
Yes
1.26 GB
74.5 MB
Figure 6.23: Performance of the RDF serialization process.
All tests suc-
ceeded and were performed with a max heap of 15 GB.
From the ﬁgure it follows that graphs with probability trees use signiﬁcantly
more space when they are stored.
Here it is important to point out a few
things. Firstly the probability trees are stored completely uncompressed, which
was a choice taken in order to make the graph easier to use for other users of
the Semantic Web. Similar to the in-memory compression performed on the
probability trees, the persistently stored trees could be compressed. Secondly
the RDF serialization used here does not store the data in a very compressed
manner; an example of this can be seen in ﬁgure 6.24, which shows how a
single node in a probability tree is represented in Turtle. Figure 6.23 also shows
the redundancy of the RDF serialization as compressing the generated ﬁles can
reduce their size by more than a factor 10. In this project we have not tested
triple stores, but it is likely that storing the graph in a triple store rather than
in a RDF serialization can reduce the storage space needed as well, because in
principle each URI of a resource is only stored once.
1
<http://vg#VGProbabilityNode/chr1 :838638:331 >
2
a
vg:VGProbabilityNode ;
3
vg:children
<http://vg#VGProbabilityNode/chr1 :838638:332 > ;
4
vg:genotype
<http://vg#VGProbabilityGenotype/G;G> ;
5
vg:id
"chr1 :838638:331"^^<http://www.w3.org /2001/ XMLSchema#string >
.
Figure 6.24: An example of a probability node in Turtle. For the genotype here,
the phasingtype "|" has been replaced with a valid XML character ";".
Figure 6.25 shows the performance for the loading of a graph from RDF.
The loading of the RDF graph is similar to the saving, both of which are quite
time consuming in comparison to the other parts of VGTool.
==PAGE:114==
102
VGTool
File
Time
(ms)
With
trees
RDF ﬁle
size
File 1
16008
No
6.7 MB
File 1
74698
Yes
634.5 MB
File 2
60807
No
13.9 MB
File 2
217144
Yes
1.26 GB
Figure 6.25: Performance of loading the graph from the Turtle format. All
tests succeeded and were performed with a max heap of 15 GB.
6.3.2
Performance summary
In this section we tested the performance of the diﬀerent functionalities of VG-
Tool.
Loading the graph into memory can be done with a heap size about 10-15 times
the size of the input ﬁle for ﬁles containing only variation.
Constructing and storing the probability trees both in memory and on the disk
provides a major challenge. As we have seen, the size of the uncompressed trees
take up about 90% of the space needed for storing the graph in memory and
almost 99% when the graph is written in an RDF serialization like Turtle.
Given an internal version of the graph, which is not to be shared with the public,
it is possible to store the observed individuals in the graph instead of the prob-
ability trees, and only generate the trees when needed. This could signiﬁcantly
reduce the size needed to store the graph without losing information. However
for sharing the graph the key point is that the graph contains information about
genetic patterns without revealing identities and as such it is necessary to have
the probability trees as part of the RDF graph. To make this feasible a number
of things can be done. A triple store or a more compact RDF serialization could
be used to store the graph. As the produced RDF is highly repetitive, there is
the possibility of compressing the RDF ﬁle to signiﬁcantly reduce the ﬁle size.
Lastly the probability trees could be compressed in the RDF in a similar way
to how they are currently being compressed in memory.
Another way to circumvent the problems regarding the storage of the RDF
graphs is to simply sample VCF ﬁles and share these instead. Currently the
main use case for the genome graph is to generate VCF ﬁles, and as such it is
a feasible solution if the needed disk space for persistently storing the graph is
unrealistic.
Some processes regarding the graph have shown to be quite time consuming.
As such it was shown that a signiﬁcant performance gain could be achieved by
splitting those tasks into smaller tasks which each could be handled in seperate
threads.
==PAGE:115==
6.3 Tests
103
6.3.3
Sampling quality
In this section we will look at how the sampled individuals correlate with the
originally observed data for both diﬀerent tree queue sizes and diﬀerent p6 as
discussed in section 4.6.
6.3.3.1
Allele frequency
The ﬁrst thing we tested was the allele frequency (AF)7 correlation for diﬀerent
queue sizes of the probability tree queue explained in 4.6. Because the samples
are generated from the probability trees and rare variants have been removed it
is a challenge to replicate the distribution in the sampled data.
Figure 6.26 shows the correlation between AF of the original data and the
sampled data for diﬀerent queue sizes with a ﬁxed p = 0.75.
In the ﬁgure the R2 correlation is noted along with a line that is ﬁtted to the
points according to the least squares method. The closer these values get to
1, the more correlation there is between the original and sampled AFs. From
the ﬁgure it follows that increasing the size of the tree queue leads to a better
correlation between the data sets, meaning that using the history contained in
probability trees leads to a more accurate AF in the sampled data.
Figure 6.27 shows how the choice of p aﬀects the AF. As can be seen, the
correlation between the original and sampled AF is generally quite good, but
having a high probability of choosing a deep tree leads to a slightly better
correlation between the data. This is in accordance with ﬁgure 6.26, which also
showed that deeper trees lead to a better correlation of AFs.
6.3.3.2
Linkage disequlibrium
The other distribution that should be in accordance with the original data is the
linkage disequilibrium. The main purpose of the probability trees is to convey
this connection between alleles at diﬀerent loci, and intuitively it makes sense
that deeper trees describe LD between alleles that are far apart better than
shallow trees. However the LD of alleles that are further apart than the span
of a tree can still be found to be statistically associated if there are alleles in
between them which they are both associated with.
6p is the probability of choosing the head of the tree queue as explained in section 4.6
7The reason it is shown as MAF in the graphs is that to express the frequency of two
variants, only the frequency of one of them (the minor frequency) has to be expressed.
==PAGE:116==
104
VGTool
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
queue size = 1
original MAF
sampled MAF
   slope= 0.917
   R^2= 0.897
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
queue size = 2
original MAF
sampled MAF
   slope= 0.918
   R^2= 0.901
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
queue size = 4
original MAF
sampled MAF
   slope= 0.923
   R^2= 0.912
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
queue size = 8
original MAF
sampled MAF
   slope= 0.934
   R^2= 0.929
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
queue size = 16
original MAF
sampled MAF
   slope= 0.938
   R^2= 0.961
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
queue size = 32
original MAF
sampled MAF
   slope= 0.953
   R^2= 0.949
Figure 6.26: Correlation between original AF and sampled AF with diﬀerent queue
sizes.
Figure 6.29 shows the correlation between LD of the original data and LD of
the sampled data. We tested with a varying tree queue size of 1, 2, 4, 8, 16 and
32. We calculated the LD for a window size of 8, i.e. the LD of alleles within 8
positions of each other. The color of the dots in the plot determine the distance
between the alleles as shown in ﬁgure 6.28.
In the plots, only alleles with R2 correlation above 0.2 are shown. From ﬁgure
6.29 it can be seen that with a small tree queue size i.e. little history, most of
the correlating LDs found are for LD windows of size 2, with a few exceptions
of size 3 and 4. As the tree queue size increases, the correlation between LD of
alleles further apart also increases which can be seen by the increasing number
of orange, yellow and green dots. The example with a queue size of 4 has some
green dots which shows that alleles further apart than the size of the tree queue
can still be found to correlate, which as mentioned earlier can occur when there
are alleles in between that are assosiated with both. From the plots it also shows
==PAGE:117==
6.3 Tests
105
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
P(queue−head) = 0.2
original MAF
sampled MAF
   slope= 0.942
   R^2= 0.937
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
P(queue−head) = 0.4
original MAF
sampled MAF
   slope= 0.951
   R^2= 0.952
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
P(queue−head) = 0.6
original MAF
sampled MAF
   slope= 0.952
   R^2= 0.96
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
P(queue−head) = 0.8
original MAF
sampled MAF
   slope= 0.949
   R^2= 0.962
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
P(queue−head) = 0.9
original MAF
sampled MAF
   slope= 0.954
   R^2= 0.963
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
P(queue−head) = 1
original MAF
sampled MAF
   slope= 0.954
   R^2= 0.962
Figure 6.27: Correlation between original AF and sampled AF with diﬀerent p.
Distance
between SNPs
LD window
size
Color
1
2
◦
2
3
◦
3
4
◦
4
5
◦
5
6
◦
6
7
◦
7
8
◦
Figure 6.28: The colours that specify the distance between SNPs.
that increasing the queue size beyond the size of the chosen LD window does
not increase the overall LD correlation signiﬁcantly, which will be tested further
in ﬁgure 6.31.
==PAGE:118==
106
VGTool
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
queuesize = 1
Sampled  R2
Original  R2
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
queuesize = 2
Sampled  R2
Original  R2
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●●●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
queuesize = 4
Sampled  R2
Original  R2
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●●
●●
●●
●●
●●●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●●●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
queuesize = 8
Sampled  R2
Original  R2
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●●●●
●●●
●
●●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●●
●●
●●
●●
●●●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●●●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●●
●●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
queuesize = 16
Sampled  R2
Original  R2
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●●
●●
●
●●
●
●●●●
●●●
●
●●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●●
●●
●●
●●
●●●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
●●●
●●
●
●
●●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
queuesize = 32
Sampled  R2
Original  R2
Figure 6.29: LD correlation for diﬀerent tree queue sizes.
Like with the AF, we also tested the correlation between LD in the data sets
for a varying p in ﬁgure 6.30.
Figure 6.30 shows again that the best results can be achieved by taking advan-
tage of the deeper history of the ﬁrst trees in the queue. In the ﬁgure, the best
results, in terms of R2, were achieved by having a 90% probability of chosing the
ﬁrst element in the tree queue. Good results were also found by having a 100%
probability of choosing the ﬁrst element in the queue, although as discussed
earlier, this scheme can lead to scenarios with bias towards certain variation.
Figure 6.31 shows how an increased tree queue size aﬀects the correlation be-
tween sampled and original LDs, for LDs in the range 2-8.
From ﬁgure 6.31 we can be see that the correlation between sampled and actual
LD for the diﬀerent window sizes improves as the tree queue size increases, but
also that it quickly ﬂattens out, here around a queue size of 16, meaning that
==PAGE:119==
6.3 Tests
107
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G G
GG
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
GG
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
GG
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
P(queue−head) = 0.2
Sampled  R2
Original  R2
   slope= 0.144
   R^2= 0.055
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G G
G
G
G G
GG
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
GG
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
P(queue−head) = 0.4
Sampled  R2
Original  R2
   slope= 0.359
   R^2= 0.224
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G G
G
G
G G
GG
G G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G G
G G
G
GG
G
G G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
GG
GG
GG
GG
GGG
GG
GGG
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
GG
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
P(queue−head) = 0.6
Sampled  R2
Original  R2
   slope= 0.546
   R^2= 0.411
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
GG
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
G
GG
G
GG
GG
G GG
G
G G
GG
G G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G G
G G
G
GG
G
G G
G G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
GG
GG
GG
GG
GGG
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
GG
GG
GG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
P(queue−head) = 0.8
Sampled  R2
Original  R2
   slope= 0.599
   R^2= 0.465
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
GG
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
GG
GG
G
GG
G
GG GG
G GG
G
G G
GG
G G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G G
G G
G G
G
GG
G
G G
G G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G G G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
GG
GG
GG
GG
GGG
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G GG
GGG
GG G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
GG
GG
G
G GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
P(queue−head) = 0.9
Sampled  R2
Original  R2
   slope= 0.65
   R^2= 0.508
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
GG
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G GG
GG
GG
G
GG
G
GG GG
G GG
G
G G
GG
G G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G G
G
G
G
G G
G G
G G
G
GG
G
G G
G G
G
G
G
G G
G
G G G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
GG
GG
GG
GG
GGG
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G GG
GGG
GG G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
GG
GG
G
G GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GGG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
P(queue−head) = 1
Sampled  R2
Original  R2
   slope= 0.655
   R^2= 0.501
Figure 6.30: Correlation between LD of original and sampled data for varying p.
beyond that size there is not much to gain from increasing the queue size. It
also follows from the ﬁgure that the replication of LD is more accurate for lower
LD windows, which makes sense as the longer the paths are in probability trees,
the more individuals are likely to have been sorted out, due to rare variation.
6.3.4
Sampling quality summary
In this section we covered the quality of the generated samples by comparing
diﬀerent distributions in regards to the sampled data versus the original data.
We found that the AF distribution could be improved by increasing the size
of tree queue, which is convenient because an increased size in tree queue also
improved the quality of the LD in sampled data. However we also found that
increasing the tree queue beyond the size of the LD window with which the tests
were performed did not increase the overall result signiﬁcantly, and that the LD
between SNPs further apart than the size of the tree queue could still be found
==PAGE:120==
108
VGTool
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
queue size
R−squared of line fitted to original vs. sampled R2 plot
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
ld window = 2
ld window = 3
ld window = 4
ld window = 5
ld window = 6
ld window = 7
ld window = 8
Figure 6.31: The relationship of entities in the VariantGraph.
in the sampled data.
Furthermore we found that replicating the LD of the original data set became
increasingly more diﬃcult for alleles further apart, which makes sense intuitively
as the data used in probability trees is only a subset of the actual data and
decreases in size as the depth of the tree increases. As for the value of p which
determines the probability of choosing elements in the queue, we found that a
higher p, i.e. higher probability of choosing a tree of the ﬁrst positions in the
queue, led to a better correlation between sampled and original data, both for
AF and LD, which indicates that using deeper trees with more history for the
sampling gives better results than shallow trees with little history.
A test which we did not perform in this section, but could be interesting, is to
ﬁnd out how the number of sampled individuals aﬀects the correlation between
the sampled and original cohort. Intuitively it makes sense that as larger cohorts
are generated, the correlation between the datasets improves. Also as the main
motivation for sampling of individuals in the ﬁrst place is to use the generated
individual for imputation of genetics, it would make sense in the future to test
how imputation with sampled data performs.
In the next chapter we discuss of the achievements of the thesis as well as future
==PAGE:121==
6.3 Tests
109
improvements that can be made to both improve on the obtained results and in
regards to extend the functionality of VGTool.
==PAGE:122==
110
VGTool
6.4
Applicability in case study
The original motivation for constructing VGTool was due to the Danish pan-
genome project. As mentioned this project aims at giving an "increased un-
derstanding of population-speciﬁc disease susceptibility and will be important
for advancing clinical and public health genetics" [12, p. 6]. With the genome
graph and VGTool we have created a way of sharing non person referable data
constructed from the observations made in the Danish pan-genome project. As
such it is possible to share summary statistics of the study publicly. This is
signiﬁcant because the sampled data can be used in research in processes such
as imputation [31]. Furthermore constructing a genome graph from 150 Danish
individuals provides an excellent reference structure for read-mapping the DNA
of Danes as the number of genetic variants encapsulated in this graph makes
it a better representation of the Danes’ genetics than a single linear reference
genome.
As we mentioned, a VCF ﬁle of only the loci with variation in the cohort of
the Danish pan-genome study is about 10 GB in size. This raises a question of
whether it feasible to build a genome graph for the entire data set which covers
all 23 chromosomes. Especially when considering that a ﬁle that contains all
loci for the cohort reaches into the terabytes. Currently the graph construc-
tion and handling is done all in memory on a cluster computer of 1 TB RAM
and 64 CPUs.
Given the results of the tests, it would be feasible to create
genome graphs on the cluster computer for each chromosome and possibly all
chromosomes at once if they are built from the ﬁle that only contains variation.
However building the graph from a ﬁle where all loci are included seems infeasi-
ble in memory given that the ﬁle size of the VCF exceeds the amount of RAM
on the cluster computer. To overcome this, compression of the graph could be
performed during load, graphs could be built for each chromosome seperately
and a scheme for storing parts of the graph on disk, while keeping the other
part in memory, could be constructed.
6.5
Tool summary
In this chapter we covered the design and implementation of VGTool. We also
performed tests to see that the tool scaled in a satisﬁable manner and that the
sampled data from the graph had reasonable correlation to the original data.
In the next section we will discuss the diﬀerent steps of the thesis and how we
achieved our initial goals and requirements.
==PAGE:123==
Chapter 7
Discussion
In this chapter we will evaluate the achieved results and compare them to the
initial goals of the thesis. As such this section will serve as discussion of problems
we initially set out to solve in the problem description of section 1.2. We will
also discuss how the implemented graph structure could function in other use
cases in the future.
7.1
Genome graphs
The ﬁrst step of this thesis was to identify some of the problems regarding the
current representation of genomic data. As discussed in chapter 2 the current
linear representation of DNA that is used in read-mapping is problematic be-
cause it relies on the similarity between the chosen reference genome and the
input reads. The current solution to this problem is for the reference to have
a number of alternative sequences that can be used if the reads do not map
to the original reference. We have not solved the problems regarding mapping,
but the constructed genome graph is easily extended and could in the future be
designed to work as a mapping reference. We also highlighted the problematics
regarding the inability to share the collected genetic data due to its close link
to the involved individuals, and used this as a motivation for creating a scheme
==PAGE:124==
112
Discussion
where sampled individuals could be constructed from the commonly observed
genetic variants.
We found that a graph was an ideal data structure for expressing the genomic
variation of a cohort, because it allows us to express alternative genetic variation
as branches in the graph. Graphs are also very ﬂexible data structures in which
anything can be linked together. This is a nice feature for a genome graph that
consists of many diﬀerent entities.
7.2
Choice of technologies
After establishing the requirements for the graph we reviewed relevant tech-
nologies that enabled us to express and work with the genome graph. We chose
to represent the graph as triples in RDF because of its ﬂexibility, extensibil-
ity, query support, and because sharing the graph as part of the Semantic Web
means that everyone who should desire to use the graph can easily access it. We
chose to develop the graph tool, VGTool, in Java because there exists a number
of relevant libraries and frameworks that allowed us to read VCF data, work
with the graph as Java objects and express it in RDF.
Due to the widespread use of the Semantic Web, triple stores and VCF ﬁles,
there are other valid programming languages that would have allowed us to
construct and share the genome graph.
7.3
Computational challenges
When constructing the genome graph we realised that some parts of the graph
were problematic in terms of space consumption. To counteract this we proposed
a number of ways for compressing the graph. On the other hand several of the
implemented algorithms for handling and using the graph proved to be very
time consuming.
Beyond ensuring that the asymptotic running time of the
designed algorithms were acceptable, we made an eﬀort to parallelize the tasks
as much as possible. Because the genome graph proposes challenges in regards to
both space and time consumption, decisions have to be made carefully because
working towards decreasing one of the two usually means an increase in the
other, exempliﬁed by for example compressing the probability trees of the graph,
which allows the graph to reside in less memory, but also means that the trees
need to be expanded every time they are to be used.
The current implementation works with the entire graph in memory, however
==PAGE:125==
7.4 The Semantic Web
113
in the future if VCF ﬁles for entire genomes with all loci are present, it could
be a good idea to change the design such that only part of the graph resides in
memory and the rest is stored on the disk, and can be retrieved if needed.
7.4
The Semantic Web
We achieved the goal of creating an extensible graph structure by expressing
the graph in RDF such that any resources of the graph can be linked to the
Semantic Web. Through testing we found that storing the graph in an RDF
serialization such as Turtle is not the best option for persistent storage because
the ﬁle size of a graph with probability trees could reach about 200 times that
of the original VCF ﬁle. As RDF serializations are largely verbose however,
we also found that compressing the produced ﬁles could decrease the size to
about 10 times that of the original ﬁle. Instead of using RDF serializations, it
makes sense to look at triple stores, which is not something we have done in
this project, but it is very likely that triple stores store the data more eﬃciently
than an RDF serialization.
7.5
Sampling individuals
One of the main goals of the thesis was to be able to share the data that has
been collected in the Danish pan-genome study. We have covered why it is not
possible to share the data in its unaltered form, and therefore instead wanted
the functionality of extracting summary statistics from the data that could not
be related back to individuals.
With this motivation in mind, we constructed the genome graph in such a
way that it contains information about observed genetic patterns which can be
used to sample data from. We have tested the quality of the sampled data by
correlating it to the original data for a number of diﬀerent settings, and found
that using the history contained in a deep probabilty tree improves the overall
quality of the result.
We also had a focus on making it possible to merge genome graphs together.
This is an important feature because it allows us to add more observations of
genetic variation to the graph, and more importantly it can make previously rare
genetic variants reach a suﬃcient number of observations thereby exceeding the
threshold for when those variants can be shared.
In its current state while the genome graph is sharable through the Semantic
Web, there are no tools for using the graph, other than the tool developed in
==PAGE:126==
114
Discussion
this project. For this reason we chose to create to an algorithm for generating
sampled individuals using the graph and storing this data in the VCF format
which is a standardized format that is widely used as a way of expressing the
genomic variation of a cohort.
Currently structural variation is not supported in VGTool, meaning that only
adjacent positions in the graph are connected. Structural variants are however
quite rare, which makes it unlikely that these variations are observed in enough
individuals to be considered common variation and therefore it is not a necessity
for generating samples.
The sampling was tested with a hypothesis that rare genetic variation is varia-
tion present in less than ﬁve individuals of a cohort. However Danmarks Statis-
tik have a set of guidelines [39, p. 13] in which this number is identiﬁed as 10.
Raising the threshold for genetic variation would of course decrease the quality
of sampling, as the probability trees will be constructed from less individuals,
but this can be mitigated by constructing the graph from more individuals.
7.6
Future work & limitations of VGTool
In the problem description1 we mentioned a number of problems that we have
worked with in the thesis.
However we have also discussed other problems
such as for example using the graph as a mapping reference. The following list
provides ideas for future work that could be done to extend the usefulness of
the genome graph and VGTool in general.
Mapping - A natural extension to the genome graph would be to use it for
read-mapping. We have already discussed earlier why there is a motivation
to do so. With the ﬂexible graph format, adding base contexts to alleles
in the graph would certainly be possible, but it would pose a number
of challenges due to the increased amount of data that the graph would
contain.
Merging - The merging algorithm that is implemented in VGTool relies on the
graphs to be constructed from the same reference. Therefore the merging
is done solely based on the positions of the two graphs which can be
assumed to be the same. Instead a more sophisticated merging algorithm
could be designed that uses the principles of mapping to identify regions
and positions that contain the same genetic patterns and merge these
regions.
1Section 1.2
==PAGE:127==
7.6 Future work & limitations of VGTool
115
Performance enhancements - In section 6.3.1 we saw that the running time
and space consumption of some of the implementated algorithms in VG-
Tool were quite large, and as such future work could be put into designing
more eﬃcient compression algorithms, faster algorithms and paralleliza-
tion without bottlenecks.
Structural variation - We have already discussed how sampling data should
only be done for common variation. Generally structural variation is quite
rare, and in a sampling scheme it is unlikely that a structural variant is
observed in enough individuals for it to occur in the sampled data. For
this reason we have not focused much on structural variation in this thesis,
however the nature of structural variants can be expressed very intuitively
using a graph structure where loci that are far apart or reside on diﬀerent
genomes can be connected together.
Traversing a genome graph with
structural variation poses new challenges however, as the direction of the
traversal can change.
Triple store & the Semantic Web - In this thesis we have built the graph
with a focus on being easy to share through the Semantic Web. However
the only persistent storage we have tested here has been RDF serializa-
tions. In order to integrate the graph as part of the Semantic Web it is
natural to store it in a triple store. The advantage of doing so is that re-
sources of the graph can be located, and thereby linked to, through their
URIs and relevant data can be retrieved from the graph through Semantic
Queries.
Ontologies - The main idea behind the Semantic Web is that data can be
linked together from diﬀerent sources. Currently the entities of the genome
graph are not linked to anything in the Semantic Web, however to fully
utilize this feature, existing ontologies regarding genetics could be linked
to entities of our genome graph.
Worldwide pan-genome - Much of the motivation for this thesis came from
the Danish pan-genome study recently undertaken in Denmark. With a
genome graph in the Semantic Web, instead of national pan-genome, there
is the potential to create pan-genomes of even larger cohorts, such as for
example Scandinavia, Europe or the entire world.
==PAGE:128==
116
Discussion
==PAGE:129==
Chapter 8
Conclusion
In this thesis we have analysed the problems of the classical representation of
genome data. The analysis lead to the motivation for using a graph structure to
represent genomic data. We discussed the design of the graph in the light of all
the presented problems, although only a subset of these problems were solved
in this thesis. The design of the graph has a focus on ﬂexibility, which means
that in the future it could be extended to handle all of the presented problems.
After discussing the design of the genome graph, we implemented a tool named
VGTool, with which we could represent the genomic data of a cohort as a
graph. The tool also achieved the goals of being able to merge genome graphs
and sample data with a statistical similarity to the original data.
VGTool was designed with a focus on modularization of tasks, such that the
diﬀerent components for handling the graph can be changed or modiﬁed without
aﬀecting other parts of the tool. The implementation process proposed a series
of challenges in regards to memory and time consumption, and as such eﬀorts
were made to reduce both. Through testing we found the critical parts of the
program in terms of the memory and time consumption and discussed which
measures could be taken to improve upon these parts.
We chose to express the genome graph as triples in the Semantic Web because
it is an easy way of sharing the graph and allowing others to extend it with
their own information. For this reason we ensured that the genome graph of
VGTool could be both exported to and imported from RDF triples. The decision
to express the graph as part of the Semantic Web was also motivated by the
==PAGE:130==
118
Conclusion
fact that several studies have already taken their own approach to representing
genomic variation in graphs, but with the Semantic Web, we feel that we have
provided a reasonable standard for expressing genome graphs, rather than have
every individual study use their own representation.
As a concluding remark we can say that we with this thesis and the implemented
tool achieved the goals creating a uniﬁed data structure of genetic variation from
which sampled data can be created and made it easily extendable in anticipation
of future use cases, which was the initial goal stated in the problem description
of section 1.2.
==PAGE:131==
Appendix A
Terminology
This appendix contains a collection of the terms explained throughout the thesis.
Phenotype
- The observable traits of an organism are called the organisms
phenotype. The phenotype of an organism is inﬂuenced both by the environ-
ment and the genetics of the organism. [Page 2]
Genotype - A genotype is a part of DNA that determines a speciﬁc charater-
istic of the individual. For any position in the DNA, there is a genotype, but it
is possible that two organisms have diﬀerent genotypes for the same "position",
resulting in diﬀerent phenotypes. [Page 2]
DNA (Deoxyribonucleic acid)
- DNA is a molecule that stores biological
information. DNA consists of two strands, which are each made up of sequence
of bases. [Page 2]
Base (Nucleobase)
- A sequence of DNA is made up of the four bases A
(adenine), C(cytosine), G(guanine) and T(thymine).
[Page 2]
Genome & Reference genome
- The genome is the entire DNA sequence
of an individual. A reference genome is the complete assembled genome of an
individual. The term reference comes from the fact that it is used as a reference
to which DNA can be aligned in order to determine similar regions.
[Page 3]
==PAGE:132==
120
Terminology
Pan-genome - A pan-genome is a collection of genetic data that encapsulates
the genetic variation of a population. [Page 3]
Sequencing
- Sequencing of DNA is the process of determining the precise
order of the bases in a DNA stand as explained in section 2.2.2. [Page 4]
Cohort - A group of individuals with a shared characteristic. In the context
of the Danish pan-genome, this characteristic is that all involved individuals are
Danish. [Page 4]
Chromosome - A chromosome is structure that contains DNA. A human in-
herits one copy of each the 23 chromosomes from each of their parents, giving
a total of 23 chromosome pairs. [Page 10]
Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) - Pronounced "snip". Describes
genetic variation of one base. [Page 11]
Indel - The term speciﬁes genetic variation that is either a deletion or an in-
sertion. The reason that one term is used for both types of variation, is that
depending on the frame of reference, an insertion can also be seen as a deletion
and vice versa. [Page 11]
Structural variation
- A more complex type of variation that changes the
structure of the genome, for example by inversing a sequence of DNA. [Page 11]
Genome assembly
- Genome assembly is the process of assembling the hu-
man genome from smaller reads as shown in ﬁgure 2.3. [Page 12]
Locus - Locus (plural loci) refers to a speciﬁc position on a chromosome. [Page
13]
Depth & Coverage
- The coverage of a locus describes the depth of the
sequencing in that locus i.e. how many reads cover the locus. A high depth is
desirable because it reduces the risk of sequencing errors. [Page 13]
Sequence alignment
- Sequence aligment is the process of aligning DNA
sequences to a reference to identify regions of similarity, and inferring meaning
from these regions, such as for example genetic variation that is related to a
certain disease [32] [Page 13]
Allele - An allele is one particular variant of a number of possible variations
for a certain locus. A genotype consists of two alleles. [Page 17]
Phasing
- Every individual inherits a copy of each chromosome from both
their parents. If a genotype is phased, it means that it is known which allele of
the genotype comes from which parent. [Page 18]
==PAGE:133==
121
Break-end
- The break-ends of a structural variation speciﬁes how two se-
quences of DNA are connected. [Page 19]
Allele frequency (AF)
- AF is an expression of the frequency of each ob-
served allele for a particular locus. [Page 20]
LD (Linkage disequilibrium)
- LD is an expression of alleles at diﬀerent
loci that are linked together statistically in the sense that they are often both
appear together. Figure 2.9 illustrates this. [Page 20]
Imputation - In genetics, imputation is the statistical inference of unobserved
genotypes. [36] [Page 20]
==PAGE:134==
122
Terminology
==PAGE:135==
Appendix B
VGTool source
VGTool is an open source project, which can be cloned from GitHub using the
command:
git clone git@github.com:Johanvb/VGTool.git
The project uses Apache Maven for handling plug-ins, and can be run by opening
the VGTool folder in IntelliJ and specifying the correct main class, Main.Main.
VGTool is open source under the GPL license.
==PAGE:136==
124
VGTool source
==PAGE:137==
Appendix C
Using VGTool
Using VGTool is simple. When the project is run, the user is presented with a
menu of diﬀerent options. The user interacts with the program through textual
input.
1
Choose option:
2
(LF) Load file from path.
3
(R) Load from rdf.
4
(W) Write graphs to files.
5
(P) Add probabilities to graphs.
6
(S #) Create # samples.
7
(PGS) Print graph sizes.
8
(PG) Print graphs.
9
(Q) Quit
Listing C.1: VGTool menu options.
The user is presented with the following options:
Load ﬁle from path. Loads a VCF ﬁle from speciﬁed path, builds and com-
presses a VariantGraph from the input.
Load from rdf. Loads a graph previously stored in the Turtle RDF serializa-
tion.
Write graphs to ﬁles. Writes the current VariantGraphs and contained enti-
ties to Turtle ﬁles.
==PAGE:138==
126
Using VGTool
Add probabilities to graphs. Constructs probability trees in the graph, and
compresses them depending on the settings of the project.
Create # samples. Creates a speciﬁed number of samples. Which chromo-
some the samples should be created for can be speciﬁed, however the de-
fault is all chromosomes. Only works if probability trees have been added
to the graph. Once the samples are created, the user can specify a ﬁle name
and the samples will be saved to "VCFDataBase/generated_samples/" +
fileName.
Print graph sizes. Prints the number of entities in the current graphs.
Print graphs. Prints relevant information about the graph, such as genotype
observations for example.
Quit. Quits the program.
==PAGE:139==
Bibliography
[1] What is Jena?
https://jena.apache.org/about_jena/about.html [On-
line; accessed 10-June-2015], . The Apache Software Foundation.
[2] An Introduction to RDF and the Jena RDF API. https://jena.apache.
org/tutorials/rdf_api.html [Online; accessed 10-June-2015], .
The
Apache Software Foundation.
[3] Resource Description Framework.
http://www.w3.org/RDF/ [Online; ac-
cessed 1-June-2015], 2014. RDF Working Group.
[4] Chromosome 1 summary.
http://useast.ensembl.org/Homo_sapiens/
Location/Chromosome?r=1, 2015. [Online; accessed 2-July-2015].
[5] OWL 2 Web Ontology Language Document Overview (Second Edition), De-
cember 11, 2012. W3C OWL Working Group.
[6] The fastg format speciﬁcation (v1.00). http://fastg.sourceforge.net/
FASTG_Spec_v1.00.pdf [Online; accessed 1-July-2015], December 12, 2012.
The FASTG Format Speciﬁcation Working Group.
[7] The Variant Call Format (VCF) Version 4.2 Speciﬁcation, version 4.2 edi-
tion, January 26, 2013. https://samtools.github.io/hts-specs/VCFv4.
2.pdf [Online; accessed 7-July-2015].
[8] Sequence Alignment/Map Format Speciﬁcation (SAM), May 11, 2015.
https://samtools.github.io/hts-specs/SAMv1.pdf [Online; accessed 7-
July-2015].
[9] Sesame. http://rdf4j.org/about.docbook?view, October 16, 2014. [On-
line; accessed 6-July-2015].
==PAGE:140==
128
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[10] Joachim Baran, Kevin B. Cohen, Geraint Duck, Michel Dumontier, Begum
Durgahee, and Jin-Dong Kim. BioInterchange - Cloud and NoSQL integra-
tion of genomics data made easy. http://www.biointerchange.org/about.
html. [Online; accessed 28-May-2015], 2015.
[11] Tim Berners-Lee. Linked Data and Design Issues. http://www.w3.org/
DesignIssues/LinkedData.html, 2009. [Online; accessed 20-May-2015].
[12] Søren Besenbacher et al. Novel variation and de novo mutation rates in
population-wide de novo assembled danish trios. Nature Communications,
6:5969, 2015.
[13] Christian Bizer and Andreas Schultz. The Berlin SPARQL Benchmark. In-
ternational Journal on Semantic Web Information Systems, 5:1–24, 2009.
Freie Universitat Berlin, Germany.
[14] Christian Bizer, Tom Heath, and Tim Berners-Lee. Linked Data - The
Story So Far.
International Journal on Semantic Web and Information
Systems, 5 (3):1–22, 2009.
[15] Compeau, Phillip E C, Pevzner, Pavel A, and Glenn Tesler. How to apply
de bruijn graphs to genome assembly.
Nat Biotech, 29(11):987–991, 11
2011. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nbt.2023.
[16] Alexander Dilthey et al.
Improved genome inference in the MHC us-
ing a population reference graph.
http://biorxiv.org/content/early/
2014/07/08/006973 [Online; accessed 1-March-2015], 2014. BioRxiv is and
archive unpublished preprints in the life sciences. This article was published
in Nature in 2015 (http://www.nature.com/ng/journal/v47/n6/full/ng.
3257.html [Online; accessed 30-June-2015]).
[17] Emden Gansner, Eleftherios Koutsoﬁos, and Stephen North.
Drawing
graphs with dot, January 26, 2006.
[18] Mark
Graves.
Graph
Data
Models
for
Genomics.
urlhttp://www.xweave.com/people/mgraves/pubs/tods-unpub.pdf
[On-
line; accessed 20-March-2015], nd. Technical report from the Department
of Cell Biology, Baylor College of Medicine.
[19] Anthony J. F Griﬃths. Introduction to genetic analysis. W.H. Freeman,
2012. ISBN 9781429276344 1429276347. URL http://www.worldcat.org/
search?qt=worldcat_org_all&q=1429276347.
[20] Graham Hamilton. JavaBeans, August 8, 1997. Version 1.01-A.
[21] M. Hattori et al. The DNA sequence of human chromosome 21. Nature,
405:311–319, 2000.
==PAGE:141==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
129
[22] Christian Theil Have and Lars Juhl Jensen. Are graph databases ready for
bioinformatics? Oxford Journals Bioinformatics, 29:1–2, 2013.
[23] J.W. Havender. Avoiding deadlock in multitasking systems, 1968.
[24] Michael Himsolt. GML: A portable Graph File Format, nd. UniversitaÌt
Passau, Germany.
[25] Ric Holt, Andy Schürr, Susan Elliott Sim, and Andreas Winter. Graph eX-
change Language. http://www.gupro.de/GXL/Introduction/background.
html. [Online; accessed 15-May-2015].
[26] Lander et al. Initial sequencing and analysis of the human genome. Nature,
409:860–921, 2001.
[27] Heng
Li.
A
proposal
of
the
Grapical
Fragment
As-
sembly
format.
http://lh3.github.io/2014/07/19/
a-proposal-of-the-grapical-fragment-assembly-format/.
[Online;
accessed 2-June-2015], 2014.
[28] Heng
Li.
On
the
graphical
representation
of
sequences.
http://lh3.github.io/2014/07/25/
on-the-graphical-representation-of-sequences/.
[Online;
accessed
2-June-2015], 2014.
[29] Yu Lin, Sergey Nurk, and Pavel A Pevzner. What is the diﬀerence between
the breakpoint graph and the de Bruijn graph? BMC Genomics, 15 (suppl
6), 2014.
[30] Yongming Luo et al. Semantic Search over the Web, chapter 2. Springer,
2012.
[31] Jonathan Marchini and Bryan Howie. Genotype imputation for genome-
wide association studies. Nature, 11:499–511, 2010.
[32] Mark P. Miller and Sudhir Kumar. Understanding human disease mutations
through the use of interspeciﬁc genetic variation, 2001.
Department of
Biology, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287-1501, USA.
[33] Paul Miller. Does Linked Data need RDF? http://cloudofdata.com/2009/
07/does-linked-data-need-rdf/, 2009. [Online; accessed 20-May-2015].
[34] Andrew Newman.
JRDF - An RDF Library in Java.
http://jrdf.
sourceforge.net, 2011. [Online; accessed 6-July-2015].
[35] Benedict Paten, Adam Novak, and David Haussler. Mapping to a Refer-
ence Genome Structure. ArXiv http://arxiv.org/abs/1404.5010 [Online;
accessed 15-April-2015], 2014.
==PAGE:142==
130
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[36] Paul Scheet and Matthew Stephens. A Fast and Flexible Statistical Model
for Large-Scale Population Genotype Data: Applications to Inferring Miss-
ing Genotypes and Haplotypic Phase. The American Journal of Human
Genetics, 78, 2006. Department of Statistics, University of Washington,
Seattle.
[37] Karsten Scheibye-Alsing, Steve Hoﬀmann, Annett M. Frankel, Peter
Jensen, and Peter F. Stadler. Sequence Assembly. Technical report, Santa
Fe Institute, 2009. SFI Working Paper 2009-04-010.
[38] Jouni Sirén, Niko Välimäki, Veli Mäkinen, and Gonzalo Navarro. Run-
Length Compressed Indexes Are Superior for Highly Repetitive Sequence
Collections. 2008. Dept. of Computer Science, Univ. of Helsinki, Finland
and Dept. of Computer Science, Univ. of Chile.
[39] Danmarks Statistik. Datafortrolighedspolitik i Danmarks Statistik, January
28, 2015. Version 1.03.
[40] T.A. Welch. A Technique for High-Performance Data Compression. Com-
puter, 17(6):8–19, June 1984.
ISSN 0018-9162.
doi: 10.1109/MC.1984.
1659158.
[41] Kevin Wilkinson, Craig Sayers, Harumi A Kuno, Dave Reynolds, et al.
Eﬃcient rdf storage and retrieval in jena2.
In SWDB, volume 3, pages
131–150. Citeseer, 2003.
