==PAGE:1==
REVIEW AND PARAMETRIC
COMPARISONS OF SHEAR DESIGN
MODELS IN EC2 AND IN
ﬁb MODEL CODE 2010
Anne Kathrine Bach Vestergaard, s092798
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Civil Engineering
Linh Cao Hoang
Bent Feddersen
February 2015
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Review and Parametric Comparisons of Shear Design
Models in EC2 and in ﬁb Model Code 2010
Anne Kathrine Bach Vestergaard, s092798, February 13th 2015
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This report is the Master’s Thesis of Anne Kathrine Bach Vestergaard, s092798. The report
is conducted at the Department of Civil Engineering of the Technical University of Den-
mark in the period September 2014 to February 2015. The report constitutes 32.5 ECTS
points. The ofﬁcial supervisors of the project have been Professor Linh Cao Hoang and
Civil Engineer Bent Feddersen.
I would like to extend my gratitude to Linh Cao Hoang for patiently and skillfully direct-
ing me towards my ﬁnal result. Without his guidance and valid input, this project would
not have been possible. Also, a special thanks to Bent Feddersen for making it possible
for me to use drawings and calculations regarding beam elements designed and used by
Rambøll.
In addition to the physical report at hand, an electronic version of the report in its full
length is included.
Anne Kathrine Bach Vestergaard
Kongens Lyngby
February 2015
v
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Abstract
The behaviour of reinforced concrete beams in shear is still discussed due to the complex
performance of the shear stresses in the beam. This report examines and compares two
shear design models, both based on a stress ﬁeld approach. The comprehensibility of the
underlying physical models as well as the accuracies and workloads are evaluated. The
shear design model in Eurocode 2 is based on the variable strut inclination method and is
used in several countries in Europe. The newly invented shear design model in ﬁb Model
Code 2010 is developed with the aim of obtaining a shear design procedure being easy to
understand and use.
The variable strut inclination method proposed by Eurocode 2 is simple compared to the
model used in ﬁb Model Code 2010 which accounts for more physical parameters includ-
ing a strain effect, a size effect and the tensile strength of the concrete. Furthermore, ﬁb
Model Code 2010 uses so-called levels of approximation where the accuracy along with
the complexity of the calculation procedure increase for higher levels of approximation.
This report focuses on level of approximation II which provides the most comparable
model in compliance with the variable strut inclination method in Eurocode 2.
Eurocode 2 yields more accurate shear predictions than ﬁb Model Code 2010. Additio-
nally, reinforced concrete beams with a ﬁxed shear reinforcement may carry a larger load
in compliance with Eurocode 2 compared to level of approximation II in ﬁb Model Code
2010. Furthermore, Eurocode 2 implies a smaller consumption of shear reinforcement for
an optimized stirrup arrangement compared to ﬁb Model Code 2010 which demands a
larger ratio of the shear reinforcement.
The workload is more extensive for the shear design model in ﬁb Model Code 2010 com-
pared to Eurocode 2 due to a more complex calculation procedure. Simultaneously, the
shear predictions obtained from ﬁb Model Code 2010 are less accurate than the corre-
sponding shear predictions for Eurocode 2.
vii
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
Resum´e
Opførslen af armerede betonbjælker belastet i forskydning diskuteres til stadighed p˚a
grund af den komplekse virkem˚ade af forskydningsspændingerne i bjælken.
Denne
rapport undersøger og sammenligner to modeller for forskydningsdesign, der begge
er baseret p˚a spændingsfelter i betonen. Forst˚aeligheden af de bagvedliggende fysiske
modeller s˚avel som nøjagtighederne og arbejdsbelastningerne er vurderet.
Modellen
for forskydning i Eurocode 2 er baseret p˚a diagonaltrykmetoden og bruges i mange eu-
ropæiske lande. Den nyligt udviklede model for forskydning i ﬁb Model Code 2010 er
udviklet med form˚alet at f˚a en procedure, som er let at forst˚a og bruge.
Diagonaltrykmetoden, som er brugt i Eurocode 2, er simpel i forhold til modellen brugt i
ﬁb Model Code 2010, som medtager ﬂere fysiske parametre, herunder en tøjningsp˚avirk-
ning og en størrelsesp˚avirkning samt trækstyrken i betonen.
Derudover benytter ﬁb
Model Code 2010 s˚akaldte approksimationsniveauer, hvor nøjagtigheden sammen med
kompleksiteten i beregningsmetoden stiger for højere niveauer. Denne rapport fokuserer
p˚a approksimationsniveau II, som giver den mest sammenlignelige model i forhold til
diagonaltrykmetoden i Eurocode 2.
Eurocode 2 forudsiger mere præcise forskydningskapaciteter end ﬁb Model Code 2010.
Desuden kan armerede betonbjælker med en given forskydningsarmering holde til større
laster, n˚ar Eurocode 2 benyttes i stedet for approksimationsniveau II i ﬁb Model Code
2010. Derudover medfører Eurocode 2 et mindre forbrug af forskydningsarmering for et
optimeret design af forskydningsbøjlerne i forhold til ﬁb Model Code 2010, som kræver
et større bøjlearmeringsforhold.
Arbejdsbelastningen er større for modellen i ﬁb Model Code 2010 sammenlignet med Eu-
rocode 2 p˚a grund af en mere kompleks beregningsmetode. Samtidig er forskydningska-
paciteterne fundet ved hjælp af ﬁb Model Code 2010 mindre præcise end de tilsvarende
forskydningskapaciteter bestemt ved Eurocode 2.
ix
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Notations
1
1
Introduction
5
1.1
Report Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Eurocode 2
7
2.1
Shear Reinforcement for Concentrated Loads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Shear Reinforcement for Uniformly Distributed Loads . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Shear Reinforcement for Other Load Cases
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4
Web Crushing Criterion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.5
Relevant Subclauses in Eurocode 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3
ﬁb Model Code 2010
19
3.1
Modiﬁed Compression Field Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.1.1
Equilibrium Conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.1.2
Compatibility Conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.1.3
Stress-Strain Relationships
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.1.4
General Shear Design Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2
Generalized Stress Field Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.3
Introduction to ﬁb Model Code 2010 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.4
Relevant Subclauses in ﬁb Model Code 2010 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4
Shear Predictions
35
4.1
Reinforced Concrete Deck Girders
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.1.1
Recreated Shear Capacity Predictions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.1.2
Predictions of Shear Capacity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.1.3
Requirement in EC2 to Avoid Large Crack Widths . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.1.4
Crack Sliding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.1.5
Different Levels of Approximation in ﬁb Model Code 2010 . . . . .
44
4.1.6
Workload
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.2
Database for Shear Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.2.1
Predictions of Shear Capacity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.2.2
Practical Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.2.3
Requirement in EC2 to Avoid Large Crack Widths . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.2.4
Crack Sliding of Rectangular Beams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.2.5
Different Levels of Approximation in ﬁb Model Code 2010 . . . . .
57
4.2.6
Workload
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
xi
==PAGE:12==
XII
CONTENTS
5
Design of Reinforced Concrete Beams
59
5.1
Beam No. 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5.2
Beam No. 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
5.3
Beam No. 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
5.4
Beam No. 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
5.5
Comparison of Eurocode 2 and ﬁb Model Code 2010 . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
6
Conclusion
69
6.1
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
Appendices
74
A Example of Calculations
77
B
Reinforced Concrete Deck Girders - Beam Properties
85
C Reinforced Concrete Deck Girders - Results
87
D Database for Shear Tests - Beam Properties
93
E
Database for Shear Tests - Results
107
F
Beam No. 1
117
G Beam No. 2
129
H Beam No. 3
141
I
Beam No. 4
159
==PAGE:13==
Notation
Asw
Cross-sectional area of transverse reinforcement
Asx
Cross-sectional area of longitudinal reinforcement
a
Length between concentrated force and support
ag
Maximum coarse aggregate size
b
Width
bw
Web width
C
Idealized concentrated compressive force in compression chord
d
Effective ﬂexural depth
Ec
Modulus of elasticity of concrete
Es
Modulus of elasticity of steel
F
Idealized concentrated tensile force in tensile chord
fc
Uniaxial compressive cylinder strength of concrete
fcd
Design uniaxial compressive strength of concrete
fck
Characteristic uniaxial compressive strength of concrete
fcr
Stress in concrete at a crack
fyw
Yield stress of transverse reinforcement
fywd
Design yield stress of transverse reinforcement
fyx
Yield stress of longitudinal reinforcement
h
Height
h f
Flange height
hw
Web height
kc
Strength reduction factor
kε
Factor accounting for the average principal tensile strain
kν
Tensile stress factor
1
==PAGE:14==
MEd
Design bending moment
P
Concentrated load
p
Uniformly distributed load
r
Longitudinal reinforcement ratio in percentage
sw
Longitudinal spacing of transverse reinforcement
swt
Transverse spacing of transverse reinforcement
sx
Average spacing of cracks perpendicular to the longitudinal reinforcement
sy
Average spacing of cracks perpendicular to the transverse reinforcement
sz
Crack spacing based on spacing of longitudinal reinforcement
sze
Effective crack spacing accounting for aggregate size effects
sθ
Average spacing of cracks inclined by θ
VEd
Design shear force
VR,c
Concrete contribution to shear resistance
VRd
Design shear resistance
VRd,c
Concrete contribution to design shear resistance
VRd,max
Maximum permissible design shear resistance with reference to concrete crushing
VRd,s
Steel contribution to design shear resistance
Vs
Steel contribution to shear resistance
x
Height of ﬂexural compression zone
z
Effective depth of shear
β
Tensile stress factor
∆Ftd
Additional force in ﬂexural tensile chord due to shear
ε0
Strain in concrete corresponding to uniaxial compressive strength, fc
ε1
Average principal tensile strain
ε2
Average principal compressive strain
εc
Strain in concrete at yield strength
εcr
Average strain in concrete at cracking
εx
Average longitudinal strain
εy
Average transverse strain
ηc
Factor accounting for compression softening
ηf c
Factor accounting for the compressive strength of the concrete
2
==PAGE:15==
γc
Partial safety factor for concrete
γs
Partial safety factor for steel
γxy
Average shear strain between longitudinal and transverse lines
ν
Effectiveness factor for concrete
ψ
Mechanical shear reinforcement ratio
ρw
Transverse reinforcement ratio
ρx
Longitudinal reinforcement ratio
σc
Principal compressive stress in concrete
σc1
Principal compressive stress in concrete
σc2
Principal tensile stress in concrete
σci
Compressive stress in concrete across a crack
σcx
Compressive stress in concrete in longitudinal direction
σcy
Compressive stress in concrete in transverse direction
σx
Longitudinal stress
σy
Transverse stress
σs
Stress in reinforcement
σsw
Stress in transverse reinforcement
σsw,cr
Stress in transverse reinforcement at crack location
σsx
Stress in longitudinal reinforcement
σsx,cr
Stress in longitudinal reinforcement at crack location
τ
Shear stress
τci
Shear stress on crack surface
τci,max
Maximum shear stress a crack of given width can resist
τ′
Shear stress being piecemeal constant in the longitudinal direction
θ
Angle of inclination of principal compressive concrete stress
θmin
Minimum allowable angle of inclination with reference to MC2010
3
==PAGE:16==
4
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 1
Introduction
The behaviour of reinforced concrete beams in shear has been studied for more than 100
years due to the complex performance of the shear stresses. The problem of determining
the shear capacity still remains open for discussion. The shear capacities predicted by
different current design codes can even vary by factors of more than two according to
[Bentz et al., 2006].
This report aims to assess and compare the shear design models from Eurocode 2 and ﬁb
Model Code 2010. The accuracies and workloads of the shear design models are evalu-
ated in particular. Furthermore, the comprehensibility of the underlying physical models
is assessed. Eurocode 2 is used in several European countries, but ﬁb Model Code 2010
should according to [Sigrist and Hackbarth, 2012] be reviewed for the future develop-
ment of the shear provisions in Eurocode 2. The objective of the newly invented shear
design model in ﬁb Model Code 2010 is to obtain a shear design procedure being easy to
understand and use. According to [Sigrist and Hackbarth, 2010], the model should addi-
tionally give a larger physical signiﬁcance to the parameters involved.
Both shear design models are based on a stress ﬁeld approach. The shear design model
in Eurocode 2 is based on the variable strut inclination method. ﬁb Model Code 2010
adds a strain effect, a size effect and the tensile strength of the concrete. Furthermore, ﬁb
Model Code 2010 uses so-called levels of approximation where the accuracy along with
the complexity of the calculation procedure increase for higher levels of approximation.
This report comprises an overall review and comparison of the two shear design models.
A general case with pure shear and ﬂexure for beams with regular cross-sections is con-
sidered. Regarding the transverse shear reinforcement, regular closed stirrups without
inclinations are assessed. Several expressions and equations throughout the report can
be expanded to include normal forces and prestressing which are left out of account in
this project. Special conditions such as anchorage lengths, conditions at supports, etc. are
not considered.
1.1
Report Structure
Eurocode 2 and ﬁb Model Code 2010 are introduced in chapter 2 and 3, respectively,
where also their underlying theories are reviewed. Two shear test databases are there-
after analysed in chapter 4. Eurocode 2 and ﬁb Model Code 2010 are with reference to
5
==PAGE:18==
6
INTRODUCTION
the databases assessed and compared in terms of accuracy and workload. Shear rein-
forcement arrangements for a range of beam elements dimensioned by Rambøll are in
chapter 5 examined in terms of the shear design models in Eurocode 2 and ﬁb Model
Code 2010. Assessments are made on the basis of the allowable loads on the beams. Ad-
ditionally, the required stirrup quantities for optimizations of the shear reinforcement are
evaluated. The report is rounded off by a conclusion in chapter 6.
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 2
Eurocode 2
Eurocode 2 is normally referred to as EC2 and is used in several European countries.
The formulas underlying the determination of the shear capacity of reinforced concrete
beams in EC2 are based on the variable strut inclination method which is reviewed in
this chapter. The variable strut inclination method was ﬁrst introduced in [Nielsen, 1967].
Thereafter, the theory was developed and summarized in [Nielsen and Bach, 1980]. To-
day, the theory is adopted in EC2 where it forms the foundation in the design of the shear
reinforcement in reinforced concrete beams.
In the variable strut inclination method, the concrete is identiﬁed as a modiﬁed Coulomb
material with a tensile strength assumed to be zero. Consequently, the shear stresses in
the concrete have to be consumed only by diagonal compression stresses in the concrete.
The variable strut inclination method is a plastic approach where both the concrete and
the reinforcement are assumed to be rigid, perfectly plastic materials.
The method is based on the lower bound solution in the plastic theory where statically
admissible stress ﬁeld distributions are evaluated. The stress ﬁeld distributions satisfy
equilibrium conditions and static boundary conditions. The load-bearing capacity is en-
larged by optimizing the stress ﬁeld distributions and utilizing a sufﬁcient amount of
shear reinforcement. Compared to former methods for dimensioning shear reinforce-
ment in concrete beams, the variable strut inclination method is mainly theoretical rather
than empirical.
The review of the variable strut inclination method revealed throughout this chapter is
mainly prepared using [Nielsen, 2005] and [Nielsen and Hoang, 2011]. First, the com-
pression ﬁeld theory is described for concentrated loads in section 2.1 after which it is
demonstrated for uniformly distributed loads in section 2.2. Afterwards, the principle of
how to use the method for any type of loading is shown in section 2.3. The so-called web
crushing criterion which minimizes the necessary amount of stirrups is demonstrated in
section 2.4. Lastly, the subclauses in EC2 concerning the design of the shear reinforce-
ment in concrete beams are listed in section 2.5.
7
==PAGE:20==
8
EUROCODE 2
2.1
Shear Reinforcement for Concentrated Loads
For the sake of simplicity, the diagonal compression ﬁeld theory is at ﬁrst illustrated for a
beam with concentrated loads as indicated in Figure 2.1. Using concentrated loads causes
sections with constant shear forces in the beam. The ﬁgure shows a horizontal, simply
supported beam loaded by two symmetrical forces, P. Ordinary closed stirrups are used
as shear reinforcement. They will be affected by tension, as diagonal cracks will pass the
stirrups.
P
P
a
bw
sw
h
Longitudinal compression
reinforcement
Longitudinal tension
reinforcement
Shear
reinforcement
Figure 2.1: Beam loaded in shear by two symmetrical concentrated forces.
The compressive and tensile zones in the element are in the variable strut inclination
method idealized as stringers in which the compressive force, C, and the tensile force, T,
are concentrated as demonstrated in Figure 2.2. The shear zone lies between the stringers
and the depth of the shear zone is denoted z.
V
M
z
C
T
θ
σc
σc
x
y
V cot θ
Compression stringer
Tension stringer
V
Figure 2.2: Diagonal compression stress ﬁeld in beam.
Besides the stringers, Figure 2.2 also shows the most simple statically admissible stress
ﬁeld possible in the shear zone. The stress ﬁeld implies a uniaxial compressive stress,
σc, in the concrete which is inclined with the angle θ compared to the horizontal x-axis.
The uniaxial compressive stress forms the diagonal compression stress ﬁeld which yields
straight cracks with the same inclination, θ, as the stress ﬁeld.
The concrete carries the following stresses:
σcx = −σc cos2 θ
(2.1)
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 2
9
σcy = −σc sin2 θ
(2.2)
τcxy = σc cos θ sin θ
(2.3)
where σcx and σcy are the normal stresses in the horizontal and vertical directions, respec-
tively, and τcxy is the shear stress.
It is assumed that the stirrups are closely spaced. The stirrup forces can thus be replaced
by equivalent stirrup stresses which are found as the forces in the stirrups distributed
over the concrete area. The shear reinforcement is working in tension in the vertical
direction. The equivalent stirrup stresses are thus given by:
σsx = τsxy = 0
(2.4)
σsy = Aswσs
swb
(2.5)
where Asw is the total stirrup area crossing the concrete area and sw is the longitudinal
stirrup spacing. The longitudinal stirrup stresses, σsx, and the shear stresses, τsxy, are
obviously zero. The total stresses in the beam are determined as the sum of the concrete
stresses and the equivalent stirrup stresses:
σx = −σc cos2 θ
(2.6)
σy = −σc sin2 θ + Aswσs
swb
(2.7)
τxy = σc cos θ sin θ
(2.8)
The shear stresses in the beam must be equivalent to the constant shear force, V:
τxy = τcxy + τsxy = τcxy = V
bz
(2.9)
The normal stresses in the concrete shown in (2.1) and (2.2) can be described in terms of
the shear stresses by:
σcx = −τxy cot θ
(2.10)
σcy = −τxy tan θ
(2.11)
Using (2.3), the compressive stresses in the concrete can be described by the shear stresses
in the beam and the angle of inclination of the compressive concrete stress:
σc =
τxy
sin θ cos θ = τxy(tan θ + cot θ)
(2.12)
According to (2.9) and (2.10), the longitudinal normal stresses in the concrete become:
σcx = −V
bz cot θ
(2.13)
==PAGE:22==
10
EUROCODE 2
Since the stresses work across the entire shear zone, the longitudinal normal stresses are
equivalent to the resulting horizontal force, V cot θ, which is also illustrated in Figure 2.2.
This resulting force is working in the center of the shear zone.
By simple bending moment equilibrium about the compression and tension stringers, it
is found that the following forces are present in the stringers:
C = M
z −1
2V cot θ
(2.14)
T = M
z + 1
2V cot θ
(2.15)
where the ﬁrst part in the expressions originates from bending and the last part from the
diagonal compression ﬁeld in the concrete. The last part in (2.15) implies an additional
force due to shear in the longitudinal tensile reinforcement:
∆Ftd = 1
2V cot θ
(2.16)
According to vertical equilibrium, the vertical compressive stresses in the concrete must
equalize the vertical tensile stresses in the stirrups:
σsy = −σcy
(2.17)
Using (2.5), (2.9) and (2.11), the equilibrium equation in (2.17) induces:
Aswσs
sw
= V
z tan θ
(2.18)
When substituting the yield stress of the stirrups, fyw, into the equation, the required
amount of shear reinforcement can be calculated.
The shear reinforcement ratio, ρw, is widely used when evaluating the shear capacity in
beams:
ρw = Asw
swb
(2.19)
The ratio is substituted into (2.18) whereby the requisite shear reinforcement is evaluated
by:
ρw fyw = τxy tan θ
(2.20)
The expression can easily be rewritten to describe the shear capacity:
VR,s = Asw
sw
z fyw cot θ
(2.21)
This formula is used to evaluate the shear resistance of the stirrups.
There is however an upper limit for the shear resistance which is in accordance with the
limit of the compressive concrete stress. The expression for the concrete compressive
stress in (2.12) must not be greater than the concrete compressive strength, fc:
VR,max = bwz
fc
cot θ + tan θ
(2.22)
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 2
11
2.2
Shear Reinforcement for Uniformly Distributed Loads
The shear reinforcement was in section 2.1 evaluated for the situation where the shear
force in the beam is constant. Now, the shear reinforcement is assessed for a uniformly
distributed load, ¯p, corresponding to a stress, p, working over the width of the beam, b.
The shear force is for this situation linearly varying throughout the beam.
The most simple statically admissible stress ﬁeld consists for this situation of homoge-
neous, uniaxial stress ﬁelds in parallelogram-shaped regions as illustrated in Figure 2.3.
Again, it is assumed that the angle of inclination of the compressive concrete stresses is
constant.
Mmax
z
C
T
θ
x
y
z cot θ
z cot θ
z cot θ
1
2
3
4
1’
2’
3’
¯p = pb
p
2p
p cot θ
p cot2 θ
2p cot2 θ
2p cot θ
CL
Figure 2.3: Diagonal compressive stress ﬁeld in beam with uniformly distributed load.
The triangular area 1-2-1’ next to the maximum bending moment, Mmax, is assumed to
have no stresses, since the shear force in the beam is zero at the location of the maximum
moment.
In the region 2-3-2’-1’, the vertical normal stresses in the concrete, σcy, must equal −p
according to the boundary condition along 1’-2’. The shear stresses must satisfy the con-
dition:
τcxy = p cot θ
(2.23)
Since the stress ﬁeld in the concrete is described in terms of uniaxial compressive stresses,
(2.1) to (2.3) are still valid:
σcx = −σc cos2 θ
(2.24)
σcy = −p = −σc sin2 θ
(2.25)
τcxy = p cot θ = σc cos θ sin θ
(2.26)
The requirements in (2.25) and (2.26) are both fulﬁlled for:
σc =
p
sin2 θ
(2.27)
==PAGE:24==
12
EUROCODE 2
Substituting (2.27) into (2.24), the longitudinal normal stresses in the concrete in the re-
gion 2-3-2’-1’ becomes:
σcx = −p cot2 θ
(2.28)
To satisfy the boundary condition along 2-3, the shear reinforcement must carry the shear
stresses along 2-3:
ρw fyw = τcxy tan θ = p
(2.29)
The section 3-4-3’-2’ carries as the previous section a vertical normal stress, p, from the
boundary condition along 2’-3’. Furthermore, the shear reinforcement in (2.29) transfers
an extra vertical compressive force, p, to the section. The total vertical concrete compres-
sive stresses in 3-4-3’-2’ become:
σcy = −2p
(2.30)
Again, the shear stresses in the concrete in the section 2-3-3’-2’ become:
τcxy = 2p cot θ
(2.31)
The uniaxial compressive stress in the concrete is found by the same procedure as in
(2.27):
σc =
2p
sin2 θ
(2.32)
The longitudinal normal concrete stresses in 2-3-3’-2’ is calculated as in (2.28) and be-
come:
σcx = −2p cot2 θ
(2.33)
As before, the shear reinforcement must carry the shear stresses along 3-4 to meet the
boundary condition, yielding:
ρw fyw = τcxy tan θ = 2p
(2.34)
The calculation method described by (2.23) to (2.34) can be continued until reaching the
support.
The stringer forces vary linearly throughout each region. The forces and variations of
those are for the each region found by the boundary conditions given by:
dT
dx = dC
dx = V
z = τxyb
(2.35)
It is possible to optimize the shear reinforcement design since the concrete and stirrup
stresses are zero at the location of the maximum moment and become larger throughout
the beam until reaching maximum stresses at the supports. Figure 2.4 illustrates the so-
called staggering concept used for the shear design.
Only half of the simply supported beam with a uniformly distributed load is shown in
Figure 2.4 since the beam is symmetrical. The shear stress distribution in the staggering
concept is sketched with the beam element divided into sections of length z cot θ. It has
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 2
13
z
θ
z cot θ
¯p = pb
x
τ ′, τ
τ
τ ′
z cot θ
z cot θ
z cot θ
z cot θ
z cot θ
CL
Figure 2.4: The staggering concept for shear design.
already been established that the shear stresses in each region are evaluated as the small-
est value of the shear stresses in the region. Thus, a modiﬁed τ′-curve indicates those
piecemeal constant shear stresses. The reinforcement in each region may with reference
to the staggering concept be designed according to the constant shear stresses, τ′.
==PAGE:26==
14
EUROCODE 2
2.3
Shear Reinforcement for Other Load Cases
Lower bound solutions only exist for the load cases evaluated in section 2.1 and 2.2. Com-
bined concentrated loads and uniformly distributed loads may likewise be evaluated by
the staggering concept using superposition as demonstrated in Figure 2.5. Furthermore,
the staggering concept can easily be extended to other load cases where the shear stress
distribution and the modiﬁed τ′-curve are deﬁned by the same procedure as demon-
strated in Figure 2.5.
z
θ
¯p2
x
τ ′, τ
τ
τ ′
z cot θ
z cot θ
z cot θ
¯p1
P
< z cot θ
Figure 2.5: Shear stress distribution and τ′-curve for a varying loading consisting
of a concentrated load, P, and two uniformly distributed loads, ¯p1 and ¯p2.
2.4
Web Crushing Criterion
The amount of requisite shear reinforcement becomes smaller for less inclined compres-
sive concrete stresses. On the other hand, the compressive concrete stresses get larger for
smaller inclinations. The lower limit for the choice of the angle of inclination, θ, is thus
determined by the compressive strength of the concrete. The shear capacity can be opti-
mized by determining this angle yielding a minimum amount of reinforcement while at
the same time inducing compressive stresses in the concrete not larger than the concrete
compressive strength.
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 2
15
The stress ﬁeld is safe for the following two conditions that underlie the statement above.
The concrete compressive stresses have to be smaller than the compressive strength of the
concrete, fc, and the stresses in the reinforcement must be smaller than the yield stress of
the reinforcement, fyw:
σc ≤fc
(2.36)
σs ≤fyw
(2.37)
The optimal value of θ is found for the situation where σc equals fc and σs equals fyw. In
this case, (2.36) and (2.37) are solved for the shear stresses and the angle of inclination of
the compressive concrete stress:
τ
fc
=
q
ψ(1 −ψ)
(2.38)
tan θ =
s
ψ
1 −ψ
(2.39)
where the mechanical degree of shear reinforcement, ψ, is implemented as:
ψ = ρw fyw
fc
(2.40)
The expression in (2.38) represents a circle with a maximum value of τ/ fc = 0.5 which
is obtained for ψ = 0.5, corresponding to an angle of inclination of θ = 45◦. The optimal
solution in the interval 0 ≤ψ ≤0.5 is thereby given by the condition in (2.36). Concrete
crushing initiates prior to yielding of the stirrups when the mechanical degree of shear
reinforcement becomes larger than 0.5. Hence, the optimal angle of inclination remains
45◦for ψ > 0.5 and τ/ fc remains at the maximum value of 0.5.
According to the above, the optimal solution for the load-carrying capacity is given by:
τ
fc
=
 p
ψ(1 −ψ)
for ψ ≤0.5
0.5
for ψ > 0.5
(2.41)
The solution is known as the web crushing criterion.
The concrete compressive stresses can generally not be as large as the concrete com-
pressive strength. The concrete compressive stresses must be transferred to the stirrups
through the longitudinal tensile reinforcement bars. The transferred stresses would have
to be completely uniformly distributed in order to reach the compressive strength. Since
this is not the case for practical design situations, the compressive concrete strength is in
the web crushing criterion replaced by a reduced compressive strength, ν fc. ν is called
the effectiveness factor and has been determined experimentally. Different expressions
for ν have been used in the literature. This report utilizes the expression recommended
in EC2:
ν = 0.6 −

1 −fc
250

(fc in MPa)
(2.42)
The web crushing criterion including the concrete effectiveness factor is given by:
==PAGE:28==
16
EUROCODE 2
τ
ν fc
=











v
u
u
tψ
ν
 
1 −ψ
ν
!
for ψ ≤ν
2
0.5
for ψ > ν
2
(2.43)
The web crushing criterion is illustrated principally in Figure 2.6.
ψ/ν
τ
νfc
0.5
0.5
Figure 2.6: Principal illustration of the web crushing criterion.
An extra requirement in EC2 is introduced for the serviceability limit state:
1 ≤cot θ ≤2.5
(2.44)
The limitation is applied since too large values of cot θ corresponding to small values of θ
might induce very large stresses in the reinforcement, giving too large crack widths. The
requirement is included in EC2, but is not a part of the variable strut inclination method.
2.5
Relevant Subclauses in Eurocode 2
This section presents subclauses from [European Committee for Standardization, 2004]
which are relevant for the shear design of reinforced concrete beams. All subclauses
have been copied directly from EC2. However, some of the subclauses include only part
of the original clauses since only parameters and rules relevant for this project are men-
tioned. The items regarding calculation of the shear capacity can be deduced from the
theory introduced in the previous sections.
Subclause 6.2.1
• 6.2.1 (4): When, on the basis of the design shear calculation, no shear reinforcement
is required, minimum shear reinforcement should nevertheless be provided accord-
ing to 9.2.2.
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 2
17
• 6.2.1 (5): In regions where VEd > VRd,c, sufﬁcient shear reinforcement should be
provided in order that VEd ≤VRd.
• 6.2.1 (6): The design shear force should not exceed the permitted maximum value
VRd,max (see 6.2.3), anywhere in the member.
Subclause 6.2.2
• 6.2.2 (6): The recommended value for ν follows from:
ν = 0.6

1 −fck
250

(2.45)
Subclause 6.2.3
• 6.2.3 (2): The angle θ should be limited. The recommended limits are given in (2.46).
1 ≤cot θ ≤2.5
(2.46)
• 6.2.3 (3): For members with vertical shear reinforcement, the shear resistance, VRd
is the smaller value of:
VRd,s = Asw
sw
z fywd cot θ
(2.47)
and
VRd,max = bwzν fcd
1
cot θ + tan θ
(2.48)
• 6.2.3 (5): In regions where there is no discontinuity of VEd (e.g. for uniformly dis-
tributed loading) the shear reinforcement in any length increment l = z cot θ may
be calculated using the smallest value of VEd in the increment.
• 6.2.3 (7): The additional tensile force, ∆Ftd, in the longitudinal reinforcement due to
shear VEd may be calculated from:
∆Ftd = 0.5VEd cot θ
(2.49)
(MEd/z + ∆Ftd should be taken not greater than MEd,max/z, where MEd,max is the
maximum moment along the beam.
Subclause 9.2.2
• 9.2.2 (5): The recommended value of ρw,min for beams is given in (2.50):
ρw,min = 0.08
p
fck
fywk
(fck and fywk in MPa)
(2.50)
• 9.2.2 (6): The maximum longitudinal spacing between shear assemblies should not
exceed sw,max. The recommended value of sw,max is given by (2.51):
sw,max = 0.75d
(2.51)
• 9.2.2 (8): The transverse spacing of the legs in a series of shear links should not
exceed swt,max. The recommended value of swt,max is given by (2.52):
swt,max = 0.75d ≤600 mm
(2.52)
==PAGE:30==
18
EUROCODE 2
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 3
ﬁb Model Code 2010
The objective of ﬁb Model Code 2010 regarding shear in beams is to introduce a new shear
design model based on understandable physical systems. The model should be easy to
understand and apply. ﬁb Model Code 2010 is referred to as MC2010.
The model examines according to [Sigrist et al., 2013] two important impacts on the shear
resistance observed from tests including the strain effect and the size effect. Contrary to
the variable strut inclination method, the tensile strength of the concrete is included. Fur-
thermore, an approach referred to as level of approximation (LoA) is incorporated. Four
levels of approximation exist in MC2010. The higher the level of approximation used, the
more accurate shear predictions are obtained from more complex calculation procedures.
Thus, a balance between accuracy and complexity is chosen appropriately depending on
the desired outcome. In this way, quick results can be obtained with a minimum of cal-
culation effort at the preliminary design stage whereas more precise shear capacities may
be obtained by means of a greater effort when assessing existing structures. Equations for
lower levels of approximation are conservative approximations derived from the higher
levels. LoA I-III all consist of analytical methods whereas the higher level LoA IV uses
numerical modelling. This report mainly focuses on LoA II since this level will probably
be the most qualiﬁed to use in codes.
Figure 3.1 shows the theories underlying MC2010. Hence, the shear equations in MC2010
are developed with reference to well-known theories brought together and reﬁned. The
modiﬁed compression ﬁeld theory is examined in section 3.1 after which the generalized
stress ﬁeld approach developed from the cracked membrane model is reviewed in sec-
tion 3.2. A general introduction to MC2010 is shown in section 3.3. Lastly, the subclauses
in MC2010 concerning the design of the shear reinforcement in concrete beams are listed
in section 3.4.
3.1
Modiﬁed Compression Field Theory
In the modiﬁed compression ﬁeld theory referred to as MCFT, the load-deformation re-
sponse of reinforced concrete elements subjected to shear is assessed. The theory is de-
veloped from the compression ﬁeld theory which has an analogue area to the variable
strut inclination method described in chapter 2. Both theories assume that shear in the
reinforced concrete beam is carried by a ﬁeld of diagonal compression and also that the
concrete cannot resist tension after cracking. The latter aspect is in MCFT improved by
19
==PAGE:32==
20
ﬁb MODEL CODE 2010
ﬁb Model Code 2010
Generalized Stress
Field Approach
Cracked Membrane Model
Modiﬁed Compression
Field Theory
Limit Analysis
Compression Field Theory
Figure 3.1: Theories behind f ib Model Code 2010.
taking tensile stresses in the cracked concrete into account whereby the shear resistance
gets contributions from both the reinforcement and the concrete. The theory is evolved
even further in the simpliﬁed modiﬁed compression ﬁeld theory where some of the equa-
tions are simpliﬁed.
Contrary to the variable strut inclination method, MCFT assesses the relationships be-
tween the stresses in the beam and the strains in the concrete and the reinforcement.
Cracked concrete is treated as a new material with its own stress-strain characteristics.
Hence, equilibrium conditions are in MC2010 evaluated together with compatibility con-
ditions and constitutive relationships. Also local stress conditions at crack locations are
considered. The shear capacity of the beam element is reached either when the reinforce-
ment yields or when the principal compressive stress in the concrete reaches its limiting
value. However, MCFT suggests the limiting concrete stress to be based on deformations
in the cracked concrete rather than concrete crushing.
Considerable variations are due to cracks present in the local strains and stresses. Aver-
age values of stresses and strains are considered to be ample and are utilized in MCFT.
The following review of MCFT is based on several articles including [Collins et al., 1996],
[Vecchio and Collins, 1988], [Bentz et al., 2006], [Collins, 1978], [Bentz and Collins, 2006]
and [Vecchio and Collins, 1986]. The review demonstrates the equilibrium conditions,
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 3
21
the compatibility conditions and the stress-strain relationships in section 3.1.1-3.1.3. Af-
terwards, the so-called general shear design method is introduced in section 3.1.4 where a
practical approach to evaluate the shear capacity of a reinforced concrete beam by MCFT
is introduced.
3.1.1
Equilibrium Conditions
The equilibrium conditions in MCFT are found in the same way as for the variable strut
inclination method in chapter 2. Thus, equilibrium is obtained in the longitudinal and
transverse directions. Also the correlation between the shear stresses, τxy, and the prin-
cipal concrete compressive stresses, σc, is derived. The ﬁnal equations are shown in (3.1)
to (3.3):
σx = σcx + ρxσsx
(3.1)
σy = σcy + ρwσsw
(3.2)
σc = τxy(tan θ + cot θ)
(3.3)
The horizontal equilibrium takes into account the longitudinal reinforcement since the
theory is applicable for both panels and beams. Hence, the latter term in (3.1) corre-
sponds to the idealized concentrated forces in the tensile and compressive chords in the
variable strut inclination method.
The longitudinal and transverse concrete stresses are still related to the shear stresses
by (2.10) and (2.11). The transverse reinforcement ratio, ρw, is described by (2.19). The
longitudinal reinforcement ratio, ρx, is similarly given by:
ρx = Asx
bwz
(3.4)
Since both compressive and tensile stresses in the concrete are now applied, the principal
tensile stress in the concrete is denoted σc1 whereas the principal compressive stress is
called σc2. The Mohr’s circle for the average concrete stresses illustrated in Figure 3.2
gives the following relationships:
σcx = σc1 −τxy cot θ
(3.5)
σcy = σc1 −τxy tan θ
(3.6)
τxy =
σc1 −σc2
tan θ + cot θ
(3.7)
Substituting (3.5) and (3.6) into (3.1) and (3.2), the following equilibrium equations are
achieved:
σx = ρxσsx + σc1 −τxy cot θ
(3.8)
σy = ρwσsw + σc1 −τxy tan θ
(3.9)
==PAGE:34==
22
ﬁb MODEL CODE 2010
x
y
1
2
τ
2
σ
σcy
τxy
2
σcx
σc1
2θ
Figure 3.2: Mohr’s circle for average stresses in the concrete.
The presence of the tensile strength of the concrete is due to aggregate interlock. Hence, it
is necessary to review the local equilibrium conditions across cracks since tensile stresses
in the concrete are taken into account. Cracking will normally occur along the interface
between the cement paste and the aggregate particles. The rough cracks induced by the
aggregates can then transfer shear in terms of aggregate interlock. Cracked reinforced
concrete transmits the load in a complex manner involving opening and closing of exist-
ing cracks, formation of new cracks, and interface shear transfer at rough crack surfaces.
The shear stresses on the crack surface replaces the loss of tensile stresses in the concrete
after the reinforcement yields at the crack. It is assumed that the aggregate interlock
resistance estimated at one location may represent the behaviour at the entire crack sur-
face. Average stresses in the concrete are illustrated in Figure 3.3 together with the local
stresses appearing at a crack. The shear stresses at the crack in Figure 3.3 (b) should be
zero due to the principal plane. However, MCFT suggests a sort of local shear stresses,
τci, accompanied by small local compressive stresses, σci, across the crack.
θ
σsw
σsx
σy
σx
τxy
τxy
σc1
θ
σsw,cr
σsx,cr
σy
σx
τxy
τxy
σci
τci
Figure 3.3: (a) Average stresses in the concrete. (b) Local stresses at a crack.
The two sets of stresses in Figure 3.3 must be statically equivalent. It gives the following
longitudinal and transverse equilibrium:
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 3
23
ρx(σsx,cr −σsx) = σc1 + σci + τci cot θ
(3.10)
ρw(σsw,cr −σsw) = σc1 + σci −τci cot θ
(3.11)
where σsx,cr and σsw,cr are the stresses in the reinforcement at the crack location in the
longitudinal and transverse directions, respectively. The horizontal and transverse equi-
librium can be satisﬁed without presence of shear stresses on the crack, τci, and local
compressive stresses, σci, only if the following is valid:
ρx(σsx,cr −σsx) = ρw(σsw,cr −σsw) = σc1
(3.12)
However, the stresses in the reinforcement at the crack must not exceed the yielding
strengths of the reinforcement:
σsx,cr ≤fyx
σsw,cr ≤fyw
(3.13)
Shear stresses on the crack must be present and satisfy the equilibrium conditions in
(3.10) and (3.11) if the requirements in (3.13) are not fulﬁlled. The direction of principal
stresses in the concrete changes at the location of the crack since shear stresses cannot
exist in a principal plane.
An empirical expression is in [Vecchio and Collins, 1986] presented for the shear stresses
across the crack:
τci = 0.18τci,max + 1.64σci −0.82
σ2
ci
τci,max
(3.14)
where τci,max is the limiting shear capacity on the crack, determined by:
τci,max =
p
fc
0.31 +
24w
ag + 16
(3.15)
where w is the crack width and ag is the maximum aggregate size.
The equation in (3.14) is simpliﬁed in [Collins and Mitchell, 1991] by disregarding the
compressive stresses on the crack, σci:
τci =
0.18
p
fc
0.31 +
24w
ag + 16
(3.16)
The crack width can be estimated as the crack spacing perpendicular to the crack, sθ,
multiplied by the principal tensile strain, ε1:
w = ε1sθ
(3.17)
The crack spacing, sθ, is calculated by:
==PAGE:36==
24
ﬁb MODEL CODE 2010
sθ =
1
sin θ
sx
+ cos θ
sy
(3.18)
where sx and sy are the average spacings of cracks perpendicular to the longitudinal and
transverse reinforcement, respectively.
3.1.2
Compatibility Conditions
Since it is assumed that the reinforcement is anchored in the concrete, any concrete strain
will be accompanied by an equal steel strain. The compatibility conditions in MCFT
are described in terms of the concrete strains illustrated in Figure 3.4. εx and εy are the
strains in the longitudinal and transverse directions, ε1 is the principal tensile strain, ε2 is
the principal compressive strain, and τxy is the shear strain.
x
y
ε1
εy
εx
ε2
θ
Figure 3.4: Average strains in cracked
reinforced concrete element.
x
y
1
2
γ
2
ε
εy
γxy
2
εx
ε2
ε1
2θ
Figure 3.5: Mohr’s circle for average
strains.
Mohr’s circle of average strains shown in Figure 3.5 yields the following relationships
between the strains:
γxy = 2(εx + ε2) cot θ
(3.19)
tan2 θ = εx −ε2
εy −ε2
(3.20)
ε1 = εx + εy −ε2
(3.21)
3.1.3
Stress-Strain Relationships
The relationships between the stresses and strains in the reinforcement are based on
Hooke’s elastic law:
σsx = Esεx ≤fyx
(3.22)
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 3
25
σsw = Esεy ≤fyw
(3.23)
New relationships between the principal stresses and strains in the concrete are required
since tensile stresses in the concrete are present. An experimental program presented in
[Vecchio and Collins, 1986] was executed to obtain information about the relationships.
It was demonstrated how the principal compressive stresses in the concrete are affected
not only by the principal compressive strains but also by the principal tensile strains. The
suggested relationship is given by:
σc2 = σc2,max
 
2
ε2
ε0

−
ε2
ε0
2!
(3.24)
where ε0 is the strain corresponding to the concrete compressive strength, fc, and σc2,max
is determined by:
σc2,max
fc
=
1
0.8 −170ε1
≤1.0
(3.25)
The relationship prior to cracking between the principal tensile stresses and strains in the
concrete is according to [Vecchio and Collins, 1986] given by Hooke’s elastic law:
σc1 = Ecε1
,
ε1 ≤εcr
(3.26)
where εcr is the strain in the concrete at cracking. The modulus of elasticity of concrete
may be calculated by:
Ec = 2fc
ε0
(3.27)
The relationship after cracking is an empirical expression based on test results. It is in
[Collins and Mitchell, 1991] suggested to be:
σc1 =
fcr
1 + √500ε1
,
ε1 > εcr
(3.28)
where fcr is the concrete compressive stress at cracking which can be evaluated as 0.33
p
fc.
Figure 3.6 illustrates all of the described stress-strain relationships for the concrete and
the reinforcement.
εs
ε2
ε1
σc1
σc2
σs
fy
1
Es
σc2,max
εc
fcr
εcr
Ecε1
fcr
1+√500+ε1
Figure 3.6: Stress-strain relationships for concrete and reinforcement according to MC2010.
==PAGE:38==
26
ﬁb MODEL CODE 2010
3.1.4
General Shear Design Method
The general shear design method is a practical approach of MCFT where the shear capac-
ity is determined as the sum of the contributions from the reinforcement and the concrete.
As for the variable strut inclination method, the reinforcement contribution is determined
by:
VR,s = Asw
sw
z fyw cot θ
(3.29)
The concrete contribution is given by:
VR,c = ftbwz cot θ
(3.30)
where ft is the concrete tensile strength which is proportional to the square root of the
compressive strength of the concrete:
ft ∝
p
fc
(3.31)
The concrete contribution to the shear strength may be expressed by a tensile stress factor,
β, demonstrating the ability of a crack to resist aggregate interlock. The shear capacity
from the concrete contribution may thereby be expressed by:
VR,c = β
p
fcbwz
(3.32)
It is seen from (3.29) and (3.32) how the shear capacity is affected by two parameters apart
from the regular beam properties. The parameters include the angle of inclination, θ, and
the tensile stress factor, β. Two parameters are used to evaluate β and θ; the longitudinal
strain, εx, and the normalized applied shear stress, τE/ fc.
The longitudinal strain, εx, captures several effects inﬂuencing the shear strength since
cracks become wider when the longitudinal strain becomes larger. Wider cracks induce
a lower grade of aggregate interlock which again causes a smaller concrete contribution
to the shear capacity. This effect of a lowered shear capacity for enlarged longitudinal
strains is called the strain effect. The longitudinal strain is suggested to be determined at
mid-depth of the cross-section. The suggestion has varied throughout the development
of the method. The longitudinal strain at mid-depth is determined by:
εx =
ME
z + 0.5VE cot θ
2AsEs
(3.33)
where the applied bending moment, ME, and the applied shear force, VE, should be taken
as positive quantities. When assuming that 0.5 cot θ equals one, (3.33) is simpliﬁed as:
εx =
ME
z + VE
2AsEs
(3.34)
The shear strength is also inﬂuenced by the size effect. The explanation of this effect is
based on [Collins, 2010]. The concrete between two cracks will be in pure shear if the
cracks are narrow enough to transmit shear stresses in terms of aggregate interlock. On
the contrary, shear stresses cannot be transmitted across cracks if they are too wide. If
so, bending moments causing vertical stresses are developed to change the force. Thus,
much higher tensile stresses become present in the concrete at crack location. Actually,
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 3
27
[Collins, 2010] proclaims that the concrete must resist tensile stresses six times higher
with presence of wide cracks. Crack width depends on crack spacing, and crack spacing
in the upper region of the web is proportional to the depth of the member. Deeper mem-
bers are thus expected to fail at lower shear stresses which is the main core of the size
effect.
The size effect is assessed in terms of the effective crack spacing parameter, sze. However,
crack spacing is controlled for members with transverse reinforcement. Such members
will have minor size effects where it is assumed that the crack spacing does not exceed
300 mm. Thus, it is conservative to use an effective crack spacing parameter of sze = 300
mm for members with transverse reinforcement.
Development of β
Since the concrete contribution to the shear capacity takes place across the cracks, the
factor for tensile stresses in concrete, β, is expressed by:
β =
τci
p
fc
(3.35)
where the numerator, τci, is the shear stresses in the concrete across the crack and the
denominator according to (3.31) is proportional to the tensile strength of the concrete.
The ability of a crack to resist shear stresses is already deﬁned in (3.16). A simpliﬁed
expression for the relationship between the crack width, w, and the longitudinal strain,
εx, is in [Bentz and Collins, 2006] suggested as:
w = 0.2 + 1000εx
(3.36)
When substituting the simpliﬁed relationship in (3.36) into (3.16) for a speciﬁc aggregate
size and a speciﬁc member depth, shear stresses across a crack in a member without
stirrups is obtained by:
τci =
0.4
p
fc
1 + 1500εx
(3.37)
By evaluating τci for different member depths and aggregate sizes, a size effect in terms
of the factor 1300/(1000 + sze) is suggested by [Bentz and Collins, 2006]. When including
this factor and substituting (3.37) into (3.35), the factor for tensile stresses in the concrete
may be determined by:
β =
0.4
1 + 1500εx
 
1300
1000 + sze
!
(3.38)
The last factor is however not necessary to include for members with transverse rein-
forcement since the size effect becomes insigniﬁcant.
Development of θ
Lower and upper limits for the angle of inclination are in [Bentz and Collins, 2006] sug-
gested as a function of the longitudinal strain, εx. The lower limit corresponds to concrete
==PAGE:40==
28
ﬁb MODEL CODE 2010
crushing whereas the upper limit is controlled by the yield of the reinforcement. A linear
relationship ﬁtting into the range is proposed as:
θ = 29◦+ 7000εx
(3.39)
3.2
Generalized Stress Field Approach
The generalized stress ﬁeld approach (GSFA) described in [Sigrist, 2011] combines limit
analysis methods with compatibility considerations. The calculation procedure is de-
rived from the cracked membrane model demonstrated thoroughly in [Kaufmann, 1998]
and [Kaufmann and Marti, 1998]. Average strains and stresses are still considered to be
ample.
With a view to MC2010, GSFA introduces an expression for the effective concrete com-
pressive strength, fce. Furthermore, the approach provides limits for the angle of inclina-
tion, θ.
The effective compressive strength in GSFA accounts for strain inﬂuences in terms of
compression softening. Compression softening means the compressive strength will be
reduced if the concrete has deteriorated due to large transverse strains. An expression
for the effective compressive strength of the concrete is shown in (3.40). The expression
is empirical and is based on [Kaufmann, 1998].
fce = ηc fc
30 MPa
fc
1/3
≤ηc fc
(3.40)
The last factor in (3.40) ensures that the effective compressive strength diminishes for
fc > 30 MPa. The factor is included since a more brittle behaviour is present for high
strength concrete. The factor ηc accounts for compression softening:
ηc =
1
1.2 + 55ε1
(3.41)
The principal tensile strain, ε1, is found by the use of Mohr’s circle of strains in Figure 3.5:
ε1 = εx + (εx −ε2) cot2 θ
(3.42)
According to [Sigrist and Hackbarth, 2010], the principal compressive strain, ε2, may be
taken as the concrete strain −ε0 corresponding to the compressive strength of the con-
crete, fc. ε0 is inﬂuenced by several parameters, but may be approximated by ε0 = 0.002.
The limitation of the angle of inclination is based on (3.20) which is found from Mohr’s
circle of strains in Figure 3.5. By rewriting (3.20), the following lower and upper limits
are obtained:
θmin = arctan

εx −ε2
εy,min −ε2
1/2
,
θmax = arctan

εx −ε2
εy,max −ε2
1/2
(3.43)
The lower limit, θmin, corresponds to concrete crushing. The upper limit, θmax, means that
the reinforcement does not yield before shear failure. Due to practical considerations,
simpliﬁed expressions for the limitations are used:
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 3
29
20◦+ 5000εx ≤θ ≤35◦+ 5000εx
(3.44)
The limits in (3.44) are developed from (3.43). Here, restraints are assumed for the size
of the yield stress of the steel, fy, and the longitudinal strain, εx. The limits have varied
throughout the literature and are modiﬁed further in MC2010.
Contrary to MCFT, GSFA does not account for tensile stresses in the concrete. The shear
capacity is thus determined in terms of the shear capacity of the reinforcement alone:
VR,s = Asw
sw
z fyw cot θ
(3.45)
The maximum permissible shear capacity with reference to web crushing is:
VR,max = fcebwz sin θ cos θ
(3.46)
The web crushing criterion based on (3.45) and (3.46) is introduced in terms of the effec-
tive compressive strength of the concrete:
τR =
q
ρw fyw( fce −ρw fyw)
with
tan θ =
s
ρw fyw
fce −ρw fyw
(3.47)
3.3
Introduction to ﬁb Model Code 2010
The expressions used in MC2010 are based on the theories reviewed in the previous sec-
tions.
The shear design model in MC2010 is divided into different levels of approximation. Dis-
regarding LoA IV, the principles for the calculation procedures are the same for all levels.
The variation between the levels consists in the number of parameters included in the
calculations.
The design shear resistance is calculated as the sum of the shear capacity contributions
from the concrete and the reinforcement, respectively:
VR = VR,c + VR,s
(3.48)
The concrete and steel contributions are calculated by:
VR,s = Asw
sw
z fyw cot θ
(3.49)
VR,c = kν
p
fcbwz
(3.50)
where kν is the tensile stress factor for concrete. The shear capacity must not exceed the
limiting value with reference to concrete crushing, given by:
VR,max = kc fcbwz sin θ cos θ
(3.51)
where kc is the strength reduction factor for concrete.
==PAGE:42==
30
ﬁb MODEL CODE 2010
To exclude the concrete contribution, the tensile stress factor for concrete, kν, is set to zero
for LoA I. Furthermore, LoA I uses ﬁxed values for the angle of inclination, θ, and the
strength reduction factor for the concrete, kε. In this way, the calculation procedure is
kept simple.
The concrete contribution to the shear capacity is still ignored for LoA II. The angle of
inclination may however now be optimized by choosing θmin, calculated by:
θmin = 20◦+ 10000εx
(3.52)
εx is calculated by (3.34) and depends on the applied shear force and bending moment.
For the evaluation of the shear strength of the beam, the calculated forces themselves
should be used. It means an iteration must be executed. In the iteration, the calculated
shear capacity shall end up being identical to the shear force applied.
The angle of inclination in (3.52) should also be applied for LoA III. Hence, the reinforce-
ment contribution to the shear capacity becomes identical for LoA II and III. The concrete
contribution to the shear capacity is utilized for LoA III with the tensile stress factor:
kν =
0.4
1 + 1500εx

1 −
VEd
VRd,max(θmin)

≥0
(3.53)
For the determination of the shear strength of the beam, the applied shear force in (3.53)
should again correspond to the shear capacity itself.
As for the variable strut inclination method, the shear design model in MC2010 applies
to regions of z cot θ along the beam. Figure 3.7 shows the forces in the web of the beam
for such a region.
z
C
T
θ
z cot θ
τc
τs
Figure 3.7: Forces in the web of the beam according to MC2010.
Additionally, MC2010 provides so-called control sections for cross sectional designs. Con-
trary to the shear design model illustrated in Figure 3.7, the shear reinforcement cannot
be varied along the beam for a cross sectional design. Hence, optimized arrangements
of the shear reinforcement cannot be obtained by cross sectional designs. However, the
cross sectional design may be utilized for shear strength evaluations of existing beams.
The design shear forces shall in cross sectional designs be determined at control sections
at a location d from supports and from transverse applied forces.
The use of control sections might cause extensively increased workloads, for instance for
continuous beams and beams having several concentrated forces. Here, several control
sections must be assessed. It is not stated in MC2010 why the control sections are chosen
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 3
31
to be located distances d and not z cot θ from supports and transverse applied forces.
3.4
Relevant Subclauses in ﬁb Model Code 2010
This section presents all subclauses from [Walraven et al., 2011] being relevant for the
shear design of reinforced concrete beams. All subclauses have been copied directly
from the Model Code. However, some of the subclauses include in the following only
part of the original clauses, since only parameters and rules relevant for this project are
mentioned.
Subclause 7.3.3.1
• The following equations are provided for the shear resistance of the webs of beams
and do not include the effects of ﬂanges. Figure 3.7 shows the regions being de-
signed for beams.
• In beams, a minimum quantity of shear reinforcement in accordance with sub-
clause 7.13.5.2 shall be provided.
• For a cross sectional design, the design shear force shall in general be determined at
control sections at a location d from the face of supports and from discontinuities of
geometry or transverse applied forces. Other control section may be required, for
example in case of varying web widths along a span, for non-uniform or signiﬁcant
concentrated loads, or at sections near points of curtailment of reinforcement.
• Sections closer to supports than the distance d may be designed for the same shear
force as at the control section provided that the member is directly supported.
• Within the framework of undertaking a cross sectional analysis, the longitudinal
strain is calculated at the mid-depth of the effective shear depth being considered
as follows:
εx =
1
2EsAs
 MEd
z
+ VEd

(3.54)
– MEd and VEd shall be taken as positive quantities.
– For shear strength evaluation, MEd and VEd are the calculated shear strength
forces themselves1.
– εx shall not exceed 0.003.
– If the value of εx is negative it shall be taken as zero.
Subclause 7.3.3.3
• This sub-clause applies to members that meet the demand for minimum shear re-
inforcement according to:
ρw ≥0.08
p
fck
fywk
(fck and fywk in MPa)
(3.55)
1This statement is not written in the Model Code directly, but is stated in [Bentz, 2010]. It is mentioned in
this report to avoid confusions regarding which shear force and bending moment to use in the calculation
of εx.
==PAGE:44==
32
ﬁb MODEL CODE 2010
• The design shear resistance is determined from:
VRd = VRd,c + VRd,s
(3.56)
but shall not be taken as greater than:
VRd,max = kc fcdbwz sin θ cos θ
(3.57)
• The strength reduction factor is deﬁned as:
kc = kεηf c
(3.58)
with kε as given in the following and:
ηf c =
 
30
fck
!1/3
≤1.0
(fck in MPa)
(3.59)
• The design shear resistance provided by stirrups is:
VRd,s = Asw
sw
z fywd cot θ
(3.60)
• The design shear resistance attributed to the concrete can be taken as:
VRd,c = kν
p
fck
γc
bwz
(3.61)
where the value of
p
fck shall not be taken as greater than 8 MPa.
• The longitudinal reinforcement in the ﬂexural tensile chord at every section of in-
terest shall be designed to resist the additional force due to shear of:
∆Ftd = VEd
2 cot θ
(3.62)
However, the total demand on longitudinal reinforcement need not exceed the de-
mand at the maximum moment location due to moment alone.
• The limits of the compressive stress ﬁeld inclination θ, relative to the longitudinal
axis of the member, are:
θmin ≤θ ≤45◦
(3.63)
Subclause 7.3.3.3 - Level I Approximation
• In the level I approach, the design shear resistance is given by:
VRd = VRd,s ≤VRd,max
(3.64)
but needs not to be taken less than the resistance of the same member without shear
reinforcement.
• The minimum inclination of the compressive stress ﬁeld is θmin = 30◦for reinforced
concrete members.
• The width of the beam or web shall be checked for the selected inclinations of the
compression stresses where kε is taken as:
kε = 0.55
(3.65)
• (3.64) and (3.65) apply to cross sections where the longitudinal stran εx remains
below a value of 0.001.
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 3
33
Subclause 7.3.3.3 - Level II Approximation
• In the level II approach, the design shear resistance is given by:
VRd = VRd,s ≤VRd,max
(3.66)
but needs not to be taken less than the resistance of the same member without shear
reinforcement.
• Within the limits of (3.63) the inclination of the compressive stress ﬁeld can be freely
selected for design, or analytically determined for assessment.
• The minimum inclination of the compressive stress ﬁeld shall be taken as:
θmin = 20◦+ 10000εx
(εx with no units)
(3.67)
• The design shear resistance attributed to the concrete shall be neglected, i.e. kν = 0.
• The width of the beam or web shall be checked for the respective inclination of the
compression stresses where kε is taken as:
kε =
1
1.2 + 55ε1
≤0.65
(3.68)
where:
ε1 = εx + (εx + 0.002) cot2 θ
(3.69)
Subclause 7.3.3.3 - Level III Approximation
• In the level III approach, the design shear resistance in the range of VRd < VRd,max(θmin)
is given by:
VRd = VRd,s + VRd,c
(3.70)
where VRd,max(θmin) is calculated from (3.57) for θ = θmin.
• In the range of VRd ≥VRd,max(θmin) the resistance is determined as in the Level II
Approximation.
• The inclination θmin is taken as given by (3.67).
• For determining the design shear resistance VRd,c attributed to the concrete the fol-
lowing expression shall be used:
kν =
0.4
1 + 1500εx

1 −
VEd
VRd,max (θmin)

≥0
(3.71)
Subclause 7.13.5.2
• Where shear reinforcement is required (see subclause 7.3.3), the minimum area of
shear reinforcement2 shall be:
Asw,min = 0.08
p
fck
bwsw
fywk
(fck and fywk in MPa)
(3.72)
2This area correspond to the minimum shear reinforcement of ρw,min = 0.08
p
fck
fywk
.
==PAGE:46==
34
ﬁb MODEL CODE 2010
• In the case of wide webs, the web width may be taken into account up to a maxi-
mum of 400 mm.
• In the case of web widths > 500 mm, stirrups with more than two legs shall be
used.
• Spacing sw between stirrups shall not exceed 0.75d or 500 mm.
Figure 3.8 demonstrates the calculation procedure used for LoA II to evaluate the shear
capacity of the beam.
Deﬁne the relevant control section(s)
Choose an initial guess of VRd,s
Calculate MRd from VRd,s
Calculate εx from (3.54)
Calculate θmin from (3.67)
Calculate new value of VRd,s from (3.60)
Deﬁne an acceptable tolerance
between the former value of VRd,s
and the recent value of VRd,s
Is the tolerance obeyed?
No
Yes
Calculate ηfc from (3.59)
Calculate ε1 from (3.69)
Calculate kε from (3.68)
Calculate kc from (3.58)
Calculate VRd,max from (3.57)
VRd is the minimum value of VRd,s and VRd,max
Figure 3.8: Calculation procedure for determination of
shear capacity using level of approximation II.
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 4
Shear Predictions
In this chapter, shear capacity predictions for EC2 and MC2010 are determined for two
different databases, both containing a range of beam tests regarding shear failure for re-
inforced concrete beams with stirrups. First, shear failure predictions for 10 laboratory
tests for reinforced concrete bridge deck girders designed as T-beams are evaluated in
section 4.1. Afterwards, a large database developed from tests executed throughout the
last 50 years is examined in section 4.2. This database includes 87 shear tests on rein-
forced concrete beams with stirrups.
The accuracies of the shear capacities calculated by EC2 and MC2010 are assessed with
reference to the test shear capacities informed in the databases. Furthermore, the work-
load for both models is evaluated. Only ultimate limit state considerations are accounted
for in this chapter. Hence, the examination is based on the strengths calculated by the
shear design models.
The shear capacity predictions for EC2 and MC2010 are determined in accordance with
the shear design models described in section 2.5 and 3.4, respectively. Focus for MC2010
will be on level of approximation II since this level will probably be the most qualiﬁed to
use in codes. However, comparisons are also executed between the three lowest levels of
approximation in MC2010. The crack sliding approach is considered an extra aspect.
Appendix A shows an example of the calculation procedures for all approaches used
throughout the chapter.
4.1
Reinforced Concrete Deck Girders
This section deals with 10 shear tests treating a range of reinforced concrete bridge girders
built in the United States during the 1950s. The bridge girders are lightly reinforced for
shear and inspections revealed that many of the bridge girders indicated diagonal cracks.
Consequently, a research program was initiated. In the program, 20 laboratory tests of
large-sized lightly reinforced concrete girders were conducted. The tests are described in
[Higgins et al., 2007] where geometries, strengths, reinforcement set-ups, failure modes
and capacities are informed. This report deals with the 10 elements being T-beams and
having shear as their failure mode. Shear predictions for seven of those elements are with
regard to MC2010 already illustrated in [Bentz, 2010].
35
==PAGE:48==
36
SHEAR PREDICTIONS
The principal geometry and loading of the 10 T-beams are illustrated in Figure 4.1 where
it is to be noticed that the number and size of longitudinal tension reinforcement bars
vary from beam to beam. The longitudinal compression reinforcement is not shown since
it does not affect the shear capacity calculations. The beams are simply supported and
carry two concentrated transverse forces of 0.5P which are located symmetrically. The
parameters shown in Figure 4.1 regarding the properties of the beams are listed in Ap-
pendix B.
0.5P
d
bw
Transverse
Longitudinal
h
hf
bf
a
reinforcement
tensile
reinforcement
0.5P
aF
L
Figure 4.1: Principal test arrangement and cross-sectional parame-
ters for laboratory tests of reinforced concrete bridge girders.
A recreation of the shear capacity predictions for LoA II demonstrated in [Bentz, 2010]
is executed in section 4.1.1 along with predictions found by EC2. The assessment of the
shear capacities evaluated by EC2 and MC2010 is performed in section 4.1.2. The sec-
tion also includes a range of more clear and evident illustrations of the shear capacity
predictions. An extra requirement in EC2 regarding the serviceability limit state is ex-
amined in section 4.1.3. Additionally, the crack sliding approach yielding smaller shear
capacity predictions is compared to the variable strut inclination method in section 4.1.4.
The shear capacity predictions for LoA II in MC2010 are in section 4.1.5 compared to the
corresponding capacities calculated using LoA I and LoA III. Finally, the workload for
the shear models in EC2 and MC2010 are discussed in section 4.1.6.
4.1.1
Recreated Shear Capacity Predictions
The objective of this section is to recreate Figure 2.6 in [Bentz, 2010]. The actual assess-
ment of the shear capacities calculated by EC2 and MC2010 happens from section 4.1.2
onwards.
Figure 4.2 shows the shear capacity predictions for EC2 and LoA II in MC2010. The re-
sults are presented in the same manner as demonstrated in Figure 2.6 in [Bentz, 2010],
with the stirrup quantity on the x-axis and the shear capacity on the y-axis. However, it
is chosen not to include shear predictions for stirrup quantities less than the minimum
degree of shear reinforcement. The minimum degree of shear reinforcement presented in
(2.50) and (3.55) and is identical for EC2 and MC2010.
Two curves giving the full range of possible shear predictions for LoA II are shown in
[Bentz, 2010] and in Figure 4.2. The upper curve is based on θmin and the lower curve
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 4
37
on θ = 45◦. The upper curve corresponds to the largest shear capacities and is therefore
used as reference. The curve giving least optimal shear capacities for EC2 corresponds to
the lower curve of MC2010 since the calculations for those shear capacities are identical
for EC2 and MC2010 with an angle of inclination of 45◦.
ρwfyw [MPa]
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
VR [kN]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
θ = θmin
θ = 45◦
Tests
MC2010
EC2
Figure 4.2: Shear capacity predictions for EC2 and LoA II in MC2010.
A plot identical to the one in Figure 4.2 is shown in Appendix C where labels on the test
results identify the 10 beams in compliance with [Higgins et al., 2007].
The way of demonstrating the shear capacity predictions in [Bentz, 2010] and Figure 4.2
causes a range of issues and confusions. Each of the 10 beam specimens yields one maxi-
mum and minimum shear capacity curve, based on the speciﬁc beam properties. It is the
case for both EC2 and MC2010. The shear capacity curves in [Bentz, 2010] and Figure 4.2
are therefore valid for only one beam element. This is misleading since the illustrations
indicate curves being valid for all tests. The element used to create the shear prediction
curves is not pointed out in [Bentz, 2010].
Shear predictions determined using LoA II in MC2010 are often conservative. It is also
the case for the 10 beam elements examined in this section. On the other hand, the predic-
tions for EC2 are larger than the test results. When only showing shear capacity curves
for one element, it is possible to manipulate the curves closer to or further away from the
test results.
The upper shear capacity curve for LoA II is assessed to correspond to the element with
the largest of the upper curves. The same element is used to illustrate the lower shear
capacity curve. The element does not have both the largest upper curve and the small-
est lower curve, though. Hence, the full range of results for all beam specimens is not
shown in Figure 4.2 after all. The beam specimen yielding the largest upper shear capac-
ity curve is 1T18. Hence, element 1T18 is used to create the shear capacity curves for LoA
II in Figure 4.2. The curves are in good agreement to the ones in [Bentz, 2010]. Element
1T18 is also used to create the shear capacity curve for EC2. Thus, the curves for EC2 and
MC2010 are comparable. Element 1T18 is identiﬁed in Appendix C.
==PAGE:50==
38
SHEAR PREDICTIONS
Based on the above, it is recommended not to assess the shear capacity predictions on the
basis of Figure 4.2 alone. However, the illustration may be used to get a picture of the
two shear models; It shows the differences between EC2 and LoA II in MC2010. The test
results should not be taken into account in the comparison, though. What can actually
be concluded from Figure 4.2 is that the shear capacities calculated using EC2 are larger
than the corresponding capacities determined by LoA II in MC2010, at least for the stir-
rup quantities shown in the ﬁgure.
Only beam element 10T0 without stirrups does not satisfy the requirement regarding the
minimum transverse reinforcement ratio. This beam is therefore not included in the fol-
lowing evaluation of the shear capacities. Figure 4.2 seems to show that neither beam
specimen 10T24-B4 fulﬁls the transverse reinforcement ratio requirement. This is how-
ever not the case, since other shear capacity curves with a smaller minimum transverse
reinforcement ratio are valid for this beam element.
4.1.2
Predictions of Shear Capacity
Figure 4.3 shows the ratios between the shear capacities found in the laboratory tests and
the shear capacities calculated using EC2 and LoA II in MC2010. The ratios are functions
of the mechanical shear reinforcement ratio divided by the effectiveness factor which for
EC2 and MC2010 is deﬁned in different ways. Hence, (4.1) and (4.2) show the parameters
used on the x-axis for EC2 and MC2010, respectively:
EC2 : ψ
ν
(4.1)
MC2010 : ψ
kc
(4.2)
Degree of shear reinforcement
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
Test-prediction ratio
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
MC2010
EC2
Figure 4.3: Test-prediction ratios for EC2 and LoA II in MC2010.
Therefore, the test-prediction ratio for a given laboratory test will for EC2 and MC2010 in
Figure 4.3 be located at different x-values, dependent on the model used to calculate the
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 4
39
shear capacity.
Figure 4.3 clearly indicates how the shear capacity models for EC2 and LoA II in MC2010
result in two signiﬁcantly different shear capacities. LoA II in MC2010 is conservative as
stated in [Bentz, 2010]. On the other hand, the shear capacities calculated by EC2 seem
unsafe since the test-prediction ratios are below one.
Figure 4.4 and 4.5 demonstrate the tendencies from Figure 4.3 by a different approach.
Figure 4.4 shows the normalized shear capacity curve for EC2 together with the corre-
sponding test values. The normalized shear capacities calculated by LoA II in MC2010
are illustrated in Figure 4.5, also together with the corresponding test values. The nor-
malized shear capacities calculated using MC2010 in Figure 4.5 are shown as individ-
ual points and not a continuous curve. The reason is the shear capacities calculated by
MC2010 are dependent on several parameters. Some of the parameters are not included
in the axes. Therefore, a single graph is not possible in Figure 4.5.
ψ/ν [-]
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
τR/νfc [-]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
EC2
Tests
Figure 4.4: Shear capacities found by EC2 together with test values.
Figure 4.6 shows the normal distributions for the test-prediction ratios for the shear mod-
els in EC2 and MC2010. Normal distributions indicate the probability of any random
observation where it is assumed that the mean of the variables is distributed normally.
Hence, the slender normal distribution for EC2 in Figure 4.6 indicates a small dispersion
for the variable strut inclination method. On the other hand, the ﬂattened normal distri-
bution for LoA II in MC2010 tells the dispersion in this model is higher.
The average test-prediction ratios for EC2 and LoA II are 0.68 and 1.54, respectively, and
the standard deviations are 0.10 and 0.19. It means the predictions are centred more
around the average ratio for EC2. Thus, the quality of the shear model in EC2 seems bet-
ter than LoA II in MC2010. More statistical parameters are listed in Appendix C together
with average ratios and 95 % conﬁdence intervals.
The average test-prediction ratio, the coefﬁcient of variation and the 5 % quantile are for
LoA II listed in [Bentz, 2010]. The differences between those values and the ones listed
==PAGE:52==
40
SHEAR PREDICTIONS
ψ/kc [-]
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
τR/kcfc [-]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
MC2010
Tests
Figure 4.5: Shear capacities found by LoA II in MC2010 together with test values.
Test-prediction ratio
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Probability density [%]
0
1
2
3
4
EC2
MC2010
Figure 4.6: Normal distributions for shear capacity predictions using EC2 and LoA II in MC2010.
in Appendix C are 3.9 %, 19.8 % and 12.9 %, respectively. The differences are not all as
low as desirable, but the statistical data is in the same range of magnitude. Only seven
beam elements were evaluated in [Bentz, 2010] whereas 10 elements are examined in this
project. Therefore, it was not after all expected that the statistical parameters are com-
pletely identical. The differences between the statistical parameters in this report and in
[Bentz, 2010] are thus considered acceptable.
4.1.3
Requirement in EC2 to Avoid Large Crack Widths
Section 4.1.2 stated that the shear capacity predictions determined using EC2 in general
are larger than the test results. The shear model in EC2 is not unsafe after all. The reason
is an additional requirement regarding the angle of inclination existing for the service-
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 4
41
ability limit state. The limiting values for θ for beams with a constant longitudinal rein-
forcement is given in (2.46).
The limitation is applied since large values of cot θ corresponding to small values of
θ might induce very large stresses in the reinforcement, giving too large crack widths.
Hence, the requirement in (2.46) means the crack width remain limited. Due to the quite
large shear capacities calculated by EC2 compared to the test results, it is demonstrated
how the requirement affects the shear capacity calculations.
Figure 4.7 again shows the ratios from Figure 4.2 between test values and the shear ca-
pacities calculated by EC2 and LoA II in MC2010. Ratios for EC2 including the crack
width requirement are also illustrated. Here, cot θ = 2.5 is used. The new shear capaci-
ties have a better ﬁt with the test values compared to the original ratios for EC2. They are
in general on the conservative side compared to before.
Degree of shear reinforcement
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
Test-prediction ratio
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
MC2010
EC2
EC2 including crack width requirement
Figure 4.7: Test-prediction ratios for LoA II in MC2010,
EC2 and EC2 including the crack width requirement.
The normalized shear capacities calculated by EC2 including the crack width require-
ment in Figure 4.8 shows the tendency as well. The original shear capacity curve for EC2
is shown with a dashed line. The requirement implies a part of the original shear capacity
curve is cut off and replaced by a linear curve having cot θ = 2.5.
Statistical parameters for EC2 including the crack width requirement are listed in Ap-
pendix C together with the original statistical parameters for EC2 and LoA II in MC2010.
Also the normal distributions, the average ratios and the 95 % conﬁdence intervals for
the three methods are illustrated in the appendix.
4.1.4
Crack Sliding
As already mentioned, all shear predictions are unsafe when using the variable strut in-
clination method in EC2. It is stated in [Nielsen and Hoang, 2011] that shear failure in
==PAGE:54==
42
SHEAR PREDICTIONS
ψ/ν [-]
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
τR/νfc [-]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
EC2
EC2 including crack width requirement
Tests
Figure 4.8: Shear capacities found by EC2 where the crack width requirement is included.
the form of crack sliding might occur in lightly shear reinforced beams. Actually, the
laboratory tests for the bridge girders were executed just because the girders were lightly
reinforced for shear. This is also observed in Figure 4.3 where ψ/ν and ψ/kc are all below
0.1.
Based on the above, the shear capacity predictions are as an extra aspect determined us-
ing the crack sliding approach. It is examined if crack sliding might be the reason for
the test-prediction ratios being less than one for EC2. The crack sliding theory is not in-
cluded in EC2, but it is however interesting to evaluate if the unsafe predictions might be
connected to the small shear reinforcement ratios.
Crack sliding happens when a crack develops into a yield line at the point where the
load required for cracking and the shear capacity intersect. The load corresponding to
this crack sliding failure may be smaller than the load determined by the variable strut
inclination method. The theory behind crack sliding and derivations of the expressions
used in the crack sliding theory are described thoroughly in [Nielsen and Hoang, 2011]
and [Hoang, 2000].
The complete crack sliding solution is given by:
τR
τc
=

































2
 
a
h
! + ψ fc
τc
 
a
h −sw
h
!
for ψ fc
τc
≤
2
 
a
h
!2
s
8ψ fc
τc
−ψ fc
τc
sw
h
for
2
 
a
h
!2 < ψ fc
τc
≤32
9 , sw
h ≤
s
2τc
ψ fc
8
3 + ψ fc
τc
 
3
4 −sw
h
!
for ψ fc
τc
> 32
9 , sw
h ≤3
4
(4.3)
where τc is calculated as:
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 4
43
τc = 0.059ν0 fc
(4.4)
ν0 is an effectiveness factor accounting for the concrete compressive strength, fc, the
height, h, and the longitudinal reinforcement ratio, r:
ν0 = 0.88
p
fc
 
1 + 1
√
h
!
(1 + 0.26r)
(4.5)
fc must be in MPa, h in meters, and r in percentage.
Figure 4.9 shows the correlation between the test results for the shear capacity and the
shear capacities calculated by the variable strut inclination method and the crack sliding
approach, respectively.
Vcal [kN]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Vtest [kN]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Crack Sliding Theory
Variable Strut Inclination Method
Figure 4.9: Shear capacity predictions for the variable strut
inclination method and the crack sliding approach.
The shear capacities calculated by the crack sliding theory are closer to the test results
than the capacities calculated using the variable strut inclination method. Hence, the ob-
servation suggests that crack sliding failure occurs in the beams. The shear capacities
calculated in terms of crack sliding are however still generally larger than the capacities
obtained in the tests. More comparisons between the crack sliding approach and test
results are illustrated in [Hoang, 2000]. Here, several ﬁgures show good correlation be-
tween the crack sliding theory and the test results.
More statistical parameters for the crack sliding approach are shown in Appendix C. The
normal distributions for the prediction ratios for the variable strut inclination method
and the crack sliding theory are also illustrated in the appendix. The steepnesses of the
distributions indicate similar dispersions for the two approaches. The average ratio for
the crack sliding theory is closer to one compared to the variable strut inclination method.
This points to the crack sliding theory as being closer to the actual physical system.
==PAGE:56==
44
SHEAR PREDICTIONS
4.1.5
Different Levels of Approximation in ﬁb Model Code 2010
The differences between LoA I, II and III will shortly be evaluated. Focus throughout
the report is still on level of approximation II. However, it is interesting to assess the dif-
ferences between the accuracies for the three levels of approximation. Furthermore, it is
relevant to rate the differences between the workloads for the three levels.
Figure 4.10 shows the ratios between the shear capacities found in the tests and the shear
capacities calculated from LoA I, II and III.
ψ/kc
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
Test-prediction ratio
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
LoA I
LoA II
LoA III
Figure 4.10: Test-prediction ratios for LoA I, II and III in MC2010.
The tendencies indicated in Figure 4.10 correspond to the expectations to the different
levels of approximation. LoA III is the most exact method; LoA II is a simpliﬁcation of
LoA III whereby the results become more conservative; LoA I is even more simpliﬁed
and is thus the most imprecise method. This statement appears in the ﬁgure in terms of
the ratios being closer to one for LoA III, although it also means that some predictions
for this level are unsafe. LoA II yields more inaccurate and conservative predictions than
LoA III. LoA I provides the most imprecise and conservative results.
The shear prediction points in Figure 4.10 for LoA I do not appear for the same shear
reinforcement ratios as is the case for LoA II and III. The reason is that kε is ﬁxed as 0.55
for LoA I whereas it is calculated by (3.68) for LoA II and III. The correlation between kε
and kc is linear and is shown in (3.58).
The differences between LoA I, II and III are even more speciﬁed in Figure 4.11 demon-
strating the normal distributions for the shear capacity predictions. The results from LoA
III are more consistent to the actual physical system compared to the other levels. How-
ever, it also implies unsafe predictions; 67 % of the shear predictions are unsafe for LoA
III whereas no predictions are unsafe for LoA I and II. The steep and slender normal dis-
tribution for LoA III with an average value close to one agrees with the fact that this level
induces consistent results being closest to reality. On the other hand, the ﬂattened normal
distribution for LoA I with its average value much larger than one indicates inconsistent
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 4
45
results. The normal distribution for LoA II falls between the ones for LoA I and LoA III.
Test-prediction ratio
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Probability density [%]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
LoA I
LoA II
LoA III
Figure 4.11: Normal distributions for the shear capacity
predictions for LoA I, II and III in MC2010.
More statistical parameters for the three levels of approximation are shown in Appendix C
along with an illustration of the 95 % conﬁdence intervals.
4.1.6
Workload
When comparing the workload used to ﬁnd the shear capacities with EC2 and LoA II in
MC2010, EC2 undoubtedly requires less work and time since only one simple calculation
is to be executed. LoA II in MC2010 requires an entire iteration procedure, meaning the
workload is increased drastically compared to EC2. The workload can be brought down
if preparing a spreadsheet or a script, for instance using Matlab. The latter was success-
fully used in this project since several beam elements had to be examined. However,
spreadsheets and scripts might not be desirable if the shear strength of a single beam el-
ement is to be estimated quickly.
The normal distributions in Figure 4.6 may among other illustrations be interpreted when
assessing the workloads of EC2 and MC2010 in proportion to the accuracy of the mod-
els. As stated above, the workload of LoA II in MC2010 is much higher than for EC2.
However, the normal distributions indicate that LoA II does not yield more precise re-
sults than EC2. Quite the contrary, the average test-prediction ratios and the standard
deviations indicate that EC2 provides more accurate results than LoA II.
The predicted shear capacities for EC2 seem unsafe whereas the predictions for LoA II
in MC2010 are very conservative. Unsafe calculations may give rise to concerns regard-
ing the strength of the beam element, but conservative calculations cause a larger stirrup
quantity, making the element more pricey and less efﬁcient. Thus, advantages and dis-
advantages are present for both models.
==PAGE:58==
46
SHEAR PREDICTIONS
When evaluating the workloads and the corresponding shear prediction accuracies of
LoA I, II and III in MC2010, the quality of the shear capacities increases along with the
workload when increasing the level of approximation. However, the workload increases
the most when going from LoA I to LoA II, since the latter level requires the before men-
tioned extensive iteration procedure. The workload is not increased to the same extend
when going from LoA II to LoA III since the iteration performed in LoA III is the same as
executed in LoA II. Therefore, the increase in accuracy is not consistent with the increase
of the workload when jumping to a higher level of approximation.
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 4
47
4.2
Database for Shear Tests
An extensive database containing shear tests for beams with shear reinforcement has
been created and extended from 1999 up to 2014. All tests in the database have been per-
formed for simple span beams subjected to point loads. The database consists of 886 tests
and is presented in [Reineck et al., 2014]. A smaller database containing 87 shear tests
has been prepared as a subset of the larger database. The smaller database is accord-
ing to [Reineck et al., 2014] appropriate for comparisons of different shear design models
such as the ones in EC2 and MC2010. The smaller database is therefore studied and as-
sessed. All relevant beam properties for the investigated beam specimens are listed i
Appendix D.
The smaller database in [Reineck et al., 2014] is completed from the larger database in ac-
cordance with several criteria. Only shear tests in the larger database fulﬁlling all criteria
have been accepted in the smaller database. The most important criteria are mentioned
in Appendix D. A full description of the selection method of shear tests being part of the
smaller database is demonstrated in [Reineck et al., 2014].
Several observations during the examination of the database are consistent to the con-
clusions obtained in section 4.1. In those cases, the observations are pointed out, but not
discussed as thoroughly as in section 4.1.
An evaluation of the shear capacity predictions determined by EC2 and LoA II in MC2010
is performed in section 4.2.1. A range of so-called practical tests are selected and assessed
in section 4.2.2. Thereafter, the crack width requirement for the serviceability limit state
in EC2 and the crack sliding aspect are examined in section 4.2.3 and 4.2.4, respectively.
The shear model in LoA II in MC2010 is compared to LoA I and LoA III in section 4.2.5.
Finally, the workload of the shear models is discussed in section 4.2.6.
4.2.1
Predictions of Shear Capacity
Figure 4.12 illustrates the ratios between the shear capacities found in the tests and the
shear capacities calculated using the models in EC2 and LoA II in MC2010. The ratios are
illustrated with reference to the mechanical degree of shear reinforcement. They are for
EC2 and MC2010 again deﬁned as in (4.1) and (4.2), respectively.
The models in EC2 and LoA II in MC2010 result in two signiﬁcantly different shear ca-
pacity approaches. LoA II in MC2010 is still conservative, especially for lower degrees
of shear reinforcement. Here, the test values are up to around 2.5 times higher than the
corresponding calculated capacities. For higher shear reinforcement ratios, the shear ca-
pacities predicted by LoA II get closer to the test values.
The shear capacities found by EC2 are for a range of elements unsafe due to test-prediction
ratios below one. It appears for low shear reinforcement ratios whereas the ratios get
closer to and above one for higher shear reinforcement ratios. As much as 54 % of the el-
ements have calculated shear capacities being larger than the test values for the variable
strut inclination method. On the contrary, no capacities calculated by LoA II are greater
than the test capacities.
==PAGE:60==
48
SHEAR PREDICTIONS
Degree of shear reinforcement
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
Test-prediction ratio
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
MC2010
EC2
Figure 4.12: Test-prediction ratios for EC2 and LoA II in MC2010.
Figure 4.12 is similar to Figure 2.11 in [Bentz, 2010]. Only 85 elements are examined in
this project whereas 334 elements are evaluated in [Bentz, 2010]. The limited number of
elements examined in this report is chosen to only include elements being comparable
for different shear design approaches. Beyond this, the ﬁgures are alike. The differences
between the average test-prediction ratios, coefﬁcients of variation and 5 % quantiles for
Figure 4.12 and Figure 2.11 in [Bentz, 2010] are 2.4 %, 5.2 % and 11.2 %, respectively. The
differences are considered to be acceptable due to the different amounts of examined el-
ements and consequential variations in the statistical parameters.
ψ/ν [-]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
τR/νfc [-]
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
EC2
Tests
Figure 4.13: Normalized shear capacities found by EC2 together with test values.
Figure 4.13 and 4.14 illustrate the trends from Figure 4.12. They show the normalized
shear capacities calculated by EC2 and LoA II in MC2010, respectively. The normalized
shear capacities in Figure 4.14 are shown as individual points and not as a continuous
graph since the shear capacities calculated by MC2010 are dependent on several param-
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 4
49
eters.
ψ/kc [-]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
τR/kcfc [-]
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
MC2010
Tests
Figure 4.14: Normalized shear capacities found by LoA II in MC2010 together with test values.
Figure 4.15 shows the normal distributions for the test-prediction ratios for EC2 and LoA
II in MC2010. The distributions indicate a larger dispersion for LoA II than for EC2. At
the same time, the average ratio is much closer to one for EC2 than for LoA II. Thus, the
quality of the shear predictions seems better for EC2.
Test-prediction ratio
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Probability density [%]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
EC2
MC2010
Figure 4.15: Normal distributions for shear capacity predictions using EC2 and LoA II in MC2010.
Statistical parameters for the test-prediction ratios for EC2 and LoA II in MC2010 are
listed in Appendix E. Average ratios and 95 % conﬁdence intervals are also included in
the appendix.
==PAGE:62==
50
SHEAR PREDICTIONS
4.2.2
Practical Tests
Besides assessing the 334 tests in [Bentz, 2010], statistical parameters for so-called prac-
tical tests are evaluated in the article as well. The term is identiﬁed by [Bentz, 2010] as
tests with a stirrup reinforcement index between 0.1 and 0.25:
0.1 ≤ρw fyw
kc fc
≤0.25
(4.6)
[Bentz, 2010] shows that this range of tests makes the model in LoA II more accurate.
A similar analysis is performed in this report. 54 practical tests exist in [Bentz, 2010]
whereas 20 practical tests are present for this report.
Degree of shear reinforcement
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Test-prediction ratio
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
MC2010
EC2
Figure 4.16: Test-prediction ratios for practical tests for EC2 and LoA II in MC2010.
Figure 4.16 shows how the limitation of the stirrup reinforcement index has a positive
impact on the shear-prediction ratios for both EC2 and LoA II. LoA II does not underesti-
mate the capacities in this interval as much as was illustrated in Figure 4.12. At the same
time, EC2 does not overestimate the shear capacities when only the practical tests are in-
cluded. The normalized shear capacities found by tests together with the shear capacities
calculated by EC2 and LoA II are shown in Appendix E.
Figure 4.17 shows the normal distributions for the test-prediction ratios for the practical
tests using EC2 and LoA II in MC2010. The normal distributions for the original full range
of tests are sketched with dashed lines. The shear capacity predictions are improved for
both models. The predictions for EC2 improves the most, though. The average test-
prediction ratio for EC2 is now 1.09 and the standard deviation is only 0.09 whereas the
average ratio and standard deviation for LoA II are 1.40 and 0.15, respectively. All statis-
tical parameters for the practical tests are shown in Appendix E.
The difference between the average test-prediction ratios for the practical tests in this
project and the analysis carried out in [Bentz, 2010] is 19 %. The difference between the
coefﬁcients of variation is 26 %. The greater differences between the statistical data in this
report and [Bentz, 2010] compared to section 4.2.1 appears due to the different number
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 4
51
Test-prediction ratio
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Probability density [%]
0
1
2
3
4
5
EC2 - practical tests
MC2010 - practical tests
EC2 - all tests
MC2010 - all tests
Figure 4.17: Normal distributions for practical tests for
shear capacity predictions for EC2 and LoA II in MC2010.
of tests evaluated.
4.2.3
Requirement in EC2 to Avoid Large Crack Widths
The inﬂuence of the extra requirement regarding large crack widths in EC2 mentioned in
(2.46) is also shortly evaluated for this database.
Degree of shear reinforcement
0
0.5
1
Test-prediction ratio
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
MC2010
EC2
EC2 including crack width requirement
Figure 4.18: Test-prediction ratios for LoA II in MC2010,
EC2 and EC2 including the crack width requirement.
Figure 4.18 illustrates the test-prediction ratios where ratios from EC2 including the crack
==PAGE:64==
52
SHEAR PREDICTIONS
width requirement in terms of cot θ = 2.5 are also shown. The new shear capacities for
EC2 show a tendency to become smaller than the test values. This is conﬁrmed in Fig-
ure 4.19 which shows the normalized shear capacities found by EC2 including the crack
width requirement. The original shear capacity curve for EC2 is sketched with a dashed
line. The requirement means the predictions for EC2 become safe, but not necessarily
closer to the test values.
ψ/ν [-]
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
τR/νfc [-]
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
EC2
EC2 including crack width requirement
Tests
Figure 4.19: Shear capacities found by EC2 where the crack width requirement is included.
Statistical parameters for EC2 including the crack width requirement are listed in Ap-
pendix E together with the original statistical parameters for EC2 and MC2010. Normal
distributions, average ratios and 95 % conﬁdence intervals are found in the appendix as
well.
4.2.4
Crack Sliding of Rectangular Beams
As already mentioned in section 4.2.1, 54 % of the shear capacity predictions are un-
safe when using the variable strut inclination method in EC2. The beam elements are
in this section divided into different groups, each including one type of cross-sectional
geometry. Three types of cross-sectional geometries are used in the database including
rectangular beams, T-beams and single symmetrical I-beams. Simple principal illustra-
tions of the three geometries are shown in Appendix D.
Figure 4.20 shows the shear capacity predictions for the variable strut inclination method
in EC2 together with the test values for the three types of geometry. The illustration
shows a correlation between the cross-sectional geometry of the beam element and the
degree of shear reinforcement. Generally, the rectangular specimens have the least shear
reinforcement ratios whereas the I-beams have the largest. The reason for using I-beams
instead of T-beams is generally to obtain more room for the longitudinal tensile reinforce-
ment bars. Thus, a larger amount of tensile reinforcement will often be present in I-beams
compared to T-beams. It is therefore natural that I-beams also contain a larger amount of
shear reinforcement compared to T-beams.
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 4
53
Almost all predictions for the rectangular beams are unsafe. On the other hand, the pre-
dictions for the single symmetrical I-beams appear conservative. The shear capacities for
the T-beams are in best agreement with the shear capacity curve determined by EC2.
ψ/ν [-]
0
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9
1
1.1 1.2 1.3
τR/νfc [-]
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
EC2
Tests, rectangular beams
Tests, T-beams
Tests, I-beams
Figure 4.20: Shear capacities found by EC2 together with test results
divided into different types of cross-sectional geometry.
The trend is even more evident in Figure 4.21 showing the normal distributions for the
test-prediction ratios found by EC2. The mean test-prediction ratios are 0.70, 1.06 and
1.18 for rectangular beams, T-beams and single symmetrical I-beams, respectively, and
the standard deviations are 0.13, 0.12 and 0.16. Hence, T-beams have the average be-
ing closest to one along with the smallest standard deviation The statistical parameters
demonstrate how the shear model in EC2 yields the most accurate shear predictions for
the T-beams. More statistical information regarding the three types of cross-sectional ge-
ometry is listed in Appendix E.
The expression for the concrete effectiveness factor, ν, used in EC2 and shown previ-
ously in (2.42) is developed and validated with data from T-beams and I-beams. This
is not stated directly in [European Committee for Standardization, 2004], but is informed
in [Sagaseta and Vollum, 2010]. This article together with [Pansuk and Sato, 2007] and
[Giaccio et al., 2002] state that ﬂanges have an effect on the shear capacity since they pro-
vide an extra concrete contribution to the shear capacity. This statement corresponds
very well to the observations made from Figure 4.20 and 4.21.
An experimental study in [Giaccio et al., 2002] demonstrates this extra contribution from
the ﬂanges to the total shear strength. [Pansuk and Sato, 2007] states at the same time that
the shear strength of beams increases as the ratio of the ﬂange width to web width be-
comes larger. An expression for the ﬂange contribution to the shear strength of the beam
is even proposed in [Sagaseta and Vollum, 2010]. This expression implies an increase of
the shear strength of T-beams and I-beams due to the presence of ﬂanges between 10 %
and 20 %. Based on this assessment, it is in [Sagaseta and Vollum, 2010] even proposed
==PAGE:66==
54
SHEAR PREDICTIONS
Test-prediction ratio
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Probability density [%]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
Rectangular beams
T-beams
I-beams
Figure 4.21:
Normal distributions for different types of cross-
sectional geometry for the shear capacity predictions for EC2.
to increase the factor of safety for shear for sections without compression ﬂanges.
Consequently, it makes sense that the shear capacity of the rectangular beams are un-
derestimated in EC2 since the extra ﬂange contribution to the shear capacity included in
terms of the effectiveness factor is missing.
[Nielsen and Hoang, 2011] states that presence of a compression ﬂange may give up to 25
% higher load-carrying capacity compared to rectangular beams. The effect must safely
be neglected for T-beams, but the lack of a compression ﬂange will on the other hand be
unsafe since the web crushing criterion is validated by beam specimens with compres-
sion ﬂanges. Furthermore, crack sliding may be governing the load-carrying capacity for
beam elements without ﬂanges, even for large degrees of shear reinforcement.
Crack sliding is critical for rectangular beams to a greater extent than for T-beams and
I-beams. Cracks initiate over a smaller area for beam elements without ﬂanges since
ﬂanges yield a much larger cross-sectional area. It means that rectangular beams have a
smaller crack surface. The load necessary to develop the crack will therefore be smaller
for rectangular beams. The crack will develop into a yield line when the load necessary
to create a shear failure is as low as the cracking load. Since the load necessary to de-
velop the crack is smaller for rectangular elements, the load-carrying capacity may also
be smaller. The shear failure may thus happen in terms of sliding before shear failure
determined by means of the variable strut inclination method occurs.
Based on the above, the rectangular beams are analysed in terms of crack sliding. The
relevant formulas regarding crack sliding have already been shown in (4.3) to (4.5) in
section 4.1.4.
Figure 4.22 compares the test results for the rectangular beam specimens with calculated
shear capacities. Generally, the shear predictions seem to get closer to the test values
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 4
55
when using the crack sliding approach. Several agreements between test results and
the crack sliding approach are illustrated in [Hoang, 2000]. More of the test series in
[Hoang, 2000] are also part of Figure 4.22.
Vcal [kN]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Vtest [kN]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Crack Sliding Theory
Variable Strut Inclination Method
Figure 4.22: Shear capacity predictions for rectangular beam elements for the
variable strut inclination method and the crack sliding approach.
The normal distributions for the test-prediction ratios of the rectangular elements are
shown in Figure 4.23 for the variable strut inclination method and the crack sliding the-
ory. The two distributions show almost similar tendencies. The crack sliding approach
has the average ratio being closest to one. More statistical data for the crack sliding ap-
proach is listed in Appendix E.
It is observed in Figure 4.22 that the beam elements with the greatest shear capacities
seem to have the worst predictions. Figure 4.24 again shows the shear capacity predic-
tions for crack sliding, but the beam elements are now divided into different ranges of
concrete strengths.
The elements differing the most in comparison to the test values are elements with very
large concrete strengths. Cracks may have to occur across stone particles for those large
concrete strengths. In that case, the shear failure will depend on the strength of the stone
rather than the strength of the concrete. It means that neither the crack sliding theory nor
the variable strut inclination method or LoA II in MC2010 can establish correct interpre-
tations of the shear capacities of those beam elements.
The deviation is observed for concrete strengths larger than 60 MPa and is greatest for
strengths larger than 90 MPa.
[European Committee for Standardization, 2004] states
that concrete strengths larger than 90 MPa are not to be used in accordance with EC2.
A corresponding statement is found in [Walraven et al., 2011] where it is declared that
structural elements with concrete strengths larger than 120 MPa are not to be used in
MC2010. Beam elements with those large concrete strengths are still examined, but the
large strengths might cause the above stated source of error.
==PAGE:68==
56
SHEAR PREDICTIONS
Test-prediction ratio
0
0.5
1
1.5
Probability density [%]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
Variable Strut Inclination Method
Crack sliding Theory
Figure 4.23: Normal contributions for the shear capacity predictions for the
variable strut inclination method and the crack sliding theory.
Vcal [kN]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
Vtest [kN]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
<20 MPa
20-40 MPa
40-60 MPa
60-80 MPa
80-90 MPa
>90 MPa
Figure 4.24:
Shear capacity predictions for different ranges of concrete
strengths for crack sliding of rectangular beam elements.
The normal distributions for the test-prediction ratios determined by LoA II in MC2010
for the three types of geometry are for good measure shown in Figure 4.25. The trends
are quite upside down compared to EC2 since the single symmetrical I-beams yield the
smallest ratios whereas the rectangular elements have largest ratios. The accuracy of LoA
II is therefore connected to the shear reinforcement ratio rather than the type of geometry.
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 4
57
Test-prediction ratio
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Probability density [%]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Rectangular beams
T-beams
I-beams
Figure 4.25: Normal distributions for different types of cross-sectional
geometry for the shear capacity predictions for LoA II in MC2010.
4.2.5
Different Levels of Approximation in ﬁb Model Code 2010
LoA I-III are all considered in [Bentz, 2010]. The three levels are evaluated and compared
also in this report.
Figure 4.26 illustrates the ratios between the shear capacities found in the tests and the
shear capacities calculated from LoA I, II and III.
ψ/kc
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
Test-prediction ratio
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
LoA I
LoA II
LoA III
Figure 4.26: Test-prediction ratios for shear capacities found by LoA I, II and III in MC2010.
The predictions for reinforcement ratios corresponding to web crushing are coinciding
for LoA II and III since the shear capacities for concrete crushing are similarly calculated
for the two levels.
==PAGE:70==
58
SHEAR PREDICTIONS
The tendencies in Figure 4.26 are in agreement with the theory behind the different levels
reviewed in chapter 3. The tendencies have already been gone through thoroughly in
section 4.1.5 where it is described that the accuracy of the predictions increases together
with the level of approximation. The test-prediction ratios for LoA III are in accordance
with Figure 2.10 in [Bentz, 2010]. Both illustrations indicate that a range of the elements
with small degrees of shear reinforcement have ratios being less than one. The differences
between the average ratios and the coefﬁcients of variation for LoA III in this report and
in [Bentz, 2010] are 5.6 % and 13.7 %, respectively. As was the case for LoA II, 334 ele-
ments were examined for LoA III in [Bentz, 2010] whereas only 85 elements are evaluated
in this report.
The trend for the three levels of approximation is even more speciﬁed in Figure 4.27
showing the normal distributions for the shear capacity predictions. More statistical pa-
rameters for the three levels of approximation are shown in Appendix E. Also the average
95 % conﬁdence intervals are illustrated in the appendix.
Test-prediction ratio [-]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
Probability density [%]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
LoA I
LoA II
LoA III
Figure 4.27: Normal distributions for the shear capacity
predictions for LoA I, II and III in MC2010.
4.2.6
Workload
The considerations regarding the workloads for the different shear design models exam-
ined for the 85 shear tests are on a general level similar to the assessment carried out for
the 10 bridge girder elements in section 4.1.6. Therefore, the main features will just be
listed shortly.
The workload for EC2 is much lower than for LoA II in MC2010. However, the quality of
the shear predictions must also be taken into consideration. EC2 yields the most accurate
predictions, but gives several unsafe predictions. On the contrary, LoA II in MC2010 is
very conservative and thus less economical.
The workload increases with the level of approximation in MC2010 together with the ac-
curacy of the shear predictions.
==PAGE:71==
Chapter 5
Design of Reinforced Concrete
Beams
The agreement between the actual shear failures and the shear predictions determined
using EC2 and MC2010 have been examined in chapter 4. In this chapter, four reinforced
concrete beam elements dimensioned and used by Rambøll are evaluated. The beams
have been used in various Rambøll projects where the geometry, parameters regarding
the reinforcement, the load arrangement etc. have been made accessible for this project.
The four Rambøll beam elements are examined in section 5.1-5.4. First, the permissi-
ble design load with reference to the shear capacity is determined in accordance with
both EC2 and LoA II in MC2010. Also the design load allowable in compliance with the
ﬂexural moment capacity is calculated. Afterwards, an optimized design of the shear re-
inforcement is for an appropriate design load proposed in accordance to the shear design
models. All calculations are executed in separate appendices.
In the end of the chapter, an overall assessment of the shear reinforcement designs is
executed in section 5.5. Also the agreement between the actual failures and the shear
predictions evaluated in chapter 4 is reﬂected on. The workload for the two models is
furthermore examined and compared.
Only level of approximation II is examined for MC2010 throughout the chapter.
5.1
Beam No. 1
Beam no. 1 is a cantilevered beam with a rectangular cross-section as shown in Figure 5.1.
The tension zone is in the top part of the beam since the bending moment is negative
throughout the beam. The beam is impacted by a uniformly distributed design load, pd.
59
==PAGE:72==
60
DESIGN OF REINFORCED CONCRETE BEAMS
2000
pd
500
445
300
ø12/200
4ø25
2ø16
Figure 5.1: Conﬁguration for beam no. 1. All measures are in mm.
All beam properties are listed in Appendix F. The appendix also includes calculations
concerning the maximum acceptable design loads and calculations regarding an opti-
mization of the transverse reinforcement. Table 5.1 shows the most important results
from Appendix F. All relative differences are determined in proportion to the smaller
value in the comparison.
Table 5.1: Shear capacity parameters for beam no. 1 evaluated by EC2 and MC2010.
Shear capacity evaluation
EC2
MC2010
Difference
Inclination of compressive concrete stress, cot θ [-]
1.89
1.61
17 %
Steel contribution to design shear resistance, VRd,s [kN]
375
319
17 %
Maximum design shear resistance, VRd,max [kN]
596
688
15 %
Maximum allowable design load, pd [kN/m]
293
205
43 %
Extra force in longitudinal reinforcement, ∆Ftd [m×pd]
1.89
1.61
17 %
Optimization of transverse reinforcement
EC2
MC2010
Difference
Transverse reinforcement ratio, ρw [-]
0.00110
0.00188
71 %
Extra force in longitudinal reinforcement, ∆Ftd [kN]
375
224
67 %
There is a difference of 17 % between cot θ used for EC2 and MC2010. The largest value
is for EC2. The same difference is found for the steel contribution to the design shear
resistance since VRd,s is linearly dependent on cot θ. cot θ for EC2 was chosen less than
the maximum allowable value. cot θ = 2.5 would have yielded a larger VRd,s, but would
however simultaneously reduce the maximum design shear resistance according to con-
crete crushing, VRd,max. The allowable design load would thus have to be reduced for
VRd,max to resist the maximum design shear force, VEd,max.
The maximum design shear resistance in accordance with concrete crushing is 15 % larger
for MC2010 compared to EC2. EC2 uses the parameter ν for the calculation of VRd,max
whereas MC2010 uses kc. ν is only dependent on the characteristic concrete strength
whereas kc also accounts for the angle of inclination and the longitudinal strain. It means
that kc is affected by the whole iteration process executed in MC2010 and thus also de-
pends on the shear capacity itself. Hence, the parameters are based on very different
approaches. The values of ν and kc are for beam no. 1 0.52 and 0.55, respectively, which
gives a difference between the parameters of around 6 %. In both models, VRd,max also
depends of θ, giving an additional difference of around 9 %. The total difference of 15 %
for VRd,max is obtained when the two differences are multiplied.
==PAGE:73==
CHAPTER 5
61
The most important result in Table 5.1 regarding the shear capacity evaluation is the
maximum allowable design load, pd. A large load is obviously desired. The load is 43
% larger for EC2 than for MC2010. The models use different sections when examining
the shear force to dimension for. EC2 uses a section z cot θ = 724 mm from the support
whereas MC2010 uses a section d = 445 mm from the support. Since MC2010 designs for
a shear force closer to the support than EC2, it must be able to resist an equivalent larger
shear force. The different evaluated sections imply a difference of 22 % between pd found
for EC2 and MC2010. The difference of 17 % for VRd,s must furthermore be accounted for.
It causes the complete difference of 43 % between the design loads for EC2 and MC2010.
The additional force due to shear in the longitudinal tensile reinforcement, ∆Ftd, is cal-
culated in the same way for EC2 and MC2010. ∆Ftd is linearly dependent on cot θ. Since
cot θ is larger for EC2, ∆Ftd becomes equivalently larger. ∆Ftd is shown as a function of
the design load in the shear capacity evaluation in Table 5.1.
pd = 150 kN/m is used in an optimization of the shear reinforcement. The difference be-
tween cot θ for the two models is now 67 % with EC2 having the larger value. Thus, ∆Ftd
is still larger for EC2 than for MC2010.
τ
x
τEd,max
958 mm
572 mm
τEC2
τMC2010
Figure 5.2: Shear stress distribution for beam no. 1. One length increment
closest to the support is shown for EC2 and MC2010, respectively.
It is interesting to notice the great difference of 71 % between the transverse reinforce-
ment ratios in the optimized shear reinforcement designs. It means the optimized design
for MC2010 includes a stirrup quantity 1.7 times higher than for EC2. A part of the expla-
nation is that the regions to be examined are different for EC2 and MC2010. The length
increments are for both models deﬁned as z cot θ, but the difference in cot θ for the two
models is 67 %. cot θ = 2.5 is used for EC2 whereby z cot θ becomes 958 mm. Since the
beam has a length of 2 m, only around half of VEd,max should be taken into account when
determining an optimal value of VRd,s. On the other hand, z cot θ = 572 mm for MC2010
due to the larger angle of inclination. This model must therefore take into account more
than 70 % of VEd,max. Hence, the shear forces to be designed for become smaller for EC2
==PAGE:74==
62
DESIGN OF REINFORCED CONCRETE BEAMS
than for MC2010 as illustrated principally in Figure 5.2. More detailed ﬁgures are found
in Appendix F. Furthermore, VRd,s depends linearly on cot θ whereby the shear resistance
becomes even larger for EC2 compared to MC2010.
As a conclusion for beam no. 1, the smaller angle of inclination for EC2 implies a larger
shear resistance and thus a larger allowable design load for EC2 compared to MC2010.
Furthermore, sections further away from the support are accounted for in EC2 due to the
smaller angle of inclination. It means the optimized stirrup arrangement has a smaller
reinforcement ratio for EC2 compared to MC2010.
5.2
Beam No. 2
Beam no. 2 is a simply supported beam with a T cross-section as illustrated in Figure 5.3.
A uniformly distributed design load, pd, is working on the entire beam.
9300
pd
695
500
ø16/200
6ø25
750
250
2000
2ø16
Figure 5.3: Conﬁguration for beam no. 2. All measures are in mm.
All beam properties are listed in Appendix G. The appendix also includes calculations
concerning the maximum acceptable design loads and calculations regarding an opti-
mization of the transverse reinforcement. Table 5.2 shows the most important results
from Appendix G. All relative differences are determined in proportion to the smaller
value in the comparison.
Table 5.2: Shear capacity parameters for beam no. 2 evaluated by EC2 and MC2010.
Shear capacity evaluation
EC2
MC2010
Difference
Inclination of compressive concrete stress, cot θ [-]
2.16
1.76
23 %
Steel contribution to design shear resistance, VRd,s [kN]
1329
1082
23 %
Maximum permitted design shear resistance, VRd,max [kN]
1936
1772
9 %
Maximum allowable design load, pd [kN/m]
414
273
52 %
Extra force in longitudinal reinforcement, ∆Ftd [ m×pd ]
5.02
4.09
23 %
Optimization of transverse reinforcement
EC2
MC2010
Difference
Transverse reinforcement ratio, ρw [-]
0.00110
0.00187
70 %
Extra force in longitudinal reinforcement, ∆Ftd [kN]
930
614
51 %
==PAGE:75==
CHAPTER 5
63
Most of the tendencies demonstrated for beam no. 1 in section 5.1 are also present for
beam no. 2. Both cot θ, the design shear resistance, VRd,s, and the extra force in the longi-
tudinal tensile reinforcement, ∆Ftd, are equivalent larger for EC2 than for MC2010 due to
a larger angle of inclination for EC2.
VRd,max does not follow the trend from beam no. 1. It is now largest for EC2. The factor kc
used in MC2010 is still larger than the concrete effectiveness factor ν used in EC2. Also
the angle of inclination provides a larger factor for the resistance in MC2010 compared
to EC2. The web width accounted for vary between the models, though. The web width
used in EC2 is the physical web width of 500 mm shown in Figure 5.3. For MC2010, it
is in section 3.4 and [Walraven et al., 2011] stated that the web width may be taken into
account up to a maximum of 400 mm only. Thus, only 80 % of the web width is utilized
in the determination of the maximum design shear resistance for MC2010. Hence, the
maximum design shear resistance becomes larger for EC2.
The width to height ratio of beams should never be either too large or too small since the
element then behaves like a plate or a disc, respectively. The statement in MC2010 limit-
ing the width of the web is most likely to ensure existence of beam conditions. However,
[Walraven et al., 2011] does not have parallel limits for the height. Thus, the limitation
for the web width and the resulting reduction of the maximum design shear resistance
seem unnecessary.
The reduction of the web width in MC2010 does not affect the steel contribution to the
design shear resistance. VRd,s and not VRd,max is most often the decisive factor for the
allowable design load in MC2010. Hence, the reduction of the web width does not nec-
essarily affect the permissible design load or an optimized shear reinforcement design.
Neither of the parameters are affected for beam no. 2.
Yet another peculiar detail regarding MC2010 is to be mentioned. Crushing of the web
has to be checked for the maximum design shear force at the support in EC2. It is different
for MC2010 where VRd,max according to [Sigrist and Hackbarth, 2012] has to be checked
at the same control section as used when evaluating VRd,s. Thus, a smaller shear force is
taken into account. Offhand, it seems odd that it is not necessary to assess web crushing
in accordance with the maximum shear force in the beam. It implies the design load al-
lowable in compliance with VRd,max gets larger.
The transverse reinforcement ratio for the optimized arrangement of the stirrups is for
beam no. 2 again 70 % larger when using MC2010 compared to EC2. As already men-
tioned in the discussion of beam no. 1, the larger value of cot θ used for EC2 means a
greater contribution to the design shear capacity and also larger length increments in-
ducing smaller shear forces to account for.
The angle of inclination cannot vary throughout the beam due to equilibrium conditions
between the different compression stress ﬁelds in the concrete. Thus, the maximum value
of θmin is used to obtain a safe design throughout the entire beam. In Appendix G, the
largest value of εx and thus the largest value of θmin is found close to center span where
the shear force is minimal. On the other hand, εx and θmin are much smaller at the sup-
ports where the crucial shear forces are located. It would imply yet another iteration to
optimize θmin in compliance with such a mindset. In this sort of iteration, the variation of
==PAGE:76==
64
DESIGN OF REINFORCED CONCRETE BEAMS
θmin together with the variation of the shear force along the beam should both be taken
into account. The shear capacity and the shear force should then be determined along
the entire beam. It would thereby be possible to ﬁnd the location giving the most crucial
shear strength. However, it is not desirable to put even more effort into the complex op-
timization procedure for the shear reinforcement design created using MC2010. Hence,
the aspect is not evaluated further in this report.
5.3
Beam No. 3
Beam no. 3 is a continuous rectangular beam as illustrated in Figure 5.4. The load on the
beam consists of a uniformly distributed design load, pd.
pd
750
695
500
ø12/200
6ø20
7005
2990
1815 2200
6ø20
695
Figure 5.4: Conﬁguration for beam no. 3. All measures are in mm.
All beam properties are listed in Appendix H. The appendix also includes calculations
concerning the maximum acceptable design loads and calculations regarding an opti-
mization of the transverse reinforcement. Table 5.3 shows the most important results
from Appendix H. All relative differences are determined in proportion to the smaller
value in the comparison.
Table 5.3: Shear capacity parameters for beam no. 3 evaluated by EC2 and MC2010.
Shear capacity evaluation
EC2
MC2010
Difference
Inclination of compressive concrete stress, cot θ [-]
2.09
1.48
41 %
Steel contribution to design shear resistance, VRd,s [kN]
722
511
41 %
Maximum permitted design shear resistance, VRd,max [kN]
1975
1991
1 %
Maximum allowable design load, pd [kN/m]
896
339
164 %
Extra force in longitudinal reinforcement, ∆Ftd [ m×pd ]
2.30
1.62
41 %
Optimization of transverse reinforcement
EC2
MC2010
Difference
Transverse reinforcement ratio, ρw [-]
0.000981
0.00144
47 %
Extra force in longitudinal reinforcement, ∆Ftd [kN]
633
326
94 %
Several trends observed for the previously evaluated beams are also present for beam no.
3. cot θ, VRd,s and ∆Ftd are all equally larger for EC2 compared to MC2010 in the determi-
nation of the shear capacity. The maximum design shear resistances in compliance with
1Corresponding to a minimum amount of shear reinforcement.
==PAGE:77==
CHAPTER 5
65
web crushing are now almost similar for the two models. Again, kc is larger than ν. Also
the larger angle of inclination for MC2010 means a greater contribution to the resistance.
As was also the case for beam no. 2, a reduced web width is however used for MC2010.
Hence, the maximum design shear resistances end up being almost equal for the models.
The design load may be signiﬁcantly higher for EC2 compared to MC2010. The reasons
for the difference are the same as already described for beam no. 1, but the principles are
explained again due to the great variation. Two parameters affect the difference between
the allowable design loads. Firstly, the difference of 41 % between the shear capacities
must be accounted for. Secondly, the location of the design shear forces taken into con-
sideration are different. z cot θ =1394 mm to the right of the right support is used for EC2
whereas d = 695 mm is used for MC2010. The different evaluated sections imply yet an-
other difference of 87 %. The shear stresses to be designed for are illustrated principally
in Figure 5.5. More detailed ﬁgures are found in Appendix H.
τ
x
τEd,max
695 mm
1394 mm
τMC2010
τEC2
Figure 5.5: Shear stress distribution for beam no. 3. One length increment to
the right of the right support is shown for EC2 and MC2010, respectively.
A huge part of the reason for the lower allowable design load for MC2010 is the use of d
instead of z cot θ when evaluating the shear force. It has been described why the stirrups
will not be affected by shear forces closer than z cot θ to the supports for the variable strut
inclination method in chapter 2. It is demonstrated by the illustration in Figure 2.4. The
same applies for MC2010. [Walraven et al., 2011] ends up using control sections at a dis-
tance d from the supports instead, though. Since d is often smaller than z cot θ, the design
shear force becomes larger for MC2010.
As for the previously examined beams, the transverse reinforcement ratio for the op-
timized design of MC2010 is larger than for EC2. The shear reinforcement design for
EC2 corresponds to the minimum requisite stirrup quantity. It is obtainable due to large
length increments of 1668 mm used throughout the beam. Smaller length increments of
861 mm used for MC2010 means that larger shear forces have to be accounted for.
The maximum shear force and the maximum value of θmin in the entire beam are both
located at the right support. The value of cot θ is still much lower for MC2010 than for
EC2, though. It is therefore not satisfactory to use the minimum requisite stirrup quantity
==PAGE:78==
66
DESIGN OF REINFORCED CONCRETE BEAMS
for MC2010. It is interesting to notice that the minimum requisite stirrup quantity would
still be satisfactory for EC2 even if the design load was increased up to more than three
times.
5.4
Beam No. 4
Beam no. 4 is a simply supported rectangular beam as illustrated in Figure 5.6. The load
on the beam consists of a uniformly distributed design load, pd, and ﬁve concentrated
design loads, Pd distributed along the beam. The concentrated loads are located not com-
pletely but close to symmetrically throughout the beam. The relationship between the
concentrated loads and the uniformly distributed load is given by:
Pd = 0.94 m × pd
(5.1)
6450
pd
716
400
ø12/200
4ø32
800
540
1310
1400
1400
1400 400
Pd
Pd
Pd
Pd
Pd
4ø32
Figure 5.6: Conﬁguration for beam no. 4. All measures are in mm.
All beam properties are listed in Appendix I. The appendix also includes calculations
concerning the maximum acceptable design loads and calculations regarding an opti-
mization of the transverse reinforcement. Table 5.4 shows the most important results
from Appendix I. All relative differences are determined in proportion to the smaller
value in the comparison.
Table 5.4: Shear capacity parameters for beam no. 4 evaluated by EC2 and MC2010.
Shear capacity evaluation
EC2
MC2010
Difference
Inclination of compressive concrete stress, cot θ [-]
2.11
1.83
15 %
Steel contribution to design shear resistance, VRd,s [kN]
1305
1132
15 %
Maximum permitted design shear resistance, VRd,max [kN]
1405
1535
9 %
Maximum allowable design load, pd [kN/m]
250
226
11 %
Extra force in longitudinal reinforcement, ∆Ftd [m×pd]
5.92
5.13
15 %
Optimization of transverse reinforcement
EC2
MC2010
Difference
Transverse reinforcement ratio, ρw [-]
0.00196
0.00305
56 %
Extra force in longitudinal reinforcement, ∆Ftd [kN]
1403
898
56 %
The tendencies described in section 5.1-5.3 appear once again. cot θ, VRd,s and ∆Ftd are all
greatest for EC2 whereas VRd,max is largest for MC2010. The permissible design load is
==PAGE:79==
CHAPTER 5
67
again greater for EC2 than for MC2010.
[Walraven et al., 2011] and section 3.4 states that the design shear force shall be deter-
mined at locations d from supports and transverse applied forces. Due to the presence
of concentrated loads, 12 control sections have to be investigated when determining the
allowable design load in compliance with MC2010. The control sections are shown in
Appendix I. It is not straightforward to identify the most critical section due to the de-
pendency of both the shear force and the bending moment. The maximum bending mo-
ment is found at center span whereas the maximum shear force is located at the supports.
Hence, iterations have to be performed for all control sections. The control section located
at the concentrated load to the left turns out to be crucial.
As was the case for beam no. 1-3, the stirrup quantity is for the optimized shear reinforce-
ment design smaller for EC2 due to a larger cot θ and larger length increments implying
smaller shear forces to be accounted for.
5.5
Comparison of Eurocode 2 and ﬁb Model Code 2010
Several clear tendencies have been pointed out throughout the examination of the four
Rambøll beam elements in section 5.1-5.4. The trends seem to be evident and without
exceptions. Furthermore, they correspond to the results from chapter 4. They are sum-
marized in the following.
A smaller value of θ and thus a larger value of cot θ is generally used for EC2 compared
to MC2010. It means the shear capacity for EC2 becomes equivalently larger. Simultane-
ously, it also means the extra force due to shear in the longitudinal tensile reinforcement
is correspondingly larger for EC2 compared to MC2010.
On the other hand, the maximum shear capacity in correlation with concrete crushing
is larger for MC2010. Exceptions appear when the web width has to be reduced for
MC2010. In this case, the maximum shear capacity for EC2 gets closer to or even larger
than the one for MC2010. The greater maximum shear capacity for MC2010 is however
without signiﬁcance since the steel contribution to the shear resistance turns out to be
crucial in the determination of the allowable design load. The latter concerns all the
examined beam elements in this report, but might not always be the case. Hence, the
maximum shear capacity should always be calculated.
EC2 yields the largest values for the permissible design loads. It all comes down to the
angle of inclination. Since smaller values of the angle may be used for EC2 compared to
MC2010, larger values of cot θ and z cot θ are obtained for EC2. It means the shear capac-
ities for EC2 become larger and simultaneously the shear forces to account for get smaller.
It also means the shear reinforcement arrangement may be optimized to a greater extend
for EC2 compared to MC2010. Less shear reinforcement is used in the optimized design
proposals for EC2 compared to the ones for MC2010. Hence, EC2 seems more economical
than MC2010.
One of the main objectives of developing the new shear capacity procedure in MC2010 is
==PAGE:80==
68
DESIGN OF REINFORCED CONCRETE BEAMS
as stated in chapter 3 to obtain a calculation procedure which is easy to understand and
apply. However, the workload for MC2010 turns out to be more extensive compared to
EC2, especially due to the iterative procedure. Also, the potentially several control sec-
tions to assess increase the workload much.
It is probably a subjective evaluation if the parameters in MC2010 are easy to understand.
It is in this project assessed that the procedure is more complicated to understand than
is the case for EC2. Especially the theory behind the angle of inclination gets more com-
plicated for MC2010 since the strains in the concrete are taken into account. The applied
forces themselves are thus also accounted for due to the iteration procedure. It is an ac-
complished fact that the strains do affect the shear capacities of beams. The enlarged
complexity of the physical model does not yield more accurate results than the simpli-
ﬁed approach in EC2, though. This statement is in compliance with the illustrations and
statistical information in chapter 4. At the same time, it increases the workload.
In the end, the applicability of MC2010 all comes down to one assessment. It must be con-
sidered if either the accuracy of the physical model or the comprehensibility, the work-
load and the economical aspect should be compromised on. It seems problematic that
the more complex physical model used in MC2010 not necessarily yields more accurate
results than the simpliﬁed model used in EC2, though.
==PAGE:81==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
The shear design models used in Eurocode 2 and in ﬁb Model Code 2010 have been as-
sessed and compared. A literature review of both models has initially been executed.
Afterwards, shear predictions have been evaluated for two beam databases with the pur-
pose of assessing the quality of the models. Finally, the shear reinforcement designs for
a range of beam elements dimensioned by Rambøll have been optimized in compliance
with the models.
Both models are based on a stress ﬁeld approach where the shear stresses in the beam are
carried by means of tension stresses in the shear reinforcement interacting with diagonal
compression stresses in the concrete. The variable strut inclination method proposed by
EC2 is simple compared to the model used in MC2010 which accounts for more physical
parameters. Hence, MC2010 incorporates inﬂuences on the shear capacity from strains
and crack spacings in terms of a strain effect and a size effect. Furthermore, the tension
strength of the concrete is included. Additionally, MC2010 uses levels of approximation.
Higher levels of approximation yield greater accuracies of the shear predictions obtained
by more complex calculation procedures. This report focuses on level of approximation
II which is the level being most comparable to the shear design model in EC2.
The variable strut inclination method used in EC2 provides more accurate shear predic-
tions than level of approximation II in MC2010. Level of approximation II in MC2010
yields conservative shear capacities whereas EC2 provides results closer to the test val-
ues. However, the variable strut inclination method appears to yield unsafe shear pre-
dictions for several rectangular and lightly reinforced beam elements. A requirement in
EC2 regarding the crack width ensures safe shear designs despite the unsafe shear pre-
dictions, though. As expected for the shear design models in MC2010, the accuracy of
the shear predictions increases with the level of approximation.
Reinforced concrete beams with a ﬁxed shear reinforcement arrangement may carry a
larger load in compliance with EC2 compared to MC2010. It is in agreement with the
conservative shear predictions obtained from MC2010. Furthermore, it implies a smaller
consumption of shear reinforcement when optimizing shear designs by EC2. MC2010
demands a larger ratio of the shear reinforcement.
The workload for the shear design model in MC2010 is more extensive than for EC2, even
for the lower levels of approximation. At the same time, the shear predictions obtained
from MC2010 are still less accurate than the corresponding shear predictions for EC2.
69
==PAGE:82==
70
CONCLUSION
6.1
Future Work
This report has evaluated and compared the shear design model in EC2 with the newly
invented shear design model in ﬁb Model Code 2010. A range of weaknesses for ﬁb Model
Code 2010 concerning practical considerations have been detected throughout the report.
It concerns the workload, the accuracy and the economical aspect of the model in partic-
ular. It is recommended to evaluate the importance of those parameters against the im-
portance of the exactness of the physical model in the further development of the model.
It has already been stated by [Nielsen and Hoang, 2011] and [Hoang, 2000] that the vari-
able strut inclination method may be unsafe for rectangular and lightly reinforced beams
since crack sliding may occur. A requirement in EC2 for cot θ regarding the serviceability
limit state ensures a safe design despite the unsafe shear capacity predictions, but it is
recommended to include the issue in the strength evaluation directly.
==PAGE:83==
Bibliography
[Ahmad et al., 1996] Ahmad, S. H., Xie, Y., and Yu, T. (1996). Effectiveness of shear rein-
forcement for normal and high-strength concrete beams. Structural Engneering Review,
Vol. 8, No. 1, pp. 65-78.
[Angelakos et al., 2001] Angelakos, D., Bentz, E. C., and Collins, M. P. (2001). Effect of
Concrete Strength and Minimum Stirrups on Shear Strength of Large Members. ACI
Structural Journal, Vol. 98, No. 3, pp. 290-300.
[Bentz, 2010] Bentz, E. C. (2010). MC2010: Shear strength of beams and implications of
the new approaches. Shear and punching shear in RC and FRC elements, Workshop 15-16
October 2010, Sal`o, Italy.
[Bentz and Collins, 2006] Bentz, E. C. and Collins, M. P. (2006). Development of the 2004
Canadian Standards Association (CSA) A23.3 shear provisions for reinforced concrete.
Canadian Journal of Civil Engineering, Volume 33, No. 5, pp. 521-534.
[Bentz et al., 2006] Bentz, E. C. et al. (2006). Simpliﬁed Modiﬁed Compression Field The-
ory for Calculating Shear Strength of Reinforced Concrete Elements. ACI Structural
Journal, Volume 103, No. 4, pp. 614-624.
[Cladera and Mari, 2005] Cladera, A. and Mari, A. R. (2005).
Experimental study on
high-strength concrete beams failing in shear. Engineering Structures, Vol. 27, No. 10,
pp. 1519-1527.
[Collins, 1978] Collins, M. P. (1978). Towards a Rational Theory for RC Members in Shear.
Journal of the Structural Division, Vol. 104, No. 4, pp. 649-666.
[Collins, 2010] Collins, M. P. (2010). Improving analytical models for shear design and
evaluation of reinforced concrete structures. Shear and punching shear in RC and FRC
elements, Workshop 15-16 October 2010, Sal`o, Italy.
[Collins et al., 1996] Collins, M. P. et al. (1996). A General Shear Design Method. ACI
Structural Journal, Volume 93, No. 1, pp.36-45.
[Collins and Mitchell, 1991] Collins, M. P. and Mitchell, D. (1991). Prestressed Concrete
Structures. Prentice Hall, New Jersey, United States of America.
[European Committee for Standardization, 2004] European Committee for Standardiza-
tion (2004). Eurocode 2: Design of concrete structures - Part 1-1: General rules and
rules for buildings. European Committee for Standardization, cen, Brussels.
[Giaccio et al., 2002] Giaccio, C., Al-Mahaidi, R., and Taplin, G. (2002).
Experimental
study on the effect of ﬂange geometry on the shear strength of reinforced concrete
T-beams subjected to concentrated loads. Can. J. Civ. Eng., Vol. 29, pp. 911-918.
71
==PAGE:84==
72
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Hamadi and Regan, 1980] Hamadi, Y. D. and Regan, P. E. (1980). Behaviour of normal
and lightweight aggregate beams with shear cracks. The Structural Engineer, Vol. 58B,
No. 4, pp. 71-79.
[Hegger et al., 2001] Hegger, J., G¨ortz, S., and Will, N. (2001).
Tragf¨ahigkeit von
Bauteilen aus selbstverdichtendem Beton. Beton- und Stahlbetonbau, Vol. 96, No. 11,
pp. 691-697.
[Higgins et al., 2007] Higgins, C. et al. (2007). Tests of RC Deck Girders with 1950s Vin-
tage Details. Journal of Bridge Engineering, ASCE, United States of America.
[Hoang, 2000] Hoang, L. C. (2000). Shear Strength of Lightly Shear Reinforced Concrete
Beams. Department of Structural Engineering and Materials, Technical University of Den-
mark, Denmark.
[Jensen, 2008] Jensen, B. C. (2008). Betonkonstruktioner efter ds/en 1992-1-1. First Edi-
tion, Nyt Teknisk Forlag, Denmark.
[Kaufmann, 1998] Kaufmann, W. (1998). Strength and Deformations of Structural Con-
crete Subjected to In-Plane Shear and Normal Forces. Institute of Structural Engineering,
Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Zurich, Switzerland.
[Kaufmann and Marti, 1998] Kaufmann, W. and Marti, P. (1998).
Structural Concrete:
Cracked Membrane Model. Journal of Structural Engineering, ASCE, Vol. 124, No. 12, pp.
1467-1475.
[Kong and Rangan, 1998] Kong, P. Y. L. and Rangan, B. V. (1998). Shear Strength of High-
Performance Concrete Beams. ACI Structural Journal, Vol 95, No. 6, pp. 677-688.
[Leonhardt and Walther, 1962a] Leonhardt, F. and Walther, R. (1962a). Schubversuche an
einfeldrigen Stahlbetonbalken mit und ohne Schubbewehrung. Ernst & Sohn, Berlin,
Germany.
[Leonhardt and Walther, 1962b] Leonhardt, F. and Walther, R. (1962b). Versuche an Plat-
tenbalken mit hoher Schubbeanspruching. Ernst & Sohn, Berlin, Germany.
[Leonhardt and Walther, 1963] Leonhardt, F. and Walther, R. (1963). Schubversuche an
Plattenbalken mit unterschiedlicher Schubbewehrung. Ernst & Sohn, Berlin, Germany.
[Levi and Marro, 1989] Levi, F. and Marro, P. (1989). Shear tests up to failure of beams
made with normal and high strength concrete. Comite Euro-international du Beton, Lau-
sanne, Schwitzerland.
[Lyngberg, 1974] Lyngberg, B. S. (1974). Planlægningsrapport for forsøg med delvis for-
spændte jernbetonbjælker med et modiﬁceret T-tværsnit. Structural Research Labora-
tory, Technical University of Denmark, Denmark.
[Nielsen, 1967] Nielsen, M. P. (1967). Om forskydningsarmering i jernbetonbjælker. Byg-
ningsstatiske Meddelelser, Vol. 38, No. 2, Denmark.
[Nielsen, 2005] Nielsen, M. P. (2005). Beton 1 del 3. 2nd Edition, Department of Civil Engi-
neering, Technical University of Denmark, Denmark.
[Nielsen and Bach, 1980] Nielsen, M. P. and Bach, F. (1980).
Beregning af forskyd-
ningsarmering efter diagonaltrykmetoden. Bygningsstatiske Meddelelser, Vol. 51, No.
3-4, Denmark.
==PAGE:85==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
73
[Nielsen and Hoang, 2011] Nielsen, M. P. and Hoang, L. C. (2011). Limit Analysis and
Concrete Plasticity. Third Edition, CRC Press, United States of America.
[Pansuk and Sato, 2007] Pansuk, W. and Sato, Y. (2007). Shear Mechanism of Reinforced
Concrete T-Beams with Stirrups. Journal of Advanced Concrete Technology, Vol. 5, No. 3,
pp. 395-408.
[Petersson, 1972] Petersson, T. (1972). Shear and torsion in reinforced concrete beams.
Statens institut f¨or byggnadsforskning, National Swedish Building Research, Stockholm, Swe-
den.
[Placas and Regan, 1971] Placas, A. and Regan, P. E. (1971). Shear Failure of Reinforced
Concrete Beams. ACI Journal, Vol. 68, No. 10, pp. 763-773.
[Reineck et al., 2014] Reineck, K., Bentz, E., Fitik, B., Kuchma, D. A., and Bayrak, O.
(2014). ACI-DAfStb Databases for Shear Tests on Slender Reinforced Concrete Beams
with Stirrups. ACI Structural Journal, Vol. 111, No. 5, pp. 1147-1156.
[Roller and Russell, 1990] Roller, J. J. and Russell, H. G. (1990). Shear Strength of High-
Strength Concrete Beams with Web Reinforcement. ACI Structural Journal, Vol. 87, No.
2, pp. 191-198.
[Sagaseta and Vollum, 2010] Sagaseta, J. and Vollum, R. L. (2010).
Inﬂuence of beam
cross-section, loading arrangement and aggregate type on shear strength. Magazine
of Concrete Research, Vol. 63, No. 2, pp. 139-155.
[Sarsam and Al-Musawi, 1992] Sarsam, K. F. and Al-Musawi, J. M. S. (1992). Shear De-
sign of High- and Normal Strength Concrete Beams with Web Reinforcement. ACI
Structural Journal, Vol. 89, No. 6, pp. 658-664.
[Shin et al., 1999] Shin, S., Lee, K., Moon, J., and Ghosh, S. K. (1999). Shear Strength of
Reinforced High-Strength Concrete Beams with Shear Span-to-Depth Ratios between
1.5 and 2.5. ACI Structural Journal, Vol 96, No. 4, pp. 549-556.
[Sigrist, 2011] Sigrist, V. (2011). Generalized Stress Field Approach for Analysis of Beams
in Shear. ACI Structural Journal, Volume 108, No. 4, pp. 479-487.
[Sigrist et al., 2013] Sigrist, V. et al. (2013). Background to the ﬁb Model Code 2010 shear
provisions - part I: beams and slabs. Structural Concrete, Vol. 14, No. 3, pp. 195-203.
[Sigrist and Hackbarth, 2010] Sigrist, V. and Hackbarth, B. (2010). A structured approach
to the design and analysis of beams in shear. Shear and punching shear in RC and FRC
elements, Workshop 15-16 October 2010, Sal`o, Italy.
[Sigrist and Hackbarth, 2012] Sigrist, V. and Hackbarth, B. (2012). Design and Analysis
of Members in Shear. Third International Workshop - Vienna, September 20-21, 2012.
[Sørensen, 1974] Sørensen, H. C. (1974). Shear tests on 12 reinforced concrete T-beams.
Structural Research Laboratory, Technical University of Denmark, Denmark.
[Vecchio and Collins, 1986] Vecchio, F. J. and Collins, M. P. (1986).
The Modiﬁed
Compression-Field Theory for Reinforced Concrete Elements Subjected to Shear. ACI
Journal, Volume 83, No. 2, pp. 219-231.
==PAGE:86==
74
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Vecchio and Collins, 1988] Vecchio, F. J. and Collins, M. P. (1988). Predicting the Re-
sponse of Reinforced Concrete Beams Subjected to Shear Using Modiﬁed Compression
Field Theory. ACI Structural Journal, Volume 85, No. 3, pp. 258-268.
[Walraven et al., 2011] Walraven, J. et al. (2011). CEB-FIP: ﬁb Model Code 2010, Final
draft. Not published.
[Yoon et al., 1996] Yoon, Y., Cook, W. D., and Mitchell, D. (1996). Minimum Shear Re-
inforcement in Normal, Medium and High-Strength Concrete Beams. ACI Structural
Journal, Vol. 93, No. 5, pp. 576-584.
==PAGE:87==
Appendices
==PAGE:88==
==PAGE:89==
Appendix A
Example of Calculations
The calculation procedures for EC2, MC2010 and the crack sliding theory are in this
appendix gone through by calculating the shear capacity step by step for one element
for each of the above mentioned models. Elements from the database introduced in
[Reineck et al., 2014] and reviewed in section 4.2 are used. The employed elements are
randomly chosen from the database.
Element 243 having a T-shaped section is used for the calculation procedures of EC2 and
MC2010. The rectangular element 24 is used for the examination of crack sliding.
Eurocode 2 and Model Code 2010
Element 243 in Appendix D is used for the calculation procedures in EC2 and MC2010.
The parameters for the T-beam are summarized in Table A.1.
Before going through the calculation procedures of EC2 and MC2010, the transverse re-
inforcement ratio, ρw, and the effective shear depth, z, are calculated.
The transverse reinforcement ratio is presented in (2.19) and is calculated by:
ρw = Asw
swbw
= 3.767 × 10−4
(A.1)
Both EC2 and MC2010 require according to (2.50) and (3.55) a minimum transverse rein-
forcement ratio of:
ρw,min = 0.08
p
fc
fyw
= 1.246 × 10−3
(A.2)
The mechanical transverse reinforcement ratio is described in (2.40) and determined as:
ψ = ρw fyw
fc
= 0.04852
(A.3)
It is necessary to ﬁnd the compression zone, x, for the evaluation of the effective shear
depth, z. The compression zone is less than the height of the ﬂange:
x = As fy
bf fc
= 40 mm < h f
(A.4)
77
==PAGE:90==
78
EXAMPLE OF CALCULATIONS
Table A.1: Parameters for element 243.
Geometric parameters
Flange width, bf [mm]
500
Web width, bw [mm]
120
Height, h [mm]
400
Flange height, h f [mm]
100
Web height, hw [mm]
300
Length, L [mm]
2500
Length between concentrated force and support, a [mm]
1213
Width of plate for concentrated force, aF [mm]
75
Longitudinal tensile reinforcement parameters
Effective ﬂexural depth, d [mm]
350
Cross-sectional area of longitudinal reinforcement, As [mm2]
1257
Yield stress of longitudinal reinforcement, fy [MPa]
400
Stirrup parameters
Cross-sectional area of stirrups, Asw [mm2]
57
Stirrup distance, sw [mm]
125
Yield stress of stirrups, fyw [MPa]
320
Concrete parameters
Uniaxial compressive strength of concrete, fc [MPa]
24.9
Test results
Test shear resistance, Vtest [kN]
150
The effective shear depth is thus calculated:
z = d −1/2x = 330 mm
(A.5)
Eurocode 2
The effectiveness factor, ν, is presented in (2.42) and calculated by:
ν = 0.6
 
1 −fc
250
!
= 0.54
(A.6)
The shear capacity is evaluated using (2.41):
τR
ν fc
=











v
u
u
tψ
ν
 
1 −ψ
ν
!
for ψ ≤ν
2
0.5
for ψ > ν
2
=
 0.2859
for ψ ≤0.2702
0.5
for ψ > 0.2702
= 0.2859
(A.7)
(A.7) induces:
τR = 3.8 MPa
(A.8)
The shear capacity, VR, is found by (A.8):
VR = τRbwz = 152 kN
(A.9)
==PAGE:91==
APPENDIX A
79
The difference between the shear resistance calculated in terms of EC2 and the shear force
obtained in the test becomes:

Vcal −Vtest
Vtest
 = 0.0127 = 1.27 %
(A.10)
Model Code 2010
The calculation procedures for both LoA I, II and III are reviewed.
Before going through the calculation principles, the parameter ηf c is determined. This
parameter is used for all levels of approximation. Since fc < 30 MPa, ηf c becomes:
ηf c = 1.0
(A.11)
LoA I
The minimum angle of inclination for LoA I is given as:
θ = 30◦
(A.12)
The factor kε should for LoA I be taken as:
kε = 0.55
(A.13)
The shear resistance for LoA I becomes:
VR = VR,s = Asw
sw
z fyw cot θ = 83 kN
(A.14)
The shear resistance must not be greater than VR,max:
kc = kεηf c = 0.55
(A.15)
VR,max = kc fcbwz sin θ cos θ = 234 kN
(A.16)
The shear resistance is given by the result in (A.14) since the shear capacity of the con-
crete due to web crushing is larger than the shear capacity of the stirrups.
The difference between the shear resistance calculated in terms of LoA I in MC2010 and
the shear force obtained from the test becomes:

Vcal −Vtest
Vtest
 = 0.56 = 56 %
(A.17)
==PAGE:92==
80
EXAMPLE OF CALCULATIONS
LoA II
It is for LoA II necessary to iterate to be able to ﬁnd the minimum angle of inclination. It
is chosen to use Vtest as a starting value for VR in the iteration:
VR,1 = Vtest = 150 kN
(A.18)
The bending moment corresponding to the shear force in (A.18) is calculated by:
MR,1 = VR,1

a −1
2aF −d

= 127 kNm
(A.19)
The moment arm corresponds to a control section located a distance d from the loading
plate.
The longitudinal strain at mid-depth of the effective shear depth is evaluated as in (3.54):
εx,1 =
MR,1
z
+ VR,1
2EsAs
= 0.00106
(A.20)
The minimum inclination of the compressive stress ﬁeld can now be taken as:
θmin,1 = 20◦+ 10, 000εx,1 = 30.6◦
(A.21)
The ﬁrst guess of the shear resistance for LoA II is determined by:
VR,2 = VR,s = Asw
sw
z fyw cot θ = 81 kN
(A.22)
The difference between the shear resistance in (A.18) and the shear resistance obtained in
(A.22) is determined:

VR,2 −VR,1
VR,1
 = 0.46 = 46 %
(A.23)
It is chosen to use a tolerance of 5 % for the difference between the shear resistance used in
the calculations and the shear resistance obtained. Since the difference between the used
and the obtained shear resistances is 46 %, the calculations must be performed again.
This time, the calculated shear resistance in (A.23) is used throughout the calculations.
The method described in (A.19) to (A.23) is repeated until a difference of less than 5 %
between the shear resistances is obtained. The repeated calculations in the iteration are
not gone through, but the results are listed in Table A.2. The initial values shown in (A.18)
to (A.23) are listed for i = 1.
Table A.2: Iteration procedure for element 243 for LoA II in MC2010.
i
VR,i [kN]
MR,i [kNm]
εx,i [×10−4]
θmin,i [degrees]
VR,i+1 [kN]
Differencei [%]
1
150
127
10.6
30.6
81
46
2
81
68
5.7
25.7
99
23
3
99
84
7.0
27.0
94
5.6
4
94
79
6.6
26.6
95
1.6
==PAGE:93==
APPENDIX A
81
The ﬁnal shear resistance is found as VR = 95 kN after three iterations.
Again, VR,max corresponding to web crushing should be checked. The parameter ηf c is
already found as 1.0 in (A.11).
The average principal tensile strain is calculated by (3.69):
ε1 = εx + (εx + 0.002) cot2 θ = 0.01125
(A.24)
The factor kε is afterwards determined by (3.68):
kε =
1
1.2 + 55ε1
= 0.55 ≤0.65
(A.25)
Hence, the factor kc can be evaluated:
kc = kεηf c = 0.55
(A.26)
The resistance of the concrete is calculated:
VR,max = kc fcbwz sin θ cos θ = 217 kN
(A.27)
The shear resistance is thus given by the result of the iteration in Table A.2.
The difference between the shear resistance calculated in terms of LoA II in MC2010 and
the shear force obtained from the test becomes:

Vcal −Vtest
Vtest
 = 0.37 = 37 %
(A.28)
LoA III
The shear resistance for LoA III includes both a steel contribution and a concrete contri-
bution. The steel contribution is evaluated as for LoA II and is thus already found in the
iteration performed in Table A.2. Also the maximum permissible shear resistance of the
concrete is evaluated as for LoA II. The concrete contribution to the shear resistance and
the parameter kν are calculated by (3.61) and (3.71), respectively. εx and VR have already
been calculated in the iteration in Table A.2. Thus, kν is calculated:
kν =
0.4
1 + 1500εx
 
1 −
VR
VR,max(θmin)
!
= 0.1125 ≥0
(A.29)
The concrete contribution to the shear resistance is determined by (3.61):
VR,c = kν
p
fczbw = 22 kN
(A.30)
The shear resistance is determined as the sum of the steel contribution and the concrete
contribution:
VR = VR,s + VR,c = 117 kN
(A.31)
The result in (A.31) demonstrates the shear resistance for LoA III since the shear resis-
tance of the concrete regarding web crushing is larger.
==PAGE:94==
82
EXAMPLE OF CALCULATIONS
The difference between the shear resistance calculated in terms of LoA III in MC2010 and
the shear force obtained from the test becomes:

Vcal −Vtest
Vtest
 = 0.22 = 22 %
(A.32)
Crack Sliding
Element 24 in Appendix D is used for the calculations regarding crack sliding. The pa-
rameters for the rectangular beam are summarized in Table A.3.
Table A.3: Parameters for element 24.
Geometric parameters
Width, b [mm]
127
Height, h [mm]
254
Length, L [mm]
1189
Length between concentrated force and support, a [mm]
579
Longitudinal tensile reinforcement parameters
Effective ﬂexural depth, d [mm]
198
Cross-sectional area of longitudinal reinforcement, As [mm2]
1140
Yield stress of longitudinal reinforcement, fy [MPa]
421
Stirrup parameters
Cross-sectional area of stirrups, Asw [mm2]
63
Stirrup distance, sw [mm]
64
Yield stress of stirrups, fyw [MPa]
324
Concrete parameters
Uniaxial compressive strength of concrete, fc [MPa]
105
Test results
Test shear resistance, Vtest [kN]
123
The transverse reinforcement ratio is calculated:
ρw = Asw
swb = 7.8 × 10−3
(A.33)
The mechanical transverse reinforcement ratio is determined:
ψ = ρw fyw
fc
= 0.02417
(A.34)
The longitudinal reinforcement ratio in % is determined by:
r = As
bh × 100 = 3.53 %
(A.35)
The effectiveness factor ν0 is calculated by (4.5):
ν0 = 0.88
p
fc
 
1 + 1
√
h
!
(1 + 0.26r) = 0.65
(A.36)
==PAGE:95==
APPENDIX A
83
τc is demonstrated in (4.4) and calculated by:
τc = 0.059ν0 fc = 4.04 MPa
(A.37)
The complete crack sliding solution is calculated by (4.3). A range of parameters to be
used are determined in (A.38) to (A.41):
ψ fc
τc
= 0.63
(A.38)
2
 
a
h
!2 = 0.39
(A.39)
sw
h = 0.25
(A.40)
s
2τc
ψ fc
= 1.78
(A.41)
The second equation in (4.3) should be used since the following conditions are fulﬁlled:
2
 
a
h
!2 < ψ fc
τc
≤32
9
(A.42)
sw
h ≤
s
2τc
ψ fc
(A.43)
The crack sliding solution, τR/τc, is calculated:
τR
τc
=
s
8ψ fc
τc
−ψ fc
τc
sw
h = 2.09
(A.44)
The shear resistance is determined using (A.44):
τR = 2.09τc = 8.4 MPa
(A.45)
The shear resistance becomes:
VR = τRbh = 272 kN
(A.46)
The difference between the shear resistance calculated in terms of the crack sliding theory
and the shear force obtained from the test becomes:

Vcal −Vtest
Vtest
 = 1.22 = 122 %
(A.47)
==PAGE:96==
84
EXAMPLE OF CALCULATIONS
==PAGE:97==
Appendix B
Reinforced Concrete Deck Girders -
Beam Properties
This appendix contains information regarding the 10 bridge girder elements introduced
in [Higgins et al., 2007]. The information is presented in terms of the listed parameters
in Table B.1 and B.2.
Table B.1: Properties for 10 bridge girder elements, part I.
Number
Section
Geometry
Longitudinal
properties
tensile reinforcement
bf
bw
h
h f
L
a
aF
d
As
fy
mm
mm
mm
mm
mm
mm
mm
mm
mm2
MPa
IT18
914
356
1219
152
7316
3353
102
1103
6036
463
2T10
914
356
1219
152
7316
3353
102
1103
6036
523
2T12
914
356
1219
152
7316
3353
102
1103
6036
523
3T18
914
356
1219
152
7316
3353
102
1103
6036
481
4T10-12
914
356
1219
152
6100
3353
102
1103
6036
471
4T12-18
914
356
1219
152
6100
3353
102
1103
6036
471
8T12-B3
914
356
1219
152
7316
3353
102
1103
6036
516
8T12-B4
914
356
1219
152
7316
3353
102
1103
5030
516
10T0
914
356
1219
152
7316
3353
102
1103
3018
478
10T24-B4
914
356
1219
152
7316
3353
102
1103
5030
478
Table B.2: Properties for 10 bridge girder elements, part II.
Number
Stirrups
Compressive
Test
strength
results
Asw
sw
fyw
fc
Failure mode
Vu
mm2
mm
MPa
MPa
kN
IT18
258
457
350
34
Shear-compression
755
2T10
258
254
350
24.5
Shear-compression
913
2T12
258
305
350
24.3
Shear-compression
858
3T18
258
457
350
27.4
Shear-compression
682
4T10-12
258
254
350
27.2
Shear-compression
1087
4T12-18
258
305
350
28
Shear-compression
1067
8T12-B3
258
305
350
35
Shear-compression
818
8T12-B4
258
305
350
34.4
Shear-compression
707
10T0
258
0
350
31.8
Shear-compression
244
10T24-B4
258
610
350
23.6
Shear-compression
557
==PAGE:98==
86
REINFORCED CONCRETE DECK GIRDERS - BEAM PROPERTIES
==PAGE:99==
Appendix C
Reinforced Concrete Deck Girders -
Results
Various ﬁgures and results described in section 4.1 and based on [Higgins et al., 2007] are
shown in this appendix.
Recreated Shear Predictions
Figure C.1 shows the shear capacity predictions for EC2 and LoA II in MC2010 and is
identical to Figure 4.2 in section 4.1.1, but includes labels on the test results identifying
the beams.
ρwfyw [MPa]
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
VR [kN]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
1T18
2T10
2T12
3T18
4T10-12
4T12-18
2T12-B3
8T12-B4
10T0
10T24-B4
Tests
MC2010
EC2
Figure C.1: Shear capacity predictions for EC2 and LoA II in MC2010.
87
==PAGE:100==
88
REINFORCED CONCRETE DECK GIRDERS - RESULTS
Predictions of Shear Capacity
Table C.1 lists statistical parameters for the test-prediction ratios for the shear capacities
calculated by EC2 and LoA II in MC2010.
Table C.1: Statistical parameters for shear capacity predic-
tions calculated by EC2 and LoA II in MC2010.
EC2
MC2010
Average test-prediction ratio
0.6786
1.538
Standard deviation of test-prediction ratio
0.1040
0.1897
Coefﬁcient of variation for test-prediction ratio [%]
15.33
12.34
5 % quantile of test-prediction ratio
0.4706
1.158
95 % quantile of test-prediction ratio
0.8866
1.917
Quantity of unsafe elements [%]
100
0
Figure C.2 shows the average shear-prediction ratios together with the 95 % conﬁdence
intervals, respectively.
EC2
MC2010
Test-prediction ratio
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Average test-prediction ratio
95 % conﬁdence interval
Figure C.2: Average ratio and 95 % conﬁdence interval for
test-prediction ratios for EC2 and LoA II in MC2010.
==PAGE:101==
APPENDIX C
89
Requirement in EC2 to Avoid Large Crack Widths
Table C.2 lists statistical parameters for the test-prediction ratios for the shear capacities
found by EC2 and LoA II in MC2010 together with the ratios for EC2 including the crack
width requirement.
Table C.2: Statistical parameters for shear design predictions calculated by
EC2, EC2 including the crack width requirement and LoA II in MC2010.
EC2
EC2 crack1
MC2010
Average test-prediction ratio
0.6786
1.202
1.538
Standard deviation of test-prediction ratio
0.1040
0.2012
0.1897
Coefﬁcient of variation for test-prediction ratio [%]
15.33
16.74
12.34
5 % quantile of test-prediction ratio
0.4706
0.7992
1.158
95 % quantile of test-prediction ratio
0.8866
1.604
1.917
Quantity of unsafe elements [%]
100
22
0
Figure C.3, C.4 and C.5 show the normal distributions, the average test-prediction ratios
and the 95 % conﬁdence intervals, respectively.
Test-prediction ratio
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Probability density [%]
0
1
2
3
4
EC2
EC2 including crack width requirement
MC2010
Figure C.3: Normal distributions for the shear capacity predictions for EC2,
EC2 including the crack width requirement and LoA II in MC2010.
1EC2 including the crack width requirement.
==PAGE:102==
90
REINFORCED CONCRETE DECK GIRDERS - RESULTS
Average test-prediction ratio
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
EC2
EC2 including crack
width requirement
MC2010
Figure C.4: Average test-prediction ratios for EC2, EC2 includ-
ing the crack width requirement and LoA II in MC2010.
Test-prediction ratio
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
EC2
EC2 including crack
width requirement
MC2010
Average test-prediction ratio
95 % conﬁdence interval
Figure C.5: Average ratio and 95 % conﬁdence interval for test-prediction ratios for
EC2, EC2 including the crack width requirement and LoA II in MC2010.
==PAGE:103==
APPENDIX C
91
Crack Sliding
Table C.3 shows statistical parameters for the test-prediction ratios for the variable strut
inclination method and the crack sliding theory.
Table C.3: Statistical parameters for shear design predictions calculated
by the variable strut inclination method and the crack sliding theory.
VSIM2
CST3
Average test-prediction ratio
0.6786
0.8139
Standard deviation of test-prediction ratio
0.1040
0.1036
Coefﬁcient of variation for test-prediction ratio [%]
15.33
12.73
5 % quantile of test-prediction ratio
0.4706
0.6067
95 % quantile of test-prediction ratio
0.8866
1.021
Quantity of unsafe elements [%]
100
100
Figure C.6 illustrates the normal contributions for the prediction ratios for the variable
strut inclination method and the crack sliding theory.
Test-prediction ratio
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Probability density [%]
0
1
2
3
4
Variable Strut Inclination Method
Crack sliding Theory
Figure C.6: Normal contributions for the shear capacity predictions
for the variable strut inclination method and the crack sliding theory.
2Variable Strut Inclination Method.
3Crack Sliding Theory.
==PAGE:104==
92
REINFORCED CONCRETE DECK GIRDERS - RESULTS
Different Levels of Approximation for MC2010
Table C.4 shows statistical parameters for the test-prediction ratios for LoA I, II and III in
MC2010.
Table C.4: Statistical parameters for shear capacity
predictions calculated by LoA I, II and III in MC2010.
LoA I
LoA II
LoA III
Average test-prediction ratio
1.734
1.538
0.8890
Standard deviation of test-prediction ratio
0.2904
0.1897
0.1190
Coefﬁcient of variation for test-prediction ratio [%]
16.74
12.34
13.39
5 % quantile of test-prediction ratio
1.154
1.158
0.6510
95 % quantile of test-prediction ratio
2.315
1.917
1.127
Quantity of unsafe elements [%]
0
0
67
Figure C.7 illustrates the average prediction ratios for LoA I, II and III together with the
limits for the 95 % conﬁdence intervals.
LoA I
LoA II
LoA III
Test-prediction ratio
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Average test-prediction ratio
95 % conﬁdence interval
Figure C.7: Average values and 95 % conﬁdence intervals for test-prediction ratios for LoA I, II
and III in MC2010.
==PAGE:105==
Appendix D
Database for Shear Tests - Beam
Properties
This appendix contains necessary information regarding the database introduced in
[Reineck et al., 2014].
Conversion of Concrete Compressive Strength
The concrete compressive strength in [Reineck et al., 2014] is given as the uniaxial com-
pressive strength of a slender prism, denoted in [Reineck et al., 2014] as f1c.
The re-
lationship between this strength and the cylinder uniaxial compressive strength is in
[Reineck et al., 2014] given as:
f1c = 0.95fc,cyl
(D.1)
where fc,cyl is the strength of a standard cylinder which is to be used as the concrete
compressive strength in both EC2 and MC2010. Hence, all concrete strengths f1c in the
database must be converted to fc,cyl by (D.1) when evaluating the shear capacities.
Criteria for Shear Tests in the Database
The smaller database in [Reineck et al., 2014] used in this report is part of a larger database.
The following items describe the most important criteria in selecting the shear tests being
part of the smaller database:
• f1c > 12 MPa
• bw ≥50 mm
• h > 70 mm
• x
d ≤0.5
• sw ≤0.55d
• 2.4 ≤a/d ≤2.89
93
==PAGE:106==
94
DATABASE FOR SHEAR TESTS - BEAM PROPERTIES
• Beams must have a minimum amount of shear reinforcement1 of ρw,min = 0.06228
p
fc
fyw
.
• Failure mode must be reported as shear failure.
• Longitudinal bars must be ribbed.
• The anchorage length at the end support must be larger than or equal to the re-
quired anchorage length.
The full list of criteria is found in [Reineck et al., 2014].
Beam Geometries
Figure D.1 shows the three types of cross-sectional geometries used in the database.
h
hf
hw
hft
hf
hw
b
b
bw
b
bw
Figure D.1: Description of geometry parameters for rectangular beams, T-beams and single sym-
metrical I-beams.
1The minimum amount of shear reinforcement in both EC2 and MC2010 is larger than this criteria.
==PAGE:107==
APPENDIX D
95
Database
The smaller database in [Reineck et al., 2014] contains a huge amount of information, and
several parameters unnecessary for this project are presented. Furthermore, symbols
shown in [Reineck et al., 2014] are not clariﬁed which causes risks of hazardous errors,
especially regarding the geometry. Therefore, the database is recreated in this appendix
where only relevant parameters regarding this project are included and symbols used
throughout this report are used. Additionally, references to most of the different shear
tests are provided. References are described in a very poor manner in [Reineck et al., 2014].
Unfortunately, it has not been possible to identify all of the references. However, most of
them are shown in the following recreated database.
It is decided to only include shear tests with rectangular beams, T-beams and single
symmetrical I-beams. Hence, two shear tests2 are excluded since those tests had ele-
ments with an isosceles trapezium section and a box section, respectively. Therefore, the
database used in this project contains only 85 shear tests.
Information regarding the database with 85 shear tests is illustrated in Table D.1-D.10. Ta-
ble D.1-D.2 show the shape of the beams and demonstrate references, Table D.3-D.4 list
section properties of the beams, Table D.5-D.6 illustrate location of loading and geome-
try properties, Table D.7-D.8 demonstrate information regarding the longitudinal tensile
reinforcement and the stirrups, and Table D.9-D.10 list the concrete prism strengths and
the test results of the shear capacities.
2The two tests are shear test number 247 and 565.
==PAGE:108==
96
DATABASE FOR SHEAR TESTS - BEAM PROPERTIES
Table D.1: Identiﬁcation of tests, part I.
Number
Geometry
Reference
24
Rectangular
[Ahmad et al., 1996]
25
Rectangular
[Ahmad et al., 1996]
40
Rectangular
[Angelakos et al., 2001]
42
Rectangular
[Angelakos et al., 2001]
62
Rectangular
-
63
Rectangular
-
64
Rectangular
-
65
Rectangular
-
132
Rectangular
[Cladera and Mari, 2005]
243
T-beam
[Hamadi and Regan, 1980]
245
T-beam
[Hamadi and Regan, 1980]
247
Rectangular
[Hegger et al., 2001]
361
Rectangular
[Kong and Rangan, 1998]
362
Rectangular
[Kong and Rangan, 1998]
367
Rectangular
[Kong and Rangan, 1998]
368
Rectangular
[Kong and Rangan, 1998]
373
Rectangular
[Kong and Rangan, 1998]
374
Rectangular
[Kong and Rangan, 1998]
377
Rectangular
[Kong and Rangan, 1998]
380
Rectangular
[Kong and Rangan, 1998]
382
Rectangular
[Kong and Rangan, 1998]
383
Rectangular
[Kong and Rangan, 1998]
385
Rectangular
[Kong and Rangan, 1998]
391
Rectangular
[Kong and Rangan, 1998]
392
Rectangular
[Kong and Rangan, 1998]
420
Rectangular
-
422
Rectangular
-
425
Rectangular
-
426
Rectangular
-
427
Rectangular
-
428
Rectangular
-
430
Rectangular
-
431
Rectangular
-
444
Rectangular
-
483
T-beam
[Leonhardt and Walther, 1962a]
484
T-beam
[Leonhardt and Walther, 1962a]
485
I-beam
[Leonhardt and Walther, 1962a]
490
I-beam
[Leonhardt and Walther, 1962b]
497
T-beam
[Leonhardt and Walther, 1963]
498
T-beam
[Leonhardt and Walther, 1963]
499
T-beam
[Leonhardt and Walther, 1963]
500
T-beam
[Leonhardt and Walther, 1963]
501
T-beam
[Leonhardt and Walther, 1963]
503
T-beam
[Leonhardt and Walther, 1963]
==PAGE:109==
APPENDIX D
97
Table D.2: Identiﬁcation of tests, part II.
Number
Geometry
Reference
504
I-beam
[Levi and Marro, 1989]
505
I-beam
[Levi and Marro, 1989]
506
I-beam
[Levi and Marro, 1989]
507
I-beam
[Levi and Marro, 1989]
508
I-beam
[Levi and Marro, 1989]
509
I-beam
[Levi and Marro, 1989]
510
I-beam
[Levi and Marro, 1989]
511
I-beam
[Lyngberg, 1974]
512
I-beam
[Lyngberg, 1974]
525
T-beam
-
534
T-beam
-
535
T-beam
-
536
T-beam
-
564
Rectangular
[Petersson, 1972]
605
T-beam
[Placas and Regan, 1971]
608
T-beam
[Placas and Regan, 1971]
613
T-beam
[Placas and Regan, 1971]
615
T-beam
[Placas and Regan, 1971]
620
T-beam
[Placas and Regan, 1971]
625
T-beam
[Placas and Regan, 1971]
630
T-beam
[Placas and Regan, 1971]
631
T-beam
[Placas and Regan, 1971]
637
I-beam
[Placas and Regan, 1971]
640
I-beam
[Placas and Regan, 1971]
647
I-beam
-
648
I-beam
-
658
Rectangular
[Roller and Russell, 1990]
660
Rectangular
[Roller and Russell, 1990]
661
Rectangular
[Roller and Russell, 1990]
671
Rectangular
[Sarsam and Al-Musawi, 1992]
674
Rectangular
[Sarsam and Al-Musawi, 1992]
675
Rectangular
[Sarsam and Al-Musawi, 1992]
697
Rectangular
[Shin et al., 1999]
702
T-beam
[Sørensen, 1974]
711
I-beam
-
712
I-beam
-
803
Rectangular
[Yoon et al., 1996]
806
Rectangular
[Yoon et al., 1996]
808
Rectangular
[Yoon et al., 1996]
809
Rectangular
[Yoon et al., 1996]
820
Rectangular
-
821
Rectangular
-
==PAGE:110==
98
DATABASE FOR SHEAR TESTS - BEAM PROPERTIES
Table D.3: Section properties, part I.
Number
Section properties
b
bw
h
h f
hw
h f t
mm
mm
mm
mm
mm
mm
24
127.0
127.0
254.0
25
127.0
127.0
254.0
40
300.0
300.0
1000.0
42
300.0
300.0
1000.0
62
240.0
240.0
350.0
63
240.0
240.0
650.0
64
240.0
240.0
950.0
65
240.0
240.0
1250.0
132
200.0
200.0
400.0
243
500.0
120.0
400.0
100.0
300.0
245
500.0
120.0
400.0
100.0
300.0
361
250.0
250.0
350.0
362
250.0
250.0
350.0
367
250.0
250.0
350.0
368
250.0
250.0
350.0
373
250.0
250.0
350.0
374
250.0
250.0
350.0
377
250.0
250.0
350.0
380
250.0
250.0
350.0
382
250.0
250.0
350.0
383
250.0
250.0
350.0
385
250.0
250.0
350.0
391
250.0
250.0
350.0
392
250.0
250.0
350.0
420
254.0
254.0
508.0
422
254.0
254.0
508.0
425
254.0
254.0
508.0
426
254.0
254.0
508.0
427
254.0
254.0
508.0
428
254.0
254.0
508.0
430
254.0
254.0
508.0
431
254.0
254.0
508.0
444
254.0
254.0
508.0
483
300.0
150.0
350.0
75.0
275.0
484
300.0
100.0
350.0
75.0
275.0
485
300.0
50.0
350.0
75.0
175.0
100.0
490
1500.0
100.0
900.0
150.0
600.0
150.0
497
960.0
160.0
440.0
80.0
360.0
498
960.0
160.0
440.0
80.0
360.0
499
960.0
160.0
440.0
80.0
360.0
500
960.0
160.0
440.0
80.0
360.0
501
960.0
160.0
440.0
80.0
360.0
503
960.0
160.0
440.0
80.0
360.0
==PAGE:111==
APPENDIX D
99
Table D.4: Section properties, part II.
Number
Section properties
b
bw
h
h f
hw
h f t
mm
mm
mm
mm
mm
mm
504
900.0
120.0
1050.0
130.0
700.0
220.0
505
900.0
120.0
1050.0
130.0
700.0
220.0
506
900.0
120.0
1050.0
130.0
700.0
220.0
507
900.0
120.0
1050.0
130.0
700.0
220.0
508
900.0
120.0
1050.0
130.0
700.0
220.0
509
900.0
120.0
1050.0
130.0
700.0
220.0
510
900.0
120.0
1050.0
130.0
700.0
220.0
511
700.0
120.0
600.0
90.0
400.0
110.0
512
700.0
120.0
600.0
90.0
400.0
110.0
525
599.4
149.9
320.0
81.3
238.8
534
400.0
110.0
355.0
80.0
275.0
535
400.0
110.0
355.0
80.0
275.0
536
400.0
110.0
355.0
80.0
275.0
564
175.0
175.0
353.0
605
610.0
152.0
305.0
76.0
229.0
608
610.0
152.0
305.0
76.0
229.0
613
610.0
152.0
305.0
76.0
229.0
615
610.0
152.0
305.0
76.0
229.0
620
610.0
152.0
305.0
76.0
229.0
625
610.0
152.0
305.0
76.0
229.0
630
610.0
152.0
305.0
76.0
229.0
631
610.0
152.0
305.0
152.0
153.0
637
610.0
64.0
305.0
76.0
165.0
64.0
640
610.0
64.0
305.0
76.0
165.0
64.0
647
838.0
77.0
648.0
107.0
441.0
100.0
648
837.0
77.0
650.0
100.0
440.0
110.0
658
457.2
457.2
870.0
660
457.2
457.2
870.0
661
457.2
457.2
870.0
671
180.0
180.0
270.0
674
180.0
180.0
270.0
675
180.0
180.0
270.0
697
125.0
125.0
250.0
702
400.0
110.0
355.0
80.0
275.0
711
500.0
90.0
700.0
125.0
500.0
75.0
712
500.0
90.0
700.0
125.0
500.0
75.0
803
375.0
375.0
750.0
806
375.0
375.0
750.0
808
375.0
375.0
750.0
809
375.0
375.0
750.0
820
655.0
155.0
820.0
150.0
670.0
821
655.0
155.0
820.0
150.0
670.0
==PAGE:112==
100
DATABASE FOR SHEAR TESTS - BEAM PROPERTIES
Table D.5: Geometry and loading, part I.
Number
Loading and geometry
aF
L
a
mm
mm
mm
24
31.8
1188.7
578.5
25
31.8
1585.0
776.6
40
76.0
5400.0
2662.0
42
76.0
5400.0
2662.0
62
180.0
1800.0
810.0
63
240.0
3600.0
1680.0
64
270.0
5400.0
2565.0
65
300.0
7200.0
3450.0
132
75.0
2160.0
1042.5
243
75.0
2500.0
1212.5
245
75.0
2500.0
1212.5
361
100.0
1960.0
730.0
362
100.0
1960.0
730.0
367
100.0
1960.0
730.0
368
100.0
1960.0
730.0
373
100.0
1960.0
730.0
374
100.0
1960.0
730.0
377
100.0
3100.0
1300.0
380
100.0
1960.0
730.0
382
100.0
1500.0
500.0
383
100.0
2260.0
880.0
385
100.0
1960.0
730.0
391
50.0
1940.0
945.0
392
50.0
1940.0
945.0
420
127.0
3657.6
1765.3
422
127.0
3657.6
1765.3
425
127.0
3657.6
1765.3
426
127.0
3657.6
1765.3
427
127.0
3657.6
1765.3
428
127.0
3657.6
1765.3
430
127.0
3657.6
1765.3
431
127.0
3657.6
1765.3
444
127.0
3657.6
1765.3
483
100.0
3000.0
1050.0
484
100.0
3000.0
1050.0
485
100.0
3000.0
1050.0
490
200.0
6000.0
2500.0
497
120.0
3000.0
1250.0
498
120.0
3000.0
1250.0
499
120.0
3000.0
1250.0
500
120.0
3000.0
1250.0
501
120.0
3000.0
1250.0
503
120.0
3000.0
1250.0
==PAGE:113==
APPENDIX D
101
Table D.6: Geometry and loading, part II.
Number
Loading and geometry
aF
L
a
mm
mm
mm
504
9600.0
3800.0
505
9600.0
3800.0
506
9600.0
3800.0
507
9600.0
3800.0
508
9600.0
3800.0
509
9600.0
3800.0
510
9600.0
3800.0
511
5000.0
1500.0
512
5000.0
1500.0
525
26.7
1981.2
977.3
534
130.0
3000.0
1050.0
535
130.0
3000.0
1050.0
536
130.0
3000.0
1050.0
564
100.0
2600.0
1150.0
605
50.0
1828.8
889.4
608
50.0
1828.8
889.4
613
50.0
3657.6
1803.8
615
50.0
2743.2
1346.6
620
50.0
1828.8
889.4
625
50.0
1828.8
889.4
630
50.0
1828.8
889.4
631
50.0
1828.8
889.4
637
50.0
1830.0
890.0
640
50.0
1830.0
890.0
647
160.0
5200.0
2520.0
648
160.0
5190.0
2515.0
658
133.4
4572.0
2219.3
660
133.4
4572.0
2219.3
661
133.4
4572.0
2219.3
671
100.0
1565.0
582.5
674
100.0
1565.0
582.5
675
100.0
1565.0
582.5
697
22.5
1075.0
526.3
702
100.0
3000.0
1050.0
711
91.4
5000.0
1654.3
712
91.4
5000.0
1654.3
803
75.0
4300.0
2112.5
806
75.0
4300.0
2112.5
808
75.0
4300.0
2112.5
809
75.0
4300.0
2112.5
820
150.0
4000.0
1925.0
821
150.0
4000.0
1925.0
==PAGE:114==
102
DATABASE FOR SHEAR TESTS - BEAM PROPERTIES
Table D.7: Longitudinal tensile reinforcement and stirrups, part I.
Number
Longitudinal
Stirrups
tensile reinforcement
d
As
fy
Asw
sw
fyw
mm
mm2
MPa
mm2
mm
MPa
24
198.1
1140.1
420.7
63.3
63.5
324.1
25
198.1
1140.1
420.7
63.3
99.1
324.1
40
925.0
1400.0
550.0
71.3
300.0
508.0
42
925.0
2800.0
550.0
71.3
300.0
508.0
62
300.0
904.8
425.8
56.5
160.0
441.5
63
600.0
1809.6
425.8
56.5
160.0
441.5
64
900.0
2714.3
425.8
56.5
160.0
441.5
65
1200.0
3619.1
425.8
56.5
160.0
441.5
132
353.0
1608.5
500.0
56.5
165.0
530.0
243
350.0
1256.6
400.0
56.5
125.0
320.0
245
350.0
1256.6
655.0
100.5
160.0
480.0
247
450.0
2945.2
532.0
100.5
100.0
514.0
361
292.0
2046.0
452.0
38.3
100.0
569.0
362
292.0
2046.0
452.0
38.3
100.0
569.0
367
292.0
2046.0
452.0
38.3
100.0
569.0
368
292.0
2046.0
452.0
38.3
100.0
569.0
373
293.0
2046.0
452.0
24.6
100.0
632.0
374
293.0
2046.0
452.0
24.6
100.0
632.0
377
524.0
4092.0
452.0
38.3
100.0
569.0
380
292.0
2046.0
452.0
38.3
100.0
569.0
382
198.0
1380.0
442.0
38.3
100.0
569.0
383
292.0
2046.0
452.0
38.3
100.0
569.0
385
292.0
2046.0
452.0
38.3
100.0
569.0
391
278.0
3284.0
433.0
38.3
100.0
569.0
392
278.0
3284.0
433.0
38.3
80.0
569.0
420
455.7
2578.9
352.4
63.3
152.4
341.4
422
455.7
2578.9
338.6
63.3
228.6
341.4
425
455.7
2578.9
383.4
63.3
228.6
372.4
426
455.7
2578.9
364.1
63.3
228.6
372.4
427
455.7
2578.9
271.0
63.3
228.6
372.4
428
455.7
2578.9
290.3
63.3
228.6
372.4
430
455.7
2578.9
406.2
63.3
228.6
372.4
431
455.7
2578.9
276.6
63.3
228.6
372.4
444
455.7
2578.9
406.2
141.9
228.6
275.9
483
300.0
1256.6
419.9
56.5
110.0
313.9
484
300.0
1256.6
419.9
56.5
110.0
313.9
485
300.0
1256.6
419.9
56.5
110.0
313.9
490
825.0
8464.0
464.8
232.0
80.0
426.6
497
375.0
2714.3
409.1
100.5
113.0
417.9
498
375.0
2714.3
409.1
56.5
113.0
440.5
499
375.0
2714.3
409.1
226.2
113.0
426.7
500
375.0
2714.3
409.1
157.1
113.0
425.8
501
375.0
2714.3
390.4
100.5
113.0
417.9
503
375.0
2714.3
390.4
100.5
113.0
417.9
==PAGE:115==
APPENDIX D
103
Table D.8: Longitudinal tensile reinforcement and stirrups, part II.
Number
Longitudinal
Stirrups
tensile reinforcement
d
As
fy
Asw
sw
fyw
mm
mm2
MPa
mm2
mm
MPa
504
940.0
9047.8
500.0
226.2
225.0
480.0
505
940.0
9047.8
500.0
226.2
225.0
480.0
506
940.0
10618.6
450.0
226.2
225.0
480.0
507
940.0
10618.6
450.0
226.2
225.0
480.0
508
940.0
14137.2
470.0
226.2
150.0
480.0
509
940.0
14137.2
470.0
226.2
150.0
480.0
510
940.0
14137.2
470.0
226.2
150.0
480.0
511
540.0
2513.3
616.3
100.5
160.0
674.0
512
540.0
2513.3
623.1
100.5
160.0
647.0
525
279.4
791.7
641.4
48.5
152.4
310.3
534
298.0
1256.6
441.5
100.5
150.0
272.7
535
298.0
1256.6
447.3
100.5
150.0
272.7
536
298.0
1256.6
444.4
100.5
150.0
272.7
564
322.0
603.2
977.0
56.5
150.0
323.0
565
278.0
1005.3
990.0
100.5
100.0
366.0
605
254.0
1608.5
630.0
142.5
114.0
270.0
608
254.0
1608.5
630.0
62.3
102.0
280.0
613
254.0
1608.5
630.0
62.3
102.0
280.0
615
254.0
1608.5
630.0
62.3
102.0
280.0
620
254.0
1608.5
630.0
62.3
102.0
280.0
625
254.0
1608.5
630.0
142.5
114.0
270.0
630
254.0
1608.5
630.0
142.5
114.0
270.0
631
254.0
1608.5
630.0
142.5
114.0
270.0
637
267.0
1608.5
630.0
157.1
114.0
704.0
640
267.0
1608.5
630.0
157.1
76.0
704.0
647
590.0
6157.5
514.6
99.4
108.0
515.0
648
589.0
7081.1
514.0
162.8
126.0
549.0
658
762.0
6538.1
472.4
142.5
196.9
445.2
660
762.0
8172.7
472.4
142.5
196.9
445.2
661
762.0
10073.9
431.0
142.5
133.4
445.2
671
233.0
1182.8
502.3
25.1
75.0
820.0
674
233.0
1470.0
543.0
25.1
100.0
820.0
675
233.0
1470.0
543.0
25.1
75.0
820.0
697
215.0
1013.4
410.1
63.3
86.0
365.9
702
298.0
1256.6
419.9
56.5
150.0
349.2
711
647.1
3573.6
600.0
100.5
165.0
600.0
712
647.1
5227.6
560.0
226.2
165.0
630.0
803
655.0
7021.5
400.0
141.8
325.0
430.0
806
655.0
7021.5
400.0
141.8
230.0
430.0
808
655.0
7021.5
400.0
141.8
270.0
430.0
809
655.0
7021.5
400.0
141.8
160.0
430.0
820
719.4
3195.0
468.1
100.5
150.0
605.0
821
719.4
3195.0
468.1
100.5
200.0
605.0
==PAGE:116==
104
DATABASE FOR SHEAR TESTS - BEAM PROPERTIES
Table D.9: Compressive concrete strength and test result, part I.
Number
Compressive
Test
strength
result
fc
Vtest
MPa
kN
24
99.99
122.78
25
95.74
94.03
40
30.40
265.86
42
36.10
279.50
62
25.88
128.70
63
24.18
249.57
64
25.34
369.39
65
24.49
472.61
132
82.65
226.62
243
23.63
149.83
245
29.43
228.83
247
66.50
428.80
361
58.51
207.41
362
58.51
279.31
367
66.70
254.61
368
66.70
220.60
373
62.01
229.78
374
62.01
176.12
377
80.32
356.03
380
80.32
259.36
382
80.32
203.95
383
82.25
243.07
385
82.25
245.14
391
68.82
247.54
392
68.82
274.64
420
38.13
209.76
422
35.77
163.06
425
35.31
219.55
426
39.31
205.31
427
22.93
164.39
428
28.89
167.95
430
39.70
237.34
431
14.94
152.83
444
40.56
242.68
483
22.56
130.94
484
22.56
126.25
485
22.56
98.08
490
23.01
800.03
497
24.92
338.32
498
24.92
267.69
499
21.29
346.17
500
21.29
336.36
501
20.31
295.16
503
20.31
296.14
==PAGE:117==
APPENDIX D
105
Table D.10: Compressive concrete strength and test result, part II.
Number
Compressive
Test
strength
result
fc
Vtest
MPa
kN
504
23.75
695.35
505
23.75
707.35
506
44.65
1009.35
507
44.65
957.35
508
47.50
1200.35
509
47.50
1258.35
510
57.00
1349.35
511
24.42
441.70
512
25.27
441.70
525
38.66
121.11
534
31.69
138.80
535
28.98
142.72
536
28.98
155.47
564
36.10
100.93
565
40.85
190.73
605
26.33
205.91
608
20.25
154.91
613
33.53
135.81
615
30.08
139.36
620
49.28
179.91
625
26.70
216.91
630
28.50
209.91
631
29.18
239.26
637
28.41
160.87
640
32.59
190.87
647
57.57
536.67
648
57.57
681.73
658
68.79
799.06
660
119.04
760.63
661
119.04
1183.37
671
76.10
207.47
674
70.49
247.77
675
71.92
221.27
697
69.35
149.32
702
32.53
140.76
711
83.00
551.42
712
83.90
894.42
803
34.20
490.38
806
63.65
696.38
808
82.65
605.38
809
82.65
728.38
820
29.30
657.10
821
29.83
571.22
==PAGE:118==
106
DATABASE FOR SHEAR TESTS - BEAM PROPERTIES
==PAGE:119==
Appendix E
Database for Shear Tests - Results
Various ﬁgures and results described in section 4.2 and based on [Reineck et al., 2014] are
shown in this appendix.
Predictions of Shear Capacity
Table E.1 lists statistical parameters for the test-prediction ratios determined by EC2 and
LoA II in MC2010.
Table E.1: Statistical parameters for shear capacity predic-
tions calculated by EC2 and LoA II in MC2010.
EC2
MC2010
Average test-prediction ratio
0.9330
1.577
Standard deviation of test-prediction ratio
0.2466
0.3266
Coefﬁcient of variation for test-prediction ratio [%]
26.43
20.72
5 % quantile of test-prediction ratio
0.4398
0.9232
95 % quantile of test-prediction ratio
1.426
2.230
Quantity of unsafe elements [%]
54
0
107
==PAGE:120==
108
DATABASE FOR SHEAR TESTS - RESULTS
Figure E.1 shows the average shear-prediction ratios together with the 95 % conﬁdence
intervals.
EC2
MC2010
Test-prediction ratio
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Average test-prediction ratio
95 % conﬁdence interval
Figure E.1: Average ratios and 95 % conﬁdence intervals
for test-prediction ratios for EC2 and LoA II in MC2010.
==PAGE:121==
APPENDIX E
109
Practical Tests
Figure E.2 and E.3 show normalized shear capacities for the practical tests together with
shear capacity predictions calculated by EC2 and LoA II in MC2010, respectively.
ψ/ν [-]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
τR/νfc [-]
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
EC2
Tests
Figure E.2: Shear capacity predictions found by EC2 together with practical tests.
ψ/kc [-]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
τR/kcfc [-]
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
MC2010
Tests
Figure E.3: Shear capacity predictions found by LoA II in MC2010 together with practical tests.
==PAGE:122==
110
DATABASE FOR SHEAR TESTS - RESULTS
Figure E.4 shows the 95 % conﬁdence intervals for EC2 and LoA II for the practical tests.
EC2
MC2010
Test-prediction ratio
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Average test-prediction ratio
95 % conﬁdence interval
Figure E.4: Average test-prediction ratio together with 95 % conﬁ-
dence interval for practical tests for EC2 and LoA II in MC2010.
Table E.2 lists statistical parameters for the test-prediction ratios for the practical tests.
Table E.2: Statistical parameters for practical tests for shear capacity
predictions calculated by EC2 and LoA II in MC2010.
EC2
MC2010
Average test-prediction ratio
1.092
1.395
Standard deviation of test-prediction ratio
0.0884
0.1479
Coefﬁcient of variation for test-prediction ratio [%]
8.092
10.60
5 % quantile of test-prediction ratio
0.9156
1.099
95 % quantile of test-prediction ratio
1.269
1.691
Quantity of unsafe elements [%]
11
0
==PAGE:123==
APPENDIX E
111
Requirement in EC2 to Avoid Large Crack Width
Table E.3 lists statistical parameters for the test-prediction ratios for the shear capacities
found by EC2 and LoA II in MC2010 together with the ratios for EC2 including the crack
width requirement.
Table E.3: Statistical parameters for shear capacity predictions calculated by
EC2, EC2 including the crack width requirement and LoA II in MC2010.
EC2
EC2 crack1
MC2010
Average test-prediction ratio
0.9330
1.351
1.577
Standard deviation of test-prediction ratio
0.2466
0.2961
0.3266
Coefﬁcient of variation for test-prediction ratio [%]
26.43
21.92
20.72
5 % quantile of test-prediction ratio
0.4398
0.7587
0.9232
95 % quantile of test-prediction ratio
1.426
1.943
2.230
Quantity of unsafe elements [%]
54
3
0
The normal distributions for the predictions are demonstrated in Figure E.5.
Test-prediction ratio
0
1
2
3
Probability density [%]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
EC2
EC2 including crack width requirement
MC2010
Figure E.5: Normal distributions for the shear capacity predictions for LoA II
in MC2010, EC2 and EC2 including the crack width requirement.
1EC2 including the crack width requirement.
==PAGE:124==
112
DATABASE FOR SHEAR TESTS - RESULTS
Figure E.6 and E.7 show the average ratios and the 95 % conﬁdence intervals, respectively.
EC2
EC2 including crack
  width requirement
MC2010
Average test-prediction ratio
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Figure E.6: Average test-prediction ratios for EC2, EC2 including the
crack width requirement and LoA II in MC2010.
EC2
EC2 including crack
  width requirement
MC2010
Test-prediction ratio
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Average test-prediction ratio
95 % conﬁdence interval
Figure E.7: Average ratios and 95 % conﬁdence intervals for test-prediction ratios
for EC2, EC2 including the crack width requirement and LoA II in MC2010.
==PAGE:125==
APPENDIX E
113
Crack Sliding
Table E.4 lists statistical parameters for the test-prediction ratios for the shear capacities
calculated by EC2 for the three types of geometry.
Table E.4: Statistical parameters for different types of cross-sectional
geometry for the shear capacity predictions calculated by EC2.
Rectangular
T-beams
I-beams
Average test-prediction ratio
0.7040
1.056
1.184
Standard deviation of test-prediction ratio
0.1338
0.1219
0.1593
Coefﬁcient of variation for test-prediction ratio [%]
19.01
11.55
13.46
5 % quantile of test-prediction ratio
0.4364
0.8118
0.8652
95 % quantile of test-prediction ratio
0.9717
1.299
1.502
Quantity of unsafe elements [%]
97
32
6
Table E.5 lists statistical parameters for the test-prediction ratios for the rectangular beam
elements determined by the variable strut inclination method and the crack sliding ap-
proach, respectively.
Table E.5: Statistical parameters for shear design predictions calculated
by the variable strut inclination method and the crack sliding theory.
VSIM2
CST3
Average test-prediction ratio
0.7040
0.7713
Standard deviation of test-prediction ratio
0.1338
0.1418
Coefﬁcient of variation for test-prediction ratio [%]
19.01
18.38
5 % quantile of test-prediction ratio
0.4364
0.4877
95 % quantile of test-prediction ratio
0.9717
1.055
Quantity of unsafe elements [%]
97
95
2Variable Strut Inclination Method.
3Crack Sliding Theory.
==PAGE:126==
114
DATABASE FOR SHEAR TESTS - RESULTS
Different Levels of Approximation for MC2010
Figure E.8 shows the normalized shear capacities calculated by LoA I, II and III together
with the corresponding test values.
ψ/kc [-]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
τR/kcfc [-]
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
LoA I
LoA II
LoA III
Tests
Figure E.8: Shear capacities found by LoA I, II and III in MC2010.
Figure E.9 illustrates the 95 % conﬁdence intervals for LoA I, II and III.
LoA I
LoA II
LoA III
Test-Prediction Ratio
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Average test-prediction ratio
95 % conﬁdence interval
Figure E.9: Average ratios and 95 % conﬁdence intervals
for test-prediction ratios for LoA I, II and III in MC2010.
Table E.6 shows statistical parameters for the test-prediction ratios for the three levels of
approximation.
==PAGE:127==
APPENDIX E
115
Table E.6: Statistical parameters for for shear capacity pre-
dictions calculated by LoA I, II and III in MC2010.
LoA I
LoA II
LoA III
Average test-prediction ratio
1.832
1.577
1.171
Standard deviation of test-prediction ratio
0.5234
0.3266
0.2063
Coefﬁcient of variation for test-prediction ratio [%]
28.58
20.72
17.62
5 % quantile of test-prediction ratio
0.7846
0.9232
0.7583
95 % quantile of test-prediction ratio
2.878
2.230
1.584
Quantity of unsafe elements [%]
0
0
24
==PAGE:128==
116
DATABASE FOR SHEAR TESTS - RESULTS
==PAGE:129==
Appendix F
Beam No. 1
In this appendix, calculations regarding the shear resistance and optimization of the de-
sign for beam no. 1 is demonstrated. First, some general parameters used throughout
the calculations are determined. Afterwards, the shear capacity is calculated for EC2 and
MC2010. Also the ﬂexural moment capacity is determined. Finally, calculations concern-
ing an optimization of the transverse reinforcement are shown for EC2 and MC2010.
General Parameters
A range of parameters used throughout the appendix is introduced in this section. All
beam properties relevant for the case of shear evaluation are listed in Table F.1.
Table F.1: Parameters for beam no. 1.
Geometric parameters
Width, b [mm]
300
Height, h [mm]
500
Length, L [mm]
2000
Longitudinal tensile reinforcement parameters
Effective ﬂexural depth, d [mm]
445
Cross-sectional area of longitudinal reinforcement, As [mm2]
1964
Characteristic yield stress of longitudinal reinforcement, fyk [MPa]
550
Partial safety factor, γs [MPa]
1.2
Design yield stress of longitudinal reinforcement, fyd [MPa]
458
Stirrup parameters
Cross-sectional area of stirrups, Asw [mm2]
226
Stirrup distance, sw [mm]
200
Characteristic yield stress of stirrups, fywk [MPa]
550
Partial safety factor, γs [MPa]
1.2
Design yield stress of stirrups, fywd [MPa]
458
Concrete parameters
Characteristic strength of concrete, fck [MPa]
35
Partial safety factor , γc [MPa]
1.45
Design strength of concrete, fcd [MPa]
24.1
117
==PAGE:130==
118
BEAM NO. 1
Minimum transverse reinforcement ratio, ρw,min:
ρw,min = 0.08
p
fck
fywk
= 0.000861
(F.1)
Depth of compression zone, x:
x = As fyd
bw fcd
= 124 mm
(F.2)
Effective shear depth, z:
z = d −1
2x = 383 mm
(F.3)
Transverse reinforcement ratio, ρw:
ρw = Asw
bwsw
= 0.00377
(F.4)
Evaluation of Shear Capacity Using EC2
The shear capacity for beam no. 1 is in this section calculated by means of EC2.
Concrete effectiveness factor, ν:
ν = 0.6
 
1 −fck
250
!
= 0.52
(F.5)
cot θ is not chosen as the maximum permissible value according to (2.46). Instead, the
value is chosen as1:
cot θ = 1.89
(F.6)
Steel contribution to design shear resistance, VRd,s:
VRd,s = Asw
sw
z fywd cot θ = 375 kN
(F.7)
Maximum permitted value of design shear resistance, VRd,max:
VRd,max = bwzν fcd
1
cot θ + tan θ = 596 kN
(F.8)
Maximum design shear force (located at support):
VEd,max = pdL = 2 m × pd
(F.9)
Design shear force at a distance z cot θ from the support2:
VEd,z cot θ = VEd,max
L −z cot θ
L
= 1.28 m × pd
(F.10)
1The reason for this choice is that this value later in the calculations turns out to yield the largest possible
value of the design load pd. If cot θ = 2.5 was chosen, pd would be reduced since crushing of the concrete
would happen prior to yielding of the stirrups.
2The design shear resistance equivalent to this design shear force is the one calculated in (F.7).
==PAGE:131==
APPENDIX F
119
Requirements according to (F.7) and (F.8) to the design load pd:
VEd,z cot θ
VRd,s
≤1 ⇒pd ≤293 kN/m
VEd,max
VRd,max
≤1 ⇒pd ≤298 kN/m
(F.11)
The design load must be up to 293 kN/m in order to comply with the shear capacity of
the beam with reference to EC2.
Additional tensile force in the longitudinal tensile reinforcement due to shear:
∆Ftd = 1
2VEd,max cot θ = 1.89 m × pd
(F.12)
For the maximum allowable value of pd, the additional tensile force in the longitudinal
reinforcement is:
∆Ftd = 554 kN
(F.13)
Evaluation of Shear Capacity Using MC2010
The shear capacity for beam no. 1 is in this section calculated in compliance with MC2010.
The control section is positioned at a location d from the support as shown in Figure F.1.
There is only one control section.
pd
d
Figure F.1: Control section for beam no. 1.
At the control section, VEd and MEd depend on the design load, pd, by the following
relationships:
VEd = pd(L −d)
(F.14)
MEd = −1
2 pd(L −d)2
(F.15)
To be able to ﬁnd the largest permissible value of the design load, an initial guess of pd
is chosen after which initial values of VRd and MRd are chosen as VEd and MEd at the
control section, calculated from (F.14) and (F.15). Afterwards, the iteration described in
Figure 3.8 and previously shown in Table A.2 is executed. As was the case in the example
in Appendix A, 5 % is chosen as the acceptable tolerance between the shear resistance
==PAGE:132==
120
BEAM NO. 1
used in the calculations and the shear resistance obtained.
The relationship between VRd and MRd at the control section is necessary to know since
MRd is found from VRd throughout the iteration:
MRd = −1
2(L −d)VRd
(F.16)
When the iteration has been executed, the new design load can be found by:
pd = VRd
L −d
(F.17)
The difference between the load in (F.17) and the initial guess of pd is then determined,
and a difference of maximum 5 % is again chosen to be acceptable. If the difference
exceeds this tolerance, the whole iteration procedure is again executed where the new
calculated value of pd is used. Consequently, a double iteration is conducted.
The numerous intermediate results are not listed, but the ﬁnal parameters are shown in
Table F.2.
Table F.2: Results from double iteration for beam no. 1.
εx [×10−4]
θmin [degrees]
VRd,s [kN]
pd [kN/m]
11.92
31.92
319
205
Also the maximum permitted value of the design shear resistance must be calculated.
Parameter taking the concrete strength into consideration, ηf c:
ηf c =
 30
fck
1/3
= 0.95 ≤1.0
(F.18)
Average principal tensile strain, ε1:
ε1 = εx + (εx + 0.002) cot2 θ = 0.0094
(F.19)
Factors kε and kc:
kε =
1
1.2 + 55ε1
= 0.58 ≤0.65
(F.20)
kc = kεηf c = 0.55
(F.21)
Maximum permitted design shear resistance, VRd,max:
VRd,max = kc fcdbwz cos θ sin θ = 688 kN
(F.22)
Design shear force at a distance d from the support3:
VEd,d = VEd,max
L −d
L
= 1.56 m × pd
(F.23)
3The design shear resistance equivalent to this design shear force is the one calculated in the iteration in
Table F.2.
==PAGE:133==
APPENDIX F
121
Requirements to the design load:
VEd,d
VRd,s
≤1 ⇒pd ≤205 kN/m
VEd,d
VRd,max
≤1 ⇒pd ≤442 kN/m
(F.24)
The ﬁrst result in (F.24) was already determined in Table F.2 from the double iteration.
The design load must be up to 205 kN/m in order to comply with the shear capacity of
the beam with reference to MC2010.
Additional tensile force in the longitudinal reinforcement due to shear:
∆Ftd = 1
2VEd,max cot θ = 1.61 m × pd
(F.25)
For the maximum allowable value of pd, the additional tensile force in the longitudinal
reinforcement becomes:
∆Ftd = 329 kN
(F.26)
Evaluation of Flexural Moment Capacity
Additionally, the ﬂexural moment capacity of the beam element also has to be examined.
The beam is normally reinforced if the following inequality is fulﬁlled:
ωund < ω < ωbal
(F.27)
where ωund is the reinforcement degree for the under-reinforced cross-section, ω is the
reinforcement degree, and ωbal is the reinforcement degree for the over-reinforced cross-
section.
The characteristic strength of the concrete is 35 MPa, and the reinforcement is in class B.
Based on this, the strength parameters are able to be looked up in [Jensen, 2008]:
εcu3 = 0.35 %
εuk = 5.0 %
λ = 0.8
η = 1.0
The reinforcement degree for the under-reinforced specimen is calculated by:
ωund = λ
εcu3
εcu3 + εuk
= 0.0523
(F.28)
Design yield strain of reinforcement:
εyd,s = fyd
Es
= 0.00229 = 0.229 %
(F.29)
==PAGE:134==
122
BEAM NO. 1
The reinforcement degree for the over-reinforced specimen is found by:
ωbal = λ
εcu3
εcu3 + εyd,s
= 0.483
(F.30)
The reinforcement degree is according to [Jensen, 2008] given by:
ω = As fyd
bdη fcd
= 0.279
(F.31)
Hence, the beam element is normally reinforced since the inequality in (F.27) is fulﬁlled.
The moment capacity is according to [Jensen, 2008] determined by:
MRd =
 
1 −1
2ω
!
ωbd2η fcd = 344 kNm
(F.32)
The maximum design moment is found at the support:
MEd,max = −1
2 pdL2 = −2 m2 × pd
(F.33)
Since the longitudinal tensile reinforcement is placed in the top of the beam as it should
be according to the negative moment distribution, the requirement in compliance with
(F.32) to the design load becomes:

MEd,max
MRd
 ≤1 ⇒pd ≤172 kN/m
(F.34)
Optimization of Stirrups Using EC2
The transverse reinforcement arrangement is now with reference to EC2 optimized in
compliance with a uniformly distributed design load of pd = 150 kN/m. The maximum
design shear force is given by:
VEd,max = pdL = 300 kN
(F.35)
cot θ = 2.5 is chosen since the maximum permitted value of the design shear resistance
can now fulﬁl the criteria regarding VEd,max for this choice of cot θ:
VRd,max = bwzν fcd
1
cot θ + tan θ = 497 kN > VEd,max
(F.36)
It is in the optimized design chosen to use stirrups with a diameter of 6 mm throughout
the beam. The distance between the stirrups with regard to a minimum amount of shear
reinforcement is determined:
ρw,min ≤Asw
bwsw
⇒sw ≤
Asw
bwρw,min
= 221 mm
(F.37)
Thus, sw = 220 mm is chosen for a minimum amount of reinforcement.
Design shear resistance corresponding to ø6 stirrups per 220 mm:
==PAGE:135==
APPENDIX F
123
VRd,min = Asw
sw
z fywd cot θ = 114 kN
τRd,min = VRd,min
bwz
= 0.99 MPa
(F.38)
Since it is noticed in (F.38) that the design shear resistance corresponding to a minimum
amount of shear reinforcement is much less than the maximum design shear force, it is
chosen to divide the beam into more length increments and evaluate the necessary shear
reinforcement in each increment.
Maximum permissible length increment:
l = z cot θ = 958 mm
(F.39)
It is for the sake of simplicity chosen to split the beam into two equally sized increments
of 1 m each. Figure F.2 shows the shear stress distribution for the beam together with
a constant shear stress in each of the two length increments, deﬁned on the basis of the
distance z cot θ inside each increment.
τ, τ ′
x
1 m
1 m
τ ′
2
τ ′
1
τEd,max
z cot θ
z cot θ
Figure F.2: Shear stress distribution for beam no. 1.
The shear stresses mentioned in Figure F.2 are calculated:
τEd,max = VEd,max
bwz
= 2.61 MPa
(F.40)
τ′
1 = τEd,max
L −z cot θ
L
= 1.36 MPa > τRd,min
(F.41)
τ′
2 = τEd,max
L −1 m −z cot θ
L
= 0.06 MPa < τRd,min
(F.42)
Only τ′
1 is larger than τRd,min and the beam is therefore designed for τ′
1 and τRd,min. ø6
stirrups are chosen for the entire beam.
Dimensioning for τ′
1:
==PAGE:136==
124
BEAM NO. 1
VEd,1 = VEd,max
L −z cot θ
L
= 156 kN
(F.43)
sw = 140 mm ⇒VRd = Asw
sw
z fywd cot θ = 177 kN > VEd,1
(F.44)
For τRd,min, it has already been determined to use ø6 stirrups per 220 mm.
Figure F.3 shows the optimized shear reinforcement design of beam no. 1 according to
EC2.
1 m
1 m
ø6/140 mm
ø6/220 mm
2 m
Figure F.3: Optimized shear reinforcement arrangement of beam no. 1 with regard to EC2.
Additional tensile force in the longitudinal reinforcement due to shear:
∆Ftd = 1
2VEd,max cot θ = 375 kN
(F.45)
The above transverse reinforcement design fulﬁls all requirements for EC2 listed in sec-
tion 2.5 and [European Committee for Standardization, 2004].
Optimization of Stirrups Using MC2010
The transverse reinforcement arrangement is also with reference to MC2010 optimized in
compliance with the uniformly distributed design load of pd = 150 kN/m.
Only one value of the angle of inclination θ must be used throughout the beam since
a varying angle would imply that equilibrium between the different compression stress
ﬁelds in the concrete is not maintained. To obtain a safe design of the beam, the smallest
value of cot θmin throughout the beam should therefore be used. It means that the largest
value of θmin and thus the largest value of the longitudinal strain, εx, should be applied.
εx will with reference to the dependency of the shear force, V, and the moment, M, be
largest at the location of the greatest values of V and M. The shear force and the moment
are both largest at the support:
VEd,max = pdL = 300 kN
(F.46)
MEd,max = −1
2 pdL2 = −300 kNm
(F.47)
==PAGE:137==
APPENDIX F
125
The peak longitudinal strain at the support is determined using (F.46) and (F.47):
εx =
MEd,max
z
+ VEd,max
2EsAs
= 0.001379
(F.48)
(F.48) is used to ﬁnd the maximum value of θmin:
θ = θmin = 20◦+ 10, 000εx = 33.79◦
(F.49)
yielding cot θ = 1.49 and z cot θ = 572 mm.
The maximum design shear force is already determined in (F.35). All parameters used to
determine the maximum permitted design shear resistance is calculated:
ηf c =
 30
fck
1/3
= 0.95 ≤1.0
ε1 = εx + (εx + 0.002) cot2 θ = 0.0089
kε =
1
1.2 + 55ε1
= 0.59 ≤0.65
kc = kεηf c = 0.56
(F.50)
The maximum permitted design shear resistance is evaluated and observed to be satisfy-
ing since it is larger than the maximum design shear force:
VRd,max = kc fcdbwz cos θ sin θ = 720 kN > VEd,max
(F.51)
As was also opted for in the optimization performed with reference to EC2, the mini-
mum shear reinforcement is chosen as ø6 stirrups per 220 mm, yielding a design shear
resistance of:
VRd,min = Asw
sw
z fywd cot θ = 68 kN
(F.52)
This design shear resistance is in terms of the shear stress given by:
τRd,min = VRd,min
bwz
= 0.59 MPa
(F.53)
Although each length increment according to z cot θ must be as low as 572 mm, it is with
reference to practical considerations chosen to divide the beam element into only two
equally sized increments of 1 m each, just like in the optimization executed in compli-
ance with EC2. Figure F.4 shows the shear stress distribution for the beam together with
a constant shear stress in each of the two length increments, deﬁned on the basis of the
distance of z cot θ inside each increment.
==PAGE:138==
126
BEAM NO. 1
τ, τ ′
x
1 m
1 m
τ ′
2
τ ′
1
τEd,max
z cot θ
z cot θ
Figure F.4: Shear stress distribution for beam no. 1.
The shear stresses mentioned in Figure F.4 are calculated:
τEd,max = VEd,max
bwz
= 2.61 MPa
(F.54)
τ′
1 = τEd,max
L −z cot θ
L
= 1.86 MPa > τRd,min
(F.55)
τ′
2 = τEd,max
L −1 m −z cot θ
L
= 0.56 MPa < τRd,min
(F.56)
Only τ′
1 is larger than τRd,min and the beam is therefore designed for τ′
1 and τRd,min. ø10
stirrups are chosen for the dimensioning executed in correlation with τ′
1 whereas ø6 stir-
rups were chosen for the dimensioning performed in proportion to τRd,min.
Dimensioning for τ′
1:
VEd,1 = τ′
1bwz = 214 kN
(F.57)
sw = 180 mm ⇒VRd,1 = Asw
sw
z fywd cot θ = 228 kN > VEd,1
(F.58)
For τRd,min, it has already been determined to use ø6 stirrups per 220 mm.
Figure F.5 shows the optimized shear reinforcement design of beam no. 1 according to
MC2010.
Additional tensile force in the longitudinal reinforcement due to shear:
∆Ftd = 1
2VEd,max cot θ = 224 kN
(F.59)
The transverse reinforcement design fulﬁls all requirements for MC2010 listed in section
3.4 and [Walraven et al., 2011].
==PAGE:139==
APPENDIX F
127
1 m
1 m
ø10/180 mm
ø6/220 mm
2 m
Figure F.5: Optimized shear reinforcement arrangement of beam no. 1 with regard to MC2010.
==PAGE:140==
128
BEAM NO. 1
==PAGE:141==
Appendix G
Beam No. 2
In this appendix, calculations regarding the shear resistance and optimization of the de-
sign for beam no. 2 is demonstrated. As was the case for beam no. 1, some general
parameters used throughout the calculations are determined at ﬁrst. Afterwards, the
shear capacity is calculated for EC2 and MC2010. Also the ﬂexural moment capacity is
determined. Finally, calculations concerning an optimization of the transverse reinforce-
ment are shown for EC2 and MC2010.
General Parameters
A range of parameters used throughout the appendix is introduced in this section. All
beam properties relevant for the case of shear evaluation are listed in Table G.1.
Minimum transverse reinforcement ratio, ρw,min:
ρw,min = 0.08
p
fck
fywk
= 0.000976
(G.1)
Depth of compression zone, x:
x = As fyd
bf fcd
= 43 mm < h f
(G.2)
Effective shear depth, z:
z = d −1
2x = 668 mm
(G.3)
Since MC2010 according to section 3.4 and [Walraven et al., 2011] requires that the web
width may be taken into account up to a maximum of only 400 mm, the transverse rein-
forcement ratio will be different for MC2010 compared to EC2. (G.4) is thus only valid
for EC2 whereas (G.5) is applicable for MC2010:
ρw,EC2 = Asw
bwsw
= 0.00402
(G.4)
ρw,MC2010 =
Asw
bw,redsw
= 0.00503
(G.5)
129
==PAGE:142==
130
BEAM NO. 2
Table G.1: Parameters for beam no. 2.
Geometric parameters
Flange width, bf [mm]
2000
Web width, bw [mm]
500
Height, h [mm]
750
Flange height, h f [mm]
250
Length, L [mm]
9300
Longitudinal tensile reinforcement parameters
Effective ﬂexural depth, d [mm]
690
Cross-sectional area of longitudinal reinforcement, As [mm2]
5890
Characteristic yield stress of longitudinal reinforcement, fyk [MPa]
550
Partial safety factor, γs [MPa]
1.2
Design yield stress of longitudinal reinforcement, fyd [MPa]
458
Stirrup parameters
Cross-sectional area of stirrups, Asw [mm2]
402
Stirrup distance, sw [mm]
200
Characteristic yield stress of stirrups, fywk [MPa]
550
Partial safety factor, γs [MPa]
1.2
Design yield stress of stirrups, fywd [MPa]
458
Concrete parameters
Characteristic strength of concrete, fck [MPa]
45
Partial safety factor, γc [MPa]
1.45
Design strength of concrete, fcd [MPa]
31.0
Evaluation of Shear Capacity Using EC2
The shear capacity for beam no. 2 is in this section calculated by means of EC2.
Concrete effectiveness factor, ν:
ν = 0.6
 
1 −fck
250
!
= 0.49
(G.6)
cot θ is not chosen as the maximum permissible value according to (2.46). Instead, the
value is chosen as1:
cot θ = 2.16
(G.7)
Steel contribution to design shear resistance, VRd,s:
VRd,s = Asw
sw
z fywd cot θ = 1329 kN
(G.8)
Maximum permitted value of design shear resistance, VRd,max:
VRd,max = bwzν fcd
1
cot θ + tan θ = 1936 kN
(G.9)
1The reason for this choice is that this value later in the calculations turns out to yield the largest possible
value of the design load pd. If cot θ = 2.5 was chosen, pd would be reduced since crushing of the concrete
would happen prior to yielding of the stirrups.
==PAGE:143==
APPENDIX G
131
Maximum design shear force (located at support):
VEd,max = 1
2 pdL = 4.65 m × pd
(G.10)
Design shear force at a distance z cot θ from the support2:
VEd,z cot θ = VEd,max
1
2 L −z cot θ
1
2 L
= 3.21 m × pd
(G.11)
Requirements according to (G.8) and (G.9) to the design load:
VEd,z cot θ
VRd,s
≤1 ⇒pd ≤414 kN/m
VEd,max
VRd,max
≤1 ⇒pd ≤416 kN/m
(G.12)
The design load must be up to 414 kN/m in order to comply with the shear capacity of
the beam with reference to EC2.
Additional tensile force in the longitudinal reinforcement due to shear:
∆Ftd = 1
2VEd,max cot θ = 5.02 m × pd
(G.13)
For the maximum allowable value of pd, the additional tensile force in the longitudinal
reinforcement is:
∆Ftd = 2079 kN
(G.14)
Evaluation of Shear Capacity Using MC2010
The shear capacity for beam no. 2 is in this section calculated in compliance with MC2010.
The control section is positioned at a location d from the support as shown in Figure G.1.
There is only one control section.
pd
d
Figure G.1: Control section for beam no. 2.
At the control section, VEd and MEd depend on the design load by the following relation-
ships:
2The design shear resistance equivalent to this design shear force is the one calculated in (G.8).
==PAGE:144==
132
BEAM NO. 2
VEd = pd
1
2 L −d

(G.15)
MEd = 1
2 pdd(L −d)
(G.16)
The same procedure as followed for beam no. 1 in Appendix F is used to ﬁnd the largest
permissible value of the design load. An initial guess of pd is chosen after which initial
values of VRd and MRd are chosen as VEd and MEd at the control section, calculated from
(G.15) and (G.16). Afterwards, an iteration is executed to ﬁnd the longitudinal strain εx. 5
% is in the iteration chosen as the acceptable tolerance between the shear resistance used
in the calculations and the shear resistance obtained.
The relationship between VRd and MRd at the control section is necessary to know since
MRd is found from VRd throughout the iteration:
MRd = d(L −d)
L −2d VRd
(G.17)
When the iteration has been executed, the new design load can be found by:
pd =
VRd
1
2 L −d
(G.18)
The difference between the load in (G.18) and the initial guess of pd is then determined,
and a difference of maximum 5 % is again chosen to be acceptable whereby a double it-
eration is conducted.
The numerous intermediate results are not listed, but the ﬁnal parameters are shown in
Table G.2.
Table G.2: Results from double iteration for beam 2.
εx [×10−4]
θmin [degrees]
VRd,s [kN]
pd [kN/m]
9.634
29.63
1082
273
Also the maximum permitted value of the design shear resistance must be calculated.
Parameter taking the concrete strength into consideration, ηf c:
ηf c =
 30
fck
1/3
= 0.87 ≤1.0
(G.19)
Average principal tensile strain, ε1:
ε1 = εx + (εx + 0.002) cot2 θ = 0.0101
(G.20)
Factors kε and kc:
kε =
1
1.2 + 55ε1
= 0.57 ≤0.65
(G.21)
kc = kεηf c = 0.50
(G.22)
==PAGE:145==
APPENDIX G
133
Maximum permitted design shear resistance, VRd,max:
VRd,max = kc fcdbwz cos θ sin θ = 1772 kN
(G.23)
It is to be noticed that a web width of only 400 mm is used in (G.23) according to the
requirement in MC2010 described in section 3.4 and [Walraven et al., 2011].
Design shear force at a distance d from the support3:
VEd,d = VEd,max
1
2 L −d
1
2 L
= 3.96 m × pd
(G.24)
Requirements to the design load pd:
VEd,d
VRd,s
≤1 ⇒pd ≤273 kN/m
VEd,d
VRd,max
≤1 ⇒pd ≤447 kN/m
(G.25)
The ﬁrst result in (G.25) was already determined in Table G.2 from the double iteration.
The design load must be up to 273 kN/m in order to comply with the shear capacity of
the beam with reference to MC2010.
Additional tensile force in the longitudinal reinforcement due to shear:
∆Ftd = 1
2VEd,max cot θ = 4.09 m × pd
(G.26)
For the maximum allowable value of pd, the additional tensile force in the longitudinal
reinforcement becomes:
∆Ftd = 1116 kN
(G.27)
Evaluation of Flexural Moment Capacity
T-beams are according to [Jensen, 2008] normally reinforced if the height of the ﬂexural
compression zone is so small that the tensile reinforcement will yield, i.e.:
x ≤
εcu3
εcu3 + εyd,s
d
(G.28)
The characteristic strength of the concrete is 45 MPa, and the reinforcement is in class B.
The strength parameters are thus identical to the ones used for the determination of the
ﬂexural capacity for beam no. 1, and the inequality is fulﬁlled:
x = 43 mm ≤
εcu3
εcu3 + εyd,s
d = 417 mm
(G.29)
Thus, the beam is normally reinforced.
3The design shear resistance equivalent to this design shear force is the one calculated in the iteration in
Table G.2.
==PAGE:146==
134
BEAM NO. 2
The design moment capacity is for T-beams with the ﬂexural compression zone located
only in the top ﬂange given by:
MRd = bf x

d −1
2x

η fcd = 1784 kNm
(G.30)
The maximum design moment is determined as:
MEd,max = 1
8 pdL2 = 10.8 m2 × pd
(G.31)
Requirement according to (G.30) to the design load:
MEd,max
MRd
≤1 ⇒pd ≤165 kN/m
(G.32)
Optimization of Stirrups Using EC2
The transverse reinforcement arrangement is now with reference to EC2 optimized in
compliance with a uniformly distributed design load of pd = 160 kN/m. The maximum
design shear force is given by:
VEd,max = 1
2 pdL = 744 kN
(G.33)
cot θ = 2.5 is now chosen since the maximum permitted value of the design shear resis-
tance can now fulﬁl the criteria regarding VEd,max for this choice of cot θ:
VRd,max = bwzν fcd
1
cot θ + tan θ = 1751 kN > VEd,max
(G.34)
It is in the optimized design chosen to use stirrups with a diameter of 10 mm throughout
the beam. The distance between the stirrups with regard to a minimum amount of shear
reinforcement is determined:
ρw,min ≤Asw
bwsw
⇒sw ≤
Asw
bwρw,min
= 322 mm
(G.35)
Thus, sw = 320 mm is chosen for a minimum amount of shear reinforcement.
Design shear force corresponding to ø10 stirrups per 320 mm:
VRd,min = Asw
sw
z fywd cot θ = 376 kN
τRd,min = VRd,min
bwz
= 1.12 MPa
(G.36)
Since it is noticed in (G.36) that the design shear resistance corresponding to a minimum
amount of shear reinforcement is much less than the maximum design shear force, it is
chosen to divide the beam into more length increments and evaluate the necessary shear
reinforcement in each increment.
Maximum permissible length increment:
l = z cot θ = 1670 mm
(G.37)
==PAGE:147==
APPENDIX G
135
Both halves of the beam are identically designed and only the left half of the beam is
examined in the following. The left half is divided into three length increments where
the ﬁrst length increment at the support is chosen to have a length of 1.7 m which is a
bit longer than z cot θ. The length of the next increment is chosen as z cot θ and the last
increment becomes 1.28 m which is less than z cot θ. The reason for this choice of length
increments is demonstrated in the following calculations where it turns out that the two
last increments away from the support both require only a minimum amount of shear
reinforcement. Therefore, each half of the beam ends up being divided into two parts of
1.7 m and 2.95 m.
Figure G.2 shows the shear stress distribution for the left half of the beam together with
a constant shear stress in the two ﬁrst length increments, deﬁned on the basis of the dis-
tance of z cot θ inside each increment.
τ, τ ′
x
1.7 m
1.28 m
τ ′
1
τEd,max
1.67 m
4.65 m
τ ′
2
z cot θ
z cot θ
< z cot θ
Figure G.2: Shear stress distribution for beam no. 2.
The shear stresses mentioned in Figure G.2 are calculated:
τEd,max = VEd,max
bwz
= 2.23 MPa
(G.38)
τ′
1 = τEd,max
1
2 L −z cot θ
1
2 L
= 1.43 MPa > τRd,min
(G.39)
τ′
2 = τEd,max
1
2 L −1.7 m −z cot θ
1
2 L
= 0.61 MPa < τRd,min
(G.40)
Only τ′
1 is larger than τRd,min and the beam is therefore designed for τ′
1 and τRd,min. ø10
stirrups are chosen for the entire beam.
Dimensioning for τ′
1:
VEd,1 = VEd,max
1
2 L −z cot θ
1
2 L
= 477 kN
(G.41)
==PAGE:148==
136
BEAM NO. 2
sw = 240 mm ⇒VRd = Asw
sw
z fywd cot θ = 501 kN > VEd,1
(G.42)
For τmin, it has already been determined to use sw = 320 mm.
Figure G.3 shows the optimized shear reinforcement design of beam no. 2 according to
EC2.
1.7 m
2.95 m
ø10/240 mm
ø10/320 mm
4.65 m
cL
Figure G.3: Optimized shear reinforcement arrangement of beam no. 2 with regard to EC2.
Additional tensile force in the longitudinal reinforcement due to shear:
∆Ftd = 1
2VEd,max cot θ = 930 kN
(G.43)
The above transverse reinforcement design fulﬁls all requirements for EC2 listed in sec-
tion 2.5 and [European Committee for Standardization, 2004].
Optimization of Stirrups Using MC2010
The transverse reinforcement arrangement is also with reference to MC2010 optimized in
compliance with the uniformly distributed design load of pd = 160 kN/m.
As already explained for beam no. 1, only one value of the angle of inclination θ must be
used throughout the beam where the largest value of θmin and thus the largest value of
the longitudinal strain, εx, should be applied. The value of εx becomes bigger for a larger
shear force V, but also for a larger moment M. Since the maximum moment is located
in the middle of the beam and the maximum shear force is found at the supports, it is
not possible to immediately assess the location of the maximum value of εx. Thus, the
longitudinal strain is proposed as a function of the distance along the beam, x:
εx(x) =
M(x)
z
+ V(x)
2EsAs
(G.44)
Expressions for the shear force and moment along the beam:
V(x) =

1
2 L −x
 pd
(G.45)
==PAGE:149==
APPENDIX G
137
M(x) = 1
2 pdx(L −x)
(G.46)
Substituting (G.45) and (G.46) into (G.44), the expression for the longitudinal strain be-
comes:
εx(x) =
1
2 pdx(L −x)
z
+
 1
2 L −x
 pd
2EsAs
(G.47)
The locations of the local extremes of εx are found by differentiating the expression in
(G.47) and setting it equal to zero:
ε′
x(x) = 0 ⇒x = 1
2 L −z ∨x = 1
2 L + z
(G.48)
Figure G.4 shows the variation of εx along the beam.
x [m]
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
εx [-]
×10-3
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
Figure G.4: Locations of maximum longitudinal strains in beam no. 2.
It is seen from the ﬁgure that the locations found in (G.48) correspond to the maximum
values of εx. The peak longitudinal strain at the support is determined using (G.47) for
x = 1/2L −z:
εx

x = 1
2 L −z

= 0.001122
(G.49)
(G.49) is used to ﬁnd the maximum value of θmin:
θ = θmin = 20◦+ 10, 000εx = 31.22◦
(G.50)
yielding cot θ = 1.65 and z cot θ = 1102 mm.
The maximum design shear force is already determined in (G.33). All parameters used
to determine the maximum permitted design shear resistance is calculated:
==PAGE:150==
138
BEAM NO. 2
ηf c =
 30
fck
1/3
= 0.87 ≤1.0
ε1 = εx + (εx + 0.002) cot2 θ = 0.0096
kε =
1
1.2 + 55ε1
= 0.58 ≤0.65
kc = kεηf c = 0.50
(G.51)
The maximum permitted design shear resistance is evaluated and observed to be satisfy-
ing since it is larger than the maximum design shear force:
VRd,max = kc fcdbw,redz cos θ sin θ = 1838 kN > VEd,max
(G.52)
Again, it is noticed that a reduced web width of bw,red = 400 mm is used.
As was also opted for in the optimization performed with reference to EC2, the mini-
mum shear reinforcement is chosen as ø10 stirrups per 320 mm, yielding a design shear
resistance of:
VRd,min = Asw
sw
z fywd cot θ = 248 kN
(G.53)
This design shear resistance is in terms of the shear stress given by:
τRd,min = VRd,min
bw,redz = 0.93 MPa
(G.54)
Although each length increment according to z cot θ must be as low as 1102 mm, it is
with reference to practical considerations chosen to divide the beam element into equally
sized increments of 1 m each. Figure F.4 shows the shear stress distribution for the beam
together with the minimum values of the shear stresses in each increment.
τ, τ ′
x
1 m
τ ′
1
τEd,max
4.65 m
1 m
1 m
1 m
0.65 m
τ ′
2
τ ′
3
τ ′
4
Figure G.5: Shear stress distribution for beam no. 2.
The shear stresses mentioned in Figure G.5 are calculated:
==PAGE:151==
APPENDIX G
139
τEd,max = VEd,max
bw,redz = 2.78 MPa
(G.55)
τ′
1 = τEd,max
1
2 L −1 m
1
2 L
= 2.19 MPa > τRd,min
(G.56)
τ′
2 = τEd,max
1
2 L −2 m
1
2 L
= 1.59 MPa > τRd,min
(G.57)
τ′
3 = τEd,max
1
2 L −3 m
1
2 L
= 0.99 MPa > τRd,min
(G.58)
τ′
4 = τEd,max
1
2 L −4 m
1
2 L
= 0.39 MPa < τRd,min
(G.59)
Only τ′
4 is not larger than τRd,min. τ′
3 is however so close to τRd,min that it is chosen to
design the beam for τ′
1, τ′
2 and τRd,min. ø10 stirrups are chosen for the entire beam.
Dimensioning for τ′
1:
VEd,1 = τ′
1bw,redz = 585 kN
(G.60)
sw = 120 mm ⇒VRd,1 = Asw
sw
z fywd cot θ = 661 kN > VEd,1
(G.61)
Dimensioning for τ′
2:
VEd,2 = τ′
2bw,redz = 425 kN
(G.62)
sw = 180 mm ⇒VRd,2 = Asw
sw
z fywd cot θ = 441 kN > VEd,2
(G.63)
For τRd,min, it has already been determined to use ø10 stirrups per = 320 mm.
Figure G.6 shows the optimized shear reinforcement design of beam no. 2 according to
MC2010.
Additional tensile force in the longitudinal reinforcement due to shear:
∆Ftd = 1
2VEd,max cot θ = 614 kN
(G.64)
The transverse reinforcement design fulﬁls all requirements for MC2010 listed in section
3.4 and [Walraven et al., 2011].
==PAGE:152==
140
BEAM NO. 2
1 m
2.65 m
ø10/120 mm
ø10/320 mm
4.65 m
cL
1 m
ø10/180 mm
Figure G.6: Optimized shear reinforcement arrangement of beam no. 2 with regard to MC2010.
==PAGE:153==
Appendix H
Beam No. 3
In this appendix, calculations regarding the shear resistance and optimization of the de-
sign for beam no. 3 is demonstrated. As was the case for the previously designed beams,
some general parameters used throughout the calculations are determined at ﬁrst. Since
the beam is continuous and therefore statically indeterminate, the force method is used
to determine the shear force and moment distributions. Afterwards, the shear capacity
is calculated for EC2 and MC2010. Also the ﬂexural moment capacity is determined. Fi-
nally, calculations concerning an optimization of the transverse reinforcement are shown
for EC2 and MC2010.
General Parameters
A range of parameters used throughout the appendix is introduced in this section. All
beam properties relevant for the case of shear evaluation are listed in Table H.1.
Minimum transverse reinforcement ratio, ρw,min:
ρw,min = 0.08
p
fck
fywk
= 0.000976
(H.1)
Depth of compression zone, x:
x = As fyd
bw fcd
= 56 mm
(H.2)
Effective shear depth, z:
z = d −1
2x = 667 mm
(H.3)
Since MC2010 according to section 3.4 and [Walraven et al., 2011] requires that the web
width may be taken into account up to a maximum of only 400 mm, the transverse rein-
forcement ratio will be different for MC2010 compared to EC2. (H.4) is thus only valid
for EC2 whereas (H.5) is applicable for MC2010:
ρw,EC2 = Asw
bwsw
= 0.00226
(H.4)
141
==PAGE:154==
142
BEAM NO. 3
Table H.1: Parameters for beam no. 3.
Geometric parameters
Width, b [mm]
500
Height, h [mm]
750
Length, L [mm]
7005
Longitudinal tensile reinforcement parameters
Effective ﬂexural depth, d [mm]
695
Cross-sectional area of longitudinal reinforcement, As [mm2]
1885
Characteristic yield stress of longitudinal reinforcement, fyk [MPa]
550
Partial safety factor, γs [MPa]
1.2
Design yield stress of longitudinal reinforcement, fyd [MPa]
458
Stirrup parameters
Cross-sectional area of stirrups, Asw [mm2]
226
Stirrup distance, sw [mm]
200
Characteristic yield stress of stirrups, fywk [MPa]
550
Partial safety factor, γs [MPa]
1.2
Design yield stress of stirrups, fywd [MPa]
458
Concrete parameters
Characteristic strength of concrete, fck [MPa]
45
Partial safety factor, γc [MPa]
1.45
Design strength of concrete, fcd [MPa]
31.0
ρw,MC2010 =
Asw
bw,redsw
= 0.00283
(H.5)
Shear Force and Moment Distributions
Beam no. 3 is statically indeterminate, and it is chosen to use the force method to ﬁnd
the shear force and moment distributions. The force method is an elastic approach, but
a plastic approach would also be possible to use. The moment at the middle support
would in the plastic approach be chosen as a suitable value whereby the spans between
the supports may be fully utilized compared to the elastic approach. However, the max-
imum moment turns out to be located at the right support where the moment cannot
be changed due to a statically determinate system at the cantilevered part of the beam.
Thus, the elastic and plastic approaches will yield the same design moment.
Figure H.1 shows beam no. 3. as a statically determinate structure where the support
located at B is replaced by a vertical force X1.
Load Case 0
Only the uniformly distributed load pd is included in load case 0 which is illustrated in
Figure H.2.
==PAGE:155==
APPENDIX H
143
pd
7.005 m
2.990 m1.815 m 2.200 m
X1
A
B
C
D
Figure H.1: Statically determinate structure of beam no. 3.
pd
7.005 m
4.805 m
2.200 m
A
B
C
D
Figure H.2: Load case 0 for beam no. 3.
The vertical reactions at A and C are found using moment equilibrium:
A :
RC0 × 4.805 m −pd(4.805 m + 2.200 m) × 1
2 × (4.805 m + 2.200 m) = 0
⇒RC0 = 5.106 m × pd
(H.6)
C :
RA0 × 4.805 m + pd × 2.200 m × 1
2 × 2.200 m −pd × 4.805 m × 1
2 × 4.805 m = 0
⇒RA0 = 1.899 m × pd
(H.7)
Control of reactions:
RA0 + RC0 = 4.805 m × pd + 2.200 m × pd
✓
(H.8)
Moment at C:
MCO + pd × 2.2 m × 1
2 × 2.2 m = 0 ⇒MCO = −2.420 m2 × pd
(H.9)
The shear force and moment distributions for load case 0 are illustrated in Figure H.3.
It is necessary to express the moment as a function along the beam. M0
1(x) describes the
moment from A to C and M0
2(x) is the moment from C to D. x denotes the distance along
the beam starting from the left support:
M0
1(x) = RA0x −pdx1
2x = 1.899 m × pdx −1
2 pdx2
(H.10)
M0
2(x) = RA0x + RC0(x −4.805 m) −pdx1
2x = −1
2(x2 −14.01 m × x + 49.07 m2)pd
(H.11)
==PAGE:156==
144
BEAM NO. 3
RA0
V [m ×pd]
2.906m×pd
2.200m ×pd
M [m2 × pd]
1.899 m
RC0
MC0
Figure H.3: Shear force and moment distributions for load case 0.
Load Case 1
Only the vertical concentrated force X1 = 1 is included in load case 1 which is illustrated
in Figure H.4.
7.005 m
2.990 m1.815 m 2.200 m
X1 = 1
A
B
C
D
Figure H.4: Load case 1 for beam no. 3.
The vertical reactions at A and C are again found using moment equilibrium:
A :
X1 × 2.990 m + RC1(2.990 m + 1.815 m) = 0 ⇒RC1 = −0.6223
(H.12)
C :
RA1(2.990 m + 1.815 m) + X1 × 1.815 m = 0 ⇒RA1 = −0.3777
(H.13)
Control of reactions:
RA0 + RC0 = −1
✓
(H.14)
Moment at B:
MB1 = 1 × 2.990 m × 1.815 m
2.990 m + 1.815 m = 1.129 m
(H.15)
==PAGE:157==
APPENDIX H
145
RA0
V
M
1
MB1
RC0
Figure H.5: Shear force and moment distributions for load case 1.
The shear force and moment distributions for load case 1 are illustrated in Figure H.5.
It is again necessary to express the moment as a function along the beam. M1
1(x) describes
the moment from A to B and M1
2(x) describes the moment from B to C. Again, x denotes
the distance along the beam starting from the left support:
M1
1(x) = X1 × 1.815 m
x
2.990 m + 1.815 m = −0.3777x
(H.16)
M1
2(x) = X1 × 2.990 m2.990 m + 1.815 m −x
2.990 m + 1.815 m
= 0.6222(x −4.805 m)
(H.17)
Displacements
The displacements for load case 0 and 1 are now calculated:
u10 =
7.005 m
Z
0 m
M0M1
EI
dx =
2.990 m
Z
0 m
M0
1(x)M1
1(x)
EI
dx +
4.805 m
Z
2.990 m
M0
1(x)M1
2(x)
EI
dx +
7.005 m
Z
4.805 m
M0
2(x) × 0
EI
dx =
2.990 m
Z
0 m
(1.899pdx −1
2 pdx2)(−0.3777x)
EI
dx +
4.805 m
Z
2.990 m
(1.899pdx −1
2 pdx2) × 0.6222(x −4.805 m)
EI
dx + 0
= −2.900 m4 × pd
EI
(H.18)
u11 =
7.005 m
Z
0 m
M1M1
EI
dx =
2.990 m
Z
0 m
M1
1(x)M1
1(x)
EI
dx +
4.805 m
Z
2.990 m
M1
2(x)M1
2(x)
EI
dx +
7.005 m
Z
4.805 m
0 × 0
EI dx =
2.990 m
Z
0 m
−0.3777x(−0.3777x)
EI
dx +
4.805 m
Z
2.990 m
0.662(x −4.805 m) × 0.662(x −4.805 m)
EI
dx + 0
= 2.040 m3 × pd
EI
(H.19)
The vertical reaction at support B called X1 can now be determined using the calculated
displacements:
==PAGE:158==
146
BEAM NO. 3
u1 = u10 + u11X1 = 0
⇒X1 = −u10
u11
= 1.422 m × pd
(H.20)
Shear Force and Moment Distributions
The vertical reactions at the supports can now be calculated using X1:
RA = RA0 + RA1X1 = 1.362 m × pd
(H.21)
RB = X1 = 1.422 m × pd
(H.22)
RC = RC0 + RC1X1 = 4.221 m × pd
(H.23)
Control of reactions:
RA + RB + RC = 7.005 m × pd
✓
(H.24)
The local maximum and minimum shear forces along the beam are now calculated. The
minus signs and plus signs in (H.26)-(H.29) indicate if the forces are to the left or to the
right of the location in question, respectively:
VA = 1.899 m × pd −0.3777 × 1.422 m × pd = 1.362 m × pd
(H.25)
VB−= 1.899 m × pd −2.990 m × pd −0.3777 × 1.422 m × pd = −1.628 m × pd
(H.26)
VB+ = 1.899 m × pd −2.990 m × pd + 0.6223 × 1.422 m × pd = −0.206 m × pd
(H.27)
VC−= 2.906 m × pd + 0.6223 × 1.422 m × pd = −2.021 m × pd
(H.28)
VC+ = 2.200 m × pd + 0 = 2.200 m × pd
(H.29)
VD = 0
(H.30)
Also the local maximum and minimum moments along the beam are calculated. M1.362m
indicates the local maximum moment between A and B which is located just 1.362 m to
the right of A:
MA = 0
(H.31)
M1.362m = 1.899 m × pd × 1.362 m −1
2 pd(1.362 m)2 −0.3777 × 1.362 m × 1.422 m × pd
= 0.9274 m2 × pd
(H.32)
MB = 1.899 m × pd × 2.990 m −1
2 pd(2.990 m)2 −0.3777 × 2.990 m × 1.422 m × pd
= −0.398 m2 × pd
(H.33)
MC = 1.899 m × pd × 4.805 m −1
2 pd(4.805 m)2 + 0 = −2.419 m2 × pd
(H.34)
MD = 0
(H.35)
==PAGE:159==
APPENDIX H
147
The complete expressions for the moment distributions along the beam for the three
spans are showed in (H.36). The distributions are calculated using M(x) = M0(x) +
M1(x)X1:
MAB(x) = 1.362 m × pdx −1
2 pdx2
MBC(x) = 2.784 m × pdx −1
2 pdx2 −4.251 m2 × pd
MCD(x) = −1
2
 x2 −14.01 m × x + 49.07 m2
pd
(H.36)
The shear force and moment distributions for the beam are illustrated in Figure H.6.
1.362
V [m ×pd]
1.628
0.206
2.021
2.200
M [m2 × pd]
2.419
0.398
0.927
Figure H.6: Shear force and moment distributions for beam no. 3.
The calculations are checked by making a simple model in Robot Structure where a uni-
formly distributed load of pd = 527 kN/m is used. The results for the model are seen
in Figure H.7 where it is noticed that the shear forces correspond to the ones calculated
above when dividing by pd = 527 kN/m.
==PAGE:160==
148
BEAM NO. 3
Figure H.7: Results from Robot model of beam no. 3.
Evaluation of Shear Capacity Using EC2
The shear capacity for beam no. 3 is in this section calculated by means of EC2.
Concrete effectiveness factor, ν:
ν = 0.6
 
1 −fck
250
!
= 0.49
(H.37)
cot θ is not chosen as the maximum permissible value according to (2.46). Instead, the
value is chosen as1:
cot θ = 2.09
(H.38)
Steel contribution to design shear resistance, VRd,s:
VRd,s = Asw
sw
z fywd cot θ = 722 kN
(H.39)
Maximum permitted value of design shear resistance, VRd,max:
1The reason for this choice is that this value later in the calculations turns out to yield the largest possible
value of the design load pd. If cot θ = 2.5 was chosen, pd would be reduced since crushing of the concrete
would happen prior to yielding of the stirrups.
==PAGE:161==
APPENDIX H
149
VRd,max = bwzν fcd
1
cot θ + tan θ = 1975 kN
(H.40)
Maximum design shear force, located at right support according to Figure H.6:
VEd,max = 2.2 m × pd
(H.41)
The design shear force should also be calculated a distance z cot θ from the support. The
beam is continuous, and the most critical section a distance z cot θ from a support is ac-
cording to Figure H.6 located to the right of the right support:
VEd,z cot θ = 2.2 m × pd −pdz cot θ = 0.81 m × pd
(H.42)
Requirements according to (H.39) and (H.40) to the design load:
VEd,z cot θ
VRd,s
≤1 ⇒pd ≤896 kN/m
VEd,max
VRd,max
≤1 ⇒pd ≤898 kN/m
(H.43)
The design load must be up to 896 kN/m in order to comply with the shear capacity of
the beam with reference to EC2.
Additional tensile force in the longitudinal reinforcement due to shear:
∆Ftd = 1
2VEd,max cot θ = 2.30 m × pd
(H.44)
For the maximum allowable value of pd, the additional tensile force in the longitudinal
reinforcement is:
∆Ftd = 2060 kN
(H.45)
Evaluation of Shear Capacity Using MC2010
The shear capacity for beam no. 3 is in this section calculated in compliance with MC2010.
The control sections are positioned at distances d from the supports as shown in Fig-
ure H.8. It is seen from the ﬁgure that there are ﬁve control sections to be investigated.
Not necessarily all control sections have to be examined thoroughly, though, since the
most critical section is the one being in possession of the largest value of εx. Thus, control
sections with both a small shear force and a small moment compared to the other control
sections may be ignored.
The shear forces for the ﬁve control sections are determined by the shear force distribu-
tion shown in Figure H.6:
VEd,1 = 0.667 m × pd
(H.46)
VEd,2 = −0.933 m × pd
(H.47)
==PAGE:162==
150
BEAM NO. 3
pd
d
d
d
d
d
1
2
3 4
5
Figure H.8: Control sections for beam no. 3.
VEd,3 = −0.901 m × pd
(H.48)
VEd,4 = −1.326 m × pd
(H.49)
VEd,5 = 1.505 m × pd
(H.50)
The moments for the ﬁve control sections are determined by the expressions listed in
(H.36):
MEd,1 = 0.705 m2 × pd
(H.51)
MEd,2 = 0.492 m2 × pd
(H.52)
MEd,3 = −0.782 m2 × pd
(H.53)
MEd,4 = −1.255 m2 × pd
(H.54)
MEd,5 = −1.133 m2 × pd
(H.55)
It is seen from the above expressions that section 4 or 5 will be most critical since those
sections have larger combinations of V and M compared to the rest of the control sec-
tions. The statement seems fair since control section 4 and 5 are located on both sides of
the right support which according to Figure H.6 is in possession of the maximum shear
force and maximum moment. Thus, only control section 4 and 5 are further investigated.
The same procedure as followed for the previously examined beams is used to ﬁnd the
largest permissible value of the design load. An initial guess of pd is chosen after which
initial values of VRd and MRd are chosen as VEd and MEd at the control section in ques-
tion, calculated from (H.49) and (H.54) for control section 4 and from (H.50) and (H.55)
for control section 5. Afterwards, an iteration is executed where 5 % is chosen as the
acceptable tolerance between the shear resistance used in the calculations and the shear
resistance obtained.
The relationships between VRd and MRd at the control sections are necessary to know
since MRd is found from VRd throughout the iterations:
MRd,4 = 0.946 m × V4,Rd
(H.56)
MRd,5 = −0.753 m × V5,Rd
(H.57)
When the iteration has been executed, the new design loads can be found by:
==PAGE:163==
APPENDIX H
151
pd,4 = −V4,Rd
1.326 m
(H.58)
pd,5 =
V5,Rd
1.505 m
(H.59)
The differences between those calculated loads and the initial guesses of pd are then de-
termined, and a difference of maximum 5 % is again chosen to be acceptable whereby a
double iteration is conducted.
The numerous intermediate results for the double iterations at the two control sections
are not listed, but the ﬁnal parameters are shown in Table H.2.
Table H.2: Results from double iterations for control section 4 and 5 for beam 3.
Control section 4
εx [×10−4]
θmin [degrees]
VRd,s [kN]
pd [kN/m]
15.78
35.78
480
362
Control section 5
εx [×10−4]
θmin [degrees]
VRd,s [kN]
pd [kN/m]
14.11
34.11
511
339
Also the maximum permitted values of the design shear resistances must be calculated.
Parameter taking the concrete strength into consideration, ηf c:
ηf c =
 30
fck
1/3
= 0.87 ≤1.0
(H.60)
Average principal tensile strains, ε1:
ε1,4 = εx,4 + (εx,4 + 0.002) cot2 θ4 = 0.0085
ε1,5 = εx,5 + (εx,5 + 0.002) cot2 θ5 = 0.0088
(H.61)
Factors kε and kc:
kε,4 =
1
1.2 + 55ε1,4
= 0.60 ≤0.65
kε,5 =
1
1.2 + 55ε1,5
= 0.59 ≤0.65
(H.62)
kc,4 = kε,4ηf c = 0.52
kc,5 = kε,5ηf c = 0.52
(H.63)
Maximum permitted design shear resistance, VRd,max:
VRd,max,4 = kc,4 fcdbwz cos θ4 sin θ4 = 2060 kN
VRd,max,5 = kc,5 fcdbwz cos θ5 sin θ5 = 1991 kN
(H.64)
==PAGE:164==
152
BEAM NO. 3
It is to be noticed that a web width of only 400 mm is used in (H.64) according to the
requirement in MC2010 described in section 3.4 and [Walraven et al., 2011].
The design shear forces at control section 4 and 5 were calculated in (H.49) and (H.50),
respectively.
Requirements to the design load:
VEd,4
VRd,s,4
≤1 ⇒pd ≤362 kN/m
(H.65)
VEd,4
VRd,max,4
≤1 ⇒pd ≤1561 kN/m
(H.66)
VEd,5
VRd,s,5
≤1 ⇒pd ≤339 kN/m
(H.67)
VEd,5
VRd,max,5
≤1 ⇒pd ≤1323 kN/m
(H.68)
The results in (H.65) and (H.67) were already determined in Table H.2 from the double
iterations. The design load must be up to 339 kN/m in order to comply with the shear
capacity of the beam with reference to MC2010. Thus, control section 5 turns out to be
most critical.
Additional tensile force in the longitudinal reinforcement due to shear:
∆Ftd = 1
2VEd,max cot θ = 1.62 m × pd
(H.69)
For the maximum allowable value of pd, the additional tensile force in the longitudinal
reinforcement becomes:
∆Ftd = 551 kN
(H.70)
Evaluation of Flexural Moment Capacity
Also the ﬂexural moment capacity of the beam element has to be examined.
The beam is normally reinforced if the following inequality is fulﬁlled:
ωund < ω < ωbal
(H.71)
where ωund is the reinforcement degree for the under-reinforced cross-section, ω is the
reinforcement degree, and ωbal is the reinforcement degree for the over-reinforced cross-
section.
The characteristic strength of the concrete is 45 MPa, and the reinforcement is in class B.
The strength parameters are therefore identical to the ones used for beam no. 1, giving:
ωund = λ
εcu3
εcu3 + εuk
= 0.0523
(H.72)
==PAGE:165==
APPENDIX H
153
ωbal = λ
εcu3
εcu3 + εyd,s
= 0.483
(H.73)
The reinforcement degree is given by:
ω = As fyd
bdη fcd
= 0.080
(H.74)
Hence, the beam element is normally reinforced since the inequality in (H.71) is fulﬁlled.
The moment capacity is according to [Jensen, 2008] determined by:
MRd =
 
1 −1
2ω
!
ωbd2η fcd = 576 kNm
(H.75)
The amounts of longitudinal reinforcement in the top and in the bottom of the beam
are identical so it is only necessary to evaluate the absolute maximum moment which
according to Figure H.6 is found at the right support:
MEd,max = −2.419 m2 × pd
(H.76)
The requirement in compliance with (H.75) to the design load becomes:

MEd,max
MRd
 ≤1 ⇒pd ≤238 kN/m
(H.77)
Optimization of Stirrups Using EC2
The transverse reinforcement arrangement is now with reference to EC2 optimized in
compliance with a uniformly distributed design load of pd = 230 kN/m. The maximum
design shear force is given by:
VEd,max = 2.2 m × pd = 506 kN
(H.78)
cot θ = 2.5 is now chosen since the maximum permitted value of the design shear resis-
tance can now fulﬁl the criteria regarding VEd,max for this choice of cot θ:
VRd,max = bwzν fcd
1
cot θ + tan θ = 1749 kN > VEd,max
(H.79)
It is in the optimized design chosen to use stirrups with a diameter of 10 mm throughout
the beam. The distance between the stirrups with regard to a minimum amount of shear
reinforcement is determined:
ρw,min ≤Asw
bwsw
⇒sw ≤
Asw
bwρw,min
= 322 mm
(H.80)
Thus, sw = 320 mm is chosen for a minimum amount of reinforcement.
Design shear force corresponding to ø10 stirrups per 320 mm:
==PAGE:166==
154
BEAM NO. 3
VRd,min = Asw
sw
z fywd cot θ = 375 kN
τRd,min = VRd,min
bwz
= 1.12 MPa
(H.81)
Maximum permissible length increment:
l = z cot θ = 1668 mm
(H.82)
The beam is divided into increments of different lengths which make sense with refer-
ence to the shear force distribution. However, only two length increments may require
more than the minimum amount of shear reinforcement since all other increments are in
possession of lengths less than z cot θ. Figure H.12 shows the shear stress distribution for
the beam together with a constant shear stress in the two length increments, deﬁned on
the basis of the distance of z cot θ inside each increment.
τ, τ ′
x
1.362 m
1.815 m
τ ′
1
τEd,max
1.628 m
7.005 m
τ ′
2
2.200 m
z cot θ
z cot θ
Figure H.9: Shear stress distribution for beam no. 3.
The shear stresses mentioned in Figure H.9 are calculated:
τEd,max = VEd,max
bwz
= 1.52 MPa
(H.83)
VEd,1 = 2.021 m × pd −z cot θpd = 81 kN
⇒τ′
1 = VEd,1
bwz = 0.24 MPa
(H.84)
VEd,2 = 2.2 m × pd −z cot θpd = 122 kN
⇒τ′
2 = VEd,2
bwz = 0.37 MPa
(H.85)
It is seen that both τ′
1 and τ′
2 are smaller than τmin. Therefore, the whole beam is de-
signed for just τmin. Actually, to have to use more stirrups than required from the min-
imum transverse reinforcement ratio the design load should be increased to more than
700 kN/m.
==PAGE:167==
APPENDIX H
155
It has already been determined to use ø10 stirrups per 320 mm for τmin.
Figure H.10 shows the optimized shear reinforcement design of beam no. 3 according to
EC2.
7.005 m
ø10/320 mm
Figure H.10: Optimized shear reinforcement arrangement of beam no. 3 with regard to EC2.
Additional tensile force in the longitudinal reinforcement due to shear:
∆Ftd = 1
2VEd,max cot θ = 633 kN
(H.86)
The above transverse reinforcement design fulﬁls all requirements for EC2 listed in sec-
tion 2.5 and [European Committee for Standardization, 2004].
Optimization of Stirrups Using MC2010
The transverse reinforcement arrangement is also with reference to MC2010 optimized in
compliance with the uniformly distributed design load of pd = 230 kN/m.
As already explained for the previously examined beams, only one value of the angle
of inclination θ must be used throughout the beam where the largest value of θmin and
thus the largest value of the longitudinal strain, εx, should be applied. Actually, the value
could be varied at the supports and thus be piecemal constant in each span. This is how-
ever not implemented since it would complicate the optimization procedure even further.
The value of εx becomes bigger for a larger shear force V and a larger moment M. The
maximum shear force and the maximum moment are according to Figure H.6 both lo-
cated at the right support. Figure H.11 shows the variation of εx along the beam where
the maximum value is seen just at the right support. The jumps in the graph are due to
the jumps in the shear force distribution at the supports.
The peak longitudinal strain at the support is determined by reading off the shear force
and the moment in Figure H.6:
εx =
MC
z + VC+
2EsAs
= 17.77 × 10−4
(H.87)
(H.87) is used to ﬁnd the maximum value of θmin:
==PAGE:168==
156
BEAM NO. 3
x [m]
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
εx [-]
×10-3
0
0.5
1
1.5
Figure H.11: Location of maximum longitudinal strain in beam no. 3.
θ = θmin = 20◦+ 10, 000εx = 37.77◦
(H.88)
yielding cot θ = 1.29 and z cot θ = 861 mm.
If using different values of θmin for the three spans as suggested above, the middle span
would be in possession of values close to the ones calculated above. An angle of incli-
nation of only 26.78◦would however be safe to use for the left span. Hence, the shear
reinforcement could be optimized a bit by varying θmin in the left span.
The maximum design shear force is already determined in (H.78). All parameters used
to determine the maximum permitted design shear resistance is calculated:
ηf c =
 30
fck
1/3
= 0.87 ≤1.0
ε1 = εx + (εx + 0.002) cot2 θ = 0.0081
kε =
1
1.2 + 55ε1
= 0.61 ≤0.65
kc = kεηf c = 0.53
(H.89)
The maximum permitted design shear resistance is evaluated and observed to be satisfy-
ing since it is larger than the maximum design shear force:
VRd,max = kc fcdbw,redz cos θ sin θ = 2120 kN > VEd,max
(H.90)
Again, it is noticed that a reduced web width of bw,red = 400 mm is used.
As was also opted for in the optimization performed with reference to EC2, the mini-
mum shear reinforcement is chosen as ø10 stirrups per 320 mm, yielding a design shear
resistance of:
VRd,min = Asw
sw
z fywd cot θ = 194 kN
(H.91)
==PAGE:169==
APPENDIX H
157
This design shear resistance is in terms of the shear stress given by:
τRd,min = VRd,min
bw,redz = 0.73 MPa
(H.92)
Again, the beam is divided into increments making sense with reference to the shear force
distribution where six length increments may require more than the minimum amount
of shear reinforcement. Figure H.12 shows the shear stress distribution for the beam to-
gether with the smallest shear stress in each increment.
τ, τ ′
x
1.362 m
1.815 m
τ ′
1
τ ′
4
τEd,max
1.628 m
7.005 m
τ ′
5
2.200 m
τ ′
6
τ ′
2
τ ′
3
z cot θ
z cot θ z cot θ z cot θ
z cot θ z cot θ
Figure H.12: Shear stress distribution for beam no. 3.
The shear stresses mentioned in Figure H.12 are calculated from the corresponding shear
forces which are determined using Figure H.6:
VEd,1 = 1.362 m × pd −z cot θpd = 115 kN
⇒τ′
1 = VEd,1
bw,redz = 0.43 MPa < τRd,min
(H.93)
VEd,2 = 1.628 m × pd −z cot θpd = 176 kN
⇒τ′
2 = VEd,2
bw,redz = 0.66 MPa < τRd,min
(H.94)
VEd,3 = 2.021 m × pd −2z cot θpd = 69 kN
⇒τ′
3 = VEd,3
bw,redz = 0.26 MPa < τRd,min
(H.95)
VEd,4 = 2.021 m × pd −z cot θpd = 267 kN
⇒τ′
4 = VEd,4
bw,redz = 1.00 MPa > τRd,min
(H.96)
VEd,5 = 2.2 m × pd −z cot θpd = 309 kN
⇒τ′
5 = VEd,5
bw,redz = 1.15 MPa > τRd,min
(H.97)
==PAGE:170==
158
BEAM NO. 3
VEd,6 = 2.2 m × pd −2z cot θpd = 110 kN
⇒τ′
6 = VEd,6
bw,redz = 0.41 MPa < τRd,min
(H.98)
Only τ′
4 and τ′
5 are larger than τRd,min and it is therefore chosen to design the beam ele-
ment for those stresses. ø10 stirrups are chosen along the entire beam.
Dimensioning for τ′
4:
sw = 220 mm ⇒VRd,4 = Asw
sw
z fywd cot θ = 281 kN > VEd,4
(H.99)
Dimensioning for τ′
5:
sw = 180 mm ⇒VRd,5 = Asw
sw
z fywd cot θ = 344 kN > VEd,5
(H.100)
For τRd,min, it has already been determined to use ø10 stirrups per 320 mm.
It is due to practical considerations chosen to design 1 meter of the beam at each side of
the right support for τ′
4 and τ′
5, respectively. The rest of the beam is designed for τRd,min.
Figure H.13 shows the optimized shear reinforcement design of beam no. 3 according to
MC2010.
ø10/220 mm
7.005 m
ø10/320 mm
ø10/180 mm
ø10/320 mm
1 m
1 m
Figure H.13: Optimized shear reinforcement arrangement of beam no. 3 with regard to MC2010.
Additional tensile force in the longitudinal reinforcement due to shear:
∆Ftd = 1
2VEd,max cot θ = 326 kN
(H.101)
The transverse reinforcement design fulﬁls all requirements for MC2010 listed in section
3.4 and [Walraven et al., 2011].
==PAGE:171==
Appendix I
Beam No. 4
In this appendix, calculations regarding the shear resistance and optimization of the de-
sign for beam no. 4 is demonstrated. As was the case for the previously designed beams,
some general parameters used throughout the calculations are determined at ﬁrst in-
cluding the shear force and moment distributions. Afterwards, the shear capacity is cal-
culated for EC2 and MC2010. Also the ﬂexural moment capacity is determined. Finally,
calculations concerning an optimization of the transverse reinforcement are shown for
EC2 and MC2010.
General Parameters
A range of parameters used throughout the appendix is introduced in this section. All
beam properties relevant for the case of shear evaluation are listed in Table I.1.
Minimum transverse reinforcement ratio, ρw,min:
ρw,min = 0.08
p
fck
fywk
= 0.000976
(I.1)
Depth of compression zone, x:
x = As fyd
bw fcd
= 238 mm
(I.2)
Effective shear depth, z:
z = d −1
2x = 597 mm
(I.3)
Transverse reinforcement ratio, ρw:
ρw = Asw
bwsw
= 0.00565
(I.4)
The shear and moment distributions for the beam are illustrated in Figure I.1 where most
relevant values are listed. The calculations for the forces and moments are based on
equality equations.
159
==PAGE:172==
160
BEAM NO. 4
Table I.1: Parameters for beam no. 4.
Geometric parameters
Width, b [mm]
400
Height, h [mm]
800
Length, L [mm]
6450
Longitudinal tensile reinforcement parameters
Effective ﬂexural depth, d [mm]
716
Cross-sectional area of longitudinal reinforcement, As [mm2]
6434
Characteristic yield stress of longitudinal reinforcement, fyk [MPa]
550
Partial safety factor, γs [MPa]
1.2
Design yield stress of longitudinal reinforcement, fyd [MPa]
458
Stirrup parameters
Cross-sectional area of stirrups, Asw [mm2]
452
Stirrup distance, sw [mm]
200
Characteristic yield stress of stirrups, fywk [MPa]
550
Partial safety factor, γs [MPa]
1.2
Design yield stress of stirrups, fywd [MPa]
458
Concrete parameters
Characteristic strength of concrete, fck [MPa]
45
Partial safety factor, γc [MPa]
1.45
Design strength of concrete, fcd [MPa]
31.0
V [m ×pd]
M [m2 × pd]
5.54
5.00
4.06
2.75
1.81
0.41
0.53
1.93
2.87
4.27
5.21
5.61
8.86
7.14
2.14
7.31
2.85
Figure I.1: Shear force and moment distributions for beam no. 4.
Evaluation of Shear Capacity Using EC2
The shear capacity for beam no. 4 is in this section calculated by means of EC2.
Concrete effectiveness factor, ν:
ν = 0.6
 
1 −fck
250
!
= 0.49
(I.5)
==PAGE:173==
APPENDIX I
161
cot θ is not chosen as the maximum permissible value according to (2.46). Instead, the
value is chosen as1:
cot θ = 2.11
(I.6)
Steel contribution to design shear resistance, VRd,s:
VRd,s = Asw
sw
z fywd cot θ = 1305 kN
(I.7)
Maximum permitted value of design shear resistance, VRd,max:
VRd,max = bwzν fcd
1
cot θ + tan θ = 1405 kN
(I.8)
Maximum design shear force (located at right support):
VEd,max = 5.61 m × pd
(I.9)
The design shear force should also be calculated a distance z cot θ from the support. How-
ever, since a transverse concentrated load Pd is located closer to the support than z cot θ,
the shear force is used at the location of the concentrated load:
VEd,0.4m = 5.21 m × pd
(I.10)
Requirements according to (I.7) and (I.8) to the design load:
VEd,0.4m
VRd,s
≤1 ⇒pd ≤250 kN/m
VEd,max
VRd,max
≤1 ⇒pd ≤251 kN/m
(I.11)
The design load must be up to 250 kN/m in order to comply with the shear capacity of
the beam with reference to EC2. This value corresponds to concentrated design loads of
235 kN.
Additional tensile force in the longitudinal reinforcement due to shear:
∆Ftd = 1
2VEd,max cot θ = 5.92 m × pd
(I.12)
For the maximum allowable value of pd, the additional tensile force in the longitudinal
reinforcement is:
∆Ftd = 1480 kN
(I.13)
1The reason for this choice is that this value later in the calculations turns out to yield the largest possible
value of the design load pd. If cot θ = 2.5 was chosen, pd would be reduced since crushing of the concrete
would happen prior to yielding of the stirrups.
==PAGE:174==
162
BEAM NO. 4
Evaluation of Shear Capacity Using MC2010
The shear capacity for beam no. 4 is in this section calculated in compliance with MC2010.
The control sections should be positioned at distances d from supports and transverse
concentrated loads as shown in Figure I.2. It is seen from the ﬁgure that there are 12
control sections to be investigated. The control sections 1, 2, 11 and 12 are placed at the
locations of the supports and exterior concentrated loads and not between. The reason is
that the distances between the exterior concentrated loads and the supports are smaller
than d.
pd
Pd
Pd
Pd
Pd
Pd
1
2 3 4
5 6
7 8
9 10 11 12
d
d
d
d
d
d
d
d
Figure I.2: Control sections for beam no. 4.
The shear forces and moments for the 12 control sections are determined by the shear
force and moment distributions shown in Figure I.1:
VEd,1 = 5.54 m × pd
,
MEd,1 = 0
(I.14)
VEd,2 = 5.00 m × pd
,
MEd,2 = 2.85 m2 × pd
(I.15)
VEd,3 = 3.47 m × pd
,
MEd,3 = 5.08 m2 × pd
(I.16)
VEd,4 = 3.34 m × pd
,
MEd,4 = 5.50 m2 × pd
(I.17)
VEd,5 = 1.13 m × pd
,
MEd,5 = 8.31 m2 × pd
(I.18)
VEd,6 = 1.09 m × pd
,
MEd,6 = 8.35 m2 × pd
(I.19)
VEd,7 = −1.21 m × pd
,
MEd,7 = 8.29 m2 × pd
(I.20)
VEd,8 = −1.25 m × pd
,
MEd,8 = 8.25 m2 × pd
(I.21)
VEd,9 = −3.55 m × pd
,
MEd,9 = 4.96 m2 × pd
(I.22)
VEd,10 = −3.59 m × pd
,
MEd,10 = 4.83 m2 × pd
(I.23)
VEd,11 = −5.21 m × pd
,
MEd,11 = 2.14 m2 × pd
(I.24)
VEd,12 = −5.61 m × pd
,
MEd,12 = 0
(I.25)
The same procedure as followed for the previously examined beams is used to ﬁnd the
largest permissible value of the design load. An initial guess of pd is for all control sec-
tions chosen after which initial values of VRd and MRd are chosen as VEd and MEd at the
==PAGE:175==
APPENDIX I
163
control section in question, calculated from the expressions above. Afterwards, an it-
eration is executed where 5 % is chosen as the acceptable tolerance between the shear
resistance used in the calculations and the shear resistance obtained.
The relationships between VRd and MRd at the control sections are necessary to know
since MRd is found from VRd throughout the iterations:
MEd,1 = 0
(I.26)
MEd,2 = 0.57 m × VEd,2
(I.27)
MEd,3 = 1.46 m × VEd,3
(I.28)
MEd,4 = 1.65 m × VEd,4
(I.29)
MEd,5 = 7.35 m × VEd,5
(I.30)
MEd,6 = 7.66 m × VEd,6
(I.31)
MEd,7 = −6.85 m × VEd,7
(I.32)
MEd,8 = −6.60 m × VEd,8
(I.33)
MEd,9 = −1.40 m × VEd,9
(I.34)
MEd,10 = −1.35 m × VEd,10
(I.35)
MEd,11 = −0.41 m × VEd,11
(I.36)
MEd,12 = 0
(I.37)
When the iteration has been executed, the new design loads can be found by:
pd,1 = V1,Rd
5.54 m
(I.38)
pd,2 = V2,Rd
5.00 m
(I.39)
pd,3 = V3,Rd
3.47 m
(I.40)
pd,4 = V4,Rd
3.34 m
(I.41)
pd,5 = V5,Rd
1.13 m
(I.42)
pd,6 = V6,Rd
1.09 m
(I.43)
pd,7 = −V7,Rd
1.21 m
(I.44)
pd,8 = −V8,Rd
1.25 m
(I.45)
pd,9 = −V9,Rd
3.55 m
(I.46)
pd,10 = −V10,Rd
3.59 m
(I.47)
pd,11 = −V11,Rd
5.21 m
(I.48)
==PAGE:176==
164
BEAM NO. 4
pd,12 = −V12,Rd
5.61 m
(I.49)
The differences between those calculated loads and the initial guesses of pd are then de-
termined, and a difference of maximum 5 % is again chosen to be acceptable whereby a
double iteration is conducted.
The numerous intermediate results for the double iterations at the 12 control sections are
not listed, but the ﬁnal parameters are shown in Table I.2. This table also shows the cal-
culated maximum permitted values of the design shear resistances.
Table I.2: Shear resistance parameters for 12 control sections for beam 4.
Control section
εx [×10−4]
θmin [degrees]
VRd,s [kN]
pd [kN/m]
VRd,max [kN]
1
5.080
25.08
1323
239
1338
2
8.659
28.66
1132
226
1535
3
12.91
32.91
956
276
1734
4
13.77
33.77
925
277
1769
5
30.00
45.00
619
548
1974
6
30.00
45.00
619
568
1974
7
30.00
45.00
619
512
1974
8
28.98
45.00
619
495
1987
9
12.41
32.41
975
275
1713
10
12.19
32.19
983
274
1703
11
7.615
27.61
1183
227
1480
12
5.079
25.08
1323
236
1338
The steel contributions to the design shear resistances yield the crucial requirements for
the design load since VRd,s < VRd,max for all control sections. Hence, the allowable de-
sign loads with regard to the 12 control sections are the ones listed in Table I.2. Thus, the
design load must be up to 226 kN/m in order to comply with the shear capacity of the
beam with reference to MC2010. Hence, control section 2 turns out to be most critical.
Additional tensile force in the longitudinal reinforcement due to shear where θ is found
from control section 2:
∆Ftd = 1
2VEd,max cot θ = 5.13 m × pd
(I.50)
For the maximum allowable value of pd, the additional tensile force in the longitudinal
reinforcement becomes:
∆Ftd = 1160 kN
(I.51)
Evaluation of Flexural Moment Capacity
Also the ﬂexural moment capacity of the beam element has to be examined.
The beam is normally reinforced if the following inequality is fulﬁlled:
ωund < ω < ωbal
(I.52)
==PAGE:177==
APPENDIX I
165
where ωund is the reinforcement degree for the under-reinforced cross-section, ω is the
reinforcement degree, and ωbal is the reinforcement degree for the over-reinforced cross-
section.
The characteristic strength of the concrete is 45 MPa, and the reinforcement is in class
B. The strength parameters are therefore identical to the ones used for the previously
evaluated beams, giving:
ωund = λ
εcu3
εcu3 + εuk
= 0.0523
(I.53)
ωbal = λ
εcu3
εcu3 + εyd,s
= 0.483
(I.54)
The reinforcement degree is given by:
ω = As fyd
bdη fcd
= 0.332
(I.55)
Hence, the beam element is normally reinforced since the inequality in (I.52) is fulﬁlled.
The moment capacity is according to [Jensen, 2008] determined by:
MRd =
 
1 −1
2ω
!
ωbd2η fcd = 1761 kNm
(I.56)
The maximum moment is according to Figure I.1 found at the middle of the concentrated
loads:
MEd,max = 8.86 m2 × pd
(I.57)
The requirement in compliance with (I.56) to the design load becomes:
MEd,max
MRd
≤1 ⇒pd ≤199 kN/m
(I.58)
Optimization of Stirrups Using EC2
The transverse reinforcement arrangement is now with reference to EC2 optimized in
compliance with a uniformly distributed design load of pd = 200 kN/m and thus con-
centrated design loads of Pd = 188 kN. The maximum design shear force is given by:
VEd,max = 5.61 m × pd = 1122 kN
(I.59)
cot θ = 2.5 is chosen since the maximum permitted value of the design shear resistance
can now fulﬁl the criteria regarding VEd,max for this choice of cot θ:
VRd,max = bwzν fcd
1
cot θ + tan θ = 1252 kN > VEd,max
(I.60)
It is in the optimized design chosen still to use two stirrups in the cross-section, but with
a diameter of 6 mm, at least for the calculation of a minimum of shear reinforcement. The
==PAGE:178==
166
BEAM NO. 4
distance between the stirrups with regard to this minimum amount of shear reinforce-
ment is determined:
ρw,min ≤Asw
bwsw
⇒sw ≤
Asw
bwρw,min
= 290 mm
(I.61)
Thus, sw = 280 mm is chosen for a minimum amount of shear reinforcement.
Design shear resistance corresponding to two ø6 stirrups per 280 mm:
VRd,min = Asw
sw
z fywd cot θ = 276 kN
τmin = VRd,min
bwz
= 1.16 MPa
(I.62)
Since it is noticed in (I.62) that the design shear resistance corresponding to a minimum
amount of shear reinforcement is much smaller than the maximum design shear force,
it is chosen to divide the beam into more length increments and evaluate the necessary
shear reinforcement in each increment.
Maximum permissible length increment:
l = z cot θ = 1493 mm
(I.63)
The beam is divided into six increments separated between the concentrated loads. The
length increments will thereby be of maximum 1400 mm. If dividing the beam into two
parts separated at the middle concentrated load, it is seen that the parts look alike, but are
not completely similar due to a minor asymmetry of the concentrated loads. However,
for the sake of simplicity and since the parts are almost the same, it is chosen to design
the two parts identical. It is seen from the shear force distribution in Figure I.1 that the
right part of the beam is most critical.
Figure I.3 shows the shear stress distribution for the right part of the beam together with
the minimum values of the shear stresses in each length increment.
τ, τ ′
x
1.4 m
τ ′
3
τ ′
1
τEd,max
3.2 m
τ ′
2
1.4 m
0.4 m
Figure I.3: Shear stress distribution for the right part of beam no. 4.
The shear stresses mentioned in Figure I.3 are calculated:
==PAGE:179==
APPENDIX I
167
τEd,max = VEd,max
bwz
= 4.70 MPa
(I.64)
τ′
1 = 5.21 m × pd
bwz
= 4.36 MPa > τmin
(I.65)
τ′
2 = 2.87 m × pd
bwz
= 2.40 MPa > τmin
(I.66)
τ′
3 = 0.53 m × pd
bwz
= 0.44 MPa < τmin
(I.67)
It is seen that τ′
3 < τmin. Therefore, it is chosen to design the ﬁrst increment closest to the
support for τ′
1, the next increment for τ′
2, and last increment for τmin.
It is for the small increment closest to the support chosen to use 2ø10 stirrups instead of
2ø6 stirrups with the purpose of not achieving distances between the stirrups so small
that it becomes practical hard to manage. Still, the principle with two stirrups are used.
Dimensioning for τ′
1 (2ø10 used):
VEd,1 = 5.21 m × pd = 1042 kN
(I.68)
sw = 200 mm ⇒VRd = Asw
sw
z fywd cot θ = 1075 kN > VEd,1
(I.69)
Dimensioning for τ′
2 (2ø6 used):
VEd,2 = 2.87 m × pd = 574 kN
(I.70)
sw = 120 mm ⇒VRd = Asw
sw
z fywd cot θ = 645 kN > VEd,2
(I.71)
For τmin, it has already been determined to use 2ø6 stirrups per 280 mm.
Figure I.4 shows the optimized shear reinforcement design of the right part of beam no.
4 according to EC2. The left half of the beam should be designed identically.
1400 mm
2ø6/280 mm
2ø6/120 mm
3200 mm
1400 mm
2ø10/200 mm
400 mm
Figure I.4: Optimized shear reinforcement arrangement of beam no. 4 with regard to EC2.
==PAGE:180==
168
BEAM NO. 4
Additional tensile force in the longitudinal reinforcement due to shear:
∆Ftd = 1
2VEd,max cot θ = 1403 kN
(I.72)
The above transverse reinforcement design fulﬁls all requirements for EC2 listed in sec-
tion 2.5 and [European Committee for Standardization, 2004].
Optimization of Stirrups Using MC2010
The transverse reinforcement arrangement is also with reference to MC2010 optimized
in compliance with the uniformly distributed design load of pd = 200 kN/m and the
concentrated design loads of Pd = 188 kN.
As already explained for the previously examined beams, only one value of the angle of
inclination θ should be used throughout the beam where the largest value of θmin and
thus the largest value of the longitudinal strain, εx, should be applied. The value of εx
becomes bigger for a larger shear force V and a larger moment M. Since the maximum
moment is located in the middle of the beam and the maximum shear force is found at
the supports, it is not possible to immediately assess the location of the maximum value
of εx. Figure I.5 shows the variation of εx along the beam where it is seen that the max-
imum value is found at the location of the concentrated load in the middle. The jumps
in the graph are due to the jumps in the shear force distribution at the concentrated loads.
x [m]
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
εx [-]
×10-3
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
Figure I.5: Location of maximum longitudinal strain in beam no. 4.
The peak longitudinal strain at the concentrated middle load is determined by reading
off the shear force and the moment in Figure I.1:
εx =
MC
z + VC+
2EsAs
= 11.95 × 10−4
(I.73)
(I.73) is used to ﬁnd the maximum value of θmin:
==PAGE:181==
APPENDIX I
169
θ = θmin = 20◦+ 10, 000εx = 31.95◦
(I.74)
yielding cot θ = 1.60 and z cot θ = 957 mm.
The maximum design shear force is already determined in (I.59). All parameters used to
determine the maximum permitted design shear resistance is calculated:
ηf c =
 30
fck
1/3
= 0.87 ≤1.0
ε1 = εx + (εx + 0.002) cot2 θ = 0.0094
kε =
1
1.2 + 55ε1
= 0.58 ≤0.65
kc = kεηf c = 0.51
(I.75)
The maximum permitted design shear resistance is evaluated and observed to be satisfy-
ing since it is larger than the maximum design shear force:
VRd,max = kc fcdbwz cos θ sin θ = 1685 kN > VEd,max
(I.76)
As was also opted for in the optimization performed with reference to EC2, the mini-
mum shear reinforcement is chosen as 2 ø6 stirrups per 280 mm, yielding a design shear
resistance of:
VRd,min = Asw
sw
z fywd cot θ = 177 kN
(I.77)
This design shear resistance is in terms of the shear stress given by:
τRd,min = VRd,min
bwz
= 0.74 MPa
(I.78)
Again, the beam is divided into six increments separated between the concentrated loads
and it is chosen to design the two halves of the beam identical. The right part of the beam
is designed in the following.
Figure I.6 shows the shear stress distribution for the right part of the beam together with
a constant shear stress in the increments, deﬁned on the basis of the distance z cot θ inside
each increment.
==PAGE:182==
170
BEAM NO. 4
τ, τ ′
x
1.4 m
τ ′
3
τ ′
1
τEd,max
3.2 m
τ ′
2
1.4 m
0.4 m
z cot θ
z cot θ
< z cot θ
Figure I.6: Shear stress distribution for the right part of beam no. 4.
The shear stresses mentioned in Figure I.6 are calculated from the corresponding shear
forces which are determined using Figure I.1:
VEd,1 = 5.21 m × pd = 1042 kN
⇒τ′
1 = VEd,1
bwz = 4.36 MPa > τRd,min
(I.79)
VEd,2 = 4.27 m × pd −z cot θpd = 663 kN
⇒τ′
2 = VEd,2
bwz = 2.77 MPa > τRd,min
(I.80)
VEd,3 = 1.93 m × pd −z cot θpd = 195 kN
⇒τ′
3 = VEd,3
bwz = 0.81 MPa > τRd,min
(I.81)
τ′
1, τ′
2 and τ′
3 are all larger than τRd,min and the beam element is therefore designed for
those stresses. Still, the principle with two stirrups are used. 2ø10 stirrups are chosen for
the design of τ′
1 and τ′
2 whereas 2ø6 stirrups are chosen for the design of τ′
3.
Dimensioning for τ′
1 (2ø10 used):
sw = 120 mm ⇒VRd,1 = Asw
sw
z fywd cot θ = 1146 kN > VEd,1
(I.82)
Dimensioning for τ′
2 (2ø10 used):
sw = 200 mm ⇒VRd,2 = Asw
sw
z fywd cot θ = 688 kN > VEd,2
(I.83)
Dimensioning for τ′
3 (2ø6 used):
sw = 240 mm ⇒VRd,3 = Asw
sw
z fywd cot θ = 206 kN > VEd,3
(I.84)
Figure I.7 shows the optimized shear reinforcement design of the right part of beam no.
4 according to MC2010.
==PAGE:183==
APPENDIX I
171
1400 mm
2ø6/240 mm
2ø10/200 mm
3200 mm
1400 mm
2ø10/120 mm
400 mm
Figure I.7: Optimized shear reinforcement arrangement of beam no. 4 with regard to MC2010.
Additional tensile force in the longitudinal reinforcement due to shear:
∆Ftd = 1
2VEd,max cot θ = 898 kN
(I.85)
The transverse reinforcement design fulﬁls all requirements for MC2010 listed in section
3.4 and [Walraven et al., 2011].
