==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Chemistry
Master Thesis, Summer 2015
Two-dimensional metal oxide and graphene
nanocomposites for supercapacitor electrodes
Written by
Jonas Hagel Thorn, s122744
Supervisor:
Qijin Chi
Co-supervisor:
Jens Ulstrup
August 2015
==PAGE:2==
Resum´e
Dette M. Sc. projekt har to form˚al. For det første ønskes det undersøgt, om det var muligt
at syntetisere et hybrid nanosheet elektrodemateriale best˚aende af cerium(IV)oxid (CeO2) og
grafenoxid (GO), i b˚ade en to-trins (GO/CeO2) og ´et-trins (dGO/CeO2) syntese i vægt ratioen
1/1 og 1/10. For det andet var projektets form˚al at undersøge elektrodematerialets egenskaber
som basis som superkapacitor elektrode.
GO/CeO2 blev syntetiseret ved at blande cerium(III)nitrat med ammoniak og lade det reagere;
herefter blandedes GO og CeO2. dGO/CeO2 blev syntetiseret ved at blande cerium(III)nitrat
med ammoniak og GO. For at undersøge, om det lykkedes at syntetisere hybrid nanosheet
elektrodematerialet blev det forsøgt karakteriseret ved hjælp af karakterisationsteknik, s˚asom
UV-Vis spektrophotometer, NanoSight Tracking Analysis, AFM, TEM, XRD og XPS. Elek-
trodematerialets evne som superkapacitor elektrode blev bestemt ved at analysere den elektro-
kemiske ydeevne, udtrykt ved den speciﬁkke kapacitans (F/g) og energidensiteten, fundet ved
hjælp af cyklisk voltammetri og galvanostatisk charge-discharge cyklusser.
UV-Vis spektroskopi, NanoSight, XRD og XPS viste, at det var lykkedes at syntetisere de
forskellige elektrodematerialer. Det formodes dog, at der skete en svag reduktion og nitrogen
tilføjelse af GO ved sammenblanding med koncentreret ammoniak. AFM og TEM muligjor-
de bestemmelsen af materialernes form som nano-sheets, med en højde p˚a ca. 1 nm og 4 nm
for henholdsvis GO og CeO2. De enkelte elektrodematerialer CeO2 og GO viste en lav speci-
ﬁk kapacitans p˚a op til 2,95 og 1,83 F/g mens GO, der havde været blandet med ammoniak
(2hGO+NH3), viste en speciﬁk kapacitans p˚a op til 27 F/g. De sammensatte elektrodemateri-
aler af GO/CeO2 i vægt ratioen 1/1 og 1/10 og dGO/CeO2 i vægt ratioen 1/1 og 1/10 havde
speciﬁkke kapacitanser p˚a op til henholdsvis 104; 6,6; 30,3 og 8,16 F/g. Materialerne er dog
brugbare som superkapacitorer. GO/CeO2 i vægtratioen 1/1 er højere end de rapporterede vær-
dier p˚a 89 F/g for grafen(rGO)/CeO2 nanocomposite. Der bør dog foretages ﬂere undersøgelser
for at bekræfte den speciﬁkke kapacitans. De speciﬁkke kapacitansværdier kan ikke konkurere
op med de ultrahøje værdier hos superkapacitor, som rGO/Ni/Ni(OH)2 og RuO2 p˚a henholds-
vis 2609 og 730 F/g. Elektrodematerialerne viser en god cyklusstabilitet med et fald p˚a ca. 10
% over 1000 charge-discharge cyklusser.
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The purpose of this study is two-fold,. First, to investigate whether a hybrid nano-sheet elec-
trode material consisting of cerium(IV)oxide (CeO2) and graphene oxide (GO) can be syn-
thesised either by a two-step (GO/CeO2) or a one-step (dGO/CeO2) procedure. The second
purpose is to examine the ability of the electrode material to act as a super-capacitor.
GO/CeO2 was synthesized by synthesising CeO2 from cerium(III)nitrate and ammonia and
mixed GOCeO2. dGO/CeO2 was synthesized by mixing cerium(III)nitrate with ammonia and
GO. In order to examine if the synthesis of the hybrid nano-sheet electrode material was success-
ful, various characterisation techniques, such as UV-Vis spectrophotometer, Nano Sight Track-
ing analysis, AFM, TEM, XRD and XPS were employed. The capability as super-capacitor
electrode material was evaluated by analysing the electrochemical performance, especially in
terms of the speciﬁc capacitance (F/g) and energy density by cyclic voltammetry and galvano-
static charge-discharge cycles.
The characterisation techniques including UV-Vis, Nano Sight, XRD and XPS conﬁrmed that
it was possible to synthesise the various electrode materials. The characterisation techniques
AFM and TEM determined the materials form as being nano-sheets with an approximate
height of 1 nm and 4 nm for GO and CeO2, respectively. It is believed, however, that there
was a slight reduction and nitrogen doping of GO when mixed with concentrated ammonia.
The individual electrode materials CeO2 and GO have a low speciﬁc capacitance of up to 2.95
and 1.83 F/g, while GO mixed with ammonia (2hGO+NH3), possess a speciﬁc capacitance
of up to 27 F/g. The composite electrode material of GO/CeO2 with a weight ratio 1/1 and
1/10 and dGO/CeO2 have speciﬁc capacitances up to 104, 6.6, 30.3 and 8.16 F/g, respectively.
Though this is not higher than the reported values GO and CeO2, the materials are suitable
for super-capacitor electrodes.
GO/CeO2 in the weight ratio 1/1 showed a larger speciﬁc
capacitance than the reported values of 89 F/g for the graphene (rGO)/CeO2 nanocomposite.
The experiments should, however, be repeated to conﬁrm the speciﬁc capacitance. The speciﬁc
capacitance values cannot compete with the ultra-high values of super-capacitor materials such
as rGO/Ni/Ni(OH)2 and RuO2 of 2609 and 730 F/g but the electrode materials show a cycle
stability with a decrease of approximately only 10 % over 1000 charge-discharge cycles.
==PAGE:4==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
Acknowledgements
I would like to use this opportunity to express my gratitude to everyone who has supported me
throughout the course of this thesis. I am thankful for their guidance, constructive criticism
and friendly advice during the project work.
First I would like to express my deep gratitude to my supervisors Qijin Chi and Jens Ulstrup.
Without your continuous support, guidance, patience and immense knowledge on the subject,
this project would not have been possible. Your doors have always been open and no question
has ever been too small.
Secondly I would like to thanks all the wonderful people in the Nano-chemistry group at DTU
chemistry, who have helped me by listening, commenting and taught me to operate the analyt-
ical tools and helped build up the daily routines in the laboratory. I would like to give special
thanks to Jingdong Zhang for her help in the laboratory and always high spirits, Chris-
tian Engelbrekt and Chengyi Hou for help with the TEM experiments, Gunnar Olsen for
guidance in the AFM and help with the XPS, Arnab Halder and Minwei Zhang for help
with the electrochemical equipment and discussions and Nedjeljko Seselj for help with the
GO synthesis.
Furthermore I would like to thank Jakob Sværke,
Patrick Leerhøj Løhmann and Re-
bekka Aspegren Bormann for reading selected parts of the report and commenting exten-
sively on them.
I would also like to thank my loved ones, especially my parents and girlfriend, for supporting
me through all the good and bad periods.
i
==PAGE:5==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
List of Abbreviations
2HGO or 2HGO+NH3 Graphene oxide placed in ammonia for two hours
AC Activated carbon
AFM Atomic force microscope
CAES Compressed air energy storage
CeO2 or Ceria Cerium oxide
CCD Charge-coupled device
CNT Carbon nano-tubes
CV Cyclic voltammetry
dGO/CeO2 one-step synthesis of Cerium oxide mixed with graphene oxide
EDX or EDAX Energy dispersive X-ray analysis
EDL Electric double layer
FWHM Full width half maximum
GCD Galvanostatic charge-discharge cycles
GO Graphene oxide
GO/CeO2 Two-step synthesis of GO and CeO2
hkl values Miller indices
I Body-centred
IHP Inner Helmholzt plane
NTA Nanoparticles tracking analysis
PHES Pumped hydroelectric storage
rGO Graphene
OHP Outer Helmholzt plane
SPM Scanning prope microscopies
TEM Transmission electron microscope
TEAM Transmission electron aberration-corrected microscope
UV-Vis Ultra violet-visible light spectrophotometry
X-ray electromagnetic radiation with a wavelength ranging from 0.01 to 10 nano-meters
XPS X-ray photoelctron spectroscopy
XRD X-ray diﬀraction
ii
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Resum´e
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
List of Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
List of Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Table of contents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Global energy issues and energy storage devices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Objectives of the thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Structure of the thesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Methods and Theory
3
2.1
Instrumentation and techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.1
Ultra violet-visible light spectrophotometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.2
NanoSight and Nanoparticle tracking analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.3
Atomic force microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.4
Transmission electron microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.5
X-ray Diﬀraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.1.6
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.1.7
Cyclic voltammetry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.1.8
Galvanostatic charge-discharge cycles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.2
Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.2.1
Capacitor types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.2.2
Electrical double layer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.2.3
The pseudo-capacitance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.2.4
Speciﬁc capacitance, energy density and power density
. . . . . . . . . .
22
2.2.5
Electode materials for supercapacitors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3
Experiments
27
3.1
Synthesis of graphene oxide
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2
Cerium oxide nano-sheet synthesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.3
Graphene Oxide/Cerium oxide nano-sheet synthesis in the ratio 1/1 and 1/10
.
31
3.4
One-step Graphene Oxide/Cerium oxide nano-composite synthesis in the ratio
1/1 and 1/10
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.5
Electrode preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.6
Electrochemical analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4
Results and discussion
36
4.1
Characterization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.1.1
Ultra violet-visible light spectrophotometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.1.2
NanoSight and nanoparticle Tracking Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.1.3
Atomic force microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.1.4
Transmission electron microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.1.5
Energy Dispersive X-Ray Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
4.1.6
X-ray Diﬀraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
4.1.7
X-ray photo-electron spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
4.2
The electrochemical performance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
4.2.1
Cyclic voltammetry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
4.2.2
Galvanostatic charge-discharge cycles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
iii
==PAGE:7==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CONTENTS
5
Conclusion
79
5.1
The characterization of the electrode materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
5.2
The electrochemical performance of the electrode materials . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
A Appendix
86
A.1 Cleaning of equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
A.1.1
Cleaning of glass equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
A.1.2
Cleaning of metal and ceramic equipment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
A.1.3
Cleaning of plastic equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
A.2 Photographs of samples
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
A.3 Supporting information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
iv
==PAGE:8==
1. Introduction
1.1
Global energy issues and energy storage devices
Since 1990 the global energy consumption has increased with more than 30 % a trend which is
expected to continue [1]. The increasing world wide energy demand and the decreasing amount
of fossil fuels available in the world, combined with an increasingly worsened environmental
situation due to global warming and pollution require development of alternative energy sources
and storage devices with higher eﬃciency and sustainability [2, 3, 4]. Awareness of the coming
problems and intensive research into alternative and ”green” energy sources in the last 25 years
has resulted in the development of new energy source as an alternative and supplement to
fossil fuels. These include solar, wind, wave and geothermal energies. The problems with these
energy resources is, that they are not always reliable and that they sometimes produce too little
or too much power compared with the energy demand. This problem can be solved by storing
the energy in highly eﬀective and sustainable energy storage devices [2, 4]. Some of the modern
energy storage devices that can store a lot of the excess energy produced by the systems such as
commercial pumped hydroelectric storage (PHES) and compressed air energy storage (CAES),
which have a conversion eﬃciency of 65-89 % [4]. A lot of the energy consumption needed today
is however placed in portable devices. In these devices one of the most used energy storage
methods are electrochemical storage which consists of rechargeable lithium batteries, fuel cells
and capacitors [3, 2, 5].
One of the techniques that have caught special interest in modern time is the capacitors and
especially the super-capacitors due to their high power densities and long life cycle compared to
batteries and fuel cells that makes them ideal for recycling energy [2, 6, 7]. The disadvantages
of capacitors is that they have a very low energy density , which is why super-capacitors are
interesting as they have a 10-200 times greater energy density than conventional capacitors
and a power density of 10-20 times greater than batteries [8, 9]. Another advantage of the
super-capacitors is that they can be used in combination with both batteries and fuel cells in
order to optimise the system both according to lifetime and eﬃciency [2].
The super-capacitor is ultra-high capacitive electrochemical capacitor that store charge due to
the pseudo-capacitance. This means they store charge both in the electric double layer (EDL)
as a normal capacitor and due to redox-based faradaic reactions where chemical compounds
undergo electro-sorption with a charge transfer of the electrolyte onto the electrode [8]. The
early focus on faradaic pseudo-capacitance was the electro-sorption of monolayers on noble
metals and electrochemical protonation of metal hydrous oxides. Recently research into rare
earth metals and transition metals is increasing because as they have multiple oxidation states
that can be accessed and are therefore considered as the best candidates [8, 9].
An often
occurring problem is the cost, which is why cerium oxide (CeO2) is an attractive alternative.
Cerium is a rare earth metal that is more available than copper or tin in the earth’s crust
and is not widely used which makes it highly available [10]. CeO2 has low cost, is relatively
environmentally friendly and has electrochemical redox characteristics which makes it a suitable
candidate as a electrode material for use as a super-capacitor [11, 10, 12]. One way to stabilise
the metal oxide on the electrode and increase the conductivity and energy density is to use
composite electrode materials where the metal oxide is combined with e.g. carbon materials.
Carbon materials can be in many forms such as activated carbon (AC), carbon black, carbon
nano-tubes (CNT), graphene (rGO), and graphene oxide (GO) [8, 11, 13]. Especially graphene
1
==PAGE:9==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
is described as the new wonder material and has caught research interest due to the ultra-
high surface area (2630 m2 ¨ g´1), ultra-low electrical resistivity which results in an ultra high
conductivity (6500 S m´1) [8, 13, 14]. Within the last eight years it has been suggested that
graphene oxide could be a better alternative that graphene as an electrode material for super-
capacitors. This is mostly due to the higher capacitance, lower cost, scalable production and
easy solution processing. [13]
1.2
Objectives of the thesis
This thesis is primarily an experimental study that aims to investigate whether it is possible
to synthesise hybrid nano-composite nano-sheet electrode material consisting of cerium oxide
and graphene oxide nano-sheets in both a one-step synthesis and a two-step synthesis in the
weight ratio 1/1 and 1/10, in a fast and environmentally friendly way. Furthermore, the study
seeks to characterize the synthesised materials as a super-capacitor electrodes and determine
whether a one-step synthesis of graphene oxide and cerium oxide is feasible and whether it is as
good as or even better than the two-step procedure. This is done by determining the speciﬁc
capacitance, energy density and the cycle life using electrochemical techniques such as cyclic
voltammetry and galvanostatic charge and discharge cycles and comparing these values to the
values reported in the related literature.
1.3
Structure of the thesis
The thesis is structured chronologically into several chapters. Chapter one gives an introduc-
tion to the subject, describes the importance of the subject and outlines the problems that will
be investigated through this thesis. Chapter two explains the principles behind the diﬀerent
characterisation techniques and the theory behind super-capacitors together with a description
of some electrode materials and their speciﬁc capacitance, energy density, power density and
cycle stability reported in the literature. Chapter three is the experimental section that de-
scribes how the diﬀerent experiments have been performed. Chapter four gives a walk-though
and discussion of all the results obtained ﬁrst by analysing whether the synthesis was suc-
cessful, Section 4.1 and then the electrochemical analysis of the electrode materials used as a
super-capacitor is determined. Chapter ﬁve is a summary and conclusion of all the ﬁndings.
2
==PAGE:10==
2. Methods and Theory
2.1
Instrumentation and techniques
A number of techniques have been used to characterize and study the synthesised materials.
These techniques and their working principles are described brieﬂy in the present chapter.
2.1.1
Ultra violet-visible light spectrophotometry
The ultra violet-visible light spectrophotometer (UV-Vis) used in the experiments is Agilent’s
8453 UV-Vis spectrophotometer. The speciﬁc product information can be found in [15]. A
UV-VIS spectrophotometer is a simple, fast, non-destructive, reliable and robust method, that
uses light from the near ultra-violet range to the near infra-red range (190-1100 nm) to measure
the light transmittance. Figure 2.1 shows the wavelengths from the ultraviolet to the infra-red
range.
Figure 2.1: The wavelengths of the electromagnetic radiation from the ultraviolet range to
the infra-red range. The wavelength used in the UV-Vis spectrophotometer is in the range of
190-1100 nm. This Figure is re-produced from reference [16].
Light is emitted from a tungsten lamp and a deuterium lamp and is transmitted through a
sample into a grating where the diﬀerent wavelengths are separated and detected by a photo-
diode array, see Figure 2.2. The advantage of using a photo-diode array is that it enables
simultaneous measurements of the entire range of wavelengths at the same time as opposed to
a scanning mono-chromator.
Figure 2.2: The schematic illustration of the UV-Vis spectrophotometer. This Figure is re-
produced from reference [17] c⃝Agilent Technologies, Inc. ă 22 ´ 06 ´ 2015 ą Reproduced
with Permission, Courtesy of Agilent Technologies, Inc.
3
==PAGE:11==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 2. METHODS AND THEORY
The principles behind an UV-Vis spectrophotometer are based on measuring the absorption
of photons by measuring the intensity of light passing through a sample (P), and compare it
to the intensity of light before it passes through the sample (Po). The ratio
P
Po is called the
transmittance (T) and is used in Lambert-Beer’s law to calculate the absorbance, see equation
2.1 [18].
A “ Logp 1
T q “ εbc
(2.1)
Where ε is the molar absorption coeﬃcient given in M ´1cm´1, b is the length of the light path
passing through the sample, and c is the concentration of the sample.
The UV-Vis instrument is used in this thesis as a characterization technique to observe whether
the synthesis was successful or not. The recorded spectra were compared with those reported
in the literature.
2.1.2
NanoSight and Nanoparticle tracking analysis
The NanoSight instrument can be used to determine the particle size on the basis of individual
particle dynamics. The Nano-sight instrument LM10 (Wiltshire, UK) utilizes Brownian motion
in the determination of the size of particles under the assumption that the particles are of
spherical shape. The Nano-Sight uses light from a red laser with a wavelength of 635 nm,
which is scattered by the particles and the scattered light is recorded by a charge-coupled
device (CCD) camera. The metallic surface below the medium consist is optical ﬂat so when
the beam passes the scattered light from the particles is caused to propagate in close proximity
to the metal ﬁlm [19]. The Nano-sight instruments principle is shown in Figure 2.3 a). A
short video of 30-90 s is recorded and every particle is tracked by identifying the centre of
each scattered light spot. Each light spot corresponds to the light scattered by a particle, see
Figure 2.3 b). The software Nanoparticles tracking Analysis (NTA) is used to analyse the video
frame-by-frame and thereby tracking the motion of the particles, see Figure 2.3 c).
Figure 2.3: a) The principles of the Nano-sight instrument. b) A frame from a video captured by
Nano-sight instrument where each bright spot represents a nano-particle in the liquid solvent.
c) the typical motion of one nano-particle tracked by the NTA software. [20]
The diﬀusion coeﬃcient is used to calculate the particle size from the hydrodynamic diameter
by the Stokes-Einstein equation, equation 2.2. The only parameter from the Stokes-Einstein
4
==PAGE:12==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 2. METHODS AND THEORY
equation needed is the viscosity.
D “ 2kBT
6πηdh
(2.2)
Where D is the diﬀusion coeﬃcient, kB Boltzmann’s constant, T the temperature in kelvin, η
the viscosity of the solvent and dh is the hydrodynamic diameter.
A relatively low particle concentration is required to obtain reliable results, with the optimal
particle concentration in 108 ´ 109 particles per mL. The lower limit of detection of the system
is aﬀected by two important key factors. The scattering of the particles needs to be strong
enough for the CCD camera to be registered, which depends on the refractive index and the
size of the particle. The higher the refractive index of the solvent the smaller particles can be
detected. The second factor depends on the frame rate, which determines the limit of detection
with respect to the size of the particle. This is a consequence of small particles moving faster
than large particles, which needs a camera with a high frame rate to detect the small particles.
2.1.3
Atomic force microscopy
Atomic force microscopy (AFM) was invented in 1986 by Binnig G, Quate CF and Gerber C
[21]. AFM is one of the high-resolution scanning probe microscopies (SPM) with a resolution
at the nano-meter scale. The principle behind AFM is that an image is generated by a probe
that is scanning across the sample surface. The probe consisting of a cantilever often made
from silicon or silicon nitride with an atomically thin tip integrated on the surface. The sample
is moved by three piezoelectric crystals on which a slight movement of the atoms are induced
by applying an electric ﬁeld. A laser beam is focused on the cantilever and reﬂected by the
cantilever onto a photo-detector. When the cantilever is moved, the reﬂection will change and
this change can be measured by the photo-detector. [22][23]. Figure 2.4 shows the working
principle of an AFM.
Figure 2.4: The principle of the Atomic Force Microscope (AFM)[24]
The AFM records the topography of the sample by measuring the laser deﬂection of the can-
tilever when the tip is brought into close to or contact with the sample. The deﬂection of the
cantilever happens when the tip surpasses the small attractive van der waals forces around 1-10
nm from the sample. It is then repulsed by the electron clouds of the atoms in the tip and the
5
==PAGE:13==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 2. METHODS AND THEORY
sample. This repulsion causes the cantilever to bend upwards. The inter-atomic force versus
the inter-atomic distance is shown schematically in Figure 2.5.
Figure 2.5: The interatomic force versus the interatomic distance [25]. c⃝Park Systems, Inc
ă 23 ´ 06 ´ 2015 ą Reproduced with Permission and Courtesy of Park Systems, Inc.
An AFM can in general be operated in either a static or a dynamic mode. The static operating
mode is called the contact mode. Here, the tip is dragged across the sample, which results in
a very strong repulsion. This is illustrated in Figure 2.5. The strong repulsion prevents the tip
from being attracted onto the surface. Contact mode AFM images are produced by measuring
the deﬂection of the cantilever directly while the tip is kept at a constant position. This is done
with the use of a feedback system. A picture of a contact mode cantilever is given in Figure 2.6
a). Due to contact and because the tip being dragged over the sample, the tip and sample could
be damaged over time. A way to minimize these damages is to operate the AFM in a dynamic
mode. In the dynamic mode - also called tapping mode - the cantilever is set to oscillate just
above its resonance frequency, which often is between 5-400 kHz. This is only possible when
the tip is kept a little further away from the sample in the attractive region, see Figure 2.5. In
the tapping mode the image is generated from changes in frequency, phase and amplitude due
to the atomic forces when the tip brieﬂy is in contact with the sample. A tapping mode tip is
shown in Figure 2.6 b).
Figure 2.6: Picture a) a contact mode cantilever and picture b) a tapping mode cantilever.
The main diﬀerence is the tapping mode tip has to be able to oscillate and the contact mode
cantilever has to be stable.
In AFM, it is important to remember that while it gives the true height of the sample there
are two disadvantages. First, it gives a topographical map of the sample that is obtained which
provides no information about elemental composition. Secondly, tip convolution, which is the
result of the curvature of the tip results in a broadening of the observed structures in the
horizontal plane (i.e. the xy-plane). This is schematically illustrated in 2.7.
6
==PAGE:14==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 2. METHODS AND THEORY
Figure 2.7: The eﬀect of tip convolution.
The AFM sample is often prepared on a mica sheet. A piece of mica sheet is cut into the
appropriate size and is attached to a small magnet with double adhesive tape. The purpose of
the magnet is to hold the sample in place on the sample holder. The mica sheet is then cleaned
and made as clean as possible by peeling oﬀa few monolayers of the surface with scotch tape.
20 µL of sample is then spread on the mica sheet and dried.
2.1.4
Transmission electron microscopy
The ﬁrst transmission electron microscope (TEM) was built by Max Knoll and Ernst Ruska in
1931 and it is a type of electron microscope. An electron microscope is a powerful characteri-
zation technique used to study solid structures. The basic principle of electron microscopy is
apparently similar to that of an optical microscope but instead of visible light a beam of accel-
erated electrons is used. Due to the particle-wave duality electrons can behave like electromag-
netic radiation with a short wavelength and very high energies. The shorter the wavelength,
the better the resolution obtained by the microscope. The relationship between the wavelength
and the energy is given by Equation 2.3 - and comes from the formula of the kinetic energy of
an electron accelerated through a voltage and the de Broglie relation - using the deﬁnition of
linear momentum that the velocity is equal the translational momentum divided with the mass
(v= p
m), see equation 2.4 and 2.5.
λ “
h
?
2meV “ 1.23 ¨
?
V
(2.3)
1
2mv2 “ eV
(2.4)
p “ h
λ
(2.5)
Where λ is the wavelength in nm, h Plank’s constant (6.6261 ¨ 10´34rm2kgs´1s), m the mass of
an electron (9.1094 ¨ 10´31kg), e the charge of an electron (1.6022 ¨ 10´19C) and V the voltage
applied. The relativistic corrections are neglected in this model but the become signiﬁcant as
the kinetic energy approaches 511 keV or 8.1871 ¨ 10´14J, which is the electron rest mass (m).
[23].
TEM has been improved over the years and in 2008 the Transmission Electron Aberration-
corrected Microscope (TEAM) project enabled to reach a resolution below 50 pico-meter (0.5
7
==PAGE:15==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 2. METHODS AND THEORY
˚A) [26]. The working principle of TEAM is that a high energy electron beam is generated in
an electron gun either by heating a tungsten ﬁlament, a lanthanum hexaboride crystal or by
using a Field emission gun. The FEI Tecnai T20 G2 used in our experiments uses a Thermionic
LaB6/CeB6 as an electron source and has a point resolution of 0.24 nm and a line resolution
of 0.14 nm [27]. A picture of a FEI Tecnai T20 G2 transmission electron microscope and the
technical principle is shown in Figure 2.8.
Figure 2.8: The same type of FEI Tecnai T20 G2 transmission electron microscope as the one
used in the experiments and the schematics of a TEM. The photo of the FEI Tecnai G2 is
printed from [28] and the principle is re-printed from [29]
Electrons generated in a electrostatic thermionic electron gun is generated within a very thin
ﬁlament (a few hundred nano-meters) in the cathode and are able to escape due to an increased
thermal energy. The electrons are then accelerated due to a high voltage of 100-300 kV between
the anode and cathode. The electron beam is directed towards the sample by an electric ﬁeld
controlled by a system of electromagnetic lenses also called condenser lenses. The beam is
focused on the sample by an objective lens. The electrons strike the sample’s atoms, causing
elastic and inelastic scattering. The scattered electrons passing through the sample are then
detected and focused on to a detector by a projection lens. The detector is a ﬂuorescent screen
or a CCD camera which generates the TEM image. To make sure that the electron beam does
not collide with anything else and to avoid any contaminants, all measurements are conducted
under ultra-high vacuum.
There are two primary ways of generating a TEM image, either by recording the primary beam
of electrons passing through the sample - this is called the bright ﬁeld mode - or by recording
8
==PAGE:16==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 2. METHODS AND THEORY
the back-scattered electrons - this is called dark ﬁeld mode, see Figure 2.9. The samples in this
project were imaged mainly by the bright ﬁeld mode.
Figure 2.9: The diﬀerence between bright and dark ﬁeld TEM
The TEM samples have to be prepared onto a support grid. The samples were prepared by
adding 5 µL analyte onto approximately 3 mm wide copper mesh coated with a thin amorphous
carbon ﬁlm. A carbon coated copper grid that is used can be seen in Figure 2.10. The samples
are then sat to evaporate protected by a petri-dish.
Figure 2.10: A carbon coated copper grid that is used in TEM samples
Energy Dispersive X-Ray Analysis
Energy Dispersive X-Ray Analysis or Energy Dispersive Analysis of X-Rays (EDX or EDAX) is
a tool that can be connected to a TEM and then used to determine the elemental composition.
This principle works as an electron collides with one of the inner electrons in the atom in an
inelastic collision, one of the outer electrons will jump in and ﬁll the vacancy. The process
emits the excess energy as a X-ray photon. This is illustrated in Figure 2.11
9
==PAGE:17==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 2. METHODS AND THEORY
Figure 2.11: How an atom is excited and an electron from the inner core is ejected. An electron
is then ”moved” from the outer shells and emits its extra energy as a X-ray photon.[30]
When the energy is released as X-ray photons each atom has a speciﬁc characteristic energy. It
is possible to assign these energies to a speciﬁc element due to a speciﬁc electron jump with a
speciﬁc energy. As an example, the EDX spectrum of CeO2 from this study is shown in Figure
2.12.
Figure 2.12: The EDX spectra of Cerium oxide samples (CeO2)
10
==PAGE:18==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 2. METHODS AND THEORY
2.1.5
X-ray Diﬀraction
X-ray crystallography can be used to identify the crystal structures of the atoms and molecules
in a solid material and to recognise diﬀerent compounds.
The working principle of X-ray
crystallography is a X-ray generated and focused into the analyte, where it collides with an
electron from the inner shell of the analyte. This collision creates a vacancy because it is exited
as shown in Figure 2.13. This vacancy will make it possible for an electron from a higher shell
to jump down into the lower shell where it can have a lower energy state. When jumping to a
lower energy state the electron will release the extra energy as an X-ray photon.
Figure 2.13: The collision of an x-ray with an electron from the inner shell where a vacancy is
created. An electron from one of the outer shells then ”jumps” in to ﬁll this vacancy and in
the process a X-ray photon is emitted [31].
This X-ray photon is then measured by the apparatus while the samples are rotated. The
energies from the atoms all come from diﬀerent angles and by measuring the intensity of the
beams at these diﬀerent angles it is possible to generate a diﬀraction pattern, an example of
which is shown in Figure 2.14.
Figure 2.14: An example of a diﬀraction pattern [32]
11
==PAGE:19==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 2. METHODS AND THEORY
The diﬀraction pattern is used to make a plot over the diﬀerent intensities and corresponding
angle, called a diﬀractogram, an example of which can be seen in seen Figure 2.15.
Figure 2.15: Shows an example of a diﬀractogram. In this case it is GO CeO2 with a weight
ratio of 1/1. This diﬀractogram is obtained during from this study and the background is not
subtracted
In powder diﬀraction the diﬀractogram is obtained by measuring from the middle of the pat-
tern in a straight line out to obtain the diﬀractogram and is used to extract diﬀerent kind
of information e.g. the crystalline size of the particle and Miller indices in the crystal. The
crystalline particle size is calculated from the Scherrer equation, equation 2.6 [11].
d “
0.9 ¨ λkα1
B2θcospθmaxq
(2.6)
where d is the crystalline particle size, λkα1 is the x-ray wavelength, B2θ is the line broadening at
full width half maximum intensity (FWHM), after subtracting the instrumental line broadening,
in radians and θmax is the Bragg’s angle that is described in Equation 2.7.
Bragg’s law is expressed in an equation that is used in X-ray spectroscopy and gives the coherent
and incoherent angles of scattering from the crystal lattice. The Bragg equation is expressed
as below, Equation 2.7
nλ “ 2dhklsinpθhklq
(2.7)
where n is described as the reﬂection order and must be an integer, λ is the wavelength of the
incoming beam, dhkl is the inter-planar spacing, and θ is the angle of the reﬂection called the
Bragg angle.Bragg’s law is illustrated in Figure 2.16.
12
==PAGE:20==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 2. METHODS AND THEORY
Figure 2.16: The diﬀerent parameters of Bragg’s Law, schematic [33]
The most simple lattice structure is called cubic packed (CP) system. When a system is CP
the equation d “
a
?
h2`l2`l2 is valid and it is therefore possible to rewrite the Bragg equation as
in Equation 2.8.
sin2pθhklq “ λ2
4a2ph2 ` l2 ` l2q
(2.8)
By measuring the 2θ values and estimating the Miller indices (hkl) the cubic unit cell dimension
a can be calculated. It is thereby possible to estimate whether we have a primitive (P), a face-
centered (F) or a body-centered (I) cubic unit cell. To estimate this, Table 2.1 is used.
Table 2.1: The allowed values of (h2 ` k2 ` l2) for cubic crystals. [23] p. 85 table 2.3.
Forbidden
Primitive
Face-centered
Body-centered
Corresponding
numbers
(P)
(F)
(I)
hkl values
1
100
2
2
110
3
3
111
4
4
4
200
5
210
6
6
211
7
-
8
8
8
220
9
221;300
10
10
310
11
11
311
12
12
12
222
13
320
14
14
321
15
-
16
16
16
400
13
==PAGE:21==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 2. METHODS AND THEORY
It is possible to determine the unit cell due to systematic absences. Because of symmetry in
the crystals, the reﬂections from speciﬁc atoms will be diﬀerent due to destructive interference
which results in speciﬁc reﬂections being absent in diﬀerent unit cells. In this report the only
unit cell system indexed is a FCC system, and in this case the Miller indices (hkl values) of the
planes must be either even or odd. [23].
Two main methods are commonly used to obtain diﬀractograms in powder diﬀraction patterns,
the transmission method and the reﬂection method. In this report only the transmission method
will be described. The transmission method works by sending a X-ray beam through a primary
focusing quartz monochromator which can rotate or vibrate the ﬂat-plate sample holder. This
is the method used for the apparatus used is these experiments. The instrument used in this
thesis for sample characterization is a Huber G670 diﬀractometer. An image of this apparatus
is shown in Figure 2.17.
Figure 2.17: The Huber G670 diﬀractometer used for the experiments [34].
The advantage of using the Huber G670 diﬀractometer on a powder is that very small amount
of sample is needed. The instrument has a short data collection time, and even with short col-
lection time a good peak resolution is obtained. The disadvantage of this method is that it gives
a relatively high amount of background from the read-out system, for example the background
radiation can come from the air, tape, the capillary scattering and possible ﬂuorescence.
2.1.6
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
The principles behind photo-electron spectroscopy are the photoelectric eﬀect that was dis-
covered in 1887 by Heinrich Rudolf Hertz, explained in 1905 by Albert Einstein and used
to develop the X-ray photo-electron spectrometer approximately forty-ﬁve years later by Kai
Siegbahn and his colleagues. The photoelectric eﬀect states that electrons can be ejected from
the surface of a solid by electromagnetic radiation or X-ray photons. The ejected electrons
are called photoelectrons. The collision of X-ray photons with electrons in an atom and the
emission of photo-electrons are shown in Figure 2.18.[35]
14
==PAGE:22==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 2. METHODS AND THEORY
Figure 2.18: How an electron will be ejected from the inner core of an atom by an X-ray.[36]
The binding energy of the photoelectrons can be calculated by measuring the kinetic energy,
because they will not change with the X-ray source for photon energy. Diﬀerent elements have
a speciﬁc binding energy with slight variations in binding energy and energy level, depending
on the exact chemical environment of the atoms, molecules or ions which is the so-called XPS
chemical shift. The sampling depth is typically about 5-10 nm [35].
2.1.7
Cyclic voltammetry
Cyclic voltammetry is one of the most eﬀective electrochemical techniques. The working princi-
ple of cyclic voltammetry is that a three electrode set-up is employed with a working electrode, a
counter electrode and a reference electrode, see Figure 2.19. The three-electrode set-up enables
to control over both electrochemical potential and of the current of the working electrode.
Figure 2.19: This Figure shows the experimental set-up of the electrochemical measurements
and where the working, reference and counter electrodes are emphasised.
The potential of the working electrode is controlled relative to the ﬁxed potential of the refer-
ence electrode by a potentiostat. The current between the working electrode and the counter
15
==PAGE:23==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 2. METHODS AND THEORY
electrode during the potential scans is measured by the potentiostat. The working electrode
used in the experiments of the study is the synthesised material immobilized on a glassy car-
bon electrode. The reference electrode is a saturated calomel electrode (SCE) and the counter
electrode a platinum wire. The experiments in this thesis were done under an argon atmo-
sphere to remove oxygen. Oxygen was removed by sending argon through the solution for at
least 20 minutes before measurements and a ﬂow of argon continue over the solution during
the measurements. The potentiostat used in this experiment was an Autolab PGE12S from
Metrohm.
In the experiments the working electrode holds the prepared GO-based electrode material. The
cyclic voltammetry measure both the electrical double layer (EDL) and the faradaic charge.
An example of a cyclic voltammogram (CV) is shown in Figure 2.20 where the cyclic voltam-
mogram of graphene oxide after two hours in 25 % ammonia is shown. The anodic (EA) and
cathodic (Ec) peak potentials correspond to the positive and negative peak potential. This is
the faradaic charge. The electric double layer is given as the minimum diﬀerence in current
between the anodic and cathodic current and is shown with green in Figure 2.20. In this case
the faradaic peaks probably originates from the functional groups.
Figure 2.20: Cyclic voltammogram of GO after two hours in 25 % ammonia. This Figure is
used to show the anodic peak (EA) and cathodic peak (Ec). The electrical double layer (EDL)
will always be present as the background of a voltammogram. The faradaic peaks probably
originates from the functional groups.
A lot of information can be extracted from a CV. Particular it can be determined whether a
reaction is reversible or irreversible. To investigate this it is possible to plot the peak current
versus the square root of the sweep rate or to plot the peak potential versus the logarithm of
the sweep rate. If the curves follow straight lines in the plots the reaction are reversible at
these sweep rates but as soon as the curve deviate from this straight line the reaction becomes
irreversible at these scan rates. This can be seen in Figure 2.21.
16
==PAGE:24==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 2. METHODS AND THEORY
Figure 2.21: An example of the two plots that shows when a reaction is reversible or irreversible.
A reaction is reversible if the plot follows straight lines in either one of the two plots. A reaction
is irreversible of if the plot deviate from these straight lines. [37]
If the peak current is proportional with the square root of the scan rate and form a straight
line when the peak current (Ip) is plotted versus the square root of the scan rate the system
is termed diﬀusion-less. This implies that the system is controlled by the slowest step, which
in this case is the diﬀusion of the electrolyte to the electrode. A reversible diﬀusion-controlled
electron transfer process is given by the Randles-Sev˘cik equation, equation 2.9.[38].
Ip “ 2.69 ¨ 105n
3
2A
?
DνC0
(2.9)
where A is the surface area of the working electrode[cm2], D the diﬀusion coeﬃcient [cm2s´1],
C0 the bulk concentration [molcm ´3], ν the scan rate [V s´1] and n the number of electrons
in the redox reaction.
The opposite of a diﬀusion-controlled system is a diﬀusion-less system.
This is when the
molecules are conﬁned to the electrode surface as monolayers or adlayers and diﬀusion no
longer are aﬀecting the kinetics of the system. A diﬀusion-less systems current peak will be
proportional to the scan rate and is shown in equation 2.10. [38].
Ip “ n2F 2
4RT νAΓ0
(2.10)
where Γ0 is the surface coverage of the adsorbate, F is the Faraday constant [96485sAmol´1],
n the number of electrons in the redox reaction, T the temperature [K], A the surface area of the
working electrode[cm2], ν the scan rate [V s´1] and R is the molar gas constant [8.314JK´1mol´1],
The formal potential (E0) of a reversible system can be estimated approximately by the average
of the cathodic (EC) and anodic peak potential (EA), see equation 2.11.
E0 “ EA ` EC
2
(2.11)
17
==PAGE:25==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 2. METHODS AND THEORY
The speciﬁc capacitance [Fg´1] of the electrode material is calculated from a CV by Equation
2.12
C “
şE2
E1 IpEqdE
2mν ¨ pE2 ´ E1q
(2.12)
Where I is the current in ampere [A], m is the mass loading in gram [g], ν is the scan rate
in volts per second [V
s ], E2 and E1 is the potential window in Volts [V], and C is the speciﬁc
capacitance in Farad per gram [F
g ].
2.1.8
Galvanostatic charge-discharge cycles
The galvanostatic charge-discharge cycles(GCD) are also called cyclic charge-discharge curves
and are investigated by Chronopotentiometry in the same three electrode set-up as described
in the beginning of Section 2.1.7. The electrodes are connected to a potentionstat/galvanostat.
In this case a potentiostat (CHI760c) from CH Instruments was used.
The working principle is to control the current and thereby determine the change in potential
over time within a pre deﬁned potential. The anodic current is turned on until the deﬁned
upper potential limit is reached where the cathodic current will be turned on until the deﬁned
lower potential limit is reached . The size of the anodic and cathodic current depend on the
current densities shown in Equation 2.13.
Id “ I
m
(2.13)
Where I is the current [A], Id is the current density [A/g], and m is the mass of the electrode
material in g.
The normal range of current densities used is 0-100 A/g. This results in plots of the change in
potential over time when the electrode charges and discharges, an example of this is shown in
Figure 2.22.
0
2 0
4 0
6 0
8 0
1 0 0
1 2 0
1 4 0
- 1 , 5
- 1 , 0
- 0 , 5
0 , 0
0 , 5
 
 
E ( V )  V s  S C E
t i m
e  ( s )
 1 A g - 1
 2 A g - 1
 3 A g - 1
 5 A g - 1
Figure 2.22: An example of galvanostatic charge-discharge curves obtained at various current
densities.
18
==PAGE:26==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 2. METHODS AND THEORY
The discharge time can be extracted from Figure 2.22 and used to calculate the speciﬁc capac-
itance by the use of Equation 2.14
C “ Id ¨ ∆t
∆U
(2.14)
where C is the speciﬁc capacitance in F/g, Id is the current density in A/g, ∆t is the discharge
time in seconds, and ∆U is the potential window applied.
2.2
Theory
2.2.1
Capacitor types
Capacitors can be classiﬁed into conventional capacitors, electrolytic capacitors and super-
capacitors.
The conventional capacitors and the electrolytic capacitors are only mentioned
here to give an overview of the diﬀerent kinds of capacitors and their diﬀerences. They will not
be further detailed as the main focus in this thesis is on super-capacitors.
Conventional capacitors are also known as a condenser and operate by having two electrical
conductive layers separated by a dielectric material that works as an electrical insulator. When
a potential diﬀerence between the two conductive layers is applied a positive charge on one of
the conductive layers and equal negative charge on the other conductive layer are accumulated
and it becomes possible to store energy electrostatically in the - hereby formed - electrical
ﬁeld. Conventional capacitors have in general a very high speciﬁc power density but a quite
low speciﬁc energy density , see Figure 2.23. The schematic representation of a conventional
capacitor is shown in Figure 2.24 [39].
Figure 2.23: The Ragone chart, where it is possible to see the speciﬁc power density versus the
speciﬁc energy density.[5]
Another type of capacitors is electrolytic capacitors, where the anode and cathode material
remain the same but otherwise they are similar to batteries in cell construction.
Between
the cathode and anode a metal oxide layer is formed that functions like a dielectric layer. The
metals often include aluminium, tantalum and ceramic capacitors in contact with solid or liquid
electrolytes with a separator between two symmetrical electrodes. The electrolytic capacitors
have a higher speciﬁc energy density than conventional capacitors. A schematic representation
of an electrolytic capacitor is shown in Figure 2.24 [39].
19
==PAGE:27==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 2. METHODS AND THEORY
Figure 2.24: The schematic representations of the conventional capacitor (left) and the elec-
trolytic capacitors (right). Modiﬁed from [39].
The third type of capacitor is the super-capacitor, which was ﬁrst patented in 1957 by N.
S.Lidorenko and A.M Ivanov as the electrochemical double layer capacitor but now also ex-
tended pseudo-capacitors and hybrid-capacitors [40]. The principle behind a super-capacitor
is that it consists of two porous polarizable electrodes connected to a wire where the current
is collected. The electrodes is immersed into an electrolyte separated by a dielectric material
which works as an electrical insulator[40]. A schematic representation is given in Figure 2.25.
Figure 2.25: Schematic representation of a super-capacitor [41]. Here the separator represents
the dielectric material.
As noted there are two types of capacitive behaviour of super-capacitors. The ﬁrst kind of
capacitive behaviour is described as the electrical double layer capacitance, which is the pure
electrostatic charge accumulation between the electrode surface and the electrolyte, as described
in section 2.2.2. The other kind of capacitive behaviour is described as the pseudo-capacitance
20
==PAGE:28==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 2. METHODS AND THEORY
which is due to the fast and reversible redox reactions that happen between the electrode surface
and the electrolyte. Which is further detailed in Section 2.2.3. The pseudo-super-capacitor often
involves both the redox reaction and the electrostatic charge accumulation.
2.2.2
Electrical double layer
The electrical double layer (EDL) is used to store the pure electrostatic charge and is accumu-
lated on the surface of an object when it is in contact with another surface, in this case the
electrolyte. The EDL is easier to understand when described as a positively charged particle
and a negatively ionic atmosphere within close proximity [18]. The most well described system
of an electrical double layer - and most interesting for this thesis - is when a solid (e.g. an
electrode) is in contact with a liquid (e.g. an electrolyte), see Figure 2.26.
Figure 2.26:
The electrochemical double layer where a) is the Helmholtz model, b) the
Gouy–Chapman model, and c) the Stern model. IHP is the inner Helmholtz plane and OHP is
the outer Helmholtz plane. The IHP refers to the speciﬁcally adsorbed ions (the Stern layer)
and OHP refers to the diﬀuse layer. The bulk solution starts when the diﬀuse layer ends. ψ0
and ψ are the potentials at the electrode surface and at the interface between the electrode and
electrolyte, respectively . The Figure is re-printed from [42].
As shown in Figure 2.26 there are several diﬀerent models describing the electrochemical double
layer. The ﬁrst one of these models for the EDL was formulated in the 19th century by Hermann
Ludwig Ferdinand Von Helmholtz. This model states that when an electrode is put into an
electrolyte and the two layers with opposite charges will form an electrode/electrolyte interface
that are separated by an atomic distance, see Figure 2.26 (a). This model is similar to that
of a two-plate conventional capacitor, see Figure 2.24 electrostatic. The speciﬁc capacitance in
F
cm is described in equation 2.15 [42, 43, 44].
CH “ ε
d
(2.15)
21
==PAGE:29==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 2. METHODS AND THEORY
where ε is the dielectric permittivity of the electrolyte(ε0 ¨ εr), and d is the thickness of the
electric double layer, which is close to the molecular diameter of the solvent.
This rather simple model was later modiﬁed by Louis Georges Gouy in 1910 and David Leonard
Chapman in 1913. They formulated the model described by Figure 2.26 (b) which is based on
the assumption of a continuous distribution of anions and cations in the electrolyte solution,
driven by thermal motion. These types of ions are distributed unequally according to the laws
of Poisson and Boltzmann. The problem with the Helmholtz and Gouy-Chapmann models is
that they underestimate or overestimate the capacitance of the EDL, respectively. The speciﬁc
capacitance in
F
cm2 is described by Equation 2.16 [42, 43, 44, 45].
CGC “ z ¨
c
2e2 ¨ n0 ¨ ε
k ¨ T
¨ Coshpz ¨ e ¨ Ψ0
2k ¨ T q
(2.16)
where z is the valence of the electrolytic ions, no is the concentration of the ions at the thermody-
namic equilibrium, ε is the dielectric permittivity of the electrolyte, e is the elementary electric
charge, k is the Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature and ψ0 is the surface potential.
In 1924, Otto Stern suggested a new model that combined the Helmholtz and Gouy-Chapmann
model, see Figure 2.26c). The speciﬁc capacitance is given in equation 2.17 [43, 44]
1
Cs
“
1
CGC
` 1
CH
(2.17)
2.2.3
The pseudo-capacitance
The pseudo-capacitance is used in the super-capacitors. They store the electric charge both
from faradaic reactions (reversible redox reactions) where chemical compounds undergo electro-
sorption or desorption with a charge transfer of the electrolyte onto the electrode and due to
accumulation of electrostatic charge in the EDL [40, 46, 8]. This makes pseudo-super-capacitors
able to store more charge than EDL-capacitors [46]. One of the best materials for these types
of capacitors is various metal oxides. Where transition metal oxides in general are considered
as the best candidates due to the broad variety of oxidation states which would be available
for redox charge transfer [8]. The most studied metal oxides is the noble metals which gives a
ultra-high theoretical capacitance of up to a 2000 F/g with RuO2. The problems with the noble
metals is high cost which limits the practical use of these materials. This is why focus on the
research into other materials such as transition metals onto both metallic, porous carbon, rGO
and GO [40, 8]. The pseudo-capacitance is characterized by a linear variation of the capacitance
with the amount of charge stored and the related to the change of potential as given in equation
2.18 [8, 2].
C “ ∆Q
∆V
(2.18)
where ∆Q is the diﬀerence in charge [C] and ∆V is the diﬀerence in potential [V]
2.2.4
Speciﬁc capacitance, energy density and power density
The most important way to compare the performance of a super-capacitor electrode is to
compare the speciﬁc capacitance, the energy density, the power density and cycle life but it is
not a well standardized way to report the results. The speciﬁc capacitance is a measure of how
many farad there can be stored per g electrode material (F/g). This can be calculated in several
ways where the two most common ways is using either cyclic voltammetry or galvanostatic
22
==PAGE:30==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 2. METHODS AND THEORY
charge-discharge cycles. The advantage of using cyclic voltammetry is it is possible to observe
whether the contribution comes from the double layer or the faradaic reactions but because
the capacitance depend on the scan rate the galvanostatic charge-discharge cycles are more
precise [6].
The speciﬁc capacitance calculated from cyclic voltammetry and galvanostatic
charge-discharge cycles are given in equation 2.12 and 2.14.
The energy density in capacitors is often quite low compared with batteries and fuel cells but
is a measure of how much energy that is stored per unit mass. This is calculated from equation
2.19.[8, 47, 2, 48]
E “ 1
2CV 2 “
(2.19)
Where E is the energy density [Wh ¨ kg´1], C is the speciﬁc capacitance [F ¨ g´1] and V is the
voltage applied to the cell.
The Power density is a measure for the power per unit mass in the electrode and is correlated
to the resistance of the capacitor. The measure of the power density of the electrode material
is not always a meaningful thing to calculate because the power density is correlated to the
resistance. It is possible to calculate the power density that is attributed from the electrode
material itself. [6]. The power density in a capacitor is quite high compared to batteries and
fuel cells [39, 47] and is calculated as shown in equation 2.20. [8, 47, 2, 48]
P “
V 2
4 ¨ Ri
(2.20)
Where P is the power density [W ¨ kg´1], W is the energy density [Wh ¨ kg´1], V is the voltage
applied on the cell, and Ri is the internal resistance of the material in ohm [Ω]. The internal
resistance is determined by the the voltage drop in the galvanostatic charge-discharge cycles,
see Equation 2.21
Ri “
∆V2
Idischarge
(2.21)
where Idischarge is the discharge current calculated from the current density and the electrodes
mass and ∆V2 is the diﬀference in potential of the voltage drop, explained in Figure 2.27.
Figure 2.27: An example of the voltage drop. used to ﬁnd the internal resistance.
23
==PAGE:31==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 2. METHODS AND THEORY
The last important way to compare the performance of a super-capacitor electrode is to test
the cycle performance. This is done by measuring the speciﬁc capacitance over several hundred
or thousand cycles. This is shown in Figure 2.28.
Figure 2.28: An example of cycle performance over several cycles [2].
2.2.5
Electode materials for supercapacitors
A broad variety of materials can be used in the construction of super-capacitors. This section
focuses on some of the most attractive materials used as a super-capacitor.
One of the key issues to reach a high speciﬁc capacitance is by charging the double layer.
This can be done by using electronically conducting electrodes with a high surface area and
many oxidation states. One of the materials that is widely used today in a super-capacitor
is carbon in diﬀerent forms. The most popular is activated carbon, carbon nano-tubes and
graphene due to their high surface area, high conductivity, high availability, relatively low
cost and stability [49, 50, 48]. The carbon materials are typically used to optimize speciﬁc
capacitance in the electrochemical double layer [50]. The problem with the carbon materials is
they don’t have strong redox reaction (faradaic peaks) which in general give them a quite low
speciﬁc capacitance which is why metal oxides are being investigated [48]. An overview over the
speciﬁc capacitance, energy density, power density and cycle stability of the diﬀerent carbon
materials is summarised in Table 2.2. Here it is seen that GO has a high speciﬁc capacitance
and a high cycle stability compared to the other carbon compounds but when the speciﬁc
capacitance are compared with the super-capacitors with a ultra-high capacitance of 2609 F/g
the speciﬁc capacitance of the carbon compounds are quite low.
24
==PAGE:32==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 2. METHODS AND THEORY
Table 2.2: An overview over the diﬀerent carbon materials for their speciﬁc capacitance, energy
density, power density and cycle stability.
Material
Speciﬁc
capaci-
tance [F/g]
Energy
density
[Wh/kg]
Power
density
[kW/kg]
Cycle
Activated
carbon
(AC) [51]
100-300
10
10
10000
Carbon
nano-tubes
(CNT) [52]
180
7
20
-
Graphene
(rGO)
[53],[54]
99-135,205
28.5
10
3000,1200
Graphene oxide (GO)
[13]
189
-
-
5000
Metal oxides are researched due to their ultra-high speciﬁc capacitance and high energy density.
An overview over the speciﬁc capacitance, energy density, power density and cycle stability of
the diﬀerent metal oxides are summarised in Table 2.3. Here it is possible to observe that
in general the metal oxides have a much higher speciﬁc capacitance than that of the carbon
compounds alone.
Table 2.3: An overview over the diﬀerent metal oxides speciﬁc capacitance, energy density,
power density and cycle stability
Material
Speciﬁc
capaci-
tance [F/g]
Energy
density
[Wh/kg]
Power
density
[kW/kg]
Cycle
RuO2 [50]
730
-
-
10000
CeO2 [55]
37
-
-
1000
MnO2 [50]
774
-
-
10000
Co3O4 [56]
456
-
-
500
NiO [57]
390
-
-
1000
Ni(OH)2 [58]
578
-
-
-
Due to the low conductivity of the metal oxides and low speciﬁc capacitance of the carbon
materials, their composite materials consisting of carbon/metal oxides are of interest.
An
overview over the carbon/metal oxides with the highest speciﬁc capacitance, energy density,
power density and cycle stability are listed in Table 2.4
25
==PAGE:33==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 2. METHODS AND THEORY
Table 2.4: An overview over the carbon/metal oxides with the highest speciﬁc capacitance,
energy density, power density and cycle stability.
Material
Speciﬁc
capaci-
tance [F/g]
Energy
density
[Wh/kg]
Power
density
[kW/kg]
Cycle
CeO2/CNT[55]
188
26.05
-
CeO2/AC[55]
4.86
4.86
-
1000
rGO/CeO2[10]
89
-
-
-
MnO2/rGO [59]
348
-
-
1000
rGO/Ni/Ni(OH)2 [59]
2609
-
-
-
RGO/NiO [59]
555
-
-
5000
rGO/RuO2 [59]
551
39.28
128.01
2000
rGO/TiO2 [59]
165
-
-
5000
SnO2/rGO [59]
294
32.2
1
2000
26
==PAGE:34==
3. Experiments
The experimental section describes several experiments performed during the Spring and Sum-
mer of 2015. The purpose of the experiments is to synthesise hybrid-nanosheets of graphene
oxide (GO) and cerium oxide (ceria).
These sheets will be investigated as super-capacitor
electrodes.
The nano-hybrid super-capacitor electrodes were prepared by synthesising GO and cerium oxide
nano-sheets and combining the two solutions in both a two-step synthesis - where GO and CeO2
were mixed - and in a one-step synthesis - where GO was mixed with cerium(III)nitrate and
reacted into cerium(IV)oxide in a direct synthesis. The nano-sheets were then characterized
by several analytic tools to determine whether the synthesis was successful. The analytic tools
include UV-Vis spectrophotometry, a NanoSight instrument, atomic force microscopy (AFM),
X-ray diﬀractometer (XRD), X-ray photoelectron spectoscopy (XPS) and transmission electron
microscopy (TEM).
The second part of the experiments were to determine the potential window of the pseudo-
capacitance, the speciﬁc capacitance, the energy density, and the power density. This was done
by cyclic voltammetry and galvanostatic charge-discharge cycles.
All these characterisation techniques and instruments were described in Section 2.1. All equip-
ment was cleaned before use by the method described in Appendix A.
3.1
Synthesis of graphene oxide
Graphene oxide (GO) was synthesised by the modiﬁed Hummers’ method [60]. The equipment
and chemicals needed for this synthesis can be found in Table 3.1 and 3.2 and the procedure is
described below.
27
==PAGE:35==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTS
Table 3.1: The equipment for the GO synthesis and how it should be cleaned.
Equipment needed
Cleaning
6 Beaker glass (more is better 25, 50, 100 mL)
Boiled in HNO3
measuring cylinder (10, 20 mL)
Boiled in HNO3
Round-bottom ﬂask (250 mL)
Boiled in HNO3
2 magnets
Boiled in HNO3
Funnel (wide pipe)
Boiled in HNO3
2 Stirring glass rod
Boiled in HNO3
Watch glass
Boiled in HNO3
2-3 Sample vials
Boiled in HNO3
2-3 glass pipetes
Boiled in HNO3
4 blue-cap bottles (caps must not be boiled)
Boiled in HNO3
Petri dish
Boiled in HNO3
2L Beaker
Boiled in HNO3
a big magnet
Boiled in HNO3
Condenser
Wash with brush, soap, HNO3 and Milli-Q
caps for sample vials
Wash with brush, soap, HNO3 and Milli-Q
2 Clamps
Wash with brush, soap, HNO3 and Milli-Q
Erlenmeyer ﬂask with exhaust
Clean with brush, soap and milli-Q
Centrifuge tubes
Clean with brush, soap and milli-Q
B¨uchner funnel
Clean with brush, soap and milli-Q water
2 grinders
Clean with brush, soap and milli-Q water
Oil bath
pH paper
spectra pore membrane (MWCO:12-14000)
ﬁltration paper
paraﬁlm
Plastic wrap
Table 3.2: Chemicals needed for the GO synthesis.
Chemicals needed
Amount
Nitric acid (30 %)
Graphite powder
5 .0 g
H2SO4 (concentrated)
50 mL
P2O5
2.5 g
K2S2O8
2.5 g
Milli-Q water
KMnO4
3.0 g
H2O2 (30 %)
2.5 mL
HCl (1M)
250 mL
10 mL H2SO4 was added in a round-bottom ﬂask and mixed with 5 g graphite powder, 2.5 g
P2O5 and 2.5 g K2S2O8, and the last 10 mL H2SO4 was added to ﬂush the chemicals into the
round-bottom ﬂask. Heat was applied (80˝C under stirring of the oil bath) for 3 hours. The
solution was cooled to room temperature and diluted with milli-Q water („ 50 mL, the product
was black-green). The solution was then ﬁltered through a b¨uchner funnel with 2 pieces of ﬁlter
paper (Munktell ﬁlter paper (5.5 cm)) with milli-Q water until a neutral pH of 6-7 was reached
28
==PAGE:36==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTS
(Approximately 2 L of milli-Q water was needed). The product was then transferred to a clean
Petri dish, covered with a watch glass and dried overnight at 50˝C in an oven.
The pre-oxidized graphite powder was then ground in a mortar. The condenser was assembled
over an ice-bath and 23 mL sulphuric acid added to the round-bottom ﬂask followed by 3.0
g potassium permanganate and 1.0 g pre-oxidized graphite powder (the chemicals were added
slowly, because it is an exothermic reaction and the reaction should occur below 20˝C). The
set-up is shown in Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: The pre-oxidized graphite powder with potassium permanganate in sulfuric acid in
a round-bottom ﬂask with condenser.
The mixture was heated to 35˝C in a water bath for two hours under continuous stirring. 46
mL of milli-Q water was added slowly (warning: purple vapours can occur) followed by 138
mL milli-Q water and 2.5 mL H2O2 (the H2O2 should be added drop by drop until no reaction
occurred (the colour of the solution was yellowish)).
The raw GO product was washed with 250 mL 1 M HCl and re-dispersed with approximately
200 mL milli-Q water. The solution was centrifuged at 12 rcf/G for 10 min and the supernatant
was centrifuged at 18514 rcf/G for 15 min. The residue was re-dispersed and centrifuged at
18514 rcf/G for 15 min. The residue was then re-dispersed and left for dialysis. A spectra pore
membrane (MWCO:12-14000, vol/length:18 mL/cm) was used for the dialysis and the milli-Q
water was changed every second hour the ﬁrst 2-3 days and the membrane was changed after
3-4 days .
The GO product was analysed by the diﬀerent characterisation techniques described in Section
2.1. GO was used directly as a reference electrode material and as a building block for the
electrode materials. GO was combined with CeO2 in the ratios 1/1 and 1/10 and the direct
synthesis of CeO2 with GO in the ratios 1/1 and 10/1.
29
==PAGE:37==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTS
3.2
Cerium oxide nano-sheet synthesis
The method used in the synthesis of cerium oxide was adopted with modiﬁcations from Zhang
et al. [61]. The synthesised ceria was characterized by diﬀerent analytic tools described in
Section 2.1. The equipment and chemicals needed for this synthesis is summarised in Table 3.3
and 3.4, and the procedure is described below.
Table 3.3: The equipment for the CeO2 synthesis and how it should be cleaned.
Equipment needed
Cleaning
3 Beaker glass (2 x 50, 600 mL)
Boiled in HNO3
measuring cylinder (10, 20 mL)
Boiled in HNO3
1 big magnet
Boiled in HNO3
4 blue-cap bottles (caps must not be boiled)
Boiled in HNO3
8 Centrifuge tubes
Clean with brush, soap and milli-q
paraﬁlm
Plastic wrap
Table 3.4: Chemicals needed for the CeO2 synthesis.
Chemicals needed
Amount
Nitric acid (30 %)
0.05 M Ce(NO3)3
120 mL
25% NH3 (concentrated)
480 mL
Milli-Q water
The cerium(IV)oxide (ceria) nano-sheets were synthesised by preparing a 120 mL 0.05 M
cerium(III)nitrate solution (CepNO3q3¨6H2O) and adding 480 mL 25% ammonia solution un-
der magnetic stirring at room temperature. After 2 hours stirring, a yellow precipitate was
produced. The proposed reaction mechanism for the conversion of Ce3` into Ce4` is shown in
reaction equation 3.1 [62], 3.2, 3.3 [63], 3.4 and 3.5 [64].
NH3 ` H2O Ñ OH´ ` NH`
4
(3.1)
Ce3` ` 3OH´ Ñ CepOHq3
(3.2)
4CepOHq3 ` O2 Ñ 4CeO2 ` 6H2O
(3.3)
NO´
3 ` H` ` hν Ñ ¨NO2 ` ¨OH
(3.4)
2 ¨ NO2 Ñ ¨N2O4
(3.5)
The product was washed to remove excess ammonia, by centrifugation at 18514 G for 10 min,
and the residue re-dispersed in ultra-pure water. The centrifugation and re-dispersion procedure
were repeated at least four times. The ﬁnal product was re-dispersed again and centrifuged at
514 G for 20 min. The supernatant was transferred to a blue bottle cap and stored until used.
The 0.05 M cerium(III)nitrate solution was prepared by weighing 2.1722 g cerium(III)nitrate
and dissolving it in 100 mL ultra-pure water. The solution is transparent. With the addition
30
==PAGE:38==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTS
of ammonia the solution turned red-brownish (due to the formation of (NH4)2Ce(NO3)6 and
turn more [12] and after two hours of reaction under magnetic stirring, green-yellow precipitate
was generated (due to the formation of CeO2 [12]). This can be seen in Figure 3.2 a) and b).
Figure 3.2: The 0.05 M cerium(III)nitrate solution was mixed with 25% ammonia which gives
a red-brownish color, which properly is due to the formation of (NH4)2Ce(NO3)6 as shown in
a). Precipitate appeared after two hours of reaction, which properly is due to the formation of
CeO2, this as shown in b) .
The initial pH of the solution was measured with a pH meter to 11.96 and the ﬁnal pH after
reaction to 11.67, i.e. only a very slight change.
3.3
Graphene Oxide/Cerium oxide nano-sheet synthesis
in the ratio 1/1 and 1/10
One of the materials used as a super-capacitor electrode material was graphene oxide mixed
with cerium oxide in the ratio 1/1 and 1/10. This was synthesised by mixing GO and CeO2. GO
and CeO2 were synthesised as described in Section 3.1 and 3.2. The equipment and chemicals
needed for this synthesis is summarised in Tables 3.5 and 3.6. The procedure is described below.
Table 3.5: The equipment for the GO/CeO2 synthesis and how it should be cleaned.
Equipment needed
Cleaning
3 Beaker glass (2x50, 600 mL)
Boiled in HNO3
measuring cylinder (10,20 mL)
Boiled in HNO3
1 big magnet
Boiled in HNO3
4 blue-cap bottles (caps must not be boiled)
Boiled in HNO3
8 Centrifuge tubes
Clean with brush, soap and milli-q
paraﬁlm
Plastic wrap
31
==PAGE:39==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTS
Table 3.6: Chemicals needed for the GO/CeO2 synthesis.
Chemicals needed
Amount
Nitric acid (30 %)
1.0126 mg/mL CeO2
62.79 g
1.0134 mg/mL GO
17.22 g
Milli-Q water
The apparent average density of the two materials was estimated by measuring the weight of 1
mL of each materials solution at least ﬁve times. The results are summarised in Table 3.7.
Table 3.7: The density of GO and CeO2 solutions was determined by weighing 1 mL of the
solution and taking the average of the measurements. At least ﬁve measurements were carried
out.
Volume
CeO2
GO
mL
g
g
1
1.0108
1.0149
2
1.0097
1.0144
3
1.0094
1.0123
4
1.021
1.0138
5
1.012
1.0145
6
1.013
7
1.0124
8
1.0121
Density [g/mL]
1.0126
1.0134
The amount of GO and CeO2 needed for the synthesis of the ratio 1/1 and 1/10 was then
calculated from the density measurements and can be seen in Table 3.8.
Table 3.8: The amount of the materials used in the synthesis of GO/CeO2 in diﬀerent ratios.
ratio
GO [g]
CeO2 [g]
1/1
12.1512
12.1608
1/10
5.067
50.63
The mixture solution was placed under vigour’s stirring for 2 hours at room temperature in a
fume-hood.
3.4
One-step Graphene Oxide/Cerium oxide nano-composite
synthesis in the ratio 1/1 and 1/10
In theory it would be possible to make a one-step synthesis instead of a two-step synthesis as
the one described in Section 3.3, which would be a faster and more time-saving method. It
was investigated whether this one-step synthesis could be done by directly synthesised cerium
oxide and graphene oxide (dGO/CeO2) mixed in the ratio 1/1 and 10/1. This was synthesised
by mixing GO, Ce(NO3)3 and ammonia. GO was synthesised as described in Section 3.1. The
equipment and chemicals needed for this synthesis are summarised in Table 3.9 and 3.10. The
procedure is described below.
32
==PAGE:40==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTS
Table 3.9: The equipment for the dGO/CeO2 synthesis and how it should be cleaned.
Equipment needed
Cleaning
3 Beaker glass (2x50, 600 mL)
Boiled in HNO3
measuring cylinder (10,20 mL)
Boiled in HNO3
1 big magnet
Boiled in HNO3
4 blue-cap bottles (caps must not be boiled)
Boiled in HNO3
8 Centrifuge tubes
Clean with brush, soap and milli-q
paraﬁlm
Plastic wrap
Table 3.10: Chemicals needed for the dGO/CeO2 synthesis.
Chemicals needed
Amount
Nitric acid (30 %)
0.05 M Ce(NO3)3
138.32 mL
25% NH3 (concentrated)
553.3 mL
Milli-Q water
1.034 mg/mL GO
25.34 mL
The apparent density of the two materials was estimated by measuring the weight of 1 mL of
each materials solution at least eight times. The results are summarised in Table 3.11.
Table 3.11: The density of GO and Ce(NO3)3 solutions was determined by weighing 1 mL of
the solution and taking the average of the measurements. At least eight measurements were
performed.
Volume
Ce(NO3)3
GO
mL
g
g
1
1.0067
1.0149
2
1.0049
1.0144
3
1.0054
1.0123
4
1.0033
1.0138
5
1.0033
1.0145
6
1.0070
1.013
7
1.0048
1.0124
8
1.0082
1.0121
9
1.0079
10
1.0081
Density [g/mL]
1.00596
1.0134
The amount of GO and Ce(NO3)3 needed for the synthesis of the ratio 1/1 and 1/10 were
calculated and can be seen in Table 3.12.
Table 3.12: The amount of the materials used in the synthesis of dGO/CeO2 in diﬀerent ratios.
ratio
GO [g]
Ce(NO3)3 [g]
Volume ammonia [mL]
1/1
12.6675
12.5745
50.298
1/10
12.6675
125.745
502.98
33
==PAGE:41==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTS
The mixtures were mixed and stirred for 2 hours at room temperature in a fume-hood. The
initial and ﬁnal pH for the two reactions are shown in Table 3.13
Table 3.13: The initial and ﬁnal pH for the two reactions.
sample
pHinitial
pHfinal
dGO-1/1
12.23
11.63
dGO-1/10
12.93
12.3
3.5
Electrode preparation
The electrode material was analysed by preparing electrodes from the material. This was done
by polishing a glassy carbon electrode as described in Table 3.14 and add 0.2 mg electrode
material onto these electrodes. The glassy carbon electrodes were then washed in ultra-pure
water and sonicated two times for 10 minutes to remove the excess alumina slurry.
Table 3.14: The polishing procedure for the glassy carbon electrodes.
Time [s]
Rotating [rpm]
movement
Abrasive material
grain size [µm]
5
-
moved in eights
silicon carbide FEPA P # 2000
10
10
-
moved in eights
silicon carbide FEPA P # 4000
3
10
300
moved in eights
Alumina slurry
1
15
300
moved in eights
Alumina slurry
0.3
20
300
moved in eights
Alumina slurry
0.05
The volume needed to dope 200 µg material onto the glassy carbon electrode was calculated by
knowing the concentration of the solutions with the electrode materials, which can be seen in
table 3.15 together with the amount of Naﬁon needed to keep the material onto the electrode.
Table 3.15: The volume of each material needed to dope an electrode with 0.2 mg material and
cover the electrode with a 3 wt% Naﬁon membrane.
Sample
C[mg/mL]
V for 0.2 mg sample [mL]
V [µL]
GO
1.0000
0.2000
200.00
2hGO
2.6300
0.0760
76.05
CeO2
0.1667
1.1998
1199.76
GO/CeO2-1/1
0.5667
0.3529
352.92
GO/CeO2-1/10
1.9000
0.1053
105.26
dGO/CeO2-1/1
0.1667
1.1998
1199.76
dGO/CeO2-1/10
1.7330
0.1154
115.41
3 wt% naﬁon
0.5690
0.0105
10.54
The mixed material was then transferred to a centrifugation tube and centrifuged at 17000 G
for 20 min and then the excess liquid was removed until only 40 µL was left. The glassy carbon
electrode was then doped two times with 20 µL sample and set to dry in a vacuum desiccator.
When completely dry Naﬁon was added onto the electrode which was dried again.
34
==PAGE:42==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTS
3.6
Electrochemical analysis
The equipment for cyclic voltammetry and galvanostatic charge-discharge cycles was set up
and argon was bubbled through the electrolyte (2M KOH was used). The working electrode
with the electrode material of interest was then connected to the set-up still under an inert
atmosphere.
The potential window of interest was investigated by cyclic voltammetry. This was done by
investigating several potential windows - at a scan rate of 100 mV/s - and ﬁnding the anodic
and cathodic peaks. The speciﬁc capacitance was then found by applying at least four diﬀerent
scan rates from 5-100 mV/s.
The speciﬁc capacitance of the electrodes was further investigated by galvanostatic charge-
discharge cycles. This was done by using the same potential window as found from the cyclic
voltammetry experiments and the current calculated from the amount of material on the elec-
trode (0.2 mg) and the current density. The range of current densities used were 0.1-100 A¨g´1.
The calculated anodic and cathodic current corresponding to the current densities are listed in
Table 3.16.
Table 3.16: The calculated current used in the galvanostatic charge-discharge cycles.
Current density [A ¨ g´1]
Current [A]
100.0
0.02
50.0
0.01
10.0
0.002
5.0
0.001
3.0
0.0006
2.0
0.0004
1.0
0.0002
0.5
0.0001
0.1
0.00002
35
==PAGE:43==
4. Results and discussion
The results will be described in two parts. The ﬁrst part is about the characterization of the
electrode material in Section 4.1. The second part is regarding the electrochemical performance
of the electrode material as a super-capacitor, which is described in Section 4.2. The charac-
terization is undertaken to determine whether the synthesis of the diﬀerent electrode materials
was successful and to determine whether nanosheets of GO and CeO2 were obtained. A further
purpose was to determine whether the cerium oxide was attached onto GO. The electrochemical
performance was tested to observe whether the material can function as a super-capacitor elec-
trode by investigating their speciﬁc capacitance. Seven diﬀerent syntheses have been completed
and characterised. The seven synthesised electrode materials are listed in Table 4.1.
Table 4.1: The diﬀerent synthesised compounds, their abbreviation, their composite ratio and
a reference to photographs of the ﬁnal colloidal product shown in Appendix A.2.
#
Synthesised compound
Abbreviation
Picture
1
Graphene Oxide
GO
Figure A.1 a)
2
Graphene Oxide placed in ammonia for 2
hours
2hGO+NH3
Figure A.1 b)
3
Cerium Oxide
CeO2
Figure A.1 c)
4
Dirrect synthesised Cerium oxide and
Graphene oxide-1/1
dGO/CeO2-1/1
Figure A.1 d)
5
Dirrect synthesised Cerium oxide and
Graphene oxide-1/10
dGO/CeO2-1/10
Figure A.1 e)
6
Graphene oxide mixed with Cerium oxide-
1/1
GO/CeO2-1/1
Figure A.1 f)
7
Graphene oxide mixed with Cerium oxide-
1/10
GO/CeO2-1/10
Figure A.1 g)
4.1
Characterization
The seven materials have been characterized by several analytical methods. The purpose of this
has been to determine whether the synthesis of the various compounds were successful and to
determine whether nanosheets of the compounds have been obtained. Furthermore the purpose
of the characterization has been to obtain as much structural information of the synthesised
electrode materials as possible.
The concentration of the analytes was determined by weight. This was done by recording the
initial weight of the vials used. 3 mL sample was added to the vials. The vials were centrifuged
at 17000 G for 10 min, and the supernatant was discarded and dried in a vacuum desiccator for
24 hours. The ﬁnal weight of the vials were recorded, and the weight diﬀerence calculated for
all samples except for GO. The concentration of GO was determined diﬀerently. This was done
by adding 5 mL solution to a clean Petri-dish and evaporate the solvent in a vacuum desiccator
for 24 hours. The initial and ﬁnal weight of the Petri-dish was recorded. The concentration of
the diﬀerent samples are summarised in Table 4.2. The concentration of GO solution used in
the experiments was diluted to 1.005 mg/mL.
36
==PAGE:44==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Table 4.2: The concentration of the seven materials solutions. The information about the initial
weight, ﬁnal weight and the weight diﬀerence is shown in table A.6 in Appendix A.2. The GO
used in the experiments was diluted to 1.005 mg/mL.
#
Sample
Concentration [mg/mL]
1
GO
4.02
2
2hGO+NH3
2.6333
3
CeO2
0.1667
4
dGO/CeO2-1/1
0.3000
5
dGO/CeO2-1/10
1.7333
6
GO/CeO2-1/1
0.5667
7
GO/CeO2-1/10
1.9000
4.1.1
Ultra violet-visible light spectrophotometry
The purpose of the ultra-violet-visible light spectrophotometry experiments was to observe
whether a reaction happens when the precursor (Cerium(III)nitrate (Ce(NO3)3)) was mixed
with ammonia.
Both the precursor and the ﬁnal synthesised product (Cerium (IV)Oxide
(CeO2)) was analysed. The UV-Vis experiments were further used to obtain the UV-Vis spec-
tra of all the synthesised products.
The spectra’s were compared to the pure synthesised
compounds reported in the literature. Calibration curves for the compounds were determined
and are shown in Appendix A.3, Figure A.2, A.3, A.4, A.5, A.6, A.7, A.8 and A.9.
As noted, the GO used in these experiments were synthesised as described in Chapter 3, Section
3.1. The UV-Vis spectrum of GO is shown in Figure 4.1 and have the characteristic absorbance
maximum at 230 and 310 nm as described by Gan et al. 2012 ([65]). This indicates that the
synthesis of GO was successful.
The UV-Vis spectrum of GO mixed with 25 % ammonia for 2 hours (2hGO+NH3) also shows
the characteristic maximum absorbance of 230 and 310 nm, see Figure 4.1.
37
==PAGE:45==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
2 0 0
2 5 0
3 0 0
3 5 0
4 0 0
4 5 0
5 0 0
0 , 0
0 , 2
0 , 4
0 , 6
0 , 8
1 , 0
1 , 2
1 , 4
1 , 6
1 , 8
2 , 0
2 , 2
2 , 4
2 , 6
2 , 8
 
 
A b s o r b a n c e  ( A U )
w a v e l e n g t h  ( n m
)
 2 h G O + N H 3  0 . 2 6 3  m
g / m
L
 G O  0 . 0 5  m
g / m
L
2 3 0
3 1 0
Figure 4.1: UV-Vis spectra of GO and GO treated with 25 % ammonia for 2 hours. The
characteristic maximum absorbance is found at 230 and 310 nm. This is consistent with those
reported for GO, see [65].
This indicates that there was no reaction between GO and ammonia at room temperature, and
it could be possible to mix Ce(NO3)3, GO and ammonia without any unnecessary reactions.
It is important that no unnecessary reactions occur if it should be possible to perform the
one-step synthesis. However, there is one discrepancy because we know from Lambert-Beers
law that the absorbance should be proportional to the concentration. This is true for all the
analyte’s within their own calibration curve however, when the absorbance of GO is compared
to the absorbance of 2hGO+NH3 at a coherent concentration, the absorbance of 2hGO+NH3
is approximately ﬁve times larger than expected, see Figure 4.1. This could indicate that a
reaction occurs between GO and ammonia although the spectrum looks almost identical. Two
possible reactions that can occur is an reduction of graphene oxide and a small amount of
nitrogen doping. This is highly likely due to the nitrogen doping onto GO was calculated by
density functional theory calculations and described as strong by [66]. Two articles [67, 68]
describes both a reduction and nitrogen doping of GO with 10 % ammonia solution at high
temperatures and [69] describes that highly oxidised graphite oxide incorporate nitrogen on the
surface and is reduced.
CeO2 was synthesised from the precursor Ce(NO3)3, and UV-Vis spectra of both the precursor
and CeO2 are compared in Figure 4.2. From this ﬁgure it is evident that a chemical reaction
occurred. The peak around 330 nm indicate that the product formed was cerium oxide, which
consist with the values reported in the literature around 250-320 nm [70, 71, 72, 73, 74]. The
small shoulder peak around 255 nm in the CeO2 spectrum is consistent with the one found at
the same position in the Ce(NO3)3. This indicate that the CeO2 synthesis was stopped too
early and there still was some unreacted Ce(NO3)3 in the sample. Whether this is the case
could be checked by repeating the synthesis and measure the UV-Vis spectrum in the beginning
of the of the synthesis and at certain time intervals afterwards.
38
==PAGE:46==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
2 0 0
2 5 0
3 0 0
3 5 0
4 0 0
4 5 0
5 0 0
0 , 0
0 , 4
0 , 8
1 , 2
1 , 6
2 , 0
2 , 4
2 , 8
 
 
A b s o r b a n c e  ( A U )
w a v e l e n g t h  ( n m
)
 C e N O 3  0 . 1  m
M
 
 C e O 2  0 . 1 7  m
g / m
L
3 3 0
2 0 2
2 5 3
Figure 4.2: UV-Vis spectra of Ce(NO3)3 and CeO2. The spectra show that Ce(NO3)3 has a
maximum absorbance around 200 nm and a much smaller peak at 255 nm. CeO2 has maxima
around 260 and 330 nm which is close to the maximum absorbance at approximately 250-320
nm reported in the literature [70, 71, 72, 73, 74].
GO was mixed with the synthesised CeO2 in the weight ratio of 1/1 and 1/10. These spectra
of the synthesised products are quite similar to the one of GO due to the two characteristic
peaks at 230 and 310 nm, which indicate that GO is present in both samples, see Figure 4.3.
To analyse the spectra further the absorbance of the 1/1 ratio is much higher than the 1/10
ratio. This could be an indication that the ratio of GO in the 1/1 sample is higher compared
to the 1/10 sample. It is not fully clear from the UV-Vis spectrum of GO/CeO2 in the ratio
1/1 whether cerium oxide is present or not. The absorbance of GO/CeO2 in the ratio 1/10 is
lower at twice the concentration which indicate that GO is not the only compound. This could
be CeO2, which also could be supported due to the increase in absorbance at around 330 nm
compared to both GO and GO/CeO2.
39
==PAGE:47==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
2 0 0
2 5 0
3 0 0
3 5 0
4 0 0
4 5 0
5 0 0
0 , 0
0 , 5
1 , 0
1 , 5
2 , 0
2 , 5
 
 
A b s o r b a n c e  ( A U )
w a v e l e n g h t  ( n m
)
 G O - C e O 2  1 / 1 0  0 . 9 5 m
g / m
L
 G O / C e O 2  1 / 1  0 . 0 5 6  m
g / m
L
 G O  0 . 0 5  m
g / m
L
3 3 0
2 3 0
3 1 0
Figure 4.3: The UV-Vis spectra of graphene oxide mixed with cerium oxide (GO/CeO2) in the
weight ratio 1/1 and 1/10 and GO.
The UV-Vis spectra of direct synthesised CeO2 and GO in the weight ratio of 1/1 and 10/1 can
be seen in Figure 4.4. In this ﬁgure there is a strong indication that CeO2 has been synthesised
due to the strong peak at approximately 330 nm. The graphene oxide is, however, not clearly
recognised due the high absorbance around 230 and 310 nm.
2 0 0
3 0 0
4 0 0
5 0 0
6 0 0
7 0 0
8 0 0
9 0 0
1 0 0 0
0 , 2
0 , 4
0 , 6
0 , 8
1 , 0
1 , 2
1 , 4
1 , 6
 
 
A b s o r b a n c e  ( A U )
w a v e l e n g t h  ( n m
)
 d G O - C e O 2 _ 1 / 1 0  0 . 1 7  m
g / m
L
 d G O / C e O 2 - 1 / 1 - 0 . 1 5  m
g / m
L
3 3 0
Figure 4.4:
The UV-Vis spectra of direct synthesised cerium oxide and graphene oxide
(dGO/CeO2) in the weight ratio 1/1 and 1/10.
To summarise some conclusions from the ultra violet-visible light experiments. It is indicated
that the synthesis of GO and CeO2 was successful due to the peaks observed in the spectra
was coherent with the peaks reported in the literature, though it is indicated that not all of
40
==PAGE:48==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
the cerium nitrate was converted into cerium oxide due to the shoulder peak at approximately
255 nm.
The UV-Vis spectra indicate that no unnecessary reactions happens when GO is mixed with 25
% ammonia for 2 hours. Although there could be indications that the GO was slightly doped
with nitrogen and slightly reduced.
In the spectra of GO/CeO2 it is indicated that GO is present. When the weight ratio of GO
is expected to be smaller, the characteristic peaks for GO is dwindling. This supports the
expectation that the GO/CeO2 -1/10 sample does not consist of pure GO but is a mixture
of a kind even. There seems to be a slight increase in the absorbance around 330 nm which
supports that CeO2 is present in the sample with the 1/10 ratio, though it is not possible to
conﬁrm the presence of cerium oxide in the 1/1 ratio.
In the spectra of dGO/CeO2 there are indications that the characteristic peak of cerium oxide
is present. The diﬀerence in the strength of the absorbance signal in this sample, compared to
pure cerium oxide and the disappearing of the shoulder peak at 250 nm, could be a complete
conversion of cerium(III)nitrate into CeO2. The increase in the signal at 330 nm - when the
ratio of CeO2 is expected to increase - supports that there is an increased amount of cerium
oxide present. It is not possible to conclude whether GO is present but the signal from GO
could be hidden in the strong background signal.
4.1.2
NanoSight and nanoparticle Tracking Analysis
The NanoSight experiments were used to determine an average size of the colloidal particles
in the solutions. This do not produce the most accurate results because it operates under the
assumption that the particles are spherical. The average particle size and concentration of the
concentrated samples of GO, cerium oxide, GO the the ratio 1/1 and directly synthesised GO
in the ratio 1/1 are shown in Table 4.3.
Table 4.3: The average particle size, standard deviation and average concentration determined
by the NanoSight instrument.
Sample
Average particle size
Standard deviation
Average concentration
[nm]
[nm]
[particles/mL]
GO
310.8
157.1
1.31E+11
CeO2
125.4
44.4
1.29E+10
GO/CeO2-1/1
246.6
108.3
6.33E+10
GO/CeO2-1/10
-
-
-
dGO/CeO2-1/1
179.2
120.5
2.26E+09
dGO/CeO2-1/10
-
-
-
2hGO+NH3
-
-
-
It is possible to see the average particle size and size distribution of GO is quite big compared
to the others electrode materials in Table 4.3 Figure 4.5, 4.6 4.7 and 4.8.
41
==PAGE:49==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 4.5: The NanoSight instruments size distribution of GO.
Cerium(IV)oxide gave a much smaller average particle size and narrower size distribution, as
shown in Figure 4.6. This small size of the particles could result in increased light scattering
of the particles which would be consistent with the high background observed in the UV-Vis
spectrum.
Figure 4.6: The NanoSight instruments size distribution of Cerium(IV)oxide.
The mixture of GO and CeO2 in the 1/1 ratio is shown in Figure 4.7 where a wide range of
size distributions appeared. There are indications that CeO2 is attached to the GO due to the
larger sizes compared to the one for CeO2 alone.
42
==PAGE:50==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 4.7: The NanoSight instruments size distribution of graphene oxide mixed with cerium
oxide in the ratio 1/1.
The directly synthesised cerium oxide with GO in the ratio 1/1 is shown in Figure 4.8 where it
has a smaller size distribution than the one for GO/CeO2-1/1. This could be due to the washing
of the sample, which could result in the removal of some GO. It is not possible to conclude
whether cerium(IV)oxide has attached itself onto GO but it seems that there are both some
quite small particles and some larger ones. This could indicate that cerium oxide only partly
attach onto the GO, but it is impossible to conclude anything without further investigation.
The small size of the particles could result in light scattering of the particles which would be
consistent with the high background observed in the UV-Vis spectrum.
43
==PAGE:51==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 4.8: The NanoSight instruments size distribution of direct synthesised cerium oxide with
graphene oxide in the ratio 1/1.
This experiment gave a general idea of the expected size distribution of the particles. Some
indications suggest that cerium(IV)oxide would attach onto GO when mixed together in both
the one-step and the two-step synthesis.
4.1.3
Atomic force microscopy
The synthesised samples were investigated by an Agilent atomic force microscope. There are
two reasons for doing AFM measurements. The ﬁrst one was to investigate the topographical
structure of the analytes with special focus on whether the materials did show the structure of
nano-sheets. The other reason was to determine whether CeO2 is attached onto the GO layer.
This was done by comparing with reference images of pure GO and CeO2.
44
==PAGE:52==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 4.9: AFM image of GO.
Figure 4.9 shows GO is in fact in the form of nano-sheets, with a height of approximately 1
nm and a general lateral extension of 8 x 5 µm. The height of GO reported in the literature is
around 1-1.2 nm [54]. This supports that the synthesis of GO in the form of nano-sheets was
successful.
Figure 4.10: AFM image of cerium(IV)oxide.
45
==PAGE:53==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
An AFM image of synthesised CeO2 is shown in Figure 4.10 and shows that CeO2 is formed as
small nano-sheets with a height of approximately 4 nm and a general lateral extension of 150
x 125 nm. This indicates that the synthesis of CeO2 in nano-sheets has been successful. This
is 1/3 of the height reported in the literature [12].
Figure 4.11: AFM image of GO reacted with 25 % ammonia for 2 hours.
The synthesised GO reacted with 25 % ammonia for two hours was analysed by AFM to
determine whether the GO still had the shape of nano-sheets after treated with 25 % ammonia
for two hours. Such an image is shown in Figure 4.11. GO is still in the shape of nano-sheets but
some of the edges are more smooths and folds in the sheets occur. The height of the nano-sheets
is still approximately 1 nm, and the general lateral size of the sheets is approximately 4 x 5 µm.
These smooth edges and folds indicate that GO has been nitrogen doped in a small amount
witch supports the ﬁndings in the UV-Vis. The hight of reduced graphene oxide is reported
between 0.7-1 nm in the literature [75, 2] even though the interplanar spacing is approximately
0.335 nm [38, 75].
46
==PAGE:54==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 4.12: AFM image of GO mixed with cerium oxide in the ratio 1/1, where 1) show the
CeO2 and 2) show the GO.
Figure 4.12 shows an AFM image of GO mixed with cerium(IV)oxide in the ratio 1/1. This
image shows that, when the two compounds are mixed the GO and CeO2 still has the shape
of nano-sheets and the CeO2 attaches itself onto the GO. Furthermore it is seen that when the
weight ratio is 1/1 the coverage of CeO2 on the GO is quite low. The thickness of GO and
CeO2 are still approximately 1 and 4 nm while the general lateral size of GO and CeO2 are 1
x 2 µm and 150 x 200 nm, respectively.
47
==PAGE:55==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 4.13: AFM image of GO mixed with cerium(IV)oxide in the ratio 1/10, where 1) show
the CeO2 and 2) show the GO.
Figure 4.12 shows an AFM image of GO mixed with cerium oxide in the ratio 1/10. This
image shows that when the two compounds are mixed the GO and CeO2 still has the shape of
nano-sheets and the CeO2 attached onto the GO. This is the same as the 1/1 ratio. The main
diﬀerence is the larger amount of CeO2 attached onto the GO.
48
==PAGE:56==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 4.14: AFM image of the directly synthesised cerium oxide with GO mixed in the ratio
1/1, where 1) show the CeO2 and 2) show the GO.
Directly synthesised cerium(IV)oxide with GO in the ratio 1/1 was analysed in an AFM and
an image is shown in Figure 4.14. Here it seen that CeO2 and GO is connected and that both
has the shape of nano-sheets.
49
==PAGE:57==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 4.15: AFM image of the directly synthesised CeO2 with GO mixed in the ratio 1/10,
where 1) show the CeO2 and 2) show the GO.
Directly synthesised CeO2 with GO in the ratio 10/1 was also analysed by AFM and an image
is shown in Figure 4.15. Here it is seen that CeO2 and GO is attached onto each other and that
both has the shape of nano-sheets. Although some of the edges of the GO are more smooths,
which indicate a slight reduction and a slight nitrogen doping.
From the AFM analysis of the diﬀerent materials it has been possible to determine that GO and
CeO2 has the shape of nano-sheets and it seems that the there are no damage to the GO when
it reacts with 25 % ammonia for two hours, although there are slight indications of a reduction
and nitrogen doping. The height of GO and CeO2 has been determined to approximately 1
and 4 nm Although some of the CeO2 seems to accumulate in larger clusters.
In GO mixed with CeO2 - in both ratios 1/1 and 1/10 - and the directly synthesised CeO2
with GO - in both ratios 1/1 and 10/1 - CeO2 is attached onto the GO and has the shape of
nano-sheets.
4.1.4
Transmission electron microscopy
The synthesised samples were imaged by a FEI Tecnai G2 transmission electron microscope
to investigate whether the GO and CeO2 was synthesised as nano-sheets and whether CeO2 is
attached onto the graphene oxide layer. Reference pictures of Cerium(III)nitrate, CeO2 and
GO were also recorded so it is possible to recognise these speciﬁc building elements, when they
are recorded together.
50
==PAGE:58==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 4.16: TEM images of cerium(III)nitrate at diﬀerent levels of magniﬁcation. The Images
was recorded on a lacey carbon grid.
Figure 4.16 shows cerium(III)nitrate at diﬀerent levels of magniﬁcation.
This is used as a
reference to investigate whether the synthesis of cerium(IV)oxide nano-sheets were successful.
51
==PAGE:59==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 4.17: TEM images of CeO2 on lacey carbon where a) is the diﬀraction pattern of CeO2.
b) A hole sheet of CeO2 with a scale-bar of 100 nm on a lacey carbon grid. c) CeO2 where
the scale-bar is 20 nm. d) CeO2 where the scale-bar is 5 nm. The crystalline structure of
cerium(IV)oxide can be observed here.
Figure 4.17 a) shows the diﬀraction pattern of cerium oxide, which indicates that cerium oxide’s
crystalline structure is a poly-crystal structure. b) shows a hole sheet of CeO2 with a scale-bar
of 100 nm on lacey carbon. This clearly shows that the synthesised cerium(IV)oxide has the
shape of nano-sheets. d) shows cerium oxide where the scale-bar is 5 nm and it is possible to
observe the crystalline structure of CeO2. When Figure 4.17 is compared to Figure 4.16 it is
possible to observe that the images are diﬀerent. This is a clear indication that a reaction has
occurred with cerium nitrate when mixed with ammonia. The TEM images conﬁrms the AFM
images that CeO2 nano-sheets has been successfully synthesised.
52
==PAGE:60==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 4.18: TEM images of GO on lacey carbon where a)’s scale-bar is 1 µm and b)’s scale-
bar is 0.5 µm. This is a reference image used to recognise GO later, when recorded with other
elements. The GO is clearly a nano-sheet.
In Figure 4.18 it is seen that GO clearly is shaped as nano-sheets. Both Figure 4.18 a) and b)
are recorded on a lacey carbon grid with a scale-bar of 1 µm and 0.5 µm, respectively. The
TEM images conﬁrm the AFM images that GO nano-sheets has been successfully synthesised
and are used to recognise GO later, when it is recorded together with other elements.
53
==PAGE:61==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 4.19: TEM images of GO mixed with CeO2 in the ratio 1/1 on a pure carbon grid
where a)is the diﬀraction pattern b), c) and d) shows diﬀerent levels of magniﬁcation of CeO2
attached onto GO.
Figure 4.19 and 4.20 shows that CeO2 is attached onto the GO when mixed together as
GO/CeO2 in the ratio 1/1 and 1/10. The sample is measured on a pure carbon grid. The
diﬀraction pattern in Figure 4.19 a) indicate that the crystalline structure is a poly-crystalline
structure, which is the same as CeO2. The TEM measurements are conﬁrming of the AFM
images that GO and CeO2 are in the shape of nano-sheets and when the image is closely ex-
amined there are indications that CeO2 are attached onto GO, which is conﬁrmed by the AFM
experiment.
54
==PAGE:62==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 4.20: TEM images of GO mixed with CeO2 in the ratio 1/1 on a pure carbon grid where
a), c) and d) shows diﬀerent levels of magniﬁcation of CeO2 attached onto GO. Where b) is
pure GO. Both GO and CeO2 has the shape of nano-sheets.
55
==PAGE:63==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 4.21: TEM images of direct synthesised cerium oxide and graphene oxide in the ratio
1/1 on a pure carbon grid where a)is the diﬀraction pattern b), c) and d) shows diﬀerent levels
of magniﬁcation of CeO2 attached onto GO.
Figure 4.21 shows that CeO2 has been attached onto and in between GO in the directly synthesis
of dGO/CeO2 in the ratio 1/1. The sample is measured on a pure carbon grid. The diﬀraction
pattern in Figure 4.21 a) indicate that the crystalline structure is a poly-crystal structure. The
TEM measurements conﬁrm the AFM images that GO and CeO2 are in the form of nano-sheets
and particles and that they are attached onto each other.
56
==PAGE:64==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 4.22: TEM images of GO mixed with CeO2 in the ratio 1/10 on a pure carbon grid
where a), b), c) and d) show diﬀerent levels of magniﬁcation of CeO2 attached onto GO and
that both CeO2 and GO are formed as nano-sheets.
Figure 4.22 shows that CeO2 has attached onto GO in the direct synthesis of dGO/CeO2 in the
ratio 1/10. The sample was measured on a pure carbon grid. The TEM measurements conﬁrm
the AFM images that GO and CeO2 are in the form of nano-sheets and that they are attached
onto each other.
From the TEM analysis it can be concluded that the synthesis of both CeO2 and GO nano-sheets
has been successful. Both GO and CeO2 keep the nano-sheet structure when GO and CeO2 is
mixed together in the ratio 1/1 (GO/CeO2-1/1) and 1/10 (GO/CeO2-1/10). Cerium(IV)oxide
attached onto GO in both cases. All this supports the images obtained from the AFM experi-
ment.
CeO2 is attached onto GO in a directly synthesis of CeO2 both in the ratio 1/1 (dGO/CeO2-
1/1) and 1/10 (dGO/CeO2-1/10), although some CeO2 is attached in between the GO sheets
in the 1/1 ratio. GO keeps the nano-sheet structure in both cases and CeO2 has the shape
of nano-sheet structures in both cases with some particles dGO/CeO2-1/1 sample. All this
supports the images obtained from the AFM experiment.
4.1.5
Energy Dispersive X-Ray Analysis
The energy dispersive X-ray analysis was performed together with the TEM experiment to get
an elemental analysis and thereby determine the material’s composition. To get an idea of the
57
==PAGE:65==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
background, and to determine whether the precursor, cerium(III)nitrate reacted, was analysed.
The sample holder consist of a lacey carbon grid in the Ce(NO3)3, CeO2 and GO sample and
consist of a pure carbon grid in the rest of the samples - which is a copper grid coated with
carbon - this means that both the copper and the carbon peaks are expected to be observed as
a background in the spectrum.
Figure 4.23: EDX spectrum of Cerium nitrate.
The result of the EDX analysis of cerium(III)nitrate is shown in Figure 4.23.
This result
indicates that cerium, nitrate and oxygen are present which is consistent with the precursor -
Ce(NO3)3. Additional elements present are carbon, a small amount of copper and silicon. The
peak from the copper and carbon is by all probability from the sample holder, while silicon
is a very common pollutant - most likely from the sample holder. Because we know this is
cerium(III)nitrate and we know the elements present it is possible to determine the background
which consist of the additional elements mentioned before. Additionally it is used to determine
whether a reaction of Ce(NO3)3 and ammonia has happened.
Figure 4.24: EDX spectrum of CeO2.
The EDX analysis of (CeO2) is shown in Figure 4.24. This spectrum points in the presence of
cerium, oxygen, copper, carbon, potassium, sulphur, chloride, calcium, sodium and silicon. It
was determined that the background from the sample holder consisted of copper, carbon and
58
==PAGE:66==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
silicon. No nitrogen peak was observed which indicates that cerium nitrate has reacted. The
cerium and oxygen peaks support, the results obtained by the analytical tools described so far,
that the product formed is cerium oxide. Potassium, sulphur, chloride, calcium and sodium
are common pollution from glassware the sample preparation, which indicate the glassware was
not cleaned enough.
Figure 4.25: EDX spectrum of GO mixed with CeO2 in the ratio 1/1.
GO mixed with CeO2 in the ratio 1/1 was analysed next. The result is shown in Figure 4.25.
This spectrum indicates the presence of cerium, carbon, oxygen and copper in the sample -
where the copper and some of the carbon are contributed from the sample holder. The large
amount of carbon and oxygen would be expected in GO. With oxygen and cerium present it is
indicated that CeO2 is present. GO and CeO2 are borh present in the sample, which supports
the results obtained by the UV-Vis.
Figure 4.26: EDX spectrum of GO mixed with CeO2 in the ratio 1/10.
Tthe EDX analysis of GO directly mixed with CeO2 in the ratio 1/10 is shown in Figure
4.26. This spectrum indicate that cerium, carbon, oxygen, copper, calcium, phosphor, osmium,
sodium and silicon as being present in the sample - where the copper, some of the carbon and
silicon comes from the sample holder. The high amount of carbon and some oxygen would be
expected in GO. With oxygen and cerium present there is indication that CeO2 is present. This
supports the expectation of GO and CeO2 being present in the sample from the other analytical
59
==PAGE:67==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
tools. Calcium, phosphor, osmium, sodium and silicon are present in very small amounts which
could be impurities from the sample preparation.
Figure 4.27: EDX spectrum of directly synthesised CeO2 and GO in the ratio 1/1.
The result of the EDX analysis of GO mixed with CeO2 in the ratio 1/1 is shown in Figure
4.27. This spectrum indicate cerium, carbon, oxygen, silicon and copper as being present in
the sample - where the background elements described earlier comes from the sample holder.
The large amount of carbon and some oxygen would be expected in GO. With oxygen and
cerium present there is indicated that CeO2 is present. This support the results from the other
analytical tools of GO and CeO2 being present in the sample even though the amount of CeO2
probably is quite low.
The EDX analysis has provided the elemental analysis of the synthesised CeO2, GO/CeO2-
1/1, GO/CeO2-1/10 and dGO/CeO2-1/1. This analysis has indicated that the syntheses were
successful. In all the samples the required elements for the expected compounds have been
found. This conﬁrms the indications from the data from the UV-Vis spectra.
4.1.6
X-ray Diﬀraction
X-ray diﬀraction was performed to analyse the particle size with the Scherrer’s equation and to
investigate whether the synthesis was successful by obtaining diﬀractograms for the materials.
GO and CeO2 was ﬁrst investigated as a reference.
The peaks in all the diﬀractograms were analysed and the crystalline particle size calculated
from the Scherrer’s equation. The mean crystalline particle size can be found in Table 4.4. A
more detailed table of all the XRD peaks are shown in Table A.7 in Appendix A.3.
Table 4.4: The mean crystalline particle size of the diﬀerent samples.
Sample
Mean particle size [˚A]
com-GO
132
GO
94
2hGO+NH3
88
CeO2
38.5
GO/CeO2-1/1
-
GO/CeO2-1/10
43
dGO/CeO2-1/1
30.75
dGO/CeO2-1/10
67.7
60
==PAGE:68==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Data for GO are shown in Figure 4.28, where the characteristic 2theta(2Θ) value of approx-
imately 11 [76] are seen. The additional peaks at 48 and 78 which is seldom shown in the
literature but is consistent with graphite oxide[55, 77]. The initial results from UV-Vis and
AFM indicate that GO has been synthesised so in order to check whether these peaks are con-
sistent with GO or graphite oxide, commercial GO has been analysed. The XRD diﬀractogram
of commercial GO is shown in Figure 4.29 and is identical to the synthesised GO which indicate
that the synthesised GO has been successful which are an additional conﬁrmation of the data
from the other experiments. That the spectra are consistent with graphite oxide indicate that,
when the colloidal sample was added to the sample holder, and the liquid evaporated the GO
sheets have re-stacked. It is not possible for the GO to actually become graphite oxide without
a reduction, but more like a 3D GO. The commercial GO powder was purchased from ”The
Sixth Element (Changzhou) Materials Technology Co., Ltd.”, Changzhou, China.
Figure 4.28: The XRD spectrum of GO.
61
==PAGE:69==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 4.29: The XRD spectrum of commercial GO which is identical to the synthesised GO
in Figure 4.28.
The GO that was placed in 25 % ammonia for two hours has a similar diﬀractogram as the one
for GO and commercial GO. There are a diﬀerence that the peak at 11 2Θ is much weaker.
This could indicate that a slight reduction of GO has taken place. This diﬀractogram is shown
in Figure 4.30. The same has been indicated from both the UV-Vis and AFM measurements.
Figure 4.30: The XRD spectrum of GO that have been placed in 25 % ammonia for two hours.
The XRD spectrum of CeO2 was compared to the literature [12, 78, 79, 80, 77] and is seen
in Figure 4.31. The sample was analysed for one hour but the signal is still quite weak but
62
==PAGE:70==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
it is still possible to recognise the peaks described in the literature. This conﬁrm the other
experiments, that the cerium oxide synthesis has been successful.
Figure 4.31: The XRD spectrum of CeO2.
A number of peaks are observed in the XRD spectrum when GO and CeO2 are mixed together
in the ratio 1/1 and is shown in Figure 4.32. The peaks in this diﬀractogram are consistent
with the peaks found for CeO2 and GO and thereby indicate that both cerium oxide and GO
are present. This conﬁrms the indications obtained from the other experiments.
Figure 4.32: The XRD spectrum of Go and CeO2 in the ratio 1/1
When GO and CeO2 was mixed together in the ratio 1/10 some peaks occurs in the XRD
63
==PAGE:71==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
spectrum shown, see Figure 4.33. The peaks in this diﬀractogram are consistent with the peaks
found for CeO2, which indicate that CeO2 is present. When GO is fully covered by a metal
oxide, in this case CeO2, the XRD signals overlap and the GO signal is thereby hidden, which
is properly why no GO signal is observed. This conﬁrms the indications obtained from the
other experiments although there was no conﬁrmed ﬁndings of GO in this experiment.
Figure 4.33: The XRD spectrum of GO and CeO2 in the ratio 1/10.
The XRD spectrum of directly synthesised cerium oxide and graphene oxide in the ratio 1/1 is
shown in Figure 4.34. The peaks in this diﬀractogram are consistent with the peaks found for
CeO2, which indicate that CeO2 is present. When GO is fully covered by a metal oxide, in this
case CeO2, the XRD signals overlap and the GO signal is thereby hidden, which is properly why
no GO signal is observed. This conﬁrms the indications obtained from the other experiments
although there was no conﬁrmed ﬁndings of GO in this experiment.
64
==PAGE:72==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 4.34: The XRD spectrum of directly synthesised CeO2e and GO in the ratio 1/1.
The XRD spectrum of directly synthesised cerium oxide and graphene oxide in the ratio 1/10
is shown in Figure 4.35. The peaks in this diﬀractogram are consistent with the peaks found
for CeO2, which indicate that CeO2 is present. When GO is fully covered by a metal oxide,
in this case CeO2, the XRD signals overlap and the GO signal is thereby hidden, which is
properly why no GO signal is observed. This conﬁrms the indications obtained from the other
experiments although there was no conﬁrmed ﬁndings of GO in this experiment.
Figure 4.35: The XRD spectrum of directly synthesised CeO2 and GO in the ratio 1/10.
It emerges from the XRD experiment that GO and CeO2 have been successfully synthesised
65
==PAGE:73==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
and that the GO sample still is GO after two hours in 25 % ammonia, although it has been
slightly reduced. The additional peaks in the GO spectra arise due to an attempted re-stacking.
This is according to what has been observed so far by the UV-Vis, AFM and TEM.
The GO peak completely vanished in the GO/CeO2-1/10, dGO/CeO2-1/1 and 1/10 which is
due to the overlap of the XRD signals due to GO is fully covered by CeO2, which is why the
only signal observed is the CeO2 signal. The GO/CeO2-1/1 sample is less covered with CeO2
so both signals are observed here. All this is according to the experimental data observed by
the other analytical tools.
4.1.7
X-ray photo-electron spectroscopy
X-ray photo-electron spectroscopy was performed in order to obtain an elemental analysis and
thereby determine the material’s composition to check whether the synthesis was successful.
This was done using a Thermo Scientiﬁc X-ray photo-electron spectrometer with an Al K-Alpha
(1486 eV) X-ray source. All samples were measured by depositing the material on polished Si-
wafer by drop casting. In all measurements, the X-ray spot area was set to 400 µm and the
ﬂood gun was used for charge compensation. The spectra obtained were analysed in the soft-
ware Thermo Avantage v. 4.88. An example of the spectra for GO after two hours in 25 %
ammonia is shown in Figure 4.36, the rest of the spectra are shown in Appendix A.3 Figure
A.10, A.11, A.12, A.13, A.14.
Figure 4.36: The XPS spectra of GO after two hours in ammonia. The counts are shown on
the 2. axis and the binding energy in electron volt (eV) is on the 1. axis.
CeO2 was analysed and the results is shown in Table 4.5. This indicate that oxygen and cerium
are present and that the ratio is approximately 2:1, which supports the experimental data from
UV-Vis, EDX and XRD that the synthesis of CeO2 has been successful. There is an uncertainty
in the Ce4s peak that can also be interpreted as the C1s peak. There was no carbon in the
sample which supports the interpretation that it is the cerium peak.
66
==PAGE:74==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Table 4.5: The XPS results of CeO2. Where BE is the binding energy in eV and At.% is the
atomic percentage.
The XPS results of GO after 2 hours in 25% ammonia is shown in Table 4.6. This indicates
that oxygen, carbon and 3 % nitrogen are present which support the experimental data from
UV-Vis, AFM, EDX, and XRD that GO has been slightly nitrogen doped GO after two hours
in 25% ammonia.
Table 4.6: The XPS results of GO after two hours in ammonia. Where BE is the binding
energy in eV and At.% is the atomic percentage.
The XPS results of GO mixed with CeO2 in the ratio 1/1 is shown in Table 4.7. These results
indicate that oxygen, cerium and carbon are present which supports the experimental data
from UV-Vis and EDX that both GO and CeO2 are present. The same can be said about GO
mixed with CeO2 in the ratio 1/10 that is shown in Table 4.8.
Table 4.7: The XPS results of GO/CeO2 in the ratio 1/1. Where BE is the binding energy in
eV and At.% is the atomic percentage.
67
==PAGE:75==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Table 4.8: The XPS results of GO/CeO2 in the ratio 1/10. Where BE is the binding energy in
eV and At.% is the atomic percentage.
The XPS results of directly synthesised CeO2 mixed with GO in the ratio 1/1 can be seen in
Table 4.9. These results indicate that oxygen, cerium and carbon are present which support
the experimental data from UV-Vis and EDX that GO and CeO2 are present. The same can
be said about the directly synthesised CeO2 mixed with GO in the ratio 1/10 shown in Table
4.10.
Table 4.9: The XPS results of directly synthesised GO/CeO2 in the ratio 1/1. Where BE is
the binding energy in eV and At.% is the atomic percentage.
Table 4.10: The XPS results of directly synthesised GO/CeO2 in the ratio 1/10. Where BE is
the binding energy in eV and At.% is the atomic percentage.
The XPS results broadly supports the other analytical tools that indicate that the synthesis of
the diﬀerent compounds has been successful and that GO mixed with 25% ammonia for two
hours is still GO, although with a slight nitrogen doping. There is a quite high uncertainty of
the percentage of the diﬀerent elements. Due to this uncertainty it is not possible to conclude
anything about the ratio of the elemental composition.
4.2
The electrochemical performance
4.2.1
Cyclic voltammetry
The purpose of the cyclic voltammetry experiments was to determine the potential window of
interest and the speciﬁc capacitance and energy density. The potential window of interest was
found by analysing the potential range relevant to cerium oxide. This is seen in Figure 4.37
68
==PAGE:76==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
where a), b), and c) shows the potential range of interest and d) show the potential window of
interest which was decided ranging from -1.5 V to 0.5 V. The scan rate used to determine the
potential window of interest was 100 mV/s.
Figure 4.37: The potential window of cerium oxide. a), b), and c) show the potential range of
interest and d) shows the selected potential window of interest. A scan rate of 100 mV/s was
used.
To ascertain that the signal from the CVs recorded was from the synthesised electrode material
and not from the glassy carbon electrode or the Naﬁon binder CVs of these were recorded,
Figure 4.38.
69
==PAGE:77==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
- 1 , 6
- 1 , 2
- 0 , 8
- 0 , 4
0 , 0
0 , 4
- 0 , 1 0
- 0 , 0 8
- 0 , 0 6
- 0 , 0 4
- 0 , 0 2
0 , 0 0
0 , 0 2
0 , 0 4
 
 
C u r r e n t  d e n s i t y ( A / g )
E ( V )  v s  S C E
 1 0 0  m
V / s
 5 0  m
V / s
 2 0  m
V / s
 1 0  m
V / s
Figure 4.38: CV of a glassy carbon electrode with a Naﬁon binder,(electrode 23b) at 100, 50,
20 and 10 mV/s.
The CV of GO and CeO2 is shown in Figure 4.39.Two peaks in the GO voltammogram observed
one at -1.12 V and one at -0.33 V vs SCE which correspond to -0.88 V and -0.089 V vs SHE
and a standard potential of E0 “ ´0.48 V vs SHE. The CeO2 voltammogram shows two peaks,
at -0.69 and -0.27 V vs SCE which correspond to -0.45 V and -0.027 V vs SHE and a standard
potential of E0 “ ´0.236 V vs SHE. Furthermore, both signals are signiﬁcantly larger and
diﬀerent compared with the signals generated from the glassy carbon electrode itself which
conﬁrms that they are diﬀerent materials. Since the speciﬁc capacitance is calculated as a
function of the current density we can also conclude that the materials therefore have a higher
speciﬁc capacitance than the glassy carbon electrode itself. The peaks in the voltammogram
originate probably from some surface reactions of the electrode material but this is diﬃcult to
determine without further experiments.
70
==PAGE:78==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
- 1 , 6
- 1 , 2
- 0 , 8
- 0 , 4
0 , 0
0 , 4
- 0 , 2 0
- 0 , 1 5
- 0 , 1 0
- 0 , 0 5
0 , 0 0
0 , 0 5
0 , 1 0
0 , 1 5
 
 
C u r r e n t  d e n s i t y  ( A / g )
E ( V )  v s  S C E
 C e O 2  -  1 0  m
V / s
 G O  -  1 0  m
V / s
Figure 4.39: CVs of GO and CeO2 with a Naﬁon binder, (electrode 9b and 19b) at 10 mV/s.
The CVs of GO and GO after two hours in 25 % ammonia are shown in Figure 4.40. Two
peaks are observed in the 2hGO+NH3 voltammogram at -0.69 V and -0.43 V vs SCE which
correspond to -0.43 V and -0.18 V vs SHE and a standard potential of E0 “ ´0.304 V vs SHE.
The signal is signiﬁcantly larger than the signal from the glassy carbon electrode. Both the
CV and the standard electrode potential of CeO2 are diﬀerent from those generated from GO.
This indicates that something has happened to GO after two hours in 25 % ammonia. From
the other characterisations techniques it has been determined a slight reduction and nitrogen
doping has taken place. The peaks in the voltammogram originate probably from some surface
reactions of the electrode material but this is diﬃcult to determine without further experiments.
71
==PAGE:79==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
- 1 , 6
- 1 , 2
- 0 , 8
- 0 , 4
0 , 0
0 , 4
- 0 , 8
- 0 , 4
0 , 0
0 , 4
0 , 8
1 , 2
 
 
C u r r e n t  d e n s i t y  ( A / g )
E ( V )  v s  S C E
 G O  -  1 0  m
V / s
 2 H G O + N H 3 -  1 0  m
V / s
Figure 4.40:
CVs of GO and GO after two hours in 25 % ammonia with a Naﬁon
binder,(electrode 9b and 19b) at 10 mV/s.
The CVs of GO/CeO2 with a Naﬁon binder in the ratio 1/1 and 1/10 in Figure 4.41. When the
voltammograms are compared to the ones for GO and CeO2 in Figure 4.39, it is clear that the
signal from the 1/1 ratio looks similar to the one for GO but is still diﬀerent. When the ratio
of cerium increases to 10/1 the voltammogram looks more like the one generated from CeO2
but again diﬀerent, which is what could be expected due to the increased amount of CeO2.
The standard potential for the GO/CeO2 with a Naﬁon binder in the ratio 1/1 and 1/10 is
calculated to be E0 “ ´0.40 and E0 “ ´0.39 V vs SHE. The peaks in the voltammogram
originate probably from some surface reactions of the electrode material but this is diﬃcult to
determine without further experiments.
72
==PAGE:80==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
- 1 , 6
- 1 , 2
- 0 , 8
- 0 , 4
0 , 0
0 , 4
- 2 , 4
- 2 , 0
- 1 , 6
- 1 , 2
- 0 , 8
- 0 , 4
0 , 0
0 , 4
0 , 8
1 , 2
 
 
C u r r e n t  d e n s i t y ( A / g )
E ( V )  v s  S C E
 G O - 1 / 1  -  1 0  m
V / s
 G O - 1 / 1 0  -  1 0  m
V / s
Figure 4.41: CVs of GO/CeO2 with a Naﬁon binder in the ratio 1/1 and 1/10, (electrode 22b
and 27b) at 10 mV/s.
The CVs of dGO/CeO2 with a Naﬁon binder in the ratio 1/1 and 1/10 in Figure 4.42. When
the voltammograms are compared to the ones for GO and CeO2 in Figure 4.39 and dGO/CeO2
in Figure 4.41, it is observed that the signal from the dGO/CeO2-1/1 is more similar to GO and
GO/CeO2 but the peaks are much more deﬁned. When the ratio of cerium increases to 10/1 the
voltammogram looks more like the one generated from CeO2, this is what would be expected
due to the increased amount of CeO2. The diﬀerence in the voltammograms for dGO/CeO2
compared to the GO/CeO2 could be due to the slight reduction and nitrogen doping observed
from the various characterisations techniques. The standard potential for the dGO/CeO2 with
a Naﬁon binder in the ratio 1/1 and 1/10 is calculated to be E0 “ ´0.41 V and E0 “ ´0.30
V vs SHE. The peaks in the voltammogram probably originate from some surface reactions of
the electrode material but this is diﬃcult to determine without further experiments
73
==PAGE:81==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
- 1 , 6
- 1 , 2
- 0 , 8
- 0 , 4
0 , 0
0 , 4
- 0 , 4
- 0 , 2
0 , 0
0 , 2
0 , 4
 
 
C u r r e n t  d e n s i t y ( A / g )
E ( V )  v s  S C E
 d G O - 1 / 1  -  1 0  m
V / s
 d G O - 1 / 1 0  -  1 0  m
V / s
Figure 4.42: CVs of GO/CeO2 with a Naﬁon binder in the ratio 1/1 and 1/10, (electrode 18b
and 5b) at 10 mV/s.
The cyclic voltammograms was used to calculate the average speciﬁc capacitance and the
standard deviation. This is shown in Table 4.11 at the scan rate of 10 mV/s. A full overview of
the speciﬁc capacitance at diﬀerent scan rates can be found in Appendix A.3 Table A.9. The
energy density of the diﬀerent electrode materials can be seen in Table 4.12. A full overview of
the energy density at the diﬀerent scan rates can also be found in Appendix A.3 Table A.10.
Table 4.11: The average speciﬁc capacitance of the diﬀerent electrode materials and the coherent
standard deviation at the scan rate of 10 mV/s.
Sample (10 mV/s)
Speciﬁc capacitance
Speciﬁc capacitance
Standard
Relative STD
[F/g]
[F/cm2]
deviation
[%]
CeO2
2.95
0.019
2.71
91.64
GO
1.83
0.012
2.01
110.25
2hGO+NH3
27.05
0.17
13.42
49.60
GO/CeO2-1/1
31.29
0.20
24.85
79.44
GO/CeO2-1/10
3.15
0.020
3.15
100.00
dGO/CeO2-1/1
14.59
0.093
7.82
53.60
dGO/CeO2-1/10
8.16
0.052
0.00
0.00
Glassy carbon
-
0.003
0.03
7.93
74
==PAGE:82==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Table 4.12: The energy density of the diﬀerent electrode materials at the scan rate of 10 mV/s.
Sample (10 mV/s)
Energy density [Wh/kg]
CeO2
1.64
GO
1.01
2hGO+NH3
15.03
GO/CeO2-1/1
17.38
GO/CeO2-1/10
1.75
dGO/CeO2-1/1
8.11
dGO/CeO2-1/10
4.54
Glassy carbon
0.26
The speciﬁc capacitance of the diﬀerent electrode materials seems to show a diﬀerence in
among the diﬀerent electrode materials. None of them seems quite good compared to the ones
described in Section 2.2.5. The speciﬁc capacitance are compared to that of a super-capacitor
to the ones reported in the literature for GO, CeO2 and reduced graphene oxide (rGO)/CeO2
of 189, 37 and 89, respectively [13, 55, 10]. The energy density seems to be as expected. The
best electrode material seems to be the GO/CeO2 in the ratio 1/1 with a speciﬁc capacitance
of 32 F/g. To be certain that this result is reliable more experiments are needed. The need for
more experiments is supported by a very high relative standard deviation. The peaks in the
voltammogram originate probably from some surface reactions of the electrode material but
this is diﬃcult to determine without further experiments.
4.2.2
Galvanostatic charge-discharge cycles
The purpose of the galvanostatic charge-discharge (GCD) cycles experiment was to determine
and conﬁrm the speciﬁc capacitance and energy density obtained from the CV studies. This
is in principle a more direct and accurate way to determine the speciﬁc capacitance.
The
galvanostatic charge discharge cylcle of GO/CeO2 in the weight ratio 1-1 are shown Figure
4.43.
Figure 4.43: galvanostatic charge discharge cycles of GO/CeO2 in the weight ratio 1-1.
The speciﬁc capacitance and energy density at a current density of 0.1 A/g is given in Table
4.13. The capacitance calculated from the other current densities are shown in Appendix A.3
Table A.11.
75
==PAGE:83==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Table 4.13: The speciﬁc capacitance and energy density at a current density of 0.1 A/g
Id “ 0.1A g´1
Speciﬁc capacitance
relative standard dev.
Energy density
[F/g]
[%]
[Wh/kg]
CeO2
0.380
57.26
2.11
GO
0.417
8.996
2.32
2hGO+NH3
23.4
11.244
130
GO/CeO2-1/1
104
-
577
GO/CeO2-1/10
6.60
32.399
36.6
dGO/CeO2-1/1
30.3
17.707
169
dGO/CeO2-1/10
5.24
-
29.1
The speciﬁc capacitance calculated from the CV - at a scan rate of 10 mV/s - and from the
GCD cycles - at a current density of 0.1 A ¨ g´1 was compared with help of a t-test and a
conﬁdence interval of 95 % , Table 4.14. The result showed that all electrode materials had the
same measured speciﬁc capacitance in the two experiments. It was not possible to determine
whether GO/CeO2-1/1, dGO/CeO2-1/10 and glassy carbon were the same with a t-test due
to too few data points - although GO/CeO2-1/1 is probably diﬀerent. This supports that that
the measurements are accurate.
Table 4.14: The comparison of the results from CV and GCD with a t-test with a conﬁdence
interval of 95 %.
GCD
CV
Speciﬁc capacitance
Speciﬁc capacitance
95 % probabillity that the
[F/g]
[F/g]
Speciﬁc capacitance are
CeO2
0.380
2.95
same
GO
0.417
1.83
same
2hGO+NH3
23.4
27.0
same
GO/CeO2-1/1
104
31.3
-
GO/CeO2-1/10
6.60
3.15
same
dGO/CeO2-1/1
30.3
14.6
same
dGO/CeO2-1/10
5.24
8.16
-
Glassy carbon
-
0.466
-
The speciﬁc capacitance depends on the current density. The speciﬁc capacitance - in percent -
of the diﬀerent materials is plotted versus the current density in Figure 4.44. This ﬁgure shows
that the speciﬁc capacitance decreases for all samples when the current density increases and
especially for the composite electrode materials.
76
==PAGE:84==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
0
1 0
2 0
3 0
4 0
5 0
6 0
7 0
8 0
9 0
1 0 0
0
1 0
2 0
3 0
4 0
5 0
6 0
7 0
8 0
9 0
1 0 0
 
 
S p e c i f i c  c a p a c i t a n c e  ( %
)
C u r r e n t  d e n s i t y  ( A / g )
 G O
 2 h G O
 C e O 2
 d G O / C e O 2 - 1 / 1
 d G O / C e O 2 - 1 / 1 0
 G O / C e O 2 - 1 / 1
 G O / C e O 2 - 1 / 1 0
 G l a s s y  c a r b o n
Figure 4.44: The stability of the speciﬁc capacitance of the diﬀerent electrode materials versus
the current density.
The stability of the diﬀerent electrode materials was investigated by running 1000 charge-
discharge cycles. The electrode materials seems to be quite stable by maintaining 90 % speciﬁc
capacitance after 1000 cycles except for the direct synthesised GO and CeO2 that falls steady
but seems to stabilise at 80 % after 1000 cycles. GO exploited to ammonia for two hours shows
a huge speciﬁc capacitance increase up to 180 % of the initial capacitance after 1000 cycles.
This is showed in Figure 4.45.
0
1 0 0
2 0 0
3 0 0
4 0 0
5 0 0
6 0 0
7 0 0
8 0 0
9 0 0
1 0 0 0
7 0
8 0
9 0
1 0 0
1 1 0
1 2 0
1 3 0
1 4 0
1 5 0
1 6 0
1 7 0
1 8 0
 
 
s p e c i f i c  c a p a c i t a n c e  ( %
)
C y c l e  n u m
b e r
 G O
 2 h G O
 C e O 2
 d G O / C e O 2 - 1 / 1
 d G O / C e O 2 - 1 / 1 0
 G O / C e O 2 - 1 / 1
 G O / C e O 2 - 1 / 1 0
 G l a s s y  c a r b o n
Figure 4.45: The stability of the speciﬁc capacitance of the diﬀerent electrode materials versus
the current density.
77
==PAGE:85==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The diﬀerent electrode materials of GO and CeO2 do not have a high speciﬁc capacitance
compared to the ones reported in literature, for GO and CeO2 of 189, 37 F/g, respectively [13,
55]. The composite material GO/CeO2 in the ratio 1/1 has the highest speciﬁc capacitance of
the electrode materials both measured with CV and GCD cycles, which seems to be around the
values reported for (rGO)/CeO2 of 89 F/g [10]. The highest speciﬁc capacitance is between 31.3-
104 F/g. This is low compared with ultra high values of super-capacitor electrode materials such
as rGO/Ni/Ni(OH)2, MnO2 and RuO2 reported in the literature to have a speciﬁc capacitance
of 2609, 730 and 774 F/g [59, 50].
This suggests that the whole procedure needs further
optimization. The initial results indicate that the two-step synthesis produces a material with
a higher capacitance than the one-step synthesis but that both composite materials have a
higher speciﬁc capacitance than the starting materials (GO and CeO2). This indicate that
the best electrode material investigated was GO/CeO2. The electrode materials cycle stability
seems to be quite stable for a super-capacitor with a general loss of 10 % in the two-step
synthesis and 20 % in the one-step synthesis over 1000 cycles.
78
==PAGE:86==
5. Conclusion
5.1
The characterization of the electrode materials
The ﬁrst question addressed was whether the synthesis of the diﬀerent compounds was success-
ful. The experimental data suggest that the synthesis of GO, CeO2, GO/CeO2 and dGO/CeO2
has been successful. This is indicated through the experimental data observed from the UV-
Vis, XRD and XPS. The experimental data obtained from these characterisations techniques
are consistent with those reported in the literature. This leads to the conclusion that the syn-
theses of the three basic materials and the four nano-composite electrode materials have been
successful.
The second question addressed was whether the synthesis of the diﬀerent compounds had the
shape of nano-sheets. The images from both AFM and TEM indicate that nano-sheets from
all compounds have been successfully synthesised. There are indications that some aggregated
CeO2 has been formed. This leads to the conclusion that the syntheses of nano-sheets of the
three basic materials and the four nano-composite electrode materials have been successful.
5.2
The electrochemical performance of the electrode
materials
The ﬁrst question addressed was how the synthesised electrode materials functions as a super-
capacitor electrode. The results show that the diﬀerent single electrode materials of GO and
CeO2 do not have a high speciﬁc capacitance compared to the ones reported in literature.
The composite material GO/CeO2 in the ratio 1/1 has the highest speciﬁc capacitance of
the electrode materials measured with CV and GCD cycles, which seems to be around the
values reported in the literature. The highest speciﬁc capacitance is between 31.3-104 F/g.
This is low compared with ultra high values of super-capacitor electrode materials such as
rGO/Ni/Ni(OH)2, MnO2 and RuO2 reported in the literature. This suggests that the whole
procedure needs further optimization but that the electrode materials synthesised, especially
the composite material GO/CeO2-1/1 can be used as a super-capacitor electrode.
The second question addressed was whether the one-step or two-step synthesis was best as a
super-capacitor electrode. The highest speciﬁc capacitance obtained through the experiments
came form the two-step synthesis of the nano-composite GO/CeO2 in the ratio 1/1 with a
capacitance of 104 F/g. The two-step synthesis of dGO/CeO2 in the ratio 1/1 and 1/10 with
a speciﬁc capacitance of 30.3 and 8.2 F/g was better than that of GO and CeO2. It is also
concluded that the ratio of CeO2 and GO should be closer to 1/1 to optimise the electrode
material.
79
==PAGE:87==
Bibliography
[1] Hae-Sung Yoon, Eun-Seob Kim, Min-Soo Kim, Jang-Yeob Lee, Gyu-Bong Lee, and Sung-
Hoon Ahn. Towards greener machine tools – A review on energy saving strategies and
technologies. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev., 48:870–891, 2015.
[2] Xiong Zhang, Haitao Zhang, Chen Li, Kai Wang, Xianzhong Sun, and Yanwei Ma. Re-
cent advances in porous graphene materials for supercapacitor applications. RSC Adv.,
4(86):45862–45884, 2014.
[3] Antonino Salvatore Aric`o, Peter Bruce, Bruno Scrosati, Jean-Marie Tarascon, and Walter
van Schalkwijk. Nanostructured materials for advanced energy conversion and storage
devices. Nat. Mater., 4(5):366–377, 2005.
[4] Jaephil Cho, Sookyung Jeong, and Youngsik Kim. Commercial and research battery tech-
nologies for electrical energy storage applications. Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 48:84–101,
2015.
[5] Martin Winter and Ralph J. Brodd. What are batteries, fuel cells, and supercapacitors?
Chem. Rev., 104(10):4245–4269, 2004.
[6] Meryl D. Stoller and Rodney S. Ruoﬀ. Review of Best Practice Methods for Determining
an Electrode Material’s Performance for Ultracapacitors. pages 1294–1301, 2010.
[7] V. V N Obreja. On the performance of supercapacitors with electrodes based on car-
bon nanotubes and carbon activated material-A review. Phys. E Low-Dimensional Syst.
Nanostructures, 40(7):2596–2605, 2008.
[8] Xin Zhao, Beatriz Mendoza S´anchez, Peter J Dobson, and Patrick S Grant. The role of
nanomaterials in redox-based supercapacitors for next generation energy storage devices.
Nanoscale, 3(3):839–855, 2011.
[9] Mahdi Robat Sarpoushi, Mahdi Nasibi, Mohammad Ali Golozar, Mohammad Reza Shish-
esaz, Mohammad Reza Borhani, and Sajad Noroozi.
Electrochemical investigation of
graphene/cerium oxide nanoparticles as an electrode material for supercapacitors. Mater.
Sci. Semicond. Process., 26(1):374–378, 2014.
[10] Kunfeng Chen and Dongfeng Xue. In-situ electrochemical route to aerogel electrode ma-
terials of graphene and hexagonal CeO2. J. Colloid Interface Sci., 446:77–83, 2015.
[11] Yi Wang, Chun Xian Guo, Jiehua Liu, Tao Chen, Hongbin Yang, and Chang Ming
Li. CeO2 nanoparticles/graphene nanocomposite-based high performance supercapacitor.
Dalton Trans., 40(24):6388–6391, 2011.
[12] Guoqing Zhang, Ju Ao, Yili Guo, Zhaoxia Zhang, Min Shao, Lina Wang, Lan Zhou, and
Jianzhong Shao. Green synthesis and catalytic performance of nanoscale CeO2 sheets.
RSC Adv., 4(39):20131, 2014.
[13] Bin Xu, Shufang Yue, Zhuyin Sui, Xuetong Zhang, Shanshan Hou, Gaoping Cao, and
Yusheng Yang.
What is the choice for supercapacitors: graphene or graphene oxide?
Energy Environ. Sci., 4(8):2826, 2011.
[14] Ramendra Sundar Dey, Hans Aage Hjuler, and Qijin Chi. Approaching the theoretical
capacitance of graphene through copper foam integrated three-dimensional graphene net-
works. J. Mater. Chem. A, 3(12):6324–6329, 2015.
80
==PAGE:88==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[15] http://www.chem.agilent.com/en-US/products-services/Instruments-Systems/Molecular-
Spectroscopy/8453-UV-Vis-Diode-Array-System/Pages/default.aspx (Accessed 2015-06-
09).
[16] http://light-measurement.com/wavelength-range/ (Accessed 2015-06-09).
[17] http://www.chem.agilent.com/en-US/products-services/Instruments-Systems/Molecular-
Spectroscopy/Pages/Photodiode Array.aspx (Accessed 2015-06-15).
[18] Daniel C Harris. Gas chromatography. W. H. Freemann and Company, 8th. edition, 2010.
[19] B Carr, T Diaper, and E Barrett. NanoParticle Tracking Analysis - The Halosystem.
pages –, 2005.
[20] Jing Shang and Xiaohu Gao. Nanoparticle counting: towards accurate determination of
the molar concentration. Chem. Soc. Rev., 43:7267–7278, 2014.
[21] G. Binnig and C. F. Quate. Atomic Force Microscope. Phys. Rev. Lett., 56(9):930–933,
1986.
[22] http://www.afmhelp.com/index.php?option=com content &view=article&id=51&Itemid=57
(Date Accessed:2015-06-22).
[23] Moore Lesley E., Smart and Elaine A. Solid State Chemistry: An Introduction. CRC
Press, 4th. edition, 2012.
[24] http://www.farmfak.uu.se/farm/farmfyskem/instrumentation/afm.html
(Date
Accessed:2015-06-22).
[25] http://www.parkafm.com/index.php/park-spm-modes/91-standard-imaging-mode/223-
basic-contact-afm-dynamic-force-microscope-dfm (Date accessed: 2015-06-22).
[26] C Kisielowski, B Freitag, M Bischoﬀ, H van Lin, S Lazar, G Knippels, P Tiemeijer,
M van der Stam, S von Harrach, M Stekelenburg, M Haider, S Uhlemann, H M¨uller,
P Hartel, B Kabius, D Miller, I Petrov, E a Olson, T Donchev, E a Kenik, a R Lupini,
J Bentley, S J Pennycook, I M Anderson, a M Minor, a K Schmid, T Duden, V Radmilovic,
Q M Ramasse, M Watanabe, R Erni, E a Stach, P Denes, and U Dahmen. Detection
of single atoms and buried defects in three dimensions by aberration-corrected electron
microscope with 0.5-A information limit. Microsc. Microanal., 14(5):469–477, 2008.
[27] http://www.cen.dtu.dk/Elektronmikroskoper/Transmissioner-Elektronmikroskoper/FEI-
Tecnai-T20-G2 (Date Accessed:2015-06-24).
[28] http://english.nanoctr.cas.cn/rh/fs/200907/t20090706 19879.html (Date Accessed:2015-
06-24).
[29] http://www.hk-phy.org/atomic world/tem/tem02 e.html(Date Accessed:2015-06-24).
[30] http://www.ammrf.org.au/myscope/analysis/eds/xraygeneration/characteristic/
(Date
Accessed:2015-07-01).
[31] http://projects.library.villanova.edu/paintingrestoration/2013/10/30/zap-visualizing-the-
pigments-with-x-rays/ (Date Accessed:2015-07-01).
[32] http://www.lrsm.upenn.edu/facilities/fac MAXS.html (Date Accessed:2015-07-01).
81
==PAGE:89==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[33] https://publish.illinois.edu/x-raycrystallography/2014/12/18/introduction/
(Date
Accessed:2015-07-01).
[34] http://struktur.kemi.dtu.dk/kenny/powder general.html(Date Accessed:2015-07-01).
[35] John F Watts. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy. 45:653–671, 1994.
[36] http://www.jeol.co.jp/en/science/xps.html (Date Accessed:2015-07-01).
[37] Lecture notes in course 47312 from DTU from the 21/10-2014. 47312 - introduction 2nd
exercise.pdf.
[38] Jingdong Zhang, Qijin Chi, and Jens Ulstrup. Chemistry at the nanoscale. 2014.
[39] M. Jayalakshmi and K. Balasubramanian.
Simple capacitors to supercapacitors - An
overview. Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 3(11):1196–1217, 2008.
[40] Yu M. Vol’fkovich and T. M. Serdyuk. Electrochemical capacitors. Russ. J. Electrochem.,
38(9):935–958, 2002.
[41] Saswata Bose, Tapas Kuila, Ananta Kumar Mishra, R. Rajasekar, Nam Hoon Kim, and
Joong Hee Lee. Carbon-based nanostructured materials and their composites as superca-
pacitor electrodes. J. Mater. Chem., 22(3):767, 2012.
[42] Li Li Zhang and X S Zhao. Carbon-based materials as supercapacitor electrodes. Chem.
Soc. Rev., 38(9):2520–2531, 2009.
[43] F. Belhachemi, S. Rael, and B. Davat. A physical based model of power electric double-
layerznsupercapacitors. Conf. Rec. 2000 IEEE Ind. Appl. Conf. Thirty-Fifth IAS Annu.
Meet. World Conf. Ind. Appl. Electr. Energy (Cat. No.00CH37129), 5(Upresa 7037):3069–
3076, 2000.
[44] E Gongadze, S Petersen, U Beck, and U Van Rienen. Classical Models of the Interface
between an Electrode and an Electrolyte. Proc. COMSOL Conf. Milan, 2009.
[45] Keith B. Oldham. A Gouy-Chapman-Stern model of the double layer at a (metal)/(ionic
liquid) interface. J. Electroanal. Chem., 613(2):131–138, 2008.
[46] Ye Min Hu, Tao Tao Shi, Jian Sen Ni, Hong Ming Jin, Ming Yuan Zhu, Ying Li, and
Qin Bai. Super-capacitive performances of nickel foam supported CeO2 nanoparticles. J.
Shanghai Jiaotong Univ., 17(5):513–516, 2012.
[47] Soheila Faraji and Farid Nasir. The development supercapacitor from activated carbon by
electroless plating — A review. 42:823–834, 2015.
[48] Mingjia Zhi, Chengcheng Xiang, Jiangtian Li, Ming Li, and Nianqiang Wu. Nanostructured
Carbon-Metal Oxide Composite Electrodes for Supercapacitors: Review. Nanoscale, pages
72–88, 2012.
[49] Patrice Simon and Yury Gogotsi. Materials for electrochemical capacitors. Nat. Mater.,
7(11):845–854, 2008.
[50] Zenan Yu, Laurene Tetard, Lei Zhai, and Jayan Thomas. Supercapacitor electrode mate-
rials: nanostructures from 0 to 3 dimensions. Energy Environ. Sci., 8(3):702–730, 2015.
[51] Li Li Zhang and X S Zhao. Carbon-based materials as supercapacitor electrodes. Chem.
Soc. Rev., 38(9):2520–2531, 2009.
82
==PAGE:90==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[52] Arunabha Ghosh and Young Hee Lee. Carbon-based electrochemical capacitors. Chem-
SusChem, 5(3):480–499, 2012.
[53] Yi Huang, Jiajie Liang, and Yongsheng Chen. An overview of the applications of graphene-
based materials in supercapacitors. Small, 8(12):1805–1834, 2012.
[54] Yan Wang, Zhiqiang Shi, Yi Huang, Yanfeng Ma, Chengyang Wang, Mingming Chen,
and Yongsheng Chen. Supercapacitor Devices Based on Graphene Materials.pdf. pages
13103–13107, 2009.
[55] Raja Rajendran, Lok Kumar Shrestha, Kosuke Minami, Munisamy Subramanian, Ra-
masamy Jayavel, and Katsuhiko Ariga.
Dimensionally integrated nanoarchitecton-
ics for a novel composite from 0D, 1D, and 2D nanomaterials:
RGO/CNT/CeO
¡sub¿2¡/sub¿ ternary nanocomposites with electrochemical performance. J. Mater. Chem.
A, 2(43):18480–18487, 2014.
[56] Li Cui, Juan Li, and Xiao Gang Zhang. Preparation and properties of Co3O4 nanorods
as supercapacitor material. J. Appl. Electrochem., 39(10):1871–1876, 2009.
[57] Xiaojun Zhang, Wenhui Shi, Jixin Zhu, Weiyun Zhao, Jan Ma, Subodh Mhaisalkar,
Tuti Lim Maria, Yanhui Yang, Hua Zhang, Huey Hoon Hng, and Qingyu Yan.
Syn-
thesis of porous NiO nanocrystals with controllable surface area and their application as
supercapacitor electrodes. Nano Res., 3(9):643–652, 2010.
[58] Dan Dan Zhao, Shu Juan Bao, Wen Jia Zhou, and Hu Lin Li. Preparation of hexag-
onal nanoporous nickel hydroxide ﬁlm and its application for electrochemical capacitor.
Electrochem. commun., 9(5):869–874, 2007.
[59] Abdul Waheed Anwar, Abdul Majeed, Nadeem Iqbal, Wasi Ullah, Ahmad Shuaib, Usman
Ilyas, Fozia Bibi, and Haﬁz Muhammad Raﬁque. Speciﬁc Capacitance and Cyclic Sta-
bility of Graphene Based Metal/Metal Oxide Nanocomposites: A Review. J. Mater. Sci.
Technol., 31:699–707, 2015.
[60] Nan Zhu, Shuang Han, Shiyu Gan, Jens Ulstrup, and Qijin Chi. Graphene paper doped
with chemically compatible prussian blue nanoparticles as nanohybrid electrocatalyst. Adv.
Funct. Mater., 23(42):5297–5306, 2013.
[61] Guoqing Zhang, Ju Ao, Yili Guo, Zhaoxia Zhang, Min Shao, Lina Wang, Lan Zhou, and
Jianzhong Shao. Green synthesis and catalytic performance of nanoscale CeO2 sheets.
RSC Adv., 4(39):20131–20135, 2014.
[62] Youjin Zhang, Tao Cheng, Qixiu Hu, Zhiyong Fang, and Kaidong Han.
Study of the
preparation and properties of CeO2 single/multiwall hollow microspheres. J. Mater. Res.,
22(06):1472–1478, 2007.
[63] Bingbing Liu, Bo Liu, Quanjun Li, Xiaobo Du, Mingguang Yao, Zepeng Li, Ran Liu,
Dedi Liu, Xu Zou, Hang Lv, Dongmei Li, Bo Zou, Tian Cui, and Guangtian Zou. Facile
hydrothermal synthesis of CeO2 nanosheets with high reactive exposure surface. J. Alloys
Compd., 509(23):6720–6724, 2011.
[64] Kai Kamada, Koji Horiguchi, Takeo Hyodo, and Yasuhiro Shimizu. Photochemical synthe-
sis of monodispersed ceria nanocrystals in simple cerium nitrate solution without additives.
Cryst. Growth Des., 11(4):1202–1207, 2011.
83
==PAGE:91==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[65] Shiyu Gan, Lijie Zhong, Tongshun Wu, Dongxue Han, Jingdong Zhang, Jens Ulstrup,
Qijin Chi, and Li Niu. Spontaneous and fast growth of large-area graphene nanoﬁlms
facilitated by oil/water interfaces. Adv. Mater., 24(29):3958–3964, 2012.
[66] Shaobin Tang and Zexing Cao.
Adsorption and dissociation of ammonia on graphene
oxides: A ﬁrst-principles study. J. Phys. Chem. C, 116(15):8778–8791, 2012.
[67] Xiaolin Li, Hailiang Wang, Joshua T. Robinson, Hernan Sanchez, Georgi Diankov,
and Hongjie Dai.
Simultaneous Nitrogen-Doping and Reduction of Graphene Oxide.
(13):15939–15944, 2009.
[68] Haibo Wang, Chuanjian Zhang, Zhihong Liu, Li Wang, Pengxian Han, Hongxia Xu, Ke-
jun Zhang, Shanmu Dong, Jianhua Yao, and Guanglei Cui.
Nitrogen-doped graphene
nanosheets with excellent lithium storage properties. J. Mater. Chem., 21(14):5430, 2011.
[69] Mykola Seredych, Joseph a. Rossin, and Teresa J. Bandosz. Changes in graphite oxide
texture and chemistry upon oxidation and reduction and their eﬀect on adsorption of
ammonia. Carbon N. Y., 49(13):4392–4402, 2011.
[70] Zhaoxia Zhang, Lina Wang, Min Shao, Yili Guo, Guangliang Chen, Jianzhong Shao, and
Guoqing Zhang. Synthesis and characterisation of CeO2 nanoparticles and rods. Micro
Nano Lett., 7(8):770, 2012.
[71] S. K. Sahoo*, M. Mohapatra, a. K. Singh, and Shashi Anand†. and Its Structural, Optical,
and Electronic Characterization. Mater. Manuf. Process., 25(9):982–989, 2010.
[72] M. Li, Y.H. Hu, Z.G. Liu, X.F. Wang, and M.T. Wang. Growth of nano hexagon-like
ﬂake arrays cerium carbonate created with PAH as the substrate. J. Solid State Chem.,
221:263–271, 2015.
[73] Xueshuang Zheng, Li Liu, and Xingping Zhou. Formation and properties of hydrophobic
CeO2 nanoparticles. Colloid J., 76(5):558–563, 2014.
[74] Reza Pournajaf, S. a. Hassanzadeh-Tabrizi, and Mahsa Jafari. Reverse microemulsion syn-
thesis of CeO2 nanopowder using polyoxyethylene(23)lauryl ether as a surfactant. Ceram.
Int., 40(6):8687–8692, 2014.
[75] F. Giannazzo, S. Sonde, V. Raineri, G. Patan`e, G. Compagnini, F. Aliotta, R. Ponterio,
and E. Rimini. Optical, morphological and spectroscopic characterization of graphene on
SiO2. Phys. Status Solidi Curr. Top. Solid State Phys., 7(3-4):1251–1255, 2010.
[76] M. Venkanna and Amit K. Chakraborty. Synthesis and characterizations of graphene oxide
and reduced graphene oxide nanosheets. 574(2014):574–576, 2014.
[77] Linhai Jiang, Mingguang Yao, Bo Liu, Quanjun Li, Ran Liu, Hang Lv, Shuangchen Lu,
Chen Gong, Bo Zou, Tian Cui, and Bingbing Liu. Controlled synthesis of CeO2/graphene
nanocomposites with highly enhanced optical and catalytic properties. J. Phys. Chem. C,
116:11741–11745, 2012.
[78] Fatemeh Heidari and Abdullah Irankhah. Eﬀect of surfactants and digestion time on nano
crystalline cerium oxide characteristics synthesized by diﬀerential precipitation. Ceram.
Int., 40(8):12655–12660, 2014.
84
==PAGE:92==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[79] Qiguang Dai, Shuxing Bai, Hua Li, Wei Liu, Xingyi Wang, and Guanzhong Lu.
Template-free and non-hydrothermal synthesis of CeO ¡sub¿2¡/sub¿ nanosheets via a facile
aqueous-phase precipitation route with catalytic oxidation properties. CrystEngComm,
16(42):9817–9827, 2014.
[80] Junchao Qian, Feng Chen, Xiaobing Zhao, and Zhigang Chen. China rose petal as biotem-
plate to produce two-dimensional ceria nanosheets. J. Nanoparticle Res., 13(12):7149–7158,
2011.
85
==PAGE:93==
A. Appendix
A.1
Cleaning of equipment
Because equipment can be made of diﬀerent types of materials diﬀerent cleaning procedures
that depend on the material is used. The diﬀerent cleaning procedures for glassware, metal,
ceramic and plastic equipment is described in subsection A.1.1, A.1.2 and A.1.3.
A.1.1
Cleaning of glass equipment
The equipment and chemicals needed to perform the cleaning step of the glassware are listed
in Table A.1 and A.2. Only glass equipment can be cleaned this way.
Table A.1: The equipment needed for the cleaning of the glassware.
Equipment needed:
Big beaker (large enough to cover the equipment that needs to be cleaned)
Teﬂon paper with holes in
Plastic wrap
watch glass
fume-hood
Ultrasonic Bath
Table A.2: The chemicals needed for the cleaning of the equipment.
Chemicals needed:
Nitric acid (7 M)
Milli-Q water
The equipment that was to be cleaned was put into a beaker with Teﬂon paper at the bottom.
The Beaker was ﬁlled with nitric acid (7 M) and boiled for 20 minutes inside a fume-hood. The
equipment was then washed three times with milli-Q water, ﬁlled again with milli-Q water,
covered with plastic wrap and sonicated in an ultrasonic bath for 30 minutes. The procedure
was repeated. The equipment was then dried in an oven at ∼110 0C for approximately 30
minutes.
A.1.2
Cleaning of metal and ceramic equipment
The chemicals needed for the cleaning of metal and ceramic equipment are given in Table A.3.
Table A.3: The chemicals needed for the cleaning of the metal and ceramic equipment.
Chemicals needed:
Ethanol (96 %)
Milli-Q water
paper towels
86
==PAGE:94==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
APPENDIX A. APPENDIX
Wet some paper towels in ethanol and wash the metal/ceramic equipment and rinse with milli-
Q water. Depending on the application and the time-frame for the use of the equipment cover
it with plastic wrap.
A.1.3
Cleaning of plastic equipment
The equipment and chemicals needed for the cleaning of plastic are listed in Table A.4 and A.5.
Table A.4: The equipment needed for the cleaning of the plastic equipment.
Equipment needed:
Big beaker (large enough to cover the equipment that needs to be cleaned)
Plastic wrap
Table A.5: The chemicals needed for the cleaning of the equipment.
Chemicals needed:
Nitric acid (7 M)
Milli-Q water
The equipment was washed with nitric acid and rinsed with milli-Q water. Depending on the
application it was covered with plastic wrap.
87
==PAGE:95==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
APPENDIX A. APPENDIX
A.2
Photographs of samples
Figure A.1: The synthesised samples. a) graphene oxide (GO), b) graphene oxide exposed to
25 % ammonia for two hours, c) cerium(IV)oxide, d) directly synthesised cerium(IV)oxide and
graphene oxide in the ratio 1:1, e) directly synthesised cerium(IV)oxide and graphene oxide in
the ratio 1:10, f) graphene oxide mixed with cerium(IV)oxide in the ratio 1:1 and g) graphene
oxide mixed with cerium(IV)oxide in the ratio 1:10
88
==PAGE:96==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
APPENDIX A. APPENDIX
A.3
Supporting information
Table A.6: The initial weight of a vial was recorded and 3 mL was added to the vial. The
vial was centrifuged at 17000 G for 10 minutes and the supernatant was discarded. The vials
were dried in a vacuum desiccator for 24 hours. The ﬁnal weight of the vials were recorded
and the weight diﬀerence calculated. This made it possible to calculate the concentration of
the samples in mg/mL, for all samples except the GO where 5 mL was used in a Petri-dish and
all 5 mL was evaporated in a vacuum desiccator for 24 hours. The rest of the procedure was
similar.
#
Sample
Initial
weight
of vial [g]
Final
weight
of vial [g]
Weight dif-
ference [g]
Concentration
[mg/mL]
1
GO
5.8789
5.8990
0.0201
4.02
2
2hGO+NH3
0.983
0.9909
0.0079
2.6333
3
CeO2
0.9897
0.9902
0.0005
0.1667
4
dGO/CeO2-
1/1
0.9903
0.9912
0.0009
0.3000
5
dGO/CeO2-
1/10
1.0052
1.0104
0.0052
1.7333
6
GO/CeO2-
1/1
0.9905
0.9922
0.0017
0.5667
7
GO/CeO2-
1/10
0.9633
0.969
0.0057
1.9000
2 0 0
2 5 0
3 0 0
3 5 0
4 0 0
4 5 0
5 0 0
0 , 0
0 , 2
0 , 4
0 , 6
0 , 8
1 , 0
1 , 2
1 , 4
1 , 6
1 , 8
2 , 0
2 , 2
 
 
A b s o r b a n c e  ( A U )
w a v e l e n g t h  ( n m
)
 G O  0 . 0 5  m
g / m
L
 G O  0 . 0 3 3  m
g / m
L
 G O  0 . 0 2  m
g / m
L
 G O  0 . 0 0 1  m
g / m
L
U V - V I S  s p e c t r u m
 o f  G r a p h e n e  o x i d e
2 3 0
3 1 0
Figure A.2: UV-Vis spectra of GO, showing the characteristic maximum absorbance of 230 and
310 nm as described in [65].
89
==PAGE:97==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
APPENDIX A. APPENDIX
2 0 0
2 5 0
3 0 0
3 5 0
4 0 0
4 5 0
5 0 0
0 , 0
0 , 2
0 , 4
0 , 6
0 , 8
1 , 0
1 , 2
1 , 4
1 , 6
1 , 8
2 , 0
2 , 2
2 , 4
2 , 6
2 , 8
 
 
A b s o r b a n c e  ( A U )
w a v e l e n g t h  ( n m
)
 G O  2 h N H 3  0 . 2 6 3  m
g / m
L
 G O  2 h N H 3  0 . 1 3 2  m
g / m
L
 G O  2 h N H 3  0 . 0 5 3  m
g / m
L
 G O  2 h N H 3  0 . 0 2 6  m
g / m
L
U V - V i s  s p e c t r u m
 o f  G r a p h e n e  o x i d e  a f t e r  2  h o u r s  w i t h  a m
m
o n i a  
2 3 0
3 1 0
Figure A.3: UV-Vis spectra of GO mixed with 25 % ammonia for 2 hours also show the
characteristic maximum absorbance of 230 and 310 nm.
1 9 0
2 0 0
2 1 0
2 2 0
2 3 0
2 4 0
2 5 0
2 6 0
2 7 0
2 8 0
2 9 0
3 0 0
0 , 0
0 , 5
1 , 0
1 , 5
2 , 0
2 , 5
3 , 0
3 , 5
4 , 0
4 , 5
 
 
A b s o r b a n c e  ( A U )
w a v e l e n g t h  ( n m
)
 C e N O 3  0 . 5  m
M
 C e N O 3  0 . 1  m
M
 
 C e N O 3  0 . 0 5  m
M
2 5 2
2 0 2
2 2 2
U V - v i s  s p e c t r u m
 o f  C e r i u m
 n i t r a t e
Figure A.4: UV-Vis spectra of Ce(NO3)3 show maximum absorbance around 200 nm and have
another maximum around 220 and 250.
90
==PAGE:98==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
APPENDIX A. APPENDIX
2 0 0
2 5 0
3 0 0
3 5 0
4 0 0
4 5 0
5 0 0
0 , 0 0
0 , 0 5
0 , 1 0
0 , 1 5
0 , 2 0
0 , 2 5
0 , 3 0
0 , 3 5
0 , 4 0
 
 
A b s o r b a n c e  ( A U )
w a v e l e n g t h  ( n m
)
 C e O 2  0 . 1 7  m
g / m
L
 C e O 2  0 . 8 5  m
g / m
L
 C e O 2  0 . 0 1 7  m
g / m
L
2 6 2
3 3 0
U V - V I S  s p e c t r u m
 o f  C e r i u m
 o x i d e
Figure A.5: UV-Vis spectra of CeO2 show maximum absorbance around 260 and 330 nm which
is close to reported [70, 71, 72, 73] [74, 73].
2 0 0
2 5 0
3 0 0
3 5 0
4 0 0
4 5 0
5 0 0
0 . 0
0 . 2
0 . 4
0 . 6
0 . 8
1 . 0
1 . 2
1 . 4
1 . 6
1 . 8
2 . 0
2 . 2
2 . 4
2 . 6
 
 
A b s o r b a n c e  ( A U )
w a v e l e n g t h  ( n m
)
 G O / C e O 2  1 / 1  0 . 0 5 6  m
g / m
L
 G O / C e O 2  1 / 1  0 . 0 2 8  m
g / m
L
 G O / C e O 2  1 / 1  0 . 0 0 5 7  m
g / m
L
2 3 0
3 0 6
U V - V i s  s p e c t r u m
 o f  G r a p h e n e  o x i d e / C e r i u m
 o x i d e  1 / 1  
Figure A.6: UV-Vis spectra of GO mixed with CeO2 (GO/CeO2) in the ratio 1/1.
91
==PAGE:99==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
APPENDIX A. APPENDIX
2 0 0
2 5 0
3 0 0
3 5 0
4 0 0
4 5 0
5 0 0
0 , 0
0 , 2
0 , 4
0 , 6
0 , 8
1 , 0
1 , 2
1 , 4
1 , 6
1 , 8
2 , 0
2 , 2
U V - V i s  s p e c t r u m
 o f  G r a p h e n e  o x i d e / C e r i u m
 o x i d e  1 / 1 0  
 
 
A b s o r b a n c e  ( A U )
w a v e l e n g h t  ( n m
)
 G O - C e O 2  1 - 1 0  0 . 9 5  m
g / m
L
 G O - C e O 2  1 - 1 0  0 . 3 8  m
g / m
L
 G O - C e O 2  1 - 1 0  0 . 1 9  m
g / m
L
 G O - C e O 2  1 - 1 0  0 . 0 9 5  m
g / m
L
 G O - C e O 2  1 - 1 0  0 . 0 3 8  m
g / m
L
2 3 0
3 1 0
Figure A.7: The UV-Vis spectrum of GO mixed with CeO2 (GO/CeO2) in the ratio 1/10.
2 0 0
2 5 0
3 0 0
3 5 0
4 0 0
4 5 0
5 0 0
5 5 0
6 0 0
6 5 0
7 0 0
0 . 0
0 . 1
0 . 2
0 . 3
0 . 4
0 . 5
0 . 6
0 . 7
0 . 8
0 . 9
1 . 0
1 . 1
1 . 2
 
 
A b s o r b a n c e  ( A U )
w a v e l e n g t h  ( n m
)
 d G O / C e O 2 - 1 / 1 - 0 . 1 5  m
g / m
L
 d G O / C e O 2 - 1 / 1 - 0 . 0 6  m
g / m
L
 d G O / C e O 2 - 1 / 1 - 0 . 0 3  m
g / m
L
 d G O / C e O 2 - 1 / 1 - 0 . 0 1 5 m
g / m
L
3 1 5
D i r e c t  s y n t h e s i s e d  G r a p h e n e  o x i d e / C e r i u m
 o x i d e  1 / 1
Figure A.8: UV-Vis spectra of directly synthesised CeO2 mixed and GO (dGO/CeO2) in the
ratio 1/1.
92
==PAGE:100==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
APPENDIX A. APPENDIX
2 0 0
3 0 0
4 0 0
5 0 0
6 0 0
7 0 0
8 0 0
9 0 0
1 0 0 0
0 , 0
0 , 2
0 , 4
0 , 6
0 , 8
1 , 0
1 , 2
1 , 4
1 , 6
1 , 8
2 , 0
2 , 2
D i r e c t  s y n t h e s i s e d  G r a p h e n e  o x i d e / C e r i u m
 o x i d e  1 / 1 0
 
 
A b s o r b a n c e  ( A U )
w a v e l e n g t h  ( n m
)
 d G O - C e O 2 _ 1 - 1 0  0 . 3 4 7  m
g / m
L
 d G O - C e O 2 _ 1 - 1 0  0 . 1 7 3  m
g / m
L
 d G O - C e O 2 _ 1 - 1 0  0 . 0 8 7  m
g / m
L
 d G O - C e O 2 _ 1 - 1 0  0 . 0 3 5  m
g / m
L
 d G O - C e O 2 _ 1 - 1 0  0 . 0 1 7  m
g / m
L
3 3 5
Figure A.9: UV-Vis spectrum of directly synthesised CeO2 mixed and GO (dGO/CeO2) in the
ratio 1/10.
93
==PAGE:101==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
APPENDIX A. APPENDIX
Table A.7: The diﬀerent XRD peaks, full width half maxium (FWHM) and particle size of the
diﬀerent samples.
Sample
2Theta
FWHM
particle size [˚A]
GO
10.997
1.035
95
42.428
0.838
128
77.553
1.978
60
Com-GO
11.118
0.702
147
42.298
0.545
213
77.316
1.188
104
2hGO+NH3
11.024
1.068
92
42.553
0.902
118
77.762
2.206
54
CeO2
28.548
2.463
39
32.941
-
-
47.412
2.624
38
56.159
-
-
77.49
-
-
88.427
-
-
94.881
-
-
GO/CeO2-1/1
-
-
-
GO/CeO2-1/10
28.295
2.15
44
32.938
-
-
42.411
-
-
47.371
2.41
42
46.206
-
-
77.522
-
-
88.279
-
-
94.955
-
-
dGO/CeO2-1/1
28.569
2.602
36
32.982
-
-
47.299
3.021
33
56.155
3.541
29
77.275
4.616
25
88.249
-
-
94.955
-
-
dGO/CeO2-1/10
28.446
1.95
49
32.667
1.82
53
47.231
2.137
47
56.011
2.099
50
69.068
0.633
201
77.19
4.152
28
88.05
2.789
46
95.071
-
-
94
==PAGE:102==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
APPENDIX A. APPENDIX
Figure A.10: XPS spectra of CeO2. The counts on the 2. axes and the binding energy in
electron volt (eV) on the 1. axes.
Figure A.11: XPS spectra of GO/CeO2 in the ratio 1/1. The counts on the 2. axes and the
binding energy in electron volt (eV) on the 1. axes.
Figure A.12: XPS spectra of GO/CeO2 in the ratio 1/10. The counts on the 2. axes and the
binding energy in electron volt (eV) on the 1. axes.
95
==PAGE:103==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
APPENDIX A. APPENDIX
Figure A.13: XPS spectra of direct synthesised GO/CeO2 in the ratio 1/1. The counts on the
2. axes and the binding energy in electron volt (eV) on the 1. axes.
Figure A.14: XPS spectra of direct synthesised GO/CeO2 in the ratio 1/10. The counts on the
2. axes and the binding energy in electron volt (eV) on the 1. axes.
96
==PAGE:104==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
APPENDIX A. APPENDIX
Table A.9: The average speciﬁc capacitance of the diﬀerent electrode materials and the standard
deviation at the diﬀerent scan rates.
Sample
Scan rate
Speciﬁc capacitance
Standard deviation
Relativ STD
[mV/s ]
[F/g]
[F/g]
[%]
CeO2
100.00
1.03
0.91
88.87
50.00
1.46
1.33
90.86
20.00
2.22
2.03
91.72
10.00
2.95
2.71
91.64
GO
100.00
1.73
2.01
116.20
50.00
2.04
2.51
123.47
20.00
2.61
3.23
123.55
10.00
1.83
2.01
110.25
2hGO+NH3
100.00
26.94
24.14
89.63
50.00
29.23
24.11
82.49
20.00
31.68
22.32
70.45
10.00
27.05
13.42
49.60
GO/CeO2-1/1
100.00
12.53
11.71
93.46
50.00
17.50
15.67
89.56
20.00
26.11
22.47
86.09
10.00
31.29
24.85
79.44
GO/CeO2-1/10
100.00
4.62
1.76
38.20
50.00
5.16
0.98
19.01
20.00
6.24
0.09
1.41
10.00
3.15
3.15
100.00
dGO/CeO2-1/1
100.00
7.06
5.30
75.14
50.00
8.84
6.04
68.28
20.00
11.88
7.10
59.81
10.00
14.59
7.82
53.60
dGO/CeO2-1/10
100.00
2.85
0.00
0.00
50.00
4.18
0.00
0.00
20.00
6.15
0.00
0.00
10.00
8.16
0.00
0.00
Glassy carbon
100.00
0.21
0.02
7.93
50.00
0.25
0.02
7.70
20.00
0.35
0.03
7.17
10.00
0.47
0.03
6.82
97
==PAGE:105==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
APPENDIX A. APPENDIX
Table A.10: The energy density and power density of the diﬀerent electrode materials at dif-
ferent scan rates
Sample
Scan rate [mV/s ]
Energy density [Wh/kg]
Power density [kW/kg]
CeO2
100.00
0.57
2.85687E-05
50.00
0.81
2.03042E-05
20.00
1.23
1.23241E-05
10.00
1.64
8.20361E-06
GO
100.00
0.96
4.80372E-05
50.00
1.13
2.82672E-05
20.00
1.45
1.45138E-05
10.00
1.01
5.07109E-06
2hGO+NH3
100.00
14.96
0.000748226
50.00
16.24
0.000405937
20.00
17.60
0.000176009
10.00
15.03
7.51294E-05
GO/CeO2-1/1
100.00
6.96
0.000348118
50.00
9.72
0.000243025
20.00
14.50
0.000145038
10.00
17.38
8.6909E-05
GO/CeO2-1/10
100.00
2.57
0.00012828
50.00
2.87
7.16353E-05
20.00
3.47
3.46818E-05
10.00
1.75
8.75228E-06
dGO/CeO2-1/1
100.00
3.92
0.000196023
50.00
4.91
0.000122843
20.00
6.60
6.59806E-05
10.00
8.11
4.0541E-05
dGO/CeO2-1/10
100.00
1.59
7.92727E-05
50.00
2.32
5.80143E-05
20.00
3.42
3.41914E-05
10.00
4.54
2.26789E-05
Table A.11: The average speciﬁc capacitance at the diﬀerent current densities.
Sample
Average
Average
Current desity
Speciﬁc capacitance
Energy density
A ¨ g´1
F/g
Wh/kg
GO
100
4.50E-02
2.50E-02
50
7.50E-02
4.17E-02
10
1.34E-01
7.42E-02
5
1.65E-01
9.17E-02
3
1.92E-01
1.07E-01
2
2.14E-01
1.19E-01
1
2.52E-01
1.40E-01
0.5
2.94E-01
1.63E-01
0.1
4.17E-01
2.32E-01
2hGO
100
2.50E-02
1.39E-02
50
6.50E-02
3.61E-02
10
4.05E-01
2.25E-01
98
==PAGE:106==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
APPENDIX A. APPENDIX
5
2.36E+00
1.31E+00
3
4.46E+00
2.48E+00
2
6.14E+00
3.41E+00
1
1.10E+01
6.11E+00
0.5
1.52E+01
8.46E+00
0.1
2.34E+01
1.30E+01
CeO2
100
8.50E-02
4.72E-02
50
1.23E-01
6.81E-02
10
1.85E-01
1.03E-01
5
2.20E-01
1.22E-01
3
2.32E-01
1.29E-01
2
2.49E-01
1.38E-01
1
2.73E-01
1.52E-01
0.5
2.98E-01
1.65E-01
0.1
3.80E-01
2.11E-01
dGO/CeO2-1/1
100
6.50E-02
3.61E-02
50
1.35E-01
7.50E-02
10
1.43E+00
7.97E-01
5
4.11E+00
2.28E+00
3
6.35E+00
3.53E+00
2
8.08E+00
4.49E+00
1
1.09E+01
6.07E+00
0.5
1.46E+01
8.14E+00
0.1
3.03E+01
1.69E+01
dGO/CeO2-1/10
100
-
-
50
-
-
10
4.00E-02
2.22E-02
5
5.35E-02
2.97E-02
3
6.99E-02
3.88E-02
2
9.56E-02
5.31E-02
1
2.07E-01
1.15E-01
0.5
6.41E-01
3.56E-01
0.1
5.24E+00
2.91E+00
GO/CeO2-1/1
100
1.10E-01
6.11E-02
50
1.80E-01
1.00E-01
10
3.90E-01
2.17E-01
5
8.82E-01
4.90E-01
3
3.96E+00
2.20E+00
2
1.60E+01
8.87E+00
1
3.79E+01
2.10E+01
0.5
1.01E+02
5.61E+01
0.1
1.04E+02
5.77E+01
GO/CeO2-1/10
100
-
-
50
-
-
10
3.25E-02
1.81E-02
5
8.20E-02
4.56E-02
3
1.63E-01
9.08E-02
2
1.77E-01
9.83E-02
1
1.14E+00
6.36E-01
0.5
1.93E+00
1.07E+00
99
==PAGE:107==
Jonas Hagel Thorn, 2015
APPENDIX A. APPENDIX
0.1
6.60E+00
3.66E+00
Glassy carbon
100
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
50
3.25E-02
1.81E-02
10
6.70E-02
3.72E-02
5
8.63E-02
4.79E-02
3
9.75E-02
5.42E-02
2
1.05E-01
5.81E-02
1
1.27E-01
7.06E-02
0.5
1.48E-01
8.20E-02
0.1
2.19E-01
1.22E-01
Table A.12: The data from the t-test of the two methods
Sample
Speciﬁc capacitance
Standard dev
Speciﬁc capacitance
[F/g] (GCD)
[F/g]
[F/g] (CV)
CeO2
3.80E-01
2.17E-01
2.95E+00
GO
4.17E-01
3.75E-02
1.83E+00
2hGO+NH3
2.34E+01
2.63E+00
2.70E+01
GO/CeO2-1/1
1.04E+02
0.00E+00
3.13E+01
GO/CeO2-1/10
6.60E+00
2.14E+00
3.15E+00
dGO/CeO2-1/1
3.03E+01
5.37E+00
1.46E+01
dGO/CeO2-1/10
5.24E+00
0.00E+00
8.16E+00
Glassy carbon
-
-
4.66E-01
Standard deviation
n1
n2(CV)
CeO2
2.71E+00
2
2
GO
2.01E+00
2
3
2hGO+NH3
1.34E+01
2
5
GO/CeO2-1/1
2.49E+01
1
3
GO/CeO2-1/10
3.15E+00
2
2
dGO/CeO2-1/1
7.82E+00
2
3
dGO/CeO2-1/10
0.00E+00
1
1
Glassy carbon
3.18E-02
-
2
tcal
Degree of
95 % certainty
freedom
that the result are
CeO2
1.5
1
same
GO
1.5
2
same
2hGO+NH3
4.5
4
same
GO/CeO2-1/1
2.1
-
diﬀerent
GO/CeO2-1/10
1.4
1
same
dGO/CeO2-1/1
3.2
2
same
dGO/CeO2-1/10
-
-
-
Glassy carbon
-
-
-
100
