==PAGE:1==
Inferring Friendships from
Longitudinal High Resolution
Data
Martin Hastrup
Supervisors:
Sune Lehmann
Jakob Eg Larsen
Kongens Lyngby 2015
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Resumé
I den moderne verden anno 2015 er udbredelsen af smartphones blevet så stor at
Danmarks Statistik vurderer at 77% af alle danskere har en smartphone. Denne
store mængde teknologi der både er højt avanceret og anvendt på daglig basis
af så mange mennesker gør det muligt at opsamle data af høj opløsning i størrer
befolkningsgrupper end det tidligere har været muligt. Dette speciale er baseret
på det temporale bluetooth data der er opsamlet over en periode på 20 måneder
fra omkring 800 smartphones, der har været brugt af førsteårsstuderende ved
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet (DTU ) i forbindelse med SensibleDTU projek-
tet. Det opsamlede bluetooth data bliver brugt til at antage at hvis to mobiler
er så tæt på hinanden at de får forbindelse til hinanden med bluetooth, antages
det at der har været en interaktion mellem de to telefoners ejere. Målet med
denne opgave er at modellere dataet på en sådan måde at de par der har et reelt
socialt forhold i disse 20 måneder kan ndes og deres karakteristika analyseret.
For at dette kan lade sig gøre, bliver dataet organiseret på en sådan måde at
kun par der har regelmæssig interaktion i disse 20 måneder er tilbage i dataet.
Specialet gennemgår derefter nogle af de matematiske modeller der kan bruges
til at adskille parrene i dataet, så det er muligt at nde de par der har en social
interaktion fra alle da andre par (f.eks. dem der bare studerer sammen). Efter
at have beskrevet disse modeller, udvælges en endelig model der bruges gennem
resten af specialet til at opstille og analysere dataet, navnlig Latent Dirichlet
allocation (LDA) med 2 komponenter.
Denne model kan opdele dataet i 2
separate grupper. Den ene gruppe, der blot studere sammen og så den anden
gruppe, som opfører sig på en sådan måde at deres relation kan siges at være
social. Disse 2 grupper bliver sammenlignet og visualiseret på en række måder
der fremhæver de unikke strukturer og kendetegn i hver gruppe.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
In the modern world, the use of smartphones is so widespread that according to
Statistics Denmark 77% of all Danes in 2015 have one. The amount of high-end
technology worn on a daily basis by this many people enables for high resolu-
tion data to be gathered on an unprecedented scale. This thesis is based on the
temporal bluetooth data gathered during a 20 month period from around 800
smartphones, used by rst year students at the Technical University of Den-
mark (DTU ) as part of the SensibleDTU project. The bluetooth data is used
as a proxy for face to face meetings between the participants of the project,
e.i. if two smartphones are close enough for them to connect with bluetooth, it
is considered as an interaction between the two participants. The goal of this
thesis is to model the data in such a way that the meaningful social relations
between the peers can be extracted and analyzed. For this to be possible, the
data is organized to only maintain information about the peers that interact on
a regular basis.
Moreover the thesis also reviews some of the mathematical models that can
be applied to the data, in terms of separating the peers of interest from all the
other interactors. After having evaluated and tried out these models, a model
is selected for the nal modeling of the data, namely the Latent Dirichlet al-
location model (LDA) with two components. The model can be used to split
the data into two separate groups. Here, the rst group consists of those who
interact during university hours and can be labeled as study pairs. The second
group consists of those who interact in such manner where their interaction can
be labeled as social. Last, the two groups are compared and visualized in several
ways to display the unique structures and traits that dene each group.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis is the nal part of my master's degree in Digital Media Technology
at the Danish University of Technology, DTU. It has been written in collabora-
tion with the SensibleDTU project, and is based on the data gathered during a
20 month period of this project.
The theme of the thesis is the analysis of temporal social data, and the inter-
actions between peers on a long term scale. The mathematical and statistical
methods used will uncover the structures within the temporal data, in order to
uncover the hidden structures which are then explained and visualized.
Martin Hastrup - 17-07-2015
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgments
First of all, I would like to express my deepest thanks to my supervisor Sune
Lehmann for his creative inputs and ideas, constructive feedback on my mate-
rial, and for the meetings we had discussing the contents of the thesis.
Next, a big thank you to Piotr Sapiezynski for joining in on the discussions
with Sune and me, and specially for his eternal patience with my frequent over-
loading of DTU's servers.
Finally, I want to thank my friends and family for providing much needed social
interaction during my sessions of coding and writing. Special thanks to Theis
F. Hinz, Mads Eiler Hansen and Jasmina Pelivani for our weekly master thesis
meetings at DTU. They might not have been productive, but they sure were
needed.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
A brief outline of network theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1.1
Core concepts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1.2
A historical perspective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.1.3
Networks in everything
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.1.4
Networks introduced in social structures . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.2
Goals, challenges and motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.3
Thesis contents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2
Setting up the data
9
2.1
Collecting the data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.1
A review of dierent approaches
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.2
The chosen method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2
The raw smartphone data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3
Transforming the data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3
Data analysis - Theory
19
3.1
Why data analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2
Machine learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2.1
Unsupervised clustering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2.2
Clusters in the smartphone data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2.3
Model theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3
Summary of models theory
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4
Inferring friendships
35
4.1
Visualizing the models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.1.1
K-means . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.1.2
pLSA
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
==PAGE:12==
x
CONTENTS
4.1.3
LDA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.2
Summary comparison of the models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.3
Evaluating the LDA model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.3.1
LDA with 5 components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.4
The nal model - LDA with 2 components . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.4.1
Visualizing the components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.4.2
The purity of the pair labeling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
4.5
Summarizing the results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5
Applications
59
5.1
Burstiness in the interevent times . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5.1.1
Burstiness - Theory
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
5.1.2
Burstiness - Application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
5.2
Dynamic long term classication
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
6
Discussion
65
7
Further work
67
8
Conclusion
69
9
Appendix
77
9.1
Appendix A . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
9.2
Appendix B . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
9.3
Appendix C . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
9.4
Appendix D . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
9.5
Appendix E . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
9.6
Appendix F . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Due to the technological advances done in recent years and the incorporation
of modern technology in most people's daily lives, it is possible to gather high
resolution data on large groups of people on an unprecedented scale. This thesis
will show how it is possible to apply network theory and machine learning on
data gathered from smartphones during a long term large scale scientic project,
to uncover the hidden structures in the social network of the participants of
this project. Since smartphones carry a variety of sensors, they are capable
of monitoring and reporting our daily lives and movements without interfering
with our actions.
The SensibleDTU 1 project uses these possibilities to create a data set with high
resolution long term data from over 800 smartphones. It it this data that is the
subject for this thesis.
Here, the focus will be to look at how smartphones connect via bluetooth when
they are close to each other, in order to detect face to face interaction. This
gives an entire complex network of all the interactions going on within this data.
The underlying theory used to describe and analyze the social structure in the
data is network theory. Therefore, the next section will briey outline the basic
concepts therein and give a historical perspective from the rst paper released
on the subject. Afterward, the paper will state network theory's role in the
1www.sensible.dtu.dk
==PAGE:14==
2
Introduction
present world and end with a description of its role in social data modeling,
which will be used throughout the thesis.
1.1
A brief outline of network theory
1.1.1
Core concepts
Before describing how network theory came to be and its role in modern day
society, the core concepts of the subject are explained.
At the core of network theory lies the idea of an abstract meta network. A
network is used to describe the relation between actors in some setting. What
this relation, these actors and this setting might be will be exemplied further
down. In a network, an actor is known as a node, and the relation between two
nodes is known as an edge. A network can either be directed or undirected, sym-
bolizing either a one way or two way interaction between nodes. A visualization
of a simple network with 7 nodes and the edges between them can be seen in
gure 1.1. In an undirected network, the degree of a node is simply the number
of edges it has. In a directed network a node has both in degree and out degree,
which is the number of edges going towards the node and away from the node,
respectively. For a whole network, the degree distribution is the distribution of
all degrees of all nodes in the network.
If it is possible to go from one node to another node only by traveling on
edges either between the nodes, or between nodes that are between the nodes,
then their is a path between the two nodes. In an undirected network, paths
always go both ways. Thus if there is a path between node 1 and 10 then there
also is a path between 10 and 1. In a directed network, paths can only go in
the same way as the edge direction. The path between two nodes that uses the
least amount of edges is said to be the shortest path. Multiple algorithms have
been developed for nding shortest path through networks, including breadth
rst search, depth rst search and A*.
In an undirected network, a connected component is a group of nodes where
there is a path from each node, to all other nodes. If the network in gure 1.1
had been undirected, it would have had two connected components, since node 6
and 7 cannot be reached from any of the other nodes, except themselves. Often
a network contains a so-called giant connected component, which is a component
containing all or almost all of the nodes. It is rare for a network to have more
than one giant component. Besides computing the degree of a node, its central-
ity can also be computed. This measures on how big a fraction of all shortest
==PAGE:15==
1.1 A brief outline of network theory
3
Figure 1.1: A small network with 7 nodes. The nodes are each given a number,
for easier identication. The edges in the network are directed, indicated by the
arrows on the edges. Some of the edges go both ways, while some of them only
go one way. In this network, node 4 has out degree 2 and in degree 3, because
it has edges going outwards to 2 other nodes, and there are 3 nodes with edges
going towards itself. Note that since the network is directed, there is a path
from node 3 to 1, but not from 1 to 3.
paths between nodes in the network, the given node is on. If a node appears on
many of the shortest paths between other nodes, it is of high importance to the
network.
The nal concept introduced here, is the clustering coecient of a node. It is
a measure of how tightly connected the nodes connected to that node is. So if
the neighbors of a given node are connected, the node itself will have a higher
clustering coecient. The clustering coecient of a node is given as:
Ci =
Number of edges between neighbors of i
Maximum number of possible edges between neighbors of i
(1.1)
3 dierent networks, and the clustering coecients of a node in each of them is
given in gure 1.2. The clustering coecient for an entire network is then given
as the average of the clustering coecients of all nodes.
With the basic terminology in place, the origins of network theory will be briey
outlined, followed by a section exemplifying some of the many applications of
==PAGE:16==
4
Introduction
(a) Ci = 1
(b) Ci = 0.3
(c) Ci = 0
Figure 1.2: Three small networks and the clustering coecients for the node i2.
network theory in the modern society.
1.1.2
A historical perspective
The idea of networks (or graphs) used to describe the structure of a complex
system is not a new one. The paper Seven Bridges of Königsberg[1] is regarded as
the rst paper released on the subject. It is written by the Swiss mathematician
and physicist Leonhard Euler in 1736, and introduces an abstract terminology
for proving that it is not possible to traverse the seven bridges in the city of
Köningsberg if one can only use each bridge once. This paper introduced some
of the notions describe above, such as nodes, edges and node degree.
1.1.3
Networks in everything
In recent years, network theory have expanded into many parts of the modern
society. Researchers in a lot of dierent elds have realized that networks are
found at the core of many complex systems. Most systems that surround us are
so complicated and vast in size that they can be almost impossible to study,
unless reduced to some general structure. This have given rise to numerous
network representations of complex systems:
• The neural network. The connections between the billions of neurons
in the human brain is called the neural network, and the study of it has
gained insight in how the brain functions.
2http://www.scielo.br/scielo.php?script=sci_arttextpid=S1415-47572008000400001
==PAGE:17==
1.1 A brief outline of network theory
5
• Disease outbreak control. Epidemiology[21] uses the notion of paths
and information ow through a network to predict how disease outbreaks
travels through a society.
This allows for better reactions in terms of
treating and containing the diseases.
• GPS systems. GPS systems compute shortest paths between points in
the real world, by treating roads as edges and intersections as nodes.
• The ow of power. The power grid of a country can be treated as a
network, showing how electricity can ow from producers to consumers.
This can help identify the critical components of the grid, which might be
prone to fail, if something should go wrong, or to see how many consumers
will be inuenced in case of a failure. The concept that if one part of a
network fails then other parts will fail as well, due to the connectedness
of the network, is known as a cascading failure.
• Cancer cells. One will often try to avoid cascading failures, but they can
also be introduced purposefully to networks, which researchers are trying
to do when ghting cancer cells.
• The internet. Perhaps the network that has inuenced the modern so-
ciety the most is the network of the internet. The understanding of the
structure in how web pages link to each other is a key part of Google's
success.
There are many other networks at play in the modern day world, than the
ones mentioned above, but just from the described networks it is clear that
the application of network science reaches far and wide. There is a couple of
reasons for why the eld of applications are expanding in the network theory.
The reasons are:
• In recent years more and more data has been stored, categorized, and
made available for researches. Through the internet, it is now possible to
quickly access and share huge amounts of data, giving a rise in the need
of the tools provided by network theory.
• In accordance with Moore's law[15], the computational power of high-
end modern computers enables scientists to study, model and visualize
big, dense and complex networks. Thus, going from being able to work
with networks with tens, or hundreds of edges, it is now possible to study
networks with millions, or even billions of edges.
• Companies such as Facebook, Google, Twitter and LinkedIn all utilize the
knowledge they can gain from network science, and have used it to become
==PAGE:18==
6
Introduction
highly successful. For instance, Google's Page Rank algorithm, which is
at the heart of how Google maps the internet, can be described using
network theory.
Finally, to summarize: The idea of networks have existed for many years, but
have until recently only been used in a few areas. However, the revolution of
storing and sharing data through the internet, and the accessibility of powerful
computers, have allowed network science to become one of the most useful tools
in studying and modeling data.
1.1.4
Networks introduced in social structures
The concepts of network theory are rst used in the context of sociology in 1887
with the publication of Gemeinschaft und Gesellschaft[2] (translated to 'Com-
munity and Society') by Ferdinand Tönnies. Here, the ties between peers are
categorized into two dierent types, namely social interactions between friends
(the community), and formal interactions (the society). This highlights a cen-
tral topic in human interaction, namely that people interact in many dierent
ways, and these interactions can be categorized. The level of categorization can
be very rough, for instance where the links between peers are either social or
formal, but it can also be more ne tuned, e.g. a link between peers can be cat-
egorized as family, close friends, distant friends, colleagues, people from class or
a romantic relation. A link can also be a bit of both. It is completely possible
that you are close friends with members of your family, or that you go for a
drink at the Friday bar with people from work, making them both colleagues
and friends.
The visual representation of graphs introduced by Euler also found its way to
sociology, which can be seen in Who Shall Survive?[3] from 1934 by the Amer-
ican psychiatrist and psycho sociologist Jacob L. Moreno. This paper contains
some of the earliest graphical representations of social networks (known as so-
ciograms, see gure 1.3). Here, people are represented as nodes, and links are
relations between peers. This visualization allows for a quick and easy inter-
pretable overview of how peers in a group are related, for instance it can reveal
if there are a few people in the group with whom everybody is connected, or if
there are people without any relations at all.
Sociograms can also help to see emerging social conicts within groups.
In
the 1970s, anthropologist Wayne Zachary studied the social dynamics among
34 people in a university karate club[14]. By drawing the sociogram for the
relations within this group, it can be seen that there are two dominating nodes
with many links. These nodes are label 1 and 34 in gure 1.4, and symbolize
==PAGE:19==
1.1 A brief outline of network theory
7
Figure 1.3: An example of a sociogram. Each node represents a person, and the
edges between nodes represents a social connection, for instance that there is a
friendship between these two people. Note that in this sociogram the edges are
directed, indicating that friendships are not necessarily reciprocal.
the karate instructor and the student founder of the club. The interesting fact
is that they in general do not share any of their links, as well as they do not
even link to each other. This allows for a grouping of the nodes, where a node
is in the same group as either node 1 or 34, depending on which it is connected
to. The fact that the social network of the karate club is divided between two
central nodes, suggests that there is a conict in the network. This conict
resulted in the two groups splitting up into two rival karate clubs.
Figure 1.4: The sociogram for the university karate club, studied by Wayne
Zachary. The nodes are shaded according to if they are linked to node 1 or node
34.
==PAGE:20==
8
Introduction
1.2
Goals, challenges and motivation
The main goal of this thesis is to uncover the structures of the social network
in the group of people participating in the SensibleDTU project. This includes
nding out which kind of ties are present in the structure, and how many of each
tie people in general have. A challenge in uncovering this structure will be, how
to transform the raw smartphone data into something that gives semantically
meaning, and then to gure out which machine learning model to apply to the
data, to properly nd the dierent types of ties. When a suitable model has been
applied, there is also the challenge of interpreting and visualizing the results.
The problems that will be considered includes:
• How many dierent kinds of social ties does a person have?
• Do people tend to have the same number of social ties, or is it very dierent
from person to person?
• Do people have a constant number of social ties, or does it change during
the course of the data collection period?
• Can the data show if friendships start or end during the course of the data
collection period?
• How well do the bluetooth induced pairs model the real world pairs?
1.3
Thesis contents
The outline of this thesis is as follows: The next chapter (chapter 2) gives an
in depth presentation of the data used for the analysis. It will describe how the
data goes from its raw form to something more rened. Chapter 3 then deals
with the theory of the mathematical models, which will be used to describe the
data. After that, the data and the mathematical theory is combined in chapter
4 in which the knowledge gained from applying the mathematics to the data
will be discussed and visualized. Chapter 6 then follows with a discussion of the
sources of errors one should keep in mind when dealing with this type of data.
The work done in this thesis opens up for further research to be done, which is
discussed in chapter 7. Finally, chapter 8 concludes the thesis with a brief recap
of the results shown in chapter 4.
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 2
Setting up the data
2.1
Collecting the data
When wanting to analyze complex social interactions between peers, both the
amount and quality of the data to be analyzed is paramount. Many previous
methods have been used to collect social meta data from population samples of
various size. Some of these methods will be reviewed in the following section.
The method chosen to gather the data in this experiment setup will then be
described.
2.1.1
A review of dierent approaches
Social interaction have been studied and modeled many times, where dierent
studies have used dierent methods. These methods include questionnaires[22],
radio frequency identication device sensor networks[23], smartphones[24], xed
location sensors[25] and others. These methods each have dierent advantages
and weaknesses, which are summarized in table 2.1, 2.2, 2.3 and 2.4.
==PAGE:22==
10
Setting up the data
Type
Strengths
Weaknesses
Questionnaires
Enables the gathering
of very detailed meta
data on each subject
Requires a lot of work
from the subjects
Is simple to implement
Subjects might give un-
truthful answers
Is
not
dependent
on
complex hardware
Table 2.1: Strengths and weaknesses of questionnaire based data collection
Type
Strengths
Weaknesses
Radio frequency iden-
tication device sensor
networks
Cheap to distribute and
produce
Requires
for
subjects
to acquire and wear a
small sensor all the time
Can collect lots of data
from the subjects, with-
out the subjects have to
do anything
Meta data on the sub-
jects might not be in-
cluded
Works in real time
Hardware
might mal-
function
Table 2.2: Strengths and weaknesses of Radio frequency identication device
sensor networks based data collection
==PAGE:23==
2.1 Collecting the data
11
Type
Strengths
Weaknesses
Smartphones
Easy to scale up, since
most
people
already
carry
a
smartphone
most of the time
Might require custom
made software to be in-
stalled in order to col-
lect specic data (this
might drain the bat-
tery)
Lots of dierent sen-
sors build in (bluetooth,
wi, GPS, accelerome-
ter, etc.)
There are lots of pri-
vacy issues when moni-
toring peoples behavior
through their personal
phone
Can collect and report
data without the sub-
jects have to do any-
thing
Data
collected
from
a
phone
might
not
correspond
to
what
happened
in
a
real
world.
For instance,
if
a
phone's
GPS
is
monitored to determine
where a subject is, but
the
subject
has
left
his/her phone at home
before going to work,
the data will not match
the actual real world
events.
Works in real time
Meta data on the sub-
jects might not be in-
cluded
Hardware
might mal-
function
Table 2.3: Strengths and weaknesses of gathering data with smartphones
==PAGE:24==
12
Setting up the data
Type
Strengths
Weaknesses
Fixed location sensors
Can be used to monitor
lots of subjects in a de-
ned area
It is required for sub-
jects to wear something
that makes them dis-
coverable (e.g. a smart-
phone or laptop)
Can collect and report
data without the sub-
jects have to do any-
thing
Privacy can be an issue,
if people are monitored
without
their
knowl-
edge
Works in real time
Meta data on the sub-
jects might not be in-
cluded
Hardware
might mal-
function
Table 2.4: Strengths and weaknesses of xed location sensors based data collec-
tion
==PAGE:25==
2.2 The raw smartphone data
13
As can be seen in the tables, there are many things to consider when choosing
a data collection method. There is the advantage of going with a device based
approach for constant monitoring of many subjects, with the privacy issues this
might contain, which will generate a lot of data meaning data that is limited
to what the device is able to monitor. On the other hand, there is also the
questionnaire based approach, which can give a lot of very specic data on each
subject. However, this does require more from the subjects, since they each
have to actively ll out such a questionnaire, probably multiple times.
2.1.2
The chosen method
In order to gain the advantages of the methods described in the section above,
two dierent methods are used to get data that is both dense and can be gathered
from lots of subjects. The two methods are questionnaires and data collection
with smartphones. The questionnaires are developed by researchers from the
Department of Public Health, Economy and Psychology, and are all part of the
University of Copenhagen (KU)1. The smartphones are Google Nexus 4s2, with
pre-installed custom software required for the longitudinal data collection. The
data is gathered as part of the SensibleDTU project, a project which aims to
study, model and understand social networks in real time. Since it is a project
based in The Technical University of Denmark (DTU)3, all the subjects are
students from DTU.
As mentioned before, a weakness with the questionnaire based approach is the
amount of work each subject is required to do. In order to get people to ll
out the questionnaires, they can use the Google Nexus 4 smartphone for as long
they study at DTU. Here, they can use it as their own private phone without
having to pay for the it. This is quite a tempting oer for many, especially if
one is a full time student. In fact, this was tempting for over 700 students who
chose to participate in the pilot section of the project.
2.2
The raw smartphone data
As discussed previously, smartphones can be used to gather all sorts of data
from the subjects. This includes, but is not limited to, GPS, Bluetooth, logging
of sms, call data, e-mail logging, and Facebook and other social media (Twitter,
Instagram, Tinder, etc) surveillance. The raw data gathered for the thesis is
1www.ku.dk
2http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nexus4
3www.dtu.dk
==PAGE:26==
14
Setting up the data
based on the bluetooth data. Bluetooth is a technology used for connecting
devices wirelessly, enabling them to send and receive packages over distances up
to 100 meters in industrial use cases, but only around 10 meters in smartphones4.
Each smartphone in the SensibleDTU project is then programmed to scan for
nearby bluetooth devices every 5 minutes. For each scan 3 values are recorded:
1. A unix timestamp.
2. The ID of the smartphone seen in the scan (or -1 if no device was detected
or if the the device seen was not a user).
3. The signal strength (or -1 if no device was detected or if the the device
seen was not a user).
All this data is then uploaded to a central data base, which results in a big
matrix of the raw data. A sample of this data matrix can be seen in table 2.5.
The data used in this thesis is the data gathered from 850 devices over roughly
20 months from September 2013 to May 2015. The complete matrix with data
gathered in this time period results in a data matrix with 101748741 rows.
Timestamp
Device
Seen device
Signal strength
1391872261
10
-1
-1
1391872262
11
12
-87
1391872262
11
13
-94
1391872262
11
12
-86
1391872262
11
13
-96
1391872264
14
-1
-1
Table 2.5: Sample of the raw data collected from the smartphones.
4http://www.bluetooth.com/Pages/Basics.aspx
==PAGE:27==
2.3 Transforming the data
15
2.3
Transforming the data
Given its current state, the raw data is somewhat hard to make sense of. In
this thesis the data is transformed into a format where it is easier to see the
underlying structures. Right now, the data is in a format where each timestamp
for each phone is a separate row in the matrix. The data is converted to a format
where each row is a pair consisting of two devices, here each column is an interval
in time of one hour. A column has a value of 1 if the pair made contact at any
point during that given hour, or 0 otherwise. The matrix is created in such
a way that each pair is only represented once, e.g. the pair containing user
number 2 and user number 3 is only represented as '2,3' and not also as '3,2'.
Meanwhile, it is not possible for devices to be in a pair with itself. A sample of
this pair matrix can be seen in table 2.6.
Pair
2014-02-09 13:00:00
2014-02-09 14:00:00
2014-02-09 15:00:00
'0,1'
0
0
0
'0,2'
1
0
0
'0,3'
0
0
0
'0,4'
1
1
1
'0,5'
0
1
0
Table 2.6: Sample of the pair data created from the raw data.
Since all possible combinations of couples exists in the pair matrix, it is quite
sparse e.g. most entries are zeros. Given that it is not of any interest to study
two people who never have any interactions, or only a couple of interactions
over the 20 month period, all couples are removed if they on average have less
than 1 interaction every fourth day. By doing this, it gives some advantages.
Firstly, it greatly reduces the size of the matrix, which makes it easier to work
with. Secondly, it makes sure only the interesting pairs are left for analysis.
This threshold of one interaction every fourth day gives around 3400 pairs with
enough interactions to make them interesting, which should be adequate for a
thorough analysis. Furthermore, other thresholds were tried out, such as one
interaction on average each day, or each other day. However, due to long breaks
between interactions, as a result of the summer vacation this would not give
enough pairs to analyze.
Moving on, it is now possible to plot some of the pairs to see how they interact
during the course of a semester. Such an interaction plot with 6 random pairs
can be seen in gure 2.1.
It is nice to have data in this format, because it gives an overview of how
people interact during the course of a 20 month period. However, it is very
hard to tell how the pairs interact on a weekly basis. Who has courses on a
==PAGE:28==
16
Setting up the data
Figure 2.1: The interaction of 6 random connected pairs during a 3 month
semester.
Tuesday afternoon? Who lives close enough to each other that their phones
connect during the night? This could be room mates, dorm mates or couples in
a romantic relationship. Furthermore, in order to get an overview of the data
on a shorter time scale, the data is reduced to only show an average semester
week. This representation gives a more in-depth view of the interactions between
pairs, and still enables to show if the pairs in general meet in every week of the
semester, or only in a few weeks. However, it is not possible to see the dierence
between a pair that only meets in the rst week of the semester and a pair that
only meets during the last week of the semester. Yet, this can be seen in the
original, non reduced, data. A plot of the weekly interaction between the 6 pairs
from gure 2.1 can be seen in gure 2.2. Looking at these initial exploratory
plots, there are some things that can already be said about the data:
• The pairs behave dierently from each other.
• Some pairs exhibit a more bursty behavior, meaning that they have many
interactions in short periods of time followed by longer breaks. This notion
of burstiness between interactions will be further explored in section 5.1.
With the data in this format, it is easy to dissect it into parts that can be fed
to the dierent machine learning implementations that will be used to analyze
and cluster the data.
==PAGE:29==
2.3 Transforming the data
17
Figure 2.2: The interaction of the 6 pairs from gure 2.1 during an average
week.
==PAGE:30==
18
Setting up the data
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 3
Data analysis - Theory
Now that the data is transformed into something more manageable, it is time
to look at how the structures in the data will be revealed.
3.1
Why data analysis
A major part of this thesis will revolve around the analysis of data. However,
it is relevant to ask the question what is the what is the point of analyzing data,
and which tools should be used in such a venture?
One often mentioned concept of data analysis is data mining. According to In-
troduction to Data Mining[26] by Pang-Ning Tan, Michael Steinbach and Vipin
Kumar, data mining is:
exploration
analysis, by automatic or semi-automatic means, of
large quantities of data in order to discover meaningful patterns.
The idea of discovering meaningful patterns in large quantities of data is exactly
what is needed. Yet, how does data mining discover these meaningful patterns?
here, the thesis will use and combine two dierent techniques:
==PAGE:32==
20
Data analysis - Theory
1. Network theory
2. Machine learning
The network theory was described already in chapter 1, and with the data
organized as explained in chapter 2, it is possible to create a network with all
the participants as nodes and their relations as edges. What this looks like,
and the structure within this data, will be discussed after the machine learning
methods have been applied to the data.
3.2
Machine learning
This section contains a brief introduction to machine learning and the ideas
behind the models tested and used in this thesis.
Machine learning combines statistical methods with raw computational force,
to discover the underlying structures in data. It is based around the notion that
an algorithm can learn from a data set to build a model, which can tell some-
thing about the underlying structure in the data, or classify/predict a desired
feature of some unseen data. The data is structured in a feature matrix, which
contains all the samples of the data, and the values of each feature for each
sample. These feature matrices can easily be of high dimensionality, with a lot
of features for each sample. In many cases, besides the feature matrix, there is
also the response variable, y. y contains the true value of the samples, and can
be used to train a model, and to evaluate how well the model is performing.
Cases where y is included is called supervised learning, and cases without a
y-vector is called unsupervised learning.
There have been proposed a lot of dierent models for machine learning1, where
each method has its own strengths and weaknesses. The method to chose de-
pends on which type of problem one tries to solve. Common types of problems
these machine learning models tries to solve are classication, regression, clus-
tering, feature extraction and dimensionality reduction. An in-depth description
of the type of problems not used here is beyond the scope of this thesis, and
will be omitted. The type of problem relevant in this thesis is unsupervised
clustering, which will be described in greater detail below.
1http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_machine_learning_concepts
==PAGE:33==
3.2 Machine learning
21
3.2.1
Unsupervised clustering
Clustering is the task of separating data into groups (clusters) that contains
elements which are similar to themselves[27]. Of course 'similar' is an abstract
concept, which can be hard to dene, especially when a computer has to un-
derstand it. In a 2d space, similarity can be dened as the euclidean distance
between two points. An example of what a clustering could look like in a toy
data set with dierent numbers of cluster can be seen in gure 3.1.
(a) 1 cluster (everything is labeled as
the same)
(b) 2 clusters
(c) 3 clusters
(d) 4 clusters
Figure 3.1: 4 gures showing how a toy data set is partitioned, based on the
number of clusters. The challenge of creating a good partition often comes down
to selecting the right number of clusters. In the case above, the intuitive number
of cluster would be 2, since there seems to be 2 clearly separated groups in the
data.
3.2.1.1
Performance evaluation
As seen in gure 3.1, one of the main tasks of unsupervised clustering is choosing
the right number of clusters. When evaluating how well a clustering performs,
==PAGE:34==
22
Data analysis - Theory
two parameters that often are considered are intra cluster distances and inter
cluster distances. The intra cluster distance is dened as the distance between
a point in a cluster and all other points in that cluster. If this distance is very
small for all points in a cluster, it means that the cluster is tightly connected,
suggesting a good t.
The inter cluster distances on the other hand, is the
distance between two dierent clusters.
This distance should be as high as
possible. Figure g:clustermeasuresvisualizestheseconcepts.
Figure 3.2: Visualization of the concepts of intra cluster distances and inter
cluster distances. A good algorithm tries to maximize the inter cluster distances
while minimizing intra cluster distances.
Calculating the average inter cluster distances and intra cluster distances for
all points are used to generate a silhouette score, which is then a single number
telling how good a t is[28].
Such a score is also available for clusters cre-
ated in high dimensional data. Other performance measures[29] includes the
Akaike information criterion (AIC)[30], Schwartz's Bayesian information crite-
rion (BIC)[31], Rissanen's minimum description length (MDL)[32] and perplex-
ity[45].
3.2.2
Clusters in the smartphone data
As mentioned in section 2.3, the remaining pairs in the data exhibits dierent
kinds of behavior. Some pairs only meet at the university during lectures, some
pairs only meet at the student dormitory, and other pairs might only meet at the
Friday bar or during the evenings on weekends. The goal of applying machine
learning to the smartphone data is, to label each pair in the data in a way
==PAGE:35==
3.2 Machine learning
23
that makes sense. That is, a pair might be labeled as a social pair, study pair,
romantic relation, dorm mates, etc. depending on what it is possible to model
from the data. To clarify, the model groups pairs together that behave similarly,
and then it is up to an external human supervisor to inspect what these pairs
have in common, and give them a label accordingly. As mentioned above, there
are several dierent models that can be applied, to split the data in the clusters.
In the thesis, three dierent models will be described and tried out on the data.
These models will be described in the section below.
3.2.3
Model theory
The models that will be tested on the smartphone data are:
• K-means clustering[33]
• Probabilistic latent semantic analysis[40]
• Latent Dirichlet allocation[45]
All of the models can compute a classication for the pairs in the data, making
them unsupervised learning algorithms. Probabilistic latent semantic analysis
(pLSA) and latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) are also what is called topic mod-
els, which as the name suggests, is a model that can nd underlying topics in the
data, which in this case are the archetypical types of behavior people exhibit in
terms of temporal interactions. Topic models were initially developed to nd un-
derlying topics in collections of text documents, which might not initially sound
similar to classifying types of behavior between peers, but the data describing a
collection of documents and the bluetooth data are actually surprisingly similar.
In topic models, a text document is only described with words counts (often in
a tfidf format[34]), reducing each document to a sparse vector of integers. The
idea is that documents that are on the same topics, will have similar word counts
and can therefore be identied as being related. This idea will be applied to the
bluetooth data where each pair is exactly a sparse vector of integers, not with
word counts, but with interaction counts during the period of the data collection.
pLSA and LDA are also generative mixed membership models, where LDA gives
the most exible solution. Thus, it is expected that LDA is the most suitable
model for this data, and is therefore chosen as the nal model. The k-means
model will be used to see how well the simplest possible model can portrait
the data, even though the mathematics behind the other models suits the data
better. These models, along with the appropriate concepts, are described in
==PAGE:36==
24
Data analysis - Theory
greater detail further down. Note that it is not the goal of this thesis to expand
or improve the standard Python implementations of any of the models.
Since the data relevant for this thesis is the smartphone data, containing pairs
as entries, with interactions at given periods in time as features, these notations
are also used when describing the models. Note that in scientic literature, the
terminology used to describe such models are often based on text classication.
Therefore, in this thesis the notion of a text corpus is equal to the smartphone
data matrix, a document is a pair, a word is a feature (or an interaction or lack
thereof at a given time), and a topic is a cluster.
Below, the core concepts of each model are explained.
3.2.3.1
K-means clustering
K-means clustering is the simplest and most intuitive of the models. As opposed
to the other models, it is not probabilistic, and does not make any assumptions
on the data. It is an iterative process that rst select k random observations,
where k is the desired number of clusters, as centers for each cluster (known as
the centroid). An observation in this data is a single pair. After that it follows
the following process:
• Assign each other observation in the same cluster as the closest centroid.
• Select a new observation as centroid, such that this node is in the center
of the cluster generated in the previous step.
These two steps repeat until the centroids no longer change. This method makes
intuitive sense in a 2d space, but easily scales up to higher dimensions. The
method is simple to implement, but can take long time to compute, is sensitive
to outliers, and is not suited to some types of data. It is also not obvious what
distance measure should be chosen to decide how to compute which centroid
is the closest. In this thesis, the Python package sklearn.cluster.KMeans2 is
used as the k-means clustering implementation. As opposed to the other mod-
els, k-means clustering assigns each pair to exactly one cluster (it gives a hard
assignment of pairs).
2http://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.cluster.KMeans.html
==PAGE:37==
3.2 Machine learning
25
3.2.3.2
Probabilistic latent semantic analysis and latent Dirichlet
allocation
Since pLSA and LDA are quite similar they will be described in the same sec-
tion, which will outline the core concepts used in the models, along with their
similarities and dierences. A more thorough comparison of pLSA and LDA
can be read in [48], which is an article dedicated to the topic. Both models are
originally thought of as methods of detecting topics in document corpora, and
are therefore suitable for sparse data. It is expected that the smartphone data
also exhibits sparsity, and should be suited well for these models.
3.2.3.3
Core concepts for generative mixed membership topic mod-
eling
This section is dedicated to describing the concepts used to explain pLSA and
LDA. These concepts are:
• Mixed membership topic models
• Generative modeling
• Latent variables
• Mixed membership model notation
• Plate notation
Mixed membership topic models. As opposed to the k-means clustering,
a mixed membership topic model is a model where each pair can be a part of
dierent clusters (a soft assignments of pairs). This makes sense, since it is easy
to imagine a pair that both studies together and are friends in general. In this
model, a cluster is now dened as a collection of all features, with dierent prob-
abilities. This means, that a cluster describing pairs who have classes Monday
from 9-12 will have a high probability of these features, and low probability of
other features, for instance Friday 17-22.
Generative modeling. In the context of the smartphone data, a generative
model is a model that can infer new pairs, given some hidden parameters. How
the new pairs are generated, and how the model estimates these parameters
is what separates the models from each other. Figure 3.3 shows how a text
document can be composed by drawing dierent words, which are drawn from
==PAGE:38==
26
Data analysis - Theory
dierent topics with a certain probability, given that hidden model parameters
are known.
Figure 3.3: This gure shows how a text document can be generated by drawing
words from dierent topics. The document is composed of a proportion of topics,
here, shown as a bar plot to the right. Each topic contains all possible words,
with dierent probabilities. Some words will carry high semantic meaning in a
given topic, and will therefore be likely to be drawn, if that topic is selected.
Thus, to generate a document, for each word, a topic is chosen with a probability
equivalent to the height of the bars in the plot to the right, and from that
topic, a word is drawn. In this way, a document will consist of words from
dierent topics, hence it is a mixed membership model. Note that this is not a
technique used to actually generate new documents, it is only the idea behind
describing documents. In pLSA and LDA this process is reversed, to see which
topics each document is composed of. Also note, that the true topic proportions
are not viable to compute, and are therefore estimated. This gure is found in
David Blei's slides in his presentation on Topic Models, at the Machine Learning
Summer School (MLSS), Cambridge 20093.
Latent variables. That a variable is latent means that it is hidden or un-
known. In the context of document topic modeling, as seen in gure 3.3, the
latent variables are the topics (how they rank each word) and the topic distri-
bution for each document. The word variables are said to be known, since they
can be read directly in each document, and hence are not latent.
==PAGE:39==
3.2 Machine learning
27
Mixed membership model notation.
In order to more formally describe
mixed membership models, a general notation is introduced[45]:
M
=
The number of all pairs
D
=
The collection of all pairs, denoted {w1, w2, ..., wM}
wm =
A pair, denoted {w1, w2, ..., wN} , where n = 0...N
N
=
Number of features in a pair
wn
=
A single feature, where n = 0...N
Z
=
Number of clusters
β
=
The collection of all clusters
θm
=
The cluster distribution parameter associated with pair m = 0...M
It should be noted that this terminology might dier from other terminologies
used in the scientic literature to describe this topic, as there does not seem
to be an ocial agreement on which symbols to use when describing mixed
membership models.
Plate notation.
Plate notation is used as a graphical way of representing
graphical models[47]. Both pLSA and LDA can be shown as graphical models,
but a further discussion of graphical models is omitted.
Plate notation can
be used to show how variables (such as words) are drawn from other variables
(such as a topic), and how dierent variables are conditioned on each other.
It is also easy to show if a variable is latent or not. Even though it can help
with the understanding of a model to create a graphical representation, plate
notation has also received criticism4 for making more complex models harder to
understand by trying to visualize them. However, both LDA and pLSA requires
relatively few steps to explain, and are suited just ne for plate notation. After
LDA and pLSA have been formally described, they are also shown with plate
notation.
3.2.3.4
pLSA
pLSA was developed by Thomas Homan in 1999[40], and is designed to provide
a more statistical sound solution to the same range of problems that Latent
Semantic Analysis was developed to solve.
In order to describe a generative mixed membership model, it is often easiest to
3http://videolectures.net/mlss09uk_blei_tm/
4http://zinkov.com/posts/2013-07-28-stop-using-plates/
==PAGE:40==
28
Data analysis - Theory
see how the model tries to generate the given data. In this context, the model
uses the latent variables to draw the features of the pairs from the hidden
distributions. The generative process of a pair in pLSA is as follows[46]:
• Select a pair w
• For each feature w in the pair:
 Choose a cluster, zn, from a multinomial distribution conditioned on
the chosen pair, i.e., drawn from p(k|w)
 Select a feature with a given value, wv, from a multinomial distribu-
tion conditioned on the chosen cluster, i.e., drawn from p(w|zn)
A plate notation representation of pLSA can be seen in gure 3.4.
pLSA provides a good way of statistically modeling topics by their underlying
structure, however, it has some aws as pointed out by David M. Blei, Andrew
Y. Ng and Michael I. Jordan in their paper on LDA[45]. In pLSA each pair is
modeled as a mixture of components of varying size of dierent clusters. Yet,
the size of the cluster components for each pair is not computed with generative
probabilistic model, which makes the model likely to overt, since the number
of parameters in the model grows linearly with the size of the data set.
Figure 3.4: Plate notation of the pLSA model. The number (Nd and M ) in the
right hand corner of each plate indicates how many times a process is repeated.
The outer plate shows that a pair is drawn M times, and for each pair, a feature,
w, is drawn N times from the cluster z, which is then conditioned on the pair
W . Note that the z circle is white because it is latent, and W and W are grey
because they are observed. The gure is taken from [46].
3.2.3.5
LDA
As pointed out above, pLSA has some issues. In order to address these issues,
the LDA model was developed as a more exible version of pLSA. The generative
==PAGE:41==
3.2 Machine learning
29
process of LDA for describing a pair, as described in [45], is:
• Choose N ∼Poisson(ζ)
• Choose θ ∼Dir(α)
• For each N feature in the pair:
 Select a cluster zn from Multinomial(θ)
 Select a feature, wn, from p(wn|zn, β), which is a multinomial prob-
ability conditioned on the topic zn
The plate notation for LDA is shown i gure 3.5.
In this model, α is a Dirichlet parameter, and remember that β is the col-
lection of all clusters.
Figure 3.5: Plate notation of the LDA model. Here a feature is drawn from
the multinomial distribution p(wn|zn, β), where wn is conditioned on zn and β,
which can be seen by the two arrows from z and β going towards the observable
w circle. z (the given cluster for that feature) is drawn from the distribution of
clusters for the given pair, θm.
Now the basics of the LDA are described, but there are still some blank spots:
• The roles of α and Dirichlet distribution are not clear yet.
• Up until now, it is assumed that the true distributions for everything (the
features in the cluster, the per-pair cluster assignments, etc.) is either
known or perfectly computed. However, since this is it not possible, they
must be estimated.
==PAGE:42==
30
Data analysis - Theory
All these topics are described below.
The Dirichlet distribution. In the LDA model, the variable θm is basically
what denes pair wm, since it contains the distribution of clusters for that pair.
θ itself is represented on what is called the simplex[45], which is the space of
positive vectors that sum to one5. A θ of length Z is said to lie on the (Z-1)-
dimensional probability simplex. The Dirichlet distribution is an exponential
family over the simplex, which density is dened as:
p(θ|⃗α) = Γ(P
i αi)
Q
i Γ(αi)
Y
i
θαi−1
i
(3.2)
and is parameterized by α.
The parameter α is a vector of Z integers ≥1, that controls the shape of the
Dirichlet distribution, from which the per-pair cluster distributions are drawn.
Examples of how this distribution can look, given dierent values for α on the
3 −1-dimensional probability simplex, is shown in gure 3.6.
Parameter estimation. The nal part of the model description is on parame-
ter estimation. The parameters of the model are α and β, and even though they
are intractable to compute, they can be estimated with a variety of methods.
Blei, Ng and Jordan[45] introduces variational inference for parameter estima-
tion. The Python implementation of LDA uses Gibbs sampling. This method
will briey be described.
Gibbs sampling is a general method for probabilistic inference. It is a method
for transitioning through the states of a Markov Chain (MC). A MC is a proce-
dure used for drawing random variables from a probability distribution, in order
to converge at the target distribution[50]. A state in the chain is an assignment
of the variables being sampled. A thorough discussion of how this is applied for
LDA can be read in [51].
3.2.3.6
Performance evaluation for LDA
As mentioned in section 3.2.1.1, there are many ways of evaluating these types
of models. The parameter to be evaluated is in this case the number of clusters
to be found. Or in other words, how many dierent types of pairs should there
5https://www.cs.princeton.edu/courses/archive/fall11/cos597C/lectures/mixed-
membership.pdf
6http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dirichlet_distribution
==PAGE:43==
3.2 Machine learning
31
Figure 3.6: 4 examples of the Dirichlet distribution on the 3 −1-dimensional
probability simplex6. Values for α, clockwise from the top left, are: {6, 2, 2},
{3, 7, 5}, {6, 2, 6} and {2, 3, 4}.
be in the data. For LDA this can be done with perplexity. The perplexity is a
measure for how well a model ts a held out test set of the data. In general, it
is dened as:
perplexity(Dtest) = exp
(
−
PM
d=1 log p(wd|β, α)
PM
d=1 Nd
)
(3.3)
Here, it looks at the log likelihood of the unseen documents, if they had been
drawn from a distribution with parameters α and β. This probability is not
directly computable, but can be estimated in a number of ways[52].
3.2.3.7
Probabilistic latent semantic analysis and latent Dirichlet
allocation, revisited
To get a better understanding of how pLSA and LDA diers, [45] provides an
illustration showing how a pair can be modeled by features and clusters, shown
==PAGE:44==
32
Data analysis - Theory
as a 2d simplex with 3 clusters described by a distribution of 3 features. This
illustration is shown in gure 3.7.
Figure 3.7: A cluster simplex of 3 clusters represented by a feature simplex with
3 features. Both models allow for multiple clusters for each pair, but in pLSA
each pair is only allowed to be at a one of the specied points within the cluster
simplex. In LDA, however, a pair can be placed at any point in the cluster
simplex.
==PAGE:45==
3.3 Summary of models theory
33
3.3
Summary of models theory
With the theory behind each model in place, it will briey be repeated why
the LDA model is chosen as the preferred model. First of all, it creates the
archetypical pairs that each pair is labeled after. This is similar to what k-
means does, but where k-means did a hard assignment allowing each pair to
be classied as the archetype it is most similar to, LDA allows for each pair
to be labeled with several labels, composed of fractions of each archetype. As
mentioned, this soft assignment is a realistic interpretation of how pairs behave
in the real world.
This is similar to what pLSA can do, but since LDA is
supposed to be a superior, or at least more exible, version of pLSA[45], LDA
will be used for the nal model.
==PAGE:46==
34
Data analysis - Theory
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 4
Inferring friendships
With the theoretical framework outlined in chapter 3, it is time to apply the
theory to the actual data and visualize the results.
4.1
Visualizing the models
When visualizing the tested models, 3 dierent plots will be made for each
model:
1. The components of the model
2. How the model splits the pairs it is trained on (the seen pairs)
3. How the model splits unseen pairs
This gives a graphical overview of the clusters found by each model, and a way
of seeing how well it generalizes to unseen data. In order to inspect the clusters
found by the dierent models, a relatively high number of clusters, namely 8, are
selected for the models to nd, for this initial inspection. The models are tested
==PAGE:48==
36
Inferring friendships
on the full data, for all 20 months, instead of the compressed 1-week data. This
is to ensure some sparsity in the data, which suits pLSA and LDA better, and to
make sure yearly events such as exam periods, semesters and vacations are also
being considered by the models. When inspecting the smartphone data, it made
sense to reduce it from 20 months to 1 average week. This reduction method will
also be applied to the visualizations of the model components and the clustered
pairs, to show how the models score dierent times of day dierently based on
the cluster.
Below are some brief sections that describe each type of visualization for each
model, followed by a section for each model with the actual visualizations.
The model components. When training a model on data, it will nd scores
for all the features of the data for each cluster. Thus, if a model with 8 clusters
is trained on the smartphone data, it will have 8 scores, for each hour in the 20
month period. By inspecting these scores, one can see how the model prioritizes
dierent features of the data based on the cluster. Even though the models are
trained on the full data, the visualizations will show an average week.
Splitting the seen pairs. As described in section 3.2, the dierent models
split the data in dierent ways. Namely, by either doing a hard or soft assign-
ment. A hard assignment would assign exactly one cluster per pair, while a
soft assignment gives fractions of clusters to each pair, to indicate how much
they belong to each cluster. The k-means model does a hard assignment, and
pLSA and LDA does a soft one. Meanwhile, when the k-means model have been
trained, the split is made and each pair is plotted with pairs of the same cluster.
In pLSA and LDA each pair is assigned to the cluster the pair belongs the most
to. This soft assignment can also be used to see how well each pair t the cluster
it is assigned to. For instance, if a model has been trained to split the data into
2 clusters, and a pair belongs 45% to cluster 1 and 55% to cluster 2, the split
is not very good at dening the pair. Yet, if pairs in general belong to mainly
one cluster, they are better separated. How the pairs belong to each cluster in
the nal model is analyzed later.
Splitting the unseen pairs. As is often the case in machine learning, it is
important to have a model that generalizes well to unseen data. A model might
perfectly t the data it has been trained on, but if it does not have the exibility
to handle unseen data it is of little worth, this is also known as overtting. In
this project, the models are trained on 75% of the pairs, and tested on the rest.
In practice, the models have build in functions to take new data as input, and
give an either hard or soft assignment (depending on the model) of the data,
which can then be plotted as described in the section above.
==PAGE:49==
4.1 Visualizing the models
37
4.1.1
K-means
Starting with the simplest of the models, the model components of the tted
k-means model, the classication of the seen pairs and the classication of the
unseen pairs can be seen in gure 4.1, 4.2 and 4.3, respectively. In general, the
split created by this model looks quite good. It nds the pairs that meet during
university hours and groups them together. There are two of the eight compo-
nents that model social interaction, namely the yellow and orange components.
However, there is the brown component, which seems to capture interaction
during all times of the week. A suggestion for the reason behind this could be
that it captures pairs that stay together for a week or more during the summer
vacation. To examine this hypothesis the components are again inspected, but
this time during all 20 months instead of just a single week (see appendix 9.1).
From there it can be seen that no component places all its mass during the sum-
mer vacation. To summarize the k-means model, it performs quite well despite
being the simplest of the models, giving an interpretable and meaningful result.
==PAGE:50==
38
Inferring friendships
Figure 4.1: Scores for each component in the k-means model with 8 components.
Note that cluster 1, 2, 5 and 8 (purple, green, blue and black) captures the
behavior of pairs that meet during weekdays from 8-17. The other components
captures the behavior of pairs that meet outside of class, indicating a social
relationship. To summarize each component, starting from the top:
1. A study component, with small peaks at Monday afternoon, Tuesday af-
ternoon and Friday Morning
2. A study component
3. A social component with peak activity during the evening and night. The
high values between midnight and 6 in the morning suggests this compo-
nent captures pairs that live close enough to each other that their phones
connect during the night e.g. dorm mates or couples in a romantic rela-
tionship
4. A component capturing pairs that does not share much interaction during
the 20 month period, but still enough interaction that they are considered.
The fact that there is no distinction between the time of day, suggests that
pairs in this component only meet once a year for a vacation together.
5. A study component, with small peaks at Monday morning, Tuesday morn-
ing, Wednesday morning and Thursday afternoon.
6. A study component, with small peaks at Monday morning, Tuesday morn-
ing and Wednesday morning
7. A social component, capturing activity outside of university hours
8. A study component
==PAGE:51==
4.1 Visualizing the models
39
Figure 4.2: The seen pairs as classied by the k-means model. Notice how they
align with the model components in gure 4.1.
Figure 4.3: The unseen pairs as classied by the k-means model. Even though
the model is not trained on these pairs, it is still able to group pairs that are
similar together.
==PAGE:52==
40
Inferring friendships
4.1.2
pLSA
Next in line is the pLSA model. The resulting components and classication of
seen and unseen pairs can be seen in gure 4.4, 4.5 and 4.6. Inspecting these
plots tells much of the same story as the k-means model. That is that there
are components that describe social activity, components that describe study
activity, and a single component (the violet) that can't be classied as either
social or study, since it has activity during all daytime hours. When inspecting
the classied pairs, both seen and unseen, it can be seen that the pairs in the
study components behave more similar to each other than pairs in the social
components. This suggests that pairs that are study related behave in more
predictable patterns, while social pairs varies more from pair to pair.
==PAGE:53==
4.1 Visualizing the models
41
Figure 4.4: Scores for each component in the pLSA model. Some of the compo-
nents in this model are pure, in terms that they contain either study behavior or
social behavior. Yet, there is a component that contains both social and study
type behavior. Starting from the top, each component can be summarized as:
1. This component mainly captures activity during the daytime
2. This component only has real values outside of university hours, making
it a social component
3. A highly study-related component, capturing activity only during univer-
sity hours
4. A social component, similar to the green component
5. A study component, similar to the orange component in many ways, but
with small peaks during the afternoon on Mondays, Tuesdays and Wednes-
days, and Friday morning
6. A study component with peaks similar to the blue component
7. A study component, with peaks in opposite times of day compared to the
blue and yellow components
8. A social component, similar to the green and brown components
==PAGE:54==
42
Inferring friendships
Figure 4.5: The seen pairs as classied by the pLSA model.
Figure 4.6: The unseen pairs as classied by the pLSA model.
==PAGE:55==
4.1 Visualizing the models
43
4.1.3
LDA
Finally comes the results from the LDA model, which were predicted to be
the model that would best describe the data.
The model components, the
classication of the seen pairs, and the classication of the unseen pairs can be
seen in gure 4.7, 4.8 and 4.9, respectively. Looking at the model components,
there are 2 components that seem to model real social interaction, namely the
orange and brown components. The black pairs do not have any weekly patterns,
besides that they have a little interaction evenly distributed, which resembles the
brown and violet components from the k-means and pLSA models, respectively.
==PAGE:56==
44
Inferring friendships
Figure 4.7: The 8 components captured by the LDA model. The model mainly
splits the components into those with focus on pairs that study together, and
those that do not study together. From the top, these components captures:
1. A study component with peaks at Monday afternoon, Thursday morning
and Friday morning
2. A study component with peaks at Monday afternoon, Tuesday afternoon,
and Friday morning
3. A social component with activity outside of University hours
4. A social component similar to the orange component
5. A study component, with peaks at Monday morning, Tuesday morning,
Wednesday morning and Thursday afternoon
6. A study component with peaks at Monday afternoon, Tuesday afternoon,
Wednesday afternoon and Friday morning
7. A social component similar to the orange and brown components
8. A component with scores evenly distributed along the week, but with a
small bump at Friday afternoon/evening, which suggests that this compo-
nent captures pairs that meet in the Friday bar
==PAGE:57==
4.1 Visualizing the models
45
Figure 4.8: The seen pairs as classied by the LDA model. Notice that even
though the black component in gure 4.7 showed promise of capturing behavior
of pairs that meet in the Friday bar, the pairs classied as belonging to the black
components cannot conrm this.
Figure 4.9: The unseen pairs as classied by the LDA model.
==PAGE:58==
46
Inferring friendships
4.2
Summary comparison of the models
Before moving on to nding a nal model, here is a brief summary of how the
3 models performed. pLSA and LDA both found four study components, three
social component and one component that were was neither study or social.
K-means did perform quite similarly with ve study components, two social
components and a single component which was neither study or social. Thus,
all models agree on the basic structure on the data, and all models create mean-
ingful and interpretable splits of both the seen and unseen pairs. As described in
chapter 3, the soft assignment and exibility given by the LDA model seems to
give it some edge over the other models. The remaining analysis will therefore
be done with this model.
4.3
Evaluating the LDA model
After, choosing the LDA model as the desired approach to model this data, it
is time to evaluate the t to nd the correct number of clusters. As described
in section 3.2.3.6, the LDA model can be evaluated using perplexity, which is
a measure for how well unseen data suits the generated model. For a thorough
analysis of this perplexity, models with clusters 1 to 20 are evaluated using 10
fold cross validation (CV ). Here each model is created three times, to account
for the randomness in the model. A model with i.e. 5 clusters is said to be a
model of size 5. This CV process described in pseudo code is:
• For models of size 1 to 20:
• Create a model using 90% of the data (the training data) and compute
perplexity using the remaining 10% (the test data)
• Do this a total of 3 times with the given training and test data
• Do this 10 times, using new data for training and computing perplexity
each time, for all data to be used for training 9 times and testing a single
time
• The nal perplexity score for a model of a given size is then the average
of the perplexity scores for that model
This gives a total of 30 perplexity scores for each model with a given size, which
gives a total of 30 · 20 = 600 perplexity scores. Note that when the data is split
==PAGE:59==
4.3 Evaluating the LDA model
47
into 90% training data and 10% test data, the data is rst shued to make
sure that the ordering of the pairs does not have an eect of the model. There
are a couple of reasons to do that many perplexity scores for each model. In
this way, CV makes sure all data has been used for both training and testing.
Meanwhile, it also makes it possible to see how much the perplexity varies for
models of the same size. If the perplexity scores for a given model size varies
a lot it can indicate very noisy data, where the shape of the clusters are very
dependent on what data is used for training and what data is used for testing.
Figure 4.10 shows the average perplexity score for each model, along with error-
bars for the rst and third quartiles. According to this gure, the best number
of clusters for the LDA model is around 5, which will be investigated further.
Besides looking at perplexity for evaluating the model, it is also possible to look
at the log likelihood for the generated model. This looks at the probability for
the data to have been generated under the given model. Since this measure
is evaluated on the same data the model has been trained on, it might not be
reliable if the model is prone to overt. Figure 4.11 shows a gure visualizing
the log likelihoods for each model. The log likelihoods are computed for the
same models as the perplexity scores, and are visualized in the same fashion.
Inspecting this plot reveals roughly the same structure as in the perplexity plot,
namely that 5 or 6 clusters seem to be a reasonable number of clusters.
Figure 4.10: Average perplexity scores for models of dierent size. Here, a lower
score indicate a better t. Note that it keeps getting better and better when
adding more clusters, but from around 5 clusters, the gain is roughly constant
for each added cluster. A model with 5 clusters will therefore be inspected.
Also, note that the bars for the rst and third quartiles are quite close to the
average score.
==PAGE:60==
48
Inferring friendships
Figure 4.11: The log likelihood values for the same models as in gure 4.10.
Here, higher log likelihood indicate a better t. The log likelihood does not
reach a global minimum at any of the models, but it increases at a constant
rate from around 5 or 6 clusters, which is consistent with the results gained by
inspecting the perplexity.
==PAGE:61==
4.3 Evaluating the LDA model
49
4.3.1
LDA with 5 components
As seen in the section above the best number of clusters, according to perplexity,
in the LDA model is 5. The components of this model can be seen in gure 4.12.
The resulting classication of the seen and unseen pairs is supplied in appendix
9.2. As was the case with the models with 8 components, there are a lot of
redundancy between the components. Component number 1 and 5, and 2 and 4
are almost similar, where 1 and 5 describes study behavior and 2 and 4 captures
social behavior. Component 3 is similar to the in-between components from the
other models, capturing a behavior that is neither study nor social. It is clear
that it should be possible to reduce the number of components, without losing a
signicant amount of information, where a possible choice is three components
with one study, one social and one in between component.
However, the nal part of the analysis will inspect a model with only two com-
ponents, to create a single split that separates the social pairs from the study
pairs. The third group with pairs that behave neither as social nor study pairs
will have to be split, as good as possible by the model.
Figure 4.12: The components of the 5 component LDA model.
This model
consists of two study components, two social components and one component
that is in between. Notice that their still is redundancy between the components.
==PAGE:62==
50
Inferring friendships
4.4
The nal model - LDA with 2 components
In this thesis, one of the goals is to be able to nd all the pairs that display
real social interaction and separate them, not only from all the pairs that never
interact, but also from the pairs that do interact, just not in any social mean-
ingful way e.g. pairs that study together. As can be seen in the LDA model
with 8 and 5 components, it is indeed possible to create a split that separates
the pairs with social interaction from the pairs that only study together.
This split is now further explored in a 2-cluster LDA model. The components
of this 2-cluster model, the classication of the seen pairs and the classication
of the unseen pairs can be seen in gure 4.13, 4.14 and 4.15, respectively.
Figure 4.13: The shape of the components in the LDA model with 2 components.
Notice the nice split between the 2 components based on the time of day and
day of the week.
Inspecting these gures (4.13, 4.14 and 4.15) reveals that it is indeed possible
to create a split that groups together the pairs with real social interaction in a
single cluster.
Now that this split has been created, the next following sections will further
visualize and analyze each of the 2 groups.
4.4.1
Visualizing the components
When inspecting the models, as done in section 4.4, the pairs and their temporal
activity were displayed. Now the focus will instead be on the individual people
==PAGE:63==
4.4 The nal model - LDA with 2 components
51
Figure 4.14: The seen pairs as classied by the model.
Figure 4.15: The unseen pairs as classied by the model.
in the data set, and the type of connections each person has.
Showing the two components as done earlier shows how the two groups dif-
ferentiate in temporal interaction. However, it is hard to tell anything about
the internal structure of each group from these plots, e. how big is each group?
How many social relations are there, compared to the number of study relations?
How tightly do the groups cluster within themselves? Do some people only have
study relations? As mentioned in the introduction of this thesis, being able to
visualize a complex network is a powerful tool, which will now be utilized to
answer the above mentioned questions. Earlier in the paper it was mentioned
==PAGE:64==
52
Inferring friendships
how a single person could be represented as a node in a network, and a relation
between two nodes is an edge. Both the social and the study component will be
visualized independently. However, each person will be present in both graphs,
to see if there are some people that only have one type of relationship. In ap-
pendix 9.3 a graph for the complete network with both relationships included,
and the corresponding summary statistics can be seen.
4.4.1.1
The social component
The social component can be seen visualized in a network in gure 4.16, and
the related summary statistics can be seen in table 4.1. Inspecting this network
and the summary statistics reveals some interesting points:
• On average, people have 2 social relations within the data.
• There is a big dierence in the number of social ties people have, with the
maximum being 12 relations and the minimum being 0.
• There are quite a few who have no social interactions at all.
==PAGE:65==
4.4 The nal model - LDA with 2 components
53
Figure 4.16: The graph of the social component. Each node is a person, and
an edge between two nodes indicates that their relationship has been classied
as social by the 2-cluster LDA model. The size and color of a node indicates
how many edges it has. The biggest/darkest nodes have 12 edges. Notice that
there are a lot of nodes without any edges. This means that, according to the
model, there are people in the data who only interact with their peers in a study
context.
==PAGE:66==
54
Inferring friendships
Table 4.1: Summary statistics for the social component. The distributions for
these values can be seen in appendix 9.4.
Number of nodes
680
Number of edges
668
Average node degree
1.965
Number of connected components
287
Average clustering coecient
0.024
4.4.1.2
The study component
The study component is visualized in gure 4.17, and summarized in table 4.2.
The network has the following characteristics:
• The giant component is clustered in smaller, tightly connected compo-
nents. This could show the dierent study lines at DTU, but it is not
explored further. This can be seen both in a visual inspection of the net-
work, but also from the fact that the average clustering coecient is 0.148,
compared to 0.024 in the social component.
• There are some people that only have social interaction with their peers.
• On average, people have eight study relations. However, as seen in gure
9.10 in appendix 9.5, the most common number of connections is actually
two.
• The highest number of study relations for a single person is 33.
==PAGE:67==
4.4 The nal model - LDA with 2 components
55
Figure 4.17: The graph of the study component. Each node is a person, and
an edge between two nodes indicates that their relationship has been classied
as study related by the 2-cluster LDA model. The size and color of a node
indicates how many edges it has. The biggest/darkest nodes have 33 edges.
==PAGE:68==
56
Inferring friendships
Table 4.2: Summary statistics for the study component. The distributions for
these values can be seen in appendix 9.5.
Number of nodes
680
Number of edges
2794
Average node degree
8.218
Number of connected components
43
Average clustering coecient
0.148
4.4.1.3
Summary comparison of the two networks
The two networks described in the section above vary in quite a lot of parame-
ters, which are summarized here:
• The average clustering coecient of the study network is 0.148 compared
to 0.024 of the social network, which makes sense since study interactions
are bound by structured factors such as lectures and classes, binding the
same group of people together. These groups can then actually be seen in
the study network.
• People have more study relations than social relations. This make sense,
since when you sit together in class your smartphone is likely to connect
to many of your class mates, where social interactions often happens with
fewer people involved.
• The average node degree of the social network is quite low, which limits
the possibility for clustering.
• Social interactions are not bound by anything but the peers' desire to meet,
which limits the clustering of the network and the number of connections
each person have.
4.4.2
The purity of the pair labeling
As discussed previously, the soft assignment of the LDA model allows for an
inspection of each pair's relationship with each component. This makes it pos-
sible to evaluate how pure each pair is. Here, pure means that a pair primarily
belongs to a single component. Figure 4.18 shows the histogram of all pairs'
fraction of the social component. The corresponding gure for the study com-
ponent is omitted, since it is just the mirrored version of gure 4.18. Examining
the histogram of the relationships with the social component reveals that there
==PAGE:69==
4.5 Summarizing the results
57
are way more study pairs than social pairs. This can be seen from the fact that
most pairs have a score between 0.0 and 0.1 in the social component. It also
reveals that the pairs tend to be quite pure. This can be seen from that the
highest bars are either around 0.0 or 1.0. There are some pairs in the middle
of the scale that cannot classied as either social or study related. However,
since this is the case for relatively few pairs, the conclusion is that the pairs in
general are pure.
Figure 4.18: The histogram of how much each pair belongs to the social com-
ponent.
4.5
Summarizing the results
This chapter has shown the process of using three dierent models on the smart-
phone data set, on to selecting a nal model and evaluating this based on both
perplexity and log likelihood. A choice is then made to reduce the 5-cluster LDA
model found by model selection to a 2-cluster LDA model for a model that ex-
==PAGE:70==
58
Inferring friendships
actly labels pairs as either social or study related. This nal model could indeed
separate the two types of pairs in the data, solely from the bluetooth activity of
the participants' smartphones. That split is then visualized in a range of ways to
highlight the behavior of the two components on a weekly basis (4.13), to show
the structure of the complete complex network of each group (4.16 and 4.17),
to inspect the purity of the split (4.18), to analyze and compare the burstiness
of each group (5.4), and nally to see how the pairs behavior over the entire 20
month period related to their labeling (5.5).
==PAGE:71==
Chapter 5
Applications
The previous chapter told the story of how it is possible to split the data based
on the longitudinal bluetooth data. This chapter will go a step further and look
at the possible applications from being able to nd the social and study rela-
tionships. In particular this thesis will explore the burstiness in the interevent
times of the pairs, and the possibility of dynamically changing the labels of the
individual pairs based on their monthly behavior is shown.
5.1
Burstiness in the interevent times
As already mentioned in chapter 2 when describing the data, pairs interact in
short bursty periods of time followed by longer breaks between interaction (the
interevent time). The theoretical foundation behind this notion of burstiness
will be laid out, and followed by a section where the theory is applied to analyze
the burstiness of the two components of the model.
==PAGE:72==
60
Applications
5.1.1
Burstiness - Theory
There are a wide range of naturally occurring phenomena which activity dis-
plays a bursty nature, i.e. a short periods with high activity followed by longer
periods with low activity, or no activity at all. These phenomena ranges from
earthquakes, to e-mail communication or human interaction[53]. A way to look
at this burstiness is to inspect the distribution of the lengths of breaks between
events.
Highly bursty processes will have many breaks of small lengths, in-
dicating brief periods of high activity, but also a few long breaks in between.
This is also described as a heavy tail behavior in the interevent time distribu-
tion. Without the modeling, it is already possible to do some inspection of the
burstiness in the data. Figure 5.1 shows the interaction of a single pair over 20
months. Just by visual inspection, the bursty behavior becomes apparent. The
distribution of interevent times for this given pair is shown in gure 5.2, where
the heavy tailed nature of the distribution can be seen.
Figure 5.1: The interactions of a single pair during 20 months. Notice the bursty
behavior.
Figure 5.2: The distribution of interevent times for the pair shown in gure 5.1.
Notice the heavy tailed behavior.
==PAGE:73==
5.1 Burstiness in the interevent times
61
A way to quantify this burstiness is by looking at the burstiness parameter B
as proposed in [53]. B is dened as:
B = στ/mτ −1
στ/mτ + 1 = στ −mτ
στ + mτ
(5.1)
mτ and στ is the mean and standard deviation of P(τ), respectively. P(τ) is the
distribution of interevent times for a given pair (or as described in the scientic
literature: a given signal). B ranges from −1 to 1, where −1 indicates a highly
non bursty (or regular) signal and 1 indicates a highly bursty signal. The B
value for the pair shown in gure 5.1 and 5.2 is 0.71, which expectedly describes
the behavior of the pair as quite bursty.
5.1.2
Burstiness - Application
Figure 5.2 showed the distribution of the interevent times for a randomly selected
pair. Now a similar plot is made with the interevent times for all pairs in the
social component and all pairs in the study component, to see if there is a
consistent dierence between the two (gure 5.3). Inspecting this plot reveals
that pairs in the social component have a higher amount of interevent times
between interactions. This suggests a more bursty behavior, which is conrmed
in gure 5.4 where the distribution of B scores for social pairs lies around a higher
mean than for study pairs (0.732 vs. 0.628). This conrms the hypothesis that
pairs that exhibit a social behavior interact more unpredictably than the study
pairs. This makes perfect sense, since pairs that study together are bound by
factors such as scheduled lectures and exams, thus getting a lower B score.
==PAGE:74==
62
Applications
Figure 5.3: The frequency and size of the interevent times in the social and
study pairs.
Figure 5.4: The distribution of B scores for the social and study pairs on a
normalized scale. Note that the shape of the distribution for the study pairs are
more bell shaped, like a regular gaussian distribution, than the distribution for
the social pairs. This is simply due to the fact that there are more pairs that
are labeled as study related.
==PAGE:75==
5.2 Dynamic long term classication
63
5.2
Dynamic long term classication
This section will look at how the pairs interact during the full 20 month period,
in relation to the 2-cluster LDA model.
Given that the available data stretches over a full 20 month period it is of
interest to inspect how the pairs behaves on this long term scale. The idea here
is to use the generated model to reclassify each pair for each month to see if
relationships can change from being study related to social, or vice versa. It
should also be possible to see if some relationships terminate abruptly. Figure
5.5 shows what this looks likes for 10 of the pairs that are connected to user
number 1. A couple of observations can be drawn from this gure:
• Even though some of the pairs change category during the semester, it is
only for a brief moment before going back to the initial label.
• Notice that pair 1,28 changes from study related to social during the winter
vacation during the last week of the rst January month (month number
5). This corresponds well to the fact that there is a huge increase in their
activity, which could indicate that they have gone on some sort of vacation
together. The model correctly classies this as social behavior. This is
also the case with pair 1,271 during the rst week of July (month 11).
• There are also cases where it is not obvious why the model changes cate-
gory from one month to another. This could be due to the specic tempo-
ral interaction during the days of the week, which can not be seen on this
plot. This was shown in the gures in section 4.1 to be of high importance
when distinguishing between social and study behavior.
• Since this is a gure containing 10 relations from user 1, it does not only
say something about the relations, but also something about user 1:
 The semester during the rst 3 months includes activity with several
peers, but once the exam period starts, user 1 only interacts with a
few others. This makes sense, since when you read up for an exam
you are not likely to do it with the entire class.
 During February, something might have happened since there is al-
most no study related activity. However, there are still social activity.
There are several possible explanations for this behavior, including
that user 1 might have been traveling during February, or just have
skipped class, before choosing to join class again in the middle of
March.
 Notice also the big increase in study related activity during the rst
week of January after the second winter holidays, in month 17, which
==PAGE:76==
64
Applications
then declines steadily during the next couple of weeks. This indicates
that the student starts the 3 weeks course of January with going
to classes in the rst week, but then as the course progresses the
student's turn-up steadily decreases.
As earlier mentioned, it would be interesting to see if some pairs were abruptly
terminated, and then investigate why this might have happened. Examples of
this have not been possible to nd, however there are multiple examples of pairs
loosing connection.
However, when this happens, it is because a single user
loses connections to all his or her peers. This is likely due to the user studying
a semester elsewhere, or if the user stops using the phone. This behavior can
be seen in gure 9.17 in appendix 9.6, along with more examples of this kind of
gure.
Figure 5.5: The interactions on a weekly basis for 10 pairs (all related to user
1) during the 20 month period. The IDs of the involved users in each pair is
given in the right hand corner.
==PAGE:77==
Chapter 6
Discussion
Even though the results gained in chapter 4 showed much promise in terms of
inferring friendships using only bluetooth data, there are sources of errors to be
considered.
1. It is crucial to remember that the only measure for interaction in this
thesis is the bluetooth data. As soon as two peers are close to each other,
it counts as an interaction, even if they were just walking by each other,
which surely should not count as an interaction. This is also true for peers
sleeping close to each other, so it is not possible to detect the dierence
between peers that sleep in the same bed, which should count as a social
interaction, or peers that sleep in the room above or below each other,
and who do not necessarily share a social connection. This could perhaps
be solved by looking at the eld for signal strength, which is also given in
the data.
2. The whole notion of pairs or relations is pretty vaguely dened. If you
just happen to sit close to a person for every course on an entire semester
without ever speaking, do you then have a relation? According to the
model, such a pair would surely be labeled as a study pair, but one could
argue that it would make more sense to try to nd the peers that are
actually working together during a course, and discard those that never
talk. The discussion of this will be left open in this thesis.
==PAGE:78==
66
Discussion
3. Since the peers found are only based on people participating in the project,
,there are probably a lot of users that only have few or no connections in
the model, but who have plenty of friends in the real world. However, this
is not evident since they are not part of the SensibleDTU project. This is
one of the pit falls when doing experiments in the real world; the models
and methods are best suited for closed supervised scenarios, which is not
the case when there is plenty of interaction with the outside world.
4. Due to the unsupervised nature of the data used in this thesis, it is hard
to verify if the found social pairs actually are social pairs in the real world.
In the gures exploring the behavior of pairs during the 20 months period (5.5),
it would have been interesting to see if some pairs would go from consistently
being labeled as a study pair, to consistently being labeled as a social pair, or
vice versa. In the same gures, one hoped to nd pairs that would go from many
interactions to none at all, for instance when a romantic relationship is ending.
However, none of these phenomena were found, but it is important to consider
that even though 20 months is a long time for continuously collecting data of
this kind, it is not a long time on a human social scale. The beginning or end of
a real friendship is not something that happens often, and can therefore be hard
to detect during only 20 months. However, if this data collection keeps going
for multiple years, preferably for the entirety of the users' studies at DTU, I
expect that these events will occur, and that they will be possible to detect.
==PAGE:79==
Chapter 7
Further work
The thesis have explored how much meaningful information it is possible to
get from social interaction between students only from looking at the bluetooth
data collected by their smartphones. However, as described in chapter 2, it is
mentioned that the bluetooth data is not the only type of information available.
More data is available from the smartphones, such as GPS data, and there is also
a detailed psychological prole of each user created via questionnaires. These
psychological proles could be used to investigate how dierent types of people
choose their peers. Or if people without any relations labeled as social would
have specic proles, e.g. that they show signs of depressions. The question-
naires could also be used to quantify how many of the social links found by the
models are actual real world social links.
The termination of friendships can also be explored further. There are mecha-
nisms such as link deletion, node deletion and aging that models the fading out
and ending of friendships[54], which could also be tested on this data. Thus,
it would also be benecial to have data from a longer period of time than 20
months.
Moreover, There is also room for correlating the psychological proles with the
networks in gure 4.17 and 4.16, where one could imagine that the nodes with
high degree or centrality share some psychological traits.
Finally, one could investigate why the model evaluation results in a model with
5 components and further explore these components in greater detail, or try
to nd a model that gives the best likelihood scores when it is trained with 2
==PAGE:80==
68
Further work
components.
==PAGE:81==
Chapter 8
Conclusion
Even with the pit falls discussed in chapter 6, this thesis showed that it is pos-
sible to infer meaningful relations between peers based solely on their temporal
bluetooth activity. The components in the data found by the model are well
separated by the hours of the week where class takes place, which is exactly
what is expected. Regarding the number of ties found for the individual par-
ticipants, the intuition that some people have many ties, while some do not is
also conrmed. The fact that it was found that there are more study ties than
social ties in the complete network is also what one could expect. In terms
of model evaluation, it would have been preferable if the optimal number of
components where two instead of ve, but nonetheless it made sense to stick
with two components which gave a good result. Last, the results discovered in
this thesis have been found using only bluetooth data. Yet, the results open up
for further work, where the data on the subjects are included, to validate the
labeling of the pairs.
==PAGE:82==
70
Conclusion
==PAGE:83==
Bibliography
[1] Leonhard Euler. Seven Bridges of Königsberg. 1736.
[2] Ferdiand Tönnies. Gemeinschaft und Gesellschaft. Leipzig: Fues's Verlag.
1887.
[3] Jacob L. Moreno. Who Shall Survive?
1934.
[4] Wayne W. Zachary. An Information Flow Model for Conict and Fission in
Small Groups. Journal of Anthropological Research, Vol. 33, No. 4 (Winter,
1977), pages 452-473. 1977.
[5] Malinowski, Bronislaw. The Family Among the Australian Aborigines: A
Sociological Study. London: University of London Press 1913.
[6] Alfred Radclie-Brown. The social organization of Australian tribes. Syd-
ney, Australia: University of Sydney Oceania monographs, No.1. 1930.
[7] Alfred Radclie-Brown. On social structure. Journal of the Royal Anthro-
pological Institute, 70, pages 1-12. 1940.
[8] Claude Lévi-Strauss. Les structures élémentaires de la parenté. Paris: La
Haye, Mouton et Co. 1947.
[9] Harrison C. White. Identity and Control: A Structural Theory of Social
Action. Princeton University Press. August 24, 1992.
[10] Stanley Wasserman and Katherine Faust. Social Network Analysis: Meth-
ods and Applications. The Press Syndicate of the University of Cambridge
1994.
==PAGE:84==
72
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[11] Charles Kadushin. Introduction to Social Network Theory. February 17,
2004.
[12] John Scott and Peter J. Carrington. The SAGE Handbook of Social Net-
work Analysis. SAGE Publications Ltd. February 17, 2011.
[13] Frigyes Karinthy. Chains. 1929.
[14] Albert-László Barabási. Network Science. Cambridge University Press
2015.
[15] Gordon E. Moore. Cramming More Components onto Integrated Circuits.
1965.
[16] Frank Nielsen. Grafteori - Algoritmer og Netværk (danish). Matematisk
Institut, Danmarks Tekniske Universitet 1995.
[17] Albert-László Barabási and R. Albert. Emergence of scaling in random
networks. Science, 286: 509. 1999.
[18] D. J. Watts and S .H. Strogatz. Collective dynamics of `small-world' net-
works Nature, 393: 440. 1998.
[19] David Easley and Jon Kleinberg. Networks, Crowds, and Markets: Reason-
ing About a Highly Connected World Cambridge University Press. 2010.
[20] M. E. J. Newman. The structure and function of complex networks. De-
partment of Physics, University of Michigan and Santa Fe Institute. March
25, 2003.
[21] Babak Pourbohloul and Joel Miller. Network Theory and the Spread of
Communicable Diseases. British Columbia Centre for Disease Control.
[22] Brian Ball and M. E. J. Newman, ES. Friendship networks and social status.
Network Science 1, pages 16-30. 2013.
[23] Ciro Cattuto, Wouter Van den Broeck, Alain Barrat, Vittoria Colizza,
Jean-François Pinton, Alessandro Vespignani, Dynamics of Person-to-
Person Interactions from Distributed RFID Sensor Networks. 10.1371/jour-
nal.pone.0011596. July 15, 2010.
[24] Nadav Aharonya, Wei Pana, Cory Ipa, Inas Khayal, Alex Pentland, So-
cial fMRI: Investigating and shaping social mechanisms in the real world.
Pervasive and Mobile Computing 7 (2011) pages 643659. September 25,
2011.
[25] Piotr Sapie»y«ski, Measuring Patterns of Human Behavior through Fixed-
Location Sensors. Technical University of Denmark. March 15, 2013.
==PAGE:85==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
73
[26] Pang-Ning Tan, Michael Steinbach, Vipin Kumar, Introduction to Data
Mining, chapter 1. Addison-Wesley. March 25, 2006.
[27] Pang-Ning Tan, Michael Steinbach, Vipin Kumar, Introduction to Data
Mining, chapter 8. Addison-Wesley. March 25, 2006.
[28] Peter J. Rousseeuw, Silhouettes: a Graphical Aid to the Interpretation and
Validation of Cluster Analysis. Computational and Applied Mathematics
20: pages 5365. 1987.
[29] Ke-Lin Du, M. N. S. Swamy, Fundamentals of Machine Learning. Springer,
Neural Networks and Statistical Learning chapter 2, pages 28-29. December
7, 2013.
[30] Akaike H., A new look at the statistical model identication. IEEE Trans-
actions on Automatic Control, 19, pages 716723. 1974.
[31] Schwarz G., Estimating the dimension of a model. Annals of Statistics, 6,
pages 461464. 1978.
[32] Rissanen J., Modeling by shortest data description. Automatica, 14(5),
pages 465477. 1978.
[33] J. MACQUEEN., Some methods for classication and analysis of multivari-
ate observations. Proc. Fifth Berkeley Symp. on Math. Statist. and Prob.,
Vol. 1 (Univ. of Calif. Press, 1967). Pages 281-297. 1967.
[34] Rajaraman, A.; Ullman, J. D., Data Mining. Mining of Massive Datasets.
pages 117. 2011.
[35] Daniel D. Lee H. Sebastian Seung, Learning the parts of objects by non-
negative matrix factorization. Nature 401, pages 788-791. October 21, 1999.
[36] William H. Lawtona Edward A. Sylvestrea, Self Modeling Curve Resolu-
tion. Technometrics Volume 13, Issue 3, pages 617-633. 1971.
[37] Pentti Paatero and Unto Tapper, Positive matrix factorization: A non-
negative factor model with optimal utilization of error estimates of data
values. Environmetrics Volume 5, Issue 2, pages 111126. June 1994.
[38] Daniel D. Lee and H. Sebastian Seung, Algorithms for non-negative matrix
factorization. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 13, pages
556562. MIT Press. 2001.
[39] Chih-Jen Lin, Projected Gradient Methods for Non-negative Matrix Fac-
torization. Department of Computer Science, National Taiwan University,
Taipei 106, Taiwan.
==PAGE:86==
74
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[40] Thomas Hofmann, Probabilistic Latent Semantic Analysis. Uncertainity in
Articial Intelligence, UAI'99, Stockholm. 1999.
[41] Thomas Hofmann and Jan Puzicha. Unsupervised Learning from Dyadid
Data. TR-98-042. December 1998
[42] Scott Deerwester, Susan T. Dumais and Richard Harshman, Indexing by
Latent Semantic Analysis. Journal of the American Society for Information
Science Volume 41, Issue 6, pages 391407. September 1990
[43] Thomas Hofmann, Probabilistic Latent Semantic Indexing. Proceedings of
the Twenty-Second Annual International SIGIR Conference on Research
and Development in Information Retrieval.
[44] A.P. Dempster, N. M. Laird and D. B. Rubin, Maximum Likelihood from
Incomplete Data via the EM Algorithm. J. Royal Statist. Soc. B, 39:1-38.
1977
[45] David M. Blei, Andrew Y. Ng and Michael I. Jordan, Latent Dirichlet
Allocation. Journal of Machine Learning Research 3 (2003) pages 993-1022.
March 1, 2003
[46] Kevin Gimpel, Modeling Topics. December 11, 2006
[47] Wray L. Buntine, Operations for Leaning with Graphical Models. Journal
of Articial Intelligence Research 2, pages 159-225. December 1994
[48] Mark Girolami and Ata Kabán, On an Equivalence between PLSI and
LDA. Proceedings of the 26th annual international ACM SIGIR conference
on Research and development in informaion retrieval Pages 433-434. 2003
[49] Bela A. Frigyik, Amol Kapila, and Maya R. Gupta, Introduction to the
Dirichlet Distribution and Related Processes. Department of Electrical
Engineering University of Washington, UWEE Technical Report Number
UWEETR-2010-0006. December 2010
[50] W. R. Gilks, S. Richardson and D. J. Spiegelhalter, Markov chain Monte
Carlo in Practice. Chapman Hall. 1996.
[51] Tom Griths, Gibbs sampling in the generative model of Latent Dirichlet
Allocation. 2002.
[52] Hanna M. Wallach, Iain Murray, Ruslan Salakhutdinov and David Mimno.
Evaluation Methods for Topic Models. Appearing in Proceedings of the 26th
International Conference on Machine Learning, Montreal, Canada. 2009.
[53] K.-I. Goh and A.-L. Barabási. Burstiness and memory in complex systems.
A Letters Journal Exploring The Frontiers Of Physics December 13, 2007.
==PAGE:87==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
75
[54] Yohsuke Murase, Hang-Hyun Jo, János Török, János Kertész and Kimmo
Kaski. Modeling the role of relationship fading and breakup in social net-
work formation. Advanced Institute for Computational Science, 7-1-26.
June 23, 2015.
==PAGE:88==
76
BIBLIOGRAPHY
==PAGE:89==
Chapter 9
Appendix
9.1
Appendix A
Contains plot of the components in the k-means 8 component model during all
20 months.
==PAGE:90==
78
Appendix
Figure 9.1: The 8 components of the k-means model on all 20 months. Notice
that none of them places its mass during the vacations.
Also note that the
ordering of the components in this plot do not align with the components in
gure 4.1.
==PAGE:91==
9.2 Appendix B
79
9.2
Appendix B
Contains plots of the classication of the seen and unseen pairs in the LDA
model with 5 components.
Figure 9.2: The seen pairs as classied by the 5 component LDA model.
==PAGE:92==
80
Appendix
Figure 9.3: The unseen pairs as classied by the 5 component LDA model.
==PAGE:93==
9.3 Appendix C
81
9.3
Appendix C
The complete graph with study and social interactions, along with the corre-
sponding summary statistics.
Table 9.1: Summary statistics for the complete network.
Number of nodes
680
Number of edges
3462
Average node degree
10.182
Number of connected components
2
Average clustering coecient
0.118
==PAGE:94==
82
Appendix
Figure 9.4: The graph of the complete network. The red edges are a study
relationships and the blue edges are social relationships. Notice the extremely
small component in the bottom left corner consisting only of two people. This
could be regarded as an outlier, but it could also be interesting to investigate
this small component further.
==PAGE:95==
9.3 Appendix C
83
Figure 9.5: The distribution of degrees for the nodes in gure 9.4.
Figure 9.6: The distribution of clustering coecients for the nodes in gure 9.4.
==PAGE:96==
84
Appendix
9.4
Appendix D
Summary statistics for the social graph.
Figure 9.7: The distribution of degrees for the nodes in gure 4.16.
Figure 9.8: The distribution of clustering coecients for the nodes in gure
4.16.
==PAGE:97==
9.4 Appendix D
85
Figure 9.9: The distribution of clustering coecients for the nodes in gure
4.16.
==PAGE:98==
86
Appendix
9.5
Appendix E
Summary statistics for the study graph.
Figure 9.10: The distribution of degrees for the nodes in gure 4.17.
Figure 9.11: The distribution of clustering coecients for the nodes in gure
4.17.
==PAGE:99==
9.5 Appendix E
87
Figure 9.12: The distribution of clustering coecients for the nodes in gure
4.17.
==PAGE:100==
88
Appendix
9.6
Appendix F
Contains more examples of the dynamic labeling of pairs during the 20 month
period.
Figure 9.13: The interactions on a weekly basis for 10 pairs during the 20 month
period.
==PAGE:101==
9.6 Appendix F
89
Figure 9.14: The interactions on a weekly basis for 10 pairs during the 20 month
period.
Figure 9.15: The interactions on a weekly basis for 10 pairs during the 20 month
period.
==PAGE:102==
90
Appendix
Figure 9.16: The interactions on a weekly basis for 10 pairs during the 20 month
period.
==PAGE:103==
9.6 Appendix F
91
Figure 9.17: The interactions on a weekly basis for 10 pairs during the 20 month
period. Notice how user number 12 apparently disappears after the summer
vacation. This is most likely either because the user chose to study a semester
as an exchange student, or because the user, for one reason or another, stops
using the phone.
