==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Master Thesis
Optimizing the
Ship Loading Problem
By Anton Boelskifte
Handed in:
The 26th of June 2015
Supervisors: Professor Harilaos N. Psaraftis (DTU Transport)
Assistant Professor Dario Pacino (DTU Transport)
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Optimizing the ship loading problem
Preface
This document is a master thesis written at the Technical University of Denmark, as the
ﬁnal part of the MSc program Transportaion & Logistics. The report have been written
during the spring semester of 2015, by MSc student Anton Boelskifte and is accredited 30 ECTS.
The thesis supervisors have been Professor Harilaos N. Psaraftis and Assistant Professor
Dario Pacino from DTU Transport, and the content of the report is heavily build on the DTU
courses 13432 Maritime Logistics, 42136 Large Scale Optimization using Decomposition and
42116 Implementing OR Solution Methods.
The reader is not expected to have any former knowledge about shipping and the maritime
industry, but basic knowledge about operation research is required.
Anton Boelskifte
Technical University of Denmark, Kongens Lyngby.
June 2015
i
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Optimizing the ship loading problem
Abstract
Ever since the introduction of container shipping in the 1950s, world trade have radically
been altered. Today exotic fruit from South America, high tech electronics from Asia and
countless other products, can be bought in even the smallest supermarkets around the world.
Thanks to container shipping the distance between consumer an producer is no longer of
great importance. While the unit cost of container transport have gone down, the volume of
containerized trade has only gone up.
Container ships and terminals are therefore bigger and busier than ever, and the capability to
load ships eﬃciently is essential. The ship loading problem addressed in this report, deals with
the many decisions faced during the loading process of a container ship. Its major components
includes deciding where containers should be stowed on board the vessel, in which order their
should be loaded, and when which equipment should be used in the process. The Ship loading
problem is not well deﬁned in the literature, and only few models exits that includes all these
components of the SLP.
This report provides a introduction to container shipping as well as as detailed description of
the Ship Loading Problem. The report proposes a mixed integer programming(MIP) model
that incorporates all the components of the SLP, by providing a speciﬁc stowage location for
each container, as well as the load sequence and schedule of the handling equipment.
The report examines the possibility of decomposing the MIP using column generation as
method to reduce computation time. Using a CPLEX solver the model have also been tested on
several diﬀerent generated instances, and a analysis of the factors increasing the computation
time is given.
iii
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Optimizing the ship loading problem
Acknowledgements
In the process of writing this thesis, I have gotten support and guidance from several people
that I would like to thank.
First oﬀall I would like to thank my supervisors. A special thank to Dario Pacino, who on
a very early stage agreed to be my supervisor on this project as I was abroad in the period
leading up to the project start. Without his guidance and feedback during this project, I
would without doubt have lost my way in the process of writing this thesis.
Thanks to both Dario Pacino, and PhD student Cagatay Iris for going through my mathemati-
cal models, and for dealing with my frustrations, anxiety and nervous breakdowns along the way.
I would also thank PhD student Jonas Mark Christensen for technical support, Thomas
Hecksher for feedback on the report, MSc Jo˜ao Paiva Fonseca for moral support, and my sister
Arendse for the many encouraging text messages and emails.
A very special thanks goes to my girlfriend Charlotte, as she has dealt with my many mood
swings and frustration during this project, and have not gotten much attention sin return.
v
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
Optimizing the ship loading problem
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Project scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Project motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Thesis question . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Report structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Container shipping
5
2.1
The ABC of container shipping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Containers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.2
Container ships . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.3
Container terminal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Optimization problems in container shipping
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.1
Routing problems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.2
Berth allocation problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.3
Crane split problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.4
Stowage plan problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
The Ship Loading Problem
15
3.1
Problem description
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.1.1
Loading operations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.1.2
Equipment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4
Literature review
19
4.1
Container operations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.2
Equipment management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.3
Full implementation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5
Modelling the Ship Loading Problem
23
5.1
Model implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.1.1
Objective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.1.2
Constraints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.2
The Compact Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.3
Model properties & assumptions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
6
Decomposition
29
6.1
Column Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
6.1.1
The master problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
6.1.2
The sub problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6.1.3
The algorithm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
6.2
Decomposing the compact model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6.2.1
Master problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6.2.2
Sub problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.2.3
Evaluation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
vii
==PAGE:10==
Optimizing the ship loading problem
7
Results
39
7.1
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
7.2
Solution & constraint eﬀect . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
7.3
Model performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
7.3.1
Varying number of containers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
7.3.2
Class clustered containers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
7.3.3
Scaling the distance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
7.3.4
Varying number of classes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
7.3.5
Varying number of cranes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
8
Conclusion
47
A Appendix
49
A.1 Dantzig wolfe decomposition example
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
References
54
viii
==PAGE:11==
==PAGE:12==
==PAGE:13==
1
INTRODUCTION
1
Introduction
Ships are one of the oldest man made constructions, that is still widely used today. Without
ships the Egyptians could not have transported rocks for their pyramids, the vikings wouldn’t
have put Scandinavia on the map, and Columbus hadn’t discovered America. The list goes
on, and although these event can not only be accredited ships, hardly many would disagree
that ships have played an important role throughout history.
Ships have come in all shapes and seizes, and have been used to solve a broad variety of
tasks. This still holds true today, although by far most ships are used for transportation.
Transportation of either passengers, ﬁnished goods or raw materials.
Even though more modern transportation solutions exist, shipping is in no sense an outdated
industry. Due to the capacity and price of sea transport, shipping is an important factor in
global economy. Compared to trucks or even planes, ships can carry enormous quantities of
both weight and volume. It is estimated that 90%1 in volume of traded commodities, have
been transported by sea. In addition, sea transport is cheaper than both ground and air
transport. The low cost of sea transport, have made it possible both to transport ﬁnished
goods from where labor costs are low, but also to transport raw materials from where they are
in surplus. Thereby maritime transport is an essential factor in the continuous globalization
process.
Although ships have been used for transportation in more than 2000 years, and may be
considered as old technology, it is still highly relevant to look at how maritime transport can
be improved.
Figure 1: Aerial photo of Container Terminal Altenwerder, in Hamburg.2
1http://www.ics-shipping.org/shipping-facts/shipping-and-world-trade, extracted 17/06/2015
2http://gcaptain.com/13000-containership-hyundai/, extracted 17/06/2015
Optimizing the ship loading problem
Page 1
==PAGE:14==
1
INTRODUCTION
1.1
Project scope
Maritime transport is a rather broad deﬁnition, but ignoring passenger transport, it is usually
divided in two; tramp and liner shipping. The two are quite diﬀerent in many ways. Diﬀerent
with respect to ship design, cargo and operation. For the same reason the challenges met in
the two kinds of shipping are also very diﬀerent.
This report is only dealing with liner shipping, more precisely container shipping. A more
formal introduction to container shipping is given in section 2, but brieﬂy container shipping
deals with transportation of general cargo between a ﬁxed set of ports. As such container
vessels can be seen as the buses of the sea. Just as a buses, container ships are following a
speciﬁc route according to a predetermined timetable. The ”passengers” of container shipping
are the containers that are picked up, and dropped of at various ports around the world.
Broad maritime terms such as ships, habours etc. should throughout the report be seen in a
container shipping framework. Therefore unless other is stated a ship will be a reference to a
container ship, a harbor to a container terminal, and so on.
1.2
Project motivation
Ever since the introduction of the container in the late 1950s, the amount of cargo transported
by container vessels have only gone one up. When the ﬁrst container ship left Port Newark in
1957, it could carry less than 100 TEUs3, whereas the largest vessels today can cary more
than 19000 TEUs4. Just the last 15 years the volumen of global containerized trade has gone
from 60 million TEUs in 1999 to 170 million TEUs in 2014[1].
The increasing number of containers has not only resulted in bigger vessels, but also in more
ﬁerce competition among ports and container terminals. The cornerstone of this competition
is eﬃciency. The eﬃciency of a port eﬀects both its ability to attract new ships and its
economically sustainability by reducing costs. For popular ports with limited or no possibility
of expansion, a higher eﬃciency may also be the only way of meeting an increasing demand.
The volume of container transport means that eﬃciency improvements can result in huge cash
savings. Even relatively small improvements per container can result in big savings.
Operation research approaches has been used to try to improve everything from the routes of
the vessels, down to the stowage position of the individual container. This has led to several
optimization problems in container shipping through the last decades, and one such problem
is the Ship Loading Problem (SLP), which will be addressed in this report.
1.3
Thesis question
As indicated in section 1.1 the rather broad title Optimizing the ship loading problem should
be seen in a container shipping framework, as the SLP only concerns the loading of container
ships. From the previous section it should also be clear that being able to load a container
vessels eﬃciently can have substantial economic impacts for both the shipowner and terminal
operator.
The SLP have recently been addressed in [22], which was the starting point of this report, and
initial inspiration for the model presented in section 5. Similar with [22], this report aims to
develop a model to determine the optimal container load sequence, by matching containers
3http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/intermodal container, extracted 17/06/2015
4http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List of largest container ships, extracted 17/06/2015
Page 2
Optimizing the ship loading problem
==PAGE:15==
1
INTRODUCTION
with speciﬁc positions on board a vessel, a process known as stowage planning.
Although the work presented in this report is related to that of [22] substantial diﬀerences are
found in how the SLP have been approached and modeled. These diﬀerences are seen in both
the models objective functions and in their constraints. More precisely this report attempts
to answer the question:
How does a model implementing the Ship Loading Problem perform in various
scenarios, while considering several cranes and optimized with respect to both
handling time and equipment usage.
Despite the signiﬁcance of the SLP, a comprehensive implementations of the problem is not
easily found in the literature. Therefore this report strives to develop a model including
several aspects of the SLP, by combining both the stowage planning part and the equipment
scheduling part of the SLP. A thorough implementation of the problem is expected to be
computational heavy. This is why this report wishes to examine how it will perform in diﬀerent
scenarios, and if performance can be improved with decomposition. Performance is in this
context seen as the time required to solve the model, such that it can be determined which
aspects of the SLP makes the problem more diﬃcult to solve.
The work done should result in an detailed study of the SLP, with focus on model formulation
and performance, and provide inspiration for further studies on the SLP.
1.4
Report structure
The structure of report is meant to give a naturally ﬂow between the diﬀerent sections when
read in chronological order.
After the introduction, the report starts with Section 2, which is a introductory section about
container shipping. As the reader is not assumed to have any preliminary knowledge about
maritime industry, this sections runs trough the fundamental elements of container shipping.
The section also presents some of the challenges met in container shipping, that have been
addressed in the literature as optimization problems.
Section 3 is a short description of the Ship Loading Problem and how it has been approached.
This is followed by a literature review in section 4 that runs trough some of the literature
published on the SLP, and highlights the diﬀerences from the work done in this report.
Section 5 is a in depth description of how the SLP is implemented in this report, and a
presentation of the proposed MIP model. The column generation framework is discussed in
Section 6, together with a suggestion of how the MIP model could be solved using the column
generations. Finally results are given in section 7, and the report conclusion in section 8.
The diﬀerent sections are connected and not meant to be read individually, however readers
familiar with container shipping may skip section 2. Likewise readers already familiar with
the ship loading problem may skip section 3 and 4, and go straight to the model, results and
conclusion.
Optimizing the ship loading problem
Page 3
==PAGE:16==
==PAGE:17==
2
CONTAINER SHIPPING
2
Container shipping
To fully understand the literature and work presented in this report, it is necessary with
some fundamental knowledge of the container shipping industry. The ﬁrst part of this section
will therefore present the basic elements of container shipping. Especially the layout and
operations of a container terminal will be discussed in detail.
The second part of this section will give a brief introduction to some of the diﬀerent challenges
met in container shipping. This is done by going through some of the problems that have
been approached using operation research and relating them to each other. In particular the
stowage planning problem is important, as it is closely related to the Ship Loading Problem.
2.1
The ABC of container shipping
As mentioned in the introduction, container ship can easiest be described as buses of the
sea. Container ships sails along speciﬁc routes, visiting a ﬁxed set of ports. Regardless of
changing demand the ships follow their routes, and do not deviate to other ports to pick up
extra containers along the way. The number of deployed ship on a given route determines the
the frequency of the route. For instance if 6 ships are deployed on a route taking 6 weeks to
complete, then all the ports of the route will be visited once a week by a vessel.
There are three components of container shipping that one must be familiar with, to get an
understanding of the industry. There are the containers themselves, which are the objects
being transported. There are the container vessels which are used for the transportation.
Finally there are the container terminals, which can be seen as the connection between ships
and containers. All three components will be introduces in the following.
2.1.1
Containers
In this report, and generally in maritime logistics, a container is a reference to a large metallic
rectangular box, used for transportation of goods. Containers are relatively cheap and very
robust. They are build to withstand rough handling by big machinery, and transportation by
sea, where they are exposed to the weather. Furthermore special paint is applied to make
the containers resistant against saltwater. They can withstand large vertical forces, thereby
enabling them to be stacked in high stacks. To keep the weight of empty containers down, the
strength is mainly along the reinforced edges of the container.
Figure 2: Figure showing the dimensions of a 20ft and 40ft container.5
5http://www.casa-de-container.com/container-de-20-pes, extracted 22/06/2015
Optimizing the ship loading problem
Page 5
==PAGE:18==
2
CONTAINER SHIPPING
The greatest strength of containers are not their robustness, but their uniform nature,
which revolutionized the transportation of general cargo. By having uniform containers with
same dimensions, products of various sizes can eﬃciently be transported by one of many
container ships, instead of requiring a speciﬁc specialized ship. Nevertheless containers do
come in some diﬀerent seizes, where the two most common are the 20ft and 40ft container
shown in Figure 2. The height and width are the same, only the length diﬀers such that one
40ft container takes up the same space as two 20ft containers. Other container sizes includes
the 10ft container, the 45ft container and high-cube container that is one foot taller than the
standard.
Besides having diﬀerent seizes, several diﬀerent types of containers exists, whereas some are
shown in Figure 3.
Figure 3: Selection of diﬀerent container types.6
The diﬀerent container types are used to accommodate the diversity in the transported
commodities. Just as for the diﬀerent seizes, some types are more commonly seen than others.
Most common is the standard or general purpose container seen in Figure 2. Reefer containers,
are also fairly common, as these are refrigerated containers used for perishable goods such
as fresh food. Tank containers are used for liquids, or liqueﬁed gas. As specialized tanker
vessels exist to carry large amount of liquids and gas, tank containers are mainly used for
small volume commodities such as medicine or special chemicals.
Open top containers are useful for homogeneous cargo such as grain, since the cargo can
be dropped directly from at conveyor belt or backhoe loader down the top of the container.
Flat rack containers are suitable for rigid oversize cargo such as vehicles, boats or other big
machinery. Applicable for both open top, and ﬂat rack containers is that other containers can
not be stacked on top on these container types.
2.1.2
Container ships
Container ships are specialized ships, designed to accommodate a maximum number of
containers and nothing else. As mentioned in the introduction container ships have grown
rapidly in seize, but are still smaller than the biggest tanker ships. Unlike tankers and other
ship types, the seize of container ships is usually given by it’s TEU capacity, and not its
deadweight tonnage (DWT). TEU is short for Twenty-foot Equivalent Units. In other words
container ships are described according to the number of 20ft containers they can accommodate,
and not weight they can transport. This makes sense since containers are generally used for
lightweight ﬁnished goods, where the total weight is rarely the limiting factor. The interior
and deck of container ships consist of a grid of possible container locations. Such a location is
called a slot, and each slot is uniquely given by its bay, stack and tier number.
6http://canarship.eu/en/types-of-container-for-shipping-cargo/, extracted 22/06/2015
Page 6
Optimizing the ship loading problem
==PAGE:19==
2
CONTAINER SHIPPING
Figure 4: Model of the Mærsk Line EEE ship, showing the bay, stack and tier dimension.7
From Figure 4 it can be seen that the bay number indicates if a slot is in the bow (front)
or in the aft(rear). The stack number indicates if the slot is to the port or starboard side of
the vessel, and ﬁnally the tier number is the height of the slot. A schematic drawing of the of
a container vessel layout is shown in Figure 5.
Figure 5: Schematic drawing of a container vessel layout.[17]
From Figure 5 it can be seen that due to the shape of the hull, not all bays and stacks
contain the same amount of slots. It can also be seen that some slots are in the hold of the
ship, while others are on the deck supported by hatch covers. The numbering of bays, stacks
and tiers is not necessarily chronological, the advantage of the numbering shown in Figure 5 is
the implicit information given by the numbers. For instance an odd bay number will always
refer to a 20ft slot, a even stack number will always be a slot to the port side of the ship and
so on.
Although all slots have same dimensions, not all containers can be placed in all slots. As
mentioned in the previous section, diﬀerent container types exists, and some of these can have
restriction to where they can be placed. Reefer containers requires electricity to keep their
contents cool, and safety regulations may restrict where tank containers may be placed, if the
7https://www.pinterest.com/stevekeifer/maersk-triple-e/, extracted 22/06/2015
Optimizing the ship loading problem
Page 7
==PAGE:20==
2
CONTAINER SHIPPING
content is hazardous. Although a 40ft container may be placed on top of two 20ft containers,
the opposite is not possible. Containers are ﬁxed with their corner castings, and since no
corner casting exits in the middle of a 40ft container, a 20ft container can not be placed on
top of a 40ft container.
Other restrictions regarding which slot a container can be placed in, are related to the overall
stability and strength of the vessel. A more detailed description of these issues can be seen
in [23], but for this report it is suﬃcient to realize that if the the weight of the containers
are not evenly distributed a ship may become unstable and may thereby not be declared
seaworthy. Likewise if all the weight is either centered or decentralized, the ship needs to
withstand enormous stress levels, and risque bending.
2.1.3
Container terminal
A container terminal can be a very busy place, where many activities are taking place at
the same time, involving many diﬀerent pieces of equipment. To avoid accidents and ensure
smooth operations it is therefore important with a clear and appropriate layout of container
terminals.
An aerial photo of the Hamburg container terminal can be seen in Figure 1. Although not all
container terminals may look like this, the photo gives a good overview of the main elements
of a container terminal. A schematic drawing of a typical container terminal layout can be
seen in Figure 6.
Figure 6: Typical container terminal layout. [23]
As it can be seen in booth Figure 1 and Figure 6 a container terminal can be divided in
three; The land side, the yard and the quay side.
The land side is where containers are exchanged between the terminal and inland transportation
forms. Typically containers that have arrived by sea, are loaded on either trucks or trains to
continue their journey towards their ﬁnal destinations. Containers arriving at the terminal
from land, are at the land side unloaded, and transported to yard.
At the quay side of the terminal, containers are being loaded and unloaded the vessels. To do
this, huge quay cranes (Figure 7) are placed along the quay. The cranes must be big enough
to reach both the highest tiers of the ship and the stack furthest away from the quay. As
container ships grows bigger and taller, so must the quay cranes to accommodate these new
Page 8
Optimizing the ship loading problem
==PAGE:21==
2
CONTAINER SHIPPING
giant ships. Despite their size, quay cranes are not stationary but can typically move along
the quay on rails. This is to allow the cranes to change between the diﬀerent bays of the
ship, and the ship doesn’t have to be moved. By shifting along the quay, several cranes can
also be aligned with a ship, allowing more cranes to be work on the same ship at the same
time. However it should be kept in mind that the cranes can not overtake each other, which is
important because you risque having idle cranes ”trapped” between working cranes.
Figure 7: Quay cranes.8
As it is time consuming each time a quay crane needs to move, the most eﬃcient approach
is to ﬁnish loading all containers on one bay, before continuing to the next. Furthermore,
speciﬁc loading policies may dictate ships to be loaded either stack by stack or tiers by tiers.
Such policies keep a simple work ﬂow for the crane operators, but also ﬁx the order in which
each slot is handled regardless of other considerations.
An important diﬀerence between the land and quay side is, that on the quay side, containers
arrive in discrete waves with the arrival of every ship, and on the land side containers usually
arrive more continuously independent of the ships. This is why the yard is needed to connect
the land and quay side.
The yard is a big storage space for containers waiting for further transportation, typically
organized in big blocs. In the yard of most terminals, containers have either arrived by land
and are continuing by sea, or have arrived by sea and are waiting to continue by land. However
in some terminals, such as Singapore, many of the containers in the yard, may simply be
containers in transit. Transit containers are containers that have arrived by one ship and are
waiting for a another ship to continue their journey. This is typical for terminals functioning as
a hub. Terminal hubs are where smaller ships brings containers from the surrounding region,
and bigger ships then transport the containers to a diﬀerent region, as it is also seen in the
airline industry.
A ﬂeet of either trucks or straddle carriers are used in the terminal to transport the containers
between the land side, the yard and the quay side. If trucks are used then gantry cranes are
needed both at the land side and in the yard. As seen in Figure 8a gantry cranes can be
mounted on rails on both sides of a block of containers, thereby enabling them to pick up all
8http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Container crane
Optimizing the ship loading problem
Page 9
==PAGE:22==
2
CONTAINER SHIPPING
containers in the bloc and loading them onto trucks. When suﬃcient space is available in
the yard, such that the containers are not stacked higher than 3-4 containers, then straddle
carriers can be used instead of trucks. As seen in Figure 8b straddle carriers can drive ”above”
a row of containers and pick up the containers directly from the block, making a gantry crane
redundant.
(a) Gantry crane.
(b) Straddle carriers.
Figure 8: Container terminal equipment.9
When containers are stacked on top of each other in the yard, you risque having so called
overstowage. Overstowage occur when containers are not stacked in the order they are picked
up. This means that one or more containers in the top of a stack is blocking the access to a
container lower in the stack. When this is the case, the top containers ﬁrst needs to be moved,
to give access the containers beneath. Such an operation is called a yard shift, or an reshuﬄe.
Each yard shift is time consuming, and risque creating overstowage in another stack, therefore
yard shifts are tried to be avoided.
Another important term related to container terminals is the makespan. The makespan is the
time a vessel is berthed at the terminal and can be compared to what is called the turnaround
time in the airline industry. You often hear how airlines try to keep their planes in the air
as much as possible to keep proﬁtability high. This is done by keeping the turnaround time
down, that is the time required to unload, fuel, clean and load the plane again.
The exact same thing holds true in container shipping. No matter the seize, a container vessel
will always be a big investment and just like planes, ships only make money when they are
on the move and transporting containers. Furthermore shipowners have to pay the container
terminal for being berthed, so shipowners want their ships to be berthed as short as possible.
The makespan is determined by the unloading and loading process, as this is the most time
consuming process at the terminal, so an eﬃcient loading process keeps the makespan low.
2.2
Optimization problems in container shipping
Although it may sound simple to sail containers from one port to another, shipowners and
container terminals are faced with multiple challenges. As mentioned in the introduction, this
have brought several optimization problems. Many of these problems are somewhat related to
each other, and should ideally be optimized together. Due to the complexity of each of these
problems, they are however not possible to optimize simultaneously.
9http://ﬁrst-tech.com.hk/special.html, extracted 22/06/2015 and
http://www.portstrategy.com/news101/port-operations/cargo-handling/sound-carriers, extracted 22/06/2015
Page 10
Optimizing the ship loading problem
==PAGE:23==
2
CONTAINER SHIPPING
The problems met in maritime logistics are not as uniquely deﬁned as for instance the traveling
salesman problem[8], or the knapsack problem[7, 4]. Most of the maritime problems can be
solved using various objective functions and constraints. Nevertheless, the problems can be
grouped depending on which aspect of container shipping they regard.
Figure 9: Anthonys Triangle
The diﬀerent groups of problems can be related to each other as in hierarchy, where
problems in the top eﬀects the problems below. From a more organizational point of view,
this can be illustrated by the Anthonys triangle in Figure 9. Anthonys Triangle depicts how
problems in the top relate to strategic decision with long term eﬀects, and problems in the
bottom relates to day to day decisions on the operational level. Starting from the top of the
hierarchy, the diﬀerent problems will now be brieﬂy discussed.
2.2.1
Routing problems
As mentioned previously, container ships follows a ﬁxed timetable on a ﬁxed route. This
means that long before the ﬁrst container can be shipped, it needs to be decided where and
when the ﬂeet of ships should sail. The problem consist of choosing a set of routes to operate,
and a frequency in which they shall be operated. By frequency is meant how often a ship
should will pass by a port on the route. Such a decisions is clearly strategical and not faced
everyday. Once it has been determined which routes should operated and how often, this will
change for several months.
Problems like these are usually solved based on a set of ports, and an set of demands. The
demands is an estimate of the amount of cargo that needs to be transported between the
diﬀerent ports. The challenge is to ﬁnd the optimal set of routes that most eﬃciently meets
the demand. Furthermore if not all ships have same capacity it may also be necessary to
decide which ships should be deployed on which routes.
These problems are clearly related to vehicle routing problems and multi-commodity ﬂow
problems, which are widely addressed in the literature. Speciﬁc work on routing problems in
container shipping can be found in [2] and [20].
2.2.2
Berth allocation problems
When shipowners have decided which routes and vessels to deploy, ports can now start planning
the arrival of ships. Each ship needs to be given a speciﬁc berth, such that there is room for
all ships, which leads to the berth allocation problem. Due to weather and other delays the
Optimizing the ship loading problem
Page 11
==PAGE:24==
2
CONTAINER SHIPPING
exact arrival time of a ship may not be known, but a rough estimate should be available for
the port several days in advance. The berth allocation problem can therefore be seen as a
problem on the tactical level.
The aim is to use the berths as eﬃciently as possible, such that there is always a free berth for
the incoming vessels. The challenge is that in most bigger ports ships are constantly arriving
and leaving. Combined with the fact that ships have various lengths, waiting time can be
diﬃcult to avoid in busy ports. In less busy ports where congestion is less of an issue, the
berth allocation plan may be optimized such that the total distance between the ship and all
the load containers is minimal.
The berth allocation is well documented in the literature, and have been addressed by many
including [21].
2.2.3
Crane split problems
Continuing down the hierarchy the next problem that is encountered is the challenge of quay
crane assignment. If it is not already ﬁxed by the berth location, it needs to be decided how
the quay cranes should be distributed among the diﬀerent ships. Once this is done, for each
ship it is determined how the bays should be divided among the quay cranes, and in which
order the bays are to be handle by the cranes. The result is what is called a crane split, or
quay crane schedule.
The objective is to ﬁnd the crane split that minimizes the handling time by having a high
utilization of the quay cranes. As the quay cranes can not change the order among them, the
crane split should be such that the cranes at all time have access to bays to work on. A model
to solving the problem can be seen in [19].
2.2.4
Stowage plan problems
A stowage plan dictates how containers should be packed on board a container vessel. The
stowage plan does not depend on either the crane split or the berth allocation, and can therefore
be solved independently. The stowage plan only depends on the layout of the container ship
and, the location of containers already on board. Once it is known exactly which containers
that will be loaded at the next port, a plan can be found.
As changes and delays can occur right up to the point where a ship is being loaded, it usually
not known well in advanced how many and which containers that needs to be loaded. For this
reason several new stowage plans may need to be developed every time a ship approaches a
port. This is why the stowage plan problem is a problem on the operational level, even though
it is not dependent on previous decisions.
The challenge of making a stowage plan, lies in the fact that many constraints needs to
be fulﬁlled. As discussed in Section 2.1.1 diﬀerent container types may impose diﬀerent
restrictions. Reefer containers must be placed with access to electricity, 20ft containers can’t
not be placed on top of a 40ft container etc. Besides this, the stowage plan should also respect
the weight distribution and stress limits of the ship, as mentioned in Section 2.1.2.
Respecting all these constraint a good stowage plan also minimizes overstowage. As over-
stowage occur in container yards with stacks of only 3-6 containers, overstowage also occurs on
container ships, where stacks are much higher. To simplify the problem of ﬁnding the optimal
plan, a class based stowage plan, or a pre-stowage plan, is often found instead. The diﬀerence
is that in a class based stowage plan, the containers are not considered individually, but as
Page 12
Optimizing the ship loading problem
==PAGE:25==
2
CONTAINER SHIPPING
groups or classes.
A class of containers is deﬁned by a type (of container), a destination, and a weight interval.
Two containers of same type, with the same destination, and approximately the same weight,
will therefore belong to the same class. Instead of ﬁnding a speciﬁc location for each container,
it is now suﬃcient to decide upon a class of containers for each position. A pre-stowage plan,
is a plan where this have been done.
The reader is refereed to [23] for a more thoroughly discussion of the diﬃculties of ﬁnding the
optimal stowage plan.
Optimizing the ship loading problem
Page 13
==PAGE:26==
==PAGE:27==
3
THE SHIP LOADING PROBLEM
3
The Ship Loading Problem
In this section the Ship Loading Problem (SLP) will be discussed and described. First the SLP
will be related to the previous discussed challenges in container shipping. Then the essence of
the SLP is described and a deﬁnition of the problem will be discussed. Finally the SLP is
broken down in two parts, which are explained in more detail.
3.1
Problem description
In the previous section, some of the challenges of container shipping were presented. The
problems covered the process from before a ﬂeet could be deployed, up until a ship was berthed
and a crane split was made. The problems were also organized in a hierarchy, to illustrate the
fact that decisions made in the top, aﬀected the problems below.
Following this methodology the Ship Loading Problem can be seen as the next challenge that
is met, or the as the problem in the bottom of the hierarchy. Immediately after a ship is
berthed, the process of unloading and loading the ship is started, and as the name suggests,
the main question of the SLP is; How should containers be loaded on a vessel?.
Similar to the previous discussed problems, it is not uniquely given how this question should
be answered. As the SLP is less studied than some of the previous mentioned maritime
optimization problems, the literature lacks a clear deﬁnition of the SLP. In Section 2.1.3 it was
described how the loading process involves several diﬀerent actions and equipment. Depending
on what equipment and which part of the loading process that is considered, the question can
and have been answered in diﬀerent ways. To the authors knowledge the ﬁrst attempt to give
a formal deﬁnition is in the soon to be published [16]. In [16] the SLP is deﬁned as
”The management of loading operations, planning of the equipment to use and
their scheduling”
Based on this deﬁnition, the question of how a ship should be loaded, is twofold. On one side
the ”how” relates to where on the vessel and in which order containers should be loaded. On
the other side, the ”how” relates to which equipment should be used.
Figure 10: Components of the Ship Loading Problem.
In Figure 10 it is illustrated that the SLP considers several aspects of the loading process,
which will be explained further in the following two sections.
Optimizing the ship loading problem
Page 15
==PAGE:28==
3
THE SHIP LOADING PROBLEM
3.1.1
Loading operations
The two questions seen in the operations side of Figure 10, can be answered with a stowage
plan and a load sequence. A stowage plan is, as described in Section 2.2.4 a plan for where
containers should be placed on board a vessel. If a detailed stowage plan is already made, this
aspect is not included in the SLP. On the other hand, if only a class based stowage plan have
been made, then it still needs to be decided exactly where each container should be loaded.
Figure 11: Stowage planning options. [16]
In Figure 11 a small example of the problem is shown. A class based stowage plan has
been made for the ship and two positions belonging to class t1 are shown. In the yard, two
containers of class t1 are also shown, leaving two possible stowage plans. The problem consists
of matching containers with positions, in the most appropriate way. In the example given in
Figure 11, that would be the stowage plan, marked in black, as this minimize the distance
each container needs to be transported.
In [16] this process is called operational stowage planning, and in [22] it is called terminal-
oriented ship stowage planning. The argument in [22] is that where the pre-stowage plan is
made by the shipowner, such that it respects the ship constraints, then the ﬁnal stowage plan
can be made by the terminal to maximize their interests. Hence the name terminal-oriented
ship stowage planning.
The next part of the operational side of the SLP have in the literature been called the load
sequencing problem. It consist of ﬁnding the optimal order in which the containers should be
loaded. As mentioned in Section 2.1.3 ships are usually loaded bay-wise, and should of cause
always be loaded from the bottom and up. Any load sequence respecting this may be seen as
a feasible sequence, however other factors may eﬀect the eﬃciency of diﬀerent sequences.
Figure 12: Load sequence options. [16]
Page 16
Optimizing the ship loading problem
==PAGE:29==
3
THE SHIP LOADING PROBLEM
In Figure 12, an example is given where the containers that needs to be loaded are available
at diﬀerent times. From the example it is seen that in the optimized sequence, containers
are loaded according to their availability, thereby ﬁnishing the loading process as quickly as
possible.
The other sequence shown in Figure 12 is based on a sea to land policy, meaning that containers
are ﬁrst loaded in the stacks closest to the sea, and then inwards towards the quay. Such
a policy simpliﬁes the job of the quay crane operators, as an entire stack is loaded before
changing. Furthermore it improves their view of the loading process, since they do not risque
having containers on the land side of the vessel, blocking their view.
Policies such as the sea to land may be preferable by the terminal, and when this is the case,
the loading sequence is ﬁxed once a detailed stowage plan is made.
3.1.2
Equipment
The second part of the SLP relates to the equipment. Clearly the equipment usages can not
be scheduled before it is decide what, or how much equipment to use in the loading process.
On the other hand, the schedule may also eﬀect what equipment is needed. Therefore it is
beneﬁcial to do equipment scheduling and assignment simultaneously.
Typically terminals have a ﬁxed setup, using either straddle carriers, or trucks combined with
gantry cranes. Based on the setup, a limited number of either trucks or straddle carriers is
then available for the loading process. The aim is then to decide which vehicles, should pick
up which containers. As type and amount of equipment vary from terminal to terminal, this
part of the SLP is less generic and depends more on the speciﬁc terminal in consideration.
Optimizing the ship loading problem
Page 17
==PAGE:30==
==PAGE:31==
4
LITERATURE REVIEW
4
Literature review
As stated in the previous section, the Ship Loading Problem is not yet well deﬁned in the
literature. For this reason articles focusing on diﬀerent parts of the SLP can be found in the
literature, under various names. The lack of a recurring understanding of the problem, also
makes it diﬃcult to compare the diﬀerent SLP models and results.
Most articles can be sorted according to the division made in the previous section, where
the SLP was divided in an operational and a equipment part. The articles presented here
have therefore been grouped according to their solution. In Section 4.1 articles that results in
either a load sequence or a stowage plan is presented, and in Section 4.2 references are given
to work done equipment side of the SLP. In the last subsection, articles that includes both the
operational part and the equipment part of SLP are presented, and compared to the work in
this report.
Each subsection is organized chronologically such that older articles are presented ﬁrst, and
more recent work is presented at the end. In general all models aim at reducing time. In
some models this is done directly, and in others it is done by reducing the number of time
consuming operations, such as yard shifts. Therefore emphasis have been put on the model
objective of the diﬀerent articles. When computation time is reported in the article, this have
also been included in the review, along with the size of the instances that are solved.
4.1
Container operations
Article [14] is a good example of the lack of an SLP deﬁnition. The article is called The
Containership Loading Problem, but only considers what in this report have been called the
operational part of the SLP. The article presents a model for ﬁnding a load sequence. This is
done while minimizing the number of expected yard shifts together with the instability of the
ship. In this article the instability is simply given as the diﬀerence between the metacenter and
the center of gravity. Weights have placed on both the number reshuﬄes and the instability,
such as the two conﬂicting objectives can be balanced. The model in [14] diﬀers from the
model proposed in this report in several ways. It does not not consider the time or number
of straddle carriers needed to implement the loading sequence. Neither does the model take
into account that several quay cranes can having diﬀerent simultaneously running loading
sequences. The model is run using an exact method on instances op to 2600 containers, and
running times are for all instances kept under 5 seconds.
The work of [14] is further developed in [15]. Here the list and trim of the loaded containers
are included ind the objective function. The model proposed in [15] also takes into account
trim and list caused by containers already on board the ship. A heuristic approach is used to
solve instance of 504 containers, and running times between 5884 and 8150 seconds is reported.
In [12] the aim is also to ﬁnd a loading sequence, while having an objective function consisting
of two parts. Beside minimizing the time spent on yard shifts, the moving time of the quay
crane is also minimized in the model. The article assumes that only one quay crane is available
for all bays of the ship, and that only one ship is in the terminal at a time. Besides having
constraints related to the stability of the ship, the model quite interestingly also sets an upper
limit on the maximum number of vehicles in diﬀerent sections of the yard. This is done as a
method to reduce congestion, and increase safety in they yard. The problem is solved using
heuristics, and unfortunately no running times are reported.
Optimizing the ship loading problem
Page 19
==PAGE:32==
4
LITERATURE REVIEW
Recently published article[22] presents a model to determine the detailed stowage plan,
based on a class based stowage plan. The objective of this model is also to minimize the time
spent on yard shifts, but also to minimizing the time needed to transport the containers. This
model takes into account the time needed to transport containers from the yard to the quay,
which is why the model have been used as inspiration for the model in this report.
Although the model includes the time used for container handling, the model does not assign
equipment to diﬀerent tasks, nor does it schedule when equipment is used as it is done in this
report. The model is solved using both CPLEX and a heuristic for instances containing up to
549 containers. This led to computation times up to 2259 seconds when solved with CPLEX,
and impressive 92 seconds for the heuristic.
4.2
Equipment management
Equipment management is not only met in container terminals. Literature dealing with this
problem may therefore not necessarily relate to the shipping industry. For instance the job
shop scheduling problem ﬁrst presented in 1966 [10], address the problem of assigning a set
of jobs to a set of machines. This problem have been addressed by many, and clearly have
similarities to the process of assigning load operations to equipment.
Focusing on articles dealing with the equipment management of container terminals, [18] can
be mentioned. In this article the aim is to ﬁnd the schedule for a single gantry crane. The
schedule includes a sequence of yard bays that should be serviced by the crane, as well as the
corresponding number of containers to pick up at each bay. The objective is to minimize the
cranes total travel time between the diﬀerent positions, while the sequence must respect the
order in which the containers are needed.
Article [5] relates to the work done in this report. In the article it is studied how vehicles best
are matched with containers, such that the makespan is mininmizing. The model presented in
this report will do the same, but the diﬀerence is that [5] only considers a single quay crane.
4.3
Full implementation
Article [25] combines both the operational and the equipment part of the SLP. This is done
by determining a load sequence as well as assigning a speciﬁc straddle carrier to each loading
event. The loading sequence is determined such that the the waiting time of the quay crane is
minimized. This is done under the assumption that the quay crane uses the same average
loading time to handle each container, and that the transportation time between container
and crane is known. The problem setup resembles that presented in this report, but since
only one quay crane is considered in [25] the model is less complex. This model also assumes
that suﬃcient space at the quay cranes is available, such that straddle carriers can drop of
containers before the quay crane is ready.
In the article an exact method is used to solve 3 instances, each with several diﬀerent numbers
of containers. The running time diﬀers substantially between the diﬀerent instances, but for
the smaller instances (10-40 containers), the optimal solution is several times found within one
minute. For all 3 instances are seen a rapidly increase in running time for bigger number of con-
tainers. The highest running time is 6037 seconds to solve a 60 container instance to optimality.
Page 20
Optimizing the ship loading problem
==PAGE:33==
4
LITERATURE REVIEW
Another example of model that includes several part of the SLP, is [17]. The rather complex
model presented in this articles, determines the load sequence of containers, the stowage plan
of the ship, and match each operation with a quay crane and a starting time. The model
has 5 diﬀerent objectives, that minimizes both the handling times, and diﬀerent inconvenient
operations. Violations on objectives is penalized with a given parameter, and then the total
penalty is minimized. The model includes weight constraints related to max weight of stacks.
Furthermore the model assumes a container terminal with 3 types of handling equipment.
Besides quay cranes, and yard transfers, the terminal is assumed to have transfer cranes to lift
an load containers from the yard on the yard transfers.
The model is solved for up to 1340 containers using a heuristic, with computational times up
to 2498 seconds.
Article [13] also ﬁnds the optimal stowage plan, and load sequence while considering terminal
equipment. The objective of the model is to minimize the number of yard shifts, vertically
instability of the ship as well as the total traveled distance by ground equipment. A heuristic
was used to test the model on instances with up to 591 containers, and computational times
between 1 and 5 minutes.
Optimizing the ship loading problem
Page 21
==PAGE:34==
==PAGE:35==
5
MODELLING THE SHIP LOADING PROBLEM
5
Modelling the Ship Loading Problem
This section will explain how the Ship Loading Problem have been implemented. This is
done by ﬁrst discussing diﬀerent possible objectives to the problem, and afterwards discussing
possible constraints. A model implementing the SLP is then presented, which is followed by a
subsection discussing the weaknesses of the proposed model.
5.1
Model implementation
In Section 3 the SLP, was claimed to consist of two parts; an operational part, and an
equipment part. On the operational part, this report assumes that a class based stowage plan
has already been made. This means that all the slots have already been assigned a class, such
that each container in the problem, only needs to be assigned to one slot out of a small subset.
Furthermore it is assumed that the class based stowage plan, to a suﬃcient degree, have taken
the ships capacity, stability and strength into account. Therefor these aspects are not included
in the proposed model for SLP.
Another input parameter for the proposed model, is the number of quays cranes and crane
split. It is assumed that the terminal follows a ”sea to land” loading policy, such that once
the detailed stowage plan is ﬁxed, so is the load sequence.
On the equipment side, this model will assume that straddle carriers are used. The model
will assign straddle carriers to each container and provide a schedule, of when each straddle
carrier drops of containers at the quay cranes.
5.1.1
Objective
As discussed in [22], the container terminal and the shipowner might not always have the
same interest. The best loading plan for a shipowner might not be the best loading plan for
the terminal. Therefore it is pointless to talk about the best or optimal loading plan without
clarifying exactly what the objective is.
As seen in Section 4 several things can and have been minimized in the ship loading problem.
One objective used, is the number of yard shifts, as in [22]. However [22] only considers one
ship. As several ships usually are loaded at the same time, it is necessary to take the load
plan of the other ships into account to determine if a yard shift is really necessary. Because
even though a yard shift may be necessary at the beginning of the load process, that may not
be the case when the container is actually being picked up. The container blocking the pick
up may already have been loaded on to a ship or truck. To get a realistic view of the number
of shifts, several load plans need to be considered, which would increase the complexity of a
model. Therefore yard shifts has not been included in this report.
Another objective could be to minimize the total distance between the containers and their
slot, as seen in Figure 11. Assuming that the straddle carriers run at a ﬁxed average speed,
this would be the same as minimizing the time needed. Such an approach would be beneﬁcial
for the container terminal, as this could lower both the man hours and the number of straddle
carriers needed to service a ship. On the other hand it could be argued that the shipowner
doesn’t care how many straddle carriers are needed, as long as the ship is loaded as quickly as
possible.
To balance these two conﬂicting objectives, a third objective have been chosen in this report.
The proposed model has a combined objective function minimizing both the number of straddle
Optimizing the ship loading problem
Page 23
==PAGE:36==
5
MODELLING THE SHIP LOADING PROBLEM
carriers and the makespan of the loading process. Thereby the the optimal load plan in this
report can be seen as the best compromise between the the shipowners wish to be berthed as
short as possible, and the terminals wish to minimize their resource consumption.
5.1.2
Constraints
Just as diﬀerent objectives can be chosen for the same problem, so can diﬀerent constraints.
Models resulting in a stowage plan, should as a minimum have a constraint ensuring that no
two containers are loaded to the same slot, and that all containers are loaded. For instance
these are the only two constraints included in [14].
Besides these, SLP models also often includes constraints related to weight and stability such
such as [22] and [17]. No such constraints are included this report, since the class based
stowage plan is assumed to ensure that stability and weights are within the ships limits.
Constraints may also be targeted speciﬁc features or limitations for a given terminal or ship.
For example when a constraint in [12] limits the maximum number of straddle carriers in a
area, it could be inspired by a small terminal with congestion problems. In theory any linear
constraint can be included, but usually adding constraints eﬀect the time required to solve
the problem.
In this model, the constraints included are related to the the straddle carriers. The constraint
ensures the feasible usage of the carriers, by prohibiting them to pick up several containers at
the same time, and ensuring suﬃcient travel time between container pickups. This model also
enforces that containers may not arrive at a quay crane before the crane is ready.
5.2
The Compact Model
Based on the considerations given in Section 3.1, a compact model solving the SLP have been
developed. As a crane split, a class based stowage plan, and the number of available straddle
carriers is assumed to be known, Table 1 lists all the used sets and their notation.
Sets
C
The set of containers.
Cp
The set of containers belonging to a class suitable for slot position p
P
The set of slot positions.
P con
c
The set of slot positions belonging ti same class as container c.
pcrane
p
The set of positions handle by the same crane as position p.
S
The set of straddle carriers.
Sp
The set of straddle carriers serving position p.
Table 1
Note that for the compact model, capital letters have been used for sets, small letters for
variables, and Greek letters for parameters.
Using the sets shown above, the problem have been modeled using four sets of decision variables
(DV). The ﬁrst decision variable
DV1:
xcps ∈{0, 1}
∀c ∈C, p ∈P, s ∈S
is a binary variable used to determine the relationship between a container, a position and a
straddle carrier. xcps = 1 if container c ∈C is placed in position p ∈P, and transported by
Page 24
Optimizing the ship loading problem
==PAGE:37==
5
MODELLING THE SHIP LOADING PROBLEM
straddle carrier s ∈S, and zero otherwise. The second decision variable
DV2:
qs ∈{0, 1}
∀s ∈S
is a binary variable indicating whether a straddle carrier have been used or not, such that
qs = 1 when straddle carrier s ∈S have been used in the solution, and 0 otherwise.
DV3:
tp ∈R+
∀p ∈P
Decision variable 3, is a non negative real number related to the end handling time of each
container. In other words tp is the time a straddle carrier delivers a container for position
p ∈P, at the corresponding quay crane. The last decision variable is
DV4:
z ∈R+
which is the makespan. Using these decision variables, the problem have been formulated as
follows.
Compact Model:
Obj.:
min
z + α
X
s∈S
qs
Subject to:
X
p∈P con
c
X
s∈Sp
xcps = 1
∀c ∈C
(1)
X
c∈Cp
X
s∈Sp
xcps = 1
∀p ∈P
(2)
2τcp −µ(2 −xcps −
X
i∈C
xip′s) ≤tp −tp′
∀c ∈C, p ∈P, s ∈Sp, p′ ∈P crane
p
|p′ < p
(3)
tp ≤tp′ + β
∀p ∈P, p′ ∈P crane
p
|p′ < p
(4)
X
c∈C
X
p∈P
xcps <µ · qs
∀s ∈S
(5)
z ≥tend
ps
∀p ∈P, s ∈S
(6)
xcps ∈{0, 1},
∀c ∈C, p ∈P, s ∈S
qs ∈{0, 1},
∀s ∈S
tps ∈R+
∀p ∈P, s ∈S
z ∈R+
Besides the sets given in Table 1, the model takes use of the following parameters, which
are either given or should be set according to the speciﬁc terminal.
Optimizing the ship loading problem
Page 25
==PAGE:38==
5
MODELLING THE SHIP LOADING PROBLEM
Parameters
α
The weight or artiﬁcial ”cost” of using a straddle carrier.
β
Minimum required time between container arrivals at quay
cranes (crane handling time).
µ
A suitable large number.
τcp
The time needed for a straddle carrier to go from the position
of container c to quay crane q.
The time needed is assumed to be equal in both directions.
Table 2
The model objective is to minimize the the makespan z and the number of used straddle
carriers qs. The parameter α is used to balance the inconvenience of using many straddle
carriers, and having a big makespan. If α is large, the reduction of the makespan will have to
be large before an extra straddle carrier is included in the solution, whereas if α is small, new
straddle carriers will be included even if they only reduce the makespan slightly.
Constraint (1) and (2) ensures that all containers are being loaded, and that one container
have been placed in each position. Constraint (4) ensures that all positions are handled in
in the correct order, and that the containers are arriving at the quay crane at least β apart.
Note that by p′ ≤p, is meant that position p′ is handled before position p according to the
load policy. In (5) the qs are set to one if straddle carrier s is used to transport one or more
containers, and in (6) the makespan is set to be bigger than all end handling times.
The most complex constraint is (3). For a given container, straddle carrier and position,
constraint (3) makes sure that the end handling time of that position is set appropriate. This
is done by forcing the diﬀerence between two consecutive positions end times (tp −tp′), to be
equal or bigger than the time required to pick up a container (2τcp). The time required for
a straddle carrier to go between a container and a given bay is assumed to be the same in
both directions, this is why the τcp is simply multiplied by two. The term multiplied by µ on
left-hand side makes sure the constraint is only binding when the two positions are handled
by the same straddle carrier.
5.3
Model properties & assumptions
The proposed compact model has some limitations and inconvenient properties. Both which
comes down to the dilemma of having a detailed model on one hand, and a easy solvable model
on the other hand. In this case the consequences of having a model including more than one
crane, several sets of straddle carriers, and speciﬁc handling times, is a high number of both
decision variables and constraints. As seen below, the number of variables is quadratic with
respect to the number of containers, assuming that |P| ≈|C|. Likewise there is a non-linear
relation between the number of constraints, and number of containers.
# of variables: |C · P · S| + |P · S| + |S| + 1
≈
|S(C2 + C + 1)|
# of constraints: |C| + |P| + |C · P · S · P| + |P + P| + |S| + |S · P|
≈|S(C3 + C + 1) + C2 + C|
With just 4 straddle carriers, 20 containers and slots, the number of decision variables becomes
1684, and the number of constraints 32500. As it shall be seen in Section 7 this makes the
model unsolvable for real life instances with several hundreds of containers.
Page 26
Optimizing the ship loading problem
==PAGE:39==
5
MODELLING THE SHIP LOADING PROBLEM
Despite these high numbers of decision variables and constraints, the proposed model still
makes several assumptions to reduce the model complexity. Where some assumptions are
reasonable, others are more severe.
In Equation (3) it is assumed that Sp = Sp′ for p ∈P and p′ ∈P crane
p
, which means that each
set of straddle carriers only service one crane during the loading process. Clearly it could be
beneﬁcial to allow straddle carriers to function across all quay cranes, but in reality this is
not how terminals are operated. To simplify the challenge of maneuvering a straddle carrier
around a terminal, the carriers usually go back an forth to one single crane.
Another acceptable assumptions, is that the number of available straddle carriers most be
known. It is reasonable to assume that a terminal must be able to give an estimation of the
number of carriers available for a given ship. However from a modeling point of view, it would
be desirable if the maximum number of carriers was not an input parameter, such that the
model simply found the necessary number of carriers.
A less desirable or realistic property is, that Equation (3) only includes the transportation
time τcp and not any container handling time. In other words the model assumes that all
containers in the yard are ready to be picked up, and that any necessary yard shifts have
already been performed by other equipment.
Furthermore the model does not include extra time when cranes shift bays. In reality, once a
crane have loaded the last container of one bay, it needs time to move before it is ready to load
the next container. This is not taken into account in the model, and as such the containers
will in reality arrive a bit to early at the crane, once the crane has shifted bays for the ﬁrst
time.
Optimizing the ship loading problem
Page 27
==PAGE:40==
==PAGE:41==
6
DECOMPOSITION
6
Decomposition
Mixed interger programming (MIP) problems, such as the one proposed in the previous
section, are more time consuming to solve than linear programming (LP) problems. For this
reason more complex MIP problems are often not solved directly using a Simplex solver. MIP
problems are instead solved either using a heuristic, or by decomposing the problem.
A heuristic is a problem based algorithm used to search for a good, but not necessarily optimal
solution. The idea of using a heuristics, is to ﬁnd a reasonable solution fast, instead of using
long time to get the optimal solution. The disadvantage is that a good heuristic can be diﬃcult
to obtain, and you risque having a method that is not very fast, and still doesn’t provide
the optimal solution. Also heuristics require a lot of tuning and adaptation to the speciﬁc
problem, which mean you risque having a less ﬂexible or generic algorithm.
Decomposition methods stills ensure optimality, but try to speed op the solving process by
transforming the original problem. The idea is to transformed or decomposed a time consuming
problem into one or more problems that are faster to solve. Clearly it is not always easy to
rewrite and decompose a problem, let alone to obtain new problems that are faster to solve.
Whether heuristics or decomposition is the best way to go, is question of opinion and the
problem at hand. It is this authors belief that one should always strive to get the optimal
solution, so if decomposition is possible this should be done. Therefore this section will
introduce the column generation algorithm, which is an decomposition method. Hereafter
the problem described in Section 5 will be modeled using column generation, and ﬁnally the
eﬃciency will be brieﬂy discussed.
6.1
Column Generation
Column generation is a method that exploits that many LP problems have a large number of
decision variables that are non-basic in the optimal solution, that is decision variables that are
zero. Examples of such problems are the crew scheduling problems addressed in [24], and the
multi-commodity ﬂow problem addressed in [3]. In crew scheduling problems a huge number
of crew schedules may exists, but only a small number are chosen and included in the ﬁnal
and optimal solution. Similarly many diﬀerent ﬂows exits in a multi-commodity ﬂow problem,
but only few are chosen.
Many diﬀerent problems of this type exist but the concept of column generation is the same
for all. The idea, originally proposed in [9] by Ford and Fulkerson, is that if only a small
subset of decision variables are included in the ﬁnal solution, then not all variables may be
needed to ﬁnd the optimal solution. So instead of including all decision variables and thereby
making the problem big and computational heavy, only a subset of decision variables are
initially considered.
The problem is then divided in two. A master problem that ﬁnds the best solution based on
the reduced subset of decision variables and a sub problem that ﬁnds new decision variables
that can improve the solution. The master and the sub problem will be explained individually
in the following 2 subsections. This will be follow by a section explaining the connection
between the two problems and go in more detail with the algorithm.
6.1.1
The master problem
As indicated in the previous, the use of column generation is by far limited to a speciﬁc
industry or technical area. However the form of the problem is important to how easy and
Optimizing the ship loading problem
Page 29
==PAGE:42==
6
DECOMPOSITION
successful column generation can be applied. The problem must be such that it consists of
choosing among diﬀerent predeﬁned sets. For instance in the crew scheduling problem, the
objective is to chose among diﬀerent schedules, where each schedule can be seen as a set of
tasks. In the multi-commodity ﬂow problem, a ﬂow can be seen as a set of edges. Note that
these sets are assumed not to violate any problem speciﬁc constraints, such that sets may in
fact be included in a solution. In the crew scheduling framework this means that a schedule
(set of tasks) must not violate the maximum number of tasks, have overlapping tasks or violate
other aspects that would make the schedule infeasible.
If the problem at hand already has the appropriate form, this becomes the master problem
with the simple diﬀerence that not all decision variables in the original problem, is included in
the master problem. However if the original problem doesn’t have the appropriate form, it
must ﬁrst be reformulated, and then the reformulated problem becomes the master problem.
If a reformulation of the problem is necessary, this can in some cases be done intuitively based
on ones understanding of the problem. However in many cases it is done more theoretical
using Dantzig-Wolfe decomposition[6].
A thorough review of the Dantzig-Wolfe decomposition will not be given here, but the essence
of the method is to use the Minkowski-Weyl Theorem to introduce new constraints and
decision variables. In a problem with N decision variables the constraints deﬁnes a solution
space or a polyhedron in the N-dimensional space. The Minkowski-Weyl Theorem states
that any polyhedron can be expressed as a convex combination of its extreme points, and a
conical combination of its extreme rays. Using this theorem, Dantzig-Wolfe decomposition
can be used to transform problems into a form suitable for column generation. An example of
Dantzig-Wolfe decomposition can be seen in the appendix.
As the original problem often requires to be reformulated to create the master problem, this
reformulation step can be seen as step 0, in the column generation algorithm. For the same
reason Dantzig and Wolfe is by some considered as the real founders of column generation,
and some use the name Dantzig-Wolfe decomposition synonymous for the column generation
method.
Before continuing to sub problem it is important to highlight some basic properties of the
master problem. Given a master problem written in a standard matrix form such as the
following, three things should be kept in mind.
min
CT x
S.t.
Ax ≤b
(π)
Firstly if the number of decision variables is increased, the vector x increases in length, and
the coeﬃcient matrix A should therefore be added an extra column. Here in lies the reason
for the name column generation, because when the sub problem ﬁnds new decision variables
it is in fact generating new columns that are added to the coeﬃcient matrix in the master
problem. Secondly it should be noted that no matter how many decision variables are added
to the master problem, the number of rows in A and the length of b stays unchanged. In other
words the number of constraints stays unchanged in the master problem.
Thirdly for each constraint in a problem there is a corresponding dual variable, indicated
with π in the constraint above. As the number of constraints stay unchanged when decision
variables are added, so does the number of dual variables. This is important since the dual
variables are linking the master problem with the sub problem, as it shall be seen in the next
section.
Page 30
Optimizing the ship loading problem
==PAGE:43==
6
DECOMPOSITION
6.1.2
The sub problem
The purpose of the sub problem is to generate new columns which is, as just explain the
same as generation decision variables. As in the case of the crew scheduling problem and
multi-commodity ﬂow problem, the columns typically have a problem speciﬁc interpretation.
Therefore the constraints of the sub problem is were all restrictions on a column is imposed,
such that the columns generated are feasible to use in the master problem.
The brilliance of the column generation method, is that sub problem does not simply generate
feasible columns but improving columns. By improving columns is meant columns that when
inserted in the master problem, will improve the solution of the master problem. These
columns are found using some insights in the simplex method. In Figure 13 an initial simplex
tableau is shown and color codded, and in Figure 14, the same tableau is shown in matrix
form.
Figure 13: Initial simplex tableau.10
Figure 14: Initial simplex tableau in matrix form.10
The entire simplex tableau of any following iteration, can be expressed by products of
the vector cB and the matrix B, that depends on the given iteration [11]. B is the basis
matrix, produced by the columns in the initial simplex tableau, of the basis variables in the
given iteration. cB is then the negative row zero elements in the initial tableau for those basis
variables. To illustrate, the simplex tableau following the one shown in Figure 13, is shown in
Figure 15, and beneath in Figure 16 the tableau is given in matrix form.
Figure 15: First iteration simplex tableau.10
10Course material from 42136 Large Scale Optimization using Decomposition, by Stefan Røpke
Optimizing the ship loading problem
Page 31
==PAGE:44==
6
DECOMPOSITION
Figure 16: Matrix form of a simplex tableau for any given iteration.11
After the ﬁrst iteration, the basic variables are now x3, x2 and x5, and going back to the
initial tableau in Figure 13, the columns of B and elements of cB are found to be
B =


1
0
0
0
2
0
0
2
1


cB =
 0
5
0

(7)
It is left to reader to verify that the simplex tableau shown in Figure 15 can in fact be written
as shown in Figure 16 using the values for B and CB that are given in Equation (7).
From Figure 16 it can be seen that row zero of the non-slack variables can be written as
cBB−1A −c. This row is used in the simplex method to ﬁnd the next entering variable, by
choosing the variable with the biggest negative number. Using that cBB−1 = π, where π is
the vector of dual variables, πAi −ci is the row 0 element for variable i.
This means that if the dual vector π is known, it can be determined whether or not column Ai
with cost ci will improve the solution. The sub problem should therefore ﬁnd a new column
Xnew with cnew that minimizes the reduced cost
cnew −πXnew
(8)
The subproblem is also called the pricing problem, as it prices all the possible columns.
6.1.3
The algorithm
The overall ﬂow of the algorithm is shown in Figure 17. The main elements are the master
and sub problem. In an iterative process ﬁrst the master problem is solved, and the dual
variables are sent to the sub problem. Hereafter the sub problem is solved and columns are
sent back to the master problem. This is repeated until no improving columns can be found
and the process is terminated. When no improving columns can be found in the sub problem,
the solution found by the master problem will be the optimal solution, despite not all possible
columns have been included in the master problem.
Figure 17: Flowchart of column generation algorithm.
As it can be seen in ﬁg. 17 the master problem are given some initial columns. The
columns must be able to form a feasible solution, such that master problem can pass dual
variables to the sub problem. In some cases, ﬁnding such an initial set of columns may be
both diﬃcult and time consuming. Furthermore it should be kept in mind that the better the
initial columns are, the fewer iterations are required to ﬁnd the optimal solution. This means
11Course material from 42136 Large Scale Optimization using Decomposition, by Stefan Røpke
Page 32
Optimizing the ship loading problem
==PAGE:45==
6
DECOMPOSITION
that it can be beneﬁcial to try to ﬁnd a good set of initial columns, especially if the sub and
master problem are time consuming.
Another way of tuning the algorithm is not to solve the sub problem to optimality, or to solve
it using a heuristic. It may be beneﬁcial simply to run the sub problem until one improving
column is found, instead of spending time trying to ﬁnd the most improving column. However
this may cause more iterations to be necessary. If a heuristic, or another method is used to
ﬁnd columns, the sub problem should at least once be solved using an exact method, otherwise
the optimality guarantee is lost.
6.2
Decomposing the compact model
The compact model given in section 5 can not be used as a master problem in column
generation, without being reformulated. Even though it is a model with many decision
variables, where many are non basic in the optimal solution, it does not comply with the
structure given in section 6.1.1.
The compact model have therefore been rewritten, and is presented in the following subsection,
followed by a subsection presenting the corresponding sub problem.
6.2.1
Master problem
The compact model in Section 5 uses a large number of binary variables to decide whether a
given container should be matched with a given slot position, and a given straddle carrier,
while being subject to a large number of constraint. This have been reduced to a much simpler
master problem in (12) - (16), with fewer constraints, and fewer decision variables. This is
done by introducing plans. A plan is deﬁned by the crane it is for, the containers it includes,
the completion time of the containers in the plan, and the number of straddle carriers used in
the plan. The new formulation of the problem requires some new sets and paramters that are
given in Table 3.
Sets & parameters - Master problem
P
The set of plans.
K
The set of cranes.
C
The set of containers.
lcon
pc ∈{0, 1}
Linking plans with containers. lcon
pc = 1 if container c is in plan p.
lcrane
pk
∈{0, 1}
Linking plans with cranes. lcrane
pk
= 1 if crane k is used in plan p.
ep
c ∈N
The end handling time of container c in plan p.
gp ∈N
The number of straddle carriers used in plan p.
Table 3
Note that P is now the set of plans, and no longer the set of positions, while C is still the set
of containers. Obviously the objective of the master problem should still be to minimizes the
makespan and number of straddle carriers, but as this is done diﬀerently from the compact
model, the following decision variables are introduced.
DV1:
xp ∈{0, 1}
∀p ∈P
(9)
DV2:
vk ∈N
∀k ∈K
(10)
DV3:
m ∈N
(11)
Optimizing the ship loading problem
Page 33
==PAGE:46==
6
DECOMPOSITION
xp is one, when plan p ∈P is included in the solution, and zero otherwise. vk is the number
of straddle carriers used by crane k ∈K and m is the makespan. Using this notation the
compact model from Section 5 is rewritten to the master problem.
Master Problem:
Obj:
min
m + α
X
k∈K
vk
(12)
s.t:
X
p∈P
lcrane
pk
xp = 1
∀k ∈K
(θ)
(13)
X
p∈P
lcrane
pk
gpxp ≤vk
∀k ∈K
(µ)
(14)
X
p∈P
lcon
pc xp = 1
∀c ∈C
(γ)
(15)
X
p∈P
lcon
pc ep
cxp ≤m
∀c ∈C
(ϵ)
(16)
xp ∈{0, 1},
∀p ∈P
vk ∈N,
∀k ∈K
m ∈N
Compared to the compact model, the number of constraints have signiﬁcantly been reduced,
as many of the constraints are know moved to the sub problem. The master problem is now
subject to 4 constraints. Constraint (13) ensures that exactly one plan is included for each
crane, such that a solution will have one plan for each crane and no more. Constraint (14)
sets vk to be the correct value, for each crane. Constraint (15) ensures that all containers are
included in exactly one of the chosen plans. Finally (16) sets the makespan m to bigger than
all completion times in the included plans.
Assuming that all possible and legal plans are included in the set P, the master problem could
be solved directly and will give the same result as the compact model. However at no point
in the following P is assumed to contain all possible plans. In the literature a distinction
between the master problem, and the restricted master problem, is sometimes made. When
this is done, the master problem contains all sets, where the restricted master problem only
contains some of the sets.
To give a better understanding of the similarities between a plan, a column and decision
variable (13) - (16) have been written in matrix form.
Page 34
Optimizing the ship loading problem
==PAGE:47==
6
DECOMPOSITION
Plan 1
Plan 2
Plan P
Constraint 1
Constraint 2
Constraint 3
Constraint 4

































lcrane
11
lcrane
21
lcrane
12...
lcrane
1k
lcrane
p1
...
· · ·
lcrane
pk
lcrane
11
g1
lcrane
21
g2
lcrane
12
g1
...
lcrane
1k
gk
lcrane
p1
gk
...
· · ·
lcrane
pk
gk
lcon
11
lcon
21
lcon
12...
lcon
1c
lcon
p1
...
· · ·
lcon
pc
lcon
11 e1
1
lcon
21 e2
1
lcon
12 e1
2
...
lcon
1c e1
c
lcon
p1 ep
1
...
· · ·
lcon
pc ep
c














































x1
x2
x3
x4
...
xp−2
xp−1
xp













=





1
1
...
1





≤





v1
v2
...
vk





=





1
1
...
1





≤





m
m
...
m





This clearly illustrates that for each decision variable corresponds a column, and that each
column corresponds to a plan. It can also be seen that each column can be divided in 4,
corresponding to the 4 constraint and the information held by each plan.
6.2.2
Sub problems
By deﬁnition a plan only applies for one crane. Furthermore each slot and each straddle carrier
also only relate to one crane. In other words the subsets of slots and subset of straddle carriers
related to the diﬀerent cranes are pairwise disjoint. This have the important implication that
the plans for each crane can be seen as somewhat independent of each other.
As two cranes does not use the same straddle carriers, the feasibility of one plan does not
eﬀect the other. As long as (15) in the master problem ensures that two plans including the
same container is not chosen, then the plans for diﬀerent cranes can be generated separately.
For this reason K identical sub problems can be used to generate and improving column for
each of the K cranes.
As discussed in section 6.1.2 each sub problem should ﬁnd the column X with cost c, that
minimizes the reduced cost given by c −πX, where π is a vector of dual variables from the
master problem. The cost of a column should, as in the original problem, be the makespan
and the straddle carrier cost. From the master problem in section 6.2.1 it is seen that the
dual vector π consists of 4 sub vectors deﬁned as
π =
 θ
µ
γ
ϵ

=
 θ1
· · ·
θk
µ1
· · ·
µk
γ1
· · ·
γc
ϵ1
· · ·
ϵc

(17)
Likewise the column X also consists of 4 parts.
XT =
 lCrane
1
· · ·
lCrane
k
lCrane
1
g1
· · ·
lCrane
k
gk
lcon
1
· · ·
lcon
c
lcon
1
e1
· · ·
lcon
c
ec

(18)
Optimizing the ship loading problem
Page 35
==PAGE:48==
6
DECOMPOSITION
This leads to the following sub problem for the SLP.
Sub problem: (for crane k)
Obj:
min
(msub + αgk) −
 X
c∈C
γclcon
c
+
X
c∈C
ϵcec + θk + µkgk
!
s.t:
X
p∈P k
X
s∈Sp
xcps ≤1
∀c ∈C
(19)
X
c∈Cp
X
s∈Sp
xcps = 1
∀p ∈P k
(20)
2Tcp −M(2 −xcps −
X
i∈C
xip′s) ≤tend
p
−tend
p′
∀p ∈P k, s ∈Sp, p′ ∈P k
p |p′ < p
(21)
tend
p
≤tend
p′
+ β
∀p ∈P k, p′ ∈P k|p′ < p
(22)
X
c∈C
X
p∈P k
xcps <µ · qs
∀s ∈Sk
(23)
msub ≥tend
ps
∀p ∈P k, s ∈Sk
(24)
X
s∈Sk
X
p∈P k
xcps = lcon
c
∀c ∈C
(25)
X
p∈P
X
s∈S
xcpstend
p
= ec
∀c ∈C
(26)
X
s∈S
qs = gk
(27)
xcps ∈{0, 1},
∀c ∈C, p ∈P k, s ∈Sk
lcon
c
∈{0, 1},
∀c ∈C
tend
ps
∈N
∀p ∈P k, s ∈Sk
ec ∈N
∀c ∈C
gk ∈N
∀k ∈K
msub ∈N
The ﬁrst term in the objective function is the cost, and the second is the product of π and X.
The product consists of 4 terms, corresponding to the 4 sub vectors of both π and X. In the
kth sub problem only lCrane
k
= 1, while the rest equals zero. This is why only the kth element
of θ and µ is included in the objective function of the sub problem above.
The constraints of the sub problem shall ensure that the generated plan is feasible and does
not violate any of the restrictions in the original problem. For this reason the constraint of the
compact model can more or less be copied to the sub problem. The only diﬀerence between
(20)-(24) and (2)-(6) is that the constraints in the sub problem only concerns a single crane.
(19) has been changed compared to the compact model, such that each container is included
at most once and (25)-(26) are included such that lcon
c
and ec are set to the correct values.
Page 36
Optimizing the ship loading problem
==PAGE:49==
6
DECOMPOSITION
6.2.3
Evaluation
The two previous subsections demonstrates that the problem can be adapted to the column
generation framework, by creating a master and a sub problem. Combined, the master and
sub problem solves the exact same problem as the one presented in Section 5. The next
step would be to implement the two problems in the iterative process shown in Figure 17.
However as stated in the introduction to this section, the essence of decomposition is to obtain
new models that are faster to solve. So if the master and sub problem does not lower the
computation time, then there is no advantage of the decomposition.
In this case, the master problem is a simple assignment problem that is easy solvable. On the
other hand the sub problem is, as mention, quite similar to the original problem. The sub
problem is smaller than the original problem, as it only includes the operations of one quay
crane, and should therefore be a bit faster to solve. The sub problem is however not solved
only once, but |K| times each iteration. Therefore the sub problem needs to be considerably
faster to solve for the column generation to lower the total computation time. As it will be
seen in the next section, this is not the case, and the full column generation framework have
therefor not been implemented.
Optimizing the ship loading problem
Page 37
==PAGE:50==
==PAGE:51==
7
RESULTS
7
Results
In this section the performance of the compact model will be evaluated. The ﬁrst subsection
will give a description of the generated data used in the various test. This is followed by a
detailed description of the model output, and a example of the eﬀect of the diﬀerent constraints.
Finally the third and main section is an analysis of the model performance in various scenarios.
As the instances run by the model are generated, and signiﬁcantly smaller than what would
be expected of real life instances, the solutions are of less interest, and instead the focus will
be on the CPU time.
The compact model have been written in Optimization Programming Language (OPL) and
solved using IBM OLOG CPLEX Optimization Studio. All experiments have been run with a
Intel Core 2 Duo CPU (2.53GHz) processor, and 4GB RAM.
7.1
Data
The data used in the following, have been generated based on a simple terminal layout with a
rectangular yard and the quay along the bottom long edge. The ship is placed approximately
in the middle of the quay and the containers have been placed randomly throughout the entire
yard. The containers are not organized in blocs, and rows, but are given a coordinate in
the yard, drawn from a uniform distribution. As the model does not include yard shifts, the
containers are only given 2-dimensional coordinates, and are assumed to be accessible at all
time. An example with 3 container classes, and 21 containers is shown in Figure 18.
Figure 18: The ship and container terminal layout in generated data.
Figure 18 also shows the conﬁguration of the ship being loaded. In this case there are 3
cranes, all servicing 2 bays and 7 containers each. Bays are loaded chronological, and according
to a sea to land policy. This means that containers arriving for crane 1 should arrive in the
following order.
Class 2 →Class 3 →Class 1 →Class 1 →Class 1 →Class 2 →Class 3
Optimizing the ship loading problem
Page 39
==PAGE:52==
7
RESULTS
7.2
Solution & constraint eﬀect
To give a better understanding of the output of the model and to document the eﬀect of the
constraints, Table 4 shows a solution to a scenario with 16 containers, 16 slots, 2 quay cranes
and 3 straddle carriers per crane. Both containers and slots are numbered from 1 to 16, where
slot 1-8 are serviced by crane 1, and the rest by crane 2.
Crane 1
Slot
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Start time
-
-
-
212
0
244
644
788
End time
0
120
240
644
788
976
1096
1216
Straddle Carrier
2
3
1
3
2
1
3
2
Container
1
10
3
4
14
9
6
2
Crane 2
Slot
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
Start time
-
-
-
100
200
308
668
628
End time
0
120
240
548
668
976
1096
1216
Straddle Carrier
4
5
6
4
5
6
5
4
Container
7
8
5
12
16
11
15
13
Table 4
Most importantly it is seen that all containers have been assigned a slot, and that all slots
are only used once. Secondly the solution demonstrates that straddle carriers respects the
division between the two cranes. Carriers 1-3 are only going to positions 1-8, serviced by crane
1, whereas carriers 4-6 only go to positions 9-16 handled by crane 2.
From the solution in Table 4, it is also seen that constraint (4) has the intended eﬀect. For
each crane the end times are α = 120 apart, and increases according to the slots. Finally the
table also shows that constraint (3) is respected, as no straddle carrier starts before it has
dropped of its previous container.
Focusing on the start and end times of straddle carrier 2, it is seen that the makespan can not
be forced further down than 1216.
7.3
Model performance
The model have been run on several diﬀerent instances with diﬀerent setups. This was done
to get an understanding of the eﬀect of diﬀerent parameters on the performance of the model.
The results and ﬁndings will be presented in the following, but the ﬁrst thing that was quickly
noticed, was that the model could only be solved quickly for a relatively small number of
containers. To be able to perform more tests at get more reliable results, instances were only
generated with less than 25 containers.
7.3.1
Varying number of containers
Table 5 shows the average CPU times for instances with a diﬀerent number of containers.
It shows that even when the number of containers is just increased by 3, corresponding to
an increase of 1 container per crane, there is a considerable increase in the average CPU
time. It is also seen that the average CPU time has a tendency to increases more and more
signiﬁcantly. Where an increase of 2.12 sec is seen between 12 and 15 containers with straddle
carrier minimization, an increase of 2909.57 sec is seen between 18 and 21 containers.
Page 40
Optimizing the ship loading problem
==PAGE:53==
7
RESULTS
Container Eﬀect
# of Containers
12
15
18
21
24
# of instances:
10
10
10
10
10
SC minimization:
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
Mean time (sec):
1.25
0.42
3.37
1.14
9.98
3.96
2919.55
107.56
3977.25
Std. Deviation:
0.71
0.13
1.06
0.38
8.76
2.91
6423.50
104.77
7046.30
Max. time (sec):
2.68
0.61
5.58
1.95
26.18
12.08
20621.55
291.91
22565.76
Min. time (sec):
0.52
0.22
2.01
0.55
3.15
2.33
15.52
9.28
302.00
|K| = 3,
|S| = 9,
α=100,
β=120
3 Classes
Table 5
If the second term of the objective function is omitted, such that the model only minimizes the
makespan, and no longer minimizes the number of straddle carriers, then the CPU times drop.
From Table 5 it can be seen that omitting straddle carrier minimization reduce the average
CPU time, but the same tendencies apply. More containers lead to bigger an bigger increases
in CPU times. Not shown in the table is the fact that although the average computation time
is lowered, some of the instances are quicker to solve with SC minimization.
The last three rows of Table 5 shows the standard diviation, maximum and minimum CPU
time, for the instances in that group. These numbers reveal that the CPU time is highly
ﬂuctuating between the diﬀerent instances and that the ﬂuctuations also becomes bigger and
bigger, as the number of containers increase. The most signiﬁcant diﬀerence between min.
and max. was seen with 24 containers, where the quickest instance was solved in 302 sec, and
slowest needed more than 6 hours to be solved. This diﬀerence should be seen in the light of
that only the location of containers, and the class based stowage plan are diﬀerent between
the two instances. The number of containers, classes, cranes, and straddle carriers are the
same, and so is the α, β and the crane split,.
Figure 19: The ship and container terminal layout in generated data.
Optimizing the ship loading problem
Page 41
==PAGE:54==
7
RESULTS
With 21 containers the instance requiring only 15 sec. to solve was Instance 8, shown in
Figure 18, and as a example of a slow instance, Instance 4 that took nearly 1.5 hours is shown
in Figure 19. At ﬁrst glance the two instances look similar, but two smaller diﬀerences can be
seen. It appears that that the containers in Instance 8, are marginally more even distributed
around the entire yard, where Instance 4, has an empty space in the upper left corner. Perhaps
a more interesting diﬀerence, is that the diﬀerent container classes are somewhat grouped in
Instance 4. All class 3 containers are seen in the center of the yard, where most of the class 1,
and class 2 containers are seen accordingly in the upper right corner, and lower left corner.
7.3.2
Class clustered containers
To investigate if grouped or clustered containers have an increasing eﬀect on the computation
time, 10 new instances were generated. For each instance a random location was chosen as
center for the diﬀerent container classes, and containers were then normally distributed around
this center. The computation time of these 10 new instances are shown in Table 6
Container Cluster Eﬀect
Instance
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
CPU time (sec)
>600
73.96
8.55
>600
45.12
156.52
5.85
28.17
>600
30.65
|C| = 18,
|K| = 3,
|S| = 9,
α=100,
β=120
3 Classes
Table 6
In Table 5 it was seen that the average CPU time for the same setup but without containers
being clustered was 3.15 seconds with a maximum of 26.18. Despite the big ﬂuctuations,
comparison with Table 6 reveals a clear tendency of higher CPU times when the containers
are clustered together according to their class. Clustered containers can however not be the
only explanation of big variations in computation time. Table 6 reveals that even though all
10 instances have clustered containers, some are solved in less than 10 seconds, while others
are not solved in 10 minutes.
(a)
(b)
Figure 20: Container yard positions, for two instances with clustered containers.
Figure 20 shows the diﬀerences in the yard between the easiest solvable instance (a), and one
of the more time consuming (b). This ﬁgure indicates that the closer all the containers are
placed to each other, the more diﬃcult it becomes to chose the optimal stowage plan.
7.3.3
Scaling the distance
To better understand the importance of the distances to the containers, 10 instances were
solved while scaling the distances. The idea was to keep all parameters ﬁxed, including the
Page 42
Optimizing the ship loading problem
==PAGE:55==
7
RESULTS
position of the containers, and then multiply all the distances with a scaling factor. To keep
the problem unchanged, the model parameter β in constraint (4) was also scaled by the same
distance.
Scaled distances - Computation time (sec)
Scaling factor:
8
1
0.8
Instance 1
1.12
3.15
5.60
Instance 2
1.42
4.93
11.61
Instance 3
1.75
5.29
11.98
Instance 4
1.36
26.18
511.53
Instance 5
1.54
7.08
39.14
Instance 6
2.03
25.47
16.79
Instance 7
1.50
12.74
87.69
Instance 8
2.40
4.09
15.97
Instance 9
1.83
4.49
76.35
Instance 10
1.79
6.33
9.80
Average CPU time
1.67
9.98
78.64
Standard deviation
0.35
8.31
146.91
|C| = 18, |K| = 3, |S| = 9, α = 100, β = 120, 3 Classes
Table 7
Besides Instance 6, all instances have an increased computation time when the distances
are scaled down and decreased computation time when the distances are scaled up. This is
interesting as it shows the importance of the numeric seize of the parameter τcp. Recall that
τcp was the time required to transport container c to position p, and the results indicate that
simply by scaling τcp the computation time can be lowered. This means that whether τcp is
given in seconds or in minutes, have an impact on the performance of the model.
The reason for this eﬀect is must likely be found in the fact, that by scaling τcp the diﬀerence
in the objective function between choosing two containers is enhanced. Thereby it becomes
easier for the CPLEX solver to determine which container should be chosen for a given slot.
7.3.4
Varying number of classes
As mentioned in Section 2.2.4 a container class is usually, or as minimum deﬁned by a port
of destination, a container type, and a weight interval. By changing the size of the weight
interval or changing the number of container types, the number of container classes will either
decease or increase. Therefore it is of interest to know what happens when the number of
containers is kept ﬁxed, while only the number of container classes is changed.
Container Class Eﬀect
# of classes
2
3
4
5
Average CPU time
1664.78
38.19
5.01
3.81
Standard deviation
2579.36
54.27
2.68
2.89
Max.
6862.09
177.73
10.00
11.03
Min.
6.10
3.99
2.60
1.59
# of instances
10
10
10
10
|C| = 18, |K| = 3, |S| = 9, α = 100, β = 120
Table 8
Optimizing the ship loading problem
Page 43
==PAGE:56==
7
RESULTS
From Table 8 it can be seen that as the number of container classes increase the computation
time decrease. This is expected, as the set of containers that can be placed in a given slot
becomes smaller when the containers are divided in more container classes. However this also
means that a bigger part of the problem needs to be decided when class based stowage is
developed. So although introducing more container classes, improves the SLP, it simply moves
the decision or the complexity to stowage plan problem.
Besides this, the same general tendency are seen. Large ﬂuctuations among the instances, and
as the average computation time increases, so does the size of the ﬂuctuations.
7.3.5
Varying number of cranes
The last test that was performed, was to determine how the model performed when a ﬁxed
number of randomly distributed containers, were solved with a varying number of cranes. The
results of this is shown in Table 9.
Crane eﬀect - Computation time (sec)
# of cranes
1
2
3
Instance 1
653.27
1.62
0.81
Instance 2
63.76
2.15
0.81
Instance 3
205.45
1.40
0.45
Instance 4
139.51
1.36
0.50
Instance 5
1021.4
1.62
0.53
Instance 6
446.1
2.61
0.45
Instance 7
482.93
1.58
0.72
Instance 8
746.25
1.92
0.67
Instance 9
547.19
0.83
0.58
Instance 10
140.95
1.61
0.42
Average CPU time
444.68
1.67
0.65
Standard deviation
310.33
0.48
0.27
|C| = 11, |K| = 3, α=100, β = 120, 3 Classes
Table 9
Each crane is assigned three straddle carriers, such that the instances with 1 cranes include 3
straddle carriers, and the instances with 3 cranes include 9 straddle carriers. A bit counter
intuitive the instance with only one crane ﬁnding a single load sequence, is more time consuming
than the instances with several cranes and straddle carriers, having to ﬁnd 3 load sequences.
As the total number of containers do not change, load sequences diﬀer in lengths. Where the
three crane scenarios includes load sequences of only 4 containers, the one crane scenario has
a sequence of 11 containers. The results in Table 9 clearly shows that the length of the load
sequences have an signiﬁcant eﬀect on the computation time, regardless of the total number
of container and cranes in the scenario.
It should be kept in mind that the model assumes that a crane split have already been made.
As in previous subsection, this means that if the number of cranes are increased in the SLP,
then a previous problem, is made more complex. In this case the crane split problem would
have to be solved for more cranes.
Page 44
Optimizing the ship loading problem
==PAGE:57==
==PAGE:58==
==PAGE:59==
8
CONCLUSION
8
Conclusion
The aim of the report was to provide a study of the Ship Loading Problem, which in the
literature review was seen to have been approached in many diﬀerent ways. Besides providing
an informative background section on container shipping, this report discussed a deﬁnition
of the SLP, and proposed a structure where the problem was organized in two parts. It was
argued that the SLP, consisted of decisions related to the container handling operations, and
decision related to the use of equipment.
In order to incorporate both aspects of the SLP, a MIP model was developed that provided
answers to both parts of the problem. The proposed model is applicable for container terminals
using straddle carriers, and it assumes that a crane split, and class based stowage plan is
available. Based on this, the model provides a detailed stowage plan, a sequence in which the
containers are loaded, an assignment of straddle carriers to containers, and a schedule for the
use of each straddle carrier.
In order to answer the thesis question of how such an implementation of the SLP performed,
various tests where conducted for diﬀerent scenarios. These test were done using a CPLEX
solver, and revealed several aspects of the model. It was seen that when the number of
containers was increased, so did the computation time. It was also seen that even relatively
small increases in problem seize, dramatically increased the time required to solve the problem.
Furthermore huge ﬂuctuations in the computation time occurred for all problem sizes tested,
and for all the diﬀerent scenarios.
In order to try and explain the huge variations, the model was run on instances where containers
where clustered together in the yard, according to their classes, as could be expected in real
life. The general tendency was that this did have an increasing eﬀect eﬀect on the computation
time, but did not explain the ﬂuctuations. Instead it was discovered that the model was very
sensitive to the numerical seize of the distance parameter. Simply by up scaling this distance
parameter, quite signiﬁcant reductions in computation time was seen.
Finally it was tested how container classes and the number of quay cranes inﬂuenced the
problem. It was seen for both the number of container classes and quay cranes, that when
increased the computation time was lowered. This led to conclusion that the length of the
load sequences had an more inﬂuential eﬀect.
The computation time of most tests behaved as expected, but three thing should be considered
in the further work of the SLP and this model. The ﬁrst thing is the huge ﬂuctuations in
computation time. The second is the signiﬁcant positive eﬀect of scaling up the distance
between container and quay crane. Thirdly the fact that length of a load sequence is more
inﬂuential than the number of quay cranes and straddle carriers.
Future work should try to exploit these ﬁndings while trying to improve the model. In this
report only small instances where considered, so an obvious next step is to try make the
problem solvable for bigger instances. This could be done either by trying to improve the
model, or by using heuristics or decomposition. In this report the model was decomposed
using column generation, but further work needs to be done to improve the sub problem.
Optimizing the ship loading problem
Page 47
==PAGE:60==
==PAGE:61==
A
APPENDIX
A
Appendix
A.1
Dantzig wolfe decomposition example
Dantzig-Wolfe decomposition is a way of transforming one mathematical model into an
equivalent one that sometimes have some convenient properties. For instance, a decomposed
model will often have a stronger LP relaxation, compared to the original problem.
Here the graph coloring problem given by (28) - (33) will be used as an example. K is the set
of colors, V the set of vertices and E the set of edges or neighbors. xik indicates if vetice i
have color k, and the objective is to minimise the total number of colors used.
Obj:
min
X
k∈K
zk
(28)
S.t
xik + xjk ≤1
∀(i, j) ∈E, k ∈K
(29)
X
k∈K
xik = 1
∀i ∈V
(30)
xik ≤zk
∀i ∈V, k ∈K
(31)
xik ∈{0, 1}
∀i ∈V, k ∈K
(32)
zk ∈{0, 1}
∀k ∈K
(33)
The ﬁrst step of the Dantzig-Wolfe decomposition is to ”get rid of”, or rephrase some of the
constraints using the Minkowski-Weyl’s Theorem. In the following eq. (30) will be used for the
master problem, such that (29) and (31) - (33) are used with the Minkowski-Weyl’s Theorem.
These constraints form a convex hull and as stated by the Minkowski-Weyl’s Theorem such a
convex hull can be deﬁned as a linear combination of the extreme points of the convex hull.
So if
X1 = conv







xik + xjk ≤1
∀(i, j) ∈E, k ∈K
xik ≤zk
∀i ∈V, k ∈K
xik ∈{0, 1}
∀i ∈V, k ∈K
zk ∈{0, 1}
∀k ∈K







then
X1 = {x =
X
p∈P
λpxp}
(34)
where xp ∈R|K|(|V |+1) is the pth extreme point, and λp is its coeﬃcient, which must comply
with P
p∈P λp = 1 and λp ≥0.
When merging all the extreme points into one n × P matrix ¯X, where n = |K|(|V | + 1) is the
dimension of the solution space, we get
Optimizing the ship loading problem
Page 49
==PAGE:62==
A
APPENDIX
¯X =
 x1,
x2,
· · · ,
xP 
=












x1
11
x2
11
· · ·
xP
11
x1
12
x2
12
· · ·
xP
12
...
...
...
x1
vk
x2
vk
· · ·
xP
vk
z1
1
z2
1
· · ·
zP
1
...
...
...
z1
k
z2
k
· · ·
zP
k












(35)
By using this, X1 can be rewritten to X1 = ¯Xλ, where λ ∈RP is the vector of coeﬃcients.
Therefore the original problem is equivalent to
Obj:
ZDW = min
X
k∈K
zk
(36)
S.t.
X
j∈K
xij = 1
∀i ∈V
(37)
[x, z]T = ¯Xλ
(38)
P
X
i=1
λi = 1
(39)
λi ≥0
∀i ∈P
(40)
xij ∈{0, 1}
∀i ∈V, j ∈K
(41)
zj ∈{0, 1}
∀j ∈K
(42)
Note that the only diﬀerence between the formulation above and the original problem, is that
eq. (29) and eq. (31) have been replaced by eq. (38), and then eq. (39) and eq. (40) have been
added to restrict the values of λ. Also note that
[x, z]T =
x
z

=












x11
x12
...
xvk
z1
...
zk












(43)
As it can be seen from eq. (38) and eq. (43), all the decision variables are now dependent on
λ, such that when λ is ﬁxed so are all the decision variables. Therefore eq. (36) - eq. (42) are
rewritten once again to a matrix form. This is done by substituting eq. (38) into the other
constraints, such that all the old decision variables are replaced by ¯Xλ.
Page 50
Optimizing the ship loading problem
==PAGE:63==
A
APPENDIX
Obj:
ZDW = min C¯Xλ
(44)
S.t.
A¯Xλ = 1
∀i ∈V
(45)
Iλ = 1
(46)
λ ≥0
(47)
The right hand side of eq. (45) and eq. (47) are vectors, and I is the identity matrix. Also
note that C is a sparse vector, whose only nonzero elements are ones, positioned in the last
|K| columns, such that eq. (44) is in fact equal to eq. (36).
C =
1
2
vk
vk + 1
n
(
)
0
0
· · ·
0
1
· · ·
1
(48)
A is a |V | × n sparse matrix designed such that eq. (45) is equal to eq. (37). Just as C, the
only nonzero elements of A are ones, which are positioned in pattern along the diagonal.
A =
1
v
v + 1
2v
2v + 1
n








1
· · ·
1
0
· · ·
0
0
· · ·
0
0
· · ·
0
1
· · ·
1
0
· · ·
0
...
...
...
0
· · ·
0
0
· · ·
0
0
· · ·
0
(49)
Note that in eq. (44) - eq. (47) λ is now the decision variable and the old decision variables
[x, z]T are completely omitted. However, it should be kept in mind that eq. (44) - eq. (47) are
just a reformulation of the original problem, and still solves the same problem. This means
that once an optimal value of λ is found, the optimal value of the original decision variables
are easily obtained by using that [x, z]T = ¯Xλ.
Now the model is rewritten one more time, by multiplying A¯X and C¯X, and by chang-
ing from a matrix notation to the a sum notation.
As zj ∈{0, 1}, then C¯X becomes a vector of length |P| containing the number of colors used
for each of the |P| extreme points. Therefore eq. (44) is equivalent to eq. (50), when cp is the
number of colors used in extreme point p.
A¯X becomes a |V | × |P| matrix, whose elements aip contains the number of times node i
is included (regardless of color) in extreme point p. Therefore eq. (45) can be rewritten to
eq. (51).
Optimizing the ship loading problem
Page 51
==PAGE:64==
A
APPENDIX
Obj:
ZDW = min
X
p∈P
cpλp
(50)
S.t
X
p∈P
aipλp = 1
∀i ∈V
(51)
X
p∈P
λp = 1
(52)
λp ≥0
∀p ∈P
(53)
Although cp and aip are dependent on C and A, it is very important not to confuse cp and
aip with the elements of the vector C and the matrix A.
eq. (50) - eq. (53) is the ﬁnal Dantzig-Wolfe decomposition of the original problem, where
eq. (51) corresponds to constraint eq. (30). Constraint eq. (29) and eq. (31) in the assignment
is implicitly in value of cp and aip, since cp and aip depends on the extreme points, and the
extreme points depends on constraint eq. (29) and eq. (31).
Page 52
Optimizing the ship loading problem
==PAGE:65==
==PAGE:66==
REFERENCES
References
[1] Review of maritime transport 2014. Technical report, United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, 2014.
[2] Richa Agarwal and ¨Ozlem Ergun. Ship scheduling and network design for cargo routing
in liner shipping. Transportation Science, 42(2):175–196, 2008.
[3] Cynthia Barnhart, Christopher A Hane, Ellis L Johnson, and Gabriele Sigismondi.
A column generation and partitioning approach for multi-commodity ﬂow problems.
Telecommunication Systems, 3(3):239–258, 1994.
[4] John J Bartholdi III. The knapsack problem. In Building Intuition, pages 19–31. Springer,
2008.
[5] Ebru K Bish, Frank Y Chen, Yin Thin Leong, Barry L Nelson, Jonathan Wing Cheong
Ng, and David Simchi-Levi. Dispatching vehicles in a mega container terminal. OR
spectrum, 27(4):491–506, 2005.
[6] George B Dantzig and Philip Wolfe. Decomposition principle for linear programs. Opera-
tions research, 8(1):101–111, 1960.
[7] Tobias Dantzig. Number, the language of science. 1939.
[8] Merrill M Flood. The traveling-salesman problem. Operations Research, 4(1):61–75, 1956.
[9] Lester Randolph Ford Jr and Delbert R Fulkerson. A suggested computation for maximal
multi-commodity network ﬂows. Management Science, 5(1):97–101, 1958.
[10] Ronald L Graham. Bounds for certain multiprocessing anomalies. Bell System Technical
Journal, 45(9):1563–1581, 1966.
[11] F.S. Hillier and G.J. Lieberman. Introduction to Operations Research. McGraw-Hill
International Editions. McGraw-Hill, 9th edition, 2010.
[12] Wenbin Hu, Zhengbing Hu, Lei Shi, Peng Luo, and Wei Song. Combinatorial optimization
and strategy for ship stowage and loading schedule of container terminal. Journal of
computers, 7(8):2078–2092, 2012.
[13] Jos´e Fernando ´ı lvarez Serrano. A heuristic for vessel planning in a reach stacker terminal.
Journal of Maritime Research, 3(1):3–16, 2006.
[14] Akio Imai, Etsuko Nishimura, Stratos Papadimitriou, and Kazuya Sasaki. The contain-
ership loading problem. International Journal of Maritime Economics, 4(2):126–148,
2002.
[15] Akio Imai, Kazuya Sasaki, Etsuko Nishimura, and Stratos Papadimitriou. Multi-objective
simultaneous stowage and load planning for a container ship with container rehandle in
yard stacks. European Journal of Operational Research, 171(2):373–389, 2006.
[16] Cagatai Iris and Dario Pacino. A survey on the ship loading problem. To be published
2015.
Page 54
Optimizing the ship loading problem
==PAGE:67==
REFERENCES
[17] Kap Hwan Kim, Jin Soo Kang, and Kwang Ryel Ryu. A beam search algorithm for
the load sequencing of outbound containers in port container terminals. OR spectrum,
26(1):93–116, 2004.
[18] Kap Hwan Kim and Ki Young Kim. An optimal routing algorithm for a transfer crane in
port container terminals. Transportation Science, 33(1):17–33, 1999.
[19] Der-Horng Lee, Hui Qiu Wang, and Lixin Miao.
Quay crane scheduling with non-
interference constraints in port container terminals. Transportation Research Part E:
Logistics and Transportation Review, 44(1):124–135, 2008.
[20] Qiang Meng, Shuaian Wang, Henrik Andersson, and Kristian Thun. Containership routing
and scheduling in liner shipping: overview and future research directions. Transportation
Science, 48(2):265–280, 2013.
[21] M Flavia Monaco and Marcello Sammarra. The berth allocation problem: a strong
formulation solved by a lagrangean approach. Transportation Science, 41(2):265–280,
2007.
[22] Maria Flavia Monaco, Marcello Sammarra, and Gregorio Sorrentino. The terminal-
oriented ship stowage planning problem. European Journal of Operational Research,
239(1):256–265, 2014.
[23] Dario Pacino and Rune Møller Jensen. Fast Generation of Container Vessel Stowage
Plans: using mixed integer programming for optimal master planning and constraint based
local search for slot planning. PhD thesis, 2012. Pacino, Dario. ”Fast Generation of
Container Vessel Stowage Plans.” (2012). PhD Thesis.
[24] David M Ryan and Brian A Foster. An integer programming approach to scheduling.
Computer scheduling of public transport urban passenger vehicle and crew scheduling,
pages 269–280, 1981.
[25] Dirk Steenken, Thomas Winter, and Uwe T Zimmermann.
Stowage and transport
optimization in ship planning. In Online optimization of large scale systems, pages
731–745. Springer, 2001.
Optimizing the ship loading problem
Page 55
