==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Processing of Geo Data
with applications to Flow Simulation
Lise Lindberg Frellesen
Kongens Lyngby 2015
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads
Building 324
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
With global climate changes the magnitude and frequencies of extreme rain and
storm events are expected to increase, and consequently so are the damages from
ﬂoods. As a proactive measure, climate change adaptation projects are neces-
sary, and for these projects to be as eﬀective as possible, a precise data basis is
essential. The key ingredient in these climate change adaptation projects is the
height model, where just small inaccuracies can lead to an incorrect prediction
of a ﬂood. Thus the geo data processing of the height model can have a crucial
eﬀect on the ﬁnal decision of where to take precautionary measures.
The goal of this thesis was to explore the thinning methods of height models
by the company NIRAS and investigate if using other geo data processing meth-
ods would lead to better and more accurate ﬂow simulations. For the geometry
processing part of the project, I chose to focus on the simpliﬁcation algorithm
by Garland and Heckbert, and afterwards experimenting with ﬂipping edges by
using simulated annealing as an optimization method.
After running ﬂow simulations on the diﬀerent thinned height models, the re-
sulting ﬂood maps was compared and statistically analyzed. The analyses did in
fact reveal that the simpliﬁcation method I used gave better and more correct
simulations, and thus my ﬁndings can lead towards better climate change adap-
tation projects in the future.
Finally, after the optimum thinning method was revealed, I implemented the
solution on a real case area and worked toward running a simulation of a real
case storm event on the thinned height model.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Resumé (Danish)
På grund af de globale klimaforandringer forventes styrken og frekvensen af ek-
streme regn- og stormhændelser at intensiveres, og det samme vil skader fra
oversvømmelser.
Som en foranstaltning er klimasikringsprojekter nødvendige,
og for at disse projekter kan blive så eﬀektive som muligt, er et præcist data-
grundlag en nødvendighed. Hovedingrediensen i klimasikringsprojekter er højde-
modellen, hvor bare små unøjagtigheder kan føre til en forkert forudsigelse af
en oversvømmelse.
Derfor kan geodata processeringen af højdemodellen have
afgørende betydning for den endelige beslutning om, hvor der skal tages gribes
ind før oversvømmelsen.
Målet med specialet var at afklare hvilke udtyndingsmetoder af højdemodeller,
der bliver brugt af ﬁrmaet NIRAS, samt at undersøge om brugen af andre geodata
processerings metoder kan lede til bedre og mere nøjagtige ﬂowsimuleringer. Til
den geometriske processering valgte jeg at fokusere på simpliﬁceringsalgoritmen
af Garland og Heckbert, og jeg eksperimenterede efterfølgende med brugen af
kantﬂip med simuleret udglødning som en optimeringsmetode.
Efter at have kørt ﬂowsimuleringer på de forskellige højdemodeller, blev de resul-
terende oversvømmelseskort sammenlignet og statistisk analyseret. Analyserne
afslørede, at min simpliﬁceringsmetode gav de bedste og mest nøjagtige simu-
leringer, og dermed kan mine fund lede mod bedre klimasikringsprojekter i fremti-
den.
Endeligt, efter jeg havde fundet frem til den optimale udtyndingsmetode, im-
plementerede jeg min løsning på et “real-case” område og arbejde henimod at
køre en simulering af en virkelig stormhændelse på den udtyndede højdemodel.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulﬁllment of the
requirements for acquiring a M.Sc. degree in Engineering. It corresponds to 30
ECTS credits, and was conducted in the period from January 2015 to June 2015.
This thesis was conducted in cooperation with the Danish company NIRAS A/S.
Kongens Lyngby, June 26, 2015
Lise Lindberg Frellesen, s132480
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
This project could not have been accomplished without the help of several people.
First I would like to express my gratitude to my supervisor Associate Profes-
sor J. Andreas Bærentzen for help and guidance whenever needed. You have
broadened my horizon, but also helped me focus. Your patience, inspiration and
support have been essential for this project.
Also a special thanks to Associate Professor Jens Gravesen for acting as a supple-
mentary supervisor during our weekly meetings. You have come with new ideas
and approaches for the direction of the project, and help see the project in a
broader perspective.
A very special thanks go to the company NIRAS A/S, which have provide me
everything I needed in this process. This covering both a workstation, data, work
hours for supervision and endless free coﬀee. I would especially like to thank my
two external supervisors at NIRAS: Peter Fløcke Klagenberg for assisting in my
work with MIKE and Morten M. Sørensen for the guidance in geo data processing.
I would also like to thank DHI for providing me a student license to the MIKE
programs, and The Danish Geodata Agency for their free distribution of data.
Without these two companies services my project could not have happened.
Finally I would like to thank my friends and family, without whose love, sup-
port and editing assistance, this thesis would never have been possible.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Abstract
i
Resumé (Danish)
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
Contents
ix
1
Background
1
1.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Project Focus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Theory
5
2.1
Geography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Geometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Modeling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3
Method
29
3.1
Exploration of MIKE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2
Data Processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.3
Mesh Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.4
Simpliﬁcation & Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.5
New Pipeline - Thinning In Parts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4
Analyses & Results
49
4.1
Meshes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.2
Simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.3
Real Case Scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
5
Discussion
69
5.1
Discussion of Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
==PAGE:12==
x
Contents
5.2
Discussion of Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
6
Perspectives
73
6.1
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
6.2
Outlook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
Bibliography
75
A Pictures & Video
79
A.1 Simulation Results - Pictures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
A.2 Simulation Results - Movie
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
B
File Formats
81
B.1
The *.xyz Format . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
B.2
The *.node Format . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
B.3
The *.poly Format . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
B.4
The *.obj Format . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
B.5
The *.mesh Format . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
B.6
Other Formats
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
C Data Quality
85
D Flood at Frederiikssund
87
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Background
1.1
Introduction
As climate changes are increasingly inﬂuencing the weather of Denmark with both
heavier rainfalls and more frequent and stronger storms, an increase in ﬂooding
of populated areas are expected. As a proactive measure, climate change adapta-
tion projects are a necessary precaution, and for these projects to be as eﬃcient
and successful as possible, a precise and realistic data basis is essential.
One of the key ingredients in a good climate adaptation project is the height
model. The Danish state had in the fall of 2014 released a new and improved
height model for the Eastern part of the country and is planning to release similar
models for the rest of the country in 2015. This new height model is released
both as a processed model and a point cloud with a resolution of 4.5 points per
m2. Though this data is very accurate and dense, the point cloud is too heavy
to be processed by the ﬂow simulation program MIKE, which is widely used for
these adaptation projects. Thus a reduction is needed, which must be done by a
carefully chosen thinning algorithm that removes redundant data without loss of
quality.
Figure 1.1: Before and after
the thinning algorithm used
by NIRAS
The chosen algorithm used by the company NI-
RAS today leaves room for improvement (see Fig-
ure 1.1), since small diﬀerences in the landscape is
being overrepresented in the ﬁnal model. This is
what my thesis will focus upon: I plan on looking
into the algorithm used and compare the results
with other algorithms.
The results will be com-
pared both before and after a ﬂow simulation, and
ﬁnally the algorithms will be evaluated for the ﬁ-
nal results. The aim is to be able to precisely and
eﬃciently gauge the overall consequences of rough
weather.
==PAGE:14==
2
1 Background
1.2
Project Focus
The aim of this project is to obtain a more precise and accurate height model
using another thinning method than the present ones used by NIRAS. Thus the
main focus of this project lies in the geometry processing of the mesh. The spe-
ciﬁc modeling that MIKE performs are observed as a “black box”, and thus I will
only describe it on a level necessary to deliver the optimum input.
The receivers of this thesis will be both of academic background (DTU) and
of more practical background (NIRAS), and I will strive towards a report that is
responsive by both backgrounds. The reader is assumed to have a basic knowl-
edge of geo data, geometry and modeling.
The main goals of this thesis are:
• Explore how NIRAS thin a point cloud, and how they make a mesh
• Explore the requirements MIKE have for an input mesh
• Find a thinning method that produces a better mesh for ﬂow simulations
• Examine if using optimization on the mesh makes it more favorable
• Create a pipeline for thinning of an area of extreme amount of data points
• Implement my solution on a large non-convex real case area
For the test of diﬀerent thinning methods, I will use small test areas of 1km2
in a way that makes it possible to run a ﬂow simulation on the original mesh,
and thus having a solution model to compare the diﬀerent result models against.
Afterwards, I will work towards implementing my solution on a real case scenario
of the area of Frederikssund under the storm Bodil.
The hypothesis to be investigated in this thesis is:
• Using a thinning method that accounts for the features of the geometry is
better than using a key point algorithm
==PAGE:15==
1.3 Related Work
3
1.3
Related Work
For the feature-preserving method, I will use a simpliﬁcation algorithm, where
my project will focus on the work of Michael Garland and Paul S. Heckbert. The
algorithm was ﬁrst introduced in an article for the 24th Annual Conference on
Computer Graphics and interaction Techniques [GH97] and later elaborated in
the Ph.D. thesis of Garland [Gar99]. This algorithm was chosen for its ability
to preserve geometric characterizations of a mesh. For the later optimization
algorithm, my project will focus on the work of Larry L. Schumaker [Sch93] on
simulated annealing and the experimental ﬁndings by my supervisor, J. Andreas
Bærentzen [Bær12]. This algorithm was chosen for its ability to restore geometric
characterizations that might have been lost during a simpliﬁcation of a mesh.
==PAGE:16==
4
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
Theory
From my background in both mathematics and geography, I will combine theory
from three diﬀerent areas of expertise: Geography, Geometry and Modeling.
These areas of expertise all overlap, and some of the following theory sections
could also belong to other areas. I have tried to allocate them to where I have
had them as learning objectives during my academic time.
Since my focus point for this project has been in the ﬁeld of geometry processing,
the section for geometry has had the highest priority in this chapter, and is thus
the most elaborated.
2.1
Geography
The theory chapter starts with the ﬁeld of geography, since the spatial data is
the foundation for the geometry processing and the later simulations.
2.1.1
Spatial Data
Spatial data is a very broad term which covers any data that has a geographical
connection [BJB10, p15].
This could e.g.
be data of people, real estates or
environment, but it could also be a height model for an area, the water level of a
ﬂood or the weather data from a particular weather station during a storm. Thus
spatial data is essential when making a climate change adaptation project.
GIS
To analyze and process spatial data, a GIS is normally used. A GIS is a Geo-
graphic Information System, and is today primarily linked to computer programs
handling spatial data [Bær12, p8]. The most widely used software programs to-
day are ArcGIS, MapInfo and QGIS, and I have used all three in my project for
various analyses and manipulations. Due to the broad term of a GIS, DHI’s sim-
ulation programs, called MIKE, could be classiﬁed as GIS, but would normally
be perceived as a modeling program, and thus I have chosen to classify it that
way in this project (see Section 2.3.2).
==PAGE:18==
6
2 Theory
2.1.2
Height Models
In general geographical terminology there exists 3 diﬀerent types of height models
[BJB10, p43+104]:
• DEM (Digital Elevation Model) is the model of all height points observed.
• DTM (Digital Terrain Model) is the model of the terrain, and thus the bare
ground surface.
• DSM (Digital Surface Model) is the model of the highest measured points,
e.g. trees, houses, grass.
A height model is usually deﬁned as a TIN (triangulated irregular network)
[BJB10, p35]. A TIN is deﬁned as irregularly distributed points with three dimen-
sional coordinates (x, y, and z) that are arranged in a network of non-overlapping
triangles, and thus has a well-deﬁned topography. In computer graphics terms,
this is called a triangular mesh [Bær12, p8].
When talking about height models, it is important to distinguish between 2.5D
and 3D models. For ﬂow modeling, it is most favorable to use 3D models, but
these models are much harder to obtain, since they cannot be measured directly
from above by e.g. a plane. Thus only a 2.5D model is a part of the basic data
programme, and 3D models can be bought from commercial suppliers.
LIDAR measurements
Measuring distances by laser is a technology called LIDAR (LIght Detection And
Ranging) [BJB10, p102].
This can be done both from an instrument on the
ground, or in the air by an instrument placed on a plane or in a drone.
The principle behind LIDAR is to shoot out a laser beam and measure the time
it takes before the reﬂected beam is returned to the instrument. By knowing
the speed of the beam and the exact placement of the instrument, it is possible
to calculate the distance to the target object and thus the precise placement of
the object. For instruments moving (e.g. on a plane) it is crucially important to
update the position, rotation and tilt of the plane for each measurement. The
scanner can register many diﬀerent reﬂections of the laser beam, and thereby
both get measurements of the treetops and the woodland during an overﬂight of
a forest.
Danish Geodata Agency’s Point Cloud
As part of ”the basic data programme” in Denmark, geographic basic data has
been available free of charge for both commercial and non-commercial purposes
==PAGE:19==
2.1 Geography
7
since 1 January 2013 [Geo14b]. A big part of this data is the Danish Height
Model (DHM), which is a 2.5D height model and the foundation for many other
products. A part of the programme is also to ensure the data is up to date. This
is done by nationwide updates with ﬁve year intervals, and a new interval period
started in 2014.
Figure 2.1: Status for the distributed data of Denmark’s new height model at
the beginning of this project. [Geo14a]
Above in Figure 2.1, a map is shown of the status for the new DHM data at the
time of the beginning of this project. The green areas are already distributed for
use, and the yellow area is still being processed and quality checked. Data for
the rest of Denmark is expected to be distributed later this year.
The DHM’s point cloud is the set of data that is the foundation of all the other
DHM products. The old point cloud (from 2007) had a data density of 0.5 points
per m2 [Geo12], while the new point cloud has 4.5 points per m2 [Geo15]. Like-
wise has the accuracy of the data been improved: Horizontal accuracy from 1.0m
to 0.15m and vertical accuracy from 0.1m to 0.05m.
The point cloud is devided into tiles, i.e. quadratic area of 1 × 1 km.
The underlying point cloud of DHM has been classiﬁed for the type of surface.
This classiﬁcation is done by algorithms after the actual measurement, which
gives rise to some concerns and errors, but see Section 3.2.3 for an elaboration
and Section 5.1 for a discussion hereof.
==PAGE:20==
8
2 Theory
The classiﬁcation of the point cloud:
1.
Unclassiﬁed (e.g. Power Lines)
2.
Ground (DTM)
3.
Low Vegetation (0-0.3m)
4.
Medium Vegetation (0.3-2m)
5.
High Vegetation (>2m)
6.
Buildings
7.
Noise (e.g clouds)
8.
Model key points (used in production)
9.
Water
17.
Bridges
In my project I will be using the DTM (class 2) only (see Section 3.2.1 for more
information).
For the test areas I have used the processed grid data from the old height model,
due to NIRAS Old Thinning algorithm needing to have data as grid (ordered).
This data is the DTM, and do not have any classiﬁcations.
2.1.3
Hydrology
Water that reaches a surface, either from rain or a water reservoir, that does not
evaporate, inﬁltrate or drain, ﬂows on the surface to depressions in the topogra-
phy, where it accumulates. If the depression is completely ﬁlled with water, the
storage capacity has been reached, and the excess water continues its ﬂow to the
next downslope depression [Dav08]. If the water has negative consequences for
society, the accumulated water is classiﬁed as a ﬂood. These ﬂoods can often
be avoided by setting up barriers, which leads the accumulated water elsewhere.
Consequently, the geometry of an area is an important object to consider in ﬂood
modeling, since an incorrect estimate of a depression can lead to an incorrect es-
timate of a ﬂood.
An important parameter in hydrology that aﬀects the ﬂow, is the roughness
of the underlying surface the water is ﬂowing on. One of the standard measure-
ments for this roughness is the Manning roughness coeﬃcient, also called the
Manning number [Hen10].
Another important parameter in hydrology, is the permeability of the under-
lying surface. The permeability is deﬁned as the ability of a porous material to
transmit water, and it determines the amount of surface water that inﬁltrates
==PAGE:21==
2.1 Geography
9
to underground reservoirs. A permeable surface, such as vegetated areas, allow
surface water to inﬁltrate, while completely impermeable surfaces, such as roads
and buildings, prevent inﬁltration of water [Hen10].
The modeling system MIKE does generally not consider permeability due to the
time frame of a ﬂooding. The relative short time a ﬂood last is too short for the
inﬁltration of water to the underlying surface to have any greater inﬂuence on
the ﬁnal results.
For simplicity of the simulations, I have chosen to have both constant Manning
number and permeability size for the surfaces, and the test areas was in fact
chosen for their uniformity of land cover and absence of buildings.
==PAGE:22==
10
2 Theory
2.2
Geometry
The main focus of this project has been on the geometry processing part, and
thus this section is the most elaborated and longest of the three main theory
sections.
2.2.1
Meshes
A (polygonal) mesh is a set of faces, a set of edges, and a set of vertices. In this
project I will only work with so-called manifold meshes, which requires that any
suﬃciently small patch is homeomorphic to a disk, and thus the mesh must not
self-intersect [Bær12, p84-85].
Often a mesh arise from a so called point cloud, which is a set of data points,
either in 2D, 2.5D or 3D. If the data points are organized, it is called a grid,
and if the distance between nearest neighbors are the same for all vertices, it is
called a regular grid. Assuming the set of vertices for a mesh is in fact the whole
underlying point cloud, meshes and point clouds have a one-to-many relationship:
One point cloud can have many diﬀerent meshes, but one mesh can only have
one underlying point cloud.
To keep track of the relationship between vertices, edges and faces, the term
1-ring is often used. The 1-ring of a vertex is basically the set of faces sharing
that vertex. The (1-ring) neighbors of a vertex is then the end points of all edges
going out from the vertex, and thus, in triangular meshes, all the vertices of
adjacent faces belong to the 1-ring.
Half Edge Data Structure
There are several ways to structure the data of the mesh, and the one the pro-
gramming library GEL uses, is the so called half edge data structure [Bær12, p90].
This structure gives each edge two representations, so called half edges. To avoid
ambiguity, each half edge has a face associated to it, which is deﬁned through
a pointer, that points to the next half edge in a loop around the corresponding
face. This gives the advantage of being able to easily visit all edges surrounding
a face, and thus easily ﬁnd the 1-ring neighbors of a vertex. See Figure 2.2 for
an illustration of the half edge data structure.
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Geometry
11
Figure 2.2: Half edge data structure [Bær12, p91]
2.2.2
Triangulations
A triangulation of a point set consists of a set of triangle faces in such a way,
that all points are vertices of at least one triangle, the interior of the faces do not
intersect, and the points only intersect the faces at the vertices [Bær12, p242-243].
In other words, a triangulation is a mesh with only triangle faces.
Delaunay Triangulations
One example of a speciﬁc triangulation is the Delaunay triangulation, which has
some additional properties.
First: All edges in the triangulation must be Delaunay edges.
A Delaunay edges is an edge, which has an empty circumcircle, i.e. there exist at
least one circle going through the two endpoints of the edge, which interior does
not contain any other points [Ede01, p8].
For an illustration1 of a non-Delaunay and a Delaunay triangulation/edge, see
Figure 2.3 on the next page.
1The picture is taken from the Wikipedia website regarding Delaunay triangulation: http:
//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Delaunay_triangulation
==PAGE:24==
12
2 Theory
Figure 2.3: Two triangulations and the circumcircles. The right one is Delaunay.
Second: If all the points are in General Position (no 4 points form a common
circle, and no 3 points are aligned), then the points have a unique Delaunay tri-
angulation.
Third: Delaunay triangulation maximizes the minimal angle, and thus avoids
skinny triangles, so called needles or caps (see Figure 2.4(a) for an illustration of
the terms). This is very helpful in ﬁnite element simulations (like MIKE), where
very skinny triangles can cause numerical instability.
Constrained Delaunay Triangulations
A Constrained Delaunay Triangulation (CDT) is a triangulation where certain
edges are pre-arranged to be in the triangulation, and the rest of the edges are
made to be Delaunay, unless they cross any of the constrained edges [Bær12,
p257]. This is very useful when wanting to work on a non-convex area, since a
pure Delaunay triangulation always makes the outer boundary convex.
Constrained Delaunay Reﬁnement
Since the CDT might not be truly Delaunay, it can be necessary to reﬁne the tri-
angulation by adding new vertices. This can be done by making the circumcenter
of a non-Delaunay triangle the new vertex, connecting it to its surrounding ver-
tices and making edge-ﬂips until all ﬂippable edges are Delaunay. But if this new
vertex encroach2 an edge, it is sometimes preferred to instead split the edge by
a Steiner point3. The Terminator algorithm used by MIKE uses this reﬁnement
strategy (see Section 3.1.1 for more info thereof).
2An edge is said to be encroached if a vertex other than its endpoints lies on or inside
its diametral circle. The diametral circle is the (unique) smallest circle that encloses an edge
[She02].
3Steiner points are additional vertices used to subdivide edges into several edges without
changing the curvature of the edge [DHI13b]. See Figure 2.4(b).
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Geometry
13
(a) Skinny triangles [She02]
(b) Steiner points [DHI13b]
Figure 2.4: Illustration of the terms.
2.2.3
Graph Theory
One can perceive a mesh as a graph, and since it is 2.5D geographical data I
was working with, the meshes are so called planar straight line graphs (PSLG).
Graphs have some additional properties, which can be useful for our meshes.
E.g. since it is only connected meshes I have worked with, Euler’s formula gives
F + V −E = 2, where F is the number of faces, E is the number of edges , and
V is the number of vertices.
Beside, for planar graphs one can also ﬁnd the dual graph, which is used in ﬁnite
element simulations.
Dual Graphs
The dual of a planar graph is deﬁned as follows [BM82]:
Given a planar graph G, we can deﬁne a new graph G∗in the following way: For
each face f of G, there exists a corresponding vertex f ∗in G∗(in practice the
midpoint of f is chosen), and for each edge e of G, there exist a corresponding
edge e∗in G∗. If two faces, f and g in G, are separated by the edge e, then the
corresponding vertices f ∗and g∗in G∗are joined by the edge e∗. The new graph
G∗is called the dual graph of G. See Figure 2.5 for an illustration4 of G and G∗.
4The picture is taken from the Wikipedia website regarding dual graphs:
http://en.
wikipedia.org/wiki/Dual_graph
==PAGE:26==
14
2 Theory
Figure 2.5: A graph G and its dual graph G∗
The dual graph of a Delaunay triangulation is called the Voronoi Diagram, and
vice versa the dual of a Voronoi Diagram is a Delaunay triangulation [Ede01, p3].
2.2.4
Mesh Simpliﬁcation Operations
The idea behind mesh simpliﬁcation is to reduce the complexity of the model,
while preserving as much of the geometry as possible.
Edge Collapse
This operation [GH97] removes a single edge as well as the two adjacent faces.
Collapsing an edge can also be seen as merging the two endpoint vertices, and to
avoid non-manifold situations, it is important to not allow two non-connecting
vertices to be merged. Two vertices that belong to diﬀerent 1-rings will, when
merged, make one vertex, which will have two independent 1-rings, and thus a
non-manifold situation occur. Hence it is important to test for connectivity in
advance when performing an edge collapse. In Figure 2.6 an illustration of an
edge collapse is seen.
Figure 2.6: Illustration of an edge collapse and the thereby face collapses
==PAGE:27==
2.2 Geometry
15
Face Collapse
For triangulated meshes, face removal simply corresponds to collapsing two edges
sharing a face, but done at once. This leads to half the operations to meet the
same simpliﬁcation degree as just doing edge collapses. Normally, the average
position of the three vertices is chosen as the new vertex position. In Figure 2.7,
an illustration of an edge collapse is seen.
Figure 2.7: Illustration of an face collapse
Vertex Removal
When removing a vertex, the corresponding edges and faces are removed along
with the vertex. The resulting hole is then re-triangulated and a new simpliﬁed
mesh arise. In Figure 2.8 an illustration of an edge collapse is seen.
Figure 2.8: Illustration of a vertex removal
2.2.5
Error Metrics
To evaluate which edge, face or vertex that needs to be manipulated in a simpli-
ﬁcation, an error metric for the disturbance of the geometry is necessary. This
metric is subsequently used in simpliﬁcation algorithms.
Geometric error
The geometric error is deﬁned by the distance between the original mesh and
the simpliﬁed mesh. By minimizing this error, one can ensure that the simpliﬁed
==PAGE:28==
16
2 Theory
mesh represents the original mesh as much as possible. The distance d between
two points v1 = (x1, y1, z1) and v2 = (x2, y2, z2) in Euclidean space is deﬁned as
d(v1, v2) =
√
(x1 −x2)2 + (y1 −y2)2 + (z1 −z2)2
Since a mesh can be described as a set of inﬁnite points, ﬁnding the distance
between two meshes is a question of matching up pairs of closest points and
calculating the distances between them.
Hausdorrf distance
One tool to measure the distance between point sets is the Hausdorﬀdistance
[Bær12, p194], which for a point set A ﬁnds the corresponding closest points in
a point set B, and then ﬁnds the greatest of these distances:
h(A, B) = max
a∈A(min
b∈B(d(a, b)))
Note that this measure is not symmetric, h(A, B) ̸= h(B, A). The symmetric
Hausdorﬀdistance is given by the largest of the two:
H(A, B) = max(h(A, B), h(B, A))
Vertex-plane distance
For a plane deﬁned by the equation n⊺v + d = 0 the squared distance of a vertex
v = [xyz]⊺to the plane is given by the equation [Gar99, p43]
D2(v) = (n⊺v + d)2 = (ax + by + cz + d)2
where n = [abc]⊺is a unit normal and d is a scalar constant.
Since meshes are composed of faces and not (inﬁnite) planes, this metric is not
optimal, but due to its good balance between accuracy and speed, calculations
of vertex-plane distance are popular among error metrics.
Maximum Supporting Plane Distance
This metric was elaborated by Ronfard and Rossignac [RR96] as an error metric
for edge-collapse based simpliﬁcation. It associates each vertex of the original
mesh with a set of supporting planes deﬁned by the faces adjacent to the vertex.
When an edge is collapsed, the set of supporting planes for the resulting vertex
is the union of the sets of the two original vertices connected by the edge. The
error at vertex v is deﬁned as
E(v) =
max
p∈planes(v) D2
p(v)
==PAGE:29==
2.2 Geometry
17
Quadric Error Metrics
The Quadric Error Metrics (QEM) was elaborated by Garland and Heckbert
[GH97], and is based on the previous approach. Instead of using the maximum
squared distance for the supporting planes, the QEM sums the squared distances:
E(v) =
∑
p
D2
p(v)
The QEM has great storage and performance beneﬁts over the previous approach.
To determine the maximum squared distance, the supporting planes of all the
vertices have to be found, which takes up considerable memory space. Besides,
the maximum of the squared distances has to be found for each vertex and for
each evaluation, which is also a time consuming operation. The QEM avoids
both these problems by computing the squared distances for all the planes.
Garland [Gar99] rewrote the equation for D2 into a new form:
D2(v) = (n⊺v + d)2
= (v⊺n + d)(n⊺v + d)
= v⊺nn⊺v + 2dn⊺v + d2
= v⊺(nn⊺)v + 2(dn)⊺v + d2
Garland deﬁnes a quadric Q as the triple Q = (A, b, c), where A is the 3x3
matrix nnT , b the 3-vector dn and c is the scalar d2. A quadric can be evaluated
at any point v according to the equation
Q(v) = v⊺Av + 2b⊺v + c
We notice that a quadric for a speciﬁc plane p gives us in fact the squared dis-
tance to the vertex v, and thus Qp(v) = D2
p(v). Qp is called the fundamental
quadric of the plane.
Addition of quadrics are deﬁned component-wise:
Qi(v) + Qj(v) = (Qi + Qj)(v) = (Ai + Aj, bi + bj, ci + cj)(v)
Hence we can now calculate the quadric error, EQ, for a speciﬁc vertex and a set
of planes, P, by summing the fundamental quadric, Qp, for each plane:
EQ(v) =
∑
p∈P
D2
p(v) =
∑
p∈P
Qp(v) =

∑
p∈P
Qp

(v) = Q(v)
where Q = ∑Qp.
==PAGE:30==
18
2 Theory
Thus, to calculate the sum of squared distances to some planes, we only need
one quadric, which is the sum of quadrics for each plane in the set. So when
contracting an edge and merging the endpoints vi and vj, the quadric for the
resulting vertex will simply be Q = Qi + Qj. This removes the need for keeping
track of the supporting planes, since each vertex has a single associated quadric.
Likewise, when calculating the cost of an edge contraction, the operation will be
simple and have constant processing time. The cost of the contraction (vi, vj) →
v will become Q(v) = Qi(v) + Qj(v). It must be noted that the QEM does not
produce the exact same results as the maximum supporting plane distance, since
each plane occur in three diﬀerent plane sets, and thus risk being counted up to
three times for one vertex after several contractions. This can be accounted for
by normalizing the quadrics by a weight for the area of the corresponding faces.
For the algorithm used by GEL, the area-weighted quadrics are then given the
weight of 1/3 of each face area to account for this problem.
Optimal Position by QEM
One of the big advantage of using QEMs, is that it gives us the possibility of
computing the optimal placement of the new vertex that arise from an edge
collapse [Bær12, p196]. We know that for quadratic equations, the minimum is
located at the roots of the derivative: ∇Q = 0. Since
∇Q(v) = 2Av + b
it is now straight forward to calculate the optimal position, vopt:
∇Q(vopt) = 2Avopt + b = 0 ⇒vopt = −1
2A−1b
Now we notice that it is crucially important to have A as full rank to avoid having
inﬁnite amount of optimal positions. This can be solved by using the singular
value decomposition of A = UΣV ⊺to ﬁnd the pseudo inverse, A+ = V Σ+U ⊺,
where small singular values of Σ have been set to zero to secure a stable solution.
One of the big beneﬁts from using optimal positioning is that we get a mesh
that is much closer to the original mesh, compared to choosing one of the orig-
inal vertex positions for the edge collapse. However, this leads to the thinned
vertex set not being a subset of the original vertex set, which could give rise to
some concerns (see Section 5.1 for a discussion hereof).
==PAGE:31==
2.2 Geometry
19
2.2.6
Thinning Algorithms
When wanting to thin a point cloud, there are diﬀerent approaches. One could
be to use simpliﬁcation and make edge collapses on a mesh, but another could
simply be to remove similar points and make a new triangulation on the resulting
point cloud. I have used the ﬁrst approach, while NIRAS has taken the second.
In this section, I will describe the approaches of the diﬀerent algorithms.
Simpliﬁcation by Edge Collapses
The most obvious simpliﬁcation is the collapse of edges that has the least impact
on the geometry of the mesh.
This require a cost function to evaluate each
edge collapse for its aﬀect on the geometry, and with such a function the greedy
strategy seen in Algorithm 1 can be used [Bær12, p194].
Algorithm 1 Simpliﬁcation by Edge Collapses
1: For each edge: store cost of a collapse in priority queue
2: Find cheapest collapse and perform it.
3: Recompute the collapse cost for all edges aﬀected by the collapse and update
priority queue.
4: If stop condition is met Then STOP, Else go to 2.
As a stop condition, the ideal is to stop the algorithm when the changes to the
mesh are too great, and an obvious function is one that measures the distance
from the simpliﬁed mesh to the original one.
This distance is the Hausdorﬀ
distance.
Garland-Heckbert Simpliﬁcation
Garland and Heckbert [GH97] proposed a diﬀerent strategy instead of using the
Hausdorﬀdistance; using QEMs. This method is much more eﬃcient to compute,
and it also easily ﬁnds the optimal position for a new vertex, see Section 2.2.5.
The pseudocode for the Garland-Heckbert algorithm is seen in Algorithm 2:
==PAGE:32==
20
2 Theory
Algorithm 2 Simpliﬁcation by Garland & Heckbert
1: Compute the Q(v) (the QEM) for all the initial vertices.
2: Initialize list
3: for each valid pair (vi, vj) do
4:
Compute the optimal position v
5:
Compute the error (Q1 + Q2) of this new vertex
6:
set the cost of contracting that pair as the error
7:
Store the pair with the cost in the list
8: end for
9: Sort the list after cost with the minimum cost pair at the top
10: for top pair (vi, vj) of list do
11:
if No. of vertices > wanted no. of vertices then
12:
Remove the pair from the list
13:
Contract this pair
14:
Update the costs of all valid pairs involving vi and vj for the pair
15:
else exist for-loop
16:
end if
17: end for
The costs and optimal positions are computed after the equations described in
Section 2.2.5.
Old Thinning by NIRAS
There are also diﬀerent approaches towards thinning, which do not include an
error metric or a cost list, and which look directly at the point cloud, not the
mesh. During my cooperation with NIRAS I got an inside look into the thinning
algorithms used. Actually they have used two diﬀerent algorithms; 1 self-coded
and 1 commercially achieved. The ﬁrst I will denote NIRAS Old Thinning, and
the second NIRAS New Thinning.
The NIRAS Old Thinning is not being used anymore, due to the quality of the
algorithm, and a wish to work on non-ordered data.
The algorithm works directly on a point cloud, but needs the data to be or-
dered after location (ﬁrst y-coord., then x-coord.). In practice, they used it on
grid data. See Algorithm 3 for pseudocode for the algorithm.
==PAGE:33==
2.2 Geometry
21
Algorithm 3 NIRAS Old Thinning Algorithm
1: Given: array of vertices D
2: set radius parameter
3: set tolerance parameter
4: Initialize list
◃Making result list
5: for vertex v in D do
6:
Find all other vertices within radius from vertex v
7:
for vertex w within radius do
8:
if w[z] is within tolerance interval of v[z] then
9:
Delete w from D
◃Deleting similar vertices
10:
end if
11:
end for
12:
list ←v
◃Updating result list
13:
Delete v from D
14: end for
◃Ending when D is empty
15: return list
As seen above, the code demands two parameters: radius and tolerance interval.
Its input is a list of points in the XYZ-format (see Appendix B for format info).
It starts at the ﬁrst point in the list and ﬁnds similar vertices and deletes them.
It keeps going until it has been through all the vertices. This results in the ﬁrst
vertex always being in the result list, and also very long processing time.
NOTE: For thinning of test areas (see Chapter 4 for results), the radius was
set at 50m and the tolerance at 0.1m.
New Thinning by NIRAS
As a new thinning method for point clouds (and not just ordered data), NIRAS
now uses a commercial product called TerraScan by Terrasolid. This program
works [Soi14] quite diﬀerent from the old self coded program, but still demands
the two parameters: radius and tolerance interval. This time, the tolerance inter-
val is used to determine the maximum allowed elevation diﬀerences from a point
to a ﬁnal triangulated model, and the radius is used to ensure that there will be
a minimum point density, even for ﬂat areas.
The selection starts by dividing the points into speciﬁc sized rectangular regions
and then ﬁnding the lowest and the highest points for each region. These points
are subsequently used to make an initial triangulated model. Then the real se-
lection of points starts: for each iteration of the selection, the program searches
for points that have elevation further away from the model than the tolerance
==PAGE:34==
22
2 Theory
allows. Each time a point is found, it is added to the selected point set, and a new
triangulated model is made. This routine continues until no points lie outside
the tolerance. See Algorithm 4 for pseudocode for the algorithm.
Algorithm 4 NIRAS New Thinning Algorithm
1: Given: Set of points P
2: set radius parameter
3: set tolerance parameter
4: Finding lowest and highest points for each region, remove from P
5: Making initial model M1
◃Making result model
6: for each iteration i do
7:
Find the vertices vlow and vhigh that are furthest away from Mi
8:
if vlow[z] distance from Mi is over tolerance level then
9:
Add vlow to Mi
10:
Delete vlow from P
11:
end if
12:
if vhigh[z] distance from Mi is over tolerance level then
13:
Add vhigh to Mi
14:
Delete vhigh from P
15:
end if
16:
Make new triangulation Mi+1 of points in Mi
◃Updating result model
17: end for
◃Ending when all points in P within tolerance
18: return last Mi
Each time a triangulation of the stored points is made, TerraScan uses the Delau-
nay triangulation to make a new model, and thus the resulting model is Delaunay.
An illustration of the selected points of a model can be seen in Figure 2.9. The
algorithm has selected the model key points, which describe the local maxima
and minima of the model.
Figure 2.9: Illustration of the NIRAS New Thinning Algorithm [Soi14]
NOTE: For thinning of test areas (see Chapter 4 for results) the radius was set
at 600m and the tolerance at 0.5m.
==PAGE:35==
2.2 Geometry
23
2.2.7
Optimization
When a mesh has been simpliﬁed, it might have lost some of its original geometric
characterizations, e.g. the straightness of a river or road. Thus a reconstruction
of the geometry is much valuable, and diﬀerent optimization methods can be used
for this.
Edge Flip
Similar to the previous section, there is a greedy approach toward optimization
of a mesh: edge ﬂipping. This method does not change any vertex position, but
simply reconnects vertices diﬀerently. This requires an energy function of an edge
to evaluate the cost of a ﬂip, and a priority queue hereof. When having an energy
function, F(e), it is simple to evaluate the loss of energy from an edge ﬂip:
∆F(e) = Fafter(e) −Fbefore(e)
where Fbefore is the energy of the edge before a ﬂip, and Fafter is the energy of
the edge after a ﬂip. The optimum edge ﬂip is thus the edge with the smallest
∆F(e), and the greedy strategy seen in Algorithm 5 can be used [Bær12, p199].
Algorithm 5 Optimization by Edge Flipping
1: For each edge: compute ∆F(e)
2: If ∆F(e) < 0 Then insert the pair (∆F(e), e) in a priority queue
3: Find the biggest (∆F(e), e), and do the ﬂip
4: Recompute the energy cost for the new edge, and update the priority queue.
5: If stop condition is met or the priority queue is empty Then STOP, Else go
to 3.
However, this energy approach only takes the geometry of the two adjacent tri-
angles, and not the geometry of the whole mesh, into account.
Energy function by dihedral angle
Minimizing the dihedral angle will improve the geometry of the mesh, but not
necessary improve the triangle quality of the mesh. See Figure 2.10 for an illus-
tration of an dihedral angle.
==PAGE:36==
24
2 Theory
Figure 2.10: Illustration of the dihedral angle, β [Bær12, p150]
If we denote the dihedral angle by β, we obtain the energy function [Bær12, p202]:
F β(e) = 1
2
||E||
∑
i=1
|βi|||ei||
where ||E|| is the set of all ﬁve edges for the two adjacent triangles.
When performing an edge ﬂip, the diﬀerence in energy is then:
∆F β(e) = F β
after(e) −F β
before(e)
One problem with this energy function, is that one really big dihedral angel after
a ﬂip could outweigh the sum of the less big dihedral angels before a ﬂip. This
problem can be solved by using a parameter γ:
F β(e) =
||E||
∑
i=1
(−cos(βi))1/γ
Simulated Annealing
In order not to just look at local optimization, but global optimization, one can
use simulated annealing, which introduces random ﬂips by temperature. It is a
probabilistic method, which is designed to avoid being stuck at a local minimum.
For each optimization run, both good and bad ﬂips are made, but the bad ﬂips
are chosen randomly according to the temperature.
Due to the temperature
being lowered, so are the probability of a bad ﬂip for each iteration. These bad
ﬂips are important for the global perspective of the optimization, since they can
bring you away from one local minimum of energy to another, and thus make the
optimization visit all minima.
A pseudocode for the Simulated Annealing is seen in Algorithm 6 [Sch93].
==PAGE:37==
2.2 Geometry
25
Algorithm 6 Optimization by Simulated Annealing
1: for iteration lower than limit do
2:
Choose a random edge e in the mesh
3:
if e can be swapped then
4:
if ∆F(e) < 0 then ﬂip e
5:
else choose a random number 0 ≤r ≤1
6:
if r ≤exp(−∆F(e)/T) then ﬂip e
7:
end if
8:
end if
9:
end if
10: end for
It is noticed that simulated annealing requires an initial temperature to be pre-
deﬁned before optimization, and an update for the temperature after each iter-
ation is also needed. An energy function should also to be deﬁned, by e.g. the
previously mentioned dihedral angle function.
An example of the algorithm used on a terrain model generated using Delaunay
triangulation, and afterwards optimized by Simulated Annealing, can be found
in Figure 2.11.
Figure 2.11: On the left is seen the Delaunay triangulation of the mesh and on
the right the optimized mesh.
As seen above, the optimization has straightened out the small stream, but also
created a lot of skinny triangles, which could give some problems later (see Sec-
tion 3.1.2 and Section 3.4.3 for more information hereof). The example is from
the later described Ribe River test area.
==PAGE:38==
26
2 Theory
2.3
Modeling
In this section, the theory behind ﬂow simulation using FVM, and the use and
theory behind MIKE, is presented.
2.3.1
FVM
A ﬁnite volume method (FVM) is a method for representing and evaluating par-
tial diﬀerential equations [Che11]. In a FVM, solutions are calculated at discrete
places on a mesh. These discrete places are called nodes, and for a cell-centered
FVM, the nodes are placed at the center of each face. The solution value at a face
is assumed to be the average value over the face, which leads to face interpolation
in order to obtain the solution values all over the faces and their corresponding
edges and vertices.
2.3.2
Modeling in MIKE
For the ﬂow simulations, I will use one of the most widely used modeling systems
and the one NIRAS uses: MIKE 21 Flow Model FM (Flexible Mesh) by DHI,
which I from now on will call MIKE21FM.
The MIKE21FM is a comprehensive modeling system for 2D water modeling
developed by DHI. The system is developed for oceanographic and coastal envi-
ronments, but by being a general free-surface water ﬂow modeling system, it is
also applicable for studies of inland ﬂooding.
The system is based on a FVM on an unstructured mesh, where the spatial
division of the initial equations is performed using a cell-centered FVM [DHI13a].
For each time step, MIKE models the water level at each face of the mesh, and
afterwards makes a 2D water model by using inverse distance interpolation of
the face midpoint value onto the corresponding vertices. It then uses barycentric
interpolation to compute the values on the whole of the face. After the modeling
has been through all time steps, a smoothing of the water model is made, which
gives the midpoints of the non-covered edges the value of the boundary vertices
from the water model. If both the end points of a non-covered edge is in the
water model, the midpoint will get the average value of the two vertices. This
makes the water model more realistic and ensures that if a face has all three
vertices given a water level value, the face will in fact be covered by water. See
Figure 2.12 for an illustration hereof.
==PAGE:39==
2.3 Modeling
27
Figure 2.12: On the left the initial water model is seen and on the right the
ﬁnal smoothed water model.
The water input in the model can be given in several ways: as precipitation,
as a water source (pump), or as a boundary condition. All three water tribute
parameters can be given as a constant value or as a varying time series. The
precipitation can also be varying in domain, and thus given as a mesh with an
attribute value at each faces for the speciﬁc precipitation for that face.
Due to the models 2 dimensions, the water column is expected to be homoge-
neous in density, salinity and temperature. MIKE also oﬀers a 3D version of the
modeling system, called MIKE3FM, which can handle non-homogeneous water
columns, but for an inland ﬂood, the 2D version is generally perceived suﬃcient.
The MIKE3FM is primarily used for transport simulations of e.g. sediments.
==PAGE:40==
28
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 3
Method
In this chapter, the methodology used to achieve the project goals is presented.
The sections of the chapter follow the order of the project goals stated in Sec-
tion 1.2, though the ﬁrst goal was already covered in Section 2.2.6, and thus will
only brieﬂy be described in this chapter.
3.1
Exploration of MIKE
For the ﬂow simulation, I will use the program MIKE21FM. This program is a
part of the MIKE Zero package, which includes a number of other programs, of
which I have used several1 in my thesis work.
Since it is crucially important to understand how MIKE works to direct the
mesh generation for these simulations, I started by examine the MIKE pipeline.
This was also necessary to investigate if it was possible to make a mesh on my
own, and not using the MIKE Mesh Generator program.
To make a ﬂow simulation in the MIKE21FM program 3 ﬁle types are needed:
• 1 mesh-ﬁle of the area of interest in the *.mesh format
• Time series ﬁles in the *.dfs0 format for diﬀerent parameters (e.g. water
level, wind, precipitation) - optional
• 1 simulation conﬁguration ﬁle of the *.m21fm format
Since I will be working on improving the mesh ﬁle, I have ﬁrst researched how
MIKE makes these ﬁles.
3.1.1
MIKE Mesh Generator
The recommended method to produce a mesh ﬁle, is to use the program MIKE
Mesh Generator. This program works in the following way:
1MIKE Mesh Generator, MIKE Time Series, MIKE21FM, MIKE Result Viewer and MIKE
Animator Plus
==PAGE:42==
30
3 Method
1. Input is a point cloud of DTM and point cloud of bathymetries (seabed),
which is used as background scatter data (not mesh vertices)
2. User makes a user-deﬁned boundary for area of interest
3. User makes other relevant boundaries and help lines (e.g. house boundaries,
coastline help line)
4. Makes triangulation within boundaries by using the “Terminator” algo-
rithm [DHI13b]
5. Uses point cloud as scatter data, and interpolate the height values to the
mesh vertices
6. Exports the ﬁnal result as a *.mesh format ﬁle
For the ﬁrst step, the point clouds must be of a maximal size of 12 million points
and in the *.xyz-format or other MIKE program formats (*.dfs2 or *.dfsu).
For the second and third step, it is possible to import the boundaries and help
lines from other GIS programs, but the program is set up to handle editing di-
rectly in the program.
For the fourth step, the triangulation is made by specifying 3 conditions in a
menu (see Figure 3.1). To understand the underlying operations of the triangu-
lation, the scientiﬁc documentation [DHI13b] refers to the Terminator algorithm,
which is described in a scientiﬁc paper [She02]. See the next paragraph for an
elaboration of the method.
For the ﬁfth step, the interpolation is made and the user has the choice of using
Natural Neighbor or Linear interpolation.
Figure 3.1: The mesh generation menu with the 3 criterion parameters
==PAGE:43==
3.1 Exploration of MIKE
31
Terminator Algorithm
The Terminator algorithm is made by Shewchuk and is based on Ruppert’s and
Chew’s constrained Delaunay reﬁnement algorithms. It works in the following
way:
1. Makes constrained Delaunay triangulation (of original vertices and con-
straint edges) by using the Triangle program (see Section 3.3.1)
2. Reﬁnes by inserting a vertex
3. Stops when the given 3 conditions are met, else repeat step 2
The method for inserting a new vertex is as follows:
Find all skinny triangles (needle or cap) and all oversized triangles, and put them
in a priority queue. For the top triangle in the queue, make circumcenter new
vertex, unless a line segment is encroached. In that case, the line segment is
instead split by a Steiner point.
The *.mesh Format
As mentioned, MIKE requires a *.mesh-ﬁle as input in the ﬂow simulation pro-
gram MIKE21FM. This ﬁle type is simply a text ﬁle, and the ﬁle structure can
be seen in Appendix B.5.
Since the *.mesh ﬁle is a text ﬁle, it is easy to edit by e.g. Notepad. Thus the
program MIKE21FM does not know how the ﬁle is made, and hence the ﬁle could
be made manually or by other programs than MIKE Mesh Generator. This is
exactly what I intent to do.
3.1.2
Requirements for the mesh
There are no oﬃcial limitations for the simulations by MIKE21FM, but I have
discovered a quite important one:
CFL Condition
MIKE21FM, and many other modeling programs using a FVM, requires that
a Courant-Friedrichs-Lewy (CFL) condition is met for numerical stability. The
condition is a limit, Cmax, for which the Courant number for each face must
be below. The Courant number depends on the inverse of the minimum edge
length for each face, and thus it is crucially important to avoid needles in the
mesh, in order to keep the number below a limit. Hence for numerical stability,
the optimal mesh for a FVM is a Delaunay triangulation due to the property of
maximizing the minimum angle and thereby avoiding needles.
The default value for Cmax is set to 0.8, but can be raised to 0.99.
==PAGE:44==
32
3 Method
3.1.3
MIKE21FM
When a mesh ﬁle is ready for the chosen area of interest, the simulations can
be made.
First there is need for a simulation conﬁguration ﬁle to be made,
which is setup directly in MIKE21FM. After the conﬁgurations are made and
the external ﬁles (*mesh, *dfsu) are loaded, the user simply push Run, and the
simulation is made. The output is picture ﬁles for each time step of the chosen
output parameters (e.g. water level, water depth, ﬂow direction, etc.). These
pictures can subsequently be used in an animation or used in image analysis.
==PAGE:45==
3.2 Data Processing
33
3.2
Data Processing
After exploring MIKE and clarifying that I in fact can make my own meshes
without using the MIKE Mesh Generator, I could start looking at height data.
The primary data for this project is the height model (or point cloud) provided
for free by the Danish Geodata Agency. It is provided through online download2,
and is parted in tiles of 1 km2. As mentioned in Section 2.1.2 the new height
model is being updated these years, and the updated data for the Eastern part
of the country has already been released.
My project is divided in two main parts: test of methods and real case sce-
nario. For the ﬁrst part, ﬁve test areas were selected, and for the second part,
the area of Frederikssund and the scenario of the storm Bodil was chosen as the
real case, which I will describe in the following sections.
3.2.1
Data Restriction - Test Areas
For the test of diﬀerent thinning methods, ﬁve small areas was chosen, since it
was possible to run simulations on the original mesh in these, and as a result
have a desired solution to aim for.
Due to the NIRAS old thinning method requiring the data to be ordered, I
had to use the grid version of the old point cloud as the data for the test areas.
Ribe River: Tile 6130-481
For the ﬁrst initial test simulation, I used data from an area chosen by NIRAS:
1 km2 at the Ribe River. This was due to the river being close to the sea, and
thus having a great ﬂood potential, but also because NIRAS already had both
the original data and thinned the data for this area themselves. It was in fact
this tile that was used in the problem statement in Chapter 1.
On overview of the test area is seen in Figure 3.2.
2http://download.kortforsyningen.dk
==PAGE:46==
34
3 Method
Figure 3.2: Test area restriction at a river in Ribe. On the left is seen the
topographic map, and on the right the vertices are colored after height, where
blue is low and red is high.
After advice from NIRAS, a water source (pump) was placed in the North-West
side of the river to simulate a ﬂood from the river.
Præstø Coast: Tile 6112-696
This tile was chosen due to being close to the coast, thus getting a sea ﬂood
scenario.
On overview of the test area is seen in Figure 3.3
Figure 3.3: Test area restriction at the coast of Præstø.
A water source was placed in the North-East corner of the area to simulate a
ﬂood from sea.
==PAGE:47==
3.2 Data Processing
35
Hesede Forest: Tile 6126-687
This tile was chosen due to being a marsh close to a lake, thus creating an inland
ﬂood scenario, e.g. due to rain.
An overview of the test area is seen in Figure 3.4.
Figure 3.4: Test area restriction at the Hesede Forest.
A water source was placed in the big lake to simulate a ﬂood from a reservoir of
the catchment area.
Tude River and Wetland: Tile 6140-641
This tile was chosen due to being a river going through low wetland, thus creating
a lowland ﬂood scenario.
On overview of the test area is seen in Figure 3.5.
Figure 3.5: Test area restriction at the Tude Wetland.
A water source was placed in the West side of the river to simulate a ﬂood of the
wetland from the river.
==PAGE:48==
36
3 Method
Halleby River: Tile 6156-636
This tile was chosen due to being a river with straight side streams like in the
Ribe case, thus creating a scenario that could be compared to the Ribe scenario.
This area is also fairly close to the sea, and a ﬂood scenario from the river is
therefore very likely as well.
An overview of the test area is seen in Figure 3.6.
Figure 3.6: Test area restriction at the Halleby River.
A water source was placed in the West side of the river to simulate a ﬂood from
the river.
3.2.2
Data Restriction - Real Case Area
As a real case scenario, I have chosen the scenario of the storm Bodil that caused
a ﬂood of the city of Frederikssund on December 6th in 2013. This scenario was
chosen in cooperation with NIRAS, since they have not been able to make
the simulation of the scenario themselves.
To make a restriction of the area, I started by looking at topographic maps
over the area, and chose to restrict the area for my analysis to populated areas.
By combining a height map with data for buildings, I then chose to restrict the
area to 32 tiles (km2). See Figure 3.7(a) for combined maps.
To insure that I in fact had a necessary inland area for a ﬂood of the size of
Bodil, I looked at sea rise maps. These maps are some that NIRAS have made of
the whole country for 10cm intervals, and which I was given access to. Since the
maximum sea level under the storm Bodil was 1.87m at Frederikssund, I chose
to look at the 1.90m sea rise map. See Figure 3.7(b) for an illustration of the sea
rise at Frederikssund, where the coast is illustrated as a turquoise line. I wanted
==PAGE:49==
3.2 Data Processing
37
to include both Græse Å (North of the center) and Sillebro Å (in the center), and
thus my original restriction was acceptable hereof. Since MIKE21FM only looks
one triangle face forward from the last water model for each timestep, the massive
amount of inland there were in my mesh should not have any implications for the
ﬁnal simulations. Hence it is better to include too much inland area, than to little.
I chose to use the DTM class of the point cloud (class #2). I also considered
adding the bridges (class #17) for a visualization of the ﬂooding of the Kronprins
Frederiks Bridge at Frederikssund, but due to the height model being 2.5D, the
bridges would block the water instead of letting the water pass through under-
neath. Thus I chose to only use the DTM data.
(a) Height map with buildings
(b) 1.9m sea rise map
Figure 3.7: Area restriction of Frederikssund
This ﬁnal restricted area, and the restriction of the classes used, resulted in the
ﬁnal point cloud having a size of 158,572,364 points.
==PAGE:50==
38
3 Method
Bathymetry (Seabed)
After having deﬁned an area restriction inland, I focused on the seabed:
Since the point cloud only have data of inland points, I had to use another method
for obtaining the data for the bathymetry. The Geodata Agency does not provide
any bathymetry data, but they do provide a topographic map that shows the
contour lines of the seabed. By using this map as a background map, I was able
to manually geo-reference the bathymetry. See Figure 3.8 for illustrations of the
obtained bathymetry data.
Figure 3.8: Bathymetry data points. Left: A zoom level where the topographic
map can be seen. Right: The whole area, where points are colored after height.
3.2.3
Data Quality
As part of my inspection of the new point cloud used for Frederikssund, I looked
at the data quality. As mentioned in Section 2.1.2, the point cloud has a density
of 4.5 points per m2, but this is an average, and thus there are areas with much
less density. Data gaps can come from surface structures that do not reﬂect the
laser from the LIDAR scanning. It could be surfaces like ﬁber cement roofs or
water bodies [Geo14a], as seen in Figure 3.9.
==PAGE:51==
3.2 Data Processing
39
Figure 3.9: A lake in Frederikssund with no data illustrated by the black
background
Likewise, the accuracy of the data is also an average, and though the Geodata
Agency promises a vertical accuracy of 5cm, half the time it is worse.
One thing the Geodata Agancy does not talk about, is the classiﬁcation of the
points. This process is done after the measurements with algorithms. First, all
data is classiﬁed as vegetation, and then by algorithms re-classiﬁed into other
classes (if necessary). Thus, points that cannot be classiﬁed under other classes,
will end in the vegetation class, even if it is in fact not vegetation.
I have experienced a lot of data in the vegetation class that deﬁnitely was not
vegetation. See Figure 3.10 for an example hereof. More examples can be found
in Appendix C.
Figure 3.10: Left: The harbor with parts classiﬁed as vegetation.
Right: Orthophoto of the harbor
==PAGE:52==
40
3 Method
Since I have only used the DTM class for my project, this is not a direct problem,
but this means that valuable data might be missing in my data set due to the
data being classiﬁed in vegetation (like the rock sides of the harbor above).
3.2.4
Data Conversion
The data was given in *.laz ﬁle format3 which is viewable, but not directly ed-
itable, and thus had to be converted to another format to be used in my own
program. I chose to convert the data to *.xyz ﬁle format, since this is the format
used by MIKE and is a text ﬁle, and thus editable. This conversion was done by
using the recommended software las2las and las2txt, which is open source and
provided by rapidlasso GmbH.
This gave some loss of information in the data, e.g. the time stamp for each point,
but I evaluated that these information was not of any signiﬁcance for my project,
and thus an acceptable loss.
After having converted all the data to *.xyz format, I needed some additional
converting. I needed both *.node and *.poly format for the triangulations (in
Section 3.3.1), *.obj format for my GEL programs (in Section 3.4.1) and *.mesh
format for MIKE simulations. See Appendix B for an outline of the diﬀerent ﬁle
formats used. All these conversions where done by my self-made programs.
3.3
Mesh Generation
For generating a mesh that can later be simpliﬁed and optimized, I have chosen
a Delaunay triangulation of the point cloud. Since a Delaunay triangulation is
unique, the generation hereof is indiﬀerent. I have used the code of the Triangle
program, which could be modiﬁed to make the output in the right format.
3.3.1
Triangle - A Triangular Mesh Generator
In 1993, Jonathan Richard Shewchuk ﬁrst made a program called Triangle, which
is a two-dimensional Delaunay mesh triangulator [She05c]. It has since been up-
graded many times, and I have been using the latest version: no. 1.6 from 2005.
The program uses the divide and conquer algorithm, which does not generalize
to dimensions higher than two [Bær12, p251].
Unfortunately, the program has some limitations regarding the size of input.
This is due to the fact that Triangle was programmed in 32-bit, which gives it a
low limitation of RAM. That means the program will run out of memory when
3It is a compressed version of *.las ﬁle format, which is a standard ﬁle format for LiDAR
point cloud data.
==PAGE:53==
3.4 Simpliﬁcation & Optimization
41
working with a large amount of data, and for Triangle this seems to happen at
approximately 24 million vertices, when doing a normal Delaunay triangulation,
and about 10-15 million vertices for a CDT (depending on number of constrained
edges). This meant I could not triangulate the entire area of the real case scenario,
since it had about 158 million vertices. Thus I had to make my triangulation and
thinning in parts, and see Section 3.5 for more details.
3.4
Simpliﬁcation & Optimization
For my method of thinning a height model, I took the approach of my supervisor,
J. Andreas Bærentzen, and chose to focus on the Garland-Heckbert simpliﬁcation.
The theory behind it can be found in Section 2.2.6, and it works quite diﬀerently
than the algorithms used by NIRAS: It takes a mesh and simpliﬁes it by removing
the geometrically not important vertices, while NIRAS’ algorithms take a point
cloud and keeps the points that are key points.
After simpliﬁcation, I have chosen to look at optimization as well. For this part,
I focused on the simulated annealing described in Section 2.2.7.
3.4.1
Programming Using GEL
To carry out the work stated above, I used GEL, which is a C++ library, and
stands for GEometry and Linear algebra [Bær11].
For the Garland-Heckbert simpliﬁcation, GEL has a function called quadric_simplify.
This function takes in up to 4 parameters: Manifold (the mesh), keep_fraction,
singular_thresh and choose_optimal_positions. I chose to except the de-
fault singular_thresh, and thus only the last parameter was of interest for
further explorations.
For the optimization, I used the minimize_dihedral_angle-function, which also
contains simulated annealing. This function takes in 5 parameters: Manifold,
max_iter, anneal, alpha and gamma. Here the last three parameters were of
interest for further explorations.
Before using these functions, there was an important detail I had to have in
mind when using ﬂoating points: avoid rounding errors. Since my data was of
geographical coordinates, the data had 3 ﬂoating points for each vertex, where
the largest had 9 digits with 7 of them before the decimal point. These large
numbers gives rise to rounding errors when performing even simple operations
on them [Gol92]. Thus an easy solution is to normalize the values, such that it
is more in the comfort zone for ﬂoating points. This meant that I had to scale
==PAGE:54==
42
3 Method
all the coordinates of my vertices to be between 0 and 1. This had to be applied
for both the simpliﬁcation and the optimization.
An example of the ﬁnal code for my thinning of the meshes can be found in
Listing 3.1 on page 44.
Another crucially important detail as well, is what version the program is com-
piled in. I started using GEL directly in the 32-bit version it is provided in, but
quickly discovered a big problem with handling large amount of data, since the
program simply crashed. After struggling with the problem for quite some time,
I, in cooperation with my supervisor, came to the conclusion that it was the ver-
sion of the compiler that caused the problem. After some days of work, we got
GEL transferred to compile in a 64-bit version, and the problem was solved. Thus
for further notice: When handling large amount of data, it is very important to
run the necessary programs in 64-bit versions.
3.4.2
Testing of Parameters
For the initial test area of Ribe, I tested a lot of diﬀerent parameters to ﬁnd
the optimal thinning method for the simulations. All the results was compared
visually, since testing them in simulations would require a great amount of time.
Optimal Positioning
As a part of the Garland-Heckbert function (quadric_simplify), I was given the
choice between using the QEM calculated optimal position for new vertex after an
edge collapse, or use the position of one of the old vertices. After experimenting
with both, I decided to use both options in my further analyses (see Chapter 4
for the results hereof).
Minimize Dihedral Angle
For the optimization, I chose to use the GEL function for minimizing the dehe-
dral angle. This function gave me 3 parameters, which could be altered. The
ﬁrst parameter decides if the simulated annealing method is used, and if not,
then a greedy optimization is used instead. The second parameter is α, which
determines the strategy for calculating the energy of the dihedral angle, where
setting α to false results in an approximation of the energy is used. And ﬁnally,
the value for the γ parameter is set. The ﬁrst two parameters are boolean, and
thus I only have two options for each. The third parameter is numeric and I
chose to look at 4 diﬀerent values inspired by the work of my supervisor: γ = 1,
2, 4, 8. Thus I had a total of 16 diﬀerent tests.
==PAGE:55==
3.4 Simpliﬁcation & Optimization
43
After visual inspection, I concluded that the following parameters were the most
optimal: minimize_dihedral_angle(m, 1000, true, false, 4.0). As ex-
pected, using simulating annealing was the optimal choice, and my ﬁndings for
the γ parameter correlated with the experimental results of my supervisor.
Scale of Z-Values
Another measure I tried was to scale the z-values on the mesh for both the
simpliﬁcation and the optimization. I tried it with four diﬀerent scale values for
z: 0.5, 1, 2, 10. I tried to do the scaling for only simpliﬁcation, only optimization,
and on both simultaneously.
This gave 12 diﬀerent results, and after visual
inspections of the diﬀerent meshes, I concluded that in fact the original z-value
(scale value 1) gave the best results, and thus decided to not use scaling of the z
values.
3.4.3
MIKE-Friendly
The meshes is aimed to be used in ﬂow simulation, and since MIKE have the re-
quirement to avoid needles for its input meshes, I had to post-process my meshes
afterwards. I have named this process: making the mesh “MIKE-friendly”.
For this I tried diﬀerent methods, such as splitting the edges (by the split_edge
function) and splitting the faces (by the split_face_by_vertex function) of nee-
dles and caps. The ﬁrst did not get me closer to getting MIKE to like my meshes,
but the second did. Unfortunately, it only worked if I split every face, and not
just the needles and caps. This gave a mesh with about three times the number
of vertices, which was not favorable at all.
I also tried a more direct approach of combining making the meshes more De-
launay (by maximize_min_angle), and then removing all left over needles (by
remove_needles) and caps (by remove_caps). This worked perfectly, and thus
was chosen as the solution.
An example of the ﬁnal code for my thinning of the meshes can be found in
Listing 3.1 on the next page.
==PAGE:56==
44
3 Method
1 string file = "Ribe.obj";
2 load(file, m); // Loading the mesh
3
4 // Initializing minimum and maximum values:
5 double min_x = INFINITY;
double max_x = 0;
6 double min_y = INFINITY;
double max_y = 0;
7 double min_z = INFINITY;
double max_z = 0;
8
9 // Calculating the minimum and maximum values:
10 for (VertexID v : m.vertices()) {
11
min_x = min(min_x, m.pos(v)[0]);
max_x = max(max_x, m.pos(v)[0]);
12
min_y = min(min_y, m.pos(v)[1]);
max_y = max(max_y, m.pos(v)[1]);
13
min_z = min(min_z, m.pos(v)[2]);
max_z = max(max_z, m.pos(v)[2]);
14 }
15
16 // Calculating the scale parameter:
17 double length_x = max_x - min_x;
18 double length_y = max_y - min_y;
19 double length_z = max_z - min_z;
20 double length = max(length_z, max(length_x, length_y));
21
22 // Translation of points:
23 for (VertexID v : m.vertices()) {
24
m.pos(v)[0] = (m.pos(v)[0] - min_x) / length;
25
m.pos(v)[1] = (m.pos(v)[1] - min_y) / length;
26
m.pos(v)[2] = (m.pos(v)[2] - min_z) / length;
27 }
28
29 // Garland-Heckbert simplification:
30 quadric_simplify(m, 0.005, 0.0001, true);
31
32 // Optimizing with simulated annealing:
33 minimize_dihedral_angle(m, 1000, true, false, 4.0);
34
35 // Translation of points back to original positions:
36 for (VertexID v : m.vertices()) {
37
m.pos(v)[0] = (m.pos(v)[0] * length) + min_x;
38
m.pos(v)[1] = (m.pos(v)[1] * length) + min_y;
39
m.pos(v)[2] = (m.pos(v)[2] * length) + min_z;
40 }
41
42 // Making the mesh MIKE-friendly:
43 maximize_min_angle(m, 0.1, false);
44 remove_caps(m, 3.0);
45 remove_needles(m, 3.0, false);
46
47 // Giving the result file a name and saving the new mesh in *.obj format:
48 const string result_file = "Ribe_Simplified.obj";
49 obj_save(result_file , m, 2, 8);
Listing 3.1: Code for the work on the test area Ribe
==PAGE:57==
3.5 New Pipeline - Thinning In Parts
45
3.5
New Pipeline - Thinning In Parts
As mentioned in Section 3.3.1, Triangle have a limit of about 10-15 million vertices
for a CDT, and the load-function from GEL has a limit of app.
15 million
vertices. Since my entire area of Frederikssund have about 158 million vertices,
my triangulation and thinning had to be done in parts.
3.5.1
Old Pipeline
Since the test areas “only” had about 400,000 vertices, I could make a very
straight forward pipeline as illustrated below in Figure 3.11.
Figure 3.11: The old pipeline
As seen above, the pipeline takes a point cloud, computes a mesh, and then uses
simpliﬁcation and optimization on it. Finally it maximizes the minimum angle
and removes needles and caps to make it “MIKE-friendly”. This is all done in
one straight pipeline.
3.5.2
Non-Convex Areas
One problem I did not have to deal with at the test areas, was non-convexity.
Since the chosen real case area was non-convex, the mesh generation had to be
CDT. This meant I had to deﬁne which edges had to be deﬁned as the boundary
edges. This was done by storing the information for each mesh, by setting care-
fully chosen criteria up for each tile. This also meant a manual visual inspection
==PAGE:58==
46
3 Method
to deﬁne the criteria, and therefore added an element to the pipeline in form of
the “Store Boundary Edge Info”-box seen in Figure 3.12.
3.5.3
Diﬀerentiating Boundaries
Another problem I did not have to deal with at the test areas, was diﬀerentiating
the boundaries. For the test areas, I let the whole boundary be identiﬁed as a
land boundary, and thus not letting any water run out of the area. For a real
case scenario, this cannot always be applied, and in my real case, there is a need
for diﬀerentiating the boundaries to classify which is sea boundary and which is
land boundary of the area. This problem was simply solved in my *.mesh-convert
program by giving the boundary points an attribute number depending on the z-
and y-value of the point, thus registering which points belonged to the North sea
boundary, to the South sea boundary and to the rest of the land boundaries.
Hence this solution did not inﬂuence the new pipeline.
3.5.4
New Pipeline
For thinning of data with hundreds of million points and making the mesh a
CDT, I had to make a new pipeline (see Figure 3.12).
As seen in the ﬁgure, I have parted the ﬁrst half pipeline up for each tile, where I
compute a mesh, simplify it and store information of the boundary edges. After
that I output the resulting point clouds and merge them into one big point cloud,
which is then computed as a mesh again, but this time by using the boundary
information and making the mesh into a CDT. The reason behind not outputting
the resulting mesh for each tile and then merging the meshes, is due to the com-
plexity of that operation. Instead, I chose to throw away all the connectivity
information and make a whole new mesh from the big merged point cloud.
After a CDT mesh is computed, the next element of the pipeline is to simplify
the data again. The second simpliﬁcation is necessary, since the simpliﬁcation
of each tile will store a lot of boundary vertices, which need not be necessary to
store in the ﬁnal merged mesh. So to reduce the redundancy, a second simpliﬁ-
cation on the merged mesh is important. Therefore the overall reduction rate is
divided into two reduction rates, one for the initial simpliﬁcations, and one for
the ﬁnal simpliﬁcation, which make the wanted reduction rate when put together.
Thereafter I continue on the old pipeline, where I optimize and make the mesh
“MIKE-friendly”.
==PAGE:59==
3.5 New Pipeline - Thinning In Parts
47
Figure 3.12: The new pipeline
In practice, I chose to thin each tile individually, though I could have combined
some of them before starting the pipeline. This would however create extra work
for the merging, and due to the load-function by GEL being O(n2), it would also
give extra loading time for the merged tiles. Hence considering the processing
time it is more favorable to have many small patches than having a few big ones.
==PAGE:60==
48
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 4
Analyses & Results
This chapter covers the statistical analyses of the meshes and the output from
the simulations. Afterwards, the results of these analyses are presented in tables.
For simplicity, I have given the results of the comparisons of the test areas ab-
breviated names:
• The original mesh vs. the NIRAS old thinned mesh: N Old.
• The original mesh vs. the original NIRAS new thinned mesh: N N0.
• The original mesh vs. the MIKE-friendly NIRAS new thinned mesh: N New.
• The original mesh vs. the Garland-Heckbert simpliﬁed mesh: G-H1.0.
• The original mesh vs. the optimized Garland-Heckbert simpliﬁed mesh:
G-H1.1.
• The original mesh vs. the Garland-Heckbert simpliﬁed with optimal position-
ing mesh: G-H2.0.
• The original mesh vs. the optimized Garland-Heckbert simpliﬁed with optimal
positioning mesh: G-H2.1.
• The original mesh vs. the optimized Garland-Heckbert simpliﬁed with optimal
positioning, by using the new pipeline discussed in Section 3.5: G-H3.1.
To assure that the following comparisons are fair, I have ensured that all the
thinned meshes have approximately the same number of vertices and faces.
==PAGE:62==
50
4 Analyses & Results
4.1
Meshes
I will start my result chapter by looking at the underlying meshes and compare
them directly to see how close they are to the original mesh.
4.1.1
Visual comparison
First I made a visual comparison of the meshes, and the diﬀerent meshes are
visualized in Figure 4.1. Since all my meshes look very much alike at this zoom,
I chose to only include one of them here.
The NIRAS old thinned mesh
The NIRAS new thinned mesh
My mesh from G-H2.0
Figure 4.1: The diﬀerent types of meshes
As seen above, the meshes have very diﬀerent structure even though they have
about the same number of vertices: NIRAS old has 2325, NIRAS new has 2344
and G-H2.0 has 2326 vertices.
==PAGE:63==
4.1 Meshes
51
The NIRAS meshes cluster the vertices, since they strive to keep the model’s key
points (local minima and maxima). The big diﬀerence between the two meshes
are that NIRAS’ old thinning method keeps points of maximum 50m distance,
and NIRAS’ new thinning method only keeps points of maximum 600m distance.
Hence the big diﬀerence in the clustering. My mesh on the other hand have nicely
distributed vertices all over the area, which gives a much nicer triangulation. This
is due to my thinning being a simpliﬁcation, and thus does not look for points
to keep, but removes points which are not important for the geometry of the mesh.
The massive clustering at the new NIRAS meshes actually meant that the meshes
cannot be used directly in a MIKE simulation due to the excessive amount of
needles, even though the mesh is Delaunay (see Section 3.1.2 for an elaboration
hereof). Thus the new NIRAS meshes all had to be processed in MIKE
Mesh Generator, where a Constrained Delaunay Reﬁnement was used. Hence
vertices were added to the meshes, but without movement or modiﬁcation of the
original vertices. Afterwards linear interpolation was used to obtain z-values for
the new vertices. For the old NIRAS mesh, a slight modiﬁcation of three triangles
were needed, but not a whole mesh reﬁnement.
My meshes were already made “MIKE-friendly” in the mesh generation, and
therefore did not need to be processed in MIKE before any simulations.
4.1.2
Statistical Comparison
For comparison of the diﬀerent meshes, I made them into grid/image ﬁles so that
I easily could subtract them from each other and get a numeric measurement for
the diﬀerences. I chose a low pixel size of 0.5×0.5 meter (a total of 4 million
pixels per picture), and the color chart was given 251 diﬀerent values, from 0 to
250 on the gray band. NoData was given the value 255. All ﬁles was given same
pixel size and color chart.
For the image analysis of the meshes, a GIS program was chosen (ArcGIS) due
to its ease of doing image/raster analysis. The format *.tif was used due to its
abilities to be georeferenced and used in GIS. The diﬀerences between the images
were calculated directly as a subtraction, where the thinned mesh was subtracted
from the original mesh by the rules of raster analysis shown in Figure 4.2, and
documentation for the raster analysis can be found on the Esri website for ArcGIS
[Esr15]. This meant that a negative pixel value indicate an underestimation, and
a positive pixel value indicate an overestimation for the thinned mesh.
==PAGE:64==
52
4 Analyses & Results
Figure 4.2: The subtraction method used [Esr15]
See Figure 4.3 for an example of the calculated diﬀerence of two pictures.
Figure 4.3: Above: The grid ﬁles of the original mesh and my G-H1.1 mesh
Below: The diﬀerence
As seen above, I have visualized the underestimated areas as orange and the
overestimated areas as blue.
==PAGE:65==
4.1 Meshes
53
Results
To compare the diﬀerences of the meshes, I made some statistical analyses. First
I extracted the value of the biggest overestimation (the Highest value) and the
biggest underestimation (the Lowest value).
Here, a number close to zero is
better, since the lower the maximum diﬀerence is, the lower the overall diﬀerence
must be. By knowing the scale of the color chart, I could translate the pixel value
into meters.
Afterwards, I counted the number of pixels with the value zero, i.e. the number
of pixels where the meshes are exactly the same. Here, on the other hand, it is
better to have a high number, since this would indicate a big similarity between
the mesh and the original mesh.
Lastly, I looked at the mean diﬀerence. I did not look at the true mean value, but
the mean value for the absolute diﬀerences. This is due to a big overestimation
in one part, and a big underestimation in another part of the mesh, which might
cancel each other out. Thus I ﬁrst took the absolute value for each diﬀerence,
and then the mean value. See Table 4.16 for the results.
6130-481
N Old
N N0
N New
G-H1.0
G-H1.1
G-H2.0
G-H2.1
G-H3.1
Highest [m]
2.12
1.31
1.50
1.84
1.31
1.20
1.47
1.49
Lowest [m]
-1.68
-1.43
-2.92
-1.43
-1.38
-1.27
-1.27
-1.61
No. of zeros
322,325
207,104
210,545
455,765
452,433
596,408
582,796
568,900
mean||z|| [m]
0.11
0.11
0.12
0.07
0.07
0.05
0.05
0.05
Table 4.4: The statistical results of the mesh diﬀerences
I noticed that the G-H2.0 mesh did best in these tests, and the N New mesh
did worst, and that the diﬀerent results are remarkably far from each other: my
meshes are for the last two parameters roughly twice as good as the NIRAS ones,
and regarding the number of zeros, my G-H2.0 had a hit rate of 15%, while the
original NIRAS New mesh only had 5%. I had expected the G-H2.1 to do best,
and the N Old to do worst, but the truly interesting results will be the ones from
the simulations, since these are the ones the whole project is aiming to optimize.
See the next section hereof.
For the rest of this chapter, I will use the “MIKE-friendly” versions
of the NIRAS meshes, since it was these meshes that was used in the
simulations.
==PAGE:66==
54
4 Analyses & Results
4.2
Simulations
I made ﬂow simulations for all ﬁve test areas. The setup for each area was exactly
the same for all the diﬀerent thinned meshes, but the setup was diﬀerent for each
test area. The diﬀerences lay in the amount of water that poured into the area,
the placement of the water source, and the initial conditions (the water level at
the beginning of the simulation).
MIKE does not export the exact data from the simulations, but only gives the
options of export in shape or picture format. Due to the limitations of the shape
format, MIKE only exports it for the FVM solutions, and thus gives one value
(the solution value) for each face. The picture format on the other hand gives
the option for also exporting the ﬁnal water model and the processed smoothed
water model mentioned in Section 2.3.2. Due to the more realistic result MIKE
gives in the picture format, this format was chosen to compare results. For the
image analysis, ArcGIS and the *.tif format was used again. The pixel size of
the output ﬁles was given the default value for all ﬁles: 1.31×1.31 meter.
To analyze the results, I made 3 diﬀerent analyses: Areas Flooded, Water Levels
and Water Depth. See the following sections for an elaboration for each analysis,
and see Section 4.2.4 for the results of the analyses.
==PAGE:67==
4.2 Simulations
55
4.2.1
Area Flooded
The ﬁrst comparison was purely based on the area ﬂooded and not the depth
or level of the ﬂood. This was done by coloring the pictures black/white, and
then subtracting the pixel color values from each other. By then assigning the
color orange to negative values (underestimated areas) and the color blue to
positive values (overestimated areas), I now had a visualization of the diﬀerence
(see Figure 4.5 for an example of the calculated diﬀerence of two pictures).
Figure 4.5: Above: The result ﬁles of the original mesh and my G-H1.1 mesh
Below: The diﬀerence
Afterwards, it was possible to count the number of pixels colored orange and blue,
thus getting an exact numerical measurement for the diﬀerence. A high number
of colored pixels indicates a big diﬀerence between the results, and vice versa.
For all the resulting images from this test see Appendix A for a link to a Dropbox
folder.
==PAGE:68==
56
4 Analyses & Results
4.2.2
Water Level
The second comparison also took the level of the ﬂood into account. This was
done by coloring the pictures in grayscale colors and then subtracting the pixel
color values from each other (and using the same scale for all pictures). I could
again assign the color orange to negative values (underestimated areas) and the
color blue to positive values (overestimated areas), and thus I now had a visual-
ization of the diﬀerence (see Figure 4.6 for an example of the calculated diﬀerence
of two pictures).
Figure 4.6: Above: The result ﬁles of the original mesh and my G-H1.1 mesh
Below: The diﬀerence
For these diﬀerences it was again possible to count the number of pixels colored
orange and blue, but since there now was many diﬀerent color values, it was more
relevant to look at the mean pixel value. In order not to let negative and positive
values balance each other out, I ﬁrst took the absolute value of the diﬀerence
and then took the mean. This mean value for each pixel could be used as an
exact numerical measurement, why a high number of mean value indicates a big
diﬀerence between the results, and vice versa.
One big problem with this analysis, is that the water level in the main water
basin (e.g. the river above) can overshadow the rest of the water level results,
since the basin have the greatest quantity of pixels. Also, normally in inland
ﬂood analyses, the water level is not as important as the actual water depth.
Thus the next test is more favorable.
For all the resulting images from this test see Appendix A for a link to a Dropbox
folder.
==PAGE:69==
4.2 Simulations
57
4.2.3
Water Depth
The third comparison looked at the depth of the ﬂood. The depth of the ﬂood was
another result from MIKE that could be exported like the other pictures. Like
in the previous test, I colored these pictures in grayscale and then subtracting
the pixel color values from each other (and using the same scale for all pictures).
I could again assign the color orange to negative values (underestimated areas)
and the color blue to positive values (overestimated areas), and then I had a
visualization of the diﬀerence (see Figure 4.7 for an example of the calculated
diﬀerence of two pictures).
Figure 4.7: Above: The result ﬁles of the original mesh and my G-H1.1 mesh
Below: The diﬀerence
For these diﬀerences, it was again possible to count the number of pixels colored
orange and blue, and the mean pixel value (of the absolute value of the diﬀerence).
This test is more favorable than the previous one, since this test also takes the
underlying mesh into account.
For all the resulting images from this test see Appendix A for a link to a Dropbox
folder.
==PAGE:70==
58
4 Analyses & Results
4.2.4
The Results
In ﬂood analyses, the main rule is to be conservative, and thus it is much better
to overestimate a ﬂood than to underestimate a ﬂood. Thus for the following
results the focus should be on the overall diﬀerences, but also to some degree for
the orange diﬀerences.
Since the Ribe River area was my initial test area, I made simulations on all
the diﬀerent meshes. Since I did not have time to make my analysis for all the
types of meshes for all test areas, I had to exclude some of them. NIRAS chose
they only wanted me to focus on the new method, and thus I excluded the N old
mesh. I chose to exclude G-H1.0 and G-H1.1 from further testing due to receiving
general better results for other meshes, but also due to a belief that using optimal
positioning would lead to better meshes. I chose to keep the G-H2.0 mesh in the
analysis due to being curious about the magnitude of the optimization eﬀect.
To make the big tables easier to read, I have colored the best (green) and worst
(red) results for each test. I have also colored the abbreviated O (for orange)
an orange color, and likewise the abbreviated B (for blue) a blue color. Again,
I will remind the reader that orange is the underestimated ﬂood and blue is the
overestimated ﬂood. I apologize for the confusion it might give that O stands for
under-, and not overestimation. I must also clarify that C indicates the sum of
all the color values, but |C| indicates the mean of the absolute values, and the
precise formulas for these values are stated here under:
C =
N
∑
i=1
Ci
and
|C| = mean (|C|) = 1
N
N
∑
i=1
|Ci|
where N is the total number of pixels and Ci is the color value for the speciﬁc
pixel, and thus the value for the diﬀerences between the two meshes.
==PAGE:71==
4.2 Simulations
59
Ribe River
Here are the results from the tests on the Ribe River area:
6130-481
N Old
N New
G-H1.0
G-H1.1
G-H2.0
G-H2.1
G-H3.1
Winner
Area
Pixels
C
24,203
33,463
22,010
20,189
17,934
17,125
18,387
G-H2.1
O
1,786
1,216
1,650
1,156
1,331
1,333
1,207
G-H1.1
B
22,417
32,247
20,360
19,033
16,603
15,792
17,180
G-H2.1
Water level
Pixels
C
155,956
165,734
153,963
152,629
150,201
149,394
47,332
G-H3.1
O
2,052
1,386
1,659
1,477
1,343
1,344
27,742
G-H2.0
B
153,904
164,348
152,304
151,152
148,858
148,050
19,590
G-H3.1
Mean
|C|
17.28
10.93
27.50
19.67
11.18
11.10
2.21
G-H3.1
O
-0.14
-0.09
-0.12
-0.09
-0.10
-0.10
-0.56
N New
B
17.13
10.84
27.38
19.57
11.08
11.01
1.64
G-H3.1
Water Depth
Pixels
C
158,959
158,547
144,366
135,877
126,604
126,566
125,453
G-H3.1
O
69,598
56,217
63,355
59,873
53,979
54,785
52,899
G-H3.1
B
89,361
102,330
81,011
76,004
72,625
71,781
72,554
G-H2.1
Mean
|C|
5.59
5.09
4.82
4.29
3.71
3.72
3.60
G-H3.1
O
-3.07
-2.09
-2.49
-2.19
-1.84
-1.88
-1.70
G-H3.1
B
2.52
3.00
2.33
2.11
1.87
1.83
1.90
G-H2.1
Table 4.8: The results from the analyses on the Ribe River test area
For this test area, it is noticed that for the ﬁrst test (ﬂooded area) my meshes
generally did best. But for the second test, the NIRAS meshes had good results,
but this was due to the main water level of the river, which overshadowed every-
thing else. For the ﬁnal test, my meshes again had the better results.
The mesh that had most wins was actually the G-H3.1 mesh, but it did have
some really bad results in the second test, when focused on underestimation.
When looking at the overall results, the mesh that did best without big fails, was
the G-H2.1 mesh.
Likewise, the mesh that had most losses was the N New, but it did have one
win. When focusing on the underestimation, it was N Old that performed most
poorly.
==PAGE:72==
60
4 Analyses & Results
Præstø Coast
Here are the results from the tests on the Præstø coast area:
6112-696
N New
G-H2.0
G-H2.1
G-H3.1
Winner
Area
Pixels
C
9,870
8,401
9,591
9,852
G-H2.0
O
2,291
1,667
320
1,678
G-H2.1
B
7,579
6,734
9,271
8,174
G-H2.0
Water level
Pixels
C
106,779
106,172
108,388
107,620
G-H2.0
O
2,244
1,617
1,873
1,634
G-H2.0
B
104,535
104,555
106,515
105,986
G-H2.0
Mean
|C|
10.22
10.09
11.73
11.82
G-H2.0
O
-0.24
-0.17
-0.17
-0.17
G-H2.1
B
9.98
9.92
11.57
11.64
G-H2.0
Water Depth
Pixels
C
89,375
68,211
70,867
69,326
G-H2.0
O
44,088
34,041
31,948
31,682
G-H3.1
B
45,287
34,170
38,919
37,644
G-H2.0
Mean
|C|
1.98
1.32
1.43
1.43
G-H2.0
O
-1.01
-0.71
-0.73
-0.75
G-H2.0
B
0.96
0.61
0.70
0.68
G-H2.0
Table 4.9: The results from the analyses on the Præstø Coast test area
For this test area, it should be noticed that G-H2.0 generally did best, and that
N New did worst.
For the underestimation my meshes clearly did best with much lower values than
the N New, but with varying winners. Espacially, in the last test my meshes had
remarkably better results.
==PAGE:73==
4.2 Simulations
61
Hesede Forest
Here are the results from the tests:
6126-687
N New
G-H2.0
G-H2.1
G-H3.1
Winner
Area
Pixels
C
10,111
10,773
9,930
10,569
G-H2.1
O
2,995
226
1,128
807
G-H2.0
B
7,116
10,547
8,802
9,762
N new
Water level
Pixels
C
95,602
99,394
97,647
97,348
N new
O
88,252
224
2,949
805
G-H2.0
B
7,350
99,170
94,698
96,543
N new
Mean
|C|
3.07
3.69
3.58
3.54
N new
O
-1.72
-0.04
-0.33
-0.16
G-H2.0
B
1.35
3.65
3.25
3.38
N new
Water Depth
Pixels
C
80,881
78,133
74,782
76,217
G-H2.1
O
32,714
37,631
35,738
38,525
N new
B
48,167
40,502
39,044
37,692
G-H3.1
Mean
|C|
2.30
2.03
1.96
2.04
G-H2.1
O
-1.20
-1.12
-1.07
-1.17
G-H2.1
B
1.10
0.91
0.89
0.87
G-H3.1
Table 4.10: The results from the analyses on the Hesede Forest test area
For this test area, it should be noticed that there was very mixed winners. Gen-
erally G-H2.1 did best, since it never failed like the G-H2.0.
When focusing on the underestimation, it was G-H2.0 that was the best and
the N New that did worst.
==PAGE:74==
62
4 Analyses & Results
Tude River and Wetland
Here are the results from the tests:
6140-641
N New
G-H2.0
G-H2.1
G-H3.1
Winner
Area
Pixels
C
34,078
21,629
22,083
51,653
G-H2.0
O
5,325
3,450
1,105
25,144
G-H2.0
B
28,753
18,179
20,978
26,509
G-H2.0
Water level
Pixels
C
178,202
60,216
74,879
175,548
G-H2.0
O
5,217
41,872
51,155
50,614
N new
B
172,985
18,344
23,724
124,934
G-H2.0
Mean
|C|
30.38
3.84
4.83
17.93
G-H2.0
O
-0.60
-1.17
-1.75
-8.22
N new
B
29.79
2.67
3.08
9.71
G-H2.0
Water Depth
Pixels
C
192,927
153,809
158,612
187,430
G-H2.0
O
88,012
79,514
81,748
69,531
G-H3.1
B
104,915
74,295
76,864
117,899
G-H2.0
Mean
|C|
6.39
3.84
4.10
7.29
G-H2.0
O
-3.05
-2.20
-2.35
-3.92
G-H2.0
B
3.33
1.64
1.74
3.37
G-H2.0
Table 4.11: The results from the analyses on the Tude Wetland test area
For this test area, it should be noticed that it was G-H3.1 that generally did
worst, since it had more remarkable misses. Generaly, the G-H2.0 did best.
For the underestimation, there were very mixed results, with only G-H3.1 as
a clear loser for the ﬁrst test and N New as a clear winner for the second test.
==PAGE:75==
4.2 Simulations
63
Halleby River
Here are the results from the tests:
6156-636
N New
G-H2.0
G-H2.1
G-H3.1
Winner
Area
Pixels
C
27,105
17,773
23,020
17,872
G-H2.0
O
11,906
3,568
5,714
4,514
G-H2.0
B
15,199
14,205
17,306
13,358
G-H3.1
Water level
Pixels
C
146,420
124,494
148,063
144,172
G-H2.0
O
11,906
8,739
123,658
8,097
G-H3.1
B
134,514
115,755
24,405
136,075
G-H2.1
Mean
|C|
11.1
3.91
5.67
9.20
G-H2.0
O
-0.43
-0.24
-4.09
-0.32
G-H2.0
B
10.67
3.67
1.58
8.87
G-H2.1
Water Depth
Pixels
C
135,526
106,578
109,860
103,500
G-H3.1
O
59,715
44,579
48,086
44,510
G-H3.1
B
75,811
61,999
61,774
59,011
G-H3.1
Mean
|C|
3.33
1.95
2.11
1.94
G-H3.1
O
-1.57
-0.85
-0.96
-0.88
G-H2.0
B
1.76
1.10
1.15
1.06
G-H3.1
Table 4.12: The results from the analyses on the Halleby River test area
For this test area, it should be noticed that generally G-H2.0 did best without
any losses and only one big miss. N New did worst generally worst, since it had
many big misses.
For the underestimation, G-H2.0 and G-H3.1 both came close with good results,
while G-H2.1 had some very big misses in the second test, and thus must be the
worst.
This test area had the same characterizations as the Ribe River test area, so
N New was expected to lose. But it was quite a surprise that G-H2.0 got such
good results compared to the results from Ribe.
==PAGE:76==
64
4 Analyses & Results
Overall results
Since the favorable tests to win are the ﬁrst and last test, I have collected the
results in a table below. Also, the parameters that was the optimal to win, was
the overall and underestimated ones, and thus only these are included.
Test
N New
G-H2.0
G-H2.1
G-H3.1
Winner
6130-481
Area
Pixel
C
33,463
17,934
17,125
18,387
G-H2.1
O
1,216
1,331
1,333
1,207
G-H3.1
W. Depth
Pixel
C
158,547
126,604
126,566
125,453
G-H3.1
O
56,217
53,979
54,785
52,899
G-H3.1
Mean
|C|
5.09
3.71
3.72
3.60
G-H3.1
O
-2.09
-1.84
-1.88
-1.70
G-H3.1
6112-696
Area
Pixel
C
9,870
8,401
9,591
9,852
G-H2.0
O
2,291
1,667
320
1,678
G-H2.1
W. Depth
Pixel
C
89,375
68,211
70,867
69,326
G-H2.0
O
44,088
34,041
31,948
31,682
G-H3.1
Mean
|C|
1.98
1.32
1.43
1.43
G-H2.0
O
-1.01
-0.71
-0.73
-0.75
G-H2.0
6126-687
Area
Pixel
C
10,111
10,773
9,930
10,569
G-H2.1
O
2,995
226
1,128
807
G-H2.0
W. Depth
Pixel
C
80,881
78,133
74,782
76,217
G-H2.1
O
32,714
37,631
35,738
38,525
N new
Mean
|C|
2.30
2.03
1.96
2.04
G-H2.1
O
-1.20
-1.12
-1.07
-1.17
G-H2.1
6140-641
Area
Pixel
C
34,078
21,629
22,083
51,653
G-H2.0
O
5,325
3,450
1,105
25,144
G-H2.0
W. Depth
Pixel
C
192,927
153,809
158,612
187,430
G-H2.0
O
88,012
79,514
81,748
69,531
G-H3.1
Mean
|C|
6.39
3.84
4.10
7.29
G-H2.0
O
-3.05
-2.20
-2.35
-3.92
G-H2.0
6156-636
Area
Pixel
C
27,105
17,773
23,020
17,872
G-H2.0
O
11,906
3,568
5,714
4,514
G-H2.0
W. Depth
Pixel
C
135,526
106,578
109,860
103,500
G-H3.1
O
59,715
44,579
48,086
44,510
G-H3.1
Mean
|C|
3.33
1.95
2.11
1.94
G-H3.1
O
-1.57
-0.85
-0.96
-0.88
G-H2.0
Table 4.13: The results from the analyses on all the test areas
From this, it is now clear that G-H2.0 is actually slightly better without any
remarkable misses (like G-H3.1). Its also better than the optimized version in
G-H2.1, which did not win as many times but thoug had generally close values
to G-H2.0. Also, we can see that N New has the remarkably worst meshes with
most losses. It is also noticed that G-H3.1 is the worst of the G-H meshes, which
was expected.
==PAGE:77==
4.3 Real Case Scenario
65
4.3
Real Case Scenario
For the real case scenario, the original point cloud consisted of about 158 million
points. I followed the pipeline given in Section 3.5.4, and started by thinning each
patch at the rate of 6.33%, such that after combining the patches I had a mesh of
10 million points, which could be handled by both Triangle and my own program.
Then I simpliﬁed the CDT mesh at the rate of 1% and obtained the ﬁnal mesh
with about 100,000 vertices. The two meshes can be seen in Figure 4.14.
Figure 4.14: Above: The ﬁrst simpliﬁed mesh (10mio. vertices) and the ﬁnal
simpliﬁed mesh (100K vertices)
Below: Zoomed section of the meshes at a road
Since it was not possible to make a mesh of the original data set, nor load the
data in a GIS program, I could not directly compare my ﬁnal mesh to the original
data set. Instead, I could compare the data against the ﬁrst simpliﬁed mesh. The
==PAGE:78==
66
4 Analyses & Results
results can be seen in Figure 4.15.
Figure 4.15: The diﬀerence between ﬁrst simpliﬁed and the ﬁnal simpliﬁed mesh
As seen, I have again visualized the underestimated areas as orange and the
overestimated areas as blue.
Statistical Results
Like in Section 4.1.2, I made a statistical analysis for the diﬀerences between the
two meshes, and see Table 4.16 for the results.
Frederikssund
G-H2.0
Highest [m]
5.98
Lowest [m]
-8.38
No. of zeros
14,422,629
mean|z| [m]
0.03
Table 4.16: The statistical results of the mesh diﬀerences
With a total of 14,422,629 pixels with zero value (out of 19,080,988 pixels) my
thinning has a hit-rate of about 76%, and compared to the Ribe mesh, having a
==PAGE:79==
4.3 Real Case Scenario
67
hit-rate of up to about 15%, this is really remarkable. Though it has to be noted
again that the comparison was not against the original data set, but against the
ﬁrst simpliﬁed mesh.
Simulation Results
Unfortunately, I could not run a simulation of the original water level data from
the storm Bodil on my mesh (see Appendix D for the documentation of the
ﬂood). This might very possibly be due to the extreme water situation of that
event. Instead, I ran a large amount of diﬀerent simulations and found the limit
of the simulations, which was at 1.08m, and thus 0.79m under the maximum
water level at Bodil, which was at 1.87m. When compared to the normal water
level of the fjord (see Figure 4.17), the event of 1.08m higher water level would
still be an extreme case.
Figure 4.17: The normal water level at Frederiksværk (15km from
Frederikssund) [DMI15]
Results from the simulation can be seen in Figure 4.18, and a video of the simu-
lation can be found in Appendix A.
==PAGE:80==
68
4 Analyses & Results
Figure 4.18: The lowest and highest water level of the simulation
As seen above, the simulation did not make the extreme ﬂood from Bodil, where
the center of the city and the barriers at the North bridge were ﬂooded (see
Appendix D for the documentation of the ﬂood). The simulation did though
show a ﬂood of the low land area at Græse Å (just North of the center), and a
small ﬂood of the coast-near populated area South of the city.
==PAGE:81==
CHAPTER 5
Discussion
In this chapter, I will discuss the methods I have used along with how these
methods could have been improved by further work. Finally, I will discuss the
results obtained in the previous chapter.
5.1
Discussion of Methods
In this section, I will discuss those of the methods I have used in the previous
chapters that I have found questionable. I will strive towards concluding whether
these methods were acceptable or could have been improved by further work.
Data
As mentioned in Section 3.2.3, the quality of the data is in fact not completely
known, since all quality measurements are given as average values. Thus, it is
uncertain how precise the data foundation for the height models of a speciﬁc
area is, and this will be passed on to the uncertainty of a simulation of a ﬂood.
Likewise, the classiﬁcation of data is very important for a later simulation, since
the simulation should only be used on the DTM, and an incorrect classiﬁcation
may lead to an incorrect simulated ﬂood.
Even though all these uncertainties of the data are valid, there is not much I
personally could have done to avoid them, and given the extreme amount of data
in the point cloud, the eﬀect of some few points being incorrectly measured or
classiﬁed should not make a big diﬀerence in the ﬁnal thinned mesh, thus not
making a big diﬀerence in the simulated ﬂood. I therefore ﬁnd these uncertainties
acceptable.
2.5D Height Models
All meshes that have been dealt with in this project have been 2.5D, which is
not optimal for any water analysis, since all bridges, other lifted obstacles and
ﬂow-through openings have been left out. This has a direct consequence for the
accuracy when simulating a ﬂood. The simulation program used only accepted
2.5D meshes, and thus another simulation program would have had to be used
to implement simulations on a 3D height model. Since my initial goal was to
optimize the input for MIKE21FM, it is really not relevant to make 3D meshes.
==PAGE:82==
70
5 Discussion
Using Optimal Positioning
When using the optimal positioning of the Garland-Heckbert algorithm, the new
positions are no longer points that come from actual measurements. This might
give rise to vertices in the mesh that cannot be found out in the real world. This
is actually quite controversial in the ﬁeld of geography, where it is generally ad-
vised to use measurement-based data and not coordinate-based (which my meshes
would be deﬁned as), due to concern for accuracy issues [Goo99]. Though these
concerns are somewhat valid generally for geographic data, I rise the argument
that when dealing with a mesh, no point on the faces or edges can be veriﬁed by
measurements. Thus the mesh that in the end resembles the original mesh the
most must also have the most places where points can be veriﬁed in the real world.
So in this very speciﬁc ﬁeld of geography (height models), I ﬁnd it acceptable to
deviate from the general rules of processing geo data.
Thinning in Parts
Due to the limitations of my programs (both Triangle and my own program),
I had to thin the real case area in parts. This is of course not optimal, since
it might lead to other results, which might not be as close to the original data
set. Unfortunately, with the time limit of this project, I did not see any other
solution to the problem. I tried to reduce the problem by using simpliﬁcation in
two sections of the pipeline (both before and after merging the patches), but I do
not have a measurement for the eﬀect of this procedure. If I had had more time,
I would have looked into the eﬀect of thinning in parts for a small test area and
compared the use of diﬀerent simpliﬁcation rates in the two stages.
It is also not the optimal procedure to throw away the connectivity when merging
the patches, but I did not see any other solution due to time limits, and the
complexity of merging meshes. For this problem, I did chose to test the eﬀects
hereof, which I did on all the test areas (called test G-H3.1). Here it was conﬁrmed
that this procedure did in fact have a negative impact on the results of a ﬂow
simulation, and that further work on optimizing the pipeline might improve the
results.
Constant Manning Numbers and Permeability Sizes
For both the test area and the real case scenario, I used a constant Manning num-
ber and permeability size for the simulations. This is not optimal for obtaining
a realistic ﬂow simulation, but it was a necessity due to the time frame of the
project.
==PAGE:83==
5.2 Discussion of Results
71
A solution for the test areas was to focus on areas of uniform landcover and
absence of buildings. For the real case area on the other hand, the parameters
might have had an inﬂuence on the simulated result, but my initial project frame
was to focus on the meshes as an input to MIKE, and not the implementation of
other parameters.
Using Grid/Images for the Statistical Analyses
To ﬁnd the diﬀerences between both meshes and simulations, I chose to work with
grid/image data. This method is just an average and thus does not use the exact
values. For the mesh diﬀerences, I did not have knowledge of a better method
for comparison of diﬀerent meshes with the placement of the vertices also being
diﬀerent, but further work on this area might have led to a better comparison
method. For the simulation diﬀerences, I did not have another choice than to
export the simulation results in an image format, and thus this method seems to
be the best when wanting to ﬁnd the diﬀerences.
5.2
Discussion of Results
In this section, I will discuss the results that I have obtained in Chapter 4.
Not Using Optimization Best
It came as a big surprise for me that it was the G-H2.0 mesh that seemed to have
the best overall result from the test simulations. An explanation hereof could
be the procedure of making the mesh “MIKE-friendly” after the optimization.
This post-process can have destroyed the improvements that the optimization
had made, since the optimization does not take the triangle quality into account,
and thus results in an increase of needles and caps (as seen in Figure 2.11),
which afterwards would have been removed.
A solution for this could be to
include criteria in the optimization that will avoid the creation of skinny triangles.
Another approach could be to use feature-preserving smoothing for the “MIKE-
friendly”-process, which though would lead to a new relocation of vertices.
Simulation of Bodil
As mentioned, I did not succeed in obtaining a simulation of the storm event
Bodil, but had to use lower water level data for the simulation. This seems to
be due to the limits of MIKE21FM and the very extreme conditions that Bodil
had, which was actually classiﬁed as a 1,000 year event. But there could also be
problems with some of the inland triangles of the mesh. A further investigation
would have been necessary to reveal the underlying cause of the failure, but due
to the time frame, it was not possible.
==PAGE:84==
72
==PAGE:85==
CHAPTER 6
Perspectives
In this chapter, I will conclude whether I have reached the goals of this project
or not. Afterwards, I will take an outlook and discuss what other directions may
be interesting to look in for future work within this ﬁeld.
6.1
Conclusion
Investigating the thinning method of NIRAS revealed a very diﬀerent approach
than the ones used by my supervisor, and thus veriﬁed the need to compare the
diﬀerent approaches.
After examining MIKE, it was clariﬁed that it is possible to make meshes without
the use of MIKE Mesh Generator, which can be used in the ﬂow simulations. It
was also clariﬁed what criteria MIKE had for input meshes, and a scheme for
making “MIKE-friendly” meshes could be set up.
As a thinning method, I used the feature-preserving simpliﬁcation of a mesh
and combined it with optimization. The results showed that my method was in
fact better than NIRAS’ key point approaches, but surprisingly also revealed that
the optimization did not have an essential eﬀect, and that it actually was one of
the not optimized meshes that did best in the tests. As discussed, this could very
likely be due to the “MIKE-friendly”-process that is needed for the simulations.
Further work would be needed to ﬁnd a way to direct the optimization more
towards MIKE21FM.
I succeed in making a pipeline for thinning of extreme amount of data and car-
rying the work out on a real case area, but I did not succeed in making the real
case event of the storm Bodil in a simulation. Further work would be needed
to clarify the reason for the failure of the simulation, but I emphasize the fact
that I did succeed in making a simulation of an extreme water event on my mesh.
Overall, I will conclude that I reached the initial goals that were set out for
this project, and conclude that I have proven my initial hypothesis.
==PAGE:86==
74
6 Perspectives
6.2
Outlook
Beside the further work discussed in Chapter 5, there are several diﬀerent ap-
proaches that could be interesting to study in this ﬁeld:
One of the obvious diﬀerent approaches is to use other thinning methods. Due
to the complexity of loading a mesh, the process time hereof is very long (about
78% of the total process time), and thus it could be interesting to look at other
mesh-free thinning approaches. I would like to emphasize the work of the in-
formation scientists at Beijing Jiaotong University for their feature point and
sampling simpliﬁcation [Lih10] as an example.
Likewise, it could have been interesting to look at other mesh simpliﬁcation meth-
ods instead of edge collapses, like the ones discussed in Section 2.2.4 (face collapse
and vertex removal). Here I would emphasize the work of Pivec and Domiter for
their implementation of Schroeder’s vertex removal algorithm [PD07] as an exam-
ple. As mentioned in Section 5.2, looking into using feature-preserving smoothing
for the “MIKE-friendly”-process could also be very interesting.
Another approach would be to look into the initial mesh generation, which for
this project was a triangulation only done in 2D. There have been several pieces
of work done on implementing Delaunay in 3D, which also works in 2.5D, and
investigating the eﬀects of using the z-value in the mesh generation could be very
interesting. I would like to emphasize the work of Devillers and Teillaud [DT11]
for constructing a unique 3D Delaunay triangulation as an example.
Other forms of polygonal mesh construction approaches could be interesting to
study as well. An example could be constructing an implicit surface using (Ra-
dial) Basis Functions [Bær12, p277], and afterwards polygonize it by e.g. the
marching cubes algorithm [Bær12, p311], since MIKE21FM actually also accepts
quadrilaterals in the input meshes.
For further work on the meshes, it would be interesting to look at mesh manip-
ulations directed towards MIKE21FM. This could be the exclusion of buildings
by cutting them out of the mesh, or identifying them by an attribute such that
they later can be given a low Manning number.
In conclusion there are plenty of opportunities for further research in this exciting
and highly relevant ﬁeld. Improving the thinning method for height models will
continue to help achieving better protection against the coming extreme weather
events from climate changes and potentially save more people from future ﬂoods.
==PAGE:87==
Bibliography
[Bær11]
J. Andreas Bærentzen. GEL: GEometric and Linear algebra tools.
September 2011. url: http://www2.imm.dtu.dk/courses/02585/
GELref/index.html (visited on June 26, 2015).
[Bær12]
J. Andreas Bærentzen et al. Guide to Computational Geometry Pro-
cessing. 1st Edition. Springer, 2012. isbn: 978-1-4471-4070-0.
[BJB10]
Thomas Balstrøm, Ole Jacobi, and Lars Bodum. Bogen om GIS og
geodata. Danish. 1st Edition, 2nd Printing. Denmark: Forlaget GIS &
Geodata, 2010. isbn: 978-87-991446-0-0.
[BM82]
J. A. Bondy and U. S. R. Murty. Graph Theory with Applications.
Fifth edition. North-Holland, 1982. isbn: 0-444-19451-7.
[Che11]
Long Chen. Finite Volume Methods. University of California at Irvine.
October 2011.
[Cre14]
JeﬀCreer. MIKE 21 *.mesh ﬁles. December 2014. url: http://www.
xmswiki.com/wiki/SMS:MIKE_21_*.mesh (visited on June 26, 2015).
[Dav08]
Tim Davie. Fundamentals of Hydrology. Second Edition. Routledge
Fundamentals of Physical Geography Series 4. 2008. isbn: 9780415399869.
[DHI13a]
DHI. MIKE 21 & MIKE 3 FLOW MODEL FM Scientiﬁc Documen-
tation. Technical report. DHI, October 2013.
[DHI13b]
DHI. MIKE ZERO: Creating 2D Bathymetries (Mesh Generator Sci-
entiﬁc Documentation). Technical report. August 2013.
[DMI15]
DMI. DMI Vandstand. Danish. June 2015. url: http://www.dmi.
dk/hav/maalinger/vandstand/ (visited on June 26, 2015).
[DT11]
Olivier Devillers and Monique Teillaud. “Perturbations for Delaunay
and weighted Delaunay 3D triangulations”. In: Computational Geom-
etry: Theory and Applications Volume 44.3 (2011), pages 160–168.
[Ede01]
Herbert Edelsbrunner. Geometry and Topology of Mesh Generation.
Volume 1. Duke University, 2001.
[Esr15]
Esri. Minus (Spatial Analyst Tool). ArcGIS Pro Documentation. Jan-
uary 2015. url: https://pro.arcgis.com/en/pro- app/tool-
reference/spatial-analyst/minus.htm (visited on June 26, 2015).
==PAGE:88==
76
Bibliography
[Gar99]
Michael Garland. “Quadric-Based Polygonal Surface Simpliﬁcation”.
Ph.D. thesis. School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University,
Pittsburg, PA, USA, 1999.
[Geo12]
Geodatastyrelsen. Danmarks Højdemodel 2007, DHM-2007/Punktsky.
Danish. Technical report. September 2012.
[Geo14a]
Geodatastyrelsen. Danmarks Højdemodel. Danish. 2014. url: http://
gst.dk/emner/referencenet-hoejdemodel-opmaaling/danmarks-
hoejdemodel/ (visited on June 26, 2015).
[Geo14b]
Geodatastyrelsen. Geodataprogrammet - delprogram 4. Danish. 2014.
url: http://gst.dk/emner/grunddataprogram/geodataprogrammet/
(visited on June 26, 2015).
[Geo15]
Geodatastyrelsen. Danmarks Højdemodel, DHM/Punktsky. Danish. Tech-
nical report. January 2015.
[GH97]
Michael Garland and Paul S. Heckbert. “Surface Simpliﬁcation Using
Quadric Error Metrics”. In: Proceedings of the 24th Annual Conference
on Computer Graphics and interactive Techniques (1997), pages 209–
216.
[Gol92]
David Goldberg. What Every Computer Scientist Should Know About
Floating-Point Arithmetic. Sun Microsystems, Inc. June 1992.
[Goo99]
Michael F. Goodchild. “Measurement-based GIS”. In: International
Symposium on Spatial Data Quality, Hong Kong. 1999, pages 1–9.
[Hen10]
Martin R. Hendriks. Introduction to Physical Hydrology. Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 2010. isbn: 978-0-19-929684-2.
[Lab10]
Stanford Computer Graphics Laboratory. Stanford Bunny. August
2010. url: http://graphics.stanford.edu/~mdfisher/Data/
Meshes/bunny.obj (visited on June 26, 2015).
[Lih10]
Lihui Wang et al. “Simpliﬁed Representation for 3D Point Cloud
Data”. In: 10th International Conference on Signal Processing. 2010,
pages 1271–1274.
[PD07]
Bostjanl Pivec and Vid Domiter. “A General Algorithm for Triangu-
lar Meshes Simpliﬁcation”. In: The 11th WSEAS International Con-
ference on Computers, Greece. July 2007.
[RR96]
Rémi Ronfard and Jarek Rossignac. “Full-range approximation of
triangulated polyhedra”. In: Proceeding of Eurographics, Computer
Graphics Forum Volume 15.3 (1996), pages C67–C76.
[Sch93]
Larry L. Schumaker. “Computing optimal triangulations using sim-
ulated annealing”. In: Computer Aided Geometric Design 10 (1993),
pages 329–345.
==PAGE:89==
Bibliography
77
[She02]
Jonathan Richard Shewchuk. “Delaunay Reﬁnement Algorithms for
Triangular Mesh Generation”. In: Computational Geometry: Theory
and Applications Volume 22 (2002), pages 21–74.
[She05a]
Jonathan Richard Shewchuk. .node ﬁles. 2005. url: http://www.cs.
cmu.edu/~quake/triangle.node.html (visited on June 26, 2015).
[She05b]
Jonathan Richard Shewchuk. .node ﬁles. 2005. url: http://www.cs.
cmu.edu/~quake/triangle.poly.html (visited on June 26, 2015).
[She05c]
Jonathan Richard Shewchuk. Triangle - A Two-Dimensional Quality
Mesh Generator and Delaunay Triangulator. 2005. url: http://www.
cs.cmu.edu/~quake/triangle.html (visited on June 26, 2015).
[Soi14]
Soininen, Arttu. TerraScan User’s Guide. Technical report. Terrasolid,
2014.
[Zin06]
Marc Benjamin Zinck. obj File Format. August 2006. url: http://
www.cs.cmu.edu/~mbz/personal/graphics/obj.html (visited on
June 26, 2015).
==PAGE:90==
78
==PAGE:91==
APPENDIX A
Pictures & Video
A.1
Simulation Results - Pictures
The picture results from the simulations of the test areas can be found in a
Dropbox folder by following this link:
www.dropbox.com/sh/uj5ehl2ac5vq0om/AABqzW5AD8gZByq9ZXb80kMYa?dl=0
A.2
Simulation Results - Movie
The video from the simulation of the real case area Frederikssund can be found
in a Dropbox folder by following this link:
www.dropbox.com/sh/2wn7c29lze5ytp7/AAAkzgs7hGYCwbeTyRakSGzOa?dl=0
If this thesis is viewed as an pdf and opened in a reader with ﬂash player, the
video is also embedded here under:
==PAGE:92==
80
==PAGE:93==
APPENDIX B
File Formats
I have had to toggle between a number of diﬀerent ﬁle formats for point clouds
and meshes during this thesis work, and I have outlined some of them here.
B.1
The *.xyz Format
One standard ﬁle format for point clouds is the *.xyz format. These are being
e.g. used by MIKE, and have the following structure:
• Vertex info: The xyz-coordinates of the vertices.
• Blank line: The ﬁles always end with a blank line to ensure the last line
of information is read.
An example of a *.xyz ﬁle is seen in Listing B.1.
1 691421.51 6190966.15 -0.03 # Vertex info start
···
10 691422.01 6190969.20 0.33 # Vertex info end
11 # Blank line
Listing B.1: Example of *.xyz ﬁle
B.2
The *.node Format
Another standard ﬁle format for point clouds is the *.node format. These are
used by the program Triangle mentioned in Section 3.3.1, and have the following
structure [She05a]:
• Header: These lines inform about the number of vertices, the dimension
(always 2), number of attributes and ﬁnally the code for boundary markers
(0: non, 1: at least one; new column expected).
• Vertex info: Indexed vertices with the xy-coordinates, (optionally) the at-
tributes (e.g. z-coordinates) and (optionally) the code for boundary marker.
• Blank line: The ﬁles always end with a blank line.
==PAGE:94==
82
B File Formats
An example of a *.node ﬁle is seen in Listing B.2.
1 10 2 1 0 # Header
2 1 691421.51 6190966.15 -0.03 # Vertex info start
···
11 10 691422.01 6190969.20 0.33 # Vertex info end
12 # Blank line
Listing B.2: Example of *.node ﬁle
B.3
The *.poly Format
When computing a CDT a standard ﬁle format for vertices and segments is
the *.poly format. These are also used by the program Triangle mentioned in
Section 3.3.1, and have the following structure [She05b]:
• Vertex header: the number of vertices, the dimension (always 2), number
of attributes and ﬁnally the code for boundary markers (0: non, 1: at least
one, new column expected).
• Vertex info: Indexed vertices with the xy-coordinates, (optionally) the at-
tributes (e.g. z-coordinates) and (optionally) the code for boundary marker.
• Segment header: The number of segments and the code for boundary
markers (0: non, 1: at least one, new column expected)
• Segment info: Indexed segments/edges with ID numbers for its end ver-
tices, and (optional) the code for boundary marker.
• Hole header: The number of holes
• Hole info: Indexed holes and the xy-coordinates for its midpoint
• Blank line: The ﬁles always end with a blank line.
An example of a *.poly ﬁle is seen in Listing B.3.
1 10 2 1 0 # Vertex Header
2 1 691421.51 6190966.15 -0.03 # Vertex info start
···
11 10 691422.01 6190969.20 0.33 # Vertex info end
12 4 1 # Segment Header
13 1 1 2 1 # Segment info start
···
15 4 4 1 1 # Segment info end
16 0 # Hole Header
17 # Blank line
Listing B.3: Example of *.poly ﬁle
==PAGE:95==
B.4 The *.obj Format
83
B.4
The *.obj Format
As mesh input for the GEL library, I have worked with the *.obj ﬁle format. This
ﬁle type uses an indexed face set, is a text ﬁle, and have the following structure
[Zin06]:
• Header (optional): These lines are ignored, so it is purely for user infor-
mation about the ﬁle.
• Vertex info: The xyz-coordinates of the vertices, starting with v to specify
the info type.
• Vertex normal (optional): The xyz-coordinates of the vertex normal,
starting with vn to specify the info type.
• Vertex texture (optional): The uv (and optionally w) mapping values,
starting with vt to specify the info type.
• Face info (optional): The face polygons made from the vertices info
stated above, starting with f to specify the info type, and then the indices
for the vertices used.
• Blank line: The ﬁles always end with a blank line.
An example [Lab10] of a *.obj ﬁle is seen in Listing B.4.
1 # OBJ file format with ext .obj
2 # vertex count = 2503
3 # face count = 4968
4 v -3.4101800e-003 1.3031957e-001 2.1754370e-002
# Vertex info start
···
2506 v -5.5039800e-002 5.7309700e-002 1.6990900e-002 # Vertex info end
2507 f 1069 1647 1578
# Face info start
···
7474 f 1320 2443 2503 # Face info end
7475 # Blank line
Listing B.4: Example of *.obj ﬁle - The Stanford bunny
B.5
The *.mesh Format
As mentioned MIKE requires a *.mesh-ﬁle as input in the ﬂow simulation (MIKE21FM).
This ﬁle type uses an indexed face set, can be opened in Notepad, and have the
following structure [Cre14]:
• Header: First two integers deﬁning the type and unit of the data; followed
by the number of vertices and a string specifying the projection.
==PAGE:96==
84
B File Formats
• Vertex info: Indexed vertices with xyz-coordinates and type info (0: inner
vertices, 1: land boundary, >1: user deﬁned boundary)
• Polygon header: First number of polygons, then maximum number of
vertices per polygon, and code for mesh type (21: triangle mesh, 25: quadri-
lated polygons exist in mesh)
• Polygon info: Indexed polygons with ID numbers for its vertices (if quads
exists all polygons have 4 vertex IDs, but the last vertex ID of triangles will
have the value 0).
• Blank line: The ﬁles always end with a blank line.
An example of a *.mesh ﬁle is seen in Listing B.5.
1 100079
1000
30
PROJCS["UTM-33",GEOGCS["Unused",DATUM["UTM Projections",
SPHEROID["WGS 1984" ,6378137,298.257223563]],PRIMEM["Greenwich",0],UNIT[
"Degree" ,0.0174532925199433]],PROJECTION["Transverse_Mercator"],
PARAMETER["False_Easting",500000],PARAMETER["False_Northing",0],
PARAMETER["Central_Meridian",15],PARAMETER["Scale_Factor",0.9996],
PARAMETER["Latitude_Of_Origin",0],UNIT["Meter",1]] # Header
2 1 602283.057351136 6163999.95971067 5.43801115417472 1 # Vertex info start
···
31 30 602561.945133097 6164253.28345082 -0.05570789028455 0 # Vertex info end
32 38 3 21 # Polygon header
33 1 27 4 23 # Polygon info start
···
70 38 27 1 2 # Polygon info end
71 # Blank line
Listing B.5: Example of *.mesh ﬁle
B.6
Other Formats
Besides the mentioned formats, I have been working with some other mesh for-
mats, which are not text ﬁles, and thus not readable/editable manually. The
most important once have been:
• Shape (*.shp) - mainly used by ESRI products and is the standard format
for GIS vector data
• TAB (*.tab) - mainly used by MapInfo
• Design (*.dgn) - mainly used by MicroStation
==PAGE:97==
APPENDIX C
Data Quality
During my work with data qualiﬁcation, I encountered some remarkable errors
in the classiﬁcation which is illustrated in this chapter. I used Quick Terrain
Reader to check data quality and visual inspection. Here I have only visualized
the points in the vegetation class, and the points are colored after the height.
Figure C.1: A crane and high lines classiﬁed as vegetation
==PAGE:98==
86
C Data Quality
Figure C.2: The harbor classiﬁed as vegetation
Figure C.3: A house classiﬁed as vegetation
==PAGE:99==
APPENDIX D
Flood at Frederiikssund
As part of my thesis work I recived documentation of the ﬂood caused by the
storm Bodil at Frederikssund. I recived this document by the Municipality of
Frederikssund, and unfortunately it was only available in Danish.
Notat om stormflodshændelse 6-7. december 2013 
Torsten Duer, Plan Vej og Miljø, Frederikssund Kommune 
Ekstrem højvandshændelse fredag d. 6./lørdag d. 7. december 2013. 
 
Udløst af stormen Bodil, der passerede hen over Danmark i løbet af torsdag d. 5. december 2013. 
Efterfølgende blev der varslet om forhøjet vandstand forskellige steder i landet, startende ved vestkysten. 
Issefjord og Roskildefjord blev særlig hårdt ramt pga. fjordenes udformning. 
 
Omkring midnat nåede vandstanden sit højeste på ca. +2,04 m over dagligt vande i Roskilde. Dette svarer 
ca. til en 1.000-års hændelse (inkl. usikkerhed) i Roskilde. Kystdirektoratet har ikke registreret 
vandstandsmålere i Frederikssund. 
 
Efterfølgende har Stormrådet bekræftet, at der var tale om en stormflodshændelse, dvs. mindst en 20-års 
hændelse. 
 
Ramte områder: 
Kronprins Frederiks Bro oversvømmet på dæmningsstrækket i den vestlige ende (kote +1,75 m ifølge 
højdekurver på webgis). 
Desuden utilgængelig pga. oversvømmelse på land lige øst for broen Klintevej Strandvej Irisvej Færgevej. 
Mågevej Vibevej. 
Frederikssund midtby. 
Bløden. 
Sillebroen fik kun få skader (4 enheder), dæmmede op for større skader (var dog uden strøm). 
Kignæs Havn. 
Over Dråby Strand. 
Marbæk Havn. 
Skyllebakke Havn. Tilsyneladende blev ejendomme med gulvkote +1,8 m oversvømmet (men sandsynligvis 
ikke meget mere end det). 
Hyllingeriis. Hårdt ramt med 1½ m vand, der skulle pumpes væk fra et større område. Private luftfotos fra 
drone viste en udbredelse, der så ud til at matche vandstandskort for +1,75 m. 
 
Forsyningens ramte anlæg: 
Pumpestationer ude af drift på Klintevej, Færgevej, Skyllebakke Havn og Mågevej. 
Vellerup Sommerby ude af drift pga. manglende strøm. 
Hyllingeriis og Skuldelev Havn oversvømmet og uden strøm. 
Neder Dråby og Hyllingeriis Renseanlæg oversvømmet og ude af drift. 
 
Frederikssund Forsynings målinger af vandstand 
Frederikssund Forsyning har ikke vandstandsmålere ved deres renseanlæg, men har indirekte målt følgende 
højeste vandstand ved de kystnære renseanlæg: 
 
Renseanlæg 
Vandstand 
Metode 
Neder Dråby 
+2,23 m 
Højeste vandstand aflæst på oversvømmede bygninger 
Frederikssund 
+1,87 m 
Højeste vandstand indmålt efter maks. udstrækning på terræn 
Hyllingeriis 
+1,87 m 
Højeste vandstand aflæst på oversvømmede bygninger 
==PAGE:100==
88
==PAGE:101==
==PAGE:102==
