==PAGE:1==
1
BEHAVIORAL DESIGN 
FOR BACK PAIN
Master thesis by David  John Ginty s102992 
& Tobias Alban  Nielsen s132649
Supervisor:
Philip Cash, Assistant Professor
DTU Management Engineering
Submitted:
3rd of July 2015
==PAGE:2==
2
PREFACE
This report represents the master thesis done by two Design and Innovation master students Tobias Alban Nielsen 
and David John Ginty from the Technical University of Denmark. The thesis have been carried out from the 4. Feb­
ruary to 3. July 2015. 
The project has been made in collaboration with department Idemolab at Delta who have supported with guid­
ance and material for prototyping and testing. Specifically we want to say thanks to:
Our supervisor, Phillip Cash, assistant professor at the Department of Management Engineering, Technological 
University of Denmark, for his supervision and guidance throughout the project.
Our contact person at Idemolab Mikkel Leth Olsen, specialist in Interaction & Electronic Sketching and Morten 
Georg Jensen, specialist from Idemolab for their inputs to the ideation and for helping evaluating different con­
cepts and measuring equipment.
Physiotherapist Jonas Bak, who provided information about treatment and the challengers the patients faces 
when suffering with back pain. 
Physiotherapist Helle Damgaard Møller, who provided a theoretical background to rehabilitation of patients with 
back pain.
All our Participants who volunteered to help us with testing different persuasive technologies. You have been very 
dedicated and open for trying new behaviors. 
==PAGE:3==
3
ABSTRACT
Recent research shows that sedentary behavior is related to several negative health risks including back pain 
problems. This thesis investigates how persuasive technology can support a behavior change that involves taking 
an increasing number of active pauses while working, and thereby reducing the risks of back pain and other neg­
ative symptoms associated with a sedentary lifestyle. The process of changing behavior is in this thesis seen from 
a psychological perspective, and related to such theories as operational conditioning, cognitive dissonance and 
system 1 and system 2 thinking. The theories are used to get a wider understand of the main existing theory on 
persuasive technology. The main contributor to the theory of persuasive technology was found to be B.J. Fogg and 
his behavior model. It is suggested that a new framework can be used to create an overview of the existing theo­
ries in the field. Such a framework called the Integrated Persuasive Technology Framework is developed, based on 
Fogg’s Behavior Model that combines theories from multiple researchers within the field.  The framework is used 
to analyze previous persuasive technology interventions and to develop two new intervention aiming at changing 
sedentary behavior.
The thesis includes a systematic review of 40 previous interventions, which have used persuasive technologies in a 
wide range of different domains. The review concludes that previous studies have had a relative small sample size, 
the median was calculated to 25 participant and a relative short timeframe with a median of 4 weeks. Self-moni­
toring, Competition and Rewards were found to be the most common persuasive principles used in the reviewed 
studies. Principles like Competition, Rewards, Similarity, Tunneling and Reduction were found not to have been 
used in the domain of sedentary behavior. 
The knowledge collected through the systematic review and the review of the theory were synthesized to seven 
key insights, which together with the Integrated Persuasive Technology Framework were used to develop, the two 
persuasive concepts Break Light and Scoreboard. 
An exploratory study was done to test Break Light and Scoreboard. The experiment ran over 4 weeks on 20 partic­
ipants divided into 4 groups 5 in each. The first week was used as baseline. Group A tried Break Light for 3 weeks, 
group B tried Scoreboard, AB tried both concepts and C was used as control group. A fitness application named 
Moves was used to collect data on the participants’ activity, and the participants was ask to fill out weekly surveys. 
The result was positive for both interventions with succeed in increase the participants’ amount of active pauses. 
It was not possible to see an increase in the group which tested both concept, this was concluded to be due to 
that the concepts became obtrusive or due to some of the limitations of the study.  In general, the participants 
stated that they liked the increase of active pause, and some claimed that it had made them perform better over 
a longer period of time. It is finally concluded that well design persuasive technologies can be used to increase the 
awareness and reinforce a healthy lifestyle.  
==PAGE:4==
4
==PAGE:5==
5
Contents
1| Introduction 
6
1.1. Aim	
6
1.2. Learning Objectives	
6
1.3. Structure of the Thesis	
6
1.4. Reading Guide	
6
2| Project Scope  
8
2.1.  Back Pain – A Common Disease	
8
2.2. What Happens to the Back that Leads to 
Pain?	
8
2.3. Sedentary Behavior	
10
2.4. Active pauses	
12
2.5. Mission Statement	
12
3| Solution space analysis 
14
3.1. Super system	
15
3.2. System	
16
3.3. Sub system	
17
3.4. Combining Perspectives	
21
4| Behavioral Change from a Psychological 
Perspective 
22
4.1. Definition of Habit	
22
4.2. Habit Formation	
23
4.3. Other Relevant Psychological Theories	
24
5| Persuasive Technology 
26
5.1. Examples of Persuasive Technology	
26
5.2. Fogg’s behavior model	
26
6| Framework for analyzing                           
empirical studies 
32
6.1. 28 design principles	
32
6.2. Motivational affordance and Psychological 
outcome	
33
7| Integrated Persuasive                                 
Design Framework  
35
8| Systematic Literature Review of               
Relevant Empirical Studies 
38
8.1. The Review Process	
38
8.2. Results across Domains and Persuasive 
Principles	
40
8.3. Going Further with the Experimentation	42
8.4. Seven key insights to persuasion	
43
8.5. Reflection 	
44
9| Conceptualization 
46
9.1. Study 1: Field Research	
46
9.2. Problem definition	
46
9.3. Ideation	
47
9.4. The Final Three Concepts	
49
9.5. Break Light	
49
9.6. Scoreboard	
51
9.7. YO!	
51
9.8. Study 2 - Preliminary Pilot Study	
52
9.9. Test of the three concepts	
53
9.10 Measuring Sedentary Behavior	
53
10|Main Experiment 
56
10.1 Mixed Methods Research	
56
10.2 Participants	
58
10.3 Design of Experiment	
58
10.4 Process	
59
10.5 Potential Ethical Issue 	
60
11| Results 
62
11.1 Quantitative Results 	
62
11.2 Part I	
66
11.3 Part II	
68
11.4 Qualitative Analysis	
74
11.5 Combining Quantitative and Qualitative 
Analysis	
75
11.6 Limitation of the main study	
76
12| Discussion and conclusion 
77
12.1 Results	
77
12.2 Future Implications	
79
12.3 Future work	
79
12.4 Final words	
80
==PAGE:6==
6
Figure 1: Project team logo
==PAGE:7==
7
1|	INTRODUCTION
The rapid changes in economics and social environ­
ment that shape our modern society have improved 
our lifestyle and thereby significantly extended our life 
expectancy. However these changes that are the basis 
of our new lifestyle is associated to a reduced demands 
for physical activity, which have been linked to a whole 
new kind of health related challenges. One of the ma­
jor challenges is back pain that is estimated to cost the 
Danish society up to 13 billion DKK and affect about 
80% of the population at some point in their lives. Ch­
anging to a more physical active lifestyle can for the 
majority of people prevent and relief back pain.
1.1	
AIM
The focus of this study is changing the physical behavi­
or at the working place, as more people than before 
have work involving prolonged periods of sitting. The 
aim is to modify existing working behavior to contain 
an increasing number of active pauses. This requires a 
behavior change that is approached through persuasi­
ve technology, defined as a technology that motivates 
and influence the user toward a specific behavior 
without the use of coercion. The field of persuasive 
technology is placed in the intersection between hu­
man-computer interaction and psychology. Therefore 
this thesis will cover both development of persuasive 
technology and experimentation according to the tradi­
tions embedded in the roots of the fields. 
1.2	 LEARNING OBJECTIVES
The thesis should show that the students are able to 
fulfill following learning objectives:
• 
Collect and organize information to formulate 
own problem formulation 
• 
Analyze and systemize existing solutions
• 
Define and describe influencing factors on be­
havior change and habit formation
• 
Evaluate and synthesis theories within the field 
of persuasive technology 
• 
Conduct a systematic literature review and 
evaluate possibilities for new research areas
• 
Explore the solution space through a combina­
tion of systematic and creative techniques
• 
Design and conduct an experiment according 
to good practice
• 
Collect and combine different types of data for 
statistical analysis
• 
Set up a clear framework for the thesis and 
communicate the work clearly and in an under­
standable manner
• 
Provide proper documentation, including prop­
er referencing throughout the project
• 
Be able to adjust the staging of the project 
based on an assessment of the magnitude of 
the task, complexity and desired results
1.3	 STRUCTURE OF THE 
THESIS
The structure of the thesis follows the chronological or­
der in which different activities have been conducted. 
The thesis start with a scoping that explains the biome­
chanics and main challenges with back pain and how it 
can be prevented with active pauses at the workplace. 
The next section explains the result from a product 
analysis using the nine window tool. Here both existing 
products and new trends within product development 
in regards to back health are discussed. The main pur­
pose of section 4 is to investigate behavior change, 
from a psychological perspective. This leads to section 
5 that defines persuasive technology and explains how 
technology can change behavior. Different theories are 
combined in a framework called the “Integrated Per­
suasive Technology Framework” which is a synthesis of 
literature within in the field. Persuasive technology is 
the basis of a systematic literature review of empirical 
studies, which purpose is to explore current research 
and help develop novel solutions that can be tested 
according to best practice. Section 7 explains the de­
velopment process of creating several persuasive pro­
totypes that could be tested in an experiment. Section 
8 explains how different persuasive concepts based 
on our literature review and a range of systematic and 
creative ideation techniques. Two concepts are brought 
further which are tested on 20 participants over a test 
period of a month. An explanation of the experimen­
tation procedure and the results are found in section 
9. This is followed by a discussion and conclusion that 
combines and reflect upon all the topics covered in the 
thesis. 
1.4	 READING GUIDE
The central literature is referenced using Harvard’s re­
ference system. A reference list is provided in the end 
of the thesis. All figures and tables are labeled with a 
text and a number. A list of figures and relevant refe­
rences are provided in the end. All figures and tables 
without a reference are created ourselves. The thesis 
is come with an appendix that supplies extra material 
that includes manuals, weighting for different choices, 
answers to surveys, etc. Relevant appendix is referred 
to in the report as [Appendix X.X]
==PAGE:8==
8
2|	 PROJECT 
SCOPE 
The following chapter will give an introduction to back 
pain in general and how this study will approach the 
issue. The chapter will cover: Why is back pain a prob­
lem? What causes back pain? How is back pain treated 
today and how do we plan to ease back pain? 
The project scope is based on different articles com­
bined with interviews of two physiotherapists Helle 
Damgaard Møller and Jonas Bak. 
2.1	  BACK PAIN – A 
COMMON DISEASE
Back pain is one of the most common medical prob­
lems in Denmark that affects up to 80% of the Danish 
population at some point in their lives. When asked at 
any time, 8-15% of the population will state they have 
back pain problems (Lærum 2005). Back pain is not 
only a problem for individuals, but also an economic 
burden for the Danish society. Back pain, together 
with back diseases, have an overall annual cost to the 
Danish society of over 13 billion DKK. This includes 5.6 
billion DKK to treatments and 7.3 billion DKK in produc­
tion loss due to sick leave (Koch et al. 2011).  
2.2	 WHAT HAPPENS TO THE 
BACK THAT LEADS TO PAIN?
To understand why and how back pain occurs, this 
section will briefly go into the biomechanics of the 
back. The back is in general designed to withstand 
great stress. This makes it possible for us to move and 
protect the neural pathways running in the spine. We 
have 24 vertebras: 7 in the neck, 12 in the chest and 
5 lower back, see Figure 2 Between each vertebra, a 
soft material functions as cushion called spinal discs 
(Lærum 2005). These are very resistance to compres­
sive loads but as we get older, the spinal discs degen­
erate narrowing the space between the vertebra which 
sometimes causes the discs to collapse into the nerves 
creating significant pain. The phenomena is also called 
spinal disc herniation (Magnusson 1998). 
Figure 2:  Illustration of the skeleton structure of the 
back http://www.necksolutions.com/lower-back-pain.
html
In most cases the specific cause of the pain can some­
times be hard to identify. Non-specified back pain is 
typically a non-dangerous condition also known as 
lumbago. In rare cases, back pain can be due to very 
serious condition, as for example fractures, infections 
or arthritis  (Lærum 2005). 
In general back pain can be categorize as followed:
• 
Lumbago (80-90%): Most back pain is unspeci­
fied, where it is not possible to determine the 
cause of the pain.
• 
Nerve root pain (10%): these are often the 
symptom of a hernia on the discus or when a 
nerve is pinched. This causes strong pain in the 
legs and feet.
• 
Other diseases (1~5%): This could be a tumor, 
a fraction or arthritis (Lærum 2005) 

As seen from the categorization most cases of back 
pain cannot be specified. Even though it can be difficult 
to diagnose the specific cause, the pain itself can be 
very real. For those with nerve root pain and other di­
sease often requires medical treatment. 
2.2.1	
TREATING BACK PAIN
Following categorization of treating back pain have 
been given by Bredland & Linge:
• 
Medical treatment: The primary focus here 
is to diagnose and cure back diseases. The 
patient might meet with a doctor who will do 
preliminary diagnostic. If there are indications 
of serious conditions as a herniated disc or 
arthritis, the doctor will forward the patient to 
an expert as a neurosurgeon or rheumatolo­
gist. In this phase, the patient will often take a 
passive role while experts perform the medical 
treatment.  
• 
Functional rehabilitation: The second focus 
area is concentrated on helping the patient to 
overcome a physical or psychological disability 
through treatment and training. Within the 
functional rehabilitation different actors have 
different methods depending on the professi­
on. 
• 
Participatory rehabilitation: In the third phase 
the patient takes a much more active role in 
changing his/her lifestyle to prevent falling 
back into habits that can cause back problems 
to reoccur (Bredland & Linge 2007). 
Figure 3 provides an overview of the interrelation of 
different actors and indicate possible direction for the 
development
Relating the categorization of back pain with how back 
pain is treated it can be seen that nerve root pain and 
other serious diseases often require medical treat­
ment, such as advanced diagnostics, surgery and dif­
==PAGE:9==
9
ferent kinds of drugs. This is followed by some kind of 
functional rehabilitation including manual therapy and 
exercises. 
The unspecific back pain which is the most common 
(80%) are often not a savior health risk and do not 
need medical treatment. However seeking profession­
als as physiotherapists and chiropractors can often help 
provide exercises and different types of treatments. 
The problem is that long term back pain has been 
shown to be related multiple factors not directly linked 
to the back. Some of the factors which is known to be 
associated with increased risk for chronic back pain can 
be seen in Table 1. These factors can be individual like 
age, weight and educational level, or psychological fac­
tors like stress and depression, or work related if your 
occupation involves heavy work or prolonged sitting.
One who meets many struggling with back pain is the 
physiotherapist Jonas Bak. He was interviewed to get 
an understanding of the challenges that people with 
back pain have. The interview gave following insights:
• 
Back pains are very individual. Some people 
can even have herniated discs without knowing 
it, while others experience extreme pain. 
• 
The process of rehabilitation is very different 
from which professional that threats you.
• 
The back pain in most cases disappears within 
14 days, no matter the treatment but it often 
return. 
• 
The reason for the relapse is often that people 
stop improving their life style as soon as the 
pain is gone because they are not motivated. 
• 
People are often reluctant to do the exercises 
that are recommended to them due to lack of 
motivation and lack of trust to the exercises.  
• 
Back pain can be prevented through a perma­
nent change in lifestyle.
• 
It is commonly agreed upon between experts 
that regular exercise and active pauses have a 
preventing effect on back pain.
Figure 3: Overview of different actors in relation to treating back pain
Factor
Specified
Individual
Age
Heritage
Gender (men 31,6% / women 37,5%)
Weight
Educational level
Long-term sick leave
Psychological
Stress
Depression
Somatization (excessive illness behavior)
Fear-avoidance beliefs
Work related
Earlier work-related injury
Heavy work
Long periods of sitting still
Table 1: Factors associated with increased risk of long term back pain. Modified version from (Møller & 
Thomsen 2012)
==PAGE:10==
10
The Interview with Jonas Bak, highlight that participa­
tory rehabilitation like lifestyle changes is often neces­
sary to prevent that the pain return, but patient often 
find this very difficult. Different exercises are suggested 
to help prevent back pain however the different expert 
do not agree on which is the most effective. One thing 
they do agree on is that bed rest do not have a posi­
tive effect and the patient need to keep moving and 
do exercises (Lærum 2005). The need of staying active 
can also be supported by studies wich indicate a strong 
association between back pain and sedentary life style 
(Magnusson 1998). 
Experts’ emphasis that the existing biomedical ap­
proach for treating back pain can be narrow-minded, 
as existing treatment strategies have shown limited 
effect in regards to treating unspecified back pain. In­
novation within the field of preventing back pain might 
involve other scientific fields and methods according 
to Helle Damgaard Møller (Møller & Thomsen 2012). 
It is on that background that this thesis will focus on 
how back pain can be treated with applying persuasive 
technology. It is believed that by increasing the physical 
activity for those with a sedentary life can help prevent 
back pain.   
2.3	 SEDENTARY BEHAVIOR
This section will dig deeper into how sedentary behav­
ior and how it affects the body. Sedentary behavior is 
here defined as activities which are done when sitting 
or lying down where the body’s energy consumption 
is low. Some examples of sedentary behavior are 
reading, writing, TV-watching and computer work. 
Today an increasing amount (>40%) of people have a 
sedentary occupation. This together with the fact that 
Danish adults spend 3 to 6 hours of their spare time 
sitting means that in average we sit down half of our 
life. (Grøntved et al. 2012).  Research have shown that 
an increasing number of treatments of the lower back 
have occurred in the last 20-30 years. Here it is stated 
that one of the risk factors are sedentary work (Koch 
2011).
Figure 4 shows the energy metabolism for different 
activities. 1 Metabolic Equivalent (MET) is the body’s 
energy consumption at rest, when laying down and 
awake (Grøntved et al. 2012). 
The Danish Health and Medicines Authority recom­
mend 30 minutes of physical activities every day and 
this should include 20 minutes twice a week of hard 
physical activity. These recommendation have proven 
to have a significant positive health effect, however 
new studies have shown that even though you follow 
these recommendation you can still live a sedentary 
life style including increased health risk (Van Dantzig et 
al. 2013).  
2.3.1	
HOW SEDENTARY BEHAVIOR 
CAUSES BACK PAIN
The human body is design to move. It is in our human 
behavior to change body posture often, even when 
we sleep. All postures in a prolonging period of time 
put stress on muscles and joint tissue. See Figure 5 
that shows how different postures put pressure on our 
lumbar discs. An upright standing position is depicted 
as 100 %. Sitting upright put on nearly 50% more strain 
on the lumbar disc while sitting and leaning forward 
nearly doubles the strain (Magnusson 1998). This could 
be one of the reasons for the associating sedentary 
behavior with back pain. Another could be the deg­
radation of muscle strength when they are not being 
used (Grøntved et al. 2012).
Sedentary occupations have been associated to in­
creased risk of both lumbago and prolapsed spinal disc. 
Even though heavy lifting can cause lumbago, studies 
have shown that active occupation which involved 
manual material handling, unlike sedentary occupa­
tions has not been associated with prolapsed spinal 
discs. This may be due to that the spinal disc are design 
to with compressive loads and that the vertebrate 
may fracture before the disc under these kind of loads 
(Magnusson 1998). 
Figure 4: The energy metabolism for different activities. 1 Metabolic Equivalent (MET) is the body’s energy consump­
tion at rest, when laying down and awake (Grøntved et al. 2012). 
==PAGE:11==
11
2.3.2	 OTHER CONSEQUENCES OF 
SEDENTARY BEHAVIOR
There are several other consequences of sedentary 
behavior that is well described in literature which will 
briefly be stated here. 
Metabolism
A systematic review of eighteen studies associated 
sedentary time with an increased risk of cardiovascular 
disease, cardiovascular and especial diabetes type II 
(Wilmot et al. 2012). The increase risk of diabetes is 
because inactivity reduce the insulin action (Stephens 
et al. 2009). A newly study showed that even a single 
day of sedentary behavior could reduce the insulin ac­
tion of a healthy young person with 39% in relation to 
a day with light physical activity (Grøntved et al. 2012).
Mental health 
Sedentary behavior is also associated with increased 
risk of depression (Zhai et al. 2014) and the reduc­
tion of learning ability and other mental performance 
(Cotman & Berchtold 2002). One explanation of this 
could be that, that the brain does not receive the 
same amount of proteins when inactive as when ac­
tive. These proteins is necessary for the regeneration 
of brain cells.  These proteins is thereby also highly 
important for our learning and mental performance 
(Cotman & Berchtold 2002).  Sedentary behavior is 
therefore not only an increasing health risk, but also a 
limitation for our concentration and learning.
Figure 5: ”The relative loads on the third lumbar disk for various body positions in living subjects in relation to 
the upright standing posture, depicted as 100 % (Magnusson 1998)
Figure 6: Settentary behavior is directly associated with 
increased health riskes
==PAGE:12==
12
2.4	 ACTIVE PAUSES
One way to counter act the effect of sedentary behav­
ior is active pauses. Studies show that taking frequent 
breaks from sitting is associated with healthier metab­
olism (Van Dantzig et al. 2013) and to relive the lumbar 
disk for some of the relative loads (Magnusson 1998). 
In a study on obese individuals it was found that in­
terrupting 5 hour longs period of sedentary behavior 
every 20 minutes with an active pause of 2 minutes of 
light physical activity could reduce the level of blood 
glucose and insulin action after the intake of carbohy­
drates (Grøntved et al. 2012). 
Even an active pause of a few minutes of light physical 
activity, like walking, is enough to create this healthy 
effect (Grøntved et al. 2012). A review comparing four 
different interventions that introduced some kind of 
pause every 15-40 minutes all reported improvements 
in perceived musculoskeletal discomfort. On top of that 
half of the interventions reported no negative effect on 
productivity while the other half reported an increase 
in productivity (Healy et al. 2012). 
Literature states two reasons that more people are not 
taking more active pauses. People are not aware of 
the health risk of sedentary behavior, and believe that 
as long as they are following the recommendation of 
30 minutes exercise each day, they are living a healthy 
lifestyle. The second is that pauses at the workplace is 
mainly controlled by external factors, and you often do 
not take pauses on your own initiative (Van Dantzig et 
al. 2013). 
2.5	 MISSION STATEMENT
Sedentary behavior affects an increasing part of the 
Danish population which is associated with an in­
creased risk of back pain and other health risks. This 
is not only a problem for the individual but also an 
economic burden for the society. Active pauses have 
been proven to have a positive effect of counteract 
these risks.  However it can be difficult get active paus­
es incorporated in your daily routines. The aim of this 
project is therefore:
To help people increase the amount of active pauses on 
a daily basis, thereby reducing the risk of back pain and 
other related health issues. 
By doing so will benefit not only the individual but also 
the whole society. 
==PAGE:13==
13
Figure 7: Active Pauses 
==PAGE:14==
14
3|	 SOLUTION 
SPACE ANALYSIS
Through the years several solutions have been created 
to relief and prevent back pain. This section will ex­
plore the existing and future solution space for solving 
back pain problems using the nine windows tool. The 
tool was first invented by Genrich Altshuller, who de­
veloped it to overcome the psychological inertia, the 
fact that product designers tend to think within their 
own conceptual framework and therefore are stucked 
within a narrow solution space (Altshuller, 1984). The 
nine window tool does so by dividing the “the world” 
into nine segments according to time and space. See 
Figure 8, that has time on the x-axis and space on the 
y-axis.
The central box in the middle is the present system. 
This is the setting our brain migrate to when we hear 
the problem. In relation to our scoping, this would be a 
patient with back pain due to an inactive lifestyle, who 
have now been given a stand-up table, some pain kill­
ers and some exercises to do. The super-system goes 
a step back looking at the context in which the system 
exist (Mann, 2011). How can the organization create 
better conditions for the employee? New regulations 
or campaigns could be an example. In this analysis the 
subsystem is defined as specific products and technol­
ogies as for example the stand-up table or the medi­
cine which the person receives. From an engineering 
perspective the solution could be better and cheaper 
equipment and more ergonomic office supplies. This 
type of solutions would definitely provide benefits for 
the current patient, but what about in future? How 
can we provide tools valuable in the future? What can 
we learn from the past, about how back pain has been 
dealt with before?
The nine-windows tool let us change our viewing per­
spectives which provides valuable insights into future 
solutions. By this approach it is possible to explore 
the solution space according to time and space, which 
gives a holistic understanding of the system (Mann, 
2001). The section will be divided into three:
-	
Super system
-	
System
-	
Sub-system
For each abstraction level, there will be given some 
perspectives of how back pain has been and might be 
approached in the future. This will give understanding 
of the background for this project and why it has been 
scoped in the way it have been. 
Figure 8: Nine windows tool
==PAGE:15==
15
3.1.3	
FUTURE
In an attempt to foresee how our working environment 
will influence our lifestyle in the future we will take 
a look at how Google are trying to create “the happi­
est, most productive workplace in the world”. Despite 
most of Google employees are software programmers, 
Google tries to encourage an active lifestyle not only 
outside of work, but while working. Workspaces are 
designed as playgrounds to spark creativity as well as 
physical activity. There is no force, but healthy choices 
are highlighted. For example there is free water and 
juice clearly visible behind a transparent cooler, as well 
as soda, but these are hidden behind translucent glass 
(Stewart, 2013). 
Thaler and Sunstein call this choice architecture, de­
fined as designing the context for decision-making. 
Through “nudging” people are guided to take healthy 
decision while preserving the freedom to choose. 
Choice architecture is often justified by the fact that 
it can compensate for irrational decision-making bias­
es (Thaler & Sunstein, 2008). As for people not being 
aware of the consequences of sedentary work. In­
corporating choice architecture into a product design 
could mean that healthy behavior is promoted by de­
signing a context that makes it clear when it might be 
time to choose to take an active pause. 
3.1	 SUPER SYSTEM
The super system describes how back pain has been 
approached from an organizational level, see Figure 9. 
3.1.1	
PAST
In the past the physical working environment has been 
improved through governmental interference. Here 
the Danish Working Environment Authority have been 
responsible for creating and enforcing law that among 
other restrict manual handling of heavy weight (Arbe­
jdstilsynet, 2005). Heavy labor has been causing degen­
eration of the body, which in the past had a great influ­
ence on our life expectancy (Hansen & Jensen, 2001). 
Even though this project aim at increasing the amount 
of physical activity when working it acknowledge that 
too much physical strain body can cause back problems 
as well.
3.1.2	
PRESENT
Today a majority works in an office, where restrictions 
on heavy labor are less relevant. Instead many com­
panies have taken the lead in relation to improving 
working environment, as it have been linked to less 
sick days and more productivity. Therefore companies 
try to encourage their employees to a healthy lifestyle. 
For example by signing up for initiatives as “We bike to 
work” were companies compete in biking to work or 
having fitness facilities and changing rooms. An issue in 
relationship toy work is that initiatives are mainly fo­
cused on activities which can be done outside working 
hours. 
Figure 9: Super system
==PAGE:16==
16
3.2.3	 FUTURE
The fitness trend which we are witnesses of today is 
believed to continue. The different will be that we now 
have more technology that can help us with reaching 
our goals towards a healthier life. Illustrated by a pic­
ture of “the most connected guy in the world” Chris 
Dancy in Figure 10, who was able reduce his weight 
with 50 kilos by having hundreds of different tracking 
and logging system help him. Even though this is ex­
treme case, self-monitoring wearables are on its way 
according to Morten Wagner from Delta, who has been 
working within the field for years. “We have for years 
measured our weight and written down the develop­
ment… The new wearables just covers a need that has 
always been there” (as cited in Djursing, 2015). Wear­
ables are here defined as electronic devices that can be 
worn. An example could be smart-watches that today 
can measure a range of parameters including: time, 
distance, pulse, steps etc.
The problem will not be to measure our performance 
but to get our head around all the data we can mea­
sure. “We try to fill data on the brain as we stood and 
drank from a fire hydrant.” (as cited in Djursing, 2015). 
Continues awareness on a healthy lifestyle together 
more possibilities for self monitoring own behavior is 
an important premise for this project. It is believed that 
product development on preventing back pain should 
consider these trends to be relevant in a near future. 
3.2	 SYSTEM
On system level the user is in focus, which is described 
the near environment in which the user acts, see Fig­
ure 10. 
3.2.1	
PAST
In the past repetitive strain work have let to physical 
degeneration on the body. A common solution have 
been work rotation, as at the Forenede Vaskerier, 
where employees rotate between different worksta­
tions to ensure strain of different parts of the body 
(Ministry of Employement, 2005). From this kind of 
examples we can learn how variation in working condi­
tions can prevent back pain while working. 
3.2.2	 PRESENT
Today a majority of work is done in the office in front 
of a desk. Back pain is now due to inactivity rather 
than over constraining the body. This has lead to an 
increased awareness regarding a healthy lifestyle that 
includes more exercise. Biking, running and working 
out has become a part of our daily life as we seek to 
optimize our performance. 
Figure 10: System
==PAGE:17==
17
3.3	 SUB SYSTEM
The sub system describes products and technologies 
that influence our systems. This part of the analysis 
tries to give an overview of different products and 
technologies that has some relevance in relation to 
improving back health. The analysis has been used as 
inspiration for exploring the solution space, rather than 
being a thorough analysis of all products and technol­
ogies within the field. It is based on a web-based desk 
research with focus on general examples from the 
field.
Following trends are currently under development in 
relation to preventing and overcoming back pain:
-	
Supporting manual labor
-	
Ergonomic office supplies
-	
Therapeutic treatments 
-	
Wearable technology
All technologies present in this analysis exist today. 
The labels: past, present and future are only given to 
create an impression of where product development is 
thought to be going. 
Figure 11: Sub system
==PAGE:18==
18
Figure 12: http://www.guldmann.dk
Figure 13: http://www.varierfurniture.com & www.
kaiku.dk
Figure 14: Bekant IKEA (www.ikea.dk)
Supporting manual labor
• 
Solutions for “correct” lifting of heavy weight. 
• 
Products that supports a specific movement
Examples
Mobile Patient Lifter: In the health sector it can be a problem with 
moving immobile patients without over constraining the back. Here 
different types of lifting equipment can help medical staff with ex­
cessive lifts.
PRESENT
PAST
Ergonomic office supplies
• 
Products used for prolonged sedentary work
• 
Supports shifting working positions to stimulate 
blood circulation and static strain of the body. 
As physiotherapist says: “the next working posi­
tion is always the best position”  
Examples
Movement chair: Varier produce chairs that have 
a designed for movement. The chairs supports an 
upright, dynamic posture and for this reason seldom 
have headrest. This should help strength core mus­
cles in the back and abdomen.  
Adjustable desks: There is a wide range of adjustable 
desks that lets change working position during the 
day. The problem according to physiotherapist Jonas 
Bak can be that people do not vary their working 
position enough. Neither standing nor sitting for too 
long is healthy for your body. 
==PAGE:19==
19
Figure 15: www.denintelligentekrop.dk
Figure 16: PomodoroTecjnique.com
Therapeutic treatments
• 
Methods for preventing back pain and increasing 
productivity
• 
There are several products supporting the different 
methods although they are normally not required.  
McKenzie method: The main idea behind this method is 
that the modern person spends the majority of his/her 
time in a leaned forward posture when working, driving 
or sitting in the sofa, which cause many of the back prob­
lem people have today. The solution is to bend the back 
opposite to counteract the strain on the back. This can 
be done with for example a mini roll seen in the picture 
which supports a natural bend in the lumbar area. 
Pomodoro Technique: Essentially this is a time manage­
ment method that breaks down work into 25 minutes 
length separated by short breaks. The aim is to reduce 
interruption on focus and ensure that you do not burn 
out. The Pomodoro Technique is often associated with a 
tomato timer, which was used when this method was first 
developed.
FUTURE
Wearable technology
• 
Electronic devices with incorporated computers 
that are designed to be worn 
• 
 Includes a wide range commercial solutions, a 
market which is predicted to grow rapidly in the 
next ten years (McKinsey Global Institute, 2013).
Fitness wristband: Fitbit Charge measures physical 
activity, heart rate and sleep which can be synced and 
displayed on the smartphone. These trackers lets you 
view progress in training, vibrate if you are sedentary 
for too long or calculate the calories that you burn. 
Smartwatches: An example of a smart watch is the 
apple watch that works with iOS and can run dedi­
cated application. In relation to tracking activity they 
have similar functionality to the fitness wristband 
such as stepcounter and heartrate monitor.
Figure 17:  www.fitbit.com
Figure 18: www.apple.com/watch/
==PAGE:20==
20
3.3.1	
TENDENCIES WITHIN THE SUB-
SYSTEM
Within different components relevant for preventing 
back problems, there is a clear tendency that equip­
ment has become more personalized. In the past com­
mon tools were shared across employees, such as the 
lifting equipment. Today and in the future products 
will collect and response to personal data. The driving 
force for this tendency are new technological advanc­
es in what is called the Internet of Things (IOT), here 
referred to as the use of sensors, data communication 
technology and actuators built into physical objects. 
Lower price and improved quality of sensors togeth­
er with improved power management allows future 
devices to run more efficiently for longer periods of 
time. McKensie state IOT as one of the disruptive tech­
nologies that will transform our life with an estimated 
economic impact of 2.7-6.2 trillion dollars in year 2025  
(McKinsey Global Institute, 2013). 
Figure 19: Valedotherapy.com
Figure 20: Lumobodytech.com
 
Valedo: A wearable fitness tracker glued to the back that 
measures posture. It records data which  is displayed on the 
phone and comes with a set of exercises and  games. 
Lumo Lift: A small device that can be fastened to the cloth­
ing and measures posture and steps. Vibrating sensor re­
minds you to sit straight and avoid sludging.
==PAGE:21==
21
3.4	 COMBINING 
PERSPECTIVES
The nine window tool unfolds the solution space for 
preventing back pain across time and space. In general 
it can be seen that there is an increasing interest in 
how we can change our behavior towards a healthier 
lifestyle. From a sub-system perspective the develop­
ment is driven by technological advancement within 
IOT that will enable us to capture a variety of personal 
data. On a system level the IOT enables us to monitor 
ourselves, which causes us to become more aware 
about our behaviors and how it is affecting our health.  
From a super system perspective the tendency goes to­
wards creating a context that facilitate rather than forc­
ing a healthy lifestyle. Combining these perspectives 
points at new systems that can capture data and based 
on this can present choices that will lead to desirable 
behaviors as active pause when doing sedentary work. 
This type of system have a potential to effectively 
change our behavior that will result in improvements 
for our back health. The product analysis highlight 
several challenges that has to be clarified before it can 
become a success. 
-	
How can relevant behavior be measured?
-	
How can data be communicated as to avoid 
data overflow?
-	
How can a product facilitate decision making in 
an attempt to improve health?
These are some of the questions approached in this re­
port. By investigating these future challenges identified 
through the nine-window method it might be possible 
to solve the problems of tomorrow instead of today. 
Figure 21: Nine Windows Tool used for sedentary behavior 
==PAGE:22==
22
4|	 BEHAVIORAL 
CHANGE FROM A 
PSYCHOLOGICAL 
PERSPECTIVE
The focus of this study is to understand how a product 
can facilitate/help create behavioral patterns that leads 
to an improvement of our back health. Our days are 
filled with behaviors that are repeated from day to 
day. Research done on college students revealed that 
approximately 45 % of the activities people do are re­
peated nearly daily and at the same location (Wood, 
Quinn, & Kashy, 2002). These activities that we repe­
at on a daily basis are typically known as habits, and 
have a great influence on the probability of developing 
certain types of health related issues later in life. Un­
derstanding, the mechanisms behind habit formation 
important as to develop products that can facilitate a 
long-lasting behavior change and hereby improve the 
health of the user.
4.1	 DEFINITION OF 
HABIT	
A habit is a relatively frequently reoccurring way of 
behaving that is connected to certain circumstances. 
A routine or practice that is acquired through frequent 
repetition. A habit does not necessarily have to be 
linked to a specific behavior but rather to a mindset, 
here defined as set of assumptions or views that pre­
determine how a person interprets a situation. Wood 
and Neal define habits as: “a learned disposition to 
repeat past responses” (Wood & Neal, 2007). Robert 
Cialdini compare habits to a tape that can be played in 
a specific situation resulting in a standard pattern of 
behaviors carried out as though they were recorded. A 
fundamental characteristics of the pattern is that they 
are composed by a sequence of behaviors which occur 
in the same order (Cialdini, 2006). The timing depends 
of the context, often a small feature called a cue or 
trigger. A trigger can be a change in the environment or 
emotional state that activates the behavior, for instan­
ce a change of light, a sound or a feeling of hunger or 
tiredness. 
4.1.1	
CHARACTERISTICS OF HABITS
Habits are usually performed with little consciousness, 
as though they were automatic. The “automaticity” of 
the habits is linked to lack of awareness, little control 
and effective execution. This allows our attention to be 
focused on other activities that requires more cognitive 
energy (Verplanken & Wood, 2006). By drawing paral­
lels to system 1 and system 2 thinking as described by 
Kahneman, it can be seen that habits are an important 
part of system 1 (Kahneman, 2011). The theory divides 
our consciousness into two systems, thereby creating 
a vocabulary that enables us to discuss ourselves as 
though we were two different persons, here represen­
ted by Homer Simpsons and Sherlock Holmes accor­
dingly. See Figure 22, The point is that even though we 
believe that we are rational human beings as Sherlock 
Holmes, many of our behaviors are habitual. They are 
not rational motivated but works on intuition, charac­
terized by Homer Simpsons, whose behavior seemingly 
is determined by his immediate thoughts and feelings. 
The advantage is that System 1 requires minimal cog­
nitive effort that enables us to perform daily tasks 
like tying our shoes with a minimum of mental effort. 
System 2 on the other hand is rational and analytical 
which enables it to solve complicated mathematical 
problems here present as Sherlock Holmes. System 2 is 
called upon whenever we need to learn new behaviors 
or take difficult decisions  (Kahneman, 2011, ch. 5). 
SYSTEM 2
Controlled 
Slow
High effort
Rational
Analytical
Can solve 17 X 32 
SYSTEM 1
Automatic 
Rapid
Low effort
Not directly moti­
vated
Intuitive
Can solve 2 + 2  
Figure 22:  Illustrates the difference between system 1 and system 2 thinking by associating the systems to well-known characters together 
with different adjectives.  
==PAGE:23==
23
Habitual behavior is performed with minimal aware­
ness and a lack of conscious intention despite of pe­
ople’s desires and motivations  (Verplanken & Wood, 
2006). The problem can be that operating system 1 is 
often immediately rewarding. (Kahneman, 2011, ch. 
5). Especially when we are tired or distracted our best 
intentions tends to be bypassed by persistent habit. An 
experiment done in the cinema showed how difficult it 
can be to persist a habit. Participants were either given 
fresh or stall popcorn. The study showed that regard­
less of the freshness of the popcorn, those with strong 
habitual behaviors in the specific context ate despite of 
their liking. On the other hand participants with wea­
ker popcorn habits only ate because of the motivation 
of doing so (Neal, Wood, Wu, & Kurlander, 2011). 
4.1.2	
A HEALTHY LIFESTYLE
The immediate consequences of eating some stall pop­
corn or sitting in front of a desktop a whole day have a 
limited effect on our overall health. Though repeating 
this action over the lifetime can have severe conse­
quences for a person’s health. It has for example been 
estimated that watching TV from a seated position for 
more than 6 hours a day lowers the life expectancy by 
4.8 years compared to a person who does not watch 
TV (Veerman et al., 2012). To change health related 
habitual behavior and thereby a lifestyle one most un­
derstand how habits are formed. 
4.2	 HABIT FORMATION
The process of creating new habits is called habit 
formation. One of the first experiments on habit for­
mation was done by behaviorist Ivan Pavlov. Briefly 
explained, Pavlov showed that it is possible to invoke 
associative learning in dogs by repeating a responding 
cue with a recurring stimulus. The cue then become 
associated or conditioned with the response, which 
through repetition becomes automatic. This stimulus–
response habit formation is now known as classical 
conditioning (Collin et al., 2012). 
Elaborating on the principles developed by Pavlov, ano­
ther behaviorist, B. F.Skinner, showed how behaviors 
are sometimes performed due to an expectation of a 
reward or as avoidance of punishment. Changing be­
havior happens through positive or negative reinforce­
ment which explains how behaviors are formed by 
parring a specific behavior with specific type of feed­
back. The process in which humans and animals learn a 
behavior to achieve a specific goal (i.e. reinforcement) 
is called operant conditioning or instrumental learning.  
(Collin et al., 2012). See Figure 23 which illustrate the 
difference between classical and operant conditioning.
4.2.1	
THE REWARD SYSTEM
Later studies by Mirenowcz and Schultz (1996) showed 
how operant conditioning is linked to our neurological 
reward system. A study was conducted on monkeys 
where a changing feature in the environment as a 
light (the cue), would give a drop of juice (the reward) 
when a lever was pulled (the response). After the 
monkey was given a reward, the dopamine rich are­
as in the brain related to the humans reward system 
were activated. Dopamine is an important part of the 
reward system in both humans and other mammals. 
It is a chemical that when it is released in the correct 
areas of the brain will create a feeling of reward after 
for example eating or sexual contact, and have been 
essential for the survival of species. After several days 
of training the monkeys learned how to respond to the 
changing of context to receive the reward. Here dopa­
mine was activated as the monkey carried out the re­
sponse before the reward was given (as cited in Wood 
& Neal, 2007). The study show how the body has been 
shaped through evolution to increase the probability 
of behaviors that leads us to our goals. Coming back 
to system 1 and system 2 thinking, dopamine explains 
why operating system 1 is associated with a pleasant 
feeling. Our brain rewards itself whenever a habitual 
behavior is carried out. If the habitual behavior also 
was healthy it would create a pleasant feeling whe­
never we took good care of our bodies, which in turn 
would further increase the likeliness of performing the 
behavior. 
4.2.2	 APPLYING OPERANT 
CONDITIONING
To form a habit with operant conditioning requires the 
individual to be motivated towards reaching a specific 
goal. The goal can be motivated either by positive or 
negative expectations of what the person wants to 
Operant Conditioning:
A behavior has a higher probability to be re­
peated through positive reinforcement, such 
as getting food when a lever is pulled.
Classical Conditioning:
A neutral stimulus as a bell can cause an 
automatic response as salvation if the stimu­
lus is conditioned through training.
Figure 23: Classical and operant conditioning. Source: (Collin et al., 2012)
==PAGE:24==
24
achieve or wants to avoid accordingly. As explained 
earlier active pauses can help prevent several health 
related issues and increase the productivity. By pairing 
the positive effect with active pauses with the positive 
effect of active pauses will increase the likeliness of the 
desired behavior. For operant conditioning to be suc­
cessful, Skinner found that constant feedback has to be 
given to the participant throughout the learning pro­
cess (Collin et al., 2012). This can be done by a trigger 
signaling when it is time to perform a desired behavior 
and the possibility to acknowledgement that the be­
havior has been performed. 
4.2.3	 WE BEHAVE ACCORDING TO OUR 
BELIEFS
While behaviorist psychology showed how habits can 
be formed by the environment, social psychologist Kurt 
Lewin, acknowledged how behavior is defined by a 
combination of the environment and the individual be­
liefs and abilities (Darnton, 2008). These cognitive pro­
cesses that happens within a person is often ignored 
by the behaviorists. Understanding how we perceive 
our self and the environment that surrounds us was 
the main focus of Leon Festinger, who was a student of 
Lewin. He observed how individuals continually seek to 
bring consistency between their beliefs and their be­
havior. If a smoker is told about the health risk related 
to smoking, the person will experience a psychological 
discomfort or cognitive dissonance (Collin et al., 2012). 
Cognitive dissonance here defines an inconsistent be­
tween the values/beliefs and the behaving self. The 
person will then be motivated to reduce or eliminate 
the dissonance, by changing either the behavior or 
their beliefs. In this case the smoker might quit, dis­
trust the new information or rationalize the dissonance 
by saying that there are so many things in our daily life 
that impose a health risks (Consolvo, McDonald, & Lan­
day, 2009). Cognitive dissonance explains why it can be 
incredible difficult to change people’s habit, since we 
tend to rationalize our actions in an attempt to bring 
consistency between past and present beliefs (Collin et 
al., 2012).  
4.2.4	 PRACTICAL IMPLICATIONS
Cognitive dissonance theory suggests that creating 
a persistent awareness regarding a specific issue can 
lead to a change in behavior. Then people will change 
behavior as to create consistency between their beli­
efs and behavior. The problem can be if people start 
rationalizing the dissonance. In that case they could 
tell themselves that: “I don’t have time for pauses” 
or “I try to avoid taking too many pauses” indicating 
that pauses are non-productive. This was some of the 
participants’ responses when doing a small field sur­
vey on peoples working habits. Often people will not 
be stamped as lazy. An intervention could be aimed at 
enabling participants to measure themselves according 
to others. As Kersty Hobson concluded when wanting 
to change people’s household habits: “the main reason 
for people to take part in the scheme was not to reduce 
their environmental impacts per se, but to measure and 
debate their behavior with others” (Darnton, 2008). 
With new opportunities for self-monitoring it will be 
possible to create new products that highlights the dif­
ference between what others do and what we do our­
selves. This would create a cognitive dissonance which 
can be minimized by changing our behavior towards 
how we want others to see ourselves. 
4.3	 OTHER RELEVANT 
PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORIES
For this study operant conditioning and cognitive dis­
sonance theory are used to explain how this study will 
improve people’s habits at work. These are classical 
psychological theories used to explain behavior change 
within many different fields (Consolvo et al., 2009). 
Other related studies on habit formation sometimes 
use goal-setting theory to explain how the habit is 
formed (van Houwelingen & van Raaij, 1989) (Lally, 
Jaarsveld, Potts, & Wardle, 2010). A main contributor 
to this theory is Albert Bandura, who believed goals to 
be the essential for driving behavior (Darnton, 2008). 
Achieving a predetermined goal provides a pleasant 
feeling of accomplishment. Here it is important that 
participant formulate their own goals together with 
an expert to ensure that the goals are challenging but 
still achievable (van Houwelingen & van Raaij, 1989). 
The goal-setting theory has some similarities to cogni­
tive dissonance theory as a person change behavior to 
achieve a coherence between the perceived self and 
the goal. As cognitive dissonance theory is thought to 
be more flexible in explaining the cognitive processes 
happening within a person this theory is used throug­
hout the thesis.
The aim of this study is to understand how technology 
most effectively can support forming healthy working 
habits. The psychological theories explored in this se­
ction will help understand the underlying mechanisms 
of habit formation which is important when reading 
the next sections.
==PAGE:25==
25
==PAGE:26==
26
5|	 PERSUASIVE 
TECHNOLOGY
This chapter explores how behavior change can be in­
corporated in products. A technology that is designed 
with the intent of modifying or creating new behavior 
is here defined as persuasive technology (IJsselsteijn, 
2006). The field has its origins in software computing, 
but persuasive technologies can in theory be used in all 
kind of interaction between human-to-human and hu­
man-to-product (Oinas-kukkonen & Harjumaa, 2008). 
This chapter aim at giving a general understanding on 
how and why persuasive technology works.  
5.1	 EXAMPLES OF 
PERSUASIVE TECHNOLOGY
We are surrounded by persuasive technologies in our 
daily lives. Products which aim to change, reinforce or 
shape our attitudes and behavior through persuasion 
and social influence. Examples of persuasive technolo­
gies are the wide range of web and mobil applications 
like Facebook, Tweeter and Endomondo, or the well-
known pop-up window offering you a good offer when 
you browse the net (Figure 24). Persuasive technology 
is used extensively in the commercial industry to in­
crease your consumption of a certain products. This 
study focuses on the use of persuasive technologies to 
enhance the quality of life.  An example of an informa­
tion technology that works as a persuasive technology 
is the eco-driving indicator, which inform you about 
your car’s current fuel consumption. The aim is to rein­
force efficient driving behavior, and thereby improving 
the fuel efficiency with 4∼26% to the benefit of both 
the environment and economy (Kim, Shin, Yoon, Bae, & 
Kim, 2011). In theory all kinds of information technolo­
gies influence us in some way or another, but before it 
can be defined as persuasive it has to be intentionally. 
(Fogg 1998) Persuasive technology can therefore be 
seen as a special case of design with intent, which aims 
to change a behavior (Lockton, Harrison & Stanton 
2008). 
5.2	 FOGG’S BEHAVIOR 
MODEL
One of the main contribution to the field is BJ Fogg. He 
has developed Fogg’s Behavior Model (FBM), which is a 
framework, describing which factors that are crucial for 
a persuasive technology to support a behavior change. 
He states that many technologies fail to persuade be­
cause the designer behind do not understand, which 
factors that lead to behavior change. (Fogg, 2009). 
Fogg have defined three factors: motivation, ability and 
trigger, which need to be present simultaneously and 
in a certain amount, before the behavior will happen 
(Figure 25).
Figure 26 is a visual illustration of Foggs Behavior Mod­
el. The arrow shows the increase likeliness that the 
behavior will happen as a function of motivation and 
the ability. When ability is low motivation need to be 
high and the same the other way around. The trigger 
needs to be present before the behavior will happen.  
This can be linked to the earlier discussed theory of 
operational conditioning and the experiment done by 
Mirenowcz and Schultz. Here a monkey is motivated 
and fully capable to pull a lever because it believes it 
gets a reward. The light acts as a trigger that makes the 
behavior happen. 
Figure 24: Pop up window http://cdn.onextrapixel.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/09/2-Photodoto.jpg
==PAGE:27==
27
Figure 26 illustrates Fogg’s Behavior Model, with the 
ability on the x-axis and the motivation on the y-axis. 
The next sections will dig deeper into the different 
components of the model.  
5.2.1	
MOTIVATION
Fogg describes three kinds of motivation:
Pleasure/pain (immediately): These are primi­
tive responses derived from self-preservation 
and the propagation of our genes and they can 
be powerful motivators (Fogg, 2009). Pleasure 
and pain is rarely appealing to use directly 
when designing persuasive technologies, how­
ever they are important for the understanding 
what drives motivation.  
Hope/fear (anticipation): Hope/fear is in con­
trast to pleasure/pain, often used in persuasive 
technologies. It could be the fear of losing your 
good health, which makes you get a vaccinati­
on or the hope that you will find true love that 
makes you join an online dating site.  
Social acceptance/rejection: Human have 
throughout our evolution been heavily de­
pending on social relations and being rejected 
from the herd have meant certain death. Even 
though this is not the case today, social ac­
ceptance is still strong motivator. It affects the 
cloth we wear to the language we speak (Fogg, 
2009). Facebook is a classic example of a per­
suasive technology, which uses this motivator.
These three kinds of motivations work very well in re­
lation to Skinner’s theory about positive and negative 
reinforcement (Collin et al., 2012). By exposing a user 
to one of the motivators it is possible to increase the 
possibility that a certain behavior will happen. These 
factors may work on a theoretical level, but literature 
indicates that they are not sufficient nor directly used 
in empirical studies. Ping Zhang suggest another more 
extensive categorizing of motivational sources (Zhang, 
2008).  While acknowledging other motional sources 
he state that the four most essential, in the field of per­
suasive technology, is psychological, social, cognitive 
and emotional sources.  
• 
Psychological needs are linked to the desire to 
promote wellbeing and growth through intera­
Figure 25: Fogg’s 3 factors of persuasion (Fogg, 2009)
Figure 26: Fogg’s Behavior Model (Fogg, 2009)
==PAGE:28==
28
ction with the environment. This could be the 
motivation of going to the gym.
• 
Social need to interact with other human 
beings and the feeling of belonging. The moti­
vation to create a Facebook account or buying 
the same shoes as your best friend. 
• 
Cognitive needs to acquire competence and 
achievement. This is often the motivation be­
hind many game applications. 
• 
Emotional needs refers to what we like and 
what we believe in. This could for example 
be the motivation for buying the new IPhone 
because you like the aesthetic design. 
Examples from Empirical Studies
 “Serious game” and gamification are two examples 
of increasing motivation which have been used in ar­
eas such as health, nutrition and energy consumption 
(Nakajima, Lehdonvirta, Tokunaga, & Kimura, 2008). 
A study done on school kids increased the daily in­
take of fruit by letting the children play a game called 
Squire’s Quest! (Baranowski et al., 2003) The game 
was designed to increase their preference for fruit by 
associating the consumption of fruit with having fun 
and thereby creating an emotional preference towards 
fruit. The children played the game over ten sessions 
of 25 minutes over 5 weeks and the result was that 
these children ate one more serving of fruit compared 
to a control group (Baranowski et al., 2003). Locosnake 
(Chittaro & Sioni, 2012) and PhoneRow (Zwinderman 
et al., 2012) are two other examples of the use of gam­
ification as a motivator in empirical studies, but with 
less positive results. Both studies aim at increasing 
the habit of regularly exercise. PhoneRow did not pro­
duced a positive result, since only one participant was 
interested in playing the game more than once. This 
emphasize the demand that the game need to be actu­
ally fun, challenging and/or rewarding. Locosnake pro­
vided a more positive result, and the participants here 
expressed that it meet some of their cognitive needs, 
however they were missing some social stimulants. An 
example of successful use of the social motivation is 
the case study Wattsup? which allowed users to com­
pare domestic energy consumption on Facebook (Fos­
ter, Lawson, Blythe, & Cairns, 2010). Eight homes was 
participating in the study, which ran for eighteen day, 
and the result showed a significant reduction in energy 
consumption. StepMatron is a very similar study with 
very similar result, but here the aim was to increase 
peoples exercise behavior (Foster, Linehan, Kirman, 
Lawson, & James, 2010). This shows that social motiva­
tion can be a very effective motivator across domains. 
These examples support the statement that Zhang’s 
four motivational sources are more efficient, when 
it comes to analyzing real life examples, than Fogg’s 
three kind of motivation. Most of the reviewed litera­
ture agrees that motivation is essential when changing 
people’s behavior.
5.2.2	 ABILITY
Ability is how easily it is for an individual to perform a 
specific behavior. The level of ability for the target be­
havior depends on the relation between, the resources 
needed to perform the behavior and the resources the 
individual have to his/her disposal. Fogg defines six 
kinds of resources:  time, money, physical effort, brain 
cycles, social deviance and non-routines.   
Time: a behavior is not simple if it demands 
more time than is available.
Money: if the behavior is expensive compared 
to your financial resources it is not simple.
Physical effort: if the behavior is physically de­
manding compared to your physical strength it 
is not simple
Brain cycles: relates to the cognitive effort re­
quired to perform a behavior. 
Social deviance: This is closely connected to 
the social acceptance/rejection, which was 
mentioned earlier. If a behavior is in conflict 
with what is social accepted for their social 
group, it can be harder to perform. 
Non-routines: People may find a task simpler 
just before they have done it before, even if it 
is more demanding. 
It is important to understand that ability is highly de­
pending on the individual. A 25 year old student and 
86 year old senior citizen may find the same behavior 
very different when it comes to simplicity, since they 
have very different resources at their disposal.  An ex­
ample of this is the digitalization of the communication 
between the Danish state and it’s citizens in 2012. It 
was found that elderly had a lower ability to comply, 
but the largest factor for the individually elderly’s abil­
ity was not their age, but their social network. ()In this 
case it was necessary to make it possible seek permis­
sion to be excused from the digitalization. 
Examples from Empirical Studies
The importance of ability is widely supported by the 
reviewed literature. Multiple empirical studies have in­
vestigated how approaching the factor ability, increas­
es the likeliness of a target behavior. The study What’s 
Your 2%? focus on addressing a low level of ability 
when it comes to do physical activities, by emphasizing 
that time does not need to be a restriction (Clinken­
beard et al., 2014). 
Even though there is general acknowledgement of abil­
ity as an important factor for behavior, Fogg’s catego­
rization of ability into 6 different kinds, was only found 
in a very limited amount of the reviewed literature. To 
support that this categorization is relevant, and to dis­
cuss if they are sufficient, is here a few examples where 
they can be used to explain some of the results in the 
empirical studies. Physical effort was found to be one 
of the main factors for the individually success of the 
participants in the study Fish’n’Steps. Here the aim was 
to increase the participant’s daily physical activity by 
given them visual feedback through their phones (Lin, 
Mamykina, Lindtner, Delajoux, & Strub, 2006). 
==PAGE:29==
29
A study which could challenge Fogg’s categorization of 
ability is Activmon. This study highlights that individu­
al’s attitude towards privacy and surveillance, may be 
very difference from one individual to another (Burns, 
Lueg, & Berkovsky, 2012). It could be argued that that 
this was included in the social deviance, since the need 
of privacy to some extend could derive from the fear of 
being exposed. However Fogg’s definition of social de­
viance emphasize that it is something that makes you 
do something that is against your social rule set and 
put your social status at risk. It can therefore be argued 
that this does not include your general rule set, even 
when your social status is not in play.  This could be 
stealing, mistreating human or animals or in this case 
which level of surveillance is okay. If it is acknowledged 
that a person’s understanding of right and wrong is not 
only derived from the fear of social rejection, a seventh 
kind of ability may be needed.  This could be called 
“inner rule set”.  The review literature do not at this 
time support sufficient material to support this state­
ment and it will therefore not be included in the future 
work of this study. It will be suggested that future work 
should investigate this further, but for now the con­
clusion will be that Fogg’s categorization of ability is 
sufficient.
5.2.3	 TRIGGERS
Even when motivation and ability is sufficient a target 
behavior will not happen if an appropriate trigger is 
not present. Fogg states that successful triggers have 
three characteristics (Fogg, 2009): 
1.	 We notice the trigger
2.	 We associate the trigger with a target behavior 
3.	 The trigger happens when we are both mo­
tivated and able to perform the behavior (ti­
ming)
He further categories triggers in sparks, facilitators and 
signals. 
Sparks: is a trigger which uses one of the ear­
lier mentioned motivators. It could be a notifi­
cation on Facebook telling you that 10 of your 
friends are using a certain application, thereby 
exploit the motivator social acceptance/rejec­
tion to motivate you to use the same applicati­
on.	
 
Facilitator: is a trigger which aims at simplify­
ing the target behavior and thereby increasing 
the ability. This can be done for example by 
automate as much of a process as possible. 
Signal: when motivation and ability is sufficient 
a signal can be a successful trigger. The timing 
of the signal is crucial, before it is success full. 
A typical example of a signal trigger would be 
your alarm clock. 
The factor triggers is the one of the three factors which 
is hard to find a generic definition throughout the re­
viewed literature. Earlier we mentioned Robert B. Cial­
dini definition of cues to play a pre-programmed tape 
(Cialdini, 2006). This definition is in many ways close 
to Fogg’s definition. However they differ in on very im­
portant way. Cialdini describes how these cues can in­
fluence us without our knowing and that they can even 
be used as weapons to make us act against our own 
will. Fogg emphasize that the trigger need to be notice 
and associate with the target behavior. 
Instead of using Fogg’s definition, Oinas-kukkonen & 
Harjumaa defines triggers as all kind of information giv­
en to the user through a technology (Oinas-kukkonen 
& Harjumaa, 2008). Triggers are then categorized as 
direct and indirect, and just like Fogg’s Triggers, they 
state that the right strategy depends on the user’s 
state of mind in the current situation.
Direct: A trigger that provides the user with relative­
ly complex information which requires some kind of 
reflection. When relating to system 1 and system 2 
thinking this can be associated to system 2 (Kahneman, 
2011). This is a slower and more demanding process, 
which means that both ability and motivation needs to 
be high (Oinas-kukkonen & Harjumaa, 2008).
Indirect:  This strategy use abstract data to make it pos­
sible for the user to quickly understand the information 
with out to much reflection (Oinas-kukkonen & Harju­
maa, 2008). Unlike the direct strategy this mainly acti­
vate the operation of system 1, which makes it possible 
to react with out to much cognitive effort. This makes it 
more suitable when motivation and ability is low. 
Examples from empirical studies
A good example of the use of the trigger spark is a case 
study done on office workers in Australia. The partic­
ipants were divided into teams that were provided 
with a weekly team score via email. The score showed 
the printing behavior of the team compared to other 
teams. (Hasan, Medland, Foth, & Curry, 2013). The 
intervention increased environmental friendly printing 
behavior by applying the social aspect and thereby the 
motivation. In this way Fogg’s categorization worked 
well, however the trigger was a daily e-mail and not a 
cue just before printing. 
Vito is a case study of a persuasive technology which 
primarily relies on a facilitator as a trigger. Vito is a pro­
totype of a remote-control which aim at reducing the 
complexity of doing physical activities, by encourage 
small incremental and tailored changes in an individ­
ual’s lifestyle (Nawyn, Intille, & Larson, 2006). In this 
case the trigger was a notification with a suggestion 
of a small exercise, which the user should perform im­
mediately, and Fogg’s definition is in therefore in this 
example applicable.  
==PAGE:30==
30
Signals are harder to find in the reviewed literature, 
since even a simple reminder can be argued to facili­
tator since it makes it easier to know when to perform 
an action. No pure signals were found to be used in the 
reviewed studies.
5.2.4	 DISCUSSION
In general the reviewed literature shows that Foog’s 
model is highly relevant and useful to understand how 
and why persuasive technologies work. However when 
relating to real life technologies it may be too theoret­
ical and rigid. Fogg’s categorization of motivation was 
found to be insufficient and Zhang’s sources of moti­
vation were found to be more useful when analyzing 
real persuasive technologies, since they gave a more 
holistic insight to motivation. The categorization of 
ability was found to be sufficient to cover the reviewed 
material, and no other categorization was found used 
in other literature. The definition of triggers was found 
only to be applicable to some persuasive technolo­
gies, mainly those using reminders or suggestions. The 
definition need to be less rigid and Oinas-kukkonen & 
Harjumaa definition of strategies to persuasion may be 
easier to apply. 
In the following work triggers will be seen not only as a 
cue to perform an action but as al kind of information 
and feedback given to the user which aim at changing 
his behavior.  
==PAGE:31==
31
==PAGE:32==
32
6|	 FRAMEWORK 
FOR ANALYZING 
EMPIRICAL 
STUDIES
This chapter gives insights into how earlier reviews of 
empirical studies have used different frameworks for 
analyzing persuasive technologies in practice. In gen­
eral the reviewed literature acknowledge Fogg’s defini­
tion and basic conceptualization of persuasive design 
(Hamari, Koivisto, & Pakkanen, 2014), but it also found 
that it does not give sufficient support on how actually 
to develop persuasive technologies (Oinas-kukkonen & 
Harjumaa, 2008).  In general Fogg’s Behavior Model is 
thought to be for theoretical to apply in practice. This 
section will therefore investigate how different re­
searchers suggest analyzing and developing persuasive 
technology in practice which in the end will be linked 
to Fogg’s Behavior Model, in a new suggested frame­
work. 
6.1	 28 DESIGN PRINCIPLES
Some literature take an approach from the software 
development where they base the framework on a 
set of requirements. Suggesting 28 design principles 
divided into 4 categories, primary task, dialogue task, 
system credibility and social support (Oinas-kukkonen 
& Harjumaa, 2008).  
6.1.1	
PRIMARY TASK SUPPORT
Primary task support includes 7 design principles: re­
duction, tunneling, tailoring, personalization, self-mon­
itoring, simulation, and rehearsal. Primary task support 
aims at directly supporting the user in doing the prima­
ry task, by making it easier for the specific individual 
(Oinas-kukkonen & Harjumaa, 2008)
6.1.2	
DIALOGUE SUPPORT
Dialogue support is about the interaction between the 
system/product and the user and includes 7 principles: 
praise, rewards, reminders, suggestion, similarity, lik­
ing, and social role. Dialogue supports aims at helping 
the user moving forward to the target behavior (Oin­
as-kukkonen & Harjumaa, 2008).
6.1.3	
SYSTEM CREDIBILITY SUPPORT
This include the design principles: trustworthiness, 
expertise, surface credibility, real-world feel, authori­
ty, third-party endorsements, and verifiability. In this 
category they aim at enhancing the credibility of the 
persuasive technology. (Oinas-kukkonen & Harjumaa, 
2008)
6.1.4	
SOCIAL SUPPORT
The principles in this category are: social facilitation, 
social comparison, normative influence, social learning, 
cooperation, competition, and recognition. These prin­
ciples are based on the interaction between multiple 
users (Oinas-kukkonen & Harjumaa, 2008). 
Further explanation of the 28 suggested design princi­
ple can be found in appendix 6.01.
A systematic review of behavioral interventions ap­
proaching obesity used the 28 principle to create an 
overview of the most successful persuasive principles. 
According to this review the nine most common princi­
ples are (Xu, Chomutare, & Iyengar, 2014) Self-monitor­
ing, Personalization, Tunneling, Reduction, Reminders, 
Similarity, Tailoring, Rewards and Competition. These 
principles are mainly from primary task and dialogue 
support group, with the exception of competition 
which is in the social support group. This indicates that 
principles from these two groups are the most widely 
used.
Figure 27: Conceptual framing (Hamari et al., 2014)
==PAGE:33==
33
6.2	 MOTIVATIONAL 
AFFORDANCE AND 
PSYCHOLOGICAL OUTCOME
One other systematic review of empirical studies 
introduce another framework with additional focus 
on how a technology change the attitude in addition 
to changing behavior. The study found that attitude 
changes as a psychological outcome are limited inves­
tigated in literature and therefore the study concludes 
that mapping empirical work on persuasive technol­
ogy using a new framework was required (Hamari et 
al., 2014). To do so they analyzed the empirical work 
with the concept of motivational affordance, psycho­
logical outcomes and behavioral outcomes (see Fig­
ure 27) (Hamari et al., 2014). Table 2 shows result of 
this systematic review. Persuasive technology is here 
categorized after how they motivate the user, which 
psychological outcome it evokes and which domain the 
behavioral outcome can be placed.  
Unlike the earlier discussed 28 principles this gives a 
deeper understand of what makes a persuasive tech­
nology work on a psychological level. However the 
framework does not support a generic framework, 
since the motivational affordance and the psychologi­
cal outcomes is not predefined and these will therefore 
change every time the framework is used. Some of the 
motivational affordance findings are for example very 
specific like “emotional icons” while other is very ab­
stract like “social support”. 
Most of the findings under Motivational affordance 
fit with one of the 28 principles with the exception 
of “progress” or “goals”. As earlier mentioned can 
Goal-setting be very effective when it comes to chang­
ing behavior) and it would therefore be relevant to in­
vestigate further (van Houwelingen & van Raaij, 1989). 
Table 2: Result from similar systematic review of emperical studies (Hamari et al., 2014)
Motivational affordance
Psychological outcomes
Behavioral outcomes
Visual or audio feedback
Engagement, encouragement
Health, exercise
Social support, comparisons, 
feedback, interaction, sharing 
Motivation 
Ecological consumption and/or 
behavior
Progress
Awareness
Education, learning
Persuasive messages and remind­
ers
Enjoyment, “fun”
Economic, commercial, marketing
Objectives and goals 
Negative attributes 
Security, safety
Rewards, credits, points, achieve­
ments
Attitude
Entertainment
Ambient or public display (display 
embedded into the environment)
Self-efficacy
No specific domain
Social agent (non-human, com­
puterized assistants)
Trust, credibility 
Competition, leaderboards, rank­
ings
Commitment 
Emoticons and expression
Sense of community
Suggestions, advice
Adherence 
Tracking
Video-based persuasion 
Positive reinforcement
Subliminal persuasion
Not specified 
==PAGE:34==
34
Figure 28:  The Integrated Persuasive Technology Framework
==PAGE:35==
35
7|	 INTEGRATED 
PERSUASIVE 
DESIGN 
FRAMEWORK 
This chapter explains a new framework, which was 
developed to give an overview of the theories which 
were discussed in the two earlier chapters. The new 
framework seeks to combine the theories and show 
how there is relation between them. The framework 
can be used to future analyzing and developing of per­
suasive technologies.
7.2.1	
EXPLANATION
The framework shows that there is two sides of per­
suasive technology. The theoretical side, which explain 
how the user is persuaded by the technology, and the 
practical side which categorize types of persuasive 
function a persuasive technology can pursues.
The Theoretical Side
Fogg’s behavior model is the foundation of the “the­
oretic” side. From earlier literature review it was 
concluded that, Fogg’s three factors were sufficient to 
generalize the main factors needed to persuade a user 
to perform a target behavior. Fogg’s categorization 
of motivation however was found to be insufficient 
and Zhang’s 4 motional sources are therefore used in 
this model to categorized different kind of motivation 
(Zhang, 2008). The framework retains Fogg’s catego­
rization of ability, since these was found in general to 
be sufficient. Fogg’s three kinds of triggers are also 
retained however are not thought to as rigid as Fogg’s 
definition, but more seen as the information or feed­
back given to the user at any time, not only immedi­
ately before the behavior. The triggers are divided into 
subcategories direct and indirect triggers, depending 
on which strategy they use to present the information 
to the user (Oinas-kukkonen & Harjumaa, 2008).
The components in each of the three factors, can be 
seen as building blocks. Which blocks a technology 
should use, depend on the specific situation. For ex­
ample if ability is low a red building block need to be 
added.  A persuasive technology is not limited to one 
building block from each of the three factors. More 
blocks of the same color can be present in a persuasive 
technology. When a persuasive technology fails it is 
due to a failure of one or more building blocks. The de­
veloper of the technology should evaluate each of the 
building blocks in relation to the target user, behavior 
and context.
In Practice
The right side of the framework represents the dif­
ferent functions a persuasive technology can use. 
These functions are the 28 principles suggested  by 
==PAGE:36==
36
Oinas-kukkonen & Harjumaa. The functions are built 
up by the factors the theoretical. The colored boxes 
indicate which of the three factors, the function mainly 
aim at applying. Reduction for example have a red box 
indicating that this is most effective when motivations 
is of a sufficient level, but the ability needs to be in­
creased. It can be seen that the functions from the pri­
mary support uses ability, while dialogue supports the 
motivational factors. The two other groups social and 
system credibility support were not possible for now to 
conclude if these are aiming more toward one factor 
than another. We acknowledge that this part in general 
is not that well documented and further investigation 
is needed before such a categorization can be made. 
7.2.2	 APPLYING THE FRAMEWORK
To test this new framework, a persuasive technology 
from the reviewed empirical studies has been ana­
lyzed. PerFrames was a digital picture frame connected 
to a camera, which monitored the user’s body posture 
when doing sedentary work (see Figure 30). The pic­
ture in the frame would be of a person the user loves 
or likes. When the user start slouching the person in 
the picture would start being displeased, and in this 
way persuade the user to improve their sedentary be­
havior. 
By using the Integrated Persuasive Technology Frame­
work it can be concluded that PerFrame use the follow­
ing functions: Self-monitoring and Liking (see Figure 
29). 
Self-monitoring is in the primary support category and 
makes it possible for the user to monitor their own 
body posture. Why this function should work can then 
be found on the theoretical side of the framework. The 
ability factors which is in play here is time. One of the 
main challenge when taking breaks when doing seden­
tary work is time management. By giving information 
about the user’s body posture the person knows when 
to take a break. This technology uses an indirect signal, 
since the information is abstract.
The function Liking, is heavily relying on the building 
block emotional motivation, since it aim at motivates 
the user by showing one of their loved dissatisfied by 
their behavior. The ability in play is social deviance 
since it increases the awareness about when it is social 
acceptable to take a break. This function is mainly fo­
cuses on motivation and like self-monitoring use indi­
rect information is it therefore using an indirect spark. 
It is important to emphasize that the building blocks 
used in each function are not necessary general for 
this function, but only for the function in this specific 
example. 
7.2.3	 REFLECTION
The Integrated Persuasive Design Framework synthe­
size the main point from various theories and models 
from the field of persuasive technology. It contrib­
utes to the existing work by constructing a structured 
framework which can support the most widely used 
theory. It further more explains how in practice design 
principles can be related to the theoretical work. 
We acknowledge that this framework is based on a 
purely theoretical level and is on a very early state of 
its development. Further development is necessary to 
fully validate its credibility and usefulness.
Figure 29: Analyzing PerFrame with The Integra­
ted Persuasive Technology Framework
==PAGE:37==
37
Figure 30: PerFrame (Obermair, Reitberger, Meschtscherjakov, Lankes, & Tscheligi, 2008)
==PAGE:38==
38
8|	 SYSTEMATIC 
LITERATURE 
REVIEW OF 
RELEVANT 
EMPIRICAL 
STUDIES
The systematic literature review creates an exploratory 
overview of the extent to which persuasive technologi­
es have been tested in various domains. The aim is to 
find fields that could be further investigated through 
an experiment. The systematic literature helps pointing 
in the direction of best practices when conducting an 
experiment and ensure that results will have some va­
lue within the field of persuasive technology. Following 
research questions are investigated:
What is good practice when conducting an experi­
ment within the field of persuasive technology?
What domains and types of persuasive principles 
are commonly used and what are the result?
8.1	 THE REVIEW PROCESS
The reviewed articles were collected by going through 
the conference articles from the yearly International 
Persuasive Technology Conference, which has been 
held since 2005. Conference from 2012 to 2014 was 
estimated to be relevant, that in total covered 83 ar­
ticles. For each article the title and abstract was scan­
ned as to evaluate the relevance. Hereafter a second 
round of reviewing, where each article was subjected 
to a more thorough read through. The snowballing te­
chnique was used to add literature from the reference 
list where it was found relevant. Through this method 
an extra 18 articles have been added. In total the lite­
rature research yielded 40 articles with were in accor­
dance with the following criteria. 
•	
The paper investigate the use of a persua­
sive technology in relation to a behavioral 
outcome
•	
The paper included an empirical study 
•	
The use test methods was described
•	
The used persuasive technology was de­
scribed 
•	
The paper included a elaboration of the 
outcome
The selected studies are listed in a table, which can be 
found in appendix 8.1.
8.1.1	
LIMITATIONS
It is important to emphasize that this research focu­
ses on articles that are related to reducing sedentary 
behavior or could used as inspiration in this context. 
The review is therefore not fully representative for 
the field, but should more be seen as an exploratory 
overview. The results of the studies were categorized 
as a success when the studies themselves came to this 
conclusion. See Table 3 for the success criteria. The 
team behind this report acknowledges that in some of 
the reviewed studies this is done by a very subjective 
assessment which is a limitation of the study. 
Another limitation is validation of the results of the re­
viewed studies. When reviewing these kind of articles 
it often comes with the possibility of publication bias 
No success
Mixed
Success
No noticeable behavior change 
was observed.  
Part of the studies created behavi­
or changes.
Noticeable behavior change was 
observed.
Table 3: Evaluation criteria
==PAGE:39==
39
(Hamari, Koivisto, & Pakkanen, 2014). Studies with po­
sitive results have been shown to be more likely to be 
published (Dwan et al., 2008), it is not possible to say if 
this bias have had any effect on the reviewed literature 
but it is worth keeping in mind. 
The aim of this sub-section is to discover good practice 
when doing empirical studies of persuasive technology. 
This is done by comparing the 40 articles found in the 
review process. 
8.1.2	
TYPE OF RESEARCH
A major element when conducting a study is the spe­
cific methods of collecting and analyzing data, here 
defined as the research approach (Creswell, 2003). In 
general there are three approaches:
A quantitative approach - investigates a pheno­
menon by collecting numerical data which is analy­
zed using statistical or mathematical analysis. 
A qualitative approach - collects different types of 
data with the intent of developing themes through 
inquiry. 
Mixed Method – uses a combination of the two 
prior
Figure 31 show to which extent the review studies uses 
quantitative, qualitative or mixed methods in their re­
search.
Figure 31 shows that the most common way to collect 
data is using a qualitative approach which was used 
18 cases. The qualitative used mostly questionnaires, 
interviews and logbooks. The ratio of studies using only 
qualitative research is thought as problematic as data 
only rely on people’s experience which can differ from 
what people actually do. 12 studies used a quantitative 
approach which involved monitoring direct usage or 
consumption, while others used measuring equipment 
like pedometers. 
The 10 cases of mixed-methods studies typically used 
similar methods to those used in quantitative and qu­
alitative studies. It can be seen that this type of expe­
rimental approach is more common when the inter­
vention is performed on fewer participants. This might 
be explained by the fact the mixed method approach 
combines different means for gathering and analyzing 
data which increases the chances of using the result. 
8.1.3	
PARTICIPANTS AND TIMEFRAME
The articles all included some kind of empirical study 
but varied in the number of participants and timefra­
me, see Figure 33 and Figure 32. 
The number of participants varied from 1 to 854 par­
ticipants, with a median of 25. One of the studies in­
cluded a public intervention with an unknown number 
indicated by NA in Figure 33. The time frame of the 
experiment lasted from one day to 156 week, with the 
median being 4 weeks, see Figure 32. 
Especially the time frame is thought to be problema­
tic, especially when evaluating the success rate of the 
shorter intervention compared to the longer ones. 
Figure 31: Research Approach
Figure 32: Timeframe in reviewed studies
Figure 33: Number of participants in reviewed studies
==PAGE:40==
40
When it comes to changing people’s behavior it seems 
as a large time frame will have smaller impact, since 
people tend to fall back in their old habits. To show a 
realistic view on the effect of a persuasive technology 
an experiment should thrive to be as long as possible, 
as not to be affected by the novelty effect. 
Figure 34: Results across domains
==PAGE:41==
41
8.2	 RESULTS ACROSS 
DOMAINS AND PERSUASIVE 
PRINCIPLES
The studies were distributed over following domains: 
Exercise – Interventions aiming at encouraging 
more exercise
Diet – Intervention related to losing weight
Sedentary – Intervention related to decrease se­
dentary behavior
Sustainable behavior - Interventions related in­
creasing environmental awareness or behavior
Other – Includes everything from interventions 
that helps participants stop smoking or stop texting 
while driving
Figure 34 show the amount of studies which were 
found in each domain and the results of the studies. 
It can be seen that persuasive technologies have been 
successful in all domains. Especially exercise is a do­
main which has had a lot of focus with 13 cases. Se­
dentary which is the domain of this project have been 
investigated in 7 cases. 
Competition
A system can motivate users to adopt a target attitude or behavior by leveraging human beings’ 
natural drive to compete
Personalization A system that offers personalized content or services has a greater capability for persuasion
Reminders
If a system reminds users of their target behavior, the users will more likely achieve their goals
Rewards
Systems that reward users may have great persuasive powers
Self-monitor­
ing
A system that helps track one’s own performance to support in achieving a goal
Similarity
People are more readily persuaded through systems that remind themselves in some meaning­
ful way
Tunneling
Using the system to guide users through a process or experience provides opportunities to per­
suade along the way
Tailoring
Information provided by the system will be more persuasive if it is tailored to the potential 
needs, interests, personality, usage context, or other factors relevant to a user group
Social support
A system that based on social interaction between multiple users call attention to relevant so­
cial norms 
Reduction
A system that reduces complex behavior into simple tasks helps users perform the target be­
havior and it may increase the benefits/cost ratio of a behavior
Table 4: Definition of 10 persuasive principles guiding the literature review
Figure 35: Interventions across several persuasive principles
==PAGE:42==
42
8.2.1	
CATEGORIZATION OF PERSUASIVE 
TECHNOLOGY
The categorization of persuasive technologies in this 
review is based on the 28 principles from Oinas-kukko­
nen & Harjumaa’s framework (Oinas-kukkonen & Har­
jumaa, 2008). To avoid a high level of complexity, these 
28 principles have been reduced to 10 principles. As a 
guideline for minimizing the number of principles have 
been another systematic literature review  which finds 
9 principles that are commonly used within persuasive 
technology literature (Xu, Chomutare, & Iyengar, 2014). 
Added the persuasive principle “social support”. Social 
support is a merge of all the principles in the social 
support group of principles (Oinas-kukkonen & Harju­
maa, 2008). See Table 4 that illustrates the final set of 
principles together with a definition. It was found that 
this was categorization was sufficient to cover the use 
of principles in the reviewed empirical work. 
Figure 36: Combining domain with persuasive principles
==PAGE:43==
43
Many of the review studies use more than one per­
suasive principle. Figure 35 shows which results these 
persuasive principles in general can be related to. The­
refore some studies are split into two according to the 
principles they use. 
Figure 35 shows that all persuasive principles have 
been successfully implemented into an intervention. 
Some principles have only been investigated by a 
few studies like: Personalization, Rewards, Similarity 
and Reduction, however these have mainly produced 
successful results. The most common persuasive te­
chnology is self-monitoring, which have been used in 
15 of the review studies. 9 of these studies produced 
positive results, which could indicate that this is a very 
effective principle.
To create an overview of the success of the specific use 
of the principles in the individual domains and their 
results a matrix have been created. Figure 36, shows 
the persuasive principles on the horizontal axis, while 
vertical shows domains. 
Focusing the attention on intervention related to 
sedentary behavior it can be seen that following per­
suasive principles needs to be tested within in: Com­
petition, Reward, Similarity, Tunneling and Reduction. 
The most common principles are Self-monitoring and 
Tailoring, however these are still only use in two cases 
each. The matrix also give an interesting insight, that a 
principle like competition is used a lot when it comes 
to exercise, but not at all in the sedentary domain. 
A shortcoming identified in this analysis and other 
literature reviews is that persuasive system are investi­
gated as a whole system instead of determining which 
principle cause which effect (Hamari et al., 2014). 
Further studies should aim at isolate the persuasive 
principles to make it possible to get a clearer insight 
into how and why persuasive technologies work. 
8.3	 GOING FURTHER WITH 
THE EXPERIMENTATION
This systematic review of relevant empirical studies 
highlighted several findings that were carried over to 
the experimental phase. In relation to the experimental 
setup “more is better” when it comes to participants 
and duration. As the study is limited by time and re­
sources it would seem reasonable to aim after the me­
dian which is four weeks and around 25 participants. 
In relation to the research approach a mixed method 
approach seems suitable as it allows for an objective 
evaluation of the persuasive technology while investi­
gating the underlying persuasive mechanisms in play. 
Especially as this study still will be relatively small, 
combining both quantitative and qualitative methods 
will provide the best basis for detecting an effect of the 
persuasive technology. The results across domains and 
persuasive principles revealed several opportunities for 
conducting an experiment that will be novel within the 
literature of persuasive technology. The most impor­
tant will be to distinguish between different persuasive 
principles, to ensure that the effect of a single persua­
sive principle is investigated at the time.
8.4	 SEVEN KEY INSIGHTS 
TO PERSUASION
Besides information on how to conduct an experiment 
the literature review provided several insights for 
implementing persuasive technology product devel­
opment. The 7 key insights described in this section 
are mainly based, but not limited to the study of Harri 
Oinas-Kukkonen and Marja Harjumaa(Oinas-kukkonen 
& Harjumaa, 2008). It is furthermore supported and 
discussed on the background of the systematic review 
literature. 
1. Information technology will change people over 
time
Thereby meant that information technology will al­
ways influence people’s attitudes and behavior in one 
way or another. This means that the attitude and the 
behavior of the user will change overtime due to the 
information provided by the technology itself. The user 
may have one need when (s)he is introduced to the te­
chnology, but as the technology proved insights in the 
current behavior the need may change. The technology 
therefore either need to be robust enough or being 
able to adapt to this change. (Oinas-kukkonen & Har­
jumaa, 2008) Timeframe is therefore very interesting 
however many of the review empirical studies have 
a very limited running time. Most empirical studies 
acknowledge this factor as a limitation of their study.
2. People like their views about the world to be or­
ganized and consistent (Oinas-kukkonen & Harjumaa, 
2008)
This means that if you can get people to make active 
decision with is in line with the target behavior it will 
be more likely to success. Deep within us all lies a ne­
arly obsessive desire to be and to appear consistent 
in what we already have done.  We feel a pressure to 
behave in an order that is in line with the decisions and 
statements we have already made (Oinas-kukkonen 
& Harjumaa, 2008). This is very well supported by the 
work done by Leon Festinger on cognitive dissonance 
which was discussed earlier, but where Festinger focus 
on how this can be an obstacle (Consolvo, McDonald, 
& Landay, 2009) for behavior change, future techno­
logies can also see this as a useful tool. One empirical 
study which use this is What’s Your 2%? Here people 
was encouraged to “like” the Facebook page of the 
project (Clinkenbeard et al., 2014). Thereby public state 
that they support and believe in this behavior change. 
3. The use of direct or indirect feedback depends on 
the user’s state of mind
A user who have a high interest in the data and eva­
luate it carefully is best served with direct feedback. 
(Oinas-kukkonen & Harjumaa, 2008). However today 
people live a busy life in an overflow of information, 
and there is often not time for carefully evaluation. In 
these case people are less thoughtful and rely more on 
system 1. These users are best served with the indirect 
==PAGE:44==
44
feedback, since these are based on cognitive shortcuts 
or rule of thumbs (Oinas-kukkonen & Harjumaa, 2008). 
An example of indirect feedback is ambient displays, 
these are used in multiple of the review literature. 
ActivMON is a color changing bracelet with give the 
user an indication of his/hers activity level throughout 
the day, instead of a specific number (Burns, Lueg, & 
Berkovsky, 2012). This  can also be related to Fogg’s 
behavior model, when motivation and ability is low, pe­
ople is better served with the in indirect and quick fe­
edback, which is putting less pressure on their system 
2 (Oinas-kukkonen & Harjumaa, 2008). Motivation and 
ability is not only changing from one individual to ano­
ther, but also through the out the day of the individual, 
and persuasive technologies should therefor when pos­
sible support both direct and indirect feedback.
4. Persuasion should be incremental
This means that the way to a certain behavior should 
be divided into smaller steps when possible. Larger 
changes in people’s behavior can as earlier discussed 
be very difficult, but the chance of success can be 
increased by making the change happen overtime. Ri­
chard H. Thaler describe in the book Nudge, a scheme 
called Save More Tomorrow with was first time intro­
duced in 1998 to solve the problem that employees did 
not have a high enough saving rate to secure a reliable 
retirement plan. The scheme was simple the saving 
rate started out low, but was increased every year. The 
result was that the employees who had participated 
ended up having lot higher saving rate than what they 
had expected possible in the beginning (Thaler, 2009). 
The earlier mentioned case study Vito, the remote 
which encourage small changes rather than larger li­
festyle changes, is a good example on how this is used 
in the reviewed literature (Nawyn, Intille, & Larson, 
2006).
5. Persuasive technology must be trustworthy and 
honest
This underline the importance of the truthfulness and 
the transparency of persuasive technologies. If the 
user do not trust or understand the end goal a lot of 
persuasiveness will get lost (Oinas-kukkonen & Harju­
maa, 2008). “Credibility is key when computing pro­
ducts report measurements. If reported measurements 
are questionable or obviously inaccurate, the products 
will lose credibility. If the product were designed to 
influence or motivate, it likely would fail because of 
the inaccurate measurements it had reported” (Fogg, 
2003). One way to insure the trust of the user is to 
keep the technology controllable for the user (Consol­
vo, McDonald, & Landay, 2009). The user should be 
able to manipulate data, to adjust for eventual lost or 
falls data so it does not interfere with reaching their 
goal. They should furthermore be in control of who 
have access to the data, to insure privacy.
6. Persuasive technologies should aim at being unob­
trusive
Persuasive technology should present and collect data 
when and where the user need it and in and without 
intruding on their daily life and nor calling unwanted 
attention to the user (Consolvo et al., 2009). Sitcoach 
for example use tailored reminders to maintain the 
unobtrusiveness of their technologies (Van Dantzig, 
Geleijnse, & Van Halteren, 2013), while for example 
BreakAway (Jafarinaimi, Forlizzi, Hurst, & Zimmer­
man, 2005) and PerFrame (Obermair, Reitberger, 
Meschtscherjakov, Lankes, & Tscheligi, 2008) use ambi­
ent displays.
7. Persuasive technology should be both useful and 
easy to use
Persuasive technologies should serve the need of the 
user in the most convenience way and without errors 
to give the optimal positive experience (Oinas-kuk­
konen & Harjumaa, 2008). One way this can be done 
is to give the user abstract feedback instead of com­
prehensive raw data, thereby making it easier for the 
user to reflect on their behavior. It can furthermore be 
improved if it relate to the user’s goal (Consolvo et al., 
2009). 
8.5	 REFLECTION 	
The seven key insights synthesize the main important 
statements about persuasive technology found in the 
reviewed literature. These key insights can be used to 
support a wide theoretical understanding of persuasive 
technologies. They can further more be used as guide­
lines when developing future technologies. In a later 
chapter this knowledge will be used when developing 
and analyzing persuasive technologies to increase the 
amount of active pauses when doing sedentary work. 
==PAGE:45==
45
==PAGE:46==
46
9|	CONCEPTUALIZATION
This chapter will cover the development of several 
persuasive concepts. In creating successful persuasive 
technologies Fogg recommends taking small steps as 
to produce measurable successes (Fogg 2009). The 
process starts by getting an understanding of the target 
behavior and the context. Study 1 will explain how a 
field research was conducted which lead to idea gen­
eration. For study 2 three ideas have been selected 
and are compared to similar successful studies. A small 
preliminary study was done to test the chosen persua­
sive technologies within our context. The findings from 
study 2 are carried over to our main study. 
 
9.1	 STUDY 1: FIELD 
RESEARCH
The purpose of this short study was to collect explicit 
knowledge and inspiration from people doing sed­
entary work. As noticed by Lewin, that to be able to 
change a behavior requires a holistic understanding of 
the forces in the environment or within the individual 
that can counteract a change (Rodgers 2011). As we 
found out there were several barriers preventing peo­
ple from taking more active pauses. The field research, 
enable us to capture already existing ideas and solu­
tions to the problem (Ideo 2011). 
The study was carried as a set of semi structured in­
terviews of twelve people sitting in the same working 
area, which definitely limited the validity of the study. 
Never the less the short study revealed some interest­
ing considerations and ideas. 
For example that pauses in contrast to the scoping of 
this project are something that people tries to avoid. 
Pauses are described as procrastinations distracting 
people from the work that they are doing. The fear of 
being viewed as a lazy person could be a barrier for 
a behavior change. An intervention should therefore 
seek at making the target behavior be something to 
strive after through competition for example. 
Figure 38 shows some of the first words people 
thought of when they heard the word pause. Here it 
can be seen that people often associate pauses with 
attending physical needs as getting food or coffee, take 
a smoke or go to the toilette. To see the questions and 
notes from the interviews see appendix 9.01.
9.1.1	
FINDINGS
To sum up the main findings from the field research.
• 
People are not aware of the health risk associ­
ated with sedentary behavior
• 
Pauses is associated with being lazy and non­
productive
• 
Active pauses should have a purpose
• 
Time management is an issue
• 
A lot of pauses are spend on Facebook or news 
sites, which means that people are sitting 
throughout their pauses
• 
When doing group work, pauses are often seen 
as something that are held simultaneously 
9.2	 PROBLEM DEFINITION
Before moving on to the ideation a clear problem defi­
nition is needed to insure that all the findings both 
from the literature research and the field research are 
clear. 
Figure 37: Field research
==PAGE:47==
47
Increasing amount of Danish adults are having sed­
entary occupation (40%) (Grøntved et al. 2012). Sed­
entary occupation increase the risk of multiple health 
issues and decrease the mental performance. Active 
pauses is a simple but effective way to counteract the 
negative effect of sedentary behavior. It is recommend­
ed to do an active pause after 30 minutes of sedentary 
behavior, however most people fail to do so. The fail­
ure to do so is the result of multiple factors. First of 
all are most people are not aware of the health risk of 
prolonged sitting and thereby not motivated to do so. 
Second is their multiple obstacles which impending the 
behavior such as the fear of being stamped as lazy.   
9.3	 IDEATION
To investigate the solution space different creative 
methods was used. It should here be mention that this 
phase was only assigned relatively short time, due to 
the limitations of the study. This section will therefore 
also be relatively brief and only describe the main part 
of the process and results.
9.3.1	
THE CREATION OF 100 IDEAS
Using several creative methods a range of ideas were 
generated. Here is a brief explanation of the different 
of the methods that were used:
• 
Association chain Brainstorm: This method is 
done by creating a list of word, by taking turn 
to say the first thing that comes to mind. These 
words were then used as inspiration to gener­
ate ideas in relation to the following problem 
statement: “How do we increase the amount 
of active pauses at a sedentary work space?” 
This kind of problem statement would often be 
more specific, but for this project it was decid­
ed to keep it broad to get a wide range of idea 
in a short time.  
• 
Behavior change strategy cards: A tool used for 
generating new ideas were behavior change 
strategy cards developed by artifactgroup.com 
(Pfarr 2012). These were some simple idea 
cards illustrating different persuasive principles 
that could spark new ideas (see Figure 39). 
This method was chosen first of all because the 
team did not had any previously experience in 
using them and wanted to test how effective 
they were. 
• 
Synthesis: By synthesizing what we heard from 
our field research together with our knowledge 
within persuasive technology lead to several 
ideas and opportunities. Synthesis helps estab­
lish new perspectives and come up with unex­
pected innovations (Ideo 2011). 
The 3 method together produced around 100 ideas of 
various quality. These ideas was synthesis into 10 con­
cepts (Figure 40 or appendix 9.02) 
Figure 38: Word cloud created in www.wordle.net
Figure 39: One of the behavior change strategy cards
==PAGE:48==
48
9.3.2	 EVALUATION
The concepts were discussed and evaluated by the fol­
lowing criteria:
• 
Cost: The project was general without funds. 
The cost of testing the concept on multiple 
participants was therefore required to be rela­
tive low.
• 
Time for prototype: Do to the time limitations 
of the study the time which could be spent on 
prototyping was limited which had an influ­
ence on the complexity of the final concepts. 
• 
Acceptance in a professional environment: The 
aim was to test the concepts in a professional 
working environment. It was there for neces­
sary that the concept would be accepted in 
this context.
• 
Possible to measure the effect: To validate the 
effect of the concept is necessary to be able to 
collect quantitative data.
• 
Isolate the effect of the persuasive principle: 
Many of the reviewed empirical studies fail to 
evaluate the persuasive principle individually. 
This study should try to do so, to support the 
validation of persuasive principles. 
• 
Likeliness of effect: The concepts should finally 
be evaluated on how likely they are to have an 
effect on the participants. This estimation will 
be done by going through theory and see if this 
indicate that the concept would persuade the 
user.   
Appendix 9.03 shows some of the main comments 
done to each of the ten concepts.
Figure 40: Result of several brainstorming sessions
==PAGE:49==
49
9.4	 THE FINAL THREE 
CONCEPTS
The final three concepts will be described in this chap­
ter together with relevant theory.
9.5	 BREAK LIGHT
This persuasive concept is derived from the concept 
Ambient Figure which applies the persuasive function 
“Reminder”. The general idea of this concept was to 
help people manage their active pauses, by informing 
them of their sedentary behavior through an ambient 
display. 
9.5.1	
THEORY
Reminders are an interesting persuasive function to 
investigate of different reasons. First of all Reminder is 
a function which facilitate an increase in the ability. In 
this case they increase the ability of doing active paus­
es, by working as a time manager. Time management 
was stated to be an issue in the field research. This 
concept is likely to increase the motivation a little since 
it is stimulating the human need of physical interaction 
with the environment. However this is very limited and 
before this persuasion will succeed, the user need to 
have a certain level of motivation.
Break Light is using an indirect signal, since the given 
information itself is not directly meant to increase ei­
ther ability or motivation. Indirect information enables 
the user to understand the message without acquiring 
much cognitive effort. This can be related to the third 
key insight, which states that direct and indirect feed­
back should be chosen according to the users’ state 
of mind when receiving the information. Another of 
the seven key insights which have affected the choice 
of an ambient display is the sixth key insight which 
states that the technology should be unobtrusive. This 
was concluded to have the highest importance, since 
the concept would interact with the user throughout 
the whole day. All of the seven key insights were used 
when developing this concept, but these two was 
found to be the most relevant for this concept.
Figure 41: Figure 3 - Blink(1)
Figure 42: Break Light analysed with the Inte­
grated Persuasive Technology Framework 
==PAGE:50==
50
9.5.2	  PROTOTYPE
Blink(1) was chosen as a platform for testing the 
concept. Blink(1) is an USB indicator light, which can 
be controlled by a program called BlinkControl.  An 
additional Java script was written, which activated a 
preprogrammed color pattern in BlinkControl. This 
pattern first changed the color of the Blink USB stick to 
blue to indicate that a timer have been started. Then 
after 5 second the color changed to green and after 
half an hour the color changed to red to indicating that 
it is time for a break (see Figure 43). The script further 
more included a timestamp function which logged ev­
ery time the Break Light icon was clicked. This data can 
be used to further support the main quantitative data.   
9.5.3	 SIMILAR STUDIES 
A number of previous studies have used different types 
of ambient displays and figures to reduce sedentary 
behavior.
Studies as BreakAway and PerFrame both use ambi­
ent displays to reduce prolonged sitting. BreakAway 
used sensors on the office chair to monitor prolonged 
sitting and send the user feedback through an ambi­
ent sculpture. The sculpture shapes reflect the shape 
of the human body’s posture. The result was positive 
and showed a relation between the sculpture and the 
participant’s changing behavior. A problem with the 
study was the sample size. Only one participant tested 
the sculpture over 4 weeks (Jafarinaimi et al. 2005). 
PerFrame was a study done on 8 office workers over 1 
week, where there posture was monitored through a 
camera and the feedback was given through a digital 
picture frame depicting a person they liked or loved 
(Obermair et al. 2008). Both studies indicated that 
ambient displays were an acceptable way to make the 
user aware of their sedentary behavior without harm­
ing their concentration.
This support the theory that ambient displays are an 
effective technology to persuade people to change 
their behavior in relation to sedentary behavior and 
Figure 43: Illustration of how break light works
Figure 44: Work Rave
also emphasize the need for further studies, due to the 
small sample size a short time frame.  
9.5.4	 EXISTING PRODUCTS
There are several products on the market which re­
mind you to take active pauses. Pomodoro Technicque 
is a working method with is base around a standard kit­
chen timer, which you set to 25 minutes, and when it 
ring you take a break. There is further more a wide ran­
ge of desktop applications, which use pop-up windows 
to remind you to take active pauses see Figure 44. 
All these products can be seen as obtrusive and is 
thereby in conflicting with the theory of persuasive 
technology.
==PAGE:51==
51
9.6	 SCOREBOARD
This persuasive concept was derived from the concept 
Share ’N’ Compare. The main point is to create a dai­
ly updated scoreboard, where users get a daily score 
showing how well they have taken active pauses in 
relation to other users. 
	
9.6.1	
THEORY
Scoreboard is mainly applying the persuasive function 
Competition however the function Self-monitoring is 
applied as well. Competition is in this concept increas­
ing both the motivation and the ability. The user is mo­
tivated to increase their active pauses to get a better 
score, thereby proving them self in a social context. 
One of the problems which was found doing the field 
research was that taking pauses was seen as being less 
productive. This decreased the ability of the behavior 
in relation to social deviance. By showing that other 
people also take active pause and by turning it into a 
game, the concept supports the user in overcoming the 
social deviance, thereby increasing the probability for a 
behavior change.
 Relating the intervention with cognitive dissonance 
theory shows that person receiving a daily scoreboard 
will experience psychological discomfort whenever re­
ceiving a score below average. The person will then be 
motivated to take more active pauses as to eliminate 
the distance between the score.  
Even though this concept is supports an increase in 
ability, it is concluded that the focus is on the motiva­
tion and the technology is therefore more a spark than 
a facilitator.  The feedback is direct, since the user is 
presented for not only their own data both also others, 
and unlike the information from Break Light they here 
need to reflect on the information. 
9.6.2	 PROTOTYPE
The user’s sedentary behavior would be monitored 
through a Mobil application. From the data the time 
between the user’s active pauses would be calculated. 
Each day the user would receive a MMS on their phone 
showing the average time between their active pauses 
compared to the performance of other users. After the 
preliminary pilot study this prototype went through 
some major changes which will be described shortly. 
Appendix 9.04 shows different layout suggestions.
9.6.3	 SIMILAR WORK
A similar successful study investigated how compe­
tition could motivate office workers to do stretching 
exercises. The study was done with 25 heavy computer 
users over a 4 weeks period. The participants could 
challenge each other to a game involving some stretch­
ing. (Chen et al. 2014). The study showed that social 
persuasion could be used to promote stretching exer­
cises, though some participants stopped challenging 
each other’s due to lacking response. 
52
63
You
Others
You are doing above 
average, congratulation!
Minutes between pauses
19/05/2015
Minutes between pauses
19/05/2015
100
63
You
Others
Others are taking more active 
pauses and are therefore more 
productive
Figure 45: Scoreboard first version of prototype
Figure 46: Scoreboard analysed with the 
Integrated Persuasive Technology Fra­
mework
Scoreboard
==PAGE:52==
52
9.7	 YO!
YO! is a persuasive concept derived from the concept 
Challenge Area. The main idea here is to visualize that 
it is socially accepted to take active pause, by creating 
an area design specific for this purpose. The new con­
cept aim at doing it easier for the individuals to arrange 
social breaks, by introducing an app where the user 
can inform others that they were taking a break.  
9.7.1	
THEORY
This concept was essentially meant to use the persua­
sive function Reduction, since it aimed at reduce the 
effort people had to put into taking social pauses. The 
concept aims at increasing the social motivation, since 
it is focuses on social pauses. Thereby stimulating the 
human need to social interaction. It further more aim­
ing at increasing the ability by decreasing the social 
deviance, by making a visual statement that it is okay 
to take active pauses, and by simplifying the mental ef­
fort needed to plan and execute an active social pause. 
The main focus of this persuasive concept is to increase 
the ability and the users are not given any information 
which they should reflect on. The triggers this concept 
is using is therefore working as indirect facilitators. 
9.7.2	 PROTOTYPE
An existing mobile application called YO! was used as 
a platform for testing this concept. YO! is a simple app, 
which enables people to send other users a notification 
which contain the statement “YO”. The “YO” should 
then be seen as an indication of the wish for a social 
break. Public lockers were labeled with stickers indi­
cating the break area (Figure 47). In these lockers the 
participants could find coffee, a foam ball and some 
healthy snacks. 
9.7.3	 SIMILAR STUDIES
An example was an intervention done on employees at 
a call center. Here it was shown rearranging the break 
structure that enabled several people to have break to­
gether. This enabled people to create social groups that 
had a beneficial influence on the productivity (Waber, 
Olguin, Kim & Pentland 2010). 
Figure 47: YO! Prototype
Figure 48: YO! Analysed with the Integrated Persuasive 
Technology Framework
==PAGE:53==
53
9.8	 STUDY 2 - PRELIMINARY 
PILOT STUDY
The purpose of the preliminary pilot study was to test 
the three persuasive concepts and to try different 
measurement equipment. The study helped with high­
lighting concerns regarding the practicability and value 
of the proposed study. This ensured that time and 
resources were not spent on a larger scale study that 
either was irrelevant or affected by ill execution  (Cre­
swell 2003). 
The pilot study was conducted on four different parti­
cipants over a time period 3-4 days. After the experi­
ment all participants were interviewed as to get feed­
back on the interventions and measurement methods. 
The preliminary pilot study indicated multiple adjust­
ments, which were implemented in the main study. 
The main findings from the preliminary study are divi­
ded into two separate areas: Test of the three concepts 
and the measuring sedentary behavior.
9.9	 TEST OF THE THREE 
CONCEPTS
9.9.1	
BREAK LIGHT
Break Light received very positive feedback from the 
participants. For one the Break Light not only reminded 
him to take pauses, but also kept him more focused as 
he tried not to get disturbed by the phone/Facebook in 
the 30 minutes it was lighting green. A function he mis­
sed was an indication that the color would soon turn 
red, so he knew that it would soon be time for a break. 
Another participant found that he often did not notice 
that the color had changed and he therefore suggested 
that it should blink when the time was up.  In gene­
ral the participants thought that Break Light enabled 
structured pauses in a constructive way and apprecia­
ted that is was possible to ignore the reminder. 
Changes
The preliminary study resulted in some minor chan­
ges. A yellow color was added to the pattern after 25 
minutes to indicate that it was soon time for an active 
pause. For the main study a couple of newer versions 
of Blink(1) were bought. These had a LED on the top of 
the device eliminated the issue that some participants 
did not recognized the color change. The prelimina­
ry study also found that the script which activated 
the color pattern did not work directly on IOS. A new 
script was written which worked on laptop with both 
windows and IOS.
9.9.2	 YO!
Yo! got a general positive feedback and several par­
ticipants saw a potential in social active pauses but 
problems were also stated. Several participants were 
missing the ability to decline a Yo! Therefore some 
participants felt obligated to take a pause whenever 
somebody else did. The locker with coffee and healthy 
snacks was only used in a limited amount, even though 
all participants expressed that they were very positive 
about it and they felt motivate to go and check “what 
was in the lockers today”. This surprise factor was so­
mething the research team had not realize in the be­
ginning of the test. 
Eliminated
This concept was decided not to be included in the fi­
nal study. It would first of all demand a lot of resources 
to develop a sufficient prototype platform, and it was 
very likely that it would not to be possible to evaluate 
the individual effect of the persuasive functions which 
would be integrated in the concept. 
9.9.3	 SCOREBOARD
In general the participants appreciated the concept 
and found that it made them more aware of their wor­
king habits. The participants who had a score below 
average reflected a lot more about the data than those 
who were above average. Some of the participants 
found the illustrations confusing and it took them a bit 
of effort to understand the message. 
9.9.4	 CHANGES
The Scoreboard, was quite time consuming for the 
research team, since the data for each participants ne­
eded to be analyzed daily, and this need to be further 
automated before the final test. The illustrations need 
to be redesign to reduce the time it takes to under­
stand the message, and it need to be investigated how 
the participant who is above average can be motivated.
Therefore the concept went through some radical 
changes. The daily messages were changed to a sco­
reboard (see Figure 49) with all the participants user 
name and a score which was a percentage of the active 
pause they had taken the day. The scoreboard was co­
lor coded, to increase the motivation by creating a wish 
for reaching a better group. To keep the participant 
motivated, even if they some days got a low score, a 
weekly scoreboard would be send to them at the end 
of each week, and thereby creating a greater goal.
9.10	MEASURING 
SEDENTARY BEHAVIOR
This section will discuss how similar experiment have 
measured sedentary behavior and what criteria was 
used to choose measuring equipment for this exper­
iment. Measuring sedentary behavior was crucial as 
to quantify the effect of the interventions described 
before.  
9.10.1	 SIMILAR EXPERIMENT
There are a wide range of ways to measure sedentary 
==PAGE:54==
54
behavior. One similar experiment used an office chair 
with a sensor pad. Another filmed the participant from 
a video camera embedded in the persuasive techno­
logy (Jafarinaimi et al. 2005; Obermair et al. 2008). 
These measuring methods drastically limits the number 
of participants anticipating in the study. Another ap­
proach is delivering all participants with Smartphones 
with an accelerometer and dedicated software (Van 
Dantzig et al. 2013). This ensures reliable data which is 
possible to validate, although it comes with economic 
cost. Low cost was a requirement for this project. So 
even though it could be ideal to provide all participants 
with fitness bracelets like Fitbit or Jawbone, it was 
found to be too expensive.
Another experiment gave all participants a pedometer 
together with some software installed on the computer 
to register keyboard and mouse activity (Van Dantzig et 
al. 2013). Measuring the negative correlation between 
physical activity and computer activity is thought to be 
a precise detection of sedentary behavior although it 
requires extensive data analysis. 
9.10.2	 TEST OF MEASUREMENT 
EQUIPMENT
Several of the measurement methods discussed above 
were tested in the preliminary pilot study. See figure 
Figure 50-Figure 52 for a short review of the different 
methods.  As noticed before an important requirement 
to the measuring equipment was the price. Another 
limitation was that different our participants had sever­
al different operating systems on their computer and 
smart phones. The measurement equipment for this 
study was required to be able to run on IOS, Android 
on the smartphone and Windows or Mac on the com­
puter, to not limit the number of participants. Other 
requirements included easy to withdraw data, accuracy 
and privacy. See appendix 9.05 for a rating of the diffe­
rent measurement methods.
The fitness application “Moves” was found to be the 
most fitting application to monitor the participants. 
It was perceived non-intrusive and convenient by the 
participants who nearly did not notice it was running 
on their phones, some participant complained that it 
depleted the battery quicker than normal. No other 
additional monitoring technology was chosen, since it 
was concluded that this would not ad sufficient value 
compared to the influence and inconvenience it would 
do on the participants. It was furthermore also valued 
that the data could be collected online throughout the 
experiment and thereby make it possible to control 
that the data collection actually was running.
Figure 49: New design of Scoreboard
==PAGE:55==
55
Figure 50: Manic Time source: http://
www.brothersoft.com/manicti­
me-143281.html
Measuring Computer Activity
“ManicTime” is a windows program that automatically logs the time 
spent on the computer. It was possible to limit the logging to only inclu­
de time spent on the computer, and thereby not violating the privacy of 
the participants. By paying a certain price it was possible to access all the 
data or by having participant send cvs files produced by the software. 
Self-reported 
The “Do-button” application enabled participants to log their activity themselves by 
pressing an icon on their smartphone, which then would set a timestamp in a google 
sheet. Unfortunately the pilot study showed that this was difficult to remember. All 
participants admitted to have forgotten to push the button, and the data in the Go­
ogle sheet was therefore difficult to interpret. 
Pros
-	
Non-intrusive
-	
Simple
-	
Easily retrieved data
Cons
-	
Often forgotten
-	
Subjective
Figure 51: Do button. Source: https://play.google.com/store/apps/detail­
s?id=com.ifttt.dobutton
Mobile Application
The fitness application “Moves” is an application that automatically records walking, cycling 
and running by using the GPS and accelerometer within the Smartphone. The application is 
free and runs on both IOS and Android. It automatically uploads daily reports to the cloud. 
Figure 52: Moves
Pros
-	
Unnoticed by participants
-	
Measure physical activity
-	
Automatic uploads daily reports
Cons
-	
Consumes a lot of battery
-	
Less accurate
-	
Logs a lot of personal data
Pros
-	
Automatic after paying
-	
Intended use of soft­
ware
Cons
-	
Only worked on Windows
-	
Indirectly measurement of 
physical activity
-	
Costly
-	
Perceived as intrusive
==PAGE:56==
56
10|	MAIN 
EXPERIMENT
An experiment with 20 participants over a four week 
period was created to evaluate different persuasive 
concepts in increasing the number of daily active pau­
ses. This includes measuring the effectiveness of the 
interventions and explore the rationale behind. The 
main research questions are set forward together with 
a number of hypothesis.
Can selected persuasive principles decrease the time 
between active pauses compared to a baseline period?
H1. Applying the persuasive principle remin­
ders will decrease the time between active 
pauses.
H2 Applying the persuasive principle compe­
tition will decrease the time between active 
pauses.
H3 Combining the persuasive principles remin­
ders and Scoreboard will decrease the time 
between active pauses more than the princip­
les apart.  
Can selected persuasive principles decrease the time 
between active pauses over a 3 week period compared 
to a control group?
H4 Compared to a control group, the time bet­
ween active pauses will be steady over three 
weeks period when applying the persuasive 
principle reminders. 
H5 Compared to a control group, the time bet­
ween active pauses will be steady over three 
weeks period when applying the persuasive 
principle competition. 
H6 Compared to a control group, the time bet­
ween active pauses will be steady over three 
weeks period when combining the persuasive 
principles reminders and Scoreboard
10.1	 MIXED METHODS 
RESEARCH
Based on the systematic literature review a mixed met­
hod approach have been used for this experiment, de­
fined as a research which incorporates both qualitative 
and quantitative data (Creswell, 2003). This allows the 
study to not only confirm a hypothesis but to explore 
and explain the achieved result. Taking into account 
that habit formation is highly influenced by the indivi­
duals motivation and ability it would be insufficient to 
do a purely quantitative analysis (Lally, Jaarsveld, Potts, 
& Wardle, 2010). 
The mixed method is characterized by utilizing multiple 
methods to gather and analyze an experiment. This 
can be valuable as different methods provides different 
perspectives at explaining the phenomena being inve­
stigated. Notice that many different terms have been 
used to describe this approach including multimet­
hodology, synthesis integrating and multimethod, but 
recent writings typically uses the term “mixed method” 
(Creswell, 2003). All terms describes the same research 
method that combines quantitative and qualitative 
data collection to explore phenomena. 
The mixed method have in recent years been discus­
sed with growing interest in books and journals, as it 
has several advantages (Hutchison, 2014). Especially 
in real-life contextual settings where it can be difficult 
immune to the many external influences. The mixed 
methods helps getting an overview of external influen­
ce and thereby contributes to the generalization of the 
findings. Another advantage is that data collection can 
involve any techniques available to the researcher. The 
challenges is that the method includes extensive data 
collection that typically includes both text and numeric 
data. The results from the analysis can be difficult to 
combine as they are in different formats. The complexi­
ty calls for a more explicit strategy to ensure that data 
analysis does not become unconsciously skewed. 
10.1.1	 TYPE OF MIXED METHODS DESIGN 
There are several considerations when doing a mixed 
method research. How is the quantitative and qualitati­
ve data implemented in the study? What is the priority 
between the qualitative and quantitative data?
This study uses what is called a concurrent triangulati­
on design. This type of model is used when separated 
quantitative and qualitative data is collected concur­
rently. The advantage is that the weaknesses inherited 
by one method can be outweighed by the strength of 
the other method   (Creswell, 2003). The priority is gi­
ven to the quantitative data gathered through the mo­
bile application “Moves”. The two data collections are 
gathered in the same phase with the qualitative data 
to assist our interpretation of the quantitative data. 
As stated by Morse this can be especially useful when 
unexpected results arise from the quantitative study 
(as cited in Creswell, 2003). 
Figure 53 gives an overview of the separated data col­
lection phase and analysis phase that is combined in 
the mixed method research. The next section will go in 
depth with quantitative and qualitative method used in 
this study. 
==PAGE:57==
57
10.1.2	 QUANTITATIVE DATA – MOVES
All quantitative data collection happens through the 
mobile application called “Moves”. The application is 
developed and run by the ProtoGeo Oy team. It works 
by using the phone’s sensors as the accelerometer and 
GPS to recognize activities and places. All data is uploa­
ded to a server which do most of the processing to 
produce daily stats. This enables the application to re­
cognize walking, cycling, running and all motorized tra­
vel which is stated as “Transport”. To conserve battery 
power, very short walks (<30 seconds) are not always 
counted, except on newer smartphones with a dedica­
ted hardware step counting, as for example iPhone 5s 
or 6. (http://moves-app.com/terms)
All data is uploaded to the cloud where it can be down­
loaded as .cvs files through accounts.moves-app.com 
every 24 hours. To do that all participants creates a 
personal account, which the researches have access 
to. At the end of the study, these accounts are dele­
ted unless participants wishes it different. To see an 
example of the data retrieved from “Moves” see ap­
pendix 10.01.  
The data is transferred to excel where it is visualized 
and combined with the qualitative analysis to properly 
separate those days’ worth analyzing. From Excel a 
data set is transferred to Rstudio where the majority 
of the statistical analysis is carried out. A range of stati­
stical methods are used to investigate the output from 
different perspectives, which includes student t-test, 
ANOVA and statistical modeling. 
10.1.3	 QUALITATIVE DATA – SURVEYS AND 
INTERVIEWS
The qualitative data has been collected through a set 
of surveys and interviews. In the start each partici­
pant are asked to answer a pre-survey created in sur­
veymonkey.com, to gather general information of the 
participants. See appendix 10.02. After each week the 
participants received a weekly survey to give the par­
ticipant a chance to highlight if anything unusual have 
happen through the week or if there had been any pro­
blems. See appendix 10.03. At the end of the study all 
participants are interviewed to investigate there expe­
rience of the interventions. 
Several approaches was used for analyzing the qualita­
tive data. Narrative analysis was used to get an under­
standing of each individual to support the quantitative 
data analysis. It was important to find out where and 
when participants had been working through the expe­
rimentation period. (Creswell, 2003). Statements from 
surveys and interviews were clustered as to enable an 
interpretation on the different perspectives regarding 
the interventions and experimentation in general. 
Within the surveys the participants were able to rate 
their own performance and awareness regarding active 
pauses. Quasi statistics is here used to illustrate the 
results from the questionnaires. 
Figure 53: Concurrent triangulation design
==PAGE:58==
58
10.2	PARTICIPANTS
In total 20 participants were recruited for the experi­
ment.  6 females and 14 males in the age 22-49 years. 
8 of the participants were office workers mainly from 
Delta while the other 12 were students from Den­
mark’s Technical University. The phones used in the 
experiment came from a wide range of manufactures 
including Apple, HTC, Google, Samsung, etc. A require­
ment was that the phone used either Android or IOS. 
12 participants used Android and 8 used some kind of 
iPhone. 
This study conducted is a “controlled field study” using 
quasi-experimental design procedures. This means 
that there will be a control group and an experimen­
tal group but participants are not randomly assign to 
the groups, in contrast to a randomized controlled 
trial (Creswell, 2003). The reason behind, is that it is 
thought to be impractical to random assign the partici­
pants. 
The general concern with quasi experimentation is the 
lack of internal validity, here defined as the degree to 
which the statistical conclusion is due to difference bet­
ween treatments or correlated to some unknown fac­
tor.  As stated by Gray and Salzman: “The issue is that 
you find what you look for and, conversely, you seldom 
find what you are not looking for” (Gray & Salzman, 
1998). The effect found might be due to different kinds 
of people instead of the different treatments. 
To overcome these issues was the pre-survey. By know­
ing the background of the participants it was possible 
to take control over any manipulations that might 
occur. In this study there was an attempt to divide 
gender and occupation among the different groups. 
Gender because our field research indicated that males 
more than females always had their phone on them 
at any time. Occupation because it was thought that it 
might have an influence if you are a student or working 
in an office. By avoiding a concentration of one type of 
participant in one group enabled the research team to 
ignore the nuisance factor on the result. 
10.3	DESIGN OF 
EXPERIMENT
The experiment is designed as a 2x2 factorial design, 
which allows an investigation of each intervention also 
called on the response variable, as well as the interacti­
on effect. The argument for this kind of design is that is 
more efficient than studying one factor at a time. Each 
factor has two levels, either they are applied or not 
applied. See Figure 54.
For this study three interdependent response variables 
are measured: time between pauses, number of pau­
ses and number of steps. 
To create an overview of the different factors influ­
encing our system a p-diagram has been created, see 
Figure 55. A p-diagram is normally used in relation to 
a mechanical design, but can be applied to understand 
a design of experiment as well because it gives a good 
overview. 
From Figure 55, the system in the middle includes the 
participants in their normal working environment. The 
inputs are the interventions and manuals given to the 
participants. Following the experimental design it is 
possible to control who gets what intervention. The 
controllable factors are treatment, gender and occupa­
tion. The output is the quantitative data received from 
“Moves” which includes time between active pauses, 
number of active pauses and number of steps while 
working. The noise factors are uncontrollable factors 
that might influence our system. This included different 
personal aspects such as vacation, exams and moti­
vation and different aspects related to the measuring 
equipment which could be forgotten phone, battery 
shortage or a whole other kind of noise factor not 
thought of. Through surveys and interviews some light 
will be cast over the different noise factors, helping the 
interpretation of the output. 
Figure 54: 2x2 factorial design
Figure 55: P-diagram
==PAGE:59==
59
10.4	PROCESS
Figure 56 shows the planned experiment. In general 
the experiment was planned to run over a four week 
period, where the first week was an introduction and 
check that the measuring equipment worked. See in­
troduction script and a manual handed out in appendix 
10.04 & 10.06. The first week would act as a baseline 
for the analysis, to see if the interventions had any ef­
fect. 
After one week, the participant would be exposed to 
an intervention, and the effect of this would be me­
asured over the next three weeks. The intervention 
started by explaining how sitting had become the new 
smoking. Explaining that as smoking, sitting was a be­
havior which was thought to be fine, but like smoking 
have shown to be related to a range of health risks. A 
video was shown emphasizing the risks of sitting too 
much. See Figure 57. This was done to ensure all had 
some kind of motivation for changing behavior. When 
the film finished participants received different types 
of interventions. For the control group it was a set of 
recommendations of how to avoid too much sitting. 
For the others it was either Break Light , Scoreboard or 
a combination of the two. See intervention script and a 
manual handed out in appendix 10.05 & 10.06. Notice 
that participants received different manuals depending 
of the intervention they received. 
The plan was that the experimentation would last for 
a total of four weeks (1 week baseline + 3 weeks inter­
vention). See Figure 56.
One thing is what is planned another what really hap­
pened. In reality not all participant ran the same num­
ber continues days, as several participants went on ho­
lidays and attended other courses. Several participants 
continued for 5-6 weeks while a few others only had 3 
weeks. For the analysis only week 1-4 is included.  
  
Figure 56: Experimentation plan
Figure 57: Screen shot of the video shown to the participants https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uiKg6JfS658
==PAGE:60==
60
10.5	POTENTIAL ETHICAL 
ISSUE 
The main ethical consideration for this study are 
the privacy issues in relation to tracking participants 
with a fitness application that both reveals physical 
activity and global position. In regards to creating a 
persuasive technology that collects and manipulate 
personal information about the user Berdichevsky 
and Neuenschwander has proposed some principles 
to consider. “The creators of a persuasive technology 
must ensure it regards the privacy of users with at 
least as much respect as they regard their own priva­
cy” (Berdichevsky & Neuenschwander, 1999). Within 
this principle, an important question to ask is whether 
the persuasive technology acts as big brother or little 
sister. A technology that collect and pass on personal 
information to a third party is regarded as a big brother 
technology and should be avoided. On the contrary a 
little sister technology collects and compute the data 
to only give it back to the user (Berdichevsky & Neuen­
schwander, 1999). Our intervention lays in between 
the two. The personal data that is collected and analy­
zed and then released within a group of participants. 
Here participants are allowed to be anonymous to 
ensure their privacy is not violated. This allowed the 
experiment also to obey the second principle: “Per­
suasive technologies that rely on personal information 
about a user to a third party must be closely scrutinized 
for privacy concerns”
Another aspect to consider is the motivation for using 
persuasive technology. The intention with the experi­
ment is to encourage healthier working habits, which is 
here viewed as ethical. The overall goal was made clear 
from the start and throughout the incremental persua­
sion process (Oinas-kukkonen & Harjumaa, 2008). Ma­
nuals with procedures where handed out both in the 
introduction and when starting up the experiment. This 
ensured that the participant always had a reasonable 
chance to know what to expect from the experiment 
(Creswell, 2003). 
For a designer of a persuasive technology it is impor­
tant to know the intended outcomes as well as the 
unintended outcomes (Berdichevsky & Neuenschwan­
der, 1999). A plausible undesired side effect is the de­
creased battery time of the participants’ smartphones. 
Participants were made aware about the issue and 
were proposed methods for overcoming the problem. 
Throughout the study the participant always had the 
possibility to close down the tracking software on 
their phones (Creswell, 2003). This opportunity was 
something several participants took advantage off, 
especially when they came home or took on weekends. 
Unfortunately it also meant that the researches had 
to send out reminders to ensure everybody turned on 
their device after the weekend.
==PAGE:61==
61
.
==PAGE:62==
62
11|	RESULTS
The results are divided into quantitative and qualitative 
results that in the end are combined and discussed. 
11.1	QUANTITATIVE RESULTS 
This section will explain how the quantitative data have 
been analyzed and show the result from the experi­
ment. In total 8373 active pauses have been collected 
over 458 days excluding weekend and holidays. For 
this analysis the response variable is the average time 
between active pauses, which has been calculated 
from the data collected from the “Moves” application. 
The data have been analyzed on a daily basis. The ad­
vantage with analyzing the data on a daily base is that 
equal weight is given to days that are active contra 
does that are less active. So imaging a participant X 
who sat for 80 minutes, then taking an active pause, 
then sitting 100 minutes compared to a person who 
worked as long as participant X but took an active 
pause every half hour. Person X would get an average 
score of 90 minutes while person Y would get an av­
erage score of 30 minutes, instead of having two data 
points for participant X and five data points for partici­
pant Y. 
11.1.1	
EVALUATION PROCEDURE
Through surveys, interviews and GPS tracking it was 
possible to extract does days that were relevant in re­
lation to sedentary working behavior. Figure 58 shows 
the criteria used to narrow down the times where it 
was thought that participants were doing sedentary 
work. Through this process it was possible to find 286 
days which were believed to representative for normal 
working habits.   
To further understand how the analysis has been per­
formed, there will here be some examples on different 
issues related to analyzing the data and how they have 
been solved.
Figure 58: Analysis process
==PAGE:63==
63
Forgotten phone
Several participants admitted to have forgotten their 
phone at several occasions. It could especially be prob­
lem for those with too small or without pockets in their 
trousers. “I definitely know that there have been some 
times when I go to the toilet were I have forgotten it, 
but in most situations I carry my phone along as I do 
not like to leave it” Otherwise it could just be that the 
phone was forgotten on the table or was recharging. “I 
have the Moves application running all days but some­
times my phone have just been charging.”
An example of how it turned up in the analysis is 
shown in Figure 59. The x-axis shows the days and the 
left y-axis shows the average number of minutes be­
tween pauses for a single participant. The orange pil­
lars is original data from the “Moves” application while 
the grey pillars illustrates the allocated time between 
pauses according to the criteria explained before. The 
steps are shown as a curve and are related to the y-axis 
to the right. For the 6. of May there is major different 
between original data (orange pillar) and the allocated 
data (grey pillar). The reason is that the “Moves” mea­
sures a sedentary behavior for nearly seven continues 
hours which is not thought to be correct. In this case 
the phone might have been forgotten and this data is 
therefore ignored.
It was possible to acknowledge that this was an error, 
because 7 hours of continues sitting seem unrealistic. 
But forgotten phones are thought to be an important 
source of error, as it has been difficult to identify. Espe­
cially considering that the Moves application drained 
some battery, it is rational to think that phones have 
been charging more than normal, as seen in the next 
example. 
Figure 59: Example of quantitative data sample
==PAGE:64==
64
Battery drainage
That “Moves” drained a lot battery was for some par­
ticipant a major issue. Some phones, especially the 
older ones where affected by this issue, which could 
mean that the phone had to be charged several times 
a day. Understandable some of the participants simply 
turned off their phone as to preserve battery. “I had to 
charge my phone 3 times a day. If you were not sitting 
at your desk there was no point in having the applica­
tion turned on”.
Figure 60 shows an example where the application is 
turned off in the end because it drained too much bat­
tery. 
 For future experiment this issue most be given more 
attention, as it lead to serious frustration among par­
ticipants. Hopefully phones are getting better as new 
phones now have dedicated hardware to measure 
physical activity. The battery drainage in these cases 
will be therefore be significantly less.  
Figure 60: Example of days where the phone is turn off
==PAGE:65==
65
Figure 61: Holidays and other days away from the work space
Away from work
Another issue was that participants worked in a great 
variety of places that could not be included. During the 
course of the study 5 out 20 participants where on hol­
iday. This has resulted in some major holes in the anal­
ysis. These were often told about in the weekly survey. 
See Figure 61. 
As a consequence the experiment ended out with 
running for longer than anticipated to ensure enough 
data from all participants. Another solution was to take 
a look in the log files from Break Light. It was thought 
that when Break Light was used, then the participant 
was working, no matter where and when. Through this 
method several data points could be included. 
==PAGE:66==
66
11.1.2	 REFLECTIONS
The process of extracting the valid data required qual­
itative data to support the analysis. Here the guide­
lines were valuable to ensure consistency throughout 
the analysis. Still this part of the data analysis can be 
viewed as partly subjective which influences the inter­
dependency the analysis. This means that the result 
can be partly biased by who execute the data analysis. 
A future study might want to gather more specific in­
formation about the participants’ sedentary behavior. 
For example by combining computer activity with the 
pedometer data or measuring pressure on the chair. 
Keeping these reservations in mind the analysis will 
continue exploring what the results within the limita­
tion of this experiment. 
11.1.3	 ANALYSIS PROCEDURE
This part of the analysis is based on a data set with 286 
observation 10 variables (participant, treatment, gen­
der, occupation, week, date, phone, motivation, time 
between pauses and normalized time between pauses 
and steps), which are analyzed using primarily Rstudio 
and Excel. The analysis is divided into two according to 
the research questions. 
1.	 Can selected persuasive principles decrease 
the time between active pauses compared to a 
baseline period?
2.	 Can selected persuasive principles decrease 
the time between active pauses over a 3 week 
period compared to a control group?
The major difference between the two questions is 
what is compared. The response variable for the first 
part will be the daily average time between active 
pauses while for the second part will be a normalized 
daily average time between active pauses over time. 
11.2	PART I
This part compares the individual baseline period with 
the experimentation period of the different interven­
tions to investigate if the selected persuasive principles 
have an effect on the participants.  
11.2.1	 TESTING ASSUMPTIONS
This statistical analysis assume the data has approx­
imately normal (Gaussian) distributed (Fukuda & 
Ohashi, 1997). This is tested by visualizing the data 
with a histogram showing the frequency of each ob­
servation, see Figure 62. The response variable in this 
case is the daily average of minutes between active 
pauses shown on the x-axis, while the y-axis shows the 
frequency. As it can be seen from the left histogram 
the distribution has a positive skew, which means tail 
is longer to the right. This kind of asymmetry violates 
the normality assumption. If these assumptions do not 
hold, the validity (α-error) and the power (1-β-error) 
cannot be assured. To overcome the issue, the data has 
been transformed by a logarithm with base 10 (Fukuda 
& Ohashi, 1997). The right histogram illustrate the new 
distribution which is assumed to be approximately nor­
mal distributed. 
The data is also checked for outliers. This is important 
because observations that are highly inconsistent with 
the main body of the data can represent invalid data 
entries. Rstudio has a useful function called “box and 
whisker plot” for the purpose. It is a boxplot that high­
lights data points that are 1.5 times the interquartile 
range below and above the lower and upper quartile 
(Crawley, 2005). 
Figure 63 shows some outliers on the top and bottom. 
Further investigation of the outliers reveals no evi­
dence that can question reliability and are therefore 
included in the data set. Now that the data the main 
assumptions have been checked, the data can be ana­
lyzed.
Figure 62:  Histogram over measured minutes between pauses
Figure 63: Boxplot of minutes between pauses to check 
for outliers
==PAGE:67==
67
11.2.2	 THE EFFECT OF THE DIFFERENT 
INTERVENTIONS
For this experiment there are four different groups, A, 
B, AB and the Control group. In each group there is a 
total of five participants. Five who received BreakLight 
(group A) another five received daily MMS’s (group B) 
and five who received a combination of interventions 
(group AB). On top of that there was five people who 
did not receive anything other than a talk and video 
about the effects of an inactive lifestyle and some rec­
ommendations of how to prevent these consequences 
by taking active pauses. Figure 64shows the results 
from the different interventions. On the y-axis is the 
minutes between active pauses and on the x-axis the 
different interventions. 
For group A it was possible to decrease sitting time 
from the baseline (Mean [µ]=65.7, standard devia­
tion [σ]=25.1) to the experimentation phase (µ=61.7, 
σ=16.0) with 4.0 minutes. For this analysis there is no 
interest in the different between how participants are 
performing, which can be extracted using an ANOVA 
(Crawley, 2005). This gives a p-value of 0.49 which is 
not significant. It is therefore not possible to confirm 
our hypothesis H1, which was applying the persuasive 
principle reminder will decrease the time between ac­
tive pauses compared to a baseline period.
For group B it was possible to decrease sitting time 
from the baseline ( [µ]=73.2, [σ]=27.8) to the experi­
mentation phase (µ=60.6, σ=17.6) with 12.6 minutes. 
An ANOVA test gives a p-value of 0.014 which means 
that hypothesis H2 Applying the persuasive principle 
Scoreboard will decrease the time between active 
pauses compared to a baseline period can be con­
firmed.
For group AB it was possible to decrease sitting time 
from the baseline ( [µ]=67.4, [σ]=14.7) to the experi­
mentation phase (µ=64.1, σ=14.9) with 3.3 minutes. 
An ANOVA test gives a p-value of 0.34 which means 
that hypothesis H2 combining the persuasive princi­
ples reminders and Scoreboard will decrease the time 
between active pauses more than the principles apart 
compared to a baseline period cannot be confirmed.
From Figure 64 it can be seen that the control group 
increases the time between pauses with 6.4 minutes 
from the baseline to the intervention period. Even 
though it is not a significant difference, it indicates that 
starting up the experiment might have influenced the 
participants. Several participants have described how 
they have glanced at the “Moves” application on their 
phones at several occasions. It was thought that the 
intervention that tried to motivate the participants 
should have had an influence but this cannot be seen 
from the data. To overcome the issue with participants 
being influenced by starting the experimentation, the 
rest of the analysis will be normalized according to the 
baseline and compared to the control group. 
Figure 64: Difference in treatment
==PAGE:68==
68
11.3	PART II
This part investigate the second research question 
which explore if selected persuasive principles de­
crease the time between active pauses over a 3 week 
period compared to a control group? As to compare 
the different treatments, it was decided to normalize 
the data according to the baseline. This means all will 
have a starting point at average time between pauses 
across all participants. Those who decrease their time 
after the intervention will get a relative decrease in 
their score.
11.3.1	 TESTING ASSUMPTIONS
Again it is tested if the normalized data has approx­
imately normal (Gaussian) distributed (Fukuda & 
Ohashi, 1997). See Figure 65 to see a histogram show­
ing the frequency of each observation. The response 
variable in this case is the normalized daily average of 
minutes between active pauses shown on the x-axis, 
while the y-axis shows the frequency. The histogram 
is again somewhat positive skewed, though it is not 
possible to correct the problem through a transforma­
tion. This could indicate that there might be a need for 
collecting more data, but for now it is assumed to be 
normal distributed. 
The data is also checked for outliers. Figure 66 shows 
some outliers on the top and bottom. Further inves­
tigation of the outliers reveals no evidence that can 
question reliability and are therefore included in the 
data set. Now that the data the main assumptions have 
been checked, the data can be analyzed.
Figure 65: Histogram of normalized time between paus­
es
Figure 66: Boxplot of the normalized time between acti­
ve pauses
==PAGE:69==
69
11.3.2	 GROUPS OVER TIME
This section is divided into three that each compares a 
group with the control group. To investigate the differ­
ence several illustrative graphs have been created to 
show how the groups performed during the duration 
of the intervention. Noticed that this analysis is limited 
to the three weeks planned from the start, eventhough 
some participants continued an extra week. The ra­
tional behind is that there are limited data for fourth 
week, which therefore limits what can be explained 
from this data. 
The Control Group vs. Group A
Figure 67 shows the average time between active paus­
es on the y-axis and the week on the x-axis. For both 
the control group and group A an average weekly per­
formance is calculated together the 90% percent con­
fidence intervals. This reveals at what weeks the differ­
ent groups differs with a 90% significance level. Week 0 
is the baseline. As the data is normalized compared to 
the baseline, everybody has the same starting point. 
The relevant hypothesis H4 state that compared to 
a control group, the time between active pauses will 
be steady over three weeks period when applying the 
persuasive principle reminders. This can be confirmed 
with a 90% significance level as none of the lines over­
laps after the baseline period. 
Figure 67: A comparison of the performance of group A compared to the control group
==PAGE:70==
70
The Control Group vs. Group B
In the same manner group B and the control group is 
compared. See Figure 68. The yellow line illustrates 
average time between active pauses for the control 
together with a shaded 90% confidence intervals and 
the grey line illustrate group B with a shaded 90% con­
fidence interval
As shown in the graph group B is only significantly 
different in week 1 and 3, despite having an average 
lower time compared to group A. At week 2 there is a 
large variation in performance which cause the 90 per­
cent confidence intervals to be quit broad. On Figure 
68 it is illustrated as slight overlap of the shaded lines. 
Hypothesis H5 which state that compared to a control 
group, the time between active pauses will be steady 
over three weeks period when applying the persuasive 
principle Scoreboard can therefore not be confirmed. 
Figure 68 also indicates that the effect of the inter­
vention wears out over time. The time between active 
pauses is lowest in the first week but increases slowly 
over the weeks. This effect will be further discuss when 
combining the qualitative and quantitative analysis.
Figure 68: A comparison of the performance of group B compared to the control group
==PAGE:71==
71
Group AB vs. the Control Group
Figure 69 shows how group AB did compared to the 
control group. 
As seen on the graph the lines overlap throughout 
the experiment, which means that there cannot be 
concluded anything with statistical significance. Un­
expectedly the results shows that combining several 
persuasive technologies have no effect even though 
using a persuasive technology by itself does have an 
effect. The interaction effect can therefore be thought 
to increase the time betweeen active pauses. An ex­
plaination could be that combining several strategies 
overwhelms the user. As for the sixth hypothesis H6 
which states that compared to a control group, the 
time between active pauses will be steady over three 
weeks period when combining the persuasive princi­
ples reminders and Scoreboard can therefore not be 
confirmed. 
Notice that the same tendency as spotted with group B 
can be seen here. It seems as if the effect of the inter­
vention wears off over time, illustrated by the minutes 
between active pauses increases a little after week 1.  
Figure 69: A comparison of the performance of group AB compared to the control group
==PAGE:72==
72
11.3.3	 STATISTICAL MODELING
For the last part of the quantitative analysis it will be 
explored which factors that influences the time be­
tween active pauses. This shall be viewed as an explor­
atory data analysis, which means can be used to find 
new hypothesis which can be investigated in future 
studies(Fukuda & Ohashi, 1997). From interviews and 
surveys it was possible to gather information about 
different factors that might have an influence on the 
experiment. See Table 5 for what factors that have 
been included in the analysis. 
An ANOVA model was created to investigate the dif­
ferent factors with only the main effects included 
in the maximal model. The response variable is the 
normalized time between active pauses. A process of 
step-wise removing the term which includes the least 
significant term was used to simplify the model. This is 
done according the parsimony guidelines:
-	
A model with k-1 explanatory variables is pre­
ferred to a model with k explanatory variables
-	
A linear model is preferred to an nonlinear 
model
-	
A model without interaction is preferred to a 
model containing interactions
This is guidelines to create what is called the minimal 
adequate model (Crawley, 2005). Notice there is not 
one single model but a number of different more or 
less plausible models that can be fitted to the data. The 
minimal adequate model is presented in Table 6, show­
ing the degrees of freedom (Df), the sum of squares 
(SS), sum of squares mean (SSM), f-values and the 
p-values associated with the f-values. 
As shown in Table 5, the type of phone, occupation and 
the coffee habits did not have a significant effect on 
the time between pauses. As for the factors that has a 
significant effect on the response variable gender, par­
ticipant and motivation will be discussed, since treat­
ment have been looked upon earlier and differences in 
participants is viewed to be unavoidable. 
Motivation
Motivation is defined as to what degree the participant 
expressed that there were motivated to take more 
active pauses beforehand. A pre-survey was sent out 
where one question was stated as: “would you be in­
terested in taking some active pauses? (Explain why/
why not)”. This can be viewed as a leading question. 
Therefore answers as “to some degree I think?” togeth­
er with answers as “Not that motivated” where viewed 
as negative responses. Positive responses were “Very 
much motivated, as I believe you thereby get a better 
return from your work” or “Yes, as it probably could 
benefit my energy level and productivity”. So being mo­
tivated was not only answering positive to a question 
but also having a reason behind the opinion. 
In general those who had stated there were motivated 
took an active pause every 62.5 minutes in average 
compared to those who had not stated there was moti­
vated who took an active pause every 71.1 minutes. As 
this was not a factor thought of when designing the ex­
periment, the motivated answers were spread unequal 
Factor
Explanation
Levels
Week
The experiment was carried out over several weeks, and this factor 
reveals if there are any different between the weeks of the inter­
vention
3
Treatment
There were four groups who each received a combination of inter­
ventions. 
4
Gender
Male or female. There were 6 females and 14 males, who in gener­
al where spread out through the experiment.
2
Occupation
Student or office worker. There were 12 students and 8 office 
workers, who in general where spread out through the experi­
ment.
2
Phone
Android or IPhone. There were 7 with Android phones and 13 us­
ing iPhones.
2
Motivation
(0/1) Rather or not the participant had expressed a motivation for 
taking more active pauses. Here 8 out of 20 had stated that they 
were interest together with a reason.
2
Coffee
(0/1) Rather or not the participant drank coffee. Half the partici­
pants stated that they took coffee breaks
2
Participant
Rather the participant reacted differently to the interventions
20
Table 5: Overview of influencing factors
Table 6:  Minimal adequate model with only main effects
Df
SS
SSM
F-value
P-value
Treatment
3
17057
5686
22.176
5.45E-12
Gender
1
7444
7444
29.034
2.62E-07
Motivation
1
2046
2046
7.981
0.00535
Participant
14
32340
2310
9.01
3.40E-14
Residuals
154
39483
256
==PAGE:73==
73
throughout the groups, though each group had at least 
one which was classified as “motivated” towards taking 
active pauses. Therefore it is possible to investigate the 
difference between groups to see if the is any interac­
tion with the treatment. 
Figure 70 shows the effect of motivation on the differ­
ent groups together with the 90% confidence interval. 
By performing a set of two-sided student t-test it was 
possible to investigate what means were significantly 
different. For group A the difference between those 
who stated a motivation compared to those who 
had not was -27.8 minutes, which gives a p-value of 
p<0.001. Similar for group AB the difference was -16.5 
minutes (p<0.001). For group B and the control group 
those who were motivated had more time between 
active pauses than those who had not, though a 
two-sided student t-test did not reveal any significant 
different.
This exploratory analysis indicates there might be an 
effect to give a persuasive technology as the reminder 
to people who are already motivated to take more ac­
tive pauses. From Foggs model this is explained by the 
fact that people already have the motivation but lacks 
the ability. Break Light here works as a tool to increase 
the ability of the participant. This will be discussed fur­
ther in the discussion.
Gender
In general it can be seen that the interventions had less 
an effect in decreasing the time between active paus­
es on the females (µ=72.6, σ=33.8) compared to the 
males (µ=64.1, σ=19.4). The interviews indicates that a 
reason could be that females does not always have the 
habit of taken their phone with theme. Especially in 
the end of the experiment when the awareness about 
the experiment had faded a little. This should definitely 
be considered in a future experiment using a phone as 
measuring device.
Figure 70: The effect of motivation on each group
==PAGE:74==
74
11.4	QUALITATIVE ANALYSIS
While the quantitative analysis explored what could 
be measured, the qualitative analysis will investigate 
the intervention from the viewpoint of the participant. 
The core of the qualitative data analysis are the weekly 
surveys and interviews conducted in the end of the 
experiment. The advantage of the qualitative analysis 
is that it gives a more holistic picture what effected the 
participants during the experiment. It allows to dive 
deeper into the problem and explore the thoughts and 
opinions of the participants. How was the main inter­
ventions Break Light and Scoreboard percieved? How 
could this experiment be improved? 
This section will start by an interpetation of how the 
two main interventions were percieved together with 
the main issues identified by the participants. Herafter 
an analysis of the self-reported behavior followed by a 
reflection of the similiarities and differences of the two 
analytical approaches. Noticed that the fundamental 
part of this analysis is interpertation. It will therefore 
go through a subjective filter that is affected by the 
researcher (Creswell, 2003). To view the questions and 
the result see appendix 11.01.  
11.4.1	 BREAK LIGHT 
Break Light was the programable USB that would re­
mind the participant to take a pause every 30 minutes 
and was given to 10 of the 20 participants. In general 
the feedback from the participants about Break Light 
were positive. BreakLight not only highlighted work­
ing habits but was also used as a boundary object for 
discussing healthy working habits. Many appriciated 
the fact that it was a physical thing that changed ap­
pearance rather than an application or a pop-up on the 
computer. This allowed the participants to ignore it as 
it when an assignment required immersion. ”It was a 
smart way to be reminded about taking pauses. You did 
not necessaryly have to comply, sometimes I let it be 
red for a periode whenever I had something that need­
ed to be finish.”
Indeed there were several limitations with the inter­
vention. “I think it was a shame that it could only be 
used at my desk. I could sometimes have needed a 
similar device at meetings when you need an active 
pause.” In total the reset button on the Break Light 
was pressed more than 300 times spread out over the 
majority of the days of the intervention. Especially in 
the end of the study the product was not used as often 
as in the start. “It was to difficult use when going from 
one meeting to another. I only really used it in the start. 
Would have been nice to have it on my phone.” 
Despite some issues related to the intervention it 
generally was thought to be a success. It definitely 
increased the awareness of good working habbits, 
and have been an important trigger for some of the 
participants to ensure more active pauses. One partic­
ipant using Break Light stated: “I had did have radical 
more active pauses”. There were several suggestions 
for improvement. The device could be smarter by 
aknowledging when an active pause was taken. For 
example by taking advantage of the accelerometer on 
the smartphone which then could be connected to the 
product. The trigger could even be provided on the 
phone if the user was not sitting beside the desktop. 
Other suggestions were especially on the type of trig­
ger, which for example could be a sound or a smell. 
11.4.2	 SCOREBOARD
Scoreboard were the daily MMS’s with a daily score 
compared to others which was sent out to 10 partici­
pants through the experimentation period. The major 
issue with this intervention was the trustworhyness. 
Several participants explained that they especially val­
ued the Scoreboard in the start of the experiment, but 
as they failed to influence the result, they eventually ig­
nored the messages. “It was frustrating that the results 
did not conform with my own perception of how many 
active pauses I have held” Another stated: “It was real­
ly frustrating when I came down in the red, then it did 
not matter at all, I couldn’t do anything” Better me­
assurement equipment would be required to provide 
participants with more precise and thrustworthy daily 
messages. “Maybe if it was possible to push a button 
and get some information about what was behind”
So why did the intervention have an effect on the time 
between active pauses? An explaination from one 
participant was that: “I did not notice my position on 
the scoreboard, but used the MMS’s as a reminder for 
taking more active pauses”. Despite complaining about 
the thrustworthyness of the data most participants 
took a peak on the scoreboard, which definitely had an 
effect. 
To increase the incentive for taken more active pauses 
could be if your score was compared to somebody you 
knew. Some even recommended a public score board. 
“Maybe it could be a display in the office. Especially in 
this office it would drive some competition. We would 
be active.” One could argue that this could be intrusive 
on peoples personal life and might have an limited ef­
fect over time.
==PAGE:75==
75
11.4.3	 SELF-REPORTED BEHAVIOR
In the end of the experiment all participants were 
asked how many active pauses they had taken during 
the experimentation period compared to before. See 
Figure 71 that compares the ratio of answers for those 
in the control group compared to those receiving some 
kind of persuasive technology. Of the control group 
60% said they had taken more pauses through the ex­
perimentation, while 40% it was the same. For those 
affected by some kind of intervention only 7% took 
the same amount, while 93% indicated that they took 
more or a lot more active pauses. 
In general a majority stated that more active pauses 
have been taken through the experimentation. This 
was confirmed in the interviews were several par­
ticipants acknowledged that they had become more 
aware about their habits when taken a pause. “As an 
office, we’ve been talking about active pauses and 
doing things like push ups, pull ups, or just running 
around in our breaks rather than just walking.” There 
is not necessarily an indication of participants taken 
more pauses, but there have been a greater focus on 
being active in the pauses that are taken. “I have be­
come better at taken a pause where I just stand up or 
walk around when I am finish with an assignment”
From both surveys and interviews it can be seen that 
the awareness about active pauses have been de­
creased during the experiment. This can be seen by 
the fact that participants rated themselves less aware 
on a 9 point scale. “I now believe the novelty value is 
disappeared” as one stated in one of the later weekly 
surveys. In correlation with a decreased awareness, 
participants also rates themselves to have taken less 
active pauses compared to the week before. To sum 
up the qualitative analysis, all participants, especially 
those exposed to a persuasive technology have experi­
ence to have taken more active pauses.  
11.5	COMBINING 
QUANTITATIVE AND 
QUALITATIVE ANALYSIS
Both the quantitative and qualitative analysis indicates 
that those receiving a persuasive technology have been 
able to decrease their time between active pauses. 
This is reported by the participants and measured by 
the fitness application. While the effect is most prom­
inent in the start, especially the quantitative analysis 
shows that the effect does not wear of significantly 
during the three week period for the groups receiving 
a single persuasive technology. The qualitative analysis 
confirms the tendency. The participants’ state to take 
more active pauses in general though the awareness 
was predominant in the start.
Different acknowledgments can be made when com­
paring the two persuasive principles used in this study. 
The quantitative analysis shows that the effect of de­
creasing the sedentary behavior was greatest for the 
persuasive principle social Scoreboard, though the 
effect was less steady over a three week period. The 
qualitative analysis explains the tendency with inter­
vention lacking trustworthiness. 
The persuasive principle reminders had a significant 
effect of reducing sedentary behavior compared to 
the control group and was steady over a three week 
Figure 71: Self-reported Behavior
==PAGE:76==
76
period. It also received the most positive feedback 
from the participants, who did complain about wanting 
more flexibility embedded in the design. For some rea­
son combining the two principles cancelled out some 
of the effect measured otherwise. Unfortunately no 
explanation can be found in the qualitative analysis. 
11.6	 LIMITATION OF THE 
MAIN STUDY
Before going into the main results the main limitation 
of the study will be discussed: 
11.6.1	 SAMPLE SIZE AND TIME FRAME
The sample size of 20 participants and time frame (1 
week baseline + 3 weeks interventions) must be ac­
knowledge to be an important limitation of the study 
for several reasons. 
A problem with a short timeframe is that the chosen 
period might not be representative for a normal work 
period. For example multiple participants stated that 
the period was not typical due to exams and holidays. 
This can raise the question of the representativeness. 
Secondly, one of the seven key insights state that per­
suasive technology will always change people over 
time and this change is unlikely to be covered over this 
short timeframe. Therefore it can be difficult to prove 
that a habit have been formed. 
In relation to the participants which were a combina­
tion of students and office workers there was already a 
great variation of workplaces. For the students it was a 
combination of studying at class, at home, doing exams 
or being at work. For the office workers who in reality 
were engineering consultants, there was a range of 
meetings with clients which influenced the working be­
havior. It could have been preferred to experiment with 
a more homogenous group of heavy computer users, 
who had multiple hours of prolonged sitting time. 
It is worth noticing that both the small sample size 
and the short timeframe is a very common limitation 
of the reviewed studies as well, where the median of 
the sample size is 25 participants and a 4 week time 
frame. With this in mind the study should be seen as 
an exploratory study, which aim is to highlight interest­
ing areas and possible use of persuasive technology for 
future studies.
11.6.2	 MEASURING EQUIPMENT
The quantitative part of the study relied primary on the 
data from the mobile application “Moves”, which is a 
fitness application designed for other purposes than 
measuring sedentary behavior. This might have had an 
influenced on our measurements. Some of participants 
who received a daily MMS stated that data not always 
matched their perceived behavior. More effort should 
have been put into validating the data received from 
Moves. 
The rational for using the application was that it was 
available for both Android and IOS. The application was 
however not identical on both platforms. For example 
it was possible to enter manual data in the IOS version, 
but as only one participant used this function a couple 
of times, it is thought to have minor influence.  
By relying on a mobile sensing application the study is 
also very depending on the commitment of the par­
ticipants, since it demand that they keep their phone 
on them doing every active pause. This is especially 
a problem because this might have been affecting 
participants unequally. Especially females compared 
to males does not always carry around their phone. 
In an attempt to control this nuisance factor females 
were spread out through the experiment. Still forgot­
ten phone are thought to be a major limitation of this 
study, and might have had a significant influence on 
the number of active pauses that have been measured. 
==PAGE:77==
77
12|	DISCUSSION 
AND 
CONCLUSION
This chapter discusses the main results of the study in 
relation to the theories found in literature, along with 
our contribution to the field of persuasive technology. 
The aim of the project was to show that specific per­
suasive principles could be used to reinforce peoples’ 
behavior of taking active pauses when doing sedentary 
work, which are therefore discussed separately. 
12.1	 RESULTS
12.1.1	 BREAK LIGHT – AMBIENT DISPLAY 
(REMINDER)
Studies like PerFrame(Obermair, Reitberger, 
Meschtscherjakov, Lankes, & Tscheligi, 2008) and 
BreakAway (Jafarinaimi, Forlizzi, Hurst, & Zimmerman, 
2005) have both indicated that it would be possible to 
improve sedentary behavior via an ambient display. 
Our work shows that it was possible to get a similar 
result as these studies with the testing of Break Light. 
Those who received the intervention Break Light 
showed a significant difference in performance com­
pared to control group over period of three weeks. 
When looking at the quantitative data for specific in­
dividuals it was possible to find strong positive results 
which is in line with the experience the participants 
reported themselves. For instance, one participants did 
improve his quantitate data significantly. He went from 
a mean value of 86.9 minutes between active pauses 
during the baseline to a mean of 61.2 minutes doing 
the 3 weeks of interventions. This is a reduction of 25.4 
minutes (30%) in average, with a p-value of 0.038. 
Furthermore multiple participants stated that Break 
Light made them more aware of their working habits 
and actually made them perform better. Several partic­
ipants stated that they would be interested in a similar 
product and two participants directly asked if it was 
possible to keep using Break Light for an extended peri­
od. This clearly indicates that Break Light helps people 
manage their breaks. 
It was found that the motivation the participants stated 
in the beginning of the study had a high impact on how 
effective all the concepts where at persuading them, 
especially for the group with Break Light. This is an in­
teresting result because it very much emphasizes what 
has been stated multiple times during this report: A 
behavior is not going to happen unless both motivation 
and ability are present in a sufficient amount (Fogg, 
2009).  Break Light is using the persuasive principle Re­
minder, and following the new framework Reminders 
are mainly facilitating ability and not motivation. This 
means that Break Light is more dependent on the us­
er’s pre-motivation compared to our other intervention 
Scoreboard. It is therefore found that Break Light can 
be used to facilitate the behavior of active pauses by 
making time managing easier, but it does not motivate. 
This led to the following conclusion:
Well timed triggers can increase the number of active 
pauses when the user is already motivated
12.1.2	 SCOREBOARD – MMS 
(COMPETITION) 
The quantitative data showed that the group receiving 
only the intervention Scoreboard was the group that 
improved the most. Why this concept was more effec­
tive than Bright Light can be explained by looking at 
the Integrated Persuasive Technology Framework. The 
Integrated Persuasive Technology Framework indicates 
that the persuasive function Competition can support 
both Motivation and Ability.  Competitions like Score­
board increases motivation by giving the individual 
a chance to show that he or she can perform better 
than others. It also increases the ability by making 
the individual aware of how they are performing and 
how much they can improve. The field research and 
the review literature revealed that active pauses was a 
behavior which lacked both motivation and ability (Van 
Dantzig, Geleijnse, & Van Halteren, 2013).  Since this 
was the most effective concept to persuade the end 
result can be used to support the following statement: 
An increase in motivation and ability is required to sup­
port the behavior of doing active pauses.  
‘Another explanation of this concept’s success can be 
found in the theory of cognitive dissonance. Multiple 
participants stated in the interviews that the com­
petition gave occasion to conversations on the topic 
outside of the experience. This is likely to have reduced 
the association between active pauses and laziness and 
to have made them more likely to also do active pauses 
to fit their behavior with their belief. This finding can 
be synthesized to the following statement:
Increased awareness and social positive views on active 
pauses may increase a healthy sedentary behavior
Trustworthiness was one of the main complains the 
participants had with the concepts. Multiple partici­
pants stated that their results did not depict their per­
ceived behavior. This could be the result of imprecise 
measuring equipment but it could also be an indication 
of how unaware we are on our sedentary behavior. 
This was one of the conclusions on a similar study 
which also had a mismatch between users’ experiences 
and feedback.  The study, which aimed at supporting 
stretch exercises at work, also had this issue and they 
suggested a review function where the participants 
could review and correct their movements (Chen et al., 
2014). Several of our participants also stated the wish 
for an option of controlling their own data. These find­
ing led to the following statement:
Persuasive competitions should support live feedback in 
order to increase trust
The 5 key insights state that persuasive technologies 
should be transparent and honest. If the user does not 
==PAGE:78==
78
trust the technology the persuasion will be inefficient. 
The loss of trust in the intervention Scoreboard was 
not visible in the quantitative data but in the qualita­
tive data. Multiple participants stated that they gave 
up on improving their score when they realized that 
their efforts did not pay off. 
Providing users with more precise data in real time was 
not possible within the limitations of this study. Though 
as the product analysis suggest, cheaper and improved 
wearables can be found in a near future. Here the chal­
lenge is no longer imprecise measurement equipment 
but the data overflow that we try to fill our brains 
with. This thesis can then provide evidence that the 
persuasive principle competition can motivate users 
to change behavior. A finding that might be valuable in 
future product development. 
12.1.3	 COMBINING PERSUASIVE 
PRINCIPLES
It was suggested that two principles would have an 
increased effect since they worked on different persua­
sive factors. The literature suggested that the behavior 
of taking active pauses while doing sedentary work was 
unlikely to happen due to little motivation and limited 
ability(Van Dantzig et al., 2013). The principles were 
chosen following the categorization in the Integrated 
Persuasive Technology Framework which indicated that 
“Competition” facilitated motivation and “Reminder” 
facilitated ability. Following this theory, the persua­
sive effect of the principle would be larger combined 
compare to individually, since behavior is dependent 
on both ability, motivation and trigger (Fogg, 2009). 
However the result indicated that the combination of 
the principles actually worked against the effect of the 
individual principles. Even though this goes against the 
earlier argument an explanation can be found in the re­
viewed theory. One of the 7 key insights to persuasive 
technology states that persuasion may get lost if the 
technology become obtrusive. This could be the case, if 
the participant finds that they get to much information, 
and thereby get annoyed by the interventions. This 
was also one of the findings of the reviewed articles 
(Oinas-kukkonen & Harjumaa, 2008). 
However it is however important to notice that none 
of the qualitative data can support this, since none of 
the participants stated that the interventions had been 
obtrusive. 
12.1.4	 PERSUASIVE TECHNOLOGY AND 
HABIT FORMATION
Both principles showed indications of being helpful in 
supporting the formation of the health habit of taking 
active pauses, since the increase in the average min­
utes between active pauses was greater for the control 
group than all the other groups after the beginning of 
the experiment. This could indicate that that the tested 
principles do support habits, however it is very limited 
how much it can be concluded on this research ques­
tion due to the short timeframe. 
Recent research has investigated how behavior change 
happen over time. In a study, where participants would 
set their own goals for forming a new habit, it was pos­
sible to set forward a model showing how new habitual 
behaviors are formed (Lally et al., 2010). A goal could 
be to take a walk of 10 minutes after breakfast was 
measured through the self-reported habit index, which 
is a 12-item questionnaire (Verplanken & Orbell, 2003). 
The study suggested an asymptotic curve, in which the 
behavior becomes increasingly more automatic as the 
behavior is repeated. At some point the degree of au­
tomation reaches a maximum, and the curve flattens 
out. The time in which it took to reach 95% of the pla­
teau, where it was believed a habit had been formed, 
ranged from 18 to 254 days. The study indicated that 
the time to form a habit depended largely on the com­
plexity of the behavior and the person. (Lally et al., 
2010). 
In our study the limited time frame made it difficult to 
cover the formation of a habit. Even with the shorter 
time frame the study still provided some indications of 
the effect. The qualitatively data shows that that the 
control group thought less about their active pauses as 
the study progressed, while the participants from the 
other group state that they were just as aware of their 
active pauses, or close to, at the end of the study as in 
the beginning. If this is related to the theory about sys­
tem 1 and system 2 thinking, it means that active paus­
es throughout the study is a behavior controlled by the 
logical system 2 (Kahneman, 2011). The conclusion is 
therefore that the persuasive principles “Reminder” 
and “Competition” can support the awareness of the 
behavior of doing active pauses, however this behavior 
cannot be turned into a habit in the three weeks which 
was the timeframe of this study. 
==PAGE:79==
79
12.2	 FUTURE IMPLICATIONS
This section will briefly touch upon how the findings 
in this study can be used within the field of persuasive 
technology and designers.
12.2.1	 IMPLICATION FOR THE FIELD OF 
PERSUASIVE TECHNOLOGY
The thesis puts forward a framework that links existing 
theories in an attempt to minimize the gap between 
theory and practice.  The new framework was found 
useful in this study as to evaluate and explain the ef­
fect of different interventions. Some limitations of the 
framework were found during the project. First of all 
was the categorization of triggers was difficult to ap­
ply to the concepts. For example the trigger for Social 
support was found to support both motivation and 
ability, this emphasis that a forth trigger category may 
be needed to include these triggers which combines 
facilitate and spark. In general triggers seems a bit mis­
placed in the framework, since trigger are placed on 
the same level as ability and motivation. It is true that 
Fogg states that this is the three factors needed before 
a behavior can happen (Fogg, 2009). However, motiva­
tion and ability are on an abstract level while triggers 
are on a concrete level. Even though more research 
is needed to verify the framework it is thought to be 
valuable for researchers as it gives a good overview of 
existing theories within the field of persuasive technol­
ogy. 
12.2.2	 IMPLICATION FOR DESIGNERS
This thesis shows how theories from the field of per­
suasive technology can be used throughout the early 
phases of product development. In the ideation phase 
persuasive technology cards were used to spark ideas 
and create concepts that supported behavior change. 
The seven key insights and the Integrated Persuasive 
Technology Framework were then useful to evaluate 
and discuss the concepts. Furthermore it could be used 
to explain when the result varied from what was ex­
pected, for example when the combined effect of the 
two concepts did not produce positive results. The ex­
planation may be found in the sixth key insight, stating 
that participants maybe got an overflow of informa­
tion and the technology therefore became obtrusive. 
An advantage of persuasive technology is that it is a 
field that seeks evidence through empirical studies, 
which provides the designer with a basis for knowing 
the effects of different principles. Understanding how 
persuasive technology can be used throughout the 
product development process can be valuable for oth­
er designers who seek a way to create product that is 
intended to change the behavior of the user. 
12.3	FUTURE WORK
The sections cover the recommendation for future 
work which would add additional valuable knowledge 
to the field of persuasive technology as well as how it 
can be used to prevent back pain. The recommenda­
tion is created by the result and the experience done 
throughout this project.
12.3.1	 SAMPLE SIZE AND TIMEFRAME
This study was only an exploratory study, but the result 
indicated that the investigated concept could be an 
effective way to prevent prolonged sitting and the as­
sociated health risk. It would therefore be recommend­
ed to repeat the study with a larger sample size and 
longer timeframe to validate the effects.
12.3.2	 PARTICIPANTS
The research showed that the people who were most 
affected by sedentary behavior was office workers with 
heavy computer use. Future studies could target this 
group as to increase the probability for measuring an 
effect of different interventions. 
12.3.3	 BETTER MEASURING EQUIPMENT
The main argument to use Moves was the low cost and 
the convenience for the participants and researchers in 
regards to collecting the data. However the precision 
of the data was questionable. Future studies should 
either be able to validate the data from Moves or 
increase the budget so it could include the purchase 
more reliable measuring equipment.  
12.3.4	 METHODS
The mixed method of using both qualitative and quan­
titative data can be concluded to be a necessary ap­
proach, since the data often needed to support each 
other and to validate data points. When expanding 
the time frame of the study the questionnaires should 
include a self-reporting habit index, to support the 
monitoring of the habit formation, which was lacking in 
this study.
==PAGE:80==
80
12.4	FINAL WORDS
This study investigates how persuasive technology can 
be used to form a habit of taking more active pauses 
while doing sedentary work. The problem is that sed­
entary behavior is associated with a range of health 
risk including back pain. Taken active pauses can help 
prevent these negative health consequences as well as 
improving the productivity. A product analysis shows 
that improvements in sensors and computer power 
will potentially enable the user to track a wide range 
data in a near future. As to utilize this potential to 
encourage healthier habits one most know the basic 
mechanisms for habit formation. Theories like oper­
ant conditioning and cognitive dissonance theory are 
used to explain behavior change from a psychological 
perspective. Viewing behavior change in relation to 
technology is called persuasive technology, which is 
explained from reviewed literature. An attempt of 
synthesizing the different theories within the field of 
persuasive technology have led to a proposed new 
framework called the Integrated Persuasive Technology 
Framework. This creates the foundation of developing 
different persuasive concepts that encourage a user to 
take more active pauses. Two concepts are tested in an 
experiment running on 20 participants for four weeks. 
The first concept Break Light is a USB that light that uti­
lize the persuasive principle reminder which attempt to 
change behavior by reminding the user in a useful way. 
The other concept Scoreboard is a daily MMS showing 
how often an active pause have been taken compared 
to others. This concept utilizes the persuasive principle 
competition which seeks to leverage the human beings 
neutral drive to compete. The effect of experiment 
is measured on a fitness application and explored 
through surveys and interviews. The result indicates 
that applying the persuasive concept by itself can sup­
port a behavior change, though it is questionable if a 
habit of taking active pauses have been formed. In re­
lation to back pain this thesis approaches the problem 
indirectly by encouraging a more active lifestyle. There 
are no direct evidence that this intervention have im­
proved back health, but active pauses was stated by 
some of the participants as to improve their productiv­
ity. The study is valuable for whoever wants to change 
behavior through persuasive technology or are inter­
esting in acquiring healthier working habits. 
==PAGE:81==
81
==PAGE:82==
82
REFERENCES
Altshuller, G.S., 1984. Creativity as an exact science: The theory of the solution of inventive prob­
lems,
Arbejdstilsynet, 2005. Vejledning om løft, træk og skub. AT -Vejledning D.3.1. Available at: https://
arbejdstilsynet.dk/da/regler/at-vejledninger/l/d-3-1-loft-traek-og-skub.aspx [Accessed June 
30, 2015].
Baranowski, T. et al., 2003. Squire’s Quest!: Dietary outcome evaluation of a multimedia game. 
American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 24(1), pp.52–61.
Berdichevsky, D. & Neuenschwander, E., 1999. Toward an ethics of persuasive technology. Com­
munications of the ACM, 42(5), pp.51–58. Available at: http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?­
doid=301353.301410.
Bredland, E. & Linge, O., 2007. Rehabilitering. Teori og Praksis. Samfundsmæssige barrier for en 
helheds- og brugerorienteret rehabiliteringsindsats. In Rehabiliteringsprocessen. FADL’s Forlag 
Aktioselskab.
Burns, P., Lueg, C. & Berkovsky, S., 2012. Activmon: encouraging physical activity through ambi­
ent social awareness. CHI ’12 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 
pp.2363–2368. Available at: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2212776.2223803.
Chen, Y.X. et al., 2014. Opportunities for persuasive technology to motivate heavy computer users 
for stretching exercise. Persuasive 20, 8462 LNCS, pp.25–30.
Chittaro, L. & Sioni, R., 2012. Turning the classic snake mobile game into a location-based exer­
game that encourages walking. Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including subseries Lec­
ture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics), 7284 LNCS, pp.43–54.
Cialdini, R.B., 2006. Influence - The Psychology of Persuasion, Harper Collins.
Clinkenbeard, D. et al., 2014. What ’ s Your 2 %? Persuasive 2014, pp.43–55.
Collin, C. et al., 2012. The Psychology Book First., DK Publishing.
Consolvo, S., McDonald, D.W. & Landay, J. a., 2009. Theory-driven design strategies for technol­
ogies that support behavior change in everyday life. Proceedings of the 27th international 
conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI 09, pp.405–414. Available at: http://
dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=1518701.1518766.
Cotman, C.W. & Berchtold, N.C., 2002. Exercise: A Behavioral Intervention to Enhance Brain Health 
and Plasticity. Trends in Neurosciences, 25(6), pp.295–301.
Crawley, M.J., 2005. Statistics: An Introduction using R,
Creswell, J.W., 2003. Research design: Qualitative, Quantitive, and mixed methods approaches Sec­
ond., Sage Publications.
Van Dantzig, S., Geleijnse, G. & Van Halteren, A.T., 2013. Toward a persuasive mobile application to 
reduce sedentary behavior. Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, 17, pp.1237–1246.
Darnton, A., 2008. GSR Behaviour Change Knowledge Review - Reference Report: An Overvie 
==PAGE:83==
83
of behaviour change models and their uses. Government Social Research, (July), p.pgs. 
10–15. Available at: http://resources.civilservice.gov.uk/wp-content/uploads/2011/09/Be­
haviour-change_practical_guide_tcm6-9696.pdf.
Djursing, T., 2015. Vi plastrer kroppen til med gadgets – og elsker det. Ingeniøren. Available at: 
http://ing.dk/artikel/vi-plastrer-kroppen-til-med-gadgets-og-elsker-det-173793 [Accessed 
June 15, 2015].
Dwan, K. et al., 2008. Systematic review of the empirical evidence of study publication bias and 
outcome reporting bias. PLoS ONE, 3(8).
Fogg, B., 2009a. A behavior model for persuasive design. Proceedings of the 4th International 
Conference on Persuasive Technology Persuasive 09, p.1. Available at: http://portal.acm.org/
citation.cfm?doid=1541948.1541999.
Fogg, B., 2009b. Creating persuasive technologies: an eight-step design process. In Proceed­
ings of the 4th International Conference on Persuasive Technology - Persuasive ’09. New 
York, New York, USA: ACM Press, p. 1. Available at: http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?­
doid=1541948.1542005 [Accessed November 13, 2010].
Fogg, B.J., 2003. Persuasive Technology: Using Computers to Change what We Think and Do. , 
p.283. Available at: http://books.google.com/books?id=9nZHbxULMwgC&pgis=1.
Foster, D., Linehan, C., et al., 2010. Motivating physical activity at work. Proceedings of the 14th 
International Academic MindTrek Conference on Envisioning Future Media Environments - 
MindTrek ’10, p.111. Available at: http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1930488.1930510.
Foster, D., Lawson, S., et al., 2010. Wattsup ?: Motivating reductions in domestic energy consump­
tion using social networks. NordiCHI 2010, pp.178–187.
Fukuda, H. & Ohashi, Y., 1997. Special Article A Guideline for Reporting Results of Statistical Anal­
ysis in Japanese Journal of Clinical Oncology. Japanese journal of clinical oncology, 27(3), 
pp.121–127.
Gray, W. & Salzman, M., 1998. Damaged Merchandise? A Review of Experiments That Compare 
Usability Evaluation Methods. Human-Computer Interaction, 13(3), pp.203–261.
Grøntved, A. et al., 2012. Stillesiddende Adfærd,
Hamari, J., Koivisto, J. & Pakkanen, T., 2014. Do persuasive technologies persuade? - A review of 
empirical studies. Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including subseries Lecture Notes in Ar­
tificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics), 8462 LNCS, pp.118–136.
Hansen, J. & Jensen, A., 2001. Arbejdsmiljø. Available at: http://www.leksikon.org/art.php?n=144 
[Accessed June 30, 2015].
Hasan, S. et al., 2013. Team-Based Feedback - Paper Printing in a Longitudinal Case Study -. , 
pp.75–86.
Healy, G. et al., 2012. Reducing prolonged sitting in the workplace. An evidence review: Full report,
Van Houwelingen, J.H. & van Raaij, W.F., 1989. The Effect of Goal-Setting and Daily Electronic 
Feedback on In-Home Energy Use. Journal of Consumer Research, 16, p.98.
==PAGE:84==
84
Hutchison, D., 2014. LNCS 8462 - Persuasive Technology 2014,
Ideo, 2011. Human centered design toolkit. , p.200.
IJsselsteijn, W., 2006. Persuasive technology for human well-being: Setting the scene. PERSUASIVE 
TECHNOLOGY, 3962, pp.1 – 5.
Jafarinaimi, N. et al., 2005. Breakaway : An Ambient Display Designed to Change Human Behavior. 
CHI’05 extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems, pp.1945–1948.
Kahneman, D., 2011. Thinking, Fast and Slow, Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
Kim, S.Y. et al., 2011. Development of Eco-Driving Guide System. In SAE Technical Papers. Avail­
able at: http://www.scopus.com/inward/record.url?eid=2-s2.0-84881214947&partnerID=t­
ZOtx3y1 [Accessed May 26, 2015].
Koch, M.B., Davidsen, M. & Juel, K., 2011. De samfundsmæssige konsekvenser ved rygsygdomme 
og rygsmerter i Danmark,
Lally, P. et al., 2010. How are habits formed: Modelling habit formation in the real world. European 
Journal of Social Psychology Eur., 40(July 2009), pp.998–1009.
Lin, J.J. et al., 2006. Fish’n’Steps: Encouraging Physical Activity with an Interactive Computer 
Game. UbiComp 2006: Ubiquitous Computing, pp.261–278. Available at: http://link.springer.
com.libproxy.usc.edu/chapter/10.1007/11853565_16\nfiles/3571/Lin et al. - 2006 - Fish?n?­
Steps Encouraging Physical Activity with a.pdf\nfiles/3588/10.html.
Lærum, E., 2005. Værd at vide om rygproblemmer - Hvad rygeksperter er enige om,
Magnusson, M.L., 1998. A Review of the Biomechanics and Epidemiology of Working Postures. 
Journal of Sound and Vibration, 215(4).
Mann, D., 2011. 9 - Windows on the World. The Triz Journal.
Mann, D., 2001. Between the Boxes - Changing Perspectives. The Triz Journal.
McKinsey Global Institute, 2013. Disruptive technologies : Advances that will transform life , busi­
ness , and the global economy. , (May), pp.125–135.
Ministry of Employement, 2005. Et godt arbejdsmiljø,
Møller, H.D. & Thomsen, L.M., 2012. Rehabilitering og mennesker med rygsmerter.
Nakajima, T. et al., 2008. Reflecting human behavior to motivate desirable lifestyle. Proceedings of 
the 7th ACM conference on Designing interactive systems, pp.405–414. Available at: http://
doi.acm.org/10.1145/1394445.1394489.
Nawyn, J., Intille, S.S. & Larson, K., 2006. Embedding Behavior Modification Strategies into a Con­
sumer Electronic Device : A Case Study. UbiComp 2006: Ubiquitous Computing, LNCS 4206, 
4206, pp.297–314. Available at: http://www.springerlink.com/index/d83k6w2736021387.pdf.
Neal, D.T. et al., 2011. The Pull of the Past: When Do Habits Persist Despite Conflict With Motives? 
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 37(11), pp.1428–1437.
Obermair, C. et al., 2008. PerFrames: Persuasive picture frames for proper posture. Lecture Notes 
==PAGE:85==
85
in Computer Science (including subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture 
Notes in Bioinformatics), 5033 LNCS, pp.128–139.
Oinas-kukkonen, H. & Harjumaa, M., 2008. A Systematic Framework for Designing and Evaluating 
Persuasive Systems. , pp.164–176.
Pfarr, N., 2012. Behavior change strategy cards. , p.29. Available at: http://www.artefactgroup.
com/content/tool/behavior-change-strategy-cards/.
Rodgers, B., 2011. Lewin’s Field Theory and the Life Space.
Stephens, B.R. et al., 2009. Detrimental Effects Of Inactivity On Insulin Action. Medicine & Science 
in Sports & Exercise, 41(Supplement 1), p.2. Available at: http://content.wkhealth.com/link­
back/openurl?sid=WKPTLP:landingpage&an=00005768-200905001-01538.
Stewart, J.B., 2013. At Google, a Place to Work and Play - NYTimes.com. New York Times. Avail­
able at: http://www.nytimes.com/2013/03/16/business/at-google-a-place-to-work-and-play.
html?_r=0 [Accessed June 15, 2015].
Thaler, R.H. & Sunstein, C.R., 2008. Nudge,
Veerman, J.L. et al., 2012. Television viewing time and reduced life expectancy: a life table analy­
sis. British Journal of Sports Medicine, 46(13), pp.927–930.
Verplanken, B. & Orbell, S., 2003. Reflections on past behavior: A self-report index of habit 
strength. , (1313). Available at: http://opus.bath.ac.uk/9535/.
Verplanken, B. & Wood, W., 2006. Interventions to break and create consumer habits. , 9156. 
Available at: http://opus.bath.ac.uk/9380/.
Wilmot, E.G. et al., 2012. Sedentary time in adults and the association with diabetes, cardiovascu­
lar disease and death: Systematic review and meta-analysis. Diabetologia, 55(11), pp.2895–
2905.
Wood, W. & Neal, D.T., 2007. A new look at habits and the habit-goal interface. Psychological re­
view, 114(4), pp.843–863.
Wood, W., Quinn, J.M. & Kashy, D. a., 2002. Habits in everyday life: Thought, emotion, and action. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 83(6), pp.1281–1297. Available at: http://doi.
apa.org/getdoi.cfm?doi=10.1037/0022-3514.83.6.1281.
Xu, A., Chomutare, T. & Iyengar, S., 2014. Systematic Review of Behavioral Obesity Interventions. 
Persuasive 2014, pp.291–301.
Zhai, L., Zhang, Y. & Zhang, D., 2014. Sedentary behaviour and the risk of depression: a meta-anal­
ysis. British Journal of Sports Medicine, pp.705–709. Available at: http://bjsm.bmj.com/cgi/
doi/10.1136/bjsports-2014-093613.
Zhang, P., 2008. Motivational Affordances : Reasons for ICT Design and Use. , 51(11), pp.145–147.
Zwinderman, M.J. et al., 2012. Phone row: A smartphone game designed to persuade people to 
engage in moderate-intensity physical activity. Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including 
subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics), 7284 
LNCS, pp.55–66.
==PAGE:86==
86
Figure List
Figure 1: Project team logo	
7
Figure 2:  Illustration of the skeleton structure of the back http://www.necksolutions.com/lower-back-pain.html	 8
Figure 3: Overview of different actors in relation to treating back pain	
9
Figure 4: The energy metabolism for different activities. 1 Metabolic Equivalent (MET) is the body’s energy con­
sumption at rest, when laying down and awake (Grøntved et al. 2012). 	 10
Figure 5: ”The relative loads on the third lumbar disk for various body positions in living subjects in relation to the 
upright standing posture, depicted as 100 % (Magnusson 1998)	 11
Figure 6: Settentary behavior is directly associated with increased health riskes	 11
Figure 7: Active Pauses 	13
Figure 8: Nine windows tool	
14
Figure 9: Super system	 15
Figure 10: System	
16
Figure 11: Sub system	 17
Figure 12: http://www.guldmann.dk	
18
Figure 13: http://www.varierfurniture.com & www.kaiku.dk	
18
Figure 14: Bekant IKEA (www.ikea.dk)	
18
Figure 18: www.apple.com/watch/	
19
Figure 15: www.denintelligentekrop.dk	 19
Figure 16: PomodoroTecjnique.com	
19
Figure 17:  www.fitbit.com	
19
Figure 19: Valedotherapy.com	 20
Figure 20: Lumobodytech.com	 20
Figure 21: Nine Windows Tool used for sedentary behavior 	
21
Figure 22:  Illustrates the difference between system 1 and system 2 thinking by associating the systems to well-
known characters together with different adjectives.  	
22
Figure 23: Classical and operant conditioning. Source: (Collin et al., 2012)	
23
Figure 24: Pop up window http://cdn.onextrapixel.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/09/2-Photodoto.jpg	 26
Figure 25: Fogg’s 3 factors of persuasion (Fogg, 2009)	
27
Figure 26: Fogg’s Behavior Model (Fogg, 2009)	 27
Figure 27: Conceptual framing (Hamari et al., 2014)	
32
Figure 28:  The Integrated Persuasive Technology Framework	
34
Figure 29: Analyzing PerFrame with The Integrated Persuasive Technology Framework	
36
Figure 30: PerFrame (Obermair, Reitberger, Meschtscherjakov, Lankes, & Tscheligi, 2008)	37
Figure 31: Research Approach	 39
Figure 33: Number of participants in reviewed studies	
39
Figure 32: Timeframe in reviewed studies	
39
Figure 34: Results across domains	
40
Figure 35: Interventions across several persuasive principles	
41
==PAGE:87==
87
Figure 36: Combining domain with persuasive principles	42
Figure 37: Field research	
46
Figure 38: Word cloud created in www.wordle.net	
47
Figure 39: One of the behavior change strategy cards	
47
Figure 40: Result of several brainstorming sessions	
48
Figure 41: Figure 3 - Blink(1)	
49
Figure 42: Break Light analysed with the Integrated Persuasive Technology Framework 	
49
Figure 43: Illustration of how break light works	 50
Figure 44: Work Rave	
50
Figure 45: Scoreboard first version of prototype	 51
Figure 46: Scoreboard analysed with the Integrated Persuasive Technology Framework	
51
Figure 47: YO! Prototype	
52
Figure 48: YO! Analysed with the Integrated Persuasive Technology Framework	 52
Figure 49: New design of Scoreboard	
54
Figure 50: Manic Time source: http://www.brothersoft.com/manictime-143281.html	
55
Figure 52: Moves	
55
Figure 51: Do button. Source: https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.ifttt.dobutton	 55
Figure 53: Concurrent triangulation design	
57
Figure 54: 2x2 factorial design	 58
Figure 55: P-diagram	
58
Figure 56: Experimentation plan	59
Figure 57: Screen shot of the video shown to the participants https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uiKg6JfS658	
59
Figure 58: Analysis process	
62
Figure 59: Example of quantitative data sample	 63
Figure 60: Example of days where the phone is turn off	 64
Figure 61: Holidays and other days away from the work space	
65
Figure 62:  Histogram over measured minutes between pauses	 66
Figure 63: Boxplot of minutes between pauses to check for outliers	
66
Figure 64: Difference in treatment	
67
Figure 65: Histogram of normalized time between pauses	
68
Figure 66: Boxplot of the normalized time between active pauses	
68
Figure 67: A comparison of the performance of group A compared to the control group	 69
Figure 68: A comparison of the performance of group B compared to the control group	 70
Figure 69: A comparison of the performance of group AB compared to the control group	71
Figure 70: The effect of motivation on each group	
73
Figure 71: Self-reported Behavior	
75
