==PAGE:1==
.BTUFS5IFTJT
1FUFS+POBUBO#FSOIBSEU+FOTFO
+VMZ
$POUSPMMFECJPEFHSBEBUJPOPGNBHOFTJVN
VTJOHTVSGBDFUSFBUNFOU
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Master Thesis
Controlled biodegradation of magnesium
using surface treatments
Author:
Peter Jonatan Bernhardt Jensen
Supervisor:
Dr. Rajan Ambat
July 31, 2015
==PAGE:3==
Danish title:
Kontrolleret nedbrydning af magnesium i biologiske systemer ved hjælp af overﬂade-
behandling
Student no:
s082874
ECTS Point:
35
Start date:
Jan. 26. 2015
End date:
July 31. 2015
Institute:
DTU, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Section for Materials & Surface Technology,
MTU
Additional supervisors:
Senior Researcher Morten Stendahl Jellesen (msj@mek.dtu.dk)
Postdoc. Rameez Ud Din (rudin@mek.dtu.dk)
Associate Professor Niels Skat Tiedje (nsti@mek.dtu.dk)
Report pages: 1-100
Appendix pages: 101-145
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Nils Koppels All`e
Bld. 404
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tel: (+45) 4525 2525
http://www.mek.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This work is the result of a six month long master thesis project conducted at the Technical
University of Denmark, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Section for Materials
& Manufacturing Technology. The project is divided into two parts: 1) Casting of a
magnesium alloy and 2) surface treatment of Mg alloys. The weighing between the two
parts is 1/7 and 6/7, corresponding to 5 and 30 ECTS points respectively, for the casting
part and surface treatment part respectively.
The casting part was supervised by Associate Professor Niels Skat Tiedje, whom I would
like to thank for taking part in this project, making it possible to combine the two areas of
research.
The surface treatment part was supervised by Dr. Rajan Ambat, whom i would like
to thank for giving me the opportunity to work within the area of biomaterials in com-
bination with some of the latest research within the area of conversion coatings. I have
followed the work of Rajan through several courses, and he has always shown great interest
in making special projects giving me the opportunity to work with the some of the latest
research in close collaboration with some of his Ph.D. students.
My deepest thanks goes to Postdoc. Rameez Ud Din who has been a guiding arrow
throughout the entire project. Rameez has shown great interest in my work and has spent
several hours assisting me with highly complicated microscopy.
I would also like to thank Senior Researcher Morten Stendahl Jellesen for assistance
and guidance within the area of electrochemical testing.
Many thanks to all the technicians and laboratory personel: Ste↵en Munch, Marianne
Buendia, Rolf Jensen, Flemming Grumsen, Peter Westermann, Ewa Adamsen and Robert
MacKay.
Last but not least I would like to thank my wife for her great support and son for
his patience and always infectious happiness!
Peter Jonatan Bernhardt Jensen
i
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
In the ﬁrst part of this work casting of AZ91 in a permanent steel die and a Zircon sand
mould was done. Complete solidiﬁcation of the alloy was realized after approximately 16s
and 170s for the steel die and sand mould respectively, as indicated on cooling curves,
thus vastly di↵erent cooling rates was achieved. Numerical simulations gave similar results.
In the case of low cooling rate a microstructural investigation, using scanning electron
microscopy, revealed large β-phases growing along the grain boundaries often accompanied
by lamellar eutectic structure. For the high cooling rate a ﬁner microstructure was observed
with less eutectic lamellae.
Using Scheil’s model of segregation a concentration proﬁle of Al in solid solution was
modelled. Energi-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) analysis roughly conﬁrmed the mod-
elled Al concentration proﬁle. It was shown that the early dendritic structures contained
approximately 3-4wt% Al, whereas the matrix in between dendrites could contain up to
11-12wt% Al.
In the second part of this work a steam-assisted hydrothermal treatment (SHT) for
controlled degradation of AZ91 and AZ31 in chloride environments was applied for the
application of biodegradable implants. The treatment utilized pressurized steam inside a
heated pressure vessel to form a protective conversion coating on the substrate
All samples were treated at 1bar over-pressure. Two treatment solutions were used: 1)
de-ionized (DI) water and 2) 0.07M Ca(NO3)2 + 0.06M NH6PO4 (CaP). Morphological
characterization and elemental analysis of the substrate, with a focus around intermetallic
particles, was done before and after SHT using SEM and EDS. Focused ion beam SEM
was used to examine the cross section of the coating around particles. GDOES was used
to study the growth of the formed oxide ﬁlm and CaP-coating as a function of treatment
time. Electrochemical testing consisted of potentiodynamic polarization in 0.1M NaCl
(pH=5.5) and weightloss after 24h immersion in phosphate bu↵ered saline (0.137M NaCl,
0.002M KCl and 0.010M Phosphate bu↵er, pH=7.4).
Results showed an accelerated growth of an oxide ﬁlm, after SHT using DI-water, consisting
of a Mg(OH)2 porous needle structure, for both alloys, on top of a thin dense oxide layer.
A CaP-compound precipitated on the substrate when the sample was placed approx. 4cm
from the treatment solution, most likely due to splashing of the solution onto the substrate.
The coatings show sensitivity to cathodic intermetallic particles due to the formation
mechanism being governed by anodic and cathodic reactions on the substrate. This is
observed as increased oxide growth in the area around cathodic AlMn(Fe)-particles. A
decreased oxide growth is seen around β-phase particles speculated to be controlled by a
higher content of Al in these areas. The thicknesses obtained for the oxide on AZ91 were
generally lower than on the AZ31, which could also be attributed to the higher Al content.
Thickness of the CaP-coating showed highly varying values with varying treatment times
(1-5µm) with no clear trend.
A decreased cathodic activity by approximately one order of magnitude was observed
for both coatings on AZ91. No improvement was observed for the AZ31 alloy. For the
anodic activity a decrease of about 1 order of magnitude was achieved on AZ91 for the
CaP-coating only.
24h immersion test showed a decrease in mass loss for both coatings on AZ91 and for the
CaP-coating alone on AZ31.
ii
==PAGE:6==
CONTENTS
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Casting of AZ91 - Materials and methods
6
2.1
Preparation of casting experiment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Microstructural analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Segregation model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4
Analysing the Al-Mg binary phase diagram . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.5
Magmasoft simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.6
Simulated and practical cooling curves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3
Surface treatment - Materials and methods
13
3.1
Preparation of samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2
Steam assisted hydrothermal treatment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
Study of surface and particle morphology after SHT
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.4
Coating growth study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.5
Electrochemical study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4
Casting of AZ91 Mg alloy - Results
20
4.1
Magmasoft simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2
Experimental casting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.3
Segregation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.4
Characterization of microstructure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5
Surface treatment - Results
38
5.1
Morphology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.2
Coating growth study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5.3
Study of electrochemical properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
6
Discussion
81
6.1
Surface morphology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
6.2
Coating growth study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
6.3
Electrochemical properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
7
Conclusion
92
8
Future work
94
A Crucible with pouring spout
102
B Feeding eﬃciency
104
C SEM and EDS
105
C.1
Raw EDS spectrum data of cast AZ91 samples
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
D LOM of castings
108
D.1 Theoretical EDS interaction volume
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
E Concentration variation of Al calculation - Table values
110
iii
==PAGE:7==
CONTENTS
F Phase Diagrams
117
G XRD-spectra
118
H Coating growth study - GDOES raw data
122
H.1 Alloy AZ91 SHT-coated using DI-water sample placed in lid . . . . . . . . . 122
H.2 Alloy AZ91 SHT-coated using DI-water at 4cm from steam source
. . . . . 125
H.3 Alloy AZ31 SHT-coated using DI-water at 4cm from steam source
. . . . . 130
H.4 Alloy AZ91 SHT-coated using CaP-solution at 4cm from steam source . . . 132
I
Electrochemical study
138
I.1
Potentiodynamic Polarization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 138
I.2
Immersion in PBS study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 141
iv
==PAGE:8==
CONTENTS
Nomenclature
CaP = Refers to 1) the chemicals (Ca(NO3)2 + NH4H2PO4) and the solution used as
steam source for SHT and 2) the coating obtained on speciﬁc samples treated using these
chemicals.
DI = De-ionized
OCP = Open circuit potential
EDS = Energy-dispersive x-ray spectroscopy
FEG-SEM = Field emission gun scanning electron microscope
FIB = Focused ion-beam
PBS = Phosphate-bu↵ered saline
PG = Pressure Gauge
PR = Pressure Regulator
SDAS = Secondary Dendrite Arm Spacing
SEM = Scanning electron microscope
SHT = Steam-assisted hydrothermal treatment
SR = Sputter rate
TC = Thermocouple
XRD = X-ray di↵raction spectroscopy
v
==PAGE:9==
1
INTRODUCTION
1
Introduction
The use of temporary metallic implants is common practise in modern hospitals. Specially
designed screws, nails, plates etc. are used to ﬁxate and support e.g. a bone fracture
reducing pain and creating better conditions for the healing process of the bone. From an
economical perspective biomedical metals is an above industry-average growing market
according to Acmite Market Intelligence[5]. It is estimated that the global demand on
biomedical metals will hit US$ 18.96 billion by 2017 and, with an anual growth of about
7%, increase to US$ 26.54 billion by 2022.
Conventional temporary metallic implants are usually made of titanium (Ti), stainless
steel (SS), and cobalt-chromium (Co-Cr) alloys. SS has been used the longest time and
stands for the largest group of biomedical metals accounting for more than half of the total
biomedical metal market[5] and is attractive due its relatively low price. Ti-alloys have
been used for a relatively short time, however due to their excellent biocompatibility and
mechanochemical properties they are some of the fastest growing biomedical metals and
currently stand for the second largest market share [5].
The conventional metallic implants are however far from perfect. One of their major
limitations is the possible release of toxic metallic ions and/or particles through corrosion
or wear processes that can lead to inﬂammation, thereby reducing biocompatibility[45].
A study back in 1995 by Puleo and Huh [40] showed that the ions from commonly used SS,
Ti and Co-Cr orthopaedic implant alloys, individually and in combinations representing
the alloy, all exhibited cytotoxicity on osteogenic cells (bone forming cells) to a larger or
lesser degree. Wang et al. [52] and Niki et al. [35] showed that Ni, Fe, Co, Cr and Ti ions
inhibit production of bone-forming proteins and contribute to bone resorption - a state
where cells ”eat” away the bone adjacent to the implant - negatively contributing to the
overall biocompatibility.
Other studies [27, 28, 30, 45] found highly increased levels of implant particles in patients
having metallic implants, possibly due to fretting corrosion. The e↵ect of wear particles
at the bone-implant interface is well known as particle disease. The implant particles
stimulate an immune response which ultimately leads to bone resorbtion eventually causing
loosening of the implant [23, 6, 60, 51, 45, 18].
Another major limitation of the conventional implants is their ability to induce stress
shielding due to their relatively high elastic moduli compared to natural bone. Table 1 on
the following page summarizes physical and mechanical properties of conventional implant
metals, magnesium and natural bone (data recreated from Staiger et al. [45]). The bodily
tissues surrounding the implant are thus shielded from the natural stresses moving through
the body when e.g. walking. These stresses stimulate bone growth and are highly necessary
to keep a healthy tissue [34, 45]. Following Wol↵’s law[57], the tissue, when shielded from
stresses, disintegrates or is resorbed which can lead to implant detachment, severe pain
and most likely costly and pain-inducing surgery to remove and re-implant the implant.
Furthermore the conventional implant metals are about 2-4 times denser than natural
bone.
The e↵ect of these drawbacks is signiﬁcantly reduced when using magnesium (Mg) and
1
==PAGE:10==
1
INTRODUCTION
its alloys. Both the density and the elastic modulus resembles that of human bone to
a much larger degree, as seen in table 1, thereby reducing the e↵ect of stress shielding.
Further more Mg is an essential element for the human metabolism with an estimated 1
mol, corresponding to about 24g, stored in the body of a normal 70 kg adult, of which
approximately half is stored in bone tissue [1, 42, 37, 50, 45].
The corrosive nature of magnesium, especially in electrolytic, aqueous environment, is
its major limitation in many engineering applications. The Pourbaix-diagram for the
magnesium-water system is shown in ﬁgure 1 on the following page. It can be seen that
passivation is ﬁrst realized in highly alkaline environments with pH> 11.5. The passivation
ﬁlm, consisting of magnesium hydroxide, is only semi-protective and easily undergoes
compressive rupture due to the higher molar volume of magnesium hydroxide compared to
metallic magnesium[43].
However, from a biomaterial perspective, this degrading property becomes intriguing,
due to the non-toxicity of the soluble oxide that is harmlessly excreted through the
urine[1, 42, 50, 45]. Thus, magnesium has the potential as a lightweight, degradable
orthopaedic implant material - an implant which would maintain mechanical integrity and
over time gradually dissolve. Eventually the implant would be replaced by natural bone
tissue avoiding the necessity of surgically removing the implant when the bone has fully
healed, hence physical irritation and chronic inﬂammatory reactions are also avoided[55].
The dissolved magnesium cations from the implant could even be a promoting factor for
bone regeneration and attachment [37, 64, 41, 56, 45], thus possibly reducing the total time
in which the patient is su↵ering from e.g. a broken bone. Zreiqat et al. [64] and Revell
et al. [41] found that using ion-implantation to modify respectively Al2O3 and TiAlV alloy
implants with Mg2+ resulted in increased adhesion to respectively human bone-derived
cells and live rabbit femurs compared to unmodiﬁed Al2O3 and TiAlV. Witte et al. [56]
tested four Mg alloys as biodegradable implants in the femurs of guinea pigs. Results
showed increased biocompatibility, adhesion to the bone and bone formation in direct
contact with the magnesium implant compared to biodegradable polymer implant. Figure
2 shows ﬂuoroscopic images of the cross sections of the implanted guinea pig femurs. The
green color in (b) indicate living bone cells, thus highly increased bone formation is evident
compared to degradable polymer implant in (a).
Table 1: Summary of physical and mechanical properties of conventional metallic implants, magnesium
and natural bone. Data collected from Staiger et al. [45]
Properties
Natural
bone
Magnesium
Ti alloy
Co-Cr al-
loy
Stainless
steel
Density [g/cm3]
1.8-2.1
1.74-2.0
4.4-4.5
8.3-9.2
7.9-8.1
Elastic modulus [GPa]
3-20
41-45
110-117
230
189-205
Compressive yield strength [MPa]
130-180
65-100
758-1117
450-1000
170-310
Fracture toughness [MPam1/2]
3-6
15-40
55-115
N/A
50-200
The major problem arising when using Mg is that it corrodes too quickly. In the biological
pH of about 7.4-7.6 Mg is not passivated according to ﬁgure 1 and the Mg is highly
sensitive to a high chloride environment as the bodily ﬂuids. The Mg implant looses
2
==PAGE:11==
1
INTRODUCTION
Figure 1: Pourbaix-diagram of the magnesium-water system.
Figure 2: Fluoroscopic images of cross-sections of degradable implants in the femur of a guinea pig. (a):
polymer type degradable implant. (b): Magnesium rod. In vivo staining of newly formed bone by calcein
green (ﬂuorescent dye capable of penetrating the cell membrane of living cells). Bar = 1.5mm; I = implant
residual; P = Periosteal bone formation; E = Endosteal bone formation. Reproduced from Witte et al. [56]
mechanical integrity before the bone has healed, due to the severe corrosion, and in the
process produces hydrogen at a rate exceeding what the biological system can handle[45, 56].
Essentially two solutions exist in order to solve this problem: 1) using the principles
of alloying to create a metal which show better passivation properties than pure Mg or 2)
create a surface coating which will slow down the corrosion process and protect the Mg
substrate for the time necessary for the bone to heal. Advantages and drawbacks may
3
==PAGE:12==
1
INTRODUCTION
exist for both solutions. In the case of alloying the corrosion rate is generally decreased
throughout the entire lifetime of the implant suggesting that hydrogen evolution will be
controlled at all times. However choosing the proper alloying elements can be diﬃcult due
to the demand for non-toxicity.
In the case of surface coating for as long as the coating is functional hydrogen evolution is
slowed down and mechanical integrity of the implant is maintained. When the coating is
corroded away, optimally after the tissue has healed, hydrogen evolution will drastically
increase which can create problems. Thus a combination of the two solutions would be a
more appropriate solution.
As mentioned, the more tricky part when applying these two solutions individually or
in combination for the protection of Mg, is that the elements used either for alloying or
as basis for surface coating should not show toxicity towards living organisms or cells.
Conventional alloys like the AZ and the AM series contain Al in various amounts and
more special alloys like the ZK and WE series contain Zr and Y/rare-earths respectively,
which all are considered not to be biocompatible [59, 20, 15]. Speciﬁcally, Al has been
connected to various neurological disorders as dementia, senile dementia and Alzheimer
disease [16, 20] and Zr, Y and rare-earths showed cytotoxicity in cell cultures from an
in-vitro study[20] and severe bone alterations from an in-vivo study[15].
On this basis, new alloy and coating formulations have been developed which show promis-
ing results. Speciﬁcally a Mg-Zn-Ca alloy has attracted much attention due to its excellent
biocompatibility[59, 46, 38, 11]. In the case of coatings, besides a requirement for corrosion
protection, there is a need for improving bio-compatibility and bioactivity. Moreover, in
order for the implant to degrade at a desired rate, the coatings should o↵er only a limited
barrier function. In this context much attention has been given to Ca/P-based coating
formulations[19, 24, 49, 29] due to the promotion of hydroxyapatite (HA), Ca5(PO4)3(OH),
which is a major component in natural bone. A comprehensive review on di↵erent types of
biomedical coatings on magnesium alloys has been made by Hornberger et al. [25].
Recently a new method for conversion coating of Al alloys have been developed[14].
The method utilizes pressurized water vapor to accelerate the formation of a conversion
oxide ﬁlm. The treatment is applicable with chemical additions as well. Due to the chemical
similarity between Al and Mg, showing a high electrochemical reactivity and a high aﬃnity
to O, which in both cases naturally results in the formation of a nanometer-sized oxide ﬁlm,
it was hypothesized that this new conversion coating method was applicable with Mg as well.
Purpose of the present work
On the basis of the previous describtion, a detailed study on the conversion coating of
Mg alloys formed by pressurized water vapor, with and without the addition of Ca/P
chemicals, was therefore planned. The project should contain the following:
Morphology study
An in depth investigation of the coating morphology with regards to the general
matrix of the metal and the intermetallic phases and particles contained in the metal.
Coating growth study
A study of the coating growth rate as a function of treatment time.
4
==PAGE:13==
1
INTRODUCTION
Corrosion study
Corrosion performance testing of the coating in chloride containing environments.
Parallel to this, a study of the as cast microstructure of a Mg alloy for two types of castings
was made in order to gain a proper understanding of the interdependency between bulk
microstructure and surface treatment. The following aspects was considered:
E↵ects of cooling rate
An investigation of the microstructure - intermetallic phases and dendritic structure -
as a result of fast and slow cooling rate.
Segregation
A comparative study between analytical estimations and measured segregation of
alloying elements in the Mg alloy.
Simulation
A study of the accurateness of simulations of castings relative to actual castings.
Methods of analysis
The following analysis methods was applied:
Light optical microscopy, low and high resolution scanning electron microscopy com-
bined with focused ion beam sputtering for surface and cross sectional characterization
of microstructure and morphologies of as cast surface, surface treated and corrosion
tested surface.
Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy for superﬁcial elemental analysis used to identify
intermetallic phases and particles, compositional gradients and surface coatings.
X-ray di↵raction spectroscopy used to identify speciﬁc compounds obtained from
surface treatments.
Glow discharge optical emission spectroscopy for evaluation of ﬁlm thicknesses
obtained from surface treatments.
Potentiodynamic and potentiostatic polarization measurements in chloride containing
aqueous solution for accelerated evaluation of corrosion performance of obtained
surface coatings.
Long term immersion corrosion testing of surface coatings in a solution containing
simulated concentrations of a number of salts contained in body ﬂuids.
5
==PAGE:14==
2
CASTING OF AZ91 - MATERIALS AND METHODS
2
Casting of AZ91 - Materials and methods
The material used for the casting was AZ91 magnesium alloy. The nominal composition of
the alloy is 9wt% Al, 1wt% Zn and Mg balance. Other functional alloying elements exist
in quantities below 1wt% along with some impurities. An analysis of the composition is
shown in table 2.
Table 2: Composition of AZ91
Element
Mg
Al
Zn
Mn
Si
Fe
Cu
Wt%
88.352
9.75
1.22
0.334
0.020
<0.001
0.006
2.1
Preparation of casting experiment
A zircon-sand mould was prepared using 5kg of zirconia sand, 3.5wt% Sodium silicate
binder and 0.35wt% Winset 50 catalyst. The binder was initially added to the sand and
mixed thoroughly by hand. Afterwards the catalyst was added and the mixture was stirred
vigorously by hand for about 1 minute to evenly distribute the catalyst. The patterns were
coated with a release agent and powdered with talc for easier release of the mould when
done curing. The sand mixture was added to the patterns and pressed ﬁrmly by hand.
Figure 3 on the next page shows the resulting sand mould.
A steel die was designed based on the wooden pattern for the sand mould and drawn using
CAD-software. The material for the steel die was a conventional steel. Figure 4 on page 8
shows a projected view of the steel mould.
A cast AZ91 ingot was cut into smaller cubes approximately 3x3x3cm in size and placed
in a crucible. A special crucible was designed and manufactured with a bottom pouring
spout in order to reduce pouring of slack (see appendix A on page 102 for a projected view
and photograph), however due to changing circumstances it was not used in practice.
In order to reduce sparking and ignition of the magnesium cubes a special salt (compound
unknown) was poured into the crucible until the Mg cubes were covered. The crucible
was placed in a furnace at about 750◦C. After the magnesium and salt had melted, excess
salt was skimmed o↵as much as possible in order to try and avoid salt inclusions in the
castings.
Moulds were placed in a box with sand and prepared with thermocouples (TC) for temper-
ature data acquisition near the center of the casting as shown in ﬁgure 5 on page 9.
At a temperature of about 650◦C and 670◦C for the sand mould and the steel die respectively,
the melt was poured into the moulds at a pouring time of about 5 seconds.
6
==PAGE:15==
2
CASTING OF AZ91 - MATERIALS AND METHODS
Figure 3: Zircon sand moulds.
7
==PAGE:16==
2
CASTING OF AZ91 - MATERIALS AND METHODS
Figure 4: Projected view of the two steel die halves. A: Casting cavity B: Combined inlet, pouring cup
and feeder. C: Die wall. D: Hole for TC data acquisition. E: Hole for TC data acquisition at a distance of
12mm from the casting. F: Holes for guide pins.
8
==PAGE:17==
2
CASTING OF AZ91 - MATERIALS AND METHODS
Figure 5: Preparation of dies and placement of TCs.
9
==PAGE:18==
2
CASTING OF AZ91 - MATERIALS AND METHODS
2.2
Microstructural analysis
A cross section of the cast samples was cut near the placement of the TC inside the
casting in order for the microscopical observations to be in keeping with the TC-data. The
microstructural analysis was done using light optical microscopy (LOM) and Scanning
Electron Microscopy (SEM) with Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) for elemental
analysis of phases and elemental gradient scans.
2.3
Segregation model
The segregation of alloying elements during solidiﬁcation of castings can induce formation
of phases with undesirable material properties and is therefore often a crucial factor to
consider when designing castings for speciﬁc purposes. The segregation of Al alloying
element in Mg is evaluated using the Mg-Al binary phase diagram in ﬁgure 6 on the next
page and Scheil’s model of segregation, (1), which will give an approximation of the fraction
of the di↵erent phases forming during solidiﬁcation.
CAl
l
= CAl
0 · (1 −fs)kAl−1
(1)
Cl is the elemental concentration in the melt, C0 is the nominal elemental concentration,
fs is the fraction of solidiﬁed material and k = Cs
Cl is the partition coeﬃcient.
The assumptions for applying Scheil’s model of segregation are 1) local equilibrium between
solid and liquid phase, 2) no di↵usion in the solid phase and 3) complete mixing in the
liquid phase.
Scheil’s model of segregation is generally valid for di↵usion coeﬃcient (D) values D <
10−11m2/s. The crystal structure of Mg is hexagonal close-packed (HCP) why di↵usion of
substitutional alloying elements is hindered to a great extent. The HCP crystal structure
show many similarities to the face centered-cubic crystal structure, one of them being the
atomic packing factor. Therefore it is assumed that the di↵usion coeﬃcient is in the order
of 10−13m2/s like for the FCC crystal structure [17, p. 188].
Besides approximating the fraction of phases, Scheil’s model will be used to estimate
the concentration gradients of Al in the solid state. In order to take di↵usion in the solid
state into account, a modiﬁcation of Scheil’s model of segregation exists as shown in (2).
CAl
s
= kAl · C0 ·
✓
1 −
fs
1 + B
◆kAl−1
(2)
Here, the partition coeﬃcient k has been applied and the back-di↵usion factor
B = 4D✓kAl
λ2
den
(3)
where ✓is the solidiﬁcation time and λden is the secondary dendrite arm spacing (SDAS),
accounts for di↵usion in the solid state. ✓-values have been obtained through Magma
simulations and will be compared with results from experimental cooling curves. λden-
values have been evaluated from an empirical equation, (4), proposed by Caceres et al. [10]
speciﬁcally for the AZ91 alloy.
10
==PAGE:19==
2
CASTING OF AZ91 - MATERIALS AND METHODS
λden = 5.3✓0.43
(4)
where the unit for ✓and λden is seconds, s, and µm respectively. The calculated λden-values
will be compared to measured values from electron and optical micrographs.
2.4
Analysing the Al-Mg binary phase diagram
From the binary phase diagram in ﬁgure 6 an evaluation of the expected phases appearing
in the casting can be made. The phase diagram shows that for an alloy with 9wt% Al two
phases are thermodynamically stable in solid state namely the Al-Mg compound Al12Mg17
(β-phase) and Mg-matrix (↵-phase). A microstructure containing dendrites of Mg with
dissolved Al and β-phases distributed in between dendrites can therefore be expected.
Further explanation follows.
Figure 6: Binary phase diagram for Al-Mg.
As the melt starts to solidify, at point 1, the composition of the melt, with decreasing
temperature, will change according to the liquidus equilibrium line in the (L + ↵)-region,
until the composition of the melt reaches eutectic composition at point 2. Accordingly, with
dropping temperature, the composition of the solidifying ↵-phase dendrites will change
according to the solidus equilibrium line in the (L + ↵)-region. Thereby the last melt will
have eutectic composition and the last solidiﬁed ↵-phase dendrites will have a maximum
of Al dissolved according to point 3.
Below the eutectic temperature at 437◦C the last melt will solidify as eutectic structure,
most likely a lamellae structure. As the temperature drops further ↵-dendritic structure
over-saturated with Al will begin to reject Al atoms. At this stage di↵usion is very limited
11
==PAGE:20==
2
CASTING OF AZ91 - MATERIALS AND METHODS
and the distances at which the atoms will be able to travel is very short. Figure 7 shows
micrographs of the AZ91 magnesium alloy at three di↵erent cooling rates (low to high: a,
b, c) reproduced from Zhu et al. [63]. Here three structures are dominating: ↵-dendritic
structure, eutectic β-phase and lamellar β-precipitates.
Figure 7: Micrographs of the AZ91 magnesium alloy at three di↵erent cooling rates. (a): low cooling rate;
(b): medium cooling rate; (c): high cooling rate. Reproduced from Zhu et al. [63]
2.5
Magmasoft simulations
A numerical simulation of the casting was made in Magmasoft. The inlet was deﬁned as
a circular area centered on the top of the casting. The inlet geometry was 30mm and
10mm in height. Approximately 12 tracer points was generated automatically in a circular
distribution.
The mould was deﬁned as a closed cube surrounding the casting having the same exterior
dimensions as the steel and sand mould.
12
==PAGE:21==
3
SURFACE TREATMENT - MATERIALS AND METHODS
Figure 8: The deﬁned geometry in Magmasoft including the casting, mould and inlet
A mesh of about 2.000.000 elements was generated. The material deﬁnitions were AZ91
Mg alloy for the casting, common steel for the steel die and Zircon-sand with silicate binder
for the sand mould. The pouring temperature was set to 660◦C and the initial mould
temperature was set to 20◦C. The feeding eﬃciency was set to 20% [48] (see appendix B
on page 104) and the pouring time was set to 5.0s.
A heat transfer coeﬃcient, HTC=1000 W/m2K, for a permanent steel mould in gravity
die casting was found most suitable for the simulation of the steel die casting. The HTC
for the sand casting was at a constant value of 1000 W/m2K.
Thermocouple data was generated from the same locations as for the practical experiment
- in the center of the casting, see ﬁgure 4 on page 8.
2.6
Simulated and practical cooling curves
In deriving the time-temperature, (t, T), cooling curves it was assumed that the curve is
composed of straight line elements between each data point. The slope, ∆T/∆t, of each of
these line elements was then calculated using equation (5)
∆T
∆t = T2 −T1
t2 −t1
(5)
3
Surface treatment - Materials and methods
In this part of the project two commercially available magnesium alloys were used: The
AZ91 alloyed with 9wt% Al and 1wt% Zn and the AZ31 alloyed with 3wt% Al and 1wt% Zn.
The AZ91 was a ingot casting and the samples were cut and prepared for experimentation
13
==PAGE:22==
3
SURFACE TREATMENT - MATERIALS AND METHODS
directly from the ingot. Sample sizes varied from test to test. Table 2 on page 6 shows the
result from a compositional analysis.
The AZ31 was acquired from Goodfellow and was a !10mm extruded rod. Samples were
cut perpendicular to the direction of extrusion in approximate sizes of !10x2.5mm. The
composition of AZ31 was not measured due to the small size of the samples.
3.1
Preparation of samples
All samples were polished using 1000 grit SiC sand paper. Loose particles were rinsed
o↵using DI water and the samples were immediately dried under a hot stream of air to
minimize oxide and subsequently cleaned ultrasonically in a bath containing 96% ethanol
for 1min.
3.2
Steam assisted hydrothermal treatment
The steam-assisted hydrothermal treatment (SHT) was conducted in an ALL AMERICAN
Autoclave, model no. 025. The autoclave was equipped with a pressure gauge (PG) and a
pressure release valve with a pressure regulator weigth (PR) with options for 5, 10 and
15psi over-pressure (corresponding to 0.34, 0.69 and 1.03bar and 107, 113 and 118◦C
respectively) of which 1.0bar was used for all treatments. The time for reaching the pre-set
pressure was approximately 18min and the time for decreasing the pressure to atmospheric
pressure, after treatment was ﬁnished and before opening of the autoclave was possible,
was approximately 4min. The treatment times mentioned in this work will refer to the time
at which the over-pressure in the autoclave was 1.0bar (corresponding to approximately
2.0bar when accounting for atmospheric pressure).
1.5l DI water, pH=5.2, or an aqueous solution of certain chemicals was used as steam
source. Samples were mounted on a ﬂat aluminum plate at two distances from the solution:
1) ⇠30cm and 2) ⇠4cm from solution surface using double-sided sticky tape, as illustrated
in ﬁgure 9 on the next page. The lower sample holder was not inside the autoclave during
treatments of samples at 30cm distance.
The chemical solution used for the steam source was 0.07M Ca(NO3)2+ 0.06M NH4H2PO4,
pH=4.2. The chemical solution will henceforth be refered to as CaP-solution. The solution
was adobted from the ﬁndings of Kaabi Falahieh Asl et al. [29], who use 0.1M Ca(NO3)2
instead of 0.07M, however due to mis-labeling of the Ca(NO3)2-chemical, a 0.07M solution
was mixed instead. This was ﬁrst realized several months into the project and was therefore
not changed.
14
==PAGE:23==
3
SURFACE TREATMENT - MATERIALS AND METHODS
Figure 9: Schematic illustration of the experimental setup showing placement of the samples inside the
autoclave relative to the treatment solution.
3.3
Study of surface and particle morphology after SHT
The surface and intermetallic particles contained in the AZ91 and AZ31 alloys were
studied before and after SHT using high resolution Field Emission Gun Scanning Electron
Microscope (FEG-SEM) Quanta 200 FEG MKII from FEI, Jeol JSM-5900 Scanning electron
microscope (SEM), an Inspect S SEM from FEI with a tungsten ﬁlament equipped with
an Oxford Instruments 50mm2 EDS X-Max using AZtec software and a Helios Nanolab
DualBeam Focused Ion Beam Scanning Electron Microscope (FIB-SEM) from FEI for
cross sectional analysis of the surface and particles.
Table 3 lists the SHT parameters for the samples investigated in the surface morphology
study. Micro indentations was made in samples, for experiment 1 and 2, and used as
reference points enabling relocation of the exact same particles before and after SHT. Micro
indentations would not be possible to relocate in experiment 3 due to the thicker coating
obtained when using the speciﬁed chemicals.
Table 3: Experimental matrix for morphology study.
Experiment
Alloy
Solution
Distance from solution
treatment time
1
AZ91
H2O
30cm
10 min
2
AZ31
H2O
4cm
10 min
3
AZ91
CaP
4cm
10 min
15
==PAGE:24==
3
SURFACE TREATMENT - MATERIALS AND METHODS
3.3.1
Surface analysis of phases
A Bruker aXS X-ray di↵raction spectrometer (XRD) was used to identify surface compounds
and phases. Grazing angles of ✓= 0.5◦and ✓= 1.5◦were used on oxide ﬁlm and CaP-
coating respectively. The scanning ranged from 2✓= 20◦-110◦with a step size of 0.04◦and
a step time of 38s and 10s for the oxide ﬁlm and CaP-coating respectively.
3.4
Coating growth study
A study of the coating growth as a function of treatment time in the early stages of the
coating evolution was made. The coating thickness was evaluated using a HORIBA Jobin
Yvon, GD proﬁler 2, Glow Discharge Optical Emission Spectroscope (GDOES) using
Quantum XP software. Sample sizes were about 25x15x2.5mm.
Three di↵erent parameters, alloy, solution and sample distance from solution was varied, as
shown in table 4 giving the opportunity to investigate the e↵ect of the individual parameter.
For each experiment ﬁve di↵erent treatment times, 30s, 60s, 120s, 240s and 480s, was
investigated.
Table 4: Experimental matrix for coating growth study.
Experiment
Alloy
Solution
Distance
1
AZ91
H2O
30cm
2
AZ91
CaP
4cm
3
AZ91
H2O
4cm
4
AZ31
H2O
4cm
For each experiment and treatment time triplicates were made for statistical evaluation.
3.4.1
GDOES calibration
In order to be able to use the GDOES apparatus for thickness measurements, it was
necessary to ﬁnd the proper power and pressure settings which give a homogeneously
sputtered crater. The crater proﬁle was measured using a HOMMELWERKE, waveline
20 roughness meter. When the proper power and pressure settings were found the crater
depth could be measured using the same roughness meter. A few untreated Mg samples,
polished and cleaned, was used for the sputter rate calibration of the SHT-coated samples
using DI-water. For the sputter rate calibration of SHT-coated samples using CaP-solution,
craters from a few samples from experiment 2 in table 4 was measured with the roughness
meter.
3.5
Electrochemical study
The electrochemical properties were evaluated using both potentiodynamic and potentio-
static polarization measurements and by simple immersion testing where the open circuit
16
==PAGE:25==
3
SURFACE TREATMENT - MATERIALS AND METHODS
potential (OCP) was measured continously. The equipment used was an ACM instruments
GillAC.
3.5.1
Polarization measurements
Figure 10 on the next page shows the setup for the potentiodynamic and potentiostatic
testing. The cell was a ﬂat cell suitable for ﬂat samples and testing of a speciﬁc area on
the sample. The cell did not support any form of stirring and all measurements were done
at room temperature. The electrolyte used was 100ml of 0.1M NaCl, pH=5.5. After each
measurement the electrolyte was renewed and the cell cleaned in DI water.
The working electrode (WE) was the sample, the reference electrode (RE) was a KCl
saturated Ag/AgCl electrode with a potential relative to the standard hydrogen electrode
of about 199±4 mV. The auxilliary electrode (AE) was a platinum wire. The exposed area
on the WE was 0.95cm2 and 0.28cm2 for the AZ91 and AZ31 samples respectively.
For the potentiodynamic measurements an OCP measurement was initially run for 900s.
The potentiodynamic measurements were divided into an anodic and a cathodic mea-
surement conducted on individual sites on the sample. The anodic measurements ranged
from OCP −100mV !OCP+500mV whereas the cathodic measurements ranged from
OCP + 100mV ! OCP −500mV and a scanning rate of 60mV/min was used in all cases.
The potentiostatic measurements were only conducted on the AZ31 alloy to test a hypoth-
esis about a certain behavior observed for this alloy in the potentiodynamic measurements.
An OCP of -1516.2mV was established after 1 hour on a reference sample only polished
and cleaned as described in section 3.1. All potentiostatic measurements were conducted
at -1416.2mV , +100mV relative to the reference OCP.
AZ91 samples were cut to sizes of about 25x20x2.5mm and the AZ31 were cut to disks with
size !10x2.5mm. Table 5 lists the parameters for the SHT. For each experiment duplicates
were prepared.
Table 5: Experimental matrix for potentiodynamic polarization study.
Experiment
Alloy
Solution
Distance from solution
treatment time
1
AZ91
H2O
30cm
10 min
20 min
2
AZ31
H2O
4cm
10 min
20 min
3
AZ91
CaP
4cm
10 min
20 min
3.5.2
Immersion test
The immersion tests were done at room temperature in a AMRESCO Biotechnology grade
phosphate bu↵ered saline (PBS) solution at physiological pH (pH=7.4) containing 0.137M
NaCl, 0.002M KCl and 0.010M Phosphate bu↵er according to the supplier. The salts and
17
==PAGE:26==
3
SURFACE TREATMENT - MATERIALS AND METHODS
Figure 10: Experimental setup for polarization measurements. A: WE: working electrode, AE: auxiliary
electrode, RE: reference electrode (Ag/AgCl). B: EA: Exposed area = 0.95cm2 for the AZ91 alloy and
0.28cm2 for the AZ31 alloy.
their concentrations resemble that of the bodily ﬂuids to some degree which is relevant for
the implant application. The pH was conﬁrmed to be at 7.4 using a Radiometer PHM220
Lab pH Meter. PBS tablets were dissolved in DI water, 1 tablet per 100ml.
For both the AZ91 and AZ31 alloy cylindrical samples (!10x10mm) were made and
polished to 1000 grit using SiC sand paper. For the AZ31 extruded rod samples a relatively
large amount of grinding was necessary to remove surface defects and manufacturing
impurities. The exact dimensions of these samples were therefore measured individually
using a caliper and the exposed area was calculated from these measurements, see table I.1
in appendix I.2.
400ml of the PBS solution was used for each immersion test, renewing the solution after
each run. Light agitation of the electrolyte was applied using a pressurized-air-driven
magnetic stirrer ensuring no interference from an electric driven stirrer, however a bit
unstable stirring was observed. The WE was the sample and an Ag/AgCl electrode was
used as RE. OCP measurements was taken every 10 seconds for 24 hours total. Samples
were weighed before and after immersion test with an accuracy of ±10−4g.
Table 6 shows the SHT-parameters for the immersion test.
18
==PAGE:27==
3
SURFACE TREATMENT - MATERIALS AND METHODS
Table 6: Experimental matrix for immersion corrosion study.
Experiment
Alloy
Solution
Distance from solution
treatment time
1
AZ91
H2O
4cm
10 min
2
AZ31
H2O
4cm
10 min
3
AZ91
CaP
4cm
10 min
4
AZ31
CaP
4cm
10 min
19
==PAGE:28==
4
CASTING OF AZ91 MG ALLOY - RESULTS
4
Casting of AZ91 Mg alloy - Results
4.1
Magmasoft simulations
Figure 11 shows the fraction of solidiﬁed material for both the sand mould and steel die.
It is seen that the center of the casting, where the thermocouple data has been acquired,
is completely solidiﬁed at approximately 194s and 25s for the sand mould and steel die
respectively. Thus the solidiﬁcation time, ✓, at the TC becomes:
✓num
sand = 194s
✓num
steel = 25s
where ”num” denotes a numerical simulation result.
Figure 11: Magmasoft solidiﬁcation simulation of the fraction solidiﬁed melt for the sand mould (left)
and steel die (right). The diagrams have been exported at the point where the melt has solidiﬁed around
the central thermocouple resulting in the following solidiﬁcation times: ✓num
sand = 194s and ✓num
steel = 25s.
Figure 12 on the following page shows a simulation diagram of the temperature of the melt
during pouring of the melt. The diagrams have been taken at 1s (left most pair) and 3s
(right most pair) into the total pouring time of 5s. At 1s the steel die casting is already
down to temperatures between 584.3◦C and 592.9◦C meaning that solidiﬁcation has begun
according to the phase diagram in ﬁgure 6 on page 11. At 3s the bottom of the sand mould
20
==PAGE:29==
4
CASTING OF AZ91 MG ALLOY - RESULTS
casting starts to solidify reaching temperatures between 592.9◦C and 601.4◦C. Most of the
melt in the steel die has solidiﬁed at 3s. This result clearly illustrates the di↵erences in
cooling rate between the sand mould and steel die.
Figure 12: Magmasoft pouring simulation diagram showing temperature of the melt at 1s and 3s into the
total pouring time of 5s for the sand mould and steel die casting.
4.1.1
Cooling curves
Figure 13a and 13b on the following page show cooling curves and the calculated time-
derivative, using equation (5), obtained from Magmasoft simulations of the sand mould
and steel die casting respectively. In both cases the time-derivatives exhibit a steep positive
slope towards zero, two times. This indicates that heat is being released at a rate which
exceeds the heat removed through the mould or die. The heat originates from the heat of
solidiﬁcation and is measurable when a large number of nuclei are able to form, overcome
the energy barrier and grow, in this case, during liquid to solid phase transformation. The
steep positive slope in the time-derived curves thereby indicates nucleation of phases during
21
==PAGE:30==
4
CASTING OF AZ91 MG ALLOY - RESULTS
solidiﬁcation. Complete solidiﬁcation is realized shortly after the last nucleation point.
Table 7 summarizes the times and temperatures for the two nucleations as well as the time
for complete solidiﬁcation, tsol, in the sand mould and steel die casting.
Table 7: Time and temperature values at nucleation points during solidiﬁcation and cooling of AZ91 alloy
cast in sand mould and steel die. Estimated solidiﬁcation time, σ, at placement of thermocouple.
t1
t2
T1
T2
✓
Sand
12s
165s
600◦C
428◦C
173s
Steel
8s
23s
600◦C
428◦C
24s
Comparing with the phase diagram in ﬁgure 6 on page 11 the ﬁrst nucleation at 600◦C can
be attributed to dendritic nucleations of ↵-Mg phase at point 1. The second nucleation at
428◦C ﬁts more or less with eutectic nucleation at point 2. A slight undercooling is present
for both the dendritic and eutectic nucleation which is necessary to overcome the energy
barrier for formation and subsequent growth.
(a) Sand mould casting.
(b) Steel die casting.
Figure 13: Magmasoft simulated cooling curves and calculated time derivative of temperatures from
thermocouple data acquired centrally in the casting and in the mould, 12mm from the edge of the casting.
(a): Sand mould casting. (b): Steel die casting.
22
==PAGE:31==
4
CASTING OF AZ91 MG ALLOY - RESULTS
4.2
Experimental casting
Figure 14 shows the resulting castings of AZ91 magnesium alloy in zircon sand mould (left)
and permanent steel die (right). A number of defects for each casting can be mentioned.
For instance the sand mould casting show ﬂash at the parting line of the mould halves,
however most prominent at the bottom due to a defect in the mould.
In the steel die casting, especially in the bottom, a sort of incoherency in the surface is
seen as depressions of the metal into the casting.
Figure 14: Castings result. Left: Sand mould casting. Right: Steel die casting.
The casting salt used to protect the melt from burning is also seen as inclusions creating a
lot of defects and enabling extensive corrosion due to the salt attracting water from humid
air.
23
==PAGE:32==
4
CASTING OF AZ91 MG ALLOY - RESULTS
Internal defects can be seen in ﬁgure 15 where the cross sections of the sand mould
(left) and steel die (right) castings are shown. The cross section has been cut close to the
location of the central thermocouple. No porosities are visible for the naked eye for the
sand mould casting, however large porosities located centrally in the casting, marked with
black arrows, are clearly visible for the steel die casting. Corrosion product is marked with
a red arrow.
Figure 15: Castings result cross section. Left: Sand mould casting. Right: Steel die casting.
The large internal porosities and the depressions on the surface for the steel die casting is
most likely due to the almost instantaneous solidiﬁcation of the melt which was realized
from the Magmasoft simulation of the temperature during pouring in ﬁgure 12 on page 21.
The high cooling rate in combination with splashing, as a result of poor pouring, is perfect
for entrapment of oxides, gases and casting salts. Gases can originate from the atmosphere
or from the melt it self due to higher solubility of gases in liquids with respect to solids.
Further more it is suggested by Dahle et al. [13] that a bad combination of mushy zone
size, interdendritic feeding, permeability and eutectic volume fraction results in a peak
percentage of microposities in the AZ91 alloy speciﬁcally.
4.2.1
Cooling curves
The thermocouple data from the experimental castings in sand mould and steel die have
been used in ﬁgure 16 and 17 to plot the (t, T)-cooling curve and, using equation (5), the
calculated time derivative of the temperature. Enlargements of area 1 and 2 in the cooling
curves are also shown in the bottom.
Looking at the derived cooling curve two clear nucleations are seen for both the sand mould
and steel die castings. In the case of sand casting no signiﬁcant undercooling can be seen
on the enlargement for either of the nucleations. The cooling rate is merely slowed down
during the nucleation. In the case of steel die a large undercooling of about 25◦C at the
ﬁrst nucleation is seen.
24
==PAGE:33==
4
CASTING OF AZ91 MG ALLOY - RESULTS
Figure 16: Top: Cooling curve from practical sand mould casting. Mid: Derived cooling curve. Bottom:
Enlargements of area 1 and 2 in the cooling curve.
25
==PAGE:34==
4
CASTING OF AZ91 MG ALLOY - RESULTS
Figure 17: Top: Cooling curve from practical steel mould casting. Mid: Derived cooling curve. Bottom:
Enlargements of area 1 and 2 in the cooling curve.
As for the Magmasoft simulated cooling curves, the ﬁrst and second nucleation seen in the
experimental cooling curve can be attributed to dendritic ↵-Mg phase and eutectic-phase
respectively. Table 8 on the following page summarizes estimated values of time and
temperature for the ﬁrst and second nucleation for the experimental casting in both the
sand mould and steel die casting. The values from the simulated cooling curves are shown
26
==PAGE:35==
4
CASTING OF AZ91 MG ALLOY - RESULTS
as well for comparison.
Table 8: Time and temperature values at nucleation points during solidiﬁcation and cooling of AZ91 alloy
cast in sand mould and steel die. Also estimated solidiﬁcation time, σ, at placement of thermocouple.
Experimental and simulation values shown.
t1
t2
T1
T2
σ
Experimental
Sand
8s
160s
600◦C
428◦C
170s
Steel
2s
14s
575◦C
421◦C
16s
Simulated
Sand
12s
165s
600◦C
428◦C
173s
Steel
8s
23s
600◦C
428◦C
24s
For the experimental casting t1 and t2 are both slightly lower than for the simulated casting.
An obvious factor, which could be the major reason for this di↵erence is the start, or
pouring, temperatures. The simulated cooling curve shows approximately 670◦C whereas
the experimental cooling curve shows approximately 625◦C resulting in a di↵erence of
45◦C. This is a large di↵erence and deﬁnitely has an inﬂuence on the time perspective.
The temperatures are in good agreement, however the undercooling in the case of the
experimental steel die casting is more severe and a di↵erence between T1- and T2-values
is seen between the sand mould and steel die castings. No such di↵erence exists for the
simulated castings. Whether this again is a result of higher pouring temperatures for the
simulated castings or the simulations falls short, when it comes to accurately modelling the
di↵usion of atoms aspect during solidiﬁcation, is not known. Another explanation could be
that di↵erences in the constituents of the simulated alloy and experimental alloy exist and
that these may alter the temperatures for nucleation.
4.3
Segregation
Using equation (1) the approximate fraction of phases forming during solidiﬁcation can be
calculated. From the binary phase diagram in ﬁgure 6 on page 11 a solidiﬁcation sequence
can be established. First ↵-Mg will solidify until eutectic composition of the melt is reached.
At this point the term CAl
l
= 33.3wt%Al and the remaining melt will solidify with eutectic
composition. Since fs indicates the fraction of solidiﬁed melt and the eutectic phase is
the last solidifying phase, (1 −fs) will indicate the fraction of eutectic phase after total
solidiﬁcation, therefore (1 −fs) = fe:
Reading from the phase diagram the partition coeﬃcient becomes:
kAl = CAl
s
CAl
l
kAl = 100 −87.4
100 −66.7
kAl = 0.38
Hence, the fraction of eutectic phase becomes:
27
==PAGE:36==
4
CASTING OF AZ91 MG ALLOY - RESULTS
fe =
✓CAl
l
CAl
0
◆
1
kAl−1
=
✓33.3wt%
9.0wt%
◆
1
0.38−1
= 12.1wt%
After total solidiﬁcation the casting will contain approximately 12.1wt% eutectic phase
and the remaining 87.9wt% will be ↵-Mg phase containing Al in solid solution.
4.3.1
Aluminum concentration variation in solid state
The concentration variation of Al between two secondary dendrites, in the case of sand
mould and steel die casting respectively, has been evaluated using equation (2) and (3):
The secondary dendrite arm spacing evaluated from empirical equation (4):
λsand
den = 5.3✓0.43
= 5.3 · 194s0.43
= 51.1µm
λsteel
den = 5.3✓0.43
= 5.3 · 25s0.43
= 21.2µm
The back-di↵usion factor, B, evaluated from equation (3):
Bsand = 4D✓kAl
λ2
den
= 4 · 10−13m2/s · 194s · 0.38
(51.1 · 10−6m)2
= 0.011
Bsteel = 4D✓kAl
λ2
den
= 4 · 10−13m2/s · 25s · 0.38
(21.2 · 10−6m)2
= 0.008
Figure 18a and 18b show plots of the concentration of Al in solid and liquid phase as a
function of fs for the sand mould and steel die case respectively. fs has been converted to
28
==PAGE:37==
4
CASTING OF AZ91 MG ALLOY - RESULTS
secondary dendrite arm spacing through the basic assumption of Scheil’s equation that
the volume element considered has the length of λden/2 [17, p. 185]. It is seen that the
concentration of Al in the liquid phase reaches the eutectic composition, 33.3wt% Al, at
a certain point. Since the concentration of Al in the liquid phase will not exceed the
eutectic composition, according to the phase diagram, the remaining of the curves have
been truncated at this point.
(a) Sand mould
(b) Steel die.
Figure 18:
Concentration variation of Al between two secondary dendrite arms with a spacing of
approximately 50µm and 21µm estimated for the sand mould and steel die casting respectively. The curves
have been truncated at the point where the liquidus phase Al concentration reaches eutectic composition.
The lowest and highest value on the horizontal axis indicate the center and ”oldest” part of
two neighbouring secondary dendrites and the dendrites grow symetrically outwards from
this point. According to the phase diagram the ﬁrst dendritic structure should contain
around 3wt% Al. Using Scheil’s equation a concentration of 3.4wt% Al is obtained for both
the sand mould and steel die case (see appendix E for table values) thereby showing good
agreement between the expected and Scheil’s model. The partition coeﬃcient contained in
Scheil’s model assumes straight liquidus and solidus lines in the phase diagram and as can
be seen this seems to be a fair assumption in this case.
29
==PAGE:38==
4
CASTING OF AZ91 MG ALLOY - RESULTS
4.4
Characterization of microstructure
In the following the microstructure in the vicinity of the thermocouple in the casting is
characterized using optical and electron microscopy.
4.4.1
Light optical microscopy
Figure 19a and 19b on the following page show light optical micrographs of the sand mould
and steel die castings respectively at the center of the casting. Di↵erent phases have been
marked with color-coded arrows (see caption). Larger magniﬁcation images can be seen in
appendix D on page 108.
30
==PAGE:39==
4
CASTING OF AZ91 MG ALLOY - RESULTS
(a) Sand mould
(b) Steel die. Eutectic lamellar structure and grain boundary β-precipitates were not
identiﬁed on this micrograph.
Figure 19: LOM micrographs. Arrow color: Red = ↵-dendrite, green = eutectic lamellar structure,
black(1) = grain boundary β-precipitates, black(2) = interdendritic β-precipitates, yellow = Al-Mn-Fe
phase, Orange = possibly oxide from casting process.
A clear dendritic structure is visible in both cases. The e↵ect of cooling rate is clearly
visible on the micrographs. In the case of sand mould casting dendrites are thicker and
31
==PAGE:40==
4
CASTING OF AZ91 MG ALLOY - RESULTS
more massive all in all and the SDAS is also clearly larger. β-precipitates are in the case
of sand mould casting larger and interconnected along the grain boundaries whereas in the
steel die case β-precipitates are scattered.
Fine eutectic lamellar is visible for the sand mould casting whereas this is not the case for
the steel die casting.
4.4.2
Electron microscopy and elemental analysis
Figure 20 on the following page shows SEM images of the sand mould and steel die casting.
Di↵erent phases are marked with arrows using the same color code as for the LOM images
in ﬁgure 19 on the previous page. No new phases can be identiﬁed however distiguishing
between a phase and porosities (marked with a blue arrow) can be a bit easier.
Comparing the images a much ﬁner distribution of β-phase is achieved for the steel die
casting. The high cooling rate results in alot more dendritic nuclei, hence the last melt be-
fore complete solidiﬁcation will ﬂow in many but smaller channels in between the dendrites.
Further more the high cooling rate will again result in more eutectic nuclei. Therefore,
when the last melt solidiﬁes eutectically, a much more scattered distribution of the eutectic
phase is achieved.
Figure 21 shows larger magniﬁcations of the eutectic lamellar phase. The lamellar phase
evidently grows much larger for the sand mould casting experiencing a slower cooling rate.
In ﬁgure 21b the lamellar phase appears to precipitate at the grain boundaries. This would
also be the area where the last melt, having the highest concentration of Al, would solidify.
This implies that the lamellar phase probably appears after total solidiﬁcation due to Al
oversaturation of the ↵-phase. Precipitation in the grain boundaries is also evidence of
post-solidiﬁcation precipitation of the lamellar phase due to the presence of a higher free
energy state in the grain boundaries. Thereby less energy is required to overcome the
energy barrier of formation in the grain boundaries.
Figure 22 shows SEM images of six di↵erent areas, labeled spectrum 1-5 and 9, ana-
lyzed with EDS for elemental composition. Table 9 summarizes the quantiﬁcation of
elemental composition in wt% for each spectrum. Appendix C.1 contains raw data of each
spectrum.
When evaluating X-ray data one must be careful when interpreting the results. Especially
for light elements, such as Mg and Al, the interaction volume, seen in appendix D.1 on
page 109, can become quite large and one may obtain results which do not reﬂect what is
supposedly analyzed on the image.
32
==PAGE:41==
4
CASTING OF AZ91 MG ALLOY - RESULTS
(a) Sand mould casting.
(b) Steel die
Figure 20: SEM images. Arrow color: Red = ↵-dendrite, green = eutectic lamellar structure, black(1) =
grain boundary β-precipitates, black(2) = interdendritic β-precipitates, yellow = Al-Mn-Fe phase.
Spectrum 1 analyzes a particle, which was not commonly found during the inspection.
33
==PAGE:42==
4
CASTING OF AZ91 MG ALLOY - RESULTS
(a) Sand mould
(b) Steel die
Figure 21: High magniﬁcation SEM images of eutectic lamellar phase.
The presence of Cl is arguable due to the low count for such a light element, however it is
possible that it originates from the casting salt used, which was known to contain Cl.
Spectrum 2 analyzes the phase which was identiﬁed as β-precipitates. The Mg/Al ratio
ﬁts well with the compound formula, Al12Mg17, thereby conﬁrming the phase. Zn is also
detected in rather high amounts which is likely due to the high miscibility of Zn in Al as
shown in the phase diagram in ﬁgure F.1 in appendix F.
Spectrum 3 and 4 analyzes the ↵-Mg matrix at two locations showing a light and dark
shade of grey respectively on the image. As can be seen in the quantiﬁcation the light area
contains only 3.15wt% Al whereas the dark area contains 13.74wt% Al. The light area
can therefore be conﬁrmed to be early dendritic structure as was previously indicated on
ﬁgure 20a. The dark area is super saturated with Al conﬁrming that these areas would be
the last solidifying ↵-Mg matrix. Again this is in good agreement with the observations
in ﬁgure 20a where it is clealy seen that the β-precipitates are only situated in the dark
↵-Mg matrix. This result show good correlation with the calculated segregation of Al in
between two secondary dendrite arms, where an Al content of about 3wt% is obtained in
the center of a dendrite, corresponding to spectrum 3, and an Al content of about 13wt%
is obtained in between two secondary dendrite, corresponding to spectrum 4.
34
==PAGE:43==
4
CASTING OF AZ91 MG ALLOY - RESULTS
Figure 22: EDS elemental analysis of six areas shown in the micrographs labeled spectrum 1 through 5
(left) and 9 (right).
Table 9: Quantiﬁcation of weight percent distribution of the elements within each spectrum. The raw
spectrum for each area analyzed can be found in Appendix C.1.
Element
Spect. 1
Spect. 2
Spect. 3
Spect. 4
Spect. 5
spect. 9
O
6.37
0.69
1.04
1.51
1.55
14.42
Mg
79.13
59.34
92.09
79.57
86.03
10.67
Al
12.46
35.71
3.15
13.74
8.60
29.26
Cl
1.01
Mn
1.02
44.20
Zn
4.26
1.66
Fe
0.92
Si
0.52
Spectrum 9 analyzes a particle similar to the one marked with a yellow arrow in ﬁgure
19 and 21. The particle reveals a high content of Mn and Al and some Fe. Mn is used in
many Al- and Mg-alloys to bind Fe-impurities to obtain better corrosion properties.
Figure 23 shows a EDS linescan performed on the yellow line between two secondary
dendrite arms. The start and end points were placed close to the center of the dendrites
in an attempt to obtain the same circumstances as for the Scheil-calculations in ﬁgure
18. In order to achieve good statistics of these kinds of analysis the linescan must run for
several hours. This scan ran for about 20 minuttes thereby only giving an indication of the
concentration variations.
35
==PAGE:44==
4
CASTING OF AZ91 MG ALLOY - RESULTS
Figure 23: EDS linescan of Al-content in between two secondary denrite arms.
In the dendritic structure (light area) from 0µm to about 11µm and from 30µm to 40µm
the Al concentration is almost constant. A small positive gradient towards the edge of
the dendrite can be observed. The concentration of Al in the dark area however shows a
relatively large positive gradient from the dendrite towards the center of the dark area. In
the SEM image in ﬁgure 20a β-precipitates were observed in between dendrites. On this
background it can be speculated that Al-atoms situated in the oversaturated, dark, ↵-Mg
matrix are migrating in solid state towards the center of the dark areas. When the Mg/Al
stoiciometry is right β-phase are able to precipitate. However due to limited di↵usion in
the solid state at low temperatures, meta-stability is often the practical reality.
An example of a linescan from dendritic structure, through oversaturated ↵-Mg matrix and
across β-phase precipitates is seen in ﬁgure 24. A large gradient in the Al concentration is
seen near the edge of the β-phase.
36
==PAGE:45==
4
CASTING OF AZ91 MG ALLOY - RESULTS
Figure 24: EDS linescan of Al-content from dendrite across β-phase.
4.4.3
Secondary dendrite arm spacing
The secondary dendrite arm spacings for the sand mould and steel die castings were
measured at six di↵erent locations using LOM and SEM micrographs. Table 10 summarizes
the calculated SDAS using equation (4) and the measured SDAS. Taking the standard
deviation into account a good agreement between the empirical and measured values is
seen.
Table 10: Secondary dendrite arm spacing - empirical and measured values comparison
Empirical
Measured
Measured standard deviation
Sand mould
51.1µm
58.3µm
10.9µm
Steel die
21.2µm
16.8µm
3.0µm
37
==PAGE:46==
5
SURFACE TREATMENT - RESULTS
5
Surface treatment - Results
This section will present the result obtained throughout the part of the project concerning
surface treatment of Mg for corrosion protection. The results have been divided into three
main sections dedicated to a speciﬁc study. The ﬁrst being a morphology study of the
coatings obtained from SHT, second a study on the growth of the coatings and last a study
on electrochemical properties of the obtained coatings.
5.1
Morphology
In the following microscopy images from SEM, FEG-SEM, FIB-SEM and elemental analysis
from EDS will be shown. The purpose will be to show what happens morphologically to the
surface microstructure as well as intermetallic particles (or phases) before and after SHT
using DI-water as steam source and in the case of AZ91 alloy also CaP-solution as steam
source. Elemental analysis using EDS will give knowledge about the elemental composition
of matrix and phases observed on the surface before and after SHT. Two sub-sections will
be dedicated to the respective alloys investigated in this work. Finally a brief section will
show the results from XRD-analysis which can help identify the structures and phases
observed after SHT.
5.1.1
AZ91
Figure 25 on the following page shows photographs of the AZ91 before, (a), and after, (b),
10 min SHT using DI-water. A clear change can be seen. White particulates appear on
the surface and a white-ish glow is inhomogenously covering the surface indicating growth
of a transparent oxide ﬁlm.
Investigation of the bulk microstructure in LOM, shown in ﬁgure 26 on the next page,
reveal a rather coarse microstructure with relatively large phases mainly precipitating on
the grain boundaries. A light blue phase with a faceted appearance is also observed.
Characterization of the surface using SEM is shown in ﬁgure 27, 29 and 31. Intermetallic
particles and phases found in the AZ91 Mg-matrix before and after SHT are shown (ﬁgure
27a, 29a, 31a and ﬁgure 27b, 29b 31b respectively). Table 11, 12 and 13 show the EDS
results from the areas marked on the respective SEM images.
In all the above mentioned ﬁgures after SHT a porous oxide ﬁlm with needle-like morphology
appears on both matrix and particle. The oxide ﬁlm is homogenously distributed over the
surface however with varying sizes of the needle-like structures. High magniﬁcation images
of the oxide formed on the Mg-matrix in ﬁgure 27c and 27d on page 40 reveals the high
aspect ratio formation and the interconnection of the needles.
The size of the needles appears to be govorned by the presence of intermetallic particles.
The particle shown in ﬁgure 27a contain large amounts of Al and Mn as well as some Fe.
After SHT the particle has been completely covered with oxide and as a result the Mg and
O signal increases whereas the Mn, Al and Fe signal decreases in the EDS analysis.
38
==PAGE:47==
5
SURFACE TREATMENT - RESULTS
(a)
(b)
Figure 25: AZ91 as cast (a) and after SHT using DI-water (b).
Figure 26: LOM image of the AZ91 bulk microstructure. Samples etched in Nital.
39
==PAGE:48==
5
SURFACE TREATMENT - RESULTS
(a) AV: 15kV, WD: 11, Mag: 4000
(b) AV: 15kV, WD: 11, Mag: 4000
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 27:
SEM images of intermetallic particle in AZ91.
(a): before SHT. (b): after SHT. The
numbered areas mark EDS-analysis. (c) and (d): High magniﬁcation of another sample but with the
same SHT-parameters. (e): Cross sectional view of oxide coating on another sample but with same
SHT-parameters.
40
==PAGE:49==
5
SURFACE TREATMENT - RESULTS
Table 11: EDS analysis showing elemental composition in wt% of intermetallic particle and matrix before
and after SHT (refer to ﬁgure 27a and 27b on the preceding page).
Spectrum
Mg
Al
Mn
Fe
O
1 (before)
5.9
30.7
47.9
2.1
9.9
1 (after )
38.3
2.1
2.9
55.9
2 (before)
90.3
6.1
3.6
2 (after )
73.4
4.5
15.6
A cross sectional view of the particle can be seen in ﬁgure 28 on the next page along with
EDS-spectra for point 1 and 2 in the image. It is seen that oxide has formed under the
particle (black arrows). Further more a thin compact oxide is observed as an intermediate
layer between the substrate and the porous oxide. Figure 27e on the preceding page shows a
higher magniﬁcation image of the oxide cross sectional view. The thickness of the compact
oxide ﬁlm has been approximated to about 100nm - 10% of the thickness of the porous
oxide in this case.
EDS spectrum 1 in ﬁgure 28 shows a high Mg-signal and a rather high O-signal compared
with Al and Mn. Spectrum 2 shows also Mg- and O-signals, but also Al- and Mn-signal
are clear constituents of the oxide.
41
==PAGE:50==
5
SURFACE TREATMENT - RESULTS
Figure 28: Cross sectional view of intermetallic particle after SHT obtained using FIB-SEM. Numbered
EDS spectra corresponds to marked locations on the image. Black arrows indicate oxide.
The particle in ﬁgure 29 also appears to be completely covered with oxide after SHT
however the particle shape can be traced under the oxide. The coverage is di↵erent from
what was seen in ﬁgure 27b in the sense that the particle is partially covered by large
needles and partially average-sized needles similar to those covering the Mg-matrix. The
EDS-analysis reveal Si and O in the particle before SHT. After SHT the Si content decreases
signiﬁcantly.
42
==PAGE:51==
5
SURFACE TREATMENT - RESULTS
(a) AV: 15kV, WD: 11, Mag: 4000
(b) AV: 15kV, WD: 11, Mag: 4000
Figure 29: SEM images of intermetallic particle in AZ91. (a): before SHT. (b): after SHT. Black line
represents approximate placement of FIB-section. The areas mark EDS-analysis.
Table 12: EDS analysis showing elemental composition in wt% of intermetallic particle and matrix before
and after SHT (refer to ﬁgure 29a and 29b).
Spectrum
Mg
Al
Si
O
1 (before)
54.6
1.3
20.0
22.5
1 (after)
48.6
0.9
13.2
36.4
2 (before)
87.4
5.7
3.1
2 (after)
82.7
5.6
11.7
Figure 30 shows cross sectional view of the particle in ﬁgure 29 and three point EDS-spectra
marked on the image. Approximate location and view orientation of the cross section is
marked by a black line and arrow in ﬁgure 29b. Oxide is seen to be ﬁlling a cavity in the
matrix where a intermetallic particle possibly used to be. Crack lines can also be observed
around the oxide-ﬁlled cavity. The three EDS-analysis show no signiﬁcant di↵erences and
the majority of elements present at these three locations are Mg and O.
The Si content observed from the EDS-analysis on ﬁgures 29a and 29b could be traces
from the edge of the analysis area indicating that what seemed to be a single particle could
be a cluster of several particles.
The cracks observed around the cavity could be a result of expansion stresses originating
from the oxide formation in the cavity.
43
==PAGE:52==
5
SURFACE TREATMENT - RESULTS
Figure 30: Cross sectional view of intermetallic particle after SHT obtained using FIB-SEM. Numbered
EDS spectra corresponds to marked locations on the image. Cavity ﬁlled with oxide and crack lines around
the cavity are marked with black arrows.
Figure 31 shows β-phase (Al12Mg17) and a Si-containing intermetallic particle identiﬁed
from the EDS-analysis result in table 13 on the next page. After SHT the oxide appears to
have partially covered the β-phase as well as the Si-intermetallic.
(a) AV: 15kV, WD: 11, Mag: 3000
(b) AV: 15kV, WD: 11, Mag: 3000
Figure 31: SEM images of intermetallic phase and particle. (a): before SHT. (b): after SHT. Black line
indicates approximate location and view orientation of FIB cross section view in ﬁgure 32 on page 46.
Spectrum 1 from the EDS-analysis shows that the β phase contains about 5wt% Zn. A
quite high amount relative to the nominal content of 1wt%. This was also observed and
explained in section 4.4.2 on page 32. The elemental conposition before and after SHT is
more or less unchanged.
Spectrum 2 reveals a high Si and Mg content in this particular area. This could be a Mg2Si
phase which is also commonly found in Mg-alloys. The compositional changes in spectrum
2 before and after SHT are insigniﬁcant.
Spectrum 3 shows also only very small changes in the compositional analysis. It is clear
44
==PAGE:53==
5
SURFACE TREATMENT - RESULTS
that some oxidation has occured for all three spectra however the thickness of the oxide
ﬁlm appears to be reduced markedly due to the low O-content compared to the previous
two cases in ﬁgure 27b on page 40 and 29b on page 43
Table 13: EDS analysis showing elemental composition in wt% of phases and matrix before and after
SHT (refer to ﬁgure 31a and 31b on the preceding page).
Spectrum
Mg
Al
Si
Zn
O
1 (before)
58.1
34.5
5.3
2.1
1 (after)
55.5
32.3
5.1
7.1
2 (before)
61.2
31.3
6.2
2 (after)
56.4
28.3
9.5
3 (before)
88.7
7.8
3.5
3 (after)
82.0
7.1
6.2
In the cross sectional view in ﬁgure 32a on the next page, located approximately on the
black line in ﬁgure 31b on the preceding page, four di↵erent elemental compositions can
be observed seeing from the di↵erence in color. Each area has been analysed with EDS
point analysis marked by red crosses. The respective spectra can be seen in ﬁgure 32b on
the next page. The light area, marked 1, shows a high Mg and Al signal proposing this
is β-phase. The following dark area, marked 2, shows a high Mg and Si signal indicating
this could be Mg2Si phase. The Al signal has dropped to insigniﬁcant values at this point.
Continuing to area 3 the Si and Mg signal drops slightly. In area 4 the Mg signal increases
signiﬁcantly whereas Si stays constant.
The oxide ﬁlm is conﬁrmed to be rather thin as previously speculated. Only at the interface
of area 1 and 2 a thin porous oxide ﬁlm can be observed. A red arrow shows approximate
thickness of the porous oxide measured to 0.6µm. The thickness of the porous layer reduces
when moving towards the β-phase as well as when moving towards area 3 and 4.
The porous oxide observed could be formed due to a galvanic couple increasing oxidation
at the interface between the two phases.
45
==PAGE:54==
5
SURFACE TREATMENT - RESULTS
(a)
(b)
Figure 32: (a): Cross sectional view of intermetallic particle shown in ﬁgure 31 on page 44 after SHT.
Numbered crosses mark EDS point analysis. (b): EDS point analysis spectra numbered according to the
crosses in the micrograph.
46
==PAGE:55==
5
SURFACE TREATMENT - RESULTS
5.1.2
CaP coating on AZ91
Introducing CaP-chemicals in the autoclave as steam source produces a similar result, from
an appearance and surface morphology point of view, as with DI-water, when the sample
is placed at a distance of 30cm from the solution. Figure 33 show, from left to right, AZ91
after SHT using CaP-chemicals at 30cm from solution, immersed in solution and 4cm from
solution respectively.
The surface morphology of the sample placed 30cm from solution can be seen in ﬁgure 34a
on the next page. The grinding lines are still visible indicating a thickness of the coating
similar to the coating obtained when using DI-water as steam source.
When the sample is immersed into the solution, on a microscopic level, large precipitate
blocks covering the surface is seen in ﬁgure 34b on the following page. The structures are
lying inorganized and discontinous. The coating has a rough feel to the touch and the
precipitates can be removed by gentle rubbing with the hands suggesting that the coating
is not precipitating on the Mg-substrate but rather sitting on the surface. Gabs (marked by
white arrow) between the blocks are also observed exposing the bare Mg-substrate. EDS
analysis of the area marked by a numbered square, number refering to spectrum number,
are shown in table 14 on page 50. It is seen that Ca, P and O are the only elements
contained in the block structure of the immersed sample.
Figure 33: From left to right: AZ91 after SHT using CaP-chemicals at 30cm from solution, immersed in
solution and 4cm from solution respectively.
47
==PAGE:56==
5
SURFACE TREATMENT - RESULTS
(a)
(b)
Figure 34: SEM images of AZ91 10 min SHT using CaP-chemicals. (a): Sample placed 30cm from
solution. (b): Sample immersed in solution.
A third macroscopic appearance is achieved when placing the sample at a distance of about
4cm from the steam source, as seen in ﬁgure 33 on the preceding page. The metallic colour
is completely covered with a dark-greyish coat. The appearance of the coating is changing
across the surface from a dark-greyish to light-greyish color. White particulates are again
showing dispursed randomly on the surface. The surface is smooth to the touch and it is
not possible to rub o↵any loosely bonded particles.
Looking in the microscope, in ﬁgure 35a on the next page, precipitation inhomogenously
covering the substrate, seeing from the exposed Mg-matrix and β-phase, is seen. EDS
analysis shown in table 14 on page 50 conﬁrms the presence of Ca and P on the covered
areas. Larger structures are also observed appearing on top of the CaP-coating. At higher
magniﬁcation in ﬁgure 35b a spherical precipitate is observed. The precipitates appears to
grow into larger clusters obtaining a ﬁne leaf (or needle)-like morphology.
48
==PAGE:57==
5
SURFACE TREATMENT - RESULTS
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 35: SEM images of AZ91 SHT using CaP-chemicals. (a)+(b): Sample placed approximately 4cm
from solution, 10 min SHT. Numbered crosses and squares refer to EDS analysis shown in table 14 on the
following page. (c)+(d): Sample placed approximately 4cm from solution, 15min SHT at 0bar overpressure
following 30s SHT at 1.0bar overpressure.
49
==PAGE:58==
5
SURFACE TREATMENT - RESULTS
Table 14: EDS analysis showing elemental composition in wt% of surface after SHT using CaP-solution
(refer to ﬁgure 35a and 35b on the previous page). EDS analysis on sample immersed in solution during
SHT also shown (ﬁgure 34b on page 48).
Spectrum
Mg
Al
Ca
P
O
1
36.2
23.1
40.7
2
54.2
36.5
3.8
3
61.4
7.8
4.8
6.6
19.4
4
3.1
33.7
20.6
42.6
5
3.3
31.7
20.0
45.0
6
42.2
4.1
14.6
12.9
26.2
7
2.81
36.6
19.1
41.5
SEM images of a di↵erent sample shown in ﬁgure 48 on page 64, showing a combined dark
and light grey appearance, are shown in ﬁgure 35c and 35d. The sample has undergone an
extended treatment: ﬁrst 15min SHT at 0bar over-pressure following 30s SHT at 1.0bar
over-pressure.
A clear di↵erence between the light and dark areas are seen. The light area is porous with
a morphology mainly composed of high-aspect-ratio needles or ﬂakes. The dark area is
densely packed ﬂakes obtaining a spherical surface morphology. Exposed Mg-substrate is
seen in the dark-area whereas the light area shows no exposed Mg-substrate.
Compositional analysis using EDS of the ”dark” and ”light” morphology is seen in ﬁgure
36 and quantiﬁcation in table 15 on the following page. Spectrum 1 shows a relatively high
Mg content of about 17wt%, whereas spectrum 5 shows a Mg content of about 4wt%, hence
a factor 4 di↵erence in Mg is seen between the two types of CaP-coating morphologies.
Spectrum 3 and 4 analyzes the substrate through a hole in the CaP-coating. Spectrum 3
on the Mg-matrix shows a relatively high Ca and P content at about 12wt% and 15wt%
respectively, whereas the Ca and P content from spectrum 4, on β-phase, shows only 1.3wt%
and 2.3wt% respectively. Further more the O content in spectrum 3 and 4 respectively is
about 35wt% and 10wt%.
Larger particles observed, analyzed in spectrum 2 and 6 respectively, show low Mg content,
but relatively high O content.
From Spectrum 3 and 4 in table 15 a factor 9 and 6 di↵erence in Ca and P respectively
and almost a factor 4 di↵erence in O content between the ↵-Mg and β-phase is seen.
50
==PAGE:59==
5
SURFACE TREATMENT - RESULTS
(a)
(b)
Figure 36: EDS area analysis of ”dark” CaP-coating areas, (a), and ”light” CaP-coating areas (b).
Numbered squares refer to spectrum column in table 15.
Table 15: EDS analysis showing elemental composition in wt%. Spectrum 1-4: ”dark” area on CaP-coating.
Spectrum 5-6: ”light” area on CaP-coating.
Spectrum
Mg
Al
Ca
P
O
Zn
1
17.4
1.7
28.4
18.4
34.1
2
3.3
34.8
19.6
42.3
3
30.8
7.2
11.7
14.6
34.5
4
48.2
32.9
1.3
2.3
9.7
5.7
5
4.15
34.0
20.2
40.9
6
2.7
36.1
20.2
41.1
Figure 37 on the next page shows a cross section of the CaP-coating at a completely
covered area, 37a, and an uncovered area, 37b. The spectra in ﬁgure 37c shows EDS
point-analysis (from left to right) on points 1 and 2 in ﬁgure 37a marked with a cross and
on point 1 in ﬁgure 37b. The CaP-coating appears to be composed of two layers: 1) a
porous bottom layer approximately 3.6µm thick with a needle like morphology and 2) a
top layer approximately 4.0µm thick showing no porosity and completely engulﬁng the
needles. A gap is observed near the center of the bottom layer seperating the bottom layer
in two halves.
The EDS-spectra for the bottom layer and top layer, (a):1 and (a):2 respectively, show
that no major di↵erence between the two layers exist. The coating is composed mainly of
the elements: Ca, P, Mg and O.
51
==PAGE:60==
5
SURFACE TREATMENT - RESULTS
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 37: Cross sectional view from FIB-SEM on SHT-coated AZ91 using CaP-solution. Sample placed
4cm from solution. (a): CaP-coating covering Mg-substrate. (b): No CaP-coating. (c): EDS-spectra of (a):
point 1 and 2 and (b): point 1
From the FIB cross cut in ﬁgure 37b it is seen that a Mg-matrix layer of about 1-2µm in
thickness surrounding the intermetallic particle has been converted to oxide. A thin oxide
ﬁlm of about 0.5µm on top of the particle is also observed.
5.1.3
Understanding the coating mechanism
In order to gain some understanding of the coating mechanism of the CaP-coating on the
magnesium substrate a small experiment was done. AZ91 samples was placed out of line
of sight from the CaP-solution on top of the bottom sample holder, shown in ﬁgure 9 on
page 15, and a drop of the CaP-solution was placed on the samples. The purpose was to
see the coating formation without splashing from the boiling CaP-solution.
52
==PAGE:61==
5
SURFACE TREATMENT - RESULTS
The samples were investigated in SEM as shown in ﬁgure 38 and 39 on the next page at two
magniﬁcations respectively. In ﬁgure 38 the coating appears to be growing in a dendritic
manner, pointed out by the red arrows, on preferred locations. The CaP-coating appears
to take the shape of a main dendrite with secondary dendrite arms growing outwards from
the main dendrite. Holes in the CaP-coating exist between dendrite arms as well as large
areas, marked by black arrow, showing no coating formation.
Figure 39 on the next page show a higher magniﬁcation micrograph of the same coating
where β-phase particles can be observed in most of the holes in the CaP-coating. Further
more a large β-phase in the top of the micrograph appears to repel the coating even further.
From these observations it can be speculated that the CaP-precipitation occurs preferably
on locations with large amounts of Mg which is indeed the case for Mg-dendrites showing
the lowest content of Al. This may be the reason that the CaP-precipitation looks like
dendrites due to their low content of alloying elements. The dendrites may be favored for
precipitation due to the abundance and faster dissolution of the Mg on these locations.
Figure 38: Low magniﬁcation SEM micrograph of CaP-coated AZ91 placed on top of sample holder out
of line of sight from splashing. CaP-solution was manually placed on the sample prior to SHT.
53
==PAGE:62==
5
SURFACE TREATMENT - RESULTS
Figure 39: High magniﬁcation SEM micrograph of same sample as in ﬁgure 38.
5.1.4
XRD
The XRD-analysis of the SHT samples was a small study due to insuﬃcient coating
thicknesses obtained allowing for proper measuring of the coating. Spectra can be found
in appendix G. In the case of Mg-reference and SHT-coated using DI-water only Mg and
β-phase was identiﬁed from the peaks, indicating that the hydroxide was too thin to detect
even at a grazing angle of 0.5◦.
In the case of SHT-sample using CaP-chemicals as steam source, immersed in the solution,
a monetite (CaPO3(OH)) spectrum ﬁt was found to be the compound most likely observed.
The following reaction may explain the formation:
4Ca+2 + 4PO−3
4
+ 4H+ ! 4CaPO3(OH)(s)
∆G(120◦C) = −590.8kJ
where the H+ originates from the reduction of water on the Mg surface.
54
==PAGE:63==
5
SURFACE TREATMENT - RESULTS
At a distance of 4cm from the solution, the obtained CaP-coating and corresponding
XRD-spectrum was not easily identiﬁed, however with some uncertaincy the compound
whitlockite (Ca18Mg2H2(PO4)14), which is also part of the CaPO4 family, showed a possible
ﬁt on the XRD-spectrum.
5.1.5
AZ31
The AZ31 samples were circular samples with a diameter of 10mm. The appearance of the
samples before and after SHT using DI-water is seen in ﬁgure 40. After SHT the samples
achieve a golden/brown colour and small particles appear on the surface.
(a)
(b)
Figure 40: AZ31 alloy (a): before and (b): after SHT using DI-water.
Figure 41 on the next page, 42 on page 57 and 43 on page 57 show SEM images of four
intermetallic particles in the AZ31 alloy before, (a), and after, (b), SHT using DI water.
EDS-analysis of the respective particles are shown in table 16, 17 and 18 and reveal that
all the particles are of the AlMnFe type. The size of the particles are approximately 75µm,
15µm and 30µm respectively.
After SHT, in all three cases, formation of oxide is observed on the particle and on the
surrounding Mg-matrix to a large or lesser degree. The oxide is least pronounced for
the particle shown in ﬁgure 41 whereas the particle and matrix in ﬁgure 42 is highly
oxidized resulting in a needle-like morphology resembling the oxide formation on a similar
particle for the AZ91 alloy in the previous section. Examining ﬁgure 43b on page 57
closely the needle-like oxide can be observed under an unknown substance, which could be
contamination, covering the particles. The needles on the Mg-matrix however are clearly
visible only slightly contaminated.
The EDS-analysis of the particles show a certain trend for the elemental composition in
all three cases: After SHT an increase in Mg and O is observed whereas Al, Mn and Fe
decreases conﬁrming that Mg and O forms a layer on the particles. For the matrix the
Mg and Al content decreases whereas the O content increases accordingly. This may be
interpreted as Mg being almost exclusively oxidized at the particle indicating a galvanic
dissolution of the surrounding Mg matrix due to the low Mg content in the particle.
55
==PAGE:64==
5
SURFACE TREATMENT - RESULTS
(a)
(b)
Figure 41: SEM image of AlMnFe intermetallic particle. (a): before SHT. (b): after SHT. Size of particle
approximately 75µm. Numbered red squares mark area of respective EDS-analysis in table 16.
Table 16: EDS analysis of intermetallic particle shown in ﬁgure 41 before and after SHT.
Spectrum
Mg
Al
Mn
Fe
Zn
O
1 (before)
6.1
20.5
67.0
1.5
5.0
1 (after)
24.5
9.6
36.9
1.0
28.1
2 (before)
94.4
2.83
1.3
1.4
2 (after)
86.2
2.5
1.1
10.2
Table 17: EDS analysis of intermetallic particle shown in ﬁgure 42 on the following page before and after
SHT.
Spectrum
Mg
Al
Si
Mn
Fe
Zn
O
1 (before)
11.0
22.9
1.4
51.6
1.6
11.5
1 (after)
47.3
52.7
2 (before)
95.0
3.1
1.0
1.0
2 (after)
86.1
2.5
1.0
10.4
56
==PAGE:65==
5
SURFACE TREATMENT - RESULTS
(a)
(b)
Figure 42: SEM image of AlMnFe intermetallic particle. (a): before SHT. (b): after SHT. Size of particle
approximately 15µm. Numbered red squares mark area of respective EDS-analysis in table 17 on the
preceding page.
(a)
(b)
Figure 43: SEM image of AlMnFe intermetallic particle. (a): before SHT. (b): after SHT. Size of particle
approximately 30µm. Numbered red squares mark area of respective EDS-analysis in table 18 on the
following page.
57
==PAGE:66==
5
SURFACE TREATMENT - RESULTS
Table 18: EDS analysis of intermetallic particle, shown in ﬁgure 43 on the preceding page, before and
after SHT.
Spectrum
Mg
Al
Si
Mn
Fe
O
1 (before)
14.8
17.3
54.4
2.0
11.3
1 (after)
38.0
5.0
16.0
40.8
2 (before)
26.0
16.7
1.2
38.2
2.1
15.8
2 (after)
37.9
5.7
0.5
15.7
1.0
39.3
3 (before)
95.9
2.5
1.6
3 (after)
77.1
1.7
21.2
58
==PAGE:67==
5
SURFACE TREATMENT - RESULTS
5.2
Coating growth study
In this section the results from GDOES analysis of the coating thickness as a function of
treatment time will be shown. Figure 44 on the next page shows a representative selection
of the GDOES measurements made of the coatings obtained from varying SHT-parameters
listed in the caption (refer to table 4 on page 16 for experimental matrix). Appendix H
lists all GDOES spectra acquired in this study.
In ﬁgures 44a on the next page and 44b on the following page the samples analyzed
are SHT-coated AZ91 using DI-water at distances of 30cm and 4cm from the steam source
respectively. In the beginning, at 1s sputter time, the signals from O, Mg and H shows
a relatively high intensity compared with Al which shows a very low intensity. As the
sputter time increases the Mg- and Al-signals are increasing whereas the O- and H-signals
are respectively decreasing and constant. At a certain point, marked with a dotted line, in
ﬁgure 44a the O- and H-signals shows a drastic decrease whereas this is more pronounced
for the H-signal alone in ﬁgure 44b. A slight drop in the Mg-signal is also observed however
after this point and onwards the Mg-signal is increasing towards a constant value.
A similar analysis can be made for ﬁgure 44c, for the AZ31 SHT-coated using DI-water at
a distance of 4cm from the steam source, however with lower intensities in general for the
Al-signal, due to the lower content of Al in the alloy.
Figure 44d shows the GDOES analysis of a AZ91 SHT-coated using CaP-solution at
4cm from steam source. Figure 44e shows the same analysis at lower intensities revealing
the Mg, H, P and Al behavior more clearly. Initially the Ca-, O-, Mg, H and P-signals show
relatively high intensities compared with the Al-intensity. As the sputtering continous the
Mg-signal shows a steady increase whereas the Ca-, O-, H- and P-signals are moderately
decreasing. Similar to the other coating types, a sudden decrease towards low intensities
are seen for the Ca-, O-, H, and P-signals. Conversely the Mg- and Al-signals are, again,
increasing.
Using the previous analysis of the GDOES-measurements an evaluation of the coating
constituents and thickness can be made. As expected the coatings all contain large amounts
of O. The coating was therefore deﬁned as the depth in the sample of which the oxygen
signal, or for the case of CaP-coating the Ca-signal, was at a signiﬁcant intensity. A
signiﬁcant drop in the O-levels could be interpreted as the interface between substrate and
coating.
59
==PAGE:68==
5
SURFACE TREATMENT - RESULTS
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 44: GDOES spectra. (a): AZ91 SHT-coated using DI-water at 30cm from solution, 60s treatment
time (b): AZ91 SHT-coated using DI-water at 4cm from solution, 240s treatment time. (c): AZ31 SHT-
coated using DI-water at 4cm from solution, 120s treatment time. (d): AZ91 SHT-coated using CaP-solution
at 4cm from solution, 60s treatment time (e): AZ91 SHT-coated using CaP-solution at 4cm from solution,
60s treatment time - lower intensity range.
5.2.1
GDOES calibration
In order to convert from sputter time to coating thickness it was necessary to establish a
sputter rate [µm/s]. Figure 45a and 45b on the next page shows respectively a roughness
60
==PAGE:69==
5
SURFACE TREATMENT - RESULTS
proﬁle of an in-homogeneously and homogeneously sputtered crater. The homogeneous
crater is almost completely ﬂat in the base and the transition from crater base to wall is
rather sharp. These characteristics are optimum for evaluating the sputter rate.
The sputter rate, SR, can be calculated from the crater depth and the sputter time given
in ﬁgure 45b.
SR = Craterdepth
Sputtertime = 60µm
180s = 0.333µm/s
(a)
(b)
Figure 45: GDOES calibration crater proﬁles for evaluation of sputter rate of untreated magnesium
samples. (a): GDOES sputtered calibration crater proﬁle. Power = 60W, Pressure = 1200Pa, Time = 170s.
(b): GDOES sputtered calibration crater proﬁle. Power = 45W, Pressure = 850Pa, Time=180s.
Accordingly for the CaP-coated samples the SR could be evaluated as seen in table 19.
Table 19: Evaluation of sputter rate of CaP-coated samples
Sample
Sputter time [s]
Crater depth [µm]
Sputter rate [µm/s]
1
87.0
13.7
0.157
2
71.5
14.0
0.196
Average
0.176
Hence, in the following evaluation of coating thickness a sputter rate of 0.333µm/s and
0.176µm/s has been applied for the SHT-coated samples using DI-water and CaP-solution
respectively.
5.2.2
GDOES data evaluation
Discarded data
A few GDOES measurements on speciﬁc samples fell out of the norm, which was exempliﬁed
in ﬁgure 44 on the previous page, in the sense that the sputter rate was reduced drastically
61
==PAGE:70==
5
SURFACE TREATMENT - RESULTS
making the coating thickness evaluation impossible due to the proﬁle-O-meter not being
able to measure the crater depth. Examples of these GDOES measurements are shown in
appendix H, ﬁgures H.111, H.112 and H.113 on page 134 along with the samples, shown in
ﬁgure H.93 on page 132 of the appendix.
SEM examinations of the craters are shown in ﬁgure 46 and reveal large oxide-containing
porosities homogenously distributed over the crater (ﬁgure 46b) which was not observed
on a crater with normal sputter rate (ﬁgure 46a). These measurements have therefore not
been included in the coating thickness evaluation.
(a)
(b)
Figure 46:
SEM examination of GDOES sputtered craters.
(a): Crater from normal sputter rate
measurement. Embedding: EDS-spectrum of numbered square area. (b): Crater from low sputter rate
measurement. Embedding: EDS-spectrum of numbered square areas.
Growth of oxide ﬁlm and CaP-coating
The graphs in ﬁgure 47 on the next page shows the average thickness with one standard
deviation as a function of treatment time for four di↵erent SHT-parameters. In ﬁgure
47a the lowest average thickness is 0.5µm for a treatment time of 120s. The shortest and
longest treatment times, 30s and 480s respectively, show the thickest coatings on average
at about 0.8µm and 1.0µm respectively. In ﬁgure 47b the coating thickness vary only very
little around 0.6µm with di↵erent treatment times. In ﬁgure 47c, for the AZ31 alloy, again
only slight di↵erences are seen, around 1µm, with di↵erent treatment times. In ﬁgure
47d, for the CaP-coating on AZ91, a decreasing average thickness is seen with increasing
treatment times up to 240s. The thickness starts o↵at approximately 5.5µm and 4.0µm
for the 30s and 60s treatment respectively. At 120s the thickness drops to approximately
2.0µm and then 1.0µm for the 240s treatment. An increase to approximately 4.0µm is seen
at 480s.
Some average thicknesses comes with a relatively large standard deviation. This is especially
seen for the 30s and 480s treatment times in ﬁgure 47a, the 240s treatment in ﬁgure 47c
and the 30, 60 and 480s treatment in ﬁgure 47d.
62
==PAGE:71==
5
SURFACE TREATMENT - RESULTS
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 47: Evaluation of SHT-coating thickness as a function of treatment time. (a): Alloy AZ91 with
DI-water as steam source placed 30cm from solution. (b): Alloy AZ91 with DI-water as steam source and
placement 4cm from steam source. (c): Alloy AZ31 with DI-water as steam source and placement 4cm from
steam source. (d): Alloy AZ91 with CaP-solution as steam source and placement 4cm from steam source.
Due to the conspicuous color of the CaP-coating, a correlation was made between the color
of the sample at the speciﬁc location of the analysis and the thickness measured at the
speciﬁc location. Figure 48 on the following page shows the CaP-coated samples after
GDOES-analysis. For each analysis-crater the measured respective thicknesses, in µm, has
been inserted in the image.
In the case of 30s treatment time, one measurement was measured in a light area, namely
crater 2 in the top sample, showing almost 10µm in thickness. The measurements conducted
in a dark area, e.g. 1 and 2, in the top and bottom samples respectively of the 30s treatment,
show a thickness of 5.1µm and 4.0µm respectively.
The dark color of the coating appears to be fading out at treatment times 120s and 240s.
Accordingly the thicknesses drop to values between 1 and 2µm.
63
==PAGE:72==
5
SURFACE TREATMENT - RESULTS
Figure 48: CAP-coated samples using SHT after GDOES analysis. Coating thickness has been calculated
using a sputter rate of 0.176µm/s for the individual analysis-craters and inserted in the image. ”n/a” and
”(x)” indicates that the GDOES-analysis has gone wrong some how and the analysis has been disregarded
from the average thickness calculation.
64
==PAGE:73==
5
SURFACE TREATMENT - RESULTS
5.3
Study of electrochemical properties
In this section results from di↵erent electrochemical tests will be shown. Initially poten-
tiodynamic polarization curves will help to understand the relative performance of the
coatings obtained from di↵erent SHT-parameters and their performance with respect to
un-coated samples of both the AZ91 and AZ31 alloy. Characterization using SEM will give
an understanding of the corrosion mechanism.
Following the potentiodynamic polarization, a brief result from potentiostatic measure-
ments will be shown.
The ﬁnal part of the section will show results from 24 hour immersion corrosion test in
PBS.
5.3.1
Potentiodynamic and potentiostatic polarization
Figure 49 on the next page show cathodic and anodic potentiodynamic polarization curves
after 15min OCP. The polarization curves was measured relative to the rest potentials
given in table 20 on page 67.
Figure 49a, 49c, 49e and 49g show cathodic potentiodynamic polarization curves for
SHT-coated Mg. The coatings obtained from both DI-water and CaP-solution all show
to inﬂuence the cathodic behavor through a decrease in the current density of almost 1
order of magnitude relative to the uncoated AZ91 reference. The di↵erence between using
DI-water and CaP-solution, as illustrated in ﬁgure 49g, does not show a clear trend. The
two curves with the lowest current densities are the 10min H2O-coated AZ91 and the
20min CaP-coated AZ91, which are almost identical to each other.
For the AZ31 alloy, the H2O-coated samples, show only slightly lower current densities
relative to the uncoated AZ31 reference and the treatment time di↵erence is almost in-
signiﬁcant. Generally the current density is 1 order of magnitude higher for the AZ31
samples with respect to AZ91 samples.
Figure 49b, 49d, 49f and 49h show anodic potentiodynamic polarization curves for SHT-
coated Mg. The coatings obtained from DI-water on AZ91, in ﬁgure 49b, show, in the case
of 20min treatment time, almost identical anodic behavior to the uncoated whereas the
10min treated sample show slightly lower current densities in the entire potential range
measured.
The coatings obtained from CaP-solution on AZ91 show about a 1 order of magnitude
decrease in current densities in the potential range from about -1400mV to about -1250mV
relative to the uncoated sample. After about -1250mV the di↵erence decreases and the
curves meet up at around -1050mV near the end of the measurement. The di↵erences
between the 10min and 20min CaP-coated samples are insigniﬁcant.
The anodic activity of the CaP-coated samples relative to the H2O-coated samples show
almost 1 order of magnitude lower current densities between -1400mV and -1300mV.
65
==PAGE:74==
5
SURFACE TREATMENT - RESULTS
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
Figure 49: Potentiodynamic polarization curves of SHT-coated samples. (a), (c), (e), (g): Cathodic
curves. (b), (d), (f), (h): Anodic curves. The legend nomenclature refers to alloy, steam source, distance
from steam source and treatment time in the same order of appearance.
66
==PAGE:75==
5
SURFACE TREATMENT - RESULTS
Table 20: Rest potentials after 15min OCP prior to potentiodynamic polarization.
SHT-parameters
OCP [mV]
AZ91, H2O, 4cm, 10min
-1543.8
AZ91, H2O, 4cm, 20min
-1536.8
AZ31, H2O, 4cm, 10min
-1510.1
AZ31, H2O, 4cm, 20min
-1514.8
AZ91, CaP, 4cm, 10min
-1480.0
AZ91, CaP, 4cm, 20min
-1489.5
The anodic behavior of the AZ31 alloy, in ﬁgure 49f on the previous page, show behavior
very di↵erent to the general AZ91 behavior with a large cathodic area observed, from
-1600mV up to -1050mV for the AZ31 reference sample, before transition to the anodic
side of the curve occurs. The H2O-coated AZ31 show a cathodic-to-anodic transition at
around -1250mV and -1150mV for the 10min and 20min treated samples respectively. After
cathodic-to-anodic transition occurs the current density increases abruptly with almost a
factor 20.
Figure 50 on the following page summarizes current density values for, (a), cathodic
polarization curves at -1800mV and, (b), anodic polarization curves at -1300mV. It is
seen, in the cathodic case, that the treatment time only show a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on
the current density for the CaP-coated AZ91 alloy. The low current density for the AZ31
alloy in the anodic polarization actually represents a current density from the cathodic
part of the curve due to the abnorm behavior of this alloy during these measurements, as
shown in ﬁgure 49f on the previous page. Thus the current densities can not be directly
compared. For the AZ91 alloy in the anodic polarization an e↵ect of treatment time is not
noticeable for none of the treatment solutions.
67
==PAGE:76==
5
SURFACE TREATMENT - RESULTS
(a)
(b)
Figure 50: Current density at constant potential for SHT-coated AZ91 and AZ31 using DI-water and
CaP-solution. Uncoated sample plotted for comparison. (a): Cathodic polarization at -1800mV. (b):
Anodic polarization at -1300mV.
Figure 51 on the following page shows SEM micrographs of the pitting morphology obtained
from anodic polarization on, (a)+(b), AZ91 SHT-coated using DI-water, (c)+(d), AZ31
SHT-coated using DI-water and, (e)+(f), AZ91 SHT-coated using CaP-solution. Pitting
was observed few places on the samples however the size of the pitted areas was rather
large. The pitting morphology for the AZ91 samples, in ﬁgure 51a,51b, 51e and 51f, were
very similar. The mode of corrosion on the AZ31 alloy, shown in ﬁgure 51c and 51d,
appears di↵erent more as a sort of intergranular corrosion which may be favored due to
the extrusion process this alloy has undergone.
68
==PAGE:77==
5
SURFACE TREATMENT - RESULTS
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 51: SEM micrographs of pitted areas on SHT-coated Mg. (a)+(b) AZ91, DI-water. (c)+(d): AZ31,
DI-water. (e)+(f): AZ91, CaP-solution.
The pitting observed on the CaP-coated AZ91 was mainly located on locations where the
69
==PAGE:78==
5
SURFACE TREATMENT - RESULTS
substrate was exposed due to inhomogenous coating. A few examples of this can be seen
in appendix I ﬁgures I.1, I.2 and I.3.
Cross sectional view of the pitting can be seen in ﬁgure 52 on the next page.
The
relative sizes of the pits is not directly comparable because it is not known if the cross
sectional cut has been placed exactly at the deepest and widest location of the pit.
Figure 52a show the pitting on AZ91 reference. Three pits can be observed and the
depth of the pits are approximately 30-40µm and the width about 50-60µm hence the
width-to-depth ratio is close to 1. This indicates that the growth mode of the pit is
almost equally into the material as along the material surface. Pit number 2 appears to be
directing the growth into the material around a subsurface β-phase marked by a white
arrow. The β-phase appears una↵ected by corrosion.
In ﬁgure 52b pitting in AZ91 SHT-coated using DI-water is seen. Clearly the pit width-to-
depth ratio is much larger than 1 hence the pit grows more along the surface than into
the material. A β-phase close to the surface can be seen marked by a white arrow. The
Mg-magtrix in the vicinity of the β-phase is only mildly a↵ected by corrosion however on
both sides of the β-phase pitting is observed.
Figure 52c show pits on AZ31 reference. The pits are smaller but in larger numbers.
On this image seven clear pits can be seen. The shape of the pit resembles that of the
AZ91 reference - more or less equal growth inwards as well as along the surface plane.
The SHT-coated AZ31 using DI-water, seen in ﬁgure 52d, shows severe corrosion attack
of the surface. Three main pits can be identiﬁed which appear to have grown together.
The shape of main pit 1 and 3 are similar to the ones observed for the AZ31 and AZ91
references however the severely corroded surface makes it hard to be conclusive.
Pitting on the CaP-coated AZ91 is seen in ﬁgure 52e. Pit 1, 2 and 4 show similarities to
the pits observed for the AZ91 reference whereas pit number 3 appears to be subsurface.
A small channel connecting the surface to the cavity is marked by a white arrow. Pit 4 is
enclosed by β-phase on both sides marked by white arrows. The β-phase and Mg-matrix
adjacent to the β-phase is still intact. This behavior is also seen for pit 3 having β-phase
on the right hand side of the pit.
70
==PAGE:79==
5
SURFACE TREATMENT - RESULTS
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 52: SEM micrographs in back-scatter-mode of cross section view of corrosion pits on SHT-coated
and uncoated Mg-alloy. (a): AZ91 reference. (b): AZ91 SHT-coated using DI-water. (c): AZ31 reference.
(d): AZ31 SHT-coated using DI-water. (e): AZ91 SHT-coated using CaP-solution. (f): Magniﬁed area on
(e) showing pit 3 and 4.
71
==PAGE:80==
5
SURFACE TREATMENT - RESULTS
Intermetallic particles
Figure 53 on the following page show SEM micrographs of intermetallic particles located
after potentiodynamic polarization test of SHT-coated AZ91. Figure 53a and 53b show
coatings using DI-water as steam source after anodic and cathodic polarization respectively.
EDS analysis spectrum of the particles, embedded in the ﬁgures, show reasonable Al and Mn
signal hence the particles observed are most likely Al-Mn-particles. The characteristic large
needle structure observed on these particles in section 5.1, ﬁgure 27b on page 40, has been
dissolved and the porous needle structure surrounding the particle has begun dissolving
outwards from the particle. In the cathodic case the dissolution of the surrounding needle
structure has been more severe exposing a layer underneath. The embedded micrograph in
ﬁgure 53b show higher magniﬁcation of the exposed layer showing remnants of the needle
structure marked with black arrows. Further more intact needle structure, marked with a
white arrow, is observed on the particle, which is not the case after anodic polarization.
Figure 53c show a particle after anodic polarization of SHT-coated AZ91 using CaP-
solution. Before polarization the particle may have appeared as shown in section 5.1.2,
ﬁgure 35a on page 49. EDS analysis spectrum show Mg, Al and Mn signals as well as high
P and Ca. The dissolution appears to have favored the large needles protruding from the
particle whereas the center of the particle show similar morphology as the surrounding
CaP-coating. The surrounding CaP-coating appears una↵ected from the polarization due
to the morphological similarties between this and the coating observed in section 5.1.2.
Cracks in the coating propagating outwards from the particle can be seen, however these
types of cracks was observed on CaP-coating not subjected to polarization measurements,
therefore it is uncertain whether these cracks appeared before or after polarization.
Figure 53d show corrosion around a particle on AZ91-reference sample subjected to cathodic
polarization. EDS-analysis on the particle marked by [1] reveal relatively high signals from
Al and Zn indicating that the particle is a β-phase particle. EDS-analysis on the corroded
surface around the particle, marked by [2], shows decreased signals from both Al and Mg.
The material surrounding the particle has been completely dissolved exposing the particle
completely.
72
==PAGE:81==
5
SURFACE TREATMENT - RESULTS
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 53: SEM micrographs of corrosion attack around particles. Embedded spectra are from EDS-
analysis on areas marked with yellow squares. (a)+(b) AZ91, DI-water as steam source, after anodic and
cathodic polarization respectively. Embedded SEM micrographs in (b) show high magniﬁcation of area
marked with black square. (c): AZ91, CaP-solution as steam source, after anodic polarization.(d): AZ91,
reference sample, after cathodic polarization.
Potentiostatic measurement of AZ31
Figure 54 on the next page shows potentiostatic measurements at +100mV vs. OCP
of AZ31 untreated (reference) and SHT-coated using DI-water thus the potentiostatic
polarization is situated in the cathodic area of the potentiodynamic curves in ﬁgure 49f on
page 66.
A sharp increase towards about 2mA/cm2 is seen in the beginning and subsequently a
relatively slow decrease over a period of about 1500s towards a stable current density of
about 0.8 to 1mA/cm2.
73
==PAGE:82==
5
SURFACE TREATMENT - RESULTS
Figure 54: Potentiostatic measurement at +100mV vs. OCP of AZ31 reference and SHT-coated using
DI-water.
5.3.2
Corrosion by immersion in PBS
Figure 55 show photos of AZ31 and AZ91 samples untreated and SHT-coated using DI-
water and CaP-solution before and after 24h immersion in PBS. For the untreated and
SHT-coated using DI-water, the color changes from a metallic grey to a dark brownish
color. Fine white particulate agglomorated on certain areas are also observed on these
samples. For the CaP-coated the color has not changed markedly and white particulate is
not observed in the same amounts as for the former samples.
(a)
(b)
Figure 55: Samples for immersion corrosion test. Top row show AZ31 samples respectively untreated,
SHT-coated using DI-water and CaP solution from left to right. Similarly for the AZ91 alloy in the bottom
row. (a): Before 24h immersion test. (b): After 24h immersion.
74
==PAGE:83==
5
SURFACE TREATMENT - RESULTS
The measured OCP during 24h immersion in PBS is shown in ﬁgure 56. From 0 to 4 hours
all curves more or less follow the same trend: a potential increase from -1800mV to about
-1750mV within the ﬁrst 1-2 hours and subsequently a steady increase of about 50mV
to -1700mV the following 2 hours. From this point on the alloys show di↵erent rates of
potential increase up until 24 hours immersion. The AZ31 show an almost linear increase
from -1700mV to between -1625mV and -1600mV whereas the AZ91 show an almost linear
increase from -1700mV to between -1575mV and -1550mV. This result in a noticeable
di↵erence of about 50mV in OCP after 24 hours of immersion in PBS for the two alloys is
thereby seen.
Figure 56: OCP measurements of SHT-coated samples immersed in agitated PBS-solution for a 24 hour
period.
Mass loss per unit area per 24 hours of the samples after immersion in PBS after removal of
corrosion products is plotted in ﬁgure 57 on the next page. Generally a lower mass loss is
observed for the AZ91 alloy samples when comparing the di↵erent treatments individually.
For both the AZ91 and AZ31 the lowest mass loss is observed for the CaP-coated sample -
about 1.5µg/cm2/24h and 1.8µg/cm2/24h for the AZ91 and AZ31 respectively. The SHT-
coated using DI-water and uncoated shows the highest mass loss of about 2.5µg/cm2/24h
in the case of AZ31 alloy.
75
==PAGE:84==
5
SURFACE TREATMENT - RESULTS
Figure 57: Mass loss from weighing of uncoated and SHT-coated AZ91 and AZ31 samples with ±0.1µg
accuracy before and after immersion corrosion test in PBS for 24 hours (refer to table 6 on page 19 for
treatment parameters.)
SEM micrographs of selected samples subjected to immersion corrosion test in PBS for 24
hours is shown in ﬁgure 58 on the following page. Figure 58a and 58b show the surface of
AZ31 reference at low and high magniﬁcation respectively. Crystallographically shaped
areas lighting up the surface, due to charging, are seen, hence an insulating layer exist
on these surfaces. In between the charging areas deep grooves exposing the bulk run in a
complex network around the charging areas. Relatively large elongated platelet structures
covering the corroded surface is seen. EDS-analysis of these structures, shown in table 21
on page 78, reveal relatively high potassium content. The white areas show relatively high
O, Al and P content whereas the Mg content is relatively low. The grooves show a high
Mg content, but also some Al, O and P (exact location of EDS-analysis not shown in the
micrographs).
Figures 58c and 58d show the surface of AZ31 SHT-coated using DI-water. The morphology
show several similarities to the reference sample - seperated white areas with a crystallo-
graphic shape surrounded by deep grooves. A ﬁne needle structure can be observed on the
white areas. The EDS-analysis, shown in table 22, reveal a similar relative conﬁguration of
elements in the white areas and grooves.
76
==PAGE:85==
5
SURFACE TREATMENT - RESULTS
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 58: SEM micrographs of sample surface immersion corrosion tested in PBS for 24h. (a)+(b): AZ31
reference. (c)+(d): AZ31 SHT-coated using DI-water. (e)+(f): AZ91 SHT-coated using CaP-solution.
Figure 58e and 58f show the surface of AZ91 SHT-coated using CaP-solution. The coating
77
==PAGE:86==
5
SURFACE TREATMENT - RESULTS
appears intact and is in many ways similar in morphology and with large areas exposing
the substrate as observed in section 5.1.2, ﬁgure 36a on page 51. The exposed substrate
appear similar to the surfaces observed in the previous cases. In the magniﬁed micrograph
cracks in the CaP-coating can be observed marked with white arrows. EDS-analysis on
di↵erent features observed in the micrograph of ﬁgure 58e, marked with squares, is shown
in table 23 and conﬁrms that the coating, marked by [1], does contain large amounts of
Ca, P and O along with some Mg. The larger structures marked [3] and [4] show similar
elemental conﬁgurations as for the coating. The exposed area, marked [2], show relatively
large amounts of Al, P and O and relatively low amounts of Ca. The Mg content is
relatively high compared with the other areas, however still only 12wt%.
Table 21: Quantiﬁcation of EDS analysis on corroded surface of AZ31 reference after 24h immersion in
PBS. Values for ”White area” and ”Groove” are averaged from three measuremens on di↵erent locations.
Mg
Al
P
K
Zn
O
Large structure
15.7
16.9
22.4
13.0
41.7
White area
16.9
8.9
18.3
3.8
48.0
Groove
50.9
4.8
11.3
2.7
28.6
Table 22: Quantiﬁcation of EDS analysis on corroded surface of AZ31 SHT-coated using DI-water after
24h immersion in PBS. Values for ”White area” and ”Groove” are averaged from two measuremens on
di↵erent locations.
Mg
Al
P
K
Zn
O
White area
25.9
4.4
14.7
4.8
47.6
Groove
64.6
3.9
8.0
2.9
20.3
Table 23: Quantiﬁcation of EDS analysis on corroded surface of AZ91 SHT-coated using CaP-solution
after 24h immersion in PBS. Speciﬁc areas for each spectrum is marked with squares in ﬁgure 58e on the
previous page.
Spectrum
Mg
Al
P
Ca
K
Zn
O
1
7.5
1.2
20.5
30.7
39.5
2
12.0
18.0
17.3
3.4
1.6
43.3
3
12.9
18.9
22.3
44.8
4
5.4
18.9
27.5
46.0
Figure 59 on the following page show the surface of the AZ91 alloy SHT-coated using
DI-water. Red arrows show intermetallic particles and the embedded EDS-spectrum show
high Al and Mn peaks thereby indentifying the particles as of the Al-Mn type. Large
78
==PAGE:87==
5
SURFACE TREATMENT - RESULTS
grooves encircling the particles can be seen thus the cathodic nature of these particles in
this material is clearly emphasized.
Areas, marked with white arrows, stand out from the surrounding due to its irregular form.
EDS-analysis was not made on these areas because they were not noticed at the time, but
from the appearance it is likely β-phases. The grooves does not pass through these areas
indicating that the main dissolution of Mg originates from the Mg-matrix.
Figure 59
The mean width and standard deviation of the grooves, obtained from 10 measurements
on random locations for all samples subjected to immersion test in PBS for 24 hours, is
plotted in ﬁgure 60 on the next page1.
The groove witdh for the AZ31 reference show a mean value of about 17µm, however with
a large standard deviation as well. The SHT-coated using DI-water is slightly lower at a
mean value of about 14µm and a smaller standard deviation. A relatively large decrease in
groove width to about 2µm is seen for the CaP-coated AZ31. For the AZ91 alloy the mean
groove width lies at a value of about 2µm in all cases.
1All samples are not shown in ﬁgure 58. The remaining SEM images can be found in appendix I, ﬁgures
I.4, I.5 and I.6
79
==PAGE:88==
5
SURFACE TREATMENT - RESULTS
Figure 60: Mean and standard deviation obtained from 10 random measurements of the groove width,
observed in SEM, ﬁgure 58 on page 77, for AZ31 and AZ91 reference and SHT-coated samples subjected to
immersion in PBS for 24 hours.
80
==PAGE:89==
6
DISCUSSION
6
Discussion
In the following the results obtained throughout this project will be summarized and
an attempt to explain the general trends and observations, and the mechanisms behind,
will be made. First the general morphology and inﬂuence of intermetallic particles and
phases will be the focus. Secondly, the coating as a function of treatment time and the
performance of the coating with respect to corrosion will be discussed. Finally an estimation
of the prospects of the obtained results with regards to biomedical application of the coating.
In general the results show that the steam-assisted hydrothermal treatment, using DI-water
as steam source, is a process which allows for the Mg substrate, whether it is AZ91 or
AZ31, to form a conversion coating in the form of an oxide ﬁlm. The oxide ﬁlm showed
a dual-layer composition with a relatively thin dense layer in the bottom and a thicker
porous layer in the top.
The addition of Ca(NO3)2 + NH6PO4-chemicals to the treatment solution resulted in a
new coating formations composed of Ca and P components. The CaP-coating appeared in
di↵erent morphologies showing various degrees of denseness.
Several results indicated that microstructure and intermetallic phases had great inﬂuence
on the coating formation for both the DI-water and CaP treatment solutions. Thus the
coatings obtained did not show complete homogeneity, however the cathodic activity was
reduced for the AZ91, coated using DI-water and CaP-solution, and anodic activity was
also reduced for the AZ91, coated using CaP-solution.
6.1
Surface morphology
Needle like oxide morphology
The oxide morphologies obtained on AZ91 and AZ31 are the same both showing a needle-
like structure. In the AZ91 case, FIB cross sections showed a layered structure of the oxide
- in the bottom a dense layer and on the top a porous layer with a needle like morphology.
Gupta et al. [21] performed a similar study on pure Mg, using a similar setup with DI-
water however using temperatures of 160◦C and treatment times between 1 and 7 hours.
The structure morphology of the coating obtained from the 1 hour treatment show also
a needle-like morphology, hence it is likely that the compound is the same as the one
obtained in the present work. The oxide from the work of Gupta et al. [21] is suggested
to be Mg(OH)2 and the formation reaction can be explained from the following reaction
sequence:
Mg(s) ! Mg2+(aq) + 2e−
(6)
H2O(l) ! H+(ag) + OH−(aq)
(7)
2H+(aq) + 2e−! H2(g)
(8)
Mg2+(aq) + 2OH−(aq) ! Mg(OH)2(s)
(9)
The formation mechanism can be illustrated as shown in ﬁgure 61 on the following page
and described as follows: Water precipitating on the Mg substrate initiates a corrosion
cell where an anodic reaction, eq. (6), produces Mg cations and loose electrons from the
Mg substrate. Accordingly, a cathodic reaction, eq. (7) and eq. (8), through reduction of
H2O, consumes the free electrons and produces hydrogen gas resulting in a net increase
81
==PAGE:90==
6
DISCUSSION
in hydroxyl ions, OH−. The increase in hydroxyl ions and decrease in H+ through gas
precipitation locally increases the pH and eventually stabilizes precipitation of Mg(OH)2,
eq (9), according to the Pourbaix diagram in ﬁgure 1 on page 3.
Figure 61: Schematic illustration of the Mg(OH)2 formation on the interface of a micro galvanic couple.
The elemental composition from EDS analysis on the cross section of the oxide obtained on
the AZ91 alloy, shown in ﬁgure 28 on page 42, showed a high Al signal as well as Mg signal
from the oxide. These observations are in agreement with the studies of Nordlien et al.
[36] who showed that the Al component has a higher aﬃnity for O than Mg and therefore
the oxide ﬁlm contain large amounts of Al2O3 as well, especially for alloys containing more
than 4wt% Al. On this basis it can be speculated that the ﬁrst layer formed on the Mg
substrate contains relatively large amounts of Al due to the higher aﬃnity for O.
This knowledge becomes interesting when it is related to the results from the casting of
AZ91. Especially for the slow cooled sand casting large di↵erences in the Al-content was
observed, ranging from about 3wt% in the center of a dendrite to about 11wt% in between
dendrites, due to segregation. Thus it can be hypothesized that the coating composition
changes accordingly showing a higher content of Al2O3 on areas with high Al content.
More over it is suggested by Song et al. [44] and Ambat et al. [7], for AZ91D speciﬁcally,
that a ﬁne microstructure produces a more continous oxide ﬁlm in a corrosion situation,
which can be directly linked to a conversion coating process. On this basis we may better
understand the inhomogeneous nature of the oxide ﬁlm observed on the AZ91 alloy. Further
studies however are necessary in order to conﬁrm this relationship.
A recent study by Ishizaki et al. [26], using a very similar setup to the one used in the
present, investigated conversion coating of AZ31 samples placed about 3cm from the water
surface and treated using steam generated from DI-water in an autoclave. The treatment
temperatures however were between 150 and 180◦C - about 30-60◦C higher than the
treatment temperatures used in the present study. The authors found that the treatment
time necessary to generate a homogenous ﬁlm composed of Mg(OH)2 and Mg-Al layered
double hydroxide, at 180◦C, was 2 hours, and at 150◦C 6-8 hours treatment time was
necessary. Compared to the present study the treatment times are no less than 6 times
longer. Using higher temperatures as well would suggest that the reactions on the surface
are faster and more likely to occur. The authors also report that for deposition times less
82
==PAGE:91==
6
DISCUSSION
than 1 hour the surface coverage of the ﬁlm was locally low.
All in all the inhomogenous coverage of the oxide ﬁlm coatings obtained in the present
study, where temperatures of about 120◦C and treatment times between 10-20min was
used and, for the AZ91 alloy speciﬁcally, a rather coarse microstructure was identiﬁed, is
most likely due to a combination of the di↵erent aspects mentioned in the previous.
Intermetallic particles
For the AZ91 alloy three di↵erent intermetallic phases and particles were identiﬁed. The
Al12Mg17 β-phase, Al-Mn(Fe) containing particles and a Si-containing particle. For the
AZ31 alloy only Al-Mn(Fe) particles were found.
Al8Mn5(Fe) and Mg2Si particles are commonly found in Mg alloys. The Mg2Si particle
may originate from casting of the Mg in Silica sand moulds[47] and stay in the alloy as
impurity elements. The Al8Mn5(Fe) appears due to addition of Mn, which function is to
react with highly insoluble Fe impurities in the Mg alloy systems. This is done due to the
high standard potential of Fe relative to Mg (E0
0(Fe) = −0.44V vs. E0
0(Mg) = −2.37V
Bardal [8, pp. 24]), hence these particles will readily act as cathodic sites for reduction of
H2O in a corrosion situation[7]. When Mn react with Fe the distance to Mg in the galvanic
series decreases which improve the overall corrosion properties of the alloy[32, 61].
Ambat et al. [7] and Zeng et al. [61] further reports that the β-phase shows cathodic be-
havior towards the Mg-matrix whereas the Mg2Si particle have similar corrosion potential
to Mg[61].
This electrochemical relationship, where the intermetallic particles act as cathodes towards
the Mg-matrix can explain the oxide formation observed under the particle in ﬁgure 28
on page 42 where a selective dissolution of the Mg adjacent to the particle has taken
place. Further more the increased dissolution of Mg cations around these intermetallics
can explain the larger needle structure found on these AlMn(Fe) particles. However a
trend shows towards only smaller particles within the size of about 10-15µm showing
this behavior due to the larger particle in ﬁgure 41 on page 56 and 43 on page 57 not
showing this behavior. However the particle in ﬁgure 41 does show an increased oxidation
around the edges of the particle which supports a higher dissolution rate of Mg. Further
investigations are however necessary to conﬁrm this relationship between size of particle
and oxide coverage.
The lack of coating coverage on the β-phase, shown in ﬁgure 31b on page 44, may
be explained by a decreasing or absence of dissolution of the β-phase and the closest few
microns of Mg-matrix adjacent to the β-phase as reported by Ambat et al. [7]. This is due
to the Mg-matrix, surrounding the β-phase, having a Al content higher than 8wt%, which
was evident for the sand cast AZ91 as shown in ﬁgure 24 on page 37.
The cathodic behavior of the intermetallic particles is clearly observed in ﬁgure 37b on
page 52. It is believed that this particle is a β-phase due to the thin oxide layer on the
particle, which was also observed for a β-phase in ﬁgure 32 on page 46, however elemental
analysis conﬁrming this has not been acquired. The thin oxide layer on top of the particle
and the clear dissolution of the Mg-matrix around the particle are crucial observations
supporting the electrochemical relationship between this intermetallic and the Mg-matrix.
On this basis it can be speculated that these types of particles contribute to an inhomoge-
nous growth of the Mg(OH)2 and CaP-coating.
83
==PAGE:92==
6
DISCUSSION
CaP coating
The CaP-coating formation showed high depency to the distance of the samples from the
solution in the autoclave as shown in ﬁgure 33 on page 47. Due to this it must be assumed
that splashing of the solution onto the Mg substrates, due to the boiling, is a necessity for
precipitation of CaP-compounds. Previous studies [24, 19, 49, 29], using a hydrothermal
treatment for depositing CaP-coating on Mg substrates, have all used an immersion method.
Further more treatment times of several hours were used in these studies. This di↵erence in
coating technique and method is crucial when evaluating the coating homogeneity, due to
the abundance of Ca and P precursors and the entire surface to be coated being completely
covered with solution at all times when the sample is immersed into the coating solution.
In this work the coating process has relied on random splashing of droplets from the
boiling solution, which may not have covered the entire sample at all times, hence the
coating formation on local areas on the sample will initiate on di↵erent times inducing
inhomogenity of the ﬁnal coating. We may even speculate that the horizontal placement
of the samples inside the autoclave can have an inﬂuence due to the chance of receiving
splashing decreasing towards the edges of the autoclave. This aspect has not been con-
sidered throughout the study. Further the amount of Ca and P ions present in a droplet
may not be suﬃcient with the given solution for complete coverage of the substrate. These
di↵erent parameters may individually or in combination partly explain why the obtained
coating in this work showed inhomogenous covering of the substrate.
The formation mechanism of the CaP-coating was explained by Gray-Munro and Strong
[19]: The anodic dissolution of magnesium is coupled with the reduction of water. This
produces hydroxyl ions at the liquid/solid interface leading to a localized high pH and
subsequent precipitation of calcium phosphate at the magnesium alloy surface.
The CaP-coating showed a dual-layer structure, as seen in the FIB cross section in ﬁgure 37a
on page 52, where the bottom, in this study, appeared to be porous needle structure and
the top CaP-precipitation. Thus the coating mechanism may be a two step procedure:
Initially the bottom layer, Mg(OH)2, forms as seen for the SHT using only H2O as steam
source. Subsequently the top layer forms as a product of the CaP-chemical addition to
the H2O steam source allowing for subsequent precipitation of a Ca-PO4-(Mg)-compound.
The formation mechanism being very similar to the formation of Mg(OH)2 supports this
hypothesis.
This two-step mechanism may also explain the larger structures observed in ﬁgure 35a on
page 49 and 36a on page 51 which, before CaP-precipitation, would most likely look like
the structure observed in ﬁgure 27b on page 40.
The indi↵erence in EDS-analysis of the bottom and top layer of the CaP-coating, shown
in ﬁgure 37c on page 52, can be explained by the porosity of the Mg(OH)2, which allows
for the CaP-solution, due to what may be capillary action, to readily wet the Mg(OH)2
coating and travel into the porosities, where precipitation subsequently can occur. Hence a
di↵erence in the EDS-spectra is not observed because the top layer elements exist in the
porosities of the bottom layer.
This relationship between the Mg(OH)2 needles and the CaP-precipitates can be under-
stood from the ﬁndings of Lin et al. [31] and Wang et al. [53]. They showed that an
84
==PAGE:93==
6
DISCUSSION
alkaline pretreatment of Ti induced the formation of a thin hydroxide ﬁlm allowing for easy
precipitation of hydroxyapatite. It is explained that a mechanism utilizing hydroxyl groups
on the surface having a slight electronegative charge attracts Ca cations and increases the
surface energy thereby assisting nucleation of CaP-precipitates. The same principle was
used succesfully by Gray-Munro and Strong [19] and Waterman et al. [54] on Mg alloys for
pretreatment prior to coating of CaP. Relating this to the inhomogeneous CaP-coverage
of the substrate we may hypothesize that an imhomogeneous Mg(OH)2 will result in an
inhomogenous CaP-precipitation and coating as well.
Again, this can be linked to the presence of β-phase intermetallics. As seen from EDS
analysis spectrum 2 and 4 on the exposed β-phase in the Mg-substrate, in ﬁgure 35a on
page 49 and 36a on page 51, a signiﬁcant decrease in the Ca, P and O content is seen.
This is further supported by the observations made from ﬁgure 39 on page 54, where
β-phases are systematically exposed in a CaP-coating. With respect to the formation
mechanism where a locally high pH is required we should expect that precipitation would
occur where the cathodic reaction produces hydroxyl ions. However, due to the lack of
hydroxyl groups on these areas, precipitation is likely more favored on the surrounding
areas where Mg(OH)2 needles are forming.
The XRD analysis of the SHT-coated sample using DI-water did not show any trace
of Mg(OH)2. This results is in agreement with Ishizaki et al. [26] who also failed to detect
Mg(OH)2 for a 1 hour treatment at 180◦. A combination of low coating thickness and low
density, resulting in a deeper penetration of X-rays, is likely the explanation for this.
The XRD analysis of the CaP-coating obtained from immersing AZ91 in solution during
SHT, showing the existence of monetite (CaPO3(OH)), is in agreement with the EDS-
analysis of the coating in table 14 on page 50, spectrum 1, showing only the presence of
Ca, P and O. Xiong et al. [58] reported a CaP block-like morphology similar to the one
observed in ﬁgure 34b on page 48 and also found, through XRD, monetite speciﬁc peaks.
With regards to the CaP-coating obtained at a distance of 4cm from the solution, the
diﬃculties in identifying the compound may be due to the inhomogenous covering of the
coating creating a spectrum where peaks are too small to identify or is hidden behind a
larger peak originating from the substrate. Further more, an attempt to ﬁnd litterature
describing the same morphology as what has been obtained using the process developed in
this work, was made, however without luck. Conﬁrmation of whether the compound is
whitlockite or something else is therefore yet to be found.
6.2
Coating growth study
The GDOES measurements used to evaluate the coating thickness showed varying reliability
due to large oxide containing porosities. These porosities may likely originate from casting
of the Mg and are common. Due to this a number of samples had to be discarded thus
reducing the statistical validity.
DI-water based coating
In the case of SHT-coatings on AZ91 using DI-water an average thickness between 0.5 and
1.0µm was obtained whereas for the AZ31 alloy an average thickness between 1 and 1.1µm
was obtained. The thicknesses reported by Ishizaki et al. [26], for an AZ31 alloy steam
treated at in an autoclave approximately 3cm from water surface, ranged from 5µm for a 4
85
==PAGE:94==
6
DISCUSSION
hour treatment at 150◦to 68µm for a 6 hour treatment at 160◦. With the treatment times
and temperatures far exceeding what was possible in this study, it is expected that the
coating thickness will exceed the ones obtained in the present study as well.
On both AZ91 and AZ31 alloys no clear trend was observed with increasing treatment
times, for the average thickness measured using GDOES, besides that the thickness was
almost independent of treatment time.
As earlier mentioned the treatment time started after a 18 min long pressure-rise-phase
until the over-pressure in the autoclave had reached 1.0bar. During these 18min the
solution is constantly at boiling point producing steam. Thus coating formation has already
initiated and been running for 18 min before the treatment time starts. This may explain
why the coating thickness appears independent of the treatment time because the preset
treatment times lying between 0.5 and 8 min are relatively short compared with the 18min
pressure-rise phase.
Studies have shown that the thickness of the oxide is governed by Cabrera-Mott[9] kinetics
implying that the rate of growth is limited by the di↵usion of cations from the substrate
through the growing oxide layer[36]. Hence a parabollic decrease in growth rate can be
expected. After 18min the change in thickness for treatment times between 0.5 and 8min
thus appears to be too small to measure.
The parabollic decrease in growth rate should for the AZ91 alloy be more pronounced
than for the AZ31 alloy due to the higher Al content, as reported by Nordlien et al. [36].
The coating thickness measured using GDOES on AZ31 and AZ91 showed indeed a higher
average thickness of the oxide for all treatment times of the AZ31 alloy thereby conﬁrming
the earlier studies.
CaP based coating
As mentioned the CaP-coated samples treated for 30s were processed for an elongated
period at 0 bar over-pressure due to the pressure regulator not being ﬁt properly on the
autoclave. Therefore these coating thicknesses can not be compared directly with the other
samples treated for 60s, 120s, 240s and 480s. The 30s treated samples will therefore be
disregarded in the following.
The samples treated for 60s, 120s and 240s showed a decrease in thickness with increasing
treatment time from approximately 4µm to 1µm. The sample treated for 480s then shows
an average thickness of about 4µm. This result is unexpected and may be a result of either
poor statistics (2 out of 3 samples for the 240s treated group had to be discarded) or an
unrealiable coating formation mechanism which relies on splashing from the solution, or
a combination of both. The thicknesses showed good correlation with the color of the
coating shown in ﬁgure 48 on page 64, hence the GDOES measurements are likely not the
source of this outcome. Another explanation could be that a net dissolution of the coating
is taking place, however further studies are required to conﬁrm this.
As mentioned the studies which showed the closest relation to the present study, with
regards to treatment method using CaP-chemicals, [24, 49, 29], all used a method where
immersion of the samples into the treatment solution was done. A comprehensive review
on biomedical coatings on Mg alloys by Hornberger et al. [25] reports several other studies
of conversion coatings using Ca and P precursors where all of them uses an immersion
86
==PAGE:95==
6
DISCUSSION
method. Since the method used in the present study is not an immersion method a direct
comparison of the coating thicknesses would not be appropriate.
Nevertheless, for a comparison of treatment methods, the coatings reported by Hornberger
et al. [25] range from tens of nanometers to tens of microns. The treatment times ranges
from 1 hour for the nanometer sized coatings up to 5 days (at 37◦C) for the micrometer
sized coatings. Kaabi Falahieh Asl et al. [29] reports thicknesses between 20µm up to
almost 400µm for a 3 hour treatment at 100◦C and 190◦C respectively. Evidently large
di↵erences in coating thickness can be achieved by varying the main treatment parameters
of time and temperature. From a time perspective it appears as though the steam-assisted
hydrothermal treatment, used in the present work produces, a more viable solution due to
the lower treatment time required.
As mentioned in section 5.1.2 on page 47 a di↵erence in morphology was observed between
the light and dark areas of the CaP-coating, as seen for the 30s samples in ﬁgure 48
on page 64. In the coating thickness anaysis using GDOES-measurements quite a large
di↵erence in thickness was observed between the light and dark area. Again this observation
may be attributed to the process. It is possible that the dark areas showing a circular shape
may have been covered by a large drop of the CaP-solution. This inevitably would give
rise to di↵erences in coating formation across the sample thus showing di↵erent thickness.
On the other hand it can be speculated that the sputter times for the light and dark areas
are di↵erent resulting in erroneous thickness calculations. However conﬁrmation that the
thickness of the light and dark areas are similar is necessary.
6.3
Electrochemical properties
The potentiodynamic polarization of AZ91 samples SHT coated using DI-water showed
a noticeable decrease in the cathodic activity relative to the uncoated AZ91, as seen in
ﬁgure 49a on page 66. This result can be understood from the coating behavior around
certain intermetallic particles acting cathodically in the Mg-matrix. This is especially seen
in ﬁgure 27b on page 40 and 28 on page 42 for a Al-Mn(Fe) particle which is completely
covered with oxide ﬁlm. More over after cathodic polarization, an intact oxide ﬁlm on a
similar AlMn-particle, shown in ﬁgure 51b on page 69, was observed. Hence the oxide on
AlMn-particles appears to create a barrier reducing the rate of the cathodic reaction.
A slight decrease in anodic activity is observed for the 10min treatment time, shown
in ﬁgure 49b on page 66, hence the coating does provide some protection which can be
attributed to the compact oxide layer observed on FIB cross section views. A passive
region however is not observed.
The duplicate sample for the 20min treatment time fell into the water during SHT-process
therefore this result was not reproduced.
Similarly for the CaP-coated AZ91 a decrease in the cathodic activity relative to the
uncoated was observed, as shown in ﬁgure 49c on page 66. For the anodic activity a no-
ticeable decrease within a certain potential range was also observed, as shown in ﬁgure 49d
on page 66.
As discussed earlier, the large structures observed in ﬁgure 35a and 36a on page 51 may
very well be increased coating formation on top of a cathodic particle. Thus similarly as
described for the coating using DI-water, the decreased cathodic activity can be explained
by these structures acting as a barrier for cathodic reaction species.
87
==PAGE:96==
6
DISCUSSION
The decrease in anodic activity may be attributed to the general CaP-coating appearing
on the Mg-substrate. Even though the coating show imhomogenous coverage the total area
of Mg-substrate is decreased which would show a decreased anodic activity given that the
CaP-coating provides suﬃcient protection.
For the AZ31 sample SHT-coated using DI-water no improvement in the cathodic activity
was observed as seen in ﬁgure 49e.
A rather large cathodic area is observed for the anodic polarization of the AZ31 alloy in
ﬁgure 49f shifting the cathodic-to-anodic transition of the AZ31 to e.g. about -1250mV for
the 10min treatment time - thus much higher potentials than for the AZ91 alloy, where a
cathodic-to-anodic transition is seen at about -1550mV to -1450mV in most cases. The
measured rest potentials after a 15min OCP are given in table 20 on page 67 showing that
the rest potential for the H2O-coated AZ31 is only about 20mV higher than the H2O-coated
AZ91. A large di↵erence in the cathodic-to-anodic transition between the AZ31 and AZ91
samples are therefore not expected. However one explanation to this phenomenon could
be that the AZ31-Mg surface changes characteristics as the measurement proceeds.
The potentiostatic measurement for the AZ31 alloy at +100mV relative to OCP, show a
decrease in current density over time suggesting that changes are indeed occuring. However
since the changes are occuring over a relatively long timespan, far exceeding the timespan
for the anodic potentiodynamic polarization, the e↵ect of hydrogen bubble evolution can not
be ruled out. A continous growth of bubbles covering the surface and hindering wetting will
also show a decrease in the current density. Conversely the steady increase in potential for
the anodic potentiodynamic polarization may speed up the possible changes in the surface
compared to the potentiostatic polarization. Further experiments ruling out the e↵ect
of hydrogen bubbles are evidently necessary to make anything conclusion about this subject.
The plots in ﬁgure 50 on page 68, summarizing the current density for the cathodic
and anodic polarization at -1800mV and -1300mV respectively, show that the treatment
time does not have a major inﬂuence except slightly for the cathodic polarization of AZ91,
CaP-coated in ﬁgure 50a on page 68, where the longer treatment show lowest current
density. A longer treatment time would likely lead to more cathodic areas being covered
with a continously growing oxide. This theory however is not conﬁrmed.
Pitting The beginning of the anodic corrosion mode shown in ﬁgure 49 on page 66
are typical behavior for pitting corrosion with a drastic increase in current density over a
relatively small potential change. This is in agreement with the extensive pitting observed
in SEM micrographs.
The amount of pits observed on the cross sectional micrographs was very low. In the case
of AZ91 SHT-coated using DI-water only one pit was found in the entire cross section.
Hence it is hard to say any conclusive about the characteristic pitting shape which was
more ﬂat than in the reference (ﬁgure 52b on page 71).
The cross section images of the pits for the AZ91 cases show that pitting often ap-
pear near intermetallic β-phases, however the β-phases are completely una↵ected by the
corrosion as well as a certain amount of Mg-matrix adjacent to the β-phases, which is clear
in ﬁgure 52f on page 71. These observations show good agreement with the work of Ambat
et al. [7] who showed that areas in the Mg-matrix with less than 8wt% Al are more prone
88
==PAGE:97==
6
DISCUSSION
to corrosion attack. In the casting of AZ91, ﬁgure 24 on page 37, it was shown that the
Mg-matrix up to several micrometers from the β-phases could contain more than 8wt% Al,
thus improving the corrosion resistance of these areas.
Immersion in PBS
The measured OCP during immersion in PBS showed a steady increase in potential
throughout the 24 hour long test from about -1800mV to about -1600mV and -1550mV
for the AZ31 and AZ91 alloy respectively. The small OCP di↵erences observed for the
di↵erent treatments for each alloy could be due to the magnetic stirrer not being able to
keep a constant stirring speed. Therefore the e↵ect of treatment could not be distinguished.
However the trend for the di↵erent alloys are clearly not a result of di↵erent stirring speeds.
The higher OCP for the AZ91 alloy might be attributed to the β-phase which is much
more pronounced in this alloy.
The mass loss of the AZ91 and AZ31 alloy, after attempting to remove corrosion products
using a scouring pad, showed the lowest mass loss for the CaP-coated for both alloys.
However the scouring process turned out to be more severe than ﬁrst anticipated. It
is possible that the scouring process may have been too rough on the samples thereby
removing the coating on the samples aswell giving false indications of the mass loss. Figure
62 show immersion sample from left to right: after CaP-coating, after 24 hour immersion
in PBS and after scouring process. The metallic substrate is clearly exposed after the
scouring process indicating that the coating, which did not seem severely attacked from
the micrographs in ﬁgure 58e on page 77, has been removed.
Figure 62: Immersion sample, AZ91 SHT-coated using CaP-solution from left to right: after CaP-coating,
after 24 hour immersion in PBS and after scouring process.
Several studies [62, 39, 33, 4, 3, 12] have reported a surface coating morphology on various
Mg alloys obtained from phosphate and phosphate/permanganate conversion coatings
very similar to the surface morphology observed in SEM, ﬁgure 58 on page 77, after 24h
immersion testing in PBS solution. The characteristic grooves observed are reproduced in
all cases. The coating baths used in the studies are not PBS solution however common for
all the solutions, including PBS, is that potassium and phosphate exists in the solution.
Thus it can be speculated that during the 24h immersion in PBS a conversion process
89
==PAGE:98==
6
DISCUSSION
of the Mg to Mg-P is taking place, which would also explain the large amounts of P in
the surface seen in table 21 on page 78. Chong and Shih [12] proposes a mechanism of
formation where the grain boundaries act as anodes resulting in the formation of local cells
seen as the white areas in ﬁgure 58 on page 77.
From this the depth and width of the grooves may be qualitatively correlated with how
much dissolution of the base metal has taken place and thus how well the surface is
protected against corrosion.
From the average groove size, measured and plotted in ﬁgure 60 on page 80, for the AZ31
alloy, a large decrease in the groove width is seen for the CaP-coated sample. Thus the
CaP-coated AZ31 appears to be more resistant towards dissolution than the uncoated and
coated using DI-water. This however is based on an unconﬁrmed hypothesis and should be
viewed critically.
For the AZ91 alloy the mean groove width lies at a value of about 2µm in all cases, thus
no major e↵ect can be observed from coating this alloy using the width of the grooves as a
measure.
Applicability of coating for implant applications
As mentioned by Staiger et al. [45] it is required for the implant to maintain mechanical
integrity over a time period of minimum 12 weeks. From the mass loss obtained from the
24 hours immersion in PBS, ﬁgure 57 on page 76, an estimation of the total mass loss of a
given implant, as the one in ﬁgure 63, can be made.
Figure 63: Screw for bone implantation. Dimensions are ﬁctive. Image obtained from [2].
To simplify, a cylinder around the screw will be the basis of the calculations. Thus the
surface area and volume of the screw is simpliﬁed to the surface area and volume of the
cylinder. Calculation example are shown in appendix I.2.1. It is assumed that the mass
loss is linearly progressing throughout the entire 12 weeks. It should also be noted that, as
mentioned, the measured mass losses are based on possibly erroneous values due to a too
rough scouring of the samples after immersion. Therefore it should be emphasized that the
estimation is very rough and will only give a slight indication of the e↵ect of surface coating.
Figure 64 show the remaining mass percentage of the screw after implantation for 12
weeks. From this it is safe to say that the CaP coating provides some protection of the
Mg-substrate when compared to untreated samples showing almost complete degradation
for both alloys.
90
==PAGE:99==
6
DISCUSSION
Figure 64: Estimated remaining mass percentage of bone screw after 12 week implantation based on mass
loss measurements from immersion corrosion test in PBS for 24 hours.
91
==PAGE:100==
7
CONCLUSION
7
Conclusion
Using magnesium for biodegradable implants has recently attracted wide attention due
to its excellent biocompatibility. However the reactivity of this material is currently its
limitation for these applications and therefore the majority of the recent research has been
focused on reducing the degradation rate.
In this work a recently developed process method, for the corrosion protection of aluminum
alloys, was applied on magnesium alloys AZ91 and AZ31. The method utilizes pressurized
water vapor, formed inside an autoclave, to form a protective conversion coating.
Parallel to this, casting of AZ91 in a permanent steel die and a Zircon sand mould was
done in order to evaluate the e↵ects of cooling rate on microstructure.
The following points summarize the most important conclusions which has been reached
throughout this work.
Casting of AZ91
• Highly di↵erent microstructures were obtained due to cooling rates resulting in
complete solidiﬁcation after approx. 16s and 170s for the steel die and sand mould
respectively. Numerical simulations gave similar solidiﬁcation results. For low cooling
rates large β-phases growing along the grain boundaries often accompanied by lamellar
eutectic structure was observed. A more ﬁne microstructure was observed with more
scattered β-phase and almost no eutectic lamellae was observed for high cooling
rates.
• Concentration proﬁles were analytically modelled using Scheil’s model and showed
good correlation with EDS-proﬁle scans. It was shown that the early dendritic struc-
tures contained approximately 3-4wt% Al whereas the matrix in between dendrites
could contain up to 11-12wt% Al.
Surface treatment of AZ91 and AZ31
• When using DI-water as treatment solution at approximately 1bar over-pressure an
accelerated growth of an oxide ﬁlm is achieved. The ﬁlm consists mainly of Mg(OH)2
porous needles, however due to the Al content in the alloys it is highly anticipated
that Al3O2 also forms in the bottom part of the ﬁlm according to earlier studies.
• When using an aqueous solution of 0.07M Ca(NO3)2 + 0.06M NH6PO4 as treatment
solution a calcium-phosphate compound is seen precipitating on the surface. Through
support from earlier studies it is hypothesized that the coating forms favorably on
porous Mg(OH)2 needles due to a combined e↵ect of 1) an electronegative attraction
of Ca-cations from the hydroxyl groups and 2) an increased surface energy.
• For both coatings the formation is governed by anodic dissolution of the base metal
and cathodic reduction of water. This results in increased oxide growth on cathodic
AlMn(Fe) intermetallic particles.
A decreased oxide formation and CaP-precipitation is seen on, and in the vicinity
of, β-phases, which is believed to be connected to segregation of Al resulting in
concentrations exceeding a critical 8wt% of Al on these areas.
• Evaluation of the chemical-free oxide ﬁlm thickness show almost complete inde-
pendency of treatment times, which is likely due to an inappropriate experimental
92
==PAGE:101==
7
CONCLUSION
approach. An average thickness of about 1µm and about 0.7µm for the AZ31 and
AZ91 alloy respectively is measured. Again the higher content of Al in the AZ91
alloy would be the explanation for an overall thinner oxide ﬁlm.
The CaP-coating showed average thicknesses up to about 4-5µm and down to about
1µm. The trend is unclear with varying treatment times. This could be due to lack
of experimental data ruling out the aspect of chance.
• Potentiodynamic polarization of both coatings on AZ91 show a decreased cathodic
activity by approximately one order of magnitude, which is speculated to be due to
coverage of AlMn(Fe) cathodic particles. No improvement is observed for the AZ31
alloy. For the anodic activity a decrease of about 1 order of magnitude is achieved
on AZ91 for the CaP-coating only.
Immersion in phosphate bu↵ered saline for 24 hours show a decrease in mass loss for
both coatings on AZ91 and for the CaP-coating alone on AZ31.
• A simpliﬁed evaluation of the degradation of a ﬁctive implant, based on the mass loss
data, showed no more than 40% of the total mass left after 12 weeks implantation.
This result alone is far from satisfactory, however compared with the uncoated Mg,
this is a great improvement compared to complete degradation.
All in all the steam-assisted hydrothermal treatment show excellent prospects, with room
for improvements, with regards to conversion treatments of Mg-alloys using chemical free
solutions or calcium-phosphate-containing solutions. It has been clariﬁed that microstruc-
ture and surface modiﬁcation, in this case, are closely related and modelling segregation of
alloying elements as well as anticipating the volume fraction of eutectic phases are powerful
tools that may help optimize the as-cast microstructure to obtain the best possible basis
for surface treatment.
93
==PAGE:102==
8
FUTURE WORK
8
Future work
Ideas and ways to improve the current study:
• In order to integrate the casting study and surface coating study more, it should be
possible to cast the magnesium alloys using a proper cover gas instead of the casting
salt used in this study. This would give a more clean casting without salt inclusions
which could be used for surface treatment studies subsequently.
• With regards to the morphology study, investigations of atleast three similar particles,
for each particle investigated, should be thoroughly analysed, using SEM with EDS
and FIB-SEM, before and after steam treatment, in order to conﬁrm the observations
on each di↵erent particle.
• In order to improve the growth study a more comprehensive calibration of the GDOES
sputter rate for both Mg(OH)2 instead of Mg and the CaP-coating should be done
and by increasing the total number of samples for analysis reduction in the statistical
deviation could be achieved.
• A more thorough XRD-study should be conducted in order to identify the CaP-
coating compound and the di↵erent morphologies formed at a distance of 4cm from
the solution.
• Finally, as with the growth study, a larger number of identical samples should be
electrochemically tested in order to conﬁrm the observed trends.
New studies based on the present work:
• In order to improve the castings and make them useful for surface treatments a
number of changes to the casting experiment is necessary: 1) Designing of a proper
gating system would reduce internal oxides. 2) Using a crucible with bottom pouring
spout could reduce internal impurities originating from the slack.
• Focus on obtaining homogeneous CaP-coating should be high priority for future
projects.
The following aspects should be considered to achieve this:
1) Pre-
treatments, such as NaOH dipping as mentioned, creating a more activated surface
for easier precipitation. 2) Using a more advanced SHT-system where a steam
jet can be supplied with CaP-solution thus covering the sample surfaces with the
chemical-solutions more evenly.
• A comprehensive study of the growth in the initial phases of the coating formation
would also give a better understanding of the variations in coating coverage on
di↵erent microstructure components.
• The relationship between microstructure and conversion coating of the AZ91 and
AZ31 Mg alloys has proven to be a crucial aspect which needs a better understanding.
Di↵erent strategies for altering the microstructure with regards to volume fraction
and sizes of secondary phases and intermetallic particles should be identiﬁed.
• More in-depth analysis of the coating should be conducted in order to conﬁrm the
Mg(OH)2/CaP-precipitation duality of the CaP-coating formation mechanism.
94
==PAGE:103==
8
FUTURE WORK
• When a homogeneous CaP-coating is obtained new electrochemical studies should
be conducted. The immersion corrosion test could be conducted in Simulated Body
Fluid, which contain a more complicated mixture of salts showing closer resemblance
to the bodily ﬂuids.
• A study on the biocompatibility, cytotoxicity and bioactivity of the CaP-coating
obtained is mandatory for the applicability on implants.
• Conducting the current investigation on the widely investigated Mg-Zn-Ca alloy, which
has shown good biocompatibility, would be higly relevant, due to the biocompatibility
problems associated with aluminum in AZ-series magnesium alloys.
95
==PAGE:104==
REFERENCES
References
[1] Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders. Merk Manual of Diagnosis and Therapy. section
2, [chapter 12].
[2] General
implants
-
Micro
Emergency
Screw,
Cross
Drive,
Self-Tapping.
http://www.general-implants.com/en/easyline/cmf-cranio-maxillo-facial/
knochenschrauben/. Accessed: 2015-07-26.
[3] Formation of Phosphate/Permanganate Conversion Coating on AZ31 Magnesium Alloy.
Journal of The Electrochemical Society, 153(3):B90–B96, 2006. doi: 10.1149/1.2164787.
[4] A chrome-free conversion coating for magnesium-lithium alloy by a phosphate-
permanganate solution. Surface and Coatings Technology, 202(9):1825–1830, 2008.
doi: 10.1016/j.surfcoat.2007.07.094.
[5] Global Biomedical Metal Market. Acmite Market Intelligence, third edition, 2014.
[6] M. J. Allen, B. J. Myer, P. J. Millett, and N. Rushton. E↵ect of particulate cobalt,
chromium and cobalt-chromium alloy on human osteoblast-like cells in vitro. The
Journal of bone and joint surgery. British volume, 79-B(3):475–487, 1997.
[7] R. Ambat, N. N. Aung, and W. Zhou.
Evaluation of microstructural e↵ects on
corrosion behaviour of az91d magnesium alloy. Corrosion Science, 42:1433–1455, 2000.
[8] E. Bardal. Corrosion and protection. Springer, 2003.
[9] N. Cabrera and N. F. Mott. Theory of the oxidation of metals. Reports on Progress
in Physics, 12(1):163–184, 1949. doi: 10.1088/0034-4885/12/1/308.
[10] C. H. Caceres, C. J. Davidson, J. R. Griﬃths, and C. L. Newton. E↵ects of solidiﬁcation
rate and ageing on the microstructure and mechanical properties of AZ91 alloy.
Materials Science and Engineering, A(325):344–355, 2002.
[11] S. Y. Cho, S. W. Chae, K. W. Choi, H. K. Seok, Y. C. Kim, J. Y. Jung, S. J. Yang,
G. J. Kwon, J. T. Kim, and M. Assad. Biocompatibility and strength retention
of biodegradable Mg-Ca-Zn alloy bone implants. Journal of Biomedical Materials
Research - Part B, 101 B:201–212, 2013. doi: 10.1002/jbm.b.32813.
[12] K. Z. Chong and T. S. Shih. Conversion-coating treatment for magnesium alloys by a
permanganate-phosphate solution. Materials Chemistry and Physics, 80(1):191–200,
2003. doi: 10.1016/S0254-0584(02)00481-9.
[13] A. K. Dahle, Y. C. Lee, M. D. Nave, P. L. Scha↵er, and D. H. StJohn. Development
of the as-cast microstructure in magnesium-aluminium alloys. Journal of Light Metals,
1:61–72, 2001.
[14] R. U. Din. Steam Initiated Surface Modiﬁcation of Aluminium Alloys. Ph.d. thesis,
Technical University of Denmark, Section of Materials & Manufacturing Technology,
2015.
96
==PAGE:105==
REFERENCES
[15] D. Dziuba, A. Meyer-Lindenberg, J. M. Seitz, H. Waizy, N. Angrisani, and J. Reifenrath.
Long-term in vivo degradation behaviour and biocompatibility of the magnesium
alloy ZEK100 for use as a biodegradable bone implant. Acta Biomaterialia, 9(10):
8548–8560, 2013. doi: 10.1016/j.actbio.2012.08.028.
[16] S. S. A. El-Rahman. Neuropathology of aluminum toxicity in rats (glutamate and
GABA impairment). Pharmacological Research, 47(3):189–194, 2003. doi: 10.1016/
S1043-6618(02)00336-5.
[17] H. Fredriksson and U. ˚A kerlind. Materials Processing During Casting. 2006.
[18] J. Gallo, M. Raˇska, F. Mr´azek, and M. Petek. Bone remodeling, particle disease and
individual susceptibility to periprosthetic osteolysis. Physiological Research, 57(3):
339–349, 2008.
[19] J. E. Gray-Munro and M. Strong. The mechanism of deposition of calcium phosphate
coatings from solution onto magnesium alloy AZ31. J Biomed. Mater. Res., 90(A):
339–350, 2009.
[20] X. Gu, Y. Zheng, Y. Cheng, S. Zhong, and T. Xi. In vitro corrosion and biocompatibility
of binary magnesium alloys.
Biomaterials, 30(4):484–498, 2009.
doi: 10.1016/j.
biomaterials.2008.10.021.
[21] R. K. Gupta, K. Mensah-Darkwa, and D. Kumar. Corrosion Protective Conversion
Coatings on Magnesium Disks Using a Hydrothermal Technique.
J. Mater. Sci.
Technol., 30(1):47–53, 2014.
[22] B. Hafner. Energy Dispersive Spectroscopy on the SEM: A Primer. Characterization
Facility, University of Minnesota.
[23] D. R. Haynes, S. J. Boyle, S. D. Rogers, D. W. Howie, and B. Vernon-Roberts.
Variation in cytokines induced by particles from di↵erent prosthetic materials. Clinical
Orthopaedics and Related Research, (352):223–230, 1998.
[24] S. Hiromoto and A. Yamamoto. High corrosion resistance of magnesium coated with
hydroxyapatite directly synthesized in an aqueous solution. Electrochimica Acta, 54:
7085–7093, 2009.
[25] H. Hornberger, S. Virtanen, and A. R. Boccaccini. Biomedical coatings on magnesium
alloys a review. Acta Biomaterialia, 8:2442–2455, 2012.
[26] T. Ishizaki, S. Chiba, K. Watanabe, and H. Suzuki. Corrosion resistance of mgal
layered double hydroxide container-containing magnesium hydroxide ﬁlms formed
directly on magnesium alloy by chemical-free steam coating. J. Mater. Chem., A(1):
8968–8977, 2013.
[27] J. J. Jacobs, A. K. Skipor, L. M. Patterson, N. J. Hallab, W. G. Paprosky, J. Black,
and J. O. Galante. Metal release in patients who have had a primary total hip
arthroplasty: A prospective, controlled, longitudinal study. Journal of Bone and Joint
Surgery - Series A, 80(10):1447–1458, 1998.
97
==PAGE:106==
REFERENCES
[28] J. J. Jacobs, N. J. Hallab, A. K. Skipor, and R. M. Urban. Metal Degradation
Products: A Cause for Concern in Metal-Metal Bearings? In Clinical Orthopaedics
and Related Research, number 417, pages 139–147, 2003.
[29] S. Kaabi Falahieh Asl, S. Nemeth, and M. J. Tan. Hydrothermally deposited protective
and bioactive coating for magnesium alloys for implant application. Surface and
Coatings Technology, 258:931–937, 2014. doi: 10.1016/j.surfcoat.2014.07.055.
[30] C. Lhotka, T. Szekeres, I. Ste↵an, K. Zhuber, and K. Zweym¨uller. Four-year study of
cobalt and chromium blood levels in patients managed with two di↵erent metal-on-
metal total hip replacements. Journal of orthopaedic research : oﬃcial publication of
the Orthopaedic Research Society, 21(2):189–95, 2003. doi: 10.1016/S0736-0266(02)
00152-3.
[31] F. H. Lin, Y. S. Hsu, S. H. Lin, and T. M. Chen. The growth of hydroxyapatite on
alkaline treated ti6al4v soaking in higher temperature with concentrated ca2+/hpo42
simulated body ﬂuid magnesium astm az91. Materials Chemistry and Physics, 87:
24–30, 2004.
[32] O. Lunder, T. K. Aune, and K. Nisancioglu. E↵ect of mn additions on the corrosion
behavior of mould-cast magnesium astm az91. Nat. Ass. Corr. Eng., 43(5):291–295,
1987.
[33] M. Mosiaek, G. Mordarski, P. Nowak, W. Simka, G. Nawrat, M. Hanke, R. P.
Socha, and J. Michalska. Phosphate-permanganate conversion coatings on the AZ81
magnesium alloy: SEM, EIS and XPS studies. Surface and Coatings Technology, 206
(1):51–62, 2011. doi: 10.1016/j.surfcoat.2011.06.035.
[34] J. Nagels, M. Stokdijk, and P. M. Rozing. Stress shielding and bone resorption in
shoulder arthroplasty. Journal of Shoulder and Elbow Surgery, 12(1):35–39, 2003.
[35] Y. Niki, H. Matsumoto, Y. Suda, T. Otani, K. Fujikawa, Y. Toyama, N. Hisamori,
and A. Nozue. Metal ions induce bone-resorbing cytokine production through the
redox pathway in synoviocytes and bone marrow macrophages. Biomaterials, 24(8):
1447–1457, 2003.
[36] J. H. Nordlien, K. Nisancioglu, S. Ono, and N. Masuko. Morphology and structure of
oxide ﬁlms formed on MgAl alloys by exposure to air and water. J. Electrochem. Soc.,
143(8):2564–2572, 1996.
[37] T. Okuma. Magnesium and Bone Strength. Nutrition, 17(7/8):679–680, 2001.
[38] R. S. Park, Y. K. Kim, S. J. Lee, Y. S. Jang, I. S. Park, Y. H. Yun, T. S. Bae, and
M. H. Lee. Corrosion behavior and cytotoxicity of Mg-35Zn-3Ca alloy for surface
modiﬁed biodegradable implant material. Journal of Biomedical Materials Research -
Part B, 100 B:911–923, 2012. doi: 10.1002/jbm.b.32652.
[39] S. Pommiers, J. Frayret, A. Castetbon, and M. Potin-Gautier. Alternative conversion
coatings to chromate for the protection of magnesium alloys. Corrosion Science, 84:
135–146, 2014.
98
==PAGE:107==
REFERENCES
[40] D. A. Puleo and W. W. Huh. Acute toxicity of metal-ions in cultures of osteogenic
cells derived from bone-marrow stromal cells. Journal of Applied Biomaterials, 6(2):
109–116, 1995.
[41] P. A. Revell, E. Damien, X. S. Zhang, P. Evans, and C. R. Howlett. The E↵ect of
Magnesium Ions on Bone Bonding to Hydroxyapatite Coating on Titanium Alloy
Implants. Key Engineering Materials, 254-256:447–450, 2004.
[42] N. E. L. Saris, E. Mervaala, H. Karppanen, J. A. Khawaja, and A. Lewenstam.
Magnesium: An update on physiological, clinical and analytical aspects. Clinica
Chimica Acta, 294(1-2):1–26, 2000.
[43] B. A. Shaw and R. C. Wolfe. Corrosion of Magnesium and Magnesium-base Alloys.
ASM Handbook, ASM International, Corrosion: Materials,13B:205–227, 2005.
[44] G. Song, A. Atrens, and M. Dargusch. Inﬂuence of microstructure on the corrosion of
diecast az91d. Corrosion Science, 41:249–273, 1998.
[45] M. P. Staiger, A. M. Pietak, J. Huadmai, and G. Dias. Magnesium and its alloys
as orthopedic biomaterials: A review. Biomaterials, 27(9):1728–1734, 2006. doi:
10.1016/j.biomaterials.2005.10.003.
[46] Y. Sun, B. Zhang, Y. Wang, L. Geng, and X. Jiao. Preparation and characterization
of a new biomedical Mg-Zn-Ca alloy. Materials and Design, 34:58–64, 2012. doi:
10.1016/j.matdes.2011.07.058.
[47] S. Takamori, Y. Osawa, T. Kimura, X. Liu, and T. Mukai. Casting Surface of AZ91
Alloy and Its Reaction with Sand Mold. Materials Transactions, 49(5):1089–1092,
2008.
[48] N. S. Tiedje. Lecture 3: Solidiﬁcation-Shrinkage. Metallurgy, Design and Manufactur-
ing of Cast Components, (41733), 2014.
[49] M. Tomozawa and S. Hiromoto. Microstructure of hydroxyapatite- and octacalcium
phosphate-coatings formed on magnesium by a hydrothermal treatment at various pH
values. Acta Materialia, 59:355–363, 2011.
[50] J. Vormann. Magnesium : nutrition and metabolism. Molecular aspects of Medicine,
24(1-3):27–37, 2003.
[51] M. L. Wang, L. J. Nesti, R. Tuli, J. Lazatin, K. G. Danielson, P. F. Sharkey, and R. S.
Tuan. Titanium particles suppress expression of osteoblastic phenotype in human
mesenchymal stem cells. Journal of Orthopaedic Research, 20(6):1175–1184, 2002.
[52] W. Y. Wang, B. H. Wicklund, R. B. Gustilo, and D. T. Tsukayama. Titanium,
Chromium and cobalt ions modulate the release of bone-associated cytokines by
human monocytes/macrophages in vitro. Biomaterials, 17(23):2233–2240, 1996.
[53] X. J. Wang, Y. C. Li, J. G. Lin, P. D. Hodgson, and C. E. Wen. Apatite-inducing
ability of titanium oxide layer on titanium surface: The e↵ect of surface energy. J.
Mater. Res., 23(6):1682–1688, 2008.
99
==PAGE:108==
REFERENCES
[54] J. Waterman, A. Pietak, N. Birbilis, T. Woodﬁeld, G. Dias, and M. P. Staiger.
Corrosion resistance of biomimetic calcium phosphate coatings on magnesium due to
varying pretreatment time. Materials Science and Engineering, B176:1756–1760, 2011.
[55] Z. Wen, C. Wu, C. Dai, and F. Yang. Corrosion behaviors of Mg and its alloys
with di↵erent Al contents in a modiﬁed simulated body ﬂuid. Journal of Alloys and
Compounds, 488(1):392–399, 2009.
[56] F. Witte, V. Kaese, H. Haferkamp, E. Switzer, A. Meyer-Lindenberg, C. J. Wirth,
and H. Windhagen. In vivo corrosion of four magnesium alloys and the associated
bone response. Biomaterials, 26(17):3557–3563, 2005. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.
2004.09.049.
[57] J. Wol↵. The law of Bone remodelling. Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 1986.
[58] X. B. Xiong, X. Y. Ni, X. R. Zeng, and J. Z. Zou. A study of monetite precipitation on
HT-C/C composites by induction heating method at di↵erent substrate temperatures.
Surface and Coatings Technology, 223:6–10, 2013.
[59] Z. Xu, C. Smith, S. Chen, and J. Sankar. Development and microstructural charac-
terizations of Mg-Zn-Ca alloys for biomedical applications. Materials Science and
Engineering B: Solid-State Materials for Advanced Technology, 176(20):1660–1665,
2011.
[60] B. I. Yanming, R. R. Van De Motter, A. A. Ragab, V. M. Goldberg, J. M. Anderson,
and E. M. Greenﬁeld. Titanium particles stimulate bone resorption by inducing
di↵erentiation of murine osteoclasts. Journal of Bone and Joint Surgery - Series A,
83(4):501–508, 2001.
[61] R. C. Zeng, J. Zhang, and W. J. et al. Huang. Review of studies on corrosion of
magnesium alloys. Trans. Nonferrous Met. Soc. China, (16):763–771, 2006.
[62] Y. Zhou, Q. Xiong, and J. Xiong. The Study of a Phosphate Conversion Coating
on Magnesium Alloy AZ91D : I . Formation , Morphology and Composition. Int. J.
Electrochem. Sci., 10:2812–2824, 2015.
[63] T. Zhu, Z. W. Chen, and W. Gao.
Dissolution of eutectic b-Mg17Al12 phase
in magnesium AZ91 cast alloy at temperatures close to eutectic temperature.
Journal of Materials Engineering and Performance, 19(6):860–867, 2010.
doi:
10.1007/s11665-009-9539-y.
[64] H. Zreiqat, C. R. Howlett, a. Zannettino, P. Evans, G. Schulze-Tanzil, C. Knabe, and
M. Shakibaei. Mechanisms of magnesium-stimulated adhesion of osteoblastic cells to
commonly used orthopaedic implants. Journal of Biomedical Materials Research, 62
(2):175–184, 2002. doi: 10.1002/jbm.10270.
100
==PAGE:109==
Appendix
==PAGE:110==
A
CRUCIBLE WITH POURING SPOUT
A
Crucible with pouring spout
1
1
2
2
3
3
4
4
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
SHEET 1  OF 1 
DRAWN
CHECKED
QA
MFG
APPROVED
s082874
02-02-2015
DWG NO
Digel_ver2
TITLE
SIZE
C
SCALE
REV
1.50
18.00
183.14
13.37
148.75
R23.00
10.0°
98.0°
51.06
R9.11
R60.03
69.19
49.5°
Figure A.1: Crucible with bottom pouring spout.
102
==PAGE:111==
A
CRUCIBLE WITH POURING SPOUT
Figure A.2: Crucible with bottom pouring spout.
103
==PAGE:112==
B
FEEDING EFFICIENCY
B
Feeding eﬃciency
Figure B.1: Reproduced from Tiedje [48]
104
==PAGE:113==
C
SEM AND EDS
C
SEM and EDS
C.1
Raw EDS spectrum data of cast AZ91 samples
Figure C.1: Spectrum 1
Figure C.2: Spectrum 2
105
==PAGE:114==
C
SEM AND EDS
Figure C.3: Spectrum 3
Figure C.4: Spectrum 4
106
==PAGE:115==
C
SEM AND EDS
Figure C.5: Spectrum 5
Figure C.6: Spectrum 5
107
==PAGE:116==
D
LOM OF CASTINGS
D
LOM of castings
Figure D.1: Sand mould casting.
Figure D.2: Steel die casting.
108
==PAGE:117==
D
LOM OF CASTINGS
D.1
Theoretical EDS interaction volume
Figure D.3: Interaction volume in Energy-dispersive x-ray spectroscopy. Reproduced from Hafner [22],
109
==PAGE:118==
E
CONCENTRATION VARIATION OF AL CALCULATION - TABLE VALUES
E
Concentration variation of Al calculation - Table values
(Skip to the following page)
110
==PAGE:119==
Fraction solid
Distance 
[µm]
Concentration of Al in liquid 
[wt%]
Concentration of Al in solid 
[wt%]
0,01
0,26
9,1%
3,4%
0,02
0,51
9,1%
3,4%
0,03
0,77
9,2%
3,5%
0,04
1,02
9,2%
3,5%
0,05
1,28
9,3%
3,5%
0,06
1,53
9,4%
3,5%
0,07
1,79
9,4%
3,6%
0,08
2,04
9,5%
3,6%
0,09
2,30
9,5%
3,6%
0,1
2,55
9,6%
3,6%
0,11
2,81
9,7%
3,7%
0,12
3,06
9,7%
3,7%
0,13
3,32
9,8%
3,7%
0,14
3,57
9,9%
3,7%
0,15
3,83
10,0%
3,8%
0,16
4,08
10,0%
3,8%
0,17
4,34
10,1%
3,8%
0,18
4,59
10,2%
3,9%
0,19
4,85
10,3%
3,9%
0,2
5,11
10,3%
3,9%
0,21
5,36
10,4%
3,9%
0,22
5,62
10,5%
4,0%
0,23
5,87
10,6%
4,0%
0,24
6,13
10,7%
4,0%
0,25
6,38
10,8%
4,1%
0,26
6,64
10,9%
4,1%
0,27
6,89
10,9%
4,1%
0,28
7,15
11,0%
4,2%
0,29
7,40
11,1%
4,2%
0,3
7,66
11,2%
4,3%
0,31
7,91
11,3%
4,3%
0,32
8,17
11,4%
4,3%
0,33
8,42
11,5%
4,4%
0,34
8,68
11,7%
4,4%
0,35
8,93
11,8%
4,5%
0,36
9,19
11,9%
4,5%
0,37
9,45
12,0%
4,5%
0,38
9,70
12,1%
4,6%
0,39
9,96
12,2%
4,6%
0,4
10,21
12,4%
4,7%
0,41
10,47
12,5%
4,7%
0,42
10,72
12,6%
4,8%
0,43
10,98
12,8%
4,8%
Sand mould casting
E
CONCENTRATION VARIATION OF AL CALCULATION - TABLE VALUES
111
==PAGE:120==
0,44
11,23
12,9%
4,9%
0,45
11,49
13,1%
4,9%
0,46
11,74
13,2%
5,0%
0,47
12,00
13,4%
5,1%
0,48
12,25
13,5%
5,1%
0,49
12,51
13,7%
5,2%
0,5
12,76
13,8%
5,2%
0,51
13,02
14,0%
5,3%
0,52
13,27
14,2%
5,4%
0,53
13,53
14,4%
5,4%
0,54
13,78
14,6%
5,5%
0,55
14,04
14,8%
5,6%
0,56
14,30
15,0%
5,7%
0,57
14,55
15,2%
5,8%
0,58
14,81
15,4%
5,8%
0,59
15,06
15,7%
5,9%
0,6
15,32
15,9%
6,0%
0,61
15,57
16,2%
6,1%
0,62
15,83
16,4%
6,2%
0,63
16,08
16,7%
6,3%
0,64
16,34
17,0%
6,4%
0,65
16,59
17,3%
6,5%
0,66
16,85
17,6%
6,7%
0,67
17,10
17,9%
6,8%
0,68
17,36
18,3%
6,9%
0,69
17,61
18,6%
7,1%
0,7
17,87
19,0%
7,2%
0,71
18,12
19,4%
7,4%
0,72
18,38
19,9%
7,5%
0,73
18,63
20,3%
7,7%
0,74
18,89
20,8%
7,9%
0,75
19,15
21,3%
8,1%
0,76
19,40
21,9%
8,3%
0,77
19,66
22,4%
8,5%
0,78
19,91
23,1%
8,7%
0,79
20,17
23,7%
9,0%
0,8
20,42
24,5%
9,3%
0,81
20,68
25,3%
9,6%
0,82
20,93
26,1%
9,9%
0,83
21,19
27,1%
10,2%
0,84
21,44
28,1%
10,6%
0,85
21,70
29,3%
11,1%
0,86
21,95
30,6%
11,6%
0,87
22,21
32,0%
12,1%
0,88
22,46
33,6%
12,7%
0,89
22,72
35,5%
13,4%
0,9
22,97
37,7%
14,2%
E
CONCENTRATION VARIATION OF AL CALCULATION - TABLE VALUES
112
==PAGE:121==
0,91
23,23
40,2%
15,2%
0,92
23,48
43,3%
16,4%
0,93
23,74
47,0%
17,8%
0,94
24,00
51,7%
19,6%
0,95
24,25
57,9%
21,9%
0,96
24,51
66,6%
25,2%
0,97
24,76
79,6%
30,1%
0,98
25,02
102,4%
38,8%
0,99
25,27
157,6%
59,6%
1
25,53
4101914072,4%
1552075594,9%
E
CONCENTRATION VARIATION OF AL CALCULATION - TABLE VALUES
113
==PAGE:122==
Fraction solid
Distance 
[µm]
Concentration of Al in liquid 
[wt%]
Concentration of Al in solid 
[wt%]
0,01
0,11
9,1%
3,4%
0,02
0,21
9,1%
3,4%
0,03
0,32
9,2%
3,5%
0,04
0,42
9,2%
3,5%
0,05
0,53
9,3%
3,5%
0,06
0,63
9,3%
3,5%
0,07
0,74
9,4%
3,6%
0,08
0,85
9,5%
3,6%
0,09
0,95
9,5%
3,6%
0,1
1,06
9,6%
3,6%
0,11
1,16
9,7%
3,7%
0,12
1,27
9,7%
3,7%
0,13
1,38
9,8%
3,7%
0,14
1,48
9,9%
3,7%
0,15
1,59
9,9%
3,8%
0,16
1,69
10,0%
3,8%
0,17
1,80
10,1%
3,8%
0,18
1,90
10,2%
3,8%
0,19
2,01
10,2%
3,9%
0,2
2,12
10,3%
3,9%
0,21
2,22
10,4%
3,9%
0,22
2,33
10,5%
4,0%
0,23
2,43
10,6%
4,0%
0,24
2,54
10,7%
4,0%
0,25
2,64
10,7%
4,1%
0,26
2,75
10,8%
4,1%
0,27
2,86
10,9%
4,1%
0,28
2,96
11,0%
4,2%
0,29
3,07
11,1%
4,2%
0,3
3,17
11,2%
4,2%
0,31
3,28
11,3%
4,3%
0,32
3,38
11,4%
4,3%
0,33
3,49
11,5%
4,4%
0,34
3,60
11,6%
4,4%
0,35
3,70
11,7%
4,4%
0,36
3,81
11,8%
4,5%
0,37
3,91
12,0%
4,5%
0,38
4,02
12,1%
4,6%
0,39
4,13
12,2%
4,6%
0,4
4,23
12,3%
4,7%
0,41
4,34
12,4%
4,7%
0,42
4,44
12,6%
4,8%
0,43
4,55
12,7%
4,8%
Steel die casting
E
CONCENTRATION VARIATION OF AL CALCULATION - TABLE VALUES
114
==PAGE:123==
0,44
4,65
12,9%
4,9%
0,45
4,76
13,0%
4,9%
0,46
4,87
13,1%
5,0%
0,47
4,97
13,3%
5,0%
0,48
5,08
13,4%
5,1%
0,49
5,18
13,6%
5,1%
0,5
5,29
13,8%
5,2%
0,51
5,39
13,9%
5,3%
0,52
5,50
14,1%
5,3%
0,53
5,61
14,3%
5,4%
0,54
5,71
14,5%
5,5%
0,55
5,82
14,7%
5,6%
0,56
5,92
14,9%
5,6%
0,57
6,03
15,1%
5,7%
0,58
6,13
15,3%
5,8%
0,59
6,24
15,5%
5,9%
0,6
6,35
15,8%
6,0%
0,61
6,45
16,0%
6,1%
0,62
6,56
16,3%
6,2%
0,63
6,66
16,6%
6,3%
0,64
6,77
16,8%
6,4%
0,65
6,88
17,1%
6,5%
0,66
6,98
17,4%
6,6%
0,67
7,09
17,7%
6,7%
0,68
7,19
18,1%
6,8%
0,69
7,30
18,4%
7,0%
0,7
7,40
18,8%
7,1%
0,71
7,51
19,2%
7,3%
0,72
7,62
19,6%
7,4%
0,73
7,72
20,0%
7,6%
0,74
7,83
20,5%
7,8%
0,75
7,93
21,0%
7,9%
0,76
8,04
21,5%
8,1%
0,77
8,14
22,1%
8,3%
0,78
8,25
22,7%
8,6%
0,79
8,36
23,3%
8,8%
0,8
8,46
24,0%
9,1%
0,81
8,57
24,7%
9,4%
0,82
8,67
25,5%
9,7%
0,83
8,78
26,4%
10,0%
0,84
8,88
27,4%
10,4%
0,85
8,99
28,4%
10,8%
0,86
9,10
29,6%
11,2%
0,87
9,20
30,9%
11,7%
0,88
9,31
32,4%
12,3%
0,89
9,41
34,1%
12,9%
0,9
9,52
36,0%
13,6%
E
CONCENTRATION VARIATION OF AL CALCULATION - TABLE VALUES
115
==PAGE:124==
0,91
9,63
38,2%
14,5%
0,92
9,73
40,9%
15,5%
0,93
9,84
44,0%
16,7%
0,94
9,94
47,9%
18,1%
0,95
10,05
52,9%
20,0%
0,96
10,15
59,4%
22,5%
0,97
10,26
68,6%
25,9%
0,98
10,37
82,7%
31,3%
0,99
10,47
108,2%
40,9%
1
10,58
175,8%
66,5%
E
CONCENTRATION VARIATION OF AL CALCULATION - TABLE VALUES
116
==PAGE:125==
F
PHASE DIAGRAMS
F
Phase Diagrams
Figure F.1: The Al-Zn phase diagram.
117
==PAGE:126==
G
XRD-SPECTRA
G
XRD-spectra
Figure G.1: XRD pattern for reference sample. Mg ﬁtted.
118
==PAGE:127==
G
XRD-SPECTRA
Figure G.2: XRD pattern for SHT using DI water as steam source at lid. Mg (yellow) and β-phase (pink)
ﬁtted.
119
==PAGE:128==
G
XRD-SPECTRA
Figure G.3: XRD pattern for immersed sample in CaP-solution. Monetite ﬁtted.
120
==PAGE:129==
G
XRD-SPECTRA
Figure G.4: XRD pattern for SHT using CaP Chemicals as steam source at 4cm distance. Whitlockite ﬁt.
121
==PAGE:130==
H
COATING GROWTH STUDY - GDOES RAW DATA
H
Coating growth study - GDOES raw data
H.1
Alloy AZ91 SHT-coated using DI-water sample placed in lid
Figure H.1: 30s SHT.
Figure H.2: 30s SHT.
Figure H.3: 30s SHT.
Figure H.4: 30s SHT.
Figure H.5: 30s SHT.
Figure H.6: 30s SHT.
Figure H.7: 60s SHT.
Figure H.8: 60s SHT.
Figure H.9: 60s SHT.
Figure H.10: 60s SHT.
Figure H.11: 60s SHT.
Figure H.12: 60s SHT.
122
==PAGE:131==
H
COATING GROWTH STUDY - GDOES RAW DATA
Figure H.13: 120s SHT.
Figure H.14: 120s SHT.
Figure H.15: 120s SHT.
Figure H.16: 120s SHT.
Figure H.17: 120s SHT.
Figure H.18: 120s SHT.
Figure H.19: 240s SHT.
Figure H.20: 240s SHT.
Figure H.21: 240s SHT.
Figure H.22: 240s SHT.
Figure H.23: 240s SHT.
Figure H.24: 240s SHT.
123
==PAGE:132==
H
COATING GROWTH STUDY - GDOES RAW DATA
Figure H.25: 480s SHT.
Figure H.26: 480s SHT.
Figure H.27: 480s SHT.
Figure H.28: 480s SHT.
Figure H.29: 480s SHT.
Figure H.30: 480s SHT.
124
==PAGE:133==
H
COATING GROWTH STUDY - GDOES RAW DATA
H.2
Alloy AZ91 SHT-coated using DI-water at 4cm from steam source
Figure H.31: 30s SHT.
Figure H.32: 30s SHT.
Figure H.33: 30s SHT.
Figure H.34: 30s SHT.
Figure H.35: 30s SHT.
Figure H.36: 30s SHT.
Figure H.37: 30s SHT.
Figure H.38: 30s SHT.
125
==PAGE:134==
H
COATING GROWTH STUDY - GDOES RAW DATA
Figure H.39: 60s SHT.
Figure H.40: 60s SHT.
Figure H.41: 60s SHT.
Figure H.42: 60s SHT.
Figure H.43: 60s SHT.
Figure H.44: 60s SHT.
Figure H.45: 60s SHT.
Figure H.46: 60s SHT.
Figure H.47: 60s SHT.
126
==PAGE:135==
H
COATING GROWTH STUDY - GDOES RAW DATA
Figure H.48: 120s SHT.
Figure H.49: 120s SHT.
Figure H.50: 120s SHT.
Figure H.51: 120s SHT.
Figure H.52: 120s SHT.
Figure H.53: 120s SHT.
Figure H.54: 120s SHT.
Figure H.55: 120s SHT.
Figure H.56: 120s SHT.
127
==PAGE:136==
H
COATING GROWTH STUDY - GDOES RAW DATA
Figure H.57: 240s SHT.
Figure H.58: 240s SHT.
Figure H.59: 240s SHT.
Figure H.60: 240s SHT.
Figure H.61: 240s SHT.
Figure H.62: 240s SHT.
Figure H.63: 240s SHT.
Figure H.64: 240s SHT.
Figure H.65: 240s SHT.
Figure H.66: 240s SHT.
128
==PAGE:137==
H
COATING GROWTH STUDY - GDOES RAW DATA
Figure H.67: 480s SHT.
Figure H.68: 480s SHT.
Figure H.69: 480s SHT.
Figure H.70: 480s SHT.
Figure H.71: 480s SHT.
Figure H.72: 480s SHT.
Figure H.73: 480s SHT.
Figure H.74: 480s SHT.
Figure H.75: 480s SHT.
Figure H.76: 480s SHT.
Figure H.77: 480s SHT.
129
==PAGE:138==
H
COATING GROWTH STUDY - GDOES RAW DATA
H.3
Alloy AZ31 SHT-coated using DI-water at 4cm from steam source
Figure H.78: 30s SHT.
Figure H.79: 30s SHT.
Figure H.80: 30s SHT.
Figure H.81: 60s SHT.
Figure H.82: 60s SHT.
Figure H.83: 60s SHT.
Figure H.84: 120s SHT.
Figure H.85: 120s SHT.
Figure H.86: 120s SHT.
Figure H.87: 240s SHT.
Figure H.88: 240s SHT.
Figure H.89: 240s SHT.
130
==PAGE:139==
H
COATING GROWTH STUDY - GDOES RAW DATA
Figure H.90: 480s SHT.
Figure H.91: 480s SHT.
Figure H.92: 480s SHT.
131
==PAGE:140==
H
COATING GROWTH STUDY - GDOES RAW DATA
H.4
Alloy AZ91 SHT-coated using CaP-solution at 4cm from steam
source
Figure H.93: Four samples after GDOES-analysis. The sample in lower right corner showed drastic
decrease in sputter rate and the crater, marked with arrow, appears shiny indicating a gentle sputtering. The
other three samples showed normal behavior and the craters appear dull due to the increased bombardement
of sputter-particles.
132
==PAGE:141==
H
COATING GROWTH STUDY - GDOES RAW DATA
Figure H.94: 30s SHT.
Figure H.95: 30s SHT.
Figure H.96: 30s SHT.
Figure H.97: 30s SHT.
Figure H.98: 30s SHT.
Figure H.99: 30s SHT.
Figure H.100: 30s SHT.
Figure H.101: 30s SHT.
Figure H.102: 30s SHT.
Figure H.103: 30s SHT.
Figure H.104: 30s SHT.
133
==PAGE:142==
H
COATING GROWTH STUDY - GDOES RAW DATA
Figure H.105: 60s SHT.
Figure H.106: 60s SHT.
Figure H.107: 60s SHT.
Figure H.108: 60s SHT.
Figure H.109: 60s SHT.
Figure H.110: 60s SHT.
Figure H.111: 60s SHT.
Figure H.112: 60s SHT.
Figure H.113: 60s SHT.
134
==PAGE:143==
H
COATING GROWTH STUDY - GDOES RAW DATA
Figure H.114: 120s SHT.
Figure H.115: 120s SHT.
Figure H.116: 120s SHT.
Figure H.117: 120s SHT.
Figure H.118: 120s SHT.
Figure H.119: 120s SHT.
Figure H.120: 120s SHT.
Figure H.121: 120s SHT.
135
==PAGE:144==
H
COATING GROWTH STUDY - GDOES RAW DATA
Figure H.122: 240s SHT.
Figure H.123: 240s SHT.
Figure H.124: 240s SHT.
Figure H.125: 240s SHT.
Figure H.126: 240s SHT.
Figure H.127: 240s SHT.
Figure H.128: 240s SHT.
Figure H.129: 240s SHT.
136
==PAGE:145==
H
COATING GROWTH STUDY - GDOES RAW DATA
Figure H.130: 480s SHT.
Figure H.131: 480s SHT.
Figure H.132: 480s SHT.
Figure H.133: 480s SHT.
Figure H.134: 480s SHT.
Figure H.135: 480s SHT.
Figure H.136: 480s SHT.
Figure H.137: 480s SHT.
Figure H.138: 480s SHT.
137
==PAGE:146==
I
ELECTROCHEMICAL STUDY
I
Electrochemical study
I.1
Potentiodynamic Polarization
Figure I.1: Corrosion pits on exposed Mg-matrix through holes in the CaP-coating.
138
==PAGE:147==
I
ELECTROCHEMICAL STUDY
Figure I.2: Corrosion pits on exposed Mg-matrix through holes in the CaP-coating.
139
==PAGE:148==
I
ELECTROCHEMICAL STUDY
Figure I.3: Corrosion pits on exposed Mg-matrix through holes in the CaP-coating.
140
==PAGE:149==
I
ELECTROCHEMICAL STUDY
I.2
Immersion in PBS study
Table I.1: Surface areas calculated for Immersion test samples.
Ref 1
Ref 2
Ref 1
Ref 2
Alloy
AZ91
AZ91
AZ31
AZ31
Area [cm2]
3.93
3.96
3.69
3.64
A 1
A 2
B 1
B 2
Alloy
AZ31
AZ31
AZ31
AZ31
Area [cm2]
3.51
3.69
3.69
3.77
C 1
C 2
D 1
D 2
Alloy
AZ91
AZ91
AZ91
AZ91
Area [cm2]
3.77
3.79
3.77
3.77
141
==PAGE:150==
I
ELECTROCHEMICAL STUDY
Figure I.4: AZ91 reference after 24 hours immersion in PBS.
142
==PAGE:151==
I
ELECTROCHEMICAL STUDY
Figure I.5: SHT-coated AZ31 using CaP-solution after 24 hours immersion in PBS.
143
==PAGE:152==
I
ELECTROCHEMICAL STUDY
Figure I.6: SHT-coated AZ91 using DI-water after 24 hours immersion in PBS.
144
==PAGE:153==
I
ELECTROCHEMICAL STUDY
I.2.1
Estimation of remaining mass of bone screw after 12 weeks implantation
Estimation of surface area:
areasurface = 2⇡rl + 2⇡r2
= 2⇡· 0.25cm · 2.0cm + 2⇡· 0.25cm2
= 3.53cm2
Estimation of mass loss over a 12 week period:
Massloss = 0.0023g/cm2/day · 3.53cm2 · 7 · 12day/12weeks
= 0.69g/12weeks
The 0.0023g/cm2/day are the measured mass loss from 24 hour immersion in PBS.
Total mass estimation of Mg bone screw (simpliﬁed to a rectangle):
masstotal = l⇡r2⇢
= 2.00cm · ⇡· 0.25cm2 · 1.80g/cm3
= 0.71g
Percentage mass remaining after 12 weeks implantation estimation:
massremaining = 0.71g −0.69g/12weeks
0.71g
· 100%
= 2.6%
145
==PAGE:154==
%56.FDIBOJDBM&OHJOFFSJOH4FDUJPOPG.BUFSJBMT
.BOVGBDUVSJOH5FDIOPMPHZ
5FDIOJDBM6OJWFSTJUZPG%FONBSL

/JMT,PQQFMT"MMÌ
#ME
,HT-ZOHCZ
5FM	

'BY	


XXXNFLEUVEL
