==PAGE:1==
 
 
DTU Vindenergi 
Master Rapport 
 
 
 
Validation	  of	  wind	  turbine	  wake	  models	  for	  
offshore	  wind	  farms	  
 
Caroline Andrea Gjertsen 
DTU Windenergy-M-0035 
February 2015 
==PAGE:2==
 
Forfatter: Caroline Andrea Gjertsen 
Titel: Validation of wind turbine  wake models for offshore wind farms 
Afdeling: Fluid Mechanics 
Caroline Andrea Gjertsen 
DTU Windenergy-M-0035 
February 2015 
 
 
Resumen: 
 
The purpose of this master thesis is to validate 
the wake models WAsP and FUGA. An analysis of the 
data available for the study is conducted to establish  
a high quality data set. The wake models are validated 
using two different cases. The empirical wake loss is 
calculated in both cases and are compared to the 
results from WAsP and FUGA. The results, possible  
error sources and limitations are discussed.  
Projektperiode: 
06/09/14 – 06/02/15 
 
ECTS: 30 
 
 
Uddannelse: MSc.Eng. 
 
 
Område: 
Wind Energy 
 
Vejledere: 
Trond S. Jensen (Aquiloz AS) 
Kurt S. Hansen (DTU) 
Martin L. Hansen (DTU) 
 
Bemærkninger: 
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark. 
 
Kontakt nr.: 
 
 
Projektnr.: 
 
 
Sponsorship: 
 
 
Forside: 
 
Sider: 51 
Tabeller: 7 
Referencer: 21 
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind Energy 
Nils Koppels Allé 
Building 403 
2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
Denmark 
Phone  45 25 25 25 
 
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk 
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
When wind turbines are placed in large oﬀshore wind farms, there will inevitably be a loss of
power production due to wind turbine wakes. Today wake models are used to calculate the
wake eﬀects. The presented thesis focus on the validation of such models, as the accuracy
of the wake models will yield a signiﬁcant impact on the power loss caused by wake eﬀects.
The wake models used in this study are WAsP and FUGA.
The greatest challenge during this study has been to establish a high quality data set, as
the accuracy and the amount of data will have a high impact on the discrepancy between
the observed wake loss and the wake loss simulated by the wake models. To validate the
wake models two cases are made. The ﬁrst case addresses the multiple wake situation, where
both models underpredicts the wake loss. WAsP simulates a similar wake development as
the observations, while FUGA simulates a slower wake development. In the second case the
wind farm eﬃciency is investigated to see how the aggregate wake loss behaves in diﬀerent
wind sectors. Both models overpredicts the wake loss, FUGA overpredicts more than WAsP.
Both approaches used yields a great amount of uncertainties, and to do a more accurate
validation more measurements needs to be obtained.
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I would like to take this opportunity to thank my supervisors at DTU, Kurt S. Hansen and
Martin L. Hansen, for many helpful meetings and feedback during the process of writing this
master thesis.
I would like to give a special thanks to my supervisor Trond S. Jensen at Aqulioz AS. He
has helped me with the programming in R, which I had never used before, and helped me
ﬁltering the data available from the wind farm. He has also given me feedback and advice
on the structure and content of the thesis.
Furthermore I want to thank all the employees at Aquiloz AS for allowing me access to their
wind farm measurements. During the whole thesis process I have also had the pleasure of
loaning an oﬃce space and a computer at Aquiloz AS, where questions were frequently given
answers to. This has been vital for my work and it has resulted in many useful discussions.
I would like to thank everyone at Aquiloz AS for ﬁve pleasant months.
iv
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract
iii
Acknowledgements
iv
Contents
v
List of Figures
vii
List of Tables
ix
Abbreviations
x
Symbols
xi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Wake eﬀects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Purpose of project
4
3
Theory
5
3.1
Wind turbine aerodynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.2
Turbulence
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.3
Atmospheric stability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.4
Wind turbine wakes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.5
Wake models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.5.1
N. O. Jensen
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.5.2
WAsP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.5.3
FUGA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4
Empirical data
12
4.1
SCADA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.2
Turbulence intensity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.3
Atmospheric stability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5
Validation of the wake models
21
5.1
Case 1 - Multiple wake situation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.1.1
Empirical wake eﬀects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.1.2
Validation of WAsP and FUGA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
v
==PAGE:6==
Contents
vi
5.1.3
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.2
Case 2 - Wind farm eﬃciency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.2.1
Empirical wake eﬀects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.2.2
Validation of WAsP and FUGA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.2.3
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6
Conclusion and future work
38
A Case 1
40
Bibliography
45
==PAGE:7==
List of Figures
1.1
Development in wind turbine size . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
3.1
Velocity proﬁle in the wake of a wind turbine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2
Wake development with the downstream distance x between the wind turbines
9
3.3
The ﬂow ﬁeld used by the model to calculate wind turbine output
. . . . . .
10
4.1
Wind rose generated from the Met Mast at 68.5 m . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.2
Scatter plot of turbine M1 in a 360◦wind sector,where the blue line is the
power curve provided by Aquiloz AS. The blue circle illustrates abnormalities
and the red circle illustrates curtailments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.3
Correlation between the anemometer at 45 m and 68.5 m at the Met Mast . .
15
4.4
Correlation between the Met Mast and the turbine nacelle at turbine M1
. .
17
4.5
Turbulence intensity plotted against wind direction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.6
Turbulence intensity plotted against the wind direction measured at Met Mast
at 68.5 m, from a wind sector from 250◦to 300◦. The red line is the mean
turbulence intensity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.7
Atmospheric stability for wind sectors 240◦to 360◦. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.1
General description of the reference turbines and the turbine rows and columns
in case 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.2
Wake loss calculated in each turbine row in the wind sector from 285◦to 295◦.
23
5.3
Wake loss calculated at each turbine row, from 295◦to 305◦. . . . . . . . . .
24
5.4
Turbulence intensity calculated for the wind sector from 295◦to 305◦
. . . .
26
5.5
Histogram of the wind speed plotted with weibull curves, calculated in WAsP
and R . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.6
Wake loss for WAsP, FUGA and observed measurements in the wind sector
from 295◦to 305◦. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.7
Direction measurements from the Met Mast plotted with the mean yaw angle
of the turbines in row 1, 5, 10 and 15 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.8
Power curves from the turbines plotted for diﬀerent conditions, against the
nominal power curve, provided by Aquiloz AS, plotted with blue . . . . . . .
31
5.9
Box plot of the wake loss divided into wind speed bins where the outliers are
marked with red
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.10 Wake loss plotted for 360◦. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.11 Wake loss plotted with the number of measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.12 Total wake loss for WAsP, FUGA and observed measurements calculated in
case 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
vii
==PAGE:8==
List of Figures
viii
A.1 Boxplot of the wake loss divided into speed bins for the diﬀerent turbine rows,
in sectors 295◦to 305◦. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
A.2 Boxplot of the wake loss divided into speed bins for the diﬀerent turbine rows,
in sectors 295◦to 305◦. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
A.3 Scatterplot of the power production for the diﬀerent turbine rows, in sectors
295◦to 305◦. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
A.4 Scatterplot of the power production for the diﬀerent turbine rows, in sectors
295◦to 305◦. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
==PAGE:9==
List of Tables
4.1
Atmospheric stability class correlated with standard deviations of the wind
direction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.1
Weibull shape and scale parameters calculated in WAsP and R . . . . . . . .
27
5.2
Total wake loss calculated in case 1 for the wind sector from 295◦to 305◦
. .
28
5.3
Wind direction sectors for the synthetic Met Mast and the original Met Mast
33
5.4
Total wake loss calculated in case 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
ix
==PAGE:10==
Abbreviations
AEP
Annual Energy Production
CFD
Computational Fluid Dynamics
EPC
Empirical Power Curve
HAWT
Horizontal Axis Wind Turbine
NPC
Nominal Power Curve
RANS
Reynolds Averaged Navier Stokes - equation
WAsP
Wind Atlas Analysis and Application Program
x
==PAGE:11==
Symbols
A
Cross section of the wind turbine rotor
Aw
Weibull scale parameter
a
Axial interference factor
α
Entrainment constant
Cp
Power coeﬃcient
CT
Thrust coeﬃcient
D
Rotor diameter
H
Height
k
Wake decay constant
kw
Weibull shape parameter
L
Monin-Obukhov length
P
Power
ρ
Density
r0
Radius of the turbine rotor
r
Radius of wake
σ
Standard deviation
T
Thrust force
U
Free stream velocity
V
Wake velocity
x
Downwind distance between the wind turbines
Z0
Roughness length
xi
==PAGE:12==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Wind energy has been used for thousands of years, but it was ﬁrst in the late nineteenth
century it was used for electrical production. There was little sustained interest in wind
generation until the price of oil rose dramatically in 1973. From around 1990, the main
motivation for utilizing wind turbines to generate electrical power was the very low CO2
emission. In 2007 the European Union declared a policy that 20 % of all energy should come
from renewable sources by 2020 [1]. This have led to an incredible development of wind
turbine technology and size, with a focus on improving eﬃciency and reducing the costs, see
ﬁgure 1.1. Nowadays, multi-megawatt turbines are the most sold units, and as of February
2015, the largest installed wind turbine is a Vestas V164 turbine with a capacity of 8MW
[2].
Figure 1.1: Development in wind turbine size
1
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1. Introduction
2
In the recent years a great part of the wind energy development has moved oﬀshore, due to
the in general good and stable wind resources accessible oﬀshore and the limited access of
areas onshore. Additionally, the environmental issues with constructing a wind farm onshore
plays a major role. However, the negative aspects of constructing a wind farm oﬀshore are
the costs. In particular the cost related to foundations, underwater cables and operation and
maintenance are greater oﬀshore than onshore.
The ﬁrst oﬀshore wind farm was built near Vindeby in 1991 and consists of eleven turbines
with a capacity of 450 kW each, located 3 km outside the coast of Denmark. Throughout the
90’s small wind farms were installed close to shore, while in 2002 the wind farm Horns Rev was
constructed 20 km outside the western coast of Denmark, with a total installed capacity of
160 MW [1]. After this the development has accelerated rapidly, and today Northern Europe
is by far the leading oﬀshore wind market.
By the end of 2013 the Northern European
countries generated over 90 % of the total installed capacity in the world oﬀshore [3].
1.1
Wake eﬀects
Wind turbines extract kinetic energy from the wind to produce electricity, hence the wind
passing the turbine rotor will have a lower energy content than the wind upstream of the
turbine. As a consequence the wind speed downstream will be reduced, this downstream
wind ﬁeld is the wake of the turbine and this eﬀect is referred to as wake eﬀect.
The power output from a wind turbine is given by equation 1.1. Where ρ is the density of
the air, A is the rotor area and U is the wind velocity [4] .
P = 1
2ρAU3
(1.1)
Equation 1.1 shows that the wind velocity, U, is the most important factor as the power is a
function of U3. Hence a small change in wind velocity will have a great impact on the power
production. In reality the wind turbine can not utilize all the energy in the wind, which will
be described in chapter 3.
==PAGE:14==
Chapter 1. Introduction
3
If a turbine is placed in the wake of another turbine it will only have access to reduced
velocity, hence have a lower power production. There will also be an increase in turbulence
in the wake, which results in a shorter lifespan for the downstream turbine, as the turbulence
will cause more fatigue on the structure. It is thus important to consider the wake eﬀects
when designing the wind farm layout, in order to maximize the energy output and lifetime
of the turbines. Due to in general lower turbulence oﬀshore than onshore, there will be a
higher wake loss oﬀshore, as the low turbulence will cause a longer lasting wake [5].
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2
Purpose of project
As more oﬀshore wind farms are installed, and their size continue to increase, it is important
to determine the power deﬁcit caused by wakes. Today wake models are used to calculate the
wake eﬀects. The goal of this study is to validate diﬀerent wake models to see how accurate
they are compared to a full scale wind farm, where the wakes will behave in a complex way
with varying climatology. A great challenge for wake model validation is to access actual
wind farm measurements, and in cooperation with Aquiloz AS, such measurements have been
obtained. The wake models used in this study are WAsP and FUGA.
In this study all the calculations are done in R. R is a programming language and software
environment for statistical computing and graphics. The R language is widely used among
statisticians and data miners for developing statistical software and data analysis.
Throughout this report the readers are assumed to have basic wind turbine aerodynamic
knowledge.
4
==PAGE:16==
Chapter 3
Theory
3.1
Wind turbine aerodynamics
The most common design of wind turbines today is the horizontal axis wind turbine, HAWT,
with 3 rotor blades. Wind turbines converts the kinetic energy in the wind into electrical
power, and the total power output from the wind turbine is given in chapter 1, by equation
1.1. However, it is not possible for the wind turbine to utilize all the energy in the wind.
In 1919, the German physicist Albert Betz calculated that the maximum power that can be
extracted from the wind is 59.3 %. This is because the wind has to move past the turbine
rotor, and can not stand still behind the turbine. This is known as Betz’s limit and is due
to the nature of wind turbines and has nothing to do with the turbine design [4].
How eﬃcient each wind turbine converts the energy in the wind into electricity is determined
by the individual power coeﬃcient, Cp.
The power coeﬃcient is given by the electricity
produced by the wind turbine divided by the total power available in the wind [4]. If the
power coeﬃcient is included in equation 1.1, the electrical power produced by a wind turbine
can be calculated from equation 3.1.
P = 1
2ρCpAU3
(3.1)
5
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 3. Theory
6
The wind also generates a thrust force, T, on the wind turbine. The thrust force is the
force in the streamwise direction resulting from the pressure drop over the rotor. The thrust
coeﬃcient, CT , is expressed by equation 3.2 [4].
CT =
T
1
2ρAU2
(3.2)
3.2
Turbulence
When investigating the wake eﬀects in a wind farm it is important to evaluate the turbulence
level in the ﬂow as it, as stated in chapter 1, will have a great impact on the wake.
Turbulence refers to ﬂuctuations in wind speed on a relatively fast timescale, typically less
than 10 minutes. Turbulence in the atmospheric boundary layer is mainly generated by two
causes: ’friction’ with the earth’s surface, and thermal eﬀects. Friction against any surface
will cause the ﬂow to alter its behavior, leading to a chaotic and unpredictable ﬂow. Thermal
eﬀect can cause air masses to move vertically and horizontally due to the change in air density
[1]. The result is a complex ﬂow, which will have an impact on the development of the wake
in terms of length and width, described in section 3.4.
The turbulence intensity is a measurement of the overall level of turbulence. It is deﬁned as
the ratio between the standard deviation of the wind speed, σ, and the mean wind speed,
Uσ, for a 10 min period, described in equation 3.3 [1].
I = σ
Uσ
(3.3)
==PAGE:18==
Chapter 3. Theory
7
3.3
Atmospheric stability
The atmospheric boundary layer is deﬁned as the lowest part of the atmosphere, and its
behavior is directly inﬂuenced by the presence of the earth’s surface. The stability of the
atmosphere can be classiﬁed into three categories: unstable, neutral and stable [1].
Unstable conditions mainly occurs during daytime, when the surface is warmer than the
air above. The hot surface will cause heated air near the surface to rise. As the air rises,
it expands due to reduced pressure, and cools adiabatically. If the cooling is not suﬃcient
to bring the air into thermal equilibrium with the surroundings, it will continue to rise,
resulting in an unstable atmosphere. This will result in a thick boundary layer with large-
scale turbulent eddies. If the adiabatic cooling of the rising air succeeds to bring the air in
thermal equilibrium with the surroundings there is a neutral atmosphere. Neutral conditions
mainly occurs in cases of strong winds, causing turbulent wind loads on the turbine. Stable
conditions often occurs in the night time when the surface is cooler than the air.
The
turbulence is then dominated by friction with the ground, and the turbulence will be reduced
when there is a stable atmosphere [1].
3.4
Wind turbine wakes
The wake of a turbine is a highly complex ﬂow, inﬂuenced by numerous properties; The
shape of the turbine and turbine blades, loads acting on the turbine, operating conditions,
turbulence, atmospheric stability and the velocity proﬁle of the upstream air.
As presented in chapter 1, the wake of a wind turbine is the region behind a turbine where the
velocity is reduced. The reduction in velocity is directly related to the thrust coeﬃcient as it
determines the momentum extracted from the ﬂow. As the wake convects downstream, the
velocity diﬀerence within and outside the wake will result in an additional shear-generated
turbulence. This shear-generated turbulence will assist the transfer of momentum into the
wake from surrounding ﬂow. The wake and the surrounding ﬂow will start to mix, and the
region of the mixing will spread inwards to the center of the wake, as well as outwards, which
will result in an increase of the width of the wake, see ﬁgure 3.1 [6]. The wake will then
become broader but shallower until the ﬂow has fully recovered far downstream, where the
velocity and turbulence levels are restored to initial ﬂow conditions [1].
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 3. Theory
8
The rate of the expansion of the wake is dependent on the turbulence level in the free
stream undisturbed ﬂow.
Whereas high turbulence intensity will generate a wider wake
that dissipates faster, and a low turbulence intensity will generate a narrower wake that
convects further downstream before initial ﬂow has been restored. In addition to the shear-
generated turbulence, a mechanical turbulence will occur, as a result of the tip vortices shed
by the blades, and the disturbance to the ﬂow from the structure itself. From the mechanical
turbulence large eddies will occur and give rise to small eddies, which will move the turbulent
energy to higher and higher frequencies until it eventually dissipates as heat [1].
Figure 3.1: Velocity proﬁle in the wake of a wind turbine
3.5
Wake models
The wake models validated in this study are WAsP and FUGA, and both models will be
described in this section. Because WAsP is a modiﬁed version of the N. O. Jensen wake
model, a brief overview of the model will be given.
3.5.1
N. O. Jensen
One of the oldest wake models is the model by N. O. Jensen, and it is based on the assumption
that the wake diameter expands linearly with the distance behind the turbine. The model
treats the wake behind the turbine as a turbulent wake, which is similar to a negative jet [7].
The wake development is illustrated in ﬁgure 3.2 [7].
==PAGE:20==
Chapter 3. Theory
9
Figure 3.2: Wake development with the downstream distance x between the wind turbines
Using the balance of mass to investigate the velocity deﬁcit in the wake yields the following
expression [7].
πr2
0V0 + π(r2 −r2
0)U = πr2V
(3.4)
Where V0 is the velocity immediately after the interaction with the wind turbine, r0 is the
radius of the turbine rotor, r is the radius of the wake and V is the wake velocity. x is
the downwind distance between the wind turbines, and U is the free stream velocity. From
equation 3.4 it is possible to ﬁnd an expression for the wake velocity [7].
Solving for V , assuming a linear wake, r = αx + r0, and assuming that the rotor is optimal
V0 = 1
3U, yields equation 3.5.
V = U(1 −2a(
r0
r0 + αx)2)
(3.5)
Where a is the axial interference factor equal to 1
3 and α is the entrainment constant, which
is equal to approximately 0.1 [7].
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 3. Theory
10
3.5.2
WAsP
The Wind Atlas Analysis and Application Program, WAsP, was introduced in 1987 by the
Wind Energy Department at the Risø Laboratory. The software is a tool for wind data
analysis, wind climate estimation, and siting of wind turbines [8].
The wake model used in WAsP is a further developed version of N. O. Jensen’s wake model,
introduced in section 3.5.1, and the model uses a wake decay constant, k. To ﬁt the oﬀshore
conditions, the wake decay constant is set to 0.05 in this study [9].
The ﬂow ﬁeld used by the model to calculate wind turbine output is illustrated in ﬁgure 3.3
[8].
Figure 3.3: The ﬂow ﬁeld used by the model to calculate wind turbine output
The eﬀective wind speed deﬁcit at the downwind wind turbine is calculated by equation 3.6
[8]
δV1 = U0(1 −
p
1 −Ct)(
D0
D0 + 2kx0
)2
(3.6)
Where U0 is the undisturbed wind speed at the upwind turbine, D0 is the rotor diameter,
CT is the thrust coeﬃcient, calculated by equation 3.2. x0 is the downwind distance between
the wind turbines and k is the wake decay constant.
The initial wind speed reduction from U0 to V1, when passing the rotor plane, is related to
CT by (1 −CT ) = (U0/V1)2 [8].
==PAGE:22==
Chapter 3. Theory
11
The problem of interacting wakes is solved by assuming the kinetic energy deﬁcit of a mixed
wake to be equal to the sum of the energy deﬁcits for each wake at the calculated downwind
position. The summation of two wakes is thus found by equation 3.7 [10].
(1 −Vtot
U0
)2 = (1 −V1
U0
)2 + (1 −V2
U0
)2
(3.7)
3.5.3
FUGA
FUGA is a wake model designed for sites with homogeneous terrain and roughness, and
is therefore used mainly for oﬀshore wind farms. It was developed by Risø and it is fully
integrated within WAsP. The annual energy production, AEP, is calculated by wind climates
speciﬁc for each turbine site, as extracted from a WAsP workspace ﬁle [11].
FUGA is a powerful engineering tool, based on a linear RANS CFD model. The Reynolds
Averaged Navier-Stokes equations, RANS, are time average equations of motion for ﬂuid
ﬂow. The RANS uses a closure based on an eddy viscosity. The E −ε closure and the mixing
length closure are examples of such models [11]. CFD, computational ﬂuid dynamics, is a
branch of ﬂuid mechanics that uses numerical methods and algorithms to solve and analyze
problems that involve ﬂuid ﬂows [12].
FUGA uses a system of look-up tables to construct the velocity ﬁeld behind a turbine, and
it uses a linear summation technique to consider multiple wakes. The model is fast, typically
105 times faster than conventional CFD [11].
A technical comprehensive description of the FUGA wake model can be found in the study
of Ott. et. al, where the model equations and solution methods are explained [11].
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 4
Empirical data
Before validating the wake models it is necessary to establish a high quality data set to obtain
accurate results. The data obtained for the study is analyzed in this chapter.
The wind farm used to validate the wake models is located in the Baltic sea, for more detailes
see Appendix B. Due to the wind farm being conﬁdential, all plots and results regarding the
wind farm will be presented in Appendix B. In the public edition Appendix B will not be
published. To validate the wake models, data collected from a meteorological measuring
mast and from the wind turbines is obtained.
4.1
SCADA
The wind data regarding speed and direction, as well as the standard deviation from the
parameters, is obtained from an on-site meteorological measuring mast, referred to as the
Met Mast. The data is obtained from the supervisory control and data acquisition system,
SCADA, and the data available is listed in Appendix B, table B.2. The system is collecting
data continuously, and logging mean values every 10 minutes. The data available for this
study is from September 2. 2010 to April 10. 2014.
The Met Mast is located north-west of the wind farm, illustrated in Appendix B, ﬁgure B.2.
The data used in this study is obtained from the Met Mast at 68.5 m, which is the same
height as the hub height of the turbines. When data is missing from the anemometer at 68.5
m, data from an anemometer at the Met Mast at 45 m is used. The log law is then used to
transform the wind speed measurements from 45 m to 68.5 m, see equation 4.1 [13].
12
==PAGE:24==
Chapter 4. Empirical data
13
Unew = U45
log(H2
z0 )
log(H1
z0 )
(4.1)
Where H1 is the height of the anemometer at 45 m, and H2 is the actual height of 68.5 m.
Z0 is the roughness length of water and this value is calculated by converting equation 4.1,
see equation 4.2.
Z0 = e
U68.5
U45
log(H1)−log(H2)
U68.5
U45
−1
(4.2)
Where Unew is set to be U68.5, which is the wind speed at 68.5 m, and U45 is the wind speed
at 45 m. The mean Z0 is calculated to be 0.00049, and by inserting this in equation 4.1, the
wind speed measured at 45 m is transformed up to 68.5 m. By using the new wind speed,
Unew, the data set contains 4.17 % more data points.
A wind rose is generated to illustrate how frequent each wind speed appears, and from which
direction the wind comes from. Figure 4.1 shows that the main wind direction is from south-
west. As illustrated in ﬁgure ??, the Met Mast is located north-west of the wind farm, hence
the Met Mast will be in the wake of the wind farm when the wind comes from south and
east. There is no data available for this study from before the wind farm was constructed.
Another wind farm is located 3 km east of the wind farm, and might inﬂuence the velocity
in eastern sectors.
Figure 4.1: Wind rose generated from the Met Mast at 68.5 m
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 4. Empirical data
14
Data from the wind farm regarding power output and turbine nacelle measurements, like
nacelle wind speed and yaw position, is also obtained from the SCADA system, covering the
same period as the Met Mast, constituting a total of 18 million data points.
The SCADA data used in this study is cleaned for abnormalities and curtailments. Some
criteria are chosen, as the power production is set to be greater than zero, the turbines must
be online, and work in normal conditions. This is done to ensure the exclusion of data from
periods where either one of the turbines were oﬄine or not in normal operation. Figure 4.2
illustrates how the data is cleaned from abnormalities and curtailments, where ﬁgure 4.2(a)
and ﬁgure 4.2(b) illustrates the uncleaned and cleaned data set, respectively. When cleaning
the data set, 2.11 % measurements is removed. As illustrated in the uncleaned plot, the
red circle shows curtailments. Curtailments occur when there is a high production of wind
power combined with low energy demand. The turbines are then restricted to produce less
power than optimal, and as can bee seen from the plot, the production is constant below
rated power. The blue circle illustrates abnormalities, which may be caused by shut-down
and start-up of the turbine. There are still some abnormalities remaining after cleaning the
data set, but due to the low amount it is not considered to be signiﬁcant.
(a) Uncleaned data
(b) Cleaned data
Figure 4.2: Scatter plot of turbine M1 in a 360◦wind sector,where the blue line is the
power curve provided by Aquiloz AS. The blue circle illustrates abnormalities and the red
circle illustrates curtailments
==PAGE:26==
Chapter 4. Empirical data
15
One way of validating the wind speed measurements at 68.5 m is to check the correlation with
other heights. As stated earlier, the data available from the Met Mast is from two diﬀerent
heights, 45 m and 68.5 m. Figure 4.3(a) shows the wind speed at 45 m at the y-axis, plotted
against the wind speed at 68.5 m at the x-axis. A line of 45◦is plotted in red. As the ﬁgure
illustrates the wind speed is higher at 68.5 m. The correlation between the two data sets are
0.98, where a value of 1 would indicate perfect comovement in a linear sense. This is a good
way of checking that the anemometer is working in both heights.
The same validation is done for the wind direction measurements at 45 m and 68.5 m. Where
the wind direction at 45 m is plotted at the y-axis against the wind direction at 68.5 m plotted
on the x-axis, see ﬁgure 4.3(b). As illustrated in the ﬁgure, the correlation between the two
heights is good, and is calculated to be 0.99.
(a) Wind speed in an 360 degree wind sector
(b) Wind direction from 3 m/s to 25 m/s
Figure 4.3: Correlation between the anemometer at 45 m and 68.5 m at the Met Mast
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 4. Empirical data
16
Another way to check the accuracy of the Met Mast is to compare it with the turbine nacelle
measurements. The turbine used to check the measurements, is turbine M1, located right
beside the Met Mast, see appendix B, ﬁgure B.2. When comparing the two measurements
only the free stream velocity is considered from 240◦to 360◦to get more accurate results.
In ﬁgure 4.4(a) the wind direction at the Met Mast is plotted at the y-axis against the wind
direction at the turbine nacelle at the x-axis. As can bee seen from the ﬁgure, the wind
direction has three diﬀerent regimes. This was tested with other turbines close to the Met
Mast, and all the plots had the same deviation. This may be due to calibration error at
the Met Mast, as they are often not subjected to proper testing and maintenance after the
wind farm has been constructed. When plotting the same measurements in a time series,
the periods where the error occurred was obtained, see ﬁgure 4.4(c), where the red line is
the measurements from the Met Mast and the black line is the measurements at the turbine
nacelle. This deviation occurred in the period from September 2010 to February 2011 and
after March 2013, and these measurements are removed in the rest of the study to avoid
inaccuracies.
The data set still obtains 2 years of data, which is a good foundation for
further analysis. The diﬀerent regimes could also been caused by yaw-misalignment at high
wind speeds, but due to the long period of time, see ﬁgure 4.4(c), this is not the case. A plot
of the cleaned data set is illustrated in ﬁgure 4.4(b). Before removing the inaccurate data the
correlation was 0.81, while the clean data set has a correlation of 0.99. The wind direction
measured from the turbine nacelle is taken from the yaw angle of the turbine. Because the
yaw angle is related to the wind direction through the action of the control system in a
complicated way, the method adds an unknown amount of uncertainty to the wind direction
data.
The wind speed measured at turbine M1 is also plotted against the wind speed measured at
the Met Mast, see ﬁgure 4.4(d). As the ﬁgure reveals the measurements will yield a great
amount of disturbance. This is because the nacelle anemometer is positioned behind the
rotor, thus including a disturbance from upstream wind speeds.
==PAGE:28==
Chapter 4. Empirical data
17
(a) Wind direction without cleaned dat set,
from 3m/s to 25m/s
(b) Wind direction with cleaned data set,
from 3m/s to 25 m/s
(c) Time series, where red represents the data
from Met Mast and black line represent mea-
surements at the turbine nacelle
(d) Wind speed in a 360 degree wind sector
Figure 4.4: Correlation between the Met Mast and the turbine nacelle at turbine M1
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 4. Empirical data
18
4.2
Turbulence intensity
When calculating the turbulence intensity equation 3.3 is used, as described in section 3.2.
Figure 4.5(a) reveals that from approximately 50◦to 80◦the turbulence intensity is high,
this is due to the Met Mast being in the wake of the wind farm. There is also a peak at
approximately 220◦, due to low wind speeds frequently occurring in this wind direction. This
peak may occur because the anemometer is mounted behind the Met Mast, thus standing in
wake of the Met Mast in this direction. To check if this is correct, the turbulence intensity
is calculated one more time, but this time the measurements from 210◦to 230◦is replaced
with the measurements from the anemometer at 45 m, see ﬁgure 4.5(b). The wind speed
measurements at 68.5 m from 210◦to 230◦is replaced with the log adjusted wind speed mea-
surements at 45 m, as described in section 4.1, in the rest of the study to avoid inaccuracies
caused by the Met Mast itself.
(a) Turbulence intensity
(b) Turbulence intensity with cleaning the data set
Figure 4.5: Turbulence intensity plotted against wind direction
In ﬁgure 4.6 the turbulence intensity is plotted in free stream conditions from 250◦to 300◦.
This is done to analyze the turbulence without any disturbance from the wind farm or the
Met Mast. As the ﬁgure reveals, the turbulence intensity is low, and the mean turbulence
intensity is approximately 0.056, equal to 5.6%, plotted with a red line. Turbulence intensity
at latitudes above 50 m is typically less than 6 % oﬀshore [14]. Which is a good indication
that the turbulence calculated in this study is valid.
==PAGE:30==
Chapter 4. Empirical data
19
Figure 4.6: Turbulence intensity plotted against the wind direction measured at Met Mast
at 68.5 m, from a wind sector from 250◦to 300◦.
The red line is the mean turbulence
intensity
4.3
Atmospheric stability
To calculate the atmospheric stability, an algorithm based on the standard deviation of the
wind direction, σθ, listed in table 4.1, is used[13]. When calculating the atmospheric stabil-
ity the wind direction is limited to the free stream direction from 240◦to 360◦to get more
accurate results.
Table 4.1: Atmospheric stability class correlated with standard deviations of the wind
direction
Stability Class
σθ
Very unstable
σθ > 15.5
Unstable
15.5 σθ > 6.5
Neutral
6.5 ≥σθ > 5.5
Stable
5.5 ≥σθ > 2
Very stable
2 ≥σθ
Figure 4.7 shows that the atmosphere is stable for the majority of the time analyzed. For
wind farms, velocity deﬁcits tend to be larger in stable conditions, as the wake recovery will
be slower. Thus stable conditions also tend to be associated with lower levels of turbulence
intensity [14].
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 4. Empirical data
20
The algorithm used is only valid upto 10 m, in this study the measurements at 45 m is used
to ﬁnd the atmospheric stability, due to lack of measurements at 10 m. Hence the stability
found in this section will yield inaccuracies, and it will only be used as an indicator of the
stability class.
Figure 4.7: Atmospheric stability for wind sectors 240◦to 360◦
==PAGE:32==
Chapter 5
Validation of the wake models
In this chapter, the wake models WAsP and FUGA, are validated using two diﬀerent cases.
The ﬁrst case addresses the multiple wake situation, using a selection of reference turbines.
The second case addresses wind farm eﬃciency, to get an overview of how the aggregate wake
loss behaves in diﬀerent wind sectors.
5.1
Case 1 - Multiple wake situation
To calculate the wake loss in the multiple wake situation some reference turbines are selected,
marked with blue, and the turbine rows and columns are speciﬁed, as illustrated in ﬁgure
5.1. The wind direction is set to the main wind direction for the reference turbines, hence
the reference turbines are always standing in free stream. The reference turbines in case 1
are chosen due to the Met Mast being positioned in front of the wind farm in that direction,
illustrated with red in ﬁgure 5.1. As a result, the input in WAsP and FUGA will not be
aﬀected by the Met Mast standing in wake of the wind farm. Figure 5.1 only illustrates a
general overview of how the reference turbines and rows are deﬁned, and the wind farm used
in this study will not have the same shape and size. For a more detailed overview of the
reference turbines and rows, as well as the main wind direction and the position of the Met
Mast, see Appendix B, ﬁgure B.3.
21
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 5. Validation of the wake models
22
Figure 5.1: General description of the reference turbines and the turbine rows and columns
in case 1
5.1.1
Empirical wake eﬀects
To validate WAsP and FUGA, the empirical wake loss needs to be calculated. The main
wind direction is coming from north-west, and the angle is set from 285◦to 295◦. To get
more accurate results, the reference turbines is grid connected 100 % during each 10 minute
period, and the same goes for the turbines standing in the wake. The data set is also cleaned
for abnormalities and curtailments, as described in chapter 4, section 4.1.
The empirical wake loss in percentage is calculated by equation 5.1.
WL[%] = (1 −Pwake
Pfree
) · 100
(5.1)
Where Pwake and Pfree is the mean power production of the turbines operating in wake and
the turbines operating in free stream undisturbed ﬂow, respectively. The Met Mast is used
to connect this value to the wind speed and wind direction.
The total wake loss in case 1 is calculated to be 21.2 % in direction 285◦to 295◦. The wake
loss is plotted in ﬁgure 5.2. As the ﬁgure reveals, the wake loss between row 1 and row 2
is small, and it is calculated to be 2 %. It then increases until it reaches row 11, which has
the highest wake loss of 33%. This is not as expected, due to the fact that the wake loss
tend to be higher between row 1 and row 2 [15]. Both the data and the coordinates of the
turbines were double checked to make sure that the input was correct and reference turbines
were correctly deﬁned.
==PAGE:34==
Chapter 5. Validation of the wake models
23
Figure 5.2: Wake loss calculated in each turbine row in the wind sector from 285◦to 295◦.
Further investigations revealed that the relatively small wake loss between row 1 and row
2 can be explained by the direction of the incoming wind speed.
If the wakes from the
reference turbines do not hit the turbines in row 2, but instead moves between the turbines,
the turbines in row 2 will receive almost undisturbed wind, thus have a small percentage
in wake loss. The direction of the incoming wind speed was changed, and some cases were
made before the main direction was found.
When changing the main wind direction to a sector from 295◦to 305◦the turbines in row
2 was hit by the center of the wakes from the reference turbines in row 1. In ﬁgure 5.3 the
wake loss is plotted for the new wind direction. The wake loss between row 1 and row 2 is
approximately 16 %, and it increases until it reaches the highest wake loss at row 7. Thus
the observed wake loss between row 1 and row 1 will be highly sensitive to the selected wind
sector.
The high wake loss in row 7 may be caused by the layout of the wind farm, see Appendix
B, ﬁgure B.3. After row 7 the turbines are no longer positioned in a relatively straight line,
but the layout starts to stoop. Thus, the turbines placed in the rows behind row 7 will no
longer be positioned in the center of the wake, hence the wake loss will decrease.
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 5. Validation of the wake models
24
As a consequence of the layout, the turbines standing in the upper columns of the last rows
will have access to almost free stream velocity.
Figure 5.3: Wake loss calculated at each turbine row, from 295◦to 305◦
In Appendix A, ﬁgure A.1 and ﬁgure A.2, the wake loss is plotted in diﬀerent speed bins
of ± 1 m/s for the rows standing in wake of the reference turbines, where the black line
describes the median wake loss.
As illustrated, the wake loss is highest for wind speeds
between 5 m/s and 11 m/s, and when the wind speed approaches rated speed at 13 m/s,
the wake loss becomes close to zero. The measurements marked with red are outliers, which
means they are observation points distant from other observations. In ﬁgure A.3 and A.4
a scatter plot is made for the power production of the reference turbines against the power
production from the turbine rows standing in the wake. As illustrated, the spread becomes
greater downstream the turbine rows. In the scatter plots the outliers are also marked with
red. The high error values, marked with a blue circle in the ﬁrst plot, can be explained by the
power production of the reference turbines. If a situation occurs where the reference turbines
produces almost equal to zero and the turbines standing in the wake produces almost rated
power, it will lead to an enormous underestimation of the wake loss, thus marked as outliers.
Outliers are removed from the data set to avoid inaccuracies.
==PAGE:36==
Chapter 5. Validation of the wake models
25
As the turbulence will have an impact on the wake eﬀects, the turbulence intensity is cal-
culated for all the turbine rows as described in chapter 3, section 3.2. The parameters used
to calculate the turbulence intensity are taken from the nacelle of the turbines, and will,
as described, yield an uncertainty to the results. The turbulence intensity calculated from
the Met Mast is plotted against the turbulence intensity calculated at the nacelle at the
reference turbines, see ﬁgure 5.4(a). As expected, the turbulence is higher when calculated
at the nacelle.
A ratio between the turbulence intensity at the Met Mast and at the reference turbines is
found to adjust the turbulence calculated at the nacelles, see ﬁgure 5.4(b). This approach
may not be accurate for the turbines standing in the wake, but due to lack of a Met Mast
inside the wake, it will be used as an indicator of how the turbulence intensity develops
downstream the turbine rows. As ﬁgure 5.4(b) shows, the adjusted turbulence intensity will
be lower than the turbulence intensity calculated at the nacelle, illustrated with blue and
black line, respectively. It will increase until it reaches row 7, and then decrease, which is
proportional with the wake loss. The ﬁndings related to turbulence intensity supports the
hypothesis that the wake loss will decrease due to layout eﬀect. The turbulence intensity will
drop towards ambient turbulence, illustrated with a red line, because some of the turbines in
the back rows is not positioned in the wake of another turbine, but instead receive undisturbed
ﬂow.
The adjusted turbulence intensity is also plotted for diﬀerent wind speeds, see ﬁgure 5.4(c).
For low wind speeds the turbulence intensity is high, and when the wind speed approaches
rated wind speed the turbulence intensity will decrease.
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 5. Validation of the wake models
26
(a) Scatter plot of the turbulence intensity
(b) Comparison of the calculated and adjusted tur-
bulence intensity
(c) Turbulence intensity plotted for diﬀerent wind
speeds
Figure 5.4: Turbulence intensity calculated for the wind sector from 295◦to 305◦
==PAGE:38==
Chapter 5. Validation of the wake models
27
5.1.2
Validation of WAsP and FUGA
When simulating the wake loss in WAsP and FUGA, the same wind direction sector from
295◦to 305◦is used.
An input in FUGA is the atmospheric stability class. As presented in chapter 4 section 4.3,
the stability class was stable and very stable for the majority of the time analyzed. The
approach used will, due to the lack of measurements at 10 m, yield an uncertainty to the
stability class. Since there is no other way to calculate the stability class, the class deﬁned in
chapter 4 will be used as an input. The parameters determining the stability class in FUGA
are the roughness length, Z0, divided by the Monin-Obukhov length, L. The Monin-Obokhov
length is deﬁned in [16] for each stability class, and an appropriate value is chosen as input.
In WAsP the Weibull distribution is used to calculate the probability of how frequent the
diﬀerent wind speeds occur. To be able to validate the wake models the same is done for
the observed measurements at the Met Mast. Figure 5.5 shows the Weilbull distribution
from WAsP and the distribution calculated in R, with a green line and a blue line, respec-
tively. Weibulls shape, kw, and scale parameters, Aw, are listed in table 5.1, for both the
calculations done in WAsP and R. The diﬀerent distributions do not diﬀer much from each
other, except for the peak where R calculates a higher probability. The measurement inputs
are exactly the same in the diﬀerent calculations. The ratio between the diﬀerent Weibull
distributions may be due to the diﬀerence in bin size or in the numerical distribution ﬁtting
routine. However, since the bin size can not be restricted from the WAsP ﬁle and the ﬁtting
algorithm is unknown, the ratio can not be further investigated. Investigations in R demon-
strates that the estimated scale and shape parameters are sensitive to the optimal routine
used by the ﬁtting algorithm. The Weibull distribution obtained from WAsP will be used in
further analysis of the empirical wake loss in order to make a more consistent foundation for
the validation of the models.
Table 5.1: Weibull shape and scale parameters calculated in WAsP and R
WAsP
R
kw
2.67
2.91
Aw
11.5
11.51
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 5. Validation of the wake models
28
Figure 5.5: Histogram of the wind speed plotted with weibull curves, calculated in WAsP
and R
In ﬁgure 5.6 the empirical wake loss is plotted with and without the Weilbull distribution, as
well as the wake loss simulated with WAsP and FUGA. As the ﬁgure reveals, the Weilbull
distribution will yield a diﬀerence in the wake loss, and by including the distribution the
empirical wake loss will be more similar to the simulations. The wake loss simulated with
WAsP has the same development as the empirical wake loss, except for the underprediction
and the big drop in the back rows. The wake loss simulated by FUGA seems to have a slower
development, where the highest wake loss appears at turbine row 9. The observed wake loss
and the wake loss simulated by WAsP both have the same peak, where the highest wake loss
occurs at row 7. The total wake loss is listed in table 5.2. When calculating the total wake
loss, FUGA is more similar to the observations with a small deviation of 3.8%, while WAsP
deviates from the observed measurements with approximately 6 %.
Table 5.2: Total wake loss calculated in case 1 for the wind sector from 295◦to 305◦
Total wake loss [%]
Measured WL
18.8
WAsP
12.7
FUGA
15
==PAGE:40==
Chapter 5. Validation of the wake models
29
It would also be interesting to look at the speed deﬁcit downstream the turbine rows, but
due to the uncertainty regarding speed measurements at the nacelle, this has not been done.
Figure 5.6: Wake loss for WAsP, FUGA and observed measurements in the wind sector
from 295◦to 305◦
5.1.3
Discussion
Model input
The SCADA data are average values of a 10 minute period, which might be a source of error,
as the measured wind at the reference turbines will take some time to reach the turbines in
the last rows. The mean velocity in the sector from 295◦to 305◦is measured to be 9 m/s,
thus after 5400 m the measurements will not be in the same period of time. On average this
happens around row 10, and will yield an uncertainty to the turbines positioned in the back
rows, as they may experience a diﬀerent climatology compared to the turbines positioned in
the front rows.
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 5. Validation of the wake models
30
As the wind sector restrictions were only made on the Met Mast, there may be cases where
the turbines in the downstream rows will receive wind from diﬀerent sectors. In ﬁgure 5.7 the
mean yaw angle is plotted for four diﬀerent turbine rows, against the mean wind direction
at the Met Mast. The highest deviation occurs in the low wind speeds. As illustrated, the
turbines standing in the back rows will receive wind from another wind sector. Although the
deviation is small, it might cause an uncertainty to the wake loss validation. If a downstream
turbine is positioned in another direction than the upstream turbine the wake loss may be
reduced, due to the downstream turbine will not be hit by the center of the wake. Hence,
the wake models might estimate a higher wake loss. The deviation between the rows and the
Met Mast plotted in ﬁgure 5.7 is the mean direction at each row, thus the deviation might
be higher in some cases.
Figure 5.7: Direction measurements from the Met Mast plotted with the mean yaw angle
of the turbines in row 1, 5, 10 and 15
Model misspeciﬁcation
Both WAsP and FUGA uses the nominal power curve, NPC, to simulate the power produc-
tion. The use of the NPC might cause some uncertainties to the results, as the power curve
will be diﬀerent for all the turbines in the wind farm. This is a result of each turbine having
slightly diﬀerent blades, being subjected to individual on-site calibration, and being exposed
==PAGE:42==
Chapter 5. Validation of the wake models
31
to slightly diﬀerent climatology. This is illustrated in ﬁgure 5.8(a), where the power curve
is plotted for two diﬀerent turbines, M10 and M18, illustrated by a green and yellow line,
respectively, where both turbines have access to undisturbed wind. The power curves devi-
ates from each other, and from the NPC, plotted in blue. The black vertical lines illustrates
error-bars, which reveals how much the power curves deviates from each other in diﬀerent
wind speeds. The power curve will not only be diﬀerent from turbine to turbine, but it will
also vary with diﬀerent wind directions. This is illustrated in ﬁgure 5.8(b), where the power
curve from turbine M18 is plotted for three diﬀerent wind directions 115◦, 190◦and 295◦,
illustrated by a yellow, red and green line, respectively.
(a) Power curve plotted for turbine M01 and M18,
where both only have access to undisturbed ﬂow
(b) Power curve plotted for turbine M18, for three
diﬀerent ﬂow directions 115◦, 190◦and 295◦
Figure 5.8: Power curves from the turbines plotted for diﬀerent conditions, against the
nominal power curve, provided by Aquiloz AS, plotted with blue
In FUGA the atmospheric stability class is an input. As stated before, the approach used to
calculate the stability class produces a great amount of uncertainties as the approach used
is only valid up to 10 m, while in this study the anemometer at 45 m is used.
In WAsP the expansion of the wake is given by the wake decay constant. Which means that
instead of using the commonly seen Gaussian distribution the velocity is considered constant
inside the wake [10]. In WAsP the atmospheric stability is considered neutral [17]. Although
the stability class deﬁned in this study yields a great amount of uncertainties, a stable class
is related to higher wake loss, and might be the reason why WAsP underestimates the wake
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 5. Validation of the wake models
32
loss. Thus, the velocity ﬁeld is not described accurately and might yield an error source to
the simulation, as the velocity inside a wake in reality is a more complex ﬂow, inﬂuenced by
several factors e.g. turbulence and atmospheric stability.
5.2
Case 2 - Wind farm eﬃciency
Another way to validate the wake models is to look at the wind farm eﬃciency. To be able
do this the aggregate empirical wake loss needs to be determined.
5.2.1
Empirical wake eﬀects
The data set for case 2 is also cleaned for abnormalities and curtailments, and the turbines
are grid connected 100 % during each 10 minute period to get accurate results.
To be able to determine the wind farm eﬃciency, access to a free undisturbed ﬂow is required
in all ﬂow directions. As stated earlier, measurements from before the wind farm was con-
structed is not available. Thus, the measurements from the Met Mast can not be used in all
ﬂow directions, due to the fact that the Met Mast will be in the wake of the wind farm in
some directions. To correct this, some synthetic Met Masts are made in the directions where
the wind speed will not consist of undisturbed ﬂow.
To make the synthetic Met Masts three diﬀerent turbines are selected: I01, K18 and M10,
marked with blue circles in Appendix B, ﬁgure B.4. An inverse power curve is made of the
NPC in R, and the power production from the three turbines is used as an input to calculate
the wind speed.
Due to the rated wind speed at 13 m/s, it will not be possible to calculate higher wind speeds
as an output of the inverse power curve. The original Met Mast is then limited to velocities
below rated wind speed. The three synthetic Met Masts and the original met mast are then
assembled to one synthetic Met Mast for the wind directions described in table 5.3.
==PAGE:44==
Chapter 5. Validation of the wake models
33
Table 5.3: Wind direction sectors for the synthetic Met Mast and the original Met Mast
Sectors[◦]
I 01
0 - 55
K 18
55 - 140
M 10
140 - 255
Met Mast
255 - 360
The synthetic Met Mast is used as an input in the NPC to calculate the power production
without the disturbed ﬂow sectors. The NPC used is this study is related to a standard
atmosphere, and to correct this the wind speed is adjusted by estimating the velocity based
on the ratio between measured and standard air density, ρ, see equation 5.2 [13].
U = Uo( ρ
ρ0
)
1
3
(5.2)
Where U0 is the wind speed measured at the site, U is the adjusted wind speed, ρ0 is equal to
1.225 kg
m3 , which is the sea level air density [18]. ρ is the average of the measured air density
data at the site.
The production is then multiplied with the number of turbines in the wind farm to get the
production of the entire wind farm without including the wake eﬀects. To calculate the wake
loss equation 5.1 is used. Where PWake is the sum of the actual production in the wind farm,
and PFree is the sum of the power calculated in undisturbed ﬂow, using the synthetic Met
Mast. In WAsP the power production output is divided into 6◦ﬂow sectors. To be able to
validate the wake models, the same is done for the empirical wake loss, where the average
wake loss is calculated in each wind direction sector.
In ﬁgure 5.9 a box plot is made for the wake loss divided into speed bins of ± 1 m/s. As
illustrated the wake loss is highest for the speed bin of 7-9 m/s. When the velocity approaches
rated wind speed, the wake loss decreases. The outliers are marked with red, and as stated
in case 1, an outlier is an observation point that is distant from other observations, and are
therefore removed from the data set, to avoid uncertainties when validating the wake models.
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 5. Validation of the wake models
34
Figure 5.9: Box plot of the wake loss divided into wind speed bins where the outliers are
marked with red
In ﬁgure 5.10 the wake loss is plotted against the wind direction. The wake loss has two
peaks around approximately 110◦and 300◦. These peaks are due to the layout, see Appendix
B, ﬁgure B.4, where the turbine rows consists of more turbines in these directions. The wake
loss will then be higher, as the turbines in the back rows will have access to more reduced
velocities. The higher wake loss at the peak of approximately 110◦is due to a combination
of the layout, where the turbines are positioned tighter downstream the turbine rows, and
that another wind farm is located 3 km away in that direction, which will yield a decrease
in power production.
==PAGE:46==
Chapter 5. Validation of the wake models
35
Figure 5.10: Wake loss plotted for 360◦
Figure 5.11 illustrates how many measurements there are in each ﬂow sector of 6◦.
As
the ﬁgure reveals, there is a low number of measurements in the northern sectors, which
is consistent with the wind rose made in Chapter 4. This will yield an uncertainty to the
wake loss calculated in these sectors. When the total wake loss is calculated, the wake loss
is weighted with the number of measurements in each wind direction sector. The total mean
empirical wake loss is calculated to be 22.3 %.
Figure 5.11: Wake loss plotted with the number of measurements
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 5. Validation of the wake models
36
5.2.2
Validation of WAsP and FUGA
When validating WAsP and FUGA the synthetic Met Mast is used as an input. The output
from both WAsP and FUGA is the power production in each 6◦ﬂow sector for each wind
speed between 4 m/s and 13 m/s. The wake loss is then calculated the same way as the
empirical wake loss, using equation 5.1. Where PWake is the power output from WAsP and
FUGA and Pfree is the undisturbed production calculated using the NPC for each wind
speed. The average wake loss is calculated in each wind direction sector, as done for the
empirical wake loss.
In ﬁgure 5.12 the wake loss from WAsP, FUGA and the observations are plotted with black,
blue and red, respectively. Both WAsP and FUGA have the same shape as the observed wake
loss, and do not deviate much from the empirical wake loss. The highest deviation occurs in
the sector around 0◦. This may have to do with the very low number of measurements from
the northern direction, which will yield an uncertainty to the empirical wake loss calculated
in that direction. For the directions where there is a high number of measurements, both
WAsP and FUGA have a good ﬁt with the empirical wake loss. Both models overpredicts
the wake loss in almost all directions. FUGA overpredicts more than WAsP, and especially
in the two sectors where the wake loss is high. The total wake loss of both WAsP and FUGA
as well as the empirical wake loss is listed in table 5.4, and as can bee seen, the two models
do not diﬀer much from the empirical wake loss.
Table 5.4: Total wake loss calculated in case 2
Total wake loss[%]
FUGA
26.4
WAsP
23.8
Empirical
22.3
==PAGE:48==
Chapter 5. Validation of the wake models
37
Figure 5.12: Total wake loss for WAsP, FUGA and observed measurements calculated in
case 2
5.2.3
Discussion
Some of the error sources discussed in case 1 will also occur in case 2. The uncertainty related
to the atmospheric stability approach used to determine the input in FUGA will also apply
in this case. As discussed in case 1, the power curve will be diﬀerent for all turbines in the
wind farm. In this case the observed wake loss is calculated using the NPC, and as stated
before, this will yield an uncertainty to the results.
The wind direction data is taken from the original Met Mast, since there is no way of
converting the wind direction data to the synthetic Met Masts.
This may result in an
uncertainty to the validation, since the turbines located far from the Met Mast may be
positioned in another direction due to the climatology tending to variate in large oﬀshore
wind farms.
Another wind farm is located 3 km east of the wind farm analyzed in this study. Thus
the power production will be inﬂuenced by the other wind farm, from 97 ±15◦[19]. This
will yield an uncertainty to the synthetic Met Mast made in that direction, thus aﬀecting
Pfree, which will lead to a reduced empirical wake loss. The other wind farm is not taken
into account when calculating the wake loss in WAsP and FUGA, which would also yield an
uncertainty to the results in the sector inﬂuenced by the other wind farm, where the wake
models might estimate a lower wake loss.
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 6
Conclusion and future work
During this study it became clear how important it is to establish a high quality data set,
as the quality of the wake analysis is highly dependent on the accuracy and the amount of
data. The biggest challenge during this study has been to handle the SCADA measurements
in a proper way, as inaccuracies in the measurements will have a substantial impact on the
discrepancy between the observed wake loss and the wake loss simulated by the wake models.
The highest discrepancy between the observed wake loss and the wake loss simulated by
the wake models occurred when the multiple wake situation were analyzed. Both models
underpredicted the wake loss, WAsP more than FUGA. WAsP simulated a similar wake
development down the turbine rows as the observed wake loss, while FUGA simulated a
slower development of the wake loss. To gain a better understanding of the discrepancy,
more measurements are needed.
As stated before a wake is a complex ﬂow, and to get
a better understanding of what is happening inside the wake, measurements from a Met
Mast inside the wake needs to be obtained. With measurements from inside the wake, the
factors inﬂuencing the wake can better be explained, e.g turbulence, velocity, direction and
atmospheric stability.
When comparing the wake loss in case 2, both models overpredicts the wake loss in almost
every wind sector. FUGA simulates a higher wake loss than WAsP, which is consistent with
case 1. The approach used in this analysis yields a great amount of uncertainties, as dis-
cussed. To do a complete validation more measurements are needed. By obtaining Met Mast
measurements from before the wind farm was constructed, or having access to measurements
from a Met Mast on all sides of the wind farm, undisturbed ﬂow in all directions could be
38
==PAGE:50==
Chapter 6. Conclusion and future work
39
obtained, and the uncertainties related to the synthetic Met Mast could be reduced. As
discussed the approaches used to calculate the empirical wake loss in case 1 and case 2, will
yield a great amount of uncertainties, thus an accurate validation of the wake models is not
performed.
To do a perfect validation of the wake models a few turbines placed in a straight line, with
Met Masts positioned after each turbine needs to be obtained. A validation could then be
done by analyzing the speed deﬁcit. By doing this the uncertainties regarding the NPC could
be neglected. By only having a few turbines the time step would be consistent downstream
the turbine rows, and it would also be easier to ﬁlter out cases where there is a high change in
wind direction, as the climatology would be more consistent within the turbines downstream.
If the power deﬁcit should be validated, an advantage with only having few turbines restricted
to the same climatology, is that the empirical power curve, EPC, can be obtained, and used
as an input in WAsP and FUGA. This way the uncertainties regarding the use of the NPC
will decrease. Due to the goal of this thesis was to validate the wake models against a full
scale wind farm, where the wakes will behave in a more complex way without homogeneous
climatology, this approach is not used.
As the atmospheric stability class is an input to FUGA, it needs to be calculated correctly.
This can be done by getting access to a sonic anemometer on the Met Mast, or temperature
measurements at diﬀerent heights, which was not available in this study. It would also be
interesting to simulate the wake loss with diﬀerent stability classes within FUGA, to see if
the simulated wake development would have a better ﬁt to the observations. For WAsP it
could have been interesting to use diﬀerent wake decay constants, to see how the wake would
propagate downstream the turbine rows, which will be left for future work.
For the purpose of comparison it would be interesting to validate more wake models to
accentuate the ﬁndings in this report.
However, due to time constraints and expensive
licenses this has not been done, and is left for future work.
==PAGE:51==
Appendix A
Case 1
In ﬁgure A.1 and A.2 the wake loss is divided into speed bins of ± 1 m/s, illustrated by a
boxplot for the diﬀerent turbine rows. The box contains 50 % of the measurements and the
black horizontal line illustrates the median wake loss. The red points illustrates the outliers.
In ﬁgure A.3 and A.4 the power production from the reference turbines are plotted on the
x-axis, against the power production of the turbines standing in the downstream rows at the
y-axis. The red points illustrates the outliers.
40
==PAGE:52==
Appendix A. Case 1
41
Figure A.1: Boxplot of the wake loss divided into speed bins for the diﬀerent turbine rows,
in sectors 295◦to 305◦
==PAGE:53==
Appendix A. Case 1
42
Figure A.2: Boxplot of the wake loss divided into speed bins for the diﬀerent turbine rows,
in sectors 295◦to 305◦
==PAGE:54==
Appendix A. Case 1
43
Figure A.3: Scatterplot of the power production for the diﬀerent turbine rows, in sectors
295◦to 305◦
==PAGE:55==
Appendix A. Case 1
44
Figure A.4: Scatterplot of the power production for the diﬀerent turbine rows, in sectors
295◦to 305◦
==PAGE:56==
Bibliography
[1] Nick Jenkins David Sharpe Ervin Bossanyi, Tony Burton.
Wind Energy Handbook,
Second Edition. May 2011.
[2] Close up - vestas v164-8.0 nacelle and hub.
Wind power monthly,
Septem-
ber
2013.
URL
http://www.windpowermonthly.com/article/1211056/
close---vestas-v164-80-nacelle-hub.
[3] Giorgio Corbetta. The european oﬀshore wind industry - key trends and statistics 2014.
EWEA, July 2014.
[4] Martin O. L. Hansen. Aerodynamics of wind turbines, second edition. Course notes,
September 2010.
[5] V.Terzija F. Gonzalez-Longatt, P.Wall. Wake eﬀect in wind farm performance. Steady-
state and dynamic behavior, October 2011.
[6] B. Sanderse. Aerodynamics of wind turbine wakes. ECN-E–09-016.
[7] N. O. Jensen. A note on wind generator interaction, risø-m-2411. November 1983.
[8] Wake eﬀect model.
Januar 2014.
URL http://www.wasp.dk/Software/WAsP/
WakeEffectModel.
[9] Niels G. Mortensen. Wind resource mapping and wind farm modelling, course 46200.
Januar 2014.
[10] N.O.Jensen I.Katic, J.Højstrup. A simple model for cluster eﬃciency. Oktober 1986.
[11] Jacob Berg Søren Ott and Morten Nielsen. Linearrised cfd models for wakes, risø-r-1772.
Risø National Laboratory, Roskilde, Denmark, December 2011.
[12] T.J.Ching. Computational ﬂuid dunamics, second edition. June 2010.
45
==PAGE:57==
Bibliography
46
[13] Aquiloz AS. Private communication.
[14] Leo. E. Jensen Kurt S. Hansen, Rebecca J. Barthelmie and Anders Sommer. The impact
of turbulence intensity and atmospheric stability on power deﬁcit due to wind turbine
wakes at horns rev wind farm. August 2011.
[15] Rebecca J. Barthelmie and Leo E. Jensen. Evaluation of wind farm eﬃciency and wind
turbine wakes at the nysted oﬀshore wind farm. May 2010.
[16] Peter Argyle and Simon Watson. A study of the surface layer atmospheric stability at
two uk oﬀshore sites.
[17] Comparison of wasp and weng. Januar 2014. URL http://www.wasp.dk/Software/
WAsP-Engineering/Comparison-of-WAsP-and-WEng.
[18] Ed R.C.Weast.
Handbook of chemistry and physics.
1964.
URL http:
//www-mdp.eng.cam.ac.uk/web/library/enginfo/aerothermal_dvd_only/aero/
atmos/atmos.html.
[19] Kurt S. Hansen. Private communication.
==PAGE:58==
 
 
DTU Vindenergi er et institut under Danmarks Tekniske Universitet med en unik integration af forskning, uddannelse, innovation og 
offentlige/private konsulentopgaver inden for vindenergi. Vores aktiviteter bidrager til nye muligheder og teknologier inden for udnyttelse af 
vindenergi, både globalt og nationalt. Forskningen har fokus på specifikke tekniske og videnskabelige områder, der er centrale for udvikling, 
innovation og brug af vindenergi, og som danner grundlaget for højt kvalificerede uddannelser på universitetet.  
 
Vi har mere end 240 ansatte og heraf er ca. 60 ph.d. studerende. Forskningen tager udgangspunkt i ni forskningsprogrammer, der er organiseret i 
tre hovedgrupper: vindenergisystemer, vindmølleteknologi og grundlagsskabende forskning. 
 
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind Energy 
Nils Koppels Allé 
Building 403 
2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
Denmark 
 
info@vindenergi.dtu.dk 
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk 
 
 
