==PAGE:1==
Fracture Modelling in Computer
Graphics
Søren Enggaard Hansen
Kongens Lyngby 2015
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
The goal of the thesis is to investigate fracture mechanics, specically the frac-
ture of thin sheets of material. Towards that goal I have implemented a FEM
simulation of a thin sheet. Based on the nodal stresses from this I calculate
locations and directions of fracture.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Summary (Danish)
Målet for denne afhandling er at udforske frakturmekanik, specielt fraktur af
tynde ark. I jagten på dette mål har jeg implementeret en FEM simulation af
et sådant tyndt ark. Ud fra spændingerne udregenet af FEM'en udregner jeg
frakturlokationer og retninger.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fullment of the requirements for
acquiring an M.Sc. in Engineering.
The thesis deals with simulation of thin viscoelastic sheets and how they frac-
ture. I use a nite element model to simulate the sheet. The nite element
model I decided to use was not well explained in litterature and I have spent
some amount of time trying to nd a solid basis for it.
The thesis consists of four sections with over 31 pages. I start with a short
introduction. Then I present some theory in the areas of continuum mechanics,
nite element modelling and computational geometry.
After that I spend a
chapter going over the implementation of the my FEM program and my fracture
mechanics. Then I present some results. And nally I talk a bit about future
work.
Lyngby, 10-July-2015
Søren Enggaard Hansen
==PAGE:8==
vi
c
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my advisors Jens Gravesen and Andreas Bærentzen, with-
out them I wouldn't have gotten to the end of this. At the end of every meeting
I always had a much more optimistic take on te project.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Summary (Danish)
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory
3
2.1
Continuum mechanics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.1
Viscosity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.2
On [Etzmuÿ et. al. 2003]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Finite Element Modelling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.1
Rayleigh-Ritz elastic force determination
. . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.2
The rotation scheme from Etzmuÿ . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.3
Viscosity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.4
The iteration scheme from Etzmuÿ . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3
Geometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3.1
Mixed area
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3
Implementation
17
3.1
main.cpp
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2
Sheet class
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2.1
split_preserve_trimesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2.2
obrientTear . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3
FEM class . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3.1
implicitFEM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
==PAGE:12==
x
CONTENTS
3.3.2
doFracture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3.3
Constraints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4
Results
27
5
Future Work
31
A Projet plan/the separate document
33
Bibliography
35
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Cloth simulation is a popular topic in computer graphics litterature and have
been so since the mid-nineties at least. Most early work use either mass-spring
systems [Pro96] or particle systems [EGS03]. In the rst years of the new mille-
nium a attempts at FEM cloth simulation started to appear [GKS02, EKS03].
The eld of fracture mechanics in computer graphics was started by O'Brien in
1999 [OH99]. At SIGGRAPH 2013 and 2014 there were papers where the used
mesh renement to improve the looks and performance of thin-sheet fracture
[BDW13, PNdJO14]. These were the two papers I wanted to replicate in my
thesis.
The original plan was: spend three weeks studying litterature, spend a month
implementing the FEM-model from [EKS03], spend two weeks comparing it to
reality, spend two weeks implementing the fracture models of [OH99, BDW13]
and of [PNdJO14]. From then on I'd experiment with some expansions: mesh
renement, plasticity, layer separation. The last month would be spent writing.
This plan didn't at all survive contact with reality. Due to what I believe are
errors in [EKS03] getting a working FEM implementation took more than two
months. Just the fracture model of [OH99, BDW13] took almost two months,
due to the unexpected diculties with implementing how the fracture changes
the mesh. To be honest, all these diculties left me demoralised and inecient
==PAGE:14==
2
Introduction
during the writing phase.
Coupled with the diculties of putting the FEM
model of Etzmuÿ on a sound footing made the writing process
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2
Theory
In this section I'll start out with talking a bit about the physics of elasticity.
From this we'll derive a method of simulating a sheet of material, a so-called
Finite Element Method. Finally I want to talk about computational geometry,
which encompasses the techniques to geometrically fracture the sheet.
2.1
Continuum mechanics
The contents of this chapter is adapted from [Irg08] and [CMP89]
Continuum mechanics is the study of the mechanical properties of matter as a
continuum. That could be solid, liquid, gaseous or matter on any other form. It
is also on a relatively macroscopic scale, as we do not model that the material
is composed of molecules or atomsor even grains, if we were modelling sand or
soil.
The mechanical phenomenon we are interested in in this thesis is deformation.
Deformation can be divided into two terms: elastic deformation and plastic
deformation. Elastic deformations want to work against the deformation, re-
turning to their rest state. Plastic deformations are permanent and cause no
==PAGE:16==
4
Theory
stress in the material.
In continuum mechanics you generally consider two broad classes of deformable
materials: brittle and ductile.
Brittle materials deform elastically until the
internal forces become so large the object fracture. Ductile materials also deform
elastically until their yield point, and start deforming plastically afterwards.
Ductile materials may still break after having deformed even further.
We will not consider ductile materials in this thesis, so we will only need to
consider elastic deformations.
In this thesis we're going to work with eectively two dimensional sheetsin the
sense that the third dimension is thin and/or uniform compared to the other
two. These sheets are 2D surfaces like V ⊂R3, parameterised by u = (u1, u2).
We consider sheets to have been deformed from a rest conguration V0 ∈R3.
We also need to refer to the displacement between them: d(u) = V (u) −V0(u)
Since we're dealing with a continuum, point forces on a body aren't that mean-
ingful. Instead we deal with tractions, which are forces on a surface or cross-
section (left below). Point forces can then be considered as tractions on a very
small cross-section of the surface (right below).
==PAGE:17==
2.1 Continuum mechanics
5
The elastic deformations in the plane of the sheets are what we want to examine.
In two dimensions these deformations are usually modeled with three strain-
values, in the shape of a 2 × 2 tensor.
ϵ =
ϵ1
ϵ3
ϵ3
ϵ2

(2.1)
You can see the material as composed of innitessimal, orthogonal bres in the
undeformed state. In the deformed state, the stretch of the bres correspond to
the diagonal strain values, and the angle between the bres correspond to the
o-diagonal strain value.
There are various ways of measuring strain, appropriate for dierent materials
and deformation sizes. For our purposes calculating the Green strain tensor
using the deformation gradient is the best choice.
To start o with we need what is called the deformation gradient, F:
F =
 ∂V
∂u1
∂V
∂u2

(2.2)
Note that this is a 3 × 2 matrix. Each of the partial derivatives is a column.
From this we get the Green strain tensor:
E = 1
2
 FT F −I

(2.3)
Like the deformations of solid comes in three dierent avours, so do the internal
forces. We call these forces stresses. Like the strains these stresses are usually
put in a 2 × 2 tensor:
σ =
σ1
σ3
σ3
σ2

(2.4)
The stresses are anologous to the respective strain. σ1 is a traction in the u1
direction. σ2 is a traction in the u2 direction. σ3 is a torque in the clockwise
direction.
The stress tensor is related to the strain tensor by a 2×2×2×2 tensor E called
the elasticity tensor. That means each stress value is a linear combination of all
four strain values. In practice many entries in the elasticity tensor are zero.
σij = Cijklϵkl
(2.5)
==PAGE:18==
6
Theory
We model linear, orthotropic materials. Linearor linearly elastic or Hookean
mean that the material behaves like a rubber band in two way: (1) a strain in
one direction leads to a proportional stress in the same direction. (2) a strain in
one direction leads to a proportional negative stress in the orthogonal direction.
So a strain ϵ1 would lead to stresses
σ1 = ϵ1η
(2.6)
σ2 = −ϵ1ην
(2.7)
where η is called Young's modulus and ν is called Poisson's ratio. Ortothropic
means that Young's modulus is dierent in the two directions. The shear stress
σ3 is related to the shear strain ϵ3 by the shear modulus: σ3 = ϵ3µ.
The so for an our orthotropic, linear elasticity tensor the non-zero values of C
are as follows:
C1111 = η1
(2.8)
C2222 = η2
(2.9)
C1212 = C1221 = C2112 = C2121 = µ
(2.10)
C1122 = C2211 = ην
(2.11)
For the Finite Element formulation we will need the strain energy per unit area.
This is the elastic potential energy from the deformation.
Elastic potential
energy is conserverative, so it must be equal to the work to deform the material.
In classic spring terms the energy to deform the string is
Uel = 1
2ks2
(2.12)
where s is the displacement. The string constant is
k = F
s
(2.13)
where F is the force exerted on the fully displaced string. Putting it all together
we get
Uel = 1
2Fs
(2.14)
For a deformed solid the strain ϵ takes the place of the displacement and the
stress σ takes the place of the force, so the formula for strain energy per unit
area is
Uel = 1
2σT ϵ
(2.15)
= 1
2ϵT Cϵ
(2.16)
It's σT since we want element-wise multiplication. And C is symmetric.
==PAGE:19==
2.1 Continuum mechanics
7
2.1.1
Viscosity
Viscosity the internal resistance agianst deformation in a material. In a vis-
coelastic material this viscous stress σv is related to the strain rate tensor dϵ
dt
via the viscosity tensor D. In a Kelvin-Voight solid the viscosity tensor is a
proportional to the elasticity tensor so
σv = αdϵ
dt
(2.17)
for some constant α.
2.1.2
On [Etzmuÿ et. al. 2003]
I originally wanted to start out with duplicating [BDW13] and they cited [EKS03]
for their FEM implementation. They claim that large rotations prevent the use
of the Cauchy's strain tensor, which they claim they use for their FEM imple-
mentation. To get around this problem they propose extracting the rotation of
their deformations in order to rotate in and out of the rest plane. I use this
method as well and will give the details in the implementation section.
Unfortunately the article mixes their own and standard terminology in a way
that makes their method confusing to follow. They use the symbol d for the
displacement of the surface. They then go on to dene the deformation gradient
as
J =
 ∂d
∂u1
∂d
∂u2

(2.18)
From this they dene the Green strain tensor as
G = 1
2
 JT J −I

(2.19)
This would all be correct if they had used the deformation gradient, F, as we
did above. What they used is called the displacement gradient, H. You actually
can get the Green strain tensor from H, like so
G = 1
2
 H + HT + HT H

(2.20)
==PAGE:20==
8
Theory
but this method isn't robust to strain above 0.01.
If you follow their denition of J and try to use their method of polar de-
composition to get the rotation back to the plane, you run into trouble. The
rst problem is that the displacement gradient often is singular. That means
the pure deformation U will also be singular, and the expression R = JU −1 is
meaningless. We 1 found a method to nd the polar decomposition using the
singular value decomposition of J. If
J = WSV T
(2.21)
then
R = WV T
(2.22)
U = V SV T
(2.23)
This method will give you a valid polar decomposition of J, but will lead you to
the next problem: This isn't the rotation you asked for. It's something weird and
dierent, with no apparent relation to the rotation you want. It turns out that it
again was the deformation gradient you wanted to take the polar decomposition
of. Which will make the rst problem irrelevant, as the deformation gradient
will not be singular, unless you compress your surface onto a single line.
2.2
Finite Element Modelling
Finite Element Modellingor FEMis a method for nding approximate solu-
tions to mathematical problems over a problem domain. The domain is divided
into non-overlapping sections called elementsfor example triangles, as below.
The elements share a number of nodesin the triangle example, the nodes would
be the points at the corners.
The found solution would then be a piecewise-smooth function: the value within
each element wil be a smooth interpolation of the values at the nodes of that
element. At the nodes and along the interfaces of two elements, the solution will
only be continuous. Since the interpolation method has been picked ahead of
time, the solution can be represented as a vector D of the values at the nodes.
The nite element problem will take the form of a system of linear equations:
KD = P
(2.24)
1Personal communication with Jens Gravesen.
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Finite Element Modelling
9
Where K is called the stiness matrix and R the load vector.
According to [CMP89], there are three kinds of method, depending on how the
stiness and load matrices is found:
Direct methods A is constructed using direct reasoning, where nodes and
elements have a direct physical meaning.
Variational methods A is constructed by optimising a functional.
Weighted residual methods A is constructed through the use of a space of
test functions.
Many people will have had experience with the Galerkin method, which is a kind
of weighted residual method. The method we will use is a variational method.
It is not uncommon to get the same linear system using dierent FEM methods.
Let's now return to the idea that the solution can be represented as a vector.
All the dierent possible solutions with a particular interpolation method cor-
respond to dierent vectorsin fact all possible vectors correspond to a solution.
That would imply the space of solutions form a vector space, and that that
space must have a basis. That basis would have to consist of functions that are
1 at their respective node, and 0 at all other nodes. We will use piecewise linear
functions, that are dierentiable everywhere except on nodes and edges of the
FEM mesh, as our space of solutions. There is a basis of these linear functions
that has some very useful properties.
2.2.0.1
Piecewise functions on a hat basis
We represent piecewise linear functions on a triangle mesh as a sum of hat
functions. One function for each node in the mesh. These hat functions are equal
to a nodal value, times one on their own node, and zero on all other nodes. In
between the hat functions interpolate linearly. In fact the hat functions are only
non-zero in the 1-ring around their node. So our piecewise functions depend only
on the value on the nodes. These hat functions are also called shape functions.
==PAGE:22==
10
Theory
Another name for the basis functions is shape function, and ther spatial deriva-
tive is often referred to as form factors.
Note that the found solution is dependent on the mesh. Smaller triangles means
a closer approximation of a smooth surface. You want your edges to go along
the smallest second derivative. In our implementation geometry only changes
when the material fractures.
Do also note that the stiness matrix usually is pretty sparse, as nodes only
interact with other nodes when their hat functions have overlapping support.2
My FEM was based on a paper by [EKS03], but I have found it hard to justify
using my other FEM sources ([CMP89, OH99]).
It seems like you use the
formulation of a static continuum mechanics FEM problem in reverse, i.e. you
use the displacements to calculate what external forces would have created these
displacements. You then use these forces to accelerate each vertex as a point
mass. I have adapted a method from [?].
2.2.1
Rayleigh-Ritz elastic force determination
We have a sheet, divided into triangles.
We treat these triangles as elastic
surfaces having constant strain. That would physically correspond to the edges
being rigid, telescoping rods. In general the sheet might be subject to gravity
and other external forces, but we will only consider forces concentrated at points.
This method will calculate how the sheet deforms in response to those forces.
Rayleigh-Ritz is about nding the displacement that minimizes a functional Π
expressing the potential energy in a linearly elastic body, V , with surface S.
This potential energy has four components: Π = Uel −Wv −WS −WC. The
components are
Uel strain energy per unit area
WV work done by body forces, e.g. gravity
WS work done by surface tractions
WC work done by concentrated forces or moments. That could be supports,
manipulation input, collisions or other things.
2The support of a function is the part of the domain where it is non-zero.
For these
hat-functions it is only on the elements that are incident with the respective node.
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Finite Element Modelling
11
From the elasticity section we have that
Uel = 1
2ϵT Cϵ
(2.25)
Due to the way we will use this body forces and surface traction are not ac-
counted for here, so WV = WS = 0. The work done by concentrated forces can
be calculated using the usual W = d · F formula, so using matrix notation
WC = DT P
(2.26)
Putting it all together we get
Π =
Z
V
1
2ϵT Cϵds −DT P
(2.27)
Now look at the integral on a single triangle element Tm. Then we can get the
strain from the point displacements at the nodes of the element like so
ϵ = Bd
(2.28)
and we get
Uel,Tm =
Z
Tm
1
2BdCBdds
(2.29)
If we move out the displacements, the integral results in a matrix and we get
Uel,Tm =d
Z
Tm
1
2BCBdsd
(2.30)
and since strain is constant on the triangle elements we use
Uel,Tm =dΩmBT CBd
(2.31)
Adding up all the elements, taking care that the contributions from each triangle
end up in the rows and columns of their vertices, we get
Π = 1
2DT KD −DT P
(2.32)
K =
X
m
km =
X
m
ΩmBT CB
(2.33)
Note that the sum here is not adding up a bunch of 2 × 2 matrices like normal.
You can consider the matrices to be indexed, and when you add them up their
entries go in the correct row and column of te big matrix.
Remember we wanted to nd the minimum of Π, so let's take the derivative and
put it equal to zero
∂Π
∂D = KD −P = 0
(2.34)
==PAGE:24==
12
Theory
so we get the FEM equation
KD = P
(2.35)
with K as the stiness matrix and P as the load vector.
2.2.2
The rotation scheme from Etzmuÿ
The FEM formulation just given is intended for static simulations of rigid struc-
tures. The large strains and rotations of a dynamic simulation of a more exible
material are outside its intended use case. [EKS03] proposes using the rotations
from the polar decompositions of the deformation gradients. This would get rid
of the rotations, but not necessarily the large strains.
So instead of
P = KD = KX −KU
(2.36)
as above, we rotate in and out of the rest plane
P = QX −˜QU
(2.37)
Q =
X
m
RkRT
(2.38)
˜Q =
X
m
Rk
(2.39)
Here X is the vector of deformed node coordinates and U is the vector of rest
node coordinates.
2.2.3
Viscosity
As we're modelling a Kelvin-Voigt solid, the whole derivation of the of the elastic
force can be reused for viscosity. You just need to substitute the nodal velocities
v for the displacements d and the viscosity tensor B for the elasticity tensor C.
Taking the step further with the rotation scheme, since the rest velocity is zero,
the velocities now substitute for the deformed coordinates.
2.2.4
The iteration scheme from Etzmuÿ
This section is my best attempt to explain how the FEM from [EKS03] I've
been using was derived.
==PAGE:25==
2.3 Geometry
13
Above we derived the FEM equation needed to nd the displacements caused
by a certain arrangement of point forces. If you really want to you can use
these equations in reverse to nd out what forces would be needed to maintain
a certain deformation. You could then go even further and use those forces to
accelerate the nodes. You just need a scheme to distribute the mass of the sheet
to the nodes. We use the mixed area algorithm explained in the next section.
For simplicity we will still call the matrix B.
Our model has all mass concentrated at the nodes, so the mass matrix M is a
diagonal matrix.The model is governed by the following equation
M d2x
dt2 = F + fext
(2.40)
where M is the mass matrix, F the viscoelastic forces from the deformed surface
and fext is the external force.
By also having the nodal velocities as variable we can separate this into a system
of two coupled equations like so
dx
dt = v
(2.41)
M dv
dt = QX −˜QU + Bv + fext
(2.42)
Taking an Euler step with a timestep of h we get
x1 = x0 + hv1
(2.43)
v1 = v0 + hM −1 
Qx1 −˜Qu + Bv1 + fext

(2.44)
which can be turned into a linear system:

M −h2Q −h2 ˜Q −hB)v1 = Mv0 + h

Qx0 −˜Qu + fext

(2.45)
2.3
Geometry
In this section I want to talk a bit about computational geometry and some
of the algorithms used to change the meshes we use. For all the nite element
simulation we use triangle meshes, so we will assume all meshes are triangluar
unless noted. Do also make note that we will only manipulate the geometry of
the rest mesh, so all the geometric algorithms will only be used in two dimen-
sional situations. We will do our geometric manipulations on the rest sheet, but
==PAGE:26==
14
Theory
they will still apply to the displaced sheets. Remember that the rest sheet is in
some sense in the parameter space of the displaced mesh.
We have a triangle mesh, looks like a 2-manifold. Consists of faces (triangles),
edges and vertices. Looks like a 2-manifold, means that an edge is shared by one
or two faces. (If the edge is next to only one edge, it must be along the boundary
of the mesh.) Also no self-intersections? This is at a somewhat abstract level.
More practically we have a half-edge datastructure. Each edge is split into two
half-edges, one in each direction. Each of the two half-edge points to to one of
the two faces.3 The half-edge also points to a vertex. The datastructure allows
us to loop through the half-edges along a certain face, or through the half-edges
going from a certain vertex.
The red edge is the current half-edge. cycle_vertex_cw will make the half-edge
point to v3, while cycle_face_cw will make the half-edge point to v0.
We also have methods to edit the mesh, to change the connectivity of the mesh.
We have a method to split an edge by inserting a vertex in the middle. The
edge will turn into two new edges, and the faces the edge borders will change
from triangles two quads. Since we only want to work with triangle meshes, we
will always split those quads into triangle immidiately afterwards.
3We consider edges along a holes to point to a special invalid face
==PAGE:27==
2.3 Geometry
15
The other method will split a face into two. This face will need to have at least
four vertices. Along with the face to split, you pass in two of the vertices along
the face. The face will then be split by creating an edge between these vertices.
So the vertices can't be neighbours for this to work.
Additionally we can change the positions of points.
We can also make a slit along two edges incident with the same vertex. That
will create a new vertex that takes over the edges on one side of the slit. The
edges that we slit along are copied over to the new vertex. That way we can keep
the same faces. Note that in practice you need to pass one half-edge pointing
to the vertex and one pointing away. Neither half-edge can point to an invalid
face, but their opposite half-edges can.
==PAGE:28==
16
Theory
Note that the grey area is not a face, but a hole.
Caps and needles are two kinds of degenerate triangles we want to avoid. Caps
have one angle very close to π. Needles have one very small edge. Caps are
removed by ipping the long edge. Needles are removed by collapsing the short
edge.
A useful term is the 1-ring of a vertex. A 1-ring consists of the point, all incident
faces and all points and edges of those faces.
2.3.1
Mixed area
How much of a triangle mesh is closest to a vertex. Ideally you'd use somthing
called the Voronoi area, but that can be hard to compute, since it isn't necssarily
contained in the 1-ring of the vertex. We use the mixed area algorithm instead.
The mixed area algorithm assigns a bit of the area of each face in the 1-ring.
We loop through the faces in the 1-ring of the vertex, adding the contribution
of each vertex. If the current face has no obtuse angle, we can use the exact
Voroni formula:
AVoronoi = 1
8

cot αj ∥pi −pj∥2 + cot αk ∥pi −pk∥2
(2.46)
where pi is the current vertex, pj, pk are the two other vertices and αj, αk are
the two other angles.
If the current angle is obtuse, we say half the are of that triangle belongs to our
vertex. The only remaining case is if one of the two other vertices are obtuse.
In that case we say a quarter of the area belongs to our vertex.
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 3
Implementation
Implemented in C++ with clang on Debian jessie GNU/Linux, using the GEL
library from DTU Compute and Eigen for solving sparse systems. I have used
the Haskell based Shake as my build system. I've been using a .obj-le viewer
that is included with GEL to see how the sheets deform. I also have a small
Python script for parsing, analysing and displaying the output of my program
Most things happen in the Sheet and FEM classes. The Sheet class contains a
representation of a surface with both a rest state and a deformed state. Physical
properties of the mesh belong here as well as the geometric part of fracturing.
In the FEM class we have an implementation of the FEM method described in
the previous chapter, as well as method for nding fracture sites and directions.
Most of my program uses the CMatrix class from GEL for vectors and matrices.
Interaction with the solvers from Eigen happen through a wrapper function that
converts from CMatrix to Eigens' sparse MatrixXd and back to CMatrix again.
==PAGE:30==
18
Implementation
3.1
main.cpp
The included main() will run a small variety of tests with a variety of proper-
ties. According to commandline options the physical setup and iteration loop is
congured.
There are eleven commandline arguments in the following order
1. setup Index of one of eleven dierent physical setups
2. iterations Number of iterations to run the simulation
3. timestep Time increment in each iteration
4. resolution Number of vertices along each dimension of the sheet
5. tensile strength How big a separating traction needs to be before fracture
6. density The mass of the sheet per unit area
7. η1 Young's modulus in the rst direction
8. η2 Young's modulus in the second direction
9. µ Shear modulus
10. ν Poisson ratio
11. viscosity ratio Ratio between viscosity tensor and elasticity tensor
The dierent setups are selected with an integer argument. An argument of
0 corresponds to no external forces on the sheet.
This should result in no
movement. An argument of 1-5 corresponds to gravity plus ve dierent ma-
nipulations of the sheet and an argument of negative 1-5 corresponds to the
same manipulations without gravity. The ve dierent setups are:
1. The top left and top right corners are xed
2. The top left and top right corners are xed vertically and perpendicularly
to the sheet. They can still slide inwards.
3. The top left and top right are xed vertically and perpendicularly. In the
last dimension they move apart at 0.1 m
s .
4. The top left and top right are xed vertically and parallel to the sheet.
Perpendicularly they move apart at 0.1 m
s .
==PAGE:31==
3.2 Sheet class
19
5. All vertices on the left edge of the sheet move left at 0.1 m
s . All vertices
on the right edge move right at 0.1 m
s .
The output of the program comes in two parts: an .obj-le in ./temp/ of the
sheet for each iteration and a JSON le with statistics as standard text output.
3.2
Sheet class
The Sheet class models a elastic sheet based on a triangle mesh. A Manifold
triangle mesh from GEL is used for the rest sheet, while the deformed mesh is
represented as per-vertex displacements from the rest sheet. The reason only
the rest sheet is kept as a triangle mesh is that we only need access to the
geometry for the rest sheet. The per vertex properties of the mesh are stored
in VertexAttributeArrays from GEL; these are displacement, velocity and
coordinates in material space. The material properties of the whole mesh also
belongs here: the density of the material, the Young moduli k1, k2, the shear
modulus µ, the Poisson ratio ν, the viscosity ratio and the tensile strength.
Most of the functions of Sheet are simple getters and setters that, say, get the
masses of all vertices as a diagonal GEL CMatrix. Nonetheless, there are still
four interesting functions in Sheet:
get_form_factors(VertexID v, FaceID f)
Calculates the form factor for node v in element f.
The helper func-
tion planeDerivative is the interesting part, partly since it is used other
places as well.
the Sheet(int resolution, double density, double eta1, double eta2, double mu, dou
Initialisation of the Sheet class
split_preserve_trimesh(VertexID v, FaceID f, double gamma)
Splits a triangle face through a given vertex and the opposite edge, while
keeping the mesh triangular.
obrienTear(VertexID v, CMatrix normal)
Fractures the mesh at vertex v along the line perpendicular to normal.
==PAGE:32==
20
Implementation
3.2.1
split_preserve_trimesh
The point of this function is to split a face in a triangle mesh, keeping the mesh
a triangle mesh. We want to split the face from a vertex to a point on the
opposite edge. So given a point v0, a face f0 and a number γ ∈]0; 1[, we want
to do
(A triangle)
(The triangle supersplit)
We start by taking any half-edge from v0 and rotating until we get the one
pointing to f0. The next two half-edges around the face point to v1 and v2.
We then split the edge between v1 and v2 and move the resulting point v3 to
(1 −γ)v1 + γv2. The materialCoordinates, displacement and velocity of
v3 is likewise weighted between the values for v1 and v2.
We then take a half-edge from v3. If this half-edge points to f0, we switch to the
opposite half-edge. Now our half-edge points to another face f1. If this face is
an invalid face, v1, v2 and v3 are along the boundary of our mesh. That means
f0 is the only quad our edge-split created. If f1 is a valid face, we will need to
split it into two triangles. The second half-edge around f1 mush point to the
last vertex v4 of f1. We then split f1 with an edge from v3 to v4.
(Drawing of the case where f1 is a real face)
(f1 split)
No matter what kind of face f1 was, we now know that f0 is the only quad in
our mesh. So the only thing left is to split f9 with an edge from v0 to v3.
3.2.2
obrientTear
When we have decided to break the mesh at a certain vertex v0, along a certain
direction, there are two cases, depending on whether the vertex is along the
boundary of the mesh. In all cases we will split te mesh with slit_verte, so
we just need to identify the incoming and outgoing edges for the method.
3.2.2.1
Boundary fracture
Start with looping through the half-edges around v0, counting how many border
an invalid face. If there are more than two, two parts of the mesh meets in a
single point. The idea of a sheet hanging together by an innitessimal thread
==PAGE:33==
3.2 Sheet class
21
seem unphysical. To mitigate this, we break the mesh across this joint whenever
we encounter it.
Multiple invalid faces: To do the split using slit_vertex, we need to nd two
edges incident with v0 along the boundary of the same part of the mesh. A pair
of such edges is marked with red above. For both we need the half-edge that
doesn't point to an invalid face.
Start with any half-edge going from v0. Cycle half-edges around the point CCW
until you nd a half-edge where the opposite half-edge points to an invalid face.
This is the outgoing edge for slit_vertex. Continue cycling CCW until you get
a half-edge that point to an invalid face. The opposite half-edge is the incoming
edge.
Single invalid face:
If we are lucky the fracture line lines up with existing edges. In that case we
just need to identify
There is at most one triangle, where the fracture line intersects the opposite
edge. If there are zero, the fracture happens in empty space and we will just
return without changing anything.1
Otherwise, we will have a face we want
to split apart. We do this with the split_preserve_trimesh function, which
gives us a new vertex v2. Now we need to split v0 into two. Both vertices need
to be connected to v2, and will inherit the faces and edges on their respective
sides of the fracture line.
In the case that the fracture line is especially close to an edge, we will not
use split_preserve_trimesh to create a new edge. Instead we will use that
existing edge to split along. This will not result in the exact fracture path, but
will avoid misshapen triangle.
3.2.2.2
Middle fracture
We want to end up with two edges that align with the stipled fracture line. If
one of the existing edges is very close to aligning, we will prefer using that edge
to creating a new. Otherwise we will have to create edges by splitting faces.
Start with a half-edge going out from v0. Call the vertex it points to v1. If the
angle between the vector from v0 to v1 and the normal of the fracture rotated
1This should not happen physically, but we have to account for it.
==PAGE:34==
22
Implementation
π
2 CCW is less than some tolerance, we have found our incoming half-edge.
Otherwise we might need to split the face. The test is whether the fracture line,
and the line going between v1 and v2 intersects between the vertices, i.e. on the
edge.
3.3
FEM class
This is where the physical simulation happens. The interface of the class in-
cludes a few methods to change the physical situation by adding gravity and
constraints. Other than that there is only doFEM which takes a single FEM step
and doFracture which fractures the mesh at the most stressed vertex, if the
stress is strong enough. A FEM object also has a Sheet object as a eld. This is
the Sheet that will simulated.
doFEM does it's work using a few private methods.
Assembling the stiness
matrix and the imlicit integration step happens in a method called implicitFEM.
The constraints on the mesh are partly enforced by the FEM itself, partly by a
method called enforce_constraints.
3.3.1
implicitFEM
This method constructs the stiness and load matrices as described in the end
of the FEM section of chapter 2. After this it assembles the left-hand side and
right-hand side of the implicit formula at the end of the same section.
First all the displacements, material coordinates, rest coordinates, velocities,
deformed coordinates and vertex masses are fetched from the Sheet. The masses
are in a diagonal CMatrix while the rest are in single column CMatrix'es. Since
a node has three coordinates each, each node will take up three rows of the
matrices (except for the material coordinates, since they are 2D). Like so:
(x0, y0, z0, x1, y1, z1, . . . )
(3.1)
Next thing is we will loop through all the faces and add up their contributions
to the stiness matrices. So for a face f: First we need to nd the rotation of
the face. We do this by getting the deformation from the Sheet and then doing
a singular value decomposition using GEL and the technique explained in the
end of section 2.1.
==PAGE:35==
3.3 FEM class
23
From there we need to loop through all pairs (ab) of vertices on the face. This
includes pairing a vertex with itself. For these pair we calculate the matrix Kf
ab
like so
[Kf
ab]0,0 = Ba,0η1Bb,0 + Ba,1µBb,1
(3.2)
[Kf
ab]0,1 = Ba,0ν∗Bb,1 + Ba,1µBb,0
(3.3)
[Kf
ab]1,0 = Ba,0µBb,1 + Ba,1ν∗Bb,0
(3.4)
[Kf
ab]0,0 = Ba,0µBb,0 + Ba,1η2Bb,1
(3.5)
where Bf
a is the form factor of a on element f and ν∗is a coecient from
[EKS03] related to Poisson's ratio.
These are then rotated according to the rotation scheme
Qf
ab = RKf
abRT
(3.6)
˜Qf
ab = RKf
ab
(3.7)
and added to the (a, b)th block of Q and ˜Q, respectively.
From here on we need to set up the equation

M −h2Q −h2 ˜Q −hB)v1 = Mv0 + h

Qx0 −˜Qu + fext

(3.8)
and solve it The left hand side is straigthforward enough, but on the right hand
side we add up the force terms rst.
That way we can zero the ones with
constraints. From there I send it to my wrapper around Eigens SimplicalLDLT
solver, which gives us the new velocities. The Euler step happens in doFEM,
3.3.2
doFracture
We want to gure out where to fracture the structure. We do that bya collection
of each tensile and compressive forces on each vertex. From these collections
calculate the separation tensor at each vertex. The vertex that has the separa-
tion tensor with the highest eigenvalue is where we fracture, if the eigenvalue is
higher than the tensile strength of the material. The corresponding eigenvector
is perpendicular to the fracture plane.
For this we need a function that turns constructs a matrix with a given vector
a aas an eigenvector with |a| as the eigenvalue. Such a function is given below:
m(a) =
(
aaT
|a|
ifa ̸= 0
0
ifa = 0
(3.9)
==PAGE:36==
24
Implementation
More practically: First we loop over all faces. From the deformation gradient on
the face we compute the strain ϵ and then the stress σ = Cϵ. Now we separate
the stress into a tensile σ+ and a compressive σ−component, like so
σ+ =
2
X
i=1
max(0, λi(σ))m(vi(σ))
(3.10)
σ+ =
2
X
i=1
max(0, λi(σ))m(vi(σ))
(3.11)
where λi(σ) is the ith eigenvalue of σ and vi(σ) the ith eigenvector.
Each vertex vi on the face f is then acted upon with a tensile and compressive
force according to the following equatins:
f +
i,f = Ωm
2
3
X
j=1
pj
2
X
k=1
2
X
l=1
σ+
kl
(3.12)
f −
i,f = Ωm
2
3
X
j=1
pj
2
X
k=1
2
X
l=1
σ−
kl
(3.13)
We now have two collections of forces for each vertex. Let {f +
i } denote the
collection of tensile forces belonging to the ith vertex and let {f −
i } denote the
compressive forces. Let then f +
i
be the sum of the tensile forces and f −
i
be the
sum of the compressive forces.
We can then loop over the vertices and calculate the so-called separation tensor
for each.
ςi = 1
2

−m(f +
i ) +
X
f∈{f +
i }
m(f) + m(f −
i ) −
X
f∈{f −
i }
m(f)


(3.14)
While we are looping we also calculate eigenvalues, and if the current biggest
eigenvalue is the biggest so far, we save the VertexID, the eigenvalue and the
eigenvector.
At the end we check if the highest eigenvalue found is bigger than the tensile
strength of our Sheet. If it is we call obrienTear with the found vertex and
fracture vector. If not, we return without fracturing.
==PAGE:37==
3.3 FEM class
25
3.3.3
Constraints
I started out doing constraints by excluding the marked vertices from getting
changed as a result of the FEM. If I wanted them to have a set velocity I had a
separate Euler step for them. I changed it over so the load vector is zeroed for
those points. This isn't enough in itself to keep the xed points from moving,
so I still reset the points as well. The proper way to do constraints would be to
apply a penalty force depending on how far the point is from where it should
be xed to.
==PAGE:38==
26
Implementation
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 4
Results
The output of the program is an .obj-le per iteration in the folder ./temp/
and a JSON le with statistics.
All the sheets here are 1 m by 1 m. If there is gravity it will be downwards, i.e.
along one of the second axis of the sheet.
First a simple example. No external forces on the sheet, not even gravity. A
10 × 10 sheet after 100 iterations with a time step of 0.01 s.
==PAGE:40==
28
Results
From the elastics section we know that a elastic material should contract in the
transverse direction of a pull. So here is a 7 × 7 sheet being pulled apart at
0.2 m
s . This is after 500 iterations at a timestep of 0.01, so the sheet should be
twice as wide as usual.
My system can handle high resolution sheets as well, but you need smaller
timesteps. I've neglected to record an example of instabilities, but here is an
example of a 20×20 sheet hanging with gravity. The required timestep is 0.001.
Here is the initial situation.
==PAGE:41==
29
After 100 iterations.
And after 2000this took half an hour to compute.
==PAGE:42==
30
Results
The weird artifacts in the middle are because the sheet doesn't collide with itself,
so it self-intersects and messes up the lighting. I believe the abnormally stretched
attachment points are because my constraint implementation is lacking.
My implementation is actually fast enough for real-time as it is. Calculating 10
seconds of a 5 × 5 sheet at a timestep of 0.01 s takes 5.6 s on my laptop. The
setup is just a sheet hanging with gravity. Here it is after ve seconds:
Unfortunately I can't show any fracture, as I can't get it working and I need to
hand this in...
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 5
Future Work
A correct FEM implementation would be nice. Chapter 13 of Cook, Malkus
and Plesha has a pretty straigthforward formulation of a dynamic FEM for
continuum dynamics. You just need to take care with the iteration scheme.
A lot of things could be done to improve the meshes. I originally wanted to use
a conforming Delaunay triangulation after fracture. You could also increase the
resolution of the mesh locally where the stress is highest.
The sparse solver in Eigen can save the sparsity analysis in order to solve simi-
larly structured problems faster. As long as the connectivity of the mesh doesn't
change, the stieness matrix should stay the same for this problem.
Part of the stiness matrix is constant as long as the geometry of the rest sheet
stays the same. You could cache these 2n × 2n doubles.
Currently the FEM doesn't incorporate bending elasticity. There is a formula
for bending elasticity in [EKS03], but I'm not sure I trust that paper. [BWH+06]
has an interesting bending model in a separate step. This is also what [BDW13]
uses. [BDW13] only say they employ the nite element approach similar to the
one used in [Etzmuÿ et al. 2003], but still do bending according to [BWH+06].
That the paper that led me to use [EKS03] do their bending dierently, seems
to me a good reason to avoid implementing more of [EKS03].
==PAGE:44==
32
Future Work
==PAGE:45==
Appendix A
Projet plan/the separate
document
The original plan was
==PAGE:46==
34
Projet plan/the separate document
Week
Activity
7
Initial litterature study
8
9
10
Simple fracture simulation
11
12
13
14
Comparison with physical reality
15
16
Mesh renement and better fracture
17
18
Plasticity
19
20
21
Mesh coarsening
22
23
Artistic defects
24
25
Finishing thesis
26
27
28
This plan didn't at all survive contact with reality. Due to what I believe are
errors in Etzmuÿ getting a working FEM implementation took more than two
months. Just the fracture model of O'Brien/Busaryev took almost two months,
due to the unexpected diculties with implementing how the fracture changes
the mesh. To be honest, all these diculties left me demoralised and inecient
during the writing phase.
Coupled with the diculties of putting the FEM
model of Etzmuÿ on a sound footing made the writing process an excruciating
experience.
==PAGE:47==
Bibliography
[BDW13]
Oleksiy Busaryev, Tamal K Dey, and Huamin Wang. Adaptive frac-
ture simulation of multi-layered thin plates. ACM Trans. Graph.,
32(4):52:152:6, July 2013.
[BWH+06] Miklos Bergou, Max Wardetzky, David Harmon, Denis Zorin, and
Eitan Grinspun. A quadratic bending model for inextensible sur-
faces. In Symposium on Geometry Processing, pages 227230, 2006.
[CMP89]
Robert D Cook, David S Malkus, and Michael E Plesha. Concepts
and applications of nite element method. John Willey and Sons,
New York, 1989.
[EGS03]
O Etzmuss, J Gross, and W Strasser. Deriving a particle system
from continuum mechanics for the animation of deformable objects.
IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph., 9(4):538550, October 2003.
[EKS03]
O Etzmuss, M Keckeisen, and W Strasser. A fast nite element so-
lution for cloth modelling. In Computer Graphics and Applications,
2003. Proceedings. 11th Pacic Conference on, pages 244251, Oc-
tober 2003.
[GKS02]
Eitan Grinspun, Petr Krysl, and Peter Schröder. CHARMS: A sim-
ple framework for adaptive simulation. In Proceedings of the 29th
Annual Conference on Computer Graphics and Interactive Tech-
niques, SIGGRAPH '02, pages 281290, New York, NY, USA, 2002.
ACM.
[Irg08]
Fridtjov Irgens. Continuum mechanics. Springer Science & Business
Media, 2008.
==PAGE:48==
36
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[OH99]
James F O'Brien and Jessica K Hodgins. Graphical modeling and
animation of brittle fracture.
In Proceedings of the 26th Annual
Conference on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques, SIG-
GRAPH '99, pages 137146, New York, NY, USA, 1999. ACM
Press/Addison-Wesley Publishing Co.
[PNdJO14] Tobias Pfa, Rahul Narain, Juan Miguel de Joya, and James F
O'Brien. Adaptive tearing and cracking of thin sheets. ACM Trans.
Graph., 33(4):110:1110:9, July 2014.
[Pro96]
Xavier Provot.
Deformation constraints in a Mass-Spring model
to describe rigid cloth behavior. In In Graphics Interface, pages
147154, 1996.
