==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
 
24th%January 2016%
Master thesis: 
“Investigation of drone technology and development of concepts” 
 
Written by: Amir Shantia Maleki 
Supervisor: Claus Thorp Hansen 
Department of Mechanical Engineering (MEK) 
Technical University of Denmark (DTU) 
==PAGE:2==
 
2
Abstract 
Maleki, A.S. Mechanical Engineering, Technical University of Denmark. 
 
This master thesis covers the development of and consecutive verification of a UAV 
(unmanned aerial vehicle) concept within the use situation poaching. A UAV technology 
analysis was performed, as well as an investigation into the use situations: first aid and 
poaching. Ideas were subsequently generated within an idea catalogue, which were then 
consecutively used as a basis for developing three concepts within a concept catalogue. The 
thesis finally arrives at a final concept, the Overseer, which is subjected to detailing and 
verification. Main challenges are also stated in relation to developing the concept into a real 
solution. 
 
During the entire process of conceptualization, relevant models have been used mainly from 
Conceptual Design: Interpretations, Mindset and Models (Andreasen, Hansen & Cash, 2015) 
as well as from the course of conceptualisation taught at DTU by Claus Thorp Hansen 
(Associate Professor). 
 
The final concept was found to be realistic and viable, but in need of further development in 
order to become fully realizable.  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
 
3
Preface 
This master thesis was written in order to complete my M.Sc. Eng. degree at the Technical 
University of Denmark (DTU). The idea for the project came from attending a course in 
Conceptualization, which was taught by my supervisor Claus Thorp Hansen. After the course 
I took contact to my supervisor, and the master thesis was thus initiated. 
 
The thesis itself emphasizes the development of an original UAV (unmanned aerial vehicle) 
concept within the context of illicit poaching, with the aim of improving the current situation. 
This encompasses an extensive market research into the different types of UAVs, their 
strengths, weaknesses and research into relevant use situations. Appropriate models, within 
conceptualization, have been used in order to arrive at a fundamentally strong concept. 
 
The reason for undertaking this task is to understand and practice all the relevant steps and 
models needed to develop a solid concept, which can be applied to improve a problematic 
situation. Within the last couple of years, illicit poaching has seen a spike in activity and it 
was therefore relevant for me to look at this problem and to apply my skills as a mechanical 
engineer to address this very real problem. 
 
I would like to extend my sincere thanks to my supervisor Claus Thorp Hansen (Associate 
Professor), for genuine interest and invaluable guidance with regards to my thesis. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
 
4
Table of Contents 
DEFINITION OF TERMINOLOGY ..................................................................................... 5 
1 INTRODUCTION .............................................................................................................. 6 
1.1 OPENING STATEMENT ..................................................................................................... 6 
1.2 TASK FORMULATION ....................................................................................................... 6 
1.3 LEARNING OBJECTIVES ................................................................................................... 6 
1.4 DESIGN STRATEGY AND DESIGN PROCESS STRUCTURE .................................................... 8 
1.4.1 Design process ........................................................................................................ 9 
1.4.2 Staging dimensions ............................................................................................... 10 
1.4.3 Analysis of technology potential ........................................................................... 11 
1.4.4 Research and analysis of one chosen use situation .............................................. 12 
1.4.5 Goal formulation ................................................................................................... 13 
1.4.6 Concept synthesis .................................................................................................. 13 
1.4.7 Detailing and verification ..................................................................................... 14 
2 ANALYSIS OF TECHNOLOGY POTENTIAL .......................................................... 15 
2.1 ANALYSIS OF THE UAV TECHNOLOGIES ....................................................................... 15 
2.1.1 First hand experience ............................................................................................ 15 
2.1.2 General observations ............................................................................................ 19 
2.1.3 Types of UAVs ....................................................................................................... 19 
2.1.4 Determining strengths and weaknesses ................................................................ 26 
2.1.5 Potential and limitations of UAV technologies ..................................................... 40 
3 RESEARCH AND ANALYSIS OF ONE CHOSEN USE SITUATION .................... 42 
3.1 USE SITUATIONS BRAINSTORM ...................................................................................... 42 
3.2 PROBLEM INVESTIGATION ............................................................................................ 44 
3.2.1 First aid – Coronary heart disease ....................................................................... 44 
3.2.2 Poaching ............................................................................................................... 50 
3.3 IDEATION PROCESS ....................................................................................................... 57 
4 GOAL FORMULATION ................................................................................................ 59 
4.1 PARADOXES .................................................................................................................. 59 
4.2 GOAL FORMULATION .................................................................................................... 60 
5 CONCEPT SYNTHESIS ................................................................................................. 62 
5.1 MORPHOLOGY .............................................................................................................. 63 
5.1.1 The Disabler .......................................................................................................... 63 
5.1.2 The Pacifier ........................................................................................................... 63 
5.1.3 The Overseer ......................................................................................................... 64 
5.2 CONCEPTS AND FINAL SELECTION ................................................................................. 64 
6 DETAILING AND VERIFICATION ............................................................................ 66 
6.1 THE REST OF THE SOLUTION .......................................................................................... 66 
6.2 REALIZATION OF INDIVIDUAL PARTS ............................................................................ 69 
6.3 CHALLENGES ................................................................................................................ 72 
6.4 CONCLUSION ................................................................................................................ 72 
7 BIBLIOGRAPHY ............................................................................................................ 75 
 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
 
5
Definition of terminology 
 
There has been quite an on-going discussion regarding the use of the word “drone”. 
Stakeholders in the drone industry generally dislike the term, because of the militaristic 
association as well as the fact that the term is technically inaccurate [1]. 
At one particular drone conference in Washington D.C., the manufacturers responsible for the 
event used an unconventional way to get the journalists to avoid using the term; the password 
for Internet access at the conference was: “DONTSAYDRONES” [2]. 
However, even though the people in the industry agree that “drone” is inadequate, they are 
having difficulties in agreeing what the correct term should be. A few suggestions given are 
“crones” (commercial drones), “UAV” (unmanned aerial vehicle), “RPA” (remotely piloted 
aircraft) and “UAS” (unmanned aircraft system). The European Union officially uses “RPAS 
(remotely piloted aircraft systems). 
 
The general public, on the other hand, has adopted the term drone and it is also now 
frequently being used by some commercial drone companies to sell their products 
(helicopters, quadcopters etc. all fall under the category “drone”). Established companies such 
as DJI and Parrot have adopted the term. 
As the intention, for this thesis, is to have a solid scientific basis, the chosen term for 
describing all types of remotely controlled aircrafts will be UAV. The reasoning behind this 
choice is, that the acronym encompasses all types of remotely controlled aircrafts and that it is 
easy to pronounce. By using this well-defined acronym, any potential ambivalence is avoided. 
 
It should be noted that regular remote controlled aircraft systems incapable of autonomous 
flight are included under the definition of UAV within this thesis. This decision has been 
made since autonomous flight is not necessarily a crucial element to the end concept, and that 
a wider solution space is desired. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
 
6
1 Introduction 
1.1 Opening statement 
 
The recent development in commercial UAVs has brought about many new potential 
applications of the drone technology. Today, UAVs are readily available for purchase to the 
general public. They come in many sizes and qualities and range from the small hobby UAVs 
to large and sturdy professional UAVs. With this plethora of aircrafts having hit the market, 
many new applications have already been established. UAVs are for instance currently being 
used in agriculture, firefighting and police work.  
This rapid development has resulted in the legislation not having been able to be upheld. The 
problem here is not so much the legislation itself, the rules are quite simple regarding UAV 
flight, but the enforcement of it. The European Aviation Safety Agency (EASA), the EU’s 
authority regarding aviation safety, has already released a regulatory framework, which calls 
for the proposal of new regulations by December 2015 [3]. 
The UAV technology, along with its application possibilities and challenges, is consequently 
in a very dynamic stage and is why I have chosen it as the subject of my thesis. 
Within the field of conceptualization I want to investigate UAVs as a technology, and in the 
end suggest an original concept. 
The underlying purpose of this thesis is to gain practical experience regarding market research 
and analysis and possibly also technology transfer.  
1.2 Task formulation 
It is the aim of this thesis to investigate the UAV technology and market, in order to 
potentially identify a new use situation and thereby synthesize a new concept or an 
improvement to the existing solutions.  
1.3 Learning objectives 
In this section, the learning objectives of the thesis will be addressed and a short explanation 
will be given as to how they will be fulfilled. 
 
The learning objectives for the master thesis at DTU are as following. An MSc from DTU: 
 
1) can identify and reflect on technical scientific issues and understand the interaction 
between 
the 
various 
components 
that 
make 
up 
an 
issue. 
 
2) can, on the basis of a clear academic profile, apply elements of current research at 
international 
level 
to 
develop 
ideas 
and 
solve 
problems.  
 
3) masters technical scientific methodologies, theories and tools, and has the capacity to 
take a holistic view of and delimit a complex, open issue, see it in a broader academic 
and societal perspective and, on this basis, propose a variety of possible actions. 
 
4) can, via analysis and modelling, develop relevant models, systems and processes for 
solving technological problems.  
 
5) can communicate and mediate research-based knowledge both orally and in writing.  
  
6) is familiar with and can seek out leading international research within his/her 
specialist area.   
==PAGE:7==
 
7
 
7) can work independently and reflect on own learning, academic development and 
specialization.  
 
8) masters technical problem-solving at a high level through project work, and has the 
capacity to work with and manage all phases of a project – including preparation of 
timetables, design, solution and documentation.  
 
The learning objectives will be addressed in the following manner: 
 
1) The first learning objective will be addressed by making in-depth market and 
technology analyses. This will shed light on current use situations, issues and 
shortcomings, whereupon a number of these issues/shortcomings will be selected for 
further analysis with regards to understanding the multiple facets that make up the 
issue. 
 
2) This learning objective is addressed by the use of current research within the field of 
UAVs and conceptualization models. The main body of literature will be found using 
DTU Findit. Articles, projects and theses will be found from respectable sources 
through the Internet. 
 
3) The third objective is fulfilled by the chosen approach of the thesis. The technology is 
first investigated openly, and is subsequently grouped into representative groups. An 
almost identical approach is utilized for investigating the use situations. Starting with 
a broad perspective of all use situations, arrived at through brainstorming, narrowing 
down to two use situations and finally into one final use situation used for concept 
synthesis. Appropriate methods and approaches are used at each step, which are 
mainly based on the use of theories from the book Concept Design: Interpretations, 
Minds and Models by Andreasen, Hansen and Cash. A well-justified concept is also 
presented, along with future challenges for its development. 
 
4) The fourth objective is realized through the structured approach to the thesis as well as 
the use of original models (such as the visual profile used for mapping capabilities of 
UAVs) and tools (Key performance parameters is a prime example). 
 
5) This objective is fulfilled in the appropriate use of relevant research to represent the 
points made within the thesis. Furthermore, the defence of the thesis will provide an 
opportunity to display skills within oral presentation and argumentation. 
 
6) The sixth objective is addressed by the choice of references throughout the thesis. It is 
apparent that many of the chosen articles and works used are quite recent and relevant 
to the thesis and the UAV technologies. 
 
7) The seventh objective will be fulfilled partly through the conclusion of the thesis, 
which offers reflection on the methods used and their effectiveness. Finally it will also 
be fulfilled at the oral defence of the thesis, as it will offer a chance to address the 
learning and personal development in relation to the thesis. 
 
8) The final objective is apparent in the delivered project plan and the documentation and 
design of solutions within the idea and concept catalogues. 
==PAGE:8==
 
8
1.4 Design strategy and design process structure 
The aim of the thesis is to find a new use situation or area of improvement for the commercial 
UAV technology. The intention is to create a match between a potential use situation and a 
drone concept, which involves the UAV technology, a so-called matching problem-solution 
pair, as shown on the following figure (Dorst & Cross, 2001). 
 
 
Figure 1: The thesis' purpose is to create a matching problem-solution pair 
As this project is concerned with the four major types of UAVs, a large part of the thesis has 
been dedicated to investigating them, identifying their weaknesses and strengths and thereby 
their ideal working conditions. This has been necessary as a means to narrowing down the 
scope of the thesis, as there are many use situations for the technology, and for being able to 
quickly and efficiently make a decision with regards to which type of UAV to use for the 
identified need situation. 
 
The following five questions have been proposed as means to approaching the task: 
 
1. What can UAV technology be used for? 
2. In which use situations can the UAV technology be used? 
3. Will the use of the UAV technology result in improving a current use 
situation? 
4. How must the UAV technology be adapted to become a solution? 
5. What does the rest of the solution look like? 
 
Within these questions, it is stressed that the use of the UAV technology has to lead to an 
improvement of an actual and current use situation. It is therefore not enough that the 
technology can be used in a given need situation. Using the technology has to add value to the 
need situation, if it does not it will be of little interest, even though it may be used in the given 
situation. It will only be interesting if the UAV can be applied to solve an actual problem or, 
at the very least, solve it better than the current solution. High priority is therefore attributed 
to the technology being able to improve a current use situation. 
 
The five questions outlined above can be grouped into three successive stages, which will all 
be part of the design process: 
 
1. Analysis of the UAV technology. 
2. Identification of a use situation, where the technology can improve an actual 
problem. 
3. Development of a solution, in which the technology is used. 
 
The grouping of the questions and phases can be seen in the following figure: 
==PAGE:9==
 
9
 
Figure 2: Main questions represented by three design stage phases 
1.4.1 Design process 
The design process is structured so that there are five general stages, these are; analysis of 
technology potential, research and analysis of one chosen use situation, design task 
formulation, concept synthesis and detailing and verification. The first two stages incorporate 
both elements of exploration and analysis. The following figure shows the five general stages, 
as well as the questions related to each one, mirroring and further detailing the elements 
discussed in the previous section: 
 
 
Figure 3: The five stages of the design process with related questions 
The following will, among other aspects of the report, go through each of the five stages in 
detail, with the aim of making the design process transparent as well as to describe the 
strategy followed. The design strategy is described taking its basis in the C*- model 
==PAGE:10==
 
10
(Andreasen, Hansen & Cash 2015), which describes five explorative and clarifying elements 
needed in the design strategy: 
 
 
Figure 4: The C*-model used with its five explorative feed chains 
First however it is important to revisit the task formulation, and to expand upon the four 
staging dimensions: Who, why, how and what. This falls under task perception and 
formulation within the C*-model. 
1.4.2 Staging dimensions 
The task formulation is a mutual agreement between the design team and the client or 
manager. Since this report is an individual assignment, an attempt has been made to provide 
answers to the four staging dimensions (Andreasen et al. 2015) in order to focus goals and 
create synergy between the stages within this project. 
 
• Who? As a mechanical engineering student, I am the sole contributor to the creation 
of this thesis. An agreement has been made with my supervisor, who will mainly offer 
guidance with respect to report structure and C*-theory content. Other relevant 
persons will be the ones who have been contacted for information with regards to 
UAV use and technology. 
 
• Why? The main motivation is to finish the thesis, in order to officially become a 
mechanical engineer. Secondly, it has been the intention to use my acquired skills 
within the field of conceptualisation to undertake a complex assignment and to 
produce an excellent end product. Lastly, the rapid development in commercial UAVs 
means that the UAV market is very dynamic and therefore very interesting from a 
developmental perspective as new designs are rapidly being introduced.  
 
• How? The thesis will, as previously mentioned, make use of a well-defined design 
process, which will ensure a holistic approach to conceptualization and thereby ensure 
that the process of concept synthesis is transparent and rational. Within this process, 
relevant models and methods such as the C*-model will be used to ensure correct 
systematization and presentation of all acquired research and knowledge of the UAV 
technology and its uses. 
 
• What? The intention is to contribute my own way of approaching conceptualisation to 
the persons who will read the thesis. Also it would be preferable that the end concept 
of the thesis will be viable and realizable. Having had courses within 
==PAGE:11==
 
11
conceptualization, needs inspired invention and entrepreneurship I am confident that I 
can contribute a well structured report and to fulfill my aspiration of making a good 
end concept. 
 
Since the task has already been formulated in the introduction, the task perception and 
formulation feed chain of the C*-model is seen as the entry point to conceptualisation for the 
thesis.  
 
The following subchapters are meant to provide the reader with an overview of each chapter 
of the thesis, and to inform about the approach and the methods used. 
1.4.3 Analysis of technology potential 
The aim of the analysis of technology potential is to answer the questions; what can the UAV 
technology be used for? In which situations can the technology be used? 
 
The design strategy is therefore initiated within the technology and idea elements feed chain 
of the C*-model, since it entails having a full understanding of the UAV technology as well 
as solid knowledge regarding potential use situations in order to be able to answer the posed 
questions. 
 
The analysis of technology potential is initiated through an account of personal experience in 
flying with three different UAVs, and the general observations made during the flights. 
 
Four types of UAVs are then investigated and explanations are offered on how the individual 
types differ from each other and where their strengths lie.  
 
Then a five-step process begins which culminates in the identification of the strengths and 
weaknesses of each of the four types of UAVs. Figure 5 shows an overview of the process: 
 
 
Figure 5: Five-step process for finding strengths and weaknesses 
• Domain Theory: Organ domain 
In this section, Domain Theory (Andreasen 1980) is used within the organ domain to 
identify organs by their function and to describe which parts of the UAVs they 
comprise. 
 
• Key performance parameters 
The key performance parameters are identified, by imagining what the intent has been 
with the specific design of each type. These are paired with the realizations of each 
parameter, which is an explanation of how the performance parameters are physically 
realized. 
 
• Differences that matter 
On the basis of the key performance parameters and realizations, the differences that 
matter are identified. 
==PAGE:12==
 
12
 
• Rating parameters and visual profile models 
Eight rating parameters are identified, which are used to rate each UAV type and 
present them in a visual profile model in order to provide a visual overview of 
capabilities. Figure 6 shows an example of the visual profile model and the rating 
parameters: 
 
 
Figure 6: Example of visual profile model as well as the eight rating parameters 
• Strengths and weaknesses 
Strengths and weaknesses are identified, and a small discussion of them is included 
for each UAV type. 
 
Finally, the chapter is concluded by the identification of the potential and the limitations of 
the UAV technology as a whole. These are described under three points which are: 
 
• What the UAV technology can do 
• What can be done with the UAV technology 
• Potential limitations 
 
This concludes the analysis of the technology potential. 
1.4.4 Research and analysis of one chosen use situation 
This section is started with a brainstorm of perceived use situations. These are then rated 
briefly with respect to four criteria: 
 
• Urgency 
• Interest 
• Adaptability 
• Complexity 
 
The rating resulted in the choice of first aid and poaching as the two use situations for further 
research. 
 
Each use situation is then researched with respect to the following five elements: 
 
• History and development 
• Recent solutions 
• Problems 
==PAGE:13==
 
13
• Challenges 
• Stakeholders 
 
The aim of this research is to get a better understanding of the problems and challenges faced 
in each of the use situations. Finally, the stakeholder diagram is seen as the starting point for 
the ideation process resulting in six ideas for each use situation in the idea catalogue. 
 
Idea catalogue 
The idea catalogue consists of a total of 12 ideas, six for each use situations. Each idea 
consists of a sketch, a description, strengths, weaknesses and rating with respect to the four 
criteria:  
 
• Attractiveness (weighted by 35%), 
• Economics (weighted by 25%) 
• Adaptability (weighted by 25%) 
• Amount of interest (weighted by 15%) 
 
Finally a weighted average grade is calculated for each of the two use situations. This is done 
in order to arrive at one final highest scoring use situation to use for concept synthesis. 
 
The chosen use situation is poaching. 
1.4.5 Goal formulation 
This section of the thesis uses the stakeholder diagram, from the previous section, to 
formulate paradoxes within the poaching use situation. 
 
These paradoxes are then used to express key characteristics of the ideal solution, which are 
then condensed into forming the following three design goals: 
 
• Create a concept, which can track animals, identify poachers and provide an overview 
of potentially dangerous situations. 
 
• Create a concept, which can disable the high-tech equipment of the poachers and/or 
relay information about their location. 
 
• Create a concept, which can aid the rangers in directly combatting poachers. 
 
A concept is then made for each of the three design goals in the concept catalogue. 
1.4.6 Concept synthesis 
The concept synthesis is initiated by the use of morphology. The six ideas from the poaching 
use situation, in the idea catalogue, are combined together in pairs to form three concepts: 
 
• The Overseer 
• The Pacifier 
• The Disabler 
 
These three concepts are then described in the concept catalogue. Each concept has a detailed 
description and is rated using five of the seven universal virtues (Andreasen et al. 2015). 
There is furthermore a justification for each rating of the concepts. 
==PAGE:14==
 
14
Finally the grades are added to find a total for each concept. The concept with the highest 
total score, the Overseer, has been chosen for detailing and verification. 
1.4.7 Detailing and verification 
This section in the thesis has the aim of answering the question: Is the solution realistic and 
viable? Before the answer to this question, the rest of the solution is detailed with respect to 
four aspects: 
 
• Patrolling pattern 
Suggestions are made as to how the patrol pattern could look like. A closed-loop 
patrol system is chosen as a basis for applying Domain Theory (Andreasen 1980) 
within the activity domain. 
 
• Charging 
A suggestion is made regarding how charging could function automatically, and 
which parts would be needed to make the charging function in an environmentally 
friendly way using solar panels, batteries, a charging/landing pad and finally a fast 
charging electrical wire.  
 
• Maintenance 
An effective maintenance solution is suggested, which would work in collaboration 
with the closed-loop patrolling system. 
 
• Trained operators and maintenance personnel 
In this section the need for training, for both operators and maintenance personnel, is 
briefly discussed, stressing the fact that the Overseer is mainly an autonomous 
solution, which only occasionally needs human input.  
 
The next section then goes on to research the realization of individual parts, by looking at the 
four main parts constituting the Overseer concept: the multirotor, the charging/landing pad, 
the night/day camera and the solar panels and batteries. 
 
The conclusion to this section is that the Overseer is indeed a realistic and viable solution, but 
that it needs to be developed and that it is not a simple plug-and-play solution. 
 
The main challenges are then described. These are the ones that need to be addressed if it is 
desired to make the concept a reality. 
 
The final section is the conclusion to the thesis. To summarise, it is concluded that the thesis 
has indeed fulfilled the aim by having investigated both the UAV technology and the selected 
use situations. This has resulted in a new concept capable of improving the current situation 
of illicit poaching. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:15==
 
15
2 Analysis of technology potential 
 
In this chapter an analysis will be performed on the technology and use situations of UAVs. 
The aim of the analysis is to investigate: 
 
• what are the capabilities of UAV technology? 
• which parameters are the most important for a UAV? 
• what are the use situations? 
 
Thus, the exploration begins at the “Technology and idea elements” feed chain of the 
exploration model: 
 
 
Figure 7: Design process taking its beginning in the “technology and idea elements” feed chain 
2.1 Analysis of the UAV technologies 
This section focuses on the exploration and analysis of various types of UAVs. The first part 
of the analysis is primarily based on first-hand experience with flying three different UAVs. 
Thereafter the most commonly available types of UAVs are analyzed with respect to strengths 
and weaknesses as well as the most important organs using domain theory. 
2.1.1 First hand experience 
As a part of my thesis I have been flying three different UAVs, to get a feel for the 
technology as well as to understand potential opportunities and limitations. The aircrafts 
flown are all from the brand Walkera.  
 
Super CP 
 
Figure 8: The Super CP helicopter UAV 
==PAGE:16==
 
16
The Super CP is a very small helicopter with a main rotor diameter of 241mm. It weighs a 
mere 45g including the battery, and can fly up to 5-6 minutes on a full 45 minutes charge. The 
main dimensions are as following: 
 
Main rotor diameter 
241mm 
Tail rotor diameter 
42mm 
Overall length 
220mm 
Gyro 
3-axis 
Takeoff weight 
45g 
Battery 
3.7V 240mAh Li-Po 
 
The Super CP uses the universal controller Devo 7, and has two flight modes; 1) manual and 
2) stunt. Stunt mode allows the rotor to rotate in both directions, which in turn allows one to 
fly the Super CP on its head.  
 
My experience with the Super CP was that it required a high degree of concentration to ensure 
a smooth take off. It is indeed very light and very fast. It is also very responsive when it 
comes to quick changes in direction and I experienced minimal lag between my input and the 
motion of the Super CP. Generally however, it was found that flying the Super CP required 
more skill and steady hands than the other two tested UAVs.  
 
QR Y100 
 
Figure 9: The QR Y100 hexacopter UAV 
The QR Y100 is a hexacopter with a built-in camera. It can be controlled by a number of 
remotes but also by smartphone. It will fly an estimated 15 minutes on a 40 minutes charge. 
The main dimensions are as following: 
 
Main rotor diameter 
105mm 
Overall (L x W x H) 222 x 252 x 93mm 
Gyro 
6-axis 
Takeoff weight 
146g 
Battery 
3.7V 1600mAh Li-
Po 
 
==PAGE:17==
 
17
A smartphone was used to fly the QR Y100. When using the smartphone, one can take off at 
the press of a button, which renders the hexacopter hovering about 10cm off the ground.  
 
The thrust and horizontal rotation are controlled by buttons on the screen, but the tilt, and 
hence the direction of motion of the QR, is controlled by tilting the smartphone in the chosen 
direction. Initially, this caused difficulty in controlling the drone, and resulted in the breaking 
of one of the rotor arms. Subsequently this was fixed, and more experience was gained.  
 
In the end it was relatively predictable to fly the QR Y100. The only recurring problem was, 
that it would lose connection to the smartphone quite suddenly which would result in the 
aircraft flying off in the direction it was going before disconnecting. This caused some harsh 
landings, as Y100 would cut the power to the rotors after 5-10 seconds or so of being 
disconnected which would cause it to fall out of the sky. The landing gear was broken during 
one such occasion. 
 
My experience was that, although practical, flying this particular UAV with a smartphone did 
not function optimally as it was nearly impossible to determine the range of operation and 
thereby predict when the QR Y100 would lose connection.  
 
During the times in which the QR Y100 functioned as intended, a steady hand and deliberate 
tilting of the smartphone were crucial in order to control it. This was partly due to there being 
a significant lag between input and output. 
 
The QR was not tested with the Devo 7 controller, but it is assumed that doing so will result 
in a much better flight experience and range. 
QR X350 Pro 
 
 
Figure 10: The QR X350 Pro quadcopter UAV 
The QR X350 Pro was the largest of the three tested UAVs. It is a quadcopter and is capable 
of flying 25 minutes on a 60 minutes charge. It has GPS, and is capable of flying a pre-
mapped route made of GPS points. The main dimensions are as following: 
 
 
==PAGE:18==
 
18
Main rotor diameter 
582mm 
Overall (L x W x H) 289 x 289 x 205mm 
Gyro 
6-axis 
Takeoff weight 
<1350g 
Battery 
11.1v 5200mAh LiPo 
 
The Devo 7 transmitter was used to control the QR X350. The quadcopter comes with a 
safety feature, which locks the rotors and requires a manual unlock. It took some time to 
figure out how this worked, but eventually the first take-off was achieved. 
 
On first-hand impression, of several test flights by the student groups, the QR X350 was quite 
easy to manoeuvre with the test flight having been performed inside a room with limited 
space. It is quite responsive and there is no noticeable lag between input and output.  
 
Another test flight was performed outside in windy conditions, which seemingly did not 
affect the stability of the X350.  
 
A set of propeller guards was subsequently fitted to the X350, for safety reasons as well as for 
protecting the aircraft itself. 
 
A third test flight, undertaken by a group of students, resulted in a broken leg. Of the four 
legs, it was also the most important one that broke, as it housed the magnetometer (compass) 
of the X350.  
 
Subsequent test flights revealed that the X350 has two distinct modes of flight, standard flight 
and headless flight. Standard flight is where the orientation of the drone, relative to the pilot, 
matters. This means that the controls are locked to the orientation of the drone; tilting forward 
on the pitch will lead to the UAV flying in the nose direction regardless of the spatial relation 
to the pilot. Flying in headless mode means that the X350 will keep readjusting its controls 
relative to where the pilot is standing. Standard flight mode is best suited for FPV flight, 
whereas headless flight mode is better for flying the drone without a camera. 
 
Regrettably, a final flight with the X350 resulted in the drone getting caught in strong wind 
and carried away so far that the group of students were not able to locate it subsequently. 
Since it was still in sight, when the decision was made to land it as safe as possible, I was able 
to insure that the X350 had a very slow and safe landing, lowering the thrust right until it 
started descending slowly towards the ground. 
 
My experience with the X350 was that it was definitely the easiest to fly out of the three 
tested UAVs. It was very stable and responsive. It was though noted that it became more 
difficult to control the UAV, the further it got from the pilot. This was not due to any fault of 
the X350, but more the pilot not being able to accurately judge the UAV’s orientation. This 
was remedied to a certain extent by flying in headless mode.  
 
The biggest realization came when I was unable to retrieve the X350, after it got caught in the 
wind. Without a first person view (FPV) system, it was too difficult to ascertain which 
direction the UAV was travelling in as well as its orientation. A valuable lesson learnt was 
that; when in doubt, land the UAV as quickly as possible.  
 
==PAGE:19==
 
19
The mishaps that occurred can all more or less be attributed to the lack of proper training in 
UAV flight. With proper training and FPV, it would have been an achievable task to bring 
back and safely land the X350. 
2.1.2 General observations 
This section of the thesis states the general observations made during flights with the UAVs 
mentioned in section 2.1.1. 
Flight 
Flying a UAV proved to require a certain amount of skill and practice. Without FPV it is 
difficult to control the aircraft, especially at distances over 30 meters. Flying in adverse 
weather conditions, also prove challenging as the UAV may act unpredictably. This was 
experienced first hand, with the X350 flying away.  
The aircraft were all fast and thereby capable of covering a lot of ground in a small amount of 
time. 
Toughness  
The UAVs all showed different degrees of toughness, however all of them were subjected to 
damage of some sort. These were mainly cases of bad/rough landings. Some of them were 
also due to bad takeoffs, where the legs of the UAV would get caught against uneven ground 
and thereby flip around. This led to damage to the propellers, landing gear and chassis. The 
general observation is, that the aircrafts will break if handled without care. 
Potential Danger 
Even though some UAVs are marketed as being recreational, they can be dangerous to both 
the pilot and potential bystanders. The rotors rotate at high speeds, and are capable of cutting 
through skin and cause damage. No such damage was experienced during the flights, but 
some unintentionally close flying to the bystanders did occur.  
2.1.3 Types of UAVs 
This section of the report is concerned with the types of UAVs, which show promise within 
the commercial sector. This therefore excludes any type of UAV, which is strictly used for 
military action. An effort has been made to include mainly commercially available UAV 
types, as a way to delimit the scope of the thesis, as well as to provide a realistic opportunity 
of making an end concept. Where appropriate, designs currently under development have 
been included in order to take into consideration the possibilities of the near future. It should 
also be mentioned that the thesis mainly takes into consideration battery-powered UAVs. 
Helicopter 
This type of UAV has in fact two rotors; 1) one large rotor with variable pitch rotor blades as 
well as a tilting mechanism to induce flight in the direction of tilt and 2) a smaller tail rotor 
needed to control the helicopter’s horizontal rotation. Earlier you could only get remotely 
controlled helicopters that had flybars, a type of bar with a paddle at each end connected to 
the rotor assembly – to explain briefly, they are a mechanical means to achieve stability. 
These are however being slowly phased out, due to the rapid development of digital 
accelerometers and gyroscopes. The two types of helicopter UAVs are shown below in Figure 
11: 
 
==PAGE:20==
 
20
 
Figure 11: Two helicopter UAVs – one with flybar (left) and one without (right) 
The tilting mechanism is shown in more detail below on Figure 12. 
 
 
Figure 12: Tilting mechanism of a helicopter 
In Japan, remotely controlled helicopters have been used in over 20 years for crop dusting. 
More specifically the helicopters used are Yamaha’s RMAX model, powered by a 21 
horsepower two-stroke engine, weighing 64 kg and capable of carrying approximately 28 kg 
of liquid spray or granules for crop dusting [4]. It is semi-autonomous, meaning it can be 
navigated by GPS to hold its position, height etc. Currently it is not possible to have it fly-by-
wire. 
 
 
Figure 13: The Yamaha RMAX helicoter UAV dusting crops 
There is currently not a downscaled version of this type of remotely controlled helicopter 
available. There are competitors though such as the Vanguard ShadowHawk.  
==PAGE:21==
 
21
It should be noted that a helicopter is inherently a very stabile design in and of itself. It does 
not require the same level of interference from the flight controller, as would a corresponding 
multirotor design. Furthermore the helicopter is also a much more efficient design, since it 
relies on varying the pitch of the rotor blades to change flight direction rather than changing 
the speed of the rotor constantly as is seen on multirotor designs. 
 
This helicopter is also very agile and is able to change directions very quickly. One last 
important point for this type of UAV is that, in case of main rotor failure, it will merely glide 
down to the ground and thereby reduce the risk of damaging either bystanders or objects close 
by. This is a very important aspect to consider, if flying over densely populated areas is 
desired. However, the large spinning rotor may pose a threat to bystanders. 
 
A main strength of the helicopter is the ability to stay stationary in the air, which is a good 
property for doing inspection work for instance. 
 
It should be noted that, at the time of writing, there is not really a market for autonomous 
helicopters. Experiments are currently being made at Stanford University, to make fully 
autonomous helicopter UAVs [5]. 
Multirotor  
The multirotor design employs more than two rotors, which are often fixed-pitch rotors, 
meaning that the individual rotors cannot change the pitch in any direction. For this reason the 
multirotor UAVs are controlled by changing the speed of the rotors relative to each other, in 
order to induce pitch, roll or yaw.  
 
 
Figure 14: A quadcopter (top left), An octocopter (top right) and a hexacopter (bottom) – all have fixed-pitch rotors 
The multirotor is not a stabile design in and of itself, which is why it relies heavily on the 
flight controller to keep it stabile. The flight controller on the other hand is reliant on 
measurements from digital accelerometers and gyroscopes. 
  
==PAGE:22==
 
22
Since the movement of multirotors is dependent on alteration of rotor speeds relative to each 
other, it is also an inefficient design compared to the previously mentioned helicopter. Having 
to constantly increase/decrease rotor speeds requires a lot of power, which is why the stability 
of a multirotor comes at a steep price. 
 
An example of this would be the tuning of a quadcopter’s stability. A quadcopter with a 
design payload of 1 kg could be made to lift a brick (approx. 2.4 kg) only by relaxing the 
stabilization tunings so that the aircraft was less stable in the air [6]. This of course results in 
the quadcopter wasting less energy on trying to stay absolutely level, and thereby frees up this 
energy to yield a stronger lifting capacity. 
 
It is also worth noting that there, up until recently, have been safety problems related to rotor 
failure of a quadcopter. When a rotor would fail, the aircraft would just drop out of the sky. 
Researchers at ETH Zurich have created an algorithm, which detects when a rotor has fallen 
off or a motor has failed. It then uses the remaining propellers to initiate a hovering horizontal 
spin, which eases down the quadcopter to a safe landing [7]. This development is quite 
relevant as a quadcopter is inherently more efficient than a corresponding hexa- or octocopter. 
This is due to the fact that, aerodynamically, larger and slower spinning props are more 
efficient than small fast-spinning props. Adding more propellers also leads to increases in 
weight and complexity, which are undesirable traits. 
 
One benefit of the multirotor design is that they are very well suited for carrying payloads of 
varying weights, sizes and weight distributions as opposed to helicopters, which need a more 
even weight distribution of the load. One of the primary reasons for this is again the advanced 
flight controller, as well as the chassis designs, which are better suited for fixation of objects. 
Multirotors are able to stay stationary in the air, just like helicopters. This makes the 
multirotors very suitable for inspection work, similar to the helicopter. 
Fixed Wing 
Fixed wing UAVs come in a variety of shapes and complexities. Common for all of them 
though is that they usually have a rotor used to create forward thrust as well as relatively large 
wings to create lift. The lift is created by the forward motion of the UAV and its wings. 
 
The fixed wing design can vary to a much greater extent than multirotor designs; there are 
designs resembling traditional single-propeller airplanes and then there are the delta type 
UAVs, which look more futuristic. Two different types are shown in Figure 15. 
 
 
Figure 15: Airplane type UAV (left) and delta type UAV (right) 
==PAGE:23==
 
23
As can be seen, the number of control surfaces also varies greatly between models; the 
airplane type UAV has ailerons, elevators and a rudder whereas the delta type only has 
ailerons. This of course has implications for both the manoeuvrability and complexity, and 
thereby also cost, of the UAV.  
 
Common for all fixed wing UAVs is that they are capable of flying faster, longer and carry 
heavier payloads than helicopters and multirotors. Being able to carry heavier payloads, 
means that one can use better cameras and sensors, as these tend to weigh more. One perhaps 
seemingly trivial, but equally important benefit of the fixed wing design is that they make a 
lot less noise than multirotors. 
 
The disadvantage is that fixed wing designs usually require a type of runway or launcher for 
takeoff and landing. They also lack the ability to hover and maintain a stationary position. 
Furthermore there is also the safety concern regarding rotor failure. In case of rotor failure, a 
fixed-wing may be able to glide to a safe landing but it will be difficult to make it turn, as 
turning with a malfunctioning rotor may generate drag and cause the UAV to drop faster. 
Majka (2015) has proposed a method to determine the optimal flight path during rotor failure, 
where the UAV avoids densely populated areas and maintains a certain height above ground-
level at all times [8]. 
 
For these given reasons, fixed wing UAVs are best suited for quantitative surveillance, flying 
quickly over large areas. 
Fixed Wing Multirotor 
Though more uncommon than either the fixed wing or multirotor designs, significant 
development has been made within a hybrid design of sorts; a type of UAV capable of flying 
both as a multirotor and a fixed wing. Figure 16 shows three different designs. 
 
 
 
Figure 16: Tail-sitter (top) and two tilt-rotor designs (bottom left and right) 
==PAGE:24==
 
24
The most common and simple version of this type would be the “tail-sitter” design, seen in 
the top of Figure 16. The following picture shows a prototype of Google’s Project Wing: 
 
 
Figure 17: Google's Project Wing tail-sitter UAV 
As seen, it has four fixed-pitch rotors. Two are mounted below and on the tip of the wings, 
while the last two are mounted on top at mid-wing. This design allows the Project Wing to 
take off and land vertically. When it has reached a sufficient height, the UAV is rotated 90 
degrees by increasing the speed of the lower rotors and is then capable of flying similarly to a 
fixed-wing design.  
 
Although this design comes with many new capabilities, one should take note that the four 
rotors are a significant increase in weight compared to a corresponding fixed-wing design and 
that the tail-sitter therefore has a shorter flight time. 
 
Other systems have also been proposed with VTOL (Vertical Take Take-Off and Landing) 
systems. One such design was proposed in 2009 by the Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency 
[9]. Technically it is not a fixed-wing design, as the wings are capable of rotating, as shown 
on Figure 18 below: 
 
Figure 18: Tilt-wing UAV made by Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency 
==PAGE:25==
 
25
This design introduces more complexity compared to the tail-sitter, by including the rotating 
wings, and may thereby make maintenance and repair work more demanding. The added 
complexity will mean an increase in weight, and thereby lower efficiency. Also it should be 
noted that the tilt-wing design is difficult to control in hover mode, as the wings tilted 
vertically become a large area for crosswinds to push on. This design has not been found to be 
competitive for the drone market at its current stage. 
 
One of the latest and most promising designs is in fact one that DTU Space and DTU 
Environment are involved with. Made in collaboration with the Danish UAV manufacturer 
Sky-Watch and Boeing, the new concept, Smart UAV, was recently unveiled at Hans 
Christian Andersen Airport [10]: 
 
 
Figure 19: Smart UAV hybrid design made at DTU 
The UAV is still in the developmental stage, and the following information is based on an 
email correspondence with one of the lead scientists of the project, Jakob Jakobsen. 
 
The Smart UAV has two large rotors embedded in the fuselage, which are used for vertical 
take-off, landing, hovering and for the transition from multirotor to fixed-wing mode. During 
these operations, the two large rotors provide 70% of the total thrust. Then there are the two 
rotors at the end of the wings. These are of the tilt-rotor type, which allows them to rotate and 
thereby serve different functions. During take-off, landing and hovering they provide the 
remaining 30% of total thrust primarily in order to stabilize the UAV. The two tilt-rotors are 
also involved in the transition from multirotor to fixed-wing mode. During fixed-wing flight, 
only the tilt-rotors provide thrust. 
 
Furthermore it has two ailerons, used to control the roll in flight mode. It is clear that this is a 
complex design; the Smart UAV is capable of vertical take-off and landing, hovering and 
fixed-wing flight rendering it capable of undertaking a multitude of tasks. However, the 
relatively large size of all the propellers, help reduce losses and it may prove to be very 
effective as a multi-purpose UAV. 
 
Jakob Jakobsen furthermore expressed that the Smart UAV is too expensive a design and that 
he therefore does not believe it will be available to the average consumer in the near future. 
He further stated that it would be difficult to obtain the necessary certification to fly the Smart 
UAV. It will most likely remain a niche product, compared to the regular multirotors and 
fixed-wings. This however does not mean that some design elements, such as the rotors 
embedded in the fuselage, will not be implemented in future consumer UAVs. 
One common advantage of these hybrid designs is that they require very little space for take-
off and landing, like multirotors, compared to a needed runway for a fixed-wing UAV. 
==PAGE:26==
 
26
Furthermore, unlike multirotors, they are capable of flying long distances fast. They can also 
hover and be controlled accurately in order to do monitoring work. 
 
The safety aspects however still remain. If a rotor fails, the Smart UAV will have to make an 
emergency landing, which may pose a risk to both the UAV and to the people on the ground. 
In such a case, Majka’s proposed method of determining the optimal flight path is also highly 
relevant. 
 
The tail-sitter design of Google’s project wing will be chosen as the representative for the 
hybrid designs, due to its more simple design. 
2.1.4 Determining strengths and weaknesses 
In order to determine the strengths and weaknesses of each design, it is important to look at 
the different UAV designs and then determine how they significantly differ from each other. 
They all more or less achieve identical things, but the way they go about doing so are 
different, and it is in these differences that the strengths and weaknesses of each design lie. 
 
This section will utilize Domain Theory (Andreasen 1980) within the organ domain, to 
determine the main functions of each UAV in the form of organs and thus in a simple manner 
show the main differences in the designs. Hereafter the key performance parameters and 
realizations are identified, in order to arrive at the differences that matter within each UAV 
type. 
From here, an effort will be made to identify a number of rating criteria in order to be able to 
rank the UAVs according to each criterion and present the ratings in a graphic profile model 
similar to the following figure: 
 
 
Figure 20: Graphic profile model – the “?” denote rating criteria which are identified later in the report 
Each layer represents a grade, going from red to green. Red is equal to the grade 1 and green 
equal to 5. 
 
After the graphic profiles are made, the strengths and weaknesses of each design will be 
formulated, which should also give some clarity as to which tasks each design is most suited 
for. 
? 
 
 
 
 
 
Speed 
Agility 
? 
? 
? 
? 
? 
==PAGE:27==
 
27
Domain theory – Organ domain 
This section of the thesis uses Domain Theory (Andreasen 1980), in order to describe the 
various organs based on their function. Within the organ domain, individual parts of the 
technology are grouped together in order to fulfil a given function. However the process of 
doing this is reversed; first the function is defined and then it is decided which parts are 
essential to that function, which then together, in a group, form an organ. 
General versions of the four types of UAV, described in the previous section, are here 
analysed with regards to the organ domain in order to make clear how they differ from each 
other. In this case it will be sufficient to use a general representative model for each UAV, as 
the aim is to find the major differences between the four UAV types and not the differences 
between the multitudes of UAVs within each type. 
 
Helicopter 
 
 
Figure 21: Organ domain theory used on the Helicopter UAV 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:28==
 
28
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Multirotor 
 
 
 
Figure 22: Organ domain theory used on the Multirotor UAV 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:29==
 
29
 
 
 
 
 
Fixed-wing 
 
 
 
Figure 23: Organ domain theory used on the Fixed-wing UAV 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:30==
 
30
 
 
 
 
 
Tail-sitter 
 
 
Figure 24: Organ domain theory used on the Tail-sitter UAV 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:31==
 
31
It is seen that the biggest differences within the types of UAVs mainly lie within the lift, 
steering and landing organs, which is unsurprising as these are also the ones closely related to 
the design and the action of flying. The remaining organs show slight variations, but are 
mainly concerned with electronics, which in this case is not the governing factor for the 
different UAV designs. 
The organs identified are valuable in giving an overview of the available functions, but to get 
a more nuanced look at the relationship between intent of design and function it is imperative 
to identify the key performance parameters and how these are physically realized. 
Key performance parameters and difference that matters 
In this section the key performance parameters are investigated for each type of UAV. The 
key performance parameters represent what the design intent has been; which functionality 
has been desired as perceived from the conducted research into each type of UAV. Alongside 
these parameters, in the “realized by” column, it is described how such functionality is 
physically realized in the product. Using this tool, it is possible to identify the forerunning 
criteria of a certain design, which in turn will yield the strengths of the design. Furthermore, it 
will allow for the identification of the differences that matter, which will play an important 
role in the choice of UAV when the concept synthesis is initiated. 
 
Helicopter 
 
 
Key performance parameter 
Realized by 
High efficiency 
Large main propeller spinning at constant 
speed. 
Tilting rotor blades and tilt mechanism. 
Light weight. 
Quick response and agility 
Quick responding tilting rotor blades and tilt 
mechanism. 
Stability 
Main rotor keeping the helicopter mostly 
stabile by itself, aided by the tail rotor to 
correct for rotation. 
Measurements from 3-axis gyroscope and 
three accelerometers sent to flight controller 
to keep the helicopter steady. 
Safety 
Self-induced controllable spin, during rotor 
failure to ensure safe landings. 
Ability to get to difficult-to-reach places. 
Compact design. 
Land and take off in areas with limited 
space. 
Vertical takeoff and landing made easy with 
helicopter design. 
Control the helicopter when it is out of 
sight. 
Camera built into the body or camera 
mounted to the fuselage. 
A way to control the helicopter. 
Radio transmitter used to send inputs to an 
on board receiver. 
Tilting rotor blades and tilt mechanism used 
==PAGE:32==
 
32
to control flight direction and altitude, while 
the tail rotor determines horizontal 
orientation. 
 
When it comes to the helicopter, the differences that matter are the following: 
 
• Agility of the helicopter 
• The safety is high with regards to rotor failure 
• The efficiency is high 
 
Multirotor 
 
Key performance parameter 
Realized by 
Inexpensive 
A number of easily replaceable fixed-pitch 
rotors are attached to the body. 
Chassis and propellers often made of plastic. 
Stability 
Flight controller capable of reading data 
picked up from gyroscope and 
accelerometers to keep UAV steady. 
Simple design 
A number of easily replaceable fixed-pitch 
rotors are attached to the body. 
The multirotor is controlled by varying the 
speed of the rotors relative to each other. 
Land and take-off in areas with limited 
space. 
Vertical takeoff and landing is possible due 
to flight controller working together with  
Easy to control 
Two different modes of flight: headless and 
regular. Headless mode adjusts the controls 
relative to the pilot, and regular mode is 
mapped to the orientation of the UAV. 
Safety 
Multirotor, with more than four rotors, can 
keep flying in case of a rotor failure. 
Quadcopters are able to land safely with 
special algorithm. 
Automatic rotor lock 
Record video and take pictures of high 
quality 
Use of model-specific gimbal and HD 
Camera. 
Record video and take pictures 
autonomously. 
“Follow me” function, in which the UAV 
follows the signal given off by transmitter or 
smartphone. 
Follow a predetermined route 
autonomously. 
Smartphone or other ground station can be 
used to set GPS waypoints and to specify 
altitude and speed.  
Carry payload 
It is easy to attach an object to the 
multirotors chassis. 
==PAGE:33==
 
33
The multirotor design allows the UAV to fly 
with uneven payloads. 
Deliver payload accurately 
Tail-sitter design allows the UAV to fly fast 
from point A to B, and its four rotors allows 
a precise landing. 
Low maintenance 
The multirotor design is practically a 
maintenance free design. 
 
The multirotor has the following differences that matter: 
 
• It is relatively easy to control. 
• The design is inexpensive and mechanically simple. 
• Can carry and deliver a variety of payloads. 
 
Fixed-wing 
 
 
Key performance parameter 
Realized by 
Efficient flight 
The light design, the large surface area of the 
wings and single tail-mounted rotor for 
propulsion. 
Easy Take-off 
Can be launched by hand. 
If UAV is too heavy, a takeoff ramp is 
needed. 
Safety 
Usually made of very light material, which 
minimizes damage to persons or property. 
Construction allows to make a gliding 
landing in case the rotor should fail 
Carry high payload 
Large surface area generating adequate lift 
and used for fixation of different objects. 
Robustness 
Fuselage is made to withstand rough 
landings and to protect internal electronics. 
Low maintenance 
Very few moving parts; ailerons, elevator 
and rudder. 
Record video and take pictures of high 
quality 
Possible to mount HD cameras on some 
models. 
Monitor large areas 
The fast flight speed and low power 
consumption. 
Long flight time 
Tail-mounted rotor turns with constant speed 
for most of the time, and lift is created by the 
surface area of the wings, using little power. 
Follow a predetermined route 
autonomously. 
Smartphone or other ground station can be 
used to set GPS waypoints and to specify 
altitude and speed.  
==PAGE:34==
 
34
The Fixed-wing has the following differences that matter: 
 
• It can carry a high payload 
• It is very light and efficient 
• It can fly fast in a given direction 
 
Tail-sitter 
 
 
Key performance parameter 
Realized by 
Fly both like a multirotor and a fixed-wing. Has rotors, and large wing surface area to 
induce lift 
Land and take-off in areas with limited 
space. 
The orientation of the rotors. 
Deliver payload accurately 
Tail-sitter design allows the UAV to fly fast 
from point A to B, and its four rotors allows 
a precise landing. 
Monitor large areas, as well as small points 
of interest. 
The hybrid design allows the UAV to fly fast 
over larger areas, and to hover and focus on a 
point of interest. 
Record video and take pictures of high 
quality 
Possible to mount HD cameras. 
Follow a predetermined route 
autonomously. 
Smartphone or other ground station can be 
used to set GPS waypoints and to specify 
altitude and speed.  
Relatively long flight time 
Once the UAV is in regular flight mode, it 
basically flies like a fixed-wing, which is 
energy efficient and allows for longer flight 
times. 
Safety 
In case of rotor failure, the UAV will be able 
to glide to a safe landing. 
 
The Tail-sitter has the following differences that matter: 
 
• It can fly both as a fixed-wing and a multirotor. 
• It can deliver payloads fast and accurately. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:35==
 
35
Identification of parameters 
Based upon the previously found differences that matter, the following important UAV rating 
parameters have been found: 
 
• Agility 
• Speed 
• Distance 
• Landing/Takeoff capability 
• Payload 
• Safety 
 
Furthermore two more important criteria were found, which are equally influential towards 
choosing the right UAV for the right application. They are the following: 
 
• Cost 
• Weight 
 
These criteria have been chosen, as they are deemed to be the most important characteristics 
and because they consistently appear in the Organ Domain and in the key performance 
parameters. The following provides a brief explanation of each criterion. 
 
Agility 
Agility describes how manoeuvrable a UAV is; how fast it can respond to changes in 
direction. This is a characteristic, which will be useful in tasks requiring fast manoeuvring, 
such as chasing a fleeing suspect in a police case. Grades are given from 1-5. 
 
Speed 
Speed represents the top speed of the UAV. Grades are given from 1-5, with grade 5 denoting 
a high top speed. The top speed is important, when it comes to covering great distances or if 
there is a need to get from point A to B fast – for instance in relation to performing deliveries. 
 
Distance 
Distance describes the farthest distance the UAV can go, limited by the power consumption 
and not counting the range of the controller/radio transmitter. Grades are given from 1-5, with 
5 denoting farthest distance. The distance criterion is very important, as it will pose limits on 
whether a UAV can be used in urban areas only, or if it can go on longer missions away from 
its starting point. Some applications may not need the UAV to return to home base, but it is 
important to factor in that the UAV has to be able to get to its point of interest as well as back 
again. 
 
Landing/Takeoff Capability 
Landing capability describes the flexibility in the landings and takeoffs of the UAV. Grades 
are given from 1-5, with 5 denoting high flexibility in landings and takeoffs, meaning that the 
UAV has minimal requirements as to where it can land/take off. The extent to which a UAV 
can land and takeoff under different conditions, is important if the UAV will have to fill 
multiple functions – having to land in different places with no guarantee of a runway. If the 
task of the UAV will be very focused, i.e. fly from point A to B and back, it may be viable to 
establish landing and takeoff zones (ramps etc.), rendering it unnecessary for the UAV to 
have a high rating within this criterion. 
  
==PAGE:36==
 
36
Payload 
Payload describes the amount of weight the UAV can carry in addition to its own weight. A 
grade of 5 denotes the highest payload. The payloads are here thought of as; the percentage of 
the UAV’s own weight, which it can carry. This is one of the more important aspects of the 
UAVs, as there is an increasing focus on using UAVs for delivery of various types of good, 
meaning a high payload will be favourable. The grade 5 is given for high payload capacity. 
 
Safety 
Safety describes the extent, to which the UAV is safe in case of having to land due to rotor 
failure. A grade of 5 denotes the highest level of safety. Safety is highly important, especially 
in cases of flying close to or over dense populated areas. 
 
Cost 
Cost denotes how competitively the UAV is priced. The grade 5 represents an inexpensive 
price, meaning the relationship between quality and price is high. Cost has been based on the 
current available models in the market. The Tail-sitter is an exception, and has been given a 
low grade of 1, as it is still very much in the testing stage. 
 
Weight 
Weight describes how heavy the UAV is in and of itself. The grade 5 represents an efficient 
design and therefore a low weight.  
 
Grading basis 
The grading has been based on the research and thereby specifications found for each type of 
UAV. The ratings are mainly based on a single UAV for each type. The specifications used 
are from the following UAVS and used as guidelines for each UAV type: 
 
• Helicopter: T-Rex 600E 
• Multirotor: DJI Phantom II 
• Fixed-Wing: 3D Robotics Aero 
• Fixed-Wing/Multirotor: Google Project Wing (In development) 
 
Graphic profiles 
Based on the previously mentioned UAVs, the following profiles have been made for each 
type of UAV. It should be taken into consideration, that these are representatives of each 
UAV type based on the conducted research. It is highly likely that there will be individual 
outlying UAVs, which do not fit these profiles. The aim here is to give a visual overview of 
each UAV’s strengths and weaknesses. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:37==
 
37
Helicopter 
Multirotor 
 
 
 
 
Fixed-Wing 
Tail-Sitter 
Figure 25: Graphic profile models for the four UAV types 
As can be seen on Figure 25, the helicopter UAV displays top grades in agility, speed and 
payload. It is the only UAV type scoring top grades in the above-mentioned criteria, because 
of its ability to make complicated manoeuvres and respond instantly to any input given by the 
pilot. The top speed for the T-Rex 600E helicopter was found to be approx. 120 km/h, which 
was a lot higher than any of the other corresponding UAVs. 
  
However the helicopter falls short when it comes to distance (flight time), some users noted 
6-7 minutes on a stock configuration [11]. A lot can be done through modifications; larger 
batteries, larger main propeller, reducing the RPMs etc., but the helicopter still falls short of 
the multirotor and fixed-wing’s flight time.  
 
It is also significantly more expensive than the above-mentioned UAV types, due to its more 
complicated parts, as well as it being more fragile than a corresponding multirotor or fixed-
wing. A crash or rough landing may lead to having to change a lot of expensive parts. 
 
The multirotor and fixed-wing both come across as good all-around UAVs. The biggest point 
of difference is that the fixed-wing can fly significantly faster, travel much further and carry 
more payload than the multirotor. This however comes at the expense of decreased agility and 
inflexibility with regards to landing and takeoff.  
==PAGE:38==
 
38
The multirotor sacrifices top speed, flight distance and payload capacity for its unrivalled 
landing and takeoff capabilities. It is also safer to land in case of rotor failure, compared to the 
fixed-wing, due to its ability to keep on flying with a faulty rotor. 
 
Both the multirotor and fixed-wing designs are better at handling rough landings and crashes 
than the helicopter. And spare parts are also cheaper. 
 
The Tail-sitter, based on Google’s Project Wing, is the least attractive UAV type of all four at 
the present moment. This is mainly due to it being in the early developmental stages, which 
renders it heavy and incapable of carrying heavy loads. The Project Wing is currently only 
able to lift 15% of its own weight in payload, which is half that of the DJI Phantom II 
multirotor. However it is more likely to be able to travel longer than the multirotor, which is 
also shown in the graphic profile.  
 
The main problem with the tail-sitter is its associated cost. As it is currently in development, 
therefore unavailable to the general public, it is bound to be expensive if at all obtainable.  
The tail-sitter was chosen for this comparison as the simplest representative of the hybrid 
designs, as it is essentially a quadcopter with attached wings, rudder and ailerons. Though it 
does not currently prove to be competitive, it will be included in design considerations as it 
still offers a difference that matters; its ability to fly as both a multirotor and a fixed-wing.  
Strengths, weaknesses and ideal use situations 
This section provides the strengths and weaknesses of each of the UAV types along with the 
types of tasks they are most suited for. The section also draws on my own experiences with 
flying UAVs. 
 
Helicopter 
 
Strengths 
Weaknesses 
Very agile and responsive 
More expensive than corresponding multirotor 
or fixed-wing 
Can fly very fast 
Not very robust 
Will glide to a landing with self-induced 
spin, in case of rotor failure 
The big single rotor can be quite dangerous and 
can cause severe damage to people. 
Can carry heavy payloads 
Standard flight time is short for electric 
helicopter UAV 
Can takeoff/land almost anywhere 
Can be difficult to control if inexperienced 
 
Sensitive to wind 
 
Given its strengths and weaknesses, the helicopter UAV would be best utilised in situations 
where information, for instance about traffic or accidents etc., is required fast. An urban 
environment would also most likely be preferable, due to its low flight time, or at least a well-
defined ground station where one can change batteries quickly and get it up in the air again in 
minimum time. There are many things that can be done to improve flight time, such as 
running lower RPMs, changing to larger rotor blades etc. A different approach would be to 
switch to a fuel-powered helicopter UAV instead, as they generally have longer range. The 
downside is that they are often quite noisy. In that sense, range is not necessarily a problem, 
but it becomes more a question of whether the helicopter’s speed and agility is necessary for 
the application as those are its main assets. Its high payload capacity also gives it the ability to 
==PAGE:39==
 
39
fly with a wide range of equipment, making it able to monitor many things such as fires, 
crops, traffic etc. 
 
Multirotor 
 
Strengths 
Weaknesses 
Can takeoff/land almost anywhere 
Can be very sensitive to wind 
Can be set to fly-by-wire 
May lose connection to transmitter, which may 
result in the multirotor flying away on its own 
Has a good level of agility 
Many designs are limited by radio transmitter 
range 
Is inexpensive and accessible 
It does not have a large payload capacity 
compared to other UAV types 
Can land safely in case of rotor failure, 
due to new algorithm (quad)  
Many designs do not shield off the rotors, 
which can be dangerous and cause harm to 
humans. 
Can continue to fly in case of a rotor 
failure (more than four rotors) 
There is no collision detection system for 
autonomous flight. 
Is easy to repair 
Too much power is used on stability, which 
could instead be used to increase payload. 
Has a decent flight time  
 
Can be fitted with a variety of sensors 
and cameras 
 
 
The multirotor is a very good all-around solution as can be seen from its strengths and 
weaknesses. It has the ability to perform autonomous missions based on pre-programmed 
GPS waypoints, which gives it capabilities within autonomous monitoring of many things; 
crops, fires, police work etc. The pilot can also always disable the fly-by-wire, and fly it 
personally if need be. Most midrange models, such as the DJI Phantom II, have flight times of 
up to 30 minutes, which enables it to perform more lengthy tasks. If need be, changing the 
battery is easy and fast which will allow the multirotor to be up in the air with minimum 
down time. 
The multirotor is ideal for tasks involving filming, taking pictures, monitoring, making 
measurements and, to a lesser extent, delivering payloads from A to B. 
 
Fixed-wing 
 
Strengths 
Weaknesses 
Can be launched fast by hand with a 
throw 
Requires a long runway to land 
Can carry heavy payloads 
Not as agile as other UAV types 
Can fly long distances 
Does not have the ability to hover in place 
Possible to fly-by-wire through use of 
pre-programmed GPS points 
Lacks the ability to make landings and takeoffs 
between point A and B, unless there is a human 
present to re-launch it 
Is robust and light capable of 
withstanding rough landings 
There is no collision detection system for 
autonomous flight. 
Is not very sensitive to wind 
It may be difficult to find a safe spot to land in 
case of rotor failure 
==PAGE:40==
 
40
Can glide to a safe landing in case of 
rotor failure 
 
 
The fixed-wing, like the multirotor, is a very good all-around UAV. However it lacks the 
ability to hover and to take off and land without physical human interaction. These are its 
main weaknesses, which render it incapable of carrying out tasks related to point monitoring, 
and to make pit stops between launch and landing site – unless the proper facilities are 
present.  
For this reason, the fixed-wing is best suited for quantitative monitoring, such as flying past a 
crop field and making many measurements over the entire field. It is the one UAV of the four 
best suited to carry relatively heavy payloads for long distances, making it ideal for various 
delivery services assuming that the landing problem is taken care of. It is suited for 
photography, but not so much of one particular object as is the case with the multirotor. Its 
resistance to the wind also renders it better at monitoring in a variety of weather conditions. 
There are also many extraordinary uses, such as providing remote places with Internet 
connections. There are many uses, and fixed-wings come in many shapes and sizes, being one 
of the most versatile UAV types. 
The multirotor and fixed-wing generally share many capabilities, but have different 
specializations as is apparent from the peaks in their graphic profiles in the previous section. 
 
Tail-sitter 
 
Strengths 
Weaknesses 
Increased agility due to multirotor 
capabilities 
Is quite heavy 
Can takeoff/land almost anywhere 
Has low payload capacity 
Can fly relatively long distances  
(<Fixed-wing) 
Cost is potentially very high 
Possible to fly-by-wire through use of 
pre-programmed GPS points 
Safety is also mediocre due to the increase in 
weight 
Is not very sensitive to wind 
Current stage of development 
 
The main strength of the tail-sitter is ability to switch between flying like a fixed-wing and a 
multirotor. This yields new possibilities in applications. For instance it will be possible, with a 
tail-sitter, to send and receive payloads regardless of location and landing facilities and the 
number of landings/takeoffs is only really limited by the capacity of the battery. It does 
however take longer to land/take off than it does with a corresponding multirotor or fixed-
wing. The reason for this is that there is a transition time between changing between modes of 
flying, and this currently takes upwards of 10-15 seconds which is a lot comparing to the 
instant takeoff/landing capabilities of the other UAV types.  
The tail-sitter will be able to take on the same tasks as a fixed-wing and multirotor, but with a 
larger capacity for flexibility in distance and landing/takeoff zones. 
2.1.5 Potential and limitations of UAV technologies 
This section revolves around identifying the potential and limitations of UAV technology, 
based on the previous exploration and analysis of the UAV technology, and its current uses 
today. This is done through an analysis of functions, which takes on a dual-perspective by 
looking at what the UAV technology can do and what one can do using the UAV technology. 
The former relates to the functional abilities of the UAV technology; what the technology is 
capable of in and of itself, the latter looks at the possibilities within given contexts. 
==PAGE:41==
 
41
Furthermore this section will look at the potential limitations of the current technology as 
well.  
 
It should be noted, that this section does not discern between types of UAVs, nor does it look 
at the relationship between price and functionality. The aim of this section is to simply state 
all possibilities as well as limitations. 
 
What the UAV technology can do: 
• Carry payloads by air from point A to B 
• Provide an “eye in the sky” through integrated or attached cameras 
• Can be operated directly or be programmed to fly-by-wire after GPS points 
• Can follow an operator using the signal from transmitter/smartphone 
• Remain stationary in air by hovering 
• Can fly back to starting point automatically 
• Can be controlled remotely with a transmitter/smartphone 
 
What can be done with the UAV technology: 
• Areas large and small can be monitored 
• Can be used to localize and follow persons or objects 
• Pictures and video can be taken from the sky 
• Delivery of relatively light items 
• A variety of measuring equipment can be attached to fulfil various tasks 
• Can be equipped to handle emergency situations with short response time 
• Can handle cables and wires and stretch them out between points 
• They can be used recreationally for competitive racing 
 
Potential limitations: 
• Can have low flight time 
• Can reach limited heights 
• Can pose a risk to persons during rotor failures 
• Carrying capacity is limited 
• Carrying payloads drastically decreases flight times 
• Spinning rotors can cause harm 
• Is susceptible to adverse weather conditions 
 
Having identified the capabilities and limitations of the UAV technology in a general manner, 
it is now time to initiate the exploration of context and thereby the identification of relevant 
use situations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:42==
 
42
3 Research and analysis of one chosen use situation 
The aim of this section is to arrive at one single use situation, for which concept synthesis will 
be initialized. In order to do this, a brainstorm will initially be used to list all of the perceived 
use situations, in which the UAV technology may be applicable.  
 
Hereafter, the identified situations will be rated with respect to four rating criteria in order to 
arrive at the top two use situations, which will be explored in much greater detail; history and 
development, recent solutions, problems, challenges, and stakeholders will be researched and 
discussed.  
 
The intention is then to make approximately five to ten ideas incorporating the UAV 
technology for each of the situations. These ideas will then be graded based on rating criteria, 
identified later in the thesis, and a weighted average score will be calculated for each of the 
use situations. The use situation with the highest average weighted score will hereafter be 
chosen as the basis for the goal formulation and concept synthesis, as outlined in Figure 3. 
 
It is important to note that the thesis is now shifting focus to two different feed chains within 
the exploration model; problem formulation and need interpretation, see Figure 26. 
 
 
Figure 26: Moving on to the "need interpretation" feed chain of the C*-model 
The need interpretation will materialize itself within the stakeholder diagrams in each use 
situation. Similarly the problem formulation will be addressed when identifying the problems 
within each use situation. 
3.1 Use situations brainstorm 
This section comprises the brainstorming of general use situations and the rating thereof. Four 
criteria have been chosen in order to rate the use situations and to arrive at the top two, which 
will be explored in detail. 
 
The rating criteria are as follows, in order of priority: 
 
Urgency 
This criterion describes how urgent the problems within the use situation are likely to be. 
Therefore First aid is for instance given a high grade here. Urgency is also attributed the 
==PAGE:43==
 
43
highest priority as it plays an important role in identifying use situations with relevant 
problematic scenarios. 
 
Interest 
This criterion incorporates my own level of interest in the given use situation. It comes 
second in the order of priority, as I believe it to be of great importance to both the quality of 
the theses as well the quality of the end concept.  
 
Adaptability  
Adaptability describes how easily the UAV technology can be adapted to accommodate the 
use situation. A high score is given in this category if a standard UAV can be adapted to fit 
the use situation, for instance through the fitting of measuring equipment. If there is a need 
for a very specialized or custom-made UAV then the score will be low, as it will take a 
significantly bigger effort. 
 
Complexity 
The last criterion describes how technically complex a UAV solution will be in the given 
situation; how many extra parts (examples: moveable, electrical and optical) it will have to 
incorporate to suit the use situation. A UAV with an incorporated camera and microphone 
will score a low complexity, whereas a UAV fitted with solar panels and laser communication 
technology will score a high complexity. 
 
Figure 27 shows 14 identified use situations and their rating with respect to the four proposed 
criteria. It also shows the selection of three high-scoring use situations. 
 
 
Urgency 
!= High  
!= Mid 
!= Low 
Interest 
!= High  
!= Mid 
!= Low 
Adaptability 
!= High  
!= Mid 
!= Low 
Complexity 
!= Low  
!= Mid 
!= High 
First aid ✔ 
! 
! 
! 
! 
Police work 
! 
! 
! 
! 
Drowning 
! 
! 
! 
! 
Traffic accidents 
! 
! 
! 
! 
Poaching ✔ 
! 
! 
! 
! 
Firefighting 
! 
! 
! 
! 
Communication 
services 
! 
! 
! 
! 
Monitoring, 
inspection and 
surveillance 
! 
! 
! 
! 
Early warning 
and disaster 
systems 
! 
! 
! 
! 
Avalanche rescue 
! 
! 
! 
! 
Breaking news  
! 
! 
! 
! 
Delivery 
! 
! 
! 
! 
Personal 
transportation 
! 
! 
! 
! 
Agriculture 
! 
! 
! 
! 
Figure 27: Rating of 14 identified use situations and subsequent selection of two use situations 
==PAGE:44==
 
44
The chosen use situations are first aid and poaching 
3.2 Problem investigation 
In order to arrive at one single chosen use situation, this section will be concerned with 
exploring the contexts of the two chosen use situations.  
 
Each use situation will be investigated with respect to: 
 
• History and development 
• Recent solutions 
• Problems 
• Challenges 
• Stakeholders 
 
History/development will give a brief overview of the recent history of the use situations and 
will point out any important strides made within them. 
 
Recent solutions will describe which solutions are used and how they are used today. 
 
In problems, the potential problems are described and an effort will be made to understand the 
consequences of them. 
 
The challenges are also identified, which are one of the most important aspects, as they will 
directly influence the idea generation process. 
 
The Stakeholders section will look at the most important and immediate stakeholders as well 
as their potential discourses and needs, in order to find potential underlying problems, which 
may be addressed in the idea generation loop. 
3.2.1 First aid – Coronary heart disease 
In order to further define this use situation, it is necessary to investigate the main causes of 
death and to further screen them for the causes, which may be remedied by first aid. A 
decision has been made to limit this investigation to Denmark, as data is readily available and 
that the channels to obtain it are already known. 
History and development 
The top three causes of death in Denmark, which may be prevented by CPR or any other type 
of first aid, are shown in Table 1: 
 
Ranking 
Cause of death 
1 
Coronary heart disease 
4 
Stroke 
10 
Diabetes Mellitus 
Table 1: Top three causes of death, which may be improved by first aid 
The ranking is based on the top 50 causes of death in Denmark [12]. Coronary heart disease 
(CHD) is the top cause of death in Denmark. And it is seen that CHD, which leads to heart 
attacks, and strokes are ranked significantly higher than diabetes. It should be mentioned here 
that complications from diabetes can lead to both heart attacks and strokes – 75% of deaths 
related to diabetes are due to coronary heart disease [13]. All of the above can eventually lead 
to cardiac arrest, which is when the heart stops beating.  
==PAGE:45==
 
45
Based on the information in Table 1, a decision has been made to focus solely on CHD in this 
section. Furthermore an argument can be made that all three conditions in Table 1 may 
eventually lead to cardiac arrest – which is where the UAV technology has a big potential in 
reducing response times. For these reasons only CHD will be investigated in depth. 
 
The CHD disease 
CHD is a disease where a waxy substance, plaque, builds up in the coronary arteries. The 
plaque is thus accumulated over many years and may eventually cause a heart attack. With 
time, the plaque may either rupture or harden. Ruptured plaque can cause blood clots, which 
may entirely shut off the flow of blood through the coronary arteries. Hardened plaque can 
narrow the inside of the coronary arteries and thereby restrict the blood flow.  
 
A restricted or blocked blood flow often results in a heart attack. Furthermore, having CHD 
over long periods of time can cause heart failure, which means that the heart will not be able 
to pump enough blood around to suit the needs of the human body. Figure 28 shows how a 
normal coronary artery looks as opposed to a coronary artery with plaque build-up. 
 
 
Figure 28: How CHD leads to plaque build-up in coronary arteries (image credit: NIH) 
As mentioned before, CHD is the top cause of death in Denmark because it leads to heart 
attacks if proper preventative action is not taken. The following Figure 29 shows incidences 
of heart attacks and Figure 30 shows incidences of death following heart attacks for both men 
and women per 100.000. 
Figure 29: Incidences of heart attacks per 100.000 related to CHD (Hjerteforeningen 2014) 
==PAGE:46==
 
46
Figure 30: Deaths per 100.000 related to CHD (Hjerteforeningen 2014) 
Looking at Figure 29 and Figure 30, it seen that there has been quite a decrease in heart 
attacks from 2002 to 2011. This is most likely attributed to a generally increased global 
awareness regarding the importance of healthier foods and physical exercise, as well as a 
decrease in daily smokers. In Denmark, daily smokers decreased to 17% in 2013 from 26% in 
2005, occasional smoking has increased though from 2% to 6% in the same time span. 
 
From Figure 29 and Figure 30 it is seen that the incidences of heart attacks are generally 
much higher than the incidences of death following heart attacks. This can mostly be 
accredited to the victim receiving the proper medical attention within the narrow time frame 
before death, as a result of cardiac arrest, occurs.  
 
For men in 2011, about 18% of all heart attacks lead to deaths, for women it is closer to 20%. 
In 2002, 28% of men who had heart attacks died as a result, for women the number was close 
to 35%.  
However the number of women falling victim to heart attacks is consistently much lower than 
men. This is because the hormone oestrogen is more prevalent in women, and that it has a 
positive effect on reducing the risk of getting CHD [14]. 
 
In general it can said that the tendency is decreasing, which is very positive. But in order to 
ensure a further decrease in deaths, it is important to improve the response times and make 
better first aid solutions. However, first it is important to briefly go through the history of 
heart attack treatment. 
 
Heart attack treatment 
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) is a simple but efficient medical technique, which 
allows practically anyone to sustain life by providing oxygenated blood to the heart and brain 
of the victim in the first critical minutes of cardiac arrest. This can keep the victim alive until 
the paramedics arrive to take over. 
 
CPR is performed by: 1) lifting the victim’s head to clear the airway, 2) pinching the nose of 
the victim and giving two breaths, watching for the chest rising with each breath and 3) 
performing 15 chest compression in case of no pulse. Steps 2) and 3) are repeated until there 
is a pulse or paramedics arrive. 
 
==PAGE:47==
 
47
CPR was officially developed in 1960 and was only intended for physicians initially. It would 
take 12 years till Leonard Cobb held the world’s first mass citizen training in CPR. 
 
Defibrillators are devices, which can revive a cardiac arrest victim, by applying electrical 
impulses to his/her chest. 
 
Bernard Lown introduced the first direct current defibrillator in 1960, seen in Figure 31. 
 
 
Figure 31: Bernard Lown using defibrillator on a patient 
The signal type used in this defibrillator, appropriately named the Lown waveform, would 
continue to be used in defibrillators till the 1980s, where a transition led to the use of biphasic 
defibrillation. This meant that two waveforms were emitted by the defibrillator instead of 
only one.  
 
Current defibrillators have two electrodes, which should be placed on designated areas of the 
victim’s chest. The defibrillator then monitors the heart rhythm automatically and applies a 
shock when a shockable rhythm is detected.  
Recent solutions 
Today CPR and defibrillators are used extensively in treating cardiac arrest victims.  
 
CPR 
Usually CPR is performed immediately after the cardiac arrest is discovered, and the 
bystander performing it has to continue to perform CPR until the arrival of paramedics or a 
defibrillator. 
 
AED 
A significant governmental effort has been made to place defibrillators at most public spaces 
such as train stations, offices and universities. These defibrillators are very much automatic in 
their function, and the only human input needed is to attach the electrodes to the chest of the 
victim properly and to press the shock button when prompted by the defibrillator to do so – 
these are called Automated External Defibrillators (AEDs). The AED will, as previously 
mentioned, automatically scan for a shockable rhythm. In case a shockable rhythm is not 
detected, the best plan of action is to continue performing CPR on the victim till the 
paramedics arrive. 
==PAGE:48==
 
48
Smartphone App 
A smartphone app, Hjertestarter, has been made by Trygfonden. This app keeps track of all 
registered defibrillators in Denmark, and can guide the user of the app to the nearest one. 
 
UAV 
A defibrillator UAV prototype has in fact already been made by Delft University in 
Netherlands see Figure 32.  
 
 
Figure 32: Delft University defibrillator drone (image credit: EPA) 
It is a multirotor design with six rotors, capable of reaching speeds up to 60 mph. According 
to The Daily Mail [15], the ambulance drone can get a defibrillator to a cardiac arrest victim 
within a 12 square kilometre zone within a minute, increasing the chance of survival from 8% 
to 80%.  
As great as the defibrillator drone seems, there are still aspects of the drone that need to be 
addressed. These aspects include, but are not limited to, implementation of collision 
detection, safety features and proper infrastructure for deployment (charging station etc.). 
Problems 
The problem, within this use situation, is that response time has a profound effect on a 
victim’s survival rate. A victim’s chances of surviving cardiac arrest diminishes by 7-10% 
every minute he/she is left untreated. And after about six minutes, parts of the brain start to 
die as well. Ten minutes almost certainly means the victim will die. 
 
In 2015, 90% of ambulances had response times within 13 minutes in the Copenhagen capital 
area for high priority victims [16]. This implies that active bystanders are a necessity in 
saving victim lives. 
 
Based on this information, the problem becomes multifaceted. An effective solution therefore 
cannot be singularly technical, but depends highly on conveying correct information and 
encouraging citizens to take action when faced with a cardiac arrest victim.  
Challenges 
Based on the problem outlined in the previous section, the challenges become apparent. The 
challenges in saving heart attack victim consist of three parts: 
 
• The response time of medical equipment or paramedics must be reduced. 
• Bystanders have to overcome their fear/shock/doubt and apply CPR. 
• Heart attack/cardiac arrest victims must be detected sooner. 
==PAGE:49==
 
49
Finding a solution, which addresses these three challenges simultaneously, will result in a 
significant increase in the chance of survival for victims. 
 
Having identified the challenges, it is now imperative to look at the actors involved in such an 
emergency situation in order to further nuance the challenges. 
Stakeholders 
This section aims to identify the most important stakeholders in a heart attack/cardiac arrest 
situation, their potential discourses and their needs. Finding the potential discourses and needs 
will lead to a holistic view of the problem, and thereby ensure that the proposed ideas will 
meet the various stakeholders’ needs to the greatest extent possible. 
Table 2 shows stakeholders, potential discourses and needs. 
 
Stakeholders 
Potential discourses 
Needs 
Victim 
• Receive help from the 
“Active bystander 
• Receive professional help 
from the paramedics 
• Someone to perform CPR 
• Defibrillator 
• Space 
Active bystander(s) 
• Call 118 
• Apply CPR until arrival of 
defibrillator or paramedics 
• Hurry to find a defibrillator 
if victim is already 
receiving CPR from 
another bystander. 
• Information on 
performing CPR 
• Endurance and arm 
strength 
• Locate the nearest 
defibrillator 
Witnesses 
• Crowd the victim or clear 
the space around victim 
• Help by guiding 
paramedics to the location 
of the victim 
• To curb their curiosity 
and put the needs of the 
victim before their own 
Paramedics/ambulance 
• Get to the victim ASAP 
• Be equipped with 
defibrillator and proper 
medicine 
• Gather knowledge on the 
location of the victim 
• Avoid heavy traffic 
• Pinpoint location of the 
victim 
• Properly functioning 
equipment 
 
Police 
• Help to clear the road with 
sirens and car/motorcycle 
• May be too busy to assist 
the ambulance 
• To clear a way through 
traffic 
Road users 
• Clear the road once the 
siren is seen/heard 
• May be slow or unwilling 
to clear the road 
• Get out of the way of the 
ambulance 
• Be attentive once the 
siren is seen/heard to 
determine best determine 
how to clear the road 
• Keep calm and act in a 
deliberate manner 
Table 2: Stakeholders, potential discourses and needs for heart attacks 
==PAGE:50==
 
50
This concludes the preliminary investigation into the chosen “first aid” use situation. Based 
on these findings, ideas will be generated and rated for this use situation as well as poaching 
to determine which use situation will be chosen for concept synthesis. Therefore the focus is 
now shifted to the second use situation: poaching. 
3.2.2 Poaching 
In looking at poaching, it is important to understand what poaching actually is. According to 
BBC it is defined as ”…hunting without legal permission from whoever controls the land.” 
[17] 
 
Interestingly hunting high profile animals, such as lions, is not prohibited in Africa for 
instance. The hunting is officially regulated by the government, which entails that hunters 
have to obtain permission to kill certain animals.  
However, ideal conditions for poaching are present in many African countries due to 
corruption, disorder and weak upholding of the law. In these countries weapons are readily 
available and poverty is prevalent, which means that locals, people responsible for wildlife, 
the police and the military are effortlessly bribed, threatened or even recruited. 
 
Additionally, the poachers themselves are becoming more and more sophisticated in their 
methods and the equipment that they use. Helicopters, night-vision goggles, tranquilizers and 
weapons with silencers allow to the poachers to hunt the animals at night, mostly avoiding 
law enforcement. 
 
Why is poaching so prevalent? Mainly it is because of a large misinformed market in Asia, 
where for instance rhino horns are wrongly believed to cure hangovers, impotence, fevers and 
even cancer. Figure 33 provides information on how lucrative the market actually is; rhino 
horn is sold at a price higher than gold. 
 
 
Figure 33: Reasons why there is a market for Rhino horns (image credit: AWF) 
In order to understand how this situation has reached such extreme heights, it is important to 
take a look at the development and history of poaching. 
 
It should be noted that poaching is not just a problem in Africa. There are problems in the 
Americas and also Asia, but the poachers use similar techniques and equipment regardless of 
location. 
History and development 
It should be observed that a conscious choice has been made to use the poaching of elephants 
in Africa for explaining the history in this use situation. The reason for this is that elephant 
==PAGE:51==
 
51
poaching was and continues to be one of the most prominent and severe cases of poaching 
known to date. 
Poaching has a long history dating back to the 1700s in Europe, where hunting was only 
reserved for the nobility.  
 
It was first in the 1880s that peasants were allowed to hunt small game on their own land, 
such as rabbits, in order to survive. 
 
In 1918 the Migratory Bird Treaty Act was established among the US, Great Britain, Mexico, 
Russia and Japan, with the aim of protecting migrating bird from being hunted, exported or 
sold [18]. 
 
In 1963 the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and 
Flora, CITES, was drafted and the final text agreed upon in 1973 by representatives of 80 
countries. The convention officially entered into force in 1975, with the aim being to ensure 
the sustainability of the animal trade, and protection of species, in order to safeguard such 
resources for the future generations [19]. 
 
In 1989 a global ban on ivory was implemented by CITES, in order to reduce poaching and 
stop the rapidly decreasing numbers of elephant populations. This resulted in President Daniel 
arap Moi setting fire to 12 tons of elephant tusks in a symbolic gesture to persuade the world 
to stop the ivory trade [20]. 
This worked to a great extent and almost entirely shut down the entire ivory market mainly 
located in Europe and the US.  
 
Figure 34 shows the trend in illicit ivory trading, and it can be seen that the trading once again 
started to rise steeply in 1995: 
 
 
Figure 34: Trend in illicit ivory trade (image credit: TRAFFIC) 
Getting closer to today, attempts have been made at depressing the price of ivory by allowing 
legal one-time ivory trades. In 1999 a one-off sale of stockpiled ivory from Zimbabwe, 
Botswana and Namibia went to Japan as a single buyer. After this sale, the illicit ivory market 
did start to decrease as seen on Figure 34. 
==PAGE:52==
 
52
In 2008, China and Japan bought 108 tonnes of ivory from Botswana, South Africa, Namibia 
and Zimbabwe in yet another one-off sale. But this sadly seems to have had the opposite 
effect, see Figure 34, as the price of ivory has greatly increased in China [21]. It is believed 
that this is due to deliberate price-fixing and a sudden surge in the number of Chinese who are 
able to buy luxury goods [22]. 
 
The problem of poaching therefore persists today and affects a lot of species, not just 
elephants. The following figure shows the state of poaching in Africa: 
 
 
Figure 35: The state of poached species in Africa (image credit: AWF) 
As the problem has now been properly outlined, it is relevant to look at which measures are 
being taken to protect the endangered animals. 
Recent solutions 
This section provides an overview over the recent solutions in fighting illicit poaching. 
 
Sniffer dogs 
Dogs are trained to detect illegal animal products such as ivory and rhino horns. Sometimes 
they are also used in tracking down and apprehending poachers. 
 
Community projects 
The African Wildlife Foundation (AWF), as an example, works directly with the communities 
to educate the people about poaching problems and implications. Furthermore AWF is trying 
to avoid deforestation by providing renewable and sustainable solutions to the communities 
living close to the endangered species. Such solutions include the installing of rainwater 
tanks, so that locals will not go into the forests for water and thereby cause deforestation. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:53==
 
53
Tracking movement of species 
GPS and radio collars are used on various species such as elephants and lions, to see their 
movement and thereby determine which land areas must be conserved as natural habitats.  
 
Rangers 
Rangers are the strongest line of defence against poachers. They are subjected to many 
dangers and, at times, limiting legislation. The dangers involve the wild animals themselves, 
which the rangers are trying to protect, dehydration, irritating insects and, last but not least, 
the poachers.  
 
 
Figure 36: Rangers on patrol (Image credit: Marco Longari, AFP/GETTY) 
The rules of engagement are so that the rangers are only allowed to fire their weapons in 
defence. This often results in the poachers having the advantage in a firefight, as they flee into 
the bushes and thus either get away or fire at the rangers while in hiding. Additionally, the 
poachers are often heavily armed. 
 
Should it happen that a ranger shoots and kills a poacher, even in self-defence, the following 
police investigation puts pressure on the ranger and his family. So the rangers have to make 
split-second decisions on whether they will engage sighted poachers or not, always bearing in 
mind the consequences [23]. 
 
Rangers are also sometimes the main targets of poachers, with two rangers getting killed 
every week worldwide. 
 
 
UAVs 
UAVs are currently being used in some national parks in South Africa and in Nepal. In Nepal, 
this has resulted in Rhino poaching becoming almost non-existent. Nepali forest officers can 
sentence caught poachers with up to 15 years of prison, this in combination with the increased 
risk of getting caught due to the patrolling drones are most likely the reasons for the decline in 
Rhino poaching. 
 
In Nepal, they are using an inexpensive fixed-wing design, which weighs 650g in total - 
including the battery and a GoPro 3 Camera – to detect poachers. The drone is identical to the 
sketch in Figure 23. 
 
==PAGE:54==
 
54
In South Africa, Kruger National Park a fixed-wing UAV, with 40 kg payload capacity and 
10-hour range, is being used at night. It has the ability to spot poachers in a 10-mile radius, 
and will subsequently alert the rangers to their presence. Below is sketch of the type of UAV 
used: 
 
Figure 37: Sketch of fixed-wing UAV being used in Kruger National Park, South Africa 
UAVs are currently being used mainly to monitor activity in the national parks; no direct 
engagement takes place between the UAV and the poachers. 
 
Software 
A free-to-use software, SMART, is being used in many places around there world where 
poaching is a problem. It is a very simple program that allows users to log data quickly and 
efficiently through the use of small handheld GPS devices. Data is mostly recorded as 
sightings of either animals and poachers, along with various time and weather information.  
 
 
Figure 38: Ranger using GPS device to log data in SMART (Image credit: SMART) 
The idea is to accumulate knowledge in order to better be able to predict, where the limited 
resources, e.g. rangers, vehicles and drones, are best put to efficient use. 
 
Google Glass 
It should also be noted that Google Glass has been used experimentally in Nepal, for 
documenting and reporting on the state of various species [24]. Using the Google Glass, 
allows one to take pictures by voice command as well as converting speech into text directly, 
which saves a significant amount of time. Previously reporting was done, by first writing 
notes on a piece of paper and then writing it up on the computer. See Figure 39 for a sketch of 
the Google Glass: 
 
==PAGE:55==
 
55
 
Figure 39: Sketch of Google Glass 
Having described the existing solutions, a look is now taken at the actual problems within this 
use situation. 
Problems 
Illicit poaching is a multifaceted problem due to it involving a large network of actors. In this 
section, an attempt has been made to identify and briefly explain the main problems with 
poaching. 
 
• Poaching has the potential to completely eradicate a number of animal species, 
robbing the future generations the privilege of witnessing them in their natural 
habitats. 
 
• Corruption is a massive problem, and will bypass any official legislation until it is 
actively dealt with. 
 
• There are not enough rangers and their equipment is often inferior to that of the 
poachers, making them easy targets. 
 
• It is difficult to track both animals and poachers, in order to decide whether the 
situation needs a vehicle dispatch. 
 
• The rules of engagement for the rangers work in favour of the poachers. 
 
• The poachers are using increasingly sophisticated weaponry and equipment. 
 
• The demand for illegal animal products in Asia can be said to be the biggest problem 
of poaching. If the demand were eliminated, there would be no incentive for poachers 
to continue poaching. 
 
There are of course some of these problems, which the UAV technology cannot address. 
However, seeing as this is the exploration of context, an effort has been made to present a 
brief holistic overview of the problems.  
Challenges 
Having identified the problems in the previous section, the challenges become apparent. 
Interestingly, UAVs can actually make a great impact to tip the scale in favour of the rangers 
and animals. However, it should be noted that in order to fully eliminate poaching it is 
necessary to address the root of the entire problem; the demand. And this is a matter of 
governmental initiative, legislation and enforcement.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:56==
 
56
The challenges in poaching are as follows: 
 
• The demand for illegal animal products must be eliminated 
• Corruption has to be battled actively and deliberately 
• The rangers need better equipment to fight the poachers 
• Animals and poachers have to be tracked in relation to each other, this requires new 
technology and improvement of communication 
• The legislation concerning the rangers and their rules of engagement need a revision 
• Methods must be found to disable the equipment of the poachers, rather than to resort 
to on-sight firefights 
Stakeholders 
A stakeholder diagram is made for the poaching use situation, to gain a deeper understanding 
of the involved actors and their actions and needs. 
 
Stakeholders 
Potential discourses 
Needs 
Animals 
• Act as prey for poachers 
• Attack either rangers or 
poachers 
• Move great distances for 
better living conditions 
• Be found at waterholes 
• Drink water 
• Become extinct 
• To be protected 
• Great areas of sustainable 
habitats where they can 
roam 
• Water 
Rangers on foot 
• Protect animals 
• Track down animals, 
either when hurt or for 
information gathering 
• Can engage a firefight 
with poachers, by first 
challenging them by 
law. 
• Can get attacked by 
animals or poachers 
• Become dehydrated 
• Be killed 
• Better equipment for 
countering poachers 
• Supplies and water 
• Knowledge on where their 
resources are best put to 
use 
• Less strict rules for the 
rangers, and harsher 
punishments for poachers 
• More resources, to protect 
animals, in form of rangers 
and equipment. 
• Backup 
 
Rangers in vehicle 
dispatch units 
• Can assist rangers on 
foot 
• Take a long time to get 
to the specified location 
• Patrol the borders of 
national parks 
• Use a lot of fuel on 
patrols 
• Save resources, such as 
fuel. 
• A better solution for 
controlling borders, as it 
can take a very long time 
and yield nothing. 
• Knowledge on firefight 
situation, to determine how 
to best assist rangers on 
foot. 
 
==PAGE:57==
 
57
Poachers 
• Scout during daytime, 
and come back to poach 
in night-time 
• Can assault rangers 
• They can flee 
• Use helicopters and 
high-tech weapons to 
poach from the sky 
• Can get attacked by 
animals, and by rangers 
after being challenged 
• Kill animals for valuable 
parts 
• To get valuable animal 
parts 
• Avoid rangers 
• Avoid injury inflicted by 
animals 
Poaching kingpins 
• Easily replace captured 
or killed poachers 
• Smuggle and trade 
valuable animal parts 
• Bribe or threaten the 
right Wildlife officials, 
through their henchmen 
• Avoid capture by 
authorities 
• Avoid any direct 
involvement with the 
animal products. 
Locals living close or in 
natural habitats 
• May take water from 
same area as animals 
• Can kill animals in 
retaliation, for animals 
killing livestock 
• Can indirectly cause 
deforestation 
• Safe place to live 
• Water 
• To protect livestock 
 
Buyers 
• Buy the illegally 
imported animal 
products 
• Distribution to selling 
vendors 
• Supply the demand 
• Keep the price high by 
fixing the prices to make 
more money  
Table 3: Stakeholders, potential discourses and needs for Poaching 
This concludes the investigation into the poaching use situation. From here the idea loop will 
be initiated, where ideas will be generated for both of the investigated use situations. 
3.3 Ideation process 
In order to decide on one use situation for subsequent concept synthesis, an idea brainstorm 
session will be utilized in this section, which should result in five to ten ideas for each use 
situation. These ideas are presented in the idea catalogue, with accompanying descriptions, 
sketches and main strengths and weaknesses. Please see the idea catalogue for details. 
 
This part of the thesis deals with the first of the four elements, in transforming ideas to 
concepts (Andreasen et al. 2015), which is create. The “create” element focuses on capturing 
ideas and making them tangible. This has been the overall aim of the ideas generated within 
the idea catalogue.  
 
Furthermore, the ideas have been rated with respect to four rating criteria: Attractiveness, 
Economics, Adaptability and Amount of interest. These four criteria are explained within the 
==PAGE:58==
 
58
idea catalogue, and are used to rate each idea. Finally a weighted average score is calculated 
for each use situation. These are seen in Table 4: 
 
Use situation 
Weighted average score 
Heart attack 
3.8 
Poaching 
3.825 
Table 4: Weighted average scores of the two use situations 
As can be seen, Poaching received the highest weighted average score. However the 
difference in score between the two situations is diminishingly small. Therefore a choice has 
been made to look at the “Amount of interest” grades in each use situation, these can be seen 
collectively on the last page of idea catalogue. As is seen, poaching has generally higher 
grades in “amount of interest” than heart attacks. Poaching is therefore chosen as the use 
situation for concept synthesis. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:59==
 
59
4 Goal formulation 
This section is concerned with defining the design goals, which the expected ideal solution 
must fulfil. This is done through the identification of paradoxes, based on the poaching 
stakeholder diagram in the previous section. These paradoxes will then be reviewed, and the 
ones that are in need of immediate remedy will be selected, and thereafter used in defining the 
design goals. 
 
It should be noted that a shift is now taken towards the perception of ideals feed chain, as the 
characteristics of the ideal solution will be identified, see Figure 40. 
 
 
Figure 40: Moving on to the "perception of ideals" feed chain 
4.1 Paradoxes 
The paradoxes are defined in this section, based on the poaching stakeholder diagram seen in 
Table 3. 
 
The identified paradoxes are: 
 
• The animals need to be protected, but this may not be possible because the rangers 
need more resources to protect them. 
 
• The rangers may try to avoid being harmed in protecting the animals, but the animals 
may still attack the rangers. 
 
• The rangers can try to track down the animals, when hurt or for information gathering, 
but the animals can make this difficult by moving great distances for better living 
conditions. 
 
• The rangers may not be able to protect the animals, due to being assaulted by 
poachers. 
 
• The rangers may be killed in engaging a firefight with the poachers, because the 
poachers may use helicopters and other high-tech equipment and that the rangers must 
challenge the poachers first. 
 
==PAGE:60==
 
60
• Rangers can try to track down animals, for information gathering or for finding an 
injured animal, but may become dehydrated and die. 
 
• Rangers on foot may need backup, but the rangers in the vehicle dispatch teams may 
take a long time to get to the specified location. 
 
• The rangers may try to protect the animals, but his can become increasingly difficult 
during night-time because the poachers operate mostly at night. 
 
• The rangers in vehicle dispatch units may patrol the borders of the national park, but 
this can lead to wasted resources if they do not find anything. 
 
• The rangers on foot may need assistance from the vehicle dispatch team, but their 
assistance may not be optimal because the rangers in the vehicle need knowledge on 
the situation to determine how to best assist the rangers on foot. 
 
It should be noted that these are the more immediate paradoxes, which only involve the 
rangers, poachers and animals. The reason for only using these paradoxes is that, these are the 
ones UAV technology can help to remedy. Paradoxes involving corruption, the poaching 
crime syndicate and government officials are not something any UAV solution can fix, and is 
a matter of legislation and the proper enforcement of it. 
4.2 Goal formulation 
Using the paradoxes identified in the previous section, we can identify the characteristics 
needed for a potential UAV solution. 
 
UAV solutions should: 
 
• Be inexpensive, as the rangers are already in need of extra resources 
• Tell the rangers where the animals are located, so that they can avoid potential harm 
• Provide the rangers with an overview of animal movement, so that they can determine 
which team is closer to the animals in need of assistance or subject to information 
gathering. 
• Help in combatting the poachers 
• Aid in disabling the high-tech equipment of the poachers 
• Provide the rangers with water in emergencies 
• Reduce the time taken for getting assistance to the rangers on foot 
• Provide the rangers with the ability to find poachers in night-time 
• Make the use of resources more efficient 
• Provide the rangers with an overview of the situation before the dispatch of vehicle 
units. 
 
The identified characteristics are then compressed into three distinct design goals, which aim 
to incorporate most, if not all, of the identified characteristics: 
 
• Create a concept, which can track animals, identify poachers and provide an overview 
of potentially dangerous situations. 
 
==PAGE:61==
 
61
• Create a concept, which can disable the high-tech equipment of the poachers and/or 
relay information about their location. 
 
• Create a concept, which can aid the rangers in directly combatting poachers. 
 
It is quite obvious that it will be unrealistic to make one UAV solution, which can address all 
three of the design goals. Trying to do so would most likely result in a UAV concept, which 
would become over-encumbered with the weight of all the equipment and thereby have a very 
short flight time. This challenge is addressed in the following section, which also marks the 
beginning of concept synthesis. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:62==
 
62
5 Concept synthesis 
This section marks the beginning of concept synthesis, and starts by addressing the problem 
arrived at in the previous section. 
 
In order to address each of the three design goals, a decision has been made to make a 
separate concept for each design goal. This approach has been deemed to be the most 
effective in synthesizing realistic and viable concepts. It also allows the effective use of the 
ideas generated in the idea catalogue in combination with morphology, in order to arrive at 
solid foundations for each of the three concepts. 
 
The thesis now moves towards the concept synthesis arrow in the C*-model, as is seen on 
Figure 41: 
 
Figure 41: Initiating concept synthesis as seen on the C*-model 
The aim of this section is to arrive at one final concept, which will be used in the next section 
for detailing and verification. 
 
It is important to note that the remaining three transformation elements, combine, visualise 
and complete, will be addressed in this section. “Combine” is utilised in the morphology 
section, as it solely deals with combining the ideas generated in the idea catalogue. 
“Visualise” is used within the concept catalogue and is materialised in the elaborate 
description of the concepts, the realistic sketches, the grades given and their justifications. 
The final element “complete” is seen in finding the final concept, but it will also be addressed 
in the next section: detailing and verification. 
 
Five of the seven universal virtues (Olesen 1992) will be used to rate each concept, which 
should provide a solid foundation for deciding on a final concept. The five universal virtues, 
which will be used, are: 
 
 
• Cost 
• Efficiency 
• Flexibility 
• Risk 
• Environmental effects 
 
==PAGE:63==
 
63
The remaining two are time and quality. A decision has been made to exclude these two, as an 
important aspect of the final concept is to avoid lengthy development (time dependent) and 
production of any new parts (quality dependent), in order to keep costs down. This means that 
an effort will be made, to produce a solution, which can be made using mostly off-the-shelf 
products. Therefore it is not necessary to look at time nor quality, because there is no real 
production involved. 
5.1 Morphology 
In order to best use the ideas generated, a decision has been made to morph the six ideas, for 
the poaching use situation, into three separate concepts. This has been done because certain 
pairs of the ideas complement each other to a great extent. The three concepts and the ideas 
they are comprised of are described below. It is also explained how each concept fulfils one 
of the design goals. 
5.1.1 The Disabler 
This concept is a morphing of the Helicopter Immobilizer UAV and the Helicopter Tracker 
UAV; please refer to the idea catalogue for the individual ideas.  
 
This gives the Disabler the ability to disable a poaching helicopter by using the EMP canon 
and, if that should fail, to track it using the small tracking helicopter UAV.  The Disabler 
addresses the design goal: 
 
• Create a concept, which can disable the high-tech equipment of the poachers and/or 
relay information about their location. 
 
 
Figure 42: Sketch of the two ideas being morphed together for the Disabler 
 
5.1.2 The Pacifier 
The Pacifier is a morphing of the two ideas; the Electromagnetic UAV and the Laser 
Tranquilizer UAV. This gives the UAV the capability to drop a strong electromagnet, which 
will attract the firearms of the poachers to it. It also has a laser pointer and can shoot 
tranquilizer darts at poachers to incapacitate them. The Pacifier address the design goal: 
 
• Create a concept, which can aid the rangers in directly combatting poachers. 
 
==PAGE:64==
 
64
 
Figure 43: Sketch of the two ideas being morphed together for the Pacifier 
5.1.3 The Overseer 
This concept is a result of the morphing of the Automatic Patrol UAV and the Animal Stalker 
UAV. This yields a UAV capable of tracking specific animals and monitoring pre-set GPS 
routes. This solution is particularly good in giving the rangers an overview of where the 
poachers are in relation to the animals. The Overseer is aimed at fulfilling the following 
design goal: 
 
• Create a concept, which can track animals, identify poachers and provide an overview 
of potentially dangerous situations. 
 
 
Figure 44: Sketch of the two ideas being morphed together for the Overseer 
This concludes the section on morphology. The focus will now be shifted towards detailing 
and rating of the concepts in the concept catalogue. 
5.2 Concepts and final selection 
The three concepts, the Disabler, the Pacifier and the Overseer, are each detailed in the 
concept catalogue through a detailed description, a realistic sketch and finally grading 
according to the chosen five universal virtues. 
 
The total scores of the three concepts are shown in Table 5, for individual grades please see 
the concept catalogue. 
 
Concept 
Total score 
The Overseer 
21 
The Disabler 
17 
The Pacifier 
16 
Table 5: Total scores for the three concepts 
==PAGE:65==
 
65
As can be seen, the Overseer has been awarded the highest total score. Not only is the 
Overseer’s score the highest, but it is significantly higher than that of the other two competing 
concepts. For this reason the Overseer is chosen as the final concept.  
Within the C*-model, the focus has now been shifted to the very last point; the concept. See 
Figure 45: 
 
Figure 45: Entering the last point of the C*-model 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:66==
 
66
6 Detailing and verification 
This section will focus on further detailing the Overseer concept, with the aim of answering 
the question: “Is the solution realistic and viable?”  
 
To initialize this section, it is explained how the rest of the solution looks like. This includes 
how the rangers will interact with the Overseer concept, and how it is intended to fit in the 
bigger picture of fighting poaching. Domain Theory (Andreasen 1980) will be applied to the 
Overseer, within the activity domain, in order to visually show how a scenario, where the 
concept is used, might look like. 
 
In order to determine if the solution is indeed realistic and viable, a section is dedicated to 
researching the individual parts, needed to make the concept a reality, and thereby 
determining whether the Overseer is a realistic solution or not. This will lead to a section 
describing the challenges in making the concept a reality. 
 
Finally, a conclusion will be formulated regarding both the validity of the proposed concept 
and the methods used throughout the thesis and their effectiveness. 
6.1 The rest of the solution 
In order to be able to fully comprehend how the Overseer will function it is important to look 
at an example of where it could operate. An example of a place of use would be Kruger 
National Park in South Africa, as seen on Figure 46. 
 
 
Figure 46: The location of Kruger National Park, South Africa (Image credit: Encyclopaedia Britannica) 
Kruger National park is approximately 360km from north to south and 65 from east to west. 
This means that in order to cover all the borders, a high number of Overseer UAVs would 
have to patrol approximately 850km of borders.  
 
Patrolling pattern 
Assuming an absolute maximum of 20km for flight distance of the Overseer multirotor, and 
that it will only go one-way (not back again, as this would mean it could fly in a 10km radius 
only), a minimum of 43 Overseer UAVs would be needed to cover all the borders of Kruger 
National Park. See Figure 47 for a quick overview. 
 
==PAGE:67==
 
67
 
Figure 47: An Overseer UAV flying from one landing/charging pad to the next 
This is quite a large number of UAVs, but it is not necessarily an unrealistic number. It should 
be noted that it is necessary to have all 43 UAVs and landing/charging pads along the borders 
to make this solution work as intended. Since all UAVS move to the next landing/charging 
pad, it makes sense to have a closed-loop system so that it can continue to go on flawlessly.  
 
Another way of implementing the Overseer would be for it to fly out from it landing/charging 
pad only 10km and then fly back again. This would of course mean that only half as much 
border is patrolled in comparison to the first scenario, but it also means that the 10km of 
border will be patrolled twice, please see Figure 48: 
 
 
Figure 48: An Overseer flying out from its landing/charging pad and back again 
The choice of a closed-loop or a go-and-return patrol pattern depends on whether or not there 
are poaching “hotspots” or not. If there are hotspots where the poachers are known to attack 
the animals, it would be preferable to use the go-and-return system because it is more fitting 
for local patrol points. If however there is no pattern to the poaching, it would be better to 
adopt a closed-loop patrol system. The closed-loop system is deemed to be the most effective. 
 
Using the Domain Theory, a set of two patrolling scenarios is represented within the activity 
domain in Figure 49. The green arrows show the scenario where the patrol is initiated and 
nothing out of the ordinary happens. The red arrows show the scenario, where the poachers 
are active. It should be noted that the patrol scenarios are valid for a closed-loop patrol 
system. 
 
==PAGE:68==
 
68
 
Figure 49: Activity domain, with two scenarios (green and red) 
It is seen that communication between the Overseers, operators and rangers is key to 
combatting the poachers. 
 
Charging 
Seeing as the Overseer UAVs would mostly be used at night, the solar panels can be put to 
efficient use in charging a number of batteries during the day. These batteries would then be 
connected in circuit with the landing/charging pad, and would charge the UAVs upon landing. 
One problem though is that a solution must be found, so that the UAVs can be charged fast. 
This is absolutely necessary for the solution to work. It would be extremely ineffective if each 
Overseer would have to be charged a couple of hours, for each 25 minutes of patrolling. Fast 
charging already exists, for electrical cars, and could most likely be adapted to suit the 
Overseer solution. This would allow the UAVs to perform a sufficient number of patrols 
during night-time. Figure 50 shows an example of the proposed charging system. 
 
 
Figure 50: An overview of the charging system 
Maintenance 
Having a closed-loop system means that it would also be easier to do routine maintenance on 
the UAVs, because the rangers would not have to move out to every single UAV when it is 
time for maintenance. With a closed-loop system, a maintenance area could be set up and the 
UAVs would then be fixed/maintained one by one as they land on the “maintenance” 
landing/charging pad. This has been sketched in Figure 51 below: 
 
==PAGE:69==
 
69
 
Figure 51: Proposed way to maintain the Overseer UAVs 
With regards to maintenance, it is quite a strength that the multirotor design has been chosen 
for the Overseer. Parts are usually inexpensive and easy to replace 
 
Trained operators and maintenance personnel 
In order for the Overseer to work optimally, it is imperative that the rangers receive the proper 
flight training necessary to operate a multirotor precisely. Such training could last anywhere 
from two days to 12 weeks depending on the level of flight proficiency needed. But seeing as 
the Overseer is meant to be an autonomous solution, there is only a need for human input 
when something out of the ordinary (such as a suspicious heat signature) is detected by the 
day/night thermal imaging camera of the Overseer – so perhaps there is only a need for a 
handful of well-trained pilots. This means that there has to be a number, around five or so, of 
rangers or other trained personal, who will be monitoring what the Overseer UAVs are seeing 
on patrol. Having five persons responsible would mean that each person has approximately 
nine camera feeds to keep an eye on (assuming 43 Overseer UAVs in total). These persons 
would then look for heat signatures, and determine whether or not a ranger dispatch team is 
needed at the location of the heat signature. 
 
The maintenance personnel do not need extensive training, as changing worn parts is quite 
easy based on my personal experience. 
 
Having looked at the solution in a bigger perspective, it is now time to look at the realization 
of the individual parts. 
6.2 Realisation of individual parts 
The following section has the aim of researching each part of the Overseer, as specified in the 
concept catalogue, and thereby see whether all the parts exist or if extensive research is 
needed to make it a reality. The parts in question are the multirotor, the charging/landing pad, 
night/day camera and the solar panels (along with batteries). Finally an answer will be 
provided to the question on whether the concept is realistic and viable. 
 
Multirotor 
The multirotor itself can be said to be of great importance, as the success of the Overseer 
concept depends on the UAV being able to perform optimally in a variety of conditions – 
both in relation to harsh weather conditions and potential hostility from animals and poachers. 
 
For these reasons a tough multirotor is needed. A solid foundation for the Overseer would for 
instance be the Game of Drones Hiro quadcopter. It has been extensively tested in a variety of 
==PAGE:70==
 
70
adverse test conditions such as; getting shot with a shotgun, being hit multiple times with a 
metal baseball bat, getting directly sprayed with water and having survived drops from high 
altitudes. None of these tests did any substantial damage to the quadcopter; the only parts that 
needed occasional replacing were propellers after which the Hiro quadcopter could continue 
to fly as if new. 
 
These qualities are essential to the Overseer, as it will be subjected to very harsh condition if 
it becomes a reality. The Hiro quadcopter is only 420 USD at the time of writing, which is 
inexpensive for a UAV showing such resilience. Figure 52 shows one of the waterproof tests 
performed on the Hiro quadcopter: 
 
 
Figure 52: The Hiro quadcopter (Image credit: Game of Drones) 
The only limiting factor may be the carrying capacity, as the Overseer needs the day/night 
thermal imaging camera to operate as intended. However, if indeed a drone with a higher 
carrying capacity is needed, it could be possible to make an agreement with the Game of 
Drones team to make a larger version of the Hiro quadcopter. 
 
Charging/landing pad 
The charging/landing pad plays a very important role in the Overseer concept; it is the one 
part, which actually makes the patrolling fully autonomous. Without the pad, a ranger would 
have to manually put the UAV’s battery in the charger and put it back in the UAV in order to 
make it patrol-ready. Therefore it is a vital part of the whole concept.  
 
As it turns out, the company Skysense has already made a charging pad exactly similar to the 
one in the Overseer concept. The exceptional aspect of this solution is that it is possible to 
retrofit the solution to most multirotor UAVs. Figure 53 shows how a charging contact has 
been retrofitted to the landing gear of a multirotor. 
 
==PAGE:71==
 
71
Figure 53: Retrofit charging contact (left) and charging pad (right) (Image credit: Skysense) 
The price for a medium sizee charging pad, suitable for most off-the-shelf multirotors, is 
2.800 USD at the time of writing, which makes it a very realistic product to use in making the 
Overseer a reality. 
 
Night/day camera 
This camera also plays a very important role in making the Overseer into a solution fit for 
identifying poachers. It needs to have thermal imaging capabilities, as the bush can get very 
thick in some places rendering ordinary cameras unusable. A thermal imaging camera only 
catches heat signatures, which means that it does not matter whether the poachers are hiding 
or not – their location will be easily detectable. 
 
Such a camera, made specifically for UAVs, is the SPI M1-D thermal imaging camera. It 
weighs around two pounds (approx. 900g), and can be attached in a multitude of ways. See 
Figure 54 for one configuration: 
 
 
Figure 54: M1-D thermal camera (Image credit: SPI) 
It has not been possible to attain a price for the M1-D, therefore it is not possible to assess 
whether it will be a realistic option or not. 
 
Solar panels and batteries 
It has not been possible to find a solution specifically designed for UAV use. But this does 
not however mean that it is unrealistic or impossible. It just means that there is a need to make 
a customised solution, which sees the right size of solar panels and batteries being fitted 
together in order to keep charging time to a minimum. This would most likely require the aid 
of an electrical engineer. 
 
==PAGE:72==
 
72
Having investigated the individual parts for availability, it now becomes apparent that the 
Overseer concept is indeed realistic and also viable, based on the relatively affordable price of 
the Hiro quadcopter and the landing/charging pad. This however does not mean that the 
solution will be a simple plug-and-play, as there are still many unanswered questions in how 
the parts will be matched to each other to function optimally. 
 
With this in mind a look is now taken at the challenges, which should be addressed in order to 
make the Overseer a reality. 
6.3 Challenges 
This section will note the challenges, which have been apparent through the writing of the 
sections in this chapter. 
 
The identified challenges are: 
 
• The problem of charging fast enough must be addressed, as it is imperative to making 
the solution work as a whole. 
• Solar panels and batteries should be matched to each other, as well as the charging 
pad. 
• Measures must be taken to protect the equipment from animal interference, as well as 
to avoid the attention of poachers. 
• The proper multirotor for the Overseer concept should be identified, through carrying 
out tests in relation to flight time, durability and carrying capacity. 
• Measures should be taken to protect the Overseer, when it is charging during daytime. 
It should be protected from excessively harsh climate conditions such as heavy rainfall 
or extreme temperatures. 
• A protocol needs to be developed in order to ensure synergy between locating 
poachers, through using the Overseer, getting the right information on the situation 
and dispatching a team of rangers. 
• The question of raising the necessary funds should be addressed, as this is one of the 
largest obstacles in the way of the Overseer concept and fighting poaching in general. 
 
These challenges would be very suitable for future project work if realization of the Overseer 
concept is desired.  
6.4 Conclusion 
The UAV technology has been investigated, which resulted in the identification of four 
distinct groups of UAVs; helicopters, multirotors, fixed-wings and tail-sitters. Furthermore 
the four groups of UAVs were subjected to Domain Theory in order to link functions to 
various physical parts on the UAVs. Key performance parameters were also found, and were 
subsequently connected to the physical aspects of the UAVs by using the key performance 
parameters and their physical realizations.  
 
The UAV groups were then individually rated, using a visual profile model, with respect to 
eight different performance parameters. This yielded a good basis for comparing the groups to 
each other. Finally the strength and weaknesses of each design were assessed, which 
culminated in finding the general possibilities, applications and limitations of the UAV 
technology. This concluded the investigation of the drone technology.  
 
==PAGE:73==
 
73
The approach to the technology investigation was effective in simplifying and categorizing all 
the research. Additionally, the visual models used proved to be very successful in providing a 
solid basis for quick comparison between the four groups. Furthermore the visual models 
were often used during idea generation and concept synthesis, to quickly get an overview of 
the strengths of each design. 
 
In order to narrow the selection of use situations to two, a simple rating method was used. The 
two use situations arrived at were poaching and first aid.  
These were then both investigated with regards to history, recent solutions, problems, 
challenges and stakeholders.  
 
This approach proved very effective in exploring the two situations, and thereby yielding 
information, which was not previously known. It furthermore yielded a better sense of 
direction for the subsequent idea generation. 
 
An idea loop was subsequently initiated, with the aim of generating 5-10 ideas for each use 
situation. These ideas have been included in the idea catalogue along with sketches, 
descriptions, strengths, weaknesses and finally a rating based on four criteria. Subsequently 
weighted average grades were found for the ideas in each use situation. These proved to be 
very close, which is why the “amount of interest” grades were used to decide on the single 
use situation. 
 
The use of a simple grading method was a great aid in judging objectively which use situation 
to continue on with. The use situation settled on was poaching. 
From here the goal formulation was arrived at in the form of three overall design goals. These 
were formulated on the basis of identified paradoxes and subsequently found ideal 
characteristics. A decision was then made to make a separate concept for each of the three 
design goals. 
 
Such an approach to formulating design goals was effective in making sure that the actual 
needs of the relevant stakeholders were met. This is true since the paradoxes identified were 
direct products of the potential discourses and needs of the individual stakeholders found in 
the stakeholder diagram. Thereby it is an iterative process of continuously condensing 
information in order to reach the final design goals, each step based on a solid foundation 
from the step before. 
 
The concept synthesis was then initiated by using morphology on the ideas within poaching, 
from the idea catalogue. This resulted in three distinct concepts, each aimed at one of the 
aforementioned design goals. Subsequently the concept catalogue was made, which included 
a realistic sketch of each concept, a detailed description and finally a rating with respect to 
five of the seven universal virtues. 
 
The concept catalogue proved to be a good tool for reflecting upon the implications of each 
concept and for visualising how the concepts might look in their final form. This was greatly 
aided by the realistic sketches of each concept. 
 
Using the grades in the concept catalogue, a total score was calculated for each concept and 
the concept with the highest score, the Overseer, was subsequently chosen for detailing and 
verification. 
 
==PAGE:74==
 
74
The Overseer concept was then subjected to detailing with regards to patrolling pattern, 
charging, maintenance and training of personnel. This yielded a greater understanding of how 
the concept would actually function in context. 
 
Each part of the Overseer concept was then researched, and it was found that the parts needed 
to make it were all in existence. The prices of the multirotor and charging/landing pad were 
found to be realistic, prices on the thermal imaging camera and solar panel solution could not 
be found.  
 
Based on the detailing and verification section, it was concluded that the Overseer concept 
was indeed realistic and viable, but that it would not be a simple plug-and-play solution 
meaning that it would require extensive research into finding the right parts for an optimal 
solution.  
 
This led to the identification of challenges related to fully developing the concept, which 
could for instance be used for further study. 
 
The task formulation at the beginning of thesis has been fully met. Through the use of an 
effective and structured approach to conceptualization, a new concept has been proposed 
within an identified use situation, poaching, which is indeed capable of improving the 
problem of illicit poaching. Furthermore the challenges of this concept have been identified, 
which may serve as a stepping-stone for future research and development of the Overseer 
concept in order to hinder the poachers and to ensure that the endangered species can be kept 
safe and will live on for future generations to experience. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:75==
 
75
7 Bibliography 
 
Articles, Reports and Websites: 
[1] McNeal, G. S. 02/03/2013. Just Call It A Drone. Forbes. Retrieved 05/10/2015 from: 
http://www.forbes.com/sites/gregorymcneal/2013/03/02/just-call-it-a-drone/ 
 
[2] Nicas, J. 09/10/2014. Why Some Drone Makers Hate the Word ‘Drone’ and Want to 
Change It. Wall Street Journal. Retrieved 05/10/2015 from: 
http://www.wsj.com/articles/why-some-drone-makers-hate-the-word-drone-and-want-to-
change-it-1412821801 
 
[3] McNeal, G. S. 23/03/2015. European Drone Regulations Are About To Get Smarter And 
More Permissive. Forbes. Retrieved 05/10/2015 from: 
http://www.forbes.com/sites/gregorymcneal/2015/03/23/european-drone-regulations-are-
about-to-get-smarter-and-more-permissive/  
 
[4] Gallagher, S. 06/05/2015. Crop-dusting unmanned helicopter gets cleared for commercial 
flight. Ars Technica. Retrieved 11/11/2015 from: 
http://arstechnica.com/information-technology/2015/05/crop-dusting-unmanned-helicopter-
gets-cleared-for-commercial-flight/ 
 
[5] Stanford University Autonomous Helicopter Website. Retrieved 07/12/2015 from: 
http://heli.stanford.edu/  
 
[6] Quora. 23/12/2013. What Makes The Quadcopter Design So Great For Small Drones? 
Forbes. Retrieved 16/09/2015 from: 
http://www.forbes.com/sites/quora/2013/12/23/what-makes-the-quadcopter-design-so-great-
for-small-drones/  
 
[7] Coxworth, B. 05/12/2013. Algorithm lets quadcopters keep flying on three or less 
propellers. Gizmag. Retrieved 16/09/2015 from: 
http://www.gizmag.com/quadcopter-failure-algorithm/30031/ 
 
[8] Majka, A. 04/05/2015. Trajectory Management of the Unmanned Aircraft System (UAS) 
in Emergency Situation. Aerospace. Retrieved 18/11/2015 from: 
http://www.mdpi.com/2226-4310/2/2/222/htm 
 
[9] Muraoka, K., Okada, N., Kubo, D. 09/04/2009. Quad Tilt Wing VTOL UAV: Aerodynamic 
Characteristics and Prototype Flight Test. Retrieved 18/11/2015 from: 
http://enu.kz/repository/2009/AIAA-2009-1834.pdf 
 
[10] Tækker, C. 28/05/2015. Ny drone kombinerer egenskaber fra helikopter og fly. DTU. 
Retrieved 20/11/2015 from: 
http://www.dtu.dk/Nyheder/2015/05/Ny-drone-kombinerer-helikopternes-og-flyets-
egenskaber 
 
[11] Forum on rcgroups.com. Retrieved 06/12/2015 from: 
http://www.rcgroups.com/forums/showthread.php?t=705651 
 
==PAGE:76==
 
76
[12] Health Profile Denmark. Retrieved 02/01/2016 from: 
http://www.worldlifeexpectancy.com/country-health-profile/denmark 
 
[13] 2013 ACCF/AHA Guideline for the Management of ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction. 
Retrieved 02/01/2016 from: 
http://content.onlinejacc.org/article.aspx?articleid=1486115 
 
[14] Prescott, E. 24/10/2011. Kvinder og hjertesygdom. Netdoktor. Retrieved 02/01/2016 
from: http://www.netdoktor.dk/centre/hjerte/kvinders_hjerter.htm 
 
[15] Prigg, M. 29/10/2014. The ambulance that could save your life: Flying defibrillator can 
reach speeds of 60mph. Daily Mail. Retrieved 04/01/2016 from: 
http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sciencetech/article-2811851/The-ambulance-drone-save-life-
Flying-defibrillator-reach-speeds-60mph.html 
 
[16] 24/12/2015. Hovedstadens ambulance kommer hurtigere frem. Avisen.dk. Retrieved 
04/01/16 from: http://www.avisen.dk/kortere-ventetid-paa-ambulancer_362451.aspx 
 
[17] 29/07/2015. When is it hunting and when is it poaching? BBC. Retrieved 05/01/2016 
from: http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-33699347 
 
[18] Migratory Bird Treaty Act of 1918. Digest of Federal Resource Laws of Interest to the 
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. Retrieved 05/01/2016 from: 
https://www.fws.gov/laws/lawsdigest/migtrea.html 
 
[19] What is CITES? CITES website. Retrieved 05/01/2016 from: 
https://www.cites.org/eng/disc/what.php 
 
[20] Perlez, J. 19/07/1989. Kenya, In Gesture, Burns Ivory Tusks. The New York Times. 
Retrieved 05/01/2016 from:  
http://www.nytimes.com/1989/07/19/world/kenya-in-gesture-burns-ivory-tusks.html  
 
[21] 16/11/2009. Data shows illegal ivory trade on rise. WWF. Retrieved 05/01/2016 from: 
http://wwf.panda.org/wwf_news/?uNewsID=180702 
 
[22] Ahmad, S. 21/08/2009. Shopping habits of China's suddenly wealthy. FT Magazine. 
Retrieved 06/01/2016 from:  
http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/9271a266-8d21-11de-a540-00144feabdc0.html 
 
[23] Neme, L. 27/06/2014. For Rangers on the Front Lines of Anti-Poaching Wars, Daily 
Trauma. National Geographic. Retrieved 06/01/2016 from: 
http://news.nationalgeographic.com/news/2014/06/140627-congo-virunga-wildlife-rangers-
elephants-rhinos-poaching/  
 
[24] Bhandari, B. 03/072014. Google Glass and drones leading the fight against poaching in 
Nepal. South China Morning Post. Retrieved 06/01/2016 from: 
http://www.scmp.com/news/asia/article/1545180/technology-leading-fight-against-poaching-
nepal 
 
 
==PAGE:77==
 
77
Books and Theses: 
Andreasen, M. M., Hansen, C. T., Cash, P. 2015. Conceptual Design: Interpretations, 
Mindset and Models. Springer. 
 
Ulrich, K. T., Eppinger, S. D. 2011. Product Design and Development. Mcgraw-Hill 
Education. 
 
Johnsen, L. S., Graversen, E. H. 2010. Teknologioverførsel: Koncept for anvendelse af 
Mobile Gravity Feed teknologi. DTU Management. 
 
 
 
 
