==PAGE:1==
Surrogate Modelling of
Coupled 1D-2D Hydraulic
Model (MIKE FLOOD)
Master’s Thesis
Cecilie Thrysøe, s103363 and Jens Toke, s093099
Supervisors:
Karsten Arnbjerg-Nielsen, Morten Borup and Nanna Høegh Ravn
July 2015
==PAGE:2==
This page is intentionally left blank
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Climate change will cause extreme precipitation events to become more extreme and to
occur more frequently. If no action is taken, the drainage systems will be overburdened,
resulting in more severe ﬂooding in urban areas. Distributed physically based models, such
as MIKE FLOOD, are commonly used to model when and where ﬂooding will occur. This
is used in urban planning for climate adaptation and real-time optimization. However,
the usage of these models are impeded due to their large computational requirements
and instabilities. To address these computational challenges, 1D-1D surrogate models are
developed to replace parts of a MIKE FLOOD model for ˚Aby catchment in ˚Arhus. The
catchment is divided into compartments, in which the volumes are described by surrogate
models. The model both contains drainage and surface compartments in between which
water can be transferred. The drainage surrogate models are response surface models, which
are ﬁtted to a calibration dataset by piecewise linear approximation functions to reproduce
the response of MIKE URBAN. The surface surrogate models are lower-ﬁdelity physically
based models, whose parameters are determined by GIS analysis. The surrogate models
are compared to MIKE FLOOD and evaluated on accuracy, stability and computational
time. The drainage surrogate models are able to reproduce the MIKE URBAN results for
diﬀerent rain inputs. Since the catchment is very steep, there is almost no backwatering
and attenuation in the system. The coupled drainage-surface surrogate models do not
describe the exchange between drainage and surface accurately, which causes discrepancies
in surface volume and water levels. Moreover, it is diﬃcult to determine which surface
depressions are contributing. By using a time step of 1 s, the computational time is reduced
1.8 times and 21 times for the drainage and surface surrogates respectively compared to the
MIKE models. Unlike the MIKE models the surrogate models did not show any instability.
Thus, the time step can be chosen based on the temporal resolution of the rain. By using a
time step of 1 min, the computational time of the drainage surrogate model can be reduced
258 times while the coupled drainage-surface surrogate model can be reduced 1330 times.
Further work needs to be conducted on backwater eﬀects and to improve the surface model
set up. The surrogate models show great potential for usage in urban water modelling for
urban planning and real-time control.
i
==PAGE:4==
This page is intentionally left blank
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This study was completed as a masters thesis at the Department of Environmental Engineer-
ing at the Technical University of Denmark. The thesis is completed in the period February
2nd 2015 to July 23rd 2015 and consists of 30 ECTS points. The thesis is supervised
by Professor Karsten Arnbjerg-Nielsen, Assistant Professor Morten Borup and external
supervisor Nanna Høegh Ravn.
The MIKE FLOOD model used in this thesis was obtained from ˚Arhus Vand.
The
applied software is MIKE by DHI, ArcGis and MATLAB.
We would like to give our thanks to Karsten Arnbjerg-Nielsen who has been a great
support throughout the whole process with excellent guidance and good discussions. Also
thanks to Morten Borup for helping with the many MIKE FLOOD issues and the good
input on the conceptual set up of the surrogate models. Thanks to Nanna Høegh Ravn for
discussing possible solutions of the surface surrogate modelling and for assisting with GIS.
A thanks to Roland L¨owe for helping with MIKE FLOOD and discussing the further work
which needs to be conducted in this ﬁeld.
Lastly, thanks to all of our fellow students and family, with whom we discussed the
project. Thank you for proofreading our report and listening to our frustrations.
ii
==PAGE:6==
This page is intentionally left blank
==PAGE:7==
Abbreviations
Comp.
Compartment
CPU
Central Processing Unit
CS
Collection System
CSO
Combined Sewer Overﬂow
DEM
Digital Elevation model
DHI
Danish Hydraulic Institute
DHM
Danmarks Højdemodel (Danish Elevation Model)
DMI
Danish Meteorological Institute
Drain.
Drainage
DSM
Digital Surface Model
DTM
Digital Terrain Model
DUDMs
Distributed Urban Drainage Models
EPA
Environmental Protection Agency
GIS
Geographic information system
IPCC
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
MF
MIKE FLOOD
MU
MIKE URBAN
ODE
Ordinary Diﬀerential Equations
RTC
Real Time Control
SMA
Simple Moving Average
SMs
Surrogate Models
Surf.
Surface
SWMM
Storm Water Management Model
iii
==PAGE:8==
Deﬁnitions
Approximation functions: Functions used to connect the calibration data points from the
physically based distributed models to describe the volume-discharge relations.
Calibration: Process of ﬁtting the surface response of the physically based distributed
model by approximation functions to describe volume-discharge relations.
Calibration data: Training data used to ﬁt the surrogate models to the physically based
distributed model.
Compartment: A surface or drainage reservoir modelled by a surrogate model.
Coupled drainage-surface surrogate models: surrogate models both included the drainage
and surface compartments.
Drainage surrogate models: surrogate models describing the volume of water in a drainage
compartment in the drainage network.
Lumped depression: Depression created from adding the volumes of all selected depressions
in the compartment to one single depression.
Selected depressions: Depressions which are included in the volume description of the
surface compartments.
Surface response: The resulting volume, discharge and ﬂooding discharge from the physi-
cally based distributed model used to calibrate the surrogate models.
Surface surrogate models: surrogate models describing the volume of water in a surface
compartment on the surface
Unit: A drainage and surface compartment.
iv
==PAGE:9==
Table of Contents
Page
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Goal and Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Outline of Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Model Classiﬁcation
3
2.1
Physically Based Distributed Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Surrogate Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Conceptual Set Up of Surrogate Models
13
3.1
Mass Balance Equations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2
Determining Discharges
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3
Computational Scheme . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4
Case Study Area
20
4.1
˚Abyhøj/Hasle Area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5
Setting Up the MIKE Models
23
5.1
MIKE URBAN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.2
MIKE FLOOD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
6
1D Surrogate Modelling of MIKE URBAN
27
6.1
Setting Up the Drainage Surrogate Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6.2
Comparison of MIKE URBAN and
Drainage Surrogate Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6.3
Eﬀects of Smaller Compartments on Drainage Results . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.4
Including Backwatering in Surrogate Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
7
1D-1D Surrogate Modelling of MIKE FLOOD
43
7.1
Setting up the Surface Surrogate Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
7.2
Comparison of MIKE FLOOD and
Coupled Drainage-Surface Surrogate Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
8
Model Evaluation
58
8.1
Comparison of Surrogate Models and MIKE Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
8.2
Limitations of the Surrogate Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
8.3
Applications of Surrogate Models in Real Life . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
8.4
Further Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
9
Conclusion
66
Bibliography
67
Appendices
71
A Equations Applied in MIKE 21
71
B MIKE URBAN Model for ˚
Arhus
72
C Rain Inputs
73
C.1
Staircase Rain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
v
==PAGE:10==
Table of Contents
C.2
Pulse Rain
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
C.3
Large Block Rain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
C.4
Large Short Pulse Rain
No Base . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
C.5
Historical Rain Event M˚aløv . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
C.6
Historical Rain Event Vedbæk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
D ADP and XRF Files
76
E Calibration Data
78
E.1
Calibration Points
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
E.2
Calibration With Piecewise Linear Interpolation
Small Compartments Klokker . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
E.3
Calibration With Piecewise Linear Interpolation
Small Compartments BSIngemann and DrHolst . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
E.4
Calibration With one Linear Function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
F Comparison of SMs and MU
83
F.1
Volume-Discharge Relation for Staircase Rain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
F.2
Compartment Volume and Discharge for Large
Short Pulse Rain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
F.3
Compartment Volume and Discharge for Large
Pulse Rain for Small Compartments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
F.4
Compartment Volume and Discharge for Large
Staircase Rain Using one Linear Function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
G Weir details in Compartment BSIngemann (2)
87
H Exmaining Backwater Eﬀects on a Test Area
89
I
Resulting Surface Depressions and Flow Paths
Large Compartments
92
J
Surface Properties
93
J.1
Flooding Limits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
J.2
Volume-Water Level Curves for Lumped Depressions . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
J.3
Maximum volume in Lumped Depressions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
K Maximum Water Level in Depressions
by MIKE FLOOD
95
L
Generating Automatic Water Balance
96
M Overview of Data Process Procedure
97
M.1 Overview of GIS Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
M.2 Overview of MIKE Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
M.3 Overview of MATLAB Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
N MATLAB Code
102
N.1 Prepare Data for MU/MF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
N.2 Extract and Handle MIKE URBAN / MIKE FLOOD Data . . . . . . . . . 106
N.3 Run Surrogate Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 118
O Alternative Surface Analysis
132
vi
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1
Introduction
According to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, climate change will change
future precipitation patterns causing extreme rain events to become more frequent and
more intense in Denmark (IPCC, 2014). Urbanization coupled with change in precipitation
is expected to increasingly overburden urban drainage systems if the capacity of the systems
is not enhanced (IPCC, 2014). This will cause an increase in risk of pluvial ﬂooding and in
the number of combined sewer overﬂows (CSOs) (Mark and Linde, 2006). The functionality
of wastewater treatment plants is also expected to decrease during extreme precipitation
events due to increased hydraulic loading, which will increase pollutant loads to receiving
water bodies (EPA Ireland, 1995).
The increased number of ﬂoodings in Denmark in previous years has shown that Danish
cities are vulnerable to climate change. The 2nd of July 2011 a severe rain event happened
in Copenhagen. This event caused the highest property damage of any rain event in
Denmark and it was evaluated by Danish Meteorological Institute (DMI) to correspond
to a 100 year event (Beredskabstyrelsen, 2012; DMI, 2011). The event had the highest
precipitation amount (135.4 mm. in 1 day at the Botanical Garden) and the highest
intensity (3.1 mm/min. at Ishøj Varmeværk) measured since the beginning of systematic
measuring in 1955 (Beredskabstyrelsen, 2012). The rain event caused damages for around
DKK 5-6 billion in Copenhagen (The City of Copenhagen, 2012). Other Danish cities
have also been exposed to ﬂooding due to extreme rain events. On 25th of August 2012
˚Arhus experienced 48 mm. of rain over 3 h, causing roads to close and a water reservoir in
Lystrup to overﬂow (Jyllands-Posten, 2012).
An agreement between the Danish government and the municipalities requires all munici-
palities to map areas sensitive to ﬂooding, make a valuation of these areas and develop
a climate adaptation plan. ˚Arhus Municipality (2014a) proposes a climate adaptation
plan in which they project the eﬀect of a 100 year event using the A1B scenario from the
IPCC as recommended by the Ministry of the Environment. The scenario is downscaled to
Denmark by DMI and is a medium scenario, which is considered to be relatively certain
until 2050 (˚Arhus Municipality, 2014a). This scenario suggests that the risk of ﬂooding
will increase and therefore there is a need for enhancing the robustness of the drainage
network by e.g. applying diﬀerent adaptation measurements. Alternatively, the storage
capacity of the drainage system can be enhanced by implementing real-time control. ˚Arhus
Vand is currently working with Kr¨uger and DHI (Danish Hydraulic Institute) to develop
real time control of the system to optimize the storage capacity of the combined drainage
system which reduces ﬂooding and pollutant loads (˚Arhus Municipality, 2014b).
To implement control in the system and optimize adaptation measures the behaviour
during a rain event must be known. This is typically modelled with high ﬁdelity models
such as MIKE URBAN (MU) and MIKE FLOOD (MF), which are physically based
distributed urban drainage models (DUDMs). However, due to large computational re-
quirements many applications of these are impeded. In real-time usage, such models cannot
be applied due to computational time (Wang et al., 2013). Furthermore the models require
large amounts of input data, are very complex and often experience large instabilities.
This study addresses the computational challenges and instabilities of a MIKE FLOOD
model by replacing parts of the model with surrogate models (SMs). A Surrogate Model is
a model that approximates the response of an original model. This type of modelling has
evolved over many years but the term has been used more intensively over the past decades
1
==PAGE:12==
Chapter 1
Introduction
(Razavi et al., 2012). The goal of surrogate modelling is to develop computationally less
demanding metamodels, which are able to reproduce the results of complex physically
based models. The surrogates may be physically based lower-ﬁdelity surrogates, which
describe the physical processes in a simpler manner, or surface response surrogates, which
approximate the response of the high-ﬁdelity physically based models. In this study both
types of surrogates are applied to describe the drainage network and surface routing for
various rain events. The ˚Aby catchment in the Danish city of ˚Arhus is used as a case study.
1.1
Goal and Scope
The primary objective of this study is to set up 1D-1D surrogate models in MATLAB
to reproduce the results of a coupled 1D-2D MIKE FLOOD model. The motivation for
constructing these surrogate models is to reduce the computational costs of the distributed
physically based model and ultimately to develop faster and more eﬃcient tools to use in
planning and real-time control of urban drainage systems.
The eﬀect of simplifying the surrogate models is examined by varying the size and thus
the number of compartments in the model. Diﬀerent methods of coping with backwater
eﬀects are examined.
The drainage surrogate models are evaluated based on MIKE URBAN results while
the exchange and the surface surrogate models are compared to MIKE FLOOD results.
The surrogate model performance is evaluated with diﬀerent rain events by comparing the
results to MIKE FLOOD results. The performance of the models is evaluated based on
the three criteria:
• Model accuracy
• Model stability
• Model computational time
Diﬀerences between the MIKE FLOOD model and reality is brieﬂy discussed but is not be
the main focus.
1.2
Outline of Thesis
The thesis is structured as follows: In chapter 2 an overview of various model types is
given along with the theory behind the two applied models. In chapter 3 the conceptual
design of the surrogate models is described with the methods for determining the model
parameters. Chapter 4 introduces the case study area. Chapter 5 presents the methods for
setting up MIKE URBAN and MIKE FLOOD. In chapter 6 and 7, the methods for setting
up the surrogate models are outlined for the drainage and surface surrogate compartments
respectively. Furthermore, the results of the surrogate models are compared to results from
the MIKE models. Chapter 8 provides an overall evaluation of the surrogate models based
on the three criteria presented above. The chapter includes a discussion on the application
of the models along with ideas for further work. Chapter 9 summarizes the conclusions.
2
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 2
Model Classiﬁcation
2
Model Classiﬁcation
The goal of a model is to simplify a complex system (Refsgaard et al., 2014), but the
level of simpliﬁcation varies with diﬀerent types of models. A model is simpliﬁed when it
describes a physical phenomenon using equations that do not necessarily include all the
behavioural details of the phenomenon. In a way all models can be regarded as simpliﬁed,
since all models are an interpretation of the reality translated into equations.
As stated in Yen (1994) and Paludan et al. (2011), the choice of model must depend on the
objective and the considered type of problem. A very simple model can sometimes describe
a phenomena just as well as a detailed complex model. According to Paludan et al. (2011)
the choice of model depends on: the purpose of the project, the type of drainage, terrain
area and which data is available.
Models describing ﬂow routing on surface and in drainage networks are generally di-
vided into two main groups: Physically based distributed models (DUDMs) which often
use the Saint-Venant equations, and lumped conceptual models, which use the storage
principle (Chow et al., 1988; Vanrolleghem et al., 2009; Motiee et al., 1997). The distinction
between physically based distributed models and lumped conceptual models is not clear
and deﬁnitions often overlap.
With inspiration from Paludan et al. (2011) and Larsen et al. (2010) ﬁve diﬀerent levels of
model complexity for modelling of stormwater ﬂow on the surface and drainage network are
shown in Figure 1. The lowest level models are typically based on empirical relations and
properties of the system, whereas the highest level models are based on physical relations.
However, that does not exclude cases where physical relations are present in the lower-level
models and empirical relations in the higher-level models. Thus, the boundaries between
the models are in reality not as clear-cut as in Figure 1, but it gives an overview of the
diﬀerent model types.
Figure 1: Classiﬁcation of surface and drainage models by increasing level of complexity,
where DEM is digital elevation model and DUDM means distributed urban drainage model.
Surface and drainage models may or may not be connected which is visualized in Figure 1
Level 0, where the surface and drainage system is not included. Apart from Level 0 the
simplest description of the surface is Level 1, which only includes a Digital Elevation Model,
from which surface depressions are obtained. This provides an overview of low-lying areas.
Level 2 includes surface runoﬀbetween the depressions with a water balance. Level 3
consists of a 1D distributed physically based model such as MIKE URBAN, where surface
ﬂow is included by a pipe system and basins. Level 4 is a 2D distributed physically based
model like MIKE 21. 2D models compute water levels in each cell, which increases the
3
==PAGE:14==
Chapter 2
Model Classiﬁcation
computational time signiﬁcantly (Wang et al., 2013).
For the drainage models the most simple representation, besides level 0, is a reservoir
model. This level can be used if no backwater eﬀects are present in the system (the term
backwater is described in Section 2.2.3). If there are backwater eﬀects in the system Level
2 can be applied. Level 3 applies a 1D distributed network model, such as MIKE URBAN
on a simpliﬁed skeletonized system. For the full description, the 1D DUDM can be applied
on the fully distributed drainage system as in Level 4.
Diﬀerent levels of surface and drainage models can be coupled together. For example
a Level 1 surface model can be combined with a Level 0 drainage model if it is a rural
catchment and the drainage system is unimportant. In contrary, a Level 3 description of
the drainage system can be matched with a Level 0 surface description as done in ˚Arhus
Municipality (2013b). This will identify critical points in the drainage system (Paludan
et al., 2011).
The distributed physically based Level 4 models are capable of describing varied ﬂows.
However, they require large amounts of data, have numerical instability issues and have
long computation time. Moreover, detailed results for every pipe in the system may not
be necessary (Motiee et al., 1997; Vanrolleghem et al., 2009). The theory behind the
distributed physically based model applied in this study is presented in Section 2.1.
In comparison to distributed physically based models the lumped conceptual models do
usually not include details of all nodes, pipes or grid cells, which reduces the computational
costs. The models are simple, stable and requires little data, so if detailed information of
a system is not needed the conceptual storage models may provide a good solution. To
lower computational costs these lumped conceptual models can replace parts of higher
level distributed models. This is the main modelling concept used in this study and it will
be presented in Section 2.2. The conceptual set up of the surrogate models will also be
presented in Section 3.
2.1
Physically Based Distributed Models
For stormwater management a range of diﬀerent distributed physically based models are
available worldwide. Examples of these are: SWMM (Storm Water Management Model)
(Rossman, 2010), SOBEK (Deltares, n.d.) and MIKE by DHI (Winther et al., 2011).
In this study the distributed physically based models MIKE URBAN and MIKE FLOOD
are used to evaluate the surrogate models. The MIKE FLOOD model will in this project
be categorized as a Level 3 drainage model, as it is not fully distributed, and a Level 4
surface model since it simulates the surface ﬂow in 2D as seen in Figure 1. The MIKE
software is used to calibrate and validate the surrogate models. In the following sections
the applied modelling tools will be described.
2.1.1
MIKE URBAN
MIKE URBAN is a GIS based modelling software, which is able to simulate dynamic
discharge and water levels in both water distributions and collection systems. MIKE
URBAN consists of three modules where only the following two will be used in this study:
MIKE URBAN Model Manager and Collection System (CS) module (DHI, 2014e).
4
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2
Model Classiﬁcation
The Model Manager is the main module of MIKE URBAN. It is a time series data
management package and a modelling environment. The Collection System includes the
pipe ﬂow simulation, rainfall-runoﬀsimulation, pollutant transport simulation, biological
processes simulation and real-time control simulation (DHI, 2014e). Within the CS-Rainfall-
Runoﬀmodule, there are three major runoﬀmodels (DHI, 2014c):
A Time-Area Method
B Kinematic Wave
C Linear Reservoir
The applied rainfall-runoﬀmodel is a type A model. This type of model is very simple
and only describes the rainfall-runoﬀby a time of concentration for each catchment. This
implies that even though MIKE URBAN is a Level 3-4 model (depending on the level of
detail in the drainage system) it still includes simple lower level sub models (see Figure 1).
For more details on the Time-Area method, see DHI (2014g).
The CS pipe ﬂow includes DHI’s MOUSE (MOdel for Urban SEwers) engine. The MOUSE
hydrodynamic engine is designed to handle any type of pipe network both including free
surface, pressurized ﬂows, open channel networks as well as any type of construction weirs,
pumps etc. The most common type of ﬂow in a drainage system is partially full pipe ﬂow.
This means that water ﬂows in the pipes due to gravity with a free surface. When the
design capacity of the drainage system is met, the water ﬁlls the entire pipe area and makes
it full ﬂowing (Butler and Davis, 2011). 1D unsteady partially full pipe ﬂow is described
by the Saint Venant equations which are applied in MIKE URBAN.
The Saint Venant equations were ﬁrst derived by Adhemar Jean Claude Barre de Saint-
Venant in 1871 from the Navier-Stokes equations, which describes ﬂuid motion (Chow
et al., 1988; Butler and Davis, 2011). The full Saint-Venant equations both account for
wave translation, backwater eﬀects, wave attenuation and ﬂow acceleration (Butler and
Davis, 2011). The Saint Venant equations are shown in Equation (1) and (2) (DHI, 2014a).
q = ∂Q
∂x + ∂A
∂t
(1)
Equation (1), referred to as the mass conservation equation or the continuity equation, is
derived from the conservation of mass. Q is the discharge [m3/s], x is the distance travelled
by ﬂow [m], A is the cross section area [m2], t is the time [s] and q is the lateral inﬂow
[m2/s].
f
ρw
= gAIf + gA∂h
∂x +
∂
 
αQ2
A
!
∂x
+ ∂Q
∂t
Kinematic Wave
Diﬀusive Wave
Dynamic Wave
(2)
Equation (2), referred to as the momentum equation, is derived from the conservation
of momentum. This equation can be simpliﬁed and split up into three equations, which
will be further discussed in Section 2.2.1. The left hand side of the equation consists of
the momentum forcing, f, and the density of water, ρw [kg/m3]. The kinematic equation
includes the gravitational acceleration, g [m/s2], the friction slope, If, and the cross section
area, A [m2]. The diﬀusive wave equation includes the kinematic wave equation and a
pressure force term governed by the water level, h [m]. The dynamic wave equation includes
the two previous terms along with terms for convective and local acceleration where α is
the momentum distribution (Chow et al., 1988).
5
==PAGE:16==
Chapter 2
Model Classiﬁcation
2.1.2
MIKE 21
MIKE 21 also applies the Saint Venant equations for describing the ﬂow and water level
variations on the surface. It simulates unsteady two dimensional ﬂow in one layer (vertically
homogeneous ﬂuids) by integrating the conservation of mass and momentum over the
vertical distance DHI (2014b). The equations that describe the ﬂow in MIKE 21 can be
seen in Appendix A.
2.1.3
MIKE FLOOD
MIKE FLOOD integrates the 1D MIKE URBAN drainage model and the 2D MIKE 21
surface model . The water transfer between the drainage and the surface compartments in
the MIKE FLOOD model is described by the Oriﬁce Equation (3) (DHI, 2007).
Qexchange = sign(HU −H21) · C · min(Am, AI)
q
2g|HU −H21|
(3)
Here Qexchange is the water transfer between the drainage and the surface [m3/s], sign
indicates that the discharge can be both positive and negative, H21 is the water level
on the surface in MIKE 21 [m], HU is the water level in the drainage system in MIKE
URBAN [m], C is the weir coeﬃcient, Am is the cross-sectional area of the manhole [m2],
AI is the cross-sectional area of the inlet [m2] and g is the gravitation acceleration [m/s2]
(DHI, 2007). This equation controls how much water ﬂows from the drainage system to
the surface and vice versa depending on the water level in the two systems.
2.1.4
Computational Scheme in the MIKE models
The computational scheme applied in the MIKE models uses an implicit ﬁnite diﬀerence
method for numerically solving of the full Saint Venant ﬂow equations. This is done in the
frame of the Double-Sweep algorithm, which ensures preservation of mass and compatibility
of energy levels in the network nodes. The applied computational grid consists of altering
points of discharge, Q, and water level, h, respectively. Figure 2 shows a section of a
network with the computational grid in the drainage system. For the surface model, each
2D cell is a computation point.
Figure 2: A section of a network with computational grid (DHI, 2014f).
The distance ∆x [m], between the computational points is given by ∆x =
l
N −1, where N
is the number of computational points and l is the length of the conduit [m]. The minimum
number of computational points in a conduit is three. The implemented numerical scheme
is a 6-point Abbott-Scheme shown in Figure 3 (DHI, 2014f).
6
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 2
Model Classiﬁcation
Figure 3: Centered 6-point Abbott scheme used as numerical scheme in MOUSE (DHI,
2014f).
Stability Criterion
The Courant number is applied to ensure a stable solution when solving numerically. The
Courant number is described in Equation (4).
Cr = ∆t(v + √gy)
∆x
(4)
where Cr is the Courant number, v is the mean ﬂow velocity [m/s], ∆t is the time step [s],
∆x is the distance between the computational points [m], g is the gravitation acceleration
[m/s2] and y is the water depth [m]. The Courant number expresses the number of grid
points a wave will move in one time step. This means that when larger time steps are
applied, the model becomes more unstable. The recommended maximum Courant number
is 20 - 60. The numerical algorithm applies a self-adapting time-step, which ensures
accurate description of unsteady ﬂow conditions. The automatically generated grid fulﬁls
the courant criterion (DHI, 2014f).
2.2
Surrogate Models
The main objective for developing surrogate models is to reduce the computational cost of
a simulation model like MIKE FLOOD. Surrogate modelling is deﬁned by Razavi et al.
(2012) as an approximation of the response of an original simulation model. A surrogate
model should thus be capable of approximately reproducing results from a computational
intensive simulation using a simpler model with less computational costs.
Razavi et al. (2012) recognizes two main types of surrogate models: response surface
models and lower-ﬁdelity models. The response surface surrogates empirically approximate
the model response by data-driven function approximations. Lower-ﬁdelity surrogates
on the other hand are physically based models, but with less details than the original
model. They are simpliﬁed to preserve the main processes being modelled. The two types
of surrogates models will be presented in the following sections along with examples of
applications within the urban water context.
7
==PAGE:18==
Chapter 2
Model Classiﬁcation
2.2.1
Lower-ﬁdelity Physically Based Models
Razavi et al. (2012) divides the lower-ﬁdelity models into three categories, whereof only
the last two are regarded in this study:
1. Reduction of model order
2. Reduction of physical processes
3. Reduction of numerical accuracy
Reduction of physical processes in the Saint Venant equation presented in Section 2.1,
Equation (2), is often made to reduce the computational time of the physically based
distributed models. In cases where eﬀects from pressure and inertial forces are small, the
kinematic wave equation can be applied. This is the ﬁrst term of Equation (2). This
approximation implies that the acceleration of the ﬂow is negligible and the friction and
gravity forces balance each other out (Chow et al., 1988). Thus it is assumed that the
friction slope is equal to the bottom line slope and that the waves in the system do
not change due to subsiding or attenuation. This simpliﬁcation can be used in drainage
systems with steep slopes, where backwater eﬀects are not likely to occur and friction
and bed slopes dwarf the other terms in Equation (2).
However, if backwatering is
present, Vanrolleghem et al. (2009) states that by not including backwatering in a system,
ﬂow maxima tends to be overestimated since the retention volume in upstream pipes
is not considered. When pressure forces become important, these can be described by
the diﬀusive wave equation (the ﬁrst two terms in Equation (2)). The diﬀusive wave
allows for wave attenuation and backwatering in the system. When eﬀects of intertial
forces are of importance the full Saint Venant equations must be applied (Chow et al., 1988).
For reduction of the numerical accuracy, the computational grid can be reduced both
spatially and temporally which generally also leads to lower computational times. There-
fore, the selection of spatial and temporal time steps, ∆x and ∆t, is a trade-oﬀbetween
accuracy and computation time. For the MIKE models the Courant number, deﬁned in
Equation (4), should be considered when manually reducing the numerical accuracy. A
way of simplifying the distributed models is to skeletonize the system by removing smaller
parts of the system. However, using this method Leitao et al. (2010) conclude that the
simpliﬁed network loses storage volume, which aﬀects the resulting surface ﬂooding.
2.2.2
Response Surface Models
A response surface model, also referred to as a metamodel, is a model of a model as it aims to
reproduce the response of a simulation model. It does not emulate any internal components;
instead it approximates the relation between the variables in the problem domain. To
approximate the model response, data-driven function approximation techniques are applied.
The basic sequential framework consists of three steps:
1. Design of experiment
2. Fitting of metamodel
3. Substitution of metamodel in original model
In the ﬁrst step, the design of experiment is set up and the input data is determined
to empirically capture the behaviour of the system. In the second step, the response
surface surrogates are ﬁtted to the response surface of the simulation model by a function
approximation technique. The approximation techniques applied for surrogate modelling
include: polynomials, kriging, nearest neighbour etc. (Razavi et al., 2012). In step three,
parts of the original model is replaced by the surrogate models.
8
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 2
Model Classiﬁcation
In urban water modelling many surface response models consist of conceptual storage
models. The following section will present the most common types and their applications.
Conceptual Storage Models
Many conceptual models are based on the storage principle. For a hydrologic system the
input, I(t), output Q(t) and storage S(t) are related by the continuity equation.
dS
dt = I(t) −Q(t)
(5)
If the inﬂow hydrograph is known, the change in storage still cannot be determined without
a relation between the storage and outﬂow. Thus, a storage function is set up to relate
I, S and Q (Chow et al., 1988). In this study, the storage function relates to the surface
response of the high ﬁdelity model. An arbitrary storage function is written in Equation
(6).
S = f(I, Q)
(6)
The following paragraphs will present commonly used storage functions.
For a reservoir, which is wide and deep compared to its length in the ﬂow direction,
a horizontal water surface is obtained. The outﬂow-storage relationship is thus invariable,
meaning that the storage is a nonlinear function of Q only:
S = f(Q)
(7)
The storage function may be a constant, K, and the storage can thus be described by a
single linear reservoir by:
S = KQ
(8)
A way of empirically describing attenuation and subsidising is to include several linear
reservoirs. A watershed may be represented by a series of n linear reservoir, which are
connected in series with storage coeﬃcients K also known as the Nash Cascade. An
illustration of this principle is seen in Figure 4 (Chow et al., 1988).
Figure 4: Conceptual drawing of the linear reservoirs model. Figure modiﬁed from Chow
et al. (1988).
9
==PAGE:20==
Chapter 2
Model Classiﬁcation
The outﬂow from reservoir n-1 becomes the inﬂow to reservoir n and the outﬂow from
reservoir n becomes inﬂow to reservoir n+1. The unit hydrograph for the discharge from
reservoir n, qn, can be calculated by the Nash cascade shown in Equation (9) (Chow et al.,
1988).
qn(t) =
1
KΓ(n)
 t
K
n−1
e−t/K
(9)
Where t is the time, n is the number of reservoirs, K is a time constant and Γ(n) is the
Gamma function for which Γ(n) = (n −1)! when n is an integer. The parameters n and K
will determine the shape of the unit hydrograph. An increased number of reservoirs will
dampen the hydrograph and cause lag. K determines the storage time and thus also result
in lag (Chow et al., 1988).
In long narrow reservoirs, or where the water surface may be curved to backwatering, the
storage-discharge relationship is variable. Thus, the storage function is no longer a single
value function as seen in Figure 5a but a curve experiencing hysteresis as in Figure 5b.
The amount of storage due to backwatering depends on the rate of change of ﬂow through
the reservoir (Chow et al., 1988). The backwater causes retarding eﬀects, which result in
the peak outﬂow to occur later as seen in Figure 5.
Figure 5: Relationships between discharge and storage from Chow et al. (1988). R denotes
the maximum storage and P denotes the maximum outﬂow.
To handle variable discharge-storage relationships, the Muskingum method can be used.
In the Muskingum model, the storage is described by the wedge and prism storage shown
in Figure 6.
10
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 2
Model Classiﬁcation
Figure 6: Prism and wedge storages for the Muskingum model from (Chow et al., 1988).
By assuming that the cross-sectional area of the ﬂow is proportional to the discharge, Q, a
linear model for routing can be set up by the proportionality coeﬃcient, K:
S = KQ + KX(I −Q)
(10)
The X value depends on the shape of the area and ranges from 0 to 0.5 for a full wedge. If
X is set to 0 in Equation (10) a linear reservoir model is obtained as shown in Equation
(8) (Chow et al., 1988). In this model there is no backwatering and the model is a level
pool reservoir. A literature review of methods for coping with backwatering is presented in
the following section.
2.2.3
Coping with Backwater Effects
This subsection presents a literature review of various backwater models. Backwater eﬀects
can be included in various ways in order for the conceptual storage models to be comparable
to the full Saint-Venant equations.
As cited in Vanrolleghem et al. (2009) the term backwatering is deﬁned as the pipe ﬂow
capacity not being suﬃcient to cope with the maximum incoming ﬂow downstream. The
excess water is thus stored in the adverse direction i.e. in available upstream retention
volume. Flooding will occur when the retention volume in the drainage system is exceeded.
Backwater eﬀects in systems can be caused by diﬀerent types of downstream constraints
e.g. pipes with limited ﬂow capacities, weirs, storage basins, etc.
The backwater concept applied in Thrysøe (2015) is based on a water balance approach as
seen in Equation (11)
Qdrain,out,corr = Qdrain,out −a ·
Sdrain,down
Sdrain,down,max
(11)
Where Qdrain,out,corr is the corrected ﬂow from one compartment to the following, Qdrain,out
is the uncorrected ﬂow from one compartment to the next, a is a location speciﬁc ﬁtting
parameter, Sdrain,down is the storage in the downstream compartment and Sdrain,down,max is
the maximum storage in the downstream compartment. This method is developed from the
wedge storage principle in the Muskingum model shown in Figure 6, where the ﬁrst term
in Equation (10) and (11) both relate to the prism storage, which is when inﬂow balances
11
==PAGE:22==
Chapter 2
Model Classiﬁcation
outﬂow, and the second term is the wedge storage, which is the excess water when in-
ﬂow exceeds the outﬂow. This volume of water will therefore cause backwatering in the pipe.
Vanrolleghem et al. (2009) examines two methods for dealing with backwater eﬀects:
the nonlinear formulation of ﬂow-volume relationship in the SMUSI approach by Muschalla
et al. (2006), the combiner-splitter approach by Solvi et al. (2005) and a combination of
the two. The SMUSI backwater approach regards the water level upstream from a point
in the system causing backwatering to be horizontal. The activated retention capacity
is determined by a horizontal section through the above lying system, which is added to
the storage volume. This relates to the Thrysøe and Muskingum method for describing
backwatering.
The principle for the combiner-splitter approach can be seen in Figure 7.
Figure 7: Pipe-combiner-splitter approach to backwater eﬀects. Figure modiﬁed from Solvi
et al. (2005).
In this approach water is limited by a splitter, which determines the maximum ﬂow in
the current pipe. With splitter 3 as a starting point, if too much water is entering from
upstream, the water is simply divided at the splitter so that a predetermined maximum
ﬂow is sent downstream and the residual water is sent upstream, simulating backwater
eﬀects. At the combiner, excess water from the downstream splitter is combined with
water from the upstream pipe. If there is still too much water at splitter 2, the excess
water can be sent further upstream. It is found that the two approaches together provide
an accurate description of the full Saint Venant Equations determined in SWMM.
Based on this literature review two overall methods are identiﬁed for coping with backwater
eﬀects.
The ﬁrst is based on the backwater volume as in Muskingum, Thrysøe and
SMUSI methods. The second is based on the limiting ﬂow capacities in the system as
in combiner-splitter method. Therefore, the volume-based approach by Thrysøe (2015)
and the combiner-splitter approach by Solvi et al. (2005) will be applied to the surrogate
models in this study, since they cope with backwater in two diﬀerent ways.
12
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 3
Conceptual Set Up of Surrogate Models
3
Conceptual Set Up of Surrogate Models
By combining the knowledge gained in Chapter 2 surrogate models are set up to replace
parts of a MIKE FLOOD model. This chapter presents the conceptual description of these
surrogate models and the methods for determining the model parameters. The MATLAB
code for the surrogate models is shown in Appendix N.3 and will be referred to throughout
this chapter.
The surrogate models simulate the volume of water within a compartment, which is a
delineated area of the MIKE FLOOD model. A single surrogate model is a volume based
reservoir model, dependent on the water volume in the reservoir itself and the upstream
and downstream conditions. The MIKE FLOOD model will be replaced by two types
of surrogate models. The ﬁrst type simulates the volume of water within a drainage
compartment and will be referred to as a drainage surrogate model. The second surrogate
model simulates the volume of water within a surface compartment and will be referred
to as a surface surrogate model. The number and spatial extent of compartments for
the drainage and surface surrogate models will be the same for simplicity. The applied
surrogate models applied would categorize as a Level 1-2 drainage model as it partially
includes backwatering and a level 2 surface model, since it includes surface runoﬀbetween
depressions (see Figure 1).
A conceptual model of a single unit is shown in Figure 8 for a drainage and a surface
compartment. Each unit contains a drainage and a surface compartment. Water can
be exchanged between the drainage compartment, the surface compartment and other
upstream or downstream compartments.
Figure 8: Conceptual model for a single unit of surrogate models consisting of a drainage
and surface compartment.
Figure 9 illustrates two units with drainage and surface compartments in a system. From the
surface compartment, water is transported to a downstream depression by transport cells
so the travel time is represented and no storage is lost. From the drainage compartments
water is transported by direct transfer to downstream compartments.
13
==PAGE:24==
Chapter 3
Conceptual Set Up of Surrogate Models
Figure 9: Conceptual model of surface and drainage surrogate models compartments in
connection.
The inputs and outputs to the drainage and surface compartment are listed and described
below.
• Qprec
Rain input to drainage
• Qdrain,in
Discharge into drainage compartment from upstream compartment
• Qdrain,out
Discharge out of drainage compartment to downstream compartment
• Qﬂood
Discharge out of drainage compartment to surface compartment
• Qsurf−drain
Discharge out of surface compartment into drainage compartment
• Qsurf,out
Discharge out of surface depression into transport cells
• Qsurf,in
Discharge out of transport cells and into surface compartment
The remaining sections of this chapter will present the mass balance equations for the
surrogate models, the method for determining the discharge terms and a presentation of
the applied computational scheme.
3.1
Mass Balance Equations
Mass balances for the drainage and surface compartments are shown in Equation (12) and
(13), respectively.
∆sdrain
∆t
= Qprec(t) +
N
X
j=1
Qdrain,up,j(t) + Qsurf−drain(t)
|
{z
}
in
−
M
X
i=1
Qdrain,out,i(t) −Qﬂood(t)
|
{z
}
out
(12)
∆ssurf
∆t
= Qﬂood(t) +
N
X
j=1
Qsurf,up,j(t)
|
{z
}
in
−
M
X
i=1
Qsurf,out,i(t) −Qsurf−drain(t)
|
{z
}
out
(13)
where ∆sdrain
∆t
and ∆ssurf
∆t
are the changes in storage in the drainage compartment and the
surface compartment, respectively. The compartments can receive water from N upstream
compartments and can discharge water to M downstream compartments. The mass balance
is conducted in the MATLAB code shown in Appendix N.3.3.
14
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 3
Conceptual Set Up of Surrogate Models
3.2
Determining Discharges
In this section the method for determining the inputs and outputs for the drainage
compartment, the surface compartment and the exchange between them are presented.
3.2.1
Drainage Compartments
The surrogate model, describing the drainage compartments, can be classiﬁed as a response
surface surrogate (see Section 2.2.2) as the in- and outputs are determined by ﬁtting of
responses from the MIKE URBAN model. However, the precipitation input is determined
by physical parameters. The MATLAB code for the drainage compartments can be seen
in Appendix N.3.4.
Qprec
The precipitation input, Qprec [m3/s] is directly inserted into the drainage compartment.
This is to simplify surface runoﬀand ensure all surface water in the model is due to ﬂooding.
The discharge load from each catchment is found by:
Q = A · I · φ · rred
(14)
where Q is the catchment load [m3/s], A is the drainage area [m2], I is the rain intensity
[µm/s], φ is the impervious fraction and rred is the reduction factor. To imitate surface
runoﬀ, a simple moving average ﬁlter (SMA) is applied to the catchment load with the
time of concentration, tc [min]. Qprec with the SMA is found by:
Qprec = Qm + Qm−1 + ... + Qm−(n−1)
n
(15)
where Qm is the mth catchment load and n is the number of discharges of which the average
is taken. Qprec is calculated and aggregated for all catchments within the compartment.
The MATLAB code for determining the precipitation discharge to the compartments is
presented in Appendix N.3.2.
Qdrain,out
The input from the upstream drainage compartment(s), Qdrain,in,up [m3/s] is set as an input
to the drainage compartment. This is a volume-discharge function based on the volume
in the upstream drainage compartment(s), sdrain,up [m3]. The ﬂow out of the drainage
compartment, Qdrain,out, is a function of the volume state in the compartment itself, sdrain
[m3].
The discharge is determined by the steady state surface response from the MIKE URBAN
model using a range of diﬀerent rain intensities, I. The steady state volumes in each
compartment and discharge from each compartment are then used to construct piecewise
linear functions to describe the volume-discharge relation for the surrogate model. The
MATLAB code for producing these can be seen in Appendix N.3.6. An illustration of a
volume-discharge function is seen in Figure 10.
15
==PAGE:26==
Chapter 3
Conceptual Set Up of Surrogate Models
Figure 10: Sketched volume-discharge relation for a drainage surrogate model.
3.2.2
Surface Compartment
The surface surrogate models can be classiﬁed as lower-ﬁdelity physically based models as
they are build on physical relations and do not depend on the output of MIKE FLOOD (see
Section 2.2.1). The MATLAB code for the surface compartments can be seen in Appendix
N.3.5.
Qsurf,out
In the surface compartment, water can move to the next surface compartment, Qsurf,out
[m3/s], through transport cells. The discharge into the transport cells, Qsurf,out, is a
function of the water volume in the surface compartment, ssurf [m3], and the maximum
volume capacity in the surface compartment, ssurf,max [m3]. The maximum volume is found
by the volume in surface depressions as seen in Section 7. When the maximum volume in
a compartment is exceeded the excess water will be routed into transport cells and thus
out of the compartment as sketched in Figure 11.
Figure 11: Principle for determining discharge out of a surface compartment and into
transport cells in surface surrogate model.
Qsurf,in
For transport on the surface in the transport cells the Manning Equation (16) is applied
(Chow et al., 1988).
Qtrans = A · M · R2/3 · S1/2
f
(16)
where Qtrans is the discharge in the transportation cells [m3/s]. A is the cross sectional
area [m2], R is the hydraulic radius given by R = A
P [m], P is the wetted perimeter [m]
and Sf is the slope of the hydraulic grade line which is set to the channel bed slope when
assuming a constant water depth. The transport from the last cell will be the input to the
next compartment, Qsurf,in [m3/s].
16
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 3
Conceptual Set Up of Surrogate Models
Exchange Between Drainage and Surface Compartments
The exchange of water between the drainage and surface compartment is based on the
spilling ﬂowrate surface response from the MIKE URBAN model and the volumes in the
drainage and surface compartments.
Qﬂood
Discharge from the drainage compartment to the surface compartment, Qﬂood [m3/s], will
occur when the compartment capacity is full. Qﬂood [m3/s] is a function of the volume in
the drainage compartment, sdrain [m3] and will be found by ﬁtting the piecewise linear
functions to the steady state spilling discharges obtained from the MIKE URBAN model.
Figure 12 shows a sketch of the points with piecewise linear functions, which describes the
volume-discharge relationship.
Figure 12: Sketched volume-discharge relation for ﬂooding of the drainage compartment
to the surface compartment.
Qsurf−drain
If storage is available in the drainage compartment water will enter the drainage com-
partment from the surface compartment, Qsurf−drain [m3/s]. This will be a function of
the water volume on the surface, ssurf [m3], and the volume in the drainage compartment,
sdrain [m3], and also of the drainage volume, from where the ﬂooding begins sﬂoodlimit [m3].
The method for determining Qsurf−drain,out can be seen in Figure 13 and Equation (17).
Figure 13: Sketched volume-discharge relation for the ﬂooding of the drainage compartment
to the surface compartment. Showing the limit of when water will discharge back into the
drainage system.
17
==PAGE:28==
Chapter 3
Conceptual Set Up of Surrogate Models
Qsurf−drain =





0,
Sﬂood,limit < SDrain
Ssurf
∆t ,
Sﬂood,limit ≥SDrain,
SSurf ≤(Sﬂood,limit −SDrain)
Sﬂood,limit−Sdrain
∆t
,
Sﬂood,limit ≥SDrain,
SSurf > (Sﬂood,limit −SDrain)
(17)
When the storage limit for ﬂooding, Sﬂood,limit, is less than the amount of water in the
drainage compartment, SDrain, no discharge from the surface to the drainage compartment
will occur. If the limit for ﬂooding is less than or equal to the water volume on the surface,
there are two cases. When the volume on the surface SSurf is less or equal to the available
space in the drainage compartment, (Sﬂood,limit −SDrain), all water on the surface will be
moved to the drainage compartment.
If there is more water in the surface compartment, than the available space in the drainage
compartment, only the volume of water available in the drainage compartment will be
moved from the surface compartment to the drainage compartment. The remaining water
will stay in the surface compartment. The net discharge between the drainage and surface
compartment will be noted Qexchange.
3.3
Computational Scheme
The computational grid in the drainage surrogate models diﬀers from that in the MIKE
models as there is only one computational point for each drainage compartment as illus-
trated in Figure 14. The computational points in MIKE FLOOD from Figure 2 are also
illustrated in Figure 14.
As the links and nodes in the drainage network are lumped together in compartments, the
computational grid points will be reduced to the number of compartments. Similarly, the
computational grid points in the surface surrogate models are also reduced from one in
each surface cell to one in each compartment plus the number of transport cells between
the compartments as shown in Figure 9.
Figure 14: Comparison of computational grid for MIKE URBAN and the surrogate
models in the drainage system. The ﬁgure is modiﬁed from DHI (2014f).
Unlike the implicit method used in MIKE a Runge Kutta 4 solution scheme is used in
the surrogate models for solving the mass balance equations given in Equation (12) and
(13). Runge Kutta 4 is an explicit ﬁnite diﬀerence method which solves the initial value
problem: y′ = f(y, t), y(t0) = y0. Here, y is the volume, s, and f(y, t) are the right hand
side of Equations (12) and (13). This is discretized temporally according to:
18
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 3
Conceptual Set Up of Surrogate Models
yn+1 = yn + ∆t
6 (k1 + 2k2 + 2k3 + k4)
(18)
where:
k1 =f(tn, yn)
k2 =f(tn + ∆t
2 , yn + ∆t
2 k1)
k3 =f(tn + ∆t
2 , yn + ∆t
2 k2)
k4 =f(tn + ∆t
2 , yn + ∆t
2 k3)
(19)
As the distance between the computational points, and thus the compartments, is much
greater for the surrogate models than the physically based distributed model, the Courant
number given in Equation (4) will decrease. This means that the surrogate models al-
low for larger time steps with the same ∆x than the physically based distributed model.
The MATLAB code uses this Runge Kutta function in the code presented in Appendix N.3.3.
Both the surrogate models have been introduced and can now be applied.
The fol-
lowing chapters describe the methods and results for setting up the surrogate models in
the case study area presented in Chapter 4. First, the drainage compartments are set up
in Chapter 6. Then, the drainage surrogates are coupled with the surface surrogates in
Chapter 7.
19
==PAGE:30==
Chapter 4
Case Study Area
4
Case Study Area
The catchment area used to test the surrogate models is situated in the Danish city of
˚Arhus and consist of the urban area ˚Aby shown on Figure 15. There is one wastewater
treatment plant (WWTP) in the ˚Aby catchment as seen on the map. Viby WWTP is
located just south of the catchment and is connected by a pump. The lakes ˚Arslev Engsø
and Brabrand sø are located directly south of the catchment and separately piped rain
water from the city is discharged directly into the lakes at several locations. The lakes feed
water to ˚Arhus ˚A, a stream that runs through the centre of ˚Arhus and into the harbour.
˚Aby WWTP also discharges water into this stream.
Figure 15: Overview map of the ˚
Aby catchment. Created with GIS data from Geo-
datastyrelsen (2015).
˚Arhus Municipality (2014b) has presented a climate adaptation plan which includes a
ﬂood map shown in Figure 16a and a value map shown in Figure 16b. The ﬂood map is
computed from a 100-year rain event with a climate factor and shows areas in risk of being
ﬂooded from cloudburst and from ﬂooding of lakes and streams. Storm surges are not
included as the ˚Aby area is not located near the harbour. The map shows that ﬂooding
is expected to occur in some areas of the ˚Aby catchment, especially near the lakes. The
value map shows the damage cost of the two catchments in DKK given the same rain event
for each 100 x 100 m cell. This map does not take into account whether ﬂooding actually
occurs in the areas. From this, a risk map can be computed followed by a prioritizing of
the vulnerable areas.
20
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 4
Case Study Area
(a)
(b)
Figure 16: (a) Areas in risk of ﬂooding from a 100 year precipitation event in the ˚
Aby
catchment. (b) Value of the ˚
Aby catchment divided into 100 x 100 m. cells, where the
color of each cell shows the damage cost. Both maps are modiﬁed from ˚
Arhus Municipality
(2014b) and show ﬂooding from a 100-year rain event in 2050.
Today, 63 % of the drainage system in ˚Arhus Municipality consists of separate pipes, where
stormwater and wastewater is separated in two diﬀerent pipes. Around 12 % of the drained
areas only has wastewater drainage while precipitation is locally inﬁltrated or diverted to
a drain (˚Arhus Municipality, 2013b).
4.1
˚Abyhøj/Hasle Area
This study will focus on the ˚Abyhøj/Hasle area in the ˚Aby catchment, which is the blue
part of the map in Figure 17. Figure 18 shows a zoom of the Hasle/˚Abyhhøj area where
contour lines have been included. The area mainly consist of residential areas with parks,
graveyards, allotment gardens and the occasional industrial areas. It is a very hilly area, as
seen on Figure 18 which is reﬂected in the name ˚Abyhøj where ”høj” means hill in Danish.
The area slopes steeply south-east towards the stream ˚Arhus ˚A.
21
==PAGE:32==
Chapter 4
Case Study Area
Figure 17: Overview map of the ˚
Aby catchment where the ˚
Abyhøj/Hasle catchment is
outlined (blue). Created with GIS data from Geodatastyrelsen (2015).
Figure 18: Overview map of the ˚
Abyhøj/Hasle catchment with contour lines for every 5
m elevation diﬀerence. Created with GIS data from Geodatastyrelsen (2015).
22
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 5
Setting Up the MIKE Models
5
Setting Up the MIKE Models
A MIKE FLOOD model of the entire ˚Arhus catchment was provided by ˚Arhus Vand (2015).
The model contains a MIKE URBAN model of the planned future drainage system and
treatment plants and a DTM, describing the surface elevation. The full model can be
seen in Appendix B Figure 46. This section describes the process of altering and setting
up the MIKE URBAN model and the MIKE FLOOD model for the case study area to
obtain results for calibration of, and comparison to the surrogate models. The procedure
for setting up the MIKE models is presented in Appendix M.2.
5.1
MIKE URBAN
To reduce the size of the drainage model only ˚Aby catchment marked with purple color in
Figure 46 is selected and the rest of the model is removed. Since it is a future model of the
drainage system, some of the wastewater from the suburbs of ˚Arhus will be pumped to
˚Aby WWTP (˚Arhus Municipality, 2013a,b). As this study focuses on ﬂooding caused by
stormwater, these catchments are disregarded and removed from the model. The links in
the ﬁnal drainage model can be seen in Figure 19a.
Some basins included in the MIKE URBAN model describe lakes or low-lying green areas,
which can be used for temporary storage of water during heavy rain events. These artiﬁcial
basins have very large volumes and the water stored in these will not show as volume on
the surface, but as volume in the drainage system, which is misleading. Moreover, the
drainage system of the MIKE URBAN model must be able to attain steady state, for the
purpose of calibrating the drainage surrogate models. This means that when a rain event of
a certain intensity over a long period is applied to the system, a state of equilibrium should
be obtained where the water level is stabilized in all pipes, nodes and basins. However,
steady state is never obtained with these large basins. Therefore, they have been removed
from the model and converted to nodes where water can spill to the surface during ﬂooding.
A more detailed map showing remaining drainage basins, outlets, weirs, pumps, links and
catchments is seen in Figure 19b. The full catchment area is divided into sub catchments
which are either connected to the drainage system in a node or an outlet.
(a)
(b)
Figure 19: MIKE URBAN Model set up of ˚
Aby catchment. Created with GIS data from
(Geodatastyrelsen, 2015) and (˚
Arhus Vand, 2015). (a) Map of the outline of ˚
Aby catchment,
the drainage network and the location of the WWTP. (b) Links, basins, weirs, pumps and
catchments have been included in the model.
There are three diﬀerent manhole cover types in MIKE URBAN: normal, sealed and
23
==PAGE:34==
Chapter 5
Setting Up the MIKE Models
spilling. All manholes in the drainage system are set to have the cover type spilling, as this
is considered to describe the physical process of discharge from drainage to surface in the
MIKE FLOOD model. If sealed cover is chosen the node will have a ﬁxed lid on the top at
ground level meaning that water cannot escape even though pressure builds up inside. If
normal cover is chosen, the water is able to discharge back to the drainage system. This
should not be included in the calibration data since the discharge from the surface to the
drainage system should also depend on the volume on the surface as described in Section 3
Equation (17).
The rain input to the model is deﬁned by a DFS0 ﬁle. The applied rain inputs can
be seen in Appendix C. The time series is set to apply to all catchments. The time area
curves are deﬁned to be a time area curve 1 (linearly increasing). The time step is set
between 1 to 30 s.
When MIKE URBAN is running, it produces a result ﬁle, PRF, and a MEX ﬁle. The PRF
ﬁle contains water levels in all nodes and links and discharges from link/pump/weir etc. in
the drainage system. The MEX ﬁle contains information about the system set up.
5.2
MIKE FLOOD
Figure 20 shows a topographical map of the catchment with links and locations of the
WWTP. It is clear that ˚Aby catchment is sloping south towards the lakes and the stream
and the WWTP is located in the south-east part in the low-lying area of the model.
Furthermore, the pipes follow the topography and the WWTP is in the low-lying part of
the catchment.
Figure 20: Topographical map with links and location of the WWTP. Created with GIS
data from Geodatastyrelsen (2015) and ˚
Arhus Vand (2015)
.
5.2.1
Digital Terrain Model of the Surface
The surface model used in this study is a DTM (Digital Terrain Model) which means that
it describes the surface of the terrain and that buildings are removed (Jensen et al., 2010).
24
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 5
Setting Up the MIKE Models
Exclusion of buildings can lead to diﬀerent ﬂow paths and a DSM (Digital Surface Model)
could have been used instead. The resolution of the DTM is 10 x 10 m. This is a coarse
DTM which might inﬂuence water pathways on smaller streets and miss depressions in
the surface. A coarse DTM is better than a coarse DSM since buildings could disturb the
picture and important ﬂow paths could be missed. A ﬁne DSM would be most accurate
since it could locate ﬂow paths between buildings and determine local ﬂoods, but it would
also result in longer computational times.
The applied DTM has an incorporated hydrological adaptation layer so that surface
water can ﬂow under bridges or in pipes under roads. An example of this can be seen in
Figure 21. In the center of the ﬁgure, it is seen that water can ﬂow on the road and pass
under the highway. Similarly, just north of Skovvang water in the small stream can pass
under the highway. These adaptations have been modiﬁed from the original DTM to make
water ﬂow more correct on the surface.
(a)
(b)
Figure 21: (a) Topographical map showing an example of hydrological adaptation to the
DTM. (b) Greyscale map of the same area. Created with GIS data from Geodatastyrelsen
(2015)
5.2.2
Coupling of the Drainage System to the Surface
In MIKE URBAN the DTM is added as a MIKE 21 layer and coupled to the drainage
system using MIKE FLOOD, which controls the transfer between the drainage and the
surface. This transfer is controlled by the Oriﬁce Equation (3) as described in Section
2.1.3. Each manhole in the drainage model is coupled to a number of surface cells. This is
set to four cells to improve link stability as recommended in DHI (2011).
An example of the 2D coupling can be seen in Figure 22. If the elevation of the links cells
is diﬀerent, the average elevation is computed and used for all four cells (DHI, 2011). In
cases of disagreement between the ground level of the nodes between MIKE URBAN and
25
==PAGE:36==
Chapter 5
Setting Up the MIKE Models
MIKE 21, the MIKE URBAN ground levels are overwritten with ground levels from the
DTM. During this process the gap between the two values are estimated to ensure that
there were no major changes in the drainage hydraulics. During a ﬂood, the drainage
system is ﬁlled and water spills out to the connected surface cells from where the surface
ﬂow is calculated by MIKE 21.
Figure 22: Example of coupled 2D nodes. Each node is connected to four surface cells.
Created with GIS data from (Geodatastyrelsen, 2015) and (˚
Arhus Vand, 2015).
5.2.3
Outputs
Like in the MIKE URBAN model, the MIKE FLOOD model produces a PRF ﬁle containing
water levels in all nodes and links and discharges from link/pump/weir etc. Moreover,
DFS2 raster ﬁles are created. These contain information about maximum water level, time
at maximum water level and other information which will not be used. These can be
imported to MIKE URBAN or ArcGis as raster layers.
26
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 6
1D Surrogate Modelling of MIKE URBAN
6
1D Surrogate Modelling of MIKE URBAN
This chapter introduces the applied method for constructing the drainage surrogate models
in the ˚Abyhøj/Hasle area and a comparison of the surrogate model results to the MIKE
URBAN results.
6.1
Setting Up the Drainage Surrogate Model
The construction of the drainage compartments will be presented in this section. As
discussed in Section 3 the drainage surrogate models will be response surface surrogates.
Thus, they will not describe the physical processes in the drainage system, but instead the
response surface of the MIKE URBAN model. The drainage surrogate models are set up
in four steps which is done in the following sections:
• 6.1.1: Division of compartments
• 6.1.2: Extraction of data from MIKE URBAN
• 6.1.3: Calibration of drainage surrogate models with MIKE URBAN surface response
• 6.1.4: Estimation of attenuation and backwater eﬀects
The last step will be carried out when comparing the results of the surrogate models to the
MIKE URBAN results. The importance of the compartment division will also be discussed
in Section 6.2, where the compartment size and shapes will be varied to serve diﬀerent
purposes. Appendix M shows an overview of this process.
6.1.1
Division Into Compartments
Requirements for the drainage compartments are as follows. The compartments must:
have as few links as possible going in and out of the compartment, have no bidirectional
ﬂow across compartment boundaries, be constructed to serve the objective. The drainage
system in ˚Abyhøj/Hasle catchment is divided into compartments using GIS as illustrated
in Figure 23. The enumeration of the compartments and their linkage is automatically
determined by the MATLAB code presented in N.1 and N.2 and can be seen in Figure 23c.
Therefore, the enumeration has no physical meaning. Appendix L explains how the water
balance is automatically modelled in MATLAB.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 23: Division of drainage system into compartments. The Figures contain: (a)
The links in the model. (b) The compartments and the links. (c) The compartments, the
compartment numbers and arrows to indicate how the compartments are linked. Created
with data from ˚
Arhus Vand (2015).
27
==PAGE:38==
Chapter 6
1D Surrogate Modelling of MIKE URBAN
For most compartments more than one pipe is connecting two compartments. It is seen
that only the compartment DrHolst (3) has one pipe leaving and one pipe entering. The
compartment Fuglebakken (4) actually leads water to two compartments: BSIngemann
(2) and Oldhojen (10) through three diﬀerent pipes.
The pipes leading to the same
compartment are merged into one big pipe in the surrogate models. The division into
compartments for the ˚Abyhøj/Hasle part of the ˚Aby catchment is seen in Figure 24 on a
large map.
Figure 24: Compartments in the Hasle/˚
Abyhøj catchment. Created with GIS data from
Geodatastyrelsen (2015) from ˚
Arhus Vand (2015).
6.1.2
Extraction of Data from MIKE URBAN
To obtain a response surface which covers varying rain intensities the MIKE URBAN
model is run with the staircase rain. It consists of gradually increasing steps to a maximum
intensity of 20 µm/s as shown in Appendix C.1. The time of each intensity step is evaluated
visually to obtain steady state, which is achieved when there is no change in volume in
each compartments over time. It is found that the length of the steps should be 24 h to
ensure steady state in each intensity step.
A network simulation in MIKE URBAN is done instead of a 2D network simulation
in MIKE FLOOD. By not including the surface, the model is much faster, and there is
no water reentering from the surface model to interfere with the drainage system. The
nodes are set to spilling nodes, as this is considered to give the most adequate physical
description as discussed in Section 5.
28
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 6
1D Surrogate Modelling of MIKE URBAN
The required outputs for calibration and comparison of the drainage compartments are
listed below:
• Discharge in links connecting compartments
• Volume in compartments
• Spilling ﬂowrate from the compartments to the surface
Discharge in links connecting compartments
As described in Section 5.1 the PRF ﬁle contains discharge for all links in the model. The
result ﬁle from the model is saved and converted to CSV format using the M11Extra
application as described in DHI (2014d). All links in each compartment are identiﬁed
using shape ﬁles which are created to show the extend of each compartment as seen in
Figure 24. Then, the Clip tool of the analysis toolbox in ArcGis is used to extract DBF
ﬁles of links in each compartment. Links present in the DBF ﬁles of two compartments
must consequently connect the compartments. This information can be used to identify
the connecting links between all compartments. The MATLAB code for this can be seen
in Appendix N.2.1 and N.2.2.
Volume in compartments
The volumes in the drainage compartments are also required. These are extracted by
including an additional parameter ﬁle (ADP) in the MIKE URBAN simulation. An ADP
is created, which includes information on which links and nodes belong to the diﬀerent
compartments. More information of the construction of the ADP ﬁle can be found in
Appendix D. The ﬁle is applied when running the MIKE URBAN simulations. It computes
the volume in each drainage compartment which is then included in the PRF ﬁle. The
volume data is then used to calibrate the surrogate models. The process of creating the
ADP ﬁle is automatized. This is done by using the shape ﬁles created in GIS as described
above. These are loaded into MATLAB and the MATLAB code presented in Appendix
N.1.1 then writes the ﬁle.
Spilling ﬂowrates from compartments
To compute the spilling rate an extra result ﬁle, XRF, is produced during the MIKE
URBAN simulation. This is done by altering the DHIAPP.INI ﬁle in the project folder.
The changes in the DHIAPP.INI ﬁle can be found in Appendix D. From this the extra
result ﬁle can be added to the result ﬁle, PRF, in MIKE VIEW and the ﬂooding discharge
can be extracted as a TXT ﬁle. In MATLAB the data is sorted according to which nodes
belongs to which compartment by the code in Appendix N.2.3.
6.1.3
Calibration of Drainage Compartments
The resulting volume, discharge and ﬂood discharge from the various compartments are
extracted to MATLAB. The data is sorted to only include the last value in each of the
staircase steps to ensure steady state. This is done in the MATLAB code shown in Appendix
N.2.4. Then the discharge from one compartment to another, and the discharge from one
compartment to the surface, is plotted as functions of the volume in the compartment.
Resulting steady state data for each compartment can be seen in Figure 53 in Appendix
E.1. As the volumes in the compartments increase, so does the discharges out of the
compartment. Generally, the discharge stagnates towards a maximum value for the largest
volumes. This indicates that the available space downstream has decreased. The function
approximation method used in this study is piecewise linear functions, which are ﬁtted to
the calibration points to describe the volume-discharge relationship for each compartment
as described in Section 3. These functions will determine the outﬂow of each compartment
to the downstream compartment and to the surface, from the volume in the compartment.
29
==PAGE:40==
Chapter 6
1D Surrogate Modelling of MIKE URBAN
The steady state volume discharge relations from Appendix E.1 Figure 53 is used as points
for ﬁtting of piecewise linear functions to obtain the volume-discharge functions which is
shown in Figure 26 (see MATLAB code in Appendix N.3.6).
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
 out
 12
Compartment no. 2
Volume in compartment [m3]
Discharge [m3/s]
(a)
0
100
200
300
400
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
 12
Compartment no. 3
Volume in compartment [m3]
Discharge [m3/s]
(b)
0
200
400
600
800
1000
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
 2
 10
Compartment no. 4
Volume in compartment [m3]
Discharge [m3/s]
(c)
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
 2
 3
Compartment no. 8
Volume in compartment [m3]
Discharge [m3/s]
(d)
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
0
1
2
3
4
5
 out
Compartment no. 10
Volume in compartment [m3]
Discharge [m3/s]
(e)
0
2000
4000
6000
0
2
4
6
8
 out
Compartment no. 12
Volume in compartment [m3]
Discharge [m3/s]
(f)
Figure 26: Calibration data for discharge out of compartment, Qout,drain, to the down-
stream compartments (number given in graphs) or out of the ˚
Abyhøj/Hasle catchment
and discharge to the surface, Qflood for all compartments in the ˚
Abyhøj/Hasle catchment.
Steady state data ﬁtted by piecewise linear functions.
30
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 6
1D Surrogate Modelling of MIKE URBAN
By connecting the points with linear pieces it is thus assumed that there is a linear
correlation between the volume and discharge in between the calibration points. The
calibration curves are forced through (0,0) which is included in the calibration data. The
volume-discharge functions are subsequently applied in the surrogate models to determine,
Qdrain,out, presented in Section 3 Equation (12).
6.1.4
Attenuation and Backwater Effects
Attenuation in the system can be examined by comparing to MIKE URBAN data. If the
peaks are delayed and dispersed, this process can be included in the model. If there are
backwater eﬀects in the system, this can be handled by one or more of the processes shown
in Section 2.2.3. Consideration of these are done when the surrogate models are compared
to the MIKE URBAN model in Section 6.2.
6.2
Comparison of MIKE URBAN and
Drainage Surrogate Models
This section compares the resulting volumes and discharges for each compartment con-
structed in Section 6.1.1 for the drainage surrogate models and the MIKE URBAN model.
The two models are compared for various types of precipitation input and the sizes and
shapes of the drainage compartments are varied to examine its inﬂuence on the results.
6.2.1
Staircase Rain
With the staircase rain presented in Appendix C.1 the surrogate models are calibrated
with the endpoint in each step in the staircase. At these points the model has reached
steady state as the volume and discharges are not changing over time. Comparison of the
resulting volumes and discharges from each compartment from the surrogate model and
MIKE URBAN for this staircase rain presented in Figure 27. The compartment number is
given in Section 6.1 Figure 23c.
In Figure 27 it is generally seen that the results from the surrogate models and MIKE
URBAN model are very similar in all compartments. Volumes, discharge and ﬂooding
discharge all follow the pattern of the precipitation and increases each day due to an
increase in the precipitation intensity. At day four, the volume in each compartment
increase more than in the previous time steps as the rain intensity increases with 2 µm/s,
from 2 µm/s to 4 µm/s, instead of an increase of 0.5 µm/s. From here, the increase in
volume per time step, generally decreases as the available storage in the compartment
decreases. As the available storage in the downstream compartment is ﬁlled the discharge
between the compartments also decrease due to the downstream constraints. The two
most upstream compartments are compartments 4 and 8. They do not receive water from
upstream and the volume in these compartments only depend on the ﬂooding discharge and
the discharge to the downstream compartments. Hence, these compartments are expected
to show the smallest discrepancies between the two models. However, for compartment 8
in Figure 27d there is a small diﬀerence in the beginning of each time step as the surrogate
model has a quicker response than the MIKE URBAN. As steady state has not been
reached in the beginning of the time step, the MIKE URBAN is delayed and thus slower
to reach the steady state volume. For compartment 4 in Figure 27c this delay is not seen.
The diﬀerence between the two compartments could be found in the compartment size and
shape. Compartment 8 is longer and larger than compartment 4. Thus, water entering the
drainage system far upstream in compartment 8 will be delayed by the retention time in
the compartment. The phenomenon is also clear when comparing the volume-discharge
31
==PAGE:42==
Chapter 6
1D Surrogate Modelling of MIKE URBAN
relations from MIKE URBAN and surrogate models as shown in Appendix F.1 Figure
57d. The surrogate models assumes a linear connection between the calibration points,
whereas the MIKE URBAN has an increase in the volume without an immediate increase
in discharge. This delay is to some degree present in all the MIKE URBAN results.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
0
0.75
1.5
2.25
3
 12
Compartment no. 2
Time [d]
Discharge [m3/s]
0
800
1600
2400
3200
Volume [m3]
(a)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
0
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
 12
Compartment no. 3
Time [d]
Discharge [m3/s]
0
75
150
225
300
Volume [m3]
(b)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
0
0.75
1.5
2.25
3
 2
 10
Compartment no. 4
Time [d]
Discharge [m3/s]
0
225
450
675
900
Volume [m3]
(c)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
0
1.5
3
4.5
6
 2
 3
Compartment no. 8
Time [d]
Discharge [m3/s]
0
800
1600
2400
3200
Volume [m3]
(d)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
0
1.25
2.5
3.75
5
Compartment no. 10
Time [d]
Discharge [m3/s]
0
525
1050
1575
2100
Volume [m3]
(e)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
0
2
4
6
8
Compartment no. 12
Time [d]
Discharge [m3/s]
0
1325
2650
3975
5300
Volume [m3]
(f)
Figure 27: Comparison of the Surrogate Models (SM) to the MIKE URBAN model (MU)
for the staircase rain. SM calibrated with multiple piecewise linear functions. Comparison
of discharge out of the compartment, Qdrain,out, to the downstream compartments (number
given in graphs) or out of the ˚
Abyhøj/Hasle catchment and discharge to the surface, Qflood
for all compartments in the ˚
Abyhøj/Hasle catchment and volume in compartment, S.
32
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 6
1D Surrogate Modelling of MIKE URBAN
Compartment 2 is the most complex compartment as it receives water from two com-
partments and discharges to two compartments. This is also the compartment with the
worst ﬁt between the volume in the surrogate models and MIKE URBAN. In Figure
27a there is a large increase in volume at day 9. This is probably due to backwatering.
The shift in discharge to compartment 12 is reduced due to downstream constraints.
The discharge in the outlet pipe from compartment 2 also stagnates towards its maxi-
mum discharge capacity at 0.48 m3/s and reaches this at day time. As this discharge
out of the compartment is held constant, the volume of water in the compartment increases.
After this time step the increased volume of water results in an increase in the ﬂood-
ing discharge. There is a clear delay of the MIKE URBAN volume compared to the
surrogate model volume in this time step. This is also visible in Appendix F.1 Figure 57a,
where the volume-ﬂooding discharge relation for the surrogate model is clearly oversim-
pliﬁed as the MIKE URBAN allows for no change in ﬂooding discharge for a range of
volumes.
A smaller interval between the calibration points would have reduced this error. Overall, a
very good ﬁt of the surrogate models to the MIKE URBAN model is achieved. In Appendix
F.4 only two calibration points are used to achieve one linear function, describing the
volume-dsicharge relation as seen in Appendix E.4. This description is clearly too simple
and more calibration points are needed. However, for many cases the number of functions
could be reduced and still capture the volume-discharge shapes.
6.2.2
Pulse Rain
Previously it was found that the use of a piecewise linear interpolation between the volume
and discharge steady state data points was enough to describe the surrogate model response
to static rain events. However, the MIKE URBAN model showed a delay in the beginning
of each step with changing rain intensity.
To examine this further a pulse of 15 µm/s for 10 minutes as seen in Appendix C.2
is send through the models. To avoid problems with having no water in the system, a
constant level of 5 µm/s is used before and after the pulse, where it is ensured that the
MIKE URBAN model has reached steady state before the pulse begins. When a high pulse
is introduced in an empty system, the diﬀerences between the models become higher, as
shown in Appendix F.2 Figure 58.
A comparison between MIKE URBAN and surrogate model for resulting volumes and
discharges for the pulse of 15 µm/s for 10 minutes with a base of 5 µm/s is seen in Figure
28.
33
==PAGE:44==
Chapter 6
1D Surrogate Modelling of MIKE URBAN
0
1
2
3
4
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
 12
Compartment no. 2
Time [h]
Discharge [m3/s]
0
300
600
900
1200
1500
Volume [m3]
(a)
0
1
2
3
4
0
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
 12
Compartment no. 3
Time [h]
Discharge [m3/s]
0
60
120
180
240
300
Volume [m3]
(b)
0
1
2
3
4
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
 2
 10
Compartment no. 4
Time [h]
Discharge [m3/s]
0
160
320
480
640
800
Volume [m3]
(c)
0
1
2
3
4
0
0.75
1.5
2.25
3
 2
 3
Compartment no. 8
Time [h]
Discharge [m3/s]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Volume [m3]
(d)
0
1
2
3
4
0
0.75
1.5
2.25
3
Compartment no. 10
Time [h]
Discharge [m3/s]
0
340
680
1020
1360
1700
Volume [m3]
(e)
0
1
2
3
4
0
1.25
2.5
3.75
5
Compartment no. 12
Time [h]
Discharge [m3/s]
0
980
1960
2940
3920
4900
Volume [m3]
(f)
Figure 28: Comparison of surrogate models (SM) to MIKE URBAN (MU) model for
pulse input of 15 µm/s for 10 min seen in Appendix C.2. Comparison of discharge out of
compartment, Qdrain,out, to the downstream compartments (number given in graphs) or out
of the ˚
Abyhøj/Hasle catchment and discharge to the surface, Qflood for all compartments
in the ˚
Abyhøj/Hasle catchment and volume in compartment, S.
The resulting surrogate model volumes and discharges ﬁt the MIKE URBAN data well
for these rapid changes. However, there are few discrepancies between the models. First,
in compartment 8 the steady state volume for 5 µm/s is reached earlier for the surrogate
model than for the MIKE URBAN model. This reﬂects the earlier ﬁndings, conﬁrming
that the compartment has a longer response time perhaps due to its size. For the same
34
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 6
1D Surrogate Modelling of MIKE URBAN
reason the peak volume for the MIKE URBAN model is smaller and more dispersed than
for the surrogate model. A possible solution could be to divide the compartment into
smaller compartments, which is done in Section 6.3. In the beginning of the time period,
there are some discrepancies between the two models for the discharge from compartment
2 to compartment 4. This is due to a downstream weir in compartment 2, which causes an
initial constraint on the discharge. The weir causes the upstream water level to ﬂuctuate,
which result in ﬂuctuations in the discharge. At times the discharge is negative. This is
also why compartment 2 experiences an immediate volume increase in the MIKE URBAN
model. A closer look on the discharge and the weir structure can be seen in Appendix G.
By examining the change between the pulse for the upstream compartments and for
the downstream compartments, the travel time in the system can be determined. In
compartment 12, the peak is more dispersed which indicates that the water contributing
from the upstream catchments arrives in compartment 12 later than the direct rain load.
However, eﬀects of backwatering and attenuation in the system are so small that no further
action is taken for improving on these eﬀects.
The volume-discharge relationship for the pulse is seen in Figure 29. The MIKE URBAN
model follows the shape of the volume-discharge curve of the calibration points, but in most
cases there is hysteresis due to backwater eﬀects as shown in Section 2.2 Figure 5. The
loops are often narrow around the calibration points resulting in a good ﬁt, shown in Figure
28. For compartments 2 and 12, which experience a wider volume-discharge loop, the
discrepancies in Figure 28 are larger. Examining the volume-discharge relationship further
the issues when starting from an empty system is visible as the MIKE URBAN model
rarely ﬁts the calibration data initially. This occurs in compartment 3, which in Figure
28b shows an immediate ﬂooding in the MIKE URBAN model, whereas the calibration
points suggest a delay. In Figure 29b this diﬀerence is clear, since the ﬂooding discharge in
the MIKE URBAN model increases quicker than the calibration points. The volume in
compartment 3 increases while the ﬂooding discharge remains constant. A reason for this
could be, that the response to the precipitation input does not occur immediately. During
the travel time within a compartment, water will contribute to the total volume without
increasing the ﬂooding discharge. The discharge between compartment 4 and 2 (as seen in
Figure 29c) does not respond as expected when comparing to the steady state data. At a
certain point, the discharge becomes negative while the volume increases. This could be
explained by the fact that there is a structure consisting of basins, weirs and pumps in the
upstream part of compartment 2, which could cause unnatural responses in its proximity.
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
 out
 12
Compartment no. 2
Volume in compartment [m3]
Discharge [m3/s]
(a)
0
100
200
300
400
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
 12
Compartment no. 3
Volume in compartment [m3]
Discharge [m3/s]
(b)
35
==PAGE:46==
Chapter 6
1D Surrogate Modelling of MIKE URBAN
0
200
400
600
800
1000
−0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
 2
 10
Compartment no. 4
Volume in compartment [m3]
Discharge [m3/s]
(c)
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
 2
 3
Compartment no. 8
Volume in compartment [m3]
Discharge [m3/s]
(d)
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
0
1
2
3
4
5
 out
Compartment no. 10
Volume in compartment [m3]
Discharge [m3/s]
(e)
0
2000
4000
6000
0
2
4
6
8
 out
Compartment no. 12
Volume in compartment [m3]
Discharge [m3/s]
(f)
Figure 29: Comparison of the volume-discharge relationship between the steady state
calibration data and the MIKE URBAN (MU) model for a pulse input of 15 µm/s for 10 min.
Comparison by discharge out of the compartment, Qout, to the downstream compartments
(number given in graphs) or out of the ˚
Abyhøj/Hasle catchment (out) and discharge to
the surface, Qflood for all compartments in the ˚
Abyhøj/Hasle catchment and volume in
compartment, S.
6.2.3
Historical Rain Event
To test the surrogate models on real rain events, two events corresponding to 10-year
events are applied in MIKE URBAN and surrogate models. The two rain series are from
measurement stations 30201 M˚aløv and 30316 Vedbæk and can be seen in Appendix C.5
Figure 51 and Appendix C.6 Figure 52, respectively. Comparison of the surrogate models
and MIKE URBAN model for M˚aløv rain event can be seen in Figure 30.
36
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 6
1D Surrogate Modelling of MIKE URBAN
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0
0.5
1
1.5
2 12
Compartment no. 2
Time [min]
Discharge [m3/s]
0
360
720
1080
1440
1800
Volume [m3]
(a)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
 12
Compartment no. 3
Time [min]
Discharge [m3/s]
0
60
120
180
240
300
Volume [m3]
(b)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0
0.75
1.5
2.25
3
 2
 10
Compartment no. 4
Time [min]
Discharge [m3/s]
0
180
360
540
720
900
Volume [m3]
(c)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0
1
2
3
4
 2
 3
Compartment no. 8
Time [min]
Discharge [m3/s]
0
520
1040
1560
2080
2600
Volume [m3]
(d)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0
1
2
3
4
Compartment no. 10
Time [min]
Discharge [m3/s]
0
380
760
1140
1520
1900
Volume [m3]
(e)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0
1.25
2.5
3.75
5
Compartment no. 12
Time [min]
Discharge [m3/s]
0
960
1920
2880
3840
4800
Volume [m3]
(f)
Figure 30: Comparison of surrogate models (SM) with MIKE URBAN (MU) model for
historical rain series measured at 30201 M˚aløv as seen in Appendix C.5. Comparison of
discharge out of compartment to the downstream compartments (number given in graphs) or
out of the ˚
Abyhøj/Hasle catchment and discharge to the surface, Qflood for all compartments
in the ˚
Abyhøj/Hasle catchment and volume in compartment, S.
Again, there are large diﬀerences between the models when the system starts empty.
Moreover, the peak of ﬂooding generally occurs faster for the MIKE URBAN model than
the surrogate models and the peak discharge is higher. The maximum intensity of the rain
exceeds the maximum intensity applied for calibration of the drainage surrogate models.
The underestimated peaks might be due to the fact that the surrogate models are not
37
==PAGE:48==
Chapter 6
1D Surrogate Modelling of MIKE URBAN
calibrated for such high intensities. Figure 31 shows the comparison of the surrogate
models and the MIKE URBAN model for the rain event at 30316 Vedbæk.
0
15
30
45
60
75
90
0
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
 12
Compartment no. 2
Time [min]
Discharge [m3/s]
0
180
360
540
720
900
Volume [m3]
(a)
0
15
30
45
60
75
90
0
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
 12
Compartment no. 3
Time [min]
Discharge [m3/s]
0
40
80
120
160
200
Volume [m3]
(b)
0
15
30
45
60
75
90
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
 2
 10
Compartment no. 4
Time [min]
Discharge [m3/s]
0
120
240
360
480
600
Volume [m3]
(c)
0
15
30
45
60
75
90
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
 2
 3
Compartment no. 8
Time [min]
Discharge [m3/s]
0
400
800
1200
1600
2000
Volume [m3]
(d)
0
15
30
45
60
75
90
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Compartment no. 10
Time [min]
Discharge [m3/s]
0
180
360
540
720
900
Volume [m3]
(e)
0
15
30
45
60
75
90
0
0.75
1.5
2.25
3
Compartment no. 12
Time [min]
Discharge [m3/s]
0
560
1120
1680
2240
2800
Volume [m3]
(f)
Figure 31: Comparison of surrogate models (SM) with MIKE URBAN (MU) model for
historical rain series measured at 30316 Vedbæk as seen in Appendix C.6. Comparison of
discharge out of compartment, Qdrain,out, to the downstream compartments (number given
in graphs) or out of the ˚
Abyhøj/Hasle catchment and discharge to the surface, Qflood for
all compartments in the ˚
Abyhøj/Hasle catchment and volume in compartment, S.
The same tendencies are seen as with M˚aløv. The peaks are generally underestimated by
the surrogate models. However, as the rain intensity is lower than for M˚aløv, the peaks are
38
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 6
1D Surrogate Modelling of MIKE URBAN
much better captured for Vedbæk. The compartments with the largest discrepancies are
the same as discussed in Section 6.2.2 due to their inaccurate volume-discharge description.
In conclusion, it is found that the drainage surrogate models are able to give a good
approximation of the MIKE URBAN model using diﬀerent rain events. However, for rain
events which exceeds the rain intensities used to calibrate the surrogate models as with
M˚aløv in Section 6.2.3, the surrogate models were not able to fully capture the behaviour of
the MIKE URBAN. In this case, the surface response must be widened for the calibration.
Moreover, there are some issues with simulating a rain event on an empty system as the
initial ﬁlling is not well described by the surrogate models. A possible solution is to apply
a base as in Section 6.2.2 or to include the ﬁlling in the calibration of the surrogate models.
The following sections examine the eﬀects of the size of the compartments and backwatering
eﬀects.
6.3
Effects of Smaller Compartments on Drainage Results
To examine the eﬀects of the compartment sizes, this is varied in this section for compart-
ment Klokker (8) to improve the results obtained in Section 6.2.2. Compartment Klokker
(8) is divided into 3 compartments: Klokker1 (8.1), Klokker2 (8.2) and Klokker3 (8.3).
The division of the compartments is shown in Figure 32. Figure 32a shows the numbering
and compartment connections while Figure 32b shows the compartments and the drainage
system.
(a)
(b)
Figure 32: Compartment divisions in the ˚
Abyhøj/Hasle catchment when Klokker (8) is
divided into three subcompartments: Klokker1 (8.1), Klokker2 (8.2) and Klokker3 (8.3).
The maps are created with GIS data from (Geodatastyrelsen, 2015) and (˚
Arhus Vand, 2015).
The new calibration data can be seen in Appendix E.2 Figure 54 where the steady state
data is ﬁtted to piecewise linear functions. The calibration data for compartment Klokker3
(8.3) has the same pattern as Klokker (8) except that there is a smaller volume and ﬂooding
39
==PAGE:50==
Chapter 6
1D Surrogate Modelling of MIKE URBAN
discharge in the compartment. With this new calibration data the same pulse of 15 µm/s
seen in Appendix C.2 is applied to the surrogate models. The resulting volumes, discharges
and ﬂooding discharges can be seen in Figure 33 for the Klokker compartments.
0
1
2
3
4
0
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
 7
Compartment no. 8.1
Time [h]
Discharge [m 3/s]
0
60
120
180
240
300
Volume [m 3]
(a)
0
1
2
3
4
0
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
 8
Compartment no. 8.2
Time [h]
Discharge [m 3/s]
0
40
80
120
160
200
Volume [m 3]
(b)
0
1
2
3
4
0
0.75
1.5
2.25
3
 2
 3
Compartment no. 8.3
Time [h]
Discharge [m 3/s]
0
420
840
1260
1680
2100
Volume [m 3]
(c)
Figure 33: Comparison of surrogate models (SM) with MIKE URBAN (MU) model
for pulse input of 15 µm/s seen in Appendix C.2 for the three Klokker compartments.
Comparison of discharge out of compartment, Qdrain,out, to the downstream compartments
(number given in graphs) and discharge to the surface, Qflood and volume in compartment,
S.
Compartment Klokker3 (8.3) in Figure 33c still has the same discrepancies as the previous
Klokker compartment in Figure 28d. The new compartment 8.3 is the largest and includes
the drainage loop. There is some non-stationary behaviour in the ﬂooding discharge,
which cannot be captured by the surrogate models. This results in a volume error in the
beginning. The peak is described well by the surrogate model. For compartments 8.1
and 8.2, which are smaller, the MIKE URBAN data is described well by the surrogate
models. For compartment 8.1 the discharge to compartment 8.2 is overestimated at the
peak as the volume in the surrogate model is larger than in the MIKE URBAN model.
The error of assuming a linear connection between the steady state calibration points is
very clear in compartment 8.2 in Appendix E.2 Figure 33b. In the ﬂooding discharge,
the surrogate model shows ﬂooding both before and after the peak, whereas the MIKE
URBAN results are zero before and after. If this is compared to the calibration data in
Figure 54b, the volume calibration points are very few within the volume range experienced
in the compartment. Between the points of 87.4 and 145.6 m3 a linear function is made
40
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 6
1D Surrogate Modelling of MIKE URBAN
which causes the ﬂooding discharge to be set to a value in between the two calibration points.
Generally, the ﬁtting of the three new compartments is not better than the ﬁtting of
one compartment. The largest of the new compartments Klokker1 (8.3) still shows the
same discrepancies as Klokker (8) did before the division due to the weir in compartment 2.
The surrogate models are however, fully capable of describing the smaller compartments.
In general, the ﬁt of the compartments is so good that there is no need to further divide the
compartments and the possibility of combining the compartments into larger compartments
could be considered.
6.4
Including Backwatering in Surrogate Model
As seen in the previous sections, backwater eﬀects in the system, are very small due to
the steep catchment. In order to examine this process further, it was attempted to force
backwatering in the most ﬂat parts of the area, by reducing the size of outgoing pipes.
However, the backwater eﬀects were still not clear and thus it was decided to create a test
area in which the methods from Section 2.2.3 could be examined. The test area is shown
in Appendix H Figure 63.
Currently the drainage surrogate models described in Section 3 are only able to reproduce
the result of the examined surface, and is thus not dependent on the state of surrounding
surrogate models. Backwatering is in a way included in the model as the volume-discharge
relationship is decreasing for high volumes. If there was no backwatering this would have
been more linear. Therefore, backwatering for the surface response used for calibration is
included and therefore it does not cause issues in the system. However, the surrogate models
should be able reproduce the MIKE URBAN model results with diﬀerent downstream
constraints, which is not included in the response surface of the MIKE URBAN used for
calibration. Diﬀerent downstream constraints may occur when a rain event is not evenly
distributed over the catchment or if control of downstream structures such as weirs are
changed from the state used in calibration.
If the ﬂow out of a compartment is reduced by a controlling structure, the Solvi ap-
proach presented in Section 2.2.3 can be applied. Results for discharge and volume in
the test system with and without Solvi can be seen in Appendix H Figure 64 and 66. It
is seen that the Solvi approach improves the volume in the compartments aﬀected by
backwatering. However, the method is not able to simulate pressurized pipes and it does
not show variations of the ﬂow when it is higher than the theoretical. For the discharges it
provides a worse ﬁt than the original model.
If there are no changes in the physical system, the Solvi approach will not be able
to simulate this as it is purely based on the theoretical ﬂow allowed in the pipes. Thus, the
discharge from a compartment can be determined as a response of the downstream volume.
A possible solution of this could be to calibrate the outﬂow of each surrogate based on
the volume of the downstream surrogate. This could either be done so that the discharge
from the compartment is solely dependent on the downstream compartment or both the
compartment itself and the downstream compartment. The best option would be that
the discharge is dependent on both volumes as this will be the most correct description
of diﬀerent situations. If this should be included without changing the surface response
used for calibration, the Thrysøe (2015) and Muskingum approach presented in Section
2.2.3 Equation 11 can be applied. When applying this it might be that the discharge from
the compartments is not linearly dependent on the downstream compartment and a in
41
==PAGE:52==
Chapter 6
1D Surrogate Modelling of MIKE URBAN
Equation (11) may be a function. For the test area presented in Appendix H, the constant
a can be set as a constant as the volume in the downstream compartments is linearly
related to the discharge out of the compartment. The resulting discharges and volumes
can be seen in Appendix H Figure 65. It is seen that this approach also improves the ﬁt
of the compartment volumes. moreover, the discharges from the compartments are much
better than the Solvi approach.
The two methods both showed good results in describing backwater eﬀects in the test area
showed in Appendix H. However, the Solvi et al. (2005) approach did not capture the
discharge peak since a maximum limit was set. This could result in exclusion of the most
important features causing ﬂooding. Moreover, backwatering due to non physical changes
in the system will not be encountered for. The approach suggested by Thrysøe (2015) is
in this context better as it depends on the states in the system and not on the physical
system. The most diﬃcult task is to identify a correlation between the discharge out of
a compartment, the volume in the compartment and the downstream volume. This also
needs to be evaluated by MIKE URBAN results, which thus needs to be computed with
some modiﬁcations resulting in backwatering.
42
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 7
1D-1D Surrogate Modelling of MIKE FLOOD
7
1D-1D Surrogate Modelling of MIKE FLOOD
This section provides the method applied for construction of the surface surrogate models
in ˚Abyhøj/Hasle area and a comparison of the coupled drainage-surface surrogate model
results to the MIKE FLOOD results.
7.1
Setting up the Surface Surrogate Models
The DTM from Section 5.2.1 is used to analyze the terrain to ﬁnd surface depressions and
ﬂow paths. These are later included in the decision making when dividing the system into
surface compartments. The steps for conducting the terrain analysis is presented in the
following sections:
• 7.1.1: Examination of the surface with GIS
• 7.1.2: Identiﬁcation of ﬂow pathways
• 7.1.3: Selection of depressions
• 7.1.4: Division of surface compartments
• 7.1.5: Determination of Physical Properties
This method of developing the surrogate models can be recursive, and it is sometimes
necessary to go back and reconsider previous steps. Appendix M.1 shows the procedure for
making the surface analysis in GIS.
The process of setting up the surface model was initially carried out using a program
developed by Nielsen et al. (2009) along with GIS analysis and data processing in MATLAB.
The method is presented in Appendix O. This method was not applied as the resulting
depression volumes became too large.
7.1.1
Examination of the Surface using GIS
The terrain analysis is carried out in ArcGis using multiple tools within the Spatial Analyst
Toolbox. They are applied to the DTM, which was introduced in Section 5.2.1. All surface
depressions with volumes larger than 25 m3 are selected and information about their
volume, area and spatial location is stored. A depression is deﬁned as a low lying area
where the slope is positive in all directions. Water will accumulate in these depressions
acting as surface storage basins. The surface depressions are converted to polygons, which
can be visualized as seen in Figure 34.
43
==PAGE:54==
Chapter 7
1D-1D Surrogate Modelling of MIKE FLOOD
Figure 34: Map of the ˚
Abyhøj/Hasle catchment showing links, depressions larger than 25
m3 and the location of the WWTP. Created with GIS data from Geodatastyrelsen (2015)
and ˚
Arhus Vand (2015).
7.1.2
Identiﬁcation of Flow Pathways
Flow pathways are identiﬁed by using various tools under hydrology in the Spatial Analyst
toolbox in ArcGis. A map showing all computed pathways is not useful since it contains
too much information, hence threshold levels are applied. A threshold level of 50 is set to
visualize the ﬂow paths as seen in Figure 35. This means that 50 grid cells discharge water
to each red cell. Figure 36 is constructed with a threshold level of 200. This threshold
is chosen so that a clear pattern of the ﬂow paths is visualized from and to the diﬀerent
surface depressions.
44
==PAGE:55==
Chapter 7
1D-1D Surrogate Modelling of MIKE FLOOD
Figure 35: Links and ﬂow paths with a threshold of 50 contributing cells for each colored
cell. Created with GIS data from Geodatastyrelsen (2015) and ˚
Arhus Vand (2015).
Figure 36: Links and ﬂow paths with a threshold of 200 contributing cells for each colored
cell. Created with GIS data from Geodatastyrelsen (2015) and ˚
Arhus Vand (2015).
45
==PAGE:56==
Chapter 7
1D-1D Surrogate Modelling of MIKE FLOOD
7.1.3
Selection of Depressions
In order to imitate the MIKE FLOOD model, only surface depression near the drainage
system or on major ﬂow paths which intersect the drainage system are included in the
analysis. If depressions are not available to the drainage system or on a major ﬂow path
they will most likely not contribute to the total volume, which will be used during ﬂooding.
Figure 37 shows the selected depressions along with the depressions from the terrain
analysis.
Figure 37: Map of the ˚
Abyhøj/Hasle catchment showing links, depressions larger than
25 m3, the location of the WWTP, large ﬂow paths and the selected depressions, which
lie close to the drainage network or on the major ﬂow paths. Created with GIS data from
Geodatastyrelsen (2015) and ˚
Arhus Vand (2015).
7.1.4
Division of Surface Compartments
The catchment can now be divided into compartments. This is done so there is no water
divide in the middle of a compartment. Since the drainage compartments deﬁned in
Section 6.1.1 contain large numbers of included depressions and water divides within the
compartments, new smaller compartments with two or less depressions included are deﬁned
in an area of the catchment. The new compartments are shown in Figure 38. Figure 39
shows the ﬂow pathways and selected depressions for these compartments.
46
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 7
1D-1D Surrogate Modelling of MIKE FLOOD
Figure 38: Overview map of the ˚
Abyhøj/Hasle catchment where the compartments DrHolst
and BSIngemann has been divided into smaller compartments. Created with GIS data from
Geodatastyrelsen (2015) and ˚
Arhus Vand (2015).
Figure 39: Map of the small compartments in ˚
Abyhøj/Hasle catchment showing links,
depressions larger than 25 m3, large ﬂow paths and the selected depressions, which lie
close to the drainage network or on the major ﬂow paths. Created with GIS data from
Geodatastyrelsen (2015).
47
==PAGE:58==
Chapter 7
1D-1D Surrogate Modelling of MIKE FLOOD
The selected depressions are lumped together as seen in Figure 40, where the ﬂow paths is
determined from Figure 36 and 39. These routes will be the only transport of water on the
surface in the model.
For the large drainage compartments deﬁned in Section 6.1.1 more depressions would be
pooled together in the surface compartments. The pooled depressions and ﬂow paths can
be seen in Appendix I Figure 67 for the entire ˚Abyhøj/Hasle.
Figure 40: Chosen ﬂow paths between the lumped depressions in the small compartments
of the ˚
Abyhøj/Hasle catchment. Created with GIS data from Geodatastyrelsen (2015) and
˚
Arhus Vand (2015).
The compartments linkage is seen in Figure 41a for the drainage compartments and in
Figure 41b for the surface compartments. As seen from this the drainage and surface
connections are not the same. As the terrain level slopes to the southeast the surface water
will be routed this way, while the drainage system for most compartments transports the
water from north to south.
48
==PAGE:59==
Chapter 7
1D-1D Surrogate Modelling of MIKE FLOOD
(a)
(b)
Figure 41: Compartment divisions in the ˚
Abyhøj/Hasle when BSIngemann (2) is divided
into ﬁve smaller compartments: BS1 (2.1), BS2 (2.2), BS3 (2.3), BS4 (2.4) and BS5 (2.5)
and DrHolst is divided into two compartments: DrHolst1 (3.1) and DrHolst 2 (3.2). Figure
(a) showing the drainage connections and Figure (b) showing the surface connections.
7.1.5
Determination of Physical Properties
The maximum volume in each of the depressions is found using the method described in
Appendix M.1. The maximum volumes in the lumped depressions can be seen in Appendix
J.3 and the volume-water level curves can be seen in Appendix J.2.
The physical parameters in Equation (16) Section 3.2.2 must be determined to ﬁnd
the surface discharge in the ﬂow pathways. The roughness coeﬃcient is set to 32 m1/3/s
since this is the default in MIKE FLOOD (DHI, 2014c). Typical ﬂow pathways in an
urban environment are roads, so the width of roads will be used in the Manning equation.
A typical road width was chosen to be 8 m. The slope will not be constant in reality, but
in order to make a simple model the mean slope between two lumped depressions will be
used.
The maximum volume in each lumped depression needs to be determined to obtain
a volume limit for when the water will start routing to the downstream compartments.
This limit is found using GIS analysis, where the maximum volume of each depression is
found. If there is more than one selected depression in a compartment the total maximum
volume is simply found by adding the volumes of these depressions.
49
==PAGE:60==
Chapter 7
1D-1D Surrogate Modelling of MIKE FLOOD
7.2
Comparison of MIKE FLOOD and
Coupled Drainage-Surface Surrogate Models
This section compares results from the MIKE FLOOD model to the coupled drainage-
surface surrogate models. These results are only produced for the small compartments (see
Figure 38).
To ensure substantial ﬂooding and expose the system to rapid changes in precipita-
tion a block rain of 20µm/s for 30 min with a base of 5 µm/s. The rain input can be
seen in Appendix C.4 Figure 50. First the drainage compartments results for the new
compartments are examined. Afterwards, the exchange between the drainage and surface
compartments is examined. Then the maximum volume in the surface compartments and
ﬁnally the surface water levels are evaluated.
7.2.1
Drainage Compartments
The drainage system is calibrated and set up, as described in Section 6.1, for the new small
compartments deﬁned in Figure 38. The steady calibration data are shown in Figure 55 in
Appendix E.3.
Appendix F.3 Figure 59 shows the comparison of resulting volumes and discharges for
the drainage surrogate models and MIKE URBAN. It is seen that the drainage surrogate
models are able to reproduce the results from MIKE URBAN also for these compartments,
which conﬁrms the ﬁndings in Section 6.3. However, for compartment BS5 (2.5) there are
instabilities in the MIKE URBAN model for the ﬂooding discharge. Moreover the volume
is overestimated during the peak and the peak discharge is underestimated. This might be
due to the shape of the compartment, which is long and narrow and the volume-discharge
relationship is thus variable as described in Section 2.2.2. Due to the poor results, this
compartment will not be used further in this chapter for evaluating the surface description.
7.2.2
Exchange Between Drainage and Surface Compartments
The exchange of water between the drainage network and the surface is examined to
evaluate whether the coupled drainage-surface surrogate models are capable of describing
this process similarly to MIKE FLOOD. As described in Section 3, the exchange between
the drainage and surface compartment is partly determined by the spilling ﬂowrate surface
response from MIKE URBAN. This only allows a unidirectional ﬂow from the drainage
system to the surface.
To include ﬂow back into the drainage compartment i.e. have a bidirectional ﬂow, the
conditions presented in Equation (17) in Section 3 is incorporated. The ﬂood limits,
Sﬂood,limit, are shown in Appendix J.1 Table 7. The discharge between MIKE URBAN and
MIKE 21 is compared to the Qﬂood and Qexchange in the surrogate models in Figure 42.
50
==PAGE:61==
Chapter 7
1D-1D Surrogate Modelling of MIKE FLOOD
0
60
120
180
240
−1
−0.5
0
0.5
1
Compartment no. 2.1
Time [min]
Discharge [m3/s]
(a)
0
60
120
180
240
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Compartment no. 2.2
Time [min]
Discharge [m3/s]
(b)
0
60
120
180
240
−0.75
−0.5
−0.25
0
0.25
Compartment no. 2.3
Time [min]
Discharge [m3/s]
(c)
0
60
120
180
240
−1
−0.75
−0.5
−0.25
0
Compartment no. 2.4
Time [min]
Discharge [m3/s]
(d)
0
60
120
180
240
0
0.015
0.03
0.045
0.06
Compartment no. 3.1
Time [min]
Discharge [m3/s]
(e)
0
60
120
180
240
−0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
Compartment no. 3.2
Time [min]
Discharge [m3/s]
(f)
Figure 42: Comparison of surrogate models (SM) to MIKE FLOOD (MF) model for a
block rain input of 20 µm/s shown in Appendix C.4. Comparison of the exchange discharge,
Qexchange from MIKE FLOOD and also including the ﬂooding discharge Qﬂood from the
surrogate models for the small compartments.
In compartment 2.1 (BS1) there is no discharge to the surface in any of the models. This
tendency is also present in the calibration data in Appendix E.3, where compartment 2.1
never experience discharge to the surface. For compartment 2.2 (BS2) the ﬂooding occurs
during the time of the block rain.
51
==PAGE:62==
Chapter 7
1D-1D Surrogate Modelling of MIKE FLOOD
The surrogate models follows the tendency of the MIKE FLOOD model with an overshoot
at the peak for both the unidirectional ﬂow and the bidirectional ﬂow. When the block rain
decreases again, the surrogate model with unidirectional ﬂow follows the MIKE FLOOD
results better than with bidirectional ﬂow. The delayed decrease in the bidirectional ﬂow
is due to the increased amount of water in the drainage compartment because of inﬂow to
the upstream drainage compartment from the upstream surface compartment.
For compartment 2.3 (BS3) MIKE FLOOD only predicts ﬂow into the drainage sys-
tem with an unstable ﬂow pattern with ﬂuctuations while the surrogate model predicts
the opposite but is stable. The surrogate model with bidirectional ﬂow also predicts ﬂow
into the drainage compartment after the pulse, which may yield in a better description of
the volumes in the compartments. For compartment 2.4 (BS4) the bidirectional surrogate
model discharges water back into the drainage due to surface routing from upstream surface
compartments, which is not seen in MIKE FLOOD. By using the bidirectional ﬂow in
this compartment there will thus be a large volume error in the drainage and the surface
compartment.
In compartment 3.1 (DrHolst1) the rapid response seen in MIKE FLOOD is not re-
ﬂected in the surrogate model. The surrogate model shows a lower and longer discharge to
the surface as the model is not calibrated for such high discharges as seen in Appendix E.3
Figure 55. The surrogate model with bidirectional ﬂow shows slight unstable tendencies,
but the ﬂuctuations only have an amplitude of 0.005 m3/s and are therefore not considered
to inﬂuence the overall result. The surrogate model in compartment 3.2 (DrHolst2) captures
the tendency of the discharge in a much smoother and more stable manner than MIKE
FLOOD. However, the baseline ﬂow is almost zero in MIKE FLOOD, while it is 0.05 m3/s
in the surrogate model.
The overall tendencies of the MIKE FLOOD model were captured by the surrogate models.
However, rapid changes in ﬂow and ﬂuctuations are not reﬂected in any of the compartments.
These rapid changes could reﬂect reality but they could also reﬂect instability issues in the
MIKE FLOOD model. Issues which are not present signiﬁcantly in the surrogate models.
In all cases, except for compartment 2.3, the surrogate models with unidirectional ﬂow
is closer to the results of the surrogate models. This does not necessarily mean that the
surrogate models should only include unidirectional ﬂow, since bidirectional ﬂow is needed
to describe the ﬂow in compartment 2.3 during the block rain.
7.2.3
Maximum Surface Volume
To further evaluate the diﬀerence between the two exchange methods, the maximum
volumes in lumped depressions in the surface compartments are compared. The same block
rain as used earlier in this section is applied in with both unidirectional and bidirectional
ﬂows. The results are seen in Table 1. The available volume in the lumped depressions can
be seen in Appendix J.3 Table 8.
52
==PAGE:63==
Chapter 7
1D-1D Surrogate Modelling of MIKE FLOOD
Table 1: Comparison of modelled maximum volumes in lumped depressions during a large
block rain for the surrogate models as seen in Appendix C.4. The ﬁrst surrogate models
include only unidirectional ﬂow between the drainage and surface compartment, i.e. water
can only ﬂow from the drainage to the surface compartment, and the second surrogate
models include bidirectional ﬂow, where water can ﬂow into the drainage compartment
again.
Volume in lumped depressions m3
BS1
BS2
BS3
BS4
DrHolst1
DrHolst2
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
3.1
3.2
Unidirectional ﬂow
0.00
441
271
1088
31.5
75.4
Bidirectional ﬂow
0.00
441
309
291
18.0
75.4
For compartments: BS1 (2.1), BS2 (2.2) and DrHolst2 (3.2) the maximum volume on the
surface does not change between the two methods. It is also seen from Figure 42 that
the maximum discharges are the same. The available volume in compartment BS2 and
DrHolst2 are also completely ﬁlled. The volume becomes lower for compartment DrHolst1
(3.1) and much lower for compartment BS4 (2.4) when bidirectional ﬂow is included in the
model. For compartment DrHolst1 (3.1) this is due to a combination of instabilities and
ﬂow back to the drainage.
Because compartment BS4 (2.4) is upstream from BS2 (2.2) and BS3 (2.3) both of
these are aﬀected by this extra ﬂow. This can be seen for compartment BS2 (2.2), in
Figure 42b, where the discharge in the bidirectional surrogate model decreases slower than
the surrogate model with unidirectional ﬂow. In compartment BS3 (2.3) the ﬂow from
upstream also oﬀsets the timing of the peak (as seen on Figure 42c) and it actually causes
the maximum volume in the compartment to be higher with bidirectional ﬂow than with
unidirectional ﬂow. For the rest of this chapter only results obtained with the unidirectional
ﬂow is examined.
Table 2 shows the surface volume in MIKE FLOOD and in the surrogate models. The
table presents the maximum volume in the selected depressions and the maximum volume
in the compartment outlines shown in Figure 38. When the maximum volume inside the
compartment outline is considered, it will include the lumped depression volume and the
volume in outgoing transport cells. The total surface volume in MIKE FLOOD is obtained
by adding all volumes within the compartment outlines. The MIKE FLOOD maximum
water level in each cell is converted into volumes as described in Appendix M.1. For the
surrogate models, only results from when applying the unidirectional discharge is shown,
since it was seen from Figure 42 that this was the most accurate description.
53
==PAGE:64==
Chapter 7
1D-1D Surrogate Modelling of MIKE FLOOD
Table 2: Comparison of modelled maximum volumes between MIKE FLOOD (MF) and the
Surrogate Models (SM) with unidirectional ﬂow i.e. only including ﬂow from the drainage
to the surface.
BS1
BS2
BS3
BS4
DrHolst1
DrHolst2
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
3.1
3.2
Volume within
MF
286
433
244
413
362
846
compartment outlines [m3]
SM
0.00
569
271
1105
31.5
383
% Diﬀerence
-
31.1
10.9
168
-91.3
-54.8
Volume in
MF
127
378
169
299
4.00
87.6
lumped depression [m3]
SM
0.00
441
271
1088
31.5
75.4
% Diﬀerence
-
16.6
60.3
264
687
-13.9
The ﬁt between the MIKE FLOOD and the coupled drainage-surface surrogate model results
vary from compartment to compartment. The volumes are overestimated for compartment
2.2, 2.3 and 2.4 in both the compartment outlines and the lumped depressions and it is
underestimated for compartment 2.1 and 3.2. For compartment 3.1 the maximum volume
is underestimated in the compartment outlines and overestimated in the lumped depressions.
For DrHolst1 (3.1) the overestimation of the lumped depression volume by the surro-
gate model is because the selected depressions are not being used in the model. As seen
in Figure 39 there are three depressions and two of them are actually located near but
upstream of the drainage network and might therefore not be used. It is clear that the water
is located elsewhere in the compartment when regarding the MIKE FLOOD volume in the
compartment outline, which is 91.3 % larger than the surrogate model volume. This might
be due to the steep slopes of the catchment, which distributes the water in the catchment.
This might also be due to water entering the compartment from upstream compartment
outlines, which is not included in the conceptual set up shown in Figure 40 in Section 7.1.5.
For compartment DrHolst2 (3.2) the volume in the compartment is also underestimated
and this might also be due to the steep slope in the area and that the compartment
receives water from upstream. However, the volume description in the selected depressions
is better. Here the maximum volume allowed in the lumped depression is reached (see
Appendix J.3). It is seen that MIKE FLOOD allows for a larger volume than the avail-
able volume in the depressions, which might be caused by water levels crest levels, which
is not included in the conceptual model of the surrogate models (see Figure 11 in Section 3).
For compartment BS1 (2.1) there is a misinterpretation in the set up of the surrogate model,
since it is assumed that no water enters from upstream compartments as seen in Figure 40.
This is a wrong assumption as the MIKE FLOOD model shows 286 m3 in the compartment
which is not due to ﬂooding in the compartment as noticed in Figure 42. Thus there must
be some upstream ﬂooding which contribute to the surface volume this compartment. In
compartment BS4 (2.4) there is also no ﬂooding discharge in the compartment as seen in
Figure 42. All water in this compartment is possibly due to upstream ﬂooding contributing
to the surface volume by surface routing. In this compartment, the compartment volume
is overestimated by 160 %, which is the worst ﬁt in the table. This could also partly
explain the underestimation of the volume in compartment 3.1 and suggests that the
surface description is not accurate for this compartment. If more water was being held
back in DrHolst2 less water would enter the BS4 compartment. It is seen that the large
maximum volume in BS4 is due to the high maximum volume in the depression, which
is the maximum allowed volume. The best ﬁt is achieved in compartment 2.3 with a
54
==PAGE:65==
Chapter 7
1D-1D Surrogate Modelling of MIKE FLOOD
diﬀerence of only 10.9 % in the compartment outlines and compartment 2.2 also achieves a
good ﬁt with a diﬀerence of 31.3 %.
The best overall ﬁt is achieved for the compartment outline comparison, which suggests
that large depressions can be used to describe the total volume within a conﬁned area such
as a compartment. However, the best ﬁts were achieved in the smallest compartments, but
can be ruined by misinterpreted ﬂow paths or wrong descriptions of the depression volumes.
To evaluate the surface results further the distribution of water in the is examined.
7.2.4
Spatially Distributed Maximum Water Level
In this section resulting maximum volumes from MIKE FLOOD is shown to achieve a
better understanding of the spatial distribution of the water. Moreover, the volumes from
the coupled drainage-surface surrogate models are converted in to water levels in the
lumped depressions to compare to the MIKE FLOOD model. The maximum water level
for the MIKE FLOOD model is shown for the compartments in Figure 43 and for the
depressions in Appendix K Figure 72.
Figure 43: Flood map of the MIKE FLOOD result showing maximum water levels in the
small compartments. This map is created with GIS data from Geodatastyrelsen (2015) and
˚
Arhus Vand (2015).
55
==PAGE:66==
Chapter 7
1D-1D Surrogate Modelling of MIKE FLOOD
From Figure 43 the used ﬂow paths between the compartments can be observed. For
compartment BS1 (2.1) it is clear that there is some water entering from upstream com-
partments which results in the large error in the volume estimation in Table 2. Also in
compartments DrHolst1 (3.1) and DrHolst2 (3.2) this seems to occur. In DrHolst2 (3.2) a
very clear ﬂow path through the catchment is seen, which corresponds to the identiﬁed
ﬂow path in Figure 40 impying that ﬂooding occurs in the upper part of the compartment.
To be able to compare the distributed water levels from MIKE FLOOD the surrogate mod-
els volume results are converted into water levels. The volumes are be converted to water
depths by using a volume/depth relation which is constructed for each depression. These
relations are constructed from the GIS data, which was used to construct the depressions in
the ﬁrst place. For each depression, the depth at each pixel is extracted. This information
is sorted from lowest to highest to decide which pixels are ﬁlled ﬁrst. The volume can then
be ﬁlled in the depression starting with the deepest part. The result of this is visualized in
Figure 44 for the surrogate models and MIKE FLOOD for compartments 2.1 to 2.4.
Figure 44: Maximum water level in selected depressions for the four small compartments
BS1, BS2, BS3 and BS4 for the surrogate models (SM) and the MIKE FLOOD (MF)
model.
The ﬁrst row in the ﬁgure shows the cells, which are included by the selected depressions.
The second row shows the resulting surrogate model maximum water levels and the third
row shows the MIKE FLOOD maximum water levels. Generally it is noticed that the
water level in the depressions is higher in the surrogate models than in MIKE FLOOD
especially in compartment BS4, where the water level in the surrogate models almost ﬁlls
the depression. For BS3 there is a nice accordance between the two models. For BS1 the
water level in the depression is not captured by the surrogate models as the model set up
is misinterpreted as discussed in the previous sections.
In Figure 44 the water volume is assumed to be equally divided between depressions
if there is more than one. This is the case in compartment BS2. However, in the MIKE
FLOOD results only one of the depressions is applied. Thus, the water level in the left
compartment is overestimated in the surrogate models, whereas the water level in the right
depressions is underestimated. Even though the depressions are selected visually and only
those that are expected to be used are included, it is still not good enough if the objective
56
==PAGE:67==
Chapter 7
1D-1D Surrogate Modelling of MIKE FLOOD
is to describe the volume/water level in each of these. The use and ﬁlling of depressions
requires a more complex description.
In conclusion the surface surrogate models are not able to fully reproduce the results
from the MIKE FLOOD model. Three major faults are identiﬁed in the model. First the
exchange between the drainage system and the surface is not well captured by the surrogate
models. The exchange is based on the surface response from the MIKE URBAN model
and the states in the drainage and surface compartments. To improve this description the
exchange could be based on the case of excess water in the drainage system. Secondly,
it is seen that the conceptual description of how the compartments interact is crucial.
As seen in the results this was not fully understood and it lead to large errors in the
description of volume in compartments, which in the surrogate models did not receive
any water from upstream, but in the MIKE FLOOD model was receiving water. This
error could be avoided by including an automatized description of the surface which is
based on the changes in elevation. Thirdly, it was shown that it is diﬃcult to tell whether
or not the depressions are being used or not. If depressions are included that are not
used in the MIKE FLOOD, water routing in the surrogate models will be delayed and/or
decreased due to the accumulation in the depressions, and vice versa. Moreover, if more
than one depression is included in one compartment it is diﬃcult to make the division
of water between them. The results can then not be translated into spatially distributed
water levels unless more information is gained on the distribution. Taking all this into
consideration, the method and description of the surface surrogate models are not ideal
since the modeller’s perspective of the system has too high inﬂuence on the results.
57
==PAGE:68==
Chapter 8
Model Evaluation
8
Model Evaluation
This chapter presents an overall comparison of the surrogate models to the MIKE FLOOD
model. This will be followed by a discussion on the limitations of the surrogate models
along with recommendations for further work.
8.1
Comparison of Surrogate Models and MIKE Models
This section provides an evaluation of the surrogate models on the three criteria: model
accuracy, model stability and model computational time. The surrogate models will be
compared to the MIKE model, from where the drainage and coupled drainage-surface
surrogate models are evaluated.
8.1.1
Model Accuracy
Section 6 and 7 concludes, that the surrogate models were generally able to imitate the
results of MIKE URBAN. Especially the drainage surrogate models produced good results
comparable to MIKE FLOOD, whereas the coupled drainage-surface surrogate models still
lack some accuracy in comparison to MIKE FLOOD. It is concluded that the objectives
must comply with the model set up, so that if detailed spatial information is needed, the
compartments need to be deﬁned such that this result can be obtained.
in Section 6.2 the model accuracy of the drainage surrogate models proved to be good for
most rain events. There is some non-linearity in the beginning of each simulation when the
drainage network is empty and starts ﬁlling up. However, this did not aﬀect the results
later on. The surrogate models performed best for rain events where the intensity variations
were not too rapid. For the pulse rain presented in Section 6.2.2 and the historical rain
events presented in Section 6.2.3 the surrogate models were able to reproduce the MIKE
URBAN model. However, for the M˚aløv rain, the intensity was outside of the MIKE
URBAN surface response used for calibration, which resulted in the surrogate models not
being able to reproduce the volume and discharge peaks. Emptying of water in the system
after the peaks is diﬃcult to evaluate, since the simulations were terminated immediately
after the end of each rain event. However, for the Vedbæk event, the surrogate models
follow the trends observed in the MIKE URBAN results after the ﬁrst peak.
The coupled drainage-surface surrogate models were not able to accurately describe where
ﬂooding on the surface will occur during a given rain event as seen in Section 7. Many issues
with the coupled drainage-surface surrogate models were identiﬁed. Firstly, exchange of
water between the drainage and the surface compartments were not reproduced accurately
by the surrogate models as the description of the discharge back to the drainage network
appears to be too simple. Secondly, when water reaches the surface, the distribution into
the depressions was diﬃcult to determine. When the selection of the available depressions
was incorrect, this resulted in large errors when the ﬁlling of water into depressions. When
the water levels in the depressions were compared to the MIKE FLOOD results, the
water levels from the surrogate models were generally overestimated except for when
the included depressions were not used by MIKE FLOOD. However, good results were
obtained when a correct analysis of the depressions was made. Finally, the conceptual set
up for water routing between the compartments was very important for the results. Here a
misinterpretation proved to have a major inﬂuence on the results. This resulted in larger
volumes within some compartments outlines than expected due to surface routing from
upstream areas.
58
==PAGE:69==
Chapter 8
Model Evaluation
8.1.2
Model Stability
If the Courant number described in Section 2.1 becomes too high the MIKE models crash.
The surrogate models do not crash but the results can become inaccurate. Figure 45 shows
the resulting volume for compartment Klokker (8) deﬁned in Section 6.1.1 Figure 24 for
diﬀerent time steps with the block rain presented in Appendix C.4 as an input. MIKE
FLOOD results are not shown as the model cannot cope with time step is higher than 3 s,
which could partly be due to improper model set up.
Figure 45: Volume over time in the drainage surrogate model during a large block rain as
seen in Appendix C.4. All volumes are for compartment Klokker (8) using various time
steps.
The Courant number increases when the time step increases, which implies that the model
becomes more and more inaccurate. This is seen in Figure 45 where the surrogate models
no longer capture the peak with 20 min time steps. Applying time steps of 1 min can
be justiﬁed since the temporal resolution of the rain data is usually not ﬁner than 1 min
(Madsen, 1998). The volume by using 1 min time steps is seen to be very similar to the 1
s results. This proves that the surrogate models indeed are much more stable than the
MIKE models and can deliver results even at large time steps. The time step applied in
the model can thus be based on the temporal resolution of the given rain event.
8.1.3
Model Computational Time
Low computational time is an important feature of surrogate models. All models are evalu-
ated with the same block rain as seen in Appendix C.4, which lasts for 4 h. Furthermore,
they are run on the same 32 core server (ENV-CALC3 at the Department of Environmental
Engineering, DTU). The computational time is recorded, both manually and automatically
to ensure that the time keeping is accurate. The manual and automatic time keeping
proved to agree. The CPU usage is noted, to be able to compare the simulation times.
The results can be seen in Table 3 where all models have time steps of 1 s. This is both
shown for the MIKE URBAN model, the MIKE FLOOD model, the drainage surrogate
models and the and the coupled drainage-surface surrogate models. The ﬁrst column
shows the actual computational time. In the second column, the simulation time has been
59
==PAGE:70==
Chapter 8
Model Evaluation
converted into % simulation time of the real time of the simulation (4 h in all cases). The
third column shows the mean CPU usage during the diﬀerent simulations. In the fourth
column, column two and three have been multiplied to even out the CPU usage and get a
number for the simulation time if all models where limited to only using 1 % of the CPU.
Thus, they can be compared more directly.
Table 3: Comparison of simulation times for drainage and surface surrogate models
(SM) to MIKE URBAN (MU) and MIKE FLOOD (MF) when the time step is 1 s. The
percentage of the simulation time compared to real time is shown and this is corrected
according to the CPU use.
Simulation
% Simulation time
Mean CPU
% Simulation time of real
time
of real time
usage
time using 1% CPU
[min]
[%]
[%]
[%]
MU
3.00
1.25
2.00
2.50
MF
97.0
40.4
11.0
445
SM Drainage
1.67
0.69
2.00
1.39
SM Surface
26.0
10.8
2.00
21.7
MIKE URBAN and the drainage surrogate models are both fast with a simulation times
of 3 min and 1.67 min, respectively, which corresponds to 1.25 % and 0.69 % of the real
time. The coupled drainage-surface models are much more computationally heavy. For
the MIKE FLOOD model, mostly due to the calculation of water in the 2D-grid cells on
the surface and for the surface surrogate model mostly due to the computation of water
routing in the transport cells. It takes 97 min for the MIKE FLOOD model, corresponding
to 40.4 % of the real time and 26 min for the surface surrogate model, which corresponds
to 10.8 % of the real time.
Both surrogate models and the MIKE URBAN model used only 2 % CPU while the
MIKE FLOOD model used 11 % CPU, which gives the same comparison ratio between the
drainage models. However for the coupled drainage surface models the ratio will change.
Including this the surface surrogate model uses 21.7 % of the real time and the MIKE
FLOOD model now uses 445 % of the real time. This means that the MIKE FLOOD
model is using 4.5 min to simulate 1 min while the surface surrogate model can do it in
20 s. It can be discussed whether this comparison is fair, since the MIKE FLOOD model
is better at exploiting the available resources and thus can use 11 % CPU instead of 2 %.
However, this comparison shows the raw computation power needed to do the calculations
and not whether the model has been optimized to run on a certain system.
In comparison with the MIKE models, the drainage surrogate model is 1.8 times faster
while the coupled drainage-surface surrogate model is 21 times faster when the CPU usage
is included. The computational time of surface surrogate model is high considering the
simple equations applied. The reason for this is probably due to lack of coding optimization
and code set up. The simulation time is expected to improve much when this is ﬁxed.
As discussed in the previous section, the time steps of the surrogate models can be increased
without causing instabilities. This can improve the performance of the surrogate models in
comparison with the MIKE models. The computational time for the various time steps
applied in the surrogate models are shown in Table 4.
60
==PAGE:71==
Chapter 8
Model Evaluation
Table 4: Computational time for simulation of a 4 h rain event using various time steps
in the surrogate models (SM).
Computational time [s]
Time step
Drainage SM
Coupled drainage-surface SM
20 min
0.40
1.20
15 min
0.48
1.60
10 min
0.70
2.30
5 min
1.40
5.00
2 min
3.30
12.0
1 min
7.40
24.0
30 s
13.0
46.0
10 s
42.0
142
The computational time of the coupled drainage-surface surrogate model decreases from
26 min (1560 s) for with a time step of 1 s to 142 s with a time step of 10 s. If the model
set up allows for coarser time steps, the simulation time can be cut down to only taking
a few seconds. The same tendencies are seen for the drainage surrogate models, where a
simulation time of a few seconds (3.30 s) is reached with 2 min time steps.
Table 5 shows the relative computational time reduction when comparing to the MIKE
models (% Simulation time of real time for 1 % CPU for MIKE divided by % Simula-
tion time of real time for 1 % CPU for surrogate models). The CPU use is taken into
consideration as in the last column in Table 3.
Table 5: Relative reduction of computation time by using the drainage surrogate models
(SM) and the coupled drainage-surface surrogate models compared to the MIKE models,
i.e. how many times faster the surrogate models are when the CPU use is taken into
consideration.
Time step [min]
Model type
Relative time reduction
10
Drainage SM
257
Surface SM
13917
1
Drainage SM
24.3
Surface SM
1334
A time step of 10 min in the surrogate models gave a good description of the volume as seen
in Figure 45 for a block rain. When using this time step, the relative speed of the drainage
surrogate model was improved 257 times, while the coupled drainage-surface model was
13917 times faster. A time step of 1 minute, which also can be used during more rapidly
changing rain events, improved the computational time of the drainage surrogate model by
24.3 times, while the coupled drainage-surface surrogate model became 1334 times faster.
To get a more accurate description of the mean computational time, the models should
also be evaluated using historical rain events, to check if the performance varies depending
on the type of rain event.
Even though the code in the surrogate models has not been optimized much for speed,
the stability of the model makes it possible to use large time steps, and thereby reduce
the computational time. Initiatives for further reduction of the computational time are
presented in Section 8.4.
61
==PAGE:72==
Chapter 8
Model Evaluation
8.1.4
Summary
Table 6 gives a qualitative overview of the surrogate models compared to the MIKE models.
In the table, points are given to each of the model on the three criteria: model accuracy,
model stability and computational time. In the computational time the fact that the
surrogate model allows for larger time steps is included. The points are given on a scale
from + to +++++, where + is the worst and +++++ is the best. The scale is relative to
compare the models meaning that the scores of the MIKE models are only relative to the
surrogate models and not to each other. Diﬀerent model objectives may require diﬀerent
weighting of three criteria, and the scores should thus not be compared quantitatively.
Table 6: Qualitative evaluation scheme for Surrogate Models (SM), MIKE URBAN (MU)
and MIKE FLOOD (MF) for three criteria. Scores are given from 1-5, 5 being the best.
Accuracy
Stability
Computational Time
Drainage SM
++++
+++++
++++
MU
+++++
++
+++
Coupled Drainage-Surface SM
+
+++++
+++
MF
++++
+
+
The drainage surrogate models are very accurate as they are able to reproduce the MIKE
URBAN results for most rain types. However, due to the limited spatial information and
their incapability of describing rapid changes their score is 4. The coupled drainage-surface
surrogate models are not able to fully describe all the processes of MIKE FLOOD and is
thus scored with 1. The drainage and the coupled drainage-surface surrogate models are
both very stable and score 5. For the computational time the drainage surrogate models
score 4 and the coupled drainage-surface surrogate models score 3. These scores are given
since the computational time can be further optimized.
8.2
Limitations of the Surrogate Models
This section discusses the limitations of the developed surrogate models. Three major
limitations are identiﬁed:
• Manual model set up
• Simplicity of model
• Veriﬁcation
8.2.1
Manual Model Set Up
In the process of setting up the surrogate models many decisions have to be taken. Large
errors will be made if these decisions do not include careful consideration of the physical
system.
The compartments are divided manually, which requires decision making based on the
given drainage system and surface area. If the division is done without following a certain
set of rules, the results will not comply with the MIKE models. An example of this would
be to make a division over a loop in MIKE URBAN, which would result in negative ﬂow.
For the surface compartments it is important that there is no water divide within the
catchment. If there was a divide the rest of the conceptual set up would be wrong as all
the water in the compartment would not discharge to the same downstream compartment.
62
==PAGE:73==
Chapter 8
Model Evaluation
An automatized set up of the compartments would be ideal based on information of the
drainage system and the surface topography.
The inclusion of depressions is also done manually. Only depressions, which are above a
certain threshold, located near the drainage system or on a large ﬂow path, are included
in the total description of the surface volume. It was interpreted visually on the basis of
GIS analyses, contour lines, maps and aerial photos. This can result in too many or too
few depressions included. In all cases this is a major simpliﬁcation of reality and errors
must be expected. The ﬂow paths, which connects the surface compartments, are found
manually using GIS analysis. This might result in errors if diﬀerent ﬂow paths are included
than the ones used in MIKE FLOOD. Moreover, there is typically more than one ﬂow path
connecting the compartments, which is not included the the surface surrogate models.
8.2.2
Simplicity of Model
The simplicity of the model is another limitation of the surrogate models.
For the case study area the drainage surrogate models were capable of describing the
various types of ﬂows. However, the surrogate models were not tested in a ﬂat area where
backwater and attenuation could inﬂuence the results. Its application may thus be limited
to areas, where there is no backwater eﬀects.
The lumping of the surrogate models provides several limitations. The coupled drainage-
surface surrogate models were not able to describe the discharge of water from the surface
to the drainage system similarly to the MIKE FLOOD model. This is due to the lumping of
the distributed system into compartments. Within the compartments there is no knowledge
on the spatial distributing of the water and thus the availability of manholes on the surface,
from where the water can discharge back to the drainage system (it should however be
kept in mind that MIKE FLOOD also describes this exchange using a simpliﬁed equation).
When the compartment size is increased this will become even harder to describe. For
large compartments it is also diﬃcult to determine which depressions are being used and
surface routing within the compartments is not included. This is an issue since ﬂooding is
usually a local phenomenon which may not be captured in the compartments. By ensuring
that the compartments are small enough to describe the surface properly, the size of the
compartments will thus be limited. To get a complete and accurate description of the
surface, all depressions could have been included. This would possibly result in a more
accurate surface description than in the MIKE FLOOD model. This would however require
a fully distributed MIKE URBAN model. Another limitation is that the surface surrogate
models are set up in one dimension. This means that ﬂow paths which are diverging and
conjugating are not included.
8.2.3
Veriﬁcation
It can be diﬃcult to verify the surface surrogate model results. The results in the surface
compartments are not directly comparable to the MIKE FLOOD water levels as the surface
ﬂooding is given as volumes for the surrogate models. To convert the volume to the
water levels, assumptions of which surface depressions are used, must be made. These
assumptions are diﬃcult to make since information about the spatial distribution of water
in the compartments lack. A way to cope with this, is to reduce the compartment size.
This will provide a more exact prediction of where the drainage system will spill water,
but it will also increase the computational time.
63
==PAGE:74==
Chapter 8
Model Evaluation
8.3
Applications of Surrogate Models in Real Life
This section discuss the use of the MIKE models to set up and verify the surrogate models
instead of approximating the surrogate models to real data. Finally it discusses the appli-
cations of the surrogate models.
In this study, the surrogate models are set up to imitate results from a MIKE UR-
BAN and a MIKE FLOOD model and not real measurements. The surrogate models have
been based on the MIKE models in the following ways:
• Rain water is inserted directly in the drainage part of the model by the time-area
method and will only appear on the surface when ﬂooding occurs.
• Volume discharge correlations are used to calibrate the drainage network.
• The same digital terrain model is applied in the surrogate models.
• The MIKE results are used to evaluate the model accuracy.
This means that the surrogate models have not been constructed and evaluated from real
data, but from another model. But can MIKE FLOOD be considered as the truth?
The surrogate models use the same method for inserting rain loads in the system as
MIKE FLOOD. Catchment loads are computed from the time-area method and inserted
directly in the drainage system at the connecting nodes. Firstly, the time-area method is
very simple as it only computes the discharge from imperviousness, reduction factor, the
time of concentration and time area curve. This method assumes that all water, which
has not been inﬁltrated, enters the drainage system and no water is left in any surface
depression. This assumption results in water only enters the surface during ﬂooding.
Having a simpliﬁed drainage network, as in this case, the ﬂooding only occurs in very
spatially limited areas of the catchment. Moreover, in reality ﬂooding usually occurs at
manholes connected by smaller pipes, which is not included in the MIKE URBAN model.
The fact that the MIKE URBAN model is already a simpliﬁed model also inﬂuences the
calibration of the data. If all pipes were included, more storage would have been available
in the drainage network. Thus, the modelled ﬂooding discharge might actually have been
smaller at these points, while ﬂooding from areas with smaller pipes could occur.
When water ﬁnally reaches the surface, the terrain level is described by a 10 x 10 DTM.
Considering the simplicity of the MIKE FLOOD model a more detailed surface description
would probably not have given better model results, as the same depressions near the
drainage system would still be used. Applying a more detailed surface model would also
require a more detailed drainage model. This would however increase the computational
time drastically and should only be done for smaller areas. By using a DTM instead of
DSM buildings are not included which might result in ﬂooding at elevated building areas.
Without compromising the computational time, a ﬁner DTM could be used in the coupled
drainage-surface surrogate models. This would create a more accurate description of ﬂow
paths in urban areas. However, this could thus not be compared directly to MIKE FLOOD.
It would be very diﬃcult to set up the surrogate models from measured data as it is rarely
available. Steady state data would be almost impossible to acquire, since the data would
be measured during a real rain events. This would also include measuring uncertainties
and the data availability would be very limited.
The surrogate models are not fully developed for application in real life at this state.
Part of the process when setting up the model is still manual. Furthermore, there are some
64
==PAGE:75==
Chapter 8
Model Evaluation
issues with the model set up, as the models are not able to fully describe all processes in
the system. When improvements are made, the surrogate models can be used in planning
by making initial screenings using large compartments. These can afterwards be reduced
in size to get a more accurate description of the eﬀects of diﬀerent adaptation measures.
For the use in real-time control the surrogate models can be coupled to a weather forecast
which can then be used to predict critical points in the network. The following section
presents recommendations for the future work for improving the surrogate models.
8.4
Further Work
A direct improvement of the computational time would be to optimize the MATLAB code.
In this study the Runge-Kutta method is used, and it might be beneﬁcial to test other
ODE solvers or to see if these are even necessary when calculating the water balances
in the surrogate models. The transportation of water in the transport cells also showed
to take a lot of time as shown in Section 8.1.3. The movement of water could be done
more computationally eﬀectively as in Johansen (1985). The number of piecewise linear
functions to the surface response of MIKE URBAN could also be reduced to only include
the major trends in the data, which in most cases is three. Moreover, the surrogate models
could be programmed to remember the state of the previous step to further optimize this
process.
The process of setting up the surrogate models and running them should be automa-
tized. The creation of the compartments should be set up automatically by setting up
requirements for this division as presented in Section 6.1 and 7.1. This should be done
based on input information on the drainage system and surface elevation from where the
drainage and surface compartment connections should be identiﬁed.
When calibrating the drainage compartments, other function approximation models than
the linear functions could be applied to obtain better ﬁt for rapid changes in the system.
Moreover, the drainage surrogate model should be tested on a more complex catchment,
where backwatering and attenuation are inﬂuencing the results to ensure that the surrogate
models can cope with this.
Various methods for describing the exchange between the drainage and surface com-
partments should be tested as the resulting exchange in this study was unsatisfactory. A
description of the distribution of water in the diﬀerent depressions should be constructed.
The description of the surface might need reconsidered as there were a lot of issues. Perhaps
an examination of the potential for applying cellular automata should be done as in Liu
et al. (2015); Ghimire et al. (2011); Dottori and Todini (2010); Ghimire et al. (2013).
When the surrogate models are fully functional they can be used in real life. The surrogate
models can serve as a tool in planning. Here the most sensitive areas can be found using
large compartments and large time steps followed by a decrease in these to obtain the
detailed level necessary. In vulnerable areas many adaptation measures can be implemented
and tested due to the low computation time. The surrogate models could also be coupled
to weather forecasts using large time steps to produce real-time ﬂood simulations, which
can be applied in real-time control.
65
==PAGE:76==
Chapter 9
Conclusion
9
Conclusion
This study addresses the computational challenges of ﬂood modelling in urban areas with
physically based distributed models by replacing large parts of a MIKE FLOOD model
of ˚Abyhøj/Hasle in ˚Arhus, Denmark, with 1D-1D surrogate models. The MIKE FLOOD
model is divided into compartments, in which the volume is modelled by surrogate models.
The surrogate models are set up in MATLAB as reservoir models and consist of drainage
surrogate models and surface surrogate models.
The drainage surrogate models are response surface models since they are calibrated using
steady state MIKE URBAN results with various rain intensities. The surface surrogates are
lower-ﬁdelity physically based models, which routes the surface water based on information
of surface depressions and ﬂow paths, obtained using GIS. Only depressions considered
available to the drainage system are included. When these are ﬁlled, water is routed
through transport cells to downstream compartments. The water exchange between the
drainage and surface models is described by the ﬂooding discharge from MIKE URBAN and
the state of the drainage and surface compartments. The surrogate models are evaluated
by three criteria: accuracy, stability and computational time.
The accuracy of the drainage surrogate models is tested for various rain events. It is found
that the drainage surrogate models describe change of water volume in the compartments
similarly to MIKE URBAN. However for rapid changes, the surrogate models underestimate
peaks in volume and discharge. Backwater eﬀects and attenuation is not included in this
model due to the steep slope of the case study area. Instead a test area is constructed
for which two backwater methods are applied and tested. The best backwater model
includes the downstream volumes similarly to the Muskingum method. The exchange
discharge, maximum surface volumes and maximum water levels, governed by the coupled
drainage-surface surrogate models, are compared to MIKE FLOOD. The surrogate models
are not able to fully capture the water exchange as simulated in MIKE FLOOD. The best
results are obtained when disregarding discharge back into the drainage compartments.
The diﬀerence in maximum surface volume between the surrogate models and MIKE
FLOOD varied from 10.9 % to 91.3 % error in the compartments and 16.6 % to 264 %
in the depressions. The largest errors are found in the depressions as it was diﬃcult to
determine which depressions should be included.
The surrogate models prove to be more stable than the MIKE models. While the MIKE
FLOOD model cannot cope with time steps larger than 3 s, the surrogate models do
not show instabilities. The time step can thus be determined from the temporal reso-
lution of the rain event. For a time step of 1 s the computational time is reduced 1.8
times for the drainage surrogate models and 21 times for the coupled drainage-surface
surrogate models. By increasing the time step to 1 min, the drainage surrogate model
becomes 258 times faster and the coupled drainage-surface surrogate model becomes 1130
times faster. A larger time reduction is expected with an optimization of the MATLAB code.
The surface surrogate models need some reconsideration as the results are not satisfactory.
However, the drainage surrogate models proved to be capable of modelling the drainage
network with results similar to MIKE URBAN. This study shows that there is great
potential for developing surrogate models in the urban water context.
66
==PAGE:77==
Bibliography
Bibliography
˚Arhus Municipality (2013a). Forslag til spildevandsplan 2013-2016. tekstdel. ˚Arhus.
˚Arhus Municipality (2013b). Spildevandsplan 2013-2016. Overordnet Kloaksaneringsplan.
Contributor: ˚Arhus Vand. ˚Arhus.
˚Arhus Municipality (2014a). Klimatilpasningsplan 2014 - Tilpasning til mere vand. Bilag
til indstilling om Forslag til Klimatilpasningsplan og indsatsplan. ˚Arhus.
˚Arhus
Municipality
(2014b).
Real
time
control
of
water
from
cloudbursts
to
prevent
pollution
of
bathing
areas
in
aarhus
bay.
˚Arhus.
URL:
https://www.aarhus.dk/sitecore/content/Subsites/Home/Projekter/Realtidstyring-af-
vand-fra-skybrud-hindrer-foruening-af-Aarhus-Bugtens-badevand.aspx. Accessed: 22nd
July 2015.
˚Arhus Vand (2015). MIKE URBAN model of ˚Aby and Viby. Unpublished MIKE URBAN
model. ˚Arhus.
Beredskabstyrelsen (2012). Redegørelse vedrørende skybruddet i storkøbenhavn lørdag den
2. juli 2011, Institut for Beredskabsevaluering. Birkerød.
Butler, D. and Davis, J. W. (2011). Urban drainage, Spon. London.
Chow, V. T., Maidment, D. R., Mays, L. W. et al. (1988). Applied hydrology. McGraw-Hill.
Singapore.
Deltares (n.d.). Sobek suite - deltares. URL: https://www.deltares.nl/en/software/sobek/.
Accessed 16th july 2015. Delft.
DHI (2007). MIKE FLOOD. 1D-2D Modelling. User Manual. MIKE Powered by DHI.
Hørsholm.
DHI (2011). MIKE FLOOD TRAINING Modelling of Urban Flooding with MIKE URBAN
Bangkok Exercise. MIKE Powered by DHI. Hørsholm.
DHI (2013). MIKE URBAN CS. ’DHIAPP.INI’ and ’*.ADP’ FILES. Reference Manual.
MIKE Powered by DHI. Hørsholm.
DHI (2014a). Mike 1D. DHI Simulation Engine for MOUSE and MIKE 11. Reference
Manual. MIKE Powered by DHI. Hørsholm.
DHI (2014b). MIKE 21 FLOW MODEL. Hydrodynamic Module. Scientiﬁc Documentation.
MIKE Powered by DHI. Hørsholm.
DHI (2014c). MIKE URBAN COLLECTION SYSTEM. MIKE Powered by DHI. Hørsholm.
DHI (2014d). MIKE URBAN CS/MOUSE TOOLS. M11EXTRAwin and M11EXTRA.
Extraction of data from MOUSE engine results ﬁles. MIKE Powered by DHI. Hørsholm.
DHI (2014e). MIKE URBAN MODEL MANAGER. User Guide. MIKE Powered by DHI.
Hørsholm.
DHI (2014f). MOUSE Pipe Flow Reference Manual. MIKE Powered by DHI. Hørsholm.
DHI (2014g). MOUSE RunoﬀReference Manual. MIKE Powered by DHI. Hørsholm.
67
==PAGE:78==
Bibliography
DMI
(2011).
Skybrud
over
københavn
-
3.
udgave.
URL:
http://www.dmi.dk/nyheder/arkiv/nyheder-2011/07/skybrud-over-koebenhavn-
anden-udgave/. Accessed: 2nd July 2015.
Dottori, F. and Todini, E. (2010). A 2d ﬂood inundation model based on cellular automata
approach, Proc. XVIII International Conference on Water Resources. In Carrera J (ed)
Barcelona.
EPA Ireland (1995). Wastewater treatment manuals. preliminary treatment, Environmental
Protection Agency, Ireland. ISBN 1-899965-22-X.
Geodatastyrelsen (2015).
Geodataprodukter — kortforsynigen - download.
URL:
http://download.kortforsyningen.dk/content/geodataprodukter. Accessed: 13th Feb
2015.
Ghimire, B., Chen, A. S., Djordjevic, S. and Savic, D. (2011). Application of cellular
automata approach for fast ﬂood simulation. Centre for Water Systems, University of
Exeter.
Ghimire, B., Chen, A. S., Guidolin, M., Keedwell, E. C., Djordjevi, S. and Savi, D. A.
(2013). Formulation of a fast 2d urban pluvial ﬂood model using a cellular automata
approach, Journal of Hydroinformatics 15(3): 676–686. IWA Publishing. University of
Exeter.
IPCC (2014). Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part B:
Regional Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. [Barros, V.R., C.B. Field, D.J. Dokken,
M.D. Mastrandrea, K.J. Mach, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, R.C.
Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken, P.R. Mastrandrea, and L.L.
White (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York,
NY, USA, 688 pp.
Jensen, L. N., Paludan, B., Nielsen, N. H. and Edinger, K. (2010). Large scale 1d-1d
surface modelling tool for urban water planning, NOVATECH 2010 . GRAIE, Lyon,
France.
Johansen, N. B. (1985). Discharge to receiving waters from sewer systems during rain,
Ph.D. Thesis. Department of Environmental Engineering, DTU. Kgs. Lyngby.
Jyllands-Posten (2012). DMI: Kraftigt skybrud i nordlige Aarhus. URL: http://jyllands-
posten.dk/indland/traﬁk/ECE4820048/DMIAccessed: 22nd July 2015.
Larsen, M., Pihl, K. A., Nielsen, N. H. and Rasmussen., S. F. (2010). The blue spot
model-development of a screening method to assess ﬂood risk on highways, Technical
Report Report 183. ISBN: 978-87-92094-66-7, Road Directorate, Danish Road Institute.
Copenhagen.
Leitao, J. P., Simoes, N. E., Maksimovic, C., Ferreira, F., Prodanovic, D., Matos, J. S.
and Marques, A. S. (2010).
Real-time forecasting urban drainage models: full or
simpliﬁed networks?, WATER SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 62(9): 2106–2114. IWA
PUBLISHING.
Liu, L., Liu, Y., Wang, X., Yu, D., Liu, K., Huang, H. and Hu, G. (2015). Developing an
eﬀective 2-d urban ﬂood inundation model for city emergency management based on
cellular automata. Published by Copernicus Publications on behalf of the European
Geosciences Union.
68
==PAGE:79==
Bibliography
Madsen, H. (1998).
Statistisk bearbejdning af nedbørsdata fra spildevandskomitens
regnm˚alersystem 1979-96. Kgs. Lyngby.
Mark, O. and Linde, J. J. (2006). Aﬂøbssystemer under p˚avirkning af klimaændringer.
hovedrapport., Miljøstyrelsen i samarbejde med DHI - Institut for Vand og Miljø og
PH-Conult med input fra Peter Steen Mikkelsen, DTU. Copenhagen.
Motiee, H., Chocat, B. and Blanpain, O. (1997). A storage model for the simulation of the
hydraulic behaviour of drainage networks, WATER SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
36(8-9): 57–63. IWA PUBLISHING.
Muschalla, D., Ostrowski, M., Pereira, C. and Schneider, S. (2006). Dokumentation des
schmutzfrachtmodells smusi version 5.0, Institut f¨ur Wasserbau und Wasserwirtschaft,
Technische Universit¨at Darmstadt, Darmstadt .
Nielsen, N. H., Jensen, L. N. and Paludan, B. (2009). 1d-1d modelling of urban ﬂooding,
In: 8th International Conference on Urban Drainage modelling, 11th September 2009,
Tokyo, Japan .
Paludan, B., Nielsen, N. H., Jensen, L. N., Brink-Kjær, A., Linde, J. J. and Mark, O.
(2011). En kogebog for analyser af klimaændringers eﬀekter p˚a oversvømmelser i byer.,
Technical Report ISBN: 978-87-92651-04-4, DANVA.
Razavi, S., Tolson, B. A. and Burn, D. H. (2012). Review of surrogate modeling in water
resources, Water Resources Research 48(7). Wiley Online Library.
Refsgaard, J. C., Madsen, H., Andreassian, V., Arnbjerg-Nielsen, K., Davidson, T. A.,
Drews, M., Hamilton, D. P., Jeppesen, E., Kjellstrom, E., Olesen, J. E., Sonnenborg,
T. O., Trolle, D., Willems, P. and Christensen, J. H. (2014). A framework for testing
the ability of models to project climate change and its impacts, CLIMATIC CHANGE
122(1-2): 271–282.
Rossman, L. A. (2010). STORM WATER MANAGEMENT MODEL USERS MANUAL
Version 5.0, United States Environmental Protection Agency. Water Supply and Water
Resources Division National Risk Management Research Laboratory Cincinnati, OH
45268.
Solvi, A.-M., Benedetti, L., Gill´e, S., Schosseler, P., Weidenhaupt, A. and Vanrolleghem, P.
(2005). Integrated urban catchment modelling for a sewer-treatment-river system., In:
Proceedings 10th International Conference on Urban Drainage. Copenhagen, Denmark,
August 21-26 2005 .
The City of Copenhagen (2012). Cloudburst management plan. Technical and Environ-
mental Administration. Copenhagen.
Thrysøe, C. (2015). Surrogate Modelling of MIKE URBAN Models, Unpublished. Project
conducted at the Technical University of Denmark. Kgs. Lyngby.
Vanrolleghem, P. A., Kamradt, B., Solvi, A.-M. and Muschalla, D. (2009). Making the
best of two hydrological ﬂow routing models: Nonlinear outﬂow-volume relationships
and backwater eﬀects model, Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Urban
Drainage Modelling, September, pp. 7–11.
Wang, L.-P., Willems, P., Assel, J. V., Gires, A., Bruni, G. and ten Veldhuis, M.-C. (2013).
Urban pluvial ﬂood modelling: Current theory and practice. Urban Water Research
Group, Imperial College London.
69
==PAGE:80==
Bibliography
Winther, L., Linde, J. J., Jensen, H. T., Mathiasen, L. L. and Johansen, N. B. (2011).
Aﬂøbsteknik, Vol. 6, Polyteknisk Forlag. Kgs. Lyngby.
Yen, B. C. (1994). Is hydraulics over-used or under-used in storm drainage, WATER
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 29(1-2): 53–61. PERGAMON-ELSEVIER SCIENCE
LTD.
70
==PAGE:81==
Appendix A
Equations Applied in MIKE 21
A
Equations Applied in MIKE 21
The equations that are used in MIKE 21 are presented in this appendix.
The mass equation is seen in Equation (20). The momentum equation can be seen in
Equation (21) and (22) for the x- and the y-direction respectively.
∂ζ
∂t + ∂p
∂x + ∂q
∂y = ∂d
∂t
(20)
∂p
∂t + ∂
∂x
 
p2
h
!
+ ∂
∂y
pq
h

+ gh∂ζ
∂x
+ gp
p
p2 + q2
C2 · h2
−1
ρw
 ∂
∂x (hτxx) + ∂
∂y (hτxy)

−Ωq
−fV Vx + h
ρw
∂
∂x (pa) = 0
(21)
∂q
∂t + ∂
∂y
 
q2
h
!
+ ∂
∂x
pq
h

+ gh∂ζ
∂y
+ gq
p
p2 + q2
C2 · h2
−1
ρw
 ∂
∂y (hτyy) + ∂
∂x (hτxy)

−Ωp
−fV Vy + h
ρw
∂
∂y (pa) = 0
(22)
where d(x, y, t) is the time varying water depth [m], ζ(x, y, t) is the surface elevation [m],
p, q(x, y, t) are the ﬂux densities in x- and y-directions [m3/s/m], h(x, y, t) is the water
depth (= ζ −d) [m], C(x, y, z) is the Chezy resistance [m1/2/s], g is the gravitational
acceleration [m/s2], f(V ) is the wind friction factor, V , Vx, Vy(x, y, t) are the wind speed
components in the x- and y-directions [m/s], Ω(x, y) is the Coriolis parameter [s−1], ρw is
the water density [kg/m3], pa is the atmospheric pressure [kg/m/s2], x and y are the space
coordinates [m], t is the time [s] and τxx, τxy and τyy are the components of eﬀective shear
stress.
71
==PAGE:82==
Appendix B
MIKE URBAN Model for ˚Arhus
B
MIKE URBAN Model for ˚Arhus
Figure 46: MIKE URBAN model for the entire ˚
Arhus city showing the ˚
Aby catchment (pur-
ple) along with links, pumps and catchments. Created with GIS data from Geodatastyrelsen
(2015) and ˚
Arhus Vand (2015).
72
==PAGE:83==
Appendix C
Rain Inputs
C
Rain Inputs
The applied rain events are presented in this appendix.
C.1
Staircase Rain
Figure 47: Staircase rain with increasing intensities from 0.5 to 20 µm/s. Each step has
a duration of 1 day.
C.2
Pulse Rain
Figure 48: Pulse rain with a peak of 15 µm/s and a base of 5 µm/s. The base starts
after 10 min and the peak starts at 2 hours and has a duration of 10 min.
73
==PAGE:84==
Appendix C
Rain Inputs
C.3
Large Block Rain
Figure 49: Block rain with a peak of 20 µm/s and a base of 5 µm/s. The base starts at
10 min and the peak starts at 2 hours for and has a duration of 30 min.
C.4
Large Short Pulse Rain
No Base
Figure 50: Pulse rain with a peak of 20 µm/s. The peak starts at 0 min and has a
duration of 5 min.
74
==PAGE:85==
Appendix C
Rain Inputs
C.5
Historical Rain Event M˚aløv
Figure 51: Historical rain event measured at 30201 M˚aløv rain gauge in the period:
08-07-2008 from 16:13 to 16:51.
C.6
Historical Rain Event Vedbæk
Figure 52: Historical rain event measured at Vedbæk 30316 rain gauge in the period:
19-08-1991 from 0:37 to 02:09.
75
==PAGE:86==
Appendix D
ADP and XRF Files
D
ADP and XRF Files
The ADP ﬁle allows for optional input of various sections in arbitrary order.
The ADP ﬁle allows for multiple sections in which parameter lines can be implemented by
”KeyWord =” followed by the parameter associated with it. The syntax of a section starts
with ”[SECTIONNAME]” and ends with ”EndSect // SECTIONNAME” (DHI, 2013).
Each section is speciﬁed by a unique ”Volume ID” label from which the total volume of the
selected part is computed. This label can then be obtained in the result ﬁle (PRF). For
each section the volume and link ID’s of the compartment are entered as the parameters.
An example of an ADP ﬁle two catchments K and I can be seen below:
[VOLUME_SELECTIONS]
[VOLUME_CALCULATION]
VolumeID = ’Volume Total’
NodeID = ’CompK_Node’
NodeID = ’CompI_Node’
LinkID = ’CompK_Link’
LinkID = ’CompI_Link’
EndSect //
[VOLUME_CALCULATION]
VolumeID = ’Volume K’
NodeID = ’CompK_Node’
LinkID = ’CompK_Link’
EndSect //
[VOLUME_CALCULATION]
VolumeID = ’Volume I’
NodeID = ’CompI_Node’
LinkID = ’ComI_Link’
EndSect //
In this case the total volume in the two compartments I and K are calculated as ’Volume
Total’, volume in compartment K is calculated as ’Volume K’ and volume in compartment
I as ’Volume I’. The computed volume time series will be in the standard result ﬁle from
the MOUSE HD simulation, the PRF ﬁle.
To compute the spilling rate an extra result ﬁle XRF is produced.
This is done by
altering the DHIAPP.INI ﬁle in the project folder by writing the following:
;
;
Generation of an extra *.XRF result file
with:
;
Flow velocity, Froude numbers, time step,
volume in pipes and nodes
;
Set PRINT_EXTRA_INFO=1 to generate the file.
PRINT_EXTRA_INFO=1
;
76
==PAGE:87==
Appendix D
ADP and XRF Files
From this MIKE URBAN will produce the extra result ﬁle. To obtain the spilling discharge
the following is entered in the DHIAPP.INI ﬁle:
;
; WRITESURFACEFLOODRESULTS=1 write flooding
(flow rate to surface and flood volume)
; and spilling (spilling flowrate) results
in XRF-file and HD summary
WRITESURFACEFLOODRESULTS=1
;
77
==PAGE:88==
Appendix E
Calibration Data
E
Calibration Data
This appendix presents the calibration data for the drainage surrogate models which is not
included in the main report.
E.1
Calibration Points
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
 out
 12
Compartment no. 2
Volume in compartment [m3]
Discharge [m3/s]
(a)
0
100
200
300
400
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
 12
Compartment no. 3
Volume in compartment [m3]
Discharge [m3/s]
(b)
0
200
400
600
800
1000
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
 2
 10
Compartment no. 4
Volume in compartment [m3]
Discharge [m3/s]
(c)
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
 2
 3
Compartment no. 8
Volume in compartment [m3]
Discharge [m3/s]
(d)
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
0
1
2
3
4
5
 out
Compartment no. 10
Volume in compartment [m3]
Discharge [m3/s]
(e)
0
2000
4000
6000
0
2
4
6
8
 out
Compartment no. 12
Volume in compartment [m3]
Discharge [m3/s]
(f)
Figure 53: Calibration data for discharge out of compartment, Qout,Drain, to the down-
stream compartments (number given in graphs) or out of the ˚
Abyhøj/Hasle catchment (out)
and discharge to the surface, Qflood for all compartments in the ˚
Abyhøj/Hasle catchment.
78
==PAGE:89==
Appendix E
Calibration Data
E.2
Calibration With Piecewise Linear Interpolation
Small Compartments Klokker
0
100
200
300
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
 7
Compartment no. 8.1
Volume in compartment [m 3]
Discharge [m 3/s]
(a)
0
50
100
150
200
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
 8
Compartment no. 8.2
Volume in compartment [m 3]
Discharge [m 3/s]
(b)
0
1000
2000
3000
0
1
2
3
4
5
 2
 3
Compartment no. 8.3
Volume in compartment [m 3]
Discharge [m 3/s]
(c)
Figure 54: Calibration data for discharge out of compartment, Qdrain,out, to the down-
stream compartments (number given in graphs) and discharge to the surface, Qflood for
the three Klokker compartments in ˚
Abyhøj/Hasle catchment. Steady state points ﬁtted by
piecewise linear functions.
79
==PAGE:90==
Appendix E
Calibration Data
E.3
Calibration With Piecewise Linear Interpolation
Small Compartments BSIngemann and DrHolst
0
10
20
30
40
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
 2.2
Compartment no. 2.1
Volume in compartment [m 3]
Discharge [m 3/s]
(a)
0
50
100
150
200
250
0
0.5
1
1.5
 2.5
Compartment no. 2.2
Volume in compartment [m 3]
Discharge [m 3/s]
(b)
0
50
100
150
200
0
0.5
1
1.5
 2.2
Compartment no. 2.3
Volume in compartment [m 3]
Discharge [m 3/s]
(c)
0
50
100
150
0
0.5
1
1.5
 2.3
Compartment no. 2.4
Volume in compartment [m 3]
Discharge [m 3/s]
(d)
0
1000
2000
3000
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
 12
Compartment no. 2.5
Volume in compartment [m 3]
Discharge [m 3/s]
(e)
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
 3.2
Compartment no. 3.1
Volume in compartment [m 3]
Discharge [m 3/s]
(f)
80
==PAGE:91==
Appendix E
Calibration Data
0
50
100
150
200
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
 12
Compartment no. 3.2
Volume in compartment [m 3]
Discharge [m 3/s]
(g)
0
200
400
600
800
1000
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
 2.5
 10
Compartment no. 4
Volume in compartment [m 3]
Discharge [m 3/s]
(h)
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
 1
 2.5
 3.1
Compartment no. 8
Volume in compartment [m 3]
Discharge [m 3/s]
(i)
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Compartment no. 10
Volume in compartment [m 3]
Discharge [m 3/s]
(j)
0
2000
4000
6000
0
2
4
6
8
Compartment no. 12
Volume in compartment [m 3]
Discharge [m 3/s]
(k)
Figure 55: Calibration data for small compartments for discharge out of compartment,
Qdrain,out, to the downstream compartments (number given in graphs) or out of the
˚
Abyhøj/Hasle catchment (out) and discharge to the surface, Qflood for all compartments
in the ˚
Abyhøj/Hasle catchment with small compartments. Steady state points are ﬁtted by
piecewise linear functions.
81
==PAGE:92==
Appendix E
Calibration Data
E.4
Calibration With one Linear Function
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
 out
 12
Compartment no. 2
Volume in compartment [m3]
Discharge [m3/s]
(a)
0
100
200
300
400
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
 12
Compartment no. 3
Volume in compartment [m3]
Discharge [m3/s]
(b)
0
200
400
600
800
1000
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
 2
 10
Compartment no. 4
Volume in compartment [m3]
Discharge [m3/s]
(c)
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
 2
 3
Compartment no. 8
Volume in compartment [m3]
Discharge [m3/s]
(d)
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
0
1
2
3
4
5
 out
Compartment no. 10
Volume in compartment [m3]
Discharge [m3/s]
(e)
0
2000
4000
6000
0
2
4
6
8
 out
Compartment no. 12
Volume in compartment [m3]
Discharge [m3/s]
(f)
Figure 56: Calibration data for discharge out of compartment, Qdrain,out, to the down-
stream compartments (number given in graphs) or out of the ˚
Abyhøj/Hasle catchment
and discharge to the surface, Qflood for all compartments in the ˚
Abyhøj/Hasle catchment.
Steady state data ﬁtted by one linear function.
82
==PAGE:93==
Appendix F
Comparison of SMs and MU
F
Comparison of SMs and MU
F.1
Volume-Discharge Relation for Staircase Rain
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
 12
Compartment no. 2
Volume [m3]
Discharge [m3/s]
(a)
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
 12
Compartment no. 3
Volume [m3]
Discharge [m3/s]
(b)
0
200
400
600
800
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
 2
 10
Compartment no. 4
Volume [m3]
Discharge [m3/s]
(c)
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
 2
 3
Compartment no. 8
Volume [m3]
Discharge [m3/s]
(d)
0
500
1000
1500
2000
0
1
2
3
4
5
Compartment no. 10
Volume [m3]
Discharge [m3/s]
(e)
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
0
2
4
6
8
Compartment no. 12
Volume [m3]
Discharge [m3/s]
(f)
Figure 57: Comparison of volume-discharge relationship for MIKE URBAN model to
steady state calibration data for staircase rain. Comparison of discharge out of compartment,
to the downstream compartments (number given in graphs) or out of the ˚
Abyhøj/Halse catch-
ment and discharge to the surface, Qflood as functions of the volume in the compartment,
S, for all compartments in the ˚
Abyhøj/Hasle catchment.
83
==PAGE:94==
Appendix F
Comparison of SMs and MU
F.2
Compartment Volume and Discharge for Large
Short Pulse Rain
The system behaviours diﬀer the most between the models when the system starts empty.
To see how much this inﬂuences the results a pulse of 20 µm/s for 5 min is applied. The
results can be seen in Figure 58.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
0
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
12
Compartment no. 2
Time [h]
Discharge [m3/s]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Volume [m3]
(a)
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
0
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
12
Compartment no. 3
Time [h]
Discharge [m3/s]
0
40
80
120
160
200
Volume [m3]
(b)
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2
10
Compartment no. 4
Time [h]
Discharge [m3/s]
0
120
240
360
480
600
Volume [m3]
(c)
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
0
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
2
3
Compartment no. 8
Time [h]
Discharge [m3/s]
0
280
560
840
1120
1400
Volume [m3]
(d)
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
0
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
Compartment no. 10
Time [h]
Discharge [m3/s]
0
180
360
540
720
900
Volume [m3]
(e)
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Compartment no. 12
Time [h]
Discharge [m3/s]
0
400
800
1200
1600
2000
Volume [m3]
(f)
Figure 58: Comparison of surrogate models with MIKE URBAN model for pulse input
of 20 µm/s for 5 min. Comparison of discharge out of compartment, Qdrain,out, to the
downstream compartments (number given in graphs) or out of the ˚
Abyhøj/Hasle catchment
and discharge to the surface, Qflood for all compartments in the ˚
Abyhøj/Hasle catchment
and volume in compartment, S.
84
==PAGE:95==
Appendix F
Comparison of SMs and MU
F.3
Compartment Volume and Discharge for Large
Pulse Rain for Small Compartments
0
1
2
3
4
0
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
 2.2
Compartment no. 2.1
Time [h]
Discharge [m 3/s]
0
8
16
24
32
40
Volume [m 3]
(a)
0
1
2
3
4
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
 2.5
Compartment no. 2.2
Time [h]
Discharge [m 3/s]
0
48
96
144
192
240
Volume [m 3]
(b)
0
1
2
3
4
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
 2.2
Compartment no. 2.3
Time [h]
Discharge [m 3/s]
0
38
76
114
152
190
Volume [m 3]
(c)
0
1
2
3
4
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
 2.3
Compartment no. 2.4
Time [h]
Discharge [m 3/s]
0
26
52
78
104
130
Volume [m 3]
(d)
0
1
2
3
4
0
0.75
1.5
2.25
3
 12
Compartment no. 2.5
Time [h]
Discharge [m 3/s]
0
570
1140
1710
2280
2850
Volume [m 3]
(e)
0
1
2
3
4
0
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
 12
Compartment no. 3.2
Time [h]
Discharge [m 3/s]
0
36
72
108
144
180
Volume [m 3]
(f)
Figure 59: Comparison of surrogate models with Mike Urban model for block rain of
20 µm/s for 30 min with a base of 5 µm/s. Comparison of discharge out of compart-
ment, Qdrain,out, to the downstream compartments (number given in graphs) or out of the
˚
Abyhøj/Hasle catchment and discharge to the surface, Qflood for all small compartments
in the ˚
Abyhøj/Hasle catchment and volume in compartment, S.
85
==PAGE:96==
Appendix F
Comparison of SMs and MU
F.4
Compartment Volume and Discharge for Large
Staircase Rain Using one Linear Function
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
0
0.75
1.5
2.25
3
 12
Compartment no. 2
Time [h]
Discharge [m3/s]
0
800
1600
2400
3200
Volume [m3]
(a)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
0
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
 12
Compartment no. 3
Time [h]
Discharge [m3/s]
0
75
150
225
300
Volume [m3]
(b)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
0
0.75
1.5
2.25
3
 2
 10
Compartment no. 4
Time [h]
Discharge [m3/s]
0
225
450
675
900
Volume [m3]
(c)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
0
1.5
3
4.5
6
 2
 3
Compartment no. 8
Time [h]
Discharge [m3/s]
0
800
1600
2400
3200
Volume [m3]
(d)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
0
1.25
2.5
3.75
5
Compartment no. 10
Time [h]
Discharge [m3/s]
0
525
1050
1575
2100
Volume [m3]
(e)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
0
1.75
3.5
5.25
7
Compartment no. 12
Time [h]
Discharge [m3/s]
0
1225
2450
3675
4900
Volume [m3]
(f)
Figure 60: Comparison of the Surrogate Models (SM) to the MIKE URBAN model
(MU) for the staircase rain. SM calibrated with one single linear function. Comparison of
discharge out of compartment, Qout,drain, to the downstream compartments (number given
in graphs) or out of the ˚
Abyhøj/Hasle catchment and discharge to the surface, Qflood for
all compartments in the ˚
Abyhøj/Hasle catchment and volume in compartment, S.
86
==PAGE:97==
Appendix G
Weir details in Compartment BSIngemann (2)
G
Weir details in Compartment BSIngemann (2)
This appendix shows the details of a weir located in the upper part of compartment
BSIngemann (2) showed in Figure 62 causing the discharge just before the weir to ﬂuctuate
as seen in Figure 61.
Figure 61: Discharge just before downstream weir in compartment BSIngemann (2) from
MIKE VIEW. The applied rain event is the pulse rain presented in Appendix C.2.
87
==PAGE:98==
Appendix G
Weir details in Compartment BSIngemann (2)
Figure 62: Proﬁle showing weir in upstream part of compartment BSIngemann (2) from
MIKE VIEW.
88
==PAGE:99==
Appendix H
Exmaining Backwater Eﬀects on a Test Area
H
Exmaining Backwater Effects on a Test Area
This appendix tests two diﬀerent backwater methods on the drainage surrogate models
which was developed during the project. The two methods are compared to surrogate
model results where backwater eﬀects have not been included. The methods are tested on
a ﬁctitious catchment area in order to have a system where backwater eﬀects occur. A
map of the model with compartment divisions can be seen in Figure 63.
Figure 63: Map of a ﬁctitious catchment area divided into four compartments: A1, A2,
B1 and B2. C is the outlet.
The results of these three model runs can be seen in Figure 64 where no backwatering has
been included, Figure 65 where the Thrysøe (2015) approach has been included and 66
where the Solvi et al. (2005) approach has been included. All ﬁgures show volumes in the
A compartments (top left), volumes in the B compartments (bottom left), discharges in
the A compartments (top right) and discharges in the B compartments (bottom right).
89
==PAGE:100==
Appendix H
Exmaining Backwater Eﬀects on a Test Area
Time [min]
20
40
60
80
100
Volume [m 3]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
Comp. A Volumes
Time [min]
20
40
60
80
100
Discharge [m 3/s]
0
1
2
3
Comp. A Discharges
Time [min]
20
40
60
80
100
Volume [m 3]
0
200
400
600
800
Comp. B volumes
Time [min]
20
40
60
80
100
Discharge [m 3/s]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Comp. B Discharges
SM Comp. 1
SM Comp. 2
MU Comp. 1
MU Comp. 2
Figure 64: Volumes and discharges for the test catchment without backwatering included
the model.
Time [min]
20
40
60
80
100
Volume [m 3]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
Comp. A Volumes
Time [min]
20
40
60
80
100
Discharge [m 3/s]
0
1
2
3
Comp. A Discharges
Time [min]
20
40
60
80
100
Volume [m 3]
0
200
400
600
800
Comp. B volumes
Time [min]
20
40
60
80
100
Discharge [m 3/s]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Comp. B Discharges
SM Comp. 1
SM Comp. 2
MU Comp. 1
MU Comp. 2
Figure 65: Volumes and discharges for the test catchment with backwatering included as
proposed by Thrysøe (2015).
90
==PAGE:101==
Appendix H
Exmaining Backwater Eﬀects on a Test Area
Time [min]
20
40
60
80
100
Volume [m 3]
0
1000
2000
3000
Comp. A Volumes
Time [min]
20
40
60
80
100
Discharge [m 3/s]
0
1
2
3
Comp. A Discharges
Time [min]
20
40
60
80
100
Volume [m 3]
0
200
400
600
800
Comp. B volumes
Time [min]
20
40
60
80
100
Discharge [m 3/s]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Comp. B Discharges
SM Comp. 1
SM Comp. 2
MU Comp. 1
MU Comp. 2
Figure 66: Volumes and discharges for the test catchment with backwatering included as
proposed by Solvi et al. (2005).
In the original SM, the volumes are underestimated for downstream compartments while it
ﬁts rather well for the upstream compartments. The upstream discharges also achieves a
good ﬁt, while the downstream discharges are also slightly overestimated. Therefore, the
focus is to get a better ﬁt for downstream compartments.
Both backwater methods estimate the downstream volumes in compartment A better than
before they were included. The Thrysøe (2015) approach undershoots a bit while the Solvi
et al. (2005) approach overshoots the volume. However, the Thrysøe (2015) approach has
a slightly better ﬁt which also becomes clear when the B compartments are investigated.
Furthermore, the Solvi et al. (2005) approach operates with a maximum discharge which is
very hard to determine. This is seen when the discharge ﬁgures are investigated. When
the predeﬁned maximum discharge is reached, it becomes steady until the volume drops,
and discharge can decrease again. The Thrysøe (2015) approach describes the discharges
much better than the Solvi et al. (2005) approach.
In conclusion, both backwater methods improve the volume description, but discharge
description is either the same or better (the Thrysøe (2015) approach) or worse (the Solvi
et al. (2005) approach). Therefore, the Solvi et al. (2005) approach should be modiﬁed
to give a better ﬁt for the discharges, but at this state the Thrysøe (2015) approach is
recommended in areas where backwater eﬀects occur.
91
==PAGE:102==
Appendix I
Resulting Surface Depressions and Flow Paths
Large Compartments
I
Resulting Surface Depressions and Flow Paths
Large Compartments
This appendix shows how the surface depressions and ﬂow paths would be in the surface
surrogate model when applying the compartments deﬁned in Section 6.1.1. This description
is not being used as there are water divides within the compartments as clearly seen in
Compartment Klokker (8) (see Figure 23 for location). Moreover, compartments are so
large that too many depressions would be included.
Figure 67: Chosen ﬂow path between lumped depressions in the large compartments of
the ˚
Abyhøj/Hasle catchment. Created using GIS data from Geodatastyrelsen (2015) and
˚
Arhus Vand (2015).
92
==PAGE:103==
Appendix J
Surface Properties
J
Surface Properties
This appendix shows surface proeprties which are not included in the main report.
J.1
Flooding Limits
Table 7: Volume ﬂood limit, sﬂood,limit.
BS1
BS2
BS3
BS4
DrHolst1
DrHolst2
Volume m3
-
96.8
180
-
83.9
0.296
J.2
Volume-Water Level Curves for Lumped Depressions
Figure 68: Volume-water level curve for lumped depression in compartment BS1 (2.1).
Figure 69: Volume-water level curve for lumped depression in compartment BS2 (2.2).
93
==PAGE:104==
Appendix J
Surface Properties
Figure 70: Volume-water level curve for lumped depression in compartment BS1 (2.3).
Figure 71: Volume-water level curve for lumped depression in compartment BS4 (2.4).
J.3
Maximum volume in Lumped Depressions
Table 8: Maximum volume in lumped depressions.
BS1
BS2
BS3
BS4
DrHolst1
DrHolst2
Volume m3
277
441
498
1088
32.1
75.4
94
==PAGE:105==
Appendix K
Maximum Water Level in Depressions
by MIKE FLOOD
K
Maximum Water Level in Depressions
by MIKE FLOOD
This appendix shows the MIKE FLOOD maximum water level computed only in the
selected depressions.
Figure 72: Flood map of the MIKE FLOOD result showing maximum water depth in
the depressions of the small compartments. Created with GIS data from Geodatastyrelsen
(2015) and ˚
Arhus Vand (2015).
95
==PAGE:106==
Appendix L
Generating Automatic Water Balance
L
Generating Automatic Water Balance
The concept of water routing between the surrogate models was introduced in Section 3 and
the practical method for doing so is explained in this section. Water is routed between the
compartments by the use of a water balance. This water balance can be created manually
using Equation (12) and (13) along with a visual interpretation of the system. However,
in order for the model to be ﬂexible and easy to adapt to larger systems with a higher
number of compartments this process must be automatized.
In order to automatically identify which compartments receive water from which, and where
they discharge water to, a give-take matrix is created as seen in Figure 73. This matrix has
a list of all compartments as rows and as columns. A 1 indicates to which compartment
a certain compartment discharge water and a 0 shows that there is no water transfer
between the compartments. In this example compartment 1 gives water to compartment
3 and compartment 3 gives water to compartment 2. This type of matrix is made for
both the drainage and the surface compartments. In this surrogate model there is always
one drainage compartment to one surface compartment so drainage compartment 2 only
transfers to surface compartment 2, and there is no need for a give-take matrix between
the drainage and the surface compartments.
Figure 73: Example of a give-take matrix where a 1 indicates that the compartment
number from the row gives water to the compartment number in the column.
The compartment connections are, for the surface surrogate model, visually determined
from the surface terrain data and for the drainage surrogate model, it is detected from the
shape ﬁles created in GIS. More on this method is explained in Appendix M.1.
Instead of inserting 0 and 1 in this matrix, a cell containing all the properties of the
discharge between the two compartments is inserted. This is created in the MATLAB code
seen in Appendix N.2.5 and it is ised in the MATLAB code in Appendix N.3.3.
96
==PAGE:107==
Appendix M
Overview of Data Process Procedure
M
Overview of Data Process Procedure
This appendix shows the data processing procedures, which were carried out using the
three softwares: GIS, MIKE and MATLAB.
M.1
Overview of GIS Procedure
All GIS work in this study has been performed using ArcGis.
The GIS procedure is done in the following steps:
1. Load layers
2. Make surface analysis
3. Create compartments
4. Compare results
Figure 74 gives an overview of this procedure.
Figure 74: Overview of GIS processes for creating surrogate models.
A DTM is used as input to the analysis. This DTM is a topographical raster layer with a
grid size of 10x10 m. The second input is a drainage system layer, which is imported from
MIKE URBAN. This layer contains information about all nodes, links, weirs, pumps etc.
The tools ﬁll and cut/ﬁll constructs a layer with depressions. By using the tool extract by
mask on the depression layer and the DTM, information about the depth in each depression
97
==PAGE:108==
Appendix M
Overview of Data Process Procedure
can be extracted. The depressions can then be sorted so only the larger depressions are
included in the layer. This is done with the raster calculator.
The surface analysis is carried out using the spatial analyst toolbox in ArcGis. The
ﬂow paths can be identiﬁed using the following procedure. Firstly, the ﬂow direction is
calculated by the ﬂow direction tool. Then the ﬂow paths can be calculated using the ﬂow
accumulation tool. The ﬂow paths can be sorted in size with the raster calculator.
By looking at contour lines, ﬂow paths and where the drainage system is located, it can be
determined which depressions should be included in the surface description. Then, these
depressions are selected and saved in a new raster layer. The raster to point tool is now
used to convert the grid cells to points. This layer is then joined spatially with the depres-
sions raster layer, and information about depth and volume in each depression is now stored.
Compartments are drawn manually as polygons. These can now be used to extract shape
ﬁles with information about which nodes or links are in a compartment using the clip tool.
To create a volume description for depressions in the diﬀerent compartments, the extract
by mask tool is used on the point rasters which contains information about water depths.
The volumes can now be calculated by multiplying each cell with 100, since each cell has
an area of 100 m2.
For comparison of results, DFS2 raster ﬁles from MIKE FLOOD can be imported to
ArcGis. These ﬁles contain raster data about maximum water levels in each cell during
a simulation. The raster is converted to points and water levels are extracted for each
compartments using the clip tool. This information is then used to calculate the water
level in Excel. The surrogate model results are given as volume in each compartment. The
depression volume descriptions in points, calculated earlier, is now used to convert the
volume to water levels. This is done manually in Excel by ﬁrst ﬁlling the deepest parts of
the depressions.
M.2
Overview of MIKE Procedure
The MIKE URBAN procedure is done in the following steps:
1. Set up model
2. Create MIKE URBAN results
Figure 75 gives an overview of this procedure.
98
==PAGE:109==
Appendix M
Overview of Data Process Procedure
Figure 75: Overview of of process for creating surrogate models in MIKE URBAN.
The ﬁrst step is to set up the model. In this study a MIKE URBAN model was provided
from ˚Arhus Vand (2015) along with a DTM model. Two models are set up: a drainage
model and a coupled drainage and surface model. In the drainage model all nodes are set
to spilling nodes by using the ﬁeld calculator. In the coupled model the nodes are set to
normal cover. Moreover, the nodes in the drainage system are coupled to the DTM by
using the feature Couple Nodes. Changes in the dhiapp.ini ﬁle to achieve the extra result
ﬁle as described in Appendix D is also done in this step.
In the next step the model results are created. First the rain is speciﬁed in the time series.
For the calibration this is the staircase rain shown in Appendix C.1. Next the simulation
parameters are speciﬁed. In there the ADP ﬁle is used and the time step is speciﬁed. Then,
the model is run which produces the MEX, PRF and XRF ﬁle. The PRF ﬁle is converted
into a CSV ﬁle by the M11Extra application.
M.3
Overview of MATLAB Procedure
The overall procedure for setting up the surrogate models in MATAB is described in this
section. The 3 steps are:
1. Prepare for MIKE URBAN simulation
2. Extract and handle MIKE URBAN data
3. Run surrogate models
Figure 76 gives an overview of the the MATLAB codes and procedure. The MATLAB
codes for each of the steps are presented below. The MATLAB codes are the white boxes.
99
==PAGE:110==
Appendix M
Overview of Data Process Procedure
Figure 76: Overview of of process for creating surrogate models in MATLAB. The white
boxes are MATLAB codes.
Prepare for MIKE simulation
Before the MIKE models are run, the division of compartments must be done according to
the description in Section 6.1.1. Shapeﬁles for each compartment are extracted by GIS.
The DBF ﬁles are then used to create the ADP ﬁle, which should be included in the model.
This is done in the MATLAB code Create adp ﬁle (see Appendix N.1.1). Information
on the compartments and MIKE URBAN catchments within the compartments are found
in the MATLAB code Get comp catch info (see Appendix N.1.2).
Extract and handle MIKE URBAN data
The result ﬁle PRF is open in MIKE VIEW, where the XRF ﬁle is added. The spilling
ﬂowrate is saved to a TXT ﬁle. The PRF ﬁle is converted to a CSV ﬁle by the M11Extra
application. This ﬁle can afterwards be read with Read MU ﬁles (see Appendix N.2.1).
Afterwards the links connecting the compartments are identiﬁed with Identify links with
the DBF ﬁles and a list of compartment names (see Appendix N.2.2). It also identiﬁes
any inputs to the system from pipes outside the drainage system. From here Create-
Data Compare sorts the data according to which compartment is connected to which
and it sorts the spilling ﬂowrate from nodes by which compartment they belong (see
Appendix N.2.3). CreateData Calibration extracts the steady state values from the
data (see Appendix N.2.4). The calibration data and compartment info is saved in a struct
in CreateModelInputData for the drainage and CreateModelInputDataSurf for the
surface compartments (see Appendix N.2.5).
100
==PAGE:111==
Appendix M
Overview of Data Process Procedure
Run surrogate models
The surrogate models are compiled with RunModel (see Appendix N.3.1). The boundary
inputs given to the surrogate models is given here. The rain load is found from Com-
partmentLoads (see Appendix N.3.2), which calculates the load of each compartment by
Equation (14) by the time area method from Equation (15). It is also optional to include
the model input from MIKE URBAN by CompartmentLoadsFromCRF. This takes the
runoﬀresult ﬁle .CRF from MIKE VIEW and adds the loads for each compartment. The
ModelCompartments is a class containing the surface and drainage properties and mass
balance and Runge-Kutta functions (see Appendix N.3.3). It runs the classes Drainage-
Compartment (see Appendix N.3.4) and SurfaceCompartments (see Appendix N.3.5)
where the PiecewiseLinearInterpolater function is run (see Appendix N.3.6).
101
==PAGE:112==
Appendix N
MATLAB Code
N
MATLAB Code
This appendix shows the MATLAB code for creating and running the surrogate models as
described in Appendix M.3.
N.1
Prepare Data for MU/MF
N.1.1
Create adp ﬁle
%***************************************************************************
% Name:
Create adp file
%
% Version:
1.0
%
% Purpose:
Creates ADP file with volumes in each compartment for a
%
MIKE URBAN simulation from shape files from GIS.
%
% Author:
Cecilie Thrysøe and Jens Toke 01−03−15
%**************************************************************************
function ADPFile = Create adp file
% Create adp file creates ADP file for MIKE URBAN simulation from shape files.
% Inputs
%−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
% ADPFILE.txt
−An empty textfile for writing.
% All compartments.xlsx
−A xlsx file containing names of all dbf files
% Compartment nodes.dbf*
−msm Node table from MIKE URBAN extracted by
%
GIS containing MUIDs.
% Compartment links.dbf*
−mam Link table from MIKE URBAN extracte by
%
GIS containing MUIDs.
% * "Compartment nodes" and "Compartment links" should be replaced
%
with the individual compartment.
% Outputs
%−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
% ADPFILE.txt
−ADP text file containing volume selections
%
for each compartment selected in the GIS
%
extraction.
clear all
close all
% opens ADPFILE.txt for writing
fid = fopen('ADPFileCompSmall','w');
% Prints first lines in ADP File
fprintf(fid,'[VOLUME SELECTIONS] \r\n \r\n');
%Read Excel−document with names of all the compartments
[˜,comps] = xlsread('All compartments small.xlsx');
% Finds the compartment name
for i=1:length(comps)
comps name type{i} = regexprep(comps{i},'.dbf','');
comps name(i) = regexprep(comps name type(i),' link','');
comps name(i) = regexprep(comps name(i),' node','');
comp vol ID{i} = ['VolumeID = ''' comps name{i} ''''];
102
==PAGE:113==
Appendix N
MATLAB Code
end
%Read all the .dbf files that tells which links are in which compartments
for k = 1:length(comps)
[num,txt]=xlsread(comps{k});
% Links in the compartment
if length(num(1,:))==40
fprintf(fid,'[VOLUME CALCULATION] \r\n');
fprintf(fid,comp vol ID{k},'\r\n \r\n');
fprintf(fid,'\r\n');
for i = 2:size(txt,1)
fprintf(fid,'\r\nLinkID = ''%s''',txt{i,2});
end
fprintf(fid,'\r\n');
end
% Nodes in the compartments
if length(num(1,:))==42
for i = 2:size(txt,1)
if isnan(num(i−1,2))<1
fprintf(fid,'\r\nNodeID = ''%.0f''',num(i−1,2));
else
fprintf(fid,'\r\nNodeID = ''%s''',txt{i,2});
end
end
fprintf(fid,'\r\n\r\nEndSect // \r\n\r\n');
end
end
% Ends ADP file
fprintf(fid,'\r\nEndSect // \r\n');
% close file
fclose(fid);
N.1.2
Get comp catch info
%**************************************************************************
% Name:
Get comp catch info
%
% Version:
1.0
%
% Purpose:
Creates catchment properties for surrogate model from the
%
MOUSE result file. Sort nodes according to compartment from
%
the ADP file.
%
% Author:
Cecilie Thrysøe & Jens Toke 01−05−15
%**************************************************************************
%
% Get comp catch info returns the catchment properties and the connection to
% the compartments as well as nodes in the compartments.
%
% Inputs
%−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
% ADPFileCompTXT.csv
−ADP file used in MIKE URBAN containing nodes
%
and links in all compartments
% 2d Network blok 1Base.csv −Result file from MOUSE containing all
%
catchments and their properties.
%
% Outputs
%−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
% CompartmentInfo.mat
−Compartmentnamesn(1 x # compartments) cell,
%
which includes names of all the compartments.
103
==PAGE:114==
Appendix N
MATLAB Code
% CatchmentInfor.mat
−Catchment names (1 x # catchments) cell,
%
which includes names of all catchments in the
%
MIKE URBAN model
%
−Catchment area (1 x # catchments) matrix,
%
which includes the area of all catchments
%
[ha]
%
−Catchment imp (1 x # catchments) matrix,
%
which includes the impervious fraction of
%
each catchment. [%]
%
−Catchment red (1 x # catchments) matrix,
%
which includes the reduction factor of each
%
catchment.
%
−Catchment tc (1 x # catchments) matrix, which
%
includes the time of concentration for each
%
catchment. [min]
%
−Catchment Nodes (1 x # catchments) matrix,
%
which includes the connecting nodes for each
%
catchment.
% CatchmentNodeInfo.mat
−CompartmentNodesCorr (# compartments x #
%
nodes in compartment) cell, which contains
%
the nodes in each compartment.
%
−CatchmentNodesComp (# compartments x #
%
catchments) cell, which contains the
%
connecting node (if any) for the given
%
catchment. If there is no connection the cell
%
will be empty.
%Opens ADP file from MU for reading and saves the values
%[num ADP] and the text [txt ADP].
[num ADP txt ADP] = xlsread('ADPFileCompSmall.csv');
%Opens MEX file from MU for reading and saves the values [num Catchment]
% and the text [txt Catchment]. Next it identifies entries for the
% catchments in the text file.
[num Catchment txt Catchment] = xlsread('2d Network blok 1Base.csv');
Catch ind=find(ismember(txt Catchment,'[MOUSE Catchments]'));
Catch ind end=find(ismember(txt Catchment,'EndSect
// MOUSE Catchments'));
% Saves Catchment properties (names [names], nodes [Nodes], area [area],
%impervious fraction [imp], time of concentration [tc], reduction factor [red])
%in (1 x number of catchments) cells.
count = 1;
for i=Catch ind+4:Catch ind end−1
Catchment names(count) = txt Catchment(i,2);
Catchment Nodes Dummy = txt Catchment{i,1};
Catchment Nodes Dummy(1:11) = [];
Catchment Nodes Dummy(end) = [];
Catchment Nodes{count} = Catchment Nodes Dummy;
Catchment area(count) = num Catchment(i−4,4);
Catchment imp(count) = num Catchment(i−4,14);
Catchment tc(count) = num Catchment(i−4,16);
Catchment red(count) = num Catchment(i−4,17);
count = count + 1;
end
% Locates entry in ADP where volume calculation starts i.e. cell entries
% for the beginning of each compartment.
ADP ind=find(ismember(txt ADP,'VolumeID '));
% This loop extracts the nodes in each compartment from the .ADP file. It
% saves the compartment names in a (number of compartments x 1) cell called
% CompartmentNames. It saves the compartment nodes in a (number of
104
==PAGE:115==
Appendix N
MATLAB Code
% compartments x number of nodes in the compartment) cell called
CompartmentNodes.
count = 1;
for j=1:length(ADP ind)
CompartmentNames{count,1} = txt ADP{ADP ind(j),2};
count=count+1;
countelements = 1;
for k=ADP ind(j)+2:length(txt ADP)
CompartmentNodes{j,countelements} = txt ADP{k,2};
countelements = countelements + 1;
% Breaks loop for end of node section
if isempty(strmatch('NodeID',txt ADP{k,1}))==1
break
end
end
end
% This loop ensures that the nodes in the compartment (CompartmentNodes)
% has the same format as the connecting nodes in the catchments. It removes
% any space or extra ''. Gives the output cell CompartmentNodesCorr (number of
% compartments x number of nodes in the compartment)
CompartmentNodesCorr=cell(length(CompartmentNodes(:,1)),length(CompartmentNodes
(1,:)));
for i=1:length(CompartmentNodes(:,1))
for k=1:length(CompartmentNodes(1,:))
if isempty(CompartmentNodes{i,k})==0
CompartmentNodesCorr{i,k} = regexprep(CompartmentNodes{i,k},'[ˆ\w
'']','');
CompartmentNodesCorr{i,k} = regexprep(CompartmentNodesCorr{i,k
},'''','');
CompartmentNodesCorr{i,k} = regexprep(CompartmentNodesCorr{i,k
},'''','');
CompartmentNodesCorr{i,k} = regexprep(CompartmentNodesCorr{i,k
},'''','');
CompartmentNodesCorr{i,k} = regexprep(CompartmentNodes{i,k},'[ˆ\w
'']','');
CompartmentNodesCorr{i,k} = regexprep(CompartmentNodesCorr{i,k
},'''','');
end
end
end
% Compares nodes in each compartment in CompartmentNodesCorr with
% connecting nodes in CatchmenNodes and finds out which catchments is in
% which catchments. The output will be a (number of compartments x number of
% catchments) matrix with the name of the connecting node in the matrix. If
% there is no connection the cell will be empty.
CatchmentNodesComp=cell(length(CompartmentNodesCorr(:,1)),1);
for i=1:length(CompartmentNodesCorr(:,1))
for k=1:length(CompartmentNodesCorr(1,:))
for l=1:length(Catchment Nodes)
if isempty(CompartmentNodesCorr{i,k})==0
if isequal(CompartmentNodesCorr{i,k},Catchment Nodes{1,l})==1
CatchmentNodesComp{i,l} = CompartmentNodesCorr{i,k};
count=count+1;
end
end
end
end
end
% saves output data
save CompartmentInfo.mat CompartmentNames
105
==PAGE:116==
Appendix N
MATLAB Code
save CatchmentInfo.mat Catchment names Catchment Nodes Catchment area Catchment
imp Catchment tc Catchment red
save CatchmentNodeInfo.mat CompartmentNodesCorr CatchmentNodesComp
N.2
Extract and Handle MIKE URBAN / MIKE FLOOD Data
N.2.1
Read MU ﬁles
%**************************************************************************
% Name:
Read MU files
%
% Version:
1
%
% Purpose:
Reads data from MU
%
% Author:
Cecilie Thrysøe & Jens Toke 01−05−15
%**************************************************************************
%
% Inputs
%−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
% output.csv
−A comma seperated value file containing the
%
MU results for all nodes and links. The
%
different types of results are identified by
%
the code number. All results in SI units.
% Q spilling.txt
−A text file containing the MU spilling
%
flowrates for all nodes in the system.
%
% Outputs
%−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
% MURes raw.mat
−Contains Q (# time steps x # links) cell, which
%
contains the discharge in each time in each
%
link in the system [m3/s]
%
−Contains Q ground (# time steps x # nodes)
%
cell, which contains the spilling flowrate from
%
each node in the system to the surface [m3/s]
%
−Contains Vol (# time steps x # compartments),
%
which contians the volume in each compartment
%
over time [m3]
%
−Time (# time steps x 1) cell, which contains
%
the time of MU simualtion [yyyy mm dd
%
hh:mm:ss]
% User defines how many time steps are in the MU result file:
t=338;
% The code starts by loading the input data by the function ReadCsv
clear all
for k=1:t
MU output(k,:)=ReadCsv('output.csv',k,k);
end
% Identifies Q ground discharge values, which is discharge from drainage to
% surface
k=5;
Q ground(1,:)=ReadCsv('Q Spilling.txt',1,1);
for y= 1:t−4
Q ground(k,:)=ReadCsv('Q Spilling.txt',y,y);
k=k+1;
end
Q ground=Q ground(:,2:2301);%Only save the useful data
106
==PAGE:117==
Appendix N
MATLAB Code
% The input boundaries to the system is saved
Input12=[MU output(:,1) MU output(:,10885)];
% Identifies Q discharge values
u=1;
for i=2:14603
if strmatch(MU output{4,i},'200')==1
Q(:,u)=MU output(:,i);
u=u+1;
end
end
%Convert numbers to doubles and remove space from the node names
x=1;
for i=5:length(Q ground(:,1));
for j=1:length(Q ground(1,:));
Q ground{i,j}=str2double(Q ground{i,j});%Convert to numbers
if iscellstr(Q ground(1,j))==1
Q ground{1,j}=regexprep(Q ground(1,j),'[ˆ\w'']','');%Remove space
from the node names
end
end
end
%% Sort the volumes for the compartments
Vol=MU output(:,14603:14616);
Time(:,1)=MU output(:,1);
%% Save the output data
save MURes raw.mat Q Vol Q ground Time
save Input12boundary Input12
N.2.2
Identify links
%**************************************************************************
% Name:
IdentifyLinks
%
% Version:
2
%
% Purpose:
Identifies which compartments are connected by links
%
% Author:
Cecilie Thrysøe & Jens Toke 01−05−15
%**************************************************************************
%
% IdentifyLinks returns the discharge in the links which are conencting the
% compartments along with the nodes
%
% Changelog:
Written by Jens Toke and Cecilie Thrysøe 10−04−2015
% Inputs
%−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
% All compartments.xlsx
−xlsx file with the names of all compartments
%
listed
% Q spilling.txt
−dbf file for each compartment containing the
%
names of all links within the compartment in
%
the third row and the results of the MF
%
simulation for all links.
% MURes raw.mat
−Contains Q (# time steps x # links) cell, which
%
contains the discharge in each time in each
%
link in the system [m3/s]
%
−Contains Q ground (# time steps x # nodes)
%
cell, which contains the spilling flowrate from
%
each node in the system to the surface [m3/s]
%
−Contains Vol (# time steps x # compartments),
107
==PAGE:118==
Appendix N
MATLAB Code
%
which contians the volume in each compartment
%
over time [m3]
%
−Time (# time steps x 1) cell, which contains
%
the time of MU simualtion [yyyy mm dd
%
hh:mm:ss]
%
% Outputs
%−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
% SortedMUData.mat
−Contains Q which is a matrix with information
%
about the discharge which compartments
%
discharge water to which and how much water
%
is transferred at different time steps.
%
Q ground, Vol and Time is carried over from
%
MURes raw.mat
%
%**************************************************************************
%
clear all
%Read Excel−document with names of all the compartments
[˜,comps] = xlsread('All compartments.xlsx');
%Load the results from the MF simulation for each of the identified links
load('MURes raw.mat')
%Read all the .dbf files that tells which links are in which compartments
for k = 1:length(comps)
[˜,txt{k}]=xlsread(comps{k});
end
f=1;
for k = 1:length(comps) %Number of compartments
for w = 1:length(comps) %Number of compartments
for i = 2:length(txt{1,k}(:,3)) %Number of links in the current
compartment
if strmatch(txt{1,k}(i,3), txt{1,w}(2:end,3)) >=1 %Compare links
from two compartments
if k==w %The compartments must be different
break
end
j = regexprep(comps{k},'.dbf',''); %Remove the file type from
the name
Compartments.(j)(1,f) = txt{1,k}(i,3);%Store the link name
Compartments.(j){2,f} = (j); %Store the compartment name under
each link
f=f+1;
end
end
end
f=1;
end
%% Convert the struct to a cell and arrange the cell for further manipulation
Comp cell=struct2cell(Compartments);
u=1;
for k = 1:length(comps) %Number of compartments
for i = 1:length(Comp cell{k,1}(1,:)) %Number of cells in the current
compartment
Comp cell new{u,1}=Comp cell{k,1}(1,i);
Comp cell new{u,2}=Comp cell{k,1}(2,i);
u=u+1;
end
end
108
==PAGE:119==
Appendix N
MATLAB Code
%% Find out which links are connecting two compartments
u=1;
count=0;
Comp matrix{1,1}='blank';
for i=1:length(Comp cell new(:,1)) % Number of links in the cell
for w=1:length(Comp cell new(:,1)) % Number of links in the cell
if strmatch(Comp cell new{i,1}, Comp cell new{w,1}) ==1 % Compare each
link to all the rest
if i˜=w %The two links must not be from the same compartment
for l=1:length(Comp matrix(1,:)) %Check if the link has already
been included in the Comp matrix
if isempty(strmatch(Comp cell new{i,1},Comp matrix{1,l}))
==1
count=count+1;
end
end
if l==count
Comp matrix{1,u}=Comp cell new{i,1}; %Name of the link
Comp matrix{2,u}=Comp cell new{i,2}; %First connected
compartment
Comp matrix{3,u}=Comp cell new{w,2}; %Second connected
compartment
u=u+1;
end
count=0;
end
end
end
end
%Identify nodes going to and from each compartment
for i=1:length(Comp matrix(1,:))
for w=2:length(Q(1,:))
if strmatch(Comp matrix{1,i},Q{1,w})>=1
dummy=strsplit(Q{2,w});
Comp matrix(4,i)=dummy(1);%Node from
Comp matrix(5,i)=dummy(3);%Node to
Comp matrix(6:length(Q(:,1))+1,i)=Q(5:end,w);%Move the data in the
matrix
end
end
end
%Convert numbers to numbers
for i=6:length(Comp matrix(:,1))
for w=1:length(Comp matrix(1,:))
Comp matrix{i,w}=str2double(Comp matrix{i,w});
end
end
%Include names for each line
Comp matrix(1:end,2:end+1)=Comp matrix(:,:);
Comp matrix(1,1)={'Link name'};
Comp matrix(2,1)={'Compartment 1'};
Comp matrix(3,1)={'Compartment 2'};
Comp matrix(4,1)={'From node'};
Comp matrix(5,1)={'To node'};
Comp matrix(6:end,1)=cell(1,length(Comp matrix(:,1))−5);
%Rename Comp matrix to Q for use in future code
Q=Comp matrix;
%Save the data for use in the calibration of drainage surrogate model
109
==PAGE:120==
Appendix N
MATLAB Code
save SortedMUData.mat Q Q ground Vol Time
N.2.3
CreateData Compare
%**************************************************************************
% Name:
CreateData Compare
%
% Version:
1.0
%
% Purpose:
Constructs sorted data from MIKE URBAN to use for
%
for comaprison to the surrogate models and to input for
%
creating claibration data
%
% Author:
Cecilie Thrysøe & Jens Toke 01−05−15
%**************************************************************************
%
% CreateData Compare data returns volume, discharge from compartment in the
% drainage system and to the surface.
%
% Inputs
%−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
% CompartmentInfo.mat
−Contains CompartmentNames (# compartments x
%
1) cell, which is the name of all the
%
compartments.
% CatchmentNodeInfo.mat
−Contains CompartmentNodesCorr(# compartments
%
x max # nodes), which is the nodes sorted
%
according to which comaprtment they belong.
% Raw calibration data.mat
−Contains Q (# timesteps + 5 x # connecting
%
links) cell, which has the Link name in the
%
first row, the two compartment names in 2.
%
and 3. row, the connecting node in the
%
upstream compartment in row 4 and the
%
connecting node in the downstream compartment
%
in row 5. The remaining rows contain the
%
steady state discharge for each link. [m3/s]
%
−Contains Q ground (# timesteps + 4 x # total
%
nodes) cell, which has the node name in the
%
first row, the steady state discharge to the
%
surface in row 5 and down. [m3/s]
%
−Contains Vol (# timesteps + 4 x #
%
compartments), which has the compartment name
%
in the first row, and then steady state
%
volume data from row 5. [m3]
%
% Outputs
%−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
% SortedMUData.mat
−Contains q flood (# timesteps x #
%
compartments) cell, which contains all time
%
steps discharge to the surface for each
%
compartment. [m3/s]
%
−Contains Vol (# timesteps x # compartments)
%
which contains all time steps volume in
%
each compartment.
[m3]
%
−Contains q out (# timesteps x # compartments
%
x # compartments), whcih contains, which has
%
all time steps discharge sorted according
%
to the giving compartment (2. dimension) and
%
the receiving compartment (3. dimension).
%
[m3/s]
%
−Contains q out outlet (# timestep x #
%
compartments) cell, which includes the
%
discharge from compartments leaving the
110
==PAGE:121==
Appendix N
MATLAB Code
%
system i.e. to WWTP e.g. [m3/s]
% The code starts by loading the input data
load ('CompartmentInfo.mat')
load('CatchmentNodeInfo.mat ')
load ('Raw calibration data.mat')
% Creates q flood cell by comparing the nodes in Q ground and
% CompartmentNodesCorr. If these match, the discharge to the surface is
% added to q flood.
q flood com=zeros(length(Q ground(:,1))−4,length(CompartmentNodesCorr(:,1)));
for i=1:length(CompartmentNodesCorr(:,1))
for j=1:length(CompartmentNodesCorr(1,:))
if isempty(CompartmentNodesCorr{i,j})==0
for k=1:length(Q ground(1,:))
if strcmp(CompartmentNodesCorr{i,j},Q ground{1,k})==1
for h=1:length(Q ground(:,1))−5
q flood com(h,i) = q flood com(h,i)+(Q ground{h+5,k});
end
end
end
end
end
end
% Creates q out and q out outlet by comparing nodes in Q and
% CompartmentNodesCorr. If both in and out nodes is found in
% CompartmentNodesCorr the data is added to q out according to the giving
% and receiving compartment. If only the giving compartment is identified
% the data is added to q out outlet according to the compartment.
q out comp=NaN(length(Q(:,1))−5,length(CompartmentNodesCorr(:,1)),length(
CompartmentNodesCorr(:,1)));
q out outlet comp=NaN(length(Q(:,1))−5,length(CompartmentNodesCorr(:,1)));
for i=1:length(CompartmentNodesCorr(:,1))
for j=1:length(CompartmentNodesCorr(1,:))
if isempty(CompartmentNodesCorr{i,j})==0
for k=1:length(Q(1,:))
if strcmp(Q(4,k),CompartmentNodesCorr(i,j))==1
for l=1:length(CompartmentNodesCorr(:,1))
for m=1:length(CompartmentNodesCorr(1,:))
if strcmp(regexprep(Q(5,k),'[ˆ\w'']',''),
CompartmentNodesCorr(l,m))==1
for h=1:length(Q(:,1))−5
if isnan(q out comp(h,i,l))==1;
q out comp(h,i,l) = Q{h+5,k};
else
q out comp(h,i,l) = q out comp(h,i,l) +
Q{h+5,k};
end
end
end
end
end
if sum(sum(strcmp(regexprep(Q(5,k),'[ˆ\w'']',''),
CompartmentNodesCorr(:,:))))==0
for h=1:length(Q(:,1))−5
if isnan(q out outlet comp(h,i))==1;
q out outlet comp(h,i) = Q{h+5,k};
else
q out outlet comp(h,i) = q out outlet comp(h,i) + Q
{h+5,k};
end
111
==PAGE:122==
Appendix N
MATLAB Code
end
end
end
end
end
end
end
% Ensures that the strings in Vol and CompartmentNames are identical
for k=1:length(Vol(1,:))
Vol{1,k}=regexprep(Vol{1,k},'Volume','');
Vol{1,k}=regexprep(Vol{1,k},'[ˆ\w'']','');
end
for i=1:length(CompartmentNames(:,1))
CompartmentNames(i,1)=regexprep(CompartmentNames(i,1),'Volume ','');
CompartmentNames(i,1)=regexprep(CompartmentNames(i,1),'[ˆ\w'']','');
CompartmentNames(i,1)=regexprep(CompartmentNames(i,1),'''','');
end
% Creates vol by comparing Vol and CompartmentNames. If these match, data is
% saved in vol.
vol comp=zeros(length(Vol(:,1))−4,length(CompartmentNames(:,1)));
for i=1:length(CompartmentNames(:,1))
if isempty(CompartmentNodesCorr{i,1})==0
for k=1:length(Vol(1,:))
if strcmp(regexprep(Vol(1,k),'[ˆ\w'']',''),CompartmentNames{i
,1})==1
for j=1:length(Vol(:,1))−4
vol comp(j,i)=str2double(Vol(j+4,i));
end
end
end
end
end
% saves output data
save SortedMUData.mat q flood com q out comp vol comp q out outlet comp Time
N.2.4
CreateData Calibration
%**************************************************************************
% Name:
CreateData Calibration
%
% Version:
1.0
%
% Purpose:
Constructs calibration data for surrogate models using last
%
values in the staircase rain to ensure steady state data.
%
Both volume, outflow of compartment and outflow to the
%
surface is produced for each compartment.
%
% Author:
Cecilie Thrysøe & Jens Toke 01−05−15
%**************************************************************************
%
% Inputs
%−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
% SortedMUData.mat
−Contains q flood (# timesteps x #
%
compartments) cell, which contains all
%
time steps discharge to the surface for each
%
compartment. [m3/s]
%
−Contains Vol (# timesteps x # compartments)
%
which contains all time steps volume in
%
each compartment.
[m3]
112
==PAGE:123==
Appendix N
MATLAB Code
%
−Contains q out (# timesteps x # compartments
%
x # compartments), whcih contains, which has
%
all time steps discharge sorted according
%
to the giving compartment (2. dimension) and
%
the receiving compartment (3. dimension).
%
[m3/s]
%
−Contains q out outlet (# timestep x #
%
compartments) cell, which includes the
%
discharge from compartments leaving the
%
system i.e. to WWTP e.g. [m3/s]
%
% Outputs
%−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
% CalibrationData.mat
−Contains q flood (# timesteps x #
%
compartments) cell, which contains the steady
%
state discharge to the surface for each
%
compartment. [m3/s]
%
−Contains Vol (# timesteps x # compartments)
%
which contains the steady state volume in
%
each compartment.
[m3]
%
−Contains q out (# timesteps x # compartments
%
x # compartments), whcih contains, which has
%
the steady state discharge sorted according
%
to the giving compartment (2. dimension) and
%
the receiving compartment (3. dimension).
%
[m3/s]
%
−Contains q out outlet (# timestep x #
%
compartments) cell, which includes the
%
discharge from compartments leaving the
%
system i.e. to WWTP e.g. [m3/s]
% The code starts by loading the input data
load('SortedMUData.mat')
% Extracts only last vlaue in staircase rain
count=1;
for i=23:24:length(vol comp(:,1))
for j=1:length(vol comp(1,:))
vol(count,j) = vol comp(i,j);
vol(1,j) = vol comp(1,j);
q flood(count,j) = q flood com(i,j);
q flood(1,j) = q flood com(1,j);
q out outlet(count,j)=q out outlet comp(i,j);
q out outlet(1,j)=q out outlet comp(1,j);
for k=1:length(vol comp(1,:));
q out(count,j,k)=q out comp(i,j,k);
end
end
% Adjusts the time
TimeCal(count) = Time(i+4);
count=count+1;
end
% rename parameters for later use
q flood Cal = q flood;
q out Cal = q out;
q out outlet Cal = q out outlet;
vol Cal = vol;
% saves output data
113
==PAGE:124==
Appendix N
MATLAB Code
save CalibrationDataKLOKKER.mat q flood q out vol q out outlet
N.2.5
CreateModelInputData
The CreateModelInputData consists of two codes. One for creating the drainage data and
one for creating the surface data.
CreateModelInputDataDrain
%**************************************************************************
% Name:
CreateModelInputDataDrain
%
% Version:
2
%
% Purpose:
Modify the input data for use in the drianage Surrogate Model
%
% Auther:
Cecilie Thrysøe and Jens Toke 01−05−2015
%**************************************************************************
% CreateModelInputDataDran returns the input data needed to run the drainage
% surrogate models
%
% Input:
%−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
% CalibrationData.mat
−Contains q flood (# timesteps x #
%
compartments) cell, which contains the steady
%
state discharge to the surface for each
%
compartment. [m3/s]
%
−Contains Vol (# timesteps x # compartments)
%
which contains the steady state volume in
%
each compartment.
[m3]
%
−Contains q out (# timesteps x # compartments
%
x # compartments), which contains the steady
%
state discharge sorted according
%
to the giving compartment (2. dimension) and
%
the receiving compartment (3. dimension)[m3/s]
%
−Contains q out outlet (# timestep x #
%
compartments) cell, which includes the
%
discharge from compartments leaving the
%
system i.e. to WWTP e.g. [m3/s]
%
% Outputs
%−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
% comp drain.mat
−Contains comp list (1 x # compartments)
%
double, which contians a list of the
%
compartment numbers.
%
−Contains GiveTake (# compartments x #
%
compartments) double, which contains
%
information on which compartment give to
%
which compartment. The rows are the giving
%
compartments and the columns are the
%
receiving compartments. If there is no
%
connection the number is NaN.
%
−Contains comp drain out (1 x # compartments),
%
which includes the steady state fitting
%
points properties for discharge of the
%
compartment, q drain out out, [m3/s]. The
%
fitting points are slopes, intersects, x
%
starting point, y starting points and number
%
of points. It also cotains the fitting points
%
for q flood, [m3/s].
%
−Contains comp drain (# compartments x #
%
compartments) cell, which contains the
114
==PAGE:125==
Appendix N
MATLAB Code
%
discharge fitting points between the given
%
and receiving compartment [m3/s]
% The code starts by loading the input data
clear all
load CalibrationData.mat
% Create matrix that finds which compartment discharges to which
% compartment and creates the GiveTake matrix
savek=1;
savew=1;
GiveTake=NaN(length(vol(1,:)),length(vol(1,:)));
for k=1:length(vol(1,:))
for w=1:length(vol(1,:))
if isnan(q out(2,k,w))==0;
GiveTake(k,w)=1;
in compk(savek)=k;
in compw(savew)=w;
savek=savek+1;
savew=savew+1;
end
end
end
%Create a list of compartments in the catchment
comps=[in compk, in compw];
count=1;
for q=1:max(comps)
if any(comps==q)
list=find(comps==q);
comp list(count)=comps(list(1));
count=count+1;
end
end
% Convert the 3D q out to a 2D Q out tot
for i=1:length(vol(:,1))
for k=1:length(vol(1,:))
Q out tot(i,k)=nansum(q out(i,k,:));
if Q out tot(i,k)==0
Q out tot(i,k)=NaN;
end
end
end
%Find the outlets from the compartments
for k=1:length(vol(1,:))
for w=1:length(vol(1,:))
if isnan(q out(2,k,w))==0
comp Q out(:,:,k,w)=[vol(:,k) q out(:,k,w)]';
else
comp Q out(:,:,k,w)=zeros(2,length(vol(:,1)));
end
end
% Create the Q flood matrix for each compartment
for i=comp list
if any(comp list==k)
comp Q flood(:,:,k)=[vol(:,k) q flood(:,k)]';
else
comp Q flood(:,:,k)=zeros(2,length(vol(:,1)));
end
end
115
==PAGE:126==
Appendix N
MATLAB Code
comp Q out out(:,:,k)=[vol(:,k) q out outlet(:,k)]';
end
%Run the DrainageCompartment function on the compartment data
for k=1:length(vol(1,:))
for w=1:length(vol(1,:))
if isnan(GiveTake(k,w))==0
comp drain{k,w}=DraiangeCompartment(comp Q out(:,:,k,w)
,[0;0],[0;0]);
end
end
end
%Create the Q flood matrix for all compartments
for k=1:length(vol(1,:))
comp drain out(k)=DrainageCompartment([0;0],comp Q flood(:,:,k),comp Q out
out(:,:,k));
end
%Create a list of outlet numbers
outlets=find(any(q out outlet)==1);
%Save output files
save comp drain.mat comp drain GiveTake comp drain out comp list outlets
CreateModelInputDataSurf
%**************************************************************************
% Name:
CreateModelInputDataSurf
%
% Version:
2
%
% Purpose:
Modify the input data for use in the surface Surrogate Model
%
% Auther:
Cecilie Thrysøe and Jens Toke 10−05−2015
%**************************************************************************
% CreateModelInputDataDSurf returns the input data needed to run the surface
% surrogate models
%
% Input:
%−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
% CalibrationData.mat
−Contains q flood (# timesteps x #
%
compartments) cell, which contains the steady
%
state discharge to the surface for each
%
compartment. [m3/s]
%
−Contains Vol (# timesteps x # compartments)
%
which contains the steady state volume in
%
each compartment.
[m3]
%
−Contains q out (# timesteps x # compartments
%
x # compartments), which contains
%
the steady state discharge sorted according
%
to the giving compartment (2. dimension) and
%
the receiving compartment (3. dimension).
%
[m3/s]
%
−Contains q out outlet (# timestep x #
%
compartments) cell, which includes the
%
discharge from compartments leaving the
%
system i.e. to WWTP e.g. [m3/s]
% GiveTakeSurf.mat
−Contains Give (1 x # given compartments)
%
double, which contains the compartment
%
numbers of the given compartments.
%
−Contains Take (1 x # receiving compartments)
%
double, which contains the receiving
116
==PAGE:127==
Appendix N
MATLAB Code
%
compartments.
%
−Contains GiveTakeSurfMat (# compartments x #
%
compartments) double, which contains
%
information on which compartment give to
%
which compartment. The rows are the giving
%
compartments and the columns are the
%
receiving compartments.
%
−Contains SurfProp (# compartments x 1) struct,
%
which contains three fields: Length,
%
Elevation and Slope for each of the
%
compartment flow paths [m], [m], [m/km].
% MaxVol.mat
−Contains Vol deps (1 x # compartments)
%
double, which contains the maximum volumes in
%
each compartment. If water volume in the
%
surface compartment is exceeded, water will
%
route to the transport cells [m3]
%
% Outputs
%−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
% comp surf.mat
−Contains CompSurf (1 x # compartments) cell,
%
which contains: the width, b, [m], the length
%
of transport cells, x trans, [m], the Manning
%
number, M, [mˆ1/3/s], the slope, S, [m/km],
%
the number of transport cells, X, an empty
%
double for transportation cells (X x 1)
%
double, object for volume out of compartment,
%
vol out, [m3], maximum volume in compartment,
%
MaxVol, [m3], object for discharge out of the
%
last transport cells, q surf out cell, [m3/s]
%
−Contains q flood limit (1 x # compartment)
%
double, which contains the volume limits
%
from where q flood will occur [m3].
% The code starts by loading the input data
clear all
load GiveTakeSurf.mat
load CalibrationData.mat
load MaxVol.mat
% Defines global constants
b = 8;
% Width of flow path [m]
M = 32;
% Manning number [mˆ1/3/s]
v = 0.6;
% Expected velocity [m/s]
dt = 1;
% Time step applied in model [s]
% Creates q flood limit
q flood limit = NaN(1,length(vol(1,:)));
for i=1:length(vol(1,:))
for j=1:length(vol(:,1))
if q flood(j,i)==0
q flood limit(i) = vol(j,i);
end
end
end
% Finds number of transport cells, length and slope.
x trans=zeros(33,1);
S=zeros(33,1);
for i=1:length(SurfProp)
if isempty(SurfProp(i).Length)==0
X(i) = round(SurfProp(i).Length/(v*dt));
x trans(i) = SurfProp(i).Length/X(i); %Length of transport one cell
S(i) = SurfProp(i).Slope; %Slope
117
==PAGE:128==
Appendix N
MATLAB Code
end
end
% Uses the SurfaceCompartment function on the input data and saves the
% properties in Comp surf
for i = Give
MaxVol(i)=Vol deps(i);
Comp surf{i}=SurfaceCompartment(MaxVol(i),b,x trans(i),M,S(i),X(i));
end
% Saves the output data
save comp surf Comp surf q flood limit
N.3
Run Surrogate Models
N.3.1
runModel
%**************************************************************************
% Name:
runModel
%
% Version:
12.0
%
% Purpose:
Run drainage and surface surrogate models to compute:
%
Volumes in the surface and drianage compartments and
%
discharges between these.
%
%
% Changelog:
25−07−14:
%
Written by Morten Borup as start to project 'Surrogate
%
Modelling of Mike Urban Models' with Cecilie Thrysøe.
%
%
25−07−14 to 15−01−15:
%
Revised by Cecilie Thrysøe with changes:
%
−
Expanded to 5 compartments
%
−
Corrected to fulfill mass balance
%
%
02−02−15 to 23−07−15:
%
Revised by Cecilie Thrysøe and Jens Toke during their
%
Master Thesis: 'Surrogate modelling of coupled 1d−2d
%
hydraulic model (MIKE FLOOD)'. Major changes:
%
−
Included a runoff model to reproduce time area models
%
from MIKE URBAN
%
−
Included automatic water balance
%
−
Included surface compartments
%**************************************************************************
%
% runModel creates surrogate model results for compartments
% Inputs
%−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
% comp drain.mat
−Contains the comp list (1 x # compartments)
%
double, which contains the list of all
%
compartments.
% Input12boundary
−Contains Input12 (# timesteps x 2) cell,
%
which contains the discharge into compartment
%
12 in each time step [m3/s]
%
% Outputs
%−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
118
==PAGE:129==
Appendix N
MATLAB Code
% SMResults.mat
−Contains:
%
Volumes drain (# time steps x # compartments)
%
Volumes in drainage compartments [m3]
%
Volumes surf (# time steps x # compartments)
%
Volumes in surface compartments [m3]
%
q drain out (# time steps x # compartments x
%
# compartments)
%
Discharge from one compartment to another
%
[m3/s]
%
q drain out out (# time steps x # compartments)
%
Discharge from the drianage compartments out of
%
the catchment area [m3/s]
%
q flood (# time steps x # compartments)
%
Discharge from the drainage compartments to the
%
surface compartments [m3/s]
%
q exchange (# time steps x # compartments)
%
Discharge between the drainage compartmnets and
%
the surface compartments [m3/s]
%
vol surf out (# time steps x # compartments)
%
Volume out of the surface compartments into the
%
transportation cells
%
TransVecs (# compartments, # cells, # compartments)
%
Volume in each transportation cell for all
%
compartments and all time steps [m3]
%
q surf cell out (# time steps x # compartments)
%
Discharge out of final trnasportation cell into
%
receiving surface compartment [m3/s]
%
trange (# timesteps x 1) vector with time [s]
% clear workspace
clear all
close all
% Load drainage draiange data (created with the script CreateModelInputData)
load comp drain.mat
% User defined
saveEveryXstep = 1;
% Saving steps
themodel.t = 60;
% Start time for model [s]
% Define rain inputs
rainload = CompartmentLoadsFromCRF;
%rainlaod = CompartmentLoads;
% Defines themodel as the Modelcompartments class
themodel = ModelCompartments;
% Defines starting and end point
startT = themodel.t;
endT = length(rainload(:,1))*60−startT;
% Loads input boundary data
load('Input12boundary.mat');
Input12numbers=str2double(Input12(5:end,2));
Input12numbers(end:end+2500,:) = Input12numbers(end,:);
% Runs model step with input of x and F
x = themodel.model step(zeros(length(comp list),2),zeros(length(comp list),2),
endT);
% Creates empty matrices for results:
119
==PAGE:130==
Appendix N
MATLAB Code
Volumes drain = zeros(ceil( (endT−themodel.t)/(themodel.dt*saveEveryXstep)),
length(comp list));
Volumes surf = zeros(ceil( (endT−themodel.t)/(themodel.dt*saveEveryXstep)),
length(comp list));
q drain out = zeros(ceil( (endT−themodel.t)/(themodel.dt*saveEveryXstep)),
length(comp list));
q drain out out = zeros(ceil( (endT−themodel.t)/(themodel.dt*saveEveryXstep)),
length(comp list));
q flood = zeros(ceil( (endT−themodel.t)/(themodel.dt*saveEveryXstep)), length(
comp list));
q exchange = zeros(ceil( (endT−themodel.t)/(themodel.dt*saveEveryXstep)),
length(comp list));
q surf out = zeros(ceil( (endT−themodel.t)/(themodel.dt*saveEveryXstep)),
length(comp list));
vol surf out = zeros(ceil( (endT−themodel.t)/(themodel.dt*saveEveryXstep)),
length(comp list));
q surf out cell = zeros(ceil( (endT−themodel.t)/(themodel.dt*saveEveryXstep)),
length(comp list));
i=1;
F = zeros(length(comp list),1);
j = 1;
saveIndex = 1;
% Runs model over t period
while themodel.t < endT
% Takes the tth value of rain
F = rainload(ceil(themodel.t/60),:);
% Ad the boundary input in compartment 12
F(12) = F(12) + Input12numbers(ceil(themodel.t/(60)));
% Model volumes:
x = themodel.model step(x,F,endT);
% Saves output data every saveEveryXstep
if(j== saveEveryXstep);
% Saves volumes in drainage and surface compartments
Volumes drain(saveIndex,:) = x(:,1);
Volumes surf(saveIndex,:) = x(:,2);
% Saves discharge from the current drainage compartment to the
% receiving compartment
for k=1:length(themodel.Comp drain(:,1))
for v=1:length(themodel.Comp drian(1,:))
if isnan(GiveTake(k,v))==0
if any(themodel.Comp drain{k,v}.q drain out)==1;
q drain out(saveIndex,k,v) = themodel.Comp drain{k,v}.q
drain out;
end
end
end
end
% Saves discharge from the drainage compartment to the surface
for v=comp list
q flood(saveIndex,v) = themodel.Comp drian out(1,v).q flood;
end
% Saves the exchange discharge between the drainage and surface
% compartment
for v=comp list
q exchange(saveIndex,v) = themodel.flood(v);
end
120
==PAGE:131==
Appendix N
MATLAB Code
% Saves the volume which is moved from the surface depressions to
% the transportation cells
for v=comp list
vol surf out(saveIndex,v) = themodel.comp surf{1,v}.vol out;
end
% Saves the discharge out of the final transport cell into the
% receiving surface compartment
for v=comp list
q surf out cell(saveIndex,v) = themodel.comp surf{1,v}.q surf out
cell;
end
% Saves the volume in each transport cell and the velocity
for k=comp list
Transvecs{k}(:,saveIndex)=themodel.comp surf{1,k}.TransVec;
velocity{k}(:,saveIndex)=themodel.comp surf{1,k}.v;
end
saveIndex = saveIndex + 1;
j = 0;
end
i=i+1;
j=j+1;
end
% Make a vector of the time [s]
trange = (startT : themodel.dt*saveEveryXstep : endT−2);
% Saves results
save SMResults.mat Volumes drain Volumes surf Transvecs q flood q exchange q
drain out out q drain out q surf out cell vol surf out trange
N.3.2
CompartmentLoads
Two methods can be applied when inserting the rain into the model. CompartmentLoads
calculates it from the catchment properties as described in Section 3 and Compartment-
LoadsFromCRF extracts the crf result ﬁle from MIKE URBAN and uses this.
CompartmentLoads
%**************************************************************************
% Name:
CompartmentLoads
%
% Version:
1.0
%
% Purpose:
Creates discharge load for each compartment to the
%
surrogate models from rain intensities and information on
%
catchments.
%
% Author:
Cecilie Thrysøe & Jens Toke 10−05−15
%**************************************************************************
function [Loads] = CompartmentLoads
% CompartmentLoads computes the discharge for each compartment from
% catchment properties from each catchment in the given compartment.
% Inputs
%−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
% intensity
−Intensity of rain event given in vector
121
==PAGE:132==
Appendix N
MATLAB Code
%
format (# time steps x 1). [um/s]
% CatchmentNodeInfo.mat
−CompartmentNodesCorr (# compartments x #
%
nodes in compartment) cell, which contains
%
the nodes in each compartment.
%
−CatchmentNodesComp (# compartments x #
%
catchments) cell, which contains the
%
connecting node (if any) for the given
%
catchment. If there is no connection the cell
%
will be empty.
% CatchmenttInfo.mat
−Catchment names (1 x # catchments) cell,
%
which includes names of all catchments in the
%
MIKE URBAN model
%
−Catchment area (1 x # catchments) matrix,
%
which includes the area of all catchments
%
[ha]
%
−Catchment imp (1 x # catchments) matrix,
%
which includes the impervious fraction of
%
each catchment. [%]
%
−Catchment red (1 x # catchments) matrix,
%
which includes the reduction factor of each
%
catchment.
%
−Catchment tc (1 x # catchments) matrix, which
%
includes the time of concentration for each
%
catchment. [min]
%
−Catchment Nodes (1 x # catchments) matrix,
%
which includes the connecting nodes for each
%
catchment.
% Outputs
%−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
% Loads
−(# time steps + max(tc) x # compartments)
%
matrix, which contains the resulting loads of
%
rain in each compartment.
% The code starts by loading the input data
load('CatchmentNodeInfo.mat')
load('CompartmentInfo.mat')
load(intensity.mat')
% Creates extra length from the time of concentration
intensitylong = zeros(length(intensity(:,1))+max(Catchment tc)+1000,length(
Catchment names(1,:)));
intensitylong(1:length(intensity(:,1)),1:length(Catchment names(1,:)))=
intensity;
% Creates load for each catchment by: Q = A * i * phi
% Ensures all parameters are in SI units
for i=1:length(intensitylong(:,1))
for j=1:length(Catchment names(1,:))
QCatch(i,j)=intensitylong(i,j)*10ˆ(−6)*Catchment area(1,j)*10000*
Catchment imp(1,j)/100*Catchment red(1,j);
end
end
% Applies a moving average filter to immitate the time−area method from the
% time of concentration for each of the catchements.
a=1;
for j=1:length(Catchment names(1,:))
b(1:Catchment tc(j))= 1/Catchment tc(j);
LoadsCatchments(:,j) = filter(b,a,QCatch(:,j));
clear b
end
122
==PAGE:133==
Appendix N
MATLAB Code
% Creates the load from each compartment from the loads of all the
% catchments.
Loads = zeros(length(LoadsCatchments(:,1)),length(CatchmentNodesComp(:,1)));
for i=1:length(CatchmentNodesComp(:,1))
for j=1:length(CatchmentNodesComp(1,:))
if isempty(CatchmentNodesComp{i,j})==0
for h=1:length(LoadsCatchments(:,1))
Loads(h,i) = Loads(h,i) + LoadsCatchments(h,j);
end
end
end
end
end
CompartmentLoadsFromCRF
%**************************************************************************
% Name:
CompartmentLoadsFromCRF
%
% Version:
1.0
%
% Purpose:
Creates discharge load for each compartment to the
%
surrogate models from rain intensities and information on
%
catchments.
%
% Author:
Cecilie Thrysøe 10−05−15
%**************************************************************************
function [Loads] = CompartmentLoadsFromCRF()
% CompartmentLoads computes the discharge for each compartment from
% catchment properties from each catchment in the given compartment.
% Inputs
%−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
% CRFRes.mat
−RainEvent (# time steps x # nodes) double,
%
which containts the rain load in each node in
%
MIKE URBAN [m3/s]
% CatchmentNodeInfo.mat
−CompartmentNodesCorr (# compartments x #
%
nodes in compartment) cell, which contains
%
the nodes in each compartment.
%
−CatchmentNodesComp (# compartments x #
%
catchments) cell, which contains the
%
connecting node (if any) for the given
%
catchment. If there is no connection the cell
%
will be empty.
% CatchmentInfo.mat
−Catchment names (1 x # catchments) cell,
%
which includes names of all catchments in the
%
MIKE URBAN model
%
−Catchment area (1 x # catchments) matrix,
%
which includes the area of all catchments
%
[ha]
%
−Catchment imp (1 x # catchments) matrix,
%
which includes the impervious fraction of
%
each catchment. [%]
%
−Catchment red (1 x # catchments) matrix,
%
which includes the reduction factor of each
%
catchment.
%
−Catchment tc (1 x # catchments) matrix, which
%
includes the time of concentration for each
%
catchment. [min]
%
−Catchment Nodes (1 x # catchments) matrix,
123
==PAGE:134==
Appendix N
MATLAB Code
%
which includes the connecting nodes for each
%
catchment.
% Outputs
%−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
% Loads
−(# time steps + max(tc) x # compartments)
%
matrix, which contains the resulting loads of
%
rain in each compartment.
% The code starts by loading the input data
load('CatchmentNodeInfoSmall.mat')
load('CompartmentInfoSmall.mat')
load('CatchmentInfoSmall.mat')
load('CRFRes LargePulse.mat')
intensity = Large Pulse;
% Creates the load from each compartment from the loads of all the
% catchments.
Loads = zeros(length(intensity(:,1)),length(CatchmentNodesComp(:,1)));
for i=1:length(CatchmentNodesComp(:,1))
for j=1:length(CatchmentNodesComp(1,:))
if isempty(CatchmentNodesComp{i,j})==0
for h=1:length(intensity(:,1))
Loads(h,i) = Loads(h,i) + intensity(h,j);
end
end
end
end
end
N.3.3
ModelCompartments
classdef ModelCompartments<handle
% ModelCompartments is a class which handles the mass balance of the
% drianage surrogate models and the surface surrogate models. It
% evolves the mass balance in time with Runge Kutta.
% Defines the properties of obj
properties
% User specified
dt = 1;
% time step [s]
% Counters
t = 0;
% Resets t value
count=1;
% counter
% Defines drainage and surface properties
Comp drain
Comp drain out
comp surf
q flood limit
flood
GiveTake
GiveTakeSurfMat
comp list
TransVecTemp=zeros(2158,33);
MaxVol
end
124
==PAGE:135==
Appendix N
MATLAB Code
% Defines the methods of obj
methods
% Mass balance for compartments
function dy = derivForAllSubMods(obj, y, F)
% This function evaluate change in volume and in and outputs
% for the compartments
dy = zeros(11,2);
% Loads drainage and surface properties and defines them as
% objects
if isempty(obj.Comp drain)==1
% Loads parameters for the drainage compartments
load comp drain.mat
obj.Comp drain=comp drain;
obj.GiveTake=GiveTake;
obj.Comp drain out=comp drain out;
%Load parameters for the surface compartments
load comp surf.mat
load GiveTakeSurfMat.mat
obj.MaxVol = MaxVol;
obj.comp surf=Comp surf;
obj.q flood limit = q flood limit;
obj.GiveTakeSurfMat=GiveTakeSurfMat;
obj.comp list=comp list;
end
% Running drainage compartments (y(in compartment),y(downstream))
for k=1:length(obj.GiveTake)
if(nansum(obj.GiveTake(k,:)))>0
take=find(isnan(obj.GiveTake(k,:))==0);
if length(take)==1
obj.Comp drain{k,take(1)}.qOut(y(k,1),y(take(1),1));
elseif length(take)==2
obj.Comp drain{k,take(1)}.qOut(y(k,1),y(take(1),1));
obj.Comp drain{k,take(2)}.qOut(y(k,1),y(take(2),1));
elseif length(take)==3
obj.Comp drain{k,take(1)}.qOut(y(k,1),y(take(1),1));
obj.Comp drain{k,take(2)}.qOut(y(k,1),y(take(2),1));
obj.Comp drain{k,take(3)}.qOut(y(k,1),y(take(3),1));
end
end
end
%Compute the outlet from the drainage compartments
%Run the surface compartments
for k=obj.comp list
obj.Comp drain out(1,k).qOutOut(y(k,1));%Outlet from drainage
obj.comp surf{1,k}.qInCell(y(k,2));%Input to transport cell
if mod(obj.count,4)==0
obj.comp surf{1,k}.qOutCell(obj.dt,obj.TransVecTemp(:,k),
obj.comp surf{1,k}.vol out);%Outlet from transport cell
obj.TransVecTemp(1:length(obj.comp surf{1,k}.TransVec(:)),k
)=obj.comp surf{1,k}.TransVec(:);
end
end
%%
Automized water balance
% Change in volume in drainage compartments
temp=zeros(length(obj.GiveTake),1);
125
==PAGE:136==
Appendix N
MATLAB Code
for w=obj.comp list
%Which compartments does the current recieve from?
recieve from=find(isnan(obj.GiveTake(:,w))==0);
%Which compartments does the current send to?
send to=find(isnan(obj.GiveTake(w,:))==0);
%Create the mass balance
%Input
input=0;
if isempty(recieve from)==0
for z=1:length(recieve from)%There could be more than one
input
if isempty(obj.Comp drain{recieve from(z),w}.q drain
out)==1
obj.Comp drain{recieve from(z),w}.q drain out=0;
end
input=input+obj.Comp drain{recieve from(z),w}.q drain
out;
end
end
%Output
output=0;
if isempty(send to)==0
for z=1:length(send to)%There could be more than one output
if isempty(obj.Comp drain{w,send to(z)}.q drain out)==1
obj.Comp drain{w,send to(z)}.q drain out=0;
end
output=output+obj.Comp drain{w,send to(z)}.q drain out;
end
end
%Subtract output from input
temp(w)=input−output;
clearvars recieve from send to
%end
end
%Widthdraw q flood and outlets from the compartments
for m=1:length(obj.Comp drain out)
%Outlets
if any(m==obj.comp list)==1
outlet=0;
if any(m==obj.outlets)==1
outlet=obj.Comp drain out(1,m).q drain out out;
end
%% This part defines makes it possible for the water to
% run into the drainage again. (Bidirectional flow)
if y(m,2)>0
if isnan(obj.q flood limit(m))==0 %Is there a flood
limit?
if obj.q flood limit(m) >= y(m,1) %Is the limit
higher than or equal to the volume in the
drainage?
if y(m,2)<=(obj.q flood limit(m)−y(m,1)) %Is
the volume on the surface less than or
equal to the difference between the flood
limit and the volume in the drainage?
obj.flood(m) = −y(m,2); %The whole volume
goes into the drainage
else
obj.flood(m) = −(obj.q flood limit(m)−y(m
,1)); %Otherwise the difference between
the flood limit and the volume in the
drainage goes into the drainage
126
==PAGE:137==
Appendix N
MATLAB Code
end
else
obj.flood(m)=obj.Comp drain out(1,m).q flood;
end
else
obj.flood(m)=obj.Comp drain out(1,m).q flood;
end
else
%% The bidirectional part ends here
obj.flood(m)=obj.Comp drain out(1,m).q flood;
end
if obj.flood(m)>0
obj.flood(m)=obj.Comp drain out(1,m).q flood;
end
%The drainage water balance is calculated
dy(m,1)=F(m)+temp(m)−obj.flood(m)−outlet;
end
end
clearvars temp
%Change in volume in surface compartments
for w=obj.comp list
recieve from=find(isnan(obj.GiveTakeSurfMat(:,w))==0);
%Input
input=0;
for z=1:length(recieve from)
if isempty(obj.comp surf{1,recieve from(z)}.q surf out cell
)==1
obj.comp surf{1,recieve from(z)}.q surf out cell=0;
end
input=input+obj.comp surf{1,recieve from(z)}.q surf out
cell;
end
%The surface mass balance is calculated
dy(w,2)=input + obj.flood(w) −obj.comp surf{1,w}.vol out;
clearvars recieve from
end
%% A Manual water balance was made to check the result of the
automized water balance
%
dy drain = Rain + input...
%
−output/outlet...
%
−q flood
%
%
dy surf = q flood + q surf up...
%
−q surf out
%
%drain 2
%
dy(2,1) = F(2) + obj.Comp drain{4,2}.q drain out +
obj.Comp drain{8,2}.q drain out...
%
−obj.Comp drain{2,12}.q drain out −obj.Comp
drain out(1,2).q drain out out...
%
−obj.Comp drain out(1,2).q flood;
%
%
%Surf 2
%
dy(2,2) = obj.Comp drain out(1,2).q flood + obj.comp
surf{1,8}.q surf out cell ...
%
+ obj.comp surf{1,3}.q surf out cell...
%
−obj.comp surf{1,2}.vol out;
%
%
%drain 3
%
dy(3,1) = F(3) + obj.Comp drain{8,3}.q drain out...
127
==PAGE:138==
Appendix N
MATLAB Code
%
−obj.Comp drain{3,12}.q drain out...
%
−obj.Comp drain out(1,3).q flood;
%
%
%Surf 3
%
dy(3,2) = obj.Comp drain out(1,3).q flood ...
%
−obj.comp surf{1,3}.vol out;
%
%
%drain 4
%
dy(4,1) = F(4) ...
%
−obj.Comp drain{4,2}.q drain out −obj.Comp
drain{4,10}.q drain out...
%
−obj.Comp drain out(1,4).q flood;
%
%
%Surf 4
%
dy(4,2) = obj.Comp drain out(1,4).q flood ...
%
−obj.comp surf{1,4}.vol out;
%
%
%drain 8
%
dy(8,1) = F(8)...
%
−obj.Comp drain{8,2}.q drain out −obj.Comp
drain{8,3}.q drain out...
%
−obj.Comp drain out(1,8).q flood;
%
%
%Surf 8
%
dy(8,2) = obj.Comp drain out(1,8).q flood ...
%
−obj.comp surf{1,8}.vol out;
%
%
%drain 10
%
dy(10,1) = F(10) + obj.Comp drain{4,10}.q drain out
...
%
−obj.Comp drain out(1,10).q drain out out...
%
−obj.Comp drain out(1,10).q flood;
%
%
%Surf 10
%
dy(10,2) = obj.Comp drain out(1,10).q flood + obj.
comp surf{1,4}.q surf out cell ...
%
−obj.comp surf{1,10}.vol out;
%
%
%drain 12
%
dy(12,1) = F(12) + obj.Comp drain{2,12}.q drain out +
obj.Comp drain{3,12}.q drain out...
%
−obj.Comp drain out(1,12).q drain out out...
%
−obj.Comp drain out(1,12).q flood;
%
%
%Surf 12
%
dy(12,2) = obj.Comp drain out(1,12).q flood + obj.
comp surf{1,2}.q surf out cell ...
%
−obj.comp surf{1,12}.vol out;
obj.count=obj.count+1;
end
% This function evolves x from F by Runge Kutta function
function x = model step(obj, x, F, endT)
x = rk4step(@obj.derivForAllSubMods, obj.dt, x, F);
x = (x>0).*x;
obj.t = obj.t + obj.dt;
% Tracks the progress
if floor(mod(obj.t,0.01*endT)) == 0
clc
Progress = sprintf('%2.0f %%\n', obj.t/endT*100);
display(Progress);
end
128
==PAGE:139==
Appendix N
MATLAB Code
end
end
end
N.3.4
DrainageCompartments
classdef DrainageCompartment<handle
% DrainageCompartment is a class which handles the discharge out of the
% drianage compartments by input volumes.
properties
% Functional outputs of compartment
q drain out func;
% Drainage discharge function
q flood func;
% Flood discharge function
q drain out out func;
% Drainage outlet functions
% Outputs from compartment
q drain out;
% Drainage discharge [m3/s]
q flood;
% Flood discharge [m3/s]
q drain out out;
% Drainage outelt [m3/s]
end
methods
% Defines linear functions by PiecewiseLinearInterpolater.
function obj = drainageCompartment(fixPointsQ drain out, fixPointsQ
flood, fixPointsQ drain out out)
obj.q drain out func = PiecewiseLinearInterpolater(fixPointsQ drain
out);
obj.q flood func = PiecewiseLinearInterpolater(fixPointsQ flood);
obj.q drain out out func = PiecewiseLinearInterpolater(fixPointsQ
drain out out);
end
% Identifies discharge of of drainage compartment from volume.
function qOut(obj, vol, volDownstream)
obj.q drain out = obj.q drain out func.calcValue(vol);
if obj.q drain out < 0
obj.q drain out = 0;
end
end
% Identifies discharge of of drianage compartments by flooding or
% to the WWTP.
function qOutOut(obj, vol)
obj.q flood = obj.q flood func.calcValue(vol);
if obj.q flood<0
obj.q flood = 0;
end
obj.q drain out out = obj.q drain out out func.calcValue(vol);
if obj.q drain out out<0
obj.q drain out out = 0;
end
end
end
end
N.3.5
SurfaceCompartments
classdef SurfaceCompartment<handle
% SurfaceCompartment is a class which handles the discharge out of the
% surface, into the transport cells, through the transport cells and out of
% the transport cellscompartments by input volumes.
129
==PAGE:140==
Appendix N
MATLAB Code
properties
TransVec
% Object for transport cells
vol out
% Volume out of surface compartment [m3]
MaxVol
% Maximum volume in surface compartment [m3]
q surf out cell
% Discharge out of transport cell [m3/s]
v
% Velocity in trnapsort cell [m/s]
% Transport Cells properties
b
%Width
x trans
%Length of transport one cell
M
%Manning number
S
%Slope
X
%Number of transport cells
end
methods
% Identifies the excess water volume in the surface compartment
function qInCell(obj,vol surf)
if vol surf>obj.MaxVol
obj.vol out = vol surf −obj.MaxVol;
else
obj.vol out=0;
end
if isempty(obj.vol out)==1
obj.vol out=0;
end
end
% Routes the water in the tranport cells
function qOutCell(obj,dt,TransVecTemp,VolIn)
if isempty(obj.TransVec)==1
obj.v=0;
obj.q surf out cell=0;
else
obj.TransVec = TransVecTemp(1:length(obj.TransVec));
obj.TransVec(1) = obj.TransVec(1) + VolIn;
if sum(obj.TransVec)>0
% loops through the number of transport cells
for i = 1 : obj.X−1
i = obj.X−i;
if obj.TransVec(i)>0;
% Volume in transport cell:
Vol = obj.TransVec(i);
% Cross sectiona area in transport cell:
A = Vol/obj.x trans;
% Hydraulic radius in transport cell:
R = 1/(2/obj.b+obj.b*obj.x trans/Vol);
% Calclates the volume transfer between two
% transport cells by Manning:
% Q = M*A*Rˆ(2/3)*Sˆ(1/2)
MARS = obj.M*A*Rˆ(2/3)*obj.Sˆ(1/2)*dt;
if MARS > Vol
MARS = Vol;
end
% Routes the water to the next transport cell:
obj.TransVec(i+1) = obj.TransVec(i+1) + MARS;
obj.TransVec(i) = obj.TransVec(i) −MARS;
obj.v(i)=MARS/A;
else
obj.TransVec(i) = 0;
obj.v(i) = 0;
end
end
130
==PAGE:141==
Appendix N
MATLAB Code
else
obj.v(1:obj.X−1)=0;
end
% Takes the volume in the last cell and empties to receiving
% compartment
obj.q surf out cell = obj.TransVec(obj.X);
obj.TransVec(obj.X)=0;
end
end
end
end
N.3.6
PiecewiseLinearInterpolator
classdef PiecewiseLinearInterpolater
% PiecewiseLinearInterpolater is a class which handles linear functions
% between given data points and identifies vlaues of this.
properties
slopes
% Slopes of the individual liniear segments.
intersects
% Intersects with y axis for the liniear segments.
xStart
% Start of intervals.
nInt
% Number of defined intervals.
end
methods
% Creates piecewise linear function between input points.
% points is a [2,:] matrix containing the endpoints of the liniear
% segments.
function obj = PiecewiseLinearInterpolater(points)
obj.nInt = length(points(1,:)) −1;
obj.xStart = points(1,:);
% Defines slopes and intersections
for i=1:obj.nInt
if points(2,i+1) −points(2,i) < eps
| |
points(1,i+1) −points
(1,i) < eps
obj.slopes(i) = 0;
else
obj.slopes(i) = (points(2,i+1) −points(2,i))/(points(1,i
+1) −points(1,i));
end
obj.intersects(i) = points(2,i) −obj.slopes(i)*points(1,i);
end
end
% Extracts y data in piecewise lienar function by x data point
function y = calcValue(obj, x)
for i=1:obj.nInt
% Calculates y from: y= a * x + b;
if(x<obj.xStart(i+1))
y = obj.intersects(i) + x*obj.slopes(i);
return;
end
y = obj.intersects(obj.nInt) + x*obj.slopes(obj.nInt);
end
end
end
end
131
==PAGE:142==
Appendix O
Alternative Surface Analysis
O
Alternative Surface Analysis
This appendix describes an alternative approach for carrying out the surface analysis.
ArcGis is still the main tool.
Examine Surface with GIS A terrain analysis is carried out using a program de-
veloped by Nielsen et al. (2009) to identify local depressions, which will act as storage
basins during a rain event. These are evaluated from the terrain level. Figure 77 shows all
the identiﬁed depressions from the rolling ball analysis on the DTM on the ˚Abyhøj/Hasle
part of the catchment area.
Figure 77: Small depressions in the ˚
Abyhøj/Hasle catchment. Created with GIS data
from Geodatastyrelsen (2015) and ˚
Arhus Vand (2015).
Sort Surface Depressions Only the largest of these surface depressions are included in
the analysis. This is done by setting a minimum threshold for storage volume. Figure 78
only includes depressions that either have a depth larger than 40 cm or an area above
1000 m2 or a volume larger than 100 m3. The reason for this, is to ensure that the largest
and most signiﬁcant depressions are identiﬁed. Depressions below the thresholds are
lumped/pooled into the larger depressions so the total volume is preserved. Later, one
large signiﬁcant depression in each compartment is chosen to represent all depressions in
the compartment as seen in Figure 79.
132
==PAGE:143==
Appendix O
Alternative Surface Analysis
Figure 78: Large depressions in the ˚
Abyhøj/Hasle catchment. Created with GIS data
from Geodatastyrelsen (2015) and ˚
Arhus Vand (2015).
Figure 79: Lumped depressions and chosen ﬂow paths in the ˚
Abyhøj/Hasle catchment.
Created with GIS data from Geodatastyrelsen (2015) and ˚
Arhus Vand (2015).
133
==PAGE:144==
Appendix O
Alternative Surface Analysis
Describing Surface Depressions by Volume/depth Relations A cumulative vol-
ume/depth relation is developed for each compartment using the *.mex ﬁles for the
depressions which were created using the code from Nielsen et al. (2009). The subsequent
data manipulation is performed in MATLAB.
This volume/depth relationship is a lumped representation of all depressions in one com-
partment. Thus, all depressions in the compartment can be described as one basin, as seen
in Figure 79, and the geometry of this basin is described by the cumulative volume/depth
relationship.
Figure 80 shows a cross sectional conceptual drawing of the merging procedure for one
compartment. At the topmost part of the ﬁgure three depressions are shown (3, 2 and
1) with bottom levels (h0) and crest levels (hc). For depression 3, the crest level (hc, 3)
determines the level at which the water will start ﬂowing towards depression 2. At the
middle part of the ﬁgure all holes have been normalized by subtracting their bottom level
from their crest level. This eliminates elevation diﬀerences between the three depressions
and their volume/depth curves can be added together. This is depicted in the bottommost
part of Figure 80 where depression 1, 2 and 3 are lumped together in one depression. This
lumped depression is ﬁctitious but it is located at the same location and elevation of a
large low-lying depression in the compartment. In this case, it is located at depression 1.
The crest level at which the water will start ﬂowing towards the next compartment is the
lowest crest level of any depression in the compartment. In this example it is hc,1. If the
lowest depression in a compartment does not have a threshold level i.e. water will not ﬂow
from here, the threshold from the second lowest depression is used instead. If there is no
water pathway from the compartment water will accumulate in the surface depressions.
Figure 80: Lumping of three surface depressions, where h0 is the bottom level of each
depression and hc is the crest level for each depression.
The cumulative volume/depth curves are constructed in MATLAB by adding all depres-
sions within a compartment. Figure 81 shows volume/depth relationships for all the
depressions/holes within the Oldhojen compartment (hole 1-5) along with the cumulative
volume/depth relationship (labelled Oldhojen). It is seen that all depressions contribute
to the cumulative curve, but the two largest depressions (hole 1 and hole 5) make up the
largest part of the cumulative curve.
134
==PAGE:145==
Appendix O
Alternative Surface Analysis
0
2
4
6
8
x 10
4
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Volume [m3]
Water Level [m]
Figure 81: Volume/depth curves all depressions along with the cumulative volume/depth
curve for the Oldhojen compartment.
Figure 82 shows the cumulative volume/depth curves for all six compartments in the
˚Abyhøj/Hasle catchment. These represent the lumped depressions as sketched in the
bottom most part of Figure 80. The crest levels for each compartment can be seen in
Table 9. Some of the curves only extend to the location of the crest level, but information
about the volume/depth relationship above the crest level is also needed. This information
will be used when the depression is completely full and water starts ﬂowing over the crest.
The way this information is gathered is simply by linearly interpolating the last meter, to
continue the trend, and by adding it at the end of the original curve. For Dr. Holst (which
is not visible on Figure 82) the whole curve was interpolated and added to the curve, since
it only consists of one small depression.
Both volume, depth and the relationship between these two varies a lot amongst the
compartments. The Stadion compartment has an overall steep slope meaning the that
depressions in the area are shallow but can contain large volumes of water. Similarly does
a less steep slope, as for the Fuglebakken compartment, mean that the depressions are
deep but not wide and therefore cannot contain much water.
10
2
10
3
10
4
10
5
10
6
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
Volume [m3]
Water Level [m]
Figure 82: Cumulative volume/depth curves for the 6 compartments in the ˚
Abyhøj/Hasle
catchment.
135
==PAGE:146==
Appendix O
Alternative Surface Analysis
Table 9: Normalized crest levels for the 6 compartments in the ˚
Abyhøj/Hasle catchment.
Compartment name
Klokker
Dr Holst
B. S. Ingemann
Fuglebakken
Oldhojen
Stadion
Crest level [m]
0.59
0.63
1.1
3.3
0.75
3.2
136
