==PAGE:1==
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
Future	  CO2	  refrigeration	  
systems	  for	  hot	  climates	    
Master	  Thesis	  	  
	  
	  
Stefano	  Bissoli	  
July	  2015	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Future CO2 refrigeration systems
for hot climates
Master Thesis
submitted the 5th of July 2015
and defended the 13th of July 2015
at the
TECHNICAL UNIVERSITY OF DENMARK
by
Stefano Bissoli
under the supervision of:
Assistant Professor Wiebke Brix Markussen (DTU), main supervisor
Researcher Martin Ryhl Kaern (DTU), co-supervisor
==PAGE:4==
Future CO2 refrigeration systems for hot climates
Copyright ©2015 by Stefano Bissoli. All rights reserved.
Master Thesis
Font: Utopia typeset with LATEX2ε
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Section of Thermal Energy
Technical University of Denmark
Nils Koppels Allé, Bld. 403
DK-2800 Kongens Lyngby
Denmark
Phone: (+45) 4525 4131
Fax: (+45) 4525 4325
www.mek.dtu.dk
ISBN: 978-87-7475-392-6
==PAGE:5==
To Mum and Dad
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Preface
The present thesis was prepared at the Section of Thermal Energy, Department of Mechanical
Engineering, Technical University of Denmark (DTU). It is submitted as ﬁnal requirement to
complete the MSc "Sustainable Energies, Thermal Energy" and it is written as a monograph.
The work was carried out for approximatively six months, from January 2015 to July 2015,
under the supervision of Assistant Professor Wiebke Brix Markussen (DTU) and co-supervision
of Researchers Martin Ryhl Kaern (DTU).
An external partner was part of this project, the Danish company The Danfoss Group. They
kindly offered their expertise in the sector, sharing information and conﬁdential ﬁndings.
København, 1st July 2015
Stefano Bissoli.
v
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
Abstract
During the last decades, the refrigeration industry was one of the sector mainly involved in
the increasing concern about sustainability and environmental issues.
From the 1950s until recently, the refrigerants used were only CFCs and similar. Unfortunately,
these well-performing refrigerants were discovered to be main responsible of ozone depletion
(CFCs and HCFCs) and increased green house effect (HFCs). For this reason, the cold industry
is asked to move on and ﬁnd sustainable alternatives. Between the so called "natural refriger-
ants", carbon dioxide seems to be the most promising solution.
The main disadvantage ofCO2 used in traditional vapour-compression cycle is the transcritical
operation, prominent especially when the ambient temperatures are high. This project deals
with possible solutions aimed to improve the performances of CO2 vapour-compression cycle
applied in hot climates. The tools considered are parallel compression, mechanical subcooling
and the use of ejectors for expansion power recovery. Firstly, these solutions are investigated
under ﬁxed design conditions. Subsequently, they are simulated during a real-operation year
using part-load modelling of the cycles.
As the reader will discover from this report, the ejector cycle seems to be the most promising
solution, whether when comparing the cycles under design conditions or during a real year of
operation (Rome’s weather conditions). The PCE cycle offers also interesting improvements,
followed by the mechanical subcooling cycles.
Keywords.
Carbon dioxide, refrigeration systems, vapour-compression cycles, ejectors, par-
allel compression, mechanical subcooling.
vii
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Preface
v
Abstract
vii
Contents
xii
Nomenclature
xiii
1
Introduction
1
2
Carbon dioxide as a refrigerant
5
2.1
Old refrigerants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
New refrigerants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
History of the refrigerant carbon dioxide . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Carbon dioxide peculiarities
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Sate-of-art of the CO2 vapour-compression technology
19
3.1
Vapour-compression refrigeration technology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2
CO2 transcritical cycles technology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3
Optimal high pressure for transcritical cycles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.4
Components design for CO2 systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.5
Impact of elevated ambient temperatures on vapour-compression refrigeration
cycles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.6
Lower performances of transcritical vapour-compression refrigeration cycles .
26
3.7
Thermodynamic cycle’s improvements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
I
Design operation of the studied cycles
29
4
Design conditions
31
4.1
Selected boundaries conditions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5
One-stage vapour-compression CO2 transcritical cycle, design conditions
35
5.1
System description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.2
System analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.3
System performances
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
ix
==PAGE:12==
Contents
6
CO2 transcritical cycle with parallel compression economization, design conditions 39
6.1
System description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.2
System analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.3
System performances
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
7
CO2 transcritical cycle with integrated mechanical subcooling, design conditions
49
7.1
System description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
7.2
System analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
7.3
System performances
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
8
CO2 transcritical cycle with dedicated mechanical subcooling, design conditions
59
8.1
System description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
8.2
System analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
8.3
System performances
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
9
CO2 transcritical cycle with ejector-expansion device, design conditions
73
9.1
The ejector model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
9.2
System description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
9.3
System analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
9.4
System performances
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
10 Comparison of the studied cycles, design conditions
87
II
Design operation of further improved cycles
93
11 Further improvements of the studied cycles
95
12 Further improvements of the CO2 transcritical cycle with PCE, design conditions
97
12.1 PCE cycle with dedicated mechanical subcooling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
12.2 PCE cycle with integrated mechanical subcooling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
12.3 PCE cycle with ejector-dedicated mechanical subcooling
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
12.4 PCE cycle with PCE-dedicated mechanical subcooling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
13 Comparison of the further improved CO2 transcritical cycles with PCE, design con-
ditions
103
14 Further improvements of the CO2 transcritical cycle with dedicated MS, design con-
ditions
109
14.1 Ejector-Dedicated mechanical subcooling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
109
14.2 Dedicated heat-driven subcooling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
111
14.3 Expansion power recovery dedicated mechanical subcooling . . . . . . . . . . .
112
15 Comparison of the further improved CO2 transcritical cycles with dedicated MS, de-
sign conditions
117
x
==PAGE:13==
Contents
16 Further improvements of the CO2 transcritical cycle using an ejector, design condi-
tions
123
16.1 Ejector cycle with integrated mechanical subcooling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
123
16.2 Ejector cycle with dedicated mechanical subcooling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
123
16.3 Ejector cycle with ejector-dedicated mechanical subcooling
. . . . . . . . . . .
126
16.4 Transcritical CO2 vapour-compression cycle using two ejectors
. . . . . . . . .
126
16.5 Internal heat exchange in ejector cycles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
127
17 Comparison of the further improved CO2 transcritical cycles with ejector, design
conditions
131
III
Part-load operation
137
18 Part-load operation of the studied cycles
139
18.1 Cycles modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
139
18.2 Location . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
141
19 One-stage vapour-compression CO2 transcritical cycle, part-load operation
143
19.1 Part-load behaviour of the system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
146
20 Vapour-compressionCO2 cycle with parallel compression economization, part-load
operation
149
20.1 Part-load behaviour of the system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
149
21 Vapour-compression CO2 cycle with integrated mechanical subcooling, part-load
operation
151
21.1 Part-load behaviour of the system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
152
22 Vapour-compression CO2 cycle with dedicated mechanical subcooling, part-load
operation
153
22.1 Part-load behaviour of the system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
153
23 Vapour-compression CO2 cycle with ejector, part-load operation
155
23.1 Part-load behaviour of the system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
155
24 Comparison of the studied cycles, part-load operation
159
25 Part-load operation using real compressors and real cooling capacity proﬁle
165
25.1 Comparison of the cycles behaviour . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
170
26 Real cycles implementation
173
26.1 Comparison of the real systems behaviours
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
174
27 Conclusion
177
28 Further work
181
xi
==PAGE:14==
Contents
Bibliography
182
A Appendix A
187
B Appendix B
191
C Appendix C
193
D Appendix D
195
xii
==PAGE:15==
Nomenclature
xiii
==PAGE:16==
Nomenclature
Abbreviations
CFC
chloroﬂuorocarbon
CO2
carbon dioxide
EERC
ejector expansion refrigeration cycle
EES
engineering equation solver
EPR
expansion power recovery
GWP
global warming potential
HCFC
hydrochloroﬂuorocarbon
HFC
hydroﬂuorocarbon
IHE
interna heat exchange
MS
mechanical subcooling
ODP
ozone depletion potential
PCE
parallel compression economization
PI
piping and instrumentation
R744
carbon dioxide
TERC
turbine expander refrigeration cycle
TEWI
total equivalent warming impact
VCRC
vapour compression refrigeration cycle
Symbols
COP
coefﬁcient of performances
[-]
cp
speciﬁc heat at constant pressure
[J/kgK]
∆T
temperature difference
[°C]
e
evaporation enthalpy
[J/kg]
h
enthalpy
[J/kg]
m
mass ﬂow rate
[kg]
η
efﬁciency
[-]
p
pressure
[bar]
˙Q
heat ﬂux
[W]
r
ratio of the motive ﬂow and the total ejector mass ﬂow rate
[-]
s
entropy
[J/kgK]
T
temperature
[°C]
u
velocity
[m/s]
UA
UA-value of the heat exchanger
[W /m2K ]
˙W
mechanical power
[W]
ω
entrainment ratio
[-]
x
quality
[kg/kg]
xiv
==PAGE:17==
Nomenclature
Subscripts
0
design conditions
compr
compressor
cond
condensation
d
diffuser
eco
economizer
evap
evaporation
gc
gas cooler
i
inlet
id
ideal or reversible process
is
isentropic
lift
lift
m
motive
main
main cycle
max
maximum
n
normalized
o
outlet
opt
optimal
s
suction
sub
subcooler or subcooling cycle
sc
subcooling
xv
==PAGE:18==
==PAGE:19==
1 Introduction
During the last decades, the refrigeration industry was forced to face some radical changes.
The use of CFCs (chloroﬂuorocarbons), starting from the 1950s, was a turning point for this
sector. These refrigerants were particularly suitable for the refrigeration applications and
ensured high performances of the traditional vapour-compression systems. Anyway, in the
middle of the 1980s, CFCs were discovered to be incredibly harmful for the planet we are living
on. They are considered one of the main responsible of the stratospheric ozone’s depletion
phenomena. Unsuccessful attempts to replaced the CFCs with similar compounds were made,
they are the HCFCs (hydrochloroﬂuorocarbons) and more recently the HFCs (hydroﬂuorocar-
bons). Anyway, the former still cause ozone depletion if released in the atmosphere, while the
second emphasises the green house effect.
All this awareness about the negative environmental impact of the traditional refrigerants it is
quite recent. Even more recent is the growing attention for the "health" of our planet. The
turning point was probably the Montreal Protocol (1987), a huge international agreement
against the compounds mainly responsible of the ozone depletion. From that moment on, the
concentration of the media and public opinion on the sustainable topics started to grow, day
after day.
The Montreal Protocol already included actions against CFCs and HCFCs. These refrigerant
are almost off the market nowadays, only their "brothers", the HFCs are still trying to survive
the arising sustainable wave. Recently, also the HFCs started to be target of political actions in
order to decrease the human impact of the Hearth. Thus, it is clear why the cold industry is
now (more than ever) looking for a new sustainable solution able to replace the traditional
refrigerants, once and for all.
Actually, carbon dioxide (CO2) is not a new solution. It was widely studied and used for refrig-
eration application before the CFC were even born. It was abandoned only due to the lower
performances respect these artiﬁcial refrigerants. Now that CFCs and similar will progressively
disappear from the market, CO2 is probably the most reliable solution for the refrigeration
industry. Its impact on the green house effect and/or the ozone depletion is almost negligible.
It is more than available on our planet, it is cheap and produced as secondary product in many
industrial processes. Moreover, on average, the CO2 can be considered as a refrigerant with
1
==PAGE:20==
Chapter 1. Introduction
very good properties for refrigeration applications.
The main problem arising from the use of carbon dioxide is its low critical point. When this
refrigerant is used in traditional vapour-compression refrigeration cycles and the ambient
temperatures are, on average, quite high, the cycle runs for most of the hours during the year
as transcritical. This implies considerable inefﬁciencies in the cycle, if compared to the same
application using the "traditional" refrigerants. This project is focused exactly on this. Here the
aim is to study possible solutions able to improve the performances of vapour-compression
CO2 cycles, especially when used in hot climates.
The main tools considered are three: mechanical subcooling, parallel compression and the
use of ejectors. These solution are here studied and compared each other to determine their
potential to improve the simple stage vapour-compression CO2 cycle.
In the ﬁrst part of this report, the three devices used to improve CO2 cycles are studied under
speciﬁc design conditions. These conditions are speciﬁcally determined in order to assess
the behaviour of these systems when applied in hot climates. Some assumptions are made
in order to simplify the analyses. For instance, the isentropic efﬁciency of the compressors
is considered constant, like the cooling capacity required to the systems. At the end of this
ﬁrst part, the cycles are compared each other and with the 1-stage reference cycle in order to
assess eventual performances improvements.
The second part of the project is again about behaviour of CO2 vapour-compression systems
under ﬁxed design conditions. Here, more complex cycles are considered in order to assess
the possibility to reach even greater performances improvements. The tools studied in the
ﬁrst part of the project are now combined together. The complexity of the cycles increases as,
hopefully, the COP of the systems. Not only the already investigated solutions are improved.
This part deals also with other possible devices usable to improve CO2 vapour-compression
cycle operating in hot climates. This represents probably the most creative part of the project.
A huge number of different solution are implemented, simulated and compared each other.
Hopefully, many hints for future studies can be taken from this part of the report.
Finally, the third part of the project is about the part-load operation of the studied cycles
(mechanical subcooling, parallel compression and ejector cycle). From the point of view
of possible future application of these systems, this is probably the most interesting part.
Studies about the design conditions of the considered cycles give important hints about the
systems’ behaviour under speciﬁc conditions. Anyway, a refrigeration system usually faces
continuously changing working conditions along one typical year of operation. The part-load
investigation allows for an accurate computational simulation of the system’s behaviour when
the working conditions are changing. In this way, it is possible to assess which one of the
considered solutions is the most promising considering one entire year of operation. The
considered cycles were investigated under the weather conditions of Rome, Italy. The location
was chosen on the base of the temperate/hot climate that makes the Italian city particularly
suitable for the investigations here performed.
The idea is to perform a step by step analysis of possible improvements of CO2 vapour-
compression cycles. Firstly, they are investigated under ﬁxed conditions, compared each other
and with other possible solution. After that, the focus goes back to the three initial solutions
2
==PAGE:21==
investigated and they are tested for real working conditions during an year in Rome, Italy.
In this way, the project is able to quantify the improvements produced by the considered
solutions for ﬁxed conditions (initially) and (after) for real-conditions of operation.
The need for an accurate investigation of CO2 transcritical systems came from the recent
interest of the Danish company DANFOSS for supermarkets’ CO2 refrigeration cycles. As
reported by Sharma et al., based on the U.S. supermarkets average, leakages of refrigerants are
estimated between 3% and 25% of the charge [1]. The wide range is due to the fact that new
and old equipments have different performances. Leakages of "traditional" refrigerants have a
great impact on the ambient and contribute directly to ozone depletion (CFCs and HCFCs)
and global warming (HFCs). "Supermarkets are intensively energy consuming with constantly
increasing number of installations" [2]. For this reason, the direct impact of refrigerants leak-
ages from supermarkets applications is an aspect that is becoming more and more important
day by day. The attention is gradually shifting to CO2 that seems the most promising solution
among the "natural refrigerants".
"Furthermore, the operation of refrigeration systems contributes to global warming indirectly"
[1]. Greenhouse gasses are typically released during generation and transmission of the elec-
tricity required by the supermarkets. This is an even more important issue in CO2 transcritical
systems because they are characterized by lower COPs respect cycles using "traditional" re-
frigerants. "Transcritical CO2 systems tend to be more popular in moderate climates such as
Northern Europe where the refrigeration system operates a majority of the time in the more
efﬁcient subcritical mode" [1]. The so called "booster" CO2 transcritical cycle is a common
solution for cold climates. As reported by Minetto et al., "the booster cycle is actually the
state-of-art solution for North Europe, where near 3000 installations, with variable lay-outs,
are currently running only on CO2" [3]. Recently, more components for CO2 systems are ap-
pearing on the market and this is paving the way for a massive usage of CO2 −onl y cycles [4].
It must be remembered that the ﬁrst supermarkets carbon dioxide applications were only in
cascade systems or in secondary loops (so CO2 combined with "traditional" refrigerants), due
to the lower knowledge and components availability. Nowadays these problems are almost
overtaken and interest is arising about the possibility to use efﬁciently transcritical CO2−onl y
systems even in hot climates. Differently from the cited cascade and secondary loop systems,
transcritical systems offers the possibility to use CO2 as unique refrigerant in the system:
this allows for the shift to "natural" refrigerants that the cold industry is looking for. The
solutions already introduced, mechanical subcooling, PCE and ejectors, ensure performances’
improvements of the low-efﬁcient CO2 transcritical cycles and are quite interesting expedients
even for supermarket applications.
Anyway, as already said, the environmental impact of "traditional refrigerants" and the neces-
sity to reach the highest possible COPs are common problems of all the refrigeration sectors.
The refrigeration industry as an all needs to shift to environmentally friendly refrigerants.
Moreover, with the increasing global consumptions, highly efﬁcient systems are required
in order to produce with lowered input requirements. For these reasons, in this project the
3
==PAGE:22==
Chapter 1. Introduction
investigation is kept quite general. The CO2 transcritical refrigeration cycles’ improvements
are tested for no particular application. In this way, the results obtained show trends that can
be applied to whichever refrigeration sector.
All the results presented in this report were obtained with computational simulations based
on the software EES (Engineering Equation Solver) [5]. The data processing was performed
using common spread sheets.
4
==PAGE:23==
2 Carbon dioxide as a refrigerant
During the last decades, the refrigeration industry was forced to face great changes due to the
increasing concern about environmental issues.
From the 1950s, the CFCs were hugely employed as refrigerants in the cold industry. They
ensured very good performances but they were found to be one of the main responsible
of the stratosphere’s ozone depletion. As an attempt to reduce the environmental impact,
the refrigerants HCFCs were introduced due to the lower ozone depletion impact. Anyway,
common idea is to move forward also from these freons due to the still high environmental
impact.
The HFCs were expected to be the ﬁnal solution due to the almost insigniﬁcant effect on the
stratosphere’s ozone but they highly increase the green house effect with consequent serious
implications on the Hearth’s climate change.
Lorentzen summarized very well the situation that is now facing the refrigeration industry:
"In the present situation, when the CFCs and in a little longer prospective the HCFCs are being
banned by international agreement, it does not seem very logical to try to replace them by
another family of related halocarbons, the HFCs, equally foreign to nature" [6]. Right now,
the cold industry is looking for a permanent solution that will not be banned or regulated in
the long run. Great interest is pointed to "natural" refrigerants, like water, air, hydrocarbons,
ammonia and carbon dioxide.
2.1
Old refrigerants
The halocarbons refrigerants ﬁrst appeared on the market in the 1930s, when the R12 was
introduced. What characterizes the history of these refrigerants is the velocity they spread
through almost all the refrigeration applications. Anyway, this is not a surprising aspect of
their stories. The CFCs were strongly promoted by their own producers. Moreover, the CFC’s
companies put incredible efforts to allow also the refrigeration technology to follow the re-
frigerants’ changes. Finally, CFCs systems were characterized by "simple and relatively cheap
operation, not without interest to the service ﬁrms and refrigerants supplier", as reported by
5
==PAGE:24==
Chapter 2. Carbon dioxide as a refrigerant
Figure 2.1 – Characteristics of some traditional and natural refrigerants including CO2 (R-744)
[7]
Figure 2.2 – Minimum ozone level and area for the last 30 years [8]
6
==PAGE:25==
2.1. Old refrigerants
Figure 2.3 – Global temperatures rise [8]
Lorentzen [6]. All these factors, together with the unquestionable suitability of this refrigerants
for cold production applications, determined the overwhelming success of the refrigerants.
During "the young" years of CFCs, only ammonia was still used for large industrial application,
all the other sectors of the cold production were dominated by halocarbons refrigerants.
Figure 2.1 presents a comparison between some "traditional" refrigerants (CFC, HCFC and
HFC) with ammonia, propane and carbon dioxide (probably the most promising "natural
refrigerants"). CFCs and HCFCs are characterized by an alarming impact on the stratospheric
ozone. Since the Vienna Convention (1985) and the following Montreal Protocol (1987), all
the industrialized world started a unite action against them. The Montreal Protocol already
disposed for the abandonment of CFCs and set increasing limits in the HCFCs use. As known,
these international agreements represents mainly guidelines for the participant countries.
Moreover, they usually apply only to developed countries. Anyway, the road is already deﬁned:
CFCs and HCFCs are destined to leave the market.
The efforts made in the last decades to save the precious ozone layer seem to be giving some
results. Figure 2.2 presents the minimum ozone level for the last thirty years. It is called "ozone
hole" an area with less than 220 Dobson units. As visible, the worst moment was in 1998 but
recently the ozone level seems to stabilize or even improve slowly. As reported by Calm, "the
progress in ozone recovery is even more evident when measured by global mean ozone rather
than ozone in the isolated Antarctic vortex" [8].
The HFCs, expected to be the long term solution from the environmental point of view, still
have a really high value of GWP. The global warming potential (GWP) is used to compare
the effect of a chemical on the green house effect using as reference the CO2 (that for this
reason has GW PCO2 = 1). The increasing green house effect is as worrying as the ozone layer
depletion. As reported by Calm, "the 1990s are the warmest decade in the last millennium and
7
==PAGE:26==
Chapter 2. Carbon dioxide as a refrigerant
the 20th century is its warmest century" [8]. Figure 2.3 is here reported to prove the increasing
global temperatures. The human responsibility for the global warming is as clear as it is for
the ozone depletion. The HFCs were one of the numerous compounds included in the Kyoto
protocol (1997) and even if it is not in force right now, its echo has been felt all over the world. If
the Kyoto Protocol can be interpreted as a symbolic act, the sunset of HFCs as refrigerants was
deﬁnitively established with the European Parliament vote of 2006. With this ﬁrst international
act against HFCs, it was established the abandon of HFC-134a as refrigerant for automotive
air-conditioning systems.
For this reason, the cold industry is looking forward for new environmentally friendly long
term solution: the "natural refrigerants".
2.2
New refrigerants
As reported by Pearson [9], nowadays the ﬂuids considered as "natural refrigerants" are ﬁve.
Air can be used for some applications without phase change reaching also quite low tem-
peratures. Anyway, the Brayton cycle has really low efﬁciency and this limits its application.
Water vapour is strongly limited by its minimum evaporation temperature of 0°C. This restricts
considerably the range of application excluding air conditioning, cold industry and freezing
processes. Hydrocarbons, like also ammonia and CO2 have a larger range of applications
possible. The limit on hydrocarbons use is set by the allowed maximum refrigerant charge.
For this reason, they cannot be used in large refrigeration systems, due to its safety issues.
On the other hand, ammonia is quite suitable for large systems but not for domestic use or
for cars’ air conditioning systems, due to its safety issues. Concluding, due to its favourable
characteristics, carbon dioxide, is the only "natural refrigerant" that gives some real hope
regarding the future employment in all-kind-of-size applications. The peculiarities of CO2 as
a refrigerant will be discussed in the following chapters. For the sake of knowledge also a brief
illustration of the CO2 history is reported here.
2.3
History of the refrigerant carbon dioxide
Brieﬂy, the history of CO2 refrigeration will be here addressed using as base the studies of
Pearson [9]. From the paper ﬁgure 2.4 is reported. It gives an interesting overview on the
refrigerants used along the cold production history. Figure 2.5 serves for the same purpose.
Effective and extremely clear (from the reader point of view) is the choice to divide the refrig-
erants’ history into four main steps.
The discovery of CO2 is dated back to the 18th century. The credit has to be given to the
Scottish physician James Black. During his experiments on heating magnesium carbonate
he came to the carbon dioxide’s discovery. Anyway, Black was not interested in refrigeration
applications. It seems that the ﬁrst to propose the use of CO2 as refrigerant was Alexander
8
==PAGE:27==
2.3. History of the refrigerant carbon dioxide
Figure 2.4 – Refrigerants’ time line [9]
Figure 2.5 – Refrigerants’ time line divided in four main steps, as reported by Calm [8]
9
==PAGE:28==
Chapter 2. Carbon dioxide as a refrigerant
Twining with his 1850 British patent.
The American Thaddeus Lowe was the ﬁrst, in 1866, to build a CO2 compressor. It was origi-
nally meant to ﬁll with hydrogen military balloon but was after adapted for carbon dioxide
applications. Apparently, Lowe was able to make ice using a close loop carbon dioxide cycle
but he never patented his idea. The ﬁrst carbon dioxide system ever built seems to be the one
of Lowe. At the same time, other refrigerants were more appreciated and widely experimented,
the use of CO2 in close loop refrigeration systems were delayed respect due to the really high
pressures required into the system.
Starting from 1887, CO2 became a valuable option in the refrigeration industry thanks to the
work of Raydt, Linde and Windhausen. They ﬁled some patents stating some of the advantages
of this refrigerant, like its safety, the possibility to produce cold at any temperature and the
fact that was cheaper than the other used refrigerants. One of the ﬁrst application of carbon
dioxide was on marine refrigeration. Starting from the 1880s until the middle of 1900 CO2 was
the main refrigerant in this application due to the safety that it ensures. Ammonia was still the
leading refrigerant for stationary applications.
From the 20th century, also ammonia started to generate some safety concerns and so started
to lose its leadership in the refrigerant market. For instance, in 1932, Frick Company started
the production of a system with double refrigerant: CO2 for low temperature application and
ammonia for higher temperatures. Other improvements were attempted in order to improve
the carbon dioxide cycles, especially when operating in transcritical conditions. An example is
the so called multiple-effect compression introduced by Voorhees in 1905. Anyway, carbon
dioxide was not able to take an important place in the refrigeration scene of the time.
From the middle of the 20th century, CO2 was really abandoned due to the appearance of
the CFCs. As already said, the halocarbons rapidly grabbed the spotlight from all the other
refrigerants for some decades.
Carbon dioxide is having only now a real chance to reach a leadership position in the refrig-
erant market. Starting from the late 20th century, the environmental concerns forced the
cold industry to look for environmentally friendly solutions. This increasing consideration of
the environmental impacts brought back to the scene some "old" refrigerants like ammonia
and carbon dioxide. In particular, during the last decades, CO2 was object of an year by year
increasing number of studies. Figure 2.6 shows the increasing number of papers on the topic
presented at the IIR conferences and congresses. Gustav Lorentzen was the one that started
these IIR conferences about new environmentally friendly refrigerants. He is probably the
main pioneer of this carbon dioxide’s reborn, also for his 1990 patent about a transcritical
CO2 air conditioning system for cars. In 1992, Lorentzen himself and Pettersen used a CO2 air
conditioning systems prototype to get the ﬁrst experimental results. Their paper and some
other results obtained in the same years pulled the carbon dioxide reborn as refrigerant.
10
==PAGE:29==
2.4. Carbon dioxide peculiarities
Figure 2.6 – Carbon dioxide’s papers presented at the IIR conferences and congresses [9]
2.4
Carbon dioxide peculiarities
Looking at table 2.1, it is worthy to cite Lorentzen, "the absolutely ideal refrigerant in every
aspect does not exist. All the available compounds have their weak points, which must be
taken into account in the design and operation of the systems" [10]. Moreover, most of the
time a proper refrigerant can be deﬁned only relatively to the speciﬁc application considered.
Anyway, CO2 is the most promising solution among the environmentally-friendly refrigerants.
As reported in ﬁgure 2.1, it is non-ﬂammable and non-toxic. From the personal safety point of
view, "it is at least as good as the best of the halocarbons" [6]. From the ambient safety point
of view, CO2 is probably the best refrigerant available so far, if excluding air and water. Its
global warming potential (GWP) is very small and it does not have ozone depletion potential
(ODP). In case of leakages at liquid state, around 50% evaporates while the rest deposits at
solid state and can be easily handled (the solid state is the common "dry ice"). Of course, a
big release of CO2 can be harmful if inhaled by humans. Anyway, a good-working ventilation
system is enough to ensure safety for workers, costumers or who else around the system. In its
paper, Lorentzen unmasked also the legendary danger that CO2 system would provide due to
their high operation pressures [6]. Moreover, carbon dioxide presents another fundamental
peculiarity of a good refrigerant, it is available everywhere and almost costless.
From the global warming point of view the reader cannot be completely convinced. CO2 is
surely another green house gas but its impact is much smaller if compared with the halo-
carbons. Moreover, CO2 is produced by a great number of other industrial activities. The
refrigeration industry just uses this secondary product postponing its release [10].
Let’s enter now more in the details of the carbon dioxide’s properties. CO2 presents a volu-
11
==PAGE:30==
Chapter 2. Carbon dioxide as a refrigerant
metric refrigeration capacity much higher than the one of the "traditional" refrigerants. This
is due to the high vapour density, as the volumetric refrigeration capacity is deﬁned as the
product between latent heat of evaporation and vapour density. Additionally, this refrigerant
can be exploited in vapour-compression refrigeration cycles below 0°C.
Figure 2.8 presents the pressure-enthalpy and the temperature-entropy diagrams for carbon
dioxide.
The carbon dioxide’s critical temperature is quite low, 31.1°C. Over this temperature is not
possible to release heat through a condensation. For this reason, vapour-compression cycles
operating in warm climates are forced to work in transcritical conditions. "Transcritical"
means that the low-pressure side of the cycle is subcritical while the high-pressure side is
supercritical. The transcritical operation is characterized by high throttling and superheat
losses. This reduces considerably the performances of CO2 −onl y systems operating in hot
climates. Anyway, "in some cases -the author is referring to small size applications- this can
be compensated by much improved compressor performances as a result of very low pressure
ratio and small volume requirement" [6]. For bigger size application, solutions to deal with
throttling and superheat losses are required. This is actually the main point of this report.
The phase diagram of CO2 is presented in ﬁgure 2.7. The reduced pressure at 0°C is consider-
ably higher than the one of the other refrigerants (ﬁgure 2.1). This peculiarity together with
the low critical pressure implies that "the low-side conditions will be much closer to the critical
point than with conventional refrigerants" [7]. This means lower p ratio in CO2 cycles.
One of the main aspects to underline regarding the CO2 behaviour concerns the abrupt prop-
erty change close to the critical point. In the supercritical region, the temperature does not go
together with the pressure any more. This independence of the two variables allow for settings
that bring to a maximum of the system performances (this aspect will be developed later in
this report). Figure 2.9 report enthalpy and entropy decreasing with temperature in a constant
pressure gas cooling process. It is visible the great change in the properties passing through
the critical point.
Figure 2.10 shows that the vapour pressure of carbon dioxide is higher than the one of other
refrigerants and the curve is more steep. Consequently, smaller temperature change are faced
when the pressure changes. For this reason, "the temperature change associated with a pressure
drop in the evaporator will become smaller" [7]. Figure 2.11 shows the already cited volumetric
refrigeration capacity for carbon dioxide and other refrigerants.
The rapid property change during isobaric supercritical processes close to critical point is
surely one of the main aspects when dealing with CO2 systems. Figure 2.12 presents the
isobaric speciﬁc heat for carbon dioxide. The behaviour of this parameter close to the critical
point has a great impact on heat exchange processes and must be kept in mind when analysing
them.
All the results provided in this report are based on EES (engineering equation solver) calcula-
tions. This software bases its CO2 calculations on the fundamental equation of state developed
by Span and Wagner [7].
12
==PAGE:31==
2.4. Carbon dioxide peculiarities
Figure 2.7 – Phase diagram of CO2 [7]
13
==PAGE:32==
Chapter 2. Carbon dioxide as a refrigerant
Figure 2.8 – (log)p-h diagram and T-s diagram for CO2 [7]
14
==PAGE:33==
2.4. Carbon dioxide peculiarities
Figure 2.9 – Enthalpy and entropy change across the critical point going through a constant
pressure gas cooling process [7]
15
==PAGE:34==
Chapter 2. Carbon dioxide as a refrigerant
Figure 2.10 – Vapour pressure for some refrigerants [7]
Figure 2.11 – Volumetric refrigeration capacity for some refrigerants [7]
16
==PAGE:35==
2.4. Carbon dioxide peculiarities
Figure 2.12 – Isobaric speciﬁc heat for CO2 [7]
17
==PAGE:36==
==PAGE:37==
3 Sate-of-art of the CO2 vapour-
compression technology
Starting with the early 1990s, carbon dioxide came back on the refrigeration scene. Due to the
increasing concern regarding the environmental impact of traditional freons, the CFCs’ appli-
cations started to decrease until they were completely abandoned. Lorentezen and Pettersen
in 1992 published what seems to be the ﬁrst paper about carbon dioxide refrigeration in this
new era of natural refrigerants rebirth [11]. From that moment on, an exponential increasing
interest has been shown for this environmentally friendly refrigerants.
Lorentzen and Pettersen pointed their attention on the cars’ air-conditioning systems. This
sector still offers considerable space for CO2 applications due to the banned use of HFC-134A
in 2006 (European parliament’s vote). This political act not only stimulate the air-conditioning
industry to work on new refrigerants, it represent the ﬁrst international action against the use
of HFC. The HFCs were discovered to be one of the major responsible of the ongoing hearth’s
climate change. For this reason, they will be dismissed completely in some years and the
refrigeration industry needs to ﬁnd a valuable alternative. For all its suitable properties and
also for the lack of valid alternatives, CO2 seems to be the most promising replacement.
In this chapter a brief presentation about the CO2 vapour-compression technology is ad-
dressed. Particular attention will be focused on the importance of the choice of the gas cooler
pressure in transcritical systems. Finally, some issue concerning carbon dioxide system will be
introduced. The solution or the attenuation of these challenges is left for the next chapters
(being this the main topic of the project).
3.1
Vapour-compression refrigeration technology
The PI diagram of a single-stage vapour-compression refrigeration cycle is proposed in ﬁgure
3.1. The same ﬁgure includes also the (log)p-h diagram for the same cycle. The refrigerant
evaporates going through the evaporator (from state 4 to 1). During this isobaric process, the
heat ˙
Qe is extracted from the cooled space and in this way the refrigeration effect is performed.
After that, the refrigerant is compressed until state 2, here its conditions allow for an heat
exchange with the ambient surrounding the cooled space. The heat exchange is performed in a
19
==PAGE:38==
Chapter 3. Sate-of-art of the CO2 vapour-compression technology
Figure 3.1 – PI diagram and (log)p-h diagram, 1 stage vapour-compression refrigeration cycle
20
==PAGE:39==
3.2. CO2 transcritical cycles technology
condenser (subcritical operation) or gas cooler (transcritical/supercritical operation). Finally,
the refrigerant is throttled in an expansion valve (state from 3 to 4) until the evaporation
pressure is reached.
Before going in deep with the speciﬁc refrigerant here considered, it is worthy to remember
some basic concepts. Citing Lorentzen, "the efﬁciency, or COP, of any reversible (loss-free) pro-
cess, working between given temperature limits, is exactly the same and completely independent
of the properties of the working medium used." [10]. When considering real cycles, even the
refrigerant used has its impact and the main losses faced can be summarized as follow:
• compressor loss. It depends mainly on the pressure level and pressure ratio, together
with some ﬂuid thermal properties.
• condenser/gas cooler losses. It is related to the temperatures involved in the heat
exchange and heat transfer properties of the ﬂuid.
• throttling loss. It depends on the ratio
cp,liq
e
• evaporator loss. Like for the condenser/gas cooler, It is related to the temperatures
involved in the heat exchange and heat transfer properties of the ﬂuid.
• ﬂow resistance loss. This is speciﬁcally connected to the refrigerant’s properties.
What is important to remember is that the impact of all these losses is all connected to the
system design. Theoretically, the system’s losses can be reduced to whatever level, if the budget
for the technological expenditures is inﬁnite. Thus, it is clear that the optimization of the
system is an economical matter. When comparing the performances of different refrigerants,
must be kept in mind that the comparison is relative to the speciﬁc system used. One refriger-
ant can give higher system’s performances than another because the cycle, as it is designed, is
more suitable for that speciﬁc refrigerant. Maybe changing the application or the the cycle’s
design, other refrigerants result in better performances.
3.2
CO2 transcritical cycles technology
Due to the very low critical point of CO2, vapour-compression refrigeration cycles working
with this ﬂuid are forced to work for many hours along the year in transcritical conditions.
Especially when considering warm climates, the high ambient temperatures force the system
to a supercritical heat rejection. The dominant transcritical operation is what mainly distin-
guish carbon dioxide from the other refrigerants. For this reason some words are used here to
describe it.
Transcritical operation means that the evaporation temperature is below the critical point,
while the heat rejection temperatures are over it. The evaporation is still performed in a
two-phase device, like in the common subcritical cycles. Instead, the condenser is replaced
21
==PAGE:40==
Chapter 3. Sate-of-art of the CO2 vapour-compression technology
Figure 3.2 – 1-stage transcritical carbon dioxide vapour-compression basic cycle [12]
with a gas cooler: the ﬂuid does not change phase during the heat rejection (differently from
what happens in subcritical condensers).
Figure 3.2 presents the (log)p-h diagram for a basic 1-stage vapour-compression transcritical
CO2 cycle. The evaporation (state from 4 to 1) is assumed to happen at 0°C, after that the
refrigerant is compressed from state 1 to 2. The gas cooling process (state from 2 to 3) is
isobaric but not iso-temperature. The gas cooler outlet temperature is here assumed to be
30°C. The cycle is closed by an isenthalpic expansion from state 3 to 4. In the evaporator
the refrigeration effect is performed by the carbon dioxide: an heat ﬂux is removed from the
cooled space’s air.
3.3
Optimal high pressure for transcritical cycles
In case of subcritical operation, the condensing pressure is determined by the condensing
temperature (in turn determined by the ambient temperature). In fact, during the two-phase
operation, pressure and temperature are coupled. This is not true any more when considering
supercritical operation: the pressure is independent from the temperature.
Coming back to ﬁgure 3.2, keeping constant the gas cooler outlet temperature, the system can
operate at different gas cooler pressures (by mean of the expansion valve that controls the
back pressure). Increasing pgc, two opposite effects are visible on the system. The enthalpy
22
==PAGE:41==
3.3. Optimal high pressure for transcritical cycles
Figure 3.3 – Carbon dioxide transcritical cycle’s COP vs. gas cooler pressure, different gas
cooler outlet temperatures and evaporation temperatures are considered [12]
23
==PAGE:42==
Chapter 3. Sate-of-art of the CO2 vapour-compression technology
difference across the evaporator increases, producing a positive effect on the COP. Also the
enthalpy difference across the compressor increases but this produces a negative effect on the
system’s COP. As a result of a trade-off between this two contributions, an optimal gas cooler
pressure can be found for each application. Figure 3.3 reports the results of an investigation
conducted by Groll and Kim [12] about the optimal gas cooler pressure. The cycle they used is
the one already introduced with ﬁgure 3.2. As visible in ﬁgure 3.3, for each transcritical cycle’s
conﬁguration an optimum COP can be found. Evaporation temperature and gas cooler outlet
temperature strongly affect the position of this maximum.
This behaviour of the system can be quite surprising if compared to conventional subcritical
systems. In fact, for subcritical operation the COP drops with the increasing condensation
temperature, due to the increasing compressor work and decreasing enthalpy difference
through the evaporator.
The importance to maximize the system’s COP is well underlined by Kauf [13]. In a society
facing increasing energy consumptions, the energy security is becoming a very current topic.
"To keep the energy necessary for propulsion of the refrigeration system small, the COP of the
system has to be high" [13]. With these words, the author of the paper stresses the importance
of the choice of the cycle’s high pressure to obtain high system’s COP. Kauf made a more
accurate investigation on this optimum high pressure than Groll and Kim. In his paper, he
demonstrated that the evaporation pressure has a good inﬂuence on the COP but the optimal
gas cooler pressure does not change signiﬁcantly. He concluded saying that mainly ambient
temperature and gas cooler outlet temperature inﬂuence the position of the optimum high
pressure.
In all the CO2 vapour-compression refrigeration cycles, the high side pressure is subject of
regulation in order to reach the optimum COP for each ambient temperature and/or to control
the cooling capacity [7].
3.4
Components design for CO2 systems
The peculiar behaviour of CO2 and relative refrigeration systems is reﬂected in the expedients
that must be adopted in the cycle’s components design. CO2 systems are characterized by
much lower compression ratio respect what happens when using other "traditional" refrig-
erants. This potentially results in better compressor efﬁciencies. On the other hand, CO2
systems can reach pressure up to 140 bar, a level much higher than the one of traditional
vapour-compression systems. For this reason, the compressors used for CO2 applications
require thicker shells.
Due to the fact that CO2 has much higher volumetric refrigeration capacity than "traditional"
refrigerants, "the volumetric ﬂow rate is much smaller for the same cooling capacity" [12].
Consequently, "the compressor chamber size for CO2 applications is smaller than a current
refrigeration compressor for the same cooling capacity" [12].
Another issue regarding the compressor concerns the leakages. Due to the high pressures
24
==PAGE:43==
3.5. Impact of elevated ambient temperatures on vapour-compression refrigeration
cycles
Figure 3.4 – R-22 and R410A capacity and COP for different ambient temperatures [14]
reached in this component, the design must be carefully determined in order to minimize the
ﬂuid losses.
The high volumetric refrigeration capacity allows also for a reduction of the pipping size.
Consequently, even the space occupied by the heat exchangers can be reduced up to 30% [12]
(comparison made with components from halocarbons cycles). "Because of the small area
over which the pressure acts in a small-diameter tube, this geometry is ideal for high pressure
systems" [12]. As a result, high pressures are not problematic for the heat exchangers.
Investigations between the possible compressor’s oil resulted in two major candidates for CO2
systems: polyolester (POE) and polyalkylene (PAG) [12].
3.5
Impact of elevated ambient temperatures on vapour-compression
refrigeration cycles
The aim of this project is to study the performances of CO2 refrigeration systems exploited
in hot/warm climates. High ambient temperatures entail a reduction of the system’s per-
formances for all the vapour-compression refrigeration cycle. In particular, carbon dioxide
systems are penalized by high ambient, because of the CO2 low critic point.
The impact of elevated ambient temperature on vapour-compression refrigeration cycles can
be understood starting from the ideal Carnot inverse cycle. From its COP’s formula (3.1) it is
visible that the COP decreases along with the increase of Tcond, assuming a constant Tevap.
COPCar not =
Tevap
Tcond −Tevap
(3.1)
25
==PAGE:44==
Chapter 3. Sate-of-art of the CO2 vapour-compression technology
In other words, high ambient temperatures reduce the COP of the Carnot inverse cycle.
This conclusion, derived from the ideal cycle, can be extend to the irreversible vapour-
compression refrigeration cycle, no matter which refrigerant it is used in the cycle. The
COP reduction will be even higher for not-ideal cycles than for the Carnot cycles. The magni-
tude of this reduction depends on the refrigerant used [15].
Going through some literature, Chin and Spatz [14] studied the different performances of
R-22 and R-410A at variable ambient temperatures. Their results are quite interesting because
they were able to show how the performance of R-410A systems are higher than the one of
R-22 cycles for low ambient temperature, while they are overtaken from the second when the
ambient temperatures are higher. Anyway, both the two systems face a decrease of the COP
with the increasing ambient T, see ﬁgure 3.4. More studies can be found in the literature, like
the one of Yana Motta and Domanski [16]. They compared much more refrigerants than the
previous studies founding that R-410A seems to be the refrigerant with higher performance
degradation with the increasing ambient temperature, while R-134A is the one with the lowest.
As already discussed, considering subcritical operation, the increasing ambient temperature
affects the condensation temperature and consequently the condensing pressure (in two-
phase conditions pressure and temperature are coupled): the warmer is the ambient, the
higher is the condensing pressure. Consequently, the enthalpy difference across the evapora-
tor is decreasing and the enthalpy difference across the compressor increases. As a result, the
COP of the system decreases with increasing ambient temperature.
3.6
Lower performances of transcritical vapour-compression refrig-
eration cycles
Carbon dioxide is characterized by a very low critical point. This implies that CO2 vapour-
compression systems work for many hours along the year in transcritical conditions, especially
when running in hot climates.
Figure 3.5 from Kim et al. [7] presents a comparison between the same vapour-compression
cycle using R-134A (subcritical functioning) and CO2. The temperature-entropy diagram is
chosen to underline the increased thermodynamic losses faced with transcritical operation.
Equal Tevap and minimum heat rejection temperature are assumed. As depicted by the ﬁgure,
transcritical operation brings higher average heat rejection temperature and higher throttling
losses. Consequently the work required in the CO2 transcritical cycle is higher.
The gliding temperature during the heat rejection can be a great advantage when considering
heat pumps. The proﬁle of the heated water or air can be perfectly matched by the cooled
refrigerant proﬁle decreasing considerably the thermodynamic losses. On the other hand,
when the heat rejection is not a topic of interest the gliding temperature just increases (more
than necessary) the average heat rejection temperature. In this way, the gliding temperature
is not an advantage when considering refrigeration systems. Anyway, in this situations, the
thermodynamic losses can be reduced with a well-performed design of the heat exchanger.
26
==PAGE:45==
3.6. Lower performances of transcritical vapour-compression refrigeration cycles
Figure 3.5 – Thermodynamic cycle comparison between R-134A and CO2 [7]
27
==PAGE:46==
Chapter 3. Sate-of-art of the CO2 vapour-compression technology
Figure 3.6 – Relative COP vs. minimum heat rejection temperature CO2 [7]
The refrigerant temperature can be allowed to approach really closely the heat sink tempera-
ture (usually air or water) at the outlet of the gas-cooler. In this way the average heat rejection
temperature is reduced.
Summing up, transcritical CO2 systems are strongly affected by the glide heat rejection temper-
ature and by the throttling losses. For this reason the outlet temperature from the gas cooler is
one of the most important parameters in this kind of systems. Again from the same paper [7],
ﬁgure 3.6 enlightens the impact of the gas cooler outlet temperature on the system’s COP. The
COP is here normalized with its value at 40°C. The ﬁgure offers also a comparison with other
"traditional" refrigerant. As visible, the higher is the minimum heat rejection temperature,
the lower is the system’s COP. Moreover, the impact of this minimum temperature on the COP
is much higher for CO2 systems than for the others presented in the ﬁgure. Concluding, it is
clear how important is that the outlet gas cooler temperature is as close as possible to the inlet
heat sink temperature to achieve good performances in CO2 systems.
Independently from the operation of the CO2 systems, transcritical or subcritical, the COP
decreases with increasing ambient temperature. Moreover, carbon dioxide systems are further
penalized from the COP point of view when operating in transcritical conditions (for the
reasons just explained). For these reasons, it becomes even more important the choice of
the correct gas cooler pressure. A wise setting of the pgc allows the system to reach higher
values of COP when the outdoor temperature is high and the system is running transcritical.
28
==PAGE:47==
3.7. Thermodynamic cycle’s improvements
Of the same importance is a proper gas cooler design that determines the gas cooler outlet
temperature.
3.7
Thermodynamic cycle’s improvements
As already expresses, the aim of this work is the study of the thermal performances of CO2
refrigeration cycles, especially when operated in hot climates. The purpose of the project is
to overcame the already cited limitations of CO2 systems when dealing with high ambient
temperatures and, consequently, a high number of transcritical operation hours.
The possible modiﬁcations to the basic cycle are many and different. Three main expedients
are here discussed: mechanical subcooling, parallel compression and the use of an ejector.
All these improvements are aimed to overcome the discussed issues faced by CO2 systems,
improving the system’s performances in hot climates operation.
The improved CO2 cycles are ﬁrstly studied for the same design conditions. Using equal
boundaries conditions, it allows for a comparison of their performances. Anyway, real systems
face every hour and every day along the year different ambient conditions. For this reason,
the studied cycles are analysed even in part-load operation, with particular attention for the
different (hour by hour) compressor work proﬁles.
29
==PAGE:48==
==PAGE:49==
Part I
Design operation of the studied cycles
31
==PAGE:50==
==PAGE:51==
4 Design conditions
The ﬁrst part of this project concerns the comparison of different improved CO2 vapour-
compression refrigeration systems, working at the same design conditions. As a reference for
this comparison, the basic one-stage vapour-compression CO2 refrigeration cycle is used. As
an attempt to improve the performances of this system, especially when dealing with high
ambient temperatures, three main modiﬁcation of the basic cycle are considered: mechanical
subcooling, parallel compression and use of an ejector are the cycle’s improvements here
considered. The three devices just cited are widely described in the following chapters, so no
words are used here to depicts their operation. The reader should continue his/her trip to
understand how they work.
The investigations here performed continue with more design operation analyses in the sec-
ond part of this report. Further improvements of the three solutions taken into account in
the ﬁrst part are proposed. Additionally, even new ideas for further improvements of CO2
vapour-compression cycles are suggested. Interesting comparison of a wide range of CO2
vapour-compression cycles, under design conditions, are offered in these two parts of the
report. The two parts are here introduced together because they complete each other and
gives a comprehensive overview of possible boosts for CO2 cycles.
All the results obtained and here presented come from simulations made with the support of
the software EES (Engineering Equation Solver). Once that the thermodynamic calculations
were made, spread sheets were used to collect different data and work on them.
4.1
Selected boundaries conditions
Same boundaries conditions and assumptions are required when investigating the different
CO2 cycles. Only in this way a fair comparison of them is performed. The modelling approach
adopted in this project is well summarized by Sarkar, "the entire system has been modelled based
on the energy balance of individual components of the system. Steady ﬂow energy equations
based on ﬁrst law of thermodynamics have been employed in each case and specify energy
quantities are used" [17]. Here the main assumptions that associates all the studied cycle are
33
==PAGE:52==
Chapter 4. Design conditions
presented. More detailed assumptions regarding only speciﬁc cycles will be introduced when
required.
• Steady-state and steady-ﬂow processes are assumed for all the components.
• The compression process is adiabatic but not isentropic. The compressor is character-
ized by a given isentropic efﬁciency ηis. This efﬁciency is assumed to be 0.9 and it is
constant. No particular assumptions are made about displacement or other geometrical
characteristics of the compressor. It is assumed as always able to compress the required
amount of refrigerant.
• The process in the throttling valve is isenthalpic.
• When a separator is used, two ﬂows come out from it: one is saturated vapour and the
other is saturated liquid.
• The processes of mixing and separation are isobaric.
• Evaporation and gas cooling/condensing processes are isobaric.
• Pressure drop and heat losses are neglected. The only heat rejection happens at the gas
cooler.
• The required cooling capacity is ﬁxed to 60kW for all the cycles. The choice of this value
is quite random. It came to the author mind after a trip in Trento during January 2015.
At that time DANFOSS was starting a new ejector system in a supermarket characterized
by a required cooling capacity of 60kW. Anyway, this is a quite random value and it is as
good as another. For instance, Minetto et al. performed a similar analysis assuming a
cooling load of 100kW [3].
• The evaporation pressure is set to 30bar. The ﬂuid coming out of the evaporator is
considered saturated vapour. It is worthy to specify that this is not a realistic assumption:
"evaporator superheat is always required to ensure that no liquid enters the compressor"
[1]. Anyway, for sake of simplicity, the superheat is here considered nil.
• The outlet temperature of the refrigerant from the gas cooler is given and equal to 40°C.
This temperature depends on the ambient conditions and the approach temperature
achieved in the gas cooler. The chosen value has the purpose to simulate very hot
ambient conditions (the gas cooler is, in fact, assumed as air-cooled). During the design
investigation of the cycles this parameter was not changed. It is obvious that a reduction
of it brings COP improvements, but the purpose of this ﬁrst part of the project is to
analyse the systems behaviour under extremely warm conditions.
No requirements are presented for the cycle’s high pressure. The gas cooler pressure is opti-
mized, for the given operating conditions, in each one of the considered cycle. Consequently,
each cycle is characterized by its own value of pgc (see chapter 3 for more informations about
34
==PAGE:53==
4.1. Selected boundaries conditions
the existence of an optimal gas cooler pressure).
The parameter primarily used to evaluate the performances of the considered cycles is the
coefﬁcient of performances (COP). It is deﬁned as the ratio between the output of the system
and its input:
COP = output
input =
cooling capacit y
compressor(s) work
(4.1)
The higher is this parameter, the lower are the consumptions to produce the same amount
of output. The other way around, the higher is this parameter, the highest is the system’s
output using the same amount of energy input. What the COP represents is very important in
a society like ours. Day by day, the population increases, along with the share of it that seeks
better life conditions. The energy consumptions of our planet are barely sustainable in the
long run. For this reason, energy savings are a very current topic nowadays. A high value of the
system’s COP means energy savings respect another system that produce the same amount of
output but with lower COP.
To be more precise during the COP calculation, the input required by the system should
include, additionally to the compressors work, the pumps and fans work. Anyway, the choice
here made was to simplify the system following what suggested by Sharma et al. "Condenser/gas
cooler and evaporator fan power consumption was assumed to be roughly equal for all the
systems, so fan power was not included in the COP calculations" [1]. Due to the fact that
the analysis here performed is structurally similar to the one of the cited authors, the same
assumption is here made.
35
==PAGE:54==
==PAGE:55==
5 One-stage vapour-compression CO2
transcritical cycle, design conditions
The ﬁrst part of this project concerns the comparison of different CO2 cycles operating at
the same design conditions. As a reference for this comparison, the one-stage CO2 vapour-
compression refrigeration cycle was chosen. Due to the high gas cooler outlet temperature
assumed for the design operation (40°C), all the cycles are operating in transcritical conditions.
Such a high temperature was chosen with the purpose to compare the different cycles for a
hot climate situation, during transcritical operation.
5.1
System description
The PI diagram of the 1-stage vapour-compression refrigeration cycle was already presented
in chapter 3. The refrigerant evaporates in the evaporator until saturated conditions, here
the refrigeration effect is performed. The air of the cooled space is cooled down due to the
heat absorbed by the evaporating CO2. Assuming that the superheating after the evaporator
is nil, the saturated vapour enters in the compressor. At the outlet of the compressor the
refrigerant reaches the gas cooler pressure, the process inside the compressor is determined
by its isentropic efﬁciency. In the gas cooler the ﬂuid is cooled down in a isobaric process.
The temperature along the heat rejection is not constant and reaches a value of 40°C at the
outlet of the gas cooler. The cycle is closed by the throttling valve that reduces the refrigerant’s
pressure to the evaporation one.
5.2
System analysis
As initially explained all the cycles were compared using the same boundaries conditions
deﬁned in chapter 4. The gas cooler outlet temperature was ﬁxed to 40°C for all the cycles,
while, nothing was said about the gas cooler pressure. The reason for this is that each one
of the cycle have its own optimal gas cooler pressure, for the given working conditions. In
37
==PAGE:56==
Chapter 5. One-stage vapour-compression CO2 transcritical cycle, design conditions
Figure 5.1 – COP vs. gas cooler pressure, 1-stage reference cycle
all the cycles considered the gas cooler pressure was optimized using the min/max function
provided by the software EES. This function was able to automatically determine which pgc
gives the maximum COP, keeping constant all the remaining system’s parameters.
Figure 5.1 represents the COP of the reference 1-stage cycle for different gas cooler pressures.
As visible, an inverted U-shape is depicted, demonstrating that an optimum can be found for
the gas cooler pressure.
CO2 transcritical cycles allow for the use of "natural" refrigerants. These ﬂuids reduce consider-
ably the direct environmental impact respect the traditional refrigerants, as CFCs, HCFCs and
HFCs. The main issue connected to CO2 transcritical cycles regards the lower performances
respect cycles using synthetic refrigerants for a given application, especially if compared for
high ambient temperatures applications. The transcritical operation brings a high degree of
irreversibility in the cycle, in particular localized in the expansion valve. Low efﬁciency means
high consumptions and, consequently, high indirect environmental impact. To make the CO2
transcritical cycle a competitive alternative, some solutions must be adopted to improve the
performances of the basic system. This is exactly the aim of this project.
5.3
System performances
The results coming from the computational simulation are presented in table 5.1. The optimal
gas cooler pressure and the resulting maximum COP are shown. The compressor work is
38
==PAGE:57==
5.3. System performances
COP
pgc,opt
Tmax
Wcompr
[-]
[bar]
[°C]
[kW]
2.162
103.6
93.97
27.76
Table 5.1 – System performances for 1-stage vapour-compression CO2 transcritical cycle at
design conditions
also presented along with the maximum temperature in the cycle. Very high temperature are
usually avoided in vapour-compression cycles due to the compressor’s oil issues that can arise.
39
==PAGE:58==
==PAGE:59==
6 CO2 transcritical cycle with parallel
compression economization, design
conditions
"The major drawback of the use of carbon dioxide as a refrigerant is its low critical temperature
which makes it impossible to avoid transcritical cycles when rejecting heat at ambient tempera-
ture typical of the summer season of most of the countries in the temperate belt" [19]. In other
words, due to the low critical point, carbon dioxide systems offer lower performances for a
given application, if compared for warm climates applications. The reasons of this are mainly
the considerably exergy losses during the gas cooling process and the the throttling one, for
transcritical operation. The non-constant temperature of heat rejection and the high pressure
difference of these cycles are the major causes of the low COPs in hot climates conditions of
operation.
Parallel compression economization (PCE) is one of the solutions here studied in order to
improve the COP of CO2 vapour-compression transcritical refrigeration cycles. Figure 6.1,
provided by the work of Sarkar and Agrawal [18], presents the PI diagram and the (log)p-h
diagram of the system.
The main purpose of this improved cycle is to reduce the losses of the throttling process. This
is achieved introducing what is the major difference respect the reference cycle: the throttling
process is two-staged, in the middle a separator is positioned and the two streams arising from
it are compressed, independently, up to the gas cooler pressure. It is important to stress that
the two ﬂows going out from the separator take different paths and they are not mixed until
the end of the compression process. The beneﬁcial effect of the separator is well described by
Chesi et al, "once the separation took place it is possible to remove the ﬂash gas from the ﬂuid by
means of an auxiliary compressor: this prevents the ﬂash vapour from entering the evaporator,
where it would not provide any useful effect, thus being sequentially compressed by means of
wasted work" [19]. Moreover, due to the separator, the refrigerant quality at the evaporator
inlet is lower than the one for the 1-stage reference cycle. This is another positive effect in fact
it increases the cooling capacity.
During the synthetic refrigerants era, the focus of the studies was mainly the ﬂuid characteris-
tics. With the new "natural refrigerants" the kind of research changes. A lot of effort must be
put into the design of the components and the improvements of the thermodynamic cycles
[19]. This is particularly true for carbon dioxide. Its peculiar properties require considerable
41
==PAGE:60==
Chapter 6. CO2 transcritical cycle with parallel compression economization, design
conditions
Figure 6.1 – PI diagram and (log)p-h diagram, transcritical CO2 cycle with parallel compression
economization [18]
42
==PAGE:61==
6.1. System description
Figure 6.2 – COP vs. economizer pressure, transcritical CO2 cycle with parallel compression
economization
attention to the system planning to achieve efﬁcient enough performances. As reported in the
work of Bell [20], PCE is a technique that appears to be very beneﬁcial in CO2 system while its
beneﬁts are much lower for other systems, like hydrocarbons ones.
6.1
System description
The system requires an additional throttling valve, a secondary compressor and a liquid-
vapour separator, usually called economizer. The pressure of the refrigerant coming from the
gas cooler is ﬁrstly reduced until the economizer pressure by means of the primary expansion
valve V1 (states from 3 to 4). The vapour line coming out the separator (state 7) is compressed
to the gas cooler pressure (states from 7 to 8). On the other hand, the liquid line (state 5)
goes through the evaporator to provide the cooling effect required to the system. After the
evaporator, also this stream is compressed to the gas cooler pressure (states from 1 to 2). At
the end of the two simultaneous compressions, the streams are mixed (process assumed as
isobaric). The mixed ﬂow resulting (state 9) goes through the gas cooler.
In the literature it is common to run into PCE cycles using internal heat exchanger (IHE). "The
internal heat exchanger is not used in this study due to its negligible effect on performance" [20].
43
==PAGE:62==
Chapter 6. CO2 transcritical cycle with parallel compression economization, design
conditions
Figure 6.3 – COP, optimal gas cooler pressure and optimal economizer pressure vs isentropic
efﬁciency of the two compressors, transcritical CO2 cycle with parallel compression econo-
mization
Figure 6.4 – COP, optimal gas cooler pressure, optimal economizer pressure and compressor
work vs. evaporation pressure, transcritical CO2 cycle with parallel compression economiza-
tion
44
==PAGE:63==
6.2. System analysis
6.2
System analysis
The operating conditions of the cycle are the same common conditions used for all the studied
cycle (see chapter 4 for the assumptions at the base of this investigation). The assumed ambi-
ent state forces the system to transcritical operation. For this reason, the gas cooler pressure
must be optimized for the given conditions.
It was found that even an optimal economizer pressure can be found for the given operating
conditions. Figure 6.2 presents the COP as a function of the economizer pressure. The graph
was created keeping constant all the reaming parameters of the cycle, even the gas cooler
pressure. The inverted U-shape presented in the ﬁgure shows the possibility to ﬁnd and
optimum also for the separator pressure. For this reason, the optimization of the cycle was
performed with a simultaneous maximization of the COP leaving gas cooler and separator
pressure free to vary.
The same system behaviour is documented in the literature, for instance in the paper pro-
posed by Sarkar and Agrawal. Citing their work, "the existence of the optimum economizer
pressure is mainly on account of the changing slope of the saturation curve" [18]. Increasing the
economizer pressure, the vapour quality at the evaporator entrance decreases. Thus, both the
refrigeration effect and secondary compressor work decreases. The impact on the refrigeration
effect is due to the increasing enthalpy of the liquid, the impact on the compressor work is
connected with the decreased quality. It is clear that the optimum is reached by means of a
trade-off between these two opposite contributions. In another paper, Sarkar shows how the
optimum economizer pressure is sensitive to the chosen working conditions, even the chosen
gas cooler pressure inﬂuence the position of this optimum [17].
As remembered by Chesi et al., the optimization of the system as performed here, varying
gas cooler and economizer pressure, requires that the compressors are able to vary their
volumetric ﬂow. This can be achieved or selecting different compressors or using ones that
allows for a rotational speed control. Also a combination of the two cited solutions can be used
[19]. It is worthy to remember that the economizer is here assumed to separate completely
the liquid and vapour phase. Of course this is not a realistic assumptions and it can affect
considerably the performances of the system. As reported by Chesi et al., "the lack of complete
separation within the ﬂash tank is very detrimental for the performances, in some conditions
it is even possible to lose completely the positive effect of the parallel compression" [19]. They
conclude their work saying that the separator design is probably the most important aspect to
achieve an improvement of the performances respect the reference cycle.
Parallel compression economization is an useful technique to reduce the gas cooler pressure.
This reduction brings important system’s improvements well summarized by an increase of
the cycle’s COP [21]. These remarks are conﬁrmed by the computational simulations made
during this project. Compared to the 1-stage transcritical reference cycle working at the same
operating conditions, the discharge pressure in the PCE cycle is reduced of more than 7%.
The COP seems to beneﬁt considerably from this reduction, as it will be presented in the last
section of this chapter.
From the same work of Sarkar and Agrawal already cited, it comes an important validation of
45
==PAGE:64==
Chapter 6. CO2 transcritical cycle with parallel compression economization, design
conditions
Figure 6.5 – PI diagram and (log)p-h diagram for CO2 parallel compression cycle with recooler
[18]
46
==PAGE:65==
6.2. System analysis
Figure 6.6 – PI diagram and (log)p-h diagram for CO2 two-stage cycle with ﬂash gas bypass
[18]
47
==PAGE:66==
Chapter 6. CO2 transcritical cycle with parallel compression economization, design
conditions
the method used in this project. They specify that their investigation was made keeping the
isentropic efﬁciency of the two compressors constant, due to the fact that it does not affect
the gas cooler optimum pressure. The same assumption was made during this work and some
computational simulations were made to support the choice. Keeping constant all the cycle’s
parameters and changing only the isentropic efﬁciency of the two compressors, the optimal
gas cooler pressure and the optimal economizer pressure remain constant. On the other hand,
obviously, the COP is strongly affected affected by the different values of isentropic efﬁciency.
For this results see ﬁgure 6.3.
The impact of different evaporation pressures on the system’s performances was also studied.
Figure 6.4 present the system’s behaviour as a function of the evaporation pressure. Increasing
the evaporation pressure, the optimal gas cooler pressure slightly decreases. The combination
of these two effects bring a beneﬁcial reduction of the power input required by the system
consequently the COP increases. For higher evaporation pressure, the optimal economizer
pressure increases.
"By parallel compression, quality of the refrigerant decreases in evaporator and both refrigera-
tion effect and compressor work increase, but increase in compressor work is less than increase
in refrigeration effect, hence COP increases" [17]. Concerning the refrigerant quality at the
evaporator inlet, a computational investigation was performed. Compared with 1-stage refer-
ence system, the PCE cycle allows for a reduction of the quality around 14%. Improvements
regarding COP and compressor work are presented in the next section.
The section about the system analysis can be concluded reporting some interesting consid-
erations made by Sarkar and Agrawal. Figure 6.5 and 6.6 presents systems having, at least
apparently, a similar thermodynamic behaviour as the PCE cycles. Consequently, it is rea-
sonable to wonder why only the PCE cycle earned such an high consideration among these
possible system’s improvements. This is the same question that Agrawal et al. asked them-
selves in their paper [18]. They found that PCE cycles and the ones with recooler have similar
performances from the COP point of view but PCE cycles becomes more and more beneﬁcial
the lower are the temperature of application (Tevap). Moreover, also from the costs point of
view the PCE cycles seem to be preferable. The lower cost of the separator compared to the
one of the recooler is something to take into account when designing a cycle [18]. Two-stage
cycles with ﬂash gas bypass present always lower performances than the other two systems.
6.3
System performances
The results coming from the computational simulation of the CO2 PCE cycle are presented in
table 6.1. The optimal gas cooler and economizer pressure are shown, along with the resulting
maximum COP. Compressor work and maximum temperature in the cycle are also presented.
Figure 6.7 offers a comparison between the performances of the CO2 parallel compression
economization cycle and the CO2 1-stage reference cycle. Optimal gas cooler pressure and
48
==PAGE:67==
6.3. System performances
COP
pgc,opt
peco,opt
Tmax
Wcompr
[-]
[bar]
[bar]
[°C]
[kW]
2.643
96.04
56.59
87.23
22.7
Table 6.1 – System performances for CO2 transcritical cycle with parallel compression at design
conditions
Figure 6.7 – Performances comparison: PCE cycle vs. 1-stage reference cycle
compressor work are reduced, respectively, of 7% and 18% respect the 1-stage reference cycle.
The COP faces an increase around 22%.
As reported by Chesi et al., the improvements that the PCE imply respect the 1-stage reference
cycle are more valuable when the outdoor ambient temperature are high [19]. This will be
even more clear when performing the yearly energy consumptions investigation (part III of
this project). At that point a comparison of the cycle’s performances in summer and winter
will be carried out.
49
==PAGE:68==
==PAGE:69==
7 CO2 transcritical cycle with integrated
mechanical subcooling, design condi-
tions
"The Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Food Safety of the European Union
just (January 2014) voted on restrictive amendments to the F-gas regulation, including both
limit to the HFC quantity that can be launched in the market (phase-down) and a ban of the
use of HFC for some applications, with different gradualness according to the speciﬁc applica-
tion and the used refrigeration GWP value" [3]. Even the HFCs, expected to be the perfected
replacement for the CFCs and HCFCs, are facing their phase out from the market. Their high
GWP is as worrying as the CFCs’ and HCFCs’ ozone depletion potential. Based on data from
Legambiente, only in 2012, 10.600 tons of HFCs entered the Italian market. Moreover, around
100.000 tons of HFCs are quantiﬁed for the already existing plants. The resulting GWP is
impressive: 250 millions tons of CO2 equivalent. This data, "together with the fact that the
refrigerant recovery rate from existing plants is still very limited in Italy, gives an idea about
the phenomenon dimensions and importance and pushes towards the introduction of natural
refrigerants, in Italy and more in general in South Europe." [3].
The harmful effect of HFCs is real and the awareness of this is spreading around the world. The
solution is represented by the low-impact "natural refrigerants" just cited, CO2 ﬁrst of all. The
problem of CO2−onl y systems is the lower efﬁciency for a given application respect cycles us-
ing traditional refrigerant, especially if compared for hot climates applications. Considerable
efforts are focused on the performance improvements of carbon dioxide transcritical systems.
Mechanical subcooling is one of the solution that can be adopted for vapour-compression
CO2 cycles in order to increase their efﬁciency.
Actually, mechanical subcooling is only one of the so called "subcooling technologies". A brief
description also of the other solutions is here presented [22]:
• Ambient subcooling: additional heat exchanger area is used to allow the liquid refriger-
ant to exchange with the ambient, performing the desired subcooling. Subcooler and
condenser can be part of the same heat exchanger or the subcooler can be a different
device positioned after the condenser. This solution is not always beneﬁcial for the
system: the cooling capacity increases along with the refrigerant charge in the system
51
==PAGE:70==
Chapter 7. CO2 transcritical cycle with integrated mechanical subcooling, design
conditions
(two opposite effects, one beneﬁcial and one not, are faced by the system).
• Subcooling with liquid-suction heat: the refrigerant coming out the condenser is sub-
cooled exchanging heat with the vapour coming out the evaporator. This solution is
beneﬁcial for the system’s operation because the absence of gas at the expansion valve
inlet and of liquid at the compressor inlet is ensured. On the other hand, this device
is not always beneﬁcial for the COP. The refrigerant charge is reduced but the speciﬁc
volume inside the compressor is increased. Again, two opposite contributions are affect-
ing the system, the resulting COP could be higher or lower depending on the speciﬁc
application.
• Subcooling with external heat exchange: the refrigerant after the condenser is subcooled
in an external heat exchanger. The secondary ﬂuid could be water ﬂowing in a closed
loop including a cooling tower. Of course the additional fan and pump work must be
taken into account when establishing which solution is the optimal for the given appli-
cation. "The investment is high but the savings are also large. The ambient conditions
will determine the amount of energy saved. Saving potential is maximum when ambient
temperatures are high and is related to compressor run time" [22].
• Mechanical subcooling: "the most signiﬁcant consequence of applying mechanical sub-
cooling is the cooling capacity increases due to the lower quality of the refrigerant ﬂowing
into the evaporator" [22]. Moreover, the discharge pressure is reduced, along with the
outlet temperature of the refrigerant from the compressor. This improves the cycle’s
COP and ensures longer compressor’s life. The literature is full of promising results
about mechanical subcooling, for this reason this solution is here taken into account to
improve the CO2 cycles performances. Two types of mechanical subcooling are possi-
ble: integrated mechanical subcooling and dedicated mechanical subcooling. In the
following two chapters they both will be widely discussed.
7.1
System description
Figure 7.1 and 7.2 presents the PI diagram and the (log)p-h diagram for subcritical operation
of a vapour-compression cycle with integrated mechanical subcooling. For the transcritical
operation the cycle has the same shape, the only difference is the discharge pressure that is
higher than the critical point. In the literature was not found an accurate investigation of
this kind of cycles for transcritical operation. Anyway, the "subcritical literature" will be used
because many thermodynamic behaviours are exactly the same.
As reported from ﬁgure 7.1 two "integrated" loops are visible: one is called main cycle, the
other is known as subcooler cycle. The main cycle is simply a 1-stage vapour-compression
cycle with the addition, after the receiver, of an heat exchanger called subcooler (states from
5 to 6). The subcooler loop is represented by the additional path going from the receiver
through the secondary expansion valve (states 5 to 8), subcooler (states from 8 to 9) and
secondary compressor (states from 9 to 12). In integrated MS cycles, the condenser/gas cooler
52
==PAGE:71==
7.1. System description
Figure 7.1 – PI diagram, transcritical CO2 cycle with integrated mechanical subcooling [23]
53
==PAGE:72==
Chapter 7. CO2 transcritical cycle with integrated mechanical subcooling, design
conditions
Figure 7.2 – (log)p-h diagram, transcritical CO2 cycle with integrated mechanical subcooling
[23]
54
==PAGE:73==
7.1. System description
is shared by the main and subcooler cycle. In dedicated MS systems, each loop has its own
condenser/gas cooler. This is the main difference between the two mechanical subcooling
solutions.
The literature about integrated mechanical subcooling cycles agrees that the additional com-
plexity of the system brings improvements to the COP. In particular, the improvements are
greater when the difference between condensing and evaporating pressure is high [23]. This
result is particularly promising for the study here conducted. For hot climates operation,
the pressure difference between evaporator and condenser/gas cooler is really high and the
mechanical subcooling cycle performs even better.
Coming back to how the system works, after the receiver (state 5), the refrigerant is divided
into two streams. The secondary stream is throttled (state from 5 to 8) and later evaporates
inside the following heat exchanger (states from 8 to 9). The main stream enters directly in
the subcooler at the receiver pressure. Here it is further cooled down due to the heat ﬂux
required by the evaporating secondary stream of CO2. In this way a reduction of the vapour
quality at the evaporator inlet is achieved and the speciﬁc enthalpy difference across the
evaporator increase. Figure 7.2 presents the comparison between the (higher) vapour quality
at the evaporator inlet for the 1-stage reference cycle (state 5’) and the (lower) one provided
by the integrated mechanical subcooling cycle (state 7). The increase in refrigeration effect
is represented by h5′ −h7 of ﬁgure 7.2. In the models used along this project, the cooling
capacity of the system is ﬁxed: an improvement of the speciﬁc enthalpy difference across the
evaporator allows for a reduction of the mass ﬂow rate circulating in the cycle! Moreover, due
to the mechanical subcooling effect, the optimal gas cooler pressure is reduced along with the
pressure drop in the expansion valve, bringing further improvements to the system COP. After
the subcooler, the secondary ﬂow is directly compressed up to the discharge pressure (states
from 9 to 12), while the main ﬂow is throttled and goes through the evaporator (states from 7
to 1). After that, it is ﬁnally compressed up to the condenser/gas cooler pressure (states from 1
to 4). The two streams join each other before the condenser/gas cooler (state 13).
Anyway, the beneﬁts of the integrated MS do not come without price. "The amount of subcool-
ing provided to the main cycle must equal the heat addition to the subcooling cycle evaporator.
The heat addition to the subcooler must be rejected in the subcooling cycle condenser at the
cost of the work consumed in the subcooling cycle compressor" [23]. It is clear that an optimal
conﬁguration of the system exist and it is the one that ensure the proper balancing of negative
and positive effects of the integrated mechanical subcooling. The study of this trade-off is left
for the next sections of the chapter.
When performing the computational simulations, the two streams in the subcooler were
considered counter-ﬂow (so the draw in ﬁgure 7.1 is not precisely the cycle that is here studied
but the difference is very small). In order to implement a well-designed heat exchanger, the
temperature difference at one side of the subcooler was set. More precisely, considering
counter-ﬂow in the subcooler of ﬁgure 7.1, it was set T6 −T8 = 5 °C. Moreover, it was assumed
that no heat losses to the environment are faced during the subcooling process.
55
==PAGE:74==
Chapter 7. CO2 transcritical cycle with integrated mechanical subcooling, design
conditions
Figure 7.3 – COP vs. subcooler pressure, CO2 integrated mechanical subcooling cycle
7.2
System analysis
The studied CO2 vapour-compression cycle with integrated mechanical subcooling operates
in transcritical conditions. Consequently, for the given boundary conditions, the optimal gas
cooler pressure must be determined.
It was found that also the subcooler pressure (pressure of state 8 or 9 of ﬁgure 7.2) has its own
optimal value that maximizes the system’s COP. Figure 7.3 presents the COP as a function of
the subcooler pressure psub, all the remaining cycle’s parameters are kept constant (the gas
cooler pressure was set to its optimum value). The inverted U-shape presented in the ﬁgure
shows the possibility to ﬁnd an optimal subcooler pressure from the COP point of view. For
this reason, the optimization of an integrated MS cycle must be performed looking for the gas
cooler and subcooler pressure that, simultaneously, gives the maximum COP for the given
working conditions. Anyway, as reported by Zubair [24], the COP curve as a function of the
subcooler pressure is quite ﬂat at its top. This means that a small difference of the subcooler
pressure from its optimum does not change that much the resulting COP.
The subcooler pressure is the main parameters that affects the performances of integrated
mechanical subcooling systems [25]. As reported by Khan et al., "the irreversibility losses
in the expansion device (the major source of irreversibility) can be signiﬁcantly reduced by
operating the system at the optimum subcooling conditions" [23]. Changing only the gas cooler
pressure, the subcooling degree does not change, while it is only affected by the subcooler
pressure. It is worthy to specify that, even if ∆Tsc does not vary with the gas cooler pressure,
the heat exchange in the subcooler does. As a consequence of the subcooling, the quality of
the refrigerant at the evaporator inlet is lower, if compared to the 1-stage reference cycle. From
56
==PAGE:75==
7.2. System analysis
Figure 7.4 – COP and compressor work vs. ∆Tsc, integrated mechanical subcooling cycle
Figure 7.5 – COP, optimal gas cooler pressure and optimal subcooler pressure vs. compressor’s
isentropic efﬁciency, integrated mechanical subcooling cycle
57
==PAGE:76==
Chapter 7. CO2 transcritical cycle with integrated mechanical subcooling, design
conditions
Figure 7.6 – COP, compressor work, optimal subcooler pressure and optimal ∆Tsc vs. evapora-
tion pressure, integrated mechanical subcooling cycle
the computational simulations performed, the evaporator inlet quality of the refrigerant is
reduced of 42% respect the reference case. "The low quality of the refrigerant at the evapora-
tor inlet corresponds to an increase in the refrigeration capacity per unit mass of refrigerant
circulating in the main cycle" [23]. Moreover, as it is shown in the last section of this chapter,
the optimal gas cooler pressure is reduce respect the 1-stage reference cycle and the system
considerably beneﬁts from the reduced compression ratio.
Figure 7.4 deals again with the optimal subcooler pressure. For different subcooler pressure, it
is possible to obtain different ∆Tsc. Increasing this temperature difference the quality at the
evaporator inlet decrease with beneﬁcial effects on the system’s performances. Simultane-
ously also the subcooler compressor’s work increases with negative effect on the system. It is
clear that is not the highest subcooling the preferable and it is the trade-off between the two
contributions that gives the optimal subcooler pressure that brings the maximum COP (for
the given working conditions). Of course the additional investment cost that is faced must be
mentioned, more components are required. This is a drawback of the integrated MS system
that it is not included in the COP.
The impact of the compressors’ isentropic efﬁciency on the system’s behaviour is reported
in ﬁgure 7.5. The increasing value of ηis brings improvements to the COP, due to the lower
compressor’s consumptions. Anyway, the isentropic efﬁciency does not affect the optimum
values of the subcooler and gas cooler pressure.
As reported by ﬁgure 7.6, increasing the evaporation pressure the COP increases and the total
compressor work decreases. The COP improvement is due to the fact that the optimal gas
cooler pressure decreases when the evaporation pressure is raised. Together, these two effects
58
==PAGE:77==
7.3. System performances
COP
pgc,opt
psub,opt
Tmax
Wcompr
[-]
[bar]
[bar]
[°C]
[kW]
2.632
96.34
57.41
87.51
22.79
Table 7.1 – System performances for CO2 transcritical cycle with integrated mechanical sub-
cooling at design conditions
Figure 7.7 – Performances comparison: integrated mechanical subcooling cycle vs. 1-stage
reference cycle
provide beneﬁts to the system’s performances. The trend of the gas cooler pressure was not
reported in ﬁgure 7.6 because it would be to chaotic. It is worthy to notice that increasing
the evaporation pressure, the optimal ∆Tsc decreases and the optimal subcooler pressure
increases.
7.3
System performances
The results coming from the computational simulation are presented in table 7.1. The optimal
gas cooler and subcooler pressure are shown, along with the resulting maximum COP. Total
compressor work and maximum temperature in the cycle are also presented.
Figure 7.7 offers a comparison between the performances of the integrated mechanical sub-
cooling cycle and the 1-stage reference cycle. The COP faces an important improvement,
around 22% respect the basic system. Optimal gas cooler pressure and compression power
are reduced, respectively, of 7% and 18%.
59
==PAGE:78==
==PAGE:79==
8 CO2 transcritical cycle with dedicated
mechanical subcooling, design condi-
tions
"Nowadays, cold conditions are mostly produced by vapour-compression, mainly due to the
inherent low cost and high efﬁciency of this principle" [27]. The synthetic refrigerants used in
these cycles for the last century are on their way out of the market, due to their devastating
impact on the environment. "Natural refrigerants", CO2 particularly, seem to be the solution
to move on, due to their reduced environmental direct impact. "Below an annual average
ambient temperature of 15°C the regular vapour compression cycle with synthetic refrigerants
is outperformed by the CO2 cycle, which makes the latter an attractive solution for some re-
gion of the globe" [27]. Considering as an example the supermarket refrigeration sector, CO2
transcritical booster cycles are the state-of-art in many countries of the North Europe. On the
other hand, CO2 systems are much less efﬁcient than "traditional" ones if compared for high
ambient temperatures applications. Coming back to the supermarket refrigeration example,
for applications in hot climates, the preferred solution that includes CO2 is represented by the
cascade systems, due to the low performances of the transcritical one [28].
Lower COP means high environmental indirect effect, represented by an high value of the
index TEWI (Total Equivalent Warming Impact). "Performance enhancement of refrigeration
and heat pump systems by cycle modiﬁcation is an emerging research topic nowadays to reduce
the electricity consumed leading to mitigating the problems related to environmental pollution
by utility power plants" [29]. This is particularly true for CO2 transcritical systems due to their
low efﬁciency in high ambient temperatures applications.
The performances of a vapour-compression refrigeration cycle, exploited in hot climates, can
be enhanced using a mechanical subcooling process of the refrigerant after the condenser/-
gas cooler. There are two ways to perform the mechanical subcooling, one of them is the
integrated mechanical subcooling saw in the previous chapter, the second is the so-called
dedicated mechanical subcooling. The main difference between them is the "integrated"
subcooler loop used for the integrated MS cycle and the secondary loop, separate from the
main one, used in dedicated MS cycle. "In a dedicated mechanical subcooling system there are
two condensers/gas coolers, one for the main cycle one for the subcooler cycle, whereas for an
integrated mechanical subcooling system there is only one condenser/gas cooler serving both
the main cycle and the subcooler cycle" [26]. It is worthy to repeat that the literature gives
61
==PAGE:80==
Chapter 8. CO2 transcritical cycle with dedicated mechanical subcooling, design
conditions
Figure 8.1 – PI diagram, transcritical CO2 cycle with dedicated mechanical subcooling [26]
62
==PAGE:81==
Figure 8.2 – (log)p-h diagram, transcritical CO2 cycle with dedicated mechanical subcooling
[26]
63
==PAGE:82==
Chapter 8. CO2 transcritical cycle with dedicated mechanical subcooling, design
conditions
promising results about different applications of mechanical subcooling. Like the integrated
mechanical subcooling, the dedicated one gives even better performances when the difference
between the evaporation and condensation/gas cooler pressure is high [26].
8.1
System description
Figure 8.1 and 8.2 presents the PI and (log)p-h diagram for subcritical operation of a vapour-
compression refrigeration cycle with dedicated mechanical subcooling. The cycle does not
have any difference when the systems runs transcritical. Of course the discharge pressure
would be over the critical point but the shape of the (log)p-h diagram would be the same. The
literature seems to be quite lacking regarding transcritical operation of dedicated mechanical
subcooling cycle. Anyway, the "subcritical literature" will be used due to the fact that many
thermodynamic behaviour are exactly the same for transcritical and subcritical operation.
Two separated cycles are composing the system, the secondary loop that allows the additional
subcooling is called subcooler cycle, while the other is called main cycle. The two systems are
coupled by means of an heat exchanger, called subcooler. The subcooler cycle requires its own
compressor, condenser/gas cooler, expansion valve and, of course, the subcooler. "In practise,
the components of the subcooler cycle are smaller than those of the main cycle" [26]. Different
refrigerants can be used in the two cycles. Regarding this topic, it is interesting the appendix D
or the paper of Qureshi and Zubair [30]. This project is speciﬁcally focused on CO2 systems,
for this reason in the two cycles was assumed carbon dioxide. The effect of other refrigerants
was not considered during the main studies of this work.
The main cycle works as the 1-stage reference cycle already introduced (chapter 5), the only
difference is the additional subcooling after the condenser (state from 3 to 4, ﬁgure 8.2). The
subcooling is allowed by the evaporating refrigerant in the subcooler loop (state from 8 to
9). During the evaporation an heat ﬂux is required by the secondary CO2, in this way the
refrigerant in the main cycle is further cooled after the condenser/gas cooler. The subcooler
cycle works exactly like the reference 1-stage cycle, the subcooler is actually the evaporator of
the cycle.
Due to the additional subcooling, the quality of the refrigerant at the evaporator inlet is lower
and, consequently, the refrigeration capacity per unit mass of refrigerant circulating is higher
[26]. Returning to ﬁgure 8.2, state 5 represents the (lower) quality at the evaporator inlet pro-
vided by the MS system, respect the (higher) quality faced by the reference 1-stage cycle (state
3’). Beyond the speciﬁc cooling capacity gain, mechanical subcooling ensures also a reduction
of the optimal gas cooler pressure for the main cycle. Comparing all the cycles for the same
evaporation pressure (see the assumptions made in chapter 4), it is clear that a reduction of
the discharge pressure brings a COP improvement. In general, a reduction of the compression
ratio is always beneﬁcial for the performances of a system [28]. Compressors, usually, work
better with smaller compression ratio, moreover the temperatures at the compressors’ outlet
are lower, increasing the lifetime of these components [31].
64
==PAGE:83==
8.2. System analysis
Figure 8.3 – COP vs gas cooler pressure of the main cycle (the COP is addressed as COPmain)
and the subcooler one (the COP is addressed as COPsub), transcritical CO2 cycle with dedi-
cated mechanical subcooling
Anyway, these improvements do not come without a price. "The amount of subcooling pro-
vided to the main cycle must equal the heat addition to the subcooling cycle evaporator. The heat
addition to the subcooling cycle must be rejected in the subcooling cycle condenser/gas cooler at
the cost of the work of the subcooling cycle compressor" [25]. It is clear that the optimal cycle
conﬁguration is the result of a trade-off between al these positive and negative contributions
to the system’s COP. This trade-off is widely discussed in the next sections. Another price that
the cycle modiﬁcation have regards the higher investment cost that must be faced due to the
higher number of components respect the 1-stage reference cycle. The aspect is not reﬂected
in the COP but must be taken into account.
When performing the computational simulations, in order to implement a well-designed heat
exchanger, the temperature difference at one side of the subcooler was set. More precisely, it
was set T4 −T8 = 5°C. Finally, it is assumed that no energy losses to the environment are faced
in the subcooler.
8.2
System analysis
During transcritical operation of the cycle, the gas cooler pressure must be optimized. The
system is provided of two gas coolers, both these two pressures must be optimized for the
given operating conditions. Figure 8.3 presents the COP trends changing only the main gas
cooler pressure (COPmain) and subcooler cycle’s gas cooler pressure (COPsub). During these
65
==PAGE:84==
Chapter 8. CO2 transcritical cycle with dedicated mechanical subcooling, design
conditions
Figure 8.4 – COP vs. subcooler pressure, transcritical CO2 cycle with dedicated mechanical
subcooling
Figure 8.5 – COP, subcooling degree and subcooler heat exchange vs. main cycle gas cooler
pressure, transcritical CO2 cycle with dedicated mechanical subcooling
66
==PAGE:85==
8.2. System analysis
Figure 8.6 – COP, subcooling degree and subcooler heat exchange vs. subcooler cycle gas
cooler pressure pressure, transcritical CO2 cycle with dedicated mechanical subcooling
Figure 8.7 – COP and compressors work vs. subcooling temperature difference, transcritical
CO2 cycle with dedicated mechanical subcooling
67
==PAGE:86==
Chapter 8. CO2 transcritical cycle with dedicated mechanical subcooling, design
conditions
Figure 8.8 – Gas coolers optimal pressure, optimal subcooler pressure and COP vs. isentropic
efﬁciency of the compressor, transcritical CO2 cycle with dedicated mechanical subcooling
68
==PAGE:87==
8.2. System analysis
Figure 8.9 – Compressors work, subcooling degree and COP vs. evaporation pressure, trans-
critical CO2 cycle with dedicated mechanical subcooling
69
==PAGE:88==
Chapter 8. CO2 transcritical cycle with dedicated mechanical subcooling, design
conditions
Figure 8.10 – (log)p-h diagram for the reference cycle and the MS transcritical CO2 one [28]
70
==PAGE:89==
8.2. System analysis
investigations all the parameters except for one gas cooler pressure were kept constant. When
one gas cooler pressure was varied, the other one was kept to its optimal value. As visible, an
optimal value exists for both the two gas coolers pressures. This optimum is also quite similar
for the two cycles (subcooler and main one).
Actually a three-dimensional optimization of the system is required due to the fact that an
optimum exists also for the evaporation pressure in the subcooler cycle. It will be referred to
this pressure as "subcooler pressure". Figure 8.4 shows the COP of the system as a function
of the subcooler pressure, all the remaining parameters of the systems were kept constant
to accomplish this analysis. The inverted U-shape of the graph suggests the existence of an
optimal subcooler pressure that maximizes the COP. When optimizing the system, it was
looked for the two gas cooler pressures and the subcooler one that, simultaneously, give the
maximum COP for the given boundary conditions.
The existence of an optimal subcooler pressure is conﬁrmed by the literature: "It should
be emphasized that there is an optimum temperature for the subcooler at which the COP of
the cycle is maximized" [26]. Moreover, as reported by Thorton et al., "the performance of a
mechanical subcooling system is controlled mostly by the subcooler temperature - and thus the
subcooler pressure, not declared by the authors -" [25].
The subcooling degree is completely controlled by the subcooler pressure. Changes of the
main cycle gas cooler pressure, does not affect the ∆Tsc, as visible from ﬁg 8.5. Anyway, even if
the subcooling degree does not vary, the heat exchange in the subcooler changes along with
the gas cooler pressure. The subcooler cycle gas cooler pressure does not have absolutely
impact on the heat exchange in the subcooler. As shown by ﬁgure 8.6, varying this pressure,
neither the subcooling degree nor the subcooler heat exchange vary. Like it was for the inte-
grated mechanical subcooling cycle, the increasing ∆Tsc generates opposite trend of the two
compressors’ works, as visible in ﬁgure 8.7. Little subcooling means smaller heat rejection in
the subcooler cycle’s gas cooler/condenser and, consequently, small work for the secondary
compressor. Increasing the subcooling degree, the optimal high pressure of the main cycle is
reduced and the compressor work of the main cycle decreases. Moreover, the quality at the
evaporator inlet is higher and, consequently, the enthalpy difference across the evaporator is
higher. On the other hand, the work of the subcooler compressor increases (because of the
higher heat rejection required) and this destroys the beneﬁt of using mechanical subcooling.
The trade-off between these opposite contributions gives the optimum subcooler pressure
(and consequently the optimum ∆Tsc). Of course this optimisation is simultaneous with the
ones of the gas coolers pressures. It is actually the optimization of the three all together that
gives the perfect balancing of all the opposite forces in the system.
From ﬁgure 8.7 it is visible that the optimal ∆Tsc is around 12°C. It must be said that for
some applications this value could be too high, as reported by Llopis et al. [28]. The practical
limitation of this temperature difference is due to the fact that "high subcooling degrees will be
lost due to the heat transfer to the environment during the distribution of the refrigerant" [28].
The system behaviour for different isentropic efﬁciencies of the compressors is represented
in ﬁgure 8.8. The increasing isentropic efﬁciency brings considerable beneﬁts to the systems
performances due to the reduction of the consumptions. Anyway, these changes do not affect
71
==PAGE:90==
Chapter 8. CO2 transcritical cycle with dedicated mechanical subcooling, design
conditions
COP
pgc,main,opt
pgc,sub,opt
psub,opt
Tmax
Wcompr
[-]
[bar]
[bar]
[bar]
[°C]
[kW]
2.634
95.55
97.71
57.46
86.78
22.77
Table 8.1 – System performances for CO2 transcritical cycle with dedicated mechanical sub-
cooling at design conditions
any of the optimized pressure in the system.
The impact of the evaporation pressure on the system’s performances is reported in ﬁgure
8.9. Along with the increasing evaporation pressure, the two optimal gas cooler pressures
decrease too, bringing an important reduction of the compressors work and, consequently,
an improvement of the system COP. The optimal subcooler pressure increases with pevap:
it is interesting to report that the optimal subcooling degree decreases with the increasing
evaporation pressure.
The optimal gas cooler pressure in a MS cycle is lower than the one of the reference 1-stage
cycle for the same operating conditions. For this reason, as reported by Llopis et al., the control
strategy must be updated when adopting the mechanical subcooling [28]. The highest beneﬁts
are obtained if the CO2 is subcooled at the reduced discharge pressure, instead the higher
value of the transcritical reference cycle. This improved control "allows increasing the COP
and the capacity of the system in all the operating conditions" [28]. Figure 8.10 summarizes
all the beneﬁcial effects of the MS cycle respect the reference one and respect the cycle with
subcooling at the optimal gas cooler pressure for the reference cycle. If the carbon dioxide’s
subcooling is performed at the reduced optimal gas cooler pressure, the compression work
is reduced and a considerable gain in speciﬁc cooling capacity is faced. If the subcooling is
performed at the gas cooler pressure of the reference cycle, the COP still increases because of
the higher speciﬁc cooling capacity but the highest possible beneﬁts are not achieved.
8.3
System performances
The results coming from the computational simulation are presented in table 8.1. The optimal
gas coolers and subcooler pressures are shown, along with the resulting maximum COP. Total
compressor work and maximum temperature in the cycle are also presented.
Figure 8.11 offers a comparison between the performances of the dedicated mechanical
subcooling cycle and the 1-stage reference cycle. Optimal gas cooler pressure and compressor
work are reduced, respectively, of 7% and 18% respect the base cycle. The COP faces an
improvement around 22%. Additionally, it is worthy to report that the evaporator inlet quality
is reduced of 42% respect the 1-stage reference cycle. As already mentioned, this is one of the
main positive contribution brought by the mechanical subcooling, along with compressor
work and gas cooler pressure reduction.
72
==PAGE:91==
8.3. System performances
Figure 8.11 – Performances comparison: dedicated mechanical subcooling cycle vs. 1-stage
reference cycle
73
==PAGE:92==
==PAGE:93==
9 CO2 transcritical cycle with ejector-
expansion device, design conditions
In all the computational simulations performed, the process inside the expansion valve was
considered isenthalpic. In reality, this process is not isenthalpic and the refrigeration effect
is reduced by the losses in this device. "During the expansion of a refrigerant in a throttling
process, much friction heat is dissipated to the refrigerant due to the large kinetic energy increase
as the refrigerant pressure decreases" [33]. Moreover, in transcritical cycles, the throttling losses
are even higher than for subcritical cycles. This is due to the big pressure difference across
the valve, in fact the refrigerant is expanded from supercritical conditions to subcritical ones
[33]. Even if the high discharge pressure allows for more compact systems, it represents one of
the main drawbacks of CO2 systems. Nowadays, as reported by Groll et al., three are the more
discussed solutions to recover part of the expansion work and, consequently, to reduce the
throttling losses [12]:
• an expansion machine can be used in the CO2 transcritical cycle. In the opinion of
Groll et al., this solution in particularly suitable for CO2 due to its properties. Citing
the authors, "with a conventional refrigerant such as R-134a, most of the theoretical
expansion work comes from the ﬂash gas, and the p-V diagram for the expansion process
becomes very narrow with a low mean pressure. For CO2 the situation is quite different,
with most of the work in the liquid phase, a high mean pressure and a small volume
requirement" [12]. Anyway, as reported by She et al., this hardware is quite expensive
and many times not feasible, especially for small size applications [34]. Kornhauser,
speaking about expanders, said "such a device would be expensive and prone to damage
by low quality two-phase ﬂow" [35]. Additionally to the costs issue, the use of expanders
for commercial refrigeration application is not a mature solution yet, both from the
hardware and control point of view [36]. As reported by Fukuta et al., the expansion
from transcritical conditions to two-phase ones is complicated and still not clear [37].
• another solution is the replacement of the expansion valve with a vortex tube expansion
device. Even if the mechanism inside the tube is still not clear, the performances increase
that can be achieved reach almost 40%, based on the data provided by Groll et al. [12].
To obtain this result they assumed a vortex tube’s efﬁciencies of 100%. Anyway, a wide
75
==PAGE:94==
Chapter 9. CO2 transcritical cycle with ejector-expansion device, design conditions
Figure 9.1 – Components and total exergy destruction comparison for different CO2 vapour-
compression cycles [32]
76
==PAGE:95==
discussion is still open regarding the efﬁciencies that it is possible to reach with this
device. Not enough experimental data are available about this solution that is still at its
early stages.
• a widely discussed idea to reduce the expansion losses is the use of an ejector instead
of the expansion valve. This solution seems the most promising among the one here
proposed. Fixed size ejectors do not have moving parts, so they ensure durability and
reliability, moreover their cost is considerably reduced respect the expansion machine.
The literature about CO2 transcritical cycles using an ejector is already quite vast and all
the authors agree on the beneﬁcial effect of the ejector as expansion device.
In EERC (Ejector Expansion Refrigeration Cycles), the expansion of the refrigerant is performed
by the ejector. This device is able to recover the expansion work that goes all lost using the
traditional expansion valves. This work recovered is used to pre-compress the vapour at the
outlet of the evaporator. In this way, the compressor’s suction inlet pressure is increased, pro-
viding a reduction of the compressor work. Moreover, generally the compressors’ efﬁciencies
are improved by reduction of the pressure ratio. Also the cooling capacity beneﬁts from the use
of an ejector because the speciﬁc enthalpy difference across the evaporator is bigger respect
the systems using a traditional expansion valve. All the literature agrees on the possibility
to achieve improved performances of the CO2 transcritical 1-stage cycle using ejectors as
expansion device. Ersoy et al. made an important literature review regarding CO2 systems
with ejector. They found out that "in all the literature and experimental results conducted on
ejector expander refrigeration/heat pump cycles, the COP has been shown to be higher than that
in the basic system." [32]. Here some emblematic examples from the literature are reported.
The Japanese company Denso Corporation developed in 2004 what they claimed to be "the
world’s ﬁrst passenger vehicle air conditioning system using an ejector" [38]. Their ejector CO2
system provided a system’s performances improvements of 25% respect the conventional
vapour-compression car air conditioning. Quite effective is also the study of Ersoy et al. [32]
about exergy destruction in three different CO2 cycles. Figure 9.1 comes from their study and
compares a vapour-compression traditional cycle (VCRC), an EERC and a turbine expander
vapour-compression refrigeration cycle (TERC). A considerable reduction of the irreversibility
is achieved passing from the traditional system to EERC. Referring to ﬁgure, ejector cycles
seems to perform even better than TERC from the exergy destruction point of view, for the
studied operating conditions.
EERC are provided of a liquid-vapour separator at the ejector outlet. This brings a second
important advantage: the ﬂash gas bypass allows for a reduction of the evaporator size [29].
The use of an ejector to enhance the performances of CO2 vapour-compression refrigeration
systems seems to be a quite attractive solution. In addition to the cited positive effects on the
system’s operation, ejector are remarkable "due to no moving parts, low costs, simple structure
and low maintenance requirements" [29].
77
==PAGE:96==
Chapter 9. CO2 transcritical cycle with ejector-expansion device, design conditions
Figure 9.2 – Representation of a two-phase ejector [39]
9.1
The ejector model
A typical two-phase ejector used for performances enhancement of CO2 vapour-compression
refrigeration cycles is presented in ﬁgure 9.2. "The working principle of the ejector is based on
converting internal energy and pressure related ﬂow work contained in the motive ﬂuid stream
into kinetic energy" [39]. Internally, the ejector can be divided into four parts:
• motive nozzle: converging-diverging nozzle that converts the high pressure of the
refrigerant coming from the gas cooler into high velocity of the ﬂow going out from
the nozzle. Supersonic speeds are reached at the outlet of this ﬁrst part of the ejector.
During typical operation in CO2 vapour-compression cycles, the outlet of the motive
nozzle is refrigerant in two-phase conditions.
• suction chamber: the primary ﬂow interacts with the secondary ﬂow due to the high
velocity and low pressure of the former. The pressure at the end of the motive nozzle is
lower than the evaporation one, thus, the secondary ﬂow is sucked inside the suction
chamber. The momentum of the primary ﬂow accelerates the secondary ﬂow that enters
the chamber. Still no mixing of the two ﬂows happens until the mixing chamber. As
reported by Elebel et al., "an additional suction nozzle can be used to pre-accelerate the
relatively stagnant suction ﬂow" [39]. In this way the losses inside the ejector are reduced
due to the small velocity difference of the two ﬂuids.
• mixing chamber: primary and secondary ﬂow completely mix in this part of the ejector.
At the mixing chamber outlet the resulting stream has still high velocity.
78
==PAGE:97==
9.1. The ejector model
• diffuser: it is used to convert the still high velocity of the stream into a pressure increase
of the refrigerant going to the compressor. In this way the compressor’s suction pressure
is raised and the system’s COP beneﬁts from it.
Two are the most important parameters when evaluating an ejector from the refrigeration
point of view: the entrainment ratio, related to the cooling capacity, and the pressure lift,
connected to the compressor work. The entrainment ratio ω is deﬁned as:
ω = suction mass f low rate
motive mass f low rate
(9.1)
The ejector’s pressure lift pli f t is deﬁned as:
pli f t = di f f user outlet pressure −suction inlet pressure
(9.2)
An ejector properly designed should be able to provide simultaneously, high pli f t and ω [39].
Anyway, these parameters does not depend only on the ejector geometry, but also on the
working ﬂuid’s properties [29].
To deal with off-design operating conditions (different working mass ﬂows), two approaches
are possible: or multiple ejectors with different geometry are used or the ejector geometry has
to be assumed as not ﬁxed. In this case, the ejector control can be performed as reported by
Liu et al. . "The ejector expansion device has two control options. First, the motive nozzle exit
position relative to the mixing section inlet and thus, the suction nozzle throat area is adjustable
through a thread mechanism. Second, the throat area of the motive nozzle is adjustable by
positioning a needle in the nozzle via a thread mechanism" [40]. To allow the continuous
optimization of the mixing pressure, variable geometry ejector must be considered.
Computational simulation of ejector systems is still a widely discussed topic. Going through
the literature, a lot of different models can be found. These models mainly refers to two ideal
cases: the constant pressure mixing model and the constant area mixing model. Some more
speciﬁc models were also realized but their application is very limited and their results were
often questioned due to the very complicated modelling [41].
Neither the constant area nor the constant pressure model represents properly what happens
inside the ejector. Anyway, they offer an interesting tool to study the overall behaviour of CO2
vapour-compression refrigeration systems with ejector expansion devices. See Appendix A for
a more accurate comparison of the main two ejector models.
Here, the chosen ejector model is the one proposed by Kornhauser in 1990 [35], one of the
most used in the literature [39]. His model is a one-dimensional constant pressure mixing one.
More precisely, he assumed an "homogeneous equilibrium model" for the two phase ﬂow,
meaning that the model is 1-D and the thermodynamic quasi-equilibrium is assumed always
for the refrigerant. Isentropic efﬁciencies for the two nozzles and the diffuser are considered
given and constant. They represent the "distance" between the ideal reversible process and
the real one, any shock effects are included in the ejector’s isentropic efﬁciencies. For this
79
==PAGE:98==
Chapter 9. CO2 transcritical cycle with ejector-expansion device, design conditions
study, it was assumed ηm = ηs = 0.8 and ηd = 0.75. Liu and Groll made an important literature
review about the ejector efﬁciencies, discovering that "in most of the literature studies, values
of 0.7-0.95 were assumed for the individual ejector component efﬁciencies" [42]. The ejector
efﬁciencies here assumed were just chosen among the most used in the literature.
In the following lines, the Kornhauser’s ejector model will be explained. The mixing pressure
pmix must be assumed, it has to be a value lower that the evaporation pressure. It is supposed
that the motive and secondary ﬂow reach the same pressure (pmix) at the mixing section inlet.
Another initial assumption must be done for the ejector ratio r, deﬁned as:
r =
motive mass f low
total e jector mass f low
(9.3)
At the outlet of the motive nozzle, enthalpy and velocity are found as:
hm,o = (1−ηm)·hm,i +ηm ·hm,o,id
(9.4)
um,o =
q
2·(hm,i −hm,o)
(9.5)
The conservation of energy establishes that, at the suction nozzle outlet, velocity and enthalpy
are deﬁned as:
hs,o = (1−ηs)·hs,i +ηs ·hs,o,id
(9.6)
us,o =
q
2·(hs,i −hs,o)
(9.7)
It is assumed that no mixing happens before the mixing chamber. The conservation of energy
and momentum, at the mixing section outlet gives:
umix,o = (1−r)·us,o +r ·um,o
(9.8)
hmix,o = (1−r)·hs,i +r ·hm,i −
u2
mix,o
2
(9.9)
smix,o = s(hmix,o,pmix)
(9.10)
At the outlet of the diffuser:
hd,o = hmix,o +
u2
mix,o
2
(9.11)
80
==PAGE:99==
9.2. System description
hd,o,is = hmix,o +ηd ·
u2
mix,o
2
(9.12)
pd,o = p(smix,o,hd,o,is))
(9.13)
r = xd,o = x(pd,o,hd,o)
(9.14)
The last equation represents a constraint on the quality at the diffuser outlet, it is used to
ensure compressor constant mass ﬂux. This conditions ensures that the system is working at
steady state conditions.
Some iterations are required to ﬁnd the solution of the system. The initially assumed value for
r must be compared to the one found using equation 9.14. If they are not identical, a new value
of r must be assumed. Kornhauser suggests the use of the arithmetic mean of the two values
to reach a fast convergence [35]. The EES model used for the computational simulation of the
ejector cycle was based on the reported equations. An iterative procedure with an internal
check on the two r values was built.
To complete the ejector’s description, some limitations of the model are discussed. First of
all, the 1-D analysis does not allow for an accurate investigation of temperature and velocity
gradients inside the ejector. Anyway, this project is not focused on inside phenomena of the
ejector thus it is not a big issue. More important, cross-sectional homogeneity and thermody-
namic equilibrium are incorrect assumptions. This can lead to important differences from the
real ejector behaviour.
9.2
System description
Now that the ejector has been introduced, the overall EERC can be described. Figure 9.3
presents PI and (log)p-h diagram for a CO2 transcritical vapour-compression refrigeration
cycle with ejector expansion device.
The refrigerant, after the gas cooler is expanded (state from 3 to 4) and consequently com-
pressed (state from 6 to 7) in the ejector. After the ejector the stream is divided into two
saturated ﬂows by the liquid vapour separator. The saturated vapour ﬂow (state 1) is sent
to the compressor. The saturated liquid ﬂow (state 8) is throttled and after that goes into
the evaporator. The evaporator work in a liquid recirculation system due to the additional
two-phase ejector. "In the ejector cycle, an expansion valve is positioned at the liquid outlet of
the separator. It is used to maintain a pressure difference between the ejector suction inlet and
the ejector outlet by controlling the suction mass ﬂow rate" [43]. The refrigerant coming out
81
==PAGE:100==
Chapter 9. CO2 transcritical cycle with ejector-expansion device, design conditions
Figure 9.3 – PI diagram and (log)p-h diagram, transcritical CO2 cycle with ejector expansion
device [39]
from the evaporator (state 10) represents the secondary ﬂow going inside the ejector.
The system reduces considerably the expansion losses due to the fact that the expansion
through the valve is now across a much smaller pressure difference. In this way the irreversibil-
ity in the system are downsized.
9.3
System analysis
The EERC is operating under the common conditions deﬁned at the beginning of part I of the
project. Consequently, the system is running transcritical and the optimal gas cooler pressure
must be determined, for the given cycle and working conditions. Figure 9.4b) presents the
inverted U-shape for the gas cooler pressure. During off-design operation, the ejector actively
controls the discharge pressure to achieve the highest possible performances. As reported by
Sarkar, "the gas cooler pressure can be controlled by changing the throat area of the nozzle since
the ﬂow rate is proportional to throat area of the nozzle" [29].
It was discovered that even an optimal mixing pressure can be determined. Figure 9.4a)
presents the COP of the system as a function of the mixing pressure. The inverted U-shape of
the COP’s graph indicates the existence of an optimal value for pmix. The optimization of the
system was performed determining the gas cooler and mixing pressure that simultaneously
give the maximum system’s COP for the given conditions.
Kornhauser noticed the same behaviour in his studied. He explained that "the selection of
optimum mixing pressure becomes a trade-off between mixing loss and nozzle and diffuser
losses" [35]. In other words, optimizing the mixing pressure, the velocity of the two streams
(motive and secondary) are regulated in order to minimize the irreversibility.
The performances of the system are not that much affected by the isentropic efﬁciencies of
nozzles and diffuser. Figure 9.5 was built considering different values for the ejector’s isentropic
82
==PAGE:101==
9.3. System analysis
Figure 9.4 – a) COP as a function of the mixing pressure, b) COP as a function of the gas cooler
pressure, transcritical CO2 cycle with ejector expansion device
Figure 9.5 – Normalized COP vs. isentropic efﬁciency of motive nozzle, suction nozzle and
diffuser of the ejector, transcritical CO2 cycle with ejector expansion device
83
==PAGE:102==
Chapter 9. CO2 transcritical cycle with ejector-expansion device, design conditions
Figure 9.6 – COP vs. ejector isentropic efﬁciencies, transcritical CO2 cycle with ejector expan-
sion device
efﬁciencies, assuming ηm = ηs = ηd. COPn is the normalized COP: the COP of the ejector
cycle divided by the one of the 1-stage reference cycle. In this way, it is possible to analyse the
impact of these efﬁciencies respect to the performances of the reference cycle. It is visible
from the ﬁgure that, even for really low values of efﬁciency, such as 0.4, the performances
of the ejector cycle are higher than the one of the reference cycle (for the given operating
conditions).
The impact of each single ejector efﬁciency can be observed from ﬁgure 9.6. In the ﬁgure,
each COP line was created changing, at once, only one of the isentropic efﬁciency inside the
ejector model. For instance, the curve COPsuction was built keeping constant ηm and ηd to
their reference values and changing only ηs. In the same way, COPmotive was built changing
only ηm and COPdi f f user was created changing only ηd. As visible from ﬁgure 9.6, the diffuser
isentropic efﬁciency has the greatest impact on the system’s COP, followed by the motive
nozzle efﬁciency. The suction nozzle efﬁciency does not affect that much the system’s COP,
the red line is almost ﬂat.
If the optimal mixing pressure is only slightly affected by changes in the ejector’s efﬁciencies,
this is not true for the gas cooler optimal pressure. An appreciable reduction of the mixing
pressure is faced when improving the efﬁciency of diffuser and/or motive nozzle. Due to the
small pressure drop realized, the suction nozzle does not affect considerably the optimal gas
cooler pressure.
As for the already studied cycles, increasing evaporation pressure and increasing isentropic
efﬁciency of the compressor brings higher system’s COP. Changing ηis of the compressors the
optimal gas cooler and mixing pressure do not vary. On the other hand, higher evaporation
84
==PAGE:103==
9.4. System performances
pressures lower down the optimal gas cooler pressure. Interesting was the comparison of the
performances of the ejector cycle with the reference one for different evaporator pressures.
The lower is pevap the greater improvements are provided by the former respect the 1-stage
cycle. This is due to the increasing pressure difference pgc −pevap that increases the pressure
recovery of the ejector.
The EERC seems to be a promising solution from the performances point of view. Respect
the 1-stage reference cycle, the COP increases while compressor’s displacement and pressure
ratio decreases. The COP improvements are particularly important from the environmental
point of view. The higher is the COP, the lower are the consumptions (electricity) to provide
the same cooling effect. From a slightly different perspective, COP improvements reduces the
indirect greenhouse gasses emissions associated to the electricity production.
If the COP based analysis represents only a ﬁrst-law investigation, the beneﬁcial effects of
additional ejector are conﬁrmed even by second-law analysis. This investigation can be
performed on exergy base and reﬂects the behaviour of each single components. In fact, the
COP analysis allows only for an overview of the overall system. Interesting are the results
obtained by Fangtian et al., "on average, the exergy loss of the ejector cycle reduces about 23%"
[44]. Regardless the value of the exergy destruction reduction, all the literature agrees on the
increase exergetic efﬁciency of the ejector cycle respect the reference one. Moreover, Fangtian
et al. observed that, with increasing ambient temperature, the exergy loss of the ejector cycle
increases slowly than the one of the 1-stage reference cycle. The same behaviour was found
for the system’s COP by Liu et al.: "the enhancement of COP becomes more signiﬁcant as the
outdoor temperature increases" [40]. This result is promising for the investigation proposed
in this project. The ejector cycle seems to be one solution to improve the CO2 transcritical
cycles performances when applied in hot climates. Similar observations are reported also in
this report when talking about the yearly behaviour of the system (part III). An interesting
second-law overview of the components behaviour is offered by Ahammed et al. [45]. Figure
9.7 presents the exergy destruction (irreversibility) for each component in an ejector cycle
(RCE) and in the 1-stage reference cycle (CRC). "It may be noted that total exergy destruction in
the entire ejector (nozzles, mixing and diffuser) is around half of that in an expansion valve of
the conventional cycle" [45].
9.4
System performances
The results coming from the computational simulations are presented in table 9.1. The opti-
mal gas cooler and mixing pressures are shown, along with the resulting maximum COP. Total
compressor work and maximum temperature in the cycle are also presented.
Figure 9.8 offers a comparison between the performances of the EERC and the 1-stage ref-
erence cycle. The gas cooler pressure, respect the reference cycle, is reduce of 4%, while the
compressor work required is lower down of about 20%. The resulting COP increase respect
the 1-stage reference cycle is around 26%, for the given working conditions. This result is
85
==PAGE:104==
Chapter 9. CO2 transcritical cycle with ejector-expansion device, design conditions
Figure 9.7 – Exergy destruction for each component of the ejector cycle (RCE) and the 1-stage
reference one (CRC) [45]
86
==PAGE:105==
9.4. System performances
COP
pgc,opt
pmix,opt
Tmax
Wcompr
[-]
[bar]
[bar]
[°C]
[kW]
2.717
99.43
28.66
79.95
22.08
Table 9.1 – System performances for CO2 transcritical cycle with ejector expansion device at
design conditions
Figure 9.8 – Performances comparison: ejector expansion cycle vs. 1-stage reference cycle
aligned with some of the literature found about ejector cycles (such as [44], [45], [46], [33]).
Anyway, even if all the literature agrees on the beneﬁcial effect of the ejector expansion device,
it must be said that the improvements reported in the literature are quite different. The entity
of the performances increase is strongly related to the considered application and the ejector
modelling (for computational investigation) and/or design (for experimental analysis). Great
attention must be paid to the inner geometry of this device to achieve the hoped improve-
ments in real-life systems.
87
==PAGE:106==
==PAGE:107==
10 Comparison of the studied cycles,
design conditions
To conclude the ﬁrst part of the project, a comparison of the studied solutions is presented.
Mechanical subcooling cycles, PCE cycle and EERC are here compared with 1-stage CO2
vapour-compression reference cycle from different point of view. The choice was not to base
this "cycles’ contest" on the absolute value coming from the computational simulations. For
sake of simplicity and for better understanding, all the value are here presented as normalized.
All the parameters are divided by the corresponding parameter’s value for the reference cycle.
In this way, if the value of one parameter is higher than 1, it means that the absolute value
of that parameter for that speciﬁc cycle is higher than the corresponding one for the 1-stage
reference.
Figure 10.1 presents the normalized optimal gas cooler pressure for the different cycles. For the
given operating conditions, the higher optimal gas cooler pressure is the one of the reference
1-stage cycle. The lowest optimal gas cooler pressure is faced in the dedicated mechanical
subcooling cycle. This is actually not visible in the graph because the difference from inte-
grated mechanical subcoolig and PCE cycle is very small. Anyway, the MS cycle and the PCE
one generates a considerable and beneﬁcial reduction of the optimal gas cooler pressure. The
optimal gas cooler pressure in the ejector cycle is lower than the reference one, but really close.
Figure 10.2 depicts the maximum temperature in the cycle for the different system conﬁgura-
tions. The higher temperature is faced in the 1-stage reference cycle. A great reduction of this
temperature is obtained in all the cycles but the biggest change was found in the ejector cycle.
Figure 10.3 presents the different consumptions for the investigated cycles. The system with
the highest consumption is certainly the 1-stage one. On the other hand, the other cycles
generate a considerable reduction of the compressor work. The reduction is almost of the
same magnitude but the ejector system has again the best performances.
Finally, ﬁgure 10.4 illustrates the normalized COP for the different cycles. As a consequence of
what already said about the systems’ consumptions, the highest COP is faced in the 1-stage
reference cycle. The other cycles ensure a COP improvement quite similar but it is again the
ejector cycle to perform better.
From this comparison emerges that all the four considered solutions give the expected en-
hancement of the system performances, if compared to the 1-stage vapour-compression
89
==PAGE:108==
Chapter 10. Comparison of the studied cycles, design conditions
Figure 10.1 – Normalized optimal gas cooler pressure for the different cycles
90
==PAGE:109==
Figure 10.2 – Normalized maximum temperature for the different cycles
91
==PAGE:110==
Chapter 10. Comparison of the studied cycles, design conditions
Figure 10.3 – Normalized compressor work for the different cycles
92
==PAGE:111==
Figure 10.4 – Normalized COP for the different cycles
93
==PAGE:112==
Chapter 10. Comparison of the studied cycles, design conditions
system. Anyway, the ejector cycle generates slightly lower consumptions and higher COP. For
the given operating conditions, it seems the most promising solution between the illustrated
one, in particular considering that quite low ejector efﬁciencies were assumed.
94
==PAGE:113==
Part II
Design operation of further improved
cycles
95
==PAGE:114==
==PAGE:115==
11 Further improvements of the studied
cycles
In the ﬁrst part of the project, four different solution (mechanical subcooling, PCE and use
of ejector) were presented, with the purpose to enhance the performances of CO2 vapour-
compression refrigeration cycles. The results were already quite satisfactory due to the con-
siderable performance improvements achieved. Anyway, further improvements of the four
studied cycles are possible and some of these solutions were already explored in the literature.
Even different CO2 cycles boosts (from the already studied four) are here mentioned. The liter-
ature presents plenty of different solutions to improve the CO2 transcritical cycle, moreover,
also the author used a bit his imagination in this part of the project.
The study of the cited four solutions suggested the idea to combine them together, where
possible. This, theoretically, should increase even more the performances of the system. What
was unknown at the time of the investigation was if this increased complexity of the cycles was
worthy or not. For instance, applying mechanical subcooling and using an ejector together in
a vapour-compression CO2 can give a big or small improvement to the system, if compared to
EERC or mechanical subcooling "traditional" cycles. Sometime, the additional cycle’s com-
plexity does not give the expected magnitude of improvement. Sometimes the performances
enhancement are even higher than expected.
The second part of the report is about these further improved cycles and their performances
enhancements. As said, not only the already studied devices are considered. Also some new
alternative solutions are presented and, hopefully, they will give even wider possibility of
choice to the future CO2 cycle’s designers. In this part of the project, each cycle is described
and brieﬂy investigated to ﬁnally compare it with the cycles studied in the ﬁrst part of the
project. To perform a "fair" comparison, the same operating conditions applied in part I of
the project were used for the following cycles.
97
==PAGE:116==
==PAGE:117==
12 Further improvements of the CO2
transcritical cycle with PCE, design
conditions
This chapter is about possible further improvements of PCE cycles operating with CO2. The
investigation is still focused on transcritical operation due to the unchanged boundary condi-
tions.
PCE cycles offer the interesting possibility to be combined with mechanical subcooling, both
integrated and dedicated. Moreover, the effect of two improved mechanical subcooling loops
applied to the PCE cycle are studied.
12.1
PCE cycle with dedicated mechanical subcooling
The idea is to apply dedicated mechanical subcooling to the already studied CO2 transcritical
PCE cycle. The additional heat exchanger (subcooler) and the subcooler loop ensure a further
cooling of the refrigerant after the gas cooler, improving the systems performances.
The optimization of the system is a 4-dimensional process. It must be simultaneously op-
timized the two gas coolers pressure, the subcooler pressure and the separator one. The
min/max function provided by the software EES was used. The main results from this opti-
mization are presented in ﬁgure 12.1. The optimal gas cooler pressure is reduced around 2%,
while the COP faces an improvement of more than 6%.
12.2
PCE cycle with integrated mechanical subcooling
Similarly to what it was done before, the integrated mechanical subcooling is applied to the
transcritical CO2 vapour-compression cycle with PCE. The subcooler loop provides subcooling
of the refrigerant at the gas cooler outlet, further improving the performances of the system.
The optimization of the system is now a 3-dimensional process. Gas cooler, subcooler and
separator pressures must be simultaneously optimized to reach the maximum system’s COP
for the given operating conditions. The main results from this optimization are presented
99
==PAGE:118==
Chapter 12. Further improvements of the CO2 transcritical cycle with PCE, design
conditions
in ﬁgure 12.2. The ﬁgure offers also a comparison between the improved cycle and the "tra-
ditional" PCE one. The improvements achieved with the additional integrated MS loop are
similar to the one obtained using dedicated MS. The optimal gas cooler is reduced around 1%,
the COP is improved of 6%.
12.3
PCE cycle with ejector-dedicated mechanical subcooling
This section tries to study the impact on the PCE cycle’s performances of an enhanced dedi-
cated mechanical subcooling system. The dedicated subcooler loop is improved by the use of
an ejector used to recover the expansion work. In this way the subcooler loop is actually an
EERC.
The optimization of the system requires the simultaneous research of the optimal gas coolers
pressures, separator pressure, subcooler pressure and ejector’s mixing one. Thus, the opti-
mization requires a 5-dimensional function.
A small investigation was performed on the inﬂuence of the ejector efﬁciencies on the system
performances. The reference case, using ηm = ηs = 0.8 and ηd = 0.75, was compared to a
situation in which ηm = ηs = 0.9 and ηd = 0.85. Figure 12.3 presents the normalized COP and
normalized compressor work obtained dividing the resulting values of the second case with
the corresponding values of the reference case. In this way it is easier to visualize the changes
that the second case offers respect to the reference. Figure 12.3 shows that the ejector’s efﬁ-
ciencies do not have a great impact on the system performances. A considerable change of
them leaves almost unchanged COP and compressor work of the system.
A comparison of the performances between the improved cycle and the PCE one is presented
in ﬁgure 12.4. The optimal gas cooler pressure is reduced around 3% respect the "traditional"
PCE cycle, while the COP faces an important improvement of 9%.
12.4
PCE cycle with PCE-dedicated mechanical subcooling
An enhanced dedicated mechanical subcooling loop is applied to the CO2 transcritical PCE
cycle. The parallel compression economization solution is used also in the subcooler cycle in
order to improve the overall system’s performances. In this way, even the subcooler cycle is
actually a PCE cycle.
The system can be optimized ﬁnding the best gas coolers, separators and subcooler pressures.
Once again, the optimization function requires as input 5 parameters.
Figure 12.5 presents the comparison between the improved PCE cycle with PCE-dedicated
mechanical subcooling and the "traditional" PCE cycle. The optimal gas cooler pressure is
reduced only around 1% respect the PCE system. The same small improvement is faced by
the maximum temperature in the cycle. A more interesting improvement is faced in terms of
compressor work and COP. The COP of the PCE cycle with dedicated mechanical subcooling is
100
==PAGE:119==
12.4. PCE cycle with PCE-dedicated mechanical subcooling
Figure 12.1 – Performance comparison: PCE cycle with dedicated mechanical subcoolig vs.
PCE cycle
around 7% higher than the "traditional" PCE system.
101
==PAGE:120==
Chapter 12. Further improvements of the CO2 transcritical cycle with PCE, design
conditions
Figure 12.2 – Performance comparison: PCE cycle with integrated mechanical subcoolig vs.
PCE cycle
Figure 12.3 – Normalized COP and compressor work: comparison of the systems performances
for two different sets of ejector efﬁciencies, PCE cycle with ejector-dedicated mechanical
subcooling
102
==PAGE:121==
12.4. PCE cycle with PCE-dedicated mechanical subcooling
Figure 12.4 – Performance comparison: PCE cycle with ejector-dedicated mechanical sub-
coolig vs. PCE cycle
Figure 12.5 – Performance comparison: PCE cycle with PCE-dedicated mechanical subcoolig
vs. PCE cycle
103
==PAGE:122==
==PAGE:123==
13 Comparison of the further improved
CO2 transcritical cycles with PCE,
design conditions
In this chapter, a comparison between the improved CO2 transcritical vapour-compression
cycles using PCE is presented. All the observations presented in this chapter refers to the
chosen operating conditions of the systems. Only normalized values are presented in the
following graphs. The CO2 vapour-compression 1-stage cycle is taken as reference for the
normalization of the results.
Figure 13.1 represents the normalized optimal gas cooler pressure for the different PCE cycles
investigated. In all the improved cycles, the reduction of the gas cooler pressure respect the
reference cycle is almost of the same magnitude. Anyway the minimum optimal gas cooler
pressure was found in the PCE cycle with ejector-dedicated mechanical subcooling.
Figure 13.2 depicts the maximum cycle’s temperature for the PCE cycles investigated. The
enhanced cycles present similar maximum temperatures with the lowest of these faced by the
PCE cycle with ejector-dedicated mechanical subcooling. Anyway, the reductions that this
cycle provides in terms of maximum cycle’s temperature and optimal gas cooler pressure do
not justify the increased system’s complexity.
A more appreciable improvements of the performances (respect the "traditional" PCE cycle)
can be noticed if looking at the cycle’s power requirements. Figure 13.3 presents the com-
pressor’s work for the investigated PCE cycles. Of course, the highest compressor work is the
one of the reference cycle. The "traditional" PCE cycle already offers a great reduction of the
consumptions, but a more interesting achievement is obtained with the new cycles. The lowest
consumptions are ensured by the PCE system with ejector-dedicated mechanical subcooling.
Anyway, the magnitude of the work’s reduction achieved by all the further improved cycles is
quite similar.
Finally, the COPs of the cycles are compared for the given operating conditions. Figure 13.4
depicts the normalized system’s COPs for the different PCE cycle under consideration. The
PCE "traditional" system already offers a good improvement respects the reference cycle.
Anyway, even higher performances can be achieved with the improved cycles. Again the
best performer is the PCE cycle with ejector-dedicated mechanical subcooling, but only with
slightly better performances respect the other improved cycles.
The further improved PCE cycles seem to offer interesting gains, especially from the compres-
105
==PAGE:124==
Chapter 13. Comparison of the further improved CO2 transcritical cycles with PCE,
design conditions
Figure 13.1 – Normalized optimal gas cooler pressure for the different PCE cycles
106
==PAGE:125==
Figure 13.2 – Normalized maximum cycle temperature for the different PCE cycles
107
==PAGE:126==
Chapter 13. Comparison of the further improved CO2 transcritical cycles with PCE,
design conditions
Figure 13.3 – Normalized compressor’s work for the different PCE cycles
108
==PAGE:127==
Figure 13.4 – Normalized system’s COP for the different PCE cycles
109
==PAGE:128==
Chapter 13. Comparison of the further improved CO2 transcritical cycles with PCE,
design conditions
sor’s work and COP point of view. Even if the PCE cycle with ejector-dedicated mechanical
subcooling seems to be the most effective one, the increased complexity is not justiﬁed by the
improvements that it brings. The PCE cycle with dedicated mechanical subcooling offers quite
similar performances from all the considered points of view, bringing even a more simple
cycle’s structure.
110
==PAGE:129==
14 Further improvements of the CO2
transcritical cycle with dedicated MS,
design conditions
The chapter is about possible improvements of the mechanical subcooling loop for CO2 trans-
critical vapour-compression systems.
The already studied mechanical subcooling is improved with the help of an ejector in the
subcooler loop. The possibility to improve the secondary loop with PCE is discarded due to
the non-satisfactory results obtained and presented in the previous chapter (chapter 13). Ad-
ditionally, two new proposals for the subcooler loop are also here introduced and investigated.
14.1
Ejector-Dedicated mechanical subcooling
The ﬁrst investigated improvement of the dedicated mechanical subcooling loop is the possi-
bility to use an ejector in the subcooler cycle. As already seen during the study of the improved
PCE cycles (chapter 13), it gives an interesting boost to the cycle. Using the experience gained
from the investigations proposed in the previous chapter, the use of PCE-dedicated mechan-
ical subcooling was abandoned. It was clear from those analyses that the most efﬁcient of
these two solution is the one with the ejector in the subcooler cycle.
An ejector is added to the subcooler cycle while the main cycle is simple 1-stage vapour-
compression transcritical CO2 system. The subcooler loop is now an EERC. In the previous
chapter the ejector-dedicated mechanical subcooling loop was applied to a PCE cycle. Here,
it is applied to the 1-stage reference cycle. In this way the gains provided by the improved
secondary loop can be directly compared to the performances of the "traditional" mechanical
subcooling system studied in the ﬁrst part of this project. In other words, in this way it is
possible a direct comparison of the two subcooler loops.
The optimal cycle’s conﬁguration was found by optimizing simultaneously the two gas coolers’
pressures and the ejector’s mixing pressure. Figure 14.3 proposes a comparison of the ejector-
dedicated mechanical subcooling cycle and the dedicated mechanical subcooling one. The
optimal gas cooler pressure is unchanged when comparing the two systems. The COP faces a
very small improvement around 3%.
111
==PAGE:130==
Chapter 14. Further improvements of the CO2 transcritical cycle with dedicated MS,
design conditions
Figure 14.1 – PI diagram of a steam-ejector refrigeration system
Figure 14.2 – PI diagram of an EPR-dedicated mechanical subcooling system refrigeration
system [34]
112
==PAGE:131==
14.2. Dedicated heat-driven subcooling
14.2
Dedicated heat-driven subcooling
A new proposal for the subcooler cycle is here pointed out. The idea comes from another
important application of the ejectors in the refrigeration industry: the steam-ejector refrigera-
tion cycles. The PI diagram of one of these systems is presented in ﬁgure 14.1. The working
ﬂuid is water, another "natural refrigerant" environmentally friendly.
The cycle is composed by condenser, expansion valve and evaporator like the traditional
vapour-compression cycles. The compressor is replaced by the combination of pump, genera-
tor and ejector. The main difference from the traditional plants is the reduction in mechanical
work required. The pump has really small consumptions respect the use of a compressor and
the main requirement of the cycle is heat at the generator.
The idea is to use an heat-driven steam ejector cycle as subcooler loop, instead of the tra-
ditional vapour-compression subcooler cycle. The main cycle is still a simple 1-stage CO2
vapour compression cycle with the addition of the subcooler after the gas cooler. The working
ﬂuid is not any more only CO2 in this system, in fact the subcooler loop uses water. Anyway,
the choice to study CO2 cycles was dictated by the necessity to switch to environmentally
friendly refrigerants. Water is, as well as carbon dioxide, a low impact refrigerant.
Some assumptions were made when simulating this system. First of all the ejector model is
the same used for the enhancement of the CO2 vapour-compression cycles. The task required
to the ejector is different, as well as the working ﬂuid. Anyway, this model was considered
good enough to roughly represents the behaviour of a steam-ejector. The ejector’s efﬁciency
were not changed from the previously assumed ones: ηm = ηs = 0.8 and ηd = 0.75. The heat
used inside the generator was assumed waste heat recovered from other application. It was
consequently considered "gratis" and not included in the system’s COP calculations. The
pumping process was assumed isenthalpic and the pumping work was considered negligible.
Combining all these assumptions, the subcooling provided to the cycle is for free and the
bigger it is the better. This can be observed from ﬁgure 14.4: the smaller is the subcooler
pressure, the higher is the subcooling provided and the system’s COP. Of course, there are
technical limits to the minimum pressures in a system. For this reason, a subcooler pressure
of 0.04 bar was assumed. In ﬁgure 14.4 the normalized COP is presented as a function of the
subcooler pressure. It refers to the cycle’s COP divided by the COP of a "traditional" dedicated
mechanical subcooling system operating at the same conditions. In this way it is possible to
see that, for the given conditions, a subcooler pressure lower that 0.042 bar always guarantees
that the dedicated heat-driven subcooling cycle performs better that the traditional one. The
generator pressure was set to 50 bar. Again, at the subcooler the temperature difference
T15 −T4 was ﬁxed to 5°C.
The assumptions made about pump power and generator heat can be considered quite realis-
tic. In steam-ejector cycles the pump power is usually neglected in the calculations. Moreover,
the possibility to recover heat from other industrial processes is quite realistic too. For this
investigation, it was assumed available a water mass ﬂow of 0.15 kg/s at 100°C.
For the given operating conditions and assumptions, the ejector mixing pressure and the gas
cooler pressure were optimized to achieve the maximum system’s COP. Figure 14.5 presents
113
==PAGE:132==
Chapter 14. Further improvements of the CO2 transcritical cycle with dedicated MS,
design conditions
a comparison of the dedicated heat-driven subcooling cycle and the dedicated mechanical
subcooling one. The optimal gas cooler pressure is reduced of more than 10%, while the COP
faces an improvement of 6%.
14.3
Expansion power recovery dedicated mechanical subcooling
The last section of the chapter is about another alternative solution to improve the perfor-
mances of the subcooler loop. The idea came after the reading of a recent work of She et al.
[34].
To improve the performances of CO2 transcritical cycles, the reduction of the expansion losses
in the throttling valve is always a good starting point. This is the purpose of the ejector, as
already seen, but also a turbine can be used instead of the traditional expansion valve. This
provides an improvement of the system’s COP but from the economical point of view this
solution is rarely feasible, in particular if considering small CO2 systems [47]. For this reason
She et al. proposed the use of a power recovery device, instead the expansion valve, used
to power the subcooler cycle: the result is an expansion power recovery (EPR) dedicated
mechanical subcooling system. Citing from their work "in the main refrigeration cycle, the
expander output power is employed to drive a compressor in an auxiliary subcooling cycle,
and the refrigerant at the outlet of the condenser (or gas cooler) is subcooled by the evaporative
cooler" [34]. The results of their work is very interesting due to the fact that they claim this
system to be even a best performer than the conventional expansion recovery system (the
expander recovers work that is used in the compressor of the main cycle).
Also the solution proposed by She et al. is surely costly. Anyway, it was chosen to investigate
this system because of the really good performances. Moreover, it was considered worthy
to present in this project at least one cycle using an expander because it represents another
widely discussed alternative in the literature about CO2 transcritical cycles’ improvements.
The PI diagram of the system is presented in ﬁgure 14.2. As visible, the compressor of the sub-
cooler cycle and the expander are mechanically coupled. The remaining components of the
main and subcooler cycle are exactly the same that are used in a 1-stage vapour-compression
cycle with dedicated mechanical subcooling.
The operating conditions assumed are the same as the other cycles, the only additional as-
sumption required was about the isentropic efﬁciency of the expander. She et al. [34] reported
a lot of literature about the isentropic efﬁciency of the expander, on the base of that a value of
0.7 was assumed.
The impact of the expander efﬁciency on the system’s performances was analysed. Values of
turbine’s efﬁciency of 0.3, 0.5, 0.7 and 0.9 were taken into account. Figure 14.6 presents the
results of this investigation. The COP is presented as normalized, the reference COP value
is the one of the "traditional" mechanical subcooling cycle. The performances of the EPR
system increase with the turbine’s efﬁciency and, as reported by She et al., the impact of
the turbine’s efﬁciency on the system COP is considerable [34]. Anyway, even for really low
114
==PAGE:133==
14.3. Expansion power recovery dedicated mechanical subcooling
Figure 14.3 – Performance comparison: Ejector-dedicated subcooling cycle vs. dedicated
mechanical subcoolinge cycle
expander performances, the system performs better than the mechanical subcooling cycle.
With the given assumptions and operating conditions the system was optimized. It was found
that an optimal gas cooler and subcooler pressure exists even for this cycle. The optimization
process requires three inputs: the two gas coolers pressures and the subcooler one. Figure
14.7 presents the optimization results got from the computational simulations. Comparing
this improved cycle with the "traditional" dedicated MS one, the optimal gas cooler pressure
is reduced around 2%. Very interesting improvements are faced in terms of compressor work
(-17%) and COP (+21%).
115
==PAGE:134==
Chapter 14. Further improvements of the CO2 transcritical cycle with dedicated MS,
design conditions
Figure 14.4 – Normalized COP and ∆Tsc vs. subcooler pressure, dedicated heat-driven sub-
cooling cycle
Figure 14.5 – Performance comparison: Dedicated heat-driven subcooling cycle vs. dedicated
mechanical subcooling cycle
116
==PAGE:135==
14.3. Expansion power recovery dedicated mechanical subcooling
Figure 14.6 – Normalized COP vs. expander’s isentropic efﬁciency, EPR dedicated mechanical
subcooling cycle
Figure 14.7 – Performance comparison: EPR-dedicated subcooling cycle vs. dedicated me-
chanical subcooling cycle
117
==PAGE:136==
==PAGE:137==
15 Comparison of the further improved
CO2 transcritical cycles with dedi-
cated MS, design conditions
In this chapter, the studied different solution to improve the dedicated mechanical subcooling
loop are compared (see chapter 14 for the cycles’ descriptions). One solution adopted was the
addition of an ejector to the traditional subcooler loop to enhance its performances. Also new
ideas for the dedicated subcooling were advanced. The possibility to recover the expansion
work of the main cycle and use it to run the compressor of the subcooler loop was taken into
consideration with promising results. A very interesting solution regards the possibility to
abandon the mechanical subcooling to switch to the heat-driven subcooling. This solution
offers the interesting possibility to obtain a "free subcooling" using waste heat recovery. In
order to make a fair comparison, all the cycles were compared and optimized under the same
operating conditions. All the results are presented as normalized values. As a reference, the
CO2 1-stage vapour-compression cycle was considered.
Figure 15.1 presents the normalized optimal gas cooler pressure for the investigated cycles.
Speaking about gas cooler pressure, it is always referred to the one of the main cycle. All the
solutions concerning mechanical subcooling systems give the same magnitude of the gas
cooler pressure’s reduction. The improvements are considerable if compared with the 1-stage
reference cycle. Anyway, even higher reductions can be achieved applying the dedicated
heat-driven subcooling system to a vapour-compression CO2 transcritical cycle (at least for
the given operating conditions).
Figure 15.2 depicts the normalized maximum cycle’s temperature for the studied systems.
Again a considerable reduction is allowed applying the mechanical subcooling. Adding to the
1-stage cycle one of the enhanced mechanical subcooling loops, the maximum temperature
reduction provided is almost the same. Anyway, an even higher reduction can be achieved
applying the dedicated heat-driven subcooling loop.
Even more interesting results are shown by ﬁgure 15.3, that depicts the normalized compressor
work for the investigated cycles. The compressor work reduction provided applying "tradi-
tional" dedicated mechanical subcooling and ejector-dedicated mechanical subcooling is
similar. A small further reduction is achieved applying the dedicated heat-driven subcooling,
but the most surprising results are given by the EPR-dedicated mechanical subcooling. The
addition of this dedicated subcooling loop to the 1-stage transcritical cycle brings a really big
119
==PAGE:138==
Chapter 15. Comparison of the further improved CO2 transcritical cycles with dedicated
MS, design conditions
Figure 15.1 – Normalized optimal gas cooler pressure for the different CO2 transcritical vapour
compression cycles with dedicated subcooling system
120
==PAGE:139==
Figure 15.2 – Normalized maximum cycle’s temperature for the different CO2 transcritical
vapour compression cycles with dedicated subcooling system
121
==PAGE:140==
Chapter 15. Comparison of the further improved CO2 transcritical cycles with dedicated
MS, design conditions
Figure 15.3 – Normalized compressor work for the different CO2 transcritical vapour compres-
sion cycles with dedicated subcooling system
122
==PAGE:141==
Figure 15.4 – Normalized system’s COP for the different CO2 transcritical vapour compression
cycles with dedicated subcooling system
123
==PAGE:142==
Chapter 15. Comparison of the further improved CO2 transcritical cycles with dedicated
MS, design conditions
reduction of the compressor work. This is due to the fact that the subcooler compressor is
working "for free". This compressor is actually conducted using the work recovered by the
expander.
Finally, ﬁgure 15.4 compares the COPs of the cycles under consideration. The ejector-dedicated
mechanical subcooling performs slightly better than the "traditional" dedicated mechanical
subcooling cycle. For this reason, the increased complexity of the former is not justiﬁed. The
dedicated heat-driven subcooling solution is very interesting because offers very good overall
cycles performances and gives the possibility to use "free" waste heat. The COP improvement
achieved is very high for the considered operating conditions. Anyway, the best performer is
the EPR-dedicated mechanical subcooling system. This cycle offers a COP almost 50% higher
than the one of the reference 1-stage cycle.
124
==PAGE:143==
16 Further improvements of the CO2
transcritical cycle using an ejector,
design conditions
This chapter concerns the possibility to increase the performances of CO2 transcritical vapour-
compression cycles using an ejector. All the improvements are obtained combining the ejector
cycle with already studied alternative solutions, more precisely dedicated and integrated me-
chanical subcooling. Also the possibility to use two ejectors in the same cycle was investigated.
This should lead to an even higher reduction of the expansion losses and compressor work.
To have a fair comparison of the system’s performances, all the cycle were running under the
same working conditions. This operating conditions are the same used for all the investigation
performed so far in this project.
16.1
Ejector cycle with integrated mechanical subcooling
The CO2 transcritical vapour-compression cycle using an ejector can be improved applying to
it integrated mechanical subcooling.
The system was optimized searching simultaneously for the optimal gas cooler, subcooler and
ejector’s mixing pressure. The results from the computational simulations are presented in
ﬁgure 16.3. The ﬁgure offers a comparison of the improved cycle with the "original" ejector
cycle. The cycle’s enhancement brings interesting performances’ improvements, except for the
maximum cycle’s temperature that is now slightly higher (actually, only less than 1°C higher!).
The COP faces an interesting increase of almost 9%. The addition of mechanical subcooling to
transcritical cycles offers important enhancement of the performances, this is a lesson that we
all learn from this report.
16.2
Ejector cycle with dedicated mechanical subcooling
In the same way as the integrated mechanical subcooling was applied to the ejector cycle, it
appears clear the possibility to analyse the system performances when applying a dedicated
125
==PAGE:144==
Chapter 16. Further improvements of the CO2 transcritical cycle using an ejector, design
conditions
Figure 16.1 – CO2 refrigeration cycle with two ejectors with expansion power recovery [49]
126
==PAGE:145==
16.2. Ejector cycle with dedicated mechanical subcooling
Figure 16.2 – PI diagram of the ejector cycle with IHE [48]
127
==PAGE:146==
Chapter 16. Further improvements of the CO2 transcritical cycle using an ejector, design
conditions
mechanical. The subcooler cycle is simply a 1-stage CO2 vapour-compression loop.
The optimization of the system requires a 4-dimensional function. Simultaneously, the system
must be investigated to ﬁnd the optimal gas coolers, subcooler and ejector’s mixing pressure.
The results coming from the computational simulations are presented in ﬁgure 16.4. The
performances’ boost offered by the additional dedicated mechanical subcooling loop are
similar to the ones offered by the addition of an integrated mechanical subcooling loop. Again
the maximum cycle’s temperature is slightly higher in the improved cycle but the difference
respect the "traditional" ejector cycle is very small. On the other hand, the COP faces an
important increase, it is almost 9% higher than for the ejector cycle.
16.3
Ejector cycle with ejector-dedicated mechanical subcooling
The performances of the ejector cycle are improved applying to it the ejector-dedicated
mechanical subcooling loop. The ejector-dedicated mechanical subcooling was already intro-
duced and studied in the previous chapters. The subcooler loop is further improved using an
additional ejector with expansion power recovery function. The main cycle is a "traditional"
ejector cycle with the addition of the subcooler, device in which the refrigerant is further
cooled down after the gas cooler.
The system was optimized before running the simulation. The optimization requires a 5-
dimensional function, the needed inputs are the two gas coolers pressures, the subcooler one
and the two ejectors’ mixing pressures. The performances of the system are presented in ﬁgure
16.5. A comparison of the improved cycle with the "traditional" ejector cycle is provided in that
ﬁgure. As expected, the improved system works better than the traditional one. The use of a
mechanical subcooling loop for the ejector cycle already gave appreciable improvements. The
use of an ejector-dedicated mechanical subcooling loop allows for even higher performances,
due to the improved behaviour of the subcooler loop. In fact, the compressor work in the
subcooler loop can be reduced due to the expansion power recovery operated by the ejector.
Even if not so clear from ﬁgure 16.5, the maximum cycle’s temperature is slightly higher for
the improved cycle. Anyway the difference is around 1°C and, thus, not really remarkable.
The system’s COP faces an important improvement using the ejector-dedicated mechanical
subcoolig. Respect the "traditional" ejector cycle, it grows about 12%.
16.4
TranscriticalCO2 vapour-compression cycle using two ejectors
The expansion losses in the throttling valve can be reduced even more using simultaneously
two ejector in a vapour-compression CO2 cycle. This idea was provided by the work of Cen
et al. [49]. In their work, they found out this cycle to present higher performances than the
"traditional" ejector system. The PI digram of the resulting system is presented in ﬁgure 16.1.
Compared to the "traditional" ejector cycle, the system requires an additional ejector, separa-
128
==PAGE:147==
16.5. Internal heat exchange in ejector cycles
tor and expansion valve. The double expansion power recovery ensured by the two ejectors
further decreases the expansion losses and compressor work, leaving room for system’s COP
improvements.
Actually, the investigations on this cycle proved that the improvements provided by the second
ejector are quite small. The pressure difference throttled in the expansion valves of the im-
proved cycle is reduced of almost 90%. Anyway, the pressure difference across the expansion
valve of the "traditional" cycle was already very small (considering the absolute value) and
so the system does not beneﬁts that much from this improvement. The inlet pressure to the
compressor is almost the same in the two cycles, as well as the optimal gas cooler pressure.
This results in compressor work almost identical for the two cycle, it is only slightly smaller for
the improved cycle (the compressor work is reduced less than 1%!). Figure 16.6 presents the
results obtained from the computational simulations. As visible, the considerable complexity
added to the system only allows for a COP increase of less than 1%.
Figure 16.7 offers an interesting investigation on the ejectors’ efﬁciencies impact. The results
presented in ﬁgure 16.6 were obtained assuming ηm = ηs = 0.8 and ηd = 0.75 for both the two
ejectors. Now the two ejectors’ efﬁciencies are varied to study their impact on the system. The
case taken as a reference for the normalization of the COPs is represented by the single-ejector
cycle studied in chapter 9. As visible from ﬁgure 16.7, when changing only the efﬁciencies of
ejector 2 the COP does not vary that much, respect the single-ejector case. A greater impact on
the COP is given by the efﬁciencies of ejector 1. This is of course a reasonable result. Ejector 1
is the one that deals with the biggest pressure recovery. Mainly from its performances depends
the inlet pressure of the compressor and so the energy consumptions of the system.
16.5
Internal heat exchange in ejector cycles
The use of internal heat exchange (IHE) in ejector cycles is a solution widely discussed in
the literature. Few word are here addressed to this solution. The PI diagram of the system
is presented in ﬁgure 16.2. The dotted line represents the cycle’s modiﬁcation required to
introduce the IHE.
The additional IHE is a solution not taken into account in this project. The reason is simple,
for the given operating conditions, the addition of IHE does not give any COP’s improvement
neither for the 1-stage reference cycle nor the ejector cycle. Actually, the system performances
of these cycles are reduced adding an internal heat exchanger to the cycle.
This is not a surprising result. The literature agrees on the fact that the IHE does not always
ensure improvement of the ejector cycle’s COP. For instance, this is stated in the work of Zhang
et al. . In their work they also add their own interpretation of this behaviour, "whether the
energy efﬁciency of the ejector cycle by IHE can be improved depends on the isentropic efﬁciency
level of the ejector. The utilization of IHE is only applicable in the cases of lower ejector isentropic
efﬁciencies or high gas cooler exit/vapour temperatures for the ejector expansion system from
the view of energy efﬁciency" [48].
129
==PAGE:148==
Chapter 16. Further improvements of the CO2 transcritical cycle using an ejector, design
conditions
Figure 16.3 – Performance comparison: Ejector cycle with integrated mechanical subcooling
vs. CO2 transcritical vapour-compression cycle with ejector
130
==PAGE:149==
16.5. Internal heat exchange in ejector cycles
Figure 16.4 – Performance comparison: Ejector cycle with dedicated mechanical subcooling
vs. CO2 transcritical vapour-compression cycle with ejector
Figure 16.5 – Performance comparison: CO2 Ejector cycle with ejector-dedicated mechanical
subcooling vs. CO2 transcritical vapour-compression cycle with ejector
131
==PAGE:150==
Chapter 16. Further improvements of the CO2 transcritical cycle using an ejector, design
conditions
Figure 16.6 – Performance comparison: CO2 double-ejector cycle vs. CO2 transcritical vapour-
compression cycle with ejector
Figure 16.7 – Normalized COP for theCO2 double-ejector cycle at different ejectors’ efﬁciencies
132
==PAGE:151==
17 Comparison of the further improved
CO2 transcritical cycles with ejector,
design conditions
This chapter deals with the comparison of different improved ejector cycles (already intro-
duced in chapter 16). Their performances are analysed respect the ones of the other systems
in order to ﬁnd out which one has the highest performer, for the given working conditions. All
the results are presented as normalized values, the 1-stage CO2 vapour compression cycle is
taken as reference.
Figure 17.1 presents the normalized optimal gas cooler pressure for the studied cycles. The
reduction in the optimal pressure is quite similar for all the ejector cycles. The additional
mechanical subcooling loop (both dedicated or integrated) seems to be the best solution from
this point of view. On the other hand, the improvement provided by the use of a secondary
ejector is negligible.
Figure 17.2 shows the normalized maximum cycle temperature for the different cycles under
investigation. The temperature reduction respect the 1-stage reference cycle is considerable
for all the improved cycles. They all give almost the same good behaviour from this point of
view, the differences between them are negligible.
As well as for the maximum cycle’s temperature, also the compressor work is remarkably
reduced, respect the reference cycle, using ejector cycles. Figure 17.3 presents the normalized
compressor work for all the cycles. In general, all the systems give amazing performances
from the compressor work reduction point of view. Again, the additional complexity of the
2-ejectors cycle is not justiﬁed by its performances. The greatest consumptions reduction is
provided by the ejector cycle with ejector-dedicated subcooling. Anyway, it is worthy to say
that also the "traditional" dedicated or integrated mechanical subcooling loop gives very good
performances.
Finally, the normalized COP of the studied cycles is compared in ﬁgure 17.4. The cycle with
the highest performances is the ejector cycle with ejector-dedicated mechanical subcooling.
Anyway, its COP is only slightly higher than the one of the ejector cycle with dedicated or
integrated mechanical subcooling. For this reason, the more complex ejector-dedicated me-
chanical subcooling loop can be avoided and instead integrated or dedicated mechanical
subcooling loop can be adopted. Once again, the 2-ejectors cycle does not show particular
improvements. Its complexity does not bring important beneﬁt respect the "traditional"
133
==PAGE:152==
Chapter 17. Comparison of the further improved CO2 transcritical cycles with ejector,
design conditions
Figure 17.1 – Normalized optimal gas cooler pressure for the different CO2 transcritical vapour
compression cycles with ejector
134
==PAGE:153==
Figure 17.2 – Normalized maximum cycle’s temperature for the different CO2 transcritical
vapour compression cycles with ejector
135
==PAGE:154==
Chapter 17. Comparison of the further improved CO2 transcritical cycles with ejector,
design conditions
Figure 17.3 – Normalized compressor work for the different CO2 transcritical vapour compres-
sion cycles with ejector
136
==PAGE:155==
Figure 17.4 – Normalized system’s COP for the different CO2 transcritical vapour compression
cycles with ejector
137
==PAGE:156==
Chapter 17. Comparison of the further improved CO2 transcritical cycles with ejector,
design conditions
ejector cycle.
138
==PAGE:157==
Part III
Part-load operation
139
==PAGE:158==
==PAGE:159==
18 Part-load operation of the studied
cycles
In the ﬁrst two parts of this report, the cycles were analysed and compared for the same, ﬁxed,
operating conditions. The design operation of a cycle is surely interesting to have a preliminary
idea of its behaviour. Anyway, it is hard to imagine a refrigeration cycle that operates under
the same conditions all along the year.
The usual heat sink for refrigeration systems is the ambient air, consequently, these cycles
are strongly affected by the ambient conditions, in particular the outdoor temperature. This
parameter inﬂuence considerably the working conditions of the system. Commonly, a refrig-
eration system must be able deal with cold winter’s operation and high temperature summer’s
operation. When far away from the design conditions, the performances of one system can
change considerably. It is this aspect that is under investigation in this third part of the project.
The performance enhancements of CO2 vapour-compression refrigeration cycles are here
studied applying solutions like mechanical subcooling (both integrated and dedicated), paral-
lel compression economization and the use of an ejector. All these solution were discovered
really promising during the performed investigation at design conditions. Now, it is interesting
to analyse if the considered solutions give a performances boost all along the year, under all
the very different ambient conditions faced by the system.
Part-load analysis means that the behaviour of one system is investigated when away from its
design conditions. The part-load of the four considered solutions was analysed for realistic
weather conditions, in order to asses which one performs better in a real-year operation.
The following chapters are about the off-design operation of the improved CO2 cycles. The
results obtained for each one of them are presented and compared. Before this, some words
are spent in this chapter to describe the method followed during the performed analysis.
18.1
Cycles modelling
The way it was dealt with the part-load operation is quite similar for all the studied cycles.
Here the common modelling part for all the cycles is presented. Particular modelling of some
components or speciﬁc assumptions are presented when it is required.
141
==PAGE:160==
Chapter 18. Part-load operation of the studied cycles
The ambient temperature is considered a given input for all the cycles. Realistic temperature
proﬁles were considered, this topic will be discussed more in details in the last section of the
chapter. For the preliminary investigation, the isentropic efﬁciency of all the compressors was
kept constant (to a value of 0.9) all along the year. This is similar to what it was done by Sharma
et al. in their CO2 systems yearly consumptions investigation [1]. The cooling capacity of the
system was treated similarly, a ﬁxed value of 60kW was assumed for all the hours of operation
of the system. Anyway, in the following chapters more realistic behaviour of the compressor
and proper load variations are also considered. The modelling for that conclusive analysis is
introduced later in this report. During transcritical operation of the systems, the gas cooler
pressure was always optimized, for every hour of the year.
After this introductory assumptions, more details are presented about the heat exchangers’
models: they represent the real key for a proper simulation of the part-load operation. First of
all, it was assumed that all the transcritical system’s switch to subcooler operation when the
ambient temperature is below 22°C. Of course this assumption is not very realistic due to the
fact that real systems pass through a transition phase between the transcritical and subcritical
operation. The assumed abrupt change at 22°C is used only to simplify the investigation.
Moreover, using a common transition temperature, the comparison of the cycles behaviours
was eased.
For evaporator and gas cooler, it was assumed that no control of the air mass ﬂow was per-
formed. The air mass ﬂow through these heat exchangers was deﬁned on the base of the
chosen design conditions and it was kept constant for all the different operating conditions
faced along one year. This is not what happens for the condenser: in this component the air
mass ﬂow rate is controlled and variable speed fans are assumed.
It is demonstrable (appendix C) that the air-side UA-value and the refrigerant-side UA-value
of the cycles’ condenser, gas cooler and evaporator varies with the air/refrigerant mass ﬂow
rate following this equations:
UA
UA0
= ( m
m0
)0.8
(18.1)
This is of course an approximation. For simple part-load investigations, without involving
complicated empirical correlation for the heat transfer coefﬁcients, the UA-value can be con-
sidered a function of the mass ﬂow. The subscript "0" means that it is referred to the chosen
design conditions. In this way, knowing mass ﬂow (air and refrigerant side) and UA-value
(air and refrigerant side) at the chosen design conditions, it is possible to determine the heat
exchanger UA-value for each one of the system’s operating conditions along the year.
In this way, part-load operation of gas cooler, condenser and evaporator was modelled. Start-
ing from the gas cooler, input parameters are the design mass ﬂow rates, the design UA-values
and the ambient temperature. At the design conditions, it was assumed that the gas cooler out-
let refrigerant temperature is 8°C higher than the ambient temperature. Actually the literature
suggests even lower approach temperatures at the gas cooler outlet([3], [1], [4] and [28]). Any-
way, a temperature difference of 8°C was assumed to be on the safety side. Using the described
simple correlation (equation 18.1), the gas cooler UA-value for each working conditions can
142
==PAGE:161==
18.2. Location
be found. Knowing the heat exchanged at the gas cooler and using the logarithmic mean
temperature difference combined with the known mass ﬂow rates, all the required outputs are
got from the model. The outlet gas cooler temperatures, both on air and refrigerant side, are
calculated.
The same goes for the evaporator. For each working condition, cooling capacity, air mass ﬂow
rate and inlet and outlet air conditions are ﬁxed. Consequently, the system adjusts slightly the
evaporation pressure to satisfy the requirements.
Also for the condenser, the way the model works is similar. The main difference is the non-ﬁxed
air mass ﬂow rate. The different air mass ﬂow control for evaporator, gas cooler and condenser
was suggested when speaking with DANFOSS about the way they control the operation of
their systems. For the condenser model, a temperature difference was ﬁxed. To ensure a
reasonable and realistic heat exchange between the two ﬂuid, the condensation temperature
was assumed to be 8°C higher than the inlet air temperature (that it is actually the ambient
temperature). This is similar to what it is done by Minetto et al. in their yearly consumption
investigation of CO2 systems [3]. On the other hand the outlet air temperature is free to vary
on the base of the working conditions. The UA-value of the condenser is determined on the
base of the simple correlation described (equation 18.1) and the design conditions, exactly as
for gas cooler and evaporator.
Also during the part-load investigation, subcooling and superheating of the refrigerant after
condenser and evaporator were considered nil. Moreover, the throttling process in the expan-
sion valve is still considered an isentropic phenomena.
The main aim of this investigation is to analyse the different performances of the cycles for
the variable ambient conditions faced along the year. Special attention is directed to the
consumptions of the cycles but the fan power was not included in this analysis. As a lot of
literature report (as [1] for instance), the fan consumptions are a very small percentage of the
compressor work. This was also personally checked by the author. Some simulations were
performed using the software Pack Calculations Pro [50]. This is a speciﬁc software that allows
detailed investigation of the energy consumptions of refrigeration cycles. The results always
suggested that the fan power is a negligible percentage of the compressor work.
18.2
Location
The part-load analysis was performed using real ambient temperature proﬁle. This gives a
more realistic mark to the results obtained and presented in this section of the report. The
chosen location for the systems is Rome, Italy. The purpose of the study is an investigation of
the CO2 vapour-compression cycles used in hot climates. As already explained, the reason are
the particularly low performances of this systems for high ambient temperature. Rome is the
perfect test to investigate the thermodynamic behaviour of these improved cycles. In a typical
winter day, the temperature hardly goes below zero. On the other hand, summer is really hot,
with typical August temperature that easily reach 30°C.
As already said in this report, for average ambient temperatures below 15°C the CO2 cycles out-
143
==PAGE:162==
Chapter 18. Part-load operation of the studied cycles
Figure 18.1 – Ambient temperatures distribution for Rome, Italy
perform the systems using "traditional" refrigerants. On the other hand, their performances
drop considerably when the working conditions are, on average, over 15°C [27]. The ambient
temperatures distribution for Rome is presented in ﬁgure 18.1. As visible, the hours with
ambient temperatures above and below 15°C are almost the same amount along the year. Of
course, this 15°C are just a representative temperature but it is clear that Rome is a location
that requires many hours of transcritical operation. For this reason it is particularly suitable
for the investigation here conduct.
The yearly temperature proﬁles were provided by the U.S. department of energy [51]. Actually,
they do not provide temperature proﬁles for each day of the year, but only the temperature
of a typical day for each month. Anyway, these data were considered more than enough
for the kind of investigation that had to be performed. The proﬁles come from an accurate
investigation of the daily temperature for 2014, so these representative days are reliable and
realistic enough proﬁles.
When calculating the yearly energy consumptions, each month was considered as composed
by all days having the same temperature proﬁle, the one of the representative day of the
considered month.
144
==PAGE:163==
19 One-stage vapour-compression CO2
transcritical cycle, part-load opera-
tion
The CO2 1-stage vapour-compression refrigeration cycle was already introduced in chapter 5.
This cycle was chosen as reference also for the part-load investigation of the improved cycles.
The system was modelled as described in chapter 18, no other particular expedients were
required. Due to the fact that the modelling of the part-load operation of compressor, gas
cooler/condenser and evaporator was already introduced, this part is here considered as
known to the reader. As already introduced, the cycle switches to subcritical operation for
temperature lower or equal than 22°C. Due to the fact that all the cycles have the same switch
temperature and use the same temperature proﬁles, they all work in transcritical mode around
20% of the hours of the year. The majority of the hours of the year, the systems run subcritical.
Anyway, the transcritical operation hours are considerable and can penalize consistently the
yearly system performances if no improvements to the cycle are adopted.
When running transcritical, the cycle is provided of one gas cooler, one evaporator, one com-
pressor and one expansion valve. As already explained in previous chapters, the throttling
process is assumed to be isenthalpic while the compressor’s behaviour is determined only by
its constant isentropic efﬁciency. Gas cooler and evaporator are modelled as described in the
previous chapter (chapter 18), as well as the condenser used in subcritical operation of the
system. During transcritical operation, the gas cooler pressure is optimized every time that
the ambient temperature (and consequently the operating conditions) changes.
Some troubles were found when running the part-load simulations using the software EES.
The program was not able to automatically optimize the gas cooler pressure for each value of
ambient temperature. Some help to the software was required, limiting the intervals in which
EES was required to ﬁnd the solution. All the results for the system’s operation at different
ambient temperature were collected in spread sheets. After that, a look-up table was built in
order to easily recreate the hourly behaviour of the system along the year.
145
==PAGE:164==
Chapter 19. One-stage vapour-compression CO2 transcritical cycle, part-load operation
Figure 19.1 – Daily compressor work proﬁles for one day from each season, 1-stage reference
cycle
146
==PAGE:165==
Figure 19.2 – Comparison of the daily compressor work proﬁles of ﬁgure 19.1, 1-stage reference
cycle
147
==PAGE:166==
Chapter 19. One-stage vapour-compression CO2 transcritical cycle, part-load operation
19.1
Part-load behaviour of the system
Figure 19.1 presents the daily compressor power proﬁles for one representative day from
each season. It was chosen to show the month immediately after the one in which the
season "ofﬁcially" begins. For instance, winter starts the 21st of December, so it is shown
a day from January as representative of the Winter season. In this way it is ensured that
the "fully developed" weather of that speciﬁc season is considered. As expected, all the
compressors’ power proﬁles follow almost perfectly the daily temperature proﬁle. In fact,
the ambient temperature is the only parameter that determines the change in the operating
conditions of the system. When the ambient temperature increases, the gas cooler mean
pressure/condenser pressure increases too, in order to make feasible the heat release to the
ambient air. On the other hand, the evaporation pressure only slightly changes because the
cooling capacity is independent from the outdoor conditions (see the assumptions made
in chapter 18). The result is that higher ambient temperatures bring higher compressors’
power requirements. For this reason, it is logic that the compressor work follows the outdoor
temperature trend.
Of course, "the COP variation is a mirror image of the ambient temperature pattern" [31].
Figure 19.2 is probably even more interesting. The daily compressor work proﬁles from ﬁgure
19.1 are now in the same graph. In this way it is possible to understand which is the period
of the year more "stressful" for the system, from the compressors’ work point of view. The
highest consumptions are faced in the summer months. The high ambient temperatures force
the system to work most of the time transcritical with high pressure differences between gas
cooler and evaporator. This increase considerably the required input to the system (in other
words, the consumptions of the compressors). On the other hand, the coldest months are the
ones with the lowest energy requirements. The pressure difference evaporator/condenser is
considerably reduced and so the compressors’ work.
As already introduced the transcritical operation of CO2 cycle at high ambient temperature is
their real week point. Figure 19.2 shows that the consumptions during summer months are
much higher than the ones for the other seasons. It is clear the necessity to work on this cycle
to improve their performances especially for high ambient temperature operation.
Table 19.1 shows some representative parameters that can give an approximative idea about
the system performances along the year. The average COP and the average compressor work
is presented. These two parameters give a taste of how good, on average, is behaving the
system during the year. Moreover, table 19.1 presents the maximum cycle’s temperature and
the maximum optimal gas cooler pressure faced by the cycle during a typical year operation.
These data will be even more meaningful when compared to the ones of the improved cycles.
148
==PAGE:167==
19.1. Part-load behaviour of the system
COPav
pgc,opt,max
Tmax
Wcompr,av
[-]
[bar]
[°C]
[kW]
4.14
97.76
93.24
15.58
Table 19.1 – Average and maximum system performances for part-load operation of CO2
1-stage vapour-compression refrigeration cycle
149
==PAGE:168==
==PAGE:169==
20 Vapour-compression CO2 cycle with
parallel compression economization,
part-load operation
The CO2 vapour-compression cycle with parallel compression economization (PCE) was al-
ready introduced in chapter 6. The cycle showed very interesting performances during the
design operation analysis. If the improved cycles are ranked based on their COPs at the studied
design conditions, the improvements the PCE cycle brings is second only to the ones provided
by the ejector cycle. For this reason the PCE cycle is a quite promising solution to improve the
performances of CO2 cycles, especially when operating in hot climates.
The cycle, respect the known 1-stage reference one, presents an additional separator, com-
pressor and expansion valve. The isentropic efﬁciency of the secondary compressor is still
assumed to be 0.9 all along the year and the expansion valve operates always as an isenthalpic
process. The separator is assumed to work ideally: two streams are coming from it, one
is saturated vapour and the other saturated liquid. For the part-load operation, gas cooler,
condenser and evaporator are modelled as already explained in chapter 18.
During the hours of transcritical operation, the gas cooler pressure was optimized every time
the ambient conditions change. Obviously, no optimization is required for the condenser
pressure when the system runs subcritical. Regardless the operating conditions (subcritical
or transcritical), the separator pressure was optimized for every operating condition. The
computational simulations were performed assuming that the separator pressure is free to
vary, until it remains at least 4 bar higher the evaporation pressure. A minimum pressure
difference across the expansion valve must be ensured for a proper functioning of this device.
20.1
Part-load behaviour of the system
As it was found for the 1-stage reference cycle, the compressors’ work proﬁles follow almost
perfectly the ambient temperature. They are not presented here because they look like the
ones shown for the reference cycle, except for the absolute value assumed by the compressor
work that is lower considering the same hour of the year.
Figure 20.1 presents the compressor work daily proﬁles for one representative day of each
season. Moreover, the ﬁgure shows the July compressor work proﬁle of the reference 1-stage
151
==PAGE:170==
Chapter 20. Vapour-compression CO2 cycle with parallel compression economization,
part-load operation
Figure 20.1 – Comparison of the daily compressor work proﬁles for a representative day from
each season, PCE cycle
COPav
pgc,opt,max
Tmax
Wcompr,av
[-]
[bar]
[°C]
[kW]
4.99
92.36
87.97
12.82
Table 20.1 – Average and maximum system performances for part-load operation of CO2 PCE
cycle
cycle, in order to make possible a comparison of the two cycle. Still, the warmest months are
the one that give the highest energy consumptions. Anyway, the ﬁgure shows a considerable
reduction of the consumptions in July respect the 1-stage reference cycle.
Table 20.1 shows some representative parameters of the cycle. The average COP and com-
pressor work are presented, along with the maximum gas cooler optimal pressure and the
maximum cycle’s temperature. They allow the reader to have a taste of the system’s perfor-
mances along the year.
152
==PAGE:171==
21 Vapour-compression CO2 cycle with
integrated mechanical subcooling,
part-load operation
In chapter 7, the integrated mechanical subcooling cycle was already introduced. The addi-
tional subcooling loop provides a further cooling of the refrigerant after gas cooler/condenser.
During the design operation analysis, this was proved to be beneﬁcial for the cycle. The CO2
vapour-compression cycle with integrated mechanical subcooling was found to provided a
great increase of the system’s performances, comparable to the boost provided by the PCE
cycle. In this chapter, the behaviour of this system in part-load operation is analysed.
The way the system was modelled is not different from what it was said in the previous chapter
for the other cycles. The components exploited in this cycle are the same used in the 1-stage
reference cycle, except for the subcooler. The subcooler model was object of a detailed inves-
tigation. Two different models were analysed: one based on the UA-value correlation used
for gas cooler, evaporators and condenser and one based on a ﬁxed temperature difference
between the two ﬂuids. The former model is surely more complicated and sometimes this ad-
ditional complexity made difﬁcult the convergence of the simulations. On the other hand, the
ﬁxed ∆T model is much more simple. Anyway, the two systems resulting from the use of the
two different models for the subcooler gave almost the same results in term of performances
(see appendix B). For this reason, the author felt free to choose the model on the base of the
facility to perform the investigation. The ﬁxed ∆T model was chosen because it made much
more ﬂuent the achievement of the simulations’ convergence. Similarly to what it was done
during the design simulations, the ∆T = T5 −T7 was ﬁxed to 5°C, for each operating condition
faced along the year.
Every time that the ambient conditions change, the system was optimized ﬁnding the optimal
gas cooler and subcooler pressure. Of course, no optimization of the condenser pressure
was performed when the system runs subcritical. On the other hand, subcooler pressure was
always optimized, regardless the operating conditions of the cycle.
153
==PAGE:172==
Chapter 21. Vapour-compression CO2 cycle with integrated mechanical subcooling,
part-load operation
Figure 21.1 – Comparison of the daily compressor work proﬁles for a representative day from
each season, integrated mechanical subcooling cycle
COPav
pgc,opt,max
Tmax
Wcompr,av
[-]
[bar]
[°C]
[kW]
4.89
92.48
88.09
13.05
Table 21.1 – Average and maximum system performances for part-load operation of CO2
integrated mechanical subcooling cycle
21.1
Part-load behaviour of the system
Figure 21.1 presents the daily compressor work proﬁles for one representative day from each
season. If the temperature proﬁle for each one of those days was added, it would be possible
to see how the compressor work proﬁles follow accurately the temperature proﬁle. As a bench-
mark, the daily compressor work proﬁle of July for the 1-stage reference cycle is also added in
ﬁgure 21.1. The reference proﬁle allows the reader to notice the considerable consumptions
reduction performed by the integrated mechanical subcooling loop during transcritical opera-
tion of the system. During the summer months, the one in which the system’s performances
are lower, the integrated mechanical subcooling cycle allows for considerable energy savings.
Table 21.1 shows some representative parameters of the cycle. The average COP and compres-
sor work are presented, along with the maximum gas cooler pressure and cycle’s temperature.
They allow the reader to have a taste of the system’s performances along the year.
154
==PAGE:173==
22 Vapour-compression CO2 cycle with
dedicated mechanical subcooling,
part-load operation
Chapter 8 makes available a very thorough description of the dedicated mechanical subcool-
ing cycle. Differently from the integrated one, the dedicated mechanical subcooling loop is
formed by a separated CO2 vapour-compression refrigeration cycle. The evaporator of the
secondary loop is actually the subcooler of the main cycle. In this component, the refrigerant
coming out from the gas cooler/condenser is further cooled down due to the evaporating CO2
of the subcooler loop. The design operation analysis of the cycle gave promising results. The
performances of the CO2 system using dedicated mechanical subcooling were found to be
more than 20% higher than the ones for the 1-stage vapour-compression refrigeration cycle.
To simulate the part-load operation of the system, two 1-stage vapour-compression cycles
must be modelled, one for the main cycle and one for the subcooler cycle. How evaporator,
gas cooler, condenser, compressor and expansion valve are modelled was already discussed in
chapter 18. The two separate loops are coupled due to the heat exchanger called subcooler.
This device was modelled in the same way explained for the integrated mechanical subcooling
cycle and the reasons behind the choice of the model are identical. See appendix B for a more
detailed comparison of the subcooler models applied to the dedicated mechanical subcooling
loop.
The yearly part-load investigation of the cycle was performed optimizing the system for all the
ambient conditions faced along the year. During transcritical operation, the two gas coolers
pressures were optimized along with the subcooler one. During hours of subcritical operation,
only the subcooler pressure required to be optimized on the base of the outdoor conditions.
22.1
Part-load behaviour of the system
The daily compressors’ work proﬁles for one representative day from each season are pre-
sented in ﬁgure 22.1. As expected for all the CO2 vapour-compression refrigeration cycles, the
summer months, with very high ambient temperatures, are the ones with the lowest system’s
performances. The cycle is forced to work for the most part of the hours as transcritical, with
high energy consumptions. Figure 22.1 present also the work proﬁle for July of the 1-stage
155
==PAGE:174==
Chapter 22. Vapour-compression CO2 cycle with dedicated mechanical subcooling,
part-load operation
Figure 22.1 – Comparison of the daily compressor work proﬁles for a representative day from
each season, dedicated mechanical subcooling cycle
COPav
pgc,opt,max
Tmax
Wcompr,av
[-]
[bar]
[°C]
[kW]
4.86
90.84
86.33
13.13
Table 22.1 – Average and maximum system performances for part-load operation of CO2
dedicated mechanical subcooling cycle
reference cycle. This benchmark allows the reader to evaluate the considerable reduction of
the compressor work that the mechanical subcooling cycle provides. It seems that even when
evaluating the system in part-load operation (not only at design conditions), the mechanical
subcooling allows for great system performances improvement. The same results were ob-
tained by Llopis et al. during their yearly investigation on mechanical subcooling cycles. "For
environmental temperature higher than 25°C approximately, the MS cycle produces high incre-
ments of the COP of the system, being thus recommended for warm and hot countries. For high
environment temperatures, the use of MS cycle allows the optimum pressure of the transcritical
cycle to be reduced, that producing an additional reduction of the power consumption in CO2
compressors and therefore a highest improvement of the COP [28]
Table 22.1 shows some representative parameters of the cycle. The average COP and compres-
sor work are presented, along with the maximum gas cooler pressure and cycle’s temperature.
They allow the reader to have a taste of the system’s performances along the year.
156
==PAGE:175==
23 Vapour-compression CO2 cycle with
ejector, part-load operation
The ejector cycle was already introduced in chapter 9. The analyses on this cycle, under design
conditions operation, showed the highest performances improvement, respect the 1-stage
reference cycle and all the other improved cycles (see chapter 10 for their comparison). The
COP increase of 26% respect the reference cycle was the most promising result found during
the investigations conducted during the ﬁrst part of the project. In this chapter, the ejector
cycle’s performances are tested also during part-load operation of the system, along a real-year
of operation.
The components that the ejector cycle has in common with the previously described cycles,
were modelled in the same way already explained. See chapter 18 for the common modelling
part of all the cycles. Concerning the ejector, no particular expedients were required to model
it. The isentropic efﬁciencies of the ejector were considered constant for all the different oper-
ating conditions, similarly to what it is done for the compressor. During the computational
simulations regarding the part-load operation, the separator pressure was assumed controlled
in order to follow whatever pressure recovery the ejector was able to perform. Especially for
low ambient temperature, very small pressure differences across the expansion valve were
faced. Anyway, for this preliminary investigation, it was assumed that whatever pressure
difference across the valve is acceptable.
The part-load analysis of the system was performed assuming the cycle always operating at
optimal conditions. During transcritical operation, the gas cooler pressure was optimized,
along with the ejector’s mixing pressure. When the system was running subcritical, only the
mixing pressure was optimized for each different ambient condition.
23.1
Part-load behaviour of the system
As for the previous cycles, the compressor work proﬁles are here reported, ﬁgure 23.1. One
representative day from each season was chosen. Moreover, as a reference, the July’s daily com-
pressor work proﬁle for the 1-stage reference cycle is reported. The system’s consumptions are
higher in the hottest months, as expected. Anyway the energy input required is considerably
157
==PAGE:176==
Chapter 23. Vapour-compression CO2 cycle with ejector, part-load operation
Figure 23.1 – Comparison of the daily compressor work proﬁles for a representative day from
each season, ejector cycle
COPav
pgc,opt,max
Tmax
Wcompr,av
[-]
[bar]
[°C]
[kW]
5.24
95.62
81.57
12.33
Table 23.1 – Average and maximum system performances for part-load operation of CO2
ejector-expansion cycle
158
==PAGE:177==
23.1. Part-load behaviour of the system
reduced respect the reference cycle, as visible from the ﬁgure.
Table 23.1 shows some representative parameters of the cycle. The average COP and compres-
sor work are presented, along with the maximum gas cooler pressure and cycle’s temperature.
They allow the reader to have a taste of the system’s performances along the year.
It is worthy to say that the assumption about the constant isentropic efﬁciencies of the ejector
should be revised. As reported by Kornhauser, "in general, ejectors perform poorly away from
their design points" [35]. Anyway, it is difﬁcult to establish a pattern for the ejector’s isentropic
efﬁciencies during part-load operation. So the constant efﬁciencies assumption used to sim-
plify a bit the investigation. It must be kept in mind that the results here obtained might be
"too good to be true".
159
==PAGE:178==
==PAGE:179==
24 Comparison of the studied cycles,
part-load operation
Part III of this report deals with the description of the part-load operation of the studied
cycle. The systems under consideration are meant to bring improvements to the CO2 vapour-
compression cycles, especially when operating in hot climates.
All these solutions (mechanical subcooling, PCE and the use of an ejector for expansion power
recovery) were proved to have higher performances than the 1-stage vapour-compression
reference cycle, when operating at design conditions (see chapter 10 for the design operation
performances of the systems). As the reader surely remembers (chapter 4), those systems were
tested under extremely hot conditions. Thus, it appears clear that the considered cycles are
promising solutions to be exploited in warm locations, like South Europe.
The third part of this project tries to answer the following questions: are these cycle providing
performances’ improvements all along the year, respect the 1-stage cycle? Or are they better
only for the design conditions assumed in the ﬁrst part of the project? The part-load analysis
allows for a simulation of the systems’ behaviour when operating away from their design con-
ditions. In this way, it is possible to perform an investigation about the systems’ performances
during a realistic year of operation. This is exactly what was performed in this third part of the
project. The chosen location for the systems’ operation was Rome, Italy.
The way all the systems were modelled to allow for the part-load analysis was already ex-
plained. This chapter is about a comparison of their performances along the operation year.
Figure 24.1 presents the maximum cycle’s temperature and the maximum optimal gas cooler
pressure faced by the cycles during their year of operation. As expected, the highest optimal
gas cooler pressure is faced by the 1-stage reference cycle. All the improved systems allow for a
reduction of the maximum (optimal) gas cooler pressure, the greatest reduction is provided
by the mechanical subcooling cycle. Anyway, the reduction is quite small and all the cycles
offers very similar behaviour from this point of view. A similar observation can be made for
the maximum temperature in the cycle. Again, the highest temperature observed along the
year is faced by the reference cycle. All the remaining cycles allows for a similar reduction of it,
the greatest reduction is provided by the ejector cycle. These results reﬂect what it was found
in chapter 10 for the design operation of the cycle and this makes perfectly sense. The highest
temperatures and gas cooler pressures are faced in the summer months, when the ambient
161
==PAGE:180==
Chapter 24. Comparison of the studied cycles, part-load operation
temperature are at their maximum. These are exactly the conditions studied during the design
operation, in fact high ambient temperatures were assumed.
Figure 24.2 and 24.3 present the average values of compressor power and COP faced by the
systems along the year. The computational simulations allowed for an hourly investigation
of the system operation. The yearly averages of these values are shown in the two cited ﬁg-
ures. Average values are quite interesting because they allow the reader to have a taste of
the systems’ performances in part-load operation. In fact, if one cycle has higher average
COP than another one, this represents a big clue that the ﬁrst cycle is more efﬁcient than the
second, when operating along a real year. As visible from ﬁgure 24.2, the average compressor
power is quite similar for the considered cycles. Anyway, the 1-stage reference cycle presents
the higher values, while the lowest is the one of the ejector cycle. Figure 24.3 is probably the
most interesting because summarises the systems’ performances with one number: the COP.
Actually, the ﬁgure presents the yearly-averaged COP. The ejector cycle allows, on average, for
a performances improvements of 27% respect the 1-stage cycle. Really good performances are
offered also by the part-load operation of the PCE systems. On average, the improvements
it provides are around 21%. The cycles with the lowest performances, among the improved
systems, are the two mechanical subcooling cycle. Anyway, even these systems allow for a
considerable improvement of the COP, on average, about 17-18% respect the reference cycle.
Based on the value of the compressor power for each hour of operation along the year, the
yearly energy consumptions of each system were calculated. Figure 24.4 presents graphically
the results. Of course the highest energy consumptions are faced by the 1-stage reference cycle
(the purpose of this project is precisely to improve the performances of this cycle). All the
improved cycles offers a similar reduction of the energy consumption. The lowest reduction
is provided by the two mechanical subcooling cycles. Once again, they have similar perfor-
mances and they ensure a reduction of the consumptions around 17% respect the reference
cycle. The ejector cycle offers a reduction of the consumption of 21%, the highest energy
saving among the considered cycles. The PCE system, as already proved along this report, is
the cycle with closest performances to the ejector one. 19% of energy saving is allowed by the
PCE system.
Figure 24.5 presents the daily compressor power proﬁles for the different cycles. One repre-
sentative day for each season was considered. Having a ﬁrst general look to the graphs, it
is clear that the scale is very different among them. Going towards the summer months the
consumptions are higher. Regardless which cycle is considered, high ambient temperature
brings higher energy input requirements. The consumptions are lowered down again during
autumn, when the ambient is colder. No matter which season it is chosen, the ejector cycle
presents the lowest compressor power consumptions. The energy savings allowed by this
system during cold and medium-temperature months are considerably higher than the rest of
the cycles considered. It is visible in ﬁgure 24.5 the gap between the ejector proﬁles and the
other proﬁles for January, April and October. During the hot months, all the improved systems
performs similarly and this gap is almost impossible to notice in the ﬁgure. Anyway, as already
said, the ejector cycle offers slighlty higher energy savings.
The different behaviour of the systems depending from the ambient temperature is quite
162
==PAGE:181==
Figure 24.1 – Maximum cycles’ temperature and optimal gas cooler pressure for the different
cycles
interesting and it is further developed with the help of ﬁgure 24.6. In this ﬁgure, the energy con-
sumptions for the different cycles, in January and August, are compared. These two months
were chosen because they include the lowest and highest ambient temperatures along the year.
Once again, the ﬁgure shows that the energy required is higher when the ambient temperature
is higher. Anyway, this ﬁgure is more interesting from the savings point of view. All the cycles
provides a greater reduction of the energy consumptions in August. In other words, when the
system is strongly negatively affected by the high ambient temperature, the improved cycles
perform even better, ensuring reduction of the consumption around 20%. Once again, the
ejector cycle is the one that provides the greatest energy saving but the difference respect the
other cycles is really small. If looking at the January’s consumptions, the savings provided by
the improved cycles are much lower, except for the ejector cycle. Even if the ejector works
better with high ambient temperatures, the reduction in energy consumptions provided in
January is only slightly lower than the one provided in August. This is for sure a strong point
for the ejector cycle: it ensures a performances boost all along the year. On the other hand, the
other improved cycles present a considerable difference in the energy input reduction during
the operation year.
163
==PAGE:182==
Chapter 24. Comparison of the studied cycles, part-load operation
Figure 24.2 – Yearly-averaged value of the compressor power for the different cycles
Figure 24.3 – Yearly-averaged value of the COP for the different cycles
164
==PAGE:183==
Figure 24.4 – Yearly energy consumptions for the different cycles
Figure 24.5 – Comparison of the daily compressor power proﬁles for the different cycles, one
representative day for each season was considered
165
==PAGE:184==
Chapter 24. Comparison of the studied cycles, part-load operation
Figure 24.6 – Comparison of the monthly energy consumptions of January and August for the
different cycles
166
==PAGE:185==
25 Part-load operation using real com-
pressors and real cooling capacity
proﬁle
The results presented in chapter 24 allow for a comparison of the part-load behaviour of the
improved cycles. Even if the models are based on quite strong assumptions, like constant
isentropic efﬁciency of the compressors, the trends and the observations proposed represent
a very good base to understand the real-life cycles’ behaviours.
In this chapter, a bit more realistic models of the cycles are proposed. The cooling capacity
is assumed as changing during the day and the compressors are characterized by varying
isentropic efﬁciencies. The behaviour of the systems is not different from what it was shown in
chapter 24, most of the graphs and trends proposed are the same, just the number are different
(hopefully more close to the one of real cycles). For this reason, many ﬁgure proposed in the
previous chapter are not repeated here.
As already said, the main changes in the cycle’s models concern the cooling capacity and the
ηis of the compressors. During all the investigations performed and presented so far, the cool-
ing capacity of the system was ﬁxed to 60kW. In the analysis here proposed, this value is kept
for the day operation of the system. The cycles are assumed to be exploited for supermarket
applications. The shops are assumed to be open from 7am to 9pm, during this hours the
required cooling capacity is assumed to be 60kW. During the hours the shops are closed, a
reduced value of the cooling capacity was assumed. In fact, during night, the refrigerators and
freezers are not open and closed continuously. Consequently the load of the system is lower
and the required output from the refrigeration system is lower. This is the same approach used
by Minetto et al. in their yearly consumptions investigation of CO2 supermarket refrigeration
systems [3].
If the change regarding the cooling capacity is quite a small one, the big improvement here
proposed is the use of real compressors in the systems. To collect the required informations
about real compressors, the web-database made available by the German company Bitzer was
used [52]. In their on-line software, they propose a great variety of compressors for different
application, each one with detailed information about the component’s behaviour. The type
of compressor chosen is semi-hermetic reciprocating one. This choice was forced by the lack
of alternatives for the considered application and refrigerant. The chosen compressor model
is 4MTC-10K. It allows both subcritical and transcritical operation, moreover the great variety
167
==PAGE:186==
Chapter 25. Part-load operation using real compressors and real cooling capacity proﬁle
Figure 25.1 – Daily compressor power proﬁles for the ejector cycle
Figure 25.2 – Comparison of the daily compressor power proﬁles for different months, ejector
cycle
168
==PAGE:187==
25.1. Comparison of the cycles behaviour
of pressure ratio possible inside its working envelope pushed the author towards the choice
of this compressor. Two small database were built in order to represent in the models the
behaviour of this compressor: one for subcritical operation and one for transcritical one. For
the subcritical operation, the isentropic efﬁciency of the compressor for different evapora-
tion and condensation pressure was stored. In this way, it was possible to built correlations
between isentropic efﬁciency and condenser pressure, for different constant evaporation
pressures. In the same way, it was dealt with the transcritical operation. It was possible to
built correlations between isentropic efﬁciency and gas cooler pressure, for many constant
evaporation pressure. In the cycles’ models, on the base of the lower compressor pressure (the
evaporation pressure set in the Bitzer software) and the operating conditions (subcritical or
transcritical), the right correlation to represent the isentropic efﬁciency was chosen. It was
proved with some simulations that this approximation allows for a very good representation
of the real compressor for different pressure levels and pressure ratios.
The models adjustments used in this more accurate investigation of the systems’ behaviour
are only the ones just explained. The remaining parts of the cycles were modelled as already
explained in chapter 18.
The daily compressor power proﬁles are not here presented again for each cycle. The shape
of these proﬁle is similar to the ones already seen in the previous chapters, only the absolute
value of the compressor power changes. As a proof of this, the compressor power proﬁles
for the ejector cycle (and not for the other systems!) are here reported. Figure 25.1 presents
these daily proﬁles for one representative day from each season. Along with them, the proﬁles
coming from the previous part-load investigation are reported to provide a benchmark for
some observations. It is visible how the shape of the two proﬁles presented in each graph
is really similar. The only difference are the higher consumptions during the working hours
of the shops. This is due to the fact that, for the same requirements in cooling capacity, the
systems has much lower compressors’ isentropic efﬁciencies. The previously assumed ηis
was 0.9, while the real values of this parameter ranges between 0.6 and 0.7 for the chosen
compressor. If the consumptions are now much higher during the working hours, if compared
with the constant compressor’s isentropic efﬁciency analysis, the same cannot be said for
the night hours. For those hours the consumption are quite similar, regardless the month
considered. This is due to the fact that the lower cooling capacity (required to the system
during night hours) compensates for the lower isentropic efﬁciencies of the compressor.
Figure 25.2 shows the just observed ejector cycle’s proﬁle sorted all in the same graph. In this
way it is possible to see that the behaviour of vapour-compression cycles does not change
even if real components models are introduced in the system. Still, the months with the higher
ambient temperature are the ones with the highest energy consumptions.
169
==PAGE:188==
Chapter 25. Part-load operation using real compressors and real cooling capacity proﬁle
Figure 25.3 – Comparison of the maximum cycle’s temperature and optimal gas cooler pressure
for the different cycles
Figure 25.4 – Comparison of COP and compressor power for the different cycles
170
==PAGE:189==
25.1. Comparison of the cycles behaviour
Figure 25.5 – Comparison of yearly energy consumptions for the different cycles
Figure 25.6 – Comparison of daily compressor power proﬁles for the different cycles, consider-
ing one representative day for each season
171
==PAGE:190==
Chapter 25. Part-load operation using real compressors and real cooling capacity proﬁle
25.1
Comparison of the cycles behaviour
This section provides a comparison of the improved CO2 cycles, under the considered (more
accurate) assumptions. Figure 25.3 is the ﬁrst here proposed. It represents the maximum
value for the cycle’s temperature and optimal gas cooler pressure faced by the systems during a
typical year of operation in Rome, Italy. As visible, the dedicated mechanical subcooling cycle
provides the lowest between the maximum optimal gas cooler pressures, while the 1-stage
reference cycle presents the highest. Anyway, this difference is very small, no signiﬁcant im-
provement is faced from this point of view. The maximum cycle’s temperature is considerably
reduced by mean of the ejector cycle. From this point of view, the ejector cycle offers quite an
improvement if compared with the other cycles. The remaining systems present almost the
same value for the maximum temperature faced in the cycle.
Figure 25.4 depicts the cycles’ COP and compressor power. As expected the two parameters
have opposite trends, if the compressor power is high for one cycle, the corresponding COP
is low. The system with the worst performances is the 1-stage reference cycle, while the one
with the best ones is the ejector cycle, with a COP boost around 26%. A great improvement is
offered also by the PCE cycle, with a COP improvement of 20%. The mechanical subcooling
cycles offer the smallest increase of performances, around 17% each.
The results are completely aligned with the ones from chapter 24. Due to the realistic behaviour
of compressors and cooling load, all the cycles lose around 1% of their COP improvement
respect the 1-stage reference system. Anyway the difference is almost negligible. The "cycles’
ranking" deﬁned in chapter 24 (from the best to the worst cycle in terms of COP) still holds up
even adding more accurate assumptions.
From the yearly energy consumptions point of view, some differences can be observed respect
what found in chapter 24. As visible in ﬁgure 25.5, the two mechanical subcooling cycles
and the PCE one present almost the same reduction of the consumptions. They all ensure a
decrease around 16%. This is quite interesting because the PCE cycle seemed to be a higher
performances system from the investigations made so far in this project. Anyway, the reason
for this change of behaviour lays in the use of a real compressor. The same compressor was
used in all the cycles, the different performances of this component for different pressure
ratio and pressure level is probably the reason of the increased consumptions in the PCE cycle.
Using a more proper compressor for the application, the PCE cycle would still show highest
performances respect the two subcooling cycles. The ejector cycle is not considerably affected
by the use of a real compressor. The yearly energy consumption reductions it provides is
around 21%. It is still the cycle with the best performances and this reduction is the same
found in chapter 24.
Figure 25.6 presents the daily compressor power proﬁles for the considered cycles, one repre-
sentative day for each season is reported. If compared with the one from chapter 24, the ﬁgure
shows highest consumptions for the considered months. As already said, the real compressors
have isentropic efﬁciencies much smaller than the 0.9 assumed in the previous chapters. This
represents the main reason for the higher consumptions. Regardless the month considered,
the 1-stage reference cycle is the one with the higher consumptions, while the ejector one has
172
==PAGE:191==
25.1. Comparison of the cycles behaviour
the lowest. As already observed in chapter 24, the ejector cycle performs much better than
the others for all the cold and temperate months, while the other improved cycles offers a
performances boost smaller during the cold months. On the other hand, all the improved
cycles offer almost the same improvement when considering the hottest months of the year.
This is visible from ﬁgure 25.6, in July the consumptions of the boosted cycles are almost the
same, the different proﬁles are overlapping and difﬁcult to distinguish.
This chapter offers an interesting investigation of mechanical subcooling, PCE and ejector
cycles under more realistic assumptions. Some differences respect the ﬁndings of chapter
24 where observed during this analysis. The main one observed regards the yearly energy
consumptions of the PCE cycle, now identical to the ones of the two mechanical subcooling
cycles. Anyway, these observed differences are not huge ones and they are all connected to the
assumptions made. The use of the same compressor for all the cycle is not a fair assumption.
Different applications require speciﬁc compressors that ﬁt with the system’s requirements.
As already said, if each cycle is equipped with a proper compressor, able to maximize the
performances of the cycle for the speciﬁc application, the "cycles’ ranking" of chapter 24
would be found.
When looking at the results from chapter 24, the only thing to keep in mind is that the con-
sumptions of a real cycle are higher, due to the use of real compressors, with losses and
inefﬁciencies. The effect of even more complicated cooling load proﬁles can be studied,
anyway, for weather conditions similar to the Rome’s ones, the ejector cycle is surely the most
promising one.
173
==PAGE:192==
==PAGE:193==
26 Real cycles implementation
The part-load operation implemented in the previous chapters gives a perfect overview of
the systems’ performances under a real year of operation. Interesting ﬁndings were extracted
from this analysis. The considered cycles (mechanical subcooling , PCE and ejector cycle)
offer considerable improvements of the performances respect the 1-stage cycle, if used under
hot weather conditions like the Rome’s ones. The ejector cycle resulted to be the one with the
highest reduction in the yearly energy consumptions, under the considered working condi-
tions. Anyway, the considered analysis cannot considered completely realistic, speciﬁcally
due to one strong assumptions made for the EERC.
When investigating the part-load operation of the ejector, whatever separator pressure was
assumed as allowed. Anyway, this is not a realistic assumption. In particular for low ambient
temperatures, the pressure recovery performed by the ejector is very small and the pressure
at the diffuser outlet is only slightly higher than the evaporation pressure. Consequently, the
pressure difference across the expansion valve (separator pressure minus evaporation pres-
sure) is not high enough to ensure a proper functioning of this component. Interesting was
a conversation that the author had with representatives of the famous refrigeration systems’
ﬁrm DANFOSS. This company offered a fundamental partnership for the realization of this
project. Speaking about ejector cycles, they explained that they usually control the separator
pressure in order to follow the pressure recovery performed by the ejector. Anyway, they do
not allow the separator pressure to be less than 4 bar higher than the evaporation pressure.
This regards the already introduced minimum pressure difference across the expansion valve
that allows a proper functioning of the component.
This control on the separator pressure was not performed during the part-load simulations
presented in the previous chapters. The purpose of this ﬁnal chapter is to present even more
realistic results, introducing this control in the ejector cycle. This means that the ejector
cycle cannot be used below certain ambient temperatures because the pressure recovery is
insufﬁcient. In this cases, the ejector cannot longer be used and it is considered a switch
from the ejector cycle to PCE or mechanical subcooling one. It is assumed that the system is
provided of a valves set able to perform this switch: the ejector is by-passed and the secondary
loop (PCE or mechanical subcooling one) is used.
175
==PAGE:194==
Chapter 26. Real cycles implementation
Figure 26.1 – Yearly energy consumptions for the considered cycles
For this analysis, the models from chapter 25 were used. Due to the fact that a real ejector
cycle’s control is here introduced, the choice was to use also the more accurate systems results
coming from the use of real compressors. No more simulations were required to perform this
ﬁnal investigation. Simply some spread sheets were used to combine together the results ob-
tained for the ejector cycle and the others. The switch from the ejector cycle to the "back-up"
one was assumed to happen when the separator pressure falls below pevap + 4 bar.
26.1
Comparison of the real systems behaviours
Three cases are here considered. The common point of this systems is the use of an ejector
cycle for expansion power recovery at high ambient temperature. When the pressure recovery
is not high enough for a proper operation of the expansion valve, a "back-up cycle" is used:
• ejector cycle + integrated mechanical subcooling cycle: the back-up cycle is the inte-
grated mechanical subcooling one. When the ambient temperature are too low for the
ejector cycle, the ejector is by-passed and an integrated mechanical subcooling cycle is
use instead. The behaviour of the other systems here considered is exactly the same,
only the used back-up cycle changes.
• ejector cycle + dedicated mechanical subcooling cycle
• ejector cycle + PCE cycle
176
==PAGE:195==
26.1. Comparison of the real systems behaviours
Figure 26.1 presents the yearly energy consumptions for the considered cycles. As visible, all
the solutions here adopted to improve the 1-stage cycle actually perform their job. The yearly
energy consumptions are reduced, regardless which one of the improved cycle is considered.
Moreover, the consumptions reduction they realize is almost the same, they deviate each other
of 3% at most. Between this cycle, the one with the highest performances seems to be the
ejector cycle using a dedicated mechanical subcooling cycle as "back-up" cycle. Anyway, it will
not be put to much stress on it. The slightly better performances of this cycle are connected
to the compressor’s choice. In fact, the chosen one ﬁts better with the requirements of this
system and a bit worse with the ones of the others. The choice of a proper compressor could
be beneﬁcial for all the cycles, especially the PCE one. In this situation, the ejector cycle using
PCE as back-up, could be the one with highest performances (as the reader would expect due
to the considerations from the previous parts of this report).
177
==PAGE:196==
==PAGE:197==
27 Conclusion
The refrigerants the cold industry have relied on for the last ﬁfty years are arising an increasing
concern about their environmental impact. CFCs and HCFCs are already abandoned solutions
due to their worrying ODP. Even the HFCs, introduced as a replacement of the former, are now
object of international political actions to reduce their utilization. The HFCs actually reduce
their impact on the ozone layer but they raise another current (and great) issue: the global
warming. During the last decades, the refrigeration industry was forced to face the increasing
concern and to embrace the changes required. The "natural refrigerants" were rediscovered
due to their low environmental impact, especially CO2 that seems the most suitable among
them.
This report is focused on CO2 applications in the refrigeration industry. As many of the other
"natural refrigerants", CO2 has negligible ODP and GWP, moreover presents good refrigerant’s
characteristics. The main problem connected with carbon dioxide is the low critical point.
For application in cold/temperate climates this does not represent a problem. Due to the
low ambient temperature, the system runs mainly subcritical with competitive performances
respect the "traditional refrigerants". CO2 −onl y cycles arise issue when applied in hot cli-
mates, due to the fact that the cycle is forced to release heat over the refrigerant’s critical
point. Transcritical CO2 cycles are strongly penalized from the performances point of view.
The expansion process in particular, due to the great pressure difference throttled, is cause of
considerable irreversibility that tears down the system’s COP.
Three main solutions were here proposed in order to improve the performances of CO2 trans-
critical cycles: mechanical subcooling, PCE and ejector-expansion device. These expedients
were accurately investigated to estimate their actual impact on the system’s COP.
In the ﬁrst part of the project, the boosted systems were compared under the same ﬁxed design
conditions. The cycles were considered as installed in a very hot location, in fact the assumed
gas cooler outlet temperature was set to 40°C. It was found that all the studied cycles offers
considerable COP improvements. Mechanical subcooling and PCE increase the systems COP
around 22% respect the 1-stage reference cycle. The ejector cycle was discovered to be the
one with the higher performances boost for the given working conditions, the COP increases
around 26%.
179
==PAGE:198==
Chapter 27. Conclusion
In the second part of the project more complex systems improvements were studied, always in
order to improve the performances of carbon dioxide systems. Many of the solution adopted
were built combining together the devices studied in the ﬁrst part of the report. Anyway, also
alternative cycle’s improvements were studied, as the use of an expander instead the tradi-
tional expansion valve or the use of a heat-driven dedicated subcooling loop. The assumed
working conditions were still ﬁxed and identical to the one used in the ﬁrst part of the project.
The PCE cycle with additional dedicated MS loop was discovered to give a considerable boost
to the systems: the COP raises around 30% respect the 1-stage reference cycle and 8% respect
the "traditional" PCE system.
It was discovered that the most efﬁcient subcooling is performed by the EPR dedicated MS
cycle. The systems faces a COP improvements around 47% respect the 1-stage cycle and
around 25% respect the "classic" dedicated MS cycle. Of course, the increased investment cost
faced when introducing an expander in the cycle must be taken into account.
Very interesting results were obtained also from the ejector cycle with additional MS loop. The
COP, respect the reference vapour-compression 1-stage cycle, raise around 37%.
The ﬁrst two parts of the report offer a great overview of the possible solution adoptable
to improve the performances of CO2 transcritical systems, especially when applied in hot
climates. Anyway, rarely a refrigeration system works under the same ambient conditions all
along the year. Considering a typical air-cooled system, the ambient air represents the heat
sink of the cycle. In this way, the ambient conditions affect considerably the system operation.
This is particularly important in CO2 cycles because high ambient temperatures force the
system to work many hours as transcritical, lowering down its performances.
The last part of the project is precisely a part-load investigation of the improved cycles: PCE,
mechanical subcooling and ejector cycle. The cycles were studied under the real weather
conditions of Rome, Italy. This location is particularly suitable for the study here conducted
because of the high ambient temperatures reached for many months of the year.
Even when considering the off-design operation, the ejector cycle is still the most promising
solution. The COP boost that it provides is around 27%, respect the 1-stage cycle (value based
on the yearly-averaged COP). Differently from what it was seen in the design investigation of
the systems, the PCE cycle presents an yearly average COP higher than the ones of the two
mechanical subcooling cycle. The improvement provided by the PCE system is around 21%
(in terms of COP), against the 17% offered by the MS cycles. Using the ejector cycle, the yearly
energy consumptions can be reduced of 21% respect the reference case. Interesting results are
obtained also from the other systems: the energy required is lowered down around 19% by the
PCE cycle and 17% by the MS systems.
The part-load analysis completes the study started in the ﬁrst two parts of the project. The
ejector cycle, the most promising at the speciﬁc design conditions assumed initially, is still a
very interesting solution when analysed for an entire year of operation in a warm climate. The
PCE cycle, surprisingly, performs even better than expected when considering its off-design
operation. This solution seems to be slightly better that the two MS cycles for a real-year of
operation.
The report is concluded with a more realistic study of the considered cycle, introducing real
180
==PAGE:199==
compressors and real cooling load proﬁles. The results reﬂect what it was found during the
ﬁrst part-load analysis, only the absolute value of the consumptions are a bit higher for all the
cycles (due to the lower isentropic efﬁciency of the compressors).
The project offers an important review of the CO2 cycles improvements. The design conditions
analysis and the part-load study clearly state the effectiveness of the studied solution when
used to boost hot-climate CO2 refrigeration systems. A considerable number of studies are
already available on the topic, the ﬁrst test application already started in many countries of
the South Europe. The way is already paved for a massive introduction on the market of these
solutions, to ﬁnally reduce the human footprint on our precious Earth.
181
==PAGE:200==
==PAGE:201==
28 Further work
This report represents a good overview of the most promising solutions to boost CO2 trans-
critical cycles. These tools are applied to a generic vapour-compression refrigeration cycle, in
order to evaluate their potential without complicating to much the investigation. The results
are promising, either if considering mechanical subcooling, parallel compression or ejector
cycle.
To complete the work here started, some other investigation are required. Each one of the con-
sidered cycle’s improvements should be tested for speciﬁc applications, from reefer containers
to supermarket refrigeration. The results presented in this report suggest the effectiveness
of the considered boosts but still they must be tested for different operating conditions and
cycles’ conﬁgurations. Some, more detailed, simulations should be performed, including all
the details here neglected. Heat losses and/or pressure drop can affect considerably the system
performances. The impact of the fan power on the yearly consumptions can be analysed and
the control strategy can be optimized to increase the savings.
Some experimental results are needed to support the ﬁndings presented in this report. The
part-load analysis offers an interesting overview of the yearly performances of the cycle but
surely not compared to what would be real-cycles’ data.
183
==PAGE:202==
==PAGE:203==
Bibliography
[1] Fricke Sharma and Bansal. Comparative analysis of various co2 conﬁgurations in super-
markets refrigeration systems. International Journal of Refrigeration, 46:86–99, 2014.
[2] Sawalha. Investigation of heat recovery in co2 transcritical solution for supermarket
refrigeration. International Journal of Refrigeration, 36:145–156, 2013.
[3] Salvatore Rossetti Minetto, Girotto and Marinetti. Recent installations of co2 supermar-
ket refrigeration system for warm climates: data from the ﬁeld. 3rd IIR International
Conference on Sustainability and the Cold Chain, London, 2014.
[4] Sawalha. Theoretical evaluation of transcritical co2 systems in supermarket refrigeration,
part i. International Journal of Refrigeration, 31:516–524, 2008.
[5] Klein. Engineering equation solver (ees). F-chart software, Madison, USA, 2006.
[6] Lorentzen. The use of natural refrigerants: a complete solution to the cfc/hcfc predica-
ment. International Journal of Refrigeration, 18:190–197, 1995.
[7] Pettersen Kim and Bullard. Fundamental process and system design isuues in co2 vapor-
compression systems. Progress in Energy and Combustion Science, 30:119–174, 2004.
[8] Calm. The next generation of refrigerants - historical review, considerations and outlook.
International Journal of Refrigeration, 31:1123–1133, 2008.
[9] Pearson. Carbon dioxide - new use for an old refrigerant. International Journal of
Refrigeration, 28:1140–1148, 2005.
[10] Lorentzen. Revival of carbon dioxide as a refrigerant. NTH, N-7034, Trondheim, Norway,
1994.
[11] Lorentzen and Pettersen. A new, efﬁcient and environmentally benign system for car
air-conditioning. Refrigeration engineering, 1992.
[12] Groll and Kim. Review article: Review of recent advances toward transcritical co2 cycle
technology. HVAC Research, 13:499–520, 2011.
[13] Kauf. Determination of the optimum high pressure for transcritical co2 refrigeration
cycles. Internal Journal of Thermal Science, 38:325–330, 1999.
185
==PAGE:204==
Bibliography
[14] Chin and Spatzi. Isuue relating to the adoption of r-410a in air conditioning systems.
20th International Congress of Refrigeration, Australia, 1999.
[15] Yana Motta and Domanski. Impact of elevated ambient temperatures on capacity and
enrgy input to a vapor compression system - literature review. Letter Report for ARTI
21-CR Research project, 2001.
[16] Yana Motta and Domanski. Performance of r-22 and its alternatives refrigerants for
unitary heat pumps and air conditioners. International Refrigeration Conference, Purdue
University, 1999.
[17] Sarkar. Optimization of transcritical co2 refrigeration cycle with parallel compression
economization. 15th ISME International Conference on Advances in Mechanical Engi-
neering, 2008.
[18] Sarkar and Agrawal. Performance optimization of transcritical co2 cycle with parallel
compression economization. International Journal of Thermal Science, 49:838–843, 2009.
[19] Ferrara Chesi, Esposito and Ferrari. Experimental analysis of r744 parallel compression
cycle. Applied Energy, 135:274–285, 2014.
[20] Bell. Performance increase of co2 refrigeration cycle with the addition of parallel com-
pression economization. 6th IIR Gustav Lorentzen Natural Working Fluids, Glasgow,
2004.
[21] Agrawal and Bhattachararyya. Optimization of two-stage transcritical co2 heat pump
cycles. International Journal of Thermal Science, 46:180–187, 2007.
[22] Qureshi and Zubair. Mechanical subcooling vapour compression systems: current status
and future directions. International Journal of Refrigeration, 36:2097–2110, 2013.
[23] Khan and Zubairl. Design and rating of an integrated mechanical subcooling vapour-
compression refrigeration system. Energy Conversion and Management, 41:1201–1222,
2000.
[24] Zubair. Thermodynamic of a vapor-compression refrigeration cycle with mechanical
subcooling. Energy, 19:707–715, 1993.
[25] Klein Thorton and Mitchell. Dedicated mechanical subcooling design strategies for
supermarket applciations. International Journal of Refrigeration, 17, 1994.
[26] Khan and Zubairl. Design and rating of an dedicated mechanical subcooling vapour-
compression refrigeration system. Mechanical Engineering Department, King Fahd
University, Saudi Arabia, 2000.
[27] Montagner and Melo. A study on carbon dioxide cycle architectures for light-commercial
refrigeration systems. International Journal of Refrigeration, 42:90–96, 2014.
186
==PAGE:205==
Bibliography
[28] Sanchez Llopis, Cabello and Torrella. Energy improvements of co2 transcritical refrigera-
tion cycles using dedicated mechanical subcooling. International Journal of Refrigeration,
2015.
[29] Sarkar. Ejector enhanced vapor compression refrigeration and heat pump systems.
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 16:6647–6659, 2012.
[30] Qureshi and Zubair. The effect of refrigerant combinations on performance of a vapor
compression refrigeration system with dedicated mechanical subcooling. International
Journal of Refrigeration, 35:47–57, 2012.
[31] Antar Qureshi, Inam and Zubair.
Experimental energetic analysis of a vapour-
compression refrigeration system with dedicated mechanical subcooling. Applied Energy,
102:1035–1041, 2013.
[32] Ersoy and Bilir. Performance characteristics of ejector expander transcritical co2 refrig-
eraion cycle. Journal of Power and Energy, 226:623–635, 2012.
[33] Lu Deng, Jiang and Lu. Particular characteristics of transcritical co2 refrigeration cycle
with an ejector. Applied Thermal Engineering, 27:381–388, 2007.
[34] Yin She and Zhang. A proposed subcooling method for vapour-comrpession refrigeration
cycle based on expansion power recovery. International Journal of Refrigeration, 43:
50–61, 2014.
[35] Kornhauser. The use of an ejector as a refrigerant expander. International Refrigeration
and Air-Conditioning Conference, 82, 1990.
[36] Hemmingsen Hafner and Van de Ven. R744 refrigeration system conﬁgurations for
supermarkets in warm climates. 3rd IIR International Conference on Sustainability and
the Cold Chain, London, 2014.
[37] Nakamura Fukuta and Yanagisawa. Characteristics of co2 transcritical expansion process.
HVACandR Research, 19:767–778, 2013.
[38] Yuhala and Wang. Denso corporation in japan, private comunication. singhua University
in Beijing, China, 2004.
[39] Elbel. An overview of historical and present development with an emphasis on air-
conditioning applications. International Refrigeration and Air-Conditioning Conference,
Purdue University, 2008.
[40] Li Liu and Groll. Performance enhancement of co2 air conditioner with a controllable
ejector. International Journal of Refrigeration, 35:1604–1616, 2012.
[41] Neumann Keenan and Lustwerk. An investigation of ejector design by analysis and
experiment. The America Society of Mechanical Engineering, 1949.
187
==PAGE:206==
Bibliography
[42] Liu and Groll. Study of ejector efﬁciencies in refrigeration cycles. Applied Thermal Energy,
52:360–370, 2013.
[43] Lucas and Koehler. Experimental investigation of the cop improvement of a refrigeration
cycle by use of an ejector. International Journal of Refrigeration, 35:1595–1603, 2012.
[44] Fangtian and Yitai. Thermodynamic analysis of transcritical co2 refrigeration cycle with
an ejector. Applied Thermal Engineering, 31:1184–1189, 2011.
[45] Bhattacharyya Ahammed and Ramgopal. Thermodynamic design and simulation of a
co2 based transcritical vapour compression system with an ejector. International Journal
of Refrigeration, 45:177–188, 2014.
[46] Yari. Performance analysis and optimization of a new two-stage ejector-expansion
transcritical co2 refrigeration cycle. International Journal of Refrigeration, 48:1997–2005,
2009.
[47] Bhattacharyya Sarkar and Gopal. Transcritical co2 heat pump systems: exergy amalysis
including heat transfer and ﬂuid ﬂow effects. Energy Conversion and Management, 46:
2053–2067, 2005.
[48] Wang Zhang, Ma and Li. Theoretical evaluation of effect of internal heat exchange
in ejector expansion transcritical co2 refrigeration cycle. Applied Thermal Energy, 50:
932–938, 2013.
[49] Liu Cen and Jiang. A novel transcritical co2 refrigeration cycle with two ejectors. Interna-
tional Journal of Refrigeration, 35:2233–2239, 2012.
[50] Morten Juel Skovrup. Pack calculation pro. User Guide, Version 4.10.
[51] U.S. Department of Energy. Italian weather data, 2015. URL http://apps1.eere.energy.
gov/buildings/energyplus/cfm/weather_data3.cfm/region=6_europe_wmo_region_6/
country=ITA/cname=Italy.
[52] Bitzer. Bitzer compressors’ database, 2015. URL https://www.bitzer.de/websoftware/.
188
==PAGE:207==
A Appendix A
In this project, the chosen ejector model is the one proposed by Kornhauser in 1990 [35]. In
his paper, Kornhauser gives an accurate description about how to model a constant-pressure
mixing ejector. See chapter 9 for the model description.
This model was chosen mainly for its simplicity. The behaviour of the ejector cycle is well
approximated by the Kornhauser’s model, even if the coding required is quite easy. The model
proposed by Kornhauser is one of the most spread in the ejector cycle’s literature, mainly
because well-performing and simple.
Going through the literature, only another model is as widely used as the Kornhauser’s one.
This model represents a constant-area mixing ejector and it is well explained by Cen et al. in
their work from 2012 [49]. The reader is recommended to see their paper for more information
about the coding proposed by the authors. Also this model offers reliable results and quite
simple coding, respect other models proposed in the literature. For this reason, it is signiﬁ-
cantly employed for ejector cycles’ studies.
Anyway, when comparing the two models, Cen’s and Kornhauser’s one, the former adds con-
siderable more complexity when setting it up in the software EES. This additional complexity
creates converging difﬁculties when performing the already complicated (and thus delicate)
part-load analysis. On the other hand, the simplicity of the Kornhauser’s model allows for a
more ﬂuent investigation of the off-design operation of the ejector cycle. The choice made
during this project was to award this peculiarity of the Kornhauser’s model.
The selection of the proper ejector model was made on the base of the level of complexity,
but it was not the only requirement. Many models were found in the literature, a lot of them
were characterized by a high level of complexity that was considered too detailed for the aim
of this project. Excluding these models, Cen’s and Kornhauser’s one remained (actually they
are the most spread in the literature, papers that propose different models are really few). An
investigation on this two models was performed and it helped during the decision process. It
was discovered that the ejector proposed by Kornhauser is not only more simple than the one
proposed by Cen, it also describes almost the same ejector’s behaviour as the other one. Here,
some results from the investigation performed on the two cycles are presented.
Figure A.1 presents a comparison, for different ambient temperatures, of COP resulting from
189
==PAGE:208==
Appendix A. Appendix A
Figure A.1 – COP trends for different ambient temperatures: 1-stage reference cycle, ejector
cycle using Cen model and ejector cycle using Kornhauser model
1-stage reference cycle and two ejector cycles, one using Cen’s ejector model and the other
using Kornhouser’s one (of course all the cycles were simulated using CO2 as refrigerant). As
visible, the two ejector cycles offer higher performances respect the 1-stage cycle at all the
considered ambient temperatures. The only difference between the two models seem to be
the slightly lower COP offered by the use of the Cen model.
Figure A.2 and A.3 present a comparison of the trends for compressor work and separator
pressure for the considered cycles. Again, it is visible that the two ejector’s models represent
almost in the same way the behaviour of this component and consequently of the overall cycle.
The differences between the compressor power and separator pressure are negligible for all
the considered ambient temperatures. Moreover, the observed trend is the same regardless
which model is considered.
Due to the similar behaviour and performances of the two models, the Kornhauser’s one was
chosen because of its lower level of complexity.
190
==PAGE:209==
Figure A.2 – Compressor power trends for different ambient temperatures: 1-stage reference
cycle, ejector cycle using Cen model and ejector cycle using Kornhauser model
Figure A.3 – Separator pressure trends for different ambient temperatures: ejector cycle using
Cen model and ejector cycle using Kornhauser model
191
==PAGE:210==
==PAGE:211==
B Appendix B
The part-load operation of the two mechanical subcooling cycles offered room for discussion
about the modelling of the subcooler. The choice made was to model it considering ﬁxed the
temperature difference at one side of it.
Another possibility was to design this component in the same way as condenser, evaporator
and gas cooler. A ﬁxed UA-value for the design conditions of the subcooler has to be de-
ﬁned. After that, the part-load operation is determined using a simple correlation between
off-design UA-value and off-design mass ﬂow rate. See chapter 18 for a detailed explanation
of this method, applied to gas cooler, evaporator and condenser.
An investigation about the two modelling possibilities was performed to help in the decision
process. It was discovered that the two models give almost the same results. Figure B.1 and B.2
present a comparison of this two subcooler models applied for a yearly part-load investigation
of the dedicated and integrated mechanical subcooling cycle. As visible, the differences in the
considered parameters are almost impossible to observe in many cases!
As for the ejector model, the choice was to award the most simple model. The model using
a design UA-value is much more complicated and generated convergence problems when
studying the part-load operation of the cycle. On the other hand, the model using a ﬁxed ∆T
at one side of the gas cooler allows for a more ﬂuent analysis of the off-design operation of the
two mechanical subcooling cycles.
193
==PAGE:212==
Appendix B. Appendix B
Figure B.1 – Comparison of the two subcooler models applied to the dedicated mechanical
subcooling cycle, yearly part-load operation of the cycle
Figure B.2 – Comparison of the two subcooler models applied to the integrated mechanical
subcooling cycle, yearly part-load operation of the cycle
194
==PAGE:213==
C Appendix C
It is possible to demonstrate that the UA-value of a condenser with variable speed fan is
proportional to the air velocity, more precisely:
UA α V 0.8
air
(C.1)
The starting point is the heat transfer coefﬁcient air-side, included in the empirical formula
for the Nusselt number (Nu).
Nu = C ·Re0.8 ·Pr 0.3
(C.2)
Taking out the convective heat transfer coefﬁcient air-side from the Nu number, the following
expression is obtained:
ha = C ·(Vair ·D
ν
)0.8 ·Pr 0.3 · k
D
(C.3)
Assuming the ﬂow as single phase, turbulent and completely developed, all the terms in
equation C.3, except Vair , are constant if the geometry, the material properties and the ﬂow
properties are constant.
ha = constant ·V 0.8
air
(C.4)
In case of air-cooled systems:
UA = (
1
Aa ·ha
+
1
Ar ·hr
)−1 ∼= Aa ·ha
(C.5)
Consequently, for a scenario that respect the reported assumption:
UAαV 0.8
air
(C.6)
195
==PAGE:214==
==PAGE:215==
D Appendix D
The dedicated MS cycle was introduced in chapter 8. Together with that, it was also introduced
the possibility to use different refrigerants (than CO2) in the subcooler loop. This project is
about carbon dioxide systems, for this reason the focus was kept on this refrigerant. Anyway,
for sake of knowledge, the impact of alternative substances in the subcooler loop was also
studied.
The refrigerants taken into account are other environmentally friendly substances, character-
ized by low GWP levels. The results are presented in ﬁgure D.1 and, as visible, they are quite
interesting. When CO2 is used in the secondary loop, the COP gains are considerable, but
still not as good as for the other refrigerants tested. All the alternative substances allow for a
further improvement of the performances, around 16-17% respect the CO2 −onl y MS cycle.
The CO2−onl y MS cycle is not the proper solution to mitigate the carbon dioxide’s drawbacks.
From the practical point of view, alternative (low-impact) refrigerants must be used in the
subcooler cycle, only in this way the system performances can be maximized.
197
==PAGE:216==
Appendix D. Appendix D
Figure D.1 – Impact on the MS cycle’s performances when using alternative refrigerants in the
subcooler loop
198
==PAGE:217==
==PAGE:218==
	  
	  
DTU	  Mechanical	  Engineering	  	  
Section	  of	  Thermal	  Energy	  
Technical	  University	  of	  Denmark	  	  
	  
Nils	  Koppels	  Allè,	  Bld.	  403	  
DK	  –	  2800Kgs.	  Lyngby	  
Denmark	  
Phone	  (+45)	  4525	  4131	  
Fax	  (+45)4588	  4325	  
	  
www.mek.dtu.dk	    
