==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
 
Mikala Skovgaard Sahlertz, s102854 
 
Gut Microbiome Richness and 
Microbial Persistence in Health and 
Disease 
 
Master thesis (30 ECTS), June 2015 
Supervisor: Henrik Bjørn Nielsen 
Microbiome Systems Biology Group 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
4 June 2015 | 1 
 
PREFACE 
This Master thesis was conducted at The Center for Biological Sequence Analysis (CBS) at the Technical 
University of Denmark with Henrik Bjørn Nielsen as supervisor. The initial idea of this project was based 
on an observation in Crohn’s patients from the MetaHIT cohort, a cohort with 396 sequenced stool 
samples: the Crohn’s patients clustered differently than the healthy individuals. I got the task to dig 
deeper into this in a much larger dataset (n = 1267). This dataset consisted of multiple cohorts and was 
accompanied by varying amounts and formats of metadata. Through this project I have become acquaint 
with handling of metadata of different formats, new statistical methods and, after some troubles, I also 
got comfortable with the R platform that is used in the ‘Microbiome Systems Biology’-group at CBS. I 
am very excited about the setup and subject of this thesis. I find the possibilities for the human gut 
microbiota interesting and to get the opportunity to work with a large cohort has been a dream come true 
- both exciting and challenging at the same time.  
 
I would very much like to thank my supervisor Henrik Bjørn Nielsen for enabling the project and PhD 
student, Anne Bresciani, who became a priceless day-to-day supervisor and sparring partner during my 
project. Furthermore, I would like to thank the people at CBS for welcoming me at the institute and for 
creating a pleasant atmosphere. 
 
From the beginning, I agreed with my supervisor to write the project in article format, which explains 
e.g. the placement of the section concerning methods. I have strived to fulfill most of the format 
requirements of a Nature article.  
 
Mikala Skovgaard Sahlertz on 1st June 2015 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
4 June 2015 | 2 
 
Gut microbiome richness and microbial persistence in 
health and disease 
Master thesis by Mikala Skovgaard Sahlertz 
Advisor: Henrik Bjørn Nielsen 
High species richness of the human gut microbiome has been associated with metabolic health, and 
has been used as a biomarker. What drives the richness of the microbiome is however, 
underexplored. Longitudinal observations from 73 Spanish and 41 American individuals allowed 
us to estimate the likelihood of observing a metagenomic species (MGS) again after a year. 
Estimates were acquired for 633 MGS (totally identified 1264 MGS) and were referred to as annual 
persistence probabilities. Here we investigated the relationship between the species richness and 
the average annual persistence of MGS across 1267 fecal samples from 1070 individuals originating 
from three continents. In healthy individuals, we observed a clear negative correlation between the 
average annual persistence and richness. A selective pressure can account for the observation that 
when the richness decreases the average annual persistence increases. Interestingly, we also 
observed a drop in the average annual persistence for a subset of individuals with very low 
richness, including a part of the Crohn’s disease patients. A disease that causes radical changes in 
the gut environment mainly due to high inflammation. We identified persistent gut species as 
Faecalibacterium prausnitzii and Alistipes shahii which were not present in the samples explaining 
the art of the observed drop. Furthermore, the longitudinal data was utilized to identify four MGS 
that were significantly associated with change in richness over time.  
 
INTRODUCTION 
The wide range of microorganisms that resides in the human gastrointestinal tract is known as the gut 
microbiota. The human gut microbiota composition has recently been suspected to influence the 
development of many metabolic diseases including obesity, diabetes, and inflammatory bowel diseases 
(IBD). The microbiota consist of around 100 trillion microbial cells that we humans lives together with. 
This has made some suggest that humans are super-organisms1, that comprise 10 times more microbial 
cells than human cells. On a genomic level there is a 100-fold higher diversity of genes in the gut 
microbiome than in the human genome2. About 60-80% of the bacterial species in the human gut have 
not been cultivated yet and remain largely uncharacterized still, this was e.g. confirmed by a study 
revealing a 76% unknown sequences from a 16S RNA fecal sample collection3. In industrialized 
countries, a rise in occurrences of IBD is observed and in developing countries, IBD is emerging. Also 
younger and younger age groups are being affected by IBD and the economic burden on the societies are 
==PAGE:4==
4 June 2015 | 3 
 
increasing in regards to hospitalization and medication.4 All in all, these facts emphasize the importance 
of learning more about the human microbiome and to investigate the microbiota using molecular tools 
and not only cultivation-based methods. 
 
Metagenomics and metagenomic species 
Metagenomics is the study of all genomic material in an environmental sample. Metagenomics makes it 
possible to investigate a complex ecosystem like the human gut microbiota without using cultivation-
based methods. Metagenomics can be based on 16S RNA sequencing or shotgun sequencing. The present 
study exclusively used Illumina shotgun sequenced data from stool samples. The 16S RNA amplicon 
sequencing is limited to the 16S RNA gene and only results in broad spectre taxonomical information 
typically with resolution at genus level or higher. In contrast, shotgun sequenced data gives 
comprehensive information about the genetic potential of the system, and the possibility to resolve the 
taxonomy at a very low level.  
A co-abundance-based method to assemble sequenced metagenomics data was applied to the dataset in 
this study5. This method involves de novo assembly of genes from shotgun sequenced samples, and a 
generation of abundance profiles for each assembled gene. Genes with similar abundances were then 
clustered using the canopy clustering algorithm5. The resulting clusters were called co-abundance gene 
groups (CAGs). CAGs containing 700 genes or more were referred to as metagenomics species (MGS), 
these were considered to represent cellular species in the gut5. This cut-off were based on a bimodal 
distribution of the size of CAG, where CAG with less than 700 genes contained genes associated with 
phages, transposons, and viruses. Another argument for this cut-off is that 700 genes is approximately 
the minimalgene number contained in known cellular organisms. The relative abundances of the 
identified MGS from each sample across the dataset were derived. These abundances were used to 
calculate the amount of unique MGS in a sample – here referred to as the species richness. 
Species richness 
The microbiome species richness is a key ecological descriptor for characterizing ecological systems 
including the human gut microbiota, and has been used as biomarker to describe metabolic disorders1. 
The microbiomes have been associated with human health in many studies. Firstly, genes for known drug 
metabolites have been found in the bacterial genomes together with new metabolites that interacts with 
==PAGE:5==
4 June 2015 | 4 
 
human protein complexes forming a local pharmacy6. Another study showed that individuals with low 
microbial richness are more often obese and that the genome composition of the microbiome may be 
used to identify high-risk individuals for developing metabolic diseases7. Cotilliard et. al also reported 
an increased risk for developing metabolic complications in individuals with low microbial richness, and 
also showed that dietary interventions have less effect on individuals with high species richness8. 
Individuals with high richness have lower risk of metabolic diseases and are less affected by short-term 
changes in diet indicating the benefits of having high microbial richness. A healthy normal individual is 
hence associated with a high richness. Most recent description of the normal human gut microbiota 
composition is that the dominant phyla are Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes, and to a lesser degree 
Proteobacteria and Actinobacteria9,10. 
Crohn’s disease and Ulcerative colitis 
Crohn’s disease and Ulcerative colitis are two types of chronic IBD with relapsing inflammations having 
similar symptoms and an overall change or imbalance relative to the normal gut microbiota composition 
– called dysbiosis. Ulcerative colitis affects only the colon and the lining of the bowel wall, but can in 
severe cases result in open sores or ulcers leading to bloody diarrhea11. Crohn’s disease is considered the 
most severe condition of the two since it can affect the whole gastrointestinal tract and affect all layers 
of the bowel wall creating deep ulcers and fistulas. The initial cause for either disease is unknown and 
there are only treatments available towards the symptoms, including abdominal pain, diarrhea, fever, 
weight loss, and surgery for removal of inflamed tissue in severe cases. It should be noted that for both 
main IBD diseases, the patients can potentially have a relative healthy period in between the relapses of 
inflammation and these pauses (or remissions) can last from s to years. In The United States of America 
the prevalence of Crohn’s disease in children were 43 per 100,000 persons, and for adults 201 per 100,000 
persons in the period of 2003-200412. 
 
Even though many human gene loci has been associated with occurrence of IBD, far from all individuals 
with the genetic potential develops IBD. It has been estimated that genetics can account for about 23% 
of the Crohn’s cases and 16% of the Ulcerative colitis cases13. During an IBD relaps the immune system 
attacks the gastrointestinal tract possibly directed at microbial antigens, why these diseases fall under the 
term autoimmune. It is commonly hypothesized that the diseases is initially triggered by a series of events 
==PAGE:6==
4 June 2015 | 5 
 
in genetically susceptible individuals that leads to the establishment of a chronic inflammation14,15. 
Events or environmental triggering factors include stress, diet, extreme hygiene, smoking, use of anti-
inflammatory agents, and infections. All these factors are known to affect the composition of the 
microbiota, which emphasizes the importance of understanding IBD related changes of the microbiota 
to better understand the diseases and to potentially identify causes and cures.  
One of the observed changes in relation to dysbiosis in Crohn’s patients is an overall low species richness 
in the gut microbiota10,16,17. More specific changes in relation to the observed dysbiosis in Crohn’s 
patients have been reported. First of all a significant reduction in the diversity of the phylum Firmicutes. 
At species level a decrease in the commensal bacteria Faecalibacterium prausnitzii (Firmicute) were 
observed to be associated with a higher risk of Crohn’s disease relapses18. 
IBD is associated with changes in the mucus layer relative to healthy individuals. Two different patterns 
of changes in the production of membrane-associated mucins from goblet cells have been observed for 
the two main IBD diseases19. There are indication that the failure of the mucus layer for Cronh’s patients 
is related to dysfunctional Paneth cell secretion in the crypts affecting the composition of the mucus to 
contain less antibacterial abilities20. In Ulcerative colitis patients, it is believed that the outer mucus layer 
is lost to a certain degree leading to increased bacterial exposure of the epithelium cells. This leads to 
inflammation that will increase the mucus production to presumably a normal state20. The mucosal layer 
plays an important role for the immune system as part of the “first line of defense”, but may now be 
considered to have an even broader protective influence in the immunity than previously expected, e.g. 
in relation to bacterial antigen presentation for dendritic cells21. Many bacteria have the ability to interact 
with or influence the mucus layer: by stimulating the production, reside in or even metabolize mucus. 
These interactions between bacterial species and the mucus layer could be essential for understanding 
the on-set of IBD and thus the human immune systems failure to function.  
Bayesian statistics 
Bayesian statistics is used in many fields including business. It is in its essence extracting information 
about real-life situations from empirical data that are in an insufficient amount for logical deduction. 
Bayesian statistics uses probability as a way of quantifying the uncertainty. In order to find a probability 
solution to a real-life situation or problem, the problem needs to be described by a mathematical 
probability model.  
==PAGE:7==
4 June 2015 | 6 
 
One important idea behind Bayesian statistics is the use of a prior probability distribution, referred to as 
the prior, which is a chosen probability distributions based on our best hypothesis for a solution to the 
problem. Priors are the base of the search for the most likely probability and can be altered when more 
or new data change our belief in the given solution. The result of a Bayesian – “run” are called posterior 
probabilities. The density distribution of these gives an indication of the degree of belief we have in the 
found most likely solution. The more narrow a distribution the higher belief, this can quantified using 
high density intervals (HDI) for the 95% credible set22. 
This study 
Here we assessed the opportunity to use longitudinal data in a Bayesian setting in order to estimate MGS’ 
persistence in the human gut and influence on the species richness of the microbiome over time. How 
well adapted a microbe is to the environment of the gut can be described by its persistence. The more 
persistent a microbe is to the gut environment the more likely it is to survive in the gut for a longer time.. 
We expected a bacterium known to inhabit the gut microbiota to have a high persistence, whereas a 
transient species accidentally arriving to the gut was expected to have a low persistence. Species might 
be transient due targeting by the immune system (pathogenic microorganisms) or simply because they 
are unable to withstand the hostile environment of the gut. As an example bacteria used in yoghurts or 
as probiotic food supplements were expected to be transient species. We correlated the two biomarkers; 
annual persistence and richness, to investigate the ecology of the gut microbiota in health and disease. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:8==
4 June 2015 | 7 
 
RESULTS 
Data 
In this study the largest available public dataset of stool samples was used. This dataset included healthy 
individuals and IBD patients. These patients are known to have a dysbiosis and are interesting to compare 
to healthy individuals. The dataset were used by Li et. al (2014) to create an integrated gene catalog 
(IGC) and covers four cohorts from four countries consisting of 1267 shotgun sequenced stool samples 
originating from 1,070 individuals in total: 368 Chinese, 139 American, 359 Spanish, and 401 Danish 
samples23. From the 1267 samples in the IGC-cohort the canopy clustering method identified 1264 MGS 
out of a total of 23,826 CAGs. These contained on average 1,980 genes spanning from 700 to a maximum 
of 17,569 genes.  
Taxonomical annotation 
Of the 1264 MGS identified, 26% (n = 326) were assigned to one of 9 different phyla detected and 19% 
(n = 241) were assigned to one of the 54 different genus identified. 126 different species taxonomies 
were assigned to 148 MGS using an in house database. 938 MGS or around 74% of the were not assigned 
any taxonomy by the methods used. 
Richness 
The average richness of the IGC-cohort were 163 MGS per sample including both healthy and sick 
individuals. The healthy European samples (Danish and Spanish samples pooled excluding IBD patients) 
had an average richness of 210 MGS. The American and healthy Chinese samples had richness averages 
lying 43% and 46% below the European average respectively (119 and 112 MGS). This significant 
difference across the different parts of the world is illustrated with medians and quantiles in Fig. 6e. 
Since the different cohorts were not directly comparable, the Chinese and American samples were not 
included when looking into IBD patients on Fig. 7.  
On Fig. 1 the detected phyla were clustered and viewed according to their relative abundance across the 
IGC cohort. We observed that the most abundant phyla were Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes, in line with 
observations of other studies9,10. The subset of Crohn’s patients had much smaller representation of 
unknown species, compared to heathy individuals from Europe (Appendix 1). 
==PAGE:9==
4 June 2015 | 8 
 
 
Figure 1 | Average microbial abundance per sample on a phylum level for the 
IGC cohort. The abundances of MGS were relative to the amount of genes 
observed in each samples. Here the average abundances per sample for the 1267 
samples were viewed for the different phyla present. In Appendix 2 the average 
microbial abundance for the four nationalities are shown.  
 
 
Longitudinal data and persistence estimations 
In the cohort used for this study a subset (n = 123) of the individuals have had fecal samples sequenced 
at two time points. Using these longitudinal data we aimed at describing the identified 1264 MGS in 
regards to their persistence in the gut microbiome. For each MGS the subset of individuals that contained 
the MGS at the first sample point were used to report the given MGS survival over time, this is also 
known as a Kaplan-Meier plot (Fig. 2). Persistence were then estimated from the survival data for a given 
MGS using a Bayesian framework. The Bayesian model for annual persistence probabilities estimation 
resulted in estimates for 633 MGS (after pruning) (Fig. 3). The HDI pruning removed MGS, where the 
probability estimation was based on too few individuals or inconsistent observations. All MGS with zero 
or one observation were removed, as well as most MGS with observations in only two to five individuals. 
Fig. 3 illustrates that the more observations the higher our belief in the true annual persistence probability 
was.  
==PAGE:10==
4 June 2015 | 9 
 
 
Figure 2 | Example of use of longitudinal data for persistence estimation. a, 
Individuals containing a given MGS (blue) in the 1st sample were lined up (n = 5). For 
the corresponding 2nd samples the presence or absence of the given MGS is reported 
(orange cross illustrates absence of the MGS) and the length of the arrow indicates the 
time difference between the two samples. b, Kaplan-Meier plot illustrating the persistence 
of the given MGS over time from the 5 individual example in a. 
 
 
Figure 3 | Pruning of Bayesian persistence estimates. 
The width of the high density index for the distribution of estimated posterior 
persistence’s against the number of individuals that the estimates is based on from the 
survival data. The cut off for HDI < 0.6 (orange line) eliminating broad HDI resulted in 
633 MGS receiving annual persistence estimates.  
 
==PAGE:11==
4 June 2015 | 10 
 
To assess the Bayesian models strength some MGS with assigned taxonomy were investigated. For 
example, Faecalibacterium prausnitzii (MGS:igc701) had a mean annual persistence estimated to be 
0.831 (Fig. 4) . This relative high annual persistence is in line with the expected for F. prausnitzii being 
an abundant known commensal gut microorganism in healthy individuals18. Another MGS that was 
assessed was Bifidobacterium animalis (MGS:igc689), this species is used as food ingredient or 
supplement. B. animalis got a low annual persistence of 0.087 (Fig. 4), which fits the expectation for 
probiotic food supplements as being transient species. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
On the heat map (Fig. 5) we observed an association between MGS annual persistence probability and 
presence in the stool samples. MGS with high persistence were present in a wider collection of stool 
samples than MGS with low persistence.  
 
 
Figure 4 | Persistence estimations for two MGS. a, Kaplan-Meier plots for B. animalis 
(MGS:igc689) and F. prausnitzii (MGS:igc701) with the persistence over sampling time 
(logarithmic scale). b, The model-based posterior probability distributions for MGS:igc689 
(black) and MGS:igc701 (green). Most likely annual persistence probability (P) are reported 
on the figure. 
==PAGE:12==
4 June 2015 | 11 
 
 
Figure 5 | MGS distribution in the IGC-cohort. A heat map for 1267 samples, where white 
illustrates the absence of a MGS in a sample and black indicates the presence of MGS in a sample. 
The MGS at the y-axis were sorted for decreasing annual persistence probability and the samples 
on the x-axis were sorted for increasing richness. We observe that in the upper-right corner the 
density of MGS are higher than in the lower-left corner.  
 
Persistence associated with richness 
Average annual persistence probability were calculated for each of the 1267 samples using the 633 MGS 
with estimated most likely annual persistence probability, this will be referred to a simply the average 
annual persistence. In average for the healthy European samples the average annual persistence were 
0.61, and for the American and Chinese 0.65 and 0.64 respectively. We assessed whether the average 
annual persistence correlated with the species richness of the samples. This correlation was first analyzed 
separately for each different nationality present in the IGC-cohort (Fig. 6a-d).  
For all four cohorts a negative correlation between average annual persistence and the richness of the 
samples were observed for richness above a certain level. For the 1267 samples together the Spearman 
correlation coefficient wasρ= -0.66 (p-value = 2.2e-16), meaning there was a general trend stating that 
the higher species richness in a sample the lower average annual persistence that sample has. For all four 
cohorts there were samples with relative low richness that did not follow this general trend, but had a 
lower average annual persistence. For the Chinese cohort this drop in average persistence was observed 
for more than 20 samples. The Chinese cohort also had the lowest average richness compared to the other 
==PAGE:13==
4 June 2015 | 12 
 
cohorts (Fig. 6e). The Danish cohort accounted for the highest average richness of 211.4 species per 
sample and contained only one sample with a very low persistence (Outlier 1, see Fig 7a).  
 
 
Figure 6 | Distribution of nationalities in the cohort a-d, The samples average 
annual persistence over species richness (no. of MGS) with SEM-bars (Standard 
error of the mean.) Spearman correlation coefficient for all nations together: 
ρ= -0.66 (p-value = 2.2e-16) e, Richness distribution for each nationality. An 
assembled plot of 6a-d can be viewed in Appendix 3. 
 
The correlation between richness and persistence were also assessed for the healthy European samples 
alone. On Fig. 7a this subset of samples are plotted with error-bars (standard error of the mean). The 
==PAGE:14==
4 June 2015 | 13 
 
Spearman correlation coefficient were found to beρ= -0.72 (p-value < 2.2e-16). This healthy subset had 
no apparent samples with a drop in average annual persistence at low richness, except for two outliers. 
Outlier1 was a colon cancer patient and Outlier2 that was a close relative to one of the Crohn’s patients 
from the Spanish cohort (Fig. 7a). The negative correlation for the healthy European samples were 
therefore more clear than for all 1267 samples, indicating the presence of a healthy baseline trend. 
The distribution of Crohn’s patients and Ulcerative colitis patients in relation to this correlation were 
assessed on Fig. 7c and 7b respectively. For most patients it was not reported whether the disease were 
in a relapse state with inflammation. The Crohn’s patients clustered with significantly low richness in 
line with other studies10,16,17(Fig. 7d). Some Crohn’s patients with richness lower than 80 were associated 
with a lower average annual persistence than healthy trend. One of these sample has in average 
persistence as low as 0.33. 
In general the Ulcerative colitis patient’s followed the general trend observed for the healthy samples 
(Fig. 7b), though the distribution of richness was shifted towards a lower average (Fig. 7d). One 
Ulcerative colitis patient had persistence below 0.3. This patients’ stool sample was collected in time of 
an inflammation relapse.  
==PAGE:15==
4 June 2015 | 14 
 
 
Figure 7 | European cohorts with IBD health status. Average annual persistence over richness 
(defined by number of unique MGS present in each sample). a, Healthy European samples (Spanish and 
Danish) with SEM-bars (Standard error of the mean). The Spearman correlation coefficient were 
ρ= -0.72 (p-value < 2.2e-16). b, Healthy samples and Ulcerative colitis patients. c, Healthy samples 
and samples from Crohn’s patients. d, Richness distribution for the IBD subsets. (UC = Ulcerative 
colitis, CD = Cronh’s Disease, FICD = Fistular Crohn’s disease.) Note: On 7a two outliers are indicated: 
Outlier1 had a richness of 22 and an average annual persistence of 0.38. This stool sample belonged to 
a Danish individual, who previously had have surgery against colon cancer (Personal correspondence). 
Outlier2 had a richness of 30, an average annual persistence of 0.50 and belonged to a Spanish individual 
closely related to a Cronh’s patient.  
 
Transient and persistent species  
In order to assess transient species, we looked at MGS with a annual persistence probabilities below 0.3 
(n = 70). For the samples that included these transient species an average richness of 204.8 were 
calculated. This was significantly higher than the average richness of 186.4 found for the samples 
containing the 94 most persistent bacteria with annual persistence probabilities above 0.7. The 
==PAGE:16==
4 June 2015 | 15 
 
significance of the difference were tested by a one-sided Welch Two Sample t-test with a 95% confidence 
level resulting in a p-value of 0.003.  
On Fig. 8 two high persistence MGS and two transient MGS have their presence indicated on the samples 
plotted with average annual persistence associated to richness. The two low persistence species (Fig. 
8a+b) were present in samples with high richness. MGS:igc84 was not present in samples with richness 
below 100 species. For the two persistent species Faecalibacterium prausnitzii (Fig. 8c) and Alistipes 
shahii (Fig. 8d) their presence followed the healthy trend through all levels of richness. 
 
Figure 8 | Four MGS precenses in the 1267 samples. Correlation of average annual persistence 
against species richness with four MGS presence or absence illustrated. Black indicates precence of 
MGS in a sample and orange indicates the MGS is absent. We have choosen two MGS with low 
persistence (a+b) and two MGS with high persistence(c+d). a, Victivallis vadensis (MGS:igc64). b, 
Bifidobacterium animalis (MGS:igc689). c, Faecalibacterium prausnitzii (MGS:igc701). d, 
Alistipes shahii (MGS:igc162). Most likely annual persistence probability (p) for the MGS are 
reported on the figure.  
 
The distribution of annual persistence probability for the different MGS with genus taxonomy assigned 
can be viewed on Fig. 9. Most genera within Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes had high persistences 
==PAGE:17==
4 June 2015 | 16 
 
consistent with the fact that these are abundant in normal gut microbiota. These two phyla both had 
genera with persistence higher than the pathogen-containing phylum Proteobacteria. It was also observed 
that there were more species within the Firmicutes that had a lower annual persistence probability than 
the Bacteriodetes.  
The observation that a portion of the genus Lactobacillus had low most likely annual persistence 
probability fits the fact that many Lactobacillus are used in fermentation of food. The Actinobacteria 
genus Bifidobacterium contains a broad range of species, some known to inhabit the gastrointestinal tract 
and some used as beneficial probiotics, explaining the widespread distribution of this genus in relation 
to annual persistence probability.  
==PAGE:18==
4 June 2015 | 17 
 
 
Figure 9 | MGS annual persistence probability distribution at phyla and genus levels. 
Distributions for the 633 MGS with assigned most likely annual persistence probability. 
Each box represents a genus (left), on the right the phyla level are indicated (color coded). 
Outliers are indicated as dots and single species observations within a genus as single 
vertical lines. MGS with unknown genus (n = 474) are reported in Fig. 10. 
==PAGE:19==
4 June 2015 | 18 
 
The MGS with estimated persistence that had no genus assigned are illustrated on Fig. 10. We 
hypothesized that many of these unknown species would be transient and have low persistence, but most 
were distributed around a persistence of 0.5. Since each of these unknown species are rare there were 
low possibility that we would observe these species in enough individuals to push the estimationsof the 
Bayesian persistence model away from the prior of 0.5.  
 
 
Figure 10 | Annual persistence probability distribution for MGS with unknown genus. 
Distribution of MGS (n = 474) most likely annual persistence probability divided into phyla 
(right). Outliers are indicated as dots and single species observations for one phyla as single 
lines.  
 
MGS influence on richness  
We also assessed the opportunity to use the longitudinal data to give estimates for a given MGS’ 
influence on species richness of the microbiome over time. It was assumed that a given species in the gut 
has an influence on the environment, both by interspecies interactions as symbiosis or in a competitive 
manner. Another way to influence the lumen environment is by stimulating the host immune system to 
either induce or reduce inflammation. Identifying species that leads to a change in the richness of the 
host microbiota (increase/decrease), is interesting since we know the importance of richness in relation 
to metabolic diseases.  
==PAGE:20==
4 June 2015 | 19 
 
 
Figure 11 | Illustration of richness estimation from longitudinal data. The 
change in richness are reported (purple arrows) for the subset of individuals (n = 4) 
containing one given MGS (in blue) at both sampling times.  
 
What we tried in practice were to collect the individuals with both samples containing a given MGS (Fig. 
11). Using KS-test we found four MGS with a significant (p < 0.05) different distribution in Δrichness 
over time compared to the total list of changes in richness for the longitudinal data (baseline)(Table 2). 
Of these MGS: MGS:igc318, MGS:igc504, and MGS:igc798 were significantly associated to high 
richness. It should be noted that in general the presence of a MGS in samples is associated with a high 
richness, so this information is not interesting in itself. Despite that these three MGS were associated to 
high richness, they all had a negative average Δrichness of -19, -8 and -14 species respectively.  
 
 
Table 2 | Four specific MGS’ influence on richness 
MGS ID 
Taxonomy 
Annual 
Persistence 
Probability 
No. of paired 
obs. in longitu-
dinal data 
Association to  
Δrichness  
(p-value) 
Association to 
richness (p-value) 
MGS:igc318 
Clostridium 
0.4206 
19 
0.03627 
< 2.2e-16 
MGS:igc504 
Subdoligranulum 
0.3687 
12 
0.01399 
< 3.354e-09 
MGS:igc798 
Pseudoflavonifractor 
0.5250 
6 
0.04914 
< 2.2e-16 
MGS:igc660 
Dorea 
0.4817 
12 
0.02592 
0.04133 
Descriptive data for four MGS, including their best taxonomy description, their most likely annual persistence 
probability and number of individuals that contained the given MGS in both time pair samples. In addition, the 
significance of their association to richness and Δrichness is reported by p-values from KS-test. The cumulative 
distributions from these tests are plotted on Fig. 12. 
 
==PAGE:21==
4 June 2015 | 20 
 
MGS:igc660 received an estimated most likely annual persistence probability of 0.482 and belonged to 
the genus Dorea, that had the highest average annual persistence probability of all Firmicutes (Fig. 10). 
This species were not associated with high richness, but instead a richness just below the baseline 
distribution. We then looked into the direction of change in richness for this MGS and found that it were 
associated with a decrease in richness over time. In average a Δrichness of -30 species were found in 
the 12 individuals containing MGS:igc660. This average decrease in richness were the largest observed 
for the four MGS. (Fig. 12).  
==PAGE:22==
4 June 2015 | 21 
 
 
Figure 12 | Four MGS species associations to richness. Plots of cumulative distributions from 
the KS.tests conducted for four MGS species, where black indicates the baseline distributions for 
all samples and blue is the distribution for the subset that contains the given MGS. Left: 114 indi-
viduals included in the baseline for ΔRichness. Right: 1267 samples included in the baseline for 
Richness. The taxonomy for the MGS and the p-values for these associations to ΔRichness and 
Richness are found in Table 2.  
 
==PAGE:23==
4 June 2015 | 22 
 
DISCUSSION  
In this project an overall inverse correlation was observed between species richness and the average 
annual persistence of MGS. This correlation was found across samples from the IGC-cohort comprising 
samples from three continents. A continental variance both in richness and in average annual persistence 
was observed for the Chinese and American samples compared to the European samples. Despite these 
differences, the majority of the samples still followed the negative correlation. This continental variance 
could potentially be explained by many factors such as cultural differences in regards to food, medication, 
and host genetics. A selective pressure can explain this negative correlation that; a decrease in richness, 
properly due to changes in the environment, will lead to survival of more persistent species resulting in 
a higher average annual persistence. To emphasize this we found a number of transient MGS that were 
mainly found in the high richness samples compared to more persistent MGS that were found across the 
richness range. We also found that the negative correlation was more significant for the healthy European 
samples, indicating this correlation might be related to the microbiomes of healthy individuals. 
However, we observed a set of samples with very low richness together with a low average annual 
persistence that did not follow the inverse correlation between species richness and the average annual 
persistence. Within this group, all nationalities were also represented. For the Chinese cohort the 
selection of samples that was part of the drop in average annual persistence at low richness could not be 
related directly to diabetes or obesity. Also a subset of samples from Crohn’s patients clustered at low 
average annual persistence and low richness. The gut environment of Crohn’s disease patients in relapse 
is altered due to high inflammation and this condition potentially explains the drop in persistence. 
Crohn’s patients in relapse have a loss of normal commensal species such as Firmicutes, instead species 
not usually fitted for the gut environment are found in sample from these individuals16. Both loss of 
keystone species with high annual persistence probability and survival of transient species in the gut can 
explain the drop in average annual persistence observed. These transient species are not well adapted for 
the healthy gut environment, but can potentially be highly persistent and thrive in this changed and 
inflamed system.  
For the individuals with Crohn’s disease metadata were not available reporting the current disease state 
of the patient during sampling (relapse or not). This would have been an interesting add on, but we 
hypothesize that the Crohn’s patients with a drop in average annual persistence are in a relapse state.  
==PAGE:24==
4 June 2015 | 23 
 
For a few other samples found in the drop in average annual persistence at low richness we had access 
to interesting metadata. First, the outlier with low richness from the Danish cohort has had colon cancer 
and following surgery in the colon. Second, a close relative to a Crohn’s patient were found among these 
samples, fitting the fact that Crohn’s is associated with family-trades making individuals more 
susceptible for developing the disease. Third, we found an Ulcerative colitis patient reported to be in a 
relapse state. These interesting observations together with the subset of Crohn’s samples indicated that 
the drop in average annual persistence happened, when the gut microbiota is altered for the worse, 
possibly driven by severe inflammation.  
Our findings indicates that a low average annual persistence could be used as a biomarker for detecting 
unhealthy individuals and potentially identifying individuals susceptible for developing IBD. Following 
microbiomes development of IBD patients in regards to this biomarker could help increase the 
understanding of the diseases and to potentially identify causes and cures.  
We can speculate that low species richness makes an individual more susceptible for a drop in average 
annual persistence, indicating the system of the gut is experiencing a breakdown. Therefore, it might be 
interesting to investigate the low species richness found in the healthy American samples. Looking into 
how healthy these individuals were and also check if the functional profile of the metabolome is different 
from the high richness cohort. This could potentially cast light on the increased levels of Crohn’s disease 
in the American population.  
 
The Bayesian model for estimating annual persistence probabilities in the gut used in this project had 
strengths and limitations. We observed that the more persistence a MGS was the more widespread in the 
population of the 1267 samples it was (Fig. 5). This observation were expected for the 228 samples from 
the longitudinal data that the persistence estimations originally were based on, but we observed that the 
observation applies to all 1267 samples in the cohort. This indicated that even though only 114 
individuals contributed to the estimations of the persistence, the model had ability to describe a real life 
situation for many MGS. We identified for example two known species whose estimated most likely 
persistence probability were in in agreement with our knowledge about them also indicating the models 
potential to describe the reality. On genus level the distribution of most likely annual persistence 
probabilities also fitted our knowledge about more of the genera, as the low levels for the Bifidobaterium 
and Lactobacillus, two probiotic bacteria containing genera. Furthermore, the commensal gut phyla 
==PAGE:25==
4 June 2015 | 24 
 
Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes both contained genera with high most likely annual persistence probability. 
We also found a subset of Firmicutes with low most likely annual persistence probabilities, this might 
explain the loss of Firmicutes that have been observed for Crohn’s patients18.  
These findings together illustrates the ability of the Bayesian model for estimating annual persistence to 
use longitudinal data to describe the real life situation in the human gut microbiome letting us predict 
MGS characteristics. We believe this Bayesian approach could facilitate advances in understanding the 
ecology of the human gut microbiome, help us characterize the microbiome and the microbial species 
involved. That considered we hypothesized that many of the unknown species would be transient and 
have low persistence, but these species had most likely annual persistence probabilities around 0.5, 
meaning they had not moved away from the prior in the Bayesian model. The number of observations 
for many of these MGS are not abundant or consistent enough for estimation of annual persistence 
probability. More longitudinal data are needed to describe these rare species and to be able to estimate 
their persistence. Increasing the size and diversity of the cohort and the longitudinal data is also 
interesting in order to investigate and understand the continental variance. 
 
We found a number of MGS with high annual persistence probability that are not present in the samples 
that are part of the observed drop in average annual persistence at low richness. Faecalibacterium 
prausnitzii and Alistipes shahi, are examples of persistence species present in the samples that follows 
the negative correlation. The drop could be explained by loss of such potential keystone species with 
high persistence. This loss, could it be due to a breakdown in the gut environment of the individual caused 
by e.g. inflammation. But whether loss of these species are cause or effect is difficult to assess. As a 
future perspective, it would be interesting to identify all of these potential keystone species and correlate 
their functions, to see if there are essential functions that can be linked to the drop in average annual 
persistence. Furthermore, a Bayesian model estimating the survival dependence of a MGS given the 
presence of other MGS, could be interesting to understand the interactions and relationships between the 
microbial species. Such a model could assess the distribution of average annual persistence observed.  
The idea to look into microbial species influence on richness is interesting since the approach applied 
here has, as far as we know, not been used before on metagenomics data. Using longitudinal data we can 
add a time perspective to the information, and not just look at each samples as snap-shots of reality, 
==PAGE:26==
4 June 2015 | 25 
 
potentially answering the questions: Is a certain species present at certain richness since the gut is altered 
– or is the that species causing the altered richness? Here we looked at into the association between a 
given MGS and changes in richness for the longitudinal sample pairs, and we did find one MGS of the 
genus Dorea, that seems to alter the gut in a negative direction leading to loss in richness. This is an 
indication that the overall approach could work, but with the limited data it is very hard to assess this 
question with simple statistics. By applying Bayesian statistics on the longitudinal data we might get 
closer to solve this with a model that takes the time difference into account and not only the change in 
richness. We believe such model could more accurately estimate the probability for the richness of the 
gut to change given the presence of a specific MGS. These estimates could be interesting in regards to 
characterizing and analyzing MGS and their influence on the microbiome. This could potentially be a 
new strong approach in investigating the ecology of the gut, and might allow us to identify potential 
keystone-species that are important for maintaining or increasing microbial richness in the human gut.  
  
CONCLUSION 
The metagenomic ecology approach of estimating annual persistence used in this study provides a new 
dimension in understanding and characterization the complex microbial communities in the human gut. 
We found suggestion that a healthy baseline exist with a strong negative correlation between the average 
annual persistence of microbial species in samples and total species richness of samples. To support this 
a subset of IBD patients were found that lay outside of this healthy base with drop in average annual 
persistence, possibly driven by inflammation. 
The overall negative correlation between species persistence and richness may be explained by a 
selective pressure that drive the microbiota toward a decreased richness by eliminating the less persistent 
species. We located examples of commensal species as the anti-inflammatory bacterium Faecalibacterium 
prausnitzii that were only present in samples within the healthy baseline, supporting the theory that loss 
of keystone species could be a critical factor for the sustainment of the healthy gut. The correlation found 
could potentially be a biomarker for identifying unbalanced microbiomes and used for detection of 
individuals with high-risk of developing metabolic diseases as IBD. 
==PAGE:27==
4 June 2015 | 26 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
Thanks to Associate Prof. Henrik Bjørn Nielsen, Prof. Anders Gorm Pedersen, PhD stud. Damian Rafal 
Plichta and PhD stud. Anne Bresciani for assisting and discussing the project at various points. Thanks 
to the ‘Microbiome Systems Biology’ group and to all other CBS staffs for making me feel welcome. 
Thanks to my family and friends for letting me take my time to work. Thank to Nanna Overby for weekly 
meeting and support in the writing and planning process. A great thanks to Katrine Graversen for keeping 
me focused in the final important hours of writing. Thanks for all the home support and patience, lots of 
patience, from my husband and father-to-be, Iggy Vincent Skovgaard Sahlertz. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:28==
4 June 2015 | 27 
 
METHODS 
Data 
This study was based on a publically available cohort23 consisting of a collection of 1267 Illumina 
shotgun sequenced fecal samples from 1070 healthy and sick individuals (Table 1). These samples were 
a collection of 4 different cohorts originating from Denmark, Spain, China and USA. The Danish cohort 
(n = 401) were from a diabetes and obesity study, including 109 diabetes patients. The Chinese cohort (n 
= 368) was from a diabetes study including 183 individuals with Type 2 Diabetes. The Spanish samples 
(n = 359) were from an IBD study and involved 114 control samples and 242 samples obtained from IBD 
patients: 58 from Crohn’s patients and 187 from Ulcerative colitis patients. As further healthy references 
the American cohort (n = 139) was included, though only longitudinal metadata were available for these 
individual.  
A co-abundance-based method to assemble sequenced metagenomics data together with a canopy 
clustering algorithm5 was applied to the cohort retrieving metagenomics species (MGS) and abundance 
profiles for the presence of these in each of the samples. 
Taxonomical annotation 
Using BLASTN on the assembled genes (>100bp) against the NCBI genome database with 3048 
reference genomes, the genes were assigned a best hit, with a sequence similarity threshold of 75% for 
phylum taxonomy and 85% for genus taxonomy annotation. For species taxonomy annotation an in house 
database was used for BLASTN alignment and genes (>100bp) were assigned a best hit with a sequence 
Table 1 | IGC cohort metadata composition  
  
Crohn’s 
disease 
Ulcerative 
colitis 
Type 2 
Diabetes 
Type 1 
Diabetes 
No. of in-
dividuals  
Healthy** 
 
 
Obese*** 
Danish 
0 
0 
78 
31 
401 
292 
211 
Chinese 
0 
0 
183 
0 
368 
185 
140 
Spanish 
58 
187 
0 
0 
359 
114 
23 
American* 
0 
0 
0 
0 
139 
139 
0 
SUM 
58 
187 
261 
31 
1267 
730 
374 
Descriptive metadata reported for the IGC cohort (n = 1267). *Metadata not available for the American cohort. **Samples 
that are from non-diabetic individuals and have no reported IBD. ***The obesity indicator utilized for the European cohorts 
were BMI > 30 and for the Chinese cohort an indicator of BMI > 25 were utilized in the original study.23 
==PAGE:29==
4 June 2015 | 28 
 
similarity threshold of 95%. Species taxonomy was assigned to MGS if the best hit for more than 25% 
of the annotated genes converged for one species. 
Richness 
The MGS abundance profiles generated from the canopy clustering of MGS were used to calculate the 
richness of each sample, an estimate of how many different MGS that were present in a given sample. 
The abundance profiles were clustered at phylum level to see the distribution for different subset of 
samples. The abundance profiles were also utilized to visualize heat maps of the presence or absence of 
MGS across multiple samples. 
 
Longitudinal data and Kaplan-Meier plots 
We assumed that metagenomic data from the same individual would be similar over time. Longitudinal 
data from 123 individuals were pruned so that their sample pairs correlated more to each other than to 
99% of the rest of the samples in the cohort (as similarity measure Spearman correlation coefficient for 
the MGS abundances was used). The pruned longitudinal data from 73 Spanish and 41 American 
individuals (n = 114) were used to generate survival plots or so called Kaplan-Meier plots for MGS. 
These survival plots summed up information about whether a given MGS was present in the samples at 
different time points. All individuals containing a specific MGS in theirs first sample were used as 
starting point (100%) for that given MGS’ survival plot. The second time points for these samples were 
plotted according to their time differences. If a given MGS was present at the second time point the plot 
continues horizontally and if the specific MGS was not present the plot decreases. In this way the Kaplan-
Meier plot illustrates the fraction of individuals containing the given MGS in both fecal samples and the 
faction of individual where the given MGS is only present in the first fecal sample.  
Persistence estimation 
We assumed that any given species in the gut of an individual has a typical probability rate of persistence 
per time unit. The probability that a given MGS is still present in the microbiome after one year were 
estimated by applying logistic regression on the Kaplan-Meier persistence data using a Bayesian model 
derived from a similar model published in Nielsen et.al. 2014. Such an estimated probability was referred 
to as a MGS’ annual persistence probability. The Bayesian model has the assumptions that a given 
bacteria will disappear from any given gut microbiota eventually and that this decline is exponential. The 
==PAGE:30==
4 June 2015 | 29 
 
probability that a given MGS will survive for t days P(t), can be found from the annual persistence 
probability: P(t) = P(t/365) . 
The Bayesian model for the exponential decline for a given MGS’ persistence in the gut is:  
P(𝑡/365) =
1
1 + exp⁡(−𝑎)𝑡/365 
where a is the model parameter or regression coefficient, that can be estimated in a Bayesian framework. 
The time, t, is a known parameter using the longitudinal data. The prior for a is assumed to be t-distributed 
with µ = 0, d.f. = 1 and τ = 5, corresponding to a t-distributed density plot around an annual persistence 
probability of P = 0.5.  
The model was implemented in a Bayesian framework with Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) using 
the ‘RUNJAGS’ package for R. MCMC is a method to compute the posterior probabilities from a model. 
It uses a parameter space that contains all the possible parameter values from a model, and samples from 
this using the data input.  
The Bayesian framework ran with three chains for the MCMC sampling until convergence were found 
(using a ‘potential scale reduction factor’ (PSFT) target below 1.1). This implementation generated a list 
of probable regression coefficients, a, for each input (MGS). These estimated model parameters can be 
converted into annual persistence probabilities (ranging from 0 to 1) using the model. From density plots 
of these annual persistence probabilities high index densities (HDI) were calculated. HDI is the narrowest 
interval that includes 95% of the probabilities for the given parameter. The narrower a density 
distribution, the higher is the belief in the correctness of the estimation from the model. To filter the 
outputs from the Bayesian model, a minimum width of HDI = 0.6 was applied. This removed e.g. all 
MGS that were not observed or were only based on observation in one individual. The remaining 633 
MGS were used for later calculations. Finally, the most likely annual persistence probability was 
calculated for each MGS (n = 633) using the mean value. 
To conduct a persistence characterization of microbiomes in a sample, the average most likely annual 
persistence probability was calculated from all the present MGS in that given sample, this result will be 
referred to as simply the average annual persistence of a sample. The average annual persistence of the 
samples in the cohort was correlated to the species richness of these samples. The spearman correlation 
==PAGE:31==
4 June 2015 | 30 
 
coefficient were calculated for all samples and for a healthy subset using a two-sided method with a 99% 
confidence interval.  
MGS influence on richness  
We assessed the possibility to identify MGS with an influence on the species richness of the gut over 
time. A Kolmogorov–Smirnov two-sided test with 95% confidence were performed on the changes in 
richness for each MGS against the total list of richness changes for the 114 longitudinal sample pairs. 
The average Δrichness were calculated for the significant MGS found. Furthermore, the MGS’ 
associations with sample richness were tested using a two-sided Kolmogorov–Smirnov test with 95% 
confidence using all 1267 samples.  
  
 
 
==PAGE:32==
4 June 2015 | 31 
 
REFERENCES  
1. 
Fang, S. & Evans, R. M. Wealth management in the gut. Nature 1, 9–10 (2013). 
2. 
Ley, R. E., Peterson, D. A. & Gordon, J. I. Ecological and evolutionary forces shaping microbial 
diversity in the human intestine. Cell 124, 837–848 (2006). 
3. 
Suau, A. et al. Direct analysis of genes encoding 16S rRNA from complex communities reveals 
many novel molecular species within the human gut. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 65, 4799–4807 
(1999). 
4. 
M’Koma, A. E. Inflammatory bowel disease: An expanding global health problem. Clin. Med. 
Insights Gastroenterol. 6, 33–47 (2013). 
5. 
Nielsen, H. B. et al. Identification and assembly of genomes and genetic elements in complex 
metagenomic samples without using reference genomes. Nat. Biotechnol. 32, 822–828 (2014). 
6. 
Jacobsen, U. P. et al. The chemical interactome space between the human host and the 
genetically defined gut metabotypes. ISME J. 7, 730–42 (2013). 
7. 
Le Chatelier, E. et al. Richness of human gut microbiome correlates with metabolic markers. 
Nature 500, 541–6 (2013). 
8. 
Cotillard, A. et al. Dietary intervention impact on gut microbial gene richness. Nature 500, 585–
8 (2013). 
9. 
Arumugam, M. et al. Enterotypes of the human gut microbiome. Nature 473, 174–180 (2011). 
10. 
Qin, J. et al. A human gut microbial gene catalogue established by metagenomic sequencing. 
Nature 464, 59–65 (2010). 
11. 
Head, K. A. & Jurenka, J. S. Inflammatory Bowel Disease Part I : Ulcerative Colitis – 
Pathophysiology and Conventional and Alternative Treatment Options. Altern. Med. Rev. 8, 
(2003). 
12. 
Kappelman, M. D. et al. The Prevalence and Geographic Distribution of Crohn’s Disease and 
Ulcerative Colitis in the United States. Clin. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 5, 1424–1429 (2007). 
13. 
Khor, B., Gardet, A. & Xavier, R. J. Genetics and pathogenesis of inflammatory bowel disease. 
Nature 474, 307–317 (2011). 
14. 
Matsuoka, K. & Kanai, T. The gut microbiota and inflammatory bowel disease. Semin. 
Immunopathol. 37, 47–55 (2015). 
==PAGE:33==
4 June 2015 | 32 
 
15. 
Knights, D., Lassen, K. G. & Xavier, R. J. Advances in inflammatory bowel disease 
pathogenesis: linking host genetics and the microbiome. Gut 62, 1505–10 (2013). 
16. 
Gevers, D. et al. The treatment-naive microbiome in new-onset Crohn’s disease. Cell Host 
Microbe 15, 382–92 (2014). 
17. 
Manichanh, C. et al. Reduced diversity of faecal microbiota in Crohn’s disease revealed by a 
metagenomic approach. Gut 55, 205–11 (2006). 
18. 
Sokol, H. et al. Faecalibacterium prausnitzii is an anti-inflammatory commensal bacterium 
identified by gut microbiota analysis of Crohn disease patients. PNAS 105, 16731–16736 (2008). 
19. 
Dorofeyev, A. E., Vasilenko, I. V, Rassokhina, O. a & Kondratiuk, R. B. Mucosal Barrier in 
Ulcerative Colitis and Crohn’s Disease. Gastroenterol. Res. Pract. 2013, 1–9 (2013). 
20. 
Johansson, M. E. V. Mucus Layers in Inflammatory Bowel Disease. Inflamm. Bowel Dis. 0, 1–9 
(2014). 
21. 
Hasnain, S. Z., Gallagher, A. L., Grencis, R. K. & Thornton, D. J. A new role for mucins in 
immunity: Insights from gastrointestinal nematode infection. Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol. 45, 364–
374 (2013). 
22. 
Kruschke, J. K. in Doing Bayesian Data Analysis, Second Edition: A Tutorial with R, JAGS, and 
Stan 15–32 (Elsevier Inc., 2015). 
23. 
Li, J. et al. An integrated catalog of reference genes in the human gut microbiome. Nat. 
Biotechnol. 32, 834–841 (2014).  
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:34==
4 June 2015 | 33 
 
APPENDIX 1 
 
 
Average microbial abundance per sample on phylum level for Crohn’s patients (a) and 
healthy Europeans (b). The abundances of MGS were relative to the amount of genes 
observed in each samples. Here the average abundances per sample was found for the two 
subsets of samples and viewed for the different phyla present.  
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:35==
4 June 2015 | 34 
 
APPENDIX 2 
Average microbial abundance per sample on phylum level for the four nationalities. 
The abundances of MGS were relative to the amount of genes observed in each samples. 
Here the average abundances per sample were found for the four nationalities and viewed 
for the different phyla present. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:36==
4 June 2015 | 35 
 
APPENDIX 3 
 
Correlation of all samples from IGC-cohort 
All 1267 samples plotted with average annual persistence over species richness (defined 
by number of unique MGS present in each sample). The Spearman correlation coefficient 
was estimated: ρ= -0.66 (p-value = 2.2e-16). Nationalities are viewed in colors; Green: 
Chinese, Pink: Danish, Blue: Spanish, Orange: American. 
 
 
 
