==PAGE:1==
Assessment of Resting-State
Functional Connectivity Changes
in Multiple Sclerosis Patients
Treated with Erythropoietin
Cecilia Louise Klyver s093114
Mette Marie Nielsen s084372
Kongens Lyngby 2015
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Matematiktorvet, building 303B,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3351
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
The objective of this project was to investigate Erythropoietin (EPO) related
changes in progressive Multiple Sclerosis (MS) patients through analysis of
resting-state functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (rs-fMRI) data.
The dataset used in this project was acquired from 2010 to 2013 as part of
a double-blind placebo controlled EPO treatment study of progressive MS pa-
tients. The subjects were scanned three times; once in week 0 (before treat-
ment), once in week 24, and once in week 48. This set-up, made it possible
to evaluate any changes in resting-state patterns in progressive MS patients in
response to EPO treatment.
The analysis was divided into three steps: preprocessing, rst-level analysis
and second level analysis. The rst-level analysis included feature extraction
performed using Regional Homogeneity (ReHo) and Independent Component
Analysis (ICA). ReHo provided information about intra-regional resting-state
functional connectivity, measured through Kendall's Coecient of Concordance
(KCC). For both groups an increase in the expression of the regional homo-
geneity in the posterior cingulate and precuneus, regions associated with the
Default Mode Network (DMN), was seen. ICA was used to detect resting-state
networks and provided information about inter-regional resting-state functional
connectivity. In the ICA analysis 31 independent components were extracted.
These were investigated and the components with functional relevance were
identied: DMN, motor network, primary visual cortex, secondary visual cor-
tex, right memory function, left memory function and auditory network. In this
work the second-level analysis of the ICA features was limited to the DMN and
motor network.
==PAGE:4==
ii
The obtained KCC-maps as well as the chosen ICA components were used for
second-level analysis where a possible dierence in the expression of the DMN
component, motor network component and regional homogeneity between the
two groups were assessed.
The second level analysis included statistical testing, classication and regres-
sion analysis. The statistical testing and classication methods were performed
in order to asses any dierences between the two groups as a result of EPO
treatment.
In this work statistical testing was performed using a exible factorial model
(parametric approach), and permutation testing (non-parametric approach).
The exible factorial analysis did not show any signicant dierence between
the EPO and placebo groups. On the other hand, permutation testing was able
to nd a signicant dierence between the groups, however the results revealed
that this dierence was steady through all three scanning sessions. This nding
reveals that a dierence between the groups was present before the EPO treat-
ment began, even when age, Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS) score,
sex, lesion load and phenotype were included as confounding nuisance covariates
in the analyses. Since the dierence was steady through all three sessions, the
results indicate that EPO did not have an eect on the patients.
Classication was carried out using Support Vector Machine (SVM), k near-
est neighbour, and linear discriminant, where age, EDSS score, sex, lesion load
and phenotype were included as confounding nuisance covariates in the analy-
ses. None of the classiers were able to separate the two groups signicantly by
training a classier based on the extracted features from the rs-fMRI data.
The combination of these ndings from statistical testing and classication in-
dicate that EPO did not change the expression of resting-state patterns in the
progressive MS patients investigated in this work.
Another objective of this project was to investigate if a correlation between
resting-state patterns and the degree of clinical disability exists in progressive
MS patients. A permutation test was carried out to nd possible regions where
the extracted features were correlated with EDSS scores. However, no correla-
tion was found.
This problem was also assessed using regression analysis in order to see if it was
possible to predict the individual EDSS scores by the extracted features. In this
work Partial Least Squares (PLS) regression was performed, which was not able
to predict the EDSS scores. These ndings suggest the expression of the DMN
component, motor component and regional homogeneity were uncorrelated with
the degree of clinical disability in the progressive MS patients investigated in
this work.
==PAGE:5==
Resumé (Danish)
Formålet med dette projekt var at undersøge Erythropoietin (EPO) relaterede
forandringer i progressive multipel sklerose (MS) patienter. Dette blev opnået
gennem analyse af resting-state Magnetisk Resonans (rs-fMRI) data.
Datasættet benyttet i dette projekt blev optaget fra 2010 til 2013 som en del
af et double-blind placebo kontrolleret EPO behandlingsstudie med progressive
MS patienter. Patienterne blev blevet scannet tre gange; en gang i uge 0 (før
behandling), en gang i uge 24 og en gang i uge 48. Dette set-up gjorde det
muligt at evaluere forandringer i aktivitetsmønstre under hvile hos progressive
MS patienter forsaget af EPO behandling.
Analysen af rs-fMRI data var opdelt i tre dele: præ-processering, enkeltpersons-
analyse og gruppeanalyse. Enkeltpersonanalysen inkluderede featureudtrækning
udført ved at anvende Regional Homogeneity (ReHo) og Independent Compo-
nent Analysis (ICA).
ReHo gav information om intra-regional resting-state funktionel konnektivitet,
målt ved hjælp af Kendall's Coecient of Concordance (KCC). For begge grup-
per blev der set et øget udtryk af den regionale homogenitet i posterior cingulate
og precuneus, hvilket er hjerneområder der er associeret med såkaldte Default
Mode Network (DMN).
ICA blev anvendt til at nde resting-state netværk og give information om inter-
regional resting-state funktionel konnektivitet. Gennem ICA analysen blev 31
uafhængige komponenter fundet. Disse blev undersøgt og komponenter med
funktionel relevans blev identiceret: DMN, motor netværk, primære visuelle
cortex, sekundær visuelle cortex, højre hukommelsesfunktion, venstre hukom-
melsesfunktion og auditive netværk. I dette projekt blev gruppeanalysen af ICA
==PAGE:6==
iv
komponenter afgrænset til DMN og motor netværk.
De udregnede KCC-maps samt de udvalgte ICA komponenter blev brugt til
gruppeanalyse hvor eventuelle forskelle mellem de to gruppers udtryk af DMN
komponenten, motor netværk komponenten og regional homogenitet blev vur-
deret.
Gruppeanalysen inkluderede statistiske tests, klassikation og regression. De
statistiske tests og klassikations metoderne blev udført med henblik på at vur-
dere en eventuel forskel mellem de to grupper som følge af EPO behandling. I
dette projekt blev følgende statistiske tests udført: exible factorial model (pa-
rametrisk metode) og permutations tests (ikke parametrisk metode). Flexible
factorial analysen viste ingen signikant forskel mellem EPO og placebo grup-
perne. Derimod viste permutations testene en signikant forskel mellem grup-
perne, men videre resultater afslørede, at denne forskel var stabil gennem alle
tre scanninger. Dette viste at forskellen mellem grupperne var til stede allerede
inden EPO behandling var påbegyndt, selv når alder, Expanded Disability Sta-
tus Scale (EDSS) score, køn, læsions volumen og fænotype indgik som variable
af ingen interesse i analysen. Eftersom at forskellen var stabil gennem alle tre
scanninger, indikerer disse resultater at EPO behandlingen ikke havde en eekt
på patienterne.
De benyttede klassikations metoder var Support Vector Machine (SVM), k
nearest neighbour, og linear discriminant, hvor alder, EDSS score, køn, læsions
volumen og fænotype indgik som variable af ingen interesse i analyserne. Ingen
af disse klassikations metoder var i stand til at opdele de to grupper signi-
kant ved at træne en klassikations model baseret på de udtrukne features
fra rs-fMRI data. Kombinationen af disse fund tyder på at EPO ikke ændrer
aktivitetsmønstre under hvile i progressive MS patienter.
Et yderligere mål med dette projekt var at undersøge hvorvidt en korrelation
mellem aktivitetsmønstre under hvile og graden af klinisk invaliditet ndes i
progressive MS patienter. En permutations test blev udført for at nde mulige
områder hvor de udtrukne features var korreleret med EDSS scorer, men resul-
taterne viste at der ikke var nogen korrelation til stede.
Dette problem blev ligeledes vurderet ved at anvende regression med henblik
på at se, om det var muligt at forudsige patienternes EDSS scorer ud fra de
udtrukne features. I dette projekt blev Partial Least Squares (PLS) regression
benyttet, som viste sig ikke at være i stand til at forudsige patienternes indivi-
duelle EDSS scorer.
Disse fund indikererede at udtrykket af DMN, motor netværk komponenterne og
regional homogenitet ikke er korreleret med klinisk invaliditet hos de progressive
MS patienter undersøgt i dette studie.
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science at the Technical University of Denmark and Danish Research Centre for
Magnetic Resonance (DRCMR) in fullment of the requirements for acquiring
an M.Sc. in Medicine and Technology. The project was initiated in January
2015 and completed in May 2015, and it was assigned a workload of 30 ECTS
points per author.
The project was supervised by PhD Kristoer Hougaard Madsen, PhD Kasper
Winther Andersen and Professor Hartwig Siebner at DRCMR and Associate
Professor Morten Mørup at DTU Compute.
The thesis deals with analysis of resting-state functional Magnetic Resonance
Imaging (rs-fMRI) data in order to investigate Erythropoietin (EPO) related
changes in progressive MS patients.
Lyngby, May 31st-2015
Cecilia Louise Klyver s093114
Mette Marie Nielsen s084372
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
First of all we would like to thank our supervisors PhD Kristoer H. Madsen
and PhD Kasper Winther Andersen at DRCMR for their constant guidance,
interesting discussions and feedback throughout this work. Their great expertise
within the eld of rs-fMRI analysis has been a great source of inspiration.
We would also like to thank our supervisor, Professor Hartwig Siebner at DR-
CMR, who had been very helpful in nding a project that match our elds of
interest and furthermore establishing contact to our other supervisors.
A great thanks should be given to our supervisor Associate Professor Morten
Mørup at DTU Compute who has been a great asset to the project by provided
valuable counsel, inspiration and enthusiastic ideas at our meetings, particularly
for machine learning aspects of the project.
In addition we wish to thank M.D., Ph.D. Karen Schreiber for providing the
dataset conducted at the Danish Multiple Sclerosis Center at Rigshospitalet as
well as Magnetic resonance (MR) images acquired at DRCMR. Furthermore
we would like to thank Research Coordinator, Pernille Iversen, who has been
very helpful as the mediating link between us and the Danish Multiple Sclerosis
Research Center, Rigshospital.
Last but not least we would like to thank the sta at DRCMR, who had given
us a warm welcome at the department and been very helpful whenever needed.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Nomenclature
List of Abbreviations
AC
Anterior Commissure
ANOVA
Analysis of Variance
BOLD
Blood-Oxygen-Level-Dependent
BA
Brodmann Area
CBF
Cerebral Blood Flow
CNS
Central Nervous System
CSF
Cerebrospinal uid
C-SVC
Regularized Support Vector Classication
CV
Cross Validation
dHB
de-oxygenated haemoglobin
DMD
Disease-Modifying Drugs
DMN
Default Mode Network
DRCMR
Danish Research Center for Magnetic Resonance
EAE
Experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis
EDSS
Expanded Disability Status Scale
EPI
Echo-Planar Imaging
EPO
Erythropoietin
EV
Explanatory Variable
FID
Free Induction Decay
fMRI
functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging
FSL
FMRIB Software Library
==PAGE:12==
x
Nomenclature
FWER
Family-wise Error Rate Correction
FWHM
Full-width at Half Maximum
GE
Gradient Echo
GM
Grey Matter
GLM
General Linear Model
Hb
oxygenated haemoglobin
HRF
Haemodynamic Response Function
ICA
Independent Components Analysis
ICBM
International Consortium for Brain Mapping
KCC
Kendall's Coecient of Concordance
KKT
KarushKuhnTucker
kNN
k nearest-neighbour
LOOCV
Leave-one-out cross validation
MAD
Median Absolute Deviation
MNI
Montreal Neurological Institute
MRI
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
MS
Multiple Sclerosis
MVPA
Multivariate Patterns Analysis
NIPALS
Nonlinear Iterative Partial Least Squares
NVR
Nuisance Variable Regression
PALM
Permutation Analysis of Linear Models
PCA
Principal Component Analysis
pdf
probability density function
PLS
Partial Least Squares
PMd
Dorsal Premotor Cortex
PPMS
Primary-Progressive Multiple Sclerosis
PRMS
Progressive-Relapsing Multiple Sclerosis
ReHo
Regional Homogeneity
RF
Radio Frequency
ROI
Region of Interest
RRMS
Relapsing-Remitting Multiple Sclerosis
rs-fMRI
Resting-State functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging
RSS
Residual Sum of Squares
SE
Spin Echo
SNR
Signal to Noise Ratio
SPMS
Secondary-Progressive Multiple Sclerosis
SPM
Statistical Parametric Mapping
SVM
Support Vector Machine
T
Tesla (the SI unit for a magnetic eld strength)
TE
Echo Time
TPM
Tissue Probability Map
TR
Repetition Time
TSS
Total Sum of Squares
VDM
Voxel Displacement Map
WM
White Matter
==PAGE:13==
xi
Notation
x
scalar
x
vector
X
matrix
xi
the ith element of a vector
Fixed Symbols
B0
The static magnetic eld of an MRI scanner
M0
Net magnetisation of protons
γ
The gyromagnetic ratio
T1
Longitudinal relaxation time constant
T2
Transversal relaxation time constant
T ⋆
2
Time constant for loss of transversal phase coherence
ICADMN
The ICA component chosen as the DMN network component
ICAmotor
The ICA component chosen as the motor network component
==PAGE:14==
xii
==PAGE:15==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Resumé (Danish)
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
Nomenclature
ix
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
5
2.1
Multiple Sclerosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Phenotypes of MS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.2
Treatment for Multiple Sclerosis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.3
Expanded Disability Status Scale . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Magnetic Resonance Imaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.1
Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.2
Resting-State Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging . .
12
2.3
Brain Anatomy and Function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3.1
Resting-State Brain Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4
Erythropoietin
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3
Dataset
17
4
Methods
19
4.1
Statistical Parametric Mapping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.1.1
The General Linear Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
==PAGE:16==
xiv
CONTENTS
4.1.2
Nuisance Covariate Regression
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2
Preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2.1
Slice Timing Correction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2.2
Reorientation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2.3
Unwarping
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2.4
Realignment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2.5
Despiking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2.6
Coregistration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.2.7
Normalisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2.8
Nuisance Variable Regression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2.9
Smoothing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.3
Feature Extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.3.1
Regional Homogeneity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.3.2
Independent Component Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.4
Statistical Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.4.1
Flexible Factorial Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.4.2
Permutation Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.5
Classication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.5.1
Support Vector Machines
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.5.2
Evaluating the Classication
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.5.3
Linear Discriminant Classication
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.5.4
k Nearest-Neighbour Classication . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.6
Regression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.6.1
Partial Least Squares
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.6.2
Implementation of PLS1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5
Results and Discussion
63
5.1
Evaluation of the Preprocessing methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
5.2
Feature Extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
5.2.1
Regional Homogeneity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
5.2.2
Independent Component Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
5.3
Statistical Analysis Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
5.3.1
Flexible Factorial Model Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
5.3.2
Permutation Test Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
5.3.3
Parametric versus Non-Parametric Tests . . . . . . . . . .
82
5.3.4
Results of the Statistical Tests in Relation to the Hypothesis 82
5.4
Classication Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
5.4.1
Discussion of the Classication Results . . . . . . . . . . .
88
5.5
Regression Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
5.5.1
Discussion of the Regression Results . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
5.6
Discussion of Links Between the Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
6
Conclusion
97
==PAGE:17==
CONTENTS
xv
A List of Contributions
101
B Cross Validation Procedure for the SVM
103
C Confusion Matrices
107
D PLS1 Implementation
121
E Validation of the PLS1 Model
127
Bibliography
129
==PAGE:18==
xvi
CONTENTS
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging (rs-fMRI) measures spon-
taneous, low frequency uctuations in the Blood Oxygenation Level Dependent
(BOLD)-signal while the subject is at rest. The importance of these uctua-
tions was rst discovered by Biswal et al. in 1995 [1]. They showed that the
uctuations were highly correlated among brain regions that were functionally
correlated. Prior to this the rs-fMRI signal was considered as a noise compo-
nent. These low-frequency uctuations corresponds to resting-state networks,
however, the actual neurophysiological origin of the resting-state networks still
remain unclear. rs-fMRI is especially suitable for studying functional connec-
tivity in patients with a neurological disability such as Multiple Sclerosis (MS),
since the inuence of impaired task performance of activation studies is avoided.
MS is one of the most common neurological disorders of young adults that of-
ten leads to chronic disability [2][3]. It has been shown that MS patients have
an abnormal pattern of motor resting-state functional connectivity as well as
resting-state regional connectivity in the brain [4][5]. Furthermore, it has been
shown that resting state patterns were correlated with clinical disability in MS
patients [5][6]. Currently no cure for MS exists [7], so treatment typically focus
on symptom management and decelerating or haltering the progression of the
disease by decreasing relapse-rate. Such treatment have not been successful for
patients with progressive MS [8]. Several animal studies suggest that Erythro-
poietin (EPO) may be a promising agent for neuroprotection and neuroregener-
==PAGE:20==
2
Introduction
ation in MS patients. [7][9]. A study shows that long-term recombinant human
erythropoietin administration in humans reduced clinical disability, reected in
a reduction of (Expanded Disability Status Scale) EDSS scores, in progressive
MS patients [10]. To our knowledge the eect of EPO on progressive MS patients
has not yet been investigated through rs-fMRI analysis.
The rst objective of this project was to investigate EPO related changes in
progressive MS patients through rs-fMRI data analysis. The second objective
of this project was to investigate if a correlation between resting-state patterns
and the degree of clinical disability exists in progressive MS patients.
The data used in this work was from a double-blind placebo controlled EPO
treatment study of progressive MS patients that was conducted at the Danish
Multiple Sclerosis Center at Rigshospitalet from 2010 to 2013. Magnetic res-
onance (MR) images of the patients, including rs-fMRI, were acquired at the
Danish Research Centre for Magnetic Resonance (DRCMR) at Hvidovre Hos-
pital. The dataset is described in Section 3.
The intra-regional resting-state functional connectivity and the inter-regional
resting-state functional connectivity of the patients were investigated in this
project through analysis of the rs-fMRI data to test the following hypothesis:
In progressive MS patients, the expression of resting-state patterns
changes in response to treatment with EPO.
The analysis was divided into three steps:
1. Preprocessing
2. First-level analysis
3. Second-level analysis
The preprocessing consisted of several steps which are explained in detail in
Section 4.2.
The rst-level analysis consisted of extracting relevant features
from the data at subject level. Feature extraction was performed using Regional
Homogeneity (ReHo) [11] and Independent Component Analysis (ICA) [12].
These methods are described in detail in Section 4.3. The second-level analysis
was performed on group level, with the extracted high dimensional features, and
consisted of three parts:
1. Statistical testing
==PAGE:21==
3
2. Classication
3. Regression
The statistical testing and classication methods were performed in order to
asses any dierences between the two groups as a result of EPO treatment.
The statistical tests included a exible factorial model and permutation testing
[13]. These are described in detail in Section 4.4. The exible factorial model
and permutation test were chosen in order to include both a parametric and
non-parametric approach to the statistical analysis. In addition, permutation
testing was also carried out to nd possible regions where the extracted features
were correlated with the EDSS scores of the patients.
Through classication it was investigated if it was possible to separate the two
groups by training a classier based on the extracted features from the rs-fMRI.
In classication analysis the class labels are required to contain discrete values
[14], and it was therefore suitable for classifying the EPO and placebo groups.
The following classication methods were used in this work: Support vector
machine (SVM) classication [15], k nearest neighbour classication, and linear
discriminant classication. SVM is designed to handle high-dimensional data
[15] and was therefore well-suited for second-level analysis of the high dimen-
sional features obtained from feature extraction. The classication methods are
described in detail in Section 4.5.
The regression analysis was performed in order to see if it was possible to predict
the degree of clinical disability of the patients, expressed by the EDSS scores,
by the extracted features. In regression analysis the target variable takes con-
tinuous values [14] and it was therefore well-suited for predicting EDSS scores.
In this work partial least squares (PLS) regression [16] was performed. This
method was chosen because it has been known to work well with high dimen-
sional data [17]. The regression analysis is described in Section 4.6.
The thesis is divided into ve main parts:
1. The rst part is a background chapter describing the medical and theo-
retical aspects of this thesis. This chapter also serves as a motivation for
this project.
2. The second part describes the dataset that was used in this work.
3. The third part describes in detail the methods applied for testing the
hypothesis.
4. The fourth part presents the results of the study and a discussion of these.
5. The fth part is the conclusion. Finally, suggestions for future research is
provided which serves to round o the project.
==PAGE:22==
4
Introduction
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 2
Background
In this chapter the background for the project is explained. Section 2.1 provides
a description of Multiple Sclerosis. Section 2.2 explains the basic concepts of
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI), including Functional Magnetic Resonance
Imaging (fMRI) and resting-state fMRI (rs-fMRI). Section 2.3 gives an overview
of the brains anatomy and function, with special focus on resting-state brain
networks. Section 2.4 provides an explanation of the function of Erythropoietin
(EPO) and gives a short overview of the most recent literature available on EPO
studies in connection to neurological diseases.
2.1
Multiple Sclerosis
MS is a complex immune-mediated disease aecting the central nervous system
(CNS), and is one of the most common neurological disorders [3][2].
It is a
disease which most often targets adolescents and often lead to chronic disability.
Demyelination, inammation, scar formation, axonal degeneration and neuronal
loss are considered pathological hallmarks of MS [18][19][3]. The myelin sheaths
are the main target of damage, which are critical for eective axonal signal
conduction. Thus, the demyelination and axonal damage weakens neural signal
==PAGE:24==
6
Background
conduction that can alter neuronal synchronization. This will aect the con-
nectivity between subcortical and spinal targets and cortico-cortical pathways
[20].
The clinical presentation depends on the extent, location and pattern of develop-
ment of the active plaques/lesions (areas of demyelination). Various neurological
symptoms can be seen, such as visual disturbances, paresis, spasticity, disturbed
sensation and ataxia [21][22]. Furthermore neuropsychological studies indicate
that cognitive impairment is present in nearly 50 % of MS patients [23][24].
Common impaired cognitive domains include attention, information processing
speed, memory, mental exibility and visuoconstruction [2].
Recent pathological studies as well as application of modern MRI-based tech-
niques have challenged the traditional view of MS as a focal, inammatory de-
myelinating white matter disease. Evidence suggest that MS causes widespread
tissue damage which extends way beyond white matter plaques [25]. In addition
neurodegeneration actually occurs very early in the disease course and appear
to have a weak correlation with the degree of inammatory demyelination [25].
This novel view of MS as a diuse disease of the CNS with an important neu-
rodegenerative component is essential for identifying new and eective treatment
strategies
2.1.1
Phenotypes of MS
Four distinct clinical forms (phenotypes) of MS can be considered based on [26].
These are relapsing-remitting MS (RRMS), primary-progressive MS (PPMS),
secondary-progressive MS (SPMS), and progressive-relapsing MS (PRMS).
About 85 % of MS patients are initially diagnosed with RRMS. This phenotype
is characterized by clearly dened attacks of neurological deterioration followed
by partial or complete remissions, during which symptoms improve partially or
completely. The majority of MS patients diagnosed with RRMS in the rst
place will at some point be diagnosed with SPMS, in which the disease begins
to progress more steadily superimposed with relapses or not. PPMS is charac-
terized by a steady deterioration of neurological functions from the beginning,
without obvious relapses and remissions. The least typical MS phenotype is the
PRMS, which is characterized by a progressive phase present from the onset of
the disease with occasional attacks along the way [26].
In this study EPO treatment has been investigated for progressive MS (PPMS
and SPMS) patients, which is relevant since no therapy for these patients has yet
proved to slow down the disease [27]. Current treatments for MS are described in
==PAGE:25==
2.1 Multiple Sclerosis
7
the next section and arguments for EPO as a promising treatment for progressive
MS is explained in section 2.4.
2.1.2
Treatment for Multiple Sclerosis
To date, no cure for MS exists [7], resulting in treatment typically focus on
modifying the disease course, treat relapses and manage symptoms [8]. Several
disease-modifying drugs (DMDs) are currently approved for the treatment of
MS, including Interferon-β, glatiramer acetate and Natlizumab. The goal of
DMD's are to decelerate or halter the progression of the disease by decreasing
relapse-rate [3][18]. Such treatments have not been very successful for patients
suering from progressive MS [27]. However, studies indicate that EPO might be
a very promising agent for neuroprotection and neuroregeneration in progressive
MS [10]. The eect of EPO is explained in Section 2.4.
2.1.3
Expanded Disability Status Scale
The Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS) is a widely used scale to quantify
clinical disability in MS. The scale was developed by John Kurtzke in 1983 [22]
as an expanded version of his previous Disability Status Scale [28]. It ranges
from 0 to 10 with 0.5 point steps (except for 0.5), where 0 indicate normal
without neurological signs or symptoms and 10 indicate death due to MS. The
EDSS quanties disability in eight functional systems: pyramidal, cerebellar,
brain stem, sensory, bowel and bladder, visual, cerebral, and others. Step 1.0
to 4.5 refers to people with MS who are fully ambulatory without aid and step
5.0 to 9.5 refer to the loss of ambulatory ability [22].
Dogonowski et al. found in [6] a signicant positive correlation between the
expression of motor resting-state connectivity in left PMd (part of the premotor
regions) and EDSS scores in RRMS and SPMS patients. This eect was shown
to be stronger when only RRMS patients was considered and no signicant cor-
relation was found when considering the group of SPMS alone. This increase in
the expression of motor resting-state connectivity might reect an adaptive cor-
tical motor reorganisation in order to preserve motor function. This eect seems
to be restricted to the relapsing-remitting stage [6]. Furthermore Dogonowski
et al. found in [5] a linear decrease in regional homogeneity of cerebellar regions
and EDSS scores in MS patients, indicating that MS impairs regional connectiv-
ity in this region. In this work permutation testing as well as regression analysis
were performed in order to investigate if a correlation between the expression
of resting-state patterns and EDSS scores exist in progressive MS patients. In
==PAGE:26==
8
Background
this project a larger sample size of progressive MS patients was used than in [6]
and [5] and both PPMS and SPMS patients were included.
2.2
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
MRI utilizes the fact that water is an essential part of the human body and
therefore consists of large amounts of hydrogen atoms. The hydrogen atom's
nucleus have one positively charged proton and this charge causes the hydrogen
nuclei to spin around their own axes. The spin creates a magnetic moment and
the nuclei becomes magnetic along their rotational-axes. If a strong magnetic
eld B0, measured in Tesla (T), is applied to the spins the net magnetization
of the protons will partially align along the B0 eld. This net magnetisation is
denoted M0 [29].
In MRI the orientation of B0 is usually in the z−direction.
The degree of
alignment is proportional to the strength of the eld. The nuclei spin around
the B0 eld in a cone-like motion known as precession. This phenomenon is
illustrated in Figure 2.1. A radio frequency (RF) wave can be used to perturb M0
Figure 2.1: The net magnetization M0 precess around the B0 eld.
away from the equilibrium (B0). When the RF pulse is switched o again M0 will
precess around the longitudinal z-axis with a frequency according to the power
of the eld, and then return to equilibrium. This is known as relaxation and the
time period for M0 to reach equilibrium is called the relaxation time. During
relaxation the spins emit measurable radio waves with a frequency proportional
to the strength of B0. This frequency f is known as the Larmor Frequency and
is described by the Larmor Equation [29]:
f = γ · B0,
(2.1)
where the proportionality factor γ is called the gyromagnetic ratio which is
approximately 42 MHz/T for protons [29].
==PAGE:27==
2.2 Magnetic Resonance Imaging
9
The emitted signal from the protons are called the Free Induction Decay (FID).
The FID signal is the basis of MR-images. To change the direction of M0 the RF
waves must be on resonance, meaning they must have the same frequency as the
rotation of M0, described by Equation 2.1. When this is satised the RF pulse
will push M0 away from the z−axis. In practice these RF pulses are emitted by
coils placed around the subject in the scanner and are produced in the transverse
(xy) plane [29]. The coordinate system in relation to the scanner is illustrated
in Figure 2.2 The M0 signal can be divided into components: Mz, which is the
longitudinal magnetisation and Mxy, which is the transversal magnetisation.
After the RF pulse is switched o Mxy decreases on a time scale T2 and Mz
approaches M0 on a time scale T1 [30]. At equilibrium Mxy=0 and Mz=M0.
T1 and T2 depend on mobility of the molecules and B0. In the human body it
Figure 2.2: The coordinate system of MRI acquisition in relation to the scanner.
is the dierence in these relaxation times that allow for contrast in MR-images
and thereby allow for visualisation of the structures in the body [29].
During image acquisition these dierences in tissue can be emphasised by ma-
nipulating the settings of sequences used for imaging. The echo time (TE) is
the time from the RF pulse is emitted to the FID is recorded and the repetition
time (TR) is the time between the RF pulse emissions. By using short TE and
TR, compared to T1, the T1 contrast is enhanced and a so-called T1-weighted
image is obtained. By using a long TE and TR a T2 weighted image is obtained
[29].
Spatial localization techniques of the FID is necessary for imaging. To do this
gradient coils are introduced to provide a linear variation in the strength of B0,
==PAGE:28==
10
Background
thus the resonance frequency varies in dierent planes [29]. The resonance fre-
quency of the protons are changed along the z-axis, the frequency of precession
changes along the x-axis and the dierence in phase is created along the y-axis.
By this gradient scheme the MR signal has a frequency and phase encoding that
can be used for spatial localization. When inhomogeneities in the magnetic eld
are introduced and the nuclei precess at dierent frequencies dephasing will oc-
cur. The dephasing leads to a loss of signal, as the spins come out of phase and
cancel out each other. The loss of signal happens on a time-scale T ⋆
2 , and the
dephasing can be refocused either by another pulse or by the use of opposing
gradients [29].
The dephasing also creates spin patterns of the nuclei, known as phase-rolls.
Dierent phase roll patterns are created by applying dierent gradients with
dierent strengths, directions, and durations.
Each phase roll pattern is as-
signed with a vector k, and each vector k is represented as a point in k-space.
Each signal is recorded as a function of the k-vector and the measured RF sig-
nal indicates the degree of similarity between the phase roll patterns and the
object in the scanner. The central regions in k-space contain image contrast
information and the outer regions contain information about ner structural
details. The reconstructed images are calculated as linear combination of sinu-
soidal patterns weighted by the magnitude of the measured RF-signal. Images
are obtained by sampling the k-space and applying an inverse Fourier transform
to obtain the localisation in image space [29].
To produce dierent images dierent image sequences are used. These sequences
use dierent times (TE and TR), pulses and gradients to obtain images with
emphasis on desired structures. The most commonly used sequences are Spin
Echo (SE) and Gradient Echo (GE) sequences or variations of these. In an SE
sequence the magnetisation is rst rotated 90◦by an RF excitation pulse, and
the inhomogeneities in the eld and tissue give a dephasing over time. Then a
RF refocusing pulse is applied and rotates the magnetisation 180◦, which refocus
the dephased signal. In a GE sequence inverse gradients are used to refocuses
the magnetisation instead of a 180◦RF pulse. In classic SE and GE sequences
a single line in k-space is recorded with a single excitation [29].
Echo planar imaging (EPI) is a GE sequence that allows for very fast data
acquisition. Instead of recording a single line in k-space after each excitation, the
entire k-space is sampled after a single excitation [29]. The k-space trajectories
for a traditional GE sequence and an EPI sequence are illustrated in Figure 2.3.
During this rapid acquisition the outer parts of k-space are dicult to reach,
thus EPI images have a limited resolution.
Since an entire slice is acquired
after a single pulse, an entire volume can be obtained in milliseconds [31], which
makes the EPI sequence very suitable for functional imaging as it can achieve a
relatively high temporal resolution.
==PAGE:29==
2.2 Magnetic Resonance Imaging
11
Figure 2.3: k-space trajectory for a traditional GE sequence. One line is acquired
in k-space after each excitation (left). k-space trajectory for an EPI sequence.
All k-space lines are acquired after a singe excitation (right).
2.2.1
Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging
fMRI is an indirect measure of neuronal activity.
It is based on the BOLD
response, which was rst discovered by Ogawa et al. in 1990 [32].
The BOLD contrast is the change of the MR-signal following the oxygenation
changes [33].
An increase in cerebral blood ow (CBF) gives rise to a net
increase in oxygenated haemoglobin (Hb) in the capillaries.
An oxygenated
haemoglobin molecule has diamagnetic properties that weakens the magnetic
eld, whereas deoxygenated haemoglobin (dHb) has paramagnetic properties
that strengthen the magnetic eld [33]. This local increase in the magnetic eld
gives a shortening of the T ⋆
2 time constant, and the MR signal will decrease
faster in the presence of dHb [33].
According to the Buxton Balloon Model proposed in [34], when a brain region
is activated the requirements for oxygen in that area is increased. The increased
oxygen consumption rst gives rise to an elevation of dHb in that area, which
lowers the signal.
To counteract this the CBF to the area increases.
This
increase is larger than the increase in oxygen consumption, hence at this time
the concentration of Hb in the area is larger than the dHb concentration. This
prolongs T ⋆
2 , which results in an increase in the MR-signal. This response to
activation is often modelled by a haemodynamic response function (HRF). The
dynamics of the BOLD response is illustrated in Figure 2.4.
==PAGE:30==
12
Background
Figure 2.4: The dynamics of the BOLD response from the Buxton Balloon
Model [34].
fMRI experiments often involve some sort of paradigm where the subject either
performs a task or is exposed to some form of stimulus to activate this haemo-
dynamic response. However, this is not the case for rs-fMRI, where the subject
is at rest. rs-fMRI is explained in the next section.
2.2.2
Resting-State Functional Magnetic Resonance Imag-
ing
rs-fMRI measures spontaneous, low frequency uctuations in the BOLD-signal
(0.01-0.1 Hz [1]) at rest, i.e. the subject is not performing a task or exposed to
external stimulations. The importance of these uctuations was st discovered
by Biswal et al. in 1995 and is described in [1]. They showed that uctuations
were highly correlated among brain regions that were functionally correlated.
Prior to this the rs-fMRI signal was considered a noise component. These areas
that show a BOLD signal synchrony is said to be functionally connected. Do-
gonowski et al. showed in [4] and [5] that patients suering from MS appear to
have an abnormal pattern of motor resting-state functional connectivity as well
as resting-state regional connectivity in the brain. Therefore rs-fMRI was used
in this project to asses any changes that may occur in MS patients in response
to EPO treatment.
==PAGE:31==
2.3 Brain Anatomy and Function
13
2.3
Brain Anatomy and Function
In this section a short overview of the brain anatomy and function will be given
with special focus on the Default Mode Network (DMN) and the motor network.
The brain is part of the CNS and is located within the cranial cavity. It consist
of the brainstem, the cerebellum, the diencephalon and the cerebrum.
The
brainstem connects the spinal cord to the remainder of the brain and can be
further partitioned into the medulla oblongata, pons, midbrain and reticular
formation. Cerebellum is attached to the brainstem and communicates with
other regions of the CNS. Diencephalon is located between the brainstem and the
cerebrum and its most important components are the thalamus, subthalamus,
epithalamus and hypothalamus. Cerebrum is the outermost part of the brain
and it accounts for about 90 % of the total brain weight. The outer surface
of the cerebrum is called the cerebral cortex, consisting of gray matter (GM)
containing nerve cell bodies (GM also appear in clusters deep inside the brain).
The cerebrum is separated into left and right hemispheres by a longitudinal
ssure. The gyri and sulci are folds that increase the surface area of the cortex
of the cerebrum signicantly. Multiple gyri and sulci divide each hemisphere
into lobes, named after the skull bones overlying each one: frontal lobe, parietal
lobe, occipital lobe and temporal lobe. The brain divided into lobes are shown
in Figure 2.5.
Figure 2.5: Lateral view of the brain. It shows medulla oblongata, pons, cere-
bellum and cerebrum. Cerebrum is divided by the gyri and sulci into lobes:
Frontal lobe, parietal lobe, occipital lobe and temporal lobe. Figure by Bruce
Blaus via Wikimedia Commons.
==PAGE:32==
14
Background
The white matter (WM) of the brain (cerebral medulla) is located in the central
part of the brain, which consist of tracts that connect areas of cerebral cortex
to each other or to other parts of the CNS.
Furthermore, the brain contains four cavities called ventricles, which are con-
nected through dierent channels. Two of them, referred to as lateral ventricles,
are located in each of the cerebral hemispheres. The ventricular system are lled
with cerebrospinal uid (CSF), which is a clear uid having several functions,
including protection of the CNS.
The brain requires a constant blood supply to maintain its normal function,
which is carried by the internal carotid arteries and the vertebral arteries. The
vertebral arteries join to form the basilar artery. Branches of the basilar artery
and internal carotid arteries complete a circle of arteries called the cerebral
arterial circle, also known as the circle of Willis. Branches from the circle of
Willis and the basal artery supply blood to the brain.
The arteries in the brain rapidly split into capillaries. The epithelial cells of
these capillaries are covered by extensions of astrocyte cell bodies, known as
foot processes. The astrocytes promote the formation of tight junction between
the endothelial cells, which form the the blood-brain barrier. The blood-brain
barrier serves as a highly selective permeability barrier that regulate the move-
ment of materials from the blood into the brain [35], and as EPO can pass
through the bloodbrain barrier [9] it can have an impact inside the brain.
2.3.1
Resting-State Brain Networks
The baseline state of the brain is not an inactive state, but seems to be very
dynamic, showing coherent low-frequency BOLD signal uctuation. These co-
herent, low-frequency uctuations corresponds to resting-state networks which
are grouped in separate functionally and anatomically plausible networks [36].
However, the actual neurophysiological origin of the resting-state networks still
remains unclear.
A number of brain resting-state networks were presented in [36] including the
default-mode network (DMN) and regions involved in motor function, visual
precessing, memory, auditory processing, and executive functioning. This nd-
ing correspond to earlier research, which has shown coherent BOLD uctuation
within particular neuroanatomical systems [1][37][38][39][40].
==PAGE:33==
2.3 Brain Anatomy and Function
15
2.3.1.1
Default Mode Network
The most robust resting-state brain network identied in humans is the DMN.
It is is a network of brain regions that are activated during rest and deactivated
during specic goal-oriented activity [41][42][38][39][40]). The function of the
DMN is not fully understood, but it has been suggested that it is related to
mental processes such as introspection, mind-wandering, remembering the past
and imagining the future [43][44][45]. The DMN is believed to consist of the
prefrontal (Brodmann areas (BA) 11), anterior cingulate (BA32), posterior cin-
gulate (BA 23/31), the inferior temporal gyrus (BA 20/37), and the superior
parietal region (BA7) [40][36]. It is believed that hippocampus also plays an
important role in the default-mode network [46]. A gure of the BA areas are
shown in Figure 2.6. The DMN is an important network in the brain in relation
to MS, as studies have shown abnormalities in the DMN in patients suering
from MS [47][48][49][50][51].
(a) 3D
(b) Sagittal plane
Figure 2.6: BA areas shown a) in 3D and b) as a sagittal plane. Figures by
Polina Tishin via Wikimedia Commons
2.3.1.2
Motor network
The cortical motor system include the sensori-motor cortex and the premotor
regions.
The sensori-motor cotex can be separated into the primary motor
cortex, which occupies the BA4 and the primary somatosensory cortices, which
occupies BA 1/2/3. The premotor cortex occupies part of BA6 [52] (see Figure
2.6) The primary motor cortex control many voluntary movements, particularly
the ne motor movements of the hands and the premotor cortex plays a role in
planning movements, among many other functions [35].
==PAGE:34==
16
Background
2.4
Erythropoietin
This section is provided to give an explanation of the function of EPO and
furthermore to give a short review of recent studies that aim to explore the
therapeutic eects of EPO on several neurological diseases.
EPO is a hormone produced mainly in the kidney. Its central role is erythro-
poiesis, which is the process by which new red blood cells (erythrocytes) are
produced [35]. However, EPO is also produced by neurons and astrocytes in the
brain and exerts essential neurobiological actions [53].
A study with animal models of acute brain damage and chronic neurodegener-
ative conditions showed that systemically administered EPO can pass through
the bloodbrain barrier where it has neurotrophic and neuroprotective eects
[9]. In another study, the therapeutic eect of ARA290 has been investigated
on rats. ARA290 is a nonerythropoietic analogue of EPO which provide neu-
roprotective and anti-inammatory eects like EPO, but does not stimulate
hematopoiesis. It was shown that ARA290 suppresses inammation in exper-
imental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) (EAE is the most widely recog-
nized animal model of MS) [7]. A study of patients with depression showed
that EPO appear to have an antidepressant-like eects [54].
Studies shows
that long-term recombinant human erythropoietin administration in humans
enhance neuropsychological function in patients suering from progressive MS
[10] and schizophrenia [55]. Several mechanisms may cause these eects, includ-
ing up-regulation of brain-derived neurotrophic factor [56], neurogenesis [57] and
hippocampal plasticity [58]. Hence, these studies suggest that EPO may be a
promising agent for neuroprotection and neuroregeneration in progressive MS
patients. However, possible side eects of EPO such as increases in haematocrit,
increased blood pressure and increased risk of thrombosis [59] will need to be
further investigated, since long-term treatment is required for MS therapy.
To our knowledge the eect of EPO on progressive MS patients has not yet been
investigated through rs-fMRI analysis.
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 3
Dataset
The dataset used in this project was acquired from 2010 to 2013 as part of
a double-blind placebo controlled EPO treatment study of progressive MS pa-
tients, conducted by the Danish Multiple Sclerosis Center at Rigshospitalet. 49
progressive MS patients were involved in the study (16 PPMS and 33 SPMS).
Magnetic resonance images of the patients were acquired at the Danish Re-
search Center for Magnetic Resonance (DRCMR) at Hvidovre Hospital, includ-
ing structural MRI images and rs-fMRI images. In total three scans were ac-
quired for each subject, one in week 0 (before treatment), one in week 24, and
one in week 48. The images were obtained with a T2⋆-weighted EPI sequence
(TR=2490, TE=30m s, ip angle=90◦, 239 whole-brain volumes over 10 min-
utes). Out of these 49 subjects only 42 completed all three scanning sessions,
and these 42 subjects are the ones used for further analysis in this project. 22
of the subjects were treated with high-dose EPO (recombinant human EPO)
and the remaining 20 received placebo (a saline solution). In the course of the
48 weeks the patients received up to 17 doses of either EPO or saline. Due to
discomfort or side eects not all patients received all planned doses. Table 3.1
summarises the demographic and clinical characteristics of the two groups. It
is seen that age is the only parameter that is signicantly dierent between the
two groups.
==PAGE:36==
18
Dataset
All
EPO
Placebo
p
subjects
group
group
Number of
Total
42
22
20
0.7532
subjects
Men
20
11
9
Women
22
11
11
Age
Mean
50.8
53.5
48
0.0137
(in years)
Median
51.5
54.5
50
Range
32-60
41-60
32-59
EDSS score
Mean
5.31
5.19
5.42
0.1978
Median
5.5
5.5
5.5
Range
3-7.5
3-7.5
4-6.5
Lesion loads
Mean
12.03
11.3
12.8
0.5702
(in ml)
Median
6.5
4.49
9.04
Range
0.72-80.6
1.08-80.6
0.72-49.7
Phenotype
PPMS
14
9
5
SPMS
28
13
15
Table 3.1: Demographic and clinical characteristics
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 4
Methods
In this chapter the methods used for the analysis are described. The analysis
is divided into three parts: Preprocessing, rst-level analysis and second-level
analysis. The rst-level analysis was performed on subject level and consisted
of two dierent feature extraction methods. The second-level analysis was per-
formed on group level and consisted of statistical analysis, classication and
regression.
4.1
Statistical Parametric Mapping
Statistical Parametric Mapping (SPM) is a statistical analysis method for func-
tional neurological images [60]. This voxel-based method produces parametric
maps based on dierent statistics such as Students's t or F-distributions. The
obtained SPMs are non-linear functions of the original data [60]. This para-
metric approach assumes that the errors are additive and Gaussian [60]. The
method usually contain three stages: preprocessing, modelling and inference.
The raw data is preprocessed, a model is then tted at each voxel, usually with
the General Linear Model (GLM), and inference is made based on the outputs
of the model [60]. SPM uses a mass-univariate approach which means the the
same model is tted to all voxels [60]. In this project the SPM8 and SPM12
==PAGE:38==
20
Methods
toolboxes have been used (Wellcome Trust Centre for Neuroimaging 1). The
toolboxes have been used for some preprocessing steps as well as a second level
analysis.
4.1.1
The General Linear Model
The GLM can be formulated at each voxel and expressed as:
y = Xβ + ε
(4.1)
where y is the N × 1 vector of observed data. X is the N × r design matrix,
which contains all eects of interest as well as all modelled nuisance eect, that
models a cause of the data. β is the r × 1 vector of r regression coecients,
and ε is N × 1 vector of random errors [60]. The regressions coecients can be
estimated by
ˆβ = (XT X)−1XT y
(4.2)
This is known as the least squares estimate which seek to minimise the error
between the observed response, and the estimated response [60]. The general
linear model is used in this project for both preprocessing and second-level
analyses. The details of its application is described later in this chapter.
4.1.2
Nuisance Covariate Regression
This section is provided to describe how specic nuisance eects can be regressed
out of the data using the GLM. This can be used prior to the methods of analysis
that does not directly use the GLM. This enables investigation of only the
eect of interest. In this work age, EDSS score, sex, lesion load and phenotype
of the subject were used as nuisance covariate and regressed out of the data.
First a design matrix, denoted Xcov were construed comprising of one column
containing ones, and one column for each of the nuisance covariates. β were
then calculated as:
β = (XT
covXcov)−1XT
covy
(4.3)
where y is the observed data. Then the data explained by the nuisance covariate
were calculated as:
ˆy = Xcovβ
(4.4)
The residual Xres is then calculated and used for further analysis.
1http://www.l.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/
==PAGE:39==
4.2 Preprocessing
21
4.2
Preprocessing
The assumption when analysing fMRI data is that each voxel represents a unique
and unchanging location in the brain.
In reality, due to head motion, eld
homogeneity etc., this assumption does not always hold. Therefore a series of
preprocessing steps have been applied to the fMRI data. The pipeline of the
preprocessing steps performed is shown in Figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: The pipeline of the preprocessing steps.
The steps are listed in
chronological order from left to right. NVR denote nuisance variable regression.
Reorientation, slice-timing correction, unwarping, realignment, nuisance vari-
able regression and smoothing were performed in SPM8, the coregistration and
normalisation steps were performed in SPM12, despiking was performed in mat-
lab.
4.2.1
Slice Timing Correction
The rs-fMRI images were acquired slice-wise, which resulted in dierent acquisi-
tion times for each slice. In addition the data were acquired using an interleaved
EPI sequence to reduce inter slice cross-talk, which complicated this time delay
further.
Thus, slice-timing correction is needed in order to correct the data
such that it appears that each slice were acquired at the same time. Slice tim-
ing correction was performed in SPM8 using a method relying on temporal sinc
interpolation of the time series. Interpolation in the time series requires that
the sampling rate obey the Nyquist theorem, which is a reasonable assumption
for the signal of interest in fMRI [61]. However some noise components, such as
cardiac noise, may not obey the Nyquist Theorem. The reference slice, which is
the slice that the other slices are corrected to, were chosen as the slice acquired
halfway through the volume, in order to minimize the timing correction made
to the data.
==PAGE:40==
22
Methods
4.2.2
Reorientation
The fMRI images originally had an origin far from the anterior commissure (AC),
which is used as the origin in Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) space [62].
The location of AC is shown in Figure 4.2. Thus to aid the realignment process,
the images were rst brought in approximate alignment by manually choosing
the origin near the AC. The manual reorientation was performed in SPM12
using appropriate translations and rotations.
Figure 4.2: Saggital plane of the brain showing the location of the AC.
4.2.3
Unwarping
EPI data is very sensitive to magnetic eld inhomogeneity, which is the most
common cause of geometric distortion in fMRI images, because the MR recon-
struction assumes that the B0 eld is uniform [63]. The distortion is usually
seen as pixels that are shifted away from where they should appear. This shift
is limited to the phase-encoding direction due to the low bandwidth of EPI in
the phase encoding direction [64]. The B0 inhomogeneity is mainly due to non
optimal shim and the dierent magnetic susceptibility in the dierent tissues of
the brain. Such internal eld inhomogeneities often arise in areas where there
is an intersection between two materials with dierent susceptibilities, particu-
larly near the cavities, i.e the sinuses in the frontal lobe and ear canals in the
temporal lobes [65]. In addition the disturbance of the eld will change during
head motion and can also arise because of blood ow in large vessels, i.e around
the saggital sinus [66]. This distortion can complicate the matching of the func-
tional images to the structural images, and it is therefore important to unwarp
the distorted EPI images. In this project a eld map based method [64] was
used to unwarp the EPI images to correct for eld inhomogeniety, which was
performed using a DRCMR in-house SPM toolbox. The eld map of the B0 eld
was obtained using two phase images acquired at two distinct echo times which
==PAGE:41==
4.2 Preprocessing
23
were subtracted (the subtraction was done automatically in the scanner). The
magnitude of the subtracted phase image at each voxel was then proportional to
the B0 eld strength. If the main magnetic eld was completely homogeneous,
the magnitude of the subtracted phase image would be the same in every voxel.
However, if the eld was inhomogeneous the subtracted phase image would not
be uniform [64]. Thus, the subtracted phase image represents how fast the sig-
nal phase changed, which provided a frequency map. The frequency map was
used to generate a eld map in the frequency domain, which was converted to a
voxel displacement map (VDM) in the spatial domain by simple multiplication.
The VDM was reoriented, using the reorientation mat le obtained from the
reorientation of the fMRI images and was nally applied on the EPI images to
re-sample voxel values.
4.2.4
Realignment
Realignment, also called motion correction, refers to the process of matching
individual volumes in order to correct for head motion between scans. However,
this step does not correct for spin history and movement during acquisition. This
is an important spatial pre-processing step, since even minor movements can
reduce the quality of the fMRI signal signicantly. The reason why the fMRI-
signal is very vulnerable to head motion is because some voxels will be displaced
to another part of the brain, that might have dierent signal intensity (for
example a GM voxel displaced to a WM voxel). Thus this eect occurs at edges
in the images where there is an intersection between two dierent tissue types,
for example at the edge of the brain and near the ventricles. The realignment
procedure was carried out in SPM8 which uses a least square approach and a
rigid body transformation (three rotations and three translations) [67][61]. The
reference image, to which the other images of the time series were realigned,
was chosen as the rst image in the time series.
4.2.5
Despiking
When assessing correlation between nearby brain regions even very small head
movements (0.5 to 1 mm) can cause large signal change. These movements,
often seen in children and diseased subjects, can be dicult to remove using
traditional methods [68]. The signal outliers will appear as spikes when inspect-
ing the time series of the voxel intensities. One way to deal with these outliers
is to exclude an entire volume from the time series, however, this will break the
time series and complicate further analysis. Therefore, so-called despiking was
performed in matlab based on the method of the AFNI 3dDespike toolbox [69].
==PAGE:42==
24
Methods
(a) Time series before despiking
(b) Time series after despiking
Figure 4.3: Time series for a single voxel (volume number on the x-axis and
voxel intensity on the y-axis) before and after despiking. It is seen that the
large spike around volume 195 is removed after despiking.
Using this despiking method a curve was tted to the voxel data times series
v(t). The curve is given as:
f(t) = a + bt + ct2 +
k=L
X
k=1

dk · sin
2πkt
T

+ ek · cos
2πkt
T

(4.5)
where T is the duration of the time series, L is the order and a, b, c, d, e are
parameters chosen to minimize the sum over t of |v(t) −f(t)|. The residual was
calculated as the median absolute deviation (MAD) for each time point. The
standard deviation σ was then calculated as
p
π/2· MAD and for each time
point s(t) = (v(t) −f(t))/σ was calculated. If s exceeded a xed threshold, c1,
then s was replaced by s′ = c1 + (c2 −c1) · tanh((s −c1)/(c2 −c1). c2 is an
upper range of the allowed deviation from the curve. Here, the parameters was
chosen as: c1 = 2, c2 = 2.5 and L = NT/30 = 239/30 ≈8, where NT denote
the number of timepoints. [69]. Figure 4.3 shows a time series for a single voxel
before (4.3a) and after despiking (4.3b). It is seen that the large spike around
volume 195 was removed by the despiking procedure.
4.2.6
Coregistration
To allow for later comparison between the ndings in the low resolutions func-
tional data and the anatomy in the high resolution structural data, the structural
==PAGE:43==
4.2 Preprocessing
25
data was coregistered to match the functional data. Since the functional data
has been reoriented and therefore was in the desired space, it was chosen to
use these as reference images for the coregistration. To improve the coregis-
tration, the structural data was rst skull stripped using a segmentation mask.
A bias corrected mean fMRI image was used as reference to which the skull-
stripped MP-RAGE structural image was coregistered. The coregistration was
performed on data from the same subject, thus the size and shape of the brain in
the functional and structural images were the same. Therefore, a 6-parameter
(3 rotations and 3 translations) rigid body transformation was used in SPM
[70]. The parameters for the optimal transformation was found as those which
maximised the normalised mutual information.
4.2.7
Normalisation
The size and shape of the brain varies a lot throughout the population. There-
fore, to allow inter-subject comparison, both the structural and functional data
were normalised, in order to create a voxel-to-voxel correspondence between the
subjects. Unlike the coregistration, normalisation deals with brains of dier-
ent shapes and sizes, so linear transformations alone are insucient. Therefore
SPM12 uses both a 12-parameter ane transformation (translations, rotation,
scaling and shearing) to get the correct size and positions and a non-linear warp-
ing to account for the shape variations [70]. SPM12 uses a unied segmentation
approach that segment the data into tissue types and then normalise one tissue
type at a time using a tissue probability map (TPM) [70]. The transforma-
tion that best ts the TPM-template to the TPM of the data was found and
was then inverted and applied to the data, thereby normalising the data to
the template. First the coregistrered structural images were normalised to the
International Consortium for Brain Mapping (ICBM) space template based on
European brains [70]. The transformation found when normalising the struc-
tural data was then applied to the functional data.
4.2.8
Nuisance Variable Regression
Besides movement, several nuisance factor occur, signals such as low frequency
scanner drift, aliasing from pulse and respiration, and spin history eects are
present in fMRI data F[71][72][73]. This was accounted for by performing Nui-
sance Variable Regression (NVR) using the GLM with the mentioned nuisance
factors as regressors. To account for low frequency scanner drift discrete cosine
high-pass ltering with a cut-o frequency of 1/128 Hz (≈0.008 Hz) was ap-
plied in the time domain. The rs-fMRI frequencies of interest is around 0.01-0.1
==PAGE:44==
26
Methods
Hz [1], so these were not aected by the high-pass ltering. To account for the
eects of pulse and respiration biorhythms were recorded during image acqui-
sition for most patients. However, excessive noise in these measurements made
it impossible to reliably detect the phase of these physiological signals in most
subjects, therefore ltering of these eects have not been performed. The eects
of pulsation is often seen around the large arteries in the brain such as the Circle
of Willis and the medial cerebral artery [74]. Respiration cause changes in the
B0 eld due to chest movements and the eects of this will be seen around the
ventricles and at the edge of the brain [75]. Since these have not been ltered
out care has be taken when analysing the activations near the mentioned ar-
eas. When the images were acquired at a time t, the number of spins that were
excited (and thereby the magnitude of the recorded signal) was dependent on
the subjects position in the scanner. Thus, it was also dependent on the spins
that were exited when the previous images were acquired, and therefore by the
previous position in the scanner. This is known as spin history eect and is
especially seen when TR ≈T1 [73]. The NVR and ltering was performed using
a DRCMR in-house SPM toolbox.
4.2.9
Smoothing
In order to increase the signal to noise ratio (SNR) and correct for residual
functional/anatomical dierences between subjects, the images were smoothed
as a nal pre-processing step. In the smoothing procedure the assumption is
that the signal of interest is more smooth than the noise. Smoothing was done
in SPM12 by convolving the image volumes with a Gaussian kernel [70]. The
full-width of half maximum (FWHM) of the Gaussian kernel was chosen as [5 5
5] mm.
==PAGE:45==
4.3 Feature Extraction
27
4.3
Feature Extraction
As a rst level analysis of the data dierent features were extracted from each
subject at each scanning session.
This was done to assess possible changes
in the EPO group compared to the placebo group in a second level analysis.
The extracted features were also used for classication in order to see if it was
possible to distinguish one group from the other.
Two dierent feature ex-
traction methods were used to extract features: Regional Homogeneity (ReHo)
and Independent Component Analysis (ICA). ReHo provides information about
intra-regional resting-state functional connectivity and ICA provides informa-
tion about inter-regional resting-state functional connectivity.
4.3.1
Regional Homogeneity
The intra-regional connectivity in a subject can be measured by calculating the
ReHo. ReHo measures the local synchronisation of the fMRI signal times series
and was rst proposed for fMRI data by Zang et al in [11]. In a previous study
patients with MS have shown reduced regional homogeneity in the cerebellum
[5]. In this project ReHo was applied in order to see if a change in regional
homogeneity can be seen between the patients in the EPO and placebo group.
ReHo is a data driven method and therefore requires no assumptions or a pri-
ori knowledge about the data.
The measure of ReHo is based on Kendall's
Coecient of Concordance(KCC), denoted W, which is calculated as:
W =
Pn
i=1(Ri)2 −n(Rm)2
1
12K2(n3 −n)
,
(4.6)
where K is the number of voxels used as a neighbourhood, n is the number of
volumes in the time series, Ri is the sum of ranks across the K voxels for the
time point i and Rm is the mean of the Ri's. In this project a neighbourhood
of 3 × 3 × 3 (K = 27) was used. The number of volumes in the time series was
n = 239 [11]. A W-map was obtained by calculating W for each voxel, which
was z-transformed to obtain a Z-map:
Z = W −µW
σW
,
(4.7)
where µW is the mean W value of the whole volume and σW is the standard de-
viation of the whole volume. The ReHo analysis was performed voxel-wise using
matlab. The analysis was done on the non-smoothed data, and the obtained
z-maps were subsequently smoothed using a Gaussian kernel with FWHM as
[5 5 5] mm. The obtained maps from the ReHo analysis will in this thesis be
referred to as KCC-maps.
==PAGE:46==
28
Methods
4.3.2
Independent Component Analysis
In this work ICA was used to assess the inter-regional connectivity of the pa-
tients.
ICA is multivariate data driven statistical method, which is suitable
for detecting resting-state networks [36][76]. ICA separate independent sources,
that have been mixed, from observed data such that the sources are maximally
independent [76]. The concept of ICA was introduced in [12], and it has been
shown that the method is well suited for fMRI data exploratory analysis [77][78].
4.3.2.1
Theoretical Basis of ICA
In this work ICA is assumed noise free. Let the data from an fMRI experiment
be denoted as a p × n matrix X, where p is the number of time points in the
experiment and n is number of voxels.
In classical ICA a decomposition is
sought such that [79]:
X = AS
(4.8)
where A is a p × p mixing matrix and S is p × n source matrix where each row
contains statistically independent spatial maps. The ith row of S is associated
with the time course contained in the ith column of the mixing matrix A. The
aim of ICA is to estimate the unmixing matrix, W = A−1, so that [79]:
S = WX
(4.9)
4.3.2.2
ICA Assumptions
Several assumptions must be met in order to apply ICA. The main assumption
is statistical independence between each of the rows of the sources S, which is
a good assumption for many types of data. This means that the probability
density function (pdf) of the rows of S must be equal to the multiplication
of each marginal pdf of the rows of S. Furthermore, the number of mixtures
and the number of sources must be equal, and the mixtures need to be linearly
independent from each other. In addition the ICA model is assumed to be noise
free, which can be considered as an approximation of the more realistic noisy
model.
Another assumption is that the data have zero mean, which can be
assumed without loss of generality. This means that A must be square and full
rank. Finally, the sources has to be non-Gaussian (except for one single source
that can be allowed to be Gaussian) [80][81].
==PAGE:47==
4.3 Feature Extraction
29
4.3.2.3
The GIFT toolbox
In this project ICA group analysis needed to be performed to allow for inferences
about groups of subjects. However, contrary to univariate methods, non-group
ICA is not naturally generalized to a method appropriately to draw group infer-
ences. For instance, when using the GLM, the regressions coecients of interest
is specied by the user, and since all subjects in the group share the same re-
gressions coecients it is straightforward to draw inferences about groups. This
is not the case in ICA, where dierent subjects in the group will have dier-
ent time courses [76]. However, a suitable multi-subject ICA analysis approach
were proposed in [76] and [82] among others, which is implemented in the GIFT
matlab toolbox [83]. In this project the GroupICATv3.0a GIFT toolbox has
been used to perform spatial ICA, in which spatially independent brain com-
ponents were calculated from the fMRI data. The three main steps in group
ICA were performed; data compression, ICA analysis and back reconstruction
[83]. Initially, the number of independent components was estimated from all
the fMRI data-sets using the procedure implemented in the GIFT toolbox. The
result of this estimate was used in the ICA analysis. The data was organized
using a temporal concatenation approach, where all 2D data matrices of every
single fMRI session were temporally stacked, as shown in Figure 4.4. This ap-
proach assumes common group maps but allows for unique time courses for each
subject.
Figure 4.4: Temporal concatenation of fMRI data
Data compression was performed to reduce the dimensions, primarily for com-
putational reasons, using Principal Component Analysis (PCA) [84]. The 126
scans were rst concatenated into one matrix, after which the group matrix
went through a data reduction step. In the second step ICA was applied to
the reduced data matrix to nd independent components.
The independent
components (spatial maps) are common for all scans. The mixing matrix (time
courses), however, are individual for each scan. The mixing matrix, which was
estimated in the ICA step has partitions that are unique for each subject. This
is graphically illustrated in Figure 4.5a. Several dierent ICA algorithms are
==PAGE:48==
30
Methods
available in the GIFT toolbox. In this project the so-called Infomax ICA algo-
rithm was used [85]. The components resulting from the ICA step are group
components. It was therefore necessary to perform back reconstruction to ob-
tain subject specic components.
In the back reconstruction step the single
subject data was projected onto the inverse of the subject-specic partition of
the mixing matrix [86]. This is graphically illustrated in Figure 4.5b The se-
lection process of functionally relavant ICA components that will be used for
second level analysis is explained in Section 5.2.2.
(a) ICA Analysis
(b) Back reconstruction
Figure 4.5: Graphical Illustration of group ICA as implemented in the GIFT
toolbox. (a) The ICA analysis step where the mixing matrix is estimated (b)
The back reconstruction step
==PAGE:49==
4.4 Statistical Analysis
31
4.4
Statistical Analysis
In order test a possible eect of EPO both parametric and non-parametric
methods of statistical analysis were applied as random eects group analysis.
The parametric test used was a exible factorial model performed using SPM12
and the non-parametric test used was a permutation test performed using the
FMRIB Software Library (FSL) Permutation Analysis of Linear Models (PALM)
toolbox [87].
4.4.1
Flexible Factorial Model
A factorial model was used because this design enables one to make inference
about an interaction between factors [60]. The model was applied to the data
using the GLM with a mass univariate approach [70], assuming that the errors
are additive and Gaussian.
In this second-level analysis the factorial design
was applied as a two-way Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) using SPM12. The
design consisted of three factors subjects, scans and groups. The scans-factor
was at three levels describing the scanning session for the subject (baseline,
weak 24, weak 48). The groups-factor was at two levels describing which group
the subjects belonged to (EPO or placbo). It was desired to model the two-way
interaction between scans and groups to asses a possible eect of EPO treatment
over time. The interactions scans by groups had 6 combination. No main eects
were modelled. The design matrix for this model is illustrated in Figure 4.6
The model parameters β were estimated using Restricted Maximum Likelihood.
Equal variance as well as dependence was assumed for subjects and sessions, for
groups unequal variance and independence was assumed.
To test the possible eect of the treatment two t-tests and three F-tests were
performed. The null hypothesis for all ve tests was formulated as:
H0 : cT β = 0
(4.10)
H1 : cT β ̸= 0
(4.11)
where β is the estimated model parameters and c is the contrast vector.
The t-tests were performed to test the dierence between the means µ of the
two groups, i.e µEP O > µplacebo and µplacebo > µEP O. The contrast vectors for
the two t-test were dened as:
cEP O>P lacebo =
1
−1
1
−1
1
−1
(4.12)
==PAGE:50==
32
Methods
Figure 4.6: The 126 × 6 design matrix of the two-way ANOVA exible factorial
model. Each row represents a subjects scanning session and each column is an
explanatory variable.
cEP O<P lacebo =
−1
1
−1
1
−1
1
(4.13)
For the three F-tests, one is performed to test a possible longitudinal eect in
the EPO group, one to test a possible longitudinal eect in the placebo, and one
to test the dierence between the longitudinal development of the two groups.
The contrast vectors for the three F-tests were dened as:
clongitudinalEP O =

1
0
−1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
−1
0

(4.14)
clongitudinalplacebo =
0
1
0
−1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
−1

(4.15)
clongitudinaldifference =
1
−1
−1
1
0
0
0
0
1
−1
−1
1

(4.16)
For the t-tests the null hypothesis states that there is no dierence in the means.
==PAGE:51==
4.4 Statistical Analysis
33
For the rst two F-test the null hypothesis states that there is no dierence
between the sessions (and hence no longitudinal eect) and for the third F-test
the null hypothesis states that there is no dierence between the longitudinal
developments of the two groups. Note that this was done at all voxels in the
volume. The test was performed on outputs from the feature extraction (rst-
level analysis), i.e. the a priori selected ICA features and the KCC features.
==PAGE:52==
34
Methods
4.4.2
Permutation Test
The essential concept of permutation testing is that if the experimental condition
has no eect on the data, then the labelling of observations by the corresponding
experimental condition is arbitrary. This can be used to test the eect of the
experimental condition [88], which will be explained in section 4.4.2.2. Permu-
tation testing is a great alternative to parametric testing when the assumptions
of the parametric approach are not guaranteed to be met. In addition, non-
parametric tests, opposed to parametric tests, are not constrained to the F or
t statistic [87]. Permutation tests were pioneered by Fisher [13] and Pitman
[89][90][91], but usage has only been practical after the availability of inexpen-
sive and powerful computers which are needed to carry out the calculations
involved. A permutation method for functional neuroimaging was introduced
by Holmes et al. in [92] which relies only on minimal assumptions and deals with
the multiple comparisons issue. Nicolas and Holmes demonstrated in [88] that
when the proper permutation assumptions are met, the non-parametric permu-
tation approach provides similar results as those achieved from a comparable
SPM approach. Furthermore their results revealed that in some circumstances,
the permutation method is more sensitive than the parametric methods [88].
4.4.2.1
Permutation Test Assumptions
Opposed to parametric tests, where the errors are assumed to follow a nor-
mal distribution, no explicit assumption about the distribution of the errors are
required for permutations testing. However, some assumptions are needed in
order to justify permuting the labels on the data [87]. If possible, the allocation
of conditions to scans should be randomized before performing the experiment
in order to avoid unexpected confounding eects and ensure that any possible
labelling is equally likely to be chosen [88]. However, explicit randomization
of conditions to scans are not always possible, for example subjects cannot be
randomly assigned to be normal controls or patients. In these cases weak dis-
tributional assumptions must be made, which require that the distributions for
the scans with dierent conditions have the same shape or are symmetric [88].
The design of the experiment may dictate blocks of observations that are jointly
exchangeable, referred to as exchangeability blocks, allowing data to be per-
muted within the block or alternatively permuted as a whole. The actual per-
mutations performed rely on the degree of exhangeability, which again rely on
the weak distributional assumptions that are made [87]. Note, that single sub-
ject fMRI data presents a challenge to non-parametric methods, because fMRI
==PAGE:53==
4.4 Statistical Analysis
35
data exhibits temporal autocorrelation, which violates the assumption of ex-
changeability of volumes within subjects.
However, when analysing a group
of subjects for population inference, only the assumption of exhangeability of
subjects is needed. Thus, multisubject analysis, which was performed in this
projects, are straightforward using a permutation test [87].
4.4.2.2
p-value
In order to test the eect of the experimental condition, several computational
steps must be performed. First, the statistic of interest must be computed for
each of the possible relabellings. Let N represent the number of random permu-
tations performed. let ti represent the statistic corresponding to the labelling
i and let T represent the value of the observed statistic corresponding to the
unpermuted labelling. The set of ti for all possible relabelling form the permuta-
tion distribution. The null hypothesis is that each of the ti are equally likely, so
the signicance of the observed statistic T can be determined by counting how
many times ti is found to be equal to or greater than T; the results is the p-value
[88]. Note that the p-values is discrete, with each possible p-value being a mul-
tiple of 1/N. Since the permutation distribution contains the observed statistic,
the smallest possible p-value is 1/N [87]. The critical value is the (⌊αN⌋+ 1)
largest member of the permutation distribution, and the test is signicant at
level α if T exceeds the critical value. An example of a permutation distribution
is shown in Figure 4.7.
It has been shown that when the number of possible permutations is large it is
not necessary to carry out all of these permutations for the test to be valid [93]
and the resulting procedure will be approximate exact [94].
4.4.2.3
Multiple Comparison Permutation Test
Until now only permutation test at a single voxels has been considered, however
multiplicity of testing must be taken into account [88]. Correction for multiple
testing using permutation tests, opposed to parametric settings, does not re-
quire more assumption to be made [87]. When considering multiple voxels, each
voxel in the volume of interest have a voxel level null hypothesis Hk
0 as well as
a test. Thus, some combined measure of error for this collection of tests must
be considered. The hypothesis of "no experimental eect anywhere" within the
volume of interest is known as the omnibus hypothesis, thus if any voxel hypoth-
esis is rejected it result in rejection of the omnibus hypothesis. The probability
of falsely rejecting the omnibus hypothesis is referred to as the familywise Type
==PAGE:54==
36
Methods
Figure 4.7: Histogram of the permutation distribution for a single voxel. In this
simple example all 20 possible permutations are carried out. The symmetry
about the y-axis, arises because for each possible labelling, the opposite labelling
is also possible which gives the same statistic but in the opposite direction. The
red lled line represent the critical value and the green dotted line represent the
observed statistic
I error [88]. A valid test must control the probability of familywise error. Weak
control implies that the probability of falsely rejecting the omnibus hypothesis
is less than α, known as the omnibus test [88]:
P(′′reject”HW |HW ) ≤α
(4.17)
where HW denote the omnibus hypothesis in the volume of interest. Since the
Type I error for individual voxels are not controlled, this test, has no localizing
power. The omnibus test can only declare "some experimental eect, some-
where". On the other hand, strong control of familywise error has localized
power, which can yield corrected p-values. This requires that the probability
of both the familywise Type I error and the Type I error at the voxel level is
considered. Strong control is maintained if and only if [88]:
P(′′reject”HU|HU) ≤α
(4.18)
where HU denote the omnibus hypothesis in a subset of voxels in the volume
of interest. Thus the validity of the omnibus test for a subset of voxels, is unaf-
fected by the correctness of the voxel null hypotheses elsewhere [88]. A method
for familywise error rate correction (FWER) is the suprathreshold cluster tests,
which threshold the statistic image at a predetermined primary threshold, and
then evaluate the extent of activation in a second level. In the second level a
suprathreshold cluster size test is performed which evaluate the signicance of
the size of connected suprathreshold regions. Regions that are greater than a
critical size are deemed activated. A nonparametric approach for FWER using
suprathreshold cluster size tests is simply to derive [92]. As the set of ti for all
==PAGE:55==
4.4 Statistical Analysis
37
possible relabelling is calculated at each voxel to generate the permutation dis-
tribution, the size of the largest cluster (above the primary threshold) across the
image for each permutation is also recorded. This create a permutation distri-
bution of the maximal suprathreshold cluster size. The critical suprathreshold
cluster size for the primary threshold is the [αN]+1 largest member of this per-
mutation distribution. Corrected p-values for each suprathreshold cluster in the
observed statistic image are then obtained by comparing their size to the permu-
tation distribution of the maximal cluster size [88]. This suprathreshold cluster
tests is graphically illustrated in Figure 4.8. Generally, these suprathreshold
cluster tests are more powerful for functional neuroimaging data than the so-
called single threshold method [95], in which the statistic image is thresholded at
a critical value and voxels exceeding the threshold are declared active. However,
note that the consequence of this extra power is a reduced localizing power, since
only the omnibus null hypothesis for the cluster, and not the null hypothesis for
voxels within a signicant cluster, are tested [88].
4.4.2.4
FSL PALM
In this project FSL PALM [87] were used as a tool for permutation testing with
the GLM on the extracted features from the rs-fMRI data. Several permutation
tests were performed on the a priori selected ICA feature components and KCC
features. In the design of this experiment the labels (EPO or placebo) were
randomly assigned to the patients prior to the data collection. For the rs-fMRI
data in this project, it was reasonable to assume compound symmetry within
blocks, because the three sessions were sampled regularly. This assumption jus-
tied within-block permutation [87]. Furthermore the subjects were assumed to
be independent, which justied whole-block permutation [87]. The input data
was masked so only voxels of interest for the dierent features were included in
the test. The design matrix contained columns corresponding to the explana-
tory variable's (EV's) and rows corresponding to volumes. The contrast used
contained a number of columns corresponding to the number of EV's in the
design matrix and rows corresponding to the contrast vectors which were used
for testing the eect of interest. t-contrasts were applied when testing for dier-
ence between the means from the two groups (EPO and placebo). F-contrasts
were applied when testing for the longitudinal eect for each group as well as
when testing for the interaction between the longitudinal developments of the
two groups. Furthermore exchangeability blocks were dened to account for
the restrictions on exchangeability. Within-block permutation was performed
when testing for the longitudinal eect for each of the two groups.
Whole-
block permutation was performed when testing for dierence between means
of the two groups. When testing for the interaction between the longitudinal
developments of the two groups both within- and whole-block permutation was
==PAGE:56==
38
Methods
(a) A simple 1D example to illustrate a predened
primary cluster threshold for a line of voxels and
their statistic. Each cluster in above the threshold
is marked in a dierent color.
(b) Histogram of the permutation distribution for
supratreshold cluster size values above the primary
threshold for each rellabeling.
The red lled line
represent the critical value and the green dotted line
represent the observed statistic
Figure 4.8: Simple illustration of a suprathreshold cluster tests, which: (a)
threshold the statistic image at a predetermined primary, and then: (b) evaluate
the extent of activation at a second level.
performed simultaneously.
The permutation tests were rst performed on the data, where the design matrix
only contained the eects of interest. Afterwards the same tests were carried
out, where age, EDSS score, sex, lesion load and phenotype of the subject were
included in the design matrix as nuisance covariates.
A possible eect of the dierent number of EPO doses were tested using permu-
tation testing. This was done using only session 2 and 3 from the EPO group
==PAGE:57==
4.4 Statistical Analysis
39
with a design matrix containing only two columns, one column of ones and one
column containing the number of EPO doses. A t-contrast c = [0
1] was then
used to test for an EPO eect.
Furthermore a permutation test was carried out to test if the extracted features
were correlated with disability in progressive MS patients. This was done for
all subjects where the design matrix included a column containing the EDSS
scores and a t-contrast testing only the eect of this explanatory variable.
For each of the tests 5000 permutation were performed with suprathreshold
cluster FWER. The cluster-forming thresholds used were 3.16 and 3.29 for per-
mutation tests performed using all126 scans and 44 scans (only session 2 and 3
from the EPO group), respectively, for α = 0.001.
==PAGE:58==
40
Methods
4.5
Classication
In order to asses a possible dierence between the EPO and placebo groups it was
investigated if it is possible to separate the two groups by training a classier
based on the extracted features from the rs-fMRI data.
A Support Vector
Machine (SVM) was used as the main classication approach. Additionally a
linear discriminant classier and a k nearest neighbour (kNN) classier was
tested on the extracted features.
In general, the goal of classication is to assign objects to one of several pre-
dened class labels. The input data comprises of a collection of records, where
each record is characterized by (x,y). x contain the set of features and y contain
the class labels. In classication the task is to learn a target function f, called
the classication model, that maps each input feature vector, x, to a predened
class label, y [14].
The feature vector set, x, can take both continuous and discrete values, how-
ever the class label, y, is required to contain discrete values. This characteristic
dierentiate classication from regression, where y takes continuous values (re-
gression is explained in Section 4.6 )
In this work, a classication model was used for predictive modelling. First a
classication model was obtained based on a training set containing records with
known class labels, this is known as supervised learning. Then the classication
model was applied on a test set to predict class labels of records that were not
part of the training set.
A classication model should both t the training
data well and correctly predict class labels of unknown records. Classication
is most eective for predicting data sets with binary or nominal class labels,
because classication does not take an implicit order among categories into
account, which exist in ordinal categories [14]. The class labels used in this
work were binary for two-class classication and treated as nominal for the
six-class classication.
4.5.1
Support Vector Machines
SVM is a popular kernel based method for classication and regression. This
method was rst proposed by Boser et al. in [96] in 1992. The "soft margin"
SVM was then proposed by Vapnik and Cortes in [15] in 1995 and is more
commonly used. An SVM is a supervised learning method [97] that is designed
to handle high-dimensional data [15]. Section 4.5.1.1 and 4.5.1.2 is based on
[97]. The principal characteristic of kernel methods is that they can transform
==PAGE:59==
4.5 Classication
41
the data from its original input space to a higher dimensional space in which
the classes are linearly separable.
4.5.1.1
Support Vector Machine with Linearly Separable Data
The two class linear classication problem is based on the discriminant function
given by:
y(x) = wT φ(x) + b,
(4.19)
where w is a weight vector, b is a bias and φ is the transformation of x from
the input space to a so called Feature Space, φ(x). The training set consists
of N vectors x1, ..., xN with their corresponding class labels t1, ..., tN where
tn ∈{−1, 1}. A new data point x is then classied based on the sign of y(x) in
Equation 4.19.
For the case of a linear SVM the input space is equal to the feature space,
i.e. φ(x) = x. For non-linear SVM, a transformation to a higher dimensional
space, in which the classes are linearly separable, occurs. Several problems can
occur as a results of the transformation due to the curse of dimensionality as
a result of a high dimensional space. Therefore non-linear SVM use so-called
kernel tricks to avoid such problems [14]. These kernel tricks are a method for
computing similarity in the transformed space, only using the input space, so
the transformation φ does not need to be computed. The similarity function
computed in the input space is called the kernel function. Several dierent kernel
functions exist which are all based on calculation the dot product between two
vectors, because it has been shown that the dot product in feature space can be
expressed as a similarity function in the input space.
The SVM model is rst dened in the case where the training data is linearly
separable in the feature space φ(x). In the linearly separable case Equation 4.19
satises that for y(xn) > 0 the class is tn = +1 and for y(xn) < 0 the class
is tn = −1, and for y(xn) = 0 the point lies on the decision boundary. The
separation is called the decision boundary or hyper plane. Many such lines that
separate the two classes of the training data may exist, but to avoid overtting
one should nd the decision boundary that gives the smallest generalisation
error. The margin of the decision boundary is the smallest distance between
the boundary and any of the samples. w and b are chosen as the ones that
maximise the margin and thereby minimise the generalisation error. This is
called the maximum margin solution. A 2D example of the possible decision
boundaries and the maximum margin solution is illustrated in Figure 4.9. The
perpendicular distance from the decision boundary to a point xn is |y(x)|/ ∥w ∥,
thus for the case where all data points are correctly classied, i.e. tny(xn) > 0
==PAGE:60==
42
Methods
(a) The black lines indicates possi-
ble decision boundaries (wT φ(x)+
b = 0) that all separate the two
classes.
(b) The black line indicate the
maximum margin solution where
the green lines indicate the mar-
gins.
Figure 4.9: A 2D example of the possible decision boundaries and the maximum
margin solution for case of linearly separable data.
for all n, the distance from the point xn to the decision boundary is given by:
tny(xn)
∥w ∥
= tn(wT φ(wn + b)
∥w ∥
(4.20)
The margin is dened by the perpendicular distance to the closest point in the
dataset, thus the parameters w and b must be optimised to nd the maximum
margin solution. This is done by:
arg max
w,b
(
1
∥w ∥min
n [tn(wT φ(xn) + b)]
)
(4.21)
The direct solution of this is very complex so the optimization problem is con-
verted into an equivalent problem which is easier to solve. When w and b are
rescaled by w →κw and b →κb, the distance to the decision boundary is still
given as tny(xn)/ ∥w ∥. Thus, one can set
tn(wT φ(xn) + b) = 1
(4.22)
for the point that lies closest to the decision boundary and:
tn(wT φ(xn) + b) ≥1,
where
n = 1, ..., N
(4.23)
The optimization problem then becomes to maximise ∥w ∥−1 which is the same
as minimising ∥w ∥2. Thus the optimisation problem is:
min
w,b
1
2 ∥w ∥2
(4.24)
==PAGE:61==
4.5 Classication
43
with Equation 4.23 as constraints and 1
2 added for convenience. To solve this
constrained optimization problem Lagrange multipliers an ≥0 (with one an for
each constraint) must be introduced. This gives the following Lagrange function:
L(w, b, a) = 1
2 ∥w ∥2 −
N
X
n=1
an{tn(wT φ(xn) + b) −1},
(4.25)
where a = (a1, ..., an). Setting the derivative of L(w, b, a) equal to zero with
respect to w and b, two conditions are obtained:
w =
N
X
n=1
antnφ(xn)
(4.26)
0 =
N
X
n=1
antn
(4.27)
Using these conditions to eliminate w and b from 4.25 the dual representation
of the maximum margin problem is obtained
˜L(a) =
N
X
n=1
an −1
2
N
X
n=1
N
X
m=1
anamtntmk(xn, xm),
(4.28)
with the kernel function dened as k(x, x′) = φ(x)T φ(x′), where x and x′ are
two input vectors, and the following constraints:
an ≥0, n = 1, ..., N,
(4.29)
N
X
n=1
antn = 0
(4.30)
Note that a linear SVM uses the simple linear kernel function, dened as
k(x, x′) = xT x′.
New data points are then classied by evaluating the sign of
y(x) =
N
X
n=1
antnk(x, xn) + b
(4.31)
by substituting w using Equation 4.26.
The constrained optimisation must
satisfy the Karush-kuhn-Tucker (KKT) conditions, which requires that these
three properties hold:
an ≥0
(4.32)
==PAGE:62==
44
Methods
tny(xn) −1 ≥0
(4.33)
an{tny(xn) −1} = 0
(4.34)
For every data point xn, either an = 0 or tny(xn) = 1. When an = 0, the
point xn will not appear in the sum in Equation 4.31, and will not have any
eect on the model for future class predictions. For the data points xn, where
tny(xn) = 1, the points lie on the maximum margin of the decision boundary
and form the basis for the model. These points are called the support vectors.
When the value of a has been found, b can be found using the support vectors
and Equation 4.31, by the following:
tn
 X
n∈S
amtmk(xn, xm) + b
!
= 1,
(4.35)
where S is the indices of the support vectors. Averaging over all the support
vectors and solving for b gives:
b =
1
NS
X
n∈S
 
tn −
X
m∈S
amtmk(xn, xm)
!
,
(4.36)
where NS is the total number of support vectors.
4.5.1.2
Support Vector Machine with Non-Separable Data
In most cases an overlap between the class distributions exist and the data is
not linearly separable, therefore a slack variable ξn ≤0 with n = 1, ..., N is
introduced. This creates a so-called soft margin SVM where the points that lie
on the wrong side of the decision boundary are penalised. For points that are on
the right side of the boundary ξn = 0 and for other points ξn = |tn −y(xn)|. For
a point on the decision boundary y(xn) = 0 will have ξn = 1 and points with
ξn > 0 will be misclassied. A 2D example for case of non-separable data with
the slack variables is illustrated in Figure 4.10. This gives the new constraints:
tny(xn) ≥1 −ξn,
where
n = 1, ..., N
(4.37)
ξn ≥0
(4.38)
Then one can maximise the margin but still allowing for some points to be
misclassied. Thus, now instead:
C
N
X
n=1
ξn + 1
2 ∥w ∥2
(4.39)
==PAGE:63==
4.5 Classication
45
Figure 4.10: A 2D example for case of non-separable data with the slack vari-
ables.
must be minimised. Here C > 0 is a parameter that controls the trade-o be-
tween the size of the margin and the slack variable penalty. The Lagrangian
function with the new parameters and constraints introduced by the slack vari-
ables now becomes:
L(w, b, a) = 1
2 ∥w ∥2 +C
N
X
n=1
ξn −
N
X
n=1
an{tny(xn) −1 + ξn} −
N
X
n=1
µnξn (4.40)
where an ≥0 and µn ≥0 are the new Lagrange multipliers. This gives the
KKT-conditions:
an ≥0
(4.41)
tny(xn) −1 + ξn ≥0
(4.42)
an(tny(xn) −1 + ξn) = 0
(4.43)
µn ≥0
(4.44)
ξn ≥0
(4.45)
µnξn = 0
(4.46)
where n = 1, ..., N. w, b and ξn can be optimised by setting the derivatives of
L equal to zero, and using Equation 4.19:
∂L
∂w = 0 →w =
N
X
n=1
antntφ(xn)
(4.47)
==PAGE:64==
46
Methods
∂L
∂b = 0 →
N
X
n=1
antn = 0
(4.48)
∂L
∂ξn
= 0 →an = C −µn
(4.49)
this gives the dual Lagrangian:
˜L(a) =
N
X
n=1
an −1
2
N
X
n=1
N
X
m=1
anamtntmk(xn, xm)
(4.50)
which is the same as the dual Lagrangian for the separable data, the only dif-
ference being the constraints:
0 ≤an ≤C
(4.51)
N
X
n=1
antn = 0,
(4.52)
where n = 1, ..., N. Substituting Equation 4.47 into Equation 4.19 the function
for the prediction of new data points becomes Equation 4.31, i.e. the same as
the function for prediction in the case with the linearly separable data. Again
point with an = 0 do not contribute to the model. The remaining points with
an > 0 are the support vectors and must satisfy tny(xn) = 1 −ξn. If an < C
then µn > 0 which from the constrains require ξn = 0, meaning the point lie on
the margin. The points where an = C lie inside the margin and can either be
correctly (ξ ≥= 1) or wrongly classied (ξn > 1). b can then be found by:
tn
 X
n∈S
amtmk(xn, xm) + b
!
= 1
(4.53)
and averaging over the support vectors:
b =
1
NM
X
n∈M
 
tn −
X
m∈S
amtmk(xn, xm)
!
,
(4.54)
where M denotes the data points that have 0 ≤an ≤C, i.e.
the support
vectors.
4.5.2
Evaluating the Classication
The performance of the classication model can be evaluated based on the num-
ber of test records that are incorrectly and correctly predicted by the model.
==PAGE:65==
4.5 Classication
47
A confusion matrix can be used to keep track of these numbers. A confusion
matrix for a two-class problem is shown in Table 4.1, where for instance f1−1
is the number of records belonging to class 1 that are incorrectly predicted as
class -1. The total number of correct prediction can be computed as f−1−1 +f11
and the total number of incorrect predictions can be computed as f1−1 + f−11
and [14].
Predicted Class
Class=-1
Class=1
Actual Class
Class=-1
f−1−1
f−11
Class=1
f1−1
f11
Table 4.1: Condusion matrix of a binary problem
However, a more convenient way to compare performance of dierent models, is
to summarize this information with a single number. In this work this is done
using the accuracy, which is a good measure of performance for balanced data.
Accuracy is dened as [14]:
Accuracy = Number of correct predictions
Total number of predictions
(4.55)
where a high accuracy indicate a high performance of the classication model.
In this work a Cross Validation (CV) approach has been used, where each record
are used once for testing and is part of the training set the same number of times.
k-fold cross validation approach divide the data into k subsets of the same size.
For each run, the testing set is chosen as one of the subsets, while the remaining
subsets are used for training. This CV process is repeated k times so that each
subset is used exactly one time for testing. The total number of correct and
incorrect prediction can be found by summing the number of these for all k runs
[14]. The total accuracy can then be calculated as:
AccuracyCV = Number of correct predictions for all k runs
Total number of predictions for all k runs
(4.56)
A so called leave-one-out CV (LOOCV) approach is a particular case of k-fold
CV. In this k = N, where N is the size of the data set, which means that each
test consist of only one record. The main advantage of this approach is that
the training set contains as much data as possible and furthermore that the test
set cover the full data set. However, this approach is computationally expensive
because the procedure is repeated N times [14].
In general, two types of errors made by a classication model exist: Training
error, which is the number of misclassication errors made on training records,
==PAGE:66==
48
Methods
and generalization error, which is the expected error of the model on unknown
records. Thus, to achieve high performance by a classication model both low
training error and low generalization are required. This is essential, because
a classication model that ts the training data too well might have a lower
generalization error compared to a classication model with a higher training
error, because the model also capture the noise of the data. This phenomenon is
known as model overtting. On the other hand, model undertting occurs when
the model does not t the data well enough to capture the true structure of the
data. Undertting results in poorly performance on both test and training sets.
Overtting and undertting are both related to the complexity of the model,
since a too simple model will result in undetting and a too complex model
will result in overtting. In addition, a classication model build based on a
training set with few training records is susceptible to overtting. This issue
can be partly prevented by the use of the LOOCV approach as it utilizes as
much data as possible for training [14].
4.5.2.1
Implementation and The LIBSVM Toolbox
In this project the LIBSVM toolbox was used as a tool for classication with
the extracted features from the rs-fMRI data. The package has been developed
by Chang and Lin at The Department of Computer Science, National Taiwan
University. The implementation detail of this package can be found in [98]. In
this project the regularized support vector classication (C-SVC) was used in
the SVM toolbox, which corresponds to the method described in Section 4.5.1.2.
The user dened parameters of the LIBSVM toolbox for the C-SVC method is:
Kernel type, kernel parameters and the regularization parameter C.
4.5.2.2
Two-class classication
Classication was performed with two a priori selected ICA features and KCC
features. The data consisted of 42 feature vectors containing voxels of interest,
corresponding to the 42 subjects with all three sessions. For the two ICA data
sets the number of features were 8493 and 8742, and for the KCC data 72210.
A label 42 × 1 vector was used with the class label −1 for the EPO group and
+1 for the placebo group.
Because the datasets used contain a very large number of features (between 8493
and 72210) compared to only 42 observations each, a linear kernel was chosen.
In this case where features >> observations, a non-linear mapping with a non-
linear kernel does not improve the performance of the classier [99]. The linear
==PAGE:67==
4.5 Classication
49
kernel was dened as K(xi,x j) = xT
i xj, which was precomputed in matlab to
decrease computation time.
Using the C-SVC methods with a linear kernel only the parameter C need
to be dened by the user. To optimise the classication, C was tested from
2−5, 2−4, ..., 214, 215.
To obtain the best results the training data was scaled to lie between 0 and 1,
and the parameters used for this normalisation was then applied to the training
data as described in [99].
As the dataset only consisted of 42 feature vectors, leave-one-out cross validation
(LOOCV) was performed, where 42 classiers were trained each using 41 feature
vectors for training and 1 feature vector for testing. This process is illustrated
in Figure 4.11. The test was also performed on the data where age, EDSS score,
sex, lesion load and phenotype of the subject were used as nuisance covariates
and regressed out of the data using the GLM as described in Section 4.1.2.
Figure 4.11: Illustration of the LOOCV approach.
4.5.2.3
Six-class Classication
A six-class classication was carried out in order to test if it was possible to
classify each session for each group as dierent classes, using the same priori
selected ICA features and KCC features. In this case the data consisted of 126
feature vectors. For the two ICA data sets the number of features were 2831
and 2914, and for the KCC data 24070, each with 126 observations. A 126 × 1
label vector was dened with 0 , 1, and 2 as class-label for the three sessions
of the EPO group and 3, 4 and 5 as class-labels for the sessions of the placebo
group.
==PAGE:68==
50
Methods
A linear kernel was again used since the features >> observations. C was again
tested from 2−5, 2−4, ..., 214, 215, and scaling was again performed as described
above.
As the three scans of one subject were dependent a "leave-one-subject-out"
approach was used, where 42 classiers were trained each using 123 feature
vectors for training and the three features of the subject were used for testing.
This procedure is illustrated in Figure 4.12.
For multi-class classication LIBSVM uses a "one-against-one" approach [98].
If k is the number of classes used, then k(k −1)/2 classiers are constructed.
Each of these classiers are created like a two class classier with samples from
two classes. All the classiers (in this case 15) are used when testing the new
data.
A voting is then carried out where the classication result of each of
these two-class classiers is a vote for that class, and the class with the highest
number of votes is chosen. If two classes have the same number of votes the one
appearing rst is chosen [98].
The six-class test was also conducted on the data where age, EDSS score, sex,
lesion load and phenotype of the subject were regressed out of the data as
described in Section 4.1.2.
4.5.2.4
Evaluation of the SVM Classication
The goal of this classication approach was to see if the two classes (EPO and
placebo) were dierent and thereby if a classier could be trained to tell the
two groups apart. The accuracy of the classication was calculated as the mean
accuracy of the classiers obtained by the LOOCV approach. For the six-class
approach the accuracy was calculated as the mean accuracy of the "leave-one-
subject-out" approach. The implementation of the SVM CV-scheme is shown
in Appendix B.
To test whether the model was signicantly predictive the accuracy was com-
pared to the permuted null distribution, where the label vector was permuted
with 5000 iterations, and a histogram of the obtained permutation accuracies
was obtained. This was done for all the classication tests performed. For the
six-class case the permutation was done in blocks corresponding to subjects, i.e
whole subjects were permuted while the order of scans were maintained.
==PAGE:69==
4.5 Classication
51
Figure 4.12: Illustration of the "leave-one-subject-out" CV approach.
==PAGE:70==
52
Methods
4.5.3
Linear Discriminant Classication
A linear discriminant classier projects data into a one dimensional subspace
that best separate the data [97]. The projection is done by:
y = wT x
(4.57)
where w is the weight vector and x is the input data [97]. The optimal w is found
by maximizing a function that gives a large separation between the projected
class means that still gives a small variance within each of the classes. When
this is achieved the class overlap is minimized in the one dimensional subspace.
w then determines the direction of the projection onto one dimension. This
principle is illustrated in Figure 4.13. The threshold for separation of the data
in subspace can then be chosen as the class conditional densities, which separates
the data into classes [97].
4.5.3.1
classify
In this project the matlab function classify was used as a tool to classify
the extracted features based on the linear discriminant classication method.
The diaglinear option was chosen, which ts a multivariate normal density to
each group with a diagonal covariance matrix estimate. The test was performed
on the extracted features and was used for both two-class and six-class classi-
cation. The performance of the linear discriminant classier was trained and
tested the same way as described in Section 4.5.2.2, 4.5.2.3, and 4.5.2.4.
Figure 4.13: A 2D example of the linear discriminant classication where the
one dimensional subspace that minimise the variance in within the groups are
sought.
==PAGE:71==
4.5 Classication
53
4.5.4
k Nearest-Neighbour Classication
kNN classication is a part of a more general technique known as lazy learners
that does not require building a model.
However, a kNN classier requires
a proximity measure between the samples. Each example is represented as a
data point in a D-dimensional space, where D is the number of voxels in each
feature vector. The proximity of a test data point to all the training data points
are computed, using a proximity measure.
The test data point is classied
based on the class labels of its neighbours, thus the prediction is based on local
information. Let k denote the number of nearest neighbours chosen. When
k = 1 the test data point is assigned to the class of the closest training data
point (This is known as the nearest neighbour classication). When the k nearest
neighbours have more than one label, the test data point is classied as the class
most common among the k nearest neighbours. When using an even value for
k, there may be a tie between the classes, and dierent tiebreaker approaches
can be used [14]. A 2D example of the kNN classication is illustrated in Figure
4.14.
(a) 1 nearest neighbour
(b) 2 nearest neighbours
(c) 3 nearest neighbous
Figure 4.14: A 2D example of kNN classication of the test point x for 1, 2 and
3-nearest neighbours.
Choosing an appropriate number of nearest neighbours are essential for the
classication accuracy. If k is too large, the test data point may be assigned to
the wrong class because the nearest neighbours may contain data points located
far away. On the other hand, a too small value of k can cause overtting due to
noise in the training data [14].
4.5.4.1
knnclassify
In this project the matlab function knnclassify has been used as a tool to
classify the extracted features based on the kNN method. The Euclidean dis-
==PAGE:72==
54
Methods
tance was used as the proximity measure since the distribution of the data
was not known. The nearest neighbour among the tied groups were used as a
tiebreaker. The optimal number of nearest neighbours were estimated by com-
puting the accuracy of the classication for k = [1 : 50]. The test was performed
on the extracted features and was used for both two-class and six-class classi-
cation. The performance of the kNN classier was trained and tested the same
way as described in Section 4.5.2.2, 4.5.2.3, and 4.5.2.4.
==PAGE:73==
4.6 Regression
55
4.6
Regression
Partial Least Squares (PLS) regression was performed in order to asses a possible
correlation between the EDSS scores of the subjects and their extracted features.
Regression is a technique of predictive modelling, which aim to estimate the
relationships between sets of variables.
Opposed to classication, where the
target variable is class labels, in regression the target variable takes continuous
values. Consider a data set, D, that contains N observations:
D = {(xi, yi)|i = 1, 2, ..., N}
(4.58)
where each xi is the explanatory variable (also referred to as the predictor
variable), which contain the feature vector corresponding to the ith observation.
yi is the target variable (also known as the response variable). In regression
the task is to learn a function f that maps the set of feature vectors x into an
output y of continuous values, and the f that ts x with the minimum error is
sought [14].
4.6.1
Partial Least Squares
PLS is a class of methods for modelling the relationship between sets of variables.
It can be used for regression, classication and dimensionality reduction. The
method was rst developed by Wold et al. in [16] and it has been shown to
work very well for high-dimensional data [17]. Thus, PLS is well suited for the
extracted features used in this work where the number of features are much
larger than the sample size. The basic assumption in PLS is that the observed
data is generated by a process which is driven by a small number of variables
that are not directly observed. These variables are referred to as latent variables
[100].
In PLS regression two blocks of variables are considered. The two blocks of
data are denoted X ∈Rn×N and Y ∈Rn×M [100]. PLS decomposes these two
blocks into:
X = TPT + E
(4.59)
Y = UQT + F
(4.60)
where T, U ∈Rn×p, are matrices that are projections of X and Y respectively.
T and U contain columns of the p extracted latent vectors (also called score
vectors) of X and Y, respectively. P ∈RN×p and Q ∈RM×p are matrices with
columns consisting of the loadings of X and Y, respectively. E ∈Rn×N and
==PAGE:74==
56
Methods
F ∈Rn×M are the residuals [100]. In PLS it is assumed that the latent variables,
T and U capture the underlying information of the original data blocks X and
Y [101].
Dierent forms of PLS exist. The classical form of PLS is based on the non-
linear iterative partial least squares (NIPALS) algorithm that was rst proposed
by Wold. One can consider NIPALS as the basis of other variants of PLS [101].
NIPALS compute weight vectors w and c such that the covariance between the
latent vectors, t and u, are maximized [100][101]:
max
t,u [cov(t, u)] = max
w,c [cov(Xw, Yc)]
(4.61)
Note that the two data blocks X and Y must be centred before the PLS regres-
sion analysis is performed.
The NIPALS algorithm starts by randomly initializing u and repeats following
six steps until convergence:
1. w = XT u/(uT u)
2. ||w|| →1
3. t = Xw
4. c = YT t/(tT t)
5. ||c|| →1
6. u = Yc
Compute weight vector w
Scale weight vector w to be of length 1
Update latent vector t based on w
Compute weight vector c
Scale weight vector c to be of length 1
Update latent vector u based on c
For the case where Y is a vector (M = 1) then u = y.
It is important to note that the solution of the NIPALS algorithm can be deter-
mined directly by solving certain eigenvalues problems [101]. From the NIPALS
algorithm it follows that:
w ∝XT u ∝XT Yc ∝XT YYT t ∝XT YYT Xw
(4.62)
Thus, the rst eigenvector of the following eigenvalue problem:
XT YYT Xw = λw
(4.63)
corresponds to w. Since t = Xw, it means that t corresponds to the eigenvector
==PAGE:75==
4.6 Regression
57
of the following eigenvalue problem:
XXT YYT t = λt
(4.64)
Likewise, it can be shown that the eigenvector of the following eigenvalue prob-
lem:
YT XXT Yc = λc
(4.65)
corresponds to c. Since u = Tc it means that u corresponds to the eigenvectors
of the following eigenvalue problem:
YYT XXT u = λu
(4.66)
From equation 4.63 and 4.65 it is seen that w and c correspond to the left
singular vector and right singular vector of the matrix XT Y associated with
the singular value
√
λ, respectively [101].
PLS is an iterative procedure. After the convergence of the latent vectors, t
and u, the data set can then be transformed by subtracting the information
contained in the latent vectors. This process is known as deation in PLS [101].
There are dierent forms of deation, and each of them dene variants of PLS
[100].
4.6.1.1
PLS1
PLS1 is a popular PLS regression method. In PLS regression problems, the
predictor and response variables are each regarded as a block of variables. The
latent vectors are extracted, which represents new predictor variables. PLS then
regress the response variable on to these new predictor variables. This form of
PLS is called PLS1 and PLS2. PLS1 is a special case of PLS2 where Y only
contains one variable [100], and will therefore be denoted y.
In PLS1 and PLS2 there is an asymmetric relation between X and y, and it
is assumed that the extracted latent vectors, {ti}k
i1, are good predictors of y.
Furthermore it is assumed that a linear relation between the latent vectors t
==PAGE:76==
58
Methods
and u exists [100]:
U = TD + H
(4.67)
where D denote a p × p diagonal matrix and H is the matrix of residuals.
Consequently, y can be deated using t directly, which means that for each
iteration a component of the regression of y on t is removed from y. Thus, the
following deation scheme is applied on X and y at each PLS1 iteration:
X = X −tpT
(4.68)
y = y −tcT
(4.69)
where p is estimated as p = XT t/tT t.
This deation scheme guarantees that the extracted latent vectors, {ti}k
i1, are
mutual orthogonal [102]. For the PLS1 case, it is not necessary to perform the
deation of y because rank(y)=1 [101].
Based on the obtained loadings and weight vectors the regression estimates can
be obtained as [103]:
ˆb = W(PT W)−1cT
(4.70)
where W is an N × p matrix containing the N × 1 vectors w obtained for each
iteration p, and P is an N × p matrix containing the vectors p N × 1 obtained
for each iteration p.
The prediction of y can then be obtained as:
ypredicted = Xˆb + y
(4.71)
To make the values of ypredicted and y comparable, the mean value of y must
be added to the estimate, since the data was centred prior to analysis.
4.6.2
Implementation of PLS1
In this project PLS1 was implemented in matlab to see if it was possible to
predict the EDSS scores of the subjects based on the features extracted in
Section 4.3.
==PAGE:77==
4.6 Regression
59
The PLS1 regression analysis was performed with a priori selected ICA features
and KCC feature. Here X consisted of 126 observations, each containing voxels
of interest as features, meaning that X ∈R126×N with N = 2831 and N = 2914
for the two ICA features respectively, and N = 24070 for the KCC features.
For all three instances y was a vector containing the EDSS scores for each of
the 126 patients, i.e. y ∈R126×1.
To see if a prediction of y was possible a two-layer cross validation approach
was used. The outer layer was a "leave-one-subject-out" cross validation, where
42 target functions were estimated with Xtrain ∈R123×N and ytrain ∈R123×1,
with Xtest ∈R3×N used to obtain ypredicted ∈R3×1.
The inner layer was another "leave-one-subject-out" cross validation, where the
optimal number of components, p, for the model was estimated. Here 41 target
functions were estimated Xtrain ∈R120×N and ytrain ∈R120×1, with Xtest ∈
R3×N used to obtain ypredicted ∈R3×1. And for each of the 41 target functions
p was tested from 1 to 30.
The value of p for which the lowest Residual Sum of Squares (RSS) was obtained,
was denoted poptimal.
The obtained poptimal was then used in the outer layer of the cross validation
to estimate the 42 target functions and obtain 42 ypredicted ∈R3×1, resulting
in one yall predicted ∈R126×1 vector containing a predicted EDSS score for all
126 observations.
This prediction was then evaluated by using the methods
described in Section 4.6.2.2. A visualisation of the rst fold in the CV procedure
can be seen in Figure 4.15. The implementation of PLS1 can be seen in Appendix
D.
4.6.2.1
plsregress
In this work the PLS1 implementation was compared to the results obtained
from the matlab function plsregress. plsregress is a PLS regression func-
tion that uses the so called SIMPLS algorithm. SIMPLS is a variant of PLS
introduced by de Jong in [104], which avoids deation steps at each iteration of
PLS1 and PLS2 [100]. In [104] it was shown that SIMPLS is equal to PLS1, when
y contains only a single variable, however it diers from PLS2. plsregress de-
termines a PLS regression of y on X, using a chosen number of PLS components,
and returns the regression coecients as well as the predictor and response la-
tent vectors and loadings. The X and y are rst centred by subtracting o the
columns means to obtain centred variables X0 and y0.
==PAGE:78==
60
Methods
Figure 4.15: Illustration of the rst fold of the CV procedure. In the outer
layer one subject is taken out to be used as test subject for the prediction of
y. The remaining data (41 subjects) is used as training set. In the inner layer
one subject is taken out of the training set for the outer layer to be used as
a test set to nd the optimal number of components. The remaining data (40
subjects) are used as training set in the inner layer. When the optimal number
of components is found in the inner layer this number is used in the outer layer
to make the prediction of y.
==PAGE:79==
4.6 Regression
61
4.6.2.2
Evaluating Goodness of Fit
In this work the goodness of the t was measured by computing the coecient
of determination, R2, as:
TSS =
X
(yobserved −yobserved)2
(4.72)
RSSPLS =
X
(yobserved −ypredicted)2
(4.73)
R2 = 1 −RSSPLS
TSS
(4.74)
Here the Total Sum of Squares (TSS) is the sum of the squared dierence
between the actual EDSS scores, yobserved, and the mean value of yobserved,
yobserved. The RSS for the PLS regression, RSSPLS, is the sum of the squared
dierence between the actual EDSS scores, yobserved, and the EDSS scores pre-
dicted with the PLS regression, ypredicted. This coecient reveals how well y
can be explained by X, where R2 = 1 would indicate that y could be explained
by X without error.
To test whether it was worthwhile to create the PLS model to predict y, an
R2
Adjusted was calculated as:
RSSmean model =
X
(yobserved −ytrain)2
(4.75)
RSSPLS =
X
(yobserved −ypredicted)2
(4.76)
R2
Adjusted = 1 −
RSSPLS
RSSmean model
(4.77)
where ytrain is the mean value of the training set, and the RSSmean model is the
residual sum of squares for such a mean model. Using ytrain as the prediction of
an unknown value of y is the simplest model one can make to predict y. Hence,
the R2
Adjusted reveals if the PLS model was better at predicting unknown values
of y than the simple mean model.
==PAGE:80==
62
Methods
==PAGE:81==
Chapter 5
Results and Discussion
In this chapter the results obtained in this project will be shown and their sig-
nicance in relation to the hypothesis will be discussed. The chapter is divided
into sections according to the methods used. The results of these methods will
rst be discussed individually and at the end of this chapter links between these
ndings will be discussed.
5.1
Evaluation of the Preprocessing methods
The evaluation of the preprocessing methods was an ongoing procedure dur-
ing preprocessing, where each step was evaluated after completion. Some of
the steps were easy to evaluate because a clear improvement was seen. The
evaluation of these steps will be further elaborated below. However, other pre-
processing steps did not reveal any obvious change, i.e. slice timing correction
and NVR, and these were simply evaluated by checking that the images did not
appear abnormal.
The image reorientation procedure was evaluated by checking that the origin of
the reoriented images were located close to the AC (cf. Figure 4.2). The un-
warping procedure to correct for eld inhomogeniety based on a eld map was
evaluated, rst of all by checking that the origins of the reoriented VDMs were
==PAGE:82==
64
Results and Discussion
correct. Furthermore, the volumes before and after unwarping were compared
by visual inspection, where areas known to be aected by eld imhomogeni-
ety were checked for abnormality. The realignment procedure was inspected by
comparing the volume time series before and after the realignment procedure
was performed, to check that severe motion had been neutralized. Despiking
was evaluated by comparing the time series of the voxel intensities before and
after despiking. It was checked that spikes above the given threshold seen before
despiking were removed after despiking (cf. Figure 4.3). After coregistration
was performed it was investigated if the structural data matched the functional
data particularly in the ventricles and in the edges of the brain. In the nor-
malisation step, the segmented tissue types, i.e. WM, GM CSF were assessed
by visual inspection. After the normalisation procedure was carried out it was
checked that the structural as well as the functional images matched the tem-
plate, particularly in ventricles and in the edges of the brain. The smoothing
procedure was checked by visual inspection, to verify that the images had been
smoothed.
These evaluations revealed that the preprocessing procedure was carried out
successfully.
5.2
Feature Extraction
5.2.1
Regional Homogeneity
Figure 5.1 shows mean of the smoothed and z-scored KCC-maps for the EPO
and placebo groups obtained in the ReHo analysis. Areas with positive val-
ues indicate an increase in regional homogeneity in that area compared to the
mean value of the map, whereas areas negative values indicate a decrease in the
regional homogeneity compared to the mean value.
The mean KCC-maps of the two groups have the same pattern of increase and
decrease in regional homogeneity. No dierence between the KCC-maps of the
two groups are visible to the naked eye. For both groups an increase in regional
homogeneity in the posterior cingulate and precuneus, regions associated with
the DMN, is seen.
These obtained maps where used for second level analysis where a possible
dierence in regional homogeneity between the two groups was assessed.
==PAGE:83==
5.2 Feature Extraction
65
(a) Mean smoothed, and z-scored KCC-map for the EPO group
(b) Mean smoothed, and z-scored KCC-map for the placebo group
Figure 5.1: KCC-maps for the two groups. Positive values indicate an increase
in regional homogeneity and areas with negative values indicate a decrease in
regional homogeneity compared to the mean value. For the negative values the
range is set to [−3, −0.5] and for the positive values the range is set to [0.5, 3]
==PAGE:84==
66
Results and Discussion
5.2.2
Independent Component Analysis
Figure 5.2: Functional resting-state networks identied with ICA. The spatial
maps are shown in sagittal, coronal, and axial views. A) and B) Default Mode
Network. C) and D) Motor network E) Primary visual cortex F) Secondary
visual cortex G) Right Memory function H) Left memory function I) and J)
Auditory network. The ICA components are thresholded at 0.8.
The number of independent components was estimated to 31 by the procedure
implemented in the GIFT toolbox. Thus, in the ICA analyses 31 independent
components were extracted. These were investigated to identify the indepen-
dent components with functional relevance.
This was done using the GIFT
toolbox by spatially sorting the components based on the correlation between
the component images and a DMN template as well as a visiomotor template.
Ten functional relevant spatial maps were identied and are shown in Figure
5.2. It is seen that the DMN, motor network and the auditory network were all
split into two components.
==PAGE:85==
5.2 Feature Extraction
67
In this work the second-level analysis were limited to the DMN and the motor
network, which were identied as the component shown in Figure 5.2A and 5.2C,
respectively. These were chosen based on section 2.3.1.1 and 2.3.1.2 and because
they were the components with the highest correlation with the appropriate
templates. In the rest of this thesis, these ICA components will be refereed to
as ICADMN and ICAmotor.
Based on the MNI average 152 T1 atlas it was found that ICADMN comprised of
the anterior cingulate (BA32), Precuneus (BA 23/31/7), posterior cingulate (BA
23/31) and Superior partial region (BA7). The ICAmotor comprised of primary
motor cortex (BA4), primary somatosensory cortex (BA1,2 and 3), premotor
cortex (BA6). This corresponds to the theory explained in Section 2.3.1.1 and
2.3.1.2
==PAGE:86==
68
Results and Discussion
5.3
Statistical Analysis Results
5.3.1
Flexible Factorial Model Results
No signicant clusters were found at level α = 0.05 using the exible factorial
model when testing the dierence of the means between the EPO and placebo
groups (EPO>placebo and EPO<placebo).
Nor was any signicant clusters
found when testing for the longitudinal eect and the dierence between the
longitudinal developments.
These results are therefore not shown.
Since no
signicant clusters were found, the exible factorial analysis indicate that EPO
treatment did not have have an eect on the patients.
In a exible factorial model analysis, which is a parametric test, the errors are
assumed to be additive and Gaussian. This assumption is not guaranteed to
be met, thus the lack of statistical signicance found, could be due to incorrect
assumptions made. A non-parametric approach, such as permutation testing, is
therefore a good alternative to the exible factorial model.
5.3.2
Permutation Test Results
In this section the results obtained from the permutation tests performed on
the extracted ICADMN, ICAmotor and KCC features are shown and discussed.
All permutation results are shown as statistical maps (t-maps and F-maps) su-
perimposed on a MNI average 152 T1 template. In the t-maps coloured blobs
indicate a signicant dierence between the EPO and placebo groups at level
α = 0.05. In the F-maps, obtained when testing for the longitudinal eect,
the coloured blobs indicate a signicant longitudinal eect at level α = 0.05.
No signicant clusters were found when testing for the interaction between the
longitudinal development, and these results are therefore not shown. The values
of the blobs, indicated on the colour bars, are (1 −p)-values. Permutation tests
where the nuisance covariates age, EDSS score, sex, lesions load and pheno-
type were included in the design matrix as explained in Section 4.4.2.4, will for
convenience be referred to as permutation tests using nuisance covariates.
To test whether these signicant dierences between the two groups were due
to the EPO treatment, these Regions of Interest (ROI) in the feature data
containing the signicant voxels, were investigated further. A mean value of the
feature data in the ROIs where plotted for each session of each each group, to
inspect each of the three sessions for the two groups to see if this dierence was
present before the treatment began. This was done for the data both before
==PAGE:87==
5.3 Statistical Analysis Results
69
and after the nuisance covariates were regressed out. The obtained curves will
be referred to as longitudinal curves. For all tests the ROIs used were the ones
obtained from data without nuisance covariates regressed out, and the mean
values in the ROIs where calculated for data with and without the nuisance
covariates regressed out as explained in Section 4.1.2. It was done this way so
the curves could be compared before and after using the nuisance covariates.
5.3.2.1
Results Obtained with the ICADMN Feature
Figure 5.3 shows the results obtained from four dierent permutation tests on
the extracted ICADMN features.
The corresponding longitudinal curves are
shown in Figure 5.4. The t-map obtained when testing the dierence of the
means between the EPO and placebo groups (mean EPO>mean placebo) are
shown in 5.3a and the longitudinal curves are shown in 5.4a. The t-map obtained
when testing for the mean dierence (mean EPO<mean placebo) are shown in
Figure 5.3b and the longitudinal curves are shown in 5.4b. The t-maps obtained
from the same two permutation tests, now using nuisance covariates are shown
in Figure 5.3c and 5.3d, respectively, and the corresponding longitudinal curves
are shown in 5.4c and 5.4d, respectively.
In Figure 5.3a a signicant dierence (mean EPO>mean placebo) is found in
one large cluster and a few minor clusters, all primarily located in precuneus
(BA 7/31) and anterior cingulate (BA32). In Figure 5.3b a signicant dierence
(mean EPO<mean placebo) is found in small clusters located in precuneus (BA
7/23/31).
In Figure 5.3c only one large cluster is found to be signicant. This cluster is
smaller than the cluster obtained without using nuisance covariates but located
in the same region, i.e. in precuneus (BA 7/31). In Figure 5.3d small clusters
are found signicant in other areas of precuneus (BA 7/23/31). These clusters
are larger than the clusters obtained without using nuisance covariates.
No signicant clusters were found when testing for a longitudinal eect in either
group, and these results are not shown shown.
The longitudinal curves shown in Figure 5.4a and 5.4b show that the dierence
found between the two groups was also present in the baseline scan, i.e. before
the EPO treatment began. The dierence between the two groups follow the
same course throughout the three scans. In Figure 5.4c and 5.4d the dierence
between the groups are still present and follow the same course throughout the
three scans, however the magnitude and the dierence is reduced.
==PAGE:88==
70
Results and Discussion
(a) Mean EPO > Mean placebo
(b) Mean EPO < Mean placebo
(c) Mean EPO> Mean placebo (using nuisance covariates)
(d) Mean EPO < Mean placebo (using nuisance covariates)
Figure 5.3: Results obtained from the permutation tests performed on the ex-
tracted ICADMN feature. These are shown as statistical t-maps superimposed on
a MNI average 152 T1 template. Coloured blobs indicate a signicant dierence
between the EPO and placebo groups at level α = 0.05.
==PAGE:89==
5.3 Statistical Analysis Results
71
(a) Mean EPO > Mean placebo (before nuisance nuisance covariates
were regressed out)
(b) Mean EPO < Mean placebo (before nuisance covariates were
regressed out)
(c) Mean EPO> Mean placebo (after nuisance covariates were re-
gressed out)
(d) Mean EPO < Mean placebo (after nuisance covariates were re-
gressed out)
Figure 5.4: Obtained longitudinal curves for the ICADMN feature.
==PAGE:90==
72
Results and Discussion
5.3.2.2
Discussion of Results Obtained with the ICADMN Feature
The signicant dierence seen in Figure 5.3a (mean EPO>mean placebo) indi-
cate that the EPO group had a higher expression of the DMN component in the
precuneus (BA 7/31) and anterior cingulate (BA32) compared to the placebo
group. Through the inspection of the longitudinal curve in Figure 5.4a it is
apparent that the two groups shows a dierence at the baseline scan, i.e. before
the treatment began. It was expected that the mean values for the EPO and
placebo groups were similar at this stage. Since the two groups follow the same
course, this dierence must be caused by something other than the treatment
with EPO.
To see if this dierence could be explained by other factors, the permutation
test was carried out with age, EDSS score, sex, lesions load and phenotype as
nuisance covariates. The result of this test, seen in Figure 5.3c, shows fewer
signicant voxels. This indicate that some of the dierence between the two
groups could be explained by these nuisance covariates. The dierence between
the groups is still present in the longitudinal curve in Figure 5.4c, but the dif-
ference is reduced. It is noted that the two groups still follow the same course
throughout the scans after nuisance covariate regression which again indicate
that the EPO treatment is not a plausible explanation for the dierence between
the group.
The signicant clusters seen in Figure 5.3b (mean EPO<mean placebo) indicate
that the placebo group had a higher expression of the DMN component in other
areas of the precuneus (BA 7/23/31).
The longitudinal curves in Figure 5.4b show that the dierence found between
the two groups are consistent trough all three scanning sessions, again making
the eect of the EPO treatment an implausible explanation for the dierence
between the two groups.
In the results obtained from the test using nuisance covariates, seen in Figure
5.3d, the clusters are larger than before, and new clusters have appeared. This
could be due to a decrease in noise (residuals) caused by the inclusion of nui-
sance covariates. The residuals will always decrease when nuisance covariates
are included, thus if the mean dierence was the same as before the t-values
would increase. However, when covariates are included the degrees of freedom
are reduced, which will reduce the power of the test, which will decrease the
signicance. Thus, a more reasonable explanation of the increase in clusters size
could be a combination of an increase in mean dierence between the groups and
a decrease in noise caused by the inclusion of nuisance covariates. It seems that
voxels at the outer edge of the cluster found before including the nuisance co-
variates had been close to a signicant level. After the nuisance covariates were
included, the increase in t-values had caused these to move above the cluster-
==PAGE:91==
5.3 Statistical Analysis Results
73
forming threshold, thus making the clusters increase in size. Similarly, it appears
that before inclusion of the nuisance covariates some small non-signicant clus-
ters had been close to a signicant level, and therefore the increase in t-values
have made these clusters signicant.
The remaining dierence in the two groups are inspected to see if the dierence
could be caused by the treatment. The fact that the longitudinal curves, seen
in Figure 5.4d, for the EPO group are steady through all sessions, indicate that
EPO does not have an eect on DMN resting-state expression. Therefore the
remaining dierence between the two group has to be explained by other factors
that were not taken into account in this work.
5.3.2.3
Results Obtained with the ICAmotor Feature
In Figure 5.5 the results obtained from two dierent permutation tests on the
extracted ICAmotor features are shown. The corresponding longitudinal curves
are shown in Figure 5.6 . The t-map obtained when testing the dierence of
the means between the EPO and placebo groups (mean EPO>mean placebo)
are shown in 5.5a and the corresponding longitudinal curves are shown in Fig-
ure 5.6a. The t-map obtained from the same permutation test using nuisance
covariates are shown in Figure 5.5b and the corresponding longitudinal curves
are shown in Figure 5.6b.
The t-maps obtained when testing the dierence of the means (mean EPO<mean
placebo) both with and without using nuisance covariates are not shown, as only
clusters containing very few voxels were signicant. The corresponding longi-
tudinal curves are not shown either. No signicant clusters were found when
testing for the longitudinal eect for each group so these results are not shown.
In Figure 5.5a a signicant dierence (mean EPO>mean placebo) is found in
a small cluster primarily located in right primary motor cortex (BA4), right
primary somatosensory cortex (BA 1/2/3) and right premotor cortex (BA6).
In Figure 5.5b only small cluster containing very few voxels are found signi-
cant located in right primary motor cortex (BA4), right primary somatosensory
cortex (BA 2/3) and right premotor cortex (BA6).
The longitudinal curves in Figure 5.6 shows a dierence between the two groups.
This dierence is again present in the baseline scans. The placebo curves are
almost steady.
The EPO curves increase slightly from the baseline scan to
session 2, and decrease slightly from session 2 to 3.
==PAGE:92==
74
Results and Discussion
(a) Mean EPO > Mean placebo
(b) Mean EPO> Mean placebo (using nuisance covariates)
Figure 5.5: Results obtained from the permutation tests performed on the ex-
tracted ICAmotor feature. These are shown as statistical t-maps superimposed
on a MNI average 152 T1 template. Coloured blobs indicate a signicant dif-
ference between the EPO and placebo groups at level α = 0.05.
==PAGE:93==
5.3 Statistical Analysis Results
75
(a) Mean EPO > Mean placebo (before nuisance covariates were re-
gressed out)
(b) Mean EPO> Mean placebo (after nuisance covariates were re-
gressed out)
Figure 5.6: Obtained longitudinal curves for the ICAmotor feature.
==PAGE:94==
76
Results and Discussion
5.3.2.4
Discussion of Results Obtained with the ICAmotor Feature
Since there are less signicant clusters in the t-map after the nuisance covariates
were used, it appears that the signicant dierence found when nuisance covari-
ates were not taken into account, could partly be explained by the dierence
between the subjects based on age, EDSS score, sex, lesions load and phenotype.
The varying course of the EPO curve could indicate a small short term EPO
eect on motor network resting-state expression. However, since this eect is
only seen in small clusters containing a few voxels it is hard to argue that an
EPO eect was present.
5.3.2.5
Results Obtained with the KCC Feature
In Figure 5.7 the results obtained from four dierent permutation tests on the
extracted KCC features are shown. The corresponding longitudinal curves are
shown in Figure 5.8.
The t-map obtained when testing the dierence of the means between the EPO
and placebo groups (mean EPO>mean placebo) are shown in Figure 5.7a and
the corresponding longitudinal curves are shown in Figure 5.8a. The t-map ob-
tained when testing the dierence of the means between the EPO and placebo
groups (mean EPO<mean placebo) are shown in Figure 5.7b and the longitu-
dinal curves are shown in Figure 5.8b.
The t-maps obtained from the same two permutation tests, now using nuisance
covariates are shown in Figure 5.7c and 5.7d, respectively, and the correspond-
ing longitudinal curves are shown in 5.8c and 5.8d, respectively. The F-map
obtained when testing for the longitudinal eect of the placeobo group is shown
in Figure 5.9a and the corresponding longitudinal curves are shown in Figure
5.9b. No signicant clusters were found when testing for the longitudinal eect
for the EPO group so these results are not shown.
In Figure 5.7a a signicant dierence (mean EPO>mean placebo) is found in
one large cluster and several minor clusters. The largest cluster is located at
the posterior cingulate (BA23) and precuneus (BA31), primary visual cortex
(BA17) and extrastriate cortical areas (BA 18/19) in left cerebrum. Some of
the signicant areas found in Figure 5.7a are not found in Figure 5.7c. However,
a large cluster in primary visual cortex (BA17) and extrastriate cortical areas
(BA18) in left cerebrum is still seen.
In Figure 5.7b a signicant dierence (mean EPO<mean placebo) is found in
some small regions and one lager cluster located in the right posterior cingulate
(BA23).
Some of the signicant areas in Figure 5.7b are not seen in 5.7d,
==PAGE:95==
5.3 Statistical Analysis Results
77
however the cluster located in the right posterior cingulate (BA23) is still visible.
In Figure 5.8 the curves of the time course of the two groups show a very
small dierence between the two groups, which are also present in the baseline
scan. The time course for both EPO and placebo group is almost steady. The
dierence is almost the same for all tests and this dierence is much smaller
than for ICADMN and ICAmotor. The magnitude of the curve in Figure 5.8a
for the EPO>placebo test without using nuisance covariate are higher than the
magnitude of the curve in Figure 5.8c where nuisance covariate were used. The
reverse apply to the EPO<placebo tests, where the magnitude of the curve in
Figure 5.8b without using nuisance covariates are lower than values in Figure
5.8d where nuisance covariates were used.
In Figure 5.9a a signicant longitudinal eect of placebo is found in one cluster
located in left posteriror cingulate (BA 23/31), precuneus (BA 7/23/31) and
extrastriate cortical areas (BA 18/19). In the corresponding longitudinal curves
shown in Figure 5.9b is it seen that the placebo curve increases from baseline
scan to session 2 and continue increasing from session 2 to 3.
==PAGE:96==
78
Results and Discussion
(a) Mean EPO > Mean placebo
(b) Mean EPO < Mean placebo
(c) Mean EPO > Mean placebo (using nuisance covariates)
(d) Mean EPO < Mean placebo (using nuisance covariates)
Figure 5.7: Results obtained from the permutation tests performed on the ex-
tracted KCC feature. These are shown as statistical t-maps superimposed on a
MNI average 152 T1 template. Coloured blobs indicate a signicant dierence
between the EPO and placebo groups at level α = 0.05.
==PAGE:97==
5.3 Statistical Analysis Results
79
(a) Mean EPO > Mean placebo (before nuisance nuisance covariates
were regressed out)
(b) Mean EPO < Mean placebo (before nuisance covariates were
regressed out)
(c) Mean EPO> Mean placebo (after nuisance covariates were re-
gressed out)
(d) Mean EPO < Mean placebo (after nuisance covariates were re-
gressed out)
Figure 5.8: Obtained longitudinal curves for the KCC feature.
==PAGE:98==
80
Results and Discussion
(a) F-map of longitudinal eect of placebo where the nuisance covariates
age, EDSS score, sex, lesions load and phenotype were included in the design
matrix
(b) Longitudinal curve of the longitudinal eect of placebo (after
nuisance covariates were regressed out)
Figure 5.9: KCC Longitudinal eect of placebo: Results obtained from the
permutation tests performed on the extracted KCC feature when testing for the
longitudinal eect of placebo where the nuisance covariates were included in the
design matrix. (a) Statistical F-map superimposed on a MNI average 152 T1
template. Coloured blobs indicate a signicant longitudinal eect of the placebo
groups at level α = 0.05. (b) longitudinal curve
==PAGE:99==
5.3 Statistical Analysis Results
81
5.3.2.6
Discussion of Results Obtained with the KCC Feature
Since fewer and smaller signicant clusters in the t-map were found when the
nuisance covariates were used for EPO>placebo, it appears that some of the
signicant clusters in the t-map found for EPO>placebo, when nuisance covari-
ates were not taken into account, could be partly explained by the dierence
between the subjects based on age, EDSS score, sex, lesions load and phenotype.
The longitudinal curves shows that a small dierence between the two groups
are still present in the baseline scan when nuisance covariates were used.
For the EPO<placebo test, the clusters that were signicant in the t-map ob-
tained, without using nuisance covariates, that were not signicant when using
nuisance covariates could be explained by the dierence between the subjects
based on the nuisance covariates. The longitudinal curves showing the same
dierence in all three scans indicate that the remaining dierence was not due
to an EPO eect but rather a dierence between the groups due to other factors
that were not taken into account in this work.
The signicant longitudinal eect of placebo seen in Figure 5.9a is consistent
with the longitudinal curve shown in Figure 5.9b. These results indicate that
for the placebo group the expression of regional homogeneity increased in the
left posterior cingulate (BA 23/31), precuneus (BA 7/23/31) and extrastriate
cortical areas (BA 18/19) during the study. This longitudinal eect must be
explained by a natural change in the course of the disease for some patients in
the placebo group, which has nothing to do with placebo or EPO.
==PAGE:100==
82
Results and Discussion
5.3.2.7
Correlation with EDSS scores
No signicant clusters were found when testing a possible correlation between
the data and EDSS scores, so these results are not shown. Thus the expres-
sion of the DMN and motor component as well as the expression of regional
homogeneity do not appear to be correlated with the EDSS scores.
5.3.2.8
Possible Eect of Dierent Number of EPO Doses
No signicant clusters were found when testing for a possible eect of the dif-
ferent number of EPO doses, so these results are not shown. This result cor-
responds to the results presented above which did not indicate any eect of
EPO. However the fact that only half of the patients were used leads to a loss
of statistical power in this test.
5.3.3
Parametric versus Non-Parametric Tests
The results obtained from the two statistical tests performed in this work (ex-
ible factorial model and permutation test) allow for a comparison between a
parametric approach and a non-parametric approach. The two tests were per-
formed on the same features and both at level α = 0.05, however the result
obtained were dierent. The exible factorial model were not able to nd any
signicant clusters for any of the features, whereas permutation testing were
able to nd some signicant clusters. This might be because a non-parametric
test can be more powerful when assumptions about the distribution are not met.
5.3.4
Results of the Statistical Tests in Relation to the
Hypothesis
In general, the results obtained from permutation testing using nuisance covari-
ates on the extracted ICADMN and ICAmotor features indicate that the EPO
group had a higher expression of the DMN and motor component in some spe-
cic areas. On the other hand the results obtained from permutation testing
using nuisance covariates on the extracted KCC features indicate that the EPO
group had a lower expression of regional homogeneity in some specic areas.
However, the longitudinal curves for all the tests performed using nuisance co-
variates revealed a dierence between the two groups which was present before
==PAGE:101==
5.3 Statistical Analysis Results
83
the EPO treatment began. These results indicate that signicant clusters found
in all permutation tests are not due to an EPO eect. Thus, the dierence must
be due to other factors that were not taken into account in this work. If the EPO
scanning sessions were acquired before or after the placebo scanning sessions,
the remaining dierence between the groups could be explained by a technical
instability of the scanner arising at some point in the study. However, since
the EPO and placebo patients have been scanned in an unsystematic order, a
possibly technical failure would have aected both groups equally. Furthermore,
the dierence between the patients in this double-blind study, could probably
have been reduced using a larger sample size.
In short, these results indicate that EPO did not have en eect on the expres-
sion of the DMN and motor component as well as the expression of regional
homogeneity in progressive MS patients investigated in this work.
==PAGE:102==
84
Results and Discussion
5.4
Classication Results
In this section the results of the classication using the three classication meth-
ods, SVM, dinear discriminant, and kNN, are presented. In Section 5.4.1 the
results are discussed in relation to the methods and the hypothesis.
As the
methods and the results are closely connected they are collectively presented
and discussed.
To optimise the classication with the SVM, the parameter C was tested from
2−5, 2−4, ..., 214, 215. No dierence in the achieved accuracy was obtained for
either the two- or six-class classication in this interval. Therefore the classi-
cation was carried out using C = 20 for both cases. Furthermore an investigation
of the classication models showed that all feature vectors were support vectors
in both cases.
Table 5.1 shows the results of the three dierent classication methods. For the
two-class classication the specied percentage indicates how many of the 42
subjects that were correctly classied to the EPO- or placebo-group with the
LOOCV scheme.
For the six-class classication the specied percentage indicates how many of
the 126 scans that were correctly classied to the correct group and session using
the "leave-one-subject-out" CV scheme.
Extracted feature/
ICADMN
ICAmotor
KCC
Classication method
Support Vector Machine
two-class
52.4 %
38.1 %
47.6 %
k Nearest Neighbour
two-class
59.5 %
57.1 %
59.5 %
k = 1
k = 5
k = 5
Linear Discriminant
two-class
54.8 %
50 %
45.3 %
Support Vector Machine
six-class
22.3 %
19.1 %
13.5 %
k Nearest Neighbour
six-class
20.6 %
19.1 %
20.6 %
k = 3
k = 15
k = 1
Linear Discriminant
six-class
21.4 %
17.5 %
14.3 %
Table 5.1: The achieved accuracies of the classication of the extracted fea-
tures. The specied percentage indicates the percentage of the samples that
were correctly classied.
==PAGE:103==
5.4 Classication Results
85
It is seen that for the two-class classication the kNN classier achieved slightly
better accuracies than the other two. For the six-class classication the three
classiers performed similarly.
Table 5.2 shows the p-value of the obtained classication accuracies compared
to the permuted null distribution, where the label vectors were permuted 5000
times. It is seen that only the kNN classier was signicantly predictive on an
α = 0.05 level compared to a random assignment, when classifying the ICADMN
feature in the six-class classication.
Extracted feature/
ICADMN
ICAmotor
KCC
Classication
Support Vector Machine
two-class
p = 0.2786
p = 0.7846
p = 0.4420
k Nearest Neighbour
two-class
p = 0.0720
p = 0.1062
p = 0.0614
Linear Discriminant
two-class
p = 0.2324
p = 0.4222
p = 0.6008
Support Vector Machine
six-class
p = 0.0526
p = 0.2718
p = 0.9372
k Nearest Neighbour
six-class
p = 0.0378
p = 0.2098
p = 0.3072
Linear Discriminant
six-class
p = 0.0536
p = 0.3990
p = 0.8798
Table 5.2: The p-value of the obtained classication accuracies, compared to
the permuted null distribution.
Table 5.3 shows the results of the three dierent classication methods after
the nuisance covariates age, EDSS score, sex, lesions load and phenotype had
been regressed out.
For the two-class classication the specied percentage
indicates how many of the 42 subjects that were correctly classied to the EPO
or placebo group with the LOOCV scheme. For the six-class classication the
specied percentage indicates how many of the 126 scans that were correctly
classied to the correct group and session using the "leave-one-subject-out" CV
scheme.
For the two-class classication the kNN classier again achieved slightly better
accuracies than the other two. For the six-class classication kNN achieved a
slightly better accuracie for the ICA components.
Table 5.4 shows the p-value of the obtained classication accuracies, after the
nuisance covariates had been regressed out, compared to the permuted null dis-
==PAGE:104==
86
Results and Discussion
Extracted feature/
ICADMN
ICAmotor
KCC
Classication method
Support Vector Machine
two-class
54.8 %
38.1 %
50 %
k Nearest Neighbour
two-class
61.9 %
54.8 %
52.4 %
k = 7
k = 7
k = 15
Linear Discriminant
two-class
45.3 %
47.6 %
50 %
Support Vector Machine
six-class
15.9 %
18.3 %
20.6 %
k Nearest Neighbour
six-class
20.6 %
21.4 %
19.1 %
k = 11
k = 8
k = 3
Linear Discriminant
six-class
18.3 %
16.7 %
17.5 %
Table 5.3: The achieved accuracies of the classication of the extracted features
after the age, EDSS score, sex, lesions load and phenotype had been regressed
out. The achieved accuracies of the classication of the extracted features. The
specied percentage indicates the percentage of the samples that were correctly
classied.
tribution, where the label vectors were permuted 5000 times. It is seen that only
the kNN classier was signicantly predictive on an α = 0.05 level compared
to a random assignment, when classifying the ICADMN feature in the two and
six-class classication.
To see if any unexpected bias was present, the confusion matrices were con-
structed for each of the tests. Since the obtained accuracies were around 50%
one could fear that all instances had been classied as one of the groups. For-
tunately, none of the tests, in both the two- and six-class case, showed signs
of any unexpected bias. These confusion matrices can be seen in Appendix C.
However, one confusion matrix showed a block-like structure suggesting that
there was a slight tendency for the EPO groups sessions to be classied as other
EPO groups sessions and the same for the placebo. This can be seen in Figure
5.10.
==PAGE:105==
5.4 Classication Results
87
Extracted feature/
ICADMN
ICAmotor
KCC
Classication
Support Vector Machine
two-class
p = 0.2085
p = 0.8080
p = 0.3658
k Nearest Neighbour
two-class
p = 0.0296
p = 0.1520
p = 0.1776
Linear Discriminant
two-class
p = 0.5828
p = 0.5204
p = 0.4104
Support Vector Machine
six-class
p = 0.5450
p = 0.2984
p = 0.3816
k Nearest Neighbour
six-class
p = 0.0388
p = 0.0656
p = 0.1780
Linear Discriminant
six-class
p = 0.2182
p = 0.4630
p = 0.6706
Table 5.4: The p-values of the obtained classication accuracies, after nuisance
covariate regression, compared to the permuted null distribution.
Figure 5.10: Confusion matrices for KNN six-class classication of the ICADMN
feature.
The red numbers indicate the number of samples classied as the
particular class. Dark colours indicate high values and light colors indicate low
values.
==PAGE:106==
88
Results and Discussion
5.4.1
Discussion of the Classication Results
The obtained p-values from the permuted null-distributions in the two-class
problem, revealed that none of the three classiers could correctly classify the
ICAmotor and KCC features as belonging to the EPO or placebo group. These
results indicate that, based on these features, there was no signicant dierence
between the two groups.
The kNN classier performed signicantly better than a random assignment
only when classifying ICADMN after the nuisance covariates were regressed out.
However, an accuracy of 61.9% was achieved, which can not be regarded as a
convincing result to conclude that there was a signicant dierence between the
two groups.
The obtained p-values from the permuted null-distributions in the six-class prob-
lem, shows that none of the three classiers could correctly classify the ICAmotor
and KCC features as belonging to the two groups' three sessions. These results
indicate that there was no development throughout the three sessions for these
features.
Again the kNN classier was the only method to produce a result that was
signicantly better than a random assignment, again for the ICADMN, both
before and after the nuisance covariates had been regressed out. However, the
achieved accuracy of 20.6%, in both cases, can again not be regarded as a con-
vincing results to conclude that the two groups' three session were signicantly
dierent.
The confusion matrix for the kNN six-class classication of the ICADMN before
nuisance covariate regression showed that there was a slight tendency for the
EPO group sessions to be classied as other EPO groups sessions and the same
for the placebo group.
This indicate a slight dierence between the groups.
However this slight dierence were not large enough to be signicant in the
two-class problem.
The fact that the confusion matrices showed no unexpected bias and none of
the classiers performed signicantly worse than a random assignment indicate
that the classication models were trained correctly.
In general the obtained results show that the kNN classier performed slightly
better than the SVM and linear discriminant classier for the specic features
used in this work, since it was the only classier that performed signicantly
better than a random assignment. This could be due to the fact that the kNN
classier does not have a linear decision boundary like the linear SVM and linear
==PAGE:107==
5.4 Classication Results
89
discriminant classier does. The fact that the two linear classiers could not
correctly classify the features indicate that these features were not linearly sep-
arable. However the fact that the results obtained using the non-linear classier
were only slightly improved, indicate that they were not non-linearly separable
either. The fact that both the linear and non-linear classiers were not able to
classify the features correctly indicate that the two groups were not signicantly
dierent.
==PAGE:108==
90
Results and Discussion
5.5
Regression Results
In this section the results obtained from the regression analysis are presented.
The signicance of these results in relation the the method and the second goal
of this project is discussed in Section 5.5.1.
Table 5.5 shows the R2 and R2
Adjusted achieved in the prediction of EDSS scores
by PLS1 regression and matlabs PLS regression function plsregress. This ta-
ble shows the results obtained from all the three extracted features, i.e. ICADMN,
ICAmotor and KCC. For all the features the optimal number of components was
the same for both PLS models.
In Figure 5.11 scatter plots of the observed EDSS scores against the predicted
EDSS scores obtained with PLS1 for the three selected features are shown.
In Figure 5.12 scatter plots of the observed EDSS scores against the predicted
EDSS scores obtained with plsregress for the three selected features are shown.
The red line in the gures containing the scatter plots is a tted regression line
between the observed and predicted EDSS scores.
Table 5.6 shows the p-values of the obtained R2
Adjusted for PLS1 and plsregress,
compared to the permuted null distribution.
Extracted feature/
ICADMN
ICAmotor
KCC
Regression method
PLS1
R2
-0.1041
-0.0402
-0.1999
PLS1
R2
Adjusted
-0.0607
0.0006
-0.1527
plsregresss
R2
-0.1041
-0.0402
-0.1999
plsregresss
R2
Adjusted
-0.0607
0.0006
-0.1527
Table 5.5: The achieved R2 and R2
Adjusted of prediction of EDSS scores by PLS
regression.
Extracted feature/
ICADMN
ICAmotor
KCC
Regression method
PLS1
R2
Adjusted
p = 0.1740
p = 0.0732
p = 0.5254
plsregresss
R2
Adjusted
p =0.1742
p =0.0728
p =0.5188
Table 5.6: The p-values of the obtained R2
Adjusted, compared to the permuted
null distribution.
==PAGE:109==
5.5 Regression Results
91
(a) ICA 13
(b) ICA 25
(c) KCC
Figure 5.11: Scatter plots of the observed EDSS score against the predicted
EDSS scores with PLS1 for the three selected features. The red line is a tted
regression line between the observed and predicted EDSS scores.
==PAGE:110==
92
Results and Discussion
(a) ICA 13
(b) ICA 25
(c) KCC
Figure 5.12: Scatter plots of the observed EDSS score against the predicted
EDSS scores with plsregress for the three selected features. The red line is a
tted regression line between the observed and predicted EDSS scores.
==PAGE:111==
5.5 Regression Results
93
5.5.1
Discussion of the Regression Results
It was expected that the results obtained using PLS1 and plsregress would be
similar, since plsregress uses the SIMPLS algorithm which had been shown to
be equal to PLS1, when the target value y contains only a single variable. As
expected, it is seen in Table 5.5 that the achieved R2 and R2
Adjusted are the same
for PLS1 and plsregress for all three features. Furthermore, it was noted that
the optimal number of components were the same for PLS1 and plsregress.
The identical results obtained in both the values of R2 and R2
Adjusted as well as
number of components indicate a correct implementation of PLS1.
It is seen that the R2 values, which reveals how well the EDSS scores were
predicted by the extracted features, are negative for all features. Thus, it was
not possible to predict the EDSS scores from the extracted features, which
indicate that the extracted features used were not correlated with the EDSS
scores of the subjects.
The R2
Adjusted values reveals whether it was worthwhile to create the PLS model
to predict the EDSS scores compared to a simple model that made the prediction
based on the mean of the training data.
These values are negative for the
ICADMN and KCC feature, and for the ICAmotor feature they are positive, but
very close to zero. These results indicate that the models performed worse than
the simple mean model, for ICADMN and KCC and slightly better for ICAmotor.
But for a value so close to zero it was not worthwhile to train a more complex
and computationally expensive model, compared to the simple mean model.
The scatter plots shown in 5.11 and 5.12 reveal that the prediction of EDSS
scores was similar for PLS1 and plsregress. Note that for these scatter plots
a perfect prediction would be illustrated as an increasing line with a slope of
1 with all data points lying on the tted regression line. However, it is seen
in Figure 5.11 and 5.12 that the tted regression lines are all horizontal and
the data points lies far away from the tted regression line, revealing a poor
prediction achieved using both PLS1 and plsregress. This is consistent with
the negative R2-values.
In Table 5.6 it is seen that the p-values of the obtained R2
Adjusted compared
to the permuted null distribution is similar for PLS1 and plsregress. It is
seen that the PLS models were not signicantly predictive on an α = 0.05 level
compared to a random assignment for any of the extracted features. Neither of
the models performed worse than a random assignment, which indicate that the
models were trained correctly.
The fact that none of the models, for any of the features, were either better or
worse than a random assignment indicate that there was simply no correlation
==PAGE:112==
94
Results and Discussion
to be found.
All these results show that the PLS models were not able to predict the EDSS
scores from the extracted features. Since PLS is known to work well with high
dimensional data, the PLS models were expected to nd a correlation if a
correlation existed. Thus, the results obtained indicate that the expression of
the DMN component, motor component and regional homogeneity were not
correlated with the degree of clinical disability in the progressive MS patients
investigated in this study.
==PAGE:113==
5.6 Discussion of Links Between the Findings
95
5.6
Discussion of Links Between the Findings
In general, the results obtained from the statistical analysis is consistent with
the results obtained from the classication. When testing the dierence of the
means between the EPO and placebo groups, the exible factorial model did
not nd any signicant dierence. The permutation tests showed that the EPO
and placebo groups were only signicantly dierent in small areas, which is
consistent with the classication results showing that it was not possible to
convincingly classify the features. Furthermore, the obtained curves showing the
longitudinal development based on the permutation mean tests, revealed that
the groups did not change throughout the three scanning sessions. This nding
is consistent with the classication results, where no success was seen in the
six-class classication problem. Thus, the results obtained indicate that there
was no development throughout the three scanning sessions for either group.
In the permutation tests the largest dierence was seen in the ICADMN, which
is again consistent with the classication results where ICADMN was the only
feature for which a classication achieved better than a random assignment. All
the above mentioned results suggest that EPO had no eect on the expression
of the DMN and motor components and regional homogeneity in the progressive
MS patients investigated in this project.
To our knowledge the eect of EPO in progressive MS patients has not yet, prior
to this study, been investigated through rs-fMRI analysis. Even though earlier
studies have shown that long-term EPO administration in humans reduced clin-
ical disability in progressive MS patients [10], it is not certain that this reduction
in EDSS score would be reected in the expression of resting-state patterns. In
the not yet published work from the double-blind placebo controlled EPO treat-
ment study of progressive MS patients, through which the dataset used in this
project was acquired, no reduction in EDSS score or other clinical outcomes
were found.
Thus the results obtained in this work is consistent with these
ndings.
The results obtained from the permutation tests in relation to the investigation
of a possible correlation between resting-state patterns and disability in progres-
sive MS patients are consistent with the results obtained from the regression
analysis. The permutation tests revealed that no regions in the extracted fea-
tures were correlated with the EDSS scores. The PLS1 regression revealed that
it was not possible to predict the EDSS scores by the extracted features. These
nding indicate that the expression of DMN and motor network components as
well as regional homogeneity were not correlated with clinical disability in the
progressive MS patients investigated in this project.
Dogonowski et al. in [6] found a correlation between the expression of motor
==PAGE:114==
96
Results and Discussion
resting-state connectivity in left PMd and EDSS scores in RRMS and SPMS
patients. However, no signicant correlation was found when considering the
group of SPMS alone in [6].
This is consistent with the results obtained in this work which indicate that the
expression of motor resting-state connectivity was not correlated with clinical
disability in progressive MS patients. The increase in the expression of motor
resting-state connectivity seen in RRMS patients, might reect an adaptive
cortical motor reorganisation in order to preserve motor function. Based on
the current study it seems that this compensatory plasticity is restricted to the
relapsing-remitting stage of the disease. This could be explained by the fact
that compensatory plasticity is no longer possible in more severe degree of the
disease.
The correlation found by Dogonowski et al. in [5] between regional homogeneity
of cerebellar regions and EDSS scores in RRMS and SPMS patients was not
found in this study when investigating only progressive MS patients (PPMS
and SPMS). This could suggest that the expression of regional homogeneity
dier between dierent phenotypes of MS.
It must be noted that the individual EDSS scores used for regression in this
work were not evenly distributed on the EDSS scale. In addition these values
did not cover the entire EDSS scale but ranged from 3 to 7.5. Thus lower scores
were not represented where the correlation may be stronger.
==PAGE:115==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
The main goal of this project was to investigate EPO related changes in progres-
sive MS patients with rs-fMRI data analysis. This was accomplished by applying
statistical and machine learning methods to features that were extracted from
preprocessed rs-fMRI data.
The extracted features were found using ReHo and ICA. Between all the ex-
tracted components from the ICA analysis, the DMN and motor network com-
ponents were identied and used for second level analysis along with the KCC-
maps obtained from the ReHo analysis.
A exible factorial model was applied to the extracted features, which was not
able to nd any signicant dierence between the EPO and placebo groups or
any longitudinal eects. This was the rst indication that EPO treatment did
not have an eect on the patients. Through permutation testing a signicant
dierence between the groups was observed, mostly in the expression of the
DMN component. However, curves showing the longitudinal development in
these areas revealed that this signicant dierence was present before the EPO
treatment began and the dierence was similar at all three scanning sessions.
These results provided the second indication that EPO did not have an eect
on the patients.
The classication methods applied included SVM, linear discriminant and kNN.
All the classication methods were performed for a two-class classication prob-
lem using a LOOCV approach, in order to test if it was possible to classify each
group to their correct class. Furthermore, the methods were performed for a
==PAGE:116==
98
Conclusion
six-class classication using a leave-one-subject-out CV approach, in order to
test if it was possible to classify each session for each group to their correct
class. The highest accuracies achieved for the two-class and six-class classica-
tion problems were 61.9 % and 22.3 %, respectively. Thus, none of the classiers
were able to convincingly classify the patients to the EPO or placebo group. Nor
were they able to classify the patients to the three scanning sessions for each
group. This was another indication that no signicant dierence between the
groups was present and furthermore that EPO treatment had no longitudinal
eect on the patients.
The second goal of this project was to investigate if a correlation between resting-
state patterns and EDSS scores exists in progressive MS patients. This was
carried out using a permutation test as well as PLS regression analysis. The
implementation of PLS1, used in this work, was validated by comparing the
performance with matlab's PLS regression function plsregress. Equal results
were obtained, which indicated a correct implementation of the PLS1 algorithm.
The permutation test did not nd any regions of the brain where the extracted
features were correlated with the EDSS scores. This nding is consistent with
the PLS1 results, where the highest R2 achieved was -0.0402, which indicate
that the extracted features used were uncorrelated with the EDSS scores. Fur-
thermore, the highest R2
Adjusted achieved was 0.0006, which indicate that it was
not worthwhile to train a more complex and computationally expensive model,
compared to a simple mean model for the particular features used in this work.
These ndings suggest that the expression of the DMN component, motor com-
ponent and regional homogeneity were uncorrelated with clinical disability in
the progressive MS patients investigated in this project.
All these results lead towards the conclusion that the expression of resting-
state patterns in the progressive MS patients investigated in this work did not
change in response to treatment with EPO. Furthermore, the results indicate
that there was no correlation between resting-state patterns and EDSS scores
in the progressive MS patients investigated in this project.
In conclusion, based on the current study we nd no reason to believe that EPO
has neuroprotective eects in PPMS or SPMS patients.
==PAGE:117==
99
Future work
The results obtained with the progressive MS patients in this study in relation
to earlier studies, which included other phenotypes, suggest that the expression
of resting-state patterns dier between dierent phenotypes of MS. Thus, for
further research the methods applied in this project could be used to investigate
possible dierences in resting-state patterns between dierent MS phenotypes.
This could be used to gain more insight into the dierent MS phenotypes.
In this work, the study of changes in inter-regional connectivity in response
to EPO treatment were limited to the DMN and motor resting-state network.
However, it could be interesting to investigate an possible EPO eect in other
resting- state-networks using the methods applied in this project.
==PAGE:118==
100
Conclusion
==PAGE:119==
Appendix A
List of Contributions
This appendix contains the list of contributions to this thesis to full the re-
quirements for a Master thesis at DTU. For each section the author is specied.
The general and describing sections have been written jointly in accordance
with the rules specied in the DTU Student Handbook. The overall direction
and conclusions of this thesis as well as nal proofreading has been done in
cooperation.
Section
Section Title
Author
number
Summary (English)
Cecilia and Mette
Resume (Danish)
Cecilia and Mette
Preface
Cecilia and Mette
Acknowledgements
Cecilia and Mette
Nomenclature
Cecilia and Mette
1
Introduction
Cecilia and Mette
==PAGE:120==
102
List of Contributions
2
Background
-
2.1
Multiple Sclerosis
Cecilia
2.2
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Mette
2.3
Brain Anatomy and Function
Cecilia
2.4
Erythropoietin
Cecilia
3
Dataset
Mette
4
Methods
-
4.1
Statistical Parametric Mapping
Mette
4.1.1
The General Linear Model
Mette
4.1.2
Nuisance Covariate Regression
Cecilia
4.2
Preprocessing
-
4.2.1
Slice Timing Correction
Cecilia
4.2.2
Reorientation
Cecilia
4.2.3
Unwarping
Cecilia
4.2.4
Realignment
Cecilia
4.2.5
Despiking
Mette
4.2.6
Coregistration
Mette
4.2.7
Normalisation
Mette
4.2.8
Nuisance Variable Regression
Mette
4.2.9
Smoothing
Mette
4.3
Feature Extraction
-
4.3.1
Regional Homogeneity
Mette
4.3.2
Independent Component Analysis
Cecilia
4.4
Statistical Analysis
-
4.4.1
Flexible Factorial Model
Mette
4.4.2
Permutation Test
Cecilia
4.5
Classication
4.5.1
Support Vector Machines
Mette
4.5.2
Evaluating the Classication
Cecilia
4.5.3
Linear Discriminant Classication
Cecilia
4.5.4
K Nearest-Neighbour Classication
Cecilia
4.6
Regression
-
4.6.1
Partial Least Squares
Mette
4.6.2
Implementation of PLS1
Cecilia
5
Results and Discussion
-
5.1
Evaluation of the Preprocessing methods
Cecilia
5.2
Feature Extraction
-
5.2.1
Regional Homogeneity
Mette
5.2.2
Independent Component Analysis
Cecilia
5.3
Statistical Analysis
Cecilia
5.4
Classication
Mette
5.5
Regression Results
Mette
5.5.1
Discussion of the Regression Results
Cecilia
5.6
Discussion of Links Between the Findings
Mette
6
Conclusion
Cecilia
==PAGE:121==
Appendix B
Cross Validation Procedure
for the SVM
This appendix contains the matlab-code for the cross validation schemes for
both the two- and six-class classication using the LIBSVM toolbox.
==PAGE:122==
SVM_2class.m
1 %% choose a data
set
to
load
load
ICA13 . mat
data=ICA13 ;
% load ICA25 . mat
6 % data=ICA25 ;
% load szKCC . mat
% data=szKCC ;
11 % load
the
l a b e l
vector
load
label
%% SVM two−c l a s s
c l a s s i f i c a t i o n
% I n i t i a l i z e
vectors
16 Accuracies = zeros (1 ,42) ;
Predicted_labels=zeros (1 ,42) ;
% Define
the
l i n e a r
kernel
function
linearKernel = @ (X , Y ) X*Y ' ;
21
f o r
i=1:42
% S e l e c t
t r a i n i n g
data
label_train=double ( label ( [ 1 : i−1,i + 1 : 4 2 ] , : ) ) ;
26
data_train=data ( [ 1 : i−1,i + 1 : 4 2 ] , : ) ;
% Normalise
t r a i n i n g
data
data_train = ( data_train −repmat (min( data_train , [ ] , 1 ) , s i z e ( data_train ←-
, 1 ) ,1) ) * spdiags ( 1 . / (max( data_train , [ ] , 1 )−min( data_train , [ ] , 1 ) ) ' ,0 ,←-
s i z e ( data_train , 2 ) , s i z e ( data_train , 2 ) ) ;
% S e l e c t
t e s t
data
31
label_test=double ( label ( i ) ) ;
ndata_test=data (i , : ) ;
% Normalise
t e s t
data
with
parameters from the
t r a i n i n g
set
data_test = ( ndata_test −repmat (min( data_train , [ ] , 1 ) , s i z e ( ndata_test ←-
, 1 ) ,1) ) * spdiags ( 1 . / (max( data_train , [ ] , 1 )−min( data_train , [ ] , 1 ) ) ' ,0 ,←-
s i z e ( ndata_test , 2 ) , s i z e ( ndata_test , 2 ) ) ;
36
% Compute kernel
matrices
between
the
pair
of
( train , t r a i n )
% and
include
sample
s e r i a l
number as
f i r s t
column
numTrain = s i z e ( data_train , 1 ) ;
K_train =
[
( 1 : numTrain ) '
,
linearKernel ( data_train , data_train )
] ;
% Compute kernel
matrices
between
the
pair
of
( test , t r a i n )
41
% and
include
sample
s e r i a l
number as
f i r s t
column
numTest = s i z e ( data_test , 1 ) ;
K_test = [
( 1 : numTest ) '
,
linearKernel ( data_test ,
data_train )
] ;
% Train
the model
46
model = svmtrain2 ( label_train ,
K_train ,
'−t 4 −c 1 −b 0 ' ) ;
% Use the model to
predict
the
l a b e l
of
the
t e s t
instance
[ predicted_label ,
accuracy ,
decision_values ] = svmpredict ( label_test , ←-
K_test ,
model ,
'−b 0 ' ) ;
51
% Save
ac cu racie s
and
predricted
l a b e l s
a = accuracy (1) ;
Accuracies ( i ) = a ;
Predicted_labels ( i )=predicted_label ;
end
56 % Calculate CV accuracy
Mean_accuray=mean( Accuracies ) ;
% Calculate
Confusion
matrix
C=confusionmat ( label , Predicted_labels ) ;
==PAGE:123==
SVM_6class.m
1 %% choose
data
set
to
load
load
ICA13_multiclass . mat
data=ICA13_multiclass ;
6 % load
ICA25_multiclass . mat
% data=ICA25_multiclass ;
% load
szKCC_multiclass . mat
% data=szKCC_multiclass ;
11
load
label126_6class . mat
label=label126_6class ;
%% SVM Six−c l a s s
c l a s s f i c a t i o n
16
% I n i t i a l i z e
vectors
Accuracies = zeros (1 ,126) ;
Predicted_labels=zeros (1 ,126) ;
21 % Define
the
l i n e a r
kernel
function
linearKernel = @ (X , Y ) X*Y ' ;
f o r
i =1:3:124
26
% S e l e c t
t r a i n i n g
data
label_train=double ( label ( [ 1 : i−1,i +3:126] ,:) ) ;
data_train_n=data ( [ 1 : i−1,i +3:126] ,:) ;
% Normalise
t r a i n i n g
data
31
data_train = ( data_train_n −repmat (min( data_train_n , [ ] , 1 ) , s i z e (←-
data_train_n , 1 ) ,1) ) * spdiags ( 1 . / (max( data_train_n , [ ] , 1 )−min(←-
data_train_n , [ ] , 1 ) ) ' ,0 , s i z e ( data_train_n , 2 ) , s i z e ( data_train_n ←-
, 2 ) ) ;
% S e l e c t
t e s t
data
( one whole
subject = s e s s i o n
1 , 2 and 3)
label_test_s1=double ( label ( i ) ) ;
label_test_s2=double ( label ( i+1)) ;
36
label_test_s3=double ( label ( i+2)) ;
data_test_s1=data (i , : ) ;
data_test_s2=data ( i +1 ,:) ;
data_test_s3=data ( i +2 ,:) ;
% Normalise
t e s t
data
41
data_test_s1 = ( data_test_s1 −repmat (min( data_train_n , [ ] , 1 ) , s i z e (←-
data_test_s1 , 1 ) ,1) ) * spdiags ( 1 . / (max( data_train_n , [ ] , 1 )−min(←-
data_train_n , [ ] , 1 ) ) ' ,0 , s i z e ( data_test_s1 , 2 ) , s i z e ( data_test_s1 ←-
, 2 ) ) ;
data_test_s2 = ( data_test_s2 −repmat (min( data_train_n , [ ] , 1 ) , s i z e (←-
data_test_s2 , 1 ) ,1) ) * spdiags ( 1 . / (max( data_train_n , [ ] , 1 )−min(←-
data_train_n , [ ] , 1 ) ) ' ,0 , s i z e ( data_test_s2 , 2 ) , s i z e ( data_test_s2 ←-
, 2 ) ) ;
data_test_s3 = ( data_test_s3 −repmat (min( data_train_n , [ ] , 1 ) , s i z e (←-
data_test_s3 , 1 ) ,1) ) * spdiags ( 1 . / (max( data_train_n , [ ] , 1 )−min(←-
data_train_n , [ ] , 1 ) ) ' ,0 , s i z e ( data_test_s3 , 2 ) , s i z e ( data_test_s3 ←-
, 2 ) ) ;
% Compute kernel
matrices
between
the
pair
of
( train , t r a i n )
46
% and
include
sample
s e r i a l
number as
f i r s t
column
numTrain = s i z e ( data_train , 1 ) ;
K =
[
( 1 : numTrain ) '
,
linearKernel ( data_train , data_train )
] ;
% Compute kernel
matrices
between
the
three
p a i r s
of
( test , t r a i n )
51
% and
include
sample
s e r i a l
number as
f i r s t
column
numTest = s i z e ( data_test_s1 , 1 ) ;
KK1 = [
( 1 : numTest ) '
,
linearKernel ( data_test_s1 ,
data_train )
] ;
==PAGE:124==
KK2 = [
( 1 : numTest ) '
,
linearKernel ( data_test_s2 ,
data_train )
] ;
KK3 = [
( 1 : numTest ) '
,
linearKernel ( data_test_s3 ,
data_train )
] ;
56
% Train
the model
model = svmtrain2 ( label_train ,
K ,
'−t 4 −c 1 −b 0 ' ) ;
% Use the model to
predict
the
l a b e l
of
the
three
t e s t
instances
61
[ predicted_label_s1 ,
accuracy_s1 ] = svmpredict ( label_test_s1 ,
KK1 , ←-
model ,
'−b 0 ' ) ;
[ predicted_label_s2 ,
accuracy_s2 ] = svmpredict ( label_test_s2 ,
KK2 , ←-
model ,
'−b 0 ' ) ;
[ predicted_label_s3 ,
accuracy_s3 ] = svmpredict ( label_test_s3 ,
KK3 , ←-
model ,
'−b 0 ' ) ;
% Save
accu rac ie s
and
predricted
l a b e l s
66
a_s1 = accuracy_s1 (1) ;
a_s2 = accuracy_s2 (1) ;
a_s3 = accuracy_s3 (1) ;
Accuracies ( i ) = a_s1 ;
Accuracies ( i+1) = a_s2 ;
71
Accuracies ( i+2) = a_s3 ;
Predicted_labels ( i )=predicted_label_s1 ;
Predicted_labels ( i+1)=predicted_label_s2 ;
Predicted_labels ( i+2)=predicted_label_s3 ;
76 end
% Calculate CV accuracy
Mean_Accuracy=mean( Accuracies ) ;
% Calculate
Confusion
matrix
81 C=confusionmat ( label , Predicted_labels ) ;
==PAGE:125==
Appendix C
Confusion Matrices
This appendix contains all the confusion matrices for the classication of the
three features ICADMN, ICAmotor and KCC with three classiers SVM, linear
discriminant, and KNN for both the two- and six-class classication. The red
numbers indicate the number of samples classied as the particular class. Dark
colours indicate high values and light colors indicate low values.
==PAGE:126==
108
Confusion Matrices
(a) ICADMN
(b) ICAmotor
(c) KCC
Figure C.1: Confusion matrices for SVM two-class classication
==PAGE:127==
109
(a) ICADMN
(b) ICAmotor
(c) KCC
Figure C.2: Confusion matrices for KNN two-class classication
==PAGE:128==
110
Confusion Matrices
(a) ICADMN
(b) ICAmotor
(c) KCC
Figure C.3: Confusion matrices for linear discriminant two-class classication
==PAGE:129==
111
(a) ICADMN
(b) ICAmotor
(c) KCC
Figure C.4: Confusion matrices for SVM six-class classication
==PAGE:130==
112
Confusion Matrices
(a) ICADMN
(b) ICAmotor
(c) KCC
Figure C.5: Confusion matrices for KNN six-class classication
==PAGE:131==
113
(a) ICADMN
(b) ICAmotor
(c) KCC
Figure C.6: Confusion matrices for linear discriminant six-class classication
==PAGE:132==
114
Confusion Matrices
(a) ICADMN
(b) ICAmotor
(c) KCC
Figure C.7: Confusion matrices for SVM two-class classication after nuisance
nuisance covariate regression
==PAGE:133==
115
(a) ICADMN
(b) ICAmotor
(c) KCC
Figure C.8: Confusion matrices for KNN two-class classication after nuisance
nuisance covariate regression
==PAGE:134==
116
Confusion Matrices
(a) ICADMN
(b) ICAmotor
(c) KCC
Figure C.9: Confusion matrices for linear discriminant two-class classication
after nuisance covariate regression
==PAGE:135==
117
(a) ICADMN
(b) ICAmotor
(c) KCC
Figure C.10: Confusion matrices for SVM six-class classication after nuisance
covariate regression
==PAGE:136==
118
Confusion Matrices
(a) ICADMN
(b) ICAmotor
(c) KCC
Figure C.11: Confusion matrices for KNN six-class classication after nuisance
covariate regression
==PAGE:137==
119
(a) ICADMN
(b) ICAmotor
(c) KCC
Figure C.12: Confusion matrices for linear discriminant six-class classication
after nuisance covariate regression
==PAGE:138==
120
Confusion Matrices
==PAGE:139==
Appendix D
PLS1 Implementation
This appendix contains the matlab-code for the implementation of PLS1. This
implementation is based on the steps of the PLS1 algorithm described in http:
//statmaster.sdu.dk/courses/ST02/module07/.
==PAGE:140==
PLS1.m
1 %% choose a data
set
to
load
load
ICA13_multiclass . mat
X_org=ICA13_multiclass ;
6 % load
ICA25_multiclass . mat
% X_org=ICA25_multiclass ;
% load
szKCC_multiclass . mat
% X_org=szKCC_multiclass ;
11
load
EDSS_126_2 . mat
y_org=EDSS_126_2 ;
% I n i t i a l i z e
vectors
16 y_predicted=zeros (126 ,1) ;
y_mean_train_org=zeros (126 ,1) ;
% Outer CV layer
to
t e s t
p r e d i c t a b i l i t y
of
the
the model
f o r
i =1:3:124
21
% S e l e c t
t r a i n i n g
data ,
3 samples
corresponding
to
one
subject
y_train_org=y_org ( [ 1 : i−1,i +3:126] ,:) ;
X_train_org=X_org ( [ 1 : i−1,i +3:126] ,:) ;
26
% Center
t r a i n i n g
data
meanX = mean( X_train_org , 1 ) ;
meanY = mean( y_train_org , 1 ) ;
X_train = bsxfun ( @minus ,
X_train_org ,
meanX ) ;
y_train = bsxfun ( @minus ,
y_train_org ,
meanY ) ;
31
% S e l e c t
t e s t
data
X_test_s1_org=X_org (i , : ) ;
X_test_s2_org=X_org ( i +1 ,:) ;
X_test_s3_org=X_org ( i +2 ,:) ;
36
% Center
the
t e s t
data
with
the
t r a i n i n g mean
X_test_s1 = bsxfun ( @minus ,
X_test_s1_org ,
meanX ) ;
X_test_s2 = bsxfun ( @minus ,
X_test_s2_org ,
meanX ) ;
X_test_s3 = bsxfun ( @minus ,
X_test_s3_org ,
meanX ) ;
41
% Save mean value
of
tranin
data
f o r
evaluating
the model
y_mean=mean( y_train_org ) ;
y_mean_train_org ( i )=y_mean ;
y_mean_train_org ( i+1)=y_mean ;
46
y_mean_train_org ( i+2)=y_mean ;
% Inner
layer
to
find
the
optimal number of
components
f o r
nComp =1:30
51
f o r
j =1:3:121
% S e l e c t
t r a i n i n g
data % take
out 3 samples
y_train_inner_org=y_train_org ( [ 1 : j−1,j +3:123] ,:) ;
56
X_train_inner_org=X_train_org ( [ 1 : j−1,j +3:123] ,:) ;
% Center
t r a i n
data
meanX_inner = mean( X_train_inner_org , 1 ) ;
meanY_inner = mean( y_train_inner_org , 1 ) ;
61
X_train_inner = bsxfun ( @minus ,
X_train_inner_org ,
meanX_inner ) ;
y_train_inner = bsxfun ( @minus ,
y_train_inner_org ,
meanY_inner ) ;
% S e l e c t
t e s t
data
X_test_s1_inner_org=X_train_org (j , : ) ;
==PAGE:141==
66
X_test_s2_inner_org=X_train_org ( j +1 ,:) ;
X_test_s3_inner_org=X_train_org ( j +2 ,:) ;
y_test_s1_inner_org=y_train_org ( j ) ;
y_test_s2_inner_org=y_train_org ( j+1) ;
y_test_s3_inner_org=y_train_org ( j+2) ;
71
% Center
the
t e s t
data
with
the
t r a i n i n g mean
X_test_s1_inner = bsxfun ( @minus ,
X_test_s1_inner_org , ←-
meanX_inner ) ;
X_test_s2_inner = bsxfun ( @minus ,
X_test_s2_inner_org , ←-
meanX_inner ) ;
X_test_s3_inner = bsxfun ( @minus ,
X_test_s3_inner_org , ←-
meanX_inner ) ;
76
% Create
the PLS1 model
% I n i t a l i z e
matrices
W_inner=zeros ( s i z e ( X_train_inner , 2 ) , nComp ) ;
P_inner=zeros ( s i z e ( X_train_inner , 2 ) , nComp ) ;
81
C_inner=zeros ( nComp , 1 ) ;
T_inner=zeros ( s i z e ( X_train_inner , 1 ) , nComp ) ;
f o r
k=1:nComp
86
w_inner=transpose ( X_train_inner ) *y_train_inner/norm(←-
transpose ( X_train_inner ) *y_train_inner ) ;
t_inner=X_train_inner*w_inner ;
c_hat_inner=(transpose ( t_inner ) *y_train_inner ) /( transpose (←-
t_inner ) *t_inner ) ;
91
p_inner=transpose ( X_train_inner ) *t_inner /( transpose ( t_inner←-
) *t_inner ) ;
X_train_inner=X_train_inner−t_inner*transpose ( p_inner ) ;
y_train_inner=y_train_inner−t_inner*c_hat_inner ;
96
% Save the
values
W_inner ( : , k )=w_inner ;
P_inner ( : , k )=p_inner ;
C_inner ( k )=c_hat_inner ;
T_inner ( : , k )=t_inner ;
101
end
B_inner=(W_inner* pinv ( transpose ( P_inner ) *W_inner ) ) *C_inner ;
106
% Estimate y based on the
t e s t
data
y_predicted_s1_inner=X_test_s1_inner *B_inner+meanY_inner ;
y_predicted_s2_inner=X_test_s2_inner *B_inner+meanY_inner ;
y_predicted_s3_inner=X_test_s3_inner *B_inner+meanY_inner ;
111
y_predicted_inner =[y_predicted_s1_inner y_predicted_s2_inner ←-
y_predicted_s3_inner ] ;
y_observed_inner=[y_test_s1_inner_org y_test_s2_inner_org ←-
y_test_s3_inner_org ] ;
% Calculate
r e s i d u a l sum of
squares
116
RSS_inner = sum(( y_observed_inner−y_predicted_inner ) .^2) ;
% Save the
values
to
find
the
optimal number of
components
RSS_all_inner ( j )=RSS_inner ;
121
end
% Save
only
the non−zero
values and compute the sum
RSS_all_inner=RSS_all_inner ( [ 1 : 3 : 1 2 1 ] ) ;
RSS_sum2=sum( RSS_all_inner ) ;
==PAGE:142==
126
% save
Residual sum of
squares
f o r
a l l nComp
RSS_it2 ( nComp )=RSS_sum2 ;
end
% Find the nComp that
gives
the
smallest
r e s i d u a l sum of
squares
131
optComp_vec=find ( RSS_it2==min( RSS_it2 ) ) ;
% I f
more than one nComp take
the same value
take
the
f i r s t
one
optComp=optComp_vec (1) ;
% Save the optComp f o r
a l l
i
optComp_all ( i )=optComp ;
136
% Use the model
in
the
outer
layer
with
the
found optComp
% Create
the PLS1 model
% I n i t i a l i z e
matrices
W=zeros ( s i z e ( X_train , 2 ) , optComp ) ;
141
P=zeros ( s i z e ( X_train , 2 ) , optComp ) ;
C=zeros ( optComp , 1 ) ;
T=zeros ( s i z e ( X_train , 1 ) , optComp ) ;
f o r
k=1:optComp
146
w=transpose ( X_train ) *y_train/norm( transpose ( X_train ) *y_train ) ;
t=X_train*w ;
c_hat=(transpose ( t ) *y_train ) /( transpose ( t ) *t ) ;
151
p=transpose ( X_train ) *t /( transpose ( t ) *t ) ;
X_train=X_train−t*transpose ( p ) ;
y_train=y_train−t*c_hat ;
156
% Save the
values
W ( : , k )=w ;
P ( : , k )=p ;
C ( k )=c_hat ;
T ( : , k )=t ;
161
end
B=(W* pinv ( transpose ( P ) *W ) ) *C ;
166
% Estimate y based on the
t e s t
data
yhat1=X_test_s1*B+meanY ;
yhat2=X_test_s2*B+meanY ;
yhat3=X_test_s3*B+meanY ;
171
% Save
estimates
y_predicted ( i )=yhat1 ;
y_predicted ( i+1)=yhat2 ;
y_predicted ( i+2)=yhat3 ;
176 end
% Save the
optimal number of
components
f o r
r e f e r e n c e
optComp_all=optComp_all ( [ 1 : 3 : 1 2 4 ] )
181 %% Evaluate
the model
% Total sum of
squares
TSS = sum(( y_org−mean( y_org ) ) .^2) ;
% Residual sum of
squares
f o r
the PLS model
186 RSS_PLS = sum(( y_org−y_predicted ) .^2) ;
% Residual sum of
squares
of
the mean model
RSS_meanmodel = sum(( y_org−y_mean_train_org ) .^2) ;
% Calculate
Rsquared
Rsquared=1−( RSS_PLS/TSS )
191 % Calculate
adjusted
Rsquared
==PAGE:143==
Rsquared_adjusted = 1 −( RSS_PLS/RSS_meanmodel )
%% V i s u a l i s e
the
estimation
of y
196 % Create
the
f i t t e d
r e g r e s s i o n
l i n e
p = p o l y f i t ( y_org , y_predicted , 1 ) ;
x1 = y_org ;
y1 = polyval (p , x1 ) ;
% S c a t t e r p l o t
of
observed
values
against
predicted
values
201 f i g u r e
plot ( y_org , y_predicted , ' o ' , ' MarkerSize ' ,10 , ' lineWidth ' , 1 . 5 )
hold on
plot ( x1 , y1 , ' r ' , ' lineWidth ' ,2)
hold off
206 xlabel ( ' Observed ' , ' FontSize ' ,
14)
ylabel ( ' Predicted ' , ' FontSize ' ,
14)
==PAGE:144==
126
PLS1 Implementation
==PAGE:145==
Appendix E
Validation of the PLS1
Model
To validate the implementation of the PLS1 model it was compared to the
matlabs PLS regression function plsregress. The two models were used on
a simple test data set. The test dataset consisted of 25 observations, corre-
sponding to 25 test subjects, which was found at http://people.sc.fsu.edu/
~jburkardt/datasets/regression/x09.txt. The parameters age, weight and
blood fat content was known for each test subject. In this validation test age
and weight were used as the explanatory variable and blood fat content was
used as the target variable, i.e. X ∈R25×2 and y ∈R25×1. The data was tested
using a LOOCV approach where the optimal number of components for the
models were found for each CV-fold. The performance of the models for data
with weak or non-existing correlation between X and y, was tested by adding
noise of varying magnitude to X. The noise consisted of a 25 × 2 matrix of ran-
dom numbers generated with matlabs randn-function. This noise matrix was
multiplied with integers from 0, 1...500 and added to X. The achieved R2
Adjusted
for both PLS1 and plsregress are plotted against the magnitude of the noise,
shown in Figure E.1. As expected the R2
Adjusted values decrease as the magnitude
of the noise increase for both models. Non of the models exhibit uncontrollable
behaviour when the noise is increased, but they both reach a plateau when the
R2
Adjusted value reach approximately R2
Adjusted = 0. It is noted that PLS1 and
plsregress perform equally up to the point where magnitude of added noise
is approximately 100. After the magnitude of the noise is increased further,
==PAGE:146==
128
Validation of the PLS1 Model
plsregress performs slightly better than PLS1. Their similar performance in-
dicate a correct implementation of PLS1, however it seems that plsregress
perform slightly better than PLS1 for this data when the correlation between
X and y weakens.
Figure E.1: The achieved R2
Adjusted for both PLS1 and plsregress are plotted
against the magnitude of the noise
==PAGE:147==
Bibliography
[1] Bharat Biswal, F. Zerrin Yetkin, Victor M. Haughton, and James S. Hyde.
Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using
echo-planar mri. Magnetic Resonance in Medicine, 34(4):537541, 1995.
[2] P. Calabrese. Neuropsychology of multiple sclerosis - an overview. Journal
of Neurology, 253(1):1015, 2006.
[3] Shiv Saidha, Christopher Eckstein, and Peter A. Calabresi.
New and
emerging disease modifying therapies for multiple sclerosis. Annals of the
New York Academy of Sciences, 1247(1):117, 2012.
[4] Anne Marie Dogonowski, Hartwig R. Siebner, Per Soelberg Sorensen,
Xingchen Wu, Bharat Biswal, Olaf B. Paulson, Tim B. Dyrby, Arnold
Skimminge, Morten Blinkenberg, and Kristoer H. Madsen. Expanded
functional coupling of subcortical nuclei with the motor resting-state net-
work in multiple sclerosis. Multiple Sclerosis, 19(5):559566, 2013.
[5] Anne-Marie Dogonowski, Kasper Winther Andersen, Kristoer Hougaard
Madsen, Per Soelberg Sørensen, Olaf Bjarne Paulson, Morten Blinken-
berg, and Hartwig Roman Siebner.
Multiple sclerosis impairs regional
functional connectivity in the cerebellum. Neuroimage: Clinical, 4:130
138, 2013.
[6] A. M. Dogonowski, H. R. Siebner, P. Soelberg Sorensen, O. B. Paulson,
T. B. Dyrby, M. Blinkenberg, and K. H. Madsen. Resting-state connec-
tivity of pre-motor cortex reects disability in multiple sclerosis.
Acta
Neurologica Scandinavica, 128(5):328335, 2013.
==PAGE:148==
130
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[7] Hong Chen, Bangwei Luo, Xiaofeng Yang, Jian Xiong, Zongwei Liu, Man
Jiang, Rongchen Shi, Chuansheng Yan, Yuzhang Wu, and Zhiren Zhang.
Therapeutic eects of nonerythropoietic erythropoietin analog ara290 in
experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis rat.
Journal of Neuroim-
munology, 268(1-2):6470, 2014.
[8] National multiple sclerosis society - medication, 2015.
[9] ML Brines, P. Ghezzi, S. Keenan, D. Agnello, NC de Lanerolle, C. Cerami,
LM Itri, and A. Cerami. Erythropoietin crosses the blood-brain barrier
to protect against experimental brain injury. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA,
97(19):1052610531, 2000.
[10] Hannelore Ehrenreich, Benjamin Fischer, Christine Norra, Felix Schellen-
berger, Nike Stender, Michael Stiefel, Anna-Leena Siren, Walter Paulus,
Klaus-Armin Nave, Ralf Gold, and Claudia Bartels. Exploring recombi-
nant human erythropoietin in chronic progressive multiple sclerosis. Brain,
130(10):25772588, 2007.
[11] Yufeng Zang, Tianzi Jiang, Yingli Lu, Yong He, and Lixia Tian. Regional
homogeneity approach to fmri data analysis. Neuroimage, Neuroimage,
22(1):394400, 2004.
[12] P. Comon. Independent component analysis, a new concept. Signal Pro-
cessing, 36(3):287314, 1994.
[13] R.A Fisher. The Design of Experiments. Oliver and Boyd, 1935.
[14] Pang-Ning. Tan, Michael. Steinbach, and Vipin. Kumar. Introduction to
data mining. Pearson, 2006.
[15] Corinna Cortes and Vladimir Vapnik. Support-vector networks. Machine
Learning, 20(3):273297, 1995.
[16] S. Wold, A. Ruhe, H. Wold, and III Dunn, W. J. The collinearity problem
in linear regression. the partial least squares (pls) approach to generalized
inverses. SIAM Journal on Scientic and Statistical Computing, 5(3):735
743, 1984.
[17] Anne-Laure Boulesteix and Korbinian Strimmer. Partial least squares: a
versatile tool for the analysis of high-dimensional genomic data. Briengs
in Bioinformatics, 8(1):3244, 2007.
[18] Sean J. Pittock and Claudia F. Lucchinetti. The pathology of ms: new
insights and potential clinical applications. Neurologist, 13(2):4556, 2007.
==PAGE:149==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
131
[19] Bruce D. Trapp, John Peterson, Richard M. Ransoho, Richard Rudick,
Sverre Mörk, and Lars Bö.
Axonal transection in the lesions of mul-
tiple sclerosis.
New England Journal of Medicine, New Engl. J. Med,
338(5):278285, 1998.
[20] Maria Luisa Dell'Acqua, Doriana Landi, Giancarlo Zito, Filippo Zappa-
sodi, Domenico Lupoi, Paolo M. Rossini, Maria M. Filippi, and Franca
Tecchio. Thalamocortical sensorimotor circuit in multiple sclerosis: An
integrated structural and electrophysiological assessment. Human Brain
Mapping, 31(10):15881600, 2010.
[21] Thomas J. Nowak and A. Gordon. Handford. Pathophysiology : concepts
and applications for health care professionals. McGraw-Hill Learning So-
lutions, 2011.
[22] JF Kurtzke. Rating neurologic impairment in multiple-sclerosis - an ex-
panded disability status scale (edss). Neurology, 33(11):14441452, 1983.
[23] Masaaki Niino.
Cognitive impairment in multiple sclerosis.
Rinsh	o
Shinkeigaku, 54(12):10581059, 2014.
[24] M. Maurelli, E. Marchioni, R. Cerretano, D. Bosone, R. Bergamaschi,
A. Citterio, A. Martelli, L. Sibilla, and F. Savoldi. Neuropsychological
assessment in ms - clinical, neurophysiological and neuroradiological rela-
tionships. Acta Neurologica Scandinavica, 86(2):124128, 1992.
[25] Massimo Filippi and Maria Assunta Rocca.
Mri evidence for multiple
sclerosis as a diuse disease of the central nervous system.
Journal of
Neurology, 252(Suppl. 5):V16V24, 2005.
[26] FD Lublin and SC Reingold. Dening the clinical course of multiple scle-
rosis: Results of an international survey. Neurology, 46(4):907911, 1996.
[27] Prof. Dr. Brück, Wolfgang. Clinical implications of neuropathological nd-
ings in multiple sclerosis. Journal of Neurology, 252(3):iii10iii14, 2005.
[28] JF Kurtzke. A new scale for evaluating disability in multiple sclerosis.
Neurology, 5(8):580583, 1955.
[29] Lars G. Hanson. Introduction to magnetic resonance imaging techniques,
August 2009.
[30] Dwight Nishimura. Principles of Magnetic Resonance Imaging. Depart-
ment of Electrical Engineering Stanford University, 2010.
[31] Matt A. Bernstein, Kevin F. King, and Xiaohong Joe. Zhou. Handbook of
MRI pulse sequences. Elsevier Academic press, 2004.
==PAGE:150==
132
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[32] S. Ogawa, TM LEE, AR KAY, and DW Tank. Brain magnetic-resonance-
imaging with contrast dependent on blood oxygenation. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA, 87(24):98689872, 1990.
[33] Seong Gi Kim and Peter A. Bandettini.
Principles of functional mri.
Functional Mri: Basic Principles and Clinical Applications, Funct. Mri:
Basic Principles and Clin. Appl, pages 323, 2006.
[34] Richard B. Buxton, Kamil Uludag, David J. Dubowitz, and Thomas T.
Liu. Modeling the hemodynamic response to brain activation. NeuroIm-
age, 23(Suppl. 1):S220S233, 2004.
[35] R. R Seeley, T. D Stephens, and P. Tate.
Anatomy and Physiology.
McGraw-Hill, 2003.
[36] J. S. Damoiseaux, S. A. R. B. Rombouts, F. Barkhof, P. Scheltens, C. J.
Stam, S. M. Smith, and C. F. Beckmann. Consistent resting-state net-
works across healthy subjects. PNAS, 103(37):1384813853, 2006.
[37] M. Hampson, IR Olson, HC Leung, P. Skudlarski, and JC Gore. Changes
in functional connectivity of human mt/v5 with visual motion input. Neu-
roreport, 15(8):13151319, 2004.
[38] CF Beckmann, M. DeLuca, JT Devlin, and SM Smith.
Investigations
into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B-Biological Sciences,
360(1457):10011013, 2005.
[39] M. De Luca, CF Beckmann, N. De Stefano, PM Matthews, and SM Smith.
fmri resting state networks dene distinct modes of long-distance interac-
tions in the human brain. Neuroimage, 29(4):13591367, 2006.
[40] MD Greicius, B. Krasnow, AL Reiss, and V. Menon.
Functional con-
nectivity in the resting brain: A network analysis of the default mode
hypothesis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 100(1):253258, 2003.
[41] DA Gusnard and ME Raichle. Searching for a baseline: Functional imag-
ing and the resting human brain. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 2(10):685
694, 2001.
[42] Marcus E. Raichle, Ann Mary MacLeod, Abraham Z. Snyder, William J.
Powers, Debra A. Gusnard, and Gordon L. Shulman. A default mode of
brain function. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 98(2):676682, 2001.
[43] Randy L. Buckner and Justin L. Vincent. Unrest at rest: Default activ-
ity and spontaneous network correlations. Neuroimage, 37(4):10911096,
2007.
==PAGE:151==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
133
[44] Randy L. Buckner and Daniel C. Carroll. Self-projection and the brain.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 11(2):4957, 2007.
[45] Malia F. Mason, Michael I. Norton, John D. Van Horn, Daniel M. Wegner,
Scott T. Grafton, and C. Neil Macrae. Wandering minds: The default
network and stimulus-independent thought. Science, 315(5810):393395,
2007.
[46] MD Greicius, G. Srivastava, AL Reiss, and V. Menon. Default-mode net-
work activity distinguishes alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: Evi-
dence from functional mri. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 101(13):46374642,
2004.
[47] Simona Bonavita, Antonio Gallo, Rosaria Sacco, Marida Della Corte,
Alvino Bisecco, Renato Docimo, Luigi Lavorgna, Daniele Corbo, Al-
fonso Di Costanzo, Fabio Tortora, Mario Cirillo, Fabrizio Esposito, and
Gioacchino Tedeschi. Distributed changes in default-mode resting-state
connectivity in multiple sclerosis. Multiple Sclerosis Journal, 17(4):411
422, 2011.
[48] David J. Hawellek, Joerg F. Hipp, and Christopher M. Lewis. Increased
functional connectivity indicates the severity of cognitive impairment in
multiple sclerosis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 108(47):19066, 2011.
[49] M. A. Rocca, P. Valsasina, M. Absinta, G. Riccitelli, M. E. Rodegher,
P. Misci, P. Rossi, A. Falini, G. Comi, and M. Filippi. Default-mode net-
work dysfunction and cognitive impairment in progressive ms. Neurology,
74(16):12521259, 2010.
[50] Stefan D. Roosendaal,
Menno M. Schoonheim,
Hanneke E. Hulst,
Ernesto J. Sanz-Arigita, Stephen M. Smith, Jeroen J. G. Geurts, and
Frederik Barkhof.
Resting state networks change in clinically isolated
syndrome. Brain, 133(6):16121621, 2010.
[51] David T. Jones, Farrah J. Mateen, Claudia F. Lucchinetti, Cliord R.
Jack, and Kirk M. Welker. Default mode network disruption secondary to
a lesion in the anterior thalamus. Archives of Neurology, 68(2):242247,
2011.
[52] Mary A. Mayka, Daniel M. Corcos, Sue E. Leurgans, and David E. Vail-
lancourt. Three-dimensional locations and boundaries of motor and pre-
motor cortices as dened by functional brain imaging: A meta-analysis.
Neuroimage, 31(4):14531474, 2006.
[53] M. Brines and A. Cerami. Emerging biological roles for erythropoietin in
the nervous system. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 6(6):484494, 2005.
==PAGE:152==
134
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[54] Kamilla W. Miskowiak, Elisa Favaron, Sepehr Hazi, Becky Inkster,
Guy M. Goodwin, Philip J. Cowen, and Catherine J. Harmer. Eects
of erythropoietin on emotional processing biases in patients with major
depression: an exploratory fmri study. Psychopharmacology, 207(1):133
142, 2009.
[55] H. Ehrenreich, D. Hinze-Selch, S. Stawicki, C. Aust, S. Knolle-Veentjer,
S. Wilms, G. Heinz, S. Erdag, H. Jahn, D. Degner, M. Ritzen, A. Mohr,
M. Wagner, U. Schneider, M. Bohn, M. Huber, A. Czernik, T. Pollmächer,
W. Maier, A. L. Sirén, J. Klosterkötter, P. Falkai, E. Rüther, J. B. Alden-
ho, and H. Krampe.
Improvement of cognitive functions in chronic
schizophrenic patients by recombinant human erythropoietin. Molecular
Psychiatry, Mol. Psychiatry, 12(2):206220, 2007.
[56] B. Viviani, S. Bartesaghi, E. Corsini, P. Villa, P. Ghezzi, A. Garau,
CL Galli, and M. Marinovich. Erythropoietin protects primary hippocam-
pal neurons increasing the expression of brain-derived neurotrophic factor.
Journal of Neurochemistry, 93(2):412421, 2005.
[57] Zhi-Yong Chen, Pundit Asavaritikrai, Josef T. Prchal, and Constance Tom
Noguchi.
Endogenous erythropoietin signaling is required for normal
neural progenitor cell proliferation.
Jounal of Biological Chemistry,
282(35):2587525883, 2007.
[58] Bartosz Adamcio, Derya Sargin, Alicja Stradomska, Lucian Medrihan,
Christoph Gertler, Fabian Theis, Mingyue Zhang, Michael Mueller, Imam
Hassouna, Kathrin Hannke, Swetlana Sperling, Konstantin Radyushkin,
Ahmed El-Kordi, Lizzy Schulze, Anja Ronnenberg, Fred Wolf, Nils Brose,
Jeong-Seop Rhee, Weiqi Zhang, and Hannelore Ehrenreich. Erythropoietin
enhances hippocampal long-term potentiation and memory. BMC Biology,
6:Article No.: 37, 2008.
[59] Howard L. Corwin, Andrew Gettinger, Timothy C. Fabian, Addison May,
Ronald G. Pearl, Stephen Heard, Robert An, Peter J. Bowers, Paul Bur-
ton, Mark A. Klausner, Michael J. Corwin, and EPO Critical Care Trials
Grp.
Ecacy and safety of epoetin alfa in critically ill patients.
New
England Journal of Medicine, 357(10):965976, 2007.
[60] Karl J. Friston. Statistical parametric mapping : the analysis of functional
brain images. Academic, 2007.
[61] J. Ashburner, G. Barnes, C. C. Chen, J. Daunizeau, G. Flandin, K. Fris-
ton, S. Kiebel, J. Kilner, V. Litvak, R. Moran, W. Penny, M. Rosa,
K. Stephan, D. Gitelman, R. Henson, C. Hutton, V. Glauche, J. Mat-
tout, and C. Phillips. SPM8 manual, 2013.
==PAGE:153==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
135
[62] Evans, Collins, Mills, Brown, Kelly, and Peters.
3d statistical neu-
roanatomical models from 305 mri volumes. pages 18131817 vol.3, 1993.
[63] Clare Poynton, Mark Jenkinson, Stephen Whalen, Alexandra J. Golby,
and William Wells. Fieldmap-free retrospective registration and distortion
correction for epi-based functional imaging. Med Image Comput Comput
Assist Interv., 11(2):271279, 2008.
[64] P. J. Reber, E. C. Wong, R. B. Buxton, and L. R. Frank. Correction of o
resonance-related distortion in echo-planar imaging using epi-based eld
maps. MRM, 39:328330, 1998.
[65] P. Jezzard and RS Balaban. Correction for geometric distortion in echo-
planar images from b-0 eld variations. Magnetic Resonance in Medicine,
34(1):6573, 1995.
[66] JLR Andersson, C. Hutton, J. Ashburner, R. Turner, and K. Friston. Mod-
eling geometric deformations in epi time series. Neuroimage, 13(5):903
919, 2001.
[67] KJ Friston, J. Ashburner, CD Frith, JB Poline, JD Heather, and RSJ
Frackowiak.
Spatial registration and normalization of images.
Human
Brain Mapping, 3(3):165189, 1995.
[68] A. X. Patel, Prantik Kundu, Mikail Rubinov, P. Simon Jones, Petra E.
Vértes, Karen D. Ersche, John Suckling, and Edward T. Bullmore. A
wavelet method for modeling and despiking motion artifacts from resting-
state fmri time series. NeuroImage, 95(0):287  304, 2014.
[69] Afni program: 3ddespike. http://afni.nimh.nih.gov/pub/dist/doc/
program_help/3dDespike.html. Accessed: 2015-01-28.
[70] J. Ashburner, G. Barnes, C. C. Chen, J. Daunizeau, G. Flandin, K. Fris-
ton, S. Kiebel, J. Kilner, V. Litvak, R. Moran, W. Penny, M. Rosa,
K. Stephan, D. Gitelman, R. Henson, C. Hutton, V. Glauche, J. Mat-
tout, and C. Phillips. SPM12 manual, 2014.
[71] AM Smith, BK Lewis, UE Ruttimann, FQ Ye, TM Sinnwell, YH Yang,
JH Duyn, and JA Frank.
Investigation of low frequency drift in fmri
signal. Neuroimage, 9(5):526533, 1999.
[72] Devesh Raj, Adam W. Anderson, and John C. Gore. Respiratory eects in
human functional magnetic resonance imaging due to bulk susceptibility
changes. Physics in Medicine and Biology, Phys. Med. Biol, 46(12):3331
3340, 2001.
[73] KJ Friston, S. Williams, R. Howard, RSJ Frackowiak, and R. Turner.
Movement-related eects in fmri time-series. Magnetic Resonance Imag-
ing, 35(3):346355, 1996.
==PAGE:154==
136
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[74] Gary H. Glover, Tie Qiang Li, and David Ress. Image-based method for
retrospective correction of physiological motion eects in fmri: Retroicor.
Magnetic Resonance in Medicine, Magn. Reson. Med, 44(1):162167,
2000.
[75] TE Lund, KH Madsen, K. Sidaros, WL Luo, and TE Nichols. Non-white
noise in fmri: Does modelling have an impact? Neuroimage, 29(1):5466,
2006.
[76] V. D. Calhoun, T. Adali, G. D Pearlson, and J. J. Pekar.
A method
for making group inferences from functional mri data using independent
component analysis. Human Brain Mapping, (14):140151, 2001.
[77] Martin J. McKeown, Scott Makeig, Greg G. Brown, Tzyy Ping Jung, San-
dra S. Kindermann, Anthony J. Bell, and Terrence J. Sejnowski. Analysis
of fmri data by blind separation into independent spatial components.
Human Brain Mapping, 6(3):160188, 1998.
[78] Martin J. McKeown and Terrence J. Sejnowski. Independent component
analysis of fmri data: Examining the assumptions. Human Brain Mapping,
6(56):368372, 1998.
[79] Christian F. Beckmann and Stephen M. Smith.
Probabilistic indepen-
dent component analysis for functional magnetic resonance imaging. Ieee
Transactions on Medical Imaging, Ieee Trans. Med. Imaging, 23(2):137
152, 2004.
[80] A. Hyvarinen. Survey on independent component analysis. Neural Com-
puting Surveys, 2, 1999.
[81] D. Langlois, S. Chartier, and D. Gosselin. An introduction to indepen-
dent component analysis: Infomax and fastica algorithms. Tutorials in
Quantitative Methods for Psychology, 6(1):3138, 2010.
[82] VJ Schmithorst and SK Holland. Comparison of three methods for gen-
erating group statistical inferences from independent component analysis
of functional magnetic resonance imaging data. Journal of Magnetic Res-
onance Imaging, 19(3):365368, 2004.
[83] The GIFT Documentation Team.
Group ICA/IVA of fMRI Toolbox
(GIFT) Manual, 2013.
[84] KJ Friston, CD Frith, PF Liddle, and RSJ Frackowiak. Functional connec-
tivity - the principal-component analysis of large (pet) data sets. Journal
of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism, 13(1):514, 1993.
[85] S. Amari, A. Cichocki, H. H. Yang, D. S. Touretzky, M. C. Mozer, and
M. E. Hasselmo. A new learning algorithm for blind signal separation.
1996.
==PAGE:155==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
137
[86] V. D. Calhoun, J. Liu, and T. Adal. A review of group ica for fmri data
and ica for joint inference of imaging, genetic, and erp data. NeuroImage,
(45):S164S172, 2009.
[87] Anderson M. Winkler,
Gerard R. Ridgway,
Matthew A. Webster,
Stephen M. Smith, and Thomas E. Nichols. Permutation inference for
the general linear model. Neuroimage, 92:381397, 2014.
[88] TE Nichols and AP Holmes. Nonparametric permutation tests for func-
tional neuroimaging: A primer with examples. Human Brain Mapping,
15(1):125, 2002.
[89] EJG Pitman. Signicance tests which may be applied to samples from
any populations. Suppl. J. R Stat. Soc., 4(1):119130, 1937.
[90] EJG Pitman. Signicance tests which may be applied to samples from
any populations: Ii the correlation coecient test. Suppl. J. R Stat. Soc.,
4(2):225232, 1937.
[91] EJG Pitman. Signicance tests which may be applied to samples from
any populations - iii the analysis of variance test. Biometrika, 29:322335,
1938.
[92] A. P. Holmes, R. C. Blair, J. D G Watson, and I. Ford. Nonparametric
analysis of statistic images from functional mapping experiments. Jour-
nal of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism, J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab,
16(1):722, 1996.
[93] J. H. Chung and D.A.S Fraser. Randomization tests for a multivariate
two-sample problem. J. Am. Stat. Assoc., 53(283):729735, 1958.
[94] E. S. Edington. Approximate randomization tests. Journal of Psychology,
72(2):143149, 1969.
[95] K. J. Friston, A. P. Holmes, K. J. Worsley, J.-P. Poline, C. D. Frith, and
R. S. J. Frackowiak. Statistical parametric maps in functional imaging: A
general linear approach. Human Brain Mapping, 2(4):189210, 1995.
[96] Bernhard E. Boser, Isabelle M. Guyon, and Vladimir N. Vapnik. Training
algorithm for optimal margin classiers. Proceedings of the Fifth Annual
ACM Workshop on Computational Learning Theory, pages 144152, 1992.
[97] C.M. Bishop. Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning. Information
Science and Statistics. Springer, 2006.
[98] Chih-Chung Chang and Chih-Jen Lin. Libsvm: A library for support vec-
tor machines. ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology,
2(3), 2011.
==PAGE:156==
138
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[99] Chih-Wei Hsu, Chih-Chung Chang, and Chih-Jen Lin. A Practical Guide
to Support Vector Classifcation, 2010.
[100] R. Rosipal, N. Kramer, C. Saunders, M. Gobelnik, S. Gunn, and J. Shawe-
Taylor. Overview and recent advances in partial least squares. 2006.
[101] Jieping. Ye, Shuiwang. Ji, and Liang. Sun.
Multi-label dimensionality
reduction. CRC Press, 2014.
[102] A. Höskuldsson. Pls regression methods. J. Chemometrics, 2:211228,
1988.
[103] Bent Jørgensen and Yuri Goegebeur. Module 7: Partial least squares re-
gression i. http://statmaster.sdu.dk/courses/ST02/module07/. Ac-
cessed: 2015-05-28.
[104] S. Dejong. Simpls - an alternative approach to partial least-squares regres-
sion. Chemometrics and Intelligent Laboratory Systems, 18(3):251263,
1993.
