==PAGE:1==
Exploring Time Series with
Interactive Data Visualization
Using Touch Interaction
ShaﬁNazar
s092961
Kongens Lyngby 2015
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Matematiktorvet, building 303B,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3351
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The goal of this thesis is to investigate and create a new visualization method
for time series that emphasizes on temporal-levels and user-interactivity.
It
has become more and more attractive to visualize time series using diﬀerent
visualization methodologies. The overall goal of a visualization is to help the user
to visually comprehend the underlying raw data. However, typical visualization
methods fail to show the characteristics that are bound to certain temporal-
levels of the time series and facilitate user-interaction with the visualization.
This thesis looks at a new visualization method that is particularly suitable for
time series which are characterized by a high degree of repetition in various
temporal-levels. The aim is to design and implement a mobile app that can be
used as a framework to visualize quantiﬁed-self time series. Also, the objective
is to enable the user to interact with the visualizations using touch gestures.
This thesis shows that it is possible to design and implement such a visualization
tool. It also proves that the end-product is applicable, and yet improvable, by
testing it on end-users in qualitative think-aloud test-sessions.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Resumé
Målet for denne afhandling er at undersøge og udvikle en ny visualisering meto-
de af tidsserier som lægger vægt på temporale-niveauer og interaktivitet. Med
tiden er det blevet attraktivt at visualisere tidsserier ved hjælp af forskellige
visualiseringsmetoder. Det overordnede mål med en visualisering er, at hjælpe
brugeren til visuel forståelse af det underliggende rå data. Dog mislykkedes det
for de typiske visualiseringsmetoder at fremhæve de egenskaber af tidsserien
som er bundet til bestemte temporale-niveauer.
Dette projekt ser på en ny visualiseringsmetode, der er særligt egnet til tidsse-
rier som er karakteriseret ved en høj grad af gentagelse i forskellige temporale-
niveauer. Målet er at designe og implementere en app, der kan bruges som en
visualiseringsværktøj til at visualisere quantiﬁed-self tidsserier. Ydermere er må-
let at gøre det muligt for brugeren at interagere med visualiseringerne ved at
bruge touch-gestus.
Denne afhandling viser, at det er muligt at designe og implementere sådan et
visualiseringsværktøj. Ved at teste appen på slutbrugere i kvalitativt tænke-
højt test-sessioner, bevises det at slutproduktet er anvendeligt, dog med plads
til forbedringer.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the department of DTU Compute at the Technical
University of Denmark in fulﬁlment of the requirements for acquiring an M.Sc.
in Digital Media Engineering. This thesis corresponds to 32.5 ECTS points.
This report describes the design and implementation of a new visualization tool,
Timeline Parallax, as an iOS mobile app. This tool facilitates visualization of
time series in diﬀerent temporal-levels and can be interacted with using touch
gestures.
Lyngby, 17-July-2015
ShaﬁNazar
s092961
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor, Jakob Eg Larsen, for the many hours of
invaluable guidance and feedback, without which this thesis would not have
been possible.
I would like to thank Mads Frøding Engels and Tomas Palsson for their time
and feedback.
Finally, I would like to thank my ﬁancé, Fharhat Saﬁ, and my family for their
moral support and encouragement throughout the thesis.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Abstract
i
Resumé
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Delimitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Report Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Analysis
7
2.1
Time Series . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Visualization Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Personal Informatics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Related work
13
3.1
Moves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2
Zenobase
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3
Fluxtream . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.4
Timeline Parallax - Solution Proposal
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.5
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4
Design
19
4.1
Design approach
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.2
Main Objectives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
==PAGE:12==
x
CONTENTS
4.3
Design Process Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.4
Initial Prototype . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.5
Discrete Time Series . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.5.1
Missing Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.5.2
Quantiﬁed-Self Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.5.3
Zoom-Area and Average-Bars
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.6
Continuous Time Series
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.6.1
Interactivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.6.2
Custom Temporal-Level . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.7
Moves Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.7.1
Activities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.7.2
Visualization Types
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.7.3
Category Filter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.7.4
Geo-Location Visualization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.8
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5
Technical Implementation
43
5.1
Development platform . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.2
System Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.3
Temporal-Level View . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.3.1
Drawing Foundation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.3.2
Data Visualization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.4
Performance Improvements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.4.1
Memory Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.4.2
Responsiveness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.5
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6
User Evaluation
53
6.1
Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
7
Results and Discussion
57
7.1
Overall Feedback . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
7.2
Temporal-Levels Views . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
7.2.1
Axis Labels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
7.2.2
Filtering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
7.3
Visualization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
7.3.1
Geo-Location visualization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
7.4
Responsiveness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
7.5
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
8
Future Work
65
8.1
Memory-Issue Improvements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
8.2
External-Data Import
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
8.3
Temporal-Level View Improvements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
==PAGE:13==
CONTENTS
xi
8.4
Visualizations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
8.5
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
9
Conclusion
71
A Timeline Parallax Demo
73
B Evaluation Questionnaire
77
Bibliography
79
==PAGE:14==
xii
CONTENTS
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 1
Introduction
According to the Oxford Dictionary1, time series is a sequence of successive
data points, measured over some period/interval of time. It can have various
types and formats and they are usually visualized using visualization methods
to provide a better understanding of the underlying data. Time series data has
been collected and visualized for centuries2 and due to the Information Age, the
amount of time series data collected has increased vastly.
The technological revolution in the new age have had an enormous impact on col-
lecting, storing and analysing time series. Since the invention of smart phones,
tracking gadgets or simply put ’personal informatics systems’ as in[LDF10], per-
sonal information tracking has ﬂourished and so has the demand for analysing
and visualizing the collected data. Personal data can be of various types, e.g.
sleep, steps, calories, location, personal ﬁnances, biometrics data and so on. Peo-
ple typically use their personal data to learn about themselves by discovering
habitual patterns that they otherwise would not have noticed. The individual
can then use the information to get rid of or introduce new behaviour in its life3.
These ﬁndings are commonly discovered by analysing the data using statistical
1http://www.oxforddictionaries.com/deﬁnition/english/time-series
2[Bri01] provides a history overview of time series.
3Behaviour-targeting is a mechanism that can be used to identify and alter behaviour,
according to[FH10].
==PAGE:16==
2
Introduction
or/and visualization methods. Moves4, FitBit 5, Sleep Cycle6 and several apps
visualize the collected time series for their users so that the understanding of
their behaviours and patterns are enhanced.
The basic idea of visualizing a time series is to make it easier to comprehend
potential patterns, progress and/or trends in the data. Visualizing a time series
can be done in numerous ways, dependent on what the goal is.
A common
visualization form is a line graph, which can show the progress of the data over
some time interval, there are a lot of other visualization methods that can be
used to highlight a diﬀerent aspect of the data, as illustrated in Figure 1.1.
Figure 1.1:
Diﬀerent visualizations of time series.
Bar graph, Line graph and
Calender-View.
The technological advances within the area of digital devices have also had its
side-eﬀects on visualization methods. It has been made easier to develop and ap-
ply new ways of graphical representation methods for the sole purpose of making
the data more comprehensible for the naked eye. The illustrated Calender-View
in Figure 1.1 and numerous other examples of modern representation-methods
are described in [BOH11]7.
Typical personal informatics systems facilitate both collecting and visualizing
data, also called a holistic system.
However, these only provide limited vi-
sualization facilities which is why external visualization frameworks/tools are
utilized to get the desired graphical representations. Such a tool can be used to
import collected data in order to create enhanced and interactive visualizations.
Examples of this, are Data Sense8, Zenobase9 and Fluxtream10.
4https://www.moves-app.com
5https://www.ﬁtbit.com/uk/app
6http://www.sleepcycle.com
7https://www.github.com/mbostock/d3/wiki/Gallery
8https://makesenseofdata.com/
9https://zenobase.com/
10https://ﬂuxtream.org/
==PAGE:17==
1.1 Problem
3
1.1
Problem
It has become more and more attractive to present time series data, such as
ﬁnancial data, scientiﬁc data and quantiﬁed-self data, using diﬀerent visualiza-
tions in order to show patterns, progress and trends. The goal of a good visu-
alization is to enhance understanding and comprehension of data, that would
otherwise be tedious to analyse. Diﬀerent types of visualization techniques are
used to visualize diﬀerent types of data, such as continuous data types (ﬁnancial
data per time, heart rate per time) and discrete data types (temperature per
day). However, there are some characteristics that traditional visualizations fail
to show, that is when visualizing diﬀerent temporal levels of time series data.
As illustrated in Figure 1.2 on next page, temporal levels can provide speciﬁc
contextual information that can be vital in recognizing habitual repetitions and
behaviour. Thus, visualizing only one speciﬁc temporal level, which is a common
practice, can be counter-productive.
This project is going to look at a new type of visualization method that is
particularly suitable for time series data which is characterized by a high degree
of repetition in various temporal levels, as illustrated in Figure 1.2. The aim
of this project is to explore 1. How diﬀerent types of time series data can be
presented in a single visualization, 2. How to present diﬀerent temporal levels of
time series data in a way that makes it possible to interact with the visualization
using touch gestures and ﬁnally 3. How to implement the visualization as a touch
device application.
In order to visualize a set of data it is necessary to take into account the type
of data set (discrete, continuous), therefore, this thesis will analyse diﬀerent
time series data types and thereby ﬁnd out how best to visualize them on a
touch device. This project will analyse how to enable the user to interact with
the visualized data in a touch device, such as go forth and back in time, see
more details for a particular point in time, and expanding/collapsing temporal
levels. In order to make the visualization interactive with touch gestures, the
solution has to be implemented as a mobile application and has to be analysed
which kinds of interaction capabilities/operations the visualization should allow
and hereafter map the operations to touch gestures to provide an intuitive user
experience.
Finally the solution is evaluated by testing it with diﬀerent types of time series
datasets, and in order to validate the design in regards to user experience it is
tested on test-users.
==PAGE:18==
4
Introduction
Figure 1.2: Examples of temporal levels(periodic intervals)
1.2
Delimitations
This thesis is going to look at quantiﬁed-self data as the main target data for
the end-product, therefore the focus will primarily be on quantiﬁed-self time
series and the various data types associated with them.
As mentioned, time series can be analysed using statistical analysis and/or by
applying visualization methods. As the above problem statement suggests, the
main focus is development of a new visualization method, therefore statistical
analysis is not of interest and will not be considered in this thesis.
==PAGE:19==
1.3 Report Structure
5
1.3
Report Structure
This thesis is divided into several chapters, each describing a speciﬁc process in
the overall development of the ﬁnal product. The following list describes the
main objectives of this thesis.
Objectives:
• Analyse and discuss existing visualizations of time series data
• Analyse related work and existing visualization methods of temporal levels
• Analyse and design the inclusion of the diﬀerent temporal levels of a time
series data set
• Analyse and design touch interaction with the visualization using gestures
• Implement the visualization in a prototype mobile application
• Apply mobile application prototyping methods
• Evaluate the implemented solution with diﬀerent time series data sets
Chapter 1 has stated and motivated the problem. The problem is further inves-
tigated in Chapter 2, by looking at what already exists and what the diﬀerence
is between those and the product of this thesis. Chapter 4 will describe the
design process in detail for the main components in the application. Chapter 5
will describe how the important components of the product are implemented.
Chapter 6 and 7 is dealing with how the product is evaluated, and what the
results are, including a discussion based on the results. Chapter 8 will outline
the possible future work for the product and ﬁnally a conclusion in Chapter 9.
==PAGE:20==
6
Introduction
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 2
Analysis
In order to solve the problem, it is essential to have an idea about what the
problem consists of. Thus this chapter will analyse the problem by dissecting
it into manageable parts, such as time series, visualization methods and related
work. Each individual part is analysed and described.
2.1
Time Series
As brieﬂy summarized in previous chapter, a time series is a collection of quanti-
tative observations that are separated by regular, or irregular, intervals in time.
The time interval between the observations are called "sample rate", e.g. a one
second time series with one second interval between each observation has a sam-
ple rate 1 Hz (sample per second). There are two diﬀerent types of time series,
discrete and continuous. A discrete time series is one in which the observations
are made at ﬁxed time intervals, i.e. they are evenly spaced. An example of
discrete time series can be the daily weather temperature measurements, where
the ﬁxed interval is one day in time, as illustrated in Table 2.1. Continuous
time series is on the other hand observations made at random time intervals,
i.e. not evenly spaced. For instance, earth quakes are observed when they occur
and their magnitude is measured, i.e. the observations have irregular/uneven
==PAGE:22==
8
Analysis
spacing between them, as illustrated in Table 2.2. Other examples of discrete
and continuous time series can be found in [BD06].
◦C
12
11
14
12
13
17
12
...
Date
1/6
2/6
3/6
4/6
5/6
6/6
7/6
...
Table 2.1: Discrete measurements: Daily temperature, June 2015
Magnitude
5.0
4.6
4.3
4.4
4.5
...
Time
02:36:24
03:18:35
03:37:51
04:47:59
05:57:58
...
Table 2.2: Continuous measurements: Earthquakes diﬀerent places around the world
12/06/15
Time series analysis can be done by using various tools and techniques. Most
common statistics analysis of a time series include the mean/average or trend/slope
of the time series. More advanced analysis would include spectral analysis and
autocorrelation in order to reveal periodicity. These are however outside of the
scope of this thesis, and will not be included.
2.2
Visualization Methods
In addition to statistical analysis, visualization methods are used to construct
visual representations of collected data. The essential part of a visualization is
to enable the user to do immediate visual comparison and thereby get a quicker
understanding of the data. In order to accomplish this, a variety of visualization
methods can be applied to accentuate diﬀerent aspects of the time series. For
instance, a line graph or scatter plot, which are common visualization methods,
can be used to show variation of the observations over time. A Trend and/or
a line showing the mean is also typically visualized on top of the the main
visualization (e.g. in case of a line graph).
Speciﬁc visualization methods can be used to show or highlight speciﬁc prop-
erties of a time series. Some of the commonly used 2-dimensional visualization
methods include scatter plot, line graph, stacked line graph, bar graph, stacked
bar graph and similar. A standard 2D graph has a x- and y-axis, where it shows
the time across the x-axis and the values of data points on the y-axis. There
are countless other graph types which all can be used to accommodate a richer
comprehension of the data, examples of conventional visualization methods1 are
shown in Figure 2.1.
1http://home.ubalt.edu/ntsbarsh/excel/excel.htm
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Visualization Methods
9
Figure 2.1: Typical MS Excel visualization methods.
There are also "unconventional" ways of visualizing time series, which have
been made possible by computer programs, mobile apps and web apps. It has
allowed the visualization to become interactive and ﬂexible, which means that
the users can manipulate the visualization in pursuit of richer understanding of
the data. Some remarkable and interactive visualization examples, as described
in [BOH11]2, are shown in ﬁgures 2.2, 2.3, 2.4.
Figure 2.2: Calender view shows the months of a year as blocks. Each block has
weeks as columns and days as rows. Hovering over a day in the visualization shows its
data value. [BOH11]
Figure 2.3: This shows yearly journal publications as ﬁlled circles with varied sizes.
Hovering over a legend shows the real data values behind the circles. Source: [BOH11]
There are several design principles that can be applied in order to create a
successful visualization.
As discussed in [TGM83], an excellent visualization
should always "present the content of the data using a clear, simple and straight-
forward design". It should always "induce the viewer to think about the substance
rather than underlying methodology, graphic design...or something else". The
2https://www.github.com/mbostock/d3/wiki/Gallery
==PAGE:24==
10
Analysis
Figure 2.4: An interactive visualization showing real-time electric generation(and
sources) in Spain during a day. Hovering shows source data value.Source: [BOH11]
representation should be true to data and the graphical display should "reveal
the data at several levels of detail, from a broad overview to the ﬁne structure".
The overall advice is to keep it simple and "avoid distorting what the data have
to say".
2.3
Personal Informatics
Quantiﬁed-self, self-tracking, self-surveillance and personal analytics, is the art
of the collecting information about oneself in order to obtain self-knowledge,
as deﬁned in [Wol09]. For a person that collects personal data, the goal is to
monitor personal habits, behaviours, activities, ﬁnances, etc., for the sole pur-
pose of acting upon it to improve her/his life. Self-tracking has always existed3
but it has increased as the advances in digital technology. Nowadays collecting
personal information can be facilitated by variety of personal informatics sys-
tems, e.g. computer programs, tracking devices, smart phone apps, web apps
and similar. There are diﬀerent aspects/stages in the overall act of self-tracking,
this is researched and discussed in [LDF10]. According to [LDF10], there are 5
diﬀerent stages in personal informatics, as illustrated in Figure 2.5.
The 5 stages are what a typical quantiﬁed-self user goes through when self-
tracking.
1. Preparation: This occurs before the user starts collecting information.
The individual has to motivate itself to decide what interesting information
to track and how it can be tracked.
3Apparently, Benjamin Franklin tracked the days in which he accomplished a subset of his
13 virtues for 60 years, according to his autobiography [Fra16].
==PAGE:25==
2.3 Personal Informatics
11
Figure 2.5: The 5 stages in the process of self-tracking according [LDF10].
2. Collection: In this stage, the user is collecting the information and is
ﬁghting to overcome the barriers/obstacles in order to keep collecting and
not give up.
3. Integration: The collected information is prepared to be reﬂected on,
involving data transformation, combining diﬀerent personal data types,
ﬁnding the right visualization method.
4. Reﬂection: The user reﬂects on the collected data by looking at visual-
izations of the data or even applying statistical analysis.
5. Action: User acts on the new-found self-knowledge, by taking necessary
measures to introduce new or get rid of behaviours/habits in life.
The important stage, from the perspective of this thesis, is the 4th stage, Re-
ﬂection. In this stage, the user uses, besides statistical analysis, visualizations
of the data to reﬂect on. In order to be successful doing this, the user has to
overcome the barriers and obstacles that can occur during the 5 stages.
According [LDF10], the barriers cascade, i.e.
obstacles/problems in earlier
stages aﬀect the later stages, which makes perfectly sense, e.g.
if the user
chooses ineﬀective visualization methods to visualize the data, it can have a
negative eﬀect on the comprehension of the data and ultimately prevent the
user from transitioning to the 5th and ﬁnal stage, Action. One example of a
barrier in Reﬂection-stage is described by a research participant in [LDF10]:
"It’s hard to get a holistic view of the data since the time ﬁlters are
at most one month and I’d like to look at several months at once."
- [LDF10] research participant
The user wants ﬂexibility and the option to add or remove diﬀerent time inter-
vals, also called temporal levels. This corresponds to the main objective of this
==PAGE:26==
12
Analysis
thesis, that is development of a visualization method that emphasizes temporal
levels.
Barriers can be reduced by using a set of design heuristics, as suggested in
[CPL14]. Data visualization should be understandable at a glance, so that the
user is enticed to explore the data further in detail. It is a good idea to enable
exploration capabilities of patterns in the visualized time series as this enables
the user to manipulate the visualization to discover patterns and thereby gain
self-knowledge. Another way of highlighting patterns is to combine multiple
dataset that somehow are related. The combination of diﬀerent sources can
reveal trigger patterns for behaviours and habits, that otherwise would have
stayed hidden.
2.4
Summary
This chapter has explained the basics about visualizations, time series and per-
sonal informatics. The goal of this thesis has been clariﬁed even more. The
focus is to create a visualization tool for quantiﬁed-self data that aids the user
in the reﬂection stage of self-tracking.
The next step is to investigate related work and existing solutions in order to
deﬁne a unique solution proposal, all of which are described in the next chapter.
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 3
Related work
This chapter will outline and describe related work, existing solutions and at
last present a solution proposal, called Timeline Parallax.
The interest and actuality of providing graphical representations of temporal
data has contributed to numerous researches within the area.
ChronoZoom, which is the product of [WBT13], is a visualization tool that is
tailored to visualize time-lines where the "primary goal is to make time rela-
tionships between diﬀerent studies of history clear and vivid". ChronoZoom
nests time-lines(events) in relation to each other and thereby shows relation-
ships in a intuitive fashion. However, it is not designed for personal data and
its visualization capabilities are limited. Another interesting visualization tool
is called TimeSeacher, as described in [HS01]. It is an advanced analysis tool
that facilitates data exploration of concurrent time-series visualizations, but its
sophistication makes it diﬃcult to use.
Timeline,as in [Huy15], is a tool that enables time-line navigation using hori-
zontal dragging gestures. Very similar to the goal of this project but this tool
only shows one temporal level.
A geo-location visualization method is proposed by [TBC13]. It investigates
how to visualize geo-locations on a time-line in order to reveal and highlight
temporal aspects of the data.
Most of the above examples are not designed for quantiﬁed-self data but there
==PAGE:28==
14
Related work
are, however, several visualization tools that are designed explicitly for that
purpose. Some of them are selected and described based on their relevance to
the domain of this project. The priority is as follows: Moves1, Zenobase2 and
Fluxtream3.
3.1
Moves
Moves, a smart phone app, is an all-round personal informatics system, which
means that it collects and visualizes the data. It collects activity and location
data and visualizes on the ﬂy. The visualization, Figure 3.1, has an attractive
and simple visual appeal.
It shows a storyline of the day and daily/weekly
period patterns.
Figure 3.1: Moves visualizations. Left: Periodic patterns for weeks or days. Right:
Daily storyline, activities and locations
The periodic pattern visualizations are shown separately, which hinders the user
to make comparisons across period patterns in order to ﬁnd correlation between
them.
There are only two periods available, daily and weekly, which is not
optimal for discovering long-term tendencies or patterns. People’s behaviours
and habits are diﬀerent depending on time of the year. By looking at the yearly
temporal level, one might discover that one’s activity increases in summer time
but decreases during winter.
It has only one visualization method of showing patterns and it is not possible
to choose other visualization types. The user is stuck with the over-simpliﬁed
’blob’ visualization method, whereas a simple stacked line graph or stacked bar
graph could have shown the data variation in a more compact manner. Also it
is not possible to import external datasets.
1http://moves-app.com/
2https://zenobase.com/
3https://ﬂuxtream.org/
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Zenobase
15
3.2
Zenobase
Zenobase, a web app, is a quantiﬁed-self data visualization framework which
can import data from Moves, FitBit, SleepCycle and more, and it visualizes the
data as shown in Figure 3.2. The type of visualizations used are fairly simplistic.
The main visualization is a bar graph which shows, in this case, moves activities.
A unique feature in Zenobase is that the bars in the graph can be clicked to
"zoom"/scale the underlying temporal-level.
Figure 3.2: Zenobase facilitates scaling the period-interval by clicking on the graph
elements.
As it is demonstrated in Figure 3.2, a click on a month in the year level zooms in
to month-interval, where it shows daily sums of activities as distance travelled.
A click on a bar in this level, will scale down to day-interval, where it shows
hourly sums and a click on one of these bars will show all of the activities in
that hour-interval(the latter is not included in the ﬁgure).
Navigation through time is handled by interacting with the bar graph or manu-
ally choosing an interval in the ﬁlter-menu. Although it can facilitate customized
period-intervals, the user is unable to visually compare the these levels side by
side, because only one level visualization is shown at a time. The overall navi-
gation through time lacks ﬂexibility and also here it is not possible to combine
and visualize multiple datasets concurrently.
==PAGE:30==
16
Related work
3.3
Fluxtream
Fluxtream is another web-based visualization framework for personal informat-
ics.
It facilitates combining multiple datasets and visualizes the data using
a time-line where all data points are plotted as rectangle blocks in the cho-
sen temporal-level, as shown in Figure 3.3. Navigation through time can be
achieved by either pressing the purple-marked buttons(start-back-forward-end)
or drag-scrolling the visualization left or right. The underlying time-interval can
be modiﬁed either by choosing one of the pre-sets or by pressing zoom in or out
buttons, highlighted in red.
Figure 3.3: Fluxtream features zoom in/out to scale the time-interval and scrolling
or pressing forward/back to navigate through time.
The disadvantages are that it only has 3 pre-sets, the user is unable to add
customized temporal-levels. The time-line visualization is not enough to fully
understand the data, other facets of the data are just as important for the inter-
pretation of the data, e.g. monthly or weekly periodic trends, that is visualized
using bar-graphs in Zenobase. Also it is not possible to have side-by-side visu-
alizations of the same data in diﬀerent time-intervals using diﬀerent graphing
methods.
3.4
Timeline Parallax - Solution Proposal
As discussed, one of the most common barriers in the reﬂection stage is poor data
visualization, which ultimately can prevent the user to correctly understand the
data. There are several aspects to take in account when building a visualization
==PAGE:31==
3.4 Timeline Parallax - Solution Proposal
17
framework, some of which were uncovered by the discussion of the existing
solutions.
A visualization tool has to be user-friendly and provide intuitive visualizations.
Although it can be convenient with many features and controls, having too
many buttons and menus can quickly become confusing for the user, as it was
the case with Zenobase and Fluxtream in Figure 3.2 and 3.3.
The solution of this thesis, Timeline Parallax, is a framework with a minimal-
istic design. Buttons and controls are avoided and replaced by touch gestures,
which instead can be used to manipulate the visualization tool. It oﬀers data vi-
sualization on customized period intervals/temporal-levels which can be shown
parallel, in order to enable the user to apply side-by-side comparisons of dif-
ferent visualizations and temporal levels. Timeline Parallax facilitates plotting
data using various visualization types, such as line graph, stacked line graph,
stacked bar graph, blobs and blocks. It also facilitates adding and removing
visualizations, i.e. the user is not stuck with pre-sets. In Timeline Parallax, the
navigation through time happens via. touch gestures, the user can drag a visu-
alization right/left to navigate through the time-line. Using Timeline Parallax,
the user is able to import multiple datasets and visualize them concurrently, this
aids the user in understanding of any underlying correlation between diﬀerent
datasets.
Timeline Parallax will be available for iOS smart devices, it is recommended
to use it on tablet rather than phones. The screen size makes signiﬁcant dif-
ference when looking at visualizations. Bigger screen allows addition of several
temporal-level visualizations without getting crowded.
Feature\Product
Zenobase
Fluxtream
Moves
Timeline Parallax
Multiple dataset integration
x
(x)
x
Customizable temporal levels
(x)
x
Data visualization
x
x
x
x
Customizable data visualization
x
Dynamic time-interval navigation
(x)
x
x
x
Side-by-side visualizations
(x)
x
Touch-enabled interaction
x
x
Geo-location visualization
x
x
x
Mobile interface
x
x
External data import support
x
x
Table 3.1: Product comparison table: Existing frameworks compared with Timeline
Parallax.
The aim is to help the user in the reﬂections process of self-tracking. Therefore
the gesture controls along with other features are designed to be intuitive and
simple to use, in order to help the user avoid barriers towards the action stage.
==PAGE:32==
18
Related work
Using Timeline Parallax, the user will be supported in data exploration, discov-
ering habitual patterns and repetitions in diﬀerent temporal levels. Table 3.1
outlines the unique functionalities that Timeline Parallax facilitates.
3.5
Summary
This chapter has brieﬂy outlined related scientiﬁc research. It also looked at
existing visualization tools that are used to visualize personal data. It described
each existing tool by highlighting their advantages and disadvantages. Finally,
it presented a solution proposal and compared it to other tools in a comparison
table.
The next chapter will describe the design process and explain the decisions
behind each design.
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 4
Design
This chapter describes the design process of the end-product, Timeline Parallax.
It explains the decisions and ideas behind the main components in non-technical
terms. Next chapter, Technical Implementation, will elaborate on the technical
implementation details.
4.1
Design approach
A software product can be developed using various development methodologies,
e.g. Waterfall, Spiral, Prototyping, Agile, Scrum. Each has its advantages and
disadvantages depending on the context it is applied in.
The approach taken in this project is explorative due to the lack of precedence
of such a tool and in order to ﬁnd the most optimal design. This makes it diﬃ-
cult to utilize mock-up-based methodologies. One major disadvantage in such a
methodology is that it is complicated to show interactivity in mock-ups which
an interactive app, such as Timeline Parallax, strongly relies on. Additionally,
user evaluation of a visualization framework requires that the test-user’s own
data is visualized and presented when testing, otherwise the user would not be
able to detect patterns and therefore fail to give optimal feedback.
Therefore a prototyping method is chosen because it allows a dynamic and ex-
plorative approach, Figure 4.1. The app is designed and developed using the
==PAGE:34==
20
Design
prototyping model that allows interchangeability between design and implemen-
tation. It is tested on users at the end of the project, where the foundation of
the app is laid and the main components are implemented.
Figure 4.1: Prototyping model
4.2
Main Objectives
As the prototyping model states, Figure 4.1, in order to start prototyping it is
necessary to determine a set of main objectives that can be used as guidelines
in the process. Main features, or objectives, of the app are depicted on Figure
4.2.
Figure 4.2: Initial mock-up proposal
The full feature list is loosely formulated in Section 3.4, Solution Proposal. The
following lists the MVP features of Timeline Parallax:
• Multiple temporal-level visualizations on same screen
==PAGE:35==
4.3 Design Process Overview
21
• Time navigation in a temporal-level using touch-gestures
• Temporal-level container navigation using touch-gestures
• Zooming in and out on a temporal-level visualization using pinch-gesture
• Visualize diﬀerent data types (discrete and continuous)
4.3
Design Process Overview
This section will provide an overview of the design process, which will later be
explained in detail.
Figure 4.3: First version, 3 scrollable
views scrolls proportionally with each
other when one is scrolled. Red line indi-
cates synchronization point between the
views.
Figure 4.4: First simple quantiﬁed-self,
Steps count, dataset added. Year, month
and week temporal-levels are designed.
X- and Y-axis units deﬁned for each tem-
poral level.
==PAGE:36==
22
Design
Figure 4.5: SensibleDTU sleep dataset
added. Transparent bar shows averages
on each x-axis unit, i.e.
monthly avg.
in the year level, weekly avg. in month
level, daily avg. in week level. Horizontal
brackets indicate the timespan visualized
by below temporal-level.
Figure 4.6:
Continuous time series,
sleep data, visualized using new visu-
alization type, Duration-blocks, which
show the exact interval of an activity in
time. New temporal-level, day, added.
Figure 4.7: Diﬀerent visualizations of
the same data. Daily sums in year and
month level, durations-blocks in week
and day level.
Container of temporal
level views is now scrollable. Continuous
time series, sleep data.
Figure 4.8: A temporal level can be re-
sized by zooming in/out using the pinch
gesture. Duration-block text shows the
length of duration. Continuous time se-
ries, sleep data.
==PAGE:37==
4.3 Design Process Overview
23
Figure 4.9: Duration-blocks are inter-
active. Can be clicked to show more de-
tail about the event.
Figure 4.10: Custom temporal levels.
Long-press gesture on a temporal shows
options: Add new temporal relative to
current or remove current temporal level.
Figure 4.11:
Moves data is added.
Activities are visualized as Blobs which
show the sum of an activity category. A
new temporal-level, hour, is added. Cat-
egories of activities have unique colours.
Figure 4.12:
2-ﬁnger long-press on
the container will show a category ﬁlter
menu. A category is removed from visu-
alizations when toggled oﬀ. Container of
temporal levels can be resized using pinch
gesture, vertically.
==PAGE:38==
24
Design
Figure 4.13:
New time series data
type is visualized along with geo-location
data. A blob can be clicked to show exact
geo-locations, on a map, for the period in
which the blob is visualized.
Figure 4.14:
New visualization types
added, stacked line graph, stacked bar
graph. Graph legends are added.
Figure
4.15:
A
tap
on
temporal
level view invokes a pop-over with de-
tailed info about the underlying period-
interval. The pop-over shows a sorted ta-
ble of all category sums.
Figure 4.16: For data type ’places’: the
same action will instead show a map of all
places the user has been in the particular
period, the location-pins can be clicked
to show name and a sum value.
==PAGE:39==
4.3 Design Process Overview
25
Figure 4.17: Custom addition of new temporal level. User has to
choose and set 4 diﬀerent properties and click ADD to insert new
temporal level visualization.
==PAGE:40==
26
Design
4.4
Initial Prototype
The ﬁrst step was to construct the base of the framework. As shown in Figure
4.18, the initial version had 3 vertically stacked views, each of the views was
made scrollable using 1-ﬁnger pan gesture, and most importantly they were
designed to scroll proportionally to each other. Then it was decided to add
visualizations on top of the views, for this purpose a randomly-generated discrete
time series was visualized using line graph, Figure 4.19.
Figure 4.18: 3 stacked views of diﬀerent
sizes can scroll proportionally.
Figure 4.19: Dataset with random val-
ues visualized using line graph.
Each view in the stack visualizes a speciﬁc temporal-level/period-interval, on
the screen at a time. Hence, their varying sizes as shown in Figure 4.20. The
green view was set to visualize an interval of 365 days, the blue showed 30 days
and the purple showed only 7 days. This sets the foundation for the temporal-
levels such as year, month and week. The synchronization point was set in the
middle of the screen, which implies that when one view is scrolled the others
are scrolled proportionally and they will always align on the same point in time
underneath the red-line.
Each temporal-level view has a unique size which is dependant on the visualized
period interval on screen. The spacing between x-axis units are determined by
the period interval of the temporal-level and is calculated as shown in Equation
(4.1):
SpacingX =
ScreenWidth
TemporalLevelLength
(4.1)
Equation (4.1) implies that, the smaller the interval is the wider will the spacing
between x-axis units become. Which leads to, the bigger the spacing between
units the wider the view of the temporal-level, Figure 4.20.
==PAGE:41==
4.4 Initial Prototype
27
Figure 4.20: A screenshot of the actual UI view hierarchy. The week temporal-level
view(purple) is clipped because of its large size, approx. 52 times bigger than the year
level(green).
In order to accomplish synchronization between views when scrolling, a conver-
sion method had to be conceived. The task of such a converter is to transform
x-axis coordinates, which are representing points in time, from one temporal-
level to another. As stated, the views have sizes that are diﬀerent from each
other. Using the relationships between the views a formula was devised to en-
able coordinate conversion between two diﬀerent temporal-level views, found
in Equation (4.2). This formula is utilized in synchronization of the views to
ensure proportional alignment of the views.
CenterXOtherV iew =
CenterXScrolledV iew
SpacingXScrolledV iew ∗SpacingXOtherV iew
(4.2)
A synchronization is designed to happen for every scroll event on a temporal-
level view. Based on the scrolled view’s new position, a new center position
is calculated and set for each view(except the scrolled view). This manoeuvre
ensures that they always are aligned underneath the red-line in the middle of
the screen, and also causes the parallax eﬀect.
The red-line strip is added to show the synchronization point between the views,
whereas before it was confusing to know exactly where the alignment point
was. The red-line strip is inspired from slide rulers(used to do mathematical
calculations) where the function of the strip is to pinpoint the exact position of
the slide on the scales, as shown in Figure 4.21.
Figure 4.21: A typical slide ruler
Furthermore, each temporal-level view has been assigned a unique colour with
==PAGE:42==
28
Design
the aim to make it more user-friendly and intuitive in terms of diﬀerentiating
between them. The raw-values of the data point underneath red-line was shown
on the top-bar, Figure 4.19.
4.5
Discrete Time Series
At this stage the basic parts of the framework was established and it was ready
to be tested with real datasets. A quantitative dataset from DataMarket1 was
downloaded and visualized using line graphs, as shown in Figure 4.22. Unit-
labels for x and y-axis were added to clarify the data context. Each temporal-
level has its own unique unit label format, e.g.
the year temporal-level has
month names as unit-labels, the month level has week numbers and the day
temporal-level has weekday names. This was done to ease the detail-load on the
user and also of practical reasons.
For example, the year level has 365 days on the screen at a all times, i.e. the
spacing in-between units becomes very small. If the unit-labels were day names,
dates or week number, the labels would become so small in width that it wouldn’t
be readable for the naked eye. The same reasoning goes for the other temporal-
levels.
For simplicity only two labels are visualized on the y-axis, namely minimum
and maximum y-value limits. Initially, the y-axis range was forced to have zero
as the minimum value, which consequently pushed the visualization ﬂat up for
datasets with minimum value signiﬁcantly larger than 0, e.g. IBM Stock Prices
with the y-value range (min:306, max:603). To highlight the diﬀerence in data,
the y-axis is truncated by setting the y-limits to the same range as the y-value
range in the dataset.
4.5.1
Missing Data
Visualizing IBM Stock Prices revealed the issue of having missing data in time
series. In this case, the visualization had holes in the line graph and by looking
closely at the week level, it turned out to be on weekends and holidays2. Missing
data occur when no data exists for a variable in the observation collection. It is
a vital aspect in visualizations and can have inﬂuence on how the user reﬂects on
overall visualization. To begin with, missing data were not plotted, appearing as
1https://datamarket.com/data/set/2322
2 Which is explainable by the fact that the stock market maintain hours of trading that
are similar to those of bank hours. Consequently, the stock market is closed on weekends and
holidays.
==PAGE:43==
4.5 Discrete Time Series
29
Figure 4.22: A discrete dataset, IBM
Stock prices 1961-62, visualized using
line graph.
Figure
4.23:
Quantiﬁed-self
data:
Steps, imported from iOS Health App.
holes in the graph, but this seemed too distracting, so it was decided to visualize
it using dashed-lines. This design would not distract the user and at the same
time disclose its existence, as shown in Figure 4.22.
4.5.2
Quantiﬁed-Self Data
It quickly became apparent that the IBM Stock Prices dataset was not a suit-
able time series for the purpose of this project.
It was diﬃcult to conclude
anything about eﬀectiveness of the visualizations on detecting periodic patterns
from this dataset. So it was decided to introduce self-tracking datasets. The
ﬁrst quantiﬁed-self dataset was Daily step count3 and visualized as shown in
Figure 4.23.
Although the data was limited to approx. 6 months, a quick test demonstrated
that it was suﬃcient to reveal patterns. To demonstrate, the year temporal-level
was used to get an overview of the variation over time. On the visualization nu-
merous spikes were noticed and therefore investigated further on the temporal-
levels below, which was showing the month and week levels. The month level
visualization showed that the spikes were recurrent in beginning of the weeks,
and by looking at the week level it was discovered that it occurred on Mondays
and Tuesdays. This information can be used to reﬂect on, e.g. what is the user
doing on Mondays and Tuesdays that causes these spikes and how can the user
learn from this new information to further improve its daily life.
3Extracted from the author’s iPhone 6. Since iOS 8.0, newer iPhones has been able to
track daily steps and other aspects of the user’s daily life.
==PAGE:44==
30
Design
Figure 4.24: Initial design of zoom area
and average bars.
Figure 4.25: Daily sleep dataset from
SensibleDTU. Average bars and horizon-
tal zoom brackets.
4.5.3
Zoom-Area and Average-Bars
As mentioned, temporal-level views are stacked vertically and sorted so that the
level with the largest period interval is on top. This means that a "downstairs
neighbour" always shows a portion of the "upstairs neighbour". The "zoomed-
in" portion is based on an interval around the synchronization point on the
red-line. Without any indication of these "zoom areas" this information is not
obvious. The initial design of zoom areas, shown in Figure 4.24, was rectangles
on top of the view to indicate which area was displayed in the below view. This
design appeared to overlap other elements, such as graph and unit labels, of the
visualization and therefore did more damage than good. In order to make it
less disruptive the zoom area indicators were reshaped into a simple horizontal
square bracket with same colour as the associated view, shown in Figure 4.25.
The visualizations so far had been simple and therefore needed some additional
details that could make it easier to compare periods visually. Hence, averages
of months, weeks and days were designed as transparent bars behind the line
graph. The aim was to make them subtle, so that it wouldn’t distract the user
from the main focus, the graphs, as shown in Figure 4.25.
4.6
Continuous Time Series
Up until now only discrete time series has been visualized. In order to visualize
a continuous time series several changes had to be made. First of all, continuous
observations are not evenly spaced and therefore occur randomly, which makes
==PAGE:45==
4.6 Continuous Time Series
31
it tedious to plot it as a graph.
Secondly, an observation can consist of an
interval, start-time and end-time, e.g. an earth-quake event or a sleep activity.
So far only daily time series has been dealt with, which was trivial to plot because
the data points only had a start-date(a point in x-axis) and a value(y-axis point)
attached to it.
The ﬁrst idea of visualizing irregular-spaced data points was to calculate the
daily sums based on the observations and thereby generating a regular-spaced
discrete dataset which could be plotted as a graph. Another idea was to visu-
alize the interval of the event using rectangles, drawn from start-time point to
end-time point on the x-axis. This would visualize the exact event in the time-
line and the width would give a visual representation of the event duration.
A sleep4 dataset was found suitable to be used in implementing the aforemen-
tioned designs. Observations in this dataset were continuous and only had a
start-time and an end-time, in the following format yyyy-MM-dd HH:mm:ss.
At ﬁrst the data was visualized utilizing duration-blocks on all temporal-levels,
as shown in Figure 4.26. It was discovered that the blocks did not make sense
in the larger temporal-levels as they did in the smaller ones, e.g. year vs. week.
The blocks became so small in the year level that some of them was unclear for
the naked eye. The week level, showing only 7 days, could be eﬃciently used to
detect sleep patterns during the week, e.g. when did the person usually sleep,
did he/she take naps in the afternoons. But the events could not be pin-pointed
at this temporal-level and the need of an additional temporal-level was con-
ﬁrmed. Thus, a day temporal-level, showing a 24-hour interval, was introduced.
This temporal-level could be used to pin-point the exact time of an event down
to the hour, as shown by the the orange view in Figure 4.26.
Since it wasn’t justiﬁable to utilize duration-blocks in the larger temporal-levels,
it was decided to combine the two visualization types, so that the daily sleep
sums are plotted as line graph in the year and month levels, while the exact
sleep activities were visualized using duration-blocks in week and day level, as
in Figure 4.27. Such a combination of visualizations will give the user a richer
understanding of the data.
4.6.1
Interactivity
Adding the new level meant that there now were 4 temporal-level views but only
3 were visible on the screen at a time. This was ﬁrst solved by implementing a
2-ﬁnger vertical ﬂick that triggered relocation(with animation) of each temporal
view one place up/down, but it didn’t feel as natural and smooth as the 1-ﬁnger
4Provided by the SensibleDTU project: https://www.sensible.dtu.dk
==PAGE:46==
32
Design
Figure 4.26:
Continuous time series:
Sleep data is visualized using duration-
blocks. Day temporal-level introduced.
Figure 4.27:
Visualization combina-
tion. Navigation is enabled via. Vertical
scroll.
pan gesture(applied horizontally on temporal-levels to scroll). So instead, all the
views were placed inside a scrollable container which could be scrolled vertically
using the 1-ﬁnger pan gesture, shown in Figure 4.27.
After testing it became apparent that scrolling up and down wasn’t an optimal
solution in cases where the user wants to observe all of the views at the same
time. To accommodate this need, a new feature was introduced; the ability to
resize the heights of the temporal-level view’s using vertical pinch gesture on
the container, as illustrated in Figure 4.28.
Figure 4.28:
Vertical pinch to resize
temporal view height.
Figure 4.29:
Duration-block can be
clicked to show details.
Up until this stage, duration-blocks were blank rectangles that didn’t disclose
much. By placing the duration length as text label on the block, the user is
aided in getting more information at a glance. Furthermore, in order to provide
information about the underlying data, without crowding the visual space, the
blocks were made click-able which would present a pop-over with the detailed
data when tapped, as shown in Figure 4.29.
==PAGE:47==
4.6 Continuous Time Series
33
4.6.2
Custom Temporal-Level
Timeline Parallax has so far visualized data on pre-set temporal-levels, i.e. year,
month, week and day. But there are cases where the pre-sets are not enough,
as found earlier when sleep data was introduced. It became apparent that a
day-level was needed to locate the sleep-activity down to the hour. As the need
for a custom temporal-level varies per user, a general solution was designed and
implemented; namely enabling the user to create and add custom temporal-level
views, as demonstrated in Figure 4.30.
Figure 4.30: Creating and adding custom temporal-level views.
The user simply initiates the process by long-pressing on a speciﬁc temporal-
level view.
Three options are presented in a pop-up; add a temporal-level
above/below the pressed view or removing the pressed view.
Choosing the
"Add.." option will open a form, with 4 ﬁelds, that has to be ﬁlled in order to
create and add a custom level. The ﬁelds are as follows; name, period interval,
visualize method and x-axis unit label-format. The rightmost screenshot in Fig-
ure 4.30 shows an example of a newly added custom level, called Olympiad(4
years).
Using the above feature, the user has to go through several steps to construct a
new temporal-level. This is acceptable in cases where the user wants a diﬀerent
temporal-level visualization-type or diﬀerent x-axis unit labels. But what if the
user just needs to adjust an existing temporal-level, i.e. the period interval. To
ensure a ﬂexible and hassle-free framework, it was decided to enable the user to
resize the interval by using the pinch-gesture horizontally(zoom in/out), which
is demonstrated in Figure 4.31.
==PAGE:48==
34
Design
Figure 4.31: Horizontal pinch-gesture can be used to resize a temporal-level. Exam-
ple demonstrates how the month level is resized to 2 months.
4.7
Moves Data
At this stage the basic functionality of the framework has been demonstrated
by applying it with several diﬀerent data types. However, the app had yet to
be user-evaluated. Informal tests were carried throughout the design process,
wherein the collected feedback were mainly superﬁcial, i.e. about the visual
appeal, feature functionality and the general UI design. It has not been possible
to test the main purpose, that is self-reﬂection based on data visualizations, of
the app yet. In order to uncover whether the framework truly was intuitive to
use and the visualizations indeed aided the user in self-reﬂection, the app had to
be tested on real end-users with their own data to visualize. For this purpose,
it was decided to integrate Moves data to the app. Moves was chosen due its
popularity which made i relatively manageable to ﬁnd Moves test-users.
4.7.1
Activities
Moves tracks two types of data: user activities and locations. An activity can
be of diﬀerent categories, such as walking, running, cycling, car, bus etc. An
activity data point has a start and end-time, distance, calories, time spent,
category name and several other information attached to it.
The data was imported and parsed into a new dataset containing the start,
end, distance and category name of the data point. Diﬀerent categories imply
the qualitative aspect in this data, which the app was not compatible with at
this stage. The app was redesigned and adjusted in order to visualize diﬀerent
categories. It was designed so that each category was plotted separately and in
order to diﬀerentiate between the graphs, each category was dealt a random-
generated colour. Furthermore, graph legends of same colour as the associated
graph were added to show category names.
==PAGE:49==
4.7 Moves Data
35
Figure 4.32: Graph legends introduced to diﬀerentiate between categories
Figure 4.32 depicts the two designs of graph legends, the idea of the ﬁrst design
was to place the legend at the beginning of the line graph. However, this wasn’t
an applicable design as the legends overlapped when the graphs had start points
close to each other. To avoid this, it was decided to place the legends beside the
graphs.
As done with the sleep data, daily sums are calculated for each activity category
and plotted using line graphs. The actual activity events are visualized using
duration-blocks. Unlike sleep activity, these activities can be of various diﬀerent
durations, as visualized in Figure 4.33 on next page. This demanded for an even
more detailed temporal-level, namely one that could show the activities down
to minute scale. Hence, the hour level was introduced, which shows 60 minutes
on the screen at a time.
As Figure 4.33 also shows, duration-block was given a circle-shape where the
size was calculated based on the activity duration. The idea was to accentuate
signiﬁcant events and suppress the smaller/insigniﬁcant ones.
However, this
design was abandoned later on due to its close similarity with a new visualization
type, Blobs.
4.7.2
Visualization Types
Visualizing Moves activities revealed several deﬁciencies in using line graph as
the visualization type. As Figure 4.32 shows, the category graphs overlap each
other, making it cluttered and demanding to diﬀerentiate between them. It was
decided to ﬁnd visualization types that would enhance the comparison ability
==PAGE:50==
36
Design
Figure 4.33: New temporal-level, Hour, introduced to show activities down to the
minute.
when looking at the visualizations. This was solved by implementing additional
3 visualization types; blobs, stacked line graph and stacked bar graph. All are
particularly suited for visual comparison of diﬀerent categories, as shown in
Figure 4.34.
Figure 4.34: New visualization types, from top to bottom: blobs, stacked-line graph,
stacked-bar graph.
Blobs are inspired by Moves visualization of daily and weekly sums, which is
shown Figure 4.35. The blobs in the visualization are weekly totals/sums and
their area-sizes are interdependent.
The area-size of a blob is calculated by
taking the ratio of the speciﬁc week’s total of a category and maximum weekly
total of the same category.
The purpose of the blobs is to ease the visual
comparison of categories, i.e. horizontally comparing the same category total
across the time-line.
This methodology was adopted quickly, as Figure 4.34
shows. Initially the sizes of the blobs were set by changing the radius based
==PAGE:51==
4.7 Moves Data
37
on the ratio, but after some testing it became apparent that something was
oﬀ. A quick trigonometry revision reminded that the radius does not increase
proportionally with the area of a circle. Instead, the area was calculated based
on the ratio and hereafter the radius from the area.
Figure 4.35: Moves visualization of weekly totals/sums.
A stacked-line graph is a basic visualization method that, as the line graph,
shows how quantities have changed over time.
The beneﬁt in using stacked
graphs is that it is particularly helpful in visually comparing magnitudes of the
stacked graphs. The same advantage holds for stacked bar graphs. Both plot
accumulated daily totals/sums.
4.7.3
Category Filter
So far, y-axis limits were, by default, set to be the minimum and maximum data
values. This had worked ﬁne for quantitative datasets with only one category,
e.g. sleep, steps and similar, but a deﬁciency was revealed when Moves activities
were visualized.
As shown in Figure 4.32, the categories overlap each other
and smaller categories are suppressed by the larger ones, as demonstrated in
Figure 4.36. The category with very high y-values is suppressing the ones with
low y-values which ﬂattens their respective graphs. To resolve this shortage,
two diﬀerent features were introduced to enable the user to take control of the
visualizations.
The ﬁrst feature had the purpose to make the y-limits resizeable/scalable. The
initial design was to enable resizing of the y-axis by pinching vertically on a
speciﬁc temporal-level view, but was quickly discarded as it collided with the
pinch gesture already used to resize the temporal-level view horizontally. Instead
the y-limit labels were made horizontally draggable using 1-ﬁnger pan gesture,
as demonstrated in Figure 4.36. The user can simply press on one of the y-limit
labels and drag it up/down to change the y-axis scale. The label’s text(y-limit)
is changed in real-time and ﬁnally when the label is released, the associated
temporal-level view will update its content according to the new y-limits.
==PAGE:52==
38
Design
Figure 4.36: Scaling y-axis is here used to accentuate the diﬀerences of the smaller
graphs.
The goal of the second addition was to enable the user to remove visualizations
of unwanted categories. Hence, a ﬁlter menu was designed, as shown in 4.37, to
be invoked by using a 2-ﬁnger long press on the screen. The ﬁlter menu pop-over
shows category name, the state(on/oﬀ) and the all-time total sums. Switching
the state oﬀwould result in removing the visualization of the category from all
temporal-level views.
Figure 4.37: 2-ﬁnger long press on screen presents the category ﬁlter.
For user convenience, a category can also be disabled by tapping on a graph
legend, as shown in Figure 4.38.
==PAGE:53==
4.7 Moves Data
39
Figure 4.38: A category can also be disabled by clicking on its legend.
4.7.4
Geo-Location Visualization
As mentioned, Moves also tracks geo-locations and groups them together in
so-called places, e.g. Home, Work, Gym, etc. A place is a location where the
user stays for longer periods at a time. Initially, this data type was visualized
using ordinary visualization graphs, as done with the activities data, but this
neglected the location aspect of the data. Although geo-locations are grouped to
make it easier to handle, the amount of place-categories can become quite large
and thereby making the graph visualization cluttered and somewhat unclear.
Therefore, a location speciﬁc solution had to be conceived.
Locations and maps go hand in hand, thus the initial idea was to enable the user
to see their places on a map for speciﬁc periods, e.g. year->2015, month->Jan
2015 or day->Sat 11/01/15.
The ﬁnal design turned out to be as shown in
Figure 4.39. The user can tap on a period interval, deﬁned by a-xis unit labels,
on a temporal-level view to invoke a map-visualization, which shows every place
visited in the particular time-interval. Each pin represents a place, the intensity
of the colour indicates time duration stayed at the particular place, i.e. the
longer duration the darker colour. As Figure 4.39 demonstrates, the pins can be
tapped to show further detailed info, i.e. name and the precise duration length.
The design stages of the pins are as depicted in Figure 4.41. First, places were
visualized using default pins5 which only showed the places and the user had to
tap on each to get duration details. This was replaced by custom pins that sat
the colour based on the duration lengths. They were calculated by comparing
the speciﬁc length to the max and min lengths in the particular period interval.
This provided the ability to visually compare places without having to tap on
each and everyone of them. As depicted by the second screenshot in Figure
4.41, it was noticed that the colours weren’t perceptibly diﬀerent from each
other. After examining the raw duration lengths, the reason became obvious.
5MKPointAnnotation
in
iOS
MapKit:
https://developer.apple.com/library/mac/
documentation/MapKit/Reference/MKPointAnnotation_class/
==PAGE:54==
40
Design
Figure
4.39:
For
location-based
datasets, tapping on a temporal-level
view presents a map of all visited loca-
tion in the chosen period. Pin colours in-
dicate diﬀerences in durations. Location-
pins can be tapped to show details.
Figure 4.40:
Tapping on a temporal-
level view presents a list of category
totals/sums for the tapped period, e.g.
10. week 2015, Jan 2015, Sat 15/05/15.
Figure 4.41: Place design process: version 1, 2 and 3(ﬁnal).
The duration length values were very diﬀerent from each other, e.g. 0.1, 119,
34, which consequently ﬂattened the colour values. It was solved by applying
logarithmic transformation on the raw values in order to reduce skewness and
compressing the upper end and stretching the lower end. The result is as shown
in the ﬁnal screenshot in Figure 4.41.
As Figure 4.40 shows, a tap on the temporal-level view for non-location data
visualization invokes the presentation of pop-over with a list of category to-
tals/sums for the particular/tapped period interval. This was added to provide
the user some speciﬁc details rather than relying solely on visual analysis.
==PAGE:55==
4.8 Summary
41
4.8
Summary
This chapter has described in detail how each component is designed and the
reasons behind. The explorative approach has resulted in a dynamic visualiza-
tion tool, designed for end-users.
It is now time to know about the technical implementations of the aforemen-
tioned designs. The following chapter will go into technical details of the imple-
mentation process.
==PAGE:56==
42
Design
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 5
Technical Implementation
This chapter describes the implementation of the app. The focus will be on
non-trivial implementations and performance optimizations.
5.1
Development platform
The design described in Chapter 4 can be implemented on any device that
utilizes touch gestures. However, the product of this thesis, is implemented on
the iOS 8.0 platform and can be used on the majority1 of iOS devices. The
device used in development has mainly been an iPad Retina2, on which all
following performance improvements were measured.
The target device is a
tablet because, as proposed under Solution Proposal in Chapter 3.2, it has a
bigger screen-size than the iOS phones.
185% according Apple: https://developer.apple.com/support/app-store/
2iOS version 8.3
==PAGE:58==
44
Technical Implementation
5.2
System Overview
Timeline Parallax is a visualization tool, which means that it should optimally
allow users to import their data from external sources. However, the priority
of the thesis has been design-exploration of the visualization method and not
the data-import or data-preparation functionality. As Figure 5.1 illustrates, the
current app relies on locally stored data ﬁles(.csv format). A demo of this is
illustrated in Appendix A.
Figure 5.1: System overview of Timeline Parallax app.
5.3
Temporal-Level View
Temporal-level views are the most vital parts of the visualization tool.
A
temporal-level view contains the visualizations and can be manipulated using
touch gestures. The ﬁrst step of the implementation process was to investigate
which platform frameworks to utilize in order achieve the desired design, as
established in Chapter 4.
5.3.1
Drawing Foundation
The temporal-level view contains the data visualization and can be navigated
using touch gestures. There are mainly two possible approaches to implement
such a design.
==PAGE:59==
5.3 Temporal-Level View
45
5.3.1.1
Subclassing UIView
The UIView class deﬁnes a rectangular area on the screen and provides interfaces
to manage the content in that area3. It is a generic view object that has little
use as-is, but it can be subclassed in order to present sophisticated content and
to achieve desired behaviour. Standard UI components, such as buttons, labels
and tables are some examples of UIView subclasses.
The temporal-level view can be implemented as a subclass to UIView.
The
beneﬁts in applying this strategy is the level of ﬂexibility that comes with it,
meaning that the temporal-level views can be implemented exactly as desired.
The visualizations can be added as sub-views and touch-gestures can be installed
in order to manipulate the view. For example, the time-line navigation can be
made possible by installing the 1-ﬁnger pan gesture and by handling its events
manually, it will be possible to update the view’s position and content as the
ﬁnger is moved. Thereby, creating the illusion of "scrolling" through time.
The disadvantage in using this strategy is the degree of boilerplate coding needed
to develop the most basic features of the view. Just implementing the scrolling
feature would require writing code for event handling, drawing, layout handling,
sub-view handling and so on. Many aspects of the subclass has to be handled
manually which makes it time-consuming.
5.3.1.2
UIScrollView
Another solution is to utilize the standard component, UIScrollView, which is a
subclass of the aforementioned UIView and is, for example, used as a catalogue
for showing and navigating images in the photo gallery app4. It includes a set of
out-of-the-box features that can come in handy in implementing the temporal-
level view, such as the default scroll feature and the associated event handling.
The scroll feature would be perfect for time-line navigation, because it uses the
1-ﬁnger pan gesture per default and it moves/updates the view automatically for
each scroll-event. The UIScrollView class facilitates a set of delegate methods
that notiﬁes the source when the UIScrollView is scrolled, e.g. when the user
starts dragging, when dragging stops or similar. All of which can be employed
to manually update the visualizations as the time-line interval changes.
The disadvantage is that it comes with some pre-set behaviours that goes against
the desired design and can be problematic to bypass, e.g. how it handles its sub-
views in case of scroll-events.
3 https://developer.apple.com/library/ios/documentation/UIKit/Reference/UIView_
Class
4On iOS devices
==PAGE:60==
46
Technical Implementation
The decision fell on the UIScrollView proposal because of the overall project
approach and the compactness of UIScrollView. As mentioned previously, this
project takes an explorative approach, which means that there is little place for
pre-optimizations. Choosing UIScrollView allowed a quick implementation of
the foundation which meant that more time could be devoted to the design and
implementation of more important parts of the product, such as visualizations
and gesture interaction.
As predicted, UIScrollView had to be adjusted where several features had to be
bypassed in order to accommodate the desired behaviour. For example, the de-
fault bouncing and deceleration animation eﬀects5 had to be bypassed in order
to get the desired horizontal time-line navigation. Another vital adjustment was
applied on how UIScrollView handled its sub-views when its content oﬀset is
changed. It is important to notice that a scroll event is ﬁred whenever the UIS-
crollView detects a change in the position of its contents and in order to keep the
other temporal level views synchronized, the content has to be re-positioned and
updated. Per default, the sub-views of UIScrollView are forced to refresh their
layouts for each content oﬀset change. In other words, the temporal-level views
had to redraw their visualizations multiple times and consequently resulting in
a very laggy experience for the user. Therefore, it was decided to override the
default interface method to manually re-position the contents without having
the sub-views(visualizations, unit labels, etc.) to redraw.
To facilitate the aforementioned customizations, the UIScrollView was sub-
classed and the new class, ParallaxScrollView, functioned as the parent for the
visualization sub-views, as illustrated in Figure 5.2.
Main View Controller
Container Scroll View
Parallax Scroll View X
Temporal Level View
Visualizations
(Graphs, blobs, etc)
X-axis Unit Labels
Y-axis Limit Labels
Zoom Area Brackets
Top Bar View
Level 4
Level 3
Level 2
Level 1
Figure 5.2: View Hierarchy
5https://developer.apple.com/library/ios/documentation/UIKit/Reference/
UIScrollView_Class/
==PAGE:61==
5.3 Temporal-Level View
47
5.3.2
Data Visualization
As Figure 5.2 indicates, the visualization and unit labels are handled in the Tem-
poralLevelView. The visualization, depending on the type, is either added as an
image(graphs) or as buttons(blobs, duration-blocks) to the TemporalLevelView.
The TemporalLevelView is then added to ParallaxScrollView and acts as its con-
tent. Notice that the TemporalLevelView can have much larger width than the
screen width, depending on what the underlying period-interval/temporal-level
is set to. Therefore it is designed so that the ParallaxScrollView takes care of
time-line navigation and gesture recognition while the TemporalLevelView is
solely responsible for the visualization and x-axis unit labels.
Figure 5.3: Main UI Components
The above is true for each deﬁned temporal level. To handle multiple temporal
levels on the same screen, all their associated ParallaxScrollViews are stacked
and added to a basic UIScrollView that acts as the container. This enables
scrolling and vertical navigation on the stacked views.
One might notice, in Figure 5.2, that both y-axis labels and zoom-area brack-
ets are not added inside the TemporalLevelView, as the x-axis unit labels is,
but are added to the container view. The reason is that the content of Paral-
laxScrollView is scrollable, which means that the y-axis labels and zoom-area
brackets would disappear from the screen in case of horizontal scrolling on the
ParallaxScrollView. They should, however, be stationary and only be reposi-
tioned in case of container scroll(vertical navigation). Hence, they were added
as sub-views to the container UIScrollView but are positioned on top of their
==PAGE:62==
48
Technical Implementation
associated ParallaxScrollViews. Main UI components and their relationships
are outlined in Figure 5.3.
5.4
Performance Improvements
Due to the nature of the project, the initial strategy was to avoid pre-optimizations.
The development was focused on exploring as many designs and concepts as
possible in the available time frame. Reﬁning and optimization were therefore
pushed to the end of the project. However, critical issues that halted progress
was taken care of immediately.
5.4.1
Memory Issues
During the development several critical memory issues occurred and had to be
dealt with. The ﬁrst memory issue occurred early in the development stage when
the IBM Stock Prices dataset was visualized for the ﬁrst time. A quick proﬁling
revealed that it consumed approx. 400 MB of RAM, which made the app very
unstable, resulting in crashes when the temporal-level views were scrolled. It
turned out that the widths of some of the temporal-level views, in this case the
week-level, were getting very big and the employed drawing method reserved
a big chunk of RAM in order to draw the graphs. Initially, all of the drawing
took place in the drawRect() interface method of the TemporalLevelView class.
Overriding the drawRect() method is the easiest way of drawing on a view
but it is also very expensive memory-wise. The consequence of overriding the
drawRect() method is that the underlying system doesn’t exactly know what to
expect, in degree of drawing intensity, so for precautionary purposes, it reserves
memory proportionally to the number of pixels in the target view, indeﬁnitely.
The exact memory consumption can be calculated6 using Equation (5.1).
Memory(Bytes) = Width ∗Height ∗4Bytes
(5.1)
In pursuit of solving this memory problem, other options were discovered and
explored. It turns out that there are two ways of drawing on a view; overriding
the drawRect() method or by creating a bitmap context image. The ﬁrst one
6A pixel in a bitmap is represented by 4 bytes. https://developer.apple.com/library/
ios/documentation/GraphicsImaging/Conceptual/drawingwithquartz2d/dq_context/dq_
context.html
==PAGE:63==
5.4 Performance Improvements
49
reserves the memory indeﬁnitely while the second one releases the memory as
soon as it is done drawing and the image context reference is released7. In light
of this, the drawRect() approach was abandoned and the graphs were drawn by
utilizing the image graphic context interface methods.
However, using this method didn’t get rid of the memory issue altogether. The
app would still crash when visualizing large datasets. This was due to the huge
and sudden memory reservation/allocation during the drawing initialization in-
side the image graphic context. Although the new approach releases memory
it still requires a lot of memory whilst drawing.
The iOS memory manage-
ment system is unforgiving towards apps that use too much memory or CPU
resources, the app is given memory warnings but if the memory problem is not
timely taken care of the app is readily terminated8, as was the case here.
Figure 5.4: Temporal-level view size - relationships
It seemed that the only way forward was to rethink the whole visualization
framework. So far, the approach had been to visualize the whole temporal level
in one big view, as illustrated in Figure 5.4. Figure 5.4 clearly shows that the
narrower the temporal-level is, the wider the visualization view becomes. In
case of a daily data collection over a period of 1 year, the week level would be
52 times the screen width whilst the year level would only be 1 screen width.
For example, drawing the graphs on the week level acquires 218 MB memory, as
derived by Equation 5.2, and that proved to be too exhaustive on the system.
218 MB = (2048*512*4/1000000)*52
(5.2)
To avoid the sudden memory allocation, a new strategy was devised. As Figure
5.4 shows, it is quite unnecessary to instantiate the whole visualization as one
big view because only parts of it are visible on the screen at a time. So by only
visualizing the visible parts, the views would get smaller and thereby require
less memory to be drawn on.
This new strategy required that only a limited portion of the temporal level was
to be visualized at a time and the visualizations had to be updated/redrawn
when needed. The state of each temporal-level was kept track of at all times,
i.e.
info about the visualized period interval and its relative position in the
time-line. Based on the state and position in the time-line, the view would get
appropriately updated and redrawn when needed.
7https://developer.apple.com/library/ios/documentation/2DDrawing/Conceptual/
DrawingPrintingiOS/HandlingImages/Images.html
8https://developer.apple.com/library/ios/documentation/iPhone/Conceptual/
iPhoneOSProgrammingGuide/PerformanceTips/PerformanceTips.html
==PAGE:64==
50
Technical Implementation
Utilizing this drawing strategy decreased the memory usage by drastically, e.g.
for the IBM Stock Prices visualizations, memory allocation fell from ∼300MB
to ∼30MB, approx. a factor 10 reduction. The memory reduction is dependent
on the speciﬁc temporal level. This drawing technique was further optimized as
the development progressed and new temporal levels was introduced.
Initially, x-axis unit labels were added as UILabel sub-views to the temporal-
level view. This worked ﬁne until the hour-level was introduced. Due to the
deﬁnition of the hour temporal-level, showing minutes of the hour as unit labels,
too many UILabels were added to the view and this seemed to destabilize the
app. To address this issue, it was decided to draw the labels on the view using the
graphic image context, as it is done with the graphs. This relieved the system
from managing all the UILabels and the app was stabilized. Using UILabels
was not the most optimal solution but it was an easy and naive solution. As
mentioned before, the focus was on exploring rather than pre-optimizing.
5.4.2
Responsiveness
It is essential for an app to be responsive in order to preserve the user’s atten-
tion. According [Nie94] and [Mil68], tasks with response times between 0.1 -
1.0 seconds can be executed without special feedback to the user. Tasks with
response times exceeding the 1.0s limit is advised to provide a feedback message
indicating that the task is expected to be done. Otherwise the user wouldn’t
know what to expect and may lose interest, which is not acceptable for such a
tool because a sub-goal of a personal informatics system is to prevent the user
from meeting any barriers that could aﬀect her/his self-reﬂection, as discussed
in [LDF10].
There are several tasks with response times over the 1.0 s limit, e.g. updating
the visualization, adding new temporal-level view, resizing views vertically, ﬁl-
tering out categories, etc. In order to make Timeline Parallax responsive and
avoid blocking the UI-thread, it was decided to utilize background threads. Ini-
tially, the temporal-level view synchronization tasks were executed in concurrent
background threads, which consequently resulted in an overloaded CPU and in-
creased memory usage, as shown Figure 5.5.
To prevent CPU and memory
"hoarding", it was decided to abandon concurrent background threads in favour
of serial background queues. A serial background queue executes tasks in the
order they are added, as opposed to concurrent threads. Using the renewed
threading solution, time-consuming tasks were queued and executed one at a
time and in the process halving the CPU usage, as shown in Figure 5.6.
Background threading allows the UI-thread to present feedback messages whilst
==PAGE:65==
5.5 Summary
51
Figure
5.5:
Updating
multiple
temporal-level views in concurrent back-
ground threads resulted in a overloaded
CPU.
Figure
5.6:
Updating
multiple
temporal-level views in a serial back-
ground queue.
executing time-consuming tasks in background, as demonstrated in Figures 5.7
and 5.8.
Furthermore, to enable smooth time-line scrolling, synchronization
tasks are put on hold until the user has stopped scrolling, whereas before tasks
were executed immediately on the UI thread, consequently blocking the UI and
forcing the user to stop time-line navigation.
Figure 5.7: Temporal-level views that
needs to redraw itself awaits the user to
ﬁnish scrolling.
Figure 5.8: Once the user has ﬁnished
scrolling, the views are locked and the
synchronization process is started in a
background thread.
5.5
Summary
This chapter has described the implementation process of some of the interesting
components. The next step is to evaluate the tool in order to validate if the
app really can aid users in understanding their data. The following chapter will
describe the evaluation approach.
==PAGE:66==
52
Technical Implementation
==PAGE:67==
Chapter 6
User Evaluation
User evaluation is a vital part of every software development. There are diﬀerent
evaluation methods that can be applied to evaluate and validate the product.
As described in Chapter 4, the chosen development methodology, a variation of
the prototyping model, suggests that user evaluation is executed when a viable
prototype is ready. Traditionally, a prototyping development relies heavily on
the user feedback but since the nature of this project is more explorative and
the fact that it is tedious to obtain true feedback without using the user’s own
data, it was decided to follow a variation of the model. The reasons are, as
stated in Chapter 4.1-Design Approach, that the test user wouldn’t be able to
relate to and understand the visualizations if they weren’t based on their own
data and thereby wouldn’t be able to give feedback on the eﬀectiveness of the
visualizations as they reﬂect on the data.
However, informal tests were carried out throughout during the development in
order to collect feedback on the overall UI design. The users of these informal
tests were fellow students and colleagues.
Also, more detailed feedback was
regularly gathered at weekly meetings with Jakob Eg Larsen1, a guru within
the area of personal informatics systems and the supervisor of this project.
The meetings were mainly open discussions about the app and the feedback
1http://oaklab.org/
http://www.dtu.dk/english/Service/Phonebook/Person?id=7165&tab=1
==PAGE:68==
54
User Evaluation
contributed in making design decisions throughout the process, as described in
Chapter 4.
6.1
Approach
It was decided to perform a summative evaluation where the goal was to deter-
mine the quality of the end-product. In order to get qualitative feedback, it was
decided to ﬁnd users who were interested in self-tracking and preferably Moves
users. Two users were found that meet the mentioned criteria:
• Tomas Palsson is a quantiﬁed-self enthusiast and the creator of a visu-
alization tool[Pal14] for time series based on the QS Spiral visualization
concept[LCJ13]. He collects multiple personal data, such as step count,
sleep, heart-rate, and has collected Moves data since start 2014. The rea-
son Tomas was chosen is that he is deeply involved in self-tracking and
has experience in using and making visualization tools.
• Mads Frøding Engels is a Software Engineer who has specialized within
the area of User Experience(UX) in mobile apps. He has recently found
interest in self-tracking and has collected his steps count since late 2014
and Moves data since beginning of 2015. The reason he was chosen was
amongst others his UX background.
• Jasmina Bonabi is a Lawyer with no particular technical baggage. She
uses Moves to track activity and location data and tracks daily calorie-
intake using Lifesum2 app. She is mainly interested in collecting data that
can help her live a healthier life. She was chosen due to her non-technical
background.
The ultimate goal of the evaluations was to determine the intuitiveness and
usefulness of the visualization tool.
In order to gather rich and exhaustive
feedback, it was decided to perform a Think Aloud test under direct observation.
The test-users were instructed to speak their thoughts as they used the app and
during the evaluation they were allowed to engage in dialogues with the observer.
The actual test session started with a quick introduction of the app and its
functionalities after which the testing could begin. The test-sessions lasted 2-
3 hours each. Each session ended with a questionnaire, containing a series of
speciﬁc questions about the the main components of the app where the goal was
2https://lifesum.com/
==PAGE:69==
6.1 Approach
55
to get detailed answers. The questionnaire can be found in Appendix B.
The limited number of test-users is due the diﬃculty in ﬁnding qualiﬁed test-
users that both used Moves app and was willing to be participate in a Think
Aloud test session. Therefore, due the limited number of test-users, the results
of this evaluation should be considered as preliminary until a more extensive
and detailed evaluation is done in the future.
==PAGE:70==
56
User Evaluation
==PAGE:71==
Chapter 7
Results and Discussion
This chapter presents and discusses user-feedback that have been collected dur-
ing the test-sessions. As mentioned, the evaluation had an open-ended approach
where the test-user could think aloud as they used the app with no particular
order or agenda. This chapter will try to group their thoughts and feedback to
ﬁt under certain topics.
The overall evaluation was a success. Despite the fact that only two test-users
were evaluated, the evaluations resulted in valuable feedback that can be used
to improve the app in future works. Unfortunately, the third test-user, Jasmina
Bonabi, could not participate in the planned test session due to some unex-
pected events in her schedule and therefore cancelled with short notice. Her
non-technical feedback would have been valuable and unique as seen from a
non-expert’s point-of-view.
7.1
Overall Feedback
The general impression was that the test-users were impressed by the app and
stated that it did help them reﬂect on their data. They both felt positively
about the overall visual appeal and the visualization of temporal-levels side-by-
side. They expressed positive remarks about the visualizations of the diﬀerent
==PAGE:72==
58
Results and Discussion
temporal-levels and how interesting it was to navigate through the time using
diﬀerent temporal-levels.
Tomas expressed that he would use the app if it was ﬁnalized and released
to the public, while Mads was not certain because he prefers holistic personal
informatics systems, such as Moves, which both collects and visualizes the data.
He stated that he would probably use it if an external-data import feature was
implemented where his data from Moves could be imported easily.
Tomas felt that the small details in the app were "simple in design but yet rich
on information". For instance, he pointed out how he liked the subtle design of
the horizontal zoom-brackets, y-axis limit labels and x-axis unit labels. Mads
expressed that the transparent designs of the axis labels were intuitive and
minimalistic, but yet he felt that certain aspects can be improved.
Finally, Tomas expressed that he would like to use the tool to visualize other
personal data that he collects, such as sleep data. Mads would like to visualize
his step count from the iOS Health app. Furthermore, they both felt that the
app was responsive but yet certain parts did need adjustments in order to make
it more responsive.
7.2
Temporal-Levels Views
Both test-users was impressed by the time-line navigation with 1-ﬁnger scrolling
and felt that it was very intuitive.
Tomas expressed his gratitude towards the design of the horizontal zoom-brackets,
he felt their subtleness fulﬁls the data to ink ratio principle, i.e. showing infor-
mation in smallest area with least amount of pixels, as described in [TGM83].
Also, he was pleased about the idea of having diﬀerent visualizations of the same
data in diﬀerent temporal-levels side by side. He felt that this design enabled
him to explore his data more eﬃciently because he now can see the data in
diﬀerent temporal-contexts. He also stated that he preferred the way the larger
temporal-levels, per default, were visualizing the daily data instead of the raw
activity/event data.
Mads stated that the possibility of adding customized temporal-levels is paramount
for the visualization tool but he felt that the existence of it was not visible
enough. He suggested adding a dedicated button in the top-bar to emphasize
this feature more explicitly. Tomas stated that "it is a fantastic idea" to enable
addition of custom temporal-levels because he liked the fact that it allowed him
to deﬁne exact period intervals and visualize the data as he desired, e.g. the ﬁrst
temporal-level he created had an 1.5 years interval(the time-line of his Moves
data) because he wanted to see his time-line on one single view. He felt that
this new level gave him a quick overview over the progress and tendencies in his
==PAGE:73==
7.2 Temporal-Levels Views
59
data.
Both test-users stated that the vertical navigation was intuitive and that they
enjoyed the vertical container resize-feature that enabled them to ﬁt all of the
temporal-level views on the screen. Tomas thought that height-resizing of the
views were intuitive by using the vertical pinch, but yet he missed the ability
to resize each view individually, so it was possible to assign one view to have,
for example, 2/3 of the screen height. The reason behind was that he felt some
temporal-levels had higher importance for his data than others.
In regards to the horizontal resizing of a temporal-level view, Mads felt it was
useful for him because it allowed him to change the underlying period-interval
of an existing temporal-level without having to create a new. However, he felt
that it was confusing that the background title didn’t change after a resize. He
suggested that the temporal-level title should be set automatically based on
the period-interval, which consequently means that it will change automatically
when a view’s period-interval is resized.
An important shortage they both discovered individually was the lack of a ’edit-
ing’ functionality for an existing temporal-level view. Mads felt that sometimes
he just wanted to change the visualization-type or x-axis unit format of an exist-
ing temporal-level view rather than going through the hassle of creating a new
one from scratch. He suggested placing a dedicated button on top-bar or in the
rightmost side of the screen. Tomas suggested putting the edit-button in the
existing temporal-level option-menu (invoked by 1-ﬁnger long press) alongside
’remove’, ’add temporal level... ’ menu-buttons.
7.2.1
Axis Labels
Tomas and Mads were positively surprised how the y-axis scale could be resized
by dragging on the y-limit labels. Though, it was observed that they had a
hard time hitting/touching the labels, meaning that the labels are probably too
small.
They both liked the overall design of the x-axis unit labels, i.e. the transparency
and subtleness. However, during the test session it was observed that they didn’t
easily understand some of the label formats. Mads expressed that the month-
level unit labels should rather show the start and end-dates of the week than
week-numbers . He pointed out the fact that week-number are not commonly
used in everyday life and therefore it doesn’t provide the end-user recognizable
information.
Both test-users had a hard time guessing the units of the smallest levels, namely
day and hour levels. The day-level shows 24 hours as its x-axis units and Hour-
==PAGE:74==
60
Results and Discussion
level shows 60 minutes. Mads felt that the meaning of these units was apparent
at a glance. Therefore, he suggested addition explanatory suﬃxes to the labels,
more speciﬁcally a ’h’ suﬃx for hour and ’m’ for minute-labels. So that the
result is: "01h, 02h, 03h" and "01m, 02m, 03m".
7.2.2
Filtering
Tomas stated that the ﬁltering was a great idea. His activity data from Moves
had one large category, "Transport", which ﬂoored other category visualization.
He was pleased that he could globally disable certain categories. Though, he
noticed that the ﬁltering menu was missing units for the category totals which
he thought was confusing.
7.3
Visualization
Tomas felt that the blobs as a visualization-type was a bit confusing to visually
comprehend at ﬁrst. He pointed out that the user doesn’t exactly know how
the sizes of the blobs are compared to each other, unless an explicit tutorial of
some sort is provided. But once he understood how they worked, he quickly
became fond of them and he stated: "It provides an immediate overview of
my progress where I can visually compare categories over periods much better
than in line graphs". Both Tomas and Mads suggested that blobs could show
the underlying category totals along with the title in order to emphasize their
diﬀerences even more. The same suggestion was directed towards the duration-
blocks visualization-type.
Both participants individually suggested visualizing blobs in a diﬀerent way so
that the categories are compared with other categories vertically across one
particular period. However, they quickly retracted their suggestions once they
tried to describe how it will work in real-life. Tomas came to the conclusion that
comparing one category to another category can sometimes be like comparing
apples and oranges, such as walking and cycling or walking and driving in car.
In other words, it wouldn’t be intuitive in the context of Moves activities but
may be for other data contexts.
Tomas felt that the line-graphs could sometimes be too detailed and unclear.
He suggested plotting period averages instead of daily totals, in order to smooth
the graph out. As he pointed out, tendencies are diﬃcult to detect by looking
at the absolute daily value visualization.
==PAGE:75==
7.3 Visualization
61
Figure 7.1: User is unable to see category names.
Mads and Tomas both expressed that it was at times diﬃcult to recognize
categories in a graph because the graph Legend labels were not visible all the
time, as illustrated in Figure 7.1. Mads pointed out that the graph legends
are scrolled with the graph and therefore the legends can disappear from the
screen. He suggested showing categories names and colours somewhere else on
the screen, such as the top-bar view. Tomas suggested that the legends could
be stacked on top of each other and added to a hide-able view in the rightmost
side.
7.3.1
Geo-Location visualization
Tomas was overly impressed by the location visualization. He liked how he could
see the location data visualized diﬀerently. He said that his absolute favourite
feature was visualization of locations on a map and the fact that he is able to
see locations in speciﬁc periods was brilliant.
However, he felt that there were too many categories which consequently crowded
the visualizations. He suggested only plotting the top-10 categories based on
their overall duration sums.
==PAGE:76==
62
Results and Discussion
Figure 7.2: User is unable to relate underlying location graph with location-pins on
the map.
During the test-session, it was observed that Mads had diﬃculties relating visu-
alizations to the location-pins on the map, as shown in Figure 7.2. He stated that
the location-pin colour mapping was intuitive because he could visually observe
where he spends his time. Though, he felt that he had a hard time connecting
the pins with categories in the graphs. He suggested adding a colour-toggle
feature that could change the colours of the pins to category colours.
7.4
Responsiveness
During the test-session, it was observed that the synchronizations/updating of
temporal-levels were of displease for the test-users. They both stated that it was
unintuitive to "block" the user out when updating views. Mads felt that the
smaller temporal-levels were acquiring too much attention despite the fact they
aren’t visible most of the time. His suggestion was to disable the temporal-levels
that aren’t visible on the screen and only update them when the user scrolls
down to make them visible. Tomas had a more general suggestion which was to
update the views in background and avoid blocking the user.
One observation from Tomas was towards the initialization of a dataset visual-
==PAGE:77==
7.5 Summary
63
ization. Due to his large Moves dataset, he experienced that the visualization
was too slow to start and was not acceptably responsive. Mads’ data was rela-
tively small, which is why he didn’t experience a noticeable delay.
7.5
Summary
The evaluation results in this chapter show that the app is usable but can
be improved in certain areas. The feedback has opened many possibilities for
future work and the potential improvements and ideas are described in the next
chapter.
==PAGE:78==
64
Results and Discussion
==PAGE:79==
Chapter 8
Future Work
This chapter will describe potential improvements and features that can be
implemented in future work. Some are derived from the collected user-feedback,
as presented in Chapter 7.
8.1
Memory-Issue Improvements
Memory-issues acquired signiﬁcant amount of attention during the development
process. Although, the issues were solved and improved continuously through-
out the development, the need for further improvement still exists. The need
becomes particularly visible when visualizing large datasets, as demonstrated
with Tomas’ dataset.
The main contributor to the reappearing memory-issues is the underlying temporal-
level view management. Due to the approach of this thesis, pre-optimizations
and optimizations of the view management were generally skipped for the ben-
eﬁt of design exploration. As mentioned in Chapter 5.4.1, the critical memory
issue was solved implementing a temporal-level partition-algorithm. However,
this algorithm is not perfect and multiple steps can be taken to improve this
algorithm in order to further ease the load on CPU and RAM of the device.
First of all, the skeleton of the temporal-level view can be re-implemented by
==PAGE:80==
66
Future Work
subclassing the UIView-class and thereby handling everything manually. Con-
sequently, this will require a considerable amount of time to implement but
once implemented it will provide much needed ﬂexibility that the the partition-
algorithm can beneﬁt from.
Secondly, the underlying temporal-level partition-algorithm can be improved
greatly. At the moment, the algorithm is designed to force the temporal-level
views to show at least one day of the time-line no matter what level it is. This
design was applicable at start until the small temporal-levels were introduced.
These small temporal-levels resulted in signiﬁcantly larger views when visual-
ized. For instance, the hour level which shows one hour on the screen at a time
gets a temporal-level view that is 24 times larger than the screen-width because
the ineﬃcient partition-algorithm requires at least one day(24 hours) of visual-
ization.
The partition-algorithm should be redesigned so that instead of one-day it parti-
tions the temporal-level views based on the smallest unit of time in the visualized
time-series, e.g. in Moves data the smallest time unit is seconds.
Figure 8.1: New start-screen allowing import of data from external sources.
8.2
External-Data Import
The current version of the app is lacking data-import facilities that can be
used to fetch data from external sources. Such functionality is paramount for a
visualization tool such as Timeline Parallax and all of the aforementioned visu-
alization frameworks provide this feature for the users.
==PAGE:81==
8.3 Temporal-Level View Improvements
67
Figure 8.1 illustrates the new start screen of the app. The idea is to keep it
simple and seamless, the user can simply tap on one of the buttons to start
importing the data from the associated source. To make it user-friendly, the
tool should deﬁne speciﬁc default temporal-level proﬁles for each of the data
source. For instance, the proﬁle for RunKeeper data should per default show
daily totals as graphs in year, month and week levels. It should show duration-
blocks in the day-level and not include temporal-levels smaller than day-level.
These proﬁle would help the user get started until he/she is comfortable enough
to conduct customizations.
As it can be seen on Figure 8.1, there are diﬀerent data types which means
that they each have to be considered uniquely.
For example, Facebook and
Twitter oﬀer numerous data types which all can be used to visualize, therefore
they should be handled diﬀerently by giving the user options on which data to
visualize.
Figure 8.2: Edit button in temporal-level Options-menu.
8.3
Temporal-Level View Improvements
The user-evaluation results can be used to improve the design of temporal-level
views in several areas.
Although users found the add and ﬁlter features intuitive with regards to their
functionality, they had diﬃculties discovering their existence. They both wished
that these features were made more visible. The problem was that these features
could only be invoked by using gestures. The purpose of using gestures in the
ﬁrst place was to simplify the overall UI design in order to avoid overwhelm-
ing the user with buttons and menus. But user-feedback proved this design
unintuitive and it showed that they preferred dedicated buttons alongside the
gestures. A suggestion to solve this problem is illustrated in Figure 8.2 and 8.3.
This design makes the functionalities more visible and yet keeps their existence
unobtrusive for the user.
==PAGE:82==
68
Future Work
Figure 8.3: Add and Filter features are made more visible.
Another notable issue both test-users were facing was the absence of graph leg-
ends during their exploration of visualizations. It became apparent that graph
legends tended to disappear from the screen when the user scrolled towards
the end of the time-line. The reason was that the graph legends were added
as sub-views to the beginning of the temporal-level view, which consequently
meant that they got scrolled along with the visualization. A design suggestion
that solves this problem is illustrated in Figure 8.4. All legends are added to a
view placed in the right side of the screen. This view is hideable, which means
that the user can hide/show it by pressing the attached arrowed-button. This
design provides the category names and colours at all times without crowding
the screen.
Figure 8.4: Graph legends as a hide-able view allows category name overview at all
times.
8.4
Visualizations
The temporal-level views are designed to act as a canvas for visualizations of
the data. This implies that any 1- or 2-dimensional visualization-type dedicated
for time-series can be added to and visualized on the temporal-level view. The
currently implemented visualization-types are merely a demonstration of the
==PAGE:83==
8.4 Visualizations
69
possibilities the temporal-level view provides. Other visualization-types such
as scatter-plot or modern visualizations such as calender-view(as mentioned in
Chapter 1) can well be implemented in order to enrich the data-exploration for
the user.
During the test-session it was noticed that the testers were confused about the
colour-coding of the categories. The problem was that some of the colours were
in vicinity of each other which made it diﬃcult for the naked eye to distinguish.
The colours are currently generated randomly using a third-library1. A solution
to this was suggested by one of the test-users, Tomas Palsson. He suggested that
instead of visualizing every single category(e.g. in Moves places), the app could
only visualize the top-10 categories. Using this suggestion would allow usage of
a static colour-palette of 10 unique colours to be used for the top-10 categories.
The remaining categories can then be visualized using a discrete colour, such
as gray. Using his suggestion would avoid crowding the visualization and also
provide uniquely identiﬁable category colours.
Figure 8.5: New location visualization-method.
The map and colour of the pins
changes dynamically as the user scrolls through the time-line.
Both of the test-users were impressed by one particular visualization-type, namely
visualizations of locations on a map. One of the test-users wondered why the
map-visualization was not emphasized even more. He felt that it would be much
more attractive and intuitive if the map-visualization was a stationary part of
1https://github.com/onevcat/RandomColorSwift
==PAGE:84==
70
Future Work
the screen and could dynamically change as the time-line was navigated. Figure
8.5 illustrates the demanded feature. The map ﬁlls 2/3 of the screen and is
dynamically updated when the the time-line is navigated. The dynamic addi-
tion/removal of pins and changing of the pin-colours on the map will give the
user an idea of the locations he/she has travelled.
8.5
Summary
This chapter has discussed and presented potential improvements and features
for future work. Some of the improvements are direct result of the user-evaluation
sessions while some are general optimizations of the app. Overall the aim of the
optimizations and improvements are to aid the user to understand and reﬂect
on the data without meeting any barriers.
==PAGE:85==
Chapter 9
Conclusion
This thesis proves that it is possible to design and implement a visualization
method that emphasizes temporal-levels and is touch-interactive. Furthermore,
it shows that a visualization tool can use this new method to facilitate visual-
izations of diﬀerent types of time series.
Firstly, the problem is motivated and delimited. The focus is narrowed down to
be on quantiﬁed-self time series with the emphasis on data that is characterized
by a high degree of repetition in various temporal-levels .
Hereafter, the problem is dissected into addressable parts in the analysis chapter,
where it is discovered that the time series and visualization methods can be of
diﬀerent types. Furthermore, this chapter investigates guidelines from existing
research, such as [LDF10], can be applied to create a visualization tool that can
help the user to successfully reﬂect on their data.
Related work investigated to conﬁrm the need for this visualization method. It
is discovered that the temporal-level notion has before been targeted in diﬀerent
ways, but not in the same fashion as in this thesis, i.e. side-by-side temporal-
level visualizations on a mobile interface with touch-interactivity.
The design chapter describes and discusses each decision that was made during
the explorative design-process. It presents a design that is implementable on
==PAGE:86==
72
Conclusion
any platform supports touch-devices.
The implementation chapter proves this claim by showing that it can be imple-
mented on a mobile platform, iOS. It is shown that the tool is customizable and
can visualize diﬀerent quantiﬁed-self time series, such as Moves data. Further-
more, it uncovers memory-issues which have been decisive for the development
process.
Finally, qualitative user-evaluations were carried out to validate the usability of
the app. The feedback results indicate that the tool is applicable in visualization
and exploration of quantiﬁed-self data. The test-users found the visualizations
helpful and intuitive when reﬂecting on their data. The results indicate that
temporal-levels aided in discovering repetitive properties and that the gestures
were mainly intuitive and deﬁnitely improvable. Their feedback provided ideas
for improvements in future work. Due to the limited number of test-users, the
results of the conducted evaluations are considered preliminary and should be
tested more thoroughly in order to achieve a conclusive validation of the tool.
The conclusion is that the problem has been solved by creating an interactive
visualization method which can visualize time series in various customizable
temporal-levels. It is shown that it can be used to discover data properties such
as patterns, progress and trends. User-feedback indicate that the tool works but
is improvable in many areas.
==PAGE:87==
Appendix A
Timeline Parallax Demo
Figure A.1: Step 1. Start the app..
==PAGE:88==
74
Timeline Parallax Demo
Figure A.2: Step 2. Choose a dataset to visualize..
Figure A.3: Step 3. Press done..
==PAGE:89==
75
Figure A.4: Step 4. Press visualize to start initialization..
Figure A.5: The chosen dataset is visualized and ready for exploration..
==PAGE:90==
76
Timeline Parallax Demo
==PAGE:91==
Appendix B
Evaluation Questionnaire
TEMPORAL LEVEL VIEW:
• Are the pre-set temporal levels appropriate in your data context?
• Which temporal level would improve your understanding of your data? 2
years? 8 weeks?
• Is the custom adding-feature of new temporal levels a intuitive process?
if no, what part could be improved?
• Does horizontal-resizing help you customise temporal levels to meet your
needs instead of creating a new from scratch?
• How easy is it for you to diﬀerentiate between the temporal levels?
– Does the transparent titles help?
– What would you suggest to do if emphasise the diﬀerences?
VISUALIZATIONS:
• Are the current visualization types intuitive?
==PAGE:92==
78
Evaluation Questionnaire
– Which one is least useful and which one most useful?
– Which other visualization types would you feel the app could make
use of?
• Are x-axis unit labels easy to understand? If not, which ones would you
change and to what?
• Are y-axis limits labels suﬃcient to represent the whole y-axis? Would
horizontal lines(min, mid, max) ease visual understanding?
• Is it clear what the diﬀerent category colours represent? Graph legends?
Category names on blobs?
RESPONSIVENESS:
• Did you feel the app is responsive? If no, which parts should be improved?
• Did you ﬁnd the gestures intuitive:
– PINCH(horizontal) on temporal level views to resize
– PINCH(vertical) on container to ﬁt temporal views on the screen?
– PRESS 1-ﬁnger to show level options, add or remove
– PRESS 2-ﬁnger to ﬁlter categories
– TAP 1-ﬁnger on a period interval on temporal-level views to show
totals/sums
– PAN y-limit labels to scale y-axis
– PAN 1-ﬁnger to scroll/navigate on temporal level views
– PAN 1-ﬁnger to scroll vertically on container
GENERAL:
• Do you feel that the the top-bar view provides necessary info?
• What other datasets would you use the app to visualize?
• Do you feel the app aided in understanding your data?
• How easy was it to search-and-ﬁnd patterns using diﬀerent temporal lev-
els?
==PAGE:93==
Bibliography
[BD06]
Peter J Brockwell and Richard A Davis. Introduction to time series
and forecasting. Springer Science & Business Media, 2006.
[BOH11] Michael Bostock, Vadim Ogievetsky, and Jeﬀrey Heer. D3 data-driven
documents. Visualization and Computer Graphics, IEEE Transac-
tions on, 17(12):2301–2309, 2011.
[Bri01]
David R Brillinger. Time series: General. International Encyclopedia
of the Social & Behavioral Sciences. Berlin: Elsevier Science Ltd,
pages 5–6, 2001.
[CPL14]
Andrea Cuttone, Michael Kai Petersen, and Jakob Eg Larsen. Four
data visualization heuristics to facilitate reﬂection in personal infor-
matics. In Universal Access in Human-Computer Interaction. Design
for All and Accessibility Practice, pages 541–552. Springer, 2014.
[FH10]
BJ Fogg and Jason Hreha. Behavior wizard: a method for matching
target behaviors with solutions. In Persuasive technology, pages 117–
131. Springer, 2010.
[Fra16]
Benjamin Franklin. The Autobiography of Benjamin Franklin. Garden
City Publishing Company, 1916.
[HS01]
Harry Hochheiser and Ben Shneiderman. Interactive exploration of
time series data. In Discovery Science, pages 441–446. Springer, 2001.
[Huy15]
David F Huynh.
Timeline:
Web widget for visualizing temporal
data website. Accessed on-line at www.simile-widgets.org/timeline/
on July, 11:2015, 2015.
==PAGE:94==
80
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[LCJ13]
Jakob Eg Larsen, Andrea Cuttone, and Sune Lehmann Jørgensen.
Qs spiral: Visualizing periodic quantiﬁed self data.
In CHI 2013
Workshop on Personal Informatics in the Wild: Hacking Habits for
Health & Happiness, 2013.
[LDF10]
Ian Li, Anind Dey, and Jodi Forlizzi. A stage-based model of personal
informatics systems. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems, pages 557–566. ACM, 2010.
[Mil68]
Robert B Miller.
Response time in man-computer conversational
transactions. In Proceedings of the December 9-11, 1968, fall joint
computer conference, part I, pages 267–277. ACM, 1968.
[Nie94]
Jakob Nielsen. Usability engineering. Elsevier, 1994.
[Pal14]
Tomas Palsson. Visual exploration of quantied-self data using spiral
visualizations. 2014.
[TBC13]
Alice Thudt, Dominikus Baur, and Sheelagh Carpendale. Visits: A
spatiotemporal visualization of location histories. In Proceedings of
the eurographics conference on visualization, 2013.
[TGM83] Edward R Tufte and PR Graves-Morris. The visual display of quan-
titative information, volume 2. Graphics press Cheshire, CT, 1983.
[WBT13] Robert L Walter, Sergey Berezin, and Ankur Teredesai. Chronozoom:
travel through time for education, exploration, and information tech-
nology research. In Proceedings of the 2nd annual conference on Re-
search in information technology, pages 31–36. ACM, 2013.
[Wol09]
Gary Wolf. Know thyself: Tracking every facet of life, from sleep to
mood to pain. Wired Magazine, 24(7):92–95, 2009.
