==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Master’s Thesis in Computational Biology
Spatial and Genetic Interactions
Inﬂuencing Human Gene Expression
Author:
Pascal Timshel
Supervisors:
Henrik Bjørn Nielsen, PhD
Tune H. Pers, PhD
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
Center for Biological Sequence Analysis
Department of Systems Biology
Technical University of Denmark
Hirschhorn Laboratory
Harvard Medical School
Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard
November 2015
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Systems Biology
Center for Biological Sequence Analysis
Kemitorvet, Building 208
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 45 25 24 77
www.cbs.dtu.dk
cbs@cbs.dtu.dk
Danish title:
Spatiale- og genetiske interaktioners indflydelse på human genekspression
==PAGE:3==
ii
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) successfully identiﬁed thousands of loci
harbouring genetic variants associated with common human diseases and traits.
GWAS has elucidated novel biological disease mechanisms, but have so far been
limited to single-locus associations. Single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) are
often modeled as having independent additive eﬀects on the phenotype, neglecting
any interaction eﬀects between SNPs. Epistasis (that is, the statistical interaction
between SNPs) has been demonstrated to prevail in model organisms such as yeast,
but results have been limited in human studies.
Our knowledge of the mechanisms that can cause epistasis is still very incomplete.
Arguably, large-scale detection of epistasis has previously been too technically
challenging owing to statistical and computational issues - the combinatorial
explosion of statistical tests becomes intractable when considering a genome scan
of all two-loci interactions. Thus, eﬃcient computational methods using a priori
biological knowledge are needed to constrain the search space for epistasis.
Recent advances in chromosome conformation capture techniques, such as the
Hi-C, have generated 3D maps of the human genome. With this a new paradigm
in genome biology has emerged: genomes are organized around gene regulatory
factors that govern cell identity. This has left a hitherto unexplored territory of
relationships between spatial and genetic factors.
My thesis aims to uncover regulatory molecular mechanisms that can cause epistatic
interactions inﬂuencing human gene expression. I hypothesize that physical prox-
imity of interacting genomic regions provides a spatial scaﬀold to identify genetic
interactions in human genotyping data. Speciﬁcally, I focus on the question whether
spatial interacting genomic loci do enrich for epistasis. To the best of my knowledge,
this is the ﬁrst work that connects 3D genome maps and genetic data to guide the
search for epistasis.
By leveraging data integration of genome-wide genetic, transcriptomic and Hi-C
data, I developed a novel computational framework for performing enrichment
analysis of “spatial epistasis” using a priori biological knowledge. I argue that
the framework can be generalized to support more advanced statistical models of
epistasis and, more importantly, alternative biological priors to drive the search for
interacting SNPs.
The hypothesis was tested under diﬀerent scenarios of spatial epistasis, including
genome structures from multiple cell lines. For one of the cell lines tested, I
identiﬁed enrichment of spatial epistasis. However, the signal was eliminated,
after more thorough quality control of the data. I conclude that this study was
underpowered to detect epistasis at this scale. Nevertheless, these results does not
support the existence of prevailing epistasis inﬂuencing human gene expression. It
remains inconclusive whether spatially interacting genomic regions are enriched for
epistasis, and ultimately, there is no evidence to deﬁnitively reject or accept the
spatial epistasis hypothesis.
==PAGE:5==
iv
==PAGE:6==
Resumé
Såkaldte ”genome-wide” associations studier (GWAS) har med stor succes iden-
tiﬁceret tusindvis af loci husende genetiske varianter associeret med udbredte
humane sygedomme og egenskaber.
GWAS har opdaget nye biologiske syg-
domsmekanismer, men har indtil videre været begrænset til enkelt-locus asso-
ciationer. Enkeltnukleotid-polymorﬁer, eller SNPs, modelleres ofte som uafhængige
additive eﬀekter på fænotypen, hvor man ser bort fra genetiske interaktioner.
Genetiske modeller af epistasis (statistisk interaktion mellem SNPs) er ofte fremhævet
som mere biologisk realistisk, og dog har denne type model haft begrænset succes
med at detektere epistasis. En mulig forklaring på den udeblevne succes er, at
omfattende søgning efter epistasis førhen har været for teknisk krævende på grund
af de statistiske og beregningsmæssige udfordringer.
Dette speciale har til formål at opdage regulatoriske molekylære mekanismer, der
kan forsage epistatiske interaktioner med indﬂydelse på human genekspression. Jeg
opstiller hypotesen om “spatial epistasis”, hvor den fysiske afstand af interagerende
genetiske loci udformer en spatial platform, der kan benyttes til at identiﬁcere
genetiske interaktioners indﬂydelse på human genekspression. Jeg tester speciﬁkt
hypotesen om, at spatial interagerende genetiske loci er beriget for epistasis. Ud fra
min viden er dette arbejde det første til at koble genomets arkitektur og genetisk
data til at guide søgning efter epistasis.
Ved at benytte dataintegration af human genotype, genekspression og lokal 3D fold-
ning af kromosomer, udvikles et værktøj til at udføre spatial epistasis berigelsesanal-
yse. Analyserne udføres i ﬂere cellelinjer uden at ﬁnde robust tegn på epistasis. Det
negative fund kan med stor sandsynlighed tilskrives manglende statistisk styrke til
at detektere epistasis, grundet det beskedne antal individer inkluderet i dette studie.
Dog antyder disse resultater at genetiske interaktioners indﬂydelse på human genek-
spression ikke er omfattende udbredt. I sidste ende forbliver det usikkert hvorvidt
spatial interagerende genetiske regioner beriger for epistasis, eftersom der ikke er
evidens til endegyldigt at forkaste eller acceptere spatial epistasis hypotesen.
==PAGE:7==
vi
==PAGE:8==
Preface
“We used to have these boundaries of disciplines, the chemistry department in
the chemistry building, the biology department in the biology building, the math
department in the math building, the computer science department in the computer
science building. The young students coming in today, they have no respect for
these boundaries - and nor they should they. They just munge together. . . and that
is the right way to be .... People are now exploring the fusion cuisine that comes
out across all these diﬀerent disciplines. There has never been a more exciting time
to be a scientist.”
Eric Lander, Founder of the Broad Institute
Having studied the interaction of biology, statistics and computer science for the
preceding ﬁve years, it has been my privilege to work on this project. The project
is a great example of why I chose to work in the ﬁeld of computational biology.
Soon after having started at the university as biotechnology student, I became
interested in systems biology and bioinformatics. It seemed so natural to approach
the complexity of biological systems holistically and try to comprehend and predict
the way that the components of these systems interact∗. I was amazed and allured
by the fact that computational biologists could do experiments in front of their
computers. I quickly found myself spending more and more time on statistics and
computer science as a “Data Scientist”, to be able to explore and integrate the ﬂood
of biological information (“Big Data”) available today†.
My ﬁrst work within bioinformatics was centered around “omics” analysis of mi-
croorganisms. Although this was learningful experience, I wanted to venture out in
the complexity of analyzing human “omics” data, though I had no idea the genetics
would play such great role in my coming work‡.
I feel that there could not be a better way to work within systems biology and
genomics, than by studying epistasis inﬂuencing gene expression. The scale and
complexity of the problem is vast and the project have enabled me to apply and
extend my scientiﬁc skills in computational biology.
∗I was particularly hooked on the ﬁeld of systems biology after reading the intriguing paper by
Lazebnik (2002) and the book by Alon (2006).
† I apologize for using these two buzzwords in
one sentence, but I could not resist after having read “Data Scientist: The Sexiest Job of the
21st Century” by Davenport and Patil (Harvard Business Review, 2012)
‡ My mom, a clinical
doctor in genetics, was thrilled by my choice of this new ﬁeld. I can deﬁnitely see the irony in
this situation and relate to the saying “the acorn never falls far from the tree”.
==PAGE:9==
viii
==PAGE:10==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost I would like to thank Tune H. Pers for making my stay in Boston
a truly unforgettable experience - both professionally and personally. He helped
me make my dream of going to Boston come true and he made it a dream being
there. I have learned a lot through his mentorship and friendship.
Secondly, I would like to thank Joel Hirschhorn for welcoming me in his lab.
Without his sharp insights and helpful critique during this project, I would have
lost contact with the important scientiﬁc aspects. Joel inspires all his lab members
to do better science - something I hope to live up to in my future scientiﬁc career.
I would also like to thank the rest of the Hirschhorn lab members for their kindness
and assistance with scientiﬁc issues. Especially I owe great thanks to Tõnu Esko
for his friendship and providing me with data for the project (and smokey scotch
whisky); “Rigel” Yingleong Chan for our many humorous and stimulating scientiﬁc
discussions, and helping me apprehend the basics of human genetics; Christina
M. Astley for generating many of the good ideas for this project and providing
biological insights to my analysis (and not to forget, where and how to get good
coﬀee in Boston). Working at vibrant environment of Broad Institute of MIT
and Harvard has been an unforgettable experience and immensely intellectually
stimulating. It has been a great pleasure and honor to work alongside so many
experienced researches and young talents.
I am grateful to people at Broad Information Technology Services for their tireless
support and rapid responses to my countless number of late-hour emails. My
code would still be running if they had not empowered me with super computing
resources.
I would also like to thank my external collaborators that have provided assistance
and expert knowledge in domains outside my expertise. Thierry Schüpbach (Swiss
Institute of Technology) provided an improved and customized release of the most
essential software used in my thesis (FastEpistasis), along with his technical insights
of computer architectures to resolve bugs - both which have been instrumental
to this project. Ferhat Ay (University of Washington) helped me navigate the
fast-paced ﬁeld of 3D genome architecture and provided pre-processed Hi-C.
Thanks to Henrik Bjørn Nielsen for mentoring me through my honors master
programme at DTU. His encouraging comments and care for my well being have
been important throughout the last two years.
I also acknowledge the long list of Danish grants that provided ﬁnancial support to
my stay in Boston, so I could concentrate on my research. Especially thanks to the
Novo Nordisk for awarding me with their Scholarship Programme.
At last, and most importantly, a special thanks and appreciation to Simone, my
loving girlfriend, and the rest of my family for their overbearingness and omnipresent
support in all of my life’s projects.
==PAGE:11==
x
==PAGE:12==
Abbreviations
Cohorts
EGCUT
Estonian Genome Center of the University of Tartu
Genetics
MAF
Minor Allele Frequency
QC
Quality Control
eQTL
expression Quantitative Trait Loci
GWAS
Genome-Wide Association Study
==PAGE:13==
xii
==PAGE:14==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Thesis Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Uncovering the Epistatic Needles in Genome-Wide Haystacks . . . .
2
1.3
Aims and Approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Epistasis
5
2.1
Deﬁnition of Epistasis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Biological Epistasis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.2
Statistical Epistasis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.3
Biological vs. Statistical Epistasis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Models of Epistasis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.1
Saturated Genotype Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.2
Multiplicative “allelic” model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Evidence of Epistasis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Spatial Organization of the Human Genome
13
3.1
Experimental methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Hi-C data analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3
Genome Contact Maps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.4
The hierarchy of the 3D genome . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.5
A New Representation of the Human Genome . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4
Spatial Epistasis Hypothesis
25
4.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2
Hypothesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.3
Biological Mechanisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5
Datasets
31
5.1
Genotypes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.1.1
Genotyping and Imputation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.1.2
Data Pre-processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.1.3
Quality Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.2
Gene Expression
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.2.1
Array Platform . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.2.2
Data Transformation and PEER Analysis
. . . . . . . . . .
32
5.2.3
Probe Annotation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.3
Hi-C data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.3.1
hESC and hIMR90 cell lines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.3.2
K562 cell line . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
==PAGE:15==
xiv
CONTENTS
6
Design Choices and Implementation
35
6.1
Design Principles and Generalizability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.2
Computational Feasibility
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.2.1
Data Subsetting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.3
Epistasis Search and FastEpistasis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.3.1
Model Deﬁnition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.3.2
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.4
Empirical Enrichment of Spatial Epistasis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.4.1
Empirical P-value . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.4.2
Null Distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6.4.3
Mathematical Formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.5
Computational Pipeline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
7
Results
47
7.1
Replication of Hemani et al. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
7.2
Spatial Proximate Epistasis Enrichment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
7.2.1
Cell Type-speciﬁc Spatial Epistasis Enrichment
. . . . . . .
48
7.2.2
Dubious Epistasis underlying hIMR90 Enrichment . . . . . .
50
8
Discussion
53
9
Conclusion
57
A Supplementary Methods
61
A.1 Population Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
A.1.1
Population Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
A.2 PEER Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
A.2.1
Bayesian Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
A.2.2
Running PEER . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
A.2.3
PEER in Practice - Lessons Learned
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
A.2.4
PEER Analysis on EGCUT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
A.3 Hi-C Data Exploration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
A.3.1
K562 cell line . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
A.3.2
Dixon et al. data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
B Supplementary Analysis and Results
81
B.1 Examples of Hemani et al. Epistatic SNP-probe Pairs . . . . . . . .
81
B.2 Spatial Epistasis Enrichment Histograms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
B.3 Minimum GCC Filter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
B.4 Deeper Insights into the hIMR90 Spatial Epistasis Enrichment . . .
88
B.5 Epistasis Tables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
C Source Code
95
C.1 GitHub Meta-analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
C.2 Source Code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
D Glossary
99
==PAGE:16==
CONTENTS
xv
References
101
==PAGE:17==
xvi
CONTENTS
==PAGE:18==
1
Introduction
Human geneticists in the post-genomic era have worked intensively on understanding
the genetic code. The advent of high-throughput sequencing technology has resulted
in the ability to measure millions of genetic variants from thousands of individuals.
These high-dimensional data have paved the way for enhancing our understanding
of disease etiology, but our current genetic models have far from embraced full
complexity of the genome. In this chapter I motivate a more complete genetic
model through the study of epistasis, which will be the main topic throughout this
thesis. Finally, I describe the aims and approaches of this thesis.
1.1
Thesis Structure
My thesis consists of 9 chapters. The ﬁrst two chapters familiarizes the reader
with the background theory and literature for this thesis.Chapter 2 presents the
deﬁnition of epistasis and a general genotype model. The chapter provides the
framework for the statistical models used in this thesis for epistasis discovery.
Chapter 3 introduces the spatial organization of the human genome along with the
chromosome capture conformation experimental technologies. The aim is to give
an overview of the fast moving ﬁeld and most recent discoveries. The 3D map of
the human genome will serve as the scaﬀold for bringing together genotypes and
gene expression, into a broader perspective of regulatory biology. In Chapter 4
I explain and justify the “spatial epistasis” hypothesis - the main hypothesis of
my thesis. Chapter 5 presents the main methods and data sets used for this work.
The implementation of the methods and illustration of the main computational
workﬂow is given in Chapter 6. I have deliberately chosen to keep the technical and
algorithmic description of the computational infrastructure to a minimum, even
though this constituted a major part of my project (as evident in from my GitHub
repository, Appendix C). The main results of this thesis is presented in Chapter 7
and discussed in Chapter 8, followed by a brief outline the possible future directions.
Chapter 9 concludes my thesis and summarizes its the main contributions.
My thesis contains a relatively comprehensive appendix. Appendix A contains the
supplementary methods and describes selected pre-processing steps of the expression
and Hi-C data. Supplementary analysis and results are given in Appendix B.
Appendix C contains an overview of the code development in this thesis along with
selected source code. A glossary can be found in Appendix D.
Words printed with this special font can be found in the glossary. Occasionally I
squeeze in footnotes - for the most part you may just ignore them∗.
∗As you will learn, I mostly used footnotes to endure writing this thesis by keeping me entertained
- I cannot guarantee that you will enjoy them in the same way.
==PAGE:19==
2
Introduction
1.2
Uncovering the Epistatic Needles in Genome-
Wide Haystacks
Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identiﬁed a plethora of trait-
associated polymorphisms. Genetic models often model single-nucleotide polymor-
phisms (SNPs) eﬀect on the phenotype as additive and independent main eﬀects.
However, it is argued that this is not a realistic biological model and that epistasis
(statistical interactions between SNPs) should be included. In this section I will
highlight some of the motivations for including epistasis in genetic models and the
implications of epistasis.
Firstly, searching for epistasis aligns well with the objectives of GWAS. The aims
and eﬀorts of GWAS can be described in two main categories. The ﬁrst is to
use knowledge of the causal variants to elucidate the biological and biochemical
pathways that underpin disease - that is, to understand biology. The second is to
improve prediction of phenotypic outcomes by leveraging estimated genetic eﬀects.
If epistasis contributes notably to the genetic architecture of a trait, then detection
of epistasis will be valuable to both of the objectives of GWASs. Epistasis have also
perspectives that extends beyond GWAS: the great promise of personal genomics
and precision medicine calls for advancements of our current incomplete genetic
models (Greene et al., 2010; Moore and Williams, 2009; Weigelt and Reis-Filho,
2014). One step forward is to enhance the detection of epistasis.
Secondly, epistasis may be a key factor in explaining heritability of traits. Most
variants identiﬁed by GWAS are characterized by weak eﬀects on the phenotype,
and explain only a small proportion of trait heritability, leading to question how
the remaining, “missing heritability” can be explained (Manolio et al., 2009; Eichler
et al., 2010).
The mystery of the missing heritability have haunted the ﬁeld
of genetics for more than a decade now (Maher, 2008), and have even been
referenced to as the “dark matter of the genome” by NIH director Francis Collins
(Collins, 2010) - an analogy to the immense quantities of invisible mass in the
universe that astrophysicists have inferred but have struggled to ﬁnd. The (broad
sense) heritability of a trait is deﬁned as the ratio (i) variation attributable to
genetics (numerator), to (ii) total variance in a population for that particular
trait (denominator) (Visscher, Hill, and Wray, 2008). The predominant view
among geneticists has been that the explanation for missing heritability lies in
the numerator - that is, in as-yet undiscovered variants (Gibson, 2012). However,
recent theoretical work by Zuk et al. (2012) suggests that the absence of epistasis
in genetic models can explain most of the missing heritability.
Thirdly, studying epistasis is an important factor for closing the gap between
genetics and systems biology (Aylor and Zeng, 2008; Moore and Williams, 2005).
Systems biologists consider cellular dynamics and development as controlled by
interactions between biological components - a portion of these interactions are
genetically determined. Human geneticists need better and more sophisticated
genome-scale models of the network of genes and regulatory elements, and of
how they interact to produce a phenotype. As an example of the complexity
and interaction of genetic systems, consider the ﬁndings by Westra et al. (2013):
expression of hundreds of human genes is controlled by several trans-acting genetic
==PAGE:20==
1.3 Aims and Approaches
3
variants.
On a personal note, I think of epistasis as one of the important unsolved problems
in genetics. Throughout my involvement in the ﬁeld of human genetics, I have
witnessed dozens of debates around epistasis and its limited evidence. However,
relatively little eﬀort has been made to detect epistasis in humans∗(Mackay and
Moore, 2014). One of the motivating factors for my interest in epistasis was the
luring challenge: on the imaginary tree with “genetic fruits”, SNPs with linear
main eﬀects on the phenotype will be the low-hanging genetic fruits, while SNPs
with nonlinear eﬀects will be the high-hanging genetic fruits, hidden in the tree
crown (along the other complex genotype-to-phenotype relationships, such as
environmental interactions). My hope with thesis is to contribute to the debate
and help settle the dispute “epistasis - undiscovered nuggets or fool’s gold?”.
Then Why Study Human Gene Expression?
By now, I hope you have
worked up an appetite for the coming Chapter 2 on page 5 about epistasis†. Since
this thesis studies epistasis inﬂuencing human gene expression, I will brieﬂy motivate
why expression phenotypes are interesting.
Genetic associations with gene expression have been reported to exhibit very large
eﬀect sizes (Powell et al., 2013), making them good candidates to search for epistasis.
This is in contrast to the small eﬀect sizes observed for most complex diseases.
GWAS have been used to study a wide range of traits and diseases. The results of
such eﬀorts are directly interpretable, for example SNPs associated with BMI, may
on average add 0.1 BMI units (kg per m2)(Locke et al., 2015) per BMI-increasing
allele or Crohn’s disease risk alleles may confer odds ratios of up to 2.66 (Franke
et al., 2010). The eﬀect of a genetic variant on a trait or disease has to be mediated
by cellular, tissue, and organ phenotypes. Many GWAS variants do not change
coding sequences (Gusev et al., 2014), suggesting that SNPs exert phenotypic
control by modifying gene expression. Hence, the genetics of gene expression is
central to understanding of the genetic basis of complex traits.
1.3
Aims and Approaches
Before you delve deeper into this thesis, I want to clearly state the main contribu-
tions, problem deﬁnitions and hypothesis put forth in this thesis.
The overarching aim of my thesis is to uncover molecular mechanisms that can
cause epistatic interactions. I will focus on how spatial and genetic interactions
inﬂuence human gene expression. Speciﬁcally, my thesis sets out to answer the
following questions:
∗A simple search in PubMed for the terms “Epistasis” AND “Human” yielded just under 1,650
entries (as of November 2015), but many of these do not relate directly to results in humans but
model systems. For comparison, the terms “GWAS” AND “Human” yielded twice the number of
entries.
† I promise you, it is going to be a royal feast of biological and statistical insights. But
please leave room for the dessert on page 47. And maybe, if you are not completely stuﬀed, help
your self at the Appendix A buﬀet.
==PAGE:21==
4
Introduction
1. What are the regulatory molecular mechanisms that cause epistasis? In
particular, are the mechanisms responsible for folding of the genome involved
in epistatic interactions?
2. Can regulatory molecular mechanisms facilitate identiﬁcation of epistatic
eﬀects in human complex traits and in particular gene expression endopheno-
types?
3. To which extent does epistasis inﬂuences human gene expression?
I propose a novel computational framework to address these questions, by searching
for statistical epistasis while targeting a mechanistic biological hypothesis. To
this end, I will use high-dimensional biological data to shed light on regulatory
biology. Typically, genetic and expression data have been explored in a linear 1D
context, but the advent of 3D maps of the human genome allows for new integrative
approaches. I will leverage data integration of genomic 3D maps, genetic and
expression data to detect epistasis, and ultimately test the main hypothesis of this
thesis described in further into my thesis (Chapter 4).
==PAGE:22==
2
Epistasis
Because epistasis plays such a big part of my thesis∗a clear deﬁnition of epistasis
is needed. This chapter will introduce biological and statistical epistasis, and
highlight the diﬀerence between the two deﬁnitions. Next I will present two models
of epistasis. This chapter is concluded with a discussion of the present evidence of
epistasis aﬀecting human complex traits.
2.1
Deﬁnition of Epistasis
Informally, epistasis means that something diﬀerent take place when a particular set
of alleles from diﬀerent loci are found together than when they are apart. Although
this general deﬁnition holds true for all variations of epistasis, there is a need for
a more speciﬁc introduction. This is evident in the literature of genetics, where
there has been confusion over deﬁnitions and interpretations of epistasis (Phillips,
2008; Cordell, 2002). This section provides a historical background and presents
two diﬀerent deﬁnitions of epistasis: biological and statistical.
2.1.1
Biological Epistasis
The term “epistatic”, which translates as “standing upon” (Moore and Williams,
2005), was ﬁrst used in 1909 by geneticist William Bateson (Bateson, 1909) to
describe the phenomenon where an allele at one locus masks the eﬀects of alleles
at one or more other loci. Figure 2.1 shows the concept of biological epistasis in
the classical sweet pea experiment conducted by Bateson and R. C. Punnett. It
is possible to cross two white ﬂowers and recover purple ﬂowers in the oﬀspring.
It was during the studies of the non-Mendelian segregation ratios (9:7 ratio of
purple to white ﬂowers) resulting from dihybrid crosses of the pea plants, that
Bateson coined the word “epistasis” (Miko, 2008). The two genes, C and P, are
responsible for producing the purple plant pigment anthocyanin from a precursor
molecule. The two gene products operates within a single biochemical pathway,
hence mutations in gene C mask the eﬀect of a mutation in gene P; gene C is said
to be epistatic to gene P.
A more explicit deﬁnition of Bateson’s deﬁnition of epistasis is shown in Figure 2.2.
In this example, the two loci, A and B, inﬂuence the hair color trait in mice. Locus
A and B have two possible alleles, A or a and B or b, respectively. The ﬁgure
illustrates that independent of the genotype at locus A, mice with any copies of the
B allele have grey coat color, that is allele B is dominant to allele b. Similarly, at
locus A allele A, producing black coat, is dominant to allele a. More importantly,
∗In a meticulous word count I found 164 instances of the word “epistasis”. So I encourage you to
familiarize yourself with the deﬁnition of epistasis before heading any deeper into my thesis.
==PAGE:23==
6
Epistasis
Figure 2.1: Bateson and Punnett classical sweet pea experiment. Illustration
taken from Phillips (2008).
if the genotype at locus B is diﬀerent from b/b, then the eﬀect at locus A is not
detectable, i.e. that eﬀect at locus A is masked by that of locus B; locus B is said
to be epistatic to locus A.
==PAGE:24==
2.1 Deﬁnition of Epistasis
7
a/a
a/A
A/A
b/b
b/B
B/B
Figure 2.2: Genotype-phenotype map. Example of coat color of mice obtained
from diﬀerent genotypes at two loci. The two loci, A and B are acting epistatically
under Bateson’s (1909) deﬁnition of epistasis.
2.1.2
Statistical Epistasis
In the ﬁeld of quantitative genetics, R.A. Fisher developed another deﬁnition
of epistasis, or “epistacy”, as Fisher referred to it. Fisher deﬁned epistasis as a
departure from the additive expectation of allelic eﬀects (Fisher, 1919). This
deﬁnition is closer to the conventional concept of statistical interaction: departure
from a speciﬁc linear model describing the relationship between predictive variables.
In Section 2.2 on the next page, the concept of epistasis and statistical models will
be treated more in depth.
2.1.3
Biological vs. Statistical Epistasis
It is important to stress that Fisher’s deﬁnition is not equivalent to Bateson’s
1909 deﬁnition. The ﬁnding of epistasis in the biological context (e.g. from a
segregation experiment of sweet pea cross) does not guarantee that there will be
epistasis in the statistical sense. Even more troubling, lack of epistasis in the
statistical sense does not mean that there are no relevant interactions between loci
in the stricter biological sense (Phillips, 2008). Statistical epistasis is a pattern of
genotype-phenotype relationships that results from genetic variation in a population,
whereas biological epistasis happens at the cellular level in an individual. Bateson’s
deﬁnition is based on the criteria that one locus is “acting” while the other locus
“modiﬁes”, suggesting asymmetric roles of two interacting loci. In Fisher’s deﬁnition,
the asymmetry between loci is absent.
In the chapters that follows, it should be clear that I adapt the statistical deﬁnition
of epistasis to detect it (Chapter 6). However, the hypothesis proposed in Chapter 1
==PAGE:25==
8
Epistasis
is clearly reaches beyond mere statistical associations and seeks to describe the
molecular interactions that can cause epistatic interactions. As proposed by Phillips
(2008), this meaning of epistasis is best deﬁned as “functional epistasis”. However,
throughout this thesis, I will use “epistasis” in its broadest sense to refer to the
dependence of the outcome of a mutation on the genetic background.
2.2
Models of Epistasis
In this section I introduce the most generic linear genotype model. I will focus on a
special case of this model, called the multiplicative genotype model, which will be
used for further analyses in this thesis. It is beyond the scope of this text to present
vast amount genetic models∗that model epistasis. For three excellent reviews on
models and detection of epistasis in human complex traits see Wei, Hemani, and
Haley (2014), Cordell (2009), and Upton et al. (2015).
2.2.1
Saturated Genotype Model
The saturated genotype model is perhaps the most commonly used parameterization
of a two locus genetic model (Cordell, 2002). Table 2.1 illustrates the saturated
two locus genotype model for biallelic loci A and B. It is known as a “saturated”
model because it is fully parameterized: there are nine two-locus genotype classes,
which are modeled by nine parameters. These parameters may be estimated to ﬁt
the observed nine two-locus phenotype values exactly. No other model exists that
can improve the ﬁt the observed phenotypes. All other models can be considered
as sub- or nested models of this general model (Walters, Laurin, and Lubke, 2014,
supplementary material). As such, recessive, dominant and allelic multiplicative
models are contained within the general model and can be considered special cases
of the model. The saturated model provides the best possible ﬁt to the observed
data, with the downside that it includes many parameters. In statistics, we are often
interested in comparing the full model to its nested sub-models, that is determining
whether a model with fewer parameters provide an equally good goodness of ﬁt.
For example, to test whether the interaction terms are required at all, we may use
the 4 degree of freedom (df) test of interaction (i11 = i12 = i21 = i22 = 0). To
reduce the df and thereby increase power, we may make parameter restrictions to
the model (while retaining one or more interaction parameters)(Marchini, Donnelly,
and Cardon, 2005). In Section 2.2.2 on the facing page we shall see one example of
reducing the df and derive at the multiplicative “allelic” model.
One common issue with the saturated genotype model is that empty cells in the
contingency table will invalidate the interaction test because of reduced df. This
issues may arise when considering rare variants or small sample sizes, where no
individuals have a combined genotype. The problem increases dramatically when
modeling higher-order interactions. One solution is to increase the sample size, but
∗For example, in the meticulous work by Li and Reich (2000), they arrive at 102 non-redundant
biallelic two-locus, two-phenotype, fully penetrant disease models.
==PAGE:26==
2.2 Models of Epistasis
9
this may not be practically possible. Another option is to use assume additivity
within a locus, as shown in Section 2.2.2.
Genotype
Locus B
b/b
b/B
B/B
Locus A
a/a
α
α + γ1
α + γ2
a/A
α + β1
α + β1 + γ1 + i11
α + β1 + γ2 + i12
A/A
α + β2
α + β2 + γ1 + i21
α + β2 + γ2 + i22
Table 2.1: Saturated two locus genotype model, with the biallelic loci A (alleles a
and A) and B (alleles b and B). α represents the “baseline” or reference genotype
eﬀect, aabb; β1 and β2 represent the eﬀects replacing one or both a alleles at locus
A with A allele; γ1 and γ2 represent the eﬀects replacing one or both b alleles at
locus B with B allele; i11, i12, i21 and i22 are interaction eﬀects.
2.2.2
Multiplicative “allelic” model
Let us now consider a restriction of the saturated genotype model that converts
the nine-parameter “genotype” model into a four parameter multiplicative “allelic”
model. We assume alleles act additively within a locus, which corresponds to
assuming
β2 = 2β1
γ2 = 2γ1
i12 = i21 = 2i11
i22 = 4i11
The resulting four parameter model in shown in Table 2.2. We may also express
the model mathematically by the linear model
M1 : y = α + β1 · SNPA + γ1 · SNPB + i11 · SNPA · SNPB
(2.1)
where y is a quantitative phenotype, SNPA and SNPB are variables taking values
(0, 1, 2) according to the number of copies of risk alleles at locus A and B respectively.
Figure 2.3 shows diﬀerent scenarios of epistasis under the multiplicative model.
This model contains a single interaction parameter i11 that may be freely estimated.
To test for epistasis, we set i11 = 0,
M2 : y = α + β1 · SNPA + γ1 · SNPB
(2.2)
and compare the goodness of ﬁt of M1 and M2 using a likelihood-ratio test.
Depending on the software used for testing for epistasis, alternative implementations
of the statistical test may be used (see Section 6.3.1 on page 38). An workﬂow for
ﬁtting the multiplicative model to genotype data using the likelihood-ratio test
is presented in Listing C.2 on page 97 (code written in the statistical language
R).
==PAGE:27==
10
Epistasis
Genotype
Locus B
b/b
b/B
B/B
Locus A
a/a
α
α + γ1
α + 2γ1
a/A
α + β1
α + β1 + γ1 + i11
α + β1 + 2γ1 + 2i11
A/A
α + 2β1
α + 2β1 + γ1 + 2i11
α + 2β1 + 2γ1 + 4i11
Table 2.2: Multiplicative “allelic” model. The biallelic loci A and B have a
multiplicative eﬀect, where the presence of homozygous AABB alleles results in a
4-unit eﬀect on the phenotype compared to the heterozygous AaBb alleles. This
model has four parameters to ﬁt, as compared to the nine parameter saturated
model shown in Table 2.1 on page 9.









0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0
1
2
SNP A
y
(a) β1 = 0; γ1 = 0.3; i11 = 0









0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
0
1
2
SNP A
y
SNP B



0
1
2
(b) β1 = 0.1; γ1 = 0.3; i11 = 0









0
1
2
0
1
2
SNP A
y
(c) β1 = 0.1; γ1 = 0.3; i11 = 0.5









−0.4
−0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0
1
2
SNP A
y
(d) β1 = 0.1; γ1 = 0.3; i11 = −0.3
Figure 2.3: Multiplicative models of two biallelic loci A and B. The plots in the top
panel ((a) and (b)) have no epistatic term, whereas the plots in the bottom panel
((c) and (d)) have a multiplicative epistatic eﬀect. Geometrically, multiplicative
epistasis corresponds to non-parallel lines. The ﬁgures were generated from the
model in Equation (2.1) with α = 0, β, γ and i11 as shown below the plots. See
Listing C.1 for source code.
==PAGE:28==
2.3 Evidence of Epistasis
11
2.3
Evidence of Epistasis
The extent to which epistasis inﬂuences human complex traits remains highly
debated. The skeptics of epistasis’ importance argue that additive genetic eﬀects
often account for more than half of the total genetic variance, leaving little room for
non-additive epistatic variance (Hill, Goddard, and Visscher, 2008). The skepticism
is further fueled by the lack of empirical ﬁndings of epistasis. Advocates for epistasis’
importance in the genetic architecture of complex traits, point to the evidence of
pervasive epistasis in model organisms (Mackay, 2014; Carlborg and Haley, 2004).
For example, a large-scale study in Saccharomyces cerevisiae examined 5.4 million
gene-gene pairs and found that ∼3% of the interactions have signiﬁcant eﬀects
(Costanzo et al., 2010). Other studies have shown similar results (Brem et al., 2005;
Tong et al., 2004).
One likely explanation for the absence of robust epistasis ﬁndings in humans, is that
the statistical power to detect it is, in principle, much lower than that of detecting
main eﬀects. Wei, Hemani, and Haley (2014) identiﬁed three primary challenges
related to this issue. Firstly, and of most importance, the “curse of dimensionality”
implies a higher multiple testing penalty caused by the large search space for
e.g. two-locus interactions. Secondly, dependence on high linkage disequilibrium∗
between the causal and observed variants is much higher for genetic interactions,
compared to additive eﬀects. Considering a pair of variants where none of the
causal SNPs are genotyped, the use of tag-SNPs to detect the true interaction leads
to a dramatic drop in statistical power. Thirdly, the increased model complexity
of epistatic models requires more parameters to ﬁt, and hence more degrees of
freedom when assessing statistical signiﬁcance of the model terms.
Despite these challenges, some attempts have been made to detect large-scale robust
epistasis in humans. Hemani et al. (2014) provided the pioneering large-scale study
of epistasis in humans inﬂuencing gene expression. Using specialized GPU software
(Hemani et al., 2011) and large high performance computing facilities, the authors
carried out an exhaustive pairwise epistasis scan, investigating more than 1015
SNP-pairs. The authors reported 30 epistatic SNP-pairs aﬀecting 19 diﬀerent
gene transcripts. Since its publication, the study has been widely disputed. In
a commentary, Wood et al. (2014) provided an alternative explanation of the
“apparent epistasis”, reporting that all of the epistatic variants could be explained
by the presence of a single untyped variant in linkage disequilibrium with one of the
epistatic SNPs. Almost all the non-additive genetic variation were eliminated when
adjusting for the eﬀect of this causal variant. In summary, at present there remains
little hard evidence for prevailing epistasis aﬀecting complex traits in humans.
∗Linkage disequilibrium (LD) is the non-random association of alleles at diﬀerent loci. A simple
measure of LD is the correlation between alleles.
==PAGE:29==
12
Epistasis
==PAGE:30==
3
Spatial Organization
of the Human Genome
The discovery of the DNA double helix (Watson and Crick, 1953) unlocked the
basic structure of DNA. DNA need extremely tight packaging in order to ﬁt within
the nucleus, while at the same time DNA stay accessible to various proteins, to
facilitate biological processes such as replication and transcription.
We often think of the genome as a linear object, but in reality chromosomes
are folded in a highly complex fashion. For example, many cis-acting regulatory
elements (e.g. enhancer elements) are located distal to their promoter targets, but
need to come within close physical proximity via folding and looping.
It is becoming increasingly clear that apart from enabling compactness of the genetic
material, the 3D structure of the genome is also important for regulating gene
expression. Hence, understanding the spatial organization of the human genome
is critical for understanding regulatory mechanisms within the cell. With the
advent of high-throughput sequencing technology, we can now study genome-wide
chromosome conformation using a technique called Hi-C∗.
In this chapter I will familiarize the reader with the most basic concepts of chromatin
organization and give a brief overview of experimental techniques used to explore
the chromatin structure. I will discuss the folding of the genome and its role
in regulating gene expression. My hope is you will learn some new surprising
facts about the topology of the genome†. It is beyond scope of this text to give a
comprehensive review of the plethora of exciting biological phenomenons the Hi-C
technique has already unlocked. To this end, I highly recommend the excellent
reviews by Gibcus and Dekker (2013), Dekker, Marti-Renom, and Mirny (2013),
Fraser et al. (2015), and Sexton and Cavalli (2015).
3.1
Experimental methods
In the past decade, with the introduction and development of Chromosome Confor-
mation Capture (3C) technologies, it has been possible to get insight into how the
genome folds by interrogating physical interactions within the genome.
The original 3C technique described in Dekker et al. (2002), was the ﬁrst molecular
assay to study genome organization. In classical 3C experiments the contents of
the nucleus are cross-linked with formaldehyde, forming covalent bonds between
physically proximal parts of chromatin. The chromatin is then digested with a
∗I learned about Hi-C during my stay at the Broad Institute where the technique was developed.
It was a mind-boggling experience to learn about this new paradigm in genome biology; like the
many other ingenious discoveries by “Broadies”.
† and maybe even inspire you - just as I was -
to test new hypotheses related to the folding of the genome.
==PAGE:31==
14
Spatial Organization of the Human Genome
restriction enzyme, and the fragments ligated (hereafter referred to as hybrid DNA).
The hybrid DNA represents pairwise interactions (physical 3D contacts). Finally
the crosslinks are then reversed, proteins are degraded and the DNA is puriﬁed.
The result is a 3C library consisting of stretches of DNA combining two fragments
from two distinct genomic locations. In classical 3C experiments, these interactions
are detected by PCR one at the time using locus-speciﬁc primers. This technique
can be extremely laborious when studying interactions for even a small part of the
genome.
More high-throughput 3C-based technologies have since been developed, including
Chromosome Conformation Capture-on-Chip (4C) (Simonis et al., 2006), Chro-
mosome Conformation Capture Carbon Copy (5C) (Dostie et al., 2006) and Hi-C
(Lieberman-Aiden et al., 2009). These methods use 3C as the principal methodology
by which they capture genomic interactions and diﬀer only in the way they detect
and quantify the hybrid DNA (Figure 3.1). Hi-C was the ﬁrst method for unbiased
sampling genome-wide physical interactions and hence provide a complete map
of the folding genome. There are also noteworthy extensions of Hi-C, such as
single-cell Hi-C Nagano et al. (2013), in situ Hi-C (Rao et al., 2014) and Capture
Hi-C (Mifsud et al., 2015).
Because the data used in this thesis was generated using the Hi-C technique, the
remainder of this chapter will focus on this particular ﬂavor of the 3C technologies.
The below description follows the original Hi-C protocol published by (Lieberman-
Aiden et al., 2009; Berkum et al., 2010) (Figure 3.2).
3C
One-by-one
PCR 
4C
One-by-all
Inverse PCR
sequencing
5C
Many-by-many
Multiplexed LMA
sequencing
• Biotin labelling
of ends 
• DNA shearing
Hi-C
All-by-all
Sequencing
Experiment
Capture
relationship
Detection
method 
Hybrid DNA
fragment
Figure 3.1: Overview of 3C-based techniques. The techniques diﬀer in detection
methodology (qPCR, DNA microarrays or DNA sequencing), and the selection
criteria and ampliﬁcation of the hybrid DNA (shown as blue and red circular DNA).
Illustration modiﬁed from Dekker, Marti-Renom, and Mirny (2013).
Hi-C protocol
In Hi-C experiments, the chromatin is treated with formaldehyde
to create protein–DNA and protein–protein interactions. The DNA is subsequently
digested with the HindIII restriction enzyme. The digested DNA (hereafter referred
to as DNA segments) is ligated in the presence of biotin-labeled nucleotides in
a diluted environment and then treated with exonuclease to digest linear DNAs
but leave DNA loops protected. The DNA is sheared using sonication, and the
==PAGE:32==
3.2 Hi-C data analysis
15
biotinylated hybrid DNA fragments (to be distinguished from DNA segments) are
pulled down with Streptavidin beads to enrich for DNA fragments containing a
ligation junction. The hybrid DNA fragments are PCR ampliﬁed using generic
primers, and subjected to paired-end sequencing. Each hybrid fragment identiﬁes a
potential interaction between two loci based on where the two ends of each fragment
are mapped to the genome.
Figure 3.2:
The Hi-C protocol published in Lieberman-Aiden et al. (2009).
Illustration borrowed from Berkum et al. (2010).
3.2
Hi-C data analysis
Analyzing Hi-C data comes with a unique set of computational challenges that
need to be overcome in order to uncover the 3D folding of the genome. In this
section I will explain the major data analysis steps and challenges when going from
raw sequence reads to interpretable maps of the genome. See Belton et al. (2012),
Lajoie, Dekker, and Kaplan (2014), and Ay and Noble (2015) for a more technical
and comprehensive review on this topic.
Step 1: Read Mapping
The output of the Hi-C experiment is paired-end sequences from the two ends
of the Hi-C ligation products. However, the paired-end mode of standard read
alignment algorithms (e.g. Bowtie (Langmead et al., 2009)) cannot be used because
they assume that two ends lie relatively close to each other. Hence each side of the
paired end read must be mapped separately to the reference genome.
Step 2: Fragment ﬁltering
Read pairs for which both ends successfully pass through the initial mapping ﬁlters
are further segregated into two categories: informative and non-informative pairs.
The genomic alignment location of each mapped read is assigned to one of the
restriction fragments. The restriction fragments can be calculated by in silico
digestion of the reference genome with the restriction enzyme used in the Hi-C
experiment. Mapped reads position should fall close to a restriction site. Any read
that lies far away from a restriction site cannot be a true ligation product and is
subsequently ﬁltered out.
==PAGE:33==
16
Spatial Organization of the Human Genome
If the read pair maps to the same restriction fragment, it can either represent a
self-circularized ligation product or an un-ligated “dangling end” product. Each
of these two cases are considered non-informative, and are therefore ﬁltered out.
Finally the read pairs are ﬁltered to remove any redundant PCR artifacts.
Step 3: Aggregating and Binning
The maximal resolution of a Hi-C dataset is determined by the restriction enzyme
used. The space of all possible interactions, which is surveyed by Hi-C experiments
for the human genome, is very large. Using a 6-bp cutting restriction enzyme (e.g.
HindIII), there are ≈106 restriction fragments∗, leading to an interaction space of
 106
2

≈1012 possible pairwise interactions†. Thus, achieving suﬃcient coverage to
support maximal resolution is a signiﬁcant challenge.
At the cost reducing the resolution, we may increase the eﬀective coverage by aggre-
gating adjacent restriction fragments into ﬁxed-size genomic intervals (“metafrag-
ments”). Binning data reduces the interaction space and smooth out noise (Lajoie,
Dekker, and Kaplan, 2014) and thus increase the statistical power for calling
signiﬁcant interactions. Typically bins are in the range of 50kb-1Mb, depending
on the size of the genome and sequencing depth of the Hi-C experiment (Sugar,
2014).
Step 4: Bias Correction
A challenge for any genome-scale study is experiment-induced biases. Hi-C data
is aﬀected by several confounding factors. Some of these biases are shared with
other high-throughput sequencing assays, such as RNA-Seq, while some are unique
to genome conformation-type assays. The primary technical biases for Hi-C data
relate to genomic characteristics such as mappability of sequence reads (sequence
uniqueness), fragment length (distance between restriction sites) and GC-content
of the ligation products (Yaﬀe and Tanay, 2011).
Several normalization methods have been proposed to eliminate these biases.
The most prominent method to date is ICE (iterative correction and eigenvector
decomposition) algorithm (Imakaev et al., 2012). ICE is based on the assumption
that all loci should have equal “visibility”: since we are interrogating the entire
interaction space in an unbiased manner, each fragment/bin should be observed
approximately the same number of times in the experiment (coverage) (Imakaev
et al., 2012, Supplementary Figure 3). That is, it assumes that all biases manifest
in the diﬀerence of coverage. The main advantage of this approach is that it
implicitly accounts for known as well as unknowns biases (it can be quite diﬃcult
to know each and every bias). Figure 3.3 shows the eﬀect of normalizing a Hi-C
data to make all loci equally visible. As most of the biases aﬀect the two ends
of the interactions independently, the expected coverage bias of the interactions
can be computed as the product of the coverage biases for the two ends. The
coverage biases is corrected iteratively, where at each iteration the interactions are
normalized with the coverage of both ends. Because the normalization procedure
changes the coverages at each iteration, it has to be repeated several times, until
∗We expect to observe the restriction site in the genome at every 46 = 4, 096 bp, giving
3.2 · 109/4, 096 ≈106 restriction fragments in the human genome
† Interestingly, this implies
that we are currently only capturing ≈0.02% of all possible interactions in a cell. (Of course, we
do not expect all genomic loci to interact.) See Table 5.2 on page 34 for the number of pairwise
interactions identiﬁed in the Hi-C used in this work.
==PAGE:34==
3.3 Genome Contact Maps
17
the coverage of all bins converges to 1. The described iterative correction procedure
is a matrix balancing problem which has been studied in several decades. The
balancing algorithm is called Sinkhorn–Knopp balancing (Sinkhorn and Knopp,
1967) and is guaranteed to converge - although slowly. More eﬃcient and scalable
matrix balancing algorithms and decomposition methods have since been developed
(Rao et al., 2014, Supplementary Note II; Li et al., 2015).
Step 5: Statistical Analysis
Hi-C data captures long-range interactions, either between loci on the same chro-
mosome (intra-chromosomal) or on diﬀerent chromosomes (inter-chromosomal).
A typical goal of Hi-C data analysis is to identify signiﬁcant interacting genomic
regions. Once the Hi-C data is normalized and the biases are removed, identifying
statistically signiﬁcant inter-chromosomal interactions is relatively simple: without
any prior knowledge on the pairwise distances between chromosomes, all possible
pairs of inter-chromosomal loci are expected to interact equally under the null
hypothesis. This means that the contact count (an integer value) between two
loci may directly be used to select interactions (as described in more details in
Appendix A.3.2 on page 75). However, there is currently no standard of what con-
tact count threshold that constitutes high-conﬁdent inter-chromosomal interactions.
In contrast, identifying high-conﬁdent inter-chromosomal interactions requires a
well-deﬁned statistical model. The genomic distance between the loci inﬂuences
the number of contacts between two intra-chromosomal loci. This dependence
can be attributed to random looping of the DNA and not biological signal from
than formation of speciﬁc chromatin loops or domains. Hence, it is important to
correct for this random polymer looping when assigning statistical signiﬁcance to
the observed contact counts. Several statistical methods have emerged to carry out
this task, but here I will focus on the non-parametric method Fit-Hi-C Ay, Bailey,
and Noble, 2014b used for processing the Hi-C data in this thesis.
Fit-Hi-C jointly models the random polymer looping eﬀect (or 1D genomic distance
bias) and technical biases (GC content, fragment length, mappability etc.). To do
this, Fit-Hi-C uses non-parametric smoothing splines to ﬁnd an initial ﬁt and then
iteratively reﬁnes the initial ﬁt to account for genuine (non-random) contacts. The
non-parametric approach learns almost any distance dependence of contact counts,
whereas standard methods uses a ﬁxed power-law decay function (Lieberman-Aiden
et al., 2009)). The advantage of the non-parametric ﬁt comes from the non-linear
dependence between contact counts and resolution, genomic distance range, and
sequencing depth. Fit-Hi-C then computes conﬁdence estimates using the reﬁned ﬁt
while incorporating biases computed by the matrix balancing normalization method
ICE, as described earlier. The resulting P-values are subsequently subjected to
multiple testing correction.
3.3
Genome Contact Maps
After this mapping, ﬁltering and aggregation of the Hi-C data described in Sec-
tion 3.2, one can construct the genome-wide interaction matrix - also referred
to as a contact map. Figure 3.3 shows an example of a contact map from the
==PAGE:35==
18
Spatial Organization of the Human Genome
human genome. A contact map is a matrix with rows and columns representing
non-overlapping regions or “bins” across the genome. Each entry in the matrix con-
tains a count of read pairs (Figure 3.3 left side) or interaction intensity (Figure 3.3
right side) that connect the corresponding bin pair in a Hi-C experiment. The
values in the contact map represents reﬂects the degree of interaction between two
genomic bins. The values may be interpreted as the probability of contact between
genomic loci, depending on the speciﬁc normalization method used to normalize
the data.
chr1
chr2
chr3
chr1
chr2
chr3
raw contact map
normalized contact map
interaction frequency
Bins with low signal 
Filtered Bins
chr1
chr2
chr3
chr1
chr2
chr3
Figure 3.3: Genome contact map. The left contact map shows raw Hi-C data.
The right contact map is ﬁltered and balanced Hi-C data. After the balancing
procedure, all loci are equally “visible” (sum of each row and column is equal). This
results in an overall smoother heatmap. The coloring of the heatmap corresponds
to the interaction frequency. The arrows below the maps mark genomic regions
(“bins”) that have been removed during quality control (ﬁltering). Both contact
maps show that chromosomes primarily interact in cis, conﬁrming long-established
concept of “chromosomes territories”. Illustration modiﬁed from Lajoie, Dekker,
and Kaplan (2014).
3.4
The hierarchy of the 3D genome
One of the major challenges of Hi-C data analysis is to diﬀerentiate biological
signal from noise and to identify and interpret the interaction patterns. In the
remainder of this chapter I will explain the outcomes of going from maps to
biological knowledge. It is beyond the scope of this text to explain all the recent
discoveries made from contact maps. For a comprehensive presentation of the
genome organization see the recent reviews by Gibcus and Dekker (2013), Dekker,
Marti-Renom, and Mirny (2013), Fraser et al. (2015), and Sexton and Cavalli
(2015) I will focus on three types of patterns observed in mammalian genomes:
chromosomal territories, chromosome compartments and TADs. For each pattern,
I will explain 1) how it can be identiﬁed visually in the contact map (Figure 3.4);
==PAGE:36==
3.4 The hierarchy of the 3D genome
19
2) how it can be interpreted biologically (Figure 3.5); and 3) how it is deﬁned in
terms of scale and hierarchy (Figure 3.7). But before we embark upon the journey
into the 3D genome and peer into the architectural structures, let us consider an
analogy to the well-known hierarchical organization of proteins.
Compartments
TAD and
sub-TAD
Loop
Domain
Cohesin
CTCF site
Loop
Contact Map
Biological Model
Figure 3.4: Going from contact map to biological model. This cartoon shows
the on overview of the genome structures that can be identiﬁed from Hi-C contact
maps. Left: major contacts patterns identiﬁes large genome structures, such as
chromosome compartments or subcompartments. Middle: quadrate elements of
enriched contact frequency along the diagonal suggest the presence of domains
of condensed chromatin or topological associated domains (TADs). Right: high-
frequency adjacent contacts indicate the presence of loops. Loops are enriched
at TAD boundaries and anchored at CTCF sites where the proteins cohesin and
CTCF facilitate loop formation. Illustration modiﬁed from Rao et al. (2014)
Analogy to Protein Hierarchical Structure
The genome, analogously to
proteins, forms an ordered hierarchical structure comprising primary, secondary,
tertiary and quaternary structures. This is a useful starting analogy for under-
standing the hierarchy of the 3D genome (Figure 3.7, analogy borrowed from
Sexton and Cavalli (2015)). The primary structure, comprising sequence elements
and nucleosomes; secondary structure, comprising interactions between nearby
nucleosomes that shape local chromatin architecture (TADs); and tertiary structure
comprising long-range 3D features (chromosome compartments); and quaternary
structure comprising the entire genome (chromosomal territories). In the following
paragraphs I will explain these structures in more details.
Chromosome Territories
The long-established concept of chromosome terri-
tories (CTs) constitutes a basic feature of nuclear architecture of chromosomes
in interphase (Figure 3.6). Interphase chromosomes adopt a form of territorial
organization where inter-chromosomal contacts are minimized (Cremer et al., 2006).
The ﬁrst evidence showing that chromosomes occupy distinct, self-associated ter-
ritories, were provided by light microscopy techniques such as ﬂuorescence in
==PAGE:37==
20
Spatial Organization of the Human Genome
Peptide chain
-helix
-strand
Protein
Protein complex
TAD
TAD
DNA
Chromosome
 portion
Nucleus
Nucleosome
fiber
Chromosome
Primary
Secondary
Tertiary
Quaternary
Figure 3.5: Analogous hierarchical organization of protein and genome structure.
The genome structure is divided into four size scales, by analogy with protein
structure. Primary structures comprising the linear sequence of polymers (peptide
chains or nucleotide sequences packaged into a nucleosomal ﬁber in chromatin)
form locally stabilized interactions to fold into secondary structures (α-helices/β-
strands or chromatin TADs). These domains in turn hierarchically co-associate
to form tertiary structures (proteins or chromosomes). The co-associations of
multiple, separately encoded subunits forms the ﬁnal quaternary structure (protein
complexes or genomes). The analogy of protein and genome structure is taken
from Sexton and Cavalli (2015). The illustration is inspired by Sexton and Cavalli
(2015). Deﬁnitions of structure scales follow the sizes from Risca and Greenleaf
(2015).
==PAGE:38==
3.4 The hierarchy of the 3D genome
21
situ hybridization (FISH) (Cremer and Cremer, 2010). In the pioneering study,
Lieberman-Aiden et al. (2009) conﬁrmed the presence of CTs, by showing that
the observed Hi-C data ﬁts the contact probability distribution of the fractal
globule rather than the equilibrium globule. Recently, Hi-C studies, accompanied
by computational methods such as HaploSeq Selvaraj et al., 2013, have shown that
intra-chromosomal contacts are more frequent than inter-chromosomes, even for
loci hundreds of megabases apart on a given chromosome. CTs appear to be in
multi-megabase scale (∼1 −10 mb) (Dekker, Marti-Renom, and Mirny, 2013) The
fact that chromosomes mostly keep to themselves, can be visualized on the contact
maps shown in Figure 3.3 on page 18.
Interphase
Nucleus
Nucleolus
Chromosome
territories
Figure 3.6: The territorial organization of chromosomes in interphase. A cartoon
of the 3D nucleus where the human genome is organized into chromosome territories
(CTs). Figure modiﬁed from Fraser et al. (2015).
Chromosome Compartments
Hi-C identiﬁed another key architecture of the
nucleus called chromosome compartments (Lieberman-Aiden et al., 2009). The two
distinct types of chromosome compartments A and B, constitute a spatially segrega-
tion of the genome between transcriptionally permissive, euchromatic regions, and
transcriptionally inert regions enriched for features of constitutive heterochromatin.
The compartments were discovered in the work of Lieberman-Aiden et al. (2009)
by using eigenvalue decomposition of the contact map (similar to the map shown in
Figure 3.3 on page 18). The genome compartments appear as a “checkerboard-like”
interaction pattern on contact maps (Figure 3.4 on page 19). Compartments appear
to be in megabase scale (∼5 mb) (Dekker, Marti-Renom, and Mirny, 2013). The
A and B compartments showed enriched interaction frequencies between the same
compartment type, and depleted interactions between diﬀerent types.
Importantly, the genome compartments are closely linked to regulatory and func-
tional partitions of the genome and correlates with indicators of transcriptional
activity, such as DNA accessibility, gene density, replication timing, GC content and
several histone marks (Dekker, Marti-Renom, and Mirny, 2013). Hence, the com-
partments are in in line with the notion of euchromatin and heterochromatin.
The compartment signal is not simply biphasic (representing just two states) but
is continuous (Dekker, Marti-Renom, and Mirny, 2013). The regions that change
the compartment A/B status typically correspond to a single or series of TADs
(Figure 3.7).
This ﬁnding suggests that TADs, which will be described next,
==PAGE:39==
22
Spatial Organization of the Human Genome
are the units of dynamic alterations in chromosome compartments (Dixon et al.,
2015).
Topological Associated Domains
Chromatin is organized into megabase-sized
topologically associating domains (TADs) that represent the building blocks of
genome organization. TADs were ﬁrst reported by Dixon et al. (2012) and deﬁned
as local chromatin interaction domains. These TADs appear to be the fundamental
modular unit of chromatin organization and describe the spatial neighborhoods
of high-frequency chromatin interactions. The boundaries of TADs are largely
conserved across mammalian species and multiple cell types in the same organism.
TADs are among strongest signal in hierarchy of nuclear domains, and its presence
of distinct domains can be identiﬁed as densely interacting squares on the diagonal
of the contact map (Figure 3.4 on page 19). TADs appear to be in multi-kilobase
scale (median size ∼500 kb) (Dekker, Marti-Renom, and Mirny, 2013). It should
be noted that slightly diﬀerent deﬁnitions of TADs exists (Rao et al., 2014). This
discrepancy is likely caused by diﬀerences in the study designs, rather than the
biological function of TADs. Variations in the resolution of the Hi-C data and
diﬀerent (hidden Markov) models used to identify TAD boundaries may result in a
bias to detect either small- or large-scale domain features.
Several studies have provided evidence for TADs role in regulation genome function.
For example, eQTLs and their target genes are enriched within TADs (Duggal,
Wang, and Kingsford, 2014), and several epigenetic markers have been found to
correlate with TAD boundaries (Rao et al., 2014). Another study observed extensive
TAD reorganization during stem cell diﬀerentiation, which suggests TADs play an
important role in cellular identity Phillips-Cremins et al., 2013; Dixon et al., 2015.
Arguably, TADs are one of the most intensive research areas of genome architecture
(Gibcus and Dekker, 2013) and important for understanding the physical wiring
diagram of the genome.
Architectural Proteins of the Nucleus
Although TADs play a central role
in genome organization, their linear modularity does not explain alone their spatial
organization. Indeed, TAD formations are mediated by both the CCCTC-binding
factor protein (CTCF) and general transcription coactivator such as the mediator
complex and cohesins (Figure 3.4 on page 19) (Bonora, Plath, and Denholtz, 2014).
As such CTCF, cohesin, and mediator act as the “architectural” proteins of the
nucleus. CTCF is required for proper cohesin localization to CTCF-enriched sites
(Ciabrelli and Cavalli, 2015). A recent elegant experiment used CRISPR inversion
of CTCF sites to show that the relative orientations of CTCF binding sites in
regulatory elements, such as promoters and enhancers, determine the directionality
of DNA looping and regulation of gene expression (Guo et al., 2015). Phillips-
Cremins et al. (2013) recently provided evidence of that CTCF plays a critical
role in the establishment and maintenance of cellular state through connecting
long-range interactions via cohesin. Hence, it is with good reason that CTCF has
been dubbed “master weaver of the genome” (Phillips and Corces, 2009).
==PAGE:40==
3.4 The hierarchy of the 3D genome
23
Chromosome
territories
Compartments
TADs and
sub-TADs
Chromatin
loops
A
B
Enhancer-promoter
Enhancer-silencer
Insulator-insulator
Figure 3.7: 3D organization of the genome. Chromatin conformations across
genomic scales illustrate the four diﬀerent organization levels outlined in the main
text. The hierarchical organization of chromatin conformations ordered from low
resolution (top) to high resolution (bottom). Chromosome territories, i.e. the
domain of a nucleus occupied by a chromosome, are built up from a hierarchy of
nucleosome ﬁbers (pink colored band). Chromosomal compartments (∼1 −10 mb
scale) A and B are shown separately to illustrate their distinguished nature. A/B
compartment status typically correspond to a single or series of TADs (mb scale).
Three examples of gene regulation in the third dimension are shown: chromatin
looping (sub-mb scale) regulate gene expression via long-range interactions amongst
enhancers, promoters (left), repressors, silencers (middle) and insulators (right). E,
enhancer; P, promoter; S, silencer; I, insulator. Figure modiﬁed from Fraser et al.
(2015).
==PAGE:41==
24
Spatial Organization of the Human Genome
3.5
A New Representation of the Human Genome
It is becoming increasingly clear that TADs have a causal role regulating genome
function (Dekker, 2008; Hebenstreit, 2013; Zirkel and Papantonis, 2014; Rao
et al., 2014; Sexton and Yaﬀe, 2015).
The regulatory and several epigenetic
markers have been found to correlate with genome folding. Rao et al. (2014)
provokingly proposed that epigenetics is de facto genome folding, backed up by the
argument “folding drives functions”. This raises the chicken and egg problem: is the
genome conformation driving gene regulation or vice versa? Are speciﬁc genome
conformations rather the cause or the eﬀect of gene expression activity? Some
evidence suggests the former: for example chromatin loops have been demonstrated
to be a cause transcriptional activation rather than a consequence (Deng et al.,
2012).
Whatever the answers to these questions are, the new genome conformation tech-
nologies have provided us with the tool to answer them. In this new representation
of the human genome, we can image that epigenetic markers may no longer be
viewed as stacked linear tracks on conventional genome browsers, but could instead
be viewed in its local or global 3D genomic context of the spatial relationship
of chromosomes or TADs. And even more importantly, to provide a scaﬀold for
overlaying or integrating additional high-dimensional biological data. What may
appear as a obscure pattern in a linear track genome browser, might form obvious
relationships in a spatial representation of the data. I will end this chapter with a
quote from a famous German philosopher:
“And those who were seen dancing were thought to be insane by those
who could not hear the music.” (Friedrich Nietzsche)
==PAGE:42==
4
Spatial Epistasis
Hypothesis
Epistatic interactions are poorly understood at the molecular level. Consequently
they are diﬃcult to detect and almost impossible to predict de novo. In this
chapter I ﬁrst provide an overview of our current understanding of the molecular
mechanisms that can cause epistasis and subsequently motivate new molecular
causes of epistasis. I will then put forward the main premise of my thesis and propose
the “spatial epistasis” hypothesis. Finally I reason over its biological plausibility.
You should ﬁnd a close connection between this chapter and research aims presented
in Section 1.3. Hopefully you appreciated the concepts of epistasis and the spatial
organization of the genome introduced in Chapters 2 and 3, because we are about
to venture into a new domain brought together by these two concepts.
4.1
Background
There are few examples of replicated large-scale epistatic interactions. One expla-
nation for the lack of empirical ﬁndings, is that detecting epistasis is too technically
challenging owing to statistical and computational issues. The use of prior biological
knowledge to guide the search for epistasis can facilitate discovery of epistatic
SNPs (Ritchie, 2011). Layers of biological machinery exist between the genotype-to-
phenotype relationships, and imposing this extra dimension of biological knowledge
into statistical analyses may help to detect epistasis. Such approaches are ben-
eﬁcial for two reasons: they increase the eﬃciency when searching for epistasis,
and facilitate the biological interpretation of the data. Several other plausible
mechanisms for epistasis exist. For example, intra-gene epistasis may result from
non-independent eﬀects of mutations on RNA stability and enzyme activity or
protein stability (Ortlund et al., 2007), However, detecting intra-gene epistasis
(or local epistasis) is complicated by confounding eﬀects of the haplotype and
linkage disequilibrium structure (see Wood et al. (2014) for a description of this
problem). Inter-gene epistasis may result from the redundancy (or ‘buﬀering’)
between pathways, structure of metabolic networks or protein interactions (Lehner,
2011). However data from databases in the public domain does not readily support
investigating two ﬁrst mentioned putative drivers of epistasis. However, protein
interaction databases have successfully been used to prioritize SNP pairs and
increase power to detect statistical epistasis (Pattin and Moore, 2008; Emily et al.,
2009). Given that the far majority of GWA-associated loci are located within
non-protein-coding regions, and such regulatory variants explain up to 79% of the
genetic heritability of diseases and traits (Gusev et al., 2014), a central challenge of
association studies is to gain biological insights from regulatory variants. A major
limitation of protein interaction-based approaches is that they are constrained to
==PAGE:43==
26
Spatial Epistasis Hypothesis
investigate genetic interactions residing in protein coding regions. Hence these
methods fail to investigate the large portion of regulatory variants in intergenic
regions.
Göndör and Ohlsson (2009) was the ﬁrst to suggest that it may be useful to integrate
chromosome interactomes when exploring the genetic (and epigenetic) background
of complex diseases. Recently, Hemani et al. (2014, Supplementary Figure 15)
followed up on this idea by proposing interacting genomic loci as a mechanism
underlying epistatic interactions. The authors performed an exhaustive search
for epistasis and cross-referenced the epistatic SNPs with a map of chromosome
interacting regions and found that 44 out of 501 epistatic interactions mapped
within 5 mb (empirical P-value P = 1.8 · 10−10). However, the detected epistatic
signal could be explained by confounding of unobserved data (Wood et al., 2014),
hence the there is currently no support for genome interactions as a driving factor
for epistasis.
4.2
Hypothesis
I suggest a mechanism by which biological function can lead to epistatic eﬀects.
It has been shown that diﬀerent chromosomal regions spatially co-localize in the
cell through chromatin interactions (Lieberman-Aiden et al., 2009). I hypothesize
that physical proximity of interacting genomic regions provides a spatial scaﬀold
to identify genetic interactions in human genotyping data - hereafter referred to
as “spatial epistasis”. I postulate that spatial epistasis inﬂuencing human gene
expression is mediated through the spatial proximity of chromatin interactions.
Speciﬁcally, I formulate the following hypothesis:
Hypothesis:
Spatial genomic interactions are enriched for genetic interactions
4.3
Biological Mechanisms
I ﬁrst consider a general biological model of chromatin crosstalk that may re-
sult in epistatic eﬀects on the phenotype. Chromatin loop formation has been
demonstrated to be sensitive to speciﬁc combinations of SNPs (Steidl et al., 2007).
Particular sets of SNPs may inﬂuence interactions between diﬀerent structures of
the genome by reinforcing or diminishing loop formation (see Figure 4.1). The
speciﬁc set of SNPs may have non-additive epistatic eﬀects on the phenotype.
Synergistic eﬀects may result in a enhanced interaction network and increased
expressivity, whereas antagonizing variants may perturb the network.
I consider two instances of the above mentioned chromatin crosstalk model, that
may justify the proposed hypothesis (Figure 4.2. In Chapter 3, I reviewed the
involvement of chromatin organization in regulating the genome function. Therefore
I will limit this chapter to explaining the basic premise of my hypothesis and reason
over its biological plausibility.
==PAGE:44==
4.3 Biological Mechanisms
27
Firstly, I speculate that the genome folding and chromatin organization orchestrated
by CTCF and other architectural proteins, may drive spatial epistasis (Figure 4.2a).
Following the same logic from the general chromatin crosstalk pertubation model,
SNPs in the (well-characterized) CTCF binding sites may disrupt CTCF binding,
change the genome folding and ultimately change the genome expressivity.
Secondly, I speculate that transcriptional factories may be a causal factor for spatial
epistasis (Figure 4.2b). It has been proposed that transcriptional activation is
associated with subcompartments termed transcription factories. Co-regulated
genes routinely co-express in these nuclear subdomains, which is thought to support
simultaneous transcription of functionally related genes (Schoenfelder et al., 2010).
The transcription factory is speculated to consists of a protein-rich core with
several DNA and RNA binding proteins, such as transcription factors (TFs) and
ribonucleoproteins (RNPs) (Eskiw et al., 2008). RNA polymerase II are attached
to the surface of the protein-rich core. As illustrated in the cartoon, transcriptional
factories provides an opportunity for both inter- and intra-chromosomal chromatin
interactions.
==PAGE:45==
28
Spatial Epistasis Hypothesis
common genetic background
predisposing SNP background
predisposing SNP background 
Locus with stabilizing allele
Locus with antagonizing allele
Mutually exclusive
interaction possibilities
Locus weakly affected by antagonizing variant
Locus strongly affected by antagonizing variant
Spatial interactions via chromatin crosstalk
Spatial epistasis between loci
Figure 4.1:
Spatial epistasis mediated by chromatin crosstalk.
The genetic
makeup may regulate the genome expressivity through chromatin interactions (e.g.
intra-chromosomal loops or inter-chromosomal bridges). This cartoon shows the
chromosomal wiring network of interacting loci (nodes). The network is postulated
to tweak transcription through the interplay of genetic variants. On the left side
of the illustration, common genetic variants facilitate a ﬁne-tuned regulation of
expressivity by allowing many possible chromatin interactions (edges). Changes
in genome expressivity may result from genetic variants within loci, that either
stabilize or antagonize the chromatin interactions of the network. The middle part
of the ﬁgure depicts the scenario of antagonizing variants that partially perturb
the chromatin crosstalk. If only one direction of the connection is lost between two
nodes, the remaining oppositely directed interaction will have a compensatory eﬀect,
so no phenotypic changes will be observed. The presence of many antagonizing
variants perturb the network and results in a severely altered phenotype (right side
of the cartoon). Epistatic eﬀects on the phenotype may arise when the connection
is lost in both directions between two nodes. The same logic can be applied to
stabilizing variants, that may result in synergistic eﬀects. Illustration adopted from
Göndör and Ohlsson (2009).
==PAGE:46==
4.3 Biological Mechanisms
29
(a) Chromatin interactions at diﬀerent scales mediating spatial epistasis. This cartoon
shows several possible scenarios for spatial epistasis facilitated by architectural proteins
act combinatorially to orchestrate the folding of the genome. The proteins are involved
in interactions at diﬀerent size scales (TADs, sub-TADs and loops). CTCF sites are
enriched TAD boundaries (Phillips and Corces, 2009) and speciﬁc motif is a potential
cause of spatial epistasis. Other factors, such as the cohesin and coactivator mediator
complex, participates in the formation of smaller sub-TADs (Kagey et al., 2010) (left).
TADs from diﬀerent chromosomes may interact and form a putative spatial epistasis site
(left, inter-chromosomal interaction chr1:2). CTCF and cohesin also act together within
TAD boundaries to support enhancer-promoter interactions (right, intra-chromosomal
interaction). Putative spatial epistasis sites for intra-chromosomal interaction are shown
for both the enhancer-promoter and TAD boundary interactions. Illustration inspired by
Bonora, Plath, and Denholtz (2014).
(b) Transcription factories and mediating spatial epistasis. This cartoon illustrates an
instance of spatial epistasis where the “spatial scaﬀold” is provided by a transcription
factory. Inter-chromosomal chromatin interactions, or so-called chromatin bridges, are
shown between chromosomal territories (CTs) 1:2 and 1:3. CT1 also includes an intra-
chromosomal, cis acting chromatin loop. All of these sites constitute putative epistatic
sites. Notice that in order to interact with other chromosomes, one or both partners of
chromatin interactions must reach beyond the conﬁnes of its CT. Illustration inspired by
Rieder, Trajanoski, and McNally (2012).
Figure 4.2: The spatial epistasis hypothesis implicating spatial proximate chro-
matin interactions as a driver for epistasis. Putative spatial epistatic sites are
shown as red rounded rectangles.
==PAGE:47==
30
Spatial Epistasis Hypothesis
==PAGE:48==
5
Datasets
Computational biology often relies on large quantities of high-dimensional biological
data. Correction interpretation of downstream analyses, requires carefully pre-
processing and cleaning of the input data. This work is no exception. I used
several key data sets to test for enrichment of spatial proximate epistasis. This
chapter describe the pre-processing of genotype, expression and Hi-C data. In the
subsequent Chapter 6, I describe how these data sets were used in a computational
pipeline.
5.1
Genotypes
The Estonian Genome Center of the University of Tartu (EGCUT) Gene Expression
Cohort (Metspalu, 2004) is composed of unrelated individuals from the Estonian
population. This study used n = 832 samples from individuals with both expression
and genotype data available. All steps described below, except genotyping and
imputation, was carried out by the author.
5.1.1
Genotyping and Imputation
Genotyping and imputation was carried out by researches at Tartu University.
Genotyping was performed using Illumina Human370CNV arrays (Illumina Inc.,
San Diego, US). The data set consisted of 311,563 genotyped SNPs. Imputation
was done using IMPUTE2 (Howie, Donnelly, and Marchini, 2009) with the HapMap
CEU phase 2 (Frazer et al., 2007) as reference panel (release # 24). All SNP genome
positions was relative to the reference human genome NCBI build 37 (UCSC hg19).
The data set comprised 2,552,493 SNPs after imputation.
5.1.2
Data Pre-processing
A list of 10 sample mix-ups was corrected. The genotype data was converted from
IMPUTE2’s probabilistic dosage format (.gen) to hard-called, best guess genotype
calls (.ped) using GTOOL (Freeman and Marchini, 2007) with a threshold of 0.9.
The genotype data contained purely biallelic single nucleotide polymorphisms. That
is, no structural or indel variants.
5.1.3
Quality Control
Quality control ﬁlters were applied as suggested by Anderson et al. (2010) and
Turner et al. (2011) resulting in 1,779,693 high quality SNPs. QC was conducted
==PAGE:49==
32
Datasets
using PLINK 1.9 (Purcell and Chang, 2014) with the parameters shown in Table 5.1.
PLINK argument
threshold
description
–maf
0.05
Minor allele frequency
–geno
0.1
Per variant missingness
–mind
0.1
Per individual missingness
–hwe
1e-6
Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium test
Table 5.1: Stardard genotype quality control parameters were used. See Anderson
et al. (2010) for details.
Finally, duplicated variants were identiﬁed and removed. Duplicate variants were
deﬁned as SNPs with identical variant identiﬁer (rsID) or genomic coordinate.
1,779,665 SNPs remained after removal of duplicated variants.
5.2
Gene Expression
The EGCUT Gene Expression Cohort consists of whole peripheral blood samples of
n = 832 individuals. The gene expression data described in the following sections
comes from the same genotyped individuals described earlier (Section 5.1). All steps
described below, except the array experiments, was carried out by the author.
5.2.1
Array Platform
Whole-genome gene-expression levels were obtained by Illumina Human HT12v3
arrays (Illumina Inc, San Diego, US) according manufacturers protocols. A subset
of the expression dataset is available at GEO (Gene Expression Omnibus) public
repository under the accession GSE48348.
Raw expression data was exported from Illumina GenomeStudio. The data was
exported without any normalization, transformation, imputation, or background
correction method that is oﬀered by Illumina’s GenomeStudio. A total of n = 48, 803
probes where exported.
5.2.2
Data Transformation and PEER Analysis
PEER (Stegle et al., 2012) was used to remove confounding factors from the
expression data set. Prior to running PEER gene, expression levels were variance
stabilized using a log2 transformation. Using PEER, we inferred 50 latent factors;
four EGCUT genetic MDS components (Figure A.1 on page 61) were included as
covariates when factors were constructed. See Appendix A.2.4 on page 66 for a
more detailed description of the analysis. The latent factors and covariates were
subsequently regressed out using an additive linear model and the resulting gene
expression residuals were used for epistasis discovery.
==PAGE:50==
5.3 Hi-C data
33
5.2.3
Probe Annotation
The Illumina manifest ﬁle was retrieved from Illumina Inc (2014, see download
URL). To allow for comparison of results to Hemani et al. (2014), the default
Illumina probe identiﬁer Array_Address_Id were mapped to Probe_Id. Probes
with the value RefSeq in the “Source” column were marked as RefSeq probes.
The values of the column “Symbol” were used for as HGNC symbols. Finally,
the genomic coordinates (“Chromosome” and “Probe_Coordinates”) and strand
orientation (“Probe_Chr_Orientation”) for the probes were extracted.
5.3
Hi-C data
The Hi-C data used in this study was derived from two diﬀerent data sets, spanning
three diﬀerent cell lines. The two data sets was of diﬀerent resolution and hence
processed diﬀerently. For both data sets, only inter-chromosomal interactions were
retained in the ﬁnal processing step. For a background description on Hi-C data
analysis see Section 3.2 on page 15.
5.3.1
hESC and hIMR90 cell lines
The publicly available Hi-C data sets from human embryonic stem cells (hESC) and
human lung ﬁbroblast (hIMR90) published by Dixon et al. (2012) were processed
with Fit-Hi-C (Ay, Bailey, and Noble, 2014b) as described in Libbrecht et al. (2015).
The Hi-C data used hg19 as reference genome. Here follows a summary of the
processing pipeline applied to the data by Libbrecht et al. (2015).
The raw paired-end libraries were processed with a pipeline that merges reads from
two replicates per cell line, maps the reads to the reference genome, extracts the
read pairs where both read ends map uniquely, and ﬁnally excludes PCR duplicates.
The human genome was then partitioned into non-overlapping 10 kb windows,
where each end of a read pair is assigned to the nearest 10 kb window mid-point,
to yield a whole genome contact map. The contact map was sparse with ≈0.3%
non-zero entries. The contact map comprised both intra- and inter-chromosomal
contacts. After eliminating all loci that are less than 50% uniquely mappable, the
bias correction method ICE (Imakaev et al., 2012) was applied to the contact map
to estimate the bias associated with each 10 kb locus (see Section 3.2 on page 15
for a description of the ICE method). Next, the computed biases and raw contact
maps were used as input to Fit-Hi-C to assign statistical conﬁdence to the contact
counts (see Section 3.2 on page 15 for more detail on Fit-Hi-C). A P-value of
interaction were estimated for each pair of 10 kb loci with non-zero contact counts
(the P-value was set to 1 for pairs with zero contacts). Finally, the combined
collection of P-values is corrected for multiple testing using the false discovery rate
(FDR), which is estimated using the standard Benjamini & Hochberg method. In
practice, Fit-Hi-C reports the statistical conﬁdence associated with a given contact
as a q-value, which is deﬁned as the minimum FDR attained at or above a given
interaction signiﬁcance (Storey, 2002; Noble, 2009).
==PAGE:51==
34
Datasets
Table 5.2 lists the number of Hi-C interactions. This work used various q-value
thresholds to deﬁne the set of inter-chromosomal interactions considered for epistasis
discovery. Because Fit-Hi-C normalizes for 1D genomic distance, the majority
of signiﬁcant contacts were inter-chromosomal or long distance interactions. See
Appendix A.3.2 on page 75 for an explorative analysis and visualization of the
Hi-C data.
no. interactions
hESC
hIMR90
all∗
91,234,032
157,113,166
inter-chromosomal
39,240,868
84,773,727
inter-chromosomal (q = 10−3)
2,515,748
1,006,394
Table 5.2: Number of interactions for diﬀerent subsets of the Dixon et al. (2012)
data.
*Intra and inter-chromosomal interactions with raw contact count > 0.
5.3.2
K562 cell line
The Hi-C data set described in this section was part of the original Hi-C publication
by Lieberman-Aiden et al. (2009). Since its publication, the data set has been
widely used and reanalyzed by various methods. I used the list of interacting
loci derived from human erythroleukemia cell line K562, published by Lan et al.
(2012). In short, Lan et al. re-analyzed the K562 Hi-C data from Lieberman-Aiden
et al. (2009) using a Mixture Poisson Regression Model. The model identiﬁes
signiﬁcant genomic interaction points using a power-law decay as background
contact probability distribution. Focal point estimates of interacting genomic
regions were obtained from Lan et al. (2012, Supplementary File 3), comprising
96137 interactions. Genomic coordinates were mapped to hg19 using LiftOver
(Min Kang and Abecasis, 2014, Software); 3205 interactions could not be mapped
to hg19. 3497 autosomal inter-chromosomal interactions were extracted. The
following outlier removal procedure applied: outliers were deﬁned as interactions
containing at least one genomic region within the 99.9-th percentile interaction
counts. Three genomic regions with interaction count > 96.23 were identiﬁed (all
from chromosome 5), resulting in exclusion of 976 (14%) interactions. After outlier
removal, 1258 (49.9%) duplicate interactions were removed. Duplicate interactions
were deﬁned as interactions with identical interacting genomic regions. The ﬁnal
set of genomic interactions comprised 1263 interactions composed of 2021 unique
interaction loci. See Appendix A.3.1 on page 72 for more details on the issues of
using the K562 cell line and an explorative analysis of the data.
==PAGE:52==
6
Design Choices
and Implementation
This chapter describes the main computational pipeline used in my thesis. I will
introduce the rationale behind each of the steps in spatial proximate epistasis
discovery. I will explain the general concepts and terminology∗. I have deliberately
chosen not to describe every technical detail but rather give an overview of the
design choices. The technical details were fun and challenging to solve. However,
my fear of loosing the reader on computer science issues that caused countless of
“all-nighters”, restraint me from including many tiresome technical and algorithmic
sections†.
A substantial amount of computational infrastructure underlie the
pipeline outlined in this chapter. So when reading this chapter, bare in mind that
a signiﬁcant of part of it is “written” in python, but has been hidden away on
GitHub (Appendix C on page 95 bear witness to more than 10,000 lines of python
code).
6.1
Design Principles and Generalizability
Before we approach the implementation of the framework outlined in this chapter,
it is important to understand the main design features. The key principle of the
framework is to use information from the spatial organization of the human genome,
to limit the search space of possible for interactions between SNPs. In Chapter 4, I
argued why known chromatin interactions might comprise a reasonable biological
prior for detecting genetic interactions. A part from using biological knowledge
to drive the search for interacting SNPs, there are three other noteworthy design
principles.
Firstly, generalizability is a core feature of the framework. There are two major
adaptable components. The ﬁrst component is the “statistical engine”, that is the
underlying model used to detect statistical epistasis. Because the framework is
“agnostic” to the statistical model of epistasis, the default linear multiplicative
’allelic’ model may be substituted with non-linear models or more advanced Bayesian
approaches that explicitly models the biological prior (see Section 6.3 for alternative
models to detect epistasis). The second component is the biological prior used to
select SNP pair candidates. A substituting of the default “spatial proximity” prior
need to meet two requirements, in addition to formulating a reasonable biological
prior. Firstly, the relationship between the biological entities in the prior and
the genetic variants needs a well-deﬁned mapping. E.g. when postulating that
∗Remember that deﬁnitions of terms printed in this special font can be found in the glossary
(Appendix D on page 99)
† Please bear with me if I, in a moment of weakness, let one or two
nerdy technical sections slip into this chapter.
==PAGE:53==
36
Design Choices and Implementation
interacting proteins enrich for epistasis, the mapping is clear: genetic variants
within genes can be mapped to the corresponding gene product (proteins, the
biological entities of the model). Secondly, in order to assess whether the biological
prior enrich for epistasis, a complement set of biological entities needs to be deﬁned.
This facilitates the generation of a null distribution, as explained in Section 6.4.
Following the protein interaction example, the complement set of biological entities
are non-interacting proteins. Clearly, for any biological prior, the most demanding
step, which requires careful considerations, is to deﬁne the interacting and non-
interaction biological entities.
Secondly, the enrichment test is based on an empirical null distribution, as opposed
to an analytical deﬁnition of a null model, where the underlying assumptions
would be diﬃcult to justify. In Section 6.4, I will explain how the empirical null
distribution directly controls for confounding factors. The framework is based on a
summarized statistic to facilitate the enrichment test. It considers the cumulative
eﬀects of SNP-pairs in interacting genomic regions, to test the hypothesis of spatial
epistasis enrichment. The second feature is reminiscent of rare variant burden
tests (Morgenthaler and Thilly, 2007), based on collapsing or summarizing the rare
variants within a region by a single value to increase statistical power. Speciﬁcally,
the framework is based on summarizing count data within pairs of genomic regions.
This principle will be describe further in Section 6.4.3.
Lastly, the framework includes an important feature to model diﬀerent scenarios of
spatial epistasis. Two biological variables are parameterized: the conﬁdence of phys-
ical interaction between genomic loci (as discussed in Appendix A.3.2 on page 75),
which ultimately represents the frequency or intensity of the interaction; and the
range or width of the interaction (this parameter is introduced in Section 6.5). The
ﬁrst parameter enable the study of how strong genomic loci need to interact in
order to drive spatial epistasis. The second parameter enables investigations of
how much the physical interaction causing spatial epistasis extends from its focal
contact point.
6.2
Computational Feasibility
A fundamental challenge for epistasis discovery is computational feasibility. To illus-
trate this, the single-phenotype exhaustive pairwise epistasis search in individuals
with one million genotyped SNPs, would require
 106
2

= 5·1011 tests. If we consider
going beyond pairwise models, one million SNPs generate 1.7 · 1017 three-SNP
models. (Consider that this number is three order of magnitude larger than the
number of cells in the human body (Bianconi et al., 2013).) This number of tests is
computationally intractable without the use of specialized hardware, which is not
readily accessible to most research groups∗. Hence, the computational complexity
needs to be addressed prior to the epistasis discovery to avoid undertaking endless
calculations.
∗And certainly not a pathetic master student unless... you are that the Broad Institute. The
people at Broad IT Services was generous enough to let me use more than 12 years of computing
time (see Table 7.1 on page 49). I hope I remembered to mention them in my acknowledgement.
==PAGE:54==
6.2 Computational Feasibility
37
The run time, T, of computing the tests for epistasis is dependent on the number
of genetic variants (NG) and the number of expression traits considered (NP). T
may be expressed using the big O notation as follows:
T(NG, NP) = O
 NP · N 2
G(l, q)

(6.1)
where l is the interaction width deﬁning the length of the genomic region considered
for epistasis discovery (Figure 6.2 on page 45 (a) illustrates this principle of l).
q is the q-value threshold used to control the statistical conﬁdence of the Hi-C
interactions considered for epistasis discovery (see Appendix A.3.2 on page 75 for a
more detailed description of q). Note that NG is squared because the all pairwise
interactions are calculated for SNPs considered for epistasis∗.
The next section explains, in practical terms, how each input data type was subsetted
and its consequence for the computation time. The downside of subsetting the
data will also be discussed.
6.2.1
Data Subsetting
SNP Subsetting
Equation (6.1) illustrates the importance of limiting the
squared term NG for computational feasibility. This study does not have the
statistical power to detect epistasis between rare variants, as discussed further in
Appendix B.3. For this reason, rare variants (MAF < 5%) was removed during
quality control of the genotype data. This removed one third of the variants. The
interaction width, l, was also used to limit NG. Values of l = [500 −50, 000]bp
was used. Interestingly, this parameter has a biological interpretation for the
model of spatial epistasis. Small l (narrow interaction width) suggests that spatial
epistasis exists in the close vicinity of interacting genomic regions, while large l
(wide interaction width) imply a broad region of spatial epistasis.
Hi-C Interaction Subsetting
The number of Hi-C interactions that are con-
sidered for spatial epistasis discovery (ninteractions) inﬂuences NG. An important
design choice in this framework is that only inter-chromosomal interactions are
considered for spatial epistasis, hence the intra-chromosomal interactions are ex-
cluded. Firstly, this dramatically reduces the search epistasis for epistasis. Secondly,
detecting epistasis between SNPs located on the same chromosome (local epistasis)
is complicated by confounding eﬀects of the haplotype and linkage disequilibrium
structure†(see Wood et al. (2014) for a further description of this issue). Diﬀerent
q-value thresholds were used to control ninteractions in the interval ≈1, 000 −40, 000.
The q-value threshold can in this context be interpreted as parameter controlling
the strength or tightness between spatial epistasis interactions. E.g. a stringent
threshold, resulting in few ninteractions, imply that spatial epistasis exists only
between the most strongly interacting genomic regions.
∗the bound on all pairwise combinations can be calculated using the binomial coeﬃcient as
 NG
2

= (NG−1)·NG
2
= O
 N 2
G

† Unexplained haplotype and linkage disequilibrium eﬀects were
the main criticisms of the Hemani et al., 2014 paper. Although the controversy of their epistasis
ﬁndings is not yet resolved, it is more convenient to simply avoid local epistasis.
==PAGE:55==
38
Design Choices and Implementation
Probe Subsetting
A natural way of limiting the expression traits for epistasis
detection, is to remove all probes that do not map to well annotated genomic
sequences (e.g. the RefSeq database). Analysis containing probes mapping to
uncharacterized genomic regions can make downstream biological analysis hard
to interpret. More than one third of the probes were discarded because they did
not map to the RefSeq database. Probes mapping to the sex chromosomes were
discarded because this work was not concerned with any sex speciﬁc hypothesis.
Most importantly, a variance and mean criteria was used to select probes exhibiting
the highest variance and mean expression. High variance/mean probes increases
the statistical power to detect epistasis (Westra et al., 2013).
It should be noted that more advanced schemes exists for subsetting and quality
control of probes (Becker et al., 2012; Westra et al., 2013). Additional criteria
include removing probes containing SNPs to avoid hybridization bias (Alberts
et al., 2007); removing probes that do not map over the full length (50 bp) to a
contiguous genomic location (i.e. no intron-spanning probes) or removing non-
uniquely mapping probes (nuID uniqueness score). These schemes were not applied
in this study because they are cumbersome to implement relative to their eﬀect on
decreasing the number of selected probes.
6.3
Epistasis Search and FastEpistasis
The software used to test for epistasis plays an important role in the design of the
study, because large-scale epistasis calculations are highly computational intensive.
A plethora of software packages for have been developed to detect epistasis (Wei,
Hemani, and Haley, 2014; Moore and Williams, 2015; Upton et al., 2015). The
methods represent a wide range of model classes, including simple linear frequentist
models (Cordell, 2009), Bayesian models (Zhang and Liu, 2007; Albrechtsen et al.,
2007), information theory (Seo, Kim, and Moon, 2003), neural networks (Beam,
Motsinger-Reif, and Doyle, 2014) and artiﬁcial intelligence (Moore and Hill, 2015).
Arguable, the most widely used software for epistasis test is PLINK (Purcell et al.,
2007) which uses the multiplicative model described in Section 2.2.2 (Equation (2.1)
on page 9). PLINK’s implementation of the model poses issues related to scalability
and speed; and ultimately prevents its usage in large-scale epistasis discovery.
6.3.1
Model Deﬁnition
I here describe the aforementioned “statistical engine” used as the underlying
workhorse for computing two-locus tests for epistasis eﬀects. The regression based
framework is implemented in FastEpistasis (Schüpbach et al., 2010; Schuepbach,
2014). The software is an eﬃcient solution extending the PLINK epistasis module.
FastEpistasis uses a parallel algorithm that is eﬃcient, scalable and optimized to
handle multiples phenotypes. The two main reasons for choosing FastEpistasis
over the algorithms mentioned in Section 6.3, was computational speed and model
simplicity. The latter is also an important design choice for power considerations,
because of modest sample size in this study.
==PAGE:56==
6.3 Epistasis Search and FastEpistasis
39
Consider the multiplicative allelic model I introduced in Section 2.2.2 on page 9
(Equation (2.1)). With alleles A and a, the genotypes at a single locus are part of
the set G = {AA, Aa, aa, missing}. The linear model for the phenotype y is given
by:
y = β0 + β1x1 + β2x2 + β3x1x2 + ϵ
(6.2)
where xi ∈R, i = 1, 2 is numerical counterpart assigned to each element of G,
chosen to the number of minor alleles (except when missing), hence xi ∈{0, 1, 2}.
ϵ is a independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) random Gaussian variable,
ϵ ∼N(0, σ2). As described earlier in Section 2.2.2, we may assess the signiﬁcance
of the interaction coeﬃcient β3 by comparing the ﬁt of the interaction model to
that of the marginal model.
y = β0 + β1x1 + β2x2 + ϵ
(6.3)
A signiﬁcant interaction term carries the interpretation that the model Equa-
tion (6.2) explains a signiﬁcantly larger proportion of phenotypic variance than
model Equation (6.3).
This model can be written more compactly and more generally for multiple phe-
notypes using matrix notation. Let XG be the N × M genotype matrix, deﬁned
by the genotypes of M SNPs for N individuals. Let Y be a corresponding N × K
phenotype vector, where K is the number of phenotypes (expression traits).
Y = XMB,
Y ∈RN×K,
XM ∈RN×4,
B ∈R4×K
(6.4)
where coeﬃcient B4,k corresponds to the genetic interaction term of phenotype k.
We have design the model matrix XM, so for each
 M
2

combination of SNPs in
XG, we construct the N × 4 matrix:
XM =

1
xm
xp
xm ⊙xp


where xm is the mth column of XG (i.e., the mth SNP over all individuals), and
xm ⊙xp is the Hadamard product (element-wise product) between vector xm and
xp.
As shown in Equation (6.4), we wish to discover the linear relationship between
SNP pairs and the phenotypes. That is, we wish to estimate a length-four coeﬃcient
vector B, such that XMB ≈Y . Given the independent Gaussian noise assumption,
this leads to the well-known maximum likelihood estimate of B, arriving at the
least square solution:
ˆB =
 XM⊤XM−1 XM⊤Y
(6.5)
We may then calculate the estimated output phenotype vector ˆY M = XM ˆB, with
the residual, δ, sum of squared error:
δM
SSE =
N
X
n=1

Yn −ˆY M
n
2
(6.6)
==PAGE:57==
40
Design Choices and Implementation
We can obtain the standard error of the estimated coeﬃcients, Sd

ˆB

using Mean
Squared Error (MSE) to estimate the variance. We scale the δM
SSE by the number
of parameters in the model (p = 4) to obtain the MSE:
Var

ˆB

= MSE
 XM⊤XM−1 = δM
SSE
N −4
 XM⊤XM−1
(6.7)
Sd

ˆB

=
s
δM
SSE
N −4 (XM⊤XM)−1
(6.8)
The signiﬁcance of the genetic interaction term is assessed via the Wald test,
W =


ˆB4,k
Sd

ˆB4,k



2
(6.9)
where W follows a χ2 distribution with degree of freedom 1.
Readers interested in more statistical details and assumptions of the tests, may refer
to Listing C.2 on page 97, that presents a workﬂow for ﬁtting the multiplicative
model to genotype data using the the statistical language R.
6.3.2
Implementation
To overcome the computational burden associated with performing millions or
billions of statistical tests, FastEpistasis have implemented highly speed optimized
solutions to the linear algebra operations described above. The computational
pipeline described in this chapter, used an unoﬃcal release 2.07 of FastEpista-
sis. This unoﬃcial release contain several additional optimization and options
customized to my project. The release was kindly provided by the main developer
of FastEpistasis, Thierry Schüpbach. I will brieﬂy outline some of the advantages
and speed-up gains of FastEpistasis.
FastEpistasis optimizes the computations by splitting the analysis tasks into three
separate applications: pre-computation, core-computation and post-computation.
During pre-computation, set of SNP pairs, deﬁned by user-speciﬁed SNP subsets A
and B, consists of all pairs of SNPs with one SNP in A and the other in B. SNPs
are ordered by those in A \ B, A ∩B and B \ A, to eﬃciently iterate through
the set of SNP pairs during the core computations. As the name implies, the
core-computation is were the statistical tests are carried out using the vectorized
(SSE) data from the pre-computation as input. In the post-computation phase,
data gathered during the computational phase is restructured to limit storage
throughput and summary output ﬁles are generated.
One important speed gain of FastEpistasis, is the algebraic solution to the normal
equation given in Equation (6.5). In contrast to PLINK, which estimates coeﬃcients
using singular value decomposition (SVD) factorization and estimates their standard
errors by applying a separate SVD to obtain the Moore-Penrose pseudo-inverse,
FastEpistasis uses a single QR decomposition to estimate the interaction coeﬃcient
==PAGE:58==
6.4 Empirical Enrichment of Spatial Epistasis
41
and standard error. Generally, the safest method in terms of numerical stability
is SVD. However, SVD comes with a much larger numerical cost, relative to the
QR decomposition. FastEpistasis supports the advanced vectorized SSE and AVX
instruction sets for additional speed-up.
To speed computations of multiple phenotypes, FastEpistasis uses an entirely
embarrassingly parallel framework to calculate epistasis tests over the dataset of
SNPs. And because the framework is embarrassingly parallel, FastEpistasis can
statically divide the work load among nodes and/or threads. Both Symmetric
MultiProcessing (SMP) and Message Passing Interface (MPI) architectures are
supported.
6.4
Empirical Enrichment of Spatial Epistasis
I used a empirical null distribution to compute the enrichment P-values for spatial
epistasis enrichment. This approach is conservative because it directly controls
for confounding variables and corrects for the data distributions. Empirical null
distributions does not rely on an analytical deﬁnition of a null model, where the
underlying assumptions would be diﬃcult to justify and could easily result in
statistical signiﬁcance where a resampling scheme would not. Yang et al. (2011)
showed that the typical null models for genetic interaction discovery is problematic
and recommended using empirical distributions. The downside of using empirical
distributions is that they are computationally intensive to generate because the
rely on high numbers of resampling.
6.4.1
Empirical P-value
The concept of an empirical P-value is easy to grasp because it is closely related
to traditional hypothesis testing. First, a suﬃcient number of samples are drawn
from the null model to generate a null distribution with high enough resolution to
determine statistical signiﬁcance. More samples leads to better approximation of
the analytical null distribution, corresponding to the blue histogram approximates
the black curve in Figure 6.1. Often 100 or 1000 samples are suﬃcient to form the
empirical null distribution. Next, the number null samples at least as extreme as
the observed score is determined and normalized by the number of null samples
generated to give the P-value (striped blue area in Figure 6.1) (Noble, 2009).
==PAGE:59==
42
Design Choices and Implementation
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
100
102
104
Score
Frequency
Null ≥ sobs
Null
sobs
Figure 6.1: The concept of the empirical P-value calculation. The blue histogram
illustrates the empirical null distribution of “scores” observed from shuﬄed interac-
tion pairs. The solid black curve is the true analytical null function (here modeled
as a S ∼F(5, 100) + c, where c = 100). The P-value associated with an observed
score of Sobs = 102 is equal to the area under the curve to the right of 102 (striped
blue). The P-value is estimated by counting null scores ≥102, leading to an
estimate of 7.6%.
6.4.2
Null Distribution
A key feature of this framework is the generation of the null distribution. The
following paragraph explains the assumptions and implementation of the null
distribution.
I assume that the observed interaction pairs from the Hi-C data is a realization of
sampling pairs of loci from a distribution of true physically interacting genomic loci.
Following this line of thought, the observed Hi-C data represents one such “spatial
proximate” sample (see the legend of Figure 6.2). In turn, the null distribution is
assumed to be a realization of sampling pairs of loci from a distribution of true
non-interacting genomic loci. In practical terms, the null distribution is generated
by shuﬄing interaction pairs to form non-interacting pairs. In this pipeline, 1,000
permutations were used to generate 1,000 null samples. We ensure that all pairs
in the null are not observed in the interaction table. Internally in the pipeline,
the null distribution is represented as a mapping of interactions fragments to null
samples∗Importantly, by shuﬄing the interaction pairs, we preserve the “genomic
properties” of the interaction table and avoid potential confounding factors in
the null distribution: e.g. bias might be introduced if the null distribution was
generated by sampling pairs of random loci from the entire genome.
∗In gory details, the generation of the null distribution is facilitated by a nested dictionary
that maps interaction fragments to the interaction table. The data structure contains Experiment
Identiﬁer (EID) (a unique identiﬁer for each sample from the null distribution) at the top-level,
and Experiment Interaction Identiﬁer (EIID) (a unique identiﬁer for each interaction for each sample
from the null distribution) at the outer level.
==PAGE:60==
6.5 Computational Pipeline
43
6.4.3
Mathematical Formulation
Here follows a more formal and mathematical formulation of the empirical P-value.
Suppose a vector, S, contains random values from the null distribution of non-
interacting genomic regions. Let Si be the number of genetic interactions from
the i-th null sample and let Sobs be the value of the observed number of genetic
interactions from interacting genomic regions. Then a right-tailed empirical P-value
for Sobs can be computed as follows∗:
Pempirical =
1 +
NP
i=1
1 · [Si ≥Sobs]
N + 1
(6.10)
Note that the above formula includes a commonly used pseudocount (North, Curtis,
and Sham, 2002; Knijnenburg et al., 2009) to avoid P-values of zero. Equation (6.10)
reveals two properties of the empirical P-value. First, the resolution of obtainable
P-values is 1/N. Secondly, the smallest achievable P-value is 1/N.
6.5
Computational Pipeline
With the basic components of the the pipeline explained earlier in this chapter, we
are now ready to put it all together. This section explains the individual steps in
the pipeline for the spatial epistasis discovery shown in Figure 6.2. This subject
is inherently technical and I recognize that the density of new terminology might
require an extra look at the glossary (Appendix D on page 99). Also, do not worry
about the footnotes - they are only intended for the most technical interested.
In step (1) the Hi-C data is transformed into an interaction table. The interaction
table deﬁnes the interaction pairs (pairs of genomic coordinates in close proximity).
Each interaction pair consists of two interactions fragments from diﬀerent chromo-
somes (inter-chromosomal). The size of the interaction fragments is determined
from the resolution of the Hi-C data and the fragment binning (see Section 3.2 on
page 15 for more details). The pipeline currently uses a ﬁxed resolution fragment
length of 10 kb.
In step (2) we deﬁne the local search space for spatial epistasis with the interaction
width (l) parameter. The search space is bounded by the symmetric distance l/2 bp
upstream and downstream from the midpoint of the interaction fragment considered.
We extract SNPs within a distance l/2 from the center of each interaction fragment.
The extracted SNPs are then partitioned into two sets†, of size n and m, where
all pairwise combinations are analyzed for epistasis using FastEpistasis. By now
we can appreciate the most important feature of this pipeline: when considering
all pairwise interactions between the two SNP sets, we test for epistasis between
both spatial proximate SNP-pairs and null SNP-pairs. (The later would in other
∗readers may want look up the Iverson bracket notation
† Partitioning of SNPs is important
to avoid calculation of redundant SNP-pairs. I developed a simple algorithm that sorts and
partitions SNPs based on the genomic coordinates to obtain minimum redundancy and maximize
speed. See also Section 6.3.2 for a description of the SNP sets A and B.
==PAGE:61==
44
Design Choices and Implementation
cases be considered a “waste product”.) In other words, we obtain the the null
distribution “for free” using this approach. This principle is illustrated in Figure 6.2
step (2), where the red colored pairwise interactions represent SNP pairs in spatial
proximity and blue lines represent SNP pairs from the null distribution.
In this pipeline, Bonferroni adjusted P-values are used to correct for multiple
hypothesis testing. FastEpistasis only outputs putative epistatic SNP pairs if they
reach a user speciﬁed signiﬁcance threshold. Hence the Bonferroni signiﬁcance
threshold needs to be precisely estimated prior to running FastEpistasis: if the
threshold is set too high, we might overlook epistatic SNP pairs, leading to an
increase in the false negative rate; conversely, if the threshold is set too low, the
computation process becomes I/O bound and thereby extremely slow∗. Fortunately,
we are able to calculate the exact number of statistical tests as the product of the
set size n and m†, prior to running FastEpistasis.
The output of FastEpistasis is compiled in step (3). For each probe, we extract the
Bonferroni signiﬁcant SNP pairs (hereafter referred to as SNP-probe pairs).
In step (4) the SNP-probe pairs are mapped to either the spatial proximate
sample or the null samples. The SNP-probe pairs are subsequently ﬁltered using
a “interaction pair” ﬁlter. This ﬁlter retains independent SNP-probe pairs by
indirectly accounting for the LD structure in the genotype data. For a given
interaction pair, the ﬁlter keeps only the sentinal SNP pair for each probe. In step
(5), the remaining SNP-probe pairs are counted for the spatial proximate sample
and each of the 1,000 null samples. This generates a distribution over SNP-probe
pair counts. We then identify the extremity of the observed spatial proximate
sample compared to the null distribution. Finally, we use Equation (6.10) on
page 43 to compute the empirical P-value.
∗I/O bound refers the condition in which a process progress is limited by the speed of the
I/O system. In this case the bottleneck will be writing terabytes to the hard drive.
† On a
technical note, the set size of n and m are slightly diﬀerent between each of the null samples
and the observed sample (spatial proximate). The diﬀerence is in set size is due to variations in
the density of genotyped SNPs throughout the genome. However, the Bonferroni correction is
uniformly distributed across the null samples.
==PAGE:62==
6.5 Computational Pipeline
45
Figure 6.2 (facing page): Spatial epistasis discovery pipeline.
The realization of the spatial proximate and null samples are coded in objects colored
in red and blue, respectively. The purple text color represents data integration steps.
(1) Pairs of inter-chromosomal spatial proximate interactions (interaction pairs, red
lines) are formed from the Hi-C interaction fragments. The null distribution (blue
lines) is generated by shuﬄing interaction pairs to form non-interacting pairs. (2)
For a given interaction width (l), SNPs within a distance l/2 from the center of
each fragment are extracted and partitioned into two sets, and then analyzed for
epistasis. The red colored lines represent SNP pairs in spatial proximity; blue lines
are SNP pairs from the null distribution; gray lines are SNP pairs that does not map
to any interactions. (3) FastEpistasis outputs the signiﬁcant SNP pairs for each
probe. (4) The SNP-probe pairs pairs are mapped to either the spatial proximate
or null distribution. (5) The SNP-probe pairs are ﬁltered using a “interaction
pair” ﬁlter. For a given interaction pair (here illustrated in light purple and orange
color), this ﬁlter keeps only the sentinal SNP pair for each probe. Finally the
empirical P-value can be calculated by counting the remaining SNP-probe pairs
and comparing the spatial proximate count to the null distribution.
...
chr1
chr2
chr22
FastEpistasis
SNP sets
Hi-C data
n x m 
SNP-pairs
rs2375
rs1407
rs1302
rs1707
rs1094
rs4691
rs4691
rs4691
rs5896
rs1691
rs1746
rs2630
rs4668
rs7299
rs4596
rs7299
rs2113
rs8030
rs2375
rs1407
Filter SNP-probe pairs to account for LD
1
2
Probe X
rs2375
rs1407
rs1407
rs1302
rs1707
rs1094
rs5896
rs1691
rs4691
rs1691
rs1746
rs1746
rs4668
rs7299
rs7299
rs2113
rs7299
rs2113
rs1407
rs1407
Inter-chromosomal interactions
q-value threshold
interaction
width (l)
interaction width (l)
Genetic data
Fit-Hi-C
Gene expression data
Probes
Combine results
Assign SNP pairs to 
Spatial Proximity and Null
SNP-probe pair count
5
Empirical P-value
rs2375
rs1407
rs1407
rs1302
rs1707
rs1094
rs1746
rs1746
rs4668
rs7299
rs7299
rs2113
4
rs7299
rs2113
rs5896
rs1691
Null samples
rs1407
rs1407
rs4691
rs1691
Spatial Proximity
Null
Spatial Proximity
Count SNP pairs
Null
Spatial Proximity vs. Null
Filter
Probe X
Probe Z
Probe Y
chr1
chr2
rs7299
rs2113
rs1707
rs1302
rs1094
interaction
width (l)
P-value 0
1
Keep sentinal SNP pair for each probe
Probe Z
rs2113
rs1094
Probe Y
rs2113
rs1094
Probe X
rs7299
rs1707
3 Significant SNP pairs
Null
Spatial proximity
Sample
Set A (n)
Set B (n)
==PAGE:63==
46
Design Choices and Implementation
==PAGE:64==
7
Results
This chapter contains the main results of my thesis. I will ﬁrst show a “proof of
concept” by replicating the epistatic SNP-probe pairs reported by Hemani et al.
Next I will present the enrichment results of spatial proximate epistasis. Selected
enrichment results are followed up by more detailed analyses.
Appendices are not always being read - I myself skip them most of the time.
However, I spent quite some time on the analysis in the appendix, so bare in mind
that they are good to read for additional insights.
7.1
Replication of Hemani et al.
This study sought to replicate the work of Hemani et al. (2014) as it provides a
way to validate the data processing pipeline used in this work. The replication of
Hemani et al. was made possible because the authors had published the signiﬁcance
of the genetic interactions in the replication cohorts, including the EGCUT cohort.
The P-values reported by Hemani et al. for the EGCUT cohort were derived from
rank transformed expression levels normalized using the “eQTL Mapping Pipeline”
(Deelen, Westra, and Franke, 2014).
434 out of the 501 SNP-probe pairs published by Hemani et al., could be recovered
in the EGCUT cohort after quality control performed in this study. The saturated
genotype model with nine degrees of freedom used by Hemani et al. was ﬁtted to
the genetic data. The expression residuals derived from the PEER analysis was
used as response variable. The P-values for the genetic interactions were found to
agree well with data published by Hemani et al. (Figure 7.1 a; Pearson correlation
of P-values r = 0.66; log-transformed P-values rlog = 0.96;). Not surprisingly,
the 30 SNP-probe pairs replicated in the independent cohorts, showed the highest
correlation. Examples of replicated and non-replicated SNP-probe pairs can be
found in Appendix B.1 on page 81.
Next, the P-values were tested for sensitivity to the choice of genotype model.
The full saturated model was compared to the much simpler multiplicative model,
because the latter model was used for spatial epistasis discovery (Section 7.2 on
the next page). The P-values derived from the two models were similar (r = 0.46,
rlog = 0.96).
Together, this analysis showed that the diﬀerence in gene expression data nor-
malization method used by Hemani et al. and this work, does not play a critical
role for the epistatic signals with large magnitude - they still remain signiﬁcant.
Likewise, the multiplicative and saturated genotype model did not aﬀect whether
a SNP-probe pair with strong signal would be deemed signiﬁcant or not. However,
the choice of normalization method and genotype model may inﬂuence the interpre-
tation of genetic interactions with less signal. Unfortunately the eﬀect estimates
==PAGE:65==
48
Results
of epistatic SNPs were not made public, so it was not possible to compare the
concordance of direction of eﬀects to the work of Hemani et al.
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGGG
G
GGG
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
GGG
GG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GG
GGGG
G
GGGGGG
GGG
GGG
GGGG
G
G
GGGGGGG
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
GGGGG
GGG
GG
GGGGGGG
GGG
GG
GGGG
GGGG
G
GGGGGG
GGGGGGGG
G
GGGGGG
GGGGGG
GGGG
GGGGGGGGGGG
GG
GGG
GGGGGGG
GGGG
GGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGG
GGGGGG
G
GGG
GGGGG
G
GG
0
10
20
30
40
0
10
20
30
40
−log10(p)  [saturated model]
−log10(p)  [Hemani et al.]
(a) Replication of Hemani et al.
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
GGGGGGG
GGG
GG
GGG
GG
G
G
GGGG
GG
GGG
GGG
GGGG
G
GGG
GGG
GGGG
GGGGG
GGGGGGG
GG
GGGG
GGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGG
GGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GG
GG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGG
GGGGGG
GGGG
GGGGGGG
0
10
20
30
40
0
10
20
30
40
−log10(p)  [saturated model]
−log10(p)  [multiplicative model]
(b) Comparison of saturated and multi-
plicative model.
Figure 7.1: P-value comparison for 434 genetic interactions. Points colored in
red represents the 30 SNP-probe pairs replicated across cohorts. The straight line
represents x = y.
7.2
Spatial Proximate Epistasis Enrichment
This section contains the primary results of my thesis. I describe the results in
two tiers of analysis depth. First I give an overview of cell type-speciﬁc spatial
epistasis enrichment. Next, I scrutinize the initial results, and provide a more
detailed analysis of the validity of the results.
7.2.1
Cell Type-speciﬁc Spatial Epistasis Enrichment
Hi-C data from three diﬀerent cell lines were used to deﬁne sets of proximate
inter-chromosomal genomic interactions. Spatial epistasis was calculated between
these regions for 9,269 probes using FastEpistasis. The resulting SNP-probe pairs
were subsequently ﬁltered to account for the genotype correlations (LD structure).
Spatial epistasis was assessed by counting epistatic SNP-probe pairs after pair
level ﬁltering to account for LD structure (referred to as “interaction pair” ﬁltering,
see Figure 6.2 on page 45). A null distribution was constructed from genomic
regions that were not spatially proximate. Diﬀerent scenarios or “parametrizations”
of the 3D genomic proximity were used, i.e.
diﬀerent thresholds for deﬁning
spatial proximate regions (interaction width and q-value). A set of negative control
parametrizations was constructed for the hIMR90 and hESC cell lines by random
sampling of interactions with contact count = 1.
In total, more than 12 years of single threaded computation time were used to carry
out the statistical test for epistasis shown in Table 7.1. A total of 1.33 · 1014 linear
regression models models were ﬁtted and tested for signiﬁcance of the interaction
term. Although the largest of the of the calculations (hESC[l = 2, 500bp; q = 10−13],
∼5 years computation single threaded time) included more than 500 trillion tests
==PAGE:66==
7.2 Spatial Proximate Epistasis Enrichment
49
for epistasis, it only covered 0.35% of the possible two-locus epistasis tests for the
genotyping data. For the same parametrization, the genomic loci searched for
epistasis covered 6.62% of the genome.
Table 7.1 shows the enrichment P-values resulting from diﬀerent parametriza-
tions of spatial epistasis.
Histograms underlying the P-values can be found
in Appendix B.2 on page 83.
Two parametrizations of spatial proximity for
the hIMR90 cell line were enriched for spatial epistasis (one-sided test, α =
0.05): hIMR90[l = 1, 000bp; q = 10−6] and hIMR90[l = 2, 500bp; q = 10−7]. These
parametrizations used medium range interaction width and a non-conservative
q-value threshold. hIMR90[l = 1, 000bp; q = 10−6] showed a two-fold enrichment
in the number of epistatic SNP-probe pairs compared to the mean of the null
(Figure B.2 on page 83, b). Using a more narrow interaction width (hIMR90[l =
500bp; q = 10−6]) resulted in marginal signiﬁcance while a very wide interaction
width (hIMR90[l = 50, 000bp; q = 10−9]) showed no enrichment (Figure B.2 on
page 83, a and d). No hESC or K562 parametrizations exhibited enrichment for
spatial epistasis. The negative control parametrizations did not enrich for spatial
epistasis as expected. Two additional ﬁltering strategies of the SNP-probe pairs
were applied to test the robustness of the enrichment P-values. Using no ﬁlter and
the “chromosome pair” ﬁlter used by Hemani et al. did not change the signiﬁcance
of the P-values in Table 7.1.
Cell line
Interaction
width, l
q-value
(ninteractions)
No. epistasis
tests per
probe†
P-value‡
hIMR90
500 bp
10−6 (26, 325)
260,273,820
0.078
1,000 bp
10−6 (26, 325)
1,042,826,407
0.001 *
2,500 bp
10−7 (8, 114)
733,442,624
0.020 *
50,000 bp
10−9 (1, 021)
4,284,422,018
0.927
hESC
500 bp
10−16 (2, 665)
3,222,025
0.257
500 bp
10−14 (11, 919)
57,787,904
0.620
1,000 bp
10−12 (39, 966)
2,236,957,368
0.643
2,500 bp
10−13 (24, 084)
5,560,830,560
0.143
K562
1,000 bp
NA (1, 263)
1,485,960
0.540
5,000 bp
NA (1, 263)
28,045,983
0.780
hIMR90control
1,000 bp
NA (5, 000)
45,668,788
0.169
hESCcontrol
1,000 bp
NA (5, 000)
45,714,894
0.317
Table 7.1: Initial spatial epistasis enrichment. P-values were calculated after
ﬁltering the SNP-probe pairs using the “interaction pair” ﬁlter. An asterisk marks
signiﬁcant enrichment (α = 0.05). The q-values threshold is not applicable for the
K562 cell line because the model used to analyze the Hi-C data does not output
FDR values. The control cell lines were constructed by sampling 5,000 interactions
with contact count = 1.
†total number of statistical tests between interacting and non-interacting loci per probe.
‡P-value derived from ﬁltered SNP-probe pairs.
==PAGE:67==
50
Results
7.2.2
Dubious Epistasis underlying hIMR90 Enrichment
The initial results shown in Table 7.1 indicated presence of spatial epistasis enrich-
ment for two parametrizations of 3D genomic proximity for the hIMR90 interactions:
hIMR90[l = 1, 000bp; q = 10−6] and hIMR90[l = 2, 500bp; q = 10−7]. This section
focuses solely on these two parametrizations and studies the validity of enrichment
results in more details. Speciﬁcally, I made two observations indicating that the
spatial epistasis enrichment is of likely dubious nature.
SNP-probe Pairs do not Co-localize
One interesting biological aspect of
epistasis inﬂuencing gene expression, is how the epistatic SNPs and probes are
spatially organized. To answer this question I investigated the chromosomal co-
localization between SNP pairs and probes, i.e how often at least one of the epistatic
SNPs was located on the same chromosome as the probe.
Both hIMR90[l = 1, 000bp; q = 10−6] and hIMR90[l = 2, 500bp; q = 10−7] showed
low SNP-probe co-localization: 8.99% and 7.38% of the spatial proximate epistasis
pairs, respectively. The same tendency was apparent when also considering the
non-spatial pairs (Table B.2 on page 91). Interestingly, the fraction of co-localizing
SNP-probe was equally low for the set of SNP-probe pair with higher conﬁdence of
epistasis (minimum GCC ≥3, see Appendix B.3 on page 85 for a description of
minimum GCC ﬁltering). These data suggest that both epistatic SNPs act in trans.
This result does not agree with published ﬁndings of marginal eﬀects (eQTLs) in
human blood (Westra et al., 2013), where the majority of the associations act in
cis (cis-eQTLs).
SNP-probe Pairs Overﬁt the Data
A major issue with the spatial epistasis
enrichment signal shown in Table 7.1 is that the underlying epistatic eﬀect estimates
may not be valid. To avoid any bias in results, I considered the genotype class
count (GCC) of putative epistatic loci as a measure of conﬁdence for the genetic
interaction. Speciﬁcally, I deﬁned the minimum GCC, as the minimum GCC
for any combination of genotypes. Hence minimum GCC measures how well the
two-locus genotype count matrix is populated and is in units of “data points”. I
demonstrated that low GCCs may cause spurious epistasis results (Appendix B.3
on page 85). The multiplicative model ﬁtted to SNP pairs with low GCCs may
give misleading estimates of the eﬀect size and P-value for the interaction term
because of overﬁtting and the presence of high leverage points (see Figure B.6 for
examples of this issue).
To investigate whether minimum GCC biased the observed enrichment signal,
SNP pairs were ﬁltered with a second ﬁlter based on their minimum GCC. In
this ﬁlter only SNP pairs with at least three data points in each genotype class
were kept (a threshold of ﬁve data points was used in Hemani et al. (2014)).
See Appendix B.4 on page 88 for ﬁgures and tables related to the GCC ﬁltered
results. The SNP-probe pair counts decreased dramatically when the mimimum
GCC ﬁlter was applied (Table B.1). For both hIMR90[l = 1, 000bp; q = 10−6] and
hIMR90[l = 2, 500bp; q = 10−7] only two SNP-probe pairs remained after ﬁltering,
resulting in removal of spatial epistasis enrichment (PGCC filter = 0.28 and 0.26,
==PAGE:68==
7.2 Spatial Proximate Epistasis Enrichment
51
respectively).
Figure B.8 on page 89 shows the enrichment histograms when
applying the minimum GCC ﬁlter. Reversing the order of the “interaction pair”
ﬁlter and minimum GCC did not change the signiﬁcance of the results (Figure B.9
on page 90).
In summary, scrutinizing the epistatic signal underlying the enrichment signal
showed that the majority of SNP-probe pairs were a result of the underpowered
design of this study, resulting in model overﬁtting for variants with rare alleles.
These data suggest that the spatial epistasis enrichment was false.
==PAGE:69==
52
Results
==PAGE:70==
8
Discussion
Several contributions of this project have already been discussed in their respective
chapters, so I order to minimize redundancy, I will not repeat the treatment of these
subjects. In particular, the proposed spatial epistasis hypothesis was discussed in
Chapter 4 and a discussion of the design features of the associated computational
framework was covered in Chapter 6.
I have presented a new framework, which uses information of the spatial organiza-
tion of the human genome, to limit the search space when searching for interactions
between SNPs in large-scale genotyping data. I proposed the “spatial epistasis” hy-
pothesis and reasoned over its biological plausibility. I argued why known chromatin
interactions might provide a reasonable biological prior for genetic interactions.
The developed framework is distinguished from existing methods that propose
either to exhaustively scanning all SNP pairs or to only test marginally signiﬁcant
loci. My method provides an alternative to these approaches by facilitating biologi-
cal interpretation of the ﬁndings, something lacking in many association studies.
If the biological prior of spatial epistasis is truly informative, the framework is
able to select potentially good SNP pair candidates, and thereby increase the
statistical power; and furthermore, detect true epistastic SNP pairs missed by
methods testing all pairs exhaustively. Few other methods have been proposed
that use biological knowledge to guide the search for epistasis. These methods
have used protein–protein interaction networks to drive the search for interacting
SNPs. However, protein interaction-based methods are restricted to select SNP
pairs in gene regions that encode the corresponding proteins. Hence these methods
fail to investigate the large portion of regulatory variants in intergenic regions. I
argued that my framework is more suited to detect and provide biological insights
of associated regulatory variants. My framework integrates 3D maps of the genome
folding, which have been shown to inform about multiple regulatory features of the
genome. As such, the developed framework contains biological knowledge critical
for gaining identifying and interpretation of regulatory variants. This quality
represents an important contribution of my work, since most genetic associations
discovered today are located in gene deserts with a regulatory function. Moreover,
I argued that the method constitutes a conceptual framework, which can be gener-
alized to use other biological priors or statistical models, and ultimately test future
hypothesis around the molecular mechanisms driving epistasis. I provided evidence
that this approach is computationally feasible for large-scale search of epistasis,
although it was diﬃcult to quantify its statistical powerful. I found that the study
was underpowered to detect large-scale epistasis. Thus my work did not provide
compelling evidence of epistasis inﬂuencing human gene expression.
Despite the lack of statistical power to detect epistasis at this scale, my method
allows to test biological hypothesis of the molecular mechanisms causing epistasis.
To summarize, I regard this framework useful for the following reasons concerning
its potential to: ascertain of the role of epistasis in the genetic architecture of
==PAGE:71==
54
Discussion
human complex traits, thus contributing to the controversy around epistasis and
missing heritability; identify (regulatory) biological mechanisms driving epistasis;
uncover new genetic interactions in human disease data.
Replication of Previous Epistatic Eﬀects
As a proof-of-concept, I rediscov-
ered the epistatic eﬀects reported by Hemani et al. (2014). The eﬀect size estimates
of the genetic interaction term was found to be highly similar (rlog = 0.96). Firstly,
this result suggests that the three parameter multiplicative allelic model performs at
least equally well in detecting epistasis, compared to the nine parameter saturated
genotype model used by Hemani et al. However, there is no basis for real power
comparison of the two models. Secondly, the result indicated that normalizing
gene expression data using PEER is comparable to using a mixed eﬀect model
with known covariates. Additional analysis provided further evidence that PEER
is eﬀectively removing batch eﬀects and other confounding factors from gene ex-
pression data (Figure A.7). Hence for future studies, I recommend using PEER for
a fast, robust and eﬀective way of removing confounding eﬀects.
Cell type discrepancy
The EGCUT expression data was derived from whole
peripheral blood samples. To deﬁne spatial interactions between genomic regions, I
used publicly available Hi-C data derived from two studies spanning three diﬀerent
cell lines: K562 from Lan et al. (2012), hESC and hIMR90 from Dixon et al.
(2012). K562 leukemia cells share many properties to hematopoietic cells (Young
and Hwang-Chen, 1981), that give rise to all human blood cells. Hence, the cell
type of the K562 Hi-C data are, to some degree, consistent with the cell type(s) of
the expression levels. Unfortunately the K562 cell line poses another problem: a
hallmark of leukemia cells is the presence of the Philadelphia chromosome, a speciﬁc
chromosomal abnormality that is the result of a reciprocal translocation between
chromosome 9 and 22 (Drexler, MacLeod, and Uphoﬀ, 1999). A explorative analysis
showed that the interactions observed in K562 cells between 9q34 and 22q11 are
labeled as inter-chromosomal, although they are actually intra-chrosomomal in
the K562 genome. In total more than 20% of the inter-chromosomal interactions
in the K562 cells are between chromosome 9 and 22. Interestingly, this suggests
that Hi-C data can be used to study chromosomal translocation in cancer cell
lines, as they will exhibit higher than expected inter-chromosomal Hi-C contact
intensities. Such application of Hi-C have previously been suggested by others
(Engreitz, Agarwala, and Mirny, 2012). A careful inspection of the data, revealed
that the Lan et al. data quality is questionable and contains several “genomic
hotspot” artifacts (Figure A.11).
The two remaining Hi-C cell lines were derived from human embryonic stem cells
and human lung ﬁbroblast. Hence there is a mismatch between the cell types
from the Hi-C and expression samples. This discrepancy between cell types might
inﬂuence downstream results. The Hi-C and expression data should be matched by
tissue or cell type to ensure that the genome folding and expression levels reﬂect
the same cellular developmental state and biology. However, increasing evidence
suggests substantial conservation of 3D genome structure across the mammals
(Dixon et al., 2012; Rao et al., 2014). In particular certain features, like TADs,
seem to be cell-type invariant (Nora et al., 2012; Dixon et al., 2012; Rao et al.,
==PAGE:72==
55
2014). If this holds true, data from diﬀerent cell types will be of less concern.
However, single-cell Hi-C experiments have consistently revealed that long-range
structures of the genome organization (e.g. interdomain and trans-chromosomal
contact structure) are highly variable between individual cells (Nagano et al., 2013).
Hence that exact eﬀect this cell type discrepancy remains unclear. It is likely that
technological advancements will render this concern important: the promise of
aﬀordable single-cell RNA-seq (Macosko et al., 2015) and single-cell Hi-C (Nagano
et al., 2013) will allow researches to generate high-resolution proﬁles of individual
cells, hence facilitating the study cell-to-cell variability of spatial epistasis.
Spurious Epistatic Signals
The initial spatial epistasis signal from the hIMR90
cell line were examined in two ways. The co-localization analysis revealed that only
a small fraction of the SNP-probe pairs co-localized on chromosomes, suggesting a
trans acting epistatic network. Although this result does not agree with the eQTLs
discovered in blood (Westra et al., 2013) and the (apparent) epistatic networks
reported by Hemani et al. (2014), it is consistent with the proposed involvement of
transcriptional factories in mediating epistasis (Göndör and Ohlsson, 2009). This
multi-interaction scenario is tentatively supported by the identiﬁcation of up to
ﬁve chromosomes simultaneously in contact with each other Zhao et al., 2006.
However, this would require that a least two of the three chromosomes involved in
the interactions, would loop out of conﬁnes of their CTs.
Although there is convincing evidence that spatial enrichment signal was false, it
is interesting to note that three of the four parametrizations involving hIMR90
chromosomal contacts exhibited marginal signiﬁcant enrichment. This raises an
interesting question: if spatial epistasis exist, is it cell type speciﬁc? If the answer
is yes, then the decrease in statistical power when using whole peripheral blood
samples, containing mixtures of cell types may hamper, or simply prohibit, detecting
of spatial epistasis.
The strength of the projects is, to my best judgment, not its results but rather the
frameworks developed and proposed hypothesis. These contributions have opened
up for new research questions and future analysis involving new (three-dimensional)
perspectives of genetics and genome biology.
==PAGE:73==
56
Discussion
==PAGE:74==
9
Conclusion
This thesis aimed to uncover regulatory molecular mechanisms that can cause
epistatic interactions inﬂuencing human gene expression, thus providing a more
complete understanding of epistasis.
In Chapter 1, I motivated the need for
more complete and biological realistic genetic models that include epistatic eﬀects.
Clarifying the deﬁnition of biological and statistical epistasis was a requirement
for understanding genotype-phenotype relationships in the presence of epistatic
eﬀects. The linear genetic models described in Chapter 2 provided the fundamental
basis for modeling epistasis. In Chapter 3, I described a new paradigm for genome
biology wherein genomes are organized around gene regulatory factors that govern
cell identity. I introduced the 3D genome maps generated by the experimental
technique Hi-C, that have paved the way for this new paradigm. I focused on
the hierarchical structure of the genome and the basic components of chromatin
organizations, such as TADs.
Together Chapters 2 and 3, set the stage for putting forward the main premise of
my thesis in Chapter 4. I proposed the “spatial epistasis” hypothesis and reasoned
over its biological plausibility. I hypothesized that physical proximity of interacting
genomic regions provides a spatial scaﬀold to identify genetic interactions in human
genotyping data.
I developed a computational framework for testing the spatial epistasis hypothesis
by performing enrichment analysis of spatial epistasis. As presented in Chapter 6,
the model is designed to test for spatial epistasis in a fast and eﬃcient way, hence
overcoming some of the major statistical and computational challenges related to
searching for epistasis. The framework was designed with the ability to model
diﬀerent scenarios of spatial epistasis by parameterizing the conﬁdence of physical
interaction between genomic loci and their interaction width. I explained that
the framework employed an empirical null distribution that directly controls for
confounding factors, when assessing enrichment signiﬁcance. Finally, I argued
that the framework can easily be generalized to support more advanced statistical
models of epistasis and, more importantly, alternative biological priors driving the
search for interacting SNPs. Ultimately, this framework provides a powerful way of
testing a broad spectrum of hypothesis beyond spatial epistasis.
As a proof of concept, the framework successfully replicated previously reported
epistatic eﬀects. This also served as quality assurance of the genetic data and
normalized expression data, and paved the way for testing the spatial epistasis
hypothesis.
In Chapter 7, the hypothesis was tested under diﬀerent scenarios of spatial epistasis,
including genome structures from multiple cell lines. For human lung ﬁbroblast
cells, I identiﬁed a strong enrichment signal of spatial epistasis (Pemperical < 0.001).
After scrutinizing the putative epistatic SNPs, it was established that more than
99% was spurious epistatic eﬀects attributed to the underpowered statistics.
==PAGE:75==
58
Conclusion
I conclude that although this study was underpowered to detect epistasis at this
scale, my results do not support the existence of prevailing epistasis inﬂuencing
human gene expression. Ultimately, there is no evidence to deﬁnitively reject
or accept the spatial epistasis hypothesis. Nevertheless, I expect the conceptual
framework to be valuable in future genetic association studies, because it has
the potential to provide the much needed biological interpretation of regulatory
variants.
==PAGE:76==
Appendix and Epilogue
A major part of my work could not be ﬁtted into regular chapters of my thesis.
Instead, to avoid distractions from the main story, I have chosen to place the addi-
tional material in the following appendices∗. Appendix A describes PEER analyses
of the expression data and explorative analyses of the Hi-C data. Supplementary
epistasis results are given in Appendix B.
∗Interestingly, there is evidence that suggests avoiding appendices. Kahneman (2011) proposed
the peak-end rule, which states that people largely judge an experience based on how they felt
at its peak (the most intense point) and at the end of the experience, rather than based on the
total sum or average of whole the experience. (This fascinating rule was discovered by studying
colonoscopy examinations: one group of patients had a colonoscopy which was short but intensely
painful throughout. In another group of patients, the colonoscopy was far longer and just as
painful at its peak - thus involving more pain in total - with one important modiﬁcation: the
pain was reduced at the end of the examination. The second group of patients reported a better
experience and less discomfort, even though they had experienced more pain overall.) Hence, the
critical point is how the story ends. Knowing that most appendices are not as exciting as the
main text, and this is no exception, I risk ruining the reader’s whole experience of my thesis. I
will at least let this be the excuse if you ended up not liking my thesis...
==PAGE:77==
60
Conclusion
==PAGE:78==
A
Supplementary Methods
A.1
Population Structure
A.1.1
Population Structure
PLINK 1.9 (Chang et al., 2015) was used to calculate genome-wide IBS pairwise
distance measures using the –genome ﬂag. Four MDS components was calculated
using –cluster –mds-plot 4.
Population structure can be identiﬁed by inspection of scatter plots of MDS
components. Appearance of clusters on such plots, indicates population structure.
Figure A.1 shows that there is little population structure in the EGCUT cohort
- the samples are centrally homogeneous distributed. This result agrees with the
reported little admixture of the Estonian population (Nelis et al., 2009).
C1
0
0.01
0.02
−0.01
0
0.010.02
Corr:
−1.04e−06
Corr:
7.59e−07
Corr:
4.96e−07
C2
0
0.01
−0.01
0
0.01
Corr:
2.11e−07
Corr:
2.23e−07
C3
−0.01
0
0.01
−0.02 −0.01
0
0.01
Corr:
−5.85e−08
C4
0
0.01
−0.01
0
0.01
Figure A.1: EGCUT population structure. The matrix elements are the four
MDS components (C1 −C4). The lower and upper diagonal show scatterplots and
Pearson correlation, respectively. Each sample (n = 832) is represented by a single
point.
==PAGE:79==
62
Supplementary Methods
A.2
PEER Analysis
Gene expression levels measured by any high-throughput technology are inherently
noisy and contain biases needed to be controlled or removed. Leek and Storey
(2007) showed that batch eﬀects and other confounding eﬀects in gene expression
data reduce power in the analysis and may introduce spurious signal to many
genes. PEER (Stegle et al., 2012) is a software package for learning confounding
eﬀects in gene expression data. Several other groups have developed statistical
approaches to account for latent variables of expression data. Leek and Storey
(2007) developed surrogate variable analysis (SVA) - a factor analysis method for
identifying expression heterogeneity components. Another tool, “eQTL mapper”
(Deelen, Westra, and Franke, 2014) uses principal component analysis (PCA) to
identify confounding non-genetic components. PEER’s main advantage compared
to other methods, is the ﬂexibility and complexity control of a probabilistic Bayesian
model.
PEER is implemented in C++ with a user-friendly interface to R (R Core Team,
2015).
A.2.1
Bayesian Model
The model underlying this PEER assumes that gene expression levels can be mod-
eled as additive eﬀects from independent sources. Speciﬁcally, these contributions
can be modeled as known and hidden factors. Figure A.2 shows diﬀerent levels of
accounting for additive eﬀects of gene expression levels for eQTL discovery. Most
studies include known factors that are easily obtained, such as age and gender.
However, fewer studies account for hidden factors, such as technical and batch
eﬀects.
Figure A.2: General additive model for gene expression variability. Each factor
in the model contributes to the gene expression variability. Typical eQTL studies
model only genotypes and known factors. Illustration adopted from Stegle et al.
(2010).
PEER learns the eﬀects of the known and hidden factors jointly across individuals
and gene probes. A graphical representation of the PEER model is shown in Fig-
ure A.3. Simply put, PEER models the observed gene expression levels as the sum
of contributions from the known and hidden factor models. Once these factors have
==PAGE:80==
A.2 PEER Analysis
63
been learned, they can be regressed out using linear regression, and the expression
residuals can be used for downstream analysis, e.g. epistasis discovery.
An important feature of PEER is the gamma prior on the inverse variance αc and
βk for weights of observed and hidden factors, respectively. This prior introduces
automatic relevance detection (ARD), forcing the weights of unused factors to
zero and thereby switching them oﬀ. In this way, ARD provides model complexity
control by automatically learning the the eﬀective number of covariates. Hence,
the user needs only set K to a suﬃciently large value. This is in contrast to
non-probabilistic factor analysis methods (e.g. PCA-type models), where there is
no automatic way of estimating optimal number of unobserved factors.
PEER learns the eﬀects of the factors using variational Bayesian inference. The
main purpose of variational Bayes is to approximate the posterior distribution of
variables in the model. In each iteration, the parameters for the posterior estimates
are updated to maximize the lower bound. The lower bound is the marginal
likelihood (“evidence”) of the observed data. The algorithm can be considered an
extension of the EM (expectation-maximization) algorithm and provides locally-
optimal solutions. A more detailed introduction of variational Bayesian inference
is beyond the scope of this section; see Bishop (2007) and Jordan (1999) for an
introduction to this framework.
==PAGE:81==
64
Supplementary Methods
Figure A.3: Bayesian network of the PEER model for gene expression variation.
The model combines observed factors (blue) and hidden factors (red) to explain
the gene expression levels (gray). The solid rectangles indicate that contained
variables are duplicated for each individual (j), gene probe (g) observed factor (c)
and hidden factor (k). fcj is the measured covariate for each individual j; vgc is the
weight for each gene g, with αc as the inverse variance parameter of the gamma
prior. xkj is the latent variables for each individual; wgk is the weight for each
gene g, with βk as the inverse variance parameter of the gamma prior. τg is the
precision parameter for the global Gaussian noise. Illustration adopted from Stegle
et al. (2010).
==PAGE:82==
A.2 PEER Analysis
65
A.2.2
Running PEER
The required input for PEER is a gene expression matrix and speciﬁcation of the
maximal number of hidden factors (K) to infer from the data. Optionally, the user
can specify input matrices shown in Table A.1 for more advanced modeling.
Optional settings
Description
Covariates matrix
Matrix specifying the known factors, e.g. age
and sex.
Uncertainty matrix
Matrix of uncertainty estimates (i.e. variance)
speciﬁc to each gene probe.
Prior connectivity matrix
Matrix specifying a priori probabilities of the
eﬀect of hidden factors on speciﬁc genes.
Table A.1: Optional PEER settings.
A.2.3
PEER in Practice - Lessons Learned
To become comfortable with PEER’s model in practice, several properties of PEER
were investigated. This section summaries the most important ﬁndings. Both the
EGCUT expression data and a smaller synthetic example data set was used to
perform simulations.
PEER Run Time
PEER’s run time scales linearly with number of individuals and number of genes,
and quadratically with the number of learned factors.
Sensitivity to Variance Stabilization Method
This work found that PEER is sensitive to the variance stabilization method. Three
types of variance stabilization were compared: log2, inverse normal transformation
(INT) and no variance stabilization. The INT was performed using rntransform
from the GenABEL R-package (Aulchenko et al., 2007). PEER did not converge
when using non-variance stabilized data. The algorithm converged very quickly
when using the INT data. This is likely because of normalization method enforces
a strict distribution of the data. log2 transformation of the data provided a good
compromise between convergence time and simplicity in the transformation function.
Hence this work recommends using this method for variance stabilization.
PEER Models Gene Probes Jointly - More Data is Better
It is of interest to know whether PEER models genes independently or jointly.
To investigate this, a ﬁve nested data sets, Dn were created from the EGCUT
==PAGE:83==
66
Supplementary Methods
cohort:
D1 ⊇D2 ⊇· · · ⊇D5
Where D1 is the full data set with all gene probes and Dn contains 1/n part of
the gene probes. For each data set, the model PEER was ﬁtted and the residuals
extracted. The Pearson correlation, r1,n, between the residuals of the full data set
and the nested subset were calculated. The correlation decreased with decrease in
size nested data set, i.e. r1,n+1 < r1,n.
PEER learns the confounding eﬀects best with more data - at the expense of
increasing computation time (correspondence with the PEER team; Leopold Parts,
11/29/14). For this reason, it is advantageous to subset on probes (QC, removing
unmapped probes) after running PEER. The intuition is that all probes, including
low quality probes, will have the same confounding pattern, which jointly improves
PEER’s ability to learn the confounding factors.
Choosing k and the Eﬀect of Automatic Relevance Detection
Running PEER with diﬀerent number of hidden factors, k, gives comparable PEER
expression residuals for the EGCUT cohort. Mean correlation between PEER
expression residuals for k = 10 and k = 50 was r = 0.956, indicating that there is
little eﬀect of using a very large k, except for the computational cost. (One may
contrast this result to the one shown in Figure A.9 on page 71). This work found
that k needs only to be set to a suﬃciently large value, so that k ≥ktrue. This is
due to the ARD feature of PEER, which switches oﬀunimportant factors. ktrue
can be estimated from inspecting the posterior variance of the factor weights (see
Figure A.5 on page 68).
PEER as a Simple Linear Model
This work sought to ﬁnd PEER’s relation to a simple regression model. First,
PEER was run on a synthetic data set with k = 0 and including four covariates.
Next, a linear regression model was ﬁt to the data with the four covariates as
explanatory variables. The residuals derived from the two models were compared
and found to correlate perfectly. This result shows that using PEER with k = 0
is equivalent to using a regression model. We conclude that PEER includes the
covariates as ﬁxed covariates and regress them out using a linear model.
A.2.4
PEER Analysis on EGCUT
PEER Settings
We compared several settings using PEER to remove confounding eﬀects from
the EGCUT expression data. We considered convergence of the algorithm and
computation time as the main criteria for selecting the ﬁnal settings shown in
Table A.2.
==PAGE:84==
A.2 PEER Analysis
67
Primary settings
Value
Prior variance stabilization method
log2 transformation
Number of hidden factors
50
Secondary settings
Value
Know factors (covariates)
4 MDS genetic components
Max iterations
1000
Global mean
No
Uncertainty matrix
No
Prior connectivity matrix
No
Table A.2: Final PEER settings for EGCUT cohort.
Diagnostics
PEER performs Baysian variational inference where, in each iteration, the pa-
rameters for the posterior estimates are updated to maximize the lower bound.
The lower bound is the log of the evidence P(data). Thus, monitoring the lower
bound is useful for checking that the inference performs correctly (i.e. the bound
is increasing) and monitoring convergence (i.e. the bound is not increasing a lot).
This improvement in the bound between two iterations is tested against the cutoﬀ
to determine when to stop the algorithm.
G
G
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG GGG GGGG
GG GGGGGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
−30
−20
−10
0
0
50
100
150
Iterations
Normalized value
G
G
Lower bound
Residual variance
Figure A.4: PEER convergence diagnostics. The variational Bayesian inference
algorithm converged after i = 176 iterations. The lower bound (red line; see also
Appendix A.2.1 on page 62) describes the ﬁt of the model. The residual variance
(blue line) is used to monitor the magnitude of the change between the iterations.
Both lines show an initial sharp change before ﬂatten out, indicating that the model
converges. For the purpose of clarity in the trends, the lower bound and residual
variance are max-scaled; the residual variance is furthermore log2 transformed.
Interpretation of Inferred Factors
The importance of the inferred factors were assessed by the posterior variance
of their weights. The factors were grouped into three categories based on their
importance (Figure A.5). Five factors with a positive posterior variance (α > 0)
were identiﬁed as “important”. The four covariates (genetic MDS components) were
==PAGE:85==
68
Supplementary Methods
found to be unimportant, indicating that the population structure of the EGCUT
is not relevant as a covariate. Figure A.6 shows the inter-correlation structure of
the ﬁve most important inferred factors.
−10
0
10
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
Inferred factors  (k)
Factor variance  (log2(1 α))
Covariates
Important
Not important
Figure A.5: PEER inferred factor importance. The variance of the inferred PEER
factors can be interpreted as the “factor importance”. Factors k = 5...9 (green)
with a positive score on the y-axis are considered “important” factors. Factors
k = 1..4 (red) are the four genetic MDS components included as covariates. This
plot further illustrates the ARD feature of PEER (see Appendix A.2.1 on page 62,
indicated by the unimportant group of factors, k = 10...54 (blue).
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
−1
−0.8
−0.6
−0.4
−0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
PEER 1
PEER 2
PEER 3
PEER 4
PEER 5
0.24
−0.73
−0.11
−0.24
−0.04
0.02
0.02
−0.01
−0.03
−0.01
Figure A.6: Factor inter-correlation matrix. Inter-correlation of PEER factors.
PEER 1 and PEER 3 are highly correlated
To validate that PEER learns confounding factors in the expression data, the
inferred factors were correlated with measured covariates (Figure A.7).
The
measured covariates used for this analysis are typical covariates such as gender,
age, batch, RIN and blood count numbers (see Table A.3 on page 70 for a full list
of the covariates). These covariates were not included when the PEER factors were
constructed, for the purpose of interpretation of the inferred PEER factors. The
strongest correlation was observed between the most important PEER factor, PEER
1, and the Batch covariate (r = −0.45). Additionally PEER 2 showed correlation
to both RNA quality (RIN) and neutrophil count. None of the inferred factors
==PAGE:86==
A.2 PEER Analysis
69
correlated with the height - a variable not expected to confound the gene expression
levels. Together these results verify that PEER is identifying confounding factors
in gene expression data.
It may be natural to question the decision of not including all measured covariates
when removing confounding factors from the expression data. In defense of this
work, there are no golden standard for which covariates to include. It is challenging
to assess which approach performs best when cleaning expression data. However,
PEER is a general framework, that does not need covariates as input - it will learn
the confounding patterns from the data. For this reason, this work recommends
running PEER without inputting covariates.
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
−1
−0.8
−0.6
−0.4
−0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Gender
Age
Height
Weight
BMI
Batch
RIN
CHOL
HDL
LDL
TRIG
PLT
RBC
WBC
NEUT
LYMPH
MONO
EO
PEER 1
PEER 2
PEER 3
PEER 4
PEER 5
Figure A.7:
Top 5 most important PEER factors correlations to measured
covariates. PEER k represents the kth most important inferred PEER factors based
on the factor variance, α (see Figure A.5, green colored factors). The size and
color of the dot in the matrix represent the magnitude and direction of the Pearson
correlation (r), respectively. See Table A.3 for a description of the variables.
==PAGE:87==
70
Supplementary Methods
Variable Name
Description
Gender
Individual gender
Age
Individual age
Height
Individual height
Weight
Individual weight
BMI
Body Mass Index
Batch
Sample Batch
RIN
RNA Integrity Number
CHOL
Cholesterol
HDL
High-Density Lipoprotein
LDL
Ligh-Density Lipoprotein
TRIG
Triglycerides
PLT
Platelet Count
RBC
Red Blood Cell count
WBC
White Blood Cell count
NEUT
Neutrophil count
LYMPH
Lymphocyte count
MONO
Monocyte count
EO
Eosinophil count
Table A.3: EGCUT measured covariates used for correlation analysis of the PEER
inferred factors.
Residual Expression
An important step in any data modeling is learning the distribution of the data -
before and after any transformation is applied to the data. The eﬀect of variance
stabilization and PEER factor removal on the sample expression value distribution
is shown in Figure A.8. The distributions of samples exhibited higher variation and
a right tail skew prior to PEER analysis. After PEER analysis the distributions of
samples show a centralized normal distribution.
To investigate the magnitude of eﬀect of using PEER, the original expression values
were compared with the expression residuals after removal of confounding factors.
For each individual we calculated the Pearson correlation of the expression values
across all probes. The expression values showed low correlation (r = 0.125 ± 0.024;
Figure A.9), indicating that removing the inferred factors from expression data has
large eﬀects.
Together, these analyses illustrate the importance of removing confounding eﬀects
from gene expression data prior to downstream analysis.
==PAGE:88==
A.2 PEER Analysis
71
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
−5
0
5
10
15
Expression value
density
After PEER
Before PEER
Figure A.8: Distribution of expression values across individuals. Values before
PEER analysis are shown in red; values after log2 transformation and PEER
analysis are shown in blue. The distribution of expression values for each individual
across all gene probes is smoothed using a N(0, 1) kernel.
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GGG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GGG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
GG
G
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
0.10
0.15
0.20
0
200
400
600
800
Individual
Correlation (r)
Figure A.9: Correlation between original expression values and PEER residuals.
For each individual in the EGCUT cohort (n = 832) the Pearson correlation was
computed across all probes. The horizontal line indicates the mean correlation
(r = 0.125 ± 0.024).
==PAGE:89==
72
Supplementary Methods
A.3
Hi-C Data Exploration
Learning the main characteristics of data from a novel high-throughput technology is
a challenge to every researcher. All high-throughput technologies comes with certain
biases that needs to be addressed. The data processing step often requires deeper
insights into the technology and knowledge about how the data was generated.
This section aims to describe the exploitative steps to characterize the Hi-C data
and learn the structure and proper representation of the data.
I will also illustrate how important explorative analysis for quality control of the
data. To this end, I will communicate the biological story of the K562 Hi-C data.
The story is a good example of data driven computational biology: you learn
the biological story from the data - without any hypothesis or domain speciﬁc
knowledge. As you will see, without any prior knowledge of cancer biology, I
learned about cancer chromosomal aberrations - just from a curious explorative
analysis.
A.3.1
K562 cell line
This section presents an explorative analysis of the Hi-C data from the K562 cell
line. The data originated from the ﬁrst Hi-C publication (Lieberman-Aiden et al.,
2009) and was reanalyzed by Lan et al. (2012) (see Section 5.3.2 on page 34 for
details) Due to the early stage of the Hi-C protocol when the paper was published,
the data has several limitations compared to later Hi-C publications. This section
will highlight the most important features of the data set.
Since this study focuses on inter-chromosomal interactions, a natural ﬁrst step for
data exploration is to consider the distribution of inter-chromosomal interactions
over chromosomes.
Given that the model used to derive the set of genomic
interactions is accurate, the expected distribution of interactions over chromosomes
is uniform. However, the distribution for the K562 cell line was found to be highly
non-uniform (Figure A.10). Chromosome 5 (17%), 9 (17%) and 22 (13%) together
constitute almost half of the total inter-chromosomal interactions.
To investigate the cause of this non-uniform distribution, the genomic interactions
were visualized using a circos plot (Yin, Cook, and Lawrence, 2012, ggbio R
package). The circos plot shows interaction hotspots between chromosomes 9 and
22 (Figure A.11).
Further analysis revealed that the interaction hotspot between chromosome 9 and
22 is located on 9q and 22q. This interesting ﬁnding can be explained by the nature
of the cell line. K562 cells are derived from the bone marrow of a patient who
had chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) (Lozzio and Lozzio, 1975). A hallmark
of CML is the presence of the Philadelphia chromosome, a speciﬁc chromosomal
abnormality that is the result of a reciprocal translocation between chromosome
9 and 22 (Drexler, MacLeod, and Uphoﬀ, 1999). This gives rise to a fusion gene,
bcr-abl, that juxtaposes the Abl1 gene on chromosome 9 (region q34) to a part of
the BCR (“breakpoint cluster region”) gene on chromosome 22 (region q11). This
==PAGE:90==
A.3 Hi-C Data Exploration
73
means that the interactions observed in K562 cells between 9q34 and 22q11 are
labeled as inter-chromosomal, although they are actually intra-chrosomomal in the
K562 genome. This work found that 20.6% of the inter-chromosomal interactions
are between chromosome 9 and 22.
These ﬁndings are interesting for two reasons: ﬁrstly, it indicates that sizable
fractions of the inter-chromosomal interactions identiﬁed in cancer cells may be
intra-chromosomal for that particular genome - or vice versa; secondly, it highlights
that Hi-C data can be used to study chromosomal translocations. Translocations
in cancer cell lines can be detected since they exhibit higher than expected inter-
chromosomal Hi-C contact intensities. Hi-C data have also been used to study
the causality of translocations. Engreitz, Agarwala, and Mirny (2012) found that
the three-dimensional genome architecture shapes the landscape of rearrangements
and further demonstrated that the oncogenic BCR-ABL gene fusion results from
elevated Hi-C contact frequencies.
Figure A.11 also shows that the largest hotspot is located on chromosome 5. A
set of three genomic regions on chromosome 5 was found to be involved in 28.1%
interactions (Table A.4). These hotspots are likely an artifact of the Poisson model
used by Lan et al. (2012) and for this reason they were removed during QC (see
Section 5.3.2 on page 34).
0
5
10
15
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
Chromosome
% of inter-chromosomal interactions
Figure A.10: Distribution of percentage of inter-chromosomal interactions over
autosomal chromosomes. Note that interactions are not normalized by the chromo-
some length.
==PAGE:91==
74
Supplementary Methods
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG GG
GG GGG
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGGGGGGGGGG GGGG G
G
GGGGGGGGGG GGGG
GGGG
G
GGG
GGGGG
GG
GG
G
GGG
GGGG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
GGGGGGGGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G GG
GG
GGGG
GGGGG G
GGG GGG
GG
GG
GGGGG
G
GGGGGGGGGGG
GGG
G
G
GGG
G
GGG
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GGGGG
G
GGG
G
GG
GGG
GGGGG
G
GGGG
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GGG
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
0M
50M
100M
150M
200M
0M
50M
100M
150M
200M
0M
50M
100M
150M
0M
50M
100M
150M
0M
50M
100M
150M
0M
50M
100M
150M
0M
50M
100M
150M
0M
50M
100M
0M
50M
100M
0M
50M
100M
0M
50M
100M
0M
50M
100M
0M
50M
100M
0M
50M
100M
0M
50M
100M
0M
50M
0M
50M
0M
50M
0M
50M
0M
50M
0M
0M
50M
Interaction Count
G
G
G
G
100
200
300
400
Figure A.11: Circos plot of autosomal inter-chromosomal interactions for Lan
et al. data (ninteractions = 3497). Edges represents interactions between genomic
regions; edges are colored according to their chromosome pair. log2(interaction
count) for a given genomic position is shown as the radii of the red points. The
“hotspots” between chromosome 9 and 22 can be explained by the presence of
Philadelphia chromosome in the K562 cell line. Hotspots on chromosome 5 remains
unexplained. Three outliers (top hotspots) were later removed, see Table A.4 on
the next page and Section 5.3.2 on page 34.
==PAGE:92==
A.3 Hi-C Data Exploration
75
Rank
Chromosome
Position
Interaction Count
1∗
chr5
133628145
478
2∗
chr5
133628590
324
3∗
chr5
133625948
174
4
chr9
135862266
20
5
chr5
133621686
14
6
chr22
22244206
12
7
chr9
135873437
12
8
chr9
135919455
12
9
chr9
135481499
12
10
chr9
135660195
12
Table A.4: Top 10 interacting genomic regions in the K562 Hi-C data.
*Genomics regions were later removed during outlier detecting.
A.3.2
Dixon et al. data
This section gives an overview of the Hi-C data produced by Dixon et al. (2012). See
Section 5.3.1 on page 33 for a description of the methods applied to the data. The
authors performed deep sequenced Hi-C experiments in human embryonic stem cells
(hESC) and human lung ﬁbroblast (hIMR90). The deep sequencing allows for a
much higher resolution compared to previous studies (e.g. the K562 data presented
in Appendix A.3.1 on page 72). For the hESC and hIMR90 cells, signiﬁcant
genomic interactions was assessed by the software Fit-Hi-C (Ay, Bailey, and Noble,
2014a). Brieﬂy, Fit-Hi-C assesses signiﬁcance of interactions by correcting for the
1D genomic distance aﬀecting the Hi-C frequency counts (see Section 3.2 on page 15
for details). Fit-Hi-C uses the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure to compute the FDR,
and deriving a q-value, deﬁned as the minimum FDR that can be attained when
calling that interaction signiﬁcant(Storey, 2002). In this work, the q-value was
used to control the number of interactions to include in the analysis∗. Firstly, the
q-value cut-oﬀcan be used to deﬁne a set of high conﬁdence interactions. Secondly,
it provides a practical way of limiting the computation time - it is unfeasible to
include all interactions in the analysis and illustrations.
Similar to the analysis of the K562 cell line, the distribution of inter-chromosomal
interactions over chromosomes were investigated. The analysis did not indicate any
clear outlier chromosome (Figure A.12), although the distribution was not uniform
- even after accounting for chromosome length. Chromosome 19 −22 contributed
little to the inter-chromosomal interactions. The small chromosomes (17 −22) are
generally not mappable to begin with, so there will be little Hi-C data mapping
to them. It is possible that normalizing by the eﬀective chromosome length may
result in a more uniform distribution. The eﬀective chromosome length accounts
for black listed regions, repeats and centromeres as described by Rosenbloom et al.
(2013) and UCSC Genome Browser (2015).
∗It should be noted that this study later discovered that the q-value is not the most intuitive way
of ﬁltering the data for inter-chromosomal interactions. Contact count provides a more intuitive
measure for doing stratiﬁed analysis based on e.g. interactions with contact count ≥30.
==PAGE:93==
76
Supplementary Methods
Before normalizing by chromosome length
After normalizing by chromosome length
0
2
4
6
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22
Chromosome
% of inter−chromosomal interactions
(a) hIMR90
Before normalizing by chromosome length
After normalizing by chromosome length
0
2
4
6
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22
Chromosome
% of inter−chromosomal interactions
(b) hESC
Figure A.12: Distribution of percentage of inter-chromosomal interactions over
autosomal chromosomes. The dashed line represents a uniform distribution.
==PAGE:94==
A.3 Hi-C Data Exploration
77
The Hi-C data from Dixon et al. (2012) contains information about the raw contact
count of the genomic interaction. The contact count is the number sequence reads
for the interaction and represents the strength of the interaction. For both cell lines,
the majority of interactions have low contact counts. Such interactions will not be
considered as signiﬁcant when analyzed by Fit-Hi-C using a q-value threshold of
10−3. Both cell lines have more intra- than inter-chromosomal interactions. The
diﬀerence between the total interaction count of the two cell lines can be explained
by the diﬀerence in sequencing depth (Dixon et al., 2012, Supplementary Table
1). Because the diﬀerence in total interaction count aﬀects the hypothesis space
for assessing statistical signiﬁcance, the stringency of the q-value cut-oﬀcannot be
directly compared between the two cell lines. The technical details of this problem
is beyond the scope of this text.
hESC
hIMR90
0e+00
2e+07
4e+07
6e+07
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
Contact Count
Count
Inter−chromosomal
Intra−chromosomal
Range = [1 ; 291]
Total count = 39,240,868
Mean count = 1.42
Range = [1 ; 164]
Total count = 51,993,163
Mean count = 2.48
Range = [1 ; 88]
Total count = 84,773,727
Mean count = 1.18
Range = [1 ; 124]
Total count = 72,339,438
Mean count = 1.68
Figure A.13: Distribution of contact counts for two cell lines from Dixon et al..
Both intra- and inter-chromosomal interactions are included. Only the contact
count range [0; 20] is shown for simplicity of the ﬁgure. Summary data of contact
counts for each cell line and interaction type is shown in colored text.
Similar to the K562 cell line, the properties of Dixon et al. Hi-C data was explored
using a circos plot. Figures A.14 and A.15 show no sign of outliers or interaction
“hotspots”. That is, no single interaction fragment can account for the interaction
count observed from its respective chromosome. The interactions are distributed
across the whole chromosome. This is in contrast to the data from the K562 cell
line shown in Figure A.11 on page 74. The circos plots only serve to visualize the
general structure and patterns of the data and do not allow to directly compare
the diﬀerence in the Hi-C data between the cell lines. This is because the scale of
the visualized attributed is diﬀerent for the two cell lines.
==PAGE:95==
78
Supplementary Methods
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
GG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
GG
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGGG
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G GGGGG
G GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GGGGG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
GG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGGG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GGGG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
GG
GG
GGG
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
GG
G
GGGGG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GGG
GG
G
GGGG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GGGG
G
G
G
GGGG
G
GG
GGGGG
G
G
G
G
G
GGGG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
GG
G
G
G G
GGG
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GGGGGGG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
0M
50M
100M
150M
200M
0M
50M
100M
150M
200M
0M
50M
100M
150M
0M
50M
100M
150M
0M
50M
100M
150M
0M
50M
100M
150M
0M
50M
100M
150M
0M
50M
100M
0M
50M
100M
0M
50M
100M
0M
50M
100M
0M
50M
100M
0M
50M
100M
0M
50M
100M
0M
50M
100M
0M
50M
0M
50M
0M
50M
0M
50M
0M
50M
0M
0M
50M
Interaction Count
G
G
G
G
G
1
2
3
4
5
Figure A.14: Circos plot of autosomal inter-chromosomal interactions for hIMR90
cell line. ninteractions = 3468 were included in the visualization (q = 10−8). Edges
represent interactions between genomic regions; edges are colored according to their
chromosome pair. The contact count for a given genomic position is shown as the
radii of the red points; the size of the red points represents the interaction count.
==PAGE:96==
A.3 Hi-C Data Exploration
79
GG
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
G G
G
G
G
GG G
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
GGG
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
GGG
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G G
GG
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
GG
G G
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G G
G
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
GGG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GGGG
GGG
GGGG
G
GG
GGG
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GGG
GGG
GG
G
G
GG
GGG
G
G
GG
GG
GGGG
GGG
GGG
G
GGGG
G
G
GG
GG
GGGG
G
G
GG
GG
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
GGG
GG
G
GGG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GGG
G
G
GGG
GGG
G
GG G
G
G
G GG
GG
G
G
G
G G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G G
GG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G GG
GG
GG
G
GG
G
GG
G
GG
G G
G
GGG
GG
G
GGG
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGGG
G
G
GG
G
GG
GG
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
GG
GG
GGG
G
G
GGG
GGG
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GGGGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
GGG
GGG
GGG
GGGGG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GGGGGGGG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GG
GG
GGG
GGG
GG
GG
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GGG
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
GG
GGG
G
G
G
GG
GGGG
GG
GGGG
GGGG
GG
GGGG
GG
G
GG
GG
G
GGG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GGGG
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
GGG
G
G
G
GGG
G
GG
G
GGGG
GGGGGGG
G
GGG
G
GGGG
GGGGGG
GGG
G
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
GGGG G
G
G
GGGGGG
G
GG
GG
GGG
G
G
GGG
G
G
GG
GGGG
G
G
G
G
GGGG
G
G
G
G
GGGG
G
GG
G
GGGGGG
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
GGG
G
GGGG
GGG
GGG
GGG
G
GGG
GG
GG
G
GG
GGG
GG
GG
G
G
G G
G
GG
G
GGG
GG
GGG
G
GGGGG
G
GGGG
G
G
GGGGGG
GG
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GG
GG
G
GG
GGG
G
G
GG
G G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G G
G
G
G
GG
G
G GG
GGGG
G
G
G G
G
GG
GG
G
G G
G
GG
G
G
G
GGGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
GG
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
0M
50M
100M
150M
200M
0M
50M
100M
150M
200M
0M
50M
100M
150M
0M
50M
100M
150M
0M
50M
100M
150M
0M
50M
100M
150M
0M
50M
100M
150M
0M
50M
100M
0M
50M
100M
0M
50M
100M
0M
50M
100M
0M
50M
100M
0M
50M
100M
0M
50M
100M
0M
50M
100M
0M
50M
0M
50M
0M
50M
0M
50M
0M
50M
0M
0M
50M
Interaction Count
G
G
G
5
10
15
Figure A.15: Circos plot of autosomal inter-chromosomal interactions for hESC
cell line. ninteractions = 2665 were included in the visualization (q = 10−16). See
Figure A.14 on page 78 for further descriptions.
==PAGE:97==
80
Supplementary Methods
==PAGE:98==
B
Supplementary Analysis
and Results
B.1
Examples of Hemani et al.
Epistatic SNP-
probe Pairs
This section provides examples of epistatic SNP-probe pairs published by Hemani
et al. (2014, Supplementary Table 1). Plotting the data for all published SNP-probe
pairs is uninteresting and beyond the scope of this section. The plots serve as a
window into the “raw” data underlying the epistasis discovery. The intention is to
familiarize the reader with what epistasis look like with “real data”.
Two examples were chosen to illustrate the extreme cases of two diﬀerent outcomes
when replicating the work of Hemani et al.. The ﬁrst example, Figure B.1 (a),
shows a very strong epistatic SNP-probe pair that could be replicated in this work.
The second example, Figure B.1 (b), shows a SNP-probe pair that, in contrast to
what Hemani et al. found, is clearly is not epistatic.
==PAGE:99==
82
Supplementary Analysis and Results
−1.5
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
0
1
2
SNP 1 allele 
Probe expression (PEER residual)
SNP 2 
allele
0
1
2
(a)
rs807491:rs7254601 is epistatic to the gene TMEM149 (Illumina ProbeID
ILMN1786426). This is the most signiﬁcant epistatic pair of all the SNP-probe pairs
published by Hemani et al. βinteraction = 0.25, P-value = 6.85 · 10−45.
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
0
1
2
0
1
2
SNP 1 allele 
Probe expression (PEER residual)
SNP 2 
allele
(b) rs10435352:rs1883613 is clearly not epistatic to the gene VNN2 (Illumina ProbeID
ILMN1678939). βinteraction = −0.01, P-value = 0.53.
Figure B.1: Examples of epistatic SNP-probe pairs published by Hemani et al.
The colored dashed line represents the linear model ﬁtted to the data. Individual
observations are represented by colored points. SNP 1 and 2 refer to the identiﬁers
with the format SNP1:SNP2 shown in the subcaptions.
==PAGE:100==
B.2 Spatial Epistasis Enrichment Histograms
83
B.2
Spatial Epistasis Enrichment Histograms
This section visually shows the evidence of presence or absence of spatial proximate
epistasis for the cell lines analyzed in this work. This section presents the epistasis
enrichment histograms that underlie the empirical P-values shown in Table 7.1 on
page 49. These P-values describe the extremity of the spatial proximate epistasis
observation, but they do not capture information about the scale of the distance
to the null. The histograms shown in this section provide a meaningful way of
assessing the degree of extremity in units of number of SNP-probe pairs.
The shape of the null distribution is on its own interesting to study. All null
distributions analyzed in this work were characterized by a bell-shape with long
right tail (right-skewed).
Surprisingly, the P-values for the unﬁltered and ﬁltered SNP-probe pairs were
found to be similar (the ﬁltering of SNP-probe pairs is described in Section 6.5 on
page 43). This is illustrated in Figures B.2 to B.5 by considering the position of
horizontal red line relative to the null distribution. The chromosome pair ﬁltering
strategy used in Hemani et al. (2014) was found to give close to identical results as
the interaction pair ﬁltering approach (data not shown).
135
μ = 58
58
μ = 39
No filter
Filter (interaction pair)
0
10
20
0
10
20
30
40
50
100
150
200
25
50
75
Number of epistatic SNP−probe pairs
Count
(a) l = 500 bp, q-value = 10−6
530
μ = 186
189
μ = 96
No filter
Filter (interaction pair)
0
5
10
15
0
10
20
30
100
200
300
400
500
40
80
120
160
Number of epistatic SNP−probe pairs
Count
(b) l = 1, 000 bp, q-value = 10−6
1336
μ = 320
149
μ = 102
No filter
Filter (interaction pair)
0
5
10
0
10
20
500
1000
50
75
100
125
150
175
Number of epistatic SNP−probe pairs
Count
(c) l = 2, 500 bp, q-value = 10−7
6931μ = 7567
340
μ = 396
No filter
Filter (interaction pair)
0
1
2
3
4
0
5
10
15
20
5000
10000
15000
20000
300
350
400
450
500
Number of epistatic SNP−probe pairs
Count
(d) l = 50, 000 bp, q-value = 10−9
Figure B.2: Histogram plots for epistasis enrichment for hIMR90 cell line. The
top panel shows the unﬁltered epistatic SNP-probe pair counts. The bottom
panel shows the counts after ﬁltering. The black colored histogram shows the null
distribution of number SNP-probe pairs using n = 1, 000 null samples. The red
horizontal line shows the observed number of epistatic SNP-probe pairs for the
spatial proximate genomic regions. The results are shown for diﬀerent interaction
width (l) and q-value thresholds in (a)-(d). Each of the four panels represents
diﬀerent parametrizations and contain two components. The ﬁrst component shows
the results without applying any ﬁlter. The second component shows the results
after applying the “interaction pair” ﬁlter.
==PAGE:101==
84
Supplementary Analysis and Results
22 μ = 30
17 μ = 20
No filter
Filter (interaction pair)
0
10
20
30
40
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
50
100
150
0
20
40
60
Number of epistatic SNP−probe pairs
Count
(a) l = 500 bp, q-value = 10−14
10
μ = 7
7
μ = 5
No filter
Filter (interaction pair)
0
30
60
90
0
50
100
150
0
50
100
0
10
20
30
Number of epistatic SNP−probe pairs
Count
(b) l = 500 bp, q-value = 10−16
221
μ = 265
130 μ = 139
No filter
Filter (interaction pair)
0
5
10
15
0
10
20
30
200
300
400
500
80
120
160
200
Number of epistatic SNP−probe pairs
Count
(c) l = 1, 000 bp, q-value = 10−12
739
μ = 724
287
μ = 256
No filter
Filter (interaction pair)
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
0
5
10
15
20
25
500
750
1000
1250
200
250
300
350
Number of epistatic SNP−probe pairs
Count
(d) l = 2, 500 bp, q-value = 10−13
Figure B.3: Epistasis enrichment for hESC cell line. See Figure B.2 for further
description of the ﬁgure.
5 μ = 10
4
μ = 4
No filter
Filter (interaction pair)
0
25
50
75
0
50
100
150
0
25
50
75
100
0
10
20
30
Number of epistatic SNP−probe pairs
Count
(a) l = 1, 000 bp
79
μ = 138
23
μ = 31
No filter
Filter (interaction pair)
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
0
10
20
30
40
0
200
400
600
20
40
60
Number of epistatic SNP−probe pairs
Count
(b) l = 5, 000 bp
Figure B.4: Epistasis enrichment for K562 cell line. No q-value threshold was
used, because the analyzed K562 Hi-C data does not support it. See Figure B.2 for
further description of the ﬁgure.
83
μ = 53
31
μ = 27
No filter
Filter (interaction pair)
0
10
20
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
50
100
150
200
250
0
20
40
60
80
Number of epistatic SNP−probe pairs
Count
(a) hESC cell line, l = 1, 000 bp
68
μ = 47
32
μ = 23
No filter
Filter (interaction pair)
0
10
20
0
20
40
0
50
100
150
0
20
40
60
Number of epistatic SNP−probe pairs
Count
(b) hIMR90 cell line, l = 1, 000 bp
Figure B.5: Epistasis enrichment for the negative controls with contactCount = 1.
See Figure B.2 for further description of the ﬁgure.
==PAGE:102==
B.3 Minimum GCC Filter
85
B.3
Minimum GCC Filter
This section illustrates the importance of using a minimum genotype class count
(GCC) ﬁlter to ensure that the model estimates can be interpreted correctly.
GCC and MAF
MAF is the most widely used measure to exclude low frequency
variants from genetic studies (e.g. GWAS lacking statistical power to detect rare
variant associations). However, when modeling epistasis it is more useful to think in
terms of minimum GCC and not MAF for setting a threshold of the SNP frequencies.
The reason should become apparent in the next two paragraphs. Minimum GCC
measures how well the two-locus genotype count matrix is populated and is in units
of “data points”. It is worth noting that the minimum GCC is tightly coupled with
the minimum MAF of the SNP pair (Pearson correlation r = 0.65 in the EGCUT
cohort).
Multiplicative Model and Minimum GCC
This work found that the mul-
tiplicative model leads to spurious epistasis results for SNP pairs with low GCC.
(Readers are encouraged to brush up their memory of epistatic models in Sec-
tion 2.2.1 on page 8 before continuing studying this section.) Low GCC causes the
model to overﬁt∗the data. In the extreme case, when the minimum GCC is zero
(i.e. missing genotype classes), the model is extrapolating, (Figure B.6 (a)). This
leads to misleading model estimates, i.e. highly signiﬁcant P-values and very large
eﬀect sizes. A detailed description is given in caption of Figure B.6.
Minimum Genotype Class Count and P-value Bias
To investigate the
scale of the problem with low GCC SNP pairs confounding the analysis, a random
sample of 100,000 signiﬁcant SNP-probe pairs was drawn from the output of the
spatial epistasis discovery of hIMR90[l = 2, 500bp; q = 10−7]. All SNP-probe pairs
were signiﬁcant after Bonferroni correction.
SNP pairs with missing genotype classes were found to be the most prevalent
class, constituting > 60% of the “epistatic” SNP-probe pairs (Figure B.7 (a)). The
P-values for epistasis was biased by the minimum genotype class counts: SNP
pairs with low minimum genotype class count showed the most signiﬁcant P-values
(Figure B.7 (b)).
∗The multiplicative model describes noise instead of the underlying expression-genotype rela-
tionship. Overﬁtting generally occurs when a model has too many parameters relative to the
number of observations. Such a model will generally have poor predictive performance.
==PAGE:103==
86
Supplementary Analysis and Results
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
1
2
rs10041179 allele
Probe expression (PEER residual)
rs9294148
allele
0
1
2
ILMN_2065022 | rs10041179:rs9294148
0
1
5
0
0
5
89
1
2
94
582
31
0
0
21
1
0
1
2
NA
0
1
2
NA
rs10041179 allele
rs9294148 allele
(a) Minimum GCC = 0.
This example illustrates the problem of overﬁtting with
the multiplicative model in case of missing GCC. This is an extreme example of a
SNP-probe pair where the ﬁtted multiplicative model suggest a strong epistatic signal
(βinteraction = 1.21, P-value = 2.00 · 10−110), but in fact there is no evidence of epistasis.
0
1
2
3
4
0
1
2
rs1478590 allele
Probe expression (PEER residual)
rs10132344
allele
0
1
2
ILMN_1680436 | rs1478590:rs10132344
1
3
11
0
1
28
117
0
7
126
535
1
0
1
1
0
0
1
2
NA
0
1
2
NA
rs1478590 allele
rs10132344 allele
(b) Minimum GCC = 1. The model reports epistasis (βinteraction = −0.44, P-value =
1.29 · 10−39), although there little evidence of epistasis. The one minor allele homozygote
individual (0, 0) is a high leverage point and greatly eﬀects the estimate of interaction
regression coeﬃcient.
==PAGE:104==
B.3 Minimum GCC Filter
87
−0.4
0.0
0.4
0.8
1.2
0
1
2
rs322673 allele
Probe expression (PEER residual)
rs2329119
allele
0
1
2
ILMN_1781285 | rs322673:rs2329119
9
43
86
12
26
149
198
25
21
106
139
17
0
1
0
0
0
1
2
NA
0
1
2
NA
rs322673 allele
rs2329119 allele
(c) Minimum GCC 9. An example of statistical epistasis using a multiplicative model
(βinteraction = −0.14, P-value = 4.07 · 10−11). No individuals are high leverage points, in
part because there are no low GCC. The ﬁtted model (thick dashed line) ﬁts well to the
mean of the observations (full line).
Figure B.6: Examples of the eﬀect of minimum GCC when using a multiplicative
model. The left component of each panel shows an interaction plot. The thick
dashed line represents the ﬁtted linear model; the full line represents the mean of
the observations for combinations of alleles. A good model ﬁt, without presence of
overﬁtting and high leverage points, is characterized by the two lines being similar.
The right component of each panel shows the matrix representation of two-locus
genotype class counts. The minimum genotype class count is the lowest value in
the matrix, when excluding missing data points (NA). The sum of all cells in matrix
is 832, corresponding to the number of individuals in the EGCUT cohort.
See Table B.3 on page 93 for additional data on the SNP-probe pairs shown in this
ﬁgure.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Minimum genotype class count
Frequency
(a) Prevalence of minimum genotype class
counts.
G
GGGG
GGGGGGG
GG
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
GGGGG
G
G
GGG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GGGGGGGG
G
G
GGG
GG
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GGGGGG
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGGGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GG
GG
GGG
G
GGG
G
GGGGG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGGG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
G
GGG
G
GGGGGG
G
GGG
G
GGGG
G
GGGG
G
G
G
G
GG
GGG
G
G
G
GGG
G
GGG
G
GGGGGG
G
G
GGGG
GG
GG
G
G
G
GGG
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GGGG
GG
GG
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GGG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGGGG
GG
GGG
G
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
GG
GG
G
G
GGGGG
G
GG
G
GGGGG
G
GGGGGG
G
G
GGG
GG
GG
G
GG
GGG
GG
G
GGG
G
G
GGG
G
GGG
G
GGGG
G
GG
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
GGGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
GG
G
GG
G
GGGG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
GGG
G
GGGG
GGG
G
G
G
G
GGG
GGGG
G
G
G
G
GGGGGG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
GGGG
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
GG
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
GG
GGG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
GGG
G
GGGG
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GGGGGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
GGGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
GGGG
GG
GG
G
G
G
GGGG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GGGG
G
GG
G
G
GG
GGGGG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
GGGG
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GGGGG
G
GGGGG
GGGG
G
GGGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
GG
G
G
GGG
GGGGG
G
GG
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGGG
G
GGGG
G
GG
G
G
G
GGGGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
GGG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GGGGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
GGG
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
GGG
GGGG
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
GGGG
GG
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
GGG
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
GGGG
G
G
G
G
GGGGGG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GGGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GGGG
G
G
G
GGG
G
GGGGG
G
GGG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
GGG
GG
GG
G
G
GGG
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GGGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGGG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGGGGGGGG
G
G
G
GGGGG
GG
G
GG
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
GGGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGGG
GGGG
G
G
G
GGG
G
GG
GGG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGGG
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGGGG
GGG
G
GGGGG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GGG
G
GGGGG
G
G
G
GGGGGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
GG
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
GGGGG
G
G
G
G
GGGG
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
GG
G
GG
G
GGGGG
GG
GGGGGG
GG
G
GGG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGGG
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGGG
G
GGG
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GGGGGG
G
GG
GG
G
GGGG
G
GGG
G
GGG
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GGGG
G
GG
G
GGGG
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GGGG
G
G
GGG
GG
GG
G
GG
G
G
GG
GG
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
GGGG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGGG
GGGGG
G
G
GG
GG
G
GGGGGG
G
G
G
G
G
GGGGG
G
GG
GG
G
GG
GGG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
GGG
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GGGG
GGGG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GGG
G
GG
GGG
G
GG
G
G
G
GGGGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
GGGG
GGG
G
G
GG
G
GG
GG
GG
G
GGGG
G
GGG
G
GGGG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGGGGG
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GGGG
G
G
GGGG
G
GGGGG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
GGG
G
GG
G
GGGGGGG
G
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GGG
G
GGGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GGG
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
GGGGGG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGGG
G
GGGGGG
G
GGG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
GGGG
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GGGGGGGG
GGGG
G
G
G
GG
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GGG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GGGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGGGG
G
G
GGGG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
GG
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GGGGG
GG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGGG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GGGG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GGGGG
G
GG
G
G
GGGGG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGGGG
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
GGGG
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GGGG
G
G
GG
G
GGG
G
GGGG
G
GG
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGGG
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
GGG
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
GGGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
GG
GGG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGGGG
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GGG
G
GG
G
GGG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GGGGG
GGGGG
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
GGGGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GGG
G
GGGG
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
GGGG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
GG
G
GGG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GGG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GGG
G
GGGG
G
G
GGGGG
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
GGGG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
GGG
G
GGGGG
G
G
GGGG
GGGGGG
GG
GGG
G
G
G
GGGG
G
G
G
G
GGG
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGGGGG
G
GG
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GGGG
G
GGGGGGGG
G
G
G
GGG
G
GGG
GGGGGG
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GGGGGGGGGGG
G
G
G
G
GGG
GG
G
GG
GGGGGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
GGGGGG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
GGG
G
GGGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGGGGGG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
GGGG
G
GGG
G
GG
GG
G
GG
G
GG
GGG
G
G
GG
GGG
GGGGGGGG
G
GG
G
G
GGG
G
GGG
GGGG
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GGG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
GGG
G
GG
G
GG
G
GGG
GGGGG
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GGGGGGGGG
G
G
G
G
GGGGG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
GGGGG
G
GGGG
G
G
GGG
G
GG
GGGGGGGG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGGG
G
GGGG
G
G
GG
G
G
GGGGGGG
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GGG
GGGGG
G
G
G
G
GGGG
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GGGGGGGG
G
GG
G
G
GG
GGG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
GG
G
GGGG
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
GGGGGG
G
GG
GGGGG
G
GGGGGGG
G
G
G
GGG
G
GG
GGG
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
GG
G
GG
GGGGGG
G
GG
G
GGG
G
G
G
GGGG
G
G
G
GGGGG
G
G
GG
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GGGGGGGGGGG
G
G
GGGGGGGG
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
GGGG
G
G
G
GGG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
GG
G
G
GG
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
GGG
G
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
GG
GG
G
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
GG
GG
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GGG
G
G
GGG
G
GG
G
GG
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GGGGGG
G
GG
G
G
G
GGGG
GGGG
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
GGGGG
G
GGGGG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GGGG
GG
G
G
G
G
GGGGG
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
GG
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GGG
G
GGG
G
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
GG
G
GGGGG
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
GGGGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGGGG
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
G
GGG
G
G
GG
GG
GG
GG
G
GGGG
G
GG
GGGGGGGGGGG
G
GG
GGG
G
G
GG
GG
G
GGGGGGGG
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
GGGGGGG
G
G
GGGG
G
G
GG
GGGGG
GGG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
GGGGGGG
GG
GG
G
GG
GG
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
GG
G
GGGGGG
G
GGGGGG
GGGG
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
GGGGGGG
G
GGGG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
GGGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGG
G
G
G
G
G
GGGGG
G
GG
G
GGGG
G
G
G
GGG
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGGG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
G
GGGGG
G
GGG
G
G
G
GGGGG
GGG
GG
GGGG
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
GG
G
G
GG
GGGG
G
GGGG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
GGG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GG
GGG
G
G
GGGG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GG
GGGGG
GG
GGGG
G
GGGG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GGGGG
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
GG
G
GGGGG
G
GGG
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGGGGGG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GGGGGGGG
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
GGG
G
G
GGGGGG
G
GG
GGGGG
GGGG
G
G
G
G
GGGG
GG
GGG
G
G
G
GGG
G
GGGG
G
GG
G
GG
G
GGG
GG
GGGGG
G
G
GGGGGG
GGGGGGGGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGGGG
G
G
G
GGG
GG
G
G
G
G
GGGGGGG
G
G
G
GG
GG
GGGGGGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGGGG
G
G
GGG
GG
GGGG
G
G
G
GGG
GGG
G
G
G
GGGGG
G
G
G
GGG
GGG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GGGGGGGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
GG
G
G
GGG
G
GGG
G
G
GG
GGGGG
G
G
G
GG
G
GGG
G
G
GGG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GGGGG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGGGGGGG
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GGGG
G
GGGG
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
GGG
GGG
GG
G
G
G
G
GGGGGG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GGG
GG
G
G
GGGG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
GGGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GGGG
G
G
GGGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GGG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
GG
GG
GGGG
G
G
GGGG
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
G
GG
GGG
G
GG
GGG
G
GG
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GGGG
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
G
GGGGGG
G
G
G
GGG
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
GGGGG
G
GG
GG
GGGG
G
GG
G
G
G
GGG
GGG
GGGGGG
G
G
G
GGG
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
GGGGGGGG
G
G
G
GG
G
GGG
G
GGG
GGG
G
GGGGG
G
G
G
GGGGG
G
GGGGG
G
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
GGG
G
G
G
G
GGGGGGGGGGG
G
GGGG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GGG
GGG
G
G
GGGG
G
G
GG
G
GGGGG
G
GGG
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GGGG
G
G
G
GGGGGGGGGGGG
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGGG
GG
G
G
GGGGG
GGG
GGG
G
GG
G
GGGG
G
GGGGG
G
GGG
G
G
GGGG
GG
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
GGGG
G
G
GGG
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
GG
GGGGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GGGGGGG
G
G
GGGG
G
G
G
GGGGG
G
G
G
GGG
GG
GG
GGGGG
GG
GGGGGGG
G
G
G
GG
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GGGGG
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GGGGGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGGGG
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
GGG
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
GGG
G
GGG
GG
GGG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGGG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
G
GGGGGG
G
GGGGG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGGGG
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
GGG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
G
GGGG
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
GG
GG
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GGGG
G
GG
G
G
G
GGGGG
G
GGG
GGGGG
G
GGGGG
GGGGGG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GGGGG
G
GGGG
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
GGGGG
GGG
GG
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
GG
G
GGGG
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
GGG
GGGGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
GGGGG
GG
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
GGGGG
G
GGGGGG
G
GGGGGGG
G
G
GG
G
GGGG
G
GGGGGGGGGGGGG
GG
G
GGGGGGG
G
G
GGG
G
GGGGGGGGGG
G
GGGG
G
GGGGGG
GG
GGGGGGG
G
GGGGGGG
GGGGGGGGGG
G
GGG
GGGGGGGG
G
GGG
G
GGGGGGGGGGGG
GGG
G
G
GGGG
G
G
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
GGG
G
GGG
G
GG
GGGG
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
GGGGGGGG
GGGGGG
G
G
GG
GG
GGG
GG
G
G
G
GGGGG
GGGGGGGG
G
GGG
G
GG
GG
GGGGG
GGG
GG
G
GG
GGGG
G
G
30
60
90
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
15
19
Minimum genotype class count
−log10(p−value)
(b) P-value bias for low minimum geno-
type class counts.
Figure B.7:
Analysis of 100,000 random signiﬁcant SNP-probe pairs.
The
pairs were drawn from the output of the spatial epistasis discovery of
hIMR90[l = 2, 500bp; q = 10−7]. Notice that the x-limit of the left plot is restricted
to [1 . . . 6] because class counts greater than this interval constitute < 0.03% of all
SNP-probe pairs analyzed.
==PAGE:105==
88
Supplementary Analysis and Results
B.4
Deeper Insights into the hIMR90
Spatial Epistasis Enrichment
This section follows up on the seemingly spatial epistasis enrichment signals
for two parametrizations of 3D genomic proximity for the hIMR90 cell line:
hIMR90[l = 1, 000bp; q = 10−6] and hIMR90[l = 2, 500bp; q = 10−7] (see Table 7.1
on page 49). This section complements Section 7.2.2 on page 50 with plots and
more detailed descriptions of the analysis procedure.
Minimum Genotype Class Count (GCC) Filtering
As illustrated in the
computational pipeline overview in Figure 6.2 on page 45, the SNP-probe pairs are
ﬁltered using an “interaction pair” ﬁlter. This ﬁlter keeps independent SNP-probe
pairs by accounting indirectly for the LD structure in the genotype data. However,
this ﬁlter does not ensure that the epistasis model ﬁts the data and that the model
estimates are reasonable. For this reason a second “GCC based” ﬁlter was applied,
retaining only SNP pairs with minimum GCC ≥3.
To evaluate the eﬀect of the minimum GCC ﬁlter, the number of signiﬁcant SNP-
probe pairs before and after applying the ﬁlter was calculated. Table B.1 shows
that ≈1% of the SNP-probe pairs remains after applying the GCC ﬁlter. The
dramatic decrease in SNP-probe pairs indicates that the signiﬁcance of the majority
of the SNP pairs is due to overﬁtting. Furthermore, only two spatial proximate
SNP-probe pairs remain for both hIMR90 parametrizations. Figure B.8 shows that
after applying the GCC ﬁlter, the spatial epistasis enrichment is removed. Together
these results reveal that the spatial epistasis enrichment shown in Table 7.1 on
page 49 is caused by low minimum GCC SNP-probe pairs with little evidence of
epistasis.
==PAGE:106==
B.4 Deeper Insights into the hIMR90 Spatial Epistasis Enrichment
89
189
2
Filter (interaction pair)
0
10
20
30
0
100
200
300
0
50
100
150
Number of epistatic SNP−probe pairs
Count
+ minimum genotype class filter
Filter (interaction pair)
P-value = 0.001
P-value = 0.28
(a) l = 1, 000 bp, q-value = 10−6
149
2
Filter (interaction pair)
+ minimum genotype class filter
0
10
20
0
100
200
0
50
100
150
Number of epistatic SNP−probe pairs
Count
Filter (interaction pair)
P-value = 0.02
P-value = 0.26
(b) l = 2, 500 bp, q-value = 10−7
Figure B.8: Eﬀect of minimum genotype class ﬁlter on enrichment histograms
for the hIMR90 cell line. The panels (a) and (b) show the two parametrizations of
hIMR90 found the be enriched for spatial epistasis. The top component in each
panel shows the histogram of SNP-probe pair counts after applying the “interaction
pair” ﬁlter (the same histogram is shown in Figure B.2 on page 83). The bottom
component in each panel shows the histogram after applying the minimum genotype
class ﬁlter with a minimum class count of three. After applying the minimum
genotype class ﬁlter, the spatial epistasis enrichment is clearly removed.
See
Figure B.2 on page 83 for further description of the ﬁgure elements.
==PAGE:107==
90
Supplementary Analysis and Results
SNP-probe pair counts
Interaction pair ﬁlter
Interaction pair ﬁlter
+ minimum GCC
ﬁlter
Parametrization
All pairs
Spatial pairs
All pairs
Spatial pairs
hIMR90[l = 1, 000bp; q = 10−6]
96,083
189
1,087
2
hIMR90[l = 2, 500bp; q = 10−7]
102,339
149
984
2
Table B.1: Eﬀect of minimum GCC ﬁltering on SNP-probe pair counts. The
table shows counts of signiﬁcant SNP-probe pair using the interaction pair ﬁltering
and in combination with minimum GCC ﬁltering. A drastic decrease in SNP-probe
pairs is observed when the minimum GCC ﬁlter is applied. “All pairs” counts
include SNP pairs from the null and spatial proximate pairs. “Spatial pairs” counts
include only the spatial proximate SNP pairs. Chromosomal positions, p-values,
eﬀect size estimates and more data appear in Table B.4 on page 94 for the two
“spatial pairs” on the right hand side of the table are.
See Figure 6.2 on page 45 for an description of the interaction pair ﬁlter.
Reverse Order Filtering
It is possible that the order of the ﬁlters inﬂuences the
enrichment results. The interaction pair ﬁltering retains only the most signiﬁcant
SNP-probe pair for a given Hi-C interaction pair. This work previously showed
that the most most signiﬁcant SNP-probe pair is biased towards low genotype class
counts (see Appendix B.3 on page 85, Figure B.7). Figure B.9 shows that the
distribution of SNP-probe pair counts is diﬀerent when ﬁrst applying the minimum
genotype class ﬁlter - it is not bell shaped as previously seen. However, the end
result, i.e. enrichment P-value after applying the interaction pair ﬁlter, remains
nearly unchanged for the reversed order ﬁlters.
3
2
Minimum genotype class filter
Minimum genotype class filter
+ Filter (interaction pair)
0
50
100
0
100
200
300
0
20
40
60
Number of epistatic SNP−probe pairs
Count
P-value = 0.36
P-value = 0.32
Figure B.9: Eﬀect of reversing the order of the SNP-probe pair ﬁlters for the
hIMR90[l = 2, 500bp; q = 10−7] parametrization. The ﬁlters were applied in the
reverse order compared to Figure B.8 (b). See Figure B.2 on page 83 for further
description of the ﬁgure elements.
SNP-probe Pair Co-localization
This section presents the SNP-probe pair
co-localization analysis. Co-localizing is deﬁned as a SNP-probe pair where at least
==PAGE:108==
B.5 Epistasis Tables
91
SNP-probe co-localization
Interaction pair ﬁlter
Interaction pair ﬁlter
+ minimum GCC
ﬁlter
Parametrization
All pairs
Spatial pairs
All pairs
Spatial pairs
hIMR90[l = 1, 000bp; q = 10−6]
9.87%
(9, 482/96, 083)
8.99%
(17/189)
9.07%
(106/1169)
50.00%
(1/2)
hIMR90[l = 2, 500bp; q = 10−7]
9.68%
(9, 902/102, 339)
7.38%
(11/149)
9.04%
(95/1, 051)
50.00%
(1/2)
Table B.2: SNP-probe pair co-localization. The table shows the percentage of
SNP-probe pairs co-localizing. The numbers in parenthesis indicates the underlying
counts. “All pairs” counts include SNP pairs from the null and spatial proximate
pairs. “Spatial pairs” counts include only the spatial proximate SNP pairs. The
right side of the table lists the co-localization after minimum GCC ﬁltering.
one of the epistatic SNPs is localized on the same chromosome as the probe.
B.5
Epistasis Tables
I here present selected data for the (putative) epistatic interactions discovered in
my thesis. I will only present epistasis data discovered when searching for spatial
epistasis in the hIMR90 cell lines. I selected three categories of epistatic eﬀects,
grouped into three tables, that summarizes some of the knowledge obtained during
this study. Importantly, the tables serve to illustrate the level of genomic and
genetic annotations used in this thesis.
Table B.3 lists SNP-pairs with diﬀerent conﬁdence of epistasis (as measured by the
minimum GCC). The SNP-pairs given in the table are also plotted in Figure B.6
on page 87. The table exempliﬁes the spurious epistatic SNPs underlying the
hIMR90 spatial epistasis enrichment. Lastly, the table serves as an example of the
importance of scrutinizing your results.
Table B.4 lists the two putative epistatic interactions that map to interacting
genomic regions (spatially epistasis). Arguably, there is little evidence to support
the spatial epistasis hypothesis.
Table B.5 lists the six SNP-probe pairs with the strongest evidence of epistasis
found in this thesis. It is noteworthy that this short list of epistatic SNPs is the
only conﬁdent epistatic signal detected in this work∗. Consider that this list of
epistatic eﬀects are the result of testing trillions of SNP-pair interactions. Hence,
the introduction of my thesis was appropriate when proclaiming “Uncovering the
Epistatic Needles in Genome- Wide Haystacks” (Section 1.2 on page 2). Indeed,
detecting epistasis remains technically challenging. Finally, it is worth noting that
∗This is strictly not true. It is possible that the hESC or K562 cell line contained additional
strong epistatic eﬀects, that did not make it into this analysis. However, the overall tendency is
unlikely to chance.
==PAGE:109==
92
Supplementary Analysis and Results
these epistatic SNPs have, to the best of my knowledge, not previous been reported.
As such, they can be considered new ﬁndings credited to this work.
==PAGE:110==
B.5 Epistasis Tables
93
SNP1
rsID
MAF1
SNP2
rsID
MAF2
P-value
Beta
minGCC
Gene
Probe
EIID
EID
5:152896308
rs10041179
0.07
6:80265632
rs9294148
0.07
2.63E-23
-0.5636
0
ITK
5:156614448
null_357_4752
null_357
5:152896308
rs10041179
0.07
6:80265632
rs9294148
0.07
1.46E-26
0.5306
0
CREB3L2
7:137210715
null_357_4752
null_357
5:152896308
rs10041179
0.07
6:80265632
rs9294148
0.07
8.02E-18
0.5514
0
FAIM3
1:205144550
null_357_4752
null_357
5:152896308
rs10041179
0.07
6:80265632
rs9294148
0.07
1.67E-31
0.5051
0
EGR2
10:64242090
null_357_4752
null_357
5:152896308
rs10041179
0.07
6:80265632
rs9294148
0.07
7.56E-25
0.5474
0
LRMP
12:25152225
null_357_4752
null_357
5:152896308
rs10041179
0.07
6:80265632
rs9294148
0.07
2.00E-110
1.2144
0
KIAA0672
17:12835495
null_357_4752
null_357
5:152896308
rs10041179
0.07
6:80265632
rs9294148
0.07
8.45E-17
0.3753
0
KIAA1407
3:115166080
null_357_4752
null_357
5:152896308
rs10041179
0.07
6:80265632
rs9294148
0.07
6.25E-13
0.4408
0
VIL2
6:159106859
null_357_4752
null_357
5:152896308
rs10041179
0.07
6:80265632
rs9294148
0.07
1.63E-11
0.6132
0
FCRL2
1:155982443
null_357_4752
null_357
5:152896308
rs10041179
0.07
6:80265632
rs9294148
0.07
2.35E-13
0.3674
0
SIAH1
16:46952618
null_357_4752
null_357
5:152896308
rs10041179
0.07
6:80265632
rs9294148
0.07
4.57E-18
0.4974
0
COL9A2
1:40538963
null_357_4752
null_357
5:152896308
rs10041179
0.07
6:80265632
rs9294148
0.07
7.09E-36
0.5992
0
FMOD
1:201576664
null_357_4752
null_357
5:152896308
rs10041179
0.07
6:80265632
rs9294148
0.07
1.77E-30
0.5593
0
GPT2
16:45522597
null_357_4752
null_357
5:152896308
rs10041179
0.07
6:80265632
rs9294148
0.07
2.60E-18
0.4203
0
STARD7
2:96214684
null_357_4752
null_357
5:152896308
rs10041179
0.07
6:80265632
rs9294148
0.07
1.01E-25
0.6053
0
FCRL5
1:155750161
null_357_4752
null_357
2:218046715
rs1478590
0.11
14:69666638
rs10132344
0.11
9.17E-52
0.2780
1
ASS1
9:132310134
null_339_6338
null_339
2:218046715
rs1478590
0.11
14:69666638
rs10132344
0.11
1.23E-14
0.1545
1
RHOBTB1
10:62373868
null_339_6338
null_339
2:218046715
rs1478590
0.11
14:69666638
rs10132344
0.11
8.18E-21
0.1546
1
DZIP3
3:109896160
null_339_6338
null_339
2:218046715
rs1478590
0.11
14:69666638
rs10132344
0.11
4.13E-15
0.1247
1
FAM90A2P
8:7104545
null_339_6338
null_339
2:218046715
rs1478590
0.11
14:69666638
rs10132344
0.11
1.73E-24
0.2147
1
GLP1R
6:39163079
null_339_6338
null_339
2:218046715
rs1478590
0.11
14:69666638
rs10132344
0.11
1.40E-30
0.1971
1
TXNRD2
22:18299943
null_339_6338
null_339
2:218046715
rs1478590
0.11
14:69666638
rs10132344
0.11
1.29E-39
0.4352
1
CSHL1
17:59341967
null_339_6338
null_339
2:218046715
rs1478590
0.11
14:69666638
rs10132344
0.11
8.18E-17
0.1293
1
NCOR2
12:123377955
null_339_6338
null_339
2:218046715
rs1478590
0.11
14:69666638
rs10132344
0.11
4.96E-15
0.1320
1
NUDT4P1
1:143848976
null_339_6338
null_339
2:218046715
rs1478590
0.11
14:69666638
rs10132344
0.11
1.52E-27
0.1737
1
C1orf200
1:9637055
null_339_6338
null_339
3:25307427
rs322673
0.26
13:79204571
rs2329119
0.42
4.07E-11
-0.1396
9
DUSP1
5:172128082
null_974_3900
null_974
Table B.3: Examples of epistastic eﬀects with diﬀerent levels of conﬁdence (measured by minimum GCC). The SNP-probe pairs are
sorted by their minimum GCC. The table presents data for three exemplary SNP-pairs. SNP-probe pairs marked in bold are plotted
in Figure B.6 on page 87. This table serves to illustrate some of the spurious epistatic eﬀects (minGCC < 3) underlying the hIMR90
spatial epistasis enrichment. P-value: 1-df test for the signiﬁcance of the genetic interaction term; Beta: eﬀect size estimate of the
genetic interaction term; Gene: the gene-probe mapping listed in the Illumina manifest ﬁle; Probe: chromosomal coordinates of the probe;
EID: Experiment Identiﬁer; EIID: Experiment Interaction Identiﬁer.
==PAGE:111==
94
Supplementary Analysis and Results
SNP1
rsID
MAF1
rsID
MAF2
SNP2
P-value
Beta
minGCC
Gene
Probe
EIID
EID
8:18885955
rs10104492
0.28
rs12451549
0.10
17:46875212
1.72E-11
0.1731
3
CSHL1
17:59341967
hic_1_4837
hic_1
2:30967126
rs1862959
0.20
rs10500890
0.18
11:21075311
2.24E-13
0.18653
3
APOD
3:196777220
hic_1_1090
hic_1
Table B.4: Top conﬁdent spatial epistastic SNP-probe pairs identiﬁed in this study. That is, these SNP-pairs map to psychical
interacting genomic loci (in hIMR90 cells). The SNP-probe pairs were selected using the criteria min GCC ≥3 (these two SNP-probe
pairs appear on the right hand side of Table B.1). See Table B.3 for a description of the table headers.
SNP1
rsID
MAF1
SNP2
rsID
MAF2
P-value
Beta
minGCC
Gene
Probe
EIID
EID
4:104066247
rs3974608
0.46
3:163183258
rs4299495
0.24
2.57E-11
0.066
10
LOC727752
19:51651
null_86_7175
null_86
3:57295044
rs9840663
0.32
22:47915370
rs80567
0.35
1.13E-11
0.086
12
ATPIF1
1:28436788
null_150_7035
null_150
9:81975039
rs7045654
0.32
16:12633764
rs7194011
0.42
2.64E-11
-0.078
19
SLC46A3
13:28172532
null_198_4075
null_198
1:176775553
rs6700266
0.35
7:82563554
rs6947662
0.4
3.10E-11
0.067
15
PIGR
1:205168794
null_420_1555
null_420
5:60895903
rs10036399
0.29
15:48836816
rs12911143
0.37
1.87E-11
0.064
11
KIAA1147
7:141003222
null_435_7721
null_435
2:135143088
rs4954158
0.39
16:63565417
rs35226
0.31
7.17E-12
-0.050
13
ABCC11
16:46823387
null_928_6011
null_928
Table B.5: Top conﬁdent epistastic SNP-probe pairs identiﬁed in this study. The SNP-probe pairs were selected using the criteria
min GCC ≥10. These SNP-probe pairs are the strongest evidence of statistical epistasis found in this thesis. None of these SNP-probe
pairs were reported by (Hemani et al., 2014). Notice that only two of the SNP-pairs co-localize with the probe. All the SNP-pairs map to
non-interacting genomic loci (“null samples”, see Figure 6.2). See Table B.3 for a description of the table headers.
==PAGE:112==
C
Source Code
C.1
GitHub Meta-analysis
Git and GitHub were used for version control of the code written for this thesis∗. I
used GitStats for this small “meta-analysis” of my code. Table C.1 shows that
Python and R were the most predominant programming languages used in this
thesis. Figure C.1 reveals that the code was not contributed equally throughout
the project period. This may be because I was too undisciplined to commit my
code as soon as it was done. Figure C.2 shows (a) my very unproductive weekends,
and (b) my habits of coding late in the night.
Extension
Files
Lines
Lines/ﬁle
R
33 (44.00%)
4115 (7.01%)
124
ipynb
9 (12.00%)
44484 (75.74%)
4942
pl
3 (4.00%)
162 (0.28%)
54
py
29 (38.67%)
8135 (13.85%)
280
txt
1 (1.33%)
1835 (3.12%)
1835
total
75
58731
Table C.1:
GitHub repository meta-analysis of programming language used
for this thesis. Only selected ﬁle extensions are shown (.R, .ipynb, .pl, .py,
.txt).
∗Unfortunately a substantial part of my code was not version controlled, and hence not included
in this “analysis”. This includes the R code used to experiment with epistatic models, replicate
the work of Hemani et al. (2014), perform the PEER analysis and generate circos plots
==PAGE:113==
96
Source Code
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
GG G
G
G
GGGGGGG GG
G
G
GG
GG
GGG
G
G
GGG
G
G
GGGGGG
G G
G
G
GG
G G GG GGGGGG G
G
G
G
GG
GGG
GGGGG
G
G
0
25
50
75
100
Oct 2014
Jan 2015
Apr 2015
Jul 2015
Oct 2015
Timestamp of commit
Count
Commit parameter
G
G
File count
Lines of code (10k)
GitHub Repository Commits
Figure C.1: File count and the number of lines of code (in values of 10,000)
plotted against date.
0
5
10
15
Mon
Tue
Wed
Thu
Fri
Sat
Sun
Day of week
Commits
Saturday
Friday
Thursday
Wednesday
Tuesday
Monday
Sunday
12a 1a 2a 3a 4a 5a 6a 7a 8a 9a 10a 11a12p 1p 2p 3p 4p 5p 6p 7p 8p 9p 10p11p
Figure C.2: Weekly distribution of commits.
==PAGE:114==
C.2 Source Code
97
C.2
Source Code
Listing C.1: Code for generating epistatic models shown in Figure 2.3 on page 10.


1 l i b r a r y ( ggplot2 )
2
3 # Generate
A l l e l e
Codes
4 a l l e l e . c o d e s <−rep ( c (0 ,1 ,2) ,
3)
5 d f . a l l e l e s <−unique ( expand.grid ( snp1=a l l e l e . c o d e s ,
snp2=a l l e l e . c o d e s
) )
6
7 # Set
beta
c o e f f i c i e n t s
8 beta.1 <−0 # main
e f f e c t SNP 1
9 beta.2 <−0 .3 # main
e f f e c t SNP 2
10 beta.12 <−0 # no
e p i s t a s i s
11
12 # Set
response
v a r i a b l e
( phenotype )
13 y1 <−with ( d f . a l l e l e s ,
beta.1 ∗snp1 + beta.2 ∗snp2 + beta.12 ∗snp1∗snp2 )
14 # Combine
v a r i a b l e s
in
data.frame ,
with SNPs as
f a c t o r s
( a l l e l e
codes
)
15 d f . e p i <−with ( d f . a l l e l e s ,
data.frame ( snp1=a s . f a c t o r ( snp1 ) ,
snp2=
a s . f a c t o r ( snp2 ) , y=y1 ) )
16 # Plot
using
ggplot
17 p <−ggplot ( d f . e p i ,
aes ( x=snp1 ,
group=snp2 ,
c o l o r=snp2 ,
y=y ) ) + geom_
point () + geom_l i n e ()


Listing C.2: . The code shows a workﬂow for testing for epistasis in R using
the multiplicative allelic model. First the genotype data is loaded from is binary
PLINK format via the SnpStats package. Next the two linear models are ﬁtted to
an example SNP-probe pair using the lm() function, and subsequently tested for
model reduction using anova().


1
l i b r a r y ( s n p S t a t s ) # used
f o r
PLINK
data
I /O
f u n c t i o n s
2
3 ### Genotypes
( from
PLINK
f i l e s )
4
f i l e s . p l i n k <−" data / EGCUT_PLINK_G E N O T Y P E S "
5
g w a s . f n <−
l a p p l y ( c ( bed=’ bed ’ , bim=’ bim ’ , fam=’ fam ’ ) ,
6
f u n c t i o n ( n )
s p r i n t f ( " %s.%s " ,
f i l e s . p l i n k ,
n ) )
7
geno <−
r e a d . p l i n k ( g w a s . f n $bed ,
g w a s . f n $bim ,
g w a s . f n $fam ) # SNPstats
8
genoBim <−geno $map # Obtain
the
SNP
i n f o r m a t i o n
from
geno
l i s t
9
colnames ( genoBim ) <−c ( " chr " ,
" SNP " ,
" g e n . d i s t " ,
" p o s i t i o n " ,
" A1 " ,
" A2 " )
10
geno <−geno $ genotypes # genotype
m a t r i x
[ i n d i v i d u a l s
X SNPs ]
|
11
geno <−as ( geno ,
" n u m e r i c " ) # C o n v e r t i n g
SnpMatrix
to
Numeric
Matrix
| # 0 ,1 ,2 .
M i s s i n g
data
w i l l
be
NA.
12
dim ( geno ) # 832
i n d i v i d u a l s ,
~2 e6
SNPs
13
14 ### Phenotypes
(EGCUT
e x p r e s s i o n
m a t r i x )
15
d f . p r o b e s <−
r e a d . t a b l e ( " e x p r e s s i o n_matrix_s a m p l e s_a l l . R D a t a " ,
h=T) # e x p r e s s i o n
m a t r i x
[
i n d i v i d u a l s
X
pr o be s ]
16
dim ( d f . p r o b e s )# 832
i n d i v i d u a l s ,
9269
p r ob e s
17
18 #### Run
E p i s t a s i s
Tests ####
19
d f . e p i s t a s i s <−
E p i s t a s i s T e s t s (
20
name.snp1=" r s 7 9 8 9 8 9 5 " ,
21
name.snp2=" r s 4 8 4 6 0 8 5 " ,
22
name.probe=" ILMN_1 6 5 1 3 8 5 " ,
23
geno=geno ,
24
e x p r e s s i o n=d f . p r o b e s )
25
26 #### Main
Function ####
27
E p i s t a s i s T e s t s <−f u n c t i o n ( name.snp1 ,
name.snp2 ,
name.probe ,
geno ,
e x p r e s s i o n )
{
28
# E x t r a c t
data
29
snp1 <−geno [ ,
colnames ( geno ) == name.snp1 ]
30
snp2 <−geno [ ,
colnames ( geno ) == name.snp2 ]
31
probe <−
e x p r e s s i o n [ ,
colnames ( e x p r e s s i o n ) == name.probe ]
32
33
i f
(
( l e n g t h ( snp1 ) <1)
|
( l e n g t h ( snp2 ) <1)
|
( l e n g t h ( probe ) <1)
)
{
34
p r i n t ( " snp1 ,
snp2
or
probe
not
found " )
35
r e t u r n ( d a t a . f r a m e ( ) ) # r e t u r n i n g
empty
data
frame
36
}
37
38
SNP_LD <−c o r ( snp1 ,
snp2 ,
use=" p a i r w i s e . c o m p l e t e . o b s " ) # compute LD
u s i n g
Pearson
C o r r e l a t i o n
39
n_u s a b l e_data_p o i n t s <−sum ( ! i s . n a ( snp1 ) & ! i s . n a ( snp2 ) ) # t o t a l
number
o f
non−NA data
p o i n t s
40
n_m i s s i n g_data_p o i n t s <−sum ( i s . n a ( snp1 ) ) + sum ( i s . n a ( snp2 ) ) # t o t a l
number
o f
m i s s i n g
data
p o i n t s
==PAGE:115==
98
Source Code
41
42
### MAF
c a l c u l a t i o n
43
# MAF Formula :
number_o f_SNP[ x ]_a l l e l e s / t o t a l_number_o f_a l l e l e s
44
tmp.snp1.maf <−( sum ( snp1==1,na.rm=T) ∗1 + sum ( snp1==2,
na.rm=T) ∗2) / (2 ∗sum ( ! i s . n a ( snp1 ) ) )
45
tmp.snp2.maf <−( sum ( snp2==1,na.rm=T) ∗1 + sum ( snp2==2,
na.rm=T) ∗2) / (2 ∗sum ( ! i s . n a ( snp2 ) ) )
46
snp1.maf <−
i f e l s e ( tmp.snp1.maf <= 0 .5 ,
tmp.snp1.maf ,
1−tmp.snp1.maf )
47
snp2.maf <−
i f e l s e ( tmp.snp2.maf <= 0 .5 ,
tmp.snp2.maf ,
1−tmp.snp2.maf )
48
49
### F a c t o r i z e
numeric
encoded
a l l e l e s
50
s n p 1 . a l l e l e <−
f a c t o r ( snp1 , l e v e l s=c ( " 0 " ,
" 1 " ,
" 2 " , NA) ,
e x c l u d e=NULL)
51
s n p 2 . a l l e l e <−
f a c t o r ( snp2 , l e v e l s=c ( " 0 " ,
" 1 " ,
" 2 " , NA) ,
e x c l u d e=NULL)
52
53
### C o n s t r u c t
two−l o c i
genotype
t a b l e
f o r
c a l c u l a t i o n
54
# o f
minimum
Genotype
C l a s s
Count
(mGCC) .
55
t a b . a l l e l e <−t a b l e ( d a t a . f r a m e ( s n p 1 . a l l e l e ,
s n p 2 . a l l e l e ) ) # c r o s s t a b u l a t i o n
56
t a b . a l l e l e
57
d f . t w o l o c u s <−a s . d a t a . f r a m e ( t a b . a l l e l e )
58
d f . t w o l o c u s . n a r m <−n a . o m i t ( d f . t w o l o c u s ) # t h i s
i s
the
3 x3
m a t r i x / t a b l e
59
min_genotype_c l a s s_count <−min ( d f . t w o l o c u s . n a r m $ Freq ) # minimum
v a l u e
i n
the
c o n t i n g e n c y
t a b l e
60
61
62
##### S t a t i s t i c a l
t e s t s −
M u l t i p l i c a t i v e
A l l e l i c
model #####
63
## F u l l
model
64
f u l l m o d . m u l t i p l i c a t i v e <−lm ( probe
~
snp1 + snp2 + snp1 : snp2 )
65
f u l l m o d . m u l t i p l i c a t i v e
66
summary ( f u l l m o d . m u l t i p l i c a t i v e )
67
beta_i n t_m u l t i p l i c a t i v e <−
f u l l m o d . m u l t i p l i c a t i v e $ c o e f f i c i e n t s [ 4 ] # c o e f f i c i e n t
f o r
i n t e r a c t i o n
term
( snp1 : snp2 )
68
## Marginal
model
69
m a r g m o d . m u l t i p l i c a t i v e <−lm ( probe
~
snp1 + snp2 )
70
## Test
f o r
model
r e d u c t i o n
|
Maximum
l i k e l i h o o d
framework
71
# Note
t h a t
the
t r a d i t i o n a l
approach
o f
u s i n g
the
anova ( lm ( . . . ) )
c a l l
r e s u l t s
i n
a
" s e q u e n t i a l
t e s t "
f o r
d r o p p i n g
model
t e r m s .
This
code
u s e s
a
more
r e l i a b l e
method
by
t e s t i n g
a
s p e c i f i c
hypotheses ,
by
u s i n g
the
c a l l
" anova ( f i t . H 0 ,
f i t . H A ) " .
A l t e r n a t i v e l y ,
the
c a l l
" anova ( lm ( . . .
) ,
ssType =3)"
or
" drop1 ( aov ( ) ) "
u s e s
a
Type
I I I
t e s t
( p a r t i a l ) ,
which
i s
a l s o
a p p r o p r i a t e
72
i n t t e s t_m u l t i p l i c a t i v e <−anova ( m a r g m o d . m u l t i p l i c a t i v e ,
f u l l m o d . m u l t i p l i c a t i v e ) # anova ( f i t . H 0 ,
f i t . H A )
73
# Because
we
a r e
assuming
i n d e p e n d e n t
Gaussian
n o i s e
( g e n e r a l
l i n e a r
model ) ,
the
l i k e l i h o o d
r a t i o
t e s t
s t a t i s t i c
we know
the
a n a l y t i c a l
d i s t r i b u t i o n
o f
the
t e s t :
F−t e s t
because
both
the
nominator
and
denominator
a r e
chi −sq
d i s t r i b u t e d .
Hence
we
do
not
have
to
r e l y
on
a s s y m p t o t i c
r e s u l t s
from
the
Wilk ’ s
L i k e l i h o o d
Ra ti o
t e s t
theorem.
74
75
### E x t r a c t i n g
Model
E s t i m a t e s
76
F_s t a t i s t i c <−
i n t t e s t_m u l t i p l i c a t i v e $F [ 2 ] # F−t e s t
v a l u e
77
# Large
v a l u e s
o f
F
r e f l e c t s
a
c o n f l i c t
between
the
data
and H0 ,
and
hence
l e a d
to
r e j e c t i o n
o f
H0
78
F_p v a l <−
i n t t e s t_m u l t i p l i c a t i v e $P [ 2 ] # or
more
c o n v e n i e n t : −log10 ( i n t t e s t_m u l t i p l i c a t i v e $P [ 2 ] )
79
# The P−v a l u e
i s
c a l c u l a t e d
as
F(F_s t a t i s t i c ,
df_denominator ,
df_numerator ,
l o w e r . t a i l=F)
80
81
### Degrees
o f
freedom
82
F_df_denominator = m a r g m o d . m u l t i p l i c a t i v e $ d f . r e s i d u a l −
f u l l m o d . m u l t i p l i c a t i v e $ d f . r e s i d u a l
83
# Formula
to
c a l c u l a t e
F_df_denominator : m_ f u l l −m_red = N_param_ f u l l −N_param_red = (3+1)
−(2+1)=1
84
# The F_df_denominator
w i l l
remain
the
same
f o r
a l l
SNP−probe
p a i r s
85
F_df_numerator =
f u l l m o d . m u l t i p l i c a t i v e $ d f . r e s i d u a l
86
# Formula
to
c a l c u l a t e
F_df_numerator :
n −m_ f u l l
= N_o b s e r v a t i o n s −N_param_ f u l l
= 6−(3+1)=2
87
# The F_df_numerator
i s
dependent
on N_o b s e r v a t i o n s .
Hence
i t
i s
s e n s i t i v e
to
m i s s i n g
data
(
unobserved
c o m b i n a t i o n s
o f
a l l e l e s )
88
89
### Return
data
frame
r e s u l t s ###
90
d f . r e s . t m p <−d a t a . f r a m e (
91
snp1=name.snp1 ,
snp2=name.snp2 ,
probename=name.probe ,
92
beta=beta_i n t_m u l t i p l i c a t i v e ,
93
F_pval ,
94
F_s t a t i s t i c ,
95
F_df_denominator ,
96
F_df_numerator ,
97
SNP_LD=SNP_LD,
98
snp1_maf=snp1.maf ,
99
snp2_maf=snp2.maf ,
100
n_u s a b l e_data_p o i n t s ,
101
n_m i s s i n g_data_p o i n t s
102
)
103
r e t u r n ( d f . r e s . t m p )
104
}

==PAGE:116==
D
Glossary
The terms listed in this glossary serve to provide precise deﬁnitions of terms most
readers will not be familiar with. They are, for the most part, made up by the
author of this thesis and are not yet∗part of the genetics jargon.
Genetics
• genotype class count (GCC): the number of observations for a particular
combination of genotypes. This is the same as the two-locus genotype counts.
A two-locus biallelic genotype model consists of nine (3 · 3 = 9) diﬀerent
genotype classes.
Hi-C data
• interaction fragment: the genomic region making one of the interacting partners.
This is the lowest level building parts of the Hi-C data set. The interaction
fragment size determines the resolution of the Hi-C data. The fragment size
can be either based on restriction fragments or ﬁxed-sized (e.g. 40 kb) by
aggregating restriction fragments into bins.
• interaction table: the complete set of interactions considered at a given FDR
threshold. Each entry consists of of two interaction fragments, constituting a
Hi-C interaction pair.
• Hi-C interaction pair: two interaction fragments interacting. That is, the
fragments are in close spatial proximity.
• interaction count: the number of interactions an interaction fragment takes
part of.
• contact count: the number of sequence reads for the interaction. The number
is derived directly after mapping, ﬁltering, pairing and duplicate removal of
the paired-end Hi-C reads.
• normalized contact count: contact count normalized for the Hi-C bias at
each locus (e.g. bias derived from the ICE method (Imakaev et al., 2012)).
Normalized counts can be obtained by using the formula:
contact_countnorm =
contact_countraw
b1·b2
, where b1 and b2 is the bias for ﬁrst and
second locus, respectively.
Spatial Epistasis Enrichment
∗Hopefully, the international scientiﬁc community will one day realize the potential of this work
and adopt the many wonderful terms for spatial epistasis.
==PAGE:117==
100
Glossary
• spatial proximate epistasis (or spatial epistasis): statistical epistasis between
genetic variants in close spatial proximity. Spatial proximity is deﬁned as
highly interacting genomic regions. That is, regions with high contact count
measured by chromosome conformation capture methods (e.g. Hi-C data).
• interaction width (l): the length in bp of the genomic region that is considered
for epistasis discovery. Thus the interaction width, l, deﬁnes the search space
for “spatial genetic interactions”. The region is bounded by the symmetric
distance l/2 bp upstream and downstream from the midpoint of the interaction
fragment.
• Experiment Identiﬁer (EID): a unique identiﬁer for each sample from the null
distribution. That is, samples from non-interacting genomic regions.
Format is [experiment_type]_[experiment_number], e.g. null_1, null_2,
..., null_1000.
• Experiment Interaction Identiﬁer (EIID): a unique identiﬁer for each interaction
for each sample from the null distribution.
Format is [experiment_type]_[experiment_number]_[interaction_number],
e.g. null_1_1923 for interaction number 1923 from null sample 1.
==PAGE:118==
References
Literature
Alberts, Rudi et al. (2007). “Sequence polymorphisms cause many false cis eQTLs”.
In: PLoS ONE 2.7, pp. 1–5. issn: 19326203. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.
0000622.
Albrechtsen, Anders et al. (2007). “A bayesian multilocus association method:
Allowing for higher-order interaction in association studies”. In: Genetics 176.2,
pp. 1197–1208. issn: 00166731. doi: 10.1534/genetics.107.071696.
Alon, Uri (2006). An Introduction to Systems Biology: Design Principles of Biolog-
ical Circuits. Chapman & Hall/CRC Mathematical and Computational Biology.
CRC Press, p. 320. isbn: 9781420011432.
Anderson, Carl a et al. (2010). “Data quality control in genetic case-control as-
sociation studies.” In: Nature protocols 5.9, pp. 1564–73. issn: 1750-2799. doi:
10.1038/nprot.2010.116.
Aulchenko, Yurii S. et al. (2007). “GenABEL: An R library for genome-wide
association analysis”. In: Bioinformatics 23.10, pp. 1294–1296. issn: 13674803.
doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btm108.
Ay, Ferhat, Timothy L Bailey, and William Staﬀord Noble (2014b). “Statistical
conﬁdence estimation for Hi-C data reveals regulatory chromatin contacts.” In:
Genome research 24.6, pp. 999–1011. issn: 1549-5469. doi: 10.1101/gr.160374.
113.
Ay, Ferhat and William S. Noble (2015). “Analysis methods for studying the 3D
architecture of the genome”. In: Genome Biology 16.1, p. 183. issn: 1474-760X.
Aylor, DL and ZB Zeng (2008). “From classical genetics to quantitative genetics
to systems biology: modeling epistasis”. In: PLoS genetics 4.3. doi: 10.1371/
journal.pgen.1000029.
Bateson, William (1909). Mendel’s Principles of Heredity. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Beam, Andrew L, Alison Motsinger-Reif, and Jon Doyle (2014). “Bayesian neural
networks for detecting epistasis in genetic association studies.” In: BMC bioin-
formatics 15.1, p. 368. issn: 1471-2105. doi: 10.1186/s12859-014-0368-0.
Becker, Jessica et al. (2012). “A systematic eQTL study of cis-trans epistasis in
210 HapMap individuals.” In: European journal of human genetics : EJHG 20.1,
pp. 97–101. issn: 1476-5438. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2011.156.
Belton, Jon Matthew et al. (2012). “Hi-C: A comprehensive technique to capture
the conformation of genomes”. In: Methods 58.3, pp. 268–276. issn: 10462023.
doi: 10.1016/j.ymeth.2012.05.001.
==PAGE:119==
102
REFERENCES
Berkum, Nynke L. van et al. (2010). “Hi-C: A Method to Study the Three-
dimensional Architecture of Genomes.” In: Journal of Visualized Experiments
39, pp. 1–7. issn: 1940-087X. doi: 10.3791/1869.
Bianconi, Eva et al. (2013). “An estimation of the number of cells in the human
body”. en. In: Annals of Human Biology.
Bishop, Christopher (2007). Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning. 1st ed.
Springer. isbn: 0387310738.
Bonora, Giancarlo, Kathrin Plath, and Matthew Denholtz (2014). “A mechanistic
link between gene regulation and genome architecture in mammalian develop-
ment”. In: Current Opinion in Genetics & Development 27, pp. 92–101. issn:
0959437X. doi: 10.1016/j.gde.2014.05.002.
Brem, Rachel B. et al. (2005). “Genetic interactions between polymorphisms that
aﬀect gene expression in yeast”. In: Nature 436.7051, pp. 701–703. issn: 0028-0836.
doi: 10.1038/nature03865.
Carlborg, Orjan and Chris S Haley (2004). “Epistasis: too often neglected in complex
trait studies?” In: Nature reviews. Genetics 5.8, pp. 618–25. issn: 1471-0056.
doi: 10.1038/nrg1407.
Chang, Christopher C et al. (2015). “Second-generation PLINK: rising to the
challenge of larger and richer datasets”. In: GigaScience 4, pp. 1–16. issn: 2047-
217X. doi: 10.1186/s13742-015-0047-8.
Ciabrelli, Filippo and Giacomo Cavalli (2015). “Chromatin-Driven Behavior of
Topologically Associating Domains”. In: Journal of Molecular Biology 427.3,
pp. 608–625. issn: 00222836. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2014.09.013.
Collins, Francis (2010). “Has the revolution arrived?” In: Nature 464.7289, pp. 674–
675. issn: 0028-0836. doi: 10.1038/464674a.
Cordell, Heather J (2002). “Epistasis: what it means, what it doesn’t mean, and
statistical methods to detect it in humans.” In: Human molecular genetics 11.20,
pp. 2463–8. issn: 0964-6906.
– (2009). “Detecting gene-gene interactions that underlie human diseases.” In:
Nature reviews. Genetics 10.6, pp. 392–404. issn: 1471-0064. doi: 10.1038/
nrg2579.
Costanzo, Michael et al. (2010). “The genetic landscape of a cell.” In: Science
(New York, N.Y.) 327.5964, pp. 425–31. issn: 1095-9203. doi: 10.1126/science.
1180823.
Cremer, Thomas and Marion Cremer (2010). “Chromosome territories”. In: Cold
Spring Harbor perspectives in biology 2.3, a003889. issn: 1943-0264. doi: 10.
1101/cshperspect.a003889.
Cremer, Thomas et al. (2006). “Chromosome territories - a functional nuclear
landscape”. In: Current Opinion in Cell Biology 18.3, pp. 307–316. issn: 09550674.
doi: 10.1016/j.ceb.2006.04.007.
Dekker, Job (2008). “Gene regulation in the third dimension.” In: Science (New York,
N.Y.) 319.5871, pp. 1793–4. issn: 1095-9203. doi: 10.1126/science.1152850.
Dekker, Job, Marc a Marti-Renom, and Leonid a Mirny (2013). “Exploring the
three-dimensional organization of genomes: interpreting chromatin interaction
data.” In: Nature reviews. Genetics 14.6, pp. 390–403. issn: 1471-0064. doi:
10.1038/nrg3454.
Dekker, Job et al. (2002). “Capturing chromosome conformation.” In: Science
295.5558, pp. 1306–1311. issn: 00368075. doi: 10.1126/science.1067799.
==PAGE:120==
LITERATURE
103
Deng, Wulan et al. (2012). “Controlling Long-Range Genomic Interactions at
a Native Locus by Targeted Tethering of a Looping Factor”. In: Cell 149.6,
pp. 1233–1244. issn: 00928674. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.03.051.
Dixon, Jesse R et al. (2012). “Topological domains in mammalian genomes identiﬁed
by analysis of chromatin interactions.” In: Nature 485.7398, pp. 376–80. issn:
1476-4687. doi: 10.1038/nature11082.
Dixon, Jesse R. et al. (2015). “Chromatin architecture reorganization during stem
cell diﬀerentiation”. In: Nature 518.7539, pp. 331–336. issn: 0028-0836. doi:
10.1038/nature14222.
Dostie, Josée et al. (2006). “Chromosome Conformation Capture Carbon Copy
(5C): A massively parallel solution for mapping interactions between genomic
elements”. In: Genome Research 16.10, pp. 1299–1309. issn: 10889051. doi:
10.1101/gr.5571506.
Drexler, H G, R A MacLeod, and C C Uphoﬀ(1999). “Leukemia cell lines: in
vitro models for the study of Philadelphia chromosome-positive leukemia.” In:
Leukemia Research 23.3, pp. 207–215. issn: 01452126. doi: 10.1016/S0145-
2126(98)00171-4.
Duggal, Geet, Hao Wang, and Carl Kingsford (2014). “Higher-order chromatin
domains link eQTLs with the expression of far-away genes”. In: Nucleic Acids
Research 42.1, pp. 87–96. issn: 03051048. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt857.
Eichler, Evan E et al. (2010). “Missing heritability and strategies for ﬁnding the
underlying causes of complex disease.” In: Nature reviews. Genetics 11.6, pp. 446–
50. issn: 1471-0064. doi: 10.1038/nrg2809.
Emily, Mathieu et al. (2009). “Using biological networks to search for interacting
loci in genome-wide association studies.” In: European journal of human genetics
: EJHG 17.10, pp. 1231–40. issn: 1476-5438. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2009.15.
Engreitz, Jesse M., Vineeta Agarwala, and Leonid a. Mirny (2012). “Three-Dimensional
Genome Architecture Inﬂuences Partner Selection for Chromosomal Translo-
cations in Human Disease”. In: PLoS ONE 7.9, pp. 1–9. issn: 19326203. doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0044196.
Eskiw, Christopher H et al. (2008). “RNA polymerase II activity is located on the
surface of protein-rich transcription factories.” In: Journal of cell science 121.Pt
12, pp. 1999–2007. issn: 0021-9533. doi: 10.1242/jcs.027250.
Fisher, R. A. (1919). “The Correlation between Relatives on the Supposition of
Mendelian Inheritance.” English. In: Transactions of the Royal Society of Edin-
burgh 52.02, pp. 399–433. issn: 0080-4568. doi: 10.1017/S0080456800012163.
Franke, Andre et al. (2010). “Genome-wide meta-analysis increases to 71 the
number of conﬁrmed Crohn’s disease susceptibility loci.” In: Nature genetics
42.12, pp. 1118–25. issn: 1546-1718. doi: 10.1038/ng.717.
Fraser, James et al. (2015). “An Overview of Genome Organization and How We
Got There: from FISH to Hi-C”. In: Microbiology and Molecular Biology Reviews
79.3, pp. 347–372. issn: 1092-2172. doi: 10.1128/MMBR.00006-15.
Frazer, Kelly A et al. (2007). “A second generation human haplotype map of
over 3.1 million SNPs.” In: Nature 449.7164, pp. 851–861. issn: 0028-0836. doi:
10.1038/nature06258.
Gibcus, Johan H. and Job Dekker (2013). “The Hierarchy of the 3D Genome”.
In: Molecular Cell 49.5, pp. 773–782. issn: 10972765. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.
2013.02.011.
==PAGE:121==
104
REFERENCES
Gibson, Greg (2012). “Rare and common variants: twenty arguments”. In: Nature
Reviews Genetics 13.2, pp. 135–145. issn: 1471-0056. doi: 10.1038/nrg3118.
Göndör, Anita and Rolf Ohlsson (2009). “Chromosome crosstalk in three di-
mensions.” In: Nature 461.7261, pp. 212–7. issn: 1476-4687. doi: 10.1038/
nature08453.
Greene, Casey S et al. (2010). “Enabling personal genomics with an explicit test of
epistasis.” In: Paciﬁc Symposium on Biocomputing. Pp. 327–36. issn: 2335-6936.
Guo, Ya et al. (2015). “Article CRISPR Inversion of CTCF Sites Alters Genome
Topology and Enhancer / Promoter Function Article CRISPR Inversion of CTCF
Sites Alters Genome Topology and Enhancer / Promoter Function”. In: Cell
162.4, pp. 900–910. issn: 0092-8674. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.07.038.
Gusev, Alexander et al. (2014). “Partitioning Heritability of Regulatory and Cell-
Type-Speciﬁc Variants across 11 Common Diseases”. In: The American Journal
of Human Genetics 95.5, pp. 535–552. issn: 00029297. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.
2014.10.004.
Hebenstreit, Daniel (2013). “Are gene loops the cause of transcriptional noise?”
In: Trends in Genetics 29.6, pp. 333–338. issn: 01689525. doi: 10.1016/j.tig.
2013.04.001.
Hemani, Gibran et al. (2011). “EpiGPU: exhaustive pairwise epistasis scans paral-
lelized on consumer level graphics cards.” In: Bioinformatics (Oxford, England)
27.11, pp. 1462–5. issn: 1367-4811. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btr172.
Hemani, Gibran et al. (2014). “Detection and replication of epistasis inﬂuencing
transcription in humans.” In: Nature 508.7495, pp. 249–53. issn: 1476-4687.
Hill, William G, Michael E Goddard, and Peter M Visscher (2008). “Data and
theory point to mainly additive genetic variance for complex traits.” In: PLoS
genetics 4.2, e1000008. issn: 1553-7404. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000008.
Howie, Bryan N, Peter Donnelly, and Jonathan Marchini (2009). “A ﬂexible and
accurate genotype imputation method for the next generation of genome-wide
association studies”. In: PLoS Genetics 5.6. issn: 15537390. doi: 10.1371/
journal.pgen.1000529.
Imakaev, Maxim et al. (2012). “Iterative correction of Hi-C data reveals hallmarks
of chromosome organization.” In: Nature methods 9.10, pp. 999–1003. issn:
1548-7105. doi: 10.1038/nmeth.2148.
Jordan, Michael I (1999). “An Introduction to Variational Methods for Graphical
Models”. In: Machine Learning 37, pp. 183–233.
Kagey, Michael H et al. (2010). “Mediator and cohesin connect gene expression and
chromatin architecture.” In: Nature 467.7314, pp. 430–435. issn: 1476-4687. doi:
10.1038/nature09380.
Kahneman, Daniel (2011). Thinking, fast and slow. Macmillan.
Knijnenburg, Theo A et al. (2009). “Fewer permutations, more accurate P-values.”
In: Bioinformatics (Oxford, England) 25.12, pp. i161–8. issn: 1367-4811. doi:
10.1093/bioinformatics/btp211.
Lajoie, Bryan R, Job Dekker, and Noam Kaplan (2014). “The Hitchhiker’s Guide to
Hi-C Analysis: Practical guidelines”. In: Methods 72, pp. 65–75. issn: 10462023.
doi: 10.1016/j.ymeth.2014.10.031.
Lan, Xun et al. (2012). “Integration of Hi-C and ChIP-seq data reveals distinct
types of chromatin linkages.” In: Nucleic acids research 40.16, pp. 7690–704. issn:
1362-4962. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks501.
==PAGE:122==
LITERATURE
105
Langmead, B et al. (2009). “Ultrafast and memory-eﬃcient alignment of short DNA
sequences to the human genome”. In: Genome biology 10.3, R25. issn: 1465-6914;
1465-6906. doi: gb-2009-10-3-r25[pii]$\backslash$n10.1186/gb-2009-
10-3-r25.
Lazebnik, Y (2002). “Can a biologist ﬁx a radio?—Or, what I learned while studying
apoptosis”. In: Cancer Cell 2.September, pp. 179–182.
Leek, Jeﬀrey T and John D Storey (2007). “Capturing heterogeneity in gene
expression studies by surrogate variable analysis.” In: PLoS genetics 3.9, pp. 1724–
35. issn: 1553-7404. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.0030161.
Lehner, Ben (2011). “Molecular mechanisms of epistasis within and between genes”.
In: Trends in Genetics 27.8, pp. 323–331. issn: 01689525. doi: 10.1016/j.tig.
2011.05.007.
Li, Wentian and Jens Reich (2000). “A complete enumeration and classiﬁcation of
two-locus disease models.” In: Human heredity 50.6, pp. 334–49. issn: 0001-5652.
doi: 22939.
Li, Wenyuan et al. (2015). “Hi-Corrector: a fast, scalable and memory-eﬃcient pack-
age for normalizing large-scale Hi-C data.” In: Bioinformatics (Oxford, England)
31.November, pp. 1–3. issn: 1367-4811. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btu747.
Libbrecht, Maxwell W et al. (2015). “Joint annotation of chromatin state and
chromatin conformation reveals relationships among domain types and identiﬁes
domains of cell type-speciﬁc expression.” In: Genome research. issn: 1549-5469.
doi: 10.1101/gr.184341.114.
Lieberman-Aiden, Erez et al. (2009). “Comprehensive mapping of long-range inter-
actions reveals folding principles of the human genome.” In: Science 326.5950,
pp. 289–93. issn: 1095-9203. doi: 10.1126/science.1181369.
Locke, Adam E. et al. (2015). “Genetic studies of body mass index yield new
insights for obesity biology”. In: Nature 518, pp. 197–206. issn: 0028-0836. doi:
10.1038/nature14177.
Lozzio, C B and B B Lozzio (1975). “Human chronic myelogenous leukemia cell-
line with positive Philadelphia chromosome.” In: Blood 45.3, pp. 321–34. issn:
0006-4971.
Mackay, Trudy F C (2014). “Epistasis and quantitative traits: using model organisms
to study gene-gene interactions.” In: Nature reviews. Genetics 15.1, pp. 22–33.
issn: 1471-0064. doi: 10.1038/nrg3627.
Mackay, Trudy Fc and Jason H Moore (2014). “Why epistasis is important for
tackling complex human disease genetics.” En. In: Genome medicine 6.6, p. 124.
issn: 1756-994X. doi: 10.1186/gm561.
Macosko, Evan Z. et al. (2015). “Highly Parallel Genome-wide Expression Proﬁling
of Individual Cells Using Nanoliter Droplets”. In: Cell 161.5, pp. 1202–1214. issn:
00928674. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.05.002.
Maher, Brendan (2008). “Personal genomes: The case of the missing heritability.”
en. In: Nature 456.7218, pp. 18–21. issn: 1476-4687. doi: 10.1038/456018a.
Manolio, Teri a et al. (2009). “Finding the missing heritability of complex diseases.”
In: Nature 461.7265, pp. 747–53. issn: 1476-4687. doi: 10.1038/nature08494.
Marchini, Jonathan, Peter Donnelly, and Lon R Cardon (2005). “Genome-wide
strategies for detecting multiple loci that inﬂuence complex diseases.” In: Nature
genetics 37.4, pp. 413–7. issn: 1061-4036. doi: 10.1038/ng1537.
==PAGE:123==
106
REFERENCES
Metspalu, Andres (2004). “The Estonian Genome Project”. In: Drug Development
Research 62.2, pp. 97–101. issn: 0272-4391. doi: 10.1002/ddr.10371.
Mifsud, Borbala et al. (2015). “Mapping long-range promoter contacts in human
cells with high-resolution capture Hi-C”. In: Nature Genetics, pp. 1–12. issn:
1061-4036. doi: 10.1038/ng.3286.
Miko, Ilona (2008). “Epistasis: gene interaction and phenotype eﬀects”. In: Nature
Education 1.1, p. 197.
Moore, Jason H and Doug P Hill (2015). “Epistasis Analysis Using Artiﬁcial
Intelligence”. In: 1253. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-2155-3.
Moore, Jason H and Scott M Williams (2005). “Traversing the conceptual divide
between biological and statistical epistasis: Systems biology and a more modern
synthesis”. In: BioEssays 27.6, pp. 637–646. issn: 02659247. doi: 10.1002/bies.
20236.
– (2009). “Epistasis and its implications for personal genetics.” In: American journal
of human genetics 85.3, pp. 309–20. issn: 1537-6605. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.
2009.08.006.
Moore, Jason H. and Scott M. Williams, eds. (2015). Epistasis. Vol. 1253. Methods
in Molecular Biology. New York, NY: Springer New York. isbn: 978-1-4939-2154-6.
doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-2155-3.
Morgenthaler, Stephan and William G. Thilly (2007). “A strategy to discover
genes that carry multi-allelic or mono-allelic risk for common diseases: A cohort
allelic sums test (CAST)”. In: Mutation Research/Fundamental and Molecular
Mechanisms of Mutagenesis 615.1-2, pp. 28–56. issn: 00275107. doi: 10.1016/j.
mrfmmm.2006.09.003.
Nagano, Takashi et al. (2013). “Single-cell Hi-C reveals cell-to-cell variability
in chromosome structure.” In: Nature 502, pp. 59–64. issn: 1476-4687. doi:
10.1038/nature12593.
Nelis, Mari et al. (2009). “Genetic structure of Europeans: a view from the North-
East.” In: PloS one 4.5, e5472. issn: 1932-6203. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.
0005472.
Noble, William S (2009). “How does multiple testing correction work?” In: Nature
biotechnology 27.12, pp. 1135–7. issn: 1546-1696. doi: 10.1038/nbt1209-1135.
Nora, Elphège P. et al. (2012). “Spatial partitioning of the regulatory landscape of
the X-inactivation centre”. In: Nature 485.7398, pp. 381–385. issn: 0028-0836.
doi: 10.1038/nature11049.
North, B V, D Curtis, and P C Sham (2002). “A note on the calculation of empirical
P values from Monte Carlo procedures.” In: American journal of human genetics
71.2, pp. 439–41. issn: 0002-9297. doi: 10.1086/341527.
Ortlund, Eric a et al. (2007). “Crystal structure of an ancient protein: evolution by
conformational epistasis.” In: Science (New York, N.Y.) 317.5844, pp. 1544–8.
issn: 1095-9203. doi: 10.1126/science.1142819.
Pattin, Kristine A and Jason H Moore (2008). “Exploiting the proteome to improve
the genome-wide genetic analysis of epistasis in common human diseases.” In:
Human genetics 124.1, pp. 19–29. issn: 1432-1203. doi: 10.1007/s00439-008-
0522-8.
Phillips, Jennifer E. and Victor G. Corces (2009). “CTCF: Master Weaver of the
Genome”. In: Cell 137.7, pp. 1194–1211. issn: 00928674. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.
2009.06.001. arXiv: NIHMS150003.
==PAGE:124==
LITERATURE
107
Phillips, Patrick C (2008). “Epistasis–the essential role of gene interactions in the
structure and evolution of genetic systems.” In: Nature reviews. Genetics 9.11,
pp. 855–67. issn: 1471-0064. doi: 10.1038/nrg2452.
Phillips-Cremins, Jennifer E. et al. (2013). “Architectural Protein Subclasses Shape
3D Organization of Genomes during Lineage Commitment”. In: Cell 153.6,
pp. 1281–1295. issn: 00928674. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.04.053.
Powell, Joseph E et al. (2013). “Congruence of additive and non-additive eﬀects on
gene expression estimated from pedigree and SNP data.” In: PLoS genetics 9.5,
e1003502. issn: 1553-7404. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003502.
Purcell, Shaun et al. (2007). “PLINK: A Tool Set for Whole-Genome Association
and Population-Based Linkage Analyses”. In: The American Journal of Human
Genetics 81.3, pp. 559–575. issn: 00029297. doi: 10.1086/519795.
Rao, Suhas S.P. et al. (2014). “A 3D Map of the Human Genome at Kilobase
Resolution Reveals Principles of Chromatin Looping”. In: Cell 159.7, pp. 1665–
1680. issn: 00928674. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2014.11.021.
Rieder, Dietmar, Zlatko Trajanoski, and James G. McNally (2012). “Transcription
factories”. In: Frontiers in Genetics 3.OCT, pp. 1–12. issn: 16648021. doi:
10.3389/fgene.2012.00221.
Risca, Viviana I. and William J. Greenleaf (2015). “Unraveling the 3D genome:
genomics tools for multiscale exploration”. In: Trends in Genetics 31.7, pp. 357–
372. issn: 01689525. doi: 10.1016/j.tig.2015.03.010.
Ritchie, Marylyn D (2011). “Using biological knowledge to uncover the mystery
in the search for epistasis in genome-wide association studies.” In: Annals of
human genetics 75.1, pp. 172–82. issn: 1469-1809. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-
1809.2010.00630.x.
Rosenbloom, Kate R et al. (2013). “ENCODE data in the UCSC Genome Browser:
year 5 update.” In: Nucleic acids research 41.Database issue, pp. D56–63. issn:
1362-4962. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks1172.
Schoenfelder, Stefan et al. (2010). “Preferential associations between co-regulated
genes reveal a transcriptional interactome in erythroid cells”. In: Nature Genetics
42.1, pp. 53–61. issn: 1061-4036. doi: 10.1038/ng.496.
Schüpbach, Thierry et al. (2010). “FastEpistasis: a high performance computing
solution for quantitative trait epistasis.” In: Bioinformatics (Oxford, England)
26.11, pp. 1468–9. issn: 1367-4811. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btq147.
Selvaraj, Siddarth et al. (2013). “Whole-genome haplotype reconstruction using
proximity-ligation and shotgun sequencing”. In: Nature Biotechnology 31.12,
pp. 1111–1118. issn: 1087-0156. doi: 10.1038/nbt.2728.
Seo, DI, YH Kim, and BR Moon (2003). “New entropy-based measures of gene
signiﬁcance and epistasis”. In: Genetic and Evolutionary Computation— ...
Pp. 1345–1356.
Sexton, Tom and Giacomo Cavalli (2015). “The Role of Chromosome Domains in
Shaping the Functional Genome”. In: Cell 160.6, pp. 1049–1059. issn: 0092-8674.
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.02.040.
Sexton, Tom and Eitan Yaﬀe (2015). “Chromosome folding: driver or passenger of
epigenetic state?” In: Cold Spring Harbor perspectives in biology 7.2, a018721.
issn: 1943-0264. doi: 10.1101/cshperspect.a018721.
==PAGE:125==
108
REFERENCES
Simonis, Marieke et al. (2006). “Nuclear organization of active and inactive chro-
matin domains uncovered by chromosome conformation capture-on-chip (4C).”
In: Nature genetics 38.11, pp. 1348–1354. issn: 1061-4036. doi: 10.1038/ng1896.
Sinkhorn, Richard and Paul Knopp (1967). “Concerning nonnegative matrices and
doubly stochastic matrices”. In: Paciﬁc Journal of Mathematics 21.2, pp. 343–
348.
Stegle, Oliver et al. (2010). “A Bayesian framework to account for complex non-
genetic factors in gene expression levels greatly increases power in eQTL studies.”
In: PLoS computational biology 6.5, e1000770. issn: 1553-7358. doi: 10.1371/
journal.pcbi.1000770.
Stegle, Oliver et al. (2012). “Using probabilistic estimation of expression residuals
(PEER) to obtain increased power and interpretability of gene expression analy-
ses.” In: Nature protocols 7.3, pp. 500–7. issn: 1750-2799. doi: 10.1038/nprot.
2011.457.
Steidl, Ulrich et al. (2007). “A distal single nucleotide polymorphism alters long-
range regulation of the PU . 1 gene in acute myeloid leukemia”. In: Journal
of Clinical Investigation 117.9, pp. 2611–2620. issn: 00219738. doi: 10.1172/
JCI30525.suppressor.
Storey, John D (2002). “A direct approach to false discovery rates”. In: Journal of
the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology) 64.3, pp. 479–498.
Sugar, Robert (2014). “Genome Analysis in Three Dimensions: Functional Analysis
of Hi-C Derived Datasets”. PhD thesis. Churchill College. University of Cambridge.
url: https://www.ebi.ac.uk/sites/ebi.ac.uk/files/shared/documents/
phdtheses/RobertThesis{\_}2014-12-12{\_}v03{\_}CORRECTED.pdf.
Tong, Amy Hin Yan et al. (2004). “Global mapping of the yeast genetic interaction
network.” In: Science (New York, N.Y.) 303.5659, pp. 808–13. issn: 1095-9203.
doi: 10.1126/science.1091317.
Turner, Stephen et al. (2011). “Quality control procedures for genome-wide associa-
tion studies”. In: Curr Protoc Hum Genet Chapter 1, Unit1 19. issn: 1934-8258.
doi: 10.1002/0471142905.hg0119s68.
Upton, Alex et al. (2015). “Review: High-performance computing to detect epistasis
in genome scale data sets”. In: Brieﬁngs in Bioinformatics March, bbv058. issn:
1467-5463. doi: 10.1093/bib/bbv058.
Visscher, Peter M, William G Hill, and Naomi R Wray (2008). “Heritability in
the genomics era - concepts and misconceptions”. In: Nature Reviews Genetics
9.april, pp. 255–266. doi: 10.1038/nrg2322.
Walters, Raymond K, Charles Laurin, and Gitta H Lubke (2014). “Epi2Loc: An
R Package to Investigate Two-Locus Epistatic Models.” In: Twin research and
human genetics : the oﬃcial journal of the International Society for Twin Studies
17.4, pp. 272–8. issn: 1832-4274. doi: 10.1017/thg.2014.38.
Watson, James D and Francis H C Crick (1953). “Molecular structure of nucleic
acids”. In: Nature 171.4356, pp. 737–738.
Wei, Wen-Hua, Gibran Hemani, and Chris S. Haley (2014). “Detecting epistasis in
human complex traits”. In: Nature Reviews Genetics September. issn: 1471-0056.
doi: 10.1038/nrg3747.
Weigelt, Britta and Jorge S Reis-Filho (2014). “Epistatic interactions and drug
response.” In: The Journal of pathology 232.2, pp. 255–63. issn: 1096-9896. doi:
10.1002/path.4265.
==PAGE:126==
SOFTWARE
109
Westra, Harm-Jan et al. (2013). “Systematic identiﬁcation of trans eQTLs as puta-
tive drivers of known disease associations”. In: Nature genetics 45.10, pp. 1238–43.
issn: 1546-1718. doi: 10.1038/ng.2756.
Wood, Andrew R. et al. (2014). “Another explanation for apparent epistasis”. In:
Nature 514.7520, E3–E5. issn: 0028-0836. doi: 10.1038/nature13691.
Yaﬀe, Eitan and Amos Tanay (2011). “Probabilistic modeling of Hi-C contact maps
eliminates systematic biases to characterize global chromosomal architecture.”
In: Nature genetics 43.11, pp. 1059–65. issn: 1546-1718. doi: 10.1038/ng.947.
Yang, Can et al. (2011). “The choice of null distributions for detecting gene-gene
interactions in genome-wide association studies.” In: BMC bioinformatics 12
Suppl 1.Suppl 1, S26. issn: 1471-2105. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-12-S1-S26.
Yin, Tengfei, Dianne Cook, and Michael Lawrence (2012). “ggbio: an R package
for extending the grammar of graphics for genomic data.” In: Genome biology
13.8, R77. issn: 1465-6914. doi: 10.1186/gb-2012-13-8-r77.
Young, N S and S P Hwang-Chen (1981). “Anti-K562 cell monoclonal antibodies
recognize hematopoietic progenitors.” In: Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States of America 78.11, pp. 7073–7. issn: 0027-8424.
Zhang, Yu and Jun S Liu (2007). “Bayesian inference of epistatic interactions in
case-control studies.” In: Nature genetics 39.9, pp. 1167–73. issn: 1061-4036. doi:
10.1038/ng2110.
Zhao, Zhihu et al. (2006). “Circular chromosome conformation capture (4C) uncov-
ers extensive networks of epigenetically regulated intra- and interchromosomal
interactions”. In: Nature Genetics 38.11, pp. 1341–1347. issn: 1061-4036. doi:
10.1038/ng1891.
Zirkel, Anne and Argyris Papantonis (2014). “Transcription as a force partitioning
the eukaryotic genome.” In: Biological chemistry 395.11, pp. 1301–5. issn: 1437-
4315. doi: 10.1515/hsz-2014-0196.
Zuk, Or et al. (2012). “The mystery of missing heritability: Genetic interactions
create phantom heritability.” In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America 109.4, pp. 1193–8. issn: 1091-6490. doi: 10.
1073/pnas.1119675109.
Software
Ay, Ferhat, Timothy Bailey, and William Noble (2014a). Fit-Hi-C. url: https:
//noble.gs.washington.edu/proj/fit-hi-c/.
Deelen, Patrick, Harm-Jan Westra, and Lude Franke (2014). eQTL Mapping
Pipeline. url: https://github.com/molgenis/systemsgenetics/wiki/eQTL-
mapping-analysis-cookbook.
Freeman, Colin and Jonathan Marchini (2007). GTOOL. url: http://www.well.
ox.ac.uk/~cfreeman/software/gwas/gtool.html.
Min Kang, Hyun and Goncalo Abecasis (2014). LiftOver. url: http://genome.
sph.umich.edu/wiki/LiftOver.
Purcell, Shaun and Christopher Chang (2014). PLINK 1.9. url: https://www.cog-
genomics.org/plink2.
==PAGE:127==
110
REFERENCES
R Core Team (2015). R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing.
Vienna, Austria: R Foundation for Statistical Computing. url: http://www.r-
project.org.
Schuepbach, Thierry (2014). FastEpistasis. Version 2.07. url: http://www.vital-
it.ch/software/FastEpistasis/.
Online Resources
Illumina Inc (2014). Illumina manifest ﬁle. Accessed: 2015-02-01. url: http :
//support.illumina.com/downloads/humanht-12\_v3\_product\_files.
html (visited on 02/01/2015).
UCSC Genome Browser (2015). Mappability or Uniqueness of Reference Genome
from ENCODE. Accessed: 2015-03-30. url: http://genome.ucsc.edu/cgi-
bin/hgFileUi?db=hg19\&g=wgEncodeMapability (visited on 03/30/2015).
