==PAGE:1==
Multi-objective PDE Constrained
Optimization for Oil Reservoir
Management
Lasse Hjuler Christiansen
Kongens Lyngby 2015
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
This thesis investigates current state-of-the-art methodology and proposes novel
operational strategies to improve mitigation of risks in open-loop production
optimization.
Following the main eﬀorts of the oil literature, the exposition is divided into
three main parts:
• Economical risk mitigation by short-term versus long-term optimization.
• Geological risk mitigation by ensemble-based optimization.
• Joint risk mitigation by Time-Explicit optimization.
The parts on economical and geological risk mitigation treat and asses conven-
tional strategies in terms of advantages and shortcomings. The results demon-
strate that in spite of a signiﬁcant potential to mitigate economical and ge-
ological risks, conventional methods are computationally expensive and fail to
handle risks in a united manner. Such methods therefore leave the oil production
subject to substantial risk and practical applications become challenged.
The third part, which constitutes the novel contribution of this thesis, introduces
a set of Time-Explicit (TE) methods, which combine multi-objective optimiza-
tion (MOO) and ensemble-based risk mitigation into a joint eﬀort to reduce
economical and geological risks. Open-loop simulations demonstrate that TE
methods oﬀer a computationally attractive alternative to a posteriori MOO
==PAGE:4==
ii
methods and stand to provide a signiﬁcantly improved balance between short-
term and long-term risk measures, such as expected return, standard deviation
and conditional value-at-risk.
As a computational tractable framework for joint risk mitigation, TE meth-
ods prove to have a considerable potential to enchance management of risks in
applications of open-loop production optimization to oil reservoir management.
The work on TE optimization has given rise to the research paper Time- Explicit
Methods for Joint Economical and Geological Risk Mitigation in Production
Optimization, which has been submitted to the Journal of Petroleum Science
and Engineering, published by Elsevier.
The paper has been enclosed with this thesis.
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis is submitted in fulﬁlment of the requirements for acquiring a M.Sc.
in Mathematical Modelling and Computation granted by the Technical Uni-
versity of Denmark (DTU). The project has been carried out during the period
from 16-02-15 to 17-08-15 at the Department of Applied Mathematics and Com-
puter Science (DTU Compute), under the academic supervision of John Bagterp
Jørgensen and Andrea Capolei. The workload corresponds to 35 ECTS.
I would like to thank my supervisors John Bagterp Jørgensen and Andrea
Capolei for the time they have devoted to the project as well as for their many
ideas, advice and guidence.
Lyngby, 17-August-2015
Lasse Hjuler Christiansen
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivational background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Thesis objectives, approach and structure . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Preliminaries
11
2.1
Reservoir model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2
Production optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.3
Case study speciﬁcations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.4
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3
Economical Risk Mitigation by Short-term/Long-term Opti-
mization
29
3.1
Production optimization under economical uncertainty . . . . . .
30
3.2
Short-term versus Long-term optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.3
Multi-objective optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.4
Numerical results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
3.5
Summary and conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
4
Geological Risk Mitigation by Ensemble-based Optimization
65
4.1
Production optimization under geological uncertainty . . . . . . .
66
4.2
Ensemble-based optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
4.3
Ensemble-based strategies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
4.4
Computational aspects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
4.5
Numerical results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
4.6
Summary and conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
==PAGE:8==
vi
CONTENTS
5
Joint Risk Mitigation by Time-Explicit Optimization
93
5.1
Joint risk mitigation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
5.2
Time-Explicit optimization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
5.3
TE optimization - Theoretical and computational aspects . . . .
97
5.4
Concrete TE methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
5.5
Numerical results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
5.6
Summary and conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 118
6
Outlook
121
6.1
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 122
6.2
Recommandations for future work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 124
A Two-Phase Immiscible Flow - Governing Equations
127
B Darcy’s Law
131
C The Adjoint Method
135
D TE Methods Vs Conventional Methods
139
E MATLAB Implementations
143
F Project Plan and Evaluation
149
Bibliography
153
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1
Introduction
The living standards of modern day life rely on our ability to produce and ex-
ploit various sources of energy to power and maintain man made technologies
intertwined into our everyday lives, including cell phones, computers, washing
machines and cars. As living conditions around the globe improve, more people
embrace power driven technologies which cause an increasing demand for eﬃ-
cient and proper use of the Worlds sources of energy. This includes the recovery
and use of fossil fuels, i.e., oil and natural gasses. The tendency of growing
global oil comsumption, depicted in Fig.
1.1, motivates a common eﬀort to
develop tools which enhance the extraction and production of petroleum re-
sources to secure widespread availability of fossil fuels. Among a large variaty
of initiatives, it has been proposed to approach this challenge by means of Opti-
mal Control technology including Nonlinear Model Predictive Control (NMPC)
[JBVdH08]. Despite a demonstrated potential to promote matters of oil recov-
ery, real-life applications of model-based control remain challenged by inherent
uncertainties tied to unpredictable ﬂuctuations in oil prices as well as the sparse
nature of geological data. These challenges motivate the work of this thesis,
which investigates current state-of-the-art methodology and proposes novel op-
erational strategies to improve mitigation of economical and geological risks for
NMPC-based oil reservoir management.
==PAGE:10==
2
Introduction
Figure 1.1: Historic oil consumption by region. Source: BP Statistical Review
of World Energy 2009.
1.1
Motivational background
Reservoir simulation
Oil is most often extracted from major oﬀ-shore oil ﬁelds, which consist of several
subsurface petroleum reservoirs located deep beneath the crust of the Earth. As
illustrated in Fig. 1.2, the recovery process involves a common operating plat-
form which controls numerous injection and production wells, drilled into the
reservoirs, in order to displace and harvest the oil. Each petroleum reservoir
consists of vast subsurface porous rock formations which contain trapped hy-
drocarbons (petroleum) within the pores or capillaries of the submerged rocks.
Many diﬀerent hydrocarbons components are present in the reservoir and de-
pending on reservoir conditions each component may exist in the ﬂuid phases:
liquid or gas.
These phases engage in intricate ﬂuid mixtures with diﬀerent
phases of water.
The goal of reservoir simulation is to model, simulate and
analyse the ﬂow of such ﬂuids through the porous medium, to eﬃciently manage
and enhance production of oil from a safety minded and economical perspective.
This thesis will focus on applications of reservoir simulation tied to the oil
recovery stage known as water ﬂooding. During this stage, wells continually
inject water into the reservoir to stimulate ﬂow rates, maintain high reservoir
pressures and lead petroleum towards production wells where the oil is recovered.
The concept of water ﬂooding is depicted in Fig. 1.3. The concrete injection and
production well settings deployed by management, are known as the operating
proﬁle or strategy of oil recovery.
==PAGE:11==
1.1 Motivational background
3
Figure 1.2: Oﬀshore oil ﬁeld.
To simulate the ﬂuid ﬂow under the inﬂuence of injection and producer wells,
reservoir simulation relies on an underlying mathematical model which accounts
for petro-physical and geological properties of the reservoir. The model also
accounts for the evolution of reservoir states, such as ﬂuid saturations and pres-
sures, which are typically expressed in terms of partial diﬀerential equations
(PDEs), subject to appropriate initial and boundary conditions. The literature
contains a broad range of reservoir model descriptions ([Che07], [AS79]). The
various formulations diﬀer in terms of assumptions and complexity. For a certain
application, the appropriate choice of model heavily depends on the reservoir in
question as well as the amount of detail required for the simulations. The work
of this thesis uses a two phase immiscible ﬂow model. A detailed description is
provided in Section 2.1. Other popular formulations of the oil literature include
black oil models as well as compositional models ([Che07]).
==PAGE:12==
4
Introduction
Figure 1.3: Conceptual drawing of water ﬂooding. Water is injected into the
reservoir in order to maintain pressure and stimulate ﬂow rates.
Production optimization
Reservoir simulation allows management to investigate and asses a given op-
erating proﬁle in terms of the strategys eﬀect on ﬂuid ﬂow and oil recovery.
However, the methodology lacks a systematic approach to determine the best
possible strategy currently available.
NMPC has been suggested as a mean
to address this issue. By combining the mathematical reservoir model with ad-
vanced gradient-based optimization tools, NMPC seeks to optimize the recovery
process by determination of the ideal well conﬁgurations subject to production
constraints. In the oil literature, the use of NMPC is referred to as Closed-Loop
Reservoir Management (CLRM); see e.g.
[BJ04], [CSFJ13], [Fos12], [FJ11],
[SAD05], [SKF12]. The procedure, illustrated in Fig. 1.4, consists of repeated
optimizations which uses feedback to optimally regulate the oil production.
Based on the mathmatical reservoir model, computer simulations are used to
calculate the optimal operating proﬁle by solution of a PDE-constrained op-
timization problem. In this context, optimality refers to the proﬁle of water
injection schemes and production borehole pressures, which maximizes a key
performance indicator (KPI) over the reservoir life-cycle, e.g, the cumulative
oil recovery or a ﬁnancial measure such as the net present value (NPV). After
the optimization procedure, only the very ﬁrst part of the resulting operating
proﬁle is applied to the true reservoir and the associated response is recorded.
A state-estimator corrects for measurement noise and physical disturbances by
data assimilation and the mathematical reservoir model is updated accordingly.
==PAGE:13==
1.1 Motivational background
5
Real Oil Reservoir 
Reservoir models 
Optimizer 
Data assimilation 
Measurements 
Noise 
Noise 
Output 
Input 
Control 
Input 
Figure 1.4: Closed-loop reservoir management. The work of this thesis will
mainly focus on theory and methods related to the optimization
circuit.
The modiﬁed model is then used by the optimizer to compute an adjusted op-
erating proﬁle. This procedure repeats itself through the reservoir life-cycle.
The work of this thesis is concerned with investigations and development of opti-
mization methods used in the control process, i.e., feedback and state-estimation
is not considered. This corresponds to computing the optimal a priori operating
proﬁle before the oil recovery process has begun and feedback becomes avail-
able. In this thesis, the procedure will be referred to as open-loop production
optimization, water ﬂooding optimization or more generally as model-based op-
timization.
Economical and geological uncertainties
Strategies of model-based optimization have in simulation studies demonstrated
a signiﬁcant potential to improve KPIs central to oil reservoir management,
including ultimate oil recovery and proﬁt ([Chi92] , [Ram87]).
Despite such
promising results, real-life applications of model-based optimization are chal-
lenged by a wide range of inherent uncertainties related to reservoir simulation.
==PAGE:14==
6
Introduction
As a result of the associated ﬁnancial risks, operating companies are reluctant
to adopt model-based Optimal Control technology into their ﬁeld operations.
This lack of conﬁdence can mainly be attributed to profound economical and
geological uncertainites:
• Economical uncertainty
Economical uncertainty is rooted in a large variety of unknown factors such
as production costs, interest rates, etc. However, the primary contributor
of uncertainty is undoubtedly tied to the unpredictable ﬂuctuations in the
prices of oil and gas. See Fig. 1.5, which depicts the highly irregular evolu-
tion of inﬂation-corrected oil prices. The primary concern is bound to the
fact that the uncertainties in prices are time-dependent, i.e., uncertainty
grows exceedingly with time and therefore also over the expected duration
of the reservoir life-cycle. Strategies of production optimization does not
consider feedback, therefore the predictions rely on a ﬁxed oil price, i.e.,
economical uncertainties are altogether neglected. As a conseqeunce, the
predictions become highly risky and often unreliable.
• Geological uncertainty
The inaccessible geographical location of oil ﬁelds limits the amount of
available geological data, i.e., the reservoir subsurface geology is largely
unknown. As a result, simulation parameters such as reservoir permeabil-
ity, porosity and initial states are often poorly estimated and therefore
associated with high degrees of uncertainty. The uncertainty propogates
to the underlying mathematical model and therefore to the simulated pre-
dictions. As a result, the predictions become risky and the production
optimization strategies become ﬂawed, i.e., the calculated operating pro-
ﬁle may in reality be far from optimal. Consequently, revenue may be
compromised.
In general, strategies of production optimization fail to account for econom-
ical and geological uncertanites.
As a consequence, the associated risks are
altogether neglected which profoundly impact the results of the optimization
procedure. This leaves the justiﬁed question of whether the simulated predic-
tions can be trusted. Operating companies therefore remain skeptic towards
applications of model-based optimization to the ﬁeld of oil reservoir manage-
ment.
These shortcomings of production optimization stand as the primary
motivation behind the work of this thesis.
==PAGE:15==
1.2 Thesis objectives, approach and structure
7
Figure 1.5: Inﬂation-corrected crude oil prices. Source: BP Statistical Review
of World Energy 2013.
1.2
Thesis objectives, approach and structure
Thesis objectives
This thesis aims to address the shortcomings of conventional production op-
timization by investigation and development of state-of-the-art strategies for
mitigation of risks related to economical and geological uncertainties.
The
paramount purpose is to asses known - and propose novel methodology to im-
prove risk managment in open-loop production optimization.
Thereby, this
thesis seeks to contribute to increase conﬁdence in model-based optimization as
a reliable tool for oil reservoir management and facilitate its practice.
Approach
As a mean to acheive this goal, this thesis investigates theory and state-of-the-
art methods of multi-objective optimization and ensemble-based optimization.
The primary focus is numerical investigations by simulation and optimization.
In turn, only fundamental theoretical aspects are covered.
==PAGE:16==
8
Introduction
Numerical case studies
A large proportion of the work presented in this thesis is based on numerical
inplementations and simulations.
All implementations have been written in
MATLAB (2014b), whereas all simulations are performed with the support of
the open source software, Matlab Reservoir Simulation Toolbox (MRST 2014a),
developed by SINTEF Applied Matemathics ([LKL+12]).
All relevant code,
which have been written in the making of this work, can be found on the USB
drive enclosed with the thesis. An overview can be found in Appendix E.
High Performance Computing
The use of NMPC-based techniques for oil reservoir management diﬀers signif-
icantly from other applications due to the often large state dimensions associ-
ated with reservoir simulation; a state dimension of 106 is not unusual. This
implies that simulations and optimization procedures become computationally
demanding. Industrial demands of real-time solutions often requires tools of
High Performance Computing. This thesis uses the DTU cluster 1 to run multi-
ple simulations and in some cases optimizations, in parallel on a total of 24 cores.
The paralization schemes are implemented using the Single Program, Multiple
Data (SPMD) framework, provided by MathWorks. Concrete applications will
be presented during the thesis and procedures will be illustrated by ﬂowcharts.
Thesis structure
The oil literature has at this point mainly addressed the questions of risk miti-
gation disjointly, focusing either on economical or geological uncertainties. This
segregated treatment naturally divides the investigations of this thesis into three
main parts. The ﬁrst two parts cover and asses the oil literatures main eﬀorts
of economical and geological risk mitigation.
The overall purpose is to gain
insight into advantages and shortcomings in order to ultimately improve the
methodology. Based on the ideas introduced in these chapters, the third main
part, which constitutes the novel contribution of this thesis, proposes a new set
of optimization methods for combined risk mitigation. Overall, the thesis is
structured as follows:
1See www.cc.dtu.dk for information on how to setup and run MATLAB programs in parallel
using the DTU Cluster.
==PAGE:17==
1.2 Thesis objectives, approach and structure
9
• Preliminaries
This chapter introduces the mathematical reservoir model and the opti-
mization techniques used throughout this thesis. General speciﬁcations on
numerical case studies are also provided.
•
Economical Risk Mitigation by Short-term/Long-term Optimization
Motivated by recent eﬀorts of the oil literature, this chapter investigates
multi-objective optimization (MOO) as a mean for economical risk mit-
igation. By a series of numerical case studies, the chapter provides an
in-depth treatment of short-term versus long-term optimization. Advan-
tages and shortcomings of the method are presented and discussed.
•
Geological Risk Mitigation by Ensemble-based Optimization
This chapter investigates the oil literatures most prelavent ensemble-based
methods for geological risk mitigation. By a series of numerical case stud-
ies, the respective ensemble-based methods are discussed and compared in
terms of origins, use and shortcomings.
•
Joint Risk Mitigation by Time-Explict Optimization
This chapter presents the novel and main contribution of this thesis, Time-
Explicit optimization. Based on the ideas of multi-objective optimization
and ensemble-based methodology, the chapter develops and introduces
new theory and methods for joint mitigation of economical and geological
risks. Numerical case studies compare TE methods to conventional risk
mitigation strategies and Reactive control.
The main work of this chapter has given rise to the research paper Time-
Explicit Methods for Joint Economical and Geological Risk Mitigation
in Production Optimization, which has been submitted to the Journal of
Petroleum Science and Engineering, published by Elsevier.
• Outlook
This chapter contains overall conclusions and recommendations for future
work.
==PAGE:18==
10
Introduction
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 2
Preliminaries
The following chapter presents the theoretical and computational foundation
which is implicitly used in subsequent chapters to investigate strategies of risk
mitigation. The content naturally divides into three parts. The ﬁrst part de-
scribes fundamental geological concepts and formulates the reservoir two-phase
immiscible ﬂow model which is used for all case study simulations. The sec-
ond part describes how to formulate, discretize and solve the PDE constrained
optimal control problem which will be encountered repeatedly throughout the
thesis. The third part provides speciﬁcations on the general setup which are
common to all numerical experiments.
The chapter is based on a study of [AS79], [Che07], [Cap13] and [VJTS09].
==PAGE:20==
12
Preliminaries
2.1
Reservoir model
The following presents the reservoir model, which will be used throughout this
thesis. The model consists of
• a mathematical model, formulated in terms of partial diﬀerential equations
(PDEs), that describes how ﬂuids ﬂow in a porous medium.
• a geological model that describes the given reservoir porous rock forma-
tions.
Mathematical model
This thesis focuses on applications of reservoir simulation tied to the oil recovery
stage known as water ﬂooding. During this stage, wells continually inject water
into the reservoir to stimulate ﬂow rates, maintain high reservoir pressures and
lead petroleum towards production wells where the oil is recovered. The high
pressures associated with water ﬂooding makes it reasonable to assume that
the reservoir pressure remains above the oil bubble point, i.e., that only the
phases of water and oil are present in the reservoir and that no mass transfer
occurs between the phases. Under this assumption, the work of this thesis will
use a two phase immiscible ﬂow model to approximate ﬂuid ﬂow through the
reservoir.
Two-phase immiscible ﬂow
The oil reservoir is represented by a set, Ω∈Rd, d ≤3, considered over the
time domain T = {t ∈R : t ≥0}. The outward pointing unit normal on the
boundary ∂Ωis denoted by n. The respective phases of water and oil are denoted
by a common index, α ∈{w, o}, w for water, and o for oil. At each point in
time, t > 0, the current state at the location r ∈Ω, is described by a set of
lithologic and petro-physical properties. These include:
• The medium porosity φ = ψ(t, r), which serves as a measure of the rock
formation’s ability to store ﬂuids. It is deﬁned as the fraction of the total
bulk reservoir volume, V, occupied by reservoir ﬂuids, i.e., φ = Vp
V , where
Vp is the pore volume.
==PAGE:21==
2.1 Reservoir model
13
• The ﬂuid saturation, Sα = Sα(t, r), deﬁned as the ratio of the pore volume
occupied by the given ﬂuid, i.e., Sα = Vα
Vp .
• The ﬂuid pressure, pα = pα(t, r).
• The ﬂuid density, ρα = ρ(pα), which is deﬁned as the ratio between the
ﬂuid mass and the capillary void it occupies, i.e., ρα = mα
Vp .
Under the inﬂuence of injection and producer wells, diﬀerences in pressure drive
ﬂuids to ﬂow and the respective states are bound to change.
Governing equations
The changes over time are encaptured and described by a set of PDEs, which
relate the ﬂuid velocities, vα = vα(pα, Sα), to the states of porosity φ, ﬂuid
pressure pα, density ρα, and saturation Sα :
∂Cα
∂t
= −∇· Nα + Qα in
Ω, t > 0, α ∈{o, w},
(2.1a)
vα · n = 0
on ∂Ω, t > 0, α ∈{o, w},
(2.1b)
Cα = Cα,0
in
Ω, t = 0, α ∈{o, w}.
(2.1c)
The equations (2.1a) are derived based on physical law of mass conversation
applied to each of the respective ﬂuids. Each equation expresses that the rate
of change in ﬂuid concentration, Cα = ραφSα, must equal the net inﬂow of
ﬂuids, caused by mass convection, Nα = ραvα, and internal injection and/or
production wells, Qα. Together with the boundary conditions (2.1b), which state
that no ﬂuids can ﬂow beyound the boundaries of the reservoir, and the initial
conditions (2.1c), which specify initial ﬂuid concentrations, they constitute the
governing equations of two-phase immiscible ﬂow.
A detailed derivation of the mass-balance equations (2.1a) can be found in Ap-
pendix A.
Constitutive relations
The states represent a total of seven unknowns:
φ, pα, ρα, Sα, α ∈{o, w}.
The physical connections between the unknowns are described in terms of so
called constitutive relations:
==PAGE:22==
14
Preliminaries
Fluid saturation
The simplifying assumptions of two-phase ﬂow imply that only water and oil
are present in the capillary void of the porous rock formations. The ﬂuids must
therefore jointly occupy the entire pore volume, i.e.,
X
α∈{o,w}
Sα = 1.
(2.2)
Capillary pressure
In the two-phase ﬂow senario, the diﬀerences in ﬂuid properties imply that the
water phase tends to wet the reservoir rock to a higher degree than the oil phase.
Water is therefore often referred to as the wetting phase, whereas oil is known as
the non-wetting phase. By wetting the reservoir rock, water remains in contact
with the rock surface, displacing the oil phase in the process. As a result, an
interfacial tension occurs between the phases. In particular, the ﬂuid pressure
of oil will be higher than the ﬂuid pressure of water. This discontinuity in ﬂuid
pressures is referred to as the capillary pressure and is deﬁned as
pc = po −pw.
For many practical purposes, the eﬀects of capillary pressure can be neglected
[Che07]. Throughout this thesis, it is therefore assumed that
pc = po −pw = 0.
(2.3)
Compressibility of rock and ﬂuids
The inclination of respectively the porous rock formation and ﬂuid densities to
change with temperature and pressure, characterizes these as being either com-
pressible, slightly compressible or incompressible. Under isothermal conditions
(constant temperature), the rock and ﬂuid compressibilities can be described by
the relations
cr = 1
φ
∂φ
∂p , cα,f = 1
ρα
∂ρα
∂p .
(2.4)
In this thesis, it is assumed that the reservoir rocks are incompressible, whereas
all ﬂuids may be characterized as being slightly compressible. Under this as-
sumption, it is reasonable to approximate ﬂuid compressibilities (2.4) as con-
stants over a certain range of ﬂuid pressures, with respect to a given ﬂuid pres-
sure datum, pα,0. By separation of variables applied to (2.4), one obtains
1
ρα
∂ρα = cα∂P ⇔
Z ρ
ρα,0
1
ρα
∂ρ = cα
Z p
p0
∂P ⇔ρα
ρα,0
= ecα(p−p0).
(2.5)
Within a common range of allowable pressures, one therefore has the relations
ρα(pα) = ρα,0ecα(pα−pα,0).
(2.6)
==PAGE:23==
2.1 Reservoir model
15
Here ρα,0 is the reservoir ﬂuid density corresponding to the ﬂuid pressure da-
tum, pα,0.
Darcy’s law
In the setting of a porous medium, the convective macroscopic ﬂuid velocities,
vα, are given explicitly by Darcy’s law for multi-phase ﬂow:
vα = −Krα
µα
K(∇pα −ραg∇z).
(2.7)
Here µα represents the ﬂuid viscosity, g the gravitational acceleration constant
and z, the current depth. The absolute - and relative ﬂuid permeabilities, K ∈
Rd×d and Krα, reﬂect geological properties of the reservoir, which describe the
inclination of the porous medium to stimulate ﬂow of a given ﬂuid. A detailed
description of how absolute - and relative permeabilites are modeled in this
thesis, will be given in Section 2.1.
Darcy’s law is empirically founded by the French engineer Henry Darcy’s exper-
iments, which date back to the 1850’s. The microscopic ﬂuid velocities within
the porous medium are represented by an average microscopic ﬂuid velocity as
illustrated by Fig. 2.1. In simplistic terms, Darcy’s law states that the average
ﬂuid velocity is proportional to the mediums ability to conduct ﬂow of the given
ﬂuid, the drop in pressure and height and inversely proportional to the ﬂuid
viscosity. The proportionality constant, λα = Krα
µα , quantiﬁes the ﬂuids inclina-
tion to ﬂow in the porous medium and is referred to as the phase mobility. The
total mobility of the two-phase system is deﬁned as λt = λo + λw. A detailed
derivation of Darcy’s law in one dimension can be found in Appendix B.
Peacemann’s well model
Injection and producer wells are referred to by index sets, I for injectors and P
for producers, which indicate perforation location ri ∈Ωof the well. For each
point the amount of injected/extracted ﬂuid mass, due to internal well action,
Figure 2.1: The macroscopic Darcy velocity represents an average of micro-
scopic ﬂuid ﬂuxes.
==PAGE:24==
16
Preliminaries
can then be written as
Qw =
X
i∈I,P
ρwqw,iδ(r −ri)
(2.8)
Qo =
X
i∈P
ρoqo,iδ(r −ri).
(2.9)
Here qw,i and qo,i, denote the volumetric ﬂow rates of respectively oil and water.
The Dirac delta function, δ, indicates that the mass ﬂow is restricted to the
speciﬁed location.
Each well is modeled according to Peacemans well description
qi = −λtWIi(pi −pbh
i ), i ∈I, P,
which states that the total volumetric ﬂow rate, qi, is proportional to the dif-
ference in reservoir pressure and well bottom hole pressure: ∆P = pi −pbh
i .
The proportionality constant, WIi, is known as Peacemanns well-index. For a
detailed description see [Pea83].
Given the total ﬂow rate, qi, the volumetric ﬂow rates of water and oil are
computed in terms of the fractional water ﬂow, fw = λw
λt :
qw,i = qi,
i ∈I,
qw,i = fwqi,
i ∈P,
qo,i = (1 −fw)qi
i ∈P.
Note in particular that production rates are modeled to be negative, thereby
indicating ﬂuid extraction.
Mathematical reservoir model - Two-phase immiscible ﬂow
The combination of the governing equations of two-phase ﬂow, (2.1a, 2.1b), with
the well desciptions, (2.8, 2.9) and the constitutive relations of ﬂuid saturation
(2.2), capillary pressure (2.3), ﬂuid density (2.6) and macroscopic ﬂuid velocities
(2.7), constitutes the mathematical reservoir model used in this thesis.
It is noted that with the deﬁnitions S := Sw = 1 −So and p := pw = po, ﬂuid
concentrations may be expressed as
Cw(p, S) = ρw(p)φS,
Co(p, S) = ρo(p)φ(1 −S).
==PAGE:25==
2.1 Reservoir model
17
One can therefore consider pressure p and water saturation S as primary state
variables instead of Co, Cw and, accordingly, specify initial conditions
p(0, r) = p0, S(0, r) = S0, r ∈Ω.
As an alternative to the formulation (2.1), the two-phase immisicble ﬂow model
may therefore also be written in the form:
∂
∂t(ρw(p)φS) = −∇· (ρw(p)vw(p)) +
X
i∈I,P
ρwqw,iδ(r −ri)
in
Ω, t > 0
∂
∂t(ρo(p)φ(1 −S)) = −∇· (ρo(p)vo(p)) +
X
i∈P
ρoqo,iδ(r −ri) in
Ω, t > 0,
vα · n = 0
on δΩ, t > 0, α ∈{o, w},
p = p0
in
Ω, t = 0,
S = S0
in
Ω, t = 0,
where vα = −λαK(∇p −ραg∇z), α ∈{o, w}.
Flow equations - Temporal and spatial discretization
Reservoir simulation relies on a numerical scheme to solve the two phase immis-
cible ﬂow equations with boundary and initial conditions:
∂Cα
∂t
= −∇· Nα + Qα, in
Ω, t > 0, α ∈{o, w},
vα · n = 0
on δΩ, t > 0, α ∈{o, w},
Cα = Cα,0
in
Ω, t = 0, α ∈{o, w}.
In pratice this is accomplished by the widely used approach known as the method
of lines ([J.07]). The approach uses a spatial numerical scheme to reduce the set
of continuous PDEs, including boundary conditions, into an initial-value prob-
lem given by a system of coupled continuous-time ordinary diﬀerential equa-
tions (ODEs). The initial-value problem is then solved by an appropriate time-
discretization scheme.
This thesis applies the spatial discretization method known as the cell-centred
ﬁnite volume two-point ﬂux approximation (TPFA) scheme, while the implicit
Euler method is used for time discretization. Other choices of temporal dis-
cretization include explicit singly diagonally implicit Runge-Kutta (ESDIRK)
methods ([VJTS09], [Cap13]). The use of TPFA is motivated by its properity to
conserve mass. This is not necessarily satisﬁed by schemes based on, e.g., ﬁnite-
diﬀerences. The Euler scheme is chosen due to its simplicity and properties
==PAGE:26==
18
Preliminaries
of stability, which are essential due to the highly non-linear nature of the ﬂow
equations. This choice of spatial and temporal discretization constellation is
prevalent in the oil industry, where it is used in commercial reservoir simulation
software like, e.g., Eclipse and, relevant to this thesis, MRST.
The main steps of the discretization procedure are outlined below:
• TPFA spatial discretization, results in an initial value problem in the form
d
dtg(x(t)) = f(x(t), u(t), θ), t ∈[t0, tf]
x(t0) = x0,
where x(t) ∈Rnx is the state vector of pressures and saturations, u(t) ∈
Rnu is the vector of controls and θ is the set of petro-physical and geological
model parameters.
• A zero-order hold approximation of the controls is introduced (Fig. 2.2),
i.e., the interval, [t0, tf], is divided into N + 1 time nodes
t0 < t1 < ... < tN−1 < tN = tf,
where it is assumed that the controls are constant during each time step
u(t) = uk, tk ≤t < tk+1,
where
k ∈N := {0, 1, ..., N −1}.
• During the time interval, tk ≤t < tk+1, the ﬂow dynamics are then
described by
d
dtg(x(t)) = f(x(t), uk, θ), tk ≤t < tk+1.
(2.10a)
x(tk) = xk.
(2.10b)
Figure 2.2: Illustration of zero-order hold approximation of the controls.
==PAGE:27==
2.1 Reservoir model
19
• Temporal discretization of (2.10), by the implict Euler method, then re-
sults in N · nx non-linear equations
Rk(xk+1, xk, uk; θ) := g(xk+1) −g(xk) −∆tkf(xk+1, uk, θ) = 0, k ∈N,
x0 = bx0.
The system of non-linear equations is solved by a (modiﬁed) Newton
method in order to successively advance the states of the system in time.
A detailed description of how to discretize the ﬂow equations can be found in
e.g. [VJTS09].
Geological model - Reservoir permeability
The geological model used in this thesis, serves to describe the reservoir per-
meability ﬁeld. Permeability is a geological feature, which measures the ability
of the porous medium to conduct ﬂow of ﬂuids through the rock capillaries.
One distinguishes between absolute and relative permeability. The quantity of
absolute permeability, K, is deﬁned for a single phase ﬂow, whereas relative
permeability refers to multi-phase ﬂow. The relative permeability is deﬁned as
the ratio of the eﬀective permeability, Kα, experimentally assigned to a given
ﬂuid, and the absolute permeability, K, i.e.,
kαr = kαK.
In the far majority of real-life reservoirs, the absolute permeability varies with
both location and direction in space; one says that the permeability is heteroge-
neous and anisotropic. The directions in space for which the permeability attains
its maximum and minimum values are called principal directions of anisotropy.
In practice, one may often align the coordinate system with the principal direc-
tions of anisotropy. In such cases, the absolute permeability may be described
in terms of a 3 × 3 tensor of the form
K =


kx
0
0
0
ky
0
0
0
kz

.
This thesis makes the simplifying assumption,
kx = ky = kz,
i.e., it is assumed that the porous medium is isotropic.
==PAGE:28==
20
Preliminaries
Relative permeabilities - The Corey model
In two-phase ﬂow senarios, it has been empirically established that the relative
permeabilites of water and oil can be considered as functions of ﬂuid saturation
alone. The saturation dependency can be modeled in terms of the Corey model:
krw(Sw) =





0,
0 ≤Sw < Swc
k0
rw ˜Snw,
Swc ≤Sw < 1 −Sor
k0
rw,
1 −Sor ≤Sw < 1
,
(2.11)
kro(Sw) =





k0
ro,
0 ≤Sw < Swc
k0
ro(1 −˜S)no,
Swc ≤Sw < 1 −Sor
0,
1 −Sor ≤Sw < 1.
(2.12)
Here
˜S =
Sw −Swc
1 −Sor −Swc
(2.13)
and
• Sor is the residual oil saturation and Swc is the connate water saturation.
These denote the saturations at which oil and water respectively ceases
and starts to ﬂow.
• k0
rw and k0
ro are the end-point relative permeabilities for the oil and water,
respectively.
• no and nw are the Corey exponents.
It is noted that these parameters are all based on experiments and empirical
observations of the porous medium in question.
2.2
Production optimization
Production optimization seeks to enhance the process of oil recovery by deter-
mining the operating proﬁle, u(t) ∈Rnu, t > 0, which maximizes the life-cycle
net present value, Ψ(tf), which is deﬁned as the integral
Ψ(tf) =
Z tf
t0
Φ(x(s), u(s), θ)ds,
(2.14)
==PAGE:29==
2.2 Production optimization
21
over the reservoir life, tf, of the discounted proﬁt, Φ, where
Φ =
−1
 1 +
d
365
τ(t)
"X
i∈P
(roqo,i(t) −rwpqw,i(t)) +
X
ℓ∈I
rwiqℓ
#
.
Here ro , rwp and rwi denote respectively the oil price, the water separation
cost, and the water injection cost; the factor −1/
 1 +
d
365)
τ(t) accounts for the
daily compounded value of the captial, where d is the annual interest rate and
τ(t) is the integer number of days at time t.
Optimal control problem
After spatial discretization by TPFA, the desire to enchance proﬁt by manip-
ulation of well conﬁgurations, may be formulated as the continuous-time con-
strained optimal control problem in Lagrange form:
max
[x(t),u(t)]
tf
t0
Ψ(tf) =
Z tf
t0
Φ(x(s), u(s))ds
(2.15a)
subject to
(2.15b)
d
dtg(x(t)) = f(x(t), u(t), θ), t ∈[t0, tf],
(2.15c)
x(t0) = x0,
(2.15d)
u(t) ∈U(t).
(2.15e)
Here U denotes constraints on the input proﬁle, u. This thesis only considers
linear bound constraints on the input proﬁle, i.e. constraints in the form
umin ≤u(t) ≤umax, t > 0,
where umin and umax are respectively lower and upper bound constraints, im-
posed to account for physical limitations of the wells. Usually, production facil-
ities also impose non-linear state or output constraints on the problem. Imple-
mentation of these are however challenged by the need for expensive gradient
computations. The recent research paper, [FSL+14a], provides a discussion of
how output constraints can be handled eﬃciently by an augmented Lagrange
method.
==PAGE:30==
22
Preliminaries
Finite dimensional optimal control problem
By zero-order hold approximation of the controls and implicit Euler time dis-
cretization, (2.15) reduces to the ﬁnite dimensional constrained optimal control
problem:
max
{xk}N
k=0,{uk}N−1
k=0
ψ = ψ({xk}N
k=0, {uk}N−1
k=0 ; θ)
(2.16a)
s.t.
Rk(xk+1, xk, uk; θ) = 0, x0 = bx0, k ∈N,
(2.16b)
umin,k ≤uk ≤umax,k,
k ∈N.
(2.16c)
Here ψ =
N−1
X
k=0
Φ(xk+1, uk)∆tk, ∆tk = tk+1 −tk is a right rectangle Euler ap-
proximation of Ψ(tf) in (2.14).
Subject to adjustements of the objective function (2.16a), the optimal control
problem (2.16) represents the general formulation of all optimization problems
which are considered in this thesis.
Single-shooting optimization
To solve (2.16), this thesis applies a single-shooting algorithm ([CVFJ12]), which
recasts the optimal control problem in the form
min
{uk}N−1
k=0
ψ({uk}N−1
k=0 ; bx0, θ)
(2.17a)
s.t.
umin,k ≤uk ≤umax,k, k ∈N,
(2.17b)
where
ψ({uk}N−1
k=0 ; bx0, θ) =
(
J(x, u; bx0, θ) =
N−1
X
k=0
Jk(xk+1, uk; θ) : R(x, u, x0; θ) = 0, x0 = bx0
)
.
Here the following notation has been introduced
Jk := Φ(xk+1, uk)∆tk, k ∈N,
and the vectors x ∈RN·nx, u ∈RN·nu and R ∈RN·nx, given by
x =


x1
x2
...
xN

, u =


u0
u1
...
uN−1

, R =


R0(x1, x0, u0; θ)
R1(x2, x1, u1; θ)
...
RN−1(xN, xN−1, uN−1; θ)

.
==PAGE:31==
2.2 Production optimization
23
Figure 2.3: Illustrative ﬂow chart of model-based optimization
Alternatives to single-shooting optimization include multiple-shooting methods
([BP84] ,[CJ12]) and collocation methods ([Bie84],[Bie13]). The use of multiple-
shooting is unattractive due to the need for expensive computations of state
sensitivities whereas application of the collocation method is challenged by the
required parameterization of the large state vectors associated with reservoir
simulation. These methods have therefore not been included in the focus on
this thesis.
Optimization with MATLAB and MRST
In this thesis, the optimal control problem (2.17) is solved by the state-of-the-
art MATLAB (2014b) gradient-based optimization tool, fmincon.
The pro-
vided routine uses an interior point algorithm, with a BFGS approximation
of the Hessian, to locate so called Karush-Kuhn-Tucker (KKT) points which
satisfy the ﬁrst order optimality conditions associated with constrained opti-
mization ([NW06]). To ensure computational eﬃciency, the required gradients,
{∇ukψ}N−1
k=0 , are calculated by the adjoint method ([SAD05],[CJ12]).
The optimization procedure, as conducted in this thesis, divides into three main
steps (Fig. 2.3):
==PAGE:32==
24
Preliminaries
1) Geological, petro-physical and econommical model parameters as well as
the initial controls are initialized and provided to fmincon.
2) The optimizer then follows the iterative steps
– The ﬂow equations are solved fully implicitly to acquire the reservoir
states, x, i.e. pressures and ﬂuid saturations.
– Based on the simulated results, the objective function, ψ, is calculated
and the adjoint method is used to compute gradients, {∇ukψ}N−1
k=0 .
– The optimizer updates the controls, {uk}N−1
k=0 .
3) Upon convergence, as measured by appropriate stopping criteria, the op-
timal operating proﬁle is returned. In this thesis, fmincon is applied with
a function value and stepsize tolerance of ϵ = 10−8. The current best, but
non-optimal iterate, is returned in cases when the optimization algorithm
uses more than 100 iterations.
In this thesis, reservoir simulations and computations of adjoint sensitivities are
performed using the MATLAB Reservoir Simulation Toolbox (MRST) functions
runScheduleADI and runAdjointADI. For the sake of completeness, the main
theoretical steps involved in the calculation of adjoint sensitivites are presented
in Appendix C. MATLAB implemtations of all optimization procedures con-
sidered in this thesis can be found on the enclosed USB drive. An overview is
presented in Appendix E.
Reference case: Reactive control
As a popular operational strategy of oil companies, Reactive control [Ram87]
will throughout this thesis be used as a reference case to validate and asses
strategies of production optimization.
In this thesis, a Reactive strategy deploys all injection wells at maximum capac-
ity and, based on feedback, shuts in producer wells as they become inproﬁtable.
In this way, potential loss of proﬁt is avoided. This is illustrated in Fig. 2.4.
Inproﬁtability of a producer well occurs when fractional water ﬂow fw, exceeds
ro
ro+rwp , where ro is the oil price and wwp denotes the water seperation cost.
Implementations of Reactive strategies can be found on the enclosed USB drive.
==PAGE:33==
2.3 Case study speciﬁcations
25
Time [days]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
NPV Millions [USD]
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Naive strategy
Reactive control
Figure 2.4: Illustration of Reactive control. The naive strategy results in loss
of proﬁt. Reactive control avoids this by shutting in inproﬁtable
producer wells. Note how proﬁt is in fact increased.
2.3
Case study speciﬁcations
This thesis presents a series of numerical case studies which seek to investigate
diﬀerent aspects of risk management in the setting of production optimization.
The following speciﬁes reservoir model parameters and assumptions which are
common to all numerical experiments. Additional details, tied to individual case
studies.
Case description
The case studies use on a two-dimensional synthetic reservoir of dimensions
620 m × 620 m × 50 m, which by spatial discretization has been divided into
31 × 31 × 1 cell blocks. A well setup of three injectors and three producers (Fig.
2.5) is applied. The controls are the water injection rates. The minimal and
maximal injection rates are 0
m3
day and 800
m3
day. Production wells operate at a
constant bottomhole pressure of 150 bar. The reservoir is simulated over a time
horizon of tf = 1800 days, which by temporal discretization has been divided
into N control steps, where N depends on the respective case study.
The numerical case studies use the permeability ﬁelds available on the enclosed
USB drive in the data ﬁle PermEns.mat. Each permeability ﬁeld is associated
with an index i ∈{1, 2, ..., 24}. The index refers to the column in the PermEns
matrix, which stores the permeability ﬁeld.
==PAGE:34==
26
Preliminaries
Speciﬁcation of petro-physical and economical model parameters are presented
in Fig. 2.5. It is noted that the oil price used in the numerical case studies
does not represent current prices. The oil price is chosen to allow the results
of this thesis to be compared to former research including [CJ12], [CSFJ15]
and [Aac15]. The Eclipse deck used to setup the reservoir can be found on the
enclosed USB drive in the ﬁle my_simple31x31x1.data. A description of how
to modify the Eclipse deck can be found in [Ø.06].
0
200
400
600
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
 
Permeability field
 
Low
Medium
High
Inj.
Prod.
Figure 2.5: Case study well setup. The depicted permeability ﬁeld (i = 8) is
used in Chapter 3.
Description
Value
Unit
φ
Porosity
0.3
-
cw
Water compressibility
4.28 · 10−10
Pa−1
co
Oil compressibility
6.65 · 10−10
Pa−1
ρw
Water density
1080
kg/m3
ρo
Oil density
962
kg/m3
µw
Dymanic water viscosity
4.8 · 10−4
Pa · s
µ0
Dymanic oil viscosity
3.5 · 10−3
Pa · s
Swc
Connate water saturation
0.1
−
Sro
Residual oil saturation
0.2
−
nw
Corey exponent for water
2
−
no
Corey exponent for oil
2
−
k0
rw
Water end-point relative perm.
1
−
k0
ro
Oil end-point relative perm.
1
−
Pinit
Inital reservoir pressure
243
atm
Sinit
Inital water saturation
0.15
−
ro
Oil price
120
USD/bbl
rwp
Water seperation cost
35
USD/bbl
rwi
Water injection cost
10
USD/bbl
d
Discount factor
0
−
Figure 2.6: Case study petro-physical and economical model parameters.
==PAGE:35==
2.4 Summary
27
2.4
Summary
This chapter has introduced the reservoir two-phase immisicible ﬂow model
which is used throughout the thesis, presented the optimal control problem cen-
tral to production optimization and provided general case study speciﬁcations.
The two-phase immisicible ﬂow model describes how the phases of water and oil
ﬂow through the reservoir. The model consists of two PDEs which express mass
conservation, along with zero ﬂux boundary conditions and appropriate initial
conditions. Saturation and pressure can be considered as the primary variables.
Darcy’s law for multi-phase ﬂow is used to model phase velocities, porosity is
assumed homogeneous, capillary pressure is assumed to be zero and relative
permeabilities are described by the Corey model. Constitutive relations relate
ﬂuid densities to pressure and wells are modeled according to the Peaceman
description. The permeability ﬁeld is assumed to be heterogeneous isotropic.
The model is discretized in space by the TPFA scheme. The resulting initial
value problem is discretized in time by the implicit Euler method. The associ-
ated system of non-linear equations are solved by a modifed Newton method to
advance the reservoir states in time.
The general optimization problem considered in this thesis may be formulated
as a ﬁnite dimensional constrained optimal control problem. The optimization
problem is solved by a single-shooting algorithm which parameterizes the con-
trols by a zero-order hold approximation. The controls are the water injection
rates. In practice, the optimization procedure is carried out using MATLAB’s
(2014b) gradient-based non-linear optimizer fmincon and the reservoir simula-
tion toolbox MRST (2014a). Gradients are calculated by the adjoint method.
==PAGE:36==
28
Preliminaries
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 3
Economical Risk Mitigation
by Short-term/Long-term
Optimization
By application of theory and methods of multi-objective optimization (MOO),
the following chapter presents a survey and investigation of the oil literature’s
main eﬀorts to mitigate economical risks. Based on a study of the recent research
paper [LR14], the chapter focuses on short-term versus long-term optimization.
To asses the strategy as a tool for economical risk mitigation, a series of numer-
ical case studies compare short-term versus long-term optimization to conven-
tional production optimization methods and Reactive control. Advantages and
shortcomings are uncovered and discussed.
==PAGE:38==
30
Economical Risk Mitigation by Short-term/Long-term Optimization
Time [days]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
NPV Millions [USD]
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
Long-term strategy
Reactive control
Figure 3.1: Comparison of NPVs associated with a typical long-term strategy
and Reactive control. Long-term strategies focus on maximizing
end-time NPV, which in turn compromises short-term gains signif-
icantly. This is indicated by the gap marked by the dotted green
line.
3.1
Production optimization under economical un-
certainty
The status of oil as an international commodity implies that the prices of
petroleum are subject to the dynamic and constantly changing global relation-
ships between supply and demand. The highly complex nature of such relation-
ships are tied to, e.g., political agendas, the current state of ﬁnancial markets
and oil investment speculations. Oil and gas prices are therefore bound to be
profoundly uncertain.
The mathematical reservoir models which constitute the core of conventional
production optimization are based on the assumption of known and ﬁxed eco-
nomical parameters. As a consequence, the inherent risks related to ﬂuctuations
in oil prices are altogether neglected. The simulated predictions therefore be-
come highly unreliable and too risky for pratical applications, including ﬁeld
operations. In particular, any potential ﬁnancial gains which may result from
the computed operating proﬁle are outweighed by the substantiate risks associ-
ated with the simulated predicitions.
==PAGE:39==
3.1 Production optimization under economical uncertainty
31
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Time [days] 
NPV 
Figure 3.2: Illustration of the negative eﬀects on long-term strategies caused
by exceedingly growing uncertainty (red shaded area) in the oil
prices (green dotted line). With time, the predicted NPV (blue
curve) becomes increasingly uncertain.
Long-term strategies
To aggrevate matters further, the negative eﬀects of economical uncertainty
become particularly pronounced in the case of conventional production opti-
mization methods. By the underlying mathematical formulation, such methods
solely focus on maximizing proﬁt at the expected end of the reservoir life. For
this reason, the associated operating proﬁles are referred to as long-term strate-
gies. The restricted focus to ﬁnal proﬁt implies that so called short-term gains
are compromised, i.e., proﬁt is initially made at a non commercially slow rate,
relative to conventional methods such as Reactive control. This is illustrated in
Fig. 3.1. The focus of long-term strategies implies that substantial revenue is
typically postponed until several years after the oil production has begun.
The issues of postponing income are naturally insigniﬁcant provided that the
simulated predictions are accurate, since proﬁt is guaranteed to be made even-
tually. However, the time-dependent and exceedingly growing uncertainty of oil
prices implies that the simulated predictions are likely to become increasingly
ﬂawed with time. Long-term predictions are therefore especially vulnerable to
economical uncertainty (Fig. 3.2). The associated risks are worsened by the
long prediction horizons associated with production optimization, which often
==PAGE:40==
32
Economical Risk Mitigation by Short-term/Long-term Optimization
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
NPV 
Time [days] 
Figure 3.3: Illustration of the idea behind short-term optimization. By ex-
pediting short-term proﬁt, the earnings become less vulnarable to
uncertainties (red shaded area) in the oil prices (green dotted line).
This increases conﬁdence in the simulated predictions.
span more than a decade. As a conseqeunce, long-term strategies become highly
unreliable. This stands as a major drawback of conventional production opti-
mization methods. To address the issues of long-term strategies and mitigate
the inherent time-dependent economical risks, the oil literature has proposed so
called short-term versus long-term optimization ([LR14], [VEVdHJ11] ).
3.2
Short-term versus Long-term optimization
For the purpose of production optimization, the use of mathematical models to
forecast oil prices is to a large degree prevented by the associated prediction
horizons which extend several years into the future. Economical risk mitigation
by model-based oil prices is therefore rarely a valid option. As an alternative,
the oil literature has proposed methods which seek to promote short-term prof-
its by maximizing the revenue (NPV) over a shorter time horizont. In this way,
the estimated oil prices are more likely to be accurate which in turn increases
conﬁdence in the simulated predictions (Fig. 3.3). This approach of risk miti-
gation is known as the short-term optimization problem.
==PAGE:41==
3.2 Short-term versus Long-term optimization
33
The problem can be written in the form
max
{xk}N
k=0,{uk}N−1
k=0
ψS =
Ns−1
X
k=0
Jk(xk+1, uk; θ), Ns < N,
(3.1a)
s.t.
Rk(xk+1, xk, uk; θ) = 0, x0 = bx0,
k ∈N,
(3.1b)
umin,k ≤uk ≤umax,k
k ∈N.
(3.1c)
Short-term optimization (3.1) does not take long-term proﬁts into account.
As a result, the associated operating proﬁle may cause commercially unaccept-
able ﬁnal proﬁts. The research project [VEVdHJ11], however suggests that the
general production optimization problem contains redundant degrees of freedom
which can be used to optimize one or several objectives simulatenously. This has
lead to consideration of the short-term versus long-term optimization problem:
max
{xk}N
k=0,{uk}N−1
k=0
(ψL(x, u, x0; θ), ψS(x, u, x0; θ))
(3.2a)
s.t.
Rk(xk+1, xk, uk; θ) = 0, x0 = bx0, k ∈N,
(3.2b)
umin,k ≤uk ≤umax,k
k ∈N.
(3.2c)
The fomulation (3.2) expresses the objective of determining the operating proﬁle
which simultaneously maximizes the long-term and short-term NPVs. In this
way, beneﬁcial eﬀects of accurate predictions are maintained while the time-
dependent risks of erroneous long-term predictions are reduced at the same time.
A description of how to solve (3.2) by scalerization techniques of multi-objective
optimization will be given in Section 3.3.
Issues of conﬂicting objectives
In most situations the individual short-term and long-term objectives are con-
ﬂicting goals. This implies that strategies which focus on long-term objectives
compromise short-terms gains and vice versa. This is illustrated in Fig. 3.4
and Fig.3.5. The short-term versus long-term optimization therefore becomes a
question of balancing opposing objectives, i.e., the goal is to determine the op-
timal trade-oﬀsenario between short-term and long-term gains. In constrast to
traditional single objective optimization problems, where only a single optimum
exists, there may be inﬁnitely many trade-oﬀs which can be considered optimal
depending, e.g., on how the importance of the respecetive objectives are mutu-
ally weighted. In particular, without any a prioir deﬁnition of optimality, it is
unclear which of the trade-oﬀsenarios, depicted in Fig. 3.4 and Fig. 3.5, are
preferable to management. The complications of opposing objectives make the
==PAGE:42==
34
Economical Risk Mitigation by Short-term/Long-term Optimization
short-term versus long-term optimization problem particularly diﬃcult and ren-
ders the problem unsolvable by standard SOO techniques. Instead one resorts
to theory and methods of multi-objective optimization (MOO).
3.3
Multi-objective optimization
Multi-objective optimization is ubiquitous in the engineering sciences where ap-
plications encompass a wide variety of ﬁelds including ﬁnancial mathematics,
optimal design, electric power systems, optimal control and central to this thesis,
oil reservoir management. As a mathematical tool, multi-objective optimization
is designed to provide solutions to complex problems of advanced multiple cri-
teria decision making, which are charatarized by conﬂicting objectives.
The
short-term versus long-term problem is one such example.
The following section lays the theoretical foundation for the MOO techniques
which will be used in this thesis to treat and solve the short-term versus long-
term optimization problem. The section formally deﬁnes the multi-objective
optimization problem in a general setting and speciﬁes important concepts such
as Pareto optimality. Special attention is given to the weighted sum method,
which will serve as the main tool to generate optimal trade-oﬀsenarios in the
numerical cases studies of this chapter.
The exposition is mainly based on [Mie99] and the monograph [BDMS08].
Problem formulation
The general multi-objective optimization problem (MOOP) takes the form
min
u∈Rn
f(u) = (f1(u), f2(u), ..., fm(u))T
(3.3a)
s.t.
u ∈S.
(3.3b)
Formulated in this way, the problem consists of ﬁnding a single decision vector,
u = (u1, u2, ..., un), such as to simultaneously minimize each objective function
fi : Rn →R, 1 ≤i ≤m, subject to the feasiblity conditions u ∈S, where the
feasible region is deﬁned by
S = {u ∈Rn| (e1(u), e2(u), ..., ene(u))T = 0, (c1(u), c2(u), ..., cnc(u))T ≥0}.
Here ei, 1 ≤i ≤ne and ci, 1 ≤i ≤nc denote respectively equality and inequal-
ity constraints. The image of the feasibility region, S, under the operation of
==PAGE:43==
3.3 Multi-objective optimization
35
Time [days]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
NVP Millons [USD]
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
Short-term versus Long-term
Figure 3.4: Illustration of the inherent conﬂict between short-term and long-
term objectives, senario 1. Increasing short-term NPV results in
an according decrease in long-term proﬁt.
Time [days]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
NVP Millons [USD]
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
Short-term versus Long-term
Figure 3.5: Illustration of the inherent conﬂict between short-term and long-
term objectives, senario 2.
==PAGE:44==
36
Economical Risk Mitigation by Short-term/Long-term Optimization
f : Rn →Rm is referred to as the feasible objective region Z ⊆Rm and is given
by
Z = {f(u) = (f1(u), f2(u), ..., fm(u)) | u ∈S}.
In the setting of oil production optimization, under the assumption of a single-
shooting formulation, the decision vector is the set of controls, specifying, e.g.,
water injection rates and borehole pressures. The objectives are given by the
long-term and short-term NPVs, whereas the constraints typically represent
physical bounds on the operating equipment.
The formulation (3.3) relies on the assumption that the individual objectives
are to be minimized. In oil production optimization and various other appli-
cations, one instead wishes to maximize the objectives, i.e., solve the problem
max
u∈Rn
f(u) = (f1(u), f2(u), ..., fm(u))T
(3.4a)
s.t.
u ∈S.
(3.4b)
This is readily accomplished by solving the equivalent MOOP
min
u∈Rn
g(u) = −(f1(u), f2(u), ..., fm(u))T
(3.5a)
s.t.
u ∈S.
(3.5b)
The formulation (3.5) is implicitly used throughout this thesis.
Pareto optimality
A fundamental assumption of MOO is that the objectives, fi, are in mutual
conﬂict, i.e., that no common optimum, u∗= (u∗
1, u∗
2, ..., u∗
n)T , exists. On the
contrary, if all objectives, fi, had the same optimum, u∗, the solution to (3.3)
could be found by minimizing anyone of the objectives individually. The MOOP
would therefore reduce to a single objective optimization problem (SOOP) and
the MOOP formulation would become obsolete. On the other hand, the con-
ﬂict in objectives implies that it is impossible to ﬁnd a single optimal desicion
vector which simultaneously minimizes all components of the objective vector,
f. Hence, with respect to the notion of optimality known from single objective
optimization, the MOOP becomes ill-posed.
The inconsistency of SOO optimality in respect to MOO motivates the need
for a generalized concept, so called Pareto optimality.
The basic idea is to
consider all objective vectors, f(u) = (f1(u), f2(u), ..., fm(u)) ∈Z, which have
the property that no element, fi, can be further minimized without increasing
==PAGE:45==
3.3 Multi-objective optimization
37
at least one other component, fj. In this case, one says that the desicion vector,
u ∈S, is non-dominated:
Definition 3.1 Let u, v ∈S ⊂Rn. Then u is said to dominate v, provided
that the following conditions hold
(i) fi(u) ≤fi(v), ∀i ∈{∈1, ..., m},
(ii) fj(u) < fi(u), for at least one j ∈{1, ..., m}.
A vector v is said to be non-dominated when no vector u ∈S dominates v.
When a decision vector is non-dominated, one says that an optimal trade-oﬀhas
been achieved. In such cases, individual objectives can not be improved without
deteriorating at least one other objective. This idea of optimality, in connection
with conﬂicting objectives, was ﬁrst introduced by Edgeworth and later reﬁned
by Vilfred Pareto [Parch], leading to the concept of Pareto optimality:
Definition 3.2 The desicion vector u∗∈S is said to be Pareto optimal if
u∗is non-dominated, i.e., if at least one of the following statements holds for all
u ∈S :
(i) fi(u) ≥fi(u∗), ∀i ∈{1, ..., m},
(ii) fj(u) > fj(u∗), for at least one j ∈{1, ..., m}.
By deﬁnition 3.2, a decision vector is Pareto optimal if it is non-dominated. This
relatively weak condition implies that there are often inﬁnitely many Pareto
optimal solutions. The set of all such solutions is denoted the Pareto optimal
set
U = {u ∈S| u is Pareto optimal }.
The decision maker
From a mathematical point of veiw, all Pareto optimal points are equally suit-
able solutions to the MOOP. From a pratical point of veiw however, certain
trade-oﬀs are more desirable than others. The choice of which Pareto optimal
solution suits a certain application the best is often beyond a mathematical
formulation. Typically, the process involves a so called decision-maker, i.e., a
==PAGE:46==
38
Economical Risk Mitigation by Short-term/Long-term Optimization
specialist with an extensive knowlegde of the problem and what properties are
required of the solution.
The decision maker examines each individual Pareto optimal point and com-
pares it to the other possible solutions before deciding which solution is to be
considered optimal. Since the dimension of the decision space S is usually much
larger than the objective space Z, i.e., n >> m, it is often convenient to rep-
resent the Pareto optimal set in the objective space. This is accomplished in
terms of the Pareto front, which is deﬁned as the image of the Pareto optimal
set by f : Rn →Rm, i.e.,
F = {f(u) = (f1(u), f2(u), ..., fm(u))|u ∈U}.
The Pareto front is a widely used tool in the engineering sciences, including
mathematical ﬁnance where its origins trace back to the classical Markowitz
Portfolio optimization problem [Mar52].
In this context, the Pareto front is
known as the eﬃcient frontier, which consists of optimal trade-oﬀsenarios be-
tween risk and expected return on a given stock portfolio. The point on the
frontier, which has the optimal ratio of return versus risk is, by the criteria of
the problem, considered optimal. The associated portfolio is referred to as the
market solution. To a large extend, this termenology carries over to the produc-
tion optimization setting. Here the Pareto front or eﬃcient frontier consists of
all optimal trade-oﬀs (ψS, ψL) between short-term and long-term gains. How-
ever, at this point, there is no equivalent to the concept of the market solution.
In section 3.4, this thesis proposes a suitable ratio to address this shortage.
The weigthed sum method
Most computational MOO methods are so called a posteriori methods. The
overall aim of such methods is to locate individual points of the Pareto front in
order to present the decision maker with diﬀerent trade-oﬀsenarios. In partice,
this is accomplished by the technique of scalarization. The orginal MOOP is
converted into one or several single objective optimization problems, such that
the solution of each SOOP represents a distinct Pareto optimal point.
The
collection of all such solutions are then used to generate a so called representative
of the Pareto front (Fig. 3.6).
The work of this thesis will repeatedly use the a posteriori method known as the
weigthed sum method. In this case, scalarization is performed by associating
each objective, fi, i ∈{1, ..., m}, with a non-negative weight wi, i ∈{1, ..., m}
and minimize the weighted sum of the respective objectives.
==PAGE:47==
3.3 Multi-objective optimization
39
Short-term profit 
Long-­‐term	  proﬁt	  
Pareto front representative 
ΨL 
ΨS 
Figure 3.6: Illustration of the the Pareto front representative of short-term
and long-term trade-oﬀs. Each red dot represents a Pareto optimal
point on the true frontier (blue curve).
This results in the SOOP:
min
u∈Rn
m
X
i=1
wifi(u)
(3.6a)
s.t.
u ∈S.
(3.6b)
It is a standard assumption that the collection of weights, {wi}m
i=1, are non-
negative and normalized such that they satisfy the condition
m
X
i=1
wi = 1.
The formulation, (3.6), allows for the use of standard non-linear SOO gradient-
based techniques. By Theorem 3.3, each choice of the user-deﬁned parameters,
{wi}m
i=1, results in a distinct Pareto optimal point. In this way, individual runs
of the optimization algorithm are used to successively generate a representative
of the Pareto front.
Theorem 3.3 The solution, u∗∈S, of the optimization problem (3.6) is a
Pareto optimal solution of the MOOP
min
u∈Rn
f(u) = (f1(u), f2(u), ..., fm(u))T
(3.7a)
s.t.
u ∈S.
(3.7b)
Proof.
The proof is by contradiction. Assume therefore that, u∗∈S, is a
==PAGE:48==
40
Economical Risk Mitigation by Short-term/Long-term Optimization
solution to the optimization problem (3.6), but not a Pareto optimal solution
of (3.7). Then there exists a u ∈S, such that
(i) fi(u) ≤fi(u∗), ∀i ∈{1, ..., m}.
(ii) fj(u) < fj(u∗), for at least one j ∈{1, ..., m}.
By assumption, the collection of weights, {wi}m
i=1, are positive.
It therefore
follows that
m
X
i=1
wifi(u) <
m
X
i=1
wifi(u∗).
This however contradicts the assumption that, u∗∈S, is a solution to (3.6). It
therefore follows that any solution of the weigthed sum optimization problem is
a Pareto optimal solution to the MOOP (3.7).
□
In the setting of production optimization, this thesis will apply the weighted
sum method to solve the short-term versus long-term problem by generating a
representative of the Pareto front. With weights, w1 ∈{ k
10}10
k=1, the associated
optimization problems may be formulated in the form:
max
{xk}N
k=0,{uk}N−1
k=0
ψ = w1ψL(x, u, x0; θ) + (1 −w1)ψS(x, u, x0; θ),
(3.8a)
s.t.
Rk(xk+1, xk, uk; θ) = 0, x0 = bx0,
k ∈N,
(3.8b)
umin,k ≤uk ≤umax,k
k ∈N.
(3.8c)
Computational shortcomings of MOO methods
The main issue of MOO is tied to the fact that there often exists inﬁnitely many
Pareto optimal trade-oﬀsenarios and that there is typically no straightforward
way to predispose the respective Pareto points. This is reﬂected in the some-
what errant strategy of a posteriori MOO methods, which seek to generate the
widest possible selection of trade-oﬀsenarios, to represent the eﬃcient frontier
suﬃciently accurate. The drawback is the comprehensive computations required
to accomplish this. This issue becomes particuarly pronounced in the case of
production optimization, where state dimensions of 106 are not unusual.
As an example, to solve the short-term versus long-term problem (3.8), the
weighted sum method requires an entire optimization run for each choice of
==PAGE:49==
3.3 Multi-objective optimization
41
the parameter, w1 ∈{ k
10}10
k=1. Further, each individual optimization run relies
on numerous simulations and adjoint calculations to provide the optimization
algorithm with function values and gradients. The approach therefore becomes
computationally demanding and for large scale problems, highly time-consuming
and ultimately intractable. To mitigate these issues, this thesis uses the DTU
HPC Cluster, a state-of-the-art multi-core processor, to run the individual opti-
mizations in parallel. Parallelization is feasible due to the mutual independence
of the respestive optimization problems. The procedure is outlined in Fig. 3.7:
1) A client program initializes geological, petro-physical and econommical
model parameters as well as the initial controls and the diﬀerent sets of
weigths.
2) To run optimizations in parallel, the client program passes on the initial
data to a set of workers, which (ideally) run on seperate cores.
Each
worker is associated with a set of weights.
3) For the given weights, each worker performs the model-based optimization
procedure outlined in Chapter 2, Fig. 2.3.
4) Upon convergence each worker returns the optimal solution to the client
program. The collection of solutions is used to generate a representative
of the Pareto front.
Concrete measures of how parallelization aﬀects run times for the short-term
versus long-term problem, will be presented in Section 3.4.
The short-term versus long-term problem and production optimization prob-
lems in general are challenged by their highly non-linear and non-convex na-
ture. In this regard it should be noted that non-linear optimization algorithms,
despite being state-of-the-art, can only hope to ﬁnd local minima. As a con-
sequence, multi-objective optimization methods based on scalarization, such as
the weighted sum method, can at best expect to ﬁnd so called locally Pareto
optimal solutions:
Definition 3.4 A desicion vector u∗∈S is said to be locally Pareto optimal
if there exists a neighbourhood N ⊂S such that u∗is Pareto optimal in N.
Non-linearity and non-convexity of the optimization problem therefore implies
that the computed solutions may not always represent actual optimal trade-oﬀ
senarios, i.e., some or all generated solutions may in fact be dominated globally.
In Section 3.4, this thesis suggests means to mitigate these issues.
==PAGE:50==
42
Economical Risk Mitigation by Short-term/Long-term Optimization
Cluster"
Discre?ze"
w"="{w1",…,"wm}"
0"="w1<"w2"<"…"<"wM"="1""
"
"
Ini??al"Reservoir"
Condi?ons,"x0"
t"
"
uinit"
Core"2"
"Op?mize:""
Ψ2=w2"ΨL+(1_w2)"ΨS'
"
"
Core"m"
"Op?mize:""
Ψm=wm"ΨL+(1_wm)"ΨS"
"
Core"1"
"Op?mize:""
Ψ1=w1"ΨL+(1_w1)"ΨS'
'
'
"
"
t"
uopt(w1)"
"
t"
uopt(w2)"
Uopt(wm)"
Short_term"proﬁt"
Long_term"proﬁt"
ΨL"
ΨS'
Pareto"front"representa?ve"
Figure 3.7: Illustrative outline of the parallelization approach, used in this
thesis, to generate the Pareto front representative.
==PAGE:51==
3.4 Numerical results
43
3.4
Numerical results
The following section presents a series of numerical experiments, which serve to
investigate diﬀerent aspects of the short-term versus long-term multi-objective
optimization problem (3.9), in terms of theory and techniques of MOO.
max
{xk}N
k=0,{uk}N−1
k=0
(ψL(x, u, x0; θ), ψS(x, u, x0; θ))
(3.9a)
s.t.
Rk(xk+1, xk, uk; θ) = 0, x0 = bx0, k ∈N,
(3.9b)
umin,k ≤uk ≤umax,k
k ∈N.
(3.9c)
The main focus of the investigations will be the ability of short-term versus
long-term optimization to mitigate risks of economical uncertainties and pro-
mote overall return by balancing short-term and long-term proﬁts. Further, the
experiments seek to uncover how the ability to balance short-term and long-term
objectives is reﬂected in operational strategies and the number of controls avail-
able. To asses quality, short-term versus long-term strategies are compared to
conventional production optimization and Reactive control. General shortcom-
ings of short-term versus long-term optimization are presented and discussed.
The case studies use the permeability ﬁeld indexed by i = 8 in the PermEns
ﬁle. Short-term proﬁts are represented by the cumulative NPV after 600 days,
which corresponds to one third of the total simulation time of 1800 days:
ψS =
Ns−1
X
k=0
Jk(xk+1, uk; θ), Ns := N
3 .
For all cases studies, the short-term versus long-term problem (3.9) is solved
by application of the weigthed sum method with weights w1 ∈{ k
10}10
k=1. This
follows the approach of [LR14]. To ensure reasonable computational times, a
parallel implementation of the single-shooting approach outlined in Fig. 3.7 is
used to simultaneously solve the optimization problems
max
{xk}N
k=0,{uk}N−1
k=0
ψ = w1ψL(x, u, x0; θ) + (1 −w1) ψS(x, u, x0; θ),
(3.10a)
s.t.
Rk(xk+1, xk, uk; θ) = 0, x0 = bx0, k ∈N,
(3.10b)
umin,k ≤uk ≤umax,k
k ∈N.
(3.10c)
The asssociated gradients are given by
∇ukψ = w1∇ukψL + (1 −w1)∇ukψS, k ∈N,
where ∇ukψL, ∇ukψS, k ∈N are calculated by the adjoint method.
==PAGE:52==
44
Economical Risk Mitigation by Short-term/Long-term Optimization
Short-term NPV Millions [USD]
350
400
450
500
550
600
Long-term NPV Millions [USD]
910
920
930
940
950
960
970
980
990
1000
Representative of the Pareto Front
Weight w 1
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Increase/decrease in %
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Increase/decrease in %
Increase in Short-term NPV
Decrease in Long-term NPV
Figure 3.8: 1) Representative of the Pareto front associated with the short-term
versus long-term optimization problem (3.9). 2) The associated short-
term gains and long-term reductions relative to the base case, w1 = 1.
Generating the Pareto front
The following generates a representative of the Pareto front, by solving the short-
term versus long-term problem (3.9), with N = 6 control steps. The resulting
Pareto front of optimal trade-oﬀs between short-term and long-term proﬁts is
presented in Fig. 3.23. The following comments can be made:
• The generated Pareto optimal solutions, which constitute the representa-
tive of the eﬃcient frontier, are quite evenly distributed over the objective
space and non-dominated in the sense of Deﬁnition 3.1. This indicates
that the representative provides an accurate representation of the true
frontier.
• Signiﬁcant short-term gains stand to be made at the modest cost of only
slightly compromised long-term gains. In particular, short-term proﬁts of
the frontier range between 370.4 million USD and 564 millons USD while
long-term proﬁts remain between 910.2 millon USD and 991.2 millon USD.
• As indicated by the curvature of the Pareto front representative, gains in
short-term proﬁts are accompanied by corresponding reductions in long-
term proﬁts.
This behaviour illustrates the inherent conﬂicts between
==PAGE:53==
3.4 Numerical results
45
the respective objectives. As one could expected, short-term gains and
long-term reductions become more pronounced as w1 decreases, i.e., as
short-term proﬁt, ψS, is attributed more weight. In particular, the choice
of parameter, w1 = 0.1, results in an operating proﬁle which increases the
base case short-term NPV by 52.26% while the long-term proﬁt is reduced
by a mere 8.13%. In constrast, the choice of parameter, w1 = 0.9, provides
a short-term gain of only 3.26%. In turn, the long-term gain is reduced by
just 0.15%.
In general, the results demonstrate a signiﬁcant potential of short-term ver-
sus long-term optimization to increase short-term gains without compromising
long-terms proﬁts in the process. The results thereby support the conclusions of
[LR14]. By this approach, economical risks may therefore be reduced while the
potentially positive eﬀects of long-term predictions are maintained to a reason-
able degree. To what degree, depends on the balance between short-term and
long-term proﬁts, which in turn relies on the Pareto optimal solution in ques-
tion. This suggests the need of an approach to identify the Pareto point, which
provides the optimal trade-oﬀbetween short-term and long-term objectives.
Determining the optimal trade-oﬀsenario
By the deﬁniton of Pareto optimality, all non-dominated points of the represen-
tative frontier, as shown in Fig. 3.23, are equally acceptable solutions. However,
in practice a decision-maker must decide which Pareto optimal solution is prefer-
able with respect to the application in question. For the purpose of economical
risk mitigation, the decision maker must asses which operating proﬁle provides
the optimal balance between short-term and long-term gains, i.e., the best pos-
sible trade-oﬀbetween risk and ﬁnal return.
The decision procedure is often non-trival and complicated due to the non-
linearity of the production optimization problem. The respective Pareto opti-
mal points are generated by linearly varying the weight w1. In constrast, the
gains and reductions in respectively short-term and long-term proﬁts exhibit
highly non-linear behaviour, i.e., the gains in short-term proﬁt are not directly
proportional to the reductions in long-term NPV and vice versa (Fig. 3.9). This
fact complicates the process of locating the most practical Pareto optimal solu-
tion. This thesis suggests to automize the decision procedure by characterizing
trade-oﬀs between short-term and long-term proﬁts in terms of the ratio
RSL = (ψS −ψB
S )2
ψB
L −ψL
= ∆ψ2
S
∆ψL
.
(3.11)
==PAGE:54==
46
Economical Risk Mitigation by Short-term/Long-term Optimization
Weight w 1
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
NPV Millions [USD]
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
Short-term profits
Long-term profits
Weight w 1
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
NPV Millions [USD]
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
Short-term gains
Long-term reductions
Figure 3.9: Ilustration of the highly non-linear dependency of short-term gains and
long-term proﬁt reductions, on the weigth parameter, w1.
Here ψB
S and ψB
L denote respectively the short-term and long-term proﬁts asso-
ciated with the base case.
The motivation for introducing the ratio (3.11) follows by the desire to promote
senarios which result in:
1) High short-term gains, as measured by
∆ψS = ψS −ψB
S .
2) Non-compromised long-term proﬁts, as measured by
∆ψL = ψB
L −ψL.
Also, for the purpose of economical risk mitigation, predicted short-term gains
are more certain and should therefore be prioritized over risky long-term pre-
dicted proﬁts. The ratio (3.11) accounts for this position by the quadratic expo-
nent, which favors signiﬁcant short-term gains. By application of this heuristic
approach to the test case, the market solution corresponds to the Pareto optimal
operating proﬁle associated with w1 = 0.6. (Fig. 3.10). Note how the market
solution appears to encapture the transition from aggressive gains and reduc-
tions to more steady inclines and declines of short-term and long-term proﬁts.
==PAGE:55==
3.4 Numerical results
47
Weigth w 1
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
 Ratio R SL
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
Trade-off ratios
Market solution
Short-term NPV Millions [USD]
350
400
450
500
550
600
Long-term NPV Millions [USD]
900
920
940
960
980
1000
Trade-off senarios
Market solution
Weight w 1
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
NPV Millions [USD]
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
Short-term profits
Long-term profits
Weight w 1
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
NPV Millions [USD]
0
50
100
150
200
Short-term gains
Long-term reductions
Figure 3.10: Illustration and comparison of the market solution to the remaining
Pareto optimal solutions. The green dotted line connects short-term
gains and long-term reductions of the market solution.
Operational mechanisms
To fully exploit the demonstrated potentials of short-term versus long-term op-
timization, one needs an understanding of how inherent conﬂicts and economical
KPIs are tied to the underlying operational proﬁles and mechanisms. To meet
this end, the following investigates operational diﬀerences between strategies
of conventional production optimization and short-term versus long-term opti-
mization. This is done by comparison of the market solution and the base case
long-term senario, w1 = 1. The results are presented in Fig. 3.11.
• Subﬁg.(4,2) shows that the strategy of maximizing long-term proﬁt is fore-
mostly reﬂected by the curtly use of injection wells, which avoids unneces-
sary water injection costs. This is manifested in the sparse use of injector
1 and 2. The result is a slow but steady NPV build-up as illustrated in
Subﬁg.(1,2). The mathematical formulated focus on end-time proﬁt is ex-
pressed by the sudden deployment of all injectors at time = 1200 days
(Subﬁg. (4,2)). As illustrated in Subﬁg.(2,1), this causes an immediate
spike in operational proﬁt which thereby promotes the end-time return.
• By the mathematical formulation of the short-term versus long-term prob-
==PAGE:56==
48
Economical Risk Mitigation by Short-term/Long-term Optimization
time [days]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
USD [Millions]
0
10
20
30
NPV pr. time step
time [days]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
USD [Millions]
0
500
1000
Cumulative NPV
time [days]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
USD [Millions]
0
10
20
Total production profit
time [days]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
USD [Millions]
0
500
1000
Cumulative production profit
time [days]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
USD [Millions]
0
1
Total water injection costs
time [days]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
USD [Millions]
0
50
100
Cumulative water injection costs
Market solution
Long-term strategy
time [days]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
flow rate [m
3/day]
0
1000
Injection schemes: Market solution.
Inj 1
Inj 2
Inj 3
time [days]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
flow rate [m
3/day]
0
1000
Injection schemes: Long-term strategy
Inj 1
Inj 2
Inj 3
Figure 3.11: Comparison of the market solution to the base case long-term strategy.
lem, focus is restricted to maximize proﬁt at two distinct times, tS and
tL, corresponding to ψS and ψL. This formulation is directly reﬂected in
the results, in terms of rather localized gains in operational proﬁts around
the speciﬁed times (Subﬁg.(2,1)). As illustrated by Subﬁg.(4,1), the gains
are seen to be directly associated with transitory but extensive localized
use of injection wells.
In general, the results show that the inherent conﬂict between short-term and
long-term objectives can be understood in terms of the opposing but interde-
pendent economical eﬀects of recovered oil and injected water. In particular, the
objective of increased short-term proﬁt implies initial aggressive use of injection
wells, in order to displace oil immediately. The associated costs accumlate and
impact the cumulative NPV negatively. In the late stages of the reservoir life, in-
jection wells are again aggressively deployed to positively aﬀect long-term proﬁt.
As a result, further water injection costs accumulate, which implies that overall
proﬁt is compromised, compared to strategies that solely focus on long-term
objectives.
==PAGE:57==
3.4 Numerical results
49
Time [days]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
NPV Millions [USD]
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
w1=1
w1=0.6
w1=0.1
Figure 3.12: Comparison of market solution and the extreme case senarios associ-
ated with w1 = 1 and w1 = 0.1, by cumulative NPV.
Conﬂicting objectives - Consequences
By the mathematical formulation, short-term versus long-term optimization fo-
cuses on two objectives in mutual conﬂict, namely ψS and ψL. The previous
analysis suggests that these conﬂicts can be attributed to the opposing econom-
ical eﬀects of recovered oil and injected water. As a result, the inherent conﬂicts
are not restricted to these individual points. This implies that manipulations
which aﬀect ψS and ψL, propagate to aﬀect the NPV at every instant of the
reservoir life, potentially in a negative manner. This is illustrated in Fig. 3.12,
which compares the market solution to the extreme senarios associated with the
weights, w1 = 1 and w1 = 0.1, in terms of cumulative NPV.
• As expected, increased short-term gains entail decreases in long-term gains.
However, it can also be observed that the signiﬁcant short-term gains are
localized around tS and that the gains come at the price of slightly sacri-
ﬁced early times short-term NPVs.
• The tendency to sacriﬁce short-term NPVs prior to ψS, becomes more
pronounced as w1 decreases, i.e., as the short-term proﬁt, ψS, is given
more weight. This is illustrated in Fig. 3.13. For w1 = 0.5, short-term
NPV is increased by 46.31% at time tS, at the cost of a reduced proﬁt by
3.39% at time = 300 days. For w1 = 0.1, the short-term NPV is increased
==PAGE:58==
50
Economical Risk Mitigation by Short-term/Long-term Optimization
Time [days]
0
200
400
600
Increase in %
0
20
40
60
w1=0.9
Time [days]
0
200
400
600
0
20
40
60
w1=0.8
Time [days]
0
200
400
600
0
20
40
60
w1=0.7
Time [days]
0
200
400
600
Increase in %
0
20
40
60
w1=0.6
Time [days]
0
200
400
600
0
20
40
60
w1=0.5
Time [days]
0
200
400
600
0
20
40
60
w1=0.4
Time [days]
0
200
400
600
Increase in %
0
20
40
60
w1=0.3
Time [days]
0
200
400
600
0
20
40
60
w1=0.2
Time [days]
0
200
400
600
0
20
40
60
w1=0.1
Figure 3.13: Illustration of inherent conﬂicts between short-term and long-term
objectives. Percentage increases in short-term gains, relative to the
base case w1 = 1.
by as much as 51.08% whereas proﬁt is in turn reduced by 11.36% at time
= 300 days.
• The signiﬁcant but localized short-term gains imply that even though
earnings are expidited, the process is not initialized immediately. This is
undesirable due to the exceedingly growing uncertainty of oil prices.
• The reasons behind localized proﬁts and the compromised short-term gains
are to be found in the prioritization of the individual objectives. As short-
term proﬁt is attributed more weigth, the use of injection wells become
increasingly centralized around the time tS, to maximally increase ψS.
The local investment of all eﬀort implies signiﬁcant local gains but com-
promises overall recovery. This is illustrated in Fig. 3.14, which compares
the extreme short-term senarios of w1 = 0.1, to the market solution. By
comparison of Subﬁg.(4,1) and Subﬁg.(4,2), it can be seen that the high
short-term gains associated with the extreme strategy come from central-
ized water injections, which in turn imply a postponement of initial- and
late stage oil recovery and as a result, reduced operational proﬁt (Sub-
ﬁg.(1,2)).
In general, the results indicate that inherent conﬂicts are ubiquitous in the
short-term versus long-term optimization problem, i.e., all individual objectives,
==PAGE:59==
3.4 Numerical results
51
time [days]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
USD [Millions]
0
10
20
30
NPV pr. time step
time [days]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
USD [Millions]
0
500
Cumulative NPV
time [days]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
USD [Millions]
0
10
20
Total production profit
time [days]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
USD [Millions]
0
500
1000
Cumulative production profit
time [days]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
USD [Millions]
0
1
2
Total water injection costs
time [days]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
USD [Millions]
0
50
100
Cumulative water injection costs
Market solution
Short-term strategy (w1=0.1)
time [days]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
flow rate [m
3/day]
0
1000
Injection schemes: Market solution
Inj 1
Inj 2
Inj 3
time [days]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
flow rate [m
3/day]
0
1000
Injection schemes: Short-term strategy (w1=0.1)
Inj 1
Inj 2
Inj 3
Figure 3.14: Comparison of the market solution to the extreme short-term
case, w1 = 0.1.
ψ(t), t0 ≤t ≤tf, are interconnected. The approach of balancing short-term
and long-term objectives, by consideration of a concrete pair of NPVs (ψS, ψL),
may therefore implicitly impact other unaddressed objectives unintentionally
and negatively. The negative eﬀects seemingly grow as individual objectives
are heavily favored. The cause is bound to centralization of water injections,
which results in localized gains. These issues are naturally mitigated by ap-
propriately balancing long-term and short-term objectives by, e.g., the market
solution which provides a more evenly distributed water injection strategy. As
a result, the negative eﬀects are primarily restricted to unbalanced conﬂicting
objectives. The issues are therefore minor as compared to the signiﬁcant gains
which short-term versus long-term NPV stands to provide.
The eﬀects of an increased number of controls
The introduction of short-term versus long-term optimization has been moti-
vated by the presence of redundant degrees of freedom (DOFs), tied to the
controls, which allow for simultaneous optimization of multiple conﬂicting ob-
jectives. It therefore becomes natural to ask whether an increased number of
controls implies more DOFs and thereby improved performance of the optimiza-
tion scheme. By numerical experiments, the following seeks to uncover if such
==PAGE:60==
52
Economical Risk Mitigation by Short-term/Long-term Optimization
Short-term NPV Millions [USD]
350
400
450
500
550
600
Long-term NPV Millions [USD]
850
900
950
1000
1050 Representatives of the Pareto fronts for varying number of controls
 N=3
 N=6
N=15
N=30
N=60
Reactive strategy
Figure 3.15: Pareto front representatives for a varying number of controls.
The
short-term gain from Reactive control is indicated by the dotted blue
line.
a correlation exists by investigation of how the number of controls eﬀect the
performance of short-term versus long-term optimization.
To meet this end, the short-term versus long-term optimization problems (3.10)
are solved for N ∈{3, 6, 15, 30, 60}. The associated Pareto optimal frontiers are
presented in Fig. 3.15. The results are further elaborated in Fig. 3.17. The
following comments can be made:
• As the number of controls increases, respectively maximal and minimal
short-term and long-term proﬁts improve gradually. This is reﬂected in
the visual prolongation and straightening of the respective Pareto front
representatives(Fig.ﬁg:EﬀectsOfControls).
• As illustrated in Fig. 3.18, maximal short-term proﬁt improves from 560.6
million USD to 588.7 million USD, i.e., an increase of 5.01%. Maximal
long-term proﬁt improves form 987.1 million USD to 1025 million USD,
which corresponds to an increase of 3.84%. The minimal short-term NPV
is increased by 3.92%, whereas the minimal NPV is increased by as much
as 13.59%. The main beneﬁt from increasing the number of controls is
therefore not substantiate additional proﬁt, but rather an increasingly
==PAGE:61==
3.4 Numerical results
53
Time [days]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
NPV Millions [USD]
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
Market solutions
N=6
N=15
N=60
Figure 3.16: Market solutions, for a diﬀerent number of controls, compared in
terms of NPV.
improved ability to promote short-term gains without compromising long-
term proﬁts in the process. Rephrased, an increased number of controls
improves the overall balance between short-term and long term objectives.
• As demonstrated in Fig. 3.18, the positive eﬀects of increased short-term
and long-term gains, are more pronounced for low numbers of controls and
gradually phase out as N increases. Due to the additional computational
eﬀort, this observation suggests that it may not be productive to choose
N unnecessarily large. For the test case, the experiments suggest that
N = 30 is optimal. In particular no signiﬁcant gains stand to made from
increasing the number of controls further.
• The positive eﬀects on the balance between short-term and long-term ob-
jectives, which come form increasing the number of controls, are directly
tied to the enhanced ﬂexibility of the water injection schemes. This is
illustrated in Fig. 3.18, which compares the market solutions for N = 6
and N = 60.
It can be seen that proﬁts remain localized around the
times tS and tL (Subﬁg.(2,1)) , however, the increased ﬂexibility associ-
ated with N = 60 controls, provides better regulation of water injections
(Subﬁg.(4,2)) and thereby the associated costs. The result is an improved
balance between accumlated costs and operational proﬁts, which in turn
implies an improved end-time return. This explains why increasing the
==PAGE:62==
54
Economical Risk Mitigation by Short-term/Long-term Optimization
Short-term NPV Millions [USD]
350
400
450
500
550
600
Long-term NPV Millions [USD]
850
900
950
1000
1050
Representatives of the Pareto fronts for varying number of controls
N=3 , MS: w_1=0.7
N=6 , MS: w_1=0.6
N=15, MS: w_1=0.8
N=30, MS: w_1=0.7
N=60, MS: w_1=0.7
N
3
6
15
30
60
Increase/decrease in %
0
20
40
60
Increase/decrease in %. Base case: Reactive control
N
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
NPV Millions [USD]
980
1000
1020
1040
Maximal long-term profit
N
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
NPV Millions [USD]
850
900
950
1000
Minimal long-term profit
N
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
NPV Millions [USD]
560
570
580
590
Maximal short-term profit
N
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
NPV Millions [USD]
360
370
380
390
Minimal short-term profit
Figure 3.17: Data representing eﬀects on short-term versus long-term optimization
by an increased number of controls. Heuristically determined market
solutions are indicated by blue diamonds.
number of controls primarily improves long-term gains.
• The delocalization of water injections also positively aﬀects short-term
gains. This is illustrated in Fig. 3.19. The improved regulation of water
injections implies that more oil is produced in the early stages of recovery
(Fig. 3.18). Therefore, the negative eﬀects of conﬂicting objectives are
implicitly mitigated by increasing the number of controls.
In general, the results indicate that an increased number of controls has various
positive eﬀects, including improved proﬁts, better balance between short-term
and long-term gains as well as mitigation of issues related to conﬂicting objec-
tives. The eﬀects are tied to the increased ﬂexibility to regulate water injections,
which comes with the increased number of controls. The beneﬁts are however
not proportional to N. To maintain computational eﬃciency the number of
controls should therefore not be chosen too large.
==PAGE:63==
3.4 Numerical results
55
time [days]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
USD [Millions]
0
10
20
30
NPV pr. time step
time [days]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
USD [Millions]
0
500
Cumulative NPV
time [days]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
USD [Millions]
0
10
20
Total production profit
time [days]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
USD [Millions]
0
500
1000
Cumulative production profit
Market solution N=6
Market solution N=60
time [days]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
USD [Millions]
0
1
2
Total water injection costs
time [days]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
USD [Millions]
0
50
100
Cumulative water injection costs
time [days]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
flow rate [m
3/day]
0
1000
Injection schemes: Market solution N=6
Inj 1
Inj 2
Inj 3
time [days]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
flow rate [m
3/day]
0
1000
Injection schemes: Market solution N=60
Inj 1
Inj 2
Inj 3
Figure 3.18: Comparison of market solutions for number of controls pr. well
N = 6 and for N = 60.
Comparison to Reactive control
The numerical results show that for each N, there exists Pareto optimal solutions
which outperform the conventional reactive strategy in terms of long-term as
well as short-term gains. This is indicated by the dotted blue line in Fig. 3.15.
As the number of controls increases, more Pareto optimal solutions become
competitively superior and the positive eﬀects become more pronounced (Fig.
3.17). In particular, for N = 3 the short-term proﬁt is increased by a mere
2.91% whereas N = 60 results in a 8.1% increase as compared to Reactive
control. Long-term gains are increased by respectively 30.67% and 48.42%.
By deploying injection wells at maximum capacity, Reactive control represents
the optimal strategy for fast oil recovery. The fact that several Pareto optimal
trade-oﬀs result in higher short-term gains is therefore rather remarkable. The
explanation is to be found in the localized water injections of short-term versus
long-term strategies. This is illustrated in Fig. 3.20.
• The full deployment of injectors implies that the Reactive strategy pro-
vides immediate operational proﬁt (Subﬁg.(2,1)). This stands in constrast
to the market solution for which aggressive water injections are postponed
==PAGE:64==
56
Economical Risk Mitigation by Short-term/Long-term Optimization
Time [days]
0
200
400
600
Increase in %
0
20
40
60
w1=0.9
Time [days]
0
200
400
600
0
20
40
60
w1=0.8
Time [days]
0
200
400
600
0
20
40
60
w1=0.7
Time [days]
0
200
400
600
Increase in %
0
20
40
60
w1=0.6
Time [days]
0
200
400
600
0
20
40
60
w1=0.5
Time [days]
0
200
400
600
0
20
40
60
w1=0.4
Time [days]
0
200
400
600
Increase in %
0
20
40
60
w1=0.3
Time [days]
0
200
400
600
0
20
40
60
w1=0.2
Time [days]
0
200
400
600
0
20
40
60
w1=0.1
Figure 3.19: Percentage short-term gains with respect to the base case senarios.
The issues of compromised short-term gains are mitigated as the num-
ber of controls increases.
and localized to the short-term time node, tS. (Subﬁg.(4,1)). As a result,
the accumulated water injection costs are signiﬁcantly lower for the mar-
ket solution as compared to the Reactive strategy (Subﬁg.(3,2)). As time
tS is reached, the overall proﬁt associated with the market solution is
therefore higher than the operational proﬁts of Reactive control, which
are encumbered by the accumulated excessive costs of water injections.
The above analysis suggests that it may be misleading to claim that short-term
versus long-term strategies outperform Reactive control in terms of short-term
gains. The misconception is tied to the mathematical formulation of the short-
term versus long-term optimization, by which it is convenient to measure short-
term gains in terms of ψS. The localized use of injections wells concentrate gains
around tS such that ψS surpasses the Reactive control at this particular point in
time. The postponed deployment of injectors however implies that the Reactive
strategy increases overall short-term gains much more eﬀectively, which from the
veiw point of economical risk mitigation is more attractive. Short-term versus
long-term optimization however remains a valuable and necessary alternative
due to the tendency of Reactive control to severely compromise long-term gains
(Subﬁg.(1,2)).
==PAGE:65==
3.4 Numerical results
57
time [days]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
USD [Millions]
0
10
20
30
NPV pr. time step
time [days]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
USD [Millions]
0
500
Cumulative NPV
time [days]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
USD [Millions]
0
10
20
Total production profit
time [days]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
USD [Millions]
0
500
1000
Cumulative production profit
time [days]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
USD [Millions]
0
1
2
Total water injection costs
time [days]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
USD [Millions]
0
100
Cumulative water injection costs
Market solution N=6
Reactive strategy
time [days]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
flow rate [m
3/day]
0
1000
Injection schemes: Market solution N=6
Inj 1
Inj 2
Inj 3
time [days]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
flow rate [m
3/day]
0
1000
Injection schemes: Reactive control
Inj 1
Inj 2
Inj 3
Figure 3.20: Comparison of the market solution for N = 6 to Reactive control.
Shortcomings of Short-term versus Long-term optimization
The presented numerical results have demonstrated a signiﬁcant potential of
short-term versus long-term optimization to mitigate the risks associated with
economical uncertainty by balancing short-term and long-term proﬁts.
The
procedure is however not without shortcomings.
The following alerts to the
most severe cases and discusses potential means of mitigation.
Issues of computational eﬀort
For the purpose of production optimization, a posteriori MOO methods are com-
putationally expensive due to the multiple optimization runs needed to generate
a representative of the Pareto front. In the case of short-term versus long-term
optimization, this issue is mitigated by the assumption of known geological pa-
rameters. This implies that the optimizations may be run in parallel, which in
turn reduces computational times.
To illustrate the issues of computational eﬀort and the positive eﬀects of par-
allelization, the following presents computational times, function counts (FCs)
and Conjugate Gradient iterations (CGIs) associated with generating the rep-
resentative of the Pareto front with N = 60. Data on FCs and CGIs is acquired
==PAGE:66==
58
Economical Risk Mitigation by Short-term/Long-term Optimization
from the output of fmincon, whereas computational times are measured using
MATLABs built-in tic, toc functions. Fig. 3.21 presents the results.
• Fig. 3.21 compares computational performance, where the optimizations
have been run in parallel. Overall, computational times are similar for
all optimizations with an avarage time of approximately 74 min.
The
results however indicate a correlation between increased computational
eﬀort and weigths which favor both objectives equally. This is reﬂected
in an increased number of function evaluations and Conjugate Gradient
iterations. An interpretation of this observation may be that the conﬂict
between the objectives complicate the optimization.
• Fig. 3.22 compares the avarage computational time of the parallelization
procedure to the time it takes to run all optimizations successively by
means of a for-loop. In accordance with the number of weights, the com-
putational time is increased by almost a factor of 10. The reason that
the time is slightly less than the sum of all times obtained from the par-
allelization procedure is likely due to time-consuming management and
distribution of memory among workers on the respective cores.
In general, the results demonstrate that MOO a posteriori methods are com-
putationally expensive and relies on parallerization to ensure reasonable com-
putational times. This issue becomes far more pronounced in real-life senarios
where the state dimensions of reservoir models are considerably larger.
Issues of an increased number of controls
The highly non-linear nature of reservoir simulation often complicates the op-
timization procedure severely. The diﬃculties become particularly pronounced
as the number of controls increases and the objective space expands accord-
ingly. Generating a representative of the Pareto front is an example of such an
issue. This is exempliﬁed in Fig. 3.23, which depicts the inital Pareto front
representative following the optimization procedure (3.10) with N = 30.
Even though signiﬁcant short-term gains are acheived as compared to the base
case w1 = 1, it is clear that the depicted curve does not provide a satisfactorily
accurate representation of the Pareto front, i.e., not all solutions represent op-
timal trade-oﬀsenarios. This is reﬂected in the fact that several of the optimal
Pareto points are dominated in the sense of Deﬁnition 3.1. The reason is that
methods designed to solve the highly non-linear problem (3.10) may result in
only locally Pareto optimal solution (Deﬁnition 3.4). Inspired by [Aac15], the
==PAGE:67==
3.4 Numerical results
59
w1=1
w1=0.9
w1=0.8
w1=0.7
w1=0.6
w1=0.5
w1=0.4
w1=0.3
w1=0.2
w1=0.1
Time [min]
0
20
40
60
80
100
Min: 72.058
Min: 74.0616
Min: 72.1561
Min: 73.4622
Min: 74.2961
Min: 75.6147
Min: 78.054
Min: 74.2344
Min: 73.1332
Min: 72.9014
Computational times
Computational times
Average time=73.9972 min
w1=1
w1=0.9
w1=0.8
w1=0.7
w1=0.6
w1=0.5
w1=0.4
w1=0.3
w1=0.2
w1=0.1
Func. counts
0
20
40
60
80
FCs: 50
FCs: 57
FCs: 63
FCs: 57
FCs: 63
FCs: 69
FCs: 73
FCs: 63
FCs: 63
FCs: 57
Function Evaluations
Func. counts
Average count=61.5
w1=1
w1=0.9
w1=0.8
w1=0.7
w1=0.6
w1=0.5
w1=0.4
w1=0.3
w1=0.2
w1=0.1
CG Iterations
0
100
200
300
CGIs: 24
CGIs: 15
CGIs: 18
CGIs: 42
CGIs: 72
CGIs: 273
CGIs: 108
CGIs: 24
CGIs: 24
CGIs: 9
Conugate Gradient iterations
CG iterations
Average CG iterations=60.9
Figure 3.21: Cumulative Distribution functions (CDFs).
Avg. comp. time
Comp. time without par.
Time [min]
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
Min: 73.9972
Min: 732.5415
Comparison of computational times with and without parallelization
Figure 3.22: Cumulative Distribution functions (CDFs).
==PAGE:68==
60
Economical Risk Mitigation by Short-term/Long-term Optimization
Short-term NPV Millions [USD]
350
400
450
500
550
600
650
Long-term NPV Millions [USD]
940
950
960
970
980
990
1000
1010
1020
1030
Initial Representative of the Pareto Front
Figure 3.23: Initial representative of the Pareto front associated with short-term
versus long-term optimization problem (3.9) for N = 30. The repre-
sentation is inaccurate due to the presence of locally pareto optimal
points.
following proposes an approach to improve the Pareto front representative by
successively replacing dominated Pareto points:
• For each ﬁxed weigth w1, dominated Pareto points are located by calcu-
lating
ψSV L = w1ψL(uλ) + (1 −w1)ψS(uλ),
(3.12)
for every Pareto optimal operating proﬁle uλ. Provided that (3.12) results
in a larger objective value for some λd ̸= w1, it follows that uw1 is domi-
nated by uλd. In the concrete test case, the only non-dominated point is
u0.3 (Fig. 3.24).
• For each ﬁxed weigth w1, the optimization procedure (3.10) is repeated,
where the dominating operating proﬁle, uλd, is used as an updated starting
guess for the optimization algorithm.
Repeated use of the outlined procedure provides an ongoingly smoothing of
the Pareto front representative by exhaustion of dominated Pareto points. The
procedure is ended when only non-dominated points remain, i.e., when the trade-
oﬀsenarios are mutually Pareto optimal. Fig. 3.25 presents the result. The
==PAGE:69==
3.4 Numerical results
61
Weights
0
0.5
1
Obj. val Millons [USD]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
w1=1
Weights
0
0.5
1
0
200
400
600
800
1000
w1=0.9
Weights
0
0.5
1
0
200
400
600
800
1000
w1=0.8
Weights
0
0.5
1
0
200
400
600
800
1000
w1=0.7
Weights
0
0.5
1
0
200
400
600
800
1000
w1=0.6
Weights
0
0.5
1
Obj. val Millons [USD]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
w1=0.5
Weights
0
0.5
1
0
200
400
600
800
1000
w1=0.4
Weights
0
0.5
1
0
200
400
600
800
1000
w1=0.3
Weights
0
0.5
1
0
200
400
600
800
1000
w1=0.2
Weights
0
0.5
1
0
200
400
600
800
1000
w1=0.1
Obj. values
Dominating obj. value
Pareto value found by optimization
Figure 3.24: Illustration of the inherent conﬂict between short-term and long-
term objectives.
Short-term NPV Millions [USD]
350
400
450
500
550
600
650
Long-term NPV Millions [USD]
940
950
960
970
980
990
1000
1010
1020
1030
Improved Representative of the Pareto Front
Figure 3.25: Improved representative of the Pareto front associated with short-term
versus long-term optimization problem (3.9) for N = 30.
==PAGE:70==
62
Economical Risk Mitigation by Short-term/Long-term Optimization
overall shape of the representative is greatly improved, which reﬂect a more
accurate representation of the true Pareto frontier. As a drawback, the non-
linearty of the problem implies that the Pareto points are localized to centain
parts of the Pareto front. Also, the procedure is computationally expensive due
to its reliance on additional optimization runs.
3.5
Summary and conclusions
By the underlying mathematical formulation, conventional production optimiza-
tion methods solely focus on long-term proﬁts. As a major drawback, long-term
predictions become highly unreliable due to the time-dependent and exceedingly
growing uncertainty of oil prices. Further, as a consequence of inherent conﬂicts
between objectives, the focus on long-term proﬁt implies that short-term rev-
enue is compromised. Conventional production optimization methods therefore
leave the oil production subject to substantial economical risk. Consequently,
operating companies are reluctant to adopt methods of model-based production
optimization.
Based on a study of the recent research paper [LR14], this chapter has presented
theoretical and practical aspects of multi-objective optimization, in order to in-
vestigate and asses the state-of-the-art short-term versus long-term optimization
problem, as a tool for economical risk mitigation for open-loop production op-
timization.
The following summarizes the main conclusions of the numerical case studies:
• Short-term versus long-term optimization has a signiﬁcant potential to
mitigate economical risks by its ability to balance short-term and long-
term proﬁts.
The best results demonstrated a short-term increase of
52.26%, while the long-term proﬁt was reduced by a mere 8.13%, as com-
pared to conventional production optimization. The results support the
research [LR14], which reﬂects the same overall tendency, namely that
short-term gains may be improved signiﬁcantly with only slight reduc-
tions of long-term proﬁts as a consequence.
• Short-term versus long-term optimization proved positively correlated to
an increased number of controls. Compared to the lowest number of con-
trols with N = 3, maximal short-term and long term proﬁts were increased
by respectively 5.01% and 3.84% while mininal short-term and long-term
proﬁts were improved by 3.93% and 13.59% in the case of N = 60. The
==PAGE:71==
3.5 Summary and conclusions
63
main beneﬁt from increasing the number of controls is therefore not sub-
stantial additional proﬁt but rather an improved balance between short-
term and long term objectives.
• The positive eﬀects of an increased number of control did not prove di-
rectly proportional to the number of controls. Relative to the increased
computational eﬀort, a large number of controls may therefore be ineﬃ-
cient. Further, an increased number of controls showed to complicate the
optimization procedure. Such issues were mitigated by successively re-
placing dominated Pareto points. As a drawback, this procedure requires
multiple additional optimization runs and is therefore computationally ex-
pensive.
• Several Pareto optimal solutions were capable of outperforming Reactive
control in terms of short-term and long-term gains, as measured by ψS
and ψL. The best results improved short-term gains by 8.1% and long-
term gains by 48.42%. However, in general, Reactive control proved to
provide higher short-term gains prioir to tS, i.e., faster expedited proﬁt.
From the point of veiw of economical risk mitigation, it is therefore inade-
quate to claim that short-term versus long-term optimization outperforms
Reactive control. Short-term versus long-term optimization however re-
mains justiﬁed by it’s superior ability to trade-oﬀshort-term and long-term
proﬁts.
Overall, the results demonstrate that short-term versus long-term optimization
has a signiﬁcant potential to mitigate economical risk by improving the balance
between short-term and long-term proﬁts, as compared to conventional produc-
tion optimization and Reactive control. However, severe drawbacks include the
following:
• Short-term versus long-term optimization relies on the computationally
demanding process of generating a representative of the Pareto front. Due
to the assumption of a single common permeability ﬁeld, computational
times can be improved by running the involved optimizations in parallel
on a suitable multi-core processor.
However, this is no longer possible
when multiple geological realization are considered.
Consequently, the
procedure is unsuitable for handling of geological uncertaintes.
• The optimization process involves tuning of a user-specifed set of weights,
which due to non-linearity of the problem, may turn out to be a non-trival
aﬀair.
• The mathematical formulation of the short-term versus long-term opti-
mization implies that focus is restricted to the objectives ψS and ψL. This
==PAGE:72==
64
Economical Risk Mitigation by Short-term/Long-term Optimization
results is in rather localized short-term and long-term gains around tS
and tL. As a result, expedition of proﬁt is delayed. From the point of veiw
of economical risk mitigation, this is undesirable due to the exceedingly
growing uncertainty of oil prices.
In conclusion, in spite of the ability to improve the balance between long-term
and short-term proﬁts, short-term versus long-term optimization is challenged
by its computationally expensive nature as an a posteriori MOO method. This
fact also challenges modiﬁcations of the approach to include multiple geological
senarios since parallelization becomes unavailable. The method is therefore unﬁt
for mitigation of geological uncertainties and leaves the oil production subject
to substantial risk.
==PAGE:73==
Chapter 4
Geological Risk Mitigation
by Ensemble-based
Optimization
The following chapter provides an investigation and survey of the most prevalent
geological risk mitigation strategies of the oil literature. Focus is directed at
popular ensemble-based methods, including Certainty-Equivalence optimization
(CE), Robust optimization (RO), Mean-Variance optimization (MVO) and the
recently introduced method of Conditional value-at-risk optimization (CVaRO).
Based on a study of the research papers [VEZVdH+09], [CSFJ13] and [CSFJ15],
the methods are discussed in terms of origins, use and shortcomings. Further,
by a series of numerical experiments, the methods are mutually compared and
assesed relative to nominal optimization (NO) and Reactive control (RC). Issues
related to the short-term versus long-term optimization problem are presented
and discussed.
==PAGE:74==
66
Geological Risk Mitigation by Ensemble-based Optimization
4.1
Production optimization under geological un-
certainty
The profound geological and petro-physical uncertainties associated with reser-
voir simulation imply that there exists a large variety of possible mathematical
models, which from a probabilistic point of veiw, may all represent the available
reservoir data equally well. Methods of conventional production optimization
neglect the presence of such uncertainties by the implicit assumption of known
model-parameters, i.e., only a single geological senario is considered in the mod-
elling process. As a consequence, the resulting mathematical model risks being
a poor approximation of the true reservoir and the simulated predictions can
therefore be highly inaccurate. In turn, this implies that the optimization pro-
cess results in suboptimal operating proﬁles which renders the approach unreli-
able and questionable from an application-related point of veiw. Under geolog-
ical uncertainty, the risks of erroneous model-based predictions simply become
too great for stakeholders to include the technology into their operations.
To fully appreciate the negative eﬀects of the pronounced risks which come
from neglecting multiple geological senarios, the optimal long-term strategy for
N = 60, computed in Chapter 3, is applied to 24 diﬀerent, however equally
propable geological senarios. The aim is to asses reliability of the scheme, i.e.,
investigate sensitivity of the optimal operating proﬁle to geological uncertainty.
The results are presented in Fig 4.1.
• The ﬁrst illustration compares the NPV of the optimal long-term strategy
(blue curve) to the expected return over all 24 geological senarios. The
shaded red area illustrates one standard deviation. The expected return
amounts to 690 million USD whereas the long-term strategy promises a
proﬁt of 1025 million USD. This single case proﬁt deﬂects by approxi-
mately two standard deviations from the mean, i.e., given geological un-
certainty, it is very unlikely that the long-term predictions are reliable.
• The above observation is substantiated by the second illustration which
shows the development of standard deviation over time. Increment oc-
curs rapidly, by 1800 days a standard deviation of 200 million USD is
reached. As a result, the geological uncertainty causes a substantial risk
of uncommercially low returns, in the magnitude of 490 million USD and
below.
• The risk of low returns is consolidated by the third illustration which
shows the estimated probability distribution function of the NPV, over
all possible geological senarios. The dotted red line indicates the mean
value, whereas the dotted blue line indicates the NPV associated with the
==PAGE:75==
4.2 Ensemble-based optimization
67
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
Millons [US Dollars]
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
Exp. Return
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
Millons [US Dollars]
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
Standard Deviation
NPV [Millon USD]
0
500
1000
1500
PDF
Time= 1800 days
Figure 4.1: Illustration of the negative eﬀects related to model-based predictions
which comes from neglectance of geological uncertainty.
base case strategy. The large width of the bell curve shows signiﬁcant
risks of low returns. Also, the small area enclosed by the dotted blue line
and the bell curve illustrates the minimal chance of getting high returns
in the magnitude of 1000 millon USD and above. The credibility of the
model-based predicted return is therefore greatly compromised in the face
of geological uncertainty and can not be trusted.
The above example demonstrates that if the geological model is subject to un-
certainty, then the alleged optimal operating proﬁle is in reality greatly im-
paired and the predicted results can be highly misleading. As a consequence,
the neglectance of geologically founded risks comes as a major drawback and
constitute a great challenge to the recognition of reservoir rimulation and pro-
duction optimization as credible tools for oil reservoir management. In order to
address this challenge, the literature has proposed a broad range of initiatives
which seeks to mitigate inherent geological risks. The far majority of such ap-
proaches are based on the fundamental idea of ensemble-based optimization, see
e.g. [VEZVdH+09], [CSFJ13] and [CSFJ15].
4.2
Ensemble-based optimization
Ensemble-based optimization seeks to represent the true reservoir conditions
in terms of Data Assimilation ([Cap13]).
Based on collected geological intel
such as seismic data, core samples, and borehole logs, a sample set of equally
probable simulation parameters are estimated by the Ensemble Kalman Filter
==PAGE:76==
68
Geological Risk Mitigation by Ensemble-based Optimization
(EnKF) ([Cap13]). The EnKF is a Monte-Carlo implementation of the tradi-
tional Kalman ﬁlter which results in nd ∈N samples θi, i = 1, ..., nd. Together
the samples constitute an ensemble
θnd = {θ1, θ2, ..., θnd} = {θi}nd
i=1.
(4.1)
The ensemble, θnd, can be considered as possible realizations of the stochastic
variable θ, i.e., each set of simulation parameters, θi, 1 ≤i ≤nd, represents one
of several equiprobable geological senarios.
Following widely used conventions of the oil literature, the work of this thesis
assumes that the geological uncertainties are related only to the reservoir per-
meability ﬁeld, i.e., possibly uncertain porosity and initial states are neglected.
The possible geological senarios are represented by an ensemble of 24 equiprob-
able permeability ﬁelds, θi, 1 ≤i ≤nd = 24. (Fig. 4.2). The realizations were
ﬁrst introduced in [CSFJ13] and have later been used in [CSFJ15] and [Aac15].
It is noted that the ﬁelds are relatively heterogeneous with values in the range
from 10mD to 2050 mD. The permeability ﬁelds can be found on the enclosed
USB drive in the ﬁle PermEns.mat, with indices i ∈{1, 2, ..., 24}.
 
 
Low
Medium
High
Figure 4.2: Ensemble of nd = 24 permeability realizations. The permeability ranges
from 10 mD to 2050 mD.
==PAGE:77==
4.3 Ensemble-based strategies
69
Problem formulation and methods
The stochastic nature of the simulation parameters, θ, implies that the single-
shooting objective function ψ = ψ(u; bx0, θ), becomes stochastic. This in turn
renders the optimization problem of interest (4.2), ill-deﬁned.
max
u∈RN·nu
ψ = ψ(u; bx0, θ)
(4.2)
s.t.
umin,k ≤uk ≤umax,k, k ∈N.
This should be understood in the sense that the objective function, ψ(u; bx0, θ),
may take several diﬀerent, however equally acceptable values. In particular, for
each given realization θi, one has the equiprobable outcomes
ψi = ψ(u; bx0, θi), 1 ≤i ≤nd.
(4.3)
The oil literature oﬀers several well-deﬁned formulations based on diﬀerent vari-
ations of (4.2). The associated methods are based on scalarization and account
for uncertainties tailored to the simulation parameters, θ, in terms of diﬀerent
estimated risk measures related to the ensemble of realizations, (4.3). The most
prevalent ensemble-based methods include Certainty-Equivalence optimization
(CE), Robust optimization (RO), Mean-Variance optimization (MVO) and as a
newcomer, Conditional Value-at-Risk optimization (CVaRO).
4.3
Ensemble-based strategies
Certainty-Equivalence optimization
Certainty-Equivalence optimization (CE) treats the inherent parameter uncer-
tainties by maximizing the NPV with respect to the sample estimated mean, bθ,
which is deﬁned by
bθ = 1
nd
nd
X
i=1
θi.
The single-shooting problem formulation therefore becomes
max
u∈RN·nu
ψ = ψ

u; bx0, bθ

s.t.
umin,k ≤uk ≤umax,k, k ∈N.
(4.4)
By maximizing the NPV over the mean permeability ﬁeld, the method seeks to
account for all possible realizations and thereby increase the overall expected
==PAGE:78==
70
Geological Risk Mitigation by Ensemble-based Optimization
NPV Millions [USD]
PDF
 
 
NO
CE
Figure 4.3: Conceptual drawing of a typical CE probability distributions function.
Relative to NO, CE increases expected return while standard deviation
remains unaﬀected.
return, Eθ[ψ].
A typical CE probability distributions function illustrated in
Fig. 4.3. The main advantage of CE optimization is that only a single geo-
logical realization, bθ, is needed to evaluate the objective function, ψ, and its
gradients, ∇ukψ, k ∈N.
As compared to conventional methods of produc-
tion optimization, no additional computational eﬀort is therefore required. The
method however suﬀers several drawbacks:
• Often the mean permeability ﬁeld fails to capture channel structures which
accurately reﬂect the geology of the ensemble. This questions applicability.
• The non-linearity of the objective function implies that
ψ

u; bx0, bθ

̸= Eθ[ψ].
In general, it can therefore not be expected that the optimal operating
proﬁl, u∗∈RN·nu, associated with (4.4), will maximize the expected
return over the ensemble, θnd.
• Risks are not directly addressed. In general, CE optimization only man-
ages to increase expected return, whereas the standard deviation remains
large, i.e., the predictions of the method can be associated with great risk.
This is illustrated in Fig. 4.3.
==PAGE:79==
4.3 Ensemble-based strategies
71
Robust optimization
Robust optimization (RO) was initially introduced by [VEZVdH+09]. As indi-
cated by its name, the method seeks to provide a more robust or risk-oriented
alternative to existing methods. As opposed to, e.g., CE optimization, which
treats expected return indirectly in terms of the mean permeability ﬁeld, bθ, RO
seeks to mitigate geological risks directly by maximizing the expected return
over the ensemble of realizations, ψi, 1 ≤i ≤nd. The RO problem formulation
therefore becomes
max
u∈RN·nu
ψ = ψRO (u; bx0, θnd)
s.t.
umin,k ≤uk ≤umax,k, k ∈N,
(4.5)
where the objective function is given by the sampled estimated mean
ψRO := 1
nd
nd
X
i=1
ψi.
The associated gradients are given by
∇ukψRO = 1
nd
nd
X
i=1
∇ukψi, k ∈N.
By using all available information, i.e., taking each geological senario into ac-
count, the aspiration of RO is to increase each individual NPV, ψi, simultane-
ously and thereby lowering the risk of low returns as well as promoting high
NPVs in the process. Fig. 4.4 illustrates a typical RO probability distributions
function. The illustration also exempliﬁes that methods, which seek to lower
risks in terms of reduced standard deviation, have a tendency to provide slightly
lowered expected returns, as compared to non-robust approaches.
By explicitly addressing the expected return of the ensemble, RO avoids the
issues of CE optimization, which are caused by non-linearity.
However, the
method is challenged on various fronts:
• The method involves a signiﬁcant amount of additional computations.
In particular, every function evaluation of the optimization algorithm in
question, involves calculation of the NPV, ψi, and its gradient, ∇ukψi, for
all 1 ≤i ≤nd. This implies that for every function call, RO requires a
total number nd equivalent simulation runs and nd adjoint calculations.
Computational eﬀort is therefore greatly increased relative to methods of
conventional production optimization.
==PAGE:80==
72
Geological Risk Mitigation by Ensemble-based Optimization
NPV Millions [USD]
PDF
 
 
RO
CE
Figure 4.4: Conceptual Drawing of a typical RO probability distributions function.
• The method only focuses on increased expected return and therefore fails
to account for risks of low realizations directly, i.e., the variance of the
ensemble (4.3) is altogether neglected. As a conseqeunce, RO has been
criticized for providing a poor handling of geological risks ([CSFJ15]).
It should be noted that the additional calculations related to each realization, ψi,
are mutually independent. These may therefore be conducted in parallel on any
suitable multi-core processor, i.e., although additional computational capacity
is required, computational times are comparable with methods of conventional
production optimization. More details will be given in Section 4.4.
Mean-Variance optimization
Mean-Variance optimization has been introduced by respectively [BCW05] and
[CSFJ15]. The method aims to remedy the insuﬃciencies of RO by directly
addressing risks in terms of the sample estimated variance
ψV = ψ2
σ =
1
nd −1
nd
X
i=1
(ψi −ψRO)2.
For this purpose a bicriteria objective function, which depends on a user-speciﬁed
parameter, λ, is introduced
ψMV O := ψRO −λψV .
(4.6)
==PAGE:81==
4.3 Ensemble-based strategies
73
NPV Millions [USD]
PDF
 
 
MVO
RO
(a) Conceptual drawing of MVO
NPV Millions [USD]
PDF
 
 
MVO
RO
(b) Conceptual drawing of pitfalls of MVO
Figure 4.5: Conceptual drawing of typical MVO probability distributions functions.
Each choice of the parameter, λ, results in a trade-oﬀbetween return and risk.
The MVO problem formulation becomes
max
u∈RN·nu
ψ = ψMV O (u; bx0, θnd)
s.t.
umin,k ≤uk ≤umax,k, k ∈N.
(4.7)
The associated gradients are given by
∇ukψMV O =
2
nd −1
nd
X
i=1
(ψi −bψ)∇ukψi, k ∈N.
Note that (4.7) can be associated with the MOO problem
max
u∈RN·nu
(ψRO(u; bx0, θnd), −ψV (u; bx0, θnd))
s.t.
umin,k ≤uk ≤umax,k,
k ∈N.
(4.8)
In particular, the objective function, ψMV O (4.6), corresponds exactly to a
weighted sum method, where each choice of the parameter, λ, results in a Pareto
optimal solution of (4.8), i.e., a trade-oﬀbetween risk and return. The solution
which provides the optimal ratio between expected return and risk, as measured
by the modiﬁed Sharpe Ratio S = ψRO
ψσ , where risk free assets have zero yield, is
considered optimal and denoted the market solution (MS) [CSFJ15]. Fig. 4.5a
depicts the basic idea of MVO.
Note also that RO can be considered as a special case of MVO with λ := 0.
By direct involvement of risk in terms of variance, MVO manages to successfully
remedy issues of CE and RO. However, MVO still faces a series of challenging
shortcomings:
==PAGE:82==
74
Geological Risk Mitigation by Ensemble-based Optimization
• For a ﬁxed choice of the parameter λ, the calculations related to each
individual geological realization may be conducted in parallel. However,
unless multi level parallelism is available, multiple optimization runs are
needed to locate the MS. In particular, for each value of the parameter,
λ, the optimization procedure has to be repeated. The method therefore
becomes computationally expensive and time-consuming.
• To generate a suﬃciently accurate representation of the Pareto front re-
quires tuning of the parameter, λ. Due to non-linearity of the problem,
this may be non-trivial.
• By construction, MVO targets both low and high returns by lowering the
proﬁt distribution variance. As a consequence, reduction of the highest
possible NPV may occur without any considerably inprovement of the
lowest possible NPV. This results in a skewed proﬁt distribution, which
increase probability of low returns. This is illustrated in Fig. 4.5b. This
undesirable phenomenon is well known in the literature, where is has been
reported by e.g. [FSL+14a].
• The modiﬁed Sharpe Ratio, which is the key criterium used to identify
the MS, may be misleading as a measure of risk [Roc15]. In particular,
distributions which have low variance relative to expected return, may
have a larger Sharp Ratio as compared to distributions which have both
high expected return and variance. This implies that the Sharp Ratio of
a distribution for which the worst case senario is better as compared to
the best possible senario of another distribution, may have a signiﬁcantly
lower Sharp Ratio. As a result, the market solution may not provide the
best possible choice among the generated Pareto optimal solutions.
Conditional Value-at-Risk optimization
Conditional Value-at-Risk optimization (CVaRO) is a fairly new concept in the
production optimization setting and has only recently begun to recieve attention
from the novel production optimization community ([HFT15] ,[Aac15],[CFJ15]).
The approach is however well known in ﬁnancial mathematics where it has
long been used in risk management as a tool speciﬁcally designed to target the
paramount risks of low returns in terms of the risk measure known as Value-at-
Risk ([Jor06]).
Risk measure: Value-at-Risk
Given a continuous proﬁt distribution ψ, low proﬁts are charectarized by the
==PAGE:83==
4.3 Ensemble-based strategies
75
Figure 4.6: Conceptual drawing of Value-at-Risk and Cond. Value-at-Risk.
concept of Value-at-Risk (VaR), which is deﬁned by
VaRβ(ψ) = q(ψ),
(4.9)
where
q(ψ) = inf{x ∈R|P(ψ ≤x) > β}, β ∈(0, 1).
In words, q(ψ) is the smallest possible return which also satisﬁes that the prob-
ability of getting lower returns is strictly larger than β. In relation to a given
proﬁt probability distribution function, q(ψ) therefore denotes the value which
encloses the 100 · β% worst possible outcomes of proﬁt, i.e., the so called β−
tail of the distribution, as illustrated in Fig. 4.6. Actions which cause the value
of VaRβ to increase, also indirectly reduce risks of getting low returns. This
should be understood in the sense that while the value q(ψ) increases, the prob-
ability of getting lower returns remains the same, namely β. By maximizing
VaRβ, stakesholders may therefore gain increased conﬁdence in their venture.
However, as a drawback VaRβ does not address the potential outcomes of low
returns directly, i.e., VaRβ provides no information about the remainder of the
distribution β-tail. Potentially, this may be ﬁnancially disastrous. In particular,
there may exist proﬁts which are in fact so low that they constitute a substan-
tiate risk in spite of the low probability of realization. This is illustrated in Fig.
4.7.
Remark 4.1 It is noted that some texts, by conventions of risk measures,
associate large values of VaRβ with high risk and small values of VaRβ with
low risk. One accounts for this with the introduction of a minus sign in the
deﬁnition (4.9). In this thesis, large values of VaRβ is associated with low risk.
Risk measure: Conditional Value-at-Risk
==PAGE:84==
76
Geological Risk Mitigation by Ensemble-based Optimization
Figure 4.7: Conceptual drawing of potential pitfalls of VaR, which motivates the
introduction of CVaR. The shaded blue areas indicate the respective
tails of the distributions.
To address the issues related to VaRβ, the concept of CVaRα(ψ), α ∈(0, 1) is
introduced. The associated value is deﬁned as the average of all low returns as
charectarized by VaRβ, 0 < β ≤α, i.e.,
CVaRα(ψ) = 1
α
Z α
0
VaRβ(ψ)dβ, α ∈(0, 1).
As opposed to the VaRβ measure, CVaRα accounts for the entire α−tail of the
distribution in terms of the mean and therefore provides a better handling of
the associated risks. See Fig. 4.6 and Fig. 4.7.
CVaR in Production optimization
In production optimization and in ﬁnance, risks mitigation related to low returns
are paramount to management and stakeholders in general. For this reason op-
timization procedures related to CVaRα have recently begun to gain grounds
in the oil community as tools for mitigation of risk related to geological uncer-
tainty. In the setting of production optimization, the probabillity distribution
function, ψnd, is discrete and due to the standing assumption of an equiprobable
ensemble-based representation of geological uncertainties, CVaRα(ψnd) is given
by the sample estimated mean
ψCVaR(ψnd) = 1
nα
nα
X
i=1
˜ψi, α ∈(0, 1).
(4.10)
Here { ˜ψi}nα
i=1 denotes the α · 100% lowest NPV realizations. The optimization
procedure is based on the same fundamental idea as MVO. The method seeks to
==PAGE:85==
4.3 Ensemble-based strategies
77
Figure 4.8: For a discrete stochatic variable, CVaR corresponds to the average of
the α% lowest NPVs. In this way, CVaR targets risks of low returns
directly.
mitigate risks of low returns in terms of CVaRα while simultaneously promote
high returns by maximizing the expected return of the ensemble, ψRO. For this
purpose one introduces the bicriteria objective function
ψCVaRO := ψRO + λψCVaR,α.
The problem formulation therefore becomes
max
u∈RN·nu
ψ = ψCVaRO (u; bx0, θnd)
s.t.
umin,k ≤uk ≤umax,k,
k ∈N.
(4.11)
Remark 4.2 It should be noted that ψCVaR,α is not diﬀerentiable with respects
to the controls {uk}N−1
k=0 . From a pragmatic point of veiw, it is however reasonable
to attempt gradient-based optimization with the gradients
∇ukψCVaR = ∇ukψRO + λ∇ukψCVaR,α, k ∈N,
where ∇ukψCVaR,α :=
1
nα
nα
X
i=1
∇uk ˜ψi, k ∈N.
With succes, this has been done by e.g., [Aac15]. This thesis follows this heuristic
approch to provide further investigations into the matter.
==PAGE:86==
78
Geological Risk Mitigation by Ensemble-based Optimization
NPV Millions [USD]
PDF
 
 
CVaRO
RO
Figure 4.9: Conceptual Drawing of a typical CVaRO probability distributions
function.
By construction, CVaRO only focuses on downside risks, i.e., low returns. In
this way, the approach avoids the issues related to variance-based methods,
which have a tendency to increase conﬁdence in the predictions by reducing
high returns without causing mentionable increments of low realizations.
In
turn, one can expect CVaRO to provide a skewed probability distribution which
reduce the probability of low proﬁt realizations, as illustrated in Fig. 4.9. As a
strategy for risk mitigation, CVaRO is therefore often preferable to e.g., MVO.
CVaRO is however not without signiﬁcant shortcomings:
• The objective function, ψCVaR, depends on a user-speciﬁed parameter
λ ∈R. As for MVO, the approach of CVaRO therefore requires multi-
ple optimization runs in order to generate the Pareto front of optimal
trade-oﬀs between risk and return. As a result, CVaRO is demanding in
terms of time and computational eﬀort.
• As mentioned, the CVaRO objective function, ψCVaR, is not diﬀeren-
tiable with respect to the control vector u. This implies that the theory of
gradient-based optimization does not apply. Hence there is no guarantee
that the method leads to an optimum, i.e., the associated operating pro-
ﬁle may not be optimal and will not necessarily decrease risk. Therefore,
CVaRO may only be considered as a heuristic approach of risk mitigation.
==PAGE:87==
4.4 Computational aspects
79
4.4
Computational aspects
As mentioned in the description of RO, MVO and CVaRO, the reliance on mul-
tiple geological realizations implies that such methods require signiﬁcant compu-
tational eﬀort to calculate the associated objective function, ψ = ψ(u; bx0, θnd),
and its gradient with respect to the controls, which are successively needed
throughout the optimization process. As a mitigating factor, the computations
involved to obtain {ψi}nd
i=1 and {∇ukψi}nd
i=1, k ∈N are mutually independent.
To ensure reasonable computational times, this fact can be used to run the in-
dividual simulations in parallel. The implementations of this thesis follow the
paralization procedure outlined below (Fig. 4.10):
1) A client program initializes petro-physical model parameters, states, con-
trols and the ensemble of geological realizations.
2) The optimizer fmincon is run.
2.1) During the optimization process, fmincon successively calls a client
program, which passes model parameters and current controls on to
nd workers, which run on individual cores managed by the client
program.
Each worker is associated with an individual geological
realization.
2.2) For the given geological realization, each worker solves the ﬂow equa-
tions and based on the states, calculates the corresponding NPV
realization and associated adjoint sensitivites.
2.3) Each worker returns the NPV and gradients to the client program,
which then collects and calculates the ensemble-based objective func-
tion and associated gradient.
2.4) Using the ensemble-based objective function and gradient, fmincon
updates the controls. The procedures repeats itself.
3) Upon convergence, the optimal controls are returned.
In the cases of a posteriori MOO methods such as MVO and CVaRO which relies
on multiple optimization runs in order to generate the Pareto front of optimal
trade-oﬀsenarios, the above procedure has to be repeated for each choice of the
parameter λ. In MATLAB, where multi-parallelism is not available, the use of
several cores to compute the realizations, ψi, i ∈{1, .., nd}, prevents individual
optimizations from being conducted in parallel. Unlike the short-term versus
long-term optimization problem, the optimization procedures of a posteriori
ensemble-based methods therefore have to be run sequentially. Such procedures
can therefore be highly time-consuming.
==PAGE:88==
80
Geological Risk Mitigation by Ensemble-based Optimization
Core%1%
%
!
!
%
%
%
%
t%
Uopt%
%
IniPPal%Reservoir%
CondiPons,%x0%
t%
%
uinit%
Ensemble$
Ɵi$$,$i$=$1,…$,nd$
%
Core%2%
%
%
Core%nd%
%
%
%
Reservoir%Simulator%
Flow%EquaPons%
Adjoint%SensiPviPes%
NPV%
Reservoir%Simulator%
Flow%EquaPons%
Adjoint%SensiPviPes%
NPV%
Reservoir%Simulator%
Flow%EquaPons%
Adjoint%SensiPviPes%
NPV%
Calculate%
Ψ,%∇Ψ%%
t%
u%
Op0mizer!
%
!
t%
u%
t%
u%
Ɵ1%
Ɵ2%
Ɵnd%
Figure 4.10: Illustrative outline of the parallelization approach, used in this thesis,
to run ensemble-based optimizations.
==PAGE:89==
4.5 Numerical results
81
4.5
Numerical results
The previous sections have introduced ensemble-based methods and established
expections of mutual relationships and individual strengths and weaknesses. By
a series of numerical experiments, the following seeks to validate these expections
and investigate the potential of ensemble-based methods to mitigate geological
risks. The ability to reduce risks will be measured in terms of expected return,
standard deviation and cond. value-at-risk. Reference cases of nominal opti-
mization and Reactive control are used to asses quality of the ensemble-based
strategies. Further, modiﬁed strategies, which combine ensemble-based opti-
mization with a reactive strategy are investigated as means to avoid the risks of
low returns.
For all of the following cases studies, the optimization problems (4.4), (4.5),
(4.7) and (4.11) are solved following the procedure outlined in Fig. 4.10 with
N = 60 and, following [SVdHJ15b], λ := 10−7 in case of MVO and λ := 1
in case of CVaRO. The permeability ﬁelds with indices i ∈{1, 2, ..., 24} in the
PermEns ﬁle, are used in all simulations.
Comparison of ensemble-based methods
The following compares CE , RO, MVO and CVaRO. Nominal production op-
timzation, as represented by the optimal long-term strategy for N = 60 intro-
duced in Chapter 3, is used as reference case. The results are presented in Fig.
4.11.
• As a general observation, all ensemble-based methods successfully improve
expected return, standard deviation and cond. value-at-risk as compared
to NO. In all cases, the most pronounced eﬀects are related to decreases
in standard deviation, i.e., conﬁdence in the predicted results is generally
improved. Visually, this is indicated by the narrowed probability bands
(Subﬁg. (1,i), i=1,2,3,4). Further, by the signiﬁcant increases in CVaR
and expected return, the positive eﬀects on the standard deviation is pri-
marily attributable to increases in the lowest possible NPV realizations,
as desired.
• Relative increases and decreases in expected return, standard deviation
and cond. value-at-risk are depicted in Fig. 4.12. Long-term expected
return is increased from 690 million USD to 735 millon USD, 784 millon
USD, 765 millon USD and 780 million USD by respectively CE, RO, MVO
==PAGE:90==
82
Geological Risk Mitigation by Ensemble-based Optimization
time [days]
100
600
1200
1800
Millons [US Dollars]
0
200
400
600
800
CE vs NO
time [days]
100
600
1200
1800
0
200
400
600
800
RO vs NO
time [days]
100
600
1200
1800
0
200
400
600
800
MVO VS NO
time [days]
100
600
1200
1800
0
200
400
600
800
CVaRO VS NO
time [days]
100
600
1200
1800
Millons [US Dollars]
0
50
100
150
200
Standard deviation
time [days]
100
600
1200
1800
Millons [US Dollars]
0
50
100
150
200
Standard deviation
time [days]
100
600
1200
1800
0
50
100
150
200
Standard deviation
time [days]
100
600
1200
1800
0
50
100
150
200
Standard deviation
time [days]
100
600
1200
1800
0
200
400
600
Cond. Value-at-Risk 12 %
NO
CE
RO
MVO
CVaRO
time [days]
100
600
1200
1800
Millons [US Dollars]
0
200
400
600
Cond. Value-at-Risk 12 %
time [days]
100
600
1200
1800
0
200
400
600
Cond. Value-at-Risk 12 %
time [days]
100
600
1200
1800
0
200
400
600
Cond. Value-at-Risk 12 %
Figure 4.11: Comparison of ensemble-based methods. Reference case: nominal op-
timization.
time [days]
100
600
1200
1800
Increse in %
0
20
40
60
80
100
Increase in exp. return
time [days]
100
600
1200
1800
0
20
40
60
80
100
Increase in exp. return
time [days]
100
600
1200
1800
0
20
40
60
80
100
Increase in exp. return
time [days]
100
600
1200
1800
0
20
40
60
80
100
Increase in exp. return
time [days]
100
600
1200
1800
Decrese in %
-300
-200
-100
0
100
Decrease in standard deviation.
time [days]
100
600
1200
1800
-300
-200
-100
0
100
Decrease in standard deviation
time [days]
100
600
1200
1800
-300
-200
-100
0
100
Decrease in standard deviation.
time [days]
100
600
1200
1800
-300
-200
-100
0
100
Decrease in standard deviation.
time [days]
100
600
1200
1800
Increase in %
0
20
40
60
80
100
Increase in CvaR
CE
RO
MVO
CVaRO
time [days]
100
600
1200
1800
0
20
40
60
80
100
Increase in CvaR
time [days]
100
600
1200
1800
0
20
40
60
80
100
Increase in CvaR
time [days]
100
600
1200
1800
0
20
40
60
80
100
Increase in CvaR
Figure 4.12: Comparison of ensemble-based methods relative to the reference case:
nominal optimization.
==PAGE:91==
4.5 Numerical results
83
NPV [Millons USD]
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
1100
CDF
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
time= 1800 days
NO
CE
RO
MVO
CVaRO
Figure 4.13: Comparison of ensemble-based methods in terms of cumulative
distribution functions. Reference case: nominal optimization.
and CVaRO. This corresponds to approximately 6.46%, 13.58%, 10.83%
and 12.99%, respectively.
• Long-term standard deviation is decreased from 200.8 million USD to
69.88 millon USD, 78.92 millon USD, 62.99 millon USD and 69.56 mil-
lon USD, respectively.
Percentage decreases amount to approximately
87.89%, 84.55%, 90.16% and 88%. Note how decreases in standard devi-
ation over time are inversely correlated to increases in expected return.
This illustrates the conﬂict between the objectives of increased return and
decreased risk.
• Long-term CVaR is increased from 360.8 millon USD to respectively 628
millon USD, 637 millon USD, 678 millon USD and 661 millon USD. This
corresponds to percentage increases of approximately 73.9%, 76.51%, 87.84%
and 83.19%.
• Overall, CE performs the worst of all considered ensemble-based methods.
This was largely expected due to the feeble foundation of only a single
permeability ﬁeld. Notably, however, CE manages to decrease standard
deviation signiﬁcantly as compared to NO. It is reasonable to assume
that this is largely due to the relatively few number of possible geological
realizations considered in these numerical experiments.
• RO manages to promote expected return the most, as expected. In turn,
RO has the overall largest standard deviation and, besides from CE, the
lowest CVaR. In the case of RO, high expected return is therefore accom-
panied by an elevated probability of low NPV realizations as compared to
==PAGE:92==
84
Geological Risk Mitigation by Ensemble-based Optimization
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
Rate [m 3/day]
0
500
1000
NO
 Optimal controls for Inj.1
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
500
1000
NO
 Optimal controls for Inj.2
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
500
1000
NO
 Optimal controls for Inj.3
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
Rate [m 3/day]
0
500
1000
CE
 Optimal controls for Inj.1
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
500
1000
CE
 Optimal controls for Inj.2
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
500
1000
CE
 Optimal controls for Inj.3
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
Rate [m 3/day]
0
500
1000
RO
 Optimal controls for Inj.1
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
500
1000
RO
 Optimal controls for Inj.2
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
500
1000
RO
 Optimal controls for Inj.3
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
Rate [m 3/day]
0
500
1000
MVO
 Optimal controls for Inj.1
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
500
1000
MVO
 Optimal controls for Inj.2
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
500
1000
MVO
 Optimal controls for Inj.3
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
Rate [m 3/day]
0
500
1000
CVaRO
 Optimal controls for Inj.1
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
500
1000
CVaRO
 Optimal controls for Inj.2
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
500
1000
CVaRO
 Optimal controls for Inj.3
Figure 4.14: Comparison of ensemble-based methods in terms of operational strate-
gies. Reference case: nominal optimization. Red dotted lines indicate
bound constraints.
MVO and CVaRO. This is illustrated in Fig. 4.13, which compares the
cumulative NPV distributions. The greater part of the possible realiza-
tions result in high returns, hence the high expected return. However, a
few realizations result in crucially low NPVs. This explains the low value
of CVaR.
• MVO provides the largest overall reduction of standard deviation and
the highest value of CVaR. The consequence is a lower expected return,
as compared to RO and CVaRO. This reﬂects the tendency of variance-
based methods to increase conﬁdence by, compressing, so to speak, the
probability density function. This is illustrated in Fig. 4.13, which shows
how the possible MVO realizations are more centralized around the mean
value. This reduces risk of low realizations, however it also inhibits high
realizations. As opposed to results of the literature [LR14], these numerical
experiments did not indicate favoritism of MVO to reduce high returns
over increment of low returns.
• CVaRO provides the second highests values of expected return and CVaR.
In this way, CVaR represents the desirable features of RO and MVO, i.e.,
promotion of high returns and mitigation of risks associated with low
returns. This is illustrated in Fig. 4.13, which shows that the CVaRO
CDF has the same overall behaviour as RO in terms of high returns, but
reduces the probability of low returns in a fashion similar to MVO.
==PAGE:93==
4.5 Numerical results
85
• The operational strategies of the ensemble-based methods are compared
in Fig. 4.14. NO is included as reference case. Overall, the strategies
exhibits similar patterns, injector 2 is used extensively, whereas injector
1 and injector 3 are subject to more curtly use. Notice also the repeated
pattern of anti-symmetrical use of injector 1 and injector 3 applied to
regulate water injection costs.
As one injector is applied the other is
shut in. This is illustrated by comparing e.g. subﬁg. (4,1) and subﬁg.
(4,3). In general, the operating proﬁles associated with ensemble-based
methods include rapid changes in the injection proﬁles, compared to the
NO strategy. This indicates sensitivity to process noise, which in turn, is
associated with risk. Such issues can be mitigated by introduction of rate
of movement constraints on the input operating proﬁle 1.
In general, the results demonstrate a signiﬁcant potential of ensemble-based
methods to mitigate geological risks as measured by expected return, standard
deviation and cond. value-at-risk. Among the ensemble-based methods, CE
proves inferior. RO stands to greatly increase expected return at the cost of
risks of low returns. On the other hand, MVO proves to decrease risk the most,
while expected return is mildly compromised as a consequence.
As a viable
middel ground trade-oﬀ, CVaRO has a potential to simultaneously promote
high NPVs realizations and reduce the probability of low returns.
Computational performances
The following compares ensemble-based methods in terms of computational per-
formances, which are measured by computational times, function counts (FCs)
and Conjugate Gradient iterations (CGIs) associated with the respective opti-
mization procedures. Data on FCs and CGIs is acquired from the output of
fmincon, whereas computational times are measured using MATLAB’s built-in
tic, toc functions. Fig. 4.15 presents the results.
• CVaRO requires the most function counts, whereas MVO is the most time-
consuming of the methods, negatively aﬀected by a large number of CGIs.
CE is by far the less computationally involved method. This could be ex-
pected due to the fact that the method does not rely on multiple geological
realizations and therefore does not involve a parallelization scheme. This
also indicates that even though the simulations of ensemble-based meth-
ods are run in parallel, computational times are nevertheless increased
1Rate-of-movement constraints are investigated in Section 5.5 in the setting of Time-
Explicit methods.
==PAGE:94==
86
Geological Risk Mitigation by Ensemble-based Optimization
CE
RO
MVO
CVaRO
Time [Minutes]
0
50
100
150
200
Min: 73.1521
Min: 106.9913
Min: 150.0997
Min: 123.038
Computational times
CE
RO
MVO
CVaRO
Function Counts
0
20
40
60
80
FCs: 63
FCs: 66
FCs: 69
FCs: 72
Function evaluations
CE
RO
MVO
CVaRO
CG Iterations
0
200
400
600
GCIs: 12
GCIs: 135
GCIs: 531
GCIs: 93
Conjugate Gradient iterations
Figure 4.15: Comparison of ensemble-based methods in terms of computational
performance.
due to management and distribution of memory among workers on the
respective cores. In this regard it should be noted that the implemtations
of this thesis rely on MATLAB spmd functionality. Great improvements
can therefore be expected by implementations of the schemes in low level
languages such as C and C + +.
It should be noted that the data represents single optimization runs. In the
cases of MVO and CVaRO, which require multiple optimization runs to generate
a representative of the Pareto front, computational eﬀort therefore increases,
roughly estimated, by a factor which equals the number of additional Pareto
points on the frontier. Computational times, for problems of the size considered
in this thesis, can therefore usually be in the magnitude of 1500 minutes = 25
hours. Notably, this is when simulation are conducted in parallel.
Comparison to Reactive control
The following compares CE, RO, MVO and CVaRO to Reative control. The
purpose is to demonstrate the power of feedback and alert to shortcomings of
ensemble-based methods related to the short-term versus long-term optimization
problem. Fig. 4.16 presents the results. Increases and decreases relative to
Reactive control are depicted in Fig. 4.17.
==PAGE:95==
4.5 Numerical results
87
• Long-term proﬁt, as measured by end-time expected return, is increased
by 5.96%, 3.39% and 5.41% by RO, MVO and CVaRO, respectively. CE
reduces end-time NPV by 0.68%. The modest increments, however, comes
at the cost of considerably compromised short-term expected returns. At
time t = 300 days, expected return is reduced by 38.24%, 43.69%, 33.44%
and 35.4% by respectively CE, RO, MVO and CVaRO.
• The evolution of CVaR exhibits the same overall behaviour of slightly im-
proved long-term values at the consequence of heavily compromised short-
term gains.
Long-term CVaR is improved by 0.35%, 6.79% and 4.15%
compared to RO, MVO and CVaRO. CE reduces CVaR by 1.13%.
• Overall, RC provides the largest standard deviation. This should however
be considered in conjuction with the signiﬁcant increment of expected
return. For example, at time t = 300, RC provides a standard deviation
of 37.8 millon USD, whereas the standard deviation associated with RO is
a mere 8.55 millon USD. However at this time, RC expected return is 417
millon USD, while RO expected return only amounts to 234 millon USD.
The worst case outcome of RC is therefore highly likely to outperform the
best case outcome associated with RO. Visually, this is indicated by the
disjoint probability bands.
The tendency of ensemble-based methods to compromise short-term perfor-
mance measures is tied to the underlying mathematical formulation. Fundamen-
tally, just as conventional strategies of production optimization, ensemble-based
methods are long-term strategies. The issues of short-term versus long-term
objectives thus reappear in the context of geological risk mitigation methods.
These shortcomings imply that economical risks are all together neglected by
ensemble-based methods. Therefore, in spite of mitigated geological risks, the
methodology remains unreliable due to the inherent focus on long-term objec-
tives.
Strategies modiﬁed by reactive control
Despite the fact that operating proﬁles, which are associated with ensemble-
based methods, have underwent optimization, it is reasonable to expect, that
over a large ensemble of possible geological realizations, some producers may
be inproﬁtable at some point during the reservoir life.
This undesirable be-
haviour increases the probability of low returns. To address this issue, it has
been proposed to combine the optimized operating proﬁles with a reactive strat-
egy, which successively shuts in uneconomical producer wells for each geological
realization of the ensemble [Cap13]. The following investigates the eﬀects of
==PAGE:96==
88
Geological Risk Mitigation by Ensemble-based Optimization
time [days]
100
600
1200
1800
Millons [US Dollars]
0
200
400
600
800
CE vs RC
time [days]
100
600
1200
1800
Millons [US Dollars]
0
200
400
600
800
RO vs RC
time [days]
100
600
1200
1800
Millons [US Dollars]
0
200
400
600
800
MVO VS RC
time [days]
100
600
1200
1800
Millons [US Dollars]
0
200
400
600
800
CVaRO VS RC
time [days]
100
600
1200
1800
Millons [US Dollars]
0
50
100
150
200
Standard deviation
time [days]
100
600
1200
1800
Millons [US Dollars]
0
50
100
150
200
Standard deviation
time [days]
100
600
1200
1800
Millons [US Dollars]
0
50
100
150
200
Standard deviation
time [days]
100
600
1200
1800
Millons [US Dollars]
0
50
100
150
200
Standard deviation
time [days]
100
600
1200
1800
Millons [US Dollars]
0
200
400
600
Cond. Value-at-Risk 12 %
RC
CE
RO
MVO
CVaR
time [days]
100
600
1200
1800
Millons [US Dollars]
0
200
400
600
Cond. Value-at-Risk 12 %
time [days]
100
600
1200
1800
Millons [US Dollars]
0
200
400
600
Cond. Value-at-Risk 12 %
time [days]
100
600
1200
1800
Millons [US Dollars]
0
200
400
600
Cond. Value-at-Risk 12 %
Figure 4.16: Comparison of ensemble-based methods.
Reference case: Reactive
control.
time [days]
100
600
1200
1800
Increse in %
-40
-20
0
20
Increase in exp. return
time [days]
100
600
1200
1800
-40
-20
0
20
Increase in exp. return
time [days]
100
600
1200
1800
-40
-20
0
20
Increase in exp. return
time [days]
100
600
1200
1800
-40
-20
0
20
Increase in exp. return
time [days]
100
600
1200
1800
Decrese in %
-100
-50
50
100
Decrease in standard deviation
time [days]
100
600
1200
1800
-100
-50
50
100
Decrease in standard deviation
time [days]
100
600
1200
1800
-100
-50
50
100
Decrease in standard deviation
time [days]
100
600
1200
1800
-100
-50
50
100
Decrease in standard deviation
time [days]
100
600
1200
1800
Increase in %
-40
-20
0
20
Increase in CvaR
CE
RO
MVO
CVaR
time [days]
100
600
1200
1800
-40
-20
0
20
Increase in CvaR
time [days]
100
600
1200
1800
-40
-20
0
20
Increase in CvaR
time [days]
100
600
1200
1800
-40
-20
0
20
Increase in CvaR
Figure 4.17: Comparison of ensemble-based methods relative to the reference case:
Reactive control.
==PAGE:97==
4.5 Numerical results
89
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
Exp. Return [Millons USD]
0
200
400
600
800
CE 
 Exp. Return
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
200
400
600
800
RO 
 Exp. Return
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
200
400
600
800
MVO 
 Exp. Return
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
200
400
600
800
CVaRO 
 Exp. Return
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
CVaR 20% [Millons USD]
0
200
400
600
CVaR 20%
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
200
400
600
CVaR 20%
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
200
400
600
CVaR 20%
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
200
400
600
CVaR 20%
Modified strategy
Expect. return
Cond. Value-at-Risk
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
Increase in % 
0
5
10
15
Increase in %
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
5
10
15
Increase in %
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
5
10
15
Increase in %
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
5
10
15
Increase in %
Figure 4.18: Comparison of ensemble-based methods and strategies modiﬁed by
reactive control.
such an approach on CE, RO, MVO and CVaRO. The results are presented in
Fig. 4.18.
• In terms of expected return, the eﬀects are seen to be modest and concen-
trated to the long-term proﬁt. Long-term expected returns stand to be
improved by 4.59%, 2.11%, 2.83% and 1.98% relative to CE, RO, MVO and
CVaRO, respectively. The localization to long-term objectives owes to the
inproﬁtability of producer wells at the late stages of the recovery process,
where the accumulated water injections and the amounts of displaced oil,
imply that water production costs exceed proﬁts of oil recovery.
• The positive eﬀects are seen to be more pronounced in the case of RO. The
increases amount to respectively 5.96%, 13.08%, 5.73% and 9.12%, relative
to CE, RO, MVO and CVaRO. This is in accordance with the previous
observation that RO has an elevated risk of low returns as compared to CE,
MVO and CVaRO. The modiﬁed strategy reveals that these low returns
are directly tied to inproﬁtable producer wells. The eﬀects of the modiﬁed
strategies on low returns are illustrated in Fig. 4.19, which compares all
NPV realizations prior to and after modiﬁcation by reactive control.
In general, the approach of combining optimization schemes with a reactive
strategy, proves to be a viable tool to mitigate the paramount risks of low re-
turns. Main applications include long-term proﬁts, due to the fact that producer
==PAGE:98==
90
Geological Risk Mitigation by Ensemble-based Optimization
Time [days]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
Millions [USD]
0
200
400
600
800
CE - NPV realizations
Time [days]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
0
200
400
600
800
Modified CE - NPV realizations
Time [days]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
Millions [USD]
0
200
400
600
800
RO - NPV realizations
Time [days]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
0
200
400
600
800
Modified RO - NPV realizations
Time [days]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
Millions [USD]
0
200
400
600
800
MVO - NPV realizations
Time [days]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
0
200
400
600
800
Modified MVO - NPV realizations
Time [days]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
Millions [USD]
0
200
400
600
800
CVaRO - NPV realizations
Time [days]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
0
200
400
600
800
Modified CVaRO - NPV realizations
Figure 4.19: Illustration of the eﬀects on low realizations caused by strategies, mod-
iﬁed by reactive control.
Red lines indicate the lowest realizations
prior to modications. Green lines denote the same realizations after
the modiﬁcations. The eﬀect is a reduced probability of low returns.
wells often become inproﬁtable in the late stages of oil recovery. The approach
is therefore not suitable as a tool of economical risk mitigation due to the neg-
ligence of short-term proﬁts.
4.6
Summary and conclusions
Conventional production optimization methods rely on the assumption of known
geological parameters. This poorly reﬂects real-life senarios, where oﬀ-shore and
subsurface locations of oil reservoirs imply that model-based descriptions of the
reservoir rock become uncertain. As a result, the predictions of such methods are
unreliable and due to the associated economical risks, oil companies are reluctant
to incoorporate model-based production optimization into their operations.
To address this challenge, this chapter has investigated and assed popular ensemble-
based methods, including Certainty-Equivalence optimization, Robust optimiza-
tion, Mean-Variance optimization and Conditional value-at-risk optimization, as
tools for mitigation of geological risk for open-loop production optimization.
The following summarizes the main conclusions of the numerical case studies:
==PAGE:99==
4.6 Summary and conclusions
91
• Ensemble-based methods have a signiﬁcant potential to mitigate geolog-
ical risks, as measured in terms of long-term expected return, standard
deviation and conditional value-at-risk.
Relative to nominal optimiza-
tion, RO increased long-term expected return by 13.58% whereas CVaRO,
MVO, and CE managed to increase expected return by 12.99%, 10.83%
and 6.46%, respectively. On the other hand, long-term conditional value-
at-risk was increased by 73.9%, 76.51%, 87.84% and 83.19% by CE, RO,
MVO and CVaRO, respectively. This demonstrates the signiﬁcant ability
of ensemble-based methods to reduce the paramount risks of low long-term
returns.
• The results demonstrate that ensemble-based methods may outperform
the feedback based Reactive strategy in terms of long-term expected return
and conditional value-at-risk. Final time expected return was increased
by 5.96%, 3.39% and 5.41% by RO, MVO and CVaRO, respectively. On
the other hand, CE reduced long-term expected return by 0.68%. RO,
MVO and CVaRO managed to increase ﬁnal time conditional value-at-risk
by respectively 0.35%, 6.79% and 4.15%, whereas CE reduced long-term
conditional value-at-risk by 1.13%. Compared to increases in expected re-
turn, the improvements of conditional value-at-risk are slightly lower. This
comes from the fact that Reactive control primarily targets low returns by
shutting in inproﬁtable production wells.
• Overall, CE proved inferior to the methods of RO, MVO and CVaRO.
Compared to the reference case, NO, the RO strategy managed to increase
long-term expected return the most. The cost proved to be an elevated
risk of low returns, relative to MVO and CVaRO. MVO provided the
lowest variance and highest CVaR, i.e., low risk. As a consequence, MVO
expected return was compromised, compared to RO and CVaRO.
• Despite the fact that the CVaRO objective function is not diﬀerentiable
with respect to the controls, the results sugget that a gradient-based ap-
proach can nevertheless be successfully applied. The results associated
with CVaRO demonstrate a desirable combination of the features of RO
and MVO which simultaneously promoted high NPVs realizations and re-
duces the probability of low returns.
• To a large extend, the above conclusions on the mutual relations between
ensemble-based methods support the previous research [VEZVdH+09],
[CSFJ13] and [CSFJ15] . However, as opposed to [LR14], the numeri-
cal experiments did not indicate signiﬁcant favoritism of MVO to reduce
high returns over increment of low returns. On the contrary, MVO pro-
vided the highest long-term conditional value-at-risk. To this conclusion
it should be noted that only single cases of MVO and CVaRO have been
considered.
==PAGE:100==
92
Geological Risk Mitigation by Ensemble-based Optimization
In general, the results demonstrate that ensemble-based methods may signiﬁ-
cantly improve long-term geological risk measures relative to conventional pro-
duction optimization and thereby mitigate geological risks.
With CE as an
expection, ensemble-based methods may also provide improved long-term risk
measures relative to Reactive control.
However, signiﬁcant shortcomings in-
clude:
• By the underlying mathematical formulation, ensemble-based methods
are long-term strategies. This was reﬂected in considerably compromised
short-term proﬁts relative to Reactive control. Short-term expected return
was reduced by 43.69%, 33.44% and 35.4% by RO, MVO and CVaRO, re-
spectively. This implies that ensemble-based methods, just as conventional
production optimization methods, altogheter neglect economical uncer-
tainty.
• Like short-term versus long-term optimization, the methods of MVO and
CVaRO are a posteriori MOO-based methods, which rely on a large num-
ber of equivalent simulation run to generate the Pareto front. However,
as opposed to short-term versus long-term optimization, the individual
optimizations can not be run in parallel due to multiple geological re-
alizations. Such methods are therefore computationally demanding and
time-consuming.
In conclusion, despite a signiﬁcant potential to mitigate long-term goelogical
risks, neglectance of short-term risk measures imply that the predictions of
ensemble-based methods remain subject to substantial economical risk whereas
the computationally demanding process of generating the Pareto front challenges
practical applications of the methodology to oil reservoir management.
==PAGE:101==
Chapter 5
Joint Risk Mitigation by
Time-Explicit Optimization
The following chapter presents the novel contribution of this thesis, Time-
Explicit (TE) methods.
Motivated by the shortcomings of conventional risk
mitigation strategies covered in Chapter 3 and 4, TE methods combine the
ideas of multi-objective optimization and ensemble-based risk mitigation into
a computationally tractable joint eﬀort of reducing economical as well as ge-
ological risks. To asses and validate the proposed Time-Explict approach, a
series of numerical case studies compare TE methods to conventional ensemble-
based methods and as a benchmark case for short-term gains, Reactive control.
Further, to provide perspective, a brief discussion relates TE methods to a rep-
resentative selection of the primary eﬀorts of the oil literature.
The main work of this chapter has be comprised to form the research paper
Time-Explicit Methods for Joint Economical and Geological Risk Mitigation in
Production Optimization, which has been submitted to the Journal of Petroleum
Science and Engineering, published by Elsevier.
==PAGE:102==
94
Joint Risk Mitigation by Time-Explicit Optimization
5.1
Joint risk mitigation
In this thesis, mitigation of economical and geological risks, has at this point
been conducted disjointly by short-term versus long-term multi-objective opti-
mization and ensemble-based approaches. The investigations have demonstrated
a signiﬁcant potential of the methodology to reduce risks by the ability to re-
spectively
• improve the balance between short-term and long-term proﬁts,
• promote risk-related performance measures such as expected return, stan-
dard deviation and conditional value-at-risk.
As a major drawback, short-term versus long-term optimzation relies on a single
geological model. As demonstrated in Section 4.1, the conseqences are highly
unreliable predictions. On the other hand, conventional geological risk miti-
gation methods solely focus the long-term NPV. As shown by the results of
Section 4.5, short-term proﬁts are consequently compromised and the time-
dependent economical risks are altogether neglected. The long-term predictions
of ensemble-based methods therefore, too, become highly risky. As a common
drawback, conventional risk mitigation methods, including short-term versus
long-term optimization, MVO and CVaRO, are computationally demanding due
to their nature as a posteriori MOO methods.
The shortcomings of conventional risk mitigation strategies motivate the need
of a novel approach, which combines the strengths of known methods into a
computationally joint eﬀort of risk mitigation. However, to a large degree the
exposition of this thesis also reﬂects the current eﬀorts of the oil literature
and only recently have so called robust ensemble-based methods been proposed
to account for economical and geological risks.
To provide perspective, the
following provides a brief discussion of selected representative contributions in
this direction:
• A modiﬁcation of the short-term versus long-term optimization problem
to account for multiple geological realizations has recently been proposed
by [FSL+14a]. Here a bicriteria objective function is optimized for multi-
ple diﬀerent choices of a user-speciﬁed parameter in order to generate the
Pareto front of short-term and long-term trade-oﬀsenarios. As opposed
to traditional short-term versus long-term optimization, the individual
optimizations required to generate the Pareto front can not be run in par-
allel. Such ensemble-based a posteriori methods therefore rely on a large
==PAGE:103==
5.1 Joint risk mitigation
95
number of time-consuming simulation runs, which puts computational ef-
ﬁciency into question. Also, the optimization process involves tuning of
a user-specifed set of weights, which due to non-linearity of the problem,
may turn out to be a non-trival aﬀair.
• To avoid time-consuming computations, a priori MOO-based hierarchical
approaches have been suggested by e.g. [FSL+14b] and recently [SVdHJ15a].
However, to ensure computational tractability, the methods rely on a
heuristic switching scheme for which matters of convergence are not fully
understood at this point. Also, the convergence rate may be slow ([VEVdHJ11]).
As an alternative to the switching scheme, [CLR12] have proposed a hi-
erarchical approach which relies on the augmented Lagrangian method.
As a common drawback, hierarchical approaches, by their nature, require
that the long-term problem is solved in advance. Hence, the approach
relies on two mutually dependent optimization runs.
• Recent studies, [SVdHJ15a] and [SVdHJ15b], seek to modify conventional
geological ensemble-based methods to account for economical uncertainties
by considering an ensemble of ne economical realizations ηne = {ηj}ne
j=1.
The studies show promising results.
However, the uncertainties of oil
prices are generally profound and grows exceedingly with time. Conse-
quently, the dynamic nature of oil prices may become practically unpre-
dictable and therefore highly diﬃcult to model accurately. This issue is
further aggrevated by the long prediction horizons associated with open-
loop production optimization. Also, as a tool for joint risk mitigation the
approach becomes computationally demanding.
As an example, to account for economical uncertainty, the RO objective
function ψROE becomes
ψROE :=
1
nd,e
nd
X
i=1
ne
X
j=1
ψ(θi, ηj) =
1
nd,e
nd
X
i=1
ne
X
j=1
ψi,j,
(5.1)
where nd,e = nd · ne. Compared to traditional RO, the approach therefore
requires additional nd · (ne −1) simulation runs and adjoint calculations
to calculate the objective function (5.1) and its gradients with respect
to the controls. For practical purposes, the approach therefore becomes
computationally intractable.
==PAGE:104==
96
Joint Risk Mitigation by Time-Explicit Optimization
5.2
Time-Explicit optimization
Based on the investigations of Chapter 3 and 4, the following combines the ideas
of multi-objective optimization and conventional risk mitigation to address the
issues of economical and geological uncertainties, unitedly.
In particular, as
a computationally tractable alternative to a posteriori MOO approaches and
methods of combined ensemble-based uncertainties, this thesis introduces a set
of novel Time-Explicit (TE) optimization methods for joint risk mitigation.
TE methods seeks to mitigate economical uncertainites implicitly by explicit
reduction of geological risks over time. Advantageously, the proposed methods
only rely on an ensemble of geological realizations. As a result, computational
eﬀort is much less involved as compared to approaches of combined model-based
uncertainites. Further, it is demonstrated that TE methods can be understood
as a priori MOO methods with weights predetermined by discretization. As op-
posed to most MOO approaches of the literature, TE methods therefore avoid
the expensive computations and cumbersome process of weigth-adjustements as-
sociated with generating the Pareto front. Compared to conventional ensemble-
based methods, additional computational eﬀort amounts to relatively few ad-
joint calcluations, i.e., solution of linear systems of equations.
Time-Explicit objectives
TE methods are based on the novel idea of optimizing a speciﬁc geological risk-
related performance measure, Tθ[Ψ] := T({ψi(t, x(t), u(t), θi)}nd
i=1), over time in
terms of an integral-based objective function
max
[x(t),u(t)]
tf
t0
T := 1
T
Z tf
t0
Tθ[Ψ](t) dt, 0 ≤t0 ≤tf,
(5.2)
where T = tf −t0.
For the purpose of production optimization, the measured geological risks, Tθ[Ψ],
are tied to the NPV of oil recovery (2.14), e.g., the expected return over all
possible geological realizations, Tθ[Ψ] := Eθ[Ψ]. In contrast to conventional geo-
logical risk mitigation strategies that focus on a single long-term objective, TE
methods seek to reduce risks and promote proﬁts at every instant of the reser-
voir life. In words, (5.2) expresses the objective of determining the operating
proﬁle, which provides the optimal geological risk senario on average over the
expected reservoir life span. Time-dependent uncertainties are therefore directly
addressed by promoting expected return and reducing the average risk over time
==PAGE:105==
5.3 TE optimization - Theoretical and computational aspects
97
Figure 5.1: Conceptual drawing of TE optimization with risk measure Tθ[Ψ] :=
Eθ[Ψ].
The integral formulation (5.2) ensures that each objective
Eθ[Ψ](t) is accounted for and assigned an appropriate weigth, dt. As a
result, signiﬁcant short-terms gains may be obtained, thereby implicitly
reducing economical risks. This stands in contrast to conventional (ro-
bust) optimization which only focuses on the single long-term objective
of increased end-time expected return.
as measured by Tθ[Ψ]. In this way, TE methods seek to balance short-term and
long-term objectives. Thereby, TE methods implicitly address risks related to
the exceedingly growing economical uncertainties. Fig. 5.1 illustrates the idea
of TE optimization. Unformally, the formulation (5.2) may also be understood
by picturing the geological risks at every point in time, Tθ[Ψ](t), as individ-
ual objectives subject to simultaneous optimization. In this way, (5.2) can be
interpreted as a multi-objective optimization approach where each objective is
weighted according to the integral. With this interpretation in mind, TE meh-
ods can be seen as a priori MOO methods which determine the trade-oﬀsenario
that provides the highest possible reduction of average risk over time. Conse-
quently, TE methods candidate to provide a computationally more attractive
alternative to the prevalent MOO approaches of the literature, which rely on
comprehensive computations in order to generate the Pareto front.
5.3
TE optimization - Theoretical and computa-
tional aspects
The following presents and discusses theoretical and computational aspects of
TE methods. The presentation will be kept general to facilitate adaptation of the
approach to arbitrary risk measures, Tθ[Ψ]. The section includes the introduc-
==PAGE:106==
98
Joint Risk Mitigation by Time-Explicit Optimization
t0 t1 
t2 
tN 
t0
~ 
t1
~ 
tM
~ 
Expected 
return 
M : ` 7! i
Figure 5.2: Illustration of TE discretization.
tion of three concrete examples of TE methods, which account for respectively
expected return, mean-variance and conditional value-at-risk.
Problem formulation
Following spatial and temporal discretization as outlined in Chapter 2, the TE
optimization problem can be considered as an optimal control problem sub-
ject to the governing equations of two-phase immiscible ﬂow as well as bound
constraints on the input proﬁle {uk}N−1
k=0 :
max
{xk}N
k=0,{uk}N−1
k=0
τ = τ(x, u, x0; θnd)
(5.3a)
s.t.
Rk(xk+1, xk, uk) = 0, k ∈N,
(5.3b)
umin,k ≤uk ≤umax,k, k ∈N.
(5.3c)
Here τ =
1
T
M−1
X
ℓ=0
Tθ[Ψ(tM(ℓ+1))]∆tM(ℓ) is a Right Rectangular approximation
of T (5.2), while Ψ(tM(ℓ)) = {ψi
M(ℓ)(x, u, x0; θi)}nd
i=1 is calculated by
ψi
M(ℓ) =
M(ℓ)−1
X
k=0
Jk(xk+1, uk; θi), i ∈{1, .., nd}, ℓ∈{1, .., M}.
The summation index ℓrefers to indices of an arbitrary subset of time-nodes
{˜tℓ}M
ℓ=0 ⊆{ti}N
i=0, M ≤N, whereas M : ℓ7→i denotes the associated index
==PAGE:107==
5.3 TE optimization - Theoretical and computational aspects
99
map (Fig. 5.2). The use of two sets of time nodes {˜tℓ}M
ℓ=0, {ti}N
i=0 for discretiza-
tion of respectively τ and ψ is chosen to preserve computational eﬃciency. In
particular, the formulation allows for the use of fewer nodes to approximate τ.
This is crucial in relation to gradient computations. In pratice, the problem
(5.3) is solved by the single-shooting approach introduced in Chapter 2.
Gradients
Gradient-based optimization algorithms used to solve (5.3) require evaluation
of the gradients ∇ukτ, k ∈N, i.e, one must calculate
∇ukτ = 1
T
M−1
X
ℓ=0
∇uk(Tθ[Ψ(tM(ℓ+1))])∆tM(ℓ), k ∈N.
(5.4)
This essentially amounts to calculation of
∇ukTθ[ΨM(ℓ)] := ∇uk(Tθ[Ψ(tM(ℓ))]), k ∈N,
(5.5)
for each time-node ˜tj ∈{˜tℓ}M
ℓ=1. Let nu denote the number of wells subject to
control. For an arbitray sample estimated risk measure Tθ[Ψ] = Tθ[ψi, ..., ψnd],
it then follows by the chain-rule of multivariate diﬀerentation that for each
k ∈N :
∇ukTθ[ΨM(ℓ)] =


∂Tθ[ΨM(ℓ)]
∂u1
k...
∂Tθ[ΨM(ℓ)]
∂unu
k

=


∂Tθ[ΨM(ℓ)]
∂ψ1
M(ℓ)
∂ψ1
M(ℓ)
∂u1
k
+ ... +
∂Tθ[ΨM(ℓ)]
∂ψ
nd
M(ℓ)
∂ψ
nd
M(ℓ)
∂u1
k
...
...
...
∂Tθ[ΨM(ℓ)]
∂ψ1
M(ℓ)
∂ψ1
M(ℓ)
∂unu
k
+ ... +
∂Tθ[ΨM(ℓ)]
∂ψ
nd
M(ℓ)
∂ψ
nd
M(ℓ)
∂unu
k


.
(5.6)
Notice that (5.6) may also be written on the form
∇ukTθ[ΨM(ℓ)] =
nd
X
i=1
∇ukψi
M(ℓ)
∂Tθ[ΨM(ℓ)]
∂ψi
M(ℓ)
, k ∈N.
(5.7)
Hence, the general formula for (5.4) becomes
∇ukτ = 1
T
M−1
X
ℓ=0
 nd
X
i=1
∇ukψi
M(ℓ+1)
∂Tθ[ΨM(ℓ+1)]
∂ψi
M(ℓ+1)
!
∆tM(ℓ), k ∈N.
(5.8)
The associated gradients, ∇ukψi
M(ℓ), k ∈N, may be computed eﬃciently by
the adjoint method.
==PAGE:108==
100
Joint Risk Mitigation by Time-Explicit Optimization
Example 5.1 Consider the choice of risk measure
Tθ[Ψ] := ψRO = 1
nd
nd
X
i=1
ψi.
It then follows that ∂Tθ[Ψ]
∂ψi
=
1
nd , ∀i ∈{1, ..., nd}. Hence one obtains,
∇ukτ = 1
T
M−1
X
ℓ=0
 
1
nd
nd
X
i=1
∇ukψi
M(ℓ+1)
!
∆tM(ℓ)
= 1
T
M−1
X
ℓ=0
∇ukψRO(tM(ℓ+1))∆tM(ℓ), k ∈N.
Remark 5.1 The results of this section are based on the assumption that the
risk measure, Tθ[Ψ], is continuously diﬀerentiable with respect to the controls
{uk}N−1
k=0 . As mentioned in Chapter 4, this assumption is not satisﬁed in the
case of conditional value-at-risk, Tθ[Ψ] := CVaRθ,α[Ψ]. Nevertheless, in this
case, this thesis pragmatically, but also successfully, uses the gradients
∇ukτCVaR,α := 1
T
M−1
X
ℓ=0
∇ukψCVaR,α(tM(ℓ+1))∆tM(ℓ), k ∈N,
where, in accordance with (5.8),
∇ukψCV aR,α := 1
nα
nα
X
i=1
∇uk ˜ψi, k ∈N.
Ties to multi-objective optimization
The following relates the TE problem to MOO. The objective function
τ = 1
T
M−1
X
ℓ=0
Tθ[Ψ(tM(ℓ+1))]∆tM(ℓ),
(5.9)
may be interpreted as a weigthed sum method, where the weights are auto-
matically determined as the time-step lengths, ∆tM(ℓ). Also, the weights are
normalized by construction (with tM(0) = t0, tM(M) = tf):
1
T
M−1
X
ℓ=0
∆tM(ℓ) = 1
T
 M
X
ℓ=1
tM(ℓ) −
M−1
X
ℓ=0
tM(ℓ)
!
= tM(M) −tM(0)
T
= 1.
==PAGE:109==
5.3 TE optimization - Theoretical and computational aspects
101
Since ∆tM(ℓ) > 0 for all ℓ∈{0, ..., M −1}, it follows by Theorem 3.3, that a
solution u = {uk}N−1
k=0 of (2.16) is also Pareto optimal with respect to the MOO
problem (with TM(ℓ) := Tθ[Ψ(tM(ℓ), x, u, x0, θ)], for notational convenience):
max
{xk}N
k=0,{uk}N−1
k=0
T = (TM(1), TM(2), ..., TM(M))
(5.10a)
s.t.
Rk(xk+1, xk, uk) = 0,
k ∈N,
(5.10b)
umin,k ≤uk ≤umax,k,
k ∈N.
(5.10c)
Accordingly, TE optimization has the neat interpretation as an a priori MOO
approach which seeks to simulteneously optimize a given sample estimated risk
measure Tθ[Ψ] at each time-node {tM(ℓ)}M
ℓ=1 such as to minimize the average
risk over time. As opposed to most MOO methods of the literature, TE meth-
ods therefore avoid the cumbersome deliberations of weigth adjustements and
additional computations associated with generating the Pareto front.
Computational aspects of TE methods
As opposed to conventional ensemble-based methods, TE methods focus on
multiple risk-related objectives over time. This enables the ability to improve
the balance between short-term and long-term performance measures. However,
it also implies that TE methods require computation of the gradients
{∇ukψi
M(ℓ)}M
ℓ=1, k ∈N for each ﬁxed i ∈{1, ..., nd}.
Unless multi-level parallelism is available, these calculations require a for-loop
and TE methods therefore become computationally more demanding compared
to conventional methods. Fig. 5.3 illustrates how this aﬀects the optimization
procedure.
Note in particular that the gradient calculations,
{∇ukψi
M(j)}N−1
k=0 , for a ﬁxed time, ˜tj ∈{˜tℓ}M
ℓ=1,
are conducted in parallel. The additional computational eﬀort of TE methods
therefore amounts to a single for-loop of M adjoint computations per gradi-
ent evaluation. Further, as demonstrated, the number of nodes, M, equals the
number of objectives subject to simultaneous optimization and may therefore, in
general, be chosen much smaller than N. Compared to methods of model-based
economical and geological uncertainties, which rely on nd · (ne −1) additional
simulations and adjoint calculations to account for economical uncertainty, com-
putational eﬀort of TE methods becomes negligible.
==PAGE:110==
102
Joint Risk Mitigation by Time-Explicit Optimization
Reservoir(Simulator(
Flow(Equa3ons(
Core(1(
(
!
!
(
(
(
(
t(
Uopt(
(
Ini33al(Reservoir(
Condi3ons,(x0(
t(
(
uinit(
Ensemble$
Ɵi$$,$i$=$1,…$,nd$
(
Core(2(
(
(
Core(nd(
(
(
(
Reservoir(Simulator(
Flow(Equa3ons(
Reservoir(Simulator(
Flow(Equa3ons(
t(
u(
Op0mizer!
(
!
t(
u(
t(
u(
Ɵ1(
Ɵ2(
Ɵnd(
Adjoint(Sensi3vi3es(
NPVs(
For i=1:M 
End 
Adjoint(Sensi3vi3es(
NPVs(
For i=1:M 
End 
Adjoint(Sensi3vi3es(
NPVs(
For i=1:M 
End 
{ruk 1
M(`)}M
`=1, k 2 N.
{ruk 2
M(`)}M
`=1, k 2 N.
{ruk nd
M(`)}M
`=1, k 2 N.
ruk⌧= 1
T
M−1
X
`=0
 nd
X
i=1
ruk i
M(`+1)
@T✓[ M(`+1)]
@ i
M(`+1)
!
∆tM(`), k 2 N
⌧= 1
T
M−1
X
`=0
T✓[ (tM(`+1))]∆tM(`)
{ 1
M(`)}M
`=1
{ 2
M(`)}M
`=1
{ nd
M(`)}M
`=1
Figure 5.3: Flow Chart
==PAGE:111==
5.4 Concrete TE methods
103
(a) Conceptual drawing of TE SRO
(b) Conceptual drawing of TE CVaR
Figure 5.4: Illustration of TE methods. Shaded areas indicate max/min bands.
5.4
Concrete TE methods
This thesis introduces three concrete TE methods:
• Time-Explicit Robust optimization (TE RO)
Tθ[Ψ] := ψRO
• Time-Explicit Sharp Ratio optimization (TE SRO)
Tθ[Ψ] := ψRO
ψσ
• Time-Explicit Cond. Value-at-Risk optimization (TE CVaR)
Tθ[Ψ] := ψRO + ψCVaR,α.
TE RO and TE SRO are inspired by RO and MVO. TE RO seeks to increase
expected return over time whereas TE SRO aims to maximize the modiﬁed
Sharpe Ratio over time. In this way, the method seeks to promote expected
return while reducing variance (Fig. 5.4a).
The potential pitfalls of TE RO and TE SRO are the same as those of RO
and MVO. TE RO does not address risks directly whereas TE SRO addresses
both high and low returns. Consequently, reduction of high returns may occur
without increasing low returns.
As risk mitigation of low returns is central to operating companies, other ap-
proaches need investigation.
Here TE CVaR, which is based on CVaRO, is
proposed. By construction TE CVaR only targets the α% lowest returns, i.e.,
the minimal returns of the ensemble are maximized over time while expected
returns are simulteneously maximized in order to promote high realizations.
==PAGE:112==
104
Joint Risk Mitigation by Time-Explicit Optimization
In this way, TE CVaR seeks to avoid pitfalls by combining only the desirable
properties of TE RO and TE SRO (Fig. 5.4b).
Remark 5.2 Note that since ψCVaR,α is discontinuous with respect to the
controls, the same also holds true for TE CVaR. Nevertheless, with promising
results, this thesis uses a gradient-based approach to optimize the TE CVaR
objective function with gradients
∇ukψTE CVaR := ∇ukψRO + ∇ukψCVaR,α, k ∈N.
5.5
Numerical results
The following presents a series of numerical case studies which serve the purpose
of illustrating the potential of TE methods to reduce geological risk measures
over time and thereby implicity mitigate time-dependent economical risks in the
process. Three concrete strategies are considered: TE RO, TE SRO and TE
CVaR. Firstly, TE CVaR is compared to NO, RO and MVO, in order to illustrate
the main beneﬁts of the time-explicit approach over conventional methods. Then
TE CVaR is compared to TE RO, TE SRO to illustrate the advantages and
limitations of diﬀerent TE risk measures. Further, TE methods are compared to
Reactive control, which is included as an optimal short-term benchmark senario.
Lastly, modiﬁed strategies, which combine TE methods with a reactive strategy
are investigated as means to avoid risks of low returns and rate-of-movement
constraints on the input proﬁle are proposed to delocalize expected proﬁts.
For all case studies, representation of (5.9) is done with M = 7, where
{˜tℓ}M
ℓ=1 = {30, 60, 900, 1200, 1500, 1680, 1800} days.
For each TE method, the optimization problem (5.3) is solved following the
procedure outlined in Fig. 5.3 with N = 60. The permeability ﬁelds with indices
i ∈{1, 2, ..., 24} in the PermEns ﬁle, are used in all simulations.
TE CVaR versus conventional methods
The following compares TE CVaR to conventional methods, NO, RO and MVO.
The results are presented in Fig. 5.5.
• As a general observation, TE CVaR provides considerably faster initial
NPV build-up compared to NO, RO and MVO. Short-term gains are sig-
==PAGE:113==
5.5 Numerical results
105
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
Millons [US Dollars]
0
200
400
600
800
TE CVaR vs NO
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
200
400
600
800
TE CVaR vs RO
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
200
400
600
800
TE CVaR vs MVO
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
Millons [US Dollars]
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Cond. Value-at-Risk 12 %
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Cond. Value-at-Risk 12 %
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Cond. Value-at-Risk 12 %
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
Increase in % 
0
20
40
60
80
100
Increase in %
Expect. Return
Cond. Value-at-Risk
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
20
40
60
80
100
Increase in %
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
20
40
60
80
100
Increase in %
Figure 5.5: Comparison of TE CVaR to conventional strategies.
NPV [Millons USD]
20
40
60
80
100
CDF
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
time= 60 days
NPV [Millons USD]
50
100
150
200
CDF
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
time= 150 days
NPV [Millons USD]
100
200
300
400
CDF
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
time= 300 days
NPV [Millons USD]
200
400
600
800
CDF
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
time= 600 days
NPV [Millons USD]
200
400
600
800
1000
CDF
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
time= 900 days
NPV [Millons USD]
200
400
600
800
1000
CDF
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
time= 1200 days
NPV [Millons USD]
200
400
600
800
1000
CDF
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
time= 1500 days
NPV [Millons USD]
0
500
1000
1500
CDF
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
time= 1800 days
TE CVaR
NO
RO
MVO
Figure 5.6: Comparison of cumulative distribution functions.
==PAGE:114==
106
Joint Risk Mitigation by Time-Explicit Optimization
niﬁcantly improved whereas long-term NPVs are only slightly compro-
mised. As the best result, TE CVaR provides a 61.7%, 42% and 63.5%
increase in short-term expected returns compared to NO, RO and MVO.
Furthermore, in all three cases, increases in expected return remain above
21% from t = 300 days until t = 900 days. Long-term expected returns
are in turn only reduced in the cases of RO and MVO by respectively 5.8%
and 3.4%.
• Fulﬁlling its primary purpose, TE CVaR manages to reduce risks as mea-
sured by cond.
value-at-risk.
Notably, in spite of increased expected
returns. This is illustrated by greatly improved CVaR, i.e., the risks of
low short-term returns are considerably reduced. As the best result, TE
CVaR provides a 109.4%, 36.3% and 49.6% increase in short-term CVaR
compared to NO, RO and MVO. Long-term CVaR is only slightly reduced
by 1.3% and 7.3% compared to RO and MVO.
• Fig. 5.6 compares the cumulative distribution functions of the considered
methods. The results show that the worst case senario of TE CVaR outper-
forms the best case senarios of NO, RO and MVO for as long as t = 1200
days. Reprashed, TE CVaR guarantees signiﬁcant increased short-term
proﬁts. From t = 1500 days to t = 1800 days, the cumulative distribution
of TE CVaR remains superior to NO in terms of low returns, whereas it
stands comparable to RO and MVO. This demonstrates the potential of
TE CVaR to eﬀectively balance short-term and long-term gains.
In general, TE RO and TE SRO provide the same overall improved ability to
balance short-term and long-term proﬁts compared to conventional ensemble-
based methods.
To avoid unnecessary repetition, the ﬁgures illustrating the
results are presented in Appendix D.
Comparison of TE methods
Fig. 5.7 compares the TE methods. MVO is used as reference case. Fig. 5.8
shows increases in expected return and CVaR relative to NO, RO and MVO.
• All TE methods provide faster initial NPV and CVaR build-up as com-
pared to the reference case MVO, i.e., short-term objectives are improved.
Standard deviations remain comparable or slightly lower as compared to
MVO. Notably, this is in spite of increased expected returns. Note in par-
ticular how TE SRO, as opposed to MVO, manages to keep a low standard
deviation throughtout the reservoir life, as indicated by the narrow proba-
bility bands. This behaviour encaptures the diﬀerences in the underlying
==PAGE:115==
5.5 Numerical results
107
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
Millons [US Dollars]
0
200
400
600
800
Mean-Variance Optimization
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
200
400
600
800
TE Robust Optimization
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
200
400
600
800
TE Sharp Ratio Optimization
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
200
400
600
800
TE CVaR Optimization
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
Millons [US Dollars]
0
50
100
150
200
Standard deviation
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
50
100
150
200
Standard deviation
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
50
100
150
200
Standard deviation
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
50
100
150
200
Standard deviation
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
Millons [US Dollars]
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Cond. Value at Risk 12 % 
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Cond. Value at Risk 12 % 
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Cond. Value at Risk 12 % 
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Cond. Value at Risk 12 % 
Figure 5.7: Comparison of TE methods. Reference case: MVO.
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
Increase in % 
0
50
100
NO Vs TE RO
Expect. Return
Cond. Value-at-Risk
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
50
100
NO Vs TE SRO
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
50
100
NO Vs TE CVaR
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
Increase in % 
0
50
100
RO Vs TE RO
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
50
100
RO Vs TE SRO
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
50
100
RO Vs TE CVaR
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
Increase in % 
0
50
100
MVO Vs TE RO
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
50
100
MVO Vs TE SRO
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
50
100
MVO Vs TE CVaR
Figure 5.8: Comparison of TE methods relative to the reference cases: NO, RO and
MVO
==PAGE:116==
108
Joint Risk Mitigation by Time-Explicit Optimization
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
Rate [m 3/day]
0
500
1000
MVO
 Optimal controls for Inj.1
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
500
1000
MVO
 Optimal controls for Inj.2
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
500
1000
MVO
 Optimal controls for Inj.3
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
Rate [m 3/day]
0
500
1000
TE RO
 Optimal controls for Inj.1
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
500
1000
TE RO
 Optimal controls for Inj.2
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
500
1000
TE RO
 Optimal controls for Inj.3
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
Rate [m 3/day]
0
500
1000
TE SRO
 Optimal controls for Inj.1
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
500
1000
TE SRO
 Optimal controls for Inj.2
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
500
1000
TE SRO
 Optimal controls for Inj.3
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
Rate [m 3/day]
0
500
1000
TE CVaR
 Optimal controls for Inj.1
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
500
1000
TE CVaR
 Optimal controls for Inj.2
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
500
1000
TE CVaR
 Optimal controls for Inj.3
Figure 5.9: Comparison of TE methods in terms of operational strategies. Refer-
ence case: MVO. The red dotted lines indicate bound constraints.
mathematical formulations. TE SRO focuses on several points in time
distributed over the entire reservoir life span, whereas MVO only focuses
on the single objective of decreasing end-time standard deviation.
• Compared to TE RO, TE SRO and TE CVaR at t = 300 days, NO ex-
pected return is increased by 70.9%, 76.5% and 64.1%, RO expected return
by 47.4%, 52.19% and 41.5% and MVO expected return by 24.7%, 28.8%
and 19%. Compared to NO, RO and MVO, increases in expected return
remain above 30% until 1200 days, 600 days and 900 days, above 20 %
until 900 days, 300 days and 900 days and above 20 % until 600 days, 300
days and 600 days. This demonstrates signiﬁcant and evenly distributed
short-term gains.
• At t = 300 days, NO CVaR is increased by 66.3%, 69.8% and 61.8%, RO
CVaR by 40.1%, 42.4% and 36.3% and MVO CVaR by 26.5%, 28.6% and
23%. The increases of NO CVaR remain above 60% until t = 1800 days
in all cases. TE CVaR provides the best result with a maximal increase of
109.4%. The increases of RO CVaR remain above 20% until 600 days, 600
days and 900 days whereas MVO CVaR remain above 30% until 600 days,
600 days and 900 days. This demonstrates the ability of TE methods to
mitigate the risks of low short-term returns.
• Fig. 5.9 compares the operational strategies associated with the TE meth-
ods.
The MVO strategy is included as reference case.
In general, the
==PAGE:117==
5.5 Numerical results
109
NPV [Millons USD]
20
40
60
80
100
CDF
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
time= 60 days
NPV [Millons USD]
50
100
150
200
250
CDF
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
time= 150 days
NPV [Millons USD]
200
250
300
350
400
CDF
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
time= 300 days
NPV [Millons USD]
300
400
500
600
700
CDF
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
time= 600 days
NPV [Millons USD]
400
600
800
1000
CDF
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
time= 900 days
NPV [Millons USD]
400
600
800
1000
CDF
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
time= 1200 days
NPV [Millons USD]
400
600
800
1000
CDF
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
time= 1500 days
NPV [Millons USD]
400
600
800
1000
CDF
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
time= 1800 days
MVO
TE RO
TE SRO
TE CVaR
Figure 5.10: Comparison of TE methods in terms of CDFs. Reference case:
MVO.
operating proﬁles contain several sudden changes in water injection rates.
These are more pronounced in the cases of MVO and TE SRO as com-
pared to TE RO and TE CVaR. Notice how the rapid changes are localized
around the time-nodes used for the optimization. This behaviour reﬂects
the desire to promote proﬁt at these particular times, which is accomplised
by increasing water injection rates to displace more oil. In general, the
sudden changes are undesirable due to the associated increased sensitivity
to process noise. Later in this chapter, rate-of-movement constraints will
be investigated to mitigate this issue.
In general, TE RO provides a fast NPV build-up and the highest long-term
expected return. However, this comes at the cost of the highest variance over
time. TE SRO provides a fast initial build-up which is then superseded by a
slower, however more steady incline. In this way, TE SRO resembles MVO, note
however that TE SRO maintains a low variances over the entire reservoir cycle,
whereas MVO primarily manages to reduce end-time risks. TE CVaR provides a
fast NPV build-up comparable to TE RO. However, TECVaR provides a lower
variance due to overall higher CVaR. In this way, TE CVaR represents the
desirable properties of TE RO and TE SRO, as intended. These observations
are substatiated by Fig. 5.10, which depicts CDFs over time. In particular, TE
CVaR gives a CDF which is comparable to that of TE RO in terms of high
returns whereas risks, as measured by low returns, are greatly reduced.
==PAGE:118==
110
Joint Risk Mitigation by Time-Explicit Optimization
Computational performances
The following compares the computational performances of TE methods to con-
ventional ensemble-based methods. Computational performance is measured in
terms of computational times, function counts (FCs) and Conjugate Gradient
iterations (CGIs) associated with the optimization procedures. Data on FCs
and CGIs is acquired from the output of fmincon, while computational times
are measured using MATLAB’s built-in tic, toc functions. Expected compu-
tational times of the TE methods are included for comparison purposes. The
theoretical times are calculated by
T = (ST + AT M) · FC
60
min,
where ST := 72.51 s and AT := 23.73 s have been estimated emperically as
the average time required to run 24 simulations and 24 adjoint calculation in
parallel. The average is based on 20 consecutive runs. M := 7 denotes the
number of objectives subject to simulteneous optimization. Fig. 5.11 presents
the results.
• Overall, the results show that TE methods are computationally more de-
manding compared to conventional methods. This is reﬂected in an in-
creased number of FCs and CGIs. However, as indicated by the calculated
expected times, the additional eﬀort is tied to the adjoint calculations as
expected. The additional eﬀort is therefore manageable.
• Despite increased computational times, TE methods remain a computa-
tional attractive alternative to methods of combined model-based uncer-
tainties. For comparison, Fig. 5.12 depicts computational times of TE
methods and the estimated time required to conduct combined model-
based optimization with nd = 24 geological realizations and ne = 24
economical realizations. The estimate is computed by
TMB = (ST + AT ) · ne · FC
60
min,
where FC = 66 is used as an estimated function count. The computation
relies on the assumption that the combination of geological and econom-
ical senarios are computed in parallel using 24 cores. Note also that the
diﬀerences in computational times will grow even more pronounced as the
number of economical realizations, ne, increases.
==PAGE:119==
5.5 Numerical results
111
RO
TE RO
Exp. time TE RO
MVO
TE SRO
Exp. time TE SRO
CVaRO
TE CVaR
Exp. time TE CVaR
Time [Minutes]
0
100
200
300
400
Min: 106.9913
Min: 291.676
Min: 286.344
Min: 150.0997
Min: 254.2265
Min: 250.551
Min: 123.038
Min: 359.8957
Min: 334.068
Computational times
RO
TE RO
MVO
TE SRO
CVaRO
TE CVaR
Function Counts
0
20
40
60
80
100
FCs: 66
FCs: 72
FCs: 69
FCs: 63
FCs: 72
FCs: 84
Function evaluations
RO
TE RO
MVO
TE SRO
CVaRO
TE CVaR
CG Iterations
0
200
400
600
800
CGIs: 135
CGIs: 513
CGIs: 531
CGIs: 765
CGIs: 93
CGIs: 165
Conjugate Gradient iterations
Figure 5.11: Comparison of TE methods in terms of computational perfor-
mance.
TE RO
TE SRO
TE CVaR
Estimate: Combined model-based methods
Time [Minutes]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
Min: 291.676
Min: 254.2265
Min: 359.8957
Min: 2771.712
Computational times
Figure 5.12: Comparison of TE methods to methods of combined model-based
uncertainties.
==PAGE:120==
112
Joint Risk Mitigation by Time-Explicit Optimization
Comparison to Reactive control
The results indicate a major potential of TE methods to mitigate the main
shortcoming of conventional ensemble-based methods, namely the inherent neg-
ligence of short-term objectives. Performance measures such as expected return
and CVaR stand to be increased by hundreds of millions of dollars. To gain
a broader perspective, which comprises feedback-based methods, the following
compares TE methods to the optimal benchmark senario for short-term gains,
Reactive control. Fig. 5.13 presents the results. Relative increases and decreases
are depicted in Fig. 5.14.
• Visual inspection shows that all TE methods provide short-term expected
returns, standard deviations and CVaRs, which are comparable, however
slightly inferior, to RC. Compared to conventional emsemble-based meth-
ods, the improvements are signiﬁcant.
The cost is midly compromised
long-term objectives.
• At time t = 300, the decreases in expected return, compared to RC, are
reduced from 43.69% to 17.03%, from 33.44% to 14.30% and from 35.40%
to 20.33% by TE RO, TE SRO and TE CVaR relative to RO, MVO
and CVaRO. As a consequence, long-term proﬁt, as compared to RC, is
increased by 1.49%, 2.28% by TE RO and TE SRO, whereas RO and MVO
increase RC long-term proﬁt by 5.96% and 3.39%. Compared to RC, TE
CVaR reduces end-time expected return by a negligible 0.21%. CVaRO,
however, increases long-term proﬁt by 5.41%.
• At time t = 300, reductions in CVaR, compared to RC, amounts to 37.61%
and 12.61% by TE RO and RO, 30.89% and 11.40% by TE SRO and
MVO and 28.80%, 14.97% by TE CVaR and CVaRO. Long-term CVaR is
reduced by TE RO and TE CVaR by 8.11% and 1.01%. RO and CVaRO,
however, increases end-time CVaR by 0.35% and 4.15%. Compared to
RC, TE SRO increases long-term CVaR by a mere 0.036%, whereas MVO
provides a 3.39% increment.
• Overall, by the distribution of proﬁt, the results suggest that TE methods
provide a better balance between short-term and long-term objectives.
Visually, this is reﬂected in Fig. 5.14. Note especially how the diﬀerences
between TE methods and RC diminishes signiﬁcantly more rapid relative
to those between RC and conventional ensemble-based methods.
In general, despite slight reductions of expected end-time proﬁts and CVaRs,
the results demonstrate that TE methods provide an improved balance between
==PAGE:121==
5.5 Numerical results
113
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
Millons [US Dollars]
0
200
400
600
800
Reactive control
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
200
400
600
800
TE Robust Optimization
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
200
400
600
800
TE Sharp Ratio Optimization
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
200
400
600
800
TE CVaR Optimization
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
Millons [US Dollars]
0
50
100
150
200
Standard deviation
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
50
100
150
200
Standard deviation
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
50
100
150
200
Standard deviation
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
50
100
150
200
Standard deviation
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
Millons [US Dollars]
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Cond. Value at Risk 12 % 
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Cond. Value at Risk 12 % 
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Cond. Value at Risk 12 % 
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Cond. Value at Risk 12 % 
Figure 5.13: Comparison of TE methods. Reference case: Reactive control.
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
Increase in % 
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
RC Vs TE RO
Expect. Return
Cond. Value-at-Risk
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
RC Vs TE SRO
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
RC Vs TE CVaR
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
Increase in % 
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
RC Vs RO
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
RC Vs MVO
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
ROC Vs CVaRO
Figure 5.14: Comparison of TE methods and conventional ensemble-based
methods relative to Reactive control.
==PAGE:122==
114
Joint Risk Mitigation by Time-Explicit Optimization
short-term and long-term objectives as compared to conventional ensemble-
based methods. Generally, however, TE methods can not compete with RC
in terms of short-term gains. Further, only sligth improvements of long-term
objectives are obtainable. This demonstrates the profound power of feedback.
It is, however, worthwhile to note that the numerical experiments of this thesis
only involves three injection wells. In general, more realistic cases, which include
several additional wells, tend to penalize RC in terms of associated increments
of the water injection costs. This suggests further investigation of TE methods’
potentially positive eﬀects to such senarios. This is, however, outside the scope
of this thesis.
Strategies modiﬁed by reactive control
The following combines TE methods with a reactive strategy, which shuts in
producer wells as they become inproﬁtable. The purpose is to investiagte the
possibilities of exploiting the power of feedback to improve the balance between
short-term and long-term objectives and to reduce the risks of low returns. The
results are presented in Fig. 5.15.
• As with conventional ensemble-based methods, the positive eﬀects of the
modiﬁed strategies are primarily restricted to long-term objectives. The
explanation is late stage inproﬁtable production wells.
Long-term ex-
pected returns are increased by respectively 2.70%, 1.45% and 3.18% rel-
ative to TE RO, TE SRO and TE CVaR, respectively.
• The increases in expected returns are seen to be attributable to a re-
duced number of low proﬁt realizations. This is reﬂected in the relative
increases of long-term CVaRs, which are 14.77%, 6.77% and 6.25%, rela-
tive to TE RO, TE SRO and TE CVaR. This observation is substantiated
by Fig. 5.16, which depicts proﬁt realizations prioir to and after the TE
operational proﬁles have been modiﬁed by a reactive strategy. It can be
observed that primarily low realizations are aﬀected. This shows that low
realizations occur due to inproﬁtable producer wells.
In general, the results show that TE methods may beneﬁt from a combination
with a feedback-based reactive strategy by improved long-term objectives. Espe-
cially risks of low returns are reduced. Since the modiﬁcations do not aﬀect the
short-term objectives of TE Methods, the combination of strategies provides an
improved balance between short-term and long-term objectives, i.e., a reactive
strategy may to a large extend restore the long-term gains which were originally
sacriﬁced by the optimization procedure in order to increase short-term proﬁts.
==PAGE:123==
5.5 Numerical results
115
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
Exp. Return [Millons USD]
0
200
400
600
800
TE RO 
 Exp. Return
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
200
400
600
800
TE SRO 
 Exp. Return
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
200
400
600
800
TE CVaR 
 Exp. Return
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
CVaR 20% [Millons USD]
0
200
400
600
CVaR 20%
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
200
400
600
CVaR 20%
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
200
400
600
CVaR 20%
Modified strategy
Expect. return
Cond. Value-at-Risk
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
Increase in % 
0
5
10
15
Increase in %
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
5
10
15
Increase in %
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
5
10
15
Increase in %
Figure 5.15: Comparison of TE methods and strategies modiﬁed by reactive
control.
Time [days]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
Millions [USD]
0
200
400
600
800
TE RO - NPV realizations
Time [days]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
0
200
400
600
800
Modified TE RO - NPV realizations
Time [days]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
Millions [USD]
0
200
400
600
800
TE SRO - NPV realizations
Time [days]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
0
200
400
600
800
Modified TE SRO - NPV realizations
Time [days]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
Millions [USD]
0
200
400
600
800
TE CVaR - NPV realizations
Time [days]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
0
200
400
600
800
Modified TE CVaR - NPV realizations
Figure 5.16: Illustration of the eﬀects on low realizations caused by strate-
gies, modiﬁed by reactive control. Red lines indicate the lowest
realizations prior to modications. Green lines denote the same
realizations after the modiﬁcations.
==PAGE:124==
116
Joint Risk Mitigation by Time-Explicit Optimization
Delocalization by rate-of-movement constraints
The operating proﬁles associated with TE methods have shown to contain sud-
den changes in the water injection rates. This is a natural consequence of the
underlying mathematical formulation, which focuses on promoting e.g. expected
proﬁt at distinct points in time. In particular, to avoid unnecessary water injec-
tion costs, the optimizer localizes all eﬀort around these points, which in turn
gives rise to sudden spikes in the injection rates. This behaviour is however
undesirable for two reasons. Firstly, sudden changes in water injection rates
make the operating proﬁle more sensitive to process noise. Secondly, localized
eﬀorts may implicitly compromise other objectives unintentionally. One could
mitigate this issue by including more objectives in the objective function. This
is however not a viable solution due to the additional computational eﬀort.
As a computationally attractive alternative, the following investigates rate-of-
movement constraints (ROMs) (5.11), as a mean to avoid sudden spikes and
thereby delocalize water injections.
∆umin,k ≤∆uk ≤∆umax,k, ∆uk = uk+1 −uk, k ∈N.
(5.11)
For test purposes, the maximal and minimal allowable rates of change are
∆umin,k = −100 m3
day, ∆umax,k = 100 m3
day, k ∈N.
For brevity, attention is restricted to TE SRO. The results are presented in Fig.
5.17 and 5.18.
• Fig.
5.17 compares the TE SRO operating proﬁles with and without
ROMs. It can be observed that the respective strategies reﬂect the same
overall tendency, namely that injection rates are increased around the
times corresponding to the destinct objectives subject to optimization and
accordingly decreased between those times. However, the ROMs prevent
sudden spikes and thereby localized water injections. As demonstrated in
Fig. 5.18, the eﬀects are positive. Overall, expected return and CVaR
are increased with only slight deteriation of long-term proﬁt as a conse-
quence. The reason is the more evenly distributed water injections, which
cause more oil to be produced in early and mid stages of the recovery
process. The increased water injection costs however midly compromises
ﬁnal return.
In general, the results demonstrate that ROMs may be applied to delocalize
water injections and thereby avoid sudden rapid changes in the operating proﬁle.
==PAGE:125==
5.5 Numerical results
117
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
Rate [m 3/day]
-200
0
200
400
600
800
1000
TE SRO
 Optimal controls for Inj.1
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
-200
0
200
400
600
800
1000
TE SRO
 Optimal controls for Inj.2
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
-200
0
200
400
600
800
1000
TE SRO
 Optimal controls for Inj.3
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
Rate [m 3/day]
-200
0
200
400
600
800
1000
TE SRO with ROMs
 Optimal controls for Inj.1
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
-200
0
200
400
600
800
1000
TE SRO with ROMs
 Optimal controls for Inj.2
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
-200
0
200
400
600
800
1000
TE SRO with ROMs
 Optimal controls for Inj.3
Figure 5.17: Comparison of TE SRO operating proﬁles prior to and after im-
posing ROM constraints on the input proﬁle.
time [days]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
Exp. Return Millons [US Dollars]
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
TE SRO vs TE SRO with ROMs
TE SRO
TE SRO with ROMs
time [days]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
Increase in % 
-5
0
5
10
15
20
TE SRO vs TE SRO with ROMs
Expect. Return
Cond. Value-at-Risk
Figure 5.18: Comparison of TE SRO prior to and after imposing ROM con-
straints on the input proﬁle in terms of expected return and
conditional value-at-risk.
==PAGE:126==
118
Joint Risk Mitigation by Time-Explicit Optimization
Further, the delocalization implies a more evenly distributed injection proﬁle,
which in turn causes a more even distribution of proﬁt. The consequence is
slightly compromised long-term proﬁts. Overall, the results suggest that ROMs
may further promote the ability of TE methods to balance short-term and long-
term objectives.
5.6
Summary and conclusions
The adoptation of model-based optimization by oil companies is challenged by
economical and geological uncertainties. In the oil literature and in previous
chapters of this thesis, risk migitation related to such uncertainties has mainly
been treated by ensemble-based approaches and short-term versus long-term
multi-objective optimization. In this chapter, Time-Explicit methods have been
proposed as a novel and computationally tractable approach to address risk miti-
gation of economical and geological uncertainites in a united fashion. Compared
to methods known from the literature, TE methods only rely on an ensemble of
geological realizations and therefore present a computationally tractable alter-
native to methods of highly expensive combined ensemble-based uncertainties.
Further is has been demonstrated that TE methods may be interpreted as a pri-
ori MOO methods with weights predetermined by discretization. As opposed to
a posteriori MOO approaches of the literature, TE methods avoid the expensive
computations and cumbersome process of weigth-adjustements associated with
generating the Pareto front.
By a series of numerical cases studies, conventional strategies of risk mitigation,
NO, RO and MVO, have been compared to three concrete TE methods: TE
RO, TE SRO and TE CVaR.
The following summarizes the main conclusions:
• The results demonstrate the potential of TE methods to signiﬁcantly im-
prove short-term risk-related performance measures such as expected re-
turn, standard deviation and cond. value-at-risk, with only slight deteri-
ation of long-term objectives as a conseqeunce.
• TE CVaR is not continuously diﬀerentiable with respect to the controls.
Nevertheless, the results demonstrate that a gradient-based approach may
successfully be used to optimization the TE CVaR objective function.
The approach proved to be a good candidate to mitigate the paramount
risks of low expected returns, while at the same time, promoting high
returns. Short-term conditional value-at-risk was increased by as much
==PAGE:127==
5.6 Summary and conclusions
119
as 109.4%, 36.3% and 49.7% as compared to NO, RO and MVO, while
expected return was increased by 61.7%, 42% and 63.5%. In turn, long-
term objectives were only reduced by 1.3% and 7.3% in the case of CVaR
and 5.8% and 3.4% in the case of expected return, relative to RO and
MVO.
• The combination of TE strategies with reactive control showed a signiﬁ-
cant potential to improve the overall balance between long-term and short-
term objectives and simultaneously minimize the risks of low returns. The
results demonstrated that a modiﬁcation by reactive control may advan-
tageously be used to restore the long-term gains, which are compromised
during the TE optimization process to increase short-term objectives.
• Reﬂecting the underlying mathematical formulation, the operating pro-
ﬁles associated with TE methods showed to contain sudden changes in
the rates of water injections localized around the objectives subject to si-
multaneously optimization. However, this causes an increased sensitivity
to process noise. By modiﬁcations of TE SRO, it was demonstrated that
such issues can be avoided using rate-of-movement constraints on the op-
erating proﬁles. Further, the results indicate that such constraints may
improve the overall balance between short-term and long-term proﬁts by
delocalizing water injections.
• Despite signiﬁcant improvements relative to conventional ensemble-based
approaches, TE methods proved unable to match the feedback-based Re-
active control in terms of short-term gains. Overall, long-term gains were
slightly improved. In this regard, it should be noted that in senarios where
reactive control is penalized by an increased number of injection wells, TE
methods have the potential to perform signiﬁcantly better.
In conclusion, as a computationally attractive alternative to approaches of com-
bined model-based uncertainites and a posteriori MOO methods, TE optimiza-
tion provides a framework for joint risk mitigation, with a signiﬁcant potential
to improve risk management in open-loop production optimization.
==PAGE:128==
120
Joint Risk Mitigation by Time-Explicit Optimization
==PAGE:129==
Chapter 6
Outlook
The Worlds exceedingly growing demand for energy requires eﬃcient and proper
use of available resources including oil and natural gasses. To meet this chal-
lenge, production optimization has been suggested to enchance and optimally
regulate the process of oil recovery and thereby fulﬁll the potential of active oil
ﬁelds. However, real-life applications of production optimization is challenged
by risks related to unpredictable ﬂuctuations in oil prices and sparse geologi-
cal data. As a conseqeunce, oil companies are reluctant to adopt methods of
model-based production optimization.
To approach the shortcomings of conventional production optimization, this
thesis has investigated known strategies, including short-term versus long term
optimization and ensemble-based optimization, and proposed novel state-of-the-
art methodology, Time-Explicit optimization, to improve management of risks
in the setting of open-loop production optimization.
==PAGE:130==
122
Outlook
6.1
Conclusion
Assesment of known strategies of risk mitigation
Current state-of-the art methodology has been assessed by investigation of short-
term versus long-term optimization and ensemble-based approaches. The fol-
lowing overall conclusions can be made:
• Compared to conventional production optimization, short-term versus long-
term optimization has a signiﬁcant potential to reduce time-dependent
economical risks by improving the balance between short-term and long-
term proﬁts.
• Relative to nominal optimization and Reactive control, ensemble-based
optimization has a considerable potential to mitigate long-term geological
risks by optimizing sample estimated expected return, standard deviation
and conditional value-at-risk.
• Short-term versus long-term optimization and popular ensemble-based ap-
proaches are computationally expensive a posteriori MOO methods, which
rely on multiple optimizations in order to generate a representative of the
Pareto front.
• Short-term versus long-term optimization does not take geological un-
certainty into account whereas ensemble-based methods solely focus on
long-term risks and thereby neglect economical risks.
In conclusion, despite the ability to improve isolated matters of risks, conven-
tional risk mitigation methods can be computationally expensive and fail to
account for economical and geological uncertainties in a united manner. Such
methods therefore leave the oil production subject to substantial risk and as a
result, practical applications become challenged.
Improved risk mitigation by Time-Explicit optimization
To address the issues of conventional risk mitigation strategies, the novel and
main contribution of this thesis, Time-Explicit optimization, has been proposed
as a computational tractable tool for joint risk mitigation. Open-loop simula-
tions have demonstrated that TE methods may signiﬁcantly improve the bal-
ance between short-term and long-term geological risk measures as compared
==PAGE:131==
6.1 Conclusion
123
to conventional ensemble-based methods. It has also been demonstrated that
the balance between objectives may be further improved by combining TE op-
timization with a reactive strategy and imposing rate-of-movement constraints
on the input proﬁle.
The work on TE optimization has given rise to the research paper Time- Explicit
Methods for Joint Economical and Geological Risk Mitigation in Production
Optimization, which has been submitted to the Journal of Petroleum Science
and Engineering, published by Elsevier.
Compared to methods of the oil literature, TE methods provide the following
main contributions :
Main contributions of TE methods
• By combining multi-objective optimization and conventional risk mitiga-
tion, TE methods provide a general framework for joint risk mitigation.
• Compared to conventional ensemble-based methods, TE optimization may
signiﬁcantly improve the balance between short-term and long-term geo-
logical risk measures.
• TE methods only rely on an ensemble of geological realizations and there-
fore present a computationally tractable alternative to methods of highly
expensive combined ensemble-based uncertainties.
• By construction, TE methods can be interpreted as a priori MOO meth-
ods. TE methods therefore avoid the expensive computations and cum-
bersome process of weigth-adjustements associated with generating the
Pareto front required by a posteriori MOO approaches of the literature.
• As opposed to hierarchical approaches of the literature, TE methods do
not rely on the long-term problem to be solved in advance.
In conclusion, by the ability to mitigate economical and geological risks in a
united and computationally tractable manner, TE optimization has a signiﬁcant
potential to improve management of risks in open-loop production optimization.
==PAGE:132==
124
Outlook
6.2
Recommandations for future work
The potential of TE methods to improve management of risks within the set-
ting of open-loop production optimization encourages but also needs further
investigations in order to validate and improve the methodology. The following
suggests future work in this direction:
• The work of this thesis uses a simple synthetic 2D reservoir model with
6 wells, where the rates of the injection wells are subject to control. To
support, validate and asses the results within a broader class of more com-
plex senarios, the proposed methodology should be applied to large-scale
and real-life models. Further, in this setting, performance should be com-
pared to conventional methods.
As a starting point, the 3D synthetic
egg-model [JFK+14], has recently been proposed as a common reference
case for validating and comparing results within the production optimiza-
tion community.
• Despite signiﬁcant improvements relative to conventional ensemble-based
approaches, TE methods proved unable to match the feedback-based Re-
active control in terms of short-term gains. In this regard, it should be
noted that in senarios where reactive control is penalized by an increased
number of injection wells, TE methods can be expected to perform signif-
icantly better. The above mentioned egg-model is a good starting point
for further investigation of this hypothesis.
• With promising results, this thesis has applied gradient-based optimiza-
tion to improve conditional value-at-risk of the discrete proﬁt distribution
tied to an ensemble of geological realizations. However, the associated ob-
jective function is not diﬀerentiable with respect to the controls. Future
work should therefore seek to establish the consequences and detect pos-
sible shortcomings. Further, derivative-free optimization methods should
also be investigated for comparison.
• The case studies of this thesis have been implemented and conducted in
MATLAB (2014b) with the support of the reservoir simulation toolbox
MRST (2014a). This is convenient and suﬃcient for base case develop-
ment and testing. However, due to the large scale nature and non-linearity
of reservoir simulation, it its not the ideal setting for further and more
complex investigations. Future work should therefore focus on implemen-
tation and tests in eﬃcient low level languages such as C/C ++ to improve
computional times and performance. In particular, investigations into fast
iterative solvers for large-scale linear systems of equations are needed to
avoid the time consuming and ineﬃcient memory allocation of standard
factorization methods. For work in this direction see e.g. [rgaSU13].
==PAGE:133==
6.2 Recommandations for future work
125
• The Time-Explicit approach has been speciﬁcally designed to resolve is-
sues tied to open-loop production optimization where feedback is not con-
sidered and economical uncertainty becomes pronounced with time. The
eﬀects of considering multiple objectives in a closed-loop setting, under a
moving prediction horizon, are however unclear. The possibility of apply-
ing TE methods, and multi-objective optimization methods in general, to
CLRM therefore needs further investigation.
==PAGE:134==
126
Outlook
==PAGE:135==
Appendix A
Two-Phase Immiscible Flow
- Governing Equations
The following appendix provides a derivation of the ﬂow equations
∂(ραφSα)
∂t
= −∇· (ραvα) + Qα, in Ω, t > 0, α ∈{o, w}.
(A.1)
The derivation is based on the assumption of isothermal conditions and the ex-
istence of a continuum of representative elementary volumes. The presentation
is based on [Che07].
Mass-balance equations
The domain Ω, representing the reservoir, is divided into a number of control
volumes. The law of mass conservation states that the rate of change in mass
within a given control volume, V, must equal the net inﬂow of mass at the
boundary ∂V. Consider mass ﬂow through a tube of rectangular cross-section
with area ∆A in the x1−direction. See Fig. A.1. Here the ﬂuid velocity is
taken to be constant over the cross section. Mass is transported by convec-
tion, i.e., mass is carried with the ﬂow. During the time, ∆t, the leading edge
of the marked parcel moves downstream a distance, vα,1∆t. Hence the mass
that crosses normal to the section in time, ∆t, is given by Z1 = ραvα,1∆t∆A.
==PAGE:136==
128
Two-Phase Immiscible Flow - Governing Equations
Figure A.1: Convectional mass ﬂux
Therefore the convective mass ﬂux in the x1 direction across the section is given
by
Z1
∆t∆A = ραvα,1.
Similarly the convective mass ﬂuxes in the x2 and x3 directions are given by
ραvα,2 and ραv3, respectively. The net mass inﬂow, Z, at the boundary, ∂V,
is therefore given by the sum of all such contributions, which in the limit as
|V | →0, gives the integral formulation
Z = −
Z
∂V
ραvα · nds,
where n is the outward pointing normal of ∂V.
The rate of change in mass within the control volume, V, is given by the rate
of change in ﬂuid mass concentration, Cα = ραφ, combined with contributions
from localized sources and sinks causing outﬂow and inﬂow of the given ﬂuid,
i.e.,
∂
∂t
Z
V
ραdx =
Z
V
∂Cα
∂t dx −
Z
V
Qαdx.
Therefore the law of mass conservation for the control volume becomes
Z
V
∂Cα
∂t dx −
Z
V
Qαdx = −
Z
∂V
ραu · nds.
(A.2)
By an application of Gauss’ Divergence Theorem one may rewrite (A.2) on
diﬀerential form. The Divergence Theorem states that the total net ﬂux over
the boundary equals the volume integral of the divergence of the vector ﬁeld,
i.e.,
−
Z
∂V
ραvα · nds = −
Z
V
∇· (ραvα)dx.
(A.3)
Rearranging (A.2) and using (A.3) one obtains
Z
V
∂Cα
∂t
+ ∇· (ραvα) −Qα

dx =
Z
V
∂(ραφ)
∂t
+ ∇· (ραvα) −Qα

dx = 0.
==PAGE:137==
129
Since this holds for any control volume and hence also in the limit as the control
volume becomes inﬁnitesimal, it follows that macroscopic behaviour of the ﬂuid
must satisfy
∂(ραφ)
∂t
+ ∇· (ραvα) −Qα = 0 in Ω, t > 0, α ∈{o, w}.
(A.4)
==PAGE:138==
130
Two-Phase Immiscible Flow - Governing Equations
==PAGE:139==
Appendix B
Darcy’s Law
The following appendix provides a derivation of Darcy’s law
v = −K
µ (∇p −ρg∇z) .
For simplicity, the derivation is restricted to the one-dimensional case for a
single-phase ﬂow.
Darcy’s law
The ﬁrst steps towards modeling the ﬂow of ﬂuids through a porous medium
were taken in the middle of the 19th century by french hydraulic engineer Henry
Darcy. In order to gain an understanding of the ﬂow of water through sand
ﬁlters, he conducted an experiment in which he injected water into a vertical
tank ﬁlled with sand and equipped with an outlet for the water at the bottom.
See Fig. B.1. The experiments may be described as follows:
As water completely ﬁlls the pores of the sand the inﬂow and outﬂow rates
become equal and the hydraulic heads at respectively top and bottom are mea-
sured using mercury ﬁlled manometers. The ﬂow of water through the sand
ﬁlter causes a loss of energy and as a result the hydraulic head is decreased.
==PAGE:140==
132
Darcy’s Law
Figure B.1: Darcy’s experiment.
Through careful measurements Darcy established that the total discharge Q is
proportional to respectively the cross-section area of the outlet A, the diﬀerence
in hydraulic head ht −hb and inversely proportional to the length of the tank
∆L, i.e, that there exists a constant C such that
Q = −CA(ht −hb)
∆L
The minus sign accounts for the direction of the ﬂow. This result has later been
reestablished for various other kinds of ﬂuids and porous media and is know as
Darcys law. The Darcy ﬂux is obtained by dividing by the cross-section area
v = Q
A = −C (ht −hb)
∆L
.
The Darcy ﬂux is often referred to as the Darcy velocity. This terminology is
however quite misleading as it suggests that the entire cross-section is available
for ﬂow. However as the porous medium only allow ﬂuid ﬂow through its in-
terconnected pores, Darcy’s velocity is not a velocity in the microscopic sense.
Instead a macroscopic velocity is obtained by averaging the microscopic veloc-
ities over the entire cross sectional area. See Fig. B.2. In general the change
in hydraulic head ht −hb = ∆h does not vary linearly along the lines of ﬂow
and it hence becomes necessary to consider drop in hydraulic head locally, i.e.,
by letting ∆L →0. In this case, the Darcy velocity should be understood as
an average value of the microscopic ﬂuxes through a so called Representative
Elementary Volume (REV), considered homogeneous from a macroscopic point
of view. In the limit as ∆L →0 one obtains
v = −C lim
∆L→0
∆h
∆L = −C dh
dL.
The hydraulic conductivity C depends on the ﬂuid and porous medium. In
==PAGE:141==
133
Figure B.2: The macroscopic Darcy velocity represents an average of micro-
scopic ﬂuid ﬂuxes.
particular experiments show that C is inversely proportional to the ﬂuid viscos-
ity µ and proportional to the ﬂuid weight λ = ρg where ρ is the density of the
ﬂuid i.e. there exists a constant k such that
C = k ρg
µ .
The Hydraulic head may be written as h = b0 −z + p
ρg, where z is the current
depth and b0 the bottom datum depth. Then Darcy’s law becomes
v = −k ρg
µ
d
dl

b0 −z + p
ρg

= −k
µ
dp
dl −ρg dz
dl

.
Darcy’s law can be extended to include two and three dimensions as well. In
these cases it may be formulated in terms of the gradient operator and takes
the form
v = −K
µ (∇p −ρg∇z) .
Here z denotes the vertical downward direction. The absolute permeability of
the porous medium K is then represented by respectively a 2 × 2 and 3 × 3
tensor.
==PAGE:142==
134
Darcy’s Law
==PAGE:143==
Appendix C
The Adjoint Method
The following appendix outlines how the adjoint method is used to calculate
the gradients, {∇ukψ}N−1
k=0 , required by the optimizer fmincon, to solve the
optimization problem (C.1). The exposition is based on [Cap13].
min
{uk}N−1
k=0
ψ({uk}N−1
k=0 ; bx0, θ)
(C.1a)
s.t.
umin,k ≤uk ≤umax,k, k ∈N,
(C.1b)
where
ψ({uk}N−1
k=0 ; bx0, θ) =
(
J(x, u; bx0, θ) =
N−1
X
k=0
Jk(xk+1, uk; θ) : R(x, u, x0; θ) = 0, x0 = bx0.
)
.
The discrete adjoint method
By the chain rule of multivariate calculus it follows that
∂ψ
∂u = ∂J
∂u + ∂J
∂x
∂x
∂u,
(C.2)
==PAGE:144==
136
The Adjoint Method
Furthermore, by assumption, R(x, u, x0; θ) = 0. Hence the implicit function
theorem implies that
∂x
∂u = −∂R
−1
∂x
∂R
∂u
(C.3)
(C.4)
Substitution of (C.3) into (C.2) gives
∂ψ
∂u = ∂J
∂u −∂J
∂x
∂R
−1
∂x
∂R
∂u .
(C.5)
Finally, introducing the adjoint variables, λ, as the solution of the linear system
of equations
λT ∂R
∂x = −∂J
∂x ,
(C.6)
it follows that
∂ψ
∂u = ∂J
∂u + λT ∂R
∂u .
(C.7)
□
Gradient calculations
By the above calculations the gradients, {∇ukψ}N−1
k=0 , may be computed by
following the steps:
• Solve the linear system of equations
λT ∂R
∂x = −∂J
∂x .
(C.8)
• Calculate
∂ψ
∂u = ∂J
∂u + λT ∂R
∂u .
(C.9)
By transposing the matrix equation (C.8) one obtains


∇x1R0
∇x1R1
∇x2R1
...
...
∇xN−1RN−1
∇xN RN−1


λ = −


∇x1J0
∇x2J1
...
∇xN JN−1

.
(C.10)
==PAGE:145==
137
The sparse structure of (C.10) can be exploited to solve the linear system
λT ∂R
∂x = −∂J
∂x ,
by the matrix equivalent of back substitution and then successively calculate
the gradients by (C.9). The procedure is outlined in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 Adjoint method for computation of {∇ukψ}N−1
k=0 .
1: procedure Adjoint algorithm
2:
Solve for λN in ∇xN RN−1λN = ∇xN JN−1.
3:
for k = N −1, N −2, ..., 1 do
4:
Compute ∇ukψ = ∇ukJk −∇ukRkλk+1
5:
Solve for λk in ∇xkRk−1λk = ∇xkJk−1 −∇xkRkλk+1.
6:
end for
7:
Compute ∇u0ψ = ∇u0J0 −∇u0R0λ1.
8: end procedure
==PAGE:146==
138
The Adjoint Method
==PAGE:147==
Appendix D
TE Methods Vs
Conventional Methods
The following appendix presents plots which compare the TE methods TE RO
and TE SRO to conventional ensemble-based methods in terms of expected
return, conditional value-at-risk and cumulative distribution functions.
The
results are included to consolidate the results obtained for TE CVaR in Section
5.5. The results are presented in Fig. D.1, Fig. D.4, Fig. D.3 and Fig. D.4.
The results demonstrate the ability of TE methods to
• provide an evenly distribution of proﬁt by balancing short-term and long-
term objectives,
• promote short-term proﬁts by a fast NPV build-up with only slightly re-
duced long-term proﬁts as a consequence,
• mitigate the risks of low short-term returns by considerably increased con-
ditional value-at-risk.
Note also how the methods reﬂect the conﬂict between objectives.
TE RO
primarily promotes expected return, at the cost of a low condtional value-at-risk,
while TE SRO promotes conditional value-at-risk by compromising expected
return.
==PAGE:148==
140
TE Methods Vs Conventional Methods
TE RO:
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
Millons [US Dollars]
0
200
400
600
800
TE RO vs Nominal Optimization
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
200
400
600
800
TE RO vs Conventional RO
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
200
400
600
800
TE RO vs Conventional MVO
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
Millons [US Dollars]
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Cond. Value-at-Risk 12 %
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Cond. Value-at-Risk 12 %
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Cond. Value-at-Risk 12 %
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
Increase in % 
-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
Increase in %
Expect. Return
Cond. Value-at-Risk
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
Increase in %
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
Increase in %
Figure D.1: Comparison of TE RO to conventional strategies.
NPV [Millons USD]
20
40
60
80
100
CDF
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
time= 60 days
NPV [Millons USD]
50
100
150
200
250
CDF
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
time= 150 days
NPV [Millons USD]
100
200
300
400
CDF
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
time= 300 days
NPV [Millons USD]
200
400
600
800
CDF
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
time= 600 days
NPV [Millons USD]
200
400
600
800
1000
CDF
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
time= 900 days
NPV [Millons USD]
200
400
600
800
1000
CDF
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
time= 1200 days
NPV [Millons USD]
200
400
600
800
1000
CDF
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
time= 1500 days
NPV [Millons USD]
0
500
1000
1500
CDF
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
time= 1800 days
TE RO
NO
RO
MVO
Figure D.2: Comparison of cumulative distribution functions (CDFs).
==PAGE:149==
141
TE SRO:
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
Millons [US Dollars]
0
200
400
600
800
TE SRO vs Nominal Optimization
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
200
400
600
800
TE SRO vs Conventional RO
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
200
400
600
800
TE SRO vs Conventional MVO
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
Millons [US Dollars]
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Cond. Value-at-Risk 12 %
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Cond. Value-at-Risk 12 %
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Cond. Value-at-Risk 12 %
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
Increase in % 
-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
Increase in %
Expect. Return
Cond. Value-at-Risk
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
Increase in %
time [days]
0
500
1000
1500
-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
Increase in %
Figure D.3: Comparison of TE SRO to conventional strategies.
NPV [Millons USD]
20
40
60
80
100
CDF
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
time= 60 days
NPV [Millons USD]
50
100
150
200
250
CDF
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
time= 150 days
NPV [Millons USD]
100
200
300
400
CDF
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
time= 300 days
NPV [Millons USD]
200
300
400
500
600
CDF
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
time= 600 days
NPV [Millons USD]
200
400
600
800
CDF
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
time= 900 days
NPV [Millons USD]
200
400
600
800
1000
CDF
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
time= 1200 days
NPV [Millons USD]
200
400
600
800
1000
CDF
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
time= 1500 days
NPV [Millons USD]
0
500
1000
1500
CDF
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
time= 1800 days
TE SRO
NO
RO
MVO
Figure D.4: Comparison of cumulative distribution functions (CDFs).
==PAGE:150==
142
TE Methods Vs Conventional Methods
==PAGE:151==
Appendix E
MATLAB Implementations
The following appendix provides a breify guide to the content of the enclosed
USB- drive, which contains all relevant code written during the making of this
thesis.
The drive contains the main folder Code, which itself contains four subfolders:
• MRST-2014a
• Economical risk mitigation
• Geological risk mitigation
• Joint risk mitigation
The MRST subfolder contains the MATLAB Reservoir Simulation Toolbox
(2014a), which is needed to run all other code ﬁles. A thorough introduction to
MRST can be found in the user guide An introduction to Reservoir Simulation
using MATLAB, by Knut-Andreas Lie. 1
1The user guide is available from the website www.sintef.no/projectweb/mrst/publications/
==PAGE:152==
144
MATLAB Implementations
The remaining subfolders are each divided into a number of folders which contain
the code needed to run the optimization procedures presented in the associated
chapters.
Each of these folders is structured according to the following template of scripts
and functions:
• Scheme
A main test script which executes the optimization procedure.
• SetupSimulation
A function which is called by Scheme to initialize controls and setup petro-
physical and geological simulation parameters.
• Run
A function which uses the output of SetupSimulation to setup and run
the optimizer fmincon.
• forwardIntegration
A function that calls the MRST functions runScheduleADI and runAdjointADI
to simulate the reservoir and calculate sensitivities by the adjoint method.
• Auxiliary functions
A number of auxiliary functions which are required to run the main scripts
and functions.
All folders also contain the Eclipse deck my_simple31x31x1.data and the en-
semble of permeability ﬁelds PermEns.mat which are used by the function SetupSimulation
to initialize simulations.
The following provides an overview of the drive content2 :
Economical risk mitigation
• Implementation of Short-term versus Long-term Optimization
Folder STLTOpt:
– TestGenParetoFront_Par
– SetupSimulationFI_ConVar
2It is noted that scripts and functions which are denoted by _ Par run in parallel. These
implementations therefore rely on a suitable multi-core processor.
For convenience, these
scripts and functions are setup to run on the DTU Cluster by the local proﬁle, i.e., they are
executable directly from accessing MATLAB over ThinLink.
==PAGE:153==
145
– RunSTLTOpt
– forwardIntegration_STLT
– Auxiliary functions
∗updateControlsAndSchedule
∗init_controls
• Implementation of Reactive Control:
Folder Reactive control:
– TestRunFI_RS
– SetupSimulationFI_RS
– RunRS_FI
– ControlStep_RS
– Auxiliary functions
∗updateControlsAndSchedule
∗ComputeNPVOWTime
∗forwardIntegration_NPV_ST
Geological risk mitigation
• Implementation of Certainty Equivalence optimization:
Folder CE:
– TestCE
– SetupSimulationFI_ConVar_Mean
– RunCE
– forwardIntegration_CE
– Auxiliary functions
∗updateControlsAndSchedule
∗ComputeNPVOWTime
∗SetupSimulationFI_ConVar_Par
∗SetupSimulationFI_ConVar_Perm
∗forwardIntegration_AvgVar
• Implementation of Robust optimization:
Folder RO:
==PAGE:154==
146
MATLAB Implementations
– TestRO
– SetupSimulationFI_Par
– RunRO
– forwardIntegration_RO
– Auxiliary functions
∗updateControlsAndSchedule
∗init_controls
∗SetupSimulationFI_ConVar_Perm
∗forwardIntegration_AvgVar
• Implementation of Mean-Variance optimization:
Folder MVO:
– TestMVO
– SetupSimulationFI_Par
– RunMVO
– forwardIntegration_MVO
– Auxiliary functions
∗updateControlsAndSchedule
∗init_controls
∗SetupSimulationFI_ConVar_Perm
∗forwardIntegration_AvgVar
• Implementation of Conditional value-at-risk optimization:
Folder CVaRO:
– TestCVaRO
– SetupSimulationFI_Par
– RunCVaRO
– forwardIntegration_CVaRO
– Auxiliary functions
∗updateControlsAndSchedule
∗init_controls
∗SetupSimulationFI_ConVar_Perm
∗forwardIntegration_AvgVar
==PAGE:155==
147
• Parallel implementation of Reactive Control:
Folder Parallel Reactive control:
– TestRS_Par
– SetupSimulationFI_RS
– RunRS_Par
– RunRS_FI
– Auxiliary functions
∗updateControlsAndSchedule
∗ComputeNPVOWTime
∗ControlStep_RS
Joint risk mitigation
• Implementation of Time-Explicit Robust Optimization:
Folder TE RO:
– TestTERO
– SetupSimulation_ConVar_Par
– RunTERO
– forwardIntegration_TERO
– Auxiliary functions
∗updateControlsAndSchedule
∗init_controls
∗forwardIntegration_AvgVar
• Implementation of Time-Explicit Sharpe Ratio Optimization:
Folder TE SRO:
– TestTESRO
– SetupSimulation_ConVar_Par
– RunTESRO
– forwardIntegration_TESRO
– Auxiliary functions
∗updateControlsAndSchedule
==PAGE:156==
148
MATLAB Implementations
∗init_controls
∗forwardIntegration_AvgVar
• Implementation of Time-Explicit Conditional value-at-risk Optimization:
Folder TE CVaRO:
– TestTECVaR
– SetupSimulation_ConVar_Par
– RunTECVaR
– forwardIntegration_TECVaR
– Auxiliary functions
∗updateControlsAndSchedule
∗init_controls
∗forwardIntegration_AvgVar
==PAGE:157==
Appendix F
Project Plan and Evaluation
The following appendix contains the original project plan for this thesis and an
auto-evaluation of the project process.
Project plan
This thesis seeks to improve management of risks in open-loop production op-
timization by investigation and assesment of state-of-the-art risk mitigation
strategies.
The purpose is to gain an in-depth understanding of advantages
and shortcomings of currently known strategies in order to ultimately improve
the methodology. The investigations of this thesis will be based on
• a literature study of relevant and recent research of the novel oil commu-
nity,
• implementations and tests of state-of-the-art methods by numerical case
studies conducted in MATLAB (2014b) with the support of the reservoir
simulation toolbox MRST (2014a).
According to current eﬀorts of the oil literature, the project will be divided into
three main parts:
==PAGE:158==
150
Project Plan and Evaluation
• Economical risk mitigation by short-term versus long-term optimization.
• Geological risk mitigation by ensemble-based optimization.
• Improved risk mitigation.
The chapters on economical and geological risk mitigation will investigate and
asses known methods, whereas the chapter on improved risk mitigation will seek
to propose novel methods or initiatives to improve risk mitigation. Current ideas
in this direction include:
•
Multi-objective Certainty Equivalence optimization (MCE)
The short-term versus long-term NPVs are simultaneously maximized us-
ing the expected reservoir permeability ﬁeld.
•
Multi-objective Mean-Variance optimization (MMV)
A quad-criteria objective function, which accounts for the short-term ver-
sus long-term expected return and risk associated with an ensemble of
geological realizations, is optimized. The aim is to ﬁnd the best possible
trade-oﬀbetween short-term versus long-term risk and return.
•
Multi-objective Conditional Value-at-Risk optimization (MMVar)
A quad-criteria objective function, which accounts for the short-term ver-
sus long-term expected return and conditional value-at-risk, which corre-
sponds to the expected return in the α % worst cases, is optimized. The
aim is to reduce the risk of low short-term and long-term returns, while
maintaining high short-term and long-term expected returns.
Outline:
• February The last two weeks of February will be spend on a literature
study of relevant research papers and material on multi-objective opti-
mization to form the foundations of the project.
• March The ﬁrst two weeks of March will be devoted to obtain familiariza-
tion with the MATLAB Reservoir Simulation Toolbox (MRST) including
functionality, data structures and the interplay with MATLABs optimiza-
tion tool fmincon. The last two weeks of March will be spend on a study
of the theoretical details of the two phase immiscible ﬂow model used in
MRST and single-shooting optimization. By the end of March, the ﬁnd-
ings should be written into the report in a chapter which accounts for
necessary theoretical background material.
==PAGE:159==
151
• April The entire month of April is devoted to investigation of the short-
term versus long-term optimization problem by implementations and sim-
ulations in MATLAB. By the end of April the results should be written
into the report in a chapter on economical risk mitigation.
• May The month of May will be spend on investigations of ensemble-
based methods by implementations and simulations in MATLAB. By the
end of April the results should be written into the report in a chapter on
geological risk mitigation.
• June The ﬁrst days of June are devoted to a process of brainstorming,
where advantages and shortcomings of known methods are summarized.
The purpose is to come up with novel ways to improve the methods. By
the end of the three ﬁrst weeks of June, it should be decided, based on
initial tests, which method(s) to pursue.
• June and July The remainder of June and the entire month of July will
be devoted to development, testing and assesment of the new method(s).
By the end of July, the ﬁndings should be written into the report in a
chapter on improved risk mitigation.
• August The ﬁrst two weeks of August will be spend on ﬁnalizing the
report.
Auto-evaluation
By the novel contribution of TE optimization, I ﬁnd that the primary objective
of the project, to improve risk mitigation in open-loop production optimization,
has been met.
To a large extend, the project outline, presented above, has been followed. Main
exceptions are tied to the month of June. Motivated by good initial results, my
supervisors and I quickly decided to drop the above mentioned ideas for im-
proved risk mitigation to focus on developing the ideas which later led to TE
optimization. This decision expedited the process and the main part of June
was partially spend on writing the research paper Time-Explicit methods for
Joint Economical and Geological Risk Mitigation for Production Optimization
and partially spend on writing the chapter on improved risk mitigation, which
came to be Joint Risk Mitigation by Time-Explicit Optimization. Also, during
this time the report began to take shape and I was working on adjusting and
ﬁnalizing all chapters simultaneously. This process extended into August. Dur-
ing this hectic and ﬁnal period of the project, I found it helpful to keep track of
progress and unﬁnished tasks by keeping a journal of my work. The additional
time spend on writing, came back many fold in terms of improved eﬀectiveness.
==PAGE:160==
152
Project Plan and Evaluation
==PAGE:161==
Bibliography
[Aac15]
P. E. Aackermann. Stochastic optimization and risk manage-
ment in the production optimization of oil reservoirs. Master’s
thesis, Technical University of Denmark, 2015.
[AS79]
K. Aziz and A. Settari. Petroleum reservoir simulation. Applied
Science Publishers, 1979.
[BCW05]
W. J. Bailey, B. Couet, and D. Wilkinson. Framework for ﬁeld
optimization to maximize asset value. SPE Reservoir Evaluation
and Engineering, 8:7–25, 2005.
[BDMS08]
J. Branke, K. Deb, K. Miettinen, and R. (Eds.) Slowinski. Multi
objective optimization: interactive and evolutionary approaches.
Springer, 2008.
[Bie84]
L. T. Biegler. Solution of dynamic optimization problems by
successive quadratic programming and orthogonal collocation.
Computers and Chemical Engineering, 8:243–248, 1984.
[Bie13]
L. T. Biegler.
A survey on sensitivity-based nonlinear model
predictive control. In: 10th IFAC International Symposium on
Dynamics and Control of Process Systems. Mumbai, India, pages
499–510, 2013.
[BJ04]
D. R. Brouwer and J. D. Jansen. Dynamic optimization of wa-
terﬂooding with smart wells using optimal control theory. SPE
Journal, 9(4):391–402, 2004.
==PAGE:162==
154
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[BP84]
H. G. Bock and K. J. Plitt. A multiple shooting algorithm for
direct solution of optimal control problems. In: Proceedings 9th
IFAC World Congress Budapest. Pergamon Press, pages 243–
274, 1984.
[Cap13]
A. Capolei.
Non-linear model predictive control for oil reser-
voirs management.
PhD thesis, Technical University of Den-
mark, 2013.
[CFJ15]
A. Capolei, B. Foss, and J. B. Jørgensen. Proﬁt and risk mea-
sures in oil production optimization. In The 2nd IFACWorkshop
on Automatic Control in Oﬀshore Oil and Gas Production in
Florianpolis, Brazil, 2015.
[Che07]
Z. Chen. Reservoir Simulation: Mathematical Techniques in Oil
Recovery. SIAM, Philadelphia, USA, 2007.
[Chi92]
G. L. Chierici. Economically improving oil recovery by advanced
reservoir management. Journal of Petroleum Science and Engi-
neering, 8(3):205–219, 1992.
[CJ12]
A. Capolei and J. B. Jørgensen. Solution of constrained optimal
control problems using multiple shooting and esdirk methods.
In 2012 American Control Conference, pages 295–300, 2012.
[CLR12]
C. Chen, G. Li, and A. Reynolds.
Robust constrained opti-
mization of short-and long-term net present value for closed-loop
reservoir management. SPE Journal, 17(3):849–864, 2012.
[CSFJ13]
A. Capolei, E. Suwartadi, B. Foss, and J. B. Jørgensen. Water-
ﬂooding optimization in uncertain geological scenarios. Compu-
tational Geosciences, 17(6):991–1013, 2013.
[CSFJ15]
A. Capolei, E. Suwartadi, B. Foss, and J. B. Jørgensen.
A
mean–variance objective for robust production optimization in
uncertain geological scenarios. Journal of Petroleum Science and
Engineering, 125:23–37, 2015.
[CVFJ12]
A. Capolei, C. Volcker, J. Frydendall, and J. B. Jørgensen. Oil
reservoir production optimization using single shooting and es-
dirk methods. In Proceedings of the 2012 IFAC Workshop on
Automatic Control in Oﬀshore Oil and Gas Production, Trond-
heim, Norway, 2012.
[FJ11]
B. Foss and J. P. Jensen. Performance analysis for closed-loop
reservoir management. SPE Journal, 16(1):183–190, 2011.
==PAGE:163==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
155
[Fos12]
B. Foss.
Process control in conventional oil and gas ﬁelds
- challenges and opportunities.
Control Engineering Practice,
20:1058–1064, 2012.
[FSL+14a]
R. M. Fonseca, A. S. Stordal, O. Leeuwenburgh, P. M. J. Van den
Hof, and J. D. Jansen. Pareto optimal solutions for minimizing
risk and maximizing expected value of life-cycle npv of produc-
tion under nonlinear constraints. In ECMOR XIV-14th Euro-
pean conference on the mathematics of oil recovery, 2014.
[FSL+14b]
R. M. Fonseca, A. S. Stordal, O. Leeuwenburgh, P. M. J. Van den
Hof, and J. D. Jansen. Robust ensemble-based multi-objective
optimization. In ECMOR XIV-14th European conference on the
mathematics of oil recovery, 2014.
[HFT15]
H. G. Hanssen, B. Foss, and A. Teixeira. Production optimiza-
tion under uncertainty with constraint handling.
In The 2nd
IFACWorkshop on Automatic Control in Oﬀshore Oil and Gas
Production in Florianpolis, Brazil, 2015.
[J.07]
LeVeque R. J. Finite diﬀerence methods for ordinary and partial
diﬀerential equations. SIAM, 2007.
[JBVdH08]
J. D. Jansen, O. H. Bosgra, and P. M. J. Van den Hof. Model-
based control of multiphase ﬂow in subsurface oil reservoirs.
Journal of Process Control, 18(9):846–855, 2008.
[JFK+14]
J. D. Jansen, R. M. Fonseca, S. Kahrobaei, M. M. Siraj, G. M.
Van Essen, and P. M. J. Van den Hof. The egg model - a geolog-
ical ensemble for reservoir simulation. Geoscience Data Journal,
23:192–195, 2014.
[Jor06]
P. Jorion. Value at Risk: The New Benchmark for Managing
Financial Risk. McGraw-Hill, New York, USA, 3 edition, 2006.
[LKL+12]
K. A. Lie, S. Krogstad, I. S. Ligaarden, J. R. Natvig, H. M.
Nilsen, and B. Skaﬂestad. Open-source matlab implementation
of consistent discretisations on complex grids. Computational
Geosciences, 16(2):297–322, 2012.
[LR14]
X. Lui and A. C. Reynolds. Gradient-based multiobjective op-
timization with applications to water ﬂooding optimization. In
ECMOR XIV-14th European conference on the mathematics of
oil recovery, 2014.
[Mar52]
H. Markowitz.
Portfolio selection.
The Journal of Finance,
7(1):77–91, 1952.
==PAGE:164==
156
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Mie99]
K. Miettinen. Nonlinear multi-objective optimization. Kluwer
Academic Publishers, Massachusetts, USA, 1999.
[NW06]
J. Nocedal and J. S. Wright. Numerical Optimization. Springer,
2006.
[Parch]
V. Pareto. Manual of political economy. The MacMillian Press
Ltd, 1971 (the original edition in 1927 in French).
[Pea83]
D. W. Peaceman. Interpretation of well-block pressures in nu-
merical reservoir simulation with nonsquare grid blocks and
anisotropic permeability. SPE Journal, 23:531–543, 1983.
[Ram87]
W. F. Ramirez. Application of Optimal Control Theory to En-
hanced Oil Recovery. Elsevier Science Ltd, 3 edition, 1987.
[rgaSU13]
SUPRI-B: RESERVOIR SIMULATION research group at Stan-
ford University. General Purpose Research Simulator. Stanford
University Std, 2013.
[Roc15]
R. T. Rockafellar. Coherent approaches to risk in optimization
under uncertainty.
Tutorials in operations research, 3:38–61,
2015.
[SAD05]
P. Sarma, K. Aziz, and L. J. Durlofsky. Implementation of ad-
joint solution for optimal control of smart wells. In Proc. of SPE
Reservoir Simulation Symposium, pages 295–300, 2005.
[SKF12]
E. Suwartadi, S. Krogstad, and B. Foss. Nonlinear output con-
straints handling for production optimization of oil reservoirs.
Computational Geosciences, 16:499–517, 2012.
[SVdHJ15a]
M. M. Siraj, P. M. J. Van den Hof, and J. D. Jansen. Handling
risk of uncertainty in model-based production optimization: a
robust hierarchical approach.
In The 2nd IFACWorkshop on
Automatic Control in Oﬀshore Oil and Gas Production in Flo-
rianpolis, Brazil, 2015.
[SVdHJ15b]
M. M. Siraj, P. M. J. Van den Hof, and J. D. Jansen. Model
and economic uncertainties in balancing short-term and long-
term objectives in water-ﬂooding optimization.
In 2015 SPE
Reservoir Simulation Symposium, 2015.
[VEVdHJ11]
G. Van Essen, P. M. J. Van den Hof, and J. D. Jansen. Hierar-
chical long-term and short-term production optimization. SPE
Journal, 16(1):191–199, 2011.
==PAGE:165==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
157
[VEZVdH+09] G. Van Essen, M. Zandvliet, P. M. J. Van den Hof, O. Bosgra,
and J. D. Jansen. Robust waterﬂooding optimization of multiple
geological scenarios. SPE Journal, 14(1):202–210, 2009.
[VJTS09]
C. Völcker, J. B. Jørgensen, P. G. Thomsen, and E. H. Stenby.
Simulation of subsurface two-phase ﬂow in an oil reservoir. In
European Control Conference 2009, pages 1221–1226, 2009.
[Ø.06]
Pettersen Ø.
Basics of reservoir simulation with the Eclipse
Reservoir Simulator. Department of Mathematics, University of
Bergen, 2006.
