==PAGE:1==
Catalysts for City 
Transition
Global Trends and Migration Patterns
Bogna Anna Gebalska 
Master Thesis
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Cities undergo a revolution. The urbanisation process is accelerated by constant population 
growth and enhanced migration, cities are gathering the generated flows of people, energies, 
but also consequent risks. Concerning the dynamic of human beings and their activities, 
influenced by innovative technologies, our habitat is facing a rapid transition, which goes on 
in every location. The city can use the opportunities of momentum, planning and acting in 
response to the events or it can miss the chance in the global competition, losing prosperity. 
There is a considerable interest in finding what triggers city attractiveness and development. 
While many international institutions with focus on cities, emphasise the significance of  
global dynamics and the importance of creating a strategy to face the resultant challenges, 
there is still a spectrum of issues that requires further research (JPI Urban Europe, 2014). 
The present study search for the essential elements that direct towards an inclusive and 
successful city transition. The report provides with broad overview of theory on city 
development and currently ongoing processes that influence the city condition. Further, in 
developed case study, three European cities are investigated, what serves to illustrate the 
differences and similarities of challenges and opportunities that result from Global Trends. 
Although the city’s success is highly dependent on local specific context, the global forces 
are powerful and influential. The research will reveal that some of forces are workable, other 
independent. The aim of this study is to examine the impact of Megatrends and Migration 
Patterns on city and direct the research outcomes towards a future sustainable development. 
The conclusive models and research result sought to be an inspiration to include the discussion 
about the Global Megatrends and Migration Patterns into the city planning strategy, enable 
the city to recognise the opportunities and risks, and work with the overall forces. 
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This thesis report is a fulfilment of the Master Degree Program Sustainable Urban Transitions, 
at the Technical University of Denmark in Copenhagen (DTU). 
It was completed as a part of Nordic Five Tech Joint Master Program in collaboration with 
Royal Institute of Technology in Stockholm (KTH), Sweden.
The following master thesis report is an outcome of research work carried out 
from 26th January 2015 to 26th June 2015.
The research was carried under the supervision of Per Sieverts Nielsen, senior researcher at the 
Technical University of Denmark in Copenhagen, and co-advisors from the Royal Institute of 
Technology in Stockholm, Patrick Verhoeven and Maria Gregorio.
 26th June 2015, Copenhagen
Bogna Anna Gebalska
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor Per Sieverts Nielsen for his involvement in my research, 
for the illuminative and productive discussions, motivation and the project guideline.
I would also like to thank my co-advisors from the Royal Institute of Technology in 
Stockholm, Patrick Verhoeven and Maria Gregorio, for their engagement, inspiring and 
refreshing perspective. 
Not being a native English speaker, I would like to apologize for any linguistic imperfections.
Bogna Anna Gebalska
==PAGE:5==
Table of Contents
1.	Introduction .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 10
1.1.	Project description .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 10
1.2.	Objectives and research question.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   11
1.3.	Research scope .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   11
1.4.	Methodology.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   12
1.4.1.	Process description .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 12
1.4.2.	Vulnerability of study .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 13
1.5.	Report outline .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 15
2.	Literature review.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   17
2.1.	Introduction to literature review .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   17
2.1.1.	Social and urban evolution .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  . 17
2.1.2.	Overview on current urban issues.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   18
2.1.3.	Definition of the city .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 20
2.2.	Key literature review .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 21
2.2.1.	Global processes  .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 21
2.2.2.	Social forces.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   26
2.2.3.	Strategies .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 30
3.	Case study .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 36
3.1.	Introduction to case studies .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  . 36
3.1.1.	Case study inquiry  .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 36
3.1.2.	Scope of the study.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   37
3.2.	Methodology of case study.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   37
3.2.1.	Process description .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 37
3.2.2.	Graphical representation .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 38
3.2.3.	Vulnerability of study .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 38
3.3.	Case study .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 39
3.3.1.	Lodz  .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 39
3.3.2.	Copenhagen.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   48
3.3.3.	Milan .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 57
4.	Analysis .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 67
4.1.	Introduction to analysis .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 67
4.2.	Analysis of case study results.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   67
4.3.	Comparison .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 67
4.4.	Power of Migration Patterns.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   72
==PAGE:6==
5.	Discussion with findings.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   75
5.1.	Introduction to Discussion.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   75
5.2.	Summary of study .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 75
5.2.1.	Significance of Megatrends .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   75
5.2.2.	Significance of Migration Pattern.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   76
5.3.	Strategic Response .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   78
5.3.1.	Working method proposal .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  . 78
5.4.	Governance in transition.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   79
6.	Conclusion.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   84
6.1.	Research conclusion .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 84
6.2.	Further steps .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   85
6.3.	Conclusive remarks  .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 85
6.3.1.	Self-evaluation and research limitations  .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  . 85
List of references
==PAGE:7==
List of figures:
Figure 1: The complexity of working process. Graph illustrates the phases of research
Figure 2: Phases of research and their characteristic. The upper bar is adaptation of Groat&Wang research 
methodology illustration (Groat&Wang, 2002)
Figure 3: Megatrends in Environmental Change: Issues and Responses, (Toshiba Smart Community, 2015)
Figure 4: Migration Pattern. Icon explanation
Figure 5: Lodz population trendline
Figure 6: Lodz Migration Pattern: First level: predominating land-based migration
Figure 7: Lodz. City characteristic
Figure 8: Copenhagen population trendline
Figure 9: Copenhagen Migration Pattern. Second level: predominant european and global migration flows
Figure 10: Copenhagen. City characteristic
Figure 11: Milan. Population trendline
Figure 12: Milan. Migration Pattern. Third level: international hub and prominent global city
Figure 13: Milan. City characteristic
Figure 14: Comparative table of case cities different characteristic, triggered by similar overall trends
Figure 15: Set of case study icons. Shows three different migration levels, subsequent indicators and 
characteristic, that may serve to generalize and recognise the patterns and processes in other cities
Figure 16: Model of  inclusive approach towards city transition
Figure 17: Model of city transition, showing two phases: Phase 1: identifying consequences, 
                     Phase 2: developing a strategic response
Figure 18: Set of questions that may help recognize impacts of Global Trends and Migration Patterns
==PAGE:8==
List of terms and abbreviations:
BBSR - The Federal Institute for Research on Building, Urban Affairs and Spatial 
Development (Germany)
EEA - European Environment Agency of European Union
ESPON - European Observation Network for Territorial Development and Cohesion, 
programme of European Union Regional Development Fund 
EU - European Union
GDP - Gross Domestic Product
GUS - Central Statistical Office of Poland
M - million
OECD - Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development
RAMSES - Reconciling Adaptation, Mitigation and Sustainable Development for Cities; “is 
a European research project which aims to deliver much needed quantified evidence of the impacts of 
climate change and the costs and benefits of a wide range of adaptation measures, focusing on cities”
(RAMSES, 2015)
SOER - State of Environment Report, the EEA Agency Report on environmental state’
“A comprehensive assessment of the European environment’s state, trends and prospects, in a global 
context” (EEA, 2015)
Voivodeship - the name of administration unit of  territorial division in Poland, the equivalent 
of province
==PAGE:9==
Part I
Introduction
setting up the Research
==PAGE:10==
10
Introduction
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
1.	
Introduction
“Cities are maybe one of the most complex systems in the universe.”
(JPI Urban Europe, 2014)
1.1.	
Project description
Geoffrey West, famous physicist and city theorists (Bettencourt & West, 2010) describes 
the complexity of the city,  remarking that cities are probably the most advanced structures 
initiated by human. Likewise human of a similar complexity with his different biological 
systems, his habits, culture, mind and soul, energy and power, which the city mirrors. Cities are 
destination for people, hence they will need to accommodate the predicted population growth 
and demographic shifts. In recent years,  under the pressure of global changes, much research 
has focused on establishing a guideline for future sustainable, resilient development of our 
urban environment. While many international institutions express concern about the future 
of our planet and a need for strategic development plans, the influence of Global Megatrends 
and Migration on cities’ future is not yet completely examined. At the same time there is 
a widespread interest of authorities in identifying how to make the cities competitive and 
successful on the global arena. It is a fundamental issue to discover the factors that affect the 
city’s prosperity and its development. Therefore, the importance of investigating the impacts of 
global trends and city - human interrelation.
In the following research the city development will be studied with an emphasis on 
anthropological aspects and migration patterns that are fundamental stimulus of urbanisation 
process. It will be claimed that urbanisation per se is linked with the movement of people – 
migration (OECD, 2015). The pattern that follows will be studied with a focus on factors that 
can be managed and independent forces, as well as dynamic relation between them. It will 
be revealed that the city’s condition is a resultant of numerous forces and depends equally on 
global processes and local responses towards them. 
This study focuses on identifying the aspects that affect today’s and future city’s prosperity. 
The research sought to address the global forces, Megatrends and Migration Patterns, to the 
local development of city. The most accurate literature points out the importance of several 
factors that are direct consequences of global processes, such as demographic change, climate 
change, technological boom, governmental and economic shifts. All of those significantly 
affect the city functioning and its development, impacting human’s behaviour, dictating 
his choices and affecting city’s structures. This study shows that the city’s potential may be 
significantly accelerated or hampered by global forces, therefore it indicates that working with 
global trends is necessary to achieve a successful city transition. 
The broad theoretical review is supported by case study, which investigates closer the condition 
and functioning of three European cities: Lodz (PL), Copenhagen (DK) and Milan (IT). The 
purpose of the case study is to realize the significance of the dynamic between local context 
and global processes, the inexorability of processes and their effects that need to be included in 
the city development strategy. To investigate the mechanism of transition and discover what is 
the success factor in the transition, different strategies to address the global challenges will be 
analysed, indicating the crucial importance of the city’s response towards the global trends. 
==PAGE:11==
11
Introduction
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
However the claim that “urban regions throughout Europe will be affected by challenges resulting 
from megatrends in diverse ways depending on the urban characteristics” (JPI Urban Europe, 
2014), there is an interrelation in patterns and factors that influence the European land 
similarly, there is a lot to be learnt mutually from different cases. There is no one-fits-all 
solution (Kabisch & Haase, 2011), however the acknowledgment of overall dynamics will 
be of help while building a tactic for future city development. Many questions have to be 
addressed to contextualize the “rights and wrongs” in terms of investments and planning. 
Result indicates clearly that the Megatrends and Migration Patterns are to be worked with 
and utilized while the city goals for success in transition.
1.2.	
Objectives and research question
Main research inquiry of this study is to investigate and derive:
• What are the Megatrends and Global Migration Patterns and how do those trends 
and patterns affect the City Transition?
Several subquestions will be addressed throughout the study:
• What influence have global trends and patterns on city development? 
• What opportunities and challenges are brought by global processes?
• What are the key aspects to be considered and questions to address, while building 
a city development strategy to navigate city transition towards achieving a successful 
and sustainable outcomes?
Numerous research investigates the city development mechanisms, addressing the current 
changes and many reports call for better understanding of processes that shape cities in order 
to help the decision makers to create the future action plan. It is certain that the global world 
is dynamic, therefore the cities are ongoing transition, trying to respond to those changing 
circumstances. Most studies point out the urge for concrete tools and methods. Therefore, my 
investigation asks how to address the complexity of current global challenges and translate 
them to the framework of local strategies.  It will focus on detecting the way to recognize and 
accommodate the changes to make a city prosper successfully in the future, as response to the 
European Commission call: “the interrelation between challenges must be better understood and 
considered for future urban policy” (JPI Urban Europe, 2014).
1.3.	
Research scope
The scope of this research is to indicate the influence of Megatrends and Global Migration 
Patterns on local condition of one city and enable to include this discussion with global forces 
in local planning. The goal is to suggest which aspects require special attention and call for 
response in city planning as well as to provoke an inclusive approach towards city transition.
This study aims to provide a set of insights in different perspectives on city transition, proving 
that the transition of city is or ongoing or inescapable process to happen, under the existing 
and predicted changes. First, the study will attempt to recognise the explanatory factors of 
the city transformation and dissolve an urban migration phenomenon. From the case studies 
==PAGE:12==
12
Introduction
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
and literature review various factors that act as a magnet of the city will be identified. The case 
study demonstrates how different are effects of global forces depending on local context and 
the policy response towards them. As an outcome of this study it is expected to demonstrate 
that there are many alternative approaches towards working with migration and current 
global changes, and that much depends on the local context of the city. City development is 
significantly influenced by global forces, however at the same time it can contribute to the 
global shifts, preventing or mitigating negative consequences and aggregating opportunities 
that are the outcomes of migration and megatrends. An overall scope of this research is to 
indicate the most current issues, questions that result from global processes and needs that has 
to be taken into consideration in a first phase of planning city development. While mapping 
megatrends may be a complex task, posing the set of questions that is formulated as a part of 
this research conclusion, may lead to recognition of trends and patterns that are key for each 
city.
The conclusive models indicates how to include the effects of global processes in the city 
transition strategy to utilize the constructive power brought about by processes and respond to 
challenges. The main result argues that while input of global forces is inevitable, the only tactic 
is to include it in the city planning, directing the efforts in alignment to the global processes.
As an overall outcome, it is argued that only when the city recognises and works with global 
forces and trends, will it be able to improve its prosperity and sustain the position in the global 
network at the same time having a good local performance to the benefit of citizens.
1.4.	
Methodology
1.4.1.	 Process description
To answer my study objectives I first draw on a lot of insights from professionals and research 
institutions that recognise and navigate the direction for the global development trends. The 
broad literature review is a fundament for further case studies, their understanding, evaluation 
and critical discussion (fig.1 and fig.2). This thesis provide with an overview of different 
reports created by international institutions that are crucial in the topic of city development 
trajectories, outlining key concepts and issues. I recognised the OECD- Organisation for 
Economic Co-operation and Development, UN-Habitat, part of United Nations and European 
Union with its different research units, among them EEA – European Environmental Agency 
as the most important sources for my study area. They all provide a broad multidisciplinary 
background and insight in urbanisation and development processes. At the same time, taking 
the professional literature as a point of departure, I will allow myself to give a personal 
perspective and understanding on the thematic question, basing on the individual experience, 
education and ethics. It will be mainly revealed at the last conclusive parts of the study, but as 
well during the whole process as for the subjective literature choice and the report narration. 
The objective information, their interpretation and critical approach will enable me to relate 
the theory to practise (Carmona, 2009; Campbell, 2006) and address the challenges, results 
of trends to the city planning. No universal solution can be applied without contextualization 
(OECD, 2015) and deep local analysis before implementation, however the knowledge 
transferring is an important tool in a transition process. 
In addressing research questions, I aim to deduce and interpret the impact of Migration 
Patterns and Global Megatrends on the single city condition, claiming that the overall 
==PAGE:13==
13
Introduction
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
patterns are in a short-term perspective impossible to steer, therefore are to be identified and 
planned for.  The process of interpreting and assessing the gathered materials accompanied 
entire research.
Current theoretical knowledge and data together with the practical knowledge enables to 
describe the ongoing processes precisely and make accurate future predictions. Consequently, 
for a successful transition, it is fundamental to map the processes of urbanisation, globalization 
and migration, drawing on different sectors, economy, demography, social sciences and localize 
the certain city within this framework, which will be the objective of case study analysis. The 
methodology of the case study will be further explained at the beginning of Part II.
City management and planning is an interdisciplinary process, where many wicked problems 
might emerge (Conklin, 2006). During the study there will be variety of perspectives and 
solutions pointed out. However my study does not aim to give the concrete answers to 
the detected challenges but to point out the significance of global issues and the need of 
addressing them. The goal is as well to provide with broad overview on processes and by 
means of that to promote the holistic approach as a foundation for local responses and 
actions, realising that a lot can be learnt from interdisciplinary and global perspective. As 
an outcome, there will be presented a model of working with global forces. The results of this 
study are aimed to be applied while creating a future city vision and planning a city transition. 
The resultant list of questions and transition model (fig.16, 17,18) can be read as a form of 
a checklist and is intended to be an inspiration tool for city planners and policy makers, to 
help them realise the importance of global processes, include and use their power in the city 
strategy.
1.4.2.	 Vulnerability of study
The final conclusions are relative as for the time and knowledge limitations of this thesis 
research, therefore an outcome has to be considered as a view-opening on different aspects and 
possibilities. As I am a student, the relevance of the outcome will depend on the knowledge of 
the reader as some of my findings might be insignificant for professionals. The study aims not 
to simplify this complex and difficult task of building a transition strategy, but to improve the 
process in order to achieve the best results and though establish a successful city strategy. The 
concept of three level Migration Pattern (fig. 4) and the models that I created as a summary of 
this research (fig. 16, 17) are aimed to be an inspiration for working with discussed trends and 
patterns.
==PAGE:14==
14
Introduction
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
Figure1.  The complexity of working process. Graph illustrates the phases of research
Literature study
Case study
Analysis
Discussion
Conclusion
Figure2.  Phases of research and their characteristic. The upper bar is adaptation of Groat&Wang research    
              methodology illustration (Groat&Wang, 2002) 
  READING, ACQUIRING, GATHERING, SELECTING, ANALYSING, EVALUATING, QUESTIONING, REASONING, WRITING, PRODUCING, CREATING
Search
Evaluation
Narration
                                                                            INTERPRETATION
1. Literature study
• literature search
• identifying sources
• depicting literature
• recognizing 
prominent    
institutions, reports 
and individuals in 
the studied subject
• reviewing literature
• taking notes
2. Case study
• case study choice
• collecting data
• mapping a context
• organizing data
• fact gathering
• building story line
3. Analysis
• gathering results 
of case study
• reviewing and 
analysing statistics
• comparing the 
cases
4. Discussion
• learning from 
literature and case 
studies
• applying theories to 
case study results
• assessment of results
5. Conclusion
• creating a tool
• producing final 
report part
• culminating key 
outcomes
==PAGE:15==
15
Introduction
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
1.5.	
Report outline
This paper is organized as follows:
• Part 1
Introduces the project field, stating a research inquiry and outlining methodology.
• Part 2
Investigates the current discourse in the studied field, describes the reviewed literature, 
explains theories and mechanisms of processes as a background for further study.
• Part 3 
Examines the case study cities following the pragmatic sectoral analysis.
• Part 4 
Presents the collected results of case study, analyses and compares the cases.
• Part 5
Merges the theoretical study with case study outcomes in search for answer to the 
research inquiry, provides with conclusive models and describes the policy frame for 
project results.
• Part 6 
Presents the conclusion of the thesis research project and sets directions for further 
action.
==PAGE:16==
Part II
Literature Review
mapping Megatrends
==PAGE:17==
17
Literature review
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
2.	
Literature review
2.1.	
Introduction to literature review
The following chapter will present the most important theories that serve to understand the 
path of the social and urban development that brought us to the point we are reaching today. 
One part of study will focus on historical urban development in order to explain the causes of 
the current city condition. Next the report will provide with more recent input of researchers 
and institutions that work with Megatrends and city development. Throughout all paper, the 
discussion will be applied to the European context.
2.1.1.	 Social and urban evolution
Cities, the most complex, fascinating and beautiful systems created alongside human 
evolution, the predominant sign of civilization. It is around 8 thousand years since human 
started to build his habitat in an organised way of the first polis, citadele or castra romana. This 
continuous process kept evolving, but it was not until the 18th century and the Industrial 
Revolution, when the cities significantly grew in size and in power. They generated demand 
for labour force-people, and soon became dominant nodes, culminating positives and 
negatives of urbanization. Further, inventions and innovations facilitated peoples movement 
and the production process, and empowered the city. The recent technical evolution did 
not interrupted the mechanism, as the movement towards cities in current second wave 
of urbanisation (OECD, 2015) has increased in speed. It was not long time ago, when the 
urban population overtook the rural one (UN-Habitat, 2013). Alongside city evolution, there 
is a constant evolution of human, education, knowledge creation, technology and all other 
structures and systems embedded in the urban areas over the Globe. Their mutually linked 
existence resulted in  lower mortality rates and allowed the human population to grow and 
master the Earth. 
As much as good, cities provide the bad impacts. Cities “have also been the source of much 
pollution and disease”, generating “environmental impacts to incipient crises in food, energy and 
water availability”, influencing social condition and economy (Bettencourt & West, 2010). 
Buildings, infrastructure push the natural landscape aside, even though they still demand 
an enormous surface of land, particularly hinterlands, where the food can grow and where 
negative impacts can be neutralized and transformed by the nature (Taylor, 2003). When the 
human realized the counterproductive, negative consequences of his activity, he started to take 
up a preventing actions. His efforts were mainly directed to restore the natural environment. 
The scientific evidence has now become overwhelming that human activities, especially the 
combustion of fossil fuels, are influencing the climate in ways that threaten the well-being 
and continued development of human society (Richardson et al. 2009). The recent call for a 
shift in the character of human actions and overall concern how to improve the situation, is 
a result of thousands of researches and studies. Moral and ethical considerations go in hand 
with environmental concerns and real threats that we more often face as an outcome of drastic 
climatic changes, evident in destructive hurricanes and other extreme weather events.  At this 
point, those concerns are more often reflected in policies, reports, recommendations, believed 
to be in power to change the future scenarios and turn around into the conscious human being 
with vision of sustainable development and resilient city. 
Somewhere around the millennium 2000, cities rapidly grew in potential – in the eyes of 
companies, investors and other powerful actors. Due to the technological advancement and 
==PAGE:18==
18
Literature review
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
progressive engineering, they became the hubs of the most prominent humans activities. The 
traditional way of understanding the city as a locus seems no longer sufficient. Cities are in 
power to grow independently, being connected or disconnected into their local geographies 
and global networks (Taylor, 2003). Nowadays cities are open systems, in contradiction to its 
originally closed form, often build in a shape of cluster, typically fenced or protected with city 
walls.  The form of modern city is far away from that. 
The current city is a dynamic entity, conceptualized as the space of flows with its characteristic 
of constant movement and inherent change (Castells, 1996). The urban land, which 
accommodates currently around 70 % of total European population (European Union, Cities 
of Tomorrow, 2011), generates the 90% of the economic product GDP, is an acceleration 
point of economic activity, governance and culture. Even the concept of a city as a hub for 
accountancy, advertising, banking, finance and law (Taylor, 2003) or as a internationally driven 
business entity (Jones, 2005) seem out of date. Currently we face a progressive digitalization, 
noticed by Toru Ishida, “digital cities are developed all over the world”. Urban fabric loses its 
significance under the pressure of evolution of Internet-based activities (Caves, 2005), the 
conception of a city in its virtual layer with the activities shifted from the real to virtual 
world, is much more accurate (Graham & Marvin, 2001). This opens a set of new challenges, 
while the former, such as urban sprawl or climatic pressures, still stay relevant. We currently 
need to find and implement practices that will help to rethink, revaluate and reuse what 
we have, not to let the ghost-cities or ghost-districts to form, but to cultivate what is vivid, 
fruitful and brilliant in the phenomenon of the city. With the rising urban population and 
sustainability objectives, “to ensure the high quality of future cities, massive investments will be 
needed” (European Union, Cities of Tomorrow, 2011). Resource allocation is vital as the 
scarcity increases. But where to direct the efforts and invest capital? That is a key question 
that has to be considered, having an overview on global processes, as well as local knowledge 
of opportunities or limitations.  Effective and coherent result of planning on global and local 
levels, may result in sustainable, successful cities.
2.1.2.	 Overview on current urban issues
There is a yet unrealized potential and power in the city that works as a magnet and 
attracts people with the hope for better living conditions, access to public amenities, more 
job, education and development opportunities (Kouritt, et al., 2014). The relatively small 
percentage of urbanized land needs to accommodate at least 70 % of total population, 
which with current peace will soon reach 8 billion people (OECD, 2015). For this reason 
understanding the mechanism, which underlies the movements and flows of society is a 
key in building successful strategies for the forthcoming future. Navigating the processes in 
the desired way seems to be a crucial challenge and task for the nations. “The development of 
cities will determine the future of Europe” foretells Johannes Hahn, the member of European 
Commission. Hence cities are crucial for accommodating the population growth, though they 
are the focus of policy makers, planners and this research. The urbanisation process for its 
principal connected with people movement, is going on constantly over the globe. While the 
movement is facilitated with the evolution of speed transportation modes, digital technologies 
and national policies of free cross-border traffic (European Union, 2007), more than 200 
million of people are immigrants nowadays. Socio-demographic changes and the emerging 
opportunities tend to enhance this migration processes. And what is characteristic for this 
migration pattern, is that the major flow is always directed to the bigger or core urban area, 
the city on all scales (JPI Urban Europe, 2014). On average 50 millions of people annually 
(Kouritt, et al., 2014), decide to settle down in cities, being attracted mainly by education and 
==PAGE:19==
19
Literature review
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
job opportunities, better living conditions, access to health care and child care, leisure facilities, 
downtown entertainment (Storper & Scott, 2009) or just lured by the unique opportunity to 
lead a life among thousands others, enjoying  at the same time the anonymity that city offers.
The most prominent factor influencing the city recently was intense IT development, which 
transformed rapidly the urban areas economically, socially and spatially (Hollands, 2008). The 
spatial, structural changes are usually long-term process not in hand with rapid movement and 
associate sudden events, so the importance of flexibility, planning for unknown and avoiding 
the policy response being belated. Observed lately, city is no longer a simple reflection of 
prosperity of a country or region, it may as well work against the overall national condition, 
being detached from context – in a positive or negative way and more dependent on global 
networks (Taylor, 2003). Those changes made the city planning and governance even more 
complex task that it was before. The latter decades acceleration of the urbanisation process, 
raised by technical and engineering advancement, cultural and economical trends, known as 
consumerism and capitalism era, are today seriously under question.
While non territorial concept of the city occurred, the matter of good city management 
became a burning issue. After a pick in city prosperity as engine of production and growth, 
there is a declining tendency observed over Europe. However, the global population is 
growing, in Europe this tendency decelerates (European Union, Cities of Tomorrow, 2011) 
and in fact many locations suffer from low birth rates and aging society, which together with 
migration affects the city decline, producing a lot of void (Berger, 2007). Facing the European 
cities’ there are some evident problems to be addressed in urban planning policies (OECD, 
2015). Global trends underlying the settings for the local development have to be taken 
into account with the same attention as the local circumstances (European Union, Cities 
of Tomorrow, 2011). Due to the complexity of problems, threats, their interrelations, the 
coupling of different scales, contexts and incentives, the dynamic of a matter, this is a huge 
challenge. The city majors and decision-makers should pose some of a key queries before they 
make an attempt to plan a strategic solutions in this uncertain times. The major dilemma is 
how to prioritize the actions in order to work out a successful strategy that will address global 
concerns and serve the city and its inhabitants at the same time. Which of those global forces 
are the most important to be considered in the specific case? Those are the questions that 
are the most interesting for me as a planner, and though I would aim to find an answered to 
them in this research. I strongly believe that the causes for planning decisions are of a most 
importance, while the results cannot be precisely predicted. The right virtue, the intention will 
bring about good outcomes.
It was previously stated, the shift towards sustainability in development plans and policy 
approach is apparent. The good practises are prioritized and desired, however the difficulty in 
defining actions under the complexity of challenges and interplay of issues. However, there is 
no guarantee for the legitimacy of actions, we can still transfer a lot of knowledge from the 
past, from all over the globe, from research and science to overcome the futuristic dark visions 
of the city. We are challenged by an urban decay predicted in visionary concepts and movies, 
self-destruction of human and explicit technological convergence. However black those 
scenarios are, we might be salvaged as the reverse process, counter-movement, is a mindset 
of many theorists and practitioners. The overcrowded earth and increasing self-destructing 
population is an unlikely future in Europe, where shrinking cities and city population decline 
are often noted (PLUREL project, 2011). 
==PAGE:20==
20
Literature review
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
From above considerations, there are several questions that I aim to address to the 
development of cities in a current transition phase of their evolution. How the city 
should respond to the global trends to achieve the resilient, sustainable, well-prospering 
outcome? How the migration proceeds, what it relies on and how the city can accelerate the 
opportunities that it gives and minimise the negative impacts? At least, what are the critical 
factors to be considered while building a city development strategy? What methods are used 
to make city attractive and successful?
The dilemma of how to navigate the actions has to be initiated with the research that will 
recognise the most important factors that influence the city condition, an indication of what 
work as a migration magnet, attract investment and cause development.
The importance of the city is predicted to increase even more in upcoming years. The apparent 
urbanisation process in Europe will not slow down, even when the population growth is 
moderate. Cities will stay a focus point as the areas of concentration of European population 
and accumulation of activities. The virtue of reaching a balance in density, land and resources 
use, technology and innovation development, designing an integrated models for sustainable 
future, is to be mastered. Today’s and future development has to be understood as a shift, 
move forward. Development does not necessarily incline growth - spatial or economic, but 
rather flexibility to change and adapt to uncertainty. Trying to find answers and solutions to 
listed problems and challenges, it is to be remembered that the components of the cities are so 
strongly interrelated that it is impossible to discuss or understand them separately. However 
they are often considered interdependently, when it comes to policy response (Bettencourt & 
West, 2010). That is why the majority of papers, discussed in upcoming part of research, calls 
for holistic, inclusive approach.
2.1.3.	 Definition of the city
In this research the term city is used as a general concept of an administrative unit with 
its certain territory and population, however it is not strictly attached to land-based 
administrative divisions as in many cases it is used as a broader concept, including cultural, 
social and economical activities and their dynamic that usually spreads beyond the 
administrative area. The usual division for morphological urban area and functional urban 
area will not be of use in this investigation as the divisions in real world became diffuse 
lately, especially when concerning holistic approach of regional urban policy and governance. 
Therefore we will discuss the city as de facto city, not de jure city that corresponds to the 
well-defined borders (European Union, Regional Policy, 2011). Indeed while setting up a 
discussion about migration and movement the city definition will stay open and intuitive 
through the research, unless the specific limitation will be required for analytical purposes. 
The delimitation of the city and urban area has to be understood intuitively. Similar to when 
we approach or abandon the city, driving a car or on a train, when our inner feeling tells that 
we entered or left the city, more than a road sign (Lynch, 1960). Therefore important to bear 
in mind that not the city in its administrative boundaries is a case of study, but the city area, 
with its fringe and all that also less formally is perceived as a city (JPI Urban Europe, 2014; 
Kabisch & Haase, 2011). This use of the term city will be followed by similarly general use of 
supporting terms of city suburbs, city core and citizen, understood here as a resident of a city 
irrespective of his actual legal state. 
City as non-territorial and non-structural term is broader understood here as a collection of 
people and their actions, the common democratic ownership (Harvey, 2008). Being respectful 
to the common right to the city, stated by David Harvey, I disagree with the claim that all the 
citizens and stakeholders have the same power in shaping the city (European Union, Regional 
==PAGE:21==
21
Literature review
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
Policy, 2011). Not all of the stakeholders are in the same level involved, concerned about 
common good or educated to make planning choices. They all build the city, however it is a 
role of of contemporary governance and planning, to steer and navigate the city development 
processes (Stoker, 1998).
2.2.	
Key literature review
In this part the main literature study will be presented, emphasizing the input of international 
organisations that work with future city and urban development. The most prominent and 
relevant to this study are reports created by European Commission and its departments, the 
global OECD – Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development, United Nations 
with UN-Habitat. A couple of interesting insights of individuals will be mentioned as well, as 
I find their theories and concepts relevant to the forthcoming discussion. The main objective 
of literature study is to understand the concept of urbanisation and migration process, to 
capture their dynamics, as well as to map the trends and their possible development. The 
demographic and social aspects and their correlation with the urban condition will be 
the underlying focus in this literature study. This part is divided into three main sections, 
explaining Global processes, Social forces and presenting insights on different possible 
Strategies.
Throughout this research it will be argued that: 
1) transition is currently a global process that affects every city, 
2) the result of transition interfere with the condition of the city and in major part is 
dependant on people migration patterns, 
3) migration is key factor of urbanisation, 
4) migration pattern is the net force of multiply factors, like behavioural patterns, 
climate changes, policies, job market, structural commodities, public facilities, trends 
and tactics.
2.2.1.	 Global processes
2.2.1.1.	 Megatrends, tendencies, directions
In the era of globalization, there are overall trends and forces recognised by researchers 
that affect the whole globe, called megatrends. Megatrends set the direction for the world 
and human development. With many variations and different intensity, formulated as an 
overall tendencies, they might be recognised universally. Characteristic for megatrend is that 
it can be recognised on a large, mainly global scale, where shapes the social, economic and 
environmental settings. The megatrends influence the world and shape the future, in this paper 
we will concentrate on how they affect the urban development, especially in European context 
(JPI Urban Europe, 2014). Recognised by prominent consultant company, currently we have 
eight biggest trends that influence our mise en scène (Kjaer-Global, 2012), those are covering 
following four categories: smart, social, organic and wellness. Smart is mainly connected to 
big data systems, importance of learning and information flow. Organic group stands for 
the cultural mix and the radical openness, wellness is composed of the positive psychology, 
individualism, in purpose of healthy and “good” life.  Social is described by the key words of 
crowdfunding, sharing, mobility and networks. All of them affect the condition of human 
==PAGE:22==
22
Literature review
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
and its mindset, all will be of most importance in this research as they set the baseline for 
modern society and are legitimate in urban context. Megatrends’ impact on the city can be 
already easily identified as driving our urban environment and actions. The entrepreneurial 
communities, shared space, facilities, social platforms, accelerated mobility and intensive usage 
of technology in our daily life. Are they not the most prominent characteristic of the urban 
life? To those megatrends Frost and Sullivan adds as well the innovation technologies such 
as 3D printing and “innovating to zero” explained in the goals of zero emissions, minimising 
energy, resources and land consumption (Frost&Sullivan, 2014). They also pose an important 
questions of the micro implication of these macro phenomena, which will be included in 
considerations of this study. 
The scale of this global movements is reflected by the concerns of many large entities that put 
an effort to recognise them and plan for them. It is an important consultancy task and the 
megatrends set a guidelines for the strategies of huge corporations, companies, research and 
innovation institutions (fig.3), what at the same time models the market, influence customers 
and the end-user mindset.  
Megatrends are mainly seen as a positive driving forces of development, so they are detected 
and chased in plans and actions. They are the blueprint for planning, policy, future strategies, 
sketching the development path. In the following study the importance of megatrends and is 
investigated in the correlation with city development and global shifts and their influence on 
city will be researched.
The Metropolitan Century (OECD, 2015)
The OECD lately finalized their report, with objectives that are in line with the objectives of 
my investigation. Consequently it seems legitimate to provide a summary of their findings as 
a point of departure to my further research. The report aims to explain why people move into 
Figure3.  Megatrends in 
Environmental Change: Is­
sues and Responses, (Toshiba 
Smart Community, 2015)
==PAGE:23==
23
Literature review
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
city and having a broad understanding of urbanisation process and its consequences.
The OECD regards the prosperity of city as a straightforward outcome of its productivity, so 
in terms of economy, described by gross domestic product, GDP, which depends mainly on 
the city’s population seize. They remark that close to 85 % of total population soon will live 
in urban areas. The urban population has increased enormously only over last 100 year from 
less than 1 billion in 1959 up to 6 billion city dwellers projected in 2050. Such a rapid shift 
is at the same time a huge opportunity and risk.  The way in which city is build, planned and 
managed, has huge social and economic implications and will also be of crucial importance for 
achieving environmental sustainability. As we could learn from the past, urban forms and city 
structures last much more than they are planned for, for instance Plattenbau1 or postindustrial 
properties, which we currently deal with in city redevelopment projects. Therefore, the 
solutions or problems we are creating in the cities today, will probably affect the future in a yet 
unknown way. The impact of the actions we take up today and life cycle of implementations 
should be a concern of all humanity. The city is seen as much as a generator of opportunities 
as much as problems. The report mentions the importance of densification of urban areas in 
order to maximize the positive aspects of it and minimize the negative impacts. The rationale 
of densification is backed with the advantages of proximity, environmental benefits or energy 
savings. Big cities falsely tend to be perceived as main polluters of our planet. Especially 
within Europe, where the attention is put towards minimising CO2 emissions, applying energy 
efficient, smart solutions, under norms and regulations, big cities are usually less harmful than 
it seems. Unlike in the past, the current advancement in technology overcomes the limits for 
city density. With smart solutions the negative impact accumulated in big urban nodes may 
be handled and neutralized in a much more effective way than in spread, low density habitats. 
One of the growth and prosperity accelerating factor is the competition provided in the dense 
urban environment, which forces business to operate more efficiently and cause the emergence 
of agglomeration economies. This competition results in aiming for improvement in many 
domains of city life. The spillover aspect is seen as a primary driver for urbanisation in 21st 
century.
2.2.1.2.	 City dynamic
City is not solely a piece of land with buildings nor a composition of diverse people. It is 
much more than that. There is an obvious difficulty in embracing the complexity of factors 
that influence the city. The dynamics in the city was broadly discussed by many researchers 
(Castells, 1996; Sassen, 2001; Taylor, 2003). Both, the globalization and rapid information 
technology progress enforced the cities as a major economic and social drivers. Cities are 
hubs joined in complex inner and outer networks, they are interrelation of people, structures 
and land. Lately, the phenomenon of a virtual city (Ishida & Isbister, 2000) pushes us to 
reconstruct the perception of the city from the land-based human habitat towards the dynamic 
hub of powers, energies and forces, and rather marginally its physical form, which nonetheless 
generates multitude concerns and negative impacts. Development nowadays is directed 
towards sustainability and resilience instead of economic growth. New and challenging aspect 
discussed in the OECD report (OECD, 2015), which calls to rethink the development 
process, is that while the development hardly ever occurs without the urbanisation, the 
urbanisation does not necessarily drives development. This reverse phenomenon is apparent 
specially in currently developing countries. Cities are dynamic, they adjust to changing 
settings, people’s demands, resources, to survive they must adapt and stay flexible. The dynamic 
of the city is accelerated by the dynamic of people as individuals and as the whole society. 
1	
building with a structure of large prefabricated concrete panels
==PAGE:24==
24
Literature review
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
The stressfulness, speed of the mainstream lifestyles and the mobility is reflected in rapid 
actions, decisions and changes. City as an activity hub accumulates those movements and 
converts them. While productivity increases in agglomerations, positive spillover occurs on a 
larger than a single city scale. City as a main productivity and economy driver, is in power to 
significantly affect the prosperity and well-being of a region and a country. With the increased 
mobility and short-time migration it is impossible to consider the city’s energy without cross 
border relations and networks (Connor, et al., 2013). The rising importance of the city and its 
huge impact implies that cities have a crucial role in dealing with climate change and shaping 
the condition of human habitat in the future. The decisions and plans initiated now will 
shape the future, having the consequences for the functioning, liveability and environmental 
sustainability of cities for decades to come. The strategy with which we address the future 
challenges should not to try to hamper the ongoing processes but accompany them wisely, 
trying to accelerate the opportunities and ensure the well-functioning of city. 
However, the rising importance of the city, most of the cities are already built and they are 
undergoing the process of transition to adapt to changes. Let us have a deeper insight in how 
the urbanisation and development in this transition period proceed.
2.2.1.3.	 Urbanisation process 
We are facing the city detachment of local land, while its connection in global network and 
cross-boundary cooperation are growing in importance (Taylor, 2003; Sassen, 2001). Apart 
of this, there are still the land based processes apparent. In the following part, I will shortly 
explain them with the help of basic theories and concepts, which distinguish different stages 
and phases of the urbanization process. 
Urbanisation (Kabisch & Haase, 2011)
While cities are born in the developing regions of the world, in Europe most of the cities 
already exist and they are predicted to grow. Hence the urbanisation phenomenon in 
European context has more often different meaning that primary rural to urban movement. 
Defining the modern urbanisation by referring exclusively to what is happening today in 
western world, we realise that the leading process is not the one connected with traditional 
movement from rural to urban areas but the migration of town and city dwellers to other 
urban destinations. Therefore, there is a pressure on existing cities to adapt to this inflow.  
This process, often called reurbanization or transition, is predominantly a resultant of social 
changes and population trends. By identifying demographic tendencies we might set a 
direction for development trajectories. Although the city transition model is a fairly new 
concept (Hopkins, 2011) the different stages and phases of urbanisation process were detected 
previously. One of the main concept, the classic cyclical urbanisation model of Van den Berg 
et al.(1982), describes four sequential phases: urbanisation, suburbanization, desurbanization 
and reurbanization. For all of them the socio-economic dynamics play a crucial role. In this 
model the increase or decrease in population in urban area is a main indicator determining 
each phase. They result in different spatial changes, such as city sprawl or conversely, densified 
city’s core. In European context this model seems to be more diverse due to the complexity 
of different development patterns. The four stage concept of urbanisation was criticized by 
researchers Nadja Kabisch and Dagmar Haase, for being too simple and not having enough 
capacity to reflect the real processes (Kabisch & Haase, 2011). Therefore, what is suggested by 
the researchers, all of the processes, mostly three latter, coexist in European city regions. The 
whole process of urbanisation is not a linear one-way mechanism but rather the combination 
==PAGE:25==
25
Literature review
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
of all. Final remark, using a multivariate statistical method, the researchers tried to identify 
factors that are assumed to drive a specific population development. It was suggested that 
the urbanisation process is self-strengthening, the bigger agglomerations tend to grow while 
the smaller towns tend to decline, what may be caused by the ‘access to amenities’ indicator, 
higher in larger city areas, which will be described in details in upcoming part. It is claimed 
that capturing the European city in one distinctive phase of urbanisation is impossible, 
rather a mix of different trends and patterns ongoing simultaneously are usually identified. 
Throughout this paper, the term urbanisation is understood as a collection of processes in 
power to change the urban shape. I would argue that it is a never-ending process, unlike it is 
stated in the OECD report (OECD, 2015), which concludes with the prediction of the end 
of urbanisation. According to OECD, the process is supposed to be accomplished and reach 
balance as no more force for increase is expected and a city will dominate over other forms 
of habitat. I believe even at the point when city is a dominant form of human environment, 
the urbanisation process is not finished. This state does not imply the static and stagnation 
of cities, on the contrary, the competitive dynamics in the network and movement of people 
between them will be enforced, so the urbanisation will. 
2.2.1.4.	 The concept of transition (Hopkins, 2011)
City, despite the structural and land considerations, is a community of its users. In this 
perspective, Rob Hopkins, the cofounder of the Transition Town concept, defines the 
transition as a move towards a “resilient community in uncertain times” (Hopkins, 2011). 
Transition, defined as 1) a passage from one form, state, style or place to another 2) a period of 
transformation, indicates an on-going process of change that is a characteristic for modern 
dynamic world. Interrelations that influence a single city have developed over decades and it 
is a massive work to change them. Nonetheless, the shift has already begun today under the 
climatic and economic pressures, alarming concerns about food, water scarcity, depletion of 
resources, terrorism and many others. City is a generator of the innovation, trends, knowledge 
(European Union, Regional Policy, 2011), so its role is to lead this transition movement. 
Hopkins, also notices that what is called transition is rather an unknown and experimental 
process, whose consequences and outcomes are to be studied now and in the future. The 
transition in urban context implies a specific concentration of the overall ongoing processes, as 
the city is a kind of a magnet for all the social and economic shifts. 
The Oxford Dictionary (2015), explains transition as: “the process or a period of changing from 
one state or condition to another”, giving the origins of the word in Latin transitio- or French 
transine-, which means go across.
Hopkins describes transition as a collection of terms, such as ‘an approach’, ‘a cultural shift’ 
including personal (inner) change, , ‘an economic process’ and I think, one of the most accurate 
understanding when it comes to future planning, ‘a tool...for turning problems into solutions’. 
He also puts an emphasis on the power of positive thinking and visualising the bright future, 
which is somehow the reflection of the moral perspective, whenever we find it recalling 
concepts of environmental ethics, virtue ethics or we refer to the 21st century para religious, 
physiological movements. 
In this paper I claim that the transition is a globally ongoing process, which affects all the 
locations all over the globe. It is so, as the process of change is a reaction to the past activities 
that caused pollution, industry downfall, political and demographic changes. It can be either 
acknowledged or happen independently as a background process, but it is no longer to be 
==PAGE:26==
26
Literature review
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
denied. Irrespective of our current response, shift has started someday in a history and its 
consequences, we experience today. What is the key aspect to be considered here, is that while 
there is an ongoing change, the human privilege and opportunity is to ‘put a wood in a stream’, 
so that its current may be navigated in a desired direction. That is why the conscious, active 
posture, planning and building strategies has a key role in a transition times. The transition 
that I try to describe here includes changes at every level of the human habitat – city 
functioning, including climatic, behavioural aspects, structural or land transformation.
Here, I find proper to explain the key difference in meaning of transition and transformation. 
Transition is prior to transformation, as transition process may result in transformation. 
Transformation is a change in a nature, form or appearance, it is apparent, easy to detect, 
observe. On the other hand transition may succeed as a background process, which has a lot 
of results in transformation but as an overall baseline is harder to be revealed and described. 
Whereas both may happen independently, successful transition often employs transformation, 
as the inner change becomes embodied. 
I detect that transition can stand for current mainstream trend that touches every urban 
area in the world. It results in the redevelopment of the urban structures, such as extension 
of metro lines apparent in Paris, Copenhagen, Warsaw, Madrid or Stockholm; the social 
and cultural challenges associated with the freedom of movement and migration, enlarged 
diversity, and economical and governmental challenges. Transition in the context of 
urbanisation is fixedly tightened with the movement of people. There are two main types of 
transition: 1) top-down model, transition towns model and 2) bottom-up model, conducted by 
individuals with no strict regulatory, grassroots. I see the great value in empowering people’s 
entrepreneurship and enhancing participation. However, without top-down initiative, which 
may be minimised to steering and navigating of modern governance, I argue that the direction 
of action and consequently an overall result of transition, might be unsuccessful.
2.2.2.	 Social forces
“One of the most complex enigmas of contemporary social science concerns the causes of urban growth 
and associated spatial patterns of population movement.” (Storper & Scott, 2009)
“Cities are mirrors of society” says Foucault (1984), consequently every action that contributes 
to well-being and well-functioning society also contributes to well-functioning city. The city 
structure becomes just a transformed landscape without the users, so the attention towards 
attracting and keeping people in the city. People are the generators of activity, productivity, 
creativity. However the efforts to attract the working force or students as a strategic goal of 
many cities, is not always successful. Interesting notation was provided by the Pew Research 
Center (Connor, et al., 2013), that the rise of emigrants has been accompanied by the increase 
in the flows of remittances back to native countries. This phenomenon of sending funds 
and other assets back, plays a huge role as in some European countries the income from 
remittances was around 10 billion US dollars in 2013 (Connor, et al., 2013). This shows that 
migration for job opportunities may not always contribute to the city economic growth as the 
generated benefits are being ‘exported’. 
Prosperity and welfare produced in the cities are not shared equally. The extra prosperity of 
the city reflected in economic indicators does not mean wealth for all urban residents as for 
the disparities in society. Income inequality produces social unrest, dissatisfaction and may 
hamper the economic stability or growth. GDP per capita is in a direct linear relation with 
==PAGE:27==
27
Literature review
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
urbanisation ratio and number of population. Therefore as the demographic predictions 
for Europe shows slowing down tendency, and population growth rate may actually turn 
negative after 2025 (Harry S. Dent, 2014), the  attention needs to be allocated in adapting to 
this situation. It indicates the change of focus groups on the job market and also requires to 
rethink the current social systems, concerning education, healthcare or retirement. 
2.2.2.1.	 Human dimension
We can conceptualize the city as a network of structures, buildings, spaces (Caves, 2005) 
the hub for movement, innovation, activity (Bettencourt & West, 2010), the concentration 
of business, transactions, governance and facilities (Sassen, 2001; Castells, 1996). Cities are 
nonetheless composed and constructed by people, as their lifestyle, activity is reflected in the 
inbuilt city environment. They are the vital power and engine for the city’s prosperity and 
therefore the focus for city managers. The role of modern governance – that tends to be open 
towards bottom-up initiatives, dialogue and corporation, is to lead the city transformation. 
Both planners and policy makers with the global overview and professional knowledge should 
navigate the course of actions. 
Citizen has a key role in considerations about the future city development. His well-being 
affected by the quality of life, is in the centre of concern for city planners. There are several 
ways to approach this issue and correlate the human with his habitat. Nowadays when the 
borders are open, human has an unprecedented freedom in his movement and settle down 
decisions, dictated mostly by his free choice. The vital question is about the causes of his 
choices (Storper & Scott, 2009). While building a strategy of a successful city transition, 
it is important to place the human in a centre of a discussion. That is why in the transition 
process, essential is the inner transition, going on in the every single human being (Hopkins, 
2011). From the shift in individual, the shift in community, society and later on global scale 
occurs. Nonetheless, while the intensification of urban activities and densification of urban 
processes, it is necessary to give a special attention to environmental issues. The human well-
being also requires to assure the protection of natural land. In the world, as predicted (Taylor, 
2003; OECD, 2015) dominated by the urban dweller, sustaining the balance between human-
changed and natural landscape has equally significant role as the smart, green and resilient city 
creation.
The current environmental, economic crisis, resulted in rethinking the priorities. It is clearly 
stated by the EU that a sustainable growth and development is a current objective of 
united countries’ actions. This statement is hard to deny but as well the sustainable goal is 
questionable due to the open and vague terminology. Referring to the essential explanation 
of sustainability as a way of fulfilling our “needs of the present without compromising the ability 
of future generations to meet their own needs.” (Brundtland, 1987:8), the term remains open for 
various interpretations and scenarios. Nonetheless this open mind is necessary to reach an 
overall agreement, irrespective of context, deciding on rights and wrongs stays in the hands of 
more local governments or is to be further specified by the policy makers. 
The power of designing and visioning the future is more firmly than ever before present in our 
culture, stated in the movie (Copenhagen Dreams/Drømme i København, 2009) it is usual not 
only in architectural design but in large scale ‘dream’ projects, to believe before we see a result.
==PAGE:28==
28
Literature review
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
2.2.2.2.	 Demographic shifts
Even narrowing down the socio-demographic mosaic to the solely European land, we 
encounter the great diversity and complexity of trends. There are common shifts that can 
be recognised in all Europe with the different time laps due to the difference in social and 
economic evolution. Whereas most processes start in the more developed parts of Europe 
– North and West, the catching-up East and South is usually belated. There are many 
opportunities for this situation as the experience of leading countries may be used by others in 
advance. 
Capturing the demographic state, there is a focus on cities as they are the heart, leading nodes 
in the shift process, for the accumulation of people, culture and activities. Past twenty years is 
characterised by demographic shift in Europe proceeded by similar movements observed in 
United States. “Over the past three decades or so, Europe has seen remarkable changes in all three 
component of national population change—mortality, fertility and migration.” (Champion, 2001). 
It is or due to the cultural patterns or we might say the natural evolution path, that the society 
is undergoing the same transformation, named the second demographic transition (Kabisch 
& Haase, 2011). Nations undergo this process that has impact on local movements. According 
to van de Kaa (1987), “the most fundamental feature of the move from the first demographic 
transition to the second, is a switch from altruism to individualism” (Champion, 2001). It is 
supported by the facilitated mobility and the general openness for alternatives, diversity and 
freedom. Today, the population rate is stimulated by migration, the longer life expectancy and 
lower fertility rate. Consequent suburbanization, aging population, shifts in lifestyles are the 
most vital aspects of the contemporary society. The growing importance of self-development, 
changed societal position of woman and the cultural openness towards alternative relationship 
models caused fo instance the later age of the first child birth and changed patterns in 
households arrangements. This major shift has influenced the spatial arrangement of cities 
and its surroundings, as for the raised demand for single households in the central parts and 
the sprawl of private properties in the suburban areas due to the affluence of middle class 
and usually lack of affordable large family housing in the city core. The transition of the city 
core aimed for business activities, young single creative workers does not remain without a 
spatial response. The structures pushed the ageing part of society and those requiring bigger 
households away from the centre, offering them lower housing prices, access to larger green 
spaces, leisure activities and public transportation, in the suburbs. 
In most European locations this demographic shift is in huge part accomplished and we move 
towards the stability and predictability in demographic trends (European Union, Regional 
Policy, 2011). The next issue that we face currently is a migration and accelerated movement of 
people that will influence the social composition of cities. The profile of European citizen is no 
longer to be easily described as for the rising diversity. Current phase, described as a third wave 
of migration (White, 1993) is characterised by  two essential elements: high skilled labour 
migration and asylum-seekers mainly from outside Europe as for the political pressures from 
Africa and Asia (Champion, 2001) and recently the unstable position in Middle Asia and 
former Russian regions. The international migration flow is strengthen by the ‘guest’ migration 
of students and workers of multinational companies (Castells, 1996). 
However above presented tendencies, there is a belief shared among the researchers that the 
common population development pattern is impossible to be described (Kabisch, et al., 2012) 
as it is dependent on many local factors. However some of them, like Mulligan and Crampton, 
managed to generalize and identify ten different patterns of population growth most often 
==PAGE:29==
29
Literature review
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
recognised (Kohlhase, 2013). The common US spatial structural transition followed the path 
from monocentric city to a polycentric structure and similar tendency is predicted to be 
observed commonly in the growing European city structures.
There is obviously an importance of the  individual characteristic of the city, however the 
understanding of migration patterns local land-based and global flows is the key to create a 
strategy for a city development.
2.2.2.3.	 Migration patterns
The mechanism of migration and people flows patterns are dependent on multiple factors, 
whose comprehension can be a key precondition for creating tools and methods to work with 
city development in the spirit of sustainability and integrity. Migration and urbanisation are 
the inseparable aspects of current city development. The prominent enigma to be solved asks 
about people’s motivations to move. Empirical studies shows that people more willingly pay 
higher prices in more attractive cities, however attractiveness is multifaceted and dependant of 
individual preferences, there are some common values appreciated by the majority of people, 
like proximity to nature, clean air or design values, described and promoted by many architects, 
such as Jan Gehl. However, there is no perfect formula for the best city environment as for 
diversity of people’s preferences.
From the studied literature, critical analysis and discussions, I formulated the sketches of 
urban migration process that help to dissolve the forces and movements as well as identify the 
drivers of them. The essence of my concept of migration machine is showed in explanatory 
figures in Case Study part, Part IV, V. They present difference in patterns of local land-
based migration and global long-distance movement. The compilation of three levels that I 
conceptualized and showed in models, represents current migration phenomenon. 
There are some overall directions in European migration pattern (JPI Urban Europe, 2014). 
The total number of international migrants is rising but remains a steady share of 3% of 
global population (Connor, et al., 2013). Better developed and wealthier North-West is the 
destination for movement from the belated and economically less efficient South-East, as 
the poor economic condition still explains most emigration. Today’s urban migration main 
trend is a migration form middle to high-income countries, not the movement of low-income 
nations (Connor, et al., 2013). Therefore, the middle-income class is a focus customer group 
to be addressed in city tactic . The spatial allotment is also a result of natural geographical-
climatic factors, as the agricultural activity is more natural to happen in warmer southern parts 
of Italy, France or Spain, whereas the historical inclinations of the former socialist division, 
hampered the economy of Poland, Eastern German, Czech or Slovakia. This westernization 
trend is however the reflection of a bigger americanization phenomenon as especially in the 
last century the cultural strength of fulfilling the American dream was a European mindset. 
“Prominent in European migration, where there is the stability in the population rate, that the 
population growth in one place causes the decline offshore and reversed, the decline of one city 
generates the urban growth elsewhere.” (Storper & Scott, 2009).
2.2.2.4.	 Social and spatial interrelations
For addressing different stages of the current city state we can refer to Van den Berg et 
al.(1982) Classical urbanisation model, described in the previous part Urbanization. In the 
reviewed literature I observed two repeating attitudes towards spatial distribution, which were 
==PAGE:30==
30
Literature review
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
conceptualized to simplify the understanding of urbanisation and migration paths. First, is 
the simple cross chart division reflecting geographic location for North, South, West, East 
(Kabisch & Haase, 2011). It is legitimate as for the economic and social factors interrelated 
with the natural climatic factors and the specific historical bias. The second division, less 
inclusive, marks a number of clusters characterised by similar development patterns, which 
are here independent of geographic location (Kabisch, et al., 2012). Both of the concepts are 
insufficient to illustrate fully the complexity of city development but helpful to see the possible 
explanatory factors for the situation we have currently.
In the past cities were established and grew in their own rhythm, now the emphasis is to build 
a strategy to navigate the future, predicting paths of human evolution and changes. Despite 
the general wisdoms of planning, such as those in favour of densification and centralisation, 
known as economically efficient and beneficial, the citizen’s well-being is still broad and 
hard to design for. The benefits of cities accrue to residents, the cities’ customers through 
the employment opportunities, amenities or agglomeration economies. Pollution, crime and 
congestion are among the costs of urbanisation density (Kohlhase, 2013). Therefore reaching 
the balance between spatial density and social well-being is a challenging task (European 
Union, Regional Policy, 2011). 
2.2.3.	 Strategies
“The degree to which any particular city manages these transitions with success is highly variable, 
thus leading to very different outcomes on population, income, and growth from one urban area to 
another.” (Storper, 2008)
In the era of acknowledged uncertainty, presumably cities will be evolving and changing 
over time. Though, the focus of accompanying this development and rapidly responding to 
arising new challenges seems a promising strategy. The question here is how to realise that, 
compatibly with the sustainability of the earth, while the innumerable powerful forces and 
dynamics, which affect the situation, are to be considered. In the following part, various 
concepts to approach city strategy will be presented, with the focus on economic factors and 
competitiveness, as  “Although policy and geography are important factors in changing the patterns 
of migration, researchers often cite economics to explain the migration trends.” (Connor, et al., 
2013). 
2.2.3.1.	 City attractiveness 
Referring to global tendencies, one of the meaningful factors that make a city an attractive 
and competitive is its unique and distinctive identity that differentiate it from other cities 
and shapes its specific. Building city attractiveness is also responsibility of planners, who try 
to relate the dynamics of the people flows and the city. It is the central point of the “Cities of 
Tomorrow” report of European Union Commission (European Union, Regional Policy, 2011). 
Solving problems and responding to people needs is a main work that can improve the city 
attractiveness. The report remarks the need for the policy to be inclusive and multi-scalar. The 
concentration of activities and interests is presented as an opportunity as well as the risk that 
may generate problems and conflicts in the dynamic urban environment. Therefore, the call 
for balanced, harmonious and sustainable territorial development (European Union, Regional 
Policy, 2011). There is also an attempt to predict the future European development pattern. 
The call for collective effort is absolutely legitimate, however the overall frame has to be 
flexible enough to adapt to the local city context and its specific. 
==PAGE:31==
31
Literature review
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
Integrated vision of the European cities future should not limit the local diversity and 
significance of small-scale cultural, landscape or economic values.  
I recognized several challenges of contemporary cities stated in the literature, among them:
• Social cohesion and integration strategy as an important response to rising mobility 
and socio-cultural diversity of cities,
• Accommodating changing population composition, flexibility in adjusting to upward 
and downward population changes,
• Successful management of labour market: steering supply and demand by education 
sector, responding to the changing market due to shifts in production and business 
activity sectors, tactics against the mono-sectoral vulnerability,
• Issues of polarisation, sprawl, affordable housing, connected with the land value and 
environmental concerns,
• Food, water, energy security, strategic approach towards food production, management 
of supply chains and tactics against resource depletion, 
• The need of resilience to natural risks and social changes
Addressing above challenges there are three key aspects to work with: productivity, 
connectivity and density (Kouritt, et al., 2014; Bettencourt & West, 2010). Steering those 
characteristics influence the migration and consequently the development of the city.
2.2.3.2.	 Importance of Amenities
Almost all studies about city development explicitly claim that strategies to provide amenities 
will raise rates of growth and per capita income (OECD, 2015).The potential of amenities 
in affecting migration patterns and its relation with human capital was broadly recognized in 
research. 
Storper and Scott (Storper & Scott, 2009), mention that in recent years the economic 
development is much more a result of population dynamics, rather than the driver of 
urbanisation. Therefore the urban growth is here an effect of choices of individuals that 
migrate for several reasons. Researchers call to rethink the process of city growth as we know 
it, challenging the spatial logic by the choices of individuals and opportunities or constrains 
created in a specific situation. They argue that the skilled, knowledgeable, creative people 
are not evenly distributed in geographical space. They tend to migrate to the suitable urban 
environment, which provides them with amenities like education, public institutions and 
development possibilities (Storper & Scott, 2009). Recently popular tactic is to attract and 
collect creative class in order to provide sufficient power for the ongoing city transition 
(Florida, 2005). As their creativity and entrepreneurship is believed to be the principal power 
of economic growth in the modern city. 
It is hard to determine if the existence of amenities: attractive job opportunities, friendly 
government, high-quality public schools and health care, safety, affordable housing, is 
the sufficient condition to attract creative individuals. However they providence is a part 
of a driving force, together with climatic or historical inclinations, it does not ensure the 
reasonable and sustainable land development of the city. There are numerous examples 
where the creative and affluent class cause the suburbanization and sprawl processes, that 
may as well result in the city core decline. Therefore, there is a lot in hands of policy makers 
==PAGE:32==
32
Literature review
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
to create the adequate conditions to attract and keep desired group of people in the city. 
Primarily the recognition of the certain values that are desired is vital to generate described 
migration process. Those considerations get the discussion closer to conceptualizing city as a 
business entity, where creating value in respond to the customers’ needs and is a precondition 
of effective and efficient business strategy, key determination of its success (Osterwalder & 
Pigneur, 2010). Later the question of how the individuals recognise the place that offers what 
they are searching for,  arises. This process might be connected with branding and promotion 
strategies (Dinnie, 2011) strengthen by rising competition between cities and regions. Uneven 
designation of power is observed in this city networks, as some of the cities prosper well 
almost constantly: like London, Paris, and some lead for a couple of decades to stagnate later 
or eventually decline.
“Thus, while human capital and skills are most certainly indispensable to urban growth, they clearly 
cannot be taken as basic independent variables that precede economic development in either the order 
of analysis or the order of time; and it follows that they do not constitute original moments of urban 
genesis.” (Storper & Scott, 2009).
Discussing the importance of amenities in city development path, there is a certain failure 
in giving them the importance of key drivers. Amenities, believed to drive urban prosperity 
are at the same time the “endogenous to the urban growth process rather than an exogenous 
driver” (Storper & Scott, 2009) . Population growth is a main force that increase the demand 
for amenities and draw investment, seeing the provision of wide range of facilities before 
the increasing population tendency, may be a misleading process. “In the second place, and 
concomitantly, should we actually observe a genuine causal relationship (as opposed to a statistical 
artifact) linking amenities and in-migration to cities, then we would also expect the relationship 
to be of marginal importance when compared to the dynamics of job creation.” (Storper & Scott, 
2009). Nonetheless, certain amount of existing amenities, linked to city’s scale and prosperity 
is an attractiveness indicator that may enforce the in-migration. Thus decline is a result of 
internal and external factors. Both biased by the context, historical, geographical and sectoral 
specific of a place that have to be respected while it comes to managing transition.
The concept of powerful amenities reduces the explanation of mechanisms of growth to the 
independent individual migration movements, prompted by the search for amenity values.
Referring to amenities it is also interesting to investigate the concept of creative class (Florida, 
2005). Desired creativity, associated with art activities and specialization, are perceived as a 
spillover for city, region or even country development (OECD, 2015). This kind of creativity, 
understood as an alternative path of development, tends to emerge as a bottom-up way 
to overcome the tough situation in the cities of decline, such as Toronto, Detroit or Lodz 
(Kabisch, et al., 2012). It seems to be somehow a natural social response in approaching the 
city economic, financial decline.
Addressing the mechanism of growth and migration pattern to the specific amenity value, 
once again draws attention to the preferences of individuals prompted by the search of certain 
settings, therefore may be a useful tool to manage the social composition of the city.
Differentiated path-dependent trajectories of urban systems, are radically intertwined with 
limitations and opportunities. Seeking to guide future developments, it is essential to realise 
that every development is the consequence of previous events and action, some of them are 
manageable some, like natural catastrophe, independent, nonetheless it is a casual chain 
(OECD, 2015). 
==PAGE:33==
33
Literature review
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
2.2.3.3.	 Smart city, Sustainability and Resilience
“The choices made during the current wave of urbanisation will have a huge and likely lasting impact 
on sustainability (...)” (OECD, 2015).
Well acknowledged issues of population growth, global climate change and economical 
growth incentives have been navigating the plans and actions in recent years. Now, it is time to 
reformulate the objectives under the changed conditions. Currently, following the European 
Union goals or a Burtland’s Commission resolutions (WCED, 1987), the call is for holistic 
city model characterised with sustainability, resilience, territorial coherence, peoples’ well-
being. Additionally those goals must be realised by multilevel, flexible and interdisciplinary 
governance in a strategic and inclusive planning (European Union, Regional Policy, 2011). 
It is not a linear process, rather a constant learning by experience, rethinking, trial and error 
method. Among other tactics, the sustainable development path (WCED, 1987) and the 
smart urbanism are most prominent terms used to navigate the course of action. It is mainly 
due to the information and communication technologies, digitalization (Ishida & Isbister, 
2000) that enabled city, its structures, implementation and management to be called smart. 
This smart city is one of several trends alike the sustainable city, walkable city, resilient 
city. As a matter of fact those slogans are vague and imprecise until translated into the 
concrete actions, what is a main concern and task for both local authorities and international 
entities nowadays. Ryohei Nakamura suggests three principles for contemporary urban 
development: liveable, workable and visitable. These incentives present an attitude registered 
in many literature, to approach the city development strategically, more similar to product 
development, which includes branding, advertising and promoting activity.
Different approaches on how to achieve urban growth or stability are raised. They usually 
mention resilience and sustainability as an overall goal and smart city concept as a tool to 
reach it. World Forum on Smart Cities held in 1999, stated aptly the trend towards smart 
incentives will guide the next decade of development. The power of words and therefore the 
smart city phenomenon is huge. Which city does not want to act smart? 
In this smart city concept, tissu urbain (Lefebvre, 1968) and its transformation is a direct 
arena for technical innovations and IT solutions that should result in resource, enrgy savings 
and allow constant improvement. Also resilience, understood commonly as the capacity for 
adaptation to events, while remaining in a desired state, is enhanced in smart tactics.
It is hard to assess the impact of urban areas on the worldwide scale, but a positive 
contribution of city planning may result in minimising the negative effects of human activity 
significantly. While biodiversity may be in danger under the pressures of urbanisation, it 
is also noticed that big cities actually contribute less to CO2 emissions. It may be result of 
the environmental awareness and eco focus or the usage of efficient technologies. Still the 
ecological footprint is underestimated in future plans. As the global urbanized area doubled 
over last fifty years, with the current global urban population growth, the dynamics underlying 
the growth of cities are to be carefully studied. Land as a most precious urban resource has 
to be considered in terms of city’s footprint. Density should be balanced between benefits of 
proximity and hazards of congestion or pollution (Leopold, 1949). Post war intensification, 
also today perceived as an antidote to the waste and ecological devastation (Newman, 1996) 
has a yet unclear ratio of positive versus negative effects. we need to remember that inhabitants 
of the city need natural land to neutralize the impacts as well as rural land to provide for them. 
Can the urbanisation problems and risks be overcome with the today’s approaches of smart 
techniques and sustainability? Time will tell.
==PAGE:34==
34
Literature review
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
2.2.3.4.	 Holistic approach
The majority of papers, discussed in above part of research, concludes expressing an urgent  
need for holistic, coherent approach in policies and actions (European Union, Regional Policy, 
2011). We need to acknowledge the certain consequentialism in the development process. 
While the mechanism is working, it is a hard task to stop it or reverse the course of action. 
It is interesting to see that the migration process have a cumulative and self-strengthening 
tendency in both growth and decline directions. Inflow of people happens in repeating 
cumulative rounds, it is circular. . From above literature study main aspects that underline the 
migration and urbanisation mechanism were identified:
• Geographical location, climate, access to resources (water, food, air quality, natural 
resources like coal, shore location, man-made like infrastructure)
• Attractive economic factors (price of land, available housing, job market, education 
opportunities)
• Amenities that city offers and their quality (public sector, leisure, services)
• City identity as a collection of historical heritage, modern spatial characteristic, the 
existing social composition (such as creative groups, multinational society)
• Position in network, regional and global connections
In concerning the above factors, the city needs to ask to which resident - customer group it 
wants to address its development. Therefore the recognition of the demographic composition, 
predicting its future change and identifying the ways to attract new customer groups is a 
crucial task.
Even though we might goal for similar results in many aspects of the city development, 
we need to remember that in this attempt of facilitating the migration and urbanization 
movement, similar implementation do not mean the same consequences to every city. On the 
other hand, regardless of the action some cities will note an accelerated growth, some will 
decline, shrink and suffer.
The interesting notice connected with migration pattern gives some extra understanding 
of the situation of capital cities, which all have an additional magnet factor for the business 
opportunities that then are driving people, administration and public sector jobs. Most larger 
cities are likely to grow, however they are characterised by the higher level of inequality and 
diversity, that may be apparent in the spatial fragmentation and divisions. In approaching the 
development strategy, there is an importance of all levels of governance: local institutions, 
societies, communities, but also a national and international framework. Although, the current 
development seeks for finding universally best-fitting solution, the successful solution is 
always context dependant. In European settings the no-growth movement inclines searching 
for stability, resilience and good quality of life at the first place. Therefore, in the upcoming 
analysis part I will search for the explanatory factors for city stability, growth or decline. Last 
remark, almost all revised literature agrees on the importance of momentum in the transition 
or development process, which is one of the hardest success factor to determinate.
==PAGE:35==
Part III
Case Study
tracing Migration Pattern
==PAGE:36==
36
Case study
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
3.	
Case study
3.1.	
Introduction to case studies
Changing territory in search for welfare and well-being is one of the instinctive processes 
of every specie, therefore the concept of human migration is inherent in his nature. The 
modern complexity of urbanised habitat makes it difficult to map reasons and factors that 
are impulses to move (migrate). In this part I will try to dissolve some of the features that are 
influencing the human migration patterns, basing on the study of three case cities. Carrying 
out the following study, it is desired to discover how the migration patterns and demographics 
influence the city transition? It will be argued that cities cannot successfully develop 
independent of overall migration trends and that it is impossible to steer the migration but to 
manage its consequences by mitigating or accelerating ongoing global processes.
In the following case study part, I depicted three different European cities to analyse for their 
similarities and differences that I find interesting to compare and that can be conceptualized 
as representative examples of processes that are ongoing in other European cities. However, 
the range on a European scale is much more diverse, the common ground can be found by 
transferring the knowledge and conclusions of this study. I believe that this choice will make 
an interesting insight in city condition and transition processes as well as give an opportunity 
for studying the influence of global European migration patterns.
Several other aspects, justify my case study choice as following:
• All of the cities are representing the most common medium-sized urban form in 
Europe (European Union, Regional Policy, 2011), which scale in European context is 
considered to play the crucial role in future urban development
• They are now in a different stages of urbanization processes, but all undergoing 
specific transition
• They represent different regions of Europe, Nordic, Middle and Eastern part (BBSR: 
Metropolitan areas in Europe, 2011)
My personal input in experiencing all of the case cities is an underlying criteria for that 
choice, as I believe it deepens the understanding of the city specific. It reveals my position as 
an architect and urban designer, and express a conviction that a site visit makes the project 
understanding rise significantly and experiencing the context cannot be replaced solely with a 
distant study.
3.1.1.	 Case study inquiry 
There are two research questions addressed to this part, an application of main research 
question:
• What influence do Megatrends and Global Migration Patterns have on case cities?
• Are the impacts addressed in the city development strategy, how and with what 
result? 
==PAGE:37==
37
Case study
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
3.1.2.	 Scope of the study
I  aim to describe each city’s transition, however the difficulty due to the uncertainty of the 
outcomes of this constantly ongoing dynamic process.  The objective of case studies is to 
search for indictors that could help evaluating current city tactic and its development strategy. 
Making a comparative analysis with the other cases, I want to present the range of alternatives 
for addressing challenges in different contexts. As an overall outcome I would formulate a set 
of approaches towards similar challenges with the possible response in a form of summarizing 
table (fig. 14). The final set, the representation of entire case study part, will enable to see how 
divergent is the situation of European cities, despite similarities that result from the unite 
policy guideline and globalization.
3.2.	
Methodology of case study
3.2.1.	 Process description
In the following case study I will investigate three European cities:  Milan (Italy), Lodz 
(Poland) and Copenhagen (Denmark). First I will focus on several aspects that I find 
important to describe the city state. Listing a set of city characteristic, their analysis and 
comparison, will be a start for discussing the factors that shape the city – influence its 
prosperity and position. At last, I aim to be able to list what can be changed in the future 
planning process for the cities improvement, what cities can do in order to work with 
megatrends and use the resultant opportunities. By systematic approach I aim to correlate the 
city condition with the influence of megatrends and patterns and reveal the main issues and 
challenges for each city and therefore for other cities.
The case study analysis will be carried out describing every city in the eleven themes, those are:
(1) Geography and location
(2) Historical inclinations
(3) Urbanisation
(4) Economy
(5) Mobility 
(6) Demography
(7) Migration
(8) Current issue
(9) Strategies, plans, development
(10) Transition area
(11) Governance
followed by the summing up chapter:
(12) Lesson
To understand the described processes and their causes we need to have an overview of the 
city condition, the resultant of history and current dynamic forces. I will try to see what is 
the state of transition in each case, by mapping the current investments and projects, plans 
and strategies. To focus on migration pattern, the statistical data will be provided, including 
demographic statistics, illustrating population size, age, structure, social composition and 
==PAGE:38==
38
Case study
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
overall position in migration pattern. Later I will look into the economic indicators including 
parameters of urbanisation and growth and the planning policy, briefing institutional 
structures, initiatives, dialogue in planning practise and visions or prospects for future. 
Further, this set of data will be adduced and compared. Next, I will try to derive the influence 
of megatrends and global forces as an outcome of data collection. As for the last step of a case 
study analysis, I will try to answer the research question of this part (see: Introduction to Case 
Study) and recognize a variety of different settings and local responses, which are shaped by 
global megatrends.
The criteria of the following analysis are composed by a set of aspects that gives an 
understanding of the city current state and brief the city’s tactic in building their future 
development. However I also aim to incorporate more innovative perspective of a city in terms 
of its prosperity and strategy, referring to a business development strategies (Osterwalder 
& Pigneur, 2010). This gives an alternative attitude towards the city development and 
management, which I find accurate under the current shift in governance that is also reflected 
in case study cities (Stoker, 1998). 
3.2.2.	 Graphical representation
In the case study part I used graphical representation to present my research findings. I 
created a set of icons that serve to illustrate scrutinized specific of every studied city and later 
use it in order to compare the cities. I will refer to the icons in the case study, part  following 
this model: fig.x, n. x, where n.x - indicates the number of single icon in the figure. The set of 
figure will be always provided at the end of each case study, as a form of case city summary. I 
will later make a comparative set using the same icons in the next part of this report, Part V. 
The formulated graphic aims to better illustrate differences between cities and helps explain 
the concept of Global Trends and Migration Patterns dependency later on. 
In each case city I will present the phase of migration, using the following icon (fig.4):
3.2.3.	 Vulnerability of study
There were differences between data gained from different sources, the national statistic 
offices tend to present more detailed data, while the citations form articles and reports of 
international institutions presented more general numbers. There was also a language barrier 
to access data in foreign languages. There is also a difficulty to assess the future predictions, 
regarding underlined by many, great uncertainty of upcoming events (European Union, Cities 
of Tomorrow, 2011). However there was no huge divergence and the data was sufficient to 
derive the tendencies and illustrate overall trends.
Figure4.  Migration Pattern. Icon expla­
nation
Where:
A dot represents the city - reflects a scale 
and position in Migration Pattern, grey 
zones reflect the area of movement - 
respectively to the scale of flows, there are 
three levels in this pattern: 1) predominant 
land-based, 2) mostly urban to urban mi­
gration on national and European scale 
3) European hub with international flows, 
spatial expansion - sprawl
1
2
3
First: dominant land-based 
Second: dominant city-to-bigger-city
Th ird: global migration, dynamic
MIGRATION STAGES
==PAGE:39==
39
Case study
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
3.3.	
Case study
3.3.1.	 Lodz
Lodz [Łódź] is the third biggest city in Poland, regarding the number of city population. 
It is the capital of the administrative region of Lodz’s Voivodship area covering 18,219 
km2 of central Poland, with the main indicators at levels: urbanisation 63% (fig. 7,n. 12), 
unemployment rate 14,1%, net migration rate: -1598 (GUS, 2015; data for year 2013). 
Currently Lodz has 707 504 permanent residents and dropping, due to the recent severe 
decline, the city is compared to Detroit (US) (After the Factory, 2012).
3.3.1.1.	 Geography and location
Lodz is a mid-size city in the central Poland. Mostly plain land is diversified by the Lodz 
Hills Landscape Park, which affects the landscape of suburban rural area, giving it a 
undulating picturesque shape. The central part of Lodz does not have open water connections, 
the small rivers and canals that in the past played a huge role in the textile industry are now 
limited to underground tiny watercourses. However, the city can be valued for a big amount 
of public green, there are more than 30 parks in Lodz that together with a Botanical garden, 
stands for around 30% of total city area. Another natural resource of a huge recreational 
potential is protected forest area called Las Lagiewnicki. The city promotes itself as a green 
city also because of the big number of green urban squares, backyards and alleys. The climate 
of Lodz is a humid continental climate (Köppen climate classification), for its central 
inland location, affected neither by the Northern Baltic Sea nor the Southern mountain 
microclimate. These mild conditions foster the agricultural activity and small probability of 
rapid weather events gives the potential for stable living conditions and development.
3.3.1.2.	 Historical inclinations
The city was established in 15th Century, as an agriculture and craftsman based town. 
When the textile manufacturing developed in 19th Century, the population number raised 
dramatically. Over five thousand new settlers were attracted to the hub of at least five great 
and prosperous factories, offering social housing for its workers, green spaces, hosting events 
and organising the life of new comers. Unfortunately, the rapid growth did not brought about 
550000
600000
650000
700000
750000
800000
850000
1940
1960
1980
2000
2020
2040
2060
Figure5.   Lodz   
population trendline
data source:
(Obraniak W., GUS, 
2014)
x:  years
y: number of population
==PAGE:40==
40
Case study
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
the care about common city structures, public spaces and the poverty areas started to emerge, 
soon the city became the second largest but grey and poor industrial area in Poland. The 
dynamic development of Lodz was disturbed by the war in 1914. The economic continuity 
of manufacturing stopped at that time was never recreated back. The post-war efforts were 
oriented on removing damages and modernisation of what was left. The Second World War 
strongly correlated Lodz with the tragedy of Jewish community, as the ghetto and camp 
were located in the city. From 1945 when the city fights for its resurgence but several other 
limitations such as Polish-Russian dependence in communism times and the competitive 
proximity to capital city of Warsaw, hindered its successful development.
3.3.1.3.	 Urbanisation
The urbanisation process were the most active in the 19th and the 20th Century alongside 
the rapid development of textile industry in the city. Therefore the city layout is historically 
composition of randomly distributed textile industry factories, developed as an enclaves for 
industrialist, businessmen and textile manufactures. The random development results in an 
unusual structural layout, without developed main city square or regular street grid. There 
was a main axes set in the early stage of city establishing, as a continuity of trade route. The 
Piotrkowska street almost 5 km long, designed as a representative street for many years was 
a pedestrian – oriented, one of the longest commercial arteries in Europe. Although the 
street today is a cultural axes of the city with numerous clubs, bars, cafés, it does not offer 
the sufficiently attractive programme to become as popular as La Ramblas in Barcelona or 
Kongens Nytorv in Copenhagen. The main commercial activity is in fact located aside in the 
nearby Manufaktura centre, renovated post-industrial site.
Accelerated sprawl, recognised as one of the most urgent planning issues, is apparent in the 
city of Lodz, causing a “doughnut effect” (fig.7, n.5). This term applied mainly to US cities, like 
Detroit or Nashville, where the periphery was developing and expending, while the central 
parts became abandoned, dysfunctional or even turned into slum. In the European context 
it is a result of rising car dependency and the incentives of middle or high class dwellers of 
having their own property afar from the noisy and polluted central city area. Luck of policies 
that could limit the land consumption or the individual car transportation together with poor 
attractiveness of the city core, resulted in the decay of the city centre in Lodz, which is today 
the place of striking contrasts between dwellers poverty and poor living conditions on one 
hand and most luxurious services, amenities that city offers on the other. The doughnut effect 
is clearly apparent on the Eurostat Map, showing the “Crude rate of migration rate” (Eurostat, 
2011). The city of Lodz with -2.6 rate gives a hole in the Lodz’s region with an overall 
positive 4.2 rate (2013). The worrying data reveals also that main outflow is observed from the 
downtown part of the city, whereas in surrounding mainly housing districts the situation is 
more stable.
3.3.1.4.	 Economy
The city of Lodz might be categorised as a lagging region (OECD, 2015) due to its former 
urbanisation and desurbanization waves, currently aiming to generate the catch-up growth.
Due to the high liability and therefore vulnerability of Lodz’s 20th Century dependence on the 
textile industry, after the industry breakdown, the city started to decline. Lack of the leading 
economic strategy resulted in the slow bottomed-up driven shift for the small businesses in 
private sector and services-based market development. This phenomenon, called tertiarisation 
trend is apparent in all case study cities, being characteristic for a labour market shift in whole 
Europe. Currently in Lodz the large IT and accountancy companies have they offices, basing 
==PAGE:41==
41
Case study
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
on the highly-educated youth labour force. Remarked by the New York Times International 
Business (Ewing, 2013) many mid-size polish cities became service hubs for outsourcing 
industry. Lodz is mentioned as a prominent example of this development, as “an international 
corporate clientele values Poland’s well-educated and multilingual work force” (Ewing, 2013). 
The luck of other job opportunities that could better fit employees professional profile due to 
the high unemployment rate, which in Lodz reaches 14,3 %, (GUS, 2015; data for January 
2015) is an incentive to accept and accelerate this development path. However the optimistic 
prospects for this development, it causes a great amount of dissatisfaction and discouragement.
Lodz city’s productiveness stands for only the 6,1 % of total Poland GDP, while the proximate 
capital city of Warsaw produces almost ¼ of the total national Gross Domestic Product. 
The proximity to the capital city of Poland could have many positive effects on Lodz’s 
development, but was so far not used in the city planning strategy effectively. While effective 
linking and cooperation with the larger, strongly growing location, bounding in networks and 
territorial cohesion is worldwide recognised as a successful development approach (Alexander, 
2015), in Polish settings the tight cooperation between cities is not popular strategy, as 
the largest urban hubs develop rather as monocentric systems (JPI Urban Europe, 2014). 
Currently Lodz’s economy bases on trade, services, mainly transit and storage logistics, the 
residue of industry and construction sectors. The reminiscences of textile industry have been 
outsourced to the suburban small cities without giving them proper attention in the city or 
region strategy. As a result of economic and social downturn, the service-oriented creative 
sectors and alternative businesses emerged recently as a response of the entrepreneur and 
mostly high educated society. 
3.3.1.5.	 Mobility
Transportation infrastructure is another extremely important factor for urban productivity 
(Kohlhase, 2013). In the Lodz’s case the infrastructure is currently under construction. The 
city does not have a ring road, what accelerates the transit traffic, cause congestion and 
pollution. The recent development is a large scale project including completing investments 
in the downtown part but also following the European guidelines regarding the overall 
connection net. However the favourable central location, the main west-east transit node, 
where the recently completed international highways are crossing, is located in the small 
neighbourhood town at the North of Lodz, Strykow. Several different ongoing projects, 
making a structural change in the city, follow the overall EU plans, such as TEN-T guidelines 
and a proposal for a Connecting Europe Facility (CEF) aiming for: “The new core network [that] 
will remove bottlenecks, upgrade infrastructure and streamline cross border transport operations for 
passengers and businesses throughout the EU. It will improve connections between different modes of 
transport and contribute to the EU’s climate change objectives. Taken as a whole, the new transport 
network will deliver safer and less congested travel as well as smoother and quicker journeys.” (TEN 
- European Union, 2013).
Major investments include replacing on-ground central railway station by the underground 
system that will free the huge central area for further investments and housing development, 
the completion of road systems, mainly regarding its capacity. Although the road infrastructure 
being improved, the lack of high speed rail and alternatives reinforce car dependence, which 
is questionable regarding the overall trends to minimise the emissions and car usage. Current 
projects taken up at the same time, have a negative impact on city functioning, as the central 
railway station is being reconstructed and closed, the traffic is constantly changed and limited. 
However it might take a long time to restore the city’s attractiveness, the plans aim to make 
a lot of infrastructure improvements. Hopefully, the transformation, which is financed and 
==PAGE:42==
42
Case study
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
supported by EU, arguing in their policy for cohesiveness and inclusiveness of city transition 
(Commission on Growth and Development, 2008), will turn out positive. 
3.3.1.6.	 Demography
Since 1988 the city notes the constant decline in population (fig. 5), struggling with the self-
aggregating problems, lack of identity and coherent strategy, today development is mainly 
driven by overall European Union financial programmes and the bottom-up, individual based 
initiatives.  The population of metropolitan region of Lodz is around 1 400 000 inhabitants. 
Total population of the city of Lodz is declining since 1988 when the city population was 
around 850 000, in 2014 was 707 500 (GUS, 2015) and is predicted to decline to around 
600 000 until 2030 (GUS, 2014). The data does not reflect fully the scale of the city shrinking 
population, as a lot of emigration, especially among the youth is not included as they officially 
are still registered citizens. The scale of this phenomenon is not yet researched but together 
with the rising movement from the city core to surrounding agglomeration towns, said by Mr 
Jakubieniec, the director of Strategy Development Department at the Lodz’s Municipality , 
to be around 1500 residents per year, accelerates the shrinking tendency. Interesting to notice 
that over years 2009-2011 the deepest decrease in population at the level of almost -25% was 
observed in the downtown district, remaining four other administrative districts of the city 
noted the drop not higher than -15%. This spatial tendency is an example of introduced before 
“doughnut city” pattern (PLUREL project, 2011).
The post worker city condition is worsening, facing the common in Europe demographic 
shifts (Champion, 2001). Lodz’s inhabitants follow the second wave of population change, 
with the similar number of single and two person households, indicating the trends of single 
lifestyle among youth and married couples with no children or parents of already independent 
children. Based on balances age composition of the population indicates the aging trend, as 
the number of citizens over 65 years is rising (data for years 2010-2013). The age of female 
having a first child is mostly located in the group of 30-35 years old and life expectancy 
is steadily extending. The prognosis for 2050 of further demographic decline, showed in a 
population trend line (fig. 5) hits the most in the group of productive population from 18 to 
the age of retirement. That puts in danger the financial liquidity and credibility of the existing 
pension system based on the employment-based state incomes, therefore is a challenge to be 
managed by the policy implementation in order to ensure the social help for the current and 
future pensioners. This shift implies that the efforts towards turning Lodz a higher education 
hub are not effective, and other strategies should be worked out, to first prepare for the 
forecasted scenario, and second make an attempt to change the demographic trends. 
3.3.1.7.	 Migration
The study of registered international and national migration flows for permanent residence 
shows the total number of out-flows estimated on the level of 5500 overcoming the in-flows 
that are around 4000 people. Mentioned previously, the international migration does not play 
a significant role in migration pattern as it stands for no more than 3% of total in-migration. 
The originate of immigrants is shared between the rural and smaller-urban areas. Similar 
reverse movement is registered with the outflow statistic shows a huge emigration to the other 
urban areas but as well to the what is called rural areas, specially within the Lodz’s Voivodship, 
which can be understood as a reflection of strong suburban sprawl tendency.
The socio-cultural composition of the city is quite homogenous as the foreign migration 
ratio and past influences are not significant. The crucial social division is for the economic 
level of inhabitants. With an average GDP in the region at the low level of 15 200 (Eurostat, 
==PAGE:43==
43
Case study
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
2011) still quite indigent middle-class is not able to offer a sufficient job opportunities form 
the private sector. Lack of industry and strategic investments in this sector result in both 
underemployment and high unemployment rate. The numbers are striking. Almost 1/6 part 
of the higher graduates emigrate with no intention of coming back, whereas very promoted 
international exchange, does not bring the newcomers to the city, as for lack of further 
opportunities, disadvantageous currency rate and language barrier.
The migration towards city is basically from the outer more rural surroundings and small 
towns for education or job purposes (fig. 6). However, this natural new residents group is not 
seen as a target group for local authorities. The city strategy is addressed to welcome people 
form better prospering polish cities like Warsaw, Krakow, Wroclaw, and the efforts are put to 
compete with them, not giving right attention to the ordinary land-based inflow, which is a 
base of migration movement towards the city. This not balanced and dictated by destructive 
ambition tactic was also a cause for not implementing one of the most wise visions over last 
years, to make Lodz a supporting city for the capital of Warsaw. The plan to develop fast 
rail connection from Lodz to central Warsaw, could accelerate positive results. Instead the 
money was invested in independent airport (with very low profits) and the currently lead huge 
investments in the central part of the city, which discussed throughout this case study, brought 
about stagnation, difficulties for commuters and residents as well as disconnected the most 
central parts of the city from the normal use for at least five years.
3.3.1.8.	 Current issue
T﻿hhe declining city of Lodz deals with a great bias of its industrial history, being now the main 
focus of redevelopment plans. The recent most prominent Manufaktura complex is a successful 
example of the functional change and renovation of one of the biggest abandoned factory site, 
currently being a multifunctional leisure-shopping centre. But the end of industry caused not 
only structural challenges for the city, as in fact the most important is the industry influence 
on the city’s economy and social shape. The city connected historically to textile industry is 
a seat of two famous universities, the school of art and the film school. Nonetheless there 
were opportunities lost during the transition process, like the unsuccessful investment in the 
big conference centre that was designed by Frank Gehry to accommodate the international 
cinematic festival. The current situation does not reflect the ambitious city strategy, which 
Figure6.   Lodz 
Migration Pattern: First 
level: predominating 
land-based migration; 
on the icon below: Lodz 
on the first level, gathers 
flows from the region 
but with limitations to 
its development due to 
the city’s characteristics.
==PAGE:44==
44
Case study
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
aspires to be self sufficient economic hub (City of Lodz, 2013). So far Lodz is only a hub 
for business supporting activities, accountancy (Ewing, 2013). This developing sector 
however does not fit  the well-educated young people, though lowering their ambition and 
underestimating abilities, often pushes towards decision to migrate to proximate capital city of 
Warsaw or abroad.
3.3.1.9.	 Strategies, plans, development
Referring to the Integrated Development Strategy for Lodz 2020+, main values listed as the 
preconditions for further city development were the high-quality social capital, society and 
governance mutual confidence and social relations. There is an emphasis on enhancing bottom 
up initiatives and their governmental support to maximize the individual entrepreneurship 
for the good of all community. The objective is to build a place that will not only be a 
touristic, business and education purposes destination but ultimately a place to stay for a life 
(The City of Lodz, 2012). In this document the City is understood as a common property 
of the residents and authorities. The most significant challenges that Lodz is facing today 
are recognised, such as: 1) Improvement of the quality of life of residents, 2) Reversal of 
adverse demographic trends,3) Creation of a sustainable transport network in Lodz and 
the agglomeration, 4)Strengthening of social bonds, fostering of citizens’ participation and 
building of self-government community, 5)Efficient management of the city, 6) Regeneration 
of urban space. It is said that the implementation of the strategy will determine the condition 
of the city, the strategy is believed to have a power to reverse the stagnation and decline trends 
(City of Lodz, 2012).
The city vision is submissive to the regional policy document the Development Strategy for 
Lodz’s Metropolitan Region 2020+, which prioritize the integration of the region mainly by 
means of improved connections and transportation infrastructure and better coordination. 
The main aims and priorities to be followed are listed after the strengths and weaknesses are 
recognised. The tactic is clear and cross disciplinary. There are as well recommendations for 
implementation tools. Very detailed and specific diagnosis recognises the concrete challenges 
and problems and gives the answers to them. 
The Lodz’s Metropolitan Region development strategy prioritizes the revitalization covering 
various fields from structural and environmental to social renewal.
Lodz is branding itself as “A friendly, creative and dynamic city of sustainable development and 
competitive living, working and investing conditions that makes use of its historic, infrastructural 
and creative potential” (City of Lodz, 2012). Low both land and estate prices in Lodz 
could potentially attract the investment. The average apartment price is  the level of 1000 
Euro per sq meter and the Investment Area price reaching hardly 100 Euro per sq meter 
makes it an beneficial location for investments. However, the opportunities, under current 
huge redevelopment plan in the centre part of the city, covering 100 hectares, including 
transformation of power plant and main railway station, is claimed to become “culture and 
entertainment centre, with certain public functions (public-private partnership, with EU funding 
contribution)” (City of Lodz, 2012).
The current strategy lacks the enforcement of somehow informally created links of a declining 
centre and better prospering suburbs of the city, where the production activity and logistics 
are mainly located (see also: fig.7,n.7). The Lodz’s Voivodship region should be included in 
the city strategies, whereas the city mainly aims for some unreachable international relations, 
unfortunately denying its textile correlations. In the small satellite city of Zgierz, located only 
20 km from the Lodz city centre the supporting policy, regarding taxation or family-friendly 
==PAGE:45==
45
Case study
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
policies, being as well in favour for the development of textile related activities resulted in the 
high economic and population growth. This small scale pattern – while the migration form 
Lodz was enhanced towards smaller surrounding towns could be in a way copied regarding 
Lodz-Warsaw relation. Having a fast, facilitated connection with Warsaw, Lodz could partly 
benefit from playing a supporting functions for the capital city, being the only closest large 
city in Warsaw’s surroundings (fig.7, n.3).In fact strengthening the Lodz-Warsaw connection 
could result in the changes in the overall structure of polish cities network (fig.7, n.3), while 
the competitiveness should go in hand with cooperation, the largest polish cities, including the 
capital and Poznan, Wroclaw, Krakow, still do not use the proximity benefits and the power of 
synergy, developing independently and irrespective of each other.
3.3.1.10.	 Transition area
Current transition in the city is infrastructure-oriented, therefore is more a structural 
transformation (see: explanation in Part II). However the legitimacy of improving infrastructure 
and enhancing mobility that are claimed to improve the productivity and enhance further 
investments (Kohlhase, 2013), there is a risk that the achieved result will be characterised 
by overcapacity and underuse. However, due to the harsh job market situation not only 
demographic decline occurred, but also a positive activation of society supported by favourable 
local authorities politics and the promotion tactic of Lodz as a creative city. Reaching 
the bottom may be for many individuals an impulse to became more independent and 
entrepreneur, what may be a good take-off for discussed in Part II inner transition, however 
the overall situation is not so easy to shift. It seems that top-down structural investments do 
not match the social and demographic situation of Lodz, being or misplaced or false start, as a 
transformation should be dictated by the inner transition and factual demand. 
3.3.1.11.	 Governance 
One of the recently implemented strategies that reflects the tendencies of open democratic 
and inclusive governance and enhance the active civic posture is a initiative of the City 
Participatory Budgeting. The 16m Polish zloty out of total 40m of Polish Zloty (around 10 
million euros) city budget is allocated for the civic postulates for the common city projects 
and local district projects. The initiative is effective and successful, as for the 129 000 citizens 
actively participated in the project previous year. The bottom-up postulates initiative resulted 
in the accomplishing of the city public free Wi-Fi, Food Bank, the Basketball Sport Academy, 
City Bike Infrastructure, city’s hospice and animal shelter. Other local district projects 
were voted as well. The positive aspect of this initiative is that it is very well planned and 
managed, including the reporting of the process and implementation phases, the process 
monitoring and controlling tools. The public discussion, individual entrepreneurship and social 
involvement was enhanced significantly as the meaningful side outcomes of the project. The 
positive involvement of public requires the transparency of actions, which is consequently 
accomplished by the local government, all of the policy documents, reports are available 
online.
3.3.1.12.	 Lodz’s lesson
There are three main aspects in the city of Lodz to be questioned and formulated for the 
future improvement: territorial coherence, self-evaluation and financial strategy. The three bullet 
points should be discussed with the help of professional expertise and global overview, and 
they will ensure that the city takes a good direction for the future and that the investment 
are not misplaced. There is a need for environmental assessment and strategy as well as a long 
==PAGE:46==
46
Case study
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
term monitoring in the process. The public participation should be consequently developed, 
as the vision is an outcome of a dialogue and consultations between several different actors – 
mainly local authorities and the residents of the regions. The act of the spatial development of 
the city point out main objective for the inner city development, that if followed might bring a 
live to the city core. They aim to re-establish a movement towards centre and create a compact 
city as a consequence, minimising sprawl  by building social consciousness and stronger 
identity for the city core.
Lack of identity is a problem for creating city attractiveness and keeping residents attached 
to their environment. Lodz no longer or not strong enough linked with any of its origins, 
neither Jewish community, which before the second World War was giving a strong cultural 
component, in fact almost all buildings and heritage was destroyed, nor any if the artistic 
identifications is present. Today’s city openness and support for alternative, creative tasks is 
supposed to gather the huge amount of creative class around the post industrial sites. However 
the effort are, having an own creative business is not a path for everyone and this is hard to 
build the 700000-inhabitant city’s identity on the action of several individuals. 
In the case of Lodz there is a risk of overcapacity and overscaling of current ongoing 
investments, that are planned for much more residents and users, what seems not to include 
the current demographic projections. The mistakes of other cities like Detroit, which 
development strategy was based on hard infrastructural investments, might be repeated by 
Lodz. The apparent phenomenon of doughnut effect was recognised in many transition cities 
all over the globe, such as Detroit, Melbourne, Houston or Birmingham, therefore with the 
right politics there is a possibility for a turnover.
The city of Lodz is an example of the development that does not follow the coherent 
strategy, but is a result of the apparent trend to catch up with western countries and due to 
the historical belatedness. Unfortunate that many of chosen solutions do not benefit from 
what is an opportunity of this delay and lessons learnt from the experience of other countries. 
Therefore the huge investments in hard infrastructure had been taken, not following compact, 
smart or emission free trends in city development. At the same time a lot of opportunities 
that are specific and unique are being mishandled and missed, like the cinematic festival and 
the film school tradition. Fortunately, at the same time the alternative, creative movement is 
observed with the low budget, bottom up initiatives to give the new life to the old abandoned 
postindustrial sites. The civil involvement and entrepreneurship is rising proportionally to the 
economic depression, what brings a hope for the positive future shifts.
==PAGE:47==
47
Case study
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
Figure7.   Lodz. City characteristic
N
E
W
S
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
List of icons:
1) geographic location, 
2) position in European structure: East-Central Europe, 
3) position in national network: disconnected, close to capital city Warsaw, 
4) migration pattern: first level: predominate land-based migration from neighbourhood smaller urban and rural   
    areas, 
5) spatial form: “doughnut” structure, 
6) population trend: severe decline since late eighties (1980s), 
7) connectivity: decentralized, lucking structures in the central part, 
8) special characteristic: postindustrial, 
9) % of foreigners: at the level of 1%
Indicators for Capital region (Lodz’ Voivodship):
10) area (respectively to max. 25000,00 km2  : 73%: 18,219 km2, 
11) population (respectively to max. 10 M): 25%: around 2,5 millions, 
12) urbanisation level: 63 %
data source: GUS, 2014
==PAGE:48==
48
Case study
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
3.3.2.	 Copenhagen
Copenhagen [København] is the capital city of Denmark and the main city in the capital 
region Hovedstaden. The city is located at the eastern edge of the Zealand island, facing 
Øresund strait, which separates Denmark from Sweden. This quite small in area and 
population city is a centre of many internationals, what makes the city as an important 
economic hub in the Northern Europe (TEN - European Union, 2013). Its welfare and 
prosperity is an outcome of trading history as well as a specific of Nordic countries culture
3.3.2.1.	 Geography and location
The city’s territory is rich with water. Apart from coastal line, there are several lakes around the 
city. The central part itself is separated from the rest of the city by The Lakes, reminiscences of 
an old stream. The mix of water and bridges makes a specific atmosphere of the city, supported 
by policy efforts to be maintained as an important tourists attractor. The Nordic location 
influence huge differences in the daylight hours between summer and winter. The longest 
days last 17 hours in the summer, while the shortest is only a seven-hour day. City lies in the 
oceanic climate zone, what makes the region vulnerable to extreme weather events like storms 
and intensive rainfalls. Recommended way to deal with the climatic risk is either to find a 
solution of decoupling the city from extreme events or to adapt to them (JPI Urban Europe, 
2014). City’s policy is characterized by a continuous coherent approach towards climatic risk, 
recently inherent in the city blue and green vision (European Union, 2013), what is a part of 
broad action towards improving city’s resilience to climate change. Designed green spaces, 
which allows the predicted rapid rainfalls to be accommodated, at the same time provide 
recreational possibilities to residents, which is in line with the promotion of healthy, active 
lifestyle. Regarding geographical inclinations, the city’s authorities focus on protection of rich 
coastal biodiversity and build strategies, which not only incorporate but prioritize values of 
land and nature.
3.3.2.2.	 Historical inclinations
The city originates in the Viking history around 10th century, being a seaside fishing town, it 
quickly developed as a trading centre with the growing importance of the harbour. The city 
status was improved later in the Middle ages when the Royal Family decided to settle down 
in Copenhagen. Soon the city gained the status of capital of Denmark, the University was 
founded, the political activities entered the city’s arena together with the architectural and 
cultural boom. City kept developed as a hub for academic activity and innovation, while the 
College of Advanced Technology was founded in 1829. The beer brewery industry, leaded 
by Carlsberg Brewery, gave Copenhagen a characteristic identity and raised its market 
competitiveness. The city’s prosperity was further accelerated by the investments in ship 
company A. P. Møller, which together with Maersk Group, having their strategic headquarters 
located in the city, throughout the years and today has a significant influence on Denmark’s 
trade patterns, navigating the economic and social development of the country and shaping 
the city position in the global network. After a years of war and post war stagnation, before 
the Millennium, the investment in improving regional bounds by local train and metro 
connections together with the decision to build the Øresund connection with Sweden, has 
opened the city for new opportunities for local and cross-border development and has brought 
many positive results. Trading tradition in the city, enhanced by its coastal location, together 
with fishing and shipping culture, gives a special value to the city’s economic development. 
This geographical opportunity was successfully developed and maintained by the city and is a 
key factor shaping city’s welfare. 
==PAGE:49==
49
Case study
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
3.3.2.3.	 Urbanisation 
Urbanisation of Denmark is at the high level, what is especially generated by the capital 
region (fig.10, n.12), as 86.9% of the population lives urban lifestyle, however the most 
urbanised Zealand accommodates half of the national population, with a Copenhagen region 
dominating. Therefore Denmark is highly urbanised country with the urbanisation rate at 
the level of 79%, 5% above the European average. With the high urbanisation indicators 
and relatively small area, the city of Copenhagen is quite densely inhabited, around 6,700 
person/km2 (Denmarks Statistiks, 2015). However, the cityscape is moderately low and there 
is a human scale preserved in the whole region. Copenhagen is compact, thanks to the strict 
building regulations that aim to sustain the unique cityscape reminding of the historical 
coastal Nordic trading town, what also helps to develop as model of walkable and bikeable 
city. Biking in Copenhagen has a long tradition, it was at the beginning of 20th Century 
when the separate bike lanes and paths occurred in the city design. Prioritizing cycling in the 
infrastructural design paid off and the city can be now proud of the fact that around half of 
daily travels is made by bike. This focus on cycling is connected with a strategy of adopting 
energy efficient lifestyles and being emission free city, that may in the future balance the 
downsides of increasing urbanisation.
Copenhagen has been developed as a core of metropolitan area, following development 
strategy of “Finger Plan”, agreed in the city’s comprehensive plan in 1948 (fig.10,n.5). The 
model base the regional development on several communication channels (fingers) which are 
the corridors of development and transportation. The core part of a palm, facing the seaside 
and country boarder being a potential limitation to the city development, was already planned 
to have a bridge connection with Sweden at that time. However it was not before 2000, 
when Copenhagen established a metropolitan cooperation Øresund bridge Swedish city of 
Malmo, which being smaller both in size and population, gives the Copenhagen more spatial 
possibilities for growth as the coastal area has been always the most precious and tends to 
be limited. The finger plan framework pursued consequently for about 80 years shaped the 
regional development putting an emphasis on harmony between nature and infrastructure, 
enhancing the connection with the core city, giving it the appropriate functional priority at the 
same time.
3.3.2.4.	 Economy
Copenhagen benefits from the features that are reserved for capital cities. Its well prospering 
economy is a mixture of various sectorial productivity, basing on trade, transport and services. 
Having a capital city function, the city has broadly developed as an administrative and 
banking hub, which today employs almost a half of total workforce. The city is a seat for 
main business headquarters of Danish companies and multinationals, what improves the 
city’s rank in global network (McCann, 2009). Young business is currently focused on ICT, 
publishing and culture activities, however the sectors of architecture, design and construction, 
pharmaceutics and research and innovation businesses are well established. The current trend 
of market for start-up’s, fed by the demand for smart and green solutions, also boosts the 
creative industry. Venture capital and founding is recently rapidly developing business sector in 
Denmark, due to the country general capital affluence and high incomes. Main sectors driving 
the city prosperity are still trade and transportation, wholesale and retail, consultancy and 
services, such as advertising, entertainment and tourism. While the large corporations have 
a significant impact on city’s economy, the downtown atmosphere relies on small businesses, 
retail stores, second-hands, cafe’s, restaurants or galleries. With the promoted public-private 
partnership, self employment in Denmark reaches only the level of 9%, whereas in Poland 
==PAGE:50==
50
Case study
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
and Italy almost ¼ of workforce is self-employed.  Public administration, education and 
health sector stands for the one-third total employment in the Hovestaden region in 2012 
(Denmarks Statistiks, 2015). Denmark is one of the Scandinavian countries with historically 
well developed social aid system. Taxation and employment policy, enables the government 
to offer free access to good education, healthcare, social benefits for students, unemployed or 
elderly, maternity and child support and many other subsidy programs. Currently at least one-
fifth of Copenhagen citizens receive the cash benefits from state (Denmarks Statistiks, 2015).
In the reviewed literature there is a lot said about the importance of political and 
administrative corporation on different levels. Every city is nested within its country and 
region and impacts national economy. It is studied that in most European countries the 
national GDP is mainly produced by the cities’ activity, in some cases like in Denmark this 
relation is extreme, as the capital city Copenhagen and its area contributes to national growth 
in more than 60% (OECD, 2015). Today Copenhagen is a pioneer in corporation of public-
private sector (Jensen, et al., 2008) has a strong focus on sustainability and innovation in all 
fields of operation.  Green growth and evaluated as successful model of green economy, mixed 
with a high and increasing share of renewable energy in the city’s district heating, and policies 
to reduce carbon emissions, all gave the city a right to become an European Green Capital 
2014. Copenhagen goals to spread good practice around Europe and beyond, emphasising 
the ambition to become a platform for progress and a powerful performance that will act 
an example and inspire other European cities.  The city has been as far effective in citizens’ 
involvement and participation projects, which value the common good and sharing maybe 
much more than any other European nation (European Union, 2013).
3.3.2.5.	 Mobility
The city aims to achieve a green mobility target, enhancing walking and cycling as well as 
providing carbon-neutral public transport.  In return, authorities and residents are rewarded 
with a better quality of life and savings of around 540 euro on their electricity and heating 
bills each year. There is a very positive tendency in the Copenhagen government to translate 
the overall goals that are often connected with restrictions and changes, to the citizen-oriented 
and positive language of policy approach. This is one of the implementation techniques to 
build the economic incentives, in this case mainly by presenting the benefits of the desired 
activity and promoting it, that contributes to building a positive attitude, together with the 
traditional direct regulatory, indicating what is legal and what is not, known as command and 
control tool, that has a very positive results. 
Focusing on all sectors that compromise the city’s carbon footprint, there are strategies to 
make a significant reduction of emissions until 2025 (City of Copenhagen, 2011). One of the 
very successful city strategy is to promote cycling in the city, which currently stands for 50% 
of daily movement. Copenhagen goals to increase the number of travels made by bike up to 
75% in 2025. This plan seems to be real, as today the number of families with and without cars 
is in balance in the country and Capital region, what with the country welfare indicates the 
good policy efforts towards limiting individual car usage, the shifts in people mind-set and 
provision of good public transportation. Regarding public transportation, the city offers low-
emission bus connections, metro and sub-urban rail. Currently the huge investment is ongoing 
and the central parts of the city are divided by the construction sites. City is building a City 
Circle Line, that will facilitate the movement in a downtown, when today the two existing 
metro lines connect more distant destinations. 
The European Union transportation policy sees Copenhagen as an important linkage with 
Sweden, especially Stockholm, its capital. The strategic location of Copenhagen, linking 
==PAGE:51==
51
Case study
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
Scandinavia and central Europe (fig.10,n.3), improves the trade tradition of the city and its 
economy. The EU development strategy Ten T- Trans-European Transport Network, includes 
Copenhagen as a  strategic node in a network (TEN - European Union, 2013). In 2009, 
Denmark and Germany reached agreement on the construction of a fixed link between the 
two countries, the Fehmarn Belt fixed link is a prioritized EU project. The fixed link, planned 
to be open in 2020, is believed to strengthen the “green transport corridor” from Stockholm 
in Sweden to Palermo in Italy (Danish Ministry of Transport, 2012). Apart from improving 
the international connections, Denmark also invest to improve the communication between its 
biggest cities, implementing a One-Hour connection model. Both infrastructure strategies are 
overlapping “As a part of the One-Hour model, a new 200 km/h line will be constructed in the TEN 
priority corridor between Copenhagen and Ringsted.” (Danish Ministry of Transport, 2012).
3.3.2.6.	 Demography
The total number of city’s inhabitants is a bit more than half a million, 580 184 in January 
2015 (Denmarks Statistiks, 2015), which makes it rather small European capital. However 
there is an interesting phenomenon in the city area, as for the small total population of 
Denmark, Copenhagen itself accommodates around one-tenth of total Denmark population, 
it’s urban region Storkøbenhavn almost one-fifth and the region Hovedstaden – more than 
one-third of national population. This reflects the central national position of this rather 
peripherally located capital.
While the European population tends to age, the population of Copenhagen manage 
to gather the young people due to the vibrant city atmosphere and lots of attractive 
opportunities. An average citizen’s age is only 35 years old, which indicates that the largest 
group is in their productive age, what is also reflected in city’s current affluence. 
Copenhagen is a one of Nordic profile city, which can be distinguished for being 
environment-friendly, welfare state having very well developed social and public sectors and  
generally high income levels.  The specific culture of Nordic countries individualists, who are 
claimed to build a model society, includes very high level of feeling responsibility for common 
space, therefore involvement in public matters, having its reflection in city’s spatial design as 
well as the citizens’ attitude. Improving citizens’ human capital by creating sharing-oriented 
settings, open for semi-formal initiatives and individual entrepreneurship is included in 
municipality policies.
Population of Denmark is constantly slightly growing with changing population growth 
ratio around 0.3 ratio over last years, currently slowing down to 0.24. City population follows 
the national and regional trends and from the 90’s when noted a decline bottom, recovers 
and grows steadily (fig.8). The city and region migration influx is an outcome of internal and 
external movements, regarding the country borders. 
==PAGE:52==
52
Case study
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
0
100 000
200 000
300 000
400 000
500 000
600 000
700 000
800 000
900 000
1880
1900
1920
1940
1960
1980
2000
2020
2040
2060
x:  years
y: number of population
3.3.2.7.	 Migration
The composition of Copenhagen’s society is very vivid, with almost one-fourth of population, 
having a foreign origins (fig.10, n.9). The major groups of immigrants come from the 
neighbourhood countries of Germany, Sweden, Norway and Poland, there is as well a large 
group of Italians. The overseas migration is composed of residents from UK, USA, Australia, 
India and China. The immigration to the Capital Region has been rising from 30 000 to 
almost 40 000 over last six years, and the Copenhagen city itself collects about half of this 
movement (Denmarks Statistiks, 2015).
Population of Denmark is constantly growing with changing population growth ratio around 
0.3 ratio over last  years, currently slowing down to 0.24. The net migration rate (difference 
between the number of persons entering and leaving a country during the year per 1,000 
persons) is at the level 2.25 migrant(s)/1,000 population.
If not for the international mainly overseas migration, Denmark cannot plan for the 
significant population growth. The European stable tendencies will not omit the small in size 
and population country. Current demographic state, with the majority of population being 
in the productive age, gives the city the extra benefit in comparison to many ageing cities in 
Europe.
3.3.2.8.	 Strategies, plans, development
The demanding climatic projections, putting the city in the risk of  flood, are the pressures 
that resulted in a green and environment oriented policies. The city not only plans to adapt 
to the climate change, but wants to actively contribute by reducing the carbon emissions 
significantly (European Union, 2013). This goal inclines the innovative approach towards 
energy production and consumption, mobility patterns and administration. The climate 
adaptation plan has been worked out in a model process of stakeholders participation, as 
a city wants a shared vision to be accepted by citizens, local businesses, institutions and 
international entities, merging designing, engineering and innovation efforts. In the Climate 
Adaptation Plan, the city of Copenhagen aims to make flexible ground for the upcoming 
climate changes and contribute to the environmental condition, rather than goal for hard 
solutions. The focus on flexibility and monitoring is due to the uncertainty of future events, 
one of the key aspects in planning: “The City of Copenhagen will develop the city in relation 
Figure8.   Copenhagen 
population trendline
data source:
(Denmarks Statistiks, 
2015)
==PAGE:53==
53
Case study
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
to the main trends in the scenario and adapt the planning the whole time”. Other important 
issues are to synchronise the climate adaptation with other planning to achieve a coherent 
long-time effects (“Synergy with Other Planning”), make a high-tech, “smart” steps to avoid 
overinvestment,  benefit from and provide for the international arena. It is stated that “the 
municipality will ensure that part of the investment in climate adaptation is recouped in 
the form of growth”, which being a green growth is suppose to make a city more attractive. 
Prominent for this plan is a focus on preliminary analysis and assessment as well as constant 
revision, which allows to avoid misplaced or wrong decisions. While using the average future 
predictions, the modelling on the possible damage in made and the planning measures are 
decided in response. The frame includes strategies towards heavy downpours and rising sea 
level and temperature, recommending a specific projects to be made and implemented. After 
discussing structural technical solutions, there is a focus on indirect consequences of climate 
change, which ones again proves the city concern about social issues. Enhancing public health, 
biodiversity and recreational attractiveness is a part of green growth strategy, which aims 
to position Copenhagen as a Green City in a European city network. There is an emphasis 
on acknowledging the common responsibility in the climate adaptation plan. The overall 
design projects and infrastructural investment are supported by individual action regarding 
the rooftops strengthening and safety. Together with solving cloudburst challenges, climate 
adaptation of the sewerage systems, the city creates a s well higher living standards for the 
benefit of local residents. The city ambition is to be inspiration with the solutions they create 
and implement for the other cities around the world, that are facing the same challenges with 
the mitigation of the cloudbursts effects and climate change adaptation. Therefore, green 
growth, means not only building strategies to mitigate predicted rainfalls and rising sea levels, 
but also the low-emission, clean energy and smart consumption patterns, it is a baseline for all 
activities and initiatives in every field that city may navigate.
Figure9.   Copenhagen 
Migration Pattern. Sec­
ond level: predominant 
European and global 
migration flows; on the 
icon below: Copenha­
gen middle position 
in migration path, the 
European well-prosper­
ing capital gathers large 
scale flows what gives 
more development op­
portunities.
==PAGE:54==
54
Case study
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
3.3.2.9.	 Transition area
In this case one of undeniable advantage, regarding two other cases, is the fact that 
Copenhagen is a capital city. It benefits from being a seat of national government, 
international institutes, organisations and other administration offices, which aggregate the 
capital city’s attractiveness – both for long term migrants and tourists (BBSR: Metropolitan 
areas in Europe, 2011). This distinctive function, is limited only to quite several cities in 
Europe.  “Strategically placed at the entrance to the Baltic Sea, the City of Copenhagen has 
been an important regional centre for centuries. Each of its many districts has developed with 
its own distinctive character, making up a dense urban fabric” (European Union, 2013). 
If the contemporary city aims to develop and grow, it has to reformulate the growth incentives, 
and therefore that is what Copenhagen did, opting for green and sustainable growth. Green 
growth concern supported by public authorities is also a key trend for Copenhagen’s business. 
Many companies within different sectors, transportation, IT, construction or industry, has 
a green focus apparent in their business strategy. Very positive aspect in Copenhagen city 
planning is that the municipality and local authorities are not afraid to cooperate with the 
private business, what in other context, such as the city of Lodz, has negative connotations, 
despite which also Milan is benefiting from the elite’s community entrepreneurship. 
Acknowledging the power of corporation with private and public sectors as well as individuals 
is a part of social transition process, which other cities may learn from. In Denmark, the 
tradition of Private-Public investments (Jensen, et al., 2008) and public participation gives a 
good example of how to navigate the rising social consciousness and individualism, achieving 
a solid, responsible and responsive society.
3.3.2.10.	 Current issue
For the well prospering Copenhagen, apart from addressing the climate change, one of 
challenge for the city planning might be to navigate the inflow in a way that the city stays a 
compact and human-scale, attracting tourists and investors to visit and stay in those favourable 
settings. Sustaining high income levels of residents and the social sector at satisfying level 
might turn a challenge with an increased inflow of undereducated or not willing to assimilate 
immigrants. However, what is for now clear, is that national, regional and city policies are 
coherent towards the migration management and so far successful. Gaining a leadership 
position, which is a city’s goal, carries huge responsibility to navigate the future trends in a 
desired way, that will result in improving a state of cities and residents wellbeing.  
3.3.2.11.	 Governance 
The credibility in governmental institutions, reliance on state and trust in politicians is to 
be considered as an important factor that shapes the communication therefore cooperation 
between citizens and city authorities. The highest level of social trust is noted in Denmark, 
over 50%, whereas in Italy and Poland the trust in public institutions and justice system is 
way below 40 % (European Commission, 2015). It is affected by socio-cultural aspects of this 
countries but the case studies indicate that by enhancing the public participation, the trust can 
be locally improved as the factor is tractable. The openness of people and the more conscious 
society is willing to pay more or make any other contribution if they are sure it will affect 
good results. The management of neighbourhoods, cities, regions, countries and international, 
cannot be executed without the democratic dialogue, and working out the best tools and 
methods in the field of governance is one of the greatest challenges to face, as for the shifts in 
importance and power, that was recently shaken dramatically from the simple country level, to 
the city, region and their networks scale (Taylor, 2003; OECD, 2015).
==PAGE:55==
55
Case study
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
3.3.2.12.	 Copenhagen’s lesson
The promotion of best practises first takes place in the city itself, by very inclusive and 
citizen well-being oriented vision, enhanced by public-private sector connections, the 
communication and broad consultation offered for residents. Smart future Copenhagen seems 
to have a logic, balanced approach towards the development, concentrating mainly on the 
improvement in the city operation, that is translated to the integrated, cross filed project plans. 
Waste, energy, infrastructure, intelligent traffic management, sustainability in buildings and 
its construction process are the part of this transition. Recent metro extension, further post 
harbour reconstructions and post industrial adaptations are other structural responses to the 
demographic and cultural shift. 
The kind of success of Copenhagen indicates the importance in planning and implementation 
of the city of the following aspects:
• Territorial values, limitations, challenges and opportunities are examined and used, 
for instance their resulted in building territorial and socio-economic cooperation 
and communication with Malmo, knowing that both cities benefit from this relation, 
planning for climatic changes with blue and green city projects, strong investment 
focus on the usage of waterfront as a main natural value in the city
• The plans are responsive to the current trend projections: there is a focus on 
sustainability and green solutions in the city, visible in soft and hard city tactics such 
as: promotion, actions to raise citizens’ consciousness and daily dealing with energy 
production and waste management
• There is an emphasis on research and development and knowledge creation, however 
knowing that the productivity depends also on number of people, the scale of the city 
Ahrend et al. (2014), the small in population Denmark, enhance the immigration by 
creating an environment of openness and equality and make a policies to navigate the 
cultural and race diversity
• The modern changing city has also its consistent policies that keeps the unique 
values and city identity strong, such as the attention to the waterfront, preserving 
the cityscape with strict restrictions on the height of buildings, trying to keep the 
industry even in the districts where the dominant function is changed like in the 
“Meatpacking” district or new harbour housing districts.
The most important lesson from city planning of Copenhagen is the cohesiveness of its 
actions on all levels. The overall framework, which is a repose to  global trends is translated 
into local settings and contextualized with regional challenges. The visionary document is 
straightforward baseline for the policies and project recommendations on all scales, from 
governmental levels down to the individual actions. This approach ensure that the common 
efforts follows the same direction, leaving at the same time space for improvements and 
flexibility towards changing settings. The planning cohesiveness, constant update, flexibility 
and cooperation are key success factors in Copenhagen. The city working method ensure 
that the short-term plans and investments are contributing to the overall long-lasting goal. 
“This version of the Copenhagen climate adaptation plan is a starting point for adapting 
Copenhagen to the climate of the future, so that Copenhagen will continue to be an attractive 
and climate-adapted city in the future” (City of Copenhagen, 2011).
==PAGE:56==
56
Case study
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
Figure10.   Copenhagen. City characteristic
N
E
W
S
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
List of icons:
1) geographic location, 
2) position in European structure: Northern Europe (western part), 
3) position in national network: crucial for national and European connection network (land and sea), 
4) migration pattern: second level: predominate migration triggered by capital function of city, both national and 
    international, 
5) spatial form: “Finger plan” structure, 
6) population trend: growing, 
7) connectivity: concentric structure, 
8) special characteristic: Nordic, harbour city,
9) % of foreigners: 22% of residents
Indicators for Capital region (region Hovedstaden):
10) area (respectively to max. 25000,00 km2  : 10%: 2 598 km2, 
11) population (respectively to max. 10 M): 17%: around 1,7 million, 
12) urbanisation level: 87%
data source: Denmarks Statistiks, 2015
==PAGE:57==
57
Case study
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
3.3.3.	 Milan
 “Milan [Milano] is the chief town of the Province of Milan and of the Lombardy Region. With 
1,324,110 inhabitants it is the second larger Municipality by population in Italy, after Rome. Milan 
is also the centre of the largest metropolitan area in Italy, and one of the largest in Europe. This is a 
vast urban zone comprising a number of Municipalities of different size, a “mega-city-region” (Hall 
and Paine 2006), with a new and complex spatial division of labour (Ranci 2007), that yet is in no 
way acknowledged from the administrative point of view, since a metropolitan area government has 
never been established (Martinotti 1993).
Milan is considered as the economic and financial capital of Italy; the stock exchange is located here, 
as well as the most important multinational corporations. It is the most global city in the country 
and one of the richest areas in Europe (...).From the political point of view, since the early Nineties, 
when direct election of Mayors was introduced in Italy, for two decades centre-right wing coalitions 
have governed the Municipality. The city has recently experienced a major change, since a centre-left 
coalition won the local election in June 2011.” (Costa, et al., 2010-2013)
3.3.3.1.	 Geography and location
No doubt, the location of Milan at the European map, has its very positive inclinations on the 
city development. Positioned in two major geographical concepts of urban Europe, Milan is a 
part of Blue Banana region and Pentagon (fig.13, n.1,2,3).
Milan is the city of European Pentagon (ESPON, 2004) with London, Paris, Munich and 
Hamburg, delimiting the zone which offers strong global economic functions, high income 
level and well developed infrastructure. This area concentrating economic activities and 
prosperity, includes 18 European capital cities, is claimed to have a dominating importance in 
Europe. The Urban Audit studies (ESPON, 2004) showed the differences between cities lying 
in Pentagon area and behind it. The lucky share is characterised by being “leaders in innovation, 
growth and employment creation” (ESPON, 2004). They prosperity and opportunities attract 
many migrants to the “Pentagon” cities. Milan urban area is the 5th largest in Europe, 
accommodating around 5 million residents (Demographia, 2015). Being a part of a Blue 
Banana, region of urbanisation and development recognised formerly by geographer Roger 
Brunet (Brunet, 1989) for a concentration of people, money and industry (Hospers, 2003), the 
Milan Province is having the highest added value in the country (Costa, et al., 2010-2013).
3.3.3.2.	 Historical inclinations
Huge part of current Milan’s success is a result of its historical development. In a Peter 
Taylor’s cities classification, Milan is ranked as an Alpha global city, explained as an important 
linkage of the major economic region into the world economy, engine of growth for Italy 
and the gateways to the local and global resources (Taylor, 2003). The city has a significant 
history originating before the times of Roman Empire and serving as a capital almost from 
the very beginning. The dynamic history of middle ages left the imprint of German, Spanish 
and French in the city’s culture, the prominent period of Italian Renascence, art, architecture 
achievements and general value of the Italian culture as a base for European evolution, all 
together made Milan fast developing city with an important role on the European map. After 
the world war’s period Milan gained a status of a commerce, trade and banking dominant 
in the Northern Italy, being as well a great university seat, which gave the city the funds to 
become a successful world city (Sassen, 2001). The labour force was involved both in industrial 
production and office work sectors, the stock exchange and high number internationals in 
the city enables it to be an economic engine of Italy in 19th and 20th centuries, focus point 
of industrialization and modernisation. The subsequent boom in the city development 
==PAGE:58==
58
Case study
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
was reflected in construction of new architecture like the symbol of Pirelli company. This 
sky scraper is not a lonely in-built attraction of the city. Numerous monuments, modern 
architecture company’s headquarters, the multitude of beautiful temples of catholic religion, 
castle, La Scala opera house and many others examples of flourish and vivid Italian heritage, 
museums filled with sculptures, paintings, music and tastes, locates the city on a 42nd place in a 
worldwide ranking of most popular tourists destinations (Euromonitor, 2014).
3.3.3.3.	 Urbanisation
Milan itself is a city strongly embedded in the territorial network, known as a polycentric 
metropolitan zone. This macro-city region evolved from a compilation of two patterns, first 
a monocentric hub, in which Milan had a dominant position and second the polycentric 
systems of smaller cities around Milan (fig.13, n.5). From this, and with the help of the 
regional policy, the dynamic urban region evolved. The accelerated growth resulted in a strong, 
stable, more independent position of towns that used to be mono-functional satellite cities 
of Milan (fig.13,n.7). Today they work together in a network, what enables them to improve 
infrastructure and benefit from the differentiated services or values that each one offers. This 
example shows how territorial cohesion and working within the surrounding lands may be 
mutually profitable: for the core city – being provided with a lot of supportive functions and 
smaller cities – which benefit from the geographical proximity to the bigger urban node. 
3.3.3.4.	 Economy
The province of Milan has consistently been the wealthiest in the country: its per capita 
GDP the highest in Italy (approx. 80% higher than the national average). And the Lombardy 
region produces the considerable percentage of total GDP in Italy. This characteristics, let 
to classify the city as a Metropolitan area with a great variety of functions, among 21 largest 
and most significant metropolitan areas in Europe of a great potential and economic power 
(BBSR: Metropolitan areas in Europe, 2011). Milan is highly ranked as a city with solid 
prosperity factors, the index being a compilation of productivity, quality of life, environmental 
sustainability, infrastructure and social equity indicators (UN-Habitat, 2013). The high GDP 
per capita 36.199,6 in 2011 (PSY: provincial statistical yearbook), at the canvas of 30.218,7 in 
Lombardy region and 23.238,8 on national level demonstrate the city’s strong position (Source: 
Unioncamere - Istituto Tagliacarne).
Today’s Milan economy is characterized by textile and garment manufacturing, automobile, 
chemicals, industrial, machinery, and publishing industry, but also a variety of art sector 
activities, mostly fashion and design. The city is a base for some of the leading fashion 
designers in the world like Armani, Gucci, Prada, & Versace.  Milan is a centre of culture, 
with plenty of museums, galleries and monuments, therefore almost 70% of economic activity 
is based on services to supply for the demand of thousands of visitors. The long-term trend 
of tertiarisation of Milan economy and labour market is more global common phenomenon 
in European market. By contrast, industrial and handcraft activities are more and more 
distributed outside of the city to the suburban municipalities and the rest of the region 
(Costa, et al., 2010-2013).  It is to be noticed that similar process is apparent in the previously 
analysed city of Lodz.
3.3.3.5.	 Mobility 
One of the focus of busy and congested Milan’ is the improvement of transportation 
infrastructure. The overall EU project Ten T- Trans-European Transport Network,  provides the 
city with the guideline for building a European transit corridors, stating that: “A well-running 
==PAGE:59==
59
Case study
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
transport infrastructure is essential to maintaining the European Union’s competitiveness and 
wealth. Its 27 Member States currently have five million km of paved roads, more than 215,000 km 
of rail lines and 41,000 km of navigable inland waterways.”
 “The TEN-T policy supports the completion of 30 Priority Projects, representing high European 
added value, as well as projects of common interest and traffic management systems that will play 
a key role in facilitating the mobility of goods and passengers within the EU”. The initiative has 
been given a strategic importance on the national level and because the EU monitoring 
the implementation and construction is guaranteed. The railway and road connections 
are made in the spirit of improving local and global connectivity, however there is a little 
focus on environmental aspects. Enlarging capacity of roads, would not enhance the shift 
in car-dependant Italian lifestyle, especially in affluent Northern region. Therefore the city 
has to deal with congestion, using effective parking policies and congestion charge, what 
being a weak command and control tool, does not bring about a long-term transitive effects 
(European Union, Cities of Tomorrow, 2011). There is a doubt if the extension of connections 
characteristic for traditional urbanisation is promoting a sustainable mobility, being one of the 
most polluted environments in Europe, the concentration of particulate matter and sulphurs is 
heading towards 100 (annual PM 10 per μg/m3), (Commission on Growth and Development, 
2008), the city of Milan undertook steps to improve the situation  joining C40 Cities group 
and implementing relevant policies (C40 Cities, 2015).
3.3.3.6.	 Demography
Milano is the capital city of the region Lombardia (Lombardy) covering the 23,844 sq km of 
the central Northern part of Italian land. The city’s society has a constant number of people 
in retirement age, while the biggest group is in their productive age (15-64), the average age 
is estimated for around 45 year old, high national birth rates (8,4) are apparent also for this 
region (Istat.it, 2014). The social composition of the city, where around 1/5 of the residents 
has foreign nationality (Istat.it, 2014) (fig.13, n.9), together with around 6 million tourist 
in the city per year, illustrates the city’s heterogeneous social structure. This is the cause for 
city flourish culture but also with an unbalanced income distribution, the Gini Index of 
0.51 in the area is a cause of social tensions and apparent disparities. Milan is a heart of 
Italian development in economic, political and administration areas. City’s growth generated 
Figure11.   Milan. 
Population trendline
data source:
(Istat.it, 2014)
x:  years
y: number of population
1000000
1100000
1200000
1300000
1400000
1500000
1600000
1700000
1800000
1950
1960
1970
1980
1990
2000
2010
2020
2030
2040
==PAGE:60==
60
Case study
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
dynamically sprawling zone that includes its metropolitan area and is extending over the 
whole region of Lombardy.
There are some worrying indicators influencing this sector, such as an increase in youth 
unemployment rate, also for the highly educated youth, the lack of income continuity due 
to short term contracts, that is a limitation for access to bank loans, which usually also limits 
homeownership and consequently might be a reason for delaying decision to set up a family, 
what once again worsen the demographics. 
There are three official scenarios for population development in the city, therefore the 
city planning is cautious about the migration trends, however in the Milan case, for the 
importance of the city and its position in network, with growing urbanisation and population, 
they might opt for the developing and increasing scenario (fig. 11). The administrative area 
of the city of Milan (Commune di Milano), Provincia di Milano with more than 3 million 
inhabitants and the whole Lombardy Region, which is almost 10 million inhabitants, roughly 
with half a land accommodate double number of inhabitants, comparing to Denmark. 
3.3.3.7.	 Migration
Both immigration rate levels in the city are positive, national 2,9 and international: 7,7 and 
total net migration at the level of 32,4 (Istat.it, 2013), indicating the city’s growth. Although 
the highest migration indicators in Italy are observed elsewhere, at the southern parts in 
Catania (34,8) or Sardegna (Olbia-Tempio city: 38,8), they are mostly affected by the poorer 
regions international immigration in-flux, whereas Milan stays the destination for higher 
educated youth and middle-aged employees. 
In the post war times city was growing in population, reaching a pick in 70’s. After that the 
number of inhabitants in the city was slowly decreasing, while the region was still growing 
territorially. It was due to the spatial expansion, facilitating regional transportation and 
growing affluence, that enables many residents to move outside the city core and commute to 
work on daily bases. From the beginning of new century, the flow of Milan residents is quite 
stable, growing or slightly declining within the range of 100 000 inhabitants. The most severe 
decline was the reflection of the crisis in years 2008-2010, whereas current state indicates the 
stable growth in upcoming years and the city might soon re-reach 1,5 million inhabitants, 
depending on concentration on decentralisation processes fostered (fig. 11). Current daily 
commuting, is a challenging movement for infrastructure and traffic management.
Figure12.   Milan. 
Migration Pattern. 
Third level: prominent 
global city; on the icon 
below: Milan third level 
in European migration, 
collecting international 
flows and offering out­
standing values, the city 
is a global hub.
==PAGE:61==
61
Case study
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
3.3.3.8.	 Current issue
This year (2015) Milan is hosting an international EXPO fair, what after the recent crisis 
brightened prospects for the city’s future with the expectations to revitalise the city’s economy 
bringing the international attention, several infrastructural and revitalisation investments. In 
addition, the city’s decades-long population decline seems to have come to an end in last years, 
with signs of recovery. We might assume that with the predicted growth in population for 
the Lombardy region (Istat.it, 2015), the population in Milan itself will grow consequently, 
however there is a lack of more accurate predictions, the UN-Habitat scenarios foresee the 
stabilization of the Milan urban agglomeration area (UN-Habitat, 2013). In many studies 
Milan is characterised for its economic activity, named as well advanced producer services, but 
also for the activity in cultural and art fields (BBSR: Metropolitan areas in Europe, 2011). The 
tendency towards a concentration of activities belonging to the tertiary sector in the Milan 
area is clear, as well as the progressive reduction of industrial production.
3.3.3.9.	 Strategies, plans, development
The Municipality of Milan (Commune di Milano) presents the development strategy, in 
which it states that the city of Milan respond towards the changed need of residence regarding 
the housing opportunities and different lifestyles patterns, realising the new proposal strategy 
of  “casa publica” attentive to the social issues and a quality of life. This guideline implies to 
provide sustainable solution to increasing housing needs, which are aimed to fulfil the diverse 
needs of residents. This general statement is executed in five different project designs of 
construction of new or requalification of existing housing stock, developing social housing 
quarters and residential districts with the focus on the accessible green areas, public spaces 
and mixed-functions. Significant,  that in a city of such a importance and scale, the new-
construction projects are in minority, balanced by the transformation and renewal of existing 
city structures. 
3.3.3.10.	 Transition area
Patsy Healey in her book “Urban Complexity and spatial planning” devoted the whole chapter 
trying to illustrate the Milan’s struggle in the urban planning processes (Healey, 2007). She 
points out that the post war development of the city was hampered by the ineffective and 
incompetent administration. Referring to her, “the story [of planning in Milan] is that of the 
difficult quest to find an effective method of planning this area which lies at the vibrant heart of the 
Italian economy (Balducci, 2001).” Italy does not share the tradition of welfare state corporatism 
characteristic for many Northern European countries. On the contrary as a historic bias, 
strong political and business clusters influenced the social composition of the city. The 
division for social classes, the separation and rank of administration and authorities, the 
meaning of elite, was influencing the development and investments much more than in other 
countries. It can be seen as well as a result of Italian city-state culture and therefore territorial 
fragmentation. Also due to history, there was a strong connection between spatial planning 
and architecture with the ideological programming.
Major international investments of Pirelli, Alfa Romeo and the fashion industry drew 
economic growth. Also here, alike in Lodz, at the end of 20th Century, the prominent period 
of industrial boom passed, living behind over 12 million sq km of post industrial sites in the 
region (Healey, 2007). However, the city position in network, enabled small, often family 
enterprises to build a strong image and go global, especially in design, art and fashion 
industries, strongly embedded in the city and nation identity.
==PAGE:62==
62
Case study
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
The post-war Milan was flooded with the migration from southern Italy and neighbourhood 
rural areas and the city focused its action on improving in housing, transportation and 
urban services sector. The planning regulations and the politics in the city influenced the 
spatial distribution, districts were developed following the normative framework for each 
zone, guided by the General Spatial Regulatory Plan (Piano Regolatore Generale), created 
with an expertise of professional planners, architects, engineers.  Under the pressure of 
immigration and Milan’s growth, the interest to create a collective capacity on a larger scale 
of the metropolitan region emerged. The high culture of urban design and architecture caused 
creation of good city structures, provided with public spaces (Italian piazza), monuments, axes, 
well arranged quartiers, suitable for the Milan’s desired “Italian North capital” and metropolis 
city scale.
3.3.3.11.	 Governance 
Patsy Healy puts an emphasis on how huge role played the politics in shaping the Milan’s 
development over years (Healey, 2007). The politics of long in majority Socialists party was 
hampering the execution of urban projects for the expanding city. Only after the release and 
with the help the of European Union the city moved into the phase of innovating the strategic 
development. The political reform, including also establish the city mayor position (1993) 
changed the distribution of regulative and implementation powers. Remarked city deficiency 
in taking the opportunities of these times, the focus was more to break the former system 
bias in administration, legacy and execution. Increasingly business-driven development was 
lucking a strategic coherent navigation. New approach emerged, driven by the insights and 
recommendation born at the Technical University of Milan, emphasising the city interaction 
with region and introducing the new agenda for “collaborative, participative process for strategy 
formation and development management” (Healey, 2007). Reinforcing Milan’s core was always 
the agenda of authorities, as they knew that only the progress of activity in the core may drive 
the rest. The region’s growth resulted in criticism for the lack of land management policies and 
many visions or proposals for its better morphological urban development. To some degree 
the unmanaged influx of international migration caused the socio-spatial segregation in the 
city. However the strong focus on the city core with a little concern about the other parts of 
the city itself, was positive as only a strong core enables the rest of its surrounding to grow 
and develop. The development of Milan, generally was hindered by the inefficient system and 
belated policy regulation, which did not match the changing events. The complexity of the 
legislative process in urban planning and the luck of tools to make a democratic and result-
oriented planning process, keep the city restrained. However the strong power of businesses 
and private sector network enabled the city to develop and grow regardless this mostly 
political barriers. 
At the border of Millennium, the shift in concern and practises was finally reached with the 
changed city Major. This innovation meant mainly new special attention to the metropolitan 
region of the city and recognition of the  necessity of strategic perspective. The legislative 
planning tools was changed for the most up-to-date, maybe less detailed framework directory 
documents (Documento di Indirizzo), which aims to set the direction and stay flexible towards 
the course of action. What is important that the planning policy and practise was released 
strongly political principals and forwarded them to be navigated by the professionals and 
scholars. The final independence of the and shift to planning principles drew expected results. 
They incorporated imperfection and insufficiency in the framework document, knowing that 
setting a desired direction was more important at that moment than the specific and precise 
project ideas. This strategic frame document opened a new development possibilities and being 
==PAGE:63==
63
Case study
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
opportunity-oriented resulted in concrete initiatives, ensuring at the same time some order 
and escaping the risk of dysfunctional development under the pressure of further unmanaged 
growth. The next step was to understand the city position on regional, national and global 
scale, and developing relation and competitiveness oriented plans.
The change of legislator pattern, resulted in the change from the bureaucratic checking the 
local projects conformity with overall documents, towards logical and professional assessment 
of the project in frames of regional and national development directions. Another tool Piano 
di Servizi – the specific wish list of municipalities was included in the process to enhance 
the corporation, enabled to understand the transportation patterns and identify the zones 
demanding improvement. The innovation in governance practises was crucial in the case of 
Milan modern development, it let the private investors and initiatives to take off. Remarked 
that the major city transformation was driven by the small scale projects and relation building 
rather than the overall strategic plan, however the decoupling of planning legislation was 
a key factor enabling this shift (Mugano et al. 2005). The mechanism that was built at this 
transformation set a new social issues and dialogue oriented practises and allow grasping often 
transitory opportunities. 
3.3.3.12.	 Milan’s lesson
Milan is a rich and lively city. There is still a huge opportunity in governance capacity to be 
used, so that the benefits from regional synergies and cross-disciplinary economic activities 
will be gained. Enhancing the future vision, however the city prospers well as its condition and 
image is a sum of the historically embedded  and presently cultivated activities, brands.“What 
is lucking is well developed public realm”, claims Patsy. As the major future problem cannot 
be ignored by such a prominent metropolis, I suggest that while facing the future challenges, 
concerning the traffic regulations, emissions, waste or energy management, the more holistic 
view and the tactic to address it need to be created in the upcoming future. However, with 
the sectorial and local initiatives, the rising consciousness of the citizens, knowledge sharing 
and the indisputable influence of international bodies, this goal seem to be available in the 
nearest future. Among Milan’s challenges managing the disparities between foreign and native 
resident seem relevant. There are several issues pointed out in this sector, such as equality of 
salaries, while foreigners earn on average 25% less than native workers in 2010 (Costa, et al., 
2010-2013), however Milan, according to many researchers is not characterised by ethnically 
segregated neighbourhoods, there some blocks concentrating migrant families. Facing current 
migration waves from overseas, the strategic policy in housing, integration and employment is 
key to avoid future tensions on the ethnical ground.
From 2005 the regional corporation is supported by the Milano Metropoli development 
agency, established as an collaboration platform between public authorities operating in the 
metropolitan area of Milan and in partnership with local town councils, development agencies, 
universities and research centres, trade unions, the business community, banks, foundations 
and nonprofit organizations. It provides the region with business incubators, enhancing 
innovation and investments as well as territorial cohesion. The postulate is to promote 
the Sustainable Development in the Metropolitan Area of Milan. This mission is realized 
on three strategic areas: ”Territorial development, Support strategic economic sectors, Special 
industrial, reindustrialization and urban development projects” (Milano Metropoli, 2011). Based 
on the municipality and province governments, the entity stays open for other stakeholder 
interest, stating: “All the municipalities in the metropolitan area of Milan, as well as any other 
public and private bodies interested in promoting the area’s economic and social development, can 
become shareholders in Milano Metropoli Development Agency.” Main tasks on agenda is to 
==PAGE:64==
64
Case study
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
promote the area, support strategic economic sectors, encourage environmental sustainability, 
reindustrialization and redevelopment, giving attention to local agencies and in this way 
translating the overall direction into the local implementations and actions. The Lombardy 
region signed up an cross regional agreement in 2014, stated joining forces for investment 
for the future of Europe, declaring new growth through smart specialisation. The previous 
ineffective management of the city and luck of cohesive  territorial approach was reflected 
with the negative migration ratio for the city of Milan observed in the first decade of the 21st 
Century (Istat.it, 2014).
The Milan case shows how difficult it is to decouple development trajectories from political 
context constrains. It also indicates fragmented ownership as one of the main barrier. Lack of 
the democratic participatory tool, delay reaching an agreement on any strategy and hold back 
implementation process. Luck of project realisation at the momentum usually accumulates even 
more complex problems and challenges in the future. However, there is a great power in elites 
of the city, which existence may be once seen as a sign of undesired inequality, it helps to keep 
the business in the city and gives the city its rate or position in network. Also, the modern city 
does not forget about its historical values and puts and emphasis of incorporating history in 
the modern life, not trying to isolate it as a monument, for instance by using the most precious 
historical sites for the cultural and business events. The very strong focus on the city core, 
might have delayed a bit a local territorial coherence, however it allowed the region to bloom, 
as only a strong core is able to drive the region.
==PAGE:65==
65
Case study
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
Figure13.   Milan. City characteristic
N
E
W
S
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
List of icons:
1) geographic location, 
2) position in European structure: Central Europe (western part), 
3) position in national network: very important node, part of Blue banana and Pentagon structures, 
4) migration pattern: third level: global Alpha+ city, predominate international migration, constant flows due to 
   dynamic people exchange but overall only slight population increase
5) spatial form: strong hub drives whole agglomeration, large metropolitan region, 
6) population trend: stable, dynamic in shorter time laps: overall slight drop, rising tendency in recent years, 
7) connectivity: agglomeration structure, polycentric metropolitan, 
8) special characteristic: significant historical values - touristic destination, 
9) % of foreigners: 27%
Indicators for Capital region (Lombardia):
10) area (respectively to max. 25000,00 km2 : 95%: 23 844 km2, 
11) population (respectively to max. 10 M): max. 10 millions, 
12) urbanisation level: 86%
data source: Istat.it, 2014
==PAGE:66==
Part IV
Case Study
Analysis
==PAGE:67==
67
Analysis
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
4.	
Analysis
4.1.	
Introduction to analysis
Following part will provide with the summary of case study, collecting the most important 
aspects. It will present comparison of case study cities and discuss how the condition of 
analysed cities is guided by Migration Patterns and influenced by Global Trends.
4.2.	
Analysis of case study results
All of three discussed case studies show that the migration process is an overall trend, the 
consequence of social and economic changes, the consequence of human evolution. We 
are no longer a sedentary society, rather a mobile, moving, having a great ability to hunt 
for opportunities worldwide unlike our ancestors.  It is not a mystery what dictates our 
settlement choices, there is mostly the same survival logic behind our decisions. It is due to 
the advancement of human being that we are so diverse and individual, what makes our needs 
and requirements so different. Therefore, we search for various objectives to be embedded in 
our destinate location. The particular city strategy may be hence conceptualized to be similar 
to the business entity strategy, which creates value for its customers - residents. It is also to 
be remembered that the position of the city in a global network is a net force of numerous 
variables including history, geographic location, local and national affiliation. It is not easy or 
impossible to influence those aspects, especially in a short-time perspective. 
The lesson from case studies indicates that seeing a city as a detached island and trying to 
force the strategy without a local cooperation is an destructive tactic. A core city may act as 
a hub and accelerator on a global scale only if it acts positively in its neighbourhood area, as 
for spatial accommodation of growth and the embedded functions that influence its position. 
For this reason city’s local position and consequent possibilities or limitations have to be 
recognised beforehand. The illustration of different levels migration pattern (fig. 15, n.1) 
developed during this study can serve to better locate the city position on the map of global 
movements.
It is to be underlined that there is no one-fits-all solution, though the development strategy 
for every city is unique due to its specific characteristic, shaped by national, regional and 
inner-country differences. The holistic approach is necessary to understand global processes 
and work with them locally.
4.3.	
Comparison
The case study indicates that similar global forces shaped differently the settings in three 
studied cities, what we can examine following the comparative tables (fig. 14, 15). It is 
apparent that depending on city, similar forces cause various results. Therefore we can derive 
that similar Global Trends and Migration Patterns influence every existing city, however 
with different consequences that are depending on city specific, its vulnerability and adaptive 
capacity, and also the capability of planners and authorities to recognise and respond to the 
impacts (see: fig. 17).
Figure14.   Following pages: 68-69. Comparative table of case cities different characteristic, triggered by 
similar overall trends.
==PAGE:68==
68
Analysis
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
Megatrend
(EEA, 2015)
Process/Event
Consequences
Lodz
Copenhagen
Milan
(1) Diverging 
global population 
trends
Demographic shifts
Ageing population
More single 
residents
Low fertility rates 
Socio-cultural shifts
More private initiatives, 
creative activities, still 
traditional family model 
in majority
Many individuals, 
international 
marriages, unstable 
living situation – 
rentals, short-term 
inhabitants
Accelerated socio-cultural mixture
(2)Towards a more 
urban world
Urbanisation
Downtown population 
decline, sprawl, 
“doughnut” city
Growth
Spatial expansion
(3) Changing 
disease burdens and 
risks of pandemics
(side effect of population 
growth, polarisation and 
rising density)
-
-
-
(4) Accelerating 
technological change
Communication 
technologies and 
innovation
Disparities in access to 
technologies
Very ICT oriented 
society
Increase in using technologies mainly 
by businesses and individuals
(5) Continued 
economic growth?
Manufacturing industry 
decline
Abandoned factories and 
sites in the city centre
Abandoned factories 
and sites in the city 
centre
Decline in manufacturing but 
factories still operates
Tertiarisation
Rapid shift to service 
sector,
Development of 
outsourcing activities
Development of 
services and other 
business sectors
Accelerate development of business 
activities
(6) An increasingly 
multipolar world
Extended mobility, 
globalization
Emigration of educated 
youth, immigration of 
uneducated from rural 
areas
More tourists, 
overseas immigration
More tourists, international society 
composition
(7) Intensified 
global competition 
for resources,
Increasing 
environmental 
pollution
Pollution, resource 
scarcity
Increasing air pollution, higher oil prices, worsening condition of environment
(8) Growing 
pressures on 
ecosystems,
Increasingly severe 
consequences of 
climate change
Climate change
More moderate climate, 
pollution
Heavier 
rainfalls, rising 
sea level 
Air pollution and urban island effect
(9) Diversifying 
approaches to 
governance
Transition of governance
Collapse of conservative 
bureaucratic system, 
shift toward client-, 
consultancy, management 
oriented governance
More open and 
transparent
Shift in planning policy, releasing the 
development from complex bureaucracy 
based regulations, simplifying the process 
of transition
==PAGE:69==
69
Analysis
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
Responses
Lodz
Copenhagen
Milan
No policy to improve the situation, 
secure or activate elderly
Facilitating the modern lifestyle, providing 
housing, offering social opportunities
Weak reaction, securing the 
pregnant employment
Social benefits for families, public 
response belated, ex. lack of 
secularism in governance
Focus on tolerance and free expression of all 
cultures, ethnical knowledge-transferring, 
benefiting from variety, focus on monitoring 
and improving security
Building an international 
identity, enhancing cultural 
exchange, slowly releasing the 
social cluster composition (still 
strong in business sectors)
Inaccurate – belated,
Huge investments in infrastructure, 
no social programs
Flexible policy, supporting business and 
society oriented, territorial cooperation 
Improving city core and 
territorial cohesion
Promoting active, healthy lifestyle
Promoting active, healthy lifestyle, enhancing 
outdoor activities, conscious consumer 
choices; well-developed social sector and 
health care
-
Establishing free Wi-Fi zones in 
the city, weak device support, no 
public access to devices in libraries or 
municipality institutions
Enhancing smart solutions, innovation 
development and technological improvement, 
using technologies to improve standard city 
management
Using technologies mainly to 
promote and improve city’s 
attractiveness
Service oriented requalification of 
sites, textile industry residues moved 
into suburban towns
Functional shift to cultural activities balanced 
with keeping the industry or its atmosphere 
where possible
Enhancing manufacturing
Attracting outsourcing investors, 
supporting small businesses
Well established cooperation with private 
sector, supporting small businesses, city 
cooperation with business
Supporting services 
development – attracting 
tourists and promoting 
investments
No successful policy to attract youth, 
excluding uneducated from city 
vision, no planning for social works 
or other job opportunities for them; 
establishing international agreements 
in education and employment 
sectors, attracting foreign business 
and visitors
Facilitating immigrants policy, controlling the 
inflow, free Danish lessons for newcomers, 
assistance in registration process, inclusive 
tolerant city policy with the emphasis on 
equal opportunities and adaptation process; 
maintaining and developing international 
agreements and employment sectors, 
attracting foreign business and visitors
Weak foreign language skills 
and learning support, tourism 
oriented economy, city 
international arena develops 
independently of policy input; 
maintaining and developing 
international agreements, 
attracting foreign business and 
visitors
-
Promoting green mobility, reducing CO2 
emissions, using renewable resources, 
producing bioenergy, heat from waste plants, 
district heating
Tariffs on congestion
-
Climate Adaptation Plan, Green and Blue 
design project, focusing on recreational green 
areas, reducing CO2 emissions
-
Public consultation of city 
investments and projects, successful 
project of introducing citizen’s 
budget, support programs for creative 
industries, policies of relocation 
of unused premises and friendly 
taxation programs for entrepreneurs
Improving and maintaining the tradition 
of public-private partnership, constant 
corporation of authorities, businesses and 
residents – communities and individuals, 
transparency
Implementation oriented 
actions, focus on right 
framework instead of precise 
guideline, enhancing territorial 
cohesion and regional 
corporation
==PAGE:70==
70
Analysis
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
Influenced by similar global forces, three case study cities shows different tendencies and 
prospects for future development. They may be treated as representative of the processes that 
are characteristic today for cities all over Europe. 
Lodz, Copenhagen, Milan will in sequence represent three groups of cities on different phase 
of underlying Migration Pattern: 
(1) Lodz - described by downturn in manufacturing sector, textile industry and population 
decline, is challenged by the bias of Eastern European history, poorly connected with regional 
and national network, undergoes a severe drop in the central part, showing the “Doughnut 
city” structure.
Lodz represents average mid-size city with no extraordinary function in its region or 
outstanding attractive factor. It accumulates mainly territorial based migration from 
surrounding areas; may face decline in population due to accelerated emigration, therefore the 
city structures may be overscaled and the city itself may shrink. For similar cities, the main 
concern will be to search for the opportunities to use their potential and focus on current 
residents welfare. Improving the regional cooperation may also be used as a tactic to improve 
the city and bring new productive energy.
(2) Copenhagen - described by extraordinary function of capital city with special values of 
seaside and Nordic location, it is well connected both locally and globally. Its friendly and 
magnetic environment as well as outstanding welfare attract many newcomers.
Copenhagen represents mid-size capital cities that are regional and/or national hubs, they are 
predicted to expand and develop mostly as result of growing urbanisation, globalization and 
open borders. Due to outstanding position in global network, the city is collecting migrants 
attracted by education, job opportunities and better future prospects. The city tactic should 
be focused on how to accommodate the rising population, deal with social tensions, ensure 
equality and maintain the city values. Regarding spatial development, those cities should 
focus on efficient land-use tactics and plan the desired density. Stated by the OECD (OECD, 
2015), those prominent mid-size cities will undergo the accelerated development in upcoming 
future, due to their development capacity.
(3) Milan - one of the European biggest urban hubs,  due to the higher entry barriers and 
specific of over one million inhabitants city, such as high density, limited housing capacity, 
fast peace of living or pollution, the city population is quite stable, but the whole region is 
growing. The city acts as a great hub in regional and international structures. Peoples’ flows are 
accelerated by short-term visits of tourists and business purposes.
Milan represents the biggest European urban agglomerations that often need to deal with 
sprawl and spatial expansion, therefore should focus on improving connections and mobility 
with attention towards minimising pollution and congestion. These metropolis are usually 
challenged by social and spatial divisions,  they need to plan to improve equity and justice. The 
city action often has a huge impact on the whole region, so they might influence and navigate 
bigger changes, therefore the huge concern and responsibility to set the directions right. Those 
agglomerations have potential to lead in smart and sustainable solutions as for they welfare 
and scale of impact.
==PAGE:71==
71
Analysis
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
Figure15.   Case cities comparison. Set of selected icons presenting case cities’ characteristic. Shows three 
different migration levels, subsequent indicators and characteristics may serve to generalize and recognise the 
patterns and processes.
List of icons:
1) migration pattern category:
–– three main levels of migration in 
European cities, from land-based 
pattern in Lodz, to global migration 
pattern in Milan
2) population trend:
–– global population growth does not 
have the same effects in European 
cities
3) spatial form:
–– shows differences in spatial 
development of cities:  Lodz 
“doughnut city”, Copehagen ”Finger 
plan”, Milan concentric, hub with a 
strong core
4) position in European structure:
–– historical and cultural inclinations 
influence the cities
5) special characteristic:
–– local characteristics: postindustrial 
city of Lodz, Nordic, harbour city of 
Copenhagen, tourists attractive, of 
extraordinary historical value Milan
6) position in network:
–– decentralized Lodz, concentric 
Copenhagen, Milan agglomeration - 
polycentric metropolis
Lodz                               Copenhagen                      Milan
N
E
W
S
N
E
W
S
N
E
W
S
1
2
3
4
5
6
==PAGE:72==
72
Analysis
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
4.4.	
Power of Migration Patterns
Discussed broader in the previous parts of this paper, modern society is much more willing 
to overcome long-distances in search for the perfect settlement destination. Hence the 
movement is facilitated by new technologies, transportation, communication and international 
agreements that expedite the cross-border transit, a lot of people decide not to stay in their 
place of birth but to emigrate. Today’s migration pattern is complex and not so easy to map, as 
the territorial land-based migration overlaps the cross-border, long-distance migration. 
The causes for people’s destination choices are the focus of many sociologist, economists and 
urban planners. The decision of migration is dictated by many different incentives, however as 
simple as it was ages ago, better living conditions and opportunities need to overbalance the 
effort to migrate. 
The city as a common habitat of an average modern man, embodies the positive as well as 
negative outcomes of his activity. The recent phenomenon is that the city accumulates all the 
flows, power and people, so that the formerly dispersed society is much more dense, their 
activity much more intensive and proximate due to communication technologies. In recent 
years in Europe, but as well overseas, rapid development and growth were reported. Due to 
the recent crisis, the incentives for economic growth have been replaced by the rising climatic 
and environmental concerns. Our cities, the hubs that accommodate the great majority of 
population, naturally need a special attention in upcoming years. 
The specific urbanisation process is taking place, which we call transition, as it mainly includes 
the reformulation of the already existing urban structures, not establishing new cities. Pointed 
out by an UN-Habitat Urban Lectures, urbanisation today is different (Halfani, 2014; Buckley, 
2014). The movement itself is an interesting social phenomenon, as even in the rural, wild 
lands, people tend to lead the urban lifestyles, travelling into distant destinations for holidays, 
using mobile devices and broadband connection on daily bases. 
According to carried case studies, I identified three levels of migration pattern in Europe, 
which characteristics influence the strength of impact of global tendencies. Case study cities 
represent each of recognized migration level (fig.6,9,12 and fig. 15,n.1). This pattern indicates 
that the traditional land-based migration is a first phase of migration and urbanisation 
today, observed in the smaller up to 1 million inhabitants European cities. They accumulate 
migration from smaller towns or surrounding rural areas, being a first stop on the migration 
path, offering education opportunities, access to public services, transportation and jobs. The 
second level is often a capital city of a region or a country, which because of its status offers 
a lot more for newcomers.  The city collects migrants from other smaller cities or other cities 
in the same rank, both nationally and internationally, according to personal preferences. 
From that point, people are more likely to make a larger step in migration. The third level of 
migration is often a long-distance migration, realised by mean of the fast railway or aircraft 
connections, which are usually inaccessible on a first migration level. This third level migration 
connects the leader cities, which in European context would be often the best prospering 
capital cities like London or Paris or outstanding metropolitan hubs like Milan or Barcelona. 
Together with the great opportunities, those cities are characterised by higher prices, possible 
barriers on a housing stock, faster and more stressful lifestyle. However, those prominent 
urban hubs are also able to set the directions for others. Impacting their regions significantly 
==PAGE:73==
73
Analysis
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
and being in a dynamic relation with the global network, they may contribute to generating or 
changing Global Trends. 
There are some specific characteristics for each of three different migration levels. The entry 
barrier tends to rise with the next level, as it is usually harder to get housing and balance 
maintenance costs in the higher level city. The cities of a higher level have obviously bigger 
population and higher density, especially in Europe, where historically there was a focus 
on city compactness. In the first two levels the population and spatial scale of the city is 
not a distinctive feature as it may be very different with respect to the regional or national 
circumstances. Simultaneously, there is a local movement around the core of every city, which 
can be described as a city internal migration pattern. It includes the daily commuting from 
sub-urban areas to the core of activity and results in sprawl or suburbanization process. 
Migration Patterns should be addressed in the policy approach to be managed wisely, with 
the focus on land value, infrastructure and transportation oriented strategies, including recent 
environmental concerns. In most cases developing city periphery must get a special focus from 
authorities as the consequences of unplanned or unmanaged growth of this fringe may be 
harmful. Growing tendency of de-concentration may result in centre decline, as in the city of 
Lodz. Facilitating the commuter zone and improving cooperation on regional level will be the 
focus of bigger urban hubs like Copenhagen or Milan. 
Migration Pattern affects urbanisation. Several urbanization stages were conceptualized 
in four-stage sequential model of urban development, proposed by Martin Van den Berg 
(1982) (Kabisch & Haase, 2011), urbanisation, suburbanization and desurbanization. What 
is prominent in our current times, is that usually they cannot be distinguished separately but 
they are all ongoing, with one or the other predominating (Kabisch & Haase, 2011). As the 
city is connected to the overall network and linked with hinterlands and hinterworlds (Taylor, 
2003), the decline in the process in one place generates increase in the other area. It is good to 
be aware that this dynamic system strives for the specific balance. 
==PAGE:74==
Part V
Discussion
directions for City Transition
==PAGE:75==
75
Discussion with findings
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
5.	
Discussion with findings
5.1.	
Introduction to Discussion
In this part I will merge the previous two parts of my thesis, transferring lessons from 
literature review to outcomes of case study, to make the most of the compilation of theoretical 
and practical study (Campbell, 2012). The following discussion will reveal the results of thesis 
investigation, answering the research inquiry and later it will lead to the conclusion. Key 
findings of case study were presented and scrutinized before in Part IV.
5.2.	
Summary of study
Trying to answer the question about the causes and triggers of city development, many 
significant researchers recognised factors that contribute to the city population and in general 
affect city prosperity. Among them amenities and job opportunities (Kouritt, et al., 2014), 
advantages of proximity (Bettencourt & West, 2010), creative class (Florida, 2005), affordable 
housing and foreign investment (Sassen, 2001). Despite those drivers, the city has a range 
of tools to shape the spatial distribution, for instance by facilitating public transportation, 
improving regional mobility (Connor, et al., 2013). The inner flux pattern that shapes the city’s 
density and peri-urbanization processes might be steered by taxation on car use or car parking 
policies (European Union, Regional Policy, 2011).  All the aspects dynamically influence 
each other and bigger picture is an effect of small-scale or sectoral changes, for instance 
enhancing local food production and direct consumer-producer relationships affects the whole 
mobility model significantly, contributing to more overall issues like sprawl or climate change 
minimising CO2 emissions (Zasada, et al., 2011). 
There is an important role of many different sectors of city functioning, from which 
demographic shifts are the key precondition for final city transition (Champion, 2001). The 
numerous dimensions of city prosperity, listed in the report “State of World Cities”, such as 
productivity, urban infrastructure, quality of life, equity and environmental sustainability (UN-
Habitat, 2013), are to be considered. The tactic for achieving desired result is shaped by both 
global trends and local settings, context dependant opportunities and limitations (fig. 17).   
Described in detail in previous part (Part IV), Migration Patterns are filtering the impact 
of Global Trends. Due to the migration level, the city operates more globally or locally, 
and is influenced by global forces respectively. The case study highlights that the interplay 
of city specific and external forces, creates a dynamic challenging environment for the city 
development.
5.2.1.	 Significance of Megatrends
Global Megatrends have proper attention of many international institutions. European 
Environmental Agency, a European Union unit, produced a SOER 2015 assessment (SOER: 
State of Environment Report), to inform policy makers about the trends, prospects and 
environmental state. The report is aimed to be a foundation for an effective policy response 
with the focus on five upcoming years, what is supposed to be in line with political cadence.
==PAGE:76==
76
Discussion with findings
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
Eleven megatrends, evaluated to be of significance for Europe (EEA, 2015), are:
• “Diverging global population trends, 
• Towards a more urban world,
• Changing disease burdens and risks of pandemics,
• Accelerating technological change,
• Continued economic growth,
• An increasingly multipolar world,
• Intensified global competition for resources,
• Growing pressures on ecosystems,
• Increasingly severe consequences of climate change,
• Increasing environmental pollution,
• Diversifying approaches to governance”  (ref. fig. 16) 
While the trends are accelerated in the dense urban environment, the focus on the cities 
seems self-explanatory. Cities power is to navigate those trends in a pressure-response cycle, as 
current state is a resultant of this dynamic. While “city governance affects urbanisation. The most 
successful manages rapid growth at different spatial levels: adequate service provision, urban sprawl, 
spatial disparities, congestion, pollution, climate change, social issues and distressed areas. Examples 
of good governance show the success of cities that go beyond the traditional issues of infrastructure 
management to include such broader elements as the knowledge and skills of workers, and the social 
capital needed to encourage innovation” (EEA, 2015).
Generally, there are worsening demographics ahead in Europe (UN-Habitat, 2013), as the 
result we might face the overcapacity of the housing stock and infrastructure, what is already 
observed in American, Eastern-European or Italian cities, such as Detroit, Lodz or Sardinia. 
There is no formula in trying to counteract those processes, creating artificial settings that not 
work with the demography dynamics and hamper the natural mechanisms (Harry S. Dent, 
2014).  Development and migration are organic mechanisms, which nature is dependant on 
multiply of factors.
5.2.2.	 Significance of Migration Pattern
Two main aspects were revealed during this study. First, noted by many researchers migration 
and urbanisation are today different, especially in Europe (Halfani, 2014; Zelinsky, 1971). This 
difference implies following aspects:
1) the physical conversion of space, which is not creating a city from a scratch on an 
empty land, but most likely reconstructing and adapting the existing urban structures, 
2) migration pattern indicates the large movement from urban to urban areas or from 
urban to suburban space, not rural-urban as it was originally,  
3)the socio-cultural transition, as most people lead urban lifestyles, even those living in 
the rural areas. 
Second, behind the city evolution there is an underlying pattern. Argued throughout this 
study, fixed migration patterns strongly influence the city’s condition, creating opportunities 
and limitation to its development. After recognising the position in migration process, the 
development strategy can be successfully scaled and planned. The specific pattern, compilation 
of possibilities and limitations that characterise a place and its inhabitants, is formed 
respectively to the urban scale and is regulated by demographic and economic factors (fig. 15).
 
==PAGE:77==
77
Discussion with findings
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
City
Transition 
Strategy
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
L
o
c
al
 
C
o
n
t
e
x
t
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
M
i
g
r
a
t
i
o
n
 
P
a
t
t
e
r
n
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
G
l
o
b
a
l 
T
r
e
n
d
s
                                   Job opportunities
                                                          Foregin migration
                                                                      Inner region movements
                                                              Social composition     
                                                     Preferences, reasons
                                                             City core inflow/outflow
                                                                                  Territorial, land-based migration
                                                                                   An average citizen profile
                                Policy response
                                                     Historical factors
                                                                 Citizens involvement
                                                                            Infrastructure improvement 
                                            Human capital
                                                                          Housing options, preferences
                                                            Territorial coherence
               Regional cooperation
  Climate change effects
                                Added value
                           Globalization
               Smart specialization
Emissions, car-dependance
International, national policy
                          Resources
                     Transparency   
Population structure
                              Tertiarisation
                       Education sectors
                                           Position in network  
                           Age composition
                          Economy
         Market sectors, industry
 Global competitivensss
                                               Demographic factors
Planning
Implementation
Investments
Policy
                                                    hinterlands, hinterworlds  
                                                    Territorial fragmentation
Figure16.  Model of  inclusive approach towards city transition
A starting point the city authorities, planners, decision makers need to acknowledge the broader picture of global forces 
shaped by trends and tendencies together with making as much objective as possible illustration of the city current state. 
To do so, they might use the multidimensional urban analysis framework (Safier, 2001), which covers the most impor­
tant dimensions of city functioning. Later, the context-dependant challenges, opportunities and limitations should be 
recognised and the list of the questions (fig. 18) may be applied at this stage to help identify areas that need more atten­
tion and build a strategic response.
Multiple factors are to be considered while planning for the city transition. Therefore, there is a set of key words within 
the main focus areas that are to be addressed while creating the future city development plan.
==PAGE:78==
78
Discussion with findings
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
5.3.	
Strategic Response
It was revealed that Megatrends and Migration Patterns generate process of change, which 
is City Transition. They may act as catalysts of city development, making the transition easier 
and faster. While their energy is utilized for activating the city’s actions, it has to be filtered 
by the context to crystallize the opportunities and challenges that result from global processes 
(see: fig. 17; Phase 1, Phase 2).
The condition of a city is influenced by overall interactions that created over decades have 
implication on today’s state. The trends and forces are in major part dependant not on local 
decisions and actions but on events and processes that are outside the border of a city, its 
region, country, they are global. The key current forces that affect every city were pointed out 
during this study and are illustrated in the conclusive model of inclusive approach towards 
transition (fig. 16).
5.3.1.	 Working method proposal
Megatrends and Migration Patterns are the catalysts for City Transition. Global trends and 
patterns, generate impacts and consequences, which requires to be included in transition 
process. The necessity to work out a strategic response is underlined in this study.
At a time the city is affected by various external powers, driven by sometimes contradictory 
incentives. Respecting the direction of global forces, the city may navigate the process of 
transition and stay responsive to overall global trends. This approach enables the city to 
develop using the opportunities that emerge and mitigate the possible risks (fig. 17).
The  formula for a successful response towards changing settings includes seven aspects, of 
which sum can result in a firm base for transition strategy: (fig. 17)
Phase 1:
(1)	Recognizing current Global Megatrends
(2)	Identifying influence of Global Trends on local settings
(3)	Recognizing the overall Migration Pattern that navigates the migration in the region
(4)	Recognize the city position on migration map
The central task of key importance is to:
(5)	Identify potential opportunities and threats as an outcomes of Migration Patterns and 
Global Trends
Phase 2:
(6)	Plan a Transition Strategy that addresses local and global challenges
(7)	Build an overall vision and ensure that it is inclusive
(8)	Enable the transition by complementary policy and navigation
Rethinking the city development, addressing the set of questions aims to lead to better 
policy decisions and planning outcomes, it enables to detect the areas that are undervalued 
or overlooked, use opportunities and set development directions. The balance between all 
development sectors and regulatory compliance is essential to initiate a successful inclusive 
process.
==PAGE:79==
79
Discussion with findings
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
5.4.	
Governance in transition
To adapt to the effects of global trends and processes, city is undergoing transition (fig. 17).  
This transition affects also the city governance. In the city transition stage, innovation has a 
transformative power (UN-Habitat, 2013). Shift in methods used by local government may 
bring about very positive results on a various levels, creating creative capital and enhancing 
prosperity. Urban planning is mentioned as a powerful tool in a transition process, as land 
management and city structure is a reflection of city’s and citizens’ values. Institutional 
transformation may be a generator for further positive socio-economic change. 
Action of governance requires to be accurate. To help identify the trends that are the most 
impactful for the city and areas that needs special attention, there is a set of questions 
formulated based on this research outcomes. Questions go through a palette of sectors and 
are intended to help navigate the realm of city action (fig. 18). This check-list was formulated 
in a way, which partly indicates tools and tactics that may be used, concerning the posed 
issue. However, the list is incomplete and requires to be updated as the trends are changing 
constantly. Answering this set may serve as a starting point for mapping challenges and 
opportunities (ref. fig. 18 p. 80-81). 
      
       
       
   fo
rces
            
           
         
Global
Megatrends
Migration
Pattern
Context
Vulnerability
Adaptive capacity
Strategy
CITY
       
       
     r
espo
nses
Implementation tools/tactic
Boundary conditions
              Vision
Development scenarios
Mitigation
Phase1
Phase 2
Policy domain
recognize, identify
plan, act, implement
Successful 
Transition
Challenges
Opportunities
Figure17.   Model of city transition, showing two phases: Phase 1: identifying consequences of forces,                     
                   Phase 2: developing a strategic response
==PAGE:80==
80
Discussion with findings
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
Figure18.   Set of questions that may help recognize the impact of trends and patterns, a navigation tool to      
map the effects of global forces (pages:80-81).
Migration pattern:
• What is the net migration rate? Is it positive or negative? What are the future scenarios? 
• What is the city level in migration pattern? (ref. fig.15) Is the migration flow based on 
territorial movement, international or overseas? What are the consequences of this migration 
and how it can be facilitated? (sectors to be considered: mobility, economy, demography)
• What triggers migration? Job opportunities, housing opportunities, social benefits?
Structural form:
• Is the city core well-functioning?
• What is a desired density?
• Is there overcapacity of existing structure apparent? What can be done? Is the new 
development necessary? What is the demand? What can be improved/revitalised?
• Does the infrastructure require improvement?
• What is a level of car-dependence? How it may be navigated by the infrastructure?
Demographic factors:
• Who are current citizens? What do they need and does the city provide for them? 
• Is the foreign migration registered? On what scale? Does the city ensure equality? Is the 
society tolerant? (Kouritt, et al., 2014)
• Is the trend in aging population observed? How can social aids and tactics respond to this 
trend?
• For who the city is planned? What resident group the city wants to attract? How it is realised 
and reflected in city’s policy? 
•  If the citizens are city’s customers, what is  a “competitive advantage”? What would satisfy 
their needs, relieve their pains?  (Osterwalder & Pigneur, 2010)
• What are the current social trends? Demographic changes?
Economic factors:
• Which market/business sector will be beneficial to be developed in this region? What 
resources are here to be used? Is tertiarisation observed? What values can be used to develop a 
market strategy?
• What is the housing situation? Are there private, rental housing? Where is the major part 
of ownership and responsibility allocated? What is the quality of housing stock? Is there 
affordable housing provided?
• What can be a city ‘Smart specialization’ (Sturesson, et al., 2012)? Which sector can be 
developed according to possibilities and demand?
• Is the city managed alike a business entity? What are the ‘goods’ produced? What is or can be 
the city added-value?
• How does the job market respond to citizens education and qualifications? Is there a match 
between these two factors?
==PAGE:81==
81
Discussion with findings
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
Location and context:
• What can be gained from regional competitiveness? What are the potential areas of 
cooperation?
• What are the city’s hinterlands? What do they provide? Is there an agriculture activity? 
• What are the opportunities of the city location? What can the city gain from territorial 
coherence? What position has the city? Can it drive the region or should it have a supportive 
function in its urban network? 
• What can be gained from proximity? Can the city gain from the agglomeration economies?
Addressing global issues:
• What are the outcomes of climate change and how are they addressed?
• What is a city approach towards overall ‘green’ trends? What is it doing to contribute to CO2 
emissions and to minimise footprint?
• What will be the consequence of climate change in the city’s location? How to plan for this?
• Are the energy sources green? What is the city reliable on? Is there district heating? What 
natural alternative sources may be introduced?
Governance:
• What is the governance system? Does it enhance cooperation? Are residents involved in 
planning process, how? Is the governance responsive?
• How the long-term vision is ensured while the short-term cadency? Is there any supportive 
body?
• How is the local governance fledged in national and international dependence?
• Is there a professional expertise involved in city planning process?
• Is the policy coherent in different sectors? What is an overall vision, goal? Are the policy 
domains complementary? Is there an alignment with other levels of policy - national, EU, 
international?
• How are citizens involved in planning/decision making? Is the policy action transparent?
==PAGE:82==
82
Discussion with findings
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
Acknowledging and understanding the dynamic relation of a single city and Global Trends, 
forces to see beyond the limits of national borders or the election period (Harry S. Dent, 
2014). Sturesson et al. (2012) emphasises that although the visions and strategies might be 
accurate, their execution often faces difficulties. The successful implementation might be 
interrupted or held back by the policy structures (Healey, 2007), lack of responsible bodies 
that could proceed with implementation. Transition can only be perceived as a long-time 
process, what is usually not in hand with the short political cadence. There may be as well 
just insufficient agility and power to execute the plans under other more rapid pressures. 
This indicates the importance of adjusting the methods and structures of city management 
in transitive period. In a broader picture, the global perspective reveals the need for regional, 
national and international cooperation, therefore the importance of the alignment of strategic 
goals through all policy levels. City planning of every European city is within the boundaries 
of larger scale policies and guidelines. For EU members, regional and national policy need to 
be in complete compliance with European Union policy and global international agreements. 
Policy levels influence each other and with the mechanisms of democracy they are agreed with 
the citizens.
European Union aims to become a leader of sustainability and resilience, the Commission 
emphasise the need for shift, expressing the political concern: “trends underline the need for 
action to reconfigure systems of production and consumption so that they operate within planetary 
limits and thereby ensure the well-being of current and future generations. In Europe, as elsewhere, 
efforts to manage environmental pressures, economic development and human well-being need to 
overcome the short‑termism currently dominating political and economic thinking and embrace long-
term, integrated, global perspectives instead” (EEA, 2015)
There is a key role of governance to enable the transition and navigate action towards right, 
desired direction. The successful transition requires to be balanced between top-down 
navigation, implementation and the dialogue with citizens, their action and desires (Safier, 
2003). However the difficulty, the goals can be reached using different management tools. 
Creating indirect incentives and building social awareness are commonly used techniques.
==PAGE:83==
Part VI
Conclusion
building Transition Strategy
==PAGE:84==
84
Conclusion
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
6.	
Conclusion
6.1.	
Research conclusion
The study sought to recognize current Global Megatrends and Migration Patterns as well as 
indicate their importance and influence on city condition and future development. 
Answering the research inquiry, the literature study identified the current Megatrends and 
explained impactful processes. The case study showed that cities undergo transition and that 
the consequences of global processes are different depending on the city specific. The result 
of research implies that in the city transition process, global pressures interfere with the 
local condition of the city, which is in huge part dependent on Migration Patterns. With 
this research I managed to reveal that there is a broader principle in how Migration Patterns 
influence the cities.
This research indicates that although cities around Europe are affected by similar Global 
Trends, there is an underlying Migration Pattern, which changes the trajectories of the global 
forces. Consequently, depending on city scale and its position in global network, the location 
in the migration hierarchy is different, what gives different opportunities and limitations 
for the city development. The outcomes emphasize that underlying Migration Pattern is a 
filter for impacts of Megatrends. It has been also discovered that Migration Patterns are well 
established paths, outcome of long-term processes that might be fostered and planned for 
in order to improve the city condition. The strategic city planning can partly influence the 
overall patterns and trends but some of them are rather independent of a single city efforts. 
Demographic factors are inescapable, important and very influential. While today cities 
develop after the migration happens, the complexity of process is challenging.
The research recognised that globalization triggers city competitiveness and what do cities 
compete for is people, who generate productivity and contribute to growth. Navigating the 
city transition has to include various factors, therefore has to be holistic in combining global 
forces and local settings (fig.16). Understanding the interplay and dependency of global and 
local factors allows to identify micro and macro trends and is said to be “a key to the future” 
development. Today cities undergo transition, which is a dynamic process. Transition strategy 
requires to be planned accordingly to recognized challenges and opportunities, however they 
are changing. There is a significant role of international research to document on the trends 
and giving a broad picture to the local policy makers to enable them to correlate the global 
processes with their local context.
Megatrends and Migration Patterns are the catalysts for City Transition. Global trends 
and patterns generate impacts and consequences, which require to be included in transition 
process. City has to work with overall forces. Using their power city can set the direction for 
future development and achieve desired goals. 
The general result indicates that adequate successful city strategy is a flexible response to 
the external factors with the focus on context and residents’ welfare. Today, dynamic city is 
challenged by addressing a broad palette of issues, what is illustrated in the conclusive models 
(fig. 16,17).
==PAGE:85==
85
Conclusion
Catalysts for City Transition. Global Trends and Migration Patterns., 2015
6.2.	
Further steps
Once the trends and patterns that influence the city are recognised and applied to the 
context to identify the potentials and threats, there comes the time to create a concrete 
transition strategy. How to conduct the inclusive process of transition,  by comprehensive 
implementation, adaptation plans (ref. fig. 16; Phase 2) is a topic for further investigation. The 
further research could concentrate on how the government and planners may seize opportunities 
that are an outcome of migration trends and address the risks and challenges? It is recognised 
that for achieving the concrete answer and therefore be able to work out an action plan, the 
overall transition framework requires to be embedded in the specific context. The further study 
should concentrate on application of the research results to planning practise, and could use 
as a starting point reference of the European Union Transition Project RAMSES framework 
(RAMSES, 2015).
My study concentrated on the importance of the first phase in the transition process (ref. fig. 
16; Phase 1),  recognising the opportunities and challenges, which should be accomplished 
before building development plans. Next step is to forward the results to the implementation 
phase (ref. fig. 16).
For further research it is also important to constantly monitor dynamic global processes and 
future changes. “As much as anything, the assessment of megatrends aims to encourage readers to 
acknowledge this interdependence and uncertainty. In so doing, it may help point the way towards 
systems of planning and governance better adapted to meeting the challenges ahead” (EEA, 2015).
Personally inspired by the topics examined in this research, I would like to explore further the 
discipline of human geography.
6.3.	
Conclusive remarks
6.3.1.	 Self-evaluation and research limitations
My research was back-and-forth process. Starting with a literature review, the new important 
positions of literature was emerging constantly throughout the whole study. Going deeper 
into the topic, I was discovering more accurate papers and reports. I found it challenging that 
the research topic is characterized by change, therefore there is a need of constant update 
of trends and processes. I tried to follow these dynamic, although the period of my research 
may seem to be short (five months), the changes in global world are rapid, as the technology 
development and innovation are. This makes my study outcomes questionable to be used 
directly, therefore I tried not to be too specific in making recommendations or evaluating the 
city development process, as I believe the results of decisions may be judged with time. The 
“rights and wrongs” of our city visions will be only evaluated by future development. 
This report is together with a mid-term and final presentation, an outcome of my five-month 
long thesis project. In this period I improved my knowledge in the field significantly. What I 
learnt goes far beyond the boundaries of this report. 
==PAGE:86==
==PAGE:87==
List of references:
After the Factory. 2012. [Film] Directed by Philip Lauri. USA: Topografie Association.
Albrechts, L., 2010. More of the same is not enough! How could strategic spatial planning be instru­
mental in dealing with the challenges ahead?. Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design, 
Volume 37, p. 1115 ^ 1127.
Alexander, T., 2015. NZ Observer. [Online] 
Available at: www.tonyalexander.co.nz
BBSR: Metropolitan areas in Europe, 2011. Metropolitan areas in Europe, Bonn: Federal Institute for 
Research on Building, Urban Affairs and Spatial Development.
Berger, A., 2007. Drosscape: Wasting Land in Urban America. s.l.:Princeton Architectural Press.
Bettencourt, L. M. A., 2013. The Kind of Problem a City Is. New perspectives on the nature of cities 
from complex systems theory. Santa Fe Institute Punblications. 
Bettencourt, L. & West, G., 2010. A unified theory of urban living. Macmillan Publishers Limited.
Brunet, R., 1989. Les villes europeénnes: Rapport pour la DATAR, Montpellier: RECLUS.
Buckley, R., 2014. Urbanization & demographics: The coordination problem [Interview] 2014.
C40 Cities, 2015. C40 Cities: Case Study. Milan's Area C reduces traffic pollution and transforms the city 
center.. [Online] 
Available at: http://www.c40.org/case_studies/milan-s-area-c-reduces-traffic-pollution-and-trans­
forms-the-city-center
C40 Cities, 2015. The C40 Cities Climate Leadership Group (C40). [Online] 
Available at: http://www.c40.org/
Campbell, H., 2006. Is the Issue of Climate Change too Big for Spatial Planning?. Planning Theory & 
Practice, June, 7(2), p. 201–230.
Campbell, H., 2012. Planning to Change the World: Between Knowledge and Action Lies Synthesis. 
Sage Journals. 
Carmona, M., 2009. Sustainable urban design: principles to practice. Int. J. Sustainable Development, 
9(1).
Castells, M., 1996. The information age: economy, society and culture. The rise of the network society.
Caves, R. W., 2005. Encyclopedia of the city.. London: Routledge.
Champion, A. G., 2001. A Changing Demographic Regime and Evolving Polycentric Urban Regions: 
Consequences for the Size, Composition and Distribution of City Populations. Urban Studies, 38(4), p. 
657–677.
City of Copenhagen, 2011. Copenhagen Climate Adaptation Plan.
City of Lodz, 2012. Strategy for the Integrated Development of Lodz 2020+. Lodz: City of Lodz.
City of Lodz, 2013. Economic Guide, Lodz: City of Lodz.
Commission on Growth and Development, 2008. The Growth Report. Strategies for Sustained Growth 
and Inclusive Development, NW, Washington: The International Bank for Reconstruction and Devel­
opment.
Commune di Milano, 2015. Commune di Mialno, Strategia di sviluppo. [Online] 
Available at: https://www.comune.milano.it/portale/wps/portal/CDM?WCM_GLOBAL_CONTEXT=/
wps/wcm/connect/contentlibrary/In+Comune/In+Comune/Strategia+di+Sviluppo/Grandi+Progetti/
Conklin, J., 2006. Wicked Problems and Social Complexity. In: Dialogue Mapping: Building Shared 
Understanding of Wicked Problems. Chichester: CogNexus Institute.
Connelly, S., 2007. Mapping Sustainable Development as a Contested Concept. Local Environment, 
12(3), p. 259 — 278.
==PAGE:88==
Connor, P., Cohn, D., Gonzalez-Barrerra, A. & Oates, R., 2013. Changing patterns of Global Migartion 
and Remittances.
COPENHAGEN DREAMS / Drømme i København. 2009. [Film] Directed by Max Kestner. Denmark: 
UPFRONT FILMS with support from The Danish Film Institute.
Copenhagen, 2015. Dalai Lama public talk conferece. København.
Costa, G., Sabatinelli, S. & Ranci, C., 2010-2013. CITY REPORT: MILAN; WILCO Publication no. 23, 
Milano.
Danish Ministry of Transport, 2012. Danish Infrastructure Investments, Copenhagen.
Demographia, 2015. Demographia World Urban Areas: 11th Annual Edition.
Denmarks Statistiks, 2015. Denmarks Statistiks. [Online] 
Available at: http://www.dst.dk/en
Dinnie, K., 2011. Chapter II: Cases, Introduction to the Practise of City Branding. In: City branding: 
theory and cases. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
EEA, 2015. Assessment of Global Megatrends - an update, Copenhagen: European Environmental 
Agency.
EEA, 2015. European environment — state and outlook 2015: Assessment of global megatrends, Copen­
hagen: European Environment Agency.
EEA, 2015. Global megatrends update: 11 Diversifying approaches to governance, Copenhagen: Euro­
pean Environment Agency.
ESPON, 2004. INTERIM TERRITORIAL COHESION REPORT, Regional Policy Paper, Luxembourg: 
Office for Official Publications of the European Communities.
Euromonitor, 2014. Euromonitor International. [Online] 
Available at: http://blog.euromonitor.com/
European Commission, 2015. Eurobarometer surveys. [Online] 
Available at: http://ec.europa.eu/public_opinion/cf/step1.cfm
European Union, Cities of Tomorrow, 2011. Regional Policy. Cities of Tomorrow. Challenges, visions, 
ways forward.
European Union, 2013. Copenhagen European Green Capital 2014.
European Union, 2007. Treaty of Lisbon amending the Treaty on European Union and the Treaty estab­
lishing the European Community. Lisbon: Official Journal of the European Union.
Eurostat, 2011. Eurostat, European Statistics. [Online] 
Available at: http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat
Ewing, J., 2013. Midsize Cities in Poland Develop as Service Hubs for Outsourcing Industry. The New 
York Times, International Business, 22 12. 
Florida, R., 2005. Cities and the Creative Class. New York: Routledge.
Foucault, M., 1984. Of Other Spaces: Utopias and Heterotopias. Architecture /Mouvement/ Continuité. 
Frost&Sullivan, 2014. Fast-Forward to 2025: New Mega Trends Transforming. s.l., s.n.
Gabrielsen, P. & Bosch, P., 2003. Environmental Indicators:Typology and Use in Reporting, s.l.: s.n.
Graham, S. & Marvin, S., 2001. Prologue and Introduction. W: Splintering Urbanism. London: 
Routledge.
Groat, L. & Wang, D., 2002. Architectural research methods. Chichester: Wiley.
GUS, 2014. Central Statistical Office of Poland, Lodz Population Projection 2014-2050. [Online] 
Available at: http://stat.gov.pl/en/topics/population/population-projection/population-projec­
tion-2014-2050,2,5.html
==PAGE:89==
GUS, 2015. Central Statistical Office of Poland, Infromation portal. [Online] 
Available at: http://stat.gov.pl/en/
Hakansson, M., 2005. Competence for Sustainable Development - Proffessional roles in local planning.
Halfani, M., 2014. The notion of prosperity [Interview] 2014.
Harry S. Dent, J., 2014. The demographic cliff. NY: Penguin Group.
Harvey, D., 2008. THE RIGHT TO THE CITY. New Left Review, September-October, Issue 53.
Healey, P., 1996. The Communicative Turn in Planning Theory and its Implication for Spatial Strategy 
Formation. In: The Communicative Turn in Planning Theory. s.l.:s.n., pp. 238-255.
Healey, P., 2007. The Struggle for Strategic Flexibility in Urban Planning in Milan. In: Urban Complxity 
and Spatial Startegies. Towards a Relational Planning for Our Times. NY: Routledge.
Hollands, R. G., 2008. Will the real smart city please stand up? Intelligent, progressive or entrepre­
neurial?. City, December.12(3).
Hopkins, R., 2011. The Transition Companion. Totnes: Green Books.
Hospers, G.-J., 2003. Beyond the Blue Banana? Structural Change in Europe's Geo-Economy. Intereco­
nomics, 2(38), p. 76–85.
Ishida, T. & Isbister, K., 2000. Digital cities: technologies, experiences and future perspectives.. Berlin: 
Springer.
Istat.it, 2014. Indicatori demografici 2014. [Online] 
Available at: http://www.istat.it/en/
Istat.it, 2015. Projections of the main demographic indicators for year, Lombardia. [Online].
Jensen, P. A., Nielsen, K. & Nielsen, S. B., 2008. Facilities Mangament Best Practice in the Nordic Coun­
tries - 36 Cases. Technical University of Denmark.
Jones, G., 2005. Multinationals and global capitalism: from the nineteenth to the twenty-first century. 
Jonsson, U., 2014. A rights-based approach to urban development [Interview] 2014.
JPI Urban Europe, 2014. JPI Urban Europe: Policy Paper. A Screening of Urban Megatrends, Joint Pro­
gramming Initiative, Urban Europe.
JPI Urban Europe, 2014. Urban Megatrends: Towards a European Research Agenda, Joint Programming 
Initiative Urban Europe.
Kabisch, N. & Haase, D., 2011. Diversifying European Agglomerations: Evidence of Urban Population 
Trends for the 21st Century. Population, Space and Place, Issue 17, p. 236–253.
Kabisch, N., Haase, D. & Haase, A., 2012. Urban Population Development in Europe,1991–2008: The 
Examples of Poland and the UK. International Journal of Urban and Regional Research, November, 
Volume 36.6, p. 1326–1348.
Kjaer-Global, 2012. 8 Global Key Trends 2020. [Online].
Kohlhase, J. E., 2013. The new urban world 2050: perspectives, prospects and problems.. Regional Sci­
ence Policy & Practice, 5(2).
Kouritt, K., Nijkamp, P. & Scholten, H., 2014. The Future of the New Urban World. International Plan­
ning Studies. 
Lefebvre, H., 1968. Le Droit à la ville. (Right to the City).
Leopold, A., 1949. The Land Ethic. W: A Sand County Almanac. brak miejsca:Oxford University Press.
Lynch, K., 1960 . The Image of the City. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Maclaren, V. W., 1996. Urban Sustainabilty Reporting. APA Journal.
McCann, P., 2009. Globalisation. Countries, Cities and Multinationals. Jena Economics Research Paper, 
Issue 42.
==PAGE:90==
McCann, P. & Asc, Z. J., 2010. Globalization: Countries, Cities and Multinationals. Regional Studies, 9 
October, pp. 1-16.
McCullough, M., 2007. New media urbanism: grounding ambient information technology. Environ­
ment and Planning B: Planning and Design, Tom 34, pp. 383-395.
Milano Metropoli, 2011. Milano Metropoli Agenzia di Sviluppo (Development Agency). [Online] 
Newman, P., 1996. Greening the City. Alternatives Journal, 22(2).
OECD, 2015. The Metropolitan Century: Understanding Urbanisation and its Consequences., Paris: 
OECD Publishing.
Osterwalder, A. & Pigneur, Y., 2010. Business model generation: a handbook for visionaries, game 
changers, and challengers.. Hoboken, N. J.: Wiley.
Oxford Dictionary., 2015. Oxford University Press
Pløge, J., 2001. Public participation and the art of governance. Environment and Planning B: Planning 
and Design, Tom 28, pp. 219-241.
PLUREL project, 2011. Publishable final activity report.
RAMSES Project, 2015. RAMSES - Reconciling Adaptation, Mitigation and Sustainable Development for 
Cities. [Online] 
Available at: http://www.ramses-cities.eu/
Rogers, E. M., 2003. Diffusion of innovations.. 5th edition ed. New York: Free Press.
Rydin, Y., 2007. Re-Examining the Role of Knowledge Within Planning Theory. Planning Theory, 
52(6).
Safier, M., 2001. THE INTER-DIMENSIONAL ANALYSIS OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT:A Guide to 
the Organisation of Cases and Their Linkages, London: Development Planning Unit University College 
London.
Safier, M., 2003. EXPLORING THE 'ROOM FOR MANOEUVRE' FOR 'DRIVERS OF CHANGE': Pro­
moting Sustainable Progress in Urban Areas. London: Development Planning Unit (DPU), University 
College London.
Sassen, S., 2001. The global city: New York, London, Tokyo. Princeton University Press. 
Satistics Denmark, 2015. Denmark 2015, Copenhagen. [Online]                                                                 
Available at: https://www.dst.dk/en
SOER, E., 2010. The European environment — state and outlook 2010, European Environmental 
Agency.
Stoker, G., 1998. Governance as Theory: five propositions. International Social Science Journal, Tom 50, 
pp. 17-28.
Storper, M. & Scott, A. J., 2009. Rethinking human capital, creativity. Journal of Economic Geography, 
Issue 9, p. 147–167.
Sturesson, J., Galal, H. & Probst, L., 2012. Smart specialization for cities. A roadmap for city intelli­
gence and excellence. World Financial Review, March-April. 
Taylor, P. J., 2003. World city network: a global urban analysis. London: Routledge.
TEN - European Union, 2013. TRANS-EUROPEAN TRANSPORT NETWORK.
The City of Lodz, 2012. Resolution No. XLIII/824/12 of the City Council in Lodz. Lodz: Department of 
the Mayor City Strategy Office, the City of Lodz.
Toshiba, 2015. Toshiba - Smart Community. [Online] 
Available at: http://www.toshiba-smartcommunity.com/en/smart-community
UN-Habitat, 2013. State of the World's Cities 2012/2013. Prosperity of Cities, Routledge.
==PAGE:91==
Urban Audit, 2015. European Environment Agency Eurostat, Urban Audit database. [Online] 
Available at: http://www.eea.europa.eu/data-and-maps/data/external/urban-audit-database
Watson, V., 2002. Do We Learn from Planning Practice?: The Contribution of the Practice Movement 
to Planning Theory. Journal of Planning Education and Research, 178(22), pp. 178-187.
WCED, 1987. Our common future, Nairobi: United Nations Environment Programme.
Zasada, I., Fertner, C., Piorr, A. & Nielsen, T. S., 2011. Peri-urbanisation and multifunctional adapta­
tion of agriculture around Copenhagen. Danish Journal of Geography, Volume 11159-72.
Zelinsky, W., 1971. The Hypothesis of the Mobility Transition. Geographical Review, 61(2), pp. 219-
249.
