==PAGE:1==
	  
Developing	  Sustainability	  Indicators	  for	  the	  
Transition	  of	  Albertslund's	  Heating	  System	  Towards	  
Carbon	  Neutrality	  
	  
by	  
Ali	  Abdel-­‐Razzak	  
B.S.	  (Civil	  Engineering),	  University	  of	  Illinois,	  2012	  
	  
	  
Thesis	  Submitted	  in	  Partial	  Fulfillment	  of	  the	  
Requirements	  for	  the	  degrees	  of	  
	  
Master	  of	  Science	  in	  Engineering	  
Technical	  University	  of	  Denmark	  
Master	  of	  Science	  
KTH	  Royal	  Institute	  of	  Technology	  
	  
June	  2015	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
 
==PAGE:2==
	  
2  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© Copyright by Ali Abdel-Razzak 2015 
All Rights Reserved	  
	  
==PAGE:3==
	  
3  
Author	  	  
Ali	  Abdel-­‐Razzak	  (s141442)	  
aorazzak@gmail.com	  
(+45)	  5225-­‐0040	  
(+20)	  100-­‐111-­‐8030	  
Thesis	  Period	  	  
February	  26th	  	  2015	  –	  June	  26th	  2015	  
30	  ECTS	  credits	  
Programme	  
Nordic	  Master	  in	  Sustainable	  Urban	  Transitions,	  offered	  by:	  
KTH	  Royal	  Institute	  of	  Technology	  
DTU	  Technical	  University	  of	  Denmark	  
Supervisors	  
Per	  Sieverts	  Nielsen	  	  
Senior	  Researcher	  	  
Department	  of	  Management	  Engineering	  	  
	  
Technical	  University	  of	  Denmark	  
Frederiksborgvej	  399	  	  
4000	  Roskilde,	  DK	  
pernn@dtu.dk 
Peter	  Brokking	  
Research	  Engineer	  
Division	  of	  Urban	  and	  Regional	  Studies	  
	  
KTH	  Royal	  Institute	  of	  Technology	  
Drottning	  Kristinas	  Väg	  30	  
1044	  Stockholm,	  SE	  
peter.brokking@abe.kth.se	  	  
Examiner 
Henning	  Schroll	  
Professor	  Emeritus	  
Department	  of	  Environmental,	  Social	  and	  Spatial	  Change	  
 
Roskilde	  University	  
Universitetsvej	  1	  
4000	  Roskilde,	  DK	  
schroll@ruc.dk	  
	  
	  
==PAGE:4==
	  
4  
Preface 
This	  thesis	  is	  submitted	  in	  partial	  fulfillment	  of	  the	  requirements	  for	  the	  degrees	  of	  
Master	   of	   Science	   in	   Engineering	   from	   the	   Technical	   University	   of	   Denmark,	   and	  
Master	   of	   Science	   from	   KTH	   Royal	   Institute	   of	   Technology.	   It	   contains	   work	  
performed	  from	  February	  to	  June	  2015,	  and	  constitutes	  a	  total	  of	  30	  ECTS	  credits.	  
This	   thesis	   was	  carried	   out	   in	   close	   cooperation	   with	   Albertslund	   Municipality.	   It	  
was	  written	  solely	  by	  myself,	  but	  much	  of	  the	  text	  is	  based	  on	  the	  work	  of	  others.	  I	  
have	  done	  my	  best	  to	  reference	  these	  sources.	  	  
Acknowledgements	  
I	   would	   like	   to	   thank	   my	   supervisor,	   Per,	   for	   his	   guidance	   throughout	   the	   entire	  
project.	  Per	  helped	  me	  find	  the	  idea	  for	  the	  project	  and	  supported	  me	  in	  developing	  
this	  idea	  until	  the	  very	  end.	  I	  would	  also	  like	  to	  thank	  Xiufeng	  for	  his	  patience	  during	  
the	  initial	  phases	  of	  the	  project.	  	  
Finally,	   I	   would	   like	   to	   thank	   Niels	   and	   Wisam	   from	   Albertslund	   Municipality	   for	  
their	  hospitality,	  and	  for	  constantly	  going	  out	  of	  their	  way	  to	  help	  me	  with	  my	  thesis.	  
I	  hope	  that	  my	  results	  will	  be	  useful	  to	  them	  in	  in	  one	  way	  or	  another.	  
	  
	  
	  
Copenhagen,	  26th	  of	  June	  2015	  
	  
Ali	  Abdel-­‐Razzak	  
	  
	  
==PAGE:5==
	  
5  
Abstract	  
A	   growing	   number	   of	   cities	   have	   committed	   themselves	   to	   pursuing	   sustainable	  
development.	  If	  we	  wish	  to	  lead	  our	  cities	  to	  sustainable	  futures,	  we	  must	  first	  be	  
able	   to	   assess	   their	   current	   level	   of	   sustainability	   and	   to	   create	   measures	   that	  
monitor	   their	   transitions.	   The	   aim	   of	   this	   study	   was	   to	   present	   a	   method	   for	  
developing	  indicators	  that	  can	  quantify	  the	  sustainable	  transition	  of	  Albertslund’s	  
heating	  system	  towards	  becoming	  100%	  carbon-­‐neutral.	  Subsequently,	  this	  method	  
was	  followed	  to	  develop	  indicators,	  and	  measure	  them	  in	  2013	  and	  2014	  to	  identify	  
trends	   related	   to	   sustainability.	   The	   net	   results	   indicated	   progress	   towards	  
sustainability.	  Notably,	  it	  was	  found	  that	  the	  non-­‐carbon	  share	  of	  energy	  used	  for	  
heating	  had	  increased	  by	  16%	  while	  the	  renewable	  energy	  share	  had	  increased	  by	  
22%.	   In	   addition,	   the	   amount	   of	   greenhouses	   gases	   emitted	   for	   heating	   had	  
decreased	  by	  40kg	  for	  each	  person	  in	  Albertslund.	  Using	  sustainability	  indicators	  in	  
this	  case	  revealed	  several	  trends	  that	  had	  never	  been	  calculated.	  These	  trends	  are	  
presented	  such	  that	  they	  can	  be	  used	  to	  communicate	  progress	  to	  stakeholders,	  and	  
to	  the	  general	  public,	  in	  order	  to	  build	  support	  for	  new	  sustainability	  initiatives.	  
==PAGE:6==
	  
6  
Table	  of	  Contents	  
PART	  I:	  INTRODUCTION	  
INTRODUCTION	  
12	  
CONTEXT	  
14	  
BACKGROUND	  
14	  
THE	  THESIS	  
18	  
PURPOSE	  
18	  
OUTLINE	  
19	  
PART	  II:	  THEORY	  
LITERATURE	  REVIEW	  
22	  
SUSTAINABLE	  DEVELOPMENT	  
22	  
SUSTAINABILITY	  INDICATORS	  
22	  
ENERGY	  INDICATORS	  FOR	  SUSTAINABILITY	  
24	  
URBAN	  SUSTAINABILITY	  INDICATORS	  
25	  
DEVELOPING	  SUSTAINABILITY	  INDICATORS	  
26	  
METHODOLOGY:	  SUSTAINABILITY	  INDICATOR	  ANALYSIS	  (SIA)	  
28	  
1.	  
SET	  THE	  SCOPE	  
29	  
2.	  
DEFINE	  SUSTAINABILITY	  GOALS	  
29	  
3.	  
IDENTIFY	  STAKEHOLDERS	  
29	  
4.	  
DEVELOP	  INITIAL	  SUSTAINABILITY	  INDICATORS	  
30	  
5.	  
FINALIZE	  SUSTAINABILITY	  INDICATORS	  
30	  
6.	  
DEVELOP	  DESCRIPTION	  SHEETS	  
31	  
7.	  
MEASURE	  INDICATORS	  
31	  
8.	  
ANALYZE	  RESULTS	  
31	  
PART	  III:	  RESULTS	  &	  ANALYSIS	  
1.	  SCOPE	  
35	  
2.	  SUSTAINABILITY	  GOALS	  
36	  
SUSTAINABILITY	  FOR	  ALBERTSLUND	  
36	  
A	  SUSTAINABLE	  HEATING	  SYSTEM	  
37	  
3.	  STAKEHOLDERS	  
38	  
4.	  INITIAL	  INDICATORS	  
40	  
INDICATORS	  CHOSEN	  FROM	  EISD	  
40	  
INDICATORS	  DEVELOPED	  BY	  STAKEHOLDERS	  
41	  
5.	  FINAL	  SUSTAINABILITY	  INDICATORS	  
43	  
==PAGE:7==
	  
7  
SUMMARY	  OF	  INDICATOR	  SELECTION	  PROCESS	  
43	  
DISCUSSION	  ON	  ELIMINATED	  SIS	  
44	  
6.	  DESCRIPTION	  SHEETS	  
46	  
SOC1:	  ACCESSIBILITY	  
46	  
SOC2:	  AFFORDABILITY	  
48	  
ECO1:	  ENERGY	  USE	  
49	  
ECO2:	  HEATING	  INTENSITY	  
50	  
ECO3:	  SUPPLY	  EFFICIENCY	  
51	  
ECO4:	  ENERGY	  DIVERSIFICATION	  
52	  
ECO5:	  ENERGY	  SECURITY	  
54	  
ENV	  1:	  CLIMATE	  CHANGE	  
55	  
ENV2:	  LOCAL	  AIR	  POLLUTION	  
56	  
7.	  MEASUREMENT	  
58	  
SOC1:	  SHARE	  OF	  BUILDINGS	  WITH	  DISTRICT	  HEATING	  
58	  
SOC2:	  SHARE	  OF	  HOUSEHOLD	  INCOME	  SPENT	  ON	  HEATING	  
60	  
ECO	  1:	  TOTAL	  HEAT	  CONSUMED	  BY	  USERS	  
60	  
ECO	  2.1:	  RESIDENTIAL	  HEAT	  USE	  PER	  M2	  
60	  
ECO	  2.2:	  COMMERCIAL	  HEAT	  USE	  PER	  M2	  
61	  
ECO	  3:	  EFFICIENCY	  OF	  ENERGY	  DISTRIBUTION	  
61	  
ECO	  4.1:	  NON-­‐CARBON	  ENERGY	  SHARE	  IN	  HEATING	  
62	  
ECO	  4.2:	  RENEWABLE	  ENERGY	  SHARE	  OF	  HEATING	  
62	  
ECO	  5:	  SHARE	  OF	  NONIMPORTED	  ENERGY	  
62	  
ENV	  1.1:	  RATIO	  OF	  GHG	  EMISSIONS	  TO	  UNITS	  OF	  ENERGY	  CONSUMED	  
63	  
ENV	  1.2:	  GHG	  EMISSIONS	  PER	  CAPITA	  
63	  
ENV	  2.1:	  RATIO	  OF	  AIR	  POLLUTANT	  EMISSIONS	  TO	  UNITS	  OF	  ENERGY	  CONSUMED	  
63	  
ENV	  2.2:	  AIR	  POLLUTANT	  EMISSIONS	  PER	  CAPITA	  
64	  
8.	  RESULTS	  
65	  
TRENDS	  
66	  
OUTCOMES	  
68	  
PART	  IV:	  DISCUSSION	  
DISCUSSION	  
70	  
IMPLEMENTING	  SUSTAINABILITY	  
70	  
INVOLVING	  STAKEHOLDERS	  
72	  
SETTING	  GOALS	  AND	  ACHIEVING	  THEM	  
73	  
ADDRESSING	  DATA	  AVAILABILITY	  
76	  
LIMITATIONS	  &	  FURTHER	  WORK	  
76	  
CONCLUSION	  
78	  
BIBLIOGRAPHY	  
79	  
APPENDIX	  A:	  CALCULATIONS	  FOR	  2013	  
84	  
	  
==PAGE:8==
	  
8  
List	  of	  Figures	  
Figure	  1:	  Definition	  of	  Sustainable	  Development,	  The	  Three	  Circles	  Error!	  Bookmark	  not	  defined.	  
Figure	  2:	  Albertslund's	  actual	  and	  planned	  CO2	  emissions	  from	  heat	  and	  electricity	  
15	  
Figure	  3:	  Albertslund’s	  Houses	  Before	  and	  After	  Renovation	  
16	  
Figure	  4:	  Combined	  Heat	  and	  Power	  in	  the	  Copenhagen	  Area	  
18	  
Figure	  5:	  Illustration	  of	  DSR	  Framework	  
23	  
Figure	  6:	  The	  Five	  Steps	  of	  Systemic	  Sustainability	  Analysis	  
26	  
Figure	  7:	  Steps	  in	  the	  urban	  sustainability	  reporting	  process	  
27	  
Figure	  8:	  Methodology	  for	  Sustainability	  Indicator	  Analysis	  (SIA)	  
28	  
Figure	  9:	  GIS	  Count	  of	  Albertslund's	  buildings	  
58	  
Figure	  10:	  Areas	  without	  district	  heating	  
59	  
Figure	  11:	  Sample	  of	  Albertslund's	  Forsyning's	  database	  on	  consumer	  consumption	  
60	  
Figure	  12:	  Modification	  to	  SIA	  
71	  
Figure	  13:	  Degree-­‐day	  Corrected	  Energy	  Used	  for	  Heating	  
74	  
Figure	  14:	  Carbon	  Dioxide	  Emissions	  from	  Heating	  
74	  
Figure	  15	  Forecasted	  Carbon	  Dioxide	  Emissions	  from	  Heating	  
75	  
	  
List	  of	  Tables	  
Table	  1:	  Summary	  of	  Stakeholders	  involved	  in	  the	  Transition	  
40	  
Table	  2:	  Indicators	  Taken	  from	  EISD	  
40	  
Table	  3:	  Summary	  of	  Indicators	  Developed	  by	  Stakeholders	  
41	  
Table	  4:	  SI	  Fulfillment	  of	  Requirements	  
43	  
Table	  5:	  Final	  set	  of	  Sustainability	  Indicators	  
45	  
Table	  6:	  Addition	  of	  non-­‐carbon	  resource	  shares	  
62	  
Table	  7:	  Addition	  of	  renewable	  resource	  shares	  
62	  
Table	  8:	  Addition	  of	  Air	  Pollutant	  Emissions	  
64	  
Table	  9:	  Summary	  of	  2014	  measurements	  for	  all	  final	  indicators	  
65	  
Table	  10:	  Comparison	  of	  results	  from	  2013	  and	  2014	  
66	  
Table	  11:	  Heat	  losses	  in	  distribution	  network	  
67	  
Table	  12:	  Addition	  of	  non-­‐carbon	  resource	  shares	  
86	  
Table	  13:	  Addition	  of	  renewable	  resource	  shares	  
86	  
Table	  14:	  Calculation	  of	  nonimported	  energy	  share	  
87	  
Table	  15:	  Addition	  of	  Air	  Pollutant	  Emissions	  
89	  
Table	  16:	  Summary	  of	  2013	  measurements	  for	  all	  final	  indicators	  
90	  
	  
	  
	  
==PAGE:9==
	  
9  
List	  of	  Abbreviations	  
CTR	  
	  
	  
Copenhagen	  Heating	  Transmission	  Company	  
DH	  
	  
	  
District	  Heating	  
EISD	   	  
	  
Energy	  Indicators	  for	  Sustainable	  Development	  
GHG	  	   	  
	  
Greenhouse	  Gas	  
IAEA	   	  
	  
International	  Atomic	  Energy	  Agency	  
ISD	  
	  
	  
Indicators	  for	  Sustainable	  Development	  
SI	  
	  
	  
Sustainability	  Indicator	  
SIA	  
	  
	  
Sustainability	  Indicator	  Analysis	  
SSA	  
	  
	  
Systemic	  Sustainability	  Assessment	  
UNDESA	  
	  
United	  Nations	  Department	  of	  Economic	  and	  Social	  Affairs	  
UN	  HABITAT	   	  
United	  Nations	  Human	  Settlements	  
USEPA	  	  
	  
United	  States	  Environmental	  Protection	  Agency	  
USI	  
	  
	  
Urban	  Sustainability	  Indicator	  
USR	  
	  
	  
Urban	  Sustainability	  Reporting	  
VF	  
	  
	  
Vestforbrændingen	  
	  
	  
	  
==PAGE:10==
	  
	  
	  
==PAGE:11==
	  
11  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
PART	  I	  
Introduction	  
	  
	  
==PAGE:12==
Part	  I:	  Introduction	  
12  
Introduction	  
Throughout	   history,	   cities	   have	   been	   characterized	   by	   their	   relative	   density	  
compared	   to	   their	   hinterlands.	   In	   the	   18th	   century,	   industrialization	   set	   about	   a	  
process	  whereby	  technological	  innovation	  and	  social	  reorganization	  caused	  massive	  
economic	  growth	  based	  on	  production.	  This	  led	  to	  rapid	  urbanization	  as	  cities	  grew	  
as	  the	  centers	  of	  regional	  and	  national	  economies	  (McCann	  &	  Acs,	  2011).	  Cities	  grew	  
suburbs,	   and	   people	   sprawled	   across	   the	   countryside.	   In	   the	   twentieth	   century,	  
technological	   advancements	   in	   transportation	   and	   telecommunications	   led	   to	  
increasing	  global	  integration	  and	  connectivity.	  By	  the	  end	  of	  the	  20th	  century,	  cities	  
could	   be	   thought	   of	   as	   nodes	   in	   a	   global	   network,	   acting	   as	   incubators	   for	   social,	  
economic	   and	   technological	   development	   (Taylor,	   2006).	   But,	   to	   perform	   these	  
functions,	   cities	   require	   a	   particularly	   large	   quantity	   of	   resources,	   and	   this	   is	  
currently	   being	   met	   primarily	   by	   fossil	   fuels–a	   resource	   that	   is	   being	   rapidly	  
depleted	  and	  is	  harmful	  to	  humans	  and	  the	  environment	  (IEA,	  2008;	  UN-­‐HABITAT,	  
2012).	  	  
Although	   cities	   depend	   on	   nature’s	   resources,	   they	   do	   not	   always	   cater	   to	   its	  
requirements.	   Cities	   often	   utilize	   carbon-­‐based	   fuels	   for	   their	   transportation	   and	  
energy	   systems,	   and	   by	   doing	   so,	   local	   air	   pollutants,	   and	   greenhouse	   gases	   are	  
emitted,	   causing	   global	   warming	   (UN-­‐HABITAT,	   2012),	   which	   in	   turn	   induces	  
climate	   change	   and	   sea-­‐level	   rise	   	   (UN-­‐HABITAT,	   	   2012).	   Cities	   produce	   huge	  
amounts	  of	  waste,	  which	  is	  not	  always	  treated	  properly	  and	  further	  contributes	  to	  
global	   warming	   (UN-­‐HABITAT,	   2012).	   Furthermore,	   urban	   development	   often	  
infringes	  on	  nature,	  damaging	  local	  ecosystems	  and	  habitats	  in	  the	  process.	  Cities	  
also	  accumulate	  crime	  and	  poverty.	  It	  is	  in	  urban	  areas	  that	  slums	  proliferate,	  and	  
from	  urban	  areas	  that	  social	  unrest	  originates	  (UN-­‐HABITAT,	  2013,	  2014)	  .	  In	  short,	  
cities	   manifest	   the	   negative	   effects	   that	   modernity	   has	   had	   on	   society	   and	   the	  
environment.	  But	  if	  cities	  create	  environmental	  and	  social	  problems,	  then	  they	  also	  
contain	  the	  solutions.	  
Today,	   more	   than	   half	   the	   world’s	   population	   lives	   in	   urban	   areas	   (UNPF,	   2008).	  
These	  areas	  consume	  over	  two-­‐thirds	  of	  the	  world’s	  energy	  and	  account	  for	  more	  
than	  70%	  of	  global	  CO2	  emissions	  (IEA,	  2008:	  179).	  These	  percentages	  are	  growing,	  
because	  the	  global	  rate	  of	  urbanization	  is	  growing	  (UNPF,	  2008),	  and	  it	  is	  for	  that	  
very	  reason	  that	  we	  should	  focus	  on	  cities	  as	  a	  starting	  point	  in	  addressing	  global	  
sustainability	  challenges.	  The	  potential	  for	  improvement	  lies	  not	  only	  in	  new	  urban	  
regions,	   which	   can	   be	   planned	   with	   social	   and	   environmental	   considerations,	   but	  
also	  in	  existing	  towns	  and	  cities	  that	  can	  gradually	  transition	  towards	  sustainability.	  
The	  paradigm	  for	  development	  up	  until	  the	  latter	  part	  of	  the	  21st	  century	  had	  been	  
growth,	  but	  due	  to	  the	  obvious	  environmental	  repercussions	  that	  this	  causes,	  the	  
dominant	   discourse	   regarding	   human	   development	   has	   become	   sustainability	  
(Keiner,	   2006:	   1).	   Sustainable	   development	   is	   an	   objective	   that	   is	   acclaimed	   by	  
almost	   all	   national	   governments,	   international	   organizations	   and	   private	   actors	  
(Connelly,	  2007).	  It	  is	  commonly	  defined	  according	  to	  the	  Brundtland	  Report	  of	  the	  
World	  Commission	  on	  Environment	  and	  Development	  (WCED,	  1987),	  which	  defines	  
==PAGE:13==
	  
13  
it	  as	  “development	  that	  meets	  the	  needs	  of	  the	  present	  without	  compromising	  the	  
ability	  of	  future	  generations	  to	  meet	  their	  own	  needs.”	  Sustainable	  development	  is	  
often	   visualized	   using	   the	   image	   of	   three	   overlapping	   circles	   (Connelly,	   2007),	  
representing	  the	  economy,	  society	  and	  the	  environment.	  Sustainable	  development	  
lies	  in	  their	  area	  of	  intersection,	  where	  it	  integrates	  considerations	  from	  the	  three	  
pillars	   of	   sustainability.	   However,	   this	   win-­‐win-­‐win	   scenario	   is	   not	   always	  
realizable.	  In	  fact,	  it	  is	  almost	  a	  utopic	  scenario.	  	  
As	   long	   as	   sustainable	   development	   is	   viewed	   as	   ‘everything	   and	  
nothing’	  it	  is	  weakened	  as	  a	  policy	  goal,	  and	  those	  wishing	  to	  promote	  
environmental	   sustainability	   and	   social	   justice	   are	   hampered	   if	   they	  
attempt	   to	   do	   so	   without	   a	   clear	   understanding	   of	   the	   tensions	   and	  
potential	  conflicts	  between	  these	  desirable	  goals.	  (Connelly,	  2007:	  260)	  
If	  we	  wish	  to	  lead	  our	  cities	  to	  sustainable	  futures,	  we	  must	  first	  be	  able	  to	  assess	  
their	   current	   level	   of	   sustainability	   and	   to	   create	   measures	   that	   monitor	   their	  
transitions.	  For	  this	  purpose,	  we	  can	  use	  Sustainability	  Indicators;	  sets	  of	  variables	  
that,	   together,	   measure	   progress	   towards	   achievement	   of	   a	   community’s	  
sustainability	   goals	   (Maclaren,	   2007).	   These	   indicators	   can	   demonstrate	   a	   lack	   of	  
sustainability,	   which	   provides	   the	   grounds	   for	   community	   action.	   They	   can	   also	  
provide	   evidence	   of	   positive	   progress,	   which	   is	   “important	   for	   justifying	   past	  
expenditures	  on	  sustainability	  initiatives	  and	  building	  support	  for	  new	  initiatives”	  
(Nandy,	  2012).	  	  Visions	  of	  urban	  sustainability	  differ	  from	  place	  to	  place	  depending	  
on	   the	   communities	   living	   there	   and	   their	   current	   attainment	   of	   sustainable	  
development.	  Therefore,	  urban	  sustainability	  indicators	  should	  be	  developed	  for	  the	  
specific	  context	  in	  which	  they	  are	  to	  be	  used.	  
	  
	  	  	  	  	  
	  
Figure	  1:	  Definition	  of	  Sustainable	  Development	  (Keiner,	  2006),	  	  
	  	  	  	  The	  Three	  Circles	  (Connelly,	  2007)	  
	  
	  
	  
==PAGE:14==
Part	  I:	  Introduction	  
14  
Context	  
Background	  
In	  Denmark,	  Copenhagen	  has	  recently	  made	  headlines	  by	  announcing	  an	  ambitious	  
plan	  to	  become	  the	  first	  carbon-­‐neutral	  capital	  city	  in	  the	  world	  by	  2025	  (City	  of	  
Copenhagen,	  2011).	  The	  city's	  carbon	  neutrality	  effort	  is	  in	  the	  context	  of	  Denmark's	  
legally	  binding	  commitment	  to	  achieve	  100%	  renewable	  power	  and	  heat	  by	  2035	  
and	   100%	   renewable	   energy	   overall	   by	   2050.	   (The	   Danish	   Ministry	   of	   Climate	  
Energy	  and	  Buildings,	  2011).	  Copenhagen’s	  goals	  will	  be	  achieved	  through	  several	  
strategies,	   which	   revolve	   around	   the	   diversification	   of	   energy	   production	   and	  
reduction	  of	  energy	  consumption.	  The	  issue	  of	  energy	  reduction	  is	  straightforward,	  
but	   expensive.	   Residential	   heat	   consumption	   accounts	   for	   a	   third	   of	   energy	  
consumption	  in	  Denmark	  (Albertslund	  Kommune,	  2009),	  and	  this	  is	  largely	  because	  
of	   old	   buildings	   with	   low	   energy	   efficiency.	   70%	   of	   Copenhagen’s	   buildings	   were	  
built	   before	   the	   first	   building	   regulations	   were	   established	   (City	   of	   Copenhagen,	  
2012),	  and	  so	  retrofitting	  them	  would	  greatly	  increase	  their	  energy	  efficiency.	  There	  
are	  also	  efforts	  to	  provide	  residents	  and	  businesses	  with	  better	  data	  about	  their	  use	  
of	  heat	  and	  electricity	  so	  they	  can	  become	  more	  aware	  of	  their	  energy	  consumption.	  
The	   main	   field	   through	   which	   Copenhagen	   aims	   to	   reach	   its	   targets	   is	   energy	  
production,	   which	   is	   planned	   to	   cover	   almost	   three	   fourths	   of	   CO2	   reductions	   by	  
2025	   (City	   of	   Copenhagen,	   2012).	   The	   goal	   is	   to	   produce	   more	   electricity	   using	  
renewable	   energy	   sources	   than	   the	   city	   actually	   consumes,	   and	   to	   transform	   the	  
district	   heating	   system	   to	   become	   100%	   carbon	   neutral	   by	   2025	   (City	   of	  
Copenhagen,	   2012).	   The	   improvements	   to	   the	   district	   heating	   system	   would	   not	  
only	  affect	  the	  inner	  city	  of	  Copenhagen,	  but	  the	  region	  around	  it	  as	  well	  since	  the	  
heat	   transmission	   pipelines	   extend	   over	   30km	   westwards	   to	   Roskilde	   and	   30km	  
southwest	   to	   Solrød	   (Veks,	   2013).	   Denmark	   has	   the	   highest	   utilization	   of	   district	  
heating	  in	  the	  world,	  covering	  over	  half	  of	  the	  country’s	  heating	  demand	  (Pedersen,	  
2012),	   and	   so	   utilizing	   this	   technology	   would	   obviously	   offer	   many	   synergistic	  
benefits	  to	  its	  suppliers	  and	  consumers.	  
The	   case	   that	   this	   thesis	   examines	   is	   17km	   to	   the	   west	   of	   Copenhagen,	   in	   the	  
municipality	  of	  Albertslund,	  which	  has	  recently	  attracted	  some	  attention	  due	  to	  its	  
sustainability	  efforts.	  Albertslund	  is	  part	  of	  the	  Green	  Cities	  Partnership,	  which	  also	  
includes	   Copenhagen	   along	   with	   four	   other	   municipalities.	   The	   binding	   initiative	  
was	   launched	   with	   the	   intention	   of	   creating	   a	   better	   political	   climate	   for	   the	  
municipalities	   to	   pursue	   common	   sustainability	   goals	   relating	   to	   energy,	   waste	  
management,	  traffic,	  food	  production	  etc.	  (Green	  Cities,	  2015),	  that	  will	  ultimately	  
result	   in	   stronger	   sustainable	   development.	   Albertslund	   is	   gradually	   decreasing	  
their	  carbon	  emissions.	  By	  the	  year	  2025,	  they	  aim	  to	  have	  completely	  carbon-­‐free	  
electricity	  and	  heating	  throughout	  the	  municipality.	  This	  involves	  several	  initiatives	  
(Albertslund	  Kommune,	  2015a):	  
	  
	  
==PAGE:15==
	  
15  
1. Providing	  buildings	  that	  currently	  utilize	  oil	  and	  natural	  gas	  for	  their	  heating	  
needs	  with	  carbon-­‐free	  heat	  sources	  
2. Making	  the	  buildings	  and	  distribution	  system	  more	  efficient	  
3. Using	  carbon-­‐free	  energy	  for	  district	  heating	  
	  
Figure	  2:	  Albertslund's	  actual	  and	  planned	  CO2	  emissions	  from	  heat	  and	  electricity	  
(Data	  from	  Albertslund	  Kommune,	  2015c)  
Albertslund	  has	  a	  population	  of	  27,706	  and	  lies	  on	  an	  area	  of	  23	  square	  kilometers	  
(Albertslund	  Kommune,	  2015b).	  Recently,	  the	  suburban	  town	  agreed	  to	  become	  the	  
Danish	  test	  site	  for	  energy	  efficient	  renovation	  of	  concrete	  housing	  areas	  (Pederson,	  
2012).	  61%	  of	  housing	  in	  Alberstlund	  is	  municipally	  owned	  (Albertslund	  Kommune,	  
2015b).	  Over	  a	  period	  of	  10	  years,	  6,000	  homes	  are	  being	  renovated	  according	  to	  
the	   2020	   Danish	   building	   standard	   (Pederson,	   2012).	   	   These	   homes	   were	   built	  
between	  1960	  and	  1980,	  which	  implies	  two	  things:	  they	  are	  prefabricated	  (Norden,	  
2011b),	   and	   they	   have	   very	   poor	   energy	   performance	   compared	   to	   today’s	  
standards	   (Albertslund	   Kommune,	   2009).	   The	   project	   utilizes	   the	   so-­‐called	  
“Albertslund	  Concept”,	  which	  allows	  for	  low-­‐cost,	  prefabricated	  solutions	  that	  can	  
yield	   substantial	   improvements	   in	   energy	   efficiency.	   This	   novel	   approach	   has	   led	  
Alberstlund	  to	  win	  the	  Nordic	  Energy	  Municipality	  2011	  Award	  (Norden,	  2011a).	  
Notably,	   the	   renovation	   includes	   the	   “Masterplan	   Syd”	   project,	   which	   is	   currently	  
underway	   in	   the	   southern	   part	   of	   Albertslund.	   This	   project	   involves	   retrofitting	  
2,200	  dwellings,	  and	  is	  the	  largest	  renovation	  project	  in	  Danish	  history	  (Cenergia,	  
2013).	  	  
==PAGE:16==
Part	  I:	  Introduction	  
16  
	  
	  
Low	  Energy	  Class	  1	  	  (a1)	  <	  35	  +1100	  /A	  kWh	  /	  m2	  /	  year	  
Low	  Energy	  Class	  2	  (a2)	  <	  50	  +1600	  /A	  kWh	  /	  m2	  /	  year	  
Building	  Code	  (B)	  <	  70	  +	  2200	  /	  A	  kWh	  /	  m2	  /	  year	  
Building	  Code	  (C)	  <	  110	  +	  3200	  /	  A	  kWh	  /	  m2	  /	  year	  
Building	  Code	  (D)	  <	  150	  +	  4200	  /	  A	  kWh	  /	  m2	  /	  year	  
Building	  Code	  (E)	  <	  190	  +	  5200	  /	  A	  kWh	  /	  m2	  /	  year	  
Building	  Code	  (F)	  <	  240	  +	  6500	  /	  A	  kWh	  /	  m2	  /	  year	  
Building	  Code	  (G)	  >	  240	  +	  6500	  /	  A	  kWh	  /	  m2	  /	  year	  
	  
Figure	   3:	   Albertslund’s	   Houses	   Before	   and	   After	   Renovation	   (Adapted	   from	  
Albertslund	  Kommune,	  2009)	  
	  
==PAGE:17==
	  
17  
Unlike	   most	   Danish	   municipalities,	   Albertslund	   owns	   its	   own	   district	   heating	  
company,	   Albertslund	   Forsyning	   (DBDH,	   2006),	   and	   so	   their	   goals	   for	   carbon	  
reduction	  are	  aligned.	  Alongside	  the	  housing	  renovations,	  Albertslund	  Forsyning	  is	  
also	   upgrading	   the	   district-­‐heating	   network	   to	   include	   low-­‐temperature	   district	  
heating.	   While	   standard	   district	   heating	   systems	   have	   operating	   supply	  
temperatures	   of	   around	   90°C,	   low	   temperature	   systems	   supply	   water	   at	   around	  
60°C	  (Danish	  Energy	  Agency,	  2014b).	  This	  significantly	  improves	  the	  efficiency	  of	  
the	   energy	   supply	   since	   heat	   loss	   is	   reduced	   (Danish	   Energy	   Agency,	   2014b).	  
Another	  major	  benefit	  is	  that	  the	  base	  load	  heat	  demand	  is	  much	  lower,	  and	  this	  
allows	   the	   system	   to	   be	   powered	   by	   renewable	   energy	   sources	   or	   surplus	   heat	  
(Danish	   Energy	   Agency,	   2014b).	   It	   is	   important	   to	   note,	   however,	   that	   low-­‐
temperature	  district	  heating	  is	  only	  practical	  for	  energy-­‐efficient	  buildings.	  During	  
the	  Masterplan	  Syd	  renovation,	  Albertslund	  Forsyning	  introduced	  low-­‐temperature	  
loops	  for	  the	  renovated	  houses	  and	  integrated	  it	  with	  the	  existing	  district	  heating	  
system(Albertslund	  Kommune,	  2009);	  due	  to	  the	  houses’	  high	  energy	  performance,	  
they	  were	  able	  to	  utilize	  the	  return	  water	  flowing	  through	  the	  network	  as	  supply	  
water,	  and	  still	  gain	  ample	  energy	  to	  satisfy	  the	  houses’	  space	  and	  water	  heating	  
needs.	  	  
Albertslund	  municipality	  is	  aiming	  for	  very	  ambitious	  carbon	  reduction	  targets,	  and	  
a	  more	  efficient	  district	  heating	  system	  is	  one	  of	  the	  keys	  to	  reaching	  these	  targets.	  
They	  hope	  to	  rebrand	  their	  municipality	  as	  an	  “urban	  laboratory”	  as	  it	  was	  known	  in	  
the	   1960s,	   to	   attract	   more	   residents	   and	   businesses.	   Their	   smart	   city	   strategy	  
especially	   targets	   green-­‐tech	   companies	   who	   they	   hope	   will	   collaborate	   on	   the	  
municipality’s	  development	  and	  settle	  there	  (Albertslund	  Kommune,	  2015a).	  Such	  
internally	   driven	   initiatives	   aim	   to	   reduce	   energy	   consumption,	   but	   they	   do	   not	  
eliminate	   the	   need	   for	   carbon.	   The	   conversion	   to	   carbon-­‐free	   energy	   for	   district	  
heating	  is	  happening	  at	  a	  regional	  scale.	  Albertslund	  Forsyning	  purchases	  its	  energy	  
from	  Veks,	  a	  transmission	  company	  that	  supplies	  heat	  to	  21	  local	  district	  heating	  
companies	   in	   12	   municipalities	   (Veks,	   2013).	   It	   is	   one	   of	   three	   transmission	  
companies	  operating	  in	  the	  capital	  region	  along	  with	  Vestforbrændingen	  (VF)	  and	  
The	  Metropolitan	  Copenhagen	  Heating	  Transmission	  Company	  (CTR).	  Around	  80%	  
of	  the	  energy	  going	  into	  Albertslund’s	  district	  heating	  system	  originates	  from	  the	  
Avedøre	   Combined	   Heat	   and	   Power	   Plant,	   while	   the	   other	   20%	   comes	   from	   VF’s	  
waste	   incineration	   plant	   (T.	   Duhn,	   personal	   communication,	   May	   22,	   2015).	   The	  
Avedøre	  Plant	  consists	  of	  two	  units.	  One	  unit	  has	  already	  been	  converted	  to	  run	  on	  
100%	  biomass	  (Veks,	  2013),	  while	  the	  second	  unit	  will	  be	  transformed	  similarly	  in	  
2016	   (Districtenergy,	   2015),	   leading	   to	   the	   possibility	   of	   carbon-­‐free	   energy	   for	  
Albertslund’s	  district	  heating	  system.	  	  
The	  changes	  to	  the	  district	  heating	  system	  in	  Albertslund	  are	  being	  performed	  as	  
part	   of	   a	   wider	   politically	   driven	   movement	   targeting	   carbon	   neutrality.	   The	  
ultimate	   goal	   is	   to	   make	   heating	   in	   the	   town	   environmentally	   sustainable,	   but	  
sustainable	   development	   also	   includes	   economic	   growth	   and	   social	   equity.	   Is	   it	  
possible	   that	   these	   changes	   could	   actually	   be	   leading	   Albertslund	   away	   from	  
sustainable	  development	  in	  certain	  ways?	  For	  instance,	  could	  the	  upgraded	  system	  
render	   space	   and	   water	   heating	   unaffordable	   to	   some	   of	   Albertslund’s	   residents?	  
==PAGE:18==
Part	  I:	  Introduction	  
18  
Could	  relying	  on	  non-­‐carbon	  energy	  sources	  decrease	  the	  reliability	  of	  the	  heating	  
supply,	  or	  threaten	  its	  security?	  At	  the	  moment,	  Albertslund	  Municipality	  have	  no	  
direct	  means	  of	  monitoring	  and	  evaluating	  the	  side	  effects	  of	  their	  carbon	  neutrality	  
initiative.	  	  
	  
Figure	  4:	  Combined	  Heat	  and	  Power	  in	  the	  Copenhagen	  Area	  (Veks,	  2013)	  
The	  Thesis	  
Purpose	  
There	   are	   many	   different	   stakeholders	   involved	   in	   the	   transition	   of	   Albertslund’s	  
heating	  system.	  They	  all	  have	  the	  same	  target	  of	  carbon	  neutrality	  in	  2025,	  but	  they	  
have	  different	  interests	  and	  different	  visions	  of	  sustainability,	  and	  so	  there	  are	  some	  
trade-­‐offs	   that	   have	   to	   be	   made	   to	   reach	   this	   goal.	   The	   purpose	   of	   this	   thesis	  
project	  is	  to	  present	  a	  method	  for	  developing	  appropriate	  indicators	  for	  the	  
sustainable	   transition	   of	   Albertslund’s	   heating	   system	   towards	   becoming	  
100%	   carbon	   neutral.	   These	   social,	   environmental	   and	   economic	   indicators	   are	  
meant	  to	  give	  a	  coherent	  picture	  of	  the	  current	  state	  of	  the	  district	  heating	  system,	  
and	   its	   progress	   towards	   sustainability	   targets.	   It	   attempts	   to	   create	   a	   common	  
framework	   that	   involves	   all	   stakeholders	   and	   accommodates	   their	   respective	  
visions	  of	  sustainability	  for	  Albertslund’s	  heating	  system.	  To	  do	  this,	  an	  attempt	  will	  
==PAGE:19==
	  
19  
be	   made	   to	   answer	   some	   research	   questions	   that	   serve	   to	   guide	   and	   inspire	   the	  
project:	  
• How	   can	   sustainability	   be	   defined	   in	   the	   context	   of	   the	   transition	   of	  
Albertslund’s	  heating	  system?	  
• What	   is	   an	   appropriate	   method	   that	   can	   be	   used	   to	   develop	   appropriate	  
indicators	  for	  the	  sustainable	  transition	  of	  Albertslund’s	  heating	  system?	  
• What	  can	  be	  learned	  by	  using	  this	  method?	  
• How	  useful	  is	  this	  method,	  and	  what	  are	  its	  limitations?	  
Outline	  
The	  report	  consists	  of	  four	  main	  sections.	  This	  section	  familiarizes	  the	  reader	  with	  
Albertslund	  and	  its	  transition,	  and	  motivates	  the	  need	  for	  this	  thesis.	  The	  second	  
section	  presents	  some	  theory	  regarding	  sustainable	  development	  and	  sustainability	  
indicators,	   and	   also	   introduces	   the	   methodology	   used	   for	   the	   study.	   The	   third	  
section	  follows	  the	  application	  of	  the	  method	  to	  the	  case	  of	  Albertslund’s	  heating	  
system.	  The	  fourth	  section	  concludes	  the	  report	  with	  a	  discussion	  surrounding	  the	  
process,	  the	  results	  and	  the	  lessons	  learned	  during	  the	  thesis.	  
	  
	  
==PAGE:20==
Part	  I:	  Introduction	  
20  
	  
==PAGE:21==
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
PART	  II	  
Theory	  
	  
	  
==PAGE:22==
Part	  II:	  Theory	  
22  
Literature	  Review	  
Sustainable	  Development	  
Sustainable	   development	   is	   often	   defined	   using	   the	   Brundtland	   definition:	  
“development	  that	  meets	  the	  needs	  of	  the	  present	  without	  compromising	  the	  ability	  
of	   future	   generations	   to	   meet	   their	   own	   needs”	   (WCED,	   1987).	   This	   definition	  
succeeds	  in	  presenting	  sustainable	  development	  as	  a	  generally	  uncontested	  concept	  
that	  everyone	  can	  agree	  on	  (Connelly,	  2007),	  but	  it	  is	  useful	  to	  expand	  this	  definition	  
in	   order	   to	   dissect	   the	   process	   of	   sustainable	   development	   and	   approach	   it	  
systematically.	   Haughton	   (1999)	   argues	   that	   there	   are	   five	   distinct,	   yet	  
interconnected	   equity	   principles	   that	   constitute	   the	   essence	   of	   sustainable	  
development.	  These	  equity	  principles	  are:	  
1. Intergenerational	   Equity	  is	  the	  most	  widely	  acknowledged	  component	  of	  
sustainable	   development	   since	   it	   draws	   directly	   from	   the	   Brundtland	  
definition.	  It	  addresses	  equity	  between	  current	  and	  future	  generations.	  
2. Intragenerational	   Equity	  seeks	  to	  address	  the	  underlying	  causes	  of	  social	  
injustice.	  It	  addresses	  equity	  within	  society.	  
3. Geographical	   Equity	   requires	   that	   local	   politics	   address	   both	   local	   and	  
global	  problems.	  	  
4. Procedural	   Equity	   holds	  that	  regulatory	  and	  participatory	  systems	  should	  
ensure	  that	  all	  people	  are	  treated	  fairly.	  This	  principle	  covers	  many	  topics	  
from	  the	  bureaucratic	  procedures	  for	  establishing	  rights	  to	  wider	  processes	  
of	  public	  engagement.	  
5. Interspecies	   Equity	   highlights	   the	   importance	   of	   preserving	   ecosystem	  
integrity	  and	  maintaining	  biodiversity.	  
Haughton’s	  principles	  envelop	  the	  three	  principles	  of	  sustainable	  development.	  He	  
contends	   that	   these	   five	   conditions	   for	   equity	   must	   be	   addressed	   singly	   and	  
collectively	  in	  order	  to	  move	  towards	  sustainable	  development.	  Therefore,	  they	  can	  
be	  useful	  when	  developing	  sustainability	  indicators.	  
Sustainability	  Indicators	  
Indicators	   are	   extremely	   useful	   tools.	   They	   can	   simplify	   complicated	   data,	   and	  
aggregate	   knowledge	   from	   social	   and	   physical	   science	   into	   accessible	   formats	  
(UNDESA,	   2007).	   Indicators	   can	   help	   actors	   reach	   their	   goals	   while	   avoiding	  
mishaps,	  and	  they	  can	  help	  them	  communicate	  their	  ideas	  and	  visions	  (Maclaren,	  
2007).	   There	   are	   a	   few	   criticisms	   towards	   using	   Sustainability	   Indicators	   (SI).	   A	  
major	   one	   is	   that	   of	   reductionism;	   that	   SIs	   oversimplify	   complex	   and	   diverse	  
processes	  (Bell	  &	  Morse,	  2008),	  but	  the	  growth	  of	  sustainability	  as	  a	  paradigm	  leads	  
to	  a	  need	  to	  quantify	  it.	  Otherwise	  it	  becomes	  impossible	  to	  set	  goals,	  track	  progress	  
and	   communicate	   it.	   Quantification	   of	   complex	   social	   and	   environmental	  
phenomena	   always	   leads	   to	   their	   simplification,	   but	   as	   long	   as	   indicators	   are	   not	  
taken	  at	  face	  value,	  they	  can	  provide	  useful,	  meaningful	  information.	  
==PAGE:23==
Part	  II:	  Theory	  
23  
There	   are	   many	   different	   types	   of	   indicators,	   and	   many	   frameworks	   that	   can	   be	  
used	   to	   define	   their	   types.	   This	   study	   will	   involve	   the	   use	   of	   the	   domain-­‐based	  
framework,	   which	   will	   be	   utilized	   for	   developing	   indicators.	   The	   domain-­‐based	  
framework	   simply	   categorizes	   indicators	   into	   one	   of	   the	   three	   domains	   of	  
sustainability	  (economy,	  environment	  or	  society	  (IAEA	  et	  al.,	  2005;	  Maclaren,	  2007).	  
Another	   common	   framework	   is	   the	   DSR	   (Driver	   State	   Reaction)	   framework.	   The	  
DSR	  framework	  is	  a	  cause-­‐effect	  framework	  that	  divides	  indicators	  into	  three	  types	  
(Bell	  &	  Morse,	  2008):	  
1. Driver	   Indicators	   track	   processes	   that	   affect	   the	   state	   of	   a	   system.	   For	  
example,	  in	  the	  case	  of	  environmental	  quality,	  a	  driver	  indicator	  could	  be	  the	  
rate	  at	  which	  a	  pollutant	  is	  passed	  into	  a	  river	  
2. State	  Indicators	  track	  the	  actual	  state	  of	  a	  system.	  Using	  the	  same	  example,	  a	  
state	  indicator	  would	  describe	  the	  concentration	  of	  a	  pollutant	  in	  the	  river	  
water	  
3. Response	   Indicators	   gauge	   required	   progress	   in	   the	   response	   of	   actors	   to	  
improve	  the	  state	  of	  the	  system.	  In	  our	  example,	  this	  could	  be	  the	  completion	  
status	  of	  a	  plan	  to	  limit	  water	  pollution.	  
	  
Figure	  5:	  Illustration	  of	  DSR	  Framework	  (Adapted	  from	  Bell	  &	  Morse,	  2008)	  
When	   analyzing	   a	   system	   from	   a	   sustainability	   perspective,	   it	   is	   important	   to	   be	  
aware	   of	   its	   current	   state,	   along	   with	   any	   positive	   or	   negative	   forces	   affecting	   its	  
state,	   and	   the	   stakeholders’	   responses	   towards	   them.	   According	   to	   Bell	   &	   Morse,	  
state	  SIs	  are	  the	  primary	  measures	  of	  project	  impacts	  whereas	  driver	  and	  response	  
SIs	  are	  more	  exploratory	  and	  analytical.	  Therefore,	  a	  set	  of	  indicators	  usually	  starts	  
off	  mainly	  consisting	  of	  state	  SIs,	  and	  as	  a	  project	  develops,	  the	  team	  gradually	  adds	  
driver	   and	   response	   SIs	   as	   they	   increasingly	   understand	   the	   driving	   and	   reacting	  
forces	  influencing	  the	  state	  of	  the	  project.	  A	  set	  of	  indicators	  should	  aim	  to	  maximize	  
unique	  and	  relevant	  information	  (Bell	  &	  Morse,	  2008).	  They	  should	  also	  rely	  on	  data	  
that	  is	  available,	  or	  obtainable,	  in	  order	  to	  be	  measured	  successfully.	  	  
The	   use	   of	   indicators	   in	   policy	   making	   has	   grown	   since	   1992,	   when	   the	   United	  
Nations	   Conference	   on	   Environment	   and	   Development	   (also	   known	   as	   the	   Earth	  
Summit)	  recognized	  their	  importance	  in	  helping	  countries	  make	  informed	  decisions	  
regarding	  sustainable	  development	  (Nandy,	  2012;	  UNDESA,	  2007;	  Vera	  &	  Langlois,	  
2007).	  This	  recognition	  is	  articulated	  in	  Chapter	  40	  of	  Agenda	  21,	  which	  highlights	  
==PAGE:24==
Part	  II:	  Theory	  
24  
the	  importance	  of	  sustainability	  indicators	  because	  of	  their	  ability	  to	  ‘provide	  solid	  
bases	   for	   decision-­‐making’	   and	   ‘contribute	   to	   a	   self-­‐regulating	   sustainability	   of	  
integrated	   environment	   and	   development	   systems’	   (UN,	   1993).	   After	   the	   Earth	  
Summit,	   the	   UN	   General	   Assembly	   established	   the	   Commission	   on	   Sustainable	  
Development	   (CSD),	   which	   was	   assigned	   the	   task	   of	   ‘reviewing	   progress	   in	   the	  
implementation	   of	   Agenda	   21	   and	   the	   Rio	   Declaration	   on	   Environment	   and	  
Development,	  as	  well	  as	  providing	  policy	  guidance	  to	  follow	  up	  the	  Johannesburg	  
Plan	   of	   Implementation	   at	   the	   local,	   national,	   regional	   and	   international	   levels’	  
(UNDESA,	   2015).	   To	   accomplish	   this	   task,	   the	   CSD	   worked	   on	   establishing	  
Indicators	   of	   Sustainable	   Development	   that	   could	   measure	   national	   and	  
international	   progress	   towards	   sustainable	   development,	   such	   as	   the	   Millennium	  
Development	  Goals	  (UNDESA,	  2007).	  The	  first	  set	  of	  CSD	  indicators,	  published	  in	  the	  
1996	  ‘Blue	  Book’,	  was	  comprised	  of	  134	  indicators,	  but	  the	  participating	  countries	  
found	  that	  the	  indicators	  presented	  many	  institutional	  challenges	  as	  they	  were	  too	  
many	  to	  handle	  (UNDESA,	  2007).	  The	  second	  revision	  of	  the	  blue	  book,	  published	  by	  
the	   CSD	   in	   2001,	   had	   reduced	   the	   set	   to	   58	   indicators,	   and	   by	   that	   time,	   the	  
importance	  of	  indicators	  in	  measuring	  progress	  towards	  sustainable	  development	  
had	  been	  established.	  
Energy	  Indicators	  for	  Sustainability	  
Energy	  is	  an	  increasingly	  relevant	  factor	  in	  the	  pursuit	  of	  sustainability.	  It	  has	  been	  a	  
prerequisite	   for	   economic	   development	   (IAEA	   et	   al.,	   2005),	   and	   is	   vital	   for	  
improving	  human	  welfare	  and	  raising	  living	  standards	  (Vera	  &	  Langlois,	  2007).	  	  
At	  the	  time	  that	  the	  CSD	  Blue	  Book	  was	  published,	  energy	  was	  becoming	  a	  central	  
theme	   in	   international	   debates	   due	   to	   its	   importance	   in	   achieving	   sustainable	  
development.	   However,	   the	   CSD	   set	   of	   58	   indicators	   only	   included	   three	   energy-­‐
related	  indicators–	  1)	  annual	  energy	  consumption	  per	  capita,	  2)	  intensity	  of	  energy	  
use	  and	  3)	  share	  of	  consumption	  of	  renewable	  energy	  resources	  (Vera	  &	  Langlois,	  
2007).	   To	   present	   a	   more	   detailed	   view	   of	   the	   state	   of	   energy	   worldwide,	   the	  
International	  Atomic	  Energy	  Agency	  (IAEA)	  launched	  a	  program	  to	  develop	  a	  set	  of	  
Energy	  Indicators	  for	  Sustainable	  Development	  (EISD),	  that	  would	  compliment	  the	  
CSD	   indicators	   (IAEA	   et	   al.,	   2005).	   This	   initiative	   was	   conduced	   by	   the	   IAEA	   in	  
cooperation	   with	   UNDESA,	   the	   International	   Energy	   Agency	   (IEA),	   the	   Statistical	  
Office	   of	   the	   European	   Communities	   (Eurostat)	   and	   the	   European	   Environment	  
Agency	   (EEA)	   (IAEA	   et	   al.,	   2005;	   Vera	   &	   Langlois,	   2007).	   In	   2005,	   this	   initiative	  
resulted	  in	  the	  publication	  of	  an	  interagency	  report,	  which	  includes	  a	  set	  of	  30	  EISDs	  
that	  is	  meant	  to	  provide	  an	  assessment	  of	  the	  most	  important	  energy-­‐related	  issues	  
that	  are	  relevant	  to	  countries	  worldwide	  (Vera	  &	  Langlois,	  2007).	  
Many	   of	   the	   energy	   indicators	   developed	   during	   this	   project	   are	   based	   on	   the	  
interagency	  EISDs,	  with	  two	  main	  differences.	  First,	  the	  interagency	  indicators	  are	  
suggested	   for	   national	   energy	   systems	   whereas	   this	   thesis	   examines	   a	   municipal	  
system.	  Secondly,	  the	  interagency	  indicators	  are	  meant	  for	  entire	  energy	  systems	  
including	  heat,	  electricity,	  transportation	  etc.	  while	  the	  thesis	  looks	  at	  heating	  only.	  
This	  means	  that	  the	  appropriate	  indicators	  for	  Albertslund’s	  district	  heating	  system	  
==PAGE:25==
Part	  II:	  Theory	  
25  
were	   often	   adapted	   from	   the	   interagency	   report’s	   30	   Energy	   Indicators	   for	  
Sustainable	  Development	  (EISD),	  but	  in	  some	  cases,	  they	  had	  to	  be	  developed	  from	  
scratch.	  
Urban	  Sustainability	  Indicators	  
When	  considering	  the	  transition	  of	  Albertslund’s	  district	  heating	  system,	  it	  is	  useful	  
to	  approach	  it	  from	  the	  perspective	  of	  energy	  and	  its	  effects	  on	  sustainability,	  but	  it	  
is	  essential	  to	  also	  consider	  the	  fact	  that	  it	  is	  an	  urban	  system	  due	  to	  the	  implications	  
that	   has	   for	   the	   kind	   of	   indicators	   that	   could	   be	   developed	   for	   it.	   Urban	  
Sustainability	   Indicators	   (USI)	   are	   meant	   to	   measure	   progress	   towards	   a	   local	  
community’s	   sustainability	   goals	   (Maclaren,	   2007;	   Nandy,	   2012).	   According	   to	  
Maclaren	   (2007),	   USIs	   differ	   from	   simple	   economic,	   social	   and	   environmental	  
indicators	   in	   the	   fact	   that	   they	   are	   integrating,	   forward,	   looking	   distributional	  
and/or	   developed	   with	   input	   from	   multiple	   stakeholders	   in	   the	   community.	   She	  
contends	   that	   a	   single	   USI	   does	   not	   necessarily	   have	   to	   possess	   all	   four	  
characteristics,	  but	  should	  possess	  at	  least	  the	  last	  one,	  and	  within	  any	  given	  set	  of	  
indicators,	   all	   four	   characteristics	   should	   be	   present.	   At	   this	   point,	   it	   is	   useful	   to	  
outline	  the	  different	  types	  of	  USIs	  and	  their	  characteristics:	  
1. 
Integrating	   Indicators	  combine	  economic,	  environmental	  and	  social	  aspects	  
of	  sustainability.	  One	  example	  could	  be	  the	  unemployment	  rate	  of	  a	  city	  since	  it	  
measures	   both	   social	   and	   economic	   stress.	   Integrating	   indicators	   can	   be	  
combined	  to	  form	  composite	  indicators.	  One	  example	  of	  a	  successful	  composite	  
indicator	  is	  the	  Human	  Development	  Index.	  	  
2. 
Forward-­‐Looking	   Indicators	   measure	   progress	   towards	   intergenerational	  
equity.	  They	  consist	  of	  three	  types	  
a. Trend	   indicators	   describe	   historic	   trends,	   and	   use	   them	   to	   define	  
thresholds,	  which	  are	  not	  to	  be	  exceeded,	  and	  targets	  that	  are	  aimed	  for.	  
These	   indicators	   are	   more	   useful	   for	   reactive,	   rather	   than	   proactive	  
planning.	  
b. Predictive	  indicators	  basically	  monitor	  past	  data	  and	  extrapolate	  it	  forward	  
to	  provide	  plausible	  information	  about	  the	  future.	  Population	  growth	  is	  a	  
common	  example	  of	  a	  predictive	  indicator.	  
c. Conditional	  Indicators	   are	   sets	   of	   predictive	   indicators	   that	   are	   based	   on	  
several	  "if"	  scenarios,	  and	  are	  more	  comprehensive	  in	  their	  projections.	  An	  
example	  is	  using	  population	  growth	  scenarios	  to	  plan	  a	  city’s	  investment	  in	  
its	  future	  residential	  areas.	  
3. 
Distributional	   Indicators	   measure	   intragenerational	   equality	   by	   observing	  
the	   distribution	   of	   conditions	   (social,	   economic,	   environmental)	   within	   a	  
population	  or	  across	  geographic	  regions.	  These	  are	  necessary	  because	  many	  
aggregating	  indicators	  fail	  to	  account	  for	  distributive	  effects.	  For	  example,	  GNP	  
may	   show	   an	   apparent	   increase	   in	   a	   country's	   economic	   well	   being	   while	  
certain	   groups	   may	   be	   experiencing	   economic	   deterioration.	   Distributional	  
==PAGE:26==
Part	  II:	  Theory	  
26  
indicators	   should	   always	   account	   for	   a	   community's	   ‘downstream’	  
contribution	  to	  environmental	  degradation.	  
4. 
Multi-­‐stakeholder	   Indicators	   are	   indicators	   that	   are	   developed	   with	   the	  
participation	  of	  many	  actors	  and	  stakeholders.	  The	  most	  influential,	  valid	  and	  
reliable	  indicators	  are	  those	  that	  have	  been	  developed	  with	  input	  from	  a	  broad	  
range	  of	  participants	  (Innes,	  1989).	  
Developing	  Sustainability	  Indicators	  
The	  method	  used	  for	  the	  purpose	  of	  this	  project	  draws	  mainly	  from	  two	  approaches	  
found	  in	  the	  literature.	  The	  first	  approach	  is	  Systemic	  Sustainability	  Analysis	  (SSA)	  
as	  described	  by	  Bell	  &	  Morse	  (2008).	  The	  second	  approach	  is	  Virginia	  Maclaren’s	  
(2007)	  method	  for	  Urban	  Sustainability	  Reporting	  (USR).	  	  
Systemic	  Sustainability	  Analysis	  
SSA	   is	   defined	   as	   “the	   participatory	   deconstruction	   and	   negotiation	   of	   what	  
sustainability	  means	  to	  a	  group	  of	  people,	  along	  with	  the	  identification	  and	  method	  
of	   assessment	   of	   indicators	   to	   assess	   that	   vision	   of	   sustainability”	   (Bell	   &	   Morse,	  
2008:	  147).	  It	  is	  a	  philosophy	  for	  developing	  indicators	  based	  on	  this	  definition,	  and	  
so	   it	   can	   be	   achieved	   through	   various	   methods	   depending	   on	   the	   project,	   but	   in	  
many	  cases	  it	  can	  be	  broken	  down	  into	  five	  steps	  as	  follows:	  
	  
Figure	  6:	  The	  Five	  Steps	  of	  Systemic	  Sustainability	  Analysis	  (Bell	  &	  Morse,	  2008:	  155)	  
1. Identify	  the	  Stakeholders	  
2. Identify	  the	  main	  SIs,	  which	  are	  dependent	  on	  the	  stakeholder	  group	  
3. Identify	  the	  band	  of	  equilibrium,	  which	  encapsulates	  the	  values	  of	  SIs	  that	  
the	  group	  equates	  as	  desirable	  for	  sustainability.	  
==PAGE:27==
Part	  II:	  Theory	  
27  
4. Develop	  the	  AMOEBA	  diagram	  as	  a	  means	  of	  representing	  the	  set	  of	  SIs.	  
5. Extend	   the	   AMOEBA	   over	   time	   to	   track	   project	   progress	   towards	  
sustainability,	  or	  lack	  thereof	  
For	  a	  full	  overview	  of	  this	  process,	  refer	  to	  Bell	  &	  Morse	  (2008),	  pp.147-­‐192.	  
Urban	  Sustainability	  Reporting	  
Similarly	  to	  SSA,	  this	  method	  also	  attempts	  to	  describe	  a	  system’s	  current	  state	  of	  
sustainability,	  and	  the	  momentum	  it	  has	  towards	  achieving	  its	  targets.	  It	  also	  relies	  
on	  the	  presumption	  that	  sustainability	  is	  subjective,	  and	  dependent	  on	  the	  views	  of	  
participating	   stakeholders.	   While	   SSA	   is	   linear,	   this	   method	   is	   more	   iterative	   and	  
involves	  going	  back-­‐and-­‐forth	  in	  the	  process	  depending	  on	  how	  it	  unfolds.	  As	  USR	  is	  
an	   iterative	   process,	   it	   is	   more	   useful	   to	   understand	   it	   through	   Figure	   7	   below,	  
rather	  than	  listing	  its	  steps.	  
	  
	  
Figure	  7:	  Steps	  in	  the	  urban	  sustainability	  reporting	  process	  (Maclaren,	  2007:	  189)	  
For	  a	  full	  overview	  of	  USR,	  refer	  to	  Maclaren	  (2007),	  pp.	  188-­‐200.	  
	  
	  
==PAGE:28==
Part	  II:	  Theory	  
28  
Methodology:	  Sustainability	  Indicator	  Analysis	  (SIA)	  
The	  method	  used	  for	  the	  purpose	  of	  this	  project	  combines	  elements	  from	  both	  the	  
SSA	  approach	  and	  the	  USR	  process.	  Like	  the	  SSA,	  it	  is	  linear	  and	  circular.	  And	  like	  
the	  USR,	  it	  focuses	  on	  developing	  a	  framework	  for	  SIs,	  and	  a	  method	  of	  analyzing	  
their	  results	  and	  assessing	  their	  performance.	  SIA	  is	  meant	  to	  be	  an	  annual	  process	  
that	  continually	  monitors	  system	  performance.	  Due	  to	  the	  fact	  that	  this	  is	  a	  5-­‐month	  
thesis,	  this	  report	  only	  includes	  the	  first	  run	  of	  the	  process.	  It	  starts	  with	  setting	  the	  
scope,	   and	   ends	   with	   the	   analysis	   of	   the	   results.	   It	   also	   leaves	   guidelines	   for	  
stakeholders	  to	  continue	  the	  process	  independently	  using	  input	  from	  the	  previous	  
year.	   This	   ensures	   that	   the	   process	   is	   self-­‐sufficient,	   and	   improves	   continuously	  
along	  with	  the	  stakeholders’	  understanding	  of	  the	  system.	  This	  section	  presents	  the	  
methodology	  for	  the	  process	  used	  in	  this	  report	  to	  use	  SIs	  to	  manage	  the	  transition	  
of	  Albertslund’s	  heating	  system.	  This	  process	  could	  very	  well	  be	  used	  in	  other	  cases,	  
but	  it	  has	  been	  developed	  with	  in	  mind.	  It	  is	  essential	  to	  tailor	  the	  method	  to	  suit	  the	  
specific	  context	  in	  which	  it	  is	  applied.	  
	  
Figure	  8:	  Methodology	  for	  Sustainability	  Indicator	  Analysis	  (SIA)	  
Set	  the	  Scope	  
Deyine	  
Sustainability	  
Goals	  
Identify	  
Stakeholders	  
Develop	  Initial	  
Sustainability	  
Indicators	  
Finalize	  
Sustainability	  
Indicators	  
Develop	  
Description	  
Sheets	  
Measure	  
Indicators	  
Analyze	  Results	  
==PAGE:29==
Part	  II:	  Theory	  
29  
1. Set	  the	  Scope	  
The	  first	  step	  is	  meant	  to	  define	  the	  scope	  of	  the	  analysis	  along	  with	  choosing	  the	  
framework	  to	  use	  for	  developing	  the	  SIs.	  This	  involves:	  
• Setting	   the	   target	   audience:	  This	  is	  important	  because	  the	  indicators	  will	  
vary	  depending	  on	  whom	  they	  are	  targeting.	  For	  example,	  if	  they	  are	  only	  
targeting	   the	   project	   implementers,	   then	   they	   could	   be	   quite	   technical	  
whereas	   if	   they	   are	   made	   to	   help	   policy	   makers	   communicate	   with	   the	  
general	  public,	  then	  they	  should	  be	  made	  more	  accessible.	  
• Setting	   the	   temporal	   range:	   A	   transition,	   by	   definition,	   happens	   over	   a	  
period	  of	  time.	  Limiting	  how	  far	  to	  look	  into	  the	  future	  limits	  uncertainty,	  and	  
so	   it	   helps	   stakeholders	   to	   develop	   realistic	   indicators	   that	   are	   relevant	   to	  
project	  goals.	  
• Setting	   the	   spatial	   boundary:	   Albertslund’s	   heating	   system,	   obviously	  
depends	   on	   energy	   purchased	   from	   outside	   of	   the	   municipality’s	  
administrative	  boundary.	  Should	  the	  analysis	  ignore	  anything	  that	  happens	  
outside	   of	   Albertslund?	   Or	   should	   it	   aim	   to	   cover	   anything	   influencing	   the	  
district	   heating	   system	   from	   the	   outside?	   This	   decision	   affects	   the	   type	   of	  
indicators	  that	  can	  be	  relevant	  to	  the	  project.	  
• Choosing	  a	  framework:	  There	  are	  six	  general	  frameworks	  that	  can	  be	  used	  
for	  developing	  sustainability	  indicators	  (Maclaren,	  2007).	  These	  are	  domain-­‐
based,	   goal-­‐based,	   sectoral,	   issue,	   causal,	   and	   combination	   frameworks.	  
There	  is	  no	  ‘correct’	  choice	  of	  framework	  to	  use,	  but	  the	  choice	  affects	  the	  
angle	  from	  which	  stakeholders	  approach	  indicator	  development,	  and	  hence,	  
could	   result	   in	   completely	   different	   SIs	   being	   developed.	   The	   choice	   of	  
framework	  has	  a	  large	  effect	  on	  the	  direction	  that	  the	  SID	  process	  takes.	  
• Set	  requirements	  for	  SIs:	  Not	  all	  indicators	  developed	  by	  the	  stakeholders	  
will	   be	   effective,	   or	   even	   feasible.	   It	   is	   important	   to	   objectively	   set	   a	  
‘screening’	  process	  for	  SIs	  to	  test	  their	  suitability	  and	  filter	  them	  accordingly.	  
The	  requirements	  used	  for	  this	  project	  are	  derived	  from	  the	  guidelines	  found	  
in	  Bell	  &	  Morse’s	  SI	  Learning	  Cycle	  (2008,	  pp.	  174-­‐179)	  	  
2. Define	  Sustainability	  Goals	  
When	  defining	  sustainability	  goals,	  it	  is	  possible	  to	  use	  already	  existing	  goals	  that	  
are	  specified	  in	  planning	  documents,	  or	  to	  develop	  them	  especially	  for	  the	  purpose	  
of	   developing	   SIs	   (Maclaren,	   2007).	   In	   order	   to	   develop	   a	   definition	   for	  
sustainability	   within	   the	   context	   of	   the	   transition,	   the	   general	   definition	   for	  
sustainability	  in	  Albertslund	  can	  be	  taken	  as	  a	  starting	  point,	  and	  then	  translated	  to	  
fit	  the	  context	  of	  the	  heating	  system.	  This	  definition	  serves	  to	  guide	  stakeholders	  in	  
identifying	  and	  developing	  indicators	  that	  suitably	  monitor	  the	  system’s	  transition	  
towards	  sustainability.	  
3. Identify	  Stakeholders	  
The	  third	  step	  in	  SIA	  is	  identifying	  the	  stakeholders	  involved	  in	  the	  transition.	  The	  
stakeholders	  are	  identified,	  and	  then	  analyzed	  with	  a	  description	  of	  the	  stake	  they	  
==PAGE:30==
Part	  II:	  Theory	  
30  
hold	  in	  the	  project,	  their	  role	  (implementer	  or	  beneficiary),	  and	  the	  size	  of	  their	  role	  
(major	  or	  minor).	  This	  is	  meant	  to	  gauge	  the	  impact	  of	  stakeholders	  on	  the	  project,	  
and	  hence,	  the	  importance	  of	  including	  each	  one	  throughout	  the	  rest	  of	  the	  process.	  
It	   is	   essential	   that	   all	   stakeholders	   with	   large	   stakes	   are	   involved	   in	   the	   SI	  
development	  process,	  while	  the	  importance	  of	  stakeholders	  with	  small	  or	  medium	  
stakes	  can	  be	  assessed	  depending	  on	  the	  situation.	  
4. Develop	  Initial	  Sustainability	  Indicators	  
To	   start	   off	   this	   step,	   a	   starting	   set	   of	   indicators	   is	   picked	   from	   the	   interagency	  
report’s	  (IAEA	  et	  al.,	  2005)	  30	  EISDs.	  This	  is	  done	  for	  several	  reasons.	  First	  of	  all,	  the	  
EISDs	  were	  developed	  collaboratively	  by	  five	  major	  international	  organizations	  with	  
expertise	  in	  the	  field	  of	  energy	  indicators	  (Vera	  &	  Langlois,	  2007).	  Their	  aim	  was	  to	  
create	  indicators	  that	  can	  foster	  the	  implementation	  of	  the	  principles	  of	  sustainable	  
development	   in	   varying	   contexts	   around	   the	   world,	   and	   so	   they	   present	   a	   good	  
starting	  point	  for	  indicator	  development	  in	  the	  context	  of	  our	  project.	  The	  second	  
reason	  is	  that,	  before	  the	  stakeholders	  are	  asked	  to	  suggest	  indicators,	  it	  is	  practical	  
to	  present	  them	  with	  these	  SIs	  to	  solidify	  their	  understanding	  of	  what	  indicators	  are,	  
and	  to	  give	  them	  an	  example	  of	  the	  kind	  of	  indicators	  that	  can	  be	  developed.	  
As	   previously	   mentioned,	   the	   30	   EISDs	   are	   meant	   for	   national	   energy	   systems	  
whereas	  this	  analysis	  focuses	  solely	  on	  the	  heating	  system	  of	  a	  municipality,	  and	  so	  
only	  some	  of	  the	  EISDs	  are	  relevant	  and	  applicable	  to	  our	  case.	  These	  are	  selected	  by	  
myself	   based	   on	   a	   subjective	   judgment	   of	   their	   relevance	   to	   the	   project.	   This	  
selection	  process	  will	  differ	  depending	  on	  who	  is	  making	  the	  selection.	  However,	  not	  
all	  of	  these	  indicators	  will	  necessarily	  make	  it	  to	  the	  final	  set,	  as	  they	  still	  have	  to	  be	  
tested	   individually	   and	   agreed	   to	   by	   the	   stakeholders.	   In	   addition,	   there	   is	   no	  
‘correct’	  set	  of	  indicators	  for	  this	  process,	  especially	  during	  the	  first	  iteration.	  As	  the	  
SIA	  process	  is	  repeated,	  successful	  indicators	  are	  kept	  while	  unsuccessful	  ones	  are	  
weeded	  out,	  leading	  to	  a	  natural	  selection	  process	  of	  sorts.	  
Next,	   the	   stakeholders	   are	   presented	   with	   the	   selected	   indicators,	   and	   asked	   to	  
complement	   them	   with	   indicators	   of	   their	   own.	   They	   are	   asked	   some	   stimulating	  
questions	  related	  to	  the	  current	  state	  of	  the	  heading	  system,	  and	  how	  it	  can	  move	  
towards	  its	  sustainability	  goals.	  At	  this	  point,	  the	  stakeholders	  are	  not	  told	  of	  the	  
criteria	  for	  SIs	  to	  pass	  to	  the	  next	  stage,	  in	  order	  to	  encourage	  them	  to	  be	  creative	  
with	  their	  ideas.	  	  
5. Finalize	  Sustainability	  Indicators	  
The	  previous	  step	  involved	  the	  development	  of	  a	  working	  list	  of	  indicators	  that	  can	  
potentially	   be	   used	   for	   the	   transition.	   This	   step	   involves	   passing	   them	   through	   a	  
checklist	  to	  ensure	  that	  the	  final	  set	  of	  indicators	  fit	  the	  requirements	  for	  SIs.	  These	  
requirements	  are	  found	  in	  Bell	  &	  Morse's	  SI	  Learning	  Cycle	  (2008,	  pp.174-­‐179),	  and	  
can	  be	  summarized	  as	  follows:	  
• Relevant:	   Does	   it	   describe	   the	   transition	   of	   the	   system?	   It	   is	   easy	   to	   lose	  
track	  of	  the	  task,	  and	  develop	  unrelated	  indicators,	  and	  this	  check	  is	  meant	  to	  
avoid	  this.	  
==PAGE:31==
Part	  II:	  Theory	  
31  
• Real:	   Does	   it	   exist	   for	   all	   stakeholders?	   	   For	   example,	   SIs	   conceived	   by	  
engineers	  could	  mean	  nothing	  to	  nonspecialists.	  
• Collectible:	  Can	  we	  construct	  the	  data	  needed	  to	  measure	  the	  indicator?	  
• Feasible:	  What	  is	  the	  cost	  of	  getting	  this	  information?	  
• Unique:	  Is	  it	  too	  similar	  to	  another	  SI?	  
During	   this	   step,	   each	   indicator	   is	   assessed	   by	   being	   passed	   through	   the	   above	  
questions	  to	  make	  sure	  that	  they	  are	  relevant,	  real,	  collectible,	  feasible	  and	  unique.	  	  
If	  any	  indicator	  fails	  to	  pass	  one	  of	  the	  above	  filters,	  it	  must	  be	  removed,	  or	  altered	  
until	  it	  does.	  This	  process	  ensures	  a	  final	  set	  of	  valid	  that	  fit	  the	  requirements.	  If	  
there	   are	   too	   many	   indicators	   at	   this	   point,	   then	   they	   are	   ranked	   in	   order	   of	  
importance,	  and	  the	  most	  important	  ones	  must	  be	  chosen	  to	  make	  sure	  that	  the	  final	  
set	  of	  indicators	  fits	  the	  established	  scope.	  
6. Develop	  Description	  Sheets	  
The	   next	   step	   is	   to	   develop	   the	   indicators	   using	   standardized	   description	   sheets.	  
These	  are	  intended	  to	  summarize	  useful	  information	  about	  the	  indicators	  that	  are	  
meant	  to	  elaborate	  the	  information	  they	  convey	  while	  highlighting	  their	  limitations.	  
They	   help	   the	   user	   group	   to	   understand	   how	   to	   measure	   each	   indicator	   and	  
communicate	  its	  results.	  Each	  description	  sheet	  contains	  the	  following	  information.	  
• Intent:	  A	  statement	  of	  the	  indicator’s	  purpose	  	  
• Issues	   to	   Consider:	   A	   brief	   discussion	   on	   the	   indicator’s	   applicability	   to	  
Albertslund’s	   district	   heating	   system	   and	   its	   relevance	   to	   sustainable	  
development.	  
• Technical	   Description:	   A	   definition	   of	   the	   indicator	   and	   its	   unit	   of	  
measurement.	  
• Measuring	  Method:	  A	  summary	  of	  the	  data	  needed	  to	  compile	  the	  indicator,	  
and	  how	  to	  use	  this	  data	  to	  calculate	  the	  indicator.	  	  
• Use:	   A	   summary	   of	   potential	   uses	   for	   the	   indicator,	   whether	   it	   is	   setting	  
goals	  or	  defining	  thresholds.	  	  
• Limitations:	   A	   critical	   analysis	   of	   the	   indicator’s	   shortcomings,	   and	   how	  
they	  can	  be	  avoided	  
7. Measure	  Indicators	  
This	  step	  involves	  following	  the	  measuring	  method	  prescribed	  in	  the	  prescription	  
sheets	   to	   collect	   the	   necessary	   data,	   and	   calculate	   all	   sustainability	   indicators	  
included	  in	  the	  final	  set.	  All	  measurements	  are	  summarized	  in	  a	  table	  	  
8. Analyze	  Results	  
The	  last	  step	  of	  the	  SIA	  involves	  analyzing	  the	  results	  from	  the	  whole	  process.	  The	  
analysis	  actually	  consists	  of	  many	  different	  tasks,	  which	  can	  be	  listed	  as	  follows:	  
• Comparing	  the	  indicator	  measurements	  with	  ones	  from	  the	  previous	  years	  	  
• Identifying	  any	  trends	  away	  from	  or	  towards	  sustainability	  
• Attempting	  to	  explain	  these	  trends.	  
==PAGE:32==
Part	  II:	  Theory	  
32  
• Identifying	  linkages	  between	  indicators	  
• Assessing	  indicator	  performance	  
• Translating	  findings	  into	  marketable	  messages	  
After	   these	   analyses	   are	   performed,	   the	   findings	   can	   be	   translated	   into	   a	   list	   of	  
messages	  to	  help	  actors	  communicate	  information,	  and	  a	  list	  of	  recommendations	  
that	  help	  them	  direct	  their	  actions	  towards	  improving	  the	  SIA,	  and	  re-­‐directing	  the	  
transition	  towards	  sustainability.	  
	  
==PAGE:33==
33	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
PART	  III	  
Results	  &	  Analysis	  
	  
	  
	  
==PAGE:34==
Part	  III:	  Results	  &	  Analysis	  
34  
	  
	  
The	   method	   shown	   above	   was	   developed	   during	   the	   thesis	   project.	   It	   constantly	  
changed	  to	  suit	  the	  context	  of	  the	  thesis,	  and	  adapt	  to	  its	  challenges.	  The	  creation	  of	  
the	  SIA	  process	  was	  as	  much	  of	  a	  learning	  experience	  as	  its	  application.	  
This	  section	  follows	  the	  application	  of	  the	  Sustainability	  Indicator	  Analysis	  method	  
to	  the	  case	  of	  Albertslund’s	  heating	  system.	  
	  
	  
Set	  the	  Scope	  
Deyine	  
Sustainability	  
Goals	  
Identify	  
Stakeholders	  
Develop	  Initial	  
Sustainability	  
Indicators	  
Finalize	  
Sustainability	  
Indicators	  
Develop	  
Description	  
Sheets	  
Measure	  
Indicators	  
Analyze	  Results	  
==PAGE:35==
Part	  III:	  Results	  &	  Analysis	  
35  
1.	  Scope	  
Target	   Audience:	  The	  sustainability	  indicators	  should	  be	  developed	  with	  several	  
goals	  in	  mind.	  They	  should	  be	  able	  to	  help	  implementers	  (engineers)	  in	  managing	  
the	   transition,	   and	   to	   help	   beneficiaries	   (residents,	   businesses,	   policy	   makers)	  
understand	   its	   progress	   and	   targets.	   This	   implies	   that	   indicators	   should	   convey	  
useful	  information	  without	  being	  overly	  technical.	  Involving	  all	  stakeholders	  in	  the	  
development	  process	  is	  a	  way	  of	  ensuring	  that	  the	  final	  set	  of	  indicators	  lies	  in	  this	  
middle	  ground.	  	  
Temporal	  Range:	  During	  this	  iteration	  of	  the	  SIA	  process,	  the	  definite	  target	  is	  the	  
system’s	   carbon	   neutrality	   in	   2025,	   and	   so	   for	   this	   current	   iteration,	   SIs	   are	  
developed	  to	  monitor	  progress	  during	  this	  10-­‐year	  period	  (2015-­‐2025).	  However,	  
in	  future	  iterations	  of	  SID,	  especially	  as	  the	  system	  gets	  close	  to	  achieving	  its	  target,	  
it	  is	  very	  possible	  that	  new	  targets	  will	  be	  set,	  and	  as	  that	  happens,	  some	  indicators	  
will	  be	  removed	  and	  more	  will	  be	  developed	  to	  reflect	  the	  system’s	  state	  and	  future	  
targets.	  
Spatial	   Boundary:	   	   The	  spatial	  boundary	  for	  indicator	  development	  is	  set	  as	  the	  
administrative	  boundary	  of	  Albertslund	  municipality.	  However,	  this	  does	  not	  mean	  
that	   all	   analyses	   will	   be	   constrained	   to	   this	   area.	   For	   example,	   considering	   that	  
geographical	   equity	   is	   a	   sustainability	   concern,	   it	   would	   be	   reductive	   to	   look	   at	  
harmful	   environmental	   effects	   within	   the	   municipality’s	   boundaries	   without	  
considering	   downstream	   effects.	   What	   the	   spatial	   boundary	   implies	   is	   that	   these	  
downstream	  effects	  have	  to	  be	  caused	  by	  heat	  production	  or	  consumption	  inside	  the	  
municipality.	  
Framework:	   A	   domain-­‐based	   framework	   will	   be	   used	   for	   developing	   the	  
sustainability	   indicators.	   This	   framework	   starts	   with	   the	   three	   dimensions	   of	  
sustainability	  (environment,	  economy	  and	  society).	  Stakeholders	  consider	  how	  and	  
why	   the	   transition	   affects	   the	   three	   dimensions,	   and	   they	   develop	   indicators	   for	  
each	   one.	   The	   domain-­‐based	   framework	   was	   chosen	   for	   indicator	   development	  
because	  it	  approaches	  the	  process	  from	  the	  perspective	  of	  sustainability,	  and	  hence	  
it	  is	  the	  most	  effective	  for	  ensuring	  coverage	  of	  its	  elements	  (Maclaren,	  2007).	  After	  
indicators	  are	  developed,	  they	  will	  be	  divided	  according	  to	  different	  themes	  inside	  
their	   domains.	   For	   example,	   there	   is	   a	   ‘climate	   change’	   theme	   inside	   the	  
environment	  domain.	  This	  division	  relates	  each	  indicator	  to	  a	  sustainability	  issue	  
that	  clarifies	  its	  aim.	  Overall,	  the	  framework	  can	  be	  considered	  to	  be	  a	  combination	  
of	  domain-­‐based,	  and	  issue-­‐based	  frameworks.	  
	  
	  
==PAGE:36==
Part	  III:	  Results	  &	  Analysis	  
36  
2.	  Sustainability	  Goals	  
Sustainability	  for	  Albertslund	  
I	  started	  this	  stage	  by	  holding	  a	  semi-­‐structured	  interview	  with	  Mr.	  Markussen,	  the	  
head	  of	  Agenda	  Center	  Albertslund	  (ACA).	  ACA	  is	  a	  local	  NGO	  that	  represents	  the	  
sustainability	  concerns	  of	  Albertslund’s	  residents,	  and	  businesses	  to	  a	  lesser	  extent,	  
and	   is	   responsible	   for	   promoting	   sustainable	   development	   in	   Albertslund.	   He	  
directed	  me	  to	  a	  planning	  document	  (Agenda	  Center	  Albertslund,	  2014)	  called	  Det	  
Bæredygtige	  Albertslund	  –	  mulighedernes	  by,	  which	  translates	  roughly	  to	  Sustainable	  
Albertslund	  –	  City	  of	  Opportunity.	  It	  is	  not	  a	  binding	  document,	  but	  rather,	  serves	  to	  
create	  visions	  of	  Albertslund’s	  future	  that	  can	  guide	  its	  strategy	  for	  sustainability.	  In	  
this	   document,	   sustainability	   for	   Albertslund	   is	   defined	   according	   to	   three	  
principles.	  These	  are	  stated	  below,	  and	  elaborated	  using	  Mr.	  Markussen’s	  opinions	  
from	  the	  interview.	  
1. Renewable	   Energy:	   This	   principle	   is	   about	   the	   exploitation	   of	   local	  
renewable	  energy,	  and	  ensuring	  that	  imported	  energy	  is	  renewable	  as	  well.	  
2. Closed-­‐Loop	  Systems:	  This	  principle	  involves	  using	  materials	  in	  an	  amount	  
that	  does	  not	  exceed	  what	  nature	  can	  replenish.	  According	  to	  this	  principle,	  
waste	   should	   be	   converted	   to	   resources	   while	   resources	   should	   never	   be	  
wasted.	  
3. Culture	   of	   Sustainability:	   Technical	   solutions	   can	   reduce	   immediate	  
negative	   environmental	   effects	   and	   lead	   to	   local	   economic	   gains.	   However,	  
the	   longevity	   of	   those	   environmental	   and	   economic	   gains	   depends	   on	   the	  
community’s	  culture.	  A	  community	  with	  a	  sustainable	  lifestyle	  would	  invest	  
those	  gains	  into	  a	  circular	  system	  (e.g.	  by	  buying	  organic	  food	  or	  investing	  in	  
a	  solar	  cell),	  while	  another	  could	  waste	  them	  by	  investing	  in	  finite	  resources	  
(e.g.	   by	   flying	   on	   an	   airplane).	   The	   issue	   of	   sustainability	   cannot	   be	  
approached	  solely	  from	  a	  technical	  angle.	  
	  
	  
==PAGE:37==
Part	  III:	  Results	  &	  Analysis	  
37  
A	  Sustainable	  Heating	  System	  
The	  next	  step	  was	  to	  convert	  these	  sustainability	  principles	  to	  fit	  the	  context	  of	  the	  
heating	  system.	  This	  was	  also	  performed	  during	  the	  interview.	  When	  asked	  about	  
what	   the	   three	   above	   principles	   of	   sustainability	   mean	   for	   the	   transition,	   Mr.	  
Markussen	  proposed	  that	  a	   sustainable	   heating	   system	   for	   Albertslund	   would	  
be	  one	  that:	  
• Minimizes	  energy	  usage	  –	  Currently,	  it	  is	  quite	  expensive	  to	  cover	  an	  entire	  
urban	   area’s	   heating	   demands	   with	   renewable	   energy	   due	   to	   technical	  
limitations.	   However,	   it	   is	   possible	   to	   increasingly	   cover	   it	   with	   renewable	  
energy	  as	  these	  demands	  decrease.	  Minimizing	  heat	  energy	  relies	  on	  more	  
efficient	   buildings,	   distribution	   systems	   and	   more	   conservative	   consumer	  
habits.	  
• Utilizes	  local	  renewable	  energy	  –	  Following	  the	  1st	  sustainability	  principle,	  
the	  district	  heating	  system	  would	  utilize	  locally	  produced	  renewable	  energy	  
such	  as	  solar	  energy	  from	  photovoltaic	  cells,	  or	  geothermal	  energy	  recovered	  
using	  heat	  pumps.	  Another	  possibility	  is	  capturing	  solar	  heat	  using	  passive	  
architectural	  design	  techniques.	  
• Imports	  renewable	  energy	  –	  It	  is	  highly	  unlikely	  that	  Albertslund’s	  heating	  
will	   be	   covered	   completely	   by	   locally	   produced	   renewable	   energy,	   which	  
means	   that	   some	   energy	   has	   to	   be	   imported.	   This	   energy	   should	   originate	  
from	  renewable	  sources	  as	  well.	  
• Minimizes	  heat	  waste	  –	  The	  heat	  transmission	  system	  should	  aim	  to	  follow	  
the	  closed-­‐loop	  systems	  principle	  as	  much	  as	  possible.	  Eliminating	  waste	  heat	  
from	  the	  system	  would	  result	  in	  lower	  energy	  requirements	  and	  better	  prices	  
for	   consumers.	   This	   can	   be	   accomplished	   by	   making	   distribution	   systems	  
more	  heat	  efficient.	  
• Recycles	  local	  waste	  energy	  –	  Following	  the	  closed-­‐loop	  systems	  principle,	  it	  
is	   important	   to	   recover	   any	   waste	   heat	   that	   leaks	   out	   of	   the	   system,	   and	  
reintroduce	  it	  into	  the	  loop	  again.	  For	  example,	  it	  is	  possible	  to	  recover	  heat	  
that	  drains	  into	  sewage	  by	  using	  heat	  pumps,	  and	  using	  that	  heat	  for	  district	  
heating.	  It	  is	  also	  possible	  to	  rely	  on	  recovered	  waste	  from	  other	  systems.	  A	  
good	  example	  is	  using	  Albertslund’s	  waste	  biomass	  as	  a	  heat	  source	  for	  the	  
system.	  
• Serves	   a	   community	   with	   a	   sustainable	   consumer	   culture	   –	   It	   is	   not	  
enough	  for	  the	  system	  to	  become	  more	  sustainable	  if	  the	  consumers	  it	  serves	  
have	  not	  transitioned	  with	  it.	  A	  sustainable	  consumer	  culture	  implies	  more	  
responsible	  consumption	  habits,	  and	  a	  mindset	  that	  values	  sustainability.	  A	  
sustainable	  heating	  system	  has	  to	  be	  one	  that	  Albertslund	  wants,	  not	  one	  that	  
it	  is	  subjected	  to.	  
	  
	  
==PAGE:38==
Part	  III:	  Results	  &	  Analysis	  
38  
3.	  Stakeholders	  
 
 
 
 
 
 
	  
	  
	  
Stakeholder:	  Albertslund	  Kommune	  (The	  Municipality)  
Role:	  Beneficiary	  
Size	  of	  Stake:	  Large	  
Description	  of	  Stake:	  The	  municipality	  has	  adopted	  the	  2025	  carbon	  neutrality	  
goals	  as	  an	  attempt	  to	  brand	  itself	  as	  a	  forward-­‐thinking	  municipality	  and	  attract	  
green-­‐tech	   businesses,	   and	   more	   residents.	   The	   district	   heating	   system	   has	   a	  
large	   part	   to	   play	   in	   achieving	   these	   goals.	   The	   municipality’s	   buildings	   also	  
depend	  on	  the	  district	  heating	  system	  and	  so	  they	  are	  the	  system’s	  users	  as	  well.   
	  
	  
	  
Stakeholder:	  Albertslund	  Forsyning	  (Distribution	  Company) 
Role:	  Implementer	  
Size	  of	  Stake:	  Large	  
Description	   of	   Stake:	   This	   Company	   is	   a	   branch	   of	   Albertslund	   Kommune.	   It	  
owns	   and	   operates	   the	   district	   heating	   system.	   Additionally,	   it	   is	   tasked	   with	  
providing	  buildings	  that	  currently	  utilize	  oil	  and	  gas	  with	  a	  carbon-­‐neutral	  source	  
of	  heat.	  
	  
	  
	  
Stakeholder:	  Albertslund’s	  Residents	  &	  Businesses 
Role:	  Beneficiary	  
Size	  of	  Stake:	  Large	  
Description	   of	  Stake:	   The	  residents	  and	  businesses	  form	  the	  large	  majority	  of	  
the	   heating	   system’s	   end	   users	   and	   so	   it	   is	   essential	   that	   their	   interests	   be	  
considered	  when	  managing	  the	  transition.	  This	  group	  can	  be	  considered	  to	  be	  the	  
main	  beneficiary	  of	  the	  project.	  
==PAGE:39==
Part	  III:	  Results	  &	  Analysis	  
39  
 
 
 
	  
	  
	  
Due	   to	   the	   time	   limitations	   presented	   by	   the	   project	   deadline,	   only	   the	   three	  
stakeholders	   with	   large	   stakes	   were	   involved	   in	   developing	   sustainability	  
indicators:	  1)	  Albertslund	  Kommune,	  2)	  Albertslund	  Forsyning,	  and	  3)	  Albertslund’s	  
residents	  and	  businesses.	  The	  municipality	  was	  represented	  by	  Niels	  Hansen,	  the	  
Special	  Advisor	  on	  Energy	  Savings	  and	  Energy	  Planning	  at	  Albertslund	  Kommune.	  
Mr.	  Hansen	  works	  with	  energy	  savings,	  smart	  city	  technologies,	  citizen	  involvement,	  
administration,	  and	  economic	  measures	  involved	  in	  Albertslund’s	  transformation	  to	  
a	  carbon	  neutral	  suburb.	  The	  Distribution	  Company	  was	  represented	  by	  El-­‐Khatib,	  
an	   Energy	   Consultant	   and	   Project	   Manager	   there.	   Finally,	   the	   residents	   and	  
businesses	  were	  represented	  by	  Mr.	  Povl	  Markussen,	  the	  head	  of	  ACA.	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
Stakeholder:	  Bo-­‐Vest	  (Housing	  Company) 
Role:	  Implementer	  &	  Beneficiary	  
Size	  of	  Stake:	  Small	  
Description	  of	  Stake:	  The	  Company	  owns	  all	  public	  housing	  in	  Albertslund.	  As	  
the	  municipality	  becomes	  more	  sustainable,	  it	  becomes	  a	  more	  attractive	  place	  to	  
live	   in.	   It	   is	   in	   their	   interest	   for	   the	   district	   heating	   system	   to	   have	   better	  
performance.	  
	  
 
	  
Stakeholder:	  Veks	  (Transmission	  Company) 
Role:	  Implementer	  
Size	  of	  Stake:	  Medium	  
Description	   of	   Stake:	   Veks	   owns	   and	   runs	   most	   of	   Western	   Copenhagen’s	  
regional	   heat	   transmission	   system,	   including	   Avedøre	   Power	   Station,	   the	   CHP	  
plant	  that	  provides	  Albertslund	  with	  80%	  of	  its	  heat.	  Although	  they	  have	  a	  large	  
role	   to	   play	   in	   the	   transition,	   they	   have	   a	   small	   stake	   in	   it	   because	   they	   are	  
responsible	  for	  regional	  heat	  transmission,	  not	  local	  distribution.	  
==PAGE:40==
Part	  III:	  Results	  &	  Analysis	  
40  
Table	  1:	  Summary	  of	  Stakeholders	  involved	  in	  the	  Transition	  
Stakeholder	  
Role	  
Size	  of	  Stake	  
Representative	  
Albertslund	  
Kommune	  
Beneficiary	  
Large	  
N.	  Hansen	  
Albertslund	  
Forsyning	  
Implementer	  
Large	  
W.	  El-­‐Khatib	  
Residents	  &	  
Businesses	  
Beneficiary	  
Large	  
P.	  Markussen	  
Bo-­‐Vest	  
Implementer	  &	  
Beneficiary	  
Medium	  
None	  
Veks	  
Implementer	  
Medium	  
None	  
4.	  Initial	  Indicators	  
Indicators	  chosen	  from	  EISD	  
The	  first	  indicators	  were	  chosen	  by	  myself	  from	  the	  interagency	  report’s	  30	  EISDs.	  
This	  was	  a	  subjective	  process	  that	  depended	  on	  my	  appraisal	  of	  their	  relevance	  to	  
the	  transition.	  For	  example	  SOC1:	  Accessibility	  was	  chosen	  because	  it	  can	  be	  easily	  
applied	   to	   Albertslund’s	   heating	   system	   by	   measuring	   its	   coverage	   of	   buildings.	  
Meanwhile,	  SOC4:	  Safety	  was	  not	  chosen	  because	  it	  measures	  the	  annual	  fatalities	  
caused	  by	  energy	  production–an	  issue	  that	  is	  completely	  irrelevant	  to	  Albertslund’s	  
heating	  system.	  	  The	  indicators	  chosen	  by	  myself	  from	  the	  interagency	  report’s	  30	  
EISDs	  are	  as	  follows:	  
Table	  2:	  Indicators	  Taken	  from	  EISD	  
Theme	  
Code	  
Indicator	  
Description	  
Accessibility	  
SOC1	  
Share	  of	  buildings	  with	  
district	  heating	  
Share	  of	  buildings	  with	  
access	  to	  district	  heating	  
Affordability	  
SOC2	  
Share	  of	  household	  
income	  spent	  on	  heating	  
Average	  monthly	  heating	  bill	  
relative	  to	  average	  household	  
income	  
Supply	  
Efficiency	  
ECO3	  
Efficiency	  of	  energy	  
conversion	  and	  
distribution	  
Consumed	  energy	  relative	  to	  
supplied	  energy	  
End	  Use	  
ECO8	  
Service/	  commercial	  
heating	  intensities	  
Heating	  energy	  (commercial)	  
per	  m2	  
ECO9	  
Household	  heating	  
intensity	  
Heating	  energy	  (residential)	  
per	  m2	  
==PAGE:41==
Part	  III:	  Results	  &	  Analysis	  
41  
Diversification	  
ECO12	   Non-­‐carbon	  energy	  
share	  in	  heating	  
Share	  of	  heat	  generation	  
from	  non-­‐carbon	  sources	  
ECO13	   Renewable	  energy	  share	  
in	  heating	  
Share	  of	  heat	  generation	  
from	  renewable	  sources	  
Climate	  
Change	  
ENV1	  
GHG	  emissions	  per	  unit	  
of	  energy	  consumed,	  and	  
per	  capita	  
GHG	  equivalents	  per	  capita	  
Air	  Quality	  
ENV3	  
Air	  pollutant	  emissions	  
per	  unit	  of	  energy	  
consumed,	  and	  per	  
capita	  
Emissions	  of	  SO2,	  NOx,	  CO,	  
particulate	  matter,	  
combusted	  HC	  (VOCs)	  
Indicators	  Developed	  by	  Stakeholders	  
I	  also	  approached	  the	  stakeholders	  to	  get	  their	  input	  through	  two	  meetings.	  The	  first	  
meeting	   was	   with	   Mr.	   Markussen	   from	   Agenda	   Center	   Albertslund	   since	   his	  
organization	   represents	   the	   sustainability	   concerns	   of	   Albertslund’s	   community,	  
both	   the	   residents	   and	   businesses.	   The	   second	   meeting	   was	   held	   with	   Mr.	   Niels	  
Hansen,	   who	   represents	   Albertslund	   Kommune	   and	   Mr.	   Wisam	   El-­‐Khatib,	   who	  
represents	   Albertslund	   Forsyning.	   Since	   the	   distribution	   company	   is	   part	   of	   the	  
municipality’s	   administration,	   Mr.	   El-­‐Khatib	   and	   Mr.	   Hansen’s	   are	   colleagues.	  
However,	   Mr.	   El-­‐Khatib	   is	   an	   Engineer	   while	   Mr.	   Hansen	   is	   an	   Economist	   and	  
Lawyer,	  and	  so	  the	  SIs	  they	  developed	  were	  quite	  diverse.	  
Both	  meetings	  were	  in	  the	  form	  of	  informal	  discussions	  that	  loosely	  followed	  the	  
same	  structure:	  First,	  I	  explain	  the	  usefulness	  of	  SIs	  in	  managing	  the	  transition	  of	  
Albertslund’s	  heating	  system.	  Then,	  I	  show	  them	  the	  above	  list	  of	  indicators	  as	  an	  
example	   of	   relevant	   SIs	   for	   the	   transition.	   Afterwards,	   I	   ask	   them	   to	   imagine	   a	  
heating	  system	  that	  is	  sustainable	  for	  Albertslund,	  and	  what	  that	  means	  for	  society,	  
the	  economy	  and	  the	  environment.	  And	  finally,	  they	  create	  SIs	  that	  they	  believe	  can	  
complement	  the	  above	  indicators	  within	  the	  three	  domains	  of	  sustainability.	  I	  tried	  
to	  encourage	  their	  creativity	  by	  explaining	  that	  these	  SIs	  will	  go	  through	  a	  screening	  
process	  later,	  and	  so	  it	  is	  better	  to	  be	  free	  with	  ideas	  rather	  than	  being	  conservative.	  
The	   two	   meetings	   resulted	   in	   the	   identification	   of	   eight	   potential	   SIs.	   These	   are	  
summarized	  in	  the	  table	  below,	  and	  then	  described	  briefly	  to	  elucidate	  their	  intent.	  
Table	  3:	  Summary	  of	  Indicators	  Developed	  by	  Stakeholders	  
Stakeholder	  
Indicator	  
Domain	  
Albertslund’s	  
Residents	  
User	  Satisfaction	  
SOC	  
User	  Awareness	  
SOC	  
Local	  energy	  share	  in	  heating	  
ECO	  
Albertslund	  
Total	  Energy	  Used	  for	  Heating	  
ECO	  
==PAGE:42==
Part	  III:	  Results	  &	  Analysis	  
42  
Forsyning	  	  
Population	  Growth	  
SOC	  
Albertslund	  
Kommune	  
Energy	  Security	  
ECO	  
Economic	  Benefits	  
ECO	  
Self-­‐Reliance	  
ECO	  
Albertslund’s	  Residents	  
User	  Awareness:	  This	  indicator	  attempts	  to	  describe	  the	  heat	  users’	  commitment	  to	  
resource	  conservation.	  This	  indicator	  can	  be	  measured	  in	  two	  ways.	  It	  can	  either	  be	  
assessed	   by	   running	   surveys	   that	   ask	   users	   about	   their	   habits,	   or	   by	   objectively	  
measuring	  consumers’	  utilization	  of	  heat	  compared	  to	  baseline	  estimates	  and	  hence,	  
assessing	   whether	   they	   are	   wasteful	   or	   conservative	   in	   their	   utilization	   of	   space	  
heating	  and	  hot	  water.	  
User	  Satisfaction:	  Going	  back	  to	  the	  idea	  of	  a	  culture	  of	  sustainability,	  this	  indicator	  
attempts	   to	   gauge	   how	   much	   consumers	   approve	   of	   the	   direction	   their	   heating	  
system	   is	   taking.	   This	   is	   highly	   related	   to	   another	   suggested	   indicator,	   user	  
awareness.	  	  
Local	  energy	  share	  in	  heating:	  This	  SI	  measures	  the	  share	  of	  heat	  generated	  using	  
energy	  from	  within	  Albertslund.	  This	  can	  be	  solar	  energy,	  passive	  heat	  energy,	  or	  
heat	  recovered	  from	  sewage	  and	  reintroduced	  into	  the	  heating	  system.	  
Albertslund	  Forsyning	  
Total	  Energy	  Used	  for	  Heating:	  While	  the	  EISD	  indicators	  measuring	  intensity	  (ECO8	  
and	   ECO9)	   present	   a	   good	   idea	   of	   energy	   usage	   in	   Albertslund,	   they	   still	   do	   not	  
present	  the	  complete	  picture.	  This	  indicator	  is	  meant	  to	  measure	  the	  total	  energy	  
used	  for	  heating	  in	  Albertslund,	  including	  district	  heating,	  oil	  and	  gas.	  
Population	   Growth:	   Demographic	   growth	   is	   useful	   for	   predicting	   future	   energy	  
needs.	   In	   this	   case,	   it	   also	   reflects	   the	   success	   of	   Albertslund’s	   goal	   of	   attracting	  
residents.	  
Albertslund	  Kommune	  
Energy	   Security:	   This	   indicator	   measures	   the	   share	   of	   energy	   consumed	   by	  
Albertslund	   that	   is	   produced	   in	   Denmark.	   Depending	   on	   imports	   from	   foreign	  
countries	  presents	  a	  risk	  for	  energy	  security.	  
Economic	  Benefits:	  This	  SI	  quantifies	  the	  yearly	  economic	  benefits	  obtained	  from	  
the	  heating	  system.	  This	  includes	  direct	  benefits	  (e.g.	  employment	  opportunities),	  
and	  indirect	  benefits	  (e.g.	  improvements	  to	  living	  standards).	  
Self-­‐Reliance:	  Speaking	  broadly,	  it	  is	  important	  for	  Albertslund	  to	  be	  economically	  
independent,	   meaning	   that	   it	   depends	   on	   resources	   generated	   within	   the	  
municipality.	  The	  idea	  behind	  this	  indicator	  is	  to	  measure	  Albertslund’s	  degree	  of	  
economic	   independence.	   Translating	   this	   concept	   to	   the	   heating	   system,	   self-­‐
reliance	  means	  that	  heat	  is	  produced	  locally.	  
==PAGE:43==
Part	  III:	  Results	  &	  Analysis	  
43  
5.	  Final	  Sustainability	  Indicators	  
The	   previous	   step	   resulted	   in	   a	   total	   of	   18	   indicators;	   10	   derived	   from	   the	   EISD	  
indicators,	  and	  8	  identified	  by	  the	  stakeholders	  that	  were	  involved	  in	  the	  project.	  
This	   step	   involves	   reducing	   them	   to	   those	   that	   are	   valid	   according	   to	   the	  
requirements	  for	  SIs.	  The	  results	  of	  this	  analysis	  are	  presented	  in	  Table	  4	  below.	  	  
Some	  SIs	  did	  not	  qualify	  for	  the	  final	  set	  since	  they	  did	  not	  fit	  the	  requirements.	  The	  
reasoning	  behind	  their	  elimination	  will	  be	  discussed	  in	  this	  section.	  SIs	  that	  were	  
included	  in	  the	  final	  set	  are	  not	  discussed	  here	  since	  they	  will	  be	  expanded	  in	  the	  
description	  sheets	  presented	  in	  the	  next	  section.	  
Summary	  of	  Indicator	  Selection	  Process	  
	  
Table	  4:	  SI	  Fulfillment	  of	  Requirements	  
Indicator	  
Relevant	  
Collectible	   Feasible	  
Unique	  
Share	  of	  buildings	  with	  
district	  heating	  
✓	  
✓	  
✓	  
✓	  
Share	  of	  household	  income	  
spent	  on	  heating	  
✓	  
✓	  
✓	  
✓	  
Efficiency	  of	  energy	  
conversion	  and	  distribution	  
✓	  
✓	  
✓	  
✓	  
Commercial	  heating	  intensity	  
✓	  
✓	  
✓	  
✓	  
Household	  heating	  intensity	  
✓	  
✓	  
✓	  
✓	  
Non-­‐carbon	  energy	  share	  in	  
heating	  
✓	  
✓	  
✓	  
✓	  
Renewable	  energy	  share	  in	  
heating	  
✓	  
✓	  
✓	  
✓	  
Ratio	  of	  GHG	  emissions	  to	  
units	  of	  energy	  consumed	  
✓	  
✓	  
✓	  
✓	  
Ratio	  of	  air	  pollutant	  
emissions	  to	  units	  of	  energy	  
consumed	  
✓	  
✓	  
✓	  
✓	  
User	  Satisfaction	  
✓	  
✓	  
✗	  
–	  
User	  Awareness	  
✓	  
✓	  
✗	  
–	  
==PAGE:44==
Part	  III:	  Results	  &	  Analysis	  
44  
Local	  energy	  share	  in	  heating	  
✓	  
✗	  
–	  
–	  
Total	  Energy	  Used	  for	  
Heating	  
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
Population	  Growth	  
✗ 
– 
–	  
–	  
Economic	  Benefits	  
✓ 
✗ 
– 
– 
Energy	  Security	  
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
Self-­‐Reliance	  
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✗ 
Discussion	  on	  Eliminated	  SIs	  
User	   Satisfaction:	   This	   indicator	   can	   be	   measured	   by	   conducting	   surveys	   to	   the	  
users	  of	  the	  heating	  system,	  and	  grading	  their	  satisfaction	  with	  its	  changes.	  While	  
this	  approach	  is	  collectible,	  this	  approach	  was	  not	  pursued	  for	  the	  purpose	  of	  this	  
report,	  as	  it	  was	  too	  time-­‐intensive.	  
User	  Awareness:	  This	  indicator	  can	  be	  measured	  by	  conducting	  surveys	  to	  the	  users	  
of	  the	  heating	  system,	  and	  assessing	  their	  consumption	  habits.	  The	  survey	  can	  be	  
combined	  with	  User	  Satisfaction	  in	  the	  same	  questionnaire.	  While	  this	  approach	  is	  
collectible,	  it	  was	  not	  pursued	  for	  the	  purpose	  of	  this	  report.	  Another	  method	  is	  to	  
use	  data	  collected	  from	  smart	  meters	  to	  compare	  user	  consumption	  patterns	  with	  
baseline	  expectancies	  of	  consumption,	  but	  smart	  meters	  are	  still	  in	  the	  process	  of	  
being	   introduced	   in	   Albertslund.	   This	   indicator	   could	   become	   valid	   in	   future	  
iterations	  of	  the	  SIA	  process	  once	  the	  data	  from	  smart	  meters	  is	  being	  collected	  and	  
stored.	  
Local	  Energy	  Share	  in	  Heating:	  Currently,	  the	  only	  local	  heat	  production	  that	  occurs	  
in	   Albertslund	   is	   through	   the	   use	   of	   heat	   pumps	   (N.	   Hansen,	   personal	  
communication,	  May	  26,	  2015).	  However,	  there	  is	  not	  enough	  data	  being	  collected	  
to	  calculate	  this	  indicator.	  
Population	  Growth:	  Population	  growth	  is	  connected	  to	  the	  heating	  system	  since	  it	  
implies	  more	  users,	  and	  potentially,	  urban	  expansion.	  However,	  it	  is	  extremely	  an	  
extremely	   broad	   indicator	   since	   it	   concerns	   a	   multitude	   of	   factors	   not	   related	   to	  
heating	   or	   energy.	   The	   broadness	   of	   this	   indicator	   makes	   it	   irrelevant	   to	   the	  
transition	  since	  it	  does	  not	  directly	  affect	  or	  reflect	  its	  effects.	  
Economic	  Benefits:	  Performing	  a	  cost-­‐benefit	  analysis	  for	  the	  heating	  system	  would	  
present	   a	   useful	   indication	   of	   the	   value	   obtained	   from	   investing	   in	   the	   system.	  
However,	   it	   is	   practically	   impossible	   to	   take	   into	   account	   the	   system’s	  
environmental	  and	  social	  benefits,	  and	  to	  give	  them	  a	  monetary	  value.	  Although	  the	  
idea	  is	  relevant	  to	  the	  transition,	  this	  indicator	  is	  not	  collectible.	  
==PAGE:45==
Part	  III:	  Results	  &	  Analysis	  
45  
Self-­‐Reliance:	   This	   indicator	   is	   basically	   a	   broader	   version	   of	   the	   indicator	   ‘Local	  
Energy	  Used	  for	  Heating’,	  and	  so	  although	  it	  is	  relevant,	  collectible	  and	  feasible,	  it	  
does	  not	  fit	  the	  requirement	  of	  being	  unique.	  
Final	  Set	  of	  Sustainability	  Indicators	  
At	   this	   point,	   a	   final	   set	   of	   sustainability	   indicators	   has	   been	   obtained,	   which	   is	  
relevant	   to	   the	   transition,	   collectible,	   feasible	   and	   unique.	   Some	   of	   the	   initial	  
indicators	  were	  combined	  into	  one	  theme	  due	  to	  their	  similarity.	  The	  Commercial	  
and	   Residential	   Heating	   Intensity	   indicators	   became	   indicators	   of	   the	   Heating	  
Intensity	   theme	   in	   the	   final	   set,	   while	   the	   Renewable	   and	   Local	   Energy	   Share	  
Indicators	  were	  combined	  into	  the	  Energy	  Diversification	  theme.	  
At	  this	  point,	  each	  final	  SI	  is	  classified	  according	  to	  the	  domain-­‐based	  framework	  
and	  identified	  according	  to	  its	  domain,	  and	  number.	  For	  example	  the	  first	  indicator	  
in	  the	  Society	  domain	  is	  identified	  as	  SOC1.	  Each	  indicator	  is	  named	  according	  to	  the	  
theme	   or	   issue	   that	   it	   is	   associated	   with,	   and	   presented	   with	   a	   more	   technical	  
description	   that	   clarifies	   its	   aim.	   The	   final	   set	   of	   indicators	   is	   summarized	   in	   the	  
table	  below:	  
Table	  5:	  Final	  set	  of	  Sustainability	  Indicators	  
Domain	   Issue	  
#	  
Indicator	  
Units	  
SOC	  
Accessibility	  
1	  
Share	  of	  buildings	  with	  district	  
heating	  
%	  
SOC	  
Affordability	  
2	  
Share	  of	  household	  income	  spent	  on	  
heating	  
%	  
ECO	  
Energy	  Use	  
1	  
Total	  heat	  consumed	  by	  users	  
MWh	  
ECO	  
Heating	  
Intensity	  
2.1	   Residential	  heat	  use	  per	  m2	  
kWh	  /	  m2	  
2.2	   Commercial	  heat	  use	  per	  m2	  
kWh	  /	  m2	  
ECO	  
Supply	  
Efficiency	  
3	  
Efficiency	  of	  energy	  distribution	  
%	  
ECO	  
Energy	  
Diversification	  
4.1	   Non-­‐carbon	  energy	  share	  in	  heating	  
%	  
4.2	   Renewable	  energy	  share	  of	  heating	  
%	  
ECO	  
Energy	  Security	   5	  
Share	  of	  nonimported	  energy	  
%	  
ENV	  
Climate	  Change	  
1	  
Ratio	  of	  GHG	  emissions	  to	  units	  of	  
energy	  consumed	  
kg/MWh	  
==PAGE:46==
Part	  III:	  Results	  &	  Analysis	  
46  
ENV	  
Air	  Quality	  
2	  
Ratio	  of	  air	  pollutant	  emissions	  to	  
units	  of	  energy	  consumed	  
g/MWh	  
6.	  Description	  Sheets	  
This	  section	  includes	  the	  description	  sheets	  developed	  for	  the	  final	  indicators.	  Each	  
description	   sheet	   includes	   the	   Intent,	   Issues	   to	   Consider,	   Technical	   Description,	  
Measuring	  Method,	  Use	  and	  Limitations	  of	  the	  indicator	  it	  describes.	  
SOC1:	  Accessibility	  
Intent	  
To	  measure	  the	  coverage	  of	  buildings	  in	  Albertslund	  by	  the	  district	  heating	  system	  
Issues	  to	  Consider	  
District	  heating	  is	  not	  the	  only	  heat	  source	  for	  Albertslund’s	  buildings,	  but	  it	  does	  
provide	   a	   large	   majority.	   In	   2013,	   it	   provided	   an	   estimated	   88%	   of	   heat	   in	  
Albertslund	  (Albertslund	  Kommune,	  2015h).	  The	  remaining	  12%	  are	  provided	  by	  
oil	   and	   natural	   gas.	   Natural	   gas	   is	   used	   by	   two	   residential	   areas:	   Risby	   and	  
Herstedøster	   Landsby	   (Albertslund	   Kommune,	   2015i).	   These	   areas	   used	   to	   be	  
farming	  villages,	  and	  have	  been	  inhabited	  for	  longer	  than	  the	  rest	  of	  Albertslund.	  
Their	  aging	  infrastructure	  has	  made	  it	  difficult	  for	  them	  to	  be	  integrated	  into	  the	  
district	  heating	  system	  Oil,	  meanwhile,	  is	  used	  by	  private	  houses	  in	  the	  Herstedøster	  
Villaby	  area	  (Albertslund	  Kommune,	  2015i).	  	  
This	   indicator	   is	   relevant	   to	   sustainable	   development	   for	   several	   reasons.	   Firstly,	  
when	   considering	   social	   equity,	   it	   is	   important	   that	   district	   heating	   is	   made	  
accessible	   to	   citizens,	   especially	   when	   the	   alternatives	   are	   more	   expensive.	  
Secondly,	  district	  heating	  is	  the	  only	  major	  source	  of	  heat	  in	  Albertslund	  that	  has	  the	  
potential	  of	  being	  carbon-­‐neutral.	  Obviously,	  oil	  and	  natural	  gas	  are	  fossil	  fuel	  based	  
sources	  that	  are	  incompatible	  with	  Albertslund’s	  energy	  goals.	  Gradually	  connecting	  
buildings	   that	   currently	   utilize	   oil	   and	   gas	   to	   the	   district	   heating	   system	   would	  
surely	   increase	   the	   system’s	   potential	   for	   sustainability,	   and	   this	   indicator	   can	  
measure	  this	  transition.	  Thirdly,	  this	  indicator	  measures	  the	  relative	  importance	  of	  
the	  district	  heating	  system	  for	  Albertslund’s	  energy	  profile.	  Consider	  a	  scenario	  in	  
which	  the	  district	  heating	  system	  is	  only	  used	  by	  5%	  of	  buildings	  in	  Albertslund.	  In	  
this	  case,	  even	  sweeping	  changes	  to	  the	  system	  could	  be	  trivial	  when	  considering	  
the	   city’s	   energy	   consumption	   as	   a	   whole.	   This	   indicator	   is	   essential,	   because	   it	  
provides	  a	  scale	  for	  the	  issue	  at	  hand.	  Without	  it,	  it	  is	  impossible	  to	  calibrate	  the	  
impact	  of	  any	  changes	  to	  Albertslund’s	  district	  heating	  system.	  
Technical	  Description	  
SOC1	   Percentage	  of	  buildings	  in	  Albertslund	  that	  utilize	  district	  heating	  
==PAGE:47==
Part	  III:	  Results	  &	  Analysis	  
47  
Measuring	  Method	  
To	   calculate	   this	   indicator,	   it	   is	   necessary	   to	   know	   the	   number	   of	   buildings	   in	  
Albertslund	  that	  utilize	  district	  heating	  and	  the	  total	  number	  of	  buildings	  in	  
Albertslund.	  It	  is	  measured	  simply	  by	  dividing	  the	  second	  value	  by	  the	  first,	  and	  
taking	  the	  result	  as	  a	  percentage.	  
Use	  
This	   indicator	   can	   be	   accompanied	   with	   a	   map	   showing	   the	   buildings	   that	   are	  
covered	  by	  the	  district	  heating	  system	  and	  the	  buildings	  that	  are	  not	  covered.	  This	  
map,	  along	  with	  the	  value	  measured	  for	  the	  indicator	  can	  be	  used	  to	  set	  goals	  for	  
extending	  service	  to	  houses	  that	  are	  not	  covered.	  After	  setting	  a	  coverage	  target,	  a	  
timeline	  can	  be	  established	  in	  order	  to	  plan	  the	  system’s	  expansion.	  	  
Limitations	  
One	  limitation	  of	  this	  indicator	  is	  that	  is	  not	  very	  detailed.	  Specifically,	  it	  does	  not	  
show	   the	   type	   of	   buildings	   that	   are	   covered	   or	   their	   size.	   This	   indicator	   can	   be	  
developed	  by	  being	  subdivided	  into	  municipal,	  commercial	  and	  residential	  coverage.	  
It	  can	  also	  be	  further	  developed	  by	  including	  a	  measure	  of	  square	  meter	  coverage	  
alongside	  building	  coverage	  since	  the	  size	  of	  the	  buildings	  is	  a	  large	  factor.	  	  
The	  biggest	  limitation	  of	  this	  indicator	  is	  that	  it	  implies	  that	  an	  increase	  in	  coverage	  
is	   always	   an	   improvement,	   but	   this	   is	   not	   the	   case.	   If	   there	   is	   a	   building	   that	   is	  
isolated	  from	  the	  rest	  of	  the	  district	  heating	  system,	  then	  connecting	  it	  to	  the	  district	  
heating	  system	  could	  be	  quite	  unsustainable	  due	  to	  the	  large	  material	  investments	  
required,	  the	  negligible	  carbon	  savings	  realized	  and	  the	  induced	  cost	  increases	  for	  
all	  users	  of	  the	  system.	  It	  could	  make	  more	  sense	  to	  use	  alternative	  fuel	  heat	  sources	  
rather	   than	   district	   heating.	   Consider	   the	   case	   of	   Risby,	   which	   is	   one	   of	   the	  
residential	  areas	  that	  are	  not	  connected	  to	  district	  heating.	  Risby	  has	  39	  detached	  
houses	  that	  accommodate	  100	  (Albertslund	  Kommune,	  2015g)	  residents.	  It	  is	  also	  
quite	  isolated	  from	  the	  rest	  of	  Albertslund.	  Connecting	  Risby	  to	  the	  district	  heating	  
would	   not	   be	   economically	   sustainable,	   but	   it	   currently	   uses	   oil	   for	   some	   of	   its	  
heating	  needs,	  which	  conflicts	  with	  the	  carbon	  neutrality	  goals.	  The	  solution	  that	  is	  
currently	   being	   investigated	   is	   to	   rely	   increasingly	   on	   organic	   pellet	   fuel	   or	  
geothermal	  heat	  pumps	  (Albertslund	  Kommune,	  2015a).	  This	  indicator	  would	  not	  
show	  any	  progress	  accomplished	  through	  these	  efforts.	  
Another	  case	  in	  which	  a	  decrease	  in	  coverage	  is	  actually	  favorable	  is	  if	  it	  is	  because	  a	  
building	   becomes	   self-­‐sufficient.	   Some	   technologies	   such	   as	   passive	   design	  
principles,	  solar	  heating	  and	  zero	  energy	  standards	  allow	  buildings	  to	  rely	  solely	  on	  
self-­‐generated	   renewable	   energy	   for	   their	   heating	   needs	   (Pedersen,	   2012).	   A	  
proliferation	   of	   such	   buildings	   in	   Albertslund	   would	   cause	   indicator	   SOC2	   to	  
decrease,	  but	  surely,	  it	  signifies	  a	  trend	  towards	  sustainability	  and	  not	  away	  from	  it.	  
To	  sidestep	  this	  issue,	  it	  is	  possible	  to	  develop	  an	  accompanying	  indicator	  to	  SOC2,	  
which	  measures	  the	  percentage	  of	  buildings	  in	  Albertslund	  that	  utilize	  alternative	  
sources	  for	  their	  heating	  needs,	  such	  as	  heat	  pumps	  or	  solar	  energy.	  
==PAGE:48==
Part	  III:	  Results	  &	  Analysis	  
48  
SOC2:	  Affordability	  
Intent	  	  
To	  give	  a	  measure	  of	  heating	  affordability	  for	  the	  average	  household	  
Issues	  to	  Consider	  
From	   the	   perspective	   of	   social	   equity,	   it	   is	   important	   for	   public	   amenities	   to	   be	  
affordable	  for	  citizens	  who	  wish	  to	  have	  them.	  Measuring	  the	  share	  of	  income	  that	  
the	  average	  household	  spends	  on	  district	  heating	  provides	  an	  overall	  indication	  of	  
the	  service’s	  affordability	  relative	  to	  the	  local	  economy.	  
Technical	  Description	  
SOC2	   Share	   of	   overall	   household	   expenditure	   on	   district	   heating	   for	   the	   average	  
household.	  
Measuring	  Method	  
The	  data	  needed	  is	  the	  average	  yearly	  household	  income	  in	  Albertslund,	  and	  the	  
average	   yearly	   household	   expenditure	   on	   district	   heating.	   The	   indicator	   is	  
measured	   by	   dividing	   the	   second	   figure	   by	   the	   first	   and	   taking	   the	   result	   as	   a	  
percentage.	  
Use	  
Currently,	   heating	   is	   not	   a	   luxury	   amenity	   for	   Albertslund’s	   citizens.	   However,	   if	  
investments	  continue	  to	  be	  made	  to	  upgrade	  the	  system	  in	  pursuit	  of	  environmental	  
targets,	   prices	   could	   increase,	   and	   district	   heating	   could	   become	   unaffordable	   to	  
some	   consumers.	   This	   indicator	   can	   be	   used	   to	   control	   how	   investments	   affect	  
consumers’	  wallets	  in	  two	  ways.	  The	  first	  way	  it	  can	  be	  used	  is	  to	  set	  a	  maximum	  
yearly	  increase	  for	  the	  indicator,	  e.g.	  by	  requiring	  that	  it	  can	  not	  increase	  by	  more	  
than	  1%	  every	  year.	  The	  other	  way	  it	  can	  be	  used	  is	  to	  set	  an	  absolute	  maximum	  
that	  cannot	  be	  surpassed.	  For	  example,	  setting	  5%	  as	  a	  limit	  for	  the	  indicator	  could	  
be	   used	   to	   ensure	   that	   district	   heating	   remains	   affordable	   for	   Albertslund’s	  
residents.	  
Limitations	  
While	   this	   indicator	   provides	   a	   broad	   view	   of	   affordability,	   it	   could	   still	   overlook	  
certain	  cases	  where	  there	  district	  heating	  is	  unaffordable	  to	  certain	  segments	  of	  the	  
population.	   It	   is	   possible	   that	   the	   unaffordability	   of	   district	   heating	   for	   certain	  
households	   becomes	   apparent	   only	   after	   observing	   the	   10%	   of	   households	   with	  
lowest	  income,	  or	  the	  30%.	  No	  matter	  what	  the	  cutoff	  is	  set	  at,	  there	  will	  always	  be	  
hidden	   trends	   that	   the	   indicator	   does	   not	   reveal.	   It	   would	   be	   more	   accurate	   to	  
calculate	  this	  indicator	  by	  looking	  at	  the	  affordability	  for	  each	  household	  separately,	  
and	  then	  analyzing	  the	  statistics,	  but	  this	  data	  is	  private.	  
==PAGE:49==
Part	  III:	  Results	  &	  Analysis	  
49  
Another	  issue	  to	  consider	  is	  this:	  if	  there	  are	  households	  that	  follow	  irresponsible	  
heating	   procedures	   (e.g.	   by	   leaving	   windows	   open	   or	   by	   leaving	   the	   heat	   on	  
unnecessarily)	  and	  end	  up	  paying	  a	  large	  share	  of	  their	  income	  on	  heating	  bills,	  is	  it	  
still	  a	  matter	  of	  affordability?	  Perhaps	  it	  is	  necessary	  to	  complement	  this	  indicator	  
with	  another	  signifying	  consumer	  awareness,	  in	  order	  to	  present	  a	  complete	  picture	  
of	  the	  situation.	  
ECO1:	  Energy	  Use	  
Intent	  
To	   measure	   the	   total	   energy	   used	   for	   space	   and	   water	   heating	   in	   Albertslund	  
Municipality	  
Issues	  to	  Consider	  
Heating	  uses	  a	  significant	  amount	  of	  energy,	  especially	  in	  colder	  climates	  such	  as	  in	  
Denmark.	   In	   2013,	   the	   energy	   consumed	   for	   heating	   Albertslund’s	   buildings	   was	  
more	   than	   double	   the	   amount	   of	   energy	   needed	   to	   provide	   them	   with	   electricity	  
(Albertslund	   Kommune,	   2015h).	   Due	   to	   Danish	   national	   law,	   all	   district	   heating	  
companies	  have	  been	  tasked	  with	  reducing	  energy	  consumption	  by	  a	  combined	  total	  
of	  around	  4PJ	  per	  year	  (Energi	  Styrelsen,	  2015).	  Reducing	  heating	  consumption	  is	  
possible	  by	  increasing	  the	  efficiency	  of	  buildings	  or	  the	  distribution	  network	  itself	  
(pipes,	  heat	  exchangers	  etc.).	  It	  is	  also	  possible	  by	  influencing	  consumers	  to	  use	  heat	  
more	   responsibly.	   To	   tackle	   these	   issue,	   it	   is	   necessary	   to	   look	   at	   reducing	   the	  
overall	  heating	  consumption	  of	  the	  city.	  
Technical	  Description	  
ECO1	   Total	  degree-­‐day	  corrected	  (DDC)1	  energy	  used	  for	  space	  and	  water	  heating	  
in	  Albertslund	  Municipality	  in	  GWh	  
Measuring	  Method	  
The	   data	   needed	   to	   calculate	   this	   indicator	   are	   the	   total	   DDC	   energy	   used	   for	  
district	  heating,	  the	  total	  energy	  used	  for	  oil	  heating,	  and	  the	  total	  energy	  used	  
for	  gas	  heating.	  The	  indicator	  can	  be	  calculated	  by	  adding	  the	  three	  values.	  
Use	  
This	   indicator	   is	   most	   useful	   when	   comparing	   two	   successive	   years,	   or	   when	  
following	   trends	   over	   a	   period	   of	   years.	   It	   can	   be	   used	   to	   compare	   actual	   annual	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
1	  Degree-­‐day	  corrected	  figures	  are	  adjusted	  for	  climate	  variations	  in	  order	  to	  give	  
values	   that	   are	   independent	   of	   climate	   fluctuations	   in	   different	   years.	   This	   takes	  
place	  by	  decreasing	  the	  actual	  energy	  used	  for	  cold	  years,	  or	  by	  increasing	  the	  actual	  
heat	   energy	   used	   in	   hot	   years.	   The	   degree-­‐day	   figure	   is	   calculated	   by	   the	   Danish	  
Meteorological	  Institute	  (Danish	  Energy	  Agency,	  2014a).	  
==PAGE:50==
Part	  III:	  Results	  &	  Analysis	  
50  
energy	  savings	  with	  national	  guidelines	  and	  savings	  targets.	  Albertslund	  Forsyning	  
is	  legally	  required	  to	  calculate	  this	  indicator	  to	  present	  to	  the	  Danish	  Energy	  Agency.	  
Limitations	  
The	  value	  given	  by	  this	  indicator	  is	  not	  very	  useful	  when	  observed	  by	  itself.	  It	  only	  
comes	  into	  perspective	  when	  compared	  with	  another	  similarly	  sized	  city,	  or	  with	  
itself	  in	  other	  years.	  One	  big	  limitation	  is	  that	  there	  is	  some	  heat	  energy	  provided	  by	  
heat	   pumps	   in	   Albertslund,	   but	   the	   data	   for	   these	   heat	   sources	   is	   not	   available.	  
However,	  the	  heat	  supplied	  by	  these	  sources	  is	  almost	  negligible	  when	  looking	  at	  
the	   system	   as	   a	   whole.	   As	   these	   heat	   sources	   become	   more	   significant,	   it	   is	  
important	  to	  include	  them	  in	  the	  total.	  	  
ECO2:	  Heating	  Intensity	  
Intent	  
To	  monitor	  heat	  consumption	  in	  Albertslund	  Municipality	  per	  area	  or	  consumer	  
Issues	  to	  Consider	  
Looking	  at	  the	  overall	  heat	  energy	  used	  in	  Albertslund	  is	  necessary	  to	  reduce	  the	  
energy	   used	   in	   the	   municipality,	   but	   this	   does	   not	   give	   a	   complete	   picture	   of	   its	  
consumption.	   It	   is	   also	   useful	   to	   break	   the	   issue	   down	   further	   by	   looking	   at	   heat	  
intensity.	  Heat	  intensity	  measures	  the	  heat	  consumption	  per	  unit	  area,	  and	  in	  this	  
way	   can	   be	   considered	   to	   be	   analogous	   to	   heating	   efficiency.	   Lower	   heating	  
intensities	  signify	  more	  efficient	  heating	  practices.	  
Lowering	   heating	   intensities	   would	   result	   in	   more	   affordable	   heating	   for	  
Albertslund’s	   residents	   and	   businesses.	   It	   would	   also	   make	   securing	   energy	   for	  
heating	  the	  municipality	  easier,	  since	  it	  relies	  on	  a	  smaller	  amount.	  And	  of	  course,	  as	  
long	   as	   energy	   generation	   has	   some	   associated	   negative	   environmental	   effects,	  
using	  less	  energy	  means	  lower	  environmental	  impacts.	  
Technical	  Description	  
This	  indicator	  consists	  of	  two	  measures:	  
ECO2.1	  
Household	  Heating	  Intensity:	  Heating	  energy	  usage	  per	  square	  meter	  
for	  residential	  buildings	  in	  Albertslund	  
ECO2.2	  
Commercial	  Heating	  Intensity:	  Heating	  energy	  usage	  per	  square	  meter	  
for	  commercial	  buildings	  in	  Albertslund	  
Measuring	  Method	  
The	  data	  needed	  to	  calculate	  the	  two	  indicators	  are	  the	  total	  degree-­‐day-­‐corrected	  
(DDC)	  energy	  consumption	  for	  each	  sector,	  and	  the	  total	  indoor	  heated	  area	  of	  
their	  buildings.	  The	  degree-­‐day-­‐corrected	  consumption	  has	  been	  chosen	  over	  the	  
raw	  consumption	  data	  because	  it	  is	  more	  appropriate	  for	  comparison	  and	  tracking	  
over	  the	  years.	  This	  is	  because	  it	  accounts	  for	  changes	  in	  the	  weather,	  and	  so	  it	  is	  
==PAGE:51==
Part	  III:	  Results	  &	  Analysis	  
51  
possible	   to	   compare	   a	   cold	   year	   with	   a	   warm	   one	   for	   example	   using	   the	   same	  
method.	  The	  indicator	  is	  measured	  by	  dividing	  the	  DDC	  energy	  consumption	  by	  the	  
heated	  area	  and	  convert	  the	  result	  to	  kWh	  /	  m2.	  
Use	  
These	  two	  indicators	  provide	  an	  aggregated	  view	  of	  the	  heat	  efficiency	  of	  buildings	  
in	   Albertslund.	   The	   measures	   obtained	   can	   be	   compared	   against	   standards	   of	  
building	   energy	   efficiency	   standards	   (such	   as	   the	   ones	   in	   Figure	   3	   in	   the	  
introduction),	   to	   give	   an	   overall	   classification	   for	   the	   municipality’s	   buildings.	  
However,	   this	   method	   is	   not	   exact	   since	   the	   number	   obtained	   is	   affected	   by	   the	  
efficiency	  of	  the	  distribution	  system,	  as	  well	  as	  other	  factors.	  A	  more	  accurate	  way	  to	  
use	   this	   indicator	   would	   be	   to	   compare	   it	   to	   itself	   through	   the	   years	   to	   monitor	  
changes	  in	  Albertslund’s	  heat	  efficiency.	  
Limitations	  
This	  indicator	  is	  quite	  general,	  and	  so	  it	  presents	  a	  good	  overview	  of	  Albertslund’s	  
energy	  intensity,	  but	  this	  generalness	  is	  also	  the	  cause	  of	  this	  indicator’s	  limitations.	  
Since	  it	  provides	  an	  overall	  measure	  of	  intensity,	  the	  indicator	  would	  not	  highlight	  
specific	  houses	  or	  districts	  that	  have	  relatively	  high	  energy	  intensities.	  Perhaps	  it	  is	  
a	  good	  idea	  to	  complement	  this	  indicator	  with	  another	  that	  reveals	  neighborhoods	  
with	  the	  highest	  energy	  intensities	  in	  order	  to	  highlight	  them	  for	  future	  renovation	  
projects.	  
Another	   shortcoming	   is	   that	   this	   indicator	   is	   aggregated	   for	   space	   and	   water	  
heating.	  Maybe	  splitting	  it	  up	  into	  two	  different	  indicators	  for	  each	  type	  of	  heating	  
would	  reveal	  patterns	  that	  could	  be	  addressed	  to	  increase	  the	  system’s	  efficiency.	  
But	  at	  this	  point	  of	  time,	  there	  is	  no	  data	  available	  to	  make	  that	  possible.	  
ECO3:	  Supply	  Efficiency	  
Intent	  
To	  measure	  the	  efficiency	  of	  Albertslund’s	  district	  heating	  distribution	  system.	  This	  
indicator	  does	  not	  consider	  losses	  in	  previous	  steps	  of	  the	  energy	  supply	  chain.	  (e.g.	  
transmission	  by	  Veks).	  
Issues	  to	  Consider	  
Albertslund	   Forsyning	   is	   spearheading	   several	   initiatives	   that	   aim	   to	   improve	   its	  
distribution	  system’s	  efficiency.	  These	  include	  replacing	  certain	  portions	  of	  the	  pipe	  
network	  to	  use	  low-­‐temperature	  heating.	  In	  one	  case,	  such	  an	  initiative	  resulted	  in	  
almost	   a	   50%	   increase	   in	   efficiency,	   from	   59%	   to	   87%	   (Danish	   Energy	   Agency,	  
2014b).	  The	  savings	  that	  could	  be	  achieved	  by	  implementing	  such	  an	  initiative	  are	  
quite	   significant.	   Another	   initiative	   by	   Albertslund	   Forsyning	   is	   the	   updating	   of	  
some	  of	  the	  heat	  exchangers.	  This	  would	  also	  improve	  their	  network’s	  efficiency.	  
==PAGE:52==
Part	  III:	  Results	  &	  Analysis	  
52  
Reducing	  energy	  losses	  during	  the	  distribution	  process	  is	  quite	  important	  because	  it	  
results	   in	   lower	   energy	   requirements,	   more	   effective	   use	   of	   resources	   and	  
reductions	  of	  environmental	  impacts.	  
Technical	  Description	  
ECO3	   Ratio	  of	  consumed	  district	  heating	  energy	  to	  supplied	  district	  heating	  energy	  
Measuring	  Method	  
The	  efficiency	  of	  a	  system	  is	  measured	  by	  dividing	  the	  total	  output	  of	  a	  system	  by	  its	  
input.	   The	   input	   of	   Albertslund’s	   district	   heating	   system	   is	   the	   amount	   of	   heat	  
purchased	   from	   Veks,	   while	   the	   output	   is	   the	   total	   amount	   of	   heat	   sold	   to	  
Albertslund	   Forsyning’s	   customers,	   in	   addition	   to	   the	   amount	   of	   heat	   they	  
consume	  themselves.	  
Use	  
This	  indicator	  is	  mostly	  useful	  for	  the	  transmission	  company,	  and	  not	  so	  much	  for	  
the	  other	  stakeholders.	  The	  company	  can	  use	  it	  to	  monitor	  the	  impacts	  of	  certain	  
initiatives	   from	   the	   perspective	   of	   the	   entire	   system.	   They	   can	   also	   use	   it	   to	   set	  
efficiency	  targets.	  
Limitations	  
The	   main	   limitation	   of	   this	   indicator	   is	   that	   it	   looks	   at	   the	   system	   as	   a	   whole.	   It	  
cannot	   pinpoint	   certain	   segments	   of	   the	   distribution	   networks	   that	   less	   or	   more	  
efficient	   than	   the	   average.	   Another	   issue	   is	   that	   it	   is	   difficult	   to	   trace	   back	   any	  
improvements	   in	   efficiency	   to	   the	   changes	   that	   caused	   them.	   For	   example,	   if	   the	  
system	   efficiency	   improved	   by	   5%	   in	   one	   year,	   is	   it	   because	   of	   new	   low-­‐	  
temperature	  heating,	  new	  heat	  exchangers,	  or	  the	  repair	  of	  a	  certain	  segment	  of	  the	  
network?	  This	  indicator	  would	  not	  be	  able	  to	  answer	  that	  question.	  
ECO4:	  Energy	  Diversification	  
Intent	  
To	   give	   an	   overview	   of	   the	   diversification	   of	   energy	   sources	   for	   Albertslund’s	  
heating	  by	  observing	  the	  share	  from	  renewable	  and	  local	  sources.	  
Issues	  to	  Consider	  
The	  definition	  of	  a	  sustainable	  heating	  system	  for	  Albertslund	  developed	  during	  this	  
report	  maintains	  that	  it	  depends	  on	  local,	  renewable	  energy	  sources.	  Local	  energy	  
includes	  any	  type	  of	  energy	  generated	  within	  Albertslund’s	  municipal	  border,	  such	  
as	  solar	  energy	  or	  geothermal	  energy.	  Renewable	  energy	  includes	  combustible	  (e.g.	  
straw,	   wooden	   pellets,	   waste)	   and	   non-­‐combustible	   (e.g.	   solar,	   wind,	   geothermal)	  
renewables.	  Increasing	  the	  share	  of	  renewable	  energy	  goes	  hand-­‐in-­‐hand	  with	  the	  
transition,	  as	  carbon	  fuel	  sources	  should	  be	  replaced	  with	  renewable	  fuel	  sources.	  
The	  main	  goal	  of	  the	  transition	  is	  to	  utilize	  non-­‐carbon	  energy	  sources,	  but	  replacing	  
==PAGE:53==
Part	  III:	  Results	  &	  Analysis	  
53  
carbon	   fuel	   sources	   with	   other	   exhaustible	   sources	   is	   not	   sustainable.	   The	   first	  
indicator	  tracks	  the	  share	  of	  renewables,	  and	  by	  aiming	  for	  this	  indicator	  to	  reach	  
100%	  as	  well,	  implementers	  can	  ensure	  that	  the	  system’s	  transition	  is	  sustainable.	  
Meanwhile,	  increasing	  the	  share	  of	  local	  energy	  is	  not	  a	  priority	  in	  the	  transition.	  
This	  option	  is	  solely	  pursued	  when	  heating	  buildings	  that	  don’t	  have	  access	  to	  the	  
district	  heating	  system.	  It	  could	  potentially	  become	  more	  important	  as	  the	  system	  
gets	  closer	  to	  reaching	  its	  current	  targets.	  
The	   issue	   of	   energy	   diversification	   is	   important	   for	   sustainable	   development	   as	  
depending	   on	   renewable,	   local	   sources	   of	   energy	   promotes	   environmental	  
sustainability	  and	  improves	  economic	  self-­‐sufficiency.	  
Technical	  Description	  
ECO	  4.1	  
Non-­‐carbon	   energy	   share	   of	   heating:	   Energy	   generated	   from	   CO2	  
neutral	  fuels	  as	  a	  share	  of	  total	  energy	  produced	  
ECO	  4.2	  
Renewable	   energy	   share	   of	   heating:	   Energy	   generated	   from	   non-­‐
combustible	   and	   combustible	   renewable	   sources	   as	   a	   share	   of	   total	   energy	  
consumed/produced.	  
Measuring	  Method	  
The	  two	  indicators	  are	  calculated	  quite	  similarly.	  For	  both,	  it	  is	  necessary	  to	  start	  by	  
finding	   the	   energy	   share	   of	   each	   resource	   in	   the	   heat	   supply.	   Then,	   each	  
resource	  is	  classified	  as	  non-­‐carbon	  or	  carbon-­‐containing,	  and	  renewable	  or	  non-­‐
renewable.	   Finally,	   the	   shares	   of	   non-­‐carbon	   resources	   are	   added	   to	   obtain	   the	  
measurement	   for	   the	   first	   indicator,	   and	   the	   shares	   of	   renewable	   resources	   are	  
added	  to	  obtain	  the	  second	  indicator.	  
Use	  
The	   Danish	   National	   Government	   has	   set	   2035	   to	   be	   the	   year	   when	   100%	   of	   the	  
energy	   used	   for	   heating	   and	   electricity	   comes	   from	   renewable	   sources.	   The	  
implementers	  of	  the	  transition	  can	  use	  indicator	  ECO	  4.2	  to	  meet	  these	  targets	  on	  
schedule,	   or	   ahead	   of	   it.	   ECO	   4.1	   can	   be	   used	   to	   pursue	   the	   municipal	   goals	   of	  
carbon-­‐neutrality	  by	  2025.	  
Limitations	  
The	   main	   issue	   with	   the	   two	   indicators	   is	   that	   they	   depend	   on	   each	   other	   to	   be	  
effective.	  A	  high	  measurement	  for	  ECO	  4.1	  implies	  sustainability	  in	  the	  system,	  but	  
this	   could	   be	   at	   the	   cost	   of	   resources	   being	   non-­‐renewable.	   Meanwhile,	   ECO	   4.2	  
aggregates	  combustible	  and	  non-­‐combustible	  renewable	  energy.	  Many	  would	  argue	  
that	  using	  solar	  energy	  is	  more	  environmentally	  sustainable	  than	  burning	  carbon	  
containing	  waste,	  for	  example.	  The	  two	  indicators	  together	  give	  a	  clear	  picture	  of	  
energy	  diversification,	  but	  could	  be	  misleading	  on	  their	  own.	  
==PAGE:54==
Part	  III:	  Results	  &	  Analysis	  
54  
ECO5:	  Energy	  Security	  
Intent	  
To	  measure	  the	  share	  of	  heat	  consumed	  in	  Alberstlund	  that	  originates	  from	  inside	  
Denmark	  
Issues	  to	  Consider	  
95%	  of	  wooden	  pellets,	  a	  renewable	  source,	  are	  imported	  from	  outside	  the	  country	  
(Danish	  Energy	  Agency,	  2014a).	  It	  is	  transported	  by	  trucks,	  ships,	  trains	  and	  other	  
vehicles,	  which	  depend	  on	  fossil	  fuels.	  From	  one	  perspective,	  depending	  on	  national	  
energy	  sources	  guarantees	  that	  they	  originate	  from	  a	  closer	  source	  physically,	  and	  
so	  fewer	  resources	  are	  used	  for	  transportation.	  From	  another	  angle,	  depending	  on	  
nationally	  produced	  energy	  increases	  energy	  security	  because	  of	  rising	  oil	  prices,	  
and	  because	  of	  the	  resistance	  to	  political	  factors	  that	  it	  brings.	  	  
Technical	  Description	  
ECO5	   Nonimported	   energy	   as	   a	   share	   of	   total	   energy	   consumed	   for	   heating	   in	  
Albertslund	  
Measuring	  Method	  
First,	   it	   is	   necessary	   to	   obtain	   the	   energy	   share	   of	   each	   resource	   in	   the	   heat	  
supply.	   The	   next	   piece	   of	   data	   to	   obtain	   is	   the	   share	   of	   each	   resource	   that	   is	  
produced	   in	   Denmark.	   The	   indicator	   can	   be	   measured	   by	   taking	   the	   weighted	  
average	  of	  the	  production	  shares	  with	  respect	  to	  the	  resource	  shares.	  
Use	  
The	  results	  of	  this	  indicator	  are	  useful	  because	  they	  show	  progress	  towards	  or	  away	  
from	  the	  utilization	  of	  nationally	  produced	  energy.	  But	  the	  measuring	  method	  itself	  
is	   also	   useful.	   By	   looking	   at	   the	   fuel	   resources	   individually	   and	   analyzing	   the	  
percentage	  of	  each	  resource	  that	  is	  nationally	  produced,	  it	  becomes	  apparent	  which	  
resources	  should	  be	  utilized	  more	  or	  less	  for	  this	  aim.	  For	  example,	  there	  is	  a	  trend	  
of	   increasingly	   utilizing	   wooden	   pellets,	   but	   since	   only	   5%	   of	   this	   resource	   is	  
produced	  in	  Denmark,	  it	  is	  unlikely	  that	  this	  initiative	  will	  increase	  self-­‐sufficiency.	  
Limitations	  
The	   method	   used	   for	   measuring	   this	   indicator	   uses	   national	   statistics,	   and	   not	  
figures	   for	   the	   Avedøre	   and	   VF	   plants	   (where	   Albertslund’s	   heat	   energy	   supply	  
comes).	  It	  does	  not	  trace	  Albertslund’s	  heat	  energy	  and	  exactly	  calculate	  how	  much	  
of	  it	  is	  imported.	  However,	  it	  does	  provide	  an	  indication	  of	  energy	  security	  based	  on	  
the	  types	  of	  sources	  that	  are	  used	  and	  where	  they	  come	  from	  in	  general.	  Another	  
limitation	  presented	  by	  this	  method	  is	  that	  it	  equates	  national	  production	  of	  energy	  
with	  energy	  security,	  but	  it	  is	  not	  so	  straightforward.	  A	  complete	  risk	  analysis	  would	  
present	  a	  more	  inclusive	  view	  of	  this	  issue,	  but	  it	  is	  very	  difficult	  to	  compress	  it	  into	  
one	  indicator.	  
==PAGE:55==
Part	  III:	  Results	  &	  Analysis	  
55  
ENV	  1:	  Climate	  Change	  
Intent	  
To	  quantify	  the	  greenhouse	  gases	  emitted	  by	  Albertslund	  for	  heating	  	  
Issues	  to	  Consider	  
This	   indicator	   is	   one	   of	   the	   most	   important	   indicators	   to	   use	   in	   managing	   the	  
transition	  for	  several	  reasons.	  The	  first	  reason	  is	  that	  is	  closely	  tied	  to	  the	  central	  
goal	  of	  the	  transition,	  which	  is	  achieving	  carbon	  neutrality.	  Another	  reason	  is	  that	  
climate	   change	   extremely	   relevant	   to	   three	   equity	   principles	   of	   sustainability:	  
intergenerational,	  geographical	  and	  interspecies	  equity.	  
During	   the	   previous	   century,	   the	   Earth’s	   temperature	   rose	   by	   0.6°C,	   and	   there	   is	  
growing	   evidence	   that	   most	   of	   this	   increase	   can	   be	   traced	   back	   to	   increasing	  
amounts	  of	  greenhouse	  gases	  being	  released	  into	  the	  atmosphere(IAEA	  et	  al.,	  2005).	  
If	   unmitigated,	   global	   warming	   has	   many	   severe	   repercussions	   such	   as	   severe	  
weather	  and	  sea-­‐level	  rise,	  which	  threatens	  coastal	  cities	  and	  has	  the	  potential	  of	  
displacing	  millions,	  if	  not	  billions	  of	  people	  (IAEA	  et	  al.,	  2005;	  UN-­‐HABITAT,	  2012).	  	  
Technical	  Description	  
ENV1.1	  
GHG	  emissions	  per	  unit	  of	  energy	  consumed	  
ENV1.2	  
GHG	  emissions	  per	  capita	  
Measuring	  Method	  
The	  first	  indicator	  is	  found	  by	  adding	  the	  CO2	  equivalents	  of	  all	  greenhouse	  gas	  
emissions	  produced	  during	  heat	  production	  for	  Albertslund	  per	  unit	  energy	  
produced.	  The	  second	  indicator	  is	  calculated	  by	  converting	  the	  first	  indicator	  to	  the	  
appropriate	  units.	  The	  conversion	  rate	  is	  found	  by	  dividing	  the	  total	  heat	  energy	  
consumed	  by	  Albertslund	  by	  its	  population.	  
Use	  
The	  first	  indicator	  is	  more	  technical	  and	  measures	  the	  ‘environmental	  efficiency’	  of	  
energy	  consumption	  for	  heat.	  The	  second	  indicator	  does	  not	  convey	  this	  information	  
as	  accurately,	  but	  it	  is	  better	  at	  communicating	  it	  to	  Albertslund’s	  residents.	  Seeing	  
how	   many	   kilograms	   or	   tons	   of	   carbon	   are	   released	   for	   their	   heating	   every	   year	  
makes	   the	   information	   more	   interesting	   and	   relevant.	   Tracking	   this	   indicator	  
through	  the	  transition	  is	  also	  a	  way	  of	  quantifying	  its	  benefits.	  
Limitations	  
The	   two	   indicators	   measure	   the	   quantity	   of	   greenhouse	   gas	   emissions,	   but	   these	  
measurements	  are	  hard	  to	  interpret	  because	  they	  are	  difficult	  to	  relate	  to	  the	  actual	  
changes	  to	  the	  climate	  that	  will	  occur,	  and	  their	  consequent	  effects.	  	  
==PAGE:56==
Part	  III:	  Results	  &	  Analysis	  
56  
ENV2:	  Local	  Air	  Pollution	  
Intent	  
To	  quantify	  the	  air	  pollutants	  emitted	  by	  Albertslund	  for	  heating	  
Issues	  to	  Consider	  
When	  considering	  the	  negative	  environmental	  effects	  of	  heating,	  it	  is	  necessary	  to	  
observe	  the	  global,	  as	  well	  as	  the	  local	  consequences.	  The	  combustion	  of	  fossil	  fuels	  
leads	   to	   ambient	   urban	   air	   pollution,	   and	   so	   tracking	   the	   emissions	   of	   such	  
pollutants	   and	   limiting	   them	   is	   a	   way	   of	   controlling	   these	   local	   negative	  
environmental	   and	   social	   consequences.	   There	   are	   four	   major	   impacts	   of	   air	  
pollutants	  (IAEA	  et	  al.,	  2005)	  ,	  they	  are:	  
• The	  acidification	  of	  soil	  and	  water	  
• The	  damage	  to	  buildings	  sensitive	  to	  these	  acidifying	  substances.	  
• The	  formation	  of	  tropospheric	  ozone	  from	  so-­‐called	  ozone	  precursors	  (e.g.	  
VOCs,	  NOx	  and	  CO)	  
• 	  The	   direct	   effects	   on	   human	   health	   and	   ecosystems	   (e.g.	   through	   high	  
atmospheric	  concentrations	  of	  particulates	  and	  VOCs)	  
Technical	  Description	  
ENV	  2.1	  
Total	  air	  pollutant	  emissions	  per	  unit	  of	  energy	  consumed	  
ENV	  2.2	  
Total	  air	  pollutant	  emissions	  per	  capita	  
Measuring	  Method	  
To	   calculate	   the	   first	   indicator,	   we	   need	   to	   gather	   the	   data	   for	   air	   pollutant	  
emissions	   during	   energy	   production	   for	   Albertslund’s	   heat.	  There	  are	  six	  air	  
pollutants	  that	  are	  considered	  during	  this	  calculation,	  and	  these	  are	  commonly	  used	  
in	  setting	  air	  quality	  standards	  (USEPA,	  2014).	  They	  are	  particulate	  matter,	  ground-­‐
level	  ozone	  (VOCs),	  carbon	  monoxide,	  sulfur	  oxides,	  nitrogen	  oxides,	  and	  lead.	  The	  
first	  indicator	  is	  calculated	  by	  adding	  the	  emissions	  of	  all	  six	  common	  air	  pollutants.	  
The	   second	   indicator	   is	   calculated	   by	   converting	   the	   first	   indicator	   to	   the	   right	  
amount.	  The	  conversion	  rate	  is	  found	  by	  dividing	  the	  total	  heat	  energy	  consumed	  
by	  Albertslund	  by	  its	  population.	  
Use	  
This	  indicator	  can	  be	  used	  to	  communicate	  progress	  in	  reducing	  local	  air	  pollutants,	  
and	  to	  set	  goals	  and	  limits	  for	  the	  rate	  of	  air	  pollutant	  emissions	  caused	  by	  heating.	  
Tracking	   this	   indicator	   through	   the	   transition	   is	   also	   a	   way	   of	   quantifying	   its	  
benefits	  
==PAGE:57==
Part	  III:	  Results	  &	  Analysis	  
57  
Limitations	  
Similarly	   to	   the	   previous	   indicator,	   the	   main	   limitation	   is	   that	   it	   is	   hard	   to	  
understand	   the	   information	   that	   it	   is	   conveying.	   How	   harmful	   is	   500g	   of	   air	  
pollutants?	  Perhaps	  this	  indicator	  can	  be	  complemented	  with	  a	  figure	  that	  is	  easier	  
to	  understand,	  such	  as	  the	  increased	  cost	  of	  healthcare	  the	  emissions	  are	  expected	  
to	  cause,	  or	  the	  value	  of	  damage	  to	  buildings.	  	  
Another	   limitation	   to	   this	   indicator	   is	   in	   its	   measuring	   method.	   The	   indicator	   is	  
calculated	   by	   simply	   adding	   the	   amounts	   of	   each	   pollutant,	   but	   they	   are	   not	   all	  
equally	  harmful;	  300g	  of	  lead	  could	  be	  much	  more	  harmful	  to	  human	  health	  than	  
300g	  of	  particulate	  matter.	  The	  problem	  is	  that	  there	  is	  no	  standard	  way	  of	  weighing	  
air	  pollutants	  (such	  as	  how	  greenhouse	  gases	  are	  weighed	  according	  to	  their	  CO2	  
equivalents).	  
	  
	  
==PAGE:58==
Part	  III:	  Results	  &	  Analysis	  
58  
7.	  Measurement	  
This	  section	  follows	  the	  measuring	  method	  prescribed	  in	  the	  description	  sheets	  to	  
go	   through	   the	   calculation	   of	   all	   indicators	   in	   order	   for	   the	   year	   2014.	   The	   two	  
indicators	  SOC	  2	  and	  ECO	  5	  are	  not	  calculated	  because	  the	  required	  data	  has	  not	  yet	  
been	  released	  for	  the	  year	  2014.	  
SOC1:	  Share	  of	  buildings	  with	  district	  heating	  
The	  first	  step	  is	  to	  count	  the	  total	  number	  of	  buildings	  in	  Albertslund.	  This	  has	  been	  
done	   using	   an	   online	   GIS	   tool	   (Albertslund	   Kommune,	   2015f)	   that	   Albertslund	  
municipality	   provides	   publicly.	   Using	   the	   tool’s	   “Bygningsflader”	   function,	   the	  
number	  of	  buildings	  was	  found	  to	  be	  12,427	  (See	  figure	  9).	  
	  
Figure	  9:	  GIS	  Count	  of	  Albertslund's	  buildings	  (Albertslund	  Kommune,	  2015f)	  
Next,	   it	   is	   necessary	   to	   find	   the	   number	   of	   buildings	   with	   no	   access	   to	   district	  
heating.	  There	  are	  three	  areas	  with	  no	  access	  to	  district	  heating:	  Risby,	  Herstedøster	  
Landsby	   and	   Herstedøster	   Villaby.	   In	   addition,	   there	   are	   a	   number	   of	   scattered	  
==PAGE:59==
Part	  III:	  Results	  &	  Analysis	  
59  
buildings	   that	   are	   found	   in	   Albertslund’s	   forests	   and	   rural	   areas.	   The	   number	   of	  
buildings	  in	  the	  three	  residential	  buildings	  are	  known	  and	  they	  are	  39,	  108	  and	  320	  
respectively	  (Albertslund	  Kommune,	  2015d,	  2015e,	  2015g).	  On	  the	  other	  hand,	  the	  
number	  of	  scattered	  buildings	  can	  be	  counted	  using	  the	  satellite	  map,	  and	  through	  
this	  way,	  it	  is	  found	  to	  be	  71.	  And	  so,	  the	  total	  number	  of	  buildings	  with	  access	  to	  
district	  heating	  is:	  
12427  –   39 + 108 + 320 + 71 =   𝟏𝟏, 𝟖𝟖𝟗	  
	  
This	   means	   that	   the	   percentage	   of	   buildings	   in	   Albertslund	   that	   utilize	   district	  
heating	  is:	  
11889 ÷ 12,427×100% = 𝟗𝟓. 𝟔𝟕%	  
	  
	  
	  
Figure	  10:	  Areas	  without	  district	  heating	  (Albertslund	  Kommune,	  2015f)	  
==PAGE:60==
Part	  III:	  Results	  &	  Analysis	  
60  
SOC2:	  Share	  of	  household	  income	  spent	  on	  heating	  
This	  indicator	  cannot	  be	  calculated	  at	  the	  moment,	  because	  income	  data	  for	  2014	  
has	   not	   yet	   been	   released	   by	   Statistics	   Denmark.	   For	   a	   sample	   calculation	   of	   this	  
indicator,	  refer	  to	  Appendix	  A.	  
ECO	  1:	  Total	  heat	  consumed	  by	  users	  
This	   indicator	   is	   already	   measured	   by	   Albertslund	   Forsyning,	   and	   is	   published	  
annually	  on	  their	  Green	  Accounts	  website.	  For	  2014,	  the	  DDC	  heat	  consumption	  was	  
measured	  to	  be	  299,548	  MWh	  (Albertslund	  Kommune,	  2015i)	  
	  
ECO	  2.1:	  Residential	  heat	  use	  per	  m2	  
This	  indicator	  can	  be	  measured	  by	  dividing	  the	  total	  energy	  use	  by	  the	  total	  heated	  
area.	  The	  data	  for	  DDC	  household	  energy	  consumption	  for	  heat	  are	  obtained	  from	  
Albertslund’s	  green	  accounts	  (Albertslund	  Kommune,	  2015c)	  while	  the	  values	  for	  
heated	  area	  for	  commercial	  and	  residential	  buildings	  are	  obtained	  from	  Albertslund	  
Forsyning’s	   database	   on	   consumer	   consumption	   and	   are	   not	   publicly	   available.	   A	  
sample	  of	  the	  database	  is	  shown	  in	  figure	  11	  below.	  
	  
Figure	  11:	  Sample	  of	  Albertslund's	  Forsyning's	  database	  on	  consumer	  consumption	  
(translated	  from	  N.	  Hansen,	  personal	  communication,	  May	  27,	  2015)	  
==PAGE:61==
Part	  III:	  Results	  &	  Analysis	  
61  
The	   total	   residential	   heated	   area	   can	   be	   determined	   by	   adding	   all	   of	   the	   heated	  
areas	   of	   residential	   households	   in	   the	   database.	   It	   is	   equal	   to	   1,105,066	   m2	   (N.	  
Hansen,	  personal	  communication,	  May	  27,	  2015).	  Therefore,	  
𝐻𝑜𝑢𝑠𝑒ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑑  𝐻𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔  𝐼𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑦
= 𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙  𝐷𝐷𝐶  𝑅𝑒𝑠𝑖𝑑𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑎𝑙  𝐸𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑦  𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑢𝑚𝑝𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛
÷ 𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙  ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑  𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑎  𝑜𝑓  ℎ𝑜𝑢𝑠𝑒ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑑𝑠=   148,007 ÷ 1,105,066
= 134  𝑘𝑊ℎ/𝑚!	  
ECO	  2.2:	  Commercial	  heat	  use	  per	  m2	  
Following	   the	   same	   approach	   as	   ECO2.1,	   the	   total	   DDC	   Commercial	   Energy	  
Consumption	   is	   1161,71MWh	   (Albertslund	   Kommune,	   2015c)	   while	   the	   total	  
commercial	   heated	   area	   is	   found	   to	   be	   869270	   m2	   (N.	   Hansen,	   personal	  
communication,	  May	  27,	  2015).	  	  And	  so,	  
𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑚𝑒𝑟𝑐𝑖𝑎𝑙  𝐻𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔  𝐼𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑦
= 𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙  𝐷𝐷𝐶  𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑚𝑒𝑟𝑐𝑖𝑎𝑙  𝐸𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑦  𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑢𝑚𝑝𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛
÷ 𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙  𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑜𝑜𝑟    ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔  𝑜𝑓  𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑚𝑒𝑟𝑐𝑖𝑎𝑙  𝑏𝑢𝑖𝑙𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑠	  
𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑚𝑒𝑟𝑐𝑖𝑎𝑙  𝐻𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔  𝐼𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑦=  115,143   ÷ 869,270 = 132  𝑘𝑊ℎ/𝑚!	  
ECO	  3:	  Efficiency	  of	  energy	  distribution	  
According	  to	  Niels	  Hansen	  from	  Albertslund	  Kommune	  (personal	  communication,	  
May	   26,	   2015),	   In	   2014,	   Albertslund	   Forsyning	   purchased	   264,859	   MWh	   of	   heat	  
from	  Veks,	  and	  sold	  212,307	  MWh	  to	  its	  customers.	  They	  also	  consumed	  1,893MWh	  
of	   heat	   themselves.	   Therefore	   the	   efficiency	   of	   the	   system	   can	   be	   calculated	   as	  
follows:	  
𝐸𝑓𝑓𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑦= 𝐻𝑒𝑎𝑡  𝑂𝑢𝑡𝑝𝑢𝑡
𝐻𝑒𝑎𝑡  𝐼𝑛𝑝𝑢𝑡×100%	  
𝐻𝑒𝑎𝑡  𝑂𝑢𝑡𝑝𝑢𝑡=   212,307𝑀𝑊ℎ+ 1,893𝑀𝑊ℎ= 214,200𝑀𝑊ℎ	  	  
𝐸𝑓𝑓𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑦   =  214,200𝑀𝑊ℎ
264,859𝑀𝑊ℎ×100% = 𝟖𝟎. 𝟖𝟕%	  
Using	   this	   method,	   the	   efficiency	   of	   Albertslund’s	   district	   heating	   system	   in	   2014	  
was	  80.87%.  
==PAGE:62==
Part	  III:	  Results	  &	  Analysis	  
62  
ECO	  4.1:	  Non-­‐carbon	  energy	  share	  in	  heating	  
To	   find	   the	   non-­‐carbon	   share	   of	   consumed	   heat	   energy,	   we	   must	   first	   know	   the	  
energy	   share	   of	   each	   resource	   in	   2014.	   This	   data	   can	   be	   found	   in	   Vek’s	   annual	  
carbon	  declaration	  report	  (Veks,	  2015).	  Each	  resource	  is	  classified	  as	  a	  non-­‐carbon	  
or	  a	  carbon-­‐containing	  resource.	  Then	  the	  shares	  of	  all	  non-­‐carbon	  resources	  are	  
added	  to	  find	  the	  final	  measure	  of	  this	  indicator.	  
Table	  6:	  Addition	  of	  non-­‐carbon	  resource	  shares	  
Resource	  
Non-­‐Carbon	  
Energy	  Share	  
Coal	  
No	  
17.83%	  
Oil	  
No	  
1.56%	  
Natural	  Gas	  
No	  
15.81%	  
Waste	  (fossil)	  
No	  
11.43%	  
Waste	  (fossil	  free)	  
Yes	  
19.47%	  
Wood	  pellets	  
Yes	  
31.34%	  
Straw	  
Yes	  
2.18%	  
Geothermal	  
Yes	  
0.37%	  
Total	  Non-­‐Carbon	  
53.36%	  
ECO	  4.2:	  Renewable	  energy	  share	  of	  heating	  
To	  calculate	  this	  indicator,	  the	  same	  dataset	  as	  ECO4.1	  can	  be	  used.	  In	  this	  case,	  each	  
resource	  is	  classified	  as	  renewable	  or	  non-­‐renewable.	  Afterwards,	  the	  shares	  of	  all	  
renewable	  resources	  are	  added	  to	  find	  the	  final	  measure	  of	  this	  indicator.	  
Table	  7:	  Addition	  of	  renewable	  resource	  shares	  
Resource	  
Renewable	  
Energy	  Share	  
Coal	  
No	  
17.83%	  
Oil	  
No	  
1.56%	  
Natural	  Gas	  
No	  
15.81%	  
Waste	  (fossil)	  
Yes	  
11.43%	  
Waste	  (fossil	  free)	  
Yes	  
19.47%	  
Wood	  pellets	  
Yes	  
31.34%	  
Straw	  
Yes	  
2.18%	  
Geothermal	  
Yes	  
0.37%	  
Renewable	  
64.79%	  
ECO	  5:	  Share	  of	  nonimported	  energy	  
This	   indicator	   cannot	   be	   calculated	   at	   the	   moment	   because	   the	   data	   for	   national	  
energy	  imports	  and	  exports	  has	  not	  yet	  been	  released	  by	  the	  Danish	  Energy	  Agency.	  
For	  a	  sample	  calculation	  of	  this	  indicator,	  refer	  to	  Appendix	  A.	  
==PAGE:63==
Part	  III:	  Results	  &	  Analysis	  
63  
ENV	  1.1:	  Ratio	  of	  GHG	  emissions	  to	  units	  of	  energy	  consumed	  
This	  data	  is	  already	  calculated	  by	  Veks	  specifically	  for	  Albertslund’s	  heat	  supply,	  and	  
is	  available	  in	  their	  annual	  carbon	  declaration	  report	  (Veks,	  2015).	  For	  2014,	  it	  was	  
equal	  to	  105kg	  CO2	  equivalents	  per	  MWh	  produced.	  However,	  this	  value	  needs	  to	  be	  
converted	  in	  order	  to	  look	  at	  the	  emissions	  for	  each	  unit	  of	  energy	  consumed.	  This	  
can	  be	  done	  by	  dividing	  by	  the	  efficiency	  of	  the	  distribution	  system:	  
	  
105 kg  CO2  equivalents
MWh  sold
×
1𝑀𝑊ℎ  𝑠𝑜𝑙𝑑
80.87%  𝑀𝑊ℎ  𝑠𝑢𝑝𝑝𝑙𝑖𝑒𝑑=   130  kg  CO2  equivalents/  MWh	  
ENV	  1.2:	  GHG	  emissions	  per	  capita	  
To	  find	  the	  GHG	  emissions	  per	  capita	  we	  can	  simply	  take	  the	  results	  from	  ENV1.1,	  
and	  convert	  it	  to	  the	  correct	  units.	  This	  means	  that	  we	  need	  the	  actual	  total	  heat	  
energy	  consumed	  in	  Albertslund,	  and	  the	  population	  of	  Albertslund.	  The	  first	  value	  
is	  found	  in	  the	  green	  accounts,	  and	  is	  equal	  to	  288,055MWh	  (Albertslund	  Kommune,	  
2015i).	  The	  population	  of	  Albertslund	  on	  the	  first	  day	  of	  2014	  can	  be	  found	  on	  the	  
Danish	   national	   statistics	   database,	   and	   is	   equal	   to	   27,728	   people	   (Danmarks	  
Statistik,	  2015c).	  
Therefore,	  
GHG  emissions  per  capita   kg  CO2  equivalents
person
=    GHG  emissions
MWh
  ×  Total  Energy  Consumed   MWh
÷   Population   persons
= 130   kg  CO2  equivalents
MWh
  ×  299,548   ÷   27,728  persons
= 1,400  kg  CO2  equivalents/capita  	  
ENV	  2.1:	  Ratio	  of	  air	  pollutant	  emissions	  to	  units	  of	  energy	  consumed	  
First,	  the	  emission	  rates	  of	  each	  of	  the	  six	  air	  pollutants	  need	  to	  be	  found.	  These	  
values	   are	   calculated	   by	   Veks	   specifically	   for	   Albertslund’s	   heat	   supply,	   and	   are	  
found	  in	  their	  annual	  carbon	  declaration	  report	  (Veks,	  2015).	  Afterwards,	  the	  values	  
are	  simply	  summed	  up	  to	  give	  us	  the	  total	  amount	  of	  air	  pollutants	  emitted	  per	  unit	  
energy	  produced.	  
==PAGE:64==
Part	  III:	  Results	  &	  Analysis	  
64  
Table	  8:	  Addition	  of	  Air	  Pollutant	  Emissions	  
Air Pollutant 
Emissions	  (g/MWh)	  
SO2  
15	  
NOx  
109	  
CO  
112	  
VOCs 
7	  
Particulate Matter 
10	  
Lead 
0	  
Total 
253	  
	  
Next,	   to	   obtain	   the	   ratio	   of	   pollutant	   emissions	   to	   units	   of	   energy	   consumed,	   we	  
must	  divide	  by	  the	  efficiency	  of	  the	  distribution	  system.	  
253
𝑔
𝑀𝑊ℎ  𝑠𝑜𝑙𝑑×
1  𝑀𝑊ℎ  𝑠𝑜𝑙𝑑
80.87%  𝑀𝑊ℎ  𝑠𝑢𝑝𝑝𝑙𝑖𝑒𝑑= 313𝑔/𝑀𝑊ℎ	  
ENV	  2.2:	  Air	  pollutant	  emissions	  per	  capita	  
Following	  the	  same	  approach	  as	  when	  calculating	  ENV	  1.2,	  	  
Air  pollutant  emissions  per  capita  
g
person
=  
  g
MWh  ×  Total  Energy  Consumed   MWh ÷   Population   persons
= 313  
g
MWh  ×  299,548    MWh ÷   27,728  persons
= 3,380  g  air  pollutant  emissions/capita  	  
	  
	  
==PAGE:65==
Part	  III:	  Results	  &	  Analysis	  
65  
Table	  9:	  Summary	  of	  2014	  measurements	  for	  all	  final	  indicators	  
Domain	   Issue	  
#	  
Indicator	  
Measurement	  
SOC	  
Accessibility	  
1	  
Share	  of	  buildings	  with	  district	  
heating	  
95.67%	  
SOC	  
Affordability	  
2	  
Share	  of	  household	  income	  spent	  
on	  heating	  
Data	  not	  
available	  
ECO	  
Energy	  Use	  
1	  
Total	  heat	  consumed	  by	  users	  
300	  GWh	  
ECO	  
Heating	  
Intensity	  
2.1	  
Residential	  heat	  use	  per	  m2	  
134	  kWh	  /	  m2	  
2.2	  
Commercial	  heat	  use	  per	  m2	  
132	  kWh	  /	  m2	  
ECO	  
Supply	  
Efficiency	  
3	  
Efficiency	  of	  energy	  distribution	  
80.87%	  
ECO	  
Energy	  
Diversification	  
4.1	  
Non-­‐carbon	  energy	  share	  in	  
heating	  
53.36%	  
4.2	  
Renewable	  energy	  share	  of	  
heating	  
64.79%	  
ECO	  
Energy	  
Security	  
5	  
Share	  of	  nonimported	  energy	  
Data	  not	  
available	  
ENV	  
Climate	  
Change	  
1.1	   Ratio	  of	  GHG	  emissions	  to	  units	  
of	  energy	  consumed	  
130	  kg/MWh	  
1.2	   GHG	  emissions	  per	  capita	  
1,400	  
kg/capita	  
ENV	  
Air	  Quality	  
2.1	   Ratio	  of	  air	  pollutant	  emissions	  
to	  units	  of	  energy	  consumed	  
313	  g/MWh	  
2.2	   Air	  pollutant	  emissions	  per	  
capita	  
3,380	  g/capita	  
8.	  Results	  
The	   first	   step	   in	   the	   analysis	   is	   to	   compare	   indicator	   measurements	   with	   the	  
previous	  year’s	  results	  and	  attempt	  to	  explain	  trends.	  This	  comparison	  is	  shown	  in	  
Table	   10,	   where	   movements	   away	   from	   sustainability	   are	   colored	   in	   red,	  
movements	   towards	   sustainability	   are	   colored	   in	   green,	   and	   neutral	   trends	   are	  
colored	  in	  orange.	  Some	  trends	  are	  simply	  stated	  in	  the	  table,	  but	  some	  of	  them	  can	  
be	  interpreted	  in	  different	  ways.	  These	  trends	  will	  be	  analyzed	  in	  this	  section,	  while	  
making	   an	   attempt	   to	   identify	   noteworthy	   statistics,	   and	   linkages	   between	  
indicators.	  
==PAGE:66==
Part	  III:	  Results	  &	  Analysis	  
66  
Trends	  
Table	  10:	  Comparison	  of	  results	  from	  2013	  and	  2014	  
Domain	  
#	  
Indicator	  
2013	  
2014	  
Trend	  
SOC	  
1	  
Share	  of	  buildings	  
with	  district	  heating	  
95.67%	  
95.67%	  
0%	  
SOC	  
2	  
Share	  of	  household	  
income	  spent	  on	  
heating	  
4.16%	  
–	  
–	  
ECO	  
1	  
Total	  heat	  consumed	  
by	  users	  
303	  GWh	  
300	  GWh	  
-­‐3	  GWh	  
ECO	  
2.1	  
Residential	  heat	  use	  
per	  m2	  
134	  
kWh	  /	  m2	  
134	  
kWh	  /	  m2	  
0	  	  
kWh	  /	  m2	  
2.2	  
Commercial	  heat	  use	  
per	  m2	  
134	  
kWh	  /	  m2	  
132	  
kWh	  /	  m2	  
-­‐2	  	  
kWh/m2	  
ECO	  
3	  
Efficiency	  of	  energy	  
distribution	  
81.91%	  
80.87%	  
-­‐1.04%	  
ECO	  
4.1	  
Non-­‐carbon	  energy	  
share	  in	  heating	  
46.07%	  
53.36%	  
+7.33%	  
4.2	  
Renewable	  energy	  
share	  of	  heating	  
52.92%	  
64.79%	  
+11.87%	  
ECO	  
5	  
Share	  of	  nonimported	  
energy	  
57.74%	  
–	  
–	  
ENV	  
1.1	  
Ratio	  of	  GHG	  
emissions	  to	  units	  of	  
energy	  consumed	  
139	  
kg/MWh	  
130	  
kg/MWh	  
-­‐9	  	  
kg/MWh	  
1.2	  
GHG	  emissions	  per	  
capita	  
1,440	  
kg/capita	  
1,400	  
kg/capita	  
-­‐40	  
kg/capita	  
ENV	  
2.1	  
Ratio	  of	  air	  pollutant	  
emissions	  to	  units	  of	  
energy	  consumed	  
311	  
g/MWh	  
313	  
g/MWh	  
+2	  	  
g/MWh	  
2.2	  
Air	  pollutant	  
emissions	  per	  capita	  
3220	  
g/capita	  
3,380	  
g/capita	  
+160	  
g/capita	  
	  
	  
	  
==PAGE:67==
Part	  III:	  Results	  &	  Analysis	  
67  
SOC	   1	   demonstrated	   a	   neutral	   trend,	   which	   implies	   that	   there	   has	   been	   no	  
improvement	   in	   providing	   more	   houses	   with	   a	   sustainable	   source	   of	   heating.	  
However,	  this	  is	  not	  the	  case.	  Between	  2013	  and	  2014,	  some	  houses	  have	  started	  
utilizing	  heat	  pumps	  (N.	  Hansen,	  personal	  communication,	  May	  26,	  2015),	  but	  this	  
change	   is	   not	   reflected	   by	   the	   indicator.	   Since	   SOC	   1	   failed	   to	   show	   this	   trend,	   it	  
should	  be	  revised	  to	  also	  include	  buildings	  utilizing	  sustainable	  heat	  sources	  besides	  
the	  district	  heating	  system.	  
ECO	   2.1	   also	   demonstrated	   a	   neutral	   trend,	   but	   this	   is	   for	   another	   reason.	   The	  
attempt	   to	   reduce	   residential	   heat	   intensity	   has	   been	   through	   the	   housing	  
renovations	  that	  are	  happening	  in	  Albertslund.	  However,	  these	  houses	  have	  begun	  
to	  be	  occupied	  towards	  the	  end	  of	  2014,	  and	  so	  the	  effects	  of	  these	  renovations	  will	  
become	   more	   obvious	   in	   the	   next	   few	   years.	   Although	   this	   indicator	   was	   not	  
informative	   during	   this	   analysis,	   it	   should	   be	   useful	   in	   the	   next	   coming	   years	   as	  
residents	  began	  to	  occupy	  the	  renovated	  houses	  and	  the	  effects	  of	  the	  renovation	  
becomes	  apparent.	  
ECO	  1	  displayed	  a	  decrease	  of	  3	  GWh,	  which	  is	  a	  trend	  towards	  sustainability.	  One	  
question	   that	   can	   be	   asked	   when	   looking	   at	   this	   decrease	   is:	   How	   much	   of	   this	  
decrease	  is	  because	  of	  renovations,	  and	  how	  much	  is	  from	  consumer	  behavior?	  It	  
would	  be	  extremely	  useful	  to	  have	  the	  ‘consumer	  awareness’	  indicator	  as	  part	  of	  the	  
final	  set	  in	  order	  to	  better	  understand	  this	  indicator,	  along	  with	  ECO	  2.1,	  2.2	  and	  
SOC	   2.	   This	   indicator	   was	   excluded	   because	   it	   was	   infeasible.	   However,	   the	  
information	   revealed	   by	   this	   indicator	   would	   be	   extremely	   useful,	   and	   so	   it	   is	  
recommended	  to	  examine	  ways	  of	  calculating	  this	  indicator.	  
ECO	   3	   displayed	   a	   negative	   trend	   from	   2013	   and	   2014.	   Looking	   at	   this	   decrease	  
superficially,	  it	  appears	  as	  if	  the	  heat	  distribution	  system	  is	  somehow	  performing	  
less	  effectively,	  but	  this	  is	  not	  the	  case.	  To	  understand	  this	  trend,	  we	  can	  examine	  
Table	  11	  below.	  The	  heat	  lost	  in	  the	  distribution	  pipes	  remains	  relative	  to	  the	  total	  
amount	   of	   heat	   transmitted	   through	   the	   pipes	   (around	   15%)	   Since	   less	   heat	   is	  
transmitted,	  less	  heat	  is	  lost.	  However,	  the	  heat	  lost	  in	  the	  exchange	  stations	  from	  
transmission	  to	  distribution	  is	  constant	  at	  3,030	  MWh	  and	  the	  heat	  lost	  from	  de-­‐
oxidation	  also	  remains	  constant	  at	  7,900MWh.	  The	  presence	  of	  these	  ‘fixed	  costs’	  
means	  that	  the	  system’s	  efficiency	  will	  decrease	  as	  it	  transmits	  less	  heat–a	  reverse	  
economies	  of	  scale	  situation	  of	  sorts.	  The	  only	  way	  to	  stabilize	  or	  improve	  efficiency	  
along	  with	  the	  decrease	  in	  energy	  consumption	  is	  to	  continually	  invest	  in	  renovating	  
the	  pipes	  or	  the	  exchange	  stations,	  and	  implementing	  low-­‐temperature	  heating.	  
Table	   11:	   Heat	   losses	   in	   distribution	   network	   (adapted	   from	   N.	   Hansen,	   personal	  
communication,	  May	  26,	  2015)	  
	  
2013	  
2014	  
Heat	  lost	  in	  exchange	  stations	  
3,030MWh	  
3,030	  MWh	  
Heat	  loss	  from	  de-­‐oxidation	  
7,900	  MWh	  
7,900	  MWh	  
Heat	  lost	  in	  the	  distribution	  pipes	   46,025	  MWh	   39,729	  MWh	  
==PAGE:68==
Part	  III:	  Results	  &	  Analysis	  
68  
ECO	  4.1	  and	  ECO	  4.2	  both	  increased,	  signifying	  a	  movement	  towards	  sustainability.	  
The	  share	  of	  non-­‐carbon	  energy	  in	  heating	  increased	  by	  over	  15%	  in	  one	  year,	  while	  
the	  share	  of	  renewable	  energy	  increased	  by	  over	  20%.	  This	  trend	  also	  corresponds	  
with	  ENV	  1.1	  and	  ENV	  1.2	  decreasing,	  as	  less	  greenhouse	  gases	  are	  being	  emitted.	  
There	  is	  a	  general	  trend	  of	  moving	  away	  from	  carbon-­‐based,	  GHG	  emitting	  fuels	  to	  
renewables,	   and	   these	   statistics	   confirm	   it.	   From	   2013	   to	   2014,	   greenhouse	   gas	  
emissions	  decreased	  by	  40kg	  for	  each	  person	  in	  Albertslund.	  
ENV	   2.1	   and	   ENV	   2.2	   both	   increased,	   signifying	   a	   movement	   away	   from	  
sustainability.	  However	  this	  increase	  is	  minimal	  as	  the	  two	  indicators	  increased	  by	  
.06%	  and	  5%	  respectively.	  
Overall,	  comparing	  the	  measurements	  from	  2013	  and	  2014	  reveals	  that	  there	  is	  in	  
fact,	  an	  overall	  movement	  towards	  sustainability.	  This	  is	  because	  the	  positive	  trends	  
easily	  outweigh	  the	  negative	  trends,	  as	  explained	  in	  the	  above	  analysis.	  
Now	  that	  the	  trends	  between	  2013	  and	  2014	  are	  analyzed,	  it	  is	  possible	  to	  highlight	  
indicators	  that	  were	  not	  useful,	  and	  ones	  that	  could	  have	  been	  if	  they	  were	  included.	  	  
Outcomes	  
Changes	  to	  SIs	  
• Change	  SOC	  1	  to	  include	  the	  share	  of	  buildings	  supplied	  by	  district	  heating	  
and	  other	  sustainable	  heat	  sources.	  
• Examine	   possibility	   of	   finding	   data	   for	   local	   heat	   generation	   through	   heat	  
pumps,	  in	  order	  to	  measure	  ‘Local	  energy	  share	  in	  heating’	  indicator.	  
• Examine	  methods	  to	  measure	  ‘consumer	  awareness’	  indicator	  
It	  is	  also	  possible	  to	  come	  up	  with	  marketable	  messages	  that	  can	  communicate	  the	  
progress	  that	  is	  being	  made	  towards	  the	  sustainability	  goals.	  These	  can	  also	  be	  used	  
to	  build	  support	  for	  new	  sustainability	  initiatives.	  
Takeaway	  Messages	  
• Non-­‐carbon	  energy	  share	  of	  heating	  increased	  by	  over	  15%	  in	  one	  year.	  Now,	  
over	  half	  of	  all	  heating	  energy	  comes	  from	  non-­‐carbon	  sources	  
• Renewable	  energy	  share	  of	  heating	  increased	  by	  over	  20%	  last	  year.	  Now,	  
almost	  two-­‐thirds	  of	  all	  heating	  energy	  comes	  from	  renewable	  energy	  
• GHG	  emissions	  decreased	  by	  40kg	  for	  each	  person	  in	  Albertslund.	  
• In	   order	   to	   maintain	   the	   heating	   system’s	   current	   efficiency,	   it	   has	   to	   be	  
continually	  improved.	  
The	  last	  step	  of	  the	  analysis	  is	  for	  stakeholders	  to	  observe	  this	  analysis	  themselves	  
and	   to	   set	   goals	   and	   thresholds	   for	   the	   indicators.	   Afterwards,	   they	   should	   plan	  
affirmative	   actions	   that	   ensure	   that	   unacceptable	   trends	   are	   corrected,	   while	  
positive	   trends	   are	   strengthened.	   This	   was	   not	   accomplished	   during	   this	   study.	  
However,	   what	   this	   study	   achieved	   is	   assembling	   useful	   information	   for	   policy	  
makers	   and	   stakeholders	   to	   utilize	   in	   devising	   the	   means	   of	   arriving	   at	   a	   more	  
sustainable	  
future.
==PAGE:69==
69	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
Part	  IV	  
Discussion	  
	  
==PAGE:70==
Part	  IV:	  Discussion	  
70  
Discussion	  
Implementing	  Sustainability	  
From	  Components	  to	  Indicators	  
The	   SIA	   process	   is	   an	   eight-­‐step	   process	   where,	   theoretically,	   the	   results	   of	   each	  
step	   are	   based	   on	   the	   preceding	   step,	   forming	   a	   logical	   chain	   of	   information.	  
However,	  the	  practicalities	  of	  any	  such	  process	  are	  often	  quite	  different.	  It	  is	  quite	  
easy	  to	  get	  lost	  in	  the	  process,	  and	  end	  up	  with	  a	  set	  of	  indicators	  that	  is	  inconsistent	  
with	  the	  project’s	  sustainability	  goals.	  The	  second	  discussion	  point	  in	  this	  section	  is	  
to	  approach	  the	  final	  set	  of	  sustainability	  indicators	  in	  relation	  to	  the	  components	  of	  
a	  sustainable	  heating	  system	  as	  defined	  during	  the	  thesis.	  
The	  definition	  of	  a	  sustainable	  heating	  system	  used	  for	  the	  SIA	  was	  developed	  with	  
Agenda	  Center	  Albertslund	  and	  involves	  six	  components:	  
1) Minimizes	  energy	  usage	  
2) Utilizes	  local	  renewable	  energy	  	  
3) Imports	  renewable	  energy	  	  
4) Minimizes	  heat	  waste	  	  
5) Recycles	  local	  waste	  energy	  
6) Serves	  a	  community	  with	  a	  sustainable	  consumer	  culture	  
Some	  of	  these	  components	  were	  directly	  addressed	  in	  the	  final	  set	  of	  indicators.	  The	  
first	  component	  is	  addressed	  through	  indicators	  ECO	  1	  (Energy	  Use),	  2.1	  and	  2.2	  
(Heating	   Intensity),	   which	   directly	   aim	   to	   minimize	   energy	   usage.	   The	   third	  
component	  was	  addressed	  directly	  in	  indicator	  ECO	  4.2	  (Renewable	  Energy	  Share	  of	  
Heating),	   while	   the	   fourth	   component	   is	   addressed	   through	   ECO	   3	   (Supply	  
Efficiency).	  The	  second	  and	  sixth	  components	  were	  not	  addressed,	  but	  their	  absence	  
was	  noted	  during	  the	  process.	  The	  analysis	  included	  a	  recommendation	  of	  adding	  
indicators	   measuring	   ‘Local	   energy	   share	   in	   heating’	   and	   ‘consumer	   awareness’,	  
which	   would	   directly	   address	   these	   components.	   Finally,	   the	   fifth	   component,	  
recycling	  local	  waste	  energy	  is	  not	  addressed	  by	  the	  indicators,	  and	  its	  absence	  was	  
not	  noted	  while	  analyzing	  the	  results.	  This	  observation	  reveals	  a	  flaw	  with	  in	  the	  SIA	  
process:	   definitions	   of	   sustainability	   are	   used	   to	   inspire	   stakeholders	   while	  
developing	   indicators,	   but	   then	   they	   are	   prone	   to	   be	   set	   aside	   for	   the	   rest	   of	   the	  
analysis.	  	  
To	  fix	  this	  flaw,	  should	  the	  final	  set	  of	  indicators	  be	  forced	  to	  fit	  the	  components	  of	  
the	  sustainable	  heating	  system?	  Imagine	  if	  such	  a	  mechanism	  was	  added	  to	  the	  SIA.	  
The	   SIA	   process	   would	   become	   iterative	   instead	   of	   linear,	   since	   indicators	   would	  
have	  to	  be	  redeveloped	  and	  readjusted	  until	  they	  fit	  the	  set	  of	  components	  in	  the	  
definition.	   Taking	   the	   example	   of	   the	   fifth	   component	   shown	   above,	   an	   indicator	  
measuring	   this	   component	   was	   not	   even	   suggested	   during	   the	   project	   since	   no	  
efforts	  for	  collecting	  waste	  heat	  currently	  exist	  in	  Albertslund.	  However,	  following	  
the	  adjusted	  SIA	  would	  have	  resulted	  in	  a	  final	  set	  of	  SIs	  that	  includes	  an	  indicator	  
measuring	   recovered	   local	   waste,	   which	   would	   essentially	   sit	   at	   ‘0’,	   until	   a	   heat	  
==PAGE:71==
Part	  IV:	  Discussion	  
71  
recycling	   initiative	   is	   launched.	   Although	   the	   measurement	   is	   not	   useful,	   it	   still	  
serves	  to	  remind	  stakeholders	  of	  the	  possibility	  of	  launching	  such	  an	  initiative.	  So,	  
should	  the	  SIA	  be	  adjusted	  to	  include	  a	  mechanism	  for	  adjusting	  indicators	  to	  fit	  the	  
definition	  of	  sustainability?	  In	  retrospect,	  I	  argue	  that	  the	  best	  way	  to	  alter	  it	  would	  
be	   to	   change	   the	   relationship	   between	   developing	   sustainability	   indicators	   and	  
finalizing	  them	  to	  allow	  going	  back	  and	  forth	  between	  the	  two	  steps	  (see	  Figure	  12).	  
After	  a	  ‘final’	  set	  of	  SIs	  is	  reached,	  it	  can	  be	  discussed	  by	  stakeholders	  in	  workshops,	  
and	  compared	  to	  the	  components	  of	  the	  sustainable	  heating	  system	  to	  see	  if	  more	  
indicators	  can	  be	  developed	  that	  would	  result	  in	  a	  more	  comprehensive	  set	  of	  SIs.	  
This	   process	   is	   repeated	   until	   the	   set	   of	   SIs	   is	   actually	   finalized	   and	   deemed	  
acceptable	  by	  all	  stakeholders.	  
	  
Figure	  12:	  Modification	  to	  SIA	  
SIs	  and	  Sustainable	  Development	  
The	   previous	   discussion	   point	   was	   to	   compare	   the	   final	   set	   of	   SIs	   to	   the	   idea	   of	  
sustainability	  developed	  during	  the	  project	  with	  ACA.	  But	  how	  do	  the	  final	  SIs	  relate	  
to	   more	   general	   definitions	   of	   sustainability?	   Do	   the	   final	   indicators	   actually	  
measure	  sustainable	  development?	  This	  discussion	  point	  aims	  to	  compare	  the	  final	  
SIs	   with	   more	   widely	   used	   depiction	   of	   sustainability,	   namely	   the	   five	   equity	  
principles	  of	  sustainable	  development	  suggested	  by	  Haughton	  (1999).	  
1) Intergenerational	   Equity:	   This	   principle	   is	   reflected	   in	   indicators	   ECO	   4	  
(Energy	  Diversification)	  and	  ENV	  1	  (Climate	  Change).	  Relying	  on	  renewable	  
energy	   decreases	   the	   dependence	   on	   nonrenewable	   resources,	   which	   are	  
preserved	   for	   future	   generations.	   In	   addition,	   it	   also	   aids	   in	   reducing	   GHG	  
emissions,	  which	  cause	  climate	  change–one	  of	  the	  biggest	  threats	  to	  future	  
generations.	  
2) Intragenerational	   Equity:	   This	   principle	   is	   addressed	   in	   indicators	   SOC	   1	  
(Accessibility)	  and	  SOC	  2	  (Affordability).	  The	  two	  indicators	  aim	  to	  ensure	  
that	  energy	  is	  provided	  to	  everyone,	  and	  at	  a	  fair	  price.	  
3) Geographical	  Equity:	  The	  main	  way	  in	  which	  the	  heating	  system	  has	  an	  effect	  
outside	   of	   Albertslund	   is	   its	   emission	   of	   GHGs,	   which	   cause	   worldwide	  
climate	  change.	  This	  principle	  is	  addressed	  in	  ENV	  1	  (Climate	  Change),	  which	  
measures	  the	  system’s	  GHG	  emissions.	  
4) Procedural	   Equity:	   This	   principle	   concerns	   the	   process	   through	   which	  
indicators	   are	   developed,	   and	   not	   the	   indicators	   themselves.	   The	   method	  
used	   for	   this	   report	   involved	   as	   many	   stakeholders	   as	   possible.	   However,	  
==PAGE:72==
Part	  IV:	  Discussion	  
72  
there	   was	   no	   open	   public	   participation.	   Albertslund’s	   residents	   were	  
represented	   by	   ACA,	   but	   many	   would	   argue	   that	   they	   should	   be	   able	   to	  
represent	  themselves.	  
5) Inter-­‐species	   Equity:	   This	   principle	   was	   addressed	   implicitly	   in	   the	  
environmental	   dimension	   since	   the	   only	   way	   the	   heating	   system	   affects	  
wildlife	  is	  through	  the	  emission	  of	  air	  pollutants	  and	  GHGs.	  
After	  this	  brief	  analysis,	  it	  becomes	  apparent	  that	  the	  sustainability	  indicators	  were	  
quite	   comprehensive	   in	   their	   coverage	   of	   equity	   issues	   relating	   to	   sustainable	  
development.	  However,	  the	  method	  of	  developing	  them	  was	  questionable	  in	  regards	  
to	  its	  fulfillment	  of	  procedural	  equity.	  Of	  course,	  the	  SIA	  is	  not	  a	  static	  process.	  It	  
should	  continually	  evolve	  along	  with	  the	  transition	  according	  to	  the	  stakeholders’	  
perceptions.	  This	  brings	  up	  several	  questions	  regarding	  how	  stakeholders	  should	  be	  
involved	  in	  the	  process.	  
Involving	  Stakeholders	  
The	   most	   common	   approach	   to	   gathering	   input	   from	   stakeholders	   is	   through	  
workshops,	  which	  aim	  to	  bring	  the	  group	  together	  on	  a	  given	  topic	  and	  to	  rapidly	  
arrive	  at	  a	  joint	  understanding	  (Bell	  &	  Morse,	  2008).	  While	  this	  may	  work	  for	  small	  
groups,	   such	   as	   the	   representatives	   approached	   during	   this	   project,	   it	   would	   not	  
work	  in	  larger	  groups	  involving	  a	  more	  heterogeneous	  group	  of	  stakeholders	  due	  to	  
the	   difficulty	   of	   actually	   reaching	   a	   consensus.	   If	   workshops	   had	   been	   used	   for	  
indicator	   development,	   the	   stakeholders	   would	   have	   individually	   identified	  
potential	  indicators,	  and	  then	  collaborated	  on	  filtering	  out	  invalid	  indicators	  until	  a	  
final	   set	   of	   indicators	   is	   achieved	   that	   is	   acceptable	   for	   all	   of	   them.	   The	   solo	  
approach	   developed	   for	   this	   project	   was	   quite	   different.	   Each	   stakeholder’s	   input	  
was	   collected	   separately	   by	   the	   researcher,	   and	   then	   filtered	   through	   a	  
predetermined	  set	  of	  requirements	  to	  attain	  the	  final	  sustainability	  indicators.	  
Of	  course,	  each	  approach	  has	  its	  benefits	  and	  drawbacks.	  When	  comparing	  the	  two	  
approaches,	   it	   is	   apparent	   that	   workshops	   require	   more	   participation	   from	   the	  
stakeholders	  since	  they	  need	  to	  perform	  more	  activities,	  whereas	  the	  solo	  approach	  
requires	  less	  time	  and	  effort	  from	  them	  (the	  SI	  development	  process	  took	  one	  hour	  
of	  their	  time).	  The	  workshop	  can	  also	  be	  considered	  as	  more	  bottom-­‐up	  compared	  
to	  the	  solo	  approach,	  which	  is	  more	  expert-­‐driven.	  However,	  this	  has	  many	  threats.	  
The	  format	  of	  the	  workshop	  presents	  the	  threat	  of	  it	  being	  dominated	  by	  powerful	  
stakeholders	  (Bell	  &	  Morse,	  2008),	  leading	  to	  group	  outcomes	  that	  actually	  reflect	  
their	   own	   interests.	   The	   solo	   approach	   sidesteps	   this	   issue	   by	   allowing	   all	  
stakeholders	  to	  develop	  SIs	  on	  their	  home	  ground,	  and	  then	  filtering	  them	  out	  as	  
objectively	   as	   possible	   later.	   Another	   threat	   is	   the	   refusal	   of	   stakeholders	   to	  
cooperate	  with	  each	  other	  due	  to	  the	  perceived	  incompatibility	  of	  their	  interests.	  
This	  is	  not	  so	  relevant	  for	  this	  specific	  project,	  but	  it	  could	  be	  a	  possibility	  in	  other	  
contexts.	   Again,	   the	   solo	   approach	   avoids	   this	   issue	   since	   the	   stakeholders	   never	  
have	  to	  face	  each	  other	  while	  developing	  indicators.	  However,	  one	  major	  downfall	  of	  
the	   solo	   approach,	   and	   one	   that	   became	   apparent	   during	   this	   project	   is	   the	   large	  
possibility	   of	   stakeholder	   exclusion.	   Albertslund’s	   Residents	   proposed	   3	   SIs,	   but	  
==PAGE:73==
Part	  IV:	  Discussion	  
73  
none	   of	   them	   were	   included	   in	   the	   final	   list	   of	   indicators.	   This	   must	   give	   them	   a	  
sense	  of	  exclusion	  from	  the	  project	  because,	  although	  their	  input	  was	  noted,	  itwas	  
not	  directly	  utilized	  during	  this	  first	  iteration.	  
The	  solo	  approach	  has	  been	  quite	  successful	  in	  this	  iteration	  of	  the	  SI	  development	  
process	   as	   evidenced	   by	   the	   final	   set	   of	   indicators.	   However,	   I	   believe	   that	  
workshops	   are	   a	   better	   format	   for	   gathering	   stakeholder	   input	   for	   all	   future	  
iterations.	   This	   is	   because	   stakeholders	   will	   have	   to	   discuss	   results	   from	   the	  
previous	  year–	  to	  evaluate	  the	  performance	  of	  indicators,	  to	  monitor	  progress	  and	  
to	   set	   new	   goals.	   It	   is	   impossible	   to	   perform	   these	   tasks	   separately.	   The	   solo	  
approach	   worked	   for	   launching	   off	   this	   project	   because	   the	   first	   iteration	   of	   the	  
analysis	   involved	   introducing	   stakeholders	   to	   sustainability	   indicators	   and	  
demonstrating	   their	   usefulness.	   After	   that,	   workshops	   are	   much	   more	   productive	  
since	  all	  stakeholders	  are	  informed	  about	  the	  process	  and	  realize	  their	  needs.	  
Setting	  Goals	  And	  Achieving	  Them	  
Currently,	  there	  are	  two	  indicators	  that	  are	  used	  by	  Albertslund	  Kommune	  to	  track,	  
and	  communicate	  progress	  towards	  the	  heating	  system’s	  sustainability	  goals.	  These	  
are	   calculated	   every	   year,	   and	   presented	   on	   the	   Green	   Accounts	   website	  
(Albertslund	  Kommune,	  2015h).	  The	  two	  indicators	  are	  energy	  consumption	  and	  CO2	  
emissions.	   The	   indicators	   are	   tracked	   throughout	   the	   years	   to	   show	   how	   they	  
progress	  (see	  Figures	  13	  and	  14).	  The	  first	  indicator	  is	  exactly	  the	  same	  as	  ECO	  1	  
and	  the	  second	  is	  very	  close	  to	  ENV	  1.1	  and	  1.2.	  The	  reason	  these	  two	  indicators	  are	  
used	   is	   because	   they	   can	   be	   used	   to	   track	   the	   two	   biggest	   goals	   for	   Albertslund	  
Forsyning:	  reducing	  energy	  usage,	  and	  reducing	  carbon	  emissions.	  
Relying	  solely	  on	  the	  information	  given	  by	  the	  two	  indicators	  gives	  a	  very	  limited	  
view	   of	   the	   system’s	   progress	   towards	   sustainability;	   one	   that	   ignores	   social	  
sustainability	  
completely,	  
and	  
approaches	  
economic	  
and	  
environmental	  
sustainability	  as	  one-­‐dimensional	  issues.	  The	  indicators	  developed	  during	  this	  study	  
have	   been	   useful	   for	   expanding	   the	   focus	   towards	   other	   facets	   of	   the	   transition.	  
Instead	  of	  focusing	  only	  on	  the	  system’s	  energy	  usage	  and	  its	  carbon	  emissions,	  its	  
affordability	  and	  accessibility	  are	  also	  examined,	  along	  with	  its	  efficiency,	  security,	  
and	  air	  pollutant	  emissions,	  among	  other	  things.	  Widening	  the	  perspective	  in	  this	  
way	  allows	  for	  a	  better	  understanding	  of	  the	  transition.	  It	  expands	  the	  possibilities	  
of	  communicating	  progress,	  and	  highlights	  trends	  that	  could	  have	  previously	  gone	  
unnoticed.	  	  
Another	  way	  these	  indicators	  can	  be	  used	  is	  to	  understand	  what	  needs	  to	  be	  done	  to	  
achieve	   goals,	   and	   plan	   for	   the	   future.	   In	   Figure	   15,	   the	   indicator	   tracking	   CO2	  
emissions	   is	   linearly	   forecasted	   to	   the	   year	   2025	   in	   order	   to	   see	   the	   amount	   of	  
carbon	   reductions	   required	   to	   achieve	   the	   goal	   of	   carbon	   neutrality.	   Using	   this	  
model,	  the	  carbon	  emissions	  from	  heating	  have	  to	  decrease	  by	  2,800	  tons	  per	  year,	  
for	   a	   total	   of	   171,963	   tons.	   Who	   is	   responsible	   for	   these	   reductions?	   And	   what	  
measures	  can	  be	  implemented	  to	  achieve	  them?	  It	  is	  impossible	  to	  plan	  for	  these	  
reductions	  without	  dividing	  them	  into	  distinct	  tasks	  that	  can	  then	  be	  approached	  
individually.	  
==PAGE:74==
Part	  IV:	  Discussion	  
74  
	  
Figure	  13:	  Degree-­‐day	  Corrected	  Energy	  Used	  for	  Heating	  
	  
	  
	  
Figure	  14:	  Carbon	  Dioxide	  Emissions	  from	  Heating	  
	  
0	  
50000	  
100000	  
150000	  
200000	  
250000	  
300000	  
350000	  
400000	  
2006	   2007	   2008	   2009	   2010	   2011	   2012	   2013	   2014	  
DDC	  Energy	  (MWh)	  
Oil	  
Natural	  gas	  
District	  heating	  
0	  
10000	  
20000	  
30000	  
40000	  
50000	  
60000	  
2006	   2007	   2008	   2009	   2010	   2011	   2012	   2013	   2014	  
CO₂	  Emissions	  (tons)	  
Oil	  
Natural	  gas	  
District	  heating	  
==PAGE:75==
Part	  IV:	  Discussion	  
75  
	  
Figure	  15	  Forecasted	  Carbon	  Dioxide	  Emissions	  from	  Heating	  
In	  the	  case	  of	  Albertslund’s	  heating	  system,	  the	  overall	  goal	  of	  carbon	  neutrality	  can	  
be	  divided	  into	  4	  distinct	  tasks.	  They	  are:	  
1. Providing	  buildings	  that	  currently	  use	  oil	  and	  gas	  with	  a	  non-­‐carbon	  source	  
of	  heating	  
2. Using	  100%	  fossil-­‐free	  energy	  for	  district	  heating	  
3. Implementing	  technical	  solutions	  that	  reduce	  energy	  consumption	  
4. Influencing	  consumer	  behavior	  to	  reduce	  consumption	  
By	   identifying	   these	   4	   initiatives,	   it	   is	   now	   possible	   to	   recognize	   which	   actor	   is	  
responsible	  for	  which	  initiative.	  Albertslund	  Municipality	  can	  directly	  address	  tasks	  
1,3	  and	  4,	  while	  task	  2	  should	  be	  addressed	  by	  Veks	  and	  other	  actors	  operating	  at	  
the	  regional	  scale.	  Another	  achievement	  is	  that	  it	  is	  now	  possible	  to	  set	  goals	  for	  
each	   task,	   and	   to	   monitor	   progress	   towards	   these	   goals.	   The	   first	   task	   can	   be	  
monitored	  by	  using	  an	  altered	  version	  of	  SOC	  1	  (Accessibility),	  and	  setting	  the	  target	  
to	  100%.	  The	  second	  task	  can	  directly	  be	  assessed	  using	  indicator	  ECO	  4.1	  (Energy	  
Diversity).	   The	   third	   task	   is	   being	   tackled	   through	   the	   housing	   renovations,	   and	  
through	   improvements	   to	   the	   heating	   system	   such	   as	   the	   introduction	   of	   low-­‐
temperature	   heating.	   These	   initiatives	   can	   be	   assessed	   by	   using	   ECO	   2.1	   and	   2.2	  
(Heat	   Intensity),	   and	   ECO	   3	   (Efficiency).	   The	   fourth	   task,	   influencing	   consumer	  
behavior	   cannot	   be	   managed	   by	   using	   any	   indicators	   included	   in	   the	   final	   set.	  
However,	  one	  of	  the	  finishing	  recommendations	  from	  the	  report	  was	  to	  examine	  the	  
potential	   of	   an	   indicator	   measuring	   consumer	   awareness.	   This	   indicator	   would	  
basically	  compare	  how	  much	  heat	  people	  are	  consuming	  to	  how	  much	  they	  should	  
be	  consuming,	  and	  serves	  as	  a	  metric	  for	  consumer	  behavior.	  
==PAGE:76==
Part	  IV:	  Discussion	  
76  
In	  this	  manner,	  indicators	  are	  useful	  as	  support	  tools	  for	  accomplishing	  objectives.	  
They	  can	  be	  used	  to	  dissect	  organizational	  goals	  into	  manageable	  tasks,	  and	  hence,	  
allow	   actors	   to	   understand	   the	   requirements	   for	   achieving	   their	   goals	   by	  
approaching	  them	  methodically.	  In	  addition,	  they	  provide	  information	  surrounding	  
the	   focused	   target	   of	   a	   transition,	   which	   helps	   stakeholders	   understand	   its	   wider	  
repercussions.	  
Addressing	  Data	  Availability	  
One	  problem	  that	  arose	  during	  the	  project	  is	  the	  issue	  of	  data	  availability.	  Focusing	  
first	  on	  the	  final	  set	  of	  indicators,	  two	  indicators	  could	  not	  be	  calculated	  for	  2014	  
because	  their	  data	  had	  not	  yet	  been	  released:	  SOC	  2	  and	  ECO	  5.	  Due	  to	  their	  absence,	  
the	  final	  analysis	  was	  incomplete.	  There	  are	  several	  options	  to	  pursue	  to	  circumvent	  
this	   issue.	   One	   option	   is	   to	   change	   the	   measuring	   method	   to	   use	   alternative	   data	  
sources.	  For	  example,	  the	  income	  data	  and	  data	  for	  national	  energy	  production	  can	  
be	  forecasted	  from	  previous	  years.	  This	  approach	  damages	  the	  measuring	  method’s	  
integrity	  in	  favor	  of	  following	  a	  more	  suitable	  schedule.	  A	  second	  option	  is	  to	  delay	  
the	  SIA	  process	  until	  the	  missing	  data	  is	  published	  by	  the	  responsible	  organization.	  
However,	   the	   later	   the	   SIA	   is	   conducted,	   the	   less	   relevant	   its	   results	   become	   to	  
stakeholders	   and	   beneficiaries,	   and	   so	   it	   becomes	   more	   difficult	   to	   use	   them	   for	  
communicating	  progress	  or	  launching	  new	  initiatives.	  The	  third	  option	  is	  to	  simply	  
exclude	  the	  indicators	  with	  missing	  data	  from	  the	  final	  set.	  Choosing	  between	  these	  
three	  options	  depends	  on	  many	  factors.	  It	  is	  basically	  an	  optimization	  problem	  with	  
two	  conflicting	  goals:	  	  maximizing	  the	  number	  of	  indicators	  that	  can	  be	  calculated	  
accurately,	  and	  choosing	  a	  time	  of	  analysis	  that	  is	  as	  early	  as	  possible	  in	  the	  year.	  It	  
can	  be	  useful	  to	  summarize	  the	  data	  needed	  for	  each	  indicator	  and	  its	  anticipated	  
time	   of	   publication,	   and	   then	   choose	   an	   appropriate	   time	   to	   conduct	   the	   analysis	  
every	  year.	  For	  example,	  if	  the	  data	  needed	  to	  calculate	  SOC	  2	  will	  be	  released	  in	  one	  
month	  whereas	  the	  data	  for	  ECO	  5	  will	  not	  be	  released	  until	  the	  following	  year,	  it	  
makes	  sense	  to	  wait	  one	  month	  to	  publish	  the	  results	  and	  exclude	  ECO	  5	  as	  a	  final	  
sustainability	  indicator.	  
There	  were	  also	  a	  few	  SIs	  that	  were	  eliminated	  during	  the	  indicator	  development	  
process	   because	   of	   data	   availability	   issues.	   The	   indicators	   ‘Local	   Energy	   Share	   in	  
Heating’	  and	  ‘Economic	  Benefits’	  were	  eliminated	  because	  they	  were	  not	  collectible,	  
while	  ‘User	  Satisfaction’	  and	  ‘User	  Awareness’	  were	  eliminated	  because	  they	  were	  
infeasible.	   The	   elimination	   of	   those	   indicators	   highlighted	   the	   fact	   that	   the	   data	  
needed	  to	  calculate	  them	  was	  not	  available.	  The	  thesis	  project	  did	  not	  only	  make	  use	  
of	   existing	   data,	   it	   also	   revealed	   which	   data	   was	   needed	   to	   gain	   a	   better	  
understanding	  of	  the	  heating	  system.	  
Limitations	  &	  Further	  Work	  
Although	   the	   research	   has	   reached	   its	   aims,	   there	   were	   some	   unavoidable	  
limitations.	  First,	  Albertslund’s	  residents	  and	  businesses	  were	  represented	  by	  one	  
person,	  Mr.	  Povl	  Markussen	  from	  ACA.	  However,	  I	  believe	  that	  it	  is	  impossible	  for	  
one	  person	  to	  represent	  such	  a	  diverse	  group	  of	  stakeholders,	  unless	  he	  is	  elected	  to	  
do	   so.	   I	   believe	   that	   the	   SIA	   process	   would	   have	   been	   more	   well-­‐founded	   if	   this	  
==PAGE:77==
Part	  IV:	  Discussion	  
77  
group	  of	  stakeholders	  had	  more	  representatives;	  at	  least	  one	  for	  the	  residents	  and	  
one	   for	   the	   businesses.	   During	   the	   study,	   it	   was	   difficult	   to	   engage	   such	  
representatives	   who	   were	   interested	   in	   participating.	   The	   second	   limitation	   was	  
that	  the	  participating	  actors	  were	  involved	  during	  the	  initial	  indicator	  development	  
process,	  but	  afterwards,	  they	  were	  not	  brought	  together	  in	  order	  to	  set	  goals	  and	  
thresholds	  for	  the	  indicators.	  One	  of	  the	  main	  benefits	  of	  using	  indicators	  is	  their	  
practicality	   in	   impelling	   change,	   and	   using	   them	   in	   this	   manner	   would	   have	  
strengthened	  the	  results	  of	  the	  study.	  The	  third	  limitation	  was	  the	  fact	  that	  the	  SIA	  
was	  performed	  for	  only	  one	  year,	  and	  this	  is	  because	  of	  the	  time	  frame	  of	  the	  thesis.	  
However,	  the	  SIA	  is	  an	  iterative	  process	  that	  gets	  repeated	  every	  year.	  Essentially,	  it	  
updates	   itself	   every	   year	   and	   evolves	   along	   with	   the	   transition.	   This	   thesis	   only	  
examined	  the	  first	  iteration	  of	  the	  SIA	  and	  so	  it	  was	  impossible	  to	  see	  that	  aspect	  of	  
the	   SIA.	   Indicator	   trends	   also	   become	   more	   apparent	   and	   meaningful	   when	  
observed	  over	  a	  longer	  period	  of	  time.	  
The	  study	  can	  also	  be	  expanded	  in	  a	  couple	  of	  ways.	  First,	  the	  focus	  of	  the	  analysis	  
was	  the	  heating	  system,	  but	  the	  same	  approach	  can	  be	  used	  for	  other	  urban	  systems	  
in	  Albertslund.	  By	  applying	  the	  same	  method	  to	  the	  transport,	  electricity,	  water	  and	  
waste	   systems,	   it	   is	   possible	   to	   create	   a	   network	   of	   indicators	   that	   essentially	  
creates	   a	   comprehensive	   monitoring	   system	   for	   Albertslund.	   The	   second	   way	   in	  
which	  this	  study	  can	  be	  expanded	  is	  by	  applying	  it	  to	  more	  cases.	  A	  good	  starting	  
point	   would	   be	   its	   application	   to	   other	   municipalities	   in	   the	   Green	   Cities	  
Cooperative	  since	  they	  share	  many	  of	  the	  same	  goals.	  If	  the	  same	  indicators	  were	  
measured	   for	   those	   municipalities,	   it	   would	   be	   possible	   to	   compare	   the	   cities’	  
performance	   to	   each	   other	   and	   create	   benchmarks	   to	   assist	   their	   transitions.	   Of	  
course,	  this	  would	  require	  changing	  the	  SIA	  process	  to	  allow	  for	  a	  different	  kind	  of	  
stakeholder	   collaboration,	   which	   would	   result	   in	   standardized	   sustainability	  
indicators,	  but	  this	  would	  not	  be	  too	  difficult	  to	  achieve.	  
	  
	  
==PAGE:78==
Part	  IV:	  Discussion	  
78  
Conclusion	  
In	   this	   thesis,	   a	   method	   was	   devised	   that	   can	   be	   used	   to	   create	   and	   develop	  
sustainability	   indicators.	   This	   method	   was	   successfully	   applied	   to	   the	   case	   of	  
Albertslund’s	  heating	  system	  and	  resulted	  in	  13	  social,	  environmental	  and	  economic	  
indicators	  that,	  together,	  give	  a	  comprehensive	  snapshot	  of	  the	  system’s	  transition	  
towards	   sustainability.	   These	   indicators	   were	   accompanied	   by	   a	   collection	   of	  
description	  sheets,	  which	  serves	  as	  a	  handbook	  of	  sorts	  to	  explain	  how	  to	  measure	  
the	  indicators	  and	  how	  to	  use	  them.	  Using	  these	  indicators	  meant	  approaching	  the	  
heating	  system	  from	  a	  new	  angle,	  and	  discovering	  new	  things	  about	  it.	  Notably,	  it	  
was	  found	  that	  between	  2013	  and	  2014,	  the	  non-­‐carbon	  share	  of	  energy	  used	  for	  
heating	  had	  increased	  by	  16%	  while	  the	  renewable	  energy	  share	  had	  increased	  by	  
22%.	   In	   addition,	   the	   amount	   of	   greenhouses	   gases	   emitted	   for	   heating	   had	  
decreased	   by	   40kg	   for	   each	   person	   in	   Albertslund.	   The	   results	   indicate	   overall	  
progress	  towards	  the	  system’s	  sustainability	  goals.	  
Besides	   their	   usefulness	   in	   analysis,	   sustainability	   indicators	   are	   also	   extremely	  
useful	  tools	  for	  proactive	  planning.	  They	  can	  be	  used	  to	  dissect	  sustainability	  goals	  
into	   manageable	   tasks,	   and	   thereby	   help	   actors	   to	   direct	   their	   efforts.	   This	   thesis	  
project	   involved	   stakeholders	   in	   developing	   indicators.	   It	   can	   be	   expanded	   by	  
bringing	  actors	  and	  stakeholders	  together	  to	  respond	  to	  the	  results	  of	  the	  indicators	  
through	  affirmative	  actions	  that	  aim	  to	  direct	  the	  system	  towards	  its	  sustainability	  
goals.	  
The	   indicators	   developed	   during	   this	   project	   were	   specifically	   developed	   for	  
Albertslund’s	  sustainability	  system.	  If	  the	  same	  approach	  were	  followed	  for	  all	  the	  
urban	   systems	   in	   Albertslund,	   it	   would	   be	   possible	   to	   assess	   the	   municipality’s	  
overall	  attainment	  of	  sustainable	  development,	  and	  to	  manage	  its	  transition	  towards	  
a	   sustainable	   future.	   And	   similarly,	   this	   same	   approach	   can	   be	   applied	   to	   other	  
municipalities	  in	  Denmark	  and	  around	  the	  world.	  
Sustainability	   indicators	   are	   extremely	   useful	   tools	   in	   the	   quest	   for	   sustainable	  
urban	  development.	  They	  are	  flexible,	  and	  can	  be	  applied	  to	  various	  contexts,	  they	  
are	  informative	  as	  they	  explicate	  transitions,	  and	  most	  importantly,	  they	  can	  serve	  
as	  catalysts	  for	  change.	  	  
==PAGE:79==
Bibliography	  
79  
Bibliography	  
Agenda	  Center	  Albertslund.	  (2014).	  Det	  Bæredygtige	  Albertslund	  –	  mulighedernes	  by.	  
Retrieved	  from	  http://www.agendacenter.dk/wp-­‐
content/uploads/2013/10/bda-­‐08-­‐scr.pdf	  
Albertslund	  Kommune.	  (2009).	  Klimaplan	  2009-­‐2015.	  Retrieved	  from	  
http://albertslund.dk/media/169454/Klimaplan2009-­‐2015.pdf	  
Albertslund	  Kommune.	  (2015a).	  Baggrund	  for	  en	  strategiplan	  for	  Albertslund	  
Varmeværk	  2015	  til	  2025.	  Retrieved	  from	  
http://albertslund.dk/media/1222161/pkt-­‐91-­‐strategiplan-­‐for-­‐albertslund-­‐
varmevaerk-­‐2015-­‐til-­‐2025-­‐pixi.pdf	  
Albertslund	  Kommune.	  (2015b).	  Facts	  about	  the	  municipality.	  Retrieved	  March	  21,	  
2015,	  from	  http://albertslund.dk/servicemenu/english/about-­‐albertslund/	  
Albertslund	  Kommune.	  (2015c).	  Heat	  in	  Albertslund.	  Retrieved	  May	  29,	  2015,	  from	  
http://groentregnskab.albertslund.dk/albertslund/varme	  
Albertslund	  Kommune.	  (2015d).	  HERSTEDØSTER	  LANDSBY.	  Retrieved	  May	  29,	  
2015,	  from	  http://groentregnskab.albertslund.dk/boliger/dit-­‐
boligomraade/herstedoester-­‐landsby	  
Albertslund	  Kommune.	  (2015e).	  HERSTEDØSTER	  VILLABY.	  Retrieved	  May	  29,	  2015,	  
from	  http://groentregnskab.albertslund.dk/boliger/dit-­‐
boligomraade/herstedoester-­‐villaby	  
Albertslund	  Kommune.	  (2015f).	  Kortservice.	  Retrieved	  May	  29,	  2015,	  from	  
http://kort.albertslund.dk	  
Albertslund	  Kommune.	  (2015g).	  Risby.	  Retrieved	  April	  14,	  2015,	  from	  
http://groentregnskab.albertslund.dk/boliger/dit-­‐boligomraade/risby	  
Albertslund	  Kommune.	  (2015h).	  TOTAL	  ENERGY	  CONSUMPTION	  AND	  CO₂.	  
Retrieved	  March	  31,	  2015,	  from	  
http://groentregnskab.albertslund.dk/albertslund/varme/co2-­‐udledning	  
Albertslund	  Kommune.	  (2015i).	  Where	  does	  the	  heat	  come	  from?	  Retrieved	  May	  29,	  
2015,	  from	  http://groentregnskab.albertslund.dk/albertslund/varme/hvor-­‐
kommer-­‐varmen-­‐fra	  
Bell,	  S.,	  &	  Morse,	  S.	  (2008).	  Sustainability	  Indicators:	  Measuring	  the	  Immeasurable?	  
(2nd	  ed.).	  London:	  Earthscan.	  
==PAGE:80==
Bibliography	  
80  
Cenergia.	  (2013).	  Report	  on	  organisation	  of	  Solar	  Energy,	  Solar	  Stock	  Exchange	  and	  
PV	  -­‐	  Coop	  in	  Copenhagen	  and	  Salzburg.	  Retrieved	  from	  
http://www.fbbb.dk/Admin/Public/Download.aspx?file=Files/Filer/GSC+D+1.
1.3+Solar+Energy_+Solar+Stock+Exchange+and+PV-­‐
+Coop+in+Copenhagen+and+Salzburg.pdf	  
City	  of	  Copenhagen.	  (2011).	  COPENHAGEN	  Climate	  Adaptation	  Plan.	  Retrieved	  from	  
http://subsite.kk.dk/sitecore/content/Subsites/CityOfCopenhagen/SubsiteFro
ntpage/LivingInCopenhagen/ClimateAndEnvironment/ClimateAdaptation/Cop
enhagenClimateAdaptionPlan.aspx	  
City	  of	  Copenhagen.	  (2012).	  CPH	  2025	  Climate	  Plan.	  Retrieved	  from	  
http://subsite.kk.dk/sitecore/content/Subsites/CityOfCopenhagen/SubsiteFro
ntpage/Business/Growth_and_partnerships/~/media/F5A7EC91E7AC4B0891
F37331642555C4.ashx	  
Connelly,	  S.	  (2007).	  Mapping	  Sustainable	  Development	  as	  a	  Contested	  Concept.	  
Local	  Environment,	  12(August	  2010),	  259–278.	  
doi:10.1080/13549830601183289	  
Danish	  Energy	  Agency.	  (2014a).	  Energy	  Statistics,	  2013.	  Ministry	  of	  Statistics	  and	  
Programme	  Implementation,	  ….	  Retrieved	  from	  
http://www.ens.dk/sites/ens.dk/files/info/tal-­‐kort/statistik-­‐noegletal/aarlig-­‐
energistatistik/energystatistics2013.pdf	  
Danish	  Energy	  Agency.	  (2014b).	  Guidelines	  for	  Low-­‐Temperature	  District	  Heating.	  
Retrieved	  from	  
http://www.danskfjernvarme.dk/~/media/danskfjernvarme/gronenergi/proj
ekter/eudp-­‐lavtemperatur	  fjv/guidelines	  for	  ltdh-­‐final_rev1.pdf	  
Danmarks	  Statistik.	  (2015a).	  AINDK2:	  A-­‐income,	  total	  by	  region,	  unit,	  sex,	  age	  and	  
income	  interval.	  Retrieved	  May	  29,	  2015,	  from	  
www.statistikbanken.dk/AINDK2	  
Danmarks	  Statistik.	  (2015b).	  FAM55N:	  Households	  1.	  January	  by	  municipality,	  type	  
of	  household	  and	  size	  of	  household.	  Retrieved	  May	  29,	  2015,	  from	  
www.statistikbanken.dk/FAM55N	  
Danmarks	  Statistik.	  (2015c).	  FOLK1:	  Population	  at	  the	  first	  day	  of	  the	  quarter	  by	  
municipality,	  sex,	  age,	  marital	  status,	  ancestry,	  country	  of	  origin	  and	  
citizenship.	  Retrieved	  May	  29,	  2015,	  from	  
http://www.statistikbanken.dk/folk1	  
Danmarks	  Statistik.	  (2015d).	  INDKP101:	  People	  by	  region,	  unit,	  sex	  and	  type	  of	  
income.	  Retrieved	  May	  29,	  2015,	  from	  www.statistikbanken.dk/INDKP101	  
==PAGE:81==
Bibliography	  
81  
DBDH.	  (2006).	  The	  installation	  of	  meters.	  Retrieved	  from	  
http://www.fortisbc.com/About/RegulatoryAffairs/GasUtility/NatGasBCUCSu
bmissions/Documents/070508_TGIThermalMeterApplication.pdf	  
Districtenergy.	  (2015).	  DONG	  Energy	  to	  convert	  final	  unit	  at	  Avedøre	  plant	  to	  
biomass.	  Retrieved	  May	  17,	  2015,	  from	  
http://www.districtenergy.org/blog/2015/04/01/dong-­‐energy-­‐to-­‐convert-­‐
final-­‐unit-­‐at-­‐avedøre-­‐plant-­‐to-­‐biomass/	  
Energi	  Styrelsen.	  (2015).	  Information	  til	  net-­‐	  og	  distributionsselskaber.	  Retrieved	  
April	  29,	  2015,	  from	  http://www.ens.dk/forbrug-­‐
besparelser/energiselskabernes-­‐spareindsats/information-­‐net-­‐
distributionsselskaber	  
Green	  Cities.	  (2015).	  Common	  goals.	  Retrieved	  April	  8,	  2015,	  from	  
http://www.greencities.dk/UK/Common-­‐Goals/	  
Haughton,	  G.	  (1999).	  Environmental	  Justice	  and	  the	  Sustainable	  City.	  Journal	  of	  
Planning	  Education	  and	  Research,	  18(3),	  233–243.	  
Innes,	  J.	  (1989).	  Knowledge	  and	  Public	  Policy:	  The	  Search	  for	  Meaningful	  Indicators	  
(2nd	  ed.).	  New	  Brunswick,	  NJ:	  Transaction	  Publishers.	  
International	  Atomic	  Energy	  Agency	  (IAEA),	  United	  Nations	  Department	  of	  
Economic	  and	  Social	  Affairs	  (UNDESA),	  International	  Energy	  Agency	  (IEA),	  
Eurostat,	  &	  European	  Environment	  Agency	  (EEA).	  (2005).	  Energy	  Indicators	  for	  
Sustainable	  Development:	  Guidelines	  and	  Methodologies.	  Vienna.	  
International	  Energy	  Agency.	  (2008).	  World	  Energy	  Outlook.	  Electronics	  and	  Power	  
(Vol.	  23).	  doi:10.1049/ep.1977.0180	  
Keiner,	  M.	  (2006).	  The	  Future	  of	  Sustainability	  (1st	  ed.).	  Springer.	  
Maclaren,	  V.	  W.	  (2007).	  Urban	  Sustainability	  Reporting,	  (March	  2013),	  37–41.	  
McCann,	  P.,	  &	  Acs,	  Z.	  J.	  (2011).	  Globalization:	  Countries,	  Cities	  and	  Multinationals.	  
Regional	  Studies,	  45(927855482),	  17–32.	  doi:10.1080/00343404.2010.505915	  
Nandy,	  S.	  (2012).	  Gaps	  in	  Urban	  Sustainability	  Indicators.	  The	  International	  Journal	  
of	  Environmental,	  Cultural,	  Economic	  and	  Social	  Sustainability,	  7(6).	  
Norden.	  (2011a).	  Albertslund	  in	  Denmark	  wins	  competition	  for	  Nordic	  Energy	  
Municipality	  2011.	  Retrieved	  March	  20,	  2015,	  from	  
http://www.norden.org/en/news-­‐and-­‐events/news/albertslund-­‐in-­‐denmark-­‐
wins-­‐competition-­‐for-­‐nordic-­‐energy-­‐municipality-­‐2011	  
==PAGE:82==
Bibliography	  
82  
Norden.	  (2011b).	  Energy	  efficient	  renovation	  of	  homes.	  Retrieved	  from	  
https://www.norden.org/sv/nordiska-­‐ministerraadet/ministerraad/nordiska-­‐
ministerraadet-­‐foer-­‐naeringsliv-­‐energi-­‐och-­‐regionalpolitik-­‐mr-­‐ner/nordiske-­‐
energikommuner/nominerade-­‐kommuner/albertslund-­‐kommunes-­‐fact-­‐sheet	  
Pedersen,	  P.	  V.	  (2012).	  Active	  House	  Renovation	  in	  Albertslund.	  Retrieved	  from	  
http://ases.conference-­‐
services.net/resources/252/2859/pdf/SOLAR2012_0330_full	  paper.pdf	  
The	  Danish	  Ministry	  of	  Climate	  Energy	  and	  Buildings.	  (2011).	  Our	  Future	  Energy.	  
Retrieved	  from	  http://www.kebmin.dk/sites/kebmin.dk/files/news/securing-­‐
denmarks-­‐energy-­‐future/our	  future	  energy.pdf	  
UN-­‐HABITAT	  (United	  Nations	  Centre	  for	  Human	  Settlements).	  (2012).	  Sustainable	  
Urban	  Energy:	  A	  Sourcebook	  for	  Asia,	  1–204.	  Retrieved	  from	  
www.unhabitat.org	  
UN-­‐HABITAT	  (United	  Nations	  Centre	  for	  Human	  Settlements).	  (2013).	  State	  of	  the	  
World’s	  Cities	  2012/2013	  -­‐	  Prosperity	  of	  Cities.	  
doi:10.1080/07293682.2013.861498	  
UN-­‐HABITAT	  (United	  Nations	  Centre	  for	  Human	  Settlements).	  (2014).	  The	  State	  of	  
African	  Cities	  2014.	  Nairobi.	  
United	  Nations	  (UN).	  (1993).	  Earth	  Summit,	  Agenda	  21,	  the	  United	  Nations	  
Programme	  of	  Action	  from	  Rio.	  New	  York.	  Retrieved	  from	  
https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/agenda21/	  
United	  Nations	  Department	  of	  Economic	  and	  Social	  Affairs	  (UNDESA).	  (2007).	  
Indicators	  of	  Sustainable	  Development :	  Guidelines	  and	  Methodologies	  Indicators	  
of	  Sustainable	  Development :	  Retrieved	  from	  
http://www.un.org/esa/sustdev/natlinfo/indicators/guidelines.pdf	  
United	  Nations	  Department	  of	  Economic	  and	  Social	  Affairs	  (UNDESA).	  (2015).	  About	  
the	  CSD.	  Retrieved	  April	  8,	  2015,	  from	  
https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/index.php?menu=1673	  
United	  Nations	  Population	  Fund.	  (2008).	  The	  state	  of	  the	  world	  population	  2007:	  
unleashing	  the	  potential	  of	  urban	  growth.	  Retrieved	  from	  
http://www.unfpa.org/sites/default/files/pub-­‐
pdf/695_filename_sowp2007_eng.pdf	  
United	  Nations	  World	  Commission	  on	  Environment	  and	  Development	  (WCED).	  
(1987).	  Our	  Common	  Future:	  The	  Brundtland	  Report.	  Oxford.	  
==PAGE:83==
Bibliography	  
83  
United	  States	  Environmental	  Protection	  Agency.	  (2014).	  What	  Are	  the	  Six	  Common	  
Air	  Pollutants?	  Retrieved	  May	  23,	  2015,	  from	  
http://www.epa.gov/oaqps001/urbanair/	  
Veks.	  (2013).	  Annual	  Report	  2013.	  Retrieved	  from	  
http://www.veks.dk/~/media/VEKS/Files/EN-­‐	  Publications/VEKS	  annual	  
report.ashx	  
Veks.	  (2014).	  Miljødeklaration	  for	  fjernvarme	  i	  Hovedstadsområdet.	  Retrieved	  from	  
http://www.hofor.dk/wp-­‐
content/uploads/2014/05/miljoedekl_2013_hofor.pdf	  
Veks.	  (2015).	  Miljødeklaration	  for	  fjernvarme	  i	  Hovedstadsområdet,	  (april).	  
Retrieved	  from	  http://www.veks.dk/da/dokumenter	  
Vera,	  I.,	  &	  Langlois,	  L.	  (2007).	  Energy	  indicators	  for	  sustainable	  development.	  
Energy,	  32(6),	  875–882.	  doi:10.1016/j.energy.2006.08.006	  
==PAGE:84==
Appendix	  A	  
84  
APPENDIX	  A:	  CALCULATIONS	  FOR	  2013	  
SOC1:	  Share	  of	  buildings	  with	  district	  heating	  
Assuming	   that	   no	   new	   buildings	   have	   been	   constructed	   in	   the	   district	   heating	  
networks’	  coverage	  area,	  the	  coverage	  in	  2013	  is	  the	  same	  as	  in	  2014:	  95.67%	  
SOC2:	  Share	  of	  household	  income	  spent	  on	  heating	  
This	   indicator	   can	   be	   measured	   by	   simply	   dividing	   the	   average	   yearly	   household	  
expenditure	   on	   district	   heating	   by	   the	   average	   yearly	   household	   income	   in	  
Albertslund.	  The	  first	  value	  (b)	  has	  been	  supplied	  by	  Albertslund	  Fjernvarme	  and	  is	  
equal	   to	   16,344	   kr/yr	   (N.	   Hansen,	   personal	   communication,	   May	   26,	   2015).	   The	  
second	  value	  is	  not	  available	  directly,	  but	  it	  can	  be	  calculated	  as	  follows:	  	  
𝐴𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒  ℎ𝑜𝑢𝑠𝑒ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑑  𝑖𝑛𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑒  (kr/yr)
=   𝐴𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒  𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙  𝑖𝑛𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑒  𝑜𝑓  𝑓𝑢𝑙𝑙𝑦  𝑡𝑎𝑥𝑎𝑏𝑙𝑒  𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑠𝑜𝑛𝑠   kr
yr   
×  #  𝑜𝑓  𝑡𝑎𝑥𝑎𝑏𝑙𝑒  𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑠𝑜𝑛𝑠   ÷ #  𝑜𝑓  𝑜𝑐𝑐𝑢𝑝𝑖𝑒𝑑  ℎ𝑜𝑢𝑠𝑒ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑑𝑠	  
Average	  total	  income	  in	  Albertslund	  =	  208,055	  DKK	  (Danmarks	  Statistik,	  2015d)	  
Taxable	  persons	  in	  Albertslund	  =	  22,188	  people	  (Danmarks	  Statistik,	  2015a)	  
Occupied	  households	  in	  Albertslund	  =	  12,496	  (Danmarks	  Statistik,	  2015b)	  
And	  so,	  
𝐴𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒  ℎ𝑜𝑢𝑠𝑒ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑑  𝑖𝑛𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑒   = 208,055  ×  22,188 ÷   12,496 = 369,424  𝑘𝑟/𝑦𝑟	  
Therefore,	  
SOC1    Share  of  overall  household  expenditure  on  district  heating  for  the  average  household  
=   average  yearly  household  expenditure  on  district  heating  
÷   𝐴𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒  ℎ𝑜𝑢𝑠𝑒ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑑  𝑖𝑛𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑒  ×  100%   = 15,458.88   ÷ 369,424  ×100%   = 𝟒. 𝟏𝟔%	  
ECO	  1:	  Total	  heat	  consumed	  by	  users	  
This	   indicator	   is	   already	   measured	   by	   Albertslund	   Forsyning,	   and	   is	   published	  
annually	  on	  their	  Green	  Accounts	  website.	  For	  2013,	  the	  DDC	  heat	  consumption	  was	  
measured	  to	  be	  302,792	  MWh	  (Albertslund	  Kommune,	  2015i)	  
==PAGE:85==
Appendix	  A	  
85  
ECO	  2.1:	  Residential	  heat	  use	  per	  m2	  
This	  indicator	  can	  be	  measured	  by	  dividing	  the	  total	  energy	  use	  by	  the	  total	  heated	  
area.	  The	  data	  for	  DDC	  household	  energy	  consumption	  for	  heat	  are	  obtained	  from	  
Albertslund’s	  green	  accounts	  (Albertslund	  Kommune,	  2015c)	  while	  The	  values	  for	  
heated	  area	  for	  commercial	  and	  residential	  buildings	  are	  obtained	  from	  Albertslund	  
Forsyning’s	  database	  on	  consumer	  consumption	  and	  are	  not	  publicly	  available.	  
The	   total	   residential	   heated	   area	   can	   be	   determined	   by	   adding	   all	   of	   the	   heated	  
areas	   of	   residential	   households	   in	   the	   database.	   Assuming	   that	   this	   area	   has	   not	  
changed	  between	  2013	  and	  2014,	  it	  is	  equal	  to	  1105066	  m2	  (N.	  Hansen,	  personal	  
communication,	  May	  27,	  2015).	  Therefore,	  
𝐻𝑜𝑢𝑠𝑒ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑑  𝐻𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔  𝐼𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑦
= 𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙  𝐷𝐷𝐶  𝑅𝑒𝑠𝑖𝑑𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑎𝑙  𝐸𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑦  𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑢𝑚𝑝𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛
÷ 𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙  ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑  𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑎  𝑜𝑓  ℎ𝑜𝑢𝑠𝑒ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑑𝑠=   148111 ÷ 1105066
= 134  𝑘𝑊ℎ/𝑚!	  
ECO	  2.2:	  Commercial	  heat	  use	  per	  m2	  
Assuming	   that	   this	   area	   has	   not	   changed	   between	   2013	   and	   2014	   ,	   the	   same	  
approach	  can	  be	  used	  as	  in	  ECO2.1.	  The	  total	  DDC	  Commercial	  Energy	  Consumption	  
is	  1161,71MWh	  (Albertslund	  Kommune,	  2015c)	  while	  the	  total	  commercial	  heated	  
area	  is	  found	  to	  be	  869270	  m2	  (N.	  Hansen,	  personal	  communication,	  May	  27,	  2015).	  
And	  so,	  
𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑚𝑒𝑟𝑐𝑖𝑎𝑙  𝐻𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔  𝐼𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑦
= 𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙  𝐷𝐷𝐶  𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑚𝑒𝑟𝑐𝑖𝑎𝑙  𝐸𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑦  𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑢𝑚𝑝𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛
÷ 𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙  𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑜𝑜𝑟    ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔  𝑜𝑓  𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑚𝑒𝑟𝑐𝑖𝑎𝑙  𝑏𝑢𝑖𝑙𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑠	  
𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑚𝑒𝑟𝑐𝑖𝑎𝑙  𝐻𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔  𝐼𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑦=  116171   ÷ 869270 = 134  𝑘𝑊ℎ/𝑚!	  
ECO	  3:	  Efficiency	  of	  energy	  distribution	  
The	  data	  used	  to	  calculate	  this	  indicator	  has	  been	  supplied	  by	  Niels	  Hansen	  from	  
Albertslund	   Kommune	   (personal	   communication,	   May	   26,	   2015).	   In	   2013,	  
Albertslund	   Forsyning	   purchased	   299,177	   MWh	   of	   heat	   from	   Veks,	   and	   sold	  
243,246	  MWh	  to	  its	  customers.	  They	  also	  consumed	  1,801MWh	  of	  heat	  themselves.	  
Therefore	  the	  efficiency	  of	  the	  system	  can	  be	  calculated	  as	  follows:	  
𝐸𝑓𝑓𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑦= 𝐻𝑒𝑎𝑡  𝑂𝑢𝑡𝑝𝑢𝑡
𝐻𝑒𝑎𝑡  𝐼𝑛𝑝𝑢𝑡×100%	  
𝐻𝑒𝑎𝑡  𝑂𝑢𝑡𝑝𝑢𝑡=   243,246𝑀𝑊ℎ+ 1,801𝑀𝑊ℎ= 245,047𝑀𝑊ℎ	  	  
==PAGE:86==
Appendix	  A	  
86  
𝐸𝑓𝑓𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑦   =  245,047𝑀𝑊ℎ
299,177𝑀𝑊ℎ×100% = 𝟖𝟏. 𝟗𝟏%	  
Using	  this	  method,	  the	  efficiency	  of	  Albertslund’s	  district	  heating	  system	  is	  81.91%.  
ECO	  4.1:	  Non-­‐carbon	  energy	  share	  in	  heating	  
To	   find	   the	   non-­‐carbon	   share	   of	   consumed	   heat	   energy,	   we	   must	   first	   know	   the	  
energy	  share	  of	  each	  resource	  in	  2013.	  This	  data	  has	  been	  supplied	  via	  e-­‐mail	  (T.	  
Duhn,	  Personal	  Communication,	  May	  22,	  2015)	  by	  an	  Energy	  Engineer	  at	  Veks.	  Each	  
resource	   is	   classified	   as	   a	   non-­‐carbon	   or	   a	   carbon-­‐containing	   resource.	   Then	   the	  
shares	   of	   all	   non-­‐carbon	   resources	   are	   added	   to	   find	   the	   final	   measure	   of	   this	  
indicator.	  
Table	  12:	  Addition	  of	  non-­‐carbon	  resource	  shares	  
Resource	  
Non-­‐Carbon	   Energy	  Share	  
Coal	  
No	  
21.80%	  
Oil	  
No	  
4.85%	  
Natural	  Gas	  
No	  
20.42%	  
Waste	  (fossil)	  
No	  
6.85%	  
Waste	  (fossil	  free)	   Yes	  
11.66%	  
Wood	  pellets	  
Yes	  
29.21%	  
Wood	  Chips	  
Yes	  
0.00%	  
Straw	  
Yes	  
4.37%	  
Bio	  oil	  
Yes	  
0.03%	  
Geothermal	  
Yes	  
0.80%	  
Total	  Non-­‐Carbon	  
46.07%	  
ECO	  4.2:	  Renewable	  energy	  share	  of	  heating	  
To	  calculate	  this	  indicator,	  the	  same	  dataset	  as	  ECO4.1	  can	  be	  used.	  In	  this	  case,	  each	  
resource	  is	  classified	  as	  renewable	  or	  non-­‐renewable.	  Afterwards,	  the	  shares	  of	  all	  
renewable	  resources	  are	  added	  to	  find	  the	  final	  measure	  of	  this	  indicator.	  
Table	  13:	  Addition	  of	  renewable	  resource	  shares	  
Resource	  
Renewable	  
Energy	  Share	  
Coal	  
No	  
21.80%	  
Oil	  
No	  
4.85%	  
Natural	  Gas	  
No	  
20.42%	  
Waste	  (fossil)	  
Yes	  
6.85%	  
Waste	  (fossil	  free)	   Yes	  
11.66%	  
Wood	  pellets	  
Yes	  
29.21%	  
Wood	  Chips	  
Yes	  
0.00%	  
==PAGE:87==
Appendix	  A	  
87  
Straw	  
Yes	  
4.37%	  
Bio	  oil	  
Yes	  
0.03%	  
Geothermal	  
Yes	  
0.80%	  
Total	  Renewable	  
52.92%	  
ECO	  5:	  Share	  of	  nonimported	  energy	  
This	   indicator	   can	   be	   derived	   from	   the	   national	   average	   for	   the	   production	   and	  
consumption	  of	  each	  resource,	  and	  the	  fuel	  distribution	  for	  district	  heating	  energy	  
production.	  
The	   first	   step	   is	   to	   find	   the	   fuel	   distribution	   of	   the	   heat	   reaching	   Albertslund’s	  
district	  heating	  system.	  These	  figures	  are	  based	  on	  Veks’	  overall	  fuel	  consumption	  
for	  2013,	  and	  not	  specifically	  for	  the	  heat	  reaching	  Albertslund.	  The	  figures	  were	  
supplied	  via	  e-­‐mail	  (T.	  Duhn,	  Personal	  Communication,	  May	  22,	  2015)	  by	  an	  Energy	  
Engineer	  at	  Veks,	  and	  are	  shown	  in	  the	  first	  column	  of	  table	  14	  below.	  	  
Next,	   the	   national	   average	   for	   the	   production	   and	   consumption	   for	   relevant	  
resources	  is	  obtained	  from	  the	  energy	  statistics	  report	  by	  the	  Danish	  Energy	  Agency	  
(2014a).	  The	  consumption	  values	  for	  wooden	  pellets,	  wood	  chips	  and	  straw	  are	  not	  
directly	   found	   in	   the	   report,	   but	   they	   can	   be	   calculated	   by	   adding	   the	   produced	  
energy	  and	  net	  imported	  energy.	  Note	  that	  some	  resources	  have	  a	  production	  share	  
of	  over	  100%,	  which	  means	  that	  Denmark	  is	  a	  net	  exporter	  of	  that	  resource.	  A	  high	  
overall	  production	  share	  signifies	  a	  high	  degree	  of	  self-­‐sufficiency.	  
The	   final	   step	   is	   to	   take	   the	   weighted	   average	   of	   the	   national	   production	   shares,	  
using	  the	  resource	  shares	  as	  weights.	  This	  gives	  the	  share	  of	  heat	  energy	  consumed	  
in	  Albertslund	  that	  is	  produced	  in	  Denmark.	  
	  
Table	  14:	  Calculation	  of	  nonimported	  energy	  share	  
	  
Resource	  
Share	  
Produced	  
(TJ)	  
Net	  
Import	  
(TJ)	  
Consumed	  
(TJ)	  
Production	  	  
Share	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
Coal	  
21.80%	  
0	   	  
135578	  
0.00%	  
Oil	  
4.85%	  
373365	   	  
301013	  
124.04%	  
Natural	  Gas	  
20.42%	  
179275	   	  
138094	  
129.82%	  
Waste	  
18.51%	  
16923	   	  
16923	  
100.00%	  
Wooden	  
pellets	  
29.21%	  
1778	  
32286	  
34064	  
5.22%	  
Wood	  Chips	  
0.00%	  
11746	  
6051	  
17797	  
66.00%	  
Straw	  
4.37%	  
20625	  
0	  
20625	  
100.00%	  
Bio	  oil	  
0.03%	  
4175	  
5,526	  
9701	  
43.04%	  
Geothermal	  
0.80%	  
229	   	  
229	  
100.00%	  
Total	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
57.74%	  
	  
==PAGE:88==
Appendix	  A	  
88  
Based	  on	  this	  method	  of	  estimation,	  57.74%	  of	  the	  energy	  powering	  Albertslund’s	  
district	  heating	  system	  was	  produced	  in	  Denmark	  in	  2013.	  
ENV	  1.1:	  Ratio	  of	  GHG	  emissions	  to	  units	  of	  energy	  consumed	  
This	  data	  is	  already	  calculated	  by	  Veks	  specifically	  for	  Albertslund’s	  heat	  supply,	  and	  
is	   available	   in	   their	   annual	   carbon	   declaration	   report.	   For	   2013,	   it	   was	   equal	   to	  
114kg	  CO2	  equivalents/MWh	  produced.	  However,	  this	  value	  needs	  to	  be	  converted	  
in	  order	  to	  look	  at	  the	  emissions	  for	  each	  unit	  of	  energy	  consumed.	  This	  can	  be	  done	  
by	  dividing	  by	  the	  efficiency	  of	  the	  distribution	  system:	  
	  
114 kg  CO2  equivalents
MWh  sold
×
1𝑀𝑊ℎ  𝑠𝑜𝑙𝑑
81.91%  𝑀𝑊ℎ  𝑠𝑢𝑝𝑝𝑙𝑖𝑒𝑑=   139  kg  CO2  equivalents/  MWh	  
ENV	  1.2:	  GHG	  emissions	  per	  capita	  
To	  find	  the	  GHG	  emissions	  per	  capita	  we	  can	  simply	  take	  the	  results	  from	  ENV1.1,	  
and	  convert	  it	  to	  the	  correct	  units.	  This	  means	  that	  we	  need	  the	  actual	  total	  heat	  
energy	  consumed	  in	  Albertslund,	  and	  the	  population	  of	  Albertslund.	  The	  first	  value	  
is	  found	  in	  the	  green	  accounts,	  and	  is	  equal	  to	  288,055MWh	  (Albertslund	  Kommune,	  
2015i).	  The	  population	  of	  Albertslund	  on	  the	  first	  day	  of	  2013	  can	  be	  found	  on	  the	  
Danish	   national	   statistics	   database,	   and	   is	   equal	   to	   27824	   people	   (Danmarks	  
Statistik,	  2015c).	  
Therefore,	  
GHG  emissions  per  capita   kg  CO2  equivalents
person
=    GHG  emissions
MWh
  ×  Total  Energy  Consumed   MWh
÷   Population   persons
= 139   kg  CO2  equivalents
MWh
  ×  288055  MWh ÷   27824  persons
= 1,440  kg  CO2  equivalents/capita  	  
ENV	  2.1:	  Ratio	  of	  air	  pollutant	  emissions	  to	  units	  of	  energy	  consumed	  
First,	  the	  emission	  rates	  of	  each	  of	  the	  six	  air	  pollutants	  need	  to	  be	  found.	  These	  
values	   are	   calculated	   by	   Veks	   specifically	   for	   Albertslund’s	   heat	   supply,	   and	   are	  
found	  in	  their	  annual	  carbon	  declaration	  report	  (Veks,	  2014).	  Afterwards,	  the	  values	  
are	  simply	  summed	  up	  to	  give	  us	  the	  total	  amount	  of	  air	  pollutants	  emitted	  per	  unit	  
energy	  produced.	  
==PAGE:89==
Appendix	  A	  
89  
Table	  15:	  Addition	  of	  Air	  Pollutant	  Emissions	  
Air Pollutant 
Emissions	  (g/MWh)	  
SO2  
23	  
NOx  
115	  
CO  
101	  
VOCs 
7	  
Particulate Matter 
9	  
Lead 
0	  
Total 
255	  
	  
Next,	   to	   obtain	   the	   ratio	   of	   pollutant	   emissions	   to	   units	   of	   energy	   consumed,	   we	  
must	  divide	  by	  the	  efficiency	  of	  the	  distribution	  system.	  
255
𝑔
𝑀𝑊ℎ  𝑠𝑜𝑙𝑑×
1  𝑀𝑊ℎ  𝑠𝑜𝑙𝑑
81.91%  𝑀𝑊ℎ  𝑠𝑢𝑝𝑝𝑙𝑖𝑒𝑑= 311𝑔/𝑀𝑊ℎ	  
ENV	  2.2:	  Air	  pollutant	  emissions	  per	  capita	  
Following	  the	  same	  approach	  as	  when	  calculating	  ENV	  1.2,	  	  
Air  pollutant  emissions  per  capita  
g
person
=  
  g
MWh  ×  Total  Energy  Consumed   MWh ÷   Population   persons
= 311  
g
MWh  ×  288055  MWh ÷   27824  persons
= 3220  g  air  pollutant  emissions/capita  	  
	  
	  
==PAGE:90==
Appendix	  A	  
90  
Table	  16:	  Summary	  of	  2013	  measurements	  for	  all	  final	  indicators	  
Domain	   Issue	  
#	  
Indicator	  
Measurement	  
SOC	  
Accessibility	  
1	  
Share	  of	  buildings	  with	  district	  
heating	  
95.67%	  
SOC	  
Affordability	  
2	  
Share	  of	  household	  income	  spent	  
on	  heating	  
4.16%	  
ECO	  
Energy	  Use	  
1	  
Total	  heat	  consumed	  by	  users	  
303	  GWh	  
ECO	  
Heating	  
Intensity	  
2.1	  
Residential	  heat	  use	  per	  m2	  
134	  kWh	  /	  m2	  
2.2	  
Commercial	  heat	  use	  per	  m2	  
134	  kWh	  /	  m2	  
ECO	  
Supply	  
Efficiency	  
3	  
Efficiency	  of	  energy	  distribution	  
81.91%	  
ECO	  
Energy	  
Diversification	  
4.1	  
Non-­‐carbon	  energy	  share	  in	  
heating	  
46.07%	  
4.2	  
Renewable	  energy	  share	  of	  
heating	  
52.92%	  
ECO	  
Energy	  
Security	  
5	  
Share	  of	  nonimported	  energy	  
57.74%	  
ENV	  
Climate	  
Change	  
1.1	  
Ratio	  of	  GHG	  emissions	  to	  units	  
of	  energy	  consumed	  
139	  kg/MWh	  
1.2	   GHG	  emissions	  per	  capita	  
1,440	  
kg/capita	  
ENV	  
Air	  Quality	  
2.1	  
Ratio	  of	  air	  pollutant	  emissions	  
to	  units	  of	  energy	  consumed	  
311	  g/MWh	  
2.2	  
Air	  pollutant	  emissions	  per	  
capita	  
3220	  g/capita	  
	  
	  
