==PAGE:1==
Noise Transfer from Laser
Sources to Bio-images
Mahmoud Taweq
Kongens Lyngby 2015
IMM-M.Sc.-2015-
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of photonics engineering
Frederiksborgvej 399, building 108,
4000 Roskilde, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 6352
info@fotonik.dtu.dk
http://www.fotonik.dtu.dk IMM-M.Sc.-2015-
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This thesis describes the dierent aspects needed in high-dynamic-range laser
noise measurements. Based on this theory, a fully functional and reliable noise
detection setup is developed, capable of providing amplitude- and shotnoise-
measurements. This setup is used to investigate the noise properties of a tapered
diode laser. This is done by studying; the electrical noise performance of dier-
ent power supplies used for tapered diode lasers; the optical noise performance
of a tapered diode laser; the optical noise performance of the frequency doubled
light (through a cascade laser) generated from a tapered diode laser. The fre-
quency doubled laser is used to pump a Ti:Sapphire laser, and the corresponding
noise performance of this laser is also investigated.
The results presented shows, that the electrical power supply noise, is trans-
ferred directly into every and each of the dierent stages; from the electrical
→tapered diode laser →frequency doubled laser →Ti:Sapphire laser. Dier-
ent power supply combinations are studied, providing dierent noise properties
at the dierent optical stages. By introducing a low pass lter, the electrical
noise performance was improved. This improvement was also present during
all the dierent optical stages, suggesting that the laser noise can be improved,
by simply improving the noise performance of its power supply. Finally, noise
measurements of a solid state laser are similarly obtained, and used to compare
its performance with the frequency tapered diode laser.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the department of Photonics at the Technical Uni-
versity of Denmark in fullment of the requirements for acquiring a M.Sc. in
Physics and Nanotechnology.
This thesis deals with laser noise in general, and the detection process of laser
noise. In particular, measurements of the amplitude noise generated from a ta-
pered diode laser are presented. Additionally, noise measurements of a frequency
doubled tapered diode laser is presented, together with noise measurement of
a Titanium Sapphire laser, pumped with the frequency doubled tapered diode
laser.
Roskilde, 20-February-2015
Mahmoud Taweq
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisors; Anders Kragh Hansen, Peter E. Andersen,
Dominik Marti and my main supervisor Ole Bjarlin Jensen, for their kind help
and support during the scope of this thesis. I would especially like to thank
Anders for his assistance and discussions regarding the noise detection setup.
I would also like to thank everyone at the Photonics department at Risø, for
providing a good and friendly working environment.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Project Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Laser Noise Theory
5
2.1
Mathematical Basics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Single-Frequency Lasers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Shot Noise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Mode-Locked Lasers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.5
Noise Transfer Function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Light Source
15
3.1
Tapered Diode Laser . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Cascade SHG . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2.1
Power Scaling Law . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2.2
The SHG Cascade Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2.3
Power Curves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2.4
Phase Oset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4
Noise Detection Setup
23
4.1
Dynamic Range Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2
Spectrum Analyzer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.3
Photo Diode . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.4
Data Interpretation and Acquisition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
4.5
Validation and Calibration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.6
Electrical Noise Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.7
Cables and Connections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5
Results and Measurements
35
5.1
Electrical Noise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.1.1
High Current Power Supplies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.2
IR Noise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.2.1
Reproducibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.2.2
Low Current Power Supplies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.2.3
High Current Power Supplies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.3
SHG Noise
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.3.1
IR Noise and the SHG Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.3.2
SHG Feedback
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.3.3
Power Dependency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.3.4
Acoustics Vibrations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.3.5
Phase Plate Noise
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.4
Ti:Sapphire Noise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.4.1
Solid State Laser as a Pump Source
. . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.5
All Noise Stages
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6
Discussion
57
7
Conclusions
63
A WienerKhinchin theorem
67
B Shotnoise Limit and Quantum Eciency
69
C Conversion from dBm to dBc
71
D Photodetector Responsivity
73
E Electrical Noise Measurements
75
F Optical Noise Measurements
79
G Matlab Scripts
85
Bibliography
91
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Many applications within the eld of biomedicine, material processing or display
technology require compact, eective and robust laser light sources in the visible
region. Tapered diode lasers are an established method to generate high power
in a near-diraction limited beam at wavelengths ranging from red to infrared
[1]. More than 10 W of output power in a near-diraction limited beam has
been demonstrated at wavelengths between 920 nm and 1064 nm [2, 3]. Further-
more, the use of integrated Bragg gratings in such diode lasers enables narrow
spectrum emission. Nonlinear frequency conversion of tapered diode lasers is
an ecient method for generation of coherent light in the required blue-green
spectral range [4, 5]. Such frequency converted laser systems are used as pump
sources for Ti:sapphire lasers and examples of their use within biophotonics
imaging, in the eld of retinal OCT has been reported [6]. The low noise of the
diode laser sources provides enhanced image contrasts, which is important for
diagnostics [7].
Laser noise has been of high interest for many years, both in the context of
fundamental physics and for a variety of laser applications. Simple types of
lasers, particularly single-frequency lasers, constitute cases of strong interest in
quantum optics which have been studied in great detail. The obtained under-
standing has also brought signicant benets for the further development of
lasers with favourable noise properties, as required for many dierent applica-
tions. Beside applications within bio-imaging, noise is similarly important for
==PAGE:12==
2
Introduction
dierent applications, such as ber-optic communication systems, various kinds
of metrology applications, and optical clocks surpassing cesium clocks in per-
formance, to name only a few examples [8]. Over quite a few decades, such
types of applications have continued to act as a driver for the development of
laser sources with still better noise properties, and of improved measurement
techniques to monitor the success of such attempts. Therefore, a decent un-
derstanding of how laser noise is generated does not only help to improve the
performance of particular devices, but also to realize fundamental limitations
in order to correctly judge the future potential of dierent types of lasers for
low-noise performance.
In this thesis, a reliable laser noise detection system is developed, capable of
describing the low noise performance of diode lasers.
One important aspect
of this work, would be understanding the origin of the noise observed in diode
lasers, and how this noise is aected during the frequency doubling process. The
frequency doubled light will then be used to pump a Titanium Sapphire (Ti:S)
laser, and similar investigations of how the noise transfer into the Ti:S laser will
be performed. Ideally, by understanding the dierent noise processes, leading
up to the noise of the Ti:S pulses, and how they relate to a certain laser imaging
modality, an ideal and optimized light source can be picked for specic imaging
applications.
1.1
Project Scope
This project can be divided into two major parts. 1) Understanding and develop-
ing a trustworthy noise detection setup. 2) Investigating the noise performance
of a certain light source; consisting of a tapered diode laser, which is frequency
doubled through two subsequent non-linear crystals, in a so called cascade Sec-
ond Harmonic Generation (SHG) laser. The motivation of this study, is to in-
vestigate the noise performance at each conversion step; from electrical current,
into IR laser emission, into SHG laser and nally into the Ti:S laser, see 1.1.
The generated femtosecond pulses emitted by the Ti:S, can be used in dierent
bio-imaging modalities, such coherent anti-Stokes Raman scattering (CARS)
[9] or high resolution optical coherence tomography (OCT) [10]. However, in
this work, the motivation is to use these short pulses in two-photon microscopy
[11, 12]. By obtaining two-photon scans with dierent pump sources, with dif-
ferent noise properties, a link between the laser noise and the imaging process,
can potentially provide improved improved image/scan quality. In this case, it
will be ideal to compare the noise performance of frequency doubled diode lasers
and solid state laser, and the corresponding two-photon images obtained, when
each laser is used to generate the short femtosecond pulses from the Ti:S laser.
==PAGE:13==
1.1 Project Scope
3
Unfortunately, the last step of the intended investigation, namely the bio-
imaging (see Fig. 1.1), was not reached during the scope of this project, and
the results of this investigation may rst become available in the near future.
SHG Green Pump 
Laser (532 nm)
Ti:sapphire Laser
Power Supply
IR Tapered Diode Laser  
           (1064 nm)
Bioimages
Figure 1.1: This gure illustrate the dierent steps which will be investi-
gated/considered in this thesis; Electrical noise measurements of
the power supply, and how this noise is transferred into the optical
noise, at the dierent stages will be studied, in order to acquire a
better understanding of laser noise and how it transfers into bio-
images.
==PAGE:14==
4
Introduction
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2
Laser Noise Theory
Noise of lasers is a short term for random uctuations of various output param-
eters. This phenomena is frequently encountered and has a profound impact on
many applications in photonics, particularly in the area of precision measure-
ments. Due to various inuences of quantum noise and uctuations of various
technical origins, the output of a laser will always contain some noise.
The
origins of laser noise can be divided into two groups:
• Quantum noise, in particular associated with spontaneous emission in the
gain medium.
• Technical noise, which arise eg.
from excess noise of the pump source
(optically and electrically), from vibrations of the laser resonator, or from
temperature uctuations.
This chapter aims to cover the theory behind dierent aspects in the area of
laser noise, which are relevant to this thesis. This chapter is structured so, that
it begins with the essential mathematical basics, which also includes explaining
some details of the notation, which often cause confusion in the literature. The
main focus would be on single-frequency lasers, which have been studied in
most detail and deserve signicant attention for various reasons, including the
fact that their understanding also greatly facilitates the understanding of more
==PAGE:16==
6
Laser Noise Theory
complicated situations, such as mode-locked lasers. The focus is then shifted
towards mode-locked lasers, in particular Ti:Sapphire lasers, by addressing the
dierent kinds of noise, which can be observed in mode-locked lasers. However,
the main focus would be on the intensity noise, which is the main target of this
thesis. Finally, a model for laser noise transfer is derived, which describes how
the noise transfer from a pump source and into a Ti:Sapphire laser.
2.1
Mathematical Basics
In this section, dierent conceptual and mathematical basics will be addressed,
which would be required later on. In this section, and throughout the rest of
this thesis, the mathematical discussion will be limited as far as possible, while
keeping more emphasis on the conceptual aspects.
In noise treatments, one
typically starts with the measurement of time-dependent uctuating quantities
such laser output power, optical phase, or the temporal positions of laser pulses.
Such quantities can either be continuously varying over time, or occur at discrete
temporal positions. In some applications, the time-varying quantities themselves
are of interest, eg.
when they carry important measurement information or
when they are needed in some compensation schemes. However, in many cases
it is sucient to use the treatment of the statistical description, based on time
and/or ensemble averaged data. Such description are frequently done by using
spectral descriptions in the form of power densities, hence the name power
spectral density. For spectral quantities which usually only exists in a nite
span of time, a frequency-dependent power density S(f) is easily dened via
the squared modulus of the Fourier-transformed data. However, for quantities
with an innite span of time, the Fourier integrals usually do not converge.
Eg. laser power P(t) will uctuate around some mean value, which can not be
integrated over an innite span. In such situations, one may in principle use a
modied denition of power density, which involves a limit process:
SP (f) ≡lim
T →∞
1
T

Z T/2
−T/2
P(t)e−i2πftdt

2
,
with units of W2/Hz. This Fourier integral is restricted to a time interval of
width T, normalized by this width and the limit for T →∞is then taken. While
this denition is simple, it's obviously awkward to use directly. Therefore, one
usually applies the WienerKhinchin theorem, see Appendix A, which gives a
connection to the autocorrelation function
SP (f) =
Z ∞
−∞
RP (τ)ei2πfτdτ .
==PAGE:17==
2.1 Mathematical Basics
7
This power density is two-sided, meaning that it's dened for positive as well
as negative frequencies. Note that negative-frequency part does not carry ad-
ditional information for real quantities such as laser power. In the following,
one-sided power densities will be used, according to what is commonly used in
the engineering disciplines [8]. These power densities are two times larger, but
dened only for positive frequencies, apart from the ω = 0 point, which must
be handled with care under integrations. The autocorrelation function can be
obtained by an inverse Fourier transform
RP (τ) =
Z
SP (f)e−i2πfτ df ,
where the frequency range must be chosen according to the use of one-sided
power densities. Thus, one can calculate a variance of power according to
σ2
P ≡< P 2 >= RP (0) =
Z
SP (f) df .
Experimentally, it's more useful to integrate the power spectral density over an
interval [f1 −f2] of noise frequencies, in order to obtain a root mean square
(rms) value of the Relative Intensity Noise (RIN):
δP
P |rms =
sZ f2
f1
SP (f)df ,
(2.1)
which is then often specied in percent [13]. Additionally, it's common to specify
10 times the logarithm (to base of 10) of this quantity, in order to obtain dBc/Hz
(The conversion into dBc will be explained in section 4.5).
The description of phase noise involves some additional mathematical aspects,
and is usually built around a power density Sφ(f) of the optical phase φ, or
alternatively by a power density Sν(f) of the instantaneous optical frequency,
which is related to the phase according to
ν = 1
2π
dφ
dt ,
where the symbol ν relates to optical frequencies and f to noise frequencies.
From the above expression, one can infer that
Sν(f) = f 2Sφ(f) ,
which shows that, for example, white frequency noise corresponds to Sφ(f) ∝
f −2 [8]. The above expression has units of Hz2/Hz, where the numerator refers
to the power density of the optical phase and the denominator refers to the
spectrum of the electric eld of a light beam. Phase noise is often retrieved
==PAGE:18==
8
Laser Noise Theory
from the spectrum of the electric eld of a light beam. However, the relation
between the power densities of the optical phase and the electric eld, is not
trivial.
Nevertheless, in cases where the excursions of the optical phase are
limited to a small range with width well below, eg. 1 rad, the eld spectrum
has a delta function at the mean optical frequency, plus noise sidebands with a
power density, which is directly proportional to Sφ(f), and the linewidth of the
eld spectrum would then be zero [8]. In other cases however, where the optical
phase undergoes a random walk, involving an unbounded long-term drift, one
obtains a eld spectrum with non-zero width and a non-trivial relation of the
power densities (see Eq. (7) and (8) in [14]):
SE(δν) =
Z ∞
−∞
exp

−
Z ∞
0
Sφ(f)(1 −cos(2πfτ))df

exp(i2πδντ)dτ ,
where SE(δν) is the power density of the electric eld, expressed as a function
of the oset δν from the mean optical frequency. Notice that SE(δν) is a two-
sided and Sφ(f) is a one-sided power density.
For the simple case of a one
sided Sφ(f) = C/f 2, the power density of the electric eld SE(f), would have
a Lorentzian shape with a full width at half maximum δνF W HM = πC, see
Appendix A.
2.2
Single-Frequency Lasers
Under the investigation of noise properties, the simplest possible laser system is
that of a single-frequency laser, which operates in a continuous wave (CW) on a
single cavity mode. In this case, one have to deal with only two dierent kinds
of noise, intensity noise and phase noise. There is a very important dierence
between the characteristics of these two types of noise. In the case of intensity
noise, gain saturation provides a 'restoring' force for the output power, which
always pulls the output power toward the steady-state solution, even under the
inuence of noise.
The optical phase however, has no restoring force.
since
the laser has no phase (or time) reference, meaning that the phase undergoes a
random walk, which can lead to ever increasing phase deviations, compared to
the noiseless case. This situation is well known for any free-running oscillator,
and the consequence of this is a nite emission linewidth [8].
In contrast to that, a quantum-limited beam in a so-called coherent state [15],
also has some intensity and phase noise, but can have a zero linewidth, mean-
ing that there is no unbounded drift of the optical phase. The corresponding
intensity noise is then called shot noise.
==PAGE:19==
2.3 Shot Noise
9
2.3
Shot Noise
A fundamental limit to the optical intensity noise as observed in many situations
(e.g. in measurements with a photodiode or a CCD camera) is given by shot
noise. This was originally interpreted as a result of the detection process, not
the light eld itself, as a constant probability for detecting a photon in a certain
time interval already produces this shot noise. However, it was later realized
that shot noise actually results from quantum uctuations of the light eld, and
a rather convincing support for this interpretation came with the demonstration
of the so-called amplitude squeezed light [16, 17], which can cause the detected
intensity noise to fall below the shot noise level.
This quantum eect can be understood, by the discreteness of photons (and
electrophotons), which are quantum particles, meaning that they can only come
in whole numbers and the camera/detector can never collect fractions of pho-
tons. Because of this and due to random statistical uctuations, when collecting
photons from an unvarying source over a set amount of time, say ten random 30
seconds intervals over the course of twenty minutes, it is highly unlikely that one
would collect 20 photons every single time. Just like ipping a coin ten times;
it is highly unlikely that one would get ve heads every single set of 10 ips.
Instead, the rst interval may give 20 photons, the next interval 23 photons, the
next interval 18 photons, and so on. This distribution of photons would follow
a Poisson distribution, and the variability from one of these thirty-second inter-
vals to the next would then be the shot noise [18]. By considering the one-sided
power density
SP,SN(f) = 2hνP ,
with P being the average power, the corresponding RIN a the shot noise level
would have the power density
SRIN,SN(f) = 2hν
P
.
(2.2)
The noise of the output of a free-running laser can approach both the shot noise
level and quantum-limited phase noise at high enough noise frequencies, but
usually does not so at low frequencies [13].
When measuring the shotnoise level, a common conguration is that of a bal-
anced homodyne detection system, consisting of two photodetectors. By using
a beam splitter, 50 % of the optical power is directed at each detector, and the
sum and dierence of the photocurrents are obtained electronically. Whereas
the sum of the photocurrents is the same as for using all light on a single detec-
tor (which simply provides the intensity noise), the dierence signal provides a
==PAGE:20==
10
Laser Noise Theory
reference for the shot noise level [19]. This will be described further in section
4.3.
2.4
Mode-Locked Lasers
Next, the focus will be shifted toward Mode-Locked (ML) lasers, in particular
Ti:Sapphire lasers. Compared to CW lasers, mode-locked lasers exhibit many
more degrees of freedom, which may be aected by noise, and dierent kinds of
noise can be relevant in dierent situations. For an overview, the dierent types
of noise in such lasers are listed below
• Intensity noise, which can be understood as noise of the average power,
and is related to noise of the pulse energy and repetition rate.
• Absolute timing jitter, which is the deviation of the pulse positions, from
the 'ticks' of either a hypothetical ideal clock, or relative to some other
oscillator.
• Phase noise of all involved cavity modes.
• The carrier-envelope oset phase [20], which is related to the phases of the
cavity modes.
• Other parameters of the pulses can also exhibit noise, in particular the
pulse duration, center frequency, chirp, etc.
In contrast to noise in CW lasers, pulse parameters such as energy, temporal
position, duration, etc. - are not dened on a continuous time scale, but only
on a discrete temporal grid. The consequence of this is, is that noise spectra
can only be specied up to half the pulse repetition rate, corresponding to the
Nyquist frequency [21].
2.5
Noise Transfer Function
In this section, a model for a Noise Transfer Function (NTF) will be derived,
between a pump source and an output laser. The motivation is to obtain expres-
sions for how the amplitude modulations (AM) and phase modulations (PM),
transfers from one stage to another, see Fig. 2.1. This section is based on [22].
At rst, consider a small-signal sinusoidal pump modulation, mp, the corre-
==PAGE:21==
2.5 Noise Transfer Function
11
Pump Noise 
(PSD)   SP(ωm)
0
ωm
X
=
=
AM NTF
PM NTF
|HAM(ωm)|
|HPM(ωm)|
ωm
0
Ti:Sapphire SSB
  Phase Noise
        (PSD)
     Ti:Sapphire
  AmplitudeNoise
        (PSD)
ω
0
2π x ωrep
ω
0
2π x ωrep
0
ωm
Pump Laser
Ti:sapphire Laser
HAM(ωm)   HPM(ωm)
SAM(ωm)=|HAM(ωm)|2 SP(ωm)
SPM-SSB(ωm)=1/2 |HPM(ωm)|2 SP(ωm)
SAM(ωm)
SPM(ωm)
Figure 2.1: This gure illustrates the transfer of pump noise (AM and PM)
into a modelocked Ti:sapphire laser. This gure was inspired by
[22].
sponding output power of a laser can then be written as a series of pulses with
the shape A(t)
P(t) = P0
X
n
A
 
t −τc0
"
n +
˜β(ωm)
2π
cos (ωmt + φ(ωm))
#!
,
where τc0 is the unperturbed round-rip cavity time, ˜β(ωm) is he phase modula-
tion index (also called peak phase deviation) of the fundamental component, of
the Fourier series expansion of P(t), and φ(ωm) is a frequency-dependent phase
oset.
For very small uctuations in pumping rate, one may use the linearized coupled
cavity rate equations to analyze the behaviour of this otherwise highly nonlinear
system (larger-scale non-linear eects require application of the full nonlinear
master-equation [23, 24]). The validation of the linearized model is found in
[25], where it was also found that both the amplitude NTF (HAM(ωm)) and
the phase NTF (HP M(ωm)) are invariant to changes in the small sinusoidal
pump modulation mp. The model is build upon the principle, that small-signal
uctuations in pump power, causes corresponding uctuations in three phys-
ical quantities; photon number n(t), population inversion N(t) and laser rod
temperature T(t). The pumping rate can be described by a strong steady-state
component and a small-signal harmonic term
RP (t) = RP 0 + RP 1 cos(ωmt) ,
(2.3)
where the small-signal sinusoidal pump modulation is dened as the ratio mp ≡
RP 1/RP 0.
Thus, the eect of this additional term, will result in sinusoidal
==PAGE:22==
12
Laser Noise Theory
variations in the physical quantities:
n(t) = nss + ℜ
 ˜n1eiωmt
N(t) = Nth + ℜ

˜N1eiωmt
T(t) = T0 + ℜ

˜T1eiωmt
,
(2.4)
where nss, Nth and T0 are the steady-state photon density, threshold population
inversion density and steady-state rod temperature, respectively. Solving the
coupled-cavity rate equations [26] and diusion equation [27] by using Eq. 2.3
as a source and Eqs. 2.4 as solutions, the phasor amplitudes of these quantities
would be
˜n1 =
ω2
spRP 1/γc
ω2sp −ω2m + i2γspωm
(2.5)
˜N1 =
iωmRP 1
ω2sp −ω2m + i2γspωm
(2.6)
˜T1 = 2RP 1
kRP 0
∞
X
l=1
J0(βlr/b)
β2
l J2
1(βl)
1
1 + iωmb2/kβ2
l
,
(2.7)
where ωsp and γsp are the relaxation oscillation frequency (ROF) and decay
rate, respectively. γc is the cavity decay rate, k = 1.8×10−5m2/s is the thermal
diusivity, r and b are the laser rod radial coordinate and radius, respectively
and βl are the roots of the thermal diusion eigenvalue problem [22].
The AM noise transfer function, HAM(ωm), is caused by simple pump-induced
uctuations in the cavity photon density, ˜n1. Fig. 2.2 shows the magnitude
of the theoretical complex HAM(ωm) for modulation frequencies from 100 Hz −
10 MHz. It's seen that the solution (Eq. 2.5) contains a second-order pole at
the ROF, with a −20 dB/decade rolelo at frequencies above ωm ≥ωsp.
On the other hand, the PM transfer function, HP M(ωm), is considerably more
involved [28]. At low modulation frequencies, thermal eects dominate and thus
follow the single pole behaviour of Eq. 2.7. These include thermal expansion
of the laser rod and the direct thermo-optic (also referred as thermal lensing)
eect [29]. At mid and higher range frequencies, the peak powers of the mode-
locked pulses causes variations in the group delay through the nonlinear index
of refraction and thus follow the characteristics of the photon density, Eq. 2.5.
==PAGE:23==
2.5 Noise Transfer Function
13
The modulation of the population inversion, Eq. 2.6, causes variation in the
group delay in the gaim medium, because of the slope of the real part of the
susceptibility, χ′(ω). This eect would show a combined double-pole, simple-
zero at the ROF according to Eq. 2.6, but this is usually not observed, indicating
the weakness of the eect [22].
Even though the NTF would not be experimentally measured in this project,
this theory and especially Eq. 2.5 will become quite helpful, when considering
the noise transfer into a Ti:S laser.
Figure 2.2: This gure shows a theoretical example of |HAM|(dB), based on
the parameters: γc = 1.28 × 107 s−1, ωsp = 2π × 700 kHz, γsp =
5 × 106 s−1.
==PAGE:24==
14
Laser Noise Theory
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 3
Light Source
The main noise target of this thesis, is a cascade Second Harmonic Generation
(SHG) laser which is built around a tapered diode laser.
In this section, a
description of this laser source is given, which would provide an easier under-
standing when measuring its noise performance, at dierent operation stages.
3.1
Tapered Diode Laser
The tapered diode laser seen in Fig. 3.1 consists of a 6 mm long DBR tapered
diode laser with a sixth order surface grating similar to the one reported in [30].
The ridge waveguide of the tapered diode laser is 2 mm long and consists of a
1 mm long unpumped DBR section and a 1 mm long pumped ridge waveguide
section. The tapered section is 4 mm long with a taper angle of 6o. The ridge
and the tapered section of the laser have separate contacts, so that the currents
to both sections can be controlled individually.
The laser structure is made
using a super large optical cavity (SLOC) [31] and the divergence of the beam
in the vertical direction is 150 (FWHM). The laser is mounted p-side up on a
CuW heat spreader which is again mounted on a 25 x 25 mm footprint heat
sink for ecient cooling and temperature stabilizing of the laser.
==PAGE:26==
16
Light Source
The wavelength of the laser is dependent on; the current into the ridge section,
the current into the tapered section and the temperature of the laser.
The
laser emits a wavelength of 1063 nm, with an output power of more than 10.5
W, when operated at 20oC, at a ridge section current of 300 mA and a taper
section current of 14 A. The spectrum of the laser is shown in Fig. 3.1(b).
The laser emits light in single longitudinal mode with a spectral width that
is resolution limited to 0.006 nm. The side mode suppression is above 25 dB,
limited by the dynamic range of the optical spectrum analyzer.
Figure 3.1: (a) Sketch of the DBR tapered laser.
(b) . Spectrum of the DBR
tapered laser at a taper section current of 14 A and 300 mA ridge
section current. The laser temperature was 20oC.
3.2
Cascade SHG
One of the main targets of this thesis, is to describe the noise performance of an
SHG cascade laser, based on a DBR-tapered diode laser. Such an investigation
would provide an understanding of how the noise properties are built up, and
how they transfer from each stage to another.
This section provides a brief
description of this laser, and the complete theory behind.
A more detailed
description and a more generalized theory of this setup, and its performance are
currently under publication [32].
3.2.1
Power Scaling Law
The rst step toward describing this setup, would be understanding the motiva-
tion behind using a cascade of nonlinear crystals, instead of using the traditional
'one-crystal' setup. The well-known expression for the SHG power output, of a
frequency doubled innite plane wave, that takes depletion into account is given
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Cascade SHG
17
by
P2ω = Pω tanh2(
p
ηPω) ,
where Pω is the fundamental beam power and η is the nonlinear conversion
eciency. Note that this expression is not strictly valid for focused beams, if
the degree of depletion approaches unity, and also that it does not take into
account thermal eects.
Nevertheless, this expression yield the correct low-
power value of η and will later be used in this section, to t the measured SHG
power curves.
Next, consider the electric eld and SHG power expressions for the case of N-
nonlinear crystals. If we denote E(i)
2ω as the complex electric eld amplitude
contribution, of the Second Harmonic (SH) eld generated in the ith crystal
of an N crystal cascade. By the superposition principle, the SH eld after N
crystals is then simply the sum;
E2ω =
N
X
i=1
E(i)
2ω ,
where phase is included through the complex addition. In the path from one
crystal to the next one, a relative phase oset between the fundamental and SH
beams occurs because of dispersion in the air and in the optics. In addition, for
quasi-phase-matched periodically poled media (the type of crystals used in this
setup), the initial and nal poling domains of each crystal are generally of an
unknown length, and thus the dispersion of the nal poling domain of the ith
crystal, and the initial poling domain of the (i + 1)th crystal also contribute to
the phase oset. Experimentally (see next section) a phase plate is positioned
between the two nonlinear crystals which allows ne adjustment of the relative
oset over several times 2π, to achieve constructive or destructive interference,
or anything in between.
Let's now consider the case where the SH eld contributions are individually
at optimal phase matching, and additionally have phase oset optimized for
maximum constructive interference, we can write
E(i)
2ω =
p
ηiLiPω ⇒E2ω =
N
X
i=1
p
ηiLiPω ,
where we denote for the ith crystal the nonlinear eciency per unit length ηi
and the length Li. Since the power goes as the squared norm of the electric
eld, we get for N identical crystals;
P2ω =
 N
X
i=1
p
ηLPω
!2
= ηLN 2P 2
ω ,
==PAGE:28==
18
Light Source
from which the fundamental scaling law of the cascade is apparent. As in the
case of a focused beam in a single crystal, the output power is still linear in
crystal length. However, a factor of N 2 introduces an enhancement factor of 4
for a two-crystals cascade, 9 for a three-crystals cascade and so on.
3.2.2
The SHG Cascade Setup
The complete SHG cascade setup is sketched in Fig. 3.2. The laser is a DBR
tapered diode laser, as described in the previous section. The emitted light is
Gaussian along the vertical axis but non-diraction-limited along the horizontal
axis. The astigmatic emission (due to the tapered section of the diode) is col-
limated and made stigmatic and circular using an aspheric lens of focal length
f = 8 mm, followed by a cylinder lens of focal length f = 80 mm. With these
collimation optics, the beam quality in the horizontal axis is characterized by
M 2
x = 7.7. In focus, the beam forms a circular central lobe in the intensity
prole, containing the majority of the power. The remaining power is then dis-
tributed among minor side lobes in the horizontal (slow) axis, as seen in Fig.
3.3(a).
Figure 3.2: Sketch of the cascade concept. The fundamental IR beam is shown
with red, and the SH beam with green. The rst nonlinear crystal
is chosen for high eciency, while the second nonlinear crystal is
chosen for SH power handling ability. Noise measurements will be
carried out at (1) the IR before the rst nonlinear crystal (2) the
IR after passing both nonlinear crystals (3) the green SHG beam
after both crystal.
After the collimation, the beam passes through a half-wave plate and an optical
isolator. By rotating the half-wave plate, the power transmitted through the
optical isolator can be varied up to a maximal transmitted power of 9.5 W.
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Cascade SHG
19
Figure 3.3: (a) The beam prole of the IR fundamental laser beam. A central
lobe carries the majority of the power. The structure in the vertical
direction (fast axis) is very slight, whereas the structure in the
horizontal direction (slow axis) is more signicant.
(b) Far eld
intensity prole of the SH cascade output at maximum SHG power.
The optical beam is diraction limited even at the highest SH power
(3.7 W).
After the isolator, another half-wave plate rotates the polarization to vertical,
and thus optimize it toward the SHG process. The light is then incident on
a pair of steering mirrors, after which it's focused into the rst crystal with
a spherical lens of focal length f = 150 mm. The diverging laser beams (IR
and green) exiting the rst crystal, are incident in a spherical concave mirror
with radius of curvature R = 200 mm. This is a highly reective mirror, coated
for both 1063 nm and 532 nm, and achromatically collimates the beams. The
beams then passes through a phase plate mounted on a rotation stage. This
phase plate is simply an uncoated BK-7 glass window of thickness 3 mm oriented
at Brewster's angle, relative to the vertically polarized beams. While the phase
plate is mounted such that it is tilted around the lateral axis to get Brewster's
angle, adjustment of the phase oset is done by rotating with a rotation stage
around the vertical axis.
After the phase plate, the two co-propagating beams are re-focused using an-
other curved mirror (identical to the previous one), into the second crystal.
Each crystal is installed into a temperature-controlled closed-top oven, and the
central lobe beam waist inside the crystal is measured to be 85 µm in diameter.
Finally, a dichroic mirror separates the fundamental and the SH beams. The
combination of the two non-linear crystals, consist of a PPMgSLT crystal of
length 40 mm, followed by a a PPMgSLT crystal of length 35 mm.
==PAGE:30==
20
Light Source
3.2.3
Power Curves
In Fig. 3.4(a), the power curves of the two individual crystals used are shown,
as measured in a standard single-crystal setup. The input power was varied by
turning the half-wave plate before the optical isolator, and for each input power,
the temperature set point of the crystal mount was reoptimized. At maximum
output power, the temperature set point of the 40 mm PPMgCLN crystal, was
lowered 0.65oC, corresponding to 0.26oC/W of SH power.
The temperature
shift required for the 35 mm PPMgSLT crystal was negligible, about 0.05 oC,
corresponding to 0.06 oC/W of SH power. The ts yield η = 3.9 %/W for the
40 mm PPMgCLN crystal, and η = 1.1 %/W for the 35 mm PPMgSLT crystals.
The 40 mm PPMgCLN crystal shows a deviation from the t at higher power,
propably the onset of thermal dephasing due to localized heating caused by SH
absorption. The PPMgSLT crystal shows a lower eciency, as expected, but no
deviation from the t for these powers.
The SHG output power of the cascade is shown in Fig. 3.4(b), along with a t to
the expression for depleted SHG. The maximum power achieved of 3.72 W, is to
date the highest power achieved by frequency doubling of a diode laser. In this
conguration, no phase matching instability is observed, and the far eld beam
prole is nearly Guassian, see Fig. 3.3(b). The t yields η = 6.7 %/W, and
the opto-optical conversion eciency is 39%, while the wall-plug electro-optical
eciency is 9.6%. Notice that these results are obtained in spite of the non-
Gaussian beam prole of the fundamental beam, with M 2
x = 7.7 of the input
beam, while achieving M 2
x = 1.25 of the SHG output beam. This nonlinear
beam cleanup eect is consistent with previous results on SHG of tapered diode
lasers [30].
The described combination of non-linear crystals, provides a high conversion
eciency through the rst crystal, while the second crystals was chosen with a
lesser conversion eciency, but with good power handling ability. As mentioned
earlier, a deeper description and discussion of the combination of crystals is
under publication [32].
3.2.4
Phase Oset
In Fig. 3.5(a), experiment and theory is compared for the crystal conguration
described. This was done at low power to avoid the severe thermal dephasing.
Based on the experimental measurement of the respective eective nonlinear
eciencies of the two crystals, the theoretical maximal value of κ0 is 234 %,
and the theoretical minimal value is 21% (taking Fresnel losses at the phase
==PAGE:31==
3.2 Cascade SHG
21
plate into account). Experimentally, enhancements from 30% up to 204% were
achieved, in ne agreement with expected values. Note that if the two crystals
were similar, the theoretical maximal value would then have been 400 %, in
accordance with the theory described earlier (factor of 4). Fig. 3.5(b) shows
the SHG and fundamental output of the cascade setup, when operated at high
power (9.5 W input). High fundamental beam depletion is apparent.
Figure 3.4: (a) SH power curves for the two nonlinear crystals used. Tempera-
ture set point was reoptimized at each point. Fits to the expression
for depleted SHG are shown.
Notie that only points below 4 W
input power were included in the ts.
(b) SH power curve of the
cascade system. Temperature set points were reoptimized for each
point. A t is shown to the expression for depleted SHG, resulting
in η = 6.7 %/W. Only the points below 4.5 W input power were
included in the t.
==PAGE:32==
22
Light Source
Figure 3.5: (a) Phase matched cascade enhancement κ0 as function of rota-
tion angle of the phase plate around the vertical axis. This mea-
surement was performed at low IR input power. The dashed lines
represent the theoretically maximal and minimal κ.
The points
represent power measurements.
The solid curve shows t, nor-
malized to the achieved maximum and minimum powers. (b) SH
(red circles) and fundamental (black squares) output of the cas-
cade, at high IR input power, as a function of rotation angle of
the phase plate around the vertical axis. Strong fundamental beam
depletion is observed.
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 4
Noise Detection Setup
This section describes the dierent components needed in a laser noise detec-
tion setup, and their requirements in order to obtain reliable intensity noise
measurements. At the same time, the homebuilt noise detection setup used in
this work, including each component will be described, see Fig 4.1.
4.1
Dynamic Range Requirements
In order to be able to detect very small amplitude uctuations in a laser source,
power uctuations must be stronger than the shot noise accompanying the light
(in conventional classical measurement systems). These uctuations scale lin-
early with the optical power. Furthermore, the maximum extraneous noise that
can appear on the laser beam is approximately equal to the average laser power
[19]. Therefore, a reliable characterization system must be capable of handling
a large dynamic range, with the low end of this range set by the shot noise and
the high end set by the average photocurrent.
The required (or attainable) dynamic range in a measurement system, is simply
obtained by calculating the shot noise limited dynamic range, which is inherited
in a laser beam. At this range/level, an average photocurrent of i0 = R(λ)P0 is
==PAGE:34==
24
Noise Detection Setup
Figure 4.1: Setup for detection of the intensity noise. The input power laser
of a laser beam is adjusted using a lter, before entering the setup.
The laser beam is then directed at one or both photodetectors (com-
bined in one unit), by rotating the polarization using a λ/2 plate,
before entering a polarizing beam splitter. The light beams are fo-
cused at the active areas of the individual photodetectors, using
two lenses with focal length f = 3 cm. The dierence between the
signals generated from each photodetector, passes through a tran-
simpedance amplifer, connected to an electric spectrum analyzer.
The signals from the individual photodetectors are monitored using
an oscilloscope.
produced, where R(λ) is the photodetector responsivity and P0 is the incident
optical power.
The fractional rms uctuation produced by the shot noise is
therefore
∆irms
i0
=
√2qi0B
i0
=
r
2qB
i0
= 5.66 × 10−10
r
B
i0
,
where q is the electron charge and B is the receiver bandwidth. The dynamic
range or signal/shot noise power is thus
DR =

i0
√2qi0B
2
=
i0
2qB ,
which in decibles normalized to 1 Hz bandwidth is
DR = 155 + 10 log10[i0(mA)] [dB/Hz] .
This is the maximum dynamic range achievable in the measurement of conven-
tional (non-squeezed) laser light source, since any AM, no matter how small,
==PAGE:35==
4.1 Dynamic Range Requirements
25
cannot be detected below this shot noise level. In order to preserve this maxi-
mum dynamic range and the ultimate noise oor dened by the shot noise limit,
all electronic circuits following the photodetector must produce noise below the
shot noise oor. This introduces the 'usual design philosophy' of all receivers:
let the noise contribution of all stages be less than that of the stages preceding
them. In this case, let shot noise > photoreceiver noise > spectrum analyzer
noise oor. Careful engineering is thus needed to preserve this situation. It's
perhaps illuminating to simply plot the relevant signal contributions as a func-
tion of average photocurrent. Fig. 4.2 is a schematic representation of the trends
in the signal and noise powers. It shows that as the average photocurrent is in-
creased, the shot noise eventually rises out of the electronic noise oor and the
dynamic range improves at the rate of 10 dB/dec of photocurrent. This is the
optimum region of operation, since the minimum detectable modulation can
now be measured. Further increase in the average photocurrent (higher optical
power P0) will simply improve the dynamic range (Notice the dierent slopes
in Fig. 4.2).
Figure 4.2: Schematic representation of the trends in the signal and noise pow-
ers. The signal power and noise power spectral densities in the
photoreceiver shown as functions of average photocurrent. Notice
how the shotnoise increases by one decade for each current decade
(∝i0), while the signal increases by two decades for each current
decade (∝i2
0).
==PAGE:36==
26
Noise Detection Setup
Frequency Band
Specied Average
Displayed Average
Noise Level
Noise Level
100 Hz
−100 dBm
−110 dBm/Hz
1 kHz −10 kHz
−110 dBm
−130 dBm/Hz
10 kHz −100 kHz
−110 dBm
−140 dBm/Hz
100 kHz −1 MHz
−120 dBm
−150 dBm/Hz
1 MHz −1.8 GHz
−130 dBm
−150 dBm/Hz
Table 4.1: Table of specied and the observed average noise levels of the Tek-
tronix 2753P, operated at dierent frequency bands.
4.2
Spectrum Analyzer
The main instrument responsible for frequency-domain analysis is the RF spec-
trum analyzer. This device can be used to measure the amplitude- and phase-
noise modulation spectra of the photoreceiver signal. The minimum detectable
signal for this instrument is set by its own input noise oor and is usually spec-
ied in terms of an input equivalent noise voltage or power.
The spectrum analyzer used in this project, is a Tektronix 2753P with a fre-
quency range of 100 Hz to 1.8 GHz. The average specied and observed noise
levels are seen in table 4.1.
In this setup, noise detection scans will run in the frequency range 100 Hz to
100 MHz, set by the analyzers own lower frequency limit. While the measure-
ments will run up to 100 MHz, investigations would only go up to ∼10 MHz,
due to the bandwidth of the photodiode described in the next section. In this
frequency range, the observed noise levels are between [−150; −130] dBm/Hz.
The signal is then amplied using a low-noise amplier (LNA). The photodiode
with the built in LNA will be described in the next section.
4.3
Photo Diode
The photo diode used in this setup is a Thorlabs PDB450A - AC, Balanced
Amplied Photodetector (BAP), which consist of two well-matched photodiodes
combined with an ultra-low noise, high speed transimpedance amplier, see
Fig. 4.1. The BAP generates an output voltage proportional to the dierence
between the photocurrens in the two photodiodes, i.e. the two optical inputs
signals. This corresponds to a high pass lter, providing AC coupled signal,
==PAGE:37==
4.4 Data Interpretation and Acquisition
27
which is necessary since the electrical spectrum analyzer used in this project,
can't tolerate any DC input. Overall, this BAP corresponds to a homodyne
detection system, which can provide measurements of the shotnoise level, see
Sec. 2.3. The laser input power is distributed between the two photodiodes by
using a polarizing beam splitter and a λ/2-plate, and each beam is focused on the
active area of the individual photodiodes. The monitor signal of the photodiodes
are observed using an oscilloscope, while the dierence (RF output) between the
two photodiodes is observed using the electrical spectrum analyzer. When the
laser beam is focused on, only one of the two photodiodes, the reference signal
would provide the amplitude noise. However, when the optical power is equally
split (balanced) into each photodiode, the reference signal would then provide
an experimental value of the shot noise. The light is split exactly 50/50 on the
photodiodes, by rotating the λ/2 plate such that the readout from the analyzer
is at a minimum level, ensuring detection of the shot noise.
The photo diode is a Si PIN based detector, specied to operate in the wave-
length range [320 −1000] nm. This detector was chosen due to its wavelength
responsivity, since it covers the IR pump wavelength (1063 nm), the SHG green
wavelength (532 nm) and the Ti:Sapphire emission spectra (700−900 nm). While
the IR wavelength (1063 nm) is outside the specied wavelength range, many
(including this) Si based devices do respond to wavelength up to 1100 nm. Thus
providing noise measurements of dierent wavelength with the same device, of-
fering easier comparison between measurements and is a way to get around
dierent noise performances of dierent detectors. The responsivity curve this
BAP can be found in Appendix D. The maximum output voltage swing of the
individual monitor outputs (see Fig 4.1) of this photodiode is 1.5 V for a 50 Ω
load. Saturation of the monitor outputs will occur at optical input power greater
than 1 mW at peak responsivity ∼800 nm. The dierent noise measurements
(at dierent λ), will be performed with dierent optical powers, due to dier-
ent wavelength responsivity. However, common for all measurements, is that
the input optical power is adjusted so, that the monitor output voltage will be
∼1.4 V for each measurement; just below saturation level.
4.4
Data Interpretation and Acquisition
As said before, the signal form the photodetectors is observed using a spectrum
analyzer, see Fig. 4.1. The spectrum analyzer is then controlled externally using
a Labview script. This script sends 6 dierent scanning commands, asking the
analyzer to perform 6 scans in the frequency ranges seen in Tab.
4.2.
By
scanning from negative frequency values and up to the desired decade, the 'DC
peak' would become visible in each scan. Notice that even if the provided signal
==PAGE:38==
28
Noise Detection Setup
Frequency range
Bandwidth
−100 Hz - 1.1 kHz
10 Hz
−1 kHz - 11 kHz
100 Hz
−10 kHz - 110 kHz
1 kHz
−100 kHz - 1.1 MHz
1 kHz
−1 MHz - 11 MHz
10 kHz
−10 MHz - 110 MHz
10 kHz
Table 4.2: Table of the dierent scanning ranges and corresponding band-
widths, performed by the electrical spectrum analyzer at each of the
6 dierent scans.
is AC coupled, the spectrum analyzer exhibits a peak at the f = 0 Hz. Since the
spectrum analyzer used in this project is quite old, and sometimes has problems
in form of frequency axis drift, the DC peak is used to dene the exact 0 Hz
point. The obtained powers in units of dBm are divided by the bandwidth B,
to obtain the the power spectral density PS in units of dBm/Hz, see Tab. 4.2.
After specifying the 0 Hz point, the negative part of each scan is discarded, see
4.3(a). The 6 scans are then stitched together at the start/end of each frequency
decade; (10, 100, ..., 100M) Hz, see Fig. 4.3.
The procedures mentioned above, used to obtain the power spectral density
Sp(f) are done using MATLAB scripts, which can be found in Appendix G.
Figure 4.3: This gures illustrates how the obtained data from the dierent
scans relate to each other (a) and how they are being stitched to-
gether into 1 curve (b). Notice that in this specic plot, (relative
to Tab. 4.2), the used bandwidth B are (10, 100, ..., 1 M) Hz, in-
creasing by a factor of 10 for each measurement.
==PAGE:39==
4.5 Validation and Calibration
29
4.5
Validation and Calibration
Before moving on to the results and measurements chapter, it's important to
ensure that this noise detection setup, provides reliable noise measurements.
Therefore, the validation and calibration of the noise detection setup will be
investigated, by measuring the amplitude noise of a Coherent V5 solid-state
green Laser. This laser is known for its low noise performance, and noise mea-
surements describing its noise properties has been reported by [19]. Moreover,
the motivation of this project is to compare this specic laser, with the cascade
SHG laser.
The rst step is to measure the noise oor of the spectrum analyzer (S.A.),
the noise oor of the photodiode combined with the S.A., then measure the
amplitude noise and the (balanced) shotnoise, see Fig.
4.4.
The rst thing
to notice is how the spectrum analyzer has the lowest noise oor at higher
frequencies, followed by the photodiode noise oor. The amplitude noise of the
laser (what was referred to as signal in Fig. 4.2) has the highest noise level,
until it reaches the shot noise level, which is about 10 dB above the photodiode
noise oor. Overall, this is to some degree, in agreement with the discussion in
Sec. 4.1. However, at lower frequencies (up to 10 kHz) a separation between the
levels; spectrum analyzer-, photodiode and the shotnoise-level is not clearly seen,
suggesting less sensitivity in this specic region [100 Hz−10 kHz]. Nevertheless,
the amplitude noise level can be observed in this frequency range, rising ∼20 dB
above the other levels. At 45 MHz, an increase in noise level is seen; for the
photodiode, the shotnoise and the amplitude noise level. This is simply the
cut-o frequency (at 45 MHz) which the photodiode provides, when it operates
at a gain level of Ag = 104 V/A.
The next step would be to convert the unit of the y-axis (amplitude noise) of Fig.
4.4 from dBm/Hz into dBc/Hz, in order to obtain the amplitude noise relative
to the carrier. Moreover, this conversion makes it possible to compare dierent
noise measurements performed with dierent wavelengths/optical powers. The
conversion is made according to the relation
SP (f) [dBc/Hz] = SP (f) [dBm/Hz] −10 log10
 U 2
RT
× 1000 mW−1

,
(4.1)
where the 10 log10() converts the electrical power into decibels, U is the voltage
through the resistor termination RT , and the factor of 1000 mW−1 provides a
unit less expression of the order of mW. The voltage is then given by
U = 1
2 R(λ) Pop Ag ,
==PAGE:40==
30
Noise Detection Setup
Figure 4.4: Amplitude noise of a (VERDI V5) solid state laser (black), the
measured (balanced) shot noise (red), the spectrum analyzer (Tek-
tronix 2753P) noise oor (blue) and the photodetector (+ spectrum
analyzer) noise oor (green).
where R(λ) is the wavelength responsivity of the detector [A/W], Ag is the
transimpedance gain [V/A] and Pop is the optical power sent in the detector
[W]. The values for gain (amplication) are usually given for an innite load,
in practise however, when using a 50 Ωtermination, one must multiply this by
a factor of 1/2. By simple logarithm rules, Eq. 4.1 can be rewritten into
SP [dBc/Hz] = SP (f) [dBm/Hz] −20 log10
1
2 R(λ) Pop Ag

−13 .
(4.2)
Fig.
4.5(a) shows the amplitude noise relative to the carrier, together with
the theoretical shotnoise limit, see Eq.
2.2.
In appendix B an example of
calculating the Shotnoise limit and the quantum eciency of the detector can be
found. By comparing the measured shotnoise level and the theoretical shotnoise
limit in Fig. 4.5(a), a deviation of about 3 −4 dB is observed. In appendix
C, a dierent conversion expression (from dBm/Hz to dBc/Hz) is also tested
with similar results. This may therefore suggest, that the calibration of this
spectrum analyzer is o with a few decibels. Therefore, every amplitude noise
measurement is calibrated according the theoretical shotnoise limit (see Fig.
4.5(b)), in order to obtain meaningful and reliable results.
As said earlier, the solid state laser was chosen, in order to compare its results
==PAGE:41==
4.5 Validation and Calibration
31
with other published results. By comparing the obtained amplitude noise in Fig.
4.5 with the ones published in [19], similar noise structures are observed. In the
[100 −1k] Hz region, similar multiple of peaks are observed in [19], however, a
certain noise peak at ∼3 kHz is not observed in Fig. 4.5.
In the frequency range [100k −1M]Hz, see Fig. 4.6(a), similar 'power supply'
peaks are observed, which describes the harmonics of the main peak at 108 kHz.
Moreover, this measurement also show the sidebans of the rst harmonic at
108±7.2 kHz, indicated by arrows. Similarly, sidebands of the second harmonic
peak (2×108 kHz), visible at 2×108±7.2 kHz which corresponds to 216±14.4 kHz
are seen. Finally, in the range [1 −10] MHz, the amplitude noise goes toward
the shotnoise limit, in accordance with the previously published results.
It's important to state that one should not expect such measurements to (ex-
actly) replicate the previously published results, because after all, these mea-
surements were performed on dierent light sources (even though they are sim-
ilar in model). A nal check of the noise detection setup, is to calculate the
RIN (see Sec. 2.2) of this light source, and compare its value with the specied
value of the manufacture. The cumulative integration (see Eq. 2.2) is seen in
Fig. 4.6(b), which goes from [1M −100] Hz and provides a RIN value of 0.0056
rms %. This is in accordance with the value of < 0.02 rms %, specied by
the manufacture. It's important to state, that this specied value is obtained
for an integration from [10 −100M]Hz. In this case however, integration will
be performed only up to 1 MHz, since it's clear that the amplitude noise goes
toward the shotnoise limit around this frequency range. By further integrating
one could risk including additional noise, which is originated from the shot noise
and from the ampliers frequency cut-o.
Fig. 4.6(b) shows details which originate from the amplitude noise (see Fig.
4.5), and basically tells that the main noise contributions comes from the peaks
at [300 −1k] Hz and from the peaks at [100 −300] kHz.
Additionally, Fig.
4.6(b) shows the cumulative integration for the measured shotnoise level. The
idea behind this curve, is to show the dierence between the noise and the
shotnoise, and to show how much (potential) room there is for improving the
noise performance of this laser, at the measured optical power. In other words,
the RIN of the shotnoise can be considered as a lower limit for the intensity noise.
A nal remark; it should be noted that the provided value (< 0.02 rms %) is
somehow a conservative value, or simply an upper limit used to describe every
laser unit produced of the specic laser model. Therefore, it seems reasonable to
trust this detection setup, since the obtain a RIN value, lies within the specied
limit: 0.0056 rms %< 0.02 rms %.
==PAGE:42==
32
Noise Detection Setup
Figure 4.5: (a) This gure shows the amplitude noise of a solid state laser, the
measured (balanced) shot noise and the shot noise limit in units
of dBc/Hz. (b) Same as (a) but after calibration according to the
shot noise limit.
Figure 4.6: (a) Zoom of the amplitude noise of a solid state laser, showing
the dierent power supply noise peaks.
(b) RIN calculation by
cumulative integration of SP (f) and SP,SN(f) in the range [100−
1M] Hz.
4.6
Electrical Noise Detection
As mentioned before, the motivation of this thesis is to investigate how the noise
transfers from a power supply and into the rest of the system. This section
describes the procedure of measuring the electrical amplitude noise, originating
from a power supply. Fig. 4.7 illustrates the setup of detecting electrical noise.
The power supply is attached to a load (power resistors) which consist of two
resistors, in parallel circuits, capable of handling up to 100 watts, and providing
a total resistance of 0.33 Ω. This load is attached to a heat sink, which dissipates
the heat into the surroundings. This load is meant to simulate the laser diode,
==PAGE:43==
4.7 Cables and Connections
33
by providing similar voltage drop, as when connected to the laser diode. As
mentioned earlier, the electrical spectrum analyzer can't tolerate DC input, and
a homebuilt DC blocker is used before the entrance of the analyzer. This DC
blocker is basically a high pass lter, consisting of a 1 mF capacitor, and uses
the analyzer's built in termination of 50 Ω. With these mentioned specications,
the DC blocker provides a cuto frequency at
fc =
1
2πRC = 3.18 Hz .
As an additional component, a high current lowpass lter (ATLF20AV from
analogtechnologies) can be introduced, to improve the noise performance of
the high current power supplies. When measuring the electrical noise of the
low current power supplies, multiple low resistance resistors in parallel circuits,
were used, which provided a similar voltage drop as when connected to the diode
laser.
Figure 4.7: Electric noise detection setup. The power supplies are connected to
a power resistor, which simulates the voltage drop corresponding to
the tapered diode laser. A DC blocker is then used before studying
the electrical signal using a spectrum analyzer. As an additional
component, a high current lowpass lter can be introduced after
the power supply.
4.7
Cables and Connections
All of the components of the measurement system should be connected with
high-quality cables and connectors. Doubleshielded or semi-rigid coax should
be used whenever possible. The instruments and cabling should be securely
mounted to minimize microphonic eects, and every eort should be made to
minimize ground loops [33].
==PAGE:44==
34
Noise Detection Setup
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 5
Results and Measurements
In this chapter, the results of the noise measurements are presented. The main
target was to study the light source described in chapter 3. This study con-
tains both electrical and optical noise measurements, and describes how the
noise transfer from the power supply, into the IR beam, into the SHG beam
and nally into the Ti:S emission. At the end of this chapter, the results are
compared to noise measurements of a solid state laser (VERDI V5), to compare
the performance of each laser.
The motivation of this study was to take this investigation a further step, by
obtaining images from a 2-photon microscope, which uses the short pulses emit-
ted from a Ti:S under ML operation. These images will then be acquired with
dierent pump sources (Cascade SHG vs Solid state), thus investigating how
the intensity noise of dierent pump sources aects the imaging process. Unfor-
tunately, the imaging modality is still under development, and may rst become
available beyond the scope of this project.
5.1
Electrical Noise
The rst step in the chain of noise transfers, is to investigate the electrical noise
of the power supplies. As described in section 3.1, the tapered diode laser have
==PAGE:46==
36
Results and Measurements
a ridge and a tapered section, each with separate contacts so that the current
to both sections can be controlled individually. The ridged part is connected to
a low current power supply, usually operated at 300 mA, while the tapered part
is connected to a high current power supply, operated at 14 A.
In total, investigations of the noise performance of 3 dierent low current power
supplies, and 4 dierent high current power supplies are carried out. However,
the next sections will only describe selected power supplies, while measurements
of the other power supplies can be found in Appendix E.
Low Current Power Supplies
This section, shows a comparison between two dierent low current power sup-
plies; Arroyo 4205 and Newport 6000, see Fig. 5.1. Both power supplies were
operated at 300 mA. Unfortunately, these power supplies didn't oer enough
noise that our detection setup could measure, and the obtained measurements
were almost identical to the background measurements.
Similar measurements were also performed at dierent current settings at 200 mA
and at 350 mA, see Appendix E.
Figure 5.1: Electrical noise measurements of low current power supplies; (a)
Arroyo 4205 and (b) Newport 6000. The power supplies were op-
erated at 300 mA. A background measurement is included, corre-
sponding to the case where the power supply were connected to the
detection setup (see Sec. 4.6) but without being switched on.
==PAGE:47==
5.1 Electrical Noise
37
5.1.1
High Current Power Supplies
In this section, a similar treatment will be carried out, but on the high current
power supplies. In this case, high current power supplies: Arroyo 4320 and
Newport 5600 operated at 14 A, will be investigated. Additionally, These power
supplies can be operated with the introduction af a high current low pass lter
(see Sec. 4.6), see Fig. 5.2. It is seen that both power supplies has the highest
noise peaks around [100k −1M] Hz.
Additionally, the Newport 5600 power
supply have more peaks distributed at both lower and higher frequencies.
By introducing the high current low pass lter, it's seen that the noise per-
formance of both power supplies improves. The most evident change is in the
[1 −100] kHz region, where a drop of up to 10 dB is seen. The low pass lter
also aect the noise peaks in the [100k −1M] Hz region, by decreasing the hight
of each peak, especially the Newport 5600 peaks. In the [1 −100] Hz region,
it seems that the noise performance is unchanged by the presence of the lter,
which is in good agreement with the spec sheet of the low pass lter. From Fig.
5.2 it is clear that the Aroyo 4320 has the (overall) better noise performance,
relative to the Newport 5600 power supply.
Similar to the low current power supply investigations, Appendix E shows mea-
surements performed at dierent high current settings; [5, 8, 10, 14] A, with- and
without the low pass lter.
The observed behaviour, as for the low current
power supplies, shows that the noise structure is unchanged at dierent current
settings, and the noise level is slightly improved at higher current settings.
Figure 5.2: Electrical noise measurements of (a) Arroyo 4320 and (b) Newport
5600 high current power supplies operated at 14 A. Additionally,
measurements of these two power supplies combined with a high
current low pass lter are included, together with background mea-
surements.
==PAGE:48==
38
Results and Measurements
5.2
IR Noise
Next, we can move on to the next step in the noise chain; measure the IR
noise of the tapered diode laser. Fig. 5.3 shows the rst optical noise measure-
ments performed on the tapered diode laser. The gure represent 4 consecutive
measurements, and shows how the intensity noise varies from measurement to
measurement, and even from a moment to another (a sudden drop/increase).
This was also clearly observed on the live screen of the electrical spectrum an-
alyzer.
Figure 5.3: Amplitude noise measurements of the tapered diode laser. This g-
ure shows 4 consecutive amplitude noise measurements, indicating
the varying and unstable noise features.
By investigating the noise performance of the laser, while adjusting the beam
dump next to the optical isolator, see Fig.
5.4(a), the noise level could be
increased/decreased depending on the angle of the beam dump. This suggested
that the noise performance of the tapered diode laser, was much more sensitive
to feedback that previously assumed. As a solution to this obstacle, a second
optical isolator is introduced into laser setup, see Fig. 5.4(b), This meant that
the feedback limit was reduced from −30 dB to −60 dB. The introduction of the
second optical isolator provided stable noise measurements, however this was at
==PAGE:49==
5.2 IR Noise
39
the cost on reducing the IR optical power by 10%, which meant that only 2.8 W
SHG power could be generated from the cascade system.
Figure 5.4: This gure shows (a) the beam dump positioned next to the optical
isolator (b) the introduction of a second optical isolator and an
additional λ/2 plate.
5.2.1
Reproducibility
After introducing a second optical isolator, the optical noise measurements be-
came stable and meaningful results could now be obtained. Before moving to the
investigation of how the noise is transferred from the electrical power supplies
and into the IR laser, an estimate of the uncertainty and the reproducibility of
the measurements must be considered. Fig. 5.5 shows 3 dierent consecutive
noise measurements performed on the IR laser beam emitted by the tapered
diode laser.
From this gure, it's seen that the noise at higher frequencies,
> 100 kHz, is reproducible from measurement to measurement.
However at
lower frequencies, particularly around 2 kHz, the measurements shows irregu-
larities, in form of moving peaks, and uncertainty in the noise level. This is
most likely caused by irregularities in the laser emission, but could also be ex-
plained by the reduced sensitivity at lower frequencies, which was previously
observed in Fig. 4.4. Nevertheless, it's important to keep this in mind, that the
detection setup has the highest uncertainty at these low frequencies.
5.2.2
Low Current Power Supplies
After achieving stable noise measurements, by introducing a second isolator, we
can now move on with the IR noise measurements. Fig. 5.6 shows the IR noise
measurement of the tapered diode laser, with two dierent power supply combi-
nations. These two measurements were performed with the Arroyo 4320 (high
current) power supply, while interchanging between the Arroyo 4205 (black)
and the Newport 6000 (red) low current power supplies. The motivation behind
this gure, is to compare the two dierent low current power supplies, and see
==PAGE:50==
40
Results and Measurements
Figure 5.5: Amplitude noise of the IR laser beam, measured at 3 dierent
times, showing the reproducibility of the noise performance. Addi-
tionally, the shotnoise limit (SN) is also shown.
if any noticeably changes in the structure are observed, and whether it could be
related to the individual noise performances of the low current power supplies,
see Fig. 5.1. However, this seems not to be the case, and the two noise measure-
ments in Fig. 5.6 are very similar, with the Newport 6000 providing a slightly
better noise performance. We will therefore stick to this power supply (Arroyo
6000) in the next measurements, while interchanging the high current power
supplies. From now on, for the sake of simplicity, the two high current sup-
plies will be refereed to as the Arroyo and the Newport power supplies (without
mentioning their model number).
5.2.3
High Current Power Supplies
After choosing a low current power supply, we will now compare the IR noise
of the tapered diode laser, when operated with dierent high current power
supplies. Fig. 5.7 shows the IR noise of the two high current power supplies,
operated with- and without the high current low pass lter, see Sec. 4.6. These
==PAGE:51==
5.2 IR Noise
41
Figure 5.6: Amplitude noise of the tapered diode laser, operated with two set
of power supplies (high- and low-current): Arroyo 4320 + Arroyo
4205 versus Arroyo 4320 + Newport 6000.
The corresponding
shotnoise limit (blue) is also shown.
measurement shows a noise structures, very similar to the noise structure seen
in the high current power supply measurements, see Fig. 5.2. The main peaks
in the [100k −1M] Hz region are clearly seen, and even the peaks in the [1 −
10] kHz region are transferred from the power supplies. However, not all the
noise peaks from the power supplies are seen in the IR noise measurement. At
higher frequencies (couple of MHz), the electrical noise structure is no longer
seen in the IR noise measurements, where the optical noise level goes toward the
SN limit. This does not mean that the electrical noise spectra, above multiple
MHz is not transferred into the optical noise. Such features will still exist in
the optical noise, and could potentially be resolved if the noise measurement
could be performed with higher optical input powers, see Fig. 4.2. Additionally,
the plateau at 45 MHz (see Sec.
4.5) correspond to the cut-o frequency of
the transimpedance amplier. This cut-o frequency correspond to the upper
(optical) detection limit. The eect of introducing the high current low pass
lter is also present in the IR noise measurements.
As in the case for the
electrical noise, this lter improves the optical noise, most strongly in the [1 −
100] kHz region, but the lter also reduces the heights of the noise peaks around
[100k −1M] Hz.
Fig. 5.8 shows a direct comparison of the IR laser amplitude noise, when oper-
==PAGE:52==
42
Results and Measurements
Figure 5.7: Amplitude noise of the tapered diode laser operated with (a) Arroyo
4320 and (b) Newport 5600 high current power supplies. Addition-
ally, the amplitude noise when introducing the low pass lter is
shown, together with the shotnoise limit. Both measurements were
carried out using the Newport 6000 low current power supply.
ated with the two dierent high current power supplies. In the lower frequencies,
the Arroyo power supply introduces more noise relative to the Newport power
supply. However, at higher frequencies the opposite eect is seen, where the
peaks in the Newport power supply are mostly prominent. While it's clear that
the Arroyo power supply has the (overall) best noise performance, this thesis
intend to study the noise transfer from one stage to another. Therefore it will be
advantageous to use the Newport power supply, providing more noise features,
would make it easier to track the 'footsteps' of the noise transfer at dierent
stages.
Therefore, in the next sections, we will stick to the Newport power
supply, meaning that the Newport 5600 will be used as the high current power
supply, and the Newport 6000 as the low current power supply.
5.3
SHG Noise
After measuring the IR intensity noise of the laser, it's time to investigate the
noise of the SHG light. As described before, the investigated laser system consist
of a cascade of two non-linear crystals which generates the green laser light. Fig.
5.9 shows three noise measurements performed on the cascade SHG system. It
shows the noise behaviour of the SH light generated (only) from the 1st nonlinear
crystal. Experimentally, this was done by setting the proper temperature in the
1st crystal, in order to achieve phase matching condition, while the second
crystal was operated at a temperature far away from phase matching condition.
Likewise, the noise behaviour of the SH light generated (only) from the 2nd
==PAGE:53==
5.3 SHG Noise
43
Figure 5.8: Comparison between the amplitude noise of the diode laser, when
operated with the Newport 5600 (black) and Arroyo 4320 (red) high
current power supplies. The corresponding shotnoise limit (green)
is also shown. Inset: A zoom of on the power supply peaks.
crystal is seen, together with a noise measurement of the complete system (both
crystals phase matched).
It is apparent from Fig. 5.9 that the noise level is dierent, depending on how
many phase matched crystal generates SH light. At higher frequencies, an al-
most constant increase (∼white noise) in the noise level is observed, which
increases from the case of having one single phase matched crystal, and into the
case of having both crystals phase matched, see the inset of Fig. 5.9. At lower
frequencies however, the noise levels are not structured in the same simple man-
ner, and once again irregularities at these frequencies are observed. However,
the electrical noise measurements (Fig. 5.2(b)), suggest that a couple of noise
peaks, at these lower frequencies should be visible. Although that the position
of these peaks are not constant in these measurements, they are actually present
in both the IR and in the SHG noise measurements.
To round up this section; the noise spectra and the especially the noise peaks
are observed in the IR noise measurements (which originates from the Electrical
noise), are also present in the SHG noise. However it seems as if, there is a
white noise contribution, and the shot noise level/limit is no longer achieved in
the frequency detection range.
==PAGE:54==
44
Results and Measurements
This eect is most evident in the case of having 2 crystals phase matched.
Figure 5.9: Amplitude noise the SH light, generated from the 1st (black), the
2nd (red) or from both non-linear crystals (blue). The shotnoise
limit (green) is also shown for the SH light. Inset: Zoom of the
power supply peaks, indicating the dierent noise levels.
5.3.1
IR Noise and the SHG Process
The observed behaviour of the SHG noise is somehow surprising and was not
expected before handed. Therefore in this section, similar noise investigation of
the SHG process will be carried out, but instead of measuring the SHG noise,
the noise of the remaining IR beam will be measured, after passing the 1st, 2nd
or both crystals while being phase matched, see Fig. 5.10. By looking at IR
noise, a similar trend is seen, indicating an increase in the IR noise level, when
the IR beam passes 2 phase matched nonlinear crystals. This increase seems
to be highest at lower frequencies and drops o in a 1/f manner (pink noise),
while at higher frequencies, there seems to be a constant increase in the noise
level (white noise).
==PAGE:55==
5.3 SHG Noise
45
Figure 5.10: Amplitude noise of the IR beam after passing 0 phase matched
crystals, after passing the 1st, the 2nd or both nonlinear crystals
being phase matched (generating SH light). The corresponding
shotnoise limit is also shown. Inset: Zoom of the power supply
peaks, indicating a level dierence in the noise.
5.3.2
SHG Feedback
In the previous section, a similarity in the IR noise and in the SHG noise was
seen, and as mentioned before, the reasoning behind the increase in noise level
is yet to be understood. Therefore, in this (and in the next) section, dierent
investigations will be carried out, in hope of explaining which processes could
be behind the observed increase in the noise level.
Fig.
5.11 shows the IR noise when it passes through 0 or 2 phase matched
crystals. Additionally, a small part (∼100 mW) of the IR beam was picked
out, before it entered the 2 phase matched non-linear crystals, what is called
Before Crystal 1, noted as (1) in Fig. 3.2. The idea of this measurement is
to investigate whether there is any feedback eects from the SHG light, which
could change/aect the IR laser noise properties. However, the two cases of
0 C and Before Crystal 1 are very similar, with minor dierences/deviations.
These small dierences between the case of 0 C and Before Crystal 1, are still
smaller relative to the increase of 2 C case, which makes it hard to draw major
conclusions from this measurement.
==PAGE:56==
46
Results and Measurements
Figure 5.11: Amplitude noise measurement of a pick up of the IR beam before
passing the rst crystal (red), while the reaming of the IR beam is
used to generate SH light through both crystals. The noise of the
IR beam after passing 0 phase matched crystals, and after passing
both crystals being phase matched. The corresponding shotnoise
limit (green) is also shown.
5.3.3
Power Dependency
Next, investigations of the power dependency of the SHG beam will be carried
out, see Fig. 5.12. This gure shows the amplitude noise of two dierent cases
of SHG. The rst one shows the case where the IR input power was reduced,
while maintaining phase matching condition in both crystals, which generated
1.12 W. In the second measurement, approximately the same amount of SH
power (1.09 W) was generated from only the 1st non-linear crystal.
The motivation behind this measurement, is to investigate the power depen-
dency of the amplitude noise, and its relation to the number of crystals used.
This measurement shows a slight increase (∼3 dB) in the amplitude noise at
higher frequencies, when the same amount of optical power is generated from 2
crystals, relative to the case where the SH light is only generated from one crys-
tal. This may suggest that the extra noise contribution (in 2C case), seen in both
the SHG and the IR measurements, is caused by the actual cascade system, and
perhaps not due to the actual SH optical power. Nevertheless, it's once again
==PAGE:57==
5.3 SHG Noise
47
hard to draw conclusions, when the observed changes are so small/negligible.
Figure 5.12: Amplitude noise of the SH light, when ∼1.1 W is generated from
either 1 (black) or from 2 (red) phase matched crystals.
The
corresponding shotnoise limit (blue) is also shown.
5.3.4
Acoustics Vibrations
The results from the previous sections suggest that the extra noise contribution
seen so far, could originate from the cascade conguration (relative to a 'single'
SHG setup). The cascade system stands out by having a phase plate between the
two non-linear crystals, which ensures that the SH light generated form the rst
crystal, is in phase with the newly generated SH light from the second crystal.
The phase plate it self is a passive component; basically a glass plate. While the
cascade system was placed on top of a damped optical table, one could imagine
that the phase plate could be aected by acoustics vibrations. Such vibrations
of the phase plate could introduces uctuations in the SHG light, mainly uctu-
ations of the phase oset between the SH light generated from the rst and from
the second non-linear crystal. Such phase uctuations will aect the SHG pro-
cess, by introducing corresponding amplitude uctuations/interference eects.
Therefore, the eect of acoustics vibrations was investigated, by covering the
cascade setup with a styrofoam box, which only allowed access of the IR beam
and exit of the SHG beam, through small sized holes made on the side walls
of the box. Styrofoam boxes oers excellent sound insulation and is used in
dierent setups. Fig. 5.13 compares the case of not having the setup covered
==PAGE:58==
48
Results and Measurements
(No Box) to the case of having the setup covered at three dierent moments.
The amplitude noise right after covering the setup (0 min), but also after 5 and
10 minutes of having the setup covered. The measurements were repeated after
5 and 10 minutes, just in case any dust particles that might have been inside
the box, would have settled down and stabilized. Thus, avoiding any additional
interactions. However, Fig. 5.13 shows no signs of improvements/change and
suggest that introducing the styrofoam box did not impact the noise measure-
ment, since the noise spectra are more or less similar.
Figure 5.13: Amplitude noise of the cascade SHG light operating in free space,
and when covered with a styrofoam box at three dierent times;
immediately after covering the setup with the box (0 min), and
after having the setup covered for 5 or 10 minutes. The corre-
sponding shotnoise limit is also shown.
5.3.5
Phase Plate Noise
In this section, the noise properties of the SHG light will be investigated, while
adjusting the angle of the phase plate between the two crystals (see Fig. 3.5).
Fig. 5.14 shows the amplitude noise at dierent phase plate angles, where the 68o
position correspond to the optimal position for the SHG process. By rotating
the phase plate, no signicant changes were seen in the noise measurements,
especially in the [100k −1M] Hz frequency range, see the inset of Fig. 5.14. In
the [1 −100] kHz range however, some random variations are observed, which
==PAGE:59==
5.4 Ti:Sapphire Noise
49
(once again) are dicult to draw conclusions from.
Figure 5.14: Amplitude noise of the cascade SHG laser, measured at dierent
phase plate angles, where the 68o angle provides the optimal phase
oset between the IR and the SHG light.
So far in this section, an increase in the noise has been observed under the
process of SHG. The reason behind this eect is not yet clear, and possible
eects would be discussed in the discussion chapter. For now, we will move on
to the next step in the noise chain investigation; noise in the Ti:S laser.
5.4
Ti:Sapphire Noise
After generating the green SHG light, the next step would be pumping a Ti:Sapphire
laser with the cascade SHG laser. The Ti:S laser is a 'Scientic' from Femto-
lasers, which provides short pulses with a repetition rate of 90 MHz. This light
source provides (under mode-locked operation) a broad emission spectrum with
a FWHM ∼50 nm, indicating less than 20 fs pulse width, see Fig. 5.15.
Next, the amplitude noise of the Ti:S noise under CW and ML operation are
measured, see Fig. 5.16. The same gure shows the noise of the corresponding
pump source (SHG from 2 crystals). By comparing the the pump source and the
Ti:S laser noise, both CW and ML, it's seen that the main noise features of the
==PAGE:60==
50
Results and Measurements
Figure 5.15: Optical spectrum of the mode-locked Ti:S laser, directly pumped
with the SHG cascade laser. The Ti:S was pumped with 2.7 W,
which provided ∼300 mW of CW emission and ∼280 mW of
ML emission.
pump source, are transferred into the Ti:S noise. This include the power supply
peaks at [100k−1M] Hz, and the few peaks around [1−10] kHz. However, a new
peak at 90 MHz is observed under ML operation, see Fig. 5.16(b). This peak
correspond to the repetition rate of the Ti:S laser. The amplitude of this peak
is expected to be higher (∼30 dB) than the observed value, however due to the
cuto frequency of the photodetector, the amplitude of this peak is considerably
reduced. Additionally, a 'plateau' around 500 kHz is only seen in the Ti:S noise
measurements, and not in the pump source. The noise transfer theory in Sec.2.5,
suggest a linear transfer of the pump source noise followed by second-order pole
at the ROF, with −20 dB/decade roleo at frequencies above above the ROF
ωm ≥ωsp.
From these noise measurements, one can deduce that the cuto frequency, of
the complex noise transfer function (see Sec. 2.5), is around ∼900 kHz, see Fig.
5.17. From this gure, it seems that the nal noise peak from the pump source
(indicated by an arrow), at ∼1 MHz is not transferred into the Ti:S noise. This
suggest that the cuto frequency would be located near or at these frequency.
5.4.1
Solid State Laser as a Pump Source
In the previous section, a noise 'plateau' around 500 kHz was observed, which
is suspected to originate relaxation oscillations of the Ti:S laser [8]. Such oscil-
lations are dependent on the pump power, and by swapping the SHG cascade
laser with the VERDI V5 solid state laser, higher pump powers can be achieved.
The solid state laser oers up to 5 W of green 532 nm laser light, more than the
==PAGE:61==
5.4 Ti:Sapphire Noise
51
Figure 5.16: Amplitude noise of Ti:Sapphire laser (red) under (a) CW and (b)
mode-locked operation. The gure also shows the corresponding
amplitude noise of the pump source; cascade SHG laser (black),
together with the corresponding shotnoise limit (blue).
Figure 5.17: Zoom of the amplitude noise of the Ti:S CW emission (black)
together with the cascade SHG pump (red). Arrow indicating the
last power supply peak observed in the pump source noise mea-
surement, which was not transferred into the Ti:S noise spectra.
SHG cascade system (2.8 W). Fig. 5.18 shows the amplitude noise of the Ti:S
CW emission at [100k −1M] Hz, for dierent pump powers. It's clear from this
measurement, that the previously observed 'plateau', is also present at similar
pump pump powers (2.7 W). However, at higher pump powers, this 'plateau'
becomes smaller in amplitude and is shifted toward higher frequencies. This is in
good agreement with [8], suggesting that the observed eect is due to relaxation
oscillations.
Next, amplitude noise of the Ti:S pumped with ∼3 W, from the solid state laser
are shown in Fig. 5.19. Once again, the main noise features of pump source are
transferred into both the CW and the ML noise measurements. The repetition
==PAGE:62==
52
Results and Measurements
Figure 5.18: Zoom of the amplitude noise of the Ti:S under CW operation,
pumped with a (VERDI V5) solid state laser, at dierent pump
powers. This gure shows the eect of relaxation oscillations,
and their dependency on pump power.
rate peak at 90 MHz under ML operation is (once again) seen as a peak (Fig.
5.19(b)). The eect of the relaxation oscillation is very weak at this pump power
level, and is mainly present in the CW emission as a small plateau.
Figure 5.19: Amplitude noise of Ti:S pumped with a (VERDI V5) solid state
laser (red) under (a) CW (b) mode-locked operation. Addition-
ally, the amplitude noise of the pump source (black) is shown,
together with the corresponding shotnoise limit (blue).
Finally, to conclude this section, the dierent amplitude noise measurements
of the ML emission, obtained with dierent pump sources/power supplies, is
shown in Fig. 5.20. It's clear that the solid state laser, has the overall best
performance when compared to the cascade SHG laser, and reaches the shot
noise limit already at ∼300 kHz. The cascade SHG laser however, reaches the
shot noise limit at ∼3 MHz, both with the Arroyo and the Newport power
supply. Similar for these measurements, is how the Ti:S, inherits its noise from
==PAGE:63==
5.5 All Noise Stages
53
the noise of the pump laser.
Figure 5.20: Amplitude noise of the Ti:S ML emission, pumped with the solid
state laser (red), the cascade SHG laser operated with the Arroyo
(black) and the Newport (blue) power supply. The corresponding
shot noise limit is also show.
5.5
All Noise Stages
To round up this chapter, the dierent stages of noise transfer will be compared,
based on the dierent power supply combinations. Table 5.1 provides the RIN
values of the dierent light source/power supply combinations, while the cor-
responding noise measurements can be found in Appendix F. This table shows
how RIN values transfers from the power supplies, and all the way into the Ti:S
emission. Most of these values follows a somewhat intuitive change; increasing
from the Electrical, into the IR, into the SHG, and nally into the Ti:S stage.
However, the eect of introducing the high current low pass lter is not as clear.
Eg. the RIN rms hvalue of the Newport IR noise is 0.161, while Newport +
Filter provides an IR RIN rms hvalue of 0.3. In this case, one would expect a
lower RIN value, when adding the low pass lter. However by looking at Fig.
==PAGE:64==
54
Results and Measurements
Power Supply →
Newport
Newport
Arroyo
Arroyo
VERDI
RIN rms h↘
+ Filter
+ Filter
V5
Electrical
0.517
0.173
0.059
0.051
-
IR
0.161
0.300
0.085
0.040
-
SHG
0.623
0.626
0.379
0.222
0.056
Ti:S ML
2.440
-
0.472
0.757
0.076
Table 5.1: Table of RIN rms values in %, for the dierent stages. These values
are given for an integration from 100 Hz −1MHz.
5.7(b), it's seen that an additional peak/level occurs at lower frequencies, in
the case of using the low pass lter. This additional increase adds up in the
integration process and thus provide a higher RIN value. As discussed earlier,
the noise measurements at lower frequencies shows some uncertainties and one
should be careful, not to draw big conclusions based on noise changes at these
frequencies. Nevertheless, the values in Tab. 5.1 provides a good feeling of the
order of magnitudes obtained at each stage.
Fig. 5.1 provides another way to illustrate the dierence in the noise levels,
obtained at the dierent stages.
From this gure, it's once again clear how
the main features in the electrical noise spectra travels all the way through the
dierent optical stages.
==PAGE:65==
5.5 All Noise Stages
55
Figure 5.21: Amplitude noise of the dierent stages in the cascade SHG laser;
the electrical noise (black), the IR laser (red), the SH light gen-
erated from both crystals (blue) and the corresponding amplitude
noise of Ti:S laser under mode-locked operation.
==PAGE:66==
56
Results and Measurements
==PAGE:67==
Chapter 6
Discussion
System Development
The described optical noise-detection system provided noise measurements from
100 Hz to 10 MHz, where the lower limit is dened by the spectrum analyzer,
and the upper by the photodetector. However, it is usually desirable to augment
this lower frequency to 1 Hz, which can be achieved by connecting the photo-
diode to an oscilloscope, and perform an FFT of the measured data. Such a
conguration would provide detection of the amplitude noise at lower frequen-
cies. The challenge would then be nding the frequency boundary between the
two instruments, which will be determined by the noise performance of each
analyzer, its resolution bandwidth and the data acquisition speed. In the case
of increasing the detection bandwidth, one would have to use another photode-
tector/transimpedance amplier, capable of providing higher frequencies. The
photodetector used in this project, had actually the option of providing a band-
width of 150 MHz, however this is at the cost of decreasing the gain by a factor
of 10. Nevertheless, the shot noise limit (for the corresponding optical input
powers) was already achieved at ∼500 kHz in the presented results.
The electrical noise measurements contained peaks and features at multiple MHz
frequencies, which was not seen in the optical noise measurements. Such features
would still transfer into the optical noise, up until multiple GHz frequencies,
==PAGE:68==
58
Discussion
where diode lasers have their relaxation oscillations [13]. In order to resolve these
'extra' features and noise peaks, measurements on higher optical input powers
would be required, and thus a dierent photodiode solution.
Measurements
performed on higher optical powers, would provide lower shot noise limit and
stronger signals, see Fig. 4.2.
The electrical spectrum analyzer used in the detection setup, is not a state of the
art instrument, and had not been calibrated for multiple of years, and therefore
caused dierent challenges.
The problem of frequency drift of the analyzer,
was bypassed by measuring from negative to positive frequencies, by manually
dening the 0 Hz point. The shot noise (balanced) measurements, were used to
account for the oset in the power signals received from the analyzer. This was
done by adjusting the measured shot noise level to the shot noise limit, thus
providing a method to calibrate the spectum analyzer.
The separation between the dierent levels; spectrum analyzer, photodetector
noiseoors and the measured shot noise level, did not completely follow the
'usual design philosophy' of all receivers, see Sec. 4.1, atleast not at the lower
frequencies. However, in reality, this 'principle' is often dicult to achieve at all
frequencies, and one should only endeavor to achieve this when it's really needed.
In case of further development/improvement of the noise detection setup, a new
spectrum analyzer with lower noiseoor, together with a photodiode capable of
handling multiple tens of mW, would resolve more optical noise features.
Noise Transfer Functions
The results of this thesis, strongly suggest a direct transfer of noise at each of the
dierent stages. Noise transfer functions, as described earlier, provides a linear
transfer followed by a cuto frequency. These functions exist between each of
the dierent stages, and can be measured experimentally. For the electrical into
optical noise transfer, a modulation on the electrical signal, typically done using
a function generator, would provide a corresponding modulation on the optical
signal. By relating the amplitude modulation in the power supply (at dier-
ent frequencies), to the measured modulation in the optical signal, a transfer
function can be obtained. Unfortunately, the investigated power supplies could
only be modulated between DC and up to couple of kHz, which wouldn't pro-
vide the cuto frequency of the noise transfer function. If one were to increase
the upper frequency modulation limit, external and more complicated electrical
setups would be required.
Based on the same principle, the noise transfer function, from the IR beam
==PAGE:69==
59
and into the SHG beam can be obtained, by modulating the IR power. This
is perhaps most easily done using an acousto-optic modulator, which provides
a modulation of the IR beam at dierent frequencies. However, such a device
was not available during this project. As described before, modulations of the
power supply, would provide modulations of the IR beam, which could in prin-
ciple be used to obtain the IR to SHG noise transfer function (up to the max.
modulation frequency). However, such a modulation would cause a modulation
in the emission wavelength of the tapered diode laser, resulting in dierent SH
conversion eciencies. This must then be taken into account under each mea-
surement, and perhaps a readjustment of the temperature phase condition of
both crystals would then be required to full perfect phase matching condition.
As it may sound, this would be a very complicated procedure, where the number
of uncertainties is very high. The noise transfer between the pump and into the
Ti:S, follows the same discussion as above, and is most easily obtained using an
acousto-optic modulator.
Power Supplies
From the electrical noise measurements, it was clear that the diode laser inher-
ited its noise spectra from the corresponding power supply used. This suggest
that improved noise performance of the power supply, will provide improved
optical noise performance. The introduction of the lowpass lter was evident
at all dierent stages. Therefore, investigating dierent types of high current
lters, or perhaps combinations of multiple lters would be advantageously, and
provide an overall improved noise performance. This is typically done in most
low noise lasers, such as the VERDI solid state laser.
Second Harmonic Generation
One of the main motivations of this thesis, is to study the noise generation/transfer
under the process of SHG of tapered diode lasers, especially in a cascade SHG
system. It was shown that both the fundamental (IR) and the SH noise prop-
erties were aected under the process of SHG. The amplitude noise of the fun-
damental beam, increased under the process of SHG, especially in the case of
cascade (2 crystals) SHG. Likewise, the amplitude noise of the SHG beam, ob-
tained from two crystals was higher than the case of a single non-linear crystal.
Additionally, the SHG laser noise, was increased to such a level, that it was
no longer shot noise limited at the measured frequencies. In recent published
==PAGE:70==
60
Discussion
results [34], a somehow similar behaviour has been reported, suggesting that
the noise of the SH wave to be higher than that of the fundamental wave. This
study is based on a tunable light source, and was performed using a much sim-
pler noise detection system (basically a photodetector + oscilloscope). However,
this research article provides no explanation/suggestions on the origin of this
eect.
The SHG and the fundamental (IR) beams are related to each other, and their
noise performances are connected. If one were to consider the power relation
between the SHG and the IR beam, one can imagine an inverse relation between
the two; an increase in the SHG power result in a decrease in the fundamental
beam, and vice versa. For the same reason, the intensity noise of the two beams
are also connected, and the SHG beam inherits its noise properties from the
fundamental beam. However, the question still remains; where does the extra
'white noise' come from, and which processes can cause this eect.
The results presented in this work, suggest that the observed increase in the
noise level, is not caused by either feedback eects of the SH light or acoustics
vibrations. Similarly, amplitude noise measurements performed at dierent op-
tical powers, and at dierent phase plate angles, didn't either provide a clear
answer to the origin of this phenomena. On the other hand, one can imagine
that this eect can be related to the phase noise, which is connected to the
amplitude noise. However, it's still unclear how such a connection is made, and
perhaps more importantly, which processes could cause an increase in phase
noise.
Another (perhaps related) explanation might lie within the fareld intensity
prole of the fundamental beam, see Fig. 3.3. The fundamental beam have a
central lobe carrying the majority of the power. However, signicant structures
in the horizontal direction (slow axis), and minor structures in the vertical
direction (fast axis) are also present in the fundamental beam. On the other
hand, the SH beam is diraction limited, with minor structures only observed
in the horizontal direction. One could therefore imagine, that the structures
lying outside the central lobe of the fundamental beam, could be related to the
additional noise observed during the SH process. Eects such as interference
and perhaps even beating might take place during the SH process, between the
structures lying outside the central lobe of the fundamental beam. The above
discussion contains mainly speculations, and strongly suggest a much deeper
investigation of this eect, in order to describe the noise properties under the
SH process.
==PAGE:71==
61
Feedback
The rst optical noise measurements performed, showed unstable noise be-
haviour with uctuating noise levels across the dierent frequencies.
As de-
scribed in the Result chapter, the position/angle of beam dump (see Fig. 5.4),
had a direct inuence on the noise performance of the laser. This eect was re-
lated to feedback, and suggested introducing a second optical isolator. This was
however, at the cost of reducing the input IR power, thus reducing the overall
SHG power. While introducing a second isolator was the 'easiest' way to get
around this problem, further investigations must be done to solve this problem,
since it also aect the pumping of the Ti:S laser, see below.
Ti:Sapphire
The cascade SHG laser was used to pump the Ti:S laser. The detection setup
provided amplitude noise measurements of both the CW and ML emission. As
described in Sec. 2.4, pulse parameters (relative to CW emission) such as energy,
temporal position, duration, etc. are not dened on a continuous time scale,
but only on a discrete temporal grid. The consequence of this is that noise
spectra can only be specied up to half the pulse repetition rate, 90/2 MHz ≃
45 Mhz, corresponding to the Nyquist frequency. This frequency correspond to
the bandwidth of the photodetector, and all amplitude measurements were only
considered up to this frequency.
The amplitude noise measurements of the Ti:S, inherited its noise from the
pump source, however, a new 'plateau' was observed, which was later explained
by relaxation oscillations. Thus, this eect could be reduced by increasing the
green pump power. While the cascade (with 2 isolators) only could generate
up to 2.8 W green light, the VERDI solid state laser could provide up to 5 M.
At higher pump powers, the eect of relaxation oscillations was reduced, thus
providing improved RIN values.
Once again, this suggest more investigations into the feedback eects of the
cascade laser, and perhaps nding a better solution than the two optical isolator
system. The cascade SHG system is capable of producing up to 3.7 W, and is
therefore not used up to its maximum potential.
==PAGE:72==
62
Discussion
Bio Imaging
As described in the introduction of this thesis, the motivation was to carry the
noise investigations one further step, by obtaining 2-photon scans, obtained with
the ML Ti:S pulses. The Ti:S would then be pumped with both the solid state
laser and the cascade SHG laser.
The understanding of how the Ti:S noise is transferred into 2-photon images is
not yet known, and can be a project of its own. However, we suspect that noise
performance of the Ti:S laser would aect the imaging process, by eg. improved
contrast. The most interesting investigation would then be, obtaining similar
scans, but with dierent Ti:S noise performances.
While the solid state laser has the best noise performance, it's not possible to
modify its noise spectra. The cascade SHG laser on the other hand, oers an an
extra dimension, with the possibility of changing its noise performance. Such a
change in the noise performance, can either be a 'big change', by interchanging
between the Arroyo and Newport power supplies, or a small modication of the
noise spectra, by adding/removing the lowpass lter.
Unfortunately, this step was not reached during the scope of this project, and
the results of this investigation may rst become available in the near future.
Phase Noise
The aspect of phase noise was not studied in this project, mainly due to the lack
of needed detection equipment. Nevertheless, it's not yet clear how the 2-photon
imaging process is connected to the laser noise in general, and in particular to
phase noise in tapered diode laser.
==PAGE:73==
Chapter 7
Conclusions
This thesis review techniques for obtaining sensitive and high-dynamic-range
measurements of laser amplitude noise, in the frequency domain at the shot
noise limit. Based on this, a noise detection setup is built, capable of providing
laser amplitude noise from 100 Hz to 10 MHz. This setup is based on balanced
amplied photodetctors, combined with an electrical spectrum analyzer, capable
of providing amplitude noise measurements and measurements of the (balanced)
shot noise level.
This system is tested on a solid state (VERDI V5) laser, and the results are in
good agreement with similar treatments, published by another research group.
The obtained RIN % rms value of this investigation, 0.0056 %, is in agreement
with the manufactures specied value; < 0.02 %, thus indicating trust worthy
results and noise detection setup.
The main target of this thesis, is to investigate the noise properties of a unique
laser system, consisting of a cascade SHG laser, based on a 1063 nm tapered
diode laser. This laser is frequency doubled through a cascade, consisting of two
nonlinear crystals. The phase oset between the fundamental and the SH beam,
is adjusted using a phase plate, positioned between the two non-linear crystals.
The tapered section of the diode laser is connected to a high-current power
supply, while the ridged section is connected to a low-current power supply.
==PAGE:74==
64
Conclusions
The noise properties of a set of dierent high- and low-current power supplies
is investigated, in order to relate how their individual performances, aect the
amplitude noise performance of the diode laser.
The amplitude noise of the IR diode laser, proved to be very sensitive to feed-
back, and required the insertion of a second optical isolator, before stable optical
noise measurements could be achieved. From the optical noise measurements,
it's observed that the diode laser inherit its noise properties from the high-
current power supply. The main noise features of the power supply, including
the noise peaks, were directly transferred into the optical noise. The measure-
ment of the low current power supplies proved not to be very useful, since the
measured signal were very close to the background level. Moreover, by changing
between dierent low current power supplies, the amplitude noise of the diode
laser was not aected. By introducing a high-current low pass lter, the electri-
cal noise was improved, resulting in a similar improvement of the optical noise
performance. The amplitude noise of the IR laser reached shot noise limit at
∼200 kHz.
Amplitude noise measurements are also performed on the SH laser light, gen-
erated from (only) the 1st non-linear crystal, from (only) the 2nd non-linear
crystal or from the combined cascade setup. The SH laser beam inherited its
noise features from the fundamental (IR) beam. However, the SHG noise mea-
surements, compared to the IR noise measurements, were no longer shot noise
limited, at least not in the detected frequency range. An almost constant in-
crease (white noise contribution) in the noise level of the SH light is observed.
Similarly, measurements of the IR light were performed under the processes of
SHG. Amplitude noise measurement of the excess IR light, after passing 1 phase
matched crystal (either the 1st of the 2nd), and after passing both crystals be-
ing phase matched, is recorded. These measurements, shows an increase in the
IR noise level after the SH process, in similar fashion to the SHG measure-
ments. This was most evident when both crystals were phase matched. The
reasoning behind this eect of noise level increase is still unclear. Dierent noise
measurements were performed in order to investigate the possible mechanisms
behind this eect. Measurements including feedback eects of the SH light into
the diode lasers, did not suggest a feedback inuence on the amplitude noise.
Similarly, measurements performed at dierent SHG optical powers, together
with investigations of acoustics vibration inuence, didn't either provide a clear
answer. Finally, measurements with dierent phase plate angle positions were
performed, but once again, without a clear change in the amplitude noise.
The Cascade laser is used to pump a Ti:S laser, providing < 20 fs pulses, and
a broad emission spectrum with a FWHM of ∼50 nm. Amplitude noise mea-
surements of both the CW and ML emission from the Ti:S laser is obtained,
==PAGE:75==
65
reaching shot noise limit at ∼2 MHz. In these measurements, relaxation os-
cillation eects were observed, indicated by a plateau-like noise level around
500 kHz. However, this eect could be signicantly reduced at higher optical
pump powers (> 3 W). Similarly to the previous steps, the main noise features
of the Ti:S, is inherited by the pump source; the cascade SHG laser. The noise
transfer from a pump source and into a Ti:S laser is described by a noise transfer
function. This is a linear function, with a a roleo at a cuto frequency, which
experimentally was deduced to be ≤1 MHz. Finally, similar noise measurements
of the Ti:S were performed, when pumped with a solid state (VERDI V5) laser.
==PAGE:76==
66
Conclusions
==PAGE:77==
Appendix A
WienerKhinchin theorem
The SchawlowTownes formula for the linewidth of a laser with quantum noise
inuences only, has been presented by Schawlow and Townes in 1958 [35]. How-
ever, this reference does not contain a derivation, but only referred to a result
for thermal noise inuences in masers and simply replaced kBT with hν. In-
stead, reference [8] provides a derivation with a detailed physical explanation,
which will be described next.
Assume a four-level single-frequency laser without amplitude/phase coupling.
The output coupler transmission is Toc, and there can be additional (parasitic)
cavity losses lpar, so that the total cavity losses are ltot = Toc + lpar.
On
average, the gain must balance the losses: g = ltot. By describing the circulating
eld with a complex amplitude A, normalized so that the intracavity power
is Pint = |A|2. During each round-trip, the gain medium adds a uctuating
amplitude δA where each of the quadrature components has the variance
σ2 = hν
4TR
g ,
with TR being the round-trip time. Its eect is that the optical phase changes
by
δφ = δAq
A ,
==PAGE:78==
68
WienerKhinchin theorem
where δAq is the quadrature component perpendicular to A in the complex
plane.
The cavity losses contribute another noise amplitude proportional to
ltot. Therefore, in total the variance of the phase is increased by
δσ2
φ =
hν
4TR|A|2 g +
hν
4TR|A|2 ltot =
hν
2TRPint
ltot ,
per round trip, where g = ltot was used, because the gain must balance the
cavity losses. As each round trip contributes statistically independent phase
uctuations, the phase variance grows with time according to
σ2
φ(t) =

(φ(t) −φ(0))2

=
hν
2TRPint
ltot
t
TR
=
hνltot
2T 2
RPint
t .
Such a linear growth of variance is consistent with a two-sided power density
Sφ(f) = C
f 2 ,
(A.1)
where
C =
1
(2π)2
hνltot
2T 2
RPint
.
One can verify this by calculating the phase variance for a given power density
proportional to f −2, which leads to an integral that can be analytically solved
and is proportional to the time t. One can further show that the power density
of Eq. A.1 corresponds to a Lorentzian eld spectrum with
L(∆f) =
C
(πC)2 + (∆f)2 ,
which approaches the phase noise power density Sφ(f) for large frequency osets
∆f. It is normalized for a unity integral and leads to the FWHM eld linewidth
∆ν = 2πC =
hνltot
4πT 2
RPint
= hνltotToc
4πT 2
RPout
.
For ltot = Toc (i.e., without parasitic cavity losses), this result is exactly equiv-
alent to the original SchawlowTownes formula [35]
∆ν = 4πhν(∆νc)2
Pout
,
where
∆νc = 1
4π
ltot
TR
,
is the half width of the resonances of the cavity (with unpumped gain medium).
==PAGE:79==
Appendix B
Shotnoise Limit and
Quantum Eciency
According to Eq. 2.2, the shot noise limit is given by
SRIN,SN(f) = 2hν
P
,
where P is the mean optical power value.
In reality, this number must be
multiplied with the quantum eciency of the photodetector.
The quantum
eciency is dened as the ration between number of electrons and the number
of emitted photons:
Ne
Nf
=
i0
e
λP
hc
= i0hc
eλP ,
where i0 = R(λ)P0 is the average photocurrent, at an incident optical power of
P0 and R(λ) is the photodetector responsivity. At 532 nm, the photodetector has
a response of R(532 nm) = 0.28 A/W, and with an optical power of 2.86 mW,
corresponds to a shotnoise limit of −154 dBc, as seen in Fig.
4.5.
For this
specic wavelength (532 nm), the quantum eciency is Ne/Nf = 0.65.
==PAGE:80==
70
Shotnoise Limit and Quantum Eciency
==PAGE:81==
Appendix C
Conversion from dBm to
dBc
In this section, a dierent method of converting dBm to dBc is described, com-
pared to Eq. 4.2.
1. Convert from dBm/Hz to mW/Hz:
P [mW/Hz] = 10
P [dBm/Hz]
10
2. Normalize to a 1 Hz bandwidth
3. Convert from power mW to voltage V:
Urms =
√
PR
4. Convert from voltage V to current A:
∆irms =
Urms
1
2 104 V/A
5. Next, we nd the fractional rms uctuation produced by the shot nise:
∆irms/i0 where i0 = R(λ)Pop is the average photocurrent, and R(λ) is
the photodetector responsivity and Pop is the incident optical power.
==PAGE:82==
72
Conversion from dBm to dBc
6. Finally, we convert this ratio into a decibel
P[dBc] = 10 log10
 ∆irms
i0
2!
==PAGE:83==
Appendix D
Photodetector Responsivity
(a)
(b)
Figure D.1: (a) Spectral responsivity of the photodetector (PDB450A) (b) In-
dividual photodetectors monitor responses.
==PAGE:84==
74
Photodetector Responsivity
==PAGE:85==
Appendix E
Electrical Noise
Measurements
In this section, all the dierent power supply measurements are presented. The
low current power supplies are investigated under operation of 200, 300 and at
350 mA. The high current power supplies are investigated when operated at
5, 8, 10 and 14 A. Additionally, the high current power supplies can also be
attached to a high current low pass lter.
==PAGE:86==
76
Electrical Noise Measurements
==PAGE:87==
77
==PAGE:88==
78
Electrical Noise Measurements
==PAGE:89==
Appendix F
Optical Noise
Measurements
In this section, the dierent optical noise measurements, obtained with the
Arroyo 4320 power supply, with and without the low pass lter. Additionally,
optical noise measurements, obtained with the Newport 5600 with a low lter,
is also presented.
==PAGE:90==
80
Optical Noise Measurements
==PAGE:91==
81
==PAGE:92==
82
Optical Noise Measurements
==PAGE:93==
83
==PAGE:94==
84
Optical Noise Measurements
==PAGE:95==
Appendix G
Matlab Scripts
In this section, the dierent Matlab functions are provided, which were used to
represent the noise data.
Import_data.m
This function imports the 6 set of measurements (D1, D2, .., D6), with the cor-
responding bandwidth (V 1, V 2, .., V 6) and uses the function stitch.m to stitch
the dierent sets of data, at the frequencies (S1, S1, .., S6).
function [B] = Import_data(D1,D2,D3,D4,D5,D6,V1,V2,V3,V4,V5,V6,S1,S2,S3,S4,S5)
% D1,D2,...,D6 are the path of the data to be importet
% V1,V2,...,V6 are the resolution bandwidth values which the data needs to
% be adjusted acoording to
% S1,S2,...,S3 are the stiching points
[B1kHz(:,1),B1kHz(:,2)] = importfile(D1,V1);
[B10kHz(:,1),B10kHz(:,2)] = importfile(D2,V2);
[B100kHz(:,1),B100kHz(:,2)] = importfile(D3,V3);
[B1MHz(:,1),B1MHz(:,2)] = importfile(D4,V4);
==PAGE:96==
86
Matlab Scripts
[B10MHz(:,1),B10MHz(:,2)] = importfile(D5,V5);
[B100MHz(:,1),B100MHz(:,2)] = importfile(D6,V6);
B=stitch(B1kHz,B10kHz,B100kHz,B1MHz,B10MHz,B100MHz,S1,S2,S3,S4,S5);
Importle.m
This is a modied import function, which in comparison to the built in import
function of MatLab, nds the DC peak and shift/adjust the frequency axis
according to the DC peak: ωDC = 0 Hz.
function [VarName3,VarName4] = importfile(filename ,Bandwidth, startRow, endRow)
%IMPORTFILE Import numeric data from a text file as column vectors.
%
[VARNAME3,VARNAME4] = IMPORTFILE(FILENAME) Reads data from text file
%
FILENAME for the default selection.
%
%
[VARNAME3,VARNAME4] = IMPORTFILE(FILENAME, STARTROW, ENDROW) Reads data
%
from rows STARTROW through ENDROW of text file FILENAME.
%
% Example:
%
[VarName3,VarName4] = importfile('Background_1kHz.txt',1, 1000);
%
%
See also TEXTSCAN.
% Auto-generated by MATLAB on 2014/09/16 15:23:29
%% Initialize variables.
delimiter = '\t';
if nargin<=2
startRow = 2;
endRow = inf;
end
%% Read columns of data as strings:
% For more information, see the TEXTSCAN documentation.
formatSpec = '%s%s%[^\n\r]';
%% Open the text file.
fileID = fopen(filename,'r');
%% Read columns of data according to format string.
==PAGE:97==
87
% This call is based on the structure of the file used to generate this
% code. If an error occurs for a different file, try regenerating the code
% from the Import Tool.
dataArray = textscan(fileID, formatSpec, endRow(1)-startRow(1)+1,..,
'Delimiter', delimiter,...,
'HeaderLines', startRow(1)-1, 'ReturnOnError', false);
for block=2:length(startRow)
frewind(fileID);
dataArrayBlock = textscan(fileID, formatSpec,...,
endRow(block)-startRow(block)+1, 'Delimiter', delimiter, 'HeaderLines', start
for col=1:length(dataArray)
dataArray{col} = [dataArray{col};dataArrayBlock{col}];
end
end
%% Close the text file.
fclose(fileID);
%% Convert the contents of columns containing numeric strings to numbers.
% Replace non-numeric strings with NaN.
raw = repmat({''},length(dataArray{1}),length(dataArray)-1);
for col=1:length(dataArray)-1
raw(1:length(dataArray{col}),col) = dataArray{col};
end
numericData = NaN(size(dataArray{1},1),size(dataArray,2));
for col=[1,2]
% Converts strings in the input cell array to numbers.
%Replaced non-numeric strings with NaN.
rawData = dataArray{col};
for row=1:size(rawData, 1);
% Create a regular expression to detect and remove
% non-numeric prefixes and suffixes.
regexstr = '(?<prefix>.*?),...,
(?<numbers>([-]*(\d+[\.]*)+[\,]{0,1}\d*[eEdD],...,
{0,1}[-+]*\d*[i]{0,1})|([-]*(\d+[\.]*)*[\,]{1,1},...,
\d+[eEdD]{0,1}[-+]*\d*[i]{0,1}))(?<suffix>.*)';
try
result = regexp(rawData{row}, regexstr, 'names');
numbers = result.numbers;
% Detected commas in non-thousand locations.
invalidThousandsSeparator = false;
if any(numbers=='.');
==PAGE:98==
88
Matlab Scripts
thousandsRegExp = '^\d+?(\.\d{3})*\,{0,1}\d*$';
if isempty(regexp(thousandsRegExp, '.', 'once'));
numbers = NaN;
invalidThousandsSeparator = true;
end
end
% Convert numeric strings to numbers.
if ~invalidThousandsSeparator;
numbers = strrep(numbers, '.', '');
numbers = strrep(numbers, ',', '.');
numbers = textscan(numbers, '%f');
numericData(row, col) = numbers{1};
raw{row, col} = numbers{1};
end
catch me
end
end
end
%% Allocate imported array to column variable names
VarName3 = cell2mat(raw(:, 1));
VarName4 = cell2mat(raw(:, 2));
%% This part the DC peak, adjust the frequency axis
%(It does not remove the negative part of the graph)
[a1,b]=max(VarName4);
B1kHz=zeros(length(VarName3)-b,2);
B1kHz(1,2)=VarName4(b);
length(B1kHz);
for i=2:length(B1kHz)
B1kHz(i,1)=i*(VarName3(2)-VarName3(1));
B1kHz(i,2)=VarName4(b+i-1);
end
VarName3 = B1kHz(:,1);
%% This part normalize from the DBM scale into the DBM/Hz according
%to the bandwidth
VarName4 = B1kHz(:,2)-Bandwidth;
==PAGE:99==
89
Stitch.m
This is the function which stitches the dierent sets of data (B1kHz, B10kHz, B100kHz, B1MHz,
at the stitching frequencies (S1, S2, .., S5).
There is no 'last' (S6) stitching
point, because the data-set simply ends at 100 MHz.
function [B] = stitch(B1kHz,B10kHz,B100kHz,B1MHz,B10MHz,...,
B100MHz,S1,S2,S3,S4,S5)
% This function stiches the 5 input matrices by finding appropriate
% stiching points near; 1k, 10k, 100k, 1M and 10M Hz
[a,b1]= min(abs(B10kHz(:,1)-S1)); % start of 10kHz
[a,sb1]=min(abs(B1kHz(:,1)-B10kHz(b1,1))); % end of 1kHz
[a,b2]= min(abs(B100kHz(:,1)-S2)); % start of 100kHz
[a,sb2]=min(abs(B10kHz(:,1)-B100kHz(b2,1))); % end of 10kHz
[a,b3]= min(abs(B1MHz(:,1)-S3)); % start of 1MHz
[a,sb3]=min(abs(B100kHz(:,1)-B1MHz(b3,1))); % end of 100kHz
[a,b4]= min(abs(B10MHz(:,1)-S4)); % start of 10MHz
[a,sb4]=min(abs(B1MHz(:,1)-B10MHz(b4,1))); % end of 1MkHz
[a,b5]= min(abs(B100MHz(:,1)-S5)); % start of 100MHz
[a,sb5]=min(abs(B10MHz(:,1)-B100MHz(b5,1))); % end of 10MkHz
B(:,1)=[B1kHz(1:sb1-1,1);B10kHz(b1:sb2-1,1);...;
B100kHz(b2:sb3-1,1);B1MHz(b3:sb4-1,1);...;
B10MHz(b4:sb5-1,1);B100MHz(b5:end,1)];
B(:,2)=[B1kHz(1:sb1-1,2);B10kHz(b1:sb2-1,2);...;
B100kHz(b2:sb3-1,2);B1MHz(b3:sb4-1,2);...;
B10MHz(b4:sb5-1,2);B100MHz(b5:end,2)];
RIN.m
This function provides the RIN value of the data-set N, which is to be integrated
from N1 to N2. Additionally, this function returns the cumulative integration
values from the frequency N2 up to N1.
function [n,x,RIN_rms_N] = RIN(N,N1,N2)
% RIN_rms_N(1) actual RIN value
% N(N_1:N_2,2) x-avlues
==PAGE:100==
90
Matlab Scripts
% RIN_rms_N
y-values in rms %
[a,N_2]=min(abs(N(:,1)-N2)); %1MHz
[a,N_1]=min(abs(N(:,1)-N1));
%100Hz
RIN_PSD_N=10.^((N(N_1:N_2,2))/10); %dBc/Hz to 1/Hz
C_N=flipud(-cumtrapz(N(N_2:-1:N_1,1),RIN_PSD_N(end:-1:1)));
%1/Hz to no unit
RIN_rms_N=sqrt(C_N)*100; %in rms percent
x=N(N_1:N_2,1);
n=RIN_rms_N(1);
SN_ limit.m
This function calculates the SN limit, of a beam with the optical power P,
wavelength λ, responsivity R(λ) and matrix length of N.
function [SN_limit] = SN_limit(P,lambda,R,N)
c=3e8;
h=6.62607e-34;
nu=c/(lambda);
SN_limit=zeros(N,1);
SN_limit(:)=10*log10(2*nu*h/(P*(R*h*c/(1.60217e-19*lambda))));
==PAGE:101==
Bibliography
[1] B. Sumpf, K.-H. Hasler, P. Adamiec, F. Bugge, F. Dittmar, J. Fricke,
H. Wenzel, M. Zorn, G. Erbert, and G. Tränkle. High-brightness quantum
well tapered lasers. volume 15(3). 2009.
[2] C. Fiebig, G. Blume, M. Uebernickel, D. Feise, C. Kaspari, K. Paschke,
J. Fricke, H. Wenzel, and G. Erbert. High-power dbr-tapered laser at 980
nm for single-path second harmonic generation. volume 15(3). 2009.
[3] B. Sumpf, K.-H. Hasler, P. Adamiec, F. Bugge, J. Fricke, P. Ressel, H. Wen-
zel, G. Erbert, and G. Tränkle. 1060 nm dbr tapered lasers with 12 w output
power and a nearly diraction limited beam quality. 2009.
[4] O.B. Jensen,
A.K. Hansen,
A. Müller,
B. Sumpf,
A. Unterhuber,
W. Drexler, P.M. Petersen, and P.E. Andersen. Power scaling of nonlinear
frequency converted tapered diode lasers for biophotonics. volume 20(2).
2014.
[5] A. Jechow, R. Menzel, K. Paschke, and G. Erbert. Blue-green light gener-
ation using high brilliance edge emitting diode lasers. volume 4(5). 2010.
[6] A. Unterhuber, B. Povaºay, A. Müller, O.B. Jensen, M. Duelk, T. Le, P.M.
Petersen, C. Velez, M. Esmaeelpour, P.E. Andersen, , and W. Drexler.
Simultaneous dual wavelength eye-tracked ultrahigh resolution retinal and
choroidal optical coherence tomography. volume 38(21). 2013.
[7] Paul Michael Petersen Andre Müller Bernd Sumpf Angelika Unterhuber
Wolfgang Drexler Ole Bjarlin Jensen, Anders Kragh Hansen and Peter E.
Andersen. Compact green-diode-based lasers for biophotonic bioimaging.
Number 10.1117/2.1201402.005287. 2014.
==PAGE:102==
92
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[8] Alphan Sennaroglu. In Solid-State Lasers and Applications). 2007.
[9] P. D. Maker and R. W. Terhune. Study of optical eects due to an induced
polarization third order in the electric eld strength. volume 137. 1965.
[10] D. Huang,
E.A. Swanson,
C.P. Lin,
J.S. Schuman,
W.G. Stinson,
W. Chang, M.R. Hee, T. Flotte, K. Gregory, C.A. Puliato, and J.G. Fu-
jimoto. Optical coherence tomography. volume 254. 1991.
[11] K. König. Clinical multiphoton tomography. volume 1. 2008.
[12] W. Denk, J. H. Strickler, and W. W. Webb. Two-photon laser scanning
uorescence microscopy. volume 248. 1990.
[13] Govind P. Agrawal and Niloy K. Dutta. In Semiconductor Lasers). 1993.
[14] B. Daino, P. Spano, and S. Piazolla. Phase noise and spectral line shape
in semiconductor lasers. volume 19. 1983.
[15] R.J. Glauber. Coherent and incoherent states of the radiation eld. volume
131. 1963.
[16] D.J. Walls. Squeezed states of light. volume 306. 1983.
[17] R.E. Slusher, L.W. Hollberg, B. Yurke, J.C. Mertz, and J.F. Valley. Ob-
servation of squeezed states generated by four wave mixing in an optical
cavity. volume 55. 1985.
[18] Hamamatsu.
http://thelivingimage.hamamatsu.com/resources/photon-
shot-noise/.
[19] Ryan P. Scott, Carsten Langrock, and Brian H. Kolner. High-dynamic-
range laser amplitude and phase noise measurement techniques. volume 7.
2001.
[20] H.R. Telle, G. Steinmeyer, A.E. Dunlop, J. Stenger, D.H. Sutter, and
U. Keller. Carrier-envelope oset phase control: A novel concept for abso-
lute optical frequency measurement and ultrashort pulse generation. vol-
ume 69. 1999.
[21] Wikipedia. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/nyquist_ frequency.
[22] Ryan P. Scott, Theresa D. Mulder, Katherine A. Baker, and Brian H.
Kolner. Amplitude and phase noise sensitivity of modelocked ti:sapphire
lasers in terms of a complex noise transfer function. volume 15. 2007.
[23] H. A. Haus and A. Mecozzi. Noise of mode-locked lasers. volume 29, page
983996. 1993.
==PAGE:103==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
93
[24] C. R. Menyuk, J. K. Wahlstrand, J. Willits, R. P. Smith, T. Schibli, and
S. T. Cundi. Pulse dynamics in modelocked lasers: relaxation oscillations
and frequency pulling. volume 15, page 66776689. 2007.
[25] R. P. Scott, B. H. Kolner, C. Langrock, R. L. Byer, and M. M. Fejer.
Ti:sapphire laser pump-noise transfer function. volume paper CFB2.
[26] A. E. Siegman. Lasers (university science books). In Lasers. 1986.
[27] A. K. Cousins. Temperature and thermal stress in nite-length end-pumped
laser rods. volume 28, page 10571069. 1992.
[28] B. H. Kolner, R. P. Scott, and C. Langrock. Laser phase noise degradation
from thermal eects due to pump power uctuations. 2003.
[29] RP Photonics Encyclopedia. http://www.rp-photonics.com/thermal_ lens-
ing.html.
[30] O. B. Jensen, P. E. Andersen, B. Sumpf, K.-H. Hasler, G. Erbert, and
P. M. Petersen. 1.5 w green light generation by single-pass second har-
monic generation of a single-frequency tapered diode laser.
volume 17,
page 65326539. 2009.
[31] A. Knauer, G. Erbert, R. Staske, B. Sumpf, H. Wenzel, and M. Weyers.
High-power 808-nm lasers with a super-large optical cavity.
volume 20,
page 621624. 2005.
[32] A. K. Hansen, M. Taweq, O. B. Jensen, P. E. Andersen, B. Sumpf, G. Er-
bert, and P. M. Petersen.
Concept for power scaling second harmonic
generation using a cascade of nonlinear crystals. (under submission).
[33] H. W. Ott. Noise reduction techniques in electronic systems. 1976.
[34] Yong Wang, Jorge Fonseca-Campos, Wan guo Liang, Chang-Qing Xu, and
Ignacio Vargas-Baca. Noise analysis of second-harmonic generation in un-
doped and mgo-doped periodically poled lithium niobate. Number 428971,
page doi:10.1155/2008/428971. 2008.
[35] A.L. Schawlow and C.H. Townes. Infrared and optical masers. volume 122.
1958.
