==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Supporting awareness of availability through
mobile devices
Andreea-Monica Coman (s130919)
Kongens Lyngby 2015
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract (English)
The aim of this thesis is to investigate the extent to which current mobile devices
can support the awareness of availability and to determine the challenges that the
virtual space presents in this matter. For this purpose, an Android mobile application,
Noplans, is developed.
In the ﬁrst part, an analysis of complementary solutions and of previous attempts
to display availability using various devices is carried out.
Also, important cues
indicating a person’s availability are identiﬁed.
The thesis then sets the requirements of the mobile application, and further out-
lines the design, prototyping and implementation phases of Noplans. Having a ﬁrst
functional version of the application, the next stage focuses on testing and evaluation.
18 participants take part in an experiment aimed at assessing their impressions on
and expectations of the application as well as its usefulness. The ﬁndings show that
there is a a growing interest in the topic of availability supported by mobile devices,
but in order to achieve this usefulness of Noplans, a connected network of people need
to start using it and for those people to start using it, a certain level of usefulness
must exist as motivation. Thus, the question of how to provide this initial network
as incentive is yet to be answered.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Abstract (Danish)
Målet med denne afhandling er at undersøge, i hvilken grad nuværende mobile enheder
er i stand til at understøtte bevidsthed om tilgængelighed, samt at bestemme hvilke
udfordringer det virtuelle rum udgør i denne sammenhæng. Til dette formål udvikles
en mobilapplikation, “Noplans”.
I den første del analyseres alternative løsninger og tidligere forsøg på at vise tilgæn-
gelighed ved hjælp af diverse enheder. Derudover identiﬁceres vigtige indikatorer for
en persons tilgængelighed.
Afhandlingen opstiller derefter kravene til mobilapplikationen og skitserer videre
design-, prototype- og implementeringsfaserne af Noplans. Idet der haves en foreløbig
funktionel version af applikationen, fokuserer næste fase på at teste og evaluere.
18 deltagere medvirker i et eksperiment, som har til formål at vurdere deres in-
dtryk af- og forventninger til applikationen såvel som dens brugbarhed. Resultaterne
viser, at der er en voksende interesse i emnet tilgængelighedsunderstøttelse vha. mo-
bile enheder, men for at sikre brugbarheden af Noplans, er det nødvendigt at der
ﬁndes et forbundet netværk af brugere, og et vist niveau af brugbarhed er omvendt
nødvendigt for at motivere en sådan brugerbase. Tilbage står spørgsmålet om hvor-
dan et netværk af brugere, som er stærkt nok til at være selvopretholdende, etableres.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Com-
puter Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulﬁlment of the requirements
for acquiring an M.Sc. degree in Digital Media Engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, July 11, 2015
Andreea-Monica Coman (s130919)
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost I would like to thank my family, my mom, my dad, my brother
who have been there for me all throughout my life, who supported me in all my
decisions, who always believed in me and who helped me get here, in Denmark, at
DTU, studying for my Master Degree.
Next, I would very much like to thank my supervisor, professor Jakob Eg Larsen
for his guidance and feedback during the elaboration of my thesis; I would also like
to extend my gratitude for all his support that has kept me focused and motivated
in the past ﬁve and a half months.
There have been many other people sharing their good words and kind thoughts
with me either in person or from a distance and showing their appreciation and
support for this important, last step in my educational life.
Special thanks go to my boyfriend for his extraordinary support with both the
good and the bad moments I encountered while writing my thesis.
Thanks to my best friend Olivia for all her love and supportive friendship all the
way from Australia. To my friend Elena for believing in me even when I didn’t and
making me smile no matter what. Thanks to Cris for her great moral support, not
only during my thesis, but ever since my arrival to Denmark and to my sister Cristina
Saiz for sharing her own reﬂections on the thesis experience, making me realise that
enjoying this period is also important and for the occasional coﬀee breaks.
Thanks to Anders and Marianne for all the understanding and for making my
student job extremely enjoyable.
Thanks to my dear Polish friend, Tomasz Pyl, for all the fun Skype conversations,
for the occasional salsa dances and his extraordinary work help. Also, thanks to my
friend Aleksandra for sharing these months of work with our own salsa, coﬀee and
muﬃn breaks. Thanks to my friends Georgi and Stefan for making me part of their
team and for the opportunity to work on something else than my thesis. Thanks to
my sweet friend Cristina G. who always cared to ask how I’m doing and didn’t forget
to wish me good luck. Thanks to Horia, Oguz and Tomasz for all the good jokes and
nice dinners and all the great moments we had in our former dormitory. As well as
to my friends in my current dormitory, especially Matilde for the lovely talks on the
terrace and laughs over dinner.
Thanks to all the wonderful people that I have met during the past two years at
DTU!
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Abstract (English)
i
Abstract (Danish)
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
Contents
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem deﬁnition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Goals and objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.5
Advantages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.6
Challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Analysis
7
2.1
Awareness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Availability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Complementary solutions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3
Design and Implementation
25
3.1
Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2
Prototyping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.3
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4
Testing and Evaluation
57
4.1
Deployment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
4.2
Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
4.3
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
5
Results
65
5.1
Usability Feedback . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
==PAGE:12==
x
Contents
5.2
Usage Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
5.3
The network eﬀect . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
6
Future improvements
81
6.1
Development
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
6.2
User experience . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
7
Conclusion
91
A
Noplans prototyping mock-ups
93
Bibliography
101
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Humans are highly social beings1. Multiple studies2,3,4 have shown that the human
need for socialization is innate and that we cannot go against it. We like to spend
our time with friends and families, we like to share our life experiences and to live in
societies because, to quote Aristotle:
“Society is something that precedes the individual. Anyone who either
cannot lead the common life or is so self-suﬃcient as not to need to, and
therefore does not partake of society, is either a beast or a god.”5
1.1
Problem deﬁnition
Nowadays, people sometimes ﬁnd it hard to fulﬁl their fundamental need of social
interaction due to the scarce free time in their busy lives.
When their free time
becomes extremely unpredictable, trying to coordinate diﬀerent social activities with
their friends becomes a struggle. Also, with the explosively increasing popularity of
social networking tools, they live under the illusion of social belonging and therefore
are tempted to stay connected to their devices instead of interacting in real life.
This, however, does not solve the initial availability coordination problem, it only
provides a virtual alternative to interacting in real life which is not necessarily desir-
able.
Availability can have multiple meanings depending on the overall context of the
problem.
In a more general sense, availability of a system deﬁnes the amount of
time during which that particular system has been in a functional state. On the
other hand, from a cognitive point of view, the availability heuristic suggests that our
decisions are based on information about similar events already existent (available)
in our mind.
For the purpose of this project and by taking into account the social aspect dis-
cussed above, availability is deﬁned as the ability of a person to engage in diﬀerent
1http://www.huﬃngtonpost.com/pascal-vrticka/human-social-development_b_3921942.html
2http://www.aipmm.com/anthropology/2010/05/humans-are-social-animals-1.php
3https://edge.org/response-detail/25395
4http://www.wired.com/2011/11/humans-social/
5http://www.goodreads.com/quotes/183896-man-is-by-nature-a-social-animal-an-individual-
who
==PAGE:14==
2
1 Introduction
types of activities (e.g. chatting, going out, talking on the phone, etc.), either with
another person or with a group. But, how can we ﬁnd the availability of a person
when we need it?
There are many context cues that can be used to predict a person’s availability.
Some of them, such as:
1. time (e.g early in the morning, during lunch break, late in the evening);
2. location (e.g at work, at home, at the cinema, at a restaurant);
3. calendar events (e.g. in a meeting, on holiday);
are considered common knowledge and have somewhat transformed into unwritten
society rules while others, such as the type of engagement in a current activity (e.g.
social, mental, physical) can diﬀer from person to person and are less reliable. In
addition, as we move away from the physical and more into the virtual space, cues
convey less and less information since signals such as closing the door during a meeting
are harder to achieve in a digital context. Nonetheless, the virtual space has increased
considerably, oﬀering more and more services which makes it one of the easiest and
quickest ways to reach the users.
1.2
Solution
A possible solution lies in trying to leverage the virtual space formed by smart devices
to display availability information which would help users with the coordination of
social activities in an actual, physical sense. The purpose of this project is to identify
the extent to which current smart devices can support availability and what beneﬁts
do they bring when used for both signalling our own availability and becoming aware
of others’.
The chosen approach is a mobile application, Noplans, which allows the users to
see which of their contacts (taken from the phone’s list of contacts) are available at
the same time as they are. Moreover, the app will also provide information regarding
location, with the capability of viewing each of a user’s contacts on a map. All in all,
Noplans aims at easing the users’ access to the availability of their networks.
The development of the application follows an iterative approach from setting the
requirements and deﬁning the project’s value proposition, to low-ﬁdelity-prototyping
of the ﬁrst mock-ups, gathering user feedback, designing the application ﬂow, imple-
menting the minimum viable product (MVP) and testing on a target user group. All
steps will be discussed into more detail in the following chapters.
The chapter structure of the current paper describes the ﬁrst full iteration of
Noplans and is as follows:
• Chapter 2 is comprised of an in-depth analysis of the current “state of the art”
in terms of awareness, availability, valuable context cues and complementary
solutions;
==PAGE:15==
1.3 Motivation
3
• In Chapter 3 the requirements of the solution along with an interactive user
interface conveying relevant availability information (time, location, etc.) are
deﬁned and the prototyping process as well as the development of the ﬁrst
version of the application are followed;
• Chapter 4 covers the testing and evaluation period of the product with a de-
scription of the participants’ network, the deployment and methods used for
gathering feedback;
• The results of the evaluation, i.e both the logged data and the user comments
are analysed in Chapter 5;
• Last but not least, Chapter 6 presents possible improvements of future releases,
either discovered during the evaluation or removed from the ﬁrst release as they
were not considered core functionality, and ideas for multi-device experiences
(e.g. smart watches).
1.3
Motivation
As a junior developer, keeping in touch with new technologies comes with the job
description. My ﬁrst encounter with Android development happened more than two
years ago and although it didn’t reveal all insights into what Android was capable
of, it deﬁnitely triggered my interest in this new world of smartphones and mobile
applications. That was what made me take the decision of developing my own Android
application as my Bachelor Thesis, “beHealthy” - a ﬁtness & nutrition mobile app
aiming at helping users stay healthy and in shape.
Moreover, all throughout my Master years, I had the opportunity to interact even
more with the Android world either in a strictly theoretical manner by brainstorming
ideas for various devices, paper prototyping, designing mock-ups, learning about user
experience, testing on target user groups, or in a more practical manner by actually
developing MVPs.
All of this has lead me to yet another moment when I decided to take one more
Android challenge, “Supporting awareness of availability through mobile devices” - the
analysis, design and implementation of a mobile application, this time being able to
apply all my previous knowledge in the ﬁeld and develop my expertise even more.
1.4
Goals and objectives
Just like “every successful story starts with a dream”, every successful project should
start with its well established goals and objectives. The main goals and objectives to
be achieved through this paper are:
• Reviewing current approaches regarding availability - in order to be able to
innovate and not repeat the same mistakes, it is important to be aware of what
==PAGE:16==
4
1 Introduction
has been done before, therefore a very important step is the analysis of related
work (see Chapter 2);
• Performing an analysis of context cues - what are the most often used signals
for our own availability and how do we use them, plus, what makes us predict
other people’s availability;
• Adapting availability cues to current smart devices - what do people expect in
the physical world in terms of availability may diﬀer from what can be seen in
the virtual world so in order to achieve the same eﬀect, some adaptations need
to be done to context cues;
• Proposing an interactive UI design that supports availability;
• Designing and developing an MVP that supports the display of availability
information (see Chapter 3);
• Evaluating the MVP prototype using a target group - after implementation it
is extremely important to get the opinion of the users in order to be able to
validate both the functionality and the design of the application based on their
feedback (see Chapter 4);
• Logging and analysing user data (see Chapter 5);
• Research multi-device solutions for supporting availability - being part of an
industry that is continuously growing and in which new technologies are always
emerging, it is relevant to expand an app’s functionality across a new generation
of devices build for the future (see Section 6.2).
1.5
Advantages
Since the release of its ﬁrst smartphone back in 20086, Google’s Android experienced
an incredible increase in the number of devices and is now dominating the global
market7. This deﬁnitely represents an important advantage for the development of
Android applications as the potential market reach is extremely wide.
Moreover, being an open source platform, Android’s developers community oﬀers a
large range of development tools, tutorials, samples, API guides and design guidelines.
Thus, accessibility and online support represent two more advantages for Android.
6http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Smartphone#Early_years
7http://gadgets.ndtv.com/mobiles/news/android-grabs-81-percent-market-share-with-over-1-
billion-phones-shipped-in-2014-report-655583
==PAGE:17==
1.6 Challenges
5
1.6
Challenges
On the other hand, one of the most diﬃcult challenges to overcome when develop-
ing an Android application is competition. With more than a million applications
available at the moment on Google Play8, bringing value to the market is extremely
diﬃcult. This makes the analysis phase crucial in the app development business.
In addition, since Noplans heavily relies on the existence of an active social net-
work, the testing and evaluation of the application pose a challenge since the results
might not be completely accurate.
8http://www.statista.com/statistics/266210/number-of-available-applications-in-the-google-
play-store/
==PAGE:18==
6
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2
Analysis
The current chapter aims at summarizing existing work eﬀorts regarding awareness
and availability in an attempt to deﬁne and enumerate essential features and ﬁndings
that have already been tested or proved. This represents an important ﬁrst step in
the development of Noplans. Moreover, an analysis of complementary solutions is
carried out both for attesting the value of such a mobile application on the market
and for investigating similarities as well as diﬀerences between the solutions.
2.1
Awareness
Author Schmidt [Sch02] from the IT University of Copenhagen deﬁned awareness
in the context of Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW) as “these elusive
practices of taking heed of what is going on in the setting”. The need for this new term
arose when, quite early in the course of CSCW, some studies (e.g. [HL91]) had shown
that actors participating in a collaborative activity pay attention to and respect the
simultaneous work of their colleagues in a seamless manner. Consequently, the use of
words such as “conversation” and “workﬂow” became scanty for describing this work
integration.
Based on the popularity that the term had gained in the CSCW world, further
research looked into possible computer-based technologies that were to support aware-
ness among and between co-workers. Such technologies were referred to as the “media
space” and authors Mantei et al. were some of the ﬁrst researchers to develop an inte-
grated Computer Audio Video Enhanced Collaboration And Telepresence (CAVECAT)
system that allowed people to work and communicate via audio-video links. Their
study [Man+91] focused both on the technological obstacles of the system:
• response time delays
• audio levels and noise
• sound localization
• lighting and camera angles
as well as its psychological and social impacts:
==PAGE:20==
8
2 Analysis
• meetings between and within oﬃces →making sure that in-oﬃce awareness
does not overrule virtual (between) awareness and private conversations do not
become dominant when public ones (including people from other oﬃces that
were on camera) were appropriate;
• gaze and eye contact →two important factors of which we are aware during
normal face-to-face communication were missing due to people looking at the
screen rather than the camera;
• status of meeting participants →the random positioning of the participants’
images on the screen created confusion as they were no longer aware of certain
hierarchies for example;
• meeting coordination →cues indicating the desire to speak were completely
overlooked on video therefore the meeting moderator became a necessity for
re-instating speech awareness;
• image size and personal impact →factors aﬀecting image size were rarely ad-
justed therefore some people were less eﬀective in the conversations due to their
small images;
• video image and social distance →the “perceived” distance displayed on video
can sometimes invade the personal space of participants without the invader
being aware of it leading to uncomfortable conversations (e.g. staying up to
reach a book creates views several inches from a participant’s neck or stomach);
• privacy and surveillance →full time access to the system allowing both video
and audio connections to all oﬃces leads to a certain degree of obtrusiveness.
Overall, the main goal of CAVECAT as well as other “media space” studies (e.g.
[Gav92] and [BHI93]) was to take awareness one step further by providing workers in
diﬀerent locations with a “virtual” space allowing interactions and the possibility of
cooperation as unrestricted and ﬂuently as in the physical space.
In the end, “the problem with awareness” [Sch02], as Schmidt puts it, is in the
ambiguity and elasticity of the term’s meaning. The term “awareness” in itself can be
extremely misleading unless a bigger context is mentioned and described for a better
understanding of what is implied by it. However, the author argues that instead of
hanging in between attention and peripheral awareness [BHI93], active and passive,
explicit and tacit etc., it’s better to have the following questions in mind and try to
answer them when discussing awareness:
1. What signals or cues are available to the actor and what is the actor able to
perceive of them?
2. Which “taken-for-granted knowledge” is invoked by the actor in making sense
of the evidence available to him or her?
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Availability
9
3. Which “indicators” or “typiﬁcations” do actors primarily rely on?
4. What do actors monitor and what is ignored, which events make a diﬀerence
and which are of no consequence?
5. How does the actor determine what is relevant to his/her own eﬀort?
6. How does the actor manage to sort out and pick up what is relevant?
These are only a couple of the so called “researchable questions” that Schmidt pro-
poses which can be valuable considerations for the next section on availability.
2.2
Availability
Danninger, Kluge, and Stiefelhagen emphasize the importance of availability in
contemporary societies by arguing that, nowadays, being surrounded by so many
means of communication, the problem is no longer contacting someone but doing it
“at the right time, in the right contexts, and with the optimal communication medium”
[DKS06]. That’s when availability becomes valuable and, as mentioned also in the
previous Section 2.1, the ﬁrst step is understanding what information (signals, cues,
indicators, etc.) is required for a system to guess a person’s availability.
First of all, we need to distinguish between synchronous and asynchronous com-
munication.
The former type of communication implies that the “sender” needs
an immediate reply and, therefore, being aware of the availability of the “receiver”
matters while the latter is less urgent and consequently also less inﬂuenced by the
availability factor. With the wide expansion of social media and the multitude of
messaging applications available, there are numerous means of asynchronous com-
munication. However, since the use of mobiles has started to thrive, asynchronous
communication has started to grow but in a negative manner by becoming more and
more disruptive. Communication methods designed to be asynchronous are being
increasingly used as synchronous means of communication.
Avrahami and Hudson discusses the eﬀect of this growth from the very beginning,
when the use of instant messaging (IM) was thriving and users felt the need to con-
stantly check for new messages which got them distracted [AH04]. Nowadays, with
almost everyone owning a smartphone, the distraction becomes higher as even emails
can be notiﬁed to users, thus turning awareness of availability into an important fac-
tor for asynchronous communication as well. Last but not least, symbolizing both
a consequence of the above statement and a proof that an availability prediction is
necessary, studies show that people started using messaging (initially asynch.) as a
way of “collecting” availability data or negotiating a switch to, for instance, calling
(synch.) [NWB00].
After having deﬁned the diﬀerences between and implications of synchronous and
asynchronous means of communication, the next step of the analysis focuses on var-
ious systems that have been developed and researched until now and which aim at
supporting awareness of availability in diﬀerent contexts.
==PAGE:22==
10
2 Analysis
MyConnector [DKS06] is an adaptive, context-aware service within the CHIL -
Computers in the Human Interaction Loop - project. During its development, an
analysis of the most powerful context cues for predicting someone’s availability is
carried out. Contextual information is collected both automatically by MyConnector,
such as:
• personal calendar information and time of the day;
• PC activity data (e.g. number of mouse clicks and keyboard events, windows
switching frequency, active programs);
• Skype activity (e.g. Skype running, ongoing IM conversation, ongoing call or
conference, number of participants in a conversation or call, number of sent and
received messages);
and manually from the participants via a popup window as follows:
• current location;
• collocation or interaction with others (e.g. alone, dyads, small groups (3-7) or
large groups (8 and above));
• current activity (e.g. out of basic, intellectual, interpersonal, personal and trans-
portation needs);
• mental and physical engagement while doing the current activity (e.g. high,
medium, low);
• the importance and urgency of the current activity (e.g. high, medium, low);
• the point in the lifespan of the current activity (e.g. begin, middle, end);
• self reported availability level from 1-4 where 1 meaning not available at all (e.g.
sleeping, swimming), 2 meaning basically not available, but exceptions possible
(e.g. in a meeting, driving), 3 meaning busy but can be disturbed (e.g. internet
browsing, preparing slides) and 4 meaning idle, communication encouraged (e.g.
public transportation, waiting for an appointment).
The results of the Bayesian classiﬁer1 used by MyConnector for gauging a person’s
availability revealed that the most powerful combination of cues was time and lo-
cation, especially for people with a structured work day. Moreover, since the best
accuracy of the classiﬁer was only 58%, the conclusion was that systems such as
MyConnector should only broadcast the contextual information but leave the “avail-
ability prediction” decision (e.g. Is this the right time and place to contact her/him?
Is s/he available?) to the users.
1http://www.cs.technion.ac.il/ dang/journal_papers/friedman1997Bayesian.pdf
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Availability
11
Another CSCW study [MS00] also acknowledges the importance of availability
(this time referred to as “Personal Presence”) awareness. In this case however, authors
Milewski and Smith focused on telephone users and their purpose was to develop a
live addressbook application providing the following personal presence cues to the
users:
• availability status or the user’s ability and/or desire to accept phone calls dis-
played as an icon from the following four values - Available [+], Urgent Only [!],
Away (leave message) [@] and Do Not Disturb [-];
• location or, in this case, the phone number at which the user can be currently
reached which means that calls are made dynamically based on the number the
contact itself chose instead of statically by the caller’s decision;
• message or a brief information about, for instance, the current activity of the
user, which is optional and its only purpose is to augment the availability status.
In addition, users could also check the amount of time since Personal Presence infor-
mation for a contact was updated.
One interesting aspect about this study is that all availability information relies
mainly on the user input and therefore the assumption that users do change their
information according to their current state. An attempt at helping users with the
updates was (a) multiple device access, being able to update their information from
diﬀerent devices (PC, wireless PDA2, phone) and (b) hint-based prompt messaging,
being prompted with a suggested potential location change based on some scenarios
(e.g. when a user is currently registered at one location but accesses the application
from a PC associated with a diﬀerent location).
The evaluation showed that users are willing to keep their information current as
long as it doesn’t require too much eﬀort. However, the location cue was updated
more often and users appreciated it as the most valuable cue whereas the availability
status was changed irregularly and it was considered unreliable therefore, having the
amount of time since a contact has last updated her/his info was crucial for the
users’ decision. Last but not least, it was again proved that the “outeraction” eﬀect
[NWB00] holds since users preferred IM for negotiating the availability status and
the live addressbook only for the actual call based on the location cue.
Two other attempts at integrating availability (or awareness, as the authors have
named it in this context) information in order to facilitate communication are ConNexus
and Awarenex [Tan+01]. Both systems follow a similar implementation and consist
of the same components but while the former is aimed at desktop users, the latter
represents an extension to mobile. Also, in this article, the main focus of the authors
is on the user interface (UI) design.
The main components of ConNexus are:
2https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Personal_digital_assistant
==PAGE:24==
12
2 Analysis
• Contact List - displaying a list of colleagues along with their awareness infor-
mation and the possibility to contact them;
• Contact Toolbar - a detailed activity view which provides access to diﬀerent
communication channels and appears upon a colleague selection;
• Communication tools - the set of communication tools (e.g. IM, e-mail, calen-
dar) appropriate for contacting each colleague.
As far as the awareness info in the Contact List is concerned, each entry indicates
(a) if the user is logged in or not, (b) whether the input devices (keyboard and
mouse) have been idle and (c) whether the user is engaged in any computer-mediated
communication activities.
In terms of the UI, the information described above is
displayed in the following way (see also Figure 2.1(a)):
(a) the name of the user is displayed in black text if s/he is logged in and, respectively,
in gray text if the user has logged out; in addition, when the user has logged out,
the exact date and time of her/his logout is also displayed - e.g. (4:47 pm 10/13)
(b) the amount of time for which the user’s input devices have been idle is displayed
next to the user’s name in parentheses - e.g. (41m)
(c) the involvement of the user in another activity is displayed as an icon next to
her/his name
Moreover, the design of the Contact Toolbar can be seen in Figure 2.1(b). At the top
of the bar, the name and duration of a currently occurring or the next appointment
in the selected contact’s calendar is displayed whereas all the possible communication
resources are arranged on the next row as icons.
Similarly, the UI design for Awarenex is presented in Figure 2.2(a). The only
diﬀerence from ConNexus to Awarenex is that, instead of displaying the idle time
of the input devices, users can now see the locale from which the contact is or was
most recently active. This information is displayed in normal text, next to the con-
tact’s name (e.g.
Nicole oﬃce).
Furthermore, the icons indicating the contact’s
communication activities are also slightly diﬀerent:
• the clock next to a person’s information indicates an appointment in her/his
on-line calendar (see Nicole in Figure 2.2(a));
• the small device represents the use of a wireless hand-held;
• the phone icon shows that the contact is in a call.
Also, an important thing to be noted is that, in Awarenex, all times are presented in a
“relative” format (e.g. idle for 22 minutes, logged oﬀfor 2 hours and 40 minutes) since
the experience with ConNexus posed problems with the “absolute” display of time in
the case of diﬀerent time zones. Lastly, the Contact Toolbar changes to a Contact
Locator (see Figure 2.2(c)) in the mobile version of the application which gathers
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Availability
13
(a) The Contact List for ConNexus provid-
ing awareness by showing computer input idle
time and communication activity indicators
for each user
(b) The Contact Toolbar for ConNexus show-
ing an important appointment and buttons
that activate communication resources
Figure 2.1: ConNexus components.
the awareness information for all locales and all options for contacting a person (see
Figure 2.2(b)).
In complete contrast to previous research, authors Matsakis and Tang look at the
other side of the problem by describing a system which passively collects availability
(a) The
Contact
List
for
Awarenex
providing
a
list
of contacts along with their
most recent locale and activity
indicators
(b) Selecting to call a user
in
the
Contact
Locator
for
Awarenex brings up a dialog
with the source and destination
phones for the call
(c) The Contact Locator for
Awarenex showing an impor-
tant appointment, an email en-
try and awareness info on all
devices in each locale
Figure 2.2: Awarenex components.
==PAGE:26==
14
2 Analysis
cues regarding the activity of users and the surrounding environment in order to
predict their unavailability, called Lilsys [MT04].
Firstly, a clear distinction between presence and availability is made. Authors
Matsakis and Tang argue that, in order to be available, a person must both be present
to engage in a social activity and receptive to social interaction at that particular time.
Furthermore, it must be acknowledged that device presence does not always imply
person presence, since devices may be easily left online without the owner being
nearby.
Also, receptivity is described as a person’s willingness to be interrupted
and, even if interruptions are considered to have a disruptive eﬀect by diminishing a
person’s productivity, that is not always the case [Hud+02].
Lilsys works as an extension of the aforementioned Awarenex system by inheriting
its device and calendar information and adding sensor detected activity to infer a
person’s unavailability. The main sensors that Lilsys gathers information from are:
• speech - a single simulated sensor to detect when someone is speaking therefore
inferring unavailability due to engagement in a conversation;
• door - a binary switch indicating whether the door is open or closed;
• phone - a binary switch indicating whether or not the phone is in use;
• motion - which in combination with speech and device activity is used to detect
a person’s presence.
When the state of any of these sensors changes, all data is sent to an inferencing engine
which, by using a simple Decision Tree, assesses both a person’s presence and their
unavailability. The results of these assessments are then translated into UI elements,
using the U.S. traﬃc sign metaphor, which are displayed to the user via Awarenex as
follows:
• a diamond yellow “warning” sign indicating possible unavailability;
• a triangular, red-borderded “yield” sign indicating probable unavailability;
• no sign due to no inference indicating neutral unavailability.
The vagueness of the symbols is deliberate, aiming at (a) reﬂecting that the predic-
tions are not 100% accurate and (b) not overly discouraging necessary interruptions.
Some interesting observations were revealed during the examination of Lilsys
usage logs. First of all, users had mixed reactions regarding the traﬃc signs metaphor
as some reported they were confused about their meaning so decided to completely
ignore them while others were too afraid to engage in any type of communication
because of them. Moreover, it appears like users expressed a certain discomfort in
being portrayed as “unavailable” especially if the inferred conclusion was not reliable
since people have diﬀerent opinions on the signiﬁcance of certain cues. For example,
closing the door may indicate a person does not want to be disturbed but it may also
simply be a way of blocking outside noises.
==PAGE:27==
2.3 Complementary solutions
15
2.3
Complementary solutions
2.3.1
Instant Messaging
Surprisingly, instant messaging (IM) pre-dates the Internet3 but it has become
much more popular with its emergence and growth.
The problem with instant messaging when it comes to availability is that it gener-
ally fails to indicate it accurately. Being online in any of the IM programs described
below does not necessarily imply that the user is actually “available” and can, for
instance, engage in a longer term social activity, it merely means s/he might see
and reply to a message instantly. The reasons behind this statement can be many.
Firstly, users often forget that they are connected to many of these programs since,
for example, both Yahoo! Messenger and Skype can login automatically when the PC
turns on while Hangouts displays a user as “available” whenever s/he is just checking
her/his emails. Furthermore, with smartphones being in our hands most of the day,
users are sometimes tempted to “go online” even if they are at work or at a lecture.
Lastly, since it seems that everyone is online all the time, it has become even harder
to actually ﬁgure out the signalling of availability behind that.
As for designs supporting availability, all IM systems have the common traﬃc
lights colors analogy in their UIs with (a) green indicating current availability, (b)
yellow indicating a period of inactivity and (c) red indicating current unavailability.
More details on how diﬀerent applications displays these indicators in diﬀerent ways
are given in the following paragraphs.
Yahoo! Messenger
Amongst the oldest instant messaging tools, Yahoo! Messenger4 (YM) displays avail-
ability information in the form of a status consisting both of an icon and a text
message. The three main values, along with their corresponding icons (see Figure
2.3), that users can choose from are:
1. Available
2. Busy
3. Invisible to Everyone
The last option is very special in terms of IM tools and is equal to a user being logged
out from everyone else’s perspective, except that the respective user can still check
out what is going on in her/his network. Considered a controversial subject in the
past, many websites started oﬀering the possibility to discover who in your network
was using the “invisible” status and though this could be aligned to some privacy
issues it does not represent the main focus of the paper.
3https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Instant_messaging
4https://messenger.yahoo.com/
==PAGE:28==
16
2 Analysis
In addition to the main values, the Idle option can also be provided by YM which
indicates that the user has not been using the computer for a certain amount of time.
This option, however, can only be enabled by the users and the timespan until the
“idle” sign appears is also set according to their preferences. Finally, information
about the device is also displayed in the contacts list therefore users can see which of
their friends are using the program from their phone.
Skype
In a very similar manner, Skype5 also displays availability as a user chosen text
message and a predeﬁned icon indicating one of the following status options (see also
Figure 2.4(a)):
1. Online
2. Away
3. Do Not Disturb
4. Invisible
5. Oﬄine
A slight diﬀerence is that the Do Not Disturb status is much more powerful in Skype
because it implies that the user will not receive any notiﬁcation regarding incoming
calls or messages so that any distractions and interruptions are avoided. Another
interesting remark is the selectable Oﬄine status which in some sense is equal to
the user logging out of the systems but it relieves the users of having to input their
passwords every time they want to re-login. Moreover, the Invisible state is exactly
as described in the YM Subsection 2.3.1 above while the Away state can or cannot
display extra information on mouse hover, namely the amount of time since the
contact’s last activity (see Figure 2.4(b)), based on the settings selected by the user.
Since it involves a mouse event, this functionality is not available on the mobile version
of Skype therefore decreasing its reliability.
5http://www.skype.com/en/
Figure 2.3: The list of status choices for Yahoo! Messenger.
==PAGE:29==
2.3 Complementary solutions
17
(a) The list of status choices for Skype
(b) Extra information for the Skype “Away”
status on mouse hover
Figure 2.4: Display of availability in Skype.
Google Hangouts
Only two years old, Google Hangouts6 is the combined replacement of three of its
predecessors, namely Google Talk (G-talk)7, Google+8 Messenger and Hangouts, pre-
viously only the video chat functionality within Google+. Although emerging with
a completely new design and multiple ways of access - within Gmail and Google+,
as a Chrome extension, in the desktop version and from your smartphone - Google
Hangouts is not innovative in terms of indicating availability. The mobile version of
the application keeps it very simple by only displaying the amount of time since or
the date/time when (a) a contact was last seen using the app (see Figure 2.5(a)), (b)
a contact has last replied in a conversation (see Figure 2.5(b)). Same UI is employed
for the desktop version of Hangouts with the exception that a small green circle is
shown in the right bottom part of the contacts’ proﬁle pictures (see Figures 2.6(b)
and 2.6(a)).
Facebook Messenger
Last but not least, with the great success that Facebook had in the world of so-
cial media networks, its chat has now also been converted to a stand-alone mobile
application, called Facebook Messenger. Figure 2.7 shows the list of active friends
6https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Google_Hangouts
7https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Google_Talk#History
8https://plus.google.com/
==PAGE:30==
18
2 Analysis
(a) The list of contacts and their last seen ac-
tivity in the mobile Hangouts version
(b) The list of conversations and the time/-
date of the last reply in the mobile Hangouts
version
Figure 2.5: Display of availability in the mobile version of Hangouts.
as displayed by the messenger application. As it can be seen, this “active” state is
displayed as a green dot plus a green text indicating whether the user is using the
computer (Web) or her/his smartphone (Mobile). In addition, the small round icon in
the bottom right side of a friend’s proﬁle picture indicates whether they actually have
the Facebook Messenger application installed or are only using the general Facebook
application on their mobile for example. This information is important as it can be
an indicator of whether the user will receive your message right away, via the app, or
later when he is in front of a computer.
==PAGE:31==
2.3 Complementary solutions
19
(a) The list of contacts and their last seen ac-
tivity in the desktop Hangouts version
(b) The list of conversations and the time/-
date of the last reply in the desktop hangouts
version
Figure 2.6: Display of availability in the desktop version of Hangouts.
2.3.2
Text Messaging
SMS came as a core functionality of mobile phones, but its usage was phased out with
the advent of smartphones. On the contrary, along with their arrival, the number of
text messaging applications increased. Their main purpose was to leverage mobile
data for sending messages which, of course, expanded from simple text to images,
music, videos, etc.
The following subsections describe two popular contemporary messaging apps and
their attempt at displaying availability for communication. The general impression,
as we will see, is that availability is not as valued in such applications due to the
fact that messaging is considered a rather asynchronous means of interaction. This,
however, is not always the case since there can be many situations and diﬀerent
contexts in which users do expect a quick reply.
WhatsApp
Figure 2.8(a) illustrates the main list of conversations in WhatsApp. Note that no
valuable availability information can be seen here, apart from the date of the last
reply in a particular conversation. In order to have the information about when one
of their contacts was last seen in the app, users must tap on the contact’s name and
==PAGE:32==
20
2 Analysis
Figure 2.7: The list of active friends in Facebook Messenger.
go in the messaging view (Figure 2.8(c)). As it can be seen in Figure 2.8(c), there
are multiple ways of displaying the last seen date/time depending on how long ago
it happened.
In addition, WhatsApp also allows users to set a status which can
either be a combination of text and emoticons according to the user’s preferences or
a predeﬁned one from the following choices:
• Available
• Busy
• At school
• At the movies
• At work
• Battery about to die
==PAGE:33==
2.3 Complementary solutions
21
• Can’t talk, WhatsApp only
• In a meeting
• At the gym
• Sleeping
• Urgent calls only
The status tries to convey information regarding the availability of a user, her/his loca-
tion and/or diﬀerent activities s/he might be engaged in (see Figure 2.8(b)). Nonethe-
less, users very rarely change their status accordingly with their current state therefore
the information is not at all reliable.
Viber
Same rules apply for Viber. The initial list of contacts provides no availability infor-
mation while the messaging view only displays whether a user is Online or when a
was s/he last seen in the app. No form of status, however, is used in Viber.
(a) The list of chats in What-
sApp
(b) The list of contacts and
their statuses in WhatsApp
(c) Diﬀerent ways of display-
ing
last
seen
date/time
in
WhatsApp
Figure 2.8: Display of availability in WhatsApp.
==PAGE:34==
22
2 Analysis
2.3.3
Other applications
Very recently released in the itunes world, BaMM and Free are two mobile applications
sharing the same focus as Noplans, helping users access the availability of their friends
and share their own for a much easier coordination of social activities in real life. This
proves that there is a need for supporting availability through mobile devices and the
market is already starting to develop into that direction.
BaMM
Released on March 30th, 2015, BaMM9 is described as “The best way to share your
free time”. The application aims at connecting two people available at the same time
and in the same geographical area in three steps:
1. Finding the available friends in the area
2. Agreeing on an activity
3. Meeting and enjoying the free time
First of all, users are able to “advertise” whether they are available or not, for how
long and for what activity (see Figure 2.9(a)). Moreover, as stated in the ﬁrst step,
users can ﬁnd their available friends. A list of friends along with all their information
(name, country, location, availability time left, activity) can be seen in Figure 2.9(b).
On selecting a friend users can see even more details and start a private conversation
with that particular friend (see the “Let’s BaMM!” button in Figure 2.9(c)).
Free
Even more recent, less than a month old, Free has been advertised as the “new
app which tells your friends when you’re free to hang out”10. The developer of the
application, Danny Trinh Calls, acknowledges the problem that people encounter
when trying to make last minute plans without knowing which of their friends are
available and in this sense he states that, with Free, he “wants to build the modern,
mobile version of the green dot from AIM11”.
The application allows users to choose from three modes (see Figure 2.10(a)):
1. Going out
2. Flexible
3. Busy
9http://bamm-app.com/
10http://www.wired.com/2015/06/new-app-tells-friends-youre-free-hang/?mbid=social_twitter
11https://www.aim.com/
==PAGE:35==
2.3 Complementary solutions
23
(a) Sharing availability status
in BaMM
(b) Searching
for
available
friends in BaMM
(c)
Viewing
more
details
about
a
friend
and
her/his
availability in BaMM
Figure 2.9: Display of availability in BaMM, an Apple mobile application similar
to Noplans.
and set a “Free” status which you share with the people you want and which lasts
for as long as you want (see Figure 2.10(b)). In addition, users can also see a list
of their friends along with their status (mode) and location plus the possibility to
contact them using the “Free?”
button (see Figure 2.10(c)).
Last but not least,
choosing the busy status, as in some IM tools, implies that the user will not receive
any notiﬁcations regarding her/his friends’ plans updates.
==PAGE:36==
24
2 Analysis
(a) Sharing a “Going out” sta-
tus in Free
(b) Conversation after sharing
the “Going out” status in Free
(c) New user notiﬁcation in
the device’s notiﬁcation drawer
Figure 2.10: Display of availability in Free, an Apple application similar to Noplans.
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 3
Design and
Implementation
This chapter describes the full design and development process of Noplans, from the
early stages of setting up the requirements (Section 3.1) to the prototyping phase
(Section 3.2) and ﬁnally to the implementation of the ﬁrst prototype release (Section
3.3).
3.1
Requirements
The main goal of an application, irrespective of its ﬁnal deployment platform (desktop,
web, mobile), is satisfying a set of user needs. These along with the usability and
user experience goals deﬁne the requirements of the ﬁnal product [Jak14b]. In the
case of Noplans, the identiﬁed user needs are [SZC12]:
• communicating
• socializing
• forming communities
Moreover, in terms of usability goals, the application should be both eﬀective and
eﬃcient to use as users wish to become aware of their contacts’ availability as quickly
as possible and at the right time and/or place. Last but not least, the user experience
goals aimed by Noplans are:
• being satisfying (rewarding the user with the right information about their
contacts’ availability - e.g. last seen, location);
• being helpful (providing meaningful ways for users to view - e.g. list ordered by
availability, map with location; and reach their contacts - e.g call, send message,
etc.);
• being motivating (encouraging users to keep more in touch with their network
- e.g. unexpected encounters with friends during big events).
==PAGE:38==
26
3 Design and Implementation
3.1.1
Functional requirements
Generally speaking, a functional requirement describes into detail what speciﬁc func-
tionality a system should perform for the targeted users1. Taking into account some
of the ﬁndings from the analysis, the following functional requirements have been
deﬁned for the current mobile application:
1.
User registration: Noplans does not follow the traditional sign up/login pro-
cedure, however, users need to somehow be identiﬁed by the system and there-
fore the registration functionality is required. When ﬁrst installed, the applica-
tion will request a user’s ﬁrst name, last name and phone number. The user’s
phone number will be used as a unique identiﬁer for all operations carried out
inside the app, similar to applications like WhatsApp (Subsection 2.3.2) and
Viber (Subsection 2.3.2) discussed in Chapter 2.
2. Storage and retrieval of contacts: Since the main feature of Noplans relies
on the relations within a user’s “network” of contacts, this functionality is cru-
cially important for the successful ﬂow of the application. Storage of contacts
occurs when the user ﬁrst installs the application and it is re-run in background
every time the user enters the app in order to check for new or updated contacts.
As for the retrieval of contacts, this operation occurs each time the user enters
the app in order to display the availability data view and whenever an event
that triggers an update in the UI has been sent (e.g. one of the contacts goes
online/oﬄine).
3.
Availability data view: Also a part of the main functionality, the data view
represents the list of contacts along with their availability information displayed
whenever the user is inside the app. The availability information stored by the
system consists of: user status (online/oﬄine), user ﬁrst name, the date when
the user was last seen in the app and the location at which the user was last
seen.
4. Module communication: Taking into account that most operations carried
out inside the app require the transmission of data to and from a web server, via
the internet, precautions regarding faults such as data loss need to be taken into
account. The application must allow back-end communication to the database
server, therefore a check for internet connection needs to be set and proper error
messages displayed to the user if something goes wrong
5. Notiﬁcation support: Noplans is a notiﬁcation-driven mobile application, which
means that all important information, such as a one of a user’s contacts joining
the Noplans network, is exchanged in the background via notiﬁcation events.
There are two types of notiﬁcations used inside the app:
1http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Functional_requirement
==PAGE:39==
3.1 Requirements
27
• visible notiﬁcations - which are displayed to the user in the phone’s notiﬁ-
cation area2 (e.g. user joined Noplans)
• hidden notiﬁcations - which are not seen by the user and are used to trigger
diﬀerent actions based on their scope (e.g refresh the list when a user goes
online/oﬄine)
An important aspect about visible notiﬁcations is that they allow an expiration
date. In this way, users will receive important updates even if they were not
connected to internet when the notiﬁcation was sent.
3.1.2
Non-functional requirements
Non-functional requirements refer to a set of criteria that deﬁnes how or to what
standards should a system perform for its targeted users3. For the current mobile
application the following non-functional requirements have been deﬁned:
1. System availability: Noplans fully relies on information stored in the database
server, therefore its back-end component must be operable and in a functioning
condition at all times.
2. Eﬃciency: Since we are dealing with an application that will be deployed
on mobile devices, resource management represents and important issue. Op-
eration eﬃciency can inﬂuence drastically the performance of the application
therefore diﬃcult tasks should not be performed at the same time. For instance,
notiﬁcations that a user has joined Noplans are sent to his/her contacts already
having an account in a background thread so that all other operations are not
inﬂuenced. Also, checking for new contacts in the phone’s book each time a user
is in the app happens in the background as well so that the UI is still usable.
3.
Robustness: In order to ensure robustness a system must be able to cope
with faults such as incorrect data storage, input abnormalities and erroneous
calculations. For instance, during user registration the user input is checked for
mistakes such as empty ﬁelds or incorrect phone number (without the country
preﬁx) in order to preserve the accuracy of the stored data. In addition, users
are prompted with error messages explaining their mistakes and the way to
correct them.
4.
Response time: According to Nielsen J. [J93], there are three time limits
that should be taken into account when designing applications having in mind
optimal performance:
• 0.1 second - reacting instantaneously
• 1.0 second - user’s ﬂow of thought
2http://developer.android.com/guide/topics/ui/notiﬁers/notiﬁcations.html
3http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Non-functional_requirement
==PAGE:40==
28
3 Design and Implementation
• 10 seconds - keeping the user’s attention
Unfortunately, not all operations necessary for the complete functional ﬂow of
an application can return a result within the time intervals mentioned above,
especially when we are dealing with application-server communication. As dis-
cussed by Myers ever since the 1980s [Mye85], a simple solution to this problem
is providing the user with feedback regarding the progress of the ongoing op-
eration. Such a case is the retrieval of contacts from a user’s phone and their
storage to the database which, based on the number of found contacts, can last
longer than the expected response time. A progress dialog stating the cause of
the delay is displayed to the user but no explicit indication of the progress is
given, since it can be diﬃcult to calculate how long this operation will be run-
ning for. This type of indication is called random progress [Mye85] and, in this
case, an alternative would be indicating the progress in the amount of contacts
that have already been saved out of the total.
5. Scalability: With the radical growth that Android apps have experienced in
the past years4 it is only natural that scalability represents an important factor
to be taken into account when aiming at the Google market. As for Noplans,
scalability can be discussed in terms of the following measures5:
• administrative scalability - by making use of a third-party cloud back-end,
speciﬁcally Parse 6, Noplans allows for an exponential growth in the num-
ber of users without any impact on performance;
• functional scalability - being only in an initial prototype development phase,
Noplans allows for extending functionality which will later be discussed in
Chapter 6; a quick example, for instance, is the source of the ”network”
used for establishing the in-app connections which can be extended from
contacts-only to include also Facebook, Gmail and LinkedIn accounts (see
Section 6.1.1).
Since the current implementation of Noplans is only a prototype, scalability is
less of a concern, however, it is good to “plan for success” and have it in mind
as a requirement for future releases.
3.1.3
User scenarios
Also known as use cases, user scenarios represent sequences of steps and actions that
need to be fulﬁlled by the user, in this case also called “actor”, in order to achieve a
goal. These goals mostly emerge from the requirements previously deﬁned in section
4http://techcrunch.com/2015/01/06/app-usage-grew-76-in-2014-with-shopping-apps-leading-
the-way/
5http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scalability
6 https://www.parse.com/
==PAGE:41==
3.1 Requirements
29
Figure 3.1: Overview of Noplans user scenarios.
3.1.1.
However, some functional requirements may only refer to the system (e.g.
notiﬁcation support), which means no interaction from the user is required and, since
the user might not even be aware of their existence, those requirements will not be
discussed in this section.
Figure 3.1 illustrates an overview of all scenarios and the relations between them.
The “actor” is the User and the <<include>> relation implies that the scenario
at the end of the arrow needs to be performed so that the other scenario can be
available. In this case, all scenarios are “included” in the User registration scenario,
therefore, a user cannot perform any action before registration. As we have seen in
the overview, there are four main scenarios a user can follow while using Noplans and
their descriptions will be presented below, in a tabular form, as follows:
1. User registration - Table 3.1
2. View contacts list - Table 3.2
3. Contact interaction - Table 3.3
4. View location on map - Table 3.4
==PAGE:42==
30
3 Design and Implementation
 
Use case 
name 
User registration 
Description 
 
The user registration operation happens only once, when the app is first 
installed and it requires the user to introduce personal information such as: 
first name, last name and phone number. This data will be used to further 
identify the user and her/his connections.  
After registration the user is directed to the main screen where s/he can see 
her/his current connections.    
 
Main flow of 
events 
User 
Application 
1. Start application 
2. Show registration form 
3. Enter user data 
4. Validate data [A1, A2] 
5. Confirm registration 
6. Save user to the database 
 
7. Display main screen 
 
8. Retrieve phone contacts 
 
9. Save user connections to the 
database 
Alternate 
flows 
 
A1 – Some or all of the fields are empty 
A2 – The format of the phone number is incorrect 
 
After each alternate flow an error message is displayed to the user and the 
app returns to step 2 
 
Assumptions 
Application has been successfully installed 
Preconditions The phone’s internet connection is enabled and the database server is 
running 
Post 
conditions 
A user has been registered and all her/his connections have been saved to 
the database 
Table 3.1: User scenario 1 - User registration.
==PAGE:43==
3.1 Requirements
31
Use case 
name 
View contacts list 
Description 
 
Viewing the contacts list happens every time the user enters the app, as it 
actually represents the main screen of the application. 
All connections, created after the registration, are displayed in a list ordered 
by when were the users last seen in the app. For each contact the displayed 
information is: status (online/offline), name, last seen date, last known 
location. 
 
Main flow of 
events 
User 
Application 
1. Start application 
2. Retrieve contacts from the 
database [A1] 
 
3. Display retrieved contacts 
4. View and interact with 
contacts list 
  
 
5. Wait for an update notification 
from the database when a user 
goes online/offline 
 
6. Display updated list 
Alternate 
flows 
A1 – None of the user’s current connection have the application installed, the 
list displays a message to the user and the app remains in step 5 until a new 
notification arrives 
 
Assumptions 
The current user has already registered 
Preconditions The phone’s internet connection is enabled and the database server is 
running 
Post 
conditions 
The user is able to view her/his contact’s information and further interact with 
each contact  
Table 3.2: User scenario 2 - View contacts list.
==PAGE:44==
32
3 Design and Implementation
Use case 
name 
Contact interaction 
Description 
In order to interact with a contact, the user needs to tap her/his name in the 
contacts list and a pop-up with quick actions will appear. Depending on the 
selected action, the user will be able to call, send a message or view the 
location of the tapped contact.  
Main flow of 
events 
User 
Application 
1. Start application 
2. Retrieve contacts from the 
database 
 
3. Display retrieved contacts 
4. Tap a contact 
5. Display quick actions pop-up 
6. Select the “Call contact” 
quick action 
7. Get the contact’s phone 
number and initiate a call 
 
8. Return to main screen once the 
call has ended 
9. Select the “Send message” 
quick action 
10. Display a list of possible 
messaging options [A1] 
 
11. Select a messaging option 
12. Get the contact’s phone and 
initiate selected messaging 
application 
 
13. Go back to main screen 
 
 
14. Select the “View location” 
quick action 
15. Get contact and open a new 
map activity  
Alternate 
flows 
A1 – If no other messaging applications are installed, the system will directly 
get the contact’s phone number and open a new message in the phone’s 
built-in messaging 
 
Assumptions 
The current user and her/his connections have already registered  
Preconditions The phone’s internet connection is enabled and the database server is 
running 
Post 
conditions 
The user is able to choose a means of interaction with her/his contacts  
Table 3.3: User scenario 3 - Contact interaction.
==PAGE:45==
3.1 Requirements
33
Use case 
name 
View location on map 
Description 
One of the possible quick actions selectable by users is “View location” which 
allows them to visualize not only where their contacts are located (or were 
located last time they had used the app) but also the distance between 
themselves and their contacts.    
Main flow of 
events 
User 
Application 
1. Start application 
2. Retrieve contacts from the 
database 
 
3. Display retrieved contacts 
4. Tap a contact 
5. Display quick actions popup 
 
6. Select the “View location” 
quick action 
7. Get contact and open a new 
map activity  
 
 
8. Insert pins at the locations of 
both the current user and the 
selected contact 
 
 
9. Display map 
 
10. Navigate on the map 
 
 
11. Tap locations for more info 
[A1] 
12. Display pin info 
Alternate 
flows 
A1 – After tapping one of the pins, the user is prompted with two built-in 
options of the map in Android: (a) get directions and (b) open in Google Maps. 
 
Assumptions 
The current user and her/his connections have already registered  
Preconditions The phone’s internet connection is enabled and the database server is 
running 
Post 
conditions 
The user is able to view her/his contacts’ locations on a map and has the 
possibility to get directions to those locations.  
 
Table 3.4: User scenario 4 - View location on the map.
==PAGE:46==
34
3 Design and Implementation
3.1.4
Interface requirements
As opposed to web design, which has been around ever since the 1990s7, designing
interfaces in a mobile context is a recent concept and still presents a lot of challenges,
such as [Jak14a]:
• the size of the screen - how to arrange information so that users don’t get
overwhelmed but do get all the necessary amount of detail;
• the gestures (touch screens) - how to ensure that touch gestures are accurate
and the user gets the expected result;
• the limited attention span of the user - how to keep the user engaged.
According to the PalmOS® UI Guidelines [Ost02], after deﬁning the general design
goals of the application you must really know your users in order to be able to provide
them with a UI that will live up to their expectations. In the guidelines, Jean O.
suggests that the easiest way to do so is by developing user scenarios which, unlike
the ones described in Section 3.1.3, must be more precise and reveal the following
details:
1. the likelihood that the user will perform a task
2. the frequency with which the user will perform the task
These are some examples of scenarios for Noplans based on which some of the interface
requirements were deﬁned:
• Users want to see all their friends that are available whenever they are available.
(likely, frequent)
• Users want to see if some of their friends are around during big events - confer-
ences, parties - or in crowded places - at the university, on the train. (likely,
frequent)
• Users want to contact - call, send a message, email, etc. - their available contacts.
(likely, less frequent)
• Users want to view the exact location of their friends. (likely, less frequent)
• Users want to get directions to the location of their friends. (less likely, infre-
quent)
In addition, the generic set of design goals that Noplans follows are (a) being intuitive,
(b) providing useful information and (b) having core features easily at reach. Last
but not least, since Noplans is, after all, an Android application, Google’s Creative
Vision8 was also taken into account.
7http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Web_design
8http://developer.android.com/design/get-started/creative-vision.html
==PAGE:47==
3.1 Requirements
35
As we have seen in the analysis chapter [2], all previous systems dealing with the
display of availability information had certain UI requirements in common, such as:
• the results (availability of contacts, friends, colleagues, etc.) are displayed in a
list;
• the traﬃc lights color analogy is used to indicate the current state of the user
(red - unavailable, green - available, yellow - idle/away);
• time and location are among the most important factors which combined can
most accurately suggest a person’s availability;
• relying on users to set or indicate their availability works if the task does not
require too much hassle.
Keeping all these in mind, the Noplans UI will be created using only standard
Android layouts, controls and events. In this way it will be easily portable across
a diversity of display sizes, resolutions and operating system versions. Aiming to
provide a high level user interface, the following decisions were taken regarding the
proposed design for the UI:
1. Main screen: The main screen will consist of a list view displaying all the con-
tacts of the user and their availability information since this is the most likely
and frequent task that users expect to fulﬁl by using Noplans (see also Subsec-
tion 3.3.3). Without having to set or keep track of an availability status, simply
entering the main screen is an indication that the user is currently available and
looking for someone to spend their free time with.
2. Availability information: The chosen availability information to be displayed
in the main screen will consist of: the user status (available/not available),
her/his name, the date/time when s/he was last seen in the app and the location
where s/he was last seen in the app [Con+10] since these are the most likely
details a user would want to see at ﬁrst. Easily recognizable for anyone familiar
with IM and considered to be common knowledge in the social virtual space,
the status of a user is displayed as a green/red dot next to the user’s name.
In addition, in order to emphasize available users, their names are written in
bold. Within 24 hours, the time when a user was last seen in the app is shown
in “relative” form (e.g. 24min ago) in order to avoid any confusions regarding
time zones. Whenever that limit is passed, the last seen date is shown directly
since the particular user is obviously not available, so the information is not as
valuable. Finally, the location is also displayed in a “relative” form (e.g 1km)
since it provides more meaning for users than, for instance, (latitude, longitude)
coordinates.
3. “Only show what I need when I need it”8: Following Google’s Creative
Vision, actions such as calling a contact, sending a message or viewing the
exact location of a contact on a map will be displayed only by request, in an
==PAGE:48==
36
3 Design and Implementation
actions pop-up, when the user taps on a contact. This type of displaying actions
to users, also known as the Quick Action pattern, has also been used by other
applications such as the oﬃcial Twitter app or the Samsung Galaxy S contacts
book9.
4. Map view: The location functionality will lead the user to a new screen with a
map view (see also Subsection 3.3.5) which will only display both the user’s and
the selected contact’s locations as pins at the corresponding (latitude, longitude)
coordinates. More complex functions such as getting directions to the contact’s
location will only be possible by initiating the built-in Google map application;
5. “Pictures are faster than words”8: Based again on Google’s Creative Vi-
sion rules, whenever possible, icons were used to indicate speciﬁc actions that
users can perform. This is mainly the case with the actions pop-up, which uses
well-known icons to indicate calling, sending a message and viewing the location.
In addition, the availability of the user is shown via a green/red circle icon as
mentioned earlier.
3.2
Prototyping
According to [Lim+06], prototyping “is an essential part of evaluating design ideas”.
Being around ever since the 1980s10 mainly for user interfaces, prototyping has nowa-
days been fully integrated in the development process of web, desktop and mobile
applications. This is due to the fact that some of the most important goals of proto-
typing are simulating core functionality of future products as well as testing multiple
representations of a product’s design. As Fudd states in his ﬁrst law of creativity,
“To get a good idea, get lots of ideas“, and this is exactly what prototyping can help
with. In addition, prototyping abides by two memorable laws of interaction design
[Ret94]:
• “Know your user”
• “You are not your user”
There are two main types of prototyping techniques extensively employed in the
development of mobile applications [Jak14b]:
1. low ﬁdelity (“lo-ﬁ”) prototyping - result is quick and cheap to achieve, can be
easily changed
2. high ﬁdelity (“hi-ﬁ”) prototyping - more expensive in both time and resources,
less prone to changes as it is more similar to the ﬁnal product
9http://www.codeproject.com/Articles/521455/Quick-action-pattern-in-Android-and-simple-
impleme
10http://designmodo.com/wireframing-prototyping/
==PAGE:49==
3.2 Prototyping
37
Arguably, both methods are valuable and authors Jim Rudd, Ken Stern, and Scott
Isensee describe into detail many of the advantages as well as the disadvantages of
each method along with a number of tips for using them in [RSI96]. For instance,
even though “lo-ﬁ” prototypes have extremely low development costs, they sometimes
tend to limit the user’s ability for error checking and are insuﬃcient when it comes
to interactivity which is fully captured by “hi-ﬁ” prototypes.
However, the well-
known “software developers’ dilemma” paradoxically states that you cannot evaluate
an interactive design until after it is build but, once built, changes to the design are
diﬃcult [Ret94] therefore it is extremely important to be aware of which prototyping
technique is needed at what moment in the development process.
Lim et al. agreed with this idea, hence they conducted a comparative study of
the two techniques. Their analysis revealed that major usability issues such as the
appearance/look of the product, unclear label meanings, icons/symbols/graphical
representations issues or locating elements in the interface were discovered by all
three prototypes. The overall conclusion was that a crucial consideration in choosing
the appropriate prototype technique is deciding on what aspects of usability the
evaluation aims at.
For the design and implementation of Noplans, both low and high-ﬁdelity pro-
totypes were used and more details about each technique will be described in the
following subsections.
3.2.1
Low-ﬁdelity prototyping
The purpose of this prototyping phase was to evaluate whether users would under-
stand the purpose of the application and would be interested in using it. The initial
design of Noplans deﬁned a much broader scope for the application and, in order to
assess if all the desired functionality was in accordance to the users’ needs, a series of
mock-ups simulating user scenarios were designed. The simulations allowed the users
to get familiar with the following main scenarios:
• visualizing available friends (by time or location)
• selecting a friend to contact
• making plans with a contacted friend (creating a group)
• interacting with friends in a group
In the beginning, an extensive part of the app’s functionality was represented by
groups, creating groups, visualizing available groups, joining a group, messaging inside
a group, etc. but since this was only an extension of the core functionality and user
feedback revealed that it did not add a lot of meaningful value to the application,
it was removed from the actual product implementation. The mock-ups created for
this purpose will be added to Appendix A. Also referred to as wireframes, mock-ups
were designed using Adobe Photoshop as well as Adobe Illustrator and the structure
of each wireframe consisted of:
==PAGE:50==
38
3 Design and Implementation
1. a top action bar with the app’s name (as it can also be seen in the current
implementation of the product, Figure 3.2)
2. a click-able header with the number of available groups plus the button to the
map view
3. a list displaying available friends with their pictures and names
The connectivity between wireframes was created using an online tool, namely
InvisionApp11. A great advantage of this tool is that the ﬁnal simulation could be
sent directly to the user’s phone so instead of testing on a computer-based prototype,
users could get the full mobile experience. During the evaluation, users were asked to
employ the “thinking aloud” method, verbalizing everything as they were navigating
through the interface12. The evaluation provided valuable feedback for improvement
that was used later in the design phase as well as in the implementation. Some of the
users’ ideas are presented below:
• more information about available users should be displayed
• the groups header takes too much space
• it is not straightforward that the groups header is click-able
• the possibility to declare an availability status would be interesting
• contacting friends directly from the map view
Apart from the above suggestions, the usability tests actually revealed a positive
reaction from the participants as they were interested in the idea and acknowledged
its usefulness. Moreover, it was also revealed that, at times, despite being able to
11http://www.invisionapp.com/
12http://www.nngroup.com/articles/thinking-aloud-the-1-usability-tool/
Figure 3.2: Top action bar with the application’s name.
==PAGE:51==
3.3 Implementation
39
visualize it on a mobile device, it was still diﬃcult for users to get a good feel of the
app (e.g. “Is this a list?”; “How do I navigate the map?”), and therefore the obvious
step further was a “hi-ﬁ” prototype.
3.2.2
High-ﬁdelity prototyping
Since the purpose of prototyping is improving a concept, a model, a design, etc., and
it usually occurs in multiple iterations, ﬁndings from past prototypes must be taken
into account when starting a new iteration, otherwise the entire process is worthless
[Ret94]. In the same manner, when developing the “hi-ﬁ” prototype, some of the
feedback suggested by users during the “lo-ﬁ” evaluation was taken into account. For
example, as it can be seen in Figure 3.3, in the new prototype users could explicitly
see a green dot on their friends’ pictures indicating their availability.
At this moment it was decided that showing only available friends in the main
screen might be too little since most of the times users would open an empty list
therefore additional information was added in the implementation as described in
Subsection 3.3.2.
The idea behind this new prototype was providing the users with a more familiar,
application-like environment so that they could focus more on the app’s functionality
and not as much on its interface. But how do you get users to think about content
rather than appearance? Done in a similar way as previously, the evaluation of the
“hi-ﬁ” prototype revealed that merely the Android implementation was not enough
to get users focus on content. The reason was that all the information presented in
the application was still based on static data. Users were not actually visualizing
availability information regarding their own friends and since Noplans is intended
to aid users at speciﬁc moments when they need that information, just imagining
scenarios is not as valuable as actually experiencing them.
Having all of these in mind, the next step was clearly a fully functional prototype
with a working backend that would give a network of people the opportunity to use
it over a period of time.
3.3
Implementation
As described in the above section, after the initial prototyping phase, the actual imple-
mentation of the application comes next and all decisions previously made regarding
requirements and UI design will now be taken into account.
Android Studio 1.1.0 was used as the integrated development environment (IDE),
along with the Android Software Development Kit (SDK) and using the Android API
level 21 (Android 5.0-5.0.2 Lollipop) as the target version but level 14 (Android 4.0-
4.0.2 Ice Cream Sandwich) as the minimum required. Moreover, the two main test
devices were a Samsung Galaxy Nexus running Android 4.2.1 (Jelly Bean) and a
Samsung S2 Plus running Android 4.2.2 (Jelly Bean). However, during the testing
==PAGE:52==
40
3 Design and Implementation
Figure 3.3: Main screen of the “hi-ﬁ” Noplans prototype.
==PAGE:53==
3.3 Implementation
41
period, the participants installed the application also on other types of both phones
and Android versions but this will be discussed in more detail in Chapter 4.
Without further ado, this chapter describes the full implementation process of the
application and its components.
3.3.1
Back-end communication
One of the most fundamental parts of Noplans is the communication with the database
server since this is the place where all data about users and their connections are saved.
For this ﬁrst iteration of the development Parse6, an existing platform that already
provides a customizable backend, was used. This decision was taken due to the fact
that building a new backend from the beginning requires a lot of time and resources.
The following paragraphs will describe into more detail the complete interaction
with and use of the Parse functionality.
Parse
Also known as “mobile Backend as a Service” (mBaaS), platforms such as Parse oﬀer
a lot of beneﬁts to developers, some of which are13:
• multiple services - cloud data storage, push notiﬁcations, analytics, etc.;
• scalability (see Subsection 3.1.2) - no extra work needed from the development
point of view with the increase of users;
• extensibility - it is easy to extend the app’s functionality since the database
models can be easily changed and no rewrites to the backend are required.
With over a hundred companies14 already successfully using its services, Parse oﬀers
three main products as follows (see also Figure 3.4):
1. Parse Core - handling all operations regarding data storage and social media
integration;
2. Parse Push - dealing with sending push notiﬁcations either to all users or a
targeted group;
3. Parse Analytics - managing the tracking of usage data.
All of the above mentioned products have been used throughout the development of
Noplans, but mainly the Core and Push modules.
13http://www.sitepoint.com/creating-cloud-backend-android-app-using-parse/
14https://parse.com/customers
==PAGE:54==
42
3 Design and Implementation
 
 
 
 
Push 
 
Analytics 
 
Core 
Parse 
Figure 3.4: Parse services.
Parse Core
One of the most important concepts that the Parse Core module works with is the
ParseObject. As seen in Figure 3.5, Noplans is built around three main such concepts,
or classes: Installation, User and Connection.
Installation is a predeﬁned Parse class and will be discussed into more detail
later in the chapter.
The other two classes are application dependent and while
the User class stores relevant identiﬁcation information about each individual user,
Connection stores all one-to-one relations that each user has with the contacts in
her/his phone.
In general, a ParseObject consists of (key:value) pairs of JSON-
compatible data. These data are schemaless meaning that no previous deﬁnition of
the class or its key types is required because Parse will automatically create them
according to the ﬁrst saved entry. For example, a single ParseObject of class User
will contain the following (key:value) pairs:
1
{ firstName : "Monica",
2
lastName : "Coman",
3
phone : +4550299202,
4
isOnline: true,
5
lastSeen: 2015-06-11T11:12:00Z,
6
location: [055.7866642, 12.5230067] }
Listing 3.1: Example of a ParseObject.
In addition, all objects saved using Parse automatically get an objectId - a unique
identiﬁer for each saved object, plus a createdAt and an updatedAt keys - dates and
times when each object was added and last modiﬁed in the cloud.
==PAGE:55==
3.3 Implementation
43
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Installation 
objectId 
appName 
appVersion 
channels 
deviceType 
installationId 
parseVersion 
phone 
User 
objectId 
firstName 
lastName 
phone 
isOnline 
lastSeen 
location 
Connection 
objectId 
phone1 
phone2 
Figure 3.5: Parse Core Objects.
In a general sense, the communication between Parse and Noplans is done via
two types of interactions: ParseQueries and Push Notifications (see Figure 3.6).
Push Notiﬁcations will be discussed into more detail in Subsection 3.3.1.
ParseQueries are used for retrieving previously saved data.
After a user has
installed the app and all her/his personal data along with her/his connections have
been saved, the queries in Listing 3.2 are run in order to retrieve the information
displayed in the main screen. This sequence of queries represents a more complex
example since it involves using the result of a previous query as a constraint for the
next one in the following way: (a) ﬁrst, all connections having the key "phone1"
equal to the phone number of the current user are retrieved and then (b) all users
whose phone numbers are equal to key "phone2" in the results of query (a) are also
retrieved and displayed to the current user.
1
// Create Connections query
2
ParseQuery<ParseObject > connectionsQuery = ParseQuery.getQuery("Connection");
3
connectionsQuery.whereEqualTo("phone1", DataUtils.phone);
4
5
// Create Users query
6
ParseQuery query = new ParseQuery("User");
7
8
query.orderByDescending("lastSeen");
9
query.whereMatchesKeyInQuery("phone", "phone2", connectionsQuery);
Listing 3.2: Retrieving ParseObjects.
==PAGE:56==
44
3 Design and Implementation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
              
Mobile Device 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Core 
Push
Analytics
Parse Android SDK 
Mobile App 
-Noplans- 
Device sensors 
Parse Queries
Push Notifications
Figure 3.6: Parse Cloud-App communication.
Parse Push
As previously mentioned, the second module used by Noplans is Parse Push which
focuses on Push Notifications. Generally speaking, notiﬁcations are messages that
can be delivered to users outside of the application’s UI2 and their purpose is mainly
to keep the users engaged and aware of changes that happen in the app without
having to interact with it directly. In particular, Push Notifications are also an
eﬀective and quick way to reach everyone in the app’s user base or just a particular
group.
Another one of their advantages is that their delivery is guaranteed.
For
instance, if the phone does not have an internet connection at the moment when the
notiﬁcation was sent this will still be delivered later.
In order to target particular user groups and send Push Notifications, Parse
makes use of the Installation class. Each Parse application must have an asso-
ciated Installation object in order to register for Push Notifications, which is
==PAGE:57==
3.3 Implementation
45
programmatically obtained in the following way:
1
// Save the current Installation to Parse.
2 ParseInstallation.getCurrentInstallation().saveInBackground();
Listing 3.3: Saving the current Installation.
Parse oﬀers two ways of sending Push Notifications:
1. through channels - simple and easy, following the subscription model (a user can
subscribe to as many channels as s/he wants and will receive all notiﬁcations
sent to that channel);
2. using advanced targeting - more powerful and ﬂexible, allowing complex querying
of the user base.
Both options are fully compatible with each other, however, for the current scope of
this project only the latter was used. According to point 5 in the functional require-
ments subsection, Noplans uses two types of notiﬁcations for diﬀerent communication
purposes:
1. a new contact joined the Noplans network →ACTION_NEW
2. one of the contacts went online/oﬄine and the list requires an update →
ACTION_UPDATE_LIST
Both types are deﬁned programmatically as follows:
1
// Define action types for Push Notifications
2
private final String ACTION_UPDATE_LIST = "com.dtu.monica.noplansgcmsync.
UPDATE_LIST_ACTION";
3
private final String ACTION_NEW = "com.dtu.monica.noplansgcmsync.
NEW_CONTACT_ACTION";
Listing 3.4: Action types for Push Notifications.
Figure 3.8 illustrates the notiﬁcation ﬂow between Noplans and the Parse Push
module. First, the application registers a ParsePushReceiver and an IntentFilter
with the Android System by using the registerReceiver() method. This means
that all received intents corresponding to the ﬁlter will be notiﬁed back to the
registered receiver.
ParsePushReceiver is a subclass of the predeﬁned Android
BroadcastReceiver15 class, generally used for sending broadcasts across applications.
After registration, the receiver remains in an “active” state, waiting for notiﬁcations
until the unregisterReceiver() method is called.
Whenever a new user has installed Noplans, the application will send a PushQuery
to Parse, which will in turn send Push Notifications to all Android systems tar-
geted by the query (see Listing 3.5). These notiﬁcations will then be passed by the
15http://developer.android.com/reference/android/content/BroadcastReceiver.html
==PAGE:58==
46
3 Design and Implementation
(a) New user notiﬁcation in the device’s no-
tiﬁcation area
(b) New user notiﬁcation in the device’s no-
tiﬁcation drawer
Figure 3.7: Noplans notiﬁcations displayed in the device’s notiﬁcation area and
drawer.
system to the corresponding receivers via the onReceive() method and, since in this
case the notiﬁcation is of type ACTION_NEW, the receivers will reply back to the sys-
tem. The system will display the notiﬁcation in the device’s notiﬁcation area and
drawer respectively (see Figure 3.7). Tapping on the notiﬁcation will either launch
the application’s main screen, if the app was closed, or bring it to the foreground, if
the app was still running in the background. In both cases, this action will trigger a
communication with the database server which means fresh data (data including the
availability information of the new contact) will be rendered in the app’s UI.
Similarly, in the case of ACTION_UPDATE_LIST notiﬁcations, the system will pass
them to the receivers which, instead of replying back, will directly trigger a change in
the application’s UI (if the application is opened) since these notiﬁcations are actually
hidden and don’t need to be displayed to the user.
1
// Create the Installation query
2
ParseQuery pushQuery = ParseInstallation.getQuery();
3
pushQuery.whereMatchesKeyInQuery("phone", "phone1", connectionsQuery);
4
5
// Create the push object
6
JSONObject pushObject = new JSONObject();
7
try {
8
pushObject.put("action", ACTION_NEW);
9
pushObject.put("myTitle", "New contact");
10
pushObject.put("myMessage", firstName.concat(" joined Noplans!"));
11
} catch (JSONException e) {
12
e.printStackTrace();
13
}
14
15
// Send a request for PushNotifications to Parse
16
ParsePush push = new ParsePush();
17
push.setQuery(pushQuery); // Set the push query
18
push.setData(pushObject);
19
push.sendInBackground(new SendCallback() {
20
@Override
21
public void done(ParseException e) {
==PAGE:59==
3.3 Implementation
47
22
if(e == null)
23
Log.i(TAG, "Push sent!");
24
else Log.i(TAG, "Push not sent! Error: " + e.getMessage());
25
}
26
});
Listing 3.5: Sending Push Notifications for a new user.
3.3.2
User data
As previously mentioned (see point 3 in Subsection 3.1.1), the most important data
regarding the user that are necessary for display in the application’s main screen are:
• status →isOnline;
• name →firstName;
• last seen date/time →lastSeen;
• last seen location →location. (see also Figure 3.5 and Listing 3.1)
However, some of these data cannot be automatically displayed to the user as they
require further calculations, such as how long ago a user was last available and what is
the distance between a user’s current location and the location where her/his contacts
were last available.
The results of such calculations are called metrics and the way in which they are
determined is described in the following paragraphs.
Time
Time availability is quite common across multiple chat applications nowadays. Table
3.5 shows a comparison between these various displays of time availability along with
the chosen option for Noplans.
A very simple algorithm has been used to compute how long it has been since a
user was last available. The subtraction of the time when a user has last used Noplans
from the current time gives the number of milliseconds that have passed since a user’s
last available time.
1
// Get the date when the user has last used the app
2
Date lastSeen = user.getLastSeen();
3
if(lastSeen != null) {
4
// Get the time when the user has last used the app
5
long last = lastSeen.getTime();
6
// Get the current time
7
long now = new Date().getTime();
8
long t = now - last; }
Listing 3.6: Calculating the time in miliseconds.
==PAGE:60==
48
3 Design and Implementation
 
Android System 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                       
 
Mobile Application
Notification 
area
Notification 
drawer
Application UI 
Broadcast 
Receiver 
1. registerReceiver( 
ParsePushReceiver receiver, 
IntentFilter filter) 
2. Send push 
query 
3. Send push 
notification 
4. onReceive( 
Contex  context, 
Intent intent) 
5. notification type 
ACTION_UPDATE_LIST 
Push
Parse Push 
Receiver 
Figure 3.8: Push Notifications ﬂow.
The getTime() method returns the time measured in Unix epoch units, i.e. the
amount of seconds that have passed since the 1st of January 1970, midnight GMT
(Greenwich Mean Time). This value is then transformed into seconds, minutes, hours,
etc. and according to the result, diﬀerent messages are displayed to the user as follows:
• if t < 60s →display t in seconds
• if t ≥60s and t < 60min →display t in minutes
• if t ≥60min and t < 24h →display t in hours
• if t = 24h →display “yesterday”
• if t > 24h →display the lastSeen date
==PAGE:61==
3.3 Implementation
49
App 
Available 
Last available 
during the day 
Last available the 
day before 
Last available in 
the past 
Whatsapp 
now 
last seen today at 
00:15 
last seen 
yesterday at 
10:00 
last seen 
23/04/2015 
Hangouts 
last seen just now 
last seen 22m 
ago/ 2h ago 
last seen 
yesterday 
last seen 3d/4w 
ago 
Viber 
Online 
-   
Last online 
yesterday at 
16:10 
Last online on 4 
January 2015 
Facebook 
messenger 
NOW 
3min/10hr 
- 
- 
Noplans 
now 
10s/20min/2h 
ago 
yesterday 
05-Jun-15 
 
Table 3.5: Various displays of time availability across multiple mobile applications.
Distance
The distance between two points deﬁned by a (latitude, longitude) pair is calculated
using the haversine formula16, which gives the great-circle distance between the points
on a sphere. In this case, the sphere is considered to be the Earth and the haversine
distance is given by:
d = 2 · r · arcsin(
√
haversin (ϕ1 −ϕ2) + cos(ϕ1) · cos(ϕ2) · haversin (λ1 −λ2)) (3.1)
where ϕ represents the latitude of each point, λ represents the longitude, r is the
radius of Earth and haversin is given by the following formula:
haversin (θ) = sin2(θ/2) = (1 −cos θ)/2
(3.2)
According to the computed haversine distance, diﬀerent messages will be displayed
to the user as follows:
• if d=0 →display “here”
• if d > 1000 km →display “abroad”
• else →display d
1000 km was deﬁned as the distance limit for a user’s “abroad” state. The reason
behind that was the assumption that, within that distance users can still be in the
16http://rosettacode.org/wiki/Haversine_formula#Java
==PAGE:62==
50
3 Design and Implementation
same country and might still want to meet for a weekend trip, for example. A deeper
analysis regarding the appropriate distance limit for and the user perception of the
“abroad” state should be carried out in future iterations.
3.3.3
Main screen
Upon launching, the application initiates its main activity (UsersActivity) which
connects to the phone’s GPS (Global Positioning System) in order to retrieve the
user’s current location and to Parse in order to retrieve the list of contacts and
their availability information.
Figure 3.10(a) presents the main screen displaying
a list of the user’s contacts according to the requirements described in point 3 of
Subsection 3.1.1. Contacts are ordered by lastSeen date therefore, people who are
also currently online in the app will be displayed at the top of the list (see Figure
3.10(b)). As previously mentioned in Subsection 3.3.2, the status of the contact is
the ﬁrst availability information shown in each row of the list which, in this case, is
displayed visually as a red/green circle (see Figure 3.9).
However, the user reaches the main screen directly when starting the app only
if s/he has already signed up. First time after installation, the start-up procedure
occurs in a slightly diﬀerent way.
3.3.4
Register
As mentioned in point 1 of Subsection 3.1.1, when installing the app users need to
provide some information (ﬁrst name, last name, phone number) that will be used
later on for identiﬁcation. Collecting the data is done via a simple Android Dialog
17 as seen in Figure 3.11.
17http://developer.android.com/guide/topics/ui/dialogs.html
(a) A contact with status “oﬄine” indicated
by a red circle
(b) A contact with status “online” indicated
by a green circle
Figure 3.9: Visualizing the status of contacts in the main screen list of Noplans.
==PAGE:63==
3.3 Implementation
51
(a) Main screen of the Noplans application
(b) A contact with status “online” indicated
by a green circle
Figure 3.10: Main screen of Noplans displaying online users at the top of the list.
When the “OK” button is clicked, the user input is checked for mistakes in order
to ensure data integrity as well as robustness of the system (see also point 3) of
subsection 3.1.2) and appropriate error messages are displayed to the user. There are
two types of such messages handled by the application:
• incorrect format of the phone number - phones numbers should contain the
country preﬁx (see Figure 3.12(a))
• empty input ﬁelds - all sign up information is required (see Figure 3.12(b))
For simplicity, in the current prototype, error messages are displayed as Toasts18.
Future versions of the application could ensure that many other user input errors
are handled, some of these will be discussed later in Chapter 6. In addition, in the
onClick() method of the sign up dialog, the following operations are also fulﬁlled:
18http://developer.android.com/guide/topics/ui/notiﬁers/toasts.html
==PAGE:64==
52
3 Design and Implementation
Figure 3.11: Registration dialog used for collecting user data after installation.
• user information is locally saved to the phone’s SharedPreferences19;
• the ParseInstallation object is updated to store the user’s phone number
which will later be used in queries for sending Push Notiﬁcations;
• a new User object is created with the inputted information and saved to the
database;
• notiﬁcations that a new user has joined Noplans are sent to the user’s contacts
who already have an account;
• the previously saved User object is updated with the user’s location;
19http://developer.android.com/reference/android/content/SharedPreferences.html
==PAGE:65==
3.3 Implementation
53
(a) The displayed error message when the for-
mat of the phone number is wrong
(b) The displayed error message when not all
ﬁelds are ﬁlled in
Figure 3.12: Error messages displayed to users during registration.
• the user’s contacts are saved to the database as Connection objects.
Since many of these operations take longer than the response times users usually
expect from mobile applications (see point 4 is subsection 3.1.2), they are handled in
a diﬀerent thread, behind a ProgressDialog20 which indicates that the application
is still working. All of this is done using the AsyncTask class21 which allows the
application to perform tasks in the background while the UI is still able to publish
results.
20http://developer.android.com/reference/android/app/ProgressDialog.html
21http://developer.android.com/reference/android/os/AsyncTask.html
==PAGE:66==
54
3 Design and Implementation
3.3.5
Quick actions pop-up
Apart from viewing a list of contacts along with their availability information, users
can also perform other actions in the main screen such as calling, sending a message
or viewing the location of a contact. These actions are displayed to the user with the
help of a QuickAction pop-up. Figure 3.13 presents the quick actions pop-up as it
appears whenever a user taps on a contact in the list.
The three actions - call, send message, view location - are indicated both with a
text and with a picture in order to create a more intuitive experience for the user.
The behaviour of each of the three actions is described in the following paragraphs
(see also Table 3.3):
1. “Call friend” - whenever this action is selected, the phone number attribute is
taken from the tapped contact and the device’s call function is triggered via a
special ACTION_CALL Intent22
2. “Send message” - this action follows a slightly diﬀerent approach depending on
whether other messaging applications (e.g. WhatsApp, Hangouts, Viber) are
installed on the device or not; if yes, the user will be prompted with a list of all
those messaging apps in order to choose which one s/he wants to use as seen
in Figure 3.14(a) (e.g. if WhatsApp is chosen, the user will be redirected to
the messaging window corresponding to the chosen contact, see Figure 3.14(b));
if no, then the device’s messaging function will be triggered with the phone
number already set to the tapped contact (see Figure 3.14(c))
3. “View location” - a map screen is emerged when this action is selected, display-
ing both the location of the current user as well as the location of the selected
contact; if the user taps on any of the two location s/he has the choice of
initiating the built-in Google map app either for getting directions or just for
visualizing the location in a diﬀerent context
Future versions of the application can provide the user with even more possible
actions inside the quick actions pop-up but this will be discussed into detail at a later
point in Chapter 6.
22http://developer.android.com/guide/components/intents-ﬁlters.html#Resolution
==PAGE:67==
3.3 Implementation
55
Figure 3.13: The quick actions pop-up displayed when a contact is tapped.
==PAGE:68==
56
3 Design and Implementation
(a) The list of messaging apps
to choose from when the “Send
message” action is chosen
(b) Sending a message to the
selected contact using What-
sApp
(c) Sending a message to the
selected contact using the de-
vice’s messaging function
Figure 3.14: Visual description of the “Send message” action scenario.
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 4
Testing and Evaluation
The current chapter describes the testing phase of the project consisting of the de-
ployment of the application so that participants were able to use it on their own
devices (Section 4.1), a more detailed description of the participants involved in the
evaluation (Section 4.2) and the methods used for gathering the feedback (see 4.3).
The results of the evaluation are discussed separately in the next Chapter [5].
4.1
Deployment
After the design and implementation phase ended, in order to achieve a complete
iteration1 (see Figure 4.1), the application needed to be released to the end-users.
This was done by deploying the application to each device belonging to the test
participants.
Since this was the ﬁrst version of Noplans and there wasn’t enough time to fulﬁl
all the requirements set by the Android Launch Checklist2, the application was not
launched on the Google Play Store. Instead, an APK (Android application package)3
was distributed to all participants along with a set of installation instructions4 and a
short description of the product, via email.
The description for the test users included the following information:
(a) the purpose of the application - “Noplans aims at displaying which of your friends
are available at the same time as you and in the same geographical area.”
(b) a couple of scenarios that present the problem “solved” by the app - ”You have
maybe found yourself in a situation like wanting to call someone to go out for a
drink but not knowing about what s/he are doing or where they are; or maybe it
happened that some of your plans got cancelled and you didn’t know who else to
call on such short notice; what about setting up a meeting point and even though
it seems like you’re both in the same spot, you can’t seem to ﬁnd each other; and
what if you have a long commute, wouldn’t it be nice to know that an old friend
is two seats away from you in a train?”
1http://agilerules.blogspot.dk/2014/07/software-development-methodologies.html
2http://developer.android.com/distribute/tools/launch-checklist.html
3https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Android_application_package
4http://www.cnet.com/how-to/how-to-install-apps-outside-of-google-play/
==PAGE:70==
58
4 Testing and Evaluation
 
Design & 
Implementation 
Testing 
Evaluation 
Requirements 
Initial 
Planning 
Deployment 
Figure 4.1: The ﬂow of an iterative and incremental development process.
(c) what is expected from the users - Users were instructed to try and use the app
as much as possible in scenarios similar to the ones described above or in other
situations that they found appropriate. Moreover, they were asked to assess the
usefulness of the application and provide feedback regarding both the design the
functionality of the app
(d) small instructions regarding registration - Upon installation, users were asked to
input their phone numbers with the country preﬁx (see also Subsection 3.3.4). In
addition, contacts that the users wanted to see in the main availability data view
should also have the country preﬁx added to their number in the users’ phones.
The testing phase lasted for 28 days (≈1 month) and the deployment of the
application was done in multiple rounds. The ﬁrst round started on March 27th when
7 participants, including myself, deployed the application and started using it. Next,
around June 3rd, the second deployment of the application took place when 3 more
==PAGE:71==
4.2 Participants
59
participants joined the Noplans network. The rest of the participants, 8 in number,
installed the application in the third deployment round which began on 10th of June.
The multiple deployment rounds represent an important aspect to be taken into
account when discussing the results of the evaluation period (see Chapter 5) therefore
I considered it was compulsory to mention it.
4.2
Participants
As previously mentioned, 18 participants, including myself, installed and used No-
plans on diﬀerent versions of the operating system and a diversity of phones. Among
the tested Android versions we could enumerate 4.0.3, 4.1.2, 4.2.2, 4.3 and the latest
5.02. The majority of the participants were males, with only 4 female participants
while the average age was 27.
Figure 4.2 illustrates the full network of participants involved in the process of
testing and evaluating Noplans. Each user is graphically represented as a node in the
network, while the connections between users are represented as edges.
A connection between two users can be either uni- or bi-directional, meaning that
only one side can see the availability information of the other side and respectively that
both sides can keep track of each other’s availability. Table 4.3 shows the connections
based on which the graph in Figure 4.2 was created.
The dimension of a node indicates the number of edges incident to a node or, in
other words, the number of connections a user has. As it can be inferred both from
the table [4.3] and from the graph [4.2], user Remus is the central point of the Noplans
network having the highest number of connections.
The node colors represent their belonging to a community. As illustrated in Figure
4.2, the Noplans network is divided into three main communities as follows:
1. The green community has user Monica as the main node connected to all other
nodes in the community.
The participants who are part of the community
were the ﬁrst ones to start using the application in round 1 of the deployment.
Lastly, their connection to the other communities is done via Remus through
both Monica and Andreea;
2. The blue community has user Remus as the main node and represent the biggest
community in the Noplans network, however, with only one extra node. Con-
trary to expected beliefs, not the entire community started testing the applica-
tion in the second round of the deployment. Only users Remus and AndreeaMi-
halcea were part of round 2, unlike the rest of the participants who joined the
network later;
3. The red community is the smallest community of the Noplans network and the
interesting fact is that its main user is actually user Remus from the adjacent
blue community. All its participants started the testing and evaluation in round
3 of the deployment.
==PAGE:72==
60
4 Testing and Evaluation
Andreea
Alex
Monica
Morten
Alexa
Oana
Dragos
Remus
AndreeaMihalcea
Bogdan
Almen
Vlad
Adrian
Dan
Robert
Alexandru
Ovidiu
Tiberiu
Figure 4.2: The network of participants used for the testing and evaluation phase
of Noplans.
==PAGE:73==
4.2 Participants
61
Bi-directional 
connection 
User 1 
User 2 
Yes 
Andreea 
Alex 
No 
Andreea 
Monica 
Yes 
Andreea 
Morten 
No 
Andreea 
Alexa 
No 
Oana 
Alexa 
No 
Monica 
Alex 
No 
Monica 
Alexa 
No 
Monica 
Oana 
No 
Monica 
Dragos 
Yes 
Alex 
Alexa 
Yes 
Alex 
Oana 
Yes 
Dragos 
Alexa 
Yes 
Morten 
Monica 
Yes 
Oana 
Andreea 
No 
Remus 
Andreea 
Yes 
Remus 
Monica 
Yes 
Remus 
AndreeaMihalcea
Yes 
Remus 
Ovidiu 
Yes 
Remus 
Bogdan 
No 
Remus 
Adrian 
No 
Remus 
Dan 
Yes 
Remus 
Robert 
Yes 
Almen 
Vlad 
No 
Adrian 
Dan 
No 
Alexandru 
Ovidiu 
No 
Alexandru 
Remus 
No 
Tiberiu 
Robert 
No 
Ovidiu 
Robert 
No 
Bogdan 
Almen 
No 
Bogdan 
Vlad 
Yes 
Bogdan 
Almen 
Figure 4.3: The table of user connections.
==PAGE:74==
62
4 Testing and Evaluation
4.3
Methodology
There are multiple ways of evaluating a product and gathering feedback from users
which can happen and be useful in diﬀerent phases of the development as follows:
• formative evaluation →guides the design phase by contributing with contem-
porary design feedback;
• summative evaluation →assesses the quality of the product after it has been
developed.
In addition, [Nie94] deﬁnes four basic ways of evaluating user interfaces:
1. automatically →by running the UI speciﬁcation through a program
2. empirically →by having real users assess the UI
3. formally →by using exact models and formulas to calculate usability
4. informally →by rules of thumb and the general skills or experience of the
evaluators
However, most often, automatic methods do not work and formal methods are ex-
tremely diﬃcult to apply therefore empirical methods have proved to be the best.
Noplans’ testing process, currently in discussion, represent an empirical summa-
tive evaluation since it has been carried out with real users and after a ﬁrst version
of the product has been implemented. Furthermore, throughout the testing process,
two types of methods were used in order to gather the necessary feedback, (a) a
qualitative method which consisted of comments, overall UI look and feel and general
impressions regarding the app’s functionality collected directly from the users and (b)
a quantitative method which consisted of user data, events logged via the application
or usage data tracked with Parse.
As previously mentioned in subsection 3.3.1, an integrated part of Parse is Parse
Analytics (see Figure 3.4 in subsection 3.3.1) which keeps track of the following,
more general, usage data:
• audience →number of active installations at a certain moment in time
• events →the number of API requests over time
• data →count of objects from predeﬁned Parse classes (Installation, Role, User),
and not only, over time
• retention →tracking of user sign ups
• performance →number of served and dropped requests relative to the request
limit over time
==PAGE:75==
4.3 Methodology
63
Although the Parse Analytics module automatically generates interactive graphs in
the online dashboard, all data can also be saved as csv (comma separated value) ﬁles.
These ﬁles were later used inside several Python scripts to create graphs that describe
diﬀerent aspects of the user behaviour. The graphs along with a usage data analysis
and several observations will be presented in the following chapter.
==PAGE:76==
64
==PAGE:77==
CHAPTER 5
Results
The current chapter contains the ﬁnal results of the testing and evaluation period (see
Chapter 4). All the feedback and logged data collected from users has been divided
into three diﬀerent sections. First, the usability feedback regarding the application
as seen from the users’ perspective is presented in Section 5.1. Next, usage data and
logs gathered during the tests are visualized plus a discussion regarding the inferred
behaviour of the users is carried out in Section 5.2. Finally, the network eﬀect along
with its implications is brieﬂy analysed in Section 5.3.
5.1
Usability Feedback
Usability has become an increasingly important part in an application development
process be it mobile, web or desktop applications.
Along the same lines, Bruce
Tognazzini1, usability consultant of the Nielsen Norman Group in partnership with
Donald Norman and Jakob Nielsen, stated the following: “If you don’t have user-
testing as an integral part of your design process you are going to throw buckets of
money down the drain.”
The overall reaction of the users was positive regarding the functionality of the
application and some of the comments appreciated the use of the phone’s contacts
as the start point for the Noplans network. Nevertheless, the feedback also revealed
some technical problems in the application’s work ﬂow such as:
• synchronization - immediately after installation, users have encountered prob-
lems with viewing the list of available contacts; it seems like the synchronization
between the database and the app takes a longer time than expected.
• internet connectivity - some users have experienced crashes if both the wireless
and the phone’s internet connectivity were disabled; a more fault tolerant design
should be aimed for.
• location - in some cases, usually depending on the phone, determining the loca-
tion of a user has proved to be inaccurate and therefore the availability distance
displayed in the main data view was also misleading; further research into loca-
tion services should be carried out.
1https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bruce_Tognazzini
==PAGE:78==
66
5 Results
• map view - even though both the locations of the current user and of the selected
contact should be displayed, some users don’t seem to have any of the locations
shown in the map view; these issues might be related to the one above.
• performance - users have experienced application time-outs, where the applica-
tion freezes and needs to be restarted in order to function again properly.
Although it might seem negative, such feedback is actually constructive and extremely
valuable during the ﬁrst iterations of any product. Some other ideas that users came
up with or would consider an improvement in the app’s usability are:
• a button allowing users to indicate their availability now or for a longer period
of time (e.g. the possibility of writing a status message or perhaps displaying
an availability timeline);
• some sort of indication that no internet connection is enabled (e.g.
a local
database displaying the data fetched when the user was last connected to inter-
net - more details in Chapter 6);
• more details about the contacts in the availability data view in order to be able
to identify diﬀerent contacts with the same ﬁrst name (e.g. display both ﬁrst
and last name of a contact or add a picture - more details in Chapter 6);
• being able to conﬁgure/customize/edit the user proﬁle (e.g. change the infor-
mation ﬁlled in when ﬁrst installing the application);
• having a shortcut created on the phone’s main screen similar to other applica-
tions;
• saving the already ﬁlled in data (e.g. if the display of the phone turns oﬀwhile
a user inputs her/his details, users would like to have the data saved when
turning the screen on again).
A couple of comments also referred to the design of the application, to details such
as fonts or the background color of the main availability data view but, since this
evaluation was focused more on the application’s functionality, the feedback needed
to be prioritised. Such comments will, nonetheless, be taken into account in further
iterations.
5.2
Usage Analysis
One of the main goals of testing, in general, is identifying usage behaviours or patterns
that can provide valuable insights into what users actually expect from the tested
products. Such information will only beneﬁt the users since it can be used to improve
the products so that they perform according to the expectations of the users.
==PAGE:79==
5.2 Usage Analysis
67
In [Xu+11], a study was carried out to investigate the key aspects of how, when
and where mobile applications were used from a spatial, temporal and user perspective.
The purpose of the study was to accumulate a higher understanding of the impact
that factors such as location, time and the user’s interest had upon mobile apps.
Their results revealed the following:
• some applications have a high likelihood of co-occurrence (see the points below)
therefore integration opportunities could enhance the user experience:
– when a user uses one app, he is also likely to use another one (e.g. when a
user uses Gmail for mailing, he is also likely to user hangouts for messag-
ing);
– users use alternatives for the same type of interest (e.g. multiple chatting
apps such as WhatsApp, Viber, Hangouts, Facebook Messenger).
• diurnal patterns can help content providers maximize their resources by dividing
their supported applications into classes:
– news apps more frequently used in the morning,
– sport apps more frequently used in the evening.
• mobility can aﬀect connectivity and performance therefore applications that
are mostly used on-the-move (e.g. social networking and gaming apps) should
compensate for this bandwidth variability
Similar observations have been revealed from the study carried out with Noplans and
they will be further discussed in the following paragraphs.
5.2.1
Number of active installations
Installations are a special Parse concept which indicates that an instance of the
application has been installed on a particular device and are mainly used in connection
to Push Notifications (see Subsection 3.3.1). Another special Parse concept is
the Users class, which is somewhat similar to the traditional username/password
authentication. According to the Parse speciﬁcations, an Installation object can
be associated to one or more User objects (e.g. if multiple sets of credentials have
been used on the same device) and the other way around, a User can have one or more
Installation objects associated (e.g. if a user has signed up with the same account
on multiple devices). However, the use of both classes is not compulsory and, in the
case of Noplans, the User-Installation relation is one-to-one also due to the fact
that a separate User class is created and not the Parse-speciﬁc one is employed.
Figure 5.1 shows the number of Daily active installations that occurred in the
period May 22nd - June 21st as well as the number of active installations over the
past 7 days (Weekly) and the past 30 days (Monthly) from the aforementioned dates.
==PAGE:80==
68
5 Results
Figure 5.1: Number of active installations per day, week and month.
An active installation deﬁnes the action of installing Noplans to an Android phone,
therefore the graphs in Figure 5.1 actually illustrate the number of users which in-
stalled the application during a day (Daily), in the past 7 days (Weekly) and in the
past 30 days (Monthly).
Monthly installations reach such a high number (60) in the beginning of the eval-
uation period due to the fact that the graph also takes into account the installations
created before the evaluation actually started. These data correspond to tests done
during the development phase, when multiple scenarios were tested in order to ensure
the quality of the version released for evaluation, and therefore multiple installations
of the product were necessary.
Nonetheless, the number of Daily active installations corresponds to the number
of participants and thus, it does not surpass the 20 limit. As expected, the number of
active installations is always higher in the beginning of a testing round, when users
are deploying the application on their phones, and starts to decline towards its end
when the application is already in use. Note that the “Daily active installations”
graph in Figure 5.1 has three peak intervals:
1. 27th-30th of May
==PAGE:81==
5.2 Usage Analysis
69
2. 3rd-6th of June
3. 9th-11th of June
which correspond to the three deployment rounds mentioned in Section 4.1. An in-
teresting aspect is that peaks are represented by intervals of 2-3 days rather than
one day as probably expected. The reason behind this is that users sometimes expe-
rienced problems with the products installation, either due to internet connectivity
or mistakes in their account information and, since no editing functionality was yet
implemented (see Subsection 6.1.4), such mistakes required a new re-installation of
the product.
Last but not least, the slightly higher number of active installations in the “Weekly
active installations” graph is also an eﬀect of the need for re-installation of the app
whenever mistakes occurred.
5.2.2
User activity measured in API requests
Figure 5.2 depicts information regarding the number of application program interface
(API) requests that have been tracked throughout the testing period. An API request
can refer to all events that require access to the Parse data such as simply opening
the Noplans and viewing the list of contacts along with their availability information.
In addition, events such as location changes or users going online/oﬄine are also
tracked under this branch of the Parse Analytics since both of them imply data
manipulation. Consequently, the current statistics actually provides a good insight
into the application’s usage frequency or, more accurately, the overall user activity.
A signiﬁcant number of requests can be noticed in the beginning of the testing
rounds which is not at all surprising considering that users have a tendency to use
applications more after they have installed them. The reason for that is simply the
curiosity of gaining knowledge about what an app can do and how it operates. It is
also quite clear that the frequency of usage starts decreasing towards the end of each
testing round, most likely for the same reasons described above. This, however, does
not indicate a good feedback for the application since it seems that users lose interest
quite quickly and, therefore, need to somehow be re-engaged in the system.
The three major peaks of the graph correspond again to the three deployment
periods described in Section 4.1. On average, there were ≈2331 API requests all
throughout the three-week testing period which does not represent an extremely high
user activity but, considering the low number of participants, does not necessarily
represent a negative aspect either.
An interesting observation regarding the peaks of the graphs is the signiﬁcant
diﬀerence between the activity of users in the ﬁrst deployment round and in the last
one. Even though the number of participants was almost equal in both rounds (last
round had an extra participant), it seems that users from the ﬁrst round were more
engaged. The exact reasons behind this behaviour are hard to explain. One could
argue, however, based on the community division presented in Section 4.2, that the
==PAGE:82==
70
5 Results
Figure 5.2: Number of daily API requests.
participants of the ﬁrst testing round were much more connected and as such more
likely to interact with each other in their free time. In addition, the participants of the
last testing round did not all belong to the same community but rather to diﬀerent
sides of a bigger network having one person in common (see Figure 4.2).
These
ﬁndings support the idea that, in order for Noplans to have the expected success and
provide the expected beneﬁcial content, it is utterly important for people in the same
active network to be eager to use it. In conclusion, having had a fully connected,
homogeneous network of 18 participants would have probably revealed completely
diﬀerent results.
Apart from API requests, there are other types of events that can be tracked
using Parse Analytics such as File Requests, Push Notiﬁcations, App Opens and Push
Opens. Moreover, Parse also provides support for Custom Analytics2 which allow
developers to track application-speciﬁc events according to their own speciﬁcations.
In the case of Noplans, ﬁle requests were not at all used and push notiﬁcations
2http://blog.parse.com/announcements/parse-analytics-same-great-taste-now-just-the-way-you-
like-it/
==PAGE:83==
5.2 Usage Analysis
71
did not produce any valuable results for analysis. As for the custom events described
above as well as the app and push opens, they were, unfortunately, discovered too late
in the development process, so there was not enough time for a new testing iteration.
5.2.3
Distribution of online users
During the second deployment of Noplans (see Section 4.1), a new type of data logging
was added to the application. The time of day when users were shown as “online” in
Noplans, i.e. when users were available, was collected from a network of 11 individuals.
There were ≈200 logs saved throughout the second evaluation phase, but, in their raw
state (see Listing 5.1), the gathered data were quite diﬃcult to analyse. In order to
draw some speciﬁc conclusions about the gathered data, a histogram was constructed
to provide more meaningful information.
1
{ "results": [
2
{
3
"createdAt": "2015-06-03T20:49:32.910Z",
4
"objectId": "IP8JwxGxw0",
5
"phone": "+40727703072",
6
"updatedAt": "2015-06-03T20:49:32.910Z"
7
},
8
{
9
"createdAt": "2015-06-04T11:01:20.661Z",
10
"objectId": "kYjwdLP07b",
11
"phone": "+40749492140",
12
"updatedAt": "2015-06-04T11:01:20.661Z"
13
},
14
{
15
"createdAt": "2015-06-11T11:15:48.513Z",
16
"objectId": "RsfC9gGwjG",
17
"phone": "+40743171311",
18
"updatedAt": "2015-06-11T11:15:48.513Z"
19
}
20
...
21
] }
Listing 5.1: Example of Online ParseObjects exported as JSON.
Figure 5.3 is the graphical representation of a frequency distribution. The logs are
divided into hourly class intervals (0-24) denoted by rectangles on the X axis, while on
the Y axis the frequency of “online” users is plotted. Thus, each rectangle represents
the number of users that have been “online” in Noplans within that particular hour
interval.
As it can be seen in the plot, there are two main intervals during a day when users
tend to be available. The ﬁrst one is between 13 and 14 (1-2 p.m) while the second
one is between 17 and 18 o’clock (5-6 p.m.). These intervals are known as peaks and
a histogram displaying two peaks is said to represent a bi-modal distribution3.
3http://www.statisticshowto.com/what-is-a-bimodal-distribution/
==PAGE:84==
72
5 Results
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Time [h]
Figure 5.3: The distribution of online users at a speciﬁc time of the day throughout
the testing period.
==PAGE:85==
5.2 Usage Analysis
73
The results of the graphical representation are not extremely surprising if we are
to analyse them even further. The two high availability intervals revealed by the
plotting the data coincide with two important moments in the regular daily schedule
of most people: (a) the lunch break and (b) the end of the work day.
We could easily imagine that people having a ﬂexible lunch break would prefer
going out at the new restaurant across the street with a friend working nearby rather
than eating a sandwich alone in front of their computer. Therefore, the ﬁrst peak of
the graph can be easily explained. Of course, some might argue that lunch breaks
may vary from company to company and from country to country but that would
only inﬂuence the graph in the sense that its peak would also vary from between
13-14 to between 12-13 or 11-12.
Moreover, as previously mentioned, the explanation behind the second peak could
be that, after a hard day at work, people realise they would rather go for a walk, try
the new ice-cream place in the city center or watch a ﬁlm before going home. And,
since they expect other people to be oﬀwork around the same time their expectations
are that they will ﬁnd someone to hang out with via Noplans.
An even deeper discussion regarding the results of this evaluation could address the
impact that such a distribution would have on the behaviour of Noplans users. With
such high peaks in very speciﬁc hour intervals and such low frequencies throughout
the rest of the day, the behaviour of the users will be inﬂuenced in the sense that they
will most likely use Noplans more in those intervals since the probability of ﬁnding
someone to spend their free time with is higher. For example, if a user has used
Noplans whenever s/he was available but only managed to ﬁnd an available contact
during the peak intervals, s/he will eventually learn this pattern and apply it to
obtain the desired results. This is not necessarily a bad thing since the probability of
a user actually having free time during the peak intervals is quite high. Furthermore,
the likelihood of users in the same network having breaks around the same times (e.g.
students in the same university, employees in the same company, people attending
the same event etc.) are also quite high.
Actually, the key challenge behind the success of an application like Noplans is
establishing a strong user network. This could also be seen as a demand and supply
problem based on user learning: the demand, i.e. the average probability of a user
to be “online” and thereby create supply, is positively correlated with the expected
supply, i.e. the number of users that were recently “online”. In other terms, the
application must have a large, stable and connected user base in order to be useful,
but such a user base requires that the application is useful in the ﬁrst place.
This means that Noplans as a system can exist in either of the following two stable
states:
1. There are no or few active users, and therefore the application is not useful;
because it is not useful, there are no active users.
2. Users are active in the app, and therefore it is useful; because the application
is useful, users continue to be active.
==PAGE:86==
74
5 Results
At the moment, the problem is getting the application from state 1 to state 2,
and the challenge is that users on their own will not achieve this as their motivation
is not driven by the usefulness of the app. Hence, the supply will not increase over
time, considering supply and demand are initially equal or close to zero. In order
for the application to be successful, state 2 must therefore be established by artiﬁcial
means, i.e. rewarding users for going “online” in some other way than the beneﬁt
of the core user experience (awareness of availability). This could be done by e.g.
initially integrating the app with an already existing powerful network such as Face-
book or granting users “points” whenever they are “online” in Noplans which they
can then spend on diﬀerent gifts. Integrating the system with another application
poses collaboration and ownership issues, while spending money to encourage usage
is obviously costly.
The behavioural concept described above would likely also be reﬂected at the
daily level, illustrated in Figure 5.3, in the sense that oﬀ-peak periods such as the
night would see dramatically less activity because users would learn that there is
little activity during that period, and would therefore have little motivation to go
“online”. The converse holds true for peak hours, when the high activity of users can
be explained by the actual availability of its user base.
5.3
The network eﬀect
One of the most important aspects of Noplans are the connections that a user has
with her/his contacts, the so called Noplans network. The following paragraphs will
provide a short insight into network analysis based on the graphs created using the
users Connection data.
Parse allows data export of all Parse classes only in JSON format as follows:
1
{ "results": [
2
{
3
"createdAt": "2015-05-27T13:48:48.285Z",
4
"objectId": "AFKdrXXoRf",
5
"phone1": "+40727703072",
6
"phone2": "+40726936485",
7
"updatedAt": "2015-05-27T13:48:48.285Z"
8
},
9
{
10
"createdAt": "2015-05-28T18:33:37.994Z",
11
"objectId": "7E2HqhE9nG",
12
"phone1": "+40726936485",
13
"phone2": "0740145136",
14
"updatedAt": "2015-05-28T18:33:37.994Z"
15
},
16
{
17
"createdAt": "2015-06-21T08:18:47.601Z",
18
"objectId": "N3AtQqbdKk",
19
"phone1": "+40749492140",
20
"phone2": "0765563087",
21
"updatedAt": "2015-06-21T08:18:47.601Z"
==PAGE:87==
5.3 The network eﬀect
75
22
}
23
] }
Listing 5.2: Example of Connection ParseObjects exported as JSON.
Since only the phone1 and phone2 attributes were needed for drawing the graph,
several Python scripts were developed in order to create the expected output. The
platform used for the graph visualization was Gephi4, a tool aimed at helping people
perform data analyses, discover patterns, understand graphs and more. Some of the
features supported by Gephi and used for visualizing the Noplans network are:
• layout algorithms for shaping the graph
• metrics for social network analysis (SNA) →e.g. Betweenness centrality, Aver-
age shortest path, Modularity, etc.
• customization of colors and node sizes for ranking or partitioning the data →
e.g. clustering, social communities, etc.
• dynamic ﬁltering for selecting nodes or edges
The steps followed for achieving the graphs in Figure 5.5 and Figure 5.6 were:
1. First, the shape of the graph was set using a force-based algorithm, namely
Force Atlas, whose principle is that linked nodes attract each other and non-
linked nodes are pushed apart. The repulsion strength used for the shaping was
10 000;
2. Secondly, the color of the graph nodes was conﬁgured by ranking them with
the nodes degree as the rank parameter. The degree of a node is deﬁned by the
number of edges (links) incident to it and the values of the ranking can be seen
in Table 5.4(a);
3. Next, the average path length (APL) of the network (≈3.7) was calculated.
The APL algorithm also provided metrics information such as betweenness (a
measure of how often does a node appear in shortest paths) and closeness (the
average distance from a given starting node to all other nodes) centrality. There
were 45776 paths found by the algorithm and the result after setting the ranking
to the betweenness centrality metric (see Table 5.4(b)) as well as running the
layout algorithm again to adjust node sizes;
4. Moreover, a study regarding communities was carried out by running the modu-
larity algorithm on the graph and partitioning the nodes according to the found
data. The method used for calculating the modularity is called the Louvain
Method5;
4http://gephi.github.io
5https://sites.google.com/site/ﬁndcommunities/
==PAGE:88==
76
5 Results
5. Lastly, the graph was ﬁltered by degree range so that nodes with only a single
edge (also known as leaves) are hidden. As mentioned before, the ﬁnal results
can be seen in both Figure 5.5 and Figure 5.6.
The resulted graphs represent in fact only potential networks since the majority
of nodes are not yet people using Noplans. Nonetheless, it is interesting to discuss the
implications of such a network growth on the development of the application. Overall,
the expansion of the network would only beneﬁt Noplans because its core functionality
relies on the existence of an active network exchanging availability information (see
the “demand and supply” discussion in the previous subsection [5.2.3]). However, if
the network only increases in size but it is not very strongly connected then users will
still not have enough availability information supplied in order to motivate themselves
to use the application.
As previously mentioned, the Louvain Method was used to ﬁnd the communities of
the Noplans network. Large scale networks are usually divided into communities due
to the fact that they are easier to analyse at the modular level and various interesting
patterns can be distinguished. The Louvain Method is an iterative method consisting
of two phases:
1. In the ﬁrst phase only small communities are identiﬁed by using local modularity
optimization;
2. In the second phase, nodes belonging to the same community are integrated
and a new network having those communities as nodes is now formed.
The two phases are repeated until the modularity maximum is reached.
In the case of Noplans, 12 communities were identiﬁed. As it can be seen in Figure
5.5, users with a high number of connections which are also users have a community
of their own (e.g. the orange community having user Remus as the main node) while
users which are not so highly connected with other users are grouped together into
one community (e.g. the light green network - adjacent to the red network - gathering
three weakly connected users). The big number of found communities indicates that
the Noplans network is not strongly connected which is another result of the bi-state
behaviour described in Subsection 5.2.3.
In addition to the above network analysis, Figure 5.7 presents the correlation
between the number of connections each user has and the average number of connec-
tions. As we can see, the majority of users are below the average which can be an
indication of the amount of database resources that will be required in the future for
supporting the application.
Note that, even if currently the focus of Noplans has been on social networks
addressing more the needs of the younger generation, an extension to a more work-
related context should not be completely dismissed. One could imagine situations like
working in a big company, or on a large campus where being aware of the location
and the availability of the employees could be valuable for the good functioning of
the whole working environment.
==PAGE:89==
5.3 The network eﬀect
77
(a) The number of links (connections) per
node (user)
(b) The betweenness centrality of each node
(user)
Figure 5.4: Network metrics.
==PAGE:90==
78
5 Results
Figure 5.5: Graphs of users and their connections divided by communities - Force
Atlas layout.
==PAGE:91==
5.3 The network eﬀect
79
Figure 5.6: Graphs of users and their connections divided by communities - Force
Atlas 2 layout.
==PAGE:92==
80
5 Results
6 
249 
324 
425 
168 
81 
52 
113 
143 
473 
155 
83 
90 
212 
90 
171 
30 
64 
151 
162 
Connections 
Number of connections per user
Average number of connections
Figure 5.7: Number of connections per user/Average number of connections.
==PAGE:93==
CHAPTER 6
Future improvements
In the current state of Noplans, all the requirements proposed in Chapter 3 have been
met, the application is functional and ready to be installed on all devices running
Android. Noplans allows users to input their data, visualize the availability of their
contacts and locate, call or send a message to their contacts.
Nevertheless, there is always room for improvement and in the following sections
some improvement ideas for Noplans, regarding both the development of new features
as well as the enhancement of the overall user experience, are discussed.
6.1
Development
6.1.1
Multiple networks
Since the “social” aspect of Noplans is one of its most important features, a main
improvement refers to supporting the display of availability information belonging to
people from multiple networks, not only to the phone’s contacts. Next releases of the
application could allow users to connect, for instance, with the following accounts:
• Facebook →Friends
• LinkedIn →Connections
• Gmail →G-contacts
Figures 6.1(a) and 6.1(b) convey a visualization of the above described function-
ality in the form of a sliding menu.
In Android, such a menu is created using a
navigation drawer. The desired behaviour of the drawer, as described by the Google
design speciﬁcations1, is similar to the temporary drawers which implies that the
drawer is closed by default (Figure 6.1(a)) and it opens on top of all other content
until one of the drawer items is selected (Figure 6.1(b)). After the selection has been
made, the screen will look similar to the current implementation except that the
content will, of course, be based on the selected network displaying contacts (either
phone’s or Gmail’s), friends or connections.
1https://www.google.com/design/spec/patterns/navigation-drawer.html#navigation-drawer-
behavior
==PAGE:94==
82
6 Future improvements
(a) Mock-up of a screen allowing the use of
multiple networks
(b) Mock-up of a sliding menu for choosing
between multiple networks
Figure 6.1: Mock-ups illustrating the future implementation of multiple accounts
in Noplans.
==PAGE:95==
6.1 Development
83
6.1.2
Quick actions pop-up expansion
As previously mentioned in Subsection 3.3.5 of the “Design and Implementation”
chapter [3], the quick actions pop-up could provide more options for users to choose
from.
Taking into account the multiple accounts functionality, the pop-up could
dynamically change along with the data shown in the list. For example, if the list
displays availability information for the current user’s Facebook friends, the pop-up
could have the “Facebook messenger” option instead of the current “Send message”
one (see Figure 6.2(a)). Similarly, in the list displaying Google contacts, users could
also have the option of sending an email to the selected contact (see Figure 6.2(b)).
6.1.3
Sorting and ﬁlters
Currently, the list in the availability data view is ﬁltered according to the last seen
date so that users that have very recently used the application are at the top of the
list and, respectively, users that have not used the application for a long time are
the bottom. This is one the simplest ways of sorting a list by time, also used in
many chatting applications, which was the main reason why it was chosen for the
ﬁrst implementation of Noplans.
Another possible way of sorting the list would be by proximity so that people
which were located close to the current user when they last used the app will be at
the top and people which were further away will be at the bottom. This possibility
was also mentioned during the testing period by one of the participants which proves
that it is worth implementing in the future. In Android this can be implemented by
using tabs. For this particular purpose, the intention is to have ﬁxed tabs2 since for
now only two types of sorting are available and therefore there is no need for scrolling
to view the desired tab. The possible future implementation is illustrated in Figure
6.3(a).
In addition, considering that the dimensions of the networks might increase with
time (as more and more people start using the app) and with the addition of the
multiple accounts functionality (described in 6.1.1), the possibility of ﬁltering lists has
also been taken into account. Users could, for instance, search for speciﬁc user names
or set a range of time/a distance radius for which to view availability information.
6.1.4
Proﬁle customization
Given more time, the idea of a customizable proﬁle would have been implemented.
As it can be seen in Figure 6.3(b), the initial design of the main screen consisted
of a list of contacts with the following information:
• proﬁle picture along with status
• name
2http://www.google.com/design/spec/components/tabs.html#tabs-types-of-tabs
==PAGE:96==
84
6 Future improvements
 
 
(a) Expansion displaying Facebook Messen-
ger directly as an option
 
Send email 
(b) Expansion displaying Gmail directly as an
option
Figure 6.2: Expansions of the quick actions pop-up.
• time since contact last used the app
• location where contact last used the app
Since the proﬁle picture would not be an indication of availability in itself and,
in order to achieve the desired functionality of the application, displaying other data
was more important, this feature was removed from the ﬁrst implementation of the
product. However, the results of the testing experiment revealed that users do ﬁnd
proﬁle pictures valuable, mainly for identiﬁcation reasons in case two contacts were to
have the same ﬁrst name. A simple solution to this problem would also be displaying
both the ﬁrst and last names of a contact (see Figure 6.5(a)). Plus, if it is taken into
account that proﬁle pictures are not compulsory and therefore users might still be
confused about the identity of a contact (see Figure 6.5(b)), the latter solution might
be preferable.
Another problem that came up during the deployment was that users wanted
to change their proﬁle data for various reasons such as a mistake in their name or
forgetting to add the preﬁx code to their phone number. Even though some of these
error are caught by the input dialog itself (see Subsection 3.3.4) it can still happen
that information is saved incorrectly therefore the Edit Profile functionality is
==PAGE:97==
6.1 Development
85
(a) Mock-up of the main screen with tabs for
choosing the sorting parameter and sorted by
location
(b) Mock-up of the main screen list with user
proﬁle pictures
Figure 6.3: Mock-ups of the main screen with designs allowing sorting and display-
ing proﬁle pictures.
==PAGE:98==
86
6 Future improvements
(a) The option for proﬁle editing added to the
sliding menu
(b) Mock-up of the proﬁle editing screen for
both general data and multiple accounts
Figure 6.4: Proﬁle customization options.
valuable. This new feature could also be a part of the sliding menu discussed earlier
in Subsection 6.1.1 (see dashed area in Figure 6.4(a)). Apart from editing general
registration data presented in Subsection 3.3.4 and deﬁned in Subsection 1 the Edit
Profile screen could also be the place where users input their credentials for diﬀerent
accounts and based on this, options in the sliding menu can either be enabled or
disabled (e.g.
if the user has connected her/his Facebook account in the proﬁle
screen then the Friends option will be enabled and conversely, if the user has not yet
connected her/his LinkedIn account then the Connections option will be disabled -
see Figure 6.1.4). Figure 6.4(b) conveys a possible designed for the aforementioned
functionality.
==PAGE:99==
6.1 Development
87
(a) Mock-up of the main screen list with no
proﬁle picture and both names
(b) Mock-up of the main screen list with some
empty proﬁle picture
Figure 6.5: Main screen mock-ups with diﬀerent availability information displayed.
6.1.5
In-app functionality
In further releases of the application some emphasis should be put on transforming
general phone functions such as calling and sending messages into in-app functionality.
This could be beneﬁcial for the users because nowadays most mobile interactions are
done via mobile data (the internet) and most phone subscriptions include a large
traﬃc package (order of GB). Therefore, it would be better if some of that traﬃc
could be used instead of the phone’s credit.
Furthermore, since a future implementation of Noplans would also imply the au-
tomatic creation of “plans” (more details in section 6.2), it would be easier for users
to distinguish between phone calls that are due to people noticing their availability
inside Noplans and usual phone calls.
==PAGE:100==
88
6 Future improvements
Figure 6.6: Disabled sliding menu option corresponding to an account connection
missing.
6.1.6
Re-design
In terms of UI, there are always new ideas and things that can be improved when it
comes to the design of a mobile application. Starting from colors, fonts and sizes and
going all the way to custom icons, special animations and speciﬁc re-arrangements of
the data, creativity has no limits, and sometimes, a warm color or an animation that
makes the users laugh is exactly the detail that makes the diﬀerence.
Same rules also apply to Noplans and in the following paragraphs a couple of ideas
for re-designing the application in the next iteration are presented:
1. Currently, the dialog displayed to the users when ﬁrst installing the application
(see Subsection 3.3.4) only consists of Android-speciﬁc items
==PAGE:101==
6.2 User experience
89
custom dialog according to Google rules3 map segment on the list.
6.2
User experience
With the emergence of many new and innovative technologies in the gadgets world,
the market is moving towards a multi-device experience4 and developers are not late
to follow in the same direction. Among these technologies we could enumerate (a) the
Google Glass Project5, (b) Spire6, (c) Android wearables7 and (d) the Apple Watch8.
However, since the development of the Glass project has been put on hold for now9
and Spire does not yet support Android, the focus of this section will be on Android
wearables, i.e. smartwatches.
When Android wearables were ﬁrst launched, they were advertised as the devices
which would help you be “more present in the real life, yet more connected to the
virtual space”. The main advantage of wearables is their context stream at a glance:
they provide only information that users need when and where they need it based on
contextual inferences, e.g. ﬂight information such as gate and boarding time when in
the airport; the address of your booked hotel when you arrived to the city etc. All in
all, Android wear10 is a set of APIs extending the Android platform and providing
enhanced notiﬁcations that matter to the user right now because it is the right time
and place.
The extension of Noplans to wearables relies on these notiﬁcations. The purpose,
of course, is not to overwhelm users by sending them notiﬁcations every time one
of their contacts is available.
This extension rather aims at helping users by, for
instance, letting them know that other contacts are also available nearby when they
are already enjoying their free time. A couple of scenarios in which the extended use
of notiﬁcations on wearables would be beneﬁcial to users are:
1. A contact goes online recently after (10-15-30 minutes after) a user has checked
the application and implicitly indicated their own availability. It is very likely
that users still want to know about the availability of their contacts shortly
after they have indicated theirs, assuming they are usually looking for a long
term engagement in a social activity. Naturally, the duration of the interval
during which notiﬁcations are presumably “desirable” should be analysed into
more detail.
2. A user is at a big event/conference/festival/etc.
where s/he does not know
many of the surrounding people. Being aware that a familiar face stands in the
3http://developer.android.com/guide/topics/ui/dialogs.html
4http://cdn.oreillystatic.com/oreilly/booksamplers/9781449340384_sampler.pdf
5https://developers.google.com/glass/
6https://www.spire.io/
7https://www.android.com/wear/
8https://www.apple.com/watch/
9http://www.nytimes.com/2015/02/05/style/why-google-glass-broke.html?_r=0
10https://developer.android.com/wear/index.html
==PAGE:102==
90
6 Future improvements
crowd could be useful for users in such a state and therefore notiﬁcations are a
plus.
==PAGE:103==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
The entire process of designing and developing a mobile application that could reveal
a new approach to the way we are using the virtual space to our advantage has been a
meaningful learning experience. The interest in availability and how to ease people’s
access to it whenever they need it seems to have caught the attention of the market
since a couple of applications regarding this topic have already been released. This
just proves that Noplans is a valuable solution to an existing problem and could have
the desired success granted that its development is taken into the right direction.
The evaluation of Noplans’ ﬁrst release revealed numerous interesting results about
the users’ behaviour in using the application and their future expectations of the
application. First of all, the problem of motivating users to be active in the application
was inevitably discovered. Eager to experience a new territory, they were using the
application much more actively in the beginning of the testing period but less towards
the end due to the lack of usefulness. The solution to this problem is in itself an
issue: having an active user base providing availability information (the solution)
also requires the application to be useful. In conclusion, the question of how to create
an initial large, stable and active network that will keep users engaged still remains
a challenge.
For the overall development phase, a well known ﬁnding is that things always take
longer than expected so it is extremely important to prioritise core features that can
give users a full minimal experience of the application and leave extra functionality
for future releases.
Last but not least, evaluation is a key point for evolution. In order to achieve
great results for interpretation, one needs to be aware of which data the results will
be based on. To sum up, it is important to clearly set speciﬁc user logs that need to
be tracked for inferring various user behaviours, and it is also important to clearly
deﬁne characteristics of users likely to match those behaviours.
==PAGE:104==
92
==PAGE:105==
APPENDIX A
Noplans prototyping
mock-ups
The following mock-ups represent the ﬁrst iteration of Noplans, i.e. the low-ﬁdelity
prototype discussed in Section 3.2.
==PAGE:106==
94
A Noplans prototyping mock-ups
Figure A.1: Initial design of the Noplans main screen and availability data view.
==PAGE:107==
A Noplans prototyping mock-ups
95
Figure A.2: Notiﬁcation received when an available friend has contacted the current
user.
==PAGE:108==
96
A Noplans prototyping mock-ups
Figure A.3: Input the agreed plans for an automatic creation of a group between
the two available friends.
==PAGE:109==
A Noplans prototyping mock-ups
97
Figure A.4: The group automatically created after the data above has been ap-
proved.
==PAGE:110==
98
A Noplans prototyping mock-ups
Figure A.5: An available group that users can join.
==PAGE:111==
A Noplans prototyping mock-ups
99
Figure A.6: A discussion between members after a user has joined an available
group.
==PAGE:112==
100
==PAGE:113==
Bibliography
[AH04]
Daniel Avrahami and Scott E Hudson. “QnA: augmenting an instant mes-
saging client to balance user responsiveness and performance”. In: Pro-
ceedings of the 2004 ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative
work. ACM. 2004, pages 515–518 (cited on page 9).
[BHI93]
Sara A Bly, Steve R Harrison, and Susan Irwin. “Media spaces: bring-
ing people together in a video, audio, and computing environment”. In:
Communications of the ACM 36.1 (1993), pages 28–46 (cited on page 8).
[Con+10]
Ionut Constandache et al. “Did you see bob?: human localization using
mobile phones”. In: Proceedings of the sixteenth annual international con-
ference on Mobile computing and networking. ACM. 2010, pages 149–160
(cited on page 35).
[DKS06]
M Danninger, T Kluge, and R Stiefelhagen. “MyConnector: Analysis
of context cues to predict human availability for communication”. In:
ICMI’06: 8th International Conference on Multimodal Interfaces, Con-
ference Proceeding (2006), pages 12–19 (cited on pages 9, 10).
[Gav92]
William W Gaver. “The aﬀordances of media spaces for collaboration”.
In: Proceedings of the 1992 ACM conference on Computer-supported co-
operative work. ACM. 1992, pages 17–24 (cited on page 8).
[HL91]
Christian Heath and Paul Luﬀ. “Collaborative activity and technologi-
cal design: Task coordination in London Underground control rooms”. In:
Proceedings of the Second European Conference on Computer-Supported
Cooperative Work ECSCW’91. Springer. 1991, pages 65–80 (cited on
page 7).
[Hud+02]
James M Hudson et al. “I’d be overwhelmed, but it’s just one more thing
to do: Availability and interruption in research management”. In: Proceed-
ings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human factors in computing systems.
ACM. 2002, pages 97–104 (cited on page 14).
[J93]
Nielsen J. Response Times: The 3 Important Limits. January 1, 1993. url:
http://www.nngroup.com/articles/response-times-3-important-
limits/ (cited on page 27).
==PAGE:114==
102
Bibliography
[Jak14a]
Ph.D. Jakob Eg Larsen - Associate Professor. Lecture: Mobile Interface
Design. Course 02827 - Mobile Application Prototyping. Technical Uni-
versity of Denmark, February 12, 2014 (cited on page 34).
[Jak14b]
Ph.D. Jakob Eg Larsen - Associate Professor. Lecture: Prototyping. Course
02827 - Mobile Application Prototyping. Technical University of Den-
mark, February 5, 2014 (cited on pages 25, 36).
[Lim+06]
Youn-kyung Lim et al. “Comparative analysis of high- and low-ﬁdelity
prototypes for more valid usability evaluations of mobile devices”. In:
Proceedings of the 4th Nordic conference on Human-computer interaction
changing roles - NordiCHI ’06 October (2006), pages 291–300. url: http:
//portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=1182475.1182506 (cited on
pages 36, 37).
[Man+91]
M Mantei et al. “Experiences in the Use of a Media Space”. In: Sociology
The Journal Of The British Sociological Association (1991), pages 203–
208 (cited on page 7).
[MS00]
a E Milewski and T M Smith. “Providing presence cues to telephone
users”. In: Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer Supported
Cooperative Work 07701.732 (2000), pages 89–96 (cited on page 11).
[MT04]
Ne Matsakis and Jc Tang. “Lilsys: sensing unavailability”. In: Proc. CSCW’04
6.3 (2004), pages 511–514 (cited on pages 13, 14).
[Mye85]
Brad A. Myers. “The importance of percent-done progress indicators for
computer-human interfaces”. In: CHI ’85 Conference Proceedings: Human
Factors in Computing Systems. CHI ’85. ACM, 1985, pages 11–17 (cited
on page 28).
[Nie94]
Jakob Nielsen. “Usability inspection methods”. In: Conference compan-
ion on Human factors in computing systems. ACM. 1994, pages 413–414
(cited on page 62).
[NWB00]
Bonnie a. Nardi, Steve Whittaker, and Erin Bradner. “Interaction and
outeraction: instant messaging in action”. In: Proceedings of the 2000
ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work (2000), pages 79–
88 (cited on pages 9, 11).
[Ost02]
Jean Ostrem. Palm OS User Interface Guidelines. January 10, 2002 (cited
on page 34).
[Ret94]
Marc Rettig. “Prototyping for tiny ﬁngers”. In: Communications of the
ACM 37.4 (1994), pages 21–27 (cited on pages 36, 37, 39).
[RSI96]
Jim Rudd, Ken Stern, and Scott Isensee. “Low vs. high-ﬁdelity prototyp-
ing debate”. In: Interactions 3.1 (1996), pages 76–85 (cited on page 37).
[Sch02]
Kjeld Schmidt. “The problem with ’awareness’: Introductory remarks on
’awareness in CSCW’”. In: Computer Supported Cooperative Work 11.3-4
(2002), pages 285–298 (cited on pages 7, 8).
==PAGE:115==
Bibliography
103
[SZC12]
Victoria Schwanda Sosik, Xuan Zhao, and Dan Cosley. “See friendship,
sort of: How conversation and digital traces might support reﬂection
on friendships”. In: Proceedings of the ACM 2012 conference on Com-
puter Supported Cooperative Work. ACM. 2012, pages 1145–1154 (cited
on page 25).
[Tan+01]
John C Tang et al. “ConNexus to Awarenex: Extending awareness to
mobile users”. In: Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
CHI 3.Im (2001), pages 221–228 (cited on page 11).
[Xu+11]
Qiang Xu et al. “Identifying diverse usage behaviors of smartphone apps”.
In: Proceedings of the 2011 ACM SIGCOMM conference on Internet mea-
surement conference. ACM. 2011, pages 329–344 (cited on page 67).
==PAGE:116==
