==PAGE:1==
Automated Process Surveying
Ivan Petrov
Kongens Lyngby 2015
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
The goal of this thesis is to develop an automated process for analysing process
models. This is achieved by creating model extractors targeting the various rep-
resentations of the predominant process model types EPC and BPMN. Using
clustering algorithms and image processing, model extractors construct coherent
process models form a variety of source ﬁles. The proposed approach accounts
for partial diagram extractions by harvesting process models or model elements
from given documents and transforming them to the standard for exchang-
ing metadata information via XML, called XMI (XML Metadata Interchange).
This is achieved by investigating sample documents and their underlying data
structures to harvest the needed information to create the according XMI repre-
sentation of the recognized models and model elements. The proposed process
reads pixel graphic images and tries to recognize model elements by their actual
visual shape and by reading contained text with an Optical Character Recogni-
tion (OCR) engine.
To complete the process model analysis, improvements to the models analysis
tool Modelscope have been introduced.
The developed extensions provide a
streamlined process model analysis though the use newly introduced metrics,
ﬁlters, aggregation funcitons and visualisations.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute, department of Applied Mathemat-
ics and Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulﬁlment
of the requirements for acquiring an M.Sc. in Computer Science and Engineer-
ing. The thesis was carried out by Ivan Petrov in the period January 26th 2015
to June 26th of 2015 and conducted under the supervision of Professor Har-
ald Sörlle, DTU Compute, department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science. This thesis is worth 30 ECTS credit points to the writer.
This thesis deals with enabling the research of performing automated process
surveying, by automatically extracting process model diagrams represented in
vector graphics in Microsoft Oﬃce documents like PowerPoint and Visio, but
also diagrams represented in pixel graphics. The thesis also focuses on enabling
researches to analyse the harvested process models though various metrics and
view the results in assorted visualisations.
Lyngby, 26-June-2015
Ivan Petrov
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank our supervisor, Harald Sörlle, for his guidance, our great
discussions, his ability to always come up with counter problems that I had not
considered and lastly for always being in a good mood and having a great sense
of humour.
A great thank you to everybody in our Thesis Working Group, for all the aca-
demic discussions at the weekly meetings, and for the very useful feedback on
problem discussion and at the project presentations.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Scope
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Analysis
5
2.1
Scenarios
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Model Exploration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.2
File Investigation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.3
Process model analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Requirements Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.1
Neighbouring Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.2
Goals and Qualities
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.3
Features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Constraints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
System Design
13
3.1
User Interface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.1.1
Initial UI design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.1.2
Design evolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.1.3
Final Design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2
Technology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
3.2.1
Development environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2.2
Supported formats . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3
System Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3.1
Component Structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3.2
Model, View and ViewModels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3.3
Description of Elements and Data structures in Gourmand 23
3.3.4
Description of Elements and Data structures in Modelscope 23
4
Implementation
25
4.1
Code Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2
External Libraries and Components
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2.1
Microsoft Oﬃce .NET Library
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2.2
Text Parser Generators
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.2.3
Image Recognition Libraries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.2.4
Optical Character Recognition Engine . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2.5
Visualisation Libraries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.3
Diagram Type Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.4
Model Element Search Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.5
Interpretation of Image Recognition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.6
Label parsing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.7
Modelscope UI Changes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.7.1
BPMN parser . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.7.2
Probes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.7.3
Aggregation functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.7.4
Filters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.7.5
Interchanging visualisations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.7.6
Custom scaling control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.7.7
Extended Export Options . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.7.8
Protocol Export
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.7.9
Matrix Visualisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5
Validation
41
5.1
Test
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.1.1
Test process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.1.2
Test cases & Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.1.3
Pixel Graphic Image Quality
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.2
Code Quality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.2.1
Code Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.3
Diagram validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.4
Programs validation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.4.1
Model Tree structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.4.2
Custom control components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.4.3
Visualisation update . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.4.4
Scatter Visualisation changes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
==PAGE:11==
CONTENTS
ix
5.4.5
Probe restructuring
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6
Conclusion
53
6.1
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6.2
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6.3
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
A Supplementary Diagram Results Documentation
59
A.1 Activities in investigating a ﬁle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
A.2 Activities in analysing a model collection
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
A.3 Process Model Image elements recognition results . . . . . . . . .
62
Bibliography
69
==PAGE:12==
x
CONTENTS
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
In software engineering,there are complex attributes which are not be directly
quantitatively measurable like quality and maintainability. By trying to deﬁne
metrics to measure these attributes we advance our understanding of their nu-
ance and complexity.
Taking direct measurements such as number of active
software projects provides the necessary information to make concrete assess-
ments such as schedule time frames and cost, but also provides information
about indirect measurements - complexity, quality, maintainability among many
others.
By ﬁnding new ways to measure software we get access to new and interesting
information about it. Focusing on Model-Driven Architecture, a software design
process which follows guidelines for structuring speciﬁcations though models,
through examining the development process we can gather information about it’s
more complex attributes. Having a standardized method which can determine
sizing concepts, in software models which will allow for eﬀective base lining and
comparison of model concepts, is a crucial problem currently addressed by many
specialists in the models community [CL08].
There is a huge amount of varied process models or model element represen-
==PAGE:14==
2
Introduction
tations out in the web as well as in documentation of the business models of
companies. Because of there predominate use in presentations as resource for
business model representations, the models are often contained in various docu-
ments formats such as - Microsoft Oﬃce suite or images which generally means
that they are in a unmodiﬁable representation or relatively complex modiﬁable
representation. By far most common unmodiﬁable representation of a process
model, is available in the form of pixel graphics. The focus of this thesis is to
enable researches to have greater availability to process model data by providing
a tools which can automate model analysis of manually transforming images to
models and provides access to data gathered though the use of various metrics
applied to the extracted models.
1.2
Scope
As stated in the motivation section 1.1 the primary focus of the thesis is to en-
able automated analysis of process model evaluation, by recognising the elements
utilized in the process model diagrams and storing the information harvested
about the model elements in a well established in the community standard for-
mats. Their subsequent evaluation is through the use of metrics only, any editing
functionality on the extracted models can be performed though various visual
editors supporting the standard formats. The scope covers the analysis of the
predominant process model formats BPMN1 and EPC2. Their varied represen-
tations when they are illustrated with Microsoft Oﬃce’s PowerPoint and Visio
model elements in the form of vector graphics (these two applications represent
the tools most used for process modelling when examining EPC models, and
translating vector graphics representations created by them in the form of pro-
cess models will result in a large potential set for analysis) as was simple pixel
formats. The secondary focus will be to investigate the area of available metrics
which can be applied to provide any signiﬁcant insights towards the process
model space and software development as a whole.
In order to allow the support for automated analysis of process models as well
as general exploration model structures, implementation of metrics and visuali-
sations which will be best used to perform such analysis will have to be created.
The focus of the development process will be on working on extension improve-
ments to existing application tools. The intentions are to analyse the existing
Gourmand and Modelscope applications, create a feature list which is com-
patible with requirements of the project which utilizes the functionality of the
applications when possible. The development process will build upon the exist-
1Business Process Model and Notation.
2Event-driven Process chain.
==PAGE:15==
1.3 Approach
3
ing structure in order to support the relevant document types to provide support
for automated analysis and in general improve the usability of the applications.
1.3
Approach
In order to complete the requirements set in this thesis, the following approach
has been used: I have met with my supervisor Harald Störrle to discuss the topic,
the goals and the focus of the thesis of automated process surveying. Working
with Harald, we discussed the diﬀerent approaches as part of analysis on the
topic their beneﬁts and how they can related to achieving the goals of the thesis.
This analysis provided the necessary information to clarify what a researcher will
need to perform analysis on process models, what tools currently exist, how they
can possibly relate to process model analysis and what general feature changes
will be needed or are missing in the tools. These requirements will be translated
to actual series of tasks (each task focusing on speciﬁc functional requirement),
which will allow for objective progress tracking of the work. The development
will ﬁrst focus on extending the Modelscope tool to handle analysis of EPC and
BPMN process model ﬁle formats, which will provide a deep understanding of
the existing diﬀerent format structures. Having the base ﬁle format parsers the
focus of the development will switch to extending the functionality of the ap-
plication as a whole - exploring the discussed features, their possible realization
and usefulness. Restructuring on the way how the application handles model
deﬁnitions, as well as diﬀerent visualisations, additional probes, numerous op-
tions towards results output as well as changes to the graphical user interface
design will take a signiﬁcant part of the development time. Following the same
structured approach applied to the development process for Modelscope, the
Gourmand application, which primary is used for model element harvesting,
will too have to be a part of the discussions. Analysis of diﬀerent diagrams as
well as improvements towards elements classiﬁcation and special cases will have
to be prioritized. The last part of the thesis period, will be dedicated towards
writing this thesis and supporting documentation, together with a lot of ﬁnal
code testing(bug ﬁxing), code reﬁning and investigating special cases.
1.4
Related Work
Surveying process models as well as process model extraction from images, or
various oﬃce documents is a highly focused topic in computer science and in
the whole modelling area. Handling extraction of model elements from vari-
ous types of representations has been a challenge that is actively addressed at
==PAGE:16==
4
Introduction
present. Even though surveying process models a small topic, it is an important
topic. Companies still predominantly use Oﬃce suite applications or custom
solutions which produce process models which are easily survey-able, providing
a way to gather information of the present sate of existing models and gathering
information on process model composition provides insight towards general use
of process models. These are several papers related to a similar topics focused
towards process model analysis and model element extraction.
• [CL08] Model size metrics
This paper reports on the Model Size Metrics (MSM) workshop event of
the MODELS 2007 conference. The focus of the workshop is to develop
metrics for use in model-centric software development. As a starting point
for discussion we focused on size.
• [CT09] Modelling and Validating BPMN Diagrams
The paper focuses on BPMN model elements and the patterns that are
introduces to handle common tasks. They introduce their own model, and
syntax to handle pattern validation and semantics. The proposed valida-
tion techniques have potential applicability towards element recognition
improvement in the Gourmand tool.
• [LKP12] AI approach to formal analysis of BPMN models.
This paper focuses on analysis of BPMN process model by applying on a
logical reconstruction of BPMN model in Prolog and deﬁning some formal
requirements on model correctness enabling formal veriﬁcation of such
models.
• [Han14] Modelscope
Support tool for analysis of models by size metrics. The tools was achieved
by designing and analysing application scenarios, and implementing a tool
to support them.
• [ER14] Harvesting Models from Documents
Thesis parer on the development of Gourmand - software tool for investi-
gating diﬀerent types of documents and extracting complete diagrams or
model elements by analysing vector graphics or performing image recog-
nition. elements.
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 2
Analysis
2.1
Scenarios
To get an idea of how we can enable an automated form of process analysis a
number of application scenarios will be described and explored. Each scenario
focuses on existing functionality within the analysed application and how new
features related to the topic can be introduced.
2.1.1
Model Exploration
By following the preface that a model researcher is working on process model
analysis, he would have a speciﬁc need of model metrics in order to measure
qualities of models. As we do not have consensus of what deﬁnes quality in a
model, a general approach model analysis has to be taken - a researcher will
have to be able to compare diﬀerent metrics of models or parts of models.
This research strategy would require a dynamic and versatile approach where
the researcher would want to apply all sorts of diﬀerent metrics on models. The
work would follow an iterative process of going back and forth between selecting
diﬀerent metrics to be applied to models and visualising the results. A typical
process could look like this:
==PAGE:18==
6
Analysis
Firstly a researcher will have to acquire and provide the process models in a
manageable way. This process would either require going though the manual
work of recreating models in a visual editor or have access to models in modiﬁ-
able format.
Secondly, a researcher will have to look over the model data and decide on which
parts to focus on. This process begins with the model elements by examining
them a as collection and ﬁguring how they can be divided into categories. These
queries will deﬁne which part of the model to look at. At any level of this process,
we will have to able to take a reading from the query result and get an actual
number, a count, or calculate a weighted result by some function.
The researcher will also want to see the generated results visualised in some
way.
The visualisations would provide a preliminary indirect measurements,
or at very least serve as basis of what the analysis should be refocused on.
Such visualisations can be easily created though the use of various software.
Likewise performing the diﬀerent queries would have to be done by hand -
an error prone and tedious task. Not only that, but also not a very ﬂexible
long term approach. The described process would be an iterative one and each
iteration will provide new ideas for queries or calculated measurements. Having
tools which can automate the two most cumbersome tasks of the process, model
harvesting and model analysis would greatly improve the speed and ﬂexibility
of how process model can be analysed and understood.
2.1.2
File Investigation
This scenario is related to the Gourmand application and it’s feature to easily
process a single ﬁle or a collection of ﬁles and export them to an XMI described
model.
The feature is predominately used by users who have a lot of ﬁles
containing models that they want to transform into a more commonly used
format such as XMI.
Scenario: Once the Gourmand application has loaded the user selects a ﬁle
from the File Tree representing the ﬁle system. Gourmand starts processing
the ﬁle and displays progress bar counting towards 100%. The user sees how
the output view changes, showing the diﬀerent pages where shapes has been
recognized. He can see the output tree generated by Gourmand so far. From
the output he can see how the application has classiﬁed the recognized shapes
into diﬀerent diagram types and that a single diagram has been selected by
default. Whenever a model is selected by the user in the generated tree the
recognised elements are highlighted in the document. The user can then choose
to export the process model into several ﬁle formats.
==PAGE:19==
2.1 Scenarios
7
2.1.2.1
Investigate File Activity
The described scenario illustrates one of the core work ﬂows in the Gourmand
application.
A detailed description of the work ﬂow is provided by ﬁg A.1.
The activity diagram shows the actions a user has to go through in order to
investigate a ﬁle. Users familiar with the tool expect this behaviour and any
extensions in the tool should be focused to the background activities.
2.1.3
Process model analysis
This scenario is focused on how the user interacts with Modelscope application
in order to select collections of models along side the choice of visualisation and
metrics to be applied. The scenario follows the work ﬂow for creating a new
visualisation protocol.
Scenario: When the Modelscope application has loaded the user selects a folder
from the ﬁle system to be processed by the application. Loading animation is
presented to the user to indicate the application is working on processing recur-
sively from the selected folder down for available models. When the application
has ﬁnished processing a ﬁle tree structure containing all found models that
have been successfully processed is displayed to the user. If the user wants to
select another folder containing models he may do so which will result in the
models being appended to the ﬁle tree. The user selects and existing visualisa-
tion protocol from the provided list or he can choose to create a new one. When
a visualisation protocol is selected the user can than choose what metrics to be
applied to the models, what general visualisation template should be used and
how the selected metrics to be displayed in the visualisation. Any changes in the
settings of the visualisation should result in a instant change of the generated
rendering so the user can quickly adjust the result to his liking. Finally the user
should be able to choose how to export the generated visualisation from variety
of options.
2.1.3.1
Analyse model Activity
The scenario provides a basic description of the desired work ﬂow for the Mod-
elscope application. A description of the work ﬂow is provided by ﬁg A.2. The
activity diagram shows the actions a user can to go through in order to analyse
the collection of models.
The focus of the scenario is to describe a straight
forward work ﬂow which will allow for new users to get quickly accustomed to.
==PAGE:20==
8
Analysis
2.2
Requirements Analysis
2.2.1
Neighbouring Systems
Like Gourmand, Modelscope is viewed as a stand alone tool, which has to op-
erate with data provided by external applications. This section provides intro-
duction to some of more important neighbouring systems which handle process
models and the connection between the two applications.
2.2.1.1
MagicDraw
MagicDraw is a popular editor for UML and other modelling languages. Follow-
ing the initial concept of the Modelscope application to support import func-
tionality for the application’s ﬁle format, is a natural progression to extend the
support of MagicDraw to include the support for their BPMN process model
ﬁle format. MagicDraw has a variety of tools for UML support, such as code
generation and reporting as well as some abilities to apply model metrics as well,
but these were not part of the of the initial concept of the tool or applicable
towards process models. MagicDraw exports in MDXML ﬁle format which not
used when exporting BPMN process models. Instead XMI based mark up with
proprietary additions is used. These additions are version speciﬁc with respect
to the BPMN standard and the version of the application.
2.2.1.2
Yaoqiang BPMN Editor
Yaoqiang BPMN Editor is a free visual editor for BPMN process model sup-
porting the OMG standard. In order to have access to a wide variety of process
models for analysis the Modelscope tool should be able to wok with the standard
description of BPMN. This tool is viewed as great way to see what diﬀerences
are introduced in the ﬁle structure when a process model is exported by an ap-
plication following the standard and one which introduces additional meta data
2.2.1.1.
2.2.1.3
Gourmand
The majority of process models available for analysis which follow the EPC or
BPMN standard can only be accessed in the form of images. Extending this
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Requirements Analysis
9
tool which supports extraction of model or and model fragments as UML from
Oﬃce tools such as Microsoft PowerPoint, Word and Visio, to support process
model diagrams will allow for direct access for analysis of such models though
Modelscope.
2.2.2
Goals and Qualities
From the scenarios in section 2.1 and the focus of the thesis the following main
goals have been set:
• Create a process for reliable process models extraction from variety of
sources to a well deﬁned standard.
• Provide researchers with the necessary model metrics tools for expository
process model analysis.
– Provide meaningful improvements to the Gourmand tool to support
for process models collection
– Enhance the Modelscope tool to allow for support of process mod-
els and extend the tool with additional metrics, visualisations and
presentation options relevant to the focus of the thesis.
2.2.3
Features
The requirements analysis is used to consider diﬀerent features and functionali-
ties the two applications should support. The following features are a result of a
brainstorm sessions in analysis process. These proposed features are evaluated
at later stage to determine their applicability and validity.
2.2.3.1
Input Features
Feature 1
Input EPC model images
It should be possible to detect EPC process diagrams within
Vector based graphics form Microsoft Oﬃce suite as well as
predominant image ﬁle formats with Gourmand.
==PAGE:22==
10
Analysis
Feature 2
Input BPMN model images
It should be possible to detect BPMN process models within
Vector based graphics form Microsoft Oﬃce suite as well as
predominant image ﬁle formats with Gourmand.
Feature 3
Input Magic draw BPMN models
Modelscope should be able to support the MagicDraw custom
BPMN process model format.
Feature 4
Input OMG BPMN models
Modelscope should also be able to support the standard pro-
vided for BPMN by OMG.
2.2.3.2
Enhancement features
Feature 5
Recognizing Nesting
It should be possible to detect BPMN and EPC process models
elements which are grouped in nested clusters. (Swim lanes,
sub processes)
Feature 6
Process complex elements
It should be possible to diﬀerentiate between sub types BPMN
elements such as Events and Gateways which can be viewed
as clusters of simple iamge graphics (rectangle,circle,convex
polygon ).
Feature 7
Matrix visualization
The Modelscope tool should be able to support Matrix visu-
alization that uses either the set of models selected for rows,
columns, and shows some metric in each cell. Examples of such
metrics could be the cosine similarity (or another metric).
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Requirements Analysis
11
Feature 8
Element Filters
It should be possible in Modelscope to ﬁlter a result set based
on additional arguments such as suppress "minor" elements,
and group concepts with many concrete subclasses (e.g., Ac-
tion, Literal).
Feature 9
Model Tree structure
Modelscope should support the display and loading of whole
sets of process modes quickly.
The existing ﬁles structure
should be preserved and displayed so the user can have better
knowledge what models he is working on.
Feature 10
Custom control components
The graphical user interface should still follow the initial con-
cept of an oscilloscope and as such, custom controls such
as dials and toggle switches should be implemented where
needed.
Feature 11
Aggregation Functions
Modelscope should be able to support aggregation functions
on the major Axis in diﬀerent visualisation templates.
In
the case of multiple inputs the following functions ( sum -
geometric mean - harmonic mean - mean (arithmetic mean)
- median - standard deviation) should be implemented.
Feature 12
Axis Settings
Modelscope should be restructured in order to expose every
setting of the oﬀered visualisation templates as an input for
a potential probe reading.
Feature 13
Visualisation update
Updates to visualisations in Modelscope require manual re-
fresh.
Automatic updates to the visualisation rendering
should be introduced to improve the usability of the appli-
cation
Feature 14
Scatter Visualisation changes
The initial support in the scatter visualisation template is
lacking and requires in depth restructuring in order to sup-
port multi axis as well as colour and size axis.
Feature 15
Visualisation Interchangeability
The Modelscope tool should support automatic interchange-
ability between the visualisation templates so far as that pos-
sible.
==PAGE:24==
12
Analysis
Feature 16
Probe restructuring
The Modelscope tool support only a very limited set of
probes. This list should be extended in order to provide more
in depth analysis capabilities and as result apply the neces-
sary change in the parses of the application ot collect the new
information.
2.3
Constraints
By examining the two applications - the environment in which they were devel-
oped and used, several constraints must be followed:
Platforms The Gourmand tool is used to analyse Microsoft Oﬃce documents
so one of the constraints for developing extensions as well as using it is to
have Microsoft Oﬃce suite installed. Due to changes in the Oﬃce libraries
and API structure, used the restriction for a speciﬁc version is lifted (2013
and up). The fact that the tool uses these libraries also imposes restric-
tions to the Operating system (Windows and Mac OS alone), this could
change with popularisation of the open source implementation of the .NET
core. Since the development for both of the applications requires .NET-
framework, more speciﬁcally C#.NET. This constrains us to develop in
Microsoft own IDE, Microsoft Visual Studio.
MagicDraw XMI Both tools have limited handling when provided with Magic
Draw XMI (due to multiple versions). DTU courses dealing with UML
modelling use MagicDraw from No Magic which has custom XMI imple-
mentation, which is subject to aggressive changes with each version of the
program. This results for a support for the majority of the elements de-
scribed in this custom XMI implementation within the versions published
in the thesis work period.
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 3
System Design
3.1
User Interface
The user interface is the graphical layout of a system, and it is an important
part of the user interaction between the user and the system. The interaction of
an application is measured in usability with greater usability (such as extended
list of functionality options) the application leaves the impression of being more
useful. Usability of applications can be measured in variety of ways. If they
are measured by learning curve, then that will be how fast the user learns how
to use the system features, measured by eﬃciency would be how the user uses
the system to achieve certain goal, memorability also plays factor of how easy
is for the user to be familiar with the system after several uses or by how many
malfunctions the user is exposed to while using the system. By following these
general criteria the core focus of the user interface is to be intuitive, in order to
have a stable working and heavily used system.
3.1.1
Initial UI design
Examining the list of features and the present state of the user interface of both
applications we can make the following observations:
==PAGE:26==
14
System Design
3.1.1.1
User interface of Gourmand
The layout of the Gourmand application is split into tree sections, the ﬁle tree,
a viewer displaying the selected ﬁle and a the generated model tree. The user is
also provided with a progress bar above the output view displaying the progress
of a model element recognition.
The output tree root also shows the page
number of each page with recognized model elements. By unfolding a page the
user is presented with the diﬀerent diagram types the application has found and
the model elements within. By unfolding a diagram, the user sees the recognized
model elements. Following this tree structure each model element can also be
unfolded, and by doing this the attributes element are exposed. Attributes for
selected element are type speciﬁc. The user is also shown the selected element
which is highlighted in the view. By modifying which elements are selected in
the tree view the user can select which speciﬁc elements to be exported.
By examining the features to be implemented, only minor UI changes are nec-
essary related to ﬁles type icons and output selection which should not impact
on the original user interface vision of the system.
3.1.1.2
User interface of Modelscope
The layout of the Modelscope application has always followed the vision to be
a representation of an oscilloscope, as such the user is presented with a lot of
options which user can then pick an choose. The layout of the application can be
split into four sections ﬁg 3.1. A models view which displays the available models
which the user has access to as well as which ones are selected and used. A
protocol list view containing the available preconﬁgured visualisation templates.
A probes and visualisations view containing the list of available probes as well
as how these probes are applied to the selected visualisations and the view
containing the rendered visualisation. The user can pick and choose between
diﬀerent protocols, diﬀerent probes and settings within the protocol.The user is
provided access to few export options from the main menu at the top.
By applying the list of features, some signiﬁcant changes to the user interface will
have to be discussed. More options have to be made available, new visualisations
templates as well as reconﬁguring of how the diﬀerent sections of the application
are shown. Including more options as part of the interface results in more space
restrictions for the UI elements which forces more general changes to the whole
interface to be considered.
==PAGE:27==
3.1 User Interface
15
Figure 3.1: Initial layout of Modelscope
3.1.2
Design evolution
As mentioned in section 3.1.1.2 there are several issues with the user interface
that have to be addressed in order to provide an overall good experience with
the Modelscope tool.
In particular in order to display the lists of available
models as well as the list of probes the user often is forced to resize the panels
in order to see the complete names of the models/probes being selected. This
actions also requires some additional space to be allocated for the visualisation
settings which greatly reduces the amount of available screen space to render the
visualisation. These produces poor results when the visualisation is displaying
information of more than few models.
Hand-drawn sketches has been used for each of the proposed design changes.
Throughout the discussions with Harald the designs 3.2 were reﬁned and proto-
typed with Microsoft Blend. Blend provided a quick way to create alterations
and still be shown how the UI will look like when integrated into the existing
application.
To address these issues the initial focus was directed towards trying and min-
imise the space required by the visualisation settings panel, without restricting
the ease with witch a probe can be assign to a particular part of the visuali-
sation. With this in mind all user interface elements serving as templates for
visualising the diﬀerent parts of the visualisation template (Axis) have to be
modiﬁed. To test this change all Axis (which can accept a probe as input) were
reduced to the initial combo box for selecting a probe and a toggle switch but-
ton. All settings related to a speciﬁc Axis now can be accessed with the use of
==PAGE:28==
16
System Design
(a) Visualisations
and
probes sketch
(b) Menu and Axis op-
tions sketch
(c) Component
connec-
tions sketch
Figure 3.2: Initial design proposal sketches
the toggle button, which will display them as need it. This change reduced both
width and height requirements of the panel, which freed a portion of space to be
used by visualisation rendering and provided a more simpliﬁed user interface.
The next iteration of the user interface was focused around repositioning the
existing panels. By examining the work ﬂow we can divide the majority user
actions in two sections. The ﬁrst containing action to initially conﬁgure a visual-
isation template in which most of the user interactions are within the probes and
visualisation settings panel. The second stage contains the group of user actions
related modifying the rendered visualisation by adjusting the selected models,
probes and visualisation settings. Actions related to the protocol’s panel are
limited to creating a new protocol or selecting an existing one. Which lead to
decoupling the probes and visualisation settings panels and residing the protocol
panel.
Repositioning the main panels in the user interface produced mixed results.
Depending on how the application is used some parts of the work ﬂow were im-
proved by making some panels occupy more screen space(particularly when the
models, probes and visualisation settings panels are resized to take more space).
These changes conﬁrmed the conclusion that the application should allow main
elements to be repositioned to the user’s preference.
This lead to exploring
possible ways to convert the main parts of the user interface to dockable panels
which will resolve the issues.
3.1.3
Final Design
The ﬁnal version of the of the user interface of Modelscope, is shown in Figure
3.3. The ﬁnal version of the interface is utilizing one of the major docking li-
braries AvalonDock1. The docking library supports ﬂoating windows as well as
1https://avalondock.codeplex.com/
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Technology
17
the ability to create tabbed panels. This allows a for very high degree of user
customisation of how the application is presented and allows for more person-
alised work ﬂows.
(a) Final Layout with docked panels
(b) Final Layout with undocked panels
Figure 3.3: Final layout of Modelscope
The program’s interface has been fully transitioned to adopt the Metro style of
applications for Windows regardless of the operating system. The uniformity of
the interface is provided by custom styling templates for the various components,
this approach can be dropped when the majority of user base switches to the
latest versions of the .NET core. The second major change in the ﬁnal version
of the user interface is the inclusion os a Settings panel.
This panel allows
for changes to the way model tree handles additions of multiple folders as well
as where protocols are saved. The settings panel can be extended to support
personalised settings for the various visualisation templates, which would allow
for an ever greater degree os customisation.
3.2
Technology
3.2.1
Development environment
The .NET framework provided by Microsoft which contains a large variety of
components and tools. Both of the modiﬁed applications have been developed
with the use of the framework based on the popularity fo the .NET core. With
the decision from Microsoft to move the .NET core as wells as other technologies
such as WPF, WCF to open source, there is the potential to port or make the
applications fully compatible to run on other operating systems.
==PAGE:30==
18
System Design
3.2.1.1
WPF (Windows Presentation Foundation)
Windows Presentation Foundation (WPF) is the main graphical library sup-
ported by Windows and it has been utilized both Gourmand and Modelscope.
The choice of the library has been made allows for the creation rich UI de-
signs utilizing user controls as well as customised deﬁnitions of stock compo-
nents. This property of mutability along side support executing computations
directly on graphic cards for better performance. Along side the ability for easy
maintainability and the removed support for the other Windows graphic library
Windforms is only reasonable to continue development strictly using WPF.
3.2.2
Supported formats
XMI Structure As previously discussed both Gourmand and Modelscope have
been developed to support the XML Metadata Interchange. This object
management standard is used for exchanging meta data information using
the standard XML markup. Based on the properties of XMI to express
meta objects, it is widely used by many modelling tools both to serve as
an input and output. The syntax of the language is not oﬃcially stan-
dardized, so representation vary form one tool to another. DTU courses,
mostly use MagicDraw as a modelling tool, and as result both applications
have been developed to support the MagicDraw’s speciﬁc changes.
It is important to note that XMI doesn’t provide information about the
visual attributes of model elements, but both Modelscope and Gourmand
can detect visual attributes associated with MagicDraw.
BPMN Structure The Business Process Model and Notation (BPMN) is an
OMG speciﬁcation that not only deﬁnes a standard on how to graphically
represent a business process but now also includes execution semantics
for the elements deﬁned, and an XML format on how to store (and share)
process deﬁnitions. The ﬁle format .BPMN is based on XMI, but with sev-
eral own speciﬁed XMI extensions. As mentioned, XMI as a descriptive
language doesn’t have standardized syntax, which creates several compli-
cations when examining implementations from several companies, however
the core BPMN elements have been described in the speciﬁcation and its
expected that these elements won’t have a modiﬁed deﬁnition.
==PAGE:31==
3.3 System Architecture
19
1 <?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
2 <definitions exporter="Visual Paradigm" exporterVersion="1"
3 id="Definition" targetNamespace="http://www.omg.org/bpmn20"
4 xmlns="http://www.omg.org/spec/BPMN/20100524/MODEL"
5 xmlns:bpmndi="http://www.omg.org/spec/BPMN/20100524/DI"
6 xmlns:omgdc="http://www.omg.org/spec/DD/20100524/DC"
7 xmlns:omgdi="http://www.omg.org/spec/DD/20100524/DI"
8 xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
9 xsi:schemaLocation="http://www.omg.org/spec/BPMN/20100524/MODEL
10 http://www.omg.org/spec/BPMN/2.0/20100501/BPMN20.xsd">
11 <bpmndi:BPMNPlane>
12
<bpmndi:BPMNDiagram>
13
.....
14
</bpmndi:BPMNDiagram>
15
</bpmndi:BPMNPlane>
16 </definitions>
Listing 1: Sample BPMN ﬁle.
MagicDraw BPMN
The modelling tool MagicDraw supports two modes for
exporting BPMN models.
The process model can be exported in the
.MDXML format which follows the MagicDraw XMI implementation with
additional namespaces containing deﬁnitions related of how the model
elements should be presented in their application.
The process model
can also be exported in the standard .BPMN extension which follows the
standard described in 3.2.2, but also contains custom deﬁned elements
produced by the application. When a ﬁle exported though the tool is used
by another editor these elements are ignored and since those deﬁnitions
are not part of the BPMN standard Modelscope’s parsing capabilities will
also choose to ignore them.
3.3
System Architecture
This section focuses on the design structures for both Gourmand and Mod-
elscope. An overview of the organisational structures for both systems is given
as well as how new proposed features will be integrated into the systems.
==PAGE:32==
20
System Design
3.3.1
Component Structures
3.3.1.1
Component structure Gourmand
The tool has been structured into several sections (UI Component, Export,
Project, ProjectSession). From the requirements and the features associated
with the tool we can safely focus only on the PrjectSession component which
is responsible for the analysis of model elements. The rest of the major com-
ponents are responsible for the other actions such as "Project Component" for
initialisation of project sessions, "Export" for generating XMI and MDXML
documents and "UI Component" focusing on binging the user interactions to
the data models.
The ProjectSession competent is composed of several sub parts each response
in some stage of the ﬁle analysis. In particular all alterations will be introduced
in the ModelHarvester component which is responsible for element classiﬁcation
and communicates with the Image extractor competent. These components will
have to be extended in order to properly classify process model elements. Finally
some alterations will have to be introduced to ModelReﬁne component which
classiﬁes the groups of elements in model types.
3.3.1.2
Component structure Modelscope
One of the main concerns of the architecture in Modelscope is "Extensibility".
Modularity has therefore been main priority in development process of the appli-
cation. With this in mind is vital that any changes to the components structures
for Probes, Parsers and Visualisations still allow for speciﬁc deﬁnitions to be ex-
changeable and most importantly extendible. By introducing so many features
from the requirements more strict deﬁnitions to the parsers and probe deﬁni-
tions will have to introduced to provide initial support and ensure that any
future extendibility will provide the expected level of standardised output.
The proposed structure changes have been addressed in the implementation in
section 4.7.2. To ensure proper expandability by future development a guide is
provided for probes and visualisation extensions.
==PAGE:33==
3.3 System Architecture
21
3.3.2
Model, View and ViewModels
A core standard when developing with WPF is following the MVVM (Model
View ViewModel) pattern. This pattern can be described as follows:
Figure 3.4: MVVM Design pattern
• ViewModel
These objects combine visual properties associated with the View, but
also have direct access to the model elements, there main purpose is to
handle interactions such as Notiﬁcation events and Commands.
• Model
Model can be viewed the same MVC pattern model. It represents the
state of the system.
• View
Following WPF practices Views are most often XAML ﬁles holding de-
scriptions of the user interface elements should be presented as well as
provide binding to the ViewModel objects to process any user interac-
tions.
This design pattern A.1 focuses on decoupled implementation. The basic diﬀer-
ence between MVC and MVVM patterns is how the functionality of the Con-
troller has been absorbed by the ViewModel. Along side Model information
the ViewModel can pass in which context the information should be displayed.
The View handles just the visual representation and has no expectations on
what type of objects have bindings it. The View can bee seen as a collection of
templates. Just as the View the Model just acts a container for information.
The main properties used by the two applications included in the MVVM pat-
tern that provide beneﬁts with regards to maintainability and readability are
Notiﬁcations and Commands.
Notiﬁcations The View binds typically to a property on the ViewModel (spec-
ifying the direction ﬂow of notiﬁcations), and when the property is changed,
the ViewModel creates a new notiﬁcation event that the View should process
==PAGE:34==
22
System Design
in order to reﬂect the new property state. This functionality is provided to the
ViewModel by the INotifyPropertyChanged interface.
1 /*XAML code */
2 <ComboBox SelectedItem="{Binding Reading}" Margin="2,0,2,0"
3 HorizontalAlignment="Stretch" Loaded="ComboBox_Loaded"
4 SelectionChanged="chb_SelectionChanged" DisplayMemberPath="Name"/>
5 /*Notification binding code */
6
public class VMAxis : INotifyPropertyChanged
7 {
8
[field: NonSerializedAttribute()]
9
public event PropertyChangedEventHandler PropertyChanged;
10
protected void NotifyPropertyChanged(String propertyName="")
11
{
12
if (PropertyChanged != null) {
13
PropertyChanged(this, new PropertyChangedEventArgs(propertyName));
14
}
15
}
16
public String Name{
17
get { return _name; }
18
set { _name = value; NotifyPropertyChanged(); }
19
}
20 }
Listing 2: Sample Notiﬁcaion code.
1
public RelayCommand ExportMDXMLCommand
2
{get{
3
if (_exportMDXMLCommand == null){
4
_exportMDXMLCommand = new RelayCommand(
5
p => this.CanExportMDXML(),
6
p => this.ExportMDXML());
7
}
8
return _exportMDXMLCommand;
9
}
10
}
Listing 3: Sample Command code.
==PAGE:35==
3.3 System Architecture
23
Commands Commands allow for binding user interactions to methods instead
of properties. In the View commands are bound and viewed the same way as
properties.
Commands are exposed in the ViewModel in the form property
delegates which are responsible for handling user interactions.
3.3.3
Description of Elements and Data structures in Gour-
mand
A great way to handle extensions is presented in the Gourmand application. In a
way to accommodate processing various types of documents, in order to handle
the common properties like position and shape form multiple sources like Pow-
erPoint, Visio and blob objects from AForge and CiNet libraries, generic class
implementations have been provided. Common properties can also be handled
by abstract classes, as several shape classes have been used from libraries, this
would lead to duplicate code instances. The use of generic deﬁnitions have been
most heavily used in the following components:
• ModelHarvester
The ModelHarvester represents the generic form of harvester, which is
responsible harvesting model elements from a speciﬁc document.
• Fragment
Fragments hold Shape objects, along side a reference to a Document ob-
ject. It also provides positions information about the shape and several
type speciﬁc methods for calculating distances between shapes.
• Extractor
Extractor provides the ﬁle speciﬁc methods for shape extraction in a doc-
ument. The Extractor object is executed ﬁrst in the model element collec-
tion process and the result set of objects is passed to the ModelHarvester
component.
3.3.4
Description of Elements and Data structures in Mod-
elscope
In order to introduce the proposed features the Modelscope application has been
restructured into several components which are responsible for diﬀerent parts of
the program. With the proposed structure new functionality can be introduced
just by extending the provided base objects.
==PAGE:36==
24
System Design
• Model
The Model object contains the collection of model elements which were
successfully extracted by the parsers, model type, annotation, version,
along with information of the ﬁle(name, size, format).
• Protocol
The Protocol object is a preconﬁgured collection of a Visualisation, Probes,
Axis and Readings containing all the information necessary to create a
particular type of graph rendering.
• Probe
A Probe is an instance of a speciﬁc type of query to be performed on the
collection of model elements in the Model class.
• Reading
A Reading represents a collection of result values (strings or doubles) from
a combination between a collection of Models and a Probe. The Object
also contains the functionality of performing computations on the results
through aggregation and ﬁltering.
• Visualisation
A Visualisation object or visualisation template as referenced though out
the project represent a speciﬁc type of visualisation (car, column, scatter,
matrix . . . chart) and contains a collection of Axis objects. It responsible
of creating the ﬁnal rendering shown to the user.
• Axis
The Axis object contains the selected Reading by the user and visualisation
options speciﬁc to how the data should be displayed.
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 4
Implementation
4.1
Code Structure
Given that both applications follow the MVVM pattern, as mentioned in the
Section 3.3.2, any code restructures will also follow the rules in MVVM. Naming
conventions and style preference for binding and command biding will follow the
guidelines of the pattern and the norm observed in both applications. A top
level view for both applications is illustrated in ﬁgure 4.1.
4.2
External Libraries and Components
4.2.1
Microsoft Oﬃce .NET Library
The initial design of the Gourmand application used the built-in .NET Oﬃce
library provided by Microsoft. This library provides direct connection to the
oﬃce applications API. The documentation of the APIs provided and the com-
mon use practices is not given with the library due to its dependence to the
versions of Oﬃce applications, classes and method names are self explanatory.
==PAGE:38==
26
Implementation
(a) Modelscope code structure
(b) Gourmand code structure
Figure 4.1: Top view code structures
Microsoft have since changed their approach to the library by discontinuing it.
To access the APIs you have to use a library interface which is shipped with the
Oﬃce application suite which is again version speciﬁc. This change required a
lot of revisions to the code to support the new library style and the changes to
the APIs which still lack documentation.
4.2.2
Text Parser Generators
Following design decision of parsing labels with working text grammar in Gour-
mand, several alterations had to be made in order to introduce support for the
previously chosen library.
The Irony library is developed with operator overloading notation in mind.
Irony’s scanner and parser modules use the grammar encoded as C# class to
control the parsing process, which makes the readability and comprehension
of the code for developers who are not comfortable with LINQ statements to
still quickly deﬁne grammar speciﬁcations. By working with the library and
the existing generic deﬁnitions of the model classes it was easy to deﬁne the
grammar speciﬁcations for EPC, BPMN elements to be supported with the
XMI and MagicDraw export classes.
4.2.3
Image Recognition Libraries
In the domain of image recognition libraries, there are still very few realistic
options which can be used with C#. By re-evaluating the requirements towards
==PAGE:39==
4.2 External Libraries and Components
27
image processing algorithms two libraries met the speciﬁcations OpenCV and
AForge.NET.
EmuguCV is wrapper around OpenCV library to be used in .NET applications.
From the documentation OpenCV is proper image recognition tool used in va-
riety of applications, however the wrapper lacks behind in documentation and
features supported by the OpenCV core.
When the wrapper was evaluated
there were some bad error handling issues when exceptions were handled by the
wrapper from the core.
AForge.NET is an open source C# framework designed for developers and re-
searchers in the ﬁelds of Computer Vision. The work on the framework’s im-
provement is in constants progress, what means that new feature and names-
paces are coming constantly.
These changes might require the support any
application using the library to have more frequent code changes.
Based on the issues faced, and the support for Image ﬁltering AForge.Net re-
mained as the primary image library to handle image processing event though
it required the existing code to be reworked to support the updated version of
the library.
4.2.4
Optical Character Recognition Engine
As this option to recognize texts inside images, was barely explored in the
initial development of Gourmand the choice of an Optical Character Recognition
(OCR) engine had to be re-evaluated.
Tesseract.NET is a wrapper for the
Tesseract OCR engine. The Tesseract OCR engine is Google funded open source
project and generally is viewed ad the best freeware OCR platform. The engine’s
output provided poor quality results in the initial tests if the input images are
not preprocessed to suit it(images, especially screen shots, must be scaled up
such that the text x-height is at least 20 pixels). It is a client-side OCR, which
means it doesn’t impose requirements such as internet connection to use it.
While the development of Gourmand to support the proposed features by this
thesis sill use the Tesseract engine, it worth pointing out that a new library by
Microsoft will be available with Windows 10 which is showcased to have much
better OCR capabilities, which could be considered as a possible replacement.
==PAGE:40==
28
Implementation
4.2.5
Visualisation Libraries
From the functionality provided and the active development Oxyplot is clear
the choice of library to build the proposed changes to Modelscope. OxyPlot is
an open source plot generation library that is licensed under the MIT license. It
has by far the greatest number of diﬀerent visualisation types available in a free
library and it was initially used in Modelscope to auto generate visualisations
without user interactions. The library however is structured in a way which
allows almost all aspects of the generated visualisation to be manipulated in
code which is strongly related to the majority of feature requirements.
The
Library also has built in support for custom visualisations which allows for
development of custom highly speciﬁc visualisations.
4.3
Diagram Type Detection
To provide qualiﬁed guess of a what type of diagram is the Gourmand applica-
tion uses the following process. It ﬁrst multiplies the number of references to
take account of the number of model elements that are contained, a class with
only a name in the algorithm is only worth a single point. Having a property
or a method is worth 2 points. This only provides a general guess on class di-
agrams. To assign values to use case diagrams and activity diagram elements
the algorithm counts the number of shapes which have been used to create the
diagram model, and subtract the total number of shapes, the number is then
multiplied the result with the sum of all the model elements.
The algorithm provides a good approximation of the evaluated diagram type.
To improve its accuracy and introduce the changes necessary to evaluate process
models diagrams two major steps were taken. The ﬁrst alteration is to provide
additional layer of distinction between diagrams which use same shape objects
to represent diﬀerent model elements by measuring colour. This alteration is
focused towards EPC model elements, which while do not follow any formal
speciﬁcation, normally are displayed with very speciﬁc colour values. By per-
forming a check to see if several colour values are present in the image or oﬃce
shape analysed along with the existing process, the application can now more
accurately distinguish between the three diagram types which use similar shape
types(activity, EPC and BPMN modes).
The second alteration introduced was on element classiﬁcation.
In order to
improve the classiﬁcation process slight adjustments to the model harvesters for
all model types were introduced when classifying groups of recognised shapes.
==PAGE:41==
4.4 Model Element Search Algorithm
29
It is often the case where nested shapes can deﬁnitively show that a model
is of a certain type. For example a Event gate element in a BPMN process
model is composed of at most 4 shapes (two circles, square and a pentagon), by
evaluating such clusters of shapes the new process can more accurately predict
the analysed model.
4.4
Model Element Search Algorithm
The algorithm used recognize the model elements is one of the most important
components of the Gourmand, and has been through several changes and addi-
tions. The original algorithm follows a few basic steps to categorised any found
elements to speciﬁc model elements.
First it queries the pool of elements for any "regular" elements, any element that
can be described as a convex polygon or a circle, then each element is classiﬁed
based on it’s shape and the parser processing the collection to a speciﬁc model
element which ﬁts that shape. The second stage examines each connector shape
(any line or arrow shape) in the collection by looking at the start and end points
and determining which elements are closest to those points. The closest elements
are stored as references to be processed by the export class. The last stage of
the algorithm processes any text shapes or any shape of type convex polygon
for text by, extracting it form a property or running the OCR library. Finally
all the recognised elements are passed to the diagram type detection function
in order to determine the probability of the elements belonging to that type. A
pseudo code description of the algorithm is presented in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 Original Gourmand shape processing algorithm
Require: Collection of all shapes on a page
Ensure: Collection of recognized model elements
1: for all "regular" Shape do
2:
if not processed then
3:
Determine the type of the current Shape;
4:
Create ModelElement according to type;
5:
Mark as processed;
6:
end if
7: end for
==PAGE:42==
30
Implementation
8: for all connector Shape do
9:
if not processed then
10:
Determine the type of the current Shape;
11:
Create ModelElement according to type;
12:
Mark as processed;
13:
for all endpoint do
14:
if has connected Shape or has a Shape within proximity then
15:
Create reference to this ModelElement on the Shape Mod-
elElement;
16:
end if
17:
end for
18:
Mark as processed;
19:
end if
20: end for
21: for all text Shape do
22:
if not processed then
23:
Run grammar to determine the type of the current text representa-
tion;
24:
Create ModelElement according to type;
25:
Create reference to this ModelElement on the containing Shape Mod-
elElement;
26:
Mark as processed;
27:
end if
28: end for
In order to enable process model extraction the original algorithm has to be
altered to handle many new model elements some which are often described my
multiple shapes, or as a result of the image analysis not recognised as simple
shapes (circle, squares, rectangles, etc.). Several major changes have been in-
troduced in the original algorithm to support the special cases introduced by
process model elements.
To address special elements one additional step has been introduced in the algo-
rithm which focuses on all irregular shapes. An irregular shape is deﬁned by an
extracted blob from a processed image that is above the threshold size deﬁned
in the settings in the application, and cannot be classiﬁed as a circle or a convex
polygon. The collection of irregular shapes is then processed by two stages.
At First the irregular shape goes through a ﬁlter to remove any text artefacts
that can be a part of it (artefacts covering shape distinguishing features). Then
the ﬁltered image is scaled to a speciﬁc size which matches a series of template
images. The image being processed is then hashed and compared with the tem-
plate images by performing a Hamming distance. If a match is found then a new
==PAGE:43==
4.4 Model Element Search Algorithm
31
model element associated with that irregular shape is created, if no match is
found the original image is checked whether it contains some speciﬁc templates
(speciﬁc pieces of elements such as lightning shape representing an error excep-
tion in BPMN). The algorithm used is Exhaustive Template Matching and it
returns an sorted array of possible matches. If match is found with reasonable
degree of certainty, a speciﬁc new model element is created based on the match’s
position (bottom, top,left,right) from the shape’s centrer. If no matches were
found in the second stage then the irregular shape is ignored.
In order to recognise complex shapes the part of algorithm responsible for regular
shapes has also been modiﬁed. The collection of regular shapes ﬁrst goes though
a clustering algorithm which sorts the elements into clusters. The algorithm
checks the centre of each shape, then measures the distance between them. If
the distance is shorter than the minimum blob size then both shapes are part of
the same cluster. Each element in the cluster is recognised in the same way as
in the original algorithm but now when the cluster size is above one, the cluster
is viewed as one model element. To classify which speciﬁc model element is
represented - basic checks are performed on the type and number of shapes that
are present in the cluster.
Algorithm 2 Changed Gourmand shape processing algorithm
Require: Collection of all shapes on a page
Ensure: Collection of recognized model elements
1: Transform collection of "regular" shapes into Clusters of "regular" shapes;
2: for all clusters do
3:
if shapes in cluster not processed then
4:
Determine the type of the current Shape;
5:
end if
6:
if cluster size > 1 then
7:
Evaluate elements in cluster;
8:
Create ModelElement according to type;
9:
Mark as cluster processed;
10:
else
11:
Create ModelElement according to type;
12:
Mark as cluster processed;
13:
end if
14: end for
==PAGE:44==
32
Implementation
15: for all "irregular" Shape do
16:
if not processed then
17:
create ﬁltered image;
18:
hash ﬁltered image;
19:
if if hash match found then
20:
Create ModelElement according to type;
21:
Mark as shape processed;
22:
else
23:
if orignal image contains matching tempalte then
24:
Create ModelElement according to type;
25:
Mark as cluster processed;
26:
end if
27:
end if
28:
end if
29: end for
30: for all connector Shape do
31:
if not processed then
32:
Determine the type of the current Shape;
33:
Create ModelElement according to type;
34:
Mark as processed;
35:
for all endpoint do
36:
if has connected Shape or has a Shape within proximity then
37:
Create reference to this ModelElement on the Shape Mod-
elElement;
38:
end if
39:
end for
40:
Mark as processed;
41:
end if
42: end for
43: for all text Shape do
44:
if not processed then
45:
Run grammar to determine the type of the current text representa-
tion;
46:
Create ModelElement according to type;
47:
Create reference to this ModelElement on the containing Shape Mod-
elElement;
48:
Mark as processed;
49:
end if
50: end for
By introducing these changes more shapes are being classiﬁed and the classiﬁca-
tions are more speciﬁc(the algorithm now supports multiple gateway and event
==PAGE:45==
4.5 Interpretation of Image Recognition
33
types) which also improves the diagram type detection process. These are still
quite a few limitations, speciﬁcally how blobs are extracted from the original
image and the requirements from the AForge Library towards template size and
image formats.
4.5
Interpretation of Image Recognition
In order to collect all the potential model elements when performing image
analysis, speciﬁcally to extract elements represented in nested forms, most of
the original implementation had to be changed. The original code was focused
on only analysing class diagrams so it was limited to only recognising rectangles.
Two important aspects of the original approach showed signiﬁcant results and
were reused in the new approach. The ﬁrst is image ﬁltering, speciﬁcally back-
ground removal and image "sharpening" though use of threshold ﬁlters. The
AForge.NET library can only perform blob recognition on a image with black
background. In the documentation it has been speciﬁed that the class process-
ing the image has a colour property to be used as the background colour value,
but during tests any signiﬁcant results were archived only when the background
colour is black. To avoid problems with updates to the library, the model images
are being processed to have a black background. Generally most model images
have a white background, so our ﬁrst step is to invert the colours on the image
to turn the background to black, then apply a grey scaling ﬁlter to desaturate
the image and as a last step to make the image more sharp a threshold ﬁlter is
applied. The threshold ﬁlter is used to segment the image into two segments,
white and black by checking pixel values to a speciﬁc threshold. An example of
this process is shown in ﬁgure 4.2.
(a) Original image
(b) Processed image
Figure 4.2: Initial process of source images for blobs detection
==PAGE:46==
34
Implementation
After the initial stage of prepping the image though the use of ﬁlters, the second
part is blob detection and analysis. The AForge.NET library provides a method
which returns an array of detected blobs. In the original solution these blobs
were just checked if they resemble a rectangle and if thy did not they were
discarded. The ﬁrst change introduced is focused on analysing the image for
nested blobs. The change in the algorithm, introduces a check on the size of the
blobs detected and if any ﬁt the criteria, they are re evaluated by checking for
new blobs within that speciﬁc piece of the original image. By performing tests
with various sample images, several factors such as image size and threshold
values are sown to be key for maximising the results.
The ﬁnal change introduced in order to improve the image analysis process is to-
wards shape classiﬁcation of blobs. The A.Forge,NET library has been expanded
in functionality towards shape detection. By expanding the shape classiﬁer with
what is possible from the resent version of the library, many new shapes are cor-
rectly classiﬁed (circles, triangles and several forms of quadrilaterals).
4.6
Label parsing
This section focuses on how label parsing is performed on images, other source
ﬁles such as ones from the Microsoft Oﬃce suite don’t require processing. The
way Optical Character Recognition (OCR) works is generally using a large set
of training data, where it compares the training data i.e. a collection of possible
character representations.
From the documentation of the OCR library, requires font sizes above 12pt. Any
smaller font sizes are not likely to be recognized correctly. As most images which
have found large quantities of text like class diagrams and process diagrams, were
about 12pt to 14pt in text size, most of the images have to be scaled to make the
text larger. This is achieved using a ﬁlter named ResizeNearestNeighbor, which
is a implementation of the Nearest-neighbour interpolation algorithm.
This
algorithm takes the nearest neighbour pixels, and performs an interpolation,
converting 1 pixel into 4 pixels of the same colour.
This takes an input of
height and width,so by scaling the image by four times the original size this
accommodates text sizes of 6 and 8pt.
To improve the scaled image a Gaussian Sharpen algorithm is applied to sharpen
the edges, an lessen the eﬀect of scaling the image, and then apply an adaptive
smoothing ﬁlter to smoothing the text in places where characters would be close,
like the case with parentheses. However, the ﬁnal result still heavily depends
on the original quality of the image.
==PAGE:47==
4.7 Modelscope UI Changes
35
4.7
Modelscope UI Changes
This section focuses on the user interface and internal structure changes asso-
ciated with probe selection, ﬁltering and result aggregation in the Modelscope
application.
4.7.1
BPMN parser
As previously discussed BPMN ﬁle format utilizes XMI structure. The imple-
mentation of the parser is complies standard deﬁned by OMG and following the
existing structure for ﬁle parsers. By examining a sample element (ﬁg 4.3) we
can see that the existing structure for model representation which contains the
id, name and type doest require modiﬁcation, but any additional information
about the elements can be used to build up the list of references.
1 <userTask completionQuantity="1" id="_13" name="Display Data"
2 implementation="##unspecified" isForCompensation="false"
3
startQuantity="1">
4 .....
5
</userTask>
Figure 4.3: Sample BPMN element.
Following the existing structure, the BPMN model parser is implemented in a
similar way to a MDXML parser. It follows the tree structure of the ﬁle process-
ing each element by creating a representation of it with several key properties
and list of references to the elements associated with it. To build up the list of
references the additional properties of the element are scanned to detect id’s of
other elements in the diagram, if any are found they two are added to the ref-
erence list. A general diagram representing the structure of the original model
and how its translated to a the generic model representation used though the
application can be seen in ﬁg 4.4.
4.7.2
Probes
Probes are one of the fundamental aspects of the Modelscope application. They
serve as predeﬁned possible queries for models. Having more probes will allow
==PAGE:48==
36
Implementation
Figure 4.4: BPMN Parser structure
the user of the application to perform more various forms of analysis as well as
explore the models in a variety of ways. The initial model probes show what is
potentially possible to be deﬁned a query for a model, but the list last lacked
any structure. In the original organisation the queries provided the same types
of readings such as (count, number of references, etc.) just for a diﬀerent sub
type of model elements.
In the proposed new structure, each type of probe has its own list of available
readings, this is introduced in order to provide more options focused on the type
of elements examined as well to allow for more generic probe readings such as
in the ﬁle probe. In the new probe structure speciﬁc queries for the following
categories have been implemented (File, Model, Diagram, Concept, Attribute,
Element, Annotation).
==PAGE:49==
4.7 Modelscope UI Changes
37
Figure 4.5: Aggregation funcitons sub panel
4.7.3
Aggregation functions
As part of the process to provide more options towards condensing the results
provided form the probes, aggregation functions were introduced as additional
option to every major axis in a visualisation template. Now each major axis
which is given a list of readings is able to perform the following functions to
condense the list (sum, geometric mean, harmonic mean, arithmetic mean, me-
dian, standard deviation are the available options presented in ﬁg 4.5). These
functions are implemented as delegate which is passed to the Reading class re-
sponsible for construction the list of readings, to be used as processing function
one the initial list has been built. By using a delegate the Reading class doesn’t
have to know how speciﬁcity to calculate harmonic mean for example, it just
has to pass a list of values and expects a list of values of the same type in return.
This approach also allows the concept to be further extended with additional
functions, just by proving the logic of the function it self regardless of how the
data is generated.
1 _agg = (g) =>{
2
double ret = 0;
3
if (g.Count() > 0)
4
{
5
//Compute the Average
6
double avg = g.Average();
7
//Perform the Sum of (value-avg)_2_2
8
double sum = g.Sum(d => Math.Pow(d - avg, 2));
9
//Put it all together
10
ret = Math.Sqrt((sum) / (g.Count() - 1));
11
}
12
return ret;
13 };
Figure 4.6: Assigning aggregation function.
==PAGE:50==
38
Implementation
Figure 4.7: Available visualisation templates
4.7.4
Filters
Filers were introduced in order to remove speciﬁc results form the visualisation
list. This could be because the user of the application wants to highlight just
a few results on one axis while showing all on another, or to ﬁnd a speciﬁc
element type among all the types present in a group of models. Filters were
implemented in the same way aggregation funcitons are used in the Reading
class.
A delegate function is passed to the Reading class, which will select
speciﬁc sub list of elements form the original extracted by the reading. The
ﬁlters implemented, can check the name and type of an element to be shown or
to be removed from the result list. This options has been made available to all
axis except for the options which is not typically used to process large lists of
reading results but for sorting.
4.7.5
Interchanging visualisations
In order to allow the user of the application to quickly transition between vi-
sualisation templates, without the need to reconﬁgure the new template, each
visualisation template had to be implemented in away to be able to convert set-
tings from one template to another. This transformation is initiated when the
user selects a diﬀerent type of a visualisation template ﬁg A.1. This transition is
handled on a Axis level, common Axis such as the title and the legend Axis can
copy each other settings, while data Axis copy just the selected reading auto-
matically. To optimise the process each template has a method that handles how
to extract and apply settings which cannot be mapped to an existing common
property. While the option is great and improves the user interaction with the
application, it requires a lot of additional work when a new visualisation tem-
plate is introduced. The new template will have to be made compatible with
the existing visualisations and the older visualisations will have to be modiﬁed
to handle readings from the new template.
==PAGE:51==
4.7 Modelscope UI Changes
39
4.7.6
Custom scaling control
In order to follow the vision of the Modelscope application to be a form of
model Oscilloscope, custom user interface controls were introduced in the form
of knobs ﬁg 4.8 to support scaling in the Scatter visualisation template. The
implementation of the control followed a few simple speciﬁcations. The con-
trol should have basic scaling support, it should support mouse scroll snapping
interactions and should be able to support mathematical labels.
Figure 4.8: Knob Control
In order to correctly display mathematical equations as labels a small custom
library was build to allow Latex based script to be rendered as labels for the
Knob control. This process is time consuming and the library is not intended to
be used for a dynamically changing labels, but for predeﬁned labels which have
to be computed only once per application start - its acceptable. The use of the
library allows for the control to be used in many other areas of the application,
it just requires a list of labels. It should be noted that the ﬁnal version of the
control requires a substantial amount of screen space, due to the labels and knob
position.
4.7.7
Extended Export Options
Figure 4.9: Available Export Formats
In order to extend the usefulness and the general experience of the user of the
Modelscope application the initial support of only PDF and CSV formats have
been expanded to ot support, PNG , SVG and chipboard support. The new ﬁle
type extensions were made available though the work of extending the renderer
of the Oxyplot graph library. Having access to the elements though the renderer
==PAGE:52==
40
Implementation
allowed the support of the SVG vector format by converting the visible object
shapes to SVG elements. It should be pointed out that due the provided way
form Microsoft of handling clipboard object streams, transparent background
visualisations are not possible and on export the visualisations are set to be
exported with a white colour as background.
4.7.8
Protocol Export
By introducing the concept of storing multiple preconﬁgured visualisation tem-
plates the natural next step is to allow the user application to be able to save
and share preconﬁgured templates. To support this functionality all the classes
referenced with a Protocol (Axis, Probes, Visualisations) have the system at-
tribute of Serializable.
This allows for the Protocol objects to be stored in
binary or XML format and then re-instantiated on application start up allowing
for seamless and continuous backup of preconﬁgured visualisation templates. To
migrate a protocol the user will just have copy the ﬁle and load it in a diﬀerent
instance of the application and form that point on the protocol will be save by
the application automatically.
4.7.9
Matrix Visualisation
From the analysis of the original application it can be clearly seen that the func-
tionality of the application been strictly developed to use the Oxyplot library
as the main way to visualise data. While the library has provided many visuali-
sation charts (bar chart, pie chart, boxplot and scatter chart), it is still missing
one of the most common types of visualisation - a matrix visualisation. To take
advantage of the already provided structure of exporting rendered visualisations
to several form of formats, a custom data series class was implemented.
The matrix data series class is responsible for translating the provided matrix,
to a rendered rectangle and tracking of mouse movements to handle zooming
functionality (shown in ﬁgA.9). Like with all other standard data series provided
in the library, calculations of the data are performed before the data is given
to the series. Following the requirements provided by the library, complex data
types can be used as values to be used by the data series, provided the user also
supplies a binding deﬁnition to point to a speciﬁc property for the correct data
type value.
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 5
Validation
This chapter covers veriﬁcation analysis the design scenarios described in Chap-
ter 3. The validation is a test of the design and not the implementation, which
can be found in Section 5.3. The diﬀerence between the actual test section and
the validation, is that the test is more implementation focused like unit tests
and special cases. The validation is where we take one step back to validate the
approach of the solution choices as a whole. Extending on the original frame-
work for testing the applications on the code metrics, the quality of the code
is measured in terms of maintainability and code complexity. To validate the
model recognition implementations, the usage scenarios described in Section 2.1
verify the provided changes to the existing solutions actually do what they were
intend it to do.
5.1
Test
As systems were built around the concept of supporting multiple document
types as input, therefore it is an obvious choice to implement tests based upon
diagrams in the diﬀerent document types, as well as provide diﬀerent model
ﬁle formats.
Having both applications following the MVVM pattern in the
implementation removed much of the diﬃculty in making automatic UI testing.
Due to the changes in distribution of the Microsoft Oﬃce library combined
==PAGE:54==
42
Validation
with the use C# Generics in the Gourmand application, several limitations
on the design were imposed to create test data by the means of creating the
documents in PowerPoint and Visio representing process models compatible
with the Microsoft’s library.
5.1.1
Test process
Figure 5.1: Development test stages
Following the already established development structure meant that there were
three main test stages as seen in ﬁg.5.1, the ﬁrst stage was during develop-
ment, which meant during development, the process began for the Gourmand
application with detecting process model elements and for Modelscope when
the BPMN format support was implemented, then continued with testing the
detected of these model elements (from image analysis and ﬁle parsing) in dif-
ferent scenarios. The second stage began for the development process, with the
extensions to the original unit tests were partially in progress. Using the tests
to process several special process model images, a few bugs were discovered in
the threshold values and shape checking in the detection algorithm, these bugs
where then ﬁxed. After each bug ﬁxing session the tests were performed again,
to check if the result was as expected. The last stage was during the validation
period, where the main focus was on validating the usage scenarios which were
deﬁned in section 2.1.
5.1.2
Test cases & Results
5.1.2.1
Unit tests
Microsoft by design restricts building unit tests with embedded Visio and Pow-
erPoint libraries, so in order to build and run the unit tests, embedding the
libraries is disabled, so running the test requires establishing new project refer-
ences to the installed libraries on for he speciﬁc computer.
==PAGE:55==
5.1 Test
43
Figure 5.2: Gourmand test cases
To test the changes of the Gourmand application seven new unit tests were
added for the new sections in the system. These tests focus on the new image
processing algorithm (when processing class, EPC and BPMN diagrams), export
of new diagram types and shape classiﬁcation with clustering in all element
classiﬁers. To correctly test the image shape classiﬁers, special test diagrams
were provided with both detectable and undetectable blobs in a from of test
images.
The new test cases implemented for the Modelscope application were focused on
the internal structure (probe results, ﬁlters, aggregation functions, visualisation
conversion), any user interface bugs were addressed as best as possible in the
design alterations phase. Between the diﬀerent visualisation templates, probes,
and aggregation functions more than nineteen new test cases were introduced
in the test suite to be run with the existing ones.
5.1.3
Pixel Graphic Image Quality
To test how the quality aﬀects image processing with the introduced changes to
the algorithm and the updated version of the libraries, a test image was prepared.
The test contained three scaled versions from the original image which had a
resolution of 600x400 with a reduction of 10, 30 and 50%.
The results showed that none of the reductions had eﬀect on the recognition
==PAGE:56==
44
Validation
(a) 100%
(b) 90%
(c) 70%
(d) 50%
Figure 5.3: Tested images
of rectangles, but had a signiﬁcant eﬀect on the more complex shapes (such
as events and gates) and to the recognition of text. The text recognition was
considerably reduced, even with a 10% decrease of image size the text font size
was the bellow the required minimum for the OCR library to provide meaningful
results. Even with improvements to the blob background ﬁltering to reduce the
noise around the letters, recognized text produced was not very meaningful even
with 100% when the font size is 12pt or less.
5.2
Code Quality
Code quality by its deﬁnition is a broad term, and is generally understood dif-
ferently by anyone trying to "quantify" code quality. It could be considered that
code quality the capability of a software to follow a set of requirements, or it
could be measured as simply as the customer value it provides. To have a more
objective and well understood deﬁnition of code quality, both Modelscope and
Gourmand solutions are measured with the tools provided by Microsoft. Mi-
crosoft’s own diagnostic tool which is a built-in feature Visual Studio Application
Life cycle Management of Microsoft Visual Studio is capable of performing code
analysis as well as generating reports on the use of system resources in real-time.
==PAGE:57==
5.2 Code Quality
45
5.2.1
Code Metrics
As we previously discussed code metric analysis provides a degree of conﬁdence
to the quality of the code. Microsoft Visual Studio uses several metrics in order
quantify code quality, and as Microsoft have previously expressed their view on
code metrics as a set of software measures which provides insight into the code
that has been developed. By using code metrics, developers can understand
which types methods have to be re-factored or require more testing. Develop-
ment teams are provided with a way to detect and identify potential risks and
to understand the current state of a project. The following sections provide a
brief description on what each metric quantiﬁes and how they relate as a whole
to the modiﬁed applications.
• Cyclomatic Complexity
Cyclomatic complexity is a measurement calculates the structural com-
plexity of the code. It is created by calculating the number of diﬀerent
code paths in the ﬂow of a given program. This value is strongly connected
to maintainability and code coverage. If a program contains a complex
control ﬂow, it will require more tests to achieve good code coverage and
thus it will be less maintainable. The tools state 10 to be a reasonable
upper limit, and an index between 3-7 is to be considered within a normal
spectrum representing well structured code.
• Maintainability Index
Maintainability index calculates the relative ease of maintaining code. The
index is a value between 0 and 100. The higher the value, the better main-
tainability. Visual Studio uses a colour coding to quickly identify trouble
spots in your code. A green rating is between 20 and 100 and indicates
that the code has good maintainability. A yellow rating is between 10 and
19 and indicates that the code is will require more then the usual eﬀort to
be maintainable. A red rating is a rating between 0 and 9 and indicates
low maintainability. The maintainability index is a summary index based
on rest of the performed metrics.
• Depth of Inheritance
By deﬁnition inheritance is the action of extending the root of the class
hierarchy. The deeper the hierarchy the more diﬃcult it could be to un-
derstand where particular methods or ﬁelds are deﬁned or redeﬁned.
• Class Coupling
This metric computes the coupling of unique classes through, local vari-
ables, parameters, return types, method calls, generic or template instan-
tiations, base classes, interface implementations and attribute decoration.
==PAGE:58==
46
Validation
Good software design practices dictates that methods and types should
have high cohesion factor and low coupling. Class coupling is also strongly
connected to maintainability, and the higher class coupling factor is, the
more diﬃcult it is to reuse and maintain the design of the application
because of its many interdependencies on other types.
• Lines of Code
The most common code metric used is lines of code, and also the broadest
measurement. The value itself does not say anything speciﬁc about the
measured program, but it is usually used to the developer. A very high
count might indicate that a type or method deﬁnition is trying to do too
much work and should probably be split up. It also indicates that a type
or method deﬁnition might could be potentially hard to maintain.
5.2.1.1
Gourmand
Figure 5.4: Code metrics for Gourmand
• Cyclomatic Complexity
The scores computed on the code are still quite high, even with the intro-
duced changes to the structure of the parsers, but again it is the sum of
all indexes here. Expanding the view would show that some of the indexes
are lower than the recommended 10, but quite a few ones are above. Its
serves as an indication that some of the code would be less complex if we
split it into smaller pieces.
• Maintainability Index
The maintainability index on Figure 5.4, shows a green colour code desig-
nation for each namespace. The lowest points of maintainability are the
namespaces associated with the PowerPoint and Visio harvesters. This
can be accounted by high amount of available shapes that have to be
processed.
==PAGE:59==
5.2 Code Quality
47
• Depth of Inheritance
The depth of inheritance is looking quite okay, but it could be better.
Most of the indexes is under 5 and some of them are above, even as high
as 9. This indicates that some focus should be focused towards looking at
the depth of inheritance to see if the implementation could be re-factored
in a better way.
• Class Coupling
The class coupling is also higher than the recommended value of 25. But
again, here the header is the sum of all class coupling of each class and
method contained in the speciﬁc namespace. Overall the implementation
is more or less low coupled, which is considered good.
5.2.1.2
Modelscope
Figure 5.5: Code metrics for Modelscope
• Cyclomatic Complexity Like the original source of the application the
scoring is still quite high. Some outline namespaces do appear to be bellow
the recommended value but are still marked by the tool as green due to
their small code a base (Figure 5.5).
• Maintainability Index With the hight amount of restructuring to compart-
mentalize the code, the maintainability index was expected. There some
areas such as parsing which show slightly lower values due to the high
amounts of custom codes used by the parsers.
• Depth of Inheritance
The depth of inheritance is again as expected, but it could be better. Sev-
eral namespaces containing most of the model view classes have a high
depth of inheritance index which in most of the cases is unavoidable. Fur-
ther restructuring may be possible provided visualisation templates don’t
need additional functionality.
==PAGE:60==
48
Validation
• Class Coupling
With the exception of the namespace containing the Probe class deﬁni-
tions, every other namespace is within the recommended parameters.The
change introduced to the application don’t appear to have degraded the
rating of the original code.
5.2.1.3
Summary
Code metrics provide a way to measure the code quality of a provided imple-
mentation. In the previous sections the code quality of both applications was
discussed and overall they are considered easy maintainable and to a degree
well structured. Almost all the measurements are within the desirable thresh-
olds provided in Table 5.1. The overall maintainability index is measured as
good with a value above 20. Almost every namespace of the modiﬁed imple-
mentations has been evaluated above 70, which is in the higher end of what
is considered good. The cyclomatic complexity is also considered as "passed"
taking into account the threshold value and a few special cases. There are some
pieces of code that should be considered if further improvements should be done.
This is absolutely reasonable, it is my belief that every implementation should
be improvable to some degree with enough eﬀort. The inheritance index is also
very reasonable, but due to a few features, small ﬂaws are still present. From the
statistics is shown that both implementations have low coupled index. Overall
the introduced changes have produced a satisfying result.
Metric
Thresholds
Cyclomatic Complexity
> 25
Maintainability Index
< 20
Depth of Inheritance
> 5
Class Coupling
> 80
Method Coupling
> 30
Table 5.1: Code metric thresholds
5.3
Diagram validation
The following section is focused on validating the process diagrams by comparing
the expected results to the generated output. The process validation is rather
simple, it analyses a sample image and tries detect the diagram type. We can
identify the model elements beforehand, and with that information know what
==PAGE:61==
5.3 Diagram validation
49
to expect of the image recognition. Finally, by comparing the input and output,
we can try to validate the behaviour of the algorithm.
To have an objective validation and to verify that one of the main goals of
the thesis has been achieved, several real life examples were chosen, from the
web. All of these examples are originally represented as pixel graphics images,
and to validate the changes the diﬀerent document and diagram types parsers,
each sample diagram was converted into the necessary document types by hand.
This approach strengthened the validation process, because the application is
working with diagrams of a certain importance.
(a) Original model image
(b) Results as PowerPoint
(c) Results as an Image
Figure 5.6: Diagram analysis sample
When a sample process model is represented as PowerPoint collection of shapes,
generally it has been successfully recognised and the correct process model type
has been assigned. In the provided example we can see the use of the improved
process algorithm can correctly reorganise the termination events which are con-
structed by clusters of to circle elements, but is unable to classify the object ﬁle
elements represented as special polygons (with both curved and straight edges).
By not being able to classify some of the elements the degree of conﬁdence in the
prediction is low but by correctly assigning the correct type to the participant
and termination event elements it is able to correctly pick the process model
type.
==PAGE:62==
50
Validation
Image recognition for process models is one of the main goals set in the thesis,
and while some signiﬁcant result have been achieved towards improvement of
the existing system there is still lot of room for improvement. This is because
of the very strict rigid demands towards a certain picture quality in order to
be able to recognize anything using the image library.
Working with image
recognition is pretty advanced and time consuming process, because it is hard
to debug the intermediary steps which process speciﬁc parts of the image. It is
worth pointing that image recognition consists of two parts: recognizing shapes
and recognizing possible text labels.
In this validation most success was observed with pictures who are similar as
the one shown in Figure 5.6.
This ﬁgure shows the image after it has been
processed by Gourmand. If the image has low quantity noise pixels and has
decent resolution most if not all elements can be usually correctly classiﬁed.
PowerPoint is also a great tool for UML and process modelling even though
it is not modelling tool. PowerPoint provides a lot of shapes that satisﬁes the
process model semantics, but since the shapes are not model speciﬁc, Gourmand
has to do a little more processing in order to recognize anything. One of the
downsides of PowerPoint is that too many shapes on one side makes it harder for
Gourmand to create the proper relations between elements, clustered elements
also provide some additional confutation when a line segment points to cluster
but is connected ot a speciﬁc inner shape. The areas of image processing still
requires improvements, and with further processing towards better classiﬁcation
and detection of elements it would add a lot of business value of the application
as well.
5.4
Programs validation
The programs validation section covers the validation of the functionalities spec-
iﬁed in the features list which are not covered in the diagram section. Here I
want to validate changes which are focused towards the Modelscope feature
speciﬁcations.
5.4.1
Model Tree structure
In the original version of the application, the currently analysed models were
displayed in a list without any information on how they are organised. One of
the features speciﬁed in section 2.2.3 is provide the user with a greater control
==PAGE:63==
5.4 Programs validation
51
over changing the selection which models to be used with the selected probes.
The component holding the model elements was redesigned to represent them
in a folder tree structure like the source ﬁles which improved the user experience
working with more model ﬁles and to quickly switch whole groups of ﬁles form
the selection process. To validate the function of the control the selected items
were manually compared to the output of the control.
Figure 5.7: Model Tree Structure
5.4.2
Custom control components
In order to fulﬁl the feature speciﬁcation related to development of custom user
interface components, custom knob control was developed.
The control has
two modes of operation, manual or automatic labels. If the control is used in
automatic mode then the user just has to set the minimum, maximum ans step
between values, and the control will generate the appropriate labels.
If the
controls is used in manual mode, the user will have to provide a list of labels
which will be directly rendered in the order provided.
This allows for a lot
more versatility in the use of the component for example it could be use as a
on/oﬀswitch. When new position of the dial is selected, the control returns the
selected label index. To validate the functionality of the control several tests
were performed with empty or extremely long strings for labels.
5.4.3
Visualisation update
Visualisation render updates on every change in settings, switch between visu-
alisations, changes in probe settings and on change to the selected model. This
==PAGE:64==
52
Validation
functionality was achieved with the use of a custom event. Upon the mentioned
changes as well as direct property updates associated with the visualisation
template, the custom event gets a notiﬁcation to recalculate and redraw the
template. This functionality was validated by testing, if the redrawing process
accrues after speciﬁc property changes within sub classes in the various axis as
well as on model lists updates.
5.4.4
Scatter Visualisation changes
The scatter visualisation template has been changed in order to support more
layers of input form probes such as size, colour, x and y positions. The ﬁltering
for this visualisation was also changed from the individual axis to a separate
section since, all the values of an axis are strongly linked (missing an x value
due to a ﬁlter will make some points just have a y value for example).
To
validate these changes, several diﬀerent selections were made with regards to
probes and readings, in order to test if diﬀerent readings are still correctly
paired on the same model parent. The ﬁnal tests were performed on the applied
scaling function to see how the size of the dots will be aﬀected in the rendering.
5.4.5
Probe restructuring
To validate probe restructuring and extensions, each probe had its associated
readings tested by ﬁrst checking that the pool of model elements provided by the
probe are of the correct type, then each possible reading result was calculated
and evaluated to conﬁrm that the probes are working in the intended order. In
the revised structure each probe has a list of available readings, these readings
have certain expectations towards the type of elements that they will be provided
by the probe. This requires each reading to be coded for the speciﬁc probe which
also provides a high degree of customisation on behaviour.
A generic count
reading in the new structure will not be able to exclude potentially incorrect
elements or perform element speciﬁc actions. In the revised system a new type
of reading can be easily added just by adding it to the list of available reading
for a speciﬁc probe.
==PAGE:65==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
The conclusion summarizes all the work that was done in this thesis. It performs
an overview of initial thoughts and motivation and wraps up the contents of this
thesis.
6.1
Summary
Taking basis in the motivation in Section 1.1 and introducing summary, the pri-
mary goal is to provide support for an automated approach to process models
analysis. The work on the thesis has shown that is possible able to harvest pro-
cess models from Microsoft PowerPoint documents containing vector graphical
model elements by investigating the underlying data structure using the pro-
vided Oﬃce .NET library. Processes model elements have also been harvested
from a variety of image formats though image recognition with a high degree of
success. The created created model elements have been successfully exported
into the current standard of exchanging meta data information via XML, the
interchange format for UML models, XMI and BPMN. By analysing the output
format of the modelling tool MagicDraw, speciﬁc tool XMI extensions have been
created to satisfy the internal XML parser of MagicDraw. This made it possible
for exporting process model elements to export to another XMI based format,
MDXML, which is the default ﬁle format and ﬁle extension of ﬁles related to
==PAGE:66==
54
Conclusion
MagicDraw. Using the tool’s speciﬁc XMI extensions allowed for process mod-
els in PowerPoint and Visio to be directly transformed from vector graphical
shapes to identical diagrams in terms of model elements, shape sizes and element
locations.
As the majority of models are represented in various image formats, one of the
main goals is to provide a way to harvest model elements from such sources.
The scope of this extension was to improve onto the initial work of recogni-
tion of class diagram elements to support the various shapes associated with
process models. Researching the area of image recognition and by examining
the initial algorithm improvements such as recursive blob search and element
clustering has been introduced. Using the .NET library AForge.NET, an image
processing library, the altered algorithm was able to recognize the many new
visual shapes of a process model diagrams, but criteria for image quality is still
very demanding in order to have meaningful results. Together with an Opti-
cal Character Recognition (OCR) engine, the algorithm processes text contents
within speciﬁc shapes of process and other diagram types, but the success is
very dependant on the size of iamge and the font used.
Looking at the partial summaries in the validation chapter of this thesis, the
focus is towards justiﬁcation of the introduced changes and vitriﬁcation that
both applications work as intended by testing the tools in the described us-
age scenarios along with a few special cases.
The validation shows that the
introduced changes allow for process model elements found in PowerPoint, Vi-
sio documents and images to be recognized and transformed with some small
ﬂaws. The validation also tries to show that the more elements are present in a
diagram PowerPoint or an image, the harder it is for the tool to recognize and
classify the model elements.
The validation of image recognition shows that this ﬁeld still requires a lot of
work in order to fully satisfy the requirement of recognizing diagrams in pixel
graphics with a consistently reliable results. The quality of the output is highly
dependent on the source image and depending on the noise level, the algorithms
in used library have trouble identifying blobs as potential elements. It is my
opinion that further improvements towards process model element identiﬁcation
could be achieved if a machine learning is introduced to be gradually trained
to recognise model elements not on ﬁltered images which have an innate loss of
information.
In the introduced changes the Modelscope is able to understand process model
ﬁle formats.
The changes introduced in ﬁle handling allow the user of the
application to quickly load and analyse batches of models on user predeﬁned
settings. These pre-deﬁned proﬁles can now be exported and shared which allow
for new users of the tool to visualise their own data in similar standardized way.
==PAGE:67==
6.2 Discussion
55
The changes to the tool have provided more options towards customisation of
ﬁndings though the use of visualisation template options, ﬁlters and aggregation
functions. The changes introduced towards user experience such as automatic
conﬁguration of new template based on the selections of the old and automatic
rendering updates, have improved the speed of user interactions and the general
feel of the tool. The added extensions towards visualisation export options have
made the data from application a lot more easier to be incorporated in variety
of ways. The eﬀort put in restructuring the application was towards providing
an architecturally sound design, resulting in a highly modular and maintainable
system structure.
6.2
Discussion
Taking basis in the summary in the previous Section 6.1, I have achieve the
sated primary goal. The user of the tools is able to analyse process models from
a variety formats, to reasonable degree. Depending on the quality of the source
input most simple and complex shapes can be classiﬁed as model elements and
be used for analysis though metric applied in Modelscope. The user is able to
select and deselect model elements of choice and export the selection of model
elements or visualisation results in variety of formats.
The implementation of Gourmand and Modelscope follows the MVVM design
pattern, which provides increased readability and maintainability of the code.
This means as experienced that future developers should be able to continue
the work on both applications within a fair time limit.
Having the existing suture of diﬀerent types of diagrams and diﬀerent types
of semantics in Gourmand provided a straight forward approach to the exten-
sion to EPC diagrams.
This type of ﬂowchart using event-driven processes
and it’s similarities to activity diagrams, was easy to handle with respect to
export functionality but hard to deﬁne towards model elements. Considering
Business Process Model and Notation (BPMN) diagrams, the clearly deﬁned
distinct visual representation element types, was a lot more easier to process
and incorporate within the existing solution.
Analysing the deﬁned application scenarios for Modelscope, it showed that this
tool was designed exploring models as in for instance allowing students to explore
models in courses where models plays a major part. This created high demand
in terms of stability and usability. On the other hand, Modelscope should be a
tool for working scientists interested in studying models. This created demands
on extending the available probes, readings and visualisations and their core
==PAGE:68==
56
Conclusion
functionality.
While the number of probes that have been though multiple
extension iterations in the development process,the provided list in the revised
version of the tool are still a set that will be always in need of alterations.
Exactly which ones are the right ones is hard to determine up front, and only
practical usage over a sustained period of time will reveal.
6.3
Future work
In this section ideas for future improvement which involves improving the pro-
posed process model analysis with the modiﬁed tools have been introduced.
This cavers partly implemented and new features I have given thoughts to.
• Logging Information of Interest
A feature that would beneﬁt both the users and the developers would
be the implementation of a log, which would document the procession
of a image analysis session. This could be beneﬁcial to the user in the
sense of knowing if a process model diagram is incomplete or faulty due to
poor image quality, getting information about what and were an elements
were recognized and what were decision processes made by the tool. It
would be much beneﬁcial when it comes to investigation of multiple ﬁles
or documents with a high amount of recognized diagrams. It can possibly
also catalogue uncategorised image blobs for future improvement of the
tool.
• Improving Diagram Detection
During our design and implementation phase, some limitations to the rec-
ognizing the correct model type have been detected, simply because same
types of shapes can be diﬀerent types of elements depending on the model
and because the source data is the same it is valued the same. It could be
potentially beneﬁcial of comparing the unclassiﬁed elements for each type
and using the value to further distinguish between the diﬀerent models.
This process a considerable amount of eﬀort to have a complete imple-
mentation of every possible scenario to account for extra elements. There
are also model elements which is almost never used which could maybe
have a higher value in the evaluation algorithm.
• Text recognition
The Gourmand application uses Tesseract.NET to recognize text, how-
ever as mentioned in the implementation, the text generated by library
are highly dependent of the picture size and font size, from the result a
==PAGE:69==
6.3 Future work
57
potential beneﬁt would be the increase the training data which could im-
prove the detection considerably. A possible alternative could be exploring
3rd party text processing web services. There may also be image ﬁlters
which may help improve the process.
• Image recognition
As described in the implementation the image processing algorithm re-
lies on the SimpleShapeChecker algorithm, to detect the primary shapes
such as rectangles, eclipses, etc. The use of HoughLineTransformation for
line detection has produced inconsistent results, unbroken lines are usu-
ally detected but ARE sometimes misrepresented as borders of elements.
Dashed lines are viewed as small image blobs that often are bellow the
threshold of the image and are ignored completely. Some improvements
towards reconstructing dashed lines though k-clustering algorithms could
be attempted but that topic goes out the scope model element harvest-
ing. In order to create image classiﬁcation with extreme accuracy to the
application should be extended with machine learning in mind.
• Dynamic template selection
An interesting feature extension for Modelscope could be the automatic
selection of visualisation template, based on the selected probes and model
ﬁles. Depending on the amount of the result some visualisations are in-
herently better for displaying information than others. This functionality
could be introduced as an option in the settings part of application for
new and inexperienced users to see the potential uses of the tool.
• Dynamic Probe generation
Due to the constant need of additional probes for the application a poten-
tial extension could the ability to deﬁne new types of probes in the ap-
plication. This could be done though a some wizard process for selecting
the output type elements and adding the query logic. This functionality
could also allow for probe sharing much like protocol sharing. This will
also introduce some requirements like speciﬁc protocol expecting speciﬁc
probes to be in the application instance.
==PAGE:70==
58
Conclusion
==PAGE:71==
Appendix A
Supplementary Diagram
Results Documentation
This appendix contains diagrams and speciﬁc instances of results for the Gour-
mand and Modelscope applications which are referenced though out thesis.
Some of the instances show typical behaviour while others outline special cases.
==PAGE:72==
60
Supplementary Diagram Results Documentation
A.1
Activities in investigating a ﬁle
Figure A.1: Activities in investigating a ﬁle
==PAGE:73==
A.2 Activities in analysing a model collection
61
A.2
Activities in analysing a model collection
Figure A.2: Activities in analysing a model collection
==PAGE:74==
62
Supplementary Diagram Results Documentation
A.3
Process Model Image elements recognition
results
Figure A.3: EPC process model recognition
The ﬁgure illustrates how each of the highlighted shapes are classiﬁed by the
algorithm for a EPC process model. A point of interest is the algorithm man-
aging to recognise a speciﬁc type of event and the high conﬁdence percentage
of the model type heuristic.
==PAGE:75==
A.3 Process Model Image elements recognition results
63
Figure A.4: Correct recognition of gateway elements
The ﬁgure illustrates how each of the highlighted shapes are classiﬁed by the
algorithm. A point of interest is that the algorithm manges to correctly classiﬁes
the diﬀerent gateway shapes.
==PAGE:76==
64
Supplementary Diagram Results Documentation
Figure A.5: Processing of nested elements
The ﬁgure illustrates how each of the highlighted shapes included are classiﬁed
by the algorithm. A point of interest is that the algorithm manges to detect
almost all nested elements in the sub process deﬁnition. The missed Start event
is most likely due to image ﬁltering.
==PAGE:77==
A.3 Process Model Image elements recognition results
65
Figure A.6: Process model classiﬁcation within PowerPoint
The ﬁgure illustrates how each of the highlighted shapes included are classiﬁed
by the modiﬁed algorithm for PowerPoint. Is should be noted that, even though
the object look like a ﬁle it is in fact build out two overlapped shapes which
couldn’t be correctly recognised by the algorithm. Thus the low recognition
score.
==PAGE:78==
66
Supplementary Diagram Results Documentation
Figure A.7: Aggregation functions in Modelscope
The ﬁgure illustrates how a sub set of result elements can be processed though
aggregation functions and displayed.
==PAGE:79==
A.3 Process Model Image elements recognition results
67
Figure A.8: Size scaling in Scatter visualisation
The ﬁgure illustrates the rust of applied scaling in a Scatter visualisation tem-
plate.
==PAGE:80==
68
Supplementary Diagram Results Documentation
Figure A.9: Matrix Visualisation in Modelscope
The ﬁgure illustrates a rendering of the Matrix visualisation. The showed exam-
ple is made out of several thousand elements and refresh courses slight hiccups
in the user interface.
==PAGE:81==
Bibliography
[CL08]
Michel Chaudron and Christian F J Lange. Second international work-
shop on model size metrics. Lecture Notes in Computer Science (in-
cluding Subseries Lecture Notes in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Lecture
Notes in Bioinformatics), Lect. Notes Comput. Sci, 5002:89–92, 2008.
[CT09]
Michele Chinosi and Alberto Trombetta.
Modeling and validating
bpmn diagrams. In Proceedings of the 2009 IEEE Conference on Com-
merce and Enterprise Computing, CEC ’09, pages 353–360, Washing-
ton, DC, USA, 2009. IEEE Computer Society.
[ER14]
Asger Jørgen Marcker Espersen and Thomas Rossen. Harvesting mod-
els from documents, 2014.
[Han14] Jacob Bølling Hansen. Modelscope - a tool to measure and visualize
model size metrics, 2014.
[LKP12] A. Ligeza, K. Kluza, and T. Potempa. Ai approach to formal analy-
sis of bpmn models. towards a logical model for bpmn diagrams. In
Computer Science and Information Systems (FedCSIS), 2012 Feder-
ated Conference on, pages 931–934, Sept 2012.
