==PAGE:1==
Geological settings, data evaluation and
identification of criteria for drilling
solutions in the Dreki offshore
exploration area, Iceland
a dissertation presented
by
Ágústa Maren Jónsdóttir (s093680)
to
The Department of Civil Engineering
in partial fulfillment of the requirements
for the degree of
Master of Petroleum Engineering
The thesis advisors are:
Louise Josefine Belmonte, and
Ove Tobias Gudmestad (external)
Technical University of Denmark
Kongens Lyngby, Copenhagen
January 2016
==PAGE:2==
© 2016 - Ágústa Maren Jónsdóttir
All rights reserved.
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The goal of the thesis is to gather and evaluate existing data from the Icelandic
offshore exploration area Dreki and to identify criteria for selecting an arctic
drilling system concept. I will compare the functionality of the anchor drilling
solution versus Dynamic positioning (DP) for this specific area in the Arctic.
The thesis consists of three parts. First part covers the tectonic history of the
Jan Mayen micro continent (JMMC) and geology including the rifting history of
the North Atlantic Ocean (NAO) and identification of potential sedimentary
layers in the Dreki area. The close by basins of the JMMC are Haltenbanken
basin (mid - West Norway), Vikingarben basin (Northern North Sea) and the
Jameson Land basin (JLB) (East Greenland). There are already well known
petroleum systems in the Haltenbanken basin and the Vikingarben basin where
currently producing reservoirs exist. There are no producing wells in East
Greenland. Therefore, the current knowledge of the Jameson Land basin will be
covered to obtain knowledge on both sides of the JMMC. The logical question is
if there are the same or similar geological data from the JLB that correlates to
offshore Norway, why should it not be the same in between, in the JMMC
including the Dreki area?
In the second part, the evaluation of the existing data from the Dreki area will
be covered. The main question here: Is the potential for oil and gas to be found in
the Dreki area?
ii
==PAGE:4==
Finally, the third part will discuss which kind of drilling system suits the Dreki
area. The question is as follows, Is semi - submersible solution a more suitable choice
than a drillship for a drilling operation in the Dreki area?
The conclusion is that commercially accumulation of hydrocarbons in the
Dreki area is still uncertain. Nevertheless, based on existing data the potential of
hydrocarbons generation is still present. Although the history of arctic
exploration in Canada and Russia has achieved commercial production, the
timeline from exploration to production takes approximately 20 years in the
Arctic [1]. Due to the long timeline from exploration to production the
exploration has to begin now to be able to meet the future energy demand.
iii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Civil Engineering in fulfillment of the
requirements for acquiring a M.Sc. in Petroleum Engineering. The thesis was
accomplished in the autumn semester 2015, at the department of Civil
Engineering. The thesis has allowed me to explore the Icelandic exploration area
Dreki, the field of geology, data evaluation and to study different drilling
solutions for the Dreki area. I have gained great knowledge during the thesis
work and I am sure that it will be useful in the future .
Lyngby, 24-January-2016
iv
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgments
I would like to thank my internal supervisor Louise Josefine Belmonte for the
opportunity to write this thesis. This is a subject of personal interest as the focus
is on an oil offshore exploration area in my home country Iceland. During the
thesis work we had discussions that helped me to focus on the important factors
and the guidance of the thesis structure has been greatly appreciated.
I would like to thank my external supervisor Ove Tobias Gudmestad,
professor at the University of Stavanger (Norway), for his field knowledge, fast
response time and useful comments in the offshore part of the thesis. It has been
greatly appreciated.
I would like to thank Þórarinn Sveinn Arnarson, hydrocarbon licensing
manager in Iceland, for providing valuable information about the Dreki area
regarding the exploration and evaluation of data and for always finding time to
answer my mails. This work would not have been possible without his
information.
I would like to thank Michael Larsen, a geology specialist in Dong Energy, for
sharing his field knowledge, fast response time and useful feedback regarding the
tectonic history of the JMMC and evaluation of the geological data from the
Dreki area.
Finally I would like to thank my friend Dorte Lindsted Jensen for reading
through my thesis and giving me a general feedback.
v
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract
ii
Preface
iv
Acknowledgments
v
Abbreviations
ix
1 Introduction
1
1.1 History of oil & gas exploration in Iceland . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2 Petroleum System
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.3 Structure of thesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.3.1
Geological settings in the Dreki area . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.3.2
Evaluation of existing data from the Dreki area . . . . . . .
11
1.3.3
Drilling system for the Dreki area . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2 Geological Settings in the Dreki Area
12
2.1 Tectonic history of the JMMC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2 Geology of JMMC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.2.1
Jameson Land basin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.2.2
Reservoir interval for central and southern Jameson Land
basin
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3 Dreki area - evaluation of existing data
34
vi
==PAGE:8==
3.1 Bathymetric map over the JMMC including the Dreki . . . . . . .
36
3.2 Gravity anomalies map over the JMMC including the Dreki
. . .
38
3.3 Magnetic Anomalies Map over the JMMC including the Dreki . .
40
3.4 2D Reflection seismic survey across the Jan Mayen Ridge . . . . .
42
3.4.1
Relevant 2D Seismic Data across the Jan Mayen Ridge . . .
43
3.5 Dreki area sampling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
3.6 Deep Sea drilling project relative to the Jan Mayen ridge (JMR)
.
48
4 Drilling Solution for the Dreki area
51
4.1 Description of standard drilling system for deepwater . . . . . . .
52
4.1.1
Telescopic joint . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.1.2
Tension ring . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.1.3
Slick and Buoyant joint . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.1.4
Choke/Kill Hose . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.1.5
Lower Marine Riser Package (LMRP) . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.1.6
Blow - Out Preventer (BOP) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.1.7
Wellhead . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.1.8
Conductor casing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.1.9
Surface casing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.2 Environmental conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.2.1
Temperature in the Dreki area
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.2.2
Visibility in the Dreki area
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
4.2.3
Wind Speed in the Dreki area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
4.2.4
Icing in the Dreki area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
4.2.5
Current Observations in the Dreki area . . . . . . . . . . .
59
4.2.6
Polar Lows in the Dreki area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
4.2.7
Ice in the Dreki area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
4.2.8
Remote and lack of infrastructure in the Dreki area
. . . .
63
4.3 Offshore Drilling Technology in the Dreki area . . . . . . . . . .
64
4.3.1
Semi-submersible rig . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
4.3.2
Drillships . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
vii
==PAGE:9==
4.4 Rig selection for the Dreki area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
4.4.1
Specific solution for drillship: the Arctic-NanuQ 5000 DP .
70
Discussion
73
Conclusion
78
References
81
Personal Communication
89
viii
==PAGE:10==
Abbreviations
AMAP Arctic monitoring and assessment programme. 1, 2
AR Arctic region. 1–3
ARCO Atlantic Richfield company. 25, 26, 28, 29, 78, 79
BOP Blow out preventer. 52, 54, 76
CNOOC China national offshore oil corporation. 6, 45
DP Dynamic positioning. ii, 66, 69, 70
DSDP Deep sea drilling project. 11, 48–50, 79
E&P exploration and production. 3
FM formation. 29–31, 33
HBB Haltenbanken basin. 27, 32, 33, 79
HC Hydrocarbon. 25
HSE Health, safety and the environment. 72
ICS Icelandic continental shelf. 4–6
ix
==PAGE:11==
JLB Jameson Land basin. ii, 11, 14, 17, 24–33, 78, 79
JMMC Jan Mayen micro continent. ii, v, vii, 11, 13–25, 33, 35–42, 73–75, 78, 79
JMR Jan Mayen ridge. vii, 17, 18, 22, 23, 36, 38, 42, 43, 47–49, 57, 59, 60, 75, 79
LMRP Lower marine riser package. 54
MODU Mobile offshore drilling units. 52, 65, 70
MOR Mid - Ocean ridge. 18, 19, 22
NAO North Atlantic Ocean. ii, 11–13, 18, 23, 42, 62, 79
NEA National Energy Authority. 4, 6, 47
NPD Norwegian Petroleum Directorate. 43–45, 47
ROV Remotely operated vehicle. 47
TOC Total organic carbon. 30, 32, 33, 50
VBPR Volcanic Basin Petroleum Research. 47, 48
VDL Variable deck load. 67, 70
VIV Vortex - induction vibration. 59
ÍSOR Iceland Geosurvey. 13
x
==PAGE:12==
”Better to fight and fall than to live without hope.”
-Volsunga Saga, Ch 12
1
Introduction
From the beginning of mankind, we have always been curious to investigate the
unknown. One of the unknown or little known areas on Earth is the Arctic region
(AR). The simple geographic definition of the Arctic is defined by the Arctic
Circle at latitudes above 66◦32
′N. The Arctic is also defined in more details
based on physical, geographical and ecological features by the Arctic monitoring
and assessment programme (AMAP). The main boundaries of the Arctic are
illustrated in figure 1.1 as the Arctic Circle, temperature boundary, marine boundary
and AMAP boundary [2]. The Temperature Boundary is the area where the
average temperature in July is 10 ◦C or below. The Marine boundary is based on
oceanographic features.
1
==PAGE:13==
Figure 1.1: The main boundaries of the Arctic area are the Arctic Circle,
temperature boundary, marine boundary and the AMAP boundary [2].
The Marine Boundary is located along the convergence of cool, less saline
surface water from the Arctic Ocean and warmer, saltier water from oceans to the
south. The Marine boundary is located in the eastern Canadian Arctic
Archipelago approximately along a latitude of 63◦N and changes north between
Baffin Island and the west coast of Greenland where it lies at approximately 65◦N.
The heat from the North Atlantic currents changes the boundary to north of 80
◦N west of Spitsbergen and from here it stretches southward into the Barents Sea
to 76 ◦N. The warm water from Pacific Ocean flows into the Bering Strait and
connects with the Arctic ocean water at approximately 72◦N. The AMAP
boundary is defined by a combination of the Arctic Circle, political boundaries,
vegetation boundaries, permafrost limits, and oceanographic features [2].
In this thesis Arctic Circle definition is used when referring to the Arctic/AR.
The AR consists of 8 countries: Sweden, Russia, Norway, Iceland, Greenland
(Denmark), Finland, Canada and parts of Alaska (USA) and the seas and the
ocean in between.
2
==PAGE:14==
Figure 1.2: Estimated undiscovered oil and gas in the AR. The BBO stands
for billion barrels of oil, TCFG stands for trillion cubic feet of gas and BBNGL
stands for billion barrels of natural gas liquids [3].
The AR is known to contain natural resources of oil and gas among others. In
figure 1.2 the estimated undiscovered oil and gas resources in the AR are
illustrated [3]. The oil and gas exploration in the AR began in the 16th century. In
the late 19th to 20th centuries the first oil and gas exploration and production
(E&P) in the AR was made, but it was not until the late 1950s that the discovery
of a commercial oil and gas field was made in Alaska. The U.S Geological Survey
has estimated that 13 % of oil and 30 % of gas from the Earth undiscovered
resources are to be found in the AR [1]. There are many challenges that oil and
gas E&P in the AR have to face including climatic, environmental and
technological challenges, remoteness and lack of infrastructure. The challenges
are not the same in different parts of the AR and in this report the focus will be on
the Icelandic offshore exploration area, Dreki. The current exploration licenses in
the Dreki area (northern Dreki) are at the latitudes from 67◦00
′N to 68◦30
′N
and longitudes from 11◦30
′W to 6◦20
′W (see Figure 1.3).
3
==PAGE:15==
The northern Dreki area covers approximately 42.700 square kilometres and
the water depth is between 1000 and 2000 meter in 80 % of the area [4].
1.1
History of oil & gas exploration in Iceland
The Icelandic continental shelf (ICS) is believed to contain commercial
accumulation of oil and gas with potential areas being the Gammur and Dreki
(see figure 1.3) [5].
Figure 1.3: Potential areas in the ICS that commercial accumulation of hy-
drocarbon could be found are the Gammur and Dreki [6].
The history of oil exploration in Iceland began in 1978 when the minister of
industry created a group to advise and prepare oil exploration and policy
formulation in that context. In 1980 (8th of February) the government
announced that exploration of oil and gas would continue due to potential oil
resources in the ICS and would be led by Icelandic institutions and the
government. In 1981 geological investigations were made in Skjálfanda bay
(north east of Iceland) and in 1985 the Jan Mayen area including Dreki was
investigated. The investigation in 1985 was performed by common measurement
expedition in a collaboration between the Norwegian Petroleum Agency and the
National Energy Authority (NEA) of Iceland [7]. In 1990 the report from the
NEA of Iceland about the preliminary research in the Dreki area was published.
4
==PAGE:16==
Seven years later, in 1997, the Parliament decided that the Minister of Industry in
Iceland should establish a group of employers, including scientists that should
evaluate whether to begin a systematic research of the oil or gas potential in the
ICS. In 2000 the draft of exploration, research and production was created, and in
2005 preparations for the license for exploration on the Dreki area was initiated.
In 2008 a draft of taxation of hydrocarbon production was created and in 2009
the first oil exploration licenses were offered in the Dreki area [7]. Then, on the
1st of March 2010, the government approved the proposal by the Minister of
Industry, Katrín Júlíusdóttir, to offer oil and gas E&P licenses on the ICS,
northeast of Iceland. The licenses were offered on the Jan Mayen Ridge where the
Dreki area is located [8]. Furthermore, on the 4th of January 2013, the
Norwegian Minister of Petroleum and Energy, Ola Borten Moe, and the Minister
of Industries and Innovation in Iceland, Steingrímur J. Sigfússon, granted two
licenses for exploration and production in the northern Dreki area. [9].
Figure 1.4: Map of the licenses in the Dreki area: the red blocks indicate
the first license, the blue blocks second license and the green blocks the third
license [10].
5
==PAGE:17==
The map of the licenses areas in the northern Dreki area is shown in figure 1.4
above. The NEA of Iceland (Orkustofnun) granted the first license to Faroe
Petroleum Norge A/S as an operator with 67.5 % shares, Íslenskt kolvetni ehf.
(Icelandic Petroleum) with 7.5 % shares, and Petoro Iceland with 25 % shares [9].
The Faroe Petroleum was founded in the Faroe Islands [11]. Icelandic Petroleum
is owned by the Icelandic engineering firm Verkís, Icelandic oil company Olís and
the company called Dreki Holding [12]. The Petoro Iceland is owned by the
government of Norway. The Petoro focuses on exploration and production on
the part of the ICS that falls within the common area of Iceland - Norway [13].
The first license group bought and analyzed all existing data from the first licensed
area (see red blocks in figure 1.4), but after 2 years of investigation the group
decided to withdraw their license because the area was believed to be unlikely to
contain hydrocarbon reservoir (Þorkell Erlingsson, personal communication).
• The second license was granted to Ithaca Petroleum ehf. as an operator with
56.25 % shares, Kolvetni ehf. with 18.75 % shares and Petoro Iceland with 25
% shares [14]. The Ithaca is a Canadian oil and gas exploration and
development company. Kolvetni ehf. is owned by Jón Helgi
Gudmundsson and his business partner Gunnlaugur Jónsson, the
Icelandic engineering firm Mannvit, and Norwegian businessman Terje
Hagevang. The distribution of the shares in Kolvetni ehf. is that Jón Helgi
Gudmundsson and his business partner Gunnlaugur Jónsson have
combined 50 % of the shares, the Icelandic engineering firm Mannvit has a
25 % share and the Norwegian businessman Terje Hagevang hold the
remaining 25 % share [12].
• The third license in the Dreki area was granted on the 22th of January 2014
to CNOOC Iceland ehf. as an operator with 60 % shares, Eykon Energy
ehf. with 15 % shares and Petoro Iceland AS with 25 % shares [14]. The
China national offshore oil corporation (CNOOC) is in the third place as
a largest national oil company in China.
6
==PAGE:18==
The focus of the company is exploration for large and medium oil and gas
fields [15]. Eykon Energy ehf. is owned by a group of investors, Heidar
Már Gudjonsson, Ragnar Þórarisson, Jón Einar Eyjólfsson, Gunnlaugur
Jónsson and Terje Hagevang [12].
According to Þórarinn Sveinn Arnarson (Hydrocarbon Licensing Manager in
Iceland) Ithaca and CNOOC maintain their plans to continue to explore the
northern Dreki area. The CNOOC, Eykon and Petoro (third licenses) have
started a 2D reflection seismic survey. In figure 1.5 below a overview of a timeline
for the exploration licenses for Ithaca and CNOOC is illustrated in order to
provide a overview of how far the exploration in the Dreki area has advanced:
Figure 1.5: A timeline of the exploration licenses for Ithaca and CNOOC
(Þórarinn Svein Arnarson, personal communication).
Both companies has started to analyze the existing data from the Dreki area,
i.e. gravity data, bathymetric, magnetic and seismic data. After each stage a
decision point for the companies takes place, where they have to evaluate the
obtained results and decide if they want to move on to the next phase.
The Chinese company CNOOC traveled to the Dreki area on the 2th of
September 2015 to perform a 2700 kilometers 2D reflection seismic data
collection with the vessel Oceanic Challenger (Þórarinn Svein Arnarson, personal
communication). This survey helps to understand the geological structure. News
of the outcome and results of the investigation have not been published yet.
7
==PAGE:19==
A project at this stage starts to become expensive with an estimated cost of 1
billion ISK (7.63 million USD approximately) [16]. Ithaca, Kolvetni ehf. and
Petoro (the second licenses) will most likely perform the 2D seismic surveys in
2016 where they should gather at least 2D seismic data corresponding to 1000
kilometers (Þórarinn Sveinn Arnarson, personal communication).
1.2
Petroleum System
When exploration of a potential hydrocarbon reservoir is considered, an essential
knowledge of the potential petroleum system in the area of interest is required.
The term Petroleum System includes:
• Active source rock
• Reservoir rock
• Seal rock
• Overburden rock
Petroleum Systems also include the trap formation process, maturation,
migration, and accumulation of petroleum [17]. The reservoir rock type and the
geological structure are important when exploring the accumulation of
hydrocarbon potential due to the fact that the reservoir rock type controls the
migration and storage of the hydrocarbons. The seal rock (geological structure)
prevents the hydrocarbon from escaping the system. If the source rock consists of
organic compounds under optimal conditions the organic compounds will
transform to hydrocarbons in a process named maturation. The maturation
process depends on temperatures ranging from 60◦C to 175◦C as a function of
depth (”the oil window”) where kerogen (organic compounds) transforms to
hydrocarbon. The common reservoir rocks are chalk, sandstone and limestone.
The important properties of a reservoir rock is porosity (store the hydrocarbon)
and permeability (transmit the fluid) [18].
8
==PAGE:20==
Porosity is a measure of pore spaces in a rock and is usually given in percentage
of the total volume [19]:
Φt = Vp
Vt
=
V1 + Vg
Vs + Vl + Vg
(1.1)
where the following symbols stands for:
• Vp pore volume
• Vt total volume of the sample
• Vl volume of liquid
• Vg volume of gas
• Vs volume of the solid
The pores in the rock have to be connected for rock to be permeable. The Darcy
Law is the empirical observation of flow to obtain permeability [20]:
q = −k
μ
AΔp
L
(1.2)
where k is the permeability, μ is the fluid viscosity, A is the cross section, Δp the
pressure difference across the pore boundary, L the length, and q the volumetric
flow. Figure 1.6 illustrates the permeability theory based on the Darcy Law:
Figure 1.6: Schematic drawing of fluid flow in a porous rock [18].
The hydrocarbon reservoirs that are found to be commercial have a porosity in
the range of 10 - 20 % and a permeability of 50 - 2000 millidarcy [18].
9
==PAGE:21==
Based on the history it is important to be able to characterize petroleum
system with as much accuracy as possible. One example of a failure to
characterize the petroleum system which has led companies worldwide to
become more aware of the risk, is the Mukluk offshore exploration area in Alaska
(USA). The Mukluk reservoir consisted of an active source rock, reservoir rock
and seal was in place. The Mukluk area is located close to the Prudhoe Bay field
which contains 4 billion cubic meters of oil. The seismic data showed that
Mukluk was a large structure but it was difficult to obtain seismic data on the
western side due to a permafrost. It was estimated that the Mukluk reservoir
contained up to 240 million cubic meters of recoverable oil. The exploration
drilling was performed in Mukluk and the drill bit cuttings indicated a massive oil
stain in the target formation. An unpleasant information was obtained during the
exploration drilling. The well tested water consisted of noncommercial amounts
of oil despite the fact that the current data showed that the reservoir formation
contained oil in the structure. This led to the conclusion that oil had migrated out
of the reservoir through time. The reason for the dry hole condition in Mukluk
and the most likely failure during the characterization of the petroleum system
was ”that either the seal was ineffective or the oil had leaked out after the structure had
tilted at some late stage” [17], which meant that the trap volume was reduced.
The Mukluk reservoir was the most expensive dry hole at that time. The
experiences from the dry holes such as Mukluk have led to the need to
understand both the past and present, history of the sediments, the fluid they
contain and the dynamic processes that act and have acted on them [17].
1.3
Structure of thesis
The thesis consists of three parts: rifting history of the North Atlantic Ocean
(NAO) with focus on Jan Mayen micro continent (JMMC), evaluation of
existing data from the Dreki area and finally the third part will discuss which kind
of drilling solution suits the Dreki area.
10
==PAGE:22==
1.3.1
Geological settings in the Dreki area
In chapter 2, the rifting history of the opening of the North Atlantic Ocean
(NAO) will be covered with focus on JMMC. The exploration area, Dreki, is
located northeast of Iceland, between East Greenland and Norway in the NAO
and is a part of the JMMC. The tectonic history of the JMMC is important when
exploring the potential petroleum system in the Dreki area since it is believed that
the JMMC is built up by the continental crust from East Greenland and Norway
that was formed before the opening of the NAO.
It is well known that petroleum systems exist offshore Norway where both oil
and gas fields are in current production. There are currently no oil or gas
producing wells in East Greenland or in Greenland in general. Since the closest
area west of the JMMC before the separation was the Jameson Land basin (JLB)
that have been investigated a obtained data from the JLB will also be covered in
chapter 2. This is done to obtain geological knowledge on the both side of the
JMMC. The logical question is that if there is the same or similar petroleum
system in JLB (East Greenland) compared to the offshore Norway, why should it
not be in between i.e. in the Dreki area?
1.3.2
Evaluation of existing data from the Dreki area
In chapter 3, the evaluation of existing data from the JMMC with focus on the
Dreki area will be covered including: bathymetric data, gravity and magnetic
measurements, 2D seismic survey data, sampling data and data from the Deep
sea drilling project (DSDP).
1.3.3
Drilling system for the Dreki area
Chapter 4, consists of a description of the standard drilling systems used in
deepwater conditions like in the Dreki area. Also a discussion of which type of
drilling solution suits the Dreki area are covered, i.e. is an drillship solution more
suitable than the semi - submersible vessel for possible exploration drilling in the
Dreki area?
11
==PAGE:23==
”You can’t connect the dots looking forward; you can only con-
nect them looking backwards.”
-Steve Jobs
2
Geological Settings in the Dreki Area
The Icelandic offshore exploration area, Dreki, is a complex area to characterize
potential petroleum systems due to a complex rifting history associated with the
opening of the North Atlantic Ocean (NAO). The Dreki area is located at the Jan
Mayen Ridge (JMR) where it is believed to contain a continental crust and the
right structure to seal the hydrocarbon reservoir. This belief is based on gravity
and magnetic measurements, geophysical properties and seismic refraction data.
The continental crust surrounded by the oceanic crust is classified as the Jan
Mayen micro continent (JMMC). Due to a limited knowledge of the Dreki area
there is a need to research close by areas to approach the target area. This is a well
known method in the oil and gas exploration phase. The areas that are
geologically and structurally comparable to the Dreki brings us back in history on
how the area between Greenland and Norway looked before the NAO was
formed in the Early Tertiary.
12
==PAGE:24==
2.1
Tectonic history of the JMMC
In this thesis work it will be investigated which kind of potential sedimentary
layers might be found in the Dreki area based on new research and publication
that the Iceland Geosurvey (ÍSOR) has used to estimate the tectonic history of
the JMMC (see figures 2.2-2.8). Figure 2.1 shows a geological time scale that
helps the reader to follow the time period during the development of the opening
of the NAO:
Figure 2.1: Geological time scale [21].
In the Permian period, before the opening of the NAO, the area between East
Greenland and Norway had been exposed to an enormous rifting. This means
that the lithosphere was pulled apart and form a linear zone [21].
13
==PAGE:25==
It is believed that the first arctic rift started in the end of late Permian where
widespread regional extension took place. Due to the extension a strong different
variation across the north to south fault was formed where the carbonate built up
and formed a source rock. Another extension in late Permian period is suggested
result in accumulations of sandstones. In the Late Permian an uplift and erosion
occurred that led to a transformation of the sediments that result in major
peneplain (featureless plain) and sectional unconformity. Through the Early
Triassic a continuing extension formed the basin structure resulting in a
dominated sandstone accumulation. It has been suggested that in the Late
Triassic an active faulting was in the JLB (East Greenland). That was the basin
located close to the west side of the JMMC. In the Late Triassic - Early Jurassic,
the accumulation of marine sediments infilling the topography due to a subsiding
where the sediments contain a source rock. This source rock is a well known oil
prone source in the North Viking Garben basin (Norwegian part of the North
Sea) [22].
In the Middle and Upper Jurassic thick layers of sediments accumulated
between Greenland and Norway. The Jurassic sediments are believed to be the
source rock that could transform to hydrocarbon in the maturation process in the
Dreki area if the right conditions were in place. This source rock is the same as
the one located along north - east Arctic [21]. It should be noted that the North
Sea Brent group and the Garn formation of mid - Norway are the Middle Jurassic
main reservoirs [22].
The divergent of the Atlantic rift was controlled by north - east to south - west
faults that followed the trend of the initial Late Triassic - Early Jurassic rift [22].
The rifting that started in the Permian period stopped in the Late Jurassic and a
thermal subsidence continued through Cretaceous.
14
==PAGE:26==
In figure 2.2, the tectonic of JMMC is illustrated schematically in the period
Cretaceous - Tertiary (63 Ma):
Figure 2.2: Tectonic of the JMMC through Cretaceous - Tertiary period [14].
In the Late Cretaceous or beginning of the Tertiary, the rifting began again that
led to a breakup of the continent between East Greenland and Norway in the
Early Eocene [21]. The yellow area in figure 2.2 is the JMMC and it is located
close to the Jameson Land basin (brown area) in East Greenland. The broken
lines indicate a possible major fault - fracture zone [14]. Figure 2.3 shows an
image of what is meant by a fault fracture:
Figure 2.3: An image of a normal fault [23].
Fault area and the black arrows in figure 2.3 indicate a movement in opposite
direction.
15
==PAGE:27==
The block on the fault right side is classified as the foot wall and the block on
the left side is classified as the hanging wall where the fault separates the ocean
floor in different depths (see figure 2.3) [23]. The light green color in figure 2.2
indicates possible deep basin areas and the dark green color indicates a possible
platform terrace and high areas in Late Cretaceous [14]. A build - up of the deep
marine and shallow marine shale between East Greenland and Norway and the
highlands were formed by uplift during the rift episode. In Late Cretaceous a trap
structure was formed that is important for hydrocarbon accumulation to take
place. Then in Early Tertiary a numerous extensional event occurred due to a
smaller volcanism linked with minor extension [22].
In figure 2.4 the tectonic of the JMMC are illustrated schematically in the Late
Paleocene - Early Eocene period (55,9 Ma):
Figure 2.4: Tectonic of the JMMC through the Late Paleocene - Early
Eocene period [14].
Before the Early Eocene the continental crust between Greenland and Norway
started to thin due to a shear extension at crustal between Greenland and
Norway. This were results from the second stage of rifting that began in Late
Cretaceous/Tertiary. The extension was followed by uplift and regional tilting
and is believed to be located on a few wide spaced faults [24].
16
==PAGE:28==
In Early Eocene the continental crust broke from south to north creating a
spreading zone, and Greenland and Norway began drifting apart [25]. The break
- up influenced the Eurasian margin and the Greenland margin including the
JMMC [26]. The magma flow out of the rifted margins and formed an oceanic
crust between Greenland and Norway. Lava covered the sediments on the
eastern slopes of the JMR. At that time the western slope of the JMR was still
attached to Greenland as shown in figure 2.4. It must be noted that it is not
known how close the JLB was to the central continental crust when East
Greenland and Norway were separated [22]. The spreading first started in the
northern part of the Norway basin. Then the final stage of the separation could
have happened due to a lithosphere rupture in the upper crust where a narrow rift
opened out due to intrusion of the mantle through the rift in a depth with a
lateral extension. Other factors could also affect the separation, e.g. an older and
weak crustal zone or an outside zone weakened due to an early magnetic activity
[26]. In figure 2.5 the tectonic of the JMMC is illustrated schematically in the
Early Eocene - Middle Eocene period:
Figure 2.5: Tectonic of the JMMC through Early Eocene - Middle Eocene
period [14].
The dark blue color in figure 2.5 is the build - up of oceanic floor time interval.
17
==PAGE:29==
In the Early Eocene - Middle Eocene the lava from the Mid - Ocean ridge
(MOR) no longer flows over the JMR and the old lava is covered with sediments.
The sediments that covered the old lava come from old basement rocks of
Greenland [21]. Also, two divergent plate boundaries are shown in figure 2.5
(red arrows), one is located north of the JMR and the other boundary south of
the JMR. The divergent boundaries could affected the opening of the NAO. The
divergent plate boundaries are an oceanic ridge where the tectonic plates spread
from each other and lava spills out between the plates. The lava spills out on the
sea beds where new ocean crust is formed.
The direction of the plate motion shows in figure 2.5 (the black arrows). The
plate motion direction in figure 2.5 is in the north - west direction in the Early
Eocene - Middle Eocene period for both the North American plate and the
Eurasian plate. The different direction of the forces including the divergent
boundaries, plate motion direction among even more unknown forces is most
likely to affected the opening of the NAO. This opposite forces between the
divergent boundaries and the direction of the plates could be the reason that led
to the MOR splits where a complex faults formed at the eastern boundary of the
JMR.
The part of the MOR that is located on the eastern boundary of the JMR
formed the Aegir Ridge (volcanic margin) due to the continued seafloor
spreading. At this point the Norway basin was formed under sea level due to the
continued seafloor spreading and the thermal subsidence of the Aegir Ridge [24].
In figure 2.6 below the tectonic of JMMC is illustrated schematically in the
Middle Eocene (47,9 Ma). The light purple color in figure 2.6 indicates the
oceanic crust formed approximately 56 - 49,7 Ma where the youngest oceanic
crust is located closest to the MOR. The plate motion direction for the Eurasian
plate changes from north - west to north - east in the Middle Eocene as shown in
figure 2.6. The changes in the forces acting on the MOR, south and north
divergent boundaries and the spreading of the Aegir Ridge could have increased
the volcanic activity along the western margins of the JMMC.
18
==PAGE:30==
Figure 2.6: Tectonic of the JMMC in the Middle Eocene period [14].
Additionally, the intersection of the JMMC within the Reykjarnes MOR could
had results in increased extension within the JMMC [14]. In figure 2.7 below the
tectonic of JMMC is illustrated schematically in the Early Oligocene (33,1 Ma).
It should be noted that in figure 2.7 the direction of the plate motion for the
North American plate changed from north-west to west and the direction of the
Eurasian plate changed from north - east to east. It can be seen clearly that the
plates are moving apart from each other. The spreading of the Aegir Ridge
system, changes in the plate motion direction, southern extend of the JMMC and
at the same time the ester margin of Greenland crossed the Iceland hotspot, this
could have formed the Kolbeinsey Ridge system [24]. The formation of the
Kolbeinsey Ridge is still not completely understood. The Kolbeinsey Ridge
system (block faulted margin) is to a lesser degree affected by volcanism
compared to the Aegir Ridge system.
19
==PAGE:31==
Figure 2.7: Tectonic of the JMMC in Early Oligocene period [14].
The spreading of the Kolbeinsey Ridge northwards into the East Greenland
margin occurs in the Early Oligocene. In this period the extension and break - up
within the Greenland margin occurred. Aegir Ridge and the Kolbeinsey Ridge
were both active parallel for about 18 million years where the margins got
through rifting caused by crustal extension, magmatism and isostatic adjustment
[25]. In the beginning the Kolbeinsey Ridge was mostly active in the south but
gradually protruded northwards and at the same time the activity at the Aegir
Ridge decreased gradually from south to north. This led the JMMC to rotate
anticlockwise and deformed causing the spreading rates in the Norway basin to
be greater in the north than in the south (see figure 2.7). The extension in the
JMMC continental crust could have affected the spreading but that is not
completely understood. The activity at Aegir Ridge comes to an end about 26 -
30 Ma and the seafloor spreading is only active at Kolbeinsey Ridge. The
anticlockwise rotation of the JMMC spreading ended after the activity of the
Aegir Ridge ended and the rifting on the west side of the JMMC broke the
continental margin into a rotated fault block (Kolbeinsey system) [24].
20
==PAGE:32==
In figure 2.8 the tectonic of the JMMC are illustrated schematically in the
Early Miocene (20,1 Ma) (above) and Holocene (below):
Figure 2.8: JMMC: Early Miocene 33,1 Ma (above) and Holocene Present
(below) [14].
The complete separation of the JMMC happened in the Early Miocene where
the seafloor spreading along the Kolbeinsey Ridge separated the JMMC from
Greenland as shown in figure 2.8 (above).
21
==PAGE:33==
It can also be seen in figure 2.8 (above) that the direction of the North
American plate has changed back from west to north - west and the Eurasia plate
has changed the direction of motion from east to north - east. When the
complete separation of the JMMC was over, the JMMC continued to drift and
cool down the longer it drifted away from the Kolbeinsey Ridge. In the Holocene
(present) there is a continued drift of the JMMC from Greenland due to the
spreading of the Kolbeinsey Ridge. Note that the Icelandic hot spot location is
believed to be fixed but the North American plate moves due to the continued
seafloor spreading and when the MOR and the Icelandic hotspot cross each other
the Iceland was formed as shown in figure 2.8 (below) [14].
In figure 2.9 the pre - drift location of the JMR is summarized:
Figure 2.9: Pre - drift location of the JMR [24].
The first line of opening is located east of JMR approximately 24 Ma before the
second line of opening that is located west of the JMR (see figure 2.9) [27]. The
JMR close by sediments of most interest are the, Jameson Land basin,
Haltenbakken basin and Viking Graben basin [24].
22
==PAGE:34==
In the next section 2.2 the potential sedimentary basin in JMMC will be
approached by comparing the JMMC close by areas. It is for sure that the
tectonic history of the JMMC is a complex one and there are still factors that are
not completely understood. Especially the opening of the southern part of the
JMR where the Kolbeinsey Ridge was formed is still not completely understood.
Nevertheless, two assumptions could be made based on the tectonic history of
the JMMC. The first assumption is that the geology of the JMMC is the same as
the Norwegian continental shelf and East Greenland until the Early Eocene. The
second assumption is that the geology of the JMMC is the same as for East
Greenland from Middle - Eocene to the end of Oligocene.
2.2
Geology of JMMC
As previously described, the JMMC is located in the middle of the Northeast
Atlantic Ocean. There is limited information about the JMMC and therefore to
get an idea and understand the potential geology of the area, comparable area
before the opening of the NAO is investigated.
Figure 2.10: Oil shows in East Greenland and Oil and gas fields in the North
Sea and offshore Western Norway exists [5].
23
==PAGE:35==
Figure 2.10 above shows the most close by area to the JMMC where oil has
been found and where commercial oil and gas fields are in current production.
This geological comparable areas are defined as:
• Jameson Land Basin (East Greenland onshore)
• Haltenbanken Basin (Mid - West Norway offshore)
• Viking Graben Basin (Norwegian part of the North Sea offshore)
The pre - drift location of the above comparable areas are illustrated in figure 2.9.
It should be noted that it is all ready well known that currently in the mid - West
Norway (Haltenbanken basin) and in the northern North Sea (Viking Graben
basin) a massive production of both gas, gas/condensate and oil fields takes
place. Furthermore, that are no producing hydrocarbon fields in east Greenland
(JLB) or in Greenland in general [5]. The Liverpool Land basin is located
offshore central East Greenland. Liverpool Land basin is the most likely to be the
closest area attached to the west side of the JMMC before the separation. There
has only been collected limiting seismic data over the Liverpool Land basin that
results in indication of rotated fault blocks below the Paleogene sediments in the
hanging wall to the JLB high. The age of the rocks in the Liverpool Land basin
fault has not been identified [22]. Since the closest area west of the JMMC
before the separation was the JLB that have been investigated a obtained data
from the JLB will be covered in section 2.2.1. This is done to obtain geological
knowledge on the both side of the JMMC including the Dreki area.
2.2.1
Jameson Land basin
The Jameson Land is an onshore basin located in East Greenland. The basin N - S
stretched and is fault bounded [28]. In figure 2.11 below the present location of
the JLB and the distribution of producing fields in offshore Norway is illustrated.
24
==PAGE:36==
Figure 2.11: Present location of the JLB and producing fields in offshore
Norway [29].
After the JMMC breakup in the Paleocene - Eocene, the JLB got through a
burial below Eocene basalts and sediments. Three phases of uplift and erosion
formed the existing East Greenland margin including the JLB [30]:
• Late Eocene uplift
• Late Miocene uplift
• Pliocene uplift
The uplifts and erosion could have affected the petroleum system in the JLB
including the seal integrity (shale), post - oil window maturity that affect the
Hydrocarbon (HC) quality in deeper area, leakage to sub - crop and affecting the
source rock maturation [30]. The JLB has been explored by the Atlantic Richfield
company (ARCO) as an operator for five years from 1985 - 1990. The ARCO in
cooperation with the Greenland Geological Survey and the Geological Survey of
Denmark and Greenland (GEUS) investigated the central part of the JLB,
approximately 10,000 square kilometers area [29].
25
==PAGE:37==
According to ARCO there is a geological risk of thermal maturity of the source
rock due to uplift and subsidence in the JLB. The ARCO has analyzed and
identified that the Jurassic source sample contains large amounts of organic
compounds but even so they reported that the sources rock was buried to shallow
to generate a large amount of oil or gas [29]. In figure 2.12 the location of
bitumen, oil and gas seeps in the JLB and the ARCO 2D seismic profile are
shown:
Figure 2.12: Location of bitumen, oil and gas seeps in the JLB and ARCO
2D seismic profile on the Jameson Land [29].
The ARCO collected 1798 kilometers seismic data in the Jameson Land [28].
The bitumen and asphalt have been found in the northern JLB when the outcrop
samples were analyzed. In the northern part of the JLB the uplift and erosion
destroyed the hydrocarbons accumulation. While in the central basin potentially
oil - prone source rocks within lower and upper Jurassic was initially at the
optimal depth to generate a significant quantity of hydrocarbons according to
ARCO [29].
26
==PAGE:38==
The comparison of biomarker curves between Haltenbanken basin (offshore
mid - Norway) and Upper Jurassic South Jameson Land are shown in figure 2.13:
Figure 2.13: Comparison of biomarker curves in mid - Norway (Hal-
tenbanken) and East Greenland (South Jameson Land) [29].
The biomarker fingerprints from the South Jameson Land and Haltenbanken
basin (HBB) almost follow the same trend (see figure 2.13). Based on the
biomarker patterns and isotope curves obtained from the samples analyzed it is
identified that the Upper Jurassic oils in the JLB are almost identical to the
produced oil in the HBB. This data gives a convincing evidence that there are
genetic links between the Upper Jurassic organic - rich shale of JLB and HBB
[29]. The potential for commercial volume of oil to be generated in the JLB
compared to offshore mid - Norway could be obtained if the optimal thermal
maturation process were present for the Upper Jurassic organic - rich shale and
younger source intervals.
27
==PAGE:39==
2.2.2
ReservoirintervalforcentralandsouthernJamesonLandbasin
It is not sufficient to have a migration of hydrocarbons. It is also required that the
reservoir has a certain quality to be able to store commercial amounts of
hydrocarbon. Based on the investigation by ARCO the central and the southern
areas of the JLB are of most interest where it is most likely that the North part of
the JLB is destroyed by uplift and erosion as previously mentioned. The main
reservoir intervals in the central and southern JLB are shown in figure 2.14.
Figure 2.14: Main reservoir interval in the central and southern JLB.
• The first reservoir interval for the JLB is the Upper Permian carbonate
platform and reefal build - ups of the Wegener Halvø formation (see figure
2.14) [29]. After the Middle - Permian hiatus with erosion along the JLB
an accumulation from Upper Permian was formed.
28
==PAGE:40==
The Upper Permian accumulation contains a carbonate and shale wrapped
up in a sequence [28]. According to ARCO the Wegener Halvø formation
(FM) is a potentially very large stratigraphic closure (traps). ARCO also
determined that the Permian carbonate reservoir data was unsatisfying
and the reservoir characteristic from the outcrop was not too encouraging.
To improve the Permian carbonate reservoir quality a further knowledge is
required [29].
• The second reservoir interval in the JLB is the Basal Triassic sandstone of
the Early Triassic Wordie Creek formation (see figure 2.14). In the Early
Triassic an accumulation of sandstone and shale sequence was formed
[28]. The Basal Triassic Sandstone of the Early Triassic Wordie Creek FM
has been discovered along the western margin of Jameson Land in Triaselv
and also on the eastern margin on the Wegener Penisula. It has been
observed from the outcrop, conglomeratic and coarse - grain that the
sandstone has channel geometries up to 35 meters deep and several
hundreds of meters wide. The mean porosity of the Early Triassic
sandstone found in the Wordie Creek FM has been estimated to be ”pretty
good” at 12.5 % with an range from 8 - 16 % [29].
• The third reservoir interval in the JLB is the Late Triassic Gipsdalen and
Fleming Fjord formations (see figure 2.14). The Late Triassic Gipsdalen and
Fleming Fjord formations consist of lacustrine, subordinate fluvial,
mudstones and sandstone [29]. The sedimentological analysis of the
Gråklint Beds was performed throughout the JLB. The Gråklint beds lie at
the base of the Gipsdalen formation and the results from the
sedimentological analysis suggested that significant oil - and gas - prone
source rock is present in the JLB together with high quality sandstones and
mudstones with high sealing quality [31]. The ARCO has also identified
these intervals in the Gipsdal and Fleming Fjord formations where high
amplitude reflectors within the Middle of the Triassic ’Wedge’ section
were observed by the seismic.
29
==PAGE:41==
This means that the organic - rich black to dark grey mudstones of the Late
Triassic could be represented which contain 6.3 % Total organic carbon
(TOC) with very good to excellent source rock type II (oil and gas). It
should be noted that poor TOC is classified between 0.1 - 1.0 weight %,
good TOC 1 - 2 weight % and excellent 2 - 15 weight % [29].
• The fourth reservoir interval in the JLB is the Lower Jurassic sandstone of the
Kap Stewart (and Neill Klinter) formation (see figure 2.14) [29]. The Kap
Stewart FM has been sequential stratigraphic analyzed where it is
suggested that a thick shale is in place containing an organic rich
compound in the central part of the JLB. The Kap Stewart organic rich
shales could act as potential source rock in the JLB. A thick sandstone is
present in both Kap Stewart and Neill klinter formations [32]. The
University of Tulsa has performed detailed petrographic studies of Lower
Jurassic sandstones of the Kap Stewart FM where the northern Lower
Jurassic sandstone of the Kap Stewart FM has porosity characteristics with
a mean value of 16 % and the southern Lower Jurassic sandstone of the
Kap Stewart FM has the mean value of 13 %. The Neil Klinter FM is
located above the Kap Stewart FM. Based on high amplitude, continuous,
seismic reflectors in the basal Neill Klinter FM it could be suggested that
the formation form an acceptable lateral seal for stratigraphic traps [29].
• The fifth reservoir interval in the JLB is the Middle Jurassic Pelion Member
of the Vardekloft and Olympen formations (see figure 2.14) [29]. The Pelion
FM consists almost completely of sandstone in southern central Jameson
Land. The distal thickness of the Pelion FM sandstones is about 10 meter
and increases gradually northward over a distance of more than 200
kilometers to a thickness of the order of 600 meters. The Pelion FM
compose a great potential reservoir body [32]. The Pelion FM sandstone
is corresponding to the Brent Group in the Viking Graben of the North
Sea and to the Garn group of the Norwegian shelf [29].
30
==PAGE:42==
The North - central and southern Jameson Land were analysed by the
University of Tulsa where 25 sandstone samples were examined. In 15
samples of 25 the porosity was 10 - 30 % and the average porosity of all the
samples was 12.2 %. The average porosity of the samples containing more
than 18 % carbonate cement was 16.3 %.
In the Basal Vardekloft FM there can be found porous sandstones of the
Pelion Member unconformity overlie, and erode into potential source
rock. This direct contact of source and reservoir could provide excellent
condition for hydrocarbon migration. It has been suggested that the
trapping mechanisms will be stratigraphic with the silty shales of the
Fossilberget FM that provide sufficient top seal [29].
• The sixth and the final step of the reservoir interval in the JLB is the Upper
Jurassic massive sandstone of the Hareelv formation (see figure 2.14) [29].
The Hareelv FM consists of black organic - rich mudstones with thick
highly irregular, well sorted sandstones [32]. The upper Jurassic sandstone
of Hareelv FM could be a feasible formation in the southern Jameson
Land, where unfractured stratigraphic traps may be in place, together with
the possibility of tilted fault block. The sandstone in the Hareelv FM is up
to 50 meters thick and the width may be more than several hundred
meters. The sandstone is normally clean and quartz rich where the mean
porosity for 16 outcrop samples have been analyzed to be 17 % where the
range is 1.6 - 23.9 %. The geochemical analysis of the Hareelv FM shale
has proven that the source rock contains total organic carbon values
ranging from 6 - 12 % and its close genetic similarities to the age
equivalent Kimmeridge Clay FM, which is the source rock in the North
Sea and other parts of the Northwest Europe. The sandstone in the
Hareelv FM is corresponding to the Magnus oil field in the North Sea. It
has also been suggested that there are significant potential for stratigraphic
traps in the upper Jurassic Hareelv FM.
31
==PAGE:43==
The sandstones are entirely surrounded by an excellent source rock that
allows efficient hydrocarbon migration to occur in the order of 25 - 35 %
similar to the North Sea [29].
To obtain commercial accumulation of hydrocarbon the final element has to be
in place, the seal (cap rock) as previously mentioned. A seal is a low permeability
rock that isolates the reservoir from the environment and allows the hydrocarbon
to accumulate in the trap. There are two types of traps, structural trap and
stratigraphic trap. The structural trap is formed by tectonic movements as a result
of strata deformation (could be fault traps) were the pores in the reservoir rock
are filled with fluid (water, gas or oil) and sealed by cap rock (mudstone or shale).
The stratigraphic trap forms in the sediment itself, i.e. a reservoir rock is
surrounded by cap rock and sealed off [18]. Only potential stratigraphic traps
that required both lateral and vertical seal (shale/mudstone) has been identified
in the JLB [29].
The results of the investigation in the JLB have proven the present of source
rock, maturation, migration, reservoir rock and potential stratigraphic trap in the
JLB. In table 2.1 below the summary of important results are illustrated where the
results reduce the uncertainty in terms of migration pathway and timing. There is
a high risk for no hydrocarbons accumulation in the northern part of the JLB.
Therefore the focus is on the central and the southern basin. In the southern JLB
biomarker curves identify that the Jurassic oils in JLB (East Greenland) are
almost identical with the HBB (mid - West Norway). It has also been proven that
both Jurassic source and reservoir rocks with good characteristic are to be found
in the central and southern basin (porosity and TOC). It should be noted that
the Jurassic sandstone is the producing reservoir rock in the North Sea and
offshore Norway. Additionally, the obtained knowledge above of the JLB shows a
strong genetic relationship with these hydrocarbon provinces, both in terms of
tectonic and the combination of physical and chemical properties, with very
similar source rock, reservoir rock and trapping styles recognized throughout the
Jurassic basin.
32
==PAGE:44==
Northern Part of the
JLB
• Bitumen seeps has been identified
• Uplift and erosion potentially destroyed hydrocarbon
traps (high risk for no oil accumulation)
Mean Porosity of
the Sandstone in the
JLB
• Early Triassic sandstone of the Wordie Creek FM
Φ = 12.5 %
• Northern Lower Jurassic sandstone of the Kap Stewart
FM Φ = 16 %
• Southern Lower Jurassic sandstone of the Kap Stewart
FM Φ = 13 %
• Middle Jurassic sandstone of the Vardekloft and the
Olympen FM Φ = 12.2 %
• Upper Jurassic sandstones of the Hareelv FM Φ = 17 %
TOC of the Source
Rock in the JLB
• Late Triassic sources rock of the Gipsdalen and Fleming
Fjord FM TOC = 6.3 weight %
• Upper Jurassic sources rock of the Hareelv FM
TOC = 6-12 weight %
JLB Comparable
with
• Sources rock of the Harrelv FM is close to genetic
similarities to the age equivalent of a source rock in the
North Sea and northwest Europe.
• Biomarker & isotope curves identify that Jurassic oils in
the JLB is almost identical to the produced oil in the HBB.
• Sandstone from upper Jurassic of the Hareelv formation
are comparable to the Magnus oil field in the North Sea.
Table 2.1: Summary of important results from the investigation in the JLB.
There is high potential that a petroleum system is to be found in the JLB, at
least in the southern and central basin and it is well known that a petroleum
system is in place offshore Norway and northern North Sea. Therefore it could be
assumed that a similar petroleum system exists in between in the JMMC
including the Dreki area. In the following chapter 3 geological data from the
Dreki area will be evaluated and hopefully support the above assumption.
33
==PAGE:45==
”Success consist of going from failure to failure without losing
enthusiasm.”
-Winston Churchill.
3
Dreki area - evaluation of existing data
The governments of Iceland and Norway made agreement between each other in
1981 to define the boundaries for the continental shelf between Iceland and the
Jan Mayen. The Norwegian government accepted the Icelandic 200 nm
economic zone including the continental margin in the area. The agreement also
defines the subsea area to be explored by the two countries in collaboration. The
total area (Iceland+Norway) covers 45.470 square kilometers. The Norwegian
sector covers 32.750 square kilometers and the Icelandic sector covers 12.720
square kilometers. The boundaries of the area is by latitudes 68◦N-70◦N 35
′ and
longitudes 10◦W30
′-6◦W30
′ [24]. In figure 3.1 the quadrants, blocks, northern
Dreki area and the Jan Mayen agreement area are shown. The Jan Mayen
agreement also includes that if a possible hydrocarbon production exists in the
other country’s sector both countries could participate with a 25 % share [24].
34
==PAGE:46==
Figure 3.1: The Jan Mayen agreement area and the northern Dreki area.
[33].
In chapter 3, the evaluation of existing data from the JMMC with focus on the
Dreki area will be covered including:
• Bathymetric data
• Gravity data
• Magnetic data
• Seismic survey data
• Sampling data
• Deep sea drilling project (DSDP) data
The data should provide information about of what JMMC is built up, based on
the tectonic history. The bathymetric, gravity and magnetic maps consist of
newly complied potential field data set by Olesen (2010) and Gernigon (2012).
The magnetic grid consists of a compilation of all previous existing ship tracks
and aeromagnetic data available for the JMMC area.
35
==PAGE:47==
The bathymetric data used for bouguer correction in the deep - water part of
the JMMC area was data observed by satellite altimeter of Sandwell & Smith
(1997) [34]. The satellite altimeter is a method where a spacecraft orbits the
Earth and collects profile continuously of the geoid height across the regions that
are below the sea level (see figure 3.2) [35].
Figure 3.2: The satellite altimeter method [35].
3.1
Bathymetric map over the JMMC including the Dreki
Figure 3.3 below shows a bathymetric map of the Norwegian Greenland Sea
including the JMMC. It should be noted that the JMMC including the Dreki area
is believed to be continental of nature. This belief is based on the tectonic history
in section 2.1, seismic data and field study in the area but it has not been proven.
The JMMC extends southward from the Jan Mayen fracture zone towards north -
east Iceland [34]. The bathymetric map also indicates that the JMR area is
separated into two parts: the northern part and the southern part (see figure 3.3).
36
==PAGE:48==
Figure 3.3: Bathymetric map over the JMMC including the Dreki area.
Bathymetric grid is made by Olesen (2010). Black lines represent a 2001 In-
Seis 2D seismic reflection data and grey lines represent a 1985 NPD 2D seis-
mic reflection data. The dashed black lines represent the refraction profiles
published by Kodaira (1998). The white circles represent the drilling location
during DSDP and the dashed white lines define the boundaries of the JMMC
where the Main Ridge is in the north and the Southern Ridge Complex is lo-
cated south east. The scale indicates the bathymetric map in meters [34].
The northern ridge is classified as the Main Ridge and continues from the Jan
Mayen Island to approximately 69.3 ◦N towards south - west and ends at
approximately 68 ◦N [34]. The southern part is divided into the southern part of
the Main Ridge and the Southern Ridge Complex system [25]. The Southern
Ridge Complex system is a ridge system that most likely has separated from the
southern part of the Main Ridge and consists of smaller ridges. The Southern
Ridge Complex is defined from approximately 68.5 ◦N and can be defined until
the limit of seismic data is reached (see figure 3.3) [34].
37
==PAGE:49==
It is indicated in figure 3.3 above that the northern part of the JMR stands
slightly higher than the southern part. From the bathymetric map it can be
concluded that the landscape is well defined in the northern part of the JMR.
However, the landscape will be less defined in the southern part where the Dreki
area is located especially where the Southern Ridge Complex system exists.
3.2
Gravity anomalies map over the JMMC including the
Dreki
Gravity data has been collected over the JMMC including the Dreki area. The
gravity measurements are commonly used in an unexplored potential
hydrocarbon area especially in areas covered with water where limited geological
information is available like in the case of the Dreki area. The gravity is caused by
the Earth gravitational attraction and the Earth rotation. The gravity field
depends on the lateral changes in density of Earth materials in the area of
measurement points [36]. In figure 3.4 below, a free air gravity anomaly over the
JMMC including the Dreki area is shown. The free air gravity anomalies are
found by the height difference between the gravimeter and the geoid [37]. A high
gravity field is defined with pink color and a low gravity field with blue color (see
figure 3.4). It can be noted from figure 3.4 that a large positive anomaly (pink
color) is identified above the Main Ridge with smaller positive anomaly
surrounding it (yellow/green color). The large positive anomaly over the Main
Ridge could be present because high density basalts lie underneath the shelf edge.
A lower positive anomaly over the Southern Ridge Complex is also identified
compared to the Main Rigde. This indicates that the Main Ridge, especially the
northern part, stands slightly higher than the southern part and corresponds to
the bathymetric map in figure 3.3.
38
==PAGE:50==
Figure 3.4: Free air gravity anomalies map over the JMMC including the
Dreki area after Olesen (2010). The dark blue dashed/continuous lines de-
fine the continent ocean boundary. The dashed white lines define the Main
Ridge and the Southern Ridge Complex. The scale indicates the free air grav-
ity anomaly in mGal [34].
The Bouguer gravity anomalies map over the JMMC including the Dreki area
has also been made where bouguer anomalies also consider the additional
gravitational attraction between the gravimeter and the geoid depending on the
materiel composition [38]. In figure 3.5 below the bouguer gravity anomalies
over the JMMC including the Dreki area are shown. In the bouguer anomalies
map a morphology of the ridge is not a factor. Gravitational attraction of
hypothetical layer of rock is included in the computation. The data helps define
material beneath the JMMC. The red areas east of the JMMC in the Norway
basin could be a result of the spreading of the Ægir ridge system that contains
denser basalts.
39
==PAGE:51==
The blue, green and yellow gravity fields over the JMMC define a deeper lower
density that could be a low density sediments.
Figure 3.5: Bouguer gravity anomalies map over the JMMC including the
Dreki area after Olesen (2010). The dark blue dashed/continuous lines define
the continent ocean boundary. The dashed white lines define the Main Ridge
and the Southern Ridge Complex. The scale indicates the bouguer gravity
anomalies in mGal [34].
3.3
MagneticAnomaliesMapovertheJMMCincludingthe
Dreki
The magnetic data has been collected over the JMMC including the Dreki area
where the purpose of the measurement is to identify the boundaries between the
continental crust and the oceanic crust in the area.
40
==PAGE:52==
This is important because it allows determining the extent of the micro
continent that is needed for prospect evaluation [34]. Magnetic anomalies are
commonly caused by dykes, faults and lava flows where the magnetic fields vary
due to a different rock magnetism. Sedimentary rocks are normally non -
magnetic where oceanic crust is. The sedimentary rocks that contain chemical
and biogenic origins like evaporates and carbonates, normally have low or
insignificant magnetions. The oceanic crust is the dominant magnetic mineral
and is the top layer of newly formed seafloors [39]. The oceanic crust is for the
most part made of lava from the divergent boundaries.
Figure 3.6: Magnetic anomalies map over the JMMC including the Dreki
area. The map is after Olsen (2010) and Gernigon (2012). The dark blue
dashed/continuous lines define the continent ocean boundary. The dashed
white lines define the Main Ridge and the Southern Ridge Complex. The
chrons is after Gernigon (2012). The scale indicates the magnetic anomalies
in nT [34].
41
==PAGE:53==
The magnetic data is plotted as a color image where pink color represents a
high magnetic field, blue color a low magnetic field and another color represents
the values in between [40]. In figure 3.6 above the magnetic anomaly of the
JMMC including the Dreki area is shown. It has been proposed that the micro
continent is divided in six segments defined by thick dash white lines as a crustal
domains labelled A - E from south to north [34]. It can be noted that the
magnetic profiles are poor in the southern part of the Norway basin compared to
the northern area. The magnetic anomaly map also shows a symmetric magnetic
anomaly pattern across the Kolbeinsey Ridge. A quiet zone (low magnetic field)
is observed in the northern part of JMMC. This quite zone corresponds to a quite
zone in the continental margin offshore Norway [41]. The southern part of the
Main Ridge observed magnetic anomaly like the oceanic type anomalies.
Furthermore, the Southern Ridge Complex system observed a sub - quiet zone.
The quiet and sub - quiet zones observed form the magnetic anomaly data over
the JMMC suggest that a continental crust from the East Greenland and Norway
separated and drifted in to the middle of NAO.
3.4
2DReflectionseismicsurveyacrosstheJanMayenRidge
The seismic surveying is a measurement method that sends shock waves to the
seafloor and records and interprets the reflection [18]. In the JMR an air gun has
been used as an energy source to send the sound waves into the seafloor. The
sound waves pass through the earth and are reflected there by giving information
of the rock layers [42]. The seismic reflection is caused by a different rock type
and the fluids in the rock. The data obtained by seismic survey shows a range of
period at a single depth as an image of the earth below the seafloor [18]. The 2D
reflection seismic data give a better understanding of the subsurface structure and
identify potential stratigraphic clues. When good quality seismic data has been
collected, a location to drill can be estimated to obtain a maximum production
that should result in more revenue for all partners.
42
==PAGE:54==
3.4.1
Relevant 2D Seismic Data across the Jan Mayen Ridge
In 1979 the Norwegian Petroleum Directorate (NPD) collected the first seismic
data across the JMR to obtain knowledge of the sedimentary layers in the
northern part of the ridge [24]. The NPD gathered 2D reflection seismic data
corresponding to 1200 kilometers [43]. The geophysical company of Norway
(GECO) organized the survey and was responsible for geophysical
measurements [33]. In figure 3.7 the location of lines collected in 1979 by the
NPD is illustrated:
Figure 3.7: 2D Seismic reflection data from NPD collected in 1979 [33].
This project was continued in 1985 and 1988 in cooperation with the Icelandic
authorities where the goal was to obtain more 2D seismic reflection data in a
small area in the southern part of the JMR [33]. In figure 3.8 below the location
of seismic lines collected in 1985 and 1988 by NPD is illustrated. The 2D
reflection seismic data gathered in 1985 corresponds to 3000 kilometers and data
from 1988 corresponds to 1500 kilometers [43]. In 2001 a Norwegian company
(InSeis) was granted a three years prospecting license in the northern Dreki area.
The purpose of the survey was to collect seismic data of better quality than
already existed for the Dreki area and to identify sub - basalt imaging.
43
==PAGE:55==
Figure 3.8: 2D seismic reflection data from NPD collected in 1979 and Ice-
landic - Norwegian cooperation collected in 1985 and 1988 [33].
InSeis was granted again 3 years prospecting license in 2008 where 2D
reflection seismic data was collected as an infill survey for the survey from 2001
[33]. In figure 3.9 the location of collected seismic lines by InSeis in 2001 and
2008 is illustrated:
Figure 3.9: 2D seismic reflection data from NPD collected in 1979, Icelandic
- Norwegian cooperation collected in 1985 - 1988 and InSeis Company in 2001
and 2008 [33].
44
==PAGE:56==
In 2011 and 2012 NPD collected seismic lines over the Jan Mayen area mostly
over the Norwegian part [44]. In figure 3.10 the location of collected seismic
lines by NPD in 2011 and 2012 is illustrated:
Figure 3.10: 2D seismic reflection data from NPD collected in 2011 and
2012 [44].
The 2D reflection seismic data gathered in 2011 corresponds to 3060
kilometers (15 lines) and data from 2012 corresponds to 9508 kilometers (64
lines). Data from 2011 and 2012 has been processed [44]. Collected data over
the Dreki area is mainly from 1985, 1988, 2001 and 2008. The latest data
collected in the Dreki area was collected by CNOOC (third license) in
September 2015. This data have not been processed and they will not be available
for several years (Þórarinn Sveinn Arnarson, personal communication).
Interpretation of seismic data will not be covered in this thesis as it is an
enormous task in itself and there are major differences in quality where the lines
are located in areas with thick basalts that destroys the seismic signal. It is difficult
to interpret seismic data in an area without drilling where there is no knowledge
about what age the individual reflectors represent.
45
==PAGE:57==
3.5
Dreki area sampling
The surface samples have been collected in the Dreki area. If the samples shows a
hydrocarbon migration in the area, it would prove a strong evidence of an active
petroleum system to be found in place. It would also prove as evidence of critical
information on source rock, maturity and migration. Many factors should be
considered when surface samples are collected including the size of the area and
the project cost. ”A rule of thumb is at least 100 cores should be collected in frontier
exploration areas with 200 - 300 in more likely target” [45]. The collected samples
must consist of different features across the area and two types of geochemistry
samples must be collected, volatile hydrocarbon (C1 to C12) and high molecular
weight hydrocarbon (C12+) [45]. In figure 3.11 the location of surface samples
collection in the Dreki area is illustrated:
Figure 3.11: Sampling location in the Dreki Area in 1973, 2010 and 2011
[33].
In 1973 a Soviet research ship, Akademic Kurchayov, investigated the geology
of the Icelandic seabed including the southern edge of the Dreki area and also the
Norwegian Sea [24]. The Soviet research ship collected rock samples and
analysed if gases existed in a few bottom cores. The collection of the samples in
1973 with focus on the Dreki area is illustrated with yellow dots in figure 3.11.
46
==PAGE:58==
The result of the analysis proved that traces of hydrocarbons (methane and
heavier hydrocarbon) were found in samples from water depths interval 1200 to
1500 meters in the southern area. The Soviet scientists concluded that the results
indicated a potential deep hydrocarbon sources of potential commercial
reservoir. The same data was also viewed by NPD where they concluded that the
amount of gas was not especially high and could as well been generated in
shallow low temperature chemical or biochemical processes. NPD also
concluded that the composition and distribution as a function of depth did not
result in migration of gas from deep sources [24].
In 2010 the NEA in Iceland in cooperation with NPD collected surface
samples in the Dreki area [44]. The surface samples were collected by Remotely
operated vehicle (ROV). The collection of the rock sample in 2010 is illustrated
by pink dots in figure 3.11 above. According to Þórarinn Sveinn Arnarson
(Hydrocarbon Licensing Manager in Iceland) the aim of the sampling collection
in 2010 was to collect rock samples close to holes on the seafloor. This was done
to investigate whether hydrocarbon seeps from the holes. The results from the
sampling in 2010 was negative, no oil or gas seep were found.
In 2011 the TGS (geophysical company) in cooperation with the Volcanic
Basin Petroleum Research (VBPR) performed a sampling survey in the Dreki
area. The rock samples collected in 2011 is illustrated with a dark pink dot north
of the Southern Complex Ridge system in figure 3.11 above. The main purpose of
the sampling collection was to recover outcrop sediments from the northern
Dreki area due to an interpretation of JM - 17 - 85 seismic line shown in figure
3.12 below [46]. The seabed sampling was collected at 1000 meters high cliff on
the JMR where a 10 gravity core and 2 dredges were retrieved. There were also
more than 200 kg of rocks and sediments retrieved from 12 sampling stations.
The results obtained by the TGS and the VBPR were presciently good where a
sedimentary rock from 250 - 65 Ma from the Mesozoic period was collected. This
was a very good result due to the fact that there had never before been found
rocks older than 50 Ma in this area.
47
==PAGE:59==
Figure 3.12: JM - 17 - 85 seismic line showing the location of the sampling
profile on the JMR [46].
Additionally, advanced geochemical analysis of the collected sediments was
performed and suggested active seepage of Jurassic oil through the sandstone
(reservoir rock) [46]. The sampling survey performed by the TGS and the VBPR
obtained a very good result and increased the potential that there could be found
an active petroleum system in the Dreki area.
3.6
Deep Sea drilling project relative to the JMR
In 1974, 18 boreholes were drilled in the Norwegian - Greenland Seas in a project
classified as the Deep Sea Drilling Project (DSDP). Five holes of the 18 holes that
the DSDP performed were drilled at or near by the JMR. These are the only
boreholes that have been drilled on the JMR (see figure 3.13) [24]. It can be seen
from figure 3.13 that boreholes 346, 347 and 349 are located on the Main Ridge
and borehole 350 is located on the Southern Ridge Complex system. The
borehole 348 is located near the JMR on the Iceland Plateau.
48
==PAGE:60==
Figure 3.13: DSDP boreholes at or near by the JMR [33].
In table 3.1 the borehole number, water depth and the drilled depth for the
boreholes drilled at or near by the JMR during the DSDP is shown:
Boreholes number
Water depth (meters)
Drilled depth (meters)
346
732
187
347
745
190
348
1763
544
349
915
320
350
1275
388
Table 3.1: The borehole number, water depth and the drilled depth for the
boreholes drilled at or near by the JMR during the DSDP [24].
Borehole 348 is drilled through sediments in the depth interval from the
seabed to 527 meters and from 527 meters to 544 meters it reaches the basalts in
the bottom of the hole. The sediments found in borehole 348 were mostly of
mudstone and partly sandy mudstone. In the top of borehole 348 the sediments
are from the Pleistocene period and at the bottom the sediments are form the
Miocene/Oligocene transition period. Borehole 350 is drilled through
sediments in the depth interval from the seabed to 346 meters and from 346 to
388 meters it reaches the basalts in the bottom of the hole. The sediments found
in borehole 350 were mostly of mudstone and partly sandy mudstone [24].
49
==PAGE:61==
The sediments are quite thin layers of Pleistocene - Miocene underlain by
Oligocene and late Eocene sediments. In the bottom of the hole a basalt was
found in the age of 40 Ma to 44 Ma. Boreholes 346, 347 and 349 were drilled
through sediments of a Pleistocene - late Eocene period were the top sediments
of holes 346 and 349 are of the Pleistocene/Pliocene period. Below the top
sediments the middle Miocene to late Oligocene sediments were identified. The
sediments found in boreholes 346 and 349 were a mudstone and sandy mudstone
with occasional layers of volcanic ash. Furthermore, organic geochemistry of the
cores from the DSDP have been analysed where the results indicate that the
Tertiary sediments of the Norwegian - Greenland Sea have little hydrocarbon
potential. Five samples from the boreholes 346 and 349 contained TOC in the
range 0.18 - 1.04 % (poor TOC). In the DSDP the drilled holes were quite
shallow and no information of the deeper structure or lithology was obtained but
knowledge of sediments from Eocene age in sandy mudstone was obtained. The
results showed that it is uncertain that the source rock contained enough organic
compound to generate hydrocarbons [24].
50
==PAGE:62==
”It’s one of those high risk, high return options.”
-Andy Brogan (leader at Ernst & Yong)
4
Drilling Solution for the Dreki area
The seismic data obtained from the Dreki area will possibly show a large structure
and possibly it will indicate trap structures where hydrocarbons are contained.
With this, a decision has to be made to continue with the project or not. If it is
decided to continue with the project due to promising results, the next step will
be the exploration drilling phase. Exploration drilling is performed to find out if a
source rock and a reservoir rock are present in the target formation. In the case of
the Dreki area an important factor is to evaluate the quality and quantity of the
hydrocarbons in place (it is most likely not commercial to produce gas in the
remote Dreki area). In this part of the process, an exploration well is drilled and
core samples are taken. Furthermore, the samples will be analyzed to find out the
quality of the crude oil and to estimate the quantity of oil available. The core
samples also provide information about geological history and composition.
51
==PAGE:63==
In chapter 4 it will be discussed which Mobile offshore drilling units (MODU)
suits better for the Dreki area if an exploration drilling operation is performed.
4.1
Descriptionofstandarddrillingsystemfordeepwater
In this section 4.1 a standard drilling system with marine riser for deepwater is
described (see figure 4.1). After the vessel has been positioned, a conductor
casing (normally 36”) is installed. The drill bit is then run through the conductor
pipe to the bottom of the hole. Then a surface casing (normally 20”) is installed
in order to drill deeper. After that, a riser pipe is added in sections, one after
another. Once this is completed, the Blow out preventer (BOP) is run down into
the seafloor. The BOP is connected to the wellhead, which is located on the top
of the conductor pipe. At that point the vessel is able to connect to the seafloor
via the riser system. A smaller drill bit than the first used is run through the riser
pipe and the surface casing is installed. Once the riser pipe is connected, the
drilling mud is used to circulate the rock and formation to the top. The drilling
continues to the target depth [47]. Starting from the top of figure 4.1, functional
requirements for elements involved in a typical drilling system will be briefly
described.
52
==PAGE:64==
Figure 4.1: Typical Deepwater Drilling system [48].
4.1.1
Telescopic joint
The purpose of the telescopic joint is to adapt the riser length and orientation to
prevent a vertical displacement of the vessel due to waves. This is controlled by
expansion and contraction of the telescopic joint [49].
4.1.2
Tension ring
The tension ring is connected to the telescopic joint at a point between the riser
system and the vessel. The tension ring is used to stabilize the drill string by
adding a tension on the string [50].
53
==PAGE:65==
4.1.3
Slick and Buoyant joint
The drilling riser is a heavy system and in deep water it is needed to install a
buoyant joint. The buoyant joint will reduce the load on the riser tensioners by a
high pressure foam buoyancy modules. The slick joint consists of choke and kill
lines and umbilicals [51].
4.1.4
Choke/Kill Hose
The choke and kill lines are installed laterally along the riser. The purpose of the
choke and kill lines is to control the well pressure by circulating the fluids into
and out of wellbore [52].
4.1.5
Lower Marine Riser Package (LMRP)
The Lower marine riser package (LMRP) is installed above the BOP. This system
enables quick disconnect of the marine riser from the BOP in emergency
scenarios.
4.1.6
Blow - Out Preventer (BOP)
The BOP is an equipment built up of series of valves and rams installed on the
top of the wellhead. The BOP is activated during drilling operations to prevent
uncontrolled release of fluids from the well to the surface (kick). It can also be
used to monitor and control the hydrocarbon from the well [53].
4.1.7
Wellhead
The wellhead is located at the seabed and is a key well pressure containing
element exposed to internal and external pressure. It is the key connection point
between the well and any temporary equipment used during drilling and
interventions. The wellhead is exposed to high and variable mechanical forces. It
is the hang - off point for the casing strings subjecting the wellhead to high
mechanical well forces by weight or by temperature effects.
54
==PAGE:66==
The wellhead is the basic foundation for the subsea trees and associated
equipment on the seabed [54]. The standard size of a high pressure wellhead
used all over the world is 18 3/4”. The exception to this is Brazil where it is
preferred to use a 16 3/4 ” wellhead size.
4.1.8
Conductor casing
The conductor casing is the first string to be installed in the well to prevent caving
into the wellbore. The conductor casing is a short string with a large diameter
that supports the surface formation [55].
4.1.9
Surface casing
The surface casing sits at the top part of the well and is attached to the wellhead.
The surface casing primary function is to protect the ground water formation
from contamination [56].
4.2
Environmental conditions
The Dreki area is located 300 kilometers south of Jan Mayen and approximately
350 kilometers north - east of Langanes (Iceland) which is above the arctic circle
where the seasonal fluctuations are high (solar corridor and daylight) [57].
When considering a suitable drilling solution in the Dreki area both the
operational cost and safety have to be considered. The main factor affecting the
cost and safety is the environmental conditions. These include: temperature,
visibility, wind speed, waves, icing, current velocity and ice conditions.
4.2.1
Temperature in the Dreki area
In the Dreki area the average temperature at 2 meters height from the sea level is
below 10 ◦C the whole year. The coldest period occurs during November to April
with average temperature during winter of – 2 to 0 ◦C. It should be noted that the
temperature variation is small between the months.
55
==PAGE:67==
Generally, the hottest month in the Dreki area is August with an average
temperature during summer of 7 to 8◦C [57]. Figure 4.2 shows the monthly
average temperatures and frequency distribution of the air temperatures from
1958 to 2001 (four observation per day):
Figure 4.2: Monthly average and frequency distribution of air temperatures
in the Dreki area from 1958 - 2001 [57].
Half of the observations falls within the boxes and the median is represented
by a line across the boxes (see figure 4.2). The other half of the observations falls
in the interval represented by the dotted lines and the circle defines a few rare
cases. Overall, the sea temperature in the Dreki area is approximately 0 to 1 ◦C
during the winter months. In the hottest summer sea temperature is
approximately 7 ◦C and the sea temperature is higher than the air temperature
most of the year [57]. Figure 4.3 below shows the monthly average temperatures
and frequency distribution of sea temperatures from 1958 to 2001 (four
observations per day). It should be noted that the temperature on the bottom of
the seabed in the Dreki area is below zero and the seawater freezes at – 1.9 ◦C
depending on the water density [58]. The density of seawater changes by
temperature, salinity and pressure. The density increases with decreasing
temperature and temperature decreases with depth (increase pressure). Salinity
also increases the density [59].
56
==PAGE:68==
Figure 4.3: Monthly average and frequency distribution of sea temperatures
in the Dreki area from 1958 - 2001 [57].
This means that the riser pipe is needed to be insulated in a drilling operation
in an area like Dreki (deepwater condition) to prevent water for freezing, to avoid
increased viscosity of the crude oil and hydrate formation.
4.2.2
Visibility in the Dreki area
There are no direct sources of information regarding the visibility in the Dreki
area but the weather stations on Iceland and Jan Mayen suggest that most of the
time fog is the main factor affecting the visibility in the Dreki area. Fog is
generated by the flow of warm saturated air over a cold surface sea [60]. In the
wintertime, rain and snow can also affect the visibility if the wind speed goes
above 20 - 25 m/s. Limited visibility is most frequent during the summer time
since fog is most common during the summer. However, in the autumn visibility
increases. At both weather stations or the close by area the fog is observed 15 - 17
% in July. On the JMR the observation could be above 20% in July.
57
==PAGE:69==
The fog will not affect the drilling operation but it may affect the helicopter
operations [60]. It is considered to be good visibility when it is up to 10
kilometers [57].
4.2.3
Wind Speed in the Dreki area
The average wind speed in the Dreki area is higher in the winter time than in the
summer. From December to March the average wind speed is approximately 10
m/s while in the summer it is approximately 6 m/s [57]. Figure 4.4 shows the
average and frequency distribution of wind speeds in the Dreki area from
1958-2001 (four observations per day):
Figure 4.4: Monthly average and frequency distribution of wind speeds (m/s)
in the Dreki area from 1958 - 2001 [57].
The wind speed at the Dreki area (Jan Mayen area) is classify as quite
moderate according to Sagex energy advisor in Norway [61].
4.2.4
Icing in the Dreki area
Icing can be caused by rain when the rain falls on a surface with temperature
below the freezing point.
58
==PAGE:70==
Furthermore, partially melted snow can freeze on the surface where heavy ice
can be accumulated up to tens of centimeters outside thin wires/cables. Icing is
most common in the period from November to April and mainly in the northerly
wind direction. More analysis is needed in order to estimate the icing risk in the
Dreki area and the effect of icing for example on helicopters and drilling units.
Spindrift icing is considered dangerous for the landing on the helicopter pools.
The spindrift icing occurs when the air temperature are below – 15 ◦C and the
drops from the spindrift will freeze in the air [57].
4.2.5
Current Observations in the Dreki area
The current velocity is important when designing an optimal deep water drilling
riser due to the Vortex - induction vibration (VIV) effect that can damage the
marine riser system due to fatigue. The ocean currents velocity in the JMR has
been measured by a moored device. Figure 4.5 shows the setup of the mooring:
Figure 4.5: Mooring setup used to measure the ocean currents in the JMR.
The mooring system consists of an acoustic doppler current profiler (ADCP)
as well as standard current meters (CMs) [62].
59
==PAGE:71==
The mooring is an assembly of devices connected to a wire and anchored on
the seafloor (see figure 4.5). Three mooring devices were installed in different
locations in the JMR defined as, JM-1, JM-2 and Dreki (see figure 4.6).
Figure 4.6: Installation of three moorings at the JMR, JM - 1, JM - 2 and
Dreki [62].
The red arrows in figure 4.6 indicate the Atlantic water (warm water flow) that
flows from the Norwegian Sea into the Nordic Seas (Greenland, Iceland and
Norwegian Seas). Then the blue arrows in figure 4.6 indicate the Arctic water
(cold water flow) and the question marks indicate the area of interest. JM - 1 and
JM - 2 were in service in 2007 - 2009 and Dreki in 2007 - 2008 [62]. For this
thesis work, the focus will be on the ocean current velocity that directly affects the
Dreki area and in which direction the current flows. Vector plots of the currents
at six different depths for the Dreki moorings are shown in figure 4.7. The vectors
indicate the direction of the flow, the length of the vectors indicates the current
velocity and the depth is indicated in the top right corner (see figure 4.7 below).
The stability of the current was low at 50 meters depth and higher near the
bottom and it can be seen a clear northward current direction at all depths [63].
60
==PAGE:72==
Figure 4.7: Vector plots of the currents at different depths for the Dreki
area. The data are the average value of seven days moving and the vectors
are shown every second day [62].
Furthermore, it can be indicate that the bottom current velocity in the Dreki
area is approximately 5 cm/s. This is defined as a weak flow and there is a
seasonal variation between upper and bottom current flows (see figure 4.7) [64].
4.2.6
Polar Lows in the Dreki area
Polar lows are weather conditions where small intense pressure systems are
formed at sea in cold air above relatively warmer water and are released in form of
storms classified as arctic hurricanes. Polar lows form unexpected and are
difficult to predict [65]. A satellite image can identify them as shown in figure
4.8. Polar lows diameters vary between 100-500 kilometers and last for
approximately 12-36 hours. Polar lows produce harsh weather, heavy snow and
strong surface winds. A satellite image can predict the development phase of a
polar lows as a cloud feature (see figure 4.8).
61
==PAGE:73==
Figure 4.8: Developing of polar Lows [65].
It is well known that polar lows are quite frequent in a warm ice - free water
within the polar region which applies to the Dreki area [65]. It should be noted,
though, that the operation of a drilling solution is not significantly affected by
polar lows, as a polar low will not increase maximum wind speed, wave height, air
temperature and icing beyond the design criteria for the drilling solution.
4.2.7
Ice in the Dreki area
The ice in the NAO is transported initially from the Arctic sea south along the
east cost of Greenland. This transportation of ice happens by the strong East
Greenland current. This leads to that the northern and central part of the
Greenland eastern coast is usually covered by ice. The amount of ice transported
from the Arctic sea varies with seasons where smallest ice extension is in
September to October. In November, the pack ice of East Greenland is gradually
built up in the north and the pack ice increases in width and moves to the south
where the pack ice continues to grow in December.
62
==PAGE:74==
In January, the pack ice reaches as far as Cape Farvel [66]. The area covered by
pack ice increases in width in February where in the central part it extends as far
as Jan Mayen and in the northern part it extends farther to the east. In figure 4.9,
the possibility of ice reaching the Dreki area based on monitoring from April
1930 - 39 and from 1946 - 54 is illustrated:
Figure 4.9: Possibility of ice in the Dreki, April 1930 - 39 and 1946 - 54 [66].
In heavy ice winters pack ice can exist in the Dreki area [66]. However, it
should be noted that the Dreki area is located farther east than ice is normally
found and is generally an ice free area [57]. But ice may drift into the exploration
area. This is not a problem and has small cost effects [60]. In case of considerable
ice drift, the drilling unit shall be disconnected and towed away from the
exploration area.
4.2.8
Remote and lack of infrastructure in the Dreki area
The Dreki area has no existing infrastructure and supply routes are very long. The
long supply routes are also affected by the above mentioned environmental
conditions including long period of darkness, visibility and other environmental
phenomena.
63
==PAGE:75==
4.3
Offshore Drilling Technology in the Dreki area
The Dreki area is a relative difficult area with respect to planning which kind of
drilling solution suits the area due to the geographical location. There are no
nearby fields to relate to and it is a lack of experience in the area. Compared to
the Barents Sea, the disadvantage in the Dreki area is that it is located far from the
shore. The Barent Sea is located closer to the north coast of Norway. The total
well cost is an important factor when choosing design of the drilling rig.
Normally, the selection of rig type is based on the balance of all design
requirements. However, for Arctic conditions the selection of a rig type solution
is based on sea ice condition and water depth [67]. The Dreki area covers 42.700
square kilometers and the water depth is between 1000 - 2000 meters for 80 % of
the area (classified between deep and ultra - deepwater) [4]. The classification of
shallow water drilling, deepwater drilling and ultra - deepwater drilling is defined
below [68]:
• Shallow water drilling: 0 - 400 meters
• Deep water drilling: 400 - 1500 meters
• Ultra - deepwater drilling: > 1500 meters
The Dreki area is located 200 - 400 kilometers from shore. There is no danger of
sea ice under present climatic conditions in the area as mentioned in section 4.2.7
but then again ice could drift into the area [6]. The wave heights in the Dreki area
are lower than those at the west - cost of Norway where on the Vøring area in the
Norwegian Sea, a 100 - year wave height is 16.5 meters [60]. The 100 - year wave
height has been estimated in the Dreki area to be approximately 12 meters [14].
64
==PAGE:76==
Generally drilling rig type selection is between [69]:
• Jack - up rigs: water depth from 15 meters to 150 meters
• Anchored semi - submersible rigs or drillship: water depth from 20 meters
to 2000 meters
• Dynamic positioning drillship or semi - submersible rigs: water depth
from 500 meters to 3000 meters
An offshore drilling vessel is defined as MODU and is generally operated for a
limited period of time and shift, from one site to another. The Jack - ups are not
suitable for the Dreki area with water depth greater than 150 meters. Jack - up rigs
can just be operated in shallow water. The choice of drilling technology will
therefore be between semi - submersible and drillship. The choice between these
two drilling solutions is not always clear. Figure 4.10 shows a photo of 6th
generation semi-submersible and drillship:
Figure 4.10: Semi - submersible versus drillship [70].
The semi - submersible and drillship are the only types of floating drilling
vessels that can operate in shallow, deep and ultra deep water [71]. The drillship
is used in remote areas including areas with icebergs and the semi - submersible is
used in a harsh environment [69]. In the sections 4.3.1 and 4.3.2 the advantages
and disadvantages of the semi - submersible rig and drillship will be summarized.
65
==PAGE:77==
4.3.1
Semi-submersible rig
The semi - submersible is a common offshore drilling rig solution and is
illustrated in figure 4.11:
Figure 4.11: Semi - submersible rig [70].
The layout of a semi - submersible consists of a drilling platform with two
parts, one on top of the other (see figure 4.11). The top part contains the living
quarters for the workers and the drilling platform. The lower part is used to
control the movement of the platform. When the platform is moved the lower
part is filled with air (buoyant). Then, when the rig is located over the drill site,
the air is let out of the lower part and the platform is ballasted into the sea to a
suitable draft [18]. A semi - submersible uses a mooring system to be kept on
location or a DP system. When a semi - submersible is reallocated from one site
to another the platform has to be towed to the site or self - propelled [71]. The
new generation of semi - submersibles contain propels so they can be moved
easily. However, these are only used when the distances between wells and/or
inspection points are close.
66
==PAGE:78==
The advantages of the semi - submersible rig is as follows [72]:
• It has good mobility in deep and ultra - deep water with high transit speed
(∼10 kts)
• It is good in turbulent offshore conditions (harsh environment) – small
response to wave effects
• It has a large deck area (working area)
The disadvantages of the semi - submersible rig is as follows [72] and [18]:
• It has high initial and operating cost
• It is costly and time consuming to install anchors in deep water area
• It has a Low Variable deck load (VDL)
• It is costly to move large distances
• It has small storage capabilities
4.3.2
Drillships
A drillship is a large vessel consisting of a drilling equipment and a large derrick
in the middle of its main deck including a hole (moonpool). The drillship is
illustrated in figure 4.12 below. Through the moonpool a drill string is extended
through the water and drilled to the target depth. The drillship moves from one
location to another by self - propelled units [71]. The advantages of the drillship
are as follows [72]:
• High capacity and large storage volumes that can be used for materials and
equipment. This is beneficial when working in remote areas where it
reduces supply transport cost
• It is mobile and has a high transit speed (up to 16 kts)
• It has a higher VDL than semi - submersibles
67
==PAGE:79==
• It has low mobilization cost
• Low initial and operating cost
• It has a large storage volume
• It is easier to disconnect the drillship compared to a semi - submersible.
This is beneficial in emergency scenarios
Figure 4.12: Drillship [72].
The disadvantages of the drillship are as follows [72]:
• It has poor stability in harsh environment
• It has a small deck area (working area)
• The height between waterline and deck is low
68
==PAGE:80==
4.4
Rig selection for the Dreki area
According to GustoMSC, the main challenges in arctic offshore drilling is the
water depth and presence of sea ice. The right drilling solution should be chosen
based on balancing the sea ice and water depth conditions. In section 4.2.7 it has
been defined that the Dreki area is generally an ice free area under current climate
conditions. Also in section 4.3 the water depth in the Dreki area has been defined
to be 1000 - 2000 meters in 80 % of the area. Figure 4.13 shows a rig selection as
a function of the water depth:
Figure 4.13: Portfolio of solutions for Arctic offshore drilling developed by
GustoMSC [67].
The moored floater is most flexible regarding the water depth and can both
operate in shallow and deep water (see figure 4.13). Today a drillship mainly
relies on the DP system to be kept on location. A lower water depth limit for the
DP system in the industry is generally from 300 to 400 meters as shown in figure
4.13. This means that the Dreki area has no problem concerning the water depth
limit in using a drillship that uses a DP system. It should be noted from figure
4.13 that the ”moored floater as a unique solution” may be a drillship that has a
mooring system. This is applied due to the gap between Jack - up and drillship in
respect to the water depth.
69
==PAGE:81==
This allows the drillship to work in a very shallow water not relevant in case of
the Dreki area. Additionally, in remote areas with no infrastructure like the Dreki
area there is a need to reduce the re - supply time and the transit speed should be
sufficient. A high transit speed should be possible in order to obtain a cost
effective mobilization and to secure a safe mobilization of the vessel to and from
the Dreki [67]. In sections 4.3.1 and 4.3.2 it has been mentioned that a semi -
submersible rig has a low VDL compared to the drillship and the transit speed of
the drilling ship is higher than of a semi - submersible. A drillship is also easier to
disconnect compared to a semi - submersible which is a big advantage regarding
emergency disconnection. It can be concluded that the potential for using a semi
- submersible solution is highly reduced when working in remote areas like Dreki
due to a low transit speed, deck load and small storage capabilities. Since this field
is in an exploration phase and the layout for production is unknown at this stage,
the use of the drillship is recommended. This is due to the fact that the drillship
has a great mobility, a large storage volume and an easy disconnection of the riser
that is beneficial in emergency scenarios. In the next section, an example of
suitable drillship for the Dreki area is given.
4.4.1
Specific solution for drillship: the Arctic-NanuQ 5000 DP
GustoMSC is one of the leading companies of designing and engineering of
MODU for the offshore oil and gas industry. GustoMSC focuses on the offshore
exploration area, construction and production markets. An example of a suitable
vessel for the Dreki area designed by GustoMSC is the NanuQ 5000 DP Arctic
drillship [73]. In figure 4.14 a photo of the NanuQ 5000 DP Arctic drillship
designed by GustoMSC is shown. The design consists of a DP system that keeps
the vessel on location. The main dimensions of a NanuQ 5000 DP drillship is
225.5 meters long, with a width of 38 meters, depth at centerline of 21.6 meters
and height at drillfloor (above the keel level) of 31.2 meters. The drilling
capabilities of the NanuQ 5000 DP are suited to conventional drilling with a
BOP in 1524 meters (5000 feet) water depth.
70
==PAGE:82==
Figure 4.14: NanuQ 5000 DP Arctic drillship, dynamically positioned [74].
The NanuQ 5000 DP consists of a single activity derrick and the design has
implemented operation options where it can operate with surface BOP and
seabed shut-off device. Inside the hull or the deckhouse the tubulars and all the
risers are located and the drilling mud and bulk storage is located inside the hull
aft. All other drilling facilities are gathered around the derrick and drillfloor. The
BOP storage is located between the drillfloor and the living quarters. The
autonomy of NanuQ 5000 DP is designed to operate in arctic conditions for up
to 120 days [74]. The storage capacities of NanuQ 5000 DP range from 16000
cubic meters for fuel oil, 1400 cubic meters for potable water, 3400 cubic meters
drilling water, 2200 cubic meters active mud, 1400 cubic meters reserve mud,
1000 cubic meters brine, 750 cubic meters base oil and 693.8 cubic meters (6000
bbls) cuttings. It should be noted that for the Dreki area it is necessary to be able
to store more back - up equipment than for example for offshore Norway to keep
operational up - time at acceptable level.
The NanuQ 5000 DP vessel is designed to fulfil classification rules and
regulations and coastal state regulations with those from Norway, Russia,
Canada, Greenland and USA.
71
==PAGE:83==
Here is no reason to believe that the same rules and regulations will not apply
also to Iceland and most likely Iceland will adopt the Norwegian standards if in
the future exploration drilling will be made in the Dreki area. The NanuQ 5000
DP vessel uses the latest technologies of emission reduction and fulfills the latest
Health, safety and the environment (HSE) regulations. Work areas and access
routes are located inside the deckhouse to protect personnel and equipment from
the climatic conditions. Re - supply stations with both lay - down areas and
bunkering facilities are placed at the starboard, the port side and the aft [74].
Additionally, it is required that an economic analysis for the semi - submersible
and the drillship is made. This will not be performed in this thesis. But based on
the history there has been a greater development of the semi - submersible over
time compared to the drillships. They are getting bigger and bigger with time.
This increase in size also increases the materiel used to build the platform and
that leads to increased cost. The economic analysis is a complex estimation where
many factors have to be taken into account including the capital cost of the
platform, transit speed and storage volume is important when working in a
remote area. A drilling operation in sensitive areas like Dreki have to be a safe
operation and cost effective where a fine balance between these requirements
must be obtained.
72
==PAGE:84==
Discussion
The question, ”Is the potential for oil and gas to be found in the Dreki area?” has been
answered through the thesis work. As the answer is yes it is potential for oil and
gas to be generated in the Dreki area. This has been answered through the
geological mapping and the results from the TGS and VBPR have especially
increased this believe. The TGS and VBPR proved that old sediments are found
in the northern part of the Southern Ridge Complex system. Additionally TGS
and VBPR proved that an active seepage of Jurassic oil through sandstone rock
exists in the area. This strongly reduced the uncertainty that the Jurassic source
rock has been over - cooked during the Early - and Middle - Tertiary rifting. This
was the period where higher heat - flow occurred due to the spreading of the
Agier ridge and later the Kolbeinsey ridge. This does not mean that the same
result can be obtained for the east and the west side of the JMMC where different
brake - up and spreading conditions affected each side of the JMMC. There is
need for hydrocarbon maturation modelling over and around the JMMC
including the Dreki area to estimate potential maturation process in the area.
Modelling has been attempted where the heat - flow measurement over and
around the JMMC including the Dreki area is shown in figure 4.15. The data used
in the heat - flow mapping is the heat flow contours of Sundvor (2000), plate
boundaries from Eldholm (1990a) and fracture zones in Norwegian basin from
Skogseid & Eldholm (1987). The heat - flow decreases from young crust at the
Kolbeinsey ridge towards older crust in the Norwegian basin (see figure 4.15).
73
==PAGE:85==
Figure 4.15: Heat - flow measurement around the JMMC including the Dreki
area. The scale indicates the heat - flow in mW/m2 [75].
The average heat - flow on the JMMC is expected to be 75 mW/m2 [76]. This
is greater than the measured heat - flow on the continental crust offshore Norway.
The heat flow studies offshore Norway has suggested that the average heat - flow
values of 64 mW/m2 for the North Sea, 65 mW/m2 for the mid - offshore Norway
and 72 mW/m2 for the Barents Shelf [77].
74
==PAGE:86==
The average heat - flow for the Jan Mayen Ridge micro continent is close to the
heat - flow for the Barent Shelf. In the Barent Shelf area a producing gas field
(Snøhvit) and oil field (Goliat) exists. This means that the are still potential for
oil generation despite for the higher heat - flow compared to both North Sea and
offshore mid - Norway where well known petroleum system exists.
Figure 4.15 above shows that the heat - flow west of the JMR is slightly higher
than on the eastern flank due to an active spreading of the Kolbeinsey ridge.
Additionally, the heat - flow modelling are still needed to obtain a knowledge of
the thermal state on the JMR to be able to estimate with more accuracy the level
of maturation of potential hydrocarbon in the different part of the Dreki area.
It is not enough to have a hydrocarbon generation in the Dreki area, as
mentioned in the thesis, for commercial accumulation to take place. Structural
traps are needed to be in place so the hydrocarbon can be accumulated. The time
interval that probably affected the JMMC structure the most is the Early Eocene
to the end of the Oligocene/Early Miocene. This was the period when the
continental crust broke between Norway and East Greenland and thereafter the
separation of the JMMC from East Greenland happened. But even if the
structure is estimated to be of good quality it is still not certain that hydrocarbon
accumulation takes place like in the case of the Mukulk reservoir in Alaska. The
JMMC including the Dreki area has been affected by erosion that could affect the
sealing quality and that could lead to an ineffective seal and the oil could have
leaked out. This means that obtained data just increases the certainty but does
not prove absolute certainty.
The geophysical data from the JMR exists in different stages of processing and
interpretation. This includes more detailed sedimentary seismic stratigraphic and
stratigraphic studies. The 2D seismic data has been collected over the JMMC
including the Dreki area to obtain a better understanding of the subsurface
structure and to try to identify clues of traps. Denser seismic grid is still needed
to be able to choose an optimal location to drill. Some projects are currently
active including the 2D seismic data collected by the CNOOC. This data has not
yet been processed and interpreted and will not be available for several years.
75
==PAGE:87==
Even though the current data has increased the potential of the hydrocarbon to
be found in the Dreki area, a final investigation is required to make a final
conclusion if there is a commercial accumulation in the area. It can only be
obtained by drilling which is an expensive operation. A great amount of
geological data must be collected before drilling takes place to reduce the risk of
drilling a dray hole. In the future it will be interesting to see the data from
CNOOC and what decisions will be taken based on the data and future
investigations in the Dreki area.
The question, ”Is the semi - submersible solution a more suitable choice than a
drillship for a drilling operation in the Dreki area?” has been answered by choosing
the drillship as priorities based on the fact that the semi - submersible solution is
highly reduced when working in the remote area like Dreki. This conclusion was
based on that the semi - submersible being affected by low transit speed, low deck
load and small storage capabilities compared to the drillship. But it should be
noted that the final conclusion for the area requires more data. Among the tasks
to be done are an economic analysis for both solutions and also an internal wave
analysis should be studied. The internal wave phenomena must be mentioned
because it may exist in the Dreki area due to the deep water condition. Internal
waves generate along the boundaries between water of greater and lesser density.
The internal waves are characterized by warm, less - saline water lying over cold,
more saline water [78]. The internal waves can be caused by a current flow over
uneven bathymetry, atmospheric disturbances and shear current flow. The
internal waves in the past have disrupted offshore drilling operations including a
drill pipe that was ripped from the BOP and lost during drilling operations [79].
Therefore, a dynamic analysis of the internal wave force is required when
choosing a suitable drilling solution. A drilling operation should be a cost
efficient operation where the two solutions should be compared and as
mentioned in the thesis a balance between a safe operation and the operational
cost is required.
76
==PAGE:88==
It is worth mentioning that debates have taken place about the potential arctic
oil spill which could result in a catastrophic disaster even bigger than the well
known disaster that happened in the gulf of Mexico (Deepwater Horizon). The
Dreki area is a very remote area with a lack of infrastructure and the nearest
location to shore is hundreds of kilometers away. Additionally, arctic
environmental conditions exist in the Dreki area. The future question is if
significant amount of oil will be found in the Dreki area will it be too significant
to ignore?
77
==PAGE:89==
Conclusion
Based on the tectonic history of the Jan Mayen micro continent (JMMC), two
assumptions are made. The first assumption is that the geology of the JMMC
including the Dreki area is the same as the Norwegian continental shelf and East
Greenland until the Early Eocene. This assumption was based on the fact that the
continental crust broke between Greenland and Norway and started to drift apart
in the Early Eocene. The second assumption is that the geology of the JMMC
including the Dreki area is the same as for East Greenland from the Middle of
Eocene to the end of Oligocene. The second assumption is based on the fact that
the spreading of the Kolbeinsey ridge northward into East Greenland took place
in the Early Oligocene, that led to the separation of the JMMC including the
Dreki area from East Greenland. The tectonic history of the JMMC suggested
that the continental crust broke from East Greenland and Norway and drifted out
to the middle of the North Atlantic Ocean (NAO). The JMMC close by areas
were investigated regarding the geological settings. As there are already well
known petroleum systems offshore Norway, the Jameson Land basin (East
Greenland) were investigated to obtain geological knowledge on both sides of
the JMMC. The investigation and analysis of the Jameson Land basin were
mainly obtained by ARCO and the University of Tulsa. The results of the
investigation suggested that in the northern part of the Jameson Land basin the
uplift and erosion had destroyed the hydrocarbon accumulation. Additionally,
there was a risk of thermal maturity of the source rock due to uplift and
subsidence in the northern part of the JLB.
78
==PAGE:90==
According to ARCO the central and the southern areas of the JLB are of most
interest. This was suggested based on an analysis that has identified that the
Jurassic source samples contain large amounts of organic compounds in the area.
The analyzed biomarker and isotope curves results show that the upper Jurassic
oil in the southern Jameson Land is almost identical to the produced oil in the
Haltenbanken basin offshore mid - Norway. This data gives convincing evidence
that there are genetic links between the upper Jurassic organic - rich shale of the
JLB and the HBB. According to ARCO a sedimentological analysis suggested
that high quality sandstone and mudstones with high sealing quality were to be
found in the JLB. Only potential stratigraphic traps have been identified in the
JLB. Based on the similarities of the JLB and HBB, e.g. both sides of the JMMC,
it has been assumed that the same or similar petroleum systems may also exist in
between in the JMMC including the Dreki area. To increase the reliability of this
assumption geological data from the Dreki area were evaluated including:
bathymetric data, gravity data, magnetic data, seismic data, sampling data and
DSDP data. The most important data was the sampling data performed by the
TGS in 2011, gravity and magnetic data’s. The bouguer gravity anomalies map
defined a deeper lower density area over the JMMC including the Dreki area that
could suggest low density sediments. The magnetic anomalies map over the
JMMC including the Dreki area observed in the northern part of the JMR a quiet
zone (low magnetic field). This quiet zone corresponds to a quiet zone in the
continental margin offshore Norway. The Southern Complex Ridge system
observed a sub-quiet zone. The low magnetic field observed over the JMMC
including the Dreki area suggested that a continental crust from East Greenland
and Norway separated and drifted into the middle of the NAO. The sampling
surveys in the Dreki area in 1973, 2010 and 2011 have also been covered in this
thesis. The surface samplings in 1973 and 2010 were collected to investigate if
seeps of oil and gas are present in the Dreki area. The result was negative, no oil
or gas seeps were found and the surface sampling does not go deep enough to
identify if there is oil or gas potential in the area.
79
==PAGE:91==
The results from the sampling survey performed by TGS and VBPR in 2011
were very good and it suggested existence of old sediments in the Dreki area.
They also found a Jurassic oil seep through the sediments which suggested that
there could be a petroleum system in the Dreki area. Even if we have a generation
of oil in the Dreki area there is need for good quality structure to be in place so oil
accumulation can take place. There is still data that is not official yet including the
2D seismic data collected by the CNOOC. This data will not be available for
several year. But in the case that the data is positive, and it is decided to go into
the exploration drilling phase, a different kind of drilling solution should be
considered. According to GustoMSC portfolio of solutions for Arctic offshore
drilling development, two solutions are considered for the Dreki area, a semi-
submersible and a drillship. The two solutions have been compared and due to
remote and lack of infrastructure in the Dreki area, the semi - submersible
solution is highly reduced due to a low transit speed, low deck load and small
storage capabilities compared to the drillship. Specific solution of a drillship that
has been designed by GustoMSC and could suit the Dreki area is the NanuQ 5000
DP. But more data and factors have to be taken into consideration at that point of
planning which kind of drilling solution suits the Dreki area. That includes an
economic analysis that has not been done in the thesis and an dynamic force
analysis affecting the drilling unit should be studied. When planning which kind
of drilling solution suits a sensitive area like the Dreki, a drilling operation has to
be safe and cost effective where a fine balance between has to be obtained.
80
==PAGE:92==
Bibliography
[1]
E. Stromquist and R. Johnston. “Opportunities and Challenges for Arctic
Oil and Gas Development”. Eurasia Group Report for the Wilson Center
(2013). Canada Institute: Washington, D.C.
[2]
J. L. Murray, L. Hacquebord, D. J. Gregor, and H. Loeng.
“Physical/Geographical Characteristics of the Arctic”. AMAP Assessment
Report: Arctic Pollution Issues (1998). Ed. by J. L. Murray, pp. 9–10.
AMAP: Oslo, Norway.
[3]
Available at: http://www.brookings.edu/blogs/brookings-
now/posts/2014/03/map-undiscovered-arctic-oil-gas-
trade-routes. Accessed on: 14-09-2015.
[4]
NEA. “Guide to Application Procedures Issue of Exploration and
Production Licenses of Hydrocarbons: The Dreki Area 1st Licensing
Round” (2009). Ministry of Industry: Iceland.
[5]
ÍSOR. “Geology and Hydrocarbon Potential of the Northern Dreki Area,
Icelandic Continental Shelf” (2008). NEA and Ministry of Industry:
Iceland.
[6]
K. Einarsson. “Intro to NEA, Water Resources in Iceland, Master Plan for
the Utilization of Energy Resources & Petroleum Exploration” (2011).
NEA: Iceland.
[7]
Þ. Reynisson. “Olíuvinnsla á Íslandi” (2012). Minister of Industry:
Iceland.
[8]
NAE. “Guide to Application Procedures Second Licensing Round on the
Icelandic Continental Shelf” (2012). NEA: Iceland.
[9]
Available at: http://www.nea.is/the-national-energy-
authority/news/nr/1311. Accessed on: 21-09-2015.
[10]
Available at: http://www.nea.is/the-national-energy-
authority/news/nr/1540. Accessed on: 21-09-2015.
81
==PAGE:93==
[11]
Available at: http://www.fp.fo/about-us/history/. Accessed
on: 07-11-2015.
[12]
Available at: https://arcticecon.wordpress.com/2012/05/.
Accessed on: 21-09-2015.
[13]
Available at:
https://www.petoro.no/petoro-annual-report/2013-
/directors--report/directors--report/petoro-as-.
Accessed on: 21-09-2015.
[14]
ÍSOR and NEA. “Iceland Offshore Exploration” (2015). NEA: Iceland.
[15]
Available at: http://www.cnooc.com.cn/en/. Accessed on:
21-09-2015.
[16]
Available at: http://www.visir.is/visbendingar-um-storar-
oliulindir-hvetja-til-leitar-a-
drekasvaedinu/article/2015150909693. Accessed on: 02-09-2015.
[17]
J. Derks, T. Fuchs, T. Hantschel, A. Kauerauf, M. Neumaier, O. Swientek,
N. Tessen, D. Welte, and B. Wygrala. “Basin and Petroleum System
Modeling”. Oilfield Review (2009). Schlumberger: Houston, Texas, USA.
[18]
O. Gudmestad, A. B. Zolotukhin, and E. T. Jarlsby. “Petroleum Resources
with Emphasis on Offshore Fields” (2010). WIT Press: England.
[19]
A. Shapiro. “28415 Oil and Gas Production Notes in Lecture 3 Porous
Medium”. Department of Petroleum Engineering (2012). Technical
University of Denmark: Denmark.
[20]
A. Shapiro. “28415 Oil and Gas Production Notes in Lecture 4 Darcy
Law”. Department of Petroleum Engineering (2012). Technical University of
Denmark: Denmark.
[21]
Anon. “Oil exploration in the Dreki area on the Jan Mayen Ridge: Report
for a plan to offer exclusive exploration and production licences for oil and
gas in the Dreki area on the Jan Mayen Ridge, northeast of Iceland and a
Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) of the proposed plan”
(2007). Ministry of Industry: Reykjavik.
82
==PAGE:94==
[22]
D. G. Roberts, M. Thompson, B. Mitchener, J. Hossack, S. Carmichel, and
H. M. Bjørnseth. “Palaeozoic to Tertiary rift and basin dynamics:
mid-Norway to the Bay of Biscay - a new context for hydrocarbon
prospectivity in the deep water frontier”. Petroleum Geology of Northwest
Europe: Proceedings of the 5th Conference (1999). Ed. by A. J. Fleet and
S. A. R. Boldy. The Geological Society: London.
[23]
Available at:
http://geomaps.wr.usgs.gov/parks/deform/gnormal.html.
Accessed on: 17-11-2015.
[24]
K. Gunnarsson, M. Sand, and S. T. Gudlaugsson. “Geology and
Hydrocarbon Potential of the Jan Mayen Ridge” (1989). NPD and NEA:
Reykjavík and Oslo.
[25]
B. Richter and S. Þ. Guðlaugsson. “Yfirlit um jarðfræði Jan Mayen -
svæðisins og hugsanlegar kolvetnislindir” (2007). ÍSOR: Iceland.
[26]
C. Gaina, L. Gernigon, and P. Ball. “Paleocene-Recent plate boundaries in
the NE Atlantic and the formation of the Jan Mayen microcontinent”.
Journal of the Geological Society (2009), pp. 601–616. Geological Society:
London.
[27]
L. Gernigo, C. Gaina, G. P. Pinvidic, and O. Olesen. “Spreading evaluation
of the Norway Basin and implication for the evaluation of the Møre rifted
margin and its intermediate conjugate system (the Jan Mayen
microcontinent)”. Vol. V - North Atlantic (2010), pp. 125–129. II Central
& North Atlantic Conjugate Margins: Lisbon.
[28]
F. G. Christansen, H. C. Larsen, C. Marcussen, S. Piasecki, and
L. Stemmerik. “Late Paleozoic plays in East Greenland”. In: Petroleum
Geology: From Mature Basin to New Frontier: Proceedings of the 7th
Petroleum Geology Conference (1993). Ed. by B. A. Vining and
S. C. Pickering. Geological Society: London, UK, pp. 657–666.
[29]
Available at: http://www.ggoplc.com/projects/jameson.html.
Accessed on: 24-11-2015.
[30]
P. Japsen, P. F. Green, and J. M. Bonow. “Investigation of the Burial and
Exhumation History of East Greenland Based on Apatite-Fission Track
Analysis, Stratigraphic Landform Analysis and the Geological Record”.
OTC-25562-MS (2015). Geological Survey of Denmark (GEUS):
Copenhagen.
83
==PAGE:95==
[31]
S. D. Andrews, S. R. A. Kelly, W. Braham, and M. Kaye. “Climatic and
eustatic controls on the development of a Late Triassic source rock in the
Jameson Land Basin, East Greenland”. Journal of the Geological Society
(2014), pp. 609–619. Geological Society of London: UK.
[32]
L. Stemmerik, G. Dam, N. Noe-Nygaard, S. Piasecki, and F. Surlyk.
“Sequence stratigraphic of source and reservoir rocks in the Upper
Permian and Jurassic of Jameson Land East Greenland”. Geology of
Greenland Survey Bulletin (1998), pp. 43–54. Geological Survey of
Denmark and Greenland (GEUS): Copenhagen, Denmark.
[33]
Available at: http://www.landgrunnsvefsja.is/vefsja/
landgrunnsvefsja.html. Accessed on: 28-10-2015.
[34]
G. Peron-Pinvidic, L. Gernigon, C. Gaina, and P. Ball. “Insights from the
Jan Mayen system in the Norwegian-Greenland sea-I. Mapping of a
microconinent”. Geophysical Journal International (2012), pp. 385–412.
Oxford University Press: UK.
[35]
Available at:
http://topex.ucsd.edu/marine_grav/explore_grav.html.
Accessed on: 30-11-2015.
[36]
K. Dehradun. “Oil & Natural Gas Corporation Ltd: ONGC 9th seminar
on modern practices in petroleum exploration” (2013). ONGC: India.
[37]
Available at: http:
//earthobservatory.nasa.gov/Features/GRACE/page3.php.
Accessed on: 30-11-2015.
[38]
Available at:
http://pubs.usgs.gov/fs/fs-0239-95/fs-0239-95.pdf.
Accessed on: 14-12-2015.
[39]
R. L. Reynolds, J. G. Rosenbaum, M. R. Hudson, and N. S. Fishman.
“Rock Magnetism, The Distribution of Magnetic Minerals in the Earth’s
Crust, and Aeromagnetic Anomalies”. Geologic Applications of Modern
Aeromagnetic Surveys (1990). Ed. by W. F. Hanna, pp. 27–45. U.S.
Geologic Survey Bulletin 1924.
[40]
N. O. Mariita. “The magnetic method”. present in a short course II on surface
exploration for geothermal resources (2007). United Nations University and
KenGen: Kenya.
84
==PAGE:96==
[41]
Available at:
http://www.mantleplumes.org/NorwayBasin.html. Accessed
on: 30-11-2015.
[42]
Available at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fIYMbK53TGI.
Accessed on: 03-12-2015.
[43]
Available at: http://www.npd.no/en/Publications/Resource-
Reports/2013/Chapter-7/. Accessed on: 03-12-2015.
[44]
Available at: http://www.npd.no/Global/Norsk/2-
Tema/Seismikk/Shapefiler/Jan-Mayen_en.pdf. Accessed on:
03-12-2015.
[45]
M. A. Abrams and A. Corporation. “Best practices for the collection,
analysis, and interpretation of seabed geochemical samples to evaluate
subsurface hydrocarbon generation and entrapment”. OTC - 24219
(2013). Texas, USA.
[46]
Available at: http:
//www.tgs.com/_uk/emails/Projects/2012/02_JanMayen_
Sampling_Feb12/Jan_Mayen_Sampling_Handout.pdf. Accessed
on: 10-12-2015.
[47]
Available at: http://www.drillingformulas.com/how-does-
deep-water-drilling-work/. Accessed on: 08-12-2015.
[48]
M. Hariharan and R. Thethi. “Drilling Riser Management in Deepwater
Environments”. 2H offshore technical paper (2007). Houston, TX, USA.
[49]
AkerSolution. “Deep water CLIP RiserTM for marine drilling operations”
(2010). Aker Solution: Norway.
[50]
GE. “Capital drilling equipment advanced, field - proven risers, diverters
and connectors” (2008). General Electric Company: Florence, Italy.
[51]
S. Holmes, K. Raghavan, O. H. O. Jr, and Y. Constantinides. “OMAE2008
- 57434: Using CFD to Study the Effects of Staggered Buoyancy on
Drilling Riser VIV”. ASME 2008 27th International Conference on Offshore
Mechanics and Arctic Engineering (2008), pp. 749–755. ASME: U.S.
[52]
Available at:
http://www.iadclexicon.org/choke-and-kill-ck-lines/.
Accessed on: 08-12-2015.
85
==PAGE:97==
[53]
S. Hauge, T. Kråkenes, S. Håbrekke, G. Johansen, M. Merz, and T. Onshus.
“Report: Barriers to prevent and limit acute releases to sea:
Environmental risk acceptance criteria and requirments to safety systems”
(2011). SINTEF: Trondheim, Norway.
[54]
ISO. “ISO-13628-4 Petroleum and Natural Gas Industries-Design and
Operation of subsea production systems Part 4: Subsea Wellhead and tree
equipment” (2010). ISO: Norway.
[55]
Available at: http://www.glossary.oilfield.slb.com/Terms/
c/conductor_pipe.aspx. Accessed on: 09-12-2015.
[56]
Available at: http://www.glossary.oilfield.slb.com/Terms/
s/surface_casing.aspx. Accessed on: 09-12-2015.
[57]
Á. Auðunsdóttir, G. Hafsteinsson, and T. Jónsson. “Greinagerð um
veðurfar og hafís á Drekasvæði (Jan Mayen-hrygg)” (2007). Veðurstofa
Íslands: Reykjarvík, Iceland.
[58]
R. Chang. “Physical Chemistry for the Biosciences” (2005). University
Science Books: U.S.A.
[59]
Available at: http://www.ric.edu/faculty/PSCI103/Seawater/
Seawater_notes.htm. Accessed on: 16-12-2015.
[60]
Sagex. “Preparations for awarding licences for exploration and production
of hydrocarbon. Project G-1: Basic premises, possible development paths
and scenarios” (2006). Minister of Industry, Energy and Tourism: Oslo,
Norway.
[61]
H. Jóhannsson. “Servicing the arctic Dreki area” (2011). Arctic Portal:
Iceland.
[62]
K. A. Mork, K. Drinkwater, S. Jónsson, and H. Valdimarsson. “Current
observations at the Jan Mayen Ridge”. Paper presented at the ESSAS open
science meeting Seattle (2011). Institute of Marine Research and Bjerknes
Center for Climate Research: Iceland and Norway.
[63]
K. A. Mork, K. Drinkwater, S. Jónsson, H. Valdimarsson, and
M. Ostrowski. “Water mass Exchanges between the Norwegian and
Iceland seas over the Jan Mayen Ridge using in-situ current
measurements”. Journal of Marine Systems (2014), pp. 227–240. Elsevier:
Bergen, Reykjarvík, and Akureyri.
86
==PAGE:98==
[64]
A. Blischke, Þ. S. Arnarson, and B. Richter. “Offshore geo - hazards to keep
in mind during prospecting and exploration activites of the Jan Mayen
Micro-Continent area” (2012). ÍSOR and NEA: Reykjavík, Iceland.
[65]
Available at:
http://www.weatheronline.co.uk/reports/wxfacts/The-
Polar-low---the-arctic-hurricane.htm. Accessed on:
01-12-2015.
[66]
F. Nusser. “Distribution and Character of Sea Ice in the European”.
ARCTIC SEA ICE (1958). National Academy of Sciences – National
Research Council: Washington, D.C.
[67]
A. Wassink, GustoMSC, and R. van der List. “Development of Solutions
for Arctic Offshore Drilling”. SPE – 166848 (2013). Socity of Petroleum
Engineers: Moscow, Russia.
[68]
A. S. Martin. “Deeper and Colder: The Impacts and Risks of Deepwater
and Arctic Hydrocarbon Development” (2012). Sustainalytics:
Amsterdam, Netherlands.
[69]
S. Tanaka, Y. Okada, and Y. Ichikawa. “Offshore Drilling and Production
Equipment”. Civil Engineering (2009). Ed. by K. Horikawa and Q. Guo,
pp. 217–248. EOLSS: Oxford, UK.
[70]
Available at:
http://www.nadlcorp.com/drilling_units/ultra-
deepwater_units. Accessed on: 14-12-2015.
[71]
W. C. Lyons, G. J. Plisga, and M. D. Lorenz. “Standard handbook of
petroleum and natural gas engineering” (1996). Elsevier: Oxford, UK.
[72]
Available at: http://www.essie.ufl.edu/~sheppard/OCE3016/
Offshore%20Structures.pdf. Accessed on: 30-11-2015.
[73]
Available at: http://www.gustomsc.com/. Accessed on: 16-12-2015.
[74]
“NanuQ 5000 DP Arctic drillship, dynamically positioned” (2012).
GustoMSC: Netherlands.
[75]
S. S. Rey. “Mikrokontinenter: geologiske og geofysiske karakteristika,
avgrensningskriterier og dannelsesmodeller; en global sammenstilling og
vurdering av Jan Mayen mikrokontinent”. hovedoppgave i Geolgoical
(Cand.Sicent.) – University i Oslo (2003). S. S. Rey: Oslo, Norway.
87
==PAGE:99==
[76]
E. Sundvor, O. Eldholm, T. P. Gladczenko, and S. Planke.
“Norwegian-Greenland Sea thermal field”. Dynamic of the Norwegian
Margin (2000). Ed. by A. Nøttvedt, pp. 397–410. The Geological Society:
Norway.
[77]
C. Pascal. “Heat flow of Norway and its continental shelf”. Marine and
Petroleum Geology (2015), pp. 956–969. Elsevier: London.
[78]
A. R. Osborne, T. L. Burch, and R. I. Scarlet. “The Influence of Internal
Waves on Deep-Water Drilling”. Journal of Petroleum Technology (1978).
Society of Petrloeum Engineers.
[79]
N. V. Kurup, S. Shi, Z. Shi, W. Miao, and L. Jiang. “Study of Nonlinear
Internal Waves and Impact on Offshore Drilling Units”.
OMAE2011-503040 Technical conference paper (2011). ASME:
Netherlands.
88
==PAGE:100==
Personal Communication
• Michael Larsen, micla@dongenergy.dk, 2015
• Þorkell Erlingsson, te@verkis.is, 2015
• Þórarinn Sveinn Arnarson, thorarinn.sveinn.arnarson@os.is, 2015
89
