==PAGE:1==
Master's Thesis
The Role of Line-1 Elements in X-
chromosomal silencing
Øystein Monsen
s130908
August 2015
Supervisor:
Frederico de Masi
Assoc. Professor, Ph.D
Centre for Biological Sequence analysis (CBS)
Institute of Systems Biology
Technical University of Denmark (DTU)
==PAGE:2==
Acknowledgements:
My thanks to my friends, Pau Cabañeros Lopez and Dorota Kuczek for making my Danish
experience a little more tolerable – without you, I could not have persevered.
Thanks go also to Mikala Skovgaard Sahlertz for office space, coffee breaks and copious amounts
of very good liquorice. Office life simply was not the same after you had the temerity to finish.
Finally, a word of appreciation to my supervisor, Frederico de Masi, who has been altogether too
patient with me - more so than I probably deserve. You had me dumped in your lap, and took it in
your stride. For this, thank you.
ABSTRACT
X-chromosomal silencing (X-chromosome inactivation, or XCI) in females of higher-order species
is a surprisingly poorly understood phenomenon – understanding of the mechanisms involved in the
transformation of one of the X-chromosomes to «silent» heterochromatin has been hampered by the
apparently subproteinaceous nature of this process and its regulation, as well as by the genetic
makeup of the relevant regions producing technical limitations on our existing methods. In this
thesis, I shall try to investigate the role of the so-called LINE-1 elements in this process by a
genomic approach in mice, producing a novel method for resolving the so-called «multi-mapping»
problem of genomic analysis. I then use this method to analyse a number of datasets, with the
results of this process included. Finally, I have included my interpretation of this analysis along
with my evaluation of the method thus produced.
1: INTRODUCTION 
Wherein I shall attempt to sum up the prior knowledge of various topics upon which this document
is dependent. Every subsection will have a general introduction to the topic with as little reference
to specific biological details as possible, and a more technical explanation with the opposite
mindset. I shall assume some basic molecular-biological knowledge (e.g. an idea of what a gene is,
general knowledge of the central dogma, knowledge of what a chromosome is – if this is lacking,
==PAGE:3==
there is a Very Quick Primer in Appendix II and a glossary of terms in Appendix I), but on a whole
this section should be readable by individuals with little or no biological training, without being too
trivial.
A NOTE: Whenever I discuss gene names in this text, I am talking about their orthologue in Mus
Musculus, i.e. the common mouse [37]. This is partially because the data I work with are mouse
data, and partially because I think the naming conventions are more intuitive.
1.1: THE X-CHROMOSOME AND ITS SILENCING
1.1.1: The Basics
All healthy female individuals of most higher species have additional copies, depending on how
many sex chromosomes the organism has – the platypus has ten(!), for instance [6] – of the X-
chromosome (this is not the genetic definition of 'female', which is "does not have an active Y-
chromosome" – X-chromosomal biology is relevant also to males with Klinefelter's syndrome, for
instance)[31]. In any given cell, however, imbalanced X-chromosome expression might very well
complicate things, producing toxic concentrations of various genetic products, and so every female
cell has some way of compensating for this imbalance. In placental mammals, this is done by one
«silent», i.e. non-expressed or expressed at a vastly reduced level, X-chromosome – this is called
"dosage compensation", and X-chromosomal inactivation (XCI) is how this asymmetry in genetic
material is dealt with in mammals.[3][4] The silencing manifests through an enormous densification
of  the  chromosomal  structure  through  various  chemical  modifications[39],  in  particular  the
chemical methylation and deacetylation of the "tails" of so-called histones[38] (the proteins around
which chromosomal DNA is wrapped, forming nucleosomes) across the chromosome structure, and
the methylation of the DNA itself. These modifications are both semiotic and physical in function
[40][41], and thus work both by simple, physical presence (methyl groups are simply smaller than
acetyl groups, for instance) and through recognition by different families of regulatory and other
proteins and subdomains. This double role of histone modifications further confounds efforts to
adequately understand and model them on a quantitative level, and their position within the
difficult-to-reach nucleus of the cell also poses practical issues. As will be a recurring theme in this
thesis, histone modifications remain a relatively mysterious problem simply due to the necessary
computational  complexity  of  any  satisfactory  model[41].  "Silent"  DNA is  generally  called
"heterochromatin", whereas its active, looser conformation is called "euchromatin" (see fig.1.1). X-
Chromosomal  Inactivation  is  thus  characterised  by  the  transformation  of  euchromatin  into
==PAGE:4==
heterochromatin  through  the  medium  of  chemical  modifications,  in  particular  to  the  tails  of
histones.
 
Fig. 1.1: A MODEL OF THE APPEARANCE OF HETEROCHROMATIN VS EUCHROMATIN: on
the upper level one may see a drosophila model of euchromatin vs. heterochromatin. Note the dense
packing of the heretochromatin complexes as opposed to euchromatin; the round disc-like shapes
are the histone complexes. More will be said on these somewhat later. Adapted from [1]
It is important, at this point, to point out that biological regulation, like so many things regarding
biology, are highly complex phenomena in the sense that it is not feasible to accurately model every
regulatory state, and so we operate with a simplified model in this case. As in the figure above,
many complex forms of regulation exist, and even in «silent» heterochromatin we can sometimes
see a certain, low level of expression. Once again, absolutes do not generally hold in biological
sciences, and this should be kept in mind throughout this paper.
The cellular choice of which X-chromosome is silenced seems to be at least partially random – the
classical illustration of this is the fur colouring of female calico cats, where alleles for the coat
colour are located on the X-chromosome.
==PAGE:5==
  
Fig. 1.2: A pretty kitty. Note the splotches of colour representing differential silencing of the X-
chromosome – the splotches do indicate that there is some continuity in the choice of silencing,
which seems to be at least partially an epigenetic process.
The understanding of the greater biological process surrounding this choice is also somewhat
limited – as of the spring of 2015, no paracrine (locally secreted) factor has been identified that
seems to have anything to do with this, though it has been proposed that one may exist[53].
Epigenetics (i.e. extragenetic cellular inheritance, or "cell memory") has been proposed as the major
mechanism of this choice, but this seems inadequate on its own in light of the actual coexistence of
patches of different silencing within the same cellular layer – the proposed epigenetic model of XCI
tends to accommodate this by assuming that the X is randomly inactivated in each cell more-or-less
separately,  and  transferred  differentially  to  the  offspring  of  the  differentially  silenced  cells.
Whatever the precise mechanism, inconsistent silencing does make sense from a fitness-maximising
point of view – it allows females of any given species to utilise both alles present in their X-
chromosomes, making them less vulnerable to various disorders such as ocular albinism and red-
green colour-blindedness.[54]
One note that must be made is that there appears to be no consistent large-scale mother/daughter
inheritance  of  X-chromosomal  silencing  patterns,  which  makes  assertions  that  this  is  an
"epigenetic" process somewhat problematic, since such inheritance is arguably a necessity for true
==PAGE:6==
epigenicity. There have also been voiced concerns, in particular by Ptashne [2] concerning the
function of histone modifications in particular as self-perpetuatingly "memory-storing" and thus
truly  epigenetic.  Regardless,  I  shall  assume  for  the  sake  of  simplicity  and  coherence  that
"epigenetic" simply refers to extragenetic information heritable (though imperfectly) from parent
cells to their offspring at division. This would necessarily include histone inheritance on a cellular
level, despite the objections mentioned.
Additionally, other posited epigenetic processes including DNA methylation are involved in X-
chromosomal silencing in organisms containing these; however, as the presence of the various
processes seems contingent on the organism (DNA methylation, for instance, does not occur in a
number of model organisms including  Drosophila Melanogaster)[2], making the assertion that
heterochromatin formation in general is dependent on these processes false a priori. There is no
reason to doubt that they are relevant in some organisms, particularly in XCI (notably placental
mammals – more on this later). However, if one is trying to examine X-chromosomal inactivation
as a general phenomenon, more precisely one strictly subsidiary to heterochromatin formation, it
makes little sense to focus on these other mechanisms – the existence of heterochromatin without
DNA methylation implies that DNA methylation is incidental to heterochromatin formation, and
correspondingly that it seems safe to assume, at least for the purposes of this thesis, that DNA
methylation is not the dominant player in the cellular choice to form heterochromatin. This, added
with  confounding  issues  of  data  collection,  means  that  I  shall  focus  mainly  on  histone
modifications. It bears mentioning that it is entirely possible (and, indeed, plausible) that the
process of XCI is to a certain extent characterised by direct DNA methylation[36], but such
concerns are outside the scope of this investigation.
1.1.2: The Details
==PAGE:7==
Fig. 1.3: Histone modifications [7]: A: An illustration of the composition of the chromatin – the
H(x) blocks are each two individual proteins coupled into an octamer.
B: Selected modifications. P equals phosphorylation, assumed to be a purely semiotic modification,
M is methylation, which is both a physical and occasionally semiotic modification, A is acetylation,
which is bigger and more unwieldy than methylation. Finally, U is "ubiquitin", a mainly semiotic
mark used widely in the cell, mainly as a tag for cellular degradation. Ubiquitin is too large and
complex  for  direct  illustration of  its  chemical structure, but the  remainder  are (R,  in these
structures, stands for "residue"):
C: Phosphate group
D: Methyl group (note that individual residues on the histone tail may be methylated multiple times
==PAGE:8==
for different semiotic outcomes or increased densifying effect)
E: Acetyl group
There are various histone modifications commonly associated with XCI, in particular H3k27me3
[9][55] – there are some significant distinctions between humans and mice (not to mention other
organisms), but the process is generally comparable. If anything, the differences that exist between
relatively closely related organisms such as humans and mice could suggest that the roles played by
the modifications are predominantly physical, in the sense that creating a generally hydrophobic
environment increases the stability of a closer structure. This is speculation, however – to my
knowledge, no serious work has been done to try and quantify the relative influence of the
modifications' different roles. [56]
 
 
Fig1.4: the timeline of XCI.  At around day 5.5, random XCI occurs. Figure adapted from [29]
X chromosomal inactivation occurs in three main phases: choice, initiation and spread.[9] This
section shall focus on explaining what is known about the molecular mechanisms in play in each
instance -  much of it remains obscure, but a simple, molecular overview is feasible[10]. In order to
try, however, we must recapitulate somewhat the central characters in this play.
Xist-Tsix and the Xic locus – They'd tell you, but then they'd have to kill you:
The basic deciding unit of X-chromosomal silencing (at least in mice and men, as it were) is
generally held today to be the Xist  functional RNA (see fig.1.5 below). Its mechanism of action is
not precisely known, but it appears to "coat" the chromosome in some manner, presumably
==PAGE:9==
recruiting the biological apparatus involved in silencing and inducing heterochromatin formation.
One hypothesis here is that it works predominantly through DNA methylation by way of regulating
DNA methyltransferases[10] – I will not investigate this line of inquiry further, and I do not believe
that it is sufficient to describe XCI for reasons described earlier. What seems likely, however, is that
it  autoregulates  through  these methyltransferases  (i.e.  enzymes  that  regulate  methylation  and
demethylation of other biological entities).
What is known is that Xist is competitively expressed with another, inhibitory RNA called Tsix (it
was discovered subsequently, and the scientists involved presumably felt like being witty) – through
a mechanism which still remains obscure, but which may, as mentioned, involve DNA methylation
either as a general or, more reasonably, as a locally regulating mechanism for determining which
RNA wins out and in the end which X-chromosome is chosen for inactivation. This process seems,
as mentioned, at least partially random – identical twins will have different inactivation patterns to
each other. [11] It is also imperfectly persistent across cellular generations, which, again, makes the
terminology of epigenetics slightly problematic.
 
Fig. 1.5: Xist-Tsix, sense-antisense – the two genes occupy the same area of the DNA, with all the
implications this has for their regulation [10]. Of course, Tsix is Xist backwards, though as we see,
also somewhat larger for unknown reasons
At any rate, the choice of X chromosome seems to hinge around the relative expression levels of
Xist and Tsix – Xist, as mentioned, induces methylation of DNA and the formation of XCI-
associated  histone  tail  modifications. Tsix,  its  "evil  twin",  competitively methylates  (through
intermediates – see [10]) the gene in a cis action (note that Xist is, to the best of our knowledge, cis,
meaning that the effective silencing of it produces a double negative, i.e. an active chromosome,
whew) silencing both its allele and the accompanying Xist allele – the  cis  relationship here is
indicated by the fact that heterozygous deletion of Tsix causes the mutant X chromosome to be
silenced. Once inactivation is completed, the active chromosome keeps expressing Tsix for a time,
==PAGE:10==
then stops. This whole paragraph should be taken with a healthy dose of skepticism as the
molecular processes involved remain somewhat obscure, but this is the best information I could find
in a literature search.
This genetic region is located within a larger region called the X-inactivation center (Xic), which
contain a number of additional genes which seem involved in the XCI (fig. 1.5) – convention
dictates the the Xic be seen as a unit, as deleting any single part of it disrupts the normal process of
XCI. Elements of the Xic are used both to detect if silencing is needed (i.e. there's a concentration
sensor in place), and seems to play some role in the choice as well [14]. Again, the full relation of
all elements in the Xic is not perfectly understood, though efforts have been made to do it, and
spatial regions seem to play a major role [52]. 
 
Fig. 1.6: Model of an Xic – note the overlapping Xist and Tsix genetic regions. Adapted from [52]
Finally, a reservation – Xist and Tsix only exist in placental mammals [12] – XCI occurs to some
extent in all known mammalian species (yes, even the platypus![57]). While we focus on this
specific mechanism, there must be some orthologous process in e.g. the marsupials of this world. In
fact, a direct analogue seems to have been identified for marsupials in the form of Rsx[13], but the
point stands – pretensions of universalism in biology must be very carefully backed up.
1.2: LINE-1 ELEMENTS
Fig. 1.7:  The overview of the LINE-1 composition. EN and RT are short for Endonuclease and
Reverse Transcriptase – both are necessary for the retrotransposition of the LINE1. Adapted from
[17].
==PAGE:11==
1.2.1: The Basics
LINE-1 elements, also known as Long Interspersed Nuclear Elements (type 1), are remnants of
transposable elements, so-called "transposons", i.e. DNA fragments that move across the genome in
an essentially parasitic manner, essentially hijacking various aspects of the molecular machinery of
the genome including DNA repair and cell division machineries[8]. Transposons are generally fairly
repetitive, contain certain telltale signs or "footprints" around their edges, and are a potential agent
for horizontal gene transfer in higher organisms – they may often be detected by examining their
nucleotide composition (G/C-content, by convention) compared to the surrounding region. It is
important to note that most transposable elements in the human genome are so-called "inactive"
transposons,  in  that  they  have  mutated  to  the  point  where  an  actual  transposition  event  is
enormously unlikely or even impossible – most, if not all of the LINE-1s in our genome have
"settled down", so to speak, and seem to have been domesticated by our genome; the human
genome in particular has 45% or so of its base pairs derived from transposable elements, of which
almost a third are LINE-1 elements (roughly 17% or the human genome) [4]. This amount is fairly
typical for mammals – the point being, these elements make up a significant portion of our genetic
material.
The complete LINE-1 consists of two ORFs, (Open Reading Frames), a polyA tail-coding element
and untranslated regions in front and in rear, and is transcriptionally (though, to reiterate, not
necessarily transposonically) active in many cases, in particular the more recent ones - older LINE-
1s are typically somewhat atrophied due to long-term evolutionary pressure, in particular having
their own regulatory elements suppressed. They form a significant part of what was once called
"junk DNA" due to its apparent lack of gene expression, but this is an increasingly outmoded term
as the premise of this thesis helps indicate. The more modern view is that play significant roles in
both the murine and human genomes, including regulatory functions and non-protein products. The
fluidity of the concept of a "gene" comes into play here in a major manner. I shall, for the purposes
of this thesis, stay with a conservative definition, wherein a gene requires a discrete, direct
phenotypic result of some description, but it may very well be reasonable to produce an expanded
definition in which the  LINE-1s are counted as a whole. [3] Regardless, it is generally fruitful to
consider the LINE-1 as a unit, despite frequent truncations or loss of function, especially in many
older LINE-1 elements[48][58]. 
==PAGE:12==
Fig. 1.8: X-ray crystallorgaphic image of a LINE-1 ORF1 gene product in its active, 
trimer state. Note that this is a protein structure – active LINE-1s are translated.
Picture from PDB. [62]
 
The  exact  nature  of  the  LINE-1  products  vary somewhat  between  LINE-1  family and  host
organism,  but  it  remains  a  major  player  in  the  currently  popular  hypothesis  regarding  the
progression of XCI, namely the Lyon hypothesis[8], which posits that they function as a sort of
genetic "relay station" for the spread of Xist and thus heterochromatin through the cromosome. This
hypothesis has been given a lot of credence by a number of recent experiments, and though the
exact mechanism by which LINE-1s might facilitate this process remains obscure there is more
support for it than any alternative (which, admittedly, is not saying a lot).
LINE-1 activity has been shown to escape silencing to some degree and in some instances, but it
remains for various reasons a very cryptic family of genetic entites [43]. They are, however,
disproportionately represented on the human X chromosome [8], though significantly less so in the
more  evolutionary recent  additions to said chromosome as well as those regions that tend to
"escape" silencing.[8] This said, established correlation does not necessarily indicate causation. We
==PAGE:13==
assume that it does in this case, however, and so I do my work on this thesis taking the Lyon
hypothesis more or less for granted where a choice is necessary – it is, for the most part, not
necessary, but that is the view that mostly informs my thinking around these issues.
Additionally, LINE-1s have been reported in some instances to flank genes which are silenced at a
late stage during XCI [43] – one notable example is  Huwe1, a ubiquitin protein ligase and the
inspiration for the thesis of Jane Rasmussen, of whose work this may be considered a direct
continuation.[44] This seems consistent with the Lyon hypothesis, with Xist RNA then potentially
working like a hitch to "glue" together two sections of DNA, effectively silencing whatever's
between them. I hasten to add that this is merely speculation - it may also have some other function,
however – this is a very novel phenomenon, and should be taken as such.
1.2.2: The Details
Table 1: Selected lineages of LINE-1s in mice, the types and distributions – selected from [58],
informed by [48]. FL elements are Functional LINE1s – i.e. they are not significantly truncated and
are potentially transcriptionally (though not necessarily translationally or transposally) active. Age
Family
Promoter type LPR structure
Tf_I
L1Md_T
F   
66-42-42
5601
1593
0.462 ± 0.095
0.25 (0.20-0.31)
Tf_II
L1Md_T
F   
66-42-41
1282
0.496 ± 0.087
0.27 (0.22-0.32)
Tf_III
L1Md_T
F   
66-42-40
4678
1892
2.233 ± 0.196
1.23 (1.12-1.34)
Gf_I
F   
66-42-42-42
2177
615
1.356 ± 0.250
0.75 (0.61-0.88)
Gf_II
L1Md_T
F   
66-66-66
770
368
3.929 ± 0.421
2.16 (1.93-2.39)
L1MdA_I
L1MdA
A   
66-42
4249
1620
0.376 ± 0.073
0.21 (0.17-0.25)
L1MdA_ II
L1MdA
A   
66-42-42
5156
1240
2.939 ± 0.294
1.62 (1.45-1.78)
L1MdA_ III
L1MdA
A   
66-42-42
4337
606
3.916 ± 0.304
2.15 (1.99-2.32)
L1MdA_IV
L1MdF2
A   
66-42-42
1209
645
4.346 ± 0.414
2.39 (2.16-2.62)
L1MdA_V
L1MdF3
A   
66-42-41
945
299
5.167 ± 0.341
2.84 (2.65-3.03)
L1MdA_VI
L1MdF3
A   
66-66
5497
219
8.554 ± 0.434
4.70 (4.47-4.94)
L1MdA_VII
L1MdF2
A   
66-65
5684
759
8.346 ± 0.414
4.59 (4.36-4.82)
Repeat masker 
classification
Genomic copy 
number
Number of FL 
elements
Average 
pairwise 
divergence (% 
± S.E.)
Age (Myr)
L1Md_F, 
L1Md_T
==PAGE:14==
is in millions of years, "genomic copy number" is the number of family members detected at all in
this category, and "LPR structure" signifies the prevalence of a certain repeat region prominent in
the coiled-coil domain of ORF1, involved in protein functionality. As may be seen,  FL numbers are
highest in the Tf_I, II and III families as well as A_I and A_II, indicating a general tendency
towards enrichment in these families.
The functional regions of the LINE-1 are not fully understood, and the hierarchisation of them is
correspondingly a bit of a mess. What is known is that the general hierarchy of conservation is
roughly (in descending order) ORF2>ORF1>3'UTR>5'UTR>polyA. [16][48][49][59] Both ORFs
are necessary for transposition, as is the 5'UTR – indeed, the 5' region contains regulatory functions,
and in the 90%-or-so of LINE-1s that are 5'-truncated, transcription is not detected, indicating an
evolutionary pressure towards inactivation in many cases. Variance within the 5' region is broader
than the other regions [48][59], at least in humans – the proposed reason for this is varying
regulation of expression, with truncation being an effective "off" switch and genetic defense
mechanism against rampant transposition of LINE-1s. An obvious conclusion that may be drawn
from these findings is that the 5' region is the most evolutionarily active region of the LINE-1, and
that categorisation based primarily upon this region may well be the optimal approach for a future
formalisation of LINE-1 functional categories.
Signs also indicate that horizontal gene transfer may play a role in the distribution of some LINE-1
families, notably members of the known active families L1MdTf-I and -II, as well as L1MdGf-1
[59] – note that all of these have been indicated in previous work, among it Ms. Rasmussen's, as
potentially  relevant  to  gene  silencing  through  "flanking"  positions.  These  groups  are  also
transcriptionally active, and are correspondingly relatively "young" examples of murine LINE-1
families. Horizontal gene transfer in higher organisms is a somewhat controversial subject [60][61],
since the concrete mechanisms of it remain severely underexplored and the precise methods of
evaluating a certain gene's candidacy for being horizontally transferred are problematic, but there is
mounting evidence for it occurring even in primates and mice. In these cases, it seems as though a
transposonic segment would be a solid candidate for a horizontally transferred gene due to its
natural genetic mobility, and sex chromosome trafficking may also be a factor. One must be careful
in such studies, however, as a frequently occurring problem is the tendency to assume a naïve null
model as the only alternative to a horizontal gene transfer event. In this case, one might well
consider  a  reasonable  alternative  model  one  involving  gene  duplication  events,  transposonic
insertions,  strong  selective  pressures,  etc.  Indeed,  fig  1.9  below  indicates  another  potential
relationship between these particular families of LINE-1s and their apparent abberrative nature – it
==PAGE:15==
seems possible that there is some evolutionary pressure for LINE-1s of a certain breed in certain
positions to conform to a genetic function.
LINE-1 evolution is strongly reminiscent both in
mice  and  in  men,  though  one  interesting
difference lies in the ORF1 – a coiled-coil domain
involved  in  trimer  formation  sees  very  little
structural conservation in mouse LINE-1 lineages
(see table 1). This may, as I see it, indicate one of
two things: Either, it helps underline a possible
horizontal transfer event as the original genesis of
LINE-1  mouse  lineages,  or  it  indicates
chromosomal appropriation of the LINE-1 gene
product, the purposes for which this domain is not
useful[59]. Potential use of the ORF1 mRNA to
regulate  and  disseminate  silencing  of  genes  in
XCI could fit into this category.
It  bears  mentioning  that  LINE-1s,  like  other
genetic  elements,  may  very  well  have  several
discrete  functions  –  so  one  hypothesis  for  the
function of LINE-1 elements does not have to be
mutually  exclusive  with  the  others.  So,  for
instance, it is not a priori impossible that both the
"relay" hypothesis (i.e. that LINE-1 acts as a way-
station for XCI through high-affinity binding of
the genetic structure [8]) and the alternative close
proximity  transfer  (i.e.  that  heterochromatin
spreads gradually from the physical properties of
the X-inactivation centre)[50] may be true, as well
as  other  potential  functions  from  the  gene
products of LINE-1 elements. Indeed, attempts at
testing either hypothesis as exclusive have been
repeatedly frustrated  and  offer  little  conclusive
Fig. 1.9: Phylogeny; ADAPTED FROM [59] – the 
evolutionary distances between various LINE-1. 
The LINE-1 families indicated as significant by 
Jane Rasmussen are circled – the authors' proposed
horizontal gene transfer events are indicated by 
arrows.
==PAGE:16==
evidence, which indicates either that there are technological or theoretical deficiencies in play – or
both, of course. One theoretical deficiency may be that the proposed model is an either/or situation,
where this juxtaposition is simply not accurate. Multipurpose elements are rife in biology, and this
should always be kept in mind when attempting to analyse and deal with such issues as these.
LINE-1s are generally grouped together in three major dimensions: evolutionary "age", i.e. the
degree  to  which  they  have  been  exposed  to  genetic  drift  (random  mutational  damage  and
degeneration  over  time)  or  evolutionary pressure.  Both  of  these  tendencies  will  tend  to,  as
mentioned, inactivate the LINE-1's transposition, either because integration into the genome as a
functional unit will tend to select for something that doesn't run away or because the transposition is
simply knocked out by random chance. A second classification  criterion  is  origin, which  is
essentially classification by the common ancestor's host, and the third is promoter type included in
the 5' UTR region. Their names can thus go along the lines of L1MdA_I, for Line1, species origin
Md (mouse, Mus Domesticus) and promoter A_1 [15]. To make matters a little more confusing, this
naming convention is not universal - the program I will mainly be using to generate LINE-1
coordinates, RepeatMasker, will not use it, for instance, though it uses a related scheme. Also,
species origin becomes somewhat more complicated when one starts to factor in the possibility of
entire families descending from horizontal gene transfer events.
1.3: PRACTICAL ISSUES
LINE-1 elements are computationally difficult to deal with directly, because there are so many of
them and they are often located in high-repeat regions, are often high-repeat themselves and (in
mice and men) are relatively A/T rich. One particular problem is the high level of conservation
among non-truncated and related LINE-1 elements – as it is practically impossible to tell apart, for
instance, one LINE-1 ORF1 from the next, the sheer weight of data makes it hard to accurately
gauge the impact of whatever one is looking for regarding them. In particular, next-generation
sequencing methods become tricky in this context, as these methods rely on mapping protocols to
figure out exactly which genes are active. The particular method I intend to use is called ChipSeq,
in order to examine the histone modifications involved in heterochromatin formation. 
"ChIP-seq", or Chromatin-ImmunoPrecipitation – Sequencing, essentially purifying a nucleus for a
DNA-associated protein and then sequencing the DNA in that sample. There are issues with this
method, most notably a remaining tendency for labs to produce results that are not reproducible in
other labs, but generally it's supposed to yield an image of where a certain DNA-associated protein
actually binds to the DNA. Obviously the reproducability issues are worrying, indicating underlying
==PAGE:17==
biases at some step in the process, but ChipSeq is generally held to be the gold standard method of
detecting and categorising protein-DNA interactions.
How it works is that it generates a filter which, using antibodies that specifically target the desired
protein, isolates both those proteins and DNA fragments. These fragments are then en-masse
sequenced into short "reads" which each has an identifier and a specific sequence, which are in turn
mapped onto the chromosome by means of computational methods (more on this later), finally
having their "coverage" density estimated against a statistical model and hopefully yielding an
indication as to where the protein bound to the DNA. Also included in the data are quality
measures, which may add considerably to the complexity of any model dealing with them, but
which are indispensable due to the inconsistency of the method and the potential ill effects of
erroneous mapping.
The main problem here for examining something like LINE-1 elements is, as mentioned, that there
are so many LINE-1 elements and they all look more-or-less the same [34]. This necessarily leads to
any reads that target LINE-1s mapping multiple places at once with equal score, severely muddling
the data and potentially producing significant density levels where there shouldn't be any. This
problem is, incidentally, also the main object of the technical efforts presented in this paper.
1.4: HOW'S IT FIT TOGETHER THEN
==PAGE:18==
Fig. 1.10: An abstract represenetation of the multi-mapping problem. Image components
mercilessly scrounged from around the internet. Basically the problem is that a single read is very
short, and the chromosome is very big – so there may be multiple locations where the genetic code
of the read matches the genetic code of the chromosome, and these may be distributed seemingly at
random. Which has to be dealt with somehow.
So,  to  recapitulate:  What  I  wish  to  examine  is  how  LINE-1  interact  with  the  spread  of
heterochromatin on the inactive X in early development. I intend to do this by analysing histones
modified in particular ways by way of a ChipSeq data set – 147 base pairs wrap around a single
nucleosome histone complex, so a single "peak" should start about that large, assuming that the
complex is not disassembled during the immunoprecipitation. However, in order to properly employ
ChipSeq in this instance, the problem of single reads mapping to multiple locations must be tackled
(it cannot, theoretically, be perfectly resolved – certain reads are actually identical, and will thus
map to the same locations despite any efforts to the contrary, for one).  My proposed method for
ameliorating this issue will be described in the end of section 2, as comprehending it requires an
understanding of which programs have been used to treat the data set in advance and how they
work. Thus, without further ado...
==PAGE:19==
2: TOOLS AND METHODS
2.1 TOOLS
In  this  section,  I  shall  explain  the  basic  function  and  algorithms  of  the  various  published
computational tools I have used in the process of producing this thesis. The degree of detail in the
explanations may vary by how critical they are to the project itself, with how difficult I think that
understanding the program is, or how  pertinent I consider the theoretical underpinnings and
assumptions the various tools impose on the data set. I will also include a short section on how they
each fit into my workflow, essentially a user's evaluation.
2.1.1: Trimmomatic
Trimmomatic [17] is a "flexible trimmer for illumina sequence data", i.e. it takes sequence data
formatted in the manner that is used by the Illumina corporation and removes those parts of it
deemed inferior as according to some inserted standard. What it takes is data in the FASTQ format
[18], then analyses this data, scanning it for e.g. low quality scores or clear adapter sequences (a
technical quirk of modern NGS methods in particular is that they add small non-information storing
sequences to the ends of reads, this done for various reasons including facilitating primer design and
protecting the actual "meat" of the reads from degradation etc). If the read in question fails to
conform to the standards of quality – this could be length, quality, adapter content, among other
qualities – it is deleted, just like that. Trimmomatic's main advantages compared to other, similar
preprocessing tools are user-friendliness and flexibility. It also trims off the adapter sequences,
which really does spare the user a lot of heart ache. It is also designed for so-called "paired-end"
reads, which are what they sound like – in order to make data easier to work with, some ChIP-Seq
protocols produce lists of "mate" reads which are a certain, fixed distance from each other. The
dataset which I am focussing on is single-ended, and so this is not relevant for this specific
procedure, but it remains a concern if the method is going to be somehow generalised.
==PAGE:20==
2.1.2: FASTQC
 
Fig. 2.1: Sample FastQC output, from their website [19]
FastQC, a "quality control tool for high throughput sequence data" [19], is more or less what it says
on the tin. One feeds it a dataset, and it produces a report with little graphs and everything –
essentially what it does is, it builds a collective model based on the entire input dataset, and then
proceeds to evaluate the dataset  as a whole based on certain criteria, pertinently k-mer content
(essentially the degree of large-scale repetition in the dataset), per base sequence quality and
overrepresented sequences, among others. It then feeds the results of this evaluation out through a
series of graphs, as  well as qualitative measurements  of acceptability. Used in tandem with
Trimmomatic,  it's  the  premium  tool  for  evaluating  the  level  of  preprocessed  data  –  some
consideration was made to using other quality control tools, but after a cursory investigation it
seemed more prudent to use FastQC.
One major lack of FastQC is that it seems to have no dedicated support for paired-end reads.
However, I don't care about paired-end reads, since I'm not using those. So it's all good.
2.1.3: RepeatMasker
RepeatMasker is a fairly old piece of software (initial release in 1998), doing a fairly simple job
very well. Its main purpose in general is to detect and mask out high-repeat regions (SINEs, LINEs
==PAGE:21==
and LTRs in particular) considered "junk DNA" for many purposes (though not, of course, for our
purposes).  Of course, sifting through this junk is exactly what we want to do, and RepeatMasker
remains the premier tool for it.
It takes as its input a "library" of known repeat sequences and a template – such as a genome or
chromosome – and uses a selection BLAST-like algorithms (HMM approaches that fragments the
query into small "words", seeds those "words" around the template and then uses a scoring matrix to
properly place them on the template) to build a range of putative locations for the queries.
Repeatmasker then runs what amounts to a housekeeping script, merging close fragments, deleting
duplicates etc, taking into account factors like GC content (important for reasons related to the
retrostransposonic  origin  of  these  elements  –  mentioned  in  the  introduction).  A number  of
parameters may be changed, including sensitivity, the significance threshold of a valid hit and
database query – so if you're working in  mus musculus, you can work exclusively from known
mouse query sequences, for instance. Finally, RepeatMasker classifies its remaining hits according
to type of repeat element, masks them and outputs the list.
RepeatMasker is deceptively simple to use for its complexity and modularity. It is a powerful tool
that must be approached with some caution, because it does a very large number of things, many of
them entirely obscured by the package's user interface. [20][21]
2.1.4: VELVET 
Velvet is a de novo assembly tool for creating artificial gene scaffold data structures. It does its job,
once again, by fragmenting the input (taken in the form of individual reads, typically in fastq
format) into k-mers, where k is an odd-number (why odd-number, I hear you cry? All in good time)
integer selected by the user, but obviously no larger than the individual reads to be fragmented.
They are then reassembled into a graph structure called a De Brujn Graph.
K-mer structure
Velvet fragments its input into k-mer "words" in a manner somewhat similar to the BLAST
algorithm described earlier. Importantly, every word is turned into a node in the graph which will be
used to combine reads into larger assemblies, which are assumed to exist as fragments of the
underlying chromosome. Calibrating the k-value is a tradeoff of sensitivity and specificity - the
smaller  k is the more ambiguous words you get, but one also gets more combinations and thus
greater coverage. k thus becomes the central variable for running velvet – any optimisation must be
done primarily around optimising k for whatever output you desire. 
==PAGE:22==
Realistically, this approach is more useful for higher-coverage methods  than methods like ChIP-
Seq when doing de-novo chromosome assembly, but for our purposes it works well. Additionally,
this approach of fragmenting the reads makes it suitable for datasets composed of very short reads,
which is exactly what we're dealing with most often when confronted with the multi-mapping
problem.
The De Bruijn Graph
 
Fig. 2.2: Example of a De Bruijn Graph for a binary system with k=4.  Adapted from[22]
The De Bruijn Graph involves assembling all these words into a graph space, with each word as a
node and each edge represents a larger word, where all letters but one overlap (k-1 in both situations
– so the 3-mers ATA and TAG would overlap in TA, and the edge between them would be called
"ATAG"). [22] Velvet builds both strands simultaneously, practically building each node on the
graph along with a "twin" – so you'll have node ATA above "twinned" with a node "TAT", which is
its reverse compliment – preventing a read from complementing itself is the reason that the k-value
has to be an odd number. This could possibly have been done in another way (say, by using read IDs
and positions), but one gets the impression that this is a concession to runtime.
The graph is built using all available information – both read identity, position within read,
neighbours within read and sequence are included in the k-mer word of a given ID. This ID
assignment, incidentally, also works as a way of keeping tally of duplicate words. Velvet thus
operates on two levels: On one hand, it works by extending "words", on the other it takes into
account individual read structure and identity. Following this basic hooking together and assembly
of contiguous regions (called 'contigs' henceforth), the graphs are more or less disassembled and a
list of contigs are printed to output in a format of your choice. Velvet assumes a linear chromosome,
==PAGE:23==
and so uses an Eulerian cycle (edge-focussed rather than node-focussed) to progress through the
graph. [23][24] It also includes various statistics, though these are not directly pertinent to this
thesis.
Running Velvet
Velvet is divided into two main sections, Velveth and Velvetg (rule of thumb: hash and graph) –
Velveth builds the dictionary of words (so it processes reads, fragments them into  k-mers and
defines local alignments between reads), and Velvetg processes this information to build and
analyse the de Bruijn graph. Why they are two separate executables is beyond me, but I will
speculate that they found a natural checkpoint and decided to simply separate the process for ease of
overview.
Velvet's main size estimate is N50, which amounts to the size threshold at which the assembly
output is bisected by "weight" – so 50% of the basepairs will be in assemblies at least the size of the
N50. I personally find this to be a measure of somewhat dubious usefulness, but that is what they
include and one is obligated to use it.
The program also contains a fair amount of customisation which it may be fruitful to investigate
further – I personally never used most of them, but as the assembly step is one of the major
potential stumbling blocs of my proposed approach, any emulation of this procedure  should pay
particular attention to velvet's algorithm and syntax.
One quirk of this whole process is that Velvet has very high memory consumption, and its output is
likewise fairly big, making it a costly program to run. Fortunately, Velvet has dedicated optimisation
tools, such as VelvetOptimiser[25], to help calibrate the optimal input parameters. Otherwise, one
may simply run it several times and pick the geometry that suits one's purpose best, such as
optimising e.g. size and number of contigs or full coverage. This is actually very similar to what
VelvetOptimiser does, however, and it may be that I was simply unable to find the right nuts and
bolts in the rather cryptic documentation of that program.
2.1.5: BOWTIE
Bowtie is "an ultrafast, memory-efficient alignment program for aligning short DNA sequence reads
to large genomes" - a mapping algorithm, part of a larger suite from the collaboration of institutions
that made cufflink and tophat (you may note a trend in their software names). It was, as of 2014, the
fastest available for its purpose without serious flaws. [26] 
==PAGE:24==
Bowtie's algorithm is based on a process called the Burrows-Wheeler transform (BWT) to make it
more efficient. The Burrows-Wheeler transform is a compression algorithm which involves no loss
of data – so a sentence compressed with BWT may be "unpacked" back into its original shape
through implicit information storage – the algorithm will be more specifically described below.[27]
Bowtie takes as its template a genome (partial or whole – so it may take the full human genome,
one mouse chromosome or a velvet assembly) and as its query a set of reads, in FASTQ or FASTA.
It  searches  in  a  two-step  process,  first  for  perfect  hits  using  the  so-called  EXACTMATCH
algorithm, which is simply an efficient way of searching for words in a BWT, and then for less-
perfect hits. These may be the result both of a failure in process or genuine genetic variance – it is,
in the bowtie algorithm, impossible to know for certain, and impossible a priori to control for this
without introducing external genetic variance data, which would make the entire premise of a BWT
method  untenable.  When  Bowtie  encounters  a  mismatch,  it  backtracks  and  juggles  with  an
"optimal" substitution (see fig. 2.3). This introduces an element of randomness into the Bowtie
algorithm (unless instructed otherwise, it will be happy after finding one that alignment that fits),
and under normal conditions one is not guaranteed to locate the global optimum for a mismatching
read. The algorithm is somewhat weighted towards assuming technical error rather than variance, as
it preferentially weighs mismatches located at low-quality read locations, if these are available. As
hinted, though, it is possible to instruct the algorithm to keep on searching until it locates a
maximum-scoring match for each read, at the cost of some additional runtime.
==PAGE:25==
 
Fig. 2.3: The how to behave in case of a mismatch. In this example, it is assumed that the A is the
lowest-quality base, and it is initially preferred – note that these sequences have already been
subjected to a BWT, and may thus not be entirely clear. The numbers involved are position scores
for decrypting the BWT – see below. Figure taken from [28]
TRANSFORM AND ROLL OUT
==PAGE:26==
 
Fig. 2.4: The BWT process. In a), the matrix is built, with the outcome being identical to the last
column of the matrix – that is the finished transformed text. In b), the process undergone in the case
of a perfect match to reconstruct the input text. In c), it is illustrated how the search program
proceeds,  iterating through the possible positions and using last-first to reconstruct the query
sequence. Figure taken from [28]
The BWT is, as mentioned, a text compression method, which works on a full library. It follows this
process:
A symbol character ($) is placed after the text, as a sort of "extra" character – so if you're using an
english alphabet, it would be ending as "xyz$". A shift matrix is then constructed (see fig. 2.4)
where each row is one shift of the text, making it a quadratic matrix of L+1 x L+1, where L is the
length of the text being transformed. This matrix has a curious property called "last-first", wherein
the quadratic nature of this matrix is exploited by the ith occurence of a certain character in the last
column is identical to the  ith occurrence of that same character in the first column (again see
fig.2.y). 
When one has a query segment, it thus becomes possible to reconstruct it through this property, as
once again seen in figure 2.y. This, allowing for a certain number of mistakes in the case of no
perfect hits, is putting it simply what bowtie does ad nauseum.
 
This, of course, is all very impractical for a human being to do, but it is computationally easier to
search through a dataset using positional data and having generally close letters – it's not very
visible in the figure, but this procedure tends to produce runs of repeated characters, which is easier
to iterate through. 
==PAGE:27==
Bowtie runs quickly and efficiently, and has a host of options and alternative arguments that can be
implemented in it. It remains the premium mapping software in the literature, and is capable of
handing paired-end reads as well as dealing with other exotic properties like colourspace.
2.1.6: MACS
MACS, or Model-Based Analysis of Chip-Seq, is what I wil refer to as a "peak-calling" software, as
it builds a model (oh wait what?!) of the read distribution based on inputted control files, then tests
for significant deviance from this baseline model.
MACS assumes that reads are subject to what amounts to a poisson distribution, defined as a
distribution of X where λ is greater than 0 and k is an integer and which has the the probability mass
function:
 
 (eq.1)
In plain language what this means is that the chance of a tag hitting a given location is random in
time or space in the null distribution, i.e. if there is no good data and everything is noise. This is
potentially somewhat problematic for our data set, for reasons I will touch upon in the discussion,
but it is generally a reasonable assumption, and MACS does control for underlying shifts in
distribution by use of a fairly sophisticated null model based on control data.
MACS also tries to compensate for the at times dramatically different background noise of the
chromosome (which will vary according to repetition, for instance, leading to a higher natural
density of read maps – the point is, there will be local biasses) by calculating the background
distribution  in four different λ variables – the whole background, and three different size windows
(1k, 5k and 10k bps of distance), assuming a control sample has been input. It then selects the
largest λ variable of those available.
Another thing MACS does is to find out the shift in peaks on the plus(Watson) and minus(Crick)
strands – it does this because the Chip-Seq method has a tendency to enrich reads somewhat to the
3' end of the actual center of the peak because reads are read 5' to 3' (so, a 30bp read starting in
location X would end at X+30 on the Watson strand and at X-29 at the Crick strand). This matters
because each peak is definitionally a region significantly higher read density than the null model in
a given genetic region, and thus the summit will be towards the center of this region of higher
==PAGE:28==
density – which again will necessarily be different on the different strands given 3' shift. In order to
produce a unified peak, this has to be evened out, and MACS simply takes the average distance of
the summits as a control measure.
MACS is capable of substituting its own baseline model for a control sample, though this is
obviously not recommended. This model is frustratingly cryptic, but from what I have been able to
find it seems to be a general pre-made model based on the organism in question, with the default
presumably being homo sapiens. 
Overall, MACS is a fairly solid piece of software, runs rather efficiently and provides easily legible
output. Its assumptions are generally acceptable and it makes no attempts to hide them – its
interface is somewhat clunky, and there are options which should probably be kept explicit which
have an implicit option, but it has good documentation and a solid manual.
2.1.7: Others, & own scripts
A number of formatting changes, particularly between FASTQ and SAM format, were carried out
over the course of these investigations. These were either used using Samtools, a fairly standard
suite of text formatting tools, or my own, custom perl scripts available in the CBS machine rgbox at
/data/s130908/scripts/. They are generally quite banal, with one exception to which we will return.
BLAT was used, which is a hidden markov model-based local alignment tool more or less as
described  in  section  2.1.3.  Additionally,  VelvetOptimiser  was  tried,  used  and  rejected  –  as
mentioned in 2.1.4, it works by simply optimising several runs of Velvet for certain criteria. I didn't
find it very useful, but perhaps that fault is with me – certainly it seems useful conceptually for the
general approach taken in this thesis.
==PAGE:29==
2.2: Proposed method:
Fig. 2.5: Two flow charts. a) describes the full process intended to produce and optimise the quality
of ChIP-seq data. b) describes the algorithm of Readresolver, which is my own script. As may
hopefully be seen, bad reads are eliminated early on through Trimmomatic (here used as a
shorthand for the entire a-priori read evaluation process), and the set of "good" reads then
proceeds through a somewhat baroque process wherein multiple possible positions are generated,
and then evaluated by examining them, first in terms of matching with the extended contig
assemblies, and then by the peak density in their immediate vicinity.
And here we arrive at the read-resolving method.
==PAGE:30==
The proposed method for resolving reads is twofold: First, an assembly structure is built from the
input reads. Then, the reads are mapped back onto this assembly structure, whose individual contigs
are again mapped onto the chromosome. The reason for doing this is to try and "extend" the reads,
making them bigger and thus easier to map unambiguously onto the chromosome. Any high-scoring
mapping locations would then be cross-referenced with the contig locations and subjected to that
filter before proceeding.
The other part of the method is implementing an implicit maximum likelihood estimator (MLE),
abstracted through the script's "score" function, assuming a poisson distribution (as one may recall
that MACS, the chosen peak-calling program already does), by taking the peak distribution to be a
perfect representation of the read distribution and then simply assigning them a score, taking out the
highest-scoring potential position(s) for the given read. Obviously, this assumption is simply an
approximation – the level of abstraction this implies means that any hope of calculating specific p-
or q-values is quashed already at this point. It also adds an obvious bias towards high-coverage
regions, which may be problematic.
The major bottleneck of this process is its high level of memory consumption and the difficulty of
compartmentalising the data set – testing it on full-scale datasets frequently triggered the linux out-
of-memory (OOM) killer, which as the name indicates kills memory-hogging processes. This may
be alleviated by properly filtering the raw dataset to remove e.g. long terminal repeat regions – I did
not do this to better evaluate the efficiacy of my read resolution method, which landed me in quite a
lot of computational trouble, as the data files ranged from 100-500GBs, requiring extraordinary
amounts of RAM.
And that is really all there is to it. The method may (and should!) be combined with other
approaches such as data filtering (removing undesired regions such as e.g. LTRs) or better data –
the current method has not been made with paired-end reads in mind, and they may mean trouble
with some of the earlier steps in this pipeline (notably trimomatic), but the theory and most of the
code  should  be  easily  adaptable.  In  fact,  it  is  likely  that  higher-quality  data  will  increase
performance and make the OOM killer less murderous due to reducing the sheer amount of data to
be handled.
2.3: Dataset
The dataset  (Ang2011) [28] is a mus musculus Chip-Seq dataset which is dividied into reads of 36
bps or shorter. It checks for four of proteins and modified proteins associated with heterochromatin
==PAGE:31==
and  XCI,  namely  H3KMe4  (a  histone  tail  modification  associated  with  XCI  and  normal
heterochromatin[9][46][47]), Oct4 (a transcription factor associated with embryonic development,
i.e. lack of silencing) [45][46], Wdr-5 (a protein that contributes to the formation of F3KMe4)[46]
and an inactivated variant of the same and Rbbp5, another histone tail methyl transferase[28][46]
[47]. It is single-ended, has a reasonable quality (see results) and is produced by Illumina's protocol,
using Solexa Cluster Station and 36 cycles of sequencing with Genome Analyzer II[28]. The dataset
is from a male mouse, which poses problems for the examination of XCI in particular. The data was
run based on the UCSC mm10 mouse genome's X chromosome [63].
File name
Target of Immunoprecipitation
SRR060171
Oct4
SRR060172
Rbbp5
SRR060173
Wdr5
SRR060174
WDR5-FL
SRR060175
InputDNA
SRR060176
Negative
Table 2: What the data files contained. Data from [28].
3: RESULTS
First, the input files (from the public Ang2011 set) were run through Velvetoptimiser, eliminating
any reads off lower than 36 base pairs and trimming adapter sequences. They were qualified by
FASTQC and merged. This merged file was turned into a series of contigs by way of the Velvet
assembler using commands optimised in order to maximise n50 and total bases in contigs – after
some iteration, hash value k=27 was settled upon. Commands run were:
Velveth parameter string: auto_data_27 27 -short -fastq allfiles.fastq
Velvetg parameter string: auto_data_27  -clean yes
Then, Bowtie was run on each individual data set matching them up to both the full genome as well
as solely the X chromosome. The amount of mapped reads may be seen in table 3.1.
Commands:
bowtie blablabla
Then, MACS was run at each of the protein datasets, using SRR060175, i.e the blank DNA
==PAGE:32==
immunoprecipitation as a control:
[TABLE 3.1: PROPORTION OF MAPPED READS]
MACS FØR OG ETTER, LINE-1 MOLEKYLÆR EVOLUSJON ANALYSE
How many multireads were trivially resolved
MACS images – before and after
Sequence analysis of detected LINE-1s
4: DISCUSSION
4.1: Direct Interpretation of Results
BLAH BLAH FUCK MY LIFE INCLUDE FIGURES AND SHIT
4.2: Room for Improvement:
A proper MLE is an obvious first choice, but it is contingent on estimating probabilities in a more
rigorous manner through the entire process – in particular, a more stringent integration with MACS
or an equivalent peak-caller is one way to do this. It also remains a problem that there is no apparent
way to properly calculate the prior probability of a given read being integrated into a Velvet run
(less naïve sequence information may be useful here). Better velvet optimisation, stricter criteria for
assembly builds (number of base-pairs included, for instance) streamlining distribution, formalising
biases (more on this later), improving code and filtering input data  are all useful things that I could
and possibly should have done. Generally, a greater degree of rigor in the mathematical aspects of
the work would have made things both easier and clearer in the long run. An external control would
also have been a good idea, though it again runs into the problem of reproducability in ChIP-Seq
data generation, and it would lose much of its strength.
4.3:  Theoretical Concerns & Bias:
There are quite a lot of biasses (both within types and different types, confusingly) included in the
process. I shall try to be systematic and open about this, though my attempts at formalising them
have proven frustrating (it turns out that bias calculations are difficult for a non-statistician, who
would've known). For starters, simply assuming that a read is more likely to exist in company with
other reads introduces a clear and probably measurable "corrective" bias into the mixture – the basic
==PAGE:33==
poisson distribution assumed by MACS and thus by me in this entire process may not actually hold;
in fact, it does not hold for "noise" datasets, which is why MACS builds a control model to
compensate. Additionally, my method simply counts peaks as a binary value – doing anything more
complicated with them was too computationally expensive – which may produce a bias  against
large, consistently-silenced regions. This, of course, is a clear candidate for improvement in any
progression of the read-resolution method, for instance by calculating scores based on the number
of base-pairs within the detected region that are also within peaks (which would take into account
the breadth, if not the height, of the peak).
Assembly generation also tends to pull the reads resolution towards peak regions, again because
these regions simply supply a greater density of reads that are likely to fit together well enough to
be used by the Velvet algorithm. Steps may be taken to counteract this (adding an algorithmic factor
biassed towards sparse areas), but it depends if that is actually desired – it seems reasonable to
envision this process as essentially sifting through ore for gold, except – of course – we  don't
actually know what the gold looks like. In a sense, what I've undertaken over the course of this
thesis has been an exercise in large-scale data deletion. It is also potentially problematic that I am,
in effect, using a model based on the data to evaluate that same data, but I have tried to be careful in
avoiding situations where anything like this is done implicitly.
All told, the implicit mathematical issues in this procedure might be enough to produce another
thesis on its own. It remains my opinion, however, that there is no way to effectively avoid these
problems. The multi-read situation is an issue without a good, universal solution – this, again, is
simply a proposed way of making the best of a bad situation.
What regards this specific analysis, it bears keeping in mind that the dataset is deliberately chosen
to be a very bad one, computationally – the reads, at 36 bps of length, are very short, they are
single-ended and, perhaps most importantly, none of the chromosome has been masked for the main
run. This all means that an absolutely unreasonable amount of multi-reads were detected, that a lot
of noise emerged and a quite excessive amount of LTR regions were detected as significant. As can
be seen, that actually improved somewhat using the method, even in its most extreme form.(FJERN
OM FEIL)
The appropriateness of the selected data set for the selected analyses also warrants an examination.
The mm10 track which is used in this investigation is a male mouse (to my knowledge, no female
mouse has yet been fully sequenced, making the study of XCI a somewhat dodgy proposition a
==PAGE:34==
priori – the female X chromosome is subject to increased crossover relative to X-Y [51], though X
crossover remains a somewhat poorly categorised phenomenon, and this would mean that the
central process being examined is  less-than-optimally accounted for. These specific cells  are
embryonic stem cells, in which XCI is not necessarily complete – the foetus always selects the
paternal X at this stage for a sort of temporary XCI before reactivating it in the inner cell mass
stage. [44][29] Of course, that doesn't really reduce the problem of examining XCI in a model in
which XCI doesn't actually occur, and so the best we can do is examine general silencing patterns
and compare them to LINE-1 distribution. It is clear that a better model is needed. As always, a
purpose-built dataset with extensive metadata (time series, known mutations etc) and multiple
controls would be ideal, but the costs of such may be too great to be truly practical.
A moment of personal critique should be accepted – this really is more of an engineering project
than a scientific one, and I have gone in without a clear hypothesis to test, and as the project has
developed there are no obvious criteria for success or failure – in its current form, this method
simply is, with no quality measurements available. Throughout this process, my conception of the
project has been more on the scientific side, however, and this has led to a very inefficient workflow
as well as a somewhat confused approach to the data. The process is much less clean than I would
have preferred it, and two separate approaches are included in one big heap. Nevertheless, the
approaches are complementary and should synergise fairly effectively – the problem, in my view, is
one of impetuousness – the method does reduce the complexity of the problem it's meant to handle.
The question that remains unanswered (and, if we wish to avoid the realm of philosophy, possibly
unanswerable), is whether it does so in a sensible way – there is no p-value appended to individual
read positions, for instance, and the frequentist plausibility criterion is arguably too simplistic to be
entirely reliable in a situation like this.
Finally, there's a fundamental issue of bioinformatics. In our work, the genome (or rather, the
genetic material) is typically conceived of as a one-dimensional line of purely theoretical data. This
is, of course, not accurate; genetic material has an actual presence, physical and chemical. The sheer
amount  of  computational  power  required  to  properly model  this,  however,  and  the  level  of
complexity inherent in any task fully accepting the biological realities is a severe problem for any
attempt at such an endeavour. The reason this is relevant to the task at hand is because factors such
as silencing are dependent on so much more than the pure, semiotic content of the genetic structure
with, at best, a layer of primary modifications in place – even simple geometric factors like
minor/major groove would be potentially useful in a situation like this, where we measure DNA
associated with protein binding, and the nuclear concentration dynamics of various factors is an
==PAGE:35==
obvious candidate for modelling at the earliest opportunity. As computers improve, the complexity
of tasks we may assess increases. Until then, we must be clever or humble, and tolerate the
limitations – including theoretical limitations – this places on us.
4.4: The Way From Here:
I imagine that an efficient tool can be built on these foundations. While I am uncertain that Perl is
the best language for it, nothing I've done is actually very difficult in and of itself, and the sequence
of steps is, in my opinion, fundamentally sound. It seems very likely to me that my script is not the
most efficient way to do it, requiring, as it does, an extraordinary amount of memory, but it may be
rewritten or adapted into a more rational framework and made as the basis of a future procedure.
Clearly, it would be advantageous to perform full sequencing of a female mouse genome. It is
difficult to imagine why it has not happened yet outside of some bizarre sexism in the scientific
community, but it is really necessary. Optimally, a sequence would be made using a time-series of
mouse embryos, so as to trace inactivation over time – through a little wet-lab trickery, it may even
be possible to perform a comparative analysis of the individual X chromosomes [32]. 
5: CONCLUSION
The work here presented is curious in that it mostly has a fairly clear expiration date. At some point,
sequencing technology is likely to advance far enough that these methods are simply no longer
necessary, be that due to larger reads, omnipresence of paired- or triplet reads or some other, more
exotic method. We will retain our old data, though, and a general thrust of how to deal with this
problem could help redeem some of that data as well as aiding in the analysis of novel data sets in
the days to come.
LINE-1 elements and "junk" DNA in general are still a new frontier to large-scale biology at this
point, and developing methods (both philosophical and computational) to help deal with the
problems posed and solved by them remains a major challenge. 
[SOME BIT ABOUT CONSERVATION]
[1]: Transcription and RNA interference in the formation of heterochromatin
Shiv I. S. Grewal & Sarah C. R. Elgin
Nature 447, 399-406(24 May 2007)
[2]: Epigenetics: core misconcept
==PAGE:36==
Mark Ptashne,  7101–7103, doi: 10.1073/pnas.1305399110 
[3]J Genomics 2015; 3:1-19 – Mechanisms of X chromosome dosage compensation - Sevinç Ercan 
[4]Annu Rev Genet. 2008;42:733-72. doi: 10.1146/annurev.genet.42.110807.091711.
X chromosome dosage compensation: how mammals keep the balance.
Payer B1, Lee JT.
[5]Warren  et  al.  (2008). "Genome  analysis  of  the  platypus  reveals  unique  signatures  of
evolution" (PDF). Nature 453 (7192):175–183. Bibcode:2008Natur.453..175W. doi:10.1038/nature06936. PMC 280304
0. PMID 18464734. 
[6] Grützner F., et al. Nature, doi:10.1038/nature03021 (2004). 
[7] Chromatin Remodelling During Host-Bacterial Pathogen Interaction By Yong Zhong Xu, Cynthia 
Kanagaratham and Danuta Radzioch 
DOI: 10.5772/55977
[8] LINE-1 elements and X chromosome inactivation:
A function for ‘‘junk’’ DNA?
Mary F. Lyon* PNAS u June 6, 2000 u vol. 97 u no. 12 u 6249
[9] X inactivation and the complexities of silencing a sex chromosome
Jennifer Chow and Edith Heard
Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2009, 21:359–366
[10] X-chromosome inactivation: the molecular basis of silencing
Barbara Panning
Journal of Biology 2008, 7:30  doi:10.1186/jbiol95 
[11] X Inactivation as a Source of Behavioural Differences in Monozygotic Female Twins
Authors: Loat, Caroline S.1; Asbury, Kathryn2; Galsworthy, Michael J.2; Plomin, Robert2; Craig, Ian W.2
Source: Twin Research, Volume 7, Number 1, 1 February 2004, pp. 54-61(8)
[12]Xist and the order of silencing
Karen Ng, Dieter Pullirsch, Martin Leeb, Anton Wutz
DOI 10.1038/sj.embor.7400871 | Published online 01.01.2007
EMBO reports (2007) 8, 34-39
[13]Nature. 2012 Jul 12;487(7406):254-8. doi: 10.1038/nature11171.
Rsx is a metatherian RNA with Xist-like properties in X-chromosome inactivation.
[14] Avner P, Heard E. X-chromosome inactivation: counting, choice and initiation. 
Nat.Rev.Genet. 2001 Jan;2(1):59–67.
[15]Sookdeo A, Hepp CM, McClure MA, Boissinot S. Revisiting the evolution of mouse LINEA1 in the
genomic era. Mob DNA. BioMed Central Ltd; 2013;4(1):3. 
[16]  J  Biomed  Biotechnol.  2006:  45621.  Published  online  2006. doi:  10.1155/JBB/2006/45621
PMCID: PMC1510943 The ORF1 Protein Encoded by LINE-1: Structure and Function During L1 Retrotransposition
Sandra L. Martin*
[17] Bioinformatics. 2014 Aug 1;30(15):2114-20. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btu170. Epub 2014 Apr 1.
Trimmomatic: a flexible trimmer for Illumina sequence data.
Bolger AM1, Lohse M2, Usadel B1.
[18] Nucl. Acids Res. (2010) 38 (6):1767-1771.doi: 10.1093/nar/gkp1137First published online: December 16,
2009 
The Sanger FASTQ file format for sequences with quality scores, and the Solexa/Illumina FASTQ variants
==PAGE:37==
Peter J. A. Cock, Christopher J. Fields, Naohisa Goto, Michael L. Heuer and Peter M. Rice
[19] FastQC A Quality Control tool for High Throughput Sequence Data
by: S. Andrews
http://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc/  Key: citeulike:11583827
[20]Using and Understanding RepeatMasker, Sébastien Tempel  DOI 10.1007/978-1-61779-603-6_2, © 
Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2012 
[21] Smit, AFA, Hubley, R & Green, P. RepeatMasker Open-4.0.
2013-2015 <http://www.repeatmasker.org>. 
[22]How to apply de Bruijn graphs to genome assembly
Phillip E C Compeau, Pavel A Pevzner & Glenn Tesler Nature Biotechnology  29,  987–991 (2011)  
[23] Genome Res. 2008. 18: 821-829 Velvet: Algorithms for de novo short read assembly using de Bruijn graphs - 
Daniel R. Zerbino and Ewan Birney
[24]Using the Velvet de novo assembler for short-read sequencing technologiesDaniel R. Zerbino Curr Protoc 
Bioinformatics. 2010 Sep; CHAPTER: Unit–11.5.
doi:  10.1002/0471250953.bi1105s31 
[25] Seemann T, Gladman S (2011) VelvetOptimiser, unpublished software. Available at Victorian 
Bioinformatics Consortium website: http://bioinformatics.net.au/software.ve？lvetoptimiser.shtml. Accessed 2012 Aug 
05
[26]BioMed Research InternationalVolume 2014 (2014), Article ID 309650 Evaluation and Comparison of 
Multiple Aligners for Next-Generation Sequencing Data Analysis 
[27] An Analysis of the Burrows-Wheeler Transform Giovanni Manzini 
Journal of the Association for Computing Machinery, Vol. 48, No. 3, May 2001, pp. 407-430
[28]Cell. 2011 Apr 15;145(2):183-97. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2011.03.003. Epub 2011 Apr 7.
Wdr5 mediates self-renewal and reprogramming via the embryonic stem cell core transcriptional network.
Ang YS1, Tsai SY, Lee DF, Monk J, Su J, Ratnakumar K, Ding J, Ge Y, Darr H, Chang B, Wang J, Rendl 
M, Bernstein E, Schaniel C, Lemischka IR
[29]Barakat TS, Gribnau J. X Chromosome Inactivation and Embryonic Stem Cells. In: Madame Curie 
Bioscience Database [Internet]. Austin (TX): Landes Bioscience; 2000-. 
[30] X chromosome regulation: diverse patterns in development, tissues and disease
Deng et al, Nature Reviews Genetics 15,367–378(2014)
[31] Mol. Hum. Reprod. (2010) 16 (6):386-395. F. Tüttelmann
 
 1, and J. Gromoll
 
 2
[32] Gene Volume 493, Issue 1, 1 February 2012, Pages 132–139Isolation of single, intact chromosomes from 
single, selected ovarian cancer cells for in situ hybridization and sequencing Marek Malecki, Waclaw Szybalski
[33]Ng, Karen et al. “Xist and the Order of Silencing.” EMBO Reports 8.1 (2007): 34–39. PMC. Web. 20 July 
2015. 
[34]Tobias Penzkofer, Thomas Dandekar, and Tomasz Zemojtel L1Base: from functional annotation to 
prediction of active LINE-1 elementsNucl. Acids Res. (2005) 33 (suppl 1): D498-D500 doi:10.1093/nar/gki044 
[35]Beck, Christine R. et al. “LINE-1 Elements in Structural Variation and Disease.”Annual review of 
genomics and human genetics 12 (2011): 187–215. PMC. Web. 20 July 2015. 
[36]Sharp, Andrew J. et al. “DNA Methylation Profiles of Human Active and Inactive X 
Chromosomes.” Genome Research 21.10 (2011): 1592–1600. PMC. Web. 20 July 2015. 
[37]Linnæus, C. 1758. Systema naturæ per regna tria naturæ, secundum classes, ordines, genera, species, cum 
characteribus, differentiis, synonymis, locis. Tomus I. Editio decima, reformata. - pp. [1-4], 1-824. Holmiæ. (Salvius). 
[38]Goodwin, G H, C A Wright, and E W Johns. “The Characterisation of 1SF Monomer Nucleosomes from 
Hen Oviduct and the Partial Characterisation of a Third HMG14/17-like in Such Nucleosomes.” Nucleic Acids 
Research 9.12 (1981): 2761–2775. Print. 
[39]Grimes BR, Babcock J, Rudd MK, Chadwick B, Willard HF: Assembly and characterization of 
heterochromatin and euchromatin on human artificial chromosomes.
Genome Biol 2004, 5:R89
[40]Regulation of nucleosome dynamics by histone modifications Gabriel E Zentner & Steven 
HenikoffNature Structural & Molecular Biology  20,  259–266  (2013)  
[41]Bannister, Andrew J, and Tony Kouzarides. “Regulation of Chromatin by Histone Modifications.” Cell 
Research 21.3 (2011): 381–395. 
==PAGE:38==
[42]Landt, Stephen G. et al. “ChIP-Seq Guidelines and Practices of the ENCODE and modENCODE 
Consortia.” Genome Research 22.9 (2012): 1813–1831.PMC. 
[43]LINE-1 Activity in Facultative Heterochromatin Formation during X Chromosome Inactivation
Chow, Jennifer C. et al.
Cell , Volume 141 , Issue 6 , 956 - 969
[44]A Shift from Reversible to Irreversible X Inactivation Is Triggered during ES Cell Differentiation
Wutz, Anton et al.
Molecular Cell , Volume 5 , Issue 4 , 695 - 705
[45]The Gene Ontology Consortium. Gene Ontology Consortium: going forward. (2015) Nucl Acids 
Res 43 Database issue D1049–D1056 
[46]The UniProt Consortium. “The Universal Protein Resource (UniProt).” Nucleic Acids 
Research 36.Database issue (2008): D190–D195. PMC. Web. 22 July 2015. 
[47]M Rebhan, V Chalifa-Caspi, J Prilusky, and D Lancet GeneCards: a novel functional genomics 
compendium with automated data mining and query reformulation support.Bioinformatics (1998) 14 (8): 656-664 
[48]Khan, Hameed, Arian Smit, and Stéphane Boissinot. “Molecular Evolution and Tempo of Amplification of
Human LINE-1 Retrotransposons since the Origin of Primates.” Genome Research 16.1 (2006): 78–87. PMC. 
[49]The biological properties and evolutionary dynamics of mammalian LINE-1 retrotransposons.
Furano AV
Prog Nucleic Acid Res Mol Biol. 2000; 64():255-94.
[50]The Xist lncRNA Exploits Three-Dimensional Genome Architecture to Spread Across the X Chromosome
Jesse M. Engreitz, Amy Pandya-Jones, Patrick McDonel, Alexander Shishkin, Klara Sirokman, Christine 
Surka, Sabah Kadri, Jeffrey Xing, Alon Goren, Eric S. Lander, Kathrin Plath, and Mitchell Guttman
Science 16 August 2013: 341 (6147), 1237973Published online 4 July 2013 
[51]A Fine-Scale Map of Recombination Rates and Hotspots Across the Human Genome 
Simon Myers, Leonardo Bottolo, Colin Freeman, Gil McVean, and Peter Donnelly
Science 14 October 2005: 310 (5746), 321-324 
[52]Nora, Elphège P. et al. “Spatial Partitioning of the Regulatory Landscape of theX-Inactivation 
Center.” Nature 485.7398 (2012): 381–385. PMC.
[53]Kim, Kun-Yong et al. “X Chromosome of Female Cells Shows Dynamic Changes in Status during 
Human Somatic Cell Reprogramming.” Stem Cell Reports 2.6 (2014): 896–909. PMC. 
[54]Krill, A E. “X-Chromosomal-Linked Diseases Affecting the Eye: Status of the Heterozygote 
Female.” Transactions of the American Ophthalmological Society67 (1969): 535–608. Print. 
[55]Sadreyev, Ruslan I. et al. “Bimodal Quantitative Relationships between Histone Modifications for 
X-Linked and Autosomal Loci.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America 110.17 (2013): 6949–6954. PMC. Web. 24 July 2015. 
[56]Genomic Maps and Comparative Analysis of Histone Modifications in Human and Mouse
Bernstein, Bradley E. et al.
Cell , Volume 120 , Issue 2 , 169 - 181
[57] Deakin JE, Hore TA, Koina E, Marshall Graves JA (2008) The Status of Dosage Compensation in 
the Multiple X Chromosomes of the Platypus. PLoS Genet 4(7) : e1000140 
[58]Stephen C. Hardies,Liping Wang, Lanxin Zhou, Yingping Zhao, N. Carol Casavant,and Shijun Huang
LINE-1 (L1) Lineages in the MouseMol Biol Evol (2000) 17 (4): 616-628 
[59]Sookdeo, Akash et al. “Revisiting the Evolution of Mouse LINE-1 in the Genomic Era.” Mobile DNA 4 
(2013): 3. PMC. Web. 26 July 2015. 
[60]Horizontal gene transfer in evolution: facts and challenges
Luis Boto
Proc. R. Soc. B 2010 277 819-827; DOI: 10.1098/rspb.2009.1679. Published 8 February 2010
[61]Crisp, Alastair et al. “Expression of Multiple Horizontally Acquired Genes Is a Hallmark of 
Both Vertebrate and Invertebrate Genomes.” Genome Biology 16.1 (2015): 50. PMC.
[62]Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2011 Aug 7;18(9):1006-14. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.2097.
==PAGE:39==
Trimeric structure and flexibility of the L1ORF1 protein in human L1 retrotransposition.
Khazina E1, Truffault V, Büttner R, Schmidt S, Coles M, Weichenrieder O.
[63]Human genome, model organisms, comparative genomics:Donna Karolchik, Galt P. Barber, Jonathan 
Casper, HiramClawson,Melissa S. Cline, Mark Diekhans, Timothy R. Dreszer, Pauline A. Fujita,Luvina 
Guruvadoo, Maximilian Haeussler, Rachel A. Harte, Steve Heitner,Angie S. Hinrichs, Katrina Learned, Brian T. 
Lee, Chin H. Li, Brian J. Raney,Brooke Rhead, Kate R. Rosenbloom, Cricket A. Sloan, Matthew L. Speir,Ann S. 
Zweig, David Haussler, Robert M. Kuhn, and W. James Kent
The UCSC Genome Browser database: 2014 updateNucl. Acids Res. (1 January 2014) 42 (D1): D764-D770 first published online November 21, 
2013doi:10.1093/nar/gkt1168
APPENDIX I: GLOSSARY OF TERMS
APPENDIX II: A VERY QUICK INTRODUCTION TO MOLECULAR BIOLOGY
APPENDIX III: MAJOR SCRIPTS
Readresolver is included here in three versions. The first is more costumisable, in the case of future use or 
adaptation, the second is quite a lot faster (a sort command is replaced by a more specialised list generation 
procedure) and the third callously sacrifices runtime to reduce memory consumption. None of them are properly
optimised, alas.
APPENDIX IV: REMAINING MACS DATA
APPENDIX V: FASTQC EVALUATIONS
APPENDIX I: GLOSSARY OF TERMS
DNA: Deoxyribonucleic Acid, the building block of the chromosome. Consists of bases (A, T, G,
C) and a backbone in two strands
RNA: Ribonucleic Acid, the intermediary step between 
Amino Acid: Generally, an organic molecule with an amine group and an acid group. In this
context, one of the 20-22 building blocks of proteins produced by all known organisms as a result of
the universal genetic code.
Gene: Region of DNA which is capable of being used as a template for a discernable phenotype of
some sort. 
Chromosome: The discrete scaffolds of genetic material; made up of DNA and attendant proteins
Transposon: «Mobile» DNA element, encodes products that facilitates its own physical movement
on the chromosome
LTR: Long Terminal Repeats, «junk DNA» typically concentrated near ends of chromosomes
LINE: Long Interspersed Nuclear Element, «junk» DNA, descended from transposons
SINE: Short Interspersed Nuclear Element, LINEs only shorter
ORF: Open Reading Frame – essentially the purely coding part of one gene
UTR: Untranslated Region. The part of a gene which is not, well, translated into a protein.
XCI: X-chromosomal inactivation – the process of «switching off» an X chromosome in female
==PAGE:40==
mammalian cells
Xic: X-inactivation centre. The gene-rich region which contains most or all of the genes necessary
to carry out XCI properly
Nucleosome: A histone complex with DNA wrapped around it – typically held to be 147bps long
Chromatin: The stuff that makes up the chromosome, i.e. nucleosomes and various attendant
proteins
Heterochromatin: «Silenced», quite dense chromatin regions
Euchromatin: «Open» chromatin regions.
Histone: Protein around which DNA is wrapped – is the main target of «epigenetic» modifications
ES: Embryonic Stem cell. Immature cells that can differentiate to all sorts of other cells
ChIP-seq: Chromatin Immunoprecipitation. The act of purifying sections («reads») of DNA by
bound protein, then sequencing them
Replication: The reproduction of DNA prior to cell division
Transcription: The copying of DNA into RNA for use in translation or as functional RNA
Translation: The step of producing proteins from RNA
Multi-mapping: The problem of short reads matching to different areas of the chromosome
Evolution: The process of biological differentiation through alteration of genetic and extragenetic
material on a species level
Epigenetic: Heritable traits not stored in DNA – essentially cell memory
Protein: Gene product composed of amino acids and possibly auxiliary elements
Polypeptide: Basically a protein, but more general – anything with the same backbone structure as a
protein (peptide bonds) is a polypeptide
Species: A terribly problematic term. Take it to mean «a group wherein two properly sexed and
fertile individuals may produce fertile, viable offspring», since we're only discussing mammals in
this thesis
==PAGE:41==
APPENDIX II: A VERY QUICK
INTRODUCTION TO MOLECULAR
BIOLOGY
Every organism as we know them (barring viruses) is composed of cells. These cells are biological,
reproducing units, composed of a number of functional compartments (organelles), at least one
membrane or cell wall, and some liquid to fill out the space. Cells come in two major types,
depending roughly on how they store their DNA: Within a special nucleus (eukaryotes), or without
(prokaryotes). There are, of course, exceptions – human blood cells, for instance, have no nucleus,
but are still considered eukaryote cells, because they belong to humans and descend from nucleus-
containing human stem cells.
==PAGE:42==
Fig. 1A: A human cell
 
By far most organisms use DNA as their heritable material (some use RNA for this, but DNA is
more stable). This means that DNA is the physical material of genes, which are transcribed into
RNA and translated into proteins(see fig. 2A).
5' C-G-A-T-T-G-C-A-A-C-G-A-T-G-C 3'
     |   |   |  |  |   |   |   |   |  |   |   |   |   |   | 
3' G-C-T-A-A-C-G-T-T-G-C-T-A-C-G 5'
==PAGE:43==
  
 
fig. 2A: The Central Dogma of Molecular Biology and a Chromosome
So, DNA is by convention read 5' to 3', based on the chemical organisation of its backbone, and is 
typically represented in a manner similar to the above. DNA is in its turn organised into 
chromosomes, which are essentially macromolecular complexes of coiled DNA (note the double-
helical structure) wrapped in supercoils around protein cores, forming nucleosomes and chromatin.
DNA availability and transcribability is then regulated by a variety of factors, yielding functional 
nc(non-coding)RNA and purely semiotic m(messaging)RNA which is exported from the nucleus 
and put to work, for instance being read and used as a blueprint for proteins by ribosomes; the 
ribosome reads the genetic code on the mRNA in triplets («codons»), using them to decipher where 
to start and how to put together the huge molecule that is the protein monomer – each triplet codes 
either for an amino acid (one of twenty, typically) or a stop. The «start» codon, used by the 
ribosome to figure out where to start building, also codes for an amino acid, methionine, so all 
proteins initially «start» with methionine at their «N-terminus» (nomenclature based on the 
chemistry of the protein backbone's peptide bonds). A combination of start, sequence, and some 
halting mechanism (such as a stop codon) is called an «open reading frame». 
So: A gene coding for a protein must have both an area to produce the RNA which will eventually 
be used as a blueprint for that protein, the code for that RNA including the relevant Open Reading 
Frame, and some way to protect the RNA from degradation.
These proteins then perform a wide variety of functions, including producing fats, operating most of
==PAGE:44==
the cellular machinery, sorting other proteins, etc etc etc. Proteins are highly structured biological 
units, and this structure, combined with chemical properties, is highly relevant to their function.
This concludes this Very Quick Introduction to Molecular Biology. For further reading, see 
an introductory text to biochemistry, such as Lehninger: Introduction to Biochemistry.
