==PAGE:1==
Chris Hedegaard Henriksen
Ultrasonic Wound Volume
Estimation
Master’s Thesis, June 26, 2015
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
CHRIS HEDEGAARD HENRIKSEN
Ultrasonic Wound Volume Estimation
Master’s Thesis, June 2015
Supervisors:
Jørgen Arendt Jensen, Ph.D., Dr.Techn, Professor at DTU Electrical
Engineering
Martin Christian Hemmsen, Ph.D., Adjunkt at DTU Electrical Engineering
DTU - Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby - 2015
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Ultrasonic Wound Volume Estimation
This report was prepared by:
Chris Hedegaard Henriksen
Advisors:
Jørgen Arendt Jensen, Ph.D., Dr.Techn, Professor at DTU Electrical Engineering
Martin Christian Hemmsen, Ph.D., Adjunkt at DTU Electrical Engineering
DTU Electrical Engineering
Biomedical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Elektrovej, Building 329
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel: +45 4525 3576
studieadministration@elektro.dtu.dk
Project period:
January 2015- June 2015
ECTS:
30
Education:
MSc
Field:
Medicine and Technology
Class:
Conﬁdential until October 1st, 2016
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial fulﬁllment of the requirements for
graduation in the above education at the Technical University of Denmark.
Copyrights:
©Chris Hedegaard Henriksen, 2015
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgement
First of all, I would like to thank my supervisor Assistant Professor Martin Christian Hemmsen
and PhD student Ramin Moshavegh for their ideas and guidance during the process of this thesis. I
am grateful for the discussions and the time they have invested in me an the project. Secondly, I
would like to thank physician Anne Rasmussen at Steno Diabetes Center as well as the patients for
letting me scan their wounds. I would also like to thank BK Medical for putting the transducer at
my disposal, and last, but not least, I would like to thank Widex for letting me use their facilities in
order to put together the scanning system.
i
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
Abstract
The purpose of this master thesis is to develop a new way of estimating wound volume by the
use of ultrasound. The main focus is patients diagnosed with diabetes with wounds underneath their
feet. Due to complications caused by diabetes, foot wounds often are difﬁcult to heal and therefore
demand comprehensive treatment. An important feature of the treatment is monitoring the increase
or decrease of the wound size during the nursing process. This is done by measuring the dimensions
of the wound. The current measuring techniques have difﬁculties estimating wound with complex
shapes. This master thesis aims to develop a new scanning system using ultrasound for imaging the
wound. Ultrasound has features that can visualize complex wound shapes that other techniques are
unable to provide. The new scanning system consists of a water container which the patient places
the foot in and a ﬁxture with a transducer that scans the wound. Clinical data is recorded using
the scanning system and a developed volume estimator algorithm is used to measure the size of
the wound as well as visualize the wound with a 3D image. The algorithm is not able to handle
complex wound shapes at the current state. During my clinical studies I discovered how difﬁcult it
is to develop a system that can accommodate the large variation of different wound locations as
well as the patients’ poor mobility. However, the scanning system shows great potential if usability
and patient well-being is enhanced as well as a more advanced algorithm is set up.
iii
==PAGE:10==
Table of Contents
Acknowledgement
i
Abstract
iii
1
Introduction
1
2
Wound measuring
3
2.1
Methods using physical contact . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Methods using non-physical contact . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Wound studies with ultrasound . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Development of scanning system
7
3.1
Scanning system
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Development of water container
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.3
Development of ﬁxture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.4
Development errors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.5
Development of software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4
Materials and Method
13
4.1
Data acquisition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.2
Data processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.3
Volume estimator algorithm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.3.1
Pre-processing of the images . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.3.2
Wound boundary estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.3.3
Volume estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.4
Active contour . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.5
Spatial resolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5
Preliminary investigations
29
5.1
Wound phantoms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.1.1
Volume of simple cavity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
iv
==PAGE:11==
TABLE OF CONTENTS
v
5.2
Phantom scanning setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.3.1
Simple phantom
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.3.2
Complex phantom
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.4
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6
Clinical Trial
37
6.1
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.2
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
7
Discussion
47
8
Conclusion
49
Appendices
51
A First Appendix
53
A.1
Water container drawing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
A.2
Assembly of container
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
A.3
Assembly of ﬁxture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
A.4
Pseudo-code for arduino script . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
A.5
Pseudo-code for python script
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
A.6
Protocol for scanning system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
B
Second Appendix
65
B.1
Sammentykke erklæring
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
B.2
Images of survey
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
C Third Appendix
71
C.1
Results case 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
D Fourth Appendix
77
D.1
Organization of code and data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
Bibliography
79
==PAGE:12==
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
In 2000 the total number of people suffering from diabetes was estimated at 171 million. This
number is expected to increase to 366 million people in 2030 which will make up approximately
4.4 % of the world population[13]. In Denmark, around 306.000 people (5.5% of the population)
are diagnosed with diabetes. The number has doubled within the last 10 years.
People with diabetes are at risk of serious complications. Some of the most common ones are
kidney diseases, cardiovascular diseases and neuro diseases. A further side effect from diabetes is
foot wounds which are caused by a mixture of neuro diseases and poor blood circulation. Damaged
nerves leads to numbness in the lower extremities and give good conditions for wounds to evolve
over time. Around 15 % (in recent studies 25%) of people diagnosed with diabetes will get a foot
wound at some point [5]. People with diabetic foot wounds have a complex pathogenesis and
because of this, healing of the wounds demand comprehensive treatment and monitoring [5]. As a
part of the treatment of wounds, the wounds are measured regularly to decide whether the treatment
is working or not. Wound measuring is an important part of this since it provides basic information
about the reduction or increase of the wound over time [13]. Today, there is still no universally
approved standard for measuring wound size. Most physicians rely on a simple ruler technique.
However, this approach does not account for more complex wounds, which makes it difﬁcult to
make a thorough assessment of the healing process [13].
Ultrasound has been an integral part of medicine for more than 40 years. This modality of-
fers the possibility of producing real-time non-invasive images of body anatomy, which means that
a scan can be made during a visit to the doctor e.g in relation to pregnancies and cardiovascular
diseases [15]. In this thesis, I want to investigate if and how ultrasound can be used to estimate the
volume of wounds. I will do this by developing a scanning system that facilitates the acquisition of
ultrasound images and developing an wound volume estimator algorithm. My main focus will be
diabetic patients with wounds underneath their feet.
A fast and exact method for estimating wound volume can be of great clinical value, since it
provides the ability of monitoring wound changes throughout the healing process. This allows
1
==PAGE:14==
2
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
physicians to consider alternative and more aggressive treatment strategies, if the current treatment
does not work [4].
The thesis is organized as follows. The current methods used to measure wounds as well as
studies using ultrasound for measuring is covered in chapter 2. In chapter 3 I propose a new
scanning system for imaging foot wounds using ultrasound. In this chapter I go through the
development process as well as research considerations and errors. Chapter 4 shows how the
scanning system is setup and used for acquiring images and the methods used in the wound volume
estimator. This approach is investigated in chapter 5, where I scan different wound phantoms and
discuss problems encountered in the process. Chapter 6 thereafter describes how I have used my
ﬁndings in a clinical trial, where I have scanned foot wounds on three patients with diabetes. In
chapter 6 I also discuss problems in the scanning process, modiﬁcations in the image formation
and provide the results. In Chapter 7 I discusses the insights, results and scope of the setup and
experiments conducted in the thesis. Finally, chapter 8 summarizes the ﬁndings of the thesis.
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Wound measuring
The ﬁrst part of the chapter I describe the different methods used for estimating surface area
and wound volume. In the second part I review previous studies concerning a scanning method and
wound measurements using ultrasound.
Wounds
In this thesis I focus on diabetic foot wounds and the case study is made at Steno Diabetes
Center. According to Anne Rasmussen, physician at Steno Diabetes center, half of the patients
who are treated at the clinic have wounds located on their toes; the rest have wounds on other
areas of their feet. The wounds have all sorts of shapes and the depth of wounds cavity can range
from a millimetre to all the way to the bone. Wounds may have various complications such as
undermining, tunnelling and tunnels with access to additional cavities, which is not visible to the
eye. Undermining and tunnelling are illustrated in ﬁgure 2.1.
Figure
2.1:
Tunnelling
and
undermining
of
a
wound.
The
image
is
taken
from
web-page:
http://what-when-how.com/nursing/
special-skin-and-wound-care-client-care-nursing-part-1/
3
==PAGE:16==
4
CHAPTER 2. WOUND MEASURING
2.1
Methods using physical contact
Methods for measuring surface area include the ruler method and planimetry. The ruler method
estimates the surface area by measuring the maximum length and width perpendicular to each other.
The approach is easy, fast and inexpensive and most widely used in clinical practice. It provides a
rough estimate of the surface area, as it is rarely quadratic or rectangular. Planimatry is a method
were the border of the wound is mapped on to transparent plastic ﬁlm. The ﬁlm is placed over 1
mm2 graph paper. The area is estimated by manually counting the number of grid boxes within the
area of the wound. The area can also be estimated by mapping the border with an electrical pen or
digitally scanning the plastic ﬁlm and tracing the border using a computer [12]. This gives a more
accurate estimate of the surface area than the ruler method. However, pressure from the pen can
alter the shape of the wound [5].
Methods for measuring volume include kundins instrument, liquid ﬁlling and casting techniques.
The kundins instrument consists of three rulers; two horizontal rulers places perpendicular to each
other and one in the centre that can be displaced in the vertical direction. The volume is measured
by placing the instrument in the wound cavity and measuring the area and the depth. The accuracy
of the method is very limited since the wound is rarely cubic. With the liquid ﬁlling method the
wound is covered with adhesive transparent ﬁlm and isotonic salt water is ﬁlled into the cavity.
The amount of ﬂuid necessary to cover the wound correspond to the volume. The downside to the
liquid ﬁlling method is that in some cases it is not possible to use the method due to the wounds’
placement on the body. On the other hand, the method is easy to use, inexpensive and reasonably
accurate. The casting method can be used regardless of the wound’s location, but does not work
when the wound has undermining or tunnelling with access to cavities. A further drawback is that
the casting material can cause irritation and allergic reactions [5].
2.2
Methods using non-physical contact
Digital planimetry is a non-contact method based on the same principle as planimetry but it uses
computer software to trace the border and calculate the area. There are several digital planimetry
systems on the market. Many of these systems have shown to be both accurate and have low user
variations [5] [12].
Methods for measuring volume includes stereophotogrammetry and colour coded structured light
(CCSL). In stereophotogrammetry stereo cameras are linked to a computer that captures an image.
The image is downloaded to the computer and the wound is manually traced on the monitor.
Software packages constructs a three-dimensional model of the wound and calculate the area and
volume. The main advantage of this method is that it produces highly reproducible results compared
to other methods[13]. The disadvantages is that it demands expensive equipment, training and time.
Furthermore, it is not able to model undermining, tunnelling and tunnels with access to cavities,
since it is only able to model what is visible to the eye.
==PAGE:17==
2.3. WOUND STUDIES WITH ULTRASOUND
5
CCSL use a special light projection at a known angle to illuminate the wound area. A camera above
the wound record two images. The area is ﬁrst illuminated with white light and afterwards with
color coded structured light. The recording camera is connected to a computer, which is able to
calculate the area of the cavity on the basis of recordings and geometric information. The wound
volume is calculated as the difference between the reconstruction of the healed wound and the actual
wound surface. CCSL gives the most reproducible results compared to other volume measuring
techniques. The accuracy decreases if the wound depth is large compared to the surface area. CCSL
can also not be used if the wound has undermining, tunnelling and tunnels with access to cavities [5].
Today, there is still no universally approved standard for measuring wound size. Most physi-
cians rely on the simple ruler technique, although it gives a crude overestimate, because it is fast,
less invasive and comfortable for the patient. Advanced computerised methods are more accurate,
but their use is limited due to availability, complicated calibration procedures, cost and physician
time [13].
2.3
Wound studies with ultrasound
Ultrasound provides a non-invasive technique for imaging of body anatomy. A transducer
generates acoustic wave pulses that are sent through the body. Organ boundaries and complex tissue
generates echoes by reﬂection or scattering that are detected by the transducer. The echoes are
converted to electrical signals and processed by the ultrasound system and presented as a gray-scale
image of the body anatomy. Each point in the image corresponds to echo-generating structure in the
body. The brightness of the point corresponds to the strength of the echo [10]. Ultrasound therefore
has an advantage when it comes to assessing undermining, tunnels and tunnels with access to
cavities, which volume estimating techniques fail to assess as previously mentioned. There are of
course pitfalls with ultrasound such lateral, axial and elevational resolution that limits the quality
of the ultrasound image. These are further elaborated in chapter 4 section 4.5.
Few studies describe methods that has the ability of measuring surface area and wound vol-
ume using ultrasound. A patent document called Method and kit for wound evaluation formed
by Martin E Wendelken and Charles L. Pope describes a method for examining wounds using
ultrasound [14]. The method includes the following kit: sterile water-soluble gel, sterile ﬂexible
adhesive ﬁlm and a ultrasound scanner. The technique starts with the practitioner cleaning the
wound and surrounding tissue. The wound is ﬁlled with an appropriate amount of sterile gel and
covered by a sterile adhesive ﬂexible ﬁlm. The practitioner then applies a layer of gel to the outer
surface of the ﬂexible adhesive ﬁlm. The wound and the surrounding tissue are then ready for
examination. Flexible ﬁlm, which is microns thick, does not appear on an ultrasound scanner.
Method and kit does not impede or reduce the scanning ability of the transducer. The ﬁlm seals
the wound with gel inside and insures that the gel is not pushed or moved away from the wound
during examination. A examination of the wound can be performed by placing the transducer over
==PAGE:18==
6
CHAPTER 2. WOUND MEASURING
the wound and scanning it. After the examination the practitioner removes the ﬁlm and rinses
the gel from the wound with sterile normal saline [14]. The article Objeciv, Noninvasive Wound
Assessment Using B-mode ultrasonography describes wound examinations using this method [15].
The wound is prepared as previously described. The wound cavity is ﬁlled with transmission gel in
order to eliminate any dead space or air pockets. The ﬁlm dressing, made of urethane (0.5 mm) with
a medical-grade acrylic adhesive, seals the wound. Gel is applied to the surface of the transducer.
Longitudinal and transverse scans are obtained by placing the transducer in a 90-degree angle to
the wound and moving the probe slowly from margin to margin. In the study, Hudson 2020, 2040
and 2060 ultrasound scanners as well as a linear array transducer with a frequency range from 8.0
to 12 MHz were used. Several experiments were conducted of diabetic foot wounds. Nearly exact
measurements (within 0.1 mm) of wound size: length, width, surface area, depth and volume may
be calculated using digital calipers with this method [15].
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 3
Development of scanning system
The ﬁrst part of the chapter brieﬂy describes how the new proposed scanning system is used.
The second part deals with considerations and development of the different components in the
scanning system. The third part describes the errors during the development of the system. The last
part brieﬂy covers how the different software in the scanning system is integrated.
3.1
Scanning system
I propose a new system using ultrasound to measure wound volume. It consists of a water
container and a ﬁxture. The container has a window that is covered by transparent plastic ﬁlm
and plates placed above. The container is placed on the ﬁxture. The ﬁxture has a motor system
which can move a transducer forward in order to make a scan of the wound. First, the container
is ﬁlled with water, then the patient’s foot is placed on the scanning window. The transducer is
put in contact with the media using ultrasound gel. Images of the wound are acquired by moving
the transducer in steps. Figure 3.1 shows the developed scanning system and ﬁgure 3.2 shows an
image taken during the clinical trial.
7
==PAGE:20==
8
CHAPTER 3. DEVELOPMENT OF SCANNING SYSTEM
Figure 3.1: Scanning system
Figure 3.2: Image from the clinical trial
==PAGE:21==
3.2. DEVELOPMENT OF WATER CONTAINER
9
The scanning system is developed with the following targets in mind; transducer BK 9070 and
ultrasound scanner BK 3000. Transducer speciﬁcations is shown in table 3.1. The main reason for
choosing this transducer is because of its high frequency, which is important for axial resolution.
Additional information concerning axial, lateral and elevational resolution for the transducer is
provided in chapter 4 section 4.5.
Speciﬁcations
Description
Categories
Musculoskeletal, Pediatric, Peripheral
Vascular, Small Parts
Frequency range
9-18 MHz
Contact surface
13 x 45 mm
Elevation focus
15 mm
Table 3.1: Transducer BK 9070
3.2
Development of water container
The water container and associated parts is illustrated in ﬁgure 3.4 and the assembled version in
ﬁgure 3.4. When designing the water container it is necessary to have some general characteristics
in mind concerning size of container, scanning window and elevation of foot.
The dimensions of the water container allows feet up to size 46 (305 mm) with some space
for longitudinal and transverse movement in the container. It is necessary to have some space to
movement in order to adjust the foot so the wound can be located above the scanning window.
The height of the container makes it possible to cover the foot with water without any risk of
water ﬂowing over the edge. The scanning media is made out of a transparent plastic, which the
transducer is able to scan through. Fixation of the container to the ﬁxture frame and the scanning
media to the scanning window is necessary in order to avoid movement of container and detachment
of the media from the scanning window. The scanning window consists of one bottom plate and
three top plates. The plates hold the scan media and elevate the foot 15 mm from the transducer.
Elevation of the foot is done in order to achieve the best elevational resolution at the wound surface.
Filling the joints of the container prevents water from running out. Running water will disturb the
scanning and other electrical equipment.
The container is developed in Solid Works and cut out with a laser cutter in either 3 mm og
5 mm transparent acryl. It is therefore fast and easy to fabricate. This is a practical solution since
it is necessary to make new container for each patient to avoid cross infection. The parts of the
container can be see in Appendix A section A.1. A detailed description of the dimensions as well
as an instruction on how to assemble the container is described in Appendix A section A.2.
==PAGE:22==
10
CHAPTER 3. DEVELOPMENT OF SCANNING SYSTEM
Figure 3.3: Container, bottom of container and scanning window plates
Figure 3.4: The assembled water container
3.3
Development of ﬁxture
The ﬁxture consists of a ﬁxture frame with four legs, a bottom plate, a motor system which is
places on the bottom plate and a transducer holder which is connected to the motor system, see
ﬁgure 3.5. When designing the ﬁxture it is necessary to have some general characteristics in mind
regarding dimensions of ﬁxture frame, movement of transducer and interface of the transducer
between motor system and scanning window.
The ﬁxture frame is designed to support the water container. The transducer determines the
height of the frame, because it must be able to ﬁt inside the ﬁxture without bending the cable.
The moving part of the motor system is connected to three rods in order to move the transducer
back and forward. The middle one moves the transducer, the other two stabilize and prevent the
transducer from tilting. Connection of the transducer holder and rod is made with a screw that is
easy to loosen and tighten so it is possible to move up and down. This is done to adjust the height
of the transducer in order to get a good connection between transducer and scanning media. A
detailed description of the dimensions as well as an instruction on how to assemble the ﬁxture is
==PAGE:23==
3.4. DEVELOPMENT ERRORS
11
described in Appendix A section A.3.
Figure 3.5: Fixture
3.4
Development errors
During the development of the water container and ﬁxture several experiments were tried out
before the ﬁnal scanning system was developed.
Water container and ﬁxture
The ﬁrst water container was made with sides that were 40 mm high. The sides were changed
from 40 mm to 150 mm in order to make sure that the different feet could be completely covered
with water. Elevation of foot was adjusted from 10 mm to 15 mm by adding another plate in the
scan window. The wound is then elevated to a point were the elevational resolution is better and
a better image quality is achieved within the range of the wound. The ﬁrst design of the water
container did not include any lists for ﬁxating the container to the ﬁxture frame. This meant that
the container moved while scanning. The scanning window was ﬁrst located in the middle of the
container but misalignment between the scanning window and the transducer caused the transducer
to be too close to the edge of the scanning window. The window in each plate was moved 10 mm
to the sides, see ﬁgure 3.4. The height of the ﬁxture frame was ﬁrst designed to be 150 mm, but
the transducer could not be inside the ﬁxture without bending the cable. The height of the ﬁxture
frame was increased to approximately 170 mm using several bolts.
==PAGE:24==
12
CHAPTER 3. DEVELOPMENT OF SCANNING SYSTEM
Scanning media
The scanning media is the interface between the water in the tank and ultrasound transducer
with gel. Several experiments with scanning media was tried. Agar was tried as a scan media
but when places in the scanning window it either broke or slid off its support. Previous design of
the scanning window contained a support list that the agar media could be placed on. Then Sika
Biresin U1404 was tried. Biresin U1404 consists of two components Biresin U1404 resin and
Biresin U1404 hardener. When mixed together, in the ratio 8 to 10, they form a material that is
soft, elastic, does not break easily and is insensitive to moisture. The mixture contains a lot of air
holes that could be avoided by making the mixture using a vacuum pump. The main reason to why
Biresin mixture was discarded was because it was not possible to scan through the mixture.
3.5
Development of software
The motor system is developed with the following targets in mind: Arduino Leonardo board,
motor and micro switches. Arduino is an open-source electronics plat-form and with the use of
AccelStepper library it is able to control the motor. The motor has 2038 counts per revolution. One
revolution correspond to 2 mm movement of the transducer.
The program Bounce _ serial _ no2.ino controls the motor and homing switches. Writing the
following commands to the serial port; move, accel, maxspeed or setPosition followed by a number,
will move the motor. The commands are used in the python script MotorDriverNew.py. The script
works by asking the user for step length and total length in millimetre. The transducer will then
move to the ﬁrst step position and scan. This sequence will continue until it reaches the end
destination. Detailed pseudo-code for the arduino- and python-script can be seen in Appendix A
section A.4 and A.5, respectively. The developed scripts is shown in appendix D section D.1 ﬁgure
D.2
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 4
Materials and Method
In the ﬁrst part of this chapter I describe the materials and method used for acquiring ultrasound
data using the scanning system. The second part deals with data processing. In the third part I
describe the volume estimator algorithm. The last part deals with properties of the transducer.
4.1
Data acquisition
Data is acquired using the scanning system, BK 3000 ultrasound scanner and BK 9070 linear
array transducer. Additional equipment; Computer, arduino board, motor controller and wireless
router. Connection of the equipment in the scan system is illustrated in ﬁgure 4.2. A detailed
description of how to set up the system and grab data is found in section A.6 in appendix A.
The data is grabbed by using the savebuffer ups,input command in janus toolbox while run-
ning the "MotorDriverNew.py" script. The condition of the acquisition can be controlled in the
different UPS modules, see ﬁgure 4.1. Running the "USPGraphView.py" script a ﬂow chart includ-
ing all modules is generated. The state of the data at each node can be inspected by clicking on it.
When writing the previously mentioned command the data is grabbed at Node-ID 0 and Pipe-ID 0,
respectively. The data at these nodes is beam-formed complex IQ data.
Figure 4.1:
The ﬁgure shows the UPS diagram. The image is taken from the note; BK3000
Ultrasound Scanner Data Acquisition and Processing
13
==PAGE:26==
14
CHAPTER 4. MATERIALS AND METHOD
Motor
Homing switch 1
Homing switch 2
Transducer
Motor controller
BK 3000
Computer
10
11
12
13
GND
4
5
6
7
Arduino Leonardo
Wireless router
Figure 4.2: Connection of the different components in the scanning system
==PAGE:27==
4.2. DATA PROCESSING
15
4.2
Data processing
The recorded data contains for each frame a folder with one .bkmdf ﬁle called stream-0, a log
ﬁle, a usecase.xml and a usecase-input.xml ﬁle. The .bkmdf ﬁle contain I/Q data acquired at the
angle perpendicular to the scan surface and the .xml ﬁle includes geometries of the data. In order
to read and convert the .bkmdf format to a .mat ﬁle, it is necessary to add the BkmDataFile toolbox,
which can only be implemented on a windows computer. BK medical supplied the toolbox. The
I/Q data is organized so that rows are changing between real numbers I and Q, staring with I data.
Data is converted into complex data and saved as a three dimensional matrix. This is done in the
MATLAB script "LoadSaveData.m". Further processing is done by converting the usecase.xml ﬁle,
which includes scan parameters, transducer- and image-geometries, to a structure array. The script
"bk3000 _ data _ convert.m" script, supplied by Ramin Moshavegh, generates the useCaseParams
structure array and saves it as a .mat ﬁle.
The acquired data is converted to gray scale images with pixel values ranging from 0 to 255
in the MATLAB script "Setup1LoadImages.m". Data is ﬁrst converted to IQ data and up-sampled
and since the data from the scanner is down-sampled by a factor of 2. Data is then demodulated by
taking the absolute value of the Hilbert transformation. The envelope data is then log-compressed
to 60 dB before scaled to lie within the range of 0 and 255. This is done by ﬁrst dividing each pixel
with the largest negative value multiplied with minus 1 and afterwards adding 1 to the pixels. Data
is then scaled to lie between 0 and 1. Each pixel is then multiplied with 28 −1 so the pixel values
range from 0 to 255.
Data is then converted from tissue coordinates to pixel coordinates and interpolated with the
zoom factor 6 using ScanConvert.m function. The function generates a scan-converted envelope
data and associated axial and lateral axes. This is done for each frame in the dataset and the
three-dimensional matrix (Row, Col, Frames) as well as axes are saved in a .mat ﬁle. The images
are then ready for further analysis. The scripts used in this part is shown in appendix D section D.1
ﬁgure D.3 and ﬁgure D.4.
4.3
Volume estimator algorithm
The basic idea of the volume estimator algorithm is for each frame to segment the tissue from
the background and extract the boundary of the tissue part as well as generate an original surface
boundary (the boundary in absence of a wound). From these boundaries two masks are generated
and these two masks are subtracted in order to isolate the area between these boundaries. The
volume is estimated by taking each area and multiplying it with the length that the probe has moved
between acquiring each frame.
==PAGE:28==
16
CHAPTER 4. MATERIALS AND METHOD
4.3.1
Pre-processing of the images
Before applying the volume estimation algorithm the echoes from the scanning media are
removed. This is done by setting all pixels to zero within the range of 0 to 10 millimetres in the
depth direction, which is done for all frames. This is possible because the scanning system is
designed in a way, where the foot is elevated 15 mm from the plastic ﬁlm. Afterwards small objects
in the images are removed. This is done by converting the image to a binary image based on a
empirically chosen threshold. Objects smaller than one-tenth of the image size or with pixel values
below the threshold are excluded from the image using this mask. Although the foot is elevated,
it is still expected that more than half of the image include tissue. Noisy objects can thereby be
removed without removing the main object. This is likewise done for every frame. Each image
is then median ﬁltered in order to remove outliers. The spatial ﬁlter mask with dimension 15x15
pixels is applied to the images by scanning through all pixels. The ﬁlter changes the centre pixel of
the output image to the median value of the mask [11]. The pre-processing part is illustrated with
an images series in ﬁgure 4.3
Figure 4.3: Pre-processing of a phantom image, where echoes removed (left), small objects are
removed (middle) and the ﬁnal median ﬁltered image (right)
4.3.2
Wound boundary estimation
The segmentation is done using an algorithm called active contour (see section 4.4) as imple-
mented in MATLAB (r2015a). Active contour requires an initial guess for the object it should
mask out. For the ﬁrst image in the volume is used a processed version of the mask from the
preprocessing as initial guess. The algorithm is then applied recursively through the images in the
volume using the resulting segmentation from the prior image in the volume as an initial guess for
the current segmentation. It is necessary to ﬁll holes, smooth boundaries and dilating the mask
before using it as initial guess for the new image.
For active contour to capture the most accurate contour, and thereby the best segmentation, it is
important that the starting guess for the ﬁrst image is close to the desired object. Therefore it is
==PAGE:29==
4.3. VOLUME ESTIMATOR ALGORITHM
17
necessary to further process the initial mask. An morphology called opening, which erodes and
dilates the object is used ﬁrst. The operation can be written as:
g(x, y) = f(x, y) ◦SE = (f(x, y) ⊖SE) ⊕SE
where f(x, y) is the input image, g(x, y) is the output image, ⊖, ⊕are erosion and dilation opera-
tions, respectively, with the same structuring element SE. When eroding an image a structuring
element investigates each pixel in the image. The centre pixel of the output image is set to ’1’,
if the overlapping structuring element detects ’1’s for all elements. Erosion of an image results
in small objects disappearing and the bigger objects dividing into small objects. Dilating makes
the object becomes bigger, small holes are ﬁlled and objects are merged together. The structuring
element investigates each pixel in the image. When the centring element hits a ’1’ all pixels that
are within the structuring element is set to the corresponding element value in the output image
[11]. Figure 4.4 shows the opening operation on a phantom image.
Figure 4.4: Illustration of opening operation on a phantom image
After opening, the small noisy objects that previously were integrated in the main object are
removed by excluding objects that are smaller than 1/100 of the image. This is chosen because
there can be cases where the main object is split into larger parts, and these objects should not be
removed. The closing operation ﬁlls holes in the object without increasing the size op the object.
This is done by ﬁrst dilating the object follow by an erosion of the object. The operation is written
as:
g(x, y) = f(x, y) • SE = (f(x, y) ⊕SE) ⊖SE
In terms of size and shape it is essential that the structuring element is the same in the dilation and
erosion [11]. Figure 4.5 shows the closing operation on the same phantom image as the opening
operation. Closing is followed by the function imfill, which ﬁlls holes inside the object that the
closing operation was not able to do. The mask is afterwards dilated before it is used as input for
the segmentation of the ﬁrst image.
==PAGE:30==
18
CHAPTER 4. MATERIALS AND METHOD
Figure 4.5: Illustration of closing operation on a phantom image
==PAGE:31==
4.3. VOLUME ESTIMATOR ALGORITHM
19
The MATLAB function "activecontour" takes the pre-processed median image and the previ-
ously described initial mask as input. The principles behind active contour are described in section
4.4. Figure 4.6 shows a detected boundary, where the initial contour is the red and the green is the
ﬁnal contour.
The boundary is detected from the segmentation by eroding the mask and subtracting it from
the original segmented image. This can be written as:
g(x, y) = f(x, y) −(f(x, y) ⊖SE)
where SE is the structuring element. This operation generates only difference between the two
binary images [11]. The segmented object is smoothed before the boundary is extracted. The
smoothed mask is dilated and used as input mask for the next image that should be segmented.
This sequence is repeated for all frames.
Figure 4.6: Detection boundary of a phantom image, where red is initial contour and the green is
the ﬁnal extracted boundary
4.3.3
Volume estimation
The area of the cavity is estimated by subtracting the tissue mask form the modelled original
tissue mask (tissue mask in absence of wound). The tissue mask is generated by extracting the ﬁrst
peak (counted from the top of the image) within the boundary image for all columns and setting
everything below this boundary to ’1’. This is very crude estimate of cavity boundary, since it
excludes undermining and tunnels. The original surface boundary is modelled by making a starting
point and end point at the sides of the detected boundary. The starting point and end point are made
==PAGE:32==
20
CHAPTER 4. MATERIALS AND METHOD
by taking the average of the ﬁrst 10 and last 10 samples of the detected boundary, see ﬁgure 4.7.
These points are connected by a straight line using linear interpolation. Modelling the original
surface boundary as a straight line is not convenient because the original surface of a foot is rarely
even.
Figure 4.7: Shows the ﬁrst 10 samples (blue box left) and the last 10 samples (blue box right) of
the detected boundary used to model the original surface boundary
The left picture in ﬁgure 4.8 shows only the tissue boundary (green) and the modelled surface
boundary (red). The B-mode image with superimposed estimated cavity is see in the right image in
ﬁgure 4.8.
Figure 4.8:
The image (left) shows the estimated wound boundary and the modelled original
boundary. The right image shows the corresponding area superimposed on the B-mode image.
There can be situations where the wound cavity boundary is over the surface boundary. This
will make objects that are not a part of the cavity. This is illustrated in the left image at coordinates
-18 mm and 21 mm, see ﬁgure 4.8. These objects are removed by setting all pixels less than ’1’ to
==PAGE:33==
4.3. VOLUME ESTIMATOR ALGORITHM
21
zero. The area of the cavity is calculated by ﬁrst calculating the area of a pixel and then multiplying
it with the number of pixels in the estimated cavity. The pixel area is calculated by multiplying the
axial (dz) and lateral (dx) sample distance, see ﬁgure 4.9. The area is calculated by summing the
number of pixels in the cavity and multiplying it with the pixel area. The volume is calculated by
multiplying each area with the step length that the frames are acquired with. The scripts used in
this part is shown in appendix D section D.1 ﬁgure D.5.
Figure 4.9: Pixels within the cavity and pixel size
==PAGE:34==
22
CHAPTER 4. MATERIALS AND METHOD
4.4
Active contour
Image segmentation is a fundamental task in image analysis responsible for partitioning an
image into multiple sub-regions based on desired features. The purpose of segmentation is to
partition an image into components, which are similar according to properties such as intensity,
color or texture. Segmentation are usually based on either edge-based or region-based properties.
Edge-based segmentation partitions an image based on discontinuities among sub-regions i.e. edges,
while region-based does the same, but based on the homogeneity of the desired sub-region. Active
contour is attractive image segmentation because it always generates sub-regions with continuous
boundaries, while the kernel-based edge detection methods such as Sobel or Prewitt edge detectors
often produce discontinuous boundaries [1].
The inspiration for using Active contour as a segmentation tool comes from [9]. This article
describes that Active contour models have proved to be useful for segmenting object of interest in
ultrasound images. Even though the images have relatively low resolution and reduced contrast
with discontinuity and uncertainty of segmentation boundaries caused by speckle noise, which
make the segmentation difﬁcult to carry out [9].
The classical energy based Active contour model snake, which was ﬁrst introduced by Kass
[6], uses internal- and external-energy for deforming a contour.
The model starts with an initial guess of the contour on the parameter form C(s) = (X(s), Y (s)),
surrounding the object of interest. Here X(s) and Y (s) are image coordinates and s is the normal-
ized length of the contour, s ∈[0,1]. The curve evolves towards its interior normal and has a stop
on the boundary of the object. In the classical model an edge-detector is used, depending on the
gradient in the image u0, to stop the evolving curve on the boundary of the desired object. The
snake model is described as [2].
J(C) = α
Z 1
0
|C′(s)|2ds + β
Z 1
0
|C′′(s)|ds −λ
Z 1
0
| ▽u0(C(s))|2ds
The ﬁrst two terms control the smoothness and softness of the contour (internal energy), so that it
can not be stretched too much in a given direction or contain kinks. The ﬁrst derivative is a tangent,
which expresses a direction and magnitude of a particular point on the curve. When the model is
minimized, it decreases the size of the tangent so that the model moves in smaller steps between
each s and the model therefore becomes more smooth in a given direction. α is a constant that
indicates how stretched the curve must be. The second derivative controls the softness of the curve.
β is a constant that indicates how straight the curve must be. If only the internal energy is minimized
the model will not stop at the object of interest but will continue to deform until it reaches the center
of the starting curve since it is minimum of a circle. It is therefore necessary to introduce external
energy that makes sure that the curve stops at the object. Third term attracts the contour towards
the outline of the object (external energy) [7]. λ is a positive parameter that weights the external
energy that attracts the curve. By minimizing the above energy function the curve will be located
==PAGE:35==
4.4. ACTIVE CONTOUR
23
at points of maxima |▽u0|, acting as an edge-detector, while keeping a smoothness in the curve [2].
The MATLAB function "activecontour" is used for the segmentation purpose in this study. The
classical Active contour models depend on image gradients to stop the curve evolution, and those
models can only delineate objects with the prominent edges highlighted by gradients. However,
the gradient descending minimization procedure has a tendency not to capture objects with very
noisy edges. This causes the curve passes through the boundary of the object without evolvement
being stopped. Instead the Mumford-Shah model is employed which can detect objects both with
or without prominent boundaries for instance with very smooth or discontinous boundaries [2].
The article [2] uses forces to explain the minimization of an energy based-segmentation using the
Mumford-Shah model. The basic idea is described with this simple illustration. Assume that an
image u0 is formed by two regions of approximately constant intensity but with distinct values for
each region. The ﬁtting term for the model is described as:
F1(C) + F2(C) =
Z
inside(C)
|u0(x, y) −c1|2 dx dy +
Z
outside(C)
|u0(x, y) −c2|2 dx dy
where C is any other variable curve and the constants c1, c2, depending on C, are the average
of u0 inside C and respectively outside C. The ﬁrst term is the force to shrink the contour. The
second term is the force to expand the contour. These two forces get balanced when the contour
reaches the boundary of our interested object. That means that the shrinking term cancellers the
expanding term. For instance, if the curve C is outside the object, the F1(C) > 0 and F2 ≈0. If
the curve C is inside the object, then F1 ≈0 but F2(C) > 0. If the curve C is both inside and
outside the object, F1(C) > 0 and F2(C) > 0. Finally, the ﬁtting energy is minimized if F1 ≈0
and F2 ≈0 and the curve C is on the boundary of the object [2]. These cases are illustrated in
ﬁgure 4.10. Besides the ﬁtting term they also penalize length of the curve, and area of the region in
their optimization.
==PAGE:36==
24
CHAPTER 4. MATERIALS AND METHOD
Figure 4.10: This image illustrates the different possible cases for the position of the curve. The
ﬁtting term is minimized only in the case when the curve is on the boundary of the object. The
ﬁgure is taken from article [2]
==PAGE:37==
4.5. SPATIAL RESOLUTION
25
4.5
Spatial resolution
Spatial resolution or resolution cell refers to how closely two reﬂectors or scatting regions can
be to one another and still be identiﬁed as separate reﬂectors on an image. The spatial behaviour
of the resolution cell are determined by the axial, lateral and elevational resolution. The axial
resolution is found along the beam’s axis and the lateral resolution is the perpendicular to the
beam’s axis in the image plane. The elevation resolution or slice thickness is found perpendicular
to both the beam’s axis and the image plane [8]. Figure 4.11 shows the described axial, lateral and
elevational resolution.
Full-width-at-half-maximum (FWHM) method is commonly used to characterize the spatial
resolution. It is given by the distance between points on the curve at which the function reaches
half its maximum value (−6dB).
Figure 4.11: Spatial resolution is determined by the elevational, lateral and axial resolution. The
ﬁgure is from the book Essentials of Ultrasound Physics [16] and modiﬁed by the author
Axial Resolution
Axial resolution is the minimum reﬂector spacing along the axis of an ultrasound beam that
results in separate, distinguishable echoes in an image. It is determined by the duration (PD) of
the ultrasonic pulses transmitted, which is equal to the number if cycles Nc in the pulse multiplied
by the period T of the ultrasound wave. This is expressed as:
PD = Nc · T
The period in µs is 1 over frequency in MHz. The pulse duration is linked to the spatial pulse
length (SPL), which is the distance that the pulse occupies in space. The SPL is the product of
==PAGE:38==
26
CHAPTER 4. MATERIALS AND METHOD
wavelength λ and number of wave cycles in the pulse:
SPL = Nc · λ
The wavelength is given by:
λ = c
f0
where c is speed of sound in the medium and f0 is the center frequency of the ultrasound pulse.
Axial resolution is limited by the spatial pulse length. If the time-gap between the arrival of
two echo pulses from two reﬂectors at different positions along the beam axis is greater than the
pulse duration, the two echoes will arrive separately. They will then be distinguishable in the
image [16]. Reﬂectors closer than one half of the SPL cannot be resolved.
Axial resolution = 1/2 · SPL
Thus the axial resolution improves if the frequency is increased [3]. The axial resolution for the
system where c = 1540 m/s, f = 11.1 MHz and Nc = 1.25 is calculated as:
Axial resolution = 1/2 · c
f · Nc = 1/2 ·
1540
11.1 · 106 · 1.25 = 0.07 · 10−3m
Elevational Resolution
Elevational resolution is determined by three properties of the transducer; element height,
center frequency and the ﬁxed elevational focal point given by the lens. At the focal point the
FWHM can be approximated by:
FWHM = λ · F # = λ · ze
he
where the F # is the ratio between the focal depth over the aperture width. The slice thickness
is approximately the size of the scan-head at the beginning of the beam. It narrows down to the
FWHM at the focal point, where after it expands again [16].
The elevational resolution for the BK 9070 probe, where the ze = 15 mm, he = 3.5 mm and
λ = 0.14 mm.
FWHM = λ · F # = λ · ze
he
= 0.14 15
3.5 = 0.6mm
Lateral Resolution
Lateral resolution depends on the imaging method and the imaging parameters. As rule of
thumb the resolution at the focal point is given by:
FWHM = λ · F # = λ · z
d
where z is the focus distance and d is the lateral aperture width [16]. The resulting resolution de-
pends on the transmitted beam and the receive beamformation. Receive focusing can be controlled
==PAGE:39==
4.5. SPATIAL RESOLUTION
27
electronically and therefore it is possible to focus along the entire beam. The scanner uses dynamic
aperture that allows to keep the F # constant for a given region of the image.
For the receiving part the FWHM = 0.2mm , where λ =
c
f0
= 0.14mm and F # = 1.5
The FWHM is approximated to be
==PAGE:40==
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 5
Preliminary investigations
This chapter describes studies conducted on two wound phantoms. The purpose of the investi-
gations is to test the volume estimation algorithm on a simple wound phantom as well as a more
complex wound phantom. The simple wound phantom is constructed with a known geometric
wound volume, while the more complex phantom has some realistic wound features.
5.1
Wound phantoms
The complex and the simple phantom differ in the shape of the cavity. The complex phantom
consists of 4.5 g powder agar, 300 g demineralized water and teaspoon of silica gel. The simple
phantom consists of twice the amount of mixture. The agar powder is mixed with demineralized
water and heated in a microwave for 4 minutes (or until the mixture begins to boil). Silica gel is
afterwards mixed with the solution and cooled to 45 degrees Celsius in a water bath. The mixture
is then poured into the mould. The cavities are made by lowering a marker (complex phantom)
or a ping-pong ball (simple phantom) into the mixture. It can be necessary to ﬁxate the objects
to avoid movement and hold them down, while the mixture hardens. When the mixture reaches
room temperature it is hardens and the objects can be removed. The agar phantoms now contains
cavities, which are casts of the objects, see ﬁgure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: Marker (complex phantom) and ping-pong ball (simple phantom)
29
==PAGE:42==
30
CHAPTER 5. PRELIMINARY INVESTIGATIONS
5.1.1
Volume of simple cavity
The volume of the ping pong ball is calculated as:
V = 4
3πr3 = 33.5 cm3
where r = 2.0 cm. The measurement series consists of 30 frames in steps of 1 mm. The wound
begins at frame 4 and half of the ball is scanned at approximately frame 24, see ﬁgure 5.2 . The
scanned part of the phantom amounts to a quarter of the entire volume, which is equal to 8.4 cm3.
Figure 5.2: Ping-pong ball phantom with starting frame and end frame. Below the phantom is
illustrated the transducer (T) and the scan- and movement- direction (arrows) of the transducer
5.2
Phantom scanning setup
Scans of the phantoms are made by placing them in the container with the cavities above the
scanning media and ﬁlling the container with water. Absorption material is placed on top of the
phantoms, see ﬁgure 5.3. Due to buoyancy of the phantoms a jug is placed on top of the absorption
material to keep it down during scanning. When handling the phantoms there may occur damage
to it, because it is very fragile. Therefore, it is not certain that the cast of the objects are exactly
identical to the shape of the objects. Scans of the complex phantom are made with the ﬁrst version
of the container, while the simple phantom is scanned in the ﬁnal container, see section 3.4 in
chapter 3. The scanning conditions of the wound phantoms with different containers are illustrated
in ﬁgure 5.4.
5.3
Results
During the experiment it was discovered that air bubbles could disturb the recordings. It was
often observed that air bubbles was pushed against the phantom during scanning. This could help
enhance the edges of the phantom. But in general the recordings worked best if the air bubbles
had time to settle before the scanning the object. If the phantom was not placed carefully in the
==PAGE:43==
5.3. RESULTS
31
Figure 5.3: Container with phantom and absorption material
Figure 5.4: Scan conditions of complex phantom (left) and simple phantom (right)
container, there would often be a large air bubble in the wound cavity. This was avoided if the
phantom was placed in the container with an angle instead of horizontally.
5.3.1
Simple phantom
The following illustrations describe processing of the data series and the ﬁnal volume esti-
mation. The left image in ﬁgure 5.5 shows the contour just before the wound phantom begins,
while the right shows the contour at the middle of the phantom. The boundary detection is a little
Figure 5.5: Wound start (frame 4) and wound end (frame 24) with initial- and ﬁnal contour
unstable for the ﬁrst few frames, but then it captures the boundary of the cavity pretty well for the
rest of the images. Boundary detection at the edges of the phantom does not work well for the 10
ﬁrst frames of the phantom. This will inﬂuence the modelling of the original surface boundary
==PAGE:44==
32
CHAPTER 5. PRELIMINARY INVESTIGATIONS
(boundary in absence of wound cavity) and thereby the estimation of the phantom volume. An
incorrect and correct surface boundary estimation is shown in ﬁgure 5.6 and the corresponding area
superimposed with the B-mode in ﬁgure 5.7. Since the surface of the phantom is ﬂat, the original
Figure 5.6:
In the left image an incorrect modelled original surface boundary (red) is shown,
where the wound boundary is the green curve. In the right image a more correct modelled original
surface boundary (red) is shown, where the wound boundary is the green curve
Figure 5.7: Left and right image show the estimated area superimposed with the corresponding
B-mode image. The images are the same as in ﬁgure 5.6
surface boundary should be a straight line. It seems as if the algorithm is not able to capture these
borders. The reason for this may be that the uniformity for the phantom is low for these frames
compared to the rest of the frames.
The stacked B-mode images are seen to the in ﬁgure 5.8. The volume of the cavity is esti-
mated to be 2.6cm3. It does not correspond with the expected volume measurement (8.4cm3)
described earlier.
After inspecting the right image in ﬁgure 5.10, it shows that the ball is only moulded 12 −13 mm
into the phantom and not one half as expected. Using this information, an adjusted calculation of
==PAGE:45==
5.3. RESULTS
33
Figure 5.8: 3D image of the wound cavity. The frames are stacked with the ﬁrst frame (4) in front
and the last frame (24) in the back
the volume is made. This is calculated as:
V = πh2 × (3r −h)
3
volume range from 7.2 cm3 to 8.3 cm3, calculated with h equal to 1.2 cm and 1.3 cm. An illustration
of the adjusted volume is shown in ﬁgure 5.9. Since it is only half the volume that is scanned
the expected volume is rather from 3.6 cm3 to 4.2 cm3. This adjustment gives a better basis for
comparison, but the estimated volume is still smaller than the expected. One of the reason for the
underestimation is that the very simple estimate of surface boundary is located in the main object
for some frames, see ﬁgure 5.6. This makes the area of the cavity smaller for these frames. Another
reason is that the transducer is not able to capture enough wall next to the cavity to distinguish
the wall from noise. This is shown in the left image in ﬁgure 5.10 where frame 4 and 24 are
superimposed. This illustrates that the original phantom surface is not a part of frame 24 the whole
cavity is therefore not captured in the last 6 frames. This contributes to the underestimation of
the volume. Small objects that are not a part of the main wound cavity which can be seen in the
right image in ﬁgure 5.8 are included in the volume estimate. These objects will overestimate the
volume measurement, but as the objects are very small, it is probably insigniﬁcant.
==PAGE:46==
34
CHAPTER 5. PRELIMINARY INVESTIGATIONS
Figure 5.9: Adjusted volume of the simple phantom
Figure 5.10: First and last image of the wound superimposed and same image with measurements
==PAGE:47==
5.3. RESULTS
35
5.3.2
Complex phantom
In order for the segmentation to work on this phantom, it is ﬁrstly necessary to change the order
of images. The segmentation begins from last recorded frame and goes backwards. This is mainly
because of noise, which is visible in the ﬁrst 10 frames of the series. These frames are excluded
from the investigation.
Boundary detection at the edges of the phantom does not work well for most of the frames
in the series. This will, as described earlier, inﬂuence the modelling of the original surface bound-
ary and thereby the estimation of the phantom volume. A bad surface boundary estimation is shown
in ﬁgure 5.11. This is adjusted by changing the range of samples, on the wound boundary, where
the start point and end point is estimated. The starting point is estimated over samples between
-16 mm and -15 mm and the end point between 15 mm and 16 mm. This solution improves the
original boundary estimation for the given images. The result is seen in the left image in ﬁgure 5.12
with the corresponding area superimposed with the B-mode in the right image. Some adjustments
Figure 5.11: The image shows an incorrect original surface boundary
of the algorithm were necessary for it to work with this phantom. The segmentation was poor in
the top of the phantom in the edges of the images 5.11. It was therefore necessary to change the
estimation of the original surface boundary in order to get a better volume estimation.
The main reason for using this phantom was to investigate how the algorithm handles wound
undermining, see section 2 in chapter 2. This is illustrated in ﬁgure 5.12. The problem is not the
estimation of the boundaries but the way the wound cavity area are isolated.
==PAGE:48==
36
CHAPTER 5. PRELIMINARY INVESTIGATIONS
Figure 5.12: The left image shoes the corrected original surface boundary, for the same frame as
in ﬁgure 5.11. Where the red contour is the original surface boundary and the green contour is the
ﬁnal boundary detection. The right image shows the corresponding cavity area superimposed with
the B-mode image
5.4
Conclusion
This chapter describes phantom experiments that were conducted to investigate the range of
validity of the volume estimation algorithm. The experiments with the simple phantom gave volume
estimations in the correct order of magnitude, but slight underestimation was seen and the reason
for this was explained. The experiments with the complex phantom showed the algorithm was not
able to handle undermining in its current form.
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 6
Clinical Trial
This chapter contains the results from the study of patients conducted at Steno Diabetes Center.
First part brieﬂy describes the patients who participated in the survey. Second part deals with the
investigations of the results conducted during the trial.
The patients participating in this study were selected by physician Anne Rasmussen mainly based
on location of the wound, since the system demands that wounds are located on the middle part of
the foot. The condition of the wounds are unknown as there has been no contact between patient
and physician since the last consultation.
In the study, I have scanned three patients. The ﬁrst patient (case 1) was a 66-year-old male
who was diagnosed with type-2 diabetes in 2003. The patient suffer from neuropathy which among
others is why the patient have had foot wounds on and off since 2009. The investigated wound is
located on the forefoot of the patients right foot, see ﬁgure 6.1. The patient’s big toe on the same
foot as wound has been amputated, due to complications caused by diabetes. The second patient
(case 2) was a 73-year-old male who was diagnosed with type-2 diabetes in 1970. The wound was
located on the forefoot of the patients left foot, see ﬁgure 6.1. The third patient (case 3) was a
76-year-old female who was diagnosed with type-2 diabetes in 1987. The wound was located on
the heel on the patients left foot. Dimensions of the wounds, measured by the physician with the
ruler technique, can be seen in table 6.1 .
Figure 6.1: Pictures of the different wounds that was investigated during the clinical trial. Case 1
(left), case 2 (middle) and case 3 (right)
37
==PAGE:50==
38
CHAPTER 6. CLINICAL TRIAL
Dimensions
Case 1
Case 2
case 3
Width [mm]
4
2
5
Length [mm]
6
3
9
Depth [mm]
2
1
3-4
Table 6.1: Dimensions of the wounds measured by the physician with the ruler technique
The examination of the wounds consisted of a normal treatment by the physician and investi-
gations with the scanning system. The study with the scanning system was done by placing the
patients foot in the container and recording scans of the wound. A container was produced for
each patient. The wound is normally treated by cleaning the wound and removing hard tissue so
the wound better can heal. During this stage of the treatment the length, width and depth is mea-
sured. After treatment the wound is dried and new bandage is applied. As part of the treatment the
patients have custom made shoes or soles that can relieve the patient’s wound, so they can heal faster.
Several problems was discovered during the study. In the two ﬁrst cases the wounds were lo-
cated upper part of the middle-foot while it was located on the heel in the last case, see ﬁgure 6.1.
The locations of wounds did not ﬁt well with the location of the scanning window in the container.
It resulted in patients having difﬁculties placing their feet correctly over the scanning window. In
order to scan the wounds, it was either necessary to move the foot completely forward or backward
as it was possible in the container, see ﬁgure 6.2. This was difﬁcult for the patients because the
were old and not very mobile. The physician had to assists the patients by holding their feet in that
difﬁcult position while scanning. As previously mentioned case 1’s big toe was amputated, which
resulted in his foot falling into the scanning window and touching the plastic ﬁlm. In that case
the physician had to hold the patient foot because it was too small to the support from scanning
window frame, see ﬁgure 6.2. Pictures form the study can be seen in appendix B section B.2
Figure 6.2: Different positions of the feet in the container for case 1 (left), case 2 (middle) and
case 3 (right)
6.1
Results
The recorded data for each case can be seen in table 6.2. The size of the wounds for case 1 and
2 is not signiﬁcant. The most extreme wound cavities for these cases are shown in ﬁgure 6.3. These
==PAGE:51==
6.1. RESULTS
39
cases are not investigated further since they are not relevant for the volume estimation. Case 3 has
a more signiﬁcant wound, which is more obvious for volume estimation. The image with the most
extreme cavity is seen in ﬁgure 6.4.
Speciﬁcations
Case 1
Case 2
Case 3
Step Length [mm]
1
1
1
Total Length [mm]
20
11
15
Number of Frames
20
11
15
Table 6.2: The step length and total length settings as well as number of the frames acquired for
each case
Figure 6.3: Largest wound cavity image for case 1 (left) and 2 (right). The wound cavity for
case 1 is located at approximately -3 mm and 23 mm. The wound cavity for case 2 is located at
approximately 0 mm and 12 mm
Figure 6.4: Largest wound cavity image for case 3 (located at approximately -8 mm and 12 mm)
==PAGE:52==
40
CHAPTER 6. CLINICAL TRIAL
Since it was difﬁcult to place case 3’s foot properly on the scanning window frame in the container,
it is necessary to change the echoes that should be removed before image segmentation to range
from 0 to 3 millimetres in the depth direction. It was generally necessary to change this parameter
in all cases. Figure 6.5 shows two segmentation results from case 3. Since the foot is tilted and the
wound is shifted to the left it is necessary to rotate the image and take only the part of the image
where the wound is located. This is done to make a better surface boundary estimation. The image
is rotated counter-clockwise direction with a 10 degree angle around its center point. The part of
the image is ranging from 0 mm to 30 mm in the depth direction and from -12 mm to 1 mm in the
lateral direction, approximately. Figure 6.7 shows two modiﬁed frames of the images in ﬁgure 6.5.
Figure 6.8 shows the estimated surface boundary and wound boundary for the new images and
ﬁgure 6.9 with the corresponding area superimposed with the B-mode images.
By taking a part of the image the segmentation is improved. This is because movement of
the curve in Active contour is an iterative process that is limited to a speciﬁed number. So if
the initial contour is smaller and located only around the object of interest (wound cavity), the
segmentation captures the wound boundary better.
Figure 6.5:
Segmentation of two frames from case 3 without rotating and taking a speciﬁed
section of of the images. The red contour is the initial contour and the green contour is the ﬁnal
boundary detection
==PAGE:53==
6.1. RESULTS
41
Figure 6.6: Shows difﬁculties with estimated original surface boundary, for the same frames as in
ﬁgure 6.5, without rotating and taking a speciﬁed section of of the images. Where the red contour
is the original surface boundary and the green contour is the ﬁnal boundary detection
Figure 6.7: Segmentation of two same frames as in ﬁgure 6.5. These frames are modiﬁed by
rotating and taking a speciﬁed section of of the images. The red contour is the initial contour and
the green contour is the ﬁnal boundary detection
==PAGE:54==
42
CHAPTER 6. CLINICAL TRIAL
Figure 6.8: Shows the new estimated original surface boundary for the same frames as in ﬁgure
6.5. The images are rotated and a speciﬁed section of of the images is taken. The red contour is the
original surface boundary and the green contour is the ﬁnal boundary detection
Figure 6.9:
The estimated area superimposed with the corresponding B-mode image. These
images are the same as in ﬁgure 6.8
==PAGE:55==
6.1. RESULTS
43
When estimating the volume of the wound an investigation of the frames are done in order to
assess which frames contain the wound and which do not. This is done since the original surface
boundary is estimated as a straight line and boundary of the foot have irregularities, which results
in small area that is included in the wound volume estimation, see ﬁgure 6.10. Figure 6.11 shows
a 3D wound volume image without removing frames that does not include wound cavity where
the B-mode images are stacked with the ﬁrst frame (1) in front and the last frame (15) in the back.
Figure 6.12 shows 3D wound volume image where the frames not including wound cavity are
removed. The adjusted 3D volume image is ranging from frame 3 to frame 11. All frames from 3
to 11 can be seen in appendix C section C.1
Figure 6.10: Original surface- and wound boundary (left) and estimated area superimposed with
the corresponding B-mode image (right). This is the ﬁrst frame of the recorded data from case 3
==PAGE:56==
44
CHAPTER 6. CLINICAL TRIAL
Figure 6.11: 3D image of the wound cavity without adjusting the number of frames. The frames
are stacked with the ﬁrst frame (1) in front and the last frame (15) in the back
==PAGE:57==
6.1. RESULTS
45
Figure 6.12: 3D image of the wound cavity with adjusted the number of frames. The frames are
stacked with the ﬁrst frame (3) in front and the last frame (11) in the back
The volume of the wound is estimated by the physician to be between 0.14cm3 and 0.18cm3.
The volume is calculated by multiplying the length, width and height. These measurements results
in the wound is modelled as a cubic form, see ﬁgure 6.13. The volume of the wound is estimated
with the wound volume algorithm to be 0.10cm3. It is expected that the estimate volume is less
than the volume measured by the physician, since the wound rarely is cubic. When inspecting the
image of the wound in ﬁgure 6.1 (right image), it is seen that the wound has a round shape.
Figure 6.13: Simple model of the wound measured by the physician
==PAGE:58==
46
CHAPTER 6. CLINICAL TRIAL
6.2
Conclusion
This chapter describes experiments that were conducted during the clinical trial. It was
necessary to adjust the frames by rotating and selecting the part the only contained the wound cavity
in order for the wound volume algorithm to handle the recorded frames. Generally Active contour
works better at segmenting the wound boundary if the frames only contain the speciﬁed part of
the image where the wound is. The wound volume estimated by the wound volume algorithm is
less than the measured volume by the physician, which is expected since the volume of the wound
rarely is cubic. When inspecting the wound of case 3, it seems that the wound has a round shape.
This underlines that the wound is smaller than the cubic measurement.
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 7
Discussion
During this project I have made two studies at Steno Diabetes Center. The ﬁrst study was
made in the fall, where I scanned the wounds of two patients using gel instead water as ultrasound
conducting material. This study showed that gel was difﬁcult to work with since gel contains air
holes and when squeezing gel onto the wound the tube can blow air into the gel as well. Furthermore
it was difﬁcult to ﬁll the wound cavity with gel because it is viscous. The second study (this thesis)
the artifacts was reduced by scanning in water. The physician has concerns regarding using water
since the physician recommend patients to avoid foot-bath. Using the scanning system may have
bad educational effect on the patient. However, water seems to be the most favourable solution at
the current state.
There were problems with the new developed scanning system that disturbed the investigations. It
was difﬁcult for the patients to place their feet properly over the scanning window. Mainly because
of the scanning window location did not ﬁt well with the location of the wounds for the given
patients. By moving the scanning window forward in the container will make it possible to handle
the wounds located on the forefoot better. Turning the container 180 degrees will make it possible
to handle the wounds on the heel better. Besides that, a smaller window frame could have given the
patients better support when placing their feet in the container and assistance from the physician
could have been avoided. Furthermore, it could have avoided rotation of the frames in the wound
volume algorithm.
It is difﬁcult to validate the wound volume estimator since at the current state there are no golden
standard for measuring wounds. One way to validate and improve the wound volume algorithm
could be to make the wound phantoms from previously made wound casts, which have been made
during measurement examinations.
A better tool for visualizing the wound as well as the missing cavity volume would improve
the physician’s possibility for assess the state of the wound. This will give the physician better
opportunities for visualizing features of the wound that current measurement techniques are not
able to visualize.
47
==PAGE:60==
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion
In this thesis a new method for recording ultrasound images in order to create a 3D image of the
foot wounds has been developed. A wound volume estimator algorithm using the image analysis
methods morphology and active contour is developed to extract the current tissue boundary of the
foot. A simple reconstruction of the original surface boundary of the foot is made to help estimate
the wound area. Cavity area within these boundaries are estimated. The volume is calculated by
multiplying each area with the step length that the frames are acquired with.
A fast and exact volume estimating technique is of great clinical value, since it provides the
ability of monitoring expansion or reduction throughout the healing process. Ultrasound sys-
tems are available in most clinics. They offer the ability of producing real-time, non-invasive
images of body anatomy during a visit to the doctor. Ultrasound has advantages compared to
other wound measuring techniques since it provides the ability of visualizing wound conditions
such as undermining and tunnelling. Known techniques that can measure these conditions require
physical contact between instrument and patient. This can result in unnecessary discomfort and
cross-infection between patients.
The new scanning method provides the ability to solve some of these different problems which
still exist within the ﬁeld of wound measurement. It therefore has the potential to improve the
monitoring, which can lead to better wound treatment. However, during my clinical studies I
discovered how difﬁcult it is to develop a system that can accommodate the large variation of
different wound locations as well as the patients’ poor mobility. For the physician, good usability
and the well-being of the patients is more important in a measuring devise than accuracy. These
ﬁelds require much more development if the physician must be convinced that the system has
potential. Otherwise, the simple instruments will still be the most used methods for measuring
wounds in wound clinics. The scanning system described in this thesis could be the solution if the
usability and patient well-being is further developed as well as a more advanced algorithm is set
up.
49
==PAGE:62==
==PAGE:63==
Appendices
51
==PAGE:64==
==PAGE:65==
APPENDIX A
First Appendix
A.1
Water container drawing
FootHolderNew3004
WEIGHT: 
A1
SHEET 1 OF 1
SCALE:1:1
DWG NO.
TITLE:
REVISION
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
MATERIAL:
DATE
SIGNATURE
NAME
DEBUR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
FINISH:
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
Q.A
MFG
APPV'D
CHK'D
DRAWN
Figure A.1: Water container items made in Solid Works
53
==PAGE:66==
54
APPENDIX A. FIRST APPENDIX
A.2
Assembly of container
The bottom plate and the sides are designed with tabs and holes so that they connect with each
other. Connecting tabs of the sides with the holes in the bottom plate and ﬁlling the joints with
silicone form the container. The lists are screwed to the bottom of the bottom plate. Connecting
the bottom plate, with the three top plates, forms the scanning window. The scanning media is
located between bottom plate and the plate above. This is all screwed together with four screws.
The scanning window is then placed in the hole in the container and screwed together. Joints are
then ﬁlled with silicone.
Figure A.2: Container, bottom of container and scan window plates
• Container Dimensions
– Exterior: l = 340 mm, w = 280 mm and h = 150 mm
– Interior: l = 330 mm, w = 270 mm and h = 145 mm
– Window: l = 180 mm, w = 100 mm and h = 5 mm
– lists: l = 240 mm, w = 20 mm and h = 5 mm
• Plates Dimension
– Exterior bottom plate: l = 180 mm, w = 100 mm and h = 5 mm
– Bottom window: l = 100 mm, w = 70 and h = 5 mm
– Exterior top plates; l = 200 mm, w = 120 mm and h = 5 mm
– Top window; l = 100 mm, w = 70 mm and h = 5 mm
==PAGE:67==
A.3. ASSEMBLY OF FIXTURE
55
A.3
Assembly of ﬁxture
The ﬁxture top part consists of eight rods. Four of the bars are connected together to form the
frame. The last four rods are connected to the joints of the frame and form the legs of the ﬁxture
top. The ﬁxture top part is screwed together with the bottom plate. The motor system is located
on the bottom plate. The motor system consists of a motor, motor holder, two end-plates, three
rods, two ball bearings, motor to rod interface, two blocks, a rod and a transducer holder. The
motor is connected to the holder with two screws and located on the end of the bottom plate. It is
connected to the rod system through the interface system. The interface between motor and middle
rod consists of three parts; one that is connected to the motor, one that is connected to the middle
rod and a plastic interface between them which can adjust misalignment. The rod system is made
by connecting the three rods to the holes in the end-plates. Both end-plates have three holes with a
ball bearing in the middle one and is screwed to the bottom plate. The moving part of the motor
system consists of two blocks. One that is connected to the rod system and one that holds the rod
that is connected to the transducer holder. The top block contains an open rectangular hole which
the rod is attached to by srews and washers. The rod is connected to the transducer holder through
a rectangular hole and a screw which ﬁxates the holder to the rod. The transducer holder consists
of two parts that is connected by two screws. Inside the two parts is a hole that matches the shaft of
the transducer.
Figure A.3: Fixture
• Fixture Dimensions
– Exterior top frame: l = 340 mm and w = 280 mm
– Interior top frame: l = 300 mm and w = 240 mm
– Frame height: 170 mm
• Dimensions of bottom plate and motor system
==PAGE:68==
56
APPENDIX A. FIRST APPENDIX
– Bottom plate: l = 340 mm, w = 280 mm and h = 10 mm
– End-plates; length = 70 mm, width = 10 mm and height = 30 mm
– Motor holder; length = 65 mm, width = 10 mm and height = 50 mm
– Rods; length = 245 mm and diameter = 8 mm
– Blocks: l = 70 mm, w = 30 mm and h = 20 mm
– Transducer rod: l = 12 mm, w = 10 mm and h = 145 mm
==PAGE:69==
A.4. PSEUDO-CODE FOR ARDUINO SCRIPT
57
A.4
Pseudo-code for arduino script
First the script declares input and output pins. The variables and pin modes are then initialized.
A loop function then read then serial port and if one of the previously mention commands is written,
it then passes the value to the corresponding function. The script writes current and target position
to the serial port. If homing switch 1 is activated the motor is then moved anticlockwise. When
homing switch 2 is activated the motor stops and the current position is set to zero. The motor then
moves clockwise to index 4072 and set position to zero. The motor is then homed. See pseudo-code
for Bounce _ serial _ no2.ino in Appendix A.2. As a default the acceleration and de-acceleration
are set to 300 and the max speed is set to 400. The max speed should not be higher then 700,
because then the motor will break down.
==PAGE:70==
58
APPENDIX A. FIRST APPENDIX
Figure A.4: Pseudo-code for Bounce _ serial _ no2.ino
==PAGE:71==
A.5. PSEUDO-CODE FOR PYTHON SCRIPT
59
A.5
Pseudo-code for python script
The list below describes which things that are necessary to do in order to run the script for
moving the transducer and scanning. Below the list is the associated pseudo-code provided.
• Open Terminal window on the MacBook and change directory to StepMotor - Command: cd
StepMotor
• Write python MotorDriverNew.py in terminal window to open a python environment and run
the script - Command: python MotorDriverNew.py
• Type total scanning length in millimetres and press enter
• Type the length of scanning steps in millimetres and press enter
==PAGE:72==
60
APPENDIX A. FIRST APPENDIX
Figure A.5: Pseudo-code for MotorDriverNew.py
==PAGE:73==
A.6. PROTOCOL FOR SCANNING SYSTEM
61
A.6
Protocol for scanning system
The system is setup by connecting the router to the scanner through Ethernet. The arduino board
is connected to the computer through the USB A-male to mini-B cable. Motor controller and micro
switches are connected to the arduino board and the motor controller is connected to the motor. The
system is prepared by establishing WI-FI connection between router and computer. This s done
by selecting WI-FI connection bmenet-ap2 on the computer. It is necessary to control if the script
running the motor has the correct IP-address. Write ipconﬁg in the command prompt window on
the scanner. If the IP-address is different then change Host variable to the correct IP-address in the
MotorDriverNew.py script. Open Janus Toolbox on the scanner and select scan settings, in the .xml
ﬁle. The scan system is prepared by connecting the transducer to the scanner and placing it in the
holder within the ﬁxture. The transducer is homed by pressing micro switch 2. Scan surface of the
transducer is covered with gel and the water container is placed on ﬁxture. The transducer is moved
up, so that it is in contact with the scan media. The patients foot is placed in the container with
the wound above the scan media and covered with water. Data is acquired by opening a terminal
window on the computer and writing the command: python MotorDriverNew.py. Thereafter type
step- and total-length in millimetres. The step length determines the distance between scans in
the elevational direction and total-length determines the total length in the elevational direction.
The system then acquires data, which is saved at Q:\DataCHHE on the scanner. To complete data
acquisition, data is copied into a new folder named set Setxx. A simple user guide is shown below.
• System preparation
– Turn on wireless router and connect it to the BK 3000 scanner through Ethernet
– Open command prompt window on the scanner and enter ipconﬁg Write down IPv4
address: e.g. 10.59.44.200
– Turn on MacBook Computer and select Wi-Fi connection bmenet-ap2
– Open MotorDriverNew.py in IDLE and change Host variable to match IPv4 address
– Open Janus Toolbox on the scanner and press Load UseCase button Select the xml ﬁle:
e.g. chhetest1.xml and press Open button
– Connect Leonardo to the MacBook through the USB A-male to mini-B cable
– System prepared for scanning
• Scan preparation
– Connect transducer to the scanner plug
– Place transducer in holder. The orientation of the transducer should be that the right
image side is located at the marked point in the ﬁxture.
– Home transducer by pressing micro switch 2
– Place the water container on the ﬁxture
==PAGE:74==
62
APPENDIX A. FIRST APPENDIX
– Cover the scanning surface of the transducer with gel and move the transducer up, so
that it is in contact with the scanning’s medium
– Place the patients foot above the scanning’s medium in the water tank
– Fill the tank with water so it covers the patients foot
– The system and patient is now ready for scanning
• Data acquisition
– Close the Arduino program, if it is open
– Open Terminal window on the MacBook and change directory to StepMotor Command:
cd StepMotor
– Write python MotorDriverNew.py in terminal window to open a python environment
and run the script Command: python MotorDriverNew.py
– Type total scanning length in millimetres and press enter
– Type the length of scanning steps in millimetres and press enter
– Scanner running
– The acquired data is saved at location Q:\DataCHHE
– Copy data into new folder named setxx
– Data acquisition completed
• Test Data
– Open Janus toolbox
– Load the usecase-inputﬁle.xml
– Acquired frames are displayed
– If frames not displayed then perform new scan
==PAGE:75==
A.6. PROTOCOL FOR SCANNING SYSTEM
63
Motor
Homing switch 1
Homing switch 2
Transducer
Motor controller
BK 3000
Computer
10
11
12
13
GND
4
5
6
7
Arduino Leonardo
Wireless router
==PAGE:76==
==PAGE:77==
APPENDIX B
Second Appendix
B.1
Sammentykke erklæring
Deltagerinformation om deltagelse i et videnskabeligt forsøg
Forsøgets titel: Estimation af sårvolumen med Ultralyd (Ultrasonic Wound Volume Estima-
tion) Vi vil spørge, om du vil deltage i et videnskabeligt forsøg, der udføres af Chris Hedegaard
Henriksen, kandidatstuderende i Medicin og teknologi på DTU (Danmarks Tekniske Universitet),
Martin Hemmsen, Adjunkt ved DTU Elektro (Center for Fast Ultrasound Imaging) samt Steno
Diabetes Center.
Før du beslutter, om du vil deltage i forsøget, skal du fuldt ud forstå, hvad forsøget går ud på, og
hvorfor vi gennemfører forsøget. Vi vil derfor bede dig om at læse denne deltagerinformation
grundigt.
Hvis du beslutter dig for at deltage i forsøget, vil vi bede dig om at underskrive en samtyk-
keerklæring. Husk, at du har ret til betænkningstid, før du beslutter, om du vil underskrive
samtykkeerklæringen. Det er frivilligt at deltage i forsøget og du kan når som helst og uden at give
en grund trække dit samtykke tilbage.
Formål med forsøget
Målet med forsøget er at undersøge om det er muligt at måle volumen af et sår ved en ultra-
lydsskanning. Ultralyd har været en supplerende del af den kliniske verden gennem de sidste
40 år og anvendes ofte ved bl.a. gynækologi- og kardiologiundersøgelser. Ultralydsskannere
udsender højfrekvente (3-20MHz) lydbølger gennem vævet og måler de ekkoer der reﬂekteres
fra det stimulerede væv. De modtagne signaler behandles og omdannes til et ultralydsbillede af
kroppens anatomi. Denne teknik gør det muligt at foretage non-invasive skanning af såret og gør
det forhåbentligt muligt at bestemme volumen.
En bedre vurdering af sårets volumen kan gøre det muligt at foretage en sammenhængende
65
==PAGE:78==
66
APPENDIX B. SECOND APPENDIX
sårvurdering og dermed give en bedre evaluering i forhold til om patienten skal følge en normal
behandling eller skal tilbydes en mere omfattende behandling.
Forsøgs opstilling
Opstillingen består af; en vandbeholder, et ﬁkstur, en ultralydsskanner og en transducer. Yderligere
udstyr; computer, arduino board, motor og motor-kontroller samt trådløs router. Transduceren er
placeret på et motor system i ﬁxturet. Vandbeholderen placeres på ﬁxturet og transduceren bringes
i kontakt med et skan-medie midten af beholderen. Foden placeres i beholderen og holdes stille
mens der skannes. Skanningerne foregår ved at ﬂytte transduceren i små steps henover skan-mediet.
Se tegning sidst side.
Fremgangsmåde for forsøget
Før skanningen kan foretages skal såret og omkringliggende væv renses og tørres med steril gaze
eller med et papirhåndklæde. Forsøgspersonen placeres på en høj stol. Derefter sænkes foden ned i
den fyldte vandbeholder og foden placeres sådan at såret er lige over skan mediet. Undersøgelsen
kan derefter foretages. Foden skal holdes så roligt, som det er muligt for personen under skan-
ningerne. Undersøgelsen tager mellem 5-10 minutter. Efter endt behandling renses såret og der
påføres forbinding.
Bivirkninger og risici
Der er ingen bivirkninger forbundet med brug af højfrekvent ultralyd til skanning af kroppens
anatomi når det gøres i kortere perioder af gangen, som er tilfældet i denne undersøgelse.
Kontakt
Vi håber, at du med denne information har fået tilstrækkeligt indblik i, hvad det vil sige at deltage i
forsøget, og at du føler dig rustet til at tage beslutningen om din eventuelle deltagelse.
Hvis du vil vide mere om forsøget, er du meget velkommen til at kontakte Chris Henriksen
på telefon +45 2980 6246 eller email chrishhenriksen@gmail.com
Med venlig hilsen Chris Hedegaard Henriksen
Indsæt underskrift
==PAGE:79==
B.1. SAMMENTYKKE ERKLÆRING
67
Motor
Homing switch 1
Homing switch 2
Transducer
Motor controller
BK 3000
Computer
10
11
12
13
GND
4
5
6
7
Arduino Leonardo
Wireless router
==PAGE:80==
68
APPENDIX B. SECOND APPENDIX
B.2
Images of survey
Figure B.1: Image from clinical survey (Case 1)
Figure B.2: Image from the clinical survey (Case 2)
==PAGE:81==
B.2. IMAGES OF SURVEY
69
Figure B.3: Image from clinical survey (Case 3)
==PAGE:82==
==PAGE:83==
APPENDIX C
Third Appendix
C.1
Results case 3
Figure C.1: Original surface- and wound boundary (left) and estimated area superimposed with
the corresponding B-mode image (right). This is the 1 frame of the recorded data from case 3
71
==PAGE:84==
72
APPENDIX C. THIRD APPENDIX
Figure C.2: Original surface- and wound boundary (left) and estimated area superimposed with
the corresponding B-mode image (right). This is the 2 frame of the recorded data from case 3
Figure C.3: Original surface- and wound boundary (left) and estimated area superimposed with
the corresponding B-mode image (right). This is the 3 frame of the recorded data from case 3
Figure C.4: Original surface- and wound boundary (left) and estimated area superimposed with
the corresponding B-mode image (right). This is the 4 frame of the recorded data from case 3
==PAGE:85==
C.1. RESULTS CASE 3
73
Figure C.5: Original surface- and wound boundary (left) and estimated area superimposed with
the corresponding B-mode image (right). This is the 5 frame of the recorded data from case 3
Figure C.6: Original surface- and wound boundary (left) and estimated area superimposed with
the corresponding B-mode image (right). This is the 6 frame of the recorded data from case 3
Figure C.7: Original surface- and wound boundary (left) and estimated area superimposed with
the corresponding B-mode image (right). This is the 7 frame of the recorded data from case 3
==PAGE:86==
74
APPENDIX C. THIRD APPENDIX
Figure C.8: Original surface- and wound boundary (left) and estimated area superimposed with
the corresponding B-mode image (right). This is the 8 frame of the recorded data from case 3
Figure C.9: Original surface- and wound boundary (left) and estimated area superimposed with
the corresponding B-mode image (right). This is the 9 frame of the recorded data from case 3
Figure C.10: Original surface- and wound boundary (left) and estimated area superimposed with
the corresponding B-mode image (right). This is the 10 frame of the recorded data from case 3
==PAGE:87==
C.1. RESULTS CASE 3
75
Figure C.11: Original surface- and wound boundary (left) and estimated area superimposed with
the corresponding B-mode image (right). This is the 11 frame of the recorded data from case 3
Figure C.12: Original surface- and wound boundary (left) and estimated area superimposed with
the corresponding B-mode image (right). This is the 12 frame of the recorded data from case 3
Figure C.13: Original surface- and wound boundary (left) and estimated area superimposed with
the corresponding B-mode image (right). This is the 13 frame of the recorded data from case 3
==PAGE:88==
76
APPENDIX C. THIRD APPENDIX
Figure C.14: Original surface- and wound boundary (left) and estimated area superimposed with
the corresponding B-mode image (right). This is the 14 frame of the recorded data from case 3
Figure C.15: Original surface- and wound boundary (left) and estimated area superimposed with
the corresponding B-mode image (right). This is the 15 frame of the recorded data from case 3
==PAGE:89==
APPENDIX D
Fourth Appendix
D.1
Organization of code and data
Figure D.1 shows the location of the data and scripts on the CD, which is included with the
submitted thesis. The ﬁrst ﬁgure D.2 shows the scripts used for programming and running the
scanning system. The second ﬁgure D.3 shows the scripts used for making the beam-formed I/Q
data into complex I/Q data. The third ﬁgure D.4 shows the scripts used for converting the complex
I/Q data into B-mode frame. The last ﬁgure D.5 shows the scripts used by the wound volume
estimator.
Figure D.1: The diagram shows the organisation of the data and scripts used in the thesis
Figure D.2: Scripts for programming and running the scanning system
77
==PAGE:90==
78
APPENDIX D. FOURTH APPENDIX
Figure D.3: Scripts for making complex I/Q data
Figure D.4: Scripts for making B-mode images
Figure D.5: Scripts for making a Wound volume estimation
==PAGE:91==
Bibliography
[1]
By D Baswaraj, a Govardhan, and P Premchand. Active Contours and Image Segmentation:
The Current State of the Art. Global Journal of Computer Science and Technology Graphics
& Vision, 12(11), 2012.
[2]
Tony F. Chan and Luminita a. Vese. Active contours without edges. IEEE Transactions on
Image Processing, 10(2):266–277, 2001.
[3]
S K Edelman. Understanding Ultrasound Physics: Fundamentals and Exam Review. ESP,
1994.
[4]
Georgina Gethin. The importance of continuous wound measuring. Wounds UK, 2(2):60–68,
2006.
[5]
F Gottrup and T Karlsmark. Sår: baggrund, diagnose og behandling. Munksgaard Danmark,
2008.
[6]
Michael Kass, Andrew Witkin, and Demetri Terzopoulos. Snakes: Active contour models,
1988.
[7]
Mads Esholdt Wiemann. Metodeudvikling af kantrutiner til klassiﬁcering af ﬁsk. Technical
report, Institut for Informatik, 2010.
[8]
Martin Christian Hemmsen. Image processing in medical ultrasound. Phd thesis, Technical
University of Denmark, 2011.
[9]
Oleg Michailovich and Allen Tannenbaum. Segmentation of Medical Ultrasound Images
using Active Contours. 2007 IEEE International Conference on Image Processing, pages V –
513–V – 516, 2007.
[10] J L Prince and J M Links. Medical Imaging Signals and Systems. Pearson Prentice Hall
bioengineering. Pearson Prentice Hall, 2006.
[11] Thomas B. Moeslund Rasmus R. Paulsen. Introduction to Medical Image Analysis. 2011.
79
==PAGE:92==
80
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[12] Lee C Rogers, Nicholas J Bevilacqua, David G Armstrong, and George Andros. Digital
planimetry results in more accurate wound measurements: a comparison to standard ruler
measurements. Journal of diabetes science and technology (Online), 4(4):799–802, 2010.
[13] Julia Shaw and Patrick M Bell. Wound Measurement in Diabetic Foot Ulceration. In Global
Perspective on Diabetic Foot Ulcerations, chapter 5. InTech, 2011.
[14] M E Wendelken and C L Pope. Method and kit for wound evaluation, 2001.
[15] Martin E Wendelken, Lee Markowitz, Mayank Patel, and Oscar M Alvarez. Objective ,
Noninvasive Wound Assessment Using B-Mode Ultrasonography. pages 1–19, 2003.
[16] Linda Zagsebski. Essentials of Ultrasound Physics.
