==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
Department of 
Wind Energy 
Master Report 
 
 
 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
    
   And Comparison Against Reanalysis Data and Energy Production 
Andres Munoz-Najar 
M-0061 
January, 2015 
==PAGE:2==
Authors: Andres Munoz-Najar 
Title: Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
And Comparison Against Reanalysis Data and Energy Production 
Department: Wind Energy 
M-0061 
January, 2015 
 
 
A wind atlas for Illinois is calculated using DTU Frogfoot software and 
publically available data: wind data from sites around the state, 
roughness data from land use maps, and orography from the SRTM 
mission. The result is a measurement based wind resource map that 
contains wind speed and power density for different heights. 
The measurement based wind atlas shows the highest resource areas 
for the state in east central Illinois, with wind speeds exceeding 7 m/s at 
100m. Overlaying the transmission lines with the resource map, shows 
that the power grid is not ideally located to take advantage of the 
resource of the area. 
The wind atlas is used to predict the energy output of entire wind farms 
and then compared against wind farm energy production data. A 
difference of -18% to 60% is found. Adjusting the wind speed data for 
long term changes and comparing to a single year energy production, 
the difference ranges from 4% to 14%, down from 28% without the 
adjustment, for two wind farms studied. 
The wind atlas based results are compared to results based on CFDDA 
and MERRA reanalysis. The wind resource is lower overall compared to 
CFDDA. Compared to the MERRA based results, is higher in the north 
east, but all other areas are lower. Compared to the NREL wind resource 
map the measurement based results were lower. 
Project period: 
2014-09-01 – 2015-01-31 
 
ECTS:  
[30] 
 
Education: 
Master of Science 
 
Field: 
Wind Energy 
 
Supervisors: 
Niels-Erik Clausen 
Jake Badger 
 
Remarks: 
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark. 
 
Contract no.: 
[Text] 
 
Project no.: 
[Text] 
 
Sponsorship: 
[Text] 
 
Front page: 
[Text] 
Pages: [Text] 
Tables: [Text] 
References: [Text] 
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind Energy 
Frederiksborgvej 399 
Building 118 
4000 Roskilde 
Denmark 
Telephone +45 46 77 50 85 
 
info@vindenergi.dtu.dk 
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk 
 
==PAGE:3==
 
 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
Preface 
This thesis fulfills a partial requirement for Master of Science in Wind Energy 
degree at the Technical University of Denmark. It has a weight of 30ECTS 
points.  It contains work done from September 2014 until January 2015. It has 
been supervised by associate professor Niels-Erik Clausen and senior scientist 
Jake Badger from DTU Wind Energy. 
 
As a resident of Illinois and being educated in the field of Wind Energy, I feel 
that it is important for me to thoroughly understand the wind resource of the 
state. Also, as a mechanical engineer it is important to understand the income 
and application aspects of a machine (on this case the wind resource for wind 
turbines) which leads to better decisions when designing or analysing them.  
 
I wish to thank Niels-Erik Clausen for his time allocated to this project. I have 
learned much from him regarding the wind resource study and from his 
suggestions on how to approach all the challenges associated with my thesis 
work. And for guiding the project to something much bigger than what was 
originally envisioned. 
 
I would also like to thank Jake Badger for all of his time spent in the project. For 
all of his guidance on the wind resource topic. For his suggestions on how to 
approach the research study and the presentation of the results. For his 
explanations and help running the Frogfoot software.  
 
I would also like to thank my family, specially my wife, for all of her support 
during my studies. 
 
 
Champaign, Illinois, 2015 
 
Andres Munoz-Najar 
MSc Wind Energy  
 
==PAGE:4==
 
 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
Content 
1. 
Introduction ........................................................................................ 7 
2. 
Data Methodology ............................................................................ 11 
3. 
Methodology Process ....................................................................... 19 
4. 
Data Analysis ................................................................................... 28 
5. 
Measurement Based Wind Resource ............................................... 49 
6. 
Reanalysis Based Wind Resource ................................................... 67 
7. 
Conclusions and Future Work .......................................................... 76 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
5 
Abstract 
A wind atlas for Illinois is calculated using DTU Frogfoot software and publically 
available data: wind data from sites around the state, roughness data from land 
use maps, and orography from the SRTM mission. The result is a measurement 
based wind resource map that contains wind speed and power density for 
different heights. 
 
The measurement based wind atlas shows the highest resource areas for the 
state in east central Illinois, with wind speeds exceeding 7 m/s at 100m. 
Overlaying the transmission lines with the resource map, shows that the power 
grid is not ideally located to take advantage of the resource of the area. 
 
The wind atlas is used to predict the energy output of entire wind farms and 
then compared against wind farm energy production data. A difference of -18% 
to 60% is found. Adjusting the wind speed data for long term changes and 
comparing to a single year energy production, the difference ranges from 4% to 
14%, down from 28% without the adjustment, for two wind farms studied. 
 
The wind atlas based results are compared to results based on CFDDA and 
MERRA reanalysis. The wind resource is lower overall compared to CFDDA. 
Compared to the MERRA based results, is higher in the north east, but all other 
areas are lower. Compared to the NREL wind resource map the measurement 
based results were lower. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
 
6 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
List of Acronyms 
AEP 
Annual Energy Production 
AWND 
Average Daily Wind Speed 
CF 
Capacity Factor 
EIA 
Energy Information Administration   
GDAL 
Geospatial Data Abstraction Library 
GPS 
Global Positioning System 
GWA 
Global Wind Atlas 
GWC 
Generalized Wind Climate 
IIRA 
Illinois Institute for Rural Affairs  
IL 
Illinois 
IREC 
Illinois Rural Electric Cooperative 
LCI 
US Geological Survey Land Cover Institute   
MODIS 
Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer 
NREL  
National Renewable Energy Laboratory   
NOOA 
National Climatic Data Center  
OWC 
Observed Wind Climate 
QGIS  
Quantum Geographic Information Systems 
RECC 
Rural Electric Convenience Cooperative Co. 
RIX 
Ruggedness Index 
SRTM 
NASA Shuttle Radar Topography Mission   
WAsP 
Wind Atlas Analysis and Application Program 
WD 
Wind direction 
WS 
Wind Speed 
WTG 
wind turbine generator 
 
==PAGE:7==
 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
7 
1. Introduction 
During recent years the wind industry in the State of Illinois has grown very fast. 
Starting in 2002 with virtually no wind power, it grew to 3568MW of installed 
capacity by 2014 ([6]). The vast amount of sparsely populated agricultural 
flatlands make the state a very attractive place for the development of wind 
energy. Also, the renewable portfolio standard for Illinois requires that by year 
2025, 25% of the energy should come from renewables, and 75% of the 
renewable energy has to come from wind power ([24] and [25]). 
 
To put Illinois into perspective, Figure 1-1 shows a comparison of the territory of 
Illinois and Denmark. 
 
Figure 1-1 Comparison (Area and Population) of Illinois and Denmark 
 
Illinois is located in the Midwest region of the United States. It has is roughly 4 
times the area of Denmark and twice the population. The Chicago metropolitan 
areas concentrates 70% of the population. Most of the land is used for 
agriculture (Figure 1-2). 
 
==PAGE:8==
 
8 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
 
Figure 1-2 Illinois Crops Land Use by Percentage - Soybeans and Corn ([19]) 
 
Illinois cultivates two main crops: soybeans and corn. Both are planted on most 
of the state, but soybeans dominate in the south and corn in the north. The 
soybean plant is low to the ground, whereas corn crops can grow very high, as 
high as 2.7m ([18]).  The typical Illinois rural landscape used for wind farms is 
illustrated along with wind speed in Figure 1-3.  
 
 
Figure 1-3 Monthly Average Wind Speed [m/s] with Seasonal Landscape View 
 
Starting in January with empty field terrain often covered with a combination of 
snow and/or ice. The plowing/planting season starts in March/April and the 
crops grow until the middle of November. After the harvest the fields are left 
empty with a rough surface. The windiest seasons of the year are the winter, 
spring, and fall. The summer season has the lowest wind speeds.  
==PAGE:9==
 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
9 
Currently Illinois ranks 4th in Wind Power in the USA (Figure 1-4). 
 
 
Figure 1-4 Wind Power Installed Capacity [MW] - Top Ten USA States and Denmark ([6]) 
 
The installed capacity in Illinois is very similar to that of Denmark onshore. 
Although in Illinois most of the wind turbine generators (WTG) are concentrated 
in large wind farms, in Denmark they are more distributed between small and 
large wind farm operations. 
This thesis is meant to answer the question: what is the wind resource of 
Illinois?  
 The wind resource will be shown in the form of wind speed and power 
density maps.  
 Data that is publicly available will be used. 
 For the core computations DTU Wind Energy Frogfoot software will be 
used. 
 And for post processing the results, open source software will be used. 
Additionally, the measurement based wind resource will be compared to results 
based on two reanalysis data sets. These reanalysis data sets are being used 
as a part of the Global Wind Atlas (GWA) project. The wind resource map from 
NREL will be compared against the results. 
Also, the measurement based applied to entire wind farms will be compared 
against wind farm energy production data. 
==PAGE:10==
 
10 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
This study will be useful to entities interested in developing wind energy in 
Illinois to make better decisions. It could also benefit future lawmakers and 
planners to understand the wind energy conditions of the state. 
The experience and documentation of this project could help spark similar 
projects for nearby states with similar characteristics (such as Iowa and 
Indiana). 
This report is divided into 7 chapters:  
 An introductory chapter. 
 A data methodology chapter, describing the data used. What the data is. 
How it was obtained. What it will be used for. 
 A methodology process chapter, that describes the process of 
transforming the data using the tools to create the wind resource map. 
 A data analysis chapter that focuses on analyzing the data used as an 
input to the Frogfoot software. It also discusses the energy production 
data from small producers and large wind farms. 
 A chapter analyzing the measurement based wind resource results. It 
looks into what are the areas of the state with the highest wind resource. 
Compares the wind resource estimate to energy production data from 
existing wind farms. 
 A chapter comparing the measurement based wind resource to two 
additional reanalysis data set results. It also compares the results to 
NREL published wind resource. 
 Conclusions and future work chapter. 
 
 
==PAGE:11==
 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
11 
2. Data Methodology 
The data used for the project can be divided into 5 groups:  
 geolocated wind speed and direction data from met masts  
 geographical data (elevation and roughness) 
 wind farm energy production data (large wind farms and small producers) 
 wind farm WTG location data 
 WTG characteristic data (power curves) 
The data described above was publicly available, with the exception of the small 
producer energy data, which was gathered through a survey. 
 
2.1 Met Mast Data 
 
The wind speed and direction data was provided by the Illinois Institute for Rural 
Affairs (IIRA). The IIRA works with schools, electric co-ops, and 
cities/municipalities that are interested in wind energy. The measurement sites 
were chosen from applications submitted by landowners and/or communities. 
The Illinois Clean Energy Community Foundation provided a grant to IIRA for 
this work. There were two sets of data. 
The first set of data consists of data for 28 different sites across Illinois. There 
were 12,828 raw data files from the met masts. Each file consists of wind 
speeds for different heights, wind vane direction for two heights and 
temperature.  
The second set of data consisted of data for 22 sites. For each site the time 
series contained wind speed data and wind direction data at different heights 
(typically 30/40/50m). The data was in an Excel file format. This data was 
downloaded directly from the IIRA website ([4]). 
The second set of data was used for the project. The first was missing 
information that made it impossible to determine: site location, measurement 
height, units, parameter description. 
 
2.2 Met Station Long Term Wind Speed data 
 
Data is collected from airports across the state and available thru The National 
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) website. This data will be 
used to create a long term wind index for the state. The data downloaded is the 
average daily wind speed (AWND), measured in tenth of meters per second. 
==PAGE:12==
 
12 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
This data was downloaded directly from Climate Data Online Search website 
([10]). 
This airport wind speed data is typically measured at 10m height, therefore not 
suitable for Wind Resource calculations. The distance from the ground is too 
close and influences the shear profile too much. Also, the sampling rate at 
which it is available, daily, is too long for Wind Resource purposes.  
 
2.3 Small energy producers – Survey of Data 
 
A survey was sent out to 25 small wind energy producers in Illinois in the form 
of an email. These were typically schools, co-ops, and cities that have WTG 
installed capacity of less than 2MW in total. These entities can share their 
production data because they are not incorporated.  
Small energy producers were asked for: detailed monthly energy production, 
WTG availability (to try to correct the energy production), WTG location, hub 
height and WTG model. 
 
2.4 Large Energy Producers - Energy Information Administration (EIA) 
data 
 
The U.S. Department of Energy through the EIA collects monthly data on 
energy generation. This information is published in report EIA-923 as a monthly 
time series. The data was downloaded from the EIA electricity data website 
([11]). 
The vast amount of information included in EIA-923 was then filtered by state 
(IL) and by fuel type (WND). The parameters relevant for this study were: 
Quantity Consumed for Electricity [MMBtu], Total Fuel Consumed [MMBtu], and 
Electricity Net Generation [MWh]. 
The availability of WTG for the wind farms is not published in EIA-923, therefore 
availability industry numbers will be used to correct the data to better 
approximate the power flux [kW/m2] at the wind farm location. 
Wind farm information such as location, WTG count, and WTG characteristics 
were not published on EIA-923 form. This information was gathered from each 
of the wind farm websites if existing or other sources on the internet. Figure 2-1 
shows a summary of the wind farm location, size and WTG used. 
 
==PAGE:13==
 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
13 
 
Figure 2-1 Illinois Wind Farms used in the Project – Location, Wind turbine generator count, model, 
hub height[m], rotor diameter[m], and total power [MW] 
 
The wind farms considered in the study range from 50MW to 300MW. The EIA-
923 data available ranges from 8 to 30 years. This is shown in Figure 2-2.  
 
 
Figure 2-2 Energy Information Administration (EIA) Form 923 - Wind farm data available listed by 
year 
 
==PAGE:14==
 
14 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
There were 144 years of monthly energy data available for wind farms in Illinois 
in EIA-923 form. The data for wind farms that have hub heights 80m and 100m 
will be used to compare to the wind resource map.  
 
2.5 Land Use Data 
 
The US Geological Survey Land Cover Institute (LCI) publishes a data map of 
the world for land use. It is based on Moderate Resolution Imaging 
Spectroradiometer (MODIS) ([29]). It is based on data from 10 years (from 2001 
until 2010). The map resolution is 500m. Each 500x500m pixel represents 
different categories (e.g. water, cropland, urban, etc.).  A picture of the entire 
world land use map is shown in Figure 2-3: 
 
 
Figure 2-3 US Geological Survey Land Cover Institute (LCI) MODIS based global map of Land Use 
  
The file format is a GEOTIFF containing integers from 0 to 16 to represent the 
different categories. These integers are then converted to their corresponding 
roughness length values. 
The data map was downloaded from the US LCI website ([5]). 
 
2.6 Elevation Data 
 
The NASA Shuttle Radar Topography Mission (SRTM) in 2000 scanned the 
surface of the world by laser producing elevation data available for public 
download ([20]). 
The elevation data first downloaded during the modeling of the GWC maps 
(downloaded using WAsP Map Editor Interface) using a 20x20km map centered 
on the met mast location. 
==PAGE:15==
 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
15 
For the entire state of Illinois the elevation data was also downloaded. The 
resolution of the available data ranges from 1 to 3 arc-sec (approximately 30m 
to 90m). The 3 arc-sec data (90x90m grid resolution data) was used for the 
state map. The downloaded binaries file format is .HGT. The version used 
SRTM3 v2.1 
The .HGT files are coordinate based. The files are projected into the UTM16 
zone (for Illinois) using the WGS84 system. 
Figure 2-4 shows the 7x4 grid of elevation maps downloaded from zones 03 
and 05: 
 
 
Figure 2-4 NASA Shuttle Radar Topography Mission Map of Available Data – Red box shows 7x4 
Grid of Elevation data for Illinois 
 
2.7 Met Mast Site - Roughness and Obstacles Data 
 
Google Earth satellite imagery was used to gather information on terrain 
roughness and obstacles for the WAsP Map Editor, using the guidelines of 
WAsP. Figure 2-5 shows a met mast site model. 
 
==PAGE:16==
 
16 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
 
Figure 2-5 Champaign met mast site - Roughness map 
  
The roughness map modeling for all the eight met mast sites is located in 
Appendix A. 
 
2.8 WTG Location 
 
WTG coordinates for 12 entire wind farms were recorded from Google Earth. 
This was a lengthy manual process that could not be automated. Figure 2-6 
shows the location of a wind farm and its corresponding WTG locations. 
 
==PAGE:17==
 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
17 
 
Figure 2-6 Digitized Wind Turbine Locations for the Pioneer Wind Farm 
  
The following Figure 2-7 shows the approximate center location of the wind 
farms that were digitized. 
 
 
Figure 2-7 Digitized wind farms. Right window zooms into the "California" wind farm WTG 
locations 
  
==PAGE:18==
 
18 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
After the wind farms were digitized, the siting patterns can be better 
appreciated. Note the pattern arrangement for the "California" wind farm being 
mainly east-west rows of WTG. 
 
2.9 Wind Turbine Generator Power Curves 
 
Power data curves for WTG model used in the Illinois wind farms (hub heights 
80m and 100m) were downloaded directly from the manufacturer websites ([12], 
[13], [14], [15], [16], and [17]). These were either data tables or power plots that 
were then digitized (see Figure 2-8) to produce a Power [kW] vs. wind speed 
[m/s] comma separated value (.CSV) file. 
  
 
Figure 2-8 Digitized Power Curve for General Electric 1.6MW Rotor Diameter 82.5m 
  
The power curve .CSV files were later used as an input to calculate Annual 
Energy Production (AEP) at each of the geolocated WTG in the wind farm using 
the Frogfoot output results. 
 
 
==PAGE:19==
 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
19 
3. Methodology Process 
To calculate the wind resource of Illinois a multi-step process was used that 
resulted in the creation of the wind energy resource map. The core components 
of the resource map were: the Generalized Wind Climate (GWC) at the met 
mast locations, the elevation map, and the roughness map.  
Later, the wind resource map was then compared to resource maps based on 
the reanalysis data (CFDDA and MERRA). 
The process to create the wind resource map uses several tools and 
technologies, both open source (such as QGIS [7], GDAL [8], and Python [9]) 
and proprietary (WAsP and Frogfoot software) to produce the work.  
 
3.1 Analysis of the Met Mast Data 
 
3.1.1 Wind Data Analysis for all Met Mast Sites 
 
Open source PYTHON ([9]), with the engineering NUMPY and SCIPY libraries 
were used for the basic data input/output and analysis. The MATPLOTLIB 
libraries were used for visualization.  
For sites/heights for which there was more than one WS measurement a ratio of 
the two WS was plotted against the wind direction. This ratio should be close to 
one except for instances in which the mast interferes with the flow. A report was 
produced for all sites that had this condition and analyzed. If the ratio value was 
noticeably higher or lower than 1.0, one of the anemometers would be more 
accurate than the one obstructed by the flow. Generally speaking, the cup 
anemometers should be oriented in the prevailing wind direction, but this is not 
always the case. Also, the wind speed units were converted from mph to m/s. 
These codes were used to produce site summaries that included: WS 
histogram, mean, standard deviation, turbulence intensity, Weibull coefficients, 
and a wind rose. The output was a Google Earth .KML file to visualize the 
results in the map for better checks and analysis. The purpose of these codes 
was to rapidly produce summaries of all met mast data sets at once. It was not 
meant to be a replacement for the WAsP Climate Analyst used in the process 
later. 
 
3.1.2 Observed Wind Climate (OWC) Input Data Screening 
 
==PAGE:20==
 
20 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
A pre-screening of the met mast data sites was done for validity to be used as 
an input for the OWC using WAsP Climate Analyst. The criteria was:  
-correct geolocation data 
-minimum one year data 
-10min wind speed bin averages (as opposed to 1hr bin for example) 
-less than 1% of “ice” count in the time series 
-less than 1% of ”NaN” count in the time series 
 
3.2 Wind Index Calculation 
 
The long term wind speed data from airports was used to create a wind index. 
This wind index could be used to correct the met mast data for long term wind 
changes.  
 
3.3 Wind Atlas Methodology 
 
The core of the analysis was an observation based wind assessment. It was 
done using part of the “Wind Atlas Methodology” WAsP software.  
The basic inputs for the wind atlas were: wind data, elevation, roughness, and 
obstacles. The output is the Generalized Wind Climate (GWC) for a specific 
site. Figure 3-1 shows the flow of this process. 
==PAGE:21==
 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
21 
 
Figure 3-1 Wind Atlas Methodology ([30]) 
  
3.3.1 Observed Wind Climate (OWC) 
 
WAsP Climate Analyst was used for converting the time series of wind speed 
and direction at a certain height to the OWC. The wind speed (WS) and wind 
direction (WD) time series was trimmed to multiples of one year exactly to not 
induce errors due to season bias. 
The output is the OWC file that contains: 
 A histogram table of WS bin range vs. angular sector (1 through 12 and 
total) 
 For each angular sector as well as the all-sector, the following statistics: 
the frequency [%], Weibull A and k fitted coefficients, mean WS [m/s], 
and power density [W/m2].  
 
==PAGE:22==
 
22 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
3.3.2 Roughness and Elevation Maps 
 
The WAsP map editor was used to download the SRTM elevation maps for an 
area of 20x20km around the met mast. It was also used to import satellite 
imagery into the map. 
The roughness of the terrain (based on the terrain classification) was modeled 
in the map. There was no need for modeling the mountainous terrain due to a 
low Ruggedness Index (RIX). 
The output result is a .MAP file for each of the met mast sites. 
 
3.3.3 Generalized Wind Climate (GWC) 
 
The WAsP software was used to calculate the GWC. The inputs were the OWC, 
the .MAP file (with roughness and elevation data), and location of the met mast.  
From WAsP a GWC .LIB file is exported. The contents of this file are a matrix of 
Weibull coefficients. The two axes in the matrix are height and roughness 
length. Also, this information is repeated for all 12 angular sectors. 
 
3.4 Frogfoot  
 
Frogfoot is a suite of programs that uses WAsP flow model and distributed 
computing at its core. It can compute a high resolution wind resource for very 
large areas. It takes into account microscale flow effects as well as the 
changing large scale wind forcing. 
The inputs and outputs (as seen by the user) of Frogfoot are shown in Figure 
3-2. 
 
==PAGE:23==
 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
23 
 
Figure 3-2 Frogfoot Software Inputs and Outputs 
  
The inputs to Frogfoot are: 
 Generalized Wind Climates (GWC) geolocated 
 Elevation (map format) 
 Roughness values (map format) 
 Boundary of the desired computation region 
 Grid size and its origin 
 Air density 
The outputs of Frogfoot are (for every grid point): 
 Mean wind speed 
 Power flux 
 Weibull coefficients A and k (for all 12 sectors). 
A flow diagram showing the internal workings of Frogfoot is shown in Figure 
3-3: 
 
==PAGE:24==
 
24 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
 
Figure 3-3 Flow of Data in the Frogfoot System (Reproduced with permission) ([1]) 
  
The core elements, represented in blue, are essential for the calculations. The 
ancillary components, shown in red, are used to setup the job and for 
input/output functions. Input data is shown in purple boxes. The output data is 
shown in green. The system works on this manner: 
 The specified grid size will determine the number of tiles in the map. The 
number of calculation nodes is 100 per tile. 
 The Climate server will compute a GWC for each node interpolating the 3 
closest GWC inputs. The interpolation weighing is inversely proportional 
to the distance to the GWC input location.  
 The Terrain Service will create tiles with elevation and roughness 
information. 
 The Job Service will take the Climate and Terrain services tiles and 
nodes and will submit jobs to be split into multiple independent WAsP 
processes (WAsP workers) that will modify the GWC using flow models. 
 The Result service receives the output of the WAsP workers in the form 
of GWC. 
 The Results Exporter puts all the tiles output together in the form of a 
map to be exported out. 
 
3.4.1 Frogfoot Calculations for the State of Illinois 
 
For the larger area (the state of Illinois) calculation of the wind resource, 
Frogfoot software was used. The inputs were: the GWC .LIB files (from the 8 
met mast sites), UTM projected elevation maps (from the SRTM mission). 
==PAGE:25==
 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
25 
MODIS data converted into roughness maps for the entire state, and grid 
spacing (3 different values were used). 
The outputs were for a given height, for the entire grid map (in the lowest 
common grid resolution):  
 WS mean [m/s] 
 Power Density [kW/m2] 
 For all 12 sectors: Weibull coefficients (A and K)  
The output results were in a SURFER binary .GRD file format. 
 
3.4.2 Frogfoot Results Post Process 
 
The QGIS software ([7]), GDAL suite of tools ([8]), and Python programming 
language ([9]) were used for post-processing the Frogfoot results. QGIS is an 
open-source graphical interface to view, edit and analyze geographic data. 
GDAL is an open source set of command line libraries for reading and writing 
between different geographical data formats. 
The .GRD Frogfoot results were imported into QGIS as raster layers. They were 
overlaid with the met station locations, elevation, and roughness maps to check 
for consistency of input/output results.  
Since it can be cumbersome to visualize the data inside QGIS, the QGIS results 
were exported to a grid of high resolution images and thru the use of .KML files 
visualized in Google Earth. This would help any user access to the results 
without knowledge of QGIS.  
 
3.4.3 Frogfoot Basic Results Check 
 
To check WASP results: at the met mast locations, the values were read and 
compared to the input OWC. This is a basic check to make sure that Frogfoot is 
interpreting the inputs correctly, therefore, these values should match.  
 
3.4.4 Results Sensitivity to Grid Size 
 
An analysis was done to compare Frogfoot results using different grid sizes. 
Histogram counts (varying the bin size) as well of visual interpretation were 
used for this purpose.  
 
==PAGE:26==
 
26 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
3.4.5 Frogfoot Results Validation to Wind Farm Energy Production data 
 
For an entire wind farm, for every WTG, Weibull coefficients were read out of 
the Frogfoot results for every sector. The WS distribution for every WTG was 
convoluted by the WTG power curve to obtain the AEP. An average AEP for all 
WTG was computed and compared to the EIA923 Wind Farm data “Electricity 
Net Generation” [MW] value.  
There are three shortcomings in this comparison:  
 No availability data for the wind farm.  
 The energy value reported is the net energy produced. The consumed 
energy by the wind farm WTGs needs to be factored in to obtain the 
gross energy production. 
 Wake losses are not taken into account. 
 
3.5 Comparison to Reanalysis Climate Based Results 
 
The computed wind resource were compared against two other Frogfoot results 
based the following on the following reanalysis data: 
 Climate Mesoscale Model–Based Four-Dimensional Data Assimilation 
(CFDDA) [source]. It is a reanalysis dataset from NASA that uses a new 
version of the Goddard Earth Observing System Data Assimilation 
System Version 5 (GEOS-5).  The focus is on the hydrological cycle on a 
range of weather and time scales ([2] and [27]). The dataset covers 21 
years of data from 1985 until 2005. It provides winds (hourly), among 
other parameters. The grid size is 40km for 28 vertical levels ([33]). 
 Modern-Era Retrospective Analysis for Research and Applications 
(MERRA) ([3] and [26]). Uses satellite era (starting from 1979) data that 
is synthesized using an atmospheric data assimilation system. The grid 
size is ½ arc-sec (latitude) by 2/3 arc-sec (longitude). 
The elevation and roughness maps will be kept the same as used for the 
measurement based results. Figure 3-4 shows a table with the Frogfoot 
results that were compared. 
 
==PAGE:27==
 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
27 
 
Figure 3-4 Frogfoot Wind Resource Maps Comparison 
 
 
3.6 Comparison to National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) Wind 
Resource 
 
The Frogfoot results were compared to published wind resource maps for 
Illinois at 80m and the continental US at 100m height ([32] and [31]). These 
were developed by NREL in collaboration with AWS Truepower. The wind 
resource maps were downloaded directly from the NREL website as a low 
resolution quality JPG file. The results grid size of these maps were 2500m for 
the map of Illinois and 2000m for the map of the US. 
 
 
==PAGE:28==
 
28 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
 
4. Data Analysis 
 
4.1 Multiple Time Series Wind Data Analysis 
 
Because of the amount of wind data provided by IIRA (the first data set had 
12,828 raw wind data files and the second set had one file for each of the 23 
locations), several computer codes were written to process the data in an 
automated manner that provided statistics and graphical reports to the user. 
For met masts that had 2 anemometers and a wind vane at the same height, a 
tower shadowing correction was done. A ratio of the two anemometer WS 
values was plotted against the WD.  All these plots were combined into a single 
PDF report (Figure 4-1). 
 
 
Figure 4-1 Tower Shadowing Effect Report Sample – Wind Speed Ratio vs. Wind Direction for 
multiple Met Mast Locations 
  
The plots were then visually analyzed to find areas in which the wind speed 
ratio WS1/WS2 was greater than 1 or less than 1. These corresponds to the 
cases where the WS2 anemometer was being obstructed by the tower or the 
WS1 was being obstructed by the tower respectively. Figure 4-2 shows a 
sample plot for site 03champaign at 50m. 
 
==PAGE:29==
 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
29 
 
Figure 4-2 Tower Shadowing Effect – Wind Speed Ratio WS1/WS2 vs. Wind Direction [deg] – Site 
03Champaign at 50m height 
  
Based on the Figure 4-3 plot, for WD ranges 110-160degrees, WS1 would be 
used for the correction and for WD ranges 280-340degrees WS2 would be 
used. For all other angles, an average of WS1 and WS2 would be used for the 
correction. This is illustrated in Figure 4-3. 
 
 
Figure 4-3 Wind Speed Correction based on WD angle – Areas in Red Correspond to Tower 
Shadow Effects – For these areas one of the Wind Speed is chosen over the other one 
  
==PAGE:30==
 
30 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
For every site and for all anemometers the following parameters were 
computed: the mean WS, standard deviation, turbulence intensity (TI), and 
Weibull coefficients based on a WS histogram Weibull fit. It then exported the 
results in the form of a summary data table (shown in Figure 4-4) as well as a 
Google earth .KML file for easier visualization. 
 
 
Figure 4-4 Wind Speed Parameters Summary for All Anemometers – Red Areas Highlight Errors in 
the Data 
  
The summary table in Figure 4-4 shows the summary values for all 18 met mast 
anemometers, highlighting the sites with data problems (i.e. “NaN” or “ice” 
values in the time series).  
The intention of this analysis was to process large amounts of data (for all the 
sites) at once to assess the data. It was not meant to be a replacement of 
WAsP Climate Analyst use later in the process. 
 
4.2 Met Mast Wind Speed Data Analysis 
 
The met mast WS data was pre-screened using criteria described in 3.1.2. For 
the sites that passed the screening, an OWC was created, which was then 
==PAGE:31==
 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
31 
imported into WAsP to create a Generalized Wind Climate (GWC) for those 
sites. These GWC serve as one of the inputs for Frogfoot. 
 
4.2.1 Site pre-screening 
 
The met mast data sites had to pass the following criteria to be used to create 
OWC. The criteria included: 10min wind speed bin averages, more than 1 year 
of data, “Ice” count less than 1% of the total, “NaN” count less than 1% of the 
total, correct GPS location. Figure 4-5 shows a table of the sites that passed the 
criteria in blue. 
 
==PAGE:32==
 
32 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
 
Figure 4-5 List of 23 Met Mast Sites in Illinois that were screened. Eight sites that passed the 
criteria are shown in blue. 
  
Notice that 3 sites had to have the GPS location corrected. This was needed 
because of the lack of significant digits in the latitude/longitude values reported. 
It was evident in Google Earth that the location was incorrect. For 3 sites the 
correct location was found nearby. For 4 other sites the location could not be 
found. 
The wind rose had to be adjusted for 2 sites. The wind rose shows most of the 
wind blowing from the north which is typically not true in Illinois. Comparing the 
==PAGE:33==
 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
33 
WD data to nearby airport WD data, it was clear that the wind rose was 
180degrees out of phase. This seems to happen when met masts are erected 
and the WD is either not calibrated or the North/South zero conversion is not 
understood. 
Figure 4-6 shows the WS time series for the 8 sites that met the criteria. For 
every site, the WS highest from the ground was picked as the input for the 
OWC going into WAsP. Picking the highest measurement helps minimize 
ground effects. 
 
 
Figure 4-6 Monthly Average Wind Speed [m/s] for all 8 Met Mast Sites used as an input to the 
Observed Wind Climate (OWC) Calculation 
  
The data used ranges from years 2005 to 2011. For 7 sites the data was 
trimmed to 1 year and for 1 site (site 15McDonough) it was trimmed to 3 years. 
Not all the sites data overlap for the same time period, for example the data for 
site 08fulton was taken in 2011 while all the other sites range from 2005 to 
2008. 
The sites that show the highest WS values are 03champaign, 05coles1, and 
10henry. These are all located in central Illinois. Also notice that they are not 
the highest met mast, because there are some other sites that had 70m or 90m 
mast. 
Sites 09hamilton and 10henry had the lowest WS even though the met mast 
anemometers were at 70m high. They were located in southern Illinois where 
the wind resource is low. These met masts are very close in location, only 24km 
away from each other. 
 
4.2.2 Observed Wind Climate (OWC) 
 
==PAGE:34==
 
34 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
The WAsP Wind Climate analyst calculated the OWC for the 8 sites using the 
wind speed and direction data series that were trimmed to multiples of 1 year. 
Figure 4-7 shows the OWC for the Champaign site at 50m height.  
 
 
Figure 4-7 Wind Climate Analyst - Observed Wind Climate (OWC) Output Window for the 
03Champaign site at 50m height 
  
Notice that for the Champaign site most of the wind comes from the south-west 
direction, which is also true for most of the sites in central and southern Illinois. 
The full OWC output from WAsP Climate Analyst for all 8 sites is located in 
appendix B. It includes: A histogram table of WS bin range vs. angular sector (1 
through 12 and total). For each angular sector (as well as the all-sector), the 
following statistics: the frequency [%], Weibull A and k fitted coefficients, mean 
WS [m/s], and power density [W/m2].  
A summary of the OWC for all 8 met mast sites (without angular sector 
information) is shown in Figure 4-8. 
 
==PAGE:35==
 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
35 
 
Figure 4-8 Observed Wind Climate (OWC) Summary Table for 8 met mast sites used in the study 
  
Notice that the highest Power Density values found correspond to the 
03Champaign met mast location, even though it is not the highest met mast. 
The OWC wind roses are visualized on the Illinois map in Figure 4-9. 
 
==PAGE:36==
 
36 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
 
Figure 4-9 Observed Wind Climate (OWC) - Wind Roses at the 8 met mast sites 
 
It can be seen that for most of the sites the prevailing wind direction comes from 
the south. Also, for the two locations in the north of the state, the two locations 
in the west side of the state, and the two locations in the south side of the state, 
the wind roses resemble each other, since the sites are close together. 
 
4.2.3 Generalized Wind Climate (GWC) 
 
After importing each OWC and the corresponding local map (with roughness 
and obstacle details), WAsP calculates the GWC for that site. Figure 4-10 
shows an example of the output of WAsP information for the GWC. 
 
==PAGE:37==
 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
37 
 
Figure 4-10 Example of GWC output for 03Champaign site (height=100m highlighted) 
 
The GWC data is a table of WS and power flux for two variables: distance from 
the ground (at 10, 25, 50, 100 and 200m) and roughness value (0.0, 0.03, 0.1, 
0.4 and 1.5m). The table contains this information for each of the 12 angular 
sectors. The full GWC WAsP .LIB files for all 8 sites are located on Appendix C. 
 
Figure 4-11 shows a summary table for all 8 sites GWC. 
 
==PAGE:38==
 
38 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
 
Figure 4-11 Generalized Wind Climate (GWC) Table (for 8 met mast location used in the study) 
showing Annual Mean Wind Speed [m/s] 
 
For purposes of better understanding the GWC applied to the typical WTG in 
Illinois, consider 100m for height (such as the latest 100m hub height WTG 
used in the most recently built wind farms in Illinois) and 0.03m for roughness 
value (farm site). Looking at the table, for h=100m and roughness=0.03m, the 
03champaign site had the best wind resource, with an average WS of 7.91m/s. 
On the other hand the lowest average WS of 5.33m/s was found at 08fulton, 
09hamilton, and 15mcdonough sites. 
 
4.3 Met Station Long Term Wind Speed Data 
 
==PAGE:39==
 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
39 
The long term WS data downloaded from NOAA for the Champaign Willard 
airport is shown in Figure 4-12.  
 
 
Figure 4-12 Champaign Airport - Daily Average Wind Speed [m/s] time series 
  
The data available for the Champaign airport dates back to 1999. This is only 
16 years of data compared to the customary 30 years of data to create a wind 
index. This was also the case for the other airport data found for central Illinois. 
Note the annual fluctuating pattern of the wind speed. 
Figure 4-13 shows the airport WS data for 4 different locations in central Illinois.  
 
==PAGE:40==
 
40 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
 
Figure 4-13 Central Illinois Airports - Wind Speed [m/s] and Wind Index 
  
Besides being at different locations, the difference in WS values in Figure 4-14 
is also due to the fact that the airport met mast height may not be 10m for all the 
sites. But what matters for the wind index computation is the relative changes in 
yearly wind speeds. 
For the years for which the data overlap, the average of the 4 locations was 
computed (shown in purple) and normalized to its mean wind speed. This yearly 
wind index could be used to correct short term WS met mast readings for long 
term changes. This index was not applied to the data used as an input for 
Frogfoot, because it was found that it was needed and created too late into the 
project. Another approach that could be used is just to create a wind index from 
the nearest airport data and apply the correction to the met mast WS. 
 
4.4 Elevation data 
 
The SRTM elevation data for the state of Illinois is shown in Figure 4-14. 
 
==PAGE:41==
 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
41 
 
Figure 4-14 SRTM Based Elevation Map for the State of Illinois 
  
Illinois highest point is Charles Mount at 376m and lowest point is the 
Mississippi river at 85m. The northern region has the highest elevation, followed 
by the central plains, and then southern Illinois. With the exception of the areas 
next to the rivers that are typically low in elevation. 
The importance of the elevation map for the wind resource calculation is not the 
absolute elevation, but the relative changes in elevation. Also, the map 
resolution is important if changes in elevation are steep. For the case of Illinois 
the 90x90m grid resolution seems adequate for Illinois due to the absence of 
complex terrain. 
==PAGE:42==
 
42 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
 
4.5 Roughness Data 
 
The land use MODIS data integers for the Illinois map region were converted 
into roughness length numbers in meters. The conversion can be seen in Figure 
4-15. 
 
 
Figure 4-15 Conversion Table - MODIS Integer to Roughness Length [m] 
  
The conversion was based on a conversion table created by DTU Wind Energy 
[21]. 
The following map (Figure 4-16) shows the Land Use MODIS map converted 
into roughness values: 
 
==PAGE:43==
 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
43 
 
Figure 4-16 Land Use Map of Illinois with Roughness Values [m] 
  
Most of the state is covered by 5 distinct land use areas: water, cropland, 
natural vegetation, forests, and urban. The roughness length values for Illinois 
range from 0(water) to 1(urban). 
Notice the central and northern parts of the state are covered by agricultural 
fields except for the large area of the city of Chicago. The southern part of the 
state has more forests with higher roughness length.  
Most of the wind farms in Illinois are located in cropland areas, where the 
roughness length is 0.05m. 
 
4.6 Large Wind Farm – Energy Production  
 
==PAGE:44==
 
44 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
The US EIA agency forms from years 2007 until 2014 were downloaded. The 
EIA forms contain many data fields, so the data was filtered by state (Illinois) 
and by fuel type (WND). Then all years were combined into a single 
spreadsheet. There are 144 years of wind farm data available, for monthly 
energy production. Figure 4-17 shows a sample of the monthly energy 
production data for 2 wind farms in Illinois. 
 
 
Figure 4-17 EIA-923 Energy Production Data for two Wind Farms in Illinois 
 
The EIA data for hub heights 80m and 100m was summarized. This was done 
so that later they can be compared to the Frogfoot wind resource value maps 
computed at 80m and 100m respectively. The monthly capacity factors were 
also computed and are shown in Figure 4-18. 
 
 
Figure 4-18 Illinois Wind Farms (80m 100m hub height) – Monthly Capacity Factors 
 
Notice that the capacity factors vary seasonally and fluctuate monthly between 
0.15 and 0.65. The wind farms are grouped in two colors: red hues (for 80m hub 
height) and blue hues (for 100m hub height). Notice the 100m hub height wind 
farms have a higher CF in general as compared to the 80m ones. One of the 
reasons for this is the higher WS at higher altitudes better utilizing the power 
curve of the WTG for higher energy yields. Also, notice the annual cyclical 
patterns similar to those shown in the long term airport data. 
==PAGE:45==
 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
45 
 
 
 
4.7 Single Wind Turbine Generator Operations – Energy Production  
 
Six small energy producers (i.e. co-ops, municipalities) shared their energy 
production data including WTG availability. WTG generators larger than 0.5MW 
were considered for 3 sites (one site had 2 WTG). Figure 4-19 shows the 
monthly energy production at the Rural Electric Convenience Cooperative 
(RECC) site. 
 
 
Figure 4-19 RECC site at the “Gob Nob” hill in Farmersville, Illinois - WTG Monthly Energy 
Production Data (in blue), % Availability (in red), and Adjusted Production Data (in Green) 
  
The RECC site has one Emergya 0.9MW WTG. The monthly energy production 
is shown in blue. It can be seen how the energy production varies and repeats 
(after 2011) seasonally.  
The WTG availability is shown in red. The availabily data was used to correct 
the energy production data to a ficticious scenario where the WTG was never 
down. This adjusted energy is shown in green.  
Figure 4-20 shows the capacity factors (adjusted for availability) for all 3 sites. 
 
==PAGE:46==
 
46 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
 
Figure 4-20 Small Energy Producers (3 sites) - WTG Capacity Factors (Adjusted using availability 
data) 
 
Notice that for the single WTG the adjusted (using availability data) monthly 
capacity factors range from 0.1 to 0.5.  
 
4.8 Capacity Factor Comparison – Large Wind Farm vs. Single Wind 
Turbine Generator Operations 
 
The capacity factor for wind farms (hub heights 80m and 100m) and the 
capacity factor for the 3 single WTG producers is shown in Figure 4-21. The 
second strip plot is for an average of the central Illinois (Peoria, Quincy, 
Springfield, and Champaign). 
 
==PAGE:47==
 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
47 
 
Figure 4-21 Capacity Factors (for Wind Farms hub height 80m and 100m average and 3 WTG) and 
Central Illinois Airport Wind Speed Average [m/s] 
 
Notice the CF follows the trend of the monthly central Illinois airport data. Also, 
note that in general, the 100m hub height have the highest CF, followed by the 
80m hub height wind farms CF. The 3 single WTG operations (hub heights 61m 
and 70m) have the lowest CF. For the year 2013, the CF are as follows: 
 0.38 large wind farms h=100m 
 0.30 large wind farms h=80m 
 0.26 WTG RECC site h=70m 
 0.25 WTG IREC h=70m 
 0.27 WTG City of Geneseo h=61m 
The single WTG monthly energy data was not used for comparison to 
Wasp/Frogfoot results, because hub heights were 61m and 70m. And the 
Frogfoot results available were for 80m and 100m. So their use for this report is 
limited to understand the Energy Production and Capacity Factors achieved by 
small energy producers that may not operate in the same way as large wind 
farms. 
 
4.9 Wind Turbine Generator - Power Curves 
 
The digitized power curves for all 6 models of WTG used at Illinois wind farms 
(hub heights 80m and 100m) are shown in the following Figure 4-22. 
 
==PAGE:48==
 
48 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
 
Figure 4-22 Power [kW] vs. Wind Speed [m/s] for 80m and 100m hub height WTG used in the study 
 
These power curves will be convoluted by the WS Weibull distribution (from the 
Frogfoot results) and integrated to compute the Annual Energy Production 
(AEP). 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:49==
 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
49 
5. Measurement Based Wind Resource 
 
The wind results discussed in this chapter were ran using the Frogfoot software. 
The inputs for these results were: the SRTM elevation maps (90mx90m 
resolution), the MODIS roughness maps (500mx500m resolution, and the GWC 
for the 8 met mast sites that met the criteria explained in Chapter 4.1. The 
output results discussed are at 100m height and for a grid size of 250mx250m. 
 
5.1 Mean Wind Speed Map at 100m 
 
The Frogfoot output map for mean WS is shown in Figure 5-1: 
==PAGE:50==
 
50 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
 
Figure 5-1 Mean Wind Speed [m/s] at h=100m – Met Mast Measurement Based Map 
 
  
==PAGE:51==
 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
51 
The minimum speed was found at 4.2 m/s. The maximum speed was found to 
be 8.2 m/s over Lake Michigan. The maximum inland speed was 7.7 m/s. 
The highest wind speed area is located on Lake Michigan in front of Chicago. 
This is due to the low roughness value of water, resulting in higher wind speeds 
at 100m height. 
Overall the best wind speeds inland are located in the east central areas of the 
state, followed by the northern areas of the state, then west central, and then 
the southern portion of the state. 
The lowest wind speed areas in central Illinois are located in river basins and 
can be observed in yellow color. 
Notice how the city of Chicago has overall lower wind speeds than the nearby 
areas in the north part of the state. This is due to the roughness of the city. 
The area with the highest wind resource (located in east central Illinois) is 
shown in Figure 5-2 with a more narrow wind speed scale (7.0m/s to 7.7m/s), to 
better distinguish the potential best areas for WTG. 
==PAGE:52==
 
52 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
 
Figure 5-2 East Central Illinois Region - Wind Speed [m/s] above 7m/s at h=100m – Met Mast 
Measurement Based Map 
 
It is important to note that there are no existing wind farms in the highest wind 
resource area of the map (in between Gibson City and Rantoul). There is a wind 
farm, Pioneer, east of the city of Paxton. And to the west of Gibson City, there is 
the Twin Groves wind farm. 
 
==PAGE:53==
 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
53 
The roughness value (R=0.05m) is constant for most of this area (agricultural 
land use) and only one of the measurement met mast is located inside the area 
(so contributions from the other 7 met masts should be minimal). Therefore, the 
elevation and direction of the prevailing wind are the main variables affecting 
the wind flow and produce a speed up. The highest WS areas of the east 
central Illinois region (Figure 5-2) can also be understood by looking at a 
topography map (Figure 5-3). The area in detail is shown within the purple lines. 
The ridges in the area cause the elevation changes and along with the 
prevailing WD that could result in high WS at 100m height. 
 
 
Figure 5-3 Illinois Topography in 3D model (Reproduced with permission [28]) 
 
 
5.1.1 Data Checks 
 
A basic check of the Frogfoot results was performed in order to ensure that the 
output WS at the met mast locations were within the range of the GWC inputs 
for Frogfoot. This is shown in Figure 5-4.  
 
==PAGE:54==
 
54 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
 
Figure 5-4 Frogfoot Results GWC Input Data Check – For all 8 met mast sites – Frogfoot Wind 
Speed [m/s] compared to 4 GWC Wind Speeds [m/s] (for roughness 0.0, 0.03m, 0.10m, and 0.40m) 
  
Comparing the Frogfoot WS to the GWC input yields: 
 For the six met mast to the north of the map, the Frogfoot WS were 
within range of the GWC inputs.  
 For the two met mast to the south of the map, the Frogfoot WS were 
below the GWC values for roughness 0.4m. Figure 4-16 shows the 
southern tip of Illinois roughness values ranging from 0.3 to 0.8. This 
high roughness in the southern areas of the state is also a main 
contributor for the reduced resources in the south. 
 
5.1.2 Grid Size Sensitivity 
 
The Frogfoot software gives the user the ability to specify the output resolution. 
Three different grid size outputs were analyzed in the study: 2500m, 500m, and 
250m. To illustrate the effect of grid size on the wind speed map, Figure 5-5 
==PAGE:55==
 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
55 
shows a portion of the wind resource map comparing the 2500m and the 250m 
grid sizes. 
 
 
Figure 5-5 Wind Speed [m/s] at 100m Map Area detail – For 2 Different Grid Sizes 
 
Figure 5-5 is divided right through the middle of a river. The top half of the figure 
shows the 2500m grid results. The bottom part shows the 250m grid size 
results, where the changes in wind speed can be noticed along the sides of the 
river. The map data is unchanged, so the variation effect is just a resampling of 
the 250m node results. For our study purposes, the 2500m grid size is not 
appropriate, because it would not provide enough resolution for each WTG (to 
be used later as a comparison for energy production data). 
The input maps for Frogfoot have the following grid sizes available: 
 Elevation SRTM grid size available: 30mx30m (1 arc-sec) and 90mx90m 
(3 arc-sec). 
 MODIS roughness map grid size: 500mx500m (15 arc-sec) 
Since the Frogfoot results shown used an input of 90m for elevation and 500m 
for roughness, there is no point in requesting output results of less than 90m.  
To put grid spacing into perspective relative to the layout of wind farms in 
Illinois, the following table (Figure 5-6) shows the average distance the closest 
WTG for 12 wind farms. 
 
==PAGE:56==
 
56 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
 
Figure 5-6 Average Spacing between WTG for 12 Wind Farms in Illinois (hub heights 80m and 
100m) 
  
The 80m and 100m hub height wind farms in Illinois have an average spacing of 
around 244m to 283m respectively (the minimum distances being 196m and 
221m). Therefore, the 250m grid size used in the study would not be sufficient 
for siting purposes. Requesting a 90m grid size output would be more 
appropriate for purposes of finding the best locations for WTG, but the current 
roughness data the grid size is still 500m, so it would not account for abrupt 
changes in terrain (e.g. going from cropland to a small lake). 
Also, higher refinements (such as using the 30m elevation data) of the grid will 
help optimize the AEP of the wind farm if used for siting purposes. Also, note 
that the closer the WTG are in a farm, the more wake effects. Wake effects 
reduce AEP and increase turbulence (causing more fatigue damage on the 
WTG). 
The following Figure 5-7 shows the WS histogram for the 3 different grid size 
results considered.  
 
==PAGE:57==
 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
57 
 
Figure 5-7 Histogram of Frogfoot Wind Speed [m/s] Results for 3 Different Grid Sizes (250m, 500m, 
and 2500m) 
 
The histogram shows most wind speeds concentrating between 4.5 and 7.5m/s. 
With the exception of an area ranging 8-8.5m/s which represents Lake Michigan 
Lake. 
The jump in WS from around 6.6 to 7m/s on the histogram indicates a 
discontinuity in the results. This corresponds to the edge patters on the wind 
speed map caused when interpolating the GWC. 
The 2500m results show a noisier behavior when compared to the 500 and 
250m results. This is due to the bin size chosen for the histogram. A sensitivity 
to bin size histograms are shown in Figure 5-8. 
 
==PAGE:58==
 
58 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
 
Figure 5-8 Wind Speed [m/s] Histogram – Bin Size Sensitivity Analysis 
 
The histograms were calculated using 0.1 and 0.01m/s bin sizes (for all 3 grid 
sizes). It is clear that for the larger bin size, the histogram becomes smoother 
compared to the smaller bin size histogram because of the number of counts.  
 
5.1.3 Edge Patterns in Wind Speed Map 
 
The wind resource maps showed noticeable edge and discontinuous patterns 
between areas of the map. This edge pattern is highlighted in Figure 5-9. 
 
==PAGE:59==
 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
59 
 
Figure 5-9 Edge Patterns on Wind Speed Map with 8 input met mast locations 
 
The edge patterns seem to happen due to the interpolation of the GWC at 
different locations. Since the interpolated GWC is a function of the three closest 
GWC inputs to Frogfoot, an explanation to this phenomena is that triangular 
regions could be intersecting each other causing artifacts. Since there are only 
8 GWC inputs for the entire state, this makes the edge patterns even more 
noticeable. 
 
5.2 Power Density Resource Map at 100m 
 
The wind power density map is shown in Figure 5-10. 
 
==PAGE:60==
 
60 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
 
Figure 5-10 Power Density [W/m2] Resource Map at 100m height 
 
==PAGE:61==
 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
61 
The power density map exhibits the same edge patterns as the wind speed map 
but are more noticeable due to the cubic wind speed nature of the results. 
 The map shows more clearly where the best areas are located. 
 The highest power is on Lake Michigan due to the low roughness of the 
water. 
 East central Illinois has the highest inland power in the state. 
 Southern Illinois has very low power winds. 
In the power density map, inside high power regions, circular areas of low 
power density can be noted. These correspond to the cities of central Illinois. 
The wind resource is lower than the nearby areas, due to the high roughness of 
the cities. This is also the case for the river basins in the area (which creates a 
forest of high roughness value along the side of the river). 
Figure 5-11 shows a map of wind farms in Illinois that have 80 and 100m hub 
heights. 
 
 
Figure 5-11 Existing Wind Farms (with hub heights 80m and 100m) Location on Power Density 
[W/m2] Map 
 
==PAGE:62==
 
62 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
The figure above shows that most of the wind farm development has been done 
in the highest wind resource areas of the state. It also shows that there are still 
plenty of potential areas to be developed. 
 
5.3 Frogfoot Results Comparison to Wind Farm Energy Data Production 
(from Energy Information Administration (EIA) Form 923)  
 
An attempt to validate the Frogfoot results to actual wind farm energy 
production data was done. For a given wind farm, for each WTG location, the 
Weibull distribution was read from the results and the Annual Energy Production 
(AEP) computed. Then all AEP were added to compute an average AEP for the 
entire wind farm. 
Figure 5-12 shows a comparison between the Wind Farm data and the Frogfoot 
results for AEP. 
 
 
Figure 5-12 AEP Comparison between Wind Farm Energy Production Data (EIA-923) and Frogfoot 
Results 
 
The table shows the values of the average AEP for each of the 12 wind farms 
that were digitized. Comparing the results yield a wide range from -18% 
(Frogfoot under predicting) to +60 % (Frogfoot over predicting). The reasons for 
these differences could be attributed to: 
 Only one year wind speed input data for Frogfoot without long term 
correction. 
 The wind farm energy production data varies year by year. 
 No availability data for the wind farms.  
 Electrical losses, turbine performance, and environmental factors. 
==PAGE:63==
 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
63 
 Wake losses. 
 Interpolation of 8 GWC for a vast area. 
 
5.3.1 Frogfoot Results Correction to Compute Energy Production for Wind 
Farms 
 
For the 2 wind farms close to the 03champaign met mast, Pioneer (22km away) 
and California (38km away), a correction was made to explain the 28% 
difference between EIA923 data and Frogfoot results shown in Figure 5-12. The 
location of the wind farms, met mast location, and the Champaign airport (used 
for long term data) is shown in Figure 5-13. 
 
 
Figure 5-13 Pioneer and California Wind Farm, Site 03Champaign Met Mast, and Champaign Airport 
 
==PAGE:64==
 
64 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
Since the Pioneer and California wind farms are located close to the 
03champaign met mast and far away from the other masts, the Frogfoot 
interpolated GWC for the two wind farms should mainly depend on the 
03champaign met mast. The correction to AEP based on Frogfoot results for 
the two wind farms was done as follows:  
 The 03champaign met mast data comes from june2006 though 
may2007.  
 Champaign airport data between june2006 though may2007 had an 
average WS of 4.85m/s. For years 2012 and 2013 had an average WS of 
4.528 and 4.405m/s respectively. 
 The WS ratio from 2006-2007 to 2012 was 0.934 and from 2006-2007 to 
2013 was 0.909 
 These ratios were applied to the Frogfoot results for every WTG AEP 
calculation. The ratios were applied to the Weibull A parameter, which 
corrects the mean WS. 
The comparison between the Frogfoot AEP for the two wind farms and the 
energy production data is shown in Figure 5-14. 
 
 
Figure 5-14 Average Annual Energy Production per WTG [kWh] - Comparison between EIA-923 
Data and Frogfoot corrected results – For the Pioneer and California wind farms 
 
The difference in the energy production results ranges from 4% to 14% 
depending on the year. The difference should account for: 
 Wake losses (which vary depending on wind farm layout, spacing, and 
direction of the prevailing winds). 
 WTG availability (97%), electrical losses (1-2%), turbine performance (1-
2%), and environmental factors (1-2%) ([34]). 
Therefore, it is possible to use the measurement based Frogfoot results to 
estimate wind farm energy production, but the inputs to Frogfoot need to be 
adjusted based on the year the measurement was taken and the year of the 
energy production data. 
 
5.4 Illinois Transmission Lines in Power Density Resource Map 
 
==PAGE:65==
 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
65 
The 345-499kV were digitized ([22] and [23]) and are shown with the power 
density map in Figure 5-15. 
 
Figure 5-15 Power Density [W/m2] at 100m with existing Power Lines (ranging from 345kV to 
499kV) 
 
This overlaid map is intended to show high wind resource areas close to the 
existing power lines. It can be seen that the transmission lines are not ideally 
located to take advantage of the high wind resource areas of east central 
Illinois.  
 
5.5 Google Earth Layers 
 
Figure 5-16 shows all relevant result maps and information that were put into 
Google Earth.   
==PAGE:66==
 
66 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
 
Figure 5-16 Illinois Wind Resource - Layers in Google Earth 
 
The different visualization layers (roughness, elevation, WS, power density, 
wind farms, WTGs, met masts, transmission lines) were created to facilitate the 
analysis of the results. For example, if an area in the map shows high WS, the 
roughness and elevation layers can be quickly turned on and off to determine if 
it is a function of these values. 
==PAGE:67==
 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
67 
6. Reanalysis Based Wind Resource 
The wind speeds at 100m height were recomputed using Frogfoot changing the 
GWC from the 8 met masts data, for the GWC derived from the CFDDA and 
MERRA data sets ([27] and [26]). Therefore, two additional wind resource maps 
were created. The elevation data (SRTM based) and the roughness data 
(MODIS based) were kept the same (6.1).  
 
 
Figure 6-1 Wind Resource Results Compared 
 
6.1 Wind Resource at 100m – GWC based on CFDDA reanalysis data 
 
The wind resource map for the GWC based CFDDA reanalysis is shown in 
Figure 6-2:  
==PAGE:68==
 
68 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
 
Figure 6-2 Wind Speeds [m/s] at 100m height - CFDDA based map 
 
The wind speed map shows high resource areas mainly in the northern and 
central regions of the state. Cities are shown as patches of low speed regions. 
Also, the river basin can be seen because of its low wind speed traversing the 
state from St. Louis to Chicago. To better appreciate high wind speed areas, the 
same map is reproduced below with a scale showing wind speed areas with 
7.0m/s or higher (Figure 6-3). 
 
==PAGE:69==
 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
69 
 
Figure 6-3 Wind Speeds [m/s] above 7m/s at 100m height - CFDDA based map 
 
The CFDDA based results show a maximum wind speed of 9.4m/s over Lake 
Michigan. It also shows a region of high wind speeds in the northwest corner of 
the state, in which speeds can reach 8.2m/s. There is also spot of high wind 
speed in the southern part of the state that correspond to Carlyle Lake due to its 
low roughness value. It can also be noted that most of the central and northwest 
regions have wind speeds above 7.4m/s. 
 
6.2 Wind Resource at 100m – GWC based on MERRA reanalysis data  
 
The wind resource map based on the MERRA data set is shown in Figure 6-4: 
 
==PAGE:70==
 
70 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
 
Figure 6-4 Wind Speed [m/s] - MERRA based map 
 
The MERRA based map shows the central area of the state as having the 
highest wind resource. It also shows the northern and southern edges of the 
state as having a low wind resource. The highest wind speeds inland are 
around 6.9m/s and are located in two very small regions (hardly noticeable on 
==PAGE:71==
 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
71 
the map above) located central east and in the south. Also, there is a large area 
in the south showing wind speeds above 7m/s, which corresponds to Lake 
Carlyle. 
A comparison of CFDDA and MERRA based results was performed subtracting 
the MERRA results from the CFDDA results. This is shown in Figure 6-5: 
 
 
Figure 6-5 Comparison of CFDDA and MERRA Based Wind Resource Maps [m/s] 
 
Overall, the CFDDA based results are higher than the MERRA based results. 
The pattern in central and southern Illinois looks similar but with a bias. The 
northern region of the state are quite higher on the CFDDA based results. Also 
the Lake Michigan area is higher in the CFDDA based map. 
This comparison is of interest to determine patterns and differences in the 
reanalysis data. 
 
6.3 Measurement based wind resource comparison to CFFDA and 
MERRA based results at 100m 
 
A comparison of the measurement based results to the CFFDA and MERRA is 
shown below (Figure 6-6). This is done by subtracting the measurement based 
results from the CFDDA and the MERRA based results. 
==PAGE:72==
 
72 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
 
Figure 6-6  Top Row Wind Resource [m/s] at 100m: Measurement Based, CFDDA, MERRA.  Bottom 
Row Difference [m/s] CFDDA-MetMast and MERRA-MetMast  
 
Comparing the CFDDA to the measurement based results: 
 The CFDDA map is always higher.  
 The east central region has the smallest differences 
 The southern region has the highest differences 
Comparing MERRA to the measurement based results: 
 Most of the areas have higher wind speeds, except for the northeast 
corner of the state. 
==PAGE:73==
 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
73 
 The southern part of the state is higher by about 1.5m reaching up to 
2.0m. 
Both CFFDA and MERRA based results look more homogenous compared to 
the measurement based map. This could be due to the fact that the climate data 
is based on 30 years of data, compared to the met mast based map, which has 
1 year of data for 7 sites and 3 years of data for 1 site. 
 
6.4 Wind Resource Comparison to NREL Results at 100m 
 
 
Additionally, the Frogfoot wind resource maps at 100m are compared to the 
NREL results. 
 
 
==PAGE:74==
 
74 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
 
Figure 6-7 Wind Speed [m/s] at 100m – Measurement based (top left), NREL (top right) ([31]), 
CFDDA based (bottom left), and MERRA based (bottom right) 
==PAGE:75==
 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
75 
The measurement based results are lower overall when compared to the NREL 
results at 80m. The high wind resource area in east central Illinois is the highest 
in both maps. 
 
 
 
6.5 Measurement Based Wind Resource Comparison to NREL Results at 
80m 
 
 
 
Figure 6-8 Wind Speed [m/s] at 80m – Measurement based (Left) and NREL results (right) ([32]) 
 
The measurement based results are lower overall when compared to the NREL 
results at 80m. The high wind resource area in east central Illinois is the highest 
in both maps. 
 
==PAGE:76==
 
76 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
7. Conclusions and Future Work 
7.1 Conclusions 
 
It is shown that is possible to create a wind resource map for a vast area (the 
state of Illinois) using publicly available data: met mast wind data, land use 
data, and orography data. DTU Frogfoot software was used for the core 
computations. The post processing was done using open source tools. The 
output is a wind atlas for Illinois shown wind speed and power density at 
different heights. 
 
The highest inland wind resources of the state were found in the east central 
region. The wind speeds are above 7 m/s at 100m. This area has not been 
developed yet. Also, the transmission lines (from 345kV to 499kV) are not 
ideally located to take advantage of the resource of east central Illinois. 
 
The measurement based wind resource is lower overall compared to CFDDA. 
Compared to the MERRA based results, is higher in the north east, but all other 
areas are lower. Compared to the NREL map the measurement based results 
were lower. 
 
The wind resource was applied to all WTG geolocated for several wind farms to 
estimate energy production. It was then compared to wind farm energy 
production public data. The difference ranged from +65% to -18% for the 
different wind farms. To explain the difference in the results, the GWC was 
adjusted based on long term airport data. The energy production was 
recomputed for 2 wind farms. The difference between production data and 
Frogfoot ranged from 4% to 14% difference (down from 28% at those 2 wind 
farms). Therefore, it is possible to compare energy production data to 
measurement based Frogfoot results for entire wind farms, but the wind speed 
long term data needs has to be taken into account in the calculation and 
adjusted to the year the production data was taken   
 
7.2 Future Work 
 
The Frogfoot interpolation algorithm could be improved for largely spaced GWC 
inputs. To increase the accuracy of the wind shear profiles, the roughness data 
could be verified for the typical Illinois wind farm terrain. Taking into account 
seasonal variations: snow/ice covered land, ploughed land, short and tall crops, 
and empty cut fields. Improve the prediction results by creating of a wind index 
using airport data.  
 
Study in detail the area located in between Gibson City, Rantoul, and Paxton, to 
find the optimal spots for WTG. Use wind data for site 03champaign. Use higher 
resolution MODIS maps (250m grid size) and SRTM (30m grid size for 1 arc-
==PAGE:77==
 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
77 
sec). Output the results at a resolution of 30m. Also, compare the results to 
those of this thesis as a sensitivity analysis.  
 
The same methodology used to create the measurement based wind resource 
of Illinois could be used for nearby states with similar characteristics (such as 
Iowa and Indiana). The land use and orography is already publically available. 
The wind farm energy production data is also available for the validation. Met 
mast wind data would be required. 
 
In a different kind of application, using economic models, estimate the cost of 
electricity in cents/kWh based on the results of the wind resource study, taking 
into account such factors as distance to transmission lines. 
==PAGE:78==
 
78 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
References 
[1] Badger, Jake (2015): Draft Document for Global Wind Atlas Documentation - 
Frogfoot Methodology, Pages 1-3 
 
[2] Rife, D. L., J. O. Pinto, A. J. Monaghan, C. A. Davis, and J. R. Hannan. 
2014. NCAR Global Climate Four-Dimensional Data Assimilation (CFDDA) 
Hourly 40 km Reanalysis. Research Data Archive at the National Center for 
Atmospheric Research, Computational and Information Systems Laboratory. 
http://rda.ucar.edu/datasets/ds604.0/. 
 
[3] Modern-Era Retrospective Analysis for Research and (NASA MERRA Atlas) 
http://gmao.gsfc.nasa.gov/ref/merra/atlas/menu.php 
 
[4] The Illinois Institute for Rural Affairs (IIRA) 
http://www.illinoiswind.org/resources-tools/wind-data/ 
 
[5] The USGS Land Cover Institute (LCI) - MODIS-based Global Land Cover 
Climatology Download 
http://landcover.usgs.gov/global_climatology.php 
 
[6] American Wind Energy Association (2014): U.S. Wind Industry Third Quarter  
Market Report, Page 5, AWEA Data Services  
 
[7] Quantum Geographic Information Systems (QGIS) 
http://www.qgis.org/en/site/ 
 
[8] Geospatial Data Abstraction Library (GDAL) 
http://www.gdal.org/gdal_utilities.html 
 
[9] Python (programming language) 
https://www.python.org/ 
 
[10] National Climatic Data Center (NOOA) – Climate Data Online Search  
http://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/cdo-web/search 
 
[11] U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA) – Electricity Data Form EIA-
923 Download 
http://www.eia.gov/electricity/data/eia923/ 
 
[12] Gamesa G90 2.0 – Power Curve 
http://www.gamesacorp.com/recursos/doc/productos-
servicios/aerogeneradores/brochure-g114-25-mw-eng.pdf 
 
[13] General Electric 1.5sle Diameter=77m – Power Curve 
==PAGE:79==
 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
79 
http://site.ge-
energy.com/prod_serv/products/wind_turbines/en/downloads/GEA14954C15-
MW-Broch.pdf 
 
[14] General Electric 1.5xle Diameter=82.5m - Power Curve 
http://www.ge-renewable-energy.com/uploads/tx_spdownloads/471-
11_Wind_1.6-82.5_A4_englisch_Screen.pdf 
 
[15] GE 1.6-100 – Power Curve 
http://pdf.directindustry.com/pdf/ge-wind-turbines/16-100-17-100-
brochure/34152-270465.html 
 
[16] Acciona AW 82-1500 - Power Curve 
http://www.inl.gov/wind/software/powercurves/pc_acciona.xls 
 
[17] Suzlon S88-2.1mw - Power Curve 
http://www.suzlon.com/pdf/S88%20product%20brochure.pdf 
 
[18] Xinhua Yin,* M. Angela McClure, Ngowari Jaja, Donald D. Tyler, and 
Robert M. Hayes (2011): In-Season Prediction of Corn Yield Using Plant 
Height under Major Production Systems, Page 926, Agronomy Journal Volume 
103, Issue 3 
 
[19] United States Department of Agriculture – Census of Agriculture Atlas 
Maps – Crops and Plants 
http://www.agcensus.usda.gov/Publications/2007/Online_Highlights/Ag_Atlas_
Maps/Crops_and_Plants/Field_Crops_Harvested/07-M165.php 
 
[20] NASA Shuttle Radar Topography Mission (SRTM) - Version1 Maps for 
North America 3 arc-sec 
http://dds.cr.usgs.gov/srtm/version1/North_America_3arcsec/3arcsec/ 
 
[21] Davis, Neil (2015): MODIS to Roughness Conversion. 
 
[22] Energy Information Administration (EIA): Transmission Voltage Class 
Power Lines 
http://www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.cfm?id=8930 
 
[23] National Public Radio (2009): Visualizing the U.S. Electric Grid 
http://www.npr.org/2009/04/24/110997398/visualizing-the-u-s-electric-grid 
 
[24] Illinois General Assembly: The Illinois Power Agency Act Amendment, 
Page 17 
http://www.ilga.gov/legislation/97/SB/PDF/09700SB1652lv.pdf 
 
[25] Illinois General Assembly: Amendment to House Bill 2427, Page 2. 
==PAGE:80==
 
80 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
http://ilga.gov/legislation/fulltext.asp?DocName=09800HB2427sam003&GA=98
&SessionId=85&DocTypeId=HB&LegID=74213&DocNum=2427&GAID=12&Se
ssion= 
 
[26] NASAThe Modern-Era Retrospective Analysis for Research and 
Applications 
http://gmao.gsfc.nasa.gov/pubs/brochures/MERRA%20Brochure.pdf 
 
[27] Research Applications Laboratory (RAL) (2009): Mesoscale Climate 
Modelling: Past, Present and Future 
http://www.nar.ucar.edu/2009/RAL/3sec/3.5_meso.php 
 
[28] Benjamin Grossman and Allan Kinsley (2003): Solid Terrain Model of 
Illinois 
http://www.isws.illinois.edu/chief/gis/past/illinois3d.aspx 
 
[29] Broxton, P.D., Zeng, X., Sulla-Menashe, D., Troch, P.A., 2014a: A Global 
Land Cover Climatology Using MODIS Data. J. Appl. Meteor. Climatol., 53, 
1593–1605. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1175/JAMC-D-13-0270.1 
 
[30] WAsP and the Wind Atlas Methodology 
http://www.wasp.dk/Software/WAsP/WindAtlasMethodologyhttp://www.wasp.dk/
Software/WAsP/WindAtlasMethodology 
 
[31] NREL: U.S. 100m Wind Speed Map 
http://www.nrel.gov/gis/wind.html 
 
[32] US Department of Energy: Illinois Wind Resource Map and Wind Potential 
Capacity at 80m 
http://apps2.eere.energy.gov/wind/windexchange/wind_resource_maps.asp?sta
teab=il 
 
[33] Peng, G., Hou., C.-Y., Rife, D., & Dattore, R. (2014, December). NCAR 
Global Climate Four-Dimensional Data Assimilation (CFDDA) Hourly 40 km 
Reanalysis: a high-resolution dynamically downscaled climatography. Poster 
presented at the 2014 AGU Fall Meeting, San Francisco, CA. 
http://cirssweb.lis.illinois.edu/publicationDetails.php?q=412 
 
[34] DTU Wind Energy (2014) 
46200 Wind Resource Assessment and Siting Report-I-45 (ed.2).pdf 
==PAGE:81==
 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
81 
Appendix A 
WAsP Site Maps 
A.1. 00bureau 
[Text] 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:82==
 
82 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
A.2. 03champaign 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:83==
 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
83 
A.3. 05coles1 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:84==
 
84 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
A.4. 07franklin 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:85==
 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
85 
A.5. 08fulton 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:86==
 
86 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
A.6. 09hamilton 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:87==
 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
87 
 
A.7. 10henry 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:88==
 
88 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
A.8. 15mcdonough 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:89==
 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
89 
Appendix B 
Observed Wind Climates (OWC) 
B.1. 00bureau 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:90==
 
90 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
B.2. 03champaign 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:91==
 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
91 
B.3. 05coles1 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:92==
 
92 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
B.4. 07franklin 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:93==
 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
93 
B.5. 08fulton 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:94==
 
94 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
B.6. 09hamilton 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:95==
 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
95 
B.7. 10henry 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:96==
 
96 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
B.8. 15mcdonough 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:97==
 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
97 
Appendix C 
Generalized Wind Climate (GWC)  
C.1. 00bureau .LIB file output 
00bureau <coordinates>-89.440817,41.401238,0.0</coordinates> 
5 5 12 
0.000 0.030 0.100 0.400 1.500  
10.0 25.0 50.0 100.0 200.0  
5.84 5.38 5.98 7.09 7.75 9.62 9.80 8.45 7.42 9.83 13.07 9.76  
6.23 6.27 6.78 6.57 6.38 6.69 7.13 7.39 7.70 7.59 7.44 6.85  
2.22 2.25 2.09 2.22 2.00 2.11 2.15 2.39 2.29 1.96 2.12 1.99  
6.82 6.87 7.43 7.19 7.00 7.33 7.81 8.09 8.43 8.32 8.15 7.50  
2.29 2.32 2.16 2.29 2.06 2.18 2.22 2.47 2.36 2.01 2.18 2.06  
7.33 7.38 7.99 7.73 7.52 7.88 8.40 8.69 9.05 8.95 8.76 8.07  
2.35 2.38 2.22 2.36 2.12 2.24 2.28 2.54 2.43 2.07 2.24 2.12  
7.95 8.01 8.66 8.39 8.15 8.54 9.11 9.43 9.82 9.69 9.50 8.75  
2.29 2.32 2.15 2.29 2.06 2.18 2.21 2.46 2.36 2.01 2.18 2.06  
8.75 8.81 9.53 9.23 8.96 9.39 10.02 10.39 10.82 10.65 10.45 9.61  
2.19 2.22 2.06 2.19 1.97 2.08 2.12 2.36 2.26 1.93 2.09 1.97  
4.91 5.56 6.08 7.44 7.85 10.18 9.65 8.08 7.18 10.68 13.83 8.57  
4.47 4.58 5.01 4.70 4.61 4.91 5.24 5.39 5.63 5.42 5.37 4.72  
2.30 1.94 1.84 2.01 1.73 1.91 1.89 2.17 1.97 1.68 1.93 1.68  
5.35 5.49 6.01 5.63 5.54 5.88 6.29 6.44 6.74 6.51 6.43 5.68  
2.49 2.10 1.98 2.17 1.87 2.06 2.04 2.34 2.13 1.81 2.08 1.81  
6.16 6.35 6.95 6.50 6.42 6.80 7.27 7.43 7.78 7.54 7.44 6.59  
2.79 2.35 2.22 2.44 2.09 2.31 2.29 2.63 2.38 2.03 2.33 2.04  
7.26 7.49 8.21 7.68 7.59 8.03 8.59 8.77 9.20 8.91 8.79 7.79  
2.98 2.52 2.38 2.60 2.24 2.47 2.44 2.81 2.55 2.17 2.49 2.18  
8.88 9.16 10.03 9.39 9.25 9.81 10.49 10.74 11.26 10.86 10.73 9.51  
2.87 2.42 2.28 2.50 2.15 2.37 2.35 2.70 2.45 2.08 2.40 2.09  
4.94 5.60 6.21 7.49 8.03 10.13 9.50 8.00 7.50 11.00 13.40 8.21  
3.87 4.00 4.35 4.08 4.01 4.30 4.60 4.71 4.88 4.73 4.66 4.10  
2.17 1.88 1.86 1.97 1.71 1.92 1.94 2.17 1.94 1.71 1.94 1.69  
4.77 4.94 5.38 5.04 4.97 5.31 5.69 5.81 6.03 5.86 5.76 5.09  
2.33 2.02 1.99 2.10 1.83 2.05 2.08 2.33 2.07 1.83 2.07 1.81  
5.58 5.80 6.31 5.90 5.84 6.23 6.67 6.80 7.07 6.89 6.75 5.98  
2.58 2.23 2.21 2.33 2.03 2.27 2.30 2.57 2.29 2.03 2.29 2.00  
6.62 6.89 7.50 7.01 6.96 7.40 7.92 8.07 8.40 8.20 8.02 7.13  
2.84 2.46 2.43 2.56 2.23 2.50 2.53 2.83 2.52 2.23 2.53 2.20  
8.08 8.40 9.15 8.56 8.47 9.02 9.67 9.86 10.27 10.01 9.78 8.68  
2.72 2.36 2.33 2.46 2.15 2.40 2.43 2.72 2.42 2.14 2.43 2.12  
5.03 5.65 6.39 7.55 8.32 10.04 9.31 7.87 7.94 11.39 12.79 7.73  
3.06 3.19 3.39 3.21 3.21 3.44 3.64 3.72 3.81 3.73 3.64 3.24  
2.13 1.89 1.88 1.95 1.78 1.96 2.00 2.15 1.90 1.77 1.94 1.73  
4.02 4.21 4.47 4.23 4.24 4.53 4.79 4.90 5.03 4.92 4.80 4.28  
2.26 2.01 2.00 2.07 1.88 2.08 2.12 2.28 2.02 1.87 2.06 1.83  
4.86 5.09 5.40 5.11 5.14 5.47 5.79 5.92 6.08 5.96 5.81 5.18  
2.46 2.19 2.18 2.26 2.05 2.26 2.31 2.48 2.21 2.04 2.24 1.99  
5.86 6.15 6.53 6.18 6.22 6.61 6.99 7.14 7.35 7.22 7.02 6.28  
2.78 2.47 2.46 2.55 2.32 2.56 2.62 2.81 2.49 2.31 2.54 2.26  
7.19 7.55 8.01 7.58 7.62 8.11 8.58 8.77 9.03 8.86 8.61 7.70  
2.68 2.38 2.37 2.46 2.24 2.47 2.52 2.70 2.40 2.22 2.45 2.17  
5.13 5.71 6.61 7.61 8.66 9.95 9.08 7.71 8.46 11.86 12.07 7.16  
2.04 2.16 2.24 2.13 2.17 2.32 2.45 2.51 2.54 2.51 2.41 2.16  
2.03 1.87 1.89 1.89 1.82 1.99 2.09 2.16 1.88 1.87 1.93 1.76  
3.09 3.28 3.40 3.24 3.30 3.52 3.72 3.81 3.85 3.81 3.65 3.28  
2.13 1.97 1.99 1.99 1.92 2.10 2.20 2.27 1.98 1.97 2.04 1.86  
3.96 4.21 4.37 4.15 4.23 4.52 4.77 4.88 4.94 4.90 4.68 4.22  
2.29 2.12 2.14 2.14 2.06 2.26 2.37 2.44 2.13 2.12 2.19 2.00  
4.96 5.28 5.47 5.21 5.31 5.66 5.96 6.10 6.20 6.14 5.87 5.29  
2.60 2.40 2.43 2.43 2.33 2.56 2.68 2.77 2.42 2.40 2.48 2.26  
6.20 6.59 6.84 6.50 6.63 7.06 7.45 7.62 7.75 7.67 7.33 6.61  
2.56 2.37 2.39 2.39 2.30 2.52 2.64 2.72 2.37 2.36 2.44 2.22 
==PAGE:98==
 
98 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
C.2. 03champaign .LIB file output 
03champaign <coordinates>-88.275917,40.354550,0.0</coordinates> 
5 5 12 
0.000 0.030 0.100 0.400 1.500  
10.0 25.0 50.0 100.0 200.0  
4.86 5.38 5.58 6.43 6.74 8.64 13.14 11.40 10.15 9.35 10.06 8.25  
6.32 7.36 7.10 6.99 6.75 7.22 8.40 8.05 7.86 7.75 7.91 7.00  
1.78 1.83 1.96 2.12 2.24 2.80 2.47 2.34 2.07 2.17 2.13 2.01  
6.93 8.07 7.78 7.66 7.39 7.90 9.19 8.81 8.61 8.48 8.66 7.67  
1.84 1.88 2.03 2.19 2.31 2.89 2.55 2.41 2.13 2.24 2.20 2.07  
7.46 8.67 8.37 8.23 7.94 8.49 9.87 9.46 9.25 9.12 9.31 8.24  
1.89 1.94 2.08 2.25 2.38 2.97 2.63 2.48 2.20 2.31 2.26 2.13  
8.08 9.38 9.07 8.93 8.62 9.21 10.71 10.27 10.02 9.89 10.10 8.94  
1.84 1.88 2.02 2.19 2.31 2.89 2.55 2.41 2.13 2.24 2.20 2.07  
8.87 10.28 9.97 9.82 9.48 10.15 11.80 11.30 11.02 10.88 11.11 9.83  
1.76 1.80 1.94 2.10 2.21 2.76 2.44 2.31 2.04 2.14 2.10 1.98  
3.95 5.82 5.52 6.74 6.74 9.25 14.29 10.54 10.04 9.12 10.37 7.63  
4.51 5.48 5.03 5.04 4.88 5.32 6.21 5.63 5.68 5.59 5.75 4.82  
1.52 1.67 1.78 1.88 2.06 2.58 2.15 1.98 1.79 1.96 1.86 1.81  
5.43 6.57 6.03 6.04 5.84 6.35 7.42 6.75 6.80 6.70 6.88 5.79  
1.64 1.79 1.91 2.03 2.22 2.79 2.32 2.14 1.92 2.12 2.01 1.96  
6.32 7.60 6.99 6.99 6.74 7.31 8.54 7.79 7.86 7.74 7.96 6.70  
1.84 2.00 2.15 2.27 2.49 3.13 2.59 2.40 2.14 2.38 2.25 2.19  
7.50 8.95 8.26 8.26 7.96 8.61 10.05 9.20 9.26 9.14 9.40 7.92  
1.96 2.14 2.29 2.43 2.67 3.35 2.78 2.57 2.29 2.54 2.40 2.35  
9.14 10.85 10.09 10.09 9.73 10.54 12.24 11.25 11.26 11.18 11.47 9.67  
1.89 2.06 2.21 2.33 2.56 3.21 2.67 2.46 2.21 2.44 2.31 2.25  
4.09 5.81 5.62 6.74 6.95 9.65 14.01 10.46 9.99 9.22 10.17 7.29  
3.92 4.74 4.40 4.38 4.27 4.73 5.40 4.90 4.93 4.87 4.93 4.18  
1.47 1.68 1.81 1.88 2.06 2.47 2.18 1.96 1.79 1.95 1.83 1.78  
4.88 5.86 5.44 5.41 5.27 5.83 6.66 6.05 6.10 6.01 6.10 5.17  
1.57 1.79 1.94 2.01 2.21 2.64 2.33 2.10 1.91 2.08 1.96 1.91  
5.76 6.89 6.39 6.35 6.18 6.81 7.79 7.09 7.15 7.05 7.16 6.07  
1.74 1.97 2.15 2.22 2.44 2.92 2.58 2.31 2.11 2.31 2.17 2.11  
6.89 8.18 7.60 7.55 7.33 8.07 9.22 8.43 8.48 8.38 8.52 7.22  
1.91 2.17 2.36 2.44 2.68 3.22 2.84 2.55 2.32 2.54 2.39 2.32  
8.38 9.94 9.27 9.20 8.94 9.85 11.24 10.28 10.32 10.22 10.39 8.80  
1.83 2.08 2.27 2.35 2.58 3.09 2.73 2.45 2.23 2.44 2.29 2.23  
4.31 5.78 5.78 6.74 7.26 10.23 13.57 10.41 9.88 9.37 9.85 6.81  
3.28 3.68 3.47 3.44 3.42 3.80 4.19 3.85 3.87 3.84 3.82 3.31  
1.58 1.68 1.85 1.92 2.17 2.35 2.15 1.94 1.81 1.96 1.84 1.80  
4.34 4.87 4.58 4.54 4.50 5.00 5.52 5.07 5.11 5.06 5.04 4.36  
1.67 1.78 1.96 2.04 2.30 2.50 2.28 2.05 1.92 2.08 1.95 1.91  
5.27 5.90 5.54 5.48 5.43 6.03 6.66 6.13 6.18 6.12 6.10 5.28  
1.82 1.94 2.13 2.22 2.51 2.72 2.49 2.24 2.09 2.27 2.13 2.08  
6.40 7.15 6.70 6.63 6.55 7.27 8.03 7.41 7.47 7.39 7.38 6.39  
2.06 2.19 2.42 2.52 2.84 3.08 2.81 2.53 2.37 2.56 2.40 2.35  
7.84 8.76 8.21 8.13 8.04 8.92 9.85 9.09 9.15 9.07 9.06 7.84  
1.99 2.11 2.33 2.42 2.74 2.96 2.71 2.44 2.28 2.47 2.31 2.27  
4.57 5.74 5.98 6.74 7.63 10.93 13.05 10.34 9.74 9.57 9.48 6.24  
2.28 2.46 2.32 2.29 2.31 2.59 2.75 2.57 2.59 2.59 2.52 2.21  
1.65 1.76 1.91 1.97 2.24 2.25 2.12 1.92 1.87 2.02 1.87 1.79  
3.47 3.74 3.52 3.47 3.50 3.92 4.17 3.90 3.93 3.93 3.83 3.36  
1.74 1.86 2.01 2.07 2.36 2.37 2.23 2.03 1.97 2.12 1.97 1.88  
4.47 4.80 4.52 4.45 4.48 5.02 5.34 5.00 5.05 5.04 4.92 4.31  
1.87 2.00 2.16 2.23 2.54 2.55 2.40 2.18 2.12 2.29 2.12 2.02  
5.62 6.03 5.67 5.58 5.60 6.27 6.68 6.27 6.33 6.31 6.16 5.42  
2.11 2.26 2.44 2.53 2.88 2.89 2.72 2.47 2.40 2.59 2.40 2.29  
7.01 7.53 7.08 6.97 7.00 7.83 8.34 7.83 7.91 7.88 7.70 6.76  
2.08 2.22 2.41 2.49 2.83 2.85 2.67 2.43 2.36 2.55 2.36 2.26 
 
 
==PAGE:99==
 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
99 
C.3. 05coles1 .LIB file output 
05coles1 <coordinates>-87.965850,39.511967,0.0</coordinates> 
5 5 12 
0.000 0.030 0.100 0.400 1.500  
10.0 25.0 50.0 100.0 200.0  
6.48 6.93 7.57 5.81 7.72 13.96 12.29 7.28 5.59 8.17 10.06 8.13  
5.86 4.68 4.97 5.47 6.95 7.88 7.42 7.14 7.00 7.89 7.70 6.94  
1.73 1.73 2.01 2.40 2.24 2.53 2.36 2.31 1.80 2.08 2.10 2.01  
6.43 5.13 5.45 5.99 7.61 8.62 8.12 7.81 7.68 8.64 8.43 7.60  
1.78 1.79 2.07 2.48 2.31 2.61 2.43 2.38 1.86 2.15 2.17 2.07  
6.92 5.53 5.86 6.43 8.17 9.26 8.73 8.40 8.26 9.28 9.06 8.17  
1.83 1.84 2.13 2.55 2.38 2.68 2.50 2.46 1.91 2.21 2.23 2.13  
7.50 5.98 6.35 6.98 8.87 10.05 9.47 9.11 8.95 10.06 9.83 8.86  
1.78 1.79 2.07 2.48 2.31 2.60 2.43 2.38 1.86 2.15 2.17 2.07  
8.23 6.57 6.98 7.69 9.76 11.07 10.42 10.03 9.83 11.05 10.81 9.74  
1.71 1.71 1.98 2.37 2.21 2.49 2.33 2.28 1.78 2.06 2.08 1.98  
6.19 7.27 7.61 5.17 8.49 15.62 11.29 6.02 5.46 9.01 10.41 7.45  
4.01 3.19 3.74 4.12 5.20 5.80 5.29 5.11 4.97 5.79 5.51 4.78  
1.47 1.60 1.83 2.27 2.01 2.29 2.13 1.97 1.50 1.91 1.86 1.72  
4.84 3.84 4.49 4.92 6.23 6.93 6.33 6.12 5.99 6.94 6.60 5.74  
1.58 1.72 1.98 2.45 2.17 2.47 2.30 2.13 1.62 2.06 2.01 1.86  
5.64 4.46 5.19 5.67 7.19 7.98 7.30 7.07 6.98 8.03 7.64 6.66  
1.77 1.93 2.22 2.75 2.43 2.78 2.58 2.39 1.81 2.31 2.25 2.08  
6.69 5.28 6.14 6.69 8.49 9.42 8.62 8.34 8.27 9.48 9.02 7.87  
1.89 2.06 2.38 2.94 2.60 2.97 2.76 2.55 1.93 2.47 2.41 2.23  
8.16 6.44 7.50 8.18 10.38 11.52 10.53 10.20 10.07 11.58 11.02 9.61  
1.81 1.98 2.28 2.82 2.50 2.85 2.65 2.45 1.85 2.37 2.31 2.14  
6.32 7.28 7.38 5.45 9.10 15.26 10.83 5.97 5.76 9.14 10.17 7.35  
3.47 2.84 3.30 3.71 4.62 5.01 4.63 4.46 4.44 5.01 4.76 4.08  
1.50 1.63 1.88 2.13 2.08 2.26 2.17 1.94 1.56 1.89 1.86 1.67  
4.31 3.52 4.09 4.58 5.71 6.18 5.71 5.51 5.52 6.19 5.89 5.06  
1.60 1.74 2.01 2.28 2.22 2.42 2.32 2.08 1.67 2.03 1.99 1.79  
5.09 4.15 4.79 5.36 6.68 7.22 6.68 6.46 6.50 7.26 6.91 5.96  
1.77 1.92 2.22 2.53 2.46 2.67 2.56 2.30 1.84 2.24 2.20 1.97  
6.08 4.95 5.70 6.36 7.93 8.57 7.93 7.67 7.76 8.63 8.21 7.10  
1.95 2.12 2.44 2.78 2.71 2.94 2.82 2.53 2.03 2.47 2.42 2.17  
7.40 6.03 6.95 7.76 9.68 10.46 9.67 9.36 9.45 10.53 10.01 8.65  
1.87 2.03 2.35 2.67 2.60 2.83 2.71 2.44 1.95 2.37 2.33 2.09  
6.51 7.30 7.05 5.84 9.96 14.74 10.18 5.90 6.19 9.33 9.82 7.20  
2.65 2.31 2.63 3.03 3.70 3.91 3.64 3.50 3.59 3.91 3.71 3.17  
1.49 1.68 1.90 2.01 2.12 2.24 2.16 1.89 1.63 1.89 1.86 1.65  
3.51 3.05 3.47 3.99 4.87 5.15 4.79 4.62 4.75 5.15 4.90 4.19  
1.58 1.78 2.02 2.13 2.25 2.38 2.29 2.01 1.73 2.01 1.97 1.75  
4.28 3.70 4.20 4.82 5.88 6.21 5.78 5.59 5.76 6.23 5.92 5.09  
1.72 1.94 2.21 2.32 2.45 2.59 2.50 2.19 1.89 2.19 2.15 1.90  
5.20 4.49 5.08 5.82 7.10 7.49 6.97 6.75 6.99 7.53 7.16 6.17  
1.94 2.19 2.49 2.63 2.77 2.93 2.83 2.47 2.13 2.47 2.43 2.15  
6.37 5.50 6.23 7.14 8.71 9.19 8.55 8.28 8.57 9.24 8.78 7.56  
1.87 2.11 2.40 2.53 2.67 2.82 2.72 2.38 2.06 2.38 2.34 2.07  
6.73 7.31 6.64 6.30 10.98 14.13 9.41 5.82 6.70 9.55 9.41 7.03  
1.70 1.59 1.76 2.10 2.53 2.61 2.45 2.34 2.47 2.60 2.45 2.06  
1.49 1.74 1.87 1.95 2.23 2.31 2.25 1.85 1.74 1.92 1.87 1.59  
2.59 2.42 2.68 3.19 3.83 3.94 3.71 3.55 3.75 3.94 3.71 3.14  
1.56 1.83 1.96 2.06 2.35 2.44 2.37 1.95 1.83 2.03 1.96 1.68  
3.35 3.11 3.44 4.09 4.90 5.05 4.75 4.57 4.83 5.06 4.77 4.04  
1.68 1.96 2.11 2.21 2.53 2.62 2.55 2.09 1.97 2.18 2.11 1.80  
4.23 3.91 4.31 5.13 6.13 6.31 5.94 5.73 6.06 6.34 5.98 5.09  
1.90 2.22 2.39 2.50 2.86 2.97 2.89 2.37 2.23 2.47 2.39 2.04  
5.28 4.88 5.38 6.40 7.65 7.88 7.42 7.15 7.57 7.91 7.46 6.35  
1.87 2.19 2.35 2.47 2.82 2.92 2.85 2.33 2.20 2.43 2.35 2.01 
 
 
==PAGE:100==
 
100 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
C.4. 07franklin .LIB file output 
07franklin <coordinates>-88.818100,37.928567,0.0</coordinates> 
5 5 12 
0.000 0.030 0.100 0.400 1.500  
10.0 25.0 50.0 100.0 200.0  
5.95 5.43 5.10 6.02 7.01 8.52 17.36 14.36 7.90 7.28 7.69 7.38  
4.74 4.44 3.96 3.76 4.38 4.73 5.62 5.34 4.79 5.00 5.60 5.31  
1.80 2.13 2.39 2.02 1.98 2.23 2.44 2.26 1.64 1.64 2.01 1.88  
5.19 4.86 4.34 4.12 4.80 5.18 6.15 5.85 5.26 5.49 6.14 5.82  
1.85 2.21 2.47 2.08 2.05 2.30 2.51 2.33 1.70 1.69 2.08 1.95  
5.59 5.23 4.66 4.43 5.16 5.57 6.60 6.28 5.66 5.91 6.60 6.26  
1.91 2.27 2.54 2.14 2.10 2.37 2.58 2.40 1.74 1.74 2.13 2.00  
6.05 5.67 5.05 4.80 5.59 6.04 7.17 6.81 6.13 6.40 7.15 6.78  
1.85 2.20 2.47 2.08 2.04 2.30 2.51 2.33 1.69 1.69 2.08 1.95  
6.65 6.24 5.57 5.28 6.15 6.65 7.89 7.50 6.72 7.02 7.86 7.44  
1.78 2.11 2.36 1.99 1.96 2.21 2.40 2.23 1.62 1.62 1.99 1.87  
5.51 5.41 5.01 6.41 7.14 8.99 20.10 12.48 6.39 7.57 7.68 7.31  
3.31 3.22 2.79 2.70 3.34 3.49 4.16 3.74 3.26 3.72 4.17 3.74  
1.59 1.97 2.10 1.67 1.82 1.98 2.14 1.86 1.28 1.52 1.86 1.61  
3.98 3.86 3.34 3.24 4.01 4.17 4.98 4.49 3.96 4.49 5.00 4.50  
1.72 2.12 2.27 1.80 1.96 2.13 2.31 2.01 1.38 1.64 2.00 1.74  
4.63 4.46 3.86 3.76 4.64 4.82 5.74 5.19 4.65 5.22 5.78 5.23  
1.92 2.38 2.54 2.02 2.20 2.40 2.60 2.25 1.54 1.84 2.25 1.95  
5.48 5.26 4.55 4.45 5.49 5.69 6.78 6.13 5.53 6.19 6.83 6.19  
2.06 2.55 2.72 2.16 2.35 2.56 2.78 2.41 1.65 1.96 2.40 2.08  
6.69 6.43 5.57 5.44 6.70 6.96 8.29 7.49 6.73 7.55 8.35 7.54  
1.97 2.45 2.62 2.08 2.26 2.46 2.66 2.31 1.58 1.88 2.31 2.00  
5.50 5.37 5.14 6.48 7.31 9.95 19.48 11.92 6.46 7.56 7.66 7.17  
2.86 2.76 2.47 2.43 2.92 3.14 3.59 3.25 2.85 3.30 3.60 3.25  
1.59 1.94 2.20 1.69 1.81 1.99 2.06 1.85 1.28 1.57 1.83 1.64  
3.55 3.42 3.04 3.01 3.61 3.88 4.43 4.03 3.57 4.10 4.45 4.03  
1.71 2.08 2.35 1.81 1.94 2.13 2.21 1.97 1.37 1.68 1.96 1.75  
4.19 4.01 3.56 3.54 4.24 4.55 5.19 4.73 4.24 4.83 5.23 4.75  
1.88 2.30 2.61 2.00 2.14 2.36 2.45 2.18 1.51 1.85 2.17 1.94  
4.99 4.76 4.22 4.22 5.05 5.40 6.16 5.62 5.09 5.76 6.21 5.66  
2.07 2.53 2.87 2.21 2.36 2.60 2.69 2.40 1.65 2.04 2.38 2.13  
6.08 5.81 5.16 5.14 6.15 6.59 7.52 6.85 6.19 7.02 7.58 6.88  
1.99 2.43 2.76 2.12 2.27 2.49 2.59 2.31 1.59 1.96 2.29 2.05  
5.49 5.33 5.34 6.54 7.55 11.37 18.51 11.13 6.61 7.55 7.63 6.95  
2.28 2.16 1.90 1.96 2.34 2.55 2.79 2.54 2.34 2.64 2.79 2.53  
1.66 1.96 1.90 1.63 1.86 1.97 1.99 1.77 1.35 1.60 1.77 1.61  
3.01 2.84 2.50 2.59 3.08 3.37 3.68 3.36 3.11 3.50 3.69 3.35  
1.76 2.08 2.01 1.73 1.97 2.09 2.11 1.87 1.44 1.70 1.88 1.71  
3.65 3.44 3.03 3.14 3.73 4.07 4.45 4.07 3.80 4.25 4.47 4.06  
1.92 2.26 2.19 1.89 2.15 2.28 2.30 2.04 1.56 1.85 2.04 1.86  
4.43 4.15 3.66 3.81 4.51 4.92 5.37 4.93 4.65 5.15 5.41 4.93  
2.17 2.56 2.48 2.13 2.43 2.57 2.60 2.31 1.76 2.10 2.31 2.10  
5.43 5.09 4.49 4.67 5.53 6.03 6.59 6.04 5.68 6.31 6.63 6.03  
2.09 2.46 2.38 2.05 2.34 2.48 2.50 2.22 1.70 2.01 2.23 2.03  
5.48 5.28 5.59 6.62 7.84 13.06 17.34 10.19 6.78 7.54 7.60 6.68  
1.51 1.43 1.31 1.40 1.56 1.73 1.82 1.66 1.59 1.78 1.82 1.65  
1.68 1.97 2.00 1.78 1.82 1.84 1.85 1.64 1.38 1.60 1.67 1.56  
2.29 2.16 1.99 2.13 2.37 2.63 2.77 2.53 2.43 2.71 2.76 2.51  
1.77 2.08 2.11 1.87 1.91 1.94 1.94 1.73 1.46 1.69 1.76 1.64  
2.95 2.77 2.55 2.74 3.05 3.37 3.55 3.25 3.15 3.49 3.55 3.23  
1.90 2.24 2.27 2.01 2.06 2.08 2.09 1.86 1.56 1.81 1.89 1.76  
3.71 3.47 3.19 3.44 3.83 4.23 4.45 4.10 3.99 4.39 4.47 4.07  
2.15 2.53 2.57 2.28 2.33 2.36 2.37 2.10 1.76 2.05 2.14 1.99  
4.63 4.33 3.98 4.29 4.78 5.28 5.56 5.11 4.98 5.48 5.57 5.07  
2.12 2.50 2.53 2.24 2.29 2.32 2.33 2.07 1.74 2.02 2.11 1.97 
 
 
==PAGE:101==
 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
101 
C.5. 08fulton .LIB file output 
08fulton <coordinates>-90.186450,40.481767,0.0</coordinates> 
5 5 12 
0.000 0.030 0.100 0.400 1.500  
10.0 25.0 50.0 100.0 200.0  
8.22 6.68 5.97 6.40 8.00 10.92 10.68 8.06 6.24 6.99 11.47 10.40  
5.75 5.03 4.84 5.13 5.31 5.69 6.06 6.11 6.11 6.07 6.45 6.16  
1.98 1.70 2.17 2.17 2.28 2.92 2.90 2.71 2.37 2.27 2.21 2.15  
6.30 5.52 5.30 5.62 5.81 6.22 6.62 6.68 6.68 6.64 7.06 6.75  
2.04 1.76 2.24 2.24 2.35 3.01 2.99 2.79 2.44 2.35 2.28 2.22  
6.78 5.94 5.70 6.04 6.24 6.68 7.11 7.18 7.18 7.14 7.59 7.25  
2.10 1.80 2.30 2.31 2.42 3.10 3.07 2.87 2.51 2.41 2.34 2.28  
7.35 6.43 6.18 6.55 6.77 7.26 7.72 7.79 7.79 7.75 8.23 7.86  
2.04 1.75 2.24 2.24 2.35 3.01 2.99 2.79 2.44 2.34 2.28 2.21  
8.08 7.06 6.80 7.20 7.45 8.00 8.51 8.58 8.58 8.52 9.06 8.65  
1.95 1.68 2.14 2.15 2.25 2.88 2.86 2.67 2.33 2.24 2.18 2.12  
7.76 6.37 5.84 6.57 8.49 11.71 10.28 7.34 5.88 7.35 12.80 9.63  
4.08 3.53 3.55 3.81 3.89 4.22 4.51 4.44 4.47 4.41 4.74 4.35  
1.68 1.50 2.15 1.90 2.04 2.73 2.55 2.30 2.05 2.00 1.98 1.86  
4.90 4.26 4.24 4.57 4.66 5.03 5.38 5.30 5.35 5.28 5.68 5.22  
1.81 1.62 2.32 2.05 2.20 2.95 2.76 2.49 2.22 2.16 2.14 2.00  
5.69 4.96 4.89 5.29 5.37 5.79 6.19 6.11 6.18 6.09 6.56 6.04  
2.03 1.81 2.60 2.30 2.47 3.31 3.09 2.79 2.49 2.42 2.40 2.25  
6.73 5.88 5.77 6.25 6.34 6.82 7.30 7.20 7.29 7.19 7.74 7.14  
2.17 1.94 2.78 2.46 2.64 3.53 3.31 2.98 2.66 2.59 2.56 2.40  
8.22 7.17 7.06 7.63 7.76 8.35 8.93 8.81 8.92 8.79 9.47 8.72  
2.09 1.86 2.67 2.36 2.54 3.39 3.17 2.86 2.55 2.49 2.46 2.31  
7.61 6.31 5.89 6.74 8.75 11.64 10.02 7.16 6.03 7.78 12.55 9.53  
3.54 3.06 3.09 3.35 3.43 3.68 3.91 3.86 3.84 3.86 4.08 3.80  
1.70 1.51 2.06 1.94 2.14 2.60 2.47 2.22 1.97 1.98 1.93 1.88  
4.39 3.81 3.82 4.14 4.23 4.53 4.82 4.75 4.75 4.77 5.05 4.70  
1.81 1.62 2.21 2.08 2.29 2.78 2.64 2.37 2.11 2.12 2.06 2.01  
5.16 4.50 4.47 4.85 4.96 5.29 5.63 5.56 5.57 5.59 5.92 5.52  
2.01 1.78 2.44 2.30 2.53 3.08 2.92 2.63 2.33 2.35 2.28 2.23  
6.14 5.37 5.30 5.76 5.88 6.26 6.67 6.60 6.61 6.64 7.03 6.56  
2.21 1.96 2.69 2.53 2.79 3.38 3.22 2.89 2.56 2.58 2.51 2.45  
7.49 6.54 6.47 7.03 7.18 7.65 8.15 8.05 8.07 8.11 8.58 8.00  
2.12 1.88 2.59 2.44 2.68 3.26 3.09 2.78 2.46 2.49 2.41 2.36  
7.46 6.24 5.97 6.99 9.16 11.43 9.64 6.97 6.22 8.47 12.16 9.30  
2.74 2.46 2.49 2.64 2.72 2.91 3.09 3.04 3.02 3.07 3.22 2.95  
1.65 1.61 2.09 1.93 2.12 2.50 2.45 2.18 1.96 1.95 1.96 1.83  
3.63 3.26 3.28 3.48 3.59 3.83 4.06 4.00 3.99 4.05 4.24 3.90  
1.75 1.71 2.22 2.05 2.25 2.65 2.60 2.31 2.08 2.07 2.08 1.94  
4.40 3.96 3.96 4.21 4.33 4.61 4.89 4.82 4.82 4.90 5.13 4.71  
1.91 1.86 2.42 2.23 2.46 2.89 2.83 2.52 2.27 2.26 2.27 2.12  
5.34 4.80 4.77 5.08 5.22 5.55 5.89 5.82 5.82 5.92 6.19 5.70  
2.16 2.11 2.74 2.53 2.78 3.27 3.20 2.85 2.57 2.55 2.56 2.39  
6.54 5.89 5.86 6.23 6.41 6.82 7.23 7.14 7.14 7.26 7.60 7.00  
2.08 2.03 2.63 2.43 2.67 3.15 3.08 2.74 2.47 2.46 2.47 2.30  
7.27 6.16 6.08 7.30 9.64 11.17 9.20 6.75 6.45 9.29 11.69 9.01  
1.78 1.63 1.65 1.73 1.81 1.95 2.05 2.02 2.00 2.07 2.12 1.94  
1.58 1.63 1.90 1.82 2.04 2.34 2.31 2.06 1.90 1.94 1.93 1.75  
2.71 2.48 2.50 2.63 2.75 2.96 3.10 3.06 3.04 3.15 3.22 2.95  
1.67 1.72 2.00 1.92 2.15 2.47 2.43 2.17 2.00 2.04 2.03 1.85  
3.49 3.19 3.21 3.38 3.53 3.79 3.97 3.92 3.90 4.04 4.13 3.79  
1.79 1.85 2.15 2.06 2.31 2.65 2.62 2.33 2.15 2.20 2.19 1.98  
4.39 4.02 4.03 4.24 4.41 4.73 4.96 4.91 4.89 5.06 5.18 4.76  
2.03 2.09 2.43 2.33 2.62 3.01 2.96 2.64 2.44 2.49 2.48 2.24  
5.49 5.01 5.03 5.30 5.51 5.91 6.20 6.13 6.11 6.32 6.47 5.95  
1.99 2.06 2.40 2.30 2.58 2.96 2.92 2.60 2.40 2.46 2.44 2.21 
 
 
==PAGE:102==
 
102 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
C.6. 09hamilton .LIB file output 
09hamilton <coordinates>-88.557900,37.995733,0.0</coordinates> 
5 5 12 
0.000 0.030 0.100 0.400 1.500  
10.0 25.0 50.0 100.0 200.0  
5.93 4.97 4.77 6.15 7.97 9.79 16.77 11.77 7.56 8.06 8.60 7.66  
5.06 4.18 3.72 3.96 4.21 4.86 5.69 5.56 5.14 4.86 5.49 5.63  
2.06 2.24 2.32 1.77 1.90 1.91 2.13 2.17 1.94 2.23 2.04 1.96  
5.54 4.57 4.07 4.34 4.62 5.33 6.23 6.09 5.63 5.32 6.02 6.17  
2.12 2.31 2.40 1.83 1.96 1.97 2.21 2.24 2.01 2.30 2.11 2.02  
5.96 4.91 4.37 4.67 4.96 5.73 6.70 6.55 6.06 5.72 6.47 6.64  
2.19 2.38 2.46 1.88 2.02 2.03 2.27 2.30 2.06 2.37 2.17 2.08  
6.46 5.33 4.74 5.06 5.38 6.21 7.27 7.10 6.56 6.20 7.01 7.19  
2.12 2.31 2.40 1.83 1.96 1.97 2.20 2.23 2.01 2.30 2.11 2.02  
7.11 5.87 5.22 5.56 5.91 6.82 7.99 7.81 7.21 6.82 7.71 7.91  
2.03 2.21 2.29 1.75 1.88 1.88 2.11 2.14 1.92 2.20 2.02 1.94  
5.48 4.84 4.77 6.63 8.42 10.19 18.89 9.42 6.96 8.45 8.59 7.35  
3.55 2.88 2.65 2.90 3.11 3.66 4.20 3.95 3.64 3.52 4.15 4.06  
1.94 2.04 1.90 1.50 1.72 1.72 1.90 1.87 1.64 2.06 1.82 1.69  
4.25 3.45 3.18 3.50 3.73 4.40 5.04 4.74 4.37 4.21 4.98 4.88  
2.09 2.20 2.05 1.62 1.85 1.85 2.05 2.02 1.77 2.22 1.96 1.83  
4.91 3.98 3.67 4.07 4.33 5.10 5.83 5.48 5.08 4.86 5.77 5.66  
2.35 2.47 2.30 1.81 2.08 2.08 2.30 2.27 1.98 2.50 2.20 2.05  
5.80 4.70 4.34 4.83 5.12 6.03 6.88 6.47 6.01 5.74 6.82 6.70  
2.51 2.64 2.46 1.93 2.22 2.22 2.46 2.42 2.12 2.67 2.35 2.19  
7.09 5.75 5.30 5.89 6.25 7.36 8.41 7.91 7.34 7.01 8.33 8.18  
2.41 2.54 2.36 1.85 2.13 2.13 2.36 2.33 2.03 2.56 2.26 2.10  
5.43 4.83 4.93 6.79 8.58 10.97 18.05 9.18 7.09 8.45 8.50 7.19  
3.04 2.52 2.37 2.58 2.75 3.27 3.65 3.43 3.17 3.11 3.58 3.50  
1.92 2.10 1.89 1.56 1.70 1.75 1.87 1.86 1.67 2.00 1.76 1.68  
3.75 3.11 2.93 3.20 3.41 4.04 4.51 4.24 3.92 3.84 4.44 4.34  
2.06 2.24 2.03 1.66 1.81 1.87 2.01 1.99 1.78 2.14 1.88 1.80  
4.40 3.64 3.44 3.78 4.01 4.75 5.29 4.98 4.62 4.51 5.21 5.10  
2.28 2.48 2.24 1.84 2.01 2.07 2.22 2.20 1.97 2.37 2.08 1.99  
5.23 4.32 4.09 4.51 4.78 5.66 6.29 5.92 5.50 5.35 6.20 6.08  
2.50 2.73 2.47 2.02 2.21 2.28 2.44 2.42 2.17 2.61 2.29 2.19  
6.38 5.27 4.98 5.49 5.83 6.90 7.67 7.22 6.70 6.53 7.56 7.41  
2.40 2.63 2.37 1.94 2.12 2.19 2.35 2.33 2.08 2.51 2.21 2.10  
5.36 4.83 5.18 7.02 8.79 12.06 16.84 8.88 7.30 8.44 8.34 6.96  
2.35 1.94 1.86 2.05 2.24 2.63 2.85 2.66 2.49 2.51 2.81 2.70  
1.92 1.97 1.69 1.55 1.71 1.75 1.83 1.79 1.71 1.93 1.73 1.65  
3.10 2.56 2.46 2.71 2.96 3.47 3.76 3.52 3.29 3.31 3.71 3.57  
2.03 2.08 1.79 1.65 1.81 1.86 1.95 1.90 1.82 2.04 1.84 1.75  
3.75 3.09 2.98 3.29 3.59 4.21 4.55 4.26 3.98 4.00 4.50 4.34  
2.22 2.27 1.95 1.79 1.97 2.03 2.12 2.07 1.98 2.23 2.00 1.90  
4.53 3.74 3.62 4.00 4.35 5.09 5.50 5.15 4.82 4.83 5.45 5.26  
2.51 2.57 2.20 2.03 2.23 2.29 2.40 2.35 2.24 2.52 2.27 2.15  
5.56 4.58 4.43 4.90 5.33 6.24 6.74 6.32 5.91 5.93 6.68 6.44  
2.41 2.47 2.12 1.95 2.15 2.21 2.31 2.26 2.16 2.42 2.18 2.08  
5.29 4.84 5.48 7.30 9.03 13.37 15.38 8.51 7.54 8.42 8.15 6.69  
1.52 1.33 1.32 1.43 1.54 1.77 1.88 1.74 1.64 1.69 1.86 1.75  
1.87 2.17 1.81 1.71 1.69 1.72 1.79 1.69 1.69 1.77 1.66 1.59  
2.30 2.01 2.01 2.17 2.34 2.69 2.85 2.65 2.49 2.57 2.82 2.66  
1.97 2.29 1.91 1.80 1.78 1.81 1.89 1.78 1.78 1.86 1.75 1.67  
2.96 2.58 2.58 2.79 3.01 3.46 3.67 3.40 3.20 3.31 3.63 3.43  
2.12 2.47 2.05 1.93 1.92 1.94 2.03 1.92 1.92 2.00 1.88 1.80  
3.71 3.22 3.23 3.51 3.79 4.35 4.60 4.28 4.02 4.15 4.56 4.32  
2.40 2.79 2.32 2.19 2.17 2.20 2.30 2.17 2.17 2.27 2.13 2.04  
4.63 4.02 4.04 4.38 4.73 5.44 5.74 5.34 5.02 5.18 5.70 5.40  
2.37 2.75 2.29 2.15 2.13 2.17 2.26 2.13 2.13 2.23 2.10 2.01 
 
 
==PAGE:103==
 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
103 
C.7. 10henry .LIB file output 
10henry <coordinates>-90.155167,41.368133,0.0</coordinates> 
5 5 12 
0.000 0.030 0.100 0.400 1.500  
10.0 25.0 50.0 100.0 200.0  
7.62 7.02 6.56 5.90 7.86 10.79 10.01 8.96 7.76 7.81 9.53 10.17  
6.45 5.89 6.15 6.27 6.44 7.09 7.24 7.77 8.11 8.19 7.77 7.10  
2.36 2.18 2.18 2.24 2.49 2.81 2.56 2.72 2.47 2.08 1.96 2.29  
7.06 6.45 6.73 6.87 7.04 7.76 7.92 8.50 8.88 8.96 8.51 7.78  
2.43 2.25 2.25 2.31 2.57 2.90 2.65 2.81 2.56 2.14 2.02 2.37  
7.59 6.93 7.24 7.38 7.56 8.33 8.50 9.13 9.54 9.61 9.14 8.36  
2.50 2.31 2.31 2.38 2.64 2.99 2.72 2.89 2.63 2.21 2.08 2.43  
8.23 7.52 7.85 8.01 8.21 9.04 9.23 9.91 10.35 10.39 9.89 9.07  
2.43 2.25 2.25 2.31 2.56 2.90 2.65 2.81 2.55 2.15 2.02 2.36  
9.06 8.27 8.64 8.81 9.04 9.96 10.17 10.92 11.40 11.36 10.83 9.98  
2.33 2.15 2.15 2.21 2.46 2.78 2.53 2.69 2.44 2.06 1.94 2.26  
6.81 7.17 6.26 5.78 8.53 11.47 9.56 8.74 7.45 7.93 10.04 10.25  
4.50 4.16 4.58 4.59 4.72 5.25 5.25 5.78 5.90 5.91 5.55 5.03  
1.98 1.86 1.94 2.04 2.28 2.55 2.19 2.51 2.10 1.80 1.74 2.19  
5.39 4.98 5.49 5.49 5.64 6.27 6.28 6.89 7.06 7.05 6.65 6.02  
2.14 2.01 2.09 2.21 2.46 2.76 2.37 2.71 2.26 1.92 1.88 2.37  
6.23 5.76 6.34 6.34 6.50 7.22 7.24 7.94 8.14 8.10 7.70 6.94  
2.40 2.25 2.34 2.48 2.76 3.09 2.66 3.04 2.54 2.12 2.10 2.66  
7.35 6.81 7.49 7.48 7.67 8.51 8.54 9.36 9.61 9.47 9.10 8.18  
2.56 2.41 2.51 2.65 2.95 3.31 2.85 3.25 2.72 2.28 2.25 2.85  
8.98 8.32 9.15 9.15 9.38 10.41 10.45 11.44 11.75 11.40 11.09 10.01  
2.46 2.31 2.40 2.54 2.83 3.18 2.73 3.12 2.61 2.19 2.16 2.73  
6.87 7.06 6.22 6.02 8.78 11.31 9.47 8.63 7.50 8.12 10.07 9.95  
3.88 3.66 3.95 3.98 4.14 4.58 4.62 5.04 5.12 5.10 4.78 4.40  
1.94 1.87 1.88 2.01 2.26 2.54 2.22 2.47 2.05 1.79 1.75 2.27  
4.79 4.53 4.88 4.91 5.11 5.64 5.70 6.21 6.32 6.28 5.92 5.42  
2.08 2.00 2.01 2.15 2.42 2.72 2.38 2.64 2.19 1.89 1.88 2.43  
5.62 5.31 5.73 5.75 5.98 6.59 6.66 7.25 7.40 7.34 6.96 6.34  
2.30 2.21 2.22 2.38 2.67 3.01 2.63 2.92 2.43 2.06 2.07 2.69  
6.67 6.32 6.81 6.83 7.09 7.80 7.90 8.59 8.79 8.65 8.28 7.52  
2.53 2.43 2.44 2.62 2.94 3.31 2.90 3.22 2.67 2.27 2.28 2.96  
8.14 7.70 8.30 8.33 8.65 9.53 9.65 10.49 10.73 10.41 10.09 9.18  
2.44 2.34 2.35 2.52 2.83 3.19 2.78 3.09 2.57 2.19 2.19 2.84  
6.96 6.90 6.16 6.37 9.13 11.08 9.35 8.47 7.55 8.39 10.12 9.53  
3.02 2.93 3.12 3.15 3.34 3.60 3.66 3.96 4.01 3.97 3.72 3.42  
1.92 1.88 1.90 2.05 2.34 2.44 2.21 2.41 2.01 1.78 1.78 2.22  
3.98 3.86 4.12 4.16 4.39 4.73 4.82 5.21 5.29 5.22 4.91 4.51  
2.03 1.99 2.02 2.18 2.48 2.58 2.34 2.55 2.13 1.88 1.88 2.35  
4.81 4.67 4.98 5.02 5.30 5.70 5.81 6.28 6.39 6.29 5.95 5.44  
2.21 2.17 2.21 2.38 2.71 2.82 2.55 2.78 2.32 2.03 2.06 2.56  
5.81 5.65 6.02 6.06 6.38 6.86 7.01 7.57 7.72 7.57 7.20 6.56  
2.51 2.46 2.49 2.69 3.06 3.19 2.88 3.15 2.63 2.29 2.33 2.90  
7.13 6.93 7.38 7.43 7.83 8.42 8.60 9.29 9.47 9.20 8.82 8.05  
2.41 2.37 2.40 2.59 2.95 3.07 2.78 3.03 2.53 2.21 2.24 2.79  
7.07 6.70 6.09 6.78 9.55 10.80 9.21 8.27 7.62 8.71 10.18 9.04  
1.97 1.98 2.08 2.11 2.27 2.41 2.48 2.64 2.67 2.64 2.49 2.27  
1.85 1.86 1.89 2.06 2.41 2.46 2.26 2.29 1.96 1.84 1.92 2.21  
2.99 3.00 3.16 3.20 3.44 3.65 3.76 3.99 4.05 4.00 3.78 3.43  
1.95 1.96 1.99 2.17 2.54 2.60 2.38 2.41 2.07 1.93 2.02 2.32  
3.84 3.86 4.05 4.10 4.40 4.67 4.81 5.12 5.20 5.13 4.85 4.40  
2.09 2.10 2.14 2.34 2.73 2.79 2.57 2.60 2.22 2.06 2.17 2.50  
4.81 4.84 5.08 5.13 5.49 5.82 6.01 6.39 6.51 6.41 6.07 5.49  
2.37 2.38 2.42 2.65 3.09 3.16 2.91 2.94 2.51 2.31 2.46 2.83  
6.01 6.04 6.34 6.41 6.86 7.28 7.51 7.98 8.12 7.97 7.59 6.86  
2.33 2.35 2.38 2.61 3.04 3.12 2.86 2.89 2.48 2.29 2.42 2.79 
 
 
==PAGE:104==
 
104 
Measurement Based Wind Atlas for Illinois 
C.8. 15mcdonough .LIB file output 
15mcdonough <coordinates>-90.682917,40.428267,0.0</coordinates> 
5 5 12 
0.000 0.030 0.100 0.400 1.500  
10.0 25.0 50.0 100.0 200.0  
5.80 5.11 5.53 6.68 9.17 12.66 9.07 8.80 7.99 11.09 10.70 7.41  
5.73 5.81 5.76 5.92 6.26 6.80 6.73 6.84 6.41 5.91 6.33 6.19  
2.03 2.10 2.37 2.34 2.57 3.16 2.90 2.40 2.10 2.00 2.20 2.30  
6.28 6.36 6.31 6.48 6.85 7.44 7.36 7.49 7.03 6.47 6.93 6.77  
2.09 2.17 2.45 2.41 2.66 3.26 2.99 2.47 2.17 2.06 2.27 2.38  
6.75 6.84 6.78 6.96 7.36 7.98 7.90 8.05 7.55 6.96 7.45 7.28  
2.15 2.23 2.52 2.48 2.73 3.36 3.08 2.54 2.23 2.12 2.34 2.44  
7.32 7.42 7.35 7.55 7.98 8.67 8.58 8.73 8.19 7.55 8.08 7.90  
2.09 2.17 2.45 2.41 2.65 3.26 2.99 2.47 2.17 2.06 2.27 2.37  
8.05 8.16 8.10 8.31 8.79 9.56 9.45 9.62 9.01 8.30 8.89 8.69  
2.00 2.07 2.34 2.31 2.54 3.12 2.87 2.37 2.07 1.97 2.17 2.27  
5.60 4.87 5.76 6.98 9.87 13.50 7.63 9.21 7.63 12.29 10.07 6.58  
4.03 4.31 4.16 4.32 4.58 5.04 4.81 4.98 4.47 4.21 4.72 4.36  
1.68 1.95 2.12 2.02 2.28 2.97 2.37 2.05 1.75 1.75 1.99 2.00  
4.84 5.16 4.98 5.17 5.47 6.01 5.75 5.96 5.37 5.06 5.65 5.22  
1.81 2.10 2.29 2.18 2.46 3.21 2.56 2.22 1.89 1.89 2.15 2.16  
5.61 5.96 5.74 5.97 6.31 6.90 6.62 6.88 6.22 5.86 6.52 6.02  
2.03 2.36 2.56 2.45 2.76 3.60 2.88 2.49 2.12 2.12 2.41 2.42  
6.65 7.05 6.78 7.05 7.44 8.14 7.81 8.13 7.36 6.93 7.70 7.11  
2.17 2.53 2.74 2.62 2.95 3.84 3.08 2.66 2.27 2.27 2.58 2.59  
8.12 8.62 8.29 8.62 9.10 9.96 9.55 9.93 8.99 8.46 9.42 8.70  
2.08 2.42 2.63 2.51 2.83 3.69 2.96 2.55 2.18 2.18 2.47 2.49  
5.53 4.95 5.86 7.22 10.17 13.09 7.67 9.13 7.99 12.16 9.77 6.47  
3.53 3.74 3.63 3.79 4.04 4.37 4.19 4.32 3.85 3.70 4.12 3.76  
1.69 1.93 2.09 2.04 2.35 2.83 2.31 2.03 1.74 1.77 2.03 1.96  
4.37 4.62 4.48 4.68 4.98 5.38 5.17 5.33 4.77 4.58 5.09 4.64  
1.81 2.07 2.24 2.19 2.52 3.03 2.47 2.18 1.86 1.89 2.17 2.09  
5.14 5.41 5.24 5.48 5.82 6.28 6.04 6.24 5.61 5.38 5.96 5.45  
2.00 2.29 2.47 2.42 2.78 3.35 2.74 2.41 2.06 2.10 2.40 2.31  
6.13 6.43 6.22 6.50 6.90 7.44 7.16 7.41 6.67 6.40 7.08 6.47  
2.20 2.52 2.72 2.67 3.06 3.69 3.01 2.65 2.26 2.30 2.64 2.54  
7.47 7.86 7.59 7.94 8.43 9.08 8.75 9.04 8.14 7.81 8.64 7.90  
2.12 2.42 2.62 2.56 2.95 3.54 2.89 2.55 2.17 2.21 2.53 2.45  
5.40 5.07 6.02 7.58 10.59 12.35 7.88 8.95 8.62 11.83 9.35 6.37  
2.81 2.92 2.86 3.01 3.23 3.42 3.31 3.36 2.99 2.96 3.22 2.93  
1.72 1.94 2.07 2.10 2.42 2.72 2.24 2.01 1.73 1.80 2.03 1.92  
3.71 3.86 3.77 3.97 4.25 4.50 4.35 4.43 3.95 3.90 4.25 3.86  
1.82 2.06 2.20 2.22 2.57 2.89 2.38 2.13 1.83 1.91 2.15 2.04  
4.50 4.66 4.55 4.79 5.12 5.42 5.25 5.35 4.79 4.72 5.13 4.67  
1.99 2.24 2.40 2.42 2.80 3.15 2.59 2.32 1.99 2.08 2.35 2.22  
5.45 5.63 5.49 5.78 6.16 6.51 6.33 6.46 5.80 5.72 6.19 5.64  
2.24 2.54 2.71 2.74 3.17 3.56 2.93 2.63 2.26 2.35 2.66 2.51  
6.69 6.92 6.75 7.09 7.57 8.00 7.77 7.93 7.11 7.01 7.60 6.92  
2.16 2.44 2.61 2.64 3.05 3.43 2.82 2.53 2.17 2.26 2.56 2.42  
5.24 5.21 6.20 8.01 11.10 11.47 8.13 8.73 9.36 11.43 8.84 6.26  
1.90 1.93 1.91 2.02 2.18 2.27 2.21 2.21 1.96 2.01 2.13 1.92  
1.74 1.93 2.02 2.12 2.50 2.65 2.20 1.96 1.71 1.84 2.04 1.83  
2.88 2.93 2.90 3.06 3.30 3.43 3.35 3.34 2.98 3.05 3.23 2.92  
1.83 2.03 2.13 2.23 2.63 2.79 2.32 2.06 1.79 1.94 2.15 1.93  
3.71 3.76 3.71 3.93 4.22 4.39 4.29 4.29 3.84 3.92 4.14 3.75  
1.97 2.19 2.29 2.40 2.83 3.00 2.49 2.22 1.93 2.08 2.31 2.08  
4.65 4.71 4.65 4.91 5.27 5.47 5.37 5.37 4.82 4.91 5.18 4.70  
2.23 2.47 2.59 2.72 3.21 3.40 2.83 2.51 2.19 2.36 2.62 2.35  
5.82 5.89 5.81 6.14 6.59 6.84 6.71 6.71 6.02 6.13 6.47 5.87  
2.20 2.44 2.55 2.67 3.15 3.35 2.78 2.47 2.15 2.32 2.58 2.31 
 
 
==PAGE:105==
 
 
DTU Wind Energy is a department of the Technical University of Denmark with a unique integration of research, education, innovation and 
public/private sector consulting in the field of wind energy. Our activities develop new opportunities and technology for the global and Danish 
exploitation of wind energy. Research focuses on key technical-scientific fields, which are central for the development, innovation and use of wind 
energy and provides the basis for advanced education at the education. 
We have more than 240 staff members of which approximately 60 are PhD students. Research is conducted within nine research programmes 
organized into three main topics: Wind energy systems, Wind turbine technology and Basics for wind energy. 
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind Energy 
Frederiksborgvej 399 
Building 118 
4000 Roskilde 
Denmark 
Telephone +45 46 77 50 85 
info@vindenergi.dtu.dk 
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk 
 
