==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
Modelling and optimization of 
domestic hot water heat pump
Matteo Danese
July 2015
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Modelling and optimization of
domestic hot water heat pump
Master Thesis
submitted the 1st of July 2015
and defended the 10th of July 2015
at the
TECHNICAL UNIVERSITY OF DENMARK
for the Master Degree
by
Matteo Danese
under suggestion of:
Assistant Professor Wiebke Brix Markussen (DTU), main supervisor
Associate Professor Davide Del Col (Università degli Studi di Padova), main supervisor
Postdoc Erasmus Damgaard Rothuizen (DTU), co-supervisor
Development Manager Kasper Korsholm Østergaard (Metro Therm A/S), co-supervisor
and under recommendation of:
Director of Energy Niels Bahnsen (Niras), examiner
==PAGE:4==
Modelling and optimization of domestic hot water heat pump
Copyright ©2015 by Matteo Danese. All rights reserved.
Master Thesis
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Section of Thermal Energy
Technical University of Denmark
Nils Koppels Allé, Bld. 403
DK-2800 Kongens Lyngby
Denmark
Phone: (+45) 4525 4131
Fax: (+45) 4525 4325
www.mek.dtu.dk
ISBN: 978-87-7475-392-6
==PAGE:5==
to my father
to thank him and to make him proud of me
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
It is good to have an end to journey toward;
but it is the journey that matters, in the end.
— Ursula K. Le Guin
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
Preface
The present thesis was prepared at the Section of Thermal Energy, Department of Mechanical
Engineering, Technical University of Denmark (DTU). It is submitted to fulﬁll the requirements
for the Master’s degree in Sustainable Energy, at DTU and in Energy Engineering, at the
Department of Industrial Engineering, Università degli Studi di Padova .
The study was carried out for ﬁve months, from February 1st, 2015 to July 1st, 2015, under
supervision of Assistant Professor Wiebke Brix Markussen (DTU), Associate Professor Davide
Del Col (Università degli Studi di Padova) and co-supervision of Postdoc Erasmus Damgaard
Rothuizen (DTU).
The work was accomplished in cooperation with the company Metro Therm A/S, Rundinsvej
55, 3200 Helsinge, Denmark, under guidance of Development Manager Kasper Korsholm
Østergaard.
København, 29th June 2015
Matteo-Danese.
vii
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
Acknowledgements
The accomplishment of this thesis and of this full master was an exciting experience, enriched
by the support of loved persons and the possibility to meet and cooperate with different people.
These few words aim to thank all these people. It was really difﬁcult to choose the right words
to express my gratitude, but I hope they can be representative for my excitement.
First of all I thank Erasmus Damgaard Rothuizen, my co-supervisor, for the assistance provided
throughout the all duration of the project. He was always available to meet me and in his ofﬁce
I found decisive advices and very productive dialogues. Secondly, my gratitude goes to Wiebke
Brix Markussen, my supervisor, for the passion for the refrigeration ﬁeld she transmitted me.
Her help was important to launch the project. Thirdly, I am grateful to Davide Del Col, my
supervisor at the Università degli Studi di Padova, for his trust and interest for the project.
Kasper Korsholm Østergaard deserves another sincere thank because of his supervision during
the days spent at Metro Therm A/S. He has been a really patient and helpful guide, always
willing to share his deep experience and knowledge with me. I am grateful also to all his
colleagues for making exciting my time in the company.
Vorrei poi ringraziare mio papà Bruno, del quale ho sempre sentito il supporto durante questi
anni nonostante la sua assenza ﬁsica. Spero possa essere orgoglioso di me. Un grazie enorme
anche a mia mamma Emilia e mia sorella Elisa. La prima non mi ha mai fatto mancare nulla,
ha sempre creduto in me e mi ha dato tutto il suo amore. La seconda è a mio parere una
persona incredibile e fantastica: mi ha sempre trasmesso forza e dispensato sorrisi grazie alla
sua vitalità innata. Ha sempre saputo tutto di me e abbiamo condiviso tutto. Un grazie di
cuore anche a tutti gli altri familiari per i momenti spesi insieme. Una menzione particolare
merita la nonna Lidia che, insieme al nonno Giovanni, mi ha sempre fatto trovare in Pugnello
un porto sicuro e colmo di affetto.
Un paragrafo a sè stante merita la mia ﬁdanzata Giulia. Ha accettato la relazione a distanza ed
è stata paziente nell’aspettare il mio ritorno. Sono stati due anni intensi, fatti di tante risate
e momenti indimenticabili trascorsi insieme, tanti arrivi per poi essere costretti ai saluti a
causa di ripartenze sempre troppo precoci. Tutto questo insieme fa parte di quel sentimento
chiamato amore che proviamo l’uno per l’altro. Grazie!
ix
==PAGE:12==
Acknowledgements
I want to thank also all the amazing people that I met during my Danish "journey". I had great
moments with you. The bad part of these experiences comes in the moments in which you are
required to say "bye bye" to all these people. Hopefully, this "bye bye" is a synonymous of "see
you soon". Last but not least, I am grateful to all my friends in Italy, especially the "Amici del
Bombardino", for waiting me home to share some talks and many funny moments together.
x
==PAGE:13==
Abstract
Nowadays, the ﬁgures describing the impact of the water heating as end use in the residential
sector are alarming both in terms of energy consumption and carbon emissions. The domestic
hot water heat pumps, even if they are already characterised by a large market, are expected
to become even more attracting because of the incoming regulations about the ecodesign
and energy labelling requirements for electric conventional water heaters and electric heat
pump water heaters. This study analyses an air source heat pump water heater, considering
a speciﬁc case-study in which the condenser is wrapped around the tank. The system is
modelled both in steady-state and dynamic conditions. The dynamic model emerged to
replicate the real temperature proﬁles in the tank with a maximum discrepancy lower than
15%. Many investigations were performed on the condenser tube length and diameter, on the
internal heat recovery unit and on possible alternative refrigerants to R134a. No signiﬁcant
improvements in terms of COP were observed, but the alternative geometries can enable a
signiﬁcantly reduction of the costs. Minichannel condensers emerged to be infeasible in the
existing system conﬁguration due to the excessive pressure drops.
According to the simulations, a reduction of the outer condenser tube diameter from 9.95 mm
to 6 mm can enhance the COP of the heating up process by 2% and lower the expenditure for
the condenser by 36%. Experimental investigations, proved that the system with the reduced
diameter enabled a reduction of 1.5 hour of the duration of the heating up process. Finally,
the height in the tank of the sensor controlling the operation of the compressor did not affect
the system performances according to the predictions from the models, and the heat pump
was proved to be able to efﬁciently heat up the domestic hot water up to 60°C.
xi
==PAGE:14==
==PAGE:15==
Contents
Preface
vii
Acknowledgements
ix
Abstract (English/Dansk)
xi
Contents
xiv
Nomenclature
xvii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Impact of water heating in the residential sector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Technologies for water heating . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Attractiveness of domestic hot water heat pump . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Purpose of the study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.5
Thesis outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2
Heat pump water heaters
11
2.1
Air source heat pump water heaters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Ground source heat pump water heaters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3
Model implementation
17
3.1
Steady-state model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Dynamic model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4
Simulation strategy
31
4.1
Other assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2
Heating up process in the steady-state model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.3
Alternative refrigerants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.4
Economical evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.5
Tapping cycle L in the dynamic model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5
Results from steady-state simulations
39
5.1
Macrochannel condenser . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.2
Sensitivity analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.3
Minichannel condenser . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
xiii
==PAGE:16==
Nomenclature
5.4
Alternative refrigerants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5.5
Analysis of the other runs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
6
Results from dynamic simulations
73
6.1
Validation of the model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
6.2
Comparison between the heating up processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
6.3
Comparison between the tapping cycle L . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
7
Experimental results
85
8
Discussion
91
8.1
Main ﬁndings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
8.2
Main limitations of the models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
8.3
System improvements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
9
Conclusion
97
Bibliography
99
A
˙mr and compressor ηis
107
B Correlations
111
B.1 Macrochannels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
111
B.2 Minichannels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
114
C Correlations for the dynamic simulations
117
D Variation of the water recirculation
123
E
Heating up process with Tamb = −1°C
125
F
EES code
127
G Dymola code
137
xiv
==PAGE:17==
Nomenclature
Abbreviations
ASHPWH Air source heat pump water heater
COP
Coefﬁcient of Performance
IHEX
Internal heat exchanger
in
Inlet
LMTD
Logarithmic mean temperature difference
out
Outlet
PI
Piping and Instrumentation
Greek letters
α
Heat transfer coefﬁcient, W /m2K
∆k
De-stratiﬁcation conductivity, W /mK
∆p
Pressure drop, bar
∆T
Temperature difference, K
∆t
Time step, s
ϵ
Effectiveness, −
ηis
Isentropic efﬁciency of the compressor, −
µ
Dynamic viscosity, kg
ms
ρ
Density, kg
m3
Roman letters
˙m
Mass ﬂow rate, kg
s
˙Q
Heat transfer rate , W
xv
==PAGE:18==
Nomenclature
˙V
Volumetric ﬂow rate, m3
s
A
Area, m2
C
Cost, AC
Cp
Speciﬁc heat at constant pressure,
J
kgK
Etapped
Tapped energy, J
f
Friction factor, −
o
Constants for the refrigerant mass ﬂow rate, −
r
Mass fraction of water recirculating in the tank, %/s
T
Temperature, °C
U
Overall heat transfer coefﬁcient,
W
m2K
u
Bulk velocity, m
s
x
Thermodynamic vapour quality, −
Xtt
Martinelli parameter, -
z
Constants for the compressor isentropic efﬁciency, −
D
Diameter, mm
F
Froude number, -
H
Heigh of the tank, m
h
Speciﬁc enthalpy, J
kg
k
Thermal conductivity, W
mK
L
Length, m
n
Times the condenser is wrapped around the tank, −
Nu
Nusselt number, −
Pr
Prandtl number, −
Q
Heat, J
R
Wall thermal resistance, mK
W
xvi
==PAGE:19==
Nomenclature
Ra
Rayleigh number, −
s
Wall thickness, mm
V
Volume, m3
W
Compressor energy, J
y
Distance from the bottom of the tank, m
Subscripts
avg
Average
c
Condenser
cond
Condensing setion
desup
Desuperheating section
e
Evaporator
r
Refrigerant
sub
Subcooling section
suc
Compressor suction
sup
Superheating
tot
Total
w
Water
xvii
==PAGE:20==
==PAGE:21==
1 Introduction
1.1
Impact of water heating in the residential sector
One of the moving engine from this work comes from an alarming indicator provided by
Eurostat concerning the European ﬁnal energy consumption: the total consumption in EU (28
countries) during 2013 was 1104584.6 thousand tons of oil equivalent, and the residential con-
sumption amounted to 295763.1 thousand tons of oil equivalent. This means that the share of
consumption in residential sector on the overall ﬁnal energy consumption was approximately
27% [1]. Figure 1.1 shows the residential energy consumption for the European countries.
From the Figure it emerges that France, Germany, Italy, United Kingdom and Poland are the
nations with the highest residential consumptions, which amount respectively to 28.5%, 27.5%,
28.8%, 29.5% and 32.2% of the national ﬁnal energy consumptions. As mentioned by Vieira et
al. [2], the future expansion of the residential sector is expected to further increase its impact
on the overall energy consumption. This upward trend of the domestic energy consumptions
is conﬁrmed also by the Energy Information Administration [3] for the USA, which consider
three possible projections for the residential energy consumptions in 2030. According to the
“Reference case”, the residential electricity consumption is expected to raise mainly because
of the increasing water heating, home cooling and “other appliances” consumptions. The
prediction hypothesizes a 24% growth in the residential electricity consumption from 2007 to
2030.
For these reasons, a better understanding of the characteristics of the residential ﬁnal energy
consumption is strongly required. Swan et al. [4] tried to accomplish this difﬁcult task by
reviewing modelling techniques used to estimate the end use energy consumption in the
aforementioned sector. Two approaches were identiﬁed: top-down and bottom up. The
former exploits historic energy data and regress the dwelling consumptions by means of
macro-economical indicators, climate data and energy price. The latter is based on the ex-
trapolation of estimated energy consumption for a few number of households to a national or
regional scale.
Thanks to these modelling techniques it is possible to estimate the impact of the different
end uses on the residential energy consumptions. It was observed by Min et al. [5], using a
1
==PAGE:22==
Chapter 1. Introduction
Figure 1.1: Final energy consumption in the residential sector for European countries [1 000
tonnes of oil equivalent] [1]
combination of the bottom-up and top-down approaches to quantify the residential energy
end use contributions in United States, that the hot water supply plays a major role, being one
of the biggest source of consumptions. This data are conﬁrmed also for European countries
by Lombard et al. [6], Singh et al. [7] and the Sustainable Energy Authority of Ireland [8].
Lombard et al. [6] report that in 2003 the share of domestic hot water consumption on the
overall residential consumptions was 26% in Spain, 22% in UK and 14% for all Europe. Singh
et al. [7] evaluate the feasibility of the goal proposed by the UK to reduce by 80% for 2050 the
greenhouse gas emission compared to the level of 1990. The authors focused on the efﬁcien-
cies of the space and water heating technologies because in 2006 they accounted for 83% of
the total domestic consumptions in UK. Dividing the two contributions, the author reports
that the contribution of the water heating was 25%, much higher than cooking and lighting
plus appliances, respectively 2.8% and 14.7%. The Sustainable Energy Authority of Ireland [8]
refers to the Irish energy use in the domestic sector and the most recent data presented in the
report are for 2011. The authors report the residential sector electricity end use for 2011: the
hot water resulted to give the greatest contribution, i.e. 25%, followed by small appliances and
lighting respectively with a share of 19% and 16%.
The aforementioned ﬁgures clearly stress the importance of the water heating in the resi-
dential sector energy and electricity consumptions. Its key role is even more highlighted by
considering environmental issues and more in details the green house gas emissions by end
use for the domestic sector.
The Energy Information Administration [3] emphasized that natural gases and liquid fuels
ﬁnd applications in the domestic sector mainly for space and water heating. This statement
is clearly reﬂected in Figure 1.2, in which the GHG emissions by end use in the domestic
2
==PAGE:23==
1.2. Technologies for water heating
sector in the United States for the year 2007 are reported. The impact of water heating on the
overall emissions for the residential sector was 13%. According to the “Reference case” in the
report Annual Energy Outlook 2014 with projections to 2040 [9], in which predictions for the
electricity use for the different end uses in 2040 are presented, this large use of fossil fuels
for water heating is not expected to stop. It is stated that in 2040 natural gas is still expected
to account for more than half the fuel exploited in dwellings for space heating, cooking and
water heating.
Figure 1.2: Greenhouse gas emissions by end use in the domestic sector for US during 2007 [3]
[10]
1.2
Technologies for water heating
After mentioning the previous ﬁgures, it is worthy to list the main technologies used nowadays
to heat up the water.
For what concerns the existing technologies for water heating in the dwellings, a ﬁrst distinc-
tion needs to be done between storage water heater and demand water heaters. The former
are characterised by the presence of an insulated tank containing the water which is heated up.
The latter do not include any storage capacity, but the water is heated up only when necessary.
The storage water heaters are the most common in the market. The application of demand
water heater is not widespread mainly because of their limited output capacity. This solution
is more suitable for low-use applications such as vacation houses [11].
Among the storage water heaters, the main technologies used to heat up the water consist
on the application of fossil fuels, electricity, solar energy, district heating or heat pumps and
they are brieﬂy explained in the following. Fossil fuel water heaters are based on the presence
of a burner in the bottom of the tank or on the ignition, generated by an electrical spark, of
3
==PAGE:24==
Chapter 1. Introduction
a vaporizing mixture of air and the fossil fuel. Electric water heaters often include a double
electric element, one placed in the bottom of the tank and one in the top. When the tank is
plenty of cold water, the upper electric element is prioritized and it heats up the water in the
top of the tank. After the water temperature reaches the desired set point temperature setted
in the thermostat, the lower electric element is activated. The working principle of a solar
collector water heater consists on the absorption of solar energy in a solar collector by means
of an absorber transferring the heat to the opportune solar collector ﬂuid. This ﬂuid, thanks to
a spiral or a mantle located in the tank, heats up the water in the tank. Finally, the heat pump
water heaters are based on the application of a heat pump releasing heat to the water from the
condenser. A more detailed explanation of the latter solution will be presented in Chapter 2.
1.3
Attractiveness of domestic hot water heat pump
The awareness of the alarming situation concerning the water heating in the domestic sector
incited the European Commission to consider urgent measures. A key action in this sense
will be the incoming regulation regarding the ecodesign and energy labelling requirements
for electric conventional water heaters and electric heat pump water heaters. According to
what published by the European Commission in the Ofﬁcial Journal 6th of September 2013,
the labels, which are going to be mandatory since September 2015, are required to report “the
water heater’s energy class and the related load proﬁle, annual electricity consumption (ﬁnal)
as well as sound power level” [12]. These actions are expected to be beneﬁcial for a further
development of the domestic hot water heat pumps (DHWHP), thanks to their much higher
efﬁciencies if compared with the electric boilers and other storage water heaters. According
to DELTA Energy & Environment [13], the market of the domestic hot water heat pump has
already been very ﬂourishing during the triennium 2010-2013: the yearly installations totaled
to 60000 across Europe. The forecast for the DHWHP market predicts an even more shining
future: the yearly installations are expected to duplicate by 2017, and the new incoming
regulations are expected to play a major role in this sense. The reason for this success lays
in the fact that heat pump water heaters are considered an attractive option to promote
energy savings in households. Moreover, they are seen as an efﬁcient way to reduce carbon
emissions in hot-water heating and they are designed as renewable by the EU’s Renewable
Energy Directive of 2009 if they meet the minimum requirements of eco-labelling stated in
Commission Decision 2007/742/EC [14].
Several investigations found in the literature focused on the application of air source heat
pumps for water heating. For example, Liu et al. [15] optimized and analysed the performances
of a multi-functional heat-pump system using as heat source ambient air and gray water in
UK residential buildings. Four possible conﬁgurations were considered: air-source-only
evaporator, water-source-only evaporator, parallel of air and water as heat sources, series of
air and water as heat sources. Both the space and water heating were considered. Even if
the system was observed to perform better in space heating plus hot water mode, the author
stated that the COP in only water heating mode is much higher than conventional electrical
4
==PAGE:25==
1.4. Purpose of the study
heaters. The system with parallel sources combination offered the best performances among
the other three alternatives. However, the author also mentions that air source heat pumps are
widely installed due to their low initial costs and the large availability of air. The heat transfer
process is strongly simpliﬁed by the application of a fan circulating the air, while other systems
require more complex processes, such as additional pipes and pumps, in order to store energy
[2]. Their main disadvantage is due to the yearly ambient temperature variations which affect
the thermal performances: they are reduced for cold weather conditions.
Finally, Imbrahim et al. [16] analysed the performances of an air source heat pump water
heater (ASHPWH) in the Lebanese context, comparing them with the ones of an electric water
heater, the most common alternative. From this comparison it emerged that the ASHPWH:
• guarantees electrical energy savings from 69% to 82%;
• halves the time elapsed to achieve one heating cycle;
• reduces the GHG emissions from 7.47 kg CO2−eq to approximately 2 kg CO2−eq per one
heating cycle.
1.4
Purpose of the study
The goal of this study is to model and to evaluate possible improvements in terms of COP for
an air-source domestic hot water heat pump focusing on the condenser. It is interesting to
evaluate the precision in which the temperature proﬁles in the storage tank can be predicted
by means of thermodynamic models. To achieve these goals, a speciﬁc case study will be
considered: the analysed heat pump will be the METROAIR AQUA produced by the company
Metro Therm A/S [17]. At the moment the company lacks of a model able to predict the
performances of the heat pump and mainly bases its choices on experimental tests to evaluate
improvements on the system. A thermodynamic model can represent a way more attractive
and cheaper solution to identify enhancements of the heat pump. First of all a steady-state
model is built up in the Engineering Equations Solver (EES) environment in order to replicate
the heating up process of the domestic hot water in the tank. Secondly, the ﬁndings from this
model are used to implement a dynamic model in the Dymola environment to enable the
inclusion of the time variable in the study.
The models will be applied to conduct several sensitivity analysis in order to identify possible
improvements in the performances of the cycle in terms of COP. Four issues will be considered:
the condenser geometry, the possibility to use different refrigerants in the cycle, the position
of the water temperature sensor on the cycle performances, the goodness of an internal heat
exchanger in such a system. In the following sections, a brief explanation and background will
be provided for each of the four aforementioned researches. Moreover, for each investigation,
a question reporting the purpose of the different analysis will be addressed in order to clarify
their goals.
5
==PAGE:26==
Chapter 1. Introduction
1.4.1
Condenser geometry
How does the condenser diameter inﬂuence the system COP? Do minichannel condensers
improve the COP? What is the impact of the condenser length on the heat pump COP?
METROAIR AQUA’ s condenser is a tube heat exchanger. The length and the diameter of the
heat exchanger will be varied in order to evaluate possible enhancement of the heat transfer
coefﬁcient and the effects on the system COP.
More in details, the heat transfer coefﬁcient in the condenser will be calculated implementing
in the model the opportune correlations: different diameters will be tested, with the con-
sideration also of mini condenser geometries. In fact, Cavallini et al. [18] emphasize the
importance of the application of minichannels for air conditioning and refrigeration. They
enable the installation of compact heat exchangers, the reduction of the refrigerant charge
and the possibility to boost the spreading of natural refrigerants. The authors also state that it
is very important to pay particular attention when applying correlations for macrochannels
to minichannel geometries without experimental validations, due to the changes in gravity,
viscous share and surface tension force. For this reason, a cautious literature review will be
performed before implementing the correlations for the heat transfer coefﬁcient.
Imbrahim et al. [16] observed that micro-condensers lower the condensing pressure if com-
pared to macro condenser, resulting in higher COP. For a better understanding of the trends
of the heat transfer coefﬁcient for different diameters, the ﬂow regime of the condensing
refrigerant for different diameters will be evaluated in this study. Then the attention will be
focused on the tube length. According to Zhang et al. [19], in which an air source heat pump
water heater was optimized, the COP shows an inverted U-trend with a maximum by varying
the condenser pipe length. Ibrahim et al. [16] assesses an increasing-converging trend for the
COP with the condenser length.
The effects of the different conﬁgurations on the pressure drops will also be evaluated in order
to estimate their impact on the heat pump running costs.
1.4.2
Different refrigerants
Which is the most suitable refrigerant to replace R134a?
R134a, currently used as refrigerant in the analysed heat pump, is a partly halogenated hy-
drocarbon (HFC). The HFC refrigerants were partly banned in Denmark after 1/01/2007 and
nowadays only small refrigeration system are built applying F-gases, i.e the refrigerant charge
needs to be lower than 10kg [20]. For what concerns the market of the DHWHP, it is still legal
to use HFC heat pumps in Denmark, but new regulations are expected to come soon. For this
reason this study will also analyse some alternatives to R134a. Following the same procedure
presented in the Section 1.4.1, the condenser geometry will be optimized looking at the system
COP for the cycles with the tested refrigerants. The aim of this investigation is to ﬁnd the most
6
==PAGE:27==
1.4. Purpose of the study
suitable refrigerant to replace R134a both considering the system COP and the volumetric
ﬂow rate, which gives indications about the expenditures for the compressor.
1.4.3
Temperature control
How is the heating up process of the domestic hot water inﬂuenced by different system
conﬁgurations? Which is the extent of the COP reduction when the heat pump is required
to heat up the domestic hot water at 60°C? How does the position of the hot water temper-
ature sensor in the bottom of the tank inﬂuence the system COP?
After the thermodynamic model will be validated, it will be used to estimate the performances
of the heat pump in terms of COP for different system conﬁgurations.
This study aims also to investigate the performances of the DHWHP when it is required to
heat up the domestic hot water to 60°C. The COP is expected to drop because of the higher
condensing temperature, but the extent of this reduction needs to be evaluated. This analysis
is relevant because several EU countries require particular actions in order to prevent the risk
of Legionella growth. For example, Bernardo et al. [21] mentioned that the Swedish industry
regulations recommend to perform a weekly thermal disinfestations at 60°C during 10 minutes
in case of water stored at temperatures lower than 60°C.
Another analysis will concern the position of the water temperature sensor in the bottom
of the tank. A higher position of the sensor is expected to increase the system COP, but on
the other hand a lower position increases the amount of available hot water in the tank. The
inﬂuence of the sensor height in the tank on the DHWHP performances will be investigated.
1.4.4
Internal heat recovery unit
Is the internal heat exchanger beneﬁcial for a DHWHP?
The current refrigeration cycle of the studied application includes an internal heat recovery
unit. However, this additional heat exchanger is not always beneﬁcial for the cycle and it can
result in lower COP. In fact the addition of an internal heat recovery unit affects the compressor
work due to the shift of the thermodynamic state point at the suction of the compressor and
the slope of the isentropic lines. This study will detect if the internal heat exchanger increases
the COP for the considered application or if it would be beneﬁcial to remove it.
In the literature, several investigations were found concerning the goodness of an internal
heat exchanger in refrigeration systems. For example, Eleiwi [22] presents practical studies
conducted on a car air conditioning system operating with R134a at two different compressor
speeds, i.e 1450 rpm and 2900 rpm. The performances of the cycle with and without internal
heat exchanger are analysed. From the experiments it emerged that for both the compressor
speeds, the COP was enhanced by including the heat recovery unit in the cycle. Moreover, the
7
==PAGE:28==
Chapter 1. Introduction
effectiveness of the internal heat exchanger was also reported: it was between 0.61 and 0.75
for a compressor speed of 1450 rpm and between 0.60 and 0.73 for a compressor speed of 2900
rpm. Pottker et al. [23] conducted experimental investigations about the effect of condenser
subcooling on an air conditioning system using R134a and R1234yf. It was observed that for
both refrigerants the COP faces a maximum due to the trade-off between the beneﬁcial effect
of the increased refrigerating effect and the detriment of the higher compressor work. For
R134a the maximum extent of the increase of the COP was 9%.
For what concerns the application of the performances of a heat pump with a liquid-suction
heat exchanger, Payne et al. [24] investigated the performances of ﬂammable refrigerants
in water-to-water heat pumps for dwellings both in cooling and heating mode. Looking at
the heating mode, which is interesting for this study, the authors found that the internal heat
recovery unit in the cycle operating with R290 worsens the COP of 5% if compared with the
cycle without internal heat exchanger. On the other hand, the cycle using as refrigerant a
mixture of R32/290 faced an increase of the COP greater then 8% thanks to the addition of the
liquid-section heat exchanger.
Due to the previous inconsistent indications, it is worthy to mention the ﬁndings deriving
from the analysis of Domaski et al. [25]. The authors stated that the beneﬁts caused by an
internal heat exchangers in the cycle depend on both the operating conditions and ﬂuid
properties, with the heat capacity resulting as the most inﬂuential property. Systems showing
good performances in terms of COP in the basic conﬁguration are only marginally affected by
the liquid-suction heat exchanger, which can have a positive or negative impact. On the other
hand, cycles with poor COP are improved by the introduction of the heat exchanger.
For these reasons, it is interesting to evaluate the inﬂuence of the heat recovery unit on the
system.
1.5
Thesis outline
In this section the structure of the thesis is explained in order to facilitate its reading.
• Chapter 1 aims to highlight the attractiveness of the domestic hot water heat pump to
reduce consumptions and emissions in the water heating end use and explains the goals
of the present study.
• Chapter 2 explains the conﬁguration of the analysed domestic hot water heat pump
and lists some other system arrangements present in the market.
• Chapter 3 presents the main equations and assumptions applied to model the air source
heat pump water heater both in steady-state and dynamic conditions.
• Chapter 4 shows the strategy adopted to simulate the heating up process in the steady-
state model and provides some more explanations concerning the application of the
models.
8
==PAGE:29==
1.5. Thesis outline
• Chapter 5 contains the result from the steady-state simulations. Different system con-
ﬁgurations and alternative refrigerants are evaluated. The inﬂuence of the main assump-
tions required to build the model is veriﬁed.
• Chapter 6 presents the ﬁndings from the dynamic model. Initially a validation of the
model and some explanations concerning the temperature proﬁles are given. Then the
model is applied to investigate the performances of three system conﬁgurations
• Chapter 7 shows the ﬁndings from the experimental tests conducted on an alternative
system arrangement.
• Chapter 8 summarizes the main ﬁndings from the analysis and also the main limitations
of the model. Some ideas for further investigations are suggested.
• Chapter 9 concludes the study by recalling the logical path followed and by mentioning
the most important numerical results from the investigations.
9
==PAGE:30==
==PAGE:31==
2 Heat pump water heaters
At the beginning of this chapter, the technology state of art for the air source heat pump water
heater is investigated. Initially, the system conﬁguration used in the METROAIR AQUA is pre-
sented. Then possible alternative system arrangements found in the literature are described.
Finally, a brief explanation of the technology applied for ground source heat pump water
heaters is presented.
2.1
Air source heat pump water heaters
The Piping and Instrumentation diagram (PI diagram) for the considered application is de-
picted in Figure 2.1. It consists of a single stage electrically driven vapour compression cycle
inclusive of an internal heat recovery unit which applies as working principle the Reverse
Carnot Cycle. The energy carrier is the refrigerant R134a. The evaporator is an air cooler which
applies forced convection, by means of a variable speed fan, to transfer heat from the air to the
refrigerant. At the outlet of the evaporator, the refrigerant in gaseous form enters at ﬁrst the
internal heat recovery unit and then the rotary compressor where it reaches higher tempera-
ture and pressure levels before being transported to the condenser. In the condenser, which is
wrapped around the domestic hot water tank, the R134a condenses and heat is released to the
hot water embedded in the tank. At the outlet of the condenser the refrigerant ﬂows again in
the internal heat recovery unit, preheating the working ﬂuid exiting the evaporator before the
compressor suction. The cycle ends with the expansion process performed by a thermostatic
expansion valve, in which the refrigerant is throttled until the evaporation pressure.
During peak hours, extra heat can be supplied to the domestic hot water thanks to the backup
integrated electrical immersion heater, which has a capacity of 1.5 kW. The electric heater is
placed in the upper part of tank and consequently it heats up the upper portion of water. Its
activation is controlled by means of an operating thermostat measuring the temperature at
point 9 in Figure 2.1 and of a set point temperature. The electric heater starts when the water
temperature T9 is lower than the set point temperature minus 5°C and it stops when T9 equals
the set point. It must be speciﬁed that this backup heat source should be used only when
11
==PAGE:32==
Chapter 2. Heat pump water heaters
it is strictly necessary, due to its much higher energy consumptions compared to the heat
pump. More in details, in the user manual of the METROAIR AQUA [17] it is suggested that
the starting of the immersed heater may be beneﬁcial for the system at ambient temperature
lower than 0°C.
For a better understanding of the cycle operation, some informations regarding the compres-
Figure 2.1: PI diagram of the METROAIR AQUA.
sor control strategy need to be provided. The control system on the compressor is an on/off
control and its operation is regulated by means of a sensor measuring the temperature at the
bottom of the tank (T10 in Figure 2.1) and of a set point temperature. Similarly to what happens
for the electric heater, when the measured temperature T10 is lower than the set point minus
5°C the compressor is switched on. It is shut down when the water temperature at the bottom
of the tank (T10) and the set point temperature are equalized. According to the terminology
suggested by Guo et al. [26], the aforementioned strategy is a thermostatic control pattern
because it is based on a setting water temperature to control the water temperature inside
the tank. Another possible solution presented by the author is the timing control pattern in
which the start-up time is determined. The optimal start-up time should correspond to the
daily hours with the warmest ambient temperature, due to the better performances offered by
the system.
Other system conﬁgurations for air source water heater found in the literature mainly concern
and differ from the one analysed in this work because of the condenser. For instance, Guo et
al. [26] and Zhang et al, [19] analysed ASHPWH with immersed condenser, while Morrison
et al. [27] considered also systems based on integrated package with external condenser, as
shown in Figure 2.2.
Both immersed and wrapped around the outside of the tank condenser coils can be found
in the market, with a small preponderance of the latter solution. For example, the company
12
==PAGE:33==
2.1. Air source heat pump water heaters
Figure 2.2: Integrated package with external condenser considered by Morrison et al [27].
Kingspan [28] proposes an immersed condenser tube and reports yearly savings of 530£ on
the heating bill compared to electric water heaters. Diplex [29] and Stiebel [30] adopt wrapped
around solutions. The former reports that the water heater design is able to satisfy alone the
90% of the hot water demand, while the latter advertises a percentage of 70% of hot water
needs met by the domestic water heater. The COP for the different systems are not mentioned
because they all refer to different standards and consequently test conditions, and, as a conse-
quence, their comparison would result unfair.
The company PHNIX [31] includes in its product portfolio microchannel heating coils
Figure 2.3: Micro-channel heating coil [31].
wrapped outside the hot water tank, as shown in Figure 2.3. In the manufacturer catalogue, it
is stated that this solution enables a higher contact area between the water inside the tank
and the condenser reaching a COP of 3.2 based on standard DS/EN 16147 [32], which will be
considered also in this study.
Finally, another system conﬁguration present in the market (Danfoss [33]) consists on the
13
==PAGE:34==
Chapter 2. Heat pump water heaters
application of a micro plate heat exchanger as depicted in Figure 2.4. According to what
described in the manual, this solution enhances the heat transfer and consequently the heat
pump efﬁciency and due to its compactness reduces the refrigerant charge. This system is
also characterised by the “TWS (Tap Water Stratiﬁcation) technology”, patented by the com-
pany. It consists on a technique according to which the water at the outlet of the micro plate
heat exchanger ﬂows in a coil immersed in the tank in order to heat up the domestic water,
promoting the thermal stratiﬁcation. The water inside the heater is split in different layers to
reduce the time required for the hot water to reach the desired temperature.
Despite the secure interest of this innovative solution, its is not considered in this work. The
reason for this choice is based on the willingness to ﬁrstly model the water heater imple-
menting different condenser geometries, and then test the optimal solution at Metro Therm
in-house laboratory. It would be impossible to test different condenser arrangements due to
the different manufacturing process required. Moreover, the condenser coil wrapped outside
the tank is considered to be still a good solution also because of the possibility to ensure a
longer operating life for the unit due to absence of direct contact between the water and the
condenser coil [31].
Figure 2.4: Micro plate condenser and TWS technology [33].
2.2
Ground source heat pump water heaters
Another possible conﬁguration for heat pump water heater consists on the extraction of heat
from the ground to evaporate the refrigerant. This system arrangement is called ground source
heat pump water heater and it requires an additional heat exchanger buried in the ground.
According to Shan et al. [34], who analysed a ground source heat pump, the soil temperature
below 5 m under ground is stable and subjected to minor variations during the year. This fact
enhances the COP compared to the other heat pumps and results in more stable performances
throughout the year. However, the application of ground source heat pumps is limited because
of the large area required by the ground heat exchanger. Both vertical and horizontal solutions
14
==PAGE:35==
2.2. Ground source heat pump water heaters
are adopted for the heat exchanger buried in the ground. Vertical solutions can require to drill
holes deeper than 100 m.
In this study only air source heat pump water heaters are considered due to willingness to
focus on the previously mentioned case study.
15
==PAGE:36==
==PAGE:37==
3 Model implementation
In this chapter, the models implemented to simulate the domestic hot water heat pump are
presented.
At the ﬁrst place, the model was built-up in the Engineering Equation Solver (EES) environ-
ment. It is an equation solving program able to solve non linear equations systems and to
detect the ﬂuids properties [35]. The heating up process of the domestic water in the tank per-
formed by the heat pump is simulated in EES. During this process all the volume of domestic
hot water inside the tank is heated.
Secondly, a model of the tank, inclusive of the heat transferred to the hot water from the
wrapped around condenser, was built in the Dymola environment [36]. Dymola, based on
the Modelica open standard, allows the implementation of dynamic simulations increasing
the reliability of the model [37]. The goal of this second model is to simulate the temperature
distribution along the tank and to replicate its heating phenomena.
3.1
Steady-state model
The equations required to model all the components depicted in Figure 2.1 are described in
the following. The numbers indicating the thermodynamic state points in this section and
for the rest of the report correspond to the ones of Figure 2.1. It must be speciﬁed that in the
aforementioned ﬁgure, thermodynamic state points 3 and 4 represent respectively the outlet
from the desuperheating section and the inlet to the subcooling section in the condenser. In
other words, they detect where the condensing process intersect the Andrews thermodynamic
diagram in the pressure-enthalpy diagram: the dew point curve characterised by saturated
vapour and the bubble point curve in which saturated liquid condition occurs. These two
additional thermodynamic state points are relevant for a better understanding of the pressure
drops in the condenser, which will be introduced in the following.
17
==PAGE:38==
Chapter 3. Model implementation
3.1.1
Evaporator
Due to focus of the report on the condenser geometry, the evaporator was built-up in a
simpliﬁed way, without considering correlations for the heat transfer coefﬁcients in the two-
phase and superheated sections.
The inlet and outlet temperatures air side were both ﬁxed. Their values are presented in
Table 3.1: Assumptions for air temperatures at the evaporator
Tin,air [°C]
7
Tout,air [°C]
4
Table 3.1. These assumptions are due to the willingness to emulates as accurately as possible
the heating up process of the domestic hot water in the tank following the indications of the
Standard DS/EN 16147 [32], in which the temperature of the air supplied to the evaporator is
ﬁxed to 7°C. In this way the temperature difference air side was ﬁxed and, as a consequence,
the air mass ﬂow rate was a free variable in order to satisfy the energy balance.
For what concerns the refrigerant side, the required assumptions are shown in Table 3.2. The
UA value in the evaporator was assumed considering the indications from similar applications
in the literature [16]. The heat transfer rate at the evaporator was calculated applying the
logarithmic mean temperature difference (LMTD) expressed in Equation 3.1.
˙Qe =UAe∆Tml,e
(3.1)
in which, assuming a constant overall heat transfer coefﬁcient along the evaporator [38],
∆Tml,e = (Tin,air −Te)−(Tout,air −Te)
ln (Tin,air −Te)
(Tout,air −Te)
(3.2)
It must be mentioned that in Equation 3.2 the superheating is not considered and the temper-
ature at the outlet of the evaporator refrigerant side was considered equal to the evaporation
temperature. This is common practice in refrigeration ﬁeld due to the fact that the ∆Tml in-
cluding the superheat is not representative and it would require to divide the heat exchangers
in two sections in the model: the evaporation section and the superheating one.
Table 3.2: Assumptions refrigerant side at the evaporator
UAe
· W
m2K
¸
130
∆Tsup [K]
3
18
==PAGE:39==
3.1. Steady-state model
3.1.2
Internal heat exchanger
For what regards the internal heat recovery unit, commonly named liquid-suction heat ex-
changer, the only necessary assumption was the value of its effectiveness, set to 0.3. This
low effectiveness was assumed due to the fact that the internal heat exchanger consists on
the welding of the tubes at the liquid and vapour lines. The impact on the system of this
assumption will the investigated in the report. The effectiveness was then expressed as
ϵ = T1 −T8
T5 −T8
(3.3)
3.1.3
Compressor
The model of the applied rotary compressor, manufactured by Shanghai Hitachi Electrical, is
WHP01900BSV-uxywz. The manufacturer catalogue was provided by the company and some
of its details useful for this work and mentioned in the following are presented in Appendix A.
The polynomials for calculating the volumetric and isentropic efﬁciency were not given in
the catalogue. Consequently a function for the isentropic efﬁciency was derived applying
an interpolating procedure in the Matlab environment [39]. The interpolating function is
presented in Equation 3.4. Further explanation regarding the calculation and the values for
the constants zi can be found in Appendix A.
ηis = z1 + z2Tc + z3Te + z4T 2
c + z5TcTe + z6T 2
e + z7T 3
c + z8T 2
c Te + z9TcT 2
e + z10T 3
c
(3.4)
For the calculation of the refrigerant mass ﬂow rate, ﬁxed by the compressor, the compressor
displacement rate would be required. However, the manufacturer catalogue gives information
only about the compressor volume, equal to 12.2ml/rev, but its velocity is not mentioned.
As a consequence, a possible solution was to assume this velocity in order to detect the
displacement volume. Following this path, a further assumption would have concerned
the volumetric efﬁciency of the compressor. This rout would have implied an unacceptable
uncertainty on the refrigerant mass ﬂow rate. Consequently it was preferred to implement
this parameter in the model by considering another interpolating procedure described in
Appendix A. It is obtained by a graph presented in the manufacturer catalogue (Figure A.1),
depicting the evolution of the mass ﬂow rate as a function of the condensing and evaporation
temperatures. The derived expression for the refrigerant mass ﬂow rate is reported in 3.5 and
the required constants are presented in Appendix A.
˙mr = o1 +o2Tc +o3Te +o4T 2
c +o5TcTe +o6T 2
e
(3.5)
19
==PAGE:40==
Chapter 3. Model implementation
3.1.4
Condenser
First of all the actual condenser geometry needs to be speciﬁed (Table 3.3). The outer diameter
Dout was found from the condenser manufacturer catalogue. The condenser total length
Ltot,cond was found as shown in Equation 3.6 considering the fact that the condenser tube,
made by aluminium, is wrapped around the tank.
Ltot,c = nπDout,tank
(3.6)
where n is the number of times the condenser is wrapped around the tank.
Before analysing the implemented equations it is also necessary to specify that considering
Table 3.3: Condenser geometry speciﬁcations
Dout [mm]
9.95
s [mm]
1.4
Ltot,cond [m]
54
n [-]
26
the route of the refrigerant inside the condenser, three heat transfer phenomena can be
identiﬁed [38]:
• Desuperheating: the refrigerant vapour is cooled until it reaches saturated vapour
conditions;
• Condensation: the saturated vapour is cooled to saturated liquid;
• Subcooling: the saturated liquid refrigerant is further cooled to a lower temperature.
The three aforementioned processes are considered separately in this work. Consequently,
three different sections are considered, each of them with a constant UA value and mean
logarithmic temperature difference. The three heat exchangers are imagined to be connected
in series. One reason for this choice lays in the fact that the speciﬁc heat can largely differ
between liquid and vapour conditions. Moreover, in case of an unique ∆Tml for the overall
condensing process, the desuperheating would take too much weight compared to condensa-
tion and subcooling due to the high temperature at the compressor discharge.
As these differences clearly empathised, different models and correlations for the heat transfer
coefﬁcients are required for the three heat exchange processes. They are described in the
following for each of the three sections.
The last consideration before going through the different equations concerns the temperature
drop in the subcooler, i.e. ∆Tsub, which was set to 5K. The impact of this assumption will be
detected performing a sensitivity analysis.
20
==PAGE:41==
3.1. Steady-state model
Desuperheating section
The heat exchanged in the desuperheating section was calculated from the energy balance
refrigerant side. The heat transferred in this section was also expressed considering the LMTD:
˙Qdesup =Udesup Adesup∆Tml,desup
(3.7)
The heat exchange area of the desuperheater was found applying Equation 3.8.
Adesup = πDinLdesup
(3.8)
The logarithmic mean temperature difference in this section was expressed as
∆Tml,desup =
(Tc −Tin,w,desup)−(T2 −Tout,w)
ln
(Tc−Tin,w,desup)
(T2−Tout,w)
(3.9)
where Tin,w,desup is the water temperature at the inlet of the desuperheater and Tout,w is the
water temperature at the outlet of the desuperheater. Tin,w,desup was calculated from the
energy balance water side at the desuperheater.
The overall heat transfer coefﬁcient Udesup was calculated by using Equation 3.10. In the
equation Dout,c needs to be expressed in [m].
Udesup =
µ
1
αr,desup
+
1
αw,desup
+Rwall,desupπDout,c
¶−1
(3.10)
In Equation 3.10 Rwall,desup stands for the heat transfer coefﬁcient for conduction through
the tube’s wall, which can be quantiﬁed applying Equation 3.11.
Rwall,desup = ln(Dout,c/Din,c)
2πk
(3.11)
The conductivity of aluminium included in Equation 3.10 was calculated at the wall temper-
ature which was found by applying simultaneously with Equation 3.10 the Newton’s law of
cooling refrigerant side.
The correlations implemented to calculate the heat transfer coefﬁcients refrigerant and water
sides have to be speciﬁed. The heat transfer coefﬁcient for the refrigerant ﬂowing inside the
condenser tube was calculated applying the Dittus-Boelter correlation reported in Equation
3.12 [40].
Nu = 0.026Re0.8Pr 0.3
(3.12)
The heat transfer coefﬁcient refrigerant side was derived from the Nusselt number using the
tube inner diameter as characteristic length. The range of applicability of the considered
correlation is reported in Equation 3.13. The correlation was derived by the authors analysing
21
==PAGE:42==
Chapter 3. Model implementation
the heat transfer from water to the atmosphere in tubular automotive radiators [40].
0.7 < Pr < 120
10000 < Re < 160000
(3.14)
The decision concerning the most suitable correlation for the heat transfer coefﬁcient water
side was quite complicated. Some correlations for external free convection ﬂows, free con-
vection within parallel plate vertical channels and laminar ﬂow in circular tubes [41] were
ﬁrstly considered. However, it was preferred to apply Equation 3.15 presented in the work of
Knudsen [42]. The correlation was derived by the author from empirical observations on the
heat transfer from tank wall to domestic water in case of solar domestic hot water systems.
This choice was due to the similarity with the application considered in this study: the solar
domestic hot water system consisted on a mantle wrapped outside the hot water tank, in the
same way of the condenser shown in Figure 2.1.
Nu = (0.186(H/Dout,tank)+2.285)(Ray(Dout,tank/H)4)0.26
(3.15)
valid for
2.0 ≤H/Dout,tank ≤3.7
(3.16)
In the analysed case the H/Dout,tank ratio is 2.12. Ray is the local Rayleigh number calculated
at characteristic length y corresponding to the distance from the bottom of the tank. For
the calculation of the Rayleigh number the difference between the wall temperature derived
from the Newton’s law of cooling refrigerant side and the average water temperature at the
desuperheater was used as temperature difference. The conductance in the wall was neglected
for the sake of simplicity. For this section of the condenser y equals 0.43 m: it is the distance
between the bottom of the tank and the beginning of the condenser tube wrapped outside the
water tank. y was used also as characteristic length to calculate the heat transfer coefﬁcient
water side from the Nusselt number.
For what concerns the calculation of the pressure drops refrigerant side in the desuperheater,
Equation 3.17 was applied [38].
∆pdesup = fdesupρdesupudesup
Ldesup
Din,c
10−5
(3.17)
where the friction factor fdesup was found considering the Blasius correlation [38]:
fdesup =
0.158
Re0.25
desup
(3.18)
valid for 3000 ≤Re ≤100000.
22
==PAGE:43==
3.1. Steady-state model
Condensing section
Initially the heat exchanged in the condensing section was calculated by expressing the energy
balance refrigerant side, similarly to what presented for the desuperheater. This value of the
heat transfer rate was then applied in the energy balance water side in order to detect the inlet
water temperature in this section, i.e. Tin,w,cond. Later, the heat transferred was expressed by
means of the LMTD similarly to what presented in the desuperheating section. The the overall
heat transfer coefﬁcient was calculated as:
Ucond =
µ
1
αr,cond
+
1
αw,cond
+Rwall,condπDout,c
¶−1
(3.19)
In Equation 3.19 the wall resistance was calculated similarly to Equation 3.11, but considering
instead the wall temperature at the condensing section to calculate the thermal conductivity.
The aforementioned temperature was found by applying the Newton’s law of cooling refriger-
ant side in this portion of the overall condenser.
The heat transfer coefﬁcient water side was derived in the same way described for the desu-
perheating section, i.e. applying Equation 3.15. The only differences lay in the calculations of
the Rayleigh and Nusselt numbers:
• the temperature difference was expressed as the difference between the average water
temperature and the wall temperature in the condensing section
• the characteristic length in the condensing section needed to be evaluated. The starting
point for this computation was the knowledge of the desuperheater length. From its
value it was possible to calculate the number of times the desuperheater wraps around
the water tank. By multiplying this value for the outer diameter of the condensing tube it
was possible to derive the distance from the bottom of the tank at which the condensing
section begins, i.e. ycond. The aforementioned procedure is summarized in Equation
3.20.
ycond = ydesup −
Ldesup
πDout,tank
Dout,c
(3.20)
where, as stated in the previous section, ydesup equals 0.43 m.
For what concerns the calculation of the heat transfer coefﬁcient refrigerant side, a distinction
needs to be made between macrochannel geometries and minichannel ones. As aforemen-
tioned in the Introduction, Matkovic et al. [43] and Cavallini et al. [18] emphasizes that the
phase change process for miniscale channels may be different than the one for macrochan-
nels because of the variations of the impacts of gravity, surface tension and shear stress. As
a consequence, the validity of the correlations for the heat transfer coefﬁcient derived by
analysis on macro-geometries needs to be veriﬁed in case of minichannels. More in details,
Matkovic et al. [43] evaluated the heat transfer coefﬁcients of R134a and R32 ﬂowing inside a
minichannel having a single circular diameter of 0.96 mm by measuring the local heat ﬂux
23
==PAGE:44==
Chapter 3. Model implementation
and the saturation and wall temperatures occurring during condensation. Then, these values
were compared with the ones derived from some models found in the literature. From this
investigation it emerged that the model presented by Cavallini et al. [44] is the heat transfer
model which gave the most accurate prediction of the heat transfer coefﬁcients. For this
reason, this correlation was applied for microgeometries. For macroscale channels the Shah’s
correlation was introduced into the model [45]. It was chosen to mention in the main body
of the report only the two main equations for minichannel and macrochannel condenser,
reported respectively in Equation 3.21 and 3.22. A more detailed explanations of the two
correlations and the meaning of the parameters included in the two mentioned equations can
be found in Appendix B. This choice was made to avoid to weigh the reading down.
αA = hLO
·
1+1.128x0.8170
µ ρL
ρG
¶0.3685 µ µL
µG
¶0.2363 µ
1−µL
µG
¶2.144
Pr −0.100
L
¸
(3.21)
αT P = hL
·
(1−x)0.8 + 3.8x0.76(1−x)0.04
p0.38
r
¸
(3.22)
The same distinction is required also for the computation of the pressure drop. For macro-
geometries the built-in EES function DELTAP-2phase-horiz was applied. It evaluates the
pressure losses by summing the momentum and frictional pressure drops, due to the fact
that the static pressure drop in a horizontal tube is nil. The former are found applying a void
fraction derived from drift ﬂux model [35], as suggested by Didi et al. [46]. The computation
of the pressure gradient is performed by applying the Muller-Steinhagen and Heck correlation
[46], which is reported in Appendix B.1.2. Then it is integrated in order to calculate the pressure
drop from the tube inlet to its outlet. A constant heat ﬂux is considered for all the length of
the tube in order to have constant dL/dx [35]. On the other hand, for minichannel tubes it
was decided to consider the interpolation described by Cavallini et al. [47] to estimate the
pressure gradient in the condensing section. This was proved by Cavallini et al. [48] to be in
good agreement with experimental results performed on minitube condensers. Again it was
preferred to present only the main equation used to estimate the frictional pressure drop in
minichannels (Equation 3.23). A linear dependence between the pressure and the condenser
tube length was assumed for applying Equation 3.23. A more complex explanation will be
provided in Appendix B.
µdp
dz
¶
=
Φ2
LO2fLOG2
DhydraulicρL
(3.23)
Subcooling section
Again the heat exchanged in the subcooler was expressed implementing the energy balances
water and refrigerant side, as well as the LMTD. The same principle described for the con-
densing section was used to estimate the wall resistance. The length of the subcooler was
24
==PAGE:45==
3.2. Dynamic model
found by subtracting the lengths of the condensing and desuperheating sections to the overall
condenser length. Moreover, the same equation was applied to calculate the heat transfer co-
efﬁcient water side, i.e. Equation 3.15. Its characteristic length for the subcooler, i.e. ysub was
calculated in the same way as in Equation 3.20, detecting the number of times the condensing
section wraps around the tank.
For the calculation of the heat transfer coefﬁcient refrigerant side, it was decided to apply the
Gnielinski correlation due to the low Reynolds number caused by the limited velocities typical
of the refrigerant in its liquid form. The correlation is reported in 3.24: the tube inner diameter
was used as characteristic length.
Nu =
(f /8(Re −100)Pr)
1+12.7(f /8)1/2(Pr 2/3 −1)
(3.24)
where
f = (0.790ln(Re)−1.64)−2
(3.25)
The previous equation is applicable in the range:
0.5 < Pr < 2000
3000 < Re < 5·106
(3.27)
The pressure drops in the subcooler were calculated using 3.17.
3.1.5
Expansion valve
The expansion process is assumed to be isenthalpic, meaning that the heat losses in the
expansion valve are neglected. This assumption can by justiﬁed by the small size of the valve.
3.2
Dynamic model
As aforementioned, the dynamic model of the tank in the Dymola environment was created in
order to understand the distribution of the water temperature inside the tank.
The starting point for the creation of the model was the work accomplished by Cruickshank
[49]. Her work consisted on the experimental and numerical evaluation of a novel multi-tank
thermal energy storage, based on the connection of standard hot water tanks applying a
single charge ﬂow loop. The charge of each single tank was performed by applying both
a natural convection heat exchanger and a thermosyphon loop. The application for the
multi-tank thermal energy storage was a solar domestic hot water system. In order to predict
the performances of the mentioned system, a numerical model was built in the TRNSYS
simulation environment. It was then validated through laboratory tests.
The model of the stratiﬁed thermal storage is based on the split of the tank into N constant
volume sections or nodes, which are assumed to be characterized by a full mixing and an
uniform temperature, as presented in Figure 3.1. For the present study, it was chosen to divide
25
==PAGE:46==
Chapter 3. Model implementation
Figure 3.1: Hot water tank divided in different nodes in order to enable the modelling of
thermal stratiﬁcation [49].
the tank in 20 nodes. As suggested by Newton [50] and conﬁrmed by Celador [51], the split of
the water tank in 15 layers is sufﬁcient to successfully represent the thermal stratiﬁcation.
The prediction of the temperature in each node can be done by applying an energy balance to
each section, taking into account both the inﬂuence of the adjacent nodes and the thermal
losses to the surrounding ambient. To account for the impact of the adjacent nodes, it is
necessary to include in the model mass and energy ﬂows, considering both the energy transfer
through vertical conduction from the tank walls and conduction between the layers. Moreover,
in the speciﬁc case considered in the present study, also the heat transferred to the domestic
hot water from the condenser wrapped around the tank needs to be included. The ordinary
differential Equation 3.28 summarizes all the considered contribution representing the energy
balance for node i-th: its understanding can be facilitated by looking at the control volume
shown Figure 3.2. Figure 3.2 was taken from Cruickshank’s report and then adjusted in order
to take into account the relevant energy contributions in the present work.
MiCp
dTi
dt =(k +∆k)Ac,i
∆Li+1→i
(Ti+1 −Ti)+ (k +∆k)Ac,i
∆Li−1→i
(Ti−1 −Ti)+Uamb,i As,i(Tamb −Ti)
−˙mupCpTi + ˙mupCpTi+1 + ˙Qcond,i −r MiCpTi −r MiCpTi
+r Mi+1CpTi+1 +r Mi−1CpTi−1
(3.28)
The initial values for each node temperature correspond to the ones at the beginning of the
time step. An uniform temperature of 10°C is considered for the water in the tank before
starting the heating up process. In order to detect the temperature distribution in the storage
tank, Equation 3.28 needs to be applied to all the N nodes of the tank. In this way a set of N
ﬁrst-order differential equations is created. Due to the fact that the temperature of each node
is affected by the temperature of the adjacent nodes, the aforementioned system of differential
26
==PAGE:47==
3.2. Dynamic model
equations needs to be solved simultaneously.
In Equation 3.28:
•
˙mup is the water ﬂow rate up the tank. Only an upward ﬂow rate is included due to the
fact that the draw-off occurs from the top of the tank in the considered application.
• Ac,i and As,i represents respectively the cross-sectional area and the surface area of
each node.
• ∆L corresponds to the center-to-center distance between two nodes;
• k is the water thermal conductivity which was assumed to be 0.58 W/mK.
• ∆k is deﬁned as the de-stratiﬁcation conductivity. De-stratiﬁcation occurs because of
the mixing of node interfaces and conduction along the hot water tank wall. Shyu [52]
observed that stratiﬁcation faces a more rapid decay compared to one theoretically
estimated when the conductivity of water is used. This happen because of the higher
conductivity of the wall material which promotes convection motion along the hot
water tank wall and de-stratiﬁcation inside it. This additional thermal conductivity is
calculated as:
∆k = kwall
Ac,wall
Ac,f luid
(3.29)
where kwall is the thermal conductivity of the tank material, i.e. steel in the speciﬁc
case, and is set to 16 W /mK . According to Newton [50], Equation 3.29 represents a good
approximation to estimate the “real” conduction between adjacent nodes. However, a
value derived from experiments for this conductivity factor is preferable because in the
equation the additional convection motion in the tank is not included, underestimating
the stratiﬁcation decay.
•
˙Qcond,i corresponds to the heat transferred to the hot water by the condenser wrapped
around the tank. This heat is different for the desuperheating, condensing and subcool-
ing section, as it will be further explained and analysed later on in the report.
• r represents the mass fraction of water which is assumed to be recirculated in the tank
and it is expressed in %
s . This additional parameter, not included in Cruickshank’s
work, is an attempt to include in the model the mixing phenomena between the layers
inside the tank. According to Dwivedi [53], the inclusion of mixing phenomena and
their validation through experiments is a further step to raise the reliability of dynamic
models of hot water tanks.
To keep the model as realistic as possible, an if-statement were introduced in the model
to control the last four terms on the right side of the equal sign in Equation 3.28. These
terms are the ones introducing in the model the mixing between the different layers,
occurring because of gravity and buoyant effect. This phenomena cause the deposit
27
==PAGE:48==
Chapter 3. Model implementation
Figure 3.2: Control volume used for node i.
of water with different temperature to a certain height in the tank according to the the
density difference: light density brings hot water to the above layers while cold water is
transported to the bottom layers because of its heavy density [54]. The implementation
of this behaviour in the model required the aforementioned if-statement. The mixing
between the node i and the node above (i-1) was allowed only if the temperature in node
i was higher than the one in node i-1. If this condition was not fulﬁlled, no mixing was
occurring between the nodes. On the other hand, the mixing between node i and the
node below (i+1) was permitted only if the temperature in the layer i+1 was higher than
the one in node i. If Ti was higher than Ti+1 the mixing was not allowed and set to zero.
This concept in graphically shown and clariﬁed in Figure 3.3.
For what concerns the heat released to the hot water from the condenser, some constraints
needed to be applied. First of all, the thermostatic control strategy described in Chapter 2 was
introduced in the tank. A sensor measuring the water temperature was imagined to be placed
in each layer of the tank. One of this layer, initially at the bottom of the tank, and a certain
set point temperature, initially 52°C, needed to be selected in order to emulate the on/off
control strategy of the heat pump. The heat from the condenser was transferred to the hot
water when the temperature at the chosen layer was equal to the set point temperature minus
5 K. The heat transfer was then stopped again when the set point temperature was reached
in the chosen layer. It was possible to implement the control in the model by introducing an
integer variable ﬂuctuating according to the temperature at the chosen layer.
The second constraint required for ˙Qcond,i regarded the nodes to which the heat was applied.
28
==PAGE:49==
3.2. Dynamic model
Figure 3.3: Regulation of the mixing between three adjacent layers.
It was possible to identify these nodes by considering the values for y, i.e. the distance from
the bottom of the tank at which each section of the condenser starts, from the steady-state
simulations. Three if-statements were introduced in the model to indicate the locations of the
desuperheating, condensing and subcooling section.
For the calculation of the compressor work, some functions relating the work of the compressor
to the average water temperature along the overall condenser were derived for each analysed
condenser geometry. The calculation of the instantaneous COP, i.e. for each second, was
performed applying Equation 3.30, considering all the heat transferred from the condenser
and the compressor work of the second under investigation.
COP =
tend
P
t=1
˙Q
tend
P
t=1
˙W
(3.30)
29
==PAGE:50==
Chapter 3. Model implementation
It was decided to calculate also the average COP, as shown in Equation 3.31. It takes into
account all the cumulative energies in the considered time step.
COPavg =
tend
P
t=1
Q
tend
P
t=1
W
(3.31)
30
==PAGE:51==
4 Simulation strategy
In Chapter 3 the equations implemented in the EES and Dymola environments to build the
models were presented. In this chapter, the way in which these models were applied and some
further required assumptions are described.
Initially, the strategy adopted to replicate through the EES model the hot water heating up
process is presented. Then the adjustments required to the model to enable the comparison
of the performances of the system working with different refrigerants are explained. Moreover,
the correlations used to derive the costs of different system conﬁguration are described. Lastly,
the assumptions necessary to enable the implementation in the Dymola model of tapping
proﬁles from the tank according to the indication given in the Standard DS/EN 16147 are
summarised.
4.1
Other assumptions
Some other assumptions considered are:
• the pressure drops in the pipes connecting the different components are not considered.
This choice is due to their limited length caused by the compactness of the analysed
application.
• the pressure drop in the evaporator and in the internal heat recovery unit are disre-
garded.
• defrosting issues are not considered in the report even for low values of the air tempera-
ture supplied to the evaporator.
• the fan power is disregarded in this analysis.
• it is assumed that the contact surface between the tube and the tank corresponds to the
overall vertical section of the tube.
31
==PAGE:52==
Chapter 4. Simulation strategy
4.2
Heating up process in the steady-state model
(a) Variation with the time of the temperature difference between T9 and T10.
(b) Evolution of the temperature T9 during the heating up process.
Figure 4.1
The heating up process was simulated in EES based on experimental results provided by
Metro Therm. The experiments were conducted in a insulated chamber in which the ambient
temperature was kept to 20°C and the air was supplied to the evaporator at 7°C, as stated in
the Standard EN 16147. The hot water temperature was measured at the middle of the tank
and at its bottom, as depicted in Figure 2.1 by the locations of the sensors at points 9 and 10.
Several experimental data were given and at this stage of the analysis it was decided to take
into account the one characterised by the highest temperature difference between T9 and T10.
The temperature at point 9 was higher than the one in point 10 during all the process due to
the thermal convection and the water recirculation inside the tank. The trend over time of the
temperature difference between T9 and T10 is shown in Figure 4.1a. The numerical values in
the axis were not reported due to the conﬁdentiality agreement with the company. To give
32
==PAGE:53==
4.2. Heating up process in the steady-state model
a rough indication it can be said that the average temperature difference between the two
proﬁles was around 2.5 K. From the ﬁgure, it can be observed that this ∆T reaches a peak after
22 minutes, then it shows a downward trend. A choice needed to be done about the water
temperature proﬁle to implement in the model. The worst possible case corresponds to the
highest hot water temperature and consequently it was chosen to consider the temperature at
point 9. Its evolution during he heating up process is depicted in Figure 4.1b, again without
numerical indications on the axis. From the ﬁgure it emerges that its trend is not linear, but it
is steeper for low water temperatures. Consequently, the idea to divide the heating up process
in four runs was considered a better approximation than considering a linear evolution of the
temperature proﬁle through the overall process. The inlet water temperature of each run was
an input for the model, while the outlet water temperature for the different run was not ﬁxed
in the model, but it was an output from the program. Consequently, it was not possible to
follow precisely the evolution of the water temperature depicted in Figure 4.1b. However, it
was still considered more realistic to follow this route instead of approximating the heating
up process with an unique linear temperature lift. The water mass ﬂow rate for the four runs
was derived from the water density, the overall water volume inside the tank and the duration
of the different time steps. The water temperatures, time steps and water mass ﬂow rates for
each run are summarized in Table 4.1. It is necessary to highlight that some temperature lifts
are overlapping in Table 4.1: for example the ﬁnal water temperature for run 1 is 31.2°C and
the initial water temperature for run 2 is 27°C. This means that the temperature raise from
27°C to 31.2°C is accomplished in both the two runs. As aforementioned, the reason for these
discrepancies lay in the fact that the outlet water temperature is an output from the program.
However, all the choices for the intervals summarized in the table were made considering
worse cases compared to the experimental data. Consequently, improvements on the cycle
for the considered runs are expected to be even more beneﬁcial in the real process. To verify
the validity of this statement, a more realistic model of the heating up process was built in
the Dymola environment and experimental tests were performed on the improved condenser
geometries: the aim of the steady-state simulations was to accomplish a ﬁrst selection on the
possible condenser conﬁgurations.
Table 4.1 shows the hot water temperature intervals for each run for the actual system conﬁgu-
ration. When different conﬁgurations are simulated, the initial water temperature, the starting
and ending time as well as the water mass ﬂow rate are implemented in the model as shown in
the table. On the other hand, the outlet water temperature is subjected to variations compared
to the values depicted in the table due to the fact that it is an output from the model.
To avoid the repetition of the same analysis four times, one for each run, initially it was
decided to conduct the investigations only on the forth run. Due to its highest water tem-
peratures which are expected to result in greater condensing pressure, this run is expected
to offer the worst performances. This assumption will be veriﬁed later on in the project by
investigating the behaviour of runs 1, 2 and 3.
33
==PAGE:54==
Chapter 4. Simulation strategy
Table 4.1: Water temperatures, time steps and water mass ﬂow rate for the four interpolating
runs.
Initial
Tw
[°C]
Final Tw [°C]
Starting time [h]
Ending time [h]
˙mw [kg/s]
Run 1
19
31.2
0
2.82
0.028
Run 2
27
37.6
2.82
5.29
0.032
Run 3
37.6
46.7
5.29
7.48
0.036
Run 4
43
55.7
7.48
10.6
0.025
4.3
Alternative refrigerants
The performances of the forth run using some alternative refrigerants to replace R134a were
also evaluated. To enable a fair comparison between the different refrigerants, some adjust-
ments of the model were required.
First of all the outlet water temperature was ﬁxed to 52°C, and the inlet water temperature and
its mass ﬂow rate were kept constant at the values shown in Table 4.1. In this way the heating
capacity was an input for the program and the performances of the different refrigerants could
be evaluated with the same required heat to the condenser.
Secondly, the correlations previously used to calculate the refrigerant mass ﬂow rate and the
compressor isentropic efﬁciency were removed. This choice was due to the fact that the corre-
lations were derived for a real compressor using R134a as refrigerant, but they are expected
to be different for other energy carriers. Consequently, it was chosen to set the isentropic
efﬁciency to 0.7 and the refrigerant mass ﬂow rate was calculated through an energy balance
at the evaporator.
Finally, Equation 4.1 was added to the model in order to evaluate the volumetric ﬂow rate at
compressor suction.
˙Vsuc =
˙mr
ρsuc
(4.1)
The same parameter was used also by Mota-Babiloni et al. [55] to compare the adaptability of
different refrigerants to existing compressors.
It was decided to present the results as a relative difference (%COP and % ˙Vsuc) of the system
working with the alternative ﬂuid taking as benchmark the system working with R134a, as
shown in Equations 4.2 and 4.3.
%COP =
µCOPalter native −COPR134a
COPR134a
¶
100
(4.2)
% ˙Vsuc =
µdotVsuc,alter native −dotVsuc,R134a
dotVsuc,R134a
¶
100
(4.3)
34
==PAGE:55==
4.4. Economical evaluation
4.4
Economical evaluation
For a more realistic analysis of the system, it was decided to roughly take into account also
the economical point of view. More in details, ﬁrst of all a cost function was derived in order
to estimate the expenditure per meter for the condenser coil for different diameters. It is
presented in equation 4.4.
Cc = (0.1374Dout,c +0.2189)0.71
(4.4)
The last term in equation 4.4, i.e. 0.71, corresponds to the coefﬁcient required to convert
the currency from Australian $ to AC[56]. This conversion was required due to fact that the
prices in the manufacturer catalogue, i.e. the company Rapid Fab, were provided in Austrlian
Dollars [57]. The prices presented in the catalogue are not inclusive of the Australian Good
and Service Tax.
Another required cost estimation concerned the expenditure for the suction/liquid heat
exchanger. It was not possible to obtain a direct price from the company due to the fact that
this component is not bought. It consists of the connection through welding, performed in the
Metro Therm’s production line, of the vapour and liquid lines. A possibility was to apply the
correlation presented by Aprea et al. [58]. In this analysis the authors evaluated the advantages
from a thermodynamic point of view offered by an internal heat recovery unit in refrigeration
systems. Their investigation ends mentioning a simple cost estimation of the IHEX examined
as a function of the cooling capacity of the plant, which is reported in Equation 4.5.
CI HEX = Q0.75
c
(4.5)
However this correlation would result in too high costs, i.e. approximately 200 AC, due to
the fact that, as aforementioned, the considered system does not include a proper heat
exchanger for IHEX but it consists on two tubes welded together. Consequently, it was chosen
to consider the costs reported in the price list for the suction line heat exchangers of the
American company Doucette Industries Inc [59]. The aforementioned heat exchanger, shown
in Figure 4.2, is characterized by four pipe connections: two for the liquid line and two for
the vapour line which exchange heat inside the component. Its dimensions are relatively
small and comparable with the ones of the pipes of the studied system. Consequently, it was
decided to estimate the cost of the IHEX by considering the cost of the smallest suction line
heat exchanger presented in the company price list. Its price amounts to 50 $, corresponding
to 45 AC applying the currency conversion [56].
4.5
Tapping cycle L in the dynamic model
Beyond the heating up process, it was also decided to use the Dymola model to simulate in a
simpliﬁed way the tapping cycle L described in the Standard DS/EN 16147 [32]. Some main
assumptions were required to enable the implementation of the aforementioned draw off
35
==PAGE:56==
Chapter 4. Simulation strategy
Figure 4.2: Suction line heat exchanger [56].
patter in a simpliﬁed way:
• for each tapping a certain energy requirement to be met is speciﬁed. These energy
requirements are considered in this analysis only to detect the corresponding water
mass ﬂow rate, as it will be speciﬁed in the following lines. The fulﬁlment of these
requirements is not checked.
• in the Standard, different kinds of tappings are speciﬁed: some of them requires to
achieve an average temperature of the water tapped (considering a minimum useful
temperature increase of 0 K), while for other tappings the energy starts to be useful only
when a certain temperature is reached (the minimum useful temperature increase varies
from 15 K to 30 K). This distinction was not considered in the model and no minimum
useful temperature increase is considered for all the cases.
• in case of dish washing tapping a temperature difference of 45 K is required between
the cold water entering in the tank and the tapped water. Because of the difﬁculties in
reaching this ∆T with the only heat pump, the eventually missing temperature differ-
ence can be covered applying an electrical resistance heater. However, its presence is
disregarded in the model.
• the power absorbed by the fan in the evaporator is not considered.
For the calculation of the tapping mass ﬂow rate, ﬁrstly the equivalent volume of hot water
(Vequivalent) at a certain temperature was evaluated for every time step. This was done
performing an energy balance (Equation 4.6) for the domestic hot water including the energy
required for each tapping as indicated in the Standard. The tapped energy (Etapped) was
expressed in J. The inlet water was considered at 10°C as speciﬁed in the Standard, while the
temperature for the tapped water was set to 52°C. The resulting ∆T speciﬁed in Equation 4.6
is 42 K. Constant values of 4200 J/kgK and 1000 kg/m3 were assumed respectively for the
speciﬁc heat at constant pressure of the water and the water density.
Vequivalent =
Etapped
Cpwρw∆T
(4.6)
36
==PAGE:57==
4.5. Tapping cycle L in the dynamic model
The goodness of the calculation shown in Equation 4.6 is conﬁrmed by a note in the Standard.
For the tapping cycle L, it is mentioned that the volume of equivalent hot water at 60°C is
supposed to be 0.1998 m3. If the temperature of the tapped water is set to 60°C instead of 52°C
and the equivalent volumes for each time step are summed, the result is precisely 0.1998 m3.
Finally, the water mass ﬂow rate was calculated from the equivalent volume of hot water for
each time step considering the duration of each time interval. Basically the aforementioned
calculation assumes that during the tapping cycle the water inside the tank is always at 52°C.
Certainly this assumption is not realistic, but the tapping cycle was only used to compare
different system conﬁgurations. The numerical results deriving from the investigation cannot
be realistic, but they can be used to compare different system designs. The water mass ﬂow
rates are shown in Table 4.2 together with the duration of each time interval implemented in
Dymola. Moreover it was decided to include for every time step in the table also the minimum
∆T at which the useful energy can be counted or the ∆T desired to be achieved, depending
on the type of tapping. This parameter will be considered later on in the report.
Table 4.2: Duration of each time interval, corresponding water mass ﬂow rates and minimum
∆T at which the useful energy can be counted for tapping cycle L [32].
Time step [s]
Tapping ﬂow
rate [kg/s]
∆Tminimum
or
∆Tdesired [K]
0
0
0
300
0.0071
15
1500
0.0190
30
900
0.0024
15
1200
0.0018
15
1200
0.0613
30
300
0.0071
15
900
0.0024
15
900
0.0024
15
1800
0.0012
15
3600
0.0006
15
3600
0.0006
30
900
0.0024
15
3600
0.0006
15
2700
0.0024
45
3600
0.0006
15
3600
0.0006
15
5400
0.0004
15
900
0.0024
15
900
0.0024
30
1800
0.0012
30
5400
0.0004
15
1800
0.0083
45
1800
0.0409
30
37
==PAGE:58==
==PAGE:59==
5 Results from steady-state simulations
In this chapter the ﬁndings from the steady-state simulations conducted in the EES environ-
ment are presented.
5.1
Macrochannel condenser
In this section the results deriving from the investigations on the length and diameter of
macro-scale condenser tubes are presented. Initially, the performances of the system with
its actual conﬁguration are shown for different tube diameters keeping a constant condenser
length or a constant condenser heat exchange area. Secondly the effects on the cycle caused
by the removal of the internal heat recovery unit are presented. The results presented will
concern the forth run for the heat pump heating up process. Some considerations regarding
the other runs will be introduced later on.
The system COP for the forth run of the actual system conﬁguration was found to be 3.2.
Figure 5.1 depicts the system COP as a function of the condenser tube diameter keeping
either the condenser length or the condenser heat exchange area equal to the one of the actual
system conﬁguration. From the graph it emerges that an increase of the diameter slightly
worsens the system COP. Consequently, it was chosen to focus the further investigations on
smaller tube dimensions. In fact, the COP faces a slightly upward trend if the condenser
diameters is reduced. However, as indicated by the scale of the y-axis, the magnitude of the
COP variations is very limited.
As easily predictable, the reduction of the tube diameter keeping a constant condenser heat
exchange area results to be more beneﬁcial than the case with constant length. This is simply
due to the fact that in order to maintain a constant heat exchange area for a reduced diameter
the condenser length needs to increase with respect to the 54 m of the actual system conﬁg-
uration. More in details, approximately 83 meters of condenser tube are required to keep a
constant heat exchange area, i.e. 1.44 m2, if the diameters is reduced to 6.95 mm. In this case,
the system COP is increased by 1.3%, while in case of constant length and a diameter of 6.95
39
==PAGE:60==
Chapter 5. Results from steady-state simulations
Figure 5.1: System COP as a function of the condenser tube outer diameter.
mm its raise amounts to 0.7 %.
Due to the similarity between the considerations about the two trends depicted in Figure 5.1,
it was decided to analyse only the case with reduced diameters and constant condenser heat
exchange area, and only point out the differences with the other case. This choice is due to the
higher COP enhancement guaranteed by this case.
The ﬁrst cycle parameter considered when reducing the tube diameter is the heat transfer
coefﬁcient refrigerant side in the condensing section. Its evolution as a function of the re-
frigerant quality is depicted in Figure 5.2 for different diameters. The lower considered limit
for the refrigerant quality was ﬁxed to 0.1 instead of 0 to avoid convergence issues in the
program. It can be observed that smaller diameters imply an increase of the aforementioned
parameter. The reason for these trends needs to be found in the ﬂow patterns inside the con-
denser tubes, because of their strong impact on the heat and momentum transfer processes
[18]. The evolution of the ﬂow regimes of the refrigerant in the channel is shown in Figure 5.3
for different diameters. They are reported in the Taitel and Dukler ﬂow regimes map, which
was developed by the two authors in order to enable a prediction of the relation between
“properties of the ﬂuid, pipe diameter, gas and liquid mass ﬂow rates and angle of inclination
to the horizontal” at which the ﬂow regime variations occur [60]. The Froude number and the
Martinelli parameter are considered to draw the map in Figure 5.3. As it emerges from the
Figure, three ﬂow regimes can be observed during the condensing process :
• annular-dispersed ﬂow: it is characterized by a continuous annular liquid ﬁlm, thicker in
the bottom than in the top, surrounding the perimeter of the tube. The core region inside
the horizontal tube is constituted by gas and it is often disturbed by liquid droplets. The
entrainment fraction can vary from zero, i.e. completely annular ﬂow, to a value close to
40
==PAGE:61==
5.1. Macrochannel condenser
Figure 5.2: Heat transfer coefﬁcient as a function of the refrigerant quality in the condenser
for different diameters.
one, i.e. completely dispersed ﬂow.
• stratiﬁed wavy ﬂow: differently than the stratiﬁed ﬂow in which the two phases are
completely separated, in the stratiﬁed wavy ﬂow, occurring at higher gas velocities,
some waves are created in the interface between the phases, even though their crests do
not reach the upper part of the tube.
• intermittent ﬂow: it occurs for high gas velocities and it is characterized by large ampli-
tude liquid waves formed at the interface between the two phases and reaching the top
of the tube which is nearly continuously wetted.
Comparing Figure 5.2 and Figure 5.3, it clearly emerges that a reduction of the condenser
tube diameter implies a shift of the ﬂow regime from stratiﬁed ﬂow to annular-dispersed ﬂow,
enhancing the refrigerant heat transfer coefﬁcient in the condensing section. This is due to the
fact that the velocity of the two-phase ﬂuid is enhanced for smaller diameters because of the
reduction of the cross sectional area of the tube. The increase of the heat transfer coefﬁcient
is caused by the better thermal properties of the refrigerant in its liquid form compared to
the refrigerant in gaseous phase. In fact, the perimeter of the tube, through which the heat
exchange with the hot water in the tank occurs, is completed wetted by liquid in case of
annular ﬂow. On the other hand, in case of stratiﬁed ﬂow almost half of the pipe perimeter is
in contact with gas.
This ﬁrst investigation emphasizes that an advantage of a reduced condenser tube diameter
lays in the increase of the heat transfer coefﬁcient refrigerant side in the condensing section.
This implies a greater U value in the condensing region, which raise its UA value. More in
details, reducing the outer diameter from 9.95 mm to 6.95 mm, the Ucond varies from 677
41
==PAGE:62==
Chapter 5. Results from steady-state simulations
Figure 5.3: Evolution of the ﬂow patterns during condensation in the Taitel and Dukler map
for different diameters.
W /m2K to 957 W /m2K . Another positive contribution to the UA value in the condensing
section for smaller diameters is the increasing heat exchange area of this section to the
detriment of the desuperheating area. The heat exchange areas of the two sections for the
aforementioned condenser diameters are summarized in Table 5.1. The variations of the
heat exchange area of the subcooling section are negligible. This shift between the areas
is beneﬁcial for the system due to the higher heat transfer guaranteed by two phase ﬂow
compared to the single phase. Moving from a diameter of 9.95 mm until a diameter of 6.95
mm the UAcond is increased from 798 W/K to 1225 W/K.
Table 5.1: Desuperheating and condensing heat exchange areas for condenser diameters of
9.95 mm and 6.95 mm.
Dout = 9.95[mm]
Dout = 6.95[mm]
Adesup [m2]
0.24
0.14
Acond [m2]
1.18
1.28
The same considerations about the U value in the condenser can be applied to the case with
reduced diameter and constant condenser length. In fact the evolution of the ﬂow regimes and
of the heat transfer coefﬁcient refrigerant side in the condensing section are almost the same
as what presented in Figure 5.2 and Figure 5.3. However, due to the reduced overall condenser
heat transfer area caused by the shorter length, the overall heat transfer coefﬁcient in the
condensing section, i.e. UAcond, is reduced. More in details, moving from a tube diameter
42
==PAGE:63==
5.1. Macrochannel condenser
of 9.95 mm to a diameter of 6.95 mm in case of constant length, Acond and U Acond decrease
respectively from 1.18 m2 and 798 W/K to 0.8 m2 and 764 W/K.
Table 5.2: Variation of ∆p for condenser diameters of 9.95 mm and 6.95 mm.
Dout = 9.95[mm]
Dout = 6.95[mm]
∆pdesup [bar]
0.022
0.150
∆pcond [bar]
0.085
1.160
∆psub [bar]
-
0.003
Other parameters investigated and inﬂuenced by the variations of the condenser length and
diameter are the pressure drops in the desuperheater, the condenser and the subcooler. Their
variation reducing the diameter from 9.95 mm until 6.95 mm keeping a constant heat ex-
change area is summarized in Table 5.2. As shown in the table, the increased condenser length
and smaller diameter considerably affect the pressure drops in all the three sections of the
condenser. The higher pressure drops have two main effects on the system: an increase of the
condensing pressure and a greater enthalpy difference in the condenser, mainly in the con-
densing section. These two effects are visible from the comparison of the pressure-enthalpy
diagrams for the cases, shown in Figure 5.4. Lowering the diameter, the condensing pressure
increases from 14.2 bar to 14.4 bar. On the other hand, as aforementioned, the increased
pressure drop cause a higher enthalpy difference across the condenser resulting in a greater
heating capacity: from 1332 W to 1349 W. The evaporation pressure is subjected to minor
variations as well as the water temperature at the outlet of the condenser, i.e. respectively
0.01 bar and 0.2°C. Moreover, it can be observed that the isentropic efﬁciency efﬁciency of the
compressor is slightly enhanced with the smaller diameter, resulting in a constant compressor
work.
The same behaviour was observed for the investigation performed with lower diameters and
constant condenser length. This justiﬁes the increase of COP for lower diameters despite the
reduction of the overall heat transfer coefﬁcients.
5.1.1
Analysis on the internal heat recovery unit
As aforementioned in the preamble of this section, another investigation performed concerned
the analysis of the effects caused on the system by the removal of the internal heat recovery
unit for different condenser lengths and diameters. The results are summarized in Figure 5.5.
As it can be seen, the removal of the heat exchanger is not beneﬁcial for diameters of 8.95 mm
and 9.95 mm.
As representative for the two aforementioned cases, it was decided to compare the systems
with and without IHEX having a condenser length of 54 m and an outer diameter of 9.95
mm. It was observed that all the heat transfer coefﬁcients refrigerant sides were subjected
43
==PAGE:64==
Chapter 5. Results from steady-state simulations
Figure 5.4: Pressure-enthalpy diagrams for condenser diameters of 9.95 mm and 6.95 mm.
Figure 5.5: COP as a function of the condenser length for different diameters with/without
IHEX.
to minor variations. The same happens for the heat transfer coefﬁcient water side in the
desuperheating and condensing sections and for the heat exchange areas of the three sections.
These observations justify the similarity of the UA values in the condenser and subcooler. For
what concerns the heat transfer coefﬁcient water side in the desuperheater, a reduction from
1903 W /m2K to 1660 W /m2K was caused by the removal of the internal heat recovery unit.
This decrease is caused by the reduction of 6K of the wall temperature in the desuperheater
caused by the reduction of the heat transferred in this section for the case without IHEX (Figure
5.6). The lower wall temperature signiﬁcantly reduces the Rayleigh number lowering also the
Nusselt number, as shown in Equation 3.15. However, despite this difference, also the UA
values in the desuperheater are very similar for the two cases: the dominant resistance for the
44
==PAGE:65==
5.1. Macrochannel condenser
heat exchange is represented by the refrigerant side, in which the heat transfer coefﬁcient is
around 350 W /m2K for the both the desuperheating sections. The similarity between the UA
values in all the sections of the condenser for the two considered cases explains the almost
coincidence of the condensing pressures. Consequently, the reason for the higher COP of the
case with IHEX lays in the signiﬁcantly higher amount of heat exchanged in the desuperheatig
section, as highlighted by the two pressure-enthalpy diagrams shown in Figure 5.6. The higher
heat transferred justiﬁes the difference between the two outlet water temperatures: from
55.6°C to 54.8°C respectively for the case with and without heat exchange. This increase of
the heating capacity overcomes the slightly lower compressor work of the case without IHEX
caused by its higher isentropic efﬁciency.
The evolution of the COP in both the two cases previously analysed, shows a ﬂat trend after a
certain condenser length. This trend is caused by the absence of variations in many inﬂuential
parameters of the system, such as the U values and the condensing and evaporating pressures.
Figure 5.6: Pressure-enthalpy diagrams for a condenser length of 54 m and a diameter of 9.95
mm with and without IHEX.
It is worthy to compare in the same way the case with Dout = 6.95mm without IHEX and the
one with Dout = 9.95mm with IHEX, in order to understand the reason why the removal of the
heat recovery unit becomes beneﬁcial. As for the previous comparison, a condenser length of
54 m is considered for both cases. This choice implies different condenser heat exchange areas
for the two cases: 1.44 m2 for the largest diameter and 0.93 m2 for the other case. Despite
the smaller heat transfer area which results in smaller UA values for all the sections in the
condenser, the latter shows a higher COP. As in the previous example, the heat transferred in
the desuperheater is higher if the system is comprehensive of the heat recovery unit. However,
this time, the signiﬁcantly higher pressure drops introduced by a diameter of 6.95 mm raises
mainly the enthalpy difference in the condensing section resulting in a greater heat exchanged,
even though they also contribute to the higher condensing pressure. This fact is graphically
45
==PAGE:66==
Chapter 5. Results from steady-state simulations
visible in Figure 5.7.
Figure 5.7: Comparison between pressure-enthalpy diagrams for a diameter of 9.95 mm with
IHEX and a diameter of 6.95 mm without IHEX both having a condenser length of 54 m.
It must be mentioned that the extent of the COP enhancement for the cases presented is quite
limited. Taking as benchmark the COP of the system with the actual conﬁguration, the two
most valid solutions shown in Figure 5.5 are both characterized by a reduced diameter of 6.95
mm and a condenser length of 70 m. One is comprehensive of the internal heat exchanger,
while the other one does not include this component in the system. The former increases
the COP by 1.2 % while the second raise it by 0.8 %. However, it must be mentioned that
these improvements concern only the last portion of the heating up process of the water, i.e.
Run 4. The effects on the other runs will be presented later on during the report. Moreover,
the attractiveness of these alternative system arrangements is increased if the economical
perspective is taken into account. In fact, a reduction of the condenser tube diameter from
9.95 mm to 6.65 mm signiﬁcantly reduces the expenditure for the condenser coil. Applying
Equation 4.4, the cost per meter drops respectively from 1.13 AC/m to 0.83 AC/m. If the actual
condenser length of 54 m is maintained for both cases, the expenditure for the condenser
coil decreases from 61 ACto 44.8 AC, implying a reduction of 16%. A comparison between the
overall costs of the condenser coils and IHEX for the actual system conﬁguration and the ones
considering a diameter of 6.95 mm and a condenser length of 70 m, are presented in Figure 5.8.
The cost for the IHEX was assumed to be 45 AC, as speciﬁed previously in the report. From the
ﬁgure it clearly emerges that the conﬁguration without IHEX implies a noticeable reduction of
the cost: it is almost halved. Also for the other system arrangement with a reduced diameter of
6.95 mm the cost is slightly reduced. Its cost is similar to the one of the actual conﬁguration
due to the fact that the advantage of the smaller diameter, is almost nulliﬁed by the greater
condenser length.
Consequently, from the economical point of view the solution with a condenser diameter
46
==PAGE:67==
5.2. Sensitivity analysis
of 6.95 mm, a length of 70 m and without IHEX seems particularly attractive. It must be
mentioned that the numerical values presented in Figure 5.8 result from assumptions on the
costs for the condenser and the IHEX and the real prices can differ from the assumed ones.
However, the general trend of the costs varying the diameters and removing the internal heat
recovery unit is expected to be the same also in reality.
Figure 5.8: Costs comparison.
5.2
Sensitivity analysis
In this section, some sensitivity analysis on the input parameters of the system are shown.
Firstly, the effects on the system COP for Run 4 of the assumed parameters required to build
up the model are quantiﬁed. The extent of their impact on the COP is shown in a spider
diagram. In this diagram, depicted in Figure 5.9, the percentage variation of the system COP
is compared with the percentage variation of each of the assumed values. The analysis was
conducted on the original cycle conﬁguration: with a condenser diameter of 9.95 mm, a length
of 54 m and inclusive of internal heat recovery unit. As shown in the ﬁgure, the considered
parameters are:
• the overall heat transfer coefﬁcient of the evaporator: UAevap. Its value was originally
assumed to be 130 W/K. It was varied from 100 W/K to 160 W/K.
• the superheating in the evaporator: ∆Tsup. It was assumed to be 3 K. Its value was varied
from 1 K to 10 K.
• the effectiveness of the internal heat recovery unit: ε. It was initially set to 0.3. In this
investigation the effectiveness of the heat exchanger was varied from 0.2 to 0.5.
• the thickness of the condenser tube: s. Its value was measured to be 1.4 mm with a laser
range ﬁnder. However, due the uncertainty of the instrument, it was chosen to vary this
thickness from 1 mm to 2 mm.
47
==PAGE:68==
Chapter 5. Results from steady-state simulations
• the outlet air temperature: Tair,out. It was initially ﬁxed to 4°C in the program. The
considered range of variation is from 1 °C to 6 °C.
• the subcooling in the condenser: ∆Tsub. It was assumed to be 5 K. This value was varied
from 4 k to 10 K.
Figure 5.9: Percentage variation of system COP as a function of the percentage variation of the
assumed parameters
From Figure 5.9 it emerges that the assumed value which affect the results the most is the
overall heat transfer coefﬁcient of the evaporator, due to its steepest trend. This parameter
has a strong inﬂuence on the evaporating pressure, which is increasing for higher values of
the UAevap. From an UAevap of 100 W /K to a value of 160 W /K the evaporation pressure
increases of approximately 12%. This fact considerably affect the pressure ratio: it shows
a decreasing trend when the overall heat transfer in the evaporator is increased, which is
beneﬁcial for the system. On the other hand, also the refrigerant mass ﬂow rate and the
isentropic efﬁciency of the compressor, which are expressed as a function of Tc and Te, are
inﬂuenced by the analysed parameter: both of them are increased for greater values of the
overall heat transfer coefﬁcient in the evaporator. The variation of the pressure ratio, of ˙mr
and of ηis affect the compressor work and the heating capacity of the condenser. Both of
them are decreased for lower values of the UAevap but with a different extent. If the analysed
parameter is reduced from its reference value, i.e. 130 W/K, to 100 W/K the compressor work
is reduced of approximately 2%, while the heating capacity decreases of 5%. The detriment
caused by the lower heating capacity prevails justifying the reduction of the system COP when
the overall heat transfer in the evaporator is reduced.
Figure 5.9 reveals that other two parameters having similar and considerable effects on the
system COP are the assumed outlet air temperature and the subcooling. The inﬂuence of
Tair,out is investigated at ﬁrst. The behaviour of the system when this temperature is raised
from 1 °C to 6 °C reﬂects the one observed for the overall heat transfer coefﬁcient of the evap-
orator. Again both the condensing and the evaporation pressures face an increase affecting
48
==PAGE:69==
5.2. Sensitivity analysis
the compressor work, the condenser heating capacity, the refrigerant mass ﬂow rate and the
isentropic efﬁciency of the compressor. These variations result in noticeable ﬂuctuations of
the COP amounting to 4% from the lowest to the highest extreme of the analysed interval.
For what concerns the explanation for the inﬂuence of the subcooler on the condenser COP,
Figure 5.10 helps the understanding of how the share of the overall condenser heat exchange
area varies between its three sections. As predictable, when the subcooling is increased the
heat exchange area of the subcooler section becomes larger, mainly at the expense of the
condensing section. Consequently, due to the fact that the U values are almost constants for
the three portions of the condenser, the UA value of the subcooler is enhanced when the ∆Tsub
increases, while the overall heat transfer coefﬁcient in the other two sections is worsened. In
the system, both higher values for the heat transferred in the subcooler and a lower amount of
heat exchanged in the condensing and desuperheating sections can be observed. However,
the extent of the the increase of the former overcomes the reduction of ˙Qcond and ˙Qdesup
resulting in a overall greater heat transferred in the condenser. This prevailing contribution of
˙Qsub combined with the observation of minor variations of the compressor work explains the
raise of the COP for higher soobcoolings.
Finally, Figure 5.9 suggests that the impacts of the assumptions concerning the effectiveness
Figure 5.10: Variations of the heat exchange areas for the three sections in the condenser as a
function of the subcooling.
of the IHEX, the thickness of the condenser tube and the superheating on the system COP is
almost negligible. In fact, even for noticeable ﬂuctuations of the aforementioned parameters,
the percentage of variation of the COP shows a ﬂat trend.
As mentioned in Chapter 3, the refrigerant mass ﬂow rate and the compressor isentropic
efﬁciency are found in the model by means of some correlations derived from data provided in
the manufacturer catalogue. Both of them are characterised by a certain degree of uncertainty
due to the fact that the correlations were found applying an interpolating procedure. Conse-
49
==PAGE:70==
Chapter 5. Results from steady-state simulations
Table 5.3: Heat transfer coefﬁcient water side for the three condensing sections.
αw,desup
[W /m2K ]
1903
αw,cond
[W /m2K ]
1383
αw,sub [W /m2K ]
1271
quently, it is worthy to evaluate their impact on the system COP. The reference values for the
compressor isentropic efﬁciency and the compressor mass ﬂow rate are respectively 0.68 and
0.00667 kg/s. Both of them were varied of ± 20%. Their impact on the system COP is depicted
in Figure 5.11. The ﬁgure highlights that the isentropic efﬁciency is a crucial parameter for
the model, due to its sharp impact on the compressor work. The system COP is increased
by almost 14% if ηis is raised by 20%, while it is reduced by 15% if the isentropic efﬁciency
drops by 20%. Also the refrigerant mass ﬂow rate has a considerable impact on the system
COP which ﬂuctuates of ± 6% for the considered range of variation for ˙mr .
Figure 5.11: Sensitivity analysis on the compressor work and refrigerant mass ﬂow rate.
Another sensitivity analysis performed on Run 4 for the original system conﬁguration focuses
on the heat transfer coefﬁcients water side. As mentioned in previous chapters, several
correlation were considered before choosing the one presented by Knudsen [42]. The results
derived from the implemented correlation for the αw in the three condensing sections are
presented in Table 5.3. The values follow the expected trend: they decrease moving from
the desuperheater to the subcooler. Three factors were observed to justify this trend. Firstly,
one reason is expected to lay in the decreasing water temperatures from the desuperheating
to the subcooling: the water properties are all calculated at the average water temperatures.
Secondly, the wall temperature, which is directly proportional to the Rayleigh number, drops
50
==PAGE:71==
5.2. Sensitivity analysis
moving from the desuperheater to the subcooler. Thirdly, the contribution of the characteristic
length at which the Rayleigh and the Nusselt numbers are calculated needs to be taken into
account. This characteristic length, i.e. y, corresponds to the distance from the bottom of tank
at which each section of the condenser begins. For the desuperheating section this value was
set to 0.43 m, while for the condensing and subcooling section it was calculated as explained in
Equation 3.20. Its value is respectively 0.39 m and 0.18 m for the two aforementioned sections.
Higher values of this parameter result in higher Rayleigh numbers due to its proportionality
with the third power of y, increasing the heat transfer coefﬁcient.
A parameter analysis was performed on the three heat transfer coefﬁcient water sides to detect
their impact on the system COP. The results are plotted in Figure 5.12. The ﬁgure was drawn
varying individually each parameter and considering as reference values the ones shown in
Table 5.3. When the heat transfer coefﬁcient water side in one section of the condenser was
varied, the αw of the remaining two sections was kept ﬁxed to the values presented in the
table. From the graph it emerges that the impact of the water heat transfer coefﬁcients on
the COP can be considered nil even for huge variations of these parameters. This is due to
the fact that for Run 4 of the original system conﬁguration the refrigerant is the dominant
resistance to the heat transfer. The aforementioned results are expected to be different for
system conﬁgurations with lower condenser tube diameters due to the enhanced values of the
heat transfer coefﬁcients refrigerant side.
Figure 5.12: Percentage variation of system COP as a function of the percentage variation of
the water heat transfer coefﬁcients.
The ﬁnal investigation concerns the inlet air temperature, which corresponds to the temper-
ature of the air supplied to the evaporator. Its value was set to 7°C according to what stated
in the standard EN 16147. In this section, disregarding the indication from the standard, it
was decided to vary this value in order to evaluate the trend of the system COP for Run 4
throughout all the year. Two locations were chosen as representative for different weather
51
==PAGE:72==
Chapter 5. Results from steady-state simulations
conditions: Copenhagen and Paris. The implemented values for the average monthly ambient
temperatures, taken from an online database [61], are shown in Table 5.4. The aforementioned
source provides two values for the average monthly ambient temperatures named respectively
as “average high temperature” and “average low temperature”. For each month it was preferred
to implement in the model the latter in order to evaluate the system performances in the
most adverse weather condition. It was decided to use the values presented in Table 5.4 as
temperatures for the air to be supplied to the evaporator. This simulation can represent the
case in which the domestic heat pump is positioned in the basement of the house and the
air is supplied to the evaporator through a duct sucking air from the outdoor ambient. The
temperature difference between the inlet and the outlet air temperatures in the evaporator
was ﬁxed to 3 K.
The evolution of the COP with the ambient temperature in Copenhagen is reported for three
Table 5.4: Average monthly ambient temperatures for Copenhagen and Paris.
Tamb Copenhagen
[°C]
Tamb Paris [°C]
January
-1
3
February
-1
2
March
0
4
April
3
6
May
7
10
June
11
13
July
13
15
August
13
15
September
10
11
October
6
9
November
3
5
December
0
3
system conﬁgurations in Figure 5.13. The chosen conﬁgurations are:
• Case 1: condenser diameter 9.95 mm, condenser length 54 m , with IHEX.
• Case 2: condenser diameter 6.95 mm, condenser length 70 m , with IHEX.
• Case 3: condenser diameter 6.95 mm, condenser length 70 m , without IHEX.
These epithets for the three condenser conﬁgurations will be applied for the rest of the report.
All the considered conﬁgurations show the same trend: the COP is higher during warm months.
This can be justiﬁed taking into account the yearly trend of the pressure ratio, i.e. the ratio
between the condensing temperature and the evaporation temperature. It is characterized
by an U-shaped trend during the year, with approximate variations from 6.4 in January to 4.6
in July for the three considered cases. The heat transferred in the overall condenser has an
52
==PAGE:73==
5.3. Minichannel condenser
inverted U-shaped trend, similarly to Figure 5.13, resulting in greater outer water temperature
for summer months. The percentage COP variation from January to July amounts for all the
cases to values around 22%. Finally, from the ﬁgure it emerges that Case 2 offers the best
performances throughout all the year compared to the other cases, and Case 3 shows COP
very close to Case 2. Both the aforementioned cases represents a slight improvement with
respect to Case 1, which is the actual system conﬁguration.
As aforementioned, a graph identical to the one presented in Figure 5.13 was drawn also
implementing the ambient temperatures for Paris summarized in Table 5.4. However it is not
reported due to its similarity with Figure 5.13. All the considerations mentioned before are
valid also for this case. The only difference lays in the fact that the COP for all the months are
higher for a system located in Paris due to the higher outdoor temperatures. For August and
July the COP reaches a value of 4.
Figure 5.13: Yearly evolution of the system COP in Copenhagen for three system conﬁgurations.
5.3
Minichannel condenser
After the previous investigation concerning the condenser tube length and diameter, it was
decided to further reduce its size. Before introducing the minichannel condenser, it is relevant
to estimate until which value of the outer macrocondenser tube diameter, the system COP
shows an increase. Due to the fact that the pressure drops are directly proportional to the
condenser length and indirectly proportional to the condenser diameter, it was chosen to
maintain a value of 54 m for the length while reducing the diameter. This choice was due
to the willingness to limit the detrimental effect of the pressure drop. The system COP as a
function of the condenser diameter keeping a constant condenser length of 54 m is shown
53
==PAGE:74==
Chapter 5. Results from steady-state simulations
in Figure 5.14. Figure 5.14 shows that a reduction of the condenser diameter to values lower
Figure 5.14: Trend of the COP varying the condenser tube diameter and keeping a constant
length of 54m.
than 5.9 mm cause a reduction of the system COP. This is partly due to fact that the increasing
pressure drops imply too high value for the condensing pressure, affecting the compressor
work. Moreover, the overall heat exchange area in the condenser is excessively reduced and
the subcooling section occupies a big portion of the condenser, reducing the area of the
condensing section. Some numerical values of the aforementioned parameters for the system
with a diameter of 5.9 mm and 5.4 mm are provided in Table 5.5. The table shows that the
conﬁguration with a condenser tube of 5.4 mm is strongly penalised by the reduction of the
overall heat exchange area of the condenser, which results in lower areas for all the three
sections.
Despite the awareness of the detrimental effect of the pressure drops on the system COP
for very small outer condenser diameters, it was decided to analyse the performances of the
forth run of the heating up process in case of minichannels. In this analysis, it was chosen to
adopt the classiﬁcation introduced by Kandlikar and Grande [62] to deﬁne the geometry of the
minichannel. According to the authors, minichannels are single tubes or multiport extructed
aluminium tubes characterised by an inner hydraulic diameter between 0.2 mm and 3 mm.
The considered minichannel has an outer diameter of 3.4 mm, resulting in an inner diameter
of 2 mm due to the fact that the tube thickness was kept constant. To reach reasonable values
for the pressure drop, the condenser length was set to 16 m. Consequently, the heat exchange
area in the condenser was 0.1 m2.
The evolution of the ﬂow regime inside the microchannel is presented according to the
54
==PAGE:75==
5.3. Minichannel condenser
Table 5.5: Numerical values of some key parameters for condenser diameters of 5.9 mm and
5.4 mm.
Dout,c = 5.9 [mm]
Dout,c = 5.4 [mm]
αr,cond [W /m2K ]
4209
5178
pc [bar]
14.58
14.91
∆pdesup [bar]
0.19
0.25
∆pcond [bar]
1.9
2.2
∆psub [bar]
0.034
0.2
Atot,cond [m2]
0.760
0.671
Adesup [m2]
0.054
0.035
Acond [m2]
0.612
0.3654
Asub [m2]
0.090
0.2713
U Adesup [W /K ]
38.83
28.33
U Acond [W /K ]
658.3
423.5
U Asub [W /K ]
52.09
174.3
indication of Cavallini et al. [44]. The authors considered only a ∆T -dependent and a ∆T -
independent ﬂow regime, requiring a single transition criterion. In fact, in previous inves-
tigations, the authors detected that for horizontal tubes dependence on ∆T is evident only
if gravity is the dominant force. The evolution of the ﬂow regime is depicted in Figure 5.15.
The transition line was found applying Equation B.17 described in Appendix B. As it emerges
from the ﬁgure, the evolution of the ﬂow regime occurs entirely in the ∆T -independent region.
According to what stated to the authors, this corresponds to annular ﬂow. The evolution of
the refrigerant side heat transfer coefﬁcient and pressure drop in the condensing section,
calculated applying Equations B.18 and B.22 from Appendix B, with the refrigerant quality are
shown in Figure 5.16. Moreover, it was decided to include in Figure 5.16a also the evolution of
the refrigerant side heat transfer coefﬁcient calculated applying the Shah’s correlation (Equa-
tion B.7 in Appendix B).
From Figure 5.16a it emerges that the Shah’s correlation predicts higher values for the heat
transfer coefﬁcient refrigerant side. However, for the reasons explained in Chapter 3, it was
decided to apply the Cavallini et al. heat transfer model to estimate the system performances.
In fact, it was decided to roughly quantify the system COP using as refrigerant heat transfer
coefﬁcient and pressure drop in the condensing section the average values from the trends
shown in Figure 5.16. A more precise estimation of the two aforementioned parameters would
have been possible by implementing a discretization procedure. In other words, the con-
sideration of intervals with constant heat ﬂux or constant refrigerant quality variation and
the calculation of the two parameters as the average over these intervals would enable more
precise results. However, the awareness of the poor performances of the system with its actual
conﬁguration if a minichannel condenser is applied, discouraged a precise analysis.
The refrigerant heat transfer coefﬁcient and pressure drop in the condensing section used in
55
==PAGE:76==
Chapter 5. Results from steady-state simulations
Figure 5.15: Evolution of the ﬂow regime for microchannel condenser (Dout,c = 3.4mm).
the simulation, as well as some relevant results from the model are summarised in Table 5.6.
From the table it emerges that the condensing pressure dramatically raises above 21 bar and
that the subcooling section occupies a relevant portion of the condenser: 33%. Moreover, the
pressure drops in all the sections of the condenser are very high resulting in a COP of 3 for the
forth run of the heating up process.
In order to graphically show the impact of the pressure drop on the system, it was decided to
Table 5.6: Numerical values of some key parameters for minichannel condenser with an outer
diameter of 3.4 mm.
αr,cond [W /m2K ]
9117
pc [bar]
21.58
∆pdesup [bar]
1.68
∆pcond [bar]
7
∆psub [bar]
1.21
Atot,cond [m2]
0.1
Adesup [m2]
0.007
Acond [m2]
0.06
Asub [m2]
0.033
UAdesup [W /K ]
10.79
UAcond [W /K ]
101.1
UAsub [W /K ]
30.95
COP [W /K ]
3
Tout,w [°C]
55.9
compare in a pressure-enthalpy diagram the cycle with and without pressure drop using as
condenser a tube of 3.4 mm with a length of 16 m. In order to estimate the refrigerant heat
transfer coefﬁcient of the case without pressure drop, a diagram similar to Figure 5.16a using
56
==PAGE:77==
5.3. Minichannel condenser
(a) COP relative difference for alternative refrigerants com-
pared to R134a.
(b) ˙Vsuc relative difference for alternative refrigerants com-
pared to R134a.
Figure 5.16
the Cavallini et al. heat transfer model was created and the average values were used in the
model. The result is shown in Figure 5.17. The ﬁgure empathizes that the condensing pressure
is signiﬁcantly reduced to 15.5 bar without taking into account the pressure drop. Moreover,
the condensing section occupies the 83% of the overall condenser area, while the area of the
subcooling section amounts only to 4%. The resulting COP is 3.4, meaning that the pressure
drops are responsible for a reduction of the COP of approximately 13%. Consequently, this
investigation suggests that the minichannels are not applicable to the system with the actual
conﬁguration, mainly due to the excessive pressure drop. However, some interventions to limit
the pressure drop would considerably raise the attractiveness of the micro-geometries. More in
details, the introduction of some manifolds in microchannel heat exchangers can considerably
reduce the pressure drop. In fact, by means of the manifolds several microchannels can be
connected in parallel. In this way the length travelled by the ﬂuid in each minichannel would
correspond to few rotations around the hot water tank. This arrangement can considerably
57
==PAGE:78==
Chapter 5. Results from steady-state simulations
Figure 5.17: Comparison of the pressure-enthalpy diagram with and without pressure drop in
case of minichannel condenser.
reduce the pressure drop due to its direct proportionality with the heat exchanger length.
This innovative solution is proposed for the example by the manufacturer Sanhua [63]. An
image of the micro-channel heat exchanger with manifolds manufactured by the company
is given in Figure 5.18. As it can be seen from the vertical section of the manifold presented
in the ﬁgure, the route of the refrigerant in the manifold is blocked in three three points by
means of some ﬂaps. Consequently, the pressure drop needs to be found considering a mix
of serial and parallel runs of the minichannels around the hot water tank. According to the
company this solution:
• reduce the refrigerant charge up to 70%;
• help the different manufacturers to meet high Seasonal Efﬁciency Ratio and Heating
Seasonal Performance Factor requirements;
• reduce the weight and volume up to 50% compared to macrogeometries;
• improve the efﬁciency of the heat transfer up to more than 30%;
• ensure a very limited performance reduction of the heat exchange with lifetime.
Finally, to roughly quantify the economical savings for the acquisition of the condenser,
Equation 4.4 can be applied. The cost of the condenser per unit of length is reduced from the
1.13 AC/m of the actual diameter of 9.95 mm to 0.49 AC/m for reduced diameter of 3.4 mm.
58
==PAGE:79==
5.4. Alternative refrigerants
Figure 5.18: Micro-channel heat exchanger with manifolds manufactured by Sanhua [63].
5.4
Alternative refrigerants
In this section, the performances of the system using alternative refrigerants as energy carrier
are presented. The possible chosen alternatives are R290, R600a, R1234yf and R1234ze(E).
The refrigerants trans-1,3,3,3-tetraﬂuoropropene (R1234ze(E)) and 2,3,3,3-tetraﬂuoroprop-1-
ene (R1234yf) are unsaturated ﬂuorinated compounds which are also known as hydroﬂuoro-
oleﬁns (HFOs) refrigerants. They are considered promising alternatives to the commonly used
refrigerants because of their particularly low atmospheric lifetime caused by their reactivity
with atmospheric hydroxyl radicals [64]. More in details, according to Fukuda et al.[65] and
Leck [66], R1234ze(E) and R1234yf are characterized by a GW P100 of respectively 6 and 4, while
the GW P100 of R134a is 1430.
Leck [66] compared the refrigeration properties of R134a and R1234yf concluding that they
are similar and that the HFO refrigerant is suitable to replace R134a in a wide range of appli-
cations. Fukuda et al. [65] tested from both a numerical and experimental point of the view
the feasibility of R1234ze(E) for high-temperature heat pumps used for industrial purposes.
The authors demonstrated that this low-GWP refrigerant is suitable also for these applications,
rather than traditional refrigeration systems. A comparison between the local heat transfer
coefﬁcients of R134a and R1234yf during condensation at 40°C in a tube having a diameter
of 0.96 mm is presented by Del Col et al. [67] for mass velocities varied from 200 to 1000
kgm−2s−1. It was observed that, in case of equal mass velocity, R1234yf is characterised by
lower heat transfer coefﬁcients: a reduction of 15% emerged at 200 kgm−2s−1 and a vapour
quality of 0.4. Moreover, Navarro-Esbrì et al. [68] experimentally evaluated the possibility to
use R1234yf as a drop-in replacement of R134a in a refrigeration system. The results showed
that the system COP and cooling capacity were reduced respectively by 19% and 9% when the
HFO refrigerant was used. However, it was also observed that the application of an internal
heat exchanger reduces the gap in energy performances between the two refrigerants.
R290 and R600a are natural refrigerants and are particularly attractive because of their nil ODP
59
==PAGE:80==
Chapter 5. Results from steady-state simulations
and low GWP, around 3. They are characterised by acceptable toxicity levels but both of them
are ﬂammable. The performances of R600a in a domestic refrigerator originally manufactured
to work with R134a were analysed by Joybary et al. [69]. An exergy analysis was conducted
on the original system, and it was observed that the compressor was characterized by the
highest exergy destruction. Then it was decided to replace R134a with R600a and the Tagauchi
method was applied in order to reduce the exergy destruction in the system with the natural
refrigerant. The authors found that at optimal conditions the R600a charge amount was 55%
lower than the one in the original system. This result, combined with the fact that R134a is
two times more expensive than R600a, increases the economical attractiveness of the natural
refrigerant. No considerations were reported concerning the system COP. Navarro et al. [70]
analysed the feasibility of the application of R290 as a drop-in replacement of R134a in an
open piston compressor. More in details, the authors conducted a comparative experimental
study considering R1234yf and R290 as alternatives to R134a. It was concluded that both
refrigerants are valid alternatives. R290 showed better performances from the efﬁciency point
of the view in all the tested conditions: the volumetric and isentropic efﬁciency were enhanced
by respectively 30% and 15%. Moreover, Danfoss [71] conﬁrmed that R290 has been used in
domestic heat pumps in Germany during last years, even though different level of success were
encountered. However, it was concluded that propane is a possible refrigerant for domestic
application with good performances in terms of energy efﬁciency, even though particular
attention needs to be addressed to its ﬂammability.
Before analysing the results, it is worthy to estimate how the performances of the system
working with R134a are altered by the assumptions presented in Section 4.3. It was decided to
replicate Figure 5.5 for three condenser geometries and system conﬁgurations, as depicted in
Figure 5.19. The condenser length was set to 70 m for the condenser diameters of 6.65 mm,
while it was 54 m for the condenser outer diameter of 9.95 mm. The label “real” in the Figure
refers to the case in which the isentropic efﬁciency of the compressor and the refrigerant mass
ﬂow rate were found from the correlations derived from the real compressor. The label “fake”
identiﬁes the system implemented applying the assumptions described in Section 4.3.
From Figure 5.19 it emerges that the performances of the system are overestimated if the
fake compressor is applied. In the following, it was decided to report some numerical results
regarding the system with a condenser outer diameter of 9.95 mm with IHEX. The ﬁrst reason
for the different performances lays in the difference between the isentropic efﬁciencies: for
the fake compressor it is set to 0.7 while for the real compressor it slightly ﬂuctuates around
the value of 0.68. Secondly, the two models are characterised by different refrigerant mass
ﬂow rates: for the real compressor its value is around 0.0067 kg/s while it is reduced to
approximately 0.0047 kg/s by applying the fake compressor. This implies higher values for
both the compressor work and the heating capacity for the real case. Thirdly, the heating
capacity of the condenser differs for the two cases due to the fact that in the model with the
real compressor the outlet water temperature was a free parameter. Its value was always
approximately 3-4 K higher than the 52°C set for the case with fake compressor, resulting in
60
==PAGE:81==
5.4. Alternative refrigerants
Figure 5.19: COP as a function of the condenser length for the system with the real compressor
and with the fake compressor.
a greater heating capacity for the model with real compressor. Fourthly, the pressure ratio
was always bigger for the case with real compressor, resulting in an enhancement of the
compressor work. Approximate value for the pressure ratios are 4.6 with the fake compressor
and 5.3 in case of real compressor.
The detriment of the greater compressor work prevails over the beneﬁt of the higher heating
capacity, resulting in poorer performances of the system when the correlations derived from
the real compressor are used.
From the ﬁgure, it can be also observed that for both cases the conﬁguration with IHEX
and Dout,c = 6.95mm is the best one. However, the results for the system without IHEX and
Dout = 6.95mm are reversed for the two compressor models: its performances are worse than
the actual system conﬁguration, i.e. Dout,c = 6.95mm with IHEX, in case of fake compressor.
Finally, from the ﬁgure it emerges that for both the compressor models, the system COP are
close for the three chosen system conﬁgurations.
It is also relevant to compare the pressure-enthalpy diagrams for the considered refrigerants.
They are all shown in Figure 5.20, in which the liquid lines start from a pressure of 0 bar and a
speciﬁc enthalpy of 0 kJ/kg to facilitate the graphical comparison of the curves. Figure 5.20
gives an indication about the latent heat of vaporization of each refrigerant. Higher latent
heats require a lower refrigerant mass ﬂow rate to provide the same heat at the condenser.
Moreover, the ﬁgure conﬁrms that all the considered ﬂuids are suitable for the analysed appli-
cation because they are characterised by similar operational ranges.
Initially, it was decided to analyse the performances in terms of COP and volumetric ﬂow rates
of the system working with different refrigerants considering its actual conﬁguration, i.e a
61
==PAGE:82==
Chapter 5. Results from steady-state simulations
Figure 5.20: Comparison of the pressure-enthalpy diagrams for the alternative refrigerants.
condenser outer diameter of 9.95 mm, an overall condenser length of 54 m and including
the internal heat recovery unit. The COP and ˙Vsuc relative differences compared to R134a are
shown in Figure 5.21. Figure 5.21 gives conﬂicting indications. From Figure 5.21a it emerges
that the system working with R600a improves its performances by 1.6%. On the other hand,
the same refrigerant is the one facing the highest enhancement of the volumetric ﬂow rate,
as shown in Figure 5.21b. A higher volumetric ﬂow rate implies a bigger compressor and
consequently raises the expenditure for this component. As a consequence, R600a does not
seem attractive from the economical point of view, despite the slight improvement of the COP.
Moreover, the ﬁgure highlights that the use of R1234yf as energy carrier lower the system COP
by 2.5%, but implies a very limited increase of the volumetric ﬂow rate compared to R134a,
i.e. approximately 3%. The ﬁndings about the COP for the refrigerant R1234yf are aligned
with what emerged from the literature. As aforementioned, according to Navarro-Esbrì et al.
[68], the system without IHEX working with R1234yf showed signiﬁcantly lower performances
compared to the same system conﬁguration working with R134a. In the current analysis, it
was observed that if the heat recovery unit is removed and the condenser outer diameter and
length are kept constant, the COP of system with R1234a is approximately 5% lower than the
system working with R134a. Moreover, Navarro-Esbrì et al. [68] also empathized that the inclu-
sion of the IHEX reduces the differences in energy performances. This is conﬁrmed by Figure
5.21a, in which the COP differs by 2.5 %, halving the gap in energy performances compared
to the systems without IHEX. However, differently than what stated by Del Col et al. [67], the
average heat transfer coefﬁcient refrigerant side during the condensing process calculated
using Equation B.11 presented in Appendix B is 2.5 % higher for R1234yf compared to R134a.
However, this difference can be explained with the discrepancy in mass velocities between
the two refrigerants. In fact, while Del Col et al. conducted experiments considering the same
mass velocities for the two refrigerants, in the present study, due to the difference in refrigerant
mass ﬂow rate, the mass velocity for R1234yf is 106 kgm−2s−1 , while its value is 84 kgm−2s−1
62
==PAGE:83==
5.4. Alternative refrigerants
for R134a. Del Col et al. compared the saturation properties of the two refrigerant at 40°C and
the authors stated that the difference between the liquid thermal conductivities of 18.3 % in
favour of R134a is a key factor for explaining the higher heat transfer coefﬁcient with equal
mass velocity. In fact the aforementioned parameter inﬂuences the thermal resistance in the
liquid ﬁlm. In the current study, the condensing temperatures are very close to 50°C for both
cases and the liquid thermal conductivity of R134a is 23.5 % higher than the one of R1234yf.
However, the lower thermal resistance in the liquid ﬁlm for the the system working R134a
cannot overcame the advantage caused by the greater mass velocity for R1234yf resulting in a
lower heat transfer coefﬁcient.
From Figure 5.21 it also emerges that despite the slight reduction in COP, i.e. 1.3% , R290 is
(a) COP relative difference for alternative refrigerants com-
pared to R134a.
(b) ˙Vsuc relative difference for alternative refrigerants com-
pared to R134a.
Figure 5.21
the only refrigerant with a lower volumetric ﬂow rate with respect to R134a, with a % ˙Vsuc of
-26%. Consequently, this refrigerant can signiﬁcantly lower the expenditure for the compres-
sor. Finally, R1234ze shows almost the same performances as R134a in therms of COP, but it
requires an increase of 33% of the volumetric ﬂow rate.
The trend of refrigerant mass ﬂow rates could be easily predicted considering Figure 5.20. The
63
==PAGE:84==
Chapter 5. Results from steady-state simulations
system working with R1234ze requires the highest mass ﬂow rate (0.0060 kg s−1) due to the
smallest heat of vaporization. The system using R290 as energy carrier shows the smallest
mass ﬂow rate (0.0025 kg s−1), even though its value was very close to the one required by the
system working with R600a (0.0026 kg s−1).
The pressure drops are not reported due to their limited values caused by the big size of the
condenser considered in this investigation.
It was then decided to evaluate the performances of the system in terms of COP varying the
condenser tube and diameter. The same system conﬁgurations presented in Figure 5.19 were
considered for each refrigerant. It was chosen to present and compare only the conﬁguration
giving the best COP for each refrigerant. For all the analysed ﬂuids the conﬁguration with
an outer condenser diameter of 6.65 mm, with IHEX and with a condenser length of 70 m
showed the best COP. The trend of the COP with the condenser length is depicted in Figure
5.22. The trend of the volumetric ﬂow rate was not presented because it was subjected to
minor variations with the condenser length.
The indications deriving from Figure 5.21a are conﬁrmed in Figure 5.22 also for the optimal
system conﬁguration among the considered ones. The only difference is the fact that for
condenser length higher than 62 m the system working with R1234yf shows a higher COP that
the system with R290. For condenser length higher than 62 m it can also be observed that
the trend of the system COP with R1234ze becomes ﬂat. This is due to the fact that after this
length the overall heat transfer coefﬁcient in the condensing section and the refrigerant mass
ﬂow rate keep constant values.
The gap between the trend of the COP with R600a and the one of R1234yf is almost constant
around a value of 5%. Finally, it can be concluded that for all the refrigerants, the COP is only
marginally affected by the condenser length if its value is varied from 30 m to 70 m.
It is also relevant to show for the different refrigerants the evolution of the pressure drop with
the overall condenser length for the same system conﬁguration used to draw the trends in
Figure 5.22. It was decided to report in Figure 5.23 only the pressure drop in the condensing
section, due to its considerably greater contribution compared to the one of the subcooling
and desuperheating sections.
Figure 5.23 shows that the two refrigerants R1234yf and R1234ze are characterised by the
highest pressure drop in the condensing section. Also for the pressure drop, the system working
with R1234ze presents a ﬂat trend after a condenser length of 62 m, for the same reasons to
justify its trend in Figure 5.22. On the other hand, the pressure drop in the condensing section
of the refrigerant R290 is the smallest. To explain these trends for the different refrigerants, it
must be mentioned that the pressure gradient in the condensing section, computed applying
the Muller-Steinhagen and Heck correlation [46], is a function of the refrigerant mass ﬂow rate,
as show in Appendix B.1.2. Higher mass ﬂow rates imply higher values for the monophase
frictional pressure gradients for the vapour and liquid phases, enhancing the frictional pressure
gradient. As previously explained by observing Figure 5.20, the mass ﬂow rate is higher for
64
==PAGE:85==
5.4. Alternative refrigerants
Figure 5.22: COP as a function of the condenser length for the system working with different
refrigerants.
refrigerants with lower latent heat of vaporization. This justiﬁes the trends of Figure 5.23
5.4.1
Safety aspects
In this section, the safety classiﬁcation for the different refrigerants is reported as well as some
practical considerations mentioned by Mariam Jarahnejad [72]. Before stating the toxicity and
ﬂammability behaviour of the different refrigerants, it is relevant to report in Figure 5.24 the
safety classiﬁcation of the refrigerants, according to ANSI/ASHRAE Standard 34-2007 [73]. The
safety classes for the refrigerants analysed in the current study is presented in Table 5.7.
The hydrocarbons refrigerant considered in this study, i.e. R290 and R600a, are classiﬁed as
Table 5.7: Safety classes of the analysed refrigerants.
Propane (R290)
A3
Isobutane (R600a)
A3
R134a
A1
R1234ze
A2L
R1234yf
A2L
highly ﬂammable and in a range of low toxicity. These refrigerants are compatible to work
with almost all lubricants (a part the ones containing silicate and silicone) commonly used in
refrigeration applications. According to Mariam Jarahnejad [72], nowadays they are applied in
several domestic refrigerators.
65
==PAGE:86==
Chapter 5. Results from steady-state simulations
Figure 5.23: Pressure drop in the condensing section as a function of the condenser length for
the system working with different refrigerants.
HFO-1234ze is non-ﬂammable, increasing its suitability in domestic applications. However,
overheating, ﬂames and sparks can cause ﬁre and consequently the risks of corrosion and
toxic decomposition. Mariam Jarahnejad [72] stated that the products of the pyrolysis of HFC-
1234ze contain hazardous products such as hydrogen ﬂuoride and ﬂuorocarbons. Moreover,
it is suggested to avoid any reaction with alkali metals. In case of leakage, this refrigerant does
not damage the biodiversity. However the biodegradability of R1234ze is not easy.
Finally, HFO-1234yf is characterised by the same safety classiﬁcation of HFC-1234ze. Ac-
cording to Mariam Jarahnejad [72], this refrigerant at high temperature can be decomposed
forming hydroﬂuoric acid (HF) and carbonyl ﬂuoride(COF2), which is converted to CO and
CO2 in case of contact with water. It is also a stable and neutral gas whose polymerization
is not harmful. Due to its difﬁcult biodegradability, it should not be discharged in the am-
bient. Mariam Jarahnejad [72] also mentioned some bases, acids and oxidizing agents not
compatible with this refrigerant.
5.5
Analysis of the other runs
The previous investigations were focused on the analysis of the performances of the forth run
of the heating up process. In this chapter, some relevant results concerning Run 1, 2 and 3 will
be provided. Again, as previously done, the three system conﬁgurations ﬁrstly described in
Section 5.2 will be considered.
As mentioned in Chapter 3, it was decided to base the initial investigation on run 4 because of
its worse performances compared to the other phases of the heating up process. The goodness
of this assumption is demonstrated in Table 5.8, in which the system COP for the four runs is
66
==PAGE:87==
5.5. Analysis of the other runs
Figure 5.24: Safety classiﬁcation of refrigerants according to ASHRAE Standard 34-2007 [73].
reported.
The relative increase of the COP compared to the COP of Case 1 is depicted in Figure 5.25.
Table 5.8: COP of the four runs of the heating up process.
COP
Case 1
Case 2
Case 3
Run 1
3.62
3.66
3.65
Run 2
4.10
4.12
4.14
Run 3
4.83
4.85
4.88
Run 4
5.61
5.61
5.65
The ﬁgure shows that for all the runs the percentage variation of the COP is very limited for the
analysed conﬁgurations. Moving from Run 4 to Run 1, the COP of Case 2 compared to the one
of Case 1 shows an almost linear reduction, meaning that the beneﬁt gained from the reduced
diameter is lowered for lower hot water temperatures. Differently, the %COP variation for Case
3 shows an inverted U-shaped trend, with a peak in Run 2.
It was then decided to show the main differences between the cycle parameters of the three
system conﬁgurations during the four runs. First of all, different shares of the overall condenser
area among the three sections were observed. More in details, while the area of the condensing
section for Case 1 is subjected to minor variations during the four runs, for Case 2 and 3 it
shows a considerable reduction. For a graphical visualization of this fact, the percentage share
of the overall condenser area between the three sections of the condenser is depicted for the 4
runs in Figure 5.26 for Cases 1 and 2. Case 3 is not presented because it is characterised by a
behaviour very similar to the one of Case 2. Figures 5.26a and 5.26b highlights that the greatest
discrepancy occurs between the forth and the third run. Case 1 shows marginal variations,
67
==PAGE:88==
Chapter 5. Results from steady-state simulations
Figure 5.25: Relative variation of the COP of Case 2 and and Case 3 compared to the COP of
Case 1.
while in Case 2 the area of the condensing section is sharply reduced causing a considerable in-
crease of the area of the subcooler. For a better understanding of this behaviour, a comparison
between the transition from Run 4 to Run 3 for Case 1 and Case 2 is ﬁrstly assessed. More in
details, the variations occurring in the expression of the LMTD in the condensing sections are
considered (Equation 3.7 applied to the condensing section). For both Case 1 and 2, the heats
transferred in the condensing section and the U values are subjected to similar variations
moving from Run 4 to Run 3. Consequently, the deciding parameter to justify the variation in
the condensing area is the logarithmic mean temperature difference. For Case 1 it is increased
by 8 % from Run 4 to Run 3, while Case 2 shows a much bigger increase amounting to 57 %.
Consequently, due to the similarity of the variation of ˙Qcond between Case 1 and 2, the heat
transfer area of the condensing section strongly decreases in Case 2 while it is characterised
by a minor ﬂuctuation for Case 1.
After the observation of this evidence, it is also relevant to investigate the variations of some
Table 5.9: Comparison between some main parameters for Run 4 and Run 3 for Case 2.
Run 4
Run 3
˙mr [kg/s]
0.0066
0.0067
˙Qdesup [W ]
283.2
255.5
˙Qcond [W ]
1011
1085
˙Qsub [W ]
51.3
50.2
Udesup [W /m2K ]
561.4
539.3
Ucond [W /m2K ]
953.3
898.3
Usub [W /m2K ]
489.3
469.4
∆pdesup [bar]
0.14
0.09
∆pcond [bar]
0.96
0.84
∆psub [bar]
0.003
0.05
68
==PAGE:89==
5.5. Analysis of the other runs
(a) Percentage variation of the areas in the
three sections of the condenser during the four
runs for Case 1.
(b) Percentage variation of the areas in the
three sections of the condenser during the four
runs for Case 2.
Figure 5.26
relevant parameters for Case 2 from Run 4 to Run 3. Some main parameters for the forth
and the third run for Case 2 are summarized in Table 5.9. The reduction of ˙Qdesup and the
increase of ˙Qcond are caused by the variation of the enthalpy differences caused by the shape
of the Andrews thermodynamic diagram for lower condensing pressure, shown for the two
considered Runs in Figure 5.27. In fact, as shown in Table 5.9, the refrigerant mass ﬂow rate is
subjected to minor variations. All the U values are decreased for the third run and the one in
the condensing section shows the biggest reduction. The reason for this drop lays in the heat
transfer coefﬁcients water side for all the three sections of the condenser. They are sharply
reduced from Run 4 to Run 3 due to the lower wall temperatures, which are directly propor-
tional to the Rayleigh numbers and consequently to the Nusselt numbers. To give a numerical
prove of the lower wall temperatures, it is worthy to mention the discharge temperatures from
the compressor for Run 4 and Run 3: they are respectively 90°C and 80°C. The condensing
section is subjected to the highest reduction in U value because the dominant and prevailing
resistance to the heat exchange is in the water side. For the desuperheating and subcooling
sections, the refrigerant in its single phase is the dominant resistance. The variations of the
pressure drops for the three sections of the condenser reﬂect the trends of the share of the
overall condenser area shown in Figure 5.26b.
In fact, the pressure drop of each section is directly proportional to the length of the corre-
sponding section: a reduction of the area of the section implies a lower length resulting in
smaller pressure drop. Table 5.9 shows that the pressure drops in the desuperheating and
condensing sections are decreased moving from Run 4 to Run 3, while the pressure drop in
the subcooler is raised. The changes of the pressure drops are aligned with the variations of
the logarithmic mean temperature difference mentioned in the previous paragraph. More in
details, while the Pinch Point for Run 4 is at the beginning of the condensing section (or at the
end of the desuperheating section), for Run 3 the minimum temperature difference between
the water and the refrigerant proﬁles shifts to the end of the subcooling section.
69
==PAGE:90==
Chapter 5. Results from steady-state simulations
Figure 5.27: Pressure-enthalpy diagrams for Run 3 and Run 4 of Case 2.
The reason for these trends lay in Figure 5.28a, in which the T-Q diagrams of Case 2 for
Run 3 and Run 4 are plotted. The initial water temperatures in the ﬁgure were shifted to 0°C
to facilitate the comparison. Figure 5.28b depicts the same comparison between the T-Q
diagrams of Case 1 for Run 3 and Run 4. Both the ﬁgures show that the temperature proﬁle for
the water is characterised by different slopes for the forth and the third run. This is due to the
different water mass ﬂow rates given as input for the two runs, as summarised in Table 4.1.
More in details, the smaller mass ﬂow rate of Run 4 causes a steeper trend for the temperature
proﬁle of the water if compared to Run 3. Both for Case 1 and Case 2, this fact results in a
reduction of the temperature difference between the water and the refrigerant at the end of
the subcooling section moving from Run 4 to Run 3. However, for Case 1 the Pinch Point
remains at the end of the desuperheating section (or beginning of the condensing section)
in both Run 4 and Run 3 due to the small contribution of the pressure drops. On the other
hand, for Case 2, moving from Run 4 to Run 3, the different slopes of the two water proﬁles
cause a shift of the Pinch Point from the end of the desuperheating section to the end of the
subccoling section because of the higher pressure drops involved. It is difﬁcult to notice this
shift in Figure 5.28a due to the small temperature differences involved. For Run 3 of Case 2,
the temperature difference at the end of the subcooler is 0.1 K, while the one at the end of the
desuperheating section is 0.4 K. This very small values can be explained considering the small
mass ﬂow rates of water involved, which can cause the water temperature and the refrigerant
one to be very close. However, experimental measurements would be required to detect the
reliability of this result.
At this point, it is interesting to verify the reason why, despite the similar mass ﬂow rates
presented in Table 4.1, Run 1 and Run 4 are still characterised by different shares of the overall
condenser area between the three sections (Figure 5.26b). The T-Q diagrams comparing
Run 4 and Run 1 for Case 2 is shown in Figure 5.29a. Again all the temperatures are shifted
70
==PAGE:91==
5.5. Analysis of the other runs
(a) T-Q diagrams for Run 4 and Run 3 of Case 2.
(b) T-Q diagrams for Run 4 and Run 3 of Case 1.
Figure 5.28
down to 0°C. The ﬁgure shows a higher overall heat transfer for the ﬁrst run, again cause by
the shape of the Andrews thermodynamic diagram. The temperature proﬁles of the water
have similar slopes as expected. The main difference between the two T-Q diagrams is the
considerable higher pressure drop in the condensing section for Run 1. For this reason, it
was decided to plot in Figure 5.29b the evolution with the vapour quality of the pressure
gradient in the condensing section calculated by applying the Muller-Steinhagen and Heck
correlation [46]. The equations applied are reported in Section B.1.2 of Appendix B. Run 1
shows a considerable higher pressure gradient compared tu Run 4. These trends were found
to be due to the difference between the densities of the vapour phase for the two runs: it is
almost halved moving from Run 4 to Run 1. This is consequence of the lower condensing
pressure for Run 1. The lower vapour density causes an increase of the monophase frictional
pressure gradient for the vapour phase, which raises the two-phase frictional pressure gradient.
71
==PAGE:92==
Chapter 5. Results from steady-state simulations
(a) T-Q diagrams for Run 4 and Run 1 of Case 2.
(b) Evolution with the vapour quality of the pressure gradient in the
condensing section calculated by applying the Muller-Steinhagen and
Heck correlation for Run 4 and Run 1 of Case 2..
Figure 5.29
Other differences found concern the heat transferred in the condensing and desuperheting
section and the compressor work for the three Cases. However, the reasons for these differ-
ences was mentioned previously during the report and they are only brieﬂy summarised in this
section. The heat transferred in the condensing section is increased lowering the condenser
diameter due to the higher enthalpy difference. Through all the runs, Case 3 shows the highest
amount of heat released in the condenser section and the lowest compressor work due to the
slightly better isentropic efﬁciency of the compressor. On the other hand, Cases 1 and 2 are
characterised by a greater heat transferred in the desuperheater due to the presence of the
internal heat recovery unit.
72
==PAGE:93==
6 Results from dynamic simulations
In this chapter the ﬁndings from the dynamic simulations conducted in the Dymola envi-
ronment are presented. Before explaining the main results derived from the investigations, a
validation of the model described in Section 3.2 through experimental results is proposed.
6.1
Validation of the model
As aforementioned, experimental data are used to validate and to adjust some parameters
of the tank model, such as the mass fraction of water which is assumed to be recirculated
in the tank (r) and the heat loss to the ambient. Taking into account the indications from
the steady-state investigations about the distance from the bottom of the tank at which each
section of the condenser starts (y) for the actual system conﬁguration, it was decided to
distribute the desuperheater, the condenser and the subcooler in the different layers of the
tank as summarised in Table 6.1. The overall heat transferred in the condensing section was
divided by three to account that it is distributed to three different nodes. This distribution was
kept constant for all the heating up process because no relevant variations of the parameter y
were observed for the existing system conﬁguration (Case 1).
The heat transferred from each section of the condenser to the hot water in the tank was
Table 6.1: Distribution of the three sections of the condenser in the tank nodes.
Section of the condenser
Nodes
Desuperheating
14
Condensing
15-16-17
Subcooling
18
implemented in the model by deriving some correlations relating the heat released and the
water temperature in the tank. More in details, the heat transferred through each section was
related to the corresponding average water temperature of the section, considering the outputs
from the four runs previously analysed. Also the compressor work was introduced in the model
73
==PAGE:94==
Chapter 6. Results from dynamic simulations
by means of correlations derived from the steady state simulations. Further explanations and
the correlations for the different system conﬁgurations analysed are presented in Appendix C.
Finally, before presenting the results, the location of the temperature sensor required to
implement the thermostatic control strategy needs to be speciﬁed. It was initially positioned
in node 17, the last layer of the condensing section. The upper limit for the temperature in
layer 17, i.e. the set point temperature, was set to 52°C, meaning that when the water reaches
this temperature at that layer the heat pump switches off.
Figure 6.1: Temperature distribution in the nodes of the tank in case of r = 0%/s and Uamb = 0
W /m2K .
Initially, no heat loss to the ambient was considered and a nil water recirculation in the tank
was assumed. The resulting temperature distribution in the 20 layers of the tanks is depicted
in Figure 6.1. It was decided to highlight with yellow the water temperatures in the tank
around the condenser and with blue the water temperature at the top node of the tank. The
ﬁgure shows that the absence of water recirculation in the tank model causes an excessive and
unrealistic thermal stratiﬁcation between the nodes. More in details, the water temperatures
of layers 15-16-17 are subjected to a rapid increase due to the considerable heat transferred
in the condensing section. The temperatures in layers 14 and 18, respectively where the
desuperheater and the subcooler are located, show a more limited increase because of the
reduced heat released by the refrigerant in its single phase. The temperatures in the two layers
74
==PAGE:95==
6.1. Validation of the model
below the condenser (19 and 20) and in the four layers above the condenser (10, 11, 12 and 13)
are slightly raised due to the contribution of the conduction between adjacent layers. Finally,
all the layers between the ninth and the ﬁrst are characterised by a constant temperature of
10°C, which is the uniform temperature inside the tank before starting the heating up process.
(a) Temperature distribution in the nodes of the tank in case of r = 10%/s and Uamb = 7 W /m2K .
(b) Comparison between the experimental data concerning the evolution of the temperatures T9 and
T10, and the predicted temperature proﬁles in node 10 and 17.
Figure 6.2
75
==PAGE:96==
Chapter 6. Results from dynamic simulations
Other simulations were performed varying r. They are presented in Appendix D. It was ob-
served that even for a value of 0.5 %/s, the mixing between the layers plays a noticeable effect
on the temperature distributions. The value for the fraction of water recirculating in the tank
ensuring a good agreement with experimental results was 10 %/s. Later, it was noticed that the
heat loss to the ambient inﬂuences the shape of the temperature proﬁles during the heating up
process. A greater contribution of the heat loss implies a more concave trend for the tempera-
ture distributions. The reason for this effect is explained in Appendix D. A satisfactory match
between experimental results and predicted results from the model was achieved settingUamb
to 7 W /m2K , as shown in Figure 6.2. Figure 6.2a depicts the temperature distributions in
all the 20 nodes setting r and Uamb respectively to 10 %/s and 7 W /m2K . Figure 6.2b shows
a comparison between the experimental data provided by Metro Therm and the predicted
temperature proﬁles in nodes 10 and 17, calculated by setting the same starting water temper-
ature of the experiments. Layers 10 and 17 were selected as representative respectively for the
temperatures at the middle and at the bottom of the tank. As mentioned in Chapter 4, several
experimental results were given by the company. For the implementation of the four runs in
the steady-state simulations, it was chosen to consider the data characterised by the highest
temperature difference between the bottom and the middle of the tank. This represents a
worst-case condition and was suitable to detect possible improvements of the COP. On the
other hand, for the validation of the model, it is relevant to refer to the most probable situation,
i.e. the one which was observed to occur with a certain repetitiveness. This condition, noticed
in many experimental data, is the one depicted in Figure 6.2b for the experimental data, with
limited temperature differences between T9 and T10. Figure 6.2b does not include numerical
indications in the axis. This choice was done in order to respect the conﬁdentiality agreement
and avoid to directly show the provided data.
It is relevant to compare predicted T10 with experimental T9 and predicted T17 with experimen-
tal T10. For what concerns the ﬁrst comparison, a maximum discrepancy of 8% was observed.
The highest percentage difference between the two temperatures for the latter comparison
was 12%. Acceptable values for the discrepancy between experimental and predicted results
found in the literature are up to 20% [16] [74] [26], consequently the model can be consid-
ered successfully validated. Moreover, it can be seen that the predicted temperature proﬁles
from the tank model replicate with satisfactory agreement the slightly concave trend of the
experimental data. Figure 6.2a depicts that all the temperature proﬁles from node 17 to node
1 are characterised by this concave trend and are quite homogeneous. An exception to this
homogeneity is represented by the evolution of the temperatures in layers 18, 19 and 20. In
fact the temperature distributions in the last three nodes of the tank show considerably lower
values. This is an expected results if the heat transfer mechanism summarised in Figure 3.3 is
applied to the bottom of the tank. During all the heating up process, no water recirculation
is permitted in the three layers in the lower part of the tank. In fact, if node 19 is considered
the middle node in Figure 3.3, i.e. node i, it is clear that both the conditions Ti < Ti−1 and
Ti+1 < Ti occur. Moreover, also the water mixing between layer 18 and layer 17 is not allowed
76
==PAGE:97==
6.1. Validation of the model
due to the higher temperature of layer 17. Consequently, node 18 is slightly heated up thanks
to only contributions of the heat transferred through the subcooling section of the condenser
and through the conduction from the above layer. Layers 19 and 20 are subjected to a limited
temperature raise because of the heat conduction between adjacent layers. The validity of
this consideration is proved also by experimental measurements performed by the company
on the really bottom part of the tank. It is consequently evident that the temperature sensor
measuring T10 was not placed in the last three layers of the tank during the tests. Its position
in layer 17, considered in the model, is proved to be a valid assumption.
However, a careful examination of Figures 6.2b highlights a slight difference. In the predicted
temperature distributions from the model, the warmest node is node 17 and the water tem-
peratures from layer 16 to layer 1 are progressively decreased. Consequently T17 is higher
than T10 in Figure 6.2a. On the other hand, from the experimental results it emerges that
the temperature in the middle of the tank (T9) is higher than the one in the bottom of the
tank T10. It was not possible to achieve this condition in the model because the heat transfer
through the condensing section occurs between layers 15 and 17, and consequently they are
characterised by the highest temperatures. Probably, the buoyancy effect in the real tank plays
a major role causing higher water temperatures ascending in the tank. However, despite this
discrepancy, the model can still be considered reliable and, as it emerges from a comparison
between Figures 6.1 and 6.2a, the inclusion of the water recirculation in the tank considerably
increase its realism.
It is also relevant to discuss the reason why in the model node 17 shows the highest temper-
ature even though the same amount of heat is transferred through the condensing section
in nodes 15, 16 and 17. To explain this result it is necessary again to refer to the heat transfer
mechanism depicted in Figure 3.3. Layer 18 is not considered in this discussion because, as
aforementioned, it does not receive any contribution from the water mixing between nodes.
On the other hand, node 16 is receiving and consequently delivering energy from both the
adjacent nodes. The same situation is occurring for node 15. For the two aforementioned
layers all the four energy transfers depicted in Figure 3.3 are occurring. More in details, node
15 is delivering to node 14 and node 16 the same amount of energy. However, the energy deﬁcit
caused by the mixing with node 14 overcomes the energy gain due to the heat exchange with
layer 16. In other words, node 15 is “cooled down” by layer 14 more than the extent in which it
is “heated up” by node 16 because of the low temperature of node 14. The same reasoning
can be applied to node 16, whose temperature is reduced due to the interaction with layer 15.
However, due to the fact that layer 15 is warmer than layer 14, the energy deﬁcit for node 16 is
less disadvantageous than the one of node 15. The same consideration can be applied also for
layer 17, concluding that node 17 is characterised by the least disadvantageous energy deﬁcit
with the above layer (node 16). This justiﬁes its highest temperature in the model.
77
==PAGE:98==
Chapter 6. Results from dynamic simulations
6.2
Comparison between the heating up processes
After the model has been validated, it was used to compare the three system conﬁgurations
described in Chapter 5.2. An assumption was required at this stage in order to simplify the
model implementation. The distribution of the three sections of the condenser in the tank
nodes is kept as described in Table 6.1 for all the cases. However, a more proper formulation
of the model should take into account that due to the considerable variation of the areas of
the three sections of the condenser proved in Section 5.5, also the repartition of the nodes
should vary. This would require an additional if-statement increasing the complexity of the
model. Moreover, it must be speciﬁed that the correct amount of heat is transferred through
each section of the condenser thanks to the correlations described in Appendix C. In fact, they
take into account the evolution of the areas in the condenser sections.
The ﬁrst comparison between the three system conﬁgurations analysed can be based on
the COPavg at the end of the heating up process. This parameter takes into account the
overall energies involved during the heating up process. All the cases show a COPavg of 5: no
differences were observed. This result is not aligned with what presented in Figure 5.25, in
which some differences in the COP were spotted for the four runs. In order to understand the
reason for this discrepancy, a simulation of the heating up process without considering the
heat loss to the ambient was run (Uamb = 0). This simulation showed some slight differences
and conﬁrmed the results of Figure 5.25. At the end of the heating up process, Case 3 shows a
slightly better COPavg than Case 1, i.e. around 1%. Case 2 is characterised again by almost
the same COPavg of Case 1: as in Figure 5.25 the instantaneous COP for the last phase of the
heating up process is slightly enhanced, but this does not affect signiﬁcantly the COPavg. This
observation implies that Case 3 is subjected to slightly higher heat loss to the ambient than
the other cases and that the contribution of the heat loss levels the variations in the COPavg
between the different system conﬁgurations.
The next investigation was conducted in order to detect if different ambient temperatures can
cause some variations of the COPavg. The average monthly temperatures for the locations
of Copenhagen and Paris summarised in Table 5.4 are again considered. More in details,
the heating up process was simulated for the most extreme value: -1°C (January-February in
Copenhagen). This was the value considered for the supplied air temperature at the evaporator.
The correlations for the compressor work and the heat transferred in the three sections
of the condenser were derived in the same way explained in Appendix C, considering the
same assumptions described in Section 5.2. Moreover, for the assessment of the heat loss
to the ambient, from the aforementioned outdoor temperatures it was required to ﬁnd the
corresponding temperature in the basement where the heat pump is again assumed to be
placed. The application of one of the correlations developed by Armstrong et al. [75] was
considered suitable for this purpose. In fact, in that study the basement foundation surface
temperatures and ground temperatures where monitored for 7.5 years in a Canadian reference
house. Some correlations were developed in order to relate the foundation surface temperature
78
==PAGE:99==
6.2. Comparison between the heating up processes
Figure 6.3: Evolution of the temperature proﬁle in node 17 during the heating up process for
the three cases considering both a Tamb of 7°C and -1°C.
to the outdoor temperature. Due to the location of the evaporator on the top of the tank for
the analysed system, it was chosen to apply Equation 6.1, which was derived measuring with a
thermocouple the temperature at the top of the interior of the basement wall.
Tbasement = 0.0061Tamb +0.4932Tamb +6.7018
(6.1)
The corresponding values of the basement temperatures for Tamb of -1°C is 6.2°C. The heating
process process derived implementing these new values is compared with the original one in
which the air is supplied to the evaporator at 7°C and the temperature in the basement is 20°C.
Table 6.2: COPavg of the overall heating up process for the the three considered system
conﬁgurations for an ambient temperature of -1°C.
System conﬁguration
COPavg
Case 1
3.94
Case 2
3.91
Case 3
3.85
The COPavg for the case with ambient temperature of -1°C at the end of the heating up process
is shown in Table 6.2 for the three cases. The table shows again small differences between
79
==PAGE:100==
Chapter 6. Results from dynamic simulations
the different cases. The actual system conﬁguration emerged to offer the best COPavg, 2.3%
higher than one of Case 3. The reason for this difference mainly lays in the heat transferred in
the desuperheating section of the condenser. Despite the slightly higher heat transfer in the
condensing section and the slightly lower compressor work of Case 3, the detriment due to the
smaller heat transfer in the desuperheating section caused by the lack of the IHEX is prevailing
causing a lower COPavg. A graphical representation of the aforementioned results is offered
in Appendix E. This fact also considerably raises the duration of the heating up process, as
shown in Figure 6.3. The ﬁgure depicts the evolution of the temperature proﬁle in node 17
during the heating up process for the three cases considering both a Tamb of 7°C (Case 1, Case
2 and Case 3 in the ﬁgure) and -1°C (Case 1 - Tamb = −1°C, Case 2 - Tamb = −1°C and Case 3 -
Tamb = −1°C in the ﬁgure). Figure 6.3 also shows that the lower temperature in the basement
in case of ambient temperature of 1°C causes higher heat loss to the ambient resulting in a
more concave trend.
6.2.1
Water temperature up to 60°C and position of the sensor
In this section the ﬁrst goal is to estimate the reduction of the COPavg if the heat pump
is required to heat up the domestic hot water up to 60°C. The system performances are
expected to decrease due to the higher pressure ratio involved. This investigation is relevant
because, as aforementioned in the report, some countries can require some periodical thermal
disinfestation of the water stored in a tank. Moreover, in some manufacturer catalogues, such
us the one proposed by the company A.O. Smith [76], it is mentioned that commercial air to
water heat pump water heaters can easily and efﬁciently maintain hot water temperatures in
the tank up to 60°C.
Due to the small magnitude of the parameter variations for the three considered system
conﬁgurations, it was preferred to investigate the inﬂuence of different set point temperatures
only on the actual system conﬁguration, Case 1, chosen as representative also for the other
cases. The variation of the COPavg with the set temperature introduced in the model to
implement the control strategy is depicted in Figure 6.4. In other words, the x-axes shows the
temperature at which the heat pump is switched off (Tstop), and consequently the temperature
at which the heating up process is concluded. The ﬁgure shows an almost linear reduction.
The COPavg is reduced approximately by 10% if the set point temperature is reduced from
52°C to 60°C. Anyway, the numerical values of Figure 6.4 show that the heating up process of
the hot water up to 60°C can still be performed efﬁciently by the heat pump.
Another idea was to plot the reduction of the COPavg as a function of the set point temperature
for different heights of the sensor in the hot water tank. In fact, the current investigation and
all the previous ones were conducted keeping the sensor controlling the operation of the heat
pump in layer 17. However, the very small variations achieved with this sensitivity analysis
discouraged to present these results. The reason for the small magnitude of the variations lay
in the proximity of the temperature proﬁles from node 17 to node 1 depicted in Figure 6.2a.
80
==PAGE:101==
6.2. Comparison between the heating up processes
Figure 6.4: Evolution of the COPavg with the stop temperature for the heat pump for Case 1.
6.2.2
Sensitivity analysis on the compressor work correlation
Figure 6.5: Sensitivity analysis on the compressor work in the dynamic model.
As explained in Appendix C, the compressor work is implemented in the Dymola model by
means of correlations resulting from the simulations of the four runs in the EES model. More
in details, the compressor work is expressed in the dynamic model as a function of the average
water temperature throughout the overall condenser. Looking at Table 6.1, it means that the
mentioned average water temperature is considered between layer 14 and 18. However, as
shown in Figure 6.2a, the temperature proﬁle in node 18 is way lower compared to the one
in the other four nodes. It was consequently decided to investigate the extent in which this
assumption affects the compressor work. The sensitivity analysis was conducted on Case
1, the actual system conﬁguration. The same correlation showed in Figure C.10 is applied.
The compressor work calculated over the average water temperature between layers 14 and
18 is considered as reference value. The relative difference between this benchmark and the
compressor work calculated as a function of the water temperature in each node between 14
and 18 is presented in Figure 6.5. The comparison was performed considering the cumulative
overall energy [J] required to the compressor at the end of the heating up process. As it
emerges from the ﬁgure, the compressor work is subjected to considerable ﬂuctuations. These
81
==PAGE:102==
Chapter 6. Results from dynamic simulations
variations follow the indications of Figure 6.2a: higher values for the temperature proﬁles
imply higher compressor works. More in details, a discrepancy of 14% is observed if the
compressor work is calculated as a function of T17 instead of T18.
6.3
Comparison between the tapping cycle L
Figure 6.6: Evolution with the time of the temperature in node 1 during tapping cycle L and
∆Tminimum or ∆Tdesired for the three considered system conﬁgurations.
In this section the results deriving from the implementation of the tapping cycle L, as described
in Section 4.5, are presented. As aforementioned in that section, Standard DS/EN 16147 [32]
speciﬁes some energy requirement and minimum/desired temperature difference for the
water to be met for every tapping. Even though the fulﬁlment of the energy requirements is
not considered in this work, it is relevant to verify at least if the water temperature in the top
of the tank meets the ∆Tminimum or ∆Tdesired (which are not distinguished) for the tappings
mentioned in Table 4.2. The evolution with the time of the temperature in node 1, the upper
layer of the tank, is shown in Figure 6.6 together with the ∆Tminimum or ∆Tdesired (red line) for
the three considered system conﬁgurations. As it is evident from the ﬁgure, the temperature in
node 1 meets the requirements on the ∆T during all the tapping cycle a part for two time steps:
from hour 5.75 to 6.5 and from hour 12.5 to 13. However, this fact was predictable considering
that in the corresponding tapping for these two time steps is the dish washing, which requires
a temperature lift of 45 K for the water. According to the Standard, the missing temperature
difference should be provided by an additional electrical resistance heater (COP=1) which is
82
==PAGE:103==
6.3. Comparison between the tapping cycle L
not considered in this report. Figure 6.6 suggests that Case 3 should be the system conﬁgura-
tion subjected to the highest penalisation in the system COP, if the electrical resistance heater
is taken into account. In fact, while from hour 5.75 to 6.5 the temperature proﬁles are quite
close, from hour 12.5 to 13 Case 3 shows a signiﬁcant lower temperature at the top of the tank
compared to the other cases.
After this preliminary investigation, the COPavg for the three cases are summarised in Table
6.3. The cumulative energies used to ﬁnd these values include all the contribution until hour
13.5, in which the tapping cycle ends. Also in this case the magnitude of the variations is very
limited. Case 2 offers an enhancement of the COPavg of 0.9% compared to Case 1 due to
higher heat transferred in the overall condenser during all the tapping cycle (the compressor
work is almost the same for the two cases). Case 3 basically does not cause any variation on
the considered parameter.
Table 6.3: COPavg of the tapping cycle L for the the three considered system conﬁgurations.
System conﬁguration
COPavg
Case 1
4.46
Case 2
4.50
Case 3
4.48
83
==PAGE:104==
==PAGE:105==
7 Experimental results
In this chapter, the experimental results derived from the tests conducted in the in-house
laboratory of the company are reported. Both the ﬁndings from the steady-state and dynamic
simulations suggested that very limited variations in terms of COP can be observed with the
two system conﬁgurations analysed. Consequently, the main advantages of a reduced diameter
lays in the cost savings. At the moment of choosing the system conﬁguration to be tested, a
key factor was the need to ﬁnd quickly in the market the condenser tube required. First of all,
the material was changed from aluminium to copper because of the easier availability of the
latter. This variation, implemented in the steady-state model, resulted to cause nil variations
in the system performances due to the small conductance in the tube wall. Two condenser
tube outer diameters satisﬁed the criteria of easy provision: 8 mm and 6 mm. Both of them
had a tube thickness of 1 mm. It was preferred to test the latter option due to the higher
attractiveness in terms of cost savings. The following choice concerned the tube length to be
tested. Again the steady-state simulations indicated that the system COP is varying marginally
with the tube length. Consequently, it was preferred to keep the actual condenser length of
54 m because in this way no changes in the production line would be required. In fact, at the
moment the machine is automated to cut the condenser tube every 54 m. The characteristics
of the tested condenser tube are summarized in Table 7.1. For the rest of report, this system
conﬁguration will be named Case 4.
Table 7.1: Characteristics of the tested condenser tube (Case 4).
Material
Copper
Dout,c [mm]
6
s [mm]
1
Lc [m]
54
Atot,c [m2]
0.85
It was then decided to keep the internal heat recovery unit in the system. This choice was
85
==PAGE:106==
Chapter 7. Experimental results
caused by the lack of signiﬁcant improvements caused by the exclusion of this component.
Moreover, Figure 6.3 proves that the absence of the IHEX can considerably prolong the dura-
tion of the heating up process for low ambient temperatures.
For what concerns the test conditions, it needs to be speciﬁed that the air was supplied at the
evaporator at 7°C. The set point temperature for the heat pump was ﬁxed to 45°C in order to
shorten the duration of the heating up process. The temperature in the higher part of the tank
is expected to be higher than 45°C due to the heating phenomena occurring in the tank. The
temperature in the hot water tank was measured at the bottom and at the middle of the tank,
respectively 23 cm and and 78 cm above the lowest point of the tank. The temperature sensor
used is a PT100 sensor class A. The uncertainty of the instrument is:
Uncer taint y = 0.15+0.002|T |
(7.1)
where the temperature T must be expressed in [°C].
Before performing the test, it was considered worthy to implement a simulation ﬁrst with EES
and then with Dymola to determine the expectations from the tests. The performances of the
heating up process obtained with Case 4 and Case 1 needed to be compared. To accomplish
this goal, the four runs were implemented in the steady-state model for Case 4 as presented
in Chapter 4. Then, similarly to what described in Appendix C, the correlations were derived
from the four runs in order to include in the dynamic model the compressor work and the heat
transferred in the three sections of the condenser. The set point temperature for the heating
up process was set to 50°C in the model. This value is higher than the 45°C considered for the
tests. However, as aforementioned, the temperature in the middle/top of the tank is expected
to be higher than 45°C in the tests, justifying the choice to set a temperature of 50°C in the
model. The results indicate that Case 4 shortens the heating up process compared to Case
1. The evolution of the temperature proﬁle in node 10 for the two cases under investigation
is depicted in Figure 7.1. The choice to report the temperature distribution in node 10 lays
in the fact that the test measurements consider the temperature in the middle of the tank.
Even though the set point temperature was set to 50°C, the predicted temperature reached in
layer 10 at the end of the heating up process is slightly lower than this value. This is due to
the heating phenomena occurring inside the tank: the heat pump stops running when the
temperature in node 17 reaches 50°C. Figure 7.1 highlights that the duration of the heating
process is reduced by almost 30 minutes for Case 4 compared to Case 1. This means that the
heat transferred in the overall condenser is increased. The COP is enhanced by 2% compared
to the original system conﬁguration.
To sum up, the expectations from the test are to observe a faster heating up process and a
slight improvement of the COP.
86
==PAGE:107==
Figure 7.1: Evolution of the temperature proﬁle in node 10 for Case 1 and Case 4.
A comparison between the experimental results concerning the temperature proﬁles at the
middle and at the top of the tank during the heating up processes for the original system
conﬁguration (Case 1) and for Case 4 is presented in Figure 7.2. In the ﬁgure T9 and T10
represents respectively the temperature in the middle and in the bottom of the tank, as shown
in Figure 2.1. The axis are shown without numerical indications because of the conﬁdentiality
agreement with the company. The ﬁgure partially conﬁrm the expectations. The heating up
process for Case 4 is faster than Case 1, as expected. However the extent of the time reduction
is almost 1.5 hours, triple than the 0.5 hours predicted by the model. This difference can
be explained considering Figure 6.2b. This ﬁgure shows that the predicted time required to
accomplish the heating up process is lower than the experimental one. This is probably due to
an overestimation of the heat transferred from the condenser to the domestic hot water. Even
though in the previous chapter it was stated that the discrepancy between predictions and
experiments was acceptable, this differences justify the inconsistency between Figure 7.1 and
Figure 7.2.
Another fact emerging from Figure 7.2 is the considerably higher temperature difference
between the middle and the bottom of the tank for Case 4. The explanation for this fact
can be found in Figure 6.2a. It depicts that the bottom layers of the tank, due to the lack of
mixing effect between the layers, are colder than the other nodes. In the tests, due to the lower
diameter of Case 4 compared to Case 1, the condenser ends at a higher height from the bottom
of the tank. Moreover, similarly to what shown in Figure 5.26b for Case 2 and as veriﬁed in
the steady-state simulations for Case 4, the subccoling section occupies a larger portion of
the overall condenser for Case 4. Consequently it is expected that, if the sensor measuring T10
87
==PAGE:108==
Chapter 7. Experimental results
Figure 7.2: Comparison between the temperature proﬁles from experimental results for Case 1
and Case 4.
is placed at the same height for both the cases, for Case 4 the sensor is already in the region
in the bottom of the tank where the water recirculation is nil. This explains the higher gap
between the temperature proﬁles in the middle and in the bottom of the tank.
The faster heating up process is expected to result in an enhancement of the COP because of
the higher heat released in the condenser. However, a veriﬁcation of this fact was not possible
due to fact that the heat transferred from the condenser and the compressor work were not
measured.
Figure 7.3: Further validation of the model.
It was also decided to take advantage of the experimental data to further validate the model.
More in details, among the two additional temperature proﬁles provided, it was considered
relevant to compare the temperature proﬁle in the middle of the tank and to disregard the one
in the bottom of the tank. This is due to the fact that in the tank model a constant distribution
on the nodes of the desuperheating, condensing and subcooling section is assumed, and the
88
==PAGE:109==
increase of the height from the bottom of the tank at which the condenser ends is not consid-
ered for the smaller diameter. This additional validation is proposed in Figure 7.3 in which
the predicted temperature distribution in node 10 is compared to the experimental results
for the temperature in the middle of the tank (T9). The two lines depicting the temperature
proﬁle ± the uncertainty calculated applying Equation 7.1 are not presented because they
would complicate the understanding of the ﬁgure. The ﬁgure highlights that the model can
predict accurately the temperature proﬁle: the maximum discrepancy is lower than 5%. From
a comparison with Figure 6.2b, it emerges that the accuracy of the model is increased for
smaller condenser areas, even if for both the cases it is acceptable. As shown in Figure 5.9 for
the system COP and consequently for the heat transferred from the condenser to the domestic
hot water, many assumptions affect the outputs from the models. A possibility can be that the
assumed values are closer to the real values for smaller condenser areas rather than for bigger
geometries. Further investigations and tests need to be done to verify this fact.
Finally, it was decided to quantify the economical beneﬁt implied by the reduced diameter
applying Equation 4.4. Moving from an outer diameter of 9.95 mm to one of 6 mm, the cost
of the condenser per unit of length is reduced from 1.13 AC/m to 0.74 AC/m. Considering the
condenser length of 54 m for both cases, the extent of the expenditure reduction is 34%. This
data does not take into account the reduction of the condenser tube thickness: it is 1.4 mm for
the actual tube and 1 mm for the new tested conﬁguration. This fact is expected to be reﬂected
in an even higher cost reduction for Case 4.
89
==PAGE:110==
==PAGE:111==
8 Discussion
In this chapter the main ﬁndings from this study as well as the main limitations of the models
implemented are presented. In the last section, some possibilities to further improve the
system are presented.
8.1
Main ﬁndings
From the analysis conducted with the steady-state model implemented in EES, minor vari-
ations were observed in the system COP varying the condenser tube length and diameter
and excluding the internal heat recovery unit. These indications are not aligned with the
experimental data shown by Zhang et al. [19], in which signiﬁcant improvements of the sys-
tem COP were observed in the heating up process modifying the condenser tube length for
an air source heat pump water heater. More in details, two tank sizes were considered, i.e.
150 l and 200 l, and the COP showed an inverted U trend varying the condenser length. The
COP reached its maximum value respectively for condenser length of 50 m and 70 m. For the
smallest tank, the extent of the COP increase was approximately 50% if the tube length was
varied from 20 m to 50 m. The differences between these results and the ﬁndings from the
present study can be due to the different sizes of the tanks and also of the systems compared:
Zhang et al. [19] considered a heating load of 3.4 kW while in the present study the heating
capacity never exceeds 1.4 kW. Moreover, a different refrigerant is applied in the two cases
(R22 instead of R134a) and the condenser is immersed in the tank in the heat pump studied
by Zhang et al. [19]. On the other hand, the ﬁndings from the current study concerning the
condenser length are close to the indications provided by Imbrahim et al. [16], in which again
an ASHPWH with immersed condenser working with R22 is studied. The outcomes from this
research on the heating up process indicate than a COP improvement of approximately 6%
can be achieved by increasing the condenser length from 40 m to 100 m. The depicted trend of
the COP enhancement with the condenser length is concave for an outer diameter of 9.9 mm.
The same conclusion can be drawn looking at Figure 5.5 for the two cases with and without
internal heat exchanger for a condenser tube diameter of 9.95 mm.
91
==PAGE:112==
Chapter 8. Discussion
For what concerns the reduction of the condenser tube diameter, a considerable beneﬁcial
effect on the condensation heat transfer coefﬁcient resulted from the simulations, as shown in
Figure 5.2. This enhancement is conﬁrmed in the literature. For example, Yan et al. [77] proved
through experimental investigations that the heat transfer coefﬁcient during condensation
of R134a averaged over the refrigerant quality was increased by 10% using a pipe diameter of
2 mm instead of 8 mm. A smaller diameter results also in higher pressure drop in the tube,
which raises the condensing pressure but at the same time increases the enthalpy difference
in the condensing section. There is consequently a trade off between the two contributions,
which results in a maximum for the COP as shown in Figure 5.14, if a constant condenser
length is maintained. However, as previously mentioned, the magnitude of the COP variations
are very limited.
The removal of the internal heat recovery emerged to cause a reduction of the heat transfer
in the superheating section of the condenser due to the lower enthalpy at the compressor
discharge. However, also in this case, negligible effects were observed on the system COP.
The limited effects on the system of the IHEX are aligned with the discussions proposed by
Domaski et al. [25]. They stated that this additional heat exchanger can be beneﬁcial in case
of poor performances of the system, but it can result in insigniﬁcant variations if the system is
already characterised by a good COP.
The attractiveness of the studied conﬁgurations is increased if the economical point of view is
taken into account. For example a system conﬁguration without IHEX, a condenser length of
70 m and an outer tube diameter of 6.95 mm can reduce the expenditures by 20%.
Another possible conﬁguration considered for the condenser was the application of minichan-
nel condenser. A sharp enhancement of the refrigerant side condensing heat transfer coefﬁ-
cient was noted, but the detriment caused by the huge pressure drops was prevailing. However,
it was also noticed that disregarding the pressure drop minichannel condensers become really
attractive. The studied minichannel geometry, with an outer diameter of 3.4 mm, can lower
the cost of the condenser per unit of length by 57%. In the aforementioned study conducted
by Imbrahim et al. [16] a numerical comparison between two minichannel condensers and a
macrochannel one is assessed. The pressure drops in the heat exchangers are neglected in
the mentioned analysis. The minigeometries result in limited COP improvements, around
2%, but they enable a refrigerant charge reduction from 1.4 kg to 0.4 kg and an increase of the
compactness of the heat exchanger.
For what concerns the analysis of alternative refrigerants as drop-in replacement for 134a for
the forth run of the heating up process, both the effects of the new refrigerants on the system
COP and on the volumetric ﬂow rate at the suction of the compressor are considered. First
of all it was observed that all the four alternative refrigerants are suitable to replace R134a
in the system. For what regards their performances, R600a showed the highest increase of
92
==PAGE:113==
8.1. Main ﬁndings
COP compared to the system working with R134a, but at the same time it was characterised by
the greatest increase of volumetric ﬂow rate. This means that this solution is expected to be
not worthy from the economical point of view. On the other hand, the system working with
R290, despite the slight reduction of the COP, enables a reduction of more then 20 % of the
volumetric ﬂow rate.
For what concerns the tank model built in the Dymola environment, a good and satisfactory
agreement with experimental results was proved. This good match between predictions and
experiments was achieved using a simple one dimensional model. According to Han et al. [54],
one dimensional models have difﬁculties in the prediction of the ﬂow structure inside the tank,
especially in case of elaborated tank structure and high ﬂow rate involved. Consequently, after
1990 most of the researches focused on two or three dimensional models. However, these mod-
els considerably increase the complexity of the model and the computational efforts required.
Han et al. [54] also stated that also with more complex models, the thermal stratiﬁcation and
the mixing within the tank are not easy to be replicated because they are affected by operating
conditions which are not possible to be described in the model. In other words, it is difﬁcult to
replicate some of the phenomena happening in the real systems. Celador et al. [51] adopted
a one dimensional model to simulate the thermal stratiﬁcation in hot water tanks for the
simulation of combined heat and power plants. The authors justiﬁed this choice mentioning
that, even though two and three dimensional models are more exhaustive, a one dimensional
model can be considered a good compromise between the accuracy of the predictions and
the time required for computation. The ﬁndings from the current study conﬁrm the validity of
this statement.
For a better understanding of the real intensity of the mixing inside the hot water tank, the
Instantaneous Proﬁle Method methodology proposed by Caldwell et al. [78] can be applied.
It consists on the measurement of the temperatures at every sensor at two different times
(t −∆t and t) and on the record of the inlet ﬂow rate during the considered time step. Using
as starting value the measurement at time t −∆t, the temperature at time t can be predicted
without taking into account any effect of mixing. The predicted temperature proﬁle and the
experimental one can then be compared to detect the extent of the mixing intensity.
The dynamic model was then applied to verify the conclusions deriving from the steady-state
simulations and to perform some more investigations. The dynamic simulations conﬁrmed
that the three system conﬁgurations analysed are characterised by similar performances in
terms of COP both during the heating up process and the tapping cycle L. Only the dynamic
simulation shown in Figure 6.3 for an ambient temperature of -1°C, showed a detriment for
the system in case of removal of the internal heat exchanger. Moreover, the model was used to
verify the extent of the COP reduction in case of heating up of the domestic hot water until
60°C. A linear decreasing trend of the system COP was observed for higher stop temperatures
of the heating up process. Finally, the variation of the height in the tank in which the sensor
controlling the operation of the heat pump is placed does not affect the system COP of the
heating up process due to the proximity of the temperature proﬁles in the tank (Figure 6.2a).
93
==PAGE:114==
Chapter 8. Discussion
It needs also to be discussed that the small magnitude of the COP variations and the uncertain-
ties of the model presented in Chapter 5.2 make difﬁcult to state the realism of the small COP
enhancements or decreases emerging from the investigations. What can be concluded from
this work is that the studied modiﬁcations of the condenser and the internal heat recovery
do not result in noticeable effects on the system COP. Moreover, the thermodynamic analysis
conducted are useful to understand what happens in the system when the two previously
mentioned components are changed or removed in case of the IHEX.
Anther possible investigation which can be conducted on the condenser consists on evaluat-
ing the system performances in case of micro plate condenser, as mentioned in Section 2.1
proposed by Danfoss.
8.2
Main limitations of the models
A general limitation of the steady-state model is represented by the assumption concerning
the UA value of the evaporator. In further investigations the correlations for the heat transfer
coefﬁcient in the evaporator need to be applied to the model. This would enable the optimiza-
tion of the area of the evaporator and the possibility to derive some considerations about the
fan power. Moreover, a temperature difference of 5 K was assumed in the subcooler for all the
runs. This fact is not expected to be replicated in the real behaviour in the system. However,
both Figure 5.9 and the good matching between experiments and predictions in the dynamic
simulations testify to the low impact of this assumption. Experimental measurements in
different parts of the condenser tube can help to detect the real evolution of the temperature
difference in the subcooler during the heating up process.
The economical evaluations were based on the prices found in the manufacturer catalogue for
a single condenser tube. In reality, in case of stock purchase the expenditures can be decreased
affecting the cost savings offered by solutions with smaller diameters. Moreover, the assumed
cost of the internal heat recovery unit was not the real one. The expenditure caused by the
welding process of the tubes need to be evaluated in further investigations.
For what concerns the analysis on alternative refrigerants, the reliability of the investigation
is limited by the assumption of introducing a fake compressor. It was not possible to ﬁnd in
manufacturers catalogues data for real compressors working with the alternative refrigerants
considered in this analysis. Consequently, further investigations need to be done trying to get
access to these data. This would give the possibility to verify the reliability of the ﬁndings from
the analysis conducted in this paper.
A limitation of the tank model lays in the correlations used to calculate the heat transfer in the
condensing sections and the compressor work. They were derived from the linear interpola-
tions of the results from the four runs implemented in the steady-state model. This limitation
does not allow the possibility to extract many thermodynamic considerations from the dy-
namic model. A more detailed investigation should model also the heat pump in Dymola and
synchronize it with the model built for the hot water tank. However, it was chosen to build
94
==PAGE:115==
8.3. System improvements
the former model in EES due to the better familiarity with its programming language. As a
consequence, the values for the average COP reported in Chapters 6 and 7 need to be veriﬁed
comparing the predicted compressor work with the experimental one. In fact, while the
predicted heat transferred through the condenser are expected to be quite realistic due to the
good agreements between the temperature proﬁles, the predictions for the compressor work
need an experimental validation. The sensitivity analysis conducted on the compressor work,
depicted in Figure 6.5, shows that this parameter is characterised by considerable ﬂuctuations
if it is expressed as a function of the temperature in different nodes in the tank. Moreover,
another critical parameter which can largely alter the compressor work is the isentropic efﬁ-
ciency of the compressor, as shown in Figure 5.11.
8.3
System improvements
As previously mentioned, there is not so much room for COP enhancement looking at the
condenser and at the internal heat recovery unit. An inexpensive and attractive solution to
improve the system COP can be represented by the replacement of the expansion valve with
a two-phase ejector. It is a device which uses the Venturi effect of a converging-diverging
nozzle to transform the pressure energy of the moving ﬂuid into kinetic energy. More in details,
the ejector takes advantage of the kinetic energy of the high-pressure refrigerant, which is
the motive ﬂuid. This energy is exploited to partially compress the saturated vapour at the
evaporator outlet, reducing the pressure lift required to the compressor. This solution would
enable a reduction of the thermodynamic losses caused by the throttling process occurring in
the expansion device [79]. Moreover, due to the absence of moving parts and the small dimen-
sions, this device can be easily applicable to existing systems. The two-phase ejector is more
advantageous in case of high pressure lift in the cycle and consequently many application
on transcritical CO2 cycles can be found in the literature. However, some applications of this
device can be found also in refrigeration systems using R134a as working ﬂuid. For example,
Chaiwongsa et al. [80] experimentally investigated the performances of a refrigeration cycle
applying a two-phase ejector as expansion device. The research focused on verifying the
inﬂuence of different parameters, such as the diameter of the motive nozzle and the tempera-
tures of the heat sink and heat source, on the system COP and other relevant parameters (the
cooling capacity, the compressor ratio). The authors does not give an indication of the COP
enhancement caused by the application of the two-phase ejector compared to the original
system. For transcritical CO2 cycles the two-phase ejector can raise the system COP of approx-
imately 20% compared to the system applying an expansion valve [81] [82].
Another possible alternative to the actually used thermostatic expansion valve is the appli-
cation of an electronic expansion valve. The thermostatic expansion valve is characterised
by some limitations. First of all it requires a minimum pressure drop between the condenser
and the evaporator. Moreover, it is necessary to maintain a minimum superheating to avoid
95
==PAGE:116==
Chapter 8. Discussion
hunting. The electronic expansion valve controls the amount of refrigerant ﬂowing in the
evaporator applying a pressure and temperature sensor placed at the outlet at the evaporator.
The elaboration of the signals is performed by a regulator, which controls the opening of the
valve in real time mode [83]. Lazzarin et al. [83] experimentally evaluated the possibility to
replace a thermostatic expansion valve with an electric one considering as case study the
refrigeration system of a supermarket located in the North of Italy. The system consisted of
two different circuits: a low temperature one (evaporation temperature of -34°C and 75 kW of
refrigeration capacity) and a medium one (evaporation temperature of -13.5°C and 325 kW of
refrigeration capacity). The working ﬂuid was R404A. The electronic expansion valve enabled
lower superheating and more steady operation for the system. Noticeable energy savings
offered by the installation of the electronic expansion valve resulted from the investigation.
In case of medium-temperature circuit, the amount of electricity required throughout all
the year was reduced from 719278 kWh to 424746 kWh. For the case with low-temperature
circuit, the system working with a thermostatic expansion vale required 397386 kWh, while
the one applying the electric expansion valve needed 295250 kWh of electricity during the year.
For what concerns the replacement of the reciprocating compressor actually included in the
cycle, Grace et al. [84] veriﬁed through experimental tests that a hermetic scroll compressor
can be a valid alternative. The authors experimentally analysed the performances of the
two compressors in a water-water chiller facility using R404A as working ﬂuid. The results
indicated that the scroll compressor was characterised by equal or greater COP and cooling
capacities compared to the reciprocating one. The advantage of the scroll compressor was
higher for greater condensing temperatures: for a Tc of 35°C the COP was on average 10%
higher for the tested 90 minutes.
96
==PAGE:117==
9 Conclusion
In this study a domestic hot water heat pump was modelled and optimised in terms of COP
focusing on the condenser. First of all the heating up process of the domestic hot water in the
tank was implemented in a steady state model. Due to the nonlinear trend of the process, it
was chosen to focus the initial investigations on the last portion of the water temperature lift
because of its poorer COP. Different condenser tube lengths and outer diameters were simu-
lated both for the system inclusive and exclusive of the internal heat recovery unit. Despite the
small magnitude of the COP variations, two alternative system conﬁgurations were selected:
both of them with a condenser outer diameter and length of respectively 6.95 mm and 70 m,
one with internal heat recovery unit and the other one without this additional component. The
effects on the heat transfer coefﬁcients and on the pressure drops were evaluated. Then, the
variations of the system COP were evaluated also for other portions of the heating up process,
resulting again in limited variations. Anyway, the outputs from these investigations in terms
of compressor work and heating capacity were used to build a dynamic model, in which the
heat transfer phenomena and in particular the water recirculation inside the tank were taken
into account. The dynamic model was validated comparing the predicted and experimental
temperature proﬁles in the tank for two set of data. For the existing system conﬁguration,
a maximum discrepancy of 13% was observed between experiments and predictions. For a
system conﬁguration characterised by a reduced condenser tube diameter, the highest gap
between the considered temperature proﬁles was lower than 5%. In both the cases, a good
agreement between predicted and experimental data was conﬁrmed, implying that the built
models can be an attractive solution to replace the more expensive experimental tests. The
dynamic simulations conﬁrmed the closeness of the performances between the actual system
conﬁguration and the two proposed solutions both during the overall heating up process
and the tapping cycle L. Moreover, an average COP reduction of 10% was observed in case
of heating up of the domestic hot water until 60°C instead of 52°C. The height in the tank of
the temperature sensor performing the on/off control function on the compressor did not
inﬂuence the system performances due to the proximity of the temperature proﬁles in the
different nodes of the tank.
97
==PAGE:118==
Chapter 9. Conclusion
The steady-state simulation of the last portion of the last portion of the heating up process
was also used to evaluate the applicability of minichannel condensers and of alternative
refrigerants to replace R134a. The minigeometry analysed was characterised by too penalizing
pressure drops and not suitable for the existing condenser conﬁguration wrapped around the
hot water tank as a single tube. However, system arrangements aiming to reduce their impact
are expected to reverse the judgement on minichannel condensers. The most attractive alter-
native refrigerant on the existing system conﬁguration from an economical point of view was
R290, reducing the compressor volumetric ﬂow rate. On the other hand, the system working
with R600a resulted in the highest COP enhancement but it is expected to be unattractive from
the economical point of view.
At the end, experimental investigations were performed comparing the actual system con-
ﬁguration with one having a condenser outer tube diameter of 6 mm. It was not possible to
test one of the two previously mentioned conﬁgurations due to the difﬁcult provision of these
condenser tubes. The condenser length was kept unchanged to 54 m during the test and the
internal heat recovery unit was included in the cycle. The new conﬁguration was observed to
shorten the heating up process by 1.5 hour. The real COP was not measured, but according to
the predictions the COP is expected to improve by 2 %. The calculated reduction in terms of
expenditure for the condenser tube, according to the data found in a manufacturer catalogue,
was found to be 34% for the reduced diameter.
To conclude, it can be said that the present study proved that there is not much room for
improvement for the system COP of the domestic hot water heat pump focusing on the
actual condenser arrangement and the internal heat recovery unit. Further investigations
can evaluate possible improvements or replacements for the expansion valve, the rotary
compressor or the evaporator, or can apply a micro plate heat exchanger as condenser.
98
==PAGE:119==
Bibliography
[1] Eurostat, 2013.
URL http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/tgm/table.do?tab=table&init=
1&language=en&pcode=t2020_rk200&plugin=1.
[2] Abel S. Vieira, Rodney A. Stewart, and Cara D. Beal. Air source heat pump water heaters in
residential buildings in australia: identiﬁcation of key performance parameters. Energy
and Buildings, 91:148–162, 2015.
[3] John J. Conti, Paul D. Holtberg, Joseph A. Beamon, A. Micheal Schaala, Glen E. Sweetnam,
and Andy S. Kydes. Annual energy outlook 2009 with projections to 2030. Technical
Report -, Energy Information Administration, Washington, DC, 20585, 2009.
[4] Lukas G. Swan and V. Ismet Ugursal. Modeling of end-use energy consumption in the
residential sector: A review of modeling techniques. Renewable and Sustainable Energy
Reviews, 13:1819–1835, 2009.
[5] Jihoon Min, Zeke Hausfather, and Qi Feng Lin. A high-resolution statistical model of
residential energy end use characteristics for the united states. Journal of Industrial
Ecology, 14(5):791–807, 2010.
[6] Luis Pérez-Lombarda, José Ortiz, and Christine Pout. A review on buildings energy
consumption information. Energy and Buildings, 40:394–398, 2007.
[7] H. Singh, A. Muetze, and P.C. Eames. Factors inﬂuencing the uptake of heat pump
technology by the uk domestic sector. Renewable Energy, 35:873–878, 2010.
[8] Emer Dennehy and Martin Howley. Energy in the residential sector. Technical Report -,
Sustainable energy authority of Ireland, Wilton Place, Bublin 2, Ireland, 2013.
[9] John J. Contia, Paul D. Holtberg, James R. Diefenderfer, Sam A. Napolitano, A. Michael
Schaal, James T. Turnure, and Lynn D. Westfall. Annual energy outlook 2014 with projec-
tions to 2040. Technical Report -, Energy Information Administration, Washington, DC,
20585, 2014.
[10] Center for climate and energy solutions, 2009. URL http://www.c2es.org/technology/
factsheet/ResidentialBuildingEnd-Use#5.
99
==PAGE:120==
Bibliography
[11] Water
heating.
URL
https://www.dmme.virginia.gov/DE/LinkDocuments/
HandbookWaterHeating.pdf.
[12] Danish Energy Agency. Guide to ecodesign and energy labelling requirements for electric
heat pump water heaters and electric conventional water heaters. Technical Report -,
Danish Energy Agency, Amaliegade 44 DK 1256 Copenhagen K, 2014.
[13] Delta energy & environment, 2015. URL http://www.c2es.org/technology/factsheet/
ResidentialBuildingEnd-Use#5.
[14] European Union. Directive 2009/28/ec of the european parliament and of the council
of 23 april 2009 on the promotion of the use of energy from renewable sources and
amending and subsequently repealing directives 2001/77/ec and 2003/30/ec (text with
eea relevance). Technical Report -, Ofﬁcial Journal of the European Union, Plateau du
Kirchberg, B.P. 1601, L-2929 Luxembourg, 2009.
[15] Xiaoyu Liu, Siu-Kit Lau, and Haorong Li. Optimization and analysis of a multi-functional
heat pump system with air source and gray water source in heating mode. Energy and
Buildings, 69:1–13, 2013.
[16] Oussama Ibrahim, Farouk Fardoun, Raﬁc Younes, and Hasna Louahlia-Gualous. Air
source heat pump water heater: dynamic modeling, optimal energy managment and
mini-tubes condensers. Energy, 64:1103–1116, 2013.
[17] Domestic hot water heat pump – Manual METROAIR AQUA and METROAIR AQUA Sl.
Metro Therm A/S, January 2014.
[18] Alberto Cavallini, Luca Doretti, Marko Matkovic, and Luisa Rossetto. Update on conden-
sation heat transfer and pressure drop inside minichannels. Heat Transfer Engineering,
24(4):74–87, 2006.
[19] J. Zhang, R. Z. Wang, and J. Y. Wu. System optimization and experimental research on air
source heat pump water heater. Applied Thermal Engineering, 27(2007):1029–1035, 2006.
[20] Per Henrik Pedersen. Gwp alternatives to hfcs in refrigeration. Environmental Projekt no.
1425 -, Miljøstyrelsen, Strandgade 29 1401, København K, 2012.
[21] Luis R. Bernardo, Henrik Davidsson, and Björn Karlsson. Retroﬁtting domestic hot water
heaters for solar water heating systems in single-family houses in a cold climate: A
theoretical analysis. Energies, 5(10):4110–4131, 2012.
[22] Muhammad Asmail Eleiwi. An experimental study on a vapour compression refrigeration
cycle by adding internal heat exchanger. Journal of Eng. Sciences, 15(4):63–78, 2008.
[23] Gustavo Pottker and Pega Hrnjak. Experimental investigation of the effect of condenser
subcooling in r134a and r1234yf air-conditioning system with and without internal heat
exchanger. International Journal of Refrigeration, 50:104–113, 2015.
100
==PAGE:121==
Bibliography
[24] W. V. Payne, E. A. Silk, and P. A. Domaski. A water-to-water heat pump using hydrocarbon
and hydroﬂuorocarbon zeotropic mixtures with and without an internal heat exchanger.
United States Department of Commerce, Gaithersburg, MD 20899, 2000.
[25] P. A. Domaski, D.A. Didion, and J.P. Doyle. Evaluation of suction line-liquid line heat
exchange in the refrigeration cycle. International Refrigeration and Air Conditioning
Conference, Paper 149, 1992.
[26] J.J. Guo, R.Z. Wang J.Y. Wu, and S. Li. Experimental research and operation optimization
of an air-source heat pump water heater. Applied Energy, 88:4128–4138, 2011.
[27] G.L. Morrison, T. Anderson, and M. Behnia. Seasonal performance rating of heat pump
water heaters. Solar Energy, 76:147–152, 2004.
[28] Kingspan, 2015. URL http://www.kingspansolar.ie/pdf/Aeromax%20Plus.pdf.
[29] Dimplex,
2015.
URL
http://www.dimplex.de/ﬁleadmin/dimplex/downloads/
produktschrift_syst/en/25-WW_4S_engl.pdf.
[30] Stiebel eltron, 2015. URL http://www.stiebel-eltron-usa.com/accelera.html.
[31] Phnix, 2015. URL http://www.phnixexp.com/.
[32] European Committee for standardization. Ds/en 16147 - heat pumps with electrically
driven compressors - testing and requirements for making of domestic hot water units.
Standard -, CEN, Avenue Marnix 17, B-1000 Brussels, 2010.
[33] Danfoss, 2015. URL http://www.danfoss.com/.
[34] Shan Kui, Li Shuhong, and Zhang Xiaosong. Water heater compound with ground source
heat pump. Proceedings of ISES World Congress, Vol. I – Vol. V:2542–2546, 2007.
[35] S. A. Klain EES. version V9.698-3D. Dassault Systèmes, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
2014.
[36] DYMOLA. version 2015 FD01 (32-bit). Dassault Systèmes, 78946 Vélizy, Villacoublay
Cedex, France, 2015.
[37] Modelon, 2013. URL http://www.modelon.com/products/dymola/.
[38] Eric Granryd et.al. Refrigeration Engineering. Royal Institute of Technology, KTH, 2011.
[39] MATLAB. version 8.4.0 (R2014b). The MathWorks Inc., Natick, Massachusetts, 2014.
[40] F. W. Dittus and L. M. K. Boelter. Heat transfer in automobile radiators of the tubular type.
International Communications in Heat and Mass Transfer, 12(1):3–22, 1985.
[41] Frank P. Incropera, David P. DeWitt, Theodore L. Bergman, and Adrienne S. Lavine.
Fundamentals of Heat and Mass Transfer. Wiley, March 10,2006.
101
==PAGE:122==
Bibliography
[42] Søren Knudsen. Investigation and optimisation of heat storage tanks for low-ﬂow SDHW
systems. PhD thesis, Technical University of Denmark, 2004.
[43] Marko Matkovic, Alberto Cavallini, Davide Del Col, and Luisa Rossetto. Experimental
study on condensation heat transfer inside a single circular minichannel. International
Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, 52:2311–2323, 2009.
[44] Alberto Cavallini, Davide Del Col, Luca Doretti, Marko Markovic, Luisa Rossetto, Claudio
Zilio, and Giuseppe Censi. Condensation in horizontal smooth tubes: a new heat transfer
model for heat exchanger design. Heat Transfer Engineering, 27(8):31–38, 2006.
[45] M. M. Shah. A general correlation for heat transfer during ﬁlm condensation inside pipes.
International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, 22(-):547–556, 1979.
[46] M.B. Ould Didi, N. Kattan, and J.R. Thome. Prediction of two-phase pressure gradients
of refrigerants in horizontal tubes. International Journal of Refrgieration, 25(-):935–947,
2002.
[47] A. Cavallini, L. Rossetto, M. Matkovic, and D Del Col. A model for frictional pressure drop
during vapour–liquid ﬂow in minichannels. International Conference Thermophysical
Properties and Transfer Processes of Refrigerants, 31 August–2 September, Vicenza, Italy, -
(-):71–78, 2005.
[48] A. Cavallini, D. Del Col, M. Matkovic, and L. Rossetto. Frictional pressure drop during
vapour–liquid ﬂow in minichannels: Modelling and experimental evaluation. Interna-
tional Journal of Heat and Fluid Flow, 30(-):131–139, 2009.
[49] Cynthia Ann Cruickshank. Evaluation of a stratiﬁed multi-tank thermal storage for solar
heating applications. PhD thesis, Queen’s University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada, 2009.
[50] Newton B. J. Modelling of Solar Storage Tanks. PhD thesis, M.Sc. Thesis, University of
Wiscons in-Madison, 1995.
[51] A. Campos Celador, M. Odriozola, and J.M. Sala. Implications of the modelling of strat-
iﬁed hot water storage tanks in the simulation of chp plants. Energy Conversion and
Management, 52(-):3018–3026, 2011.
[52] Shyu R.J., Lin J.Y., and Fan L.J. Thermal analysis of stratiﬁed tanks. ASME, Solar Energy
Engineering, 22(-):55–61, 1989.
[53] Vijay Dwivedi. Thermal Modelling and Control of Domestic Hot Wate Tank. PhD thesis,
M.Sc. Thesis, University of Strathclyde, 2009.
[54] Y.M. Han, R.Z. Wang, and Y.J. Dai. Thermal stratiﬁcation within the water tank. Renewable
and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 13:1014–1026, 2009.
102
==PAGE:123==
Bibliography
[55] Adriàn Mota-Babiloni, Joaquìn Navarro-Esbrì, Angel Barragàn, Francisco Molè, and
Bernardo Peris. Theoretical comparison of low gwp alternatives for different refrigeration
conﬁgurations taking r404a as baseline. International Journal of Refrigerantion, 44:81–90,
2014.
[56] X-rates, 2015. URL http://www.x-rates.com/calculator/?from=AUD&to=EUR&amount=
1.
[57] Rapid fab, 2015. URL http://www.fab.net.au/rapidfab.htm.
[58] C. Aprea, M. Ascani, and F. De Rossi. A criterion for predicting the possible advantage
of adopting a suction/liquid heat exchanger in refrigeration system. Applied Thermal
Engineering, 19:329–336, 1998.
[59] Doucette industries inc, 2015. URL http://doucetteindustries.com/.
[60] Yemada Taitel and A. E. Dukler. A model for predicting ﬂow regime transitions in hori-
zontal and near horizontal gas-liquid ﬂow. AlChE Journal, 22(1):47–55, 1976.
[61] World weather online, 2015. URL http://www.worldweatheronline.com/.
[62] S. G. Kandlikar and W. J. Grande. Evolution of microchannel ﬂow passages - thermohy-
draulic performance and fabrication technology. Heat Transfer End, 24(1):3–17, 2003.
[63] Sanhua, 2013. URL https://www.sanhuaeurope.com/wo/en/.
[64] Richard A. Perkins and Marcia L. Huber. Measurement and correlation of the thermal con-
ductivity of 2,3,3,3-tetraﬂuoroprop-1-ene (r1234yf) and trans-1,3,3,3-tetraﬂuoropropene
(r1234ze(e)). J. Chem. Eng. Data, 56(12):4868–4874, 2011.
[65] Sho Fukuda, Chieko Kondou, Nobuo Takata, and Shigeru Koyama. Low gwp refrigerants
r1234ze(e) and r1234ze(z) for high temperature heat pumps. International Journal of
Refrigeration, 40(-):161–173, 2014.
[66] Thomas J. Leck. Evaluation of hfo-1234yf as a potential replacement for r-134a in refriger-
ation applications. 3rd IIR Conference on Thermophysical Properties and Transfer Process
of Refrigerants, Boulder, CO, 2009.
[67] D. Del Col, D. Torresin, and A. Cavallini. Heat transfer and pressure drop during con-
densation of the low gwp refrigerant r1234yf. International Journal of Refrigeration, 33:
1307–1318, 2010.
[68] J. Navarro-Esbrì, J.M. Mendoza-Miranda, A. Mota-Babiloni, A. Barragàn-Cervera, and
J.M. Belman-Flores. Experimental analysis of r1234yf as a drop-in replacement for r134a
in a vapor compression system. International Journal of Refrigeration, 36:870–880, 2013.
103
==PAGE:124==
Bibliography
[69] Mahmood Mastani Joybari, Mohammad Sadegh Hatamipour, Amir Rahimi, and Fate-
meh Ghadiri Modarres. Exergy analysis and optimization of r600a as a replacement
of r134a in a domestic refrigerator system. International Journal of Refrigeration, 36:
1233–1242, 2013.
[70] E. Navarro, I.O. Martìnez-Galvan, J. Nohales, and J. Gonzàlvez-Macia. Comparative
experimental study of an open piston compressor working with r-1234yf, r-134a and
r-290. International Journal of Refrigeration, 36:768–775, 2013.
[71] Danfoss. Danfoss compressors - practical application of refrigerant r290 propane in small
hermetic systems, 2014.
[72] Mariam Jarahnejad. New Low GWP Synthetic Refrigerants. PhD thesis, M.Sc. Thesis, KTH
School of Industrial Engineering and Management - Division of Applied Thermodynam-
ics and Refrigeration SE-100 44 STOCKHOLM, 2012.
[73] William F. Walter et al. Designation and safety classiﬁcation of refrigerants. Standard 34-
2007, ANSI/ASHRAE, 1791 Tullie Circle NE, Atlanta, GA 30329, Approved by the ASHRAE
Standards Committee on January 23, 2010; by the ASHRAE Board of Directors on January
27, 2010; and by the American National Standards Institute on February 24, 2010.
[74] Fu L., Ding G., and Zhang C. Dynamic simulation of air-to-water dual-mode heat pump
with screw compressor. Appl Therm Eng., 88(11):4128–4138, 2003.
[75] Armstrong M. M., Ruest K., and Swinton M. C. Assessing the impact of cold climate on
basement temperatures. Report B-6042.2, Canadian Centre for Housing Technology, M20,
Montreal Road, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K1A OR6, 2011.
[76] A.o. smith, 2015. URL http://www.hotwater.com/lit/spec/com_elec/aosze15000.pdf.
[77] Yi-Yie Yan and Tsing-Fa Lin. Condensation heat transfer and pressure drop of refrigerant
r134a in a small pipe. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, 42:697–708, 1999.
[78] Jeffrey S. Caldwell and William P. Bahnﬂeth. Identiﬁcation of mixing effects in stratiﬁed
chilled-water storage tanks by analysis of time series temperature data. Inclusion in
Ashrae transaction 1998, 104, 1998.
[79] Kornhauser A. A. The use of an ejector as a refrigerant expander. International Refrigera-
tion and Air Conditioning Conference, Paper 82, 1990.
[80] Praitoon Chaiwongsa and Somchai Wongwises. Experimental study on r-134a refrig-
eration system using a twp-phase ejector as an expansion device. Applied Thermal
Engineering, 28:467–477, 2008.
[81] H. T. Ozaki and H. Takeuchi. Regeration of expansion energy by ejector in co2 cycle. Pro-
ceedings of the 6th IIR-Gustav Lorentzen Conference on Natural Working Fluids, Glasgow,
2004.
104
==PAGE:125==
Bibliography
[82] G. E. D. Li. Transcritical co2 refrigeration cycle with ejector-expansion device. Int. J. Refr.,
28:766–773, 2005.
[83] Renato Lazzarin, Daniele Nardotto, and Marco Noro. Electronic expansion valves vs.
thermal expansion valves. ASHRAE Journal, pages 34–38, 2009.
[84] I. Grace, D. Datta, and S. A. Tassou. Comparison of hermetic scroll and reciprocating com-
pressor operating under varying refrigerant charge and load. International Compressor
Engineering Conference, Paper 1518, 2002.
[85] A. Cavallini, G. Censi, D. Del Col, L. Rossetto, L. Doretti, and G.A. Longo. Experimental
investigation on condensation heat transfer and pressure drop of new hfc refrigerants
(r134a, r125, r32, r410a, r236ea) in a horizontal tube. Int. J. Refrigeration, 24(-):73–87,
2001.
[86] Paleev I. I. and Filippovich B. S. Phenomena of liquid transfer in two-phase dispersed
annular ﬂow. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, 9(10):1089–1093, 1966.
105
==PAGE:126==
==PAGE:127==
A ˙mr and compressor ηis
Figure A.1: Refrigerant mass ﬂow rate as a function of condensing and evaporating tempera-
tures.
For the calculation of the compressor isentropic efﬁciency and refrigerant mass ﬂow rates,
it was required to build up a simple EES model in which the test conditions and the points
extrapolated from Figures A.1 and A.2 were included. The test conditions are speciﬁed in Table
A.1.
The values of the refrigerant mass ﬂow rates and the heating capacity were approximately
estimated from Figures A.1 and A.2 for several combinations of evaporating and condensing
temperatures. The four aforementioned values were given as input in the EES code, together
with the test conditions. It was then possible to calculate the enthalpy and the entropy of the
refrigerant at the suction of the compressor. First the expression for the refrigerant mass ﬂow
rate was derived from Figure A.1. Then it was applied for the computation of the isentropic
107
==PAGE:128==
Appendix A. ˙mr and compressor ηis
efﬁciency: the isentropic compression was compared with the compression process required
to meet the heating capacity given as input. In this way it was possible to detect the values of
the isentropic efﬁciency as a function different condensing and evaporating temperatures. All
these values for the refrigerant mass ﬂow rate and the compressor isentropic efﬁciency were
introduced in Matlab with the goal to create the interpolating function presented in the main
body of the report.
The constants zi and oi required respectively in Equations 3.4 and 3.5 to calculate the isen-
tropic efﬁciency of the compressor and the refrigerant mass ﬂow rate are presented in Tables
A.2 and A.3.
Table A.1: Test conditions for the compressor
∆Tsub [K]
8.3
∆Tsup [K]
10
Figure A.2: Heating capacity as a function of condensing and evaporating temperatures.
108
==PAGE:129==
Table A.2: Constants used for calculating the compressor isentropic efﬁciency
z1
−517.1
z2
−0.03627
z3
5.555
z4
0.00436
z5
−0.009884
z6
−0.01396
z7
−4.396·10−6
z8
−6.312·10−7
z9
1.888·10−5
z10
8.931·10−6
Table A.3: Constants used for calculating the refrigerant mass ﬂow rate
o1
0.0546
o2
0.0004367
o3
−0.001089
o4
−3.457·10−7
o5
−8.947·10−7
o6
3.004·10−6
109
==PAGE:130==
==PAGE:131==
B Correlations
In this Appendix a detailed explanation of the correlations implemented in the model for the
heat transfer coefﬁcients and the pressure drop is provided. As explained in Chapter 3, it is
necessary to distinguish between the correlations applied for macrochannels and the ones
used for microchannels.
B.1
Macrochannels
B.1.1
Heat transfer coefﬁcient
For the calculation of the heat transfer coefﬁcient refrigerant side in the condensing section it
was chosen to apply the Shah’s correlation [45]. In the following, the considerations presented
in the original paper will be repeated to provide an understanding about the way in which the
correlation was developed.
Through the analysis of various data derived from horizontal, vertical downﬂow and upﬂow
orientations, it was observed that Equation B.1 is valid in absence of bubble nucleation and if
the tube surface is kept wetted by the liquid.
Ψ =
1.8
Co0.8
(B.1)
where Ψ and Co are:
Ψ = αT P
α1
(B.2)
Co =
µ 1
x −1
¶0.8 µρG
ρL
¶0.5
(B.3)
In Equations B.2 and B.3, ρL and ρG stand respectively for the density of liquid and density
of water, x is the thermodynamic vapour quality, αT P is the two phase condensing or boiling
111
==PAGE:132==
Appendix B. Correlations
heat transfer coefﬁcient, α1 is the superﬁcial heat transfer coefﬁcient of the liquid phase and
it is calculated as:
α1 = αL(1−x)0.8
(B.4)
where αL is the heat transfer coefﬁcient assuming that all the mass is ﬂowing as liquid, calcu-
lated applying the Dittus-Boelter equation.
Then, a comparison between the aforementioned equations and experimental data suggested
that a slight change of the term Co would be beneﬁcial for the correlation. Consequently a new
parameter Z is introduced and deﬁned as in Equation B.5, where pr is the reduced pressure.
Z =
µ 1
x −1
¶0.8
p0.4
r
(B.5)
A further analysis of varied data, proved that Equation B.6 gave the best ﬁt.
Ψ = 1+ 3.8
Z 0.95
(B.6)
If Equations B.2, B.4 and B.5 are considered, Equation B.6 can be rewritten as:
αT P = αL
·
(1−x)0.8 + 3.8x0.76(1−x)0.04
p0.38
r
¸
(B.7)
The original paper also presents a methodology to estimate the mean heat transfer coefﬁcient
from Equation B.7. As an approximation, the validity of Equation B.8 can be assumed. In the
Equation, αT PL is the local two phase heat transfer coefﬁcient and L is the length of the tube
in which the analysed condensation process occurs.
αT PL = 1
L
Z L
0
αT PLdL
(B.8)
At this point, two assumptions are presented by the author:
• the transport properties of liquid phase and the pressure are subjected to negligible
changes along the length of the pipe;
• Equation B.8 gives a quite accurate deﬁnition of mean heat transfer coefﬁcient.
Thanks to these two assumptions, the local two phase heat transfer coefﬁcient from L1 to L2
can be derived by integrating Equation B.7 as:
αT PM =
αL
L2 −L1
Z L1
L1
·
(1−x)0.8 + 3.8x0.76(1−x)0.04
p0.38
r
¸
dL
(B.9)
Assuming that the vapour quality varies linearly with the pipe length, expanding the second
term in Equation B.9 applying the binomial theorem and neglecting small terms, it is possible
112
==PAGE:133==
B.1. Macrochannels
to rewrite Equation B.9 as:
αT PM =
αL
(x2 −x1)
·
−(1−x)1.8
1.8
+ 3.8
p0.38
r
µx1.76
1.76 −0.04x2.76
2.76
¶¸x2
x1
(B.10)
If the variation of the vapour quality is from 1 to 0, Equation B.10 becomes:
αT PM = αL
µ
0.55+ 2.09
p0.38
r
¶
(B.11)
Equation B.11 was used in the report to calculate the average heat transfer coefﬁcient through
the condensing process. Shah observed that if the heat transfer coefﬁcient is calculated at
x = 0.5 applying Equation B.7, and it is then compared with the result of Equation B.11, the
difference amounts only to 5%.
B.1.2
Pressure drop
The frictional pressure gradient in the condensing section for macrogeometries was calculated
by applying the Muller-Steinhagen and Heck correlation [46]. In this section, the equations are
reported, mainly because they are used to calculate the trends depicted in Figure 5.29b. In the
following equations, the subscript g indicates that all the mass is assumed to ﬂow as vapour,
while the subscript l indicates that all the refrigerant is hypothesized to be ﬂowing as liquid.
fg = 0.079
Re0.25
g
(B.12)
fl = 0.079
Re0.25
l
(B.13)
µdp
dz
¶
g
= fl
2 ˙m2
r
Din,cρg
(B.14)
µdp
dz
¶
l
= fl
2 ˙m2
r
Din,cρl
(B.15)
µdp
dz
¶
f r ictional
=
(µdp
dz
¶
l
+2
"µdp
dz
¶
g
−
µdp
dz
¶
l
#
x
)
(1−x)1/3 +
µdp
dz
¶
g
x3
(B.16)
113
==PAGE:134==
Appendix B. Correlations
B.2
Minichannels
B.2.1
Heat transfer coefﬁcient
For the calculation of the heat transfer coefﬁcient in the condensing section in case of
minichannels, it was chosen to apply the heat transfer model developed by Cavallini et al. in
[44]. Also in this case, a more detailed description of the model is presented following the
considerations of the original article.
The moving engine for the development of this model, is the observation of the parameters
which affect the heat transfer coefﬁcient in a horizontal pipe. The saturation temperature,
the mass velocity, the vapour quality and the pipe geometry show an inﬂuence on the heat
transfer coefﬁcient. On the other hand, its dependence on the temperature difference ∆T was
not always veriﬁed, but it occurs if gravity is the dominant force. Consequently, the authors
distinguish two ﬂow regimes: a ∆T -dependent one and a ∆T -independent one. This requires
an unique transition criterion. The validation of the model, performed considering experi-
mental data, suggests that Equation B.17 well represents the transition line, expressing the gas
velocity JG (or the transition dimensionless gas velocity JT
G ) as a function of the Martinelli’s
parameter Xtt.
JT
G =
("
7.5
4.3X 1.111
tt
+1
#−3
+C −3
T
)−1/3
(B.17)
where CT = 1.6 for hydrocarbons and CT = 2.6 for other refrigerant. Due to the fact that R134a
is a HFC refrigerant, a value of 2.6 was used for CT .
For the development of the equations for the heat transfer model, data sets from Cavallini et
al.[85] were used. For the ∆T -independent ﬂow regime, occurring when JG > JT
G , a two-phase
multiplier correcting the liquid phase heat transfer coefﬁcient is considered as shown in
Equation B.18.
αA = αLO
·
1+1.128x0.8170
µ ρL
ρG
¶0.3685 µ µL
µG
¶0.2363 µ
1−µL
µG
¶2.144
Pr −0.100
L
¸
(B.18)
For the ∆T -dependent ﬂow regime, occurring when JG < JT
G , the heat transfer coefﬁcient, ex-
pressed by Equation B.19, is related to αA and to a fully-stratiﬁed ﬂow heat transfer coefﬁcient
αST RAT .
αD =
"
αA
Ã
JT
G
JG
!0.8
−αST RAT
#Ã
JG
JT
G
!
+αST RAT
(B.19)
αLO =
0.023Re0.8
LOPr 0.4
L kL
D
(B.20)
114
==PAGE:135==
B.2. Minichannels
αST RAT = 0.725
½
1+0.741
·(1−x)
x
¸0.3321¾−1 "
k3
LρL(ρL −ρG)ghLG
µLD∆T
#0.25
+(1−x0.087)αLO (B.21)
where hLG corresponds to the latent heat.
In Chapter 3, in the main body of the report, it was decided to mention only Equation B.18
due to the fact that only ∆T -dependent ﬂow regime was observed in this study. The authors
also state that all the ﬂow regimes typical of the process of condensation are included in the
model:
• Annular ﬂow is contained in Equation B.18.
• Stratiﬁed-wavy ﬂow and Stratiﬁed-smooth ﬂow are both covered by Equation B.19. The
transition between wavy to smooth stratiﬁed ﬂow is represented in the linear interpola-
tion comprised in Equation B.19 and when the smooth ﬂow occurs, the T-dependent
component is the prevailing one.
• Slug ﬂow is represented by both Equations B.18 and B.19. Due to the ∆T -independent
nature, the transition line described by Equation B.17 is conceived to be inclusive of a
weak effect of T in Equation B.19 when the development of slug ﬂow occurs.
B.2.2
Pressure drop
For what concerns the estimation of the frictional pressure drop in minichannels, the model
derived through the observation of experimental data and described by Cavallini et al. [47]
was considered. It is presented in the following.
The frictional pressure gradient can be calculated through Equation B.22 for JG > 2.5.
µdp
dz
¶
=
Φ2
LO2fLOG2
DhρL
(B.22)
where the friction factor fLO is referred to surfaces with negligible surface roughness and is
expressed as shown in Equation B.23 for any ReLO.
fLO = 0.046Re−0.2
LO
= 0.046
µGDhydraulic
µL
¶−0.2
(B.23)
The others parameters included in Equation B.22 can be evaluated applying the following
equations.
Φ2
LO = Z +3.595F H(1−E)W
(B.24)
W = 1.398pR
(B.25)
115
==PAGE:136==
Appendix B. Correlations
Z = (1−x)2 + x2 ρL
ρG
µµG
µL
¶0.2
(B.26)
F = x0.9525(1−x)0.414
(B.27)
H =
µ ρL
ρG
¶1.132 µµG
µL
¶0.44 µ
1−µG
µL
¶3.542
(B.28)
The entrained liquid fraction E needs to be calculated using Equation B.29 as presented by
Paleev and Filippovich [86].
E = 0.015+0.44log
"µρGC
ρL
¶µµjg
σ
¶2
104
#
(B.29)
i f E ≥0.95
E = 0.95
(B.30)
i f E ≤0
E = 0
(B.31)
where jG is the superﬁcial gas velocity, σ is the surface tension and ρGC is the homogeneous
gas core density, calculated as:
ρGC =


x +(1−x)E
x
ρG
+ (1−x)E
x


(B.32)
which in case of ρL >> ρG can be simpliﬁed to:
ρGC ≈ρG
µ
1+ (1−x)E
x
¶
(B.33)
The model was also extended for JG < 2.5, but this extension is not reported in this report
because only values of JG greater than 2.5 were observed.
116
==PAGE:137==
C Correlations for the dynamic simula-
tions
As mentioned in Chapter 6, the heat transferred through each section of the condenser to
the hot water tank was implemented in the tank model deriving some correlations from the
steady state simulations. More in details, some correlations relating the heat transferred in
each section of the condenser with the corresponding average water temperature of each
section were extrapolated. Three system conﬁgurations were considered:
• Case 1: condenser diameter 9.95 mm, condenser length 54 m , with IHEX.
• Case 2: condenser diameter 6.95 mm, condenser length 70 m , with IHEX.
• Case 3: condenser diameter 6.95 mm, condenser length 70 m , without IHEX.
The correlation for the heat transferred in the desuperheating, condensing and sucooling
sections for three aforementioned geometries are depicted in Figures C.1, C.2, C.3, C.4, C.5,
C.6, C.7, C.8 and C.9 . The ﬁgures show the four points resulting from the steady state sim-
ulations, the linear interpolation adopted through Excel and the corresponding equation.
The temperatures are expressed in K due to the fact they are expressed in K in Dymola and
consequently the correlations required this unit of measure.
Moreover, as mentioned in Chapter 6, also the compressor work for the three system conﬁgu-
rations was introduced in the model by considering some correlations. It was correlated with
the average water temperature in the condenser as shown in Figures C.10, C.11 and C.12.
117
==PAGE:138==
Appendix C. Correlations for the dynamic simulations
Figure C.1: Correlation for the heat transfer in the desuperheating section for Case 1.
Figure C.2: Correlation for the heat transfer in the condensing section for Case 1.
118
==PAGE:139==
Figure C.3: Correlation for the heat transfer in the subcooling section for Case 1.
Figure C.4: Correlation for the heat transfer in the desuperheating section for Case 2.
Figure C.5: Correlation for the heat transfer in the condensing section for Case 2.
119
==PAGE:140==
Appendix C. Correlations for the dynamic simulations
Figure C.6: Correlation for the heat transfer in the subcooling section for Case 2.
Figure C.7: Correlation for the heat transfer in the desuperheating section for Case 3.
Figure C.8: Correlation for the heat transfer in the condensing section for Case 3.
120
==PAGE:141==
Figure C.9: Correlation for the heat transfer in the subcooling section for Case 3.
Figure C.10: Correlation for the compressor work for Case 1.
Figure C.11: Correlation for the compressor work for Case 2.
121
==PAGE:142==
Appendix C. Correlations for the dynamic simulations
Figure C.12: Correlation for the compressor work for Case 3.
122
==PAGE:143==
D Variation of the water recirculation
In this chapter some other temperature distributions resulting from the tank model varying
the extent of water recirculation (r) are presented. In Figure 6.1 of Chapter 6 it was observed
than a nil water recirculation in the tank causes an excessive thermal stratiﬁcation of the
hot water in the tank. Considerable variations in the temperature proﬁles are shown even
for very low value of the amount of water recirculating. Figure D.1 depicts the temperature
distributions in the 20 nodes of the tank for r equals to 0.5 %/s. The temperature across the
condenser wrapped around the tank are highlighted with yellow, while the temperature in the
top layer of the tank is highlighted with blue. In the ﬁgure the heat loss to the ambient was
set to zero. A comparison between Figures D.1 and 6.1 highlights the considerable extent of
the mixing between the nodes even for limited values of water recirculating. It can already be
observed that the temperatures in layers 18-19 and 20 are considerably lower than the ones in
the rest of tank, as largely explained in Chapter 6. Moreover, the temperature in node 17 is the
warmest as it again explained in Chapter 6.
Additionally, in the main body of the report was explained that the inclusion in the model of
the heat loss with the ambient causes a more concave trend of the temperature proﬁles. This
fact is evident comparing Figure D.2 with Figure 6.2a. In both of them the same amount of
water recirculation is considered (r=10 %/s), but the former is characterised by nil heat losses
with the ambient while the latter considers the heat loss (Uamb = 7W /m2K ). The concave
trend caused by the heat loss can be explained with the fact that they are proportional to the
temperature difference between the water inside the tank and the ambient temperature. The
latter was set to 20°C as speciﬁed in Standard [32], while the former varies during the heating
up process. For water temperatures lower than 20°C the heat loss represents a "gain" for the
system due to the positive contribution of the term Uamb,i As,i(Tamb −Ti) in Equation 3.28.
This justiﬁes the sharper trend of the temperature proﬁles for low water temperatures in the
tank. On the other hand, for water temperature higher than 20°C the heat loss to the ambient
becomes an actual loss for the system, reducing the slope of the temperature proﬁles for high
water temperatures.
123
==PAGE:144==
Appendix D. Variation of the water recirculation
Figure D.1: Temperature distribution in the nodes of the tank in case of r = 0.5%/s and
Uamb = 0 W /m2K .
Figure D.2: Temperature distribution in the nodes of the tank in case of r = 10%/s andUamb = 0
W /m2K .
124
==PAGE:145==
E Heating up process with Tamb = −1°C
In this chapter a graphical representation of some results concerning the heating up process
with Tamb = −1°C for the three system conﬁgurations considered are presented. A brief
explanation of these results was provided in Section 6.2. Table 6.2 shows the COPavg for the
three considered cases. Case 1 shows the highest COPavg and the increase compared to Case 3,
i.e. 2.3%, was a surprising result. The reason for this discrepancy must be found in the different
heat transferred in the desuperheating section, caused by the presence of the heat recovery
unit in Case 1, which affect the overall heat transfer in the condenser (Qtot−cond) as depicted
in Figure E.1. The dotted lines depict the heat transfer in the desuperheating section, while
the continuous ones show the overall heat released to the water in the condenser. More in
details the Figure shows that the gap between Qdesup is increasing with time, causing the same
effect on Qtot−cond. In the previous simulations, Case 3 showed results comparable with the
other cases thanks to the higher heat transferred in the condensing section which overcame
the reduced heat released by the desuperheater. However, for an ambient temperature of
-1°C, the slightly higher heat transferred in the condensing section does not compensate the
signiﬁcantly smaller Qdesup. The heat transferred in the other sections of the condenser and
the compressor work were not plotted due to the very small magnitude of the variations,
causing the almost overlapping of the curves.
Case 1 and Case 2 are characterized by very similar results due to the fact that they are both
inclusive of the IHEX.
125
==PAGE:146==
Appendix E. Heating up process with Tamb = −1°C
Figure E.1: Heat transferred in the desuperheatinging section and in the overall condenser
during the heating up process for the three system conﬁgurations with an ambient temperature
of -1°C.
126
==PAGE:147==
F EES code
In this chapter the EES code and a screen shot of the diagram window used to run the model
are presented.
"*********************************************************************"
"Procedure heat transfer coefficient water"
"*********************************************************************"
Procedure hwater(T_in_w, T_out_w, T_wall, L, H, D_out_tank: h_w)
p_amb=1.013
g=9.81
T_w_avg=(T_out_w+T_in_w)/2
Beta=1/T_w_avg
mu_w=Viscosity(Water,T=T_w_avg , P=p_amb)
rho_w=Density(Water,T=T_w_avg , P=p_amb)
Pr_w=Prandtl(Water,T=T_w_avg,P=p_amb)
k_w=Conductivity(Water,T=T_w_avg,P=p_amb)
Gr_w=(g*Beta*(T_wall-T_w_avg)*rho_w^2*L^(3))/(mu_w^(2))
Ra_w=Gr_w*Pr_w
"Rayleigh number"
Nuss_w=(0.186*(H/D_out_tank)+2.285)*(Ra_w*(D_out_tank/H)^4)^(0.26)
h_w=Nuss_w*k_w/L
end
"***********************************************************************"
"Procedure isentropic efficiency compressor"
"***********************************************************************"
Procedure Compressor(T_e, T_c: eta_is)
p00 = -517.1
p10 = -0.03627
p01 =
5.555
p20 = 0.00436
p11 = -0.009884
127
==PAGE:148==
Appendix F. EES code
p02 =
-0.01396
p30 = -4.396e-06
p21 =
-6.312e-07
p12 =
1.888e-05
p03 =
8.931e-06
x_pol=T_c
y=T_e
eta_is = p00 + p10*x_pol + p01*y + p20*x_pol^2 + p11*x_pol*y + p02*y^2 +
p30*x_pol^3 + p21*x_pol^2*y + p12*x_pol*y^2 + p03*y^3
end
"**************************************************************************"
"Procedure mass flow rate compressor"
"**************************************************************************"
Procedure mr(T_e, T_c: m_r)
p00 = 0.0546
p10 = 0.0004367
p01 =
-0.001089
p20 = -3.457e-07
p11 = -8.947e-07
p02 = 3.004e-06
x=T_c
y=T_e
m_r =p00 + p10*x + p01*y + p20*x^2 + p11*x*y + p02*y^2
end
"****************************************************************************"
"Procedure Dittus-Boelter correlation"
"****************************************************************************"
Procedure Dittus(R$,T[2], T[3], p_c,D_in,m_r: h_r)
A_cross=pi*D_in^(2)/4
T_r_avg=(T[2]+T[3])/2
Pr_r=Prandtl(R$,T=T_r_avg,P=p_c)
rho_r=Density(R$,T=T_r_avg,P=p_c)
mu_r=Viscosity(R$,T=T_r_avg,P=p_c)
k_r=Conductivity(R$,T=T_r_avg,P=p_c)
"in W"
v_r=m_r/(A_cross*rho_r)
Re_r=rho_r*v_r*D_in/mu_r
Nus_r=0.023*Re_r^(0.8)*Pr_r^(0.3) "n=0.3 for cooling (Dittus-Boelter
correlation)"
128
==PAGE:149==
h_r=Nus_r*k_r/D_in
end
"******************************************************************************"
"Procedure deltap desuperheater and subcooler"
"******************************************************************************"
Procedure deltapcalc(R$,T[2], T[3], p_c,D_in,m_r,L: DELTAp)
A_cross=pi*D_in^(2)/4
T_r_avg=(T[2]+T[3])/2
Pr_r=Prandtl(R$,T=T_r_avg,P=p_c)
rho_r=Density(R$,T=T_r_avg,P=p_c)
mu_r=Viscosity(R$,T=T_r_avg,P=p_c)
k_r=Conductivity(R$,T=T_r_avg,P=p_c)
"in W"
v_r=m_r/(A_cross*rho_r)
Re_r=rho_r*v_r*D_in/mu_r
f=0.158/(Re_r^0.25)
DELTAp=f*rho_r*v_r^2*L/D_in*10^(-5)
end
"*******************************************************************************"
"Procedure Shah correlation"
"*******************************************************************************"
Procedure Shah(R$,p_c, m_r,D_in: h_r_cond)
p_critic=P_crit(R$)
p_r=p_c/p_critic
A_cross_cond=pi*D_in^(2)/4
mu_l=Viscosity(R$,x=0 , P=p_c)
rho_l=density(R$,x=0 , P=p_c)
k_l=Conductivity(R$, x=0, P=p_c)
Pr_l=Prandtl(R$, x=0, P=p_c)
v_l=m_r/(A_cross_cond*rho_l)
Re_lo=rho_l*v_l*D_in/mu_l
h_L_SHAH=0.023*Re_lo^0.8*Pr_l^0.4*k_l/D_in
h_r_cond=h_L_SHAH*(0.55+2.09/p_r^0.38)
end
"********************************************************************************"
"Procedure Gnieliski correlation"
"********************************************************************************"
Procedure Gnieliski(R$,T[5],T[4],p_c, m_r,D_in: h_r_sub)
129
==PAGE:150==
Appendix F. EES code
T_r_avg_sub=(T[5]+T[4])/2
A_cross_sub=pi*D_in^(2)/4
Pr_r_sub=Prandtl(R$,T=T_r_avg_sub,P=p_c)
rho_r_sub=Density(R$,T=T_r_avg_sub,P=p_c)
mu_r_sub=Viscosity(R$,T=T_r_avg_sub,P=p_c)
k_r_sub=Conductivity(R$,T=T_r_avg_sub,P=p_c)
"in W"
v_r_sub=m_r/(A_cross_sub*rho_r_sub)
Re_r_sub=rho_r_sub*v_r_sub*D_in/mu_r_sub
f_sub=(0.790*ln(Re_r_sub)-1.64)^(-2)
Nus_r_sub=((f_sub/8)*(Re_r_sub-1000)*Pr_r_sub)/(1+12.7*(f_sub/8)^(1/2)*(Pr_r_sub^(2/3)-1))
h_r_sub=Nus_r_sub*k_r_sub/D_in
end
"*************************************************************************************"
"INPUT DATA"
"*************************************************************************************"
"********** Gravity*******"
g=9.81
"********** Refrigerant*******"
R$ = 'R134a'
"********** Tank ********"
H=1.4
"Tank height"
D_out_tank=0.660
"Tank outer diameter"
L=0.43
"Starting height for the condenser"
"***********Condenser*********"
D_in=D_out-thickness
"Inner diameter"
"***********Heating capacity*********"
T_avg_w=(T_in_w+T_out_w)/2 "Average water temperature"
p_amb=1.013
Cp_w=Cp(Water,T=T_avg_w , P=p_amb)
"***********************************************************************"
"EVAPORATOR"
"************************************************************************"
"************ Energy balances***************"
Q_e=m_air*Cp_air*(T_air_in-T_air_out)
"Air side"
Cp_air=Cp(Air,T=T_avg_air)
T_avg_air=(T_air_in+T_air_out)/2
Q_e=m_r*(h[8]-h[7])
"Refrigerant side"
"************ LMTD**************************"
Q_e=UA_evap*DELTAT_ml_evap
dT[7]=T_air_in-T_e
130
==PAGE:151==
dT[8]=T_air_out-T_e
DELTAT_ml_evap=(dT[7]-dT[8])/ln(Arg_evap)
Arg_evap=dT[7]/dT[8]
"*************Cycle properties***************"
p_e=P_sat ( R$, T=T_e)
p[7]=p_e
p[8]=p_e
T[8]=T_e+DELTAT_superheating
h[8]=Enthalpy(R$, T=T[8], p=p[8])
"*****************************************************************"
"ITERNAL HEAT RECOVERY UNIT"
"*****************************************************************"
h[1]-h[8]=h[5]-h[6]
Effectiveness=(T[1]-T[8])/(T[5]-T[8])
h[1]=Enthalpy(R$, p=p_e, T=T[1])
T[5]=T[4]-DELTAT_subcooling
h[5]=Enthalpy(R$, p=p[5], T=T[5])
T[6]=Temperature(R$, p=p[6], h=h[6])
p[6]=p[5]
p[5]=p[4]-DELTAp_sub
p[1]=p_e
"***************************************************************"
"COMPRESSOR"
"***************************************************************"
"**********Refrigerant mass flow rate****************"
Call mr(T_e, T_c: m_r)
"**********Thermodinamic state compressor discharge**"
s[1]=Entropy(R$, p=p_e, T=T[1])
T[2]=Temperature(R$, p=p_c, h=h[2])
p[2]=p_c
h_2_is=Enthalpy(R$, p=p[2], s=s[1])
eta_is=(h_2_is-h[1])/(h[2]-h[1])
Call Compressor(T_e, T_c: eta_is)
"**********Compressor work****************************"
W_comp=m_r*(h[2]-h[1])
***************************************************************"
"CONDENSER"
"**************************************************************"
p_c=P_sat(R$ ,T=T_c)
A_cond_tot=pi*L_tot_cond*D_in
131
==PAGE:152==
Appendix F. EES code
"************************DESUPERHEATER*************************************"
"*********Thermodynamic state points**********"
Q_desup=m_r*(h[2]-h[3])
h[3]=Enthalpy(R$, p=p[3], x=1)
p[3]=p_c-DELTAp_desup
T[3]=T_sat(R$,P=P[3])
"*********Temperature water side**************"
Q_desup=m_w*Cp_w*(T_out_w-T_in_w_desup)
"*********LMTD********************************"
Q_desup=U_desup*A_desup*DELTAT_ml_desup
A_desup=pi*L_desup*D_in
dT[3]=T[3]-T_in_w_desup
dT[2]=T[2]-T_out_w
DELTAT_ml_desup=(dT[3]-dT[2])/(ln(Arg))
Arg=dT[3]/dT[2]
1/(U_desup)=((1/(h_r_desup)+1/(h_w_desup)+R_wall_desup*pi*D_out))
R_wall_desup=(ln(D_out/D_in))/(2*pi*k_al_desup)
"Wall resistance"
k_al_desup=Conductivity(Aluminum, T=T_wall_desup)
"Aluminum thermal
conductivity at T_wall"
"*********Newton's law of cooling to find T_wall*****"
Q_desup=A_desup*h_r_desup*(T_r_avg_desup-T_wall_desup)
T_r_avg_desup=(T[2]+T[3])/2
"********Heat transfer coefficient water side*********"
Call hwater(T_in_w_desup, T_out_w, T_wall_desup, L, H, D_out_tank: h_w_desup)
"********Heat transfer coefficient refrigerant side***"
Call Dittus(R$,T[2], T[3], p_c,D_in,m_r: h_r_desup)
"*********UA******************************************"
UA_desup=U_desup*A_desup
"**********************CONDENSENSING SECTION*******************"
"*************Thermodynamic state points**************"
Q_cond=m_r*(h[3]-h[4])
h[4]=Enthalpy(R$, p=p[4], x=0)
p[4]=p[3]-DELTAp_cond
T[4]=T_sat(R$,P=P[4])
"************Temperatures water side*******************"
Q_cond=m_w*Cp_w*(T_in_w_desup-T_in_w_cond)
"************LMTD**************************************"
Q_cond=U_cond*A_cond*DELTAT_ml_cond
dT[4]=(T[4]-T_in_w_cond)
DELTAT_ml_cond=(dT[4]-dT[3])/(ln(Arg2))
Arg2=(dT[4])/(dT[3])
A_cond=pi*L_cond*D_in
1/(U_cond)=((1/(h_r_cond)+1/(h_w_cond)+R_wall_cond*pi*D_out))
R_wall_cond=(ln(D_out/D_in))/(2*pi*k_al_cond)
"Wall resistance"
k_al_cond=Conductivity(Aluminum, T=T_wall_cond)
132
==PAGE:153==
"**************Newton's law of cooling to find T_wall***********"
Q_cond=A_cond*h_r_cond*(T_c-T_wall_cond)
"*************Heat transfer coefficient water side**************"
Call hwater(T_in_w_cond, T_in_w_desup, T_wall_cond, L_2, H, D_out_tank:
h_w_cond)
n=L_desup/(pi*D_out_tank)
L_2=L-n*D_out
"****************Heat transfer coefficient refrigerant side -
SHAH*************"
Call Shah(R$,p[3], m_r,D_in: h_r_cond)
"**************UA***********************************************"
UA_cond=U_cond*A_cond
"********************************SUBCOOLER**********************************************"
"*************Thermodynamic state points************************"
Q_sub=m_r*(h[4]-h[5])
Q_sub=m_w*Cp_w*(T_in_w_cond-T_in_w)
"*************LMTD**********************************************"
L_sub=L_tot_cond-L_desup-L_cond
Q_sub=U_sub*A_sub*DELTAT_ml_sub
dT[5]=T[5]-T_in_w
DELTAT_ml_sub=((dT[5])-dT[4])/(ln(Arg3))
Arg3=dT[5]/dT[4]
A_sub=pi*L_sub*D_in
1/(U_sub)=((1/(h_r_sub)+1/(h_w_sub)+R_wall_sub*pi*D_out))
R_wall_sub=(ln(D_out/D_in))/(2*pi*k_al_sub)
"Wall resistance"
k_al_sub=Conductivity(Aluminum, T=T_wall_sub)
"**********Newton's law of cooling to find T_wall***************"
Q_sub=A_sub*h_r_sub*(T_r_avg_sub-T_wall_sub)
T_r_avg_sub=(T[5]+T[4])/2
"**********Heat transfer coefficient water side*****************"
Call hwater(T_in_w, T_in_w_cond, T_wall_sub, L_3, H, D_out_tank: h_w_sub)
n_2=L_cond/(pi*D_out_tank)
L_3=L_2-n_2*D_out
"***********Heat transfer coefficient refrigerant side - Gnielinski****"
Call Gnieliski(R$,T[5],T[4],p[4], m_r,D_in: h_r_sub)
"***********UA******************************************"
UA_sub=U_sub*A_sub
"***********************************************************************"
"EXPANSION VALVE"
"***********************************************************************"
h[6]=h[7]
"************************************************************************"
"COP"
133
==PAGE:154==
Appendix F. EES code
"************************************************************************"
Q_c=Q_sub+Q_desup+Q_cond
COP=Q_c/W_comp
"*************************************************************************"
"PRESSURE DROP"
"*************************************************************************"
"DESUPERHEATER"
Call deltapcalc(R$,T[2], T[3], p[2],D_in,m_r,L_desup: DELTAp_desup)
"CONDENSER"
DELTAP_cond=DELTAP_2phase_horiz('R134a', G_J, p[3], D_in, L_cond, x_i, x_o)
x_i=1
x_o=0
G_J=m_r/A_cross_cond
A_cross_cond=pi*D_in^(2)/4
"SUBCOOLER"
Call deltapcalc(R$,T[4], T[5], p[4],D_in,m_r,L_sub: DELTAp_sub)
134
==PAGE:155==
Figure F.1: Diagram window used to run the EES code.
135
==PAGE:156==
==PAGE:157==
G Dymola code
In this chapter the code implemented in Dymola to simulate the heating phenomena in the
tank is presented.
model Tank
import SI = Modelica.SIunits;
import cons = Modelica.Constants;
replaceable package Water = HeatPump_all.Fluids.Water constrainedby
Modelica.Media.Interfaces.PartialTwoPhaseMedium
annotation(choicesAllMatching = true);
Water.ThermodynamicState WaterIn;
Water.ThermodynamicState WaterOut;
HeatPump_all.Port portA
;
HeatPump_all.Port portB
;
parameter Integer n;
SI.Temperature[n] T;
SI.Mass[n] M;
parameter SI.Volume V "Volume of tank";
parameter SI.Length D "Diameter of tank";
parameter SI.Length b "Thickness of tank shell";
parameter SI.ThermalConductivity k_steel "Thermal conductivity steel, 16";
parameter SI.ThermalConductivity k_water "Thermal conductivity Water, 0.58";
SI.ThermalConductivity Dk;
parameter SI.Temperature T_initial "Initial water temperature";
parameter SI.Temperature T_a "Ambient temperature";
137
==PAGE:158==
Appendix G. Dymola code
SI.Temperature T_out;
parameter Real U;
parameter SI.SpecificHeatCapacity cp_water "Specific heat capacity water,
4200";
parameter SI.SpecificHeatCapacity cp_steel "Specific heat capacity steel, 420";
parameter SI.Density d_steel "Density steel, 7775";
parameter SI.Density d_water "Density Water, 1000";
parameter Real y "Mass fraction of each node which is circulated";
SI.Heat[n] Q_cond;
SI.Heat[n] Q;
SI.Heat[n] Qmix1;
SI.Heat[n] Qmix2;
SI.Heat[n] Qmix3;
SI.Heat[n] Qmix4;
SI.Heat Q_total;
SI.Heat Q_c;
SI.Heat Q_cond_total;
SI.Heat Q_balance;
SI.Length[n] x;
SI.Length L;
SI.Area A_s;
SI.Area A_c;
SI.Efficiency COP;
SI.Efficiency COP_tot;
parameter SI.Pressure p "Water pressure";
SI.SpecificEnthalpy h_out( start=Water.specificEnthalpy_pT(p=p, T=T_initial));
SI.MassFlowRate m_flow_up;
SI.MassFlowRate m_flow_down;
SI.Temperature T_in(start=273+40);
SI.Temperature T_avg_w;
SI.Work W_comp;
SI.Temperature T_avg;
Integer z;
initial equation
for i in 1:n loop
T[i]=T_initial;
end for;
138
==PAGE:159==
if T_initial>=47+273 then
z=1;
else
z=2;
end if;
equation
T_in=Water.temperature(WaterIn);
h_out=Water.specificEnthalpy(WaterOut);
L=V/(cons.pi*(D/2)^2*n);
A_s=cons.pi*D*L;
A_c=cons.pi*(D/2)^2;
Dk=k_steel*(cons.pi*D*b)/A_c;
if portA.m_flow>0 then
m_flow_up=0;
m_flow_down=portA.m_flow;
WaterIn=Water.setState_ph(p=p, h=portA.h);
WaterOut=Water.setState_pT(p=p, T=T[n]);
portB.h=h_out;
else
m_flow_up=portB.m_flow;
m_flow_down=0;
WaterIn=Water.setState_ph(p=p, h=portB.h);
WaterOut=Water.setState_pT(p=p, T=T[1]);
portA.h=h_out;
end if;
T_avg=sum(T)/n;
Q_total=sum(Q);
Q_cond_total=sum(Q_cond);
Q_balance=Q_total-Q_cond_total;
for i in 1:n loop
M[i]=L*A_c*d_water;
end for;
x[1]=L;
x[n]=L*n;
Q_cond[1]=0;
Q_cond[n]=0;
(Qmix2[n])=0;
(Qmix1[n])=0;
(Qmix3[1])=0;
(Qmix4[1])=0;
139
==PAGE:160==
Appendix G. Dymola code
if T[2]>T[1] then
(Qmix2[1]) = y*M[2]*cp_water*(T[2]);
(Qmix1[1])= y*M[1]*cp_water*(T[1]);
else
(Qmix2[1])=0;
(Qmix1[1])=0;
end if;
M[1]*cp_water*der(T[1])=(k_water+Dk)*A_c/L*(T[2]-T[1])+U*A_s*(T_a-T[1])
-m_flow_down*cp_water*T[1]+m_flow_up*cp_water*T[1+1]+m_flow_down*cp_water*T_in
-m_flow_up*cp_water*T[1]+(Qmix2[1])-(Qmix1[1]);
der(Q[1])=M[1]*cp_water*der(T[1]);
for i in 2:n-1 loop
x[i]=L*i;
if T[i+1]>T[i] then
(Qmix2[i]) = y*M[i+1]*cp_water*(T[i+1]);
(Qmix1[i])= y*M[i]*cp_water*(T[i]);
else
(Qmix2[i])=0;
(Qmix1[i])=0;
end if;
if T[i-1]>T[i] then
(Qmix3[i])=0;
(Qmix4[i])=0;
else
(Qmix3[i]) = y*M[i-1]*cp_water*(T[i-1]);
(Qmix4[i])= y*M[i]*cp_water*(T[i]);
end if;
if x[i]>=1.26 and x[i]<1.33 and z==2 and T[i]<55+273 then
der(Q_cond[i])=0.1489*T[18]+4.9027;
//Case1
elseif x[i]>=1.05 and x[i]<1.26 and z==2 and T[i]<55+273 then
der(Q_cond[i])=(-8.1028*T[16]+3605.2)/3;
//Case1
elseif x[i]>0.98 and x[i]<1.05 and z==2 and T[i]<55+273 then
der(Q_cond[i])=(3.9343*T[14]-997.78);
//Case1
else
der(Q_cond[i])=0;
140
==PAGE:161==
end if;
M[i]*cp_water*der(T[i])=(k_water+Dk)*A_c/L*(T[i+1]-T[i])
+(k_water+Dk)*A_c/L*(T[i-1]-T[i])+U*A_s*(T_a-T[i])
+m_flow_down*cp_water*T[i-1]-m_flow_up*cp_water*T[i]+m_flow_up*cp_water*T[i+1]
-m_flow_down*cp_water*T[i]+der(Q_cond[i])+(Qmix2[i])
-(Qmix1[i])-(Qmix4[i])+(Qmix3[i]);
der(Q[i])=M[i]*cp_water*der(T[i]);
end for;
if T[n-1]>T[n] then
(Qmix3[n])=0;
(Qmix4[n])=0;
else
(Qmix3[n]) = y*M[n-1]*cp_water*(T[n-1]);
(Qmix4[n])= y*M[n]*cp_water*(T[n]);
end if;
M[n]*cp_water*der(T[n])=(k_water+Dk)*A_c/L*(T[n-1]-T[n])+U*A_s*(T_a-T[n])
+m_flow_down*cp_water*T[n-1]-m_flow_down*cp_water*T[n]+m_flow_up*cp_water*T_in-
m_flow_up*cp_water*T[n]+(Qmix3[n])-(Qmix4[n]);
der(Q[n])=M[n]*cp_water*der(T[n]);
T_out=Water.temperature(WaterOut);
portA.m_flow+portB.m_flow=0;
portA.p=p;
portB.p=p;
if z==2 then
der(W_comp) =4.6511*T_avg_w - 1129.7; //Case1
COP=der(Q_c)/der(W_comp);
else
der(W_comp)=0;
COP=0;
end if;
der(Q_c)=der(sum(Q_cond));
COP_tot=Q_c/(W_comp+0.001);
T_avg_w=(T[14]+T[18])/2;
algorithm
when T[16]<=47+273 and z==1 then
z:=2;
elsewhen T[16]>= 52+273 and z==2 then
z:=1;
141
==PAGE:162==
Appendix G. Dymola code
end when;
end Tank;
142
==PAGE:163==
==PAGE:164==
Avrai, avrai, avrai il tuo tempo per andar lontano,
camminerai dimenticando, ti fermerai sognando...
Avrai, avrai, avrai la stessa mia triste speranza
e sentirai di non avere amato mai abbastanza
— Claudio Baglioni
==PAGE:165==
==PAGE:166==
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Section of Thermal Energy
Technical University of Denmark 
Nils Koppels Allé, Bld. 403
DK- 2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
Denmark
Phone (+45) 4525 4131
Fax  (+45) 4588 4325
www.mek.dtu.dk
