==PAGE:1==
Master’s thesis
Photocatalytic reactions in
micro-reactors
Valeria Magrì
Supervisor:
Peter Vesborg
CINF - Center for Individual Nanoparticle Funtionality
Technical University of Denmark
7th of September 2015
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Physics in fulﬁllment of the requirements for
acquiring an M.Sc. in Physic at the University of Milan, under the Erasmus+
program. All the work has been done at the Center of Individual Nanoparticle
Functionality (CINF), under the supervision of Peter Vesborg, whom I would
like to thank for the possibility of working on this interesting subject. This work
would not be ﬁnished without Daniel Trimarco, who has been my reference
point in the past seven months, and Bastian Mei, who also contributed with
starting this project and deﬁning it along the way. I would like to thank Ib
Chorkendorﬀfor inspiring me in the choice of this project and the participants
of the microreactors meeting for helpful discussion. I am also grateful to Morten
Nielsen for all the time he spent ﬁnding and explaining his old work to me. Last,
I would like to thank all the people of CINF who answered my many questions
and who welcomed me in a very inspiring and friendly environment.
At the end of this path I must thank my supervisor in Italy Paolo Milani for all
the good advice and for making me start this new experience at DTU.
Lyngby, 7th of September 2015
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This thesis presents an analysis of diﬀerent photocatalytic reactions. A detailed
study is given on the eﬀect of V2O5 doping on TiO2 used as a catalyst for
preferential CO photo-oxidation (CO-Prox) to CO2 in a stream of hydrogen and
under UV light. In addition, studies are given on the use of diﬀerent catalysts
for the same reaction as well as a study of ammonia oxidation over vanadia
doped TiO2.
Motivation for these studies comes from previous work on the
subject, where an increase in CO-Prox activity of 5.5 times was found on TiO2
when adding a very narrow range of V2O5 loadings. All the experiments were
performed in a gas phase µ-reactor with a low volume reaction chamber, high
active area for the catalyst illumination and fast time constant.
For CO-Prox over vanadia doped titania, two diﬀerent commercial catalysts
were tested, w2730x and P25, both from Degussa. An increase in activity of
2 times was achieved when adding vanadia to w2730x in the expected loading
range, while a decrease in activity was seen when doing the same on P25. It
was found that the deposition method inﬂuences the activity and that a high
load of vanadia is detrimental for the reaction.
Other non-commercial catalysts were tested for CO-Prox. Carbon nitride sup-
ported gold nanoparticles were shown to be inactive for the reaction. Tin or
rhodium doped anatase TiO2 was also tested. The pure anatase TiO2 showed
an activity comparable with P25, while the addition of Sn did not improve the
activity and Rh had a positive eﬀect, increasing the activity 2 times.
Ammonia oxidation over TiO2 was demonstrated to be feasible and the products
of the reaction are N2 and N2O. The addition of vanadia did not improve the
activity in any case, even though the eﬀect depends on the loading.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Resumé
I denne rapport præsenteres en analyse af forskellige fotokatalytiske processer.
Eﬀekten af V2O5 doping af TiO2 til brug i selektiv fotooxidation af CO til CO2
(CO-Prox) under UV belysning i hydrogenstrøm undersøges. Desuden undersø-
ges brugen af forskellige andre katalysatorer til samme reaktion, samt ammoniak
oxidation over vanadia dopet TiO2. Motivationen for dette projekt kommer fra
tidligere studier i emnet, hvor der blev fundet en 5,5 fold forøgelse i CO-Prox
aktiviteten med TiO2 ved et snævert interval af V2O5 dopingmængder. Alle eks-
perimenter blev udført i gasfase µ-reaktor med et lav-volumen reaktionskammer,
højt aktivt område til katalysator-belysning og kort tidskonstant.
For CO-Prox over vanadia-dopet TiO2 blev to forskellige kommercielle kataly-
satorer testet, w2730x og P25, begge fra Degussa. En fordobling i aktiviteten
blev fundet ved vanadia doping af w2730x i det forventede dopinginterval, mens
der blev fundet en forværring af aktiviteten af P25 ved samme doping. Det
blev observeret, at deponeringsmetoden har betydning for aktiviteten og en høj
vanadia koncentration forværrer reaktionshastigheden.
Andre ikke-kommercielle katalysatorer blev testet til CO-Prox. For guld-nanopartikler
på karbonnitrid support blev ingen aktivitet observeret. Anatase (TiO2) dopet
med hhv. tin og rhodium blev også undersøgt. Ren anatase havde en aktivitet
sammenlignelig med P25, tin doping forøgede ikke aktiviteten, mens rhodium
fordoblede aktiviteten.
Ammonium oxidation over TiO2 blev fundet mulig med N2 og N2O som reak-
tionsprodukter. Tilføjelse af vanadia forøgede ikke aktiviteten for denne reak-
tion, men aktiviteten afhænger af koncentrationen.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
General theory
3
2.1
Photocatalysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
Important concepts and working mechanism . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
3
Experimental methods
7
3.1
Microreactors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Experimental setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
The Quadrupole Mass Spectrometer (QMS) . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
Light source . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
Experimental procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
Catalyst loading
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
Bonding of the reactors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
Catalyst testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4
Preferential CO Oxidation on Vanadia doped TiO2 photocata-
lysts
17
4.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2
Photocatalytic process in TiO2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.3
Vanadia eﬀect . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.4
Previous works and motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
Preliminary calculations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.5
Experimental part
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
Samples preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
Gas composition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
Light intensity study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
Preliminary measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.6
Results and discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
Other observations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.7
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5
Preferential CO Oxidation on other photocatalysts
41
5.1
Gold catalyst . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
Experimental results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
Analysis and conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.2
Other TiO2 photocatalysts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
Experimental results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
Analysis and conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6
Ammonia Oxidation on TiO2 photocatalysts
47
6.1
Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6.2
Experimental procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6.3
Results and discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.4
Ammonia Prox . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6.5
Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
7
Conclusion
57
8
Outlook
59
A Sample overview
61
B Dispersion issues
63
C Recipe for depositing the catalysts
65
Bibliography
67
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Photocatalysis is one of the most promising ﬁelds for the generation of clean and
renewable energy. This is due to the ability of harvesting solar energy and store
it in chemical products, as photocatalysts enhance chemical reactions when they
absorb photons. The starting point of my master project has been to study a
particular photocatalytic reaction and the full motivation will be explained in
detail; but as photocatalysis is a wide subject, in the beginning of this master
thesis I will give an introduction to the important concepts and deﬁnitions,
which will be necessary to understand my experiments. This can be found in
Chapter 2.
I will then proceed in Chapter 3 by explaining the experimental setup used, as
this is common for all the experiments All the reactions are studied in the gas
phase in a µ-reactor, which is a micro-fabricated device that features a reaction
chamber of a 240 nL of volume, a fast time response and a large area for the
deposition of photocatalysts. In the ﬁrst part of the chapter special attention
is given to the properties of the µ-reactors and their advantages for the study
of photocatalytic reactions. In the second part I will explain the experimental
procedure followed, from the preparation of the catalysts to the steps followed
in the testing.
The main part of my work has been dedicated to the study of titanium dioxide,
which is one of the most used materials due to its great photocatalytic properties,
high availability and low cost. Previous studies at CINF demonstrated that CO
is eﬃciently and preferentially oxidized on TiO2 and that adding vanadium oxide
==PAGE:12==
2
Introduction
can increase the activity, so my goal was to complete the previous studies and
give a complete overview of the eﬀect. This can be found in Chapter 4, which
is dedicated to CO preferential oxidation in a stream of hydrogen, over vanadia
doped TiO2.
While working at this initial assignment, the master project evolved and I moved
on to try diﬀerent catalysts and reactions. Other catalysts were readily avail-
able and this made me decide to test them for the same reaction. This was
developed in two side projects, which are described in Chapter 5. In the ﬁrst
one I will present the results on a gold based catalyst and in the second another
commercial catalyst is used, doped with diﬀerent metals.
Towards the end of my project, I went back to the original catalysts used and
decided to use them for a diﬀerent reaction. Ammonia oxidation was chosen
as it is an interesting topic in the conversion of pollutants to environmentally
friendly products and there were good probabilities that TiO2 could work for
this purpose, as described in Chapter 6.
Finally I will end the thesis with a summary of all the results achieved, along
with comments about what I would have liked to examine in more detail and
ideas for continuing the work.
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 2
General theory
In this chapter I will explain important concepts which will be needed to un-
derstand all the experiments done during my project, starting from the basics
of photocatalysis.
2.1
Photocatalysis
Photocatalysis is a ﬁeld that has reached much prominence during the last
decades, as the basic working principle, the absorption of photons to drive chem-
ical reactions, promises to be an eﬀective way to harvest energy from the sun.
A photocatalyst is a semiconductor material which illuminated by photons of
energy equal to or higher than its band gap produces electrons and holes; these
charges can quickly recombine, or they can be separated and reach the surface.
When a reactant is in contact with the surface of the photocatalyst, chemical
reactions can be driven by the interaction between the chemicals and the photo
generated electrons or holes, as it is shown schematically in Figure 2.1, for TiO2.
Important concepts and working mechanism
As in heterogeneous catalysis, photocatalytic reactions can be broken up in
individual steps and there are important conditions to be satisﬁed:
==PAGE:14==
4
General theory
Figure 2.1: The photocatalytic mechanism in titanium dioxide, the
main catalyst used during the project. Photons with en-
ergy higher than the band gap are absorbed in the bulk
material and the photogenerated charge migrate to the sur-
face, where they can oxidize (holes) or reduce (electrons)
adsorbed species (from [11]).
1. Reactants need to be adsorbed on the surface of the catalyst
2. Charges must be transferred from the photocatalyst to the reactants (fol-
lowing the steps of creations of electrons and holes and charge transfer
reactions in the solid)
3. Reactions take place on the surface, where the catalyst favors the reaction
4. The ﬁnal products must be able to desorb
It is important to stress that except for step 2), the other steps are the same in
heterogeneous catalysis. The general steps for any catalytic process are shown
in 2.2, where it is possible to see how a catalyst favors reactions between two
chemical species A and B, by decreasing the potential barrier of the reaction.
The 5 main parameters which govern the kinetics in a photocatalytic reaction
are (i) the mass of catalyst, (ii) the wavelength, (iii) the initial concentration (or
pressure) of the reactant, (iv) the radiant ﬂux and (v) exceptionally the temper-
ature in extreme conditions with respect to room temperature [11]. Of all these
parameters, in my project I took into consideration mainly the relationship be-
tween activity and light intensity. Results from literature show that the activity
of the catalyst (or the reaction rate r) is directly proportional to the incident
photon ﬂux below a maximum value, above which the rate declines to follow a
square root dependence. Such a change has been ascribed to the fact that too
high radiant ﬂuxes increase the identical concentrations in photo-electrons and
holes, which bring to a higher recombination rate. Other results show, though,
that direct proportionality has been seen rarely and the dependence has an
==PAGE:15==
2.1 Photocatalysis
5
Figure 2.2: General potential diagram for a catalytic process, from [4].
In order for the reaction to take place a potential barrier
must be overcome; the catalyst decreases the barrier when
the reactants are adsorbed onto its surface, so that the
reaction is favored.
exponent between 0.5 and 1.
In order to increase the activity catalysts can be used together to have a synergis-
tic eﬀect. The added materials can, for example, improve the photon absorption
properties of the ﬁrst catalyst, thus enhancing the amount of light harvested,
or they can add energy levels in the band gap of the ﬁrst material, acting as a
trapping site for electrons or holes and thus decreasing the recombination rate
of the charges.
Furthermore they can act eﬀectively as co-catalysts, adding
adsorption sites on the surface of the catalyst, thus increasing the amount of
reactants that can participate in a reaction, or decreasing the potential barrier
of the process.
Understanding the way a catalytic reaction proceeds is usually not simple, but
knowledge on the mechanism governing the reaction and how to explain any
improvement in the activity, lead to the development of better catalysts.
==PAGE:16==
6
General theory
Figure 2.3: Dependence of the reaction rate from diﬀerent parameters
in a photocatalytic reaction: a) the mass of the catalyst,
b) the wavelength, c) the initial concentration of the reac-
tants, d) the temperature and e) the incident photon ﬂux
on the photocatalyst (from [11]).
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 3
Experimental methods
In this chapter I will present the experimental setup used for the project, as
well as the procedure used for testing the catalyst, as it is the same for all the
samples prepared.
3.1
Microreactors
All the reactions studied during my master project are run in µ-reactors, devel-
oped at CINF for studying reactions in the gas phase with amounts of catalyst
in the order of 10−6 grams [10, 27, 7]. A µ-reactor is shown in Figure 3.1 (b):
on a silicon wafer a small volume reactor chamber, two gas inlets and an outlet
are etched. As shown in Figure 3.1 (a) the catalyst is loaded on a pyrex lid,
which is later anodically bonded together with the silicon at around 400 ◦C and
applying a 1 kV potential diﬀerence.
The dimensions of the reactors are 16 × 20 mm2 × 0.35 mm, for the silicon
while the Pyrex lid has a height of 0.5 mm.
The circular active area has a
diameter of 10 mm and a height of only 3 µm, so that the reactor volume is
∼240 nl. The two inlet channels, I1 and I2, allow the mixing of gases directly
on the chip, before reaching the reaction chamber, so this limits the interactions
between potentially dangerous gases, e.g. oxygen and hydrogen. The outlet O1
deviates most of the ﬂow coming out of the mixing channel, enabling to have
high ﬂow values in the gas line before the µ-reactor; in this way it is possible
==PAGE:18==
8
Experimental methods
Figure 3.1: Sketch of the cross-section of the µ-reactor (a), where it is
possible to see that the catalyst is loaded on the pyrex lid,
which is later bonded to the reactor. In the picture of a
loaded reactor (b), it is possible to see the path followed
by the gasses: these enter from inlet I1 and I2, are mixed
in the mixing channel and exit from outlet O1. Only a
small portion of this ﬂow enters the reaction chamber and
proceeds to the QMS through outlet O2 (from [27]).
to control the ﬂows with standard mass ﬂow controllers and to change the gas
composition in relatively fast times. The channel connecting the mixing channel
to the reaction chamber is very shallow in order to prevent back-diﬀusion of the
products from the reaction chamber, that will otherwise be undetected. The
outlet capillary, O2, has a width of 5 µm, a depth of 3 µm and a length of 1.5
mm. These dimensions of the capillary have been chosen to obtain a high ﬂow
resistance in the channel, such that the gas ﬂow through the reaction chamber is
of around 3 × 1014 molecules s−1. The pressure drops in the capillary to around
10−7 mbar under typical experimental conditions, while the reaction chamber
is at atmospheric pressure. The residence time in the chamber depends on the
width of O2 and can be 2 or 10 s. A complete description of the µ-reactor, as
well as the details about the micro fabrication process, can be found in [10].
3.2
Experimental setup
The µ-reactor is connected to a gas system as shown in Figure3.2, with up to
four gases that can be used at the same time. The sealing between the rector
and the coupling block is ensured with O-rings, but as these are made from an
elastomer, a small amount of gas diﬀusion from the surrounding air into the
system is unavoidable, particularly at elevated temperatures. This gives rise to
an unwanted background signals of air, complicating analysis of the reaction
products. To mitigate this problem, a continuous ﬂow of argon is introduced in
the volume surrounding the O-rings. Thus, any unwanted background due to
diﬀusion through O-rings will be in the form of argon.
==PAGE:19==
3.2 Experimental setup
9
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.2: The experimental setup. On the left, schematic of the gas
system (from [13]) and on the right a zoom of the con-
nection block (from [10]). Each inlet on the µ-reactor is
connected to two diﬀerent lines, so that two gases can be
put in using gas mass ﬂow controllers. The ﬁrst outlet,
that deviates most of the ﬂow, is connected to a rough-
ing pump, while only O2 goes to the QMS. All the pneu-
matic valves are controlled through a lab-view program.
The sealing between µ-reactor and the connection block is
achieved with o-rings.
==PAGE:20==
10
Experimental methods
The Quadrupole Mass Spectrometer (QMS)
The detection of the gas species is achieved with a quadrupole mass spectrom-
eter, Balzers model QMA125 with a cross-beam ﬁlament and a SEM detector.
The basic principle of operation is the separation of ions according to their
charge to mass ratio. This is done by ionizing the gas of interest with a cross
beam ion source, a ﬁlament which ionizes molecules in the gas by emission of
electrons. The ions thus produced are forced through an electric ﬁeld generated
between two pairs of rods, as shown in Figure3.2. The ﬁeld in the quadrupole
is the superposition of a static ﬁeld and an alternate ﬁeld: V = U + V cos(ωt).
Figure 3.3: Principle of operation of a quadrupole mass spectrometer
(image taken from the producer of the model used [25]).
The chosen values of U, V and ω determine a stable trajectory only for ions
satisfying a precise condition on the mass to charge ratio, while all the others
impact on the walls without reaching the detector. The detector is a Secondary
Electron Multiplier (SEM) that produces a cascade of secondary electrons for
each ions that hits it, thus generating a current signal. By changing the oper-
ating parameters of the QMS it is possible to make a scan over all the masses
and analyze the gas composition.
A QMS cannot operate normally at pressures above 10−5 mbar, due to the
presence of too many charged gas molecules. This is why it is of fundamental
importance the design of the outlet capillary to maintain the pressure drop
between the reactor and the QMS.
The QMS is assumed to be linear in the range of pressures investigated, below 6
× 10−5 mbar, which means that any diﬀerence in the current read in the SEM is
directly proportional to the diﬀerence in the partial pressures of the gas species
analyzed.
==PAGE:21==
3.3 Experimental procedure
11
Light source
The setup is equipped with an UV light source standing right above the reaction
chamber, as shown in the picture 3.2.
Figure 3.4: The LED is sitting over the reactor, with a shutter in be-
tween to cut the light during the experiments.
The light source used in all the experiments is a high-power UV-LED source
(Hamamatsu model LC- L2) ﬁtted with a focusing lens assembly (Hamamatsu
L10561- 220) suited for areas of 8 mm in diameter. The peak wavelength is
367 nm and the FWHM 9 nm. A shutter is placed between the source and the
reactor to block the light during the experiments. This is due to the fact that
the output power depends on the heating of the diode and turning it oﬀevery
cycle would change the power output. For the same reason a cooling block is
connected to the diode. To avoid heating of the reactor due to the illumination,
another cooling block is placed under the reactor.
3.3
Experimental procedure
The following procedure applies to all the experiments preformed during the
project, so it will be explained in this section for future reference.
Catalyst loading
All the catalysts used were loaded onto the µ-reactor Pyrex lids, with dropcast-
ing from a water-based suspension. The suspensions were prepared by dispersing
==PAGE:22==
12
Experimental methods
15 mg of material in 15 ml of high purity water (Milli-Q water system by Merck
Millipore), unless otherwise noted. Two diﬀerent ways of drying the lids were
used: just evaporation at a controlled temperature of 25 ◦C, or freeze drying on
the setup shown in picture 3.3.
Figure 3.5: Freeze drying setup
The heart of this device is a Peltier element with the hot side connected to a
water cooling system, thus capable of bringing the sample to sub-zero temper-
atures. The top part is made of a metal plate sitting directly on the cold side
of the Peltier element and the samples are put in its central area. Finally a
removable plastic lid, with channels that can be connected to a nitrogen gas
source, is used to close the volume around the samples, and an o-ring seals the
interface between the plate and the lid.
When freeze drying the droplets are left to evaporate half an hour in order to
achieve the wanted proﬁle and frozen on place at -12 ◦C. Then they are dried
overnight in a stream of nitrogen to sublimate the ice while keeping the material
dispersed in it, ideally in the same conﬁguration as when it was frozen. A more
detailed explanation can be found in [15]. This method prevents the appearing
of stains and "coﬀee rings" which are typical when evaporating a solution.
Bonding of the reactors
Once the catalyst is deposited on the lid, this must be bonded together with
the µ-reactor. This is done usually with an anodic bonding process, which is
a way to create a chemical bond between two similar materials by applying a
strong electrostatic force and heating. In our case the two materials are both
Silicon based, so it’s possible to create a permanent bond, as the ions and
==PAGE:23==
3.3 Experimental procedure
13
impurities in the crystals migrate under the applied electric ﬁeld, until they
reach an equilibrium which is achieved with the creation of bonds [26]. In order
to achieve this result in a short time, the reactor is also heated close to the
melting point of glass, around 400 ◦C.
This procedure can induce phase changes or particles aggregation in some cat-
alyst, so a cold bonding method was developed, as described in detail in [26].
Figure 3.6: The cross-section of the cold bonding setup, from [26]. The
whole chip save for the reaction chamber area is in contact
with the heated ceramic, at 400 ◦C.
Here the reactor chamber sits on a cold ﬁnger, as shown in the scheme in Fig-
ure 3.6, which is cooled by a water cooling system to a temperature of 25 ◦C.
The sides of the reactor are heated with halogen lamps by resistive heating,
but because of the local cooling and the thermal conductivity of the air in the
chamber, the area of the lid where the catalyst is deposited, is kept well under
100 ◦C during the entire process.
==PAGE:24==
14
Experimental methods
Catalyst testing
When a reactor is ﬁnally prepared and mounted on the experimental setup,
the reactor itself and the connection tubes are ﬁlled with air. As previously
mentioned, the pressure in the reaction chamber can be kept at 1 bar, while
having the channel to the QMS in vacuum. It is important that air left on the
backside of the reactor, at outlet 2 (referring to Figure 3.1), is removed before
opening to the QMS, in order not to ruin the QMS with a too high pressure
and to prevent contaminants from going in. This is achieved by pumping down
the line with a turbomolecular pump, while the valve connecting to the QMS is
closed, until the pressure is ﬁnally under the threshold of 10−5 mbar.
Most of the catalysts analyzed during the project are able to oxidize carbon,
so the ﬁrst step during the experiment is to set a ﬂow of O2 and eventually
argon, while illuminating the catalyst with UV light. In this way any carbon
contamination on the sample is burned producing either CO or CO2. In Figure
3.7 it is possible to see a typical result of an experiment: the current signal in
the QMS as a function of time, for all the masses analyzed. In the ﬁrst part the
decaying exponential shows the decrease of the CO2 in the chamber with time,
when all the carbon is converted. At the same time the air is removed and this is
seen in the decrease of the water vapor signal. As there may be small variation
in the gas ﬂows, due to diﬀerences in the µ-reactors, in order to compare the
results all the signals are normalized to the Ar signal, which is usually of the
order of 10−7 A.
When all the contaminants and unwanted gas are removed, the signal in the
QMS for gases other than Ar and O2 is the background signal, given both by
the real presence of those gases in the air left in the chamber and by electronic
noise in the QMS. When the background signal is recorded, it is now possible to
introduce the gasses needed into the reaction chamber, by setting the ﬂow with
the mass ﬂow controllers. Depending on the reaction analyzed, though, it may
take more or less time to reach a stable ﬂow, because of the diﬀerent sticking
coeﬃcient of the gases and diﬀusion speeds in the line. This second step may take
as long as two hours, but it is fundamental to achieve an equilibrium condition
when starting the measurement otherwise the results may be misinterpreted.
The actual experiment consists in illuminating the catalyst with UV radiation
intermittently, with 4 cycles of light-dark, each of 30 minutes total duration (15
minutes of light and 15 of darkness). In order not to change the conditions
the LED is not turned oﬀ, but the light is stopped with a shutter controlled
electronically.
The diﬀerence between the light and the dark signal is directly proportional
to the amount of product in the chamber. This quantity, from now on called
∆QMS, is taken as the parameter to compare the results.
==PAGE:25==
3.3 Experimental procedure
15
Figure 3.7: Typical experimental result: after an initial part where
contaminants are burnt, the gases are left to reach equi-
librium, before the testing can start.
==PAGE:26==
16
Experimental methods
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 4
Preferential CO Oxidation
on Vanadia doped TiO2
photocatalysts
This chapter describes the ﬁrst and longest study performed during my master
project, the preferential oxidation of CO over TiO2 in a stream of hydrogen. Due
to the importance of this part, there is a long introduction about the motivation
behind the work and the theories that made me begin this project. Material in
this chapter will also serve as reference for the following chapters, as all the work
presented later was started from ideas that came up during these experiments.
4.1
Introduction
Hydrogen is seen as the fuel of the future, when the transition from the fossil
fuel based economy to a green economy will be achieved ﬁnally. Nonetheless, the
production of hydrogen from renewable sources has still many years to go. At
the moment the grand part of the hydrogen production comes from the steam
reforming process, which produces:
CH4 + H2O ⇄OCO + 3H2;
∆H◦
298 = +206kJ/mol
(4.1)
CnHm + H2O ⇄nCO + 2H2;
∆H◦
298 > 0kJ/mol
(4.2)
==PAGE:28==
18
Preferential CO Oxidation on Vanadia doped TiO2 photocatalysts
Hydrogen obtained in this way cannot be readily used because it contains traces
of CO, which will poison the catalysts in most low-temperature polymer fuel
cells [4]. PEMFs can accept CO concentrations no higher than 50 ppm, while
currently the gas produced in steam reforming has 0.2-0.4 vol.% of CO [22]. For
this reason preferential oxidation of CO at ppm levels in a stream of hydrogen
(CO-Prox) has drawn a lot of attention in order to solve this problem and
photocatalysis can be an eﬃcient solution. The reaction itself is very simple
and often studied as test reaction when developing new devices [28]. A molecule
of CO reacts with oxygen to form CO2 :
CO(g) + 1
2O2(g)→CO2(g)
Titanium dioxide is the most used photocatalyst because of its good selectivity
and high activity for this reaction and due also to its abundance, price and
safety.
4.2
Photocatalytic process in TiO2
In order to understand the results of the experiments, it is important to un-
derstand photocatalytic mechanism of titanium dioxide. TiO2 can be found in
three diﬀerent phases, anatase, rutile and brookite, with diﬀerent properties.
The band gap is 3.2-3.3 eV for anatase, 3-3.1 eV for rutile and 3.3 eV brookite
[31]. The valence band of TiO2 is at 3 V vs. normal hydrogen electrode (NHE)
and is formed by the overlapping of oxygen 2p orbitals, whereas the lower part
of the conduction band predominantly originates from 3d orbitals of the Ti4+
[15]. The process of photoexcitation happens when a photon with an energy,
hν, higher than the bandgap, Eg, of the semiconductor promotes an electron
from the valence band (VB) to the conduction band (CB), leaving behind a
hole in the VB. The excited photogenerated carriers quickly thermalize and
thermalization times are around 100-300 fs for TiO2. Furthermore, to be able
to participate in chemical reactions holes and electrons need to reach the surface
of the photocatalyst, which means they need to have a high enough lifetime and
diﬀusion length. Holes and electrons tend to recombine in the material, and
this is particularly pronounced in defects-rich samples. The time scale of this
process is around 10 ns.
When the photogenerated charges reach the surface they can interact with chem-
icals adsorbed on surface sites. For TiO2 there are a few possible outcomes, of
which the most probable are:
• Oxygen radicals (O2
–) can be formed if O2 is adsorbed on the surface and
accepts photogenerated electrons
• Hydroxil radicals (OH·) can be formed if a hole is transferred to an OH
adsorbed on the Ti(IV) site.
==PAGE:29==
4.2 Photocatalytic process in TiO2
19
In order for CO oxidation to take place, oxidant species must be adsorbed on
the surface, as well as obviously CO. It has been shown that CO is adsorbed at
surface oxygen vacancies (SOVs), where it can react with the adjacent lattice
oxygen to form CO2 [29].
Theories about mixed phase catalysts
The mechanism of photocatalytic CO oxidation in TiO2 is still debated. The
diﬀerent phases show diﬀerent mechanisms of light absorption, and there is
not yet a universally accepted explanation for the phenomenon in mixed-phase
TiO2 catalysts. Traditionally anatase has been reported to be the active phase,
but the presence of rutile greatly improves the photocatalytic activity, so that
mixed-phase catalysts are more active than the pure phase ones. It has been
proposed that rutile introduces trapping sites for electrons at a slightly lower
energy than anatase conduction band, and for holes at a slightly higher energy
than the maximum of the valence band, in this way preventing the recombination
of the charges, which can then reach the surface [12]. While the true process is
still debated, it is universally recognized that mixed-phase photocatalysts are
more active because they stabilize charge separation, preventing recombination
of electrons with holes and furthermore the smaller band gap of rutile extends
the useful energy of the photons in the visible range.
The two photocatalysts used in the project have diﬀerent percentages of anatase/rutile
phases, and diﬀerent average particle size, and an overview of they properties
as given from the producer is shown in Table 4.1.
Speciﬁc surface area
(BET)
Average size
Density
Comes as:
P25
50 ± 15 g/m2
21 nm
(primary particles)
130 g/l
powder
w2730x
\
≤100 nm
(aggregates)
1280 g/l
30 wt% solution
Table 4.1: Properties of the photocatalysts used, from the producer
website (Degussa). As it is possible to see, w2730x comes
as an aqueous dispersion, and so it is necessary to dry it and
crush it in a powder in order to perform the same charac-
terization as P25, and extensive information is not supplied
by the producer.
==PAGE:30==
20
Preferential CO Oxidation on Vanadia doped TiO2 photocatalysts
4.3
Vanadia eﬀect
The addition of vanadium oxide to titanium dioxide can enhance the activity of
the catalyst, and the system is well known and studied, at least as a thermal
catalyst. Vanadia doped TiO2 for NOx removal is commercialized by Haldor
Topsoe. In this catalyst vanadyl groups actively participate in the reaction as
the reactant are adosrbed at the vanadia/titania surface [8, 24]. As for the use as
a photocatalyst, vanadium oxide is usually used as a bulk crystal for its electron
generation properties, as the band gap of this material is only 2-2.2 eV. Added
to TiO2 this oxide acts as an electron injector to titanium, and generating holes
in vanadia, thus increasing the charge separation.
4.4
Previous works and motivation
Previous studies on titanium dioxide were made at CINF, giving the motivation
to the current work. During his PhD M. G. Nielsen showed that an increase
of ∼5.5 times in the photocatalytic activity for ethylene removal was achieved
when adding an optimal loading of 0.125 wt% (over the mass of titania) V2O5
to a commercial TiO2 catalyst, i.e. w2730x from Degussa (Evonik) [15]. The
results found during his project are shown in Figure 4.1a.
Trying to ﬁnd an explanation for the higher activity, Nielsen found that Bond
et al. [2] give a calculation for estimating the amount of V2O5 coverage on an
anatase TiO2 catalyst. Here they show that a theoretical monolayer equivalent
corresponds to 0.145 wt% of V2O5 per m2 of anatase surface. The shape of
vanadium species on the surface of TiO2 strongly depends on the coverage, and
reports in literature show the presence of monomer vanadyl structures at low
loadings, and crystalline structures at high loadings above 6 wt%. According
to Nielsen the optimum loading of vanadia corresponds to a coverage of
1
100
of monolayer (as the surface area of w2730x is 88 m2/g). He speculates from
ESR studies that an electron is transferred from V4+ to the ethene, which thus
binds to the vanadyl group. Subsequently the ethene is oxidized by a neighbor
hydroxyl radical. The function of vanadyl groups is then the capture of the
species on the surface of TiO2, while no photon absorption takes place in the
vanadia. On the other hand, photon absorption is expected at high loadings,
when vanadia shows crystalline formations, and the results show that at the
highest loading the activity is completely killed.
Another conﬁrmation of the eﬀect of vanadia was achieved again by Nielsen in
a macroscopic ﬂow reactor, where the TiO2 was spin-coated over a 4-inch wafer
and half of the area was masked in order to deposit vanadia on the other half.
Once at a time one of the two parts was masked and the other irradiated with
UV light, so that the two halves could be tested in the same conditions. In
==PAGE:31==
4.4 Previous works and motivation
21
(a) Results of ethylene removal from Nielsen’s phd thesis [15]: it is possible to see
an increase of 5.3 times in the activity when adding an optimum loading of
0.125 wt% of vanadia to w2730x.
(b) Results of CO-Prox on Nielsen’s samples as done by T. Østergaard, from [18].
The maximum increase in activity is more than 5 times between 1 and 10
% light intensity. The sample used for the measurement are w2730x without
vanadia and w2730x with 0.125 wt % of vanadia.
Figure 4.1
this unpublished work it was measured an increase in activity of 2 times for the
sample with vanadia compared to the pure sample.
==PAGE:32==
22
Preferential CO Oxidation on Vanadia doped TiO2 photocatalysts
After this discover, it was decided to test the same commercial catalyst, without
vanadia loading, for CO preferential oxidation. J. N. Hansen and P. L. Moritzen
[16] showed during a project that CO can be eﬃciently oxidized by w2730x and
the working parameters were investigated.
In a following project T. Østergaard demonstrated the same enhancement in
activity in the case of CO-Prox, by using the same µ-reactors used by Nielsen
[18]. His results are shown in Figure 4.1b and he saw the activity enhancement
depends on the light intensity, as at high light intensity full conversion of CO is
approached and at low light intensity noise aﬀects the measurements. Nonethe-
less an ideal condition for the reaction was found, between 1 % and 10 % LED
light intensity, where almost all the CO is oxidized while very little hydrogen is
and in this range the increase in activity, while adding vanadia, is more than 5
times. He also showed that the activity follows a power law in respect to light
intensity, with an exponent of 0.58 (0.7 in previous works [28]).
The latest project done on the subject by C. Kieler aimed at reproducing the
same enhancement eﬀects on another commercial photocatalyst, P25, again by
Degussa [13], which is reported in literature to show higher catalytic activity
than w2730x [12]. He also found an error in Nielsen’s calculations for the added
percentage of vanadia, so he showed that the optimum loading was not at 0.125
wt%, but in reality the amount loaded was 0.194 wt % of V2O5 (over the total
mass of the catalysts).
According to the explanation given by Nielsen, the
enhancement in activity depends not on the mass of the co-catalyst added, but
on its surface coverage of the TiO2.
As P25 has a lower surface area than
w2730x, the maximum is expected at lower amount of vanadia. Both catalysts
have been characterized by XRD and BET to measure the phase distribution
and the surface area and the results are reported in Table 4.2.
Catalyst
Speciﬁc surface area
from BET (m2/g)
Phase composition
from XRD
w2730x
95.0 ± 0.5
80 % anatase
20 % rutile
P25
53.5
60 % anatase
40 % rutile
Table 4.2: Results from previous BET and XRD characterization on
the two catalyst, both in powder form.
According to Kieler’s calculation, reported in Table 4.3 the same monolayer cov-
erage as the optimum loading for w2730x is expected for P25 at 0.109 wt %,
where the numbers for P25 are estimated from the value of monolayer coverage
given by bond and the relative surface area between the two commercial cata-
lysts. Due to problems in the experimental procedure his work was not ﬁnished,
but in his project he reproduced the results on w2730x on a new set of reactors,
==PAGE:33==
4.4 Previous works and motivation
23
V2O5 wt %
for w2730x
from Morten
V2O5 wt %
for w2730x
corrected
V2O5 wt %
for P25
Monolayer
Activity (a.u.)
0.000
0.000
0.000
0
1.00
0.060
0.093
0.053
0.010
1.25
0.09
0.140
0.079
0.015
0.125
0.194
0.109
0.020
5.50
0.190
0.295
0.166
0.031
3.25
0.250
0.389
0.219
0.041
1.25
1.000
1.555
0.876
0.164
0.10
4.000
6.219
3.502
0.655
0.10
8.000
12.438
7.005
1.309
0.10
Table 4.3: Corrections to the amounts of vanadia in Nielsen’s samples,
done by Kieler.
showing though a much smaller increase in activity and shifted to lower Vana-
dia loading, as shown in Figure 4.2. It is speculated that the optimum is very
Figure 4.2: Results of CO-Prox on Kieler’s new samples of w2730x.
An optimum is shown at 0.1 wt %, but the value is lower
than expected.
narrow, so the sampling is too coarse to show the peak in activity.
The aim of my project will be to ﬁll in the gap between the previous works, in
order to reproduce and explain how to obtain the increase in activity on w2730x
for CO-Prox and investigate if the same mechanism works on P25.
==PAGE:34==
24
Preferential CO Oxidation on Vanadia doped TiO2 photocatalysts
Preliminary calculations
Starting from the raw data by Nielsen, the weight percentages of V2O5 were
veriﬁed and corrected, as sometimes they were given according to the TiO2
mass. The weight percentages of V2O5 presented in all the rest of the work are
deﬁned over the total amount of catalyst:
wt% =
m(V2O5)
m(TiO2) + m(V2O5)
All the samples produced, the amount of co-catalyst expected and the experi-
mental errors are summarized in a Table found in Appendix A.
4.5
Experimental part
Samples preparation
In order to study the eﬀect of vanadia on the activity I prepared a series of
samples with diﬀerent loading of co-catalyst, both for P25 and w2730x. Due
to the diﬀerent nature of the two catalysts it has been necessary to solve some
practical problems in the preparation, as described in Appendix C.
Vanadia was added to the samples starting by a solution of 1g/l NH4VO3 pre-
pared just once. For each loading wanted the correct amount of precursor was
calculated and added to the titania dispersion. After dropcasting, each lid was
calcined at 450 ◦C for 6 hours, with a ramp of ∼2◦C/min, in a stream of syn-
thetic air (20.9 % oxygen in nitrogen). This step is necessary for the conversion
of the NH4VO3 to V2O5, according to the reaction:
2NH4VO3 →V2O5 + 2NH3 + H2O
In this time all the precursor should be converted to the wanted oxide [1]. All
the lids were loaded with the same volume of catalyst, 40 µl, except in the case
of the maximum loading of vanadia, where a higher volume was dropcasted in
order to have a similar amount of TiO2 as in the lower loadings. The results
were later normalized to the real amount of TiO2 present in each sample, as
calculated from the eﬀective amount of catalyst weighted.
Gas composition
All the experiments are done on the setup described in Section 3.2. The gas ﬂow
is set to 10 ml/min, with the individual ﬂows as well as the ﬁnal gas composition
presented in Table 4.4.
==PAGE:35==
4.5 Experimental part
25
Gas
Flow
Component
%
Ar
3.3 ml/min
Ar
89.88
O2 1% in Ar
0.7 ml/min
O2
0.07
CO 0.1 % Ar
5 ml/min
CO
0.05
H2
1 ml/min
H2
10
Table 4.4: Gas composition for the CO-Prox experiment. On the left
the gas ﬂows set with the mass controllers and on the right
the percentage of each compound over the total ﬂow.
The stoichiometry is then H:CO (1000:5), where the content of CO is slightly
higher than the percentage obtained with the most eﬃcient ways of producing
hydrogen [22] . In this way an attempt is done to simulate industrial conditions,
but the percentages of CO are still high enough to keep noise in the QMS
negligible.
Light intensity study
As seen in Section 2.1, the ﬁnal activity depends on reactants available, on the
mass of the catalyst and on the photon ﬂux. Changes in the mass of the catalyst
and in the gas composition were not investigated, taking as starting point the
results of previous works. Fixing these two parameters means that there is a
value of light intensity where all the CO will be converted for the given mass
of catalyst and increasing the light above that will not change the activity, i.e.
full conversion will be reached. Therefore a study of the activity as a function
of the illumination has been done. The LED source is not homogeneous, but
shows an intensity proﬁle reported in Figure 4.3a.
By integrating the intensity proﬁle over the area of the reactor an average value
for the irradiance of 750 mW/cm2 at full power is obtained. Lower intensity
values were achieved by using simple neutral density (ND) ﬁlters of optical
density 0.3, 1.0 and 2.0 (Newport Corp.), or by changing the power of the LED.
In my study I changed the light intensity over 5 orders of magnitude by keeping
the LED at maximum power, or I tried to achieve lower intensities by decreasing
the LED power, which allows for variations in steps of 10 %. The QMS signal
as a function of light intensity is shown in Figure 4.4a (for CO) and Figure 4.4b
(for CO2), along with a power law ﬁt.
==PAGE:36==
26
Preferential CO Oxidation on Vanadia doped TiO2 photocatalysts
(a) Intensity distribution of
the LED, modiﬁed from
Hamamatsu website.
(b) Light intensity dependence for CO-Prox over P25.
(modiﬁed from [28])
Figure 4.3
==PAGE:37==
4.5 Experimental part
27
Light intensity [% LED maximum power]
10-3
10-2
10-1
100
101
102
∆QMS / argon signal [a.u.]  
-10-2
-10-3
-10-4
-10-5
CO signal for pure P25 as a function of light intensity
With 100 % LED intensity and filters
With 50 % LED intensity and filters
With 10 % LED intensity and filters
Filter 2+0.3 and LED 10%
fitted curve
(a) Light intensity study on a sample of P25. Absolute value of the signal for CO,
with the calculated power ﬁt.
Light intensity (% LED maximum power)
10-3
10-2
10-1
100
101
102
∆QMS / argon signal [a.u.]  
10-5
10-4
10-3
10-2
CO2 signal for pure P25 as a function of light intensity
With 100 % LED intensity and filters
With 50 % LED intensity and filters
With 10 % LED intensity and filters
Filter 2+0.3 and LED 10%
fitted curve
(b) Light intensity study on a sample of P25. Value of the signal for CO2, with the
calculated power ﬁt.
In this case the ∆QMS is negative because CO decreases
when light is turned on.
Figure 4.4
==PAGE:38==
28
Preferential CO Oxidation on Vanadia doped TiO2 photocatalysts
The reason for the choice of the ﬁt is that Vesborg et al. found that, for CO-Prox,
the activity follows a power law with exponent ∼0.84 up to moderate irradiance
values of 1 mW/cm2 [28]. The same power law was seen by Østergaard with an
exponent of 0.58 for w2730x.
The ﬁt results obtained for the sample of pure P25 are:
y = (6.7 ± 0.9)10−4 × x(0.46±0.07) for CO2 and
y = −(5.7 ± 0.4)10−4 × x(0.53±0.04) for CO.
The good compatibility between the two cases shows that we are indeed con-
verting the CO to CO2. It was not possible to investigate lower light intensities
with the ﬁlters available, to measure the relationship with more precision. Being
able to ﬁt the activity as a function of light intensity means that it is possible
to compare measurements done at diﬀerent light intensity: due to lack of time
some of the results presented later are made at a higher light intensity and
corrected to the ﬁnal intensity used during the experiment.
It is important to note that the activity tends to saturate in both cases, meaning
that we approach the full conversion of CO, with the given mass of the catalyst.
It is safe to assume that the trend observed match with the high intensity part
of the plot in Figure 4.3b, keeping in mind that the gases composition and the
masses of catalyst in the two cases are diﬀerent. The conclusion is then that
P25 shows a saturation region for high LED intensity and in order to quantify
an increase in the activity when adding Vanadia it is important to keep the
illumination in the safe region, where the activity is around 10-20 % the value
at full conversion.
Another important observation is that measurements at the same theoretical
intensity do not match when using the ﬁlters or changing the LED intensity, as
keeping the LED at maximum power brings unwanted heating eﬀects, that lower
the device eﬃciency. The ﬁlters may also be responsible for a higher extinguish
power at the LED wavelength, than the nominal one. An LED intensity of 10 %
was then chosen for running the experiments, in order to preserve the eﬃciency
of the light source. To obtain the wanted intensity of 0.05 % both the OD 2
and the OD 0.3 ﬁlters were used. The result was not ideal, as it is shown in
Figure 4.4b and Figure 4.4a, because by letting the LED cool down more or less
diﬀerent values were achieved.
The values for the intensity are shown in % over the maximum intensity of
the LED. After noticing some changes in the intensity of the LED during the
experiments, it was decided that the intensity should have been measured. In
the end, though, the measure was not done due to technical problems.
On both Figure 4.4b and Figure 4.4a it is shown the activity at the light intensity
used during the experiment.
An overview of the intensity dependence for all the gases studied for the CO-Prox
==PAGE:39==
4.5 Experimental part
29
Light intensity [% LED maximum power]
10-2
10-1
100
101
102
∆QMS [nA] 
×10-4
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
QMS signals for pure P25 as a function of light intensity
CO2
CO
H2
O2
(a) Light intensity study on a sample of P25. On the y axis there is the diﬀerence
between the light and the dark signal, normalized to the argon signal. The values
are thus all in the same order of magnitude, but it is important to remember that
H2, O2 and CO signals are at least one order of magnitude higher than CO2.
Light intensity [% LED maximum power] 
10-2
10-1
100
101
102
∆QMS/Dark signal [%] 
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
CO and H2 turnovers for P25 as a function of light intensity
H2
CO
(b) Light intensity study on a sample of P25, percentage of converted CO and H2
under UV illumination, as a function of the LED light intensity. On the y axis it
is shown the amount of gas converted, where 100 % is the total amount of gas in
the reaction chamber, as calculated by the background corrected signal. On the
x axis there is the light intensity where 100 % is the maximum LED intensity (at
which it should correspond a value of irradiance of 750 mW/cm2, according to the
datasheet).
Figure 4.5
reaction is given in Figure 4.5a. For the two gases of interest in the reaction,
==PAGE:40==
30
Preferential CO Oxidation on Vanadia doped TiO2 photocatalysts
CO and H2, the percentage of the gas converted has been calculated, as shown
in Figure 4.5b. This number is obtained by dividing the ∆QMS signal by the
background corrected dark signal, so a value of 100 % would correspond to a
total conversion of all the gas in the reaction chamber. It is interesting to see
that 50 % of CO conversion is obtained already at 1 % light intensity, while
the hydrogen signal ﬂuctuates above and below 0. This is due to noise in the
QMS, so it can be inferred that there is no oxidation of hydrogen and the small
amount of oxygen in the ﬂow preferentially react with CO.
As the fundamental parameter is the relative value of the activity between diﬀer-
ent samples, I followed the same procedure for every reactor, turning the LED
on 30 minutes before starting each measurement, in order to have the same
heating time.
Preliminary measurements
After choosing the correct light intensity, the diﬀerence between the light and
dark signal (∆QMS) was analyzed for diﬀerent loadings of Vanadia.
Seeing that the CO and the CO2 signals are dependent, the production of CO2
was chosen in order to determine when the light was on or oﬀ.
In order to estimate the error in the procedure, two reactors were measured
two times, in two diﬀerent days and the results is shown in Table 4.5. This
shows there’s an unavoidable ﬂuctuation in the measurements, that gives rise
to a relative error in the activity of around 9 %.
∆QMS 1 for CO2 (a.u.)
∆QMS 2 for CO2
P25 reactor n. 1
5.5734e-04
7.7542e-04
P25 reactor n. 2
7.3433e-04
7.8550e-04
Table 4.5: Two diﬀerent reactors were measured in diﬀerent days, in
order to estimate the experimental error.
Another necessary test was the reproducibility of the results. More than one
reactor has been produced for each loading for P25, dropcasting the freshly
prepared solution onto more than one lid at a time. Moreover, for one of the
loadings another solution was prepared a diﬀerent day and a new reactor was
measured with it. As shown in Figure 4.6, results from diﬀerent reactors show a
good compatibility. All the results presented during this work rely on this fact
and thus diﬀerent solutions are not prepared for every loading investigated.
==PAGE:41==
4.6 Results and discussion
31
V2O5 wt%
0.2
0.22
0.24
0.26
0.28
0.3
∆QMS/ Argon signal (a.u.)
×10-4
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
QMS signal
P25 + 0.25 % 13/05 n.2
P25 + 0.25 % 13/05 n. 3
P25 + 0.25 % 05/08
Figure 4.6: P25 with a loading of 0.25 wt% of V2O5.
The activi-
ties are compatible and this shows that the experimental
procedure allows to determine a value for the activity de-
pending exclusively on the amount of co-catalyst and not
on preparation conditions.
Mass spectra
The products of the reaction were analyzed by scanning all the masses with the
QMS, as seen in Figure 4.7.
As the reaction is very simple and only CO2 is produced, the mass signals
recorder during the experiment are only 6: CO, CO2, O2, H2, H2O and the
carrier gas, Ar.
4.6
Results and discussion
The CO2 signal diﬀerence between light and dark, ∆QMS, was analyzed for
all the samples. The results are shown for the two diﬀerent catalysts that I
used during the project, P25 (Figure 4.8) and w2730x (Figure 4.9). Due to
experimental problems with the deposition of the solutions, only a few of the
reactors with the desired loadings of w2730x turned out well, so only a part of
the desired samples was available and more about these problems can be found
in Appendix B. The graphs are all shown with the wt% of the co-catalyst on
the x axis.
P25 was by far the most studied catalyst, as all the reactors were loaded by
simple evaporation from the aqueous slurry without any problem, giving in a
==PAGE:42==
32
Preferential CO Oxidation on Vanadia doped TiO2 photocatalysts
Mass/amu 
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
SEM Current [nA]
×10-10
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
P25 + 0.25 % V2O5
CO
O2
H2O
CO2
H2
Ar
QMS signal
Figure 4.7: Example of mass spectrum for CO-Prox, taken with a
sample of P25. The peaks are ﬁtted according to NIST
database of cracking patterns and mass spectrum for each
element.
short time a very homogeneous deposition. It is possible to see that P25 does not
show any improvement with vanadia, instead there is a very unexpected drop in
the activity for the sample at 0.2 %, which was not explained, but found in all
the samples produced. This is particularly interesting because according to the
previous work, an optimum was expected around 0.1 wt%, if the hypothesis is
true that vanadia eﬀect depends on the surface area covered by the co-catalyst.
Another possibility is that the vanadia could preferentially deposit on anatase
and in this case the diﬀerent percentage of anatase/rutile phase in the two
catalysts would play a role. If this was true, though, the eﬀect seen on w2730x
would be expected at even lower loadings for P25, due to the lower anatase
percentage, so this does not seem a possible explanation. More about this can
be found in the next section.
The w2730x samples produced are too far apart to investigate the optimum, as
the peak in activity is supposed to be very sharp. Nonetheless, an increase in
the activity is seen when adding vanadia, the optimum loading being a factor of
2 higher than the pure sample. So even if the sampling is too coarse to identify
a trend, the increase in the activity at the optimum is compatible with the value
found for the macroscopic reactor by Nielsen; moreover a smaller eﬀect is also
seen for the sample with 0.1 wt%. This is an interesting result, as it shows that
an increase in activity can be achieved even at the lower loading of vanadia .
In order to make a complete study, the original reactors made by Morten Nielsen
during his phd thesis were also remeasured (Figure 4.10). This set has many
loadings of V2O5 and indeed a trend is seen: the optimum is found at 0.19 wt%,
which shows an increase in activity of 3.6 times the activity of the pure w2730x
sample. This value is lower than the one measured by Nielsen and Østergaard,
==PAGE:43==
4.6 Results and discussion
33
Figure 4.8: Results for the test an all the P25 samples, deposited by
evaporation. Half of the measurements (red triangle) were
done at an earlier time with 1 % LED intensity, so they are
converted at the lower light intensity by using the power
law found.
who saw an increase of at least 5 times the pure one. In his undocumented work
on the macroscopic reactor, Nielsen found that the activity lowered during the
years, so the lower value found is believed to depend on the age of the reactors.
Nonetheless, the important result of this measure is that the eﬀect of vanadia is
shown and no error was found in the past work. It is thus necessary to ﬁnd the
reason why the same optimum is not seen with the newly prepared samples. A
possibility that must be investigated is that the catalyst has changed during the
years. When starting the experiments a new powder of TiO2 was prepared by
drying and crushing the as-received dispersion in a fume-hood, with the same
procedure used by Nielsen in the past. A diﬀerent level of moisture in the newly
prepared powder or a diﬀerent particle size could have inﬂuenced the dispersion
properties of w2730x and the interaction with the vanadia precursor in solution
can change.
==PAGE:44==
34
Preferential CO Oxidation on Vanadia doped TiO2 photocatalysts
V2O5 wt %
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
0.2
∆QMS/ Argon signal [a.u.]
×10-5
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
QMS signal
w2730x freeze dried filter2.3
Figure 4.9: Results for the samples of w2730x, which were produced
with freeze drying. This set is lacking many of the wanted
loadings, but it is still possible to see an increase of 2 times
the activity between the pure and the optimum loading
sample.
Other observations
A few other interesting observations were made, as diﬀerent ways of depositing
the catalyst and bonding were used during the project .
Eﬀect of bonding
The eﬀect of using the two diﬀerent bonding methods, cold bonding and hot
bonding, was investigated, as the lids already undergo a calcination step where
they are heated at 450 ◦C, so it is pointless to keep the temperature below 100
◦C during the bonding. The results are shown in Figure 4.11 and it is clear that
the bonding procedure does not inﬂuence the activity signiﬁcantly. In the case
of TiO2 the use of hot bonding is then preferred, as it is possible to bond more
than one reactor at a time and the success rate is higher than in the case of cold
bonding.
Eﬀect of catalyst deposition
On the other hand, the way the catalyst is loaded onto the lid inﬂuences the ac-
tivity strongly. Two diﬀerent deposition methods of the same TiO2 suspension,
both with and without adding of Vanadia, are investigated, as it can be seen in
Figure 4.12. It is clear that evaporating the suspension inﬂuences both catalyst
==PAGE:45==
4.6 Results and discussion
35
V2O5 wt %
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
∆QMS/ Argon signal (a.u.)
×10-4
0
0.5
1
1.5
QMS signal
w2730x Morten freeze dried filter2.3
Figure 4.10: Results obtained testing again the samples made by
Morten Nielsen during his phd thesis.
at the same way, when NH4VO3 is added, as they both show a decreasing peak
at the same wt%.
An explanation for the phenomenon can be attributed to the interaction of the
vanadia precursor with the TiO2 in the suspension. All the samples were pro-
duced from aqueous phase, starting by a dispersion of the catalyst in high purity
water. When adding the vanadium precursor to the solution and sonicating, the
salt molecules will be very dispersed in the aqueous slurry. It is proposed that
with freeze drying, where the molecules are left as they are in the suspension
and then the water is slowly sublimated due to the nitrogen atmosphere, the
particles don’t have enough energy to reorganize. The molecules of NH4VO3 are
then well dispersed into the TiO2 matrix and they are converted to V2O5 where
they are. Instead when evaporating the compounds in the water are brought
around by capillary forces due to the shrinking of the droplets. As the energy is
high enough for them to interact, NH4VO3 tends to aggregate and accumulate
in certain areas, bringing to a non uniform deposition over TiO2. The matrix of
V2O5 seems to cover the active area of the catalyst, thus decreasing the overall
activity. This is conﬁrmed by visual observations in some cases where depositing
a high wt % of NH4VO3 makes it visible at the naked eye, showing a typical
yellow color and thus it was possible to recognize some areas that showed a
higher content of precursor.
Moreover the results show that for both w2730x and P25 the activity of the pure
sample is higher when evaporating compared to the freeze drying. The easiest
reason for this is that mass is lost during freeze drying, due to the fact that the
deposited material when is only sitting on the glass and it was very volatile. An
==PAGE:46==
36
Preferential CO Oxidation on Vanadia doped TiO2 photocatalysts
V2O5 wt %
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
∆QMS/ Argon signal (a.u.)
×10-4
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
QMS signal
P25 cold bonded filter1
P25 hot bonded filter1
Figure 4.11: Comparison of the activities for samples prepared from
the same solution and bonded using either cold bonding
or hot bonding.
early observation of this fact brought to reintroducing water in the freeze drying
setup, by letting the nitrogen ﬂow through a bubbler. No loss of material was
observed, but it cannot be excluded that, even with all the possible precautions,
some of the material is always lost after the end of the drying step.
Given these considerations, the activity of the two catalyst could not be com-
pared and after trying many times to deposit them with the same procedure,
only an incomplete set was obtained. As the greatest number of samples was
obtained with diﬀerent methods for the two formulations of TiO2, the results
are divided according to the deposition method: evaporation in Figure 4.13 and
freeze drying in Figure 4.14.
4.7
Conclusion
The activity for two diﬀerent commercial TiO2 catalyst is compared and the
eﬀect of diﬀerent loading of V2O5 is investigated. The results show that the
activity depends strongly on the way the aqueous slurry in which the catalysts
are dispersed is deposited. This unexpected result made diﬃcult to compare the
eﬀect on the two commercial catalysts, as they seem very sensitive to the depo-
sition method and the way that gives a good dispersion for one does is diﬃcult
to apply to the other. Given the long time spent trying diﬀerent parameters
for the deposition and the high failure percentage, the set are missing wanted
==PAGE:47==
4.7 Conclusion
37
V2O5 wt %
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
0.2
∆QMS/ Argon signal [a.u.]
×10-4
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
QMS signal
P25 evaporated
P25 freeze dried
w2730x evaporated
w2730x freeze dried
Figure 4.12: Comparison of the activities for samples prepared from
the same aqueous slurry, but with diﬀerent preparation
methods, freeze drying or simple evaporation.
data. In the end I managed to produce samples that could be compared and
this brought to interesting observations. The results obtained seem to imply
that the freeze drying procedure allows for better dispersion properties and the
eﬀect of the co-catalyst appears. It seems though that the total activity for the
unmodiﬁed catalyst is lower and this can be due to loss of material. Nonethe-
less, the eﬀect of activity increase due to vanadia is of more than 3 times in the
old samples, deposited with freeze drying, and of 2 times in the new samples.
Another observation is that a high area of vanadia is detrimental to the activ-
ity under UV light, and this eﬀect depends only on the amount of co-catalyst
deposited, which is believed to aggregate and cover the active area.
==PAGE:48==
38
Preferential CO Oxidation on Vanadia doped TiO2 photocatalysts
V2O5 wt %
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
∆QMS / ∆QMS P25 
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
QMS signal for CO2
P25 filter 2.3
P25 filter 1
w2730x
Figure 4.13: Results for the samples prepared by evaporation, normal-
ized by the activity of pure P25. Note that they all show
a decrease at the expected optimum for w2730x, even if
the two catalysts have diﬀerent speciﬁc surface area and
the optimum was expected to be dependent from that.
==PAGE:49==
4.7 Conclusion
39
V2O5 wt %
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
0.2
∆QMS / ∆QMS P25 
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
QMS signal for CO2
w2730x
w2730x not calcined
P25
Anatase
Rutile
Figure 4.14: Results for samples prepared by freeze drying, normalized
by the activity of pure P25. The values are normalized
to the mass of the catalyst dispersed in the solution. In
addition to the presented results a sample of pure anatase
phase and one of pure rutile are added for comparison,
to show that P25 is more active than the pure phase
samples. On the other hand w2730x seem to be
==PAGE:50==
40
Preferential CO Oxidation on Vanadia doped TiO2 photocatalysts
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 5
Preferential CO Oxidation
on other photocatalysts
As a parallel project to investigations of vanadia doped TiO2, it was decided
to try two other available catalysts for CO-Prox. These two small side projects
were started and the results collected in this chapter, because in both cases I
was requested to test new photocatalysts for CO oxidation.
5.1
Gold catalyst
Carbon nitride supported gold nanoparticles were given by Jerrik Mielby, from
DTU Chemistry.
These have a gold nanoparticle at the center of an outer
shell of C3N4. The average size of the particles is 20.4 ± 2.5 nm in diameter
and they contain approximately 12 wt % gold, 32 wt% carbon and 56 wt%
nitrogen. The nanoparticles came already dispersed in a 1 g/L solution; 40 µl
were deposited both with freeze drying and evaporation.
Two samples were
tested, with the same gas composition used in Section 4.5, while doing cycles of
illumination/darkness of 10 minutes each. All the experiments were done at the
maximum LED intensity, and this was chosen as already in preliminary tests
the particles did not show a high activity.
==PAGE:52==
42
Preferential CO Oxidation on other photocatalysts
Figure 5.1: Test with light of one the Au/C3N4 nanoparticles samples.
The CO and CO2 signal did not reach a steady state, but
as no consumption of CO appeared it was decided not to
continue with the testing.
Experimental results
The QMS signal over time for one of the samples is shown in Figure 5.1.
It is clear that the photocatalytic activity is not very pronounced, as the diﬀer-
ence in the signal between light in dark is very small, The gold nanoparticles
were not further investigated because already in the ﬁrst test they did not show
any decrease in the CO signal, meaning that any activity shown is not related
to CO oxidation: the CO shows no decrease in the signal compatible with the
level of increase in the CO2. On the other hand CO displays a very small in-
crease, meaning that carbon in the reactor is being oxidized to CO and CO2;
this probably comes from contamination during the preparation procedure and
should not come from the carbon nitrides as these are not reported to oxidize
at ambient temperature.
Sample
∆QMS for CO2 (a.u)
∆QMS for H2 (a.u)
∆QMS for CO (a.u)
Freeze dried
4.2 × 10−5
-2.2 × 10−6
9.1 × 10−6
Evaporated
1.7 × 10−5
1.6 × 10−4
1.1 × 10−6
==PAGE:53==
5.2 Other TiO2 photocatalysts
43
Analysis and conclusions
Both C3N4 and Au should show photocatalytic activity in the investigated light
range, as C3N4 has band gap of 2.7 eV and gold nanoparticles of less than 100
nm size absorb light in the UV range, and the composite system is demonstrated
to work for other photocatalytic reactions [3, 6]. Nonetheless no conversion of
CO was seen during my experiment and this was not expected. In order to
understand the result found, a research into literature was made and a study
by Singh et al. on Au/C3N4 used as thermal catalyst present a result useful for
this case [21]: here the CO is reported to bind to an hydroxyl site. The lack
of OH groups on the surface of the catalyst investigated is proposed to be the
reason why no activity is shown, as if the CO cannot bind to the surface the
transfer of photogenerated electrons is not possible.
5.2
Other TiO2 photocatalysts
Another small project was to test the activity of TiO2 with tin and rhodium
as co-catalysts, produced in the Laboratory of Industrial Chemistry in Ruhr-
University of Bochum.
All the powders were given by Bastian Mei (CINF).
These catalysts are based on another commercial TiO2 catalyst, made of pure
anatase and with surface area 100 m2/g (Sachtleben). More information about
the preparation of the diﬀerent powders can be found in [5] and [17]. Tin was
added to TiO2 by a grafting technique, where a Sn(IV) precursor was added
to dried TiO2, and the ﬁnal powder was obtained after annealing at 450 ◦C.
A sample of the pure anatase TiO2 was also calcined at 450 ◦C for compar-
ison. Furthermore the Sn(IV) could be reduced to Sn(II) by treatment in 5
% hydrogen in argon gas, at 250 ◦C. The eﬀect of adding rhodium was also
investigated, and 0.3 w% of Rh was deposited on top of the catalysts, with an
in-situ photodeposition technique. All the powders available were dispersed in
high purity water and 40 µl were dropcasted and freeze dried onto the lids of
the reactors, and tested with the same procedure described in 3.2. As only a
small amount of catalysts was available, only a small mass, either 5 mg or 10
mg, was used to produce the aqueous slurry; the relative error on the mass is
then more important compared to the samples prepared in the previous chapter,
and this gives a high error when normalizing the results over the eﬀective mass
of catalyst deposited.
The samples analyzed are summarized in Table 5.1 .
==PAGE:54==
44
Preferential CO Oxidation on other photocatalysts
Table 5.1: Overview of all the samples:
the total amount of co-
catalysts added was used as the parameter to plot the re-
sults in the next section.
Catalyst
Total mass
dispersed
in solution (mg)
Total mass
of all
co-catalysts (mg)
Mass of
TiO2 (mg)
Total
wt%
co-catalysts
TiO2
calcined at 450
9.9
0
9.9
0.00
TiO2
+ 0.25 wt% Sn(II)
5.1
0.013
5.09
0.25
TiO2 + 0.3 wt% Rh +
0.25 % Sn(II)
5.1
0.028
5.07
0.55
TiO2
+ 0.25 wt% Sn(VI)
5.1
0.013
5.09
0.25
TiO2 + 0.3 wt% Rh
5.1
0.015
5.08
0.30
TiO2 + 0.3 wt% Rh
reduced in H
4.9
0.015
4.89
0.30
TiO2 + 0.3 wt% Rh
+ 0.25 wt% Sn(VI)
5
0.028
4.97
0.55
Experimental results
Due to lack of time, only one sample for each of the catalysts was produced.
The results of the photocatalytic activity tests are shown in Figure 5.2a, with
one of the P25 samples described in the ﬁrst part of the thesis as comparison.
Analysis and conclusions
The results show an increase in activity of more than 3 times when adding
Rh.
This increase is lost when the powder is further reduced in hydrogen,
meaning that the Rh present on the surface as Rh2O3 (with valence state Rh3+)
is converted to metallic Rh (with valence state Rh0). On the other hand adding
tin decreases the photocatalytic activity for CO oxidation. Chu at el. tested
this catalyst with photocatalytic production of hydrogen, and they inferred that
Sn(IV) species function as electron acceptors under light illumination, so they
can reduce protons to H2 [5]. Following this explanation, the decrease in activity
in the case of CO-Prox would come from the lack of added oxidant species,
while the eﬀect of rhodium is to enhance the production of oxidant species,
that increase the overall activity. It is interesting to note, though, that metallic
Rh has minimal or no eﬀect to the photocatalytic activity of TiO2, so it is
speculated that Rh3+ is the active center for the reaction. It is still not clear
==PAGE:55==
5.2 Other TiO2 photocatalysts
45
why the eﬀect of rhodium is not so pronounced when tin is present as Sn(IV),
and in the future a more detailed characterization of the powders could explain
which role Sn and Rh play in CO oxidation.
==PAGE:56==
46
Preferential CO Oxidation on other photocatalysts
Sum of cocatalyst w %
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
∆QMS/ Argon signal [a.u.]
×10-4
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
CO2 signal
TiO2 - calcined at 450
TiO2 + 0.3 Rh
TiO2 + 0.3 Rh reduced in H
TiO2 + 0.25 Sn(II)
TiO2 + 0.3 Rh + 0.25 Sn(II)
TiO2 + 0.25 Sn(IV)
TiO2 + 0.3 Rh + 0.25 Sn(IV)
P25 freeze dried
(a)
Sum of cocatalyst wt %
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
∆QMS/ Argon signal [a.u]
×10-4
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
H2 signal 
TiO2 - calcined at 450
TiO2 + 0.3 Rh
TiO2 + 0.3 Rh reduced in H
TiO2 + 0.25 Sn(II)
TiO2 + 0.3 Rh + 0.25 Sn(II)
TiO2 + 0.25 Sn(IV)
TiO2 + 0.3 Rh + 0.25 Sn(IV)
P25 freeze dried
(b)
Figure 5.2: Comparison of the photocatalytic activity for pure anatase
TiO2, and TiO2 with addition of Sn or Rh, for CO2 pro-
duction (a), for hydrogen conversion (b). It is important to
note that the hydrogen background signal is three orders
of magnitude higher than the the ∆QMS signal, so there is
eﬀectively no hydrogen conversion, and the signal shown
is attributed to noise.
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 6
Ammonia Oxidation on
TiO2 photocatalysts
Ammonia is a chemical of great importance, mainly due to its large usage as
a fertilizer. Among the other applications of ammonia there are the removal
of NOx in car exhausts and storage of hydrogen for fuel cells. This makes this
industrial produced chemical very interesting and widely studied, but its usage
is ﬂawed by a few drawbacks, namely the toxicity of ammonia and its NOx by-
products, and the low tolerance to ammonia of hydrogen fuel cells. A possible
solution to overcome these problems is to selectively oxidize ammonia to produce
environmentally friendly products, in the reaction:
4NH4 + 3 O2 →2N2 + 6 H2O
(6.1)
State of the art catalysts are based on platinum, palladium and rhodium. They
are very expensive materials, which work a low temperature (<200 ◦C), but are
not very selective towards the production of N2. Ideally a low-cost, eﬃcient
and selective towards N2 catalyst is wanted. More abundant catalysts are oxide
catalysts, which work in an oxygen excess at medium to low temperatures, below
380◦C. Among simple transition metal oxides for ammonia oxidation, the most
active are Co3O4, MnO2 Cr2O3, CuO, but among the less active V2O5 is present
[20]. Moreover TiO2 was shown to enhance the activity of ammonia oxidation
under visible light irradiation [14].
As no study had been done on Vanadia doped TiO2 for Ammonia photocatalytic
==PAGE:58==
48
Ammonia Oxidation on TiO2 photocatalysts
oxidation, it was decided to try and see if this system could give interesting
results.
6.1
Theory
Along with the wanted reaction 6.1, two other reaction can take place with an
excess of oxygen:
4 NH4 + 3 O2 →N2 + H2O
(6.2)
4 NH4 + 3 O2 →N2 + H2O
(6.3)
where 6.2 is the well-known Ostwald process at the base of the production of
nitric acid and 6.3 produces nitrous oxide, which is used in medical applications
for its anaesthetic properties.
According to a ﬁrst principle study of the selective catalytic oxidation of ammo-
nia over vanadium oxides [30], the reaction on a V2O5 surface should proceed
through activation of NH3 forming a NH3
+ intermediate. If this then interact
with another NH3 or NH3
+ then N2H4 can be favorably produced, which then
can be oxidized to N2. On the other hand, in an excess of Oxygen NH3
+ is
most likely to interact with O2 to form NO, which can then be converted with
a Selective Catalytic Reduction (SCR) by NH3 into N2.
Vanadia-Titania catalysts have been thoroughly investigated for the SCR of NO
[24], [9], [19] and they have been proved to be active towards the conversion of
NO to N2 as thermal catalysts.
It was then decided to search the mass signal for all these compounds, because
they are the expected products of the reaction and because it was hoped to ﬁnd
useful insight on the way the reaction could work.
6.2
Experimental procedure
Ammonia diluted in argon was substituted to CO on the experimental setup.
The reactors chosen for the test are the ones produced by Nielsen, as this is
the only complete set with many vanadia loadings that showed an increase in
activity. P25 was also tested for a comparison.
The gas ﬂow was set as close as possible to stoichiometric ratio, in order not to
have an excess of oxygen and trigger one of the unwanted reactions:
==PAGE:59==
6.2 Experimental procedure
49
Figure 6.1: The blank experiment done on an empty reactor, used to
check if any reaction was happening in absence of a cat-
alyst when illuminating with UV light. This experiment
also showed the background signals for the gases.
Gas
Flow
Component
Percentage (%)
NH3
7.2 ml/min
NH3
0.36
O2 in Ar
2.7 ml/min
O2
0.27
Total
9.9 ml/min
Ar
99.37
So that the ratio NH3:O2 is 4:3.
An empty reactor was measured at the beginning, in order to check the gas
composition without any catalysts and to measure the signal background for
the following measurements. The QMS signal normalized to the argon signal is
shown in Figure 6.1.
The QMS has not been calibrated and the signal for the diﬀerent gases could
be aﬀected by a change in the sensitivity of the QMS to the speciﬁc compound.
This number should not diﬀer a lot for the gases used and according to the
reference table from the producer there is a factor of 2, at maximum, of relative
sensitivity between the main peak of Ar and O2 or H2. With the empty reactor
it was possible to check this, by setting the ﬂow with the calibrated mass ﬂow
controllers and checking the relative intensity of the main lines.
The mass
spectra for the empty reactor is shown in Figure 6.2a and obviusly is dominated
by the Ar signal.
The main peak here is due to argon and as this signal is way higher than the
others, the calibration is going to suﬀer of imprecision, so only a rough estimate
will be given.
A zoom of the interesting part of the spectrum is shown in
==PAGE:60==
50
Ammonia Oxidation on TiO2 photocatalysts
Mass/amu 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
SEM Current [nA]
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Empty
NH3
O2
N2O
H2O
N2
N2H4
NO2
Ar
QMS signal
(a)
Mass/amu 
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
SEM Current [nA]
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
Empty
NH3
O2
N2O
H2O
N2
N2H4
NO2
Ar
QMS signal
(b)
Figure 6.2: Mass spectra of the empty reactor, used to understand the
composition of the gas ﬂow. It is possible to see, in the
zoom on the right, that a part of the ammonia is converted
to nitrogen and to
Figure 6.2b, where the main components in the gas ﬂow have been recognized.
The intensity of the peaks for each element are taken from NIST database and it
is possible to see that in the real ﬂow the gases show diﬀerent cracking patterns
than the reference ones. For example the Ar secondary peaks are higher than
the foreseen percentage, which comes from the height of the main peak.
The sensitivity of the QMS to the gases has been estimated by checking how
much the proportions between the main peaks of Ar, NH3 and O2 diﬀer in
respect to the relative percentages in the gas composition. The result is shown
in ??, where the signal for the QMS is normalized to the Argon signal.
Table 6.1: Analysis of the sensitivity of the QMS.
Gas
Fraction relative
to Argon
QMS signal main
peak normalized to Ar
QMS signal/fraction
Sensitivity according
to producer
Ar
1
1
1
1
NH3
3.62E-003
3.01E-003
0.83
0.83
O2
2.42E-003
1.52E-003
0.63
0.54
The total mass scan for each of the 5 samples tested was analyzed prior to any
test with light, in order to see that there were no signiﬁcant changes in the
gas composition compared to the empty reactor. The mass for the expected
products, from the considerations in Section 6.1, are looked for during the test.
A big delay was present in the NH3 signal, due to the high sticking coeﬃcient
of this compound, so the signal in the QMS takes a long time to reach steady
state. In the beginning cycles of 20 minutes of light and 20 minutes of darkness
were tried, but the signal kept decreasing or rising respectively and it never fully
==PAGE:61==
6.3 Results and discussion
51
reached an equilibrium state. During the measurement it was decided to take
cycles of 10 minutes of light and 15 minutes of darkness, as it was seen that
a longer time is needed after illuminating with light, for the NH3 signal to go
back to the original value.
Furthermore, a preliminary study of the conversion as a function of light inten-
sity was done, to check if at high light intensity there was a saturation of the
signal due to full conversion of all the ammonia in the gas ﬂow. The result is
presented in Figure 6.3 and after this it was chosen to run all the experiments
with a ﬁlter of optical density 0.3 and 10 % LED intensity, in order to have a
total intensity of 5%.
Light intensity [%]
0.001
0.01 
0.1  
1    
10   
∆QMS /Argon signal (a.u) 
10-5
10-4
10-3
10-2
N2 production as a function of light intensity
Only filters
Change LED intensity
Figure 6.3: Production of N2 as a function of light intensity. N2 was
chosen as the indicator of the activity for ammonia oxida-
tion and the LED intensity of 5 % was chosen to run the
experiments, as it seems the activity is well far away form
full conversion.
6.3
Results and discussion
An example of the QMS signal is shown in Figure 6.4. The main change in the
QMS signal is the N2, so this parameter was chosen in order to compare the
activities of the diﬀerent samples. The results are shown in Table 6.2; ∆QMS is
the diﬀerence between the light and the dark currents, normalized to the Argon
signal. The N2 has an increase of more than 100 % between light and dark,
==PAGE:62==
52
Ammonia Oxidation on TiO2 photocatalysts
Figure 6.4: Example of a test. The ammonia signal is delayed due to
the high sticking coeﬃcient, so that it keeps going down
during all the time the catalyst is illuminated.
The N2
signal, on the other hand, reaches steady state quickly.
while the NH3 shows only a small decrease. The maximum value of 1.04 × 10−3
is though compatible with the ammonia fed into the reactor, as the maximum
value if all the ammonia was converted to N2 is:
maxN2 = 1
2
mol%Ammonia
mol%Ar
× sensAr
sensNH3
= 2.2 × 10−3
The results for the samples of w2730x are shown in Figure 6.5.
It is important to stress that N2 is the main product, along with a small pro-
duction of N2O. Hydrogen is shown as well, as it could be useful to give an
indication of the amount of water produced, but the signal is so low that is lost
into noise. Ammonia and water have a high sticking coeﬃcient, so the signal is
delayed and it was diﬃcult to analyze the amount of reactant converted.
6.4
Ammonia Prox
As a ﬁnal test for this preliminary study of NH3 oxidation, the same experi-
ment was repeated for two of the samples in a stream of hydrogen. The gas
composition used is:
==PAGE:63==
6.4 Ammonia Prox
53
sample
∆QMS /Ar signal (a.u)
light-dark signal /dark signal (%)
0
1.03 × 10−3
694
0.09
0.44 × 10−3
138
0.19
0.78 × 10−3
452
0.39
0.51× 10−3
312
6.2
3.43× 10−5
17
p25
1.04× 10−3
476
Table 6.2: Diﬀerence in the signal of N2 for the samples analyzed. An
estimate of the percentage increase is given in order to give
the order of magnitude of the production of N2 compared
to the background signal, but as the dark signal is very low
this number is subject to great variability.
V2O5 wt%
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
∆QMS/ Argon  signal [a.u]
×10-4
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
QMS signal
N2
N2O
NH3
H2
Figure 6.5: ∆QMS signals for N2, N2O, NH3 and H2, for all the samples
of vanadia doped w2730x tested. It is interesting to see
that, while vanadia does not improve the reaction, the
eﬀect is dependent on the wt % loaded: for the optimal
loading the activity is higher than for the lower loading or
the higher loadings.
==PAGE:64==
54
Ammonia Oxidation on TiO2 photocatalysts
Mass/amu 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
SEM Current [nA]
10-2
10-1
100
101
102
w2730x + 0.125 % V2O5
light
dark
Figure 6.6: Mass spectra of the sample with optimum loading of vana-
dia, of 0.19 wt%. It is possible to see that the only diﬀer-
ences between the light and dark spectra are the N2 and
N2O peaks, as well as obviously a decrease in the oxygen.
Gas
Flow
Component
Percentage (%)
NH3
7.2 ml/min
NH3
0.34
O2 in Ar
2.4 ml/min
O2
0.23
H2
1 ml/min
H2
9.4
Total
9.9 ml/min
Ar
90.03
So that the ratio NH3:O2 is 3:2.
Apart from the new gas composition the experiment proceeded in the same
way as before, with cycles of light/darkness of 10 and 15 minutes. Again the
products of the reaction were ﬁrst investigated doing a mass scan over the range
1-50 amu.
An example of the diﬀerence in the mass spectra between light and darkness is
Figure 6.6.
As seen from the mass spectra, the main diﬀerence between the light and the
dark current is the increase in N2 and N2O peaks, with a smaller increase for H2
and to this corresponds a decrease in the ammonia signal. This is exactly the
same behavior as in the previous case, except that now the amount of hydrogen
is higher. The presence of the stream of hydrogen does not prevent the oxidation
of ammonia, but as the relative amount of ammonia and oxygen is lower in the
new gas composition, the eﬀect is a bit lower, as shown in Table 6.3. Nonetheless
the catalyst is preferential to ammonia oxidation and no oxidation of hydrogen
is shown, as variation in the signal is due to noise.
==PAGE:65==
6.5 Conclusions
55
weight %
0
0.194
N2
0.85 x 10−4
0.53 x 10−4
%
355.7385
405.7376
N2O
-6.4 x 10−4
-1.4 x 10−3
NH3
-2.96 x 10−5
-2.92 x 10−5
%
-18.0493
-20.992
H2
-7.98 x 10−4
0.19 x 10−4
%
-1.4
0.6
Table 6.3: Results for NH3-Prox experiment: QMS signal normalized
to Ar signal.
6.5
Conclusions
The aim of this last chapter in my project was to investigate the oxidation
of ammonia and I showed that this can be eﬀectively photo-oxidized by UV
light on TiO2, producing mainly N2 and a small amount of N2O. The activity
seen is not very high, but this was a preliminary study and further experiments
can give insights on the way the reaction proceed and show if it is possible
to improve the activity of the catalyst and how. From the data collected it
seems that addition of vanadia does not positively aﬀect the activity and the
addition of vanadyl groups on the surface mainly decrease the reaction rate.
This decrease, though, depends on the loading: at the optimum loading there is
a higher activity. The production of N2 and N2O while there is no comparable
increase in the unwanted NO, is interesting for a future application of this
catalyst. Furthermore I demonstrated that TiO2 preferentially oxidize ammonia
in a stream of hydrogen and this can be of great interest for cleaning gas streams.
In the future it would also be interesting to reproduce the results in a system
with a faster time response, in order to decrease the eﬀect of the delay of the
ammonia signal, which will hopefully bring to a higher percentage of conversion.
==PAGE:66==
56
Ammonia Oxidation on TiO2 photocatalysts
==PAGE:67==
Chapter 7
Conclusion
As it is clear already from the title of this thesis, this project started from a
precise study, a photocatalyst used for one reaction, and it evolved during the
months in an unpredictable way. In the end I tested many diﬀerent catalysts
for CO preferential oxidation and I investigated ammonia oxidation on TiO2,
while having to solve interesting challenges that were not expected.
The main result of the work on CO-Prox over w2730x and P25 was to ﬁnally
give a complete study on the eﬀect of vanadia as a co-catalyst, and connect all
the projects done in the past. My results showed that there is an increase in
the activity of at least 2 times on w2730x when adding low loadings of vanadia
(0.1-0.2 wt%). The samples made in the past, that I remeasured, still showed a
peak in activity of more than 3 times. It is expected that this peak appears in
a very narrow range of added wt% of V2O5 and this could be why it does not
appear in my study. The eﬀect of vanadia is seen when the co-catalyst is very
well dispersed on the surface of TiO2, and this is achieved by using the freeze
drying technique. On the other hand, when vanadia aggregates on the surface
of TiO2 the activity activity is lowered. This was seen when evaporating both
w2730x and P25: a dip in the activity is seen for 0.2 wt%. This eﬀect depends
only on the amount of co-catalyst deposited, and not on the surface area of the
TiO2 as both catalyst show it.
In order to further investigate CO oxidation, other catalysts were tested. The
results on nanoparticles of Au/C3N4 show the lack of activity for CO oxidation,
while the material shows photocatalytic activity in the form of carbon conversion
==PAGE:68==
58
Conclusion
to CO and CO2 . The proposed explanation for this is that CO cannot bind to
the surface, due to the lack of OH groups, and so the transfer of photogenerated
electrons is not possible.
When using another TiO2 based catalyst made of pure anatase, an increase in
activity was seen when adding rhodium, or rhodium and tin. This eﬀect can be
attributed to the increase in oxidant species due to Rh. No positive eﬀect was
seen by adding only Sn, both as Sn(II) and Sn(IV).
The last project in my work was to analyze the oxidation of ammonia, and I
showed that this can be eﬀectively photo-oxidized by UV light on TiO2, pro-
ducing mainly N2 and a small amount of N2O. Here vanadia does not positively
aﬀect the activity. The production of N2 and N2O while there is no compa-
rable increase in the unwanted NO, is interesting for a future application of
this catalyst. Furthermore it was demonstrated that TiO2 preferentially oxidize
ammonia in a stream of hydrogen, and this can be of great interest for cleaning
gas streams.
With this last experiment, I also tested the activity of the same series of samples
used for CO-Prox in a diﬀerent reaction. The trend of the activity for ammonia
oxidation is diﬀerent compared to the trend seen for CO-Prox and this answers
one of the possible question about the samples, if the increase in activity is only
due to an increase amount of catalyst in the reaction chamber. This means that
reason why there is a peak in the activity must be looked for into the interaction
of vanadia and titania with the CO.
To summarize all the work done in these months, I improved a procedure for
testing diﬀerent photocatalysts successfully. The results presented in this work
show the activity of diﬀerent photocatalysts can be eﬀectively compared in the
µ-reactors, so that the eﬀect of adding co-catalyst can be investigated.
==PAGE:69==
Chapter 8
Outlook
Many challenges arose during the course of this project, and these will have to
be addressed in the future. In order to understand completely the eﬀect of TiO2
it is necessary to ﬁnd a more reliable way to deposit the catalysts. A few ideas
that I had during the project, but I did not manage to try, were: analyze the
properties of the dispersion in water, measure the mass loss with freeze drying
and reproduce all the results with diﬀerent solutions.
An idea for testing the inﬂuence dispersion is to use deionized water instead of
MilliQ water. Another possibility would be make and estensive pH study with
vanadia in solution. Having a more exhaustive characterization of the starting
powders could also give better insight on the interactions in water.
As for the hypothetical mass loss due to freeze drying, a few solutions can be
followed. Measuring the mass deposited on the lid is diﬃcult to achieve, due
to the low values deposited but would be undoubtedly useful. If this cannot
be achieved, at least an experiment with macroscopic quantities of aqueous
slurry could show if there is a mass loss and of which entity, but then it will be
necessary to understand if smaller quantities of liquid behave at the same way.
Light absorption spectroscopy could also give a qualitative idea of the amount
of material deposited.
Another important point that I did not achieve was to reproduce the results of
w2730x starting from diﬀerent solutions. For P25 samples made from the same
solution in diﬀerent days, or from diﬀerent solutions, gave the same activity and
==PAGE:70==
60
Outlook
this is supposed to apply also for w2730x, but was not possible to demonstrate
it.
If time had allowed, it would have been interesting to further test the anatase
TiO2 powders. The mixed eﬀect of Sn was not entirely expected and the expla-
nation for this could be potentially useful for developing a better catalyst.
Finally, the study on ammonia gave great expectations to produce a working
catalyst. This, of course, will require another stand-alone project.
==PAGE:71==
Appendix A
Sample overview
All the samples prepared during my project for studying CO-Prox are shown
in Table A.1. The data refer to the solution prepared, in most cases more than
one reactor was prepared from these. The methods used for the deposition are
also reported.
==PAGE:72==
62
Sample overview
Table A.1: Overview of all the solutions prepared.
Sample
Deposition
method
Mass
dispersed
(mg)
Error
mass (mg)
VH2O (ml)
Error V (ml)
VNH4V O3
(ml)
Error V
Mass
V2O5 (mg)
wt%
err %
w2730x
freeze dried
15.1
0.2
15
0.075
0
0
0
0
0
w2730x
evaporated
14.8
0.3
15
0.075
0
0
0
0
0
w2730x +
0.15 wt% N
evaporated
15.1
0.2
15
0.075
28.9
0.535
0.022
0.149
0.003
P25
evaporated
freeze dried
14.8
0.2
15
0.075
0
0
0.000
0.000
0.000
P25 + 0.05
wt% V2O5
evaporated
15
0.2
15
0.075
10.84
0.15
0.008
0.056
0.001
P25 + 0.1
wt% V2O5
evaporated
14.8
0.2
15
0.075
21.6
0.255
0.017
0.113
0.002
P25 + 0.15
wt% V2O5
evaporated
15.1
0.2
15
0.075
29.4
0.3
0.023
0.151
0.003
P25 + 0.20
wt% V2O5
evaporated
15.1
0.2
15
0.075
39.0
0.6
0.030
0.200
0.004
P25 + 0.25
wt% V2O5
evaporated
15.1
0.2
15
0.075
48.0
0.6
0.037
0.247
0.004
P25 + 0.08
wt% V2O5
evaporated
14.8
0.2
15
0.075
16
0.2
0.012
0.084
0.002
P25 + 0.13
%wt V2O5
evaporated
14.8
0.2
15
0.075
26
0.208
0.020
0.136
0.002
P25 + 5.4
wt% V2O5
evaporated
15
0.2
15
0.075
1050
6.3
0.816
5.161
0.071
w2730x
freeze dried
15
0.2
15
0.075
0
0.000
0.000
0.000
w2730x
+ 0.1 w%
freeze dried
15.1
0.2
15
0.075
19.3
0.335
0.015
0.099
0.002
w2730x
+ 0.2 w%
freeze dried
15
0.2
15
0.075
39.0
0.6
0.030
0.202
0.004
P25 + 0.25
wt% V2O5
evaporated
14.7
0.2
15
0.12
48
0.288
0.037
0.253
0.004
TiO2 anatase
100 m2/g
freeze dried
10.3
0.2
10
0.08
0
0.000
0.00
0
0
TiO2 rutile
100 m2/g
freeze dried
10
0.2
10
0.08
0
0.000
0.00
0
0
==PAGE:73==
Appendix B
Dispersion issues
It has been a major problem during my whole project the fact that depositing
the catalyst from the dispersion doesn’t always show the same results. Moreover
while with P25 it was fairly easy to produce an uniform area, the same could
not be said for w2730x. A possible explanation to this phenomenon is to be
searched into the diﬀerent properties of the two, and it is proposed that this
comes from their diﬀerent solubility and mean aggregate size in the suspension.
According to DLVO theory, the aggregation of nanoparticles is determined by
the sum of repulsive electrostatic force due the surface charge on the particles,
and the attractive Van der Waals forces. When TiO2 is dispersed in water the
surface of the nanoparticles is generally covered by hydroxyl group as shown in
Equation B.1:
TiIV+H2O →TiIV−OH + H+
(B.1)
The surface charge of TiO2 is a function of solution pH, which is aﬀected by the
reactions that occur on the particle surface as shown in the following equations:
TiIV−OH + H+ →TiIV−OH2
+
(B.2)
TiIV−OH →TiIV−O−+ H+
(B.3)
The average diameter of the particles in the aqueous slurry depends on diﬀerent
factors: the ionic strength of the solvent, the pH of the suspension, the surface
==PAGE:74==
64
Dispersion issues
area of the particles and the primary particle size. The eﬀect of these parameter
on the dispersion properties of the nanoparticles has been studied in literature,
at least for P25, while there is a lack of documentation about w2730x.
It
has been shown that around the pH obtained dispersing an amount of P25
in high purity water, the particles strongly aggregate and the average radius
of the agglomerates is larger [23] than when the pH is lower or higher than
equilibrium, and this eﬀect is higher when the ionic strength of the solution
is lower. The particles were though dispersed in MilliQ water, which has an
ionic strength of less than 10−5M, and that does not exhibit a very clear pH
as the lack of impurities and ions in solution makes it very diﬃcult to calculate
the pH. It could be for this uncertainty, and due to local variations in the pH
and the aggregation of particles in suspension, that aqueous slurries prepared
in the same way would lead to diﬀerent results. Also, the diﬀerence in the pH
between solution prepared with P25 or w2730x and in the primary particle size
of each catalyst could explain why diﬀerent deposition methods work for the two
powders. A test was done on pure w2730x changing the pH of the suspension
with addition of NaOH and HCl, and by bubbling CO2, but even if the results
of very low pH seemed better, the deposition was still not as uniform as P25. It
was also tried to disperse the powder in a mixture of water and ethanol and to
evaporate it. This solutions were eventually abandoned due to the lack of good
results and the addition of more variables in the procedure.
==PAGE:75==
Appendix C
Recipe for depositing the
catalysts
The ﬁnal procedure used for preparing the lids with the catalysts is presented
in this section for future use.
W2730x comes as a suspension of 30 w%, that shows a certain amount of pre-
cipitate with storage time. The original suspension was then evaporated on a
hot plate at 50 ◦while stirring for two days. The obtained powder was then
crushed with a mortar and collected to be used in the suspensions. On the other
hand P25 comes already in powder form. For every sample 15 mg of powder are
suspended in MilliQ water and, after coarse shaking, they are left in a ultrasonic
bath at least for 4 hours. In the meantime pyrex lids need to be cleaned and the
area were we don’t want to deposit the catalyst masked. The ﬁnal procedure
adopted is ﬁrst to cut the mask shapes in the blue tape, and then clean a lid
very quickly with some lens paper with a small amount of ethanol, and put
carefully the mask on it. This step should be done just before the solution is
dropcasted, but the lids done earlier are covered with some aluminum foil while
the others are being prepared. It is also possible to cut the hole in the blue tape
already on the lid, as apparently there was no correlation between deposition
problems and the presence of the blue tape, as this procedure was used in the
past without problems. It seemed safer to act in the ﬁrst way though, as the
blue tape leaves some microscopic remains on the area of the deposition. Ace-
tone was also tried for cleaning, but no appreciable diﬀerence in the outcome
was seen, so this option was dropped.
==PAGE:76==
66
Recipe for depositing the catalysts
Once the solution is ready it is hand shaken for one minute to make sure the
suspension is homogeneous, then the lid is uncovered and the solution is shaken
again for 10 seconds just prior to selecting the wanted volume with the mi-
cropipette. After dropcasting the pyrex glasses is covered with a lid or aluminum
foil to prevent dust falling onto the suspension. When evaporating, the lid are
sitting on the freeze drying setup with the water cooling running at 25 ◦C, in
order to keep the temperature of the substrate constant. When freeze drying,
the droplets are left to evaporate for around half an hour until the droplet is
almost ﬂat and only then the Peltier element is turned on to reach a tempera-
ture below -10 ◦C. When the droplets are frozen, the lid can be closed and the
nitrogen started at the lowest available ﬂow, qualitatively decided with the help
of a bubbler. Now the temperature can be set between 0 and -1 ◦C, so that
the ice sublimate faster. After the freeze drying the powders are very volatile
on the surface. Reinserting moisture in the system, by letting the nitrogen ﬂow
though the bubbler, seemed helpful to prevent material going away. Another
possibility discussed is to illuminate the TiO2 with an UV light.
As soon as the deposition is ﬁnished, the lids can be calcined and bonded.
==PAGE:77==
Bibliography
[1] a. Biedunkiewicz, U. Gabriel, P. Figiel, and M. Sabara. Investigations on
NH4VO3 thermal decomposition in dry air. Journal of Thermal Analysis
and Calorimetry, 108:965–970, 2012.
[2] G. Bond. Preparation and properties of vanadia/titania monolayer cat-
alysts. Applied Catalysis A: General, 157(1–2):91 – 103, 1997. Vanadia
catalysts for selective oxidation of hydrocarbons and their derivatives.
[3] N. Cheng, J. Tian, Q. Liu, C. Ge, A. H. Qusti, A. M. Asiri, A. O. Al-Youbi,
and X. Sun. Au-nanoparticle-loaded graphitic carbon nitride nanosheets:
Green photocatalytic synthesis and application toward the degradation of
organic pollutants. ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces, 5(15):6815–6819,
2013. PMID: 23875941.
[4] I. Chorkendorﬀand J. W. Niemantsverdriet. Concepts of modern catalysis
and kinetics. John Wiley &amp; Sons, 2006.
[5] S. Chu, A. E. Becerikli, B. Kortewille, F. E. Oropeza, and J. Strunk. Tin-
grafted tio2 with enhanced activity for photocatalytic hydrogen generation
from aqueous methanol solutions. International Journal of Hydrogen En-
ergy, 39(33):18784 – 18792, 2014.
[6] Y. Di, X. Wang, A. Thomas, and M. Antonietti. Making metal/carbon ni-
tride heterojunctions for improved photocatalytic hydrogen evolution with
visible light. ChemCatChem, 2(7):834–838, 2010.
[7] F. Dionigi, M. G. Nielsen, T. Pedersen, O. Hansen, I. Chorkendorﬀ, and
P. C. K. Vesborg. A transparent pyrex µ-reactor for combined in situ optical
characterization and photocatalytic reactivity measurements.
Review of
Scientiﬁc Instruments, 84(10):–, 2013.
==PAGE:78==
68
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[8] J. Dumesic, N.-Y. Topsøe, H. Topsøe, Y. Chen, and T. Slabiak. Kinet-
ics of selective catalytic reduction of nitric oxide by ammonia over vana-
dia/titania. Journal of Catalysis, 163(2):409 – 417, 1996.
[9] N. Economidis. Comparison of TiO2-based oxide catalysts for the selective
catalytic reduction of NO: eﬀect of aging the vanadium precursor solution.
Applied Catalysis B: Environmental, 23(2-3):123–134, Nov. 1999.
[10] T. R. Henriksen, J. L. Olsen, P. Vesborg, I. Chorkendorﬀ, and O. Hansen.
Highly sensitive silicon microreactor for catalyst testing. Review of Scien-
tiﬁc Instruments, 80(12):–, 2009.
[11] J.-M. Herrmann. Photocatalysis fundamentals revisited to avoid several
misconceptions. Applied Catalysis B: Environmental, 99(3):461–468, 2010.
[12] D. C. Hurum, A. G. Agrios, K. A. Gray, T. Rajh, and M. C. Thurnauer. Ex-
plaining the enhanced photocatalytic activity of degussa p25 mixed-phase
tio2 using epr. The Journal of Physical Chemistry B, 107(19):4545–4549,
2003.
[13] C. Kieler. Photocatalytic CO-PROX with TiO2 Technical University of
Denmark. 2014.
[14] Ł. Kowalczyk and M. Szynkowska. Oxidation of ammonia using modiﬁed
tio2 catalyst and uv-vis irradiation. Chemical Papers, 66(6):607–611, 2012.
[15] M. G. Nielsen. Development of new photocatalysts for eﬃcient removal of
ethylene. PhD thesis, Center for Individual Nanoparticle Functionality -
Technical University of Denmark, 2013.
[16] J. Novak and P. Lang. Fotokatalytisk PROX af CO i hydrogen Forord.
2014.
[17] F. E. Oropeza, B. Mei, I. Sinev, A. E. Becerikli, M. Muhler, and J. Strunk.
Eﬀect of sn surface states on the photocatalytic activity of anatase tio2.
Applied Catalysis B: Environmental, 140–141:51 – 59, 2013.
[18] T. Østergaard. CO-PROX in µ-reactors. (January), 2014.
[19] G. Ramis, L. Yi, G. Busca, M. Turco, E. Kotur, and R. Willey. Adsorption,
Activation, and Oxidation of Ammonia over SCR Catalysts. Journal of
Catalysis, 157(2):523–535, Dec. 1995.
[20] V. Sadykov, L. Isupova, I. Zolotarskii, L. Bobrova, A. Noskov, V. Par-
mon, E. Brushtein, T. Telyatnikova, V. Chernyshev, and V. Lunin. Oxide
catalysts for ammonia oxidation in nitric acid production: properties and
perspectives. Applied Catalysis A: General, 204(1):59 – 87, 2000.
[21] J. A. Singh, S. H. Overbury, N. J. Dudney, M. Li, and G. M. Veith. Gold
nanoparticles supported on carbon nitride: Inﬂuence of surface hydroxyls
==PAGE:79==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
69
on low temperature carbon monoxide oxidation. ACS Catalysis, 2(6):1138–
1146, 2012.
[22] M. Steinberg and H. C. Cheng. Modern and prospective technologies for
hydrogen production from fossil fuels. International Journal of Hydrogen
Energy, 14(11):797 – 820, 1989.
[23] K. Suttiponparnit, J. Jiang, M. Sahu, S. Suvachittanont, T. Charinpan-
itkul, and P. Biswas. Role of surface area, primary particle size, and crys-
tal phase on titanium dioxide nanoparticle dispersion properties. Nanoscale
Res Lett, 6(1):27, 2011.
[24] N. Topsoe. Characterization of the nature of surface sites on vanadia-titania
catalysts by FTIR. Journal of Catalysis, 128(2):499–511, Apr. 1991.
[25] P. Vacuum. Mass spectrometers and residual gas analysis.
[26] P. Vesborg and I. Chorkendorﬀ.
Udforskning af nye nano strukturerede
materialer til fremstilling af hydrogen. PhD thesis, 2010.
[27] P. C. Vesborg, J. L. Olsen, T. R. Henriksen, I. Chorkendorﬀ, and O. Hansen.
Gas-phase photocatalysis in µ-reactors.
Chemical Engineering Journal,
160(2):738–741, 2010.
[28] P. C. K. Vesborg, S. I. In, J. L. Olsen, T. R. Henriksen, B. L. Abrams,
Y. Hou, A. Kleiman-Shwarsctein, O. Hansen, and I. Chorkendorﬀ. Quanti-
tative measurements of photocatalytic CO-oxidation as a function of light
intensity and wavelength over TiO2 nanotube thin ﬁlms in ??-reactors.
Journal of Physical Chemistry C, 114:11162–11168, 2010.
[29] X. Wu, A. Selloni, and S. K. Nayak. First principles study of CO oxidation
on TiO2(110): the role of surface oxygen vacancies. The Journal of chemical
physics, 120(110):4512–4516, 2004.
[30] R.-M. Yuan, G. Fu, X. Xu, and H.-L. Wan. Mechanisms for selective cat-
alytic oxidation of ammonia over vanadium oxides. The Journal of Physical
Chemistry C, 115(43):21218–21229, 2011.
[31] R. Zallen and M. Moret. The optical absorption edge of brookite tio 2.
Solid State Communications, 137(3):154–157, 2006.
