==PAGE:1==
	  
Development of Ligand-Based Luminescent 
Oxygen Channeling Immunoassay (LOCI) for 
Quantification of C-Reactive Protein	  
Master	  thesis	  by	  Maria	  Eckhart	  Thomsen	  s102868	  	  
Supervisors:	  Christian	  Rosenquist	  and	  Tine	  Skovgaard	  (Department	  of	  Research	  Bioanalysis	  at	  Novo	  
Nordisk	  A/S,	  Måløv,	  Denmark),	  Peter	  M.	  H.	  Heegaard	  and	  Ulrik	  Boas	  (National	  Veterinary	  institute,	  
Technical	  University	  of	  Denmark)	  
ABSTRACT 	  
C-­‐Reactive	  protein	  (CRP)	  is	  an	  acute	  phase	  protein	  and	  its	  plasma	  concentration	  increases	  during	  an	  
inflammatory	  response,	  a	  characteristic	  that	  has	  long	  been	  utilised	  for	  clinical	  purposes.	  The	  present	  
thesis	  describes	  the	  development	  of	  two	  Luminescent	  Oxygen	  Channelling	  Immunoassays	  (LOCI)	  able	  
to	   quantify	   Pig	   CRP	   in	   a	   sample.	   The	   first	   assay	   was	   a	   homogenous	   assay	   performed	   in	   a	   two-­‐step	  
reaction.	   The	   first	   step	   involves	   the	   incubation	   of	   the	   sample	   with	   a	   biotinylated	   anti-­‐CRP	   IgG	   and	  
beads	  (acceptor	  beads)	  coated	  with	  another	  anti-­‐CRP	  IgG.	  In	  the	  next	  step	  beads	  (donor	  beads)	  coated	  
with	  streptavidin	  were	  added.	  Irradiation	  causes	  photosensitized	  formation	  of	  singlet	  oxygen	  from	  the	  
donor	   bead,	   which	   diffuse	   to	   and	   activates	   a	   chemiluminescer	   in	   the	   acceptor	   beads	   and	   thereby	  
initiating	  a	  luminescence	  emission.	  The	  other	  LOCI	  assay	  was	  a	  heterogeneous	  assay	  (Wash-­‐LOCI)	  and	  
does	  thereby	  need	  wash	  and	  incubation	  steps	  like	  an	  ELISA	  assay.	  The	  assay	  is	  based	  on	  the	  affinity	  of	  
CRP	  for	  phosphocholine.	  The	  phosphocholine	  is	  coupled	  to	  a	  synthetic	  globular	  polymer	  (dendrimer)	  
together	  with	  biotin.	  The	  donor	  beads	  coated	  with	  streptavidin	  is	  coated	  to	  the	  bottom	  of	  the	  plate	  and	  
a	  sandwich	  is	  created	  between	  the	  dendrimer	  and	  an	  anti-­‐CRP	  IgG.	  This	  is	  combined	  with	  acceptor	  
beads	  coated	  with	  antibodies	  specific	  for	  the	  anti-­‐CRP.	  When	  comparing	  the	  LOCI	  assay	  with	  an	  hs-­‐
ELISA	  assay	  it	  uses	  smaller	  sample	  volumes,	  has	  a	  broader	  dynamic	  range	  and	  decrease	  the	  workload.	  
CRP	  values	  quantified	  by	  the	  LOCI	  assay	  correlated	  well	  with	  values	  quantified	  by	  the	  ELISA	  assay.	  The	  
sensitivity	  was	  not	  as	  high	  as	  with	  the	  ELISA	  assay.	  On	  the	  other	  hand,	  the	  sensitivity	  of	  Wash-­‐LOCI	  
assay	  was	  even	  higher	  than	  for	  the	  ELISA	  assay	  but	  the	  workload	  was	  comparable	  to	  the	  ELISA	  assay	  
due	  to	  the	  many	  wash	  steps,	  and	  a	  homogeneous	  LOCI	  assay	  is	  preferable.	  The	  intra-­‐	  and	  interassay	  
variations	   were	   acceptable	   for	   the	   LOCI	   assay	   and	   it	   has	   the	   potential	   to	   be	   used	   for	   routine	  
measurement	  of	  CRP	  levels	  in	  pig.	  
==PAGE:2==
	  
2	  
Table	  of	  Contents	  
1.	  PREFACE	  AND	  ACKNOWLEDGEMENT	  
4	  
2.	  ABBREVIATION	  LIST	  
5	  
3.	  INTRODUCTION	  
6	  
4.	  BACKGROUND	  
7	  
4.1.	  C-­‐REACTIVE	  PROTEIN	  
7	  
4.2.	  ENZYME-­‐LINKED	  IMMUNOSORBENT	  ASSAY	  
8	  
4.3.	  DENDRIMERS	  
9	  
4.4.	  LUMINESCENT	  OXYGEN	  CHANNELLING	  ASSAY	  
11	  
5.	  MATERIALS	  AND	  METHODS	  
15	  
5.1.	  DOT	  BLOTTING	  
15	  
5.1.1.	  MATERIALS	  
15	  
5.1.2.	  METHOD	  
16	  
5.2.	  ELISA	  
17	  
3.2.1.	  MATERIALS	  
17	  
5.2.2.	  METHOD	  
18	  
5.3.	  CONJUGATION	  OF	  ACCEPTOR	  BEADS	  
18	  
5.3.1.	  MATERIALS	  
18	  
5.3.2.	  METHOD	  
19	  
5.4.	  BIOTINYLATION	  
20	  
5.4.1.	  MATERIALS	  
20	  
5.4.2.	  METHOD	  
21	  
5.5.	  HOMOGENOUS	  LOCI	  
21	  
5.5.1.	  MATERIALS	  
21	  
5.5.2.	  METHOD	  
22	  
5.6.	  WASH-­‐LOCI	  (HETEROGENEOUS)	  
22	  
5.6.1.	  MATERIALS	  
22	  
5.6.2.	  METHOD	  
23	  
6.	  RESULTS	  
24	  
6.1.	  THE	  EXPERIMENTAL	  JOURNEY	  
24	  
6.2.	  LOCI	  ASSAY	  WITH	  TWO	  MONOCLONAL	  ANTI-­‐CRP	  IGG.	  
32	  
6.2.1.	  OPTIMISATION	  
32	  
6.2.2.	  QUALIFICATION	  
35	  
6.2.3.	  COMPARISON	  BETWEEN	  ELISA	  AND	  LOCI	  ASSAY	  
39	  
6.3.	  WASH	  LOCI	  ASSAY	  WITH	  THE	  DENDRIMER	  AND	  A	  POLYCLONAL	  ANTI-­‐CRP	  IGG	  
40	  
6.3.1.	  OPTIMISATION	  
40	  
6.3.2.	  QUALIFICATION	  (BRIEF)	  
42	  
6.3.3.	  COMPARISON	  BETWEEN	  THE	  ELISA,	  LOCI	  AND	  WASH-­‐LOCI	  ASSAY	  
42	  
6.4.	  CRP	  QUANTIFICATION	  IN	  MINIPIGS	  
43	  
7.	  DISCUSSION	  
44	  
8.	  CONCLUSION	  
47	  
==PAGE:3==
	  
3	  
REFERENCES	  
48	  
APPENDIX	  1	  
53	  
APPENDIX	  2	  
56	  
	  
	  
	  
==PAGE:4==
	  
4	  
1.	  Preface	  and	  acknowledgement	  	  
	  
This	  Master’s	  thesis	  is	  made	  as	  a	  completion	  of	  my	  education	  in	  Pharmaceutical	  Design	  and	  
Engineering	   at	   the	   Technical	   university	   of	   Denmark	   (DTU)	   and	   is	   a	   result	   of	   collaboration	  
between	   the	   National	   Veterinary	   Institute	   (DTU	   vet)	   and	   Novo	   Nordisk	   A/S,	   Research	  
Bioanalysis	  department	  in	  Måløv,	  Denmark.	  The	  thesis	  was	  conducted	  at	  the	  department	  of	  
Research	  bioanalysis,	  Novo	  Nordisk	  A/S,	  from	  the	  1th	  of	  January	  to	  the	  1th	  of	  august.	  	  	  
	  
The	  time	  during	  my	  master’s	  thesis	  has	  enriched	  my	  knowledge	  and	  enthusiasm	  within	  the	  
field	  of	  scientific	  research	  and	  I	  would	  like	  to	  express	  my	  gratitude,	  for	  helping	  my	  through,	  
to:	  
	  
My	  project	  supervisors	  at	  Novo	  Nordisk	  A/S;	  Christian	  Rosenquist,	  department	  manager	  at	  
the	  department	  of	  research	  bioanalysis,	  and	  Tine	  Skovgaard,	  senior	  scientist	  at	  department	  of	  
research	  bioanalysis	  for	  their	  guidance	  and	  engagement	  throughout	  the	  project.	  
	  
My	  main	  project	  supervisor	  at	  DTU,	  Peter	  M.	  H.	  Heegaard,	  Professor	  at	  DTU	  vet,	  for	  guidance	  
within	  assay	  technology.	  
	  
My	   other	   project	   supervisor	   at	   DTU,	   Ulrik	   Boas,	   Lector	   at	   DTU	   vet,	   for	   delivering	   the	  
phosphocholin	  derivates	  and	  guidance	  within	  the	  use	  of	  them	  in	  assay	  technology.	  
	  
The	  people	  in	  the	  department	  of	  research	  bioanalysis,	  Novo	  Nordisk	  A/S,	  for	  always	  being	  
helpful	   and	   a	   special	   thanks	   to	   Linda	   Buch-­‐Rasmussen	   and	   Susanne	   Gøttsche	   Jacobsen	   for	  
their	  indispensable	  help	  in	  the	  laboratory.	  
	  
Trine	   P.	   Ludvigsen	   and	   Berit	   Ø.	   Christoffersen,	   Novo	   Nordisk	   A/S,	   for	   delivering	   serum	  
sample.	  	  
	  
==PAGE:5==
	  
5	  
2.	  Abbreviation	  List	  
	  
ALP	  
	  
Alkaline	  phosphatase	  
Alpha	  	  	  
Amplified	  luminescent	  proximity	  homogenous	  assay	  
	  
BSA	  
	  
Bovine	  serum	  albumin	  
	  
cAMP	   	  
Cyclic	  adenosine	  monophosphate	  
CD	  	  
	  
Control	  diet	  	  
CDP	  
	  
Cytidine	  disphosphocholine	  
CMO	  	   	  
Carboxylmethoxylamine	  hemihydrochloride	  
CPS	  
	  
Counts	  per	  second	  
CRP	  
	  
C-­‐reactive	  protein	  
CV	  	  
	  
Coefficient	  of	  variation	  
	  
DMSO	  	  	  
Dimethyl	  sulfoxide	  
	  
ECL	  	  
	  
Electrochemiluminescence	  
ELISA	   	  
Enzyme-­‐linked	  immunosorbent	  assay	  
	  
FMAT	  	  	  
Fluorometric	  microvolume	  assay	  technology	  
FRET	  	   	  
Fluorescence	  resonance	  energy	  transfer	  technology	  
	  
HFD	  	   	  
High-­‐fat/high-­‐cholesterol	  diet	  
HFRT	   	  
Homogenous	  time	  resolved	  fluorescence	  
HRP	  
	  
Horseradish	  peroxidase	  
HTS	  
	  
High	  throughput	  screening	  
	  
IL	  
	  
Interleukin	  
IgG	  
	  
Immunoglobulin	  G	  
	  
LOCI	   	  
Luminescent	  oxygen	  channeling	  immunoassay	  
	  
PAMAM	  
Polyamido	  amine	  
PEG	  
	  
Polyethylene-­‐glycol	  
PBS	  	  
	  
Phosphate-­‐buffered	  saline	  
PPI	  
	  
Polypropylene	  imine	  
	  
SD	  
	  
Standard	  deviation	  
	  
TBS	  	  
	  
Tris-­‐buffered	  saline	  
TMB	  	   	  
Tetramethylbenzidine	  
TNF	  
	  
Tumor	  necrosis	  factor	  
	  
	  
==PAGE:6==
	  
6	  
3.	  Introduction	  
	  
C-­‐reactive	   protein	   (CRP)	   is	   an	   acute	   phase	   protein	   commonly	   used	   as	   a	   reliable	   marker	   of	  
inflammation	  in	  humans	  and	  many	  other	  mammals	  because	  of	  the	  rapid	  and	  high	  increase	  
after	  an	  inflammatory	  stimulus	  [1].	  Small	  elevation	  of	  the	  CRP	  level	  is	  also	  used	  as	  a	  sensitive	  
indicator	  of	  increased	  risk	  of	  diabetes	  [2]	  and	  cardiovascular	  events	  [3].	  
The	  aim	  of	  the	  project	  was	  to	  develop	  a	  Luminescent	  Oxygen	  Channeling	  Immunoassay	  (LOCI)	  
for	  the	  quantification	  of	  CRP,	  which	  could	  be	  used	  to	  measure	  inflammation	  in	  a	  pig	  model.	  
The	  assay	  should	  be	  based	  on	  the	  known	  ligand	  for	  CRP,	  phosphocholine,	  and	  qualified	  for	  use	  
in	  routine	  measurements	  of	  CRP	  levels.	  The	  assay	  should	  preferable	  be	  sensitive,	  have	  a	  broad	  
dynamic	   range	   and	   a	   small	   sample	   volume.	   Compared	   to	   enzyme-­‐linked	   immunosorbent	  
assay	   (ELISA),	   a	   frequently	   used	   immunoassay	   for	   quantification	   of	   CRP,	   LOCI	   is	   usually	  
superior	  regarding	  these	  parameters	  [4].	  The	  main	  difference	  between	  ELISA	  and	  LOCI	  is	  that	  
ELISA	  is	  a	  heterogeneous	  assay	  whereas	  LOCI	  is	  a	  homogeneous	  assay.	  A	  heterogeneous	  assay	  
is	  an	  assay	  where	  the	  analyte	  is	  immobilised	  and	  wash	  steps	  are	  included	  for	  the	  separation	  of	  
unbound	   from	   bound	   reagent.	   A	   homogeneous	   assay	   excludes	   all	   the	   wash	   steps	   and	   all	  
reagents	   and	   analyte	   is	   mixed	   together.	   CRP	   and	   ELISA	   is	   described	   more	   thorough	   in	   the	  
background	  section.	  	  
As	   mentioned	   above,	   the	   assay	   should	   be	   based	   on	   a	   known	   ligand	   for	   CRP,	   namely	  
phosphoholine	   [5],	   which	   has	   previously	   been	   used	   in	   CRP	   assays.	   Phosphocholine	   will	   be	  
presented	  on	  a	  dendrimer,	  a	  scaffold	  molecule	  previously	  used	  in	  an	  ELISA	  assay	  to	  increase	  
the	   sensitivity	   [6].	   More	   sensitive	   CRP	   assay	   are	   needed	   to	   measure	   the	   small	   elevation	  
connected	  to	  cardiovascular	  events.	  LOCI	  is	  normally	  a	  very	  sensitive	  assay	  already	  and	  when	  
combining	   it	   with	   the	   dendrimer,	   the	   assay	   might	   have	   an	   even	   better	   sensitivity.	   LOCI	   is	  
based	  on	  the	  proximity	  of	  two	  beads	  and	  a	  singlet	  oxygen	  that	  transfer	  energy	  from	  one	  bead	  
to	  the	  other	  [7].	  This	  is	  possible	  because	  the	  one	  bead,	  a	  donor	  bead,	  is	  normally	  streptavidin	  
coated	  and	  the	  other,	  an	  acceptor	  bead,	  is	  conjugated	  with	  an	  anti	  analyte	  immunoglobulin	  
(IgG).	  Another	  antibody	  is	  then	  biotinylated	  enabling	  the	  streptavidin-­‐coated	  donor	  bead	  to	  
bind	  with	  the	  antibody.	  A	  sandwich	  between	  the	  two	  antibodies	  is	  created	  in	  the	  presence	  of	  
the	  analyte	  and	  the	  beads	  are	  brought	  into	  close	  proximity.	  Excitation	  of	  the	  donor	  bead	  at	  
680	  nm	  generate	  singlet	  oxygen	  molecules	  that	  trigger	  a	  series	  of	  chemical	  reactions	  in	  the	  
acceptor	  bead	  resulting	  in	  a	  light	  emission	  at	  615	  nm	  [7].	  A	  more	  thorough	  description	  of	  the	  
dendrimer	  and	  the	  LOCI	  technology	  can	  be	  found	  in	  the	  background	  section.	  	  
	  
In	  development	  of	  the	  LOCI	  assay	  for	  CRP,	  dendrimer	  coated	  with	  biotin	  and	  phosphocholine,	  
was	   investigated	   in	   combination	   with	   both	   polyclonal	   and	   monoclonal	   anti-­‐CRP	   IgG	  
conjugated	   to	   the	   acceptor	   beads.	   Because	   this	   combination	   did	   not	   result	   in	   a	   functional	  
assay,	  other	  LOCI	  assay	  set-­‐ups	  were	  also	  investigated.	  An	  assay	  with	  two	  antibodies	  specific	  
for	  CRP,	  another	  assay	  with	  phosphocholine	  coated	  to	  the	  acceptorbeads	  combined	  with	  both	  
biotinylated	  polyclonal	  and	  monoclonal	  anti-­‐CRP	  IgG	  and	  lastly	  a	  heterogeneous	  LOCI	  assay	  
==PAGE:7==
	  
7	  
using	  dendrimer	  coated	  with	  biotin	  and	  phosphocholine	  combined	  with	  both	  polyclonal	  and	  
monoclonal	  anti-­‐CRP	  IgG	  conjugated	  to	  the	  acceptor	  beads.	  All	  the	  different	  assay	  set-­‐ups	  and	  
how	  successful	  they	  was	  will	  be	  discussed	  in	  the	  result	  section.	  
4.	  Background	  
4.1.	  C-­‐Reactive	  Protein	  
	  
C-­‐reactive	  protein	  (CRP)	  was	  the	  first	  described	  acute	  phase	  protein	  [8],	  [9].	  It	  was	  discovered	  
as	   a	   protein	   whose	   serum	   concentration	   increased	   during	   an	   infection	   of	   streptococcus	  
pneumonia.	  Later	  it	  was	  discovered	  that	  the	  level	  of	  CRP	  increase	  in	  the	  presence	  of	  any	  kind	  
of	  inflammation.	  In	  man	  it	  is	  the	  most	  used	  acute	  phase	  protein	  for	  detection	  of	  inflammations	  
because	  of	  the	  rapid	  increase	  of	  up	  to	  1000-­‐fold,	  but	  it	  is	  also	  a	  moderate	  or	  major	  acute	  phase	  
protein	  in	  most	  other	  species	  [1].	  Normal	  level	  of	  CRP	  in	  healthy	  pigs	  is	  about	  10-­‐20	  µg/ml	  
and	   the	   concentration	   can	   quickly	   increase	   up	   to	   25-­‐fold	   as	   a	   result	   of	   infections	   and	  
inflammatory	   states	   and	   is	   considered	   the	   best	   acute	   phase	   protein	   for	   assessing	   an	  
inflammatory	  state	  and	  general	  pig	  health	  [10]–[12].	  For	  the	  quantification	  of	  the	  elevated	  
levels	  of	  CRP,	  ELISA	  has	  been	  a	  frequently	  used	  immunoassay	  for	  that	  purpose	  [13].	  
	  
Studies	  have	  shown	  that	  there	  is	  a	  strong	  relationship	  between	  inflammation	  and	  the	  risk	  of	  
cardiovascular	  events	  as	  well	  [14],	  [15].	  Slightly	  elevated	  concentration	  of	  CRP	  is	  therefore	  
associated	  with	  a	  cardiovascular	  risk	  factor	  and	  maybe	  even	  a	  stronger	  predictor	  than	  low-­‐
density	  lipoprotein	  cholesterol	  [16].	  Because	  the	  concentration	  of	  CRP	  has	  traditionally	  been	  
used	  to	  monitor	  acute	  inflammation	  the	  detection	  limit	  of	  the	  CRP	  assay	  is	  usually	  quite	  high	  
and	  might	  not	  be	  suitable	  for	  assessing	  and	  predicting	  risk	  of	  coronary	  and	  cardiovascular	  
diseases.	   A	   CRP	   assay	   with	   higher	   sensitivity	   is	   therefore	   needed.	   Many	   of	   the	   existing	  
sensitive	  CRP	  assays	  are	  based	  on	  ELISA	  methodology	  as	  well	  [17].	  
	  
CRP	   is	   composed	   of	   five	   identical	   subunits	   and	   is	   a	   member	   of	   the	   pentraxin	   family.	   Each	  
subunit	  is	  composed	  of	  two	  phases,	  one	  with	  binding	  affinity	  for	  ligands	  and	  two	  Ca++	  ions	  and	  
the	   other	   with	   binding	   affinity	   for	   C1q	   and	   Fc	   receptors.	   CRP	   functions	   as	   a	   pattern	  
recognition	  receptor	  of	  the	  innate	  immune	  system.	  Phosphocholine	  is	  the	  primary	  ligand	  for	  
CRP	  with	  a	  high	  binding	  affinity	  in	  a	  calcium	  dependent	  manner.	  	  Phosphocholine	  is	  found	  in	  
the	   bacterial	   cell	   wall	   as	   well	   as	   the	   eukaryotic	   cell	   membrane.	   The	   binding	   of	   CRP	   to	  
phosphocholine	  invokes	  the	  innate	  immune	  system	  by	  activating	  the	  complement	  system	  and	  
phagocytosis	  by	  the	  binding	  of	  C1q	  and	  Fc	  receptors,	  respectively.	  CRP	  is	  synthesised	  in	  the	  
liver	   and	   expression	   can	   be	   upregulated	   by	   Interleukin	   (IL)-­‐6,	   a	   cytokine	   involved	   in	   e.g.	  
inflammation	  and	  the	  immune	  response	  (the	  whole	  paragraph	  is	  from	  the	  Pilot	  Project	  called	  
‘Acute	  Phase	  Proteins	  as	  Inflammatory	  Markers’	  attached	  this	  thesis).	  
==PAGE:8==
	  
8	  
4.2.	  Enzyme-­‐Linked	  Immunosorbent	  Assay	  
	  
ELISA	  is	  a	  solid	  phase	  immunoassay	  that	  is	  able	  to	  detect	  and	  quantify	  many	  types	  of	  analytes.	  	  
It	  is	  a	  heterogeneous	  assay	  because	  the	  substance	  to	  be	  quantified	  has	  to	  be	  immobilised	  to	  a	  
surface	  enabling	  the	  separation	  of	  bound	  and	  unbound	  material	  throughout	  the	  assay	  [18].	  
There	  are	  different	  types	  of	  ELISA	  assays;	  sandwich,	  direct,	  indirect	  and	  competitive.	  In	  the	  
most	  used	  ELISA	  assay,	  sandwich	  ELISA,	  the	  plate	  is	  coated	  with	  a	  capture	  antibody	  specific	  
for	   the	   analyte	   of	   interest.	   As	   a	   heterogeneous	   assay,	   a	   liquid	   sample	   and	   the	   following	  
reagents	  are	  added	  onto	  the	  immobilised	  solid	  phase,	  incubated	  and	  washed.	  Dependent	  on	  
the	   ELISA	   design	   a	   detection	   enzyme	   or	   another	   tag	   is	   either	   linked	   directly	   to	   a	   primary	  
detection	   antibody	   specific	   for	   the	   substance	   of	   interest	   or	   to	   a	   secondary	   antibody	   that	  
recognise	   the	   primary	   antibody.	   The	   most	   commonly	   used	   enzymes	   are	   horseradish	  
peroxidase	  (HRP)	  or	  alkaline	  phosphatase	  (ALP).	  Detection	  is	  accomplished	  by	  adding	  proper	  
substrate	  and	  the	  intensity	  of	  colour	  development	  from	  the	  enzymatic	  reaction	  is	  measured	  
spectrophotometrically.	  
	  
As	  mentioned	  in	  the	  introduction,	  ELISA	  has	  also	  been	  the	  most	  used	  method	  for	  quantifying	  
the	  CRP	  concentration	  most	  often	  as	  a	  sandwich	  ELISA	  with	  two	  antibodies	  specific	  for	  CRP.	  
Many	   ELISA	   kits	   have	   been	   developed	   for	   several	   species	   including	   pigs	   (e.g.	   from	   R&D	  
systemsTM	  [19]	  and	  GenWay	  Biotech	  Inc	  ©	  [20]	  etc.)	  
	  
An	  ELISA	  assay	  was	  developed	  for	  a	  more	  sensitive	  quantification	  of	  both	  pig	  and	  human	  CRP	  
based	  on	  affinity	  for	  phosphocholine	  [6].	  Dendrimers	  are	  used	  as	  scaffold	  for	  a	  multivalent	  
display	   of	   phosphocholine.	   The	   use	   of	   dendrimers	   as	   coatable	   agents	   combined	   with	   a	  
polyclonal	  rabbit	  anti-­‐human	  CRP	  IgG	  demonstrated	  possible	  detection	  of	  pig	  and	  human	  CRP	  
in	  serum	  with	  high	  sensitivity.	  The	  structure	  and	  properties	  of	  dendrimers	  will	  be	  explained	  
in	  the	  next	  section.	  	  
	  
The	   dendrimers	   were	   coupled	   with	   cytidine	   disphosphocholine	   (CDP)	   and	   showed	   great	  
functionality	   as	   a	   coating	   agent	   presenting	   phosphocholine.	   The	   binding	   of	   CRP	   to	  
phosphocholine	  is	  calcium	  depenent	  and	  calcium	  ions	  were	  needed	  to	  ensure	  saturation.	  In	  
combination	  with	  polyclonal	  rabbit	  anti-­‐human	  CRP	  IgG	  the	  assay	  showed	  higher	  sensitivity	  
than	  a	  previously	  published	  immunoassay	  for	  quantification	  of	  CRP	  [21].	  The	  detection	  of	  CRP	  
was	  visualised	  by	  a	  horseradish	  peroxidase	  (HRP)	  conjugated	  secondary	  antibodies	  and	  the	  
substrate,	  tetramethylbenzidine	  (TMB),	  see	  Figure	  1.	  
In	   previously	   published	   ligand	   based	   ELISA	   assays	   for	   CRP	   quantification,	   the	   CDP	   was	  
conjugated	  to	  bovine	  serum	  albumin	  (BSA)	  [22],	  [23].	  The	  assay	  using	  the	  dendrimers	  showed	  
higher	  sensitivity	  and	  lower	  background	  compared	  to	  the	  assay	  using	  BSA.	  The	  detection	  limit	  
was	  determined	  to	  0.3	  and	  0.1	  ng/ml	  for	  porcine	  and	  human	  CRP,	  respectively,	  in	  the	  assay	  
using	  dendrimers,	  compared	  to	  a	  detection	  limit	  of	  10	  ng/ml	  in	  the	  two	  previously	  published	  
==PAGE:9==
	  
9	  
assays	   with	   BSA.	   The	   dendrimers	   improved	   the	   signal	   significantly	   and	   showed	   acceptable	  
intra-­‐	  and	  interassay	  variation.	  
	  
	  
Other	   studies	   have	   also	   tried	   to	   improve	   the	   sensitivity	   of	   ELISA	   with	   dendrimers	   in	  
biomarker	  detection.	  ELISA	  assays	  have	  been	  developed	  for	  the	  detection	  of	  IL-­‐6	  and	  IL-­‐1β	  
[24]	  for	  the	  diagnosis	  of	  Intra-­‐amniotic	  infection/inflammation	  in	  pregnant	  woman	  and	  an	  
ELISA	   assay	   for	   the	   detection	   of	   human	   tumor	   necrosis	   factor-­‐alpha	   (TNF-­‐α)	   for	   early	  
diagnosis	  of	  perinatal	  disease	  [25].	  All	  three	  assays	  did	  use	  dendrimers	  for	  the	  presentation	  of	  
antibodies	   as	   a	   capture	   strategy.	   The	   ELISA	   plate	   was	   modified	   with	   polyethylene-­‐glycol	  
(PEG)	  and	  polyamido	  amine	  (PAMAM)	  dendrimers	  are	  immobilised	  on	  the	  PEG.	  The	  capture	  
antibodies	   are	   then	   coupled	   to	   the	   dendrimer	   surface.	   This	   dendrimer-­‐capture	   strategy	  
showed	   improvement	   in	   the	   sensitivity	   compared	   to	   ELISA	   kits	   for	   the	   same	   purpose.	   All	  
three	   assays	   showed	   at	   least	   a	   2-­‐fold	   increase	   in	   sensitivity	   compared	   to	   ELISA	   Kits.	  
Dendrimers	  have	  thereby	  proven	  to	  increase	  the	  sensitivity	  for	  ELISA	  assay	  and	  is	  a	  strategy	  
well	  suited	  when	  higher	  sensitivity	  is	  needed.	  The	  dendrimers	  are	  not	  only	  used	  as	  a	  scaffold	  
but	  are	  extremely	  well	  defined	  polymers	  with	  many	  applications	  and	  opportunities.	  	  
4.3.	  Dendrimers	  	  
	  
Buhleier	  et	  al.	  first	  described	  the	  dendritic	  structure	  in	  1978	  [26]	  as	  a	  new	  class	  of	  polymers	  
called	  cascade	  molecules.	  Later	  the	  design	  of	  larger	  structures	  was	  possible	  and	  the	  polymer	  
was	   now	   called	   dendrimer.	   Dendrimers	   are	   synthetic	   polymers	   with	   a	   lot	   of	   different	  
applications.	   The	   dendrimers	   has	   a	   large	   molecular	   size	   with	   homogenous,	   symmetric	   and	  
monodisperse	  structure.	  They	  have	  a	  combination	  of	  a	  high	  number	  of	  functional	  groups	  on	  
the	  surface	  and	  a	  compact	  molecular	  structure.	  The	  polymer	  have	  tree	  like	  branching	  from	  a	  
central	   core	   resulting	   in	   a	   globular	   or	   semi-­‐globular	   structure	   [27],	   [28].	   The	   dendritic	  
Figure	  1:	  Dendrimer-­‐based	  ELISA	  for	  the	  quantification	  of	  CRP:	  The	  phosphocholine	  
conjugated	  PPI-­‐dendrimer	  is	  coated	  to	  the	  plate	  for	  the	  binding	  and	  quantification	  of	  CRP.	  The	  
quantification	  is	  detected	  by	  a	  polyclonal	  rabbit	  anti-­‐human	  IgG	  followed	  by	  a	  HRP-­‐conjugated	  
anti-­‐rabbit	  IgG.	  The	  different	  components	  are	  outlined	  to	  the	  right.	  The	  components	  are	  not	  
drawn	  to	  scale.	  	  
==PAGE:10==
	  
10	  
structure	  can	  be	  divided	  into	  three	  parts:	  the	  surface,	  the	  shell	  or	  interior	  and	  the	  core.	  The	  
globular	  dendritic	  structure	  begins	  with	  a	  central	  group	  of	  atoms	  called	  the	  core.	  The	  rest	  of	  
the	   dendritic	   structure	   is	   characterised	   by	   levels	   of	   branches	   called	   generation.	   The	  
generation	  number	  is	  the	  number	  of	  branch	  points,	  typically	  called	  focal	  or	  cascade	  points,	  
which	  looks	  like	  tree	  branches.	  A	  generation	  5	  dendrimer	  has	  5	  focal	  points	  between	  core	  and	  
surface	   [27],	   [28],	   see	   Figure	   2A.	   The	   core	   of	   the	   dendrimer	   is	   sometimes	   designated	   as	  
generation	   0	   because	   the	   core	   has	   no	   focal	   point	   and	   intermediates	   like	   carboxylic	   acid	   in	  
PAMAM	  is	  sometimes	  denoted	  as	  half-­‐generations	  [29],	  see	  Figure	  2B.	  	  
The	  surface	  has	  a	  high	  number	  of	  end	  groups	  with	  potential	  reactive	  sites.	  For	  a	  generation	  5	  
polypropylene	  imine	  (PPI)	  dendrimer	  the	  number	  of	  functional	  groups	  are	  64,	  see	  Figure	  2A.	  
The	   shell	   can	   be	   divided	   into	   the	   inner	   and	   outer	   shell.	   The	   space	   between	   the	   last	   outer	  
branching	  and	  the	  surface	  is	  called	  outer	  shell	  while	  the	  rest	  of	  the	  interior	  of	  the	  dendrimer	  
is	  the	  inner	  shell,	  which	  is	  well	  suited	  for	  encapsulation	  of	  molecules	  [28],	  [29].	  
There	  are	  different	  kinds	  of	  dendrimers	  with	  different	  core	  structures,	  e.g.	  PPI	  dendrimers	  
have	   a	   core	   of	   1,4-­‐diaminobutine	   and	   PAMAM	   dendrimers	   have	   a	   core	   of	   ammonia.	   The	  
dendrimer	  also	  have	  different	  linkages,	  e.g.	  PPI	  dendrimers	  have	  linkages	  of	  polyamines	  while	  
PAMAM	  dendrimers	  have	  a	  combination	  of	  polyamides	  and	  amines	  [28].	  	  
	  
Dendrimers	   have	   a	   lot	   of	   applications	   especially	   within	   drug	   delivery.	   Surface	   engineered	  
dendrimers	  are	  commercially	  available	  as	  e.g.	  containers	  for	  drugs	  or	  gene	  delivery.	  They	  are	  
the	   newest	   class	   of	   macromolecular	   nanoscale	   delivery	   device	   because	   of	   their	   structural	  
diversity	   for	   a	   targeted	   and	   controlled	   drug	   delivery.	   Drug	   molecules	   are	   loaded	   in	   the	  
interior	  or	  attached	  to	  the	  surface.	  The	  dendrimer	  solves	  some	  of	  the	  challenges	  within	  drug	  
delivery,	   e.g.	   increase	   the	   solubility,	   bioavailability	   and	   permeability	   as	   well	   as	   eliminating	  
Figure	  2:	  Dendrimers	  [28]:	  Left:	  A	  5	  generation	  polypropylene	  imine	  (PPI)	  dendrimer.	  Right:	  A	  3	  generation	  polyamido	  
amine	  (PAMAM)	  dendrimer.	  The	  generations	  is	  marked	  with	  circles	  
==PAGE:11==
	  
11	  
problems	   within	   biocompatibility	   and	   toxicity	   [27],	   [29].	   Dendrimers	   can	   also	   be	   used	   for	  
other	  purposes	  such	  as	  scaffold	  for	  ligands	  because	  of	  the	  functional	  groups	  on	  the	  surface	  as	  
described	  for	  the	  ELISA	  assays	  in	  the	  previous	  section.	  
	  
Dendrimers	   are	   synthesised	   in	   a	   stepwise	   method	   and	   they	   are	   prepared	   using	   either	   a	  
divergent	  or	  convergent	  approach.	  In	  the	  divergent	  method	  the	  synthesis	  start	  from	  the	  core	  
to	   which	   the	   branches	   are	   attached	   by	   adding	   them	   in	   a	   stepwise	   manner,	   generation	   by	  
generation.	  By	  the	  convergent	  method	  the	  synthesis	  starts	  from	  the	  exterior	  and	  ends	  up	  at	  
the	  core.	  In	  this	  method	  the	  dendrimer	  is	  synthesised	  in	  segments	  and	  coupled	  together	  when	  
finished.	   The	   number	   of	   generations	   is	   predetermined	   as	   well	   as	   only	   a	   small	   number	   of	  
reactive	  sites	  are	  functionalised	  in	  each	  step	  resulting	  in	  fewer	  side-­‐reactions.	  This	  results	  in	  
the	  possibility	  of	  purification	  after	  each	  step.	  Another	  advantage	  of	  the	  convergent	  method	  is	  
that	   it	   is	   possible	   to	   synthesise	   an	   asymmetric	   dendrimer	   by	   joining	   different	   segments	  
together	  [28],	  [29].	  
	  
Even	   though	   the	   dendrimers	   have	   proved	   to	   improve	   sensitivity	   of	   the	   above	   mentioned	  
ELISA	  assays	  there	  are	  still	  many	  limitation	  in	  the	  ELISA	  assay	  that	  cannot	  be	  solved	  and	  the	  
need	  for	  High	  Throughput	  screening	  (HTS)	  have	  induced	  interest	  in	  alternative	  assays.	  	  
	  
4.4.	  Luminescent	  oxygen	  channeling	  assay	  
	  
ELISA	   is	   a	   frequently	   used	   immunoassay	   for	   detection	   and	   quantification	   of	   analytes	   in	  
plasma	  and	  serum	  samples.	  However,	  demands	  for	  more	  sensitive	  assays,	  broader	  dynamic	  
range	  and	  at	  the	  same	  time	  reducing	  the	  assay	  time	  and	  sample	  volume	  have	  brought	  new	  
assays	  to	  the	  table.	  Because	  of	  the	  time	  consuming	  incubation	  and	  washing	  steps	  as	  well	  as	  
the	  large	  sample	  volume,	  ELISA	  is	  not	  the	  optimal	  assay	  when	  dealing	  with	  small	  volume	  of	  
blood	  sample	  drawn	  from	  animal	  such	  as	  rats	  and	  mice.	  ELISA	  does	  also	  have	  a	  low	  capacity	  
and	  often	  lack	  a	  broad	  working	  range	  [30].	  	  	  
	  
Therefore	  there	  has	  been	  a	  need	  to	  develop	  a	  homogenous	  methodology	  that	  could	  eliminate	  
the	   need	   for	   separation	   of	   bound	   and	   unbound	   ligand	   or	   receptor	   and	   at	   the	   same	   time	  
increase	  the	  sensitivity	  and	  the	  dynamic	  range	  while	  decreasing	  the	  sample	  volume.	  LOCI	  was	  
first	  described	  in	  1994	  by	  Ullman	  et	  al	  [29]	  and	  it	  showed	  high	  sensitivity	  and	  robustness	  as	  a	  
homogenous	   assay	   with	   a	   broad	   dynamic	   range.	   LOCI	   is	   a	   bead-­‐based	   technology	   where	  
proximity	  of	  two	  types	  of	  beads	  leads	  to	  a	  chemiluminescent	  signal	  [7],	  [31].	  The	  two	  different	  
beads	   in	   the	   assay,	   donor	   beads	   and	   acceptor	   beads,	   have	   different	   properties.	   The	   donor	  
beads	  contain	  a	  photosensitizer,	  phthalocyanine,	  which	  transforms	  surrounding	  oxygen	  to	  an	  
excited	  and	  reactive	  form	  of	  singlet	  oxygen,	  when	  illuminated	  at	  680	  nm.	  The	  singlet	  oxygen	  
has	  a	  limited	  lifetime	  prior	  to	  falling	  back	  to	  ground	  state.	  Because	  of	  the	  short	  half-­‐life	  of	  
approximately	  4	  µsec,	  the	  singlet	  oxygen	  can	  diffuse	  no	  more	  than	  200	  nm	  in	  solution.	  In	  the	  
presence	   of	   acceptor	   beads	   within	   that	   proximity,	   energy	   is	   transferred	   from	   the	   singlet	  
==PAGE:12==
	  
12	  
oxygen	   to	   the	   acceptor	   beads	   that	   activates	   a	   chemiluminescer	   and	   thereby	   initiating	  
luminescence,	  see	  Figure	  3.	  In	  the	  absence	  of	  an	  acceptor	  bead,	  singlet	  oxygen	  returns	  back	  to	  
the	  ground	  state	  and	  no	  signal	  is	  produced	  [32].	  	  
The	  LOCI	  technology	  is	  commercialised	  by	  Perkin	  Elmer	  under	  the	  name	  Alpha	  (Amplified	  
Luminescent	   Proximity	   Homogenous	   Assay)	   and	   is	   used	   for	   high	   throughput	   screening	   as	  
AlphaScreen®	  and	  for	  immunoassay	  as	  AlphaLISA®.	  AlphaLISA®	  has	  shown	  great	  potential	  
for	  measuring	  biomarkers	  and	  drugs	  [32]	  as	  an	  enhanced	  alternative	  to	  ELISA	  and	  is	  suitable	  
for	  high	  throughput	  fluid	  dispensing	  and	  systems	  where	  interference	  with	  sample	  matrix	  is	  a	  
problem	  [33].	  	  
	  
The	  difference	  between	  AlphaScreen®	  and	  AlphaLISA®	  is	  implied	  in	  the	  variance	  between	  
the	  acceptor	  beads	  used	  in	  the	  two	  assays.	  The	  Alphascreen®	  acceptor	  beads	  have	  three	  dyes:	  
thioxene,	  anthracene	  and	  rubrene	  (TAR	  beads).	  The	  chemiluminescent	  thioxene	  capture	  the	  
single	  oxygen	  and	  transfer	  energy	  to	  the	  other	  dyes.	  The	  light	  from	  the	  final	  dye,	  rubrene,	  
emits	  light	  that	  can	  be	  detected	  between	  520	  and	  620	  nm.	  The	  AlphaLISA®	  acceptor	  beads	  
also	   have	   thioxene	   as	   a	   dye,	   but	   anthracene	   and	   rubrene	   is	   replaced	   with	   europium.	   The	  
europium	   generates	   an	   intense	   and	   much	   narrower	   wavelength	   at	   615	   nm.	   [7],	   [32],	   [34].	  
Because	  the	  emission	  from	  the	  AlphaLISA	  acceptor	  beads	  is	  narrower	  it	  is	  less	  prone	  to	  matrix	  
interference	  typically	  present	  in	  serum	  and	  plasma	  samples	  [32].	  	  
The	  beads	  designed	  for	  the	  Alpha	  technology	  is	  coated	  with	  latex-­‐based	  hydrogel	  containing	  
reactive	  aldehydes	  in	  the	  surface.	  This	  coating	  reduce	  nonspecific	  binding	  as	  well	  as	  making	  
the	  surface	  suitable	  for	  different	  ligands	  or	  receptors	  to	  be	  conjugated	  [34].	  
Figure	  3:	  The	  principle	  of	  a	  LOCI	  assay.	  One	  anti-­‐analyte	  IgG	  is	  conjugated	  to  
acceptor	   beads	   (red)	   and	   another	   anti-­‐analyte	   IgG	   is	   biotinylated.	   These  
antibodies	   create	  a	  sandwich	  if	  the	   analyte	  (yellow)	  is	  present.	  Biotin	  (purple)  
bind	   to	   streptavidin	   coated	   donor	   beads	   (blue)	   and	   bring	   the	   two	   beads	   into  
close	  proximity.	  The	  donor	  bead	  is	  excited	  at	  680	  nm	  generating	  singlet	  oxygen  
molecules	  resulting	  in	  an	  energy	  transfer	  within	  the	  acceptor	  bead	  and	  generates  
a	  light	  emission	  at	  615	  nm.	  The	  components	  are	  not	  drawn	  to	  scale.	  
==PAGE:13==
	  
13	  
AlphaLISA®	  can	  both	  be	  used	  in	  a	  sandwich	  and	  a	  competitive	  assay.	  The	  most	  frequently	  
used	  assay	  is	  the	  sandwich	  assay.	  When	  quantifying	  an	  analyte	  in	  a	  sandwich	  AlphaLISA®,	  the	  
assay	   normally	   captures	   the	   analyte	   between	   two	   anti-­‐analyte	   antibodies,	   one	   that	   is	  
biotinylated	  and	  one	  that	  is	  conjugated	  to	  the	  acceptor	  bead.	  Normally	  the	  AlphaLISA®	  assay	  
is	  composed	  of	  two	  steps.	  The	  biotinylated	  and	  acceptor	  bead	  conjugated	  with	  antibodies	  are	  
added	  in	  the	  first	  step	  together	  with	  the	  sample	  and	  incubated	  in	  one	  hour.	  In	  the	  second	  step	  
a	  streptavidin	  coated	  donor	  bead	  is	  added,	  and	  incubated	  for	  30	  min.	  The	  streptavidin	  will	  
bind	  to	  the	  biotinylated	  antibody	  and	  if	  the	  analyte	  is	  present	  the	  two	  beads	  are	  brought	  in	  
close	  proximity	  [4],	  see	  Figure	  3.	  In	  this	  assay	  it	  is	  important	  to	  have	  two	  different	  antibodies	  
that	  bind	  two	  different	  epitopes	  on	  the	  analyte	  so	  it	  is	  not	  a	  competitive	  binding	  for	  the	  two	  
antibodies.	  The	  different	  steps	  and	  components	  in	  the	  sandwich	  assay	  are	  illustrated	  in	  Figure	  
4.	  	  
	  
	  
In	  the	  competitive	  assay,	  a	  biotinylated	  analyte	  is	  used	  together	  with	  an	  antibody	  conjugated	  
to	  acceptor	  beads	  and	  streptavidin	  coated	  donor	  beads.	  Addition	  of	  free	  analyte	  will	  compete	  
with	  the	  biotinylated	  analyte,	  reducing	  the	  signal	  in	  a	  concentration	  dependent	  manner.	  Many	  
other	  combinations	  and	  opportunities	  are	  possible	  in	  the	  AlphaLISA®	  assays	  making	  it	  very	  
versatility	  [4],	  [7].	  	  The	  Alpha	  technology	  can	  be	  used	  for	  many	  purposes,	  e.g.	  detection	  and	  
quantification	   of	   analytes,	   measurement	   of	   protein-­‐protein	   interaction,	   measurement	   of	  
enzyme	  activity	  and	  many	  more.	  	  	  
	  
An	  example	  of	  a	  sandwich	  AlphaLISA®	  assay	  is	  the	  measurement	  of	  insulin	  in	  human	  plasma.	  
The	  donor	  bead	  is	  streptavidin	  coated,	  one	  anti-­‐insulin	  antibody	  is	  biotinylated	  and	  another	  
anti-­‐insulin	  antibody	  is	  conjugated	  to	  acceptor	  bead.	  The	  insulin	  will	  be	  captured	  between	  the	  
two	   anti-­‐insulin	   antibodies	   and	   bring	   the	   donor	   and	   acceptor	   bead	   in	   close	   proximity	   and	  
signal	  is	  increased	  in	  a	  concentration	  dependent	  manner	  [30].	  	  
A	  competitive	  AlphaLISA®	  assay	  has	  been	  developed	  to	  measure	  the	  accumulation	  of	  cyclic	  
adenosine	  monophosphate	  (cAMP).	  The	  donor	  bead	  is	  streptavidin	  coated	  in	  order	  to	  bind	  
Figure	   4:	   The	   sandwich	   LOCI	   assay	   protocol:	   The	  different	  step	   and	  reagent	  is	   described	  above	  the	  illustrations.	  The	  
components	  are	  not	  drawn	  to	  scale.	  
==PAGE:14==
	  
14	  
biotinylated	  cAMP	  and	  acceptor	  beads	  are	  coated	  with	  anti-­‐cAMP	  antibodies.	  The	  biotinylated	  
cAMP	  binds	  to	  the	  streptavidin	  coated	  donor	  bead	  and	  interact	  with	  the	  anti-­‐cAMP	  antibodies	  
coated	  to	  acceptor	  beads.	  When	  adding	  cell	  lysate	  with	  free	  cAMP	  it	  will	  compete	  with	  the	  
biotinyated	  cAMP	  and	  the	  signal	  will	  decrease	  in	  a	  concentration	  dependent	  manner	  [35].	  	  
Protein-­‐protein	  interactions	  can	  also	  be	  measured	  by	  the	  Alpha	  technology.	  An	  Alphascreen®	  
assay	  is	  developed	  to	  measure	  ligand	  binding	  to	  a	  member	  of	  the TNF	  receptor	  family.	  The	  
donor	  bead	  is	  streptavidin	  coated	  and	  will	  bind	  a	  biotinylated	  anti-­‐CD8	  IgG.	  The	  ligand	  is	  CD8-­‐
tagged	  and	  CD8	  will	  thereby	  be	  captured	  by	  anti-­‐CD8	  IgG	  and	  the	  ligand	  will	  bind	  the	  TNF	  
receptor.	  A	  fusion	  protein	  is	  created	  with	  the	  TNF	  receptor	  and	  IgG	  and	  the	  acceptor	  bead	  was	  
coated	  with	  an	  anti-­‐IgG	  (protein	  A).	  If	  the	  ligand	  and	  receptor	  binds	  it	  will	  bring	  the	  donor	  and	  
acceptor	  bead	  together	  and	  generate	  signal.	  This	  assay	  can	  both	  measure	  direct	  binding	  but	  
also	  identify	  molecules	  that	  inhibit	  the	  binding	  [36].	  	  
The	  Alpha	  technology	  has	  gained	  success	  because	  of	  the	  high	  sensitivity	  as	  a	  result	  from	  the	  
60.000	  oxygen	  singlets	  generated	  by	  each	  donor	  bead.	  The	  technology	  is	  easy	  to	  develop	  and	  
is	   highly	   miniaturisable	   and	   automatable.	   The	   miniaturisable	   property	   is	   important	   when	  
reducing	  cost	  and	  increasing	  throughput.	  The	  technology	  can	  quantify	  analyte	  with	  a	  sample	  
volume	   lower	   than	   1	   μl,	   but	   most	   often	   a	   sample	   volume	   of	   1	   μl	   is	   used	   because	   of	   the	  
limitation	  in	  pipetting.	  The	  low	  volumes	  result	  in	  a	  lower	  labour	  and	  material	  cost	  per	  sample.	  
The	  smallest	  sample	  volume	  is	  not	  always	  preferable	  because	  increased	  sample	  volume	  can	  
increase	   the	   sensitivity	   and	   the	   assay	   will	   perform	   best	   at	   a	   total	   volume	   of	   25-­‐50	   ul.	   The	  
assay	   can	   be	   optimised	   by	   adjusting	   the	   concentration	   of	   the	   biotinylated	   antibody	   and	  
acceptor	  beads	  as	  well	  as	  the	  amount	  of	  sample	  volume	  and	  incubation	  time	  [32],	  [37],	  [38].	  
Incubation	  time	  after	  the	  first	  step	  is	  normally	  one	  hour	  is	  only	  increased	  if	  the	  sensitivity	  is	  
not	  acceptable.	  Because	  the	  technology	  is	  homogenous	  the	  assay	  can	  easily	  be	  automated	  on	  
liquid	  handling	  systems	  [37].	  	  
The	   LOCI	   sandwich	   assay	   needs	   high	   concentration	   and	   density	   of	   antibodies	   when	  
conjugated	  to	  beads	  or	  biotinylated.	  When	  working	  with	  polyclonal	  antibodies	  this	  is	  not	  the	  
case	  because	  of	  the	  small	  fraction	  of	  specific	  antibodies	  [39].	  This	  makes	  both	  conjugation	  as	  
well	  as	  biotinylation	  inefficient.	  Polyclonal	  antibody	  can	  be	  preferred	  because	  of	  the	  cheaper	  
and	  faster	  production	  and	  it	  can	  be	  difficult	  to	  obtain	  two	  monoclonal	  antibodies	  specific	  for	  
the	   analyte	   of	   interest	   that	   will	   cooperate	   in	   a	   sandwich.	   Therefore,	   a	   heterogeneous	   LOCI	  
assay	  was	  developed,	  called	  Wash-­‐LOCI,	  which	  allows	  washing	  and	  thereby	  separating	  bound	  
from	  non-­‐bound	  reagents.	  A	  Wash-­‐LOCI	  was	  developed	  for	  quantification	  of	  human	  insulin	  
[40].	   The	   anti-­‐insulin	   IgG	   coated	   acceptor	   beads	   were	   bound	   to	   the	   well	   bottom	   of	   a	   high	  
binding	   AlphaLISA®	   plate,	   the	   sample	   is	   then	   added	   followed	   by	   a	   biotinylated	   polyclonal	  
anti-­‐insulin	  IgG	  and	  lastly	  the	  donor	  beads.	  Between	  each	  reagent	  the	  plate	  was	  washed	  to	  
separate	  the	  bound	  from	  the	  non-­‐bound	  and	  incubated	  [40].	  The	  assay	  set-­‐up	  is	  a	  lot	  like	  an	  
ELISA	   assay,	   but	   still	   have	   a	   lot	   of	   the	   same	   qualities	   as	   the	   homogenous	   LOCI	   assay.	   The	  
sample	  volume	  is	  still	  very	  small	  compared	  to	  ELISA	  as	  well	  as	  maintaining	  the	  high	  capacity,	  
==PAGE:15==
	  
15	  
high	  sensitivity	  and	  the	  broad	  working	  range.	  	  
LOCI	  is	  not	  the	  only	  no	  wash	  alternative	  to	  ELISA.	  Homogenous	  time	  resolved	  fluorescence	  
(HFRT)	   is	   a	   frequently	   used	   assay	   technology	   in	   drug	   discovery	   and	   high	   throughput	  
screening.	  It	  combines	  fluorescence	  resonance	  energy	  transfer	  technology	  (FRET)	  with	  time	  
resolved	  measurements.	  FRET	  is	  based	  on	  an	  energy	  transfer	  between	  two	  fluorophores.	  Like	  
the	  LOCI	  technology,	  FRET	  is	  a	  distance	  dependent	  energy	  transfer	  between	  a	  donor	  and	  an	  
acceptor	  molecule.	  Coupling	  of	  fluorescent	  labels	  to	  both	  molecules	  can	  assess	  the	  interaction	  
between	   them.	   Exciting	   the	   donor	   and	   then	   monitoring	   the	   relative	   donor	   and	   acceptor	  
molecule	  emissions	  makes	  it	  possible	  to	  determine	  when	  FRET	  has	  occurred,	  and	  thereby	  a	  
quantification	  of	  the	  interaction	  of	  e.g.	  proteins	  or	  the	  presence	  of	  biomarkers. In	  FRET	  the	  
detection	  is	  inhibited	  by	  background	  noise	  and	  co-­‐existing	  material	  in	  the	  sample.	  The	  time	  
resolved	   measurement	   of	   HFRT	   eliminate	   that	   short-­‐lived	   background	   fluorescence	   with	   a	  
time	   delayed	   between	   the	   initial	   excitation	   and	   fluorescence	   measurements	   [41],	   [42].	  
Another	   homogenous	   immunoassay	   is	   the	   fluorometric	   microvolume	   Assay	   Technology	  
(FMAT).	  It	  uses	  a	  biotinylated	  anti-­‐analyte	  antibody	  that	  interacts	  with	  streptavidin-­‐coated	  
beads	   and	   an	   AlexaFluor-­‐647	   labelled	   anti-­‐analyte	   anibody.	   The	   AlexaFluor-­‐647	   tagged	  
antibody	  binds	  to	  an	  antigen	  and	  a	  luminescent	  signal	  is	  emitted	  from	  aggregated	  beads	  [43].	  
Electrochemiluminescence	  (ECL)	  assay	  is	  another	  homogenous	  assay	  with	  two	  anti-­‐analyte	  
antibodies.	   One	   antibody	   is	   biotinylated	   and	   the	   other	   is	   ruthenylated.	   The	   biotinylated	  
antibodies	  bind	  to	  the	  streptavidin-­‐coated	  paramagnetic	  beads	  that	  serve	  as	  the	  solid	  phase.	  
The	  ruthenium-­‐labelled	  anti-­‐mouse	  antibodies	  in	  close	  proximity	  to	  an	  electroplate	  results	  in	  
a	  chemiluminescent	  signal	  [44].	  
	  
Compared	   to	   HFRT	   assays,	   Alpha	   technology	   showed	   higher	   sensitivity	   and	   a	   broader	  
dynamic	   range	   [42]	   and	   compared	   to	   FMAT	   and	   ECL	   the	   sensitivity	   was	   increased	   as	   well	  
[45].	  	  
5.	  Materials	  and	  Methods	  
	  
This	  section	  describes	  the	  experiments	  of	  this	  thesis.	  The	  methods	  are	  only	  described	  for	  the	  
working	  assays	  set-­‐up,	  all	  experiments	  and	  optimisation	  steps	  before	  the	  definitive	  assay	  is	  
described	  in	  the	  results	  section.	  	  
	  
5.1.	  Dot	  blotting	  
5.1.1.	  Materials	  
	  
	  
	  
==PAGE:16==
	  
16	  
Derivates	  
	  
Performed	  and	  delivered	  by	  Ulrik	  Boas,	  DTU	  Vet.	  
	  
-­‐ 
Phosphocholine-­‐PPI-­‐biotin	   A:	   Divergent	   modification.	   Biotinylated	   by	   activation	   of	  
biotin	  in	  situ.	  Conjugation	  of	  Cytidine	  diphosphocholine	  to	  PPI	  dendrimer	  described	  in	  
[6].	  
	  
-­‐ 
Phosphocholine-­‐PPI-­‐biotin	   B:	   Divergent	   modification.	   Biotinylated	   using	   an	   active	  
biotin-­‐NHS	   ester.	   Conjugation	   of	   Cytidine	   diphosphocholine	   to	   PPI	   dendrimer	  
described	  in	  [6].	  
	  
-­‐ 
Phosphocholine-­‐biotin.	  
	  
Buffers	  
	  
-­‐ 
Tris-­‐buffered	  saline (TBS)	  washing	  buffer	  +	  0.1%	  Tween	  (pH=8.6)	  
	  
	  
	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
see	  appendix	  1	  
	  
-­‐ 
Blocking	  buffer	  (TBS	  washing	  buffer	  +	  2%	  Tween)	  (pH=8.6)	  
see	  appendix	  1	  
	  
Other	  reagents	  and	  materials	  
	  
-­‐ 
Alkaline	   phosphatase	   conjugated	   streptavidin	   (2mg/ml)	   (cat.	   no:	   S-­‐921,	   life	  
technologies)	  
	  
-­‐ 
NBT/BCIP	  tablet	  (1	  tablet	  per	  10	  ml	  MilliQ	  water)	  
	  
-­‐ 
Nitrocellulose	  membrane	  
	  
5.1.2.	  Method	  
	  
Two	  different	  dilutions	  of	  the	  three	  derivates	  were	  tested.	  The	  derivates	  were	  diluted	  both	  1	  
mg/ml	  and	  0.1	  mg/ml	  (diluted	  10	  times	  from	  1	  mg/ml).	  Two	  µl	  of	  the	  two	  dilutions	  were	  
applied	  directly	  on	  a	  nitrocellulose	  membrane.	  When	  dried	  the	  membrane	  was	  blocked	  with	  
blocking	  buffer	  for	  five	  minutes	  on	  a	  shaking	  table.	  The	  membrane	  was	  then	  washed	  3	  x	  five	  
minutes	   in	   TBS	   washing	   buffer	   +	   0.1%	   Tween	   on	   a	   shaking	   table.	   The	   membrane	   was	  
incubated	  with	  alkaline	  phosphatase	  conjugated	  streptavidin	  diluted	  1:2000	  in	  TBS	  washing	  
buffer	  +	  0.1%	  Tween	  for	  60	  min.	  The	  membrane	  was	  again	  washed	  3	  x	  five	  minutes	  in	  TBS	  
washing	   buffer	   +	   0.1%	   Tween	   on	   a	   shaking	   table.	   Two	   NBT/BCIP	   tablets	   were	   diluted	   in	  
==PAGE:17==
	  
17	  
milliQ	  water	  and	  added	  to	  the	  membrane	  as	  substrate.	  The	  membrane	  were	  then	  rinsed	  and	  
dried	   on	   filter	   paper	   and	   if	   the	   derivates	   was	   biotinylated	   the	   dots	   on	   the	   nitrocellulose	  
membrane	  were	  visual.	  	  
	  
5.2.	  ELISA	  
3.2.1.	  Materials	  
	  
Derivates	  
	  
Performed	  and	  delivered	  by	  Ulrik	  Boas,	  DTU	  Vet.	  
	  
-­‐ 
Phosphocholine-­‐PPI-­‐biotin	  (procedure	  A)	  
	  
-­‐ 
Phosphocholine-­‐PPI-­‐biotin	  (procedure	  B)	  
	  
-­‐ 
Phosphocholine-­‐biotin	  
	  
Plates	  
	  
-­‐ 
PierceTM	  coated	  streptavidin	  clear	  strip	  plates	  with	  superblockTM	  blocking	  buffer.	  (cat.	  
co.	  15120,	  Thermo	  Fisher	  Scientific)	  
	  
Reagents	  
	  
-­‐ 
Antibodies	  (rabbit	  anti	  human	  CRP	  (Q0329)	  and	  HRP	  conjugated	  goat	  anti	  rabbit	  IgG	  
(P217))	  from	  DAKO	  	  
	  
-­‐ 
TMB-­‐colour:	   Tetramethylbenzidine	   (TMB)	   plus	   substrate	   Ready	   for	   use	   (cat.	   No.	  
4390A	  from	  KEN	  EN	  TEC)	  
	  
-­‐ 
4M	  phosphoric	  acid	  
	  
-­‐ 
Calibrator:	   Serum	   KVL-­‐Pool	   28/2-­‐00	   Caa	   (conc.	   9.062	   μg/ml,	   quantified	   based	   on	  
human	  CRP	  standard	  (cat.	  no.	  X923,	  DAKO))	  received	  from	  DTU	  vet	  
	  
	  
Buffer	  
	  
-­‐ 
Washing/dilution	  buffer	  (ELISA	  Buffer)	  (pH=7.4)	  	  
	  
see	  appendix	  1	  
==PAGE:18==
	  
18	  
Instrument	  
-­‐ 
ELISA	  plate	  reader	  (thermo	  scientific	  multiskan	  EX,	  Thermo	  scientific)	  
	  
5.2.2.	  Method	  
	  
The	  streptavidin-­‐coated	  plates	  were	  washed	  in	  washing/dilution	  buffer	  four	  times	  before	  use.	  
The	  derivates	  were	  diluted	  to	  40	  ng/ml	  in	  the	  washing/dilution	  buffer	  and	  added	  to	  the	  plate,	  
100	   μl/well,	   and	   incubated	   for	   60	   min	   on	   a	   shaking	   table	   at	   37°C.	   The	   plates	   were	   then	  
washed	  in	  washing/dilution	  buffer	  four	  times.	  The	  calibrator	  and	  sample	  were	  then	  added	  to	  
the	   plate	   in	   appropriate	   dilutions	   diluted	   in	   washing/dilution	   buffer,	   100	   μl/well,	   and	  
incubated	  for	  60	  min.	  on	  a	  shaking	  table	  at	  37°C.	  The	  plates	  were	  again	  washed	  four	  times	  in	  
washing/dilution	  
buffer.	  
Polyclonal	  
Rabbit	  
Anti-­‐Human	  
IgGs	  
diluted	  
1:1000	  
in	  
washing/dilution	   buffer	   were	   added	   to	   the	   plate,	   100	   μl/well,	   and	   incubated	   60	   min	   on	   a	  
shaking	  table	  at	  37°C.	  The	  plates	  were	  then	  washed	  four	  times	  in	  washing/dilution	  buffer.	  
HRP	  conjugated	  goat	  anti-­‐rabbit	  IgGs	  diluted	  1:2000	  in	  washing/dilution	  buffer	  were	  added	  
to	  the	  plate,	  100	  μl/well,	  and	  incubated	  60	  min	  on	  a	  shaking	  table	  at	  37°C.	  The	  plates	  were	  
again	  washed	  four	  times	  in	  washing/dilution	  buffer	  and	  developed	  with	  TMB	  substrate,	  100	  
μl/well,	   and	   stopped	   by	   adding	   100	   μl/well	   4M	   phosphoric	   acid.	   The	   plates	   were	   read	   at	  
490nm	  and	  correcting	  for	  background	  at	  650nm	  at	  an	  automatic	  ELISA	  plate	  reader.	  
	  
5.3.	  Conjugation	  of	  acceptor	  beads	  
	  
5.3.1.	  Materials	  
	  
Reagents	  
	  
-­‐ 
Aldehyde	   beads	   (unconjugated	   Europium	   acceptor	   beads;	   Perkin	   Elmer,	   catalog	   no.:	  
EUROP050MG,	  20	  mg/ml	  in	  0.1M	  MES	  buffer	  pH=6.0.	  0.05%	  proclin-­‐300	  is	  added	  as	  a	  
preservative)	  
	  
-­‐ 
Monoclonal	   mouse	   anti-­‐porcine	   C-­‐reactive	   protein	   antibody	   (cat.	  no.	   AM26061PU-­‐N,	  
Acris)	  
	  
-­‐ 
4-­‐Aminophenylphosphorylcholine	  (cat.	  no.	  	  sc-­‐206826,	  Santa	  Cruz	  Biotechnology	  Inc.)	  	  
	  
Buffers	  and	  solutions	  
	  
-­‐ 
Sodium	  cyanoborohybride	  solution	  	  
	  
	  
	  
see	  appendix	  1	  
==PAGE:19==
	  
19	  
	  
-­‐ 
Natrium-­‐phosphate	  buffer	  (0.1M	  pH=8.0)	  	  	  
	  
	  
see	  appendix	  1	  
	  
-­‐ 
1%	  Tween-­‐20	  in	  Naatrium-­‐phosphate	  buffer	  
	  
-­‐ 
Carboxylmethoxylamine	  Hemihydrochloride	  (CMO)	  solution	  	  
(0.3M	  pH=5.0)	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
see	  appendix	  1	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
-­‐ 
TRIS	  Buffer	  (0.1M	  pH=8.0)	  	   	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
see	  appendix	  1	  
	  
-­‐ 
PerkinElmer	  buffer	  (pH=7.4)	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
see	  appendix	  1	  
	  
Instrument	  
	  
-­‐ 
Amicon	   Μltra	   Centrifugal	   Filter	   Unit,	   μltracel-­‐50k,	   (cat.	   no.	   UFC805024,	   Merck	  
Millipore)	  
	  
-­‐ 
Eppendorf	  centrifuge	  5430	  
	  
-­‐ 
Eppendorf	  BioPhotometer	  
	  
5.3.2.	  Method	  
	  
For	  the	  conjugation	  of	  antibodies	  to	  aldehyde	  beads	  the	  beads	  need	  to	  be	  dissolved	  in	  Na-­‐
phosphate	  buffer.	  The	  buffer	  change	  is	  done	  to	  get	  rid	  of	  Na-­‐azide	  and	  ensure	  that	  the	  pH	  is	  8.	  
This	   can	   be	   done	   on	   a	   centrifugal	   filter	   unit.	   The	   needed	   volume	   of	   the	   antibody	   was	  
transferred	  to	  the	  ULTRACEL	  50K	  and	  was	  centrifuged	  down	  to	  250-­‐500	  µl	  in	  an	  Eppendorf	  
centrifuge	   at	   5000	   rpm.	   The	   antibodies	   were	   dissolved	   with	   Natrium-­‐phosphate	   buffer	   at	  
least	  5	  times	  the	  volume	  and	  again	  centrifuged	  down	  to	  250-­‐500	  µl	  in	  Eppendorf	  centrifuge	  at	  
5000	  rpm.	  This	  was	  done	  two	  times	  in	  total.	  The	  antibodies	  need	  a	  concentration	  of	  >5	  mg/ml	  
and	   the	   protein	   content	   were	   therefore	   measured	   on	   Eppendorf	   BioPhotometer.	   The	  
extinction	   coefficient	   for	   antibody	   is	   1.38,	   so	   the	   concentration	   of	   the	   antibody	   can	   be	  
calculated	  based	  on	  the	  absorbance	  at	  280	  nm	  (absorbance	  divided	  by	  1.38).	  Phosphocholine	  
was	  diluted	  in	  Natrium-­‐Phosphate	  buffer	  in	  25	  μg/ml.	  
	  
The	  conjugation	  was	  performed	  by	  a	  reductive	  animation	  reaction	  creating	  a	  Schiff	  base	  with	  
the	  aldehyde	  on	  the	  beads	  and	  amine	  on	  antibodies	  or	  phosphocholine.	  Per	  1	  mg	  aldehyde	  
beads,	  12,5	  µl	  1%	  Tween-­‐20,	  600	  µg	  antibody,	  10	  µl	  sodium	  cyanoborohybride	  solution	  were	  
added	  and	  a	  total	  volume	  of	  250	  μl	  was	  achieved	  by	  adding	  Natrium-­‐phosphate	  buffer	  (the	  
amount	   depends	   on	   the	   concentration	   of	   the	   antibody	   solution	   from	   above).	   When	  
==PAGE:20==
	  
20	  
conjugating	  the	  phosphocholine	  to	  the	  acceptor	  beads	  four	  different	  amount	  were	  tried	  out,	  
0.2	  μg,	  2	  μg,	  20	  μg	  and	  200	  μg	  of	  phosphocholine	  were	  substituted	  with	  the	  600	  μg	  antibody	  
from	  the	  above-­‐mentioned	  mix.	  
The	  conjugation	  solution	  were	  incubated	  three	  days	  and	  nights	  at	  37˚C.	  
	  
The	  beads	  were	  blocked	  by	  adding	  10	  µl	  CMO	  solution	  (per	  1	  mg	  beads)	  and	  incubated	  for	  60	  
min	  at	  37˚C.	  
	  
The	   conjugated	   beads	   were	   then	   purified	   and	   washed	   with	   TRIS	   buffer.	   This	   was	   done	   by	  
centrifuged	  the	  conjugation	  solution	  13.000	  g	  for	  30	  min.	  at	  4˚C,	  removing	  the	  supernatant	  
with	   a	   micropipette	   and	   dissolving	   1	   ml	   TRIS	   buffer	   (per	   1	   mg	   beads)	   with	   the	   pellet	   by	  
pipette	  mixing	  and	  vortex.	  This	  was	  done	  two	  more	  times	  and200	  µl	  PerkinElmer	  buffer	  (per	  
1	  mg	  beads)	  was	  added	  the	  last	  time	  instead	  of	  TRIS	  buffer.	  The	  conjugation	  is	  done	  and	  the	  
conjugated	  beads	  were	  stored	  in	  the	  dark	  at	  4˚C	  in	  PerkinElmer	  buffer.	  
	  
5.4.	  Biotinylation	  
	  
5.4.1.	  Materials	  	  
	  
Reagents	  
	  
-­‐ 
Biotin-­‐X-­‐NHS	  (cat.	  no.	  203188,	  Calbiochem)	  
	  
-­‐ 
Dimethyl	  sulfoxide	  (DMSO)	  (cat.	  no.	  1.09678,	  Merck)	  
	  
-­‐ 
Proclin	  300	  (cat.	  no.	  48912-­‐U,	  Sigma-­‐Aldrich)	  
	  
-­‐ 
Monoclonal	   mouse	   anti-­‐human/mouse/porcine	   C-­‐reactive	   protein	   antibody	   (cat.	   no.	  
MAB1707,	  R&D)	  
	  
-­‐ 
Polyclonal	  rabbit	  anti-­‐human	  CRP	  (cat.	  no.	  Q0329,	  Dako)	  
	  
Instruments	  
	  
-­‐ 
Amicon	   Ultra	   Centrifugal	   Filter	   Unit,	   Ultracel-­‐50k,	   (cat.	   no.	   UFC805024,	   Merck	  
Millipore)	  
	  
-­‐ 
Eppendorf	  centrifuge	  5430	  
	  
-­‐ 
Eppendorf	  BioPhotometer	  
==PAGE:21==
	  
21	  
Buffer	  
	  
-­‐ 
Phosphate-­‐buffered	  saline	  (PBS)	  buffer	  (pH=7.4)	  
	  
5.4.2.	  Method	  
	  
The	  antibodies	  have	  to	  be	  dissolved	  in	  PBS	  at	  a	  concentration	  of	  1	  mg/ml.	  A	  fresh	  solution	  of	  3	  
mg/ml	  Biotin-­‐X-­‐NHS	  in	  DMSO	  was	  made	  and	  100	  μl	  (per	  1	  ml	  antibody)	  was	  added	  drop-­‐wise	  
while	  mixing.	  The	  reaction	  mixture	  was	  incubated	  over	  night	  at	  4˚C.	  
	  
The	  antibodies	  were	  then	  purified	  from	  excess	  biotin	  by	  transferring	  the	  reaction	  mixture	  to	  a	  
centrifugal	  filter	  unit.	  The	  unit	  was	  filled	  op	  with	  PBS	  and	  spun	  down	  until	  the	  original	  volume	  
was	   obtained.	   This	   was	   done	   two	   more	   times.	   The	   concentration	   of	   the	   antibody	   was	  
measured	  at	  280	  nm	  on	  Eppendorf	  BioPhotometer.	  
	  
The	  biotinylated	  antibodies	  or	  phosphocholine	  were	  stored	  in	  0,05%	  proclin	  300	  at	  4˚C.	  
	  
5.5.	  Homogenous	  LOCI	  
	  
5.5.1.	  Materials	  
	  
Plates	  
	  
-­‐ 
AlphaPlateTM-­‐384	  (light	  grey,	  untreated);	  (cat.	  no.	  6005359,	  Perkin	  Elmer)	  
	  
Buffer	  
	  
-­‐ 
LOCI	  buffer	  (pH=7.4)	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
see	  appendix	  1	  
	  
Reagents	  
	  
-­‐ 
Conjugated	  acceptor	  beads	  (see	  3.3)	  
	  
-­‐ 
Biotinylated	  antibodies	  (see	  3.4)	  
	  
-­‐ 
Alphascreen®	  Streptavidin	  Donor	  beads;	  (cat.	  no.	  6760002,	  Perkin	  Elmer)	  
	  
-­‐ 
Calibrator:	  reference	  standard	  of	  pig	  CRP	  derived	  from	  whole	  serum	  (Product	  no:	  RS-­‐
5CRP,	  BIOTREND,	  köln,	  Germany)	  
==PAGE:22==
	  
22	  
Instrument	  
	  
-­‐ 
EnVision	  multiply	  plate	  reader;	  Perking	  Elmer	  
5.5.2.	  Method	  
	  
Two	  µl	  of	  the	  sample/calibrator	  were	  added	  in	  appropriate	  dilutions	  to	  the	  wells	  of	  a	  384-­‐
well	   AlphaPlate.	   A	   mixture	   of	   antibody	   (Acris)	   coated	   acceptor	   beads	   (33.7	   µg/ml)	   and	  
biotinylated	  antibody	  (R&D)	  (2	  nM)	  was	  prepared.	  Fifteen	  µl	  of	  the	  mixture	  was	  added	  per	  
well.	  The	  Plate	  was	  covered	  with	  a	  black	  lid	  and	  incubated	  over	  night	  (18-­‐24	  hrs.)	  at	  4°C.	  
	  
A	  solution	  of	  66.7	  µg/ml	  streptavidin-­‐conjugated	  donor	  beads	  solution	  was	  prepare	  in	  a	  room	  
where	  green	  filters	  are	  applied	  on	  lights	  because	  the	  donor	  beads	  is	  sensitive	  to	  excess	  light	  
[32]	  and	  30	  µl	  was	  added	  per	  well.	  The	  Plate	  was	  covered	  with	  a	  black	  lid	  and	  incubated	  for	  
30	  min	  at	  21-­‐22°C.	  
	  
The	  plate	  was	  read	  in	  EnVision	  with	  a	  filter	  with	  a	  bandwidth	  of	  520-­‐645	  nm	  after	  excitation	  
by	  the	  680	  nm	  laser.	  
	  
5.6.	  Wash-­‐LOCI	  (heterogeneous)	  
	  
5.6.1.	  Materials	  
	  
Derivates	  
	  
Performed	  and	  delivered	  by	  Ulrik	  Boas,	  DTU	  Vet	  
	  
-­‐ 
Phosphocholine-­‐PPI-­‐biotin	  (procedure	  A)	  
	  
-­‐ 
Phosphocholine-­‐biotin.	  
	  
Plates	  
	  
-­‐ 
AlphaPlateTM-­‐384	   High	   Binding	   (light	   grey,	   untreated);	   (cat.	   no.	   6057690,	   Perkin	  
Elmer)	  
	  
Buffers	  
	  
-­‐ 
Washing	  (ELISA)	  Buffer	  (pH=7.4)	   	  
	  
	  
	  
see	  appendix	  1	  
	  
==PAGE:23==
	  
23	  
-­‐ 
Carbonate	  buffer	  with	  2	  mg/ml	  dextran	  T-­‐500,	  pH	  9,6	  
	  
Reagents	  
	  
-­‐ 
AlphaScreen®	  Streptavidin	  Donor	  beads;	  (cat.	  no.	  6760002,	  Perkin	  Elmer)	  
	  
-­‐ 
Anti-­‐rabbit	  IgG	  Alphalisa®	  Acceptorbeads;	  (cat.	  no.	  AL104,	  Perking	  Elmer)	  
	  
-­‐ 
Biotinylated	  polyclonal	  rabbit	  anti-­‐human	  CRP	  IgG	  (see	  3.4)	  
	  
-­‐ 
Calibrator:	   Serum	   KVL-­‐Pool	   28/2-­‐00	   Caa	   (conc.	   9.062	   μg/ml,	   quantified	   based	   on	  
human	  CRP	  standard	  (cat.	  no.	  X923,	  DAKO))	  received	  from	  DTU	  vet	  
	  
Instrument	  
	  
-­‐ 
EnVision	  multiply	  plate	  reader;	  Perking	  Elmer	  
	  
5.6.2.	  Method	  
	  
The	   plate	   was	   coated	   with	   35	   µl	   donor	   beads	   solution	   (streptavidin	   coated	   donor	   beads	  
diluted	  in	  carbonate	  buffer,	  conc.	  5	  μg/ml).	  The	  plate	  was	  then	  centrifuged	  at	  4000	  rpm	  in	  60	  
min	  and	  incubated	  overnight	  at	  21-­‐22˚C.	  	  
	  
The	   plate	   was	   washed	   three	   times	   with	   80	   μl	   ELISA	   buffer.	   Ten	   μl	   of	   Phosphocholine-­‐PPI-­‐
biotin	  (procedure	  A)	  or	  Phosphocholine-­‐biotin	  were	  added	  to	  the	  plate	  in	  a	  concentration	  of	  
100	  ng/ml	  diluted	  in	  ELISA	  buffer	  and	  the	  plate	  was	  incubated	  on	  a	  shaking	  table	  at	  21-­‐22˚C	  
in	  one	  hour.	  The	  plate	  was	  then	  washed	  three	  times	  with	  80	  μl	  ELISA	  buffer.	  Ten	  μl	  of	  the	  
standard	   or	   samples	   diluted	   in	   ELISA	   buffer	   were	   added	   to	   the	   plate	   and	   the	   plate	   was	  
incubated	  on	  a	  shaking	  table	  at	  21-­‐22˚C	  in	  one	  hour.	  The	  plate	  was	  then	  washed	  three	  times	  
with	   80	   μl	   ELISA	   buffer.	   Ten	   μl	   of	   the	   polyclonal	   rabbit	   anti-­‐human	   CRP	   diluted	   1:2000	   in	  
ELISA	  buffer	  were	  added	  to	  the	  plate	  and	  the	  plate	  was	  incubated	  on	  a	  shaking	  table	  at	  21-­‐
22˚C	  in	  one	  hour.	  The	  plate	  was	  then	  washed	  three	  times	  with	  80	  μl	  ELISA	  buffer.	  Ten	  μl	  of	  
anti-­‐rabbit	   acceptor	   beads	   diluted	   in	   ELISA	   buffer	   to	   a	   concentration	   of	   100	   μg/ml	   were	  
added	  to	  the	  plate	  and	  the	  plate	  was	  incubated	  on	  a	  shaking	  table	  at	  21-­‐22˚C	  in	  one	  hour.	  The	  
whole	  procedure	  was	  carried	  out	  in	  a	  room	  where	  green	  filters	  are	  applied	  on	  lights	  because	  
the	  donor	  beads	  is	  sensitive	  to	  excess	  light	  [32].	  	  
	  
The	  plates	  are	  read	  in	  EnVision	  with	  a	  filter	  with	  a	  bandwidth	  of	  520-­‐645	  nm	  after	  excitation	  
by	  the	  680	  nm	  laser.	  
==PAGE:24==
	  
24	  
6.	  Results	  
	  
The	  main	  objective	  in	  this	  project	  was	  to	  establish	  a	  LOCI	  assay	  able	  to	  quantify	  CRP	  in	  pig	  
serum	   and/or	   plasma	   using	   the	   high	   affinity	   binding	   between	   CRP	   and	   its	   ligand	  
phosphocholine.	   Such	   an	   assay	   was	   not	   developed	   but	   two	   other	   assays	   came	   out	   of	   this	  
study,	   a	   LOCI	   assay	   using	   two	   monoclonal	   anti-­‐CRP	   IgGs	   and	   a	   heterogeneous	   LOCI	   assay	  
(Wash-­‐LOCI)	   using	   dendrimers	   as	   scaffold	   for	   phosphocholine	   together	   with	   an	   polyclonal	  
anti-­‐CRP	  IgG.	  The	  homogeneous	  LOCI	  assay	  was	  optimised	  and	  qualified	  for	  the	  purpose	  of	  
using	  the	  assay	  in	  the	  future	  for	  routine	  measurements	  of	  inflammation	  in	  pigs	  within	  studies	  
carried	  out	  at	  the	  Novo	  Nordisk	  A/S,	  Måløv.	  First,	  all	  the	  different	  set-­‐ups	  tested	  in	  this	  study	  
are	  elaborated.	  
	  
6.1.	  The	  experimental	  journey	  
	  
The	  first	  experiment	  was	  a	  homogeneous	  LOCI	  assay	  with	  the	  same	  component	  that	  is	  used	  in	  
the	  dendrimer-­‐based	  ELISA	  assay	  [6],	  described	  in	  section	  4.2.	  The	  ELISA	  assay	  was	  based	  on	  
phosphocholine	   coated	   dendrimers	   and	   polyclonal	   anti-­‐human	   CRP	   IgG	   together	   with	   a	  
secondary	  detection	  antibody.	  The	  concept	  behind	  the	  LOCI	  assay	  was	  as	  follows:	  Dendrimers	  
were	  coated	  with	  both	  phosphocholine	  and	  biotin.	  The	  polyclonal	  anti-­‐human	  CRP	  IgG	  was	  
conjugated	  to	  acceptor	  beads	  and	  used	  together	  with	  streptavidin-­‐conjugated	  donor	  beads.	  
The	   streptavidin	   on	   the	   donor	   beads	   binds	   to	   the	   biotin	   on	   the	   dendrimers,	   the	  
phosphocholine	  on	  the	  dendrimer	  will	  then	  bind	  the	  CRP	  and	  the	  polyclonal	  anti-­‐human	  CRP	  
IgG	  that	  were	  conjugated	  to	  the	  acceptor	  beads	  will	  bind	  CRP	  as	  well.	  The	  donor	  bead	  and	  the	  
acceptor	   bead	   will	   thereby	   be	   brought	   in	   close	   proximity	   and	   the	   Luminescent	   oxygen	  
channelling	  reaction	  can	  take	  place,	  see	  Figure	  5.	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	            
	                                      
	    
	  
	  
O2 
Excitation 
680	  nm 
Emission 
620	  nm 
Figure	  5:	  CRP	  LOCI	  with	  phosphocholine	  coated	  dendrimers	  combined	  with	  anti-­‐CRP	  IgG.	  
The	  phosphocholine	  (light	  green)	  and	  biotin	  (yellow)	  is	  coated	  to	  the	  dendrimer	  (dark	  green).	  
The	  biotin	  on	  the	  dendrimer	  binds	  to	  a	  streptavidin	  (light	  blue)	  coated	  donor	  bead	  (dark	  blue).	  
The	   phosphocholine	   binds	   CRP	   (orange	   pentamer),	   which	   also	   bind	   an	   anti-­‐CRP	   IgG	   (black)	  
coated	   to	   the	   acceptor	   bead	   (red).	   When	   CRP	   is	   present,	   donor	   beads	   and	   acceptor	   beads	   is  
brought	  in	  close	  proximity	  and	  the	  Luminescent	  oxygen	  channelling	  reaction	  can	  take	  place.	  The	  
components	  are	  not	  drawn	  to	  scale.	  
==PAGE:25==
	  
25	  
Before	  the	  LOCI	  assay	  was	  tested	  the	  phosphocholine	  derivates	  received	  from	  DTU	  vet	  were	  
tested	   in	   the	   above-­‐mentioned	   ELISA	   and	   by	   dotplot	   to	   check	   if	   the	   synthesis	   and	  
biotinylation	  were	  successfully.	  All	  three	  derivates	  were	  biotinylated,	  see	  Figure	  6A	  with	  visual	  
spots	  for	  all	  three	  derivates.	  Both	  dendrimers	  showed	  great	  dose	  response,	  see	  Figure	  6B,	  and	  
performed	   well	   in	   the	   ELISA	   assay.	   Dendrimers	   biotinylated	   by	   activation	   of	   biotin	   in	   situ	  
(Dendrimer	  (A))	  had	  the	  highest	  signal	  in	  the	  ELISA	  assay	  and	  was	  the	  selected	  dendrimer	  for	  
the	  LOCI	  assay.	  The	  biotinylated	  phosphocholine	  did	  only	  show	  a	  very	  weak	  dose	  response	  
compared	  to	  the	  dendrimer	  derivates,	  see	  Figure	  6B.	  
	  
	  
The	  LOCI	  with	  the	  chosen	  dendrimer	  was	  tested	  as	  described	  above.	  This	  complex	  did	  not	  
show	  any	  signal	  that	  was	  significantly	  higher	  than	  the	  background	  (CRP=0	  ng/ml)	  and	  as	  seen	  
in	  Figure	  7,	  none	  of	  the	  tested	  dendrimer	  concentration	  (legend	  to	  the	  right)	  showed	  a	  signal	  
that	  was	  dose	  dependent	  (the	  signal	  in	  the	  LOCI	  signal	  is	  counts	  per	  second	  abbreviated	  cps).	  
The	   hypothesis	   was	   that	   it	   is	   caused	   by	   either	   a	   problem	   with	   the	   buffer	   composition,	   the	  
conjugation	  to	  the	  acceptor	  beads	  or	  the	  dendrimers.	  
	  
The	  LOCI	  buffer	  (see	  appendix	  1)	  has	  a	  lot	  of	  protein	  and	  other	  components	  compared	  to	  the	  
ELISA	  buffer	  (see	  appendix	  1)	  that	  might	  have	  caused	  some	  nonspecific	  binding.	  EDTA	  is	  also	  
in	  the	  LOCI	  buffer	  and	  will	  abolish	  the	  signal	  because	  it	  will	  bind	  the	  calcium	  ions	  needed	  for	  
the	   phosphocholine-­‐CRP	   binding.	   EDTA	   was	   therefore	   excluded	   from	   the	   LOCI	   buffer.	   The	  
LOCI	  assay	  did	  however	  not	  result	  in	  signals	  different	  from	  Figure	  7	  neither	  with	  the	  ELISA	  
buffer	  nor	  the	  LOCI	  buffer	  without	  EDTA,	  or	  with	  systematically	  removal	  of	  the	  proteins	  (IgG	  
and	  BSA)	  and	  other	  components	  (HBR1	  and	  Dextran)	  from	  the	  LOCI	  buffer	  that	  could	  cause	  
problems.	  
Figure	  6:	  A:	  Results	  from	  the	  dotplot.	  The	  nitrocellulose	  membrane	  has	  a	  visual	  dot	  with	  all	  three	  derivates,	  and	  all	  the	  
derivates	   are	   thereby	   biotinylated.	   B:	   Evaluation	   of	   the	   three	   derivates	   in	   the	   ELISA	   assay.	   Dendrimer	   (A)	   means	   the	  
dendrimer	   coated	   with	   biotin	   and	   phosphocholine,	   biotinylated	   by	   procedure	   A.	   Dendrimer	   (B)	   means	   the	   dendrimer	  
coated	   with	   biotin	   and	   phosphocholine,	   biotinylated	   by	   procedure	   B.	   Phosphocholine	   means	   the	   biotinylated	  
phosphocholine.	  
==PAGE:26==
	  
26	  
	  
The	   next	   hypothesis	   was	   that	   the	   conjugation	   of	   the	   polyclonal	   antibodies	   to	   the	   acceptor	  
beads	   was	   unsuitable	   because	   of	   the	   large	   amount	   of	   non-­‐specific	   antibodies.	   The	  
concentration	   and	   purity	   of	   specific	   antibodies	   is	   really	   low	   in	   polyclonal	   antibodies	   [39]	  
compared	   to	   monoclonal	   antibodies	   and	   only	   a	   small	   fraction	   of	   the	   antibodies	   within	   the	  
polyclonal	  antibodies	  is	  specific	  for	  CRP.	  This	  will	  result	  in	  small	  amounts	  of	  the	  antibodies	  
conjugated	  to	  the	  acceptor	  beads	  to	  be	  specific	  to	  CRP.	  The	  acceptor	  beads	  were	  therefore	  
conjugated	  with	  monoclonal	  anti-­‐CRP	  IgGs	  instead	  and	  tested	  in	  an	  assay	  combined	  with	  the	  
dendrimer.	  The	  signals	  were	  not	  different	  from	  the	  signals	  shown	  in	  Figure	  7,	  neither	  with	  the	  
buffers	   tried	   above.	   Hence,	   it	   was	   still	   unknown	   if	   the	   antibodies	   were	   conjugated	   to	   the	  
acceptor	  beads.	  To	  check	  the	  conjugation	  of	  the	  monoclonal	  antibodies	  to	  acceptor	  beads,	  the	  
yield	   of	   the	   conjugation	   could	   have	   been	   tested,	   but	   this	   has	   not	   been	   done.	   The	   yield	   is	  
usually	  very	  high	  and	  is	  not	  routinely	  measured	  after	  conjugations.	  The	  conjugation	  reaction	  
is	  carried	  out	  with	  an	  overload	  of	  antibodies	  and	  only	  a	  small	  amount	  of	  the	  antibodies	  is	  
conjugated	   to	   the	   beads.	   The	   conjugation	   was	   tested	   in	   a	   LOCI	   assay	   instead,	   where	   the	  
dendrimer	  was	  replaced	  with	  a	  second	  antibody,	  which	  was	  biotinylated,	  see	  Figure	  8.	  	  	  
	  
Six	  combinations,	  with	  the	  three	  antibodies	  (two	  different	  monoclonal	  (from	  Acris	  and	  R&D,	  
see	  specification	  in	  the	  method)	  and	  the	  polyclonal	  antibody	  (from	  dako,	  see	  specification	  in	  
the	  method))	  all	  conjugated	  to	  acceptor	  beads	  and	  biotinylated,	  were	  tested.	  One	  combination	  
with	  the	  two	  monoclonal	  antibodies	  gave	  a	  signal	  that	  was	  dose	  dependent.	  The	  combination	  
was	   the	   Acris	   antibody	   conjugated	   to	   acceptor	   beads	   and	   R&D	   antibody	   biotinylated,	   see	  
Figure	  7:	  CRP	  LOCI	  with	  phosphocholine	  coated	  dendrimers	  combined	  with	  anti-­‐CRP	  IgG	  Calibration	  curves	  for	  11	  
different	  concentration	  of	  the	  dendrimer	  shown	  to	  the	  right.	  	  
300	  
350	  
400	  
450	  
500	  
550	  
600	  
650	  
700	  
750	  
0	  
5	  
10	  
15	  
20	  
25	  
30	  
35	  
40	  
45	  
50	  
Signal	  	  
CRP	  ng/ml	  
CRP	  LOCI	  with	  phosphocholine	  coated	  acceptor	  beads	  	  
1000	  ng/ml	  
200	  ng/ml	  
40	  ng/ml	  
8	  ng/ml	  
1.6	  ng/ml	  
0.32	  ng/ml	  
0.064	  ng/ml	  
0,0128	  ng/ml	  
0.00256	  ng/ml	  
0.00512	  ng/ml	  
0.0001024	  ng/ml	  
0	  ng/ml	  
==PAGE:27==
	  
27	  
Figure	  9.	  This	  indicated	  that	  the	  polyclonal	  antibody	  was	  neither	  successfully	  biotinylated	  or	  
conjugated	   to	   acceptorbeads.	   It	   can	   be	   concluded	   that	   the	   polyclonal	   antibody	   was	   not	  
biotinylated	  because	  there	  was	  no	  signal	  when	  combined	  with	  the	  acceptor	  beads	  conjugated	  
with	   Acris	   antibody,	   which	   has	   proven	   to	   work	   in	   combination	   with	   biotinylated	   R&D	  
antibody.	  It	  can	  also	  be	  concluded	  that	  the	  conjugation	  to	  acceptor	  beads	  was	  not	  successful	  
because	   there	   was	   no	   signal	   when	   combined	   with	   biotinylated	   R&D	   antibody,	   which	   have	  
proven	  to	  work	  combined	  with	  acceptor	  beads	  conjugated	  with	  Acris	  antibody.	  An	  assay	  with	  
the	   acceptor	   beads	   conjugated	   with	   the	   polyclonal	   antibody	   was	   not	   expected	   to	   give	   any	  
signal	  because	  the	  purity	  is	  very	  small	  and	  many	  antibodies	  conjugated	  to	  the	  acceptor	  beads	  
lacked	  specificity	  as	  discussed	  above.	  The	  biotinylated	  polyclonal	  antibody	  is	  not	  feasible	  to	  
use	  either,	  because	  very	  high	  concentration	  of	  the	  biotinylated	  polyclonal	  antibody	  is	  required	  
which	  is	  not	  tolerated	  in	  LOCI	  [40].	  
	  
	    
	    
	  
	  
O2 
Excitation 
680	  nm 
Emission 
615	  nm           
Figure	   8:	   CRP	   LOCI	   with	   two	   anti-­‐CRP	   IgGs:	  A	  biotinylated	  antibody	  (black	  with	  yellow  
circle)	  binds	  to	  the	  streptavidin	  (light	  blue)	  coated	  donor	  beads	  (dark	  blue)	  and	  the	  other	  
antibody	  is	  conjugated	  to	  the	  acceptor	  beads	  (red).	  When	  CRP	  is	  present	  the	  two	  antibodies	  
will	   both	   bind	   CRP	   and	   bring	  donor	   beads	   and	   acceptor	   beads	   in	   close	   proximity	   and	  the	  
Luminescent	  oxygen	  channelling	  reaction	  can	  take	  place.	  The	  components	  are	  not	  drawn	  to  
scale.	  
0	  
2000	  
4000	  
6000	  
8000	  
10000	  
12000	  
14000	  
16000	  
18000	  
0	  
5	  
10	  
15	  
20	  
25	  
30	  
35	  
40	  
45	  
50	  
Signal	  
CRP	  ng/ml	  
CRP	  LOCI	  with	  two	  anti-­‐CRP	  IgGs	  
R&D	  conjugated	  and	  Acris	  
biotinylated	  	  
Acris	  conjugated	  and	  R&D	  
biotinylated	  	  
R&D	  conjugated	  and	  Polyclonal	  
(Q0329)	  biotinylated	  	  
Acris	  conjugated	  and	  Polyclonal	  
(Q0329)	  biotinylated	  	  
Polyclonal	  (Q0329)	  conjugated	  
and	  R&D	  biotinylated	  
Polyclonal	  (Q0329)	  conjugated	  
and	  Acris	  biotinylated	  
Figure	  9:	  CRP	  LOCI	  with	  two	  anti-­‐CRP	  IgGs:	  Calibration	  curve	  for	  the	  six	  possible	  combinations	  with	  the	  three	  antibodies  
biotinylated	  as	  well	  as	  conjugated	  to	  acceptor	  beads.	  
==PAGE:28==
	  
28	  
The	   combination	   of	   biotinylated	   Acris	   antibody	   and	   acceptor	   beads	   conjugated	   with	   R&D	  
antibody	  did	  not	  show	  a	  signal	  significant	  higher	  than	  the	  background	  either	  indicating	  that	  
either	   the	   Acris	   antibody	   was	   not	   biotinylated	   or	   the	   R&D	   antibody	   is	   not	   suited	   to	   be	  
conjugated	   to	   acceptor	   beads.	   The	   yield	   of	   the	   conjugation	   of	   the	   R&D	   antibody	   to	   the	  
acceptor	  beads	  could	  have	  been	  tested	  here	  as	  well.	  The	  dose	  response	  for	  the	  combination	  
with	   Acris	   antibody	   conjugated	   to	   acceptor	   beads	   and	   R&D	   antibody	   biotinylated	   had	   low	  
signals	  though.	  The	  assay	  was	  therefore	  optimised	  to	  increase	  the	  signal	  and	  quantified	  for	  
the	  use	  of	  baseline	  measurement	  of	  CRP	  at	  Novo	  Nordisk	  A/S,	  Måløv.	  See	  section	  6.2	  for	  the	  
optimisation	  and	  quantification	  of	  the	  LOCI	  assay	  as	  well	  as	  comparison	  with	  the	  dendrimer-­‐
based	  ELISA	  [6].	  	  
	  
A	   new	   set	   up	   with	   phosphocholine	   conjugated	   directly	   to	   the	   acceptor	   beads	   by	   the	   same	  
method	  as	  for	  the	  conjugation	  of	  antibody,	  was	  carried	  out,	  see	  Figure	  8.	  The	  acceptor	  beads	  
would	   thereby	   work	   as	   a	   phosphocholine	   scaffold	   comparable	   to	   the	   function	   of	   the	  
dendrimers	   in	   the	   ELISA	   assay	   described	   previously.	   A	   special	   phosphocholine	   with	   a	   free	  
amine	   (4-­‐Aminophenylphosphorylcholine)	   was	   used	   in	   the	   conjugation.	   The	   free	   amine	  
should	  theoretically	  bind	  to	  the	  acceptor	  bead	  [46]	  and	  at	  the	  same	  time	  be	  able	  to	  bind	  CRP	  
[47]	  because	  it	  has	  previous	  been	  used	  in	  the	  purification	  of	  CRP.	  Because	  phosphocholine	  has	  
a	  smaller	  molar	  weight	  than	  an	  antibody,	  the	  amount	  of	  phosphocholine	  in	  the	  conjugation	  
reaction	  was	  based	  on	  the	  molar	  concentration	  used	  for	  antibody	  as	  well	  as	  10,	  100	  and	  1000	  
times	  higher	  than	  that.	  A	  LOCI	  assay	  using	  the	  acceptor	  beads	  coated	  with	  phosphocholine	  
together	  with	  each	  of	  the	  biotinylated	  monoclonal	  antibody	  was	  conducted.	  
	  
The	  signal	  for	  the	  tested	  concentration	  combined	  with	  either	  Acris	  or	  R&D	  antibody	  did	  not	  
show	  a	  signal	  that	  was	  significantly	  higher	  than	  the	  signal	  for	  the	  background	  (CRP=0	  ng/ml),	  
see	  Figure	  9.	  The	  background	  is	  increased	  when	  using	  higher	  phosphocholine	  concentration	  
in	   the	   conjugation	   and	   also	   shows	   a	   higher	   signal	   when	   using	   biotinylated	   Acris	   antibody	  
	    
	    
	  
	  
O2 
Excitation 
680	  nm 
Emission 
615	  nm       
	  
	  
	  
	              
Figure	  8:	   CRP	   LOCI	  with	  a	   phosphocholine	   coated	  acceptor	   bead	  combined	   with  
two	  different	  monoclonal	  antibodies:	  The	  biotinylated	  antibody	  (black	  with	  a	  yellow  
circle)	   binds	   to	   the	   streptavidin	   (light	   blue)	   coated	   donor	   bead	   (dark	   blue).	   The  
phosphocholine	  (green)	  is	  coated	  directly	  to	  the	  acceptor	  bead.	  When	  CRP	  is	  present	  the	  
antibody	  and	  phosphocholine	  will	  both	  bind	  CRP	  and	  bring	  donor	  beads	  and	  acceptor  
beads	   in	   close	   proximity	   and	   the	   Luminescent	   oxygen	   channelling	   reaction	   can	   take  
place.	  The	  components	  are	  not	  drawn	  to	  scale. 
==PAGE:29==
	  
29	  
compared	   to	   biotinylated	   R&D	   antibody.	   But	   the	   calibration	   curve	   does	   still	   not	   increase	  
above	  the	  background	  signal.	  
	  
Because	  this	  conjugation	  to	  the	  acceptor	  beads	  has	  not	  been	  tried	  before,	  it	  is	  not	  known	  if	  the	  
conjugation	  was	  successful.	  The	  yield	  of	  the	  conjugation	  could	  have	  been	  determined	  here	  as	  
well.	  It	  is	  likely	  that	  another	  conjugation	  method	  is	  needed	  and	  further	  work	  on	  that	  could	  be	  
very	  interesting.	  	  
	  
	  
Since	  the	  combination	  of	  Acris	  antibody	  conjugated	  to	  acceptor	  beads	  and	  the	  R&D	  antibody	  
biotinylated	  did	  work,	  it	  is	  not	  certain	  why	  the	  Acris	  antibody	  conjugated	  to	  acceptor	  beads	  
combined	   with	   dendrimer	   did	   not	   work.	   It	   has	   been	   proved	   that	   the	   Acris	   antibody	  
conjugated	  to	  acceptor	  beads	  bind	  CRP	  in	  the	  above	  mentioned	  assay	  and	  it	  has	  also	  been	  
proved	   that	   the	   dendrimer	   binds	   to	   both	   CRP	   and	   streptavidin	   in	   the	   ELISA	   assay.	   One	  
explanation	  to	  why	  an	  assay	  using	  these	  two	  components	  together	  does	  not	  work	  could	  be	  
that	  the	  antibody	  and	  phosphocholine	  bind	  the	  same	  epitope	  and	  cannot	  bind	  CRP	  at	  the	  same	  
time.	  To	  confirm	  that	  the	  dendrimer	  bind	  the	  streptavidin	  coated	  donor	  beads	  and	  CRP	  in	  a	  
LOCI	   assay,	   a	   heterogeneous	   LOCI	   assay	   was	   performed	   with	   all	   the	   same	   reagent	   as	   the	  
ELISA	  assay	  [6],	  with	  wash	  step	  carried	  out	  between	  every	  single	  component,	  see	  Figure	  10A.	  	  
Figure	   9:	   CRP	   LOCI	   with	   phosphocholine	   coated	   acceptor	   beads	   combined	   with	   two	   different	   monoclonal	  
antibodies.	  The	  calibration	  curves	  are	  from	  four	  different	  concentration	  of	  phosphocholine	  used	  within	  the	  conjugation	  to	  
acceptor	  beads	  combined	  with	  either	  Acris	  or	  R&D	  antibody	  that	  is	  biotinylated.	  
0	  
200	  
400	  
600	  
800	  
1000	  
1200	  
1400	  
0	  
50	  
100	  
150	  
200	  
250	  
300	  
350	  
400	  
450	  
500	  
Signal	  
CRP	  ng/ml	  
CRP	  LOCI	  with	  phosphocholine	  coated	  acceptor	  beads	  	  
R&D	  biotinylated	  -­‐	  	  0,2µg	  ph	  
R&D	  biotinylated	  -­‐	  	  2µg	  ph	  
R&D	  biotinylated	  -­‐	  	  20µg	  ph	  
R&D	  biotinylated	  -­‐	  	  200µg	  ph	  
Acris	  biotinylated	  -­‐	  	  0,2µg	  ph	  
Acris	  biotinylated	  -­‐	  	  2µg	  ph	  
Acris	  biotinylated	  -­‐	  	  20µg	  ph	  
Acris	  biotinylated	  -­‐	  	  200µg	  ph	  
==PAGE:30==
	  
30	  
	  
The	  donor	  beads	  was	  coated	  to	  a	  high	  binding	  AlphaLISA®	  plate.	  The	  dendrimers	  were	  then	  
added,	  then	  the	  sample,	  the	  polyclonal	  antibody	  and	  last	  acceptor	  beads	  coated	  with	  antibody	  
specific	  for	  the	  polyclonal	  antibody.	  	  
	  
The	  assay	  showed	  signals	  that	  was	  dose	  dependent	  and	  was	  significant	  higher	  than	  the	  signal	  
when	   using	   a	   dendrimer	   concentration	   of	   0	   ng/ml	   and	   had	   an	   optimal	   dendrimer	  
concentration	  of	  100	  ng/ml,	  see	  Figure	  11.	  The	  polyclonal	  antibody	  could	  be	  used	  in	  this	  set-­‐
up	  because	  wash	  steps	  were	  included	  and	  all	  the	  non-­‐specific	  antibodies	  were	  washed	  away	  
as	  in	  the	  ELISA	  assay.	  
Figure	  10:	  Principle	  of	  Wash	  LOCI	  (A)	  and	  LOCI	  (B).	  The	  phosphocholine	  (light	  green)	  and	  biotin	  (yellow)	  is  
coated	  to	  the	  dendrimer	  (dark	  green).	  The	  biotin	  on	  the	  dendrimer	  binds	  to	  a	  streptavidin	  (light	  blue)	  coated  
donor	   bead	   (dark	   blue),	   which	   is	   coated	   to	   the	   plate	   in	   Wash-­‐LOCI.	   The	   phosphocholine	   binds	   CRP	   (orange  
pentamer),	  which	  also	  bind	  a	  polyclonal	  anti-­‐CRP	  IgG	  (black).	  The	  acceptor	  bead	  (red)	  is	  coated	  with	  an	  antibody	  
specific	  for	  the	  anti-­‐CRP	  IgG.	  The	  wash-­‐LOCI	  (A)	  is	  a	  heterogeneous	  assay	  and	  there	  is	  a	  wash	  step	  between	  every	  
reagent.	  The	  LOCI	  assay	  (B)	  is	  homogeneous	  and	  no	  wash	  step	  is	  required.	  When	  CRP	  is	  present	  donor	  beads	  and  
acceptor	  beads	  is	  brought	  in	  close	  proximity	  and	  the	  Luminescent	  oxygen	  channelling	  reaction	  can	  take	  place.  
The	  components	  are	  not	  drawn	  to	  scale. 
0	  
20000	  
40000	  
60000	  
80000	  
100000	  
120000	  
140000	  
0	  
200	  
400	  
600	  
800	  
1000	  
1200	  
Signal	  	  
CRP	  ng/ml	  
CRP	  Wash-­‐LOCI	  with	  phosphocholine	  coated	  acceptor	  beads	  
100000	  ng/ml	  
10000	  ng/ml	  
1000	  ng/ml	  
100	  ng/ml	  
10	  ng/ml	  
0	  ng/ml	  
Figure	   11:	   Calibration	   curve	   for	   CRP	  Wash-­‐LOCI	   with	   phosphocholine	   coated	   dendrimer	   combined	   with	   polyclonal	  
anti-­‐CRP	  IgG	   and	   acceptor	   beads	   coated	   with	   antibodies	   specific	   for	   the	   polyclonal	   anti-­‐CRP	  IgG,	   with	   five	  different  
dendrimer	  concentrations.	  	  
==PAGE:31==
	  
31	  
To	  be	  on	  the	  safe	  side	  the	  wash-­‐LOCI	  was	  washed	  between	  every	  addition	  of	  reagent.	  This	  was	  
done	  to	  ensure	  that	  every	  binding	  reached	  equilibrium.	  Otherwise	  a	  wash	  step	  after	  adding	  
the	  polyclonal	  antibody	  was	  the	  only	  necessary	  wash	  step	  because	  it	  is	  the	  only	  reagent	  that	  
contains	  non-­‐specific	  binding	  molecules.	  To	  confirm	  that	  the	  reason	  why	  the	  homogeneous	  
LOCI	  assay	  using	  the	  monoclonal	  Acris	  antibody	  conjugated	  to	  acceptor	  beads	  did	  not	  work	  
because	  both	  the	  phosphocholine	  and	  the	  antibody	  bind	  the	  same	  epitope,	  a	  heterogeneous	  
LOCI	  assay	  with	  the	  dendrimer	  and	  monoclonal	  Acris	  antibody	  conjugated	  to	  acceptor	  beads	  
could	  have	  been	  tested.	  If	  that	  assay	  would	  not	  work	  it	  could	  have	  been	  confirmed	  that	  the	  
reason	  why	  the	  homogeneous	  LOCI	  assay	  did	  not	  work	  was	  that	  the	  phosphocholine	  and	  the	  
antibody	  interfered	  with	  each	  other.	  Because	  the	  heterogeneous	  LOCI	  assay	  did	  have	  a	  very	  
good	  dose	  response	  and	  high	  sensitivity	  the	  assay	  was	  optimised,	  qualified	  and	  compared	  to	  
the	  LOCI	  and	  the	  ELISA	  assay	  described	  in	  section	  6.3.	  To	  confirm	  that	  the	  dendrimer	  was	  the	  
reason	   for	   the	   high	   sensitivity	   of	   the	   heterogeneous	   LOCI	   assay,	   the	   dendrimer	   was	  
substituted	   with	   biotinylated	   phosphocholine	   at	   the	   same	   concentration	   used	   for	   the	  
dendrimers.	   This	   set-­‐up	   gave	   a	   very	   weak	   dose	   response	   compared	   to	   the	   assay	   using	   the	  
dendrimer,	  see	  Figure	  12,	  and	  the	  dendrimers	  are	  thereby	  responsible	  for	  the	  high	  sensitivity	  
of	  the	  heterogeneous	  LOCI	  assay.	  The	  Y-­‐axis	  on	  Figure	  12	  is	  in	  logarithmic	  scale	  to	  show	  that	  
there	  is	  a	  small	  dose	  response	  in	  the	  wash	  LOCI	  using	  the	  phosphorcholine,	  but	  the	  signal	  is	  
much	  higher	  when	  using	  the	  dendrimer.	  
	  
The	  setup	  with	  the	  dendrimer,	  polyclonal	  rabbit	  anti-­‐human	  CRP	  IgG	  and	  the	  acceptor	  beads	  
conjugated	   with	   anti-­‐rabbit	   IgG,	   used	   in	   the	   heterogeneous	   LOCI,	   was	   tested	   in	   a	  
homogeneous	  LOCI	  assay	  as	  well,	  see	  Figure	  10,	  and	  resulted	  in	  signals	  that	  was	  not	  higher	  
100	  
1000	  
10000	  
100000	  
1000000	  
0,1	  
1	  
10	  
100	  
1000	  
Signal	  
CRP	  ng/ml	  
Wash	  LOCI	  with	  dendrimer	  and	  phosphorcholine	  	  
Phosphocholine	  
Dendrimer	  
Figure	   12:	   The	   comparison	   of	   the	   wash-­‐LOCI	  using	   biotinylated	  dendrimer	  as	  scaffold	  for	   phosphocholine	  or	  biotinylated  
phosphocholine.	  
==PAGE:32==
	  
32	  
than	   the	   background	   and	   did	   not	   differ	   from	   signals	   showed	   in	   Figure	   7.	   That	   was	   also	  
expected	  since	  many	  of	  the	  anti-­‐rabbit	  IgG	  on	  the	  acceptor	  beads	  would	  bind	  polyclonal	  that	  
does	  not	  bind	  CRP,	  due	  to	  lack	  of	  specificity.	  To	  confirm	  that	  this	  is	  the	  reason	  why	  this	  assay	  
gave	   a	   weak	   dose	   response,	   an	   affinity	   purification	   of	   the	   polyclonal	   antibody	   could	   be	  
conducted	  and	  used	  in	  the	  assay.	  	  	  
	  
The	   result	   of	   the	   above-­‐mentioned	   experimental	   work	   was	   two	   functional	   assays	   to	   be	  
elaborated	   further.	   The	   LOCI	   assay	   using	   two	   monoclonal	   anti-­‐CRP	   IgG,	   which	   will	   be	  
elaborated	  in	  section	  6.2.,	  and	  the	  Wash-­‐LOCI	  using	  the	  dendrimer	  and	  the	  polyclonal	  anti-­‐
CRP	  IgG,	  which	  will	  be	  elaborated	  in	  section	  6.3.	  
6.2.	  LOCI	  assay	  with	  two	  monoclonal	  anti-­‐CRP	  IgG.	  
	  
The	  LOCI	  assay	  was	  based	  on	  two	  antibodies	  that	  recognise	  the	  analyte.	  As	  mentioned	  above,	  
the	   combination	   with	   Acris	   antibody	   conjugated	   to	   acceptor	   beads	   and	   R&D	   antibody	  
biotinylated	  was	  the	  only	  combination	  giving	  a	  dose	  response	  in	  the	  LOCI	  assay	  and	  will	  be	  
explored	  further	  here.	  The	  calibration	  curve	  was	  made	  from	  a	  reference	  standard	  of	  pig	  CRP	  
derived	  from	  whole	  serum	  diluted	  in	  the	  LOCI	  buffer	  during	  the	  optimisation.	  	  
	  
6.2.1.	  Optimisation	  
The	  default	  settings	  were	  as	  followed:	  Concentration	  of	  antibody	  coupled	  acceptor	  beads	  was	  
66.67	   μg/ml,	   concentration	   of	   streptavidin	   coupled	   donor	   beads	   was	   66.67	   μg/ml,	  
concentration	   of	   biotinylated	   antibody	   was	   five	   nM,	   the	   sample	   volume	   was	   one	   μl,	   the	  
incubation	  time	  was	  one	  hour	  and	  the	  CRP	  calibrators	  was	  0.62	  to	  453.1	  ng/ml,	  see	  Figure	  
13A.	  The	  background	  signal	  is	  very	  high	  (1800-­‐1900	  cps),	  the	  upper	  asymptote	  is	  not	  reached	  
and	  sensitivity	  is	  low.	  Sensitivity	  is	  estimated	  as	  the	  CRP	  concentration	  at	  which	  the	  curve	  
reaches	   the	   linear	   part	   of	   the	   slope.	   The	   low	   sensitivity	   means	   that	   the	   concentration	   is	  
relative	  high	  before	  the	  signal	  reaches	  the	  linear	  part	  of	  the	  curve	  and	  at	  the	  same	  time	  is	  
significantly	   higher	   than	   the	   background	   signal	   by	   visual	   inspection.	   To	   reach	   the	   upper	  
asymptote	  the	  highest	  CRP	  concentration	  was	  increased	  to	  1000	  ng/ml	  and	  diluted	  in	  3-­‐fold	  
steps	  (1.37	  to	  1000	  ng/ml).	  The	  incubation	  time	  was	  changed	  from	  one	  hour	  to	  overnight	  (18-­‐
24	   hrs.),	   hoping	   to	   increase	   the	   sensitivity.	   A	   way	   to	   decrease	   the	   background	   signal	   is	   to	  
lower	   the	   concentration	   of	   acceptor	   beads,	   so	   the	   concentration	   is	   changed	   from	   66.67	   to	  
33.34	  μg/ml.	  By	  lowering	  the	  concentration	  of	  the	  acceptor	  beads,	  all	  the	  signals	  are	  lowered	  
including	  the	  background	  signal	  and	  in	  combination	  with	  the	  increased	  incubation	  time	  and	  
higher	  concentration,	  the	  calibration	  curve	  have	  a	  visually	  wider	  dynamic	  range	  and	  a	  higher	  
sensitivity,	  see	  Figure	  13B.	  	  
==PAGE:33==
	  
33	  
	  
However	  the	  two	  lowest	  concentrations	  did	  not	  have	  a	  signal	  that	  was	  significantly	  higher	  
than	  the	  background	  signal	  and	  hence	  the	  calibrators	  are	  prepared	  in	  2-­‐fold	  dilution	  steps	  
instead	   of	   3-­‐fold	   steps	   (15.625	   to	   1000	   ng/ml),	   see	   Figure	   14.	   The	   final	   calibrators	   were	  
diluted	  in	  a	  calibration	  matrix	  (see	  appendix	  1)	  containing	  a	  higher	  protein	  level	  compared	  to	  
the	  LOCI	  buffer,	  for	  long	  term	  storage	  in	  freezer.	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
Figure	   14:	   Optimisation	   of	   calibration	   curve.	   Calibration	  curve	  with	  the  
following	  parameters:	  Concentration	  of	  antibody	  coupled	  acceptor	  beads	  was  
33.34	   μg/ml,	   concentration	   of	   biotinylated	   antibody	   was	   five	   nM,  
concentration	   of	   streptavidin	   coated	   donor	   beads	   was	   66.67	   μg/ml,	   the  
sample	   volume	   was	   one	   μl,	   the	   incubation	   time	   was	   over	   night	   and	   the	  
calibrator	  was	  15.625	  to	  1000	  ng/ml.	  	  	  
Figure	  13:	  Optimisation	  of	  calibration	  curve,	  concentration	  of	  acceptor	  beads	  and	  the	  incubation	  time.	  A:	  Calibration	  
curve	  with	  the	  following	  parameters:	  Concentration	  of	  antibody	  coupled	  acceptor	  beads	  was	  66.67	  μg/ml,	  concentration	  of	  
biotinylated	  antibody	  was	  five	  nM,	  concentration	  of	  streptavidin	  coated	  donor	  beads	  was	  66.67	  μg/ml,	  the	  sample	  volume  
was	   one	   μl,	   the	   incubation	   time	   was	  one	  hour	   and	   the	   calibrator	  was	   0.62	   to	   453.1	   ng/ml.	   B:	   Calibration	  curve	   with	   the	  
following	   parameters:	   Concentration	   of	   antibody	   coupled	   acceptor	   beads	   was	   33.34	   μg/ml,	   concentration	   of	   biotinylated  
antibody	  was	  five	  nM,	  concentration	  of	  streptavidin	  coated	  donor	  beads	  was	  66.67	  μg/ml,	  the	  sample	  volume	  was	  one	  μl,	  the	  
incubation	  time	  was	  over	  night	  and	  the	  calibrator	  was	  1.37	  to	  1000	  ng/ml.	  
==PAGE:34==
	  
34	  
Changing	   sample	   volume	   and	   the	   concentration	   of	   the	   biotinylated	   antibody	   may	   further	  
optimise	  the	  assay.	  The	  signal	  and	  the	  sensitivity	  are	  increased	  along	  with	  increasing	  volume	  
of	  sample	  [37].	  The	  sample	  volume	  was	  tested	  in	  one,	  two	  and	  five	  μl.	  The	  calibration	  curves	  
using	  one	  μl	  sample	  have	  not	  reached	  the	  upper	  asymptote	  and	  the	  lower	  asymptote	  is	  at	  a	  
relatively	   high	   concentration,	   see	   Figure	   15A.	   The	   calibration	   curves	   using	   two	   μl	   sample	  
volume	   have	   reached	   the	   upper	   asymptote	   and	   the	   lower	   asymptote	   is	   at	   a	   lower	  
concentration,	  see	  Figure	  15B.	  The	  calibration	  curves	  using	  five	  μl	  have	  a	  lower	  concentration	  
at	  the	  upper	  asymptote,	  than	  the	  other	  two	  curves,	  see	  Figure	  15C,	  and	  at	  the	  same	  time	  more	  
sensitive	  at	  lower	  concentration.	  The	  calibration	  curve	  using	  two	  μl	  sample	  seems	  to	  have	  the	  
best	  dynamic	  range	  (longest	  linear	  part	  on	  the	  curve)	  and	  the	  sample	  volume	  is	  set	  to	  two	  μl.	  
The	  concentration	  of	  the	  biotinylated	  antibody	  was	  tested	  in	  two,	  five	  and	  ten	  nM.	  The	  signal	  
for	  the	  biotinylated	  antibody	  is	  the	  same	  for	  two	  nM	  and	  five	  nM	  but	  is	  slightly	  decreased	  with	  
ten	  nM.	  The	  concentration	  is	  therefore	  set	  to	  two	  nM.	  	  
The	  assay	  optimisation	  led	  to	  the	  following	  setup:	  Concentration	  of	  antibody	  coupled	  acceptor	  
beads	  was	  33.34	  ug/ml,	  Concentration	  of	  biotinylated	  antibody	  was	  two	  nM,	  concentration	  of	  
streptavidin	   coated	   donor	   beads	   was	   66.67	   μg/ml,	   the	   sample	   volume	   was	   two	   μl,	   the	  
incubation	  time	  was	  over	  night	  (18-­‐24	  hrs)	  and	  the	  calibrators	  were	  15.625	  to	  1000	  ng/ml.	  
To	  see	  the	  impact	  of	  the	  incubation	  time	  the	  two	  different	  incubation	  times	  (one-­‐hour	  and	  
overnight)	   was	   compared,	   see	   Figure	   16,	   both	   with	   the	   same	   assay	   parameters	   as	   stated	  
above.	  The	  curve	  for	  one-­‐hour	  incubation	  has	  a	  longer	  plateau	  before	  reaching	  the	  linear	  part	  
of	  the	  curve	  and	  the	  signal	  is	  10	  times	  higher	  for	  the	  long	  incubation.	  The	  calibration	  curve	  for	  
the	  long	  incubation	  time	  has	  a	  longer	  linear	  part	  and	  does	  only	  just	  reach	  the	  top	  asymptote	  
and	  is	  selected	  as	  the	  best	  incubation	  time	  for	  this	  assay.	  The	  short	  incubation	  time	  could	  have	  
been	   used	   with	   higher	   concentration	   of	   the	   calibrator,	   but	   because	   of	   limitations	   with	   the	  
concentration	  of	  the	  reference	  standard	  used	  and	  the	  fact	  that	  it	  had	  to	  change	  matrix,	  the	  
concentration	  could	  not	  be	  increased.	  Next	  the	  assay	  has	  to	  be	  qualified	  to	  ensure	  that	  the	  
assay	  is	  trustworthy. 	  
Figure	  15:	  Optimisation	  of	  the	  concentration	  of	  the	  biotinylated	  antibodies	  and	  sample	  volume.	  A:	  Calibration	  curve  
using	  one	  μl	  sample	  with	  two,	  five	  and	  ten	  nM	  biotinylated	  antibody.	  B:	  Calibration	  curve	  using	  two	  μl	  sample	  with	  two,	  five	  
and	  ten	  nM	  biotinylated	  antibody.	  C:	  Calibration	  curve	  using	  ten	  μl	  sample	  with	  two,	  five	  and	  ten	  nM	  biotinylated	  antibody.	  
All	  three	  with	  the	  following	  parameter:	  Concentration	  of	  antibody-­‐coupled	  acceptor	  beads	  was	  33,34	  μg/ml,	  incubation	  over	  
night	  and	  the	  calibrator	  was	  1.37	  to	  1000	  ng/ml.	  	     
==PAGE:35==
	  
35	  
	  
6.2.2.	  Qualification	  
The	  qualification	  is	  based	  on	  guidelines	  from	  [48],	  [49].	  The	  calibration	  curve	  was	  fitted	  using	  
a	  five-­‐parameter	  dose	  response	  curve	  with	  weight	  1/Y2	  in	  GraphPad	  Prism6.	  The	  calibration	  
curve	   is	   seen	   in	   Figure	   17.	   The	   concentrations	   of	   the	   samples	   were	   determined	   by	  
interpolating	  the	  concentration	  to	  the	  calibration	  curve.	  
	  
Figure	  17:	  The	  calibration	  curve	  with	  the	  optimized	  set-­‐up	  with	  log(CRP	  
ng/ml)	   and	   AlphaLISA®	   signal	   fitted	   with	   a	   five–parameter	   dose	  
response	  curve	  weight	  1/Y2	  in	  GraphPad	  Prism6.	  
Figure	   16:	   Comparison	   of	   the	   incubation	   time	   for	   the	   optimised	   LOCI	   assay	   (one  
hour	   and	   over	   night.	   Additional	   parameters:	   Concentration	   of	   antibody	   coupled  
acceptor	  beads	  was	  33.34	  ug/ml,	  concentration	  of	  streptavidin	  coated	  donor	  beads	  was  
66.67	  μg/ml,	  concentration	  of	  biotinylated	  antibody	  was	  two	  nM,	  the	  sample	  volume	  was  
two	  μl	  and	  the	  calibrator	  was	  15.625	  to	  1000	  ng/ml.	  
==PAGE:36==
	  
36	  
Three	  serum	  samples	  were	  used	  as	  controls	  in	  the	  qualification.	  The	  samples	  were	  received	  
from	  Trine	  Pagh	  Ludvigsen,	  Novo	  Nordisk	  A/S,	  Måløv.	  The	  concentration	  of	  the	  samples	  was	  
measured	  10	  times.	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
The	  assay	  variation	  was	  determined	  by	  the	  coefficient	  of	  variation	  (CV%)	  (SD/mean	  x	  100%,	  
SD=standard	  deviation)	  of	  the	  interpolated	  concentration	  and	  is	  a	  definition	  of	  how	  alike	  the	  
concentrations	  quantified	  in	  the	  assay	  are.	  This	  indicates	  how	  well	  the	  assay	  can	  reproduce	  
the	   results.	   Inter-­‐assay	   variation	   is	   the	   variation	   between	   plates	   and	   days.	   The	   inter-­‐assay	  
variation	  of	  the	  controls	  is	  based	  on	  10	  determinations	  on	  10	  different	  plates	  on	  8	  different	  
days.	  The	  measured	  control	  concentrations	  all	  had	  an	  inter-­‐assay	  CV<10%,	  see	  Table	  1,	  and	  
thereby	  acceptable	  (<20%).	  The	  mean	  of	  the	  10	  concentrations	  were	  determined	  to	  be	  the	  
definite	  concentration	  of	  the	  three	  controls	  and	  the	  80-­‐120%	  reference	  range	  of	  the	  inter-­‐
assay	  variation	  study	  is	  seen	  in	  Table	  2.	  This	  means	  that	  if	  the	  controls	  are	  quantified	  within	  
that	  range	  the	  assay	  is	  performing	  well.	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
Mean	  (ng/ml)	  
80-­‐120%	  (ng/ml)	  
K1	  
54594	  
43856	  -­‐	  65784	  
K2	  
16886	  
13556	  -­‐	  20335	  
K3	  
9822	  
7798	  -­‐	  11698	  
	  
The	   intra-­‐assay	   variation	   is	   the	   variation	   within	   a	   plate	   and	   was	   determined	   by	   26	  
determinations	   of	   each	   control	   on	   three	   different	   days.	   The	   CV%	   is	   determined	   for	   the	  
interpolated	  concentration.	  The	  result	  can	  be	  seen	  in	   Table	  3.	  The	  highest	  CV%	  value	  of	  the	  
three	   days	   is	   determined	   as	   the	   definitive	   CV%	   intra-­‐assay	   variation	   seen	   in	   the	   result	  
column.	  The	  intra-­‐assay	  variations	  are	  all	  <5%	  and	  acceptable	  (<20%)	  The	  Intra-­‐assay	  CV%	  is	  
not	  dependent	  of	  the	  concentration.	  	  
	  
	  
Concentration	  of	  CRP	  (ng/ml)	  
	  
1.	  run	  
2.	  run	  
3.	  run	  
4.	  run	  
5.	  run	  
6.	  run	  
K1	  
53854	  
49291	  
55242	  
56295	  
46125	  
50381	  
K2	  
15926	  
15444	  
15921	  
14397	  
17946	  
17827	  
K3	  
10807	  
9324	  
10120	  
8190	  
9652	  
9513	  
	  
7.	  run	  
8.	  run	  
9.	  run	  
10.run	  
Mean	  
CV%	  
K1	  
58101	  
62655	  
59400	  
56853	  
54820	  
9.15	  
K2	  
16969	  
19154	  
18394	  
17476	  
16945	  
8.77	  
K3	  
9638	  
10964	  
10191	  
9083	  
9748	  
8.42	  
Table	  1:	  Inter-­‐assay	  variation:	  Ten	  determination	  of	  the	  concentration	  
of	  the	  controls	  (K1,	  K2,	  K3)	  and	  the	  CV%.	  	    
Table	  2:	  Reference	  range	  for	  the	  three	  controls	  (K1,	  K2,	  K3)	  
==PAGE:37==
	  
37	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
Intra-­‐assay	  variation	  (CV%)	  
	  
1.	  run	  
2.	  run	  
3.	  run	  
Result	  
K1	  
2.02	  
4.44	  
3.03	  
4.44	  
K2	  
3.44	  
1.93	  
2.43	  
3.44	  
K3	  
2.29	  
4.44	  
6.27	  
6.27	  
	  
The	   controls	   were	   not	   spiked	   matrix,	   but	   actual	   samples	   as	   mentioned	   above	   and	   the	  
qualification	   of	   the	   assay	   was	   thereby	   based	   on	   controls	   that	   were	   measured	   in	   the	   same	  
assay	  as	  being	  qualified.	  Because	  of	  that,	  the	  spike	  recovery	  cannot	  be	  determined	  as	  well	  as	  
the	  hook	  effect	  of	  the	  concentration	  range.	  The	  K1	  control	  is	  used	  to	  determine	  the	  lower	  limit	  
of	  quantification	  (LLOQ)	  and	  the	  higher	  limit	  of	  quantification	  (HLOQ).	  The	  K1	  was	  used	  to	  
prepare	  samples	  within	  the	  range	  of	  the	  calibration	  curve	  and	  a	  little	  higher	  and	  a	  little	  lower,	  
11	  samples	  in	  total.	  The	  samples	  were	  determined	  eight	  times	  and	  the	  calibration	  curve	  four	  
times	   per	   run	   and	   repeated	   three	   different	   days.	   The	   concentration	   of	   the	   samples	   was	  
determined	   as	   well	   as	   CV%	   and	   recovery%.	   Recovery%	   is	   a	   measure	   of	   how	   close	   the	  
measured	   concentration	   is	   to	   the	   actual	   concentration	   (based	   on	   the	   concentration	   of	   the	  
controles	   from	   Table	   1)	   and	   is	   determined	   as:	   measured	   mean	   of	   concentration/actual	  
concentration	  x	  100%.	  
	  
Table	  4:	  Determination	  of	  LLOQ	  and	  HLOQ:	  K1	  was	  diluted	  in	  a	  range	  from	  above	  and	  below	  the	  calibrator	  (Exp.	  Conc.	  in	  
the	  left	  column).	  Mean	  is	  the	  mean	  of	  the	  measured	  concentration	  of	  the	  dilution	  (eight	  time	  determination).	  The	  CV%	  for	  the	  
eight	   determinations	   is	   calculated	   and	   the	   recovery%	   based	   on	   the	   expected	   concentration	   is	   calculated	   as	   well.	   The	  
experiment	  was	  run	  three	  times	  	  
	  
1.	  run	  
2.	  run	  
3.	  run	  
Exp.	  Conc.	  
(ng/ml)	  
Mean	  
(ng/ml)	  
CV%	  
Recovery%	  
Mean	  
(ng/ml)	  
CV%	  
Recovery%	  
Mean	  
(ng/ml)	  
CV%	  
Recovery%	  
1574	  
2393	  
17.56	  
151.98	  
2803	  
30.96	  
178.02	  
-­‐	  
-­‐	  
-­‐	  
1050	  
1055	  
2.25	  
100.50	  
1166	  
8.02	  
111.13	  
1314	  
16.51	  
125.16	  
840	  
835	  
1.92	  
99.47	  
929	  
3.48	  
110.66	  
887	  
4.74	  
105.68	  
420	  
394	  
1.72	  
93.79	  
462	  
1.39	  
110.20	  
433	  
2.47	  
103.25	  
210	  
192	  
2.17	  
91.64	  
226	  
1.73	  
107.75	  
196	  
2.41	  
93.37	  
105	  
100	  
2.93	  
94.86	  
105	  
2.55	  
100.82	  
97	  
2.30	  
92.48	  
52	  
45	  
2.92	  
85.35	  
49	  
2.77	  
93.64	  
46	  
2.18	  
87.24	  
26	  
22	  
3.34	  
82.62	  
22	  
4.04	  
84.37	  
21	  
2.82	  
81.67	  
13	  
9	  
15.74	  
69.36	  
8	  
15.09	  
61.21	  
8.5	  
7.58	  
64.79	  
	  
It	  was	  possible	  to	  interpolate	  concentrations	  in	  the	  range	  13	  to	  1574	  ng/ml	  (only	  13	  to	  1050	  
ng/ml	   in	   the	   third	   run).	   The	   LLOQ	   and	   HLOQ	   is	   determined	   to	   be	   lowest	   and	   highest	  
concentration,	  respectively,	  with	  a	  CV<20%	  and	  recovery	  of	  80-­‐120%.	  This	  means	  that	  the	  
LLOQ	  for	  the	  three	  runs	  are	  26	  ng/ml.	  The	  HLOQ	  is	  1050	  ng/ml	  for	  the	  first	  and	  second	  run	  
Table	   3:	   Intra-­‐assay	   variation:	   based	   on	   26	   determination	   on	   three	  
different	  days.	  CV%	  for	  all	  three	  days	  is	  stated	  and	  the	  highest	  CV%	  for	  
the	  three	  controls	  (K1,	  K2,	  K3)	  was	  used	  as	  the	  intra-­‐assay	  variation.	  
==PAGE:38==
	  
38	  
and	  840	  ng/ml	  for	  the	  third	  run	  and	  the	  HLOQ	  was	  set	  to	  840	  ng/ml,	  see	  Table	  4.	  Samples	  and	  
controls	  are	  all	  diluted	  50	  and	  200	  times	  giving	  a	  measureable	  range	  from	  1300	  to	  168000	  
ng/ml.	   The	   limit	   of	   detection	   (LOD)	   is	   determined	   by	   measuring	   12	   samples	   of	   the	   0	  
calibrator,	   the	   matrix,	   repeated	   three	   different	   days.	   LOD	   is	   calculated	   as	   the	   signal	  
mean+3xSD	   and	   then	   the	   concentration	   was	   determined	   by	   interpolation.	   The	   LOD	   for	   the	  
first	  run	  was	  5.96	  ng/ml,	  5.98	  ng/ml	  for	  the	  second	  run	  and	  5.3	  for	  the	  third	  run.	  The	  highest	  
value	  is	  5.98	  ng/ml	  and	  set	  as	  the	  LOD.	  The	  LOD,	  LLOQ	  ad	  HLOQ	  of	  the	  assay	  is	  summed	  up	  in	  
Table	  5.	  Figure	  18	  shows	  the	  dynamic	  range	  and	  the	  LLOQ	  is	  interpreted	  from	  the	  figure	  to	  be	  a	  
little	  under	  20	  ng/ml	  and	  the	  HLOQ	  to	  be	  a	  little	  over	  900	  ng/ml.	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
Cross-­‐reactivity	  was	  tested	  with	  a	  recombinant	  Human	  CRP	  and	  the	  assay	  showed	  no	  signal	  
significant	  higher	  than	  the	  background	  meaning	  that	  there	  is	  no	  cross-­‐reactivity	  with	  human	  
CRP.	  
	  
Concentration	  of	  CRP	  (ng/ml)	  
	  
1.	  run	  
2.	  run	  
3.	  run	  
Result	  
LOD	  
5.96	  
5.98	  
5.3	  
5.98	  
LLOQ	  
26	  
26	  
26	  
26	  
HLOQ	  
1050	  
1050	  
840	  
840	  
Table	  5:	  Overview	  of	  LOD,	  LLOQ	  and	  HLOQ:	  The	  LOD	  is	  determined	  by	  
mean	  signal	  +	  3xSD	  and	  the	  LLOQ	  and	  HLOQ	  is	  determined	  by	  the	  lowest	  
and	   highest,	   respectively,	   concentration	   with	   a	   CV<20%	   and	   recovery	  
between	  80-­‐120%.	  
Figure	  18:	  LLOQ	  and	  HLOQ:	  The	  lowest	  level	  of	  quantification	  	  (LLOQ)	  is	  determined	  to	  26	  ng/ml  
both	  by	  calculation	  but	  when	  the	  recovery%	  and	  CV%	  is	  plotted,	  the	  LLOQ	  is	  below	  20	  ng/ml.	  The	  
highest	   level	   of	   quantification	   (HLOQ)	   was	   calculated	   to	   be	   840	   ng/ml	   but	   when	   the	   CV%	   and  
recovery%	  is	  plotted	  the	  HLOQ	  seems	  to	  be	  at	  least	  900	  ng/ml.	  The	  x-­‐axis	  is	  the	  CRP	  concentration.	  
==PAGE:39==
	  
39	  
The	  serum	  control	  K1	  has	  gone	  through	  a	  thaw-­‐freeze	  stability	  study.	  The	  sample	  was	  thawed	  
at	   room	   temperature	   in	   one	   hour	   until	   the	   sample	   had	   room	   temperature	   and	   frozen	  
overnight.	  This	  was	  repeated	  five	  times.	  The	  data	  indicates	  that	  serum	  samples	  are	  stable	  of	  at	  
least	  5	  thaw/freeze	  cycles	  and	  still	  have	  an	  acceptable	  recovery	  of	  CRP,	  see	  Figure	  19.	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
6.2.3.	  Comparison	  between	  ELISA	  and	  LOCI	  assay	  
In	  order	  to	  evaluate	  the	  assay,	  pig	  serum	  already	  quantified	  using	  the	  dendrimer-­‐based	  ELISA	  
assay	  [6]	  was	  quantified	  in	  the	  LOCI	  assay	  as	  well	  for	  comparison.	  The	  serum	  was	  collected	  
from	  a	  study	  of	  minipigs	  on	  a	  high	  fat	  diet	  treated	  with	  human	  insulin	  or	  human	  insulin	  and	  
statin	   (Berit	   Ø.	   Christoffersen,	   study	   nr:	   BQC140601,	   Novo	   Nordisk	   A/S,	   Måløv,	   Denmark).	  
The	   study	   had	   a	   total	   sample	   number	   of	   157,	   but	   due	   to	   missing	   sample,	   the	   total	   sample	  
number	   was	   reduced	   to	   130.	   All	   130	   samples	   were	   quantified	   using	   the	   LOCI	   assay	   and	  
compared	   with	   the	   same	   130	   quantified	   samples	   using	   the	   ELISA	   assay.	   Due	   to	   outliers,	  
extremely	  high	  concentration	  and	  CRP	  level	  to	  low	  to	  quantify	  in	  the	  LOCI	  assay,	  80	  data	  point	  
were	  used	  for	  comparison	  of	  the	  two	  data	  sets	  shown	  in	  Figure	  20.	  There	  is	  a	  good	  correlation	  
between	   the	   two	   assays	   (R=0.87)	   but	   the	   quantification	   executed	   using	   the	   ELISA	   assay	  
showed	   over	   2-­‐fold	   higher	   concentrations	   (slope:	   2.1	   intersection:	   2425)	   compared	   to	  
quantification	   executed	   using	   the	   LOCI	   assay	   indicating	   a	   difference	   in	   the	   calibration.	   The	  
correlation	  without	  removal	  of	  outlier	  is	  seen	  in	  appendix	  2.	  
	  
0	  
20	  
40	  
60	  
80	  
100	  
120	  
0	  
1	  
2	  
3	  
4	  
5	  
6	  
Recovery	  %	  
Thaw/freeze	  cycles	  
	  
Figure	   19:	   Thaw/Freeze	   stability	   of	   K1:	   The	   thaw/freeze	   stability	   is  
evaluated	  on	  recovery. 
==PAGE:40==
	  
40	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
6.3.	  Wash	  LOCI	  assay	  with	  the	  dendrimer	  and	  a	  polyclonal	  anti-­‐CRP	  IgG	  
	  
The	  dendrimer	  was	  tested	  in	  another	  assay,	  which	  also	  used	  the	  LOCI	  technology,	  but	  worked	  
as	  a	  heterogeneous	  assay,	  by	  washing	  between	  additions	  of	  components.	  The	  purpose	  of	  the	  
assay	  is	  to	  use	  all	  the	  same	  reagents	  as	  in	  the	  dendrimer-­‐based	  ELISA	  [6]	  and	  thereby	  go	  back	  
to	   the	   original	   aim	   of	   the	   study,	   but	   still	   use	   the	   LOCI	   technology	   to	   quantify	   the	   CRP,	   see	  
Figure	  10.	  This	  will	  give	  an	  indication	  if	  the	  reagents	  work	  in	  a	  LOCI	  set-­‐up	  and	  especially	  if	  
the	  dendrimers	  works.	  
	  
6.3.1.	  Optimisation	  	  
Different	  buffers	  were	  tested.	  First	  the	  ELISA	  Buffer	  (see	  appendix	  1)	  was	  tested	  which	  gave	  a	  
good	  dose	  response.	  The	  LOCI	  buffer	  (see	  appendix	  1)	  was	  excluded	  because	  EDTA	  abolishes	  
the	   signal	   because	   it	   binds	   the	   calcium	   ions,	   which	   is	   needed	   for	   the	   binding	   of	  
phosphocholine	   and	   CRP.	   A	   modified	   LOCI	   buffer	   was	   prepared	   without	   EDTA	   and	   added	  
Calcium	  (same	  amount	  as	  for	  the	  ELISA	  buffer).	  The	  LOCI	  signal	  was	  much	  lower	  when	  using	  
the	   modified	   LOCI	   Buffer	   than	   for	   ELISA	   buffer	   and	   the	   background	   was	   much	   higher.	   A	  
modified	   ELISA	   buffer	   with	   BSA,	   IgG,	   dextran	   and	   HBR1	   gave	   extremely	   high	   background	  
signals	  indicating	  that	  it	  might	  be	  one	  or	  some	  of	  these	  reagents	  that	  were	  causing	  the	  high	  
background.	  Because	  of	  limited	  time	  and	  priority	  of	  the	  assay	  the	  ELISA	  buffer	  was	  chosen	  
and	  no	  more	  buffer	  optimisation	  was	  performed.	  The	  calibrator	  used	  in	  the	  ELISA	  assay	  [6]	  
was	  also	  used	  in	  this	  heterogeneous	  LOCI	  assay.	  The	  calibration	  curve	  was	  set	  to	  range	  from	  
0.62	  to	  453	  ng/ml	  (3-­‐fold	  dilution	  steps).	  	  	  
	  
0	  
10000	  
20000	  
30000	  
40000	  
50000	  
60000	  
70000	  
80000	  
0	  
5000	   10000	   15000	   20000	   25000	   30000	   35000	  
ELISA	  (conc.	  ng/ml)	  
LOCI	  (conc.	  ng/ml)	  
Figure	   20:	   Comparison	   of	   serum	   CRP	   concentration	   determined	   by	   LOCI	   and  
ELISA	  assay.	  R=0.87,	  slope:	  2.1.	  
==PAGE:41==
	  
41	  
To	  optimise	  the	  assay,	  the	  optimal	  concentration	  of	  the	  dendrimers,	  donor	  beads,	  polyclonal	  
antibody	  and	  acceptor	  beads	  conjugated	  with	  anti-­‐rabbit	  IgGs	  were	  determined.	  
	  
Variation	   of	   the	   dendrimer	   concentration	   resulted	   in	   the	   highest	   signal	   at	   100	   ng/ml,	   see	  
Figure	  11.	  The	  concentration	  of	  donor	  beads,	  which	  was	  coated	  to	  the	  plate,	  was	  set	  to	  five	  
μg/ml.	  By	  increasing	  the	  concentration	  to	  ten	  μg/ml	  the	  signal	  did	  not	  increase	  significantly	  
and	  the	  concentration	  was	  set	  to	  five	  μg/ml.	  
	  
Then	  the	  concentration	  of	  acceptor	  beads	  and	  the	  polyclonal	  antibody	  was	  determined.	  The	  
polyclonal	  antibody	  was	  diluted	  500,	  1000,	  and	  2000	  times.	  This	  was	  tested	  in	  combination	  
with	  two	  different	  concentrations	  of	  acceptor	  beads,	  100	  μg/ml	  and	  50	  μg/ml.	  The	  calibration	  
curves	  for	  the	  six	  different	  combinations	  are	  seen	  in	  Figure	  21.	  Diluting	  the	  polyclonal	  antibody	  
2000	  times	  does	  not	  decrease	  the	  signal	  compared	  to	  diluting	  it	  1000	  and	  500	  times.	  Diluting	  
the	  acceptor	  beads	  does	  have	  an	  effect	  on	  the	  signal,	  however,	  this	  is	  also	  the	  last	  reagent	  
added	   and	   the	   plate	   is	   not	   washed	   afterwards.	   A	   concentration	   of	   50	   μg/ml	   significantly	  
decreases	  the	  signal	  compared	  to	  a	  concentration	  of	  100	  μg/ml.	  Based	  on	  Figure	  21	  the	  optimal	  
dilutions	   of	   the	   polyclonal	   antibody	   is	   determined	   to	   be	   2000	   times	   for	   the	   polyclonal	  
antibody	  combined	  with	  a	  concentration	  of	  100	  μg/ml	  of	  acceptorbeads.	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
Figure	  21:	  Optimisation	  of	  wash-­‐LOCI:	  Parameter:	  Dendrimer	  concentration	  100	  ng/ml,	  donor	  beads	  1000x	  
dilution.	  Blue:	  Acceptor	  beads	  of	  100	  μg/ml	  and	  500x	  dilution	  of	  polyclonal	  antibody.	  Red:	  Acceptor	  beads	  at	  
100	  μg/ml	  and	  1000x	  dilution	  of	  polyclonal	  antibody.	  Green:	  Acceptor	  beads	  at	  100	  μg/ml	  and	  2000x	  dilution	  
of	  polyclonal	  antibody.	  Purple:	  Acceptor	  beads	  of	  50	  μg/ml	  and	  500x	  dilution	  of	  polyclonal	  antibody.	  Turkish:	  
Acceptor	  beads	  of	  50	  μg/ml	  and	  1000x	  dilution	  of	  polyclonal	  antibody.	  Orange:	  Acceptor	  beads	  of	  50	  μg/ml	  
and	  2000x	  dilution	  of	  polyclonal	  antibody.	  
0	  
100000	  
200000	  
300000	  
400000	  
500000	  
600000	  
1	  
10	  
100	  
1000	  
Signal	  
CRP	  ng/ml	  
500x	  
1000x	  
2000x	  
500x	  
1000x	  
2000x	  
100	  μg/ml	  
50	  μg/ml	  
==PAGE:42==
	  
42	  
6.3.2.	  Qualification	  (brief)	  	  
Because	  of	  limited	  time	  a	  full	  qualification	  of	  the	  assay	  was	  not	  possible	  but	  an	  estimate	  of	  the	  
LOD	  and	  LLOQ	  as	  well	  as	  recovery	  was	  carried	  out.	  LLOQ	  was	  estimated	  by	  5xSD	  +	  mean	  of	  
the	  0	  calibrator	  and	  LOD	  was	  determined	  as	  the	  previously	  qualification	  (3xSD+mean	  of	  0	  
calibrator).	  The	  LOD	  and	  LLOQ	  were	  0.06	  ng/ml	  and	  0.1	  ng/ml	  (N=8),	  respectively.	  Dilution	  
recovery	  was	  achieved	  at	  the	  linear	  part	  of	  the	  calibration	  curve.	  	  	  
	  
6.3.3.	  Comparison	  between	  the	  ELISA,	  LOCI	  and	  Wash-­‐LOCI	  assay	  
To	   evaluate	   the	   Wash-­‐LOCI,	   samples	   from	   Co-­‐3	   from	   BQC140601	   were	   quantified	   on	   the	  
Wash-­‐LOCI	  and	  25	  samples	  (those	  that	  could	  be	  measured	  in	  both	  the	  LOCI	  and	  the	  ELISA	  and	  
not	  considered	  outliers	  in	  either	  of	  the	  assays	  or	  extremely	  high	  quantification	  that	  change	  
the	  slope	  and	  regression	  coefficient	  significantly)	  were	  compared	  to	  the	  other	  two	  assays.	  The	  
comparisons	  without	  removal	  of	  outliers	  are	  seen	  in	  appendix	  1.	  When	  comparing	  the	  data	  
sets	  from	  the	  two	  LOCI	  assays	  the	  correlation	  is	  excellent	  (R=0.94).	  The	  slope	  of	  regression	  
line	  was	  3.06	  indicating	  a	  difference	  in	  calibration	  between	  the	  LOCI	  and	  the	  Wash-­‐LOCI,	  see	  
Figure	   22A.	   The	   similarity	   between	   the	   ELISA	   and	   Wash-­‐LOCI	   was	   excellent	   with	   a	   slope	   of	  
regression	  of	  1.04	  and	  the	  correlation	  was	  good	  (R=0.82)	  but	  lower	  than	  for	  the	  two	  LOCI	  
assays,	   see	   Figure	   22B.	   Finally	   the	   comparison	   of	   ELISA	   and	   LOCI	   is	   also	   carried	   out	   for	   the	  
overview	  of	  the	  three	  assays	  all	  together.	  ELISA	  and	  LOCI	  had	  a	  good	  correlation	  (R=0.84)	  and	  
the	  calibration,	  as	  also	  stated	  earlier,	  was	  over	  2-­‐fold	  higher	  for	  the	  ELISA	  than	  for	  the	  LOCI,	  
see	  Figure	  22C.	  	  
	  
0	  
10000	  
20000	  
30000	  
40000	  
50000	  
60000	  
0	  
5000	  
10000	  
15000	  
20000	  
Wash-­‐LOCI	  (ng/ml)	  
LOCI	  (ng/ml)	  	  
A	  
0	  
10000	  
20000	  
30000	  
40000	  
50000	  
60000	  
0	  
10000	  
20000	  
30000	  
40000	  
Wash-­‐LOCI	  (ng/ml)	  
ELISA	  (ng/ml)	  
0	  
10000	  
20000	  
30000	  
40000	  
0	  
3000	   6000	   9000	  12000	  15000	  18000	  
ELISA	  (ng/ml)	  
LOCI	  (ng/ml)	  
Figure	   22:	   Three	   plots	   showing	   the	   correlation	   and	  
similarity	  of	  ELISA,	  Wash-­‐LOCI	  and	  LOCI.	  	  
A	   shows	   the	   comparison	   of	   serum	   CRP	   concentration	  
determined	   by	   LOCI	   and	   Wash-­‐LOCI	   assay.	   R=0.94,	   slope:	  
3.06	  
B	   shows	   the	   comparison	   of	   serum	   CRP	   concentration	  
determined	   by	   ELISA	   and	  Wash-­‐LOCI	   assay.	   R=0.82,	   slope:	  
1.04	  
C	   shows	   the	   comparison	   of	   serum	   CRP	   concentration	  
determined	  by	  LOCI	  and	  ELISA	  assay.	  R=0.84,	  slope:	  2.2	  
B 
C 
==PAGE:43==
	  
43	  
6.4.	  CRP	  quantification	  in	  minipigs	  
	  
The	  LOCI	  assay	  was	  tested	  by	  performing	  baseline	  evaluation	  of	  CRP	  levels	  for	  a	  study	  (study	  
no:	  TRPL141002,	  Novo	  Nordisk	  A/S,	  måløv).	  The	  aim	  of	  this	  study	  was	  to	  evaluate	  the	  effect	  
on	  atherosclerosis	  with	  high	  fat	  diet	  and	  induced	  diabetes	  among	  other	  things	  in	  castrated	  
Göttingen	  Minipigs.	  Pigs	  have	  a	  cardiovascular	  system	  that	  is	  comparable	  to	  humans	  and	  is	  
useful	  as	  a	  model	  for	  human	  physiology	  and	  pathophysiology	  [50]	  and	  the	  pig	  is	  therefore	  a	  
suitable	  animal	  model	  of	  atherosclerosis.	  
In	  this	  baseline	  evaluation	  51	  pig	  samples	  were	  determined	  in	  two	  dilutions	  (50x	  and	  200x).	  
The	   pigs	   were	   divided	   in	   three	   groups:	   HFD	   (High-­‐fat/high-­‐cholesterol),	   HFD	   induced	  
diabetes	  (by	  streptozotocin)	  and	  CD	  (Control	  diet).	  Concentrations	  below	  5200	  ng/ml	  were	  
only	   measured	   in	   50	   times	   dilution	   and	   concentrations	   above	   42000	   ng/ml	   were	   only	  
measured	  in	  200	  times	  dilution.	  Concentrations	  between	  5200	  and	  42000	  were	  measured	  at	  
both	   dilutions.	   The	   CRP	   level	   for	   the	   three	   groups	   is	   seen	   in	   Figure	   23.	   Two	   outliers	   were	  
removed	  from	  the	  figure	  due	  to	  extreme	  levels,	  one	  from	  the	  control	  group	  and	  one	  from	  the	  
HFD,	  see	  appendix	  2	  for	  distribution	  without	  removal	  of	  outliers.	  	  
The	  level	  of	  CRP	  in	  the	  control	  group	  is	  low.	  Pigs	  fed	  with	  HFD	  diet	  with	  or	  without	  induced	  
diabetes	  had	  a	  much	  higher	  CRP	  level	  than	  the	  control	  group.	  	  The	  levels	  of	  CRP	  in	  the	  three	  
groups	  are	  discussed	  in	  the	  discussion.	  
	  
	  
	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
C D
H F D
D ia b e tic
0
1 0 0 0 0
2 0 0 0 0
3 0 0 0 0
n g /m l
Figure	  23:	  CRP	  levels	  (ng/ml)	  for	  minipigs	  divided	  into	  three	  
groups.	  CD:	  control	  diet,	  HFD:	  High	  fat/high	  cholesterol	  diet,	  and	  
Diabetic:	  HFD	  and	  induced	  diabetes	  	  	  
==PAGE:44==
	  
44	  
7.	  Discussion	  
	  
The	   aim	   of	   this	   project	   was	   to	   establish	   a	   LOCI	   assay	   using	   dendrimers	   coated	   with	  
phosphocholine	  making	  an	  CRP	  assay	  that	  is	  quick,	  sensitive,	  have	  a	  broad	  dynamic	  range	  and	  
use	   small	   sample	   volumes.	   The	   assay	   should	   be	   used	   for	   baseline	   measurement	   of	  
inflammation	  in	  pigs	  within	  studies	  carried	  out	  at	  the	  Novo	  Nordisk	  A/S,	  Måløv.	  Because	  it	  
was	  already	  proved	  that	  the	  dendrimer	  increased	  the	  sensitivity	  of	  an	  ELISA	  assay	  [6],	  the	  
LOCI	  assay	  should	  be	  able	  to	  adapt	  that	  system.	  Compared	  to	  ELISA,	  the	  LOCI	  assay	  is	  faster,	  
normally	  have	  a	  broader	  dynamic	  range	  and	  use	  smaller	  sample	  volumes	  making	  it	  a	  more	  
attractive	  assay	  format	  especially	  for	  high	  throughput	  [38].	  	  A	  homogeneous	  LOCI	  assay	  using	  
dendrimers	  was	  not	  successfulle	  developed	  in	  this	  study	  as	  discussed	  in	  the	  result	  section.	  
Instead	  the	  study	  led	  to	  two	  assays,	  a	  LOCI	  assay	  with	  two	  monoclonal	  anti-­‐CRP	  IgG	  and	  a	  
heterogeneous	  LOCI	  assay,	  called	  Wash-­‐LOCI,	  using	  the	  polyclonal	  anti-­‐human	  CRP	  antibody	  
and	  the	  dendrimers.	  
	  
The	   LOCI	   assay	   showed	   a	   broad	   dynamic	   range	   and	   good	   sensitivity	   with	   small	   sample	  
volume	  used,	  but	  unfortunately	  the	  dendrimer	  could	  not	  be	  implemented	  in	  this	  homogenous	  
LOCI	   assay.	   On	   the	   contrary,	   the	   Wash-­‐LOCI	   assay	   could	   implement	   the	   dendrimer,	   which	  
resulted	  in	  a	  much	  higher	  sensitivity	  but	  the	  workload	  was	  much	  higher	  due	  to	  of	  the	  many	  
wash	  and	  incubation	  steps.	  To	  distinguish	  if	  the	  assays	  have	  potential	  they	  are	  compared	  to	  
previously	  
published	  
immunoassay	  
such	  
as	  
the	  
dendrimer	  
based	  
ELISA	  
[6],	  
immunoturbidimetric	   [21],	   time-­‐resolved	   fluoroimmunoassay	   [51]	   and	   time-­‐resolved	  
immunofluorometric	  [52].	  The	  LOD	  of	  the	  LOCI	  assay	  was	  determined	  to	  be	  5.98	  ng/ml.	  When	  
compared	  to	  the	  two	  immunoturbidimetric	  assays	  from	  [21]	  the	  LOD	  are	  80	  and	  210	  ng/ml	  
and	   thereby	   higher	   than	   in	   the	   LOCI	   assay.	   The	   LOD	   for	   ELISA,	   time-­‐resolved	  
fluoroimmunoassay	   and	   time-­‐resolved	   immunofluorometric	   are	   0.335	   ng/ml,	   0.099	   ng/ml	  
and	   2.8	   ng/ml,	   respectively,	   and	   thereby	   lower	   than	   the	   LOD	   of	   the	   LOCI	   assay.	   The	   LOCI	  
assay	  did	  thereby	  show	  lower	  sensitivity	  than	  three	  out	  of	  four	  previous	  published	  assays.	  
The	   Wash-­‐LOCI	   assay	   showed	   a	   better	   sensitivity	   with	   a	   LOD	   of	   0.06	   ng/ml	   and	   thereby	  
higher	   sensitivity	   than	   all	   the	   other	   mentioned	   immunoassays.	   The	   inter-­‐	   and	   intraassay	  
variation	   of	   the	   LOCI	   assay	   were	   <10%	   and	   similar	   to	   those	   reported	   in	   the	   other	  
immunoassays.	   The	   inter-­‐	   and	   intraassay	   variation	   was	   not	   determined	   for	   the	   Wash-­‐LOCI	  
assay.	  
The	  LOCI	  and	  Wash-­‐LOCI	  assay	  was	  further	  compared	  to	  the	  dendrimer-­‐based	  ELISA	  assay	  
[6]	  regarding	  correlation	  and	  similarity.	  	  
There	  was	  a	  good	  correlation	  between	  ELISA	  and	  LOCI	  or	  Wash-­‐LOCI	  with	  R=0.87	  (N=80)	  and	  
R=0.82	  (N=25),	  respectively.	  The	  correlation	  was	  even	  better	  between	  LOCI	  and	  Wash-­‐LOCI	  
with	   R=0.94	   (N=25).	   My	   own	   quantifications	   (LOCI	   and	   Wash-­‐LOCI)	   were	   thereby	   better	  
correlated	  than	  ELISA	  is	  with	  both	  LOCI	  and	  Wash-­‐LOCI.	  	  
==PAGE:45==
	  
45	  
The	  slope	  of	  regression	  for	  ELISA	  compared	  to	  the	  LOCI	  assay	  was	  2.1.	  This	  means	  that	  the	  
concentration	   is	   in	   average	   over	   two	   times	   higher	   when	   quantified	   on	   the	   ELISA	   assay	  
compared	  to	  LOCI	  assay.	  Many	  components	  in	  the	  two	  assays	  differ	  from	  each	  other	  e.g.	  ELISA	  
use	  50	  times	  more	  analyte.	  By	  adding	  more	  analyte,	  you	  typically	  also	  get	  a	  higher	  sensitivity.	  
The	  difference	  in	  concentration	  measured	  by	  the	  two	  assays	  is	  most	  of	  all	  a	  clear	  indication	  of	  
the	  difference	  in	  calibration.	  The	  ELISA	  assay	  uses	  a	  serum	  pool	  that	  is	  calibrated	  against	  a	  
commercial	   human	   CRP	   standard.	   The	   LOCI	   assay	   use	   a	   commercial	   Pig	   CRP	   reference	  
standard	   derived	   from	   whole	   serum	   whose	   concentration	   is	   quantified	   based	   on	   another	  
commercial	   standard.	   It	   is	   therefore	   difficult	   to	   determine	   which	   calibrator	   is	   the	   most	  
correct.	  A	  better	  comparison	  could	  have	  been	  made	  if	  the	  same	  calibrator	  was	  used	  in	  the	  two	  
assays.	  The	  sandwich	  in	  the	  ELISA	  assay	  consist	  of	  the	  phosphocholine	  coated	  dendrimer	  and	  
a	   polyclonal	   antibody	   and	   in	   the	   LOCI	   assay	   it	   consist	   of	   two	   monoclonal	   antibodies.	   A	  
polyclonal	  antibody	  are	  a	  mix	  of	  different	  antibodies	  with	  difference	  in	  specificity	  and	  affinity	  
and	  binds	  different	  epitopes	  and	  have	  a	  lower	  purity	  level	  compared	  to	  monoclonal	  antibody	  
[39].	  The	  binding	  specificity	  and	  affinity	  is	  therefore	  different	  between	  the	  two	  assays	  and	  can	  
contribute	  to	  the	  difference	  in	  quantification.	  The	  slope	  of	  regression	  for	  ELISA	  compared	  to	  
the	  Wash-­‐LOCI	  was	  1.04,	  and	  did	  thereby	  show	  very	  good	  similarity.	  This	  was	  also	  anticipated	  
because	  all	  the	  same	  reagent	  and	  the	  same	  calibrator	  were	  used	  in	  the	  two	  assays.	  The	  slope	  
of	  regression	  for	  LOCI	  compared	  to	  the	  Wash-­‐LOCI	  was	  3,06.	  This	  means	  that	  concentration	  is	  
in	  average	  three	  times	  higher	  when	  quantified	  on	  the	  Wash-­‐LOCI	  compared	  to	  the	  LOCI	  assay.	  
As	  stated	  above	  the	  Wash-­‐LOCI	  assay	  used	  all	  the	  same	  reagent	  as	  the	  ELISA	  resulting	  in	  a	  
difference	  in	  calibration,	   binding	   affinity	   and	   specificity	   in	   the	   sandwich	   complex	   in	   Wash-­‐
LOCI	  compared	  to	  LOCI.	  	  
	  
The	  results	  do	  not	  allow	  any	  conclusion	  as	  to	  which	  of	  these	  assays	  are	  the	  most	  accurate.	  
Both	  calibrators	  were	  quantified	  based	  on	  another	  standard	  and	  there	  is	  a	  need	  for	  an	  official	  
Pig	  CRP	  calibrator	  or	  a	  spiked	  matrix.	  
When	   comparing	   the	   ELISA	   and	   the	   newly	   developed	   LOCI	   assay	   the	   sensitivity	   was	   not	  
improved.	   The	   advantages	   of	   the	   LOCI	   assay	   compared	   to	   the	   ELISA	   assay	   are	   clearly	   the	  
reduction	  of	  workload	  and	  no	  wash	  steps	  increasing	  the	  ability	  to	  perform	  high	  throughput.	  
Other	   important	   improvement	   is	   increased	   dynamic	   range	   and	   the	   smaller	   sample	   volume	  
needed.	   The	   lower	   sensitivity	   of	   the	   LOCI	   assay	   compared	   to	   the	   ELISA	   assay	   is	   not	   that	  
important	  because	  the	  CRP	  concentration	  in	  pig	  samples	  is	  not	  that	  low	  and	  the	  sample	  is	  
diluted	  less	  than	  in	  the	  ELISA	  assay,	  and	  the	  LOCI	  assay	  would	  still	  be	  able	  to	  quantify	  small	  
increases	  in	  the	  CRP	  level.	  
Previous	   published	   comparisons	   have	   been	   made	   between	   ELISA	   and	   LOCI	   e.g.	   for	   the	  
quantification	   of	   insulin	   [30],	   [53].	   	   They	   report	   that	   the	   LOCI	   assay	   increase	   the	   dynamic	  
range	  and	  have	  a	  higher	  sensitivity.	  They	  also	  report	  that	  the	  workload	  is	  greatly	  improved	  
especially	  because	  of	  the	  removal	  of	  all	  wash	  steps,	  which	  also	  makes	  it	  easier	  to	  automate.	  
The	  smaller	  sample	  volume	  was	  also	  considered	  a	  great	  improvement.	  Besides	  the	  sensitivity,	  
==PAGE:46==
	  
46	  
the	   conclusions	   from	   theses	   studies	   fully	   agree	   with	   the	   conclusions	   when	   comparing	   this	  
newly	   developed	   LOCI	   assay	   with	   ELISA	   for	   the	   quantification	   of	   CRP.	   The	   sensitivity	   was	  
greatly	  improved	  in	  the	  Wash-­‐LOCI,	  though,	  but	  the	  workload	  was	  increased	  because	  of	  the	  
wash	  steps	  as	  well	  as	  the	  lack	  of	  ability	  to	  perform	  high	  throughput,	  making	  it	  a	  less	  attractive	  
assay.	  
Finally	   the	   LOCI	   assay	   was	   used	   for	   baseline	   measurements,	   see	   Figure	   23,	   to	   get	   an	  
impression	  of	  how	  the	  assay	  performed	  when	  quantifying	  samples	  with	  unknown	  CRP	  values.	  
This	   study	   was	   included	   to	   illustrate	   the	   application	   of	   the	   LOCI	   assay.	   Within	   a	   minipig	  
models	  for	  atherosclerosis,	  quantification	  showed	  that	  pigs	  fed	  with	  HFD	  with	  and	  without	  
induced	  diabetes	  had	  significantly	  higher	  CRP	  value	  compared	  to	  pigs	  in	  the	  control	  group.	  
The	  pigs	  with	  induced	  diabetes	  showed	  the	  highest	  mean	  values	  of	  CRP.	  As	  mentioned	  in	  the	  
introduction	   a	   small	   increase	   in	   CRP	   is	   linked	   to	   developing	   cardiovascular	   diseases	   e.g.	  
atherosclerosis	  [54].	  It	  is	  also	  known	  that	  diets	  with	  high	  level	  of	  saturated	  fat	  and	  cholesterol	  
increase	  the	  risk	  of	  atherosclerosis	  [55],	  [56]	  and	  CRP	  levels	  as	  well	  [57].	  The	  increase	  in	  CRP	  
levels	   for	   minipigs	   models	   for	   atherosclerosis	   fed	   with	   high	   fat/cholesterol	   is	   therefore	  
expected.	  Diabetes	  is	  known	  to	  exacerbate	  cardiovascular	  event,	  which	  is	  actually	  the	  leading	  
cause	  of	  death	  in	  diabetic	  patients	  [58],	  [59],	  and	  the	  further	  increased	  CRP	  level	  was	  also	  
anticipated	  here.	  
	  
	  
==PAGE:47==
	  
47	  
8.	  Conclusion	  	  
	  
The	  aim	  of	  developing	  a	  ligand	  based	  LOCI	  assay	  able	  to	  quantify	  pig	  CRP	  in	  samples	  using	  
dendrimers,	   as	   scaffold	   for	   the	   known	   ligand	   for	   CRP,	   namely	   phosphocholine,	   was	   not	  
achieved.	  Theoretically	  an	  assay	  using	  the	  dendrimer	  coated	  with	  phosphocholine	  and	  biotin	  
combined	  with	  a	  biotinylated	  monoclonal	  antibody	  should	  work.	  The	  reason	  for	  the	  assay	  not	  
working	   was	   not	   fully	   solved	   in	   this	   thesis	   but	   a	   possible	   explanation	   could	   be	   that	   the	  
phosphocholine	   and	   the	   monoclonal	   antibody	   is	   binding	   the	   same	   epitope	   and	   therefore	  
interfere	   with	   each	   other,	   but	   that	   cannot	   be	   finally	   concluded.	   However,	   the	   two	   assays	  
developed	  in	  this	  thesis	  did	  show	  great	  potential.	  It	  can	  be	  concluded	  that	  the	  LOCI	  assay	  uses	  
smaller	  sample	  volumes,	  has	  a	  broader	  dynamic	  range	  and	  decrease	  the	  workload	  compared	  
to	  the	  dendrimer-­‐based	  ELISA	  assay	  described	  in	  the	  thesis.	  The	  sensitivity	  was	  not	  as	  high	  as	  
for	  the	  ELISA	  assay,	  but	  because	  of	  the	  range	  of	  CRP	  in	  pig	  samples,	  a	  higher	  sensitivity	  is	  not	  
absolutely	   necessary.	   When	   including	   wash	   steps	   to	   a	   LOCI	   assay	   (called	   Wash-­‐LOCI)	   the	  
dendrimer	  could	  be	  used	  together	  with	  the	  polyclonal	  anti-­‐CRP	  IgG,	  also	  used	  in	  the	  ELISA	  
assay.	  This	  resulted	  in	  an	  even	  higher	  sensitivity	  than	  for	  the	  ELISA	  assay.	  The	  Wash-­‐LOCI	  has	  
some	  of	  the	  same	  drawbacks	  as	  the	  ELISA	  assay	  concerning	  the	  workload	  and	  the	  many	  time-­‐
consuming	  incubation	  and	  wash	  steps	  and	  a	  homogeneous	  assay	  is	  to	  be	  preferred.	  The	  LOCI	  
assay	   showed	   low	   inter-­‐	   and	   intraassay	   variation	   indicating	   good	   reproducibility.	   The	  
correlations	  between	  the	  three	  assays	  were	  good,	  but	  the	  similarities	  showed	  a	  difference	  in	  
calibration	  due	  to	  the	  difference	  in	  calibrators	  used.	  This	  is	  not	  that	  problematic	  as	  long	  as	  the	  
correlation	  with	  previously	  published	  assays	  and	  the	  reproducibility	  of	  the	  results	  is	  good.	  
Overall,	  the	  LOCI	  assay	  is	  a	  good	  candidate	  for	  quantifying	  pig	  CRP	  in	  serum	  samples	  and	  has	  
proven	  to	  be	  useful	  in	  baseline	  measurements	  at	  Novo	  Nordisk	  A/S,	  Måløv,	  Denmark.	  Further	  
work	  on	  coupling	  the	  phosphocholine	  to	  acceptor	  beads	  and	  combining	  it	  with	  a	  biotinylated	  
antibody	   with	   high	   affinity	   for	   CRP	   could	   be	   really	   interesting	   in	   the	   aim	   of	   developing	   a	  
ligand-­‐based	  LOCI	  assay	  for	  the	  quantification	  of	  pig	  CRP.	  
	  
	  
==PAGE:48==
	  
48	  
References	  
[1]	  
M.	  B.	  Pepys	  and	  G.	  M.	  Hirschfield,	  “C-­‐reactive	  protein:	  a	  critical	  update,”	  J.	  Clin.	  Invest.,	  
vol.	  111,	  no.	  12,	  pp.	  1805–1812,	  2003.	  
[2]	  
A.	  D.	  Pradhan,	  J.	  E.	  Manson,	  N.	  Rifai,	  J.	  E.	  Buring,	  and	  P.	  M.	  Ridker,	  “C-­‐reactive	  protein,	  
interleukin	  6,	  and	  risk	  of	  developing	  type	  2	  diabetes	  mellitus,”	  JAMA,	  vol.	  286,	  no.	  3,	  pp.	  
327–334,	  2001.	  
[3]	  
P.	  M.	  Ridker,	  “Clinical	  Application	  of	  C-­‐Reactive	  Protein	  for	  Cardiovascular	  Disease	  
Detection	  and	  Prevention,”	  Circulation,	  vol.	  107,	  no.	  3,	  pp.	  363–369,	  2003.	  
[4]	  
PerkinElmer,	  “AlphaLISA	  immunoassays:	  the	  no-­‐wash	  alternative	  to	  ELISAs	  for	  
research	  and	  drug	  discovery,”	  Nat.	  Methods,	  vol.	  5,	  pp.	  8–9,	  2008.	  
[5]	  
D.	  Thompson,	  M.	  B.	  Pepys,	  and	  S.	  P.	  Wood,	  “The	  physiological	  structure	  of	  human	  C-­‐
reactive	  protein	  and	  its	  complex	  with	  phosphocholine,”	  Structure,	  vol.	  7,	  no.	  2,	  pp.	  169–
177,	  1999.	  
[6]	  
P.	  M.	  H.	  Heegaard,	  H.	  G.	  Pedersen,	  A.	  L.	  Jensen,	  and	  U.	  Boas,	  “A	  robust	  quantitative	  solid	  
phase	  immunoassay	  for	  the	  acute	  phase	  protein	  C-­‐reactive	  protein	  (CRP)	  based	  on	  
cytidine	  5’-­‐diphosphocholine	  coupled	  dendrimers.,”	  J.	  Immunol.	  Methods,	  vol.	  343,	  no.	  2,	  
pp.	  112–8,	  2009.	  
[7]	  
E.	  F.	  Ullman,	  H.	  Kirakossian,	  A.	  C.	  Switchenko,	  J.	  Ishkanian,	  M.	  Ericson,	  C.	  a.	  Wartchow,	  
M.	  Pirio,	  J.	  Pease,	  B.	  R.	  Irvin,	  S.	  Singh,	  R.	  Singh,	  R.	  Patel,	  A.	  Dafforn,	  D.	  Davalian,	  C.	  Skold,	  
N.	  Kurn,	  and	  D.	  B.	  Wagner,	  “Luminescent	  oxygen	  channeling	  assay	  (LOCI(TM)):	  
Sensitive,	  broadly	  applicable	  homogeneous	  immunoassay	  method,”	  Clin.	  Chem.,	  vol.	  42,	  
no.	  9,	  pp.	  1518–1526,	  1996.	  
[8]	  
W.	  S.	  Tillett,	  “Serological	  reactions	  in	  pneumonia	  with	  a	  non-­‐protein	  somatic	  fraction	  of	  
pneumococcus,”	  J.	  Exp.	  Med.,	  vol.	  52,	  no.	  4,	  pp.	  561	  –	  571,	  1930.	  
[9]	  
T.	  Abernethy,	  “The	  occurrence	  during	  acute	  infections	  of	  a	  protein	  not	  normally	  present	  
in	  the	  blood	  I.	  Distribution	  of	  the	  reactive	  protein	  in	  patients’	  sera	  and	  the	  effect	  of	  
calcium	  on	  the	  flocculation	  reaction	  with	  C	  polysaccharide	  of	  pneumococcus,”	  J.	  Exp.	  
Med.,	  vol.	  73,	  no.	  2,	  pp.	  173	  –	  182,	  1941.	  
[10]	   F.	  Lampreave,	  N.	  González-­‐Ramón,	  S.	  Martínez-­‐Ayensa,	  M.	  a	  Hernández,	  H.	  K.	  Lorenzo,	  a	  
García-­‐Gil,	  and	  a	  Piñeiro,	  “Characterization	  of	  the	  acute	  phase	  serum	  protein	  response	  
in	  pigs.,”	  Electrophoresis,	  vol.	  15,	  no.	  5,	  pp.	  672–676,	  1994.	  
[11]	   H.	  H.	  Chen,	  J.	  H.	  Lin,	  H.	  P.	  Fung,	  L.	  L.	  Ho,	  P.	  C.	  Yang,	  W.	  C.	  Lee,	  Y.	  P.	  Lee,	  and	  R.	  M.	  Chu,	  
“Serum	  acute	  phase	  proteins	  and	  swine	  health	  status,”	  Can.	  J.	  Vet.	  Res.,	  vol.	  67,	  no.	  4,	  pp.	  
283–290,	  2003.	  
==PAGE:49==
	  
49	  
[12]	   M.	  Pomorska-­‐Mól,	  I.	  Markowska-­‐Daniel,	  K.	  Kwit,	  K.	  Stępniewska,	  and	  Z.	  Pejsak,	  “C-­‐
reactive	  protein,	  haptoglobin,	  serum	  amyloid	  A	  and	  pig	  major	  acute	  phase	  protein	  
response	  in	  pigs	  simultaneously	  infected	  with	  H1N1	  swine	  influenza	  virus	  and	  
Pasteurella	  multocida.,”	  BMC	  Vet.	  Res.,	  vol.	  9,	  no.	  14,	  pp.	  1–9,	  2013.	  
[13]	   M.	  Algarra,	  D.	  Gomes,	  and	  J.	  C.	  G.	  Esteves	  da	  Silva,	  “Current	  analytical	  strategies	  for	  C-­‐
reactive	  protein	  quantification	  in	  blood.,”	  Clin.	  Chim.	  Acta.,	  vol.	  415,	  pp.	  1–9,	  2013.	  
[14]	   S.	  K.	  Singh,	  M.	  V.	  Suresh,	  B.	  Voleti,	  and	  A.	  Agrawal,	  “The	  connection	  between	  C-­‐reactive	  
protein	  and	  atherosclerosis,”	  Ann.	  Med.,	  vol.	  40,	  no.	  2,	  pp.	  110–120,	  2008.	  
[15]	   J.	  T.	  Willerson	  and	  P.	  M.	  Ridker,	  “Inflammation	  as	  a	  Cardiovascular	  Risk	  Factor,”	  
Circulation,	  vol.	  109,	  no.	  21	  suppl	  1,	  pp.	  II2–10,	  2004.	  
[16]	   P.	  M.	  Ridker,	  N.	  Rifai,	  L.	  Rose,	  J.	  E.	  Buring,	  and	  N.	  R.	  Cook,	  “Comparison	  of	  C-­‐Reactive	  
Protein	  and	  Low-­‐Density	  Lipoprotein	  Cholesterol	  Levels	  in	  the	  Prediction	  of	  First	  
Cardiovascular	  Events,”	  N.	  Engl.	  J.	  Med.,	  vol.	  347,	  no.	  20,	  pp.	  1557–1565,	  2002.	  
[17]	   N.	  Rifai,	  R.	  P.	  Tracy,	  and	  P.	  M.	  Ridker,	  “Clinical	  Efficacy	  of	  an	  Automated	  High-­‐Sensitivity	  
C-­‐Reactive	  Protein	  Assay,”	  Clin.	  Chem.,	  vol.	  45,	  no.	  12,	  pp.	  2136–2141,	  1999.	  
[18]	   S.	  Paulie,	  H.	  Perlmann,	  and	  P.	  Perlmann,	  “Enzyme-­‐linked	  Immunosorbent	  Assay,”	  eLS,	  
pp.	  1–4,	  2009.	  
[19]	   R&D	  systems,	  “Porcine	  C-­‐Reactive	  Protein/CRP	  DuoSet	  ELISA.”	  [Online].	  Available:	  
https://www.rndsystems.com/products/porcine-­‐c-­‐reactive-­‐protein-­‐crp-­‐duoset-­‐elisa-­‐
15-­‐plate_dy2648.	  [Accessed:	  10-­‐Aug-­‐2015].	  
[20]	   GenWay	  Biotech	  Inc,	  “Pig	  CRP	  (C-­‐Reactive	  Protein)	  ELISA	  Kit.”	  [Online].	  Available:	  
https://www.genwaybio.com/pig-­‐crp-­‐c-­‐reactive-­‐protein.	  [Accessed:	  10-­‐Aug-­‐2015].	  
[21]	   M.	  Kjelgaard-­‐Hansen,	  S.	  Martínez-­‐Subiela,	  H.	  H.	  Petersen,	  A.	  L.	  Jensen,	  and	  J.	  J.	  Ceron,	  
“Evaluation	  and	  comparison	  of	  two	  immunoturbidimetric	  assays	  for	  the	  heterologous	  
determination	  of	  porcine	  serum	  C-­‐reactive	  protein.,”	  Vet.	  J.,	  vol.	  173,	  no.	  3,	  pp.	  571–7,	  
2007.	  
[22]	   P.	  D.	  Eckersall,	  “An	  enzyme-­‐linked	  immunosorbent	  assay	  for	  canine	  C-­‐reactive	  protein.,”	  
Vet.	  Rec.,	  vol.	  124,	  no.	  18,	  pp.	  490	  –	  491,	  1989.	  
[23]	   P.	  D.	  Eckersall,	  “Conjugation	  of	  cytidine-­‐5’-­‐diphosphocholine	  to	  bovine	  serum	  albumin	  
in	  the	  development	  of	  an	  enxyme-­‐linked	  immunosorbent-­‐assay	  for	  canine	  C-­‐reactive	  
protein,”	  Biochem.	  Soc.	  Trans.,	  vol.	  17,	  no.	  2,	  p.	  414,	  1989.	  
[24]	   H.	  J.	  Han,	  R.	  M.	  Kannan,	  S.	  Wang,	  G.	  Mao,	  J.	  P.	  Kusanovic,	  and	  R.	  Romero,	  “Multifunctional	  
dendrimer-­‐templated	  antibody	  presentation	  on	  biosensor	  surfaces	  for	  improved	  
biomarker	  detection,”	  Adv.	  Funct.	  Mater.,	  vol.	  20,	  no.	  3,	  pp.	  409–421,	  2010.	  
==PAGE:50==
	  
50	  
[25]	   A.	  Bosnjakovic,	  M.	  K.	  Mishra,	  H.	  J.	  Han,	  R.	  Romero,	  and	  R.	  M.	  Kannan,	  “A	  dendrimer-­‐
based	  immunosensor	  for	  improved	  capture	  and	  detection	  of	  tumor	  necrosis	  factor-­‐α	  
cytokine,”	  Anal.	  Chim.	  Acta,	  vol.	  720,	  pp.	  118–125,	  2012.	  
[26]	   E.	  Buhleier,	  W.	  Wehner,	  and	  F.	  Vögtle,	  “‘Cascade’-­‐	  and	  ‘Nonskid-­‐Chain-­‐like’	  Syntheses	  of	  
Molecular	  Cavity	  Topologies,”	  Synthesis-­‐stuttgart,	  pp.	  155–158,	  1978.	  
[27]	   E.	  Abbasi,	  S.	  F.	  Aval,	  A.	  Akbarzadeh,	  M.	  Milani,	  H.	  T.	  Nasrabadi,	  S.	  W.	  Joo,	  Y.	  Hanifehpour,	  
K.	  Nejati-­‐Koshki,	  and	  R.	  Pashaei-­‐Asl,	  “Dendrimers:	  synthesis,	  applications,	  and	  
properties.,”	  Nanoscale	  Res.	  Lett.,	  vol.	  9,	  no.	  1,	  pp.	  1–10,	  2014.	  
[28]	   U.	  Boas	  and	  P.	  M.	  H.	  Heegaard,	  “Dendrimers	  in	  drug	  research.,”	  Chem.	  Soc.	  Rev.,	  vol.	  33,	  
no.	  1,	  pp.	  43–63,	  2004.	  
[29]	   B.	  N.	  Vedha	  Hari,	  K.	  Kalaimagal,	  R.	  Porkodi,	  P.	  K.	  Gajula,	  and	  J.	  Y.	  Ajay,	  “Dendrimer:	  
Globular	  nanostructured	  materials	  for	  drug	  delivery,”	  Int.	  J.	  PharmTech	  Res.,	  vol.	  4,	  no.	  1,	  
pp.	  432–451,	  2012.	  
[30]	   F.	  Poulsen	  and	  K.	  B.	  Jensen,	  “A	  luminescent	  oxygen	  channeling	  immunoassay	  for	  the	  
determination	  of	  insulin	  in	  human	  plasma.,”	  J.	  Biomol.	  Screen.,	  vol.	  12,	  pp.	  240–247,	  
2007.	  
[31]	   E.	  F.	  Ullman,	  H.	  Kirakossian,	  S.	  Singh,	  Z.	  P.	  Wu,	  B.	  R.	  Irvin,	  J.	  S.	  Pease,	  a	  C.	  Switchenko,	  J.	  D.	  
Irvine,	  a	  Dafforn,	  and	  C.	  N.	  Skold,	  “Luminescent	  oxygen	  channeling	  immunoassay:	  
measurement	  of	  particle	  binding	  kinetics	  by	  chemiluminescence.,”	  Proc.	  Natl.	  Acad.	  Sci.	  
U.	  S.	  A.,	  vol.	  91,	  no.	  June,	  pp.	  5426–5430,	  1994.	  
[32]	   PerkinElmer,	  “AlphaLISA	  and	  AlphaScreen	  no-­‐wash	  assays	  on	  the	  ASK.”	  [Online].	  
Available:	  
http://www.perkinelmer.com/Resources/TechnicalResources/ApplicationSupportKno
wledgebase/AlphaLISA-­‐AlphaScreen-­‐no-­‐washassays/AlphaLISA-­‐AlphaScreen-­‐no-­‐wash-­‐
assays.xhtml.	  [Accessed:	  10-­‐May-­‐2015].	  
[33]	   M.	  Bielefeld-­‐Sevigny,	  “AlphaLISA	  immunoassay	  platform-­‐	  the	  ‘no-­‐wash’	  high-­‐
throughput	  alternative	  to	  ELISA.,”	  Assay	  Drug	  Dev.	  Technol.,	  vol.	  7,	  pp.	  90–92,	  2009.	  
[34]	   S.	  Rai,	  “High-­‐Throughput	  AlphaLISA	  Analysis,”	  Genet.	  Eng.	  Biotechnol.	  News,	  vol.	  32,	  no.	  
14,	  pp.	  24–25,	  2012.	  
[35]	   D.	  Gabriel,	  M.	  Vernier,	  M.	  J.	  Pfeifer,	  B.	  Dasen,	  L.	  Tenaillon,	  and	  R.	  Bouhelal,	  “High	  
throughput	  screening	  technologies	  for	  direct	  cyclic	  AMP	  measurement.,”	  Assay	  Drug	  
Dev.	  Technol.,	  vol.	  1,	  no.	  2,	  pp.	  291–303,	  2003.	  
[36]	   J.	  Wilson,	  C.	  P.	  Rossi,	  S.	  Carboni,	  C.	  Fremaux,	  D.	  Perrin,	  C.	  Soto,	  M.	  Kosco-­‐Vilbois,	  and	  A.	  
Scheer,	  “A	  homogeneous	  384-­‐well	  high-­‐throughput	  binding	  assay	  for	  a	  TNF	  receptor	  
using	  alphascreen	  technology.,”	  J.	  Biomol.	  Screen.,	  vol.	  8,	  no.	  5,	  pp.	  522–532,	  2003.	  
==PAGE:51==
	  
51	  
[37]	   PerkinElmer	  Inc.,	  “AlphaLISA	  Assay	  Development	  Guide.”	  
[38]	   M.	  Bielefeld-­‐Sevigny,	  “AlphaLISA	  immunoassay	  platform-­‐	  the	  ‘no-­‐wash’	  high-­‐
throughput	  alternative	  to	  ELISA.,”	  Assay	  Drug	  Dev.	  Technol.,	  vol.	  7,	  no.	  1,	  pp.	  90–92,	  
2009.	  
[39]	   N.	  S.	  Lipman,	  L.	  R.	  Jackson,	  L.	  J.	  Trudel,	  and	  F.	  Weis-­‐Garcia,	  “Monoclonal	  Versus	  
Polyclonal	  Antibodies:	  Distinguishing	  Characteristics,	  Applications,	  and	  Information	  
Resources,”	  ILAR	  J.,	  vol.	  46,	  no.	  3,	  pp.	  258–268,	  2005.	  
[40]	   F.	  Poulsen,	  “Wash-­‐LOCI	  -­‐	  A	  Semi-­‐Heterogeneous	  Version	  of	  the	  LOCI	  Technology	  
Allowing	  Removal	  of	  Unbound	  Material	  After	  Each	  Assay	  Step,”	  in	  Trends	  in	  
Immunolabelled	  and	  Related	  Techniques,	  E.	  Abuelzein,	  Ed.	  InTech,	  2012,	  pp.	  259–274.	  
[41]	   F.	  Degorce,	  A.	  Card,	  S.	  Soh,	  E.	  Trinquet,	  G.	  P.	  Knapik,	  and	  B.	  Xie,	  “HTRF:	  A	  technology	  
tailored	  for	  drug	  discovery	  -­‐	  a	  review	  of	  theoretical	  aspects	  and	  recent	  applications.,”	  
Curr.	  Chem.	  Genomics,	  vol.	  3,	  pp.	  22–32,	  2009.	  
[42]	   J.	  F.	  Glickman,	  X.	  Wu,	  R.	  Mercuri,	  C.	  Illy,	  B.	  R.	  Bowen,	  Y.	  He,	  and	  M.	  Sills,	  “A	  comparison	  of	  
ALPHAScreen,	  TR-­‐FRET,	  and	  TRF	  as	  assay	  methods	  for	  FXR	  nuclear	  receptors.,”	  J.	  
Biomol.	  Screen.,	  vol.	  7,	  no.	  1,	  pp.	  3–10,	  2002.	  
[43]	   J.	  H.	  Toney,	  A.	  Ogawa,	  M.	  Blair,	  and	  Y.-­‐W.	  Park,	  “A	  ‘mix	  and	  read’	  assay	  for	  insulin	  using	  
fluorometric	  microvolume	  assay	  technology.,”	  Assay	  Drug	  Dev.	  Technol.,	  vol.	  1,	  no.	  4,	  pp.	  
521–525,	  2003.	  
[44]	   R.	  Golla	  and	  R.	  Seethala,	  “A	  sensitive,	  robust	  high-­‐throughput	  
electrochemiluminescence	  assay	  for	  rat	  insulin.,”	  J.	  Biomol.	  Screen.,	  vol.	  9,	  no.	  1,	  pp.	  62–
70,	  2004.	  
[45]	   P.	  Pste,	  J.	  R.	  Beasley,	  R.	  Swanson,	  J.	  Yang,	  D.	  Dunn,	  P.	  Drug,	  and	  P.	  O.	  Box,	  “Conversion	  of	  
ELISA	  to	  No	  Wash	  Technologies	  AlphaScreen,”	  p.	  8543.	  
[46]	   PerkinElmer,	  “Alpha	  bead	  conjugation.”	  [Online].	  Available:	  
http://www.perkinelmer.com/Resources/TechnicalResources/ApplicationSupportKno
wledgebase/AlphaLISA-­‐AlphaScreen-­‐no-­‐washassays/alpha-­‐bead-­‐conjugation.xhtml.	  
[Accessed:	  10-­‐May-­‐2015].	  
[47]	   S.	  Mori,	  Y.	  Nakata,	  and	  H.	  Endo,	  “Purification	  of	  rabbit	  C-­‐reactive	  protein	  by	  affinity	  
precipitation	  with	  thermosensitive	  polymer.,”	  Protein	  Expr.	  Purif.,	  vol.	  5,	  no.	  2,	  pp.	  153–
6,	  Apr.	  1994.	  
[48]	   Food	  and	  Drug	  Administration,	  “Guidance	  for	  Industry:	  Bioanalytical	  Method	  
Validation,”	  U.S.	  Dep.	  Heal.	  Hum.	  Serv.,	  vol.	  may,	  pp.	  4–10,	  2001.	  
[49]	   Novo	  Nordisk	  A/S,	  “Standard	  Operating	  Procedure	  -­‐	  Validation	  of	  Plasma	  Assay,”	  2011.	  
==PAGE:52==
	  
52	  
[50]	   M.	  P.	  Jokinen,	  T.	  B.	  Clarkson,	  and	  R.	  W.	  Prichard,	  “Animal	  models	  in	  atherosclerosis	  
research,”	  Exp.	  Mol.	  Pathol.,	  vol.	  42,	  no.	  1,	  pp.	  1–28,	  Feb.	  1985.	  
[51]	   A.	  M.	  Gutiérrez,	  J.	  J.	  Cerón,	  B.	  A.	  Marsilla,	  M.	  D.	  Parra,	  and	  S.	  Martinez-­‐Subiela,	  “Dual-­‐
label	  time-­‐resolved	  fluoroimmunoassay	  for	  simultaneous	  quantification	  of	  haptoglobin	  
and	  C-­‐reactive	  protein	  in	  meat	  juice	  from	  pigs,”	  Can.	  J.	  Vet.	  Res.,	  vol.	  76,	  no.	  2,	  pp.	  136–
142,	  Apr.	  2012.	  
[52]	   S.	  Martinez-­‐Subiela,	  P.	  D.	  Eckersall,	  F.	  M.	  Campbell,	  M.	  D.	  Parra,	  P.	  Fuentes,	  and	  J.	  J.	  
Ceron,	  “A	  time-­‐resolved	  immunofluorometric	  assay	  for	  porcine	  C-­‐reactive	  protein	  
quantification	  in	  whole	  blood,”	  Luminescence,	  vol.	  22,	  no.	  3,	  pp.	  171–176,	  2007.	  
[53]	   S.	  B.	  Petersen,	  J.	  M.	  Lovmand,	  L.	  Honoré,	  C.	  B.	  Jeppesen,	  L.	  Pridal,	  and	  O.	  Skyggebjerg,	  
“Comparison	  of	  a	  Luminescent	  Oxygen	  Channeling	  Immunoassay	  and	  an	  ELISA	  for	  
detecting	  Insulin	  Aspart	  in	  human	  serum,”	  J.	  Pharm.	  Biomed.	  Anal.,	  vol.	  51,	  pp.	  217–224,	  
2010.	  
[54]	   E.	  Paffen	  and	  M.	  P.	  M.	  DeMaat,	  “C-­‐reactive	  protein	  in	  atherosclerosis:	  A	  causal	  factor?,”	  
Cardiovasc.	  Res.,	  vol.	  71,	  no.	  1,	  pp.	  30–39,	  2006.	  
[55]	   T.	  W.	  Jensen,	  M.	  J.	  Mazur,	  J.	  E.	  Pettigew,	  V.	  G.	  Perez-­‐Mendoza,	  J.	  Zachary,	  and	  L.	  B.	  
Schook,	  “A	  cloned	  pig	  model	  for	  examining	  atherosclerosis	  induced	  by	  high	  fat,	  high	  
cholesterol	  diets.,”	  Anim.	  Biotechnol.,	  vol.	  21,	  no.	  3,	  pp.	  179–87,	  2010.	  
[56]	   Y.	  V.	  Yuan,	  D.	  D.	  Kitts,	  and	  D.	  V.	  Godin,	  “Interactive	  effects	  of	  increased	  intake	  of	  
saturated	  fat	  and	  cholesterol	  on	  atherosclerosis	  in	  the	  Japanese	  quail	  (Coturnix	  
japonica),”	  Br.	  J.	  Nutr.,	  vol.	  80,	  no.	  01,	  p.	  89,	  2007.	  
[57]	   S.	  J.	  Koopmans,	  R.	  Dekker,	  M.	  T.	  Ackermans,	  H.	  P.	  Sauerwein,	  M.	  J.	  Serlie,	  H.	  M.	  M.	  van	  
Beusekom,	  M.	  van	  den	  Heuvel,	  and	  W.	  J.	  van	  der	  Giessen,	  “Dietary	  saturated	  
fat/cholesterol,	  but	  not	  unsaturated	  fat	  or	  starch,	  induces	  C-­‐reactive	  protein	  associated	  
early	  atherosclerosis	  and	  ectopic	  fat	  deposition	  in	  diabetic	  pigs,”	  Cardiovasc.	  Diabetol.,	  
vol.	  10,	  p.	  64,	  2011.	  
[58]	   A.	  Neil,	  “Diabetes	  and	  cardiovascular	  disease,”	  Diabetes,	  Obes.	  Metab.,	  vol.	  5,	  no.	  1,	  pp.	  
11–18,	  2003.	  
[59]	   S.	  M.	  Grundy,	  I.	  J.	  Benjamin,	  G.	  L.	  Burke,	  A.	  Chait,	  R.	  H.	  Eckel,	  B.	  V	  Howard,	  W.	  Mitch,	  S.	  C.	  
Smith,	  and	  J.	  R.	  Sowers,	  “Diabetes	  and	  Cardiovascular	  Disease:	  A	  Statement	  for	  
Healthcare	  Professionals	  From	  the	  American	  Heart	  Association,”	  Circulation,	  vol.	  100,	  
no.	  10,	  pp.	  1134–1146,	  1999.	  	  
	  
	  
==PAGE:53==
	  
53	  
Appendix	  1	  
	  
The	  concentrations	  in	  the	  tables	  are	  the	  concentration	  of	  the	  chemical	  in	  the	  final	  solution.	  
Chemicals	  used	  in	  the	  buffers	  are	  listed	  in	  the	  bottom	  of	  every	  page.	  
	  
Buffer	  used	  in	  ELISA	  and	  Wash-­‐LOCI	  
	  
Washing/dilution	  buffer	  (ELISA	  buffer)	  
1000	  ml	  
0.05M	  Tris	  
6,057g	  
0.15M	  NaCL	  
8,766g	  
0.1%	  Tween	  20	  
1g	  
0.01M	  CaCl	  
1,1099g	  
Milli	  Q	  water	  ad	  1000ml,	  pH=7.4	  	  
	  
	  
Buffers	  used	  in	  dot	  blotting	  
	  	  
TBS	  washing	  buffer	  +	  0,1%	  Tween	  20	  
1000	  ml	  
0.05M	  Tris	  
6,057g	  
0.15M	  NaCL	  
8,766g	  
0.1%	  Tween	  20	  
1g	  
Milli	  Q	  water	  ad	  1000ml,	  pH=8,6	  
	  
Blocking	  buffer	  (TBS	  washing	  buffer	  +	  2%	  Tween	  20)	  
1000	  ml	  
0.05M	  Tris	  
6,057g	  
0.15M	  NaCL	  
8,766g	  
2%	  Tween	  20	  
20g	  
Milli	  Q	  water	  ad	  1000ml,	  pH=8,6	  
	  
Chemicals	  
TRIS;	  	   	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
Sigma	  7-­‐9	  T-­‐1378	  
NaCl;	  	   	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
Merck	  106404	  
Tween	  20;	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
Merck-­‐schuchard	  822184	  
CaCl;	   	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
Merck	  102382	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
==PAGE:54==
	  
54	  
	  
Buffers	  for	  conjugation	  of	  acceptor	  bead	  
	  
Sodium	  cyanoborohybride	  solution	    
1	  ml	  
Sodium	  cyanoborohybride	  
25	  mg	  
Add	  1	  ml	  milli	  Q	  water	  
	  
0.1M	  Na-­‐phosphatbuffer	    
1000	  ml	  
0.1M	  Na2HPO4	  	  	  (77.99g/mol	  	  (alkaline))	  
16.71g	  
0.1M	  NaH2PO4	  	  	  (137.99g/mol	  	  (acidic))	  
0.84g	  
Add	  1000	  ml	  milli	  Q	  water,	  pH=8.0	  (regulated	  with	  HCl	  and	  NaOH)	  
	  
0.3M	  CMO	  solution	      
1ml	  
Carboxylmethoxylamine	  
Hemihydrochloride(218,59g/mol)	  
0.65	  g	  
Add	  1	  ml	  milli	  Q	  water	  pH=5.0	  (regulated	  with	  NaOH)	  
	  
0.1M	  Tris-­‐buffer	      
1000	  ml	  
0.1M	  Tris	  	  	  (121.1g/mol)	  
12.11g	  
Add	  1000	  ml	  milli	  Q	  water,	  pH=8.0	  (regulated	  with	  HCl)	  
	  
Peckin	  Elmer	  buffer	    
1000	  ml	  
25mM	  Hepes	  	  	  (238.30g/mol)	  
5.96g	  
50mM	  NaCl	  	  	  (58.44g/mol)	  
2.92g	  
0.1%	  Tween	  20	  
1g	  
0.05%	  proclin	  300	  
0.5ml	  
Add	  1000	  ml	  milli	  Q	  water,	  pH=7.4	  (regulated	  with	  NaOH)	  
	  
Chemicals	  
Sodium	  cyanoborohybride;	  	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
Sigma	  156159	  
Na2HPO4;	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
Merck	  106580	  
NaH2PO4;	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
Merck	  106346	  
Tween	  20;	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
Merck-­‐schuchard	  822184	  
Carboxylmethoxylamine	  Hemihydrochloride	  (CMO);	  	  
	  
ACROS	  Organic	  108430025	  
TRIS;	  	   	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
Sigma	  7-­‐9	  T-­‐1378	  
Hepes;	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
Sigma	  H-­‐3375	  
NaCl;	  	   	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
Merck	  106404	  
Proclin	  300;	  	   	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
Aldrich	  48126	  
==PAGE:55==
	  
55	  
Buffers	  used	  in	  the	  LOCI	  assay	  	  
	  
LOCI	  buffer	    
1000	  ml	  
25mM	  Hepes	  	  (238.30g/mol)	  
5.96	  g	  
50mM	  NaCL	  	  (58.44g/mol)	  
2.92	  g	  
0.1%	  Tween	  20	  	  	  
1	  g	  
0.5%	  Bovine	  albumin	  serum	  
5	  g	  
2mg/ml	  Dextran	  T500	  
2	  g	  
0.1%	  Bovine	  IgG	  
1	  g	  
0.01%	  Proclin	  300	  	  
0.1	  ml	  
0.01%	  (50mg/ml	  ~	  5%)	  Gentamycin	  	  3.93M	  
2	  ml	  
10mM	  EDTA	  	  (442.56g/mol)	  
4.42	  g	  
Milli	  Q	  water	  ad	  1000ml,	  pH=7.4	  
	  	  
0.2mg/ml	  HBR1	  
10.36	  ml	  
	  
Calibrator	  matrix	    
1000	  ml	  
10mM	  Hepes	  	  (238.30g/mol)	  
2.38	  g	  
140mM	  NaCL	  	  (58.44g/mol)	  
8.18	  g	  
3.5mM	  KCl	  	  (74.5513g/mol)	  
0.26	  g	  
0.01%	  Tween	  20	  
0.1	  g	  
7%	  Bovine	  albumin	  serum	  
70	  g	  
1%	  Bovine	  IgG	  
10	  g	  
6.4mM	  EDTA	  (442.56g/mol)	  
2.83	  g	  
Milli	  Q	  water	  ad	  1000ml,	  pH=7.2	  
	  	  
	  
Chemicals	  
Hepes;	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
Sigma	  H-­‐3375	  
NaCl;	  	   	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
Merck	  106404	  
Tween	  20;	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
Merck-­‐schuchard	  822184	  
BSA;	   	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
Sigma	  A2153	  	  
Dextran	  T500;	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
Pharmacosmos	  5510	  0500	  
Bovine	  IgG;	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
Sigma	  G5009	  
Proclin	  300;	  	   	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
Aldrich	  48126	  
Gentamycin;	   	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
Biological	  Industries	  03-­‐035-­‐1	  
EDTA	  pH	  7,4;	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
Fluka	  93302	  
KCL;	   	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
Merck	  10	  
==PAGE:56==
	  
56	  
Appendix	  2	  
	  
Figure	  22	  without	  removal	  of	  outliers	  
	  
N=94,	  R=0.82,	  slope	  1.67
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
Figure	  24	  without	  removal	  of	  outliers	  
N=36	  
	  
A	  
R=0.73,	  slope=1.9	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
0	  
20000	  
40000	  
60000	  
80000	  
100000	  
120000	  
140000	  
160000	  
0	  
10000	  
20000	  
30000	  
40000	  
50000	  
60000	  
70000	  
80000	  
ELISA	  (conc.	  mg/ml)	  
LOCI	  (conc.	  mg/ml)	  
0	  
20000	  
40000	  
60000	  
80000	  
100000	  
120000	  
140000	  
160000	  
0	  
10000	  
20000	  
30000	  
40000	  
50000	  
60000	  
Wash-­‐LOCI	  (CRP	  conc.	  ng/ml)	  
LOCI	  (CRP	  conc.	  ng/ml)	  
==PAGE:57==
	  
57	  
B	  
R=0.65,	  slope=0.64	  
	  
	  
C	  
R=0.93,	  slope=2.5	  
	  
	  
	  
Figure	  25	  without	  removal	  of	  outliers	  
0	  
20000	  
40000	  
60000	  
80000	  
100000	  
120000	  
140000	  
160000	  
0	  
20000	  
40000	  
60000	  
80000	   100000	   120000	   140000	   160000	  
Wash-­‐LOCI	  (CRP	  conc.	  ng/ml)	  
ELISA	  (CRP	  conc.	  ng/ml)	  
y	  =	  2,4928x	  +	  1640,9	  
R²	  =	  0,87363	  
0	  
20000	  
40000	  
60000	  
80000	  
100000	  
120000	  
140000	  
160000	  
0	  
10000	  
20000	  
30000	  
40000	  
50000	  
60000	  
ELISA	  (CRP	  conc.	  ng/ml)	  
LOCI	  (CRP	  conc.	  ng/ml)	  
