==PAGE:1==
Clinical pilot study on the optimization of
chirp stimuli for recording auditory
brainstem responses
a thesis presented
by
Jeffrey Andrew Hullfish
to
The Department of Electrical Engineering
in partial fulfillment of the requirements
for the degree of
Master of Science
in the subject of
Engineering Acoustics
Technical University of Denmark
Kongens Lyngby, Capital Region
June 2015
==PAGE:2==
©2015 – Jeffrey Andrew Hullfish
all rights reserved.
==PAGE:3==
Thesis advisor: James Michael Harte
Jeffrey Andrew Hullfish
Clinical pilot study on the optimization of chirp stimuli for
recording auditory brainstem responses
Abstract
Arecentstudyexaminestheefficacyofusingchirpsofdifferentlengthstoevokeauditorybrainstem
responses (ABRs) in a normal hearing population (Elberling et al., 2010). They demonstrate that wave
V magnitudes tend to increase monotonically with stimulus length until reaching a maximum, after
which they begin to decrease once again. The implication is that individual subjects each have a so-
called optimal chirp stimulus that can be found empirically. The present study proposes that chirp
stimuli can be similarly optimized in a hearing-impaired population.
The experiment records ABRs elicited by standard clicks and five broadband chirps. These include,
in order of increasing length, the LS-80 Chirp (Elberling & Don, 2010) and Chirps 1–4 (Elberling et al.,
2010). ABRs are recorded for all test stimuli at 60 dB nHL. Additional ABRs with the click and LS-80
Chirp are also recorded at 80 dB nHL for comparison. The primary test group is a clinical vestibular
schwannoma(VS)screeningpopulation, whoareasymmetricallyhearing-impaired. Anormalhearing
populationservesasthenegativecontrolgroup. SixconfirmedVSpatientsarealsoexaminedandserve
as the positive control group.
The results indicate that the relationship observed by Elberling et al. (2010) breaks down in the
screeningpopulationandthatnopatternisdiscernible. Thisisarguedtobearesultofthepopulation’s
non-homogeneity however as distinct, if unexpected patterns do occur on an individual basis. A test
population of sufficient size to create subgroups with similar hearing impairments is needed in order
to determine more accurately the effect different pathologies have on electrophysiology.
iii
==PAGE:4==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Literature Review
6
2.1
Vestibular schwannoma . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Auditory brainstem response . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Methods
28
3.1
Subjects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.2
Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4
Results
32
4.1
Normal hearing population
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2
Clinical VS screening population . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.3
Comparing the normal and screening populations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
4.4
Confirmed VS population . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
5
Discussion
69
6
Conclusion
76
References
82
Appendix A Signal detection theory
83
Appendix B
Noise exposure levels
85
Appendix C
Analyzing ABR data
87
C.1
Data tables, screening population . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
iv
==PAGE:5==
Listing of figures
2.1
Basic anatomy for vestibular schwannoma . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Location terminology for intracanalicular vestibular schwannomas
. . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Cross-section of the internal auditory canal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Cochlear damage caused by vestibular schwannoma . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.5
Efficiency & positive predictive value of click ABR indices . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.6
Auditory nerve compression and small tumor detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.7
Creating the stacked ABR
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.8
Click vs. chirp stimuli . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.9
Normal hearing population average chirps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.10
Narrow-band chirps
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.11
Level-specific chirps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.12
Chirp parameter data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.1
NH population: mean hearing thresholds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.2
NH population: comparison with Elberling et al. (2010) . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.3
Subject NH-12: wave V p-p magnitudes, 60 dB nHL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.4
Subject NH-12: ABR waveforms, 60 dB nHL
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.5
Subject NH-12: ABR waveforms, 80 dB nHL
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.6
Subject HI-00: ABR waveforms, 60 dB nHL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.7
Subject HI-00: ABR waveforms, 80 dB nHL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.8
Subject HI-00: audiogram . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.9
Subject HI-00: wave V p-p magnitudes, 60 dB nHL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.10
Subject HI-01: audiogram
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.11
Subject HI-01: wave V p-p magnitudes, 60 dB nHL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.12
Subject HI-02: audiogram . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.13
Subject HI-02: wave V p-p magnitudes, 60 dB nHL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.14
Subject HI-03: audiogram
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.15
Subject HI-03: wave V p-p magnitudes, 60 dB nHL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.16
Subject HI-04: audiogram . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.17
Subject HI-04: wave V p-p magnitudes, 60 dB nHL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.18
Subject HI-05: audiogram
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
v
==PAGE:6==
4.19
Subject HI-05: wave V p-p magnitudes, 60 dB nHL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
4.20
Subject HI-06: audiogram . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
4.21
Subject HI-06: wave V p-p magnitudes, 60 dB nHL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
4.22
Subject HI-07: audiogram . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
4.23
Subject HI-07: wave V p-p magnitudes, 60 dB nHL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
4.24
NH and HI populations: wave V p-p magnitude & latency distributions
. . . . .
62
4.25
Frequency response of the ER-3A vs. ER-2 insert earphones . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
4.26
Example ABR data from confirmed VS patient TP-21
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
vi
==PAGE:7==
This thesis is dedicated to Claus Elberling and Manuel Don.
vii
==PAGE:8==
Acknowledgements
The author would like to formally acknowledge the following people for their contribu-
tions which helped to make this ambitious project a reality. Firstly, thanks to Torsten Dau for being
DTU’s faculty supervisor for this thesis. I learned a great deal about hearing science during his course
and I greatly appreciate his support of my final research project as a master’s student.
At Bispebjerg Hospitalet I thank Jesper Yde for recruiting the test subjects in the screening popu-
lation and for being the primary point of contact at the hospital where I spent two months working
on this study. At Rigshospitalet I thank Per Cayé-Thomasen for recruiting the test subjects in the
confirmed VS population and for allowing me the privilege of personally observing a VS surgery for
the first time.
I would like to thank Claus Elberling. Not only have his insights and advice as a co-supervisor
been invaluable, but the information that he has provided—both published and unpublished—have
directly helped to solve a number of problems that arose over the course of this thesis. This project
owes much of its success to his efforts on my behalf.
I would like to thank everyone at the Interacoustics Research Unit. Firstly, thanks to Kristian
Gøtsche-Rasmussen for his help in calibrating the levels of the test stimuli. Thanks also to Sinnet
Kristensen who collected the data in the confirmed VS population and provided valuable insights
both as a colleague and as co-supervisor. Finally I would especially like to thank James Harte, who was
the primary supervisor for this thesis. Since our first project together a year and a half ago, his mentor-
ship has helped me to develop well beyond the level of a typical junior scientist. He has made himself
consistently available to help me at all stages of my research: introducing me to new ideas, helping me
to understand difficult ideas, and advising me on how to refine my own ideas once I had put them to
paper. Without him, this thesis would not have been possible.
viii
==PAGE:9==
Image credit: Blausen.com staff
1
Introduction
Vestibularschwannoma(VS)isabenigntumorthatoriginatesinthemyelin-forming(Schwann)
cells of the vestibular branch of the 8th cranial nerve. The tumor can prove lethal if it is not eventually
removed due to its location near the respiratory centers of the pons in the brainstem (Roeser et al.,
2007). Early diagnosis and regular monitoring of the tumor are therefore highly important.
1
==PAGE:10==
In Denmark approximately 100 people are diagnosed with an intracanalicular VS every year (i.e.
occurring inside the internal auditory canal); VS has a prevalence of approximately 1–2 per 100,000
worldwide (Stangerup et al., 2004; Tos et al., 2004). In the majority of cases the tumor is unilateral (i.e.
presenting only on one side). Patients typically start by complaining of hearing and/or balance prob-
lems. The tumor typically presents with unilateral, sensorineural hearing loss in the high frequencies
(Roeser et al., 2007, pp. 97–98) but, due to unrelated losses associated with age, most patients will
show bilateral, asymmetric hearing loss with worse thresholds on the tumor side.
Oneverysensitive,non-invasive,andobjectivemethodfordetectingsmallacoustictumors
is the stacked auditory brainstem response, or stacked ABR (Don et al., 1997). The procedure uses a
form of output compensation; more on this in Section 2.2.1. In short, it works by separately recording
different frequency regions in the cochlea, temporally aligning the wave V peaks of each waveform
manually after recording, and then summing them to create one waveform: the stacked ABR.
This test however was never truly embraced by clinics. This was due in part to the unreasonably
long test times it requires and variability due to hearing losses unassociated with the tumor. The
method more widely used by clinics historically is the click-evoked ABR (see e.g. Selters & Brackmann,
1977). The problem with the click ABR, however, is that it can often fail to detect small tumors. Re-
ports of the click ABR’s false negative rate for small tumors range anywhere from 13% to 33% (Wilson
et al., 1992; Hendrix et al., 1990; Chandrasekhar et al., 1995; Bauch et al., 1996). The stacked ABR, on
the other hand, was shown to detect 95% of 54 small tumors missed by the click ABR while main-
taining 88% specificity (Don et al., 2005b). Given the drawbacks of electrophysiological methods in
general thus far, patients suspected of VS are now often sent directly to MRI.
A meta-analysis by Koors et al. (2013) concedes that MRI is the definitive method for VS screen-
ing. Nevertheless they maintain that ABR is a cost-effective and sufficiently sensitive procedure for
diagnosing suspected VS patients. This is partly because treatment paradigms are becoming more
2
==PAGE:11==
conservative as understanding of the growth of schwannomas improves (i.e. better to observe and
only scan when necessary). Another major factor is the cost and availability of MRI.i In rural areas
and developing nations access to MRI is limited at best. Even in industrialized nations there is increas-
ing pressure on MRI scanners as more patients are referred. Given these factors, they urge that ABR
be reconsidered as part of the standard clinical practice for VS screening.
However, clinical and even cost-effectiveness are not always enough to bring about changes in clin-
ical practice in the short term. This holds true even in socialized healthcare systems (e.g. the United
Kingdom, Drummond & Banta, 2009). That said, based on conversations between the author and
medical professionals in Denmark, there is continued interest in keeping ABR as a part of the diag-
nostic procedure for VS. A new test that improves on the sensitivity of click ABR while still keeping
test times short enough to be viable for clinical use is therefore needed.
In the broadest context, this thesis aims to establish the feasibility of using broadband chirp
stimuli that account for traveling wave delay in the cochlea by delaying the frequency components
of the stimulus itself. Rather than realigning the wave V peaks resulting from multiple derived-band
measurements, as with the stacked ABR, a single or at least reduced number of chirp measurements
can be made to evoke an ABR with synchronized contributions across the whole cochlea. Chirps have
already been shown to be effective in a normal hearing population (see e.g. Elberling & Don, 2008)
but have yet to be tested in a clinical VS screening population, which is hearing-impaired. The chirp’s
compensation at the input (stimulus) level will ideally lead to a reduction in test time while retaining
at least some of the improved sensitivity of the stacked ABR in detecting small acoustic tumors (Don
et al., 2009).
i
The ABR costs $300–400, on average, while a gadolinium contrast MRI can range from $2400 to $3000
(Murphy & Selesnick, 2002).
3
==PAGE:12==
Designing optimal chirp stimuli is however a very complicated process. Even in normal hearing
adults the traveling wave delay is affected by stimulus level (Elberling & Don, 2010). In a hearing-
impaired population there are a host of other factors to consider in addition. Loss of outer hair cells,
for example, will degrade the amplification mechanism in the affected regions of the cochlea, affecting
its nonlinearity which will in turn alter the behavior of the traveling wave. VS has already been shown
to cause damage to both inner and outer hair cells as well as the cochlear neurons Roosli et al. (2012).
What is unknown as of yet is exactly how the different pathologies of the inner ear affect the design of
an optimized chirp.
One additional challenge facing this study is that patients suspected of having VS typically have
some degree of presbycusis (age-related hearing loss) comorbid with any losses attributable to a tumor.
Identifying and isolating these different sources of hearing loss in each patient will be key in ensuring
the sensitivity of any chirp-evoked ABR procedure as a diagnostic tool. Otherwise there is a risk of
misdiagnosing patients with simple presbycusis as VS patients (i.e. false positives).
In order to examine the relationship between the configuration of hearing loss and the electro-
physiology, this thesis will record ABRs evoked with a number of different stimuli in three distinct
populations. Clicks and several chirps of different lengths will be used, in a manner similar to the
study by Elberling et al. (2010). Evoking ABRs with multiple stimuli makes it possible to reasonably
estimate the optimal chirp on an individual basis and to observe what happens to the ABR waveform
when using stimuli that are increasingly less optimal. Elberling et al. (2010) observed that in normal
hearing adults the wave V magnitude of the ABRs increased monotonically with chirp length until
the optimal stimulus was reached, after which they began to decrease again. The results of this study
demonstrate that, at least in a normal hearing population, it is possible to optimize chirp stimuli on
an individual basis.
4
==PAGE:13==
The present study is based on the hypothesis that it should also be possible to individually
optimize chirps in a clinical VS screening population. Derived-band ABR latency data from studies by
Don et al. (1998, 2005b) demonstrate that the optimal chirp length in an ear with VS present is likely
to be shorter than that for the other, non-tumor ear. A separate, unrelated study also shows shorter
derived-band latencies in a general hearing-impaired population (Strelcyk et al., 2009). Furthermore,
theABR amplitudesin an impaired population are reduced as a result of the varioussources of hearing
loss (Don et al., 2012). Given all this information, a similar yet distinct relationship from the one
observed by Elberling et al. (2010) is expected. Specifically, the screening population should have an
optimal chirp—albeit shorter than what was observed in a normal hearing population—and using a
suboptimal (i.e. shorter or longer) stimulus should produce monotonic decreases in ABR amplitudes.
5
==PAGE:14==
2
Literature Review
2.1
Vestibular schwannoma
Vestibular schwannoma (VS), also referred to as acoustic neuroma, is a benign tumor affecting the
auditory system (Figure 2.1) that is usually stable or grows slowly at an estimated rate of 0.1–0.2 cm
in diameter per year (Bederson et al., 1991). It is commonly located in the internal auditory canal and
most cases have at least some intracanalicular component (Figure 2.2); only an estimated 20% of cases
are purely extracanalicular (Morantz & Walsh, 1994). Even intracanalicular tumors can extend into
the cerebellopontine angle however if their growth is left unchecked. Because of its proximity to the
respiratory centers of the pons in the brainstem, a growing VS can be lethal if not removed (Roeser
et al., 2007).
VS is a result of the overproduction of Schwann cells, which are responsible for forming the myelin
sheaths around neurons in the peripheral nervous system (NIH-NIDCD, 2004). The tumor typically
originates in the vestibular part of the vestibulocochlear nerve (8th cranial nerve or CN VIII; see Fig-
ure 2.3) and 90% of tumors originate in the inferior portion of the vestibular nerve (Silk et al., 2009).
As a result of its location, VS tends to impinge on fibers in the cochlear part of the 8th cranial nerve
as it grows. This causes electrophysiological abnormalities that can be detected using auditory evoked
6
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.1: Schematic diagram of the peripheral and central auditory system. Vestibular schwannoma (VS) typically orig-
inates in the internal auditory canal (IAC) but can also grow into the cerebellopontine angle (CPA) (Roeser et al., 2007).
The locations in the anatomy corresponding to waves I, III, and V of the auditory brainstem response are also indicated.
Typical VS patients have extended latencies for waves III and V (with normal III-V interpeak intervals) while wave I is
unaffected (Burkard et al., 2007).
Figure 2.2:
Location terminology for intra-
canalicular vestibular schwannomas. Fundus tu-
mors occur in the third of the internal auditory
canal (IAC) nearest the cochlea, central tumors
occur in the middle third, and porus tumors occur
in the ﬁnal third (Cayé-Thomassen et al., 2007).
7
==PAGE:16==
potentials. Of particular interest is the auditory brainstem response (ABR), which has been used as a
diagnostic screening tool for lesions of the auditory nerve and brainstem as early as the 1970s (Burkard
et al., 2007, Ch. 14).i More on this in Section 2.2.
VS is most commonly associated with asymmetric, sensorineural hearing loss—especially in the
high frequencies but progressing to include lows—and unilateral tinnitus (Roeser et al., 2007, p. 97).
Thetumorisusuallyunilateralbutcanalsobebilateral, whichisoftenanindicatorofneurofibromato-
sis type 2, a genetic disorder. Other common auditory symptoms include loss of balance, dizziness,
absent stapedius reflexes, and speech recognition impairment beyond what would be expected from
the degree of hearing loss alone (Roeser et al., 2007, p. 98). Depending on the amount of involvement
with nearby cranial nerves, additional symptoms can also develop. For example, “involvement of CN
VIII can cause facial numbness, involvement of CN VII can cause facial weakness, and involvement
of CN IV can cause diplopia [double vision].” (Roeser et al., 2007, p. 361) It is also possible for VS
Figure 2.3: Spoendlin & Schrott (1989) Trans-
verse section through the nerves of the in-
ternal auditory canal showing the facial nerve
(VII),vestibularnerve(superiorandinferiorpor-
tions), as well as cochlear nerve ﬁbers from: the
base (hook), lower basal turn (Ia), upper basal
turn (Ib), the second and apical turns (II).
i
This chapter makes frequent reference to Chapter 14 of the book by Burkard et al. (2007). The reader is in-
vited to review this work as a good initial point of reference for further information on auditory brainstem
responses.
8
==PAGE:17==
to present as sudden deafness, which occurs in about 20% of cases (Inoue et al., 2000; Sauvaget et al.,
2005).
VS can go undiagnosed in the early stages because the hearing losses induced by the tumor are often
mistaken for presbycusis (age-related hearing loss). This is likely a result of the fact that most VS pa-
tients are typically diagnosed from 30–60 years of age. In order to avoid the more serious symptoms,
early diagnosis is critical (NIH-NIDCD, 2004). For the purposes of this thesis, any audiometric asym-
metry between the ears of a given patient is attributed entirely to VS. This assumes that presbycusis,
if present, affects both of a patient’s ears identically.
Regarding hearing loss, traditional views on VS assume that the tumor primarily affects retro-
cochlear (i.e. auditory nerve) function, leaving the cochlea mostly intact (e.g. Selters & Brackmann,
1977; Bozorg Grayeli et al., 2008). Certainly intuition would suggest that a schwannoma in the right
place—or the wrong place, depending on your perspective—or of sufficient size would have an effect
on the degree of hearing loss. Roosli et al. (2012) however found that neither tumor size nor location
had a significant correlation with hearing loss, including air conduction thresholds, bone conduction
thresholds, and speech scores. This finding has been corroborated by multiple authors (e.g. Arriaga
et al., 1993; Nadol et al., 1996; Cayé-Thomassen et al., 2007).
Furthermore if VS has no effect on the cochlea then otoacoustic emissions (OAE) would be un-
affected in VS patients. This however has been shown not to be the case (Telischi et al., 1995; Gou-
veris et al., 2007; Ferri et al., 2009). The implication is that retrocochlear effects cannot alone explain
the hearing losses caused by VS. This is supported by the fact that pure tone thresholds have been
shown not to shift until after losing 80–90% of cochlear nerve fibers (Schuknecht, 1955). Therefore,
VS-induced hearing loss must have a cochlear mechanism in addition to any retrocochlear damage.
Roosli et al. (2012) also reported significant cochlear damage in the tumor ears of VS patients via
post-mortem histological examination. Even in a case where the tumor was almost entirely extra-
9
==PAGE:18==
canalicular, e.g. as shown in Figure 2.4, they observed damage not only to both the inner and outer
hair cells but also to the spiral ganglion cells (cochlear neurons) that they attributed to the tumor.
Though the exact reasons for this cochlear damage are unclear—vascular and/or ototoxic mechanisms
aresuspected—thedamagewouldcertainlyresultinhearingloss. Furthermore,cochleardamagecould
explain why OAEs are affected in some VS patients. They went on to point out a subset of VS patients
that exhibit normal ABRs despite having documented hearing losses (Murofushi & Takehisa, 2010).
This, they observed, can be explained by a schwannoma with no retrocochlear contributions to hear-
ing loss at all (i.e. purely cochlear). For all of the above reasons, this thesis operates under the assump-
tion that VS-induced hearing loss has a cochlear mechanism with additional involvement possible at
the retrocochlear level.
Figure 2.4 (following page): Roosli et al. (2012) [Top] 100-year old woman with untreated solitary vestibular schwannoma
(VS) approximately 11x8x8 cm in size located at the entrance of the internal auditory canal (IAC) in the left temporal
bone. The VS was located mainly in the cerebellopontine angle and did not come close to the cochlea in any section.
[Bottom] Photomicrographs of the cochlea on VS side are shown along with similar views from the contralateral ear. The
low power views demonstrate loss of neuronal cells within the modiolus on the VS side (A) compared to the opposite ear
(B).HighpowerviewsofboxedareasshowthattheorganofCortiinthebasalturnwasmissing(C),whileitwaspreserved
on the contralateral side (D). The hair cell and neuronal losses were likely to have been caused by the VS.
10
==PAGE:19==
11
==PAGE:20==
2.2
Auditory brainstem response
The first published instance of the ABR being used as a tool for detecting tumors affecting CN VIII
was by Selters & Brackmann (1977). They reasoned that it would be useful on the basis that the au-
ditory nerve clearly plays a role in the generation of the ABR waveform. Their data has proven to
be largely consistent with subsequent studies and the ABR has in general been shown to be highly
effective at detecting such tumors (Musiek et al., 1994).
The current clinical practice is to record ABRs evoked with a click: a broadband, transient
stimulus. Click ABR in patients with VS will typically exhibit extended wave V latencies (Burkard
et al., 2007). Bauch et al. (1996) performed an analysis of tumor and non-tumor ears to evaluate the
sensitivity of different click ABR indices as decision criteria for diagnosing VS; see Figure 2.5 for an
overview.ii,iii
Bauch et al. found that using the absolute wave V latency as a decision criterion was 92% sensitive
in detecting tumors but also produced a false positive rate of 37%. The wave I–V latency difference
(I–V interpeak interval, or IPI) was another highly sensitive index but came with a false negative rate
of 13%, which is prohibitively high for clinical use. The optimal criteria were, according to their study,
a combination of I–V IPI and interaural wave V latency difference (ILD). These indices produced a
decision criteria with a sensitivity of 92% and a sensitivity of 88%.
ii
The test population used by Bauch et al. (1996) had a 50% prevalence of VS. The results shown in Figure 2.5
therefore do not accurately reflect the performance of click ABR in a clinical screening population, which
has a prevalence that is probably closer to 5% (Turner et al., 1984).
iii
For a review of basic signal detection theory, including the terms commonly used to evaluate tests like ABR,
refer to Appendix A.
12
==PAGE:21==
Figure 2.5: Bauch et al. (1996) Percent ef-
ﬁciency (accuracy) and positive predictive
value of several different click ABR indices.
The test population consisted of 75 tumor
earsmatchedwithnon-tumorearsthathad
identical or near-identical hearing losses
(n=150 total). Though the predictive value
of the combined ILD + I–V IPI criteria (88%)
islowerthanthatoftheI–VIPIalone(97%),
the false negative rate (not shown) is re-
duced from 13% to 8% in exchange.
Tumor size has a considerable effect on the sensitivity of the click ABR. The procedure is
highly effective at diagnosing medium (1–2 cm) and large (≥2 cm) tumors but less so when it comes to
diagnosing small tumors (≤1 cm). Considering the importance of the early diagnosis of VS, low small
tumor detection rates for click ABR are a serious shortcoming and a major factor in the procedure’s
decline in popularity.iv
PartofthereasonfortheclickABR’sinabilitytodetectsmalltumorsreliablyisduetothetonotopic
organization of the cochlea. The cochlea’s basilar membrane has both width and stiffness gradients
along its length, with the narrowest and stiffest part at the base. This changes the resonant frequency
of the membrane along its length. This means that high frequencies are encoded at the base of the
cochlea and low frequencies are encoded at the apex, and this phenomenon is known as tonotopic
organization.
This same phenomenon is present in the auditory nerve, as seen previously in Figure 2.3. This is
important because the high-frequency fibers in the auditory nerve are closest to the vestibular nerve
as a result and VS is therefore most likely to compress these fibers. Click-evoked ABRs are sensitive to
iv
Bauch et al. noted that sensitivity could potentially be improved by increasing stimulus presentation levels
to compensate for hearing loss but that current protocols already use levels as high as 80–90 dB nHL.
Increasing levels further risks not only noise-induced hearing loss but also patient discomfort, which is
detrimental to ABR recordings.
13
==PAGE:22==
such tumors because, as explained in Figure 2.6, the wave V latency is dominated by high-frequency
fibers. Some small tumors, however, originate from locations that make them more likely to interfere
with middle- and/or low-frequency fibers. Without sufficient compression of high-frequency fibers,
the latency of wave V will be unaffected. It is these tumors that the click ABR fails to detect.
This begs the question of how the compression of auditory nerve fibers affects the transmission
of action potentials. One might intuit that there is some sort of delay mechanism, given the fact that
procedures like the click ABR are sensitive to changes in latency. If the compression of auditory nerve
fibers delays the transmission of action potentials, however, then it should not matter which fibers are
compressed. After all, even though activity from the high-frequency regions of the cochlea dominates
the ABR the activity from lower frequency regions still contributes. And yet despite this the tumors
that do not sufficiently compress the high-frequency fibers do not affect the latency of wave V (as
demonstrated in Figure 2.6).
Recall the tonotopic organization of the cochlea. Because of the traveling wave delay high frequen-
cies are encoded before middle and low frequencies. This means that when stimulating the cochlea
with a broad range of frequencies simultaneously, as with the click, the high-frequency components
of that stimulus will be encoded and transmitted first. These high-frequency contributions dominate
the ABR and therefore dictate the latency of wave V.
Consider now what would happen if these high-frequency contributions were somehow removed.
Without the dominanthigh-frequency contributions, the latency of wave V wouldbe dictated instead
Figure 2.6 (following page): Don et al. (2005a) Schematic diagram of the cross-section of the internal auditory canal (see
Figure 2.3 for real cross-section). Because of the tonotopic organization of ﬁbers in the auditory nerve, VS is likely to
compress the high-frequency ﬁbers. Standard ABR measures (i.e. click ABR) are sensitive to the wave V latency changes
caused by such tumors, including the I–V IPI and the interaural wave V latency difference (IT5). Other tumors, partic-
ularly small ones, will only compress middle- and/or low-frequency ﬁbers. These small tumors are missed by the click-
evoked ABR because they don’t induce the expected changes in wave V latency.
14
==PAGE:23==
15
==PAGE:24==
by the remaining frequencies. Given the effects of the traveling wave delay, these lower frequency
regions are activated later when stimulated with a click. As a consequence the wave V peak would also
occur later. The implication is therefore that the compression of nerve fibers is not actually delaying
the transmission of action potentials at all. It is blocking them.
Evidence of this proposed blocking mechanism comes from a study by Hatayama et al.
(1999), who directly studied the effects of auditory nerve compression. They surgically clamped the
auditory nerves of dogs (at levels of 50, 60, 70, 80, and 100% compression) and observed the electro-
physiological effects intraoperatively using click-evoked ABRs. They then post-operatively recorded
ABRs serially over periods ranging from 5–119 days and observed any changes. After this period the
dogs were sacrificed and the histological effects of compression were observed via post-mortem exam-
ination.
The ABRs showed that even under only 50% compression all peaks other than wave I completely
disappeared. The peaks reappeared within an hour after releasing the clamp, albeit with prolonged
latencies; the latencies returned to normal within a week. Histological examination of these dogs
showed multiple, small instances of cavitation in the nerve at the site of compression. The spiral gan-
glioncellswerehowevermostlyintactandtheinternalauditoryarterywascompletelypatent(i.e. open
and unobstructed).
Under increased levels of compression the observed effects became more severe. The prolonged
latencies observed after removing the 60% compression clamps did not fully recover and the histolog-
ical examination showed that over half of the nerve fibers at the site of compression were interrupted;
many of the spiral ganglion cells had also degenerated. Both the severity and the permanency of the
observed changes in the ABR increased with increasing levels of compression. The histological effects
followed the same trend, except for the internal auditory arteries which showed no signs of rupturing
even at 100% nerve compression.
16
==PAGE:25==
The fact that all the peaks except wave I disappear immediately after compression strongly implies
the effect of the blocking mechanism proposed in this thesis. The prolonged latencies resulting after
releasing the clamps are suggested by Hatayama et al. to indicate a “conduction impairment of nerve
impulses” (read: delay mechanism) but the fact that they evoked their ABRs with click stimuli means
that the effects of the traveling wave delay were still present. The more likely explanation therefore is
that the high-frequency fibers were significantly impacted by the compression and that the recovery
of the ABR latencies after compression was related to the recovery of the nerve. Once the dominant,
high-frequency contributions to the ABR were reintroduced, the earlier activation of those regions
in the cochlea by the click caused the ABR latencies to shift back to the observed, pre-compression
baseline. The fact that many of the observed peaks did not fully recover their magnitudes is further
evidence of the proposed blocking mechanism.
Assumingthe blocking mechanism is present thenit is magnitude, not latency, that wouldbe
the criterion of interest in screening for tumors that compress the nerve. The latency changes would
then simply be a byproduct of the traveling wave delay interacting with click stimuli. This means
that the neural activity in the cochlea is occurring asynchronously when evoked with a click and con-
sequently that the amplitude of the resulting ABR is compromised. If the goal is to use magnitude
as the sensitive index for screening suspected VS patients, then a new method of recording ABRs is
necessary that mitigates the desynchronizing effects of the traveling wave delay.
17
==PAGE:26==
2.2.1
The derived-band method and the stacked ABR
The stacked ABR was developed by Don et al. (1997) as a way to improve upon the sensitivity of
the click ABR in detecting small tumors. It is made up of six individual derived-band ABRs that are
obtained across a broad frequency range. The derived-band method for performing ABR recordings
involves first recording the response to a standard click stimulus followed by ABRs recorded using
clicks with high-pass masking noise, each with a progressively lower cutoff frequency. By subtracting
the waveforms from adjacent measurements, so-called derived-band ABRs are created that represent
the activity from specific frequency regions of the cochlea.
The wave V peaks from all of these derived bands are then aligned in the time domain and summed
together. The resulting waveform, called the stacked ABR, is representative of the synchronous out-
put from the entire basilar membrane; see Figure 2.7. This compensation at the output level mitigates
the effects of phase cancelation due to the traveling wave delay (Don et al., 2009).
Figure 2.7: Don et al. (2005b) [Left] The standard click ABR and the corresponding derived-band ABR waveforms in the
time domain. [Right] The stacked ABR resulting from summing the derived-bands after aligning them in the time domain
according to wave V peak latency.
18
==PAGE:27==
Output compensation however cannot distinguish between different sources of delay.
Those delays that are retrocochlear in origin, including delays caused by the presence of VS, are com-
pensated for as well as any cochlear delays. The result is that the stacked ABR discards all latency
information and bases its decision criteria entirely on changes in magnitude.
Furthermore, it is important to note that the noise variance present in the derived-band ABRs will
be combined in the stacked ABR. The total noise in the stacked ABR is a root mean square (RMS)
value, meaning that it is the square root of the sum of the squared noise in each derived band. This
can easily compromise the sensitivity of the stacked ABR, which relies on small changes in magnitude
for its decision criteria. As a result the test protocol requires that its derived-band recordings have
noise floors not exceeding 20 nV (Don et al., 2005b).v The difficulty of consistently achieving such
low noise floors and the long testing times in general required to create a stacked ABR have prevented
the procedure from being adopted into clinical practice. A recent study by Kochanek et al. (2015) also
criticizes the procedure’s specificity as being too low and does not recommend it as a result.
2.2.2
Chirp ABR
The chirp, like the click, is a broadband, transient stimulus. What makes the chirp unique is that its
frequency components are delayed according to a functional model of the cochlea. This results in
an upward sweep, shown in Figure 2.8. Don et al. (2009) commented that chirps, by accounting for
the traveling wave delay at the stimulus level (input compensation), are similar to the stacked ABR’s
output compensation. While the latter represents the gold standard in ABR amplitudes, the chirp
ABR could in theory still achieve a significant increase in amplitude while drastically reducing testing
time. This would be of great clinical value for small tumor detection.
v
For a stacked ABR containing five derived-band recordings this is equivalent to approximately 45 nV RMS
noise.
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 2.8: Elberling & Don (2008) [Top]
The temporal waveform of the click and
the chirp.
The stimuli are band lim-
ited to the frequency range from 200 to
10,000 Hz. The amplitude of the chirp has
been multiplied by 2. The two stimuli are
temporally aligned so the phase delay at
10,000 Hz of both stimuli corresponds to
0 ms. [Bottom] The (identical) amplitude
spectra of the two stimuli. The lower cut-
offcorrespondsto-6dBat200Hzandthe
higher cutoff corresponds to the falling
spectrum of a 100 μs click, having its ﬁrst
null at 10,000 Hz.
The latency-frequency model for cochlear delay is dictated by a power function which was
originally described by Anderson et al. (1971),
τ = k f−d,
(2.1)
where τ is the delay in seconds and f is frequency in Hz. The two parameters, k and d, dictate the
length of the chirp, with lower values creating shorter chirps and higher values creating longer ones.
By empirically fitting these parameters to individuals, chirps based on this power function can be
optimized.
Elberling & Don (2008) used derived-band ABR latencies recorded in a population of normal hear-
ing subjects from previous studies (Don et al., 1998, 2005b) to create individually optimized chirps
using this same method. The resulting set of data (chirp parameters k and d) was later used by El-
berling et al. (2010) to create the set of five chirps shown in Figure 2.9. These chirps encapsulate the
inter-individual variation in a normal hearing population, with Chirp 3 representing the mean of the
20
==PAGE:29==
Figure 2.9:
Elberling et al. (2010) The
graph shows the electrical waveform and
itstemporallocationfortheclickandeach
of the ﬁve chirps based on the N=81 nor-
mal hearing subjects used in Elberling &
Don (2008). All six stimuli have identical
amplitudespectraandconsequentlyiden-
tical spectrum levels. In this plot, how-
ever, the chirps are scaled ×2 relative to
the click for better visibility.
distribution. Note how even in a normal hearing population the range of chirps necessary to ade-
quately describe the whole distribution is quite large. Chirps 1 and 5 have a 3.18 ms difference in delay
between the 5700 Hz and 710 Hz frequency components.
There are additional factors to consider when creating a cochlear model besides the trav-
eling wave delay, however. For example, at low levels of stimulation, a given frequency will excite a
restricted area on the basilar membrane. As level increases, this area of excitation spreads asymmetri-
cally towards the base of the cochlea where high frequencies are encoded. This phenomenon is called
upward spread of excitation. The impact of this phenomenon is described in detail by Elberling et al.
(2010); their argument is paraphrased as follows.
The improved efficacy of the chirp stimulus is a result of its delay function, which is designed to
achieve synchronous activation of neurons across the entire basilar membrane. At higher levels, how-
ever, each of the frequency components of the chirp excite a broader area of the membrane. This
21
==PAGE:30==
results in a desynchronization of the neuronal response which leads to a reduction in overall ABR
amplitude. The effect worsens as the length of the chirp increases.
There are two main implications of this phenomenon. The first is the possibility that a maximum
level of stimulation exists such that the chirp is no longer an improvement over the click. The second
is that if it is necessary to consider upward spread of excitation then a number of existing models of
cochlear delay are inadequate when based on: (1) linear mechanical properties of the cochlea, e.g. by
Dau et al. (2000) using the model by de Boer (1980); (2) otoacoustic emission latencies, e.g. by Fobel &
Dau(2004)usingdata from Shera& Guinan (2000); (3) derived-bandABR latencies, e.g. by Elberling
& Don (2008) using data from Don et al. (1998, 2005b).
22
==PAGE:31==
Given the effects of upward spread of excitation, Elberling & Don (2010) hypothesized a
relationship between ABR amplitudes and chirp length such that longer chirps would be more effec-
tive at low presentation levels and that clicks and shorter chirps would conversely be more effective at
high levels. To test this hypothesis, they used narrow-band chirps, shown in Figure 2.10, as a so-called
“direct approach” to empirically fitting chirp stimuli. Deriving empirical chirp delay functions in this
way accounts for the influence of e.g. upward spread of excitation in addition to the traveling wave
delay. Using their data they refined the chirp delay model by modifying the parameters to account for
varying presentation levels,
k = k1 ek2L,
k1 = 1.65
k2 = −0.0625,
(2.2)
d = d1L + d2,
d1 = −0.00755
d2 = 0.788,
(2.3)
where L is the stimulus presentation level in dB nHL. This resulted in a new, level-specific chirp delay
model,
τ = k1 ek2L f−(d1L+d2),
(2.4)
which was used to produce a set of level-specific, broadband chirps, shown in Figure 2.11.
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 2.10: Elberling & Don (2010) The waveform and envelope of the broad-band CE-Chirp and the four octave-band
chirps are shown. All ﬁve stimuli are plotted using the same arbitrary amplitude scale in digital units, d.u.. The individual
levelsindBnHL,bywhicheachoftheoctave-bandstimulicontributestothebroad-bandchirpat60dBnHL,areindicated
to the right. The zero point, 0 ms, corresponds to the temporal location of the 10,000 Hz component of the CE-Chirp.
24
==PAGE:33==
Figure 2.11: Elberling & Don (2010) The waveforms of the chirps designed from the new delay models are shown. For
comparison the CE-Chirp is also shown. All ﬁve chirps are plotted with an amplitude scale in digital units, d.u.
25
==PAGE:34==
To begin to understand how to adapt the chirp ABR for use in a clinical VS screening popula-
tion, Elberling and Don have provided a number of chirp parameter data from their previous studies,
shown in Figure 2.12 (Elberling & Don, 2010; Don et al., 1998, 2005b). Together, these data represent
a reasonable estimate of the inter-individual variation expected in the target screening population.
From this information the five test stimuli to be used in the present study were chosen. These include,
in order of increasing stimulus length, the 80 dB nHL level-specific chirp (LS-80 Chirp) derived in
Elberling & Don (2010) and Chirps 1–4 from the population chirps derived in Elberling et al. (2010).
Figure 2.12 (following page): [Top] Chirp parameter data obtained using narrow-band chirp latencies at 80 dB nHL (blue),
60 dB nHL (red), and 40 dB nHL (green) in N=12 normal hearing subjects (Elberling & Don, 2010). [Middle] Chirp parame-
ter data obtained using derived-band latencies at 60 dB nHL in the tumor ears (circles) and non-tumor ears (triangles) of
N=30conﬁrmedVSpatientswithsmallormediumtumors(Donetal.,1998,2005b); notethatoneoutlierisnotdisplayed
within the scale of the plot. [Bottom] Both datasets presented together with the ﬁve test stimuli (orange). The ﬁrst stim-
ulus is the LS-80 chirp from Elberling & Don (2010) and the remaining stimuli are chirps 1–4 from Elberling et al. (2010);
all test stimuli are presented at 60 dB nHL.
26
==PAGE:35==
27
==PAGE:36==
3
Methods
3.1
Subjects
Normal hearing subjects (N = 13) ages 23–31 were tested at DTU. Normal hearing is defined here
as having pure-tone thresholds better than 20 dB HL at all frequencies and no reported problems
associated with hearing. This population served as the negative control group in the study, meaning
that no result is expected when testing for the presence of VS.
The target screening population (N = 8) ages 54–69 were tested at Bispebjerg Hospitalet. This
population consists of patients who are candidates for standard clinical ABR screening as determined
by their referring audiologist. This includes patients with audiometric asymmetry of at least 15 dB at
one or more frequencies. No additional restrictions were imposed in terms of the audiogram; hearing
thresholds in this test group ranged from 0–70 dB HL. Confirmed VS patients (N = 6) ages 42–71
were tested at Rigshospitalet. This population served as the positive control group in the study (i.e.
expect to detect VS). There were no restrictions according to gender, age, or degree of hearing loss.
Hearing thresholds in this test group ranged from 0–95 dB HL. Patients with conductive hearing
losses, middle ear surgeries, and/or hyperacusis were excluded from the study.
28
==PAGE:37==
3.2
Experiment
Before the start of the experiment, participants were provided with written information about the
study as well as an information meeting where they had an opportunity to have any questions about
the procedure answered. Participants then signed a written consent form. All experiments were ap-
provedbytheScience-EthicsCommitteefortheCapitalRegionofDenmark(referenceH-3-2013-004).
Participants in the screening population also completed a questionnaire before the start of the ex-
periment detailing relevant aspects of their medical history. This included whether they suffered from
other symptoms that can indicate the presence of VS—tinnitus, balance issues, and dizziness—and for
how long, if known. They were also asked to report any known allergies or exposure to ototoxic drugs.
Normal hearing participants only provided information about their gender and age.
The total noise dose from the experiments did not exceed the limit of 85 dB LEX,8h, which is equiv-
alent to an eight-hour exposure level of 85 dBA, set by the Danish Working Environment Authority
(http://engelsk.arbejdstilsynet.dk/en/). Refer to Appendix B for noise exposure calcula-
tions.
A series of preliminary tests were performed both to screen subjects (i.e. to confirm that there
werenomiddleearpathologies)andtocollectsupplementaryinformation. Pure-toneaudiometrywas
performed in a sound-isolated booth at 0.5, 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, and 8 kHz. The audiograms were obtained
in the normal hearing population using the Interacoustics AA222 Audio Traveler audiometer and
Sennheiser HDA-200 headphones. Subjects in the screening and confirmed VS populations provided
recent audiograms obtained by their referring audiologists.
Additional measurements were obtained using the Interacoustics Titan probe. The first of these
included a wide-band tympanogram. Measurements of stapedius reflexes were also obtained at 0.5, 1,
29
==PAGE:38==
2, and 4 kHz. Finally, distortion product otoacoustic emissions were measured at 0.5, 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, and
8 kHz using stimuli at 60 dB nHL.
The main body of the experiment consisted of a series of ABR recordings performed using the
Interacoustics EP 25 Eclipse system. The recordings wereperformed in a soundproofed and electrically
shielded booth. Subjects were tested while lying down on a bed in the booth and were encouraged
to fall asleep. Four pre-gelled, surface electrodes were used to obtain the ABR recordings: one on
each mastoid, one on the forehead (vertex), and one on the cheekbone (ground). The stimuli were
presented using Interacoustics IP-30 insert earphones, which have an identical frequency response to
the ER-3A insert earphones, with foam eartips.
3.2.1
Recording protocols
ABR recordings were made at two levels: 80 and 60 dB nHL. The stimuli tested at 80 dB nHL
included the click and the LS-80 Chirp derived by Elberling & Don (2010). The stimuli tested at
60 dB nHL again included the click and LS-80 Chirp—referred to at this level as Chirp 0.5 for clarity—
as well as Chirps 1–4 of the population-averaged chirps derived by Elberling et al. (2010). Subjects in
the confirmed VS population were only tested using the stimuli at 80 dB nHL due to time constraints.
All recordings were performed at a rate of 27.1 stimuli per second with Bayesian weighting and
alternating stimulus polarity. Jitter was used in the normal and screening populations only. The stop
criteria in the normal and screening populations were 20 nV residual noise or 8000 sweeps, whichever
came first. The stop criteria for the confirmed VS population were 30 nV residual noise or 10000
sweeps, whichever came first.
30
==PAGE:39==
3.2.2
Calibration
To calibrate the test stimuli, a 711-coupler with a DB2012 attachment was initially calibrated using a
GRAS 42AB calibrator. This attachment is used to simulate the foam eartip used with the ER-3A/IP-
30 insert earphones. The resulting calibration level for the 711-coupler was 114 dB SPL and the DB2012
attachment, because of its volume, adds a correction factor of 1.2 dB SPL.
Once this initial calibration was determined, the DB2012 attachment was then switched out with
a DB2015 to calibrate the test stimuli. This was done because the foam eartip can be inserted flush to
the reference plane of the DB2015, making the measurements more reliable; the initial calibration level
does not change with the different attachment. Click stimuli were calibrated in terms of peak-to-peak
equivalent sound pressure level (dB peSPL), according to the standard ISO 389-6:2007, and further
calibrated in terms of normalized hearing level (nHL) using peak-to-peak reference equivalent thresh-
old sound pressure level (dB RETSPL) values from Richter & Fedtke (2005) and Gøtsche-Rasmussen
et al. (2012). The chirp stimuli were calibrated with reference to the CE-Chirp. FFT and octave levels
of one cycle (N = 1000) were obtained. The 2 kHz octave-band of the reference stimulus (CE-Chirp)
was then compared to the 2 kHz octave band of the test stimuli. The correction factor, defined as the
difference in level between the stimuli at the 2 kHz octave band, was found in Matlab to be approxi-
mately 28.0 dB. This gain was then added to the test stimulus levels in the Eclipse software.
31
==PAGE:40==
4
Results
Before presenting the results it is worthwhile to first define some terms and quantities that will surface
repeatedly throughout the remainder of the chapter. These will be presented in brief here and also in
more detail in Appendix C.
TheprimarypointofinterestinthepresentstudyistheamplitudeofwaveVintheABRrecordings—
described here as a peak-to-peak (p-p) magnitude value—in nanovolts (nV).i When presenting these
values a 95% confidence interval is frequently also included. Though this interval is indicated in fig-
ures using error bars it is important to note that this is not equivalent to standard deviation. The final
quantity of note is the multiple-point F-ratio, or Fmp. This is related to the signal-to-noise ratio but
instead compares the variance of the total response to an estimate of the noise variance. Fmp is used in
place of SNR because with measurements such as the ABR it is not possible to completely isolate the
signal from the residual noise.
i
The trough used to determine the p-p magnitude is defined here as the lowest point of deflection occurring
within approximately 4 ms of the identified wave V peak. See Appendix C for the full reasoning.
32
==PAGE:41==
4.1
Normal hearing population
The normal hearing population consisted of 13 adults ages 23–31. Every subject had an audiogram with
hearing thresholds better than 20 dB HL; the population means of the thresholds at each frequency
measured are presented in Figure 4.1. The preliminary tests—tympanograms and measurements of
stapedius reflexes and DPOAEs—did not indicate any abnormalities in the population. For the pur-
poses of illustration, the magnitudes and confidence intervals for one test subject’s wave Vs are given
in Figure 4.3 for the stimuli tested at 60 dB nHL. The corresponding ABR waveforms for this subject
are also presented in Figures 4.4–4.5.
As expected the p-p wave V magnitudes increase with increasing stimulus length until reaching
the optimal stimulus—Chirp 2 in this example—after which they proceed to decrease again. Though
the optimal stimulus tends to differ among subjects and even between the ears of the same subject
the general trend in wave V p-p magnitudes remains consistent throughout the entire normal hearing
population. The results agree with those from the study by Elberling et al. (2010), as shown in Figure
4.2.
==PAGE:42==
Figure 4.1: Arithmetic mean of the hearing thresholds in the normal hearing population (N = 13 subjects, 26 ears) from
500 Hz up to 8000 Hz. All subjects had thresholds better than 20 dB HL at the measured frequencies.
Figure 4.2: Arithmetic mean of the wave V magnitudes in the normal hearing populations using the stimuli tested by
Elberling et al. (2010) (N = 10, red) and the present study (N = 13, blue) at 60 dB nHL. Error bars indicate the standard
deviation. Stimulus length refers to the change in delay between the 710 and 5700 Hz frequency components of the
chirps; the click is at 0 ms.
34
==PAGE:43==
Figure 4.3: Subject NH-12’s wave V p-p magnitudes for the stimuli tested at 60 dB nHL. Left and right plots show the
results from the left and right ears, respectively. Error bars indicate the 95% conﬁdence interval. Arithmetic mean of
the wave V p-p magnitudes in the normal hearing population shown with a dotted line.
35
==PAGE:44==
Figure 4.4 (following page): Auditory brainstem responses recorded for Subject NH-12 using the stimuli at 60 dB nHL.
Thewaveformsarepresentedfromtoptobottominorderofstimuluslength, withtheshorteststimulus(click)presented
ﬁrst. Theverticalaxisindicatesamplitudeandthescaleissetat±200nVforallwaveforms. Theorangeandgreencurves
indicate the responses generated using the stimuli of alternate polarities (rarefaction and condensation). The ﬁnal ABRs
are the result of the average of these two curves.
36
==PAGE:45==
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure4.5(followingpage): AuditorybrainstemresponsesrecordedforSubjectNH-12usingthestimuliat80dBnHL.The
waveformsarepresentedwiththecorrespondingwaveformsfromthe60dBnHLstimulibelowforlevelcomparison. The
vertical axis indicates amplitude and the scale is set at±200 nV for all waveforms. The orange and green curves indicate
the responses generated using the stimuli of alternate polarities (rarefaction and condensation). The ﬁnal ABRs are the
result of the average of these two curves.
38
==PAGE:47==
39
==PAGE:48==
4.2
Clinical VS screening population
The target screening population consisted of eight patients ages 54–69 who were flagged as candi-
dates for VS screening by their referring audiologists. This typically means an interaural asymmetry
in hearing thresholds of 15 dB or more in the high frequencies but can include other frequencies, as
well. Other common warning signs of VS include absent stapedius reflexes, unilateral tinnitus, and
vestibular symptoms including balance issues and/or dizziness. This population also typically has ex-
isting hearing losses from presbycusis due to their advanced age and occasionally from occupational
noise exposure, as well. The various hearing losses present in the screening population result in an
overall reduction in ABR amplitudes relative to normal hearing adults, as seen in Figures 4.6–4.7.
Figure 4.6 (following page): Auditory brainstem responses recorded for Subject HI-00 using the stimuli at 60 dB nHL. The
waveforms are presented from top to bottom in order of stimulus length, with the shortest stimulus (click) presented
ﬁrst. The vertical axis indicates amplitude and the scale is set at ±200 nV for all waveforms. The orange and green
curves indicate the responses generated using the stimuli of alternate polarities (rarefaction and condensation). The
ﬁnal ABRs are the result of the average of these two curves.
40
==PAGE:49==
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 4.7 (following page): Auditory brainstem responses recorded for Subject HI-00 using the stimuli at 80 dB nHL. The
waveforms are presented with the corresponding waveforms from the 60 dB nHL stimuli below for level comparison.
The vertical axis indicates amplitude and the scale is set at ±200 nV for all waveforms. The orange and green curves
indicate the responses generated using the stimuli of alternate polarities (rarefaction and condensation). The ﬁnal ABRs
are the result of the average of these two curves.
42
==PAGE:51==
43
==PAGE:52==
Though all eight of the subjects tested had asymmetrical hearing losses, only two pre-
sented with the high-frequency asymmetry typical of VS patients. Others presented instead with low-
frequency asymmetry while still others presented with broadband asymmetry. Furthermore, two of
the subjects’ asymmetries were the result of an onset of sudden deafness that had normalized (i.e. re-
turned to symmetrical hearing thresholds) by the time of testing.
The differences present in the screening population subjects’ audiograms alone limit the ability to
conclude anything meaningful about the data when considered as a whole. On an individual basis
however, the data can provide insight into the wide range of cases that one is clearly very likely to see
when working with a clinical VS screening population. Because of this, the data from this population
will primarily be described as a series of separate case studies.
Each case study will begin with a review of basic information about the subject including their
audiogram and a summary of their other, related symptoms. An overview of the results of the prelim-
inary tests—tympanogram, stapedius reflexes, and DPOAE measurements—will follow. Finally, the
results of the ABR recordings will be discussed. Data tables containing specific information about the
recordings for each subject can be found in Appendix C.1.
44
==PAGE:53==
Subject HI-00
Figure 4.8: Left (blue) and right (red) audiograms for subject HI-00 from 500 Hz up to 8000 Hz. The audiogram shows
the classic presentation of high-frequency asymmetry typical of patients in the VS screening population.
Subject HI-00 is a 62-year old female presenting with high-frequency, asymmetrical hearing loss
typical of patients suspected of VS; see Figure 4.8 for the audiogram. This subject reported having
no other symptoms associated with the tumor. The subject also had no reported occupational noise
exposure, allergies, or prior use of ototoxic drugs.
The subject’s tympanogram was within normal limits for both ears. There was symmetrical ab-
sorbance within normal limits, but higher/better than normal data in the 500–1250 Hz and 3–4 kHz
regions. Stapedius reflexes were present in both ears for all frequencies tested. DPOAEs were success-
fully detected in the better (right) ear at all frequencies tested, except at 3000 Hz, while in the worse
(left) ear they were only detected at 1000 Hz.
In both ears, Chirp 0.5 achieved the greatest peak-to-peak wave V magnitude of the stimuli at
60 dB nHL (Figure 4.9). The magnitudes of the click and the longer chirps do decrease relative to
45
==PAGE:54==
that of the optimal stimulus but it is not clear whether these decreases are monotonic. The adjacent
stimulus, Chirp 1, elicited a smaller magnitude than Chirp 2 in both ears. That said, the relatively high
noise floors of the Chirp 1 recordings make it difficult to say with certainty whether this is truly the
case.
At 80 dB nHL both the click and the LS-80 Chirp elicited strong wave Vs, with the chirp outper-
forming the click in terms of magnitude. Wave III was also very prominent with both stimuli and the
LS-80 Chirp also elicited what may have been a small wave I. This was the case in both ears, though as
expected the better ear did achieve better wave V magnitudes.
Figure 4.9: Wave V p-p magnitudes for subject HI-00 using the stimuli tested at 60 dB nHL. Left and right plots show the
results from the left and right ears, respectively. Error bars indicate the 95% conﬁdence interval. Missing data indicate
an ABR without a clear wave V peak. Arithmetic mean of the wave V p-p magnitudes in the screening population shown
with a dotted line.
46
==PAGE:55==
Subject HI-00 is interesting because the only indicator of VS she possesses is high-frequency, asym-
metric hearing loss. Of all the subjects in our screening population, this subject also had the best ABR
recordings. The waveform morphology was very clear and the residual noise was generally low, in
most cases down to 20 nV. However, given the lower ABR amplitudes in general relative to the nor-
mal hearing population, it is unclear even at these low noise floors whether we see the expected trend
in our chirp-evoked responses.
Subject HI-01
Figure 4.10: Left (blue) and right (red) audiograms for subject HI-01 from 500 Hz up to 8000 Hz. The audiogram shows
sloping hearing loss in both ears and asymmetry ≥20 dB at all measured frequencies above 500 Hz.
Subject HI-01 is a 64-year old male presenting with broadband, asymmetrical hearing loss except
at 500 Hz; see Figure 4.10 for the audiogram. This subject reported having tinnitus in both ears for as
long as he could remember as well as intermittent issues with balance and dizziness. The subject also
reported occupational noise exposure but had no reported allergies or ototoxic drug use.
47
==PAGE:56==
No tympanograms are available for this subject as it was not possible to get a sufficient seal in the
ear canal with the probe. Stapedius reflexes were absent in this subject except at 2000 and 4000 Hz in
the better (right) ear. DPOAEs were not detected at any frequencies except in the better ear at 1000
and 4000 Hz.
Of the stimuli measured at 60 dB nHL, Chirp 1 achieved the best wave V magnitudes in both ears
(Figure 4.11). In the better ear, relative to the adjacent chirps, there was over 150 nV difference. Unfor-
tunatelytheresidualnoiseintherecordingsmakeitdifficulttosayanythingelseabouttheserecordings
with certainty. Though 40 nV noise floors were achieved in every recording—give or take less than 5
nV—the 95% confidence interval at that level is still high at approximately 110 nV. It was not possible
Figure4.11: WaveVp-pmagnitudesforsubjectHI-01usingthestimulitestedat60dBnHL.Leftandrightplotsshowthe
results from the left and right ears, respectively. Error bars indicate the 95% conﬁdence interval. Missing data indicate
an ABR without a clear wave V peak. Arithmetic mean of the wave V p-p magnitudes in the screening population shown
with a dotted line.
48
==PAGE:57==
to clearly discern wave V peaks in the worse ear for the click recording or the Chirp 4 recording. Given
the level of hearing loss in that ear, however, this is not surprising.
At 80 dB nHL, the LS-80 Chirp performed much better than the click. Interestingly the wave V
magnitude in the worse ear was even higher than that of the better ear. That said, there was also a fairly
strong PAMR present in that particular recording which raises some uncertainty about wave V.
Subject HI-02
Figure 4.12: Left (blue) and right (red) audiograms for subject HI-02 from 500 Hz up to 8000 Hz. No data available at
3000 Hz. This subject presented with sudden deafness in the right ear. The sudden deafness had normalized (i.e. re-
turned to symmetrical hearing thresholds) at the time this audiogram was performed and at the time of testing. The cur-
rent audiogram shows sloping hearing loss all the way to the high frequencies, starting with thresholds of 20–25 dB HL
at 500 Hz.
Subject HI-02 is a 61-year old male who presented with sudden deafness in the right ear; as seen
in the audiogram (Figure 4.12), his thresholds have since normalized. The subject reports having no
tinnitus but did experience balance issues and dizziness while the sudden deafness was present. No
occupational noise exposure, allergies, or ototoxic drug use was reported.
49
==PAGE:58==
No tympanograms are available for this subject as it was not possible to get a sufficient seal in the
ear canal with the probe. Stapedius reflexes were present for all frequencies tested in the right ear but
only at 4000 Hz in the left ear; this is unexpected considering that the sudden deafness presented in
the right ear. DPOAEs were not detected at any frequency measured in either ear.
For all stimuli tested, including those at 80 dB nHL, the ABR amplitudes were very small. That
said, wave V peaks were at least detected in all recordings except when using the click in the right ear
at 60 dB nHL (Figure 4.13). No other peaks besides wave V were detected in the ABRs recorded at
60 dB nHL. The recordings at 80 dB nHL did elicit stronger responses, as expected. Wave III peaks
Figure4.13: WaveVp-pmagnitudesforsubjectHI-02usingthestimulitestedat60dBnHL.Leftandrightplotsshowthe
results from the left and right ears, respectively. Error bars indicate the 95% conﬁdence interval. Missing data indicate
an ABR without a clear wave V peak. Arithmetic mean of the wave V p-p magnitudes in the screening population shown
with a dotted line.
50
==PAGE:59==
were detected in all of those recordings and, in the left ear, the LS-80 Chirp also evoked what could
possibly be wave I.
The issues with the ABRs in this subject are likely related to the subject himself—namely his hear-
ing loss—rather than the quality of the recordings. Residual noise floors not exceeding 20 nV were
achieved in every single ABR recording performed on this subject. Unfortunately the low amplitudes
make it difficult to discern a relationship among the stimuli tested. Chirp 4 and Chirp 2 evoked the
highest wave V magnitudes in the left and right ears, respectively. However, the wave Vs obtained
with the other stimuli are so similar in magnitude that even with noise floors down to 20 nV it is not
possible to say with certainty whether the decrease relative to the optimal stimulus is monotonic.
51
==PAGE:60==
Subject HI-03
Figure 4.14: Left (blue) and right (red) audiograms for subject HI-03 from 500 Hz up to 8000 Hz. This subject presented
with sudden deafness in the left ear in the low frequencies. The sudden deafness had normalized (i.e. returned to sym-
metrical hearing thresholds) at the time this audiogram was performed and at the time of testing. The current audiogram
shows a sloping, high-frequency hearing loss that starts at 3000 Hz in both ears. The thresholds in both ears are normal
below that point.
Subject HI-03 is a 64-year old male who presented with sudden deafness in the right ear, resulting
in a low frequency asymmetry. The current, normalized audiogram (see Figure 4.14) shows a sloping
hearing loss beginning above 2000 Hz which tops out at 45 dB HL in the left ear. With the sudden
deafness normalized the hearing thresholds are normal at 200 Hz and below. The subject reported
having tinnitus in both ears for as long as he could remember as well as balance issues and dizziness for
the past 3–4 years. The subject also reported 3–4 years of exposure (between the ages of 15 and 18) to
occupational noise. No allergies or use of ototoxic drugs were reported.
The tympanograms in both ears exhibit a lower than normal compliance. This increased stiffness
could indicate scarring or a ruptured tympanic membrane but, since it was observed in both ears,
52
==PAGE:61==
it could also just be normal for this particular subject. The right ear additionally exhibits less than
normal absorbance above 3000 Hz. Stapedius reflexes were present in both ears at all frequencies
except at 2000 Hz in the right ear. DPOAEs were detected in the left ear at 1000, 2000, and 3000 Hz
and in the right ear at 2000 and 3000 Hz.
The ABR recordings were unfortunately noisy—ranging from approximately 52–82 nV—as a re-
sult of the subject’s restlessness, which also led to a number of recordings with PAM responses. This
makes it difficult to observe anything meaningful about the relative magnitudes of the waveforms,
though wave V peaks were at least detected with every stimulus tested (Figure 4.15). That said, the LS-
80 chirp evoked a wave V peak approximately 270 nV greater in the better ear than the worse ear. Even
Figure4.15: WaveVp-pmagnitudesforsubjectHI-03usingthestimulitestedat60dBnHL.Leftandrightplotsshowthe
results from the left and right ears, respectively. Error bars indicate the 95% conﬁdence interval. Missing data indicate
an ABR without a clear wave V peak. Arithmetic mean of the wave V p-p magnitudes in the screening population shown
with a dotted line.
53
==PAGE:62==
with higher than ideal noise floors, this difference is quite large and therefore interesting. Strangely
the opposite phenomenon happened with the 80 dB nHL click; the worse ear had a wave V that was
about 160 nV greater in magnitude than the better ear. This difference however could be explained at
least partially by the uncertainty resulting from the high amounts of residual noise in the recordings.
Subject HI-04
Figure 4.16: Left (blue) and right (red) audiograms for subject HI-04 from 500 Hz up to 8000 Hz. This audiogram shows
signiﬁcant asymmetry in the low frequencies (500 and 1000 Hz) and also at 6000 Hz. The thresholds in the better ear
(left) are almost normal except at 4000 and 8000 Hz.
Subject HI-04 is a 69-year old male with more than 40 dB of asymmetry at 500 and 1000 Hz as
well as 30 dB of asymmetry at 6000 Hz; see Figure 4.16 for the complete audiogram. The subject
reported experiencing tinnitus in the worse (right) ear for about 6 months. This is the only subject in
our test population to report unilateral tinnitus, which is one of the classic warning signs of VS. No
other symptoms were reported. The subject had no reported occupational noise exposure, allergies,
or ototoxic drug use.
54
==PAGE:63==
No tympanograms are available for this subject as it was not possible to get a sufficient seal in the ear
canal with the probe. Stapedius reflexes were not detected in either ear at any of the frequencies mea-
sured. This is surprising, given the generally normal thresholds in the left ear. It is therefore likely that
the measurement was in error, perhaps due to the same poor probe seal that caused the tympanograms
to fail. DPOAEs were detected in the left ear at 1000, 2000, and 4000 Hz and in the right ear at 3000
and 4000 Hz.
The longer chirps evoked the greatest wave Vs in both ears overall at 60 dB nHL (Figure 4.17).
However, Chirp 0.5 evoked a wave V in the better (left) ear over 100 nV greater than either of the two
adjacent stimuli: the click and Chirp 1. In that same ear the wave V resulting from the LS-80 chirp—
Figure4.17: WaveVp-pmagnitudesforsubjectHI-04usingthestimulitestedat60dBnHL.Leftandrightplotsshowthe
results from the left and right ears, respectively. Error bars indicate the 95% conﬁdence interval. Missing data indicate
an ABR without a clear wave V peak. Arithmetic mean of the wave V p-p magnitudes in the screening population shown
with a dotted line.
55
==PAGE:64==
which has the same waveform as Chirp 0.5—was nearly 400 nV greater than the 80 dB nHL click,
though it should be noted that a relatively small PAMR was detected for both of these recordings.
The fact that the same phenomenon occurred at both presentation levels suggests that, at least for this
subject, the expected relationship between stimulus length and p-p magnitude is not present.
Subject HI-05
Figure 4.18: Left (blue) and right (red) audiograms for subject HI-05 from 500 Hz up to 8000 Hz. No data available at
3000 Hz. The audiogram shows sloping hearing loss with ≥15 dB of asymmetry from 2000 Hz and up.
Subject HI-05 is a 66-year old male with hearing loss ≥20 dB HL at all frequencies above 500 Hz.
As shown in Figure 4.18 there is also asymmetry of 10–25 Hz at these frequencies. The subject reported
no tinnitus or any vestibular symptoms. The subject did report occupational noise exposure but had
no known allergies or use of ototoxic drugs.
The tympanogram could not be measured in the right ear due to a poor probe fit. A tympanogram
was measured in the left ear and shows low compliance and low absorbance in the 1.5–7 kHz region.
56
==PAGE:65==
However this is likely due to a poor probe fit, as well, since this region is expected to be the best for
absorbance. Stapedius reflexes were detected in both ears at all measured frequencies. DPOAEs were
detected at 500, 1000, 2000, and 4000 Hz in the left ear but only at 500 Hz in the right ear.
Wave V was not detected in the better (left) ear with the 60 dB nHL click. Wave V was also not
detected in the worse (right) ear with any stimulus tested at 60 dB nHL (Figure 4.19). It is interesting
that despite the failure of the click to evoke wave V the chirps all were able to, at least in the better ear.
The stimuli tested at 80 dB nHL achieved better results, with wave V detected in both ears. The LS-80
Chirp evoked larger wave V peaks in both ears, as expected, but interestingly in the worse ear they also
evoked waves I and III. These were not evoked by the LS-80 Chirp in the better ear, at least not clearly,
Figure4.19: WaveVp-pmagnitudesforsubjectHI-05usingthestimulitestedat60dBnHL.Leftandrightplotsshowthe
results from the left and right ears, respectively. Error bars indicate the 95% conﬁdence interval. Missing data indicate
an ABR without a clear wave V peak. Arithmetic mean of the wave V p-p magnitudes in the screening population shown
with a dotted line.
57
==PAGE:66==
though they to appear to be present in the click recording at the same level. Unfortunately the residual
noise in the 80 dB nHL recordings was relatively high (59–68 nV) and so there is a significant amount
of uncertainty present in these measurements.
Subject HI-06
Figure 4.20: Left (blue) and right (red) audiograms for subject HI-06 from 500 Hz up to 8000 Hz. This audiogram shows
hearing loss in both ears with asymmetry ≥15 dB in the high frequencies (4000 Hz and above).
Subject HI-06 is a 62-year old female with thresholds of 25–45 dB HL in the better ear and sig-
nificant high-frequency asymmetry starting at 4000 Hz; see Figure 4.20 for the complete audiogram.
This subject reported no additional symptoms, no noise exposure, no allergies, and no known use of
ototoxic drugs.
The tympanograms for both ears were within normal limits. Stapedius reflexes were detected in
both ears at all measured frequencies. DPOAEs were only detected at 1000 and 2000 Hz in the better
ear.
58
==PAGE:67==
WaveVpeaksweredetectedwithallstimuliexceptwiththeclickinthebetter(right)earat60dBnHL
(Figure 4.21). Unfortunately the subject was restless during the recordings and the resulting noise
floors were relatively high, ranging from about 47–70 nV. A number of the recordings at 60 dB nHL
also suffered from low Fmp values while the left ear recordings at 80 dB nHL had very high Fmp values
but those were likely caused by the presence of very strong PAMRs. As a result it is difficult to observe
anything meaningful about the ABRs for this subject.
Figure4.21: WaveVp-pmagnitudesforsubjectHI-06usingthestimulitestedat60dBnHL.Leftandrightplotsshowthe
results from the left and right ears, respectively. Error bars indicate the 95% conﬁdence interval. Missing data indicate
an ABR without a clear wave V peak. Arithmetic mean of the wave V p-p magnitudes in the screening population shown
with a dotted line.
59
==PAGE:68==
Subject HI-07
Figure 4.22: Left (blue) and right (red) audiograms for subject HI-07 from 500 Hz up to 8000 Hz. No data available at
3000 Hz. This audiogram shows asymmetry ≥30 dB at all measured frequencies. The thresholds in the better ear (left)
is almost normal except at 6000 and 8000 Hz.
Subject HI-07 is a 54-year old female with better ear thresholds ≤20 dB HL at and below 4000 Hz
and thresholds at 40 dB HL for 6000 and 8000 Hz. There is 30–35 dB of asymmetry at all frequencies
in the audiogram (see Figure 4.22). This subject reported no additional symptoms, no noise exposure,
no allergies, and no known use of ototoxic drugs.
No tympanograms are available for this subject as it was not possible to get a sufficient seal in the
ear canal with the probe. Stapedius reflexes were only detected at 500 and 1000 Hz and only in the
worse ear. This is unexpected but could be due to the same issues that caused the tympanograms to
fail. DPOAEs were not detected at any frequency in either ear.
The ABR recordings were successful overall, with wave V peaks detected with all stimuli tested and
noise floors generally at the desired level of 40 nV (Figure 4.23). Interestingly in the better (left) ear,
60
==PAGE:69==
two non-adjacent stimuli evoked high wave Vs at 60 dB nHL: Chirp 0.5 and Chirp 3. The LS-80 Chirp
also significantly outperformed the 80 dB nHL click in that ear. This is now the second time such a
patternhasbeenobserved, thefirstbeingwithSubjectHI-04. Theimplicationisthatsomeaspect(s)of
these subjects’ hearing impairments are leading to a breakdown in the expected relationship between
stimulus length and p-p wave V magnitudes. The result of this breakdown is that two non-adjacent
stimuli achieve ’optimal’ ABRs which is of great interest.
Figure4.23: WaveVp-pmagnitudesforsubjectHI-07usingthestimulitestedat60dBnHL.Leftandrightplotsshowthe
results from the left and right ears, respectively. Error bars indicate the 95% conﬁdence interval. Missing data indicate
an ABR without a clear wave V peak. Arithmetic mean of the wave V p-p magnitudes in the screening population shown
with a dotted line.
61
==PAGE:70==
4.3
Comparing the normal and screening populations
Summary data for the stimuli tested at 60 dB nHL are presented via box and whisker plots in Figure
4.24. The wave V peak-to-peak magnitude distributions for the normal hearing population appear to
follow a somewhat parabolic pattern, increasing with stimulus length to a point after which they fall
off again. These results are in agreement with those of Elberling et al. (2010) who performed a similar
experiment, as previously shown in Figure 4.2.
Figure 4.24: Box and whisker plots of the peak-to-peak magnitudes (left) and latencies (right) for wave V obtained using
each of the test stimuli at 60 dB nHL. The plots in blue represent the normal hearing population (N = 13) and the plots
in red represent the target screening population (N = 8). The center lines indicate the median, the boxes indicate the
interquartile range, and the whiskers indicate the full range of the distribution excluding outliers, which are indicated by
pluses.
62
==PAGE:71==
This pattern appears to break down however for the screening population. The distributions for
some of the chirp stimuli have very wide magnitude ranges but they exhibit no apparent change in
their overall positions relative to that of the click. This is not surprising however given the highly
non-homogeneous behavior observed in the screening population. The results in this group on an
individual basis show that the chirps tested do actually provide gains in terms of wave V magnitude
relative to the click; more on this in Chapter 5. It is the differences among the population in terms of
notonlytheoptimalstimulusbutalsothemagnitudesoverallthatleadstotherelativelystaticbehavior
of the magnitude distributions that were observed.
The wave V latency distributions are similar for both populations tested at 60 dB nHL, albeit
with greater range in the screening population. Both populations show a linear decrease in latency
with increasing stimulus length. This is argued here to be a result of how the chirp stimuli were cali-
brated in the time domain.
Because the stimuli tested were all of different lengths it was necessary to choose a standardized
zero point. For this experiment the chirp stimuli were aligned at their respective 10 kHz frequency
components. This means that the onset of the longest stimulus, Chirp 4, occurred first and those of
the shorter stimuli occurred progressively later.
The IP-30 earphones, identical to the ER-3As, have a frequency response with a significant rolloff
starting at around 4 kHz, as shown in Figure 4.25. This rolloff limits the contributions of the high
frequencies to the overall ABR and as a result the lower frequencies become more dominant.
In the distributions of the data we observe that the ABRs obtained with longer chirps have shorter
wave V latencies and vice versa, resulting in an overall downward, linear trend. As previously stated,
the test stimuli were aligned at 10 kHz and therefore the lower frequencies were not synchronized.
It is likely that the trend seen in the latency data is a direct result of this temporal alignment of the
chirp stimuli at 10 kHz. This is supported by the fact that the trend occurs in both the normal hearing
63
==PAGE:72==
Figure 4.25: Frequency responses for the ER-3A insert earphone, which is identical to the IP-30 used in this experiment,
and the ER-2 insert earphone. The responses are adjusted to have the same level at 2.5 kHz. Though the ER-3A has a
signiﬁcant high-frequency rolloff starting at about 4 kHz, it is the preferred transducer for clinical use both because it is
less expensive and because it distorts less at high levels. The ER-2 is generally used for research purposes but the ER-3A
was used in the present study because of its clinical application.
and the screening populations. Assuming this is true, then shifting the ABRs in the time domain as
if the stimuli were aligned at 2.5 kHz—proposed by Elberling to be the most important frequency
component to the ABR—should result in the wave V latencies becoming more or less aligned.
OneinterestingobservationisthatthewaveVmagnitudesobtainedwiththeLS-80Chirpwere
greater than those obtained with the click at 80 dB nHL in every ear tested in the normal hearing and
in the screening populations. To test this finding, the magnitude distributions for the LS-80 Chirp
and the 80 dB click were analyzed using a two-sample t-test.ii
ii
The two-sample t-test is a statistical test that determines the likelihood that two distributions have been
sampled from different populations. The null hypothesis of the t-test is that the two distributions tested
are sampled from the same population. This test assumes that both distributions are normal and have
equal variance. Before performing the t-test, a Lilliefors test was used to test the former assumption and a
two-sample variance test was used to test the latter.
64
==PAGE:73==
At the level of α = 0.05, however, only in the normal hearing population were the LS-80 Chirp
magnitudes significantly different from those of the click. It is possible that the reason this difference
was not statistically significant for the screening population was the small wave V magnitudes overall.
Applying an appropriate compensation factor to the magnitudes that accounts for hearing loss might
yield different results. Compensating for hearing loss in this way has been done before with derived-
band ABRs (e.g. by Don et al., 2012). This was only possible however because gain factors could be
applied to those individual derived-bands (i.e. to match the hearing loss at each frequency). Using
broadband stimuli as in this experiment makes such a strategy unfortunately impossible.
65
==PAGE:74==
4.4
Confirmed VS population
As with the screening population, the confirmed VS population is highly non-homogeneous. Two
of their audiograms exhibit high-frequency asymmetry, another two have low-frequency asymmetry,
one has broadband asymmetry, and the remaining patient’s asymmetry is in the high frequencies but
the better ear actually changes as frequency increases. Stapedius reflexes were detected in three of the
patients and not detected in the remaining three. See Table 4.1 for general information about the
tumors in this test group.
Given testing time constraints, much of the data collected in the previous populations are not avail-
able here. This includes both tympanogram and DPOAE information as well as the ABR recordings
at 60 dB nHL. Comparing the ABRs recorded using the LS-80 Chirp and the click at 80 dB nHL
reveals many interesting findings nevertheless.
Patient ID
Gender
DOB
Ear
Size (mm)
Months since diagnosis
TP-16
F
1964
R
1
TP-17
F
1973
L
20
8
TP-18
M
1965
L
8
10
TP-19
F
1944
R
7
15
TP-21
F
1953
R
5
TP-22
M
1974
L
15
4
Table4.1: SummarydatatableofthesixconﬁrmedVSpatients. Alongwithpatients’gendersandbirthyears,information
about the tumor ear, size, and number of months since diagnosis are also given. Two of the patients do not have tumor
size data available but it is known that their tumors are intracanalicular.
66
==PAGE:75==
One of the confirmed tumor patients, TP-21, has been presented as an example in Figure 4.26.
Note the drastic difference in the ABR waveforms—and consequently the p-p wave V magnitudes—
betweentheVSandnon-VSear. Thisonlyoccurredinoneoftheotherpatientsinthetestpopulation:
TP-17, who had the largest tumor in the group. The difference between p-p wave V magnitudes at-
tained with the click and the LS-80 is also very large in the VS ear for TP-21, with the chirp performing
significantly better. Interestingly the chirp did not perform as well in the non-VS ear. In fact, the
observed wave V was slightly higher in magnitude with the click but the difference between the two
stimuli was not large enough to say that this change was significant.
Figure4.26(followingpage): [Top]AudiogramforpatientTP-21from125–8000Hz. Stapediusreﬂexeswereabsentinthis
subject. [Middle] ABR waveforms obtained in patient TP-21 using the click (top) and the LS-80 Chirp (bottom), both at
80 dB nHL. [Bottom] The p-p magnitudes of wave V for the above ABRs. Error bars indicate the 95% conﬁdence interval.
Note that the left and right ears are reversed in these plots (i.e. red = right ear, blue = left ear).
67
==PAGE:76==
68
==PAGE:77==
5
Discussion
The agreement of the normal hearing results with those from Elberling et al. (2010) seems to confirm
that, at least in a normal hearing population, the chirp delay model works as intended. Wave V magni-
tudes increased monotonically with stimulus length until reaching an optimal chirp, after which they
decreased monotonically. The original hypothesis however was that a similar, yet distinct relation-
ship would emerge using the same set of stimuli in a clinical VS screening population. The apparent
breakdown of this relationship that was observed was therefore quite interesting.
Considering the screening population as a whole, it is not difficult to see why this sup-
posed breakdown occurred. The expectation was that the recruited test subjects would have reason-
ably similar audiological profiles when in actuality the subjects had a broad range of symptoms. There
was no consistent pattern in the hearing losses or even in any of the pathologies tested for, never mind
those that were not tested. The ABRs varied widely as a result. That no discernible pattern emerged
in the distributions of the wave V magnitudes when using different chirp stimuli is therefore unsur-
prising, to say the least.
69
==PAGE:78==
Neverthelesstheindividualscreeningsubjectsprovedtobeveryinterestingcasestudies. Despitethe
overall lower amplitudes relative to the normal hearing population, many of the screening subjects did
appeartohaveanoptimalchirp. Somesubjectsevenhadshortoptimalstimuli(Chirps0.5and1)which
would indicate that they fit with the original hypothesis. That said, the high amount of variation in
wave V magnitudes using the stimuli make it difficult to say this with certainty. Conversely there were
other subjects for whom their optimal chirp was one of the longer ones which is the opposite of what
was expected.
Perhaps the most interesting results were from subjects HI-04 and HI-07, who each had one ear
in which two non-adjacent stimuli evoked a high wave V magnitude. This may also have been the
case with subject HI-06 but the higher residual noise in those recordings make the results more am-
biguous. Regardless, the existence of subjects with two dissimilar, “optimal” stimuli is surprising. It
is possible in such cases that only the high frequency contributions to the ABR are synchronized with
the shorter stimuli and that the low-frequency contributions are only synchronized well enough to
increase the total ABR magnitude with the longer stimuli. This would mean that stimuli of mid-
dling length would have equally failed to incorporate both high- and low-frequency contributions,
resulting in a desynchronization and therefore an overall drop in magnitude. This however is a purely
speculative explanation.
Given that the ABR amplitudes in the normal hearing population behaved as expected, the various
deviations that were observed in the VS screening population must be attributable to some combina-
tion of pathologies. Given the non-homogenous nature of the screening population, however, it is
impossible to be more specific at this time. This was mentioned early on as a potential challenge.
Recall that the prevalence of VS is estimated at approximately 1–2 per 100,000 worldwide (Stangerup
et al., 2004; Tos et al., 2004). Within the screening population, estimates place the prevalence at about
5% (Turner et al., 1984). Separating this population into subgroups according to similar presentations
ofsymptomswouldbeagoodfirststeptoisolatingandidentifyingthecause(s)oftheabnormalABRs.
70
==PAGE:79==
Unfortunately the number of available test subjects in the present study is prohibitively small. A fu-
ture study or meta-analysis of suspected VS patients would therefore be useful.
Thoughtheconfirmedtumorpopulationwasalsonon-homogeneous, thereweresome
interesting observations to be made here, as well. The first was that the LS-80 Chirp did not outper-
form the 80 dB nHL click in all of the tested ears. This is contrary to what was observed in not only the
normal hearing but also the screening population, which makes it surprising. The only thing distin-
guishing the confirmed tumor population from the screening population is the presence of the tumor
itself. Ostensibly this unexpected behavior observed with the LS-80 Chirps in this population is there-
fore caused by the tumor. The dataset in the present study is unfortunately too small to determine
the specific effect the tumors are having; a larger study is needed.
Even more surprising was that the ABRs recorded in the confirmed population using the LS-80
Chirp were still sensitive to the presence of VS according to the interaural wave V latency differences
(IT5). Note that with standard, click-evoked ABR procedures an IT5 of at least 0.2 ms would be
considered a significant indicator of VS. In some cases these differences were actually greater with the
chirp than with the click. A recent study by Lee et al. (2015) reports similar results.
Furthermore, over half of the chirps tested in the screening population at 60 dB nHL also showed
a high number of significant IT5s; three subjects out of the eight tested had a significantly high IT5
using the LS-80 Chirp. There were even high IT5s observed in the normal hearing population, though
not as many. These findings raise questions about the original assumptions of the thesis.
71
==PAGE:80==
If the proposed blocking mechanism is sufficient to explain the effects of auditory nerve
compressiononthetransmissionofactionpotentials, thenaproperlydesignedchirpshouldnotevoke
ABRs with significant interaural latency differences. The most obvious question is whether the chirps
are, in fact, properly designed. Recall that the chirps tested in this experiment were created based on
derived-band latency data from a population of normal hearing subjects Elberling & Don (2008). As
previously mentioned it does appear that the chirps are properly designed for a normal hearing pop-
ulation, as both the results of the present study and of Elberling et al. (2010) show. And yet even in
this population significant IT5s do still emerge. That said, most of these were exactly 0.2 ms; count-
ing only those IT5s that were actually greater than 0.2 ms reduces the number of so-called significant
instances to less than a third of the original.
One possible implication is that it is not valid to assume that even a normal hearing subject’s ears are
identical. If they were then the optimal chirp stimulus would be the same in both ears and the ABRs
would be identical—or at least reasonably close to it. About half of the normal hearing population
did not have the same optimal chirp for both ears, however. Excluding high IT5s that occurred in nor-
mal hearing subjects without the same optimal chirp for both ears would reduce the total number of
observed instances to three. Of these only one high IT5 occurs between the optimal stimuli. Granted,
this reasoning is too reductionist to be adequate on its own. Further analysis of the data would be
necessary to say for certain whether high IT5s are a problem in the normal hearing population.
It would also be useful to examine I–V interpeak latencies (IPIs). Unfortunately many of the
recordings do not contain clear wave I peaks which makes this impossible. A new study that incorpo-
rates the use of TIPtrodes into chirp-evoked ABR recordings would be helpful on this front.i
i
TIPtrodes are foam eartips wrapped in foil that serve as electrodes in ABR recordings. Bauch et al. (1996)
note that they can get stronger wave I peaks which makes them useful. They are much more expensive than
standard foam eartips, however, so using them outside of research applications may not be practical.
72
==PAGE:81==
The issue of chirp design only gets more complicated when considering the effects of hear-
ing impairment. The assumption regarding the VS screening population was that their ears would not
be identical. The optimal chirp stimuli were therefore not expected to be the same for both ears and
indeed they were not in six of the eight subjects tested. To compare the interaural differences in ABRs
evoked by different chirps, it is important to make sure that the absolute latencies are occurring where
expected with every chirp. The systematic latency shift that was observed with the different stimuli
means that the IT5 cannot be determined directly from the recordings in their present state. A more
appropriate standardized zero point for the stimuli would first need to be established, as previously
discussed in Section 4.3.
The issue is complicated further still by the wide range of hearing impairments observed in the
screening population. The only relevant exclusion criteria for the present study were conductive hear-
ing losses. Controlling for conductive losses still includes all impairments that result in sensorineural
hearing loss, including those caused by a potential tumor. With little more than an audiogram to de-
scribe each subject’s impairments, it is not clear what specific pathologies are causing them. The one
thing that is clear, however, is that sensorineural hearing loss absolutely has an effect on electrophysi-
ology.
As previously mentioned, a larger study that can separate similarly impaired subjects into sub-
groups is needed in order to isolate the effects of different pathologies. Another study to evaluate
the robustness of ABRs in impaired subjects is also needed. This would be a long-term study that
tracked changes, if any, in the ABRs of impaired individuals over the course of multiple sessions.
A retrospective study that examines the stacked ABR data from e.g. Don et al. (1997, 2005b) would
also be useful. By examining the necessary shifts in derived-band latencies to create the stacked ABR,
suchastudywouldbeabletodeterminewhethertheseshiftsaresystematicinsuspectedandconfirmed
tumor patients (i.e. according to a chirp function). The answer to this would determine whether
existing chirps are suitable for use as screening tools for VS.
73
==PAGE:82==
A relatively straightforward issue when evaluating chirps in a hearing-impaired pop-
ulation is that of audibility. The chirp exhibits the greatest advantage over the click at low levels. The
problem with presenting stimuli at low levels however is that ABRs disappear near hearing thresh-
olds. In a population where many of those thresholds are greater than 60 dB HL, recording ABRs
with low-level stimuli becomes problematic. This was evident even within the small test group ex-
amined in this thesis. An electrophysiological test that is magnitude-sensitive will therefore need to
exclude some patients based on their audiograms alone.
At higher levels the upward spread of excitation takes effect which leads to progressively shorter
chirps becoming optimal Elberling & Don (2010). Presenting stimuli at too high a level also risks
patient discomfort, which is detrimental to ABRs, never mind the overexposure to noise. That said,
a study that examines chirps more extensively at 80 dB nHL might be useful. Outside of this thesis,
which only compares the LS-80 Chirp to an 80 dB nHL click, such experiments do not yet exist in the
literature to the author’s knowledge.
ProperlyevaluatingtherecordedwaveformsisanissueofgreatimportancetoABRtesting.
While numerous studies have investigated the objective detection of peaks in an ABR waveform (e.g.
Elberling & Don, 1984; Don et al., 1984) this is still done subjectively quite often, as it was in this thesis.
The method used here determines the wave V p-p magnitude based on two separate estimations of
its peak and trough: the first by the author and the second by a more experienced researcher. The
trough is defined here as the lowest point of deflection occurring within approximately 4 ms after the
identified peak.ii
The problem with this method is that this so-called wave V trough does not occur at the same la-
tency consistently across recordings, even within the same subject. This raises the question of whether
the magnitude of wave V is being correctly quantified in every recording. It might be more appropri-
ii
All of the ABR evaluation methods used in this thesis are discussed in detail in Appendix C.
74
==PAGE:83==
ate to choose a certain point consistently when comparing recordings, for example the first deflection,
rather than simply the lowest deflection within a given timeframe. If the trough definition used in
the present study is shown to be not valid then many of the wave V p-p magnitudes identified in this
study are incorrect.
The ambiguity in the wave V magnitudes is significantly more of a problem in impaired popula-
tions than a normal hearing one. This is because ABRs recorded in impaired individuals are reduced
in magnitude and often much more noisy. These two factors combined can make the morphology of
the waveforms very difficult to identify, as was the case in many of the recordings from the screening
population. A new procedure that can define ABRs more objectively and reliably is therefore needed
in order to create a sensitive electrophysiological test, e.g. to screen for vestibular schwannomas. If on
the other hand the ABR peaks must be identified subjectively then a standardized criteria for picking
e.g. the wave V trough would be useful.
75
==PAGE:84==
6
Conclusion
Previous studies have reported that chirp stimuli elicit greater ABR amplitudes than click stimuli of
the same level in a normal hearing population (e.g. Elberling et al., 2010; Elberling & Don, 2010). The
present study is based on the premise that the advantages of the chirp over the click should also be
observed in a hearing-impaired population. The main hypothesis is that hearing-impaired subjects
(1) have an optimal chirp stimulus, (2) using a shorter or longer stimulus will monotonically decrease
the amplitude of wave V, and (3) the optimal chirp is shorter than for a normal hearing subject. This
was examined in the specific context of a clinical screening population for VS, who are asymmetrically
hearing-impaired.
Standard methods of screening for VS using click-evoked ABR are based on abnormal latency mea-
sures, namely the wave I–V interpeak interval (IPI) and the interaural wave V latency difference (IT5).
These abnormalities have been historically attributed to a neural conduction delay caused by the tu-
mor compressing the auditory nerve. The present study proposes instead that this compression blocks
the transmission of action potentials, based in part on the findings of Hatayama et al. (1999). The ob-
served delays are proposed to be a byproduct of the interaction of the cochlear traveling wave delay
with the click stimulus. By screening for VS with a chirp-evoked ABR, assuming the stimulus is prop-
76
==PAGE:85==
erly designed, no significant latency changes should be observed interaurally. The sensitive criteria is
therefore proposed to be based on magnitude instead of latency, as with the stacked ABR (Don et al.,
1997).
Auditory brainstem responses to click and chirp stimuli are studied in thirteen normal hearing sub-
jects, eight suspected VS patients, and six confirmedVS patients. The chirp stimuli, designed by Elber-
ling et al. (2010) and Elberling & Don (2010), are of progressively increasing length. The ABR ampli-
tude results in the screening population indicate a breakdown of the relationship observed in normal
hearing subjects. This is argued to be in part due to the high degree of non-homogeneity inherent in
this population. A larger study is proposed to examine the specific effects of different pathologies on
the ABR.
Surprisingly, a large proportion of the ABR results show abnormal IT5s. A recent study by Lee
et al. (2015) reports similar findings. This unexpected result could be because the chirp stimuli are
based on a cochlear-neural delay model of normal hearing individuals (Elberling & Don, 2008). A
new model or models that incorporate specific hearing impairments and pathologies may therefore be
necessary to optimize the advantage of the chirp stimulus in a hearing-impaired population. It is also
possible that the blocking mechanism proposed in the present study may be insufficient to explain
the effects of VS on the electrophysiology. More research is needed to evaluate the effects of auditory
nerve compression on the transmission of action potentials.
77
==PAGE:86==
References
Anderson, D., Rose, J., Hind, J., &Brugge, J.(1971). Temporalpositionofdischargesinsingleauditory
nerve fibers within the cycle of a sine-wave stimulus: frequency and intensity effects. J Acoust Soc
Am, 49, 1131–1139.
Arriaga, M., Long, S., & Nelson, R. (1993). Clinical correlates of acoustic neuroma volume. Am J
Otol, 14, 465–468.
Bauch, C., Olsen, W., & Pool, A. (1996). ABR indices: Sensitivity, specificity, and tumor size. Am J
Audiol, 5, 97–104.
Bederson, J., von Ammon, K., Wichmann, W., & Yasargil, M. (1991). Conservative treatment of pa-
tients with acoustic tumors. Neurosurgery, 28, 646–650.
Blausen.com staff (2014). Blausen Gallery 2014. Wikiversity Journal of Medicine https://en.
wikiversity.org/wiki/Blausen_gallery_2014. (image credit).
Bozorg Grayeli, A., Refass, A., Smail, M., et al. (2008). Diagnostic value of auditory brainstem re-
sponses in cerebellopontine angle tumours. Acta Otolaryngol, 128, 1096–1100.
Burkard, R., Don, M., & Eggermont, J. (2007). Auditory Evoked Potentials - Basic Principles and
Clinical Application. Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins.
Cayé-Thomassen, P., Dethloff, T., Hansen, S., Stangerup, S., & Thomsen, J. (2007). Hearing in
patients with intracanalicular vestibular schwannomas. Audiol Neurotol, 12, 1–12.
Chandrasekhar, S., Brackmann, S., & Devgan, K. (1995). Utility of auditory brainstem response au-
diometry in diagnosis of acoustic neuromas. Am J Otol, 16(1), 63–67.
Dau, T., Wagner, O., Mellert, V., & Kollmeier, B. (2000). Auditory brainstem responses with opti-
mized chirp signals compensating basilar membrane dispersion. J Acoust Soc Am, 107, 1530–1540.
de Boer, E. (1980). Auditory physics. Physical principles in hearing theory I. Phys Rep, 62, 87–174.
Don,M.,Elberling,C.,&Maloff,E.(2009). Inputandoutputcompensationforthecochleartraveling
wave delay in wide-band ABR recordings: Implications for small acoustic tumor detection. J Am
Acad Audiol, 20, 99–108.
Don, M., Elberling, C., & Waring, M. (1984). Objective detection of averaged auditory brainstem
responses. Scand Audiol, 13(4), 219–228.
78
==PAGE:87==
Don, M., Kwong, B., & Tanaka, C. (2005a). The stacked ABR: a successful small acoustic tumor
screening method. Clinical presentation slides, House Ear Institute.
Don, M., Kwong, B., & Tanaka, C. (2012). Interaural stacked auditory brainstem response measures
for detecting small unilateral acoustic tumors. Audiol Neurotol, 17, 54–68.
Don,M.,Kwong,B.,Tanaka,C.,Brackmann,D.,&Nelson,R.(2005b). ThestackedABR:Asensitive
and specific screening tool for detecting small acoustic tumors. Audiol Neurotol, 10, 274–290.
Don, M., Masuda, A., Nelson, R., & Brackmann, D. (1997). Successful detection of small acoustic
tumors using the stacked derived-band auditory brain stem response amplitude. Am J of Otol, 18,
608–621.
Don, M., Ponton, C., Eggermont, J., & Kwong, B. (1998). The effects of sensory hearing loss on
cochlear filter times estimated from auditory brainstem response latencies. J Acoust Soc Am, 104,
2280–2289.
Drummond, M. & Banta, D. (2009). Health technology assessment in the United Kingdom. Int J
Technol Assess Health Care, 25, 178–181.
Elberling, C. (2014). Reference calibration values for tone bursts and narrow-band chirps (and how
they relate to the threshold for pure tones). DTAS Annual Conference.
Elberling, C., Callø, J., & Don, M. (2010). Evaluating auditory brainstem responses to different chirp
stimuli at three levels of stimulation. J Acoust Soc Am, 128, 215–223.
Elberling, C. & Don, M. (1984). Quality estimation of average auditory brainstem responses. Scand
Audiol, 13, 187–197.
Elberling, C. & Don, M. (2008). Auditory brainstem responses to a chirp stimulus designed from
derived-band latencies in normal-hearing subjects. J Acoust Soc Am, 124, 3022–3037.
Elberling,C.&Don,M.(2010). Adirectapproachforthedesignofchirpstimuliusedfortherecording
of auditory brainstem responses. J Acoust Soc Am, 128, 2955–2964.
Fawcett, T. (2006). An introduction to ROC analysis. Pattern Recognition Letters, 27(8), 861–874.
Ferri, G., Modugno, G., Calbucci, F., et al. (2009). Hearing loss in vestibular schwannomas: analysis
of cochlear function by means of distortion-product otoacoustic emissions. Auris Nasus Larynx,
36, 644–648.
Fobel, O. & Dau, T. (2004). Searching for the optimal stimulus eliciting auditory brainstem responses
in humans. J Acoust Soc Am, 116, 2213–2222.
79
==PAGE:88==
Gøtsche-Rasmussen, K., Poulsen, T., & Elberling, C. (2012). Reference hearing threshold levels for
chirp signals delivered by an ER-3A insert earphone. Int J of Audiol, 51, 794–799.
Gouveris, H., Victor, A., & Mann, W. (2007). Cochlear origin of early hearing loss in vestibular
schwannoma. Laryngoscope, 117, 680–683.
Hatayama, T., Iwabuchi, T., Sekiya, T., & Suzuki, S. (1999). Effect of compression on the cochlear
nerve: A short- and long-term electrophysiological and histological study. Neurological Research,
21, 599–610.
Hendrix,R.,DeRio,R.,&Sclafani,A.(1990). Theuseofdiagnostictestinginasymmetric, sensorineu-
ral hearing loss. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg, 103(593–598).
Hoth, S. (1986). Reliability of latency and amplitude values of auditory-evoked potentials. Audiology,
25, 248–257.
Inoue, Y., Kanzaki, J., & Ogawa, K. (2000). Vestibular schwannoma presenting as sudden deafness. J
Laryngol Otol, 114(8), 589–592.
Kochanek, K., Śliwa, L., Gołębiewski, M., Piłka, A., & Skarżyński, H. (2015). Comparison of effective-
ness of ABR-based methods in diagnosis of retrocochlear pathologies. In IERASG (pp. OP–8).:
IERASG.
Koors, P., Thacker, L., & Coelho, D. (2013). ABR in the diagnosis of vestibular schwannoma: a meta-
analysis. Am J Otol, 34, 195–204.
Kristensen, S. & Elberling, C. (2012). Auditory brainstem responses to level-specific chirps in normal-
hearing adults. J Am Acad Audiol, 23, 712–721.
Lane, D. (1993). HyperStat Online Statistics Textbook. http://davidmlane.com/hyperstat/
index.html.
Lee, J. H., Chang, M. Y., Lee, M. Y., Lee, E. Y., Cho, S. W., Jang, J. H., Oh, S. H., & Chang, S. O.
(2015). Clinical implication of chirp stimuli on tumor detection: preliminary report. In IERASG
(pp. OP–7).: IERASG.
Morantz, R. & Walsh, J. (1994). Brain tumors: a comprehensive text. Informa HealthCare.
Murofushi, T. & Takehisa, M. (2010). Vestibular schwannoma with absent vestibular evoked myo-
genic potentials to clicks but normal abr, caloric responses and vestibular evoked myogenic poten-
tials to 500 hz tone bursts. Acta Otolaryngol, 130, 525–528.
Murphy, M. & Selesnick, S. (2002). Cost-effective diagnosis of acoustic neuromas: a philosophical,
macroeconomic, and technological decision. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg, 127, 253–259.
80
==PAGE:89==
Musiek, F., Borenstein, S., Hall, J., & Schwaber, M. (1994). Auditory brainstem response: neurodiag-
nostic and intraoperative applications. Handbook of Clinical Audiology, (pp. 351–374).
Nadol, J. J., Diamond, P., & Thornton, A. (1996). Correlation of hearing loss and radiologic dimen-
sions of vestibule schwannomas (acoustic neuromas). Am J Otol, 17, 312–316.
NIH-NIDCD (2004). Vestibular schwannoma (acoustic neuroma) and neurofibromatosis. http:
//www.nidcd.nih.gov/health/hearing/pages/acoustic_neuroma.aspx.
O’Beirne, G. & Patuzzi, R. (1999). Basic properties of the sound-evoked post-auriculus muscle re-
sponse (PAMR). Hearing Research, 138(1–2), 115–132.
Powers, D. (2001). Evaluation: From precision, recall and f-measure to ROC, informedness, marked-
ness & correlation. J Machine Learning Tech, 2(1), 37–63.
Richter, U. & Fedtke, T. (2005). Reference zero for the calibration of audiometric equipment using
clicks as test signals. Int J of Audiol, 44, 478–487.
Roeser, R., Valente, M., & Hosford-Dunn, H. (2007). Audiology Diagnosis. Thieme Publishing
Group, second edition.
Roosli, C., Linthicum Jr., F., Cureoglu, S., & Merchant, S. (2012). Dysfunction of the cochlea con-
tributing to hearing loss in acoustic neuromas: an under-appreciated entity. Otol Neurotol, 33,
473–480.
Sauvaget, E., Kici, S., Kania, R., Herman, P., & Tran Ba Huy, F. (2005). Sudden sensorineural hearing
loss as a revealing symptom of vestibular schwannoma. Acta Otolaryngol, 125, 592–595.
Schuknecht, H. (1955). An experimental and clinical study of deafness from lesions of the cochlear
nerve. J Laryngol Otol, 69, 75–97.
Selters, W. & Brackmann, D. (1977). Acoustic tumor detection with brainstem electric response au-
diometry. Arch Otolaryngol, 103, 181–187.
Shera, C. & Guinan, J. (2000). Frequency dependence of stimulus-frequency-emission phase: Impli-
cations for cochlear mechanics. In International Symposium on Recent Developments in Auditory
Mechanics (pp. 381–387).
Silk, P., Lane, J., & Driscoll, C. (2009). Surgical approaches to vestibular schwannomas: what the
radiologist needs to know. Radiographics, 29, 1955–1970.
Spoendlin, H. & Schrott, A. (1989). Analysis of the human auditory nerve. Hearing Research, 43,
25–38.
81
==PAGE:90==
Stangerup, S., Tos, M., Cayé-Thomassen, P., Tos, T., Klokker, M., & Thomsen, J. (2004). Increasing
annual incidence of vestibular schwannoma and age of diagnosis. J Laryngol Otol, 118(8), 622–627.
Strelcyk, O., Christoforidis, D., &Dau, T.(2009). Relationbetweenderived-bandauditorybrainstem
response latencies and behavioral frequency selectivity. J Acoust Soc Am, 126, 1878–1888.
Sturzebecher, E., Cebulla, M., & Wernecke, K. D. (2001). Objective detection of transiently evoked
otoacoustic emissions. Scand Audiol, 29, 78–88.
Telischi, F., Roth, J., Stagner, B., et al. (1995). Patterns of evoked otoacoustic emissions associated with
acoustic neuromas. Laryngoscope, 105, 675–682.
Tos, M., Stangerup, S., Cayé-Thomassen, P., Tos, T., & Thomsen, J. (2004). What is the real incidence
of vestibular schwannoma? Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg., 130(2), 216–220.
Turner, R., Shepard, N., & Frazer, G. (1984). Clinical performance of audiological and related diag-
nostic tests. Ear and Hearing, 5, 187–194.
Wilson, D., Hodgson, R., Gustafson, M., & et al. (1992). The sensitivity of auditory brainstem re-
sponse testing in small acoustic neuromas. Laryngoscope, 102, 961–964.
82
==PAGE:91==
A
Signal detection theory
While MRI scanning has emerged as the gold standard in terms of VS detection, a number of tests
using auditory evoked potentials have been developed over the years. The goal of these tests is to
screen patients and rule out those who do not have VS. Before examining the different methods of VS
screening, it is worthwhile to review some basic signal detection theory.
Signal detection theory is used to quantify the performance of a given test according to two primary
factors: the presence/absence of the condition—in this case VS—and the outcome of the test. These
two factors lead to four possible results described in Table A.1. A number of quantities have been
defined as ratios based on different combinations of these four results; some key examples of which
are also given in Table A.1.
It is important to remember that while minimizing errors in detection is the goal of any test, in a
clinical context such as this one a false positive is much less costly than a false negative. While it is true
that the goal of using a screening test for VS is to send as few people for MRI scans as possible, it is
more important that anyone not sent for an MRI is sure to not have VS.
83
==PAGE:92==
Vestibular schwannoma
Test outcome
present
absent
positive
true positive (TP)
false positive (FP)
negative
false negative (FN)
true negative (TN)
Accuracy
(TP + TN) / total population
Prevalence
tumor present / total population
Sensitivity
TP / tumor present
Speciﬁcity
TN / tumor absent
Positive predictive value (PPV)
TP / outcome positive
Negative predictive value (NPV)
TN / outcome negative
Table A.1: Some basic terms used in signal detection theory (Fawcett, 2006; Powers, 2001), in the context of vestibular
schwannoma screening. The upper table lists the four possible outcomes of a single trial of the test to be evaluated. The
lower table deﬁnes a number of ratios based on these outcomes that are commonly used to quantify the performance of
a test.
84
==PAGE:93==
B
Noise exposure levels
The daily personal noise exposure level, LEP,d, which corresponds to LEX,8h defined in international
standard ISO 1999:1990 clause 3.6, is expressed in decibels and is ascertained using the formula,
LEP,d = LAeq,Te + 10 log10
( Te
T0
)
(B.1)
where
• Te is the duration of the person’s working day, in seconds
• T0 is 28,800 seconds (8 hours)
• LAeq,Te is the equivalent continuous A-weighted sound pressure level (as defined in ISO 1999:
1990 clause 3.5) in decibels, that represents the sound the person is exposed to during the work-
ing day
If the work is such that the daily exposure consists of two or more periods with different sound
levels, the daily personal noise exposure level (LEP,d) for the combination of periods is ascertained
using the formula,
LEP,d = 10 log10
[
1
T0
i=n
∑
i=1
Ti 100.1(LAeq,T)i
]
(B.2)
where
85
==PAGE:94==
• n is the number of individual periods in the working day
• Ti is the duration of period i
• (LAeq,T)i is the equivalent continuous A-weighted sound pressure level that represents the
sound the person is exposed to during period i
• ∑i=n
i=1 Ti is equal to Te, the duration of the person’s working day, in seconds
The exposure level and duration for each stimulus used in the ABR recordings were cal-
culated individually, the results of which are given in Table B.1. The total duration, Te, was defined
as the total noise exposure duration incurred in one ear during the course of the experiment. This is
justified because the stimuli are presented using insert earphones and therefore only one ear is exposed
to noise at any point in the experiment. This information was applied in Equation B.2 to obtain the
total equivalent noise exposure level, LEP,d, which was 76.0 dBA.
Stimulus
Recordings
Exposure
Type
dB nHL
Sweeps
Sweeps/sec
N
LAeq, dBA SPL
Ti, seconds
Click
80
8000
27.1
1
92.5
295.20
60
72.5
295.20
Chirp
80
93.0
295.20
60
5
73.0
1476.01
Table B.1: The stimuli used in the experiment with presentation levels given in dB nHL. The exposure levels, LAeq, are
determined by converting the presentation level to the peak-to-peak reference equivalent threshold sound pressure
level (dB peRETSPL). This involves applying a linear correction factor that depends on the type of stimulus and the type
of transducer. Using ER-3A insert earphones the correction factor is 12.5 dB for the click and 13.0 dB for the chirp (El-
berling, 2014). The exposure duration for each recording, Ti, was calculated assuming the maximum number of sweeps
(8000) was reached.
86
==PAGE:95==
C
Analyzing ABR data
The primary data of interest are the amplitudes of the recorded ABR waveforms, specifically that of
wave V. This amplitude is defined here as the difference between the wave V peak itself and the lowest
point of deflection in the ABR waveform occurring within approximately 4 ms of that peak. The
value of this difference is referred to as the wave V peak-to-peak (p-p) magnitude.
The decision to define the p-p magnitude in this way was based on the reasoning by Kristensen &
Elberling (2012) that residual noise can make the wave V trough difficult to clearly identify. Also like
that study, the wave Vs were identified by two observers: first by one with limited experience (i.e. the
author) and then again by an observer with more significant clinical experience. In this way wave V
was identified in each recording under two levels of scrutiny, albeit subjectively.
EEG recordings all contain a certain amount of residual noise and ABR is no exception. The
different indices of the response waveform, such as the wave V p-p magnitude, are therefore not able
to be determined exactly. It is however possible to calculate the uncertainty of these indices mathe-
matically. In this case the 95% confidence interval is an appropriate estimate of the uncertainty present
in the measured wave V p-p magnitudes.
87
==PAGE:96==
The confidence interval is defined as the measured value ± the margin of error. The margin of error
is the product of the critical value and the standard error. Hoth (1986) derived the standard error for
ABR amplitudes,
ΔA =
√
2 σ(n),
(C.1)
where the residual noise present in the recording is treated as a Gaussian variable with standard devi-
ation σ(n).
The critical value for the 95% confidence interval is 1.96. This value represents the number of stan-
dard deviations from the mean necessary to cover 95% of values in a normal distribution. More specif-
ically, each tail of the distribution would contain 2.5% of the values. Therefore, by looking up the
z-score for which 97.5% of the values are below, one arrives at the number 1.96 (Lane, 1993, Ch. 8).
The resulting 95% confidence interval for the wave V p-p magnitude is then given by,
CI95% = AVp−p ± 1.96
√
2 σ(n),
(C.2)
where AVp−p is the observed p-p magnitude for wave V and σ(n) is the residual noise for the recording.
Note that, for every 10 nV of residual noise, the confidence interval increases by 27.72 nV. This means
that given a 40 nV stop criteria the confidence interval would be ±110.87 nV; at 20 nV this decreases
to ±55.44 nV. Achieving the lowest noise floors possible is therefore of great importance.
Another useful metric for quantitatively evaluating biological signals is the multiple-point F-
ratio (Fmp). It was first proposed by Sturzebecher et al. (2001) as a variant of the single-point F-ratio
originally suggested by Elberling & Don (1984). It is related to the signal-to-noise ratio. The distinc-
tion is that for measurements like the ABR it is impossible to completely isolate the signal from the
noise in the measurement. This ratio instead compares the variance of the total response—the signal
88
==PAGE:97==
and the noise—to an estimated variance of the averaged background noise. As the names suggest,
the key difference between these two ratios is that Fsp estimates the noise variance at one point in the
response while Fmp uses the mean noise variance estimated at multiple points.
Higher values for Fmp generally indicate a better ABR. However, if one or more of the points used
to estimate the noise variance are at the same place in the response as, for example, a post-auricular
muscle response (PAMR) then the ratio will be misleadingly high. This is because the PAMR pro-
duces a very large wave in the ABR, typically peaking at around 10 ms. PAMR is the result of electrical
activity in the muscle just behind the ear and is typically observed in subjects with tension in the head
and neck during an EEG measurement. If large enough it can disrupt not only the Fmp but also the
nearby peaks in the ABR, namely wave V. The study by O’Beirne & Patuzzi (1999) provides a more
detailed overview of the fundamental properties of the PAMR.
C.1
Data tables, screening population
The following tables summarize the data collected from the ABR recordings in the VS screening pop-
ulation. The columns show the peak-to-peak magnitude and latency of wave V as well as the mul-
tiple point F-ratio and the residual noise for each recording. The first two stimuli were presented at
80 dB nHL and the remaining stimuli were presented at 60 dB nHL. Recordings without data for
magnitude and latency did not exhibit clear wave Vs.
89
==PAGE:98==
Left
Right
Stimulus
mag. (nV)
lat. (ms)
Fmp
noise (nV)
mag. (nV)
lat. (ms)
Fmp
noise (nV)
Click 80
464
5.60
29.06
19.72
511
5.47
49.50
20.02
LS-80 Chirp
526
4.48
11.70
39.87
654
4.61
17.59
39.82
Click 60
256
6.13
9.06
19.95
337
6.00
13.12
19.81
Chirp 0.5
370
5.01
18.17
19.80
472
5.21
28.81
25.29
Chirp 1
342
4.60
6.62
39.85
351
4.80
5.16
39.92
Chirp 2
347
4.13
20.54
19.66
413
4.40
35.12
19.88
Chirp 3
278
3.73
16.66
19.91
340
4.60
35.36
19.81
Chirp 4
286
2.87
18.27
19.46
377
2.73
43.51
19.97
Table C.1: Subject HI-00
Left
Right
Stimulus
mag. (nV)
lat. (ms)
Fmp
noise (nV)
mag. (nV)
lat. (ms)
Fmp
noise (nV)
Click 80
179
5.67
5.52
43.02
372
5.60
5.50
39.67
LS-80 Chirp
504
5.08
76.78
44.60
450
4.81
11.83
39.87
Click 60
3.10
42.23
220
5.93
3.26
39.55
Chirp 0.5
211
5.68
2.19
39.94
247
5.34
3.11
39.85
Chirp 1
267
5.13
3.15
39.80
428
4.73
6.71
39.92
Chirp 2
157
4.67
2.35
38.80
240
4.47
2.56
42.40
Chirp 3
185
4.27
3.37
39.90
184
4.00
1.74
40.45
Chirp 4
3.45
39.97
190
3.40
2.82
39.60
Table C.2: Subject HI-01
90
==PAGE:99==
Left
Right
Stimulus
mag. (nV)
lat. (ms)
Fmp
noise (nV)
mag. (nV)
lat. (ms)
Fmp
noise (nV)
Click 80
267
5.73
13.00
19.97
312
6.07
19.00
19.58
LS-80 Chirp
276
5.21
26.71
19.94
346
5.41
39.41
19.88
Click 60
184
6.60
7.83
19.75
3.62
19.80
Chirp 0.5
233
5.88
15.63
19.46
183
5.94
7.24
19.59
Chirp 1
205
5.80
7.39
19.78
173
6.13
7.13
19.78
Chirp 2
261
5.60
11.02
19.99
274
5.80
13.14
19.75
Chirp 3
212
5.47
9.54
19.85
200
5.53
6.80
19.86
Chirp 4
302
5.07
12.62
19.78
197
4.87
10.00
19.90
Table C.3: Subject HI-02
Left
Right
Stimulus
mag. (nV)
lat. (ms)
Fmp
noise (nV)
mag. (nV)
lat. (ms)
Fmp
noise (nV)
Click 80
264
5.67
37.76
56.24
421
5.67
9.44
70.36
LS-80 Chirp
725
4.94
80.75
66.65
457
5.08
16.54
72.80
Click 60
267
6.40
3.99
61.10
358
6.53
2.27
67.02
Chirp 0.5
318
6.48
25.30
62.54
227
6.01
3.31
75.79
Chirp 1
356
5.47
3.65
61.61
372
5.67
2.53
71.20
Chirp 2
326
4.93
5.63
58.36
428
5.40
2.03
82.04
Chirp 3
413
4.87
6.29
61.96
434
4.87
3.49
74.33
Chirp 4
372
3.87
5.94
52.33
439
4.53
4.26
71.66
Table C.4: Subject HI-03
91
==PAGE:100==
Left
Right
Stimulus
mag. (nV)
lat. (ms)
Fmp
noise (nV)
mag. (nV)
lat. (ms)
Fmp
noise (nV)
Click 80
315
6.00
20.01
43.97
498
6.07
11.19
39.67
LS-80 Chirp
713
5.48
78.96
39.64
503
5.41
21.14
39.50
Click 60
255
6.60
5.46
45.24
308
6.60
6.88
45.09
Chirp 0.5
383
5.88
18.06
39.93
354
5.94
11.62
37.64
Chirp 1
271
5.40
2.65
42.46
406
5.47
8.49
39.40
Chirp 2
457
5.07
36.80
19.61
399
5.13
30.75
19.98
Chirp 3
483
4.53
13.24
39.03
362
4.60
6.00
39.82
Chirp 4
462
3.87
13.01
39.79
418
4.13
11.69
38.29
Table C.5: Subject HI-04
Left
Right
Stimulus
mag. (nV)
lat. (ms)
Fmp
noise (nV)
mag. (nV)
lat. (ms)
Fmp
noise (nV)
Click 80
334
5.73
1.72
65.38
307
5.87
3.52
66.74
LS-80 Chirp
407
5.14
3.00
59.03
356
5.21
3.18
67.72
Click 60
0.66
51.24
0.99
53.07
Chirp 0.5
389
5.74
3.42
57.44
0.93
53.27
Chirp 1
256
5.07
3.62
43.72
1.46
40.38
Chirp 2
300
4.60
5.14
39.49
0.52
39.84
Chirp 3
363
4.20
6.35
39.81
1.84
39.93
Chirp 4
309
3.80
4.03
39.48
0.86
39.55
Table C.6: Subject HI-05
92
==PAGE:101==
Left
Right
Stimulus
mag. (nV)
lat. (ms)
Fmp
noise (nV)
mag. (nV)
lat. (ms)
Fmp
noise (nV)
Click 80
305
5.60
158.56
68.11
498
5.47
12.26
61.33
LS-80 Chirp
329
4.94
119.87
70.42
572
4.94
8.98
57.66
Click 60
275
6.00
4.40
65.02
2.06
59.88
Chirp 0.5
243
5.74
7.82
68.45
231
4.88
3.79
58.35
Chirp 1
158
5.33
8.67
67.87
288
5.13
2.25
63.61
Chirp 2
244
4.80
1.04
52.57
191
4.93
6.38
51.01
Chirp 3
445
4.13
6.96
57.05
206
4.73
2.17
47.04
Chirp 4
213
4.40
3.45
59.23
217
2.80
1.76
51.85
Table C.7: Subject HI-06
Left
Right
Stimulus
mag. (nV)
lat. (ms)
Fmp
noise (nV)
mag. (nV)
lat. (ms)
Fmp
noise (nV)
Click 80
357
5.33
4.25
39.80
405
5.20
4.95
39.45
LS-80 Chirp
556
4.74
9.22
39.78
477
4.54
7.19
44.21
Click 60
332
6.13
4.04
39.63
286
5.73
2.81
39.84
Chirp 0.5
514
5.34
7.70
39.45
336
5.21
3.34
39.40
Chirp 1
341
5.20
5.32
39.96
265
4.53
2.72
39.72
Chirp 2
388
4.67
6.54
39.46
270
4.13
4.74
39.45
Chirp 3
542
4.53
11.48
39.82
150
3.53
4.50
19.98
Chirp 4
426
4.13
7.71
39.70
200
3.47
2.50
39.93
Table C.8: Subject HI-07
93
==PAGE:102==
T
his thesis was typeset using LATEX,
originally developed by Leslie Lamport
and based on Donald Knuth’s TEX. The
body text is set in 11 point Egenolff-Berner
Garamond, a revival of Claude Garamont’s
humanist typeface.
A template that can be
used to format a PhD thesis with this look
and feel has been released under the per-
missive mit (x11) license, and can be found
online
at
github.com/suchow/Dissertate
or from its author, Jordan Suchow, at su-
chow@post.harvard.edu.
94
