==PAGE:1==
Feasibility Study of MID technologies for
Danfoss Drives A/S applications.
Alan J. Cortizo
Kongens Lyngby
MEK-MSc-Jan-2016
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Building 404, DK-2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 45252525, Fax +45 45251961
info@mek.dtu.dk
http://www.mek.dtu.dk
MEK-MSc-Jan-2016
==PAGE:3==
Summary
The objective of this Master thesis is to evaluate the technological possibilities of MIDs (molded interconnect
devices) in the context of a Danfoss Drives A/S application, and establish a comparison between currently
adopted solutions and innovative technologies.
Danfoss Drives is currently the world leading producer of dedicated electric drives for a wide range of
applications.
Molded Interconnect Devices are dened as injection moulded parts that can combine mechanical and
electrical functions. By the integration of multiple functions in a single component, design robustness is
increased.
Within the frame of this Master Thesis project, technologies will be evaluated in terms of materials, process
capabilities, geometrical precision and functional performance.
A through state-of-the-art research of existing MID technologies will be made to nd out the capabilities
and limitations of current technology.
A preliminary comparison will be made between the Danfoss Drives requirements and the technological
possibilities, screening out those processes unable of meeting the demands.
After the qualifying technologies have been selected, a series of tests and analysis will be performed on the
MID technologies available. The analysis aims to compare and contrast the well established Danfoss Drive
solutions with the innovative methods, discuss their advantages and highlight their limitations.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the department of mechanical engineering at the Technical University of Den-
mark in fullment of the requirements for acquiring an M.Sc. in Materials and Manufacturing Engineering.
The project took place between August 2015 and January 2016 under the supervision of Aminul Islam, and
Peter Torben Tang. This thesis was carried out in collaboration with Danfoss Drives A/S, world leader
for the manufacturing of dedicated electronic drives for varied purposes. The supervisor from Danfoss was
Ejner Lykke Iversen.
This Master thesis deals with the analysis of technological possibilities for the simplication of Danfoss'
assembly chain. The motivation behind this study is that of nding a suitable solution that reduces the
number and complexity of components to be manually assembled for Danfoss' drives.
The report contains detailed results of the conducted analysis and research.
Lyngby, 03-January-2016
Alan J. Cortizo
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisors Aminul and Torben Tang for their leading and help during this project,
as well as the personnel in DTU manufacturing who have always been helpful. Specially to Nikolaos, Jan,
Max, Jannick, David, Stean, Mikkel and Peter.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
1
Background and motivation
1
1.1
Project objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Danfoss's problem and solutions
3
2.1
Danfoss alternative solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Proposed solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Technological Research
7
3.1
3D printing technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.1.1
Conductive laments for 3D printing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.1.2
Aerosol conductive ink . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.1.3
Metal spraying . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2
Hot embossing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.3
1K molding technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.3.1
Insert molding
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.4
2K molding technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.4.1
Conductive plastics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.4.2
Platable plastic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.5
Laser based technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.5.1
MIPTEC
R
⃝. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.5.2
LPKF-LDS
R
⃝. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4
Danfoss requirements and technological selection
15
4.1
General criteria for process selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.2
Final selection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5
Economical viability of Schulatec Tinco 50
R
⃝
19
6
Electrical Analysis of Schulatec TinCo 50 R
⃝
21
6.1
Volume conductivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
6.2
Ampacity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
7
Experimentation on plating Schulatec TinCo 50 R
⃝
27
7.1
Initial electroplating testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
7.1.1
Electroplating calculations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
7.1.2
Coverage
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
7.1.3
Adhesion testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
7.1.4
Causes of electroplating failure and analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
7.2
Second electroplating test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
7.3
Electroless plating
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
8
Injection molding of Schulatec TinCo 50 R
⃝
41
8.1
Dog-bone sample molding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
8.1.1
Study of dierences with supplied samples.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
8.1.2
Tensile test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
8.1.3
Conductivity test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
8.1.4
Further electroplating analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
9
Final results and conclusions
49
9.1
Final results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
9.2
Discussion and conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
A Extra documentation on surfaces after rst plating test
53
Bibliography
59
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Background and motivation
Simplication of assembly lines, reduced number of parts and robustness are all main items in a designers
checklist. After a visit to Danfoss Drives A/S factory it became evident that the assembly of their devices
is currently a main cost driver, since the complexity of the design creates a bottleneck during the manual
assembly of all the components. It is also clear that the presence of many assembled components requires
several tolerance verication processes for correct tting of all the involved parts. And when the great
diversity of electric drives produced simultaneously by Danfoss is considered, the real magnitude of the
problem comes forth.
The context on which this project is inspired is one component of a variable-frequency drive (VFD). Also
known as adjustable-frequency controller, or inverter drive, it is a type of adjustable-speed drive used
in electro-mechanical drive systems to control AC motor speed and torque by varying the motor's input
frequency and voltage.
(a) Example of one of Danfoss's VLT series drives [vlt-
drives.danfoss.com]
(b) Drive function in the electrical system [openelectri-
cal.org]
Figure 1.1: Danfoss Drive systems
The area suggested by Danfoss for investigation consist of an injection molded plastic separator between two
Printed Circuit Boards (PCB), that also contains metallic tubes that allow for the electrical interconnection
of the PCBs. In this scenario the plastic component is serving a mechanical function and the manually
placed metallic tubes provide the electric functionalities.
==PAGE:12==
2
Background and motivation
There is a need for replacing this complex hand assembled component, by a simpler solution, that preserves
the same functionality, but facilitates the assembly operation.
Current development by Danfoss is focusing on combining the elements of this plastic separator, to produce
a part that integrates the metallic tubes on the plastic piece, so they don't have to be assembled manually.
What Danfoss is aiming for is an integration of mechanical and electrical functionalities. This technology has
traditionally been referred to as Molded Interconnect Devices (MIDs). MIDs are dened as injection molded
components that integrate mechanical and electrical functionalities in one single component. Present since
the 1980's this techniques have risen from the need of 3D capabilities in the connection and build up of
Printed Circuit Boards (PCBs)
Today the MID technologies are employed widely in the electronic product industry for its miniaturiza-
tion/weight saving advantages, and in the automobile industry for sensor placement and integration. Many
other industries have started to use MID to minimize production cost and to make robust products.
1.1
Project objectives
This project will focus on evaluating the currently adopted solutions, and establish a comparison with the
most suitable MID technologies, to assess the possibility of improvement of Danfoss Drives lines.
For this purpose, an initial evaluation of the main functional requirements by Danfoss will be elaborated,
based on which, the alternatives technologies will be ltered.
Once a reasonable alternative technology is selected, it will be evaluated performance and process wise.
Various factors such as costs, functionality, process adaptability, quality of the results, and others will be
considered.
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 2
Danfoss's problem and solutions
This chapter will analyze Danfoss's drives current design, exposing the possibilities and limitations it has
regarding the adoption of new technologies.
To gain a general overview of the current situation at Danfoss, it must be considered that Danfoss mainly
takes care of assembly, testing, and packaging in its Graasten factory, while getting provided with parts
manufactured at dierent facilities. Assembly is an eciency and quality governed process, so any redesign
that allows a reduction to the number of parts, or assembly complexity, will improve the whole assembly
process further on.
Figure 2.1: Example of one of Danfoss' plastic separators
The part that this project focuses on, shown on gure 2.1, is a thermoplastic separator that lays between
two printed circuit boards (PCBs), this part functions as a separator, but it also holds and directs the
electrical interconnections between the two PCBs and the external connectors. This component adds no
real value for the electronic drive, since its real value comes from its electronics, but since its design has
acquired a high degree of complexity, it involves signicant manufacture and assembly costs.
==PAGE:14==
4
Danfoss's problem and solutions
The main problem exposed by Danfoss is that, currently, operators have to manually x in place each of
the metallic components, with the subsequent chance of error and time consumption. Tolerances of each
component that must be assembled become relevant for ensuring an adequate t, which for the larger
models in Danfoss' line that have many components can become a concern.
2.1
Danfoss alternative solution
In an attempt to reduce the assembly complexity, engineers at Danfoss have come up with a simplied
system, by integrating the metallic parts into the plastic parts, making a single component for the assembly
that integrates both support and electric functions, as shown in Figure 2.2
The process proposed for the construction of this connector is insert molding, which involves the placement
of the metallic pieces inside the injection molding cavity so they can be wrapped in the plastic material.
This solutions intends to simplify the assembly by joining together several of the pieces the operator has
to place manually, reducing the time the operator spends doing so, and reducing the chance of error in
placing one part.
Figure 2.2: Example of one of Danfoss' simplication designs
A few of the problems that this solution can create through the production process are:
• The need for a screw to go through the metallic insert once the assembly is nished, causes it to be a
thin walled tube, and this can be a problem when subjected to the injection molding pressures: if it
does not have an internal support during molding, the tube might yield and collapse on itself. and in
==PAGE:15==
2.2 Proposed solutions
5
the case that internal support is provided, the tubes may still contract and grip this internal support,
diculting ejection of the part from the machine.
• The small tubes rely on the shrinkage of the polymer to ensure a secure grip between plastic and
metallic tube, adding external surface features ,such as knurling or a higher roughness on the tubes
to ensure adhesion, will add further complexity to the manufacturing of such pins.
• This solution simplies the assembly operations of the global product, but on the other hand, adds
manufacturing complexity. The tolerances of all the matching parts and the molding and handling
machinery become critical for a secure t and a correct function.
These and other concerns create an opportunity for the investigation of dierent solutions
2.2
Proposed solutions
The need to reduce assembly complexity, by means of integration of mechanical and electrical functionalities,
has appeared in the manufacturing industry in several dierent contexts, for this reason a wide range of
technologies with this purpose exist today. In this case a technology that can produce relatively large
scale, complex shaped, and highly conductive features is required. It is proposed that one of the existing
technologies could be found suitable for application on this Danfoss problem or others similar to it, and so
a research and evaluation of the possibilities must be done.
Ideally one of this investigated technologies could reduce the part number signicantly, as is shown con-
ceptually in gure 2.3.
Figure 2.3: Comparison of a multi-piece design as the existing one (left) to an MID design (right)
Previous to the analysis, the general conceptual objectives are identied as:
• Relatively high conductivity and current capacity
• Three dimensional circuit capabilities
• Large scale features: up to centimeter scale
• Cost eective: not excessively complex process
==PAGE:16==
6
Danfoss's problem and solutions
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 3
Technological Research
An extensive analysis of MID technologies was carried before determining which ones are suitable for the
particular Danfoss case. The following sections comprise an explanation of the major characteristics of
each technology that was taken into consideration.
3.1
3D printing technologies
Additive manufacturing has evolved in recent years to the point that creating functional electronics is now
a realistic possibility. diverse technologies exist that are capable of printing electronics:
• Conductive polymer compounds as lament in additive manufacturing
• Aerosol conductive ink printing.
• Metal spraying over polymer parts.
3.1.1
Conductive laments for 3D printing
Polymer compounds with enhanced conductivities by means of conductive particles, such as carbon, are
used to create extrusion lament compounds that have higher electrical conductivities than the original
polymer. Due to the characteristics of the process, parts are created layer by layer, this causes an anisotropy
in the conductivity: the conductivity through the same layer is relatively high, but across dierent layers
is much lower.
The highest conductivity on a commercially available material found is that of the Functionalize F-Electric R
⃝
[6], with a resistivity value of ρ = 0.75 Ωcm through the same layer which is still really high when compared
to that of copper ρ = 1.68× 10−10 Ωcm. The limiting factor of the conductivity has bound this technology
to low power applications.
==PAGE:18==
8
Technological Research
3.1.2
Aerosol conductive ink
The Aerosol Jet technology is able to print ne-feature electronic patterns onto almost any substrate. The
patented process [18], utilizes aerodynamic focusing to precisely deposit electronic materials in dimensions
ranging from 10 micrometers up to centimeter scale. The capabilities of the Aerosol Jet technology include:
• Feature Sizes down to 10 microns
• Thin Layer Deposits from 100 nm
• Many Materials and Substrates
• Scalable to support high volume production needs
• Low-Temperature Processing
The Aerosol Jet process begins with a mist generator that atomizes a source material. Particles in the
resulting aerosol stream can then be rened in a virtual impactor. The material stream is then aerody-
namically focused using a ow guidance deposition head, which creates an annular ow of sheath gas to
collimate the aerosol. The co-axial ow exits the ow guidance head through a nozzle directed at the
substrate, which serves to focus the material stream to as small as a tenth of the size of the nozzle orice
(typically 100µm).
Patterning is accomplished by attaching the substrate to a computer-controlled platen, or by translating
the ow guidance head while the substrate position remains xed. The relatively large (>5mm) stando
distance from the deposition head to the substrate allows accurate material deposition on non-planar
substrates, over existing structures and into channels.
Once deposited, the materials may undergo a thermal or chemical post-treatment to attain nal electrical
and mechanical properties and adhesion to the substrate. Aerosol Jet printed electronic systems can locally
process the deposition using a laser treatment process that permits the use of substrate materials with very
low temperature tolerances, such as polymers. The end result is a high-quality thin lm with excellent edge
denition and near-bulk properties.
3.1.3
Metal spraying
Flamecon R
⃝technology developed by Leoni AG, Germany, [12] [20]
Involves feeding metals like copper, zinc or aluminium through a regulator into a chamber heated to high
temperatures. The metal particles are molten and fed computer-controlled via a gentle carrier gas ow onto
the surface of plastics, wood, ceramics or metal via a printing nozzle. Here forms a conductive coating, the
thickness and width of which can be varied by operating parameters.
It has been demonstrated to manufacture MIDs with thicker circuitry (200 microns on up). It is used after
laser structuring roughens the plastic surface for good metal adhesion in the areas where circuit paths are
to be deposited. One advantage is that plateable plastics are not required. The technique is also free of
chemical processes and less costly than most MID manufacturing methods. It is currently unsuitable for
ne-pitch MIDs but Leoni is working on components with 200-micron pitch.
==PAGE:19==
3.2 Hot embossing
9
Flamecon R
⃝has already been successfully tested for use in the automotive and electronics industries.
3.2
Hot embossing
Hot embossing is a fast and economic process for production of Molded Interconnect Devices (MID), which
does not need wet processing steps. The layout of an electronic circuit is milled into a steel stamp. A
special copper foil is placed on the molded plastic part of the MID. With a suitable press equip-ment the
foil is pressed on the MID at an increased stamp temperature. The conductor lines are punched out and
connected with the thermoplastic substrate. The remaining foil is removed and the MID is ready. See
Figure 3.1
Figure 3.1: Hot embossing process for MID production
Hot embossing can be applied on a variety of thermoplastic materials. Alternatively pins can be pressed in
and soldered, although these approaches severely complicate the process. Hot embossing is not limited to
rigid substrates. Special plastic foils or at exible cables (FFC) can be structured too. Hot embossing foils
are normally based on copper with functional surface layers on bottom and top. As a top layer metals like
Sn or Ni/Au are used depending on further processing of the MID substrate. The bottom layer usually has
a treatment with a rough surface which enables a good adhesion to the thermoplastic substrate. Copper
foils for hot embossing are commercially available in dierent thicknesses from 12 to 100 µm. Minimum
line width and space depends on the copper foil thickness and is approximately 400 µm / 400µm for a 25
µm foil. [8]
==PAGE:20==
10
Technological Research
3.3
1K molding technologies
3.3.1
Insert molding
Insert molding, sometimes known as overmolding, is the process of molding or forming plastic parts around
other, non-plastic parts, or inserts. The inserted component is most commonly a simple metal object, such
as a knife blade or surgical tube, but inserts can be as complex as batteries and motors, as well. Non-metal
materials can also be used in insert molded components. [21]
This is the technology employed on the solution currently under development by Danfoss.
Figure 3.2: Example of complex insert molded parts [precision.moulds.asia] [xcentricmold.com]
The parts can acquire high degrees of complexity as shown in Figure 3.2 and the inserts can vary from
metallic threads for xing, to thin laminae for electrical purposes
Insert molding can be a highly ecient alternative to the assembly of discrete parts using soldering, con-
nectors, fasteners, or adhesives [17]. Its benets over such methods include:
• Reduced assembly and labor costs. By joining numerous components assembly and labor costs are
minimized.
• Reduced size and weight. By eliminating fasteners and connectors, and by combining the physical
strength of resin and metal inserts, insert molding yields smaller and lighter components.
• Increased reliability. With every part tightly secured in thermoplastic, an insert molded component
prevents part loosening, misalignment, improper terminations, and other problems.
• Increased design exibility.
The drawback of insert molding comes from the need to place the inserts inside the mold cavity, these
operations can be automated by the use of industrial robots and various systems.
==PAGE:21==
3.4 2K molding technologies
11
3.4
2K molding technologies
2K or two shot molding consists of a two step molding process, in which a base and an attachment are
injected in two separate shots. The technology is widely used in the industry since it allows the creation of
multi-material parts, that have great bonding and quality, and the processing times are signicantly shorter
compared to a multi-piece assembly, It also simplies the machinery when compared to insert molding, since
it does not require the placement of inserts inside the molding cavities. The polymer component with the
highest melting point is molded rst, so it is unaected when the second component is injected.
The change in the mold geometry that allows for the second shot to add material to the rst part is usually
performed by movable inserts, or by changing the core or cavity by a rotating mechanism as shown in gure
3.3
Figure 3.3: Example view of a 2K rotating mold process [Simtec Silicone]
3.4.1
Conductive plastics
By means of 2K molding, and the use of both a non conductive, and a conductive injection moldable plastic
compound, it is possible to create MIDs that are functional without any need for addition processing after
the molding stages are completed.
The higher conductivity of the plastic compound is achieved by the inclusion of ller materials with good
conductive properties. Circuit tracks are created by the conductive plastic, this processing technique oers
great possibilities in terms of 3D design capabilities, although its use has been traditionally limited by the
relatively small conductivity of the compounds.
Detailed investigations over the development of dierent plastic compounds have been made [9], and glob-
ally such materials can be classied as binary (only one ller material) or ternary compounds (two ller
materials) The most used llers in the market and research are:
• Copper ber
• Steel ber
• Carbon bre
• Carbon black (particulate)
• Carbon nanotubes.
• Low melting point alloys (as second ller material)
==PAGE:22==
12
Technological Research
Figure 3.4: Conductivities based on ller vol. % [9]
The conductive properties of such compounds are dependent on the ller and the % of ller in the compound,
previous investigations [9] show results as those in Figure 3.4
The usage of only one ller material typically limits the conductivity under values that would make possible
electronic applications as the ones this project focuses on, creating therefore a need for metallic inserts or
other types of post-processing. Ternary compounds however are able to reach higher conductivity values
in the order of 105 to 106 S/m. This makes them suitable for certain electric applications, such materials
are already commercially available.
For experimentation on the project, the material Schulatec TinCo 50 R
⃝by A. Schulmann GmbH, Kerpen,
Germany [3] has been obtained since it was easily available. The supplier reports conductivity in the range
of 5·105 S/m which is the highest found in this research, and lays close to the range of copper and other
metals used in conductive applications. (Approximately 5·107 S/m)
3.4.2
Platable plastic
Based on the same 2K molding principle, this method does not produce directly a conductive part. It relies
on a further chemical etching and electroless metalization step. The two injection shots use a platable and
a non-platable thermoplastic to create the structure, afterwards the part is put in a series of chemical baths
that selectively will etch, neutralize, catalyze, and electroless plate only one of the plastic components, thus
creating a surface conducting layer.
Although available for several thermoplastics, the most common electroless plated polymer is ABS. The
etching solution consists of a hot balanced mixture of chromic acid, sulfuric acid, and water [10], the
introduction of these chemicals on a production chain may rise environmental or safety concerns.
==PAGE:23==
3.5 Laser based technologies
13
3.5
Laser based technologies
The following procedures require the use of laser light to activate a catalyst, microstructure the polymer
surface, or remove material; as such, they all share similar limitations that arise from the limited geometrical
capabilities of laser systems, that can only aect line-of-sight geometries, as happens also with the 3D
printing based processes.
3.5.1
MIPTEC
R
⃝
This process is patented by Panasonic R
⃝, and is one of the most complex solutions, used specially in the
smaller scale due to its good precision and the quality of the nished product. [19] It consists of a 1K molded
platable-plastic part that is then chemically etched and fully electroless plated, after a small metallic initial
layer has been created, a laser then creates the contour of the future circuit tracks, selectively eliminating
parts of this thin initial plating layer. Once those conductive tracks have been created, electroplating is
used to increase the plating thickness at a high rate and with smoothing and leveling agents in the bath,
so the result of the plating has a very high quality. When the desired thickness is achieved, the whole part
is again chemically etched, removing all the undesired plating material, and leaving only smooth surfaced
electric tracks with high accuracy and precision.
3.5.2
LPKF-LDS
R
⃝
LDS stands for Laser Direct Structuring, this process involves a simple one-material injection molding stage,
with a range of specially doped thermoplastics [13]. Once the part has been molded, it is then transferred to
a xture in a laser processing machine, and is hence selectively activated by laser light, which will eliminate
the outermost layer of the surfaces to be plated exposing and activating the metalization catalyst agents
that are inside the plastic, afterwards it can be electroless plated, adding a copper layer, and additionally
exterior coatings to this copper like gold, to improve characteristics such as corrosion resistance or electrical
conductivity. [14]
An example of the capabilities of this technology can be see on gure 3.5.
Figure 3.5: Example of a component made by LPKF-LDS [LPKF.com]
==PAGE:24==
14
Technological Research
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 4
Danfoss requirements and
technological selection
In this chapter the dierent technological possibilities considered will be analyzed and contrasted in terms
of their possibilities, and performance, leading to a nal selection of suitable techniques. The processes to
be compared are compiled in table 4.1.
Table 4.1: Candidate technologies to be evaluated
Conductive 3D printing
Aerosol Conductive Ink
Metal Spraying
Hot embossing
Insert Molding
2K Conductive Polymer
2K Platable Polymer
LPKF-LDS
MIPTEC
4.1
General criteria for process selection
A general evaluation of Danfoss' production process and part features gives a list of requirements that must
be met by the technological candidates as detailed in the following subsections.
4.1.0.1
Material Conductivity
Being the focus of the project a power application, it is expected that the conductivity of the material
employed to create the conductive path must be suciently high.
Most of the technologies are based
on the creation of a highly conductive metallic layer, but others such as 3D printing with conductive
compounds or 2K molding with conductive compounds, rely on the intrinsic conductivity of the plastic
material. Based on the research of commercial materials available, 3D printing must be ruled out until
suciently conductive materials appear, as detailed on section 3.1.1. For 2K molding there is at least one
material in the market that can suit the needs, TinCo 50 R
⃝[3].
All the technologies capable of a relatively high conductivity will be preserved as candidates, this narrows
the selection group as in Table 4.2
==PAGE:26==
16
Danfoss requirements and technological selection
Table 4.2: Candidate technologies after rst criterion
Conductive 3D printing
Aerosol Conductive Ink
Metal Spraying
Hot embossing
Insert Molding
2K Conductive Polymer
2K Platable Polymer
LPKF-LDS
MIPTEC
4.1.0.2
Easily scalable conductivity
In the diverse range of Danfoss drives, there is a high variability of current intensity demands, this means
that a technique that is suitable for both large and small currents would be preferable. Out of the remaining
technologies it can be identied that Insert molding and 2K Conductive Polymer molding, both, share the
same design constraints, the current capacity will be proportional to the cross-section of the metallic insert
or the molded conductor material. Concerning the 2K molded component, the lower conductivity of the
conductive compounds than that of metals, will make the conductive feature bigger.
In the case of hot embossing and 2K platable polymer molding, the conductive features are just supercial,
and while changes to the thickness of this supercial conductive layer can be made, by a longer plating
process of a thicker section of metallic foil embossed, they are technically limited to a relatively thin layer,
another way of increasing the amount of conductive material is to widen the conductive path, but this
creates a spatial limitation. Features may become too wide to be practical.
Figure 4.1: Possible design changes to increase conductivity; Plating (left) Hot embossing (right)
Figure 4.2: Possible design change to increase surface area cross section.
This is not a dening characteristic to completely eliminate a possibility since there are some design
workarounds that can help increase the surface area for conductivity without increasing the eective width
as in Figure 4.2, but it gives certain preference to the Insert molding and Conductive polymer processes
over the rest for their simplicity.
4.1.0.3
3D capabilities
The possibility of working with interior features that are not directly in line of sight is highly desirable,
The current design involves features that involve electrical conduction through the part, and not only over
==PAGE:27==
4.2 Final selection
17
its external surfaces. 3D capabilities are a shared limitation of all techniques that rely on a beam to create
the circuitry, be it laser light such as LDS or sprayed coatings as Aerosol conductive ink, all of them have
a basic 2.5D operating range. Flexibility can be increased by means of multi-axis computer controlled
xtures for the part being treated, but this complicates the process without eliminating the limitation for
line-of-sight surfaces only.
Hot embossing is even more limited in this aspect due to the nature of the process, which complicates the
embossing of any feature over non-planar surfaces, unless the process is combined with the insertion of pins
and soldering. This reduces the possibilities to those in Table 4.3
Table 4.3: Candidate technologies after second and third criterion
Conductive 3D printing
Aerosol Conductive Ink
Metal Spraying
Hot embossing
Insert Molding
2K Conductive Polymer
2K Platable Polymer
LPKF-LDS
MIPTEC
4.1.0.4
Production costs
In many cases the single most important criterion for a design decision such as this one will be the nal
cost of the product. For this kind of element not only the cost of the part is important, but since it is aimed
at reducing assembly complexity, the possible savings during the assembly step must also be regarded in
an economic analysis of the possibilities.
A full economical assessment is not part of a feasibility study, but nonetheless this must not be disregarded
as a constraint. For this reason a supercial analysis of the remaining possibilities is carried. A graphical
overview can be seen in table 4.4, where the cost sources are represented for each process in comparison
to the currently used Danfoss solution. Marked with an X are the steps involved in every process, and the
color coding reects a cost comparison against the currently adopted solution.
As it is represented in table 4.4, the solutions with the fewer number of manufacturing processes or steps,
will tend to be the most cost eective, nonetheless it has to be taken into consideration that a one-step
process as 2K molding, is relatively more expensive than its single-material molding counterpart, due mainly
to the higher complexity of the molds and machinery required.
4.2
Final selection
After reviewing the pros and cons of each technology it is determined that the most suitable technology
to represent an alternative to Danfoss's insert molding solution is 2K molding with conductive plastic
compounds.
For the evaluation and comparison of this technology the material Schulatec TinCo 50 R
⃝was selected and
aquired. This material supplied by A. Schulman, is an injection moldable polymer compound, based on
a PA6 polyamide (15%wt, 56%vol), combined with ne copper bers (52%wt, average length 0.65mm,
diameter 35µm) and a low-melting Tin/Zinc alloy (melting point: 199 Celsius) [16]
==PAGE:28==
18
Danfoss requirements and technological selection
Table 4.4: Visualization of dierent cost sources for Insert molding, 2K molding + metallization, and 2K molding with Conductive plastics;
benchmarked against those of the current Danfoss solution. Marked with an X are the process steps involved for each technology
Molding
Conductor
Shaping
Chemical
Etching
Plating
Manual Assembly
Process →
Technology used ↓
1K
molding
Insert
Molding
2K
molding
Metal bending
/shaping
Chemical
Baths
Electroless
plating
Multiple
part
placement
Fixing
Screws
Danfoss's old
solution
X
X
X
X
Insert
Molding
X
X
X
X
2K +
Metallization
X
X
X
X
2K
Conductive
X
X
Currently Existing Costs
New Added Cost
Removed Cost
Decreased Cost
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 5
Economical viability of Schulatec
Tinco 50
R⃝
Having selected the conductive polymer compound for the 2K molding process, interest turns on clarifying
if it is a viable material for an application such as the one proposed. The electrical purpose and design of
this application is that of a bus bar, meaning in terms of design that the conductivity and cost will be the
main limiting factors.
With this in mind a material selection index can be created. A material selection index gives a numerical
value to a the performance of a material for a certain application based on its intrinsic characteristics, by
the use of this numerical value, the relative dierence in performance to that of other materials con be
compared.
1. First, the functionality must be dened, in this case it is an electrical conductor with no mechanical
loads or critical mechanical requirements.
2. The objective is to obtain an electrical resistance value for the conductor, which will depend on
the electrical application: the allowable voltage drop, or other similar conditions. To obtain equal
resistance of a conductor made from dierent materials, the cross section area of the conductor must
vary.
3. The constraint to be minimized is the cost of the conductive element
The constraint function is the cost, to be minimized, dened as:
Cost = V · ρ · Cm
(5.1)
• V is the volume of the conductive element.
• ρ is the density of the material.
• Cm is the cost per unit of mass.
From the objectives it is derived that the component will be designed with a target electrical resistance
value. Electrical resistance is dened (As in section 6.1)
Resistance = ρe
ℓ
A
(5.2)
==PAGE:30==
20
Economical viability of Schulatec Tinco 50
R
⃝
• ρe is the electrical resistivity.
• ℓis the length of the of material.
• A is the cross-sectional area of the material.
Combining this last equations, and knowing that the electrical resistance will be a constant target value,
it is derived that the cost is directly proportional to ρeρe and ρ.
Cost ∝ρe · ρe · ρ
(5.3)
To minimize the cost, the right of the equation must be minimized or, reversely, its inverse must be
maximized. By means of the CES engineering selector database, completed with the data about Schulatec
Tinco obtained from the manufacturer [3], a comparison can be established. As is displayed on gure 5.1
the inverse of the material selection index is compared with a few reference conductor materials.
Figure 5.1: Material index inverse of common materials used in the production of conductors and Schu-
latec Tinco 50 R
⃝. (Higher better)
It is clear from the graph that the conductive plastic compound is not as cost eective as it metallic
counterparts, performing approximately 400 times worse than copper, or 5 times worse than silver.
It must be noted that this material index only reects the impact of the raw material cost, and not the
nished product cost. As an example of this contrast, a design like the one this project studies, requires the
injection molding of a plastic component, the machining or metal forming of the conductor bars or tubes,
and their posterior manual assembly, on the other hand a similar component produced by 2K molding with
the conductive polymer would only consist of a single fully automated plastic molding step.
A full economical study going into further detail than the one performed in section 4.1.0.4 must be per-
formed in order to determine if the inferior cost performance of the material as an electrical conductor is
compensated by the signicant reduction in production and assembly complexity and cost that it oers.
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 6
Electrical Analysis of Schulatec
TinCo 50 R⃝
The conductive material must perform similarly to the metallic parts in the current design solution, for
this reason it must be analyzed and veried that the performance of the material is at least suitable
for the application. Properties of the material such as the electrical conductivity, thermal conductivity,
ammability, soldering capabilities, etc.
will determine if a design based on the selected commercially
available material Schulatec TinCo 50 R
⃝is realistically possible.
This material consists of a injection moldable polymer compound, based on a PA6 polyamide (15%wt,
56%vol), combined with ne copper bers (52%wt, average length 0.65mm, diameter 35µm) and a low-
melting Tin/Zinc alloy (melting point: 199 Celsius) [16]
Table 6.1: Composition of the Schulatec Tinco 50 R
⃝Material
Weight %
Density
Tinco 50
-
3400 Kg/m3
Polyamide PA6
15
1140 Kg/m3
Copper
52
7130 Kg/m3
Tin/zinc alloy
33
726 Kg/m3
6.1
Volume conductivity
Electrical resistivity (also known volume resistivity) is an intrinsic property that quanties how strongly a
given material opposes the ow of electric current. A low resistivity indicates a material that allows the
movement of electric charge. Resistivity is commonly represented by the Greek letter ρe (rho). The SI unit
of electrical resistivity is the ohm·metre (Ω·m)
Electrical conductivity is the reciprocal of electrical resistivity, and measures a material's ability to conduct
an electric current. It is commonly represented by the Greek letter σ (sigma). Its SI unit is Siemens per
metre (S/m).
σ = 1
ρe
(6.1)
==PAGE:32==
22
Electrical Analysis of Schulatec TinCo 50 R
⃝
The usual way of performing a volume conductivity test consists of xing a uniform section specimen of
the material with electrical contacts on both ends. In this case, the electrical resistivity ρe is dened as:
ρe = RA
ℓ
(6.2)
• R is the electrical resistance of a uniform specimen of the material (measured in ohms, Ω)
• ℓis the length of the piece of material (measured in metres, m)
• A is the cross-sectional area of the specimen (measured in square metres, m2 ).
The total resistance of a specimen of material increases with length, but decreases with increasing cross-
sectional area.
Figure 6.1: View of the copper bers (orange) and tin alloy (grey) network in polyamide (black)
It must be noted that the material being used is a non homogeneous mixture, that has no dened conductive
structure other than a randomly distributed network of copper bers and tin alloy as seen in gure 6.1.
For most purposes it can be assumed that macroscopically it behaves as a homogeneous mixture, but in
certain scenarios it must be taken into account that any ber compound will have a preferred direction of
ber alignment after injection molding according to the ow, and that ber arrangement will relate to the
electrical conductivity of this material.
In the case of the studied material Schulatec TinCo 50 R
⃝the manufacturer Aschulmann claims a conductivity
of 5 · 105 S/m [3] but it is reported in detailed studies about this and similar materials, that conductivity
values are susceptible to the injection molding conditions such as: mold temperature, distance to injection
gate, electrical conduction direction relative to injection ow direction, among other factors [15, 16]. As
can be seen in gures 6.2 6.4 6.3.
Conductivity is critical when it comes to producing a conductor, to obtain a small cross section, a small
resistance, and thus, a small voltage drop.
==PAGE:33==
6.1 Volume conductivity
23
Figure 6.2: Inuence of the wall thickness and ow lenght on the conductivity over the wall thickness on
a ternary compound material similar to Tinco 50 R
⃝. (h = wall thickness of the plate) [16]
Figure 6.3: Flow length in dependence on the conductor cross-section and the mould temperature on a
ternary compound material similar to Tinco 50 R
⃝. [16]
The samples provided by the supplier were tested on a setup as shown on Figure 6.5, by the use of a power
source, and two multimeters for the simultaneous measurement of current, and voltage drop over the Tinco
50 Samples (10 × 4 × 50 mm). The resistance was calculated from the measurements of voltage and current
and the conductivity derived from the resistance value as explained in Section 6.1.
==PAGE:34==
24
Electrical Analysis of Schulatec TinCo 50 R
⃝
Figure 6.4: Material warming under current load on a ternary compound material similar to Tinco 50 R
⃝.
[16]
Figure 6.5: Testing device assembly for the 10 × 4mm samples, 50 mm separation. [16]
The results of this testing are shown in table 6.2 and gure 6.6, and when compared to the conductivity
value provided by the manufacturer [3] it is seen that the tested samples clearly over-perform, having a
higher conductivity, or equally, a lower resistivity than it was expected. It must be considered that these
test samples are most likely molded by the manufacturer under optimal process conditions to ensure this
excellent electrical performance. it is also to be noted than the electrical conductivity was tested along the
same direction as the injection molding ow, being this the most favorable direction in this material due
to the natural alignment of bers along the injection ow path.
==PAGE:35==
6.2 Ampacity
25
Table 6.2: Measurements of conductivity on 3 randomly selected samples
Conductivity measurements
Sample 1
Sample 2
Sample 3
Sample resistance (3 avg.)
0.001995 [Ω]
0.001960 [Ω]
0.001943 [Ω]
Conductivity (3 avg.)
6.28E+05 [1/Ω· m]
6.39+05 [1/Ω· m]
6.45E+05 [1/Ω· m]
Figure 6.6: Graphed results of the conductivity test on 3 of the supplied samples, Standard dev.
3
measurements per sample, compared to specications
As shown in gure 6.6 there is variation in the conductivity even between samples that are supposed molded
under identical conditions.
6.2
Ampacity
Another design constrain generally used is the ampacity, this expresses the maximum current a conductor
can carry continuously without suering any thermal induced damage from its own heat dissipation. It is
generally dependent on the insulation and thermal dissipation properties of the material, and the media
that surrounds it. For common wires the ampacity is regulated by standard codes and tabulated [1]. This
is not directly applicable for this case, but the principles can be related. The general principle is to allow
the designer to select a conductor that will operate at a temperature bellow a certain limit, depending on
the conductor insulation material, generally 60◦or 70◦C.
As can be seen in gure 6.4 tests related to ampacity have already been performed on a ternary com-
pound with equal composition to Schulatec Tinco 50, relating current density to the maximum conductor
temperature. In the case of a 2K molded component the ampacity should be calculated depending on
the design, since the heat dissipation will be greatly aected by the surrounding material and size. It is
nonetheless to be noted that a conductor made with Schulatec Tinco R
⃝will have an ampacity much lower
==PAGE:36==
26
Electrical Analysis of Schulatec TinCo 50 R
⃝
than a conventional copper wire, thus requiring a larger section. In the case of the compound tested in the
previous studies cited, it can be seen that, as a reference, to operate below 60 ◦C an unsheathed conductor
would allow up to 1.5 A/mm2.
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 7
Experimentation on plating Schulatec
TinCo 50 R⃝
The electrical testing of the material revealed that the conductivity of the material can reach really high
values for a polymer compound, but it is still much lower than that of metal. Following inspiration from
previously studied MID technologies, it was proposed that a method of improving the electrical conductivity
of a conductor made of this material could be the use of electroplating.
Electroplating uses electric current to reduce metal cations dissolved in an electrolytic solution so that they
form a coherent metal coating on an electrode. It is primarily used to change the surface properties of an
object (e.g. abrasion and wear resistance, corrosion protection, lubricity, aesthetic qualities, etc.) and in
this case it can benet the global conductivity by creating a highly conductive surface layer.
The chemical process of electroplating is known as electrodeposition. It is analogous to a galvanic cell
acting in reverse. The part to be plated is the cathode of the circuit. The anode is made of the metal to
be plated on the part. Both components are immersed in an electrolitic solution containing one or more
dissolved metal salts as well as other ions that permit the ow of electricity. A power supply applies a direct
current to the anode, oxidizing the metal and dissolving it in the solution. At the cathode, the dissolved
metal ions in the electrolyte solution are reduced at the interface between the solution and the cathode,
attaching to it. [5]
As the material being tested is an injection molded compound of polyamide, copper bers, and low melting
point tin alloy, it is necessary that there is a signicant presence of metallic particles exposed on the surface,
and that these particles are connected to the electrically conductive network of bers, so they will allow
the plated copper to grow onto them. For initial verication a microscope view of the surface revealed that
there is certain presence of metallic particles on the surface.
This indicates that there can be some conductivity on the exterior surface of the material. It is predicted
that, being an injection molded part, it has a predominant arrangement of the bers in the direction
parallel to that of the injection ow, and a higher concentration of bers on the inside compared to the
outer layers, this is typical in all injection molded ber compounds. It was also observed that the copper
bers were rarely exposed without a full coverage of tin alloy. The electrical connection of these surface
metallic particles to the core conducting network of bers was veried with a multimeter and a simple
touch probe.
The high conductivity of the material as well as the presence of conducting copper bers and tin alloy
at the surfaces suggest that the plating process is indeed possible. Said process has never been reported
==PAGE:38==
28
Experimentation on plating Schulatec TinCo 50 R
⃝
before, and it is unknown to the material's manufacturer [3].
7.1
Initial electroplating testing
For an initial assessment of the electroplating capabilities of the material 2 samples were prepared, starting
from 2 rectangular 80 × 10 × 4 mm pieces had one of their faces grinded down manually with a wet silicon
carbide P#80 sandpaper. The purpose of this grinding is to make sure that at least one of the surfaces
of the material has abundant exposed copper bers and roughness, so it can be compared to the other
surfaces that haven't been modied, in terms of plating height, adhesion, etc. see Figure 7.1
The two elements were to be plated one by one and only on selected areas, those areas that were to remain
unplated were covered with tape. The electrical resistance of the whole setup (sample and connections)
should not exceed approximately 100 Ωto allow the plating circuit to function, it was tested with a
multimeter at approximately 0.6 Ω.
The plating setup consisted of a copper plating bath with no additives, and individual sample conditions
can be seen in Table 7.1
Table 7.1: Plating sample conditions
Plating conditions
1st Sample
2nd Sample
Exposed surface
6cm2
5cm2
Current intensity
0.2A (3.3A/dm2)
0.4A (8A/dm2)
Plating time
6 min (360s)
11 min (660s)
(a) Grinded TinCo 50 Sample
(b) Unaltered TinCo 50 Sample
Figure 7.1: Grinded and untreated surfaces of one sample
7.1.1
Electroplating calculations
The plating bath consists of a copper sulfate solution which contains the ions Cu2+(aq) and SO2−
4 (aq).
Copper ions in the solution migrate to the negative electrode where they are reduced and deposited as
==PAGE:39==
7.1 Initial electroplating testing
29
elemental copper, according to the half-reaction: Cu2+(aq) + 2·e−→Cu(s). The electrode at which the
reduction occurs is called the cathode.
According to Faraday's law, the equation that governs electroplating processes is:
W = I × t × A
n × F
(7.1)
Where:
• W = weight of plated metal in grams
• I = current in Amperes
• t = time in seconds
• A = Atomic weight of Copper = 63.546 g/mol
• n = Valence of the dissolved metal in solution in equivalents per mole. Copper = 2
• F = Faraday's constant in coulombs per equivalent. F = 96, 485.309 Coulombs/equivalent.
Considering this, and the half reaction equation of the cathode, the deposited weight of copper under a
certain set of conditions can be derived, but usually the thickness of the plating is of higher interest:
T = W × 10000
ρ × S
(7.2)
Where:
• T = thickness in micrometers
• W = weight of plated metal in grams
• ρ = density in grams per cubic meter. Copper = 8.933 g/cm3
• S = Surface area exposed to plating process in cm2
• 10000 = multiplicative factor to convert centimeters to micrometers.
Combining both equations 7.1 and 7.2, the deposited copper weight, and thickness of the metal layer if it
was distributed homogeneously can be estimated. As in Table 7.2
Table 7.2: Results of plating calculations
1st sample
2nd sample
Plated copper weight
0.024 g
0.043 g
Homogeneous thickness
4.4 µm
9.7 µm
With this calculations in hand, an optical microscopy inspection is carried after the plating to see what
has occurred on the samples. Using an innite focus Alicona microscope that generates a 3D visualization
of the surface. The SPIP analysis software package was used to analyze the 3D data obtained from the
innite focus microscope.
Since the distribution of metallic particles is not homogeneous it is expected that the copper buildup will
not be homogeneous either. Thus breaking the correlation between the calculated homegeneous plating
thickness, and the real thicknesses that appears on the samples.
==PAGE:40==
30
Experimentation on plating Schulatec TinCo 50 R
⃝
Representative results are shown in gures 7.2 and 7.3, for the full results refer to the appendix A.
It is to be noted that there is a great dierence between grinded and not grinded surfaces, reected on the
following characteristics: (see Figures 7.2c, 7.2d, 7.3c and 7.3d)
• Grinded surfaces have a much higher roughness, possibly inducing a better adhesion of the deposited
copper.
• The height of the deposited metal is consistently larger in the surfaces that are not grinded. This
is suspected to derive from a local concentration of electric eld lines due to the higher separation
between active electrodeposition sites compared to that of the grinded surfaces.
(a) Grinded sample 1 plated
(b) Not grinded sample 1 plated
(c) Grinded sample 1 plated prole
(d) Not grinded sample 1 plated prole
Figure 7.2: Sample 1 Optical microscopy, after plating
In gure 7.2 it can be clearly compared how the not grinded surface, 7.2b and 7.2d, shows a really smooth
surface, only interrupted by the large bumps of copper growth of aproximately 40 µm of height, it can also
be seen that the distances between the dierent copper growths varies signicantly in the range of 0.05 -
1mm.
Figure 7.2a shows how a grinded surface has a clearly dierentiated aspect, and in 7.2c it can be observed
that the surface is extremely irregular, the dierentiation of the roughness of the polyamide and the copper
==PAGE:41==
7.1 Initial electroplating testing
31
growth is not so clear. The electrodeposited copper has a lower height than that of the non grinded surface
as can be seen on the prole (mm 0.6 on the horizontal axis) of 7.2c.
(a) Grinded sample 2 plated
(b) Not grinded sample 2 plated
(c) Grinded sample 2 plated prole
(d) Not grinded sample 2 plated prole
Figure 7.3: Sample 2 Optical microscopy after plating
On gure 7.3 it can be seen that again, as in sample number one, there is clear dierentiation between
grinded and not grinded surfaces. In this case it can be noted that the tipical height of the plating is around
90 µm for the non grinded surface, and about 60 µm on the grinded sample, both signicantly larger than
the previous case in 7.2 due to the higher plating current density and plating time used for this sample.
Since the distance between electrodeposition sites does not give an accurate description of the surface due
to its great variability and randomness, it is better to employ the surface coverage as a measure.
7.1.2
Coverage
Clearly seen in gures 7.2a 7.2b 7.3a 7.3b the plating does not completely cover the whole surface, but the
percentage of surface covered varies with the pretreatment of the surface and the dierent electroplating
conditions. The thickness of a hypothetically fully covered surface calculated previously as in table 7.2 is
invalid, the copper plated has a larger thickness but does not fully cover the surface.
==PAGE:42==
32
Experimentation on plating Schulatec TinCo 50 R
⃝
An image analysis software [11] was utilized to approximate the percentage of coverage from pixel color
statistic techniques. By grouping the dierently colored pixels in an image of the surface into a relevant
amount of color groups (2 or 3) by K-means, and then counting the amount of pixels of each color group,
it can be easily determined what percentage of the surface is polyamide, or metal.
First to be taken as a reference, an image of a sample without an altered surface or any treatment was
analyzed. This will determine the original amount of exposed metal particles after the injection molding
process. As in Figure 7.4.
(a) Polyamide color (89.66%)
(b) Original full color
(c) Metal color (10.34%)
(d) Polyamide color - 2 (96.17%)
(e) Original full color - 2
(f) Metal color - 2(3.83%)
Figure 7.4: Color decomposition of 2 sections of unaltered molded surface into 2 color clusters.
The same color analysis is done on the 4 sample surfaces in gures 7.2a 7.2b 7.3a 7.3b obtaining the results
shown in Table 7.3. It is deduced that the grinding of the surfaces is in fact exposing more platable material,
and the longer plating of sample number 2 also benets the coverage of the surface. This indicates that an
optimized pre-treatment of the surface and plating bath can produce better results.
Table 7.3: Image color analysis results after plating, [11]
Samples:
Unaltered
Non-plated
Sample 1
Grinded
Sample 1
Not grinded
Sample 2
Grinded
Sample 2
Not grinded
Metallic area %
7.08 % (avg.)
19.87 %
20.32 %
45.35 %
27.32 %
Note that even though the software has a high precision in the separation of colors, there is an error source
from only analyzing a random area of the surface and not the whole surface. It was impossible to analyze
larger images since the analysis software resamples the images to a limited amount of pixels, so inputting
a larger image would produce a lower quality result.
==PAGE:43==
7.1 Initial electroplating testing
33
7.1.3
Adhesion testing
To evaluate the quality of the plating in both the grinded on non grinded surface, not only the coverage
is important, also the strength of the bond between the existing surface end the deposited layer, for this
purpose a simple test was performed: a sticky tape was applied on both a grinded and a not grinded surface
after they had been plated, the tape was peeled o after a few seconds. It was expected that a properly
bound electrodeposited layer would remain attached to the material surface, while a poorly bound layer
would be ripped o the surface by the removal of the sticky tape . Results can be seen in gure 7.5
Figure 7.5: Simple adhesion test, untreated surface (left), grinded surface (right)
In the case of the grinded surface the majority of the plating stuck to the plated surface, leaving little
evidence on the tape, therefore proving that the adhesion was good. On the other hand, the surface that
had not been grinded previously to the plating showed poor adhesion, with the plated copper being majorly
(> 90%) ripped o the surface by the tape.
This leads to the conclusion that for all practical applications, the surface must be treated prior to the
plating to increase the adherence, by mechanical means like grinding, or alternatively a chemical process.
7.1.4
Causes of electroplating failure and analysis
For a more detailed analysis of what is causing the adhesion problems, an how the electroplating mechanism
is developing over the surface, 4 samples were prepared, and analyzed in an optical microscope, for the
preparation the samples were cut in the direction perpendicular to that of the injection molding ow
direction. These samples were then cold molded in a transparent resin compound for support during the
preparation and analysis. The preparation consisted of a multi-step grinding and polishing process with
diamond based grinding discs, and a 1 µm diamond suspension nal polish.
==PAGE:44==
34
Experimentation on plating Schulatec TinCo 50 R
⃝
Figure 7.6: Cold molded samples, prepared for microscope inspection
(a) Electrodeposited copper (right) grown on top of
tin coated copper ber (left), visible interstitial
polyamide layer (Red arrows), not grinded surface
(b) Electrodeposited copper (left), visible interstitial
polyamide layer (Red arrows), not grinded surface
(c) Electrodeposited copper (top) over an existing copper ber and tin alloy, grinded surface
Figure 7.7: Interstitial polyamide layer on untreated plated surfaces (a) and (b) compared to grinded
plated surface (c).
The potential causes detected for the lack of adhesion and the poor plating properties of surfaces not
previously grinded are:
==PAGE:45==
7.2 Second electroplating test
35
• High separation between active sites: the electrically conductive sites on the surface have a relatively
small size compared to the distances in between them, creating a concentration of electric eld lines
that causes a vertical growth of the plated copper. As seen in gures 7.8b 7.8a,.
• Interstitial polyamide layer: the electroplated copper is deposited on top of a very thin layer of
polyamide that coats the metallic particles in the material, this prevents metal-metal adhesion and
creates a fragile peeling spot. As seen in gures 7.7a and 7.7b.
• These copper deposits have a small adhesion base and a relatively large height, meaning they are
structurally weak and can be easily removed. As seen in gures 7.2 and 7.3.
(a) Cross section on surface layer of material, Multiple
metallic particles, few of them make contact with
exterior (top)
(b) Pre-grinded plated surface (bottom): many deposi-
tion sites. Untreated plated surface (left): few de-
position sites
Figure 7.8: High separation between plating sites, and its inuence on Plating.
7.2
Second electroplating test
The results of the rst testing showed that plating the untreated surfaces directly from injection molding
is not adequate in terms of coverage and adhesion due to both the separation between active plating sites,
and the interstitial polyamide layer that remains in between the plating and the original metallic particles.
Grinding of surfaces improved the plating results, but it is suspected that the process was too rough,
causing smearing of the metallic particles over the surface, and ripping bers and metallic particles from
the surface. At the same time an excessive roughness ruined the smooth look of the surfaces.
It was proposed that dierent treatments of the surface could produce better results. To test this hypothesis
2 dierent processes were chosen, milling and sandblasting, milling was expected to produce a cleaner cut
than grinding, while sandblasting: impact by a high velocity stream of soft chalk-like particles, was expected
to selectively remove only the polyamide while leaving the metallic particles nearly intact.
To explore the dierences between the surfaces produced by each process, the same microscope imaging
and color analysis as for the previous test were performed. And results are shown in gure 7.9 and table
7.4
==PAGE:46==
36
Experimentation on plating Schulatec TinCo 50 R
⃝
(a) Unaltered injection molded surface
(b) Milled surface
(c) Briey sandblasted surface
(d) Extensively sandblasted surface
Figure 7.9: Surfaces generated by the dierent processes
It can be seen in gure 7.9 that the unaltered molded surface shows a low presence of exposed metallic
particles, while the 3 pretreatment methods have exposed more metal.
It is important to note 2 factors that dierentiate the 3 methods: local abundance of metal, and color.
Concerning the abundance of metal, the milled surface has removed a depth of approximately 2mm from the
surface of the sample. As in any injection molded compound that contains bers, the ber concentration
is higher away from the exterior surfaces, so this may induce a higher presence of metallic particles. In
the microscopy shown in section 7.1.4 this phenomenon did not seem to be signicant and the dierence in
ber concentration between outer layers of the material and the inner core was low.
In comparison the sandblasted surfaces, are on a more external layer of the injection molded polymer, so
there should be no dierence in ber concentration compared to the unaltered molded surface.
When it comes to color, it has to be noted that the milled surface presents silver-like metallic particles,
this means that the tin that surrounded the copper bers has been smeared over the surface by the mill,
hiding the color of copper.
==PAGE:47==
7.2 Second electroplating test
37
The light sandblasting exposed silver metallic looking particles, this means it was not intense enough to
eliminate the tin alloy that covers the copper particles, on the other hand the more extensive sandblasting
did expose much of the copper, thus proving that not only the polyamide is removed, but also some of the
tin alloy.
Table 7.4: Results from image analysis of surfaces shown in Figure 7.9 and the reference unaltered as in
section 7.1.2.
Samples:
Before plating
Unaltered
molded
Milled
Briey
sandblasted
Extensively
sandblasted
Metallic area %
7.08 % (avg.)
14.98 %
7.67 %
16.53 %
The image color analysis results shown in table 7.4 must be taken with care since the local variations can
produce dierences in the results depending on the selected area to be analyzed of about 5%, but it is
important to show the tendency that the extensive sandblasting and milling expose a signicantly higher
amount of metal.
Regarding the plating process, the plating conditions were preserved from those for sample number two in
the rst test (see table 7.1). Plating current density: the Amperes per square centimeter of surface, and
plating time, were preserved, so the plating thickness if the layer was homogeneous is the same.
The main factors to be observed again are coverage and adhesion, for coverage the image color analysis
technique was used again, and results are summarized in table 7.5, they should be compared to table 7.4
to see the eect of the plating, although it must be noted that the before plating, and after plating images,
are not of the exact same area, thus part of the variation may arise from the local heterogeneity of the
material.
Adhesion was quickly veried by the use of a sticky tape as in section 7.1.3, and the results were similar to
those of grinded surfaces, obtaining a much better adhesion that in the untreated surfaces.
Table 7.5: Results of image analysis for metal coverage after second plating test
Samples:
After plating
Untreated
Milled
Briey
sandblasted
Extensively
sandblasted
Metallic area %
27.32 %
38.35 %
28.26 %
44.74 %
It is evident from the data and in gure 7.10 that the milled and extensively sandblasted surfaces show a
higher coverage of electrodeposited copper than the unaltered and briey sandblasted ones. The coverage
is directly related to the amount of metal that was exposed in the beginning, increasing the coverage % by
a factor of 3.8 in the case of untreated and lightly sandblasted surfaces, and by a factor of 2.5 and 2.7 on
the milled and extensively sandblasted surfaces respectively.
==PAGE:48==
38
Experimentation on plating Schulatec TinCo 50 R
⃝
(a) Unaltered molded surface, plated
(b) Milled surface, plated
(c) Briey sandblasted surface, plated
(d) Extensively sandblasted surface, plated
Figure 7.10: Surfaces generated by the dierent pre-treatment processes after plating
7.3
Electroless plating
Another possibility for plating a material is electroless plating, also known as chemical or auto-catalytic
plating. It is a non-galvanic plating method that involves several simultaneous reactions in an aqueous
solution, which occur without the use of external electrical power.
Electroless plating has several advantages versus electroplating. Free from electric ux-density and power
supply issues, it provides an even deposit regardless of workpiece geometry, and with the proper pre-plate
catalyst, it can deposit on non-conductive surfaces [22]. Among its drawbacks, it requires a more complex
chemical preprocessing, and it deposits material at much lower rates than electroplating. It is usually
followed by an electrolytic plating to build up thickness at higher speed.
Microscopy inspections of the surface of the Schulatec Tinco 50 R
⃝and image analysis show that the surface
layer is composed mainly of polyamide with inclusions of tin alloy, the copper bers are covered by the tin
alloy (gures 7.2b 7.3b, 7.4, 7.8a), if an electroless layer can be deposited on the polyamide, it is expected
that it will bridge all the conductivity gaps between the metallic particles on the surface,thus improving
==PAGE:49==
7.3 Electroless plating
39
the surface conductivity at the same time as it provides a better surface for secondary processes such as
soldering or electrical contacs.
Polymeric substrates, like the polyamide in this compound, are conventionally plated by pre-conditioning
the surface by contact with an aqueous solution of at least one organic compound active for conditioning
or pre-etching the surface of the plastic, etching with a strong oxidizing acid or base, seeding the surface
with a noble metal catalyst, such as a palladium chloride solution, then immersing the seeded surface in
an autocatalytic electroless plating solution where an initial coating of a conductive metal, e.g. copper or
nickel, is established by chemical deposition. The metal deposit acts as a buss to allow a thicker coating of
metal to be built up electrolytically. [4]
In a general case, the surface etching step is essential, due to the need of a strong adhesion, so the plated
surface can resist the mechanical stresses that will appear from a further electroplating, or those caused
by usage of the plated plastic element. This initial surface etching step is conventionally based on chromic
acid (hexavalent chromium). [7]
Hexavalent chromium is a proven carcinogen and toxic by inhalation and contact. The European Commis-
sion Regulation number 143/2011 of 17 February 2011 amending Annex XIV to Regulation (EC) number
1907/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council on the Registration, Evaluation, Authorization
and Restriction of Chemicals will force the industry to give up chromium use because of its high toxicity.
[7]
This electroless plating possibility was not tested in this project.
==PAGE:50==
40
Experimentation on plating Schulatec TinCo 50 R
⃝
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 8
Injection molding of Schulatec TinCo
50 R⃝
This chapter deals with the injection molding test that was performed with the raw supplied material. A
series of tests were carried on a batch of dog bone shaped samples molded at DTU. A comparison of the
impact and possibilities of dierent molding conditions to those recommended by the manufacturer was
done.
8.1
Dog-bone sample molding
The molding conditions of the samples supplied by the manufacturer are assumed to be within the recom-
mended values, summarized in table 8.1
Table 8.1: Processing conditions recommended by manufacturer
Drying
Feed Temp.
Cylinder Temp.
Nozzle Temp.
Melt Temp.
Mould Temp.
3-4 h. 80◦C
80◦C
260-295◦C
280-295◦C
260-290◦C
60-130◦C
Injection P.
Holding P.
Holding Time
Back pressure
Injection speed
Screw speed
<1000-1800 Bar
30-50% Inj. P.
Short
<20-40 Bar
Very fast
0.4m/s peripheral
Under controlled molding conditions, a batch of dog bone shaped samples was produced, according to
the ISO standard 527 for determination of tensile properties [2], with the described 1B shape shown and
described in gure 8.1 and table 8.2. The molding was done in a Ferromatic Milacron K60 horizontal
molding machine, with 30 mm. screw diameter. The conditions are compiled in table 8.3
==PAGE:52==
42
Injection molding of Schulatec TinCo 50 R
⃝
Table 8.3: Processing conditions used for the molding of dog bone test samples
Drying
Feed Temp.
Cylinder Temp.
Nozzle Temp.
Melt Temp.
Mould Temp.
3h. 80◦C
32◦C
246-256◦C
245◦C
245◦C
36◦C
Injection P.
Holding P.
Holding Time
Back pressure
Injection speed
Screw speed
175 Bar
60 Bar
6s.
4 Bar
60mm/s
1.25m/s peripheral
Figure 8.1: Sketch of tensile test standard dog bone sample
Table 8.2: Dimensions of the dog bone samples
Specimen tipe
1B
l3
Overall length
150mm
l1
Length of narrow parallel-sided portion
60mm
r
Radius
60mm
l2
Distance between broad parallel-sided portions
108mm
b2
Width at ends
20mm
b1
Width at narrow portion
10mm
h
Preferred thickness
4mm
L0
Gauge length
50mm
L
Initial distance between grips
115mm
8.1.1
Study of dierences with supplied samples.
The dierence in molding conditions between the ones recommended by the supplier and the ones used for
the dog bone shaped samples was predicted to aect the electrical conductivity. As had been reported by
previous work on the material [16], the distribution of the tin alloy inside the material is greatly aected
by the mold temperature and injection temperature, if they are too low they cause a premature freezing
of the tin alloy. This leads to a worse connection between bers, and as a consequence a lower volume
conductivity.
The mechanical characteristics were expected to remain closer to the supplier's specications, since the
==PAGE:53==
8.1 Dog-bone sample molding
43
mechanical performance is mainly dependent on the polyamide matrix and the amount of copper bers,
and this was not to be greatly aected by the dierence in molding temperatures.
Two tests were carried: a tensile testing, and conductivity testing.
8.1.2
Tensile test
Four dog bone shaped samples were used to compare their ultimate strength, also known as tensile stress,
with that of specications: σu = 33 MPa [3]. Tensile stress indicates the stress level in a material sample
subjected to pure tension in the moment of failure or break. The compiled results are shown in gure 8.2
and compared to the manufacturing specications (Red).
Figure 8.2: Ultimate stress σu compared to the manufacturer's specication (Red)
It is clear that, as expected, the mechanical properties are not aected by the dierence in molding condi-
tions, with a maximum deviation of -0.36 MPa from the suppliers specication of 33 MPa.
The Schulatec Tinco 50 R
⃝compound is a mix of polyamide PA6, copper bers, and a tin/zinc alloy as
detailed in table 6.1, It is to be noted that both the polyamide matrix and the copper bers have a
higher tensile strength individually than they do combined, thus indicating the appearance of some failure
mechanism such as ber pull-out. To verify this hypothesis, a failure surface analysis was carried on an
Alicona innite focus microscope.
In gure 8.3 a 3D representation of the surface can be seen, highlighted in red are the most clear spots
where a ber was cleanly pulled out, many more can also be seen with close attention. As it can be noted
most of the surface contains this kind of pull o induced holes, also taking advantage of the true color
representation of the failure surface, it can be noted that there is little presence of the characteristic copper
color, meaning that the break occurs mainly on the interface between the tin alloy that covers the copper
bers, and the polyamide matrix. All this means that the mechanical characteristics of the material are
==PAGE:54==
44
Injection molding of Schulatec TinCo 50 R
⃝
indeed signicantly aected by this factor, thus leaving a ber compound that has lower ultimate tensile
stress than the pure polyamide of the matrix.
Figure 8.3: Traces of ber pull-out over the failure surface.
8.1.3
Conductivity test
Following the same procedure as in chapter 6 three molded samples were tested, to compare the conductivity
to the samples sent by the supplier. As seen in gure 8.4.
It is concluded that as expected, the dierence in molding conditions, mainly mold temperature and injec-
tion temperature, caused a signicant loss in conductivity. the dog bone molded samples are approximately
2.5 times less conductive than the supplied samples.
==PAGE:55==
8.1 Dog-bone sample molding
45
Figure 8.4: Comparative of average conductivity of supplied samples and samples molded as in section
8.1
8.1.4
Further electroplating analysis
After the molding of the samples it was noted that they looked brighter than the ones sent by the material
supplier, this could suggest a higher presence of metal exposed on the surface, to verify this hypothesis
the same surface optical microscopy followed by an image color analysis procedure as in section 7.1.2 was
followed.
Results are shown in table 8.4 and gure 8.5. When compared to the average surface coverage of untreated
surfaces in the supplied samples shown in section 7.1.2 in table 7.3 of 7.08% it is proved that the samples
have a slightly higher exposure of surface metal.
Table 8.4: Results of image color analysis for the surfaces of dog bone samples molded under conditions
in table 8.3
Sample image 1
Sample image 2
Average
Metal exposed (%)
12.17 %
11.65 %
11.91 %
This small rise in the metallic presence over the surface is believed to arise from the use of lower molding
temperatures, this causes the tin alloy to freeze in contact with the mold, and then be smeared by the still
owing polymer, further investigation into the surface should be carried to verify this hypothesis.
With the knowledge acquired from the previous tests exposed in chapter 7 it was decided that the method
that would yield best plating results would be a pre-treatment of the surface by sandblasting, since it
increased the exposure of metal without excessively distorting the surface as grinding did.
One sample was prepared for plating by sandblasting, and was afterwards plated under the same conditions
of sample two from section 7.1 shown in table 7.1: Current density of 8A/dm2 and 11 minutes plating bath.
The results from this plating test were poor. In terms of coverage, the initially higher amount of exposed
surface metal was expected to cause a higher coverage, but the coverage after plating was not higher, as
shown in table 8.5. This coverage of 30.89% is lower than the 44.74% obtained for the samples supplied by
the manufacturer after a sandblasting treatment as in section 7.2
==PAGE:56==
46
Injection molding of Schulatec TinCo 50 R
⃝
(a) Sample image 1 unaltered surface
(b) Sample image 2 unaltered surface
Figure 8.5: Surface images from dog bone molded samples used for image color analysis
(a) Sandblasted surface.
(b) Plated surface.
Figure 8.6: Surface images from dog bone molded samples after sandblasting process used for image color
analysis
Table 8.5: Coverage of dog bone samples molded under conditions in 8.3, after sandblasting and plating.
(All values are 2 image average)
Unaltered surface
Sandblasted surface
Plated surface
Metal exposed (%)
11.91 %
7.44 %
30.89 %
The drop in metallic exposure after the sandblasting as shown on table 8.5 was not expected, the fact that
copper is not revealed on the surface indicates that the sandblasting treatment was not excessive. This
conrms the previous suspicion about the smearing of tin over the surface during the injection molding
process as responsible for the higher metallic exposure on the untreated surface. Once this really thin layer
that contains the smeared tin is removed by the sandblasting, the presence of metal drops to values similar
to the ones found in the samples supplied by the manufacturer tested in chapter 7 in the 7-8% range.
==PAGE:57==
8.1 Dog-bone sample molding
47
The possibility of plating an untreated surface with the higher metal exposure of the DTU-molded samples
was dimmed irrelevant because of the adhesion issues of untreated surfaces that appeared in previous tests.
==PAGE:58==
48
Injection molding of Schulatec TinCo 50 R
⃝
==PAGE:59==
Chapter 9
Final results and conclusions
9.1
Final results
The pursue of a way to improve the conductivity of the material employed for 2K molding has lead the
experimentation of this research towards an electroplating process.
As was reviewed in chapter 7 and
section 8.1.4, the results have not been optimal in terms of adhesion and coverage of the electroplated
layer. Nonetheless, the pretreatment of the surface managed to drastically improve the adhesion, and the
coverage was also improved, although it remained far from optimal.
The rst objective of this electroplating process was that of producing a highly conductive layer over the
surface of the already conductive material. The layer formed in the tests does not fully cover the surface, but
the conductive bridges it creates over the conductive bers exposed on the surface can eectively improve
the overall conductivity of the component, partially achieving the original purpose.
For this comparison, the general denition of conductivity cannot be applied, since the electroplated samples
are no longer a homogeneous material, thus violating the denition of conductivity. These samples consists
of a homogeneous core made of Schulatec Tinco 50 R
⃝, and a conductive coating layer.
For purpose of comparison, the resistance of the 50×10×4mm. samples is used instead of the conductivity
as shown in 9.1.
Being all the samples tested of equal dimensions this gives an accurate comparison.
The tests were performed on both, the supplied and the dog bone shaped molded ones, under the plating
conditions that were found most optimal in terms of coverage: sandblasted surface, and longer plating bath
as in table 7.1. The conditions are again summarized in 9.1
Table 9.1: Final plating conditions
Plating conditions
All samples
Pretreatment
Sandblasting
Current intensity
8A/dm2
Plating time
11 min (660s)
It is clearly seen on gure 9.1 that the plating of the samples has reduced the resistance of the sample by a
factor of 2.8 in the case of the supplied samples, and by a factor of 2 in the samples molded at DTU. This
==PAGE:60==
50
Final results and conclusions
Figure 9.1: Comparative of electrical resistance of the 50 × 10 × 4mm.
is a really signicant improvement considering that the coverage achieved was always far below 50% of the
surface area. It becomes evident that the copper plating layer is eectively improving the conductive path.
Even though it is not suciently homogeneous to create a conductive layer by itself, it is enough to bridge
the gaps between dierent conductive bers exposed on the surface of the material, reducing the resistance.
9.2
Discussion and conclusion
It has been shown that it is possible to manufacture complex conductive elements by means of injection
molding, and while the conductivity and current capacity is not as good as on metallic conductors, ways
of improving the conductivity have been proposed and experimented with, showing moderately positive
results.
The manufacturing and assembly advantages of alternative technologies were reviewed. The selected tech-
nology, 2K molding with a conductive polymer, has great potential in terms of simplicity, robustness, ease
of manufacturing and assembly simplication.
The usage of an optimized molding process with Schulatec Tinco 50 R
⃝allows the maximization of the
conductivity. If the conductivity obtained was still lower than necessary, it has been shown that a plating
process of the surface eectively reduces the electrical resistance. The results obtained from electroplating
have not been optimal, mainly due to the scarce amount of metal present on the surface and the poor
adhesion of untreated surfaces. However an increase in the conducting capabilities has been observed.
==PAGE:61==
9.2 Discussion and conclusion
51
Diverse pretreatment processes for the surface were investigated: milling, grinding, and sandblasting. The
plating results were best when using a moderate sandblasting with a soft chalk-like particulate.
The
adhesion was good and the coverage of metal was relatively high.
The molding of samples under dierent conditions from those recommended by the manufacturer proved to
be disadvantageous. Whilst the mechanical characteristics of the material were not altered, the conductivity
suered a big decrease, as had been reported in other studies of ternary compounds. Furthermore, the
expected improvement in the electroplating layer due to the higher presence of metal exposed on the
surface was not successful, since the supercial metal layer was removed by the necessary pretreatment of
the surface by sandblasting.
It must therefore be concluded that the application of this alternative technology is possible, but the
limitations in conductivity will force the use of large cross sections for relatively small currents. Since the
application proposed is a power transmitting connector, power losses are a concern, and thus the resistance
of the conductor must be minimal.
When compared to the alternative that Danfoss had proposed, which was insert molding, it is evident that
all other MID technologies have problems to produce conductive paths for high power applications in a
limited size. Nonetheless, in certain applications that are not power intensive, such as sensor connectors,
LED lighting, among others many of the technologies exposed are feasible. Particularly the one selected:
2K molding with a conductive polymer.
From a manufacturing and assembly point of view, the usage of MIDs gives signicant advantages. It has
been shown how the cost competitiveness of the selected material for a conductive connector application is
far inferior to metals, but it is expected that the benets that arise from simplied manufacturing, assembly,
and processing, can justify its usage.
Further work on the topic exposed on this report should focus on perfecting the plating possibilities of
conductive compounds. And following the inspiration of the experimentation performed on this project
it is recommended that further research is carried on the development of MIDs by mixing principles of
currently existing MID technologies.
==PAGE:62==
52
Final results and conclusions
==PAGE:63==
Appendix A
Extra documentation on surfaces
after rst plating test
This appendix contains the additional data obtained and analyzed after the rst plating test of samples 1
and 2 described in section 7.1. it is taken out of the main report for visual and conciseness reasons.
For a signicant analysis of the characteristics of the 4 dierent surfaces after plating: ground and not
ground surfaces of the two plated samples, the strategy used was that of choosing four cross sections of
every 3D image data set obtained for each surface with the Alicona Innite focus microscope, forming a
# shaped pattern: two horizontal cross sections (Top & Bottom) and two vertical cross sections (Left &
Right) with the objective of giving an accurate unbiased representation.
==PAGE:64==
54
Extra documentation on surfaces after rst plating test
(a) Color image
(b) 3D data
(c) Top prole
(d) Bottom prole
(e) Right prole
(f) Left prole
Figure A.1: Surface analyzed from Sample 1. Pre-ground
==PAGE:65==
55
(a) Color image
(b) 3D data
(c) Top prole
(d) Bottom prole
(e) Right prole
(f) Left prole
Figure A.2: Surface analyzed from Sample 1. Not pre-ground
==PAGE:66==
56
Extra documentation on surfaces after rst plating test
(a) Color image
(b) 3D data
(c) Top prole
(d) Bottom prole
(e) Right prole
(f) Left prole
Figure A.3: Surface analyzed from Sample 2. Pre-ground
==PAGE:67==
57
(a) Color image
(b) 3D data
(c) Top prole
(d) Bottom prole
(e) Right prole
(f) Left prole
Figure A.4: Surface analyzed from Sample 2. Not Pre-ground
==PAGE:68==
58
Extra documentation on surfaces after rst plating test
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
[1] Safety of machinery - electrical equipment of machines. part 1: general requirements. DS-EN 602014-
1:2006, page 132, 2006.
[2] Plastics - determination of tensile properties - part 2 - test conditions for molding and extrusion
plastics. DS/EN ISO 527-2, 2012.
[3] A. Schulmann GmbH. Schulatec Tinco 50 technical specications, 2007.
[4] D. Dillard, E. Maguire, and L. Donovan. Us patent 4,315,045 conditioning of polyamides for electroless
plating, 1982. US Patent 4,315,045.
[5] J. Dofour. An Introduction to Metallurgy. Cameron, 2006.
[6] Functionalize.
Functionalize F-electric www.functionalize.com/about/functionalize-f-electric-highly-
conductive-lament.
[7] A. Garcia. Doctor thesis: Metallisation electroless des polymeres induite par des ligands. pages 1112,
2011.
[8] Hahn-Schickard. Hot Embossing technology for MID manufacture www.hahn-schickard.de.
[9] C. Hopmann, J. Fragner, and S. Haase. Development of electrically conductive plastic compounds
based on ller combinations. Journal of Plastics Technology, (2):4967, 2014.
[10] G. A. Krulik. Electroless plating of plastics. Journal of Chemical education, 55(6):360370, June 1978.
[11] M. Krzywinski. Image color sumarizer mkweb.bcgsc.ca/color-summarizer/?analyze.
[12] Leoni
AG.
Leoni
AG
Flamecon
www.leoni.com/en/press/releases/details/leoni-awarded-the-
intelligence-for-transportation-and-logistics-innovation-prize/.
[13] LPKF.
LPKF-LDS
List
of
approved
materials
in
terms
of
performance
www.lpkf.com/_mediales/2074-approved-plastics-lpkf-lds.pdf.
[14] LPKF. LPKF-LDS Process www.lpkf.com/applications/mid/lpkf-lds-process/.
[15] W. Michaeli, C. Hopmann, and J. F. et al.
Injection molding of conductor paths: integration of
functionality by the use of a metal/thermoplastic hybrid material. Journal of Polymer Engineering,
31(5):479487, 2011.
[16] W. Michaeli, T. Pfeerkorn, and J. Fragner. Highly conductive plastics: Custom-formulated functional
materials for injection mouldable electronic applications.
[17] Microplastics
Inc.
Insert
molding
manufacturer,
Microplastics
www.microplasticsinc.com/what_is_insert_molding.php.
==PAGE:70==
60
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[18] OPTOMEC.
Aerosol
InkJet
3d
printing
electronics
www.optomec.com/additive-
manufacturing/printed-electronics/aerosol-jet-technology.
[19] Panasonic. Panasonic MIPTEC http://www3.panasonic.biz/ac/e/tech/mid/miptec/index.jsp.
[20] PlasticsTechnology. Mids make a comeback www.ptonline.com/articles/mids-make-a-comeback.
[21] Stack Plastics. Insert molding manufacturer, Stack plastics www.stackplastics.com/insert-molding.
[22] Surface Technology. Electroless Nickel Plating Solutions www.surfacetechnology.co.uk/plating/electroless-
nickel-plating/.
