==PAGE:1==
A framework for data driven
HTML5 applications
Patrik Reppien
s103092
Kongens Lyngby 2015
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Matematiktorvet, building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3351
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The purpose of the thesis was to design, implement, and test a tool for making
development of HTML5 applications, or single page applications, more simple.
The thesis work has been separated into two parts: A framework for develop-
ment of Single Page Applications, and a Single Page Application for project
management.
The rst part of the thesis has focused on creating the tool.
This was ac-
complished by using the concept of model driven development to incorporate
common features and behavior of single page applications into a framework.
The resulting framework is able to generate a single page application based on
a model of data entities and the relations between these. Furthermore, the sin-
gle page application framework was tested using manual test scripts, and the
framework was compared to existing model driven development frameworks.
The second part of the thesis was to perform an acceptance test of the new
tool by using the framework to develop a project management application for
the electric engineering company Logos Design A/S. The framework success-
fully generated a large part of the application, enabling the development of the
project management application to focus on the domain specic features of the
application. The framework especially proved useful during development of the
parts of the application revolving around simple entities and operations.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Resumé
Formålet med dette speciale var at designe, implementere og teste et værktøj for
at gøre det nemmere at udvikle HTML5 applikationer. Arbejdet med specialet
har været opdelt i to dele.
Den første del af specialet har fokuseret på at skabe dette værktøj. Dette blev
gjort ved at bruge et koncept kendt som modeldrevet udvikling til at indarbejde
fælles træk og funktioner for HTML5 applikationer i et rammeværk. Det resulte-
rende rammeværk er i stand til at generere en HTML5 applikation baseret på en
model der representerer dataenheder og relationerne mellem disse. Desuden er
HTML5 rammeværket blevet testet ved hjælp af manuelle testscripts, og ram-
meværket er blevet sammenlignet med eksisterende rammeværker der bruger
modeldrevet udvikling.
Den anden del af specialet var at udføre en accepttest af det nye værktøj ved at
bruge rammeværket til at udvikle en projektstyringsapplikation til elektronikin-
geniørvirksomheden Logos Design A/S. Rammeværket formåede succesfuldt at
generere en stor del af applikationen, hvilket gjorde at der under implemen-
teringsfasen kunne fokuseres på de mere domænespecikke dele af projektsty-
ringsapplikationen. Rammeværket var især brugbart under udviklingen af de
dele af applikationen der håndterede simple dataenheder ved hjælp af simple
operationer.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This report is the result of a 30 ECTS point Master's Thesis conducted at
the department of Informatics and Mathematical Modelling at the Technical
University of Denmark, DTU. The thesis is entitled A framework for data driven
HTML5 applications, and is the result of work conducted from August 2015 to
December 2015. The thesis is the nal requirement for acquiring the degree of
Master of Science in Engineering, and has been written under supervision of
Associate Professor Christian Probst.
I would like to thank the company of Logos Design A/S for letting me include
them in my thesis.
I am particularly grateful for the assistance and advice
provided by Mads Pii, the technical director of Logos Design A/S, and for his
help to deduce many of the requirements for the second part of the thesis. I
would also like to thank my supervisor for valuable guidance and good advice
throughout the project.
Søborg, 22-December 2015
Patrik Reppien
==PAGE:8==
vi
Preface
==PAGE:9==
Abbrevations
ACL
Access Control List
AJAX
Asynchronous JavaScript and XML
API
Application Programming Interface
CRUD
Create, Read, Update, Delete
CSS
Cascading Style Sheets
DAL
Data Access Layer
DSL
Domain Specic Language
DLL
Dynamic Link Library
EF
Entity Framework
HTML
Hyper Text Markup Language
HTTP
Hyper Text Transfer Protocol
JS
JavaScript
JSON
JavaScript Object Notation
LINQ
Language Integrated Query
MDD
Model Driven Development
MVC
Model View Controller
OODBMS
Object Oriented Database Management System
ORM
Object Relational Mapping
RBAC
Role Based Access Control
RDBMS
Relational Database Management System
REST
Representational State Transfer
SOAP
Simple Object Access Protocol
SPA
Single Page Application
SQL
Structured Query Language
UML
Unied Modeling Language
XML
Extensible Markup Language
==PAGE:10==
viii
Abbrevations
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Abstract
i
Resumé
iii
Preface
v
Abbrevations
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
A framework for development of Single Page Applications
3
2.1
Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.1
Object Relational Mapping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.2
Technologies and tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2.1
Development process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2.2
Framework features
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.3
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.3.1
The data model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.3.2
The framework core
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.3.3
The DAL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
2.3.4
The web application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
2.4
Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
2.5
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
2.5.1
Other MDD frameworks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
3
A Single Page Application for project management
53
3.1
Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
3.1.1
Vacation management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
==PAGE:12==
x
CONTENTS
3.1.2
Project management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
3.2
Designing the data model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
3.3
Adjustment of the generated SPA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
3.3.1
Holiday management and group management . . . . . . .
63
3.3.2
User and employee management
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
3.3.3
Vacation management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
3.3.4
Calculation of expected vacation . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
3.3.5
Project management and estimation . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
3.3.6
Employee allocation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
3.4
Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
3.4.1
Holiday management and group management . . . . . . .
72
3.4.2
User and employee management
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
3.4.3
Vacation management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
3.4.4
Calculation of expected vacation . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
3.4.5
Project and allocation management
. . . . . . . . . . . .
73
4
Conclusion
75
4.1
Further work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
Bibliography
77
A Code snippets
81
B Test cases
85
C User interface images
95
D Attached les
101
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1
Introduction
In the early stages of the modern internet, web pages were typically static in
nature. A web site would consist of a number of interconnected documents,
so called web pages, using the Hyper Text Markup Language (HTML) for for-
matting. These documents could then be retrieved by using the Hyper Text
Transfer Protocol (HTTP).
As the internet developed, web sites began to use server side scripting languages
to generate HTML documents instead of statically storing them. Web pages
were now used extensively as a user interface to view and change information
on servers in dierent ways. Due to the scripts being on the server, however, it
was still necessary to load an entire new web page from the server every time
information on the page had to be updated.
Later on, the use of HTML5 and client side scripting became increasingly pop-
ular for enhancing the user experience and decrease the number of required
reloads.
Especially the emergence of AJAX, which allows browsers to asyn-
chronously transfer data to and from web servers, has changed the way browsers
==PAGE:14==
2
Introduction
interact with servers signicantly.
Today, web pages containing entire web applications are becoming more and
more common. These are known as HTML5 applications or Single Page Appli-
cations (SPA), and provide a very smooth user experience while being fast and
responsive.
The thesis will examine how the development of a database-driven SPA can be
made as simple as possible. The thesis consists of two parts.
The rst part concerns the analysis, design, and implementation of a SPA frame-
work which applies the concept of Model Driven Development (MDD). Dierent
technologies will be analyzed and compared for implementing the framework,
and the selected technologies will be used and incorporated. Furthermore, exist-
ing SPA frameworks will be analyzed, and will be compared to the constructed
framework.
The second part of the thesis will use the framework constructed in the rst part
of the project, to develop a SPA for an electronic engineering company. This
part will include analysis, design, and in particular development of the SPA.
The eectiveness and usability of the framework will thus be tested, and the
framework can be changed and adjusted accordingly, depending on the results.
This part of the thesis will also include testing of the developed SPA and ex-
tensive dialogue with the company in order to ensure a robust and useful end
product.
This report can be read by anyone with a basic understanding of Computer
Science and Web Development.
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2
A framework for
development of Single Page
Applications
This chapter will explain the dierent options and ideas considered for making
development of SPAs easier using the concept of MDD. The choices made will be
discussed and justied, and the consequences of these choices will be examined.
Furthermore, the development of a framework uniting and implementing these
ideas will be explained and discussed.
==PAGE:16==
4
A framework for development of Single Page Applications
2.1
Analysis
This section will examine and discuss how the process of constructing a SPA
can be aided by the use of MDD. Furthermore, the technologies and methods
which will be used throughout the thesis for supplementing this approach will
be uncovered and discussed.
A Single Page Application is a web application which is loaded by the client
using only a single page load. All further communication with the web server,
including retrieval of data and HTML, is done asynchronously using JavaScript
(JS)1. Hence, a large part of any SPA will be written in JS. The basic architec-
ture of a common database driven SPA is seen in Figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: The overall architecture of a typical SPA application.
Usually in SPA applications, the role of the web server is much less signicant
than in traditional web applications. A large part of the presentation and busi-
ness logic of the application has been moved from the server to the client, which
leaves the web server with three main responsibilities:
• Host the web application, and serve it upon request.
1As JavaScript is the de facto standard for client side scripting, and the only client side
scripting language supported by all major browsers, no further client side scripting technologies
will be considered in the thesis.
==PAGE:17==
2.1 Analysis
5
• Expose web service end points for use of asynchronous operations.
• Pipe requests from web service end points to a persistent data storage,
typically a database, and answer these requests with responses.
Developers can easily host and serve an application by the use of web server
software, and this does not in general require much time. Furthermore, creating
web service end points has become easier over the years, as dierent frameworks
and tools for this have emerged. However, developers still have to dene these
end points one way or another, depending on what operations and data which
should be exposed. In addition, the developer is required to link these end points
to appropriate database queries in order to insert and retrieve data for the web
service operations.
By introducing MDD, and by restricting the web service end points to include
only create, read, update, and delete (CRUD) operations, it is possible to cre-
ate a framework which generates both web services, database queries, and the
connection between these two.
The framework will be based on a model of
the domain in which the application will operate. The model will describe the
data associated with each entity of the domain as well as the relations between
entities, and is referred to as the data model of the application from this point.
Object Relational Mapping (ORM), which will be explained in detail in section
2.1.1, can be used by the framework to greatly reduce the amount of code nec-
essary to connect and transfer data between the application and the database.
ORM is also based on a data model and is therefore a technology which is
obvious to include in the framework.
Only the most simple SPAs are exclusively using CRUD operations. Applica-
tions usually need more advanced features and operations from the web server.
Therefore, the generated web services and database queries will not always be
sucient. Allowing users of the framework to annotate parts of the model with
meta data attributes is one approach to achieve a more exible web server gen-
eration. However, a very large number of dierent meta data attributes would
be required in order to be able to generate web server code for every possible
SPA scenario. This would result in a framework which would be too advanced
==PAGE:18==
6
A framework for development of Single Page Applications
to use, and where it would be easier to program and congure the web server
from scratch instead. Hence, an important key feature of the framework is that
it should not only generate web service end points and database queries, but
rather generate code for this which is easily changed and customized, even after
generation.
2.1.1
Object Relational Mapping
The purpose of using MDD as part of the thesis is to investigate how big a part
of an application which can be generated based on the application's data model.
A large part of any application is the database and the connection between the
database and the application. Considering that this layer of the application is
solely concerned with data, it should be possible to create a large part of the
layer using a data model of the application.
Before attempting to handle this, the structure of both databases and in-memory
data structures should be considered. Data in a database is typically based on
a relational data model where data is represented as tables, rows, and columns.
The state of a row is unique: If two rows in the same table are equal, this is
usually due to an error. The advantage of the relational model is primarily the
normalization and integrity of the data, which ensures that data is only stored
once. Furthermore, the Structured Query Language (SQL) is excellent at doing
ad-hoc queries and return the data in the desired form.
The demands of in-memory data structures are usually quite dierent. Whereas
databases usually only contain data, in-memory data structures are expected to
contain behavior as well. This is accomplished through the concept of objects,
which collects related behavior and data into a single entity. Each entity has
an implicit identity. The consequence of this is that even if the elds of the
object are all equal, the objects are not considered the same. Related objects
are also considerably easier to navigate between, while SQL requires the use of
join statements to navigate between related tables. To reduce the redundancy
of code describing behavior, the concept of objects is also heavily reliable on
generalization through inheritance.
==PAGE:19==
2.1 Analysis
7
Mapping between these two data models does not seem dicult on the sur-
face. However, numerous challenges arises when one considers how to match
an object oriented data model to a relational data model. These diculties are
also known as the object-relational impedance mismatch[1]. An example of one
of the challenges is representing inheritance in the data model. The relational
model has no simple or obvious way of representing hierarchies in general, and
the approaches that do exist either perform poorly or threatens the integrity of
the data.
The Object Relational Mapping (ORM) problem is therefore a hard and complex
problem, but also one of the most common problems occurring in computer
science. Because of this, there have been numerous attempts to solve it in an
ecient way which has resulted in a number of frameworks handling a large
part of the problem. These frameworks are becoming increasingly popular, and
has grown more capable over the years.
ORM frameworks should never be seen as a way to abstract from the database
and only work with in-memory data structures, as this is not the case. ORM
frameworks are in fact often referred to as leaky abstractions because they are
not able to handle all mappings in a satisfactory way without knowledge of the
underlying systems. Furthermore, the developer entrusts a lot of control to a
ORM framework and thus, these frameworks experience a lot of opposition in
various developer communities[2]. Hence, when working with ORM, a developer
should always have knowledge of the underlying relational database, as well as
the SQL used to communicate with it, as none of these technologies can simply
be abstracted from.
That being said, ORM is a problem that any application using a relational
database has to handle. The alternative is to place an SQL query inside the
object oriented language for every unique retrieval or manipulation operation
which should be performed. In addition, a large amount of boilerplate code is
needed in order to ensure a data access layer which is maintainable[2]. In most
cases, using an ORM framework greatly reduces the amount of code and SQL
statements which a developer needs to write
By using an ORM framework, it is only necessary to implement the data
==PAGE:20==
8
A framework for development of Single Page Applications
model once, either as database tables or as objects in an object oriented lan-
guage. These two approaches are known as database rst and code rst, re-
spectively. Both approaches enable developers to abstract some of the details
of the database away. Developers interact with the generated or dened ob-
jects through the associated programming language, and the ORM framework
converts these interactions into corresponding queries for the database.
Using the database rst approach requires developers or database administrators
to dene the data model through tables in the database. The ORM framework
then generates classes for the object oriented language, which corresponds to the
dened tables. Developers can then interact with the database through these
auto generated objects.
If a model is made in the object oriented language, the code rst approach can
be used, which will generate database tables and the primary keys of these.
One-to-one relations between objects will be transformed into foreign keys, and
many-to-one and many-to-many relations will result in additional tables being
created. The meta data of all tables can usually be controlled in some manner,
by dening primary keys, data types, and constraints through code.
In many ORM frameworks a third option also exists, where the data model
is implemented using a visual designer, which is then saved to a le, usually
in an XML-format. This approach is usually referred to as Model First. The
designed model is used to generate the database and corresponding classes.
Hence, developers neither have full control of the database, nor the generated
classes of their application. In addition, it is dicult to extend such a model
with meta data, which will be an important part of the framework.
Another option would be to use an Object Oriented Database Management
System (OODBMS), which stores data directly as objects, as opposed to the
more widespread Relational Database Management System (RDBMS) which
has been focused on in this section. This would eliminate the use for ORM,
but would also bind the database and application more strongly together. A
comparison of the two dierent paradigms is done in an article by Gheorghe
Sab u[3], which concludes that OODBMSs are well suited for complex data
structures dedicated to a particular program, and that RDBMSs on the other
==PAGE:21==
2.1 Analysis
9
hand ensure data independence, by completely separating data from processing.
Thus, the thesis will use a relational database for the framework, as SPAs usually
utilize simple data structures. Furthermore, SPAs in particular are often used
to perform simple CRUD operations on data which is used in other applications,
and a high degree of data independence is desirable in any system environment
with multiple applications.
While the database rst approach is usually the preferred approach for larger
projects, the code rst approach is the most suitable for the framework. This
is due to the fact that the code used to represent the data model is completely
controlled by the developer, and is not auto generated as in database rst or
model rst approach. This makes it possible to dene the data model in code,
which has various advantages. This will be explained in further detail in section
2.1.2.
2.1.2
Technologies and tools
A consistent and meaningful choice of environment, technologies, and third-
party tools is important during any development project, the framework de-
veloped in the thesis included. A large amount of development hours can be
saved by utilizing these in an ecient way, and the choices made will impact
the performance and usability of the framework.
Initially, it should be decided how developers should dene the data model.
Several options exist for this:
• By using the client side scripting language JS.
• Through database tables, and the relations between these.
• Through a statically and manifestly typed server side scripting language
using classes and elds.
• Through a visual designer tool.
==PAGE:22==
10
A framework for development of Single Page Applications
As mentioned in section 2.1, a large part of the SPA is going to be written in JS.
Constructing the data model in this language therefore seems appropriate. In
JS, the JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) format is used to represent objects.
Modeling the data model using JSON is therefore be the most appropriate
way of using JS for the data model, is would be an intuitive way for a front
end developer to work with data. However, JSON is not strongly typed, and
does not allow meta data to be separated from the actual data. This can be
circumvented in a number of ways, but not in a way that completely separates
meta data from data. In addition, the resulting model will not be very practical
to work with.
The advantage of choosing either a server side scripting language or a visual
designer tool to create the model is that Code First ORM can be used to connect
and generate the database and the web server data model without changing the
model much.
Furthermore, by using a statically typed server side scripting
language, developers will be able to use the framework eciently, and make
it considerably easier to implement and use the data model without specifying
additional meta information, such as types, not already present in the model.
Neither dynamically typed languages nor database tables and relations have
these capabilities. A strongly typed server side scripting language is therefore
chosen as the modeling language for the data model. A visual designer tool
can still be used to construct the model in the server side scripting language,
which would enable developers inexperienced with statically typed languages to
generate the web server. However, only a basic knowledge of object oriented
programming and types, which is or should be possessed by most developers, is
required in order to construct a data model in a statically typed language, and
thus a visual designer tool will not be part of the framework constructed in the
thesis.
There are several statically typed server side scripting languages available, but
choosing a fairly widespread language with a robust and strong ORM framework
would be preferred. The most apparent options are:
• Java EE, using Java Server Pages (JSP) for the web server and Hibernate
for ORM.
==PAGE:23==
2.1 Analysis
11
• C#, using ASP.NET MVC Web API 2.0 and Entity Framework (EF) for
ORM.
Java is server independent, while ASP.NET will be server independent as of
ASP.NET 5[4]. In addition, applications written in earlier versions of ASP.NET
can be upgraded to ASP.NET 5 without changing much, soon eliminating the
server independence advantage that Java has enjoyed over ASP.NET for many
years. Hence, it will be possible to take advantage of the heavily integrated
technologies of the .NET framework without limiting the resulting application
to a Microsoft IIS server. Moreover, in terms of the two frameworks, .NET and
the language of C# are more suited for the thesis compared to Java due the
following:
• Language-Integrated Query (LINQ) technology, which directly integrates
with EF.
• Properties, which eliminate the use of explicit get and set-methods. These
are otherwise necessary in order to keep the code maintainable.
• ASP.NET MVC uses the classic Model View Controller (MVC) design
pattern to separate data, routing, and view templates in a maintainable
and logical structure, which will be very practical during the thesis.
• Web API allows the web server to easily provide web service end points.
Most of the above can be supported by Java through the use of third party
tools, but by using the .NET framework it is possible to avoid the usage of
these. Based on this, the thesis will use C# and the ASP.NET MVC framework
for server side scripting, while EF will be used for ORM. The data model will be
dened using the C# language, and the classes and properties of this language,
while Web API 2.0 will be used to expose web service end points.
Web API uses the Representational State Transfer (REST) architectural style to
expose web services, which uses HTTP as the underlying application protocol.
REST is excellent for exposing data to clients over the internet, as the protocol
is built around the CRUD operations, and uses the HTTP protocol extensively.
==PAGE:24==
12
A framework for development of Single Page Applications
In addition, REST endpoints are stateless, meaning that all requests will contain
the complete state of the resource, and the information required to change it.
In this way, the web server does not need to save any part of the clients state,
as the clients are required to store their state themselves.
The alternative to REST is Simple Object Access Protocol (SOAP). SOAP is
usually used to expose application logic rather than data, and is more contract
based than REST. Furthermore, because SOAP per denition uses XML as
data format, JS will have to parse the response data before a JS object can be
created. In addition, SOAP requires a signicant overhead as opposed to REST
which really takes advantage of the HTTP protocol. SOAP is in general a heavy
protocol to use for transporting data to and from a browser. ASP.NET Web
API using REST and JSON will therefore be used to transport data between
the web server and the clients.
An example of a RESTful2 service exposing employee data is seen below:
GET /employee: Retrieve all employees.
GET /employee/AAA: Retrieve the employee with the key AAA.
POST /employee: Add a new employee using the content of the request.
PUT /employee/AAA: Change the employee with the key AAA using
the content of the request.
DELETE /employee/AAA: Delete the employee with the key AAA.
Data is easy to expose using REST, especially by using Web API, and data can
be sent to the browser using the JSON format. This is an advantage when the JS
receives the data, as no additional parsing is needed3. In addition, HTML pages
and data resources are loaded in the same way using the same port and protocol.
It is therefore not necessary to open any additional ports in any rewall that
might exist.
2A web service which follows the REST architectural style is called a RESTful service.
3Because objects in JS are constructed using the JSON format.
==PAGE:25==
2.1 Analysis
13
ASP.NET MVC has been chosen as the framework for generating HTML based
on data and view templates. However, most of the development a programmer
will do while constructing a SPA, will be using a large amount of JS as well.
While JS holds many great features, the language itself provide developers with
a very large degree of freedom, thus making it very easy to write bad and
unstructured code, which is hard to maintain. The use of JS frameworks as
part of the SPA generation should therefore be considered in order to encourage
a more structured and seamless development of JS.
There exists a number of frameworks which enables a more simple and structured
development of JS for SPAs. Some of the most popular are[5]:
• AngularJS
• Backbone.js
• Ember.js
According to a comparison[5], AngularJS has by far the biggest community.
This is often an important factor, as a bigger community means more questions
answered, and more third party libraries. The technical features are also very
practical for SPA development, as AngularJS supports two way model bind-
ing, and includes its own view templating which mainly uses custom HTML
attributes. The HTML is thus still easy to read, and does not contain a large
amount of <script>-tags.
Finally, it should be considered what language the actual framework should be
written in. Because the data model will be written in C#, the obvious choice is
to write the framework in C# as well. In that case, the framework and the data
model are able to be compiled together, and the framework can use reection to
extract information from the data model. In another language, manual parsing
or additional tools would be necessary. In addition, the framework should consist
of as few languages as possible for simplicity. C# is therefore also chosen for
implementing the actual framework.
==PAGE:26==
14
A framework for development of Single Page Applications
2.2
Design
This section will consider the development process which a user of the SPA
framework will go through as well as the features which should be included in
the framework.
2.2.1
Development process
In section 2.1, the outline of a framework for SPA applications were determined.
In addition, it was decided to use the web server and ORM technologies from
the .NET framework in the framework of the thesis. When using the .NET
platform, the obvious Integrated Development Environment (IDE) to choose
for the development process is Visual Studio. While alternatives exist, Visual
Studio is by far the most widespread IDE for the .NET framework. This section
will therefore focus on creating the most smooth and intuitive development
process for a developer using Visual Studio.
A third party product in .NET is usually contained separately as compiled code
in a dynamic link library (DLL) le, which holds some advantages[6]. In the
case of the framework, however, having the framework in its own separate DLL
le is not enough, as this would have some consequences for the development
process:
• A developer would have to start a new project and import the framework
DLL le into this project.
• The developer would have to manually connect the new project to the
framework by calling the right methods.
• The data model would have to be dened in the new project, but the
developer would need documentation in order to know how it should be
dened.
Fortunately, utilizing the framework can be made easier. For a developer using
Visual Studio, a new project is usually started by using the Visual Studio Project
==PAGE:27==
2.2 Design
15
Wizard to create the project from a selection of templates. The advantage of
this is that the project is set up, and the necessary meta les are generated.
Many of the templates also contain a standard project consisting of some initial
code.
Visual Studio allow developers to dene their own project templates. By dening
a project template which includes the framework and the appropriate bindings
to the project, developers are only required to obtain these project templates,
which can easily be done through the NuGet package manager, which is part of
Visual Studio. Additionally, the template is able to include some initial code,
which demonstrates how the developer should dene the data model.
The project template should consist of the following elements:
• The compiled framework and the references to it.
• All the libraries necessary for the framework to work.
• A folder for dening the data model classes.
• An executable console application, which is able to launch the framework.
By executing the framework from within the project where the data model is
dened, the framework is able to access the data model at runtime. This enables
the framework to use reection in order to extract the model and its meta data
attributes, and use this data to generate the SPA.
The data model classes are intended to be dened in the generated folder. How-
ever, developers should be free to add sub folders to the generated folder, or
even put the data model classes in a dierent folder or no folder at all. The
location of the data model classes should not matter, as long as they are within
the project folder. Hence, a interface or base class for data model classes should
be dened instead, as this allows the framework to use reection for retrieving
the data model classes based on this interface or base class.
In this way, a
location-based convention is not necessary, and the location of the classes does
not matter, as long as they are compiled within the same assembly.
==PAGE:28==
16
A framework for development of Single Page Applications
Figure 2.2: A owchart illustrating the development process using the frame-
work. Note that the process allows developers to change the data
model even after creating and customizing the web server.
When a data model project has been created and the data model classes have
been dened, the model is executed.
This generates the code for an initial
SPA application, which is a result of the data model classes and the associated
meta data attributes. The code can be changed and customized in order to
implement the more application specic features which cannot be specied by
the data model.
Because agile development processes are widespread[7] and growing, it should
be possible to change the data model project and execute it again, in case the
data model or any of its meta data attributes changes. The changes in the data
model should be reected in the SPA when re-executing the framework, without
deleting the custom changes made after the rst execution.
The resulting development process which a user of the framework will go through
is shown in Figure 2.2.
2.2.2
Framework features
When the framework code is executed, code for a SPA should be generated
based on the data model. As mentioned in section 2.1, the data model is able
to contain meta data which can be used to customize the SPA to be generated.
==PAGE:29==
2.2 Design
17
This section will look at which meta data the user of the framework should be
able to dene, and the purpose of the meta data.
One of the main features of the framework is that it should generate web services
based on the data model classes. However, it might not always be desirable to
expose every part of the data model as a web service endpoint. This could be
because of security reasons, or because some parts of the model should only be
exposed through another data endpoint.
As an example, consider a model for an employee. The employee might have a
home address dened, which is contained in a separate address model. When an
employee is retrieved through a web service, the address of the employee should
be retrieved as well. However, a web service only retrieving addresses might not
be useful nor desired.
Therefore, a user of the framework should be able to control which entities that
should have web services generated. One option is to generate web services for
all classes which are explicitly annotated with the meta data attribute. The
second option is to generate web services for all entities except the entities with
the new meta data attribute. While it may be the case that most classes are
to be exposed as web services, the rst approach holds more advantages. Ex-
plicitly marking classes to be exposed as web services is more intuitive for most
developers, and in addition this opens op the possibility to dene parameters
on the meta data attribute which can be used to communicate various options
about the individual web services to be generated.
The rst parameter which will be introduced for the web service attribute is a
parameter specifying the URL where the REST endpoint can be found. The
parameter will be optional, and if it is not set, the default Web API URL
/api/{ResourceName} will be used for the web service. The various REST verbs
can then be used to aect the resource represented by the class, as described in
section 2.1.2. Note that it is also possible to change the default URL for Web
API after code generation.
When an entity is exposed to a client, either through a server side template or
through a RESTful service, it is sometimes the case that the entity should have
==PAGE:30==
18
A framework for development of Single Page Applications
a dierent format or use dierent types for its elds, either for practical purposes
or for security reasons. An example of this could be date types where it may be
more appropriate to expose the date in a string format or the UNIX timestamp
of the date, as opposed to the C# DateTime format. Another example could be
that the eld or property containing the password hash of a user should not be
included when exposing users to the client.
In these cases, it is necessary to introduce view models. A view model is a class
which contains entity information for views and clients. The view model for an
entity should be used in place of an entity every time that the entity needs to
be exposed to clients in any way. Usually, a view model should contain only the
information necessary for the clients using it. This holds one main advantage:
Data exposed in web services and views are no longer directly coupled to the
entity. This makes it easy to change formats and data types for views without
aecting the data layer. This advantage is reinforced by the fact that ORM plays
an important and central role in the framework, and changing data types would
also mean changing the database.
Furthermore, as Web API automatically
serializes the objects sent to the client, including all properties and elds, a
developer might accidentally expose condential information, such as a password
hash, without explicitly choosing to do so. By decoupling the data model from
the client, this information can only be shared by explicitly adding the elds or
properties to the view model.
For these reasons, the framework should be able to generate view models from
entities, including conversions from view models to entities and from entities to
view models. Letting the framework generate a view model for a specic entity
could be made an optional parameter in the web service attribute as the URL
parameter mentioned earlier in this section. However, there is really only one
reason not to use view models, which is that slightly more code is required. As
the framework takes care of the code generation, view models do not require any
additional development time. View models are therefore not made optional in
the framework after all, and each entity marked with the web service attribute
will consequently have a corresponding view model generated.
The web services generated from the entities marked with the web service at-
tribute will be consumed by the part of the SPA running JS client side in the
==PAGE:31==
2.2 Design
19
users' browsers. It should be possible to some extent to generate the HTML
and JS for consuming these services. More specically, views and code allowing
the user to perform CRUD operations on the entity are simple and predictable
enough that these can be generated from the entity and its properties. The
HTML in these views will in most cases need to be changed in order to ob-
tain the desired website look and design, but an initial view with the CRUD
operations in place is nonetheless an easier place to start.
Some developers prefer to start the development of views from scratch.
In
addition, the logic concerning some entities may be more complex than simple
CRUD operations, and so an initial view would be more annoying than useful.
Hence, not all web service entities should generate a corresponding initial view.
This should rather be a feature which the user of the framework can select for
each individual entity. As a REST web service is required in order to create
a CRUD view, the most robust approach is to add the option for generation
of an initial view as a parameter to the web service attribute. Thus, it is not
possible to select this option unless the entity is annotated with the web service
attribute.
Authentication is an important and central part of most modern web appli-
cations. The most common and well-known authentication mechanism in web
applications today is through cookie-based username and password combina-
tion, although several other authentication mechanisms exist. Once a user is
authenticated, data related to that user can be retrieved and used. In particu-
lar, the users authorization level can be retrieved, and the actions which the user
is allowed to perform can be determined. The most widespread authorization
mechanism today is Role Based Access Control (RBAC)[8], where rights and
privileges are determined for a set of roles, and each user then belongs to one
or more roles. This greatly reduces the complexity of security administration as
compared to managing rights and privileges for each individual user through,
for example, Access Control Lists (ACL).
Given that authentication and authorization are very common mechanisms
within web development, the framework should be able to generate code en-
abling the use of these two concepts. As for all other entities in the framework,
a data model class is required, in order to be able to dene the data which
==PAGE:32==
20
A framework for development of Single Page Applications
is directly related to the user.
This could be data like the users initials, e-
mail, phone number, address, etc. Because authentication and authorization
mechanisms have to be generated for this model in particular, the framework is
required to know which one of the data model classes which represents the user
entities.
This is accomplished by introducing a new attribute. This user entity attribute
is used to annotate the class which should represent a user. Hence, the class
annotated with this new meta data attribute is a user model. The code generator
of the framework is then able to use the properties and name of this class to
generate a security principal class, and the corresponding authentication and
authorization code. A username property is also required in order to perform
authentication. Such a property, however, does not need to be explicitly dened.
Because the class is annotated by the user entity attribute, the code generator
can generate the username property if it is unable to nd one.
A dedicated username property is not always desirable. In many systems, the e-
mail or initials of a user are used as the username, and so, a username property
would be redundant and misleading. For this reason, an additional attribute
is introduced for annotating a property as the username property. The prop-
erty annotated should be of type string, and if no property is annotated, the
framework should look for a property named username. If this property is not
found either, then the code generator adds a username property during code
generation. The properties found on the user entity data model class are added
to the generated principal class along with the generated username property, if
such a property was generated.
A user model attribute and a user model username attribute are sucient for
generating authentication mechanisms.
The next step is to enable the user
of the framework to control access to resources and operations based on the
authorization roles and permissions of each user. In most systems, at least two
roles are required: Regular users and administrators, where administrators are
able to create additional regular users and administrators. While more roles
might exist in many systems, focus will initially be on enabling the framework
to support these two roles.
==PAGE:33==
2.2 Design
21
By introducing an authorization meta data attribute which can be used on data
model classes, data mol which should only be accessed by authenticated users
can be annotated, and the code generator can thereby create this access check
when generating code for the entity. Furthermore, if the user should have a
specic role in order to perform certain operations on the entity, the name of
the role which is allowed to access or manipulate the resource can be supplied
as argument to the attribute. A parameter for each CRUD operation will be
present. Hence, the role or roles required to perform an operation on an entity
may dier depending on the operation.
To sum up, the meta data attributes which will be allowed, and their function-
ality, are described in the following:
• RestServiceEntity: Attribute which generates a REST web service for
the entity which is annotated with the attribute. This attribute will also
generate appropriate view models for the SPA.
 Url: Optional string parameter for the RestServiceEntity-attribute
which can be used for dening the url for the resource relative to the
host of the SPA.
 CreateView: Optional boolean parameter for the RestServiceEntity
which is used to dene whether a default view for manipulating the
annotated entity resource should be generated.
• Principal: Attribute for annotating a user model. The annotated model
will be used to generate authentication and authorization logic. Only one
Principal model is allowed.
 PrincipalUsername: Attribute for annotating a username property
in a model class marked with the Principal attribute.
• Authorize: Attribute to limit access to the annotated entity for clients.
The annotated entity will only be accessible to authenticated users.
 Get: Parameter which is used to specify what roles an authenticated
user should have in order to obtain read access to the annotated
entity.
==PAGE:34==
22
A framework for development of Single Page Applications
 Post: Analogous to GET, but concerns the right to create new entities.
 Put: Analogous to GET, but concerns the right to change existing
entities. Cannot contain any roles which have not been granted read
access.
 Delete: Analogous to GET, but concerns the right to delete existing
entities. Cannot contain any roles which have not been granted read
access.
==PAGE:35==
2.3 Implementation
23
2.3
Implementation
This section will account for the implementation strategy and choices made with
regard to the SPA framework. In addition, the challenges encountered during
development as well as the solutions to these will be explained and analyzed.
As described in section 2.2.1, the framework will consist of two parts. A DLL
le with the framework itself, and a console application which will execute the
framework and contain the data model which will dier depending on the SPA.
These two parts will each be implemented in two separate projects. Further-
more, the framework will generate a SPA which will consist of two projects: A
web application project containing the content and controlling parts of the SPA,
including view templates, JS, CSS, web controllers, and web services, and a Data
Access Layer (DAL) retrieving and storing data through ORM. This separation
mainly serves structural purposes, but also allows for easier maintenance.
One could argue that a business logic layer project would be appropriate as
well. However, as mentioned in section 2.1, the web server in a SPA usually only
contains a sparse amount of business logic. Hence, such a layer, if introduced,
would mainly send data between the data access layer and the web project.
Because the intention is that data manipulation should primarily be performed
at the client, a business logic layer will initially not be a part of the framework.
The development of the framework will consist of four projects which will be
given the following names:
• {ProjectName} - The project in which the data model for a given SPA will
be dened. This is also the project which is able to be generated through
the "New project" wizard of Visual Studio.
• DDHTML5Framework - The framework core, consisting of code generation
tools as well as interfaces and meta data attributes for dening the data
model.
• {ProjectName}.DAL - The DAL project which the SPA is dependent
upon. Generated by the framework.
==PAGE:36==
24
A framework for development of Single Page Applications
• {ProjectName}.Web - The web application itself. Generated by the frame-
work.
The {ProjectName} parameter will be dened upon creation of the project
through the new project dialogue.
2.3.1
The data model
As discussed in section 2.2.1, it should be possible to create the data model
project through a Project Template selected in the New Project dialogue of
Visual Studio. A project template is dened as described in the ocial Visual
Studio documentation[9].
The executable data model project will consist of an entry point calling the
framework in addition to the classes forming the data model itself. The entry
point also supplies the framework with two arguments:
• The project name, which will be used to name the two generated projects.
Hence, the project name argument should be identical to the project name
of the data model project. The project name is also used in the namespace
names.
• A database connection string used for connecting to a database. This pa-
rameter is optional, and if it is missing, the default Visual Studio LocalDB
database will be used.
When the project is created through the New Project dialogue, the two frame-
work parameters should be dened during the dialogue. This is not done in the
same way for both parameters.
The project name is a default parameter, which is present in practically all
project templates, and Visual Studio requires this parameter to be dened
when creating any project.
The placeholder for the parameter is the string
==PAGE:37==
2.3 Implementation
25
$projectname$, and the argument provided for the parameter will substitute
any placeholders dened in the project template les.
The connection string is a custom parameter. Ideally, a wizard would have to
be implemented. This can be done as described in the ocial Visual Studio
documentation[10].
However, a project template is only able to contain one
wizard, and a dedicated wizard is required to import packages and dependencies
for the project. It may be possible to chain these wizards, but no documentation
has been found for this, and the issue has not been researched any further due
to the time constraints of the project.
In order to dene meta data for the template, an XML le with the le ex-
tension .vstemplate is created. This le also lists the les which are included
in the template, and whether or not parameters should be substituted in each
le. Finally, the le accounts for the libraries which should be installed when
creating a project from the project template. In the data model project, Entity
Framework should be installed into the solution in order to perform ORM in
the SPA. All the libraries contained in an ASP.NET MVC Web API 2.0 project
should be installed as well. To ensure that a project can be created and run
without any connection to the internet, and to minimize the time taken to create
a project, all libraries are packaged into the project template as well, instead of
downloading the libraries through NuGet when creating the project.
The project template les and the XML le is compressed into a ZIP archive,
and moved to the Visual Studio Project Templates directory. After restarting
Visual Studio, the project template is shown in the Visual Studio New Project
dialogue, and a new data model project can be created.
Although not part of the thesis, the project template can easily be distributed
by creating a Visual Studio Installer (.vsi) le, and sharing this le on NuGet,
allowing all Visual Studio users to download and use the template and the SPA
framework.
In order to help developers get familiar with creating data model classes, the
data model project template contains two examples of data model classes: A
regular data model class and a user model. Both of these can be seen in Ap-
==PAGE:38==
26
A framework for development of Single Page Applications
Figure 2.3: The les and folders of a new project created from the project
template.
pendix A in Figure A.1. These examples also show how meta data annotations
are used to annotate the model or parts of it. The dierent attributes and their
individual usage were all explained in section 2.2.2.
The project tree of a new project created through the project template can be
seen in Figure 2.3.
2.3.2
The framework core
The DLL le containing the framework library itself should contain all parts
of the framework which do not change between projects. This includes code
and le generation, manipulation of project metadata les, and, if necessary,
merging the generated les with any previous customized versions of the same
les.
2.3.2.1
Resources and utilities
The framework contains a number of resources to make the code generation
process more easy and manageable. Each resource is either a zip archive or a
text le. The zip archive resources can be seen as project templates, as these
contain the les required for a given project, while the text les are templates
for code les. The les in the zip archives as well as the individual template
==PAGE:39==
2.3 Implementation
27
les contain placeholders for variable substitutions. These placeholders have the
form __NAME__, where NAME is replaced by the name of the placeholder.
The reason for this naming convention in particular is that the name is still a
valid name in many coding contexts, thus making it easier to nd syntax errors
through Visual Studio.
All generated code is initially placed in a temporary folder within the calling
data model project.
This is to ensure that the project is not placed in the
end destination before it is completely generated. Otherwise, an error during
framework execution might result in a broken or incomplete SPA being placed in
the destination directory. In addition, all le operations are performed through
a le helper class, which reduces the redundancy of le reads and writes, and
collects all le operations in one le. This includes extraction of the zip archive
resources, creating and copying les and directories, and navigating between
directories.
The Web project as well as the DAL project, will look dierent depending on
whether a user model is found in the data model project or not. Hence, all les
of the zip archive resources might not be relevant, as some are only performing
authentication logic. To solve this, the zip archive extraction method accepts
an exclusion list of le paths within the archive which should not be extracted
to the temporary directory, and such a list can be provided if a condition, such
as a user model not having been dened, renders some les unneeded.
Likewise, it is occasionally the case that some sections of code in a le should
only be generated if one or more conditions are met while the rest of the le's
content should not be inuenced by these conditions. Such a problem can be
solved by having the zip archive contain a le for each possible case of conditions.
The framework would then be able to use the exclusion list to exclude all the
les where the corresponding set of conditions are not fullled, and only leave
the le corresponding to the actual case. This would, however, quickly result in
a large number of les, even for a small number of conditions. The number of
dierent cases would be 2x, where x is the number of conditions. Using exclusion
lists would therefore result in a framework which would be harder to maintain,
as a change to one of the resource les would have to be performed for each
case.
==PAGE:40==
28
A framework for development of Single Page Applications
The problem can also be handled by using the substitution placeholders. The
framework can then substitute the substitution variable with code which de-
pends on the aforementioned conditions. The code snippets would have to be
hardcoded in the framework, or exist in separate template les. Either way, the
location of these code snippets would not be completely clear.
A better solution is to keep the code snippets in the les where they should
be inserted, while avoiding multiple versions of the same le. Inspired by the
branching constructs found in most programming languages, usually in the form
of if-statements, a similar construct is introduced into the template les of the
framework's resources. The construct can be seen below:
__IF(Condition)__
...
__ELSE__
...
__ENDIF__
The code which should be generated if the condition is met is placed between
the IF and ELSE parts, and the code which should be generated if the condition
is not met is placed between the ELSE and ENDIF parts. This is not dierent
from the way that an if-statement is usually used. A compiler or interpreter of
some form is usually implemented in order to handle language constructs such
as branching.
In the thesis, a more simple approach is taken. Because this language construct
is only used internally within the framework, implementing or using normal
compiler or interpreter techniques seems excessive. Instead, only regular ex-
pressions are used to parse the constructs and the associated code snippets in
the templates, whereas normally a context-free grammar is used. The main con-
sequence of this is that it is not possible to nest these branching constructs, as
regular expressions, as opposed to context free grammars, are not able to keep
a stack. The need for nesting these constructs should be small, and it is always
possible to create a condition which is a conjunction of other conditions in order
to circumvent nesting. In addition, only one condition is allowed as argument
to the branching construct. Conjunctions and disjunctions and other boolean
==PAGE:41==
2.3 Implementation
29
Figure 2.4: The SPA generation process. The process is started by executing
the data model project.
expressions will therefore have to be done in the framework prior to assigning
the condition variable.
2.3.2.2
Code generation
With the introduction of the tools described in the previous section, code gener-
ation of the two SPA projects can be performed. The whole process is roughly
illustrated in Figure 2.4.
When the data model project is executed, a method is called within the frame-
work, which starts the process of generating the SPA from the data model.
Initially, the framework should load and read the data model. All data model
classes implement a unique interface, IDataModel. These classes are all loaded
into an array by the use of reection on all classes contained by the assembly
calling the framework. Because this does not include any enums dened and
used in the data model, a list consisting of all enums dened by the calling as-
sembly is created as well. Furthermore, an additional array is created which only
contains the classes annotated with the RestServiceEntity attribute. Finally,
the framework searches for a model annotated with the Principal attribute. If
more than one of these models are found, an exception is thrown, as it should
not be possible to dene more than one user model4. If a single user model was
4Claims should be used to model the dierences between user groups instead.[11]
==PAGE:42==
30
A framework for development of Single Page Applications
found, the framework checks if any of the user models properties is annotated
with the PrincipalUsername attribute.
If found, the annotated property is
saved into a variable for later use.
The SPA's DAL project is generated rst. The rst step in this process is to load
and extract the DAL zip archive resource from the framework's resources. The
content of this zip archive, as well as the DAL template resources, are discussed
in further detail in section 2.3.3.
The next step is the generation of entity classes. These classes resemble the
classes of the data model, but all the data model annotations and interface
implementations have been removed, as these are only used by the framework.
An entity class is generated through a template resource, where the name and
all the properties of the corresponding data model class are inserted into the
template. The primary purpose of these classes is to form a set of classes which
can be used to perform code-rst ORM.
The generation of entity classes does not include any enums that might have
been dened, as enums are not able to implement the IDataModel interface.
This might result in missing data types and compile errors in the generated
projects. The list of dened enums mentioned earlier in this section is therefore
iterated, and all enums are redened in the generated projects using a template
resource. The enums are redened in separate les with the le name being
equal to the enum name.
The SPA Web project contains considerably more les. Similar to the generation
of the DAL project, the ZIP archive resource for the Web project is extracted as
the rst step. All les related to authentication and authorization is excluded
from extraction if no user model was found among the data model classes. Next,
the list of data model classes annotated with the RestServiceEntity attribute
which was loaded in the start of the process is iterated, and REST service
endpoints are generated for all of these using a template resource.
A view
model class is also generated as part of the service generation, and if the boolean
CreateView-parameter is set to true, a default view is created as well. The web
services as well as the view models and the default views are discussed in greater
detail in section 2.3.4.
==PAGE:43==
2.3 Implementation
31
Because the view model corresponding to the user model is dierent from the
rest of the data model classes' view models, the user view model is generated
separately. In particular, it should be ensured that password hashes and other
user information is not exposed. This view model is of course only generated if
a user model was found.
All les of the DAL project and Web project have now been generated. For
developers to be able to compile the generated projects and view them in Visual
Studio, the projects' .csproj le has to be updated. The .csproj le is an XML
document which describes the content and code les associated with a project
as well as other project meta data. A .csproj le template used as a starting
point is contained in the DAL zip archive resource. The generated les which
should be added to the project are then added to the XML node listing the code
le paths which should be compiled.
However, this might cause problems when executing the framework more than
once. The generated project might have been customized and new les might
have been added to the project. By using the .csproj le stored in the zip archive
resource, all these customizations would be overwritten once the framework is
run after performing them. Instead, the framework tries to load the previously
generated .csproj le from the generated projects destination directory. The
.csproj le contained in the resource is used only if no .csproj le could be found
in the destination directory. The disadvantage of this is that the content of the
.csproj le is no longer known in advance by the framework. In particular, this
means that the le paths which are added may already exist in the le. To avoid
duplicates, a le path should therefore be removed from the .csproj le before
attempting to add it.
Both projects should also have unique project IDs. A projects ID is also con-
tained in the .csproj le, and when a previously generated .csproj le cannot
be found, the framework generates a unique ID which is inserted into the newly
generated .csproj le. If a previously generated .csproj le is found, the project
keeps the same ID and is considered updated and not created.
After updating or creating the .csproj les, all les are ready to be moved to
the destination directory. The newly generated projects are copied from the
==PAGE:44==
32
A framework for development of Single Page Applications
temporary folder to the same directory as the solution le, which is also the
same directory as the data model project folder. In addition, the placeholder
parameters in all les are replaced by their respective arguments as they are
copied to their new location. These arguments, and the placeholders they should
replace, are generated and returned by the DAL and Web project generation
methods respectively. If the projects already exists in the solution directory
due to a previous run of the framework, the newly generated project and the
existing project has to be merged. This is explained in more detail in section
2.3.2.3.
The nal step is to update the solution le so that the newly generated projects
are loaded into Visual Studio, if they are not already. Because the concept of
solution les in Visual Studio were introduced in InterDev[12], part of Visual
Studio 1997, and XML was not dened until the year 1998[13], solution les are
unfortunately not written in XML, as the solution le format has not changed
since 1997. An XML parser can therefore not be used to manipulate the le.
The solution le format denition[14] is, however, not complicated and the only
operation which the framework should perform on the solution le is to add the
generated projects and ensure that no duplicates are created. In order to avoid
duplicates, all projects which should be added are removed from the le. This is
done by removing all lines which contain either the project name surrounded by
quotes or the GUID of the project. After this, the projects and their standard
congurations can safely be inserted.
When the framework execution is done, the generated projects can be found in
the destination directory. The projects can also be found in the same solution as
the data model project and, due to the updated project and solution meta data
les, the solution explorer in Visual Studio also shows these generated projects.
2.3.2.3
Merging projects
When the generated projects are moved to their end destination, projects from
an earlier execution of the data model project may exist. Furthermore, these
projects may have been customized with additional code, or some code might
==PAGE:45==
2.3 Implementation
33
have been removed. This raises the question of how to handle such a conict.
This problem is important, and plays a large role in how useful the framework
actually is. As mentioned in section 2.2.1, iterative development processes are
widespread, and the framework should be able to be executed not only in the
beginning of, but also during, an implementation phase. The framework will
therefore not be as useful if execution of the framework subsequently to the rst
time is not handled properly.
The dierent reasons a developer may have of running the framework a second
time should rst be considered. These could be any of the following:
• The developer using the framework might want to start over with a dif-
ferent set of data model classes, by generating a project from scratch, and
thereby overwrite all custom changes made.
• One or more completely new data model classes were added to the data
model project, and should be included in the generated projects.
• One or more data model classes might need some additional properties or
meta data attributes, but everything else should remain the same.
• The developer may want to remove custom changes from one or more
classes by regenerating these classes from the data model project, but still
keep custom changes on other classes.
Because these four scenarios require the framework to handle the conict in
dierent ways, the developer using the framework is required to determine the
course of action. The rst scenario is simple enough to handle: In all cases
where a le already exists at the end destination, it should be overwritten with
the newly generated le. This would mean loss of all custom changes, and this
solution therefore only works with the rst scenario.
The second scenario requires that existing les and custom changes are not
overwritten. Therefore, if a le conict occurs, the le already existing at the
end destination should be kept, and the generated le should not be used. The
==PAGE:46==
34
A framework for development of Single Page Applications
new les generated from the new data model does not exist in the destination
directory, and no conict will therefore occur for these new les.
The third and fourth scenarios are more tricky, as the conict resolution should
be dierent for each occurring conict, depending on whether the data model has
changed or not. In addition, in the third scenario the developer may not want
custom changes to be removed from the les generated by the data model which
is changed. This scenario may therefore require custom changes to be merged
with updated generated code, which is quite challenging to do automatically
without any user input.
From the four scenarios described above, it is evident that the framework should
know whether conicts should be resolved by overwriting the existing les, or
by merging the existing project les with the newly generated les. Parts of
the merging process can be done automatically, but some manual user input is
required.
A large part of the merging can be solved by enabling the framework to de-
termine whether a given generated le has been customized or not. If custom
changes are not present in a le, that le can safely be overwritten with the
newly generated and updated le, as no code or content generated by the user
is lost.
This can be determined by comparing the generated les from the last run of the
framework with the les residing in the destination directory. In order to have
access to the generated les content before any custom changes were performed,
a new temporary le folder is created.
When the generated les have been
moved to the destination folder, and all conicts have been resolved, the new
temporary folder is cleared and the generated les are copied to the new folder.
When copying les to the destination folder, some conicts can now be resolved
automatically by comparing the le existing in the destination directory with the
corresponding le found in the new temporary folder. After the rst execution,
the new temporary folder will always contain the les generated during the last
execution of the data model project. The exception, of course, is if the developer
deleted these les between two iterations. No comparison can be made in this
==PAGE:47==
2.3 Implementation
35
case, which should be communicated to the user of the framework through
a warning, and the framework should not overwrite any les unless explicitly
stated so by the developer. Furthermore, no conicts should occur during the
rst data model execution, and the lack of previously generated les is therefore
not a problem during the rst iteration.
By implementing this, the remaining conicts will always include a customized
le, which seems appropriate.
The customized le is either conicting with
a generated le which was updated since the last execution, or a generated
le which has not changed. In the latter case, one could argue that the user
most likely wants to keep the custom changes unless the fourth scenario is the
case.
In order to make the manual merging process less comprehensive, the
customized les are left unchanged if no change can be registered between the
generated les from the current iteration and the generated les from the last
iteration. Users of the framework are then required to manually delete the le
where custom changes should be removed if the fourth scenario is indeed the
case. This seems fairly intuitive, and the same approach can be taken within
version control technologies to revert les[15]. However, a option for explicitly
reverting les would be preferred.
The only conicts remaining are between generated les which have changed,
and existing customized les. This requires the user of the framework to man-
ually merge the conicting les. To make this process as easy and manageable
as possible, a graphical user interface for merging the les is required. This
can be programmed from scratch, but utilizing one of the many existing pro-
grams solving this problem is more ecient. An example of such a program is
WinMerge[16], which highlights the lines where the les dier and allows the
user to copy sections of text between the two les. WinMerge is also able to
take two command line arguments which are used to specify the two les which
should be merged, which is useful when launching WinMerge from another ap-
plication.
The disadvantage of using an application such as WinMerge is that an instance
of the application would have to be started for each occurring conict which
could not be resolved automatically. This would result in several merge windows
followed by each other which would not be very user friendly, and the developer
==PAGE:48==
36
A framework for development of Single Page Applications
using the framework may quickly loose overview. Hence, a better merge process
would be achieved by being able to see an overview of all the conicted les,
as known from several source control tools.
Unfortunately, it has not been
possible to nd a standalone application which is able to both show such an
overview and merge les.
A custom merge tool would therefore have to be
implemented to achieve such an overview. In addition, creating such a tool would
allow for a much more integrated merge process, where the conicts which were
automatically handled could also be shown and the conict resolution changed.
In addition, the fourth scenario could be handled through a revert operation
on the specic les which should have custom changes removed, thereby not
requiring developers to delete the les manually.
Neither WinMerge nor the custom merging tool has been implemented in the
framework. However, the detection of changes to the generated code has been
implemented.
2.3.3
The DAL
The purpose of the DAL is to connect the application to the database, and
retrieve and save data for the SPA. By putting this part of the application into
a separate project, a more structured and maintainable application is obtained.
The DAL consists of entity classes, a Context class, and a repository inter-
face and an implementation of this interface for each entity marked with the
RestServiceEntity.
The entity classes are generated from the data model
classes dened in the data model project, and most of these are simply the data
model classes without the meta data attributes. However, if a data model class
was marked with the Principal attribute, thus making it a user model, the
corresponding entity class will inherit the IdentityUser class, which includes
username, password hashes, and other required security features. This ensures
that the user model entity can be used to represent users in authentication and
authorization using the ASP.NET Identity framework[17].
The Context class is the class which connects the entity classes to the tables of
==PAGE:49==
2.3 Implementation
37
the database. This is done by dening a number of properties having the generic
type DataSet<T>. Such a class is dened for each of the entity classes as the most
common scenario is a table per class. Additional DataSet<T>-properties can be
dened by the developer after code generation in order to create multiple tables
containing the same type. The Context class inherits from either the DbContext
class or the IdentityDbContext class, depending on whether a user model was
found or not.
The IdentityDbContext class is identical to the DbContext
class, except for some predened DataSet<T> properties for storing users and
authorization data.
The repository interface is intended to be the only part of the DAL project
which the Web project interacts with.
The purpose of the repository is to
prevent direct interaction with the database in order to avoid redundant code
and increase structure5. This generic interface is central to the application, and
oers a number of generic operations:
• Get, which retrieves data from the database. The method is overloaded,
and actually consist of two dierent methods with dierent parameters.
The rst overload is used to retrieve and lter multiple rows from a table
based on the lambda expression supplied.
The second overload uses a
predicate to retrieve the rst row matching the predicate. This can, for
example, be used to retrieve an item with a specic primary key.
• Post, which adds an item to the database in the specied table.
• Put, which changes an existing item. The item supplied to this operation
should have its ID-attribute set in order to be able to nd the item to
change.
• Delete, an operation which is also overloaded. The rst overload deletes
a supplied entity. The entity should have its ID-attribute set in order to
nd it in the database. The second overload takes a predicate instead,
and deletes all items from the specied table which fullls the predicate.
The names of the methods correspond to the REST operations which use them.
The full interface can be seen in Figure A.2 in Appendix A.
5More information about the repository pattern can be found on the internet[18]
==PAGE:50==
38
A framework for development of Single Page Applications
By enforcing the repository interface, all methods of the repository implementa-
tions have the same signatures. Originally, the interface had a slightly dierent
appearance, and was implemented by a single generic class. This approach pre-
sumed that not only the interface could be generalized, but the implementation
as well. This proved to be true to some extend, but caused problems when
updating nested entities.
Consider a data model class with the following elds:
public class ProjectResource {
public DateTime MonthYear { get; set; }
public int Hours { get; set; }
}
Next, consider the following data model class:
public class Project {
public string ProjectName { get; set; }
public List<ProjectResource> Resources { get; set; }
}
The second data model class, ProjectResource contains a one-to-many rela-
tionship to the rst data model class, Project, and ProjectResource is there-
fore a nested entity of the Project entity. This causes a number of problems
when the repository implementation is generalized:
• When an entity is created, only new instances of nested entities can be
referenced. In the example above, it is not possible to add an existing
ProjectResource to the collection of a new Project in a general way.
• An updated nested entity is not persisted by updating the entity it is
nested in. Thus the collection with multiple ProjectResource instances
is not updated by updating the Project instance.
• When retrieving instances of an entity, the nested entity instances are not
present.
==PAGE:51==
2.3 Implementation
39
All of the above problems are present because the nested entity is in a separate
database table. This table has to be referenced when retrieving data, and the
nested entity instances should be attached to the table when persisting them.
This cannot be done in a generic implementation, as the dependencies between
the data model classes vary.
By dening a repository class for each entity marked with the RestServiceEntity,
these problems can be xed, as individual repository implementations make it
signicantly easier to dene the necessary persisting logic for each entity. In
addition, developers can more easily add custom repository code which should
only be applied to a limited number of entities.
The dependencies can be resolved automatically, to some degree, in a number
of ways. One approach is to recursively retrieve the objects nested within the
properties when retrieving an object. However, the entities may have a large
number of dependencies which links the entities close together. In the Project
class example mentioned earlier in this section, this approach would mean that
the list of ProjectResource objects associated with a given project should
be retrieved every time a Project object is retrieved. This is okay, and does
not take long to retrieve. However, if the ProjectResource objects also were
to contain links to other entities in the database, perhaps even collections of
entities, performance would start to suer.
In the worst case scenarios, all
records contained in the database might be retrieved.
An alternative approach to increase performance is to retrieve the objects nested
within the properties in a non-recursive way.
In the example provided, this
would mean that any entity object nested within the properties of any nested
ProjectResource objects would not be retrieved, but the ProjectResource ob-
jects themselves would still be retrieved. If the nested objects of the ProjectResource
object are needed, the Id-property of ProjectResource, which is present on all
entity objects generated from the data model, can then be used to retrieve the
ProjectResource from this entity's associated repository. The retrieved object
will then contain the nested objects associated with it.
The disadvantage of the latter approach is that the client may have to chain
several AJAX requests in order to retrieve nested objects. However, these com-
==PAGE:52==
40
A framework for development of Single Page Applications
plicated objects are, as mentioned in section 2.1.1, not very common in SPAs,
and the latter approach will therefore be used.
The SPA framework does not include integration with external data providers
except for external database servers. This can, however, be implemented in the
DAL by the developer after code generation by dening interfaces and imple-
mentations for this.
2.3.4
The web application
The web application project contains the controllers delivering the SPA as well
as the services which allows the SPA to communicate with the database through
the web server. In addition, the web application contains view templates, CSS
les, and JS les.
The project looks quite dierent depending on whether a user model is dened in
the data model project or not. If a user model was indeed dened, authentication
and authorization mechanisms have to be set up. This is done by launching a
conguration method immediately when launching the web application, and
before the web site is ready. The conguration method binds the features of the
ASP.NET Identity framework to the Context le dened in the DAL project. In
addition, an administrator role is created, and an initial user possessing this role
is created as well. Hence, a minimum of two dierent user types are generated:
Administrators and regular users.
All requests to the server are handled by a controller. Either a regular ASP.NET
MVC controller, or a Web API controller which is specialized in exposing REST-
ful services. These two types of controllers will be merged into a single type in
the upcoming version of ASP.NET MVC[4], but for now Web API controllers
will be used for exposing RESTful services.
The web application is a SPA, and hence should only perform a single page load.
The initial page load is handled by a single controller. This controller is the only
controller which returns HTML as a response. All other controllers either return
data or nothing, and require that the client generates the necessary HTML to
==PAGE:53==
2.3 Implementation
41
visualize the data and the changes to it.
The only other regular controller which may be generated by the framework
is a controller handling all authentication and authorization requests.
This
controller includes the following operations:
• Login, which authenticates a user. The authentication is cookie-based,
and the login is therefore saved in the session.
• Register, which is used to create new users. This operation is only made
available to administrators per default. The administrator creating the
user should also supply the eventual roles which the new user should have.
• LogOut, which logs the user out of the application.
• ResetPassword, which enables an administrator to change the password
of the specied user.
• Current, which returns the currently authenticated user's details.
The reason that the authorization controller is not a Web API controller is
that these operations are not stateless, and does not revolve around handling a
resource.
The authentication and authorization controller is, of course, only generated if
a user model was dened in the data model project. The user model denes the
data directly associated with an authenticated user which should be possible
to retrieve when the user is successfully authenticated. The Current method
will return a view model which directly corresponds to the authenticated users
associated entity.
All other controllers of the application are API controllers and expose REST
service endpoints. These are all generated from the data model classes which
were annotated with the RestServiceEntity attribute. Each of the API con-
trollers have an instance of the repository implementation corresponding to the
data model class used to generate the service. This repository is used to retrieve
and manipulate data when handling service requests. The dierent controllers
==PAGE:54==
42
A framework for development of Single Page Applications
Figure 2.5: The user's interaction with the dierent controllers, and the con-
trollers' interaction with the rest of the application.
relationship to the data layer and the rest of the application can be seen in
Figure 2.5.
The HTML returned by the main controller in a generated SPA consists of a
master page and a number of sub pages. All generated SPAs initially contain a
main sub page. Depending on whether a user model was dened, a sub page for
creating and editing users is also present. Additionally, a sub page is generated
for each data model class annotated with the RestServiceEntity where the
CreateView option was set to true.
The entire content of both the master page and the sub pages, which the user
is authorized to view, is sent to the browser. A designated area in the master
page is used to show a single sub page. AngularJS is used to toggle between
the dierent sub pages, and the sub pages which are not shown are saved in
memory.
In order to obtain a decent look and feel on the master page and the sub pages
in general, and enable the SPA to work on all types of screens, the Twitter
Bootstrap framework is used.
This framework consists of a JS library and
various CSS classes which can be used for solving common styling issues.
Each sub page may have some level of security. The main sub page does not have
any access restrictions. The user management sub page can only be accessed by
==PAGE:55==
2.3 Implementation
43
the administrator role. The security of sub pages generated from data model
classes is more complex. The page can only be accessed by roles which are able
to perform GET or POST operations. The access levels of PUT and DELETE
requests do not determine the access to the page. This is because a GET request
is always required in order to obtain the IDs of the entity instances which should
be modied or deleted. The authorization level for PUT and DELETE requests
will therefore always be equal to or higher than (i.e. include at least the same
roles) the authorization level for GET requests.
The data model pages may have to appear dierent depending on the user's
roles. A user who is only allowed to create and view instances should not have
the option to send PUT or DELETE requests through the SPA, as these requests
would be denied at the web server. However, a user who is allowed to edit and
delete instances as well should have these features available.
This ltering of features is obtained by considering the meta data dened in
the Authorize attribute for the data model class, and generating the necessary
if-statements server side. For example, if a user wants to access the instances
of a holiday entity, and is authorized to perform all CRUD operations, the user
will be presented with a view with all features available as shown in Figure 2.6.
Figure 2.6: The view generated from a holiday entity without any ltering.
If the user is only allowed to view entity instances, the user will be presented for
the view shown in Figure 2.7 where no create, edit, or edit options are present.
==PAGE:56==
44
A framework for development of Single Page Applications
Figure 2.7: The view generated from a holiday entity with all create, edit,
and delete features ltered away due to the authenticated user's
insucient access rights.
Likewise, only the create button will be shown if the user is not allowed to view
instances.
Creating and editing instances of data model classes implies that it should be
possible to set and change the properties of the instances through the gener-
ated HTML template. Because the data model is created in a statically typed
language, the framework is able to use reection to determine the types of the
properties when generating the SPA. This allows the framework to select the
editor to be displayed for a property based on the property type. The framework
has associated a number of types with editors:
• All string properties will be edited using a text input eld.
• All properties which have a numeral type will use the number input elds
introduced in HTML5, which is a text eld restricted to numbers. Number
elds generated from integer types will impose a restriction which ensures
that only integers can be supplied as input.
• Boolean properties result in a checkbox, representing true or false.
• Enum properties are edited through a drop down menu containing all the
possible enum values.
• DateTime properties are manipulated using a third party datepicker[19].
This covers all the built-in types of C# except for the object type. Editors
are not generated for properties of more complex types such as custom object
==PAGE:57==
2.3 Implementation
45
properties or collections, as it is more hard to predict how a developer may
want to set and read these properties. One approach could be to recursively
generate editors for the nested properties. However, in many cases this would
quickly lead to a large number of editors. Furthermore, there is a good chance
that many of these editors are obsolete, as the object property may simply be
an association, whose data is and should be edited elsewhere. However, if the
property represents a one-to-one compositional relationship between the two
objects, the nested properties of the object property can be edited together
with the rest of the properties on the same page with good reason. Likewise, if
a property represents a one-to-many compositional relationship in the form of
a collection property, it should be possible to manipulate the collection and the
items within together with the entity instance.
A simple example of an association between two objects is a project object
containing a list of employees working on the project. One would not expect
to be able to change and add employees in the same sub page as projects, as
neither of the two objects are part of the other.
As an example of a compositional relationship, consider a car, an engine, and
four wheels, where the engine is related to the car through a property, and the
wheels are referenced through a collection property. Because the car and the
engine form a compositional relationship, it is natural to edit the properties of
the engine together with the cars remaining properties. The most intuitive way
to edit the properties of the wheels would also be while editing the car.
The framework, however, would need a way of recognizing a compositional re-
lationship to handle this. This could be done by introducing a new meta data
attribute into the data model. However, this meta data attribute and the re-
quired view templates have not been implemented and thus, object and collec-
tion properties not stated in the bulleted list earlier in this section are simply
ignored.
As mentioned, only administrators have access to the user management sub
page. This sub page can be seen in Figure 2.8, and enables administrators to
send asynchronous requests to the user controller on the web server. Adminis-
trators are also able to edit the properties of the users. Editors are generated
==PAGE:58==
46
A framework for development of Single Page Applications
Figure 2.8: The page generated by the SPA framework for performing user
management. The page is only generated if a user model is found
in the data model.
from the types of the properties of the user model analogous to the properties
of the regular data model classes. In addition to the user model properties,
administrators are also able to select the roles which a user should have.
Each sub page has a corresponding JS le containing an AngularJS controller
which is referenced in the HTML template. This le contains the client side
code required to be able to show and receive data from the user. In addition,
some JS code is necessary to perform web service requests and receive responses
from the web server. This code could be placed in the individual AngularJS
controllers. Instead however, a single JS le is used to centralize all web service
request code, including AJAX communication. This le is also used to create a
web service interface to the AngularJS controllers, which enables these to treat
the collections of entity instances as a simple JS object, which supports all of
the REST verbs. Thus the JS in this le acts as the client side DAL.
==PAGE:59==
2.4 Testing
47
2.4
Testing
This section will describe how the designed and implemented framework has
been tested. While this section accounts for the functional testing which have
been done, it does not account for the usability and eectiveness of the frame-
work, as this is the purpose of the second part of the thesis.
The testing of a software implementation is usually based on the use cases
created during the analyze phase of the software development process. However,
the development process of the framework has been more explorative in nature
than a normal development process, and many of the framework features which
should be tested were not present during the analyze phase of the thesis. The
tests are therefore not based on any formal use cases, but are still based on the
most important and common scenarios.
As mentioned in section 2.3.4, the generated SPA looks quite dierent depending
on whether a user model was dened in the data model project or not. The test
scripts should therefore thoroughly test SPAs generated from a data model both
with and without a user model. In addition, all meta data attributes and various
common combinations of meta data attributes should be tested throughout the
test scripts.
All test cases start by creating a project based on the data model project tem-
plate described in section 2.3.1. Next, one or more data model classes which may
have one or more meta data attributes are dened. The data model project is
executed, and the generated SPA and its features are then examined, and com-
pared with the expected output and features. A total of four test scripts, all
dened in Appendix B, have been dened, and are all described shortly in the
following:
1. The test case, found in Figure B.1, creates two simple data model classes
where one is exposed through a web service and has a view created. No
user model is dened in this test script and thus, no authorization is
present on the data model classes. The generated view is examined to see
if it corresponds to the data model class.
==PAGE:60==
48
A framework for development of Single Page Applications
2. The test script, found in Figure B.2, is similar to the previous one, but an
authorization attribute is used to restrict the edit and delete operations of
the data model class, and a user model is dened as well. The generated
view is tested as an anonymous user and as a logged in user to verify that
the authorization works.
3. The user management features are tested in this test script which found in
Figure B.3. A user model with a string property annotated as a user name
property is dened. A new admin user is then created in the resulting SPA,
and this admin user is used to create a new regular user.
4. The limitations and robustness of the data model are tested in this test
script which is found in Figure B.4, and it is veried that exceptions are
thrown when expected. An example of a limitation is the fact that it is
only possible to have a single user model in a data model project.
The test scripts have all been executed manually.
Automatic testing of the
framework would make it easier to avoid regression errors, but this would be a
lot more time consuming and has therefore not been part of the scope of the
thesis.
==PAGE:61==
2.5 Discussion
49
2.5
Discussion
This rst part of the thesis has examined how much MDD can contribute to the
development of a SPA. The resulting framework is able to simplify a signicant
part of the development, provided that the desired application is simple enough.
The main challenge has been enabling the resulting framework to be useful in
more complex scenarios, where the behavior of the SPA is more demanding.
Every application can be separated into behavior (logic) and structure. The
structure of data is considerably easier to encapsulate within a model than
behavior. Hence, the main challenge of MDD is to include the behavior of an
application in the model as well.
UML includes a number of models which
are used to model the behavior of a system, such as state machines.
These
models are at the moment primarily used for documentation purposes, and not
for actual development. The reason is that these models quickly grow very large
and complex, as a great level of detail is required in order to convert the model
into an application module. Hence, a model covering every possible behavior of
a program is, in most cases, more dicult to create than the application code
created from it.
The thesis has taken a dierent approach to the subject of MDD. Instead of
covering every type of application, the thesis has focused on the development of
SPAs. Furthermore, only the most common behavior of SPAs are included in
the model, such as authentication and authorization.
The framework was never intended to cover every possible development scenario.
Rather, the framework should be seen as a tool for generating and maintaining
very simple CRUD SPAs, and provide a good starting point for the development
of more complex SPAs. Because the framework generates a large part of the
boilerplate code, and also provides default views for manipulating data, a work-
ing prototype can quickly be obtained for many SPAs through the framework.
One could argue that the default views of the application are not always useful.
Hence, default views are not generated as default, but are only generated for
the data model classes which are annotated with the option. In particular, the
==PAGE:62==
50
A framework for development of Single Page Applications
look and feel of the SPA is dicult to represent in the data model. A meta data
attribute for selecting a styling theme for the SPA would be one option, but in
general, custom styling requires a completely dierent model. The generated
SPA should for now have custom styling added after generation.
Thus, the
generated views of the framework are primarily intended for SPAs where styling
and a custom look is not important. The generated views can, however, still be
used as a starting point for more customized views.
Not all of the ideas proposed in this part of the thesis have been implemented.
More common behavior could be modeled through meta data attributes. Es-
pecially searching is very common in SPAs, and in applications in general, and
could be modeled by annotating the properties which should be searchable with
a meta data attribute. Furthermore, the attribute could take a number of pa-
rameters, which species how the property should be searched. The framework
would then be able to add a search eld to the generated default view. Another
common requirement in many SPAs and applications in general, which was not
implemented, is validation of data. Many data structures contain properties
whose values should be constrained. These constraints can intuitively be mod-
eled as meta data attributes in the data model as well, and result in both server
side and client side validation of the data.
Although all proposed features have not been implemented, the framework in
its current form has, however, still proven that MDD can be used to generate a
large part of the code for SPAs whose main focus is CRUD operations.
2.5.1
Other MDD frameworks
Some of the MDD strategies presented in the thesis have been attempted before.
A concrete example, and the example most similar to the framework constructed
in the thesis is Microsoft's Domain Specic Language (DSL) tools[20] rst re-
leased in 2006. These tools can be used to create a data model using a visual
designer. An associated code generation framework is then able to generate the
database of an application as well as the connection to the database from the
model. Code for performing CRUD operations on the entities is also created.
==PAGE:63==
2.5 Discussion
51
Furthermore, the DSL tools are able to generate unit tests and random test data
for testing the CRUD operations of the entities.
The DSL tools are in many ways similar to the framework constructed in the the-
sis. Both frameworks revolve around CRUD operations, and automatic database
generation. The DSL code generator also checks for custom changes in the gen-
erated code when code is generated multiple times, and provides the user with
dierencing tools for merging changes in the data model with custom changes
in the generated code, as proposed in the thesis. However, the DSL tools and
the SPA framework are also quite dierent.
The DSL tools do not use ORM for connecting the database and the application,
but rather uses SQL queries, which is most likely due to the fact that Microsoft's
ORM agship Entity Framework did not get released until 2008. In addition,
the data model used by the DSL tools is designed using a visual designer, and
the model is saved using an XML format as opposed to the SPA framework
where the model is represented as C# classes.
The DSL tools also covers enterprise applications in general, as opposed to the
SPA framework which only covers the development of SPAs.
The disadvan-
tage of this broad coverage is that the DSL tools are only able to generate
the data layer, as this is the only part of an enterprise application which can
be generalized suciently. The SPA framework covers a more narrow range
of applications, and is therefore able to generalize to a much greater extent,
enabling the generation of web services, view models, views, and authorization
mechanisms.
Generation of unit tests for CRUD operations on entities is possible using the
DSL tools, but has not been implemented in the SPA framework. However,
this is denitely a valid topic for further development. Unit tests are neglected
in many development processes, and generating these will ensure that CRUD
operations are working, even after performing custom changes.
In addition,
generating some initial unit tests may motivate developers to create additional
unit tests.
Other MDD frameworks exist as well, although none of these focus on SPAs in
==PAGE:64==
52
A framework for development of Single Page Applications
particular. The Sculpture framework[21] is able to generate web services and
data link layers from data models as well, and is built around the concept of
molds. Molds are used to determine how the model should be processed, and
how the resulting code should be generated. The molds are found ready-made,
but custom molds can also be created. Hence, Sculpture takes a more modular
approach to MDD, and achieves the application specic information through
molds.
==PAGE:65==
Chapter 3
A Single Page Application
for project management
The second part of the thesis will design, implement, and test a SPA for project
management, using the framework constructed during the rst part of the the-
sis. The purpose is to determine how useful the SPA framework actually is in
developing a SPA.
The development is done in cooperation with the danish engineering rm Logos
Design A/S. The company needs an application for managing the projects of the
company more eectively. Thus, the second part of the thesis will initially collect
information and requirements from the management of Logos Design A/S. This
information will be used to design the system, and determine how the framework
can be used to construct the system. Next, the system will be implemented and
tested. Logos Design A/S will be involved in the implementation and testing of
the framework in order to ensure that the expectations to the application match
the implementation.
==PAGE:66==
54
A Single Page Application for project management
3.1
Analysis
This section will describe the company Logos Design A/S, and the business
processes of this company relevant for the SPA to be constructed. Furthermore,
the company's requirements for the SPA will be deducted from these processes,
which will ultimately be collected in a number of use cases.
The engineering company Logos Design A/S has existed since 1986. The com-
pany specializes in development of electronics and embedded software, and fo-
cuses on custom solutions and projects rather than producing o-the-shelf pro-
ducts. Thus, the management of projects and project resources is important to
ensure high quality products, fulllment of deadlines, and, ultimately, satised
clients.
Project management in Logos Design A/S is currently done through multiple
spreadsheets. Copies of the spreadsheets are attached to this report (cf. Ap-
pendix D). This entails some challenges, as the spreadsheets have limitations,
and are cumbersome to maintain. The management sta have already examined
a number of o-the-shelf products in order to nd a substitute system which is
more maintainable, but none so far t with the project management processes
of Logos Design A/S. The company has therefore wanted a custom solution
for some time. Furthermore, Logos Design A/S wants the application to be a
web-based and responsive SPA in order to obtain a fast and user-friendly user
interface, as the management sta has so far been used to a fast performing
desktop application. In addition, the .NET platform is suitable for Logos De-
sign A/S, as the company already has a server running Internet Information
Services (IIS).
This project was taken up as a bachelor of engineering graduation project in
January 2015 by the student Jesper Kim Jensen[22]. The project was written in
the server side scripting language PHP without the use of a JS framework, and
was not nished due to the project's time constraints. It is limited how much
of the implementation for the project which can be reused due to the dierent
technologies used. However, some of the analysis and design considerations from
this previous project can be used to implement this project.
==PAGE:67==
3.1 Analysis
55
Logos Design A/S has requested that the SPA should be able to handle two
dierent but related problems: Project management and vacation management.
The two problems will initially be treated individually, although they are related.
In the context of vacation management and project management, there are two
roles: Project managers and employees. Employees are able to send and view
his or her own vacation requests, while project managers are able to administer
projects and vacation requests. Hence, every employee of Logos Design A/S
should have a user in the SPA. The company has requested that the employees'
initials are used for logging into the system.
Employees may be part of an employee group.
Each employee group has a
number of core competencies and one or more project managers leading the
group. Employees may change groups occasionally, as the required resources of
each group may vary. Hence, it should be possible to change the group a user
is associated with after the user has been created.
The requirements for vacation management and project management will be
deduced and analyzed in the following sections.
3.1.1
Vacation management
In order to deduce the requirements for the vacation management section of the
SPA, the existing procedures and routines for vacation requests and management
have to be examined. The management of vacation is currently done through
spreadsheets together with the management of projects. In order to request
vacation, the employee has to write an email with the request to one of the
project managers. One of the project managers then approves or denies the
vacation by replying to the email, and updates the spreadsheet if the vacation
was approved.
In addition, if an employee wants to cancel a vacation request, the employee
has to write another email to the project manager, requesting that the vacation
request is canceled. If the vacation request has not been approved yet, the vaca-
tion request is simply removed. However, if the vacation request was approved,
==PAGE:68==
56
A Single Page Application for project management
the project manager determines if the vacation request can be canceled or not.
As a consequence of the email procedure, it is not possible for employees to
get an overview of the vacation which they have requested, or which have been
approved. This can currently only be deduced from the emails sent back and
forth between the employee and the project manager. In the new system, em-
ployees should be able to see their vacation requests, and the status of these.
In addition, project managers should be able to see the vacation requests and
the status of these for all employees. This will make it considerably easier for
managers to determine whether an employees vacation request can be approved
or not.
The spreadsheet used for managing vacation also contains a row where project
managers are able to write the expected vacation of employees. The expected
vacation is based on the vacation requests from previous years, the premise
being that employees use their vacation time in the same weeks as previous
years. Expected vacation is used in an attempt to predict the available project
resources for future months. The expected vacation time for employees whose
vacation time cannot be predicted is placed in the weeks with the most available
resources, the premise being that vacation time is fairly uniformly distributed.
In addition, the average employee at Logos Design A/S is expected to take a
total of 25 days of vacation each year: One week of vacation prior to summer,
three weeks of vacation during the summer, and one week of vacation after
summer. This is also taken into account when the expected vacation is entered.
Employees normally work from Monday to Friday and have the weekend and
various holidays o.
Any holidays or weekends which may be included in a
vacation should therefore not count as vacation time.
Weekends are trivial
to predict and take into account in a calculation of expected vacation time.
However, holidays are more dicult.
Most of the holidays in Denmark are
calculated from the Easter holiday, which is calculated from the rst Sunday
after the rst full moon after Spring Equinox. In addition, other holidays are
always the same date, such as Christmas and New Years Eve. For simplicity,
holidays will not be calculated, but will be added manually to the system by
Project Managers through the SPA. The calculation of expected vacation time
can then take the holidays into account.
==PAGE:69==
3.1 Analysis
57
Figure 3.1: A use case diagram of the vacation management part of the SPA.
A project manager is able to perform the same actions as an em-
ployee.
The fairly complicated logic of expected vacation time will be implemented in
the SPA. Ideally, this should run as a scheduled job on the server, but for
simplicity, the expected vacation time calculation is activated through the SPA
by project managers.
The vacation management requirements which have been deduced from Logos
Design A/S are illustrated through a use case diagram in Figure 3.1. Note that
project managers can also request vacation time even though they can approve
the vacation request themselves.
3.1.2
Project management
The project managers of Logos Design A/S have a meeting every Monday where
the management of projects is done. The management of projects is currently
separated into two areas: Estimation of projects and administration of employee
allocation. The two areas are administered in two separate spreadsheets. The
rst spreadsheet is used to assign the number of working hours which should
==PAGE:70==
58
A Single Page Application for project management
Figure 3.2: A use case diagram illustrating the use cases of the project man-
agement part of the SPA.
be spent on projects each month. The particular resources which should be
assigned to the project are not taken into account. In addition, the spread-
sheet also contains the number of working days which each employee has in the
various months. The number of working days have taken approved vacation
and expected vacation into account. Each spreadsheet covers a full year, and is
updated every Monday.
The second spreadsheet only covers a single month, and is used for allocating
employees to projects in order to cover the number of working hours which a
project is estimated to in the resource spreadsheet. A new spreadsheet is created
every month, and the number of estimated working hours for a given month is
copied from the resource spreadsheet to the new employee allocation spreadsheet
for each project. Hence, the monthly estimate for a project is present in two
spreadsheets, and has to be manually updated in the rst spreadsheet if the
estimate changes in the second spreadsheet.
Another consequence of managing the projects in this way is that data is spread
across numerous spreadsheets, which makes it hard and confusing to evaluate
==PAGE:71==
3.1 Analysis
59
historic data and deduce statistical conclusions. The only statistics being done
by Logos Design A/S at the moment is a measure of the eciency of the total
work hours. This is calculated by dividing the total number of estimated work
hours of projects during a month with the total number of available work hours
for the same month. This results in a percentage which indicates how under-
staed or overstaed Logos Design A/S is or has been in that particular month.
If the percentage is signicantly above 100 percent, not enough resources are
available for the projects. Contrarily, if the percentage is signicantly below
100 percent, there is not enough projects in process. As this key performance
indicator (KPI) is important to Logos Design A/S, it should also be present in
the SPA to be constructed. In addition, by joining all the data into a database,
information can be examined and analyzed in a more convenient and simple
way, allowing the SPA to calculate and present additional statistics and KPIs.
Logos Design A/S has also requested that an option for synchronizing the
monthly estimate of a project with the allocated employee work hours should be
present. This is a feature which management is currently missing, and which is
not possible to implement using the current spreadsheet solution. This feature
will therefore also be implemented in the new project management spa.
The deduced requirements for the project management part of the spa are il-
lustrated through a use case diagram in Figure 3.2. Notice that only project
managers acts in this part of the application
==PAGE:72==
60
A Single Page Application for project management
3.2
Designing the data model
This section will examine and discuss how the requirements discovered in sec-
tion 3.1 can be incorporated into the design of a Project Management SPA. In
particular, the section will account for how the framework constructed during
the rst part of the thesis will be utilized to generate a signicant part of the
application.
As the SPA will be created by using the SPA framework, the data model of the
system has to be dened. To do this, the necessary entities and the relation
between these are rst considered. These entities are:
• An employee entity in order to contain data about the employees at Logos
Design A/S. Furthermore, this entity will contain authentication informa-
tion such as password hashes and roles.
• A project entity. The elds for this entity is deduced from the Project-
Info.xls le attached to this report (cf. Appendix D).
• A vacation entity for containing the vacation requests of employees and
their status.
• A holiday entity for administering holidays as part of the calculation of
expected vacation and available work resources.
• A resource entity for indicating a relationship between an employee and a
project, and for containing the monthly estimates of projects.
• A group entity for grouping employees together in departments.
A C# class is dened for each of these entities. An UML class diagram, which
illustrates the entities, their elds, and the relations between the entities, is
shown in Figure 3.3.
The next step is annotating the data model with the meta data attributes de-
scribed in section 2.2.2 in order to achieve the best possible starting point for
developing the SPA. The employee entity is obviously the entity which will be
==PAGE:73==
3.2 Designing the data model
61
Figure 3.3: An UML class diagram illustrating the entities and properties of
the data model which the project management SPA will be based
upon.
used for authentication and authorization purposes, and will thus be annotated
with the Principal attribute. Furthermore, as employees will use their ini-
tials to log into the system, the initials property of the employee class will be
annotated with the PrincipalUsername attribute to reect this requirement.
A RestServiceEntity attribute will be attached to the project, employee,
holiday, and vacation classes.
Resources will only be exposed through the
project entity as allocated employees and estimates respectively. In addition,
the CreateView parameter will be set to true on the RestServiceEntity at-
tributes attached to the project, holiday and vacation classes, as these entities
all need at least one dedicated view.
The Authorize attribute will be attached to all entities, as it should not be
possible to access any entities as an unauthenticated user. Furthermore, the
only entity objects a regular employee is allowed to access are the vacation
requests created by the employee.
An employee is also allowed to add new
vacation requests, and should be able to change or delete them if they have
not already been approved. Hence, the best starting point for implementing
this behavior is to not supply any role arguments to the Authorize attribute
==PAGE:74==
62
A Single Page Application for project management
on the vacation class, as employees are able to perform all CRUD operations
to some degree. The role required performing any operation on any other data
model entities is set to the "Administrator" role, as project managers are seen
as administrators in the project management SPA. This eectively ensures that
these resources and their corresponding views cannot be accessed by any user
which is not associated with the "Administrator" role.
==PAGE:75==
3.3 Adjustment of the generated SPA
63
3.3
Adjustment of the generated SPA
The project management SPA which has been developed is for internal use
within the company only. While a good user experience is still a requirement, a
custom and unique styling is not necessary. The styling and classes provided by
the Bootstrap framework, which are used in all generated views, are sucient,
and the CSS used in general in the application will therefore not be changed
further.
Even though the data model dened in section 3.2 was able to generate a great
starting point, and most of the required sub pages, a large part of the application
still needed to be adjusted to fulll the more application specic requirements.
Development of the application was divided into the following parts:
• Holiday management and group management.
• User and employee management.
• Vacation management.
• Calculation of expected vacation.
• Project management and estimation.
• Employee allocation.
The implementation choices considered in each part are described in the follow-
ing sections. User interface images for each section can be found in Appendix
C.
3.3.1
Holiday management and group management
The holiday management sub page and the group management sub page are
excellent examples of how the framework allows for a more eective develop-
ment process. The data model class is quite simple for both entities and only
the simple CRUD operations are performed on the entity instances. As these
==PAGE:76==
64
A Single Page Application for project management
operations were already supported by the generated views, no custom changes
needed to be made whatsoever on either of the sub pages.
The groups sub page can be seen in Figure C.8, and the holidays sub page in
Figure C.7.
3.3.2
User and employee management
Most of the user management sub page has been generated from the employee
data model class. It is possible to create new users, delete existing users, and
reset the password of a user without any custom changes having been introduced
to the generated view.
Establishing the connection between employees and
employee groups had to be implemented manually however.
When creating or editing a user, it is possible to assign the user to one of the
existing groups. Thus, every group is loaded and shown to the project manager
which is then able to choose the group which the employee should be associated
with.
The user management sub page can be seen in Figure C.9.
3.3.3
Vacation management
Vacation management has been designed and implemented in accordance with
the vacation request procedures of Logos Design A/S examined in section 3.1.1,
and is administered through two sub pages.
The rst sub page is available to all employees and project managers, and allows
the creation of vacation requests as well as cancellation requests. To provide
an intuitive overview, a calendar overview will be used for displaying vacation
requests and their associated status. A unique color is associated with each
individual status in the overview. A popular JS library which provides a great
calendar module and easy event handling is the FullCalendar library.
This
library has been used to implement all calendar views of the application, and
==PAGE:77==
3.3 Adjustment of the generated SPA
65
Figure 3.4: An UML state machine describing the relationship between the
possible statuses of a vacation request.
was also recommended by the previous project management project[22].
In
addition to the calendar view, each employee will also be able to see his or her
vacation requests in list form. The list form will also be used to cancel vacation
requests.
The second sub page will only be available to project managers. This sub page
will also contain a calendar view. However, this calendar view will show the
vacation requests of all employees. This will allow project managers to obtain
an overview of the employees on vacation leave in a specic period. The second
sub page will also contain a list view showing the vacation requests which await
approval or cancellation approval, where it will be possible for project managers
to approve or decline each request.
The intention is that the calendar view
can be used to determine whether a given request should be approved or not,
depending on the number of employees requesting vacation simultaneously.
Each vacation request will have a status attached. The possible statuses of a
request, and their associated color in the calendars are:
• Requested (Blue)
==PAGE:78==
66
A Single Page Application for project management
• Approved (Green)
• Declined (Red)
• Cancellation requested (Black)
The relationship between the dierent statuses are illustrated as an UML state
machine in Figure 3.4. As shown in the gure, a vacation status will initially
be set to the "Requested" status. If a project manager approves the vacation
request, the request will receive the status "Approved". Likewise, if the admin
declines the vacation request, the status will be set to "Declined". It will be
possible for a vacation request to be canceled at any time by the employee who
created it, but the cancellation will have to be approved by a project manager
if the vacation request has already been approved.
The vacation request page available for all employees can be seen in Figure C.5,
while the vacation management page for project managers can be seen in Figure
C.6.
3.3.4
Calculation of expected vacation
The SPA should be able to calculate the expected vacation of employees based
on the rules and premises introduced in section 3.1.1. While the logic is fairly
complicated, and dicult to automate, Logos Design A/S has requested that an
attempt is made. In addition, the calculation process should be deterministic
to ensure the same result every time the calculation is run.
The calculation will be initiated from the vacation management sub page through
a button, and an overview of the calculation can be seen in Figure 3.5.
Initially, all expected vacation that may exist will be deleted from the database.
The expected vacation is persisted as a regular vacation object, but will have
a status of "Expected".
When data from the previous calculation has been
deleted, the new calculation is performed.
==PAGE:79==
3.3 Adjustment of the generated SPA
67
Figure 3.5: An illustration of the expected vacation calculation process. The
amount of expected vacation to create for an employee is deter-
mined from the amount of requested and approved vacation for
that employee.
Next, the amount of expected vacation to create is determined for each employee
based on a template and the amount of requested and approved vacation. The
template is a list of expected vacation periods, and is shown below:
EVPTemplate = new List<ExpectedVacationPeriod>();
EVPTemplate.Add(new ExpectedVacationPeriod(5, 8, 15));
EVPTemplate.Add(new ExpectedVacationPeriod(9, 12, 5));
EVPTemplate.Add(new ExpectedVacationPeriod(1, 4, 5));
The three expected vacation periods indicate that 15 days of vacation should be
present in total between May and August, ve days of vacation in total between
September and December, and ve days of vacation in total between January
and April. The amount of requested or approved vacation days in these periods
are subtracted from the template values. This leaves the amount of expected
vacation to generate in each period.
The next step is to generate expected vacation for employees based on their
vacation the previous year. This is done by calculating the numbers of the weeks
numbers covered by a previous vacation and placing an expected vacation in the
same week in the next year. However, this expected vacation will not be created
if the amount of expected vacation to generate for the corresponding expected
vacation period is zero or negative.
==PAGE:80==
68
A Single Page Application for project management
If no previous vacations exist for an employee, or the number of vacation days
held the previous vacation year is below 25, the rest of the vacation days present
in the expected vacation periods are placed in the least populated weeks. This
follows the premise that employee vacations are evenly spread within a number
of periods. Furthermore, the remaining expected vacation days will be placed
as much together as possible, as this is the general tendency in Logos Design
A/S.
This is implemented through an array of integers of length 366. Each position
in the array contains the number of employees who has taken, or is expected to
take, vacation that day of the year. Weekends and holidays have an innitely
high value in the array for two reasons: To avoid the placement of expected
vacation on weekends and holidays, and to separate vacations in a more logical
way1.
The optimal place to start an expected vacation, based on the least
populated day, can then be calculated. Days will continue to be added to an
expected vacation until either no days are left for that expected vacation period,
or a day which is more populated is reached.
An example can be seen in Figure 3.6. In the gure, the weekends have an
innitely high value. The ideal place to start a vacation in the example would be
day fourteen. As the week of this day, and the week after are equally populated,
ten days of expected vacation time can be placed in these two weeks. Once these
two weeks of expected vacation has been placed, another week can be placed
following the two weeks, as the population of all days of this week is now equal
to the two weeks.
In practice, vacation will never be completely evenly spread. From the imple-
mentation attempt it can be concluded that it is dicult to model the expected
vacation in a deterministic way if no data about previous vacation habits is
present. A better solution to this problem would be to allow project managers
to manually create expected vacation. With the introduction of the SPA where
every employee has a user, it is even possible to allow employees to add their
expected vacation themselves.
1Vacations are often held from the beginning of a week to the end of a week, and in relation
with a holiday. For example, if Thursday is a holiday, many employees choose to take a day
o Friday as well.
==PAGE:81==
3.3 Adjustment of the generated SPA
69
Figure 3.6: An example of the distribution of employees' vacation days on the
days of the year. The innitely high columns indicate weekends.
In this example, the expected vacation calculation would place an
expected vacation between day 14 and 18 and between 21 and 25.
3.3.5
Project management and estimation
Logos Design A/S has so far been used to managing projects through spread-
sheets. This should be taken into account when considering the design of the
project management part of the application.
The previous project management application[22] created for Logos Design A/S
implemented project management by using a custom grid structure implemented
from scratch in JS. Each cell in the grid contained a number which corresponded
to the number of hours a specic project was estimated to in a given month. This
page can be seen in Figure C.1 in Appendix C. Implementing such a custom grid
requires a large amount of time, especially if the user experience should be sat-
isfying. Hence, the same approach will not be taken in the project management
SPA.
To enable a more ecient implementation process, a third party spreadsheet
library will be used. This way, the user experience and styling of the grid is
not an issue, and much of the wanted functionality is already implemented.
==PAGE:82==
70
A Single Page Application for project management
A popular and well-documented library serving this purpose is the JS library
HandsOnTable. The user experience of this library resembles that of a tradi-
tional spreadsheet, and contains a large amount of event hooks which makes
it easy to add custom JS code. In addition, the HandsOnTable library can be
customized to disable editing and apply custom styling to the cells, which is
ideal when calculated values, statistics, and headers should be shown, but not
be editable.
Logos Design A/S has communicated that the design and functionality of the
previous project[22], shown in Figure C.1 in Appendix C, was acceptable. Thus,
this design will be implemented in this project as well.
However, the table
grid will be implemented by using the HandsOnTable library instead to save
development time, and an additional column containing the total estimate of
the project will be added to the design as requested by Logos Design A/S.
The creation of projects will also be done on this page. This functionality is
generated as part of the framework view, and thus does not have to be manually
implemented.
The project management page can be seen in Figure C.3.
3.3.6
Employee allocation
Analogous to the project management section of the application, the previous
project[22] implemented employee allocation by using a custom grid structure.
Each grid corresponded to one month, and each cell in the grid contained the
number of hours a given employee was allocated to a given project in that
particular month. In the right side of each grid, each projects estimated hours
for that particular month can be viewed and edited, and the dierence between
this estimate and the allocated resources is also available. The implementation
of the previous project can be seen in Figure C.2 in Appendix C. Logos Design
A/S was also satised with the design of this implementation, but for the same
reasons as in section 3.3.5, the HandsOnTable library will be used in this project
instead.
==PAGE:83==
3.3 Adjustment of the generated SPA
71
In addition, three rows will be added to the bottom of the grid. The rst of
these rows will contain the total number of hours a given employee is allocated
to projects. The second row will contain the number of hours each employee is
available that given month. This is calculated by taking the number of days in
the month minus the weekends and the employee's vacation and multiplying it
with 7.4, the number of hours an employee works every day according to Logos
Design A/S. The last row contains the dierence between the two previous rows,
and hence denotes the amount of an employee's available hours not assigned onto
projects yet.
A project manager should only be able to view and allocate the employees which
are in the project manager's own group. This should also be taken into account
when retrieving data for the table, and a few changes therefore has to be made
in the web service controllers.
The employee allocation page can be seen in Figure C.4.
==PAGE:84==
72
A Single Page Application for project management
3.4
Testing
This section will describe how the implemented project management SPA has
been tested.
Most of the application parts listed in section 3.3 will be tested separately. This
will be done by using manual test scripts in the same way as when the SPA
framework was tested, as described in section 2.4. All the described test scripts
can be found in Appendix B.
3.4.1
Holiday management and group management
The holiday and group management pages were generated through the frame-
work, and no custom changes were performed to neither of the pages. Hence,
this functionality has already been tested as part of the SPA framework test.
The CRUD operations will however be smoke tested for both sub pages to ensure
that the sub pages are functional.
3.4.2
User and employee management
Most of the user and employee management sub page has already been tested
as part of the testing of the framework. However, the association to groups has
not. The last part of the test script seen in Figure B.3 is therefore run through
with a focus on the persistence of the group association.
3.4.3
Vacation management
The test of vacation management is done through three test scripts which tests
all use cases related to vacation management. These use cases were illustrated
in Figure 3.1. However, the excepted vacation calculation is not tested in these
scripts.
==PAGE:85==
3.4 Testing
73
The three test scripts are described in the following:
1. In this test script, found in Figure B.5, a regular employee creates a vaca-
tion request. The vacation request is then approved by a project manager.
The employee then tries to cancel the request, and the project manager
approves the cancel request.
2. This test script, found in Figure B.6 is similar to the previous one. How-
ever, in this test script the cancel request is not approved, and the status
of the vacation request goes back to being approved.
3. In this test script, found in Figure B.7, a vacation request is created as
before, but is declined by the project manager. The employee once again
cancels the request, and this time the request is deleted immediately.
3.4.4
Calculation of expected vacation
The calculation of expected vacation is done in a single test script shown in Fig-
ure B.8. This test script ensures that requested and approved vacation requests
from previous years are used for calculating the expected vacation. In addi-
tion, the script veries that the number of requested, approved, and expected
vacation days in one vacation year equals 25, that vacation is grouped together
in weeks, and that the vacation weeks are placed in one of the least populated
weeks.
3.4.5
Project and allocation management
The project and estimation sub page will be tested together with the employee
allocation sub page, as these two sub pages share much of the same data and
resources.
The test script can be seen in Figure B.9. Two projects are created, and it is
veried that the data related to the projects, including their monthly estimates,
can be updated through the spreadsheet on the sub pages. It is also veried
==PAGE:86==
74
A Single Page Application for project management
that the estimates can be seen and changed on the allocation sub page and that
the allocations of employees to projects can be changed as well. Furthermore,
the correctness of the calculations done on the allocations sub page is veried.
==PAGE:87==
Chapter 4
Conclusion
The thesis has sought to create a framework enabling a simpler development of
SPAs. MDD and declarative programming was quickly determined to be the
central concepts which the SPA framework should be built upon. In addition,
common functionalities and features of SPAs were identied and incorporated
into the framework design.
The result is a framework which is able to generate a SPA based on a data
model denition. The data model is able to be annotated with various meta
data attributes to vary the behavior of the generated SPA. The framework is
especially useful for creating a great starting point for custom SPA development,
but can also be used continuously in both sequential and iterative development
processes.
The framework was eld tested by using it to develop a project management
application for the electronic engineering company Logos Design A/S. During
this development process, the framework was especially useful for generating
views and end points for simple entities only using CRUD operations. In addi-
==PAGE:88==
76
Conclusion
tion, the framework was used to provide access control for entities and sub pages
of the application in an easy and intuitive way. In conclusion, the framework
successfully eliminated a large part of the common and trivial coding tasks of
SPA development, and enabled development to be focused on implementing the
application specic features of the SPA.
4.1
Further work
Several ideas for expanding the framework with additional common SPA behav-
ior were discussed in section 2.5. In addition, a custom graphical user interface
for merging generated code with custom code changes would increase the us-
ability of the framework as well.
Other MDD frameworks include generation of unit tests for testing the CRUD
operations of the DAL. Implementing this in the SPA framework as well would
enable developers to use these unit tests to perform regression testing after
custom changes have been performed in the generated code.
The MDD approach taken in the thesis could also be extended to cover more
than just the generation of database driven SPAs. Examples could be generation
of desktop applications or applications for mobile devices. Both of these could
be accomplished by following the same approach presented in the thesis: By
identifying common behavior, extending the data model with appropriate meta
data attributes, and implementing the corresponding code generation modules.
==PAGE:89==
Bibliography
[1] Interoperability Happens - The Vietnam of Computer Science
22/12 2015
http://blogs.tedneward.com/2006/06/26/The+Vietnam+Of+Computer+Science.aspx
[2] OrmHate
22/12 2015
http://martinfowler.com/bliki/OrmHate.html
[3] G. Sab u. Comparison of RDBMS, OODBMS and ORDBMS, Informatica
Economic , 2007
[4] Top 10 Changes in ASP.NET 5 and MVC 6
22/12 2015
http://stephenwalther.com/archive/2015/02/24/top-10-changes-in-asp-net-
5-and-mvc-6
[5] AngularJS vs. Backbone.js vs. Ember.js
22/12 2015
https://www.airpair.com/js/javascript-framework-comparison
[6] Advantages of Using DLLs
22/12 2015
https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/dtba4t8b.aspx
==PAGE:90==
78
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[7] Survey: Is agile the new norm?
22/12 2015
http://techbeacon.com/survey-agile-new-norm
[8] Role Based Access Control (RBAC) and Role Based Security
22/12 2015
http://csrc.nist.gov/groups/SNS/rbac/
[9] Creating Project and Item Templates
22/12 2015
https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/vstudio/s365byhx(v=vs.100).aspx
[10] How to: Use Wizards with Project Templates
22/12 2015
https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/vstudio/ms185301(v=vs.100).aspx
[11] How to create dierent user types in ASP.NET Identity?
22/12 2015
http://stackoverow.com/questions/21664434/how-to-create-dierent-user-
types-in-asp-net-identity#answers
[12] Microsoft Visual InterDev 6.0
22/12 2015
http://www.irt.org/software/sw011/
[13] Extensible Markup Language (XML) 1.0
22/12 2015
http://www.w3.org/TR/1998/REC-xml-19980210
[14] Solution (.Sln) File
22/12 2015
https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/bb165951.aspx
[15] How can I remove all my changes in my svn working directory?
22/12 2015
http://stackoverow.com/questions/1239998/how-can-i-remove-all-my-
changes-in-my-svn-working-directory
==PAGE:91==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
79
[16] WinMerge
22/12 2015
http://winmerge.org/
[17] ASP.NET Identity
22/12 2015
http://www.asp.net/identity
[18] The Repository Pattern
22/12 2015
https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/649690.aspx
[19] bootstrap-datepicker
22/12 2015 https://bootstrap-datepicker.readthedocs.org/en/latest/
[20] Model-Driven Development of .NET Enterprise Applications
22/12 2015
https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/aa730848(v=vs.80).aspx
[21] Sculpture - Model Your Life
22/12 2015
https://sculpture.codeplex.com/
[22] J.K. Jensen. Et webbaseret projektstyringsværktøj. Bachelor's thesis, Tech-
nical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby Denmark, 1 2015.
==PAGE:92==
80
BIBLIOGRAPHY
==PAGE:93==
Appendix A
Code snippets
This appendix contains code snippets relevant to the thesis.
==PAGE:94==
82
Code snippets
[Authorize(Post="Administrator",
Put="Administrator", Delete="Administrator")]
[RestServiceEntity(CreateView = true)]
public class DataModelExample : IDataModel
{
public int Id { get; set; }
public string Title { get; set; }
public UserModelExample Manager { get; set; }
}
[RestServiceEntity]
[Principal]
public class UserModelExample : IDataModel
{
[PrincipalUsername]
public string Initials { get; set; }
public string FirstName { get; set; }
public string LastName { get; set; }
public string Phone { get; set; }
public string Mail { get; set; }
}
Figure A.1: The two data model examples included in the data model project
template.
==PAGE:95==
83
interface IRestRepository<T> where T : class {
IEnumerable<T> Get(Func<IQueryable<T>, IEnumerable<T>> dbSetSelector);
T Get(Expression<Func<T, bool>> predicate);
T Post(T newItem);
T Put(T changedItem);
void Delete(T entityToDelete);
void Delete(Expression<Func<T, bool>> predicate);
}
Figure A.2: The interface which all data model repositories inherit from.
==PAGE:96==
84
Code snippets
==PAGE:97==
Appendix B
Test cases
This Appendix chapter contains the test scripts used for testing the framework
as well as the Project Management SPA.
==PAGE:98==
86
Test cases
Name: Simple data models (no authorization).
Prerequisites: None.
Steps:
1. Create a data model project.
2. Enter a valid connection string.
3. Create a data model with arbitrary properties.
4. Create another data model. The properties of the data model should
consist of a DateTime property, an integer property, a boolean property,
a string property and a reference to the rst data model dened.
5. Annotate the second data model with a RestServiceEntity meta data
attribute, where the "CreateView"-option is set to true.
6. Execute the data model project. No conicts should occur.
7. Verify that entity classes corresponding to the dened data models are
present in the DAL project.
8. Verify that a service, view model and view model mappings have been
created.
9. Build and run the project.
10. Verify that it is possible to navigate to the generated view.
11. Verify that the property referencing the rst data model is ignored in the
view.
12. Verify that the create and edit modal windows show appropriate editors
for all other properties.
13. Verify that it is possible to both create, view, edit and delete instances
of the data model.
Figure B.1
==PAGE:99==
87
Name: Simple data models (with authorization).
Prerequisites: None.
Steps:
1. Create a data model project.
2. Enter a valid connection string.
3. Create a data model class.
The properties of the data model should
consist of a DateTime property, an integer property, a boolean property,
and a string property.
4. Annotate the data model with a RestServiceEntity meta data at-
tribute, where the "CreateView"-option is set to true.
5. In addition, annotate the data model with a Authorize-attribute, where
GET and POST is allowed for anonymous users and PUT and DELETE
is only allowed for the "Administrator" role.
6. Create a data model class with a single string property. Annotate the data
model class with the Principal attribute (thereby marking it as being
a user model) and the string property with the PrincipalUsername-
property.
7. Execute the data model project. No conicts should occur.
8. Verify that entity classes corresponding to the dened data models are
present in the DAL project. Also verify that the user model entity class
inherits from the IdentityUser-class.
9. Verify that the Context-class inherits from IdentityDbContext, and
that no data set containing the user models is dened as a property in
the class.
10. Verify that a service, view model and view model mappings have been cre-
ated for the data model marked with the RestServiceEntity-attribute.
11. Build and run the project.
12. Verify that it is possible to navigate to the generated view without logging
in.
13. Verify that it is only possible to create and view data model instances.
Create some data model instances to prove this.
14. Log in by using the administrator account.
15. Verify that it is now possible to edit and delete data as well.
Figure B.2
==PAGE:100==
88
Test cases
Name: User management.
Prerequisites: None.
Steps:
1. Create a data model project.
2. Enter a valid connection string.
3. Create a data model class. The properties of the data model should con-
sist of a DateTime property, an integer property, a boolean property, and
a string property. Annotate the data model class with the Principal
attribute (thereby marking it as being a user model) and the string prop-
erty with the PrincipalUsername-property. Remember the name of the
string property.
4. Execute the data model project. No conicts should occur.
5. Verify that the user model entity class inherits from the IdentityUser-
class.
6. Verify that the Context-class inherits from IdentityDbContext, and
that no data set containing the user models is dened as a property in
the class.
7. Verify that a service, view model and view model mappings have been
created for the user model.
8. Build and run the project.
9. Log in as an administrator. Verify that the name of the string property
is used as a label for the username form element.
10. Navigate to the User management sub page.
11. Create a new administrator user. Verify that it is possible to supply a
value to all properties dened in the data model.
12. Verify that it is possible to edit all properties as well.
13. Log out, and verify that the initials can be used to log in with the new
user.
14. Verify that the new user also has access to the User Management subpage.
15. Create a new user, which is not an administrator.
16. Log ind with the new user.
17. Verify that the user does not have access to the User Management sub-
page.
Figure B.3
==PAGE:101==
89
Name: Data model robustness.
Prerequisites: None.
Steps:
1. Create a data model project.
2. Enter a valid connection string.
3. Create a data model class with an Integer-property with an integer prop-
erty with the name "Id", and an arbitrary string property.
4. Annotate the string property with the PrincipalUsername attribute.
5. Execute the data model project. Verify that an error occurs because the
data model is not a user model.
6. Remove the PrincipalUsername-attribute, and comment out the "Id"-
property.
7. Execute the project again. Verify that an error occurs because of the lack
of an Id-property.
8. Remove the commenting from the Id attribute.
9. Add an authorization attribute to the data model.
10. Execute the data model project. Verify that an error occurs because of
the lack of a user model.
11. Remove the authorization attribute again.
12. Create a user model and dene a boolean property. Mark the attribute
with the PrincipalUsername-attribute.
13. Execute the project, and verify that an error occurs because the data
type cannot be a username.
Figure B.4
==PAGE:102==
90
Test cases
Name: Approve vacation request test.
Prerequisites: A regular user and an project manager user exists in the web
application.
Steps:
1. Open the application and log in using a regular user.
2. Conrm that the user has access to the vacation sub page.
3. Go to the vacation sub page and create a new arbitrary vacation.
4. Verify that the vacation is now visible in both the calendar and in the
list view.
5. Delete the vacation through the list view.
6. Create the vacation again, and verify that it is visible again.
7. Log out, and log in as a project manager user.
8. Verify that the user has access to both the vacation and the vacation
management sub page.
9. Go to the vacation management sub page, and verify that the vacation
added by the regular user is visible in both the calendar and the list view.
10. Approve the vacation through the list view, and verify that the vacation
has now changed color in the calendar, and no longer appears in the list
view.
11. Log out of the project manager user and log in as the regular user once
more.
12. Verify that the regular user is able to see that the vacation request is
approved in the calendar as well as in the list view.
13. Delete the approved vacation through the list view.
14. Conrm that the vacation request is not deleted this time, but instead
changes status to "Cancellation requested".
15. Log out of the regular user and in as a project manager user.
16. Go to the vacation management page and approve the cancellation. Verify
that the vacation request is now deleted.
Figure B.5
==PAGE:103==
91
Name: Decline vacation request test.
Prerequisites: A regular user and a project manager user exists in the web
application.
Steps:
1. Open the application and log in using a regular user.
2. Conrm that the user has access to the vacation sub page.
3. Go to the vacation sub page and create a new arbitrary vacation.
4. Verify that the vacation is now visible in both the calendar and in the
list view.
5. Delete the vacation through the list view.
6. Create the vacation again, and verify that it is visible again.
7. Log out, and log in as a project manager user.
8. Verify that the user have access to both the vacation and the vacation
management sub page.
9. Go to the vacation management sub page, and verify that the vacation
added by the regular user is visible in both the calendar and the list view.
10. Decline the vacation through the list view, and verify that the vacation
has now changed color in the calendar, and no longer appears in the list
view.
11. Log out of the project manager user and log in as the regular user once
more.
12. Verify that the regular user is able to see that the vacation request has
been declined in the calendar as well as in the list view.
13. Cancel the approved vacation through the list view.
Verify that the
vacation request is deleted.
Figure B.6
==PAGE:104==
92
Test cases
Name: Decline cancellation request test.
Prerequisites: A regular user and a project manager user exists in the web
application.
Steps:
1. Open the application and log in using a regular user.
2. Conrm that the user has access to the vacation sub page.
3. Go to the vacation sub page and create a new arbitrary vacation.
4. Verify that the vacation is now visible in both the calendar and in the
list view.
5. Delete the vacation through the list view.
6. Create the vacation again, and verify that it is visible again.
7. Log out, and log in as a project manager user.
8. Verify that the user has access to both the vacation and the vacation
management sub page.
9. Go to the vacation management sub page, and verify that the vacation
added by the regular user is visible in both the calendar and the list view.
10. Approve the vacation through the list view, and verify that the vacation
has now changed color in the calendar, and no longer appears in the list
view.
11. Log out of the project manager user and log in as the regular user once
more.
12. Verify that the regular user is able to see that the vacation request is
approved in the calendar as well as in the list view.
13. Delete the approved vacation through the list view.
14. Conrm that the vacation request is not deleted this time, but instead
changes status to "Cancellation requested".
15. Log out of the regular user and in as a project manager user.
16. Go to the vacation management page and decline the cancellation. Verify
that the vacation request changes status to "Approved".
17. Log in as the regular user once more, and verify that the "Approved"
status is visible for this user as well.
Figure B.7
==PAGE:105==
93
Name: Expected vacation calculation test.
Prerequisites: A regular user and a project manager user exists in the web
application, and no vacation requests currently exist in the system.
Steps:
1. Log in as a project manager user.
2. Create an arbitrary vacation request for a week in the current year.
3. Create another arbitrary vacation request for a week in the current year,
and use a project manager user to approve it.
4. Create another arbitrary vacation request for a week in the current year,
and use a project manager user to decline it.
5. Run the expected vacation calculation.
6. Verify that expected vacations have been created in the same weeks as
the approved and requested vacations for the next couple of years (not in
the current year).
7. Verify that the declined vacation request has not had expected vacation
generated.
8. Delete the two vacation requests.
9. Log in as a regular user.
10. Create one long vacation request covering from rst of January to the
last day in March.
11. Create another long vacation request from the beginning of May to the
end of July.
12. Log out and log in as the project manager user again.
13. Create a random vacation request for a week in July.
14. Create another random vacation request for a week in October.
15. Run the expected vacation calculation.
16. Verify that exactly one week of expected vacation has been generated in
April.
17. Verify that two weeks of expected vacation has been generated in August,
and not three.
18. Verify that no weeks of expected vacation has been generated between
September and December.
19. In addition, verify that none of the expected vacations overlap with each
other, nor with any other type of vacation request.
Figure B.8
==PAGE:106==
94
Test cases
Name: Create project and allocate employees.
Prerequisites: A regular user and a project manager user exists in the web
application.
Steps:
1. Log in using a project manager user.
2. Verify that the user can access the Projects sub page and the Resource
Management sub page, and go to the Projects sub page.
3. Create an arbitrary project.
4. Verify that the project is shown in the spreadsheet on the page.
5. Create another arbitrary project, and verify that this project is also
shown.
6. Enter an integer for the current month for the rst project created.
7. Enter another number for the next month for the second project created.
8. Verify that it is possible to change the title and project number of the
project.
9. Go to the Resource management sub page.
10. Verify that the number entered is shown under the estimate column for
the rst project, and that the estimate for the second project is zero.
11. Verify that it is possible to change the title and project number of the
project here as well.
12. Go to the next month and verify that the estimate entered for the second
project is shown here, and that no estimate is set for the rst project.
13. Go back to the current month and enter two dierent numbers for two
employees on the rst project.
14. Conrm that the Total column changes accordingly, and that the "Di"
column shows the dierence between the estimate and the allocated hours.
15. Change the Estimate column to another number.
16. Go back to the Projects sub page and verify that the estimate has also
been updated here.
Figure B.9
==PAGE:107==
Appendix C
User interface images
This appendix contains user interface images from Jesper Kim Jensen's project[22]
and from the project management SPA created in the thesis.
==PAGE:108==
96
User interface images
Figure C.1: The view for administering projects and monthly estimates in the
previous project management application.
Figure C.2: The view for administering the allocation of employees in the
previous project management application.
==PAGE:109==
97
Figure C.3: The sub page for projects and project estimation in the new
project management SPA.
Figure C.4: The sub page for allocation of employees in the new project man-
agement SPA.
==PAGE:110==
98
User interface images
Figure C.5: The sub page for vacation requests in the new project manage-
ment SPA. This is the only page accessible by regular users.
==PAGE:111==
99
Figure C.6: The sub page for vacation management and approval in the new
project management SPA.
Figure C.7: The sub page for managing holidays in the new project manage-
ment SPA.
==PAGE:112==
100
User interface images
Figure C.8: The sub page for managing groups in the new project management
SPA.
Figure C.9: The user management sub page of the new project management
SPA.
==PAGE:113==
Appendix D
Attached les
This appendix contains a list and description of the les related and attached
to the thesis.
==PAGE:114==
102
Attached les
• Allocation.xls - A copy of the spreadsheet currently used to handle al-
location at Logos Design A/S.
• ProjectInfo.xls - A copy of the spreadsheet template used to document
each project at Logos Design A/S and the data related to the project. The
spreadsheet has been used in the thesis for deducing the necessary elds
for project entities.
• Resources.xls - A copy of the spreadsheet in which vacation management
and project estimation is currently being handled.
• Thesis_Code.zip - All projects and code related to the thesis.
This
includes six projects.
 DDHTML5Framework - The framework source code.
 LogosThesis.DataModel - The data model project used to generate a
large part of the project management SPA for Logos Design A/S.
 MyTestProject.DLL - The data access layer of the project manage-
ment SPA.
 MyTestProject.Web - The web application for the project manage-
ment SPA.
 ProjectTemplate - The project template used for creating new data
model projects.
 ProjectTemplateWizard - Originally used by the ProjectTemplate for
setting the connection string of the data model project.
• Thesis_Plan.xls - The time plan used throughout the project.
