==PAGE:1==
excitation and
characterization
of higher order
modes in optical
fibers
master thesis
m.sc in photonics engineering
Author:
lorenzo leandro
Supervisor DTU:
karsten rottwitt
Supervisor OFS:
lars grüner-nielsen
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
==PAGE:4==
author:
Lorenzo Leandro
Technical University of Denmark
Excitation and characterization of higher order modes in optical ﬁbers,
Master Thesis, 29. juni 2015.
e-mail:
lorenzo.leandro0@gmail.com
supervisors:
Karsten Rottwitt
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Photonics Engineering
2800 Kogens Lyngby, Denmark
karo@fotonik.dtu.dk
Lars Grüner-Nielsen
OFS
Priorparken 680, 2605 Brøndby, Denmark
lgruner@ofsoptics.com
==PAGE:5==
A B ST R A C T
The possibility to use space division multiplexing in few-mode ﬁbers
to increase the capacity of optical communication systems has been
widely studied in recent years. The use of different spatial modes
as different channels requires a deep knowledge on the modal be-
haviour, properties and to be able to excite the modes individually.
In this work, four few-mode ﬁbers, step- and graded-index two- and
four-LP-modes, are studied with focus on the excitation and chara-
cterization of each and every guided mode. Different types of long
period gratings are tested for mode conversion. Distributed coupling,
attenuation and dispersion are measured and a new S2-driven modal
resolved bend-loss analysis is presented for the ﬁrst time. Finally, it is
included a discussion on the quality of the optical ﬁbers considering
their use in the ﬁeld of telecommunications.
v
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
A C K N O W L E D G E M E N T S
I would like to express my deep gratitude to Karsten Rottwitt and
Lars Grüner-Nielsen, my research supervisors. Their passion for this
ﬁeld has been a beacon in the difﬁcult moments I faced during this
experience.
To Denmark and to DTU for welcoming me under their quiet and
warm roof.
To my family and all the ones who love me.
Without You, I would have never made it so far.
To all those who have told me that I could not do it, that I was not
enough.
Well, I did it.
vii
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
C O N T E N T S
1
introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Structure of the Manuscript . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
theoretical background
3
2.1
Introduction to Optical Fibers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Coupled-Wave Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
LP Modes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Modes in Optical Fibers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.5
Few-mode Fibers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.6
Properties of Modes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.6.1
Dispersion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.6.2
Propagation Losses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.6.3
Mode Coupling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.6.4
Bend Loss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.7
Gratings as Mode converters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
2.7.1
Principle of Operation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
2.7.2
Fabrication of Long-Period Gratings . . . . . . .
29
2.7.3
Simulation of the Transmission . . . . . . . . . .
31
2.7.4
Applications of Long-Period Gratings . . . . . .
32
3
methods of mode characterization
35
3.1
M2 Factor
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.2
Spatially and Spectrally resolved imaging . . . . . . . .
36
3.3
Other Characterization Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4
fibers of interest
41
5
experimental work
43
5.1
Mode Conversion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.1.1
Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.1.2
S2 Camera Reﬂections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.1.3
Gratings Drawing Procedure . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.1.4
Selection the Grating Period and Optimum Cou-
pling Coefﬁcient
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.1.5
Transmission Over Time . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5.1.6
Modal Content Characterization . . . . . . . . .
57
5.1.7
Optimization and best gratings . . . . . . . . . .
58
5.2
Modes Characterization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
5.2.1
Distributed Mode Coupling . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
5.2.2
Chromatic Dispersion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
5.2.3
Propagation Losses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
ix
==PAGE:10==
x
contents
5.3
Bend-Loss Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
5.3.1
Principle of Operation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
5.3.2
Experimental Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
6
fibers applications
83
7
conclusion
85
8
future possibilities
87
a
lp modes calculator
89
b
dominant LP11 dgd graphs
93
bibliography
95
==PAGE:11==
1
I N T R O D U C T I O N
1.1
motivation
The object of this work is to have a complete characterization of four
few-mode ﬁbers to obtain useful information for their use in commu-
nication systems.
The appellative few-modes refers to the fact that those ﬁbers allow the
light to pass through in a relatively low number of modes. They are to
be compared with the so-called single-mode ﬁbers, which guide only
the fundamental mode (see section 2).
A mode is a precise transverse amplitude proﬁle of the light, which
is self-consistent during propagation and has a speciﬁc value of the
propagation constant β.
For some years, the study of the higher
order modes (HOMs), all the modes which are not the fundamen-
tal one, was limited to ﬁnd a way to avoid their propagation while
having a large effective area of the fundamental mode. Using large
cores, in step-index ﬁbers, allows to guide higher power and to re-
duce non-linearities, but it lead to HOM guidance. More recently,
due to the need of higher transmission speed, the HOMs have been
widely studied to optimize their use in communication systems. In-
deed, the possibility of an increase of transmission capacity per ﬁber
by using HOMs has already been demonstrated [Qian et al., 2012] by
using each spatial mode as different channel. This technique is called
space division multiplexing (SDM) and is only possible if a good under-
standing of the modes behaviour and coupling process is achieved,
together with a system optimized for their transmission. Therefore
there is a need for a full characterization of the modes guided in the
ﬁbers of interest.
In this work a complete theoretical explanation
for the multi-mode operation and HOMs behaviour into the ﬁber
is provided. It is then shown how the individual excitation of the
modes of interest is possible and useful to have them characterized.
The information provided for each mode in the ﬁbers contains but is
not limited to: attenuation, dispersion, mode coupling, splicing and
bend-loss. A new method for measuring modal resolved bend-loss in
few-mode ﬁbers without the use of mode converters is presented and
demonstrated by comparison with direct loss measurements. Some
results of this new technique have been submitted to Optics Letters.
Once obtained these information about the guided modes, it is possi-
ble to argue the ﬁber quality in terms of use in communication sys-
tems.
1
==PAGE:12==
2
introduction
The work that has been done for this project has the purpose to com-
bine theoretical studies and experimental analysis, in order to have a
complete reference for the use of few-mode ﬁbers for communication
purposes.
1.2
structure of the manuscript
The following is composed by two main parts. The ﬁrst starts with
chapter 2, which is the theoretical background derived from a deep
study of the literature in the ﬁeld and needed to properly understand
the results obtained from the experimental work. This part has been
written with the objective of including the most important properties
and knowledge on few-mode ﬁbers for communication. This chap-
ter is therefore considered important as a structured and consistent
reference for the topic but can be overlooked by the expert reader.
In within this part, an overview on ﬁber optics is presented, in sec-
tion 2.1, before going through the coupled-wave theory, section 2.2,
starting point to derive the linearly polarized modes (section 2.3) and
to explain how the light behaves in ﬁbers. After the mathematical
treatment on the modes, their most important parameters are deﬁned
in section 2.6. Furthermore, in chapter 3, an overview on the existing
methods for characterization of light beams is presented, focusing
mainly on spatially and spectrally resolved imaging, widely used in
this work. The second part, chapter 5, is mostly on the experimental
work done at OFS1 in order to measure the important parameters of
the ﬁbers of interest. The topics of mode conversion, section 5.1, and
mode characterization, section 5.2, cover most of this chapter and are
followed by a detailed explanation of a new method of measuring
bend-loss of individual modes in few-mode ﬁbers, by using spatially
and spectrally resolved imaging, without the use of mode converters.
This procedure, entirely designed during this Master Project, is, to
date and to the best of our knowledge, one of the only two methods
of mode resolved bend-loss analysis which do not require mode con-
version, the ﬁrst proposed in 2013 by Schulze [Schulze et al., 2013].
Two small parts on the ﬁber of interest, chapter 4, and on their ap-
plications, chapter 6, have been included to make clear to the reader
where those ﬁbers stand in the market and what are their possible ap-
plications. A small discussion on the future possibilities for further
analysis is contained in chapter 8. Finally, a conclusion summarize
the important results. At the end of the manuscript, an appendix
has been written to include some complementary information and
graphs.
1 http://www.ofsoptics.com
==PAGE:13==
2
T H E O R E T I C A L B A C KG R O U N D
A rather deep theoretical background is necessary to understand how
to characterize and use few-mode ﬁbers for communication purposes.
In this section, an overview of coupled-wave theory is given, in order
to provide the basic bricks necessary to explain the choices that have
been taken in the experimental work. The ﬁelds of linearly polarized
modes (LP modes) and few-mode ﬁbers are brieﬂy treated, together
with an explanation of the ﬁbers properties, in order to understand
the reason for the analysis done in the experimental part. Finally, the
topic of mode conversion is presented for completeness.
2.1
introduction to optical fibers
Optical waveguides are dielectric structures which can guide light by
the use of total internal reﬂection. This phenomenon has been known
since 1854 [Agrawal, 2011], but only when the loss of optical ﬁbers
was reduced to below 20 dB/km [Kapron, 1970] their use for commu-
nication purposes was considered.
In the ideal case, an optical ﬁber is uniform on the axis of propa-
gation. Therefore, it is the transverse proﬁle of the refractive index
that matter most in deﬁning the optical properties of the structure.
The simplest description of an optical ﬁber is a cylindrical core of
silica, with an external layer called cladding, whose refractrive index
is lower than the core one. It is possible to have an abrupt transition
between core and cladding indexes, which leads to the name step-
index ﬁbers, or a gradual change in graded-index ﬁbers. Examples of
those structures are found in ﬁgure 2.1, where cross-sections and in-
dex proﬁles are shown. However, the index proﬁle can be engineered
to obtain the desired optical properties, thus many different struc-
tures can be found in literature [Agrawal, 2011; Born and Wolf, 1999;
Knight et al., 1998; Rufﬁn et al., 2005].
An arbitrary transverse refractive index proﬁle n(r) can be deﬁned,
as in [Snyder, 1983], to be:
n(r) = n1 [1 −2∆f(r)]
1
2
(2.1)
Where r is the radial coordinate and ∆= (n2
1 −n2
2)/(2n2
1), where one
ﬁnds the refractive indexes of the core and the cladding, n1 and n2,
respectively. The function f(r) describes the shape of the proﬁle, thus
3
==PAGE:14==
4
theoretical background
Figure 2.1: Step-index (top left) and graded-index (top right) ﬁber cross sec-
tions with their relative refractive index proﬁles.
Source: [Agrawal, 2011].
is a step-function in the case of step-index ﬁbers, a parabolic function
in the graded-index case, etc.
The step-index case has a simpler mathematical treatment1, so it is of-
ten the choice for a starting point in the theoretical point of view, but
it is also very often used in practical experiments and for many ap-
plication. The total internal reﬂection at the core-cladding interface,
that allows the guiding of the light, is explain by the help of ﬁgure 2.2
from [Agrawal, 2011]. The critical angle ϕc, deﬁned as the smallest
angle at which the light is totally reﬂected by the core-cladding in-
terface and thus guided into the core, can be found by Snell’s law as
in [Agrawal, 2011]:
n0 sin(ϑi) = n1 cos(ϕc) =
 n2
1–n2
2
 1
2
(2.2)
where n0, n1 and n2 are the air, the core and the cladding refractive
indexes, respectively. In analogy with lenses, one can see in the term
n0 sin(ϑi) is the so-called numerical aperture (NA) of the ﬁber, which
represents the ﬁber capacity of gathering light. For n1 close to n2 it
is approximated by:
NA = n1(2∆)
1
2 =
 n2
1–n2
2
 1
2
(2.3)
Looking at equation 2.3, is clear that the fractional index change ∆
should be made as large as possible to have the maximum light gath-
ered into the ﬁber. However, the optimum value of ∆results to be a
1 For this reason, most of the theoretical models and cases treated in this work refer
to this simpliﬁed case.
==PAGE:15==
2.1 introduction to optical fibers
5
Figure 2.2: Representation of a piece of ﬁber to explain the total internal
reﬂection: only rays for which ϕ > ϕc will be reﬂected from
the core-cladding interface and thus guided into the waveguide.
Source: [Agrawal, 2011].
trade-off between maximizing NA and minimizing the modal disper-
sion. The modal dispersion is the resultant differential delay between
modes, captured at the same time in the ﬁber, caused by the different
path length they had travelled. This phenomenon can easily make to
drop the maximum bit-rate achievable into a ﬁber [Agrawal, 2011].
The case for graded-index ﬁber follows the same logic with slight
differences due to the smoother change in refractive index between
core and cladding. It can be shown [Agrawal, 2011] that the total
reﬂection still happen, but with a different ray paths, depending on
the grading of the refractive index. On the other hand, the depen-
dence of the maximum bit-rate on the index values is changed from
the step-index case, which leads to an higher communication speed
for graded-index ﬁbers.
When describing optical ﬁbers, the so-called normalized frequency V it
is often used, deﬁned as in [Agrawal, 2011; Snyder, 1983]:
V = a2π
λ
 n2
1–n2
2
 1
2 = a2π
λ NA
(2.4)
where a is the core radius and λ the wavelength of the used light. It
is shown in section 2.2 that the normalized frequency quantiﬁes the
ﬁbers ability to support transverse modes. Indeed, the number of
guided modes in a step-index ﬁber is given by [Venghaus, 2012] N ∝
V2/2, for large values of V. The V parameter also gives a condition
on single-mode operation, which is guaranteed when V < 2.405.
==PAGE:16==
6
theoretical background
2.2
coupled-wave theory
Following the derivation by [Snyder, 1983], it is possible to derive
the mode proﬁles guided in a waveguide. A mode is a precise trans-
verse amplitude proﬁle of the light, which is self-consistent during
propagation, with a speciﬁc value of the propagation constant β. In
the case of optical waveguides, the self-consistency condition requires
that the complex amplitude transverse proﬁle of the light remains un-
changed during the propagation. Those modes depends on the base
on which one builds the mathematical model and usually refers to
complete and orthogonal bases. In general there are two different
kinds of modes in ﬁbers: guided (or bound) modes and radiative (or
cladding) modes2. The guided modes are the one of major interest for
most applications since they are supported over all the length of the
structure by means of total internal reﬂection (see section 2.1). Thus,
they can be used to transfer information through the ﬁbers.
The
cladding modes are usually unavoidable and also unwanted, since
those modes are lossy. Indeed, those refer to modes outside the con-
dition for total internal reﬂection and the energy is not fully contained
into the waveguide during propagation.
The bound modes’ electric and magnetic ﬁeld, Ej and Hj come from
solving the source-free Maxwell’s equations, considering the current
density J = 0 and the charge density ρ = 0:
∇× E
=
i(µ0/ε0)1/2kH
∇× H
=
−i(µ0/ε0)1/2kn2E
∇· (n2E)
=
0
∇· H
=
0
(2.5)
where n is the refractive index, ε0, µ0, k = 2π/λ and λ are the di-
electric constant, the magnetic permeability, the wavenumber and the
wavelength of light in free space, respectively. The ﬁelds E and H are
assumed to have an implicit harmonic time dependence, such that
E = E0(x, y, z) exp (iωt) and H = H0(x, y, z) exp (iωt), where ω is
the angular frequency. In the derivation by Snyder [Snyder, 1983], the
waveguide is considered translationally invariant. This means that the
refractive index proﬁle does not vary with the distance z on the propa-
gation axis, leaving only the transverse components, thus n = n(x, y).
2 The leaky modes have not been included, being not relevant to the following discus-
sion. In general, they are guided modes which couple strongly with radiative modes,
leading to high losses.
==PAGE:17==
2.2 coupled-wave theory
7
In this simpliﬁed and ideal case3, one can express the ﬁelds as super-
position of ﬁelds with the form:
E(x, y, z)
=
e(x, y) exp (iβz)
H(x, y, z)
=
h(x, y) exp (iβz)
(2.6)
which in cylindrical polar coordinates are:
E(r, ϕ, z)
=
e(r, ϕ) exp (iβz)
H(x, ϕ, z)
=
h(r, ϕ) exp (iβz)
(2.7)
where β is the propagation constant4. Thanks to the translation invari-
ance property, it is possible to decompose the ﬁelds into longitudinal
and transverse component, such that:
E
=
(et + ezˆz) exp (iβz)
H
=
(ht + hzˆz) exp (iβz)
(2.8)
where ˆz is the longitudinal unit vector, parallel to the waveguide axis.
Eliminating either the electric or the magnetic ﬁelds [Snyder, 1983]
from equation 2.5, it is possible to obtain the source-free homoge-
neous vector wave equation5, of which the modes are direct and exact
solutions:

∇2
t + n2k2 −β2
j

ej
=
−
 ∇t + iβjˆz

et,j · ∇t ln n2

∇2
t + n2k2 −β2
j

hj
=
 ∇t + iβjˆz

× hj

× ∇t ln n2
(2.9)
where ∇t and ∇2
t are vector operators6, and where the index j has
been included to remember that the ﬁelds component ej and hj are
solutions of this equation and are related to the ﬁelds Ej and Hj by
equation 2.8. To be noted that the spatial variation of the components
ej and hj can be expressed in any coordinate system, leaving the pos-
sibility to rewrite the solutions for, as example, planar waveguides or
circular ﬁbers. In general, the vector wave equations 2.9, as Maxwell’s
equations rewritten, is enough to calculate the modal ﬁelds in every
point of the waveguide. The calculation leads to a consistency con-
dition on the propagation constants βj of the single modes, which
3 A more general derivation, which consider the full n = n(x, y, z) proﬁle has been
done by Marcuse [Marcuse, 1973]. Considering a changing z behaviour of the re-
fractive index allowed Marcuse to derive solutions that consider possible waveguide
imperfections.
4 The propagation constant β determines how the amplitude and phase of light
with a given frequency varies along the propagation direction z, such that A(z) =
A(0) exp (iβz). In general β is complex and the imaginary part models the loss dur-
ing propagation. In the mode calculation, usually, the material is considered lossless
and so β is real.
5 The terms homogeneous comes from the fact that J = 0 has been assumed. In any
other case, the vector wave equation will be more complicated and inhomogeneous.
6 The vector operators are deﬁned as: ∇tA = ˆx ∂A
∂x + ˆy ∂A
∂y and ∇2
tA = ∂2A
∂x2 + ∂2A
∂y2
==PAGE:18==
8
theoretical background
turns out to be an explicit function of the modal ﬁelds. This condi-
tion is generally called eigenvalue equation. Usually, when writing the
eigenvalue equation, the dimensionless modal parameters uj and wj
are used, for the step-index case, deﬁned as:
uj
=
a

k2n2
1 −β2
j
1/2
wj
=
a

β2
j −k2n2
2
1/2
(2.10)
where n1 and n2 are the core and cladding refractive index, as shown
in ﬁgure 2.1. From the deﬁnition of those parameters comes that:
V2 = u2
j + w2
j
(2.11)
where V is the normalized frequency deﬁned in equation 2.4. Equa-
tion 2.11, which stands for different modes with different j, is of help
to solve the eigenvalue equation.
It is also useful to introduce the normalized propagation constant
beff as [Agrawal, 2011]:
beff = β/k −n2
n1 −n2
= neff −n2
n1 −n2
(2.12)
where the effective refractive index neff = β/k has been introduced,
which is a quantiﬁcation of the phase delay per unit length in a waveg-
uide, relative to the phase delay in vacuum.
An important thing to notice is that it is not necessary to solve the
vector wave equation for the transverse components of ej and hj be-
cause they can be written in terms of the longitudinal components
ez,j and hz,j [Snyder, 1983].
Also, the term ∇t ln n2 in equation 2.9 is responsible of considering
coupling between various ﬁeld components.
There are two excep-
tional cases in which this term does not appear in the equation for
the transverse ﬁelds. These occur in the cases ez,j = 0 or hz,j = 0
(if a cylindrical symmetry is present) and give solutions called trans-
verse electric (TE) and transverse magnetic (TM) modes, respectively.
In general, in optical ﬁbers, the non-zero term ∇t ln n2 gives rise to
coupling between ez,j and hz,j, thus the TE and TM modes are not
always appropriate to describe the light propagation. A more general
description is given by the hybrid (HE and EH) modes which consider
a mixture of TE and TM waves to describe the propagation of light in
the structure.
At this point, the structure of the waveguide and the boundary con-
ditions have to be considered and different solutions can be found
in different cases (one example of solutions for the step-index case
is shown in appendix A). For a given structure, one could solve the
eigenvalue equation ﬁnding different βj for different j. The more val-
ues for β are found, the more modes the waveguide guides. From
==PAGE:19==
2.3 lp modes
9
those values, all the other dispersion parameters can be calculated,
together with the dimensionless parameters u and w and the ﬁelds
components, which will be expressed as Bessel functions of ﬁrst (J)
and second (K) kind [Snyder, 1983] (in case of a step-index ﬁber),
which coefﬁcients can be found through normalizing the intensity.
2.3
lp modes
Typical values of relative refractive index ∆(as used in equation 2.1)
are on the order of 10−3 for conventional step-index ﬁbers. For such
low values, which mean that n1 ≃n2, a signiﬁcant simpliﬁcation of
the theoretical mode description [Venghaus, 2012] is obtained. The
ﬁbers in which ∆≪1 are called weakly guiding ﬁbers, since the small
index contrast leads to a not-tight guidance of the light. This term,
ﬁrst used by Gloge [Gloge, 1971], refers to cases in which the ﬁber
modes are assumed to be polarized in only one direction. Thus, the
resultant solutions of the eigenvalue equation are called linearly polar-
ized (LP) modes.
Following the derivation in [Gloge, 1971], one can differentiate the
equations for longitudinal components expressed by the transverse
components. In this way the approximate expressions for those trans-
verse components are obtained. By matching the boundary condi-
tions and assuming n1 ≃n2 and ε1 ≃ε2, the eigenvalue equation
for weakly guiding step-index ﬁbers is obtained:
uJl−1(u)
Jl(u)
= −wKl−1(w)
Kl
(2.13)
where J and K refers to Bessel function of the ﬁrst and second kind,
respectively, and l is the so-called azimuthal number, which is an
integer. It have been here used the dimensionless parameters u and
w deﬁned in equations 2.10. Equation 2.13 is valid for all HE and
EH modes, which are its solutions. Therefore, this single equation
allows us to calculate the whole set of modes guided in a step-index
weakly guiding ﬁber. The set of LP modes, anyway complete and
orthogonal base for light waves, can be described by the azimuthal
mode order l, by adding the radial mode order m, which corresponds
to the m-th root of the eigenvalue equation. The different equations
and the correspondence between conventional modes and LP modes
are shown in table 2.1.
Another thing to notice is that a small index difference between core
and cladding is also very advantageous from the fabrication point of
view. Indeed, it allows the manufacturers to make the ﬁbers with one
basic material and then induce an small change in refractive index in
the core by locally adding dopants, tailoring the index proﬁle.
==PAGE:20==
10
theoretical background
LP mode
(l ⩾1)
Conventional mode
(l ⩾1)
Dispersion equation
LP0l mode
(m = 0)
EH1l mode
J0(u)
uJ1(u) =
K0(w)
wK1(w)
LP1l mode
(m = 1)
TE0l mode
TM0l mode
EH21 mode
J1(u)
uJ0(u) = −K1(w)
wK0(w)
LPml mode
(m ⩾2)
EHm−1,l mode
HEm+1,l mode
Jm(u)
uJm−1(u) = −
Km(w)
wKm−1(w)
Table 2.1: Table showing the dispersion equations valid for the different
modes in a ﬁber, and the correspondence between conventional
and LP modes.
A simulation has been made to show the calculated proﬁles for some
LP modes in a ﬁber. In ﬁgure 2.3, it is seen how the intensity proﬁle of
the light in LP01, LP11 and LP21 looks like for a ﬁber with core radius
a = 1.9 µm, cladding radius a′ = 62.5 µm and NA = 0.82. A more
detailed explanation of the simulation is contained in appendix A.
These modes are the ones seen in the experimental part, in real ﬁbers.
2.4
modes in optical fibers
Considering an optical ﬁber, one can use the exact solutions of the
eigenvalue equation of an optical ﬁber [Snyder, 1983] or use, when
possible, the approximation of LP modes [Gloge, 1971]. In ﬁgure 2.4,
it can be seen how the LP modes are made by superposition of con-
ventional (or exact) hybrid modes, for the ﬁrst few modes, in a cir-
cular step-index ﬁber. Each LP mode has two polarizations and two
orthogonal intensity patterns, with azimuthal dependences indicated
by the cosine and the sine. Since, in the weakly guiding approxima-
tion, the propagation constant of the modes is independent on the
polarization direction, the LP modes results to be degenerate on dif-
ferent intensity pattern rotations and different polarization directions
(the LP11 and the LP21 are four time degenerate, the LP02 only two
times).
Since an optical ﬁber can support a ﬁnite number of guided modes at
a given wavelength, there is the need for a condition to understand in
which regime each ﬁber works. For step-index ﬁbers, the number of
guided modes depends not only on the numerical aperture NA (equa-
tion 2.3) but also on the ratio between core radius and wavelength
(a/λ). Therefore, the normalized frequency V deﬁned in equation 2.4
is the best choice to represent the single-mode regime condition. The
==PAGE:21==
2.4 modes in optical fibers
11
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 2.3: Figure showing the intensity proﬁle for two LP modes.
(a) Surface and (b) Contour plot calculated for the LP01, (c-d)
for the LP11 and (e-f) for the LP21. In the surface plots (left), the
two axis in which the intensity is plot are the transverse compo-
nents x and y. Thus, the surface plots represent the normalized
transverse intensity proﬁle in the ﬁber. The contour plots (right)
represent the same intensity in 2D in order to show the radial
dependence. In this case, a red circle marks the position of the
core-cladding interface.
==PAGE:22==
12
theoretical background
Figure 2.4: Image showing a representation of the twelve exact modes and
the corresponding four LP modes of a circular step-index ﬁber,
with indication of different polarizations and degenerations.
Source: [Ma, 2009].
frequency V is also related to the dimensionless parameters u and w
(equation 2.11) which give a sense of what is happening to the mode.
For w = 0, the mode is not guided any more (cut-off), while for
w →u, the mode is very well bounded. Each mode is guided by the
ﬁber with its own combination of u and w and therefore its own prop-
agation constant β7. Since β is related to the phase velocity, which
is the speed of the mode, each mode will travel at different speed,
giving raise to the phenomenon of intermodal dispersion. This limits
the use single-mode ﬁbers, which are now replaced by graded-index
ﬁbers for communication purposes.
2.5
few-mode fibers
The condition for the single-mode operation regime of a step-index
optical ﬁber it has been seen in section 2.1 and 2.2. For values of
V > 2.405, for a given wavelength, more than one mode is guided in
the same ﬁber. This leads to the name multi-mode ﬁbers. By the use
of the normalized propagation constant beff deﬁned in equation 2.12,
it is clear how the condition on the normalized frequency V works.
Simply looking at a beff vs V graph, as in ﬁgure 2.5, and plotting the
calculated values for the modes, one can see how many modes are
7 Here,the propagation constant β is considered real, since the lossless material ap-
proximation is used.
==PAGE:23==
2.5 few-mode fibers
13
Figure 2.5: Dependence of the normalized propagation constant beff on the
normalized frequency V, simulated with λ = 1550 nm, core ra-
dius a = 5 µn and n2 = 1.45 while n1 was used to change the
V value. The graph shows when one has single or multi-mode
operation in a ﬁber. Source: [Ma, 2009].
guided for a speciﬁc normalized frequency, thus a speciﬁc structure.
This behaviour can be tailored by changing the ratio a/λ and/or the
value of the numerical aperture NA, both of which change the nor-
malized frequency V. Fibers with values of V between 3 and 10 are
often called few-mode ﬁbers, to be distinguished from the other multi-
modes ﬁbers that guide many modes8.
Usually, the more modes a ﬁber supports or the larger the core, the
easier is to launch light into it. This is because of the higher numerical
aperture, which represent how well the ﬁber gathers light. In any
case, for an efﬁcient launching, two conditions have to be fulﬁlled:
• The input light should only hit the core;
• the most of the power of the input light should be contained in
angles lower than arcsin (NA).
If the M2 (see section 3.1) factor is sufﬁciently small, the two con-
ditions can be fulﬁlled simultaneously. Anyway, this does not take
into account in which mode most of the power is guided (it has been
demonstrated that the M2 factor does not assure either a single or
multi-mode operation [Nicholson et al., 2008]). Usually, the energy is
mostly in the fundamental mode (the LP01 in weakly guiding ﬁbers)
but few-mode ﬁbers can easily have 20 or 30 % of the power in higher
order modes (HOMs).
8 Common telecom ﬁbers have a core diameter of 50 µm or 62.5 µm, and a cladding
diameter of 125 µm. Such ﬁbers support hundreds of guided modes.
==PAGE:24==
14
theoretical background
2.6
properties of modes
To understand the physics and behaviour of the modes in an optical
ﬁber, with the purpose of using them for space division multiplex-
ing, thus as separate channels in communication systems, one should
have information about some parameters and properties of the modes
of interest. In this section it is provided a theoretical background, for
some of the interesting properties, needed to properly understand
the experimental work.
2.6.1
Dispersion
There are many different types of dispersion and all involve the phase
velocity or phase delay of light. Considering an input pulse, contain-
ing various frequency components, sent in a multi-mode ﬁber, one
sees a broadening of the pulse at the output. This broadening, given
by dispersion, is, in general, a sum the various phenomena described
in the following.
chromatic dispersion
Following the derivation in [Agrawal, 2011],
and considering a single mode individually, its group velocity vg is
deﬁned as [Biss and Brown, 2004]:
vg =
 dβ
dω
−1
(2.14)
which can be used to write the time T which a spectral component at
the frequency ω requires to travel a length L of ﬁber: T = L/vg. By
the use of β = neffk = neffω/c it is seen that the refractive index
does depend on the frequency since β does, and thus the group index
is deﬁned as:
ng = neff + ω
dneff
dω

(2.15)
which leads to different travel times T for different spectral compo-
nents. This phenomenon, called chromatic dispersion or group-velocity
dispersion, gives a pulse broadening because different frequencies of
the pulse do not arrive simultaneously at the output. Moving from
frequency ω to wavelength λ, one easily ﬁnds the pulse broadening
due to chromatic dispersion, having the range of wavelength ∆λ of
the source:
∆T = d
dλ
 L
vg

∆λ = DL∆λ
(2.16)
where D is called dispersion parameter, in units of ps/(nm km) deﬁned
as:
D = d
dλ
 1
vg

= −2πc
λ2 β2
(2.17)
==PAGE:25==
2.6 properties of modes
15
Figure 2.6: Total dispersion D and contributions from material dispersion
DM and waveguide dispersion DW for conventional single-
mode ﬁbers. The shift of the zero-dispersion wavelength is given
by the waveguide component. Source: [Agrawal, 2011].
where the GVD parameter β2 = d2β/dω2 is introduced. The GVD de-
termines how much a pulse broadens propagating in a ﬁber and it is
used because the dispersion parameter can vary considerably when
shifting wavelength. In general it can be considered as a sum of two
terms D = DM + DW. The material dispersion DM originates from
the refractive index dependence on frequency given by resonance fre-
quencies at which the material absorb electromagnetic radiation. The
waveguide dispersion DW leads to a shift of the zero dispersion wave-
length so that the total dispersion is zero, for instance in the common
single mode telecom ﬁbers, near 1.31 µm and reduces the D value
in the range 1.3 −1.6 µm. The proﬁle of the two components and
of the sum D is shown in ﬁgure 2.7(a), together with the shift given
by DW.
The GVD can be tailored to give the best properties in
the communication wavelength range. As shown in ﬁgure 2.7(b), it
is possible to make structure with dispersion proﬁle such that the
λZD point is in the vicinity of 1.55 µm (dispersion-shifted ﬁbers) or such
that the dispersion is relatively small over a large wavelength range
(dispersion-ﬂattened ﬁbers). The DM and DW are, for the step-index
case, given by [Agrawal, 2011]:
DM = −2π
λ2
dn2g
dω = dn2g
c dλ
DW = −2π∆
λ2

n2
2g
n2ω
Vd2(Vb)
dV2
+ dn2,g
dω
d(Vb)
dV

(2.18)
where n2,g is the group index of the cladding material. This disper-
The bit-rate B is
limited by the fact
that B∆T < 1 to
distinguish different
bits. For chromatic
dispersion (by the
use of 2.16) one has:
BL|D|∆λ < 1
.
sion also effects the bit rate. In general, one wants this kind of disper-
sion as high as possible because the spreading of the pulse rapidly re-
==PAGE:26==
16
theoretical background
Figure 2.7: Wavelength dependence of the dispersion parameter D for stan-
dard, dispersion-shifter and dispersion-ﬂattened ﬁbers.
Source: [Agrawal, 2011].
duces the peak power and so the effect of non-linearities. When high
dispersion is obtained, dispersion compensating ﬁbers are needed to
achieve high bit-rate.
intermodal dispersion
Intermodal dispersion results from dif-
ferent propagation characteristics of higher-order transverse modes
in waveguides, such as multi-mode ﬁbers. It can severely limit the
possible data rate of a system for optical ﬁber communications. As
already seen for chromatic dispersion in the previous paragraph, dif-
ferent frequency components, with different propagation constants,
travels at different speed. The pulse broadening given by the inter-
modal dispersion can be estimated by considering the shortest and
the longest ray paths, obtaining:
In the case of
intermodal
dispersion for
step-index ﬁbers,
the limitation
on the bit-rate B,
since B∆T < 1, is:
BL < n2c
n2
1∆
∆T = n1
c

L
sin ϕC
−L

(2.19)
In the same way, different modes in a ﬁber will have differen β and
thus different group velocity vg, resulting in a splitting of the pulse,
if it is made by various modes. The strength of intermodal dispersion
can be quantiﬁed as the differential mode delay (DMD) sometimes
called differential group delay (DGD), the time difference between
the arrival instants of two modes.
It depends strongly on the re-
fractive index proﬁle of the ﬁber in and around the ﬁber core. This
phenomenon can also be minimized by using multi-mode ﬁbers with
==PAGE:27==
2.6 properties of modes
17
a parabolic refractive index proﬁle (graded-index ﬁbers), where the
delay ∆T is estimated by:
∆T = Ln1∆2
8c
(2.20)
In the graded-index
case, the limitation
on the bit-rate B,
since B∆T < 1,
results:
BL <
8c
n1∆2
polarization mode dispersion
In section 2.3, it has been seen
how the modes can show degenerate nature for different polariza-
tions. This holds only if the ﬁber is ideal with a perfect cylindrical
core of uniform diameter. Real ﬁbers exhibit high variations in the
shape and many imperfections. Those imperfections can also break
the cylindrical symmetry on which the mode degeneracy is based. In
this case the ﬁber acquires birefringence, which means that the opti-
cal properties of the structure depend on the polarization of the used
light. If different polarization of the same mode are simultaneously
excited and, because of the birefringence, exhibit different group ve-
locities, a broadening of the initial temporal light proﬁle will be seen.
If the birefringence is constant along the ﬁber, the broadening can be
estimated as:
∆T = L|βx −βy|
(2.21)
where the subscripts x and y denotes different polarization directions
of the same mode and L the ﬁber length. As well as all the other cases,
this dispersion limits the possible bit-rate. This limitation is somehow
more difﬁcult than the previous cases. It depends on the ﬁber struc-
ture and its statistics has been widely studied [Foschini et al., 1999;
Huttner et al., 2000; Shtaif and Mecozzi, 2000]. The difference of this
dispersion and the others is that most systems in communication sys-
tems are polarization insensitive (unless a coherent detection scheme
is employed). Thus, this effect results in a broadening in systems not
able to see the different polarizations and in a time delay between
bits if the polarizations are used as different channels.
higher-order dispersion
In the previous paragraphs, while talk-
ing about the dispersion parameter D, was stated that it is possible to
tailor it in order to have a well positioned zero dispersion wavelength
(see ﬁgure 2.7). However, it is important to notice that the dispersive
effect does not completely disappear at this point in wavelength, ei-
ther. In the case in which D approaches zero, higher-order dispersive
effect comes into play. Those effect depends on the dispersion slope
S = dD/dλ which is given by:
S = (2πc
λ2 )2β3 + (4πc
λ3 )β2
(2.22)
where β3 = dβ2/dω = dβ/dω is the third-order dispersion parame-
ter. When λ = λZD one has β2 = 0 and S ∝β3. This effect plays an
==PAGE:28==
18
theoretical background
important role in modern systems. The S > 0 for most ﬁbers leads to
slightly different group velocity dispersion values for different chan-
nels and it results difﬁcult to compensate the dispersion in all the
channels simultaneously. To avoid this issue, new types of ﬁbers have
The bit-rate B
limitation for
higher-order
dispersion results to
be: BL|S|∆λ2
been designed to have either small S (reduced-slope ﬁbers) or negative
(reverse-dispersion ﬁbers) [Agrawal, 2011]. Even if the limitation on the
bit-rate seem inﬁnite from the equation in paragraph 2.6.1, usually S
or β3 become the limiting factor in case of D →0.
2.6.2
Propagation Losses
When light propagates along a waveguide it experience attenuation,
which are of high importance in the ﬁeld of ﬁber optics, especially in
the case of ﬁber-based communication systems. Indeed, it creates the
need of ampliﬁers on long-way communication path, placed in order
to be able to receive a sufﬁcient amount of power after the propaga-
tion of the information in the ﬁber. Obtaining a signal much weaker
than the initial one also increase the importance of noise. The usual
approximation to model propagation losses is considering them con-
stant along the waveguide. In this case, an attenuation coefﬁcient α can
be deﬁned by considering that the overall power of the beam decay
as ∼exp (−αz) [Snyder, 1983] while propagating along z. The value
of the coefﬁcient is often expressed in dB/km and it is usually wave-
length dependent. The origin of this losses can be attributed to ab-
sorption in the optical spectrum, different kind of scattering (Raman,
Brillouin and Rayleigh scattering) and core-cladding interface irreg-
ularities. Typical Telecom ﬁbers suffer of 0.2 dB/km of attenuation
at 1550 nm. This leave 1 % of the power of the original signal, after
propagation for 100 km. This is usually sufﬁcient for high bit-rate
communication systems. The value 1550 nm as transmission wave-
length is commonly chosen because of the minimum attenuation.
2.6.3
Mode Coupling
It has been seen in section 2.2 how wave propagation in optical ﬁbers
is analysed by solving Maxwell’s equations (eq. 2.5) with some bound-
ary condition, which depend on the structure used. Assuming weak
guidance, decomposition of the solutions in orthogonal set of linearly
polarised modes is possible (section 2.3). Ideally, these modes propa-
gate without coupling between each other, as parts of an orthogonal
basis. In real ﬁbers small perturbations always exist (e.g., bends and
microbends, temperature or pressure changes, etc.) and so does the
modal coupling. Considering this coupling theory one can explain
how the modes couple in propagation (distributed mode coupling)
and how to use periodic perturbations to voluntarily induce a trans-
==PAGE:29==
2.6 properties of modes
19
fer of energy between two speciﬁc modes [Kashyap, 1999]. This is the
case in which the period of the perturbation is close to the sum or
difference between the modes propagation constants.
Following the analysis by Kashyap [Kashyap, 1999], the modes in an
optical ﬁber can be expressed as a sum of l transverse ﬁeld mode am-
plitudes, Aµ(z), and a continuum of radiation modes, Aρ(z)9, with
propagation constants βµ and βρ, respectively:
Et = 1
2
µ=l
X
µ=1
h
Aµ(z)eµ,tei(ωt−βµz) + cc
i
+
X Z ρ=∞
ρ=0
h
Aρ(z)eρ,tei(ωt−βρz)i
dρ
(2.23)
where eµ,t and eρ,t are the radial transverse electric ﬁeld distribution
(deﬁned as in equation 2.8 where the exponential has been included)
of the µ-th guided and the ρ-th radiation modes, respectively. All the
different types of radiation modes (e.g., TE, TM and hybrid modes)
are accounted in equation 2.23 by the use of the summation before
the integral.
The LP modes (section 2.3) are solutions, in the weak guidance regime,
of the unperturbed homogeneous wave equation 2.9.
In order to
model the coupling between modes, effects of perturbation have to be
included, with the assumption that the solutions remain unchanged,
thus the modes are the same.
This can be modelled by means of
material polarization:
P = Punpert + Pperturb
(2.24)
where Punpert = ε0χ(1)Eµ. Referring to the transverse mode µ, it
is possible to write the perturbed wave equation, derived from equa-
tion 2.5, as:
∇2Eµ,t = µ0ε0εr
∂2
∂t2 Eµ,t + µ0
∂2
∂t2 Pperturb,µ
(2.25)
9 Those mode amplitudes are deﬁned such that |Aµ,t|2 is the power carried by the
µth guided mode, and the same for the radiative modes. In this case the subscript
t has been included since the longitudinal component has been considered small
compared to the transverse one (LP modes).
==PAGE:30==
20
theoretical background
which is a scalar equation. Introducing equation 2.23 into 2.25, the
wave equation is rewritten as:
∇2

1
2
µ=l
X
µ=1
h
Aµ(z)eµ,tei(ωt−βµz) + cc
i
+
X Z ρ=∞
ρ=0
h
Aρ(z)eρ,tei(ωt−βρz)i
dρ
#
−µ0ε0εr
∂2
∂t2

1
2
µ=l
X
µ=1
h
Aµ(z)eµ,tei(ωt−βµz) + cc
i
+
X Z ρ=∞
ρ=0
h
Aρ(z)eρ,tei(ωt−βρz)i
dρ
#
= µ0
∂2
∂t2 Pperturb,µ
(2.26)
where the LHS can be simpliﬁed ignoring coupling into radiation
modes and considering weak coupling and slowly varying envelope
(SVEA), which states that ∂2Amu
∂z2
≪βmu∂Amu
∂z
. In this case,
∇2Et = 1
2
µ=l
X
µ=1

−2iβmu∂Aµ
∂z eµ,tei(ωt−βµz)
−βmu2Aµeµ,tei(ωt−βµz) + cc

(2.27)
This, together with the expansion of the second term in equation 2.26
and noticing that ω2µ0ε0εr = β2
µ, simpliﬁes the wave equation to:
µ=l
X
µ=1

−iβmu∂Aµ
∂z eµ,tei(ωt−βµz) + cc

= µ0
∂2
∂t2 Pperturb,µ (2.28)
which, multiplying both sides by e∗
µ,t, integrating over the wave guide
cross-section and applying the orthogonality, leads to:
µ=l
X
µ=1

−2iωµ0
∂Aµ
∂z ei(ωt−βµz) + cc

=
Z ∞
−∞
Z ∞
−∞
µ0
∂2
∂t2 Pperturb,µe∗
µ,t dxdy
(2.29)
which is the ﬁnal wave equation, where orthogonality and perturba-
tion (by means of Pperturb,µ) are included. From equation 2.29, a
variety of phenomena can be described, in the coupling of modes.
By considering the ﬁeld in the LHS made by two components (two
modes with arbitrary direction in the ﬁber) the equation still holds
and leads to a relation between the modes amplitudes, which of
course depends on the given perturbation. For example, taking as
==PAGE:31==
2.6 properties of modes
21
electric ﬁeld Et the sum of two counter-propagating waves (which
are orthogonal, so ideally do not encounter coupling),
Et = 1
2
h
Aυeυ,tei(ωt−βυz) + Bµeµ,tei(ωt+βµz)i
(2.30)
and introducing it in equation 2.29, one gets:
∂Aυ
∂z ei(ωt−βυz) + cc

−
∂Bµ
∂z ei(ωt+βµz) + cc

=
i
2ω
Z ∞
−∞
Z ∞
−∞
∂2
∂t2 Pperturb,µe∗
µ,υ,t dxdy
(2.31)
which couples the two modes amplitudes while a perturbation is ap-
plied. A similar equation is valid for the magnetic ﬁeld Ht.
spatially periodic refractive index modulation
Considering
a perturbation which is period and in which the dielectric constant
varies along the propagation direction in the ﬁber, the total polariza-
tion will be deﬁned as:
P = ε0 [εr −1 + ∆ε(z)] Eµ
(2.32)
where ∆ε(z) is the perturbed permittivity and εr is the relative per-
mittivity of the unperturbed core (remember that n2 = εr with n
refractive index). Since the permittivity is related to the refractive in-
dex, thus in this case [n + δn(z)]2 = εr + ∆ε(z), if the perturbation is
small compared to n,
∆ε(z) ≈2nδn(z)
(2.33)
The refractive index modulation is deﬁned as as:
δn(z) = ¯
∆n
h
1 + υ
2

e[(2πN/Λ)z+ϕ(z)] + cc
i
(2.34)
where ¯
∆n is the refractive index change averaged over a single period
of the perturbation, υ is the relative amplitude of the modulation
(the total amplitude is ∆n = υ ¯
∆n) and the cc term describes the
real periodic modulation in complex notation. Λ is the perturbation
period, N an integer for its harmonic order and ϕ(z) an arbitrary
spatially varying phase change. With this deﬁnition, the total material
polarization, from 2.32, becomes:
P = ε0

n2 −1 + 2n ¯
∆n
h
1 + υ
2

e[(2πN/Λ)z+ϕ(z)] + cc
i
Eµ (2.35)
which is a sum of three terms: the permittivity term, the dc refractive
index change and the ac refractive index modulation. Then, the mate-
rial polarization P can be brought back to the form 2.32 by deﬁning a
new modulation aplitude as:
δn(z) = 2n
h
¯
∆n + ∆n

e[(2πN/Λ)z+ϕ(z)] + cc
i
(2.36)
==PAGE:32==
22
theoretical background
Equation 2.36 describes the modulated refractive index due to a spa-
tially periodic perturbation. This is then used in the RHS of an equa-
tion similar to 2.31. In general the RHS is:
RHS = −inωε0Bµei(ωt+βµz)
Z ∞
−∞
¯
∆n eµ,t · e∗
µ,tdxdy
−inωε0Aυei(ωt−βpz+ϕ(z))
Z ∞
−∞
∆n
2 eυ,t · e∗
µ,tdxdy + cc
(2.37)
which the ﬁrst exponent is the same it has been shown in equa-
tion 2.29 LHS in the case of only one ﬁeld.
The second term has
two parts: one dependent on the phase-synchronous factor,
βp = 2πN
Λ
± βυ
(2.38)
where βυ is the phase factor of the perturbation, and the second part
is the overlap integral.
When considering the interaction between
two modes, e.g.
A and B, these two terms have to be taken into
account. The ﬁrst term gives the phase matching (or momentum conser-
vation) condition. The second term, which is the overlap integral of the
refractive index modulation proﬁle and the distributions of the mode
ﬁelds, gives the strength of the interaction. Furthermore, because of
the energy conservation, the frequency ω remains the same during
the coupling.
phase matching
Considering coupling between two modes, the
energy transfer from the driving ﬁeld Aυ to the generated ﬁelds is
non-negligible if the waves remain in phase over a signiﬁcant distant.
This leads to the phase matching condition:
βµ = βυ
(2.39)
Deﬁning the phase mismatch (or detuning) ∆β = βµ −βυ, one gets:
∆β = βµ ± βυ −2πN
Λ
(2.40)
which turns the phase matching condition to be ∆β = 0. If the two β
have identical and positive signs then the relations considers counter-
propagating modes; if they have opposite signs, then it considers co-
propagating modes.
A visual explanation is showed in ﬁgure 2.8,
where it is seen how the period of the grating need to match the
distance in propagation constant between the modes in order to have
maximum conversion.
overlap integral
The fact that the different modes are compo-
nents of an orthogonal base, suggests that the overlap integral be-
tween modes of different order will be null. However, in the integral
==PAGE:33==
2.6 properties of modes
23
Figure 2.8: Phase matching condition showed on a β axis.
The hatched
region refers to the continuous cladding modes, with a range of
propagation constants from 0 to βclad. At higher values, the β
for LP01 and LP11 modes are found. An arrow shows when the
perturbation (for instance a grating) period matches the phase
condition for optimum conversion.
Figure 2.9: Cross-section of the ﬁber where the LP01 and LP11 modes are
shown, along with the transverse refractive index modulation
proﬁle, which is non-symmetric.
Due to this asymmetry, the
overlap integral has different absolute values on the two sides
of the ﬁber, leading to a possible generated asymmetric polar-
ization wave, thus a non-zero coupling between LP01 and LP11.
This is the case for tilted gratings. Source: [Kashyap, 1999].
in equation 2.37, there is also the refractive index modulation. If this
modulation is non-symmetric, the integral value can result non-zero
for modes of different orders. In this case, shown in ﬁgure 2.9, the
non-uniform transverse distribution of the sources gives rise to a po-
larization wave that has an odd symmetry. In the ﬁgure, the overlap
between an LP01 and an LP11 has non-zero value on one side of the
ﬁber, due to non-symmetric refractive index modulation proﬁle. The
polarization wave (in this case the LP11 mode) is allowed, thanks to
the non-zero integral, to have a symmetry different from the driving
ﬁeld (the LP01 mode). The magnitude of the overlap depends on the
exact perturbation proﬁle.
==PAGE:34==
24
theoretical background
2.6.4
Bend Loss
For optical ﬁbers, bending is a source of additional losses and, in
general, an unavoidable problem for ﬁber-based systems. Typically,
these losses rise quickly once a certain critical bend radius is reached.
It has seen to be very small (a few millimeters) for ﬁbers with high
numerical aperture, whereas it is much larger (often tens of centime-
ters) for single-mode ﬁbers with large mode areas. These losses can
be the result of macroscopic and/or microscopic bending, the latter
often due to imperfect fabrication conditions. Various methods to pre-
dict this curvature loss can be found in literature. Among them, the
simple formula introduced by Marcuse [Marcuse, 1976], for weakly
guiding waveguides, have been of large use in the academic and ap-
plication ﬁelds. Even if it requires some strong assumptions, like the
weakly guiding approximation and sufﬁciently large curvature radii,
the simplicity of this formula has made it very useful over the years.
Furthermore, very good agreements for single-mode ﬁbers have been
found, after adjustments for bend-induced stress [Sharma, 1984]. On
the other hand, to our knowledge, there is no reliable technique to
predict mode-dependent bend loss in multi-mode ﬁbers, which has
been proved to be difﬁcult to achieve. Alternatively to direct formu-
las, simulations using various algorithms have been presented [Scar-
mozzino et al., 2000].
Beam propagation method [Scarmozzino et
al., 2000] with conformal mapping [Heiblum, 1975] is an example.
This method has been tested against measurements in [Schermer and
Cole, 2007], where a correction to Marcuse’s formula, for increased
accuracy, is also presented. The idea is to transform the circularly
curved ﬁber to an equivalent straight ﬁber with a different effective
refractive index. This has been done by conformal mapping. The
resultant effective refractive index, referred to ﬁgure 2.10, is:
n′(x, y) = n(x, y)

1 +
x
Reff

(2.41)
where n′(x, y) is the new index distribution, written in function of
the unperturbed one n(x, y), and Reff is equivalent bend radius:
Reff ≡
R
1 −n2
2 [p11 + p12]
(2.42)
deﬁned as function of p11 and p12, components of the photo-elastic
tensor which represent the stress distribution in the material, and the
bend curvature R. In equation 2.41, the bracketed term represents
the net effect of the bending, and it accounts for the stress effect. To
be noted that stress does not always sum up with the bending effect.
On the contrary they counteract each other as noticeable for the silica
ﬁbers case [Nagano et al., 1978; Sharma, 1984]. Given the equiva-
lent ﬁber, the modes can be calculated using the beam propagation
==PAGE:35==
2.6 properties of modes
25
Figure 2.10: Refractive index distribution of an unstressed bent ﬁber (a) and
its equivalent (b), straight ﬁber after conformal mapping. The
refractive index of the equivalent proﬁle increases away from
the center of curvature.
x = R ln(ρ/R) ≈ρ −R with R the
curvature and ρ the radial variable in the bent ﬁber.
Source: [Schermer and Cole, 2007].
method. The approach is to solve Maxwell’s equations numerically
in the transverse plan for some steps in the longitudinal direction,
to simulate the wave propagation. The results show that the bend-
ing tends to distort the ﬁber modes, causing them to shift away from
the center of curvature. This effect breaks the cylindrical symmetry,
which allows the degeneracy of differently oriented modes, making
the different orientations to be distinguishable (they see a different re-
fractive index thus they accumulate different delay while propagating.
See section 3.2). Important implication of this, is that even and odd
modes are not expected to have a signiﬁcant polarization coupling
with one another when a precise velocity matching is present. The
calculated modes for the bent case are shown in ﬁgure 2.11, where
it is clear the reason why the degeneracy is lost with adequate bend-
ing. The solutions for the bent case do not have cylindrical symmetry
and look very different from the straight case. Only one measure-
ment technique for modal bend-loss has been presented [Schulze et
al., 2013] before this work. It uses of computer generated hologram as-
sisted by modal decomposition for a resultant complex setup. A new
bend-loss measurement method, resolved for different modes thanks
to the S2 analysis, will be presented in chapter 5. This requires only
an S2 setup and allows to measure bend-loss individually for each
and every guided mode, at once.
==PAGE:36==
26
theoretical background
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 2.11: Simulated normalized transverse mode ﬁeld distribution for
lowest order LP modes, for straight ﬁber (left) and bent ﬁber
(right). The subscripts “e” and “o” denote whether the mode
is even or odd in respect to the x-axis, respectively.
The
core-cladding interface is denoted by the circle.
Readjusted
from [Schermer and Cole, 2007].
==PAGE:37==
2.7 gratings as mode converters
27
2.7
gratings as mode converters
2.7.1
Principle of Operation
Assuming a perturbation given by a dielectric grating, a period mod-
ulation of the material refractive index, the polarization of this mate-
rial results to be modiﬁed as in equation 2.32. This term enters in the
overall polarization 2.24 as Pgrating = Pperturb and gives raise to
a speciﬁc perturbation in the perturbed wave equation 2.25. In gen-
eral, these perturbation in the core refractive index of optical ﬁbers
are called ﬁber Bragg gratings. They can have a period varying from
the nanometre to the millimetre range. In the latter case the name
long period gratings (LPGs) is used. Those are generally used as band-
rejection ﬁlters [Vengsarkar et al., 1996], since they usually make the
guided modes to couple with leaky or radiative modes. On the other
hand, in large mode area (LMA) ﬁbers they are also usable as mode
converters [Bilodeau et al., 1991; Grüner-Nielsen and Nicholson, 2012;
Hill et al., 1990].
A ﬁber Bragg grating has analytical solution in
coupled-wave theory if the refractive index modulation and period
are constants. In general, more complex gratings can be considered
as sum of several sections with the above mentioned characteristics.
Following the relation 2.38, Bragg gratings can be used to transfer the
energy from one guided mode to another. In this case they acquire
the appellative of mode converter.
Since LPGs are of major impor-
tance in this work, one of these gratings in a LMA ﬁber is considered,
where the propagation constants of the co-propagating guided modes
are such that conversion is possible. From equation 2.38, moving to
wavelength, the phase matching condition results:
Λ =
λLPG
neff
m1 −neff
m2
(2.43)
where Λ is the period of the grating, λLPG is the conversion peak
wavelength, neff
m1 and neff
m2 are the effective refractive index of the ﬁrst
and second mode, respectively. Here a conversion from the mode 1
to the mode 2 is considered. Equation 2.43 is of major importance in
the ﬁeld of ﬁber gratings since directly relates the modes index differ-
ence and the grating period to the obtained conversion peak. It can be
used varying the period to measure the index difference or knowing
the ∆neff to ﬁnd the right grating in order to have maximum conver-
sion. On the contrary, varying the conversion peak wavelength and
the grating period, while maintaining the difference in propagation
constants ﬁxed, one can ﬁnd the phase matching curve (PMC). It usu-
ally shows a maximum, thus where there is a change of slope, which
is called turn around point (TAP) and is the optimum operation point
for conversion, since gives the maximum bandwidth. This also means
==PAGE:38==
28
theoretical background
Figure 2.12: (a) Simulation: Grating phase-matching curve in dispersion-
tailored ﬁbers. Large bandwidths are obtained at the TAP. (b)
Experiment: Resultant TAP LPG spectrum. The dashed lines
indicate the grating period and show the correspondence be-
tween the phase-matching relationship and the grating spec-
trum obtained. Source: [Ramachandran et al., 2002b].
that when operating close but not exactly on the optimum, two peaks
are found, as shown in ﬁgure 2.12.
The spectral dependance of the grating transmission T is approxi-
mated by [Vengsarkar et al., 1996] for co-directional mode (conversion
from mode 1 to mode 2) coupling:
T = Pm2
Pm1
=
sin2

κL
q
1 +
  δ
κ
2
1 +
  δ
κ
2
(2.44)
where L is the grating length, δ is the detuning parameter:
δ = 1
2

βm1 −βm2 −2π
Λ

(2.45)
and κ is the coupling constant, as it was in section 2.6.3:
κ ∼1
λ
Z +a
−a
Em1Em2∆n(r)r dr
(2.46)
where ∆n(r) represents the induced perturbation transverse proﬁle.
This is, for instance, applicable to mode conversion between LP01 and
==PAGE:39==
2.7 gratings as mode converters
29
LP11 considering them as mode 1 and mode 2, respectively. Since in
our experimental work only LPGs have been used, the focus will be
kept on them.
2.7.2
Fabrication of Long-Period Gratings
The inscription of long-period gratings consists in generating a peri-
odical perturbation of the refractive index in the core or the cladding.
Since LPGs have a much longer period in respect to normal Bragg
gratings, different physical properties of materials can be used to
produce this change in index [Martinez-rios et al., 2012]. UV photo-
sensitivity [Hill et al., 1990], residual thermal stress [Grüner-Nielsen
and Nicholson, 2012], photoelasticity and mechanical stress [Hwang,
1999; Savin et al., 2000] are only some of the commonly used ones.
The transverse modulation proﬁle determines the modes involved in
coupling [Anemogiannis and Glytsis, 2003], while the longitudinal
modulation proﬁle determines the location and shape of the bands
of conversion [DeLisa et al., 2000]. Position of the conversion peak
wavelength, bandwidth, peak depth, polarization dependent loss and
other properties are thus given by the speciﬁc refractive index change
proﬁle and the ﬁber structure.
uv long-period gratings
Usually done in two different ways,
the UV radiation method is one of the most used techniques to gen-
erate LPGs in Ge-doped optical ﬁbers. They require carefully cho-
sen wavelength (between 193 −360 nm), laser power and exposition
time [Othonos et al., 2000]. In the amplitude mask method, shown in
ﬁgure 2.13(a), is required that the ﬁber to be scanned by the UV in-
scription beam through an amplitude mask, which contains several
transparent windows which form the periodical pattern when illumi-
nated. The point-to-point method, the UV inscription beam illumates
a thin split aperture placed above the ﬁber. Then, the source and
the aperture are moved in the desired points in order to create the
periodic pattern. The result of this second method in shown in ﬁg-
ure 2.13(b). The expected proﬁle is Gaussian and symmetric in the
transverse plane.
residual thermal stress long-period gratings
Applying the
heating and a successive fast cool down of the glass can alter the vis-
cosity modifying the refractive index. The heating can be done by
means of a CO2 laser (radiation method), shown in ﬁgure 2.14(a), and
by electric arc discharge method, ﬁgure 2.14(b). This methods generate
an asymmetric refractive index change, allowing to make converter
from symmetric to both symmetric and asymmetric modes. Another
technique to cause residual thermal stress consists in making con-
==PAGE:40==
30
theoretical background
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.13: LPG inscription by UV techniques: (a) phase amplitude mask;
(b) point-to-point. Source: [Martinez-rios et al., 2012].
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.14: LPG
inscription
by
residual
thermal
stress
techniques:
(a) radiation method;
(b) electric arc discharge method.
Source: [Martinez-rios et al., 2012].
tact between the ﬁber and an hot wire, usually heated by electrical
current, at speciﬁc points for speciﬁc time in order to create the de-
sired perturbation. This method has proved to be exploitable to make
mode converters for few-mode ﬁbers [Grüner-Nielsen and Nicholson,
2012].
etching induced long-period gratings
The refractive index
can be changed by a geometrical modulation of the ﬁber diameter.
This can be done by chemical etching methods [Vaziri, 1997]. This kind
of LPGs are also knows as corrugated LPGs. By the use of a photomask
and an acid solution, an etching at chosen location can be achieved.
This method suffers of low repeatability and difﬁculties in the ﬁnal
structure control. The resultant ﬁbers are usually fragile to tension or
bending stress.
==PAGE:41==
2.7 gratings as mode converters
31
Figure 2.15: LPG inscription by mechanical stress techniques: (a-b) pressure
point; (c-d) microbending. Source: [Martinez-rios et al., 2012].
mechanical stress induced long-period gratings
The refrac-
tive index can be modulated, thanks to the photo-elastic effect, by ex-
posing the glass to mechanical stress. Microbending (ﬁgure 2.15(a-b))
and periodical pressure points (ﬁgure 2.15(c-d)) can be used to gen-
erate the wanted pattern [Hwang, 1999; Savin et al., 2000]. Different
techniques have been proposed, over the years, in order to generate
microbendings. It is possible to use metallic grooved plates, as shown
in ﬁgure 2.15, coils spring and torsion and even acoustic waves. The
amplitude of index change this method allows to produce is of the
order of 10−5 and a wide range of possible pattern is achievable. The
ﬂexibility and the low cost of this technique are the main reasons of
their common use. Conversion above 20 dB and a good bandwidth
control (10 −50 nm) are achievable by tuning the grating parameter.
The drawbacks are high sensitivity to ambient temperature, insertion
loss and applied pressure. In the experimental part, reported in chap-
ter 5, these are studied in detail and gratings similar to the one in
ﬁgure 2.15(d) are used.
2.7.3
Simulation of the Transmission
The behaviour of the transmission spectrum can be simulated by the
use of equation 2.44.
In the case of mechanical gratings, the cou-
pling coefﬁcient k is tuned by changing the pressure of the grating
on the ﬁber. This is possible since the refractive index changes with
mechanical stress, leading to the induced perturbation term ∆n(r) in
equation 2.46. In ﬁgure 2.16, it is seen how the maximum transmis-
sion varies while changing the coupling coefﬁcient. The behaviour is
periodic, thus the transmission peak is expected to reach a maximum
and then go to zero periodically. This transmission considers only
the conversion between the fundamental mode and the ﬁrst HOM in
==PAGE:42==
32
theoretical background
Figure 2.16: Maximum trasmission from LP01 to LP01 values for different
coupling coefﬁcients, simulated by the use of equation 2.44.
The conversion peaks values appear to change periodically
with the coupling coefﬁcient, which is dependent on the in-
duced perturbation ∆n(r).
one of the ﬁbers of interest. In ﬁgure 2.17, two example of measured
(red) and simulated (blue) results are shown. In ﬁgure 2.17(a), the
ﬁrst measured minimum of the transmission is considered, while in
ﬁgure 2.17(b) the second minimum has been considered. In this case,
the minimum of the transmission of one mode refers to the maximum
conversion to the other mode. With the help of a root mean square
deviation (RMSD) method, the best ﬁt, in coupling coefﬁcient k, for
the measured curves has been found, and shown as blue lines. The
position of the peaks seems to ﬁt, but in most cases it is clear that
the conversion, which is the only effect considered in the theoretical
model, is not the only component visible in the measurements. Back-
conversion to the fundamental mode because of non-perfect splices
and coupling given by propagation or small bends is the most proba-
ble reason of these discrepancies.
2.7.4
Applications of Long-Period Gratings
For completeness, some of the most known applications of Bragg
gratings and long-period gratings will be here listed [Martinez-rios
et al., 2012].
The most prominent commercial use of gratings in
recent years has been in sensing. Many schemes using gratings as
sensing elements have been proposed, based on evanescent ﬁeld in-
teraction [Villatoro et al., 2003], Bragg gratings [Othonos et al., 2000],
LPGs [Vengsarkar et al., 1996]. Reﬂectors and high-efﬁciency ﬁber
lasers have been proved to make use of UV-inscripted LPGs [Ball
==PAGE:43==
2.7 gratings as mode converters
33
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.17: (red) Measured transmission spectra of the LP01, for the ﬁrst
maximum (a) and the second maximum (b). (blue) Best ﬁt of
the theoretical model (equation 2.44), in coupling coefﬁcient,
with the measured spectra.
==PAGE:44==
34
theoretical background
and Morey, 1992; Mizrahi et al., 1993]. Coupling between guided
modes have been also demonstrated [Bilodeau et al., 1991; Hill et
al., 1990], along with rocking ﬁlters for polarization mode conver-
sion [Hill et al., 1991; Johnson et al., 1992]. Gratings result highly
sensitive to physical perturbations like strain, pressure and tempera-
ture [a.D. Kersey et al., 1997; Othonos et al., 2000], and even humid-
ity [Liu et al., 2007] and electric ﬁelds [Eggleton et al., 1999], mak-
ing feasible to use them for high precision sensing. The use of con-
catenated long-period gratings has been demonstrated in [Ramachan-
dran et al., 2002a], where a broader spectrum, compared to commong
single-LPG setups, has been achieved. From this and [Ramachandran
et al., 2002b], some ideas on how the bandwidth of the conversion/re-
jection can be tailored for speciﬁc requirements. Since the application
of the grating strongly depend on its sensitivity (i.e. high sensitiv-
ity required for sensing, low sensitivity required for communication
systems), a complete characterization of the single element if often
required. An example of investigation of the shift in peak conver-
sion wavelength, while changing temperature, pressure or strain, is
presented by Zhu [Zhu et al., 2001]. Further investigation on this
interesting use of gratings is not in within the scope of this work.
A complete theoretical analysis on the use of LPGs for temperature,
strain and pressure changes is presented in [Martinez-rios et al., 2012],
for the interested reader.
To be noted that many other ways to excite higher order modes have
been presented in literature [Igarashi et al., 2014; Leon-Saval et al.,
2014; Salsi et al., 2011]. Deeper investigation on these methods is not
in within the scope of this work, but their importance is nevertheless
proved.
==PAGE:45==
3
M E T H O D S O F M O D E
C H A R A C T E R I Z AT I O N
Various methods have been developed in order to characterize the
modes guided in ﬁbers. In this section, the M2 factor and the S2
methods are explained in detail, with working process, applications
and limitations. Some other methods are outlined and some refer-
ences are given for interested readers.
3.1
M2 factor
The M2 factor, or beam quality factor, is a common measure of the
beam quality of a laser beam. It is deﬁned [Niu et al., 1998] by the
use of the half-angle beam divergence ϑ and the beam radius at the
beam waist ω0:
M2 = πϑω0
λ
(3.1)
where (ϑω0) is also called beam parameter product and π/λ is the beam
parameter product for a diffraction-limited Gaussian beam with the
same wavelength λ.
Such a deﬁnition for the M2 factor leads to
M2 = 1 for diffraction-limited beams, thus Gaussian beams.
For
other beams, it is common to say “M2 times diffraction-limited” and
they have values of M2 > 1. This factor limits the degree to which
the beam can be focused for a given beam divergence angle, which
is often limited by the numerical aperture of the focusing lens. It can
differ depending on the axis for not circularly symmetric beams and
it can be calculated from the measured evolution of the beam radius
during propagation.
In the ﬁeld of optical ﬁbers, and especially large mode area (LMA)
ﬁbers, the more power is contained in higher-order modes (HOMs),
the more degraded is the M2. This is a problem when, for a certain
application, like high power lasers, a diffraction-limited beam quality
with M2 ≈1 is required. Furthermore, it has been demonstrated that
measured good beam quality with M2 ≈1 does not ensure single-
mode propagation. High values of M2 do not guarantee multi-mode
operation [Nicholson et al., 2008], either, proving the beam quality fac-
tor to be insufﬁciently sensitive to impairments caused by HOMs. For
this reason, when considering LMA ﬁbers, or in general multi-mode
operating ﬁbers, another method to characterize the beam quality and
modal components is required.
35
==PAGE:46==
36
methods of mode characterization
3.2
spatially and spectrally resolved imag-
ing
The spatially and spectrally resolved imaging (S2) of modal content in
optical ﬁbers has ﬁrst been proposed by Nicholson [Nicholson et al.,
2008]. This technique make use of the fact that different modes prop-
agates at different speed in the ﬁbers, to calculate the delay between
them and their relative powers. Since each mode sees a different effec-
tive refractive indexes (different propagation constant and thus differ-
ent group velocity) a delay between different modes accumulate mak-
ing them to spectrally interfere (the so-called multimode-interference,
MMI). This interference pattern can be used, together with the spa-
tial interference, to calculate the differential group delay (DGD) between
each mode and the fundamental mode. By having the spectrum of
the light in different points of the beam, it is then possible to retrieve
the information of DGD by the use of Fourier transformation and to
calculate the modes intensity pattern and the ratio between the pow-
ers (Multi-Path-Interference, MPI).
The setup, shown in ﬁgure 3.1(a), is composed by a broadband source
which send light into the ﬁber under test (FUT). The beam coming
out of the FUT is then imaged into a single-mode ﬁber and an optical
spectrum analyser (OSA) is used to measure its spectrum. By the use
of a automated translation stage (x and y directions), the spectrum at
each (x, y) point of the beam is obtained (example in ﬁg. 3.1(b)). Ap-
plying a Fourier transformation to those spectra one can obtain the
temporal distance between all the interfering modes (the interference
is usually considered to happen between the fundamental mode and
the HOMs, while interference between HOMs is often neglected). A
typical result from this transformation is shown in ﬁg. 3.1(c). In this
graph the different peaks are easily distinguishable. While the DC
component represents the fundamental mode1, the other peaks rep-
resent other guided modes (HOMs) which have accumulated some
delay. This delay is obtained as an absolute value (it is not possible to
know by only looking at ﬁgure 3.1(c) if the ﬁrst HOM has a positive
or negative delay compared to the fundamental mode). By the anal-
ysis explained below, it is possible to calculate the intensity pattern
relative to a precise DGD point or the one integrated over an arbi-
trary DGD range. This intensity pattern gives the possibility to easily
recognise the different modes. The width of the peaks gives informa-
tion about how the coupling to that mode has been done. Wide peaks
refers to mode which received energy along a long length, thus a dis-
tributed coupling [Jasapara and Yablon, 2012] (to be distinguished
1 Here the case in which most of the power is in the fundamental mode is considered.
Indeed, the power in any other mode is given as relative to the overall beam. If
more than 10 % of the power is stored in HOMs than the MPI values for those are
underestimated [Jollivet et al., 2014].
==PAGE:47==
3.2 spatially and spectrally resolved imaging
37
Figure 3.1: (a) Schematic representation of the S2 setup; (b) typical opti-
cal spectrum measured at an arbitrary (x, y) point and (c) the
Fourier transform of the optical spectrum in (b) showing multi-
ple beat frequencies. Fourier ﬁltering is used to pick out differ-
ent peaks of interest. The horizontal axis of the Fourier trans-
form is normalized to the ﬁber length to obtain group delay
difference in units of ps/m. Source: [Nicholson et al., 2008].
from dispersion). Narrow peaks indicates that the modes are gener-
ated at discrete points in the ﬁber. This, together with the information
of the DGD, can also be used to estimate where along the ﬁber there
are source of unwanted coupling (bad splices, unwanted sharp bends,
ect.).
Usually, a large number of modes can be characterize simultaneously.
The precise number depends on the resolution of the OSA used and
the extent of the group delay difference between the modes. A po-
lariser can be included to distinguish the different polarization com-
ponent.
Assuming A1(x, y, ω) and A2(x, y, ω) to be the spatially and frequency
dependent amplitudes of two modes into the ﬁber and related by a
constant α, assumed independent on wavelength, one has:
I2(x, y, ω) = α2(x, y)I1(x, y, ω)
(3.2)
where I1(x, y, ω) = A2
1(x, y, ω) and I2(x, y, ω) = A2
2(x, y, ω) are the
modes intensities. It is then possible to write the interference pattern
expected for those two modes, being τb the beat frequency between
them:
Iint(x, y, ω) = I1(x, y, ω)[1 + α2(x, y) + 2α(x, y)cos(τbω)] (3.3)
This is the information acquired from the spectrum analyser (ﬁg-
ure 3.1(b) for each (x, y) point).
The Fourier transform of this in-
==PAGE:48==
38
methods of mode characterization
tensity, B(x, y, τ) = F{Iint(x, y, τ)} will give results as the one in ﬁg-
ure 3.1(c). The value f(x, y) is deﬁned as the ratio between the am-
plitude of the Fourier transform of the spectral intensity at the de-
sired group delay, B(x, y, τb), and the one at group delay zero (which
contain the DC component), B(x, y, 0). This is seen to be useful to
calculate the constant α and so the intensity patterns:
α(x, y) = 1 −
p
1 −4f2(x, y)
2f(x, y)
(3.4)



I1(x, y) = I1+2(x, y)
1
1+α2(x,y)
I1(x, y) = I1+2(x, y)
1
1+α2(x,y)
(3.5)
where I1+2(x, y) is the total intensity at the point (x, y), sum of I1(x, y)
and I2(x, y). Once the intensities of the two mode in each point are
known, the MPI can be found as:
MPI = 10log10
RR
I2(x, y) dx dy
RR
I1(x, y) dx dy

= 10log10
PHOM
P01

(3.6)
where were the focus has been moved from intensity to power (PHOM
is the power of the higher order mode and P01 the power of the
fundamental mode) to be able to compare with actual measurements.
different setups
Another setup able to perform S2 imaging is
shown in [Blin et al., 2009]. In this case, a tunable laser as light source
and a CCD camera to capture the light coming out of the ﬁber are
used to have a spectrum like the one in ﬁgure 3.1(b) for each point.
The CCD camera is able to obtain the power at all and each point
(each pixel is a (x, y) point) in one time. The tunable laser provides
the change in wavelength which leads to a power versus wavelength
plot, which is the spectrum. This method has proved to be faster2
than the classical S2 setup but, on the other hand, it requires a very
precise camera. This alternative setup moves the requirement on the
precision of the OSA to the one of the tunable laser, for what concerns
the spectral accuracy, and from the precision of the automated stages
to the number of pixel of the camera, for what concerns the spatial
accuracy. The CCD plus tunable laser setup also requires to not over-
expose the camera, which will result in a lower spatial precision.
limitations and settings
Since the S2 imaging depends on the
developing of a relative delay between different modes while prop-
agating through the ﬁber, one should choose carefully the length of
the ﬁber used in order have the modes to accumulate enough (but
2 A typical scan using a CCD camera can take up to seconds or a very few minutes,
while an S2 performed with an OSA and an automated stage can easily take hours.
==PAGE:49==
3.2 spatially and spectrally resolved imaging
39
not too much) delay. Indeed, by choosing the wavelength step-size in
the scan3, one sets the delay range of the measurements, which has to
be enough to see all the modes. There is also the case in which, if not
enough delay is accumulated in the ﬁber, the modes peaks will be one
on top of each other and indistinguishable. In this case, the important
parameter is the wavelength range of the scan. Indeed, since a Fourier
transformation is involved, the wavelength range will give the reso-
lution in time on the DGD plot. Another limitation of this imaging
technique is that a slowly varying spectrum is assumed. This leads to
high error in the measurements of variation in the power spectrum.
Apart from these settings notions, it needs to be taken into account
very carefully what is the modal content and the power distribution
of the overall beam. As demonstrated by Nicholson in [Nicholson
et al., 2008], the intensity calculation assume that the overall beam
captured after the ﬁber is a pure mode. Indeed, the intensity pattern
is calculated by the use of this assumption and the MPI is given as
relative power to the LP01. However, the MPI calculation itself refers
to the overall beam intensity. This means that if the beam does not
have almost all the power in one mode, the MPI values are calculated
incorrectly. It has been demonstrated [Jollivet et al., 2014] that this
error is negligible if at least the 95 % of the power in the LP01 (in
case this is the dominant mode), but it starts to grow very fast once
this condition is not fulﬁlled and a considerable amount of power
is stored in HOMs. In the latter case, the MPI calculated underesti-
mates the actual value for the relative power in the HOMs [Jollivet et
al., 2014]. Other methods of considering the overall intensity pattern
have been proposed by Otto [Otto et al., 2013]: the ﬁrst method pre-
sented takes as intensity pattern for N-interfering modes to evaluate
the overall beam; the second method is based on a general analytical
mode reconstruction when measuring three guided modes or more.
The quality of the methods has been studied in [Jollivet et al., 2014]
extensively. The other strong assumption made in [Nicholson et al.,
2008] is that interference between HOMs can be neglected. This is a
fair guess if most of the power is in the fundamental mode (so in that
case it was a good assumption) but it is not as good when a consider-
able amount of power is in HOMs. In this latter case, spurious peaks
in the DGD will be seen as a consequence of HOMs beating. Those
can be avoided by considering them in the model, as demonstrated
in [Nguyen et al., 2012].
applications
The applications of the S2 method vary very much.
To date, this technique offers an unmatched ability to accurately re-
solve strongly attenuated HOMs (up to 40 dB). Recent applications [Jol-
3 the wavelength step-size is given by the smaller step in λ of the tunable laser, when
the alternative setup demonstrated is [Blin et al., 2009] is used. Otherwise, it is given
by the smaller step in the OSA when a classical setup is used [Nicholson et al., 2008].
==PAGE:50==
40
methods of mode characterization
livet et al., 2014] include, but are not limited to, mode analysis in large
mode area (LMA) ﬁbers [Nicholson et al., 2008; Nicholson et al., 2009],
band-gap ﬁbers [Dong et al., 2012], photonic crystal ﬁbers [Bromage et
al., 2011] and many other different kind of waveguides [Bauters et
al., 2013; Kerttula et al., 2012]. It has been employed to characterize
HOMs suppression in ampliﬁers [Nicholson et al., 2012], to analyse
performances of Q-switching ﬁber lasers [Kadwani et al., 2012] and
to study the behaviour of leaky modes [Gu et al., 2013]. In chapter 5,
a method feasible for the mode-resolved bend loss analysis, using the
S2 method, is presented.
The spatially and spectrally resolved imaging has been proved to be
a very robust, relatively simple and elegant method for the character-
ization of the mode content in multi-mode ﬁbers. It does not require
a priori knowledge of the modes guided in the structure. An ampli-
tude versus DGD plot is obtained and intensity pattern for a chosen
time range can be calculated to distinguish the modal content of the
peaks. From these, the MPI for each guided mode can be obtained.
Also, a phase of each intensity pattern can be estimated by phase
retrieval algorithm [Fienup, 1982]. This helps to evaluate the modal
content and check for possible spurious peaks or reﬂection inside the
setup (which usually present a peculiar modulation in the phase). Fi-
nally, other generalization for the method are presented in literature
(example [Jollivet et al., 2014]).
3.3
other characterization methods
Many others mode characterization methods have been proposed
in recent years.
Among the S2, already explained in section 3.2,
low coherence interferometry [Ma et al., 2009], correlation ﬁlter tech-
nique(CFT) [Kaiser et al., 2009], cross-correlated imaging [Demas and
Ramachandran, 2014; Schimpf et al., 2011] and high speed modal de-
composition [Stutzki et al., 2011] are the most important ones. Oth-
ers also have proved to be able to quantify the HOMs in optical
ﬁbers.
These include side polished coupler approach [Szczepanek
and Berthold, 1978], bulk-optic Fabry-Perot resonators [Andermahr
et al., 2008], holograﬁc elements for imagining [Shaklan, 1991] and
various deconvolution techniques [Leminger and Grau, 1980; Sko-
robogatiy et al., 2003; Soh et al., 2004].
==PAGE:51==
4
F I B E R S O F I N T E R E ST
For this work, four different ﬁbers have been used. Two ﬁbers have
a step-like refractive index structure and thus are called step-index
ﬁbers. The ﬁrst one supports two LP-modes, LP01 and LP11, while
the second one supports four LP-modes, thus also guides LP21 and
LP02.
Even if easy to model and to fabricate, the step-like refrac-
tive index proﬁle is not optimized for use in communication systems.
The other ﬁbers support the same modes, one two and the other four
LP-modes, but they differ for the refractive index structure, which is
parabolic-shaped. These ﬁbers, called graded-index, have a structure
optimized for low bend-loss, small difference in group velocity (thus
low DGD accumulates) for different modes but a relatively high ef-
fective refractive index difference between different modes. Further-
more, the large effective index difference minimize the distributed
mode coupling. These properties make them well suited for transmis-
sion systems using MIMO-DSP. The graded-index structure is shown
in ﬁgure 4.1. The optical properties of the ﬁber are obtained from the
index proﬁle by solving the scalar wave equation with a ﬁnite element
mode solver. This also gives the number and proﬁle of the guided
modes, which for the ﬁbers here used are the ones shown in ﬁgure 2.3.
The results of this simulation are used not only to foretell the delay
Figure 4.1: Left: refractive index proﬁle of trench assisted graded index
ﬁber supporting four LP modes. Right: Illustrative diagram of
modal propagation constants for a hypothetical FMF.
Source: [Grüner-nielsen et al., 2015].
41
==PAGE:52==
42
fibers of interest
between modes but also to obtain values for dispersion, dispersion
slope and effective refractive index to compare with the results of
the characterization (see section 5.2). The ﬁbers have been designed
and fabricated at OFS and their properties have been of interest be-
cause of their possible use in communication systems. Indeed, some
measurements have already been done on these ﬁbers before and use-
ful information about the fabrication process, the speciﬁc differential
group delay values (two-mode graded-index ﬁber [Grüner-Nielsen et
al., 2012]; four-mode graded-index ﬁber [Grüner-nielsen et al., 2015])
and their splice performances ([Grüner-nielsen et al., 2014]) can be
found in literature.
==PAGE:53==
5
E X P E R I M E N TA L W O R K
The goal of this chapter is to explain the experimental work done at
OFS in order to obtain mode conversions and characterization of each
mode in the ﬁbers of interest. The setup used for the mode conversion
is presented in the ﬁrst section, with a detailed explanation of its
usage and optimization. Once the modes excitation is obtained, the
modes characterization, the procedures for each parameters and their
values are presented. Finally, a new method for mode resolved bend-
loss analysis in few-mode ﬁbers is introduced here for the ﬁrst time,
together with two examples.
5.1
mode conversion
With the term mode conversion, it is meant the transfer of part of the
energy of a beam between one guided mode to another. This can
be done, as explained in section 2.7, by the use of gratings. For this
work, two main type of gratings are used: mechanical and thermal
gratings. In the following, the setup used for mode conversion and
its optimization are explained and the obtained results are shown.
5.1.1
Setup
Two main set of source and receiver have been used in this work, and
are shown in ﬁgure 5.1 as continuous or hatched lines. A broadband
source or a tunable laser are used as source, depending if a spectrum
analyser or the S2 needs to be used, respectively. The broadband light
source used is an Agilent 83437A, while a Photonetics TECL has been
used as tunable laser. The S2 setup is shown in ﬁgure 3.1(a) and the
OSA used is a Ando AQ6137B Optical Spectrum Analyser.
Attached to the source, a single-mode ﬁber guarantees that only the
LP01 is present when the ﬁber under test is spliced. On the FUT a
grating needs to be applied in order to excite the HOMs. It is ad-
visable to make sure that only the fundamental mode (or the mode
from which the energy should be moved) arrives at the grating. This
is because the grating works in both direction (from each of the two
modes to the other), thus its efﬁciency strongly depends on the modal
content that comes from the input. In order to be sure that only the
fundamental mode reaches the mode converter, a mode stripper can
43
==PAGE:54==
44
experimental work
Figure 5.1: Setup used for testing the ﬁbers under test (FUT). Either a broad-
band light source or a tunable laser are used, depending on the
analysis. The receiver is also tuned accordingly between a opti-
cal spectrum analyser (OSA) or an S2 setup, explained in detail
in section 3.2. The part containing the ﬁrst mode stripper and
the grating is modiﬁed or removed depending on the needed
analysis. The single-mode ﬁbers are shown in grey, while the
few-mode ﬁbers in black.
be used.
For this work, a Phoenix Photonics MMS-01 mechanical
mode stripper for few-mode ﬁber has been used. It consists of two
furrows where to place the ﬁber, which is bent in two orthogonal di-
rections three times each, with a bending diameter of around 1.5 cm.
Its effectiveness has been proved to be high for the step-index ﬁbers,
as shown in ﬁgure 5.2, and low for the graded-index cases. This is
because the graded-index ﬁbers are extremely resistant to bending,
as demonstrated in section 5.3. For this reason, the making of good
splices is of critical importance when using these graded-index ﬁber.
An Ericcson FSU975 Fusion Splicer has been used for this purpose
and for all the other splices made during this work.
In general, the bending resistance and the effectiveness of the mode
stripper used should be tested in advance, in order to obtain a good
conversion. The grating is followed by another mode stripper in case
the spectrum analyser is used. Even if the grating is supposed to be
made on the FUT, in most cases this has not been possible. For this
reason a grating inscribed in the step-index two-mode ﬁber and a sub-
sequent splice to the FUT is shown in ﬁgure. After the grating, some
length of ﬁber is held still. This length is needed to let the HOMs
to accumulate enough delay from the fundamental mode in order to
be clearly distinguishable in the S2 scans and to have enough DGD
to overtake the camera reﬂections peaks, as explained in section 5.1.2.
This requirements is only needed for the usage of S2 setup and not
for the spectrum analyser. If the latter is used, a last splice to another
single-mode ﬁber is made as input for the OSA, which shows the
transmission of the fundamental mode, the LP01. In this way, it is
possible to see a decrease in its energy when conversion happens.
==PAGE:55==
5.1 mode conversion
45
Figure 5.2: Effect of the MMS-01 mode strippers on 16 m step-index four-
mode ﬁber.
A bad splice is made on purpose to have high
HOMs’ components in the few-mode ﬁber, then two Phoenix
Photonics MMS-01 mode strippers are used, one at the begin-
ning and one at the end of the FUT, where the S2 setup was
placed. Integrating over the entire curves, MPIs of −21.4 dB and
−11.8 dB are found for the case with the stripper and without,
respectively, proving the strong effect of this mode stripper on
this step-index ﬁber. Similar results are observed for the step-
index two-mode ﬁber, while no change is visible between the
two curves for the graded-index ﬁbers when using the same
mode stripper, proving its scarce effect on these latter ﬁbers. On
the top, a picture of the mode stripper is included.
5.1.2
S2 Camera Reﬂections
As explained in section 5.1.1, the IR CCD camera used in the S2 setup
creates some internal reﬂections which appear, in the beating ampli-
tude versus DGD, to be as delayed components of the output beam.
A reference scan, using a single-mode ﬁber, has been taken to study
this issue and the results are shown in ﬁgure 5.3. The peaks are arte-
facts which do not refer to actual delays of the ﬁber, and for this
reason they should not be considered in any calculation. Since it is
not possible to reduce their intensity, one has to select the length of
the ﬁber in order to allow the HOMs to accumulate the necessary de-
lay to overtake them. Given this requirement, and the fact that this
S2 setup goes up to 4000 ps, the choice of the length is a trade off
between how separated the peaks are and how long time is needed
for each scan. In most applications the long times needed for the
scans are not a big issue, since they still takes less than a few minutes.
On the other hand, in some cases it is advisable to reduce the scan
time as much as possible, when many scans need to be taken. This is
the case, for example, for the S2-driven bend-loss analysis explained
==PAGE:56==
46
experimental work
Figure 5.3: Camera reﬂection peaks seen by the S2 scanning the output
beam of a 1 m single-mode ﬁber linked to the tunable laser.
These peaks are given by internal reﬂections of the camera and
are unavoidable during any S2 scan. They have seen to change
only slightly position and dimension. Because of their presence,
most of the analysis requires to use a certain length of ﬁber in or-
der to allow the HOMs to accumulate enough DGD to overtake
the reﬂection peaks. In the images, the reconstructed intensity
and phase of one of the peaks, are shown.
in section 5.3. The peculiar phase pattern and the modulation visi-
ble in the intensity image, in ﬁgure 5.3, clearly shows that the peak
are given by a reﬂection. It has been seen that is always possible
to distinguish if a peak is given by those internal reﬂections or not,
as soon as multiple peaks do not overlap (if a reﬂection peak is on
top of a delayed HOM peak the resultant intensity and phase contain
both components). For this reason the length of the ﬁbers under test
should always be enough to overtake the 26 ps limit of the reﬂections.
A detailed scan of these peaks should be enough to upgrade the S2
algorithm to exclude them from the calculation, but this is outside
the scope of this work. A deeper analysis on the origin of these peaks
is contained in [Gray et al., 2014].
5.1.3
Gratings Drawing Procedure
Mechanical and thermally induced gratings are the two type of LPGs
used for this work. Their making is done in different ways and they
have different properties.
mechanical gratings
As shown already in ﬁgure 2.15, a mechan-
ical grating consists in a grooved metal plate which applies pressure
to the ﬁber, creating microbending and/or pressure points. These
perturbations have a period which is the period of the grooves and a
==PAGE:57==
5.1 mode conversion
47
Figure 5.4: Comparison between the different rubbers and the plane metal
plate used as top part of the mechanical grating applied to a
step-index two-mode ﬁber. The graph shows the Transmission
of the LP01 by OSA. The lack of energy shown by the peaks refer
to conversion to LP11.
total length given by their number. The ﬁber is placed straight into
two holders. In between these, the grooved metallic plate is placed
below the ﬁber and a plane metal plate is attached to a moving stage
above the ﬁber. This moving stage is used to control the pressure ap-
plied. On the plane metallic plate, different types of rubber have been
tested to apply the pressure more gently and the resultant conversion
peaks are shown in ﬁgure 5.4. From rubber 1 to rubber 3 the mate-
rial gets thinner and harder, becoming more and more similar to the
metal. Two main things have to be noticed by looking at ﬁgure 5.4.
First, all the rubbers and the metal plate show a good conversion and
the slight differences in depth and position are given by slightly dif-
ferent optimizations of the applied pressure and angle of the grating,
respectively. Secondly, in many cases a modulation of the curve is
seen in the OSA measurement, as is the case, for instance, for the
rubber number 3. Those modulation are given by the presence of any
perturbation other than the grating. Additional perturbation in the
ﬁber can give some reﬂected light which interacts with the forward
beam and gives interference. Since conversion is applied and seen in
the spectrum, a periodic behaviour appear over the conversion peak
given by the grating. The period of this modulation, λB, is given by
the length of ﬁber in between the perturbations L, one of which can
be the grating, as:
λB =
λ2
c · DGD · L
(5.1)
where λ is the wavelength of the source, c the speed of light and
DGD the differential group delay between the interfering modes. The
==PAGE:58==
48
experimental work
Figure 5.5: Comparison between two different gratings length for the same
conversion in the same ﬁber. The high modulation seen in the
red line is given by previous tries on the same ﬁber. The slight
difference in peak position is given by half a degree of differ-
ence in the grating angle. The depth is smaller in the 1 cm case
most probably because of higher difﬁculty in the optimization
process.
longer the ﬁber between the perturbations, the higher the frequency
of oscillation, the better is for the understanding of the peak depth
and width. For this reason it is advisable to remove the ﬁber holders
after the application of the grating, and move the ﬁber a few meters
if another try has to be done on the same ﬁber. This is because the
pressure usually leave some mechanical stress which acts as a second
grating, even if much weaker. In section 5.1.4, the selection of the
period and coupling coefﬁcient are explained. Regarding the length
of the grating, the behaviour has not been analysed in detail as the
grating period or coupling coefﬁcient, but a few tests have shown the
possibility to obtain a broader spectrum by using a shorter grating,
as shown in ﬁgure 5.5.
On the other hand, working with shorter
gratings has proved to be more difﬁcult because of the very precise
optimization needed for the applied pressure. The best results for
mechanical gratings are shown in section 5.1.7.
thermal gratings
As already explained in section 2.7.2, the resid-
ual thermal stress LPGs are made by heating the ﬁber in speciﬁc
points. The distance between the points gives the period of the grat-
ing, while their number gives the gratings length. The setup used
for this work, shown in ﬁgure 5.6, consists in two moving stages po-
sitioned in vertical, the top one holding the ﬁber, the bottom one
only giving the ﬁber the direction. The bottom holder is needed be-
==PAGE:59==
5.1 mode conversion
49
Figure 5.6: Setup used for the making of thermal gratings. A broad-band
source, together with an optical spectrum analyser (OSA), give
the possibility to an almost-real time measurement of the trans-
mission of the LP01 through the grating. Splices to single-mode
ﬁbers (in grey) and MMS-01 mode strippers are used to ensure
the presence of only the fundamental mode before the grating
and the OSA. A platinum wire is kept in contact with the ﬁber
under test (FUT) which is moved by a stage, controlled by a
computer.
cause in between them the ﬁber is put in contact with a platinum wire
which can be heated up by electrical current. A Newpoer XPS Motion
Controller/Driver controls the moving stages and offers a computer
interface to change the movement parameters. Because of the need
of a constant contact between ﬁber and wire, even when the wire is
highly heated and thus slightly deformed, the ﬁber is placed such
that it forms an angle where it touches the wire. After this angle, the
ﬁber passes through the second stage, which gives it back the vertical
direction. A weight of 2.5 g is used to keep the ﬁber in tension and
in contact with the wire. The platinum wire is modiﬁed in a speciﬁc
W-shape to minimize the effect of heating on its length.
A Thur-
bly Thandor Instruments TSX1820P Programmable DC-PSU is used
as current source. By this electrical current (between 10 and 13 A),
the ﬁlament is heated up, while the ﬁber is moved by the computer-
controlled translation stages. By using the stages, the ﬁber can be
moved with high precision and by tuning the speed and the moving
time, the period of the grating can be chosen. A broadband source
and a spectrum analyser are used, as explained in section 5.1.1, thus
it is possible to have an almost real-time spectrum of the LP01 trans-
mission through the grating.
The procedure is stopped when the
==PAGE:60==
50
experimental work
Figure 5.7: Spectra taken by an OSA of different annealing done on the
same thermal grating. Two, four and six passages of the ﬁber
of the heated wire have been done, using 12 A and moving the
stage at 0.5 mm/s. Thanks to the annealing, the grating is moved
back on the optimum point.
optimum length of the grating is reached.
Since the OSA takes a
few seconds to measure the spectrum (this is the reason for “almost
real-time”), the optimum point is shown on the OSA just after it has
been passed, making it very difﬁcult to hit the optimum length of
the grating. For this reason, a further step is required to get back to
the optimum point. It has been explained in section 2.7.3, that length
of the grating and coupling coefﬁcient have the same oscillating be-
haviour for the maximum conversion. In the case of the mechanical
gratings, the length is not changed if not for a few tests using dif-
ferent gratings, while it is the pressure which is studied intensively
and changed in a continuous way. In the case of thermal gratings,
while heating more and more points, it is the grating length that gets
longer, while the coupling coefﬁcient remain the same, being given by
the amount of heat received by the ﬁber. Once passed the optimum
in grating length, it is possible to slightly reduce the perturbation
strength, so the refractive index change (thus the coupling coefﬁcient
by equation 2.46). This is done by annealing the grating passing the
piece of ﬁber over the wire at constant speed and temperature. An
example of the spectra for different annealing times on one thermal
grating is shown in ﬁgure 5.7. This changes the refractive index of
the already-heated part less than the untouched part, reducing the
overall ∆n. This is the same procedure used in [Grüner-Nielsen and
Nicholson, 2012] to make a thermal grating. Many things have been
proved able to change the end result during this process. The weight
attached to the ﬁber, the angle made by the ﬁber while touching the
wire and the ﬁlament shape can change the contact between the two
==PAGE:61==
5.1 mode conversion
51
Figure 5.8: Spectra taken by an OSA of different thermal gratings written
in a step-index two-mode ﬁber, annealed for different times. To
be noted that the procedure used to make the gratings was the
same, except for the annealing part.
elements, varying the amount of heat transferred and thus the change
in refractive index. The exact values of the current, the moment in
which the current is turned on, the time needed to the ﬁlament to
be heated and the moment at which the movement is started, can
all change the effectiveness of the grating. Furthermore, the differ-
ence between the length of the grating and the annealed length can
create another perturbation which effects a lot the ﬁnal spectrum. Fi-
nally, the temperature and time duration of the annealing, not only
give a periodic behaviour in coupling coefﬁcient, but also modify the
structure of the ﬁber, melting the coating and bending the waveguide.
This results in a chirped grating and a broadening of the conversion
peak. Many effect are not fully understood in this pictures and thus
the procedure is not easily replicable. Many different tests have been
done during this work and none of them resulted in gratings with the
same spectrum. In ﬁgure 5.8, the resultant OSA spectra of thermal
gratings made with different annealing is shown. No clear patter has
been seen when annealing more than a few times and many differ-
ent results can be obtained. The best results for thermal gratings are
shown in section 5.1.7.
5.1.4
Selection the Grating Period and Optimum Coupling Coeﬃ-
cient
The grating period is given by the distance between each perturba-
tion point in the grating, while the coupling coefﬁcient is given by
equation 2.46 and tuned by changing the strength of the perturbation.
The optimum is found differently for different grating types.
==PAGE:62==
52
experimental work
Figure 5.9: Image showing the relative position of the ﬁber under test
(black) relative to the mechanical grating grooves (grey), when
it is rotated to tune the period.
mechanical gratings
In the case of mechanical gratings the dis-
tance between each point can not be easily changed by changing the
grooves, because it will require to make a new grating. The easiest
option is to rotate a grating with a shorter period. The ﬁber passes
through each groove seeing a different period depending on the an-
gle, as shown in ﬁgure 5.9. By applying simple trigonometry rules,
it is easy to show that the angle α at which one should rotate the
grating, is:
α = arccos
ΛG
Λ

(5.2)
where ΛG is the period of the grating not tilted and Λ is the needed
period, calculated as in equation 2.43, knowing the propagation con-
stants of the modes. The fact that the grating has to be tilted at a
speciﬁc angle limits the available conversions. For instance, it has
not been possible to achieve conversion in the graded-index ﬁbers by
using tilted mechanical gratings. The reason for this is that even if
one can calculate the angle at which the grating needs to be tilted,
the precision required for the angle is too high. In the graded-index
two-mode ﬁber, in order to have conversion between LP01 and LP11 at
1550 nm one should tilt a 0.5 mm grating of 27.35◦. Having a window
of measure from OSA between 1400 nm and 1700 nm, the angle has
to be in within 27.19◦and 27.52◦in order to appear on the spectrum
analyser, assuming the coupling coefﬁcient to be already optimized.
These values are calculated, by equation
2.38, knowing the effec-
tive refractive indexes by OFS mode calculator. For the graded-index
four-mode ﬁber, the conversion between LP01 and LP11 requires the
angle to be in within 22.85◦and 23.39◦and the conversion between
LP11 and LP21 to be in within 21.60◦and 21.93◦. Because of the in-
trinsic imprecision of the rotating stage and the ﬁber holders, these
optimum points were not possible to ﬁnd. On the other hand, the
conversion between LP01 and LP11 in the step-index two-mode ﬁber
requires the angle to be in within 27.9◦and 37.12◦, and thus easier
to achieve in the desired position in wavelength. Different measure-
==PAGE:63==
5.1 mode conversion
53
ments of the spectrum for different angles are shown in ﬁgures 5.10
and 5.11.
The coupling coefﬁcient k, deﬁned in equation 2.46, is
tuned, in the case of mechanical gratings, by changing the applied
pressure on the ﬁber (see section2.7.2). In the same ﬁgures it is also
shown how changing the pressure effects the conversion peak using
different angles for the grating. As seen already in section 2.7.3, from
simulation, the maximum conversion oscillates while increasing k,
so applying more and more pressure a sequence of maximum and
minimum is visible. An important thing to notice from ﬁgures 5.10
and 5.11, is that there are points at which the transmission goes to
zero even if some pressure is applied (for example the seventeenth
line in ﬁgure 5.10(a)). This clearly shows an oscillating behaviour in
k. In case of sharp bends or other disturbances one does not expect
to have zero transmission for strong applied perturbation. This is a
robust hint that suggests that only conversion is seen during these
measurements. Considering that the breaking point of the ﬁber has
been almost reached to make these ﬁgures, one could argue that this
mechanical grating does not create disturbances other than the one
needed for conversion. It is shown how the peak moves when the
period is varied and how different peaks grow and die when the
pressure is changed. In some cases, two peaks appear in symmetric
positions. This has been already seen in the simulation in section 2.7.3
but the reason for the peaks to not show the same depth remains un-
clear.
thermal gratings
In the case of thermal gratings, the period is
tuned by changing speed and moving duration of the stages that
carry the ﬁber. Because of the difﬁculties in replicating the results
for this procedure, the speed has been kept constant and the mov-
ing time has been changed slightly to match the position of the peak.
This process, as done for this work, is anyway far to be optimized.
Regarding the coupling coefﬁcient, the variation during the making
of the grating has been null. The current has been kept at 11 A, thus
the temperature of the wire remained the same. The big variation has
been in the annealing process. since the annealing tends to reduce the
change in refractive index, it directly change the coupling coefﬁcient.
Also, at the edges of the annealed part, a net step in refractive index
is produced and its effect has not been studied. For these reasons
the optimization of the coupling coefﬁcient for the thermal gratings
has been done by trial and error, thanks also to the almost real-time
measurements by the OSA.
==PAGE:64==
54
experimental work
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.10: Spectra captured by an OSA of a mechanical grating applied
to a step-index two-mode ﬁber. The coupling coefﬁcient has
been varied by changing the applied pressure. (a) Grating of
a period of 1 mm tilted by 30◦in respect to the ﬁber, in order
to achieve a longer effective period; (b) Grating of a period of
1 mm tilted by 31.5◦.
==PAGE:65==
5.1 mode conversion
55
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.11: Spectra captured by an OSA of a mechanical grating applied
to a step-index two-mode ﬁber. The coupling coefﬁcient has
been varied by changing the applied pressure. (a) Grating of a
period of 1 mm tilted by 32.5◦in respect to the ﬁber, in order
to achieve a longer effective period; (b) Grating of a period of
1 mm tilted by 33.5◦.
==PAGE:66==
56
experimental work
Figure 5.12: Spectrum taken by an OSA of a mechanical grating, using the
rubber number 2, left in the optimum coupling position for one
and an half hour, obtaining a very different spectrum. Only
with a reoptimization the previous result can be obtained once
again.
5.1.5
Transmission Over Time
Even if the procedure to draw thermal gratings is not yet optimized,
takes longer than using mechanical gratings and some issues are not
completely understood, there is one main reason for using thermal
gratings: the conversion does not change in time. Their time stability
is extremely good in comparison with the mechanical gratings. These
latter use screws and mechanical tools to apply pressure on the ﬁber.
This, together with the fact that in some cases the precision in cou-
pling coefﬁcient has to be extremely high, makes it difﬁcult to keep
the system optimized while the screws and the ﬁber coating tend to
relax. This relaxation has seen to be strongly dependant on the rub-
ber used over the metal plate, thus the rubbers seen in ﬁgure 5.4, do
not give the same results after all. An example of this effect is shown
in ﬁgure 5.12, where the rubber number 2, which results have been
compared with other rubbers in ﬁgure 5.4, is kept in the optimum
coupling position for one and an half hour, when the spectrum is
taken again. This effect has seen to be very much dependent on the
speciﬁc setup used. In ﬁgure 5.13, the best rubber for stability in time
is shown. This rubber is thinner and harder than the others, reduc-
ing the relaxation effect. The decrease of the conversion peak has
been seen to be higher the closest to the optimum one gets, but still
in within 5 dB of change. In ﬁgure 5.13 it is clear that far from the
optimum the change is smaller than close to it. The same thing hap-
pens when the coupling coefﬁcient is far from the optimum. In this
case every rubber would show perfect stability. This issue has been
==PAGE:67==
5.1 mode conversion
57
Figure 5.13: Spectrum taken by an OSA of a mechanical grating on a step-
index two-mode ﬁber, using the rubber number 4, not previ-
ously shown, left in the optimum coupling position for half an
hour, taking a spectrum for each 5 minutes. It is clear that the
effect is stronger the closer to the optimum. Also, in red, the
measured MPI values from S2 to check that the energy lost
from the fundamental mode is actually converted in the HOM.
seen in each and every mechanical grating test. It can be reduced by
choosing a better rubber, but it can be never be called off.
5.1.6
Modal Content Characterization
The ﬁrst step when making a grating is the use of the spectrum anal-
yser to obtain an almost real-time measure of the conversion peak.
This needs a broadband source and gives only the spectrum of the
fundamental mode, the LP01.
This means that, even if extremely
useful for the optimization, in general, the OSA measurement is nec-
essary but not sufﬁcient to prove that the energy lost from this mode
is acquired by an HOM. For this purpose, once a grating is made
and optimized, the source is switched to the tunable laser and the
output is linked to the S2 setup instead of the OSA. As explained in
section 3.2, the S2 is able to obtain the power of a mode relatively to
the power of the dominant mode (if a dominant mode is present with
> 90% of the total output power). In the case of mode converters, it
is possible to use this method with an HOM as dominant mode and
obtain the relative power of the other modes. In ﬁgure 5.14, the result
of three S2 scans are shown in blue, red and green for three different
wavelength. For each of those curves the intensity and phase patterns
can be calculated together with the MPI (see section 3.2). These pat-
terns help to understand to what mode the peak refers to. If an HOM
is dominant, as seen in the case of the ﬁgure looking at the intensity
==PAGE:68==
58
experimental work
Figure 5.14: Beating amplitude versus DGD of a dominant LP11 beam out-
put of a step-index two-mode ﬁber after the application of a
mechanical grating to convert the fundamental mode into the
HOM. The lines of different colors refer to different scans of
width 10 nm centred in 1525 nm (blue line), 1555 nm (red line)
and 1605 nm (green line). The image on the top left shows the
intensity of the DC component, the LP11 mode, while the im-
ages on the right show intensity and phase of the peak at 60 ps,
which refers to the LP01.
pattern of the DC component, the intensity of the other peaks looks
different than expected. This is due to the calculation of this pattern,
which considers the LP01 to be dominant. Nevertheless, the phase
helps to distinguish deﬁnitely one mode from the others. In the case
of ﬁgure 5.14, for example, the peak that refers to the LP01 mode is
not as symmetric as the mode that represents, and the intensity in
the center is zero. Still it can be distinguished from the LP11 because
the intensity tends to concentrate in the middle. The phase shows a
pattern seen many times, in previous tests, to refer to the fundamen-
tal mode, removing all doubts. This procedure is used to obtain the
MPI values comparable to the once the OSA gives for the LP01. In
this way a direct conﬁrmation of the spectra captured by the spec-
trum analyser is achieved, as for instance shown in ﬁgure 5.13. The
same method is feasible to measure the relative power of each mode
in respect to the dominant mode, whichever it is, in few-mode ﬁbers.
5.1.7
Optimization and best gratings
By the use of the OSA and the S2, the grating can be optimized in
all details. In some cases, as for the thermal gratings, the effects that
comes into account are not all properly understood. In other cases,
as for the mechanical gratings, it might require a bit of time to hit
==PAGE:69==
5.1 mode conversion
59
Figure 5.15: Spectra taken by the OSA of a mechanical grating for conver-
sion between LP01 to LP11 in a step-index two mode ﬁber. Over
the ﬁber, between the grating and the metal plate, rubber num-
ber 4 has been used. The blue and green line show the spec-
trum before and after the measurement of MPI, respectively.
the coupling coefﬁcient optimum and to check the stability of the
conversion.
For this work, the excitation of the LP11 was necessary in all the four
ﬁbers of interest and in the four-mode ﬁbers the excitation of the
LP21 and the LP02 was also required. The best mechanical grating
conversion from LP01 to LP11 in step-index two-mode ﬁber done for
this purposes, is shown in ﬁgure 5.15.
Spectrum before and after
the measure of MPI have been taken, to ensure a good stability of
the conversion during the time needed for the S2 scan. Furthermore,
the possibility of using other peaks than the ﬁrst on in k has been
studied.
From ﬁgure 5.10, for instance, multiple peaks have seen
to appear for higher pressure applied on the ﬁber, and often these
peaks are broader than the ﬁrst one. One example of this is shown
in ﬁgure 5.16, where the MPI measurement of the second peak in k,
of the grating used for the making of ﬁgure 5.15, is shown. The use
of these second peaks for conversion has to be studied further, but
the preliminary results are promising, since a broader conversion is
preferable in most cases.
The same conversion has been possible with a thermal grating in
a very broad spectrum. This grating has been done following the
procedure in section 5.1.3 with 10 periods, a long annealing process
and optimization by trial and error. The resultant spectrum and MPI
for this grating is shown in ﬁgure 5.17. This result has been found
difﬁcult to replicate. A second try with the same setup and procedure
gave the results in ﬁgure 5.18, where still a very good conversion in
a broad spectrum is seen, but the MPI at 1550 nm, the wavelength
==PAGE:70==
60
experimental work
Figure 5.16: Spectra taken by the OSA of a mechanical grating for the sec-
ond conversion peak between LP01 to LP11 in a step-index two
mode ﬁber. Over the ﬁber, between the grating and the metal
plate, rubber number 4 has been used. The blue line shows the
grating just optimized; the green line shows the spectrum after
one hour; the red line shows the MPI taken by S2.
Figure 5.17: Spectrum (blue) taken by the OSA of a thermal grating for the
conversion between LP01 to LP11 in a step-index two mode
ﬁber.
MPI (red) of the fundamental mode measured by S2.
The grating is formed by 10 perturbation points devided by
1.165 cm and afterwards annealed 10 times heating the wire
with 11 A of current, the same used for heating the grating
points for 8 seconds each.
==PAGE:71==
5.1 mode conversion
61
Figure 5.18: Spectrum (blue) taken by the OSA of a thermal grating for the
conversion between LP01 to LP11 in a step-index two mode
ﬁber.
MPI (red) of the fundamental mode measured by S2.
The grating is formed by 10 perturbation points devided by
1.165 cm and afterwards annealed 10 times heating the wire
with 11 A of current, the same used for heating the grating
points for 8 seconds each. This result refers to a different grat-
ing in respect to ﬁgure 5.17.
of major interest for communication, is lower in absolute value in
respect of the previous grating.
All tries to obtain conversion in graded-index ﬁbers have been un-
successful due to the extremely high precision needed in the fabrica-
tion of the gratings. All the experiments to obtain LP02 mode exci-
tation have been ineffective. Both mechanical and thermal gratings
are, with the used setup, asymmetric perturbations in the ﬁber. From
theory (see section 2.6.3), it is knows that symmetric modes can be
excited only by symmetric perturbations. In reality, one expect the
mode ﬁelds to have a non-zero overlap integral even if they do not
share the same symmetry. Nevertheless, direct excitation of this mode
has not been seen during this work. Several tries have been done to
obtain a pure LP21 in the step-index four-mode ﬁber, both using ther-
mal and mechanical gratings. In both cases, the spectra captured by
the OSA showed promising results, but the scan from the S2 showed
a mixture of all the HOMs, which is not feasible to characterize the
modes individually.
Since a good excitation of the LP11 is most ﬁbers was not possible,
the thermal grating in ﬁgure 5.17, made on the step-index two-mode
ﬁber, has been used to transfer the light in other ﬁbers, directly in
the HOM. Its use, in respect to the mechanical grating in ﬁgure 5.15,
was preferable because of the better stability in time and the broader
conversion spectrum. Splicing the step-index two-mode ﬁber with the
==PAGE:72==
62
experimental work
Figure 5.19: MPI values of the all the non-DC components in the DGD
curve (see ﬁg. 5.20). The thermal grating in ﬁgure 5.17, made
in the step-index two-mode ﬁber, has been used to excite the
LP11. Then, the beam is passed, though a splice, to: (blue)
graded-index two-mode ﬁber; (red) graded-index four-mode
ﬁber; (green) step-index four-mode ﬁber.
grating to each and all the other three ﬁbers it has been possible to ob-
tain a pure LP11 (>99% of the overall power) in everyone of them and
in a broad spectrum. In ﬁgure 5.19, the MPI values obtained from
several S2 scan are shown. From these MPI of the all the components
which do not refer to the LP11, it is possible to check the percentage
of the beam power stored in this mode. Starting from 1500 nm, ev-
ery 10 nm a S2 scan as the ones in ﬁgure 5.20 are made. Integrating
over the whole DGD curve, one ﬁnds the MPI values, which give the
power of all non-LP11 components relative to the power of the LP11.
Obtaining a pure LP21 mode by converting directly from the funda-
mental mode has proved difﬁcult to achieve in both the four-mode
ﬁbers. A different experiment brought to the conversion needed for
the mode characterization. After achieving the conversion to the LP11
in the step-index four mode ﬁber, another possibility is to use a sec-
ond converter to achieve enough energy transfer from the LP11 to the
LP21 mode. This has been possible by the use of a mechanical grat-
ing of period Λ = 1.302 cm (thus ΛG = 0.5 cm tilted of α = 39.8◦)
applied on the same step-index four-mode ﬁber. The optimization of
this grating is somewhat more difﬁcult than the direct ones, because
in this case is not possible to use the real-time OSA measurement.
Indeed, since the spectrum analyser can only see the transmission of
the fundamental mode, the energy transfer from the LP11 to the LP21
is not visible. Also, the effectiveness of the second grating, the me-
chanical one, is strongly dependant on the mode content and ﬁeld
distribution in between the ﬁrst and the second converters. Since,
==PAGE:73==
5.1 mode conversion
63
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.20: Beating amplitude versus DGD of a dominant LP11 beam out-
put of a few meters of (a) graded-index two-mode ﬁber; (b)
graded-index four-mode ﬁber; (c) step-index four-mode ﬁber.
Scans of width 10 nm centred in 1555 nm. The images show
the intensity and phase of the guided modes. A small amount
of LP21 is visible in the two-mode ﬁber case because it is a
leaky mode, present for a few meters. The integration of these
curves over the whole x-axis give one of the MPI values given
in ﬁgure 5.19.
==PAGE:74==
64
experimental work
in both ﬁbers, the modes have seen to be strongly bend and torsion
dependant, moving even slightly the ﬁbers between the gratings can
result in a change of the conversion efﬁciency. A longer a less pre-
cise optimization by S2 scan has been done. These scans take much
longer time than an OSA scan but they see the full modal content of
the beam, showing how much power there is in each mode. In any
case, when using the S2 for this purpose, one should remember that
its algorithm only works if there is a dominant mode carrying more
than 90% of the power. Still, the camera in the setup gives a useful
feedback during the optimization.
As already done for the LP11, the LP21 output obtained has been
spliced into the graded-index four-mode ﬁber, instead of trying a dif-
ferent grating. The results of the S2 scans are shown in ﬁgure 5.21, for
both ﬁbers. As the MPI values show, the amount of LP21 in the step-
index ﬁber is almost the same that can be found by splicing it to the
graded-index ﬁber. Even if the conversion is not perfect, a beam of 94
to 96% of the power in the LP21 mode has been achieved in both the
step-index and the graded-index four-mode ﬁbers. In the step-index
ﬁber, the LP02 has not been possible to excite, even with the use of
two gratings as done for the LP21. Regarding the graded-index ﬁber,
these two modes have a very close propagation constant, resulting in
a very strong coupling between each other. This means that when
exciting selectively the LP21 in this ﬁber, a mixture of this mode and
the LP02 will be seen. This is also the case for ﬁgure 5.21(c), in which
already some power can be seen in the center of the ﬁber, even only
after a couple of meters. For this reason, these modes together are
hereby considered as one mode.
5.2
modes characterization
Once obtained the modes individually excited in the ﬁbers, their
characterization can be done. Chromatic dispersion, attenuation, dis-
tributed mode coupling and bend-loss have been studied for each
mode in each ﬁber, except the LP02 in the step-index four-mode ﬁber.
For this characterization, the mode of interest must be dominant in
the ﬁber and the precision of the measurements is strongly reduced
by the presence of other modes. For this reason, not only a good
mode conversion is required, but also a study of the distributed cou-
pling is needed to understand how much power is lost from the mode
of interest when measuring other parameters on long spools.
==PAGE:75==
5.2 modes characterization
65
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.21: (a)MPI values of the all the non-DC components (non-LP21)
and LP21 output beam in (b) step-index and (c) graded-index
four-mode ﬁbers at 1555 nm.
The thermal grating in ﬁg-
ure 5.17, made in the step-index two-mode ﬁber, has been used
to excite the LP11. Then, the beam is passed, though a splice,
to a step-index four-mode ﬁber where it is converted to LP21
by a mechanical grating.
5.2.1
Distributed Mode Coupling
As explained in detail in section 2.6.3, the distributed mode coupling
is the transfer of energy between modes due to small perturbation in
the ﬁber. These perturbation can be minimized but not completely
avoided.
They include macro- and micro-bends, temperature and
pressure changes, small fabrication imperfections, etc. In fact, they
depends not only on the type of waveguide, but on the speciﬁc ﬁber
used and its position and usage.
Every perturbation can possibly
change the distributed coupling. In order to measure this effect, the
S2 setup has been used. By sending the light, in the mode of inter-
est, through some length of ﬁber a amplitude versus DGD graph is
obtained, here shown in ﬁgures 5.22 and 5.23, for the different ﬁbers.
==PAGE:76==
66
experimental work
The DGD is the delay accumulated by one mode in respect to an-
other. As DC component the dominant mode is seen, and peaks for
the different modes are seen for some values of delay. Integrating
from the end of the DC peak to the beginning of the ﬁrst other peak
(which refers to the other mode component created at the splice) one
obtains a measure of the relative power transferred from one mode
to the other is some length of ﬁber. In ﬁgures 5.22 and 5.23, the DGD
graphs are shown for every ﬁber having the LP01 as dominant mode.
The integrating ranges are highlighted in black and the resultant in-
tensity images are shown. Similar analysis have been done while hav-
ing the LP11 as dominant mode. Regarding the four-mode ﬁbers, the
analysis having a dominant LP21 has not been done, in the step-index
case, because of the already too high coupling to other modes which
already give no possibility to run dispersion or attenuation measure-
ments. For the graded-index ﬁber, instead, the coupling has been
seen to be low enough from the LP01 and the LP11 to the LP21, thus
a low coupling on the opposite direction can be expected. In most
cases, the S2 scan has been done for both sides of the spool. The idea
is that the ﬁber in the inner side of the spool sees a different curva-
ture and a different pressure because of the rest of the ﬁber. In the
step-index two-mode ﬁber cases these effects appear to be strongly
visible. In ﬁgure 5.22, two peaks appear at high delay when mea-
suring from the inner part to the outer part of the spool (Side 1),
while they appear at low delay measuring on the opposite side of the
spool (Side 2). Since it is difﬁcult to exclude them and since the im-
portant information for mode coupling is the ﬁber output beam, these
peaks have been included in the integration for the MPIs of the step-
index ﬁber. The MPI values for all the ﬁbers and modes analysed
are summarised in table 5.1. These values do not include the peak
from the splices, except in the case of the step-index two-mode ﬁber,
in which this peak and the ones given by the different pressure are
undistinguishable, and the graded-index four-mode ﬁber, in which
the analysis on the individual modes coupling is more complex. In
general, the splice contribution changes when making a new splice.
On the other hand, it has to be noticed that the important aspect is
to have still a pure mode of interest after a long length of ﬁber. In
this sense, the contribution of the splice must be taken into account.
For the step-index four-mode ﬁber, the coupling values without the
splice contribution already show a very high transfer of energy. So
high that after 1 km of ﬁber one can expect a mixture of modes, even
if starting with an almost-pure mode. For this ﬁber, only the values
for one side have been taken since for such a short ﬁber there is only
one layer of turns on the spool, thus the two sides see the same condi-
tions. Regarding the graded-index two-mode ﬁber, the contribution
of the splice peaks does not move the MPI above −20 dB, thus it does
not critically change the amount of power in the mode of interest. Of
==PAGE:77==
5.2 modes characterization
67
Mode Coupling
in Fiber
Modes
MPI [dB]
Side 1
MPI [dB]
Side 2
Length
[m]
SI2MF
LP01 to LP11
−17.8
−17.4
1500
LP11 to LP01
−20.3
−17.8
1500
SI4MF
LP01 to LP11
−23.1
150
LP11 to LP01
−21.8
150
GI2MF
LP01 to LP11
−28.9
−24.1
15000
LP11 to LP01
−26.9
−28.1
15000
GI4MF
LP01 to Others
−25.1
−24.3
8750
LP11 to Others
−17.9
−18.5
8750
Table 5.1: MPI values for distributed mode coupling in the ﬁbers of interest.
Obtained integrating over the ranges shown in ﬁgure 5.20, B.1
and B.2 for the different ﬁbers, with different lengths and mea-
sured on side 1, where the light travels from the inner to the
other part of the spool, and side 2, from the outer to the inner
part of the spool.
more difﬁcult interpretation are measures for the graded-index four-
mode ﬁber. In this case, having coupling to more than one mode,
integrating on the DGD curve before the ﬁrst peak, one obtains the
sum of the distributed coupling from the dominant mode to the oth-
ers, but since the DGD is accumulated differently depending on the
mode, this value will give the contribution for the ﬁrst mode from
all the ﬁber length, while for the second mode only for some part
of the ﬁber length (which will be the ending part of the ﬁber, since
the lower delay values are considered). The remaining contribution
from the second mode can be measured by integrating on the curve
between the ﬁrst and the second peaks, but still the part at the same
delay as the ﬁrst peak will not be considered. For these reasons the
distributed coupling measurements for this ﬁber are somewhat more
complicated than the others. To remain on the safe side, the values
for total coupling to other modes, thus integrating on both the black
rectangles in ﬁgure 5.23(c) together, are considered in table 5.1.
5.2.2
Chromatic Dispersion
Once obtained the information on distributed coupling between modes,
one can proceed with measuring the dispersion. Since for this mea-
surement a long ﬁber is required, high coupling between modes would
increase the error having the value calculated over a mixture of modes.
The analysis explained here gives the chromatic dispersion value for
the mode of interest. This is done by the use of a modulated signal
sent through the ﬁber by an Agilent 86037C Chromatic Dispersion
==PAGE:78==
68
experimental work
Figure 5.22: Beating amplitude versus DGD from S2 scan for 1500 m step-
index two-mode ﬁber, both sides of the spool showing the ef-
fect of the pressure on the inner ﬁber. On the left, the image of
the output beam, the dominant mode LP01. On the right, the
intensity of the LP11 obtained by integrating over the black rect-
angle, covering all the distributed coupling components and
the splice peak.
Test Solution. The phase change is measured and the dispersion in
the ﬁber is reconstructed, together with its slope. Other dispersions
are here neglected. In ﬁgure 5.24, the measurements are shown, to-
gether with a 5-terms Sellmeier ﬁt. The measured values for LP01 and
LP11 summarized in table 5.2. The measurements for the fundamen-
tal mode have been done by using two mode strippers, one at the be-
ginning and the other at the end of the spool, while the measurements
for the ﬁrst HOM have been done by using one mode stripper and the
thermal grating in ﬁgure 5.17. The use of one less mode stripper and
the remaining portion of fundamental mode after conversion brought
the measurements to have higher error. This is because the less pure
the mode of interest is, the more the dispersion value move towards
the other mode. A hint to understand the error in the measurements
is given by the length of the ﬁber, which is measured mechanically,
and then calculated by knowing the effective refractive index of the
mode of interest. The more power in other modes is present, the more
error in the index and thus the bigger the difference between mechan-
ically measured and calculated by light delay lengths. In general, the
error in the measurements for the LP11 is higher due to the presence
of only one mode stripper. This can not be solved because of the lack
of a mode stripper able to remove the fundamental mode leaving the
HOMs. Also, higher error for the 9 km step-index two-mode ﬁber is
noticeable in respect to the 1.5 km spool. This is because of the high
distributed coupling in this ﬁber which increase the amount of power
==PAGE:79==
5.2 modes characterization
69
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.23: Beating amplitude versus DGD of a dominant LP01 beam out-
put of (a) 200 m step-index four-mode ﬁber; (b) 15 km graded-
index two-mode ﬁber; (c) 8.75 km graded-index four-mode
ﬁber. On the top, the intensity images of the dominant mode
(left) and the other guided modes (right), the latter obtained by
integrating over the black rectangles.
==PAGE:80==
70
experimental work
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.24: Dispersion measurements on (a) graded-index two- and four-
mode ﬁbers and (b) step-index two-mode ﬁber. The latter mea-
sured over 1.5 and 9.0 km. Measurements for LP01 (circles) and
LP11 (triangles) are shown together with the 5-terms Sellmeier
ﬁt (continuous lines).
==PAGE:81==
5.2 modes characterization
71
Fiber
Mode
Dispersion
[ps/(nm ∗km)]
Slope
[ps/(nm2 ∗km)]
Length
[km]
SI2MF
LP01
21, 0/21, 2
0.063/0.065
9.30/9.05
LP11
20.3/20.8
0.063/0.059
9.30/9.05
LP01
21.0/21, 2
0.063/0.065
1.50/1.52
LP11
20.7/20.8
0.066/0.059
1.50/1.54
GI2MF
LP01
19.6/19.9
0.064/0.067
15.0/15.0
LP11
19.5/20.1
0.061/0.065
15.0/15.0
GI4MF
LP01
18.4/18.9
0.066/0.068
8.75/8.80
LP11
19.1/19.0
0.064/0.068
8.75/8.90
Table 5.2: Dispersion and dispersion slope values for LP01 and LP11 modes
in all the ﬁbers of interest. The values are compared with the
simulated ones, in red. In magenta, the measured ﬁber length,
measured by the effective refractive index of the mode of interest.
These have to be compared with the black values, showing the
length of the ﬁber measured mechanically.
of the mode which is supposed to be suppressed. Anyway, since the
values of dispersion for the two modes in this ﬁber are close, no big
difference is seen even if a non-negligible portion of power is in the
wrong mode. Very good agreement is seen for the graded-index two-
mode ﬁber, for which a very low distributed coupling is observed.
Similar results are shown for the four-mode graded-index, which still
show higher noise than its counterpart two-mode ﬁber, because of the
presence of more modes to couple into. In conclusion, a very good
accordance between measured and simulated values has been found
for most of the ﬁbers. The step-index four-mode ﬁber has been ne-
glected because of its high distributed coupling which degrades eas-
ily the dispersion measurement. The sum of LP21 and LP02 modes
in the graded-index four-mode ﬁber has also been neglected because
of composed of two modes which, even if with the same propagation
constant, are expected to have very different dispersion, resulting in
a useless measurement.
5.2.3
Propagation Losses
As well as for the dispersion measurements, the attenuation has to be
measured on long length of ﬁber in order to be precise. Two methods
have been used here to measure this value.
The ﬁrst is the cut-back method (CBM), which requires a 1550 nm
source and a power meter. The source sends light into the spool and
the power meter allows to measure the beam power at the output. By
having this measure for a length L of ﬁber and a much shorter one
==PAGE:82==
72
experimental work
s << L, one can estimate the attenuation αA the light suffers while
going through the length L:
αA = 10
L log
 Ps
PL

(5.3)
where PL and Ps are the powers measured by the power meter after a
length L and a length s of ﬁber, respectively. This estimation is more
precise the higher the difference between L and s.
The second method makes use of the optical time domain response
(OTDR). For these measurements a Photon Kinetics Model 6500 OTDR
has been used. A very short pulse is sent into the ﬁber, at the selected
wavelength (1550 nm). It travels through the whole length and some
of it is back-reﬂected at each step into the ﬁber and ﬁnally from its
ending edge. The time delay of the pulse is related to the group veloc-
ity vg (eq. 2.14) and a measure of its power can be obtained for each
part of the ﬁber. The more linear this behaviour is through the ﬁber,
the more one can trust to have only attenuation of the desired mode
and not any other effect such distributed coupling. The slope of this
descending straight line gives the attenuation. The curves have been
averaged over 30 s to reduce the noise. The entire curve, except ini-
tial and ﬁnal peaks (which introduce non-linearities) has been used to
measure the slope by two-points method and the slope of the linear ﬁt
in the same range is shown for comparison. Furthermore, the OTDS
measurement has been repeated on both sides of each spool, using
the same criteria used in section 5.2.1. The results for both the analy-
sis are shown in table 5.3. Again, the attenuation for 1.5 and 9.0 km
spool of the step-index two-mode ﬁber have been measured to show
the effect of distributed coupling. In the 9.0 km the values are very
close for different sides, methods and modes. This shows that in this
case a sort of averaging has been done on the modes. In the very ﬁrst
part of the ﬁber the modes couple in such a way that the values ac-
quired for the attenuation are an average of the ones of the two modes.
In the 1.5 km case, on the other hand, the values for the two modes
are different, showing higher attenuation for the LP11 in respect to
the LP01 and also the two sides of the spool behave differently, as ex-
pected from the coupling measurements shown in section 5.2.1. High
difference between the two methods show how strong the error and
the effect of the splices is on this ﬁber. Regarding the graded-index
two-mode ﬁber, the two methods and the OTDR with the linear ﬁt
show a very good accordance. This is because of the extremely low
distributed coupling seen for this ﬁber. The two modes show slightly
different attenuation and the noise in the measurement has seen to be
very low. In this case, the LP01 shows the higher loss, as expected by
the mode ﬁeld which is mainly contained in the core region. Indeed,
the inner part of the ﬁber has higher attenuation because of the pres-
ence of dopants. Similar results, even if not as good, are shown for
==PAGE:83==
5.3 bend-loss analysis
73
Fiber
Mode
CBM
[dB/km]
OTDR
Side 1
[dB/km]
OTDR
Side 2
[dB/km]
Length
[km]
SI2MF
LP01
−0.187
−0.174/−0.169
−0.192/−0.192
1.2/1.5
LP11
−0.220
−0.234/−0.232
−0.215/−0.204
1.2/1.5
LP01
−0.178
−0.184/−0.184
−0.183/−0.185
8.5/9.0
LP11
−0.180
−0.183/−0.183
−0.187/−0.186
8.5/9.0
GI2MF
LP01
−0.197
−0.196/−0.195
−0.194/−0.193
14.3/15.0
LP11
−0.183
−0.188/−0.189
−0.186/−0.186
14.3/15.0
GI4MF
LP01
−0.224
−0.223/−0.223
−0.224/−0.224
8.50/8.75
LP11
−0.219
−0.206/−0.206
−0.211/−0.210
8.50/8.75
LP21−02
−0.215
−0.206/−0.204
−0.210/−0.209
8.50/8.75
Table 5.3: Attenuation valus for all the guided mode in the ﬁbers of interest.
Values measured with cut-back (CBM) and optical time domain re-
sponce (OTDR) two-points methods are shown, the latter for both
sides of the spool. In red, the values of the slope given from the
linear-ﬁt. In magenta, the length of the total ﬁber, to be com-
pared with the value on which the measurement is done, written
in black.
the graded-index four-mode ﬁber. In this case the splice on the LP11
and LP21−02 analysis has an higher impact on the agreement between
the two methods, because of the impossibility to use the mode strip-
per to clean the mode and because of the presence of more modes to
couple into. In this case the input and the output are the same since
the OTDR requires to capture the back-reﬂected light. This does not
allow the use of mode strippers before the grating, because it would
remove part of the reﬂected light in the mode of interest before being
captured. Good agreement between two-point method and linear ﬁt
demonstrate the absence of other effects than attenuation of the mode
of interest, thus very low coupling between modes is observed. As
done for the dispersion measurement, the step-index four-mode ﬁber
has been neglected because of its high distributed coupling between
modes, which does not allow the usage of long ﬁbers if a pure mode
is needed.
5.3
bend-loss analysis
The possibility of apply space division multiplexing in few-mode
ﬁbers to high-speed communication systems, thus using the differ-
ent modes as different channels, brought the need of mode resolved
characterization methods. In particular, only one reference exists, to
==PAGE:84==
74
experimental work
the best of our knowledge, regarding a technique to measure mode
resolved bend-loss in few-modes ﬁbers [Schulze et al., 2013]. Another
technique, entirely designed and tested during this Master Project, is
here presented for the ﬁrst time. This procedure requires the setup
used for spatially and spectrally resolved imagining (S2), shown in
section 3.2, and it allows to measure the bend-loss of each and every
guided mode at once. The results here presented have been submit-
ted to Optics Letters.
5.3.1
Principle of Operation
Linked to the broadband source by a splice, a piece of ﬁber (FUT) is
taken and a bent of certain length and certain curvature is applied,
before the link to the S2 setup. During the analysis, different bending
lengths and curvatures are tested and both a power measure and an
S2 scan are made. Even if every S2 setup is feasible for this technique,
the one proposed in [Blin et al., 2009], is here used and strongly sug-
gested because of the shorter time required for each scan. By scan-
ning the ﬁber output in wavelength and space, the S2 setup is able to
measure the MPI, deﬁned in 3.6, and reported here for reference:
MPI = 10 log
PHOM
Pm

= 10 log
R R
IHOM(x, y)dxdy
R R
Im(x, y)dxdy

(5.4)
Where the subscript HOM refers to the higher order mode and the
subscript m refers to the overall output. In a speciﬁc bending state
of the ﬁber, the S2 measure the relative power of the HOM in respect
to the overall output. Assuming that the fundamental mode (LP01) is
dominant (>90% of the output), a power meter would give a measure
of power of the fundamental mode in respect to a reference, which is
here taken to be the bend-free case:
αPM = 10 log
 Pm
Pref

(5.5)
Saying that the fundamental mode is dominant, thus that overall
beam and LP01 component are the same, is an assumption that needs
to be veriﬁed. Its validity can easily be assured while measuring the
MPI of the HOMs. In order to be valid, over the whole analysis and
thus for each bending, the MPI of all the HOMs has to be less than
−10 dB. This is also an important condition for the correct use of the
S2 algorithm, which considers the output to be a pure fundamental
mode. A deep analysis on how this restriction affects the error in
the measurements and on how to relax it is presented in [Jollivet et
al., 2014]. In the results presented here, the MPI is kept below the
limit, assuring the validity of both the power meter and the S2 mea-
surements. The sum of the values, given by the S2 and the power
meter, gives then the relative power of the HOM LPHOM, relative to
==PAGE:85==
5.3 bend-loss analysis
75
the overall output (thus the fundamental mode) in the bend-free case
Pref:
αPM + MPI = 10 log
PHOM
Pref

(5.6)
If two different bending states , 1 and 2, are considered, such that
the bending applied to the ﬁber is different from one another, it is
possible to calculate the relative power of the HOM in one case in
respect to the power of the HOM in the other case, without knowing
the absolute value of those powers:
(αPM;2 + MPI2) −(αPM;1 + MPI1) = 10 log
PHOM;2
PHOM;1

(5.7)
Considering case 1 to be the bend-free case, the power meter value
αPM;1 is be zero and the result of this subtraction is the relative power
of the HOM in the bent case relative to itself in the bend-free case,
which is by deﬁnition the bend-loss of the individual HOM.
5.3.2
Experimental Results
Two examples are here presented. The ﬁrst one is the analysis done
on a 220 m long graded-index two-LP-modes ﬁber [Grüner-Nielsen
et al., 2012]. A tunable laser illuminates the ﬁber and the S2 setup is
used to measure the modal content of the output. The ﬁber length
has been selected in order to give the HOM, the LP11, space to ac-
cumulate enough DGD to be distinguished from spurious peaks in
the amplitude vs delay (given by internal camera reﬂections). These
cause of these peaks has been studied in detail in [Gray et al., 2014].
The beating amplitude versus differential group delay is calculated
and the one for the bend-free case is shown in ﬁg. 5.25. A bad splice
between the source and the FUT, made on purpose with 4 µm offset
from the perfect alignment, helped to generate enough HOM to be
clearly visible in the S2 scan. Measurements like the one in ﬁgure 5.25
for different bend diameters, 3.7 cm, 1.5 cm, 1 cm, 0.8 cm and 0.5 cm,
and different lengths of the bent ﬁber, are used to evaluate the trans-
mission of the LP11 mode. The result is shown in ﬁgure 5.26, where
each point is calculated as in equation 5.6.
From ﬁgure 5.26, the
bend-loss of the LP11 for each curvature may be obtained by making
a linear ﬁt and the absolute value of the slope then gives the value
of the loss in dB/cm. Also, using the values obtained by the power
meter (as in eq. 5.5), the bend-loss of the LP01 is obtained. The values
for this ﬁrst ﬁber are summarized in table 5.4.
In order to give an idea of the error in the measurement, a set of
six measures, with more points and a diameter of 1.5 cm, have been
made using the same setup, the same ﬁber without changing the
==PAGE:86==
76
experimental work
Figure 5.25: Beating amplitude as function of differential group delay calcu-
lated from the measured spectra of the S2 for a graded-index
two-modes ﬁber. The peak at 0 DGD refers to the fundamental
LP01 mode while the peak at 36 ps refers to the LP11 mode. The
image on the right shows the calculated intensity pattern when
integrating from 24 to 87 ps, avoiding the camera reﬂections
and including all the terms of the HOM. Measure done scan-
ning from 1547 to 1553 nm with a step of 0.045 nm on 220 m of
ﬁber.
Figure 5.26: Relative Power of the LP11 in respect to the LP01-unbent for
different bend diameters and bent lengths. The slope of each
curve, in absolute values, gives the bend-loss per centimetre
for the speciﬁc bend diameter. The slopes given by the linear
ﬁt are 0 dB/cm for D = 3.7 cm, −0.17 dB/cm for D = 1.5 cm,
−0.38 dB/cm for D = 1 cm, −0.62 dB/cm for D = 0.8 cm and
−1.24 dB/cm for D = 0.5 cm.
==PAGE:87==
5.3 bend-loss analysis
77
GI 2-Modes Fiber
Bend-Loss [dB/cm]
LP01
LP11
D = 3.7 cm
0
0
D = 1.5 cm
0
0.17
D = 1 cm
0.01
0.38
D = 0.8 cm
0.03
0.62
D = 0.5 cm
0.15
1.24
Table 5.4: Summary of the bend-loss values measured for the two modes
guided in the graded-index two-modes FUT, for different bend
diameters D.
splice to the source, to reduce the differences to the minimum. The re-
sult of those six measurements is a set of values for each length point,
shown in ﬁgure 5.27 as a box plot, where minimum, maximum and
quartiles are visible. The averages of these measurements, shown in
green in ﬁgure 5.27, follow a very linear behaviour (R2 very close to 1)
and the LP11 bend-loss results 0.17 dB/cm for this curvature and this
ﬁber. To verify the bend loss numbers obtained with the described S2
technique a comparison with a direct bend loss measurement for the
LP11 mode has been done. By subtracting the MPI value expected for
the LP11 for the straight ﬁber (in this case the offset value of the linear
ﬁt has been used), as shown in eq. 5.7, the result in ﬁgure 5.27 can be
related with the transmission of the LP11 done in a direct bend loss
measurement, by using a mode converter to launch LP11 into the ﬁber
under test and a power meter. A thermal grating, already shown in
section 5.1 and similar to the one used in [Grüner-Nielsen and Nichol-
son, 2012], has been used as mode converter to have approximately
99% of the energy stored in the LP11. Then, a power meter has been
used to measure the power, using the same curvature as before. The
results are compared in ﬁgure 5.28, where the two ways of measuring
the bend-loss of the LP11 are shown. The green line is measured hav-
ing a dominant fundamental mode, using the S2, while the blue line
is measured using the power meter, having the HOM dominant. The
graph shows the two LP11 transmissions, from which the absolute
value of the slope of a linear ﬁt can be taken, obtaining the bend-loss.
The results give both a value of the R2 parameter very close to 1, en-
suring a linear behaviour, and the values of the slope are also very
close, being −0.168 and −0.171 dB/cm.
This demonstrates the possibility of measuring bend-loss of individ-
ual HOMs in a few-mode ﬁber, without the use of mode converters.
The S2-driven bend-loss analysis, not only allows to measure the loss
of an HOM in a bent ﬁber without the use of a mode converter, but
it makes possible to measure the loss of all the HOMs a ﬁber guides.
==PAGE:88==
78
experimental work
Figure 5.27: Box-plot of six bend-loss measurements done by S2 on the
same graded-index two-modes ﬁber. 220 m of ﬁber and a cur-
vature of 1.5 cm are used to have up to around 70 cm of bent
ﬁber.
The averages of the measurements for each point are
linked by the green line on which a linear ﬁt is made, resulting
in R2 value very close to 1 and a slope of −0.17 dB/cm which
gives the resultant bend-loss of the LP11 mode (0.17 dB/cm),
for this ﬁber at this curvature.
Figure 5.28: Comparison between the (blue) common bend-loss analysis on
the LP11 measured by power meter, using a mode converter
to have a strong HOM component, and the (green) S2-driven
bend-loss, done having the fundamental mode as dominant,
thus not requiring a converter.
==PAGE:89==
5.3 bend-loss analysis
79
Figure 5.29: Beating amplitude as function of differential group delay calcu-
lated from the measured spectra of the S2 for a graded-index
four-modes ﬁber. The peak at 0 DGD refers to the fundamental
LP01 mode, the peak at 780 ps refers to the LP11 mode and the
peak at 1500 ps refers to the LP21−02 considered, summed, as
a single mode. The image on the right shows the calculated
intensity pattern when integrating from 1021 to 1995 ps, con-
taining the sum of the LP21 and the LP02 , while the image on
the left shows the calculated intensity when integrating from
to 1021 ps, containing the LP11 peak. Measure done scanning
from 1550 to 1550.5nm with a step of 0.002 nm on 8630 m of
ﬁber.
The same S2 scan, if properly set, can show the beating peaks of all
the modes present in the ﬁber. This means that the same analysis can
be done on ﬁbers which guide many modes. To show this, the bend-
loss analysis of the individual HOMs guided in 8630 m of four-modes
graded-index ﬁber [Grüner-nielsen et al., 2015] is presented. In ﬁg-
ure 5.29, the beating amplitude in function of group delay is shown.
The different peaks refer to the LP11 and LP21−02. In this case the
LP21 and LP02 have the same propagation constant, resulting in high
coupling during propagation. For this reason the sum of them has
been considered as single mode and the losses have not been mea-
sured for them individually. The relative powers for these modes are
shown in the transmission chart in ﬁgure 5.30 where different curva-
tures have been considered. In this case, the ﬁgure shows the values
for the LP21 and LP02 summed. The bend-loss for the LP11 has been
found to be zero for every bend diameter except for D = 0.3 cm, for
which the mode shows a loss of around 2 dB/cm. This bend diam-
eter is very close to the breaking point of ﬁber. This demonstrates
the strong resistance of this ﬁber to bending, even more than the two-
mode ﬁber used for the analysis in ﬁgure 5.26. No loss and very low
loss are shown for the LP11 and LP21−02, respectively, ensuring good
==PAGE:90==
80
experimental work
Figure 5.30: Relative Power of the LP21−02 in respect to the LP01 for dif-
ferent bend diameters and bent lengths.
The slope of each
curve gives the bend-loss per centimetre for the speciﬁc bend
diameter. The slopes given by the linear ﬁt are 0 dB/cm for
D = 3.7 cm and D = 1.5 cm, −0.39 dB/cm for D = 0.8 cm,
−0.93 dB/cm for D = 0.5 cm and −2.65 dB/cm for D = 0.3 cm.
resistance to bending if using the ﬁber in a communication system
and using the different modes as different channels. Furthermore,
this analysis showed how to make an efﬁcient mode stripper which
can either remove the LP21−02 or both LP21−02 and LP11. In table 5.5
are presented the resultant bend-loss of each and every individual
mode guided in the four-modes ﬁber (still, in this particular ﬁber the
LP21 and the LP02 are considered as a single mode). An important
comparison can be done between these values and the ones for a
standard single-mode ﬁber (OFS AllWave R⃝). A standard bend-loss
analysis on this SD-SMF has been done using the same setup. Val-
ues of 0.01 dB/cm, 0.90 dB/cm and 3.76 dB/cm have been found for
bending diameters of 3.7 cm, 1.5 cm and 1 cm, respectively, showing
GI 4-Modes Fiber
Bend-Loss [dB/cm]
LP01
LP11
LP21−02
D = 3.7 cm
0
0
0
D = 1.5 cm
0
0
0
D = 0.8 cm
0
0
0.39
D = 0.5 cm
0
0
0.93
D = 0.3 cm
0.35
1.94
2.65
Table 5.5: Summary of the bend-loss values measured for the LP01, the
LP11 and the LP21−02 modes guided in the graded-index four
modes FUT, for different bend diameters D.
==PAGE:91==
5.3 bend-loss analysis
81
a much higher effect of bending on commonly used ﬁbers in respect
to the graded-index ﬁbers used for this work. During the making of
this analysis, the effect of tension and torsion on the ﬁbers has been
noticed. Depending on how resistant to torsion the ﬁber is, the MPI
given by the S2 will change due to the twists created after the bent
part of the ﬁber. In early tests on a step-index ﬁber, the error in the
measurements given by this effect has proved to be so high for the
analysis to be of no use for bend-loss characterization. In these cases,
turning the ending part of the ﬁber to release the torsion is the only
way to overcome its strong effect. Unfortunately, this is not a valid
option when working with ﬁbers with high distributed coupling and
low resistance to bending. Indeed, moving the ﬁber in between dif-
ferent scans will increase the error due to these effects. In the ﬁbers
used as examples here, this has seen to be of much less importance
than in the step-index case and moving the ﬁber after the bending at
each step has proved to be more problematic than the torsion itself.
For this reason, in the examples presented here, a 3 −4 m of ﬁber has
been left free for the kinks to release as much as possible, and the
rest of the ﬁber has been held still. On the other hand, this might
not be the best solution for other kind of ﬁbers. Thus it is preferable
to study the torsion effect on the ﬁber before to proceed with the S2-
driven bend-loss analysis. Additionally, since the bent ﬁber will tend
to release the bending, a way to hold the ﬁber and to apply some ten-
sion to it needs to be found. This tension will also modify the MPI
and its effect will strongly depend on the speciﬁc ﬁber. For this work,
this tension has been applied manually and it has been proved to be
not of critical importance with the ﬁbers under test. Nevertheless,
this issue should be understood and solved before to proceed with
the bend-loss analysis.
==PAGE:92==
==PAGE:93==
6
F I B E R S A P P L I C AT I O N S
In the past decades, researchers have explored every available degree
of freedom in optical ﬁbers, with the purpose of increase the data car-
rying capacity. Multiplexing in time, wavelength, polarization and
phase are already largely used, even in commercial communication
systems. One potentially huge source of improvement has been left
unused, at least on large scale, until recent years: the use of multi-
ple spatial modes as parallel channels. This is called Space Division
Multiplexing (SDM). Two main approaches to SDM have been pre-
sented in literature [Richardson et al., 2013]. The use of multi-core
ﬁber (MCF), allows to transmit different channels in different locations
in within the ﬁber.
The multi-mode ﬁber (MMF) approach, instead,
consists in the use of different spatially distinct modes as different
channels, transmitting them in a single core.
Since in the coming
decade it is expected for the single-mode ﬁbers (SMF) to reach their
capacity limit [Essiambre and Tkach, 2012], in the next few years
the increase in capacity need will lead towards an unfavourable and
costly scaling.
The alternative offered by SDM is the next step in
capacity-per-ﬁber growth and a reduction of the cost-per-bit, if not
an increment in energy efﬁciency [Winzer, 2011]. Most of the issues
found applying SDM, are given by cross-talk between cores or be-
tween modes.
Regarding mode division multiplexing, distributed
coupling can occur transferring energy between channels. Differen-
tial mode delay and different modal loss (attenuation and bending),
as previously seen, can reduce the maximum bit-rate achievable or
even make the channel impossible to use. Equalization by multiple-
input multiple-output (MIMO) processing can be used to mitigate
these impairments, at the cost of high complexity scaling [Randel et
al., 2011].
The extremely low mode coupling, the short delay between modes
and the high resistance to bend- and propagation-loss ensure the
possible usage of the graded-index ﬁbers examined in this work, for
MMF-SDM communication systems. The low loss and low mode cou-
pling splicing in between these ﬁbers, to step-index few-mode ﬁbers
and single-mode ﬁbers have been demonstrated and will be of major
importance in a slow-upgrading solution to the capacity problem in
commercial systems. Being remarkably more cost efﬁcient to grad-
ually move on from the current SMF systems, in respect to upgrad-
ing the whole existing communication grid with modern ﬁbers, the
possibility of use few-mode ﬁbers designed for SDM as a drop-in re-
83
==PAGE:94==
84
fibers applications
placement for non-SDM counterparts is of extreme importance. This
opens the opportunity to build hybrid SDM-SMF networks, allowing
the spreading in time of the ﬁber replacement, without waiting for
real-time MIMO implementations for these ﬁbers.
This leads to a
much more gradual and cost-effective transition to the full-capacity
SDM network for optical communication.
The use of few-mode ﬁbers to increase the speed in respect to single-
mode ﬁber has been demonstrated by Xi Chen [Chen et al., 2013].
Many experimental proofs of MMF-SDM application on optical net-
works are found in literature [Qian et al., 2011; Sleiffer et al., 2014].
Different market scenarios have been considered for both MCF and
MMF approaches to SDM [Richardson et al., 2013; Sleiffer et al., 2013].
Their use, alone or combined, have been studied widely and new ca-
pacity records are continuously reached [Qian et al., 2012].
==PAGE:95==
7
C O N C LU S I O N
The purpose of this work is to acquire information on the modes of
the few-mode ﬁbers of interest in terms of some of the parameters
important in communication systems. At ﬁrst, an extensive study of
the literature is presented in order to make a complete and coherent
reference for few-mode ﬁbers for communication purposes. From the
basic mathematical model of light propagation, through the most im-
portant parameters for few-mode ﬁbers and to the use of long period
gratings as mode converters, the deﬁnitions and principles required
are enclosed in chapter 2. An overview on modal beam characteriza-
tion techniques is contained in chapter 3, with focus on spatially and
spectrally resolved imagining, extensively used in this work. This
ﬁrst part of the manuscript summarises the knowledge on few-mode
ﬁber and explains the important concepts with focus on their com-
munication system usage. The second part, starting from chapter 4,
contains the experimental work done in the laboratories at OFS. Mode
conversion by mechanical and thermal gratings is extensively studied
and their fabrication, optimization and best results are presented in
section 5.1. Broad and stable conversion from LP01 to LP11 (>99%
of the beam power) has been proved in all the ﬁbers of interest and
mode converters to excite the LP21 mode (>90% of the beam power)
in the four-mode ﬁbers are shown. The conversion to LP02 has not
been possible due to intrinsic asymmetric perturbation methods used,
but this mode has been seen in the graded-index four-mode ﬁber
because of the high coupling between the third and fourth guided
modes, which share the same propagation constant. Thanks to these
conversions, measurements on distributed mode coupling, chromatic
dispersion and attenuation have been done on all the guided modes
except the LP02 in the step-index four-mode ﬁber. The results and
an extended analysis are presented in section 5.2. In section 5.3, a
new bend-loss analysis, done by the use of the S2 setup and resolved
on individual modes, is presented for the ﬁrst time. This is, to date
and to the best of our knowledge, one of the only two methods of
mode resolved bend-loss analysis in few-mode ﬁbers which does not
require mode converters. The S2-driven bend-loss analysis has been
entirely designed and tested during this Master Project and the re-
sults have been compared with standard bend-loss measurements for
the ﬁrst HOM in a few-mode ﬁber and for the fundamental mode in
a standard single-mode ﬁber. In chapter 6, a brief overview of the
possible use of these ﬁbers for communication systems is presented.
85
==PAGE:96==
86
conclusion
Thanks to these analysis, the graded-index ﬁbers good quality for
communication purposes have been demonstrated and compared with
the step-index ﬁbers. The latter, even being very important to under-
stand the light behaviour in the different modes, lack of the resistance
needed in terms of bend-losses and distributed mode coupling. High
resistance to bend- and propagation-loss (even higher than standard
single-mode ﬁbers) for all the modes and low delay between modes
proved the graded-index two- and four-mode ﬁbers here presented to
be feasible to both hybrid SDM-SMF and full-capacity SDM networks,
and even for MCF-MMF combined space division multiplexing.
==PAGE:97==
8
F U T U R E P O S S I B I L I T I E S
During this project, quite a few analysis, ideas and some optimiza-
tions have not been considered because of lack of time. For this rea-
son, this short section have been included to provide hints for the
interest reader about the future possibilities for excitation and charac-
terization of higher order modes in few-modes ﬁbers.
First of all, the excitation of the HOMs in the ﬁbers have been done
by optimizing in coupling coefﬁcient and different rubbers, for the
mechanical gratings. Further optimization can be done by consider-
ing the grating length, the shape of the grooves and some objective
analysis can be done on the thickness and hardness of the rubbers. A
possible analysis is about the possibility to add a chirp on the grat-
ings, for instance by bending the ﬁber while applying pressure. This
can potentially broaden the conversion peak. Regarding the thermal
gratings, the process here used is far to be optimized. All the dif-
ferent steps require to be studied individually and many different
effects are seen to be important and thus they must be taken in ac-
count. Some of these are the grating length, the coupling coefﬁcient
and the annealing. Even the shape of the platinum wire has seen to
be of some importance for the ﬁnal result. From the few tests run
for the thermal gratings shown in this work, it has been seen that
the process need quite some work to be fully understood and opti-
mized, but it also shows some very promising results. For instance,
the thermal grating in ﬁgure 5.17, used for conversion from LP01 to
LP11, shows not only a very deep transmission peak but so broad to
be hardly comparable with the best mode converters found in liter-
ature. Furthermore, a deeper study on the use of conversion peaks
found at high coupling coefﬁcient might be of use to achieve broader
conversion (see ﬁgure 5.16 for an example of such a conversion peak).
Conversion to the LP02 by the use of symmetric perturbation have to
be studied more in detail.
The conversion by mechanical and thermal gratings has been studied
here, but other types of grating may be as good or even better than
the ones used for this work. Furthermore, one can think of using
a different technique to obtain the desired modes in the ﬁber. One
possibility is to directly send the light in the right shape (for instance
the LP11 shape) to excite directly the right mode. This can be done
by SLMs or photonic lanterns. Their use may bring some technical
problems and some speciﬁcally designed programs might be needed,
for example to generate the computer generated hologram for the
87
==PAGE:98==
88
future possibilities
SLM, but the same setup could be easily applied on different ﬁbers
and different modes.
For what concerns the S2-driven bend-loss analysis, the possibility to
study how degenerate modes react to bending may bring interesting
results. For instance, it is expected that if the ﬁber is placed in the
right direction and no torsion is applied, it would be possible to ob-
tain high loss for the LP11;X and low loss for the LP11;Y or vice versa.
This could lead to a new kind of mode strippers able to distinguish
between degenerate modes. Also, a modal bend-loss analysis run at
different wavelengths might show interesting results. Besides, analy-
sis at different wavelengths are also of interest for the attenuation of
the different guided modes. A full effective mode area analysis could
be done by the use of the mode converters presented in this work.
==PAGE:99==
A
L P M O D E S C A LC U L ATO R
As explained in section 2.3, it is possible to calculate the modes
ﬁeld proﬁles, in the weakly guiding approximation, by solving equa-
tion 2.13. This has been done to get the proﬁles showed in ﬁgure 2.3.
First of all, some parameters have to be given in order to deﬁne the
structure which guides the light. The numerical aperture (NA), de-
ﬁned as in equation 2.3, and the cladding refractive index (n2) have
given values (in order to get the proﬁles in ﬁgure 2.3 the values
NA = 0.8221 and n2 = 1.505 have been used). From these, the core
index can be calculated from the deﬁnition of NA. Also, the core
and cladding radius are taken in input (a = 1.9 µm and a′ = 62.5 µm
in the example). Given the wavelength, the normalized frequency V
can be calculated as in equation 2.4. Knowing from equation 2.11
and 2.10 how the normalized frequency is related to the propagation
constants of each guided mode, it is possible to graphically solve the
eigenvalue equation 2.13 and to ﬁnd all the uj and wj which are con-
sistent with both the equations. Those are used to ﬁnd the values βj
of the guided modes (each j refers to one LP mode). This calculation
is done by the following code:
%% Solving the dispersion function to find every guided mode
Ko = 2*pi/lambda;
V = (pi*2*r_1*NA)/lambda;
U = linspace(0,V,50000);
5
w1 = sqrt(V^2 - U.^2);
u1 = [];
peak_index = 1;
m = -1;
m_tab = [];
10
l_tab = [];
while isempty(peak_index) == 0
u1 = [u1 1i U(peak_index)];
m = m+1;
dispf = (besselj(m,U)./(U.*besselj(m-1,U)))...
15
+ (besselk(m,w1)./(w1.*besselk(m-1,w1)));
[peak_dispf,peak_index] = findpeaks(-abs(dispf));
l_tab = [l_tab 1:length(peak_index)];
for i = 1:length(peak_index)
m_tab = [m_tab m];
20
end
89
==PAGE:100==
90
lp modes calculator
end
m = m-1;
u1 = [u1(3:end) 1i];
w1 = sqrt(V^2 - u1.^2);
25
end_mode = [];
for i = 1:length(u1)
if u1(i) == 1i
end_mode = [end_mode i];
end
30
end
u_beta = u1;
u_beta(end_mode) = [];
beta = sqrt(((n1*Ko)^2)-(u_beta/r_1).^2);
35
%propagation constant of the fiber [degree/microm]
n_eff = beta/Ko;
% Make the beta/n_eff table for every supported mode
T = table(m_tab’,l_tab’,beta’,n_eff’);
40
% Add Variables Names
T.Properties.VariableNames = {’m’,’l’,’Beta’,’n_eff’};
% Display the table
fprintf(’\n
LP_ml GUIDED MODES\n\n’);
disp(T);
The code also prints out a table of all the guided LP modes and their
propagation constants. The values of βj are then used to calculated
the electric ﬁeld components for each mode. In this case the compo-
nents are already written in the code:
45
r_1 = 1.9;
%core radius [um]
r_2 = 62.5;
%clad radius [um]
m = input(’m: ’);
l = input(’l: ’);
u = u1(end_mode(m+1)+1:end_mode(m+2)-1);
50
w = w1(end_mode(m+1)+1:end_mode(m+2)-1);
%% S parameter and coordinates definition
if m == 0 && l == 1
u = u(1);
w = w(1);
55
s = -1 + (u^2*w^2/(V^2))...
*(besselj(0,u)/(u*besselj(1,u)))*(Delta);
end
%% Coordinates definition
r = linspace(0,62.5,2000);
60
%definition of the radial coordinate r
teta = linspace(0, 2*pi, 2000)’;
==PAGE:101==
lp modes calculator
91
%definition of the angular coordinate teta
[Teta,R]=meshgrid(teta,r);
%definition of a grid used to build the
65
%coordinates of the field as matrixes
%% Field components
if m == 0 && l == 1
% FUNDAMENTAL MODE
% Field components for psi = 0 in radial coord
70
% CORE FIELD 0 < r =< a
Ex_core = (-1i*A*beta(1)*r_1/u*(((1-s)/2)...
*besselj(0,u*R/r_1)-((1+s)/2)...
*besselj(2,u*R/r_1).*cos(2*Teta))).*(R<=r_1);
Ey_core = 1i*A*beta(1)*r_1/u*((1+s)/2)...
75
*besselj(2,u*R/r_1).*sin(2*Teta).*(R<=r_1);
% CLADDING FIELD r_1 < r < r_2
Ex_clad = (-1i*A*beta(1)*r_1*besselj(1,u)...
/(w*besselk(1,w))*((1-s)/2*besselk(0,w*R/r_1)...
+((1+s)/2)*besselk(2,w*R/r_1).*cos(2*Teta)))...
80
.*(R>=r_1);
Ey_clad = (-1i*A*beta(1)*r_1*besselj(1,u)...
/(w*besselk(1,w))*(((1+s)/2))...
*besselk(2,w*R/r_1).*sin(2*Teta)).*(R>=r_1);
else
85
% HIGHER MODES (it is not used the s parameter (s~0)
% CORE FIELD 0 < r =< a
Ex_core = 2*A*besselj(m,u*R/r_1).*sin(m*Teta)...
.*(R<=r_1);
Ey_core = 0;
90
% CLADDING FIELD r_1 < r < r_2
Ex_clad = 2*A*(besselj(m,u)/besselk(m,w))...
*besselk(m,w*R/r_1).*sin(m*Teta).*(R>=r_1);
Ey_clad = 0;
end
95
Ecore = Ex_core + Ey_core ;
%transverse field in the core
Eclad = Ex_clad + Ey_clad ;
%transverse field in the cladding
where A is calculated by normalization. Finally, the electric ﬁelds are
plotted in surface and contour plot. The code also provides a basic
interaction with the user in order to allow the selection of the mode
one wants to calculate or plot. Furthermore, it is possible to include
a Gaussian laser beam which is supposed to be used as input in the
considered ﬁber and the power coupling coefﬁcient is calculated for
a given combination of laser beam and ﬁber. However, further inves-
tigation on this matter is outside the scope of this work.
==PAGE:102==
==PAGE:103==
B
D O M I N A N T L P 1 1 D G D G R A P H S
In section 5.2.1, the distributed mode coupling is measured by S2
scans for all the ﬁbers. The MPI values, starting from a dominant
LP01 or a dominant LP11 are calculated considering coupling to all
the other modes, and when possible not considering the peak given
by the splice to the source. In ﬁgure 5.22 and 5.23, the beating ampli-
tude versus group delay measurements, the integration range and the
retreived intensity patterns are shown for every ﬁber in the dominant
LP01 case. For completeness, here in ﬁgure B.1 and B.2, are included
the images which refers to the dominant LP11 case. The LP11 mode
is excited by the use of the thermal grating in ﬁgure 5.17 and then a
splice to the ﬁber of interest is made. The beam quality is ensured by
the analysis done in section 5.1.7.
Figure B.1: Beating amplitude versus DGD of a dominant LP11 beam out-
put of 1500 m step-index two-mode ﬁber. On the top, the in-
tensity image of the dominant mode (left) and the other guided
mode (right), the latter obtained by integrating over the black
rectangles, the same used to calculate the MPI value in table 5.1.
93
==PAGE:104==
94
dominant lp11 dgd graphs
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure B.2: Beating amplitude versus DGD of a dominant LP11 beam out-
put of (a) 200 m step-index four-mode ﬁber, (b) 1.5 km graded-
index two-mode ﬁber and (c) 8.75 km graded-index four-mode
ﬁber. On the top, the intensity images of the dominant mode
(left) and the other guided modes (right), the latter obtained by
integrating over the black rectangles, the same used to calcu-
late the MPI values in table 5.1. In the four-mode ﬁber case,
the images only show the indicated peaks and the MPI value is
calculated on the black rectangle.
==PAGE:105==
B I B L I O G R A P H Y
A.D. Kersey, M.a. Davis, H.J. Patrick, M. LeBlanc, K.P. Koo, C.G. Ask-
ins, M.a. Putnam, and E.J. Friebele
1997 “Fiber grating sensors”, J. Light. Technol., vol. 15, 8, pp. 1442-
1463, issn: 0733-8724, doi: 10.1109/50.618377.
Agrawal, Govind P.
2011 “Optical receivers”, in Fiber-Optic Communication Systems, John
Wiley & Sons, Inc., pp. 128-181, isbn: 9780470918524, doi:
10.1002/9780470918524.ch4.
Andermahr, N., T. Theeg, and C. Fallnich
2008 “Novel approach for polarization-sensitive mode measure-
ment and its application in few-mode ﬁber ampliﬁer sys-
tems”, 2008 Conf. Quantum Electron. Laser Sci. Conf. Lasers
Electro-Optics, CLEO/QELS, pp. 9-10.
Anemogiannis, E. and E. N. Glytsis
2003 “Transmission characteristics of long-period ﬁber gratings
having arbitrary azimuthal / radial refractive index varia-
tions”, Lightwave, vol. 21, 1, pp. 218-227.
Artiglia, M., G. Coppa, P. Di Vita, M. Potenza, and A. Sharma
1989 “Mode ﬁeld diameter measurements in single-mode opti-
cal ﬁbers”, J. Light. Technol., vol. 7, 8, pp. 1139-1152, issn:
07338724, doi: 10.1109/50.32374.
Ball, G. A. and W. W. Morey
1992 “Continuously tunable single-mode erbium ﬁber laser.” Opt.
Lett., vol. 17, 6, pp. 420-422, issn: 0146-9592, doi: 10.1364/
OL.17.000420.
Bauters, Jared F., Michael L. Davenport, Martijn J. R. Heck, J. K. Doylend,
Arnold Chen, Alexander W. Fang, and John E. Bowers
2013 “Silicon on ultra-low-loss waveguide photonic integration
platform.” Opt. Express, vol. 21, 1, pp. 544-55, issn: 1094-4087,
doi: 10.1364/OE.21.000544.
Bilodeau, F., K.O. Hill, B. Malo, D.C. Johnson, and I.M. Skinner
1991 “Efﬁcient, narrowband LP01-LP02 mode convertors fabricated
in photosensitive ﬁbre: spectral response”, Electron. Lett., vol. 27,
8, p. 682, issn: 00135194, doi: 10.1049/el:19910426.
95
==PAGE:106==
96
bibliography
Biss, D. and T. Brown
2004 “Cylindrical vector beam focusing through a dielectric inter-
face: reply to comment.” Opt. Express, vol. 12, 10, pp. 970-971,
issn: 1094-4087, doi: 10.1364/OPEX.12.000970.
Bjarklev, A.
1986 “Microdeformation losses of single-mode ﬁbers with step-
index proﬁles”, J. Light. Technol., vol. LT-4, 3, pp. 341 -346,
issn: 15582213, doi: 10.1109/JLT.1986.1074708.
Blin, Stephane, Duc Minh Nguyen, Thanh Nam Nguyen, Monique
Thual, Thierry Chartier, and Laurent Provino
2009 “Simple modal analysis method for multi-mode ﬁbers”, Eu-
ropean Conference on Optical Communication, ECOC, p. 5287326.
Born, M. and E. Wolf
1999 Principles of optics, Cambridge University Press, isbn: 0521642221,
9780521642224.
Bromage, Jake, John M. Fini, Christophe Dorrer, and Jonathan D.
Zuegel
2011 “Characterization and optimization of Yb-doped photonic-
crystal ﬁber rod ampliﬁers using spatially resolved spectral
interferometry.” Appl. Opt., vol. 50, 14, pp. 2001-2007, issn:
0003-6935, doi: 10.1364/AO.50.002001.
Chen, Xi, Jiayuan He, An Li, Jia Ye, and William Shieh
2013 “Characterization and analysis of few-mode ﬁber channel
dynamics”, IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett., vol. 25, 18, pp. 1819-
1822, issn: 10411135, doi: 10.1109/LPT.2013.2275249.
Daxhelet, Xavier and Mykola Kulishov
2003 “Theory and practice of long-period gratings: when a loss
becomes a gain.” Opt. Lett., vol. 28, 9, pp. 686-688, issn: 0146-
9592, doi: 10.1364/OL.28.000686.
DeLisa, Matthew P., Zheng Zhang, Mira Shiloach, Saeed Pilevar, Christo-
pher C. Davis, James S. Sirkis, and William E. Bentley
2000 “Evanescent wave long-period ﬁber bragg grating as an im-
mobilized antibody biosensor”, en, Anal. Chem., vol. 72, 13
(July 2000), pp. 2895-2900, issn: 0003-2700, doi: 10 . 1021 /
ac9912395.
Demas, Jeff and Siddharth Ramachandran
2014 “Sub-second mode measurement of ﬁbers using Cˆ2 imag-
ing”, Opt. Express, vol. 22, 19, p. 23043, issn: 1094-4087, doi:
10.1364/OE.22.023043.
==PAGE:107==
bibliography
97
Dong, Liang, Kunimasa Saitoh, Fanting Kong, Paul Foy, Thomas Hawkins,
and Devon Mcclane
2012 “Mode area scaling for high power ﬁber lasers with all-solid
photonic bandgap ﬁbers”, vol. 8381, 24, pp. 1-7, doi: 10.111
7/12.921225.
Eggleton, B.J., a.a. Abramov, J.a. Rogers, R.P. Espindola, a. Hale, R.S.
Windeler, and T.a. Strasser
1999 “Electrically tunable efﬁcient broadband long-period ﬁber
grating ﬁlter”, Tech. Dig. Summ. Pap. Present. Conf. Lasers Electro-
Optics. Postconf. Ed. CLEO ’99. Conf. Lasers Electro-Optics (IEEE
Cat. No.99CH37013), vol. 11, 4, pp. 445-447, doi: 10.1109/
CLEO.1999.833809.
Essiambre, René-Jean and Robert W. Tkach
2012 “Capacity Trends and Limits of Optical Communication Net-
works”, Proc. IEEE, vol. 100, 5 (May 2012), pp. 1035-1055,
issn: 0018-9219, doi: 10.1109/JPROC.2012.2182970.
Fienup, J. R.
1982 “Phase retrieval algorithms: a comparison.” Appl. Opt., vol. 21,
15, pp. 2758-2769, issn: 0003-6935, doi: 10 . 1364 / AO . 21 .
002758.
Foschini, Gerard J., R. M. Jopson, Lynn E. Nelson, and Herwig Kogel-
nik
1999 “Statistics of PMD-induced chromatic ﬁber dispersion”, J.
Light. Technol., vol. 17, 9, pp. 1560-1565, issn: 07338724, doi:
10.1109/50.788561.
Gloge, D.
1971 “Weakly guiding ﬁbres”, Appl Opt, vol. 10, 10, pp. 2252-2258,
issn: 00036935, doi: 10.1364/AO.10.002252.
Gray, D. R., S. R. Sandoghchi, N. V. Wheeler, G. T. Jasion, J. P. Wooler,
M. N. Petrovich, F. Poletti, and D. J. Richardson
2014 “Towards real-time mode content characterization of multi-
mode ﬁbers”, 2014 European Conference on Optical Communi-
cation (ECOC), pp. 1-3, doi: 10.1109/ECOC.2014.6964102.
Grüner-Nielsen, Lars and Jeffrey W. Nicholson
2012 “Stable mode converter for conversion between LP 01 and
LP 11 using a thermally induced long period grating”, 2012
IEEE Photonics Soc. Summer Top. Meet. Ser. PSST 2012, vol. 2,
pp. 214-215, doi: 10.1109/PHOSST.2012.6280803.
==PAGE:108==
98
bibliography
Grüner-Nielsen, Lars, Yi Sun, Jeffrey W. Nicholson, Dan Jakobsen,
Kim G. Jespersen, Robert Lingle, and Bera Pálsdóttir
2012 “Few mode transmission ﬁber with low DGD, low mode
coupling, and low loss”, J. Light. Technol., vol. 30, 23, pp. 3693-
3698, issn: 07338724, doi: 10.1109/JLT.2012.2227243.
Grüner-nielsen, Lars, Yi Sun, Rasmus V Jensen, Jeffrey W Nicholson,
and Robert Lingle Jr
2014 “Splicing of Few Mode Fibers”, 2014 European Conference on
Optical Communication (ECOC), 1, pp. 1-3.
Grüner-nielsen, Lars, Yi Sun, Rasmus V Jensen, Jeffrey W Nicholson,
Robert Lingle Jr, and Brondby
2015 “Recent advances in low DGD few-mode ﬁber design , fab-
rication , characterization and experiments”, pp. 3-5, doi:
10.1364/OFC.2015.M2C.3.
Gu, Guancheng, Fanting Kong, Thomas W. Hawkins, Paul Foy, Kanx-
ian Wei, Bryce Samson, and Liang Dong
2013 “Impact of ﬁber outer boundaries on leaky mode losses in
leakage channel ﬁbers”, Opt. Express, vol. 21, 20, pp. 24039-
24048, issn: 1094-4087, doi: 10.1364/OE.21.024039.
Hamel, Philippe, Yves Jaouën, Renaud Gabet, and Siddharth Ramachan-
dran
2007 “Optical low-coherence reﬂectometry for complete chromatic
dispersion characterization of few-mode ﬁbers.” Opt. Lett.,
vol. 32, 9, pp. 1029-1031, issn: 0146-9592, doi: 10.1364/OL.
32.001029.
Heiblum, M.
1975 “Analysis of curved optical-waveguides by conformal trans-
formation”, IEEE J. Quantum Electron., vol. 11, 2, pp. 75 -83,
issn: 15581713, doi: 10.1109/JQE.1975.1068563.
Hill, K.O., B. Malo, K.A. Vineberg, F. Bilodeau, D.C. Johnson, and I.
Skinner
1990 “Efﬁcient mode conversion in telecommunication ﬁbre us-
ing externally written gratings”, Electron. Lett., vol. 26, 16,
p. 1270, issn: 00135194, doi: 10.1049/el:19900818.
Hill, K.O., F. Bilodeau, B. Malo, and D.C. Johnson
1991 “Birefringent photosensitivity in monomode optical ﬁbre: ap-
plication to external writing of rocking ﬁlters”, Electron. Lett.,
vol. 27, 17, p. 1548, issn: 00135194, doi: 10.1049/el:199109
71.
==PAGE:109==
bibliography
99
Huttner, B., C. Geiser, and N. Gisin
2000 “Polarization-induced distortions in optical ﬁber networks
with polarization-mode dispersion and polarization-dependent
losses”, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., vol. 6, 2, pp. 317-
329, issn: 1077260X, doi: 10.1109/2944.847767.
Hwang, I.K.
1999 “Long-period ﬁber gratings based on periodic microbends”,
Opt. Lett., vol. 24, 18, pp. 1263 -1265, issn: 15394794, doi:
10.1364/OL.24.001263.
Igarashi, Koji, Daiki Souma, Takehiro Tsuritani, and Itsuro Morita
2014 “Performance evaluation of selective mode conversion based
on phase plates for a 10-mode ﬁber”, Opt. Express, vol. 22, 17,
p. 20881, issn: 1094-4087, doi: 10.1364/OE.22.020881.
Jasapara, J. and a. D. Yablon
2012 “Spectrogram approach to S2 ﬁber mode analysis to distin-
guish between dispersion and distributed scattering.” Opt.
Lett., vol. 37, 18, pp. 3906-8, issn: 1539-4794, doi: 10.1364/
OL.37.003906.
Johnson, D. C., F. Bilodeau, B. Malo, K. O. Hill, P. G. Wigley, and G. I.
Stegeman
1992 “Long-length, long-period rocking ﬁlters fabricated from con-
ventional monomode telecommunications optical ﬁber.” Opt.
Lett., vol. 17, 22, pp. 1635-1637, issn: 0146-9592, doi: 10 .
1364/OL.17.001635.
Jollivet, Clemence, Daniel Flamm, Michael Duparre, and Axel Schulz-
gen
2014 “Detailed characterization of optical ﬁbers by combining S2
imaging with correlation ﬁlter mode analysis”, J. Light. Tech-
nol., vol. 32, 6, pp. 1068-1074, issn: 07338724, doi: 10.1109/
JLT.2013.2297337.
Kadwani, Pankaj, Clemence Jollivet, R. Andrew Sims, Axel Schülzgen,
Lawrence Shah, and Martin Richardson
2012 “Comparison of higher-order mode suppression and Q-switched
laser performance in thulium-doped large mode area and
photonic crystal ﬁbers”, Opt. Express, vol. 20, 22, p. 24295,
issn: 1094-4087, doi: 10.1364/OE.20.024295.
Kaiser, Thomas, Daniel Flamm, Siegmund Schröter, and Michael Du-
parré
2009 “Complete modal decomposition for optical ﬁbers using CGH-
based correlation ﬁlters.” Opt. Express, vol. 17, 11, pp. 9347-
9356, issn: 1094-4087, doi: 10.1364/OE.17.009347.
==PAGE:110==
100
bibliography
Kapron, F. P.
1970 “Radiation losses in glass optical waveguides”, Appl. Phys.
Lett., vol. 17, 10, p. 423, issn: 00036951, doi: 10 . 1063 / 1 .
1653255.
Kashyap, Raman
1999 Fiber Bragg Gratings, Elsevier, pp. 119-193, isbn: 9780124005600,
doi: 10.1016/B978-012400560-0/50005-1.
Kerttula, Juho, Valery Filippov, Vasily Ustimchik, Yuri Chamorovskiy,
and Oleg G. Okhotnikov
2012 “Mode evolution in long tapered ﬁbers with high tapering
ratio”, Opt. Express, vol. 20, 23, p. 25461, issn: 1094-4087, doi:
10.1364/OE.20.025461.
Knight, J.C., T.a. Birks, P.St.J. Russell, and J.P. de Sandro
1998 “Properties of photonic crystal ﬁber and the effective index
model”, vol. 15, 3, pp. 748-752, issn: 1084-7529, doi: 10.136
4/JOSAA.15.000748.
Leminger, O.G. and G.K. Grau
1980 “Analytical relations between modal power distribution and
near-ﬁeld intensity in graded-index ﬁbres”, vol. 16, pp. 721-
722, doi: 10.1049/el:19790513.
Leon-Saval, Sergio G., Nicolas K. Fontaine, Joel R. Salazar-Gil, Burcu
Ercan, Roland Ryf, and Joss Bland-Hawthorn
2014 “Mode-selective photonic lanterns for space-division multi-
plexing.” Opt. Express, vol. 22, 1, pp. 1036-44, issn: 1094-4087,
doi: 10.1364/OE.22.001036.
Liu, Yang, Liwei Wang, Min Zhang, Dongsheng Tu, Xianhui Mao, and
Yanbiao Liao
2007 “Long-period grating relative humidity sensor with hydro-
gel coating”, English, IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett., vol. 19, 12
(June 2007), pp. 880-882, issn: 1041-1135, doi: 10.1109/LPT.
2007.897551.
Ma, Y. Z., Y. Sych, G. Onishchukov, S. Ramachandran, U. Peschel, B.
Schmauss, and G. Leuchs
2009 “Fiber-modes and ﬁber-anisotropy characterization using low-
coherence interferometry”, Appl. Phys. B Lasers Opt., vol. 96,
pp. 345-353, issn: 09462171, doi: 10.1007/s00340-009-3517-
9.
Ma, Yuzhao
2009 Characterization of higher order modes in optical ﬁbers, PhD the-
sis, Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg.
==PAGE:111==
bibliography
101
Marcuse, D
1973 “Coupled mode theory of round optical ﬁbers”, Bell Syst.
Tech. J., vol. 52, 6, pp. 817-842, doi: 10.1002/j.1538-7305.
1973.tb01992.x.
Marcuse, D.
1976 “Curvature loss formula for optical ﬁbers”, J. Opt. Soc. Am.,
vol. 66, 3, pp. 216 -220, issn: 00303941, doi: 10.1364/JOSA.
66.000216.
Martinez-rios, Alejandro, David Monzon-hernandez, Ismael Torres-
gomez, and Guillermo Salceda-delgado
2012 Long period ﬁber gratings, ed. by Yasin Dr Moh, InTech, chap. 4,
pp. 275-294, isbn: 978-953-307-922-6.
Mizrahi, Victor, David J. DiGiovanni, Robert M. Atkins, Steven G.
Grubb, Yong Kwan Park, and Jean Marc P Delavaux
1993 “Stable single-mode erbium ﬁber-grating laser for digital com-
munication”, J. Light. Technol., vol. 11, 12, pp. 2021-2025, issn:
07338724, doi: 10.1109/50.257965.
Nagano, K, S Kawakami, and S Nishida
1978 “Change of the refractive index in an optical ﬁber due to
external forces.” Appl. Opt., vol. 17, 13 (July 1978), pp. 2080-
5, issn: 0003-6935, doi: 10.1364/AO.17.002080.
Namihira, Y.
1994 “Relationship between nonlinear effective area and mode-
ﬁeld diameter for dispersion shifted ﬁbres”, Electron. Lett.,
vol. 30, 3 (Feb. 1994), pp. 262-264, issn: 0013-5194, doi: 10.
1049/el:19940149.
1997 “Comparison of wavelength dependence of correction factor
of effective area and MFD for large effective area ﬁbers with
dispersion shifted ﬁbers”.
Nguyen, Duc Minh, Stéphane Blin, Thanh Nam Nguyen, Sy Dat Le,
Laurent Provino, Monique Thual, and Thierry Chartier
2012 “Modal decomposition technique for multimode ﬁbers”, Appl.
Opt., vol. 51, p. 450, issn: 0003-6935, doi: 10.1364/AO.51.
000450.
Nhlapo, Thabiso J.
2003 Theory of long-period gratings, PhD thesis, University of Johan-
nesburg.
Nicholson, J W, a D Yablon, S Ramachandran, and S Ghalmi
2008 “Spatially and spectrally resolved imaging of modal content
in large-mode-area ﬁbers.” Opt. Express, vol. 16, 10, pp. 7233-
7243, issn: 1094-4087, doi: 10.1364/OE.16.007233.
==PAGE:112==
102
bibliography
Nicholson, J. W., J. M. Fini, a. M. DeSantolo, X. Liu, K. Feder, P. S.
Westbrook, V. R. Supradeepa, E. Monberg, F. DiMarcello, R.
Ortiz, C. Headley, and D. J. DiGiovanni
2012 “Scaling the effective area of higher-order-mode erbium-doped
ﬁber ampliﬁers”, Opt. Express, vol. 20, 22, p. 24575, issn:
1094-4087, doi: 10.1364/OE.20.024575.
Nicholson, Jeffrey W., Andrew D. Yablon, John M. Fini, and Marc D.
Mermelstein
2009 “Measuring the modal content of large-mode-area ﬁbers”,
IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., vol. 15, 1, pp. 61-70, issn:
1077260X, doi: 10.1109/JSTQE.2008.2010239.
Nicholson, J.W., J.M Fini, S. Ghalmi, J.C. Jasapara, a. DeSantolo, E.
Monberg, and F. Dimarcello
2010 “Measuring the modes of optical ﬁbers using S2 imaging”,
Lasers Electro-Optics Quantum Electron. Laser Sci. Conf. (QELS),
2010 Conf., pp. 12-13.
Niu, Y. X., Y. F. Wang, X. Liu, C. Zhang, and S. S. Zhu
1998 “The Laser beam quality factor M-2 and its measurement”,
Laser Process. Mater. Ind. Appl. Ii, vol. 3550, pp. 378-382, doi:
10.1117/12.317915.
Othonos, Andreas, Kyriacos Kalli, and Glenn E. Kohnke
2000 “Fiber Bragg Gratings: Fundamentals and Applications in
Telecommunications and Sensing”, Phys. Today, vol. 53, 5,
p. 61, issn: 00319228, doi: 10.1063/1.883086.
Otto, Hans Jürgen, Florian Jansen, Fabian Stutzki, Cesar Jauregui,
Jens Limpert, and Andreas Tunnermann
2013 “Improved modal reconstruction for spatially and spectrally
resolved imaging (S2)”, J. Light. Technol., vol. 31, 8, pp. 1295-
1299, issn: 07338724, doi: 10.1109/JLT.2013.2242430.
Qian, Dayou, Ming-fang Huang, Ezra Ip, Yue-kai Huang, Yin Shao,
Junqiang Hu, and Ting Wang
2011 “101.7-Tb/s (370x294-Gb/s) PDM-128QAM-OFDM transmis-
sion over 3 x 55-km SSMF using pilot-based phase noise mit-
igation”, America (NY)., pp. 7-9, doi: 10 . 1364 / OFC . 2011 .
PDPB5.
Qian, Dayou, Ezra Ip, Ming-fang Huang, Ming-jun Li, Arthur Doga-
riu, and Shaoliang Zhang
2012 “1 . 05Pb / s Transmission with 109b / s / Hz Spectral Efﬁ-
ciency using Hybrid Single- and Few-Mode Cores”, 1, pp. 6-
7, doi: 10.1364/FIO.2012.FW6C.3.
==PAGE:113==
bibliography
103
Qian, Jing-ren Qian Jing-ren and Wei-ping Huang Wei-ping Huang
1986 “Coupled-mode theory for LP modes”, J. Light. Technol., vol. 4,
6, issn: 0733-8724, doi: 10.1109/JLT.1986.1074766.
Ramachandran, Siddharth, Samir Ghalmi, Zhiyong Wang, and Man
Yan
2002a “Band-selection ﬁlters with concatenated long-period grat-
ings in few-mode ﬁbers”, Opt. Lett., vol. 27, 19, pp. 1678-
1680, issn: 0146-9592, doi: 10.1364/OL.27.001678.
Ramachandran, Siddharth, Zhiyong Wang, and Man Yan
2002b “Bandwidth control of long-period grating-based mode con-
verters in few-mode ﬁbers.” Opt. Lett., vol. 27, 9, pp. 698-700,
issn: 0146-9592, doi: 10.1364/OL.27.000698.
Randel, Sebastian, Roland Ryf, Alberto Sierra, Peter J Winzer, Alan
H Gnauck, Cristian A Bolle, René-Jean Essiambre, David W
Peckham, Alan McCurdy, and Robert Lingle
2011 “6x56-Gb/s mode-division multiplexed transmission over 33-
km few-mode ﬁber enabled by 6x6 MIMO equalization.” Opt.
Express, vol. 19, 17 (Aug. 2011), pp. 16697-707, issn: 1094-
4087, doi: 10.1364/OE.19.016697.
Rao, Y.J.
2003 “Novel ﬁber-optic sensors based on long-period ﬁber grat-
ings written by high-frequency CO/sub 2/ laser pulses”,
J. Light. Technol., vol. 21, 5 (May 2003), pp. 1320-1327, issn:
0733-8724, doi: 10.1109/JLT.2003.810561.
Richardson, D. J., J. M. Fini, and L. E. Nelson
2013 “Space division multiplexing in optical ﬁbres”, Nature Pho-
tonics, 7, pp. 354-362, doi: 10.1038/nphoton.2013.94.
Rufﬁn, a Boh, Ming-Jun Li, Xin Chen, Andrey Kobyakov, and Frank
Annunziata
2005 “Brillouin gain analysis for ﬁbers with different refractive
indices.” Opt. Lett., vol. 30, 23, pp. 3123-3125, issn: 0146-9592,
doi: 10.1364/OL.30.003123.
Salsi, Massimiliano, Clemens Koebele, Donato Sperti, Patrice Tran,
Patrick Brindel, Haik Mardoyan, Sebastien Bigo, Aurelien
Boutin, Frederic Verluise, Pierre Sillard, Marianne Astruc, Li-
onel Provost, Frederic Cerou, and Gabriel Charlet
2011 “Two mode transmission at 2x100Gb/s, over 40km-long pro-
totype few-mode ﬁber, using LCOS-based programmable mode
multiplexer and demultiplexer”, 2011 Opt. Fiber Commun.
Conf. Expo. Natl. Fiber Opt. Eng. Conf., vol. 19, 17, pp. 1-3,
issn: pending, doi: 10.1364/OE.19.016593.
==PAGE:114==
104
bibliography
Savin, S., M. J. Digonnet, G. S. Kino, and H. J. Shaw
2000 “Tunable mechanically induced long-period ﬁber gratings.”
Opt. Lett., vol. 25, 10, pp. 710-712, issn: 0146-9592.
Scarmozzino, R., A. Gopinath, R. Pregla, and S. Helfert
2000 “Numerical techniques for modeling guided-wave photonic
devices”, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., vol. 6, 1 (Jan.
2000), pp. 150-162, issn: 1077-260X, doi: 10.1109/2944.8268
83.
Schermer, Ross T. and James H. Cole
2007 “Improved bend loss formula veriﬁed for optical ﬁber by
simulation and experiment”, IEEE J. Quantum Electron., vol. 43,
10, pp. 899-909, issn: 00189197, doi: 10 . 1109 / JQE . 2007 .
903364.
Schimpf, D. N., R. a. Barankov, and S. Ramachandran
2011 “Cross-correlated (C2) imaging of ﬁber and waveguide modes.”
Opt. Express, vol. 19, 14, pp. 13008-13019, issn: 1094-4087,
doi: 10.1364/OE.19.013008.
Schulze, Christian, Adrian Lorenz, and Daniel Flamm
2013 “Mode resolved bend loss in few-mode optical ﬁbers”, Opt.
Express, vol. 21, 3, pp. 75-83, issn: 1094-4087, doi: 10.1364/
OE.21.003170.
Shaklan, Stuart
1991 “Selective mode injection and observation for few-mode ﬁber
optics”, Appl. Opt., vol. 30, 30, pp. 4379-4383, doi: 10.1364/
AO.30.004379.
Sharma, A.B.
1984 “Constant-curvature loss in monomode ﬁbers: an experimen-
tal investigation”, Appl. Opt., vol. 23, 19, pp. 3297 -3301, issn:
15394522, doi: 10.1364/AO.23.003297.
Shtaif, M. and A. Mecozzi
2000 “Study of the frequency autocorrelation of the differential
group delay in ﬁbers with polarization mode dispersion.”
Opt. Lett., vol. 25, 10, pp. 707-709, issn: 0146-9592, doi: 10.
1364/OL.25.000707.
Siegman, A.E.
1993 “Deﬁning, measuring, and optimizing laser beam quality”,
Proc. SPIE, vol. 1868, pp. 2-12, doi: 10.1117/12.150601.
Skorobogatiy, M., C. Anastassiou, Steven Johnson, O. Weisberg, Torkel
Engeness, Steven Jacobs, Rokan Ahmad, and Yoel Fink
2003 “Quantitative characterization of higher-order mode convert-
ers in weakly multimoded ﬁbers.” Opt. Express, vol. 11, 22,
pp. 2838-2847, issn: 1094-4087, doi: 10.1364/OE.11.002838.
==PAGE:115==
bibliography
105
Sleiffer, V. a J. M., P. Leoni, Y. Jung, J. Surof, M. Kuschnerov, V. Vel-
janovski, S. U. Alam, D. J. Richardson, Y. Sun, B. Corbett, R.
Winﬁeld, S. Calabrò, and H. Waardt
2014 “20 x 960 Gb/s Space-division-multiplexed 32QAM trans-
mission over 60 km few-mode ﬁber”, vol. 22, 1, pp. 749-755,
issn: 10944087, doi: 10.1364/OE.22.000749.
Sleiffer, V.a.J.M., H. Chen, Y. Jung, P. Leoni, M. Kuschnerov, a. Simper-
ler, H. Fabian, H. Schuh, F. Kub, D.J. Richardson, S.U. Alam,
L. Grüner-Nielsen, Y. Sun, a.M.J. Koonen, and H. de Waardt
2013 “Field demonstration of mode-division multiplexing upgrade
scenarios on commercial networks”, Opt. Express, vol. 21, 25,
p. 31036, issn: 1094-4087, doi: 10.1364/OE.21.031036.
Snyder, A.W.
1983 Optical waveguide theory, Chapman and Hall, isbn: 9780412099502.
Soh, Daniel Beom Soo, Johan Nilsson, Seungin Baek, Christophe Code-
mard, Yoonchan Jeong, and Valery Philippov
2004 “Modal power decomposition of beam intensity proﬁles into
linearly polarized modes of multimode optical ﬁbers.” J. Opt.
Soc. Am. A. Opt. Image Sci. Vis., vol. 21, 7, pp. 1241-1250, issn:
1084-7529, doi: 10.1364/JOSAA.21.001241.
Stutzki, Fabian, Hans-Jürgen Otto, Florian Jansen, Christian Gaida,
Cesar Jauregui, Jens Limpert, and Andreas Tünnermann
2011 “High-speed modal decomposition of mode instabilities in
high-power ﬁber lasers”, Opt. Lett., vol. 36, 23, p. 4572, issn:
0146-9592, doi: 10.1364/OL.36.004572.
Szczepanek, Paul S. and John W. Berthold
1978 “Side Launch Excitation of Selected Modes in Graded-index
Optical Fibers”, Phys. Scr., vol. 17, 20, pp. 3245-3247, issn:
0031-8949, doi: 10.1088/0031-8949/1989/T29/041.
Vaziri, M.
1997 “An etched two-mode ﬁber modal coupling element”, J. Light.
Technol., vol. 15, 3 (Mar. 1997), pp. 474-481, issn: 07338724,
doi: 10.1109/50.557563.
Venghaus, Herbert
2012 Fibre optic communication : key devices, Springer, isbn: 9783642205163.
Vengsarkar, Ashish M., Paul J. Lemaire, Justin B. Judkins, Vikram
Bhatia, Turan Erdogan, and John E. Sipe
1996 “Long-period ﬁber gratings as band-rejection ﬁlters”, Light-
wave, vol. 14, 1, pp. 58-65, doi: 10.1109/50.476137.
==PAGE:116==
106
bibliography
Villatoro, Joel, David Monzón-Hernández, and Efrain Mejía
2003 “Fabrication and Modeling of Uniform-Waist Single-Mode
Tapered Optical Fiber Sensors”, EN, Appl. Opt., vol. 42, 13
(May 2003), p. 2278, issn: 0003-6935, doi: 10.1364/AO.42.
002278.
Winzer, Peter J.
2011 “Energy-Efﬁcient Optical Transport Capacity Scaling Through
Spatial Multiplexing”, IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett., vol. 23,
13 (July 2011), pp. 851-853, issn: 1041-1135, doi: 10.1109/
LPT.2011.2140103.
Yariv, A.
1973 “Coupled-mode theory for guided-wave optics”, IEEE J. Quan-
tum Electron., vol. 9, 9, issn: 0018-9197, doi: 10.1109/JQE.
1973.1077767.
Yin, Shizhuo, Sung-hyun Nam, Jesus Chavez, Chun Zhan, and Claire
Luo
2003 “Innovative long period gratings: principles and applications”,
SPIE, vol. 5206, pp. 30-44, issn: 0277786X, doi: 10.1117/12.
513910.
Zhu, Yinian, Pieter L. Swart, and Beatrys M. Lacquet
2001 “Wavelength tunable add/drop multiplexer for dense wavelength-
division multiplexing using short- and long-period ﬁber grat-
ings”, in Opt. Eng. Sens. Nanotechnol. (ICOSN ’01), ed. by
Koichi Iwata, International Society for Optics and Photonics,
pp. 174-178, doi: 10.1117/12.427042.
==PAGE:117==
“So Long, and Thanks for All the Fish”
