==PAGE:1==
Morten Nylin (s103034)
Flexible Row Detection for
Agriculture
Master’s Thesis, January 2016
==PAGE:2==
Flexible Row Detection for Agriculture
This report was prepared by:
Morten Nylin (s103034)
Advisors:
Jens Christian Andersen, Associate Professor at the Electrical Engineering Department of DTU
Helge Svenningsen, Electrical Engineering Department of DTU
Claes Dühring Jæger, Research Engineer at AGRO INTELLIGENCE
DTU Electrical Engineering
Automation and Control
Technical University of Denmark
Elektrovej, Building 326
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel: +45 4525 3576
studieadministration@elektro.dtu.dk
Project period:
September 2015- January 2016
ECTS:
30
Education:
MSc
Field:
Electrical Engineering
Class:
Public
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial fulﬁllment of the requirements for graduation
in the above education at the Technical University of Denmark.
Copyrights:
©Morten Nylin, 2016
==PAGE:3==
Flexible Row Detection for
Agriculture
Morten Nylin
Kongens Lyngby 2016
==PAGE:4==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Electrical Engineering
Automation and Control
Richard Petersens Plads, building 326,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 45 25 35 76
www.aut.elektro.dtu.dk
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
In resent years an increasing eort has been made to create an autonomous
platform, which would be able to robustly perform in crop elds. This thesis
presents a proposal to such a solution.
By Identifying the transitions between dierent surfaces, as for example seen
between crop rows and soil, using a Generalized Likelihood Ratio method, it
is possible to nd and estimate straight lines. For detecting the lines a new
method searching for a common vanishing point is introduced.
The entire process has been implemented as a plug-in for MobotWare, and has
been tested and found capable of navigating a mobile robot autonomously.
==PAGE:6==
ii
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract
i
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem Formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Thesis structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Overview
5
2.1
Task break down . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Camera
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Computer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.5
Experimental platform . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.5.1
Robotti . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.5.2
iRobot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Image analysis
9
3.1
General description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.2
M
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
Direction of application
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.4
Gray-scale input image . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.5
Image Scaling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.6
Thresholding
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.7
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.8
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4
Line Detection
25
4.1
General description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2
Inuence of Parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
==PAGE:8==
iv
CONTENTS
4.2.1
Number of Lines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2.2
Line width
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.3
Peak Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.4
Coordinate Transformation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.5
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.6
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5
Implementation
43
5.1
Final Implementation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.2
Path Planning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.3
SMR-CL Script . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.4
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6
Test
47
6.1
GLR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6.2
Line Detector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
6.3
Full System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6.4
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
7
Future Work
55
8
Conclusion
57
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Ever since the invention of the steam engine the process of automating produc-
tion facilities has been going on. Though many robots have been installed in
factories around the world, there are still potential for further implementations.
In for example agriculture robots have yet to make a great breakthrough. This
is mainly because agricultural production is not as nice and uniform, as the
one found in a traditional factory, meaning that every cow, chicken and crop
eld vary from one way or another, making it though for a hard coded robot to
repeatedly perform in the best possible way.
However in recent years a continually increasing eort has been made to make
autonomous robots, that are exible enough to perform in these areas, such as
automated milking machines and autonomous ploughs and hoes.
Exactly the automation of hoes is the goal of this thesis. For a hoe to perform
acceptably it must remove all unwanted plants in between the rows, without
damaging the rows them self. For that to happen the hoe has to know where
the rows are. This thesis seeks to introduce a new and robust way of identifying
the position of the crop rows, using a camera as the only exteroceptive sensor.
==PAGE:10==
2
Introduction
1.1
Problem Formulation
The goal of this thesis is to analyse images in to detect lines and rows, with a
focus on exibility, such that if line or row exist it must be found, though it
specically are should target lines along the direction of movement.
A further goal of the thesis is to implement the found methods, in order drive
an autonomous agricultural robot in a crop eld using only the found lines and
rows to navigate it.
1.2
Limitations
A few limitations has been necessary to have in this project.
The rst limitation had to be introduced because the thesis focuses on a mobile
platform for the nal implementation. It is therefore not feasible to only have
it work on a large and powerful computer, since they are not as easy to carry
around. That is why it has been decided that the nal product should work on
a raspberry pi 2 model B as well, as they are much more suited for mobile use.
The second limitation is there as a result of seasonal challenges. Because there
are no crops on the elds, it is not possible to test the system in these conditions.
Instead the nal tests are carried out in and around DTU campus Lyngby on
small straight tracks. As a consequence it has been necessary to change the
robotic platform as well, to something more suited for these areas.
1.3
Thesis structure
The thesis is divided into the following chapters
Overview
This chapter contains an analysis and breakdown of the tasks, that need to be
done in order to solve the problem. Furthermore it contains a short description
of the hardware and software used.
Image Analysis
Here the rst processing of the image is performed in order to enhance lines
dened by the transition from one material to the other.
Line Detection
From the output of the previous chapter, this one introduces a method for
==PAGE:11==
1.3 Thesis structure
3
identifying and estimating straight lines.
Implementation
This chapter gives a short description of the nal implementation, along with
an introduction to how the route planner works.
Test
Contains the test results and an analysis of what went well and what went
wrong.
Future Work
Recommendation for changes needed, in order to make the system even better.
Conclusion
Final remarks that concludes on the end result of the thesis.
==PAGE:12==
4
Introduction
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 2
Overview
To make a robot operate autonomously is not an easy task, especially more so
when it has to do it outside of the laboratory. It requires rst of all a platform
that are able to operate in the given environment and secondly the ability to
interpret sensor data in order to complete the mission goals.
This chapter focuses on identifying and describing these requirements.
2.1
Task break down
In general the task of controlling an autonomous robot can be split into four basic
areas: sensing, interpreting, planning and execution. For this project where the
robot should be able to navigate a crop eld, the four tasks are identied as:
Sensing. To perceive the crop rows a sensor is needed and because narrow lines
of small plants are hard to detect using range, data from for example a laser
scanner, the best choice is a camera. Although cameras can make it hard for
later processing due to changing lighting conditions. It is however still optimal
from an industry point of view, since the amount of information and detail
obtained in an image far overshadows other types of sensors compared to price.
The camera used is presented in the section below
==PAGE:14==
6
Overview
Interpreting. The job of the interpreter is to extract the positions of the crop
rows. Because a camera was chosen as the sensor for this thesis, the rst step
of this will be done through image analysis. The image analysis must make
the data ready for the second step, which is to get a good estimation of the
lines representing the rows. Further more these two steps should give stable
results even in changing conditions. Descriptions of the image analysis and line
estimation are found in chapter 3 and 4 accordingly.
Planning. From the line positions obtain under interpreting, the robot must
be able to plan its own route in such a way that it does not destroy any plants
unnecessary by crossing the rows. For the actual tests is must keep the robot
on the road or path. The planning is presented in chapter 5.
Execution. Finally the plan is made it needs to be executed, which is done
by passing the commands to the robots motor controller. While the passing of
commands is described in chapter 5, the results are presented in chapter 6.
2.2
Camera
The camera used for this thesis is a "Raspberry Pi Camera Board" revision 1.3
from element14, it measures 25x20x9 mm and has a xed focus with an focal
ratio of 2.9.
The image sensor itself is a OmniVision OV5647, which has a pixel size of 1.4x1.4
µm and a maximum resolution of 2592x1944 pixels, though this will be scaled
down to about ten percent in the nal implementation.
The eld of view horizontally is 53.50 degrees and vertically 41.41 degrees.
2.3
Computer
The Computer used for this project is the "Raspberry Pi 2 Model B" version
1.1 from Element14. It measures 85x56x16 mm and utilises a quad-core ARM
Cortex-A7 CPU running at a maximum speed of 900 MHz. It has 1 GB of RAM
and connects to the camera through the CSI camera interface.
==PAGE:15==
2.4 Software
7
2.4
Software
The software used for implementation, is MobotWare (Beck (2010)) [9] devel-
oped at DTU institute for Automation and Control. One of the main reasons
for using MobotWare is its easy way of implementing new functionality as plug-
ins, which not only allows for relatively fast prototyping, but also the ability to
reuse extensions for a large variety of dierent robots.
The plug-in created for this will be connected to the camera server, which is the
part of mobotware that handles all camera related actions.
2.5
Experimental platform
Due to the limitations in test areas it has been necessary to focus on two plat-
forms instead of one, because they each have their optimal working conditions
in dierent areas.
2.5.1
Robotti
The Robotti is the target platform for implementation of this project. It is an
agricultural platform developed by kongskilde, and are meant to perform in the
crop elds solving dierent tasks depending on whichever tool is mounted to it.
The dimensions are as can seen in gure 2.1
Figure 2.1: Dimensions of the robotti platform
However due to its large width it is not suited to run the tracks of the intended
test area.
==PAGE:16==
8
Overview
2.5.2
iRobot
Due to the limitations of the test areas, the nal implementation will be run
on the iRobot platform instead of the robotti. Its smaller dimensions as seen
in gure 2.2 and a powerful drive train makes it ideal for driving on smaller
paths, despite them being a little rough.
It has a dierential drive system where both wheels on the same side are con-
nected to a single electrical motor.
Figure 2.2: Dimensions of the iRobot platform
The raspberry pi and its camera is mount in the blue box seen in the drawing
above, at a height of 0.69 meters and an angle θ of 0 degrees.
Other sensors on the irobot includes encoders for odometry measurements and
a laser scanner for obstacle avoidance.
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 3
Image analysis
Image analysis is the process of making the a computer extract informations
from a 2D image, about things like the 3D space it represents. We as humans
have no trouble doing, our brain is constantly analysing our surroundings on a
subconscious level, and naturally we might think that computers can easily do
this as well.
However they can not.
Especially when working in at outside environment,
changing variables such as hight of the sun in the sky, and change weather con-
ditions, creates a wide variation images each with dierent intensity and colour
schemes.
To further complicate this problem, the limited processing power of computers,
make complex algorithms that might otherwise solve the problem, practically
impossible to use outside of the lab.
Despite these problems attempts has be made to utilise in several elds includ-
ing robotics. For example Jakobsen (2015) [1] which focused on identifying the
crop rows using only the colour dierence between the soil and crops. Unfortu-
nately this method was found to be very susceptible changing conditions.
In this chapter a robust method for highlighting the transition between crops
and the dirt around it is presented. Is based on the statistical Generalized Likeli-
hood Ratio (GLR), and is not limited to nding crop rows but rather transitions
between dierent areas in general.
The following will also explain the inuence of the variables appearing the
method along with a short description of the nal implementation done in
==PAGE:18==
10
Image analysis
MobotWare/C++.
3.1
General description
In Blanke (2006) [3] a method called the Generalized Likelihood Ratio is derived.
It is used to identify if there is a signicant dierence between a time-series of
M discrete measurements, and a Gaussian null hypothesis, in order to detect an
otherwise hidden fault.
g(k) =
1
2σ2
max
k−M+1≤j≤k
1
k −j + 1


k
X
i=j
(z(i) −µ0)


2
(3.1)
In equation 3.1 σ and µ0 are parameters of the null hypothesis, M is the size
of the window of interest and k is the current time instance. For each time
instance the summation is repeatedly carried out backwards in time with rst
the current sample, then current + previous and so on. The biggest value found
is divided by 2σ2, to reveal a value directly related the probability of the values
still belonging to the null hypothesis.
Taking the argmax of 3.1 like in 3.2 instead, reveals the time instance that
maximizes the squared summation, and therefore the entire equation.
ˆk0 = arg{ 1
2σ2
max
ka−M+1≤j≤ka
1
k −j + 1


ka
X
i=j
(z(i) −µ0)


2
}
(3.2)
This can further be reduce, because the
1
2σ2 is constant scaling factor.
ˆk0 = arg{
max
ka−M+1≤j≤ka
1
k −j + 1


ka
X
i=j
(z(i) −µ0)


2
}
(3.3)
By considering grayscale images as just a 2 dimensional arrays containing dis-
cretized samples, the formulae is directly translatable. In equation 3.3 k would
refer to a pixel positions instead, and by looking at pixels with continuous low
positions the summation would be carried out in the same way.
Counting how many times the individual pixels is found as k0, gives an indica-
tion of where transitions occur in the image. This is illustrated in gure 3.1b
where the transitions in 3.1a between light and dark soil stand out brighter from
a background of dark pixels.
==PAGE:19==
3.2 M
11
(a) New sown eld
(b) Result of applying the GLR method to
3.1a
Figure 3.1
From this point on grayscale images such as 3.1b, will be referred to as the GLR
grayscale.
3.2
M
The variable M represents how many samples back the algorithm looks, in the
search to nd the highest sum. Finding the best value of M is crucial in order
to get best result, however two things are important to remember. First an
increase in M will lead to an increased in calculation time and therefore a slower
system, and secondly an increase in M will also lead to more secure detections.
With the prototyping of the algorithm done in MatLab, the calculation times
have been found quantitatively for an image of size 98x130 pixels. The resulting
times are found in Figure 3.2.
Figure 3.2: Calculation time found for dierent values of M
==PAGE:20==
12
Image analysis
Calculating a linear trend line for the data points reveals a R2 of 0.9995. The
line parameters A and B are not important, because they will not be the same
as in the nal implementation.
As mentioned the security of the detected transitions, will increased along with
M, but only to a certain point. gure 3.3 illustrates this.
(a) GLR of gure 3.1a with M=5
(b) GLR of gure 3.1a with M=20
(c) GLR of gure 3.1a with M=50
(d) GLR of gure 3.1a with M=100
Figure 3.3
As M becomes bigger, the larger transitions will increasingly stand out more
and more from the background, while an increasing number of smaller transi-
tions that might otherwise have been interesting are lost. Continuing to make
M bigger will ultimately result in the loss of even the biggest transitions.
All in all there are pros and cons when choosing a suiting value of M, and
it will all depend on the situation in which the GLR is used. For the rest of
this thesis M will be equal to 20, because it through test showed to be the
equilibrium between processing time and result.
==PAGE:21==
3.3 Direction of application
13
3.3
Direction of application
The original equations for GLR 3.1 and 3.2 where derived for use on a ever
increasing stream of 1 dimensional data points, and will only be calculated from
the newest data point and M time instances backwards. However an image has
2 Dimensions and a xed data set. Consequently the GLR is not bound to one
direction, but can be applied in many dierent, from both left to right, top to
bottom, vice versa and everything in between.
(a) GLR when applying it to gure3.1a
from left to right
(b) GLR when applying it to gure3.1a
from right to left
(c) GLR when applying it to gure3.1a
from top to bottom
(d) GLR when applying it to gure3.1a
from bottom to top
Figure 3.4
Depending on the direction the GLR is applied, it will yield dierent results,
as can be seen in gure 3.4. In gure 3.4a where the GLR is applied from
left to right the enhanced part tend to focus on the right side of the transition,
while gure 3.4b going from right to left focuses on the left side. The same goes
or gure 3.4c and 3.4d. To illustrate why this happens observe the vector below:
==PAGE:22==
14
Image analysis
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
Applying the GLR to the vector from left to right with M = 3 and µ0 = 0, the
algorithm will nd hatk0 on the following vector positions:
0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 4, 4, 8
Giving the resulting vector:
1
1
1
1
3
0
0
1
Notice that the right side of the edge at position 4, is triggered 3 times while
the left at 3, is only triggered once. Although real data does not contain as well
dened edges as the ones shown above, the principle is still in applicable.
In practice this could be a problem, if not all transitions are detected as they
should, but could also be used as a tool, to select the general direction of the
lines searched for.
In the nal implementation of this gure 3.4a and 3.4b are added together,
to create the residual image seen in gure 3.2. Because the GLR is applied
horizontally it highlights plough lines going from top to bottom.
If head land detection is need as well, a solution might be to add gure 3.4c
and 3.4d as well, in order to increase the focus on horizontal lines. Note though
that every time a new GLR image independent of the direction, it is necessary
to run the algorithm again, with the cost of increased processing time.
3.4
Gray-scale input image
As mentioned in the introduction the GLR method is robust towards changing
colours, however choosing the right grayscale image can aect the output. The
input grayscale image though can be found in large variety of ways, for exam-
ple as each separate channel in the rgb colour model or as all three channels
combined to one intensity image.
==PAGE:23==
3.4 Gray-scale input image
15
(a) Crop eld with newly sprouted corn plants
(b) Grayscale image derived from the red
channel of 3.5a
(c) Grayscale image derived from the green
channel of 3.5a
(d) Grayscale image derived from the blue
channel of 3.5a
(e) Grayscale image derived from all three
rgb channels of 3.5a
Figure 3.5
Depending on which method is choosen, dierent features will be highlighted,
which can be utilized to target specic transistions when applying the GLR. For
instance gure 3.6a is the result of the GLR being applied to the green channel
image 3.5c. Compared to 3.6b which is the result of the GLR on the red channel
==PAGE:24==
16
Image analysis
image, the crop lines stand out much clearer and is hence easier to identify later
on. However they are still visible in 3.6b and would still be detectable.
(a) Calculation time found for dierent
values of M
(b) Calculation time found for dierent
values of M
In general the grayscale image should seek to maximize the contrast around
the wanted transitions, in order to make the line identication easier later
on. There is a danger of choosing a too specic grayscale conversion method
though.
Changing lighting conditions and other parameters might alter the
colour scheme of the objects, and thus render the method useless.
For those reasons the nal implementation of the GLR is applied to a grayscale
image derived from all three rgb channels like gure 3.5e, which gives the result
below 3.7.
Figure 3.7: Calculation time found for dierent values of M
==PAGE:25==
3.5 Image Scaling
17
3.5
Image Scaling
Scaling the image to the right size before applying the GLR algorithm is impor-
tant because of the two factors. The rst one is how small objects and transition
can be and still be detectable and the other ones is the overall processing time
of the image.
(a) Grayscale image of gure 3.5a in res-
olution 1536x2048
(b) GLR
of
gure
3.8a
in
resolution
1536x2048
Figure 3.8
(a) Grayscale image of gure 3.5a in res-
olution 96x128
(b) GLR
of
gure
3.9a
in
resolution
96x128
Figure 3.9
==PAGE:26==
18
Image analysis
(a) Grayscale image of gure 3.5a in res-
olution 24x32
(b) GLR of gure ?? in resolution 24x32
Figure 3.10
To determine the inuence of the resolution on details, consider the six images
in gure 3.8, 3.9 and 3.10.
In gure 3.10b barely any features are visible, due to its grayscale image 3.10a
being of so low resolution, that most of the information concerning crop rows are
lost. On the other hand the high resolution GLR image 3.8b does not show any
distinctive features neither. This is because the high resolution makes even the
tiniest feature detectable, creating a resulting map lled irrelevant detections.
For high resolution images the smaller details can be ltered out by increasing
M, but as documented in section 3.2 it would lead to higher processing times.
Figure 3.11: processing time as function of resolution
With increased resolution, comes an increase in processing time. Figure 3.11
shows that every time the resolution is doubled, the overall processing time is
==PAGE:27==
3.6 Thresholding
19
quadrupled. This is because both image axis are being multiplied by 2, thereby
increasing the total number of pixels by four. This in connection with the nec-
essary larger M, heavily penalizes selection of higher resolutions
To decrease the resolution several methods exists Parker (1983) [4], which each
comes with its downsides and advantages. Although Nearest-neighbor Interpo-
lation is a light method computational wise, it results in a loss of too much
information, and would necessitate the use of higher resolution images.
Another method is the Bicubic convolution algorithm Keys (1981). This method
translates details better, when decreasing the resolution, however it comes with
a cost increased processing time.
All in all the nal resolution must be selected, such that the important features
can be separated, and still keep a reasonable processing time. For this project
the optimal conguration was to downscale the original image to a resolution of
96x128 pixels using the Bicubic convolution algorithm.
3.6
Thresholding
In order to make the line detection easier, the grayscale image generated is con-
verted to a simple black and white image. The easiest way to do this and the
way it is done in the implementation, is by thresholding the grayscale image
across a static boundary, setting every thing below the boundary to zero and
every thing above to 1. Other more adaptive methods like otsu's (Otsu (1979))
[6] could be utilized, but because of the adaptability of the GLR algorithm, it
is assumed that the grayscale image relatively constant.
==PAGE:28==
20
Image analysis
(a) BW image created from GLR grayscale
with a threshold of 1
(b) BW image created from GLR grayscale
with a threshold of 4
(c) BW image created from GLR grayscale
with a threshold of 8
(d) BW image created from GLR grayscale
with a threshold of 16
Figure 3.12
Finding the right threshold is done by analysing the outcome when using dier-
ent values. The goal is to nd the threshold that will give the later line detection
its optimum conditions.
Observe the four BW images in gure 3.12, each of these are created from
gure 3.9b by thresholding it with 1, 4, 8 and 16.
In the rst image 3.12a the threshold of 1 does not suppress the unwanted de-
tections enough making it impossible to separate the smaller lines. <newline
With a threshold of 4 image 3.12b also shows too many detections outside of
the actual lines, and estimating the smaller lines would be hard. If However the
nal goal is to only identify the largest of the lines, a threshold 4 of could be
the right solution.
The third image 3.12c shows a clear segregation of even the smaller lines which
is desirable. The threshold of 8 is therefore the best choice in this situation.
The fourth image3.12d is not usable, because the high threshold of 16 has not
included enough to identify the lines.
Note that the optimum threshold of 8 is only valid for this implementation be-
==PAGE:29==
3.7 Implementation
21
cause several factors will inuence it. Among them is the resolution and M.
The amount of dierent directions the GLR is run through, and the subsequent
addition of those directions, will decide the actual range of pixel values in the
grayscale image, and therefore the threshold.
3.7
Implementation
In order to prove that the GLR method works in reality, it has been implemented
as part of plug-in to MobotWare called austraightline appendix A. Below in
gure 3.13 is a summation of the general ow of the code.
Figure 3.13: Execution diagram for the GLR process
Because it has not been possible to run live test on crop elds, the processes has
slight changes. For example it has been necessary to crop the image received
from the camera to only half size, from 192x128 to 96x128, because the test
setup ran with the camera pointing straight ahead making the images half sky
and half ground.
The nal result as can be seen in gure 3.14 has clearly detected the transition
points between the brick road and grassy verge. The robustness of the method
is addressed in the test chapter 6.
==PAGE:30==
22
Image analysis
(a) The same scenery that the orignal im-
age for 3.14b was taken in.
(b) Thresholded GLR output of an image
taken in the scenery as 3.14a.
Figure 3.14
Another interesting part of the implementation is processing times for the indi-
vidual parts, which can be found in the table below. The value in it was found
by timing each part 10 times and then calculating the statistics. It shows that
the biggest time consumer is the cropping of the original image, however the
time could be brought down if the image where resized before it was cropped.
When it comes to the standard deviation of the processing times, which gives
an indication of how constant they are, most of them relatively small compared
to their respective means, except for the one concerning the threshold. This is
properly due to the fact that the amount of points above the threshold varies.
Collectively the entire process takes just shy of 0.2 seconds, which is long con-
sidering that it should run live. However with further optimization and a the
development of more powerful but still cheap processors, the processing time is
guaranteed to come down.
Mean
σ
Crop
0.149840
0.001511
resize
0.000609
0.000044
GLR
0.037151
0.000092
Threshold
0.005124
0.002031
SUM
0.192723
3.8
Summary
A new method for detecting changes in the in grayscale images are presented.
It oers robust capabilities within an agricultural context, as the it is largely
independent of rbg colours and therefore not as sensitive to colour changes as
==PAGE:31==
3.8 Summary
23
previously designed methods.
Furthermore the parameters taking part in this process has been identied and
described, along with the consequence of changing them.
Finally the GLR method has been implemented, and was found capable of
solving the task.
==PAGE:32==
24
Image analysis
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 4
Line Detection
Line the detection has been subject of image analysis for many years, and several
methods like RANSAC (Fischer (1980) [7]) and Hough transform (Hough (1962)
[8]) exists at this point. However they both have their drawbacks. RANSAC
is computationally heavy, and Hough transform do not perform well on images
with to many disturbances in them, like the ones created by the previous pre-
sented GLR.
In this section a new method for nding straight lines is introduced, in order
to identify and estimate lines in black and white images created by the GLR
algorithm.
4.1
General description
Under the assumption that all lines sought after is parallel in the real world,
which is the case when considering crop rows, every line in the image plane must
share a common vanishing point. The goal of this line detector is to nd and
identify this global vanishing point.
==PAGE:34==
26
Line Detection
(a) Image
of
a
corn
eld
with
newly
sprouted plants
(b) Thresholded GLR of 4.1a
Figure 4.1
Consider this: Draw a straight line on top of each of the found transitions in
the BW image generated by thresholding, and observe the result in gure 4.2b
below. Notice how all the lines intersect each other at the vanishing point.
If on the other hand the lines where drawn such that they intersect at a wrong
vanishing point, they will no longer be placed directly on top of the transitions,
and it will look like gure 4.2a.
If the number of pixels that where covered by the drawn lines where counted,
the sum would be signicantly lower for the wrong vanishing point compared to
the correct one.
Consequently the best vanishing point can be identied by drawing lines fanning
out from each possible candidate and afterwards count the total number of
covered pixels by them.
(a) Estimated vanishing point located at
the wrong location
(b) Estimated vanishing point located at
the right location
Figure 4.2
==PAGE:35==
4.1 General description
27
However it is not known before hand where the transitions are placed in the
image, and if only ve lines like the ones above where drawn, the chances are
that they would not be placed at the right positions are low, and the highest
count might then be due to random factors like faulty detections or crossing of
correct ones.
The solution is to increase the number of drawn lines, in order to raise the
possibility of placing them right. Furthermore there are possible transitions not
only going from top to bottom in the image, but also from the top and out the
sides. These must also be covered.
Figure 4.3: Example of how more line must be drawn to increase the proba-
bility ot hitting the right ones
With all these new lines covering almost all of the image, the collective sum for
each vanishing point might be very close one another, especially if the source
image is noisy, making the risk of accepting a wrong vanishing point much
greater. This is illustrated by gure 4.4, where both sub-plots shows the pixel
count as a function of line number. I.e. the area under the graph equals the
collective sum of all covered points. Notice how 4.4a, despite being an incorrect
vanishing point, clearly has a larger area under it, compared to the correct one
in 4.4b, ultimately leading to a false detection.
==PAGE:36==
28
Line Detection
(a) Wrong vanishing point can have a large
collective pixel count
(b) Correct vanishing point can have a
small collective pixel count
Figure 4.4
Notice also that the peaks in 4.4b has a larger prominence (mathworks (2015))
compared to 4.4a. Assuming that the more distinct the peaks are, the higher is
the likelihood that they belong to the best vanishing point, it is possible to use
peak prominences for identication, rather than the collective sum.
(a) Points check in step 1 in order to nd
the largest peak
(b) Possible vanising points along the tran-
sition found in step 1
Figure 4.5
Another problem is the amount of possible vanishing points that need to be
check, in order to nd the right one.
For every point the process includes
drawing of lines and counting of pixels which all this will lead to an extremely
high overall processing.
==PAGE:37==
4.2 Inuence of Parameters
29
However because the prominence can be used as decider the process may be
split into three steps:
• First step is to identify the single largest peak, when looking at a line of
vanishing points along the horizontal axis 4.5a. By assuming that this line
must be a correct transition, the true vanishing point has to exist along
it.
• Searching every possible vanishing point along the previously found line,
the next step seeks to maximize the prominence of the second largest
peak. The vanishing point where it is detected, is considered to be the
most correct one.
• When step 2 is complete all peaks with a prominence larger than a certain
threshold is assumed to represent real world lines.
Following these steps will limit the number of possible vanishing points that are
tested from m ∗n to m + n.
The nal result when running the line detection for image 4.1a will look like
gure 4.6.
Figure 4.6: Final result of the line detector with the found lines on top of the
original image
4.2
Inuence of Parameters
In the previous section it is covered how the line detection works by creating a
fan on lines, from which the best ones are chosen. Two parameters is relevant
here: The amount of lines that are fanning out from each vanishing point, and
the second parameter is the width of each line. I.e. how much of the BW image
==PAGE:38==
30
Line Detection
it covers and thus how large its potential value might be. The next two sections
covers the inuence of these parameters.
4.2.1
Number of Lines
In the general description of the line detector it was briey mentioned, that it
search along more than only four lines, however a specic number was never
indicated. In the nal implementation (appendix A) each line is dened as
its start and end points, with the possible vanishing point as start, and the end
as somewhere in the pixel interval [(96, -128);(96, 256)], for an image of size
96x128. This means that the number of lines can be described by the number
of pixel which separate them.
In gure 4.7 the images shows the resulting line count graph, for lines drawn
at every single, third, and tenth pixel. Notice how the number of drawn lines
(x-axis) decreases from 381 in 4.7a to 38 4.7e.
As steps get larger the chance of placing the lines on top of a transition dimin-
ishes, because everything that might be in between the lines can not be detected.
While this is not too great of a problem for large wide transitions, smaller ones
like the two left most found in 4.7b and 4.7d is easily missed, if the detection
lines are not placed exactly on top of them, which is why they are not found in
4.7f.
Furthermore if a transition is found, but the detection line is placed only in pe-
riphery of the transition, the resulting parameter estimation will be inaccurate.
This is observable in 4.7f where the two right most transitions are found to be
a couple of pixels o their optimal position.
However having a small separation can also lead to problems, as more and more
details is found, the chance of nding something that will lead to a false de-
tection increases. Observe how that is true for 4.7a where a tiny drop around
x = 200, in an otherwise correct transition peak leads to a false detection in 4.7b.
==PAGE:39==
4.2 Inuence of Parameters
31
(a) Line count for optimal vanishing point,
with a line separation of 1
(b) transitions found from 4.7a
(c) Line count for optimal vanishing point,
with a line separation of 3
(d) transitions found from 4.7c
(e) Line count for optimal vanishing point,
with a line separation of 10
(f) transitions found from 4.7c
Figure 4.7
==PAGE:40==
32
Line Detection
Figure 4.8: Collective calculation time in MatLab for the entire system with
varying separation
Another problem with choosing a small separation, is that the calculation time
goes up. In gure 4.8 the collective system processing time as a function of the
separation value is visible. The graph shows that as the distance between detec-
tion lines are double the calculation time is approximately halved. This makes
logically sense since a doubling separation is equal to a halving the number of
lines, meaning half the work load.
All in all the best compromise for the separation must be found as a balance
of calculation time and accuracy. For this project the optimal was a separation
of 3, because it signicantly lowered the calculation time while still kept an
acceptable accuracy.
4.2.2
Line width
The second parameter is the line width, it is eectively a descriptor for how
large an area the search lines are covering. The width is dened as the number
of extra pixels on the image y-axis that are included in the line count, meaning
that a line with width 0 only counts what are directly below it, while a line with
width 1 also includes the pixel values to the right and left.
==PAGE:41==
4.2 Inuence of Parameters
33
(a) Line count for optimal vanishing point,
with a line width of 0
(b) Line count for optimal vanishing point,
with a line width of 1
(c) Line count for optimal vanishing point,
with a line width of 3
(d) Line count for optimal vanishing point,
with a line width of 10
Figure 4.9
Figure 4.9 shows the result of changes in width. The rst thing to notice is
that as the width grows larger so do the peaks. This is because the increased
number of pixels taking part in the line sum, leads to potentially larger values.
The second and most important thing to notice, is that more and more smaller
features are ltered out, as the width increases. This is especially useful for more
noisy data, as it is seen by comparing 4.9a to 4.9b. However too large a width
might lead to the loss otherwise correct features, such as it is seen in 4.9c, where
the two smaller peaks that show up at the left side of 4.9b are lost. A large line
width might be useful though, if the search is for the transitions between more
substantial surfaces, such as earthy crop eld and grassy headland.
==PAGE:42==
34
Line Detection
Figure 4.10: Measured and expected collective calculation times in MatLab
for the entire system with varying line width
It is expected that the collective processing time of the system will be linear
increasing as a function of the width, however measurements from MatLab in
gure 4.10 shows that this is not true. However this might be due to opti-
mization in MatLab rather than the impact of varying widths. Despite this it is
clear from both measured and expected values, that smaller widths equals lower
processing times.
For this project the nal line width is set to 1, as it yielded low processing
time but still some ltering of smaller disturbances.
4.3
Peak Detection
In the general description of the line detector, it was stated that the transitions
where identied by nding the peaks and looking at their prominence, but it
was never fully explained. However this will be remedied in this section.
==PAGE:43==
4.3 Peak Detection
35
Figure 4.11: Identied local maxima
To nd the peaks in the line count graph gure 4.11, is simply the process
of identifying all locale maxima, meaning all data points with neighbours that
have lower value than the data point itself. Though this process nds all the
right peaks, it also marks smaller peaks that do not originate from a transition,
but rather from points falsely detected by the GLR. However these can all be
ltered out by looking at their prominence.
Prominence can be described as the height of the peak relative to its surround-
ings, and is an indication of how much the peaks stands out. As an example
consider peak 3 and 7 in gure 4.12, although 7 has the higher peak value,
3 has the highest prominence as indicated by the coloured area, because of its
surrounding of relative lower valleys.
Figure 4.12: The prominence of each peak is marked by the colour. Copied
from Mathworks (2015) [10].
The task of nding the prominence for all peaks can be summarised as four step
==PAGE:44==
36
Line Detection
process:
• Identify all peaks contained in the signal.
• From each peak look left and right along a line parallel to the x-axis, and
in both direction nd where the line either crosses the boundary of the
data set or the signal itself. Between the peak and the crossings are now
dened an interval.
• For each interval identify the lowest value.
• The highest of the two value are the baseline, and the prominence is cal-
culated as: prominence = peak −baseline.
When the prominence are found for all peaks, they can simply be thresholded
to remove all peaks below a certain value. Setting this threshold is a balance
though, too low and it will not remove enough, and too high and it will remove
peaks that otherwise where correct.
The best threshold is very circumstantial, and depends not only on the degree
of details that are needed, but also on how the line width is set, because dier-
ent widths will lead to dierent prominence values for the same lines. This is
illustrated in gure 4.9.
With the parameters set to the values found in the previous sections, the eect
of dierent prominence thresholds can be observed in gure 4.13.
As stated the low threshold of 1 in 4.13a detects a lot of tiny peaks as correct
transitions (every blue triangle), resulting in the lines seen in 4.13b. Although a
small threshold might generate too many false positives, in some cases it might
be necessary in order to identify certain features, it should however then be
accompanied by alternative ways to lter unwanted peaks out.
With a high threshold comes heavy removal of smaller and medium peaks as
seen in 4.13e, but also an increased robustness towards disturbances. This is
especially useful when the area of interest is strong transitions between for ex-
ample dierent types of surfaces.
The balance in this case is a threshold of 10 4.13c which gives a fairly good
resistance towards disturbances, while still being able to detect the smaller crop
rows seen in the left side of the 4.13d.
==PAGE:45==
4.3 Peak Detection
37
(a) Peak
detection
with
a
prominence
threshold of 1
(b) The resulting transitions found from
4.13a
(c) Peak
detection
with
a
prominence
threshold of 10
(d) The resulting transitions found from
4.13c
(e) Peak
detection
with
a
prominence
threshold of 30
(f) The resulting transitions found from
4.13e
Figure 4.13
==PAGE:46==
38
Line Detection
4.4
Coordinate Transformation
By now all the lines have been found, and described by start and end point.
The next step is to transform them into real world objects, so they can be used
for guiding the robot.
The rst step in this process is to convert the lines from 2D to 3D coordinates
with relation to the camera. However because of the nature of 2D images there
are no stored depth information. To overcome this it is assumed that the camera
is oriented such that x is forward, y is left and z is up.
Figure 4.14: Orientation of image and camera coordinate systems
With these informations the general transform from world to image found in
Siegwart (2011) [11] can be manipulated to reveal equation 4.1 and 4.2, which
calculates camera position from the pixel coordinate (xpixel, ypixel) and distance
xcam.
ycam =
Heightimage
2
−xpixel

∗xcam
f
(4.1)
zcam =
Widthimage
2
−ypixel

∗xcam
f
(4.2)
By further assuming that the area the camera is observing is at, and placing
all points on a sphere with radius 1 meter such that xcam = 1 , it is possible
to project the points onto the ground, by following the straight line dened by
the camera and the to zworld = 0. This is shown in gure 4.15. Note that
everything still is in reference to the camera, meaning that the ground is not
located at zcam = 0 but rather at zcam = −zworld,cam, which is the cameras
negative z coordinate in the world frame.
==PAGE:47==
4.4 Coordinate Transformation
39
Figure 4.15: Points at 1 meter projected onto the at ground
The next step is to transform the coordinates found in the camera frame to the
world frame. For this the Homogeneous transformation matrix as dened in
Spong (2006) [12] is used.
Hworld
cam
=
R
d
0
1

(4.3)
Because the rotation in frames from camera to world only happens around the
z-axis R = Rz,γ. d is equal to the world frames displacement from the camera
frame, i.e. equal to the negative position of the camera in the world.
R =


cos(γ)
−sin(γ)
0
sin(γ)
cos(γ)
0
0
1
0

, d =


−xworld,cam
−yworld,cam
−zworld,cam


(4.4)
Finally the world coordinates can be calculated as
Pworld = Hworld
cam
∗Pcam
(4.5)
Pworld =


xworld
yworld
zworld
1

, Pcam


xcam,ground
ycam,ground
zcam,ground
1


(4.6)
By doing this process for each start and end point the transitions are mapped
into the real world coordinates, which can be utilized for dierent purposes. In
an agricultural context it might for example be interesting to avoid the crops
lines in order not to destroy them with heavy equipment or to only clear weeds
in between the rows.
==PAGE:48==
40
Line Detection
4.5
Implementation
In order to prove that the method works in reality, it has been implemented as
part of a plug-in to MobotWare called austraightline (appendix A). Below in
gure 4.16 is a summation of the general ow of the code. The last step also
has the path planning, which is described in chapter 5 included, because they
have been implemented as integral parts of each other.
Figure 4.16: Execution diagram for the line detection process
Because live test in crop elds has not been possible, the testes has been conned
to only tracks in and around DTU. Along with the time consuming process of
implementing, this has lead to a simplication of the problem such that the nal
implementation only registers the two largest lines found in the GLR output.
However as is seen in gure is does solve the task of identifying the lines that
are the side of the road.
Figure 4.17: Example of detected lines from gure 3.14b
Another interesting part of the implementation is the processing time, which
can be found in the table below. From the table it is clear the heaviest time
consumer, is the part taking care of searching for the biggest line along the hor-
izontal axis. With close to 0.4 seconds this is not sustainable for an autonomous
vehicle.
==PAGE:49==
4.6 Summary
41
The standard deviation of the vertical search is quit substantial compared to
the mean. This is due to new data continuously are being written to memory,
every time a candidate for the second largest peak is found.
Collectively the entire process takes just above of 0.4 seconds on average, which
is long considering that it should run live. However with further optimization
and a the development of more powerful but still cheap processors, the process-
ing time is guaranteed to come down.
Mean
σ
nd Horizontal point
0.393950
0.000591
nd Vertical point
0.011953
0.006452
Coordiante transformation
0.000784
0.000019
and path planning
SUM
0.406687
4.6
Summary
In this chapter a method for detecting straight lines in a black and with images
like the ones generated by the GLR method, has been introduced.
The parameters taking part in this process has been identied and described,
along with the consequence of changing them.
Finally the Line detection method has been implemented and was found ca-
pable of solving the task, though the processing time is too high and further
optimization is needed.
==PAGE:50==
42
Line Detection
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 5
Implementation
An important step in proving the feasibility of the two methods presented above,
is to implement and at test them in a realistic environment in real time. The
implementation itself are created as a plug-in for MobotWare and utilises func-
tions from openCV [13] in order to achieve its goals.
The following sections describes the processes needed to run tests, from the gen-
eral implementation of the methods, to decision of where to drive, and nally
ending with the SMR-CL script running the actual commands.
5.1
Final Implementation
In both chapter 3 and 4 a short execution diagram for the implementation of
the individual processes where shown, however they do not shed light on the
complete system. Below in gure 5.1 is shown the collective diagram, including
the GLR and line detector but also set-up stages that were previously not left
out.
==PAGE:52==
44
Implementation
Figure 5.1: Execution diagram for the nal system
Timing the system reveals an average processing time of around 0.9 seconds
with a standard deviation of 0.003. The time however is not optimal for a real
time system as it limits the operating speed of the application, and further
optimization is therefore needed. Investigating the separate parts reveals that
0.2 s. comes from the part of the process concerning the GLR, 0.4 s. from the
line detector and 0.3 s. three from everything not related to the previous two.
As covered in chapter 3 and 4 the GLR and line detection can be optimized, but
as the timings in the table below shows the general handling and initialization
can be greatly improved. However this is future work and not in the scope of
this thesis.
==PAGE:53==
5.2 Path Planning
45
µ
σ
Entire system
0.894140
0.003042
GLR process
0.192723
0.000591
Line detection process
0.406687
0.006452
Other
0.294730
5.2
Path Planning
So far it has been described how to identify transitions, but it has never been
shown how to actually use them.
The rst thing when utilising them is to
consider the environment and what they represent.
Because the tests can not be performed on an crop eld due the season, the
task is instead to follow the small roads and side walks around DTU Lyngby
campus.
Because these areas are assumed to consist of two dierent types
uniform surfaces i.e. road and not road, the two biggest transitions must be
between these areas. This has lead to a limitation in the implementation, where
a maximum of two lines can be found if they satisfy the conditions.
From all of this a set of decision rules is dened:
1. If two lines are found the robot should drive exactly between them.
2. If only one line exist follow it at a predetermined distance.
3. If no lines are found follow current route.
Because of the assumptions and the general ability of the line detector to only
nd straight lines, the route of the robot is also dened as a straight line de-
scribed by x, y, θ. Here θ is the angle between the route and the global x-axis
and x, y denes where the route is located.
For both rule 1 and 2, x and y are found at a distance of 1 meter away from the
camera and either directly in between the lines or 0.5 meters next to one. θ is
found by placing a secondary point like the rst one at a distance of 0 meters
and then calculate the angle of the line dened by primary and secondary point.
When ever a new path has been calculated it is stored as global variables that
are accessible to everything else in the system.
==PAGE:54==
46
Implementation
(a) Illustration of x, y and θ calculated as
the path for rule 1
(b) Illustration of x, y and θ calculated as
the path rule 2
Figure 5.2
If instead rule three triggers no changes will be made to the global variables
where the previous path is stored, and the robot will therefore continue along
that route.
5.3
SMR-CL Script
To control the order of everything from the execution of the plug-in, to the
passing of commands to robot, a SMR-CL script has been created appendix
B. It is based around a continuous loop, that will read the newly calculated
path from the global variables, and issue a command for the robot to follow
that route. To update the variables the script also calls the plug-in with the
command vision "line img=14 side=2", which makes it run the entire process
described above.
5.4
Summary
In this chapter the structure of the nal implementation of the methods pre-
sented in chapters 3 and 4 where shown. With the focus on the test environ-
ment it was also documented how the path which is used to control the robot
where found. And nally the top layer of the control structure the SMR-CL
script where presented and its general functionality where documented.
==PAGE:55==
Chapter 6
Test
To prove the real world application of the system, the implementation is tested
in the area around DTU Lyngby Campus. Specically four dierent areas has
been selected: First one is a brick road with grassy verge as seen in gure 6.1a.
Second is a side walk with grass to the right and cobblestone to the left in gure
6.1b. Third is the back-door entrance to building 326 illustrated in gure 6.1c.
The last one is part of the gravel road encircling the whole of DTU 6.1d.
Note that all the images found in gure 6.1 is not the same as those processed
in the following three sections, but is merely a representation of the area. How-
ever the red box in each image marks the exact features that where found in
the original images.
Although the original colour images are lost, their corresponding gray-scale im-
ages are shown in gure 6.3, and a keen observer might be able to identify the
details within them.
The two rst sections contain the individual tests of the GLR method and the
line detector. Here the robot was driven via remote control in order to obtain
the data in the most ecient ways. The third section focuses on the test of the
entire autonomous system, here the robot drove without human intervention.
==PAGE:56==
48
Test
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 6.1: Colour images of the same scenes as used for testing. The red box
marks the area of what the original would have looked like.
6.1
GLR
The main criteria for the GLR method was that it rst of all should be able to
detect the transitions between dierent objects, and secondly do it robustly. In
the following it is analysed if the method full these criteria or not.
The brick road. This test area is dened by a small walkway about 1.5 meter
wide, that is made out of concrete bricks, and surrounded by a grassy verge.
The edges between the two surfaces are very sharp and as can be observed in
gure 6.2a there is no trouble detecting them. The same goes for the rest of
the images in this test series.
However some of the GLR outputs not shown here, has a signicant amount of
false detections in between the two major transitions. This happened because
==PAGE:57==
6.1 GLR
49
the road was spotted with tiny wet areas, that where darker than the rest. Such
areas could potentially also occur if sun light shone through the tree crowns
creating places in and out of shadow.
The side-walk. The side-walk is made out of the same types of concrete bricks
as the previous road. It is surrounded by grass to the left and cobblestone to
the right. The cobblestone itself creates a border between the side-walk and a
larger asphalt road.
Its the residual GLR image is found in gure 6.2b, and shows a signicant
amount of transitions. The narrow but well dened lines in the left side of the
image, is the vertical separation between the individual cobblestones. Along
with the less distinct line in the middle of the image, they are the result of
bright and dark gaps between the stones not wider than a couple of centime-
tres. This shows that the method in its current set-up is capable of detecting
small details located close to each other.
The wide fuzzy line to the left is again due to the boundary between dry and
wet areas on the side-walk and not the grass, which is only just visible in the
top left corner.
The Entrance. The back-Entrance is an example of an area with large smooth
surfaces each with a dierent colour. While it is not as clear in gure 6.1c, the
scene consists of two areas of poured concrete separated by a galvanized grate.
The resultant GLR output gure 6.2c shows two well dened lines, with and
absolute minimum of false detections in between them, due to the lack of vari-
ations in the surfaces.
Note that the border of the bin has been detected as well and is observable in
the top left corner.
The Gravel Road. The boundary between the gravel road and the surrounding
grass is not well dened, making it hard to detect. Despite that most of the
images show a more or less clear line of detected points in the boundary between
the two surfaces, just like it is seen in the left side of gure gure 6.2d. Some
however does not show any distinctive lines as it is seen in the right side of the
same image.
What more is that the uneven surface of the gravel road and the grass leads to
a lot of false detections.
==PAGE:58==
50
Test
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 6.2: Black and white GLR images for a bricked road, side walk, back
entrance to build 326 at DTU lyngby campus and a gravel road.
In conclusion the test of the GLR has shown that it is indeed capable of de-
tecting the transition between dierent surfaces, across a large variation o
colour schemes. However depending on local dierences in the surface texture,
the amount of false detection vary, potentially making it harder to identify the
lines.
6.2
Line Detector
For the line detector to be successful, it should be able to correctly identify
lines in a black and white image, like the one created by the GLR, despite it
containing a lot of disturbances.
The tests made in this section is a direct continuation of results found in previous
one, and uses the images in gure 6.2 as input to the line detector.
The brick road. As the GLR easily detected the transition between road and
grass in all gray-scale images, the line detector easily nds and estimates the
lines in all the BW images.
However the detected lines are a few pixels o their actual positions, which can
be observed in gure 6.3a, where the detected lines has been superimposed on
the original gray-scale image.
The Side-walk. The GLR image of the side-walk contain a lot data, that ulti-
mately makes it hard to detect the separate lines. Despite of that two lines has
==PAGE:59==
6.2 Line Detector
51
in fact been correctly found in gure 6.3b. Again with a shift in position of a
few pixels.
Analysing several dierent side-walk images reveal that the lines found are al-
most always correct, but there are no consistency from image to image, about
which lines are detected. This is mainly due to the limitation of the implemen-
tation described in chapter 5, where a maximum of two lines can be detected.
The Entrance. Just like the the brick road the GLR image shows two very
distinct lines, that are found and estimated without any problems. And just
like all previous ones they come with a shift of a few pixels.
The Gravel Road. Despite the amount of false detection in 6.2d, the detector
has managed to identifying the borders of the road correctly. Analysing other
images like this one, strongly suggest however that the line on right side of g-
ure 6.3d is found by pure luck, because more often than not data where no clear
line is visible will give false detection.
At other times the found lines will be in the right direction, though their posi-
tions might more or less o. This is due to the points that make up the lines
being spread too far to get an exact estimation.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 6.3: The found lines added onto the original gray-scale images for a
bricked road, side walk, back entrance to build 326 at DTU lyngby
campus and a gravel road.
The detector is capable of nding the lines and estimate their parameters, even
though they are surrounded by a lot of false data. Yet there can be too much
disturbance to do it properly, and in those cases the risk of nding something
incorrect considerable.
==PAGE:60==
52
Test
6.3
Full System
To prove that the entire system works and are able to perform autonomously, a
last test has been performed on the brick road described above. Here the GLR
has to show the right transitions, the detector has nd the right lines and the
must calculate a correct position to drive for.
So far the previous test sections has shown good results when it comes to the
brick road, however in the nal test the robot stayed on the road for about 7.5
meter, but continuously kept pulling more and more towards the right, until it
nally ended in the verge and had to be stopped by manually.
(a) xy-position of the robot
(b) Theta as function of time
Figure 6.4
Several things could explain why the robot did not stay on the road. One could
be that the lines where detected in the wrong places, but as gure 6.5 shows,
even though more and more of the road disappeared from the cameras view, the
lines where correctly detected until the it saw nothing but grass gure 6.5f.
Another possibility is that the route the robot tries to follow where calculated
wrongly. However as can be seen in gure 6.4a, which shows the position of the
robot, the odometry hints that the robot driving slightly to the left and trying
hit the correct path. This leads to the conclusion that the route was indeed
placed correctly, at the left of the robot.
The most likely explanation is that even though it steered to the left, bad
calibration of the odometry let it drift more and more to the right. This could
be solved by a faster refresh rate of the route, or an even better calibration.
==PAGE:61==
6.4 Summary
53
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 6.5: Lines found during the nal test.
Notice how the robot moves
more and more right o the road, until it only sees grass 6.5f.
Despite failure the test actually showed that the system as a mean of track-
ing lines and using that information to guide an autonomous robot is feasible,
though further work is need to make it run problem free.
6.4
Summary
In this chapter is has been shown how the implementation of the GLR method
is capable of detecting transitions when running live, though too soft a edges
between surfaces, might lead to a lot of false detections.
It is further shown that the line detector is able to correctly extract information
from the BW image created by the GLR. However to much disturbance can lead
to wrong identications.
Lastly the entire system was tested and it was found able to perform au-
tonomously on shorter distances.
==PAGE:62==
54
Test
==PAGE:63==
Chapter 7
Future Work
Through the ndings in this thesis it is possible identify areas that in the future
need further improvement.
Image Analysis
The extraction of transitions done by the image analysis works fairly well, and
the method in general does not need any changes. However a better way to
nd µ0 in equation 3.3 could be utilised. Currently it is found as the mean of
the entire image, and is therefore sensitive to too many bright or dark pixels.
Instead it should be found in a more intelligent way, that will ensure a better
separation between the dierent surfaces.
Furthermore the order in which cropping and scaling of the image is done should
be reversed in order to experience faster processing times.
Line Detection
The main issue with the line detector is the long processing times, and an eort
should be made to decrease it. This could be done by trimming the process to
include fewer step, or by simply cleaning up the code.
The ability to handle more lines than two is also necessary, because real life
situations like a crop eld, would denitely display more than just a few line.
The test also showed that sometimes the line detector nds a line that are not
correct which potentially could lead to a wrong navigation.
To combat this
it is proposed that a correlation of the found lines from image to image are
==PAGE:64==
56
Future Work
implemented. This will make it possible to identify incorrect lines, if they do
not show up across several images.
Implementation
If more lines are added a revision of the planner is needed as well in order to
accommodate them.
==PAGE:65==
Chapter 8
Conclusion
The main problem of making a mobile robot drive autonomously in a real world
environment, using only a robust identication of straight lines as guide, has
been solved.
The solution has been designed and as a three step process, consisting of image
analysis, line detection and path planning, which has been implemented as a
plug-in for MobotWare. It is furthermore capable of running on a lighter pro-
cessing unit, and should in that sense be interesting for application outside of
pure research.
==PAGE:66==
58
Conclusion
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
[1] A. B. Jackobsen (2015): Crop row navigation for autonomous eld robot
[2] H. J. Andersen (2001): Outdoor computer vision and weed control
[3] M. Blanke, M. Kinnaert, J. Lunze, M. Staroswiecki (2006): Diagnosis and
Fault-Tolerant Control, 2nd edition. Springer. p238-253.
[4] J. A. Parker, R. V. Kenyon, D. E. Troxel (1983): Comparison of Interpola-
tion Methods for Image Resampling.
[5] R. G. Keys (1981): Cubic Convolution Interpolation for Digital Image Pro-
cessing.
[6] N. Otsu (1979): A Threshold Selection Method for Gray-Level Histograms.
[7] M. A. Fischer, R. C. Bolles (1980): Random Sample Consensus: A Paradigm
For Model Fitting With Applications To Image Analysis And Automated
Cartography.
[8] P. V. C. Hough (1962): Method And Means for Recognizing Complex Pat-
terns.
[9] A. B. Beck, N. A. Andersen, J. C. Andersen, O. ravn (2010): Mobotware -
A Plug-in Based Framework For Mobile Robots.
[10] mathworks
(2015).
ndpeaks.
Available:
http://se.mathworks.com/help/signal/ref/ndpeaks.html#bu2uu.
Last
accessed 28th dec 2015.
[11] R. Siegwart, I. R. Nourbakhsh, D. Scaramuzza (2011): Introduction to
Autonomous Mobile Robots, 2nd edition. p 154.
==PAGE:68==
60
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[12] M. W. Spong, S. Hutchinson, M. Vidyasagar (2006): Robot Modelling And
Control, 1st edition. p 60-65.
[13] http://www.opencv.org. Last accessed 10th jan 2016.
