==PAGE:1==
 
  
 
	  	          
Hydrolysis	  of	  Cod	  (Gadus	  Morhua)	  
Head	    
	  	  	  	  	  
Fataneh	  Meldstad	  
Submission Date: June 2015 
Supervisors:  
Turid Rustad, NTNU 
Ana Carvajal, SINTEF 
Rasa Slizyte, SINTEF 
Caroline Baron, DTU 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
1 
Hydrolysis	  of	  Cod	  (Gadus	  Morhua)	  Head	  
Preface  
This master thesis project is a part of the international M.Sc. programme Aquatic Food 
Production - Safety & Quality (AQFood). It was carried out at the Norwegian University of 
Science and Technology (NTNU) in collaboration with SINTEF Fisheries and Aquaculture. 
The hydrolysis part of the project was performed in laboratories of SINTEF Fisheries and 
Aquaculture and the laboratory work was carried out partly at the department of 
biotechnology at NTNU and partly at SINTEF, in the period of March to June 2015. 
I would like to express my deepest appreciation to those who made this thesis possible.  
I wish to thank my main supervisor at NTNU, Professor Turid Rustad for the useful 
comments, remarks and support through the whole process of this master thesis. I am also 
grateful to my three other supervisors, Ana Karina Carvajal and Rasa Slizyte at SINTEF 
Fisheries and Aquaculture, and Caroline P. Baron at DTU for their support and guidance 
throughout the project. 
Special thanks are given to Merethe Selnes, Marte Schei and Guro Møen Tveit at SeaLab, 
Per Egil Gullsvåg at SINTEF Energy, and Maiken Jeanette Lindgjerdet Grøndtveit and Erle 
Saltvedt at NTNU – Department of Biotechnology, for helping me with the analysis, 
answering my numerous questions and giving me useful advice and tips.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
 
 
2 
	  	  
Summary  
A large number of wild cod caught in Norwegian waters is landed without head, while 
there is a great potential for increased utilization and profitability for this protein rich marine 
byproduct. The aim of this study was to investigate the possibilities of freezing and thawing 
of cod heads before hydrolysis and to study the effect of freezing and thawing of cod heads 
on yield and properties of cod head hydrolysates. 
The parameters that were investigated included storage conditions: frozen storage of 
minced versus whole head for 20-21 days, and thawing methods: air thawing (4ºC for 20 
hours) versus water immersion (6-10ºC for 3 hours); in addition to comparison between two 
hydrolysis time of 30 and 60 minutes by ProtamexTM enzyme.  
The biochemical characteristics and changes in the raw material and the final product, 
fish protein hydrolysates were determined. The analyses were mostly performed on the 60 
minutes hydrolysis due to limited time available. The analysis methods used in the project 
included determination of composition (protein, lipid, ash and dry matter content of raw 
material, FPH and sediment fractions), degree of hydrolysis, TCA-solubility, and amount of 
free amino acids.  
Results showed that the yield of the dry matter in hydrolysate fractions ranged between 
10.6% and 12.3% compared to the FPH produced from fresh raw material with 11.0% yield. 
The lipid content in freeze-dried FPH ranged from 0.37-0.71%, and the protein content was 
88.4% for day one and 67.7-71.6% in the other samples. The degree of hydrolysis varied 
more significantly and showed higher values for the whole head thawed in water and minced 
head thawed in air and rather low for the day one sample.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
 
 
3 
Hydrolysis	  of	  Cod	  (Gadus	  Morhua)	  Head	  
Table	  of	  Contents	  
1	  
INTRODUCTION	  
4	  
1.1	  
FISH	  BYPRODUCTS	  
4	  
1.1.1	  
FISH	  BYPRODUCTS	  –	  DEFINITION	  
5	  
1.1.2	  
FISH	  BYPRODUCTS	  –	  GENERATION	  
6	  
1.1.3	  
FISH	  BYPRODUCTS	  –	  PRESERVATION	  METHODS	  
7	  
1.1.4	  
FISH	  BYPRODUCTS	  –	  FACTORS	  AFFECTING	  QUALITY	  OF	  RAW	  MATERIALS	  
8	  
1.1.5	  
FISH	  BYPRODUCTS	  –	  STATISTICS	  
10	  
1.1.6	  
FISH	  BYPRODUCTS	  –	  APPLICATIONS	  
12	  
1.2	  
ATLANTIC	  COD	  (GADUS	  MORHUA)	  
13	  
1.3.1.	  
BIOLOGY	  AND	  DISTRIBUTION	  
13	  
1.3.2.	  
COD	  REST	  RAW	  MATERIAL	  
14	  
1.3.3.	  
COD	  HEAD	  
15	  
1.3	  
FISH	  PROTEIN	  HYDROLYSATES	  (FPH)	  
16	  
1.3.1	  
CHEMICAL	  HYDROLYSIS	  
17	  
1.3.2	  
ENZYMATIC	  HYDROLYSIS	  
18	  
1.3.3	  
DEGREE	  OF	  HYDROLYSIS	  
21	  
1.3.4	  
YIELD	  
22	  
1.3.5	  
PROPERTIES	  AND	  APPLICATIONS	  OF	  FPH	  
24	  
2	  
AIM	  OF	  THE	  WORK	  
29	  
3	  
MATERIALS	  AND	  METHODS	  
30	  
3.1	  
PREPARATION	  OF	  THE	  COD	  HEADS	  
30	  
3.2	  
HYDROLYSIS	  PROCESS	  
33	  
3.3	  
ANALYSIS	  OF	  RAW	  MATERIAL,	  SEDIMENTS	  AND	  FPH	  
37	  
3.3.1	  
TOTAL	  DRY	  MATTER	  CONTENT	  
37	  
3.3.2	  
YIELD	  AND	  MASS	  BALANCE	  
37	  
3.3.3	  
TOTAL	  ASH	  CONTENT	  
38	  
3.3.4	  
TOTAL	  LIPID	  CONTENT	  
38	  
3.3.5	  
TOTAL	  PROTEIN	  CONTENT	  
39	  
3.4	  
ANALYSIS	  OF	  FPH	  
39	  
3.4.1	  
PROTEIN	  RECOVERY	  
39	  
3.4.2	  
DEGRADATION	  AND	  SOLUBILIZATION	  OF	  PROTEINS	  
39	  
3.4.3	  
DETERMINATION	  OF	  DEGREE	  OF	  HYDROLYSIS	  (DH)	  
41	  
3.4.4	  
DETERMINATION	  OF	  AMOUNT	  OF	  FREE	  AMINO	  ACIDS	  
42	  
4	  
RESULTS	  AND	  DISCUSSION	  
43	  
4.1	  
SENSORY	  CHARACTERISTICS	  OF	  HYDROLYSATES	  
43	  
4.2	  
RAW	  MATERIAL	  COMPOSITION	  
44	  
4.2.1	  
TOTAL	  DRY	  MATTER	  CONTENT	  
45	  
4.2.2	  
TOTAL	  ASH	  CONTENT	  
45	  
4.2.3	  
TOTAL	  PROTEIN	  CONTENT	  
45	  
==PAGE:5==
 
 
4 
	  	  
4.2.4	  
TOTAL	  LIPID	  CONTENT	  
46	  
4.3	  
COMPOSITION	  OF	  FRACTIONS	  
46	  
4.3.1	  
DRY	  MATTER	  CONTENT	  
46	  
4.3.2	  
YIELD	  OF	  DRY	  MATTER	  IN	  FRACTIONS	  
47	  
4.3.3	  
MASS	  BALANCE	  
48	  
4.3.4	  
MOISTURE	  CONTENT	  
49	  
4.3.5	  
ASH	  CONTENT	  
50	  
4.3.6	  
LIPID	  CONTENT	  
52	  
4.3.7	  
PROTEIN	  RECOVERY	  IN	  FPH	  POWDER	  
53	  
4.4	  
DEGREE	  OF	  HYDROLYSIS	  (DH)	  
55	  
4.5	  
DETERMINATION	  OF	  HYDROLYSIS:	  TCA-­‐SOLUBILITY	  VS.	  TOTAL	  SOLUBLE	  PEPTIDES	  
57	  
4.6	  
DEGREE	  OF	  HYDROLYSIS:	  FORMOL	  TITRATION	  VS.	  TCA-­‐SOLUBILITY	  METHOD	  
60	  
4.7	  
AMOUNT	  OF	  FREE	  AMINO	  ACIDS	  
61	  
4.8	  
SUGGESTIONS	  TO	  IMPROVE	  THE	  PROCESS	  AND	  ANALYSES	  
62	  
5	  
CONCLUSION	  
65	  
6	  
WORKS	  CITED	  
67	  
 
1 Introduction  
1.1 
Fish Byproducts 
The byproducts from fish processing are very important for the fish industry, not 
only because of the nutritional value, but also due to the economic, political, and 
environmental parameters that are associated with bioconversion technologies of fish 
byproducts (Venugopal & Shahidi, 1998). However, the most common use of 
byproducts from the fish-filleting industry in Norway is in fish silage production, 
where it is concentrated or dried and used for feed (Bekkevold & Olafsen, 2007). 
The marine raw materials have become more expensive globally due to the quota 
system. In Europe, the total allowable catches (TACs) for most commercial fish 
stocks (including cod) is set annually by the Council of fisheries ministers (European 
Commission, 2014). In Norway, the TAC is enforced by the Norwegian Ministry of 
Fisheries and Coastal Affairs to ensure long-term, optimal exploitation of living 
marine resources. Therefore, it is of great importance for the fish processing 
==PAGE:6==
 
 
5 
Hydrolysis	  of	  Cod	  (Gadus	  Morhua)	  Head	  
companies to utilize the whole catch including the valuable fractions of the marine 
processing byproducts, such as: fish oil, proteins, collagen and gelatine, enzymes, 
minerals, and bioactive compounds. This amount should be maximized for human 
consumption and other value added ingredients.  
Enzymatic hydrolysis is one of the effective methods to recover different 
compounds from fish rest raw material. The resulting fish protein hydrolysate can be 
applied to improve the functional, nutritional and nutraceutical properties of different 
food products. 
1.1.1 Fish Byproducts – Definition 
According to The Marine Ingredients Organisation (IFFO), normally, less than 
half of a fish is used for human consumption. The rest of the fish is called byproducts 
and is not consumed directly by humans (IFFO, 2013). According to Shahidi (1994), 
the discards and byproducts of seafood processing account for approximately three-
quarters of the total weight of the catch. Furthermore, Falch, et al. (2006) estimated 
that the byproduct (including viscera) represents up to two-third of the weight of a 
round fish. 
Considering the high value of the fish proteins and the oil content, the so-called 
byproducts can be transformed into highly valuable products that in some cases can 
be worth even more than the fish fillets (Rustad, et al., 2011).  
In Norway, the definition distinguishes between marine byproducts and wastes, 
where byproducts include “products that are not regarded as ordinary saleable 
products (fillet, round, eviscerated, or beheaded fish), but which can be recycled after 
treatment; while, wastes are products that cannot be used for feed or value-added 
products, but which have to be composted, burned, or destroyed” (Bekkevold & 
Olafsen, 2007).  
There are different definitions for fish byproducts, and different phrases and terms 
used to name them, particularly with recent developments in understanding the value 
of the fractions that can be obtained from the fish byproducts. Therefore, the term has 
gradually changed from “waste” and “waste via co-products” or “co-streams” to 
“byproducts” and “rest raw material” (Rustad, et al., 2011). 
==PAGE:7==
 
 
6 
Introduction	  
Introduction	  
1.1.2 Fish Byproducts – Generation  
Fish byproducts are generated during fish processing, which can be divided into 
two major stages: the handling of the raw fish after catching (wild fish) or harvesting 
(farmed fish), and the processing of the fish to fish products.  
Wild fish is caught using different methods, such as different kinds of net, hook, 
pot, etc. In spite of the method used, struggling and stress might be the consequence 
of the capturing that can affect the fish quality and increase the amount of waste. 
Right after the fish is caught, some processing steps can be taken, in order to keep 
them fresh and undamaged during storage and transportation. For instance, if a fish is 
not bled within 30 minutes of its death, it will not bleed properly. Therefore, quality 
defects such as discoloration might occur in the product (Digre, 2013).  
The typical on-board processes can consist of operations such as: transferring of 
the catch from the fishing gear (e.g. trawl, net, etc.) to the vessel, sorting and grading 
of the catch based on the type and size, bleeding, gutting, washing, chilling, storage 
and finally landing the fish at the port and transportation to the next part in the supply 
chain, either the distributer or a production site.  
The number and order of the operations that are applied on the catch on board and 
on shore (e.g. plant) depends on the type of the fishing gear, the size and the 
equipment of the vessel, the time between catching and landing, the type and demand 
of the market, and the fish species (Ababouch, 2005). The primary operation of the 
fish on the fishing vessel can be either manual or automated. The latter is supposed to 
reduce wastes by avoiding rough handling of the catch.  
One of the first steps in fish processing after slaughtering is gutting, either on 
board or in the processing plant and it is done to prevent autolytic spoilage rather than 
bacterial spoilage (Shewan, 1961) and also to eliminate the possibility of parasite 
migration from the intestines into the muscle (Borderıas & Sanchez-Alonso, 2011).  
The residual raw materials that are obtained from processing of fish include head, 
bones, trimmings and visceral fractions, such as: liver, stomach, roe, and gonads. 
Based on the activity level of endogenous enzymes in the different organs, the 
byproduct fractions have different degrees of degradation potential, namely: easily 
==PAGE:8==
 
 
7 
Hydrolysis	  of	  Cod	  (Gadus	  Morhua)	  Head	  
degradable byproducts (e.g. viscera, or blood), and relatively stable byproducts (e.g. 
heads, skin and bones) (Rustad, et al., 2011). Therefore, the treatment, preservation, 
and processing method used for each fraction should be chosen according to its 
susceptibility. 
Biochemical deterioration of the raw materials (e.g. autolysis and lipid oxidation) 
leads to formation of degradation products, such as fatty acids and lipid oxidation 
products that has a negative influence on organoleptic and nutritional properties of the 
fish and shortens the shelf life of the product. To prevent the problem, the enzymatic 
activity should be reduced or the enzymes (lipases and proteases) should be 
inactivated soon after slaughtering. The enzyme inactivation can be achieved by 
heating or freezing. In addition, the enzyme activity can be minimized or slowed 
down as long as the fish is frozen or stored at very low temperature. 
There is also an alternative, which is to keep the fish alive and fresh by 
maintaining suitable conditions, for instance keeping the fish in cold clean water to 
reduce the metabolic rate (Ababouch, 2005). Different methods of preservation of fish 
on-board are discussed further in Chapter 1.1.3. 
These rest raw materials can add value to the total production by further 
processing and utilization. Different applications for marine rest raw material are 
described in Chapter 1.1.6. 
1.1.3 Fish Byproducts – Preservation methods 
Marine-based raw materials are highly perishable and unstable (Chapter 1.1.4). 
The spoilage of rest raw material can result in off flavors and odors that develop due 
to protein degradation and lipid oxidation. In order to produce FPH with desired 
characteristics, fresh or well-preserved raw material should be used. Therefore, 
storage and transportation of the raw material to the manufacturing sites should be 
carried out under controlled conditions, such as temperature, oxygen, etc.  
Different preservation methods can be used to prolong the period of storage 
between catch and landing, such as acidification by inorganic acids, chilling and 
freezing. In this project, different freezing and thawing methods are investigated in 
==PAGE:9==
 
 
8 
Introduction	  
Introduction	  
order to find practical solutions for storage conditions on board and maximizing the 
yield of the resulting fish protein hydrolysate.  
Stable low temperature is mainly used to reduce lipolysis and proteolysis, while 
acidification has antimicrobial effect (Rustad, et al., 2011), and therefore, the 
preservation method should be selected based on the characteristics of the raw 
material and its vulnerability. For instance, because cod is a lean fish, the lipid is 
concentrated in the liver that makes the byproduct containing liver susceptible to lipid 
oxidation, and these byproducts should be treated differently than the other fractions. 
However, in this project cod heads were the only raw material used and the lipid 
content in the heads is reported to be rather low (Chapter 1.2.1). 
As mentioned earlier, one of the ways to keep the fresh marine rest raw material 
for the time period between catching and landing without perceptible changes in the 
quality is rapid freezing soon after catching and filleting, and then storing at a suitable 
constant low temperature. The product should be worth the space, energy and cost 
that the on-board freezing requires. For instance, the value of cod liver is well known 
for its oil content and the fishermen know that it is worth saving on board the catching 
vessel (World Fishing and Aquaculture, 2015). The growing knowledge on the health 
beneficial effects of marine protein hydrolysates and their great potential as 
ingredients in functional foods increases the market demand for the other fractions of 
the fish rest raw material that have so far been discarded at sea. 
1.1.4 Fish Byproducts – Factors affecting quality of raw materials  
The most important biochemical changes that can occur during storage and affect 
the quality of marine rest raw material include: lipid and protein oxidation, enzymatic 
reactions, reactions with lipid oxidation products, and changes in pH, which can lead 
to protein aggregation, denaturation, cross-linking and breakdown of polypeptide 
chains. Such changes in protein structure can reduce the nutritional value of the 
product (e.g. reduced digestibility), decrease the yield of fish protein hydrolysate 
(FPH), change the organoleptic properties (e.g. color and odor), and alter protein 
solubility and other functional properties (Thorkelsson, et al., 2009). Some of the 
most important factors that can influence the quality of marine raw material are 
discussed in this section. 
==PAGE:10==
 
 
9 
Hydrolysis	  of	  Cod	  (Gadus	  Morhua)	  Head	  
Protein and lipid oxidation 
Both proteins and lipids are targeted for oxidative reactions in marine rest raw 
material during processing and storage, which is generally initiated by reactive 
oxygen species (ROS), such as hydroxyl radicals and singlet oxygen (Choe & Min, 
2006). Singlet oxygen reacts with aromatic amino acids, while oxidation with 
hydroxyl radical (OH−) leads to formation of cross-linked products and carbonyl 
compounds (Choe & Min, 2006; Davies, 1987). Partial protein denaturation induced 
by OH− oxidation can result in unfolding of the protein structure and therefore, the 
accessibility of peptide bonds is increased for the enzymes (Davies, 1987); while 
excessive denaturation have an adverse effect on enzyme activity.  
The lipid content of marine raw material is highly susceptible to oxidation. Lipid 
oxidation products can influence the production, yield, quality, composition and 
functionality of fish protein hydrolysate. Interaction between lipid oxidation products 
and proteins can lead to Schiff base formation (Yong & Karel, 1978), cross linking 
(Tironi, et al., 2002), polypeptide chain scission, denaturation and destruction of some 
amino acids (Soyer & Hultin, 2000; Refsgaard, et al., 2000; Thorkelsson, et al., 2009). 
The contribution of lipid oxidation products in protein functionality depends on the 
extent of oxidation, for instance gelling properties of FPH can be improved (or 
unchanged) by mild oxidation, while highly oxidized lipids can reduce gel forming 
capacity of FPH (Tunhun, et al., 2002; Thorkelsson, et al., 2009). 
Furthermore, the covalent bond between secondary lipid oxidation products 
(formed by hydroperoxide decomposition) and proteins can damage the protein and 
amino acids and reduce the yield of FPH in hydrolysis process. The lipid-protein 
interaction depends on the level of oxygen in the system, the extent of lipid oxidation 
and formation of secondary products, the temperature and time at which the raw 
material is stored, the degree of unsaturation of lipid, the contact surface area between 
proteins and lipids, and the concentration of prooxidants and antioxidants (Aubourg & 
Medina, 1999; Thorkelsson, et al., 2009).  
The oxidative activities are not completely inhibited by frozen storage conditions, 
particularly in the presence of catalysts such as, light, transition metals, heme groups, 
etc. Therefore, a variety of oxidation products are formed in the raw material before 
==PAGE:11==
 
 
10 
Introduction	  
Introduction	  
the hydrolysis process takes place, which are normally small molecules that interact 
with the other components and reduce the nutritional and sensory properties of the 
product (Aubourg, 2001; Thorkelsson, et al., 2009). For example, lipid oxidation may 
be one of the factors contributing to the loss of protein solubility during frozen 
storage (Saeed & Howell, 2002).  
Endogenous enzymes (autolysis) 
The endogenous enzymes that are present in different organs of the fish and the 
bacterial enzymes are responsible for autolytic process and changes in the properties 
of the raw material that leads to alterations in texture, flavor and odor. The 
concentration of autolytic enzymes is the highest in the internal organs, which makes 
the marine rest raw material containing viscera more vulnerable towards autolysis 
(Thorkelsson, et al., 2009). There are also proteolytic enzymes in fish muscles and 
other tissues that are activated by pH drop due to post mortem glycolysis and leads to 
softening of the muscle and formation of peptides and free amino acids (Thorkelsson, 
et al., 2009). 
Autolysis of lipids and phospholipids can lead to formation of degradation 
products, such as fatty acids, which reduce sensory quality and oxidative stability of 
fat (i.e. promoting oxidation); while, proteolytic degradation results in reduced 
molecular weight of proteins that affects their functional properties (Falch, et al., 
2007).  
1.1.5 Fish Byproducts – Statistics  
On-board processing of fish can lead to a decrease in the utilization of the total 
catch, since a significant part of the rest raw material is discarded into the sea (Rustad, 
et al., 2011). The amount of the marine byproduct and the discarded processing 
leftovers depends on the fish species, size, season and fishing grounds (Falch, et al., 
2006).  
According to SINTEF Fisheries and Aquaculture report, in 2013 there was a total 
production of 3.07 million tons fish and crustaceans, including live catch and farmed 
seafood in Norway, from which 0.87 million tons (28% of total catch) of byproducts 
were produced (Olafsen, et al., 2014). This means that a significant share of the total 
==PAGE:12==
 
 
11 
Hydrolysis	  of	  Cod	  (Gadus	  Morhua)	  Head	  
fish production is considered byproducts, which is a valuable resource for further 
economic exploitation.  
The report also states that in 2013, 600,000 tons of the produced byproducts were 
utilized, which is only 69% of the total. In addition, statistics shows that in 2013, a 
sum of up to 260-280,000 metric tons of demersal fisheries’ byproducts was not used 
for further processing, mainly due to on-board processing that was performed on 
trawlers and other types of long distance fishing fleets (Olafsen, et al., 2014). The 
main reason for discarding the byproducts in the sea can be lack of technical solutions 
and perceived economic intensives to bring byproducts ashore.  
The fish head, guts and livers from demersal species have made up most of the 
non-used parts of marine byproducts (Olafsen, et al., 2014). Figure 1 shows that a 
sum of 87% of the total available byproducts ends up as various types of feed 
ingredients, and only 13% goes directly or indirectly to human consumption. 
The different applications, in which the available byproduct was used for in 
Norway in 2013 includes: direct human consumption (as fresh, frozen seafood 
products, only 8% of the total byproduct in 2013), indirect human consumption (e.g. 
fish protein hydrolysate (FPH) and cod liver oil, 5% of the total produced byproduct 
in 2013), fishmeal and fish-oil, and silage refinement (i.e. further processing of silage 
into oils and fish protein concentrate) (Figure 1).  
 
Figure 1. Byproducts used in different productions (% and tons), 2013, Norway, source: 
(Olafsen, et al., 2014) 
==PAGE:13==
 
 
12 
Introduction	  
Introduction	  
1.1.6 Fish Byproducts – Applications 
The main part of the fish byproduct from the fish-filleting industry in Norway is 
used in fish silage production, where it is concentrated or dried and used for feed 
(Bekkevold & Olafsen, 2007). 
Nevertheless, fish residual raw materials can be used directly for human 
consumption, for instance, dried cod head is utilized in Africa; fish liver can be 
canned or used for its oil content; the trimmings can be turned to minced fish 
products, and the roe/milt of some species is a valuable product that can be processed 
in different ways. The most common preservation methods used for these products 
include salting, drying, smoking and freezing.  
The fish byproducts are rich in nutrients such as proteins, lipids, etc., and there 
have been numerous investigations to develop different methods for the separation 
and purification of these nutrients.  
The traditional extraction of fish oil consists of cooking and pressing followed by 
centrifugal separation. Due to the high temperatures used, this method may not only 
damage the lipids (i.e. faster degradation and oxidation), but also have a negative 
effect on the protein fraction. Therefore, biological methods such as enzymatic 
hydrolysis are the preferred technology to produce lipid and protein fractions of high 
quality (Rustad, et al., 2011). Since cod is a lean fish with a low concentration of 
lipid, lipid extraction will not be discussed in this report. 
Fish is also a rich source of protein and different types of protein fractions can be 
produced from fish rest raw material, such as surimi (washed fish mince), fish protein 
isolates (FPI), fish protein concentrates (FPC), and fish protein hydrolysates (FPH). 
The difference between the three is as follows: FPI is the fish protein that is purified 
by the pH shift process to achieve a protein content of more than 90% of the dry 
matter; FPC is a product of chemical hydrolysis; and FPH is produced using 
enzymatic hydrolysis (Arason, et al., 2009).  
FPH is used in this project to determine the influence of freezing storage and 
thawing methods on the quality of the product. The processing methods and 
properties of FPH will be discussed in more details in Chapter 1.3. 
==PAGE:14==
 
 
13 
Hydrolysis	  of	  Cod	  (Gadus	  Morhua)	  Head	  
1.2 
Atlantic Cod (Gadus morhua) 
Atlantic cod (Gadus morhua) is a benthopelagic fish that belongs to the family 
Gadidae. It has a dark green or brown skin with a long, lateral line and a barbel or 
whisker that protrudes from its lower jaw (Figure 2). Cod is a lean fish with firm, 
white flesh that readily flakes when cooked. 
 
Figure 2. Atlantic Cod (Gadus morhua) 
1.3.1. Biology and distribution 
The Atlantic cod can live for 25 years, grow to 2 meters in length, and weigh up to 
96 kg. The growth rate and sexual maturity age varies between years and areas, for 
example, the sexual maturity age can be between two and up to eight years. 
The largest cod stock in the world belongs to the North-East Arctic cod, which is 
managed by Norway and Russia, and the stock is in a good condition. The joint 
Norwegian-Russian Fisheries Commission sets the annual total allowable catch for 
the stock (The Norwegian Ministry of Trade, Industry and Fisheries, 2015). Different 
fishing methods, such as trawling, long-line, gill net, Danish seine and hook and line 
gears are used to catch cod. The other Norwegian cod stock is the North Sea cod, 
which is managed together with the EU and unfortunately is in a very poor condition.  
The main spawning period is March-April, when female cod releases the eggs in 
batches and the male cod compete to fertilize them. When the eggs are fertilized, they 
are carried slowly with ocean currents and grow into larvae.  
The main nursery and feeding areas for Northeast Arctic cod are in the Barents 
Sea, where the water temperature is above 0ºC (south of the polar front), and the main 
spawning areas are along the Norwegian coast north of 67°N (The Norwegian 
==PAGE:15==
 
 
14 
Introduction	  
Introduction	  
Ministry of Trade, Industry and Fisheries, 2015). Figure 3 shows the spawning, 
migration, and feeding areas for the Northeast Arctic cod. 
 
Figure 3 The North east Arctic cod, spawning area, spawning migration and feeding area 
source: (The Norwegian Ministry of Trade, Industry and Fisheries, 2015) 
1.3.2. Cod rest raw material 
As mentioned in Chapter 1.1, the rest raw material of a round fish such as cod 
includes what is left after filleting, such as the head, backbones, trimmings, skin, roe, 
viscera, etc., and it can represent up to two-third of the fish (Gildberg, 2002; Slizyte, 
et al., 2009; Rustad, et al., 2011).  
Some of the fresh and high-quality cod byproducts are directly used for human 
consumption, such as cod roe (sugar salted, cooked and chilled, smoked, frozen or 
canned), head (including cheeks, chin medallions, and tongues), backbone (to obtain 
muscle strips and swim bladders), liver (oil production), milt, stomach, and trimmings 
(minced fish products) (Rustad, et al., 2011). Different ingredients, such as proteins, 
lipids, creatine, taurine, collagen, calcium, and phosphorous can also be extracted 
from cod byproducts. 
As mentioned earlier, the main challenge with cod rest raw material is the long 
fishing trips (i.e. up to two weeks), during which, the cod is processed and stored on 
==PAGE:16==
 
 
15 
Hydrolysis	  of	  Cod	  (Gadus	  Morhua)	  Head	  
board and the rest raw material is often discarded at sea. In a study by Akse, et al. 
(2002), a storage time of 12 hours after catch for gutted and un-gutted fish is 
suggested. They found that the quality of the fish and the byproducts is not reduced 
during this period. There is also a difference between spawning cod and heavily 
feeding cod (i.e. capelin cod), where the former could be stored for up to 48 hours 
versus 12 hours for the latter (Rustad, et al., 2011).  
1.3.3. Cod head 
In this project, cod heads were removed from caught wild fish and used to 
produce fish protein hydrolysate, and therefore a brief description of this raw material 
is given in this section.  
Approximately 20% of the live weight of cod consists of heads, but the percentage 
will vary depending on the type of machine that is used to remove the head, for 
example whether or not collar is included in the removed head (Falch & Slizyte, 
2008). 
According to Stoknes & Økland (2002), farmed cod has smaller head ratio to the 
round weight (13-15% of body weight) compared to wild fish (about 18%). Cod head 
consists of about 55% muscle, 20% bone, 15% gills, 5% skin and 4% eyes, with an 
average protein content of about 14-15% (Stoknes & Økland, 2002; Arnesen & 
Gildberg, 2006). In a report published by Møreforsking (Økland & Kjerstad, 2002), 
chemical composition of cod head is determined (Table 1): 
Table 1. Chemical composition of cod head (% weight), source: (Økland & Kjerstad, 2002) 
Sample 
Water (%) 
Protein (%) 
Lipids (%) 
Ash (%) 
Cod head 
79.3 
14.2 
4.1 
6.4 
Stoknes and Økland (2002) described micro and macro mineral composition in 
cod heads. In addition, Stoknes et al. (2004) described Fatty acid and fat class 
composition of the eyes and brain. Different authors suggest several applications for 
the fractions that can be extracted from fish head in health food, cosmetics, ingredient 
and infant formula (Stoknes et al., 2004; Stoknes & Økland 2002; Stoknes & 
Hellevik, 2000). However, there has not been any evidence of using cod heads to the 
recovery of protein and gelatin in Norway (Aas & Kjerstad, 2008). 
==PAGE:17==
 
 
16 
Introduction	  
Introduction	  
In Norway, a large proportion of the catch is landed without head. While in other 
fishing nations like Iceland, Denmark, the Faroe Islands and Canada, cod is normally 
landed with head on and the head can be utilized either for direct human consumption 
or as ingredients in food and animal feed industries (Bekkevold & Olafsen, 2007). 
Drying, salting and freezing are some of the methods used to preserve whole heads.  
In Norway, heads from wild caught cod have traditionally been underutilized (Aas 
& Kjerstad, 2008). While, the Icelandic statistics shows that they have developed an 
appropriate utilization and market for cod head, including exportation of salted and 
fermented cod heads to Nigeria and Asian countries such as Korea and China and 
frozen head to Portugal and Spain (Aas & Kjerstad, 2008). There is a great potential 
for Norway to achieve a better utilization of cod heads in general and wild cod heads 
in particular, due to its larger size compared to the farmed cod.  
Due to the large size of wild cod head, a large space is required to store them, and 
therefore mincing is an option that should be considered to minimize the required 
space. If the heads are supposed to be stored in frozen state, there is an extra 
processing cost of freezing and frozen-storage space as well. In this project, the 
possibility of frozen storage of whole versus minced cod heads is investigated. The 
main purpose is to determine if it is profitable to spend the space and energy to store 
cod head and use it as raw material for production of value added FPH, despite the 
changes that might take place during freezing and thawing. 
1.3 
Fish protein hydrolysates (FPH) 
Kristinsson and Rasco (2000) defined protein hydrolysates as chemically or 
enzymatically broken down proteins into free amino acids and/or peptides, which can 
present a large range of molecular weight distribution depending on the greater or 
lesser degree of hydrolysis.  
The protein hydrolysates can be used to change the functional characteristics (e.g., 
water-holding, texture, gelling, foaming and emulsification properties) of different 
food systems; in addition, the resulting proteins are less allergenic and easier to 
digest. Several bioactive properties are also attributed to protein hydrolysates that will 
be discussed in section 1.2.6. 
==PAGE:18==
 
 
17 
Hydrolysis	  of	  Cod	  (Gadus	  Morhua)	  Head	  
1.3.1 Chemical hydrolysis 
Chemical hydrolysis of fish byproducts is used in some industrial practices, and it 
is done by using strong chemicals and solvents (acid or alkaline) at extreme 
temperature (up to 118ºC) and pH conditions. Hydrochloric and sulphuric acid are the 
most common acids used for chemical hydrolysis of fish proteins, which result in an 
extensively hydrolysed product with high solubility (Slizyte, 2004).   
Although the process is relatively inexpensive and the method is rather simple, it 
is difficult to control the process, and the chemical and compositional properties of 
the resulting hydrolysate might be variable from batch to batch (Kristinsson & Rasco, 
2000). In addition, the extreme conditions of production may reduce the nutritional 
value of the products, for instance destruction of susceptible amino acids (e.g. 
tryptophan), which would limit their use in food applications. 
The other issue that arises when acid is used for hydrolysis is that it should be 
neutralized by a base (e.g. sodium hydroxide), which leads to formation of a large 
amount of salt. The salt decreases the desirability of the product, and interferes with 
functional properties of the protein. Therefore, the acid hydrolysis is mainly used for 
production of fertilizers (Kristinsson & Rasco, 2000). 
The alkaline reactants (e.g. sodium hydroxide) are also used to hydrolyse fish 
proteins, primarily by using fish protein concentrate (FPC) as the starting substrate 
(Slizyte, 2004). However, alkaline hydrolysis can also cause some defects in the 
product, including an adverse effect on the nutritive value of the product and several 
unpleasant reactions. For example, by removal of hydrogen from the alpha carbon of 
an amino acid, racemization of L-amino-acid to D-amino-acid might happen. D-
amino-acid cannot be absorbed in human gastrointestinal system. In addition, 
cleavage of disulfide bonds in some essential amino acids (e.g. cysteine, serine and 
threonine) not only destroys and eliminates them from the product, but also may lead 
to formation of toxic and highly reactive substances such as dehydroalanine (DHA) 
(Kristinsson & Rasco, 2000).  
==PAGE:19==
 
 
18 
Introduction	  
Introduction	  
1.3.2 Enzymatic hydrolysis  
Enzymatic hydrolysis of fish proteins is performed either by endogenous enzymes 
that are mainly originated from viscera and liver (i.e. autolysis), or/and exogenous 
enzymes that are added to promote the hydrolysis process. Many enzymes of 
microbial, plant and animal origin have been used in hydrolysis of fish proteins, 
including: papain, Alcalase®, bromelain, ProtamexTM, etc. (Souissi, et al., 2007). 
When commercial proteases are used, the rate of enzymatic hydrolysis is 
accelerated compared with autolysis. The process can be controlled by the choice of 
added enzyme(s), process conditions and the time of the hydrolysis reaction. 
Hydrolysis process causes a decrease in the peptide size, which can improve the 
functional properties of the proteins, quality, and yield. The functional properties of 
the fish protein hydrolysate (FPH) depend on many different factors, including type of 
processing method used, characteristics of the raw material, and the extent of the 
hydrolysation.  
However, there are some disadvantages in using enzymatic hydrolysis that can 
restrict the application and production of fish protein hydrolysates on an industrial 
scale. One of the disadvantages of enzymatic hydrolysis of fish rest raw material is 
the relatively high price of commercial enzymes that are used as exogenous enzymes 
in the process. The other problem is the challenges in controlling the hydrolysis 
process to obtain uniform results and products with the same quality and 
characteristics (Kristinsson & Rasco, 2000). The protein yield is also variable in this 
method and depends on different factors (Chapter 1.3.4).  
The enzymatic hydrolysis of fish protein (cod head) is the method used in the 
current project. There are more details about properties and applications of FPH in 
Chapter 1.3. 
Enzymes 
Enzymes are proteins consisting of long chains of amino acids, which are bound 
together by peptide bonds, and are present in every living cell. The main function of 
enzymes in biological systems is to control the metabolic processes, by which energy 
and fresh cell materials are produced.  
==PAGE:20==
 
 
19 
Hydrolysis	  of	  Cod	  (Gadus	  Morhua)	  Head	  
The proteases can be divided into groups based on, mechanism of action and 
three-dimensional structure (Neurath, 1989). For example, based on their active site, 
peptidases can be divided into two classes: the exopeptidases and endopeptidases. 
Exopeptidases (exoproteases or aminopeptidases) can cleave the proteins only near 
the N- or C-terminus, and endoproteases (endoproteases or proteinases) preferentially 
act away from the termini and cleave the internal peptide bonds within the protein 
molecule. Therefore, the hydrolysis products of endopeptidases are usually smaller 
peptides, while exopeptidases produce free amino acids, di- or tri-peptides (Slizyte, 
2004) Endopeptidases have complex specificities with regard to which peptide bonds 
they can hydrolyse. The specificity of endopeptidase determines the number of 
cleavages in a peptide chain, and thereby the size distribution and characteristics of 
the hydrolysis product, such as hydrophobicity and aromatic properties. In some 
processes, both endogenous and exogenous enzymes are used.  
The proteases can also be classified based on their pH requirements into acidic 
(mainly produced by molds and yeasts), neutral or alkaline. The other way to 
characterize proteases is based on their mechanism of action and sensitivities towards 
different inhibitors due to the principal functional groups in their active sites, namely: 
serine, thiol, metallo and aspartic proteases, which have serine, thiol, metal ion or 
aspartic acid, respectively, in their active sites (Venugopal, 1994; Kristinsson & 
Rasco, 2000).  
The desirability of a proteinase for industrial purposes depends on the hydrolysis 
product that is required. In other words, the choice of enzyme can be based on the raw 
material characteristics, the desired chemical and functional properties (e.g. gelation, 
foaming, emulsifying), and on the bioactive properties of the product. For instance, 
usually bioactive peptides are smaller than peptides contributing to functional 
properties.  
The extent of hydrolysis can be controlled either by choosing site-specific 
enzymes (e.g. trypsin or chymotrypsin) versus non-specific proteases (e.g. papain) or 
by maintaining the hydrolysis process conditions, namely hydrolysis time. 
==PAGE:21==
 
 
20 
Introduction	  
Introduction	  
Hydrolysis process 
The hydrolysis process using one or more commercial proteases generally 
involves the preparation of raw material (e.g. collection and mincing of the fish rest 
raw material), addition of water (the amount of water could vary in different 
processes), addition of enzyme and providing constant optimum temperature for the 
enzyme, followed by deactivation of the enzyme at a particular time of hydrolysis and 
separation of the fractions. The inactivation of the enzyme can be achieved by heating 
to 75-100°C for 5-30 minutes or by chemical inactivation (e.g. extreme pH values).  
After hydrolysis, a suspension of different particles (depending on the raw 
material) is obtained, such as lipids, scales, bones, and insoluble proteins. The mixture 
is separated into fractions using centrifugation, ultrafiltration, nanofiltration, or 
sieving to recover the hydrolysates as a soluble phase and separate it from the lipid 
phase and insoluble sludge phase. Centrifugation is the most common practice to 
separate these fractions. It uses the action of centrifugal force to promote accelerated 
settling of particles with different densities in a solid-liquid mixture.  
Five distinct major phases might be formed in the vessel during centrifugation 
depending on the composition of raw material, namely: sludge on the bottom, aqueous 
phase in the middle (containing protein hydrolysate), a lipid-protein fraction between 
aqueous layer and sludge, an oil-water emulsion, and the oil layer on the top (Slizyte, 
2004).  
The aim of the fractionation step in the hydrolysis process is to obtain the 
desirable compounds with maximum purity. Optimum centrifugal separation depends 
on the size, shape and density of the particles in the mixture and the viscosity of the 
hydrolysis suspension, and on the speed of rotation in the centrifuge (Slizyte, 2004). 
Eventually, the aqueous supernatant is either concentrated or dehydrated using a 
spray-dryer or freeze-dryer (Kristinsson & Rasco, 2000). The concentration or drying 
method is chosen based on different factors, such as: the cost of operation, the 
changes in the properties of the product due to high temperature (e.g. coagulation and 
denaturation of proteins), the appearance of the end product (e.g. color), and the 
length of the operation time. For example, longer operation can cause quality defects 
due to oxidation and increase the total cost of operation.  
==PAGE:22==
 
 
21 
Hydrolysis	  of	  Cod	  (Gadus	  Morhua)	  Head	  
1.3.3 Degree of hydrolysis  
Degree of hydrolysis (DH) indicates the percentage of the peptide bonds that are 
cleaved by the hydrolysis, and can be calculated as follow:  
DH% = h/htot × 100 
Where:  
h - The number of hydrolysed peptide bonds  
htot - The total number of peptide bonds present 
DH is used to describe the extent of the hydrolysis process, which determines the 
characteristics of the FPH (Slizyte, et al., 2005). For example, the size of the peptides 
in the FPH defines the interfacial activities and properties of the protein, and therefore 
the degree of hydrolysis is of great significance (Slizyte, et al., 2009).  
There are different direct and indirect methods to determine DH of protein 
hydrolysates, including the pH-stat method, amount of soluble nitrogen after 
trichloroacetic acid precipitation (SN-TCA), 2,4,6-trinitrobenzenesulfonic acid 
(TNBS), o- phthaldialdehyde (OPA), amino acid nitrogen, and formol titration 
methods (Rutherfurd, 2010). Formol titration and soluble nitrogen after TCA 
precipitation (which is an indirect method) are used in this project to determine the 
DH.  
Generally, hydrolysates with lower degrees of hydrolysis (i.e. partial hydrolysis) 
have larger molecular weight and higher surface hydrophobicity. Hydrophobicity 
plays an important role in determining functional properties of hydrolysates, including 
solubility, foaming, interfacial properties (e.g. emulsification), and antioxidant effects. 
Under normal conditions, peptides with larger molecular weight (i.e. minimum length 
of >20 residues) increase emulsifying stability and activity, and decrease solubility 
and gelling properties (Kristinsson & Rasco, 2000).  
The most important drawback of the low molecular weight peptides (i.e. 
molecular weight from 1000-6000 Da) is their bitter flavor. When proteins are 
hydrolysed, the buried hydrophobic peptides are released, which can interact with the 
taste buds causing a bitter taste (Hou, et al., 2011). According to Damodaran, et al., 
(2007), bitter peptides have a mean residue hydrophobicity of more than 1.4 kcal/mol. 
==PAGE:23==
 
 
22 
Introduction	  
Introduction	  
Adler-Nissen (1984) indicated that a DH value of 3-5% could usually reduce 
bitterness, and according to Daukas, et al. (2004), the highest risk of bitterness is in 
the DH range between 4 and 40%. 
The bitterness of FPH can be eliminated by employing a mixture of endo- and 
exopeptidases that can further break the bitter peptides down into free amino acids. 
However, formation of free amino acids can lead to decreased functional properties of 
fish protein hydrolysates. Therefore, in order to achieve the most appropriate %DH 
and to ensure the desirable functional and bioactive properties and preventing the 
development of bitter taste, strict control of hydrolysis process and terminating the 
process at that point is of great importance (Kristinsson & Rasco, 2000).  
An alternative method to avoid or reduce formation of bitter peptides and to have 
a better control over the process is to inactivate the endogenous enzymes prior to the 
hydrolysis. Different enzyme inactivation methods can be used, such as heat 
treatment, pressure induced inactivation, and mechanical (i.e. shearing) inactivation, 
of which the heating process is the most common method. One disadvantage of heat 
inactivation of the endogenous enzymes is the possible decrease in the yield and 
nutritional value of FPH (Chapter 1.3.4).  
1.3.4 Yield 
Hydrolytic process yield determines the profitability of hydrolysis process, which 
is one of the most important factors in production of FPH. The yield of the FPH as the 
soluble fraction in enzymatic hydrolysis depends on the type, properties and 
concentration of the substrate, the type and properties of the enzyme, the enzyme-
substrate compatibility, the hydrolysis conditions (e.g. pH, temperature and the time 
of enzymatic reaction, concentration of enzyme and degree of dilution), and the 
fractionation conditions after hydrolysis process (Slizyte, 2004). Some of the most 
important factors and the way they influence the yield of the FPH are described here. 
The substrate 
The substrate is the raw material used for hydrolysis, which is a determining 
factor for both the hydrolysis process and properties of the final product. Some of the 
most important properties of the substrate that influence the yield and characteristics 
of the final product include: the conformation of protein molecules (e.g. denaturation), 
==PAGE:24==
 
 
23 
Hydrolysis	  of	  Cod	  (Gadus	  Morhua)	  Head	  
lipid content (e.g. lipid oxidation, protein-lipid complexes), and the composition of 
the raw material (e.g. bones, head, skin, viscera) (Slizyte, 2004). 
Protein denaturation, whether it happens before or after hydrolysis step, has a 
negative effect on the yield of FPH fraction. The heat treatment might be applied on 
the raw material prior to hydrolysis (in order to deactivate the endogenous enzyme), 
which can cause protein denaturation. The denatured proteins in raw material can 
increase the resistance to hydrolysis by enzymes (Mohr, 1980). The hydrolysate is 
heated after hydrolysis to inactivate the enzyme(s), resulting in protein denaturation 
after hydrolysis. Protein denaturation occurs when the hydrophobic interactions 
between peptides occurs, which leads to self-association of larger peptides, possibly 
precipitation of proteins and eventually decreased yield of hydrolysate fraction (Mohr, 
1980; Slizyte, et al., 2005). 
The amount of lipid in raw material is the other factor that has a significant effect 
on the protein recovery and the percentage of solubilized protein. In addition, if the 
lipid content consists mainly of phospholipids and other polar lipids, initial heating of 
raw material can lead to formation of protein-lipid complexes (Slizyte, et al., 2005). 
The formation of protein-lipid complexes increases the resistance to enzymatic 
breakdown, resulting in reduction in the yield of both oil and FPH fractions (Slizyte, 
et al., 2005). 
The enzyme 
The second factor, commercial enzymes, as explained in Chapter 1.3.2, is usually 
a combination of endo- end exopeptidases that are used to produce FPH with different 
properties. The enzyme for hydrolysis should be selected based on its specificity and 
efficiency, the enzyme stability in the substrate system, the chemical and functional 
properties of the desired product, and the economic cost/benefit (Kristinsson & Rasco, 
2000). It is suggested in literature that using broad-spectrum endopeptidases (e.g. 
pepsin) are more effective in solubilizing fish proteins (i.e. increasing yield) than 
when highly specific enzymes (e.g. tripsin) are used for enzymatic hydrolysis process 
(Mohr, 1980; Gildberg, 2002).  
==PAGE:25==
 
 
24 
Introduction	  
Introduction	  
The concentration of enzyme & substrate  
Another significant factor in enzymatic hydrolysis and the yield of FPH is the 
concentration of both enzyme(s) and substrate (i.e. protein content) in the system. An 
increase in the concentration of total fish solids can reduce the yield of FPH in the 
solubilized phase, due to the product inhibition (Mohr, 1980). Therefore, by adding 
proper amount of water to the raw material prior to hydrolysis, the access of enzymes 
to the proteins is enhanced and therefore the yield of the FPH can be significantly 
improved (Kristinsson & Rasco, 2000; Gildberg et al., 2002). In a project by Slizyte, 
et al. (2005), different amounts of water were added to the raw material prior to 
hydrolysis and its influence on yield of different fractions was investigated. The 
authors suggested that the higher moisture content makes proteins more available for 
enzymes, and therefore the yield of the fractions increases. The results showed that 
the added water was more important regarding the yield of all fractions than type of 
the enzyme used. However, the yield of the lipid fraction was the highest in the 
samples without addition of water, while the yield of FPH in these samples was lower 
than the samples with added water (Slizyte, et al., 2005).  
The hydrolysis conditions  
Eventually, the conditions, at which the process takes place, such as pH and 
temperature should be adjusted to the optimal conditions for both activity and stability 
of the selected enzymes (Mohr, 1980). Since it is rather expensive to adjust the pH, 
the temperature adjustment is used to improve the conditions for enzyme activity and 
stability. 
1.3.5 Properties and applications of FPH 
There is a great potential in the food industries (e.g. bakery products, appetizers, 
cookies and soups) for FPH as protein supplement, because of its effective 
characteristics. These positive aspects include good nutritional value with well-
defined chemical composition, quick intestinal absorption/utilization in the body, 
flavor enhancing properties, and functional, antioxidative and bioactive properties. 
FPH is particularly of interest for individuals with special nutritional and 
physiological needs, for instance it can be utilized in formula for infants who have 
allergies to intact proteins or are born with inborn errors of metabolism. According to 
==PAGE:26==
 
 
25 
Hydrolysis	  of	  Cod	  (Gadus	  Morhua)	  Head	  
Aas & Elsayed (1969), an extensive hydrolysis with proteolytic enzymes can 
eliminate the allergenic and antigenic properties of cod products.  
Functional properties 
According to Hall & Ahmad (1992), the functional properties can be defined as: 
“The overall physicochemical behavior of performance of proteins in food systems 
during processing, storage, and consumption”. In addition, a more general definition 
given by Pour-El (1976) is: “Any property of food or food ingredients except its 
nutritional ones that affects its utilization”.  
Functional properties of proteins can be categorized into three main groups based 
on the mechanism of action (Damodaran, et al., 2007):  
1. Hydration-related properties, such as: absorption of water/oil, solubility, 
thickening, wettability  
2. Structural-related and rheological characteristics, such as: viscosity, 
elasticity, adhesiveness, aggregation, and gelation)  
3. Interface-related properties, such as: emulsifying and foaming activities  
The functional properties of FPH is determined with regard to different 
compositional and processing parameters, such as: physiochemical properties of the 
original protein (i.e. raw material, fish), enzyme specificity, hydrolysis conditions and 
reaction time, composition of the FPH, the amino acid sequences, molecular size, the 
electrostatic changes in the protein structure, water affinity, etc. (Pires & Batista, 
2013; Souissi, et al., 2007).  
Some of the functional properties that make them suitable for food applications 
are briefly explained in this section. However, the details are left out, since this 
project is not focused on functional properties of FPH.  
• Water holding capacity 
Since the functional properties of proteins in food matrices depends greatly on the 
water-protein interactions, the water holding capacity (WHC) is one of the factors that 
are of significance in protein hydrolysates. WHC is defined as the ability of the 
==PAGE:27==
 
 
26 
Introduction	  
Introduction	  
protein to absorb water and retain it against gravitational force within a protein 
matrix, such as protein gels or beef and fish muscle (Feng & Hultin, 1997). FPH can 
contribute to increased water holding capacity in food matrices. In a study by Slizyte, 
et al. (2009), the WHC of cod mince increased by addition of FPH powders by 
approximately 12% for FPH obtained from frozen backbones and 16% for FPH 
obtained from fresh backbones.  
The increased water holding capacity in hydrolysed protein compared to native 
proteins is due to the increased surface area to mass ratio with exposure of some 
hydrophobic groups that are buried in the intact protein structure (Damodaran, et al., 
2007). However, according to Slizyte, et al. (2009), excessive hydrolysis decreases 
water-holding capacity of the hydrolysates. The sludge fraction of enzymatic 
hydrolysis of cod byproduct have shown even higher water holding capacity, fat 
absorption and emulsifying properties than FPH, which can inspire increased 
utilization of marine byproducts via enzymatic hydrolysis (Slizyte, et al., 2004). 
• Interfacial properties 
The other functional property of protein that can be maintained by hydrolysis is 
their interfacial properties, including emulsification and foaming characteristics, 
which is useful when FPH is used as surfactants in food products, such as sausages 
and dressings.  
An emulsion is a mixture of two or more immiscible liquids, such as oil and 
water; and proteins are used to improve emulsion formation and increase the stability 
of the emulsion. FPH can reduce the interfacial tension at oil-water interface and form 
an interfacial film to prevent coalescence of the droplets (Damodaran, et al., 2007). 
The good emulsification property of FPH is due to the interfacial features, such as 
solubility in water and surface activity that is determined by their hydrophilic and 
hydrophobic functional groups (Slizyte, et al., 2009). For instance, they can adsorb to 
the surface of the oil droplets that are formed during homogenization, and by forming 
a protective membrane prevent the droplets from coalescing and therefore, promote 
the oil-in-water emulsion (Slizyte, et al., 2005). However, according to Kristinsson & 
Rasco (2000), the emulsifying properties of the hydrolysate decreases with an excess 
increase in the degree of hydrolysis, due to formation of small peptides, that have 
lower surface activity and less hydrophobicity. 
==PAGE:28==
 
 
27 
Hydrolysis	  of	  Cod	  (Gadus	  Morhua)	  Head	  
Foaming properties of FPH is related to their film-forming capacity at the air-
water interface. Hydrogen bonding, electrostatic and hydrophobic interactions are the 
intermolecular interactions that are involved at the interface. There is a difference 
between rapid foam formation ability of a protein and the stability of the formed 
foam. Foam is formed more rapidly in presence of low molecular weight and 
amphipathic (i.e. a compound with both hydrophilic and hydrophobic properties) 
proteins, which is not necessarily ideal for the protein-protein interactions required to 
form stable foams (Damodaran, et al., 2007).  
• Solubility 
Solubility is another important functional property that is determined by the 
degree of hydrolysis (DH). Hydrolysis of proteins increases their solubility and if a 
moderate heating is applied, aggregation and precipitation of protein content could be 
avoided and the FPH can remain soluble in a wide pH range (Rustad & Hayes, 2012).  
Antioxidant properties 
Antioxidant properties of FPH are of particular interest in foods, since lipid 
oxidation is one of the major challenges in food industries. The lipid oxidation 
compounds may cause undesirable changes in flavor, color, texture and loss of 
nutritional value of food products. In addition, some reactive oxygen species (ROS), 
such as superoxide anion (O2-), singlet oxygen (O2*) and hydroxyl radicals (̇ HO), 
together with free radicals and peroxides are produced in human body during cellular 
respiration. ROS formation have to be prevented either by endogenous antioxidants, 
like enzymes, tocopherol, ascorbic acid and peptides, or by consumption of 
antioxidants in food or dietary supplements (Zahara, 2007; Batista, 2013).  
Antioxidant properties of FPH are related to its inhibitory effect on several 
different oxidation pathways, such as inactivation of ROS, scavenging free radicals, 
chelating of pro-active transition metal ions (e.g. Fe2+ and Cu2+), and non-radical 
reduction of hydroperoxydes to nonreactive hydroxides (Jensen, et al., 2013; Shahidi, 
et al., 1995; Slizyte, et al., 2009). The antioxidant property of FPH is important in 
production of oxidatively stable food products that are fortified with proteins (Slizyte, 
et al., 2009).  
==PAGE:29==
 
 
28 
Introduction	  
Introduction	  
Bioactive properties 
There is an increasing interest in the positive impact of food-derived bioactive 
peptides on human health, such as: antimicrobial, antihypertensive, cholesterol-
lowering, antithrombotic, mineral absorption enhancement, antioxidative, and 
immune-modulatory properties (Rutherfurd-Markwick & Moughan, 2005; Kim & 
Mendis, 2006).  
Bioactive peptides are physiologically active peptides within the intact protein 
molecule sequence consisting of generally 3-20 amino acid residues in length. They 
can be released by enzymatic hydrolysis during fermentation, enzymatic hydrolysis 
with selective protease, or gastrointestinal digestion (Korhonen & Pihlanto, 2003).  
Hypertension is an important health issue causing cardiovascular diseases, which 
is regulated by Angiotensin I Converting Enzyme (ACE). ACE influences blood 
pressure by converting the inactive angiotensin 1 into the potent vasoconstrictor 
angiotensin 2 (Jensen, et al., 2013). One of the most important bioactivity aspects of 
fish protein hydrolysates is their ability to inhibit the action of the ACE (Gálvez, et 
al., 2013).  
==PAGE:30==
 
 
29 
Hydrolysis	  of	  Cod	  (Gadus	  Morhua)	  Head	  
2 Aim of the work 
The main aim of this project was to investigate the possibility of utilizing marine 
cod heads, and whether it would be profitable to freeze-store and thaw them to 
produce high quality FPH with high yield. Furthermore, since the minced head 
requires less storage space, the raw material, cod head, was frozen either as whole 
head or in minced state. 
Therefore, the parameters that were investigated in order to find practical 
solutions for storage conditions on board and further utilization of this byproduct to 
produce fish protein hydrolysates included: the state of raw material (minced or 
whole), the effect of freezing, and two different thawing methods.  
Other than determining the composition of raw materials and FPHs, other 
methods were employed to study influence of the applied conditions on the product. 
The degree of hydrolysis was investigated to determine the degree of protein 
degradation, and the amino acid content and composition was examined to 
differentiate between the FPH produced from fresh and frozen raw material with 
regard to the total amino acid content and the dominating amino acid in FPH. 
In addition, it is important to obtain the highest yield for FPH compared to the 
other fractions regarding the concentration of protein in the dry matter. Therefore, the 
yield of protein content in FPH obtained by two different hydrolysis time, 30 and 60 
minutes, was measured for the hydrolysates produced from fresh raw material, and 
frozen and thawed samples. 
  
==PAGE:31==
 
 
30 
Materials	  and	  methods	  
Materials	  and	  methods	  
3 Materials and methods 
3.1 
Preparation of the cod heads 
The raw material used in this project was cod heads that were removed from live 
fish caught by two fishermen and delivered at SINTEF Fisheries and Aquaculture AS. 
Approximately 40 cod were caught in different areas of Trondheimsfjorden in week 
10 (2015) and kept alive onboard the vessels in plastic tubes (600 L) of fresh seawater 
that was pumped and circulated. The fish were stored in small fish pens (ventemerd) 
in the sea outside Ila Fiskemottak for a maximum of 2.5 weeks and a minimum of a 
couple of days before the experiment.  
The fish was delivered alive to SINTEF Fisheries and Aquaculture AS and gutting 
and removing of the head was performed the day before the first hydrolysis (day 
zero). The heads were covered with ice and stored at 4ºC overnight until further 
processing. The removal of heads was carried out manually, and some of the heads 
contained neck meat as well (Figure 4). In addition, the ice that was used to cover the 
heads during storage time was melted and some of the heads were soaked in the 
melted water, which caused some physical changes such as deformation and 
discoloration (Figure 4).  
 
Figure 4. Examples of the cod heads used for the project, demonstrating inclusion of neck 
meat in some samples and deformation and discoloration in the heads that were soaked in 
water during storage time. 
Upon separation of the heads for mincing and storage, we tried to make a blend of 
the heads with neck meat and without, the samples that were soaked in water and the 
dried ones, and regarding the size of the heads.  
==PAGE:32==
 
 
31 
Hydrolysis	  of	  Cod	  (Gadus	  Morhua)	  Head	  
Figure 5 shows a summary of the main hydrolysis steps and the process conditions 
used in this project.  
 
Figure 5. Flow diagram illustrating an overview of the whole project and handling of the cod 
head as the raw material prior to hydrolysis. The samples for analysis are shown in blue boxes. 
Three kg of the total heads were used for hydrolysis on day one in two parallels 
and the rest were divided into two parts. Half of them were frozen as whole heads and 
the other half were minced and vacuum packed in plastic bags (0.5–0.6 kg per unit) 
and used in 1.5 kg batches (Figure 6). The mincing was carried out in a Hobart 
mincer (10 mm holes) to produce a homogenous substrate. 
 
Figure 6. Minced cod head; the vacuum packing machine on the left and the vacuum-packed 
minced cod head on the right 
==PAGE:33==
 
 
32 
Materials	  and	  methods	  
Materials	  and	  methods	  
To investigate the influence of freezing and thawing, whole and minced cod heads 
were frozen using an impingement freezer (Figure 7) with air temperature of -37ºC 
for about 25 min and stored at -20ºC.  
 Figure 7. The impingement freezer used to freeze the raw material as the intact or vacuum-
packed minced cod head at -37ºC 
After 20 days, half of the whole heads and half of the minced heads were removed 
from the freezer and placed under running tap water (6 to 10ºC) to thaw and be 
prepared for hydrolysis process. The minced heads were packed as a thin layer (0.8-
1.3 cm), and therefore only 30 minutes was enough for them to thaw; while for the 
whole heads, it took 3 hours until the core temperature of -2ºC was achieved 
(Appendix I). In addition, since the whole heads were directly in touch with water, 
and the water was running for three hours, some particles and soluble compounds 
were removed from the head and into the water that was discarded.  
The rest of the stored cod heads were moved to a cold storage room on the 21st 
day from delivery date (Figure 8), and after about 20 hours, the core temperature of 
the whole heads reached 0ºC. It took much shorter time for the minced head to thaw 
at 4ºC, but they were left in cold room until the whole heads were thawed.  
==PAGE:34==
 
 
33 
Hydrolysis	  of	  Cod	  (Gadus	  Morhua)	  Head	  
 
Figure 8. The frozen cod heads removed from the freezer and ready for thawing in either 
water or air 
3.2 
Hydrolysis process 
The hydrolysis processing steps to produce fish protein hydrolysate from cod 
heads are summarized in Figure 9. The thawed cod heads were either already minced 
(on the day of delivery) or were grinded using a Hobart mincer with 10 mm holes and 
mixed prior to hydrolysis to produce a homogenous batch.  
 
Figure 9. Flow diagram illustrating the main steps in hydrolysis of cod rest raw material 
(heads) 
==PAGE:35==
 
 
34 
Materials	  and	  methods	  
Materials	  and	  methods	  
One kg of the raw material (approx. 3-5 cod heads) was mixed with 1 kg of 50ºC 
distilled water, and put into two parallel hydrolysis reactors (with 3 liter capacity) that 
were placed in the same preheated water bath with controlled temperature to provide a 
constant temperature of 50ºC the entire time. An electrical impeller was mixing the 
blend constantly during hydrolysis, in order to ensure uniform temperature and 
condition in the entire mixture (Figure 10). 
 
Figure 10. The reactor equipped with mechanical stirring placed in a water bath used for 
hydrolysis process of cod heads.  
The temperature of the raw material was monitored using a digital thermometer, 
and when the blend reached a temperature of 50ºC, the enzyme was added. Right 
before addition of the enzyme, 500 g of the raw material was removed from each 
reactor to be analyzed as the zero-sample of the batch. For this project, the enzyme 
ProtamexTM (Novozymes AS - Denmark) was used with a concentration of 0.1% dry 
weight of enzyme per wet weight of the raw material (i.e. total weight of fish and 
water). The enzyme was diluted with a few drops of distilled water and mixed with 
the mixture of minced cod head and water. A constant temperature of 50ºC and the 
rotation in the reactor provided optimal condition for the enzyme activity in the 
reactors.  
After 30 minutes of hydrolysis, another 500 grams of the cod head mixture was 
removed from each reactor and the remaining mixture was left in the reactors for 30 
==PAGE:36==
 
 
35 
Hydrolysis	  of	  Cod	  (Gadus	  Morhua)	  Head	  
more minutes. The samples after 0 and 30 minutes hydrolysis were only analyzed to 
measure the dry weight, acid vs. total soluble peptides, and free amino acid 
composition; but 60 minutes FPH samples were in addition analyzed for lipid and 
protein content, degree of hydrolysis and yield.  
Right after removal from the water batch, the enzymes were inactivated by 
heating the hydrolysates at 90ºC in a microwave oven for 5 minutes. After heat-
treatment and deactivation of the enzymes, the samples were mixed and divided into 
50 ml graduated centrifuge tubes, and centrifuged for 10 minutes using a Sigma 3K- 2 
for 6000×g at 40°C. In the centrifugation of the mixture, only two fractions were 
separated, namely the fish protein hydrolysate (the aqueous phase), and the sediments 
in the bottom of the tube (Figure 11).  
 
Figure 11. Two phases in one of the hydrolysed products (frozen sample) separated by 
centrifugation (6000×g at 40°C); the aqueous light color phase on the right (hydrolysate) and 
the dark solid phase in the left of the picture (sediment) 
Since the concentration of lipid is very low (maximum 3.91% of raw material 
according to our results, Chapter 4.2), the lipid and emulsion phases were not 
separated in this project. However, some traces of narrow yellow lines were observed 
in the liquid phase of 30 and 60 minutes hydrolysate samples, which were not 
separable from the hydrolysate phase.  
After separation, the aqueous phase containing the fish protein hydrolysate was 
thawed at room temperature and filtered using glass wool in a funnel and was freeze-
dried after freezing at -80ºC to obtain the FPH in a powder state for further analysis. 
The sediment fraction was also thawed in room temperature, mixed, frozen at -80ºC 
and freeze-dried.  
==PAGE:37==
 
 
36 
Materials	  and	  methods	  
Materials	  and	  methods	  
Table 2. The samples used for analysis including: A. day zero raw material: B. day one with 
no frozen storage and three different hydrolysis times (0, 30 and 60 minutes), C. Whole (WH) 
and minced cod heads (MH) stored in frozen state for 20 days and thawed in 6-10ºC running 
water (W) and three different hydrolysis times (0, 30 and 60 minutes), and D. Whole and 
minced cod heads stored frozen for 21 days and thawed in air (A) at 4ºC cold room for 20 
hours and three different hydrolysis times (0, 30 and 60 minutes), 
A. Day zero: raw material 
Sample Hydrolysis time (min) 
1 
- 
 
B. Day one 
Reactor Hydrolysis time (min) 
1 & 2 
1 & 2 
1 & 2 
0 
30 
60 
C. Whole and minced cod heads thawed in water (W) 
Reactor Whole/Minced Head Hydrolysis time (min) 
1 & 2 
1 & 2 
1 & 2 
WH 
WH 
WH 
0 
30 
60 
1 & 2 
1 & 2 
1 & 2 
MH 
MH 
MH 
0 
30 
60 
 
D. Whole and minced heads thawed in air (A) 
Reactor Whole/Minced Head Hydrolysis time (min) 
1 & 2 
1 & 2 
1 & 2 
WH 
WH 
WH 
0 
30 
60 
1 & 2 
1 & 2 
1 & 2 
MH 
MH 
MH 
0 
30 
60 
The total number of samples used for analysis was 61, including the hydrolysates, 
sediments and raw material sample taken right after receiving the cod heads on day 
==PAGE:38==
 
 
37 
Hydrolysis	  of	  Cod	  (Gadus	  Morhua)	  Head	  
zero, which was also freeze dried. As explained earlier, two thawing methods and two 
parallels per raw material and three hydrolysis times of zero, 30 and 60 minutes were 
used, providing 30 fish protein hydrolysate and 30 sediment samples (Table 1).  
3.3 
Analysis of raw material, sediments and FPH 
The following analysis was performed on all samples including raw materials for 
each batch, wet and dry (i.e. freeze dried) sediments, and wet and dry (i.e. freeze 
dried) fish protein hydrolysates for all three hydrolysis times of zero, 30 and 60 
minutes. 
3.3.1 Total dry matter content 
The dry and empty glass container was weighed and filled with 1-2 g of the 
thoroughly mixed sample and weighed again immediately. The container with the 
sample was placed in the drying oven at 105 ± 2°C for 20-24 hours and weighed 
again immediately. The procedure was carried out in triplicate per sample. The 
difference in the mass represents the amount of water that was removed, and the dry 
matter content can be calculated using the following equation: 
DM% = weight  of  dry  sample g
weight  of  wet  sample g ×100 
Due to inhomogeneous composition, it proved very difficult to obtain 
representative samples of the sediment fraction, and the dry matter analysis and 
results were not reliable.  
3.3.2 Yield and Mass balance 
In order to estimate the yield of the fractions based on dry matter, the mass 
balance for the hydrolysates was calculated based on the dry weight of the fraction 
and the raw material, and the corresponding DM% using the calculation shown 
below: 
Yield =
dry  weight  of  fraction   g
dry  weight  of  100  g  raw  material   g  
=
wet  weight  of  fraction  (g)
dry  weight  of  100  g  raw  material  (g)  ×  DM% 
==PAGE:39==
 
 
38 
Materials	  and	  methods	  
Materials	  and	  methods	  
The mass balance for the sum of dry weight (DW) of all fractions per 100 g raw 
material was calculated as follows: 
DW  of  raw  material
DW  of  100  g  raw  material =
DW  of  hydrolysate
DW  of  100  g  raw  material +
DW  of  sediment
DW  of  100  g  raw  material  
Since only two fractions are obtained in hydrolysis of cod head, the sum of dry 
weight of hydrolysate and sediment fraction should be (more or less) equal to the total 
dry weight of raw material per 100 g raw material.  
3.3.3 Total ash content 
Ash is the inorganic part of the sample that has low volatility and remains after the 
water and organic matter have been removed by heating in the presence of oxygen. 
The ash content provides a measure of the total amount of minerals within a product.  
A known amount of sample (≈ 1g) was placed into a dried pre-weighed porcelain 
crucible, burning the organic matter off the sample in an air atmosphere at 
temperature above 550ºC overnight. The crucible was weighed after it was cooled to 
room temperature in a desiccator. The total ash content was calculated as follows: 
Ash  content% = weight  of  sample  after  ashing   g
weight  of  wet  sample   g
×100 
3.3.4 Total lipid content 
The lipid content in the raw material, sediments and hydrolysates were determined 
using the Bligh and Dyer method, which is based on the insolubility of lipids in polar 
solvents versus their solubility in non-polar solvents (Bligh & Dyer, 1959). Merethe 
Selnes performed the analysis at SINTEF Fisheries and Aquaculture. 
Exactly 10 grams of the sample was mixed with distilled water (10 ml), 
chloroform (20 ml) and methanol (40 ml) in a chloroform resistant centrifuge tube 
and homogenized for 2 minutes using an Ultra Torrax homogenizer. Another 20 ml 
chloroform was added and homogenized for 30 seconds, followed by addition of 20 
ml distilled water and 30 more second homogenization. The sample was centrifuged 
for 10 minutes at 9000 rpm, and 1 ml of the chloroform phase was transferred to a pre 
weighed glass tube using a pipette. The chloroform was removed by evaporation at 
==PAGE:40==
 
 
39 
Hydrolysis	  of	  Cod	  (Gadus	  Morhua)	  Head	  
70ºC under a stream of N2 gas, and the tubes were placed in a desiccator overnight 
and weighed afterwards to determine the lipid content of the sample using following 
calculation: 
Total  lipid  content  % = lipid  after  evaporation   g   ×  added  chloroform  (ml)
evaporated  chloroform   ml   ×  sample  (g)
×100 
3.3.5 Total protein content 
The total amount of nitrogen in the samples was determined using a C/N-analyzer 
(Elemental Combustion System 4010, CHNS-O) by Marte Schei at SINTEF Fisheries 
and Aquaculture. The samples were prepared by weighing about 1-2 mg of the 
samples for each parallel; six parallels per sample were analyzed. The total amount of 
protein in the fish protein hydrolysate and the sediments was calculated by 
multiplying the nitrogen content by 6.25 (Adler-Nissen, 1986). The nitrogen content 
was also used to determine the degree of hydrolysis by formol titration method that 
will be described later (Chapter 3.4.3).  
3.4 
Analysis of FPH 
3.4.1 Protein recovery 
Protein recovery represents the amount of protein in the raw material that is found 
in the hydrolysate fraction after 60 minutes hydrolysis regarding the dry weight of 
FPH, which is calculated using following equation: 
Protein  recovery   % = protein  in  FPH  from  100  g  raw  material
protein  in  100  g  raw  material
×100  
= yiled  of  FPH  from  100  g  raw  material  ×  protein  content  in  FPH
protein  in  100  g  raw  material
×100  
=
DW  of  FPH  (g)
DW  of  100  g  raw  material  (g)  ×  protein  content  in  FPH  (%)
dry  matter  in  FPH  (%)
protein  in  100  g  raw  material  (g)
×100  
3.4.2 Degradation and solubilization of proteins 
The trichloroacetic acid soluble nitrogen (SN-TCA) method is used in this project, 
which does not determine the number of peptide bonds broken, and therefore is not 
==PAGE:41==
 
 
40 
Materials	  and	  methods	  
Materials	  and	  methods	  
considered a direct method to determine DH. However, in this method the TCA-
soluble nitrogen is quantified, which is assumed to consist only of amino acids and 
small size peptides resulted from degradation of proteins. Non-hydrolysed protein is 
precipitated by TCA and separated by centrifugation, and the nitrogen content of the 
supernatant is determined by Lowry method, and compared with the total content of 
soluble peptides (Rutherfurd, 2010). 
Determination of total soluble peptides: 
Amount of total soluble proteins in all cod head protein hydrolysate samples were 
determined using the Lowry method (Lowry, et al., 1951), where bovine serum 
albumin (BSA) at different concentrations was utilized as standard. A stock solution 
of BSA (1000 µg/ml) was used to make 10 ml dilutions with 12.5, 25, 50, 100, 150, 
200, and 300 µg/ml concentrations. 0.1 g of each FPH and raw material sample was 
dissolved in 10 ml doubly distilled water, filtered using filter paper in a funnel and 
diluted to a ratio of 1:50 with doubly distilled water. 
0.5 ml of the following solutions was added to separate test tubes: One blank 
sample containing only water, triplicates of the filtered total soluble peptides for the 
raw material and each FPH sample, and triplicates for each dilution of BSA standard 
solutions. 
Alkaline copper agent was prepared by adding 1 ml of 1% CuSO4 and 1 ml of 2% 
potassium sodium tartrate to 100 ml of 2% Na2CO3 in 0.1 M NaOH. 2.5 ml of the 
alkaline copper reagent was added to each test tube and mixed with whirlmixer right 
away. After 10 minutes at room temperature, 0.25 ml Folin-Ciocalteu reagent diluted 
in a ratio of 1:2 with doubly distilled water was added to the test tubes, mixed and left 
for 30 minutes at room temperature. The absorbance at 750 nm was read in a 
spectrophotometer (Ultrospec 2000, UV/Visible spectrophotometer, Pharmacia 
Biotech). The blank sample was held as the reference and the BSA solutions were 
used to plot the standard curve to determine the percentage of acid soluble peptides in 
the dry matter. 
==PAGE:42==
 
 
41 
Hydrolysis	  of	  Cod	  (Gadus	  Morhua)	  Head	  
Determination of acid soluble peptides: 
The TCA soluble peptides were separated from the sample using Hoyle & Merritt 
(1994) method, and the Lowry method was used to determine the amount of acid 
soluble peptide in percentage of dry matter (Lowry, et al., 1951). 
0.1 g of the FPH was dissolved in 10 ml doubly distilled water, of which 2 ml was 
added to 2 ml TCA 10% and mixed well using whirlmixer. The sample in the test 
tubes were left for 30 minutes in ambient temperature, and then filtered by filter paper 
placed in a funnel. The transparent filtered solution contained acid soluble peptides of 
the sample and was diluted to a ratio of 1:20 with doubly distilled water. The Lowry 
method, as explained for the total soluble peptides was applied to determine the 
amount of acid soluble peptides. The analysis was run in duplicate for all fish protein 
hydrolysates that were hydrolysed for zero, 30 and 60 minutes. 
3.4.3 Determination of degree of hydrolysis (DH) 
The DH can be evaluated as the proportion (%) of α-amino group nitrogen with 
respect to the total N in the sample (Taylor, 1957). The amount of free amino groups 
was determined using the formol titration method, which is based on the reaction 
between formaldehyde and the amino group of an amino acid at neutral or alkaline pH 
that leads to liberating a proton and lowering the pKa of the amino acid-formaldehyde 
complex. NaOH is used to titrate the protons in order to increase the pH of the 
reaction mixture to the pKa of the amino acid, providing a direct measurement of the 
amount of free amino groups present. Formol titration is a rapid method that needs 
real-time monitoring and the results can be variable (Rutherfurd, 2010). 
A hydrolysate solution was prepared by weighing FPH (0.25 g) in a beaker and 
addition of distilled water to a total of 50 g. The solution was mixed with enough 0.1 
M NaOH to reach pH 7.0. Formaldehyde (10 ml) was added and the solution was left 
for 5 minutes in room temperature. The mixture was titrated by 0.1 M NaOH to pH 
8.5, and the amount of NaOH consumed for titration was used to calculate the amount 
of free amino groups in the FPH using the following equation: 
%  free  amino  groups = NaOH  used   ml   ×  concentration  of  NaOH  ×  14.007  ×  100
FPH  sample   g   ×  1000
 
==PAGE:43==
 
 
42 
Materials	  and	  methods	  
Materials	  and	  methods	  
The degree of hydrolysis (DH) was determined by dividing the amount of free 
amino groups by the total amount of nitrogen, calculated from the protein 
concentration: 
%  Degree  of  hydrolysis = %  free  amino  groups  ×  100
%  nitrogen  content
 
3.4.4 Determination of amount of free amino acids  
The method described by Osnes & Mohr (1985) was used to remove the proteins 
and separate the free amino acids for HPLC analysis. A concentration of 0.05 g of the 
powder FPH was dissolved in 5 ml distilled water. Two 1 ml parallels of this solution 
were precipitated with addition of 0.25 ml of 10% sulphosalisylic acid to each sample. 
The mixture was mixed vigorously, left at 4ºC for 30 minutes, and then centrifuged 
for 10 minutes with 10,000-rpm speed at 4ºC. In order to ensure that all proteins are 
precipitated, only 1 ml of the top supernatant of one parallel was transferred into a 
new eppendorf tube and the same process was repeated. Lack of precipitation in the 
second process indicates that all the protein was removed in the first round and the 
first sample could be used. After precipitation of all the protein, the supernatant was 
filtered using a filter with a pore size of 0.2 µm, and 0.205 ml of each filtered sample 
was sent for HPLC analysis.  
==PAGE:44==
 
 
43 
Hydrolysis	  of	  Cod	  (Gadus	  Morhua)	  Head	  
4 Results and Discussion  
In order to determine the influence of the state of the substrate on the 
characteristics of the fish protein hydrolysate, the cod heads were frozen as either 
intact whole heads or minced, and stored for up to 21 days. Two thawing methods 
were used to defrost the cod heads, namely by soaking the frozen raw material in 
running water of 6-10ºC or placing in the cold room of 4ºC overnight. ProtamexTM 
was the chosen enzyme used to hydrolyse cod heads for 30 and 60 minutes, and two 
separate phases of hydrolysate and sediment were obtained.  
The composition and characteristics of the resulting fish protein hydrolysates (and 
sediments to some extent) were analyzed to evaluate the differences due to raw 
material status, thawing methods and hydrolysis time; the results are shown and 
discussed in this chapter. 
4.1 
Sensory characteristics of hydrolysates 
Figure 12 shows the appearance and color of frozen hydrolysate samples for day 
1, day 20 (thawed in water), and day 21 (thawed in air) hydrolysed for zero, 30 and 60 
minutes.  
The zero minute hydrolysate fraction produced from raw material that was frozen 
for 20 and 21 days was not in liquid state and had a fibrous or fleshy-like texture 
(Figure 12), which can be an indication of possible interactions between different 
components during storage and low degradation rate during thawing. 
The 30 minutes hydrolysed samples for the minced cod heads thawed in both air 
and water were not fractioned properly (Figure 12, second raw, second column), 
which made it difficult to separate the hydrolysate from the sediment phase. It can be 
suggested that the 60 minutes hydrolysis be used for these conditions of freezing and 
thawing, and if it is necessary to use only 30 minutes hydrolysis, the centrifugation 
step should be modified to separate the fractions more adequately. 
The minced head zero minute sample was much darker than the other zero 
samples, which can be due to hemoglobin content of the sample released by the 
mincing stage. 
==PAGE:45==
 
 
44 
Results	  and	  Discussion	  
Results	  and	  Discussion	  
 
Figure 12. A comparison between the appearances of the frozen centrifuged cod head 
hydrolysates on the first day (the left column), the whole head thawed in water (the middle 
column) and minced head thawed in water (the right column); Protein hydrolysate in the 
aqueous phase (left part), and the sediments at the bottom (right), for zero, 30 and 60 minutes 
from top.  
4.2 
Raw material Composition 
The composition of the raw material prior to each hydrolysis is shown in table 3, 
in order to demonstrate the changes in raw material during freezing storage and the 
influence of the two thawing methods used. 
Table 3. Gross composition (g/100 g) of raw material used for enzymatic hydrolysis of cod 
head for fresh raw material and after freezing – thawing  
Composition 
R-H 
R-WH-W R-MH-W R-WH-A R-MH-A 
Dry matter (%) 
23.36 
21.41 
21.15 
21.76 
22.04 
Ash (%) 
7.17 
5.97 
6.88 
6.86 
7.27 
PC (%) 
13.52 
13.57 
11.93 
12.45 
12.36 
LC (%) 
3.91 
3.74 
3.19 
3.40 
3.74 
R-H: fresh raw material (day one); R-WH-W: frozen whole head (20 days frozen storage) 
thawed in running water (6-10ºC for 3 hours); R-MH-W: frozen minced head (20 days frozen 
storage) thawed in running water (6-10ºC for 20 minutes) and stored in 4ºC for 2.5 hours 
prior to hydrolysis; R-WH-A: frozen whole head (21 days frozen storage) thawed in air (4ºC 
for 20 hours); R-MH-A: frozen minced head (21 days frozen storage) thawed in air (4ºC for 
20 hours) 
==PAGE:46==
 
 
45 
Hydrolysis	  of	  Cod	  (Gadus	  Morhua)	  Head	  
4.2.1 Total dry matter content 
The dry matter (DM) content is lower for the frozen/thawed samples than the 
fresh raw material, which indicates some biochemical changes during freezing and 
thawing (Table 3). As mentioned before, the texture of the 0 min hydrolysate was 
different for the frozen raw material compared to the 0 min hydrolysate of fresh raw 
material. The minced head thawed in air showed the lowest decrease in DM among 
frozen/thawed samples, which can be due to its vacuum packaging that prevented 
more interaction with the environment. While the other vacuum packed minced-head 
that was thawed in water appeared to have the maximum reduction of dry matter and 
gain of moisture. There might be some penetration of water in the sample through the 
packaging while it was immersed in water. The whole head thawed in water had the 
second lowest DM, perhaps because it adsorbed some water while thawing in water 
for 3 hours.  
4.2.2 Total ash content 
The ash content was 7.17% for the raw material, and 5.97% to 7.27% for the other 
samples (Table 3). The lowest ash content was observed in the whole head thawed in 
water. The whole heads were left immersed in running water for 3 hours, and 
therefore lost a considerable amount of loose particles and soft tissues that might be 
water-soluble and washed out. In addition, the removal of those external items that 
might be included in cod head by water can be an explanation of the low 
concentration of ash in the product.  
 The other raw material samples did not show any large difference in ash content 
compared to the fresh raw material. The ash results in this project are higher than 
what was observed in a project by Slizyte, et al. (2005), which was maximum 4.4 
g/100 g for the cod viscera sample and 3.6 g/ 100 g for the backbone cod sample. The 
reason can be the high bone content of the cod heads used as the raw material. 
4.2.3 Total protein content 
The protein content for the fresh raw material was 13.52% of dry weight and for 
the stored samples ranged between 11.93 and 13.57% of dry weight (Table 3). The 
highest belonged to the whole head thawed in water and the lowest for the minced 
==PAGE:47==
 
 
46 
Results	  and	  Discussion	  
Results	  and	  Discussion	  
head thawed in water. The differences that were observed between the whole head 
thawed in water and the rest can be attributed to either removing of soft tissues and 
some water-soluble components (such as neck), or to the exposure of the more hidden 
components in the cod head that promotes removal of water-soluble protein content.  
The raw material thawed in air had more or less the same protein content for both 
whole and minced head. The protein content was determined using CN method, 
which showed a large fluctuation (standard deviation) in the results for the six-fold 
analysis of the same sample. Perhaps using more homogenous sample would give a 
better estimation of protein content. 
4.2.4 Total lipid content 
The lipid content ranged between 3.19 and 3.74% dry weight for the frozen stored 
samples (freeze dried), while the day one raw material contained 3.91% lipid (Table 
3). Lower lipid content in frozen stored raw material can be due to degradation of 
lipid content into other components during storage and thawing. The minced head 
thawed in water and whole head thawed in air showed the lowest and second lowest 
lipid content, respectively. The lipid content in the raw material was measured after 
freeze-drying, which is one more processing step that might influence the 
composition of the raw material. 
4.3 
Composition of fractions 
The compositional differences between the FPH samples that were produced from 
fresh cod head and the raw material with different freezing/thawing methods provides 
information on the influence of storage time, thawing method used, and hydrolysis 
process on the characteristics of the product, including the yield of FPH.  
The dry matter and ash content were determined for the wet hydrolysate, and 
moisture, lipids, proteins, and free amino acid content were the compositional 
elements that were measured for freeze-dried FPH in this study. 
4.3.1 Dry matter content 
In Figure 13, the dry weight of FPH fractions per 100 g of each sample is 
compared for 0, 30 and 60 minute hydrolysis time. The FPH samples follow more or 
==PAGE:48==
 
 
47 
Hydrolysis	  of	  Cod	  (Gadus	  Morhua)	  Head	  
less a similar pattern with an almost linear increase in the dry weight after 30 min and 
more change that is rapid after 60 min hydrolysis, indicating the importance of time, 
at which the raw material is hydrolysed. The frozen whole head that was thawed in 
water showed the lowest dry weight for FPH for 0 and 30 minutes samples, but after 
60 minutes, the concentration is comparable to the other samples.  
 
Figure 13. The dry weight of FPH fractions per 100 g of each sample after 0, 30 and 60 
minute hydrolysis; WH: frozen Whole Head; MH: frozen Minced Head; W: Water thawed; 
A: Air thawed 
The sediment fraction is a heterogeneous mixture that should be thoroughly mixed 
prior to analysis to avoid uneven distribution of bones. Unfortunately, the size of 
the samples taken for the analysis was not sufficient to provide an acceptable 
representative of the whole fraction, and therefore, the dry weight of the sediment 
fraction for this project is not reliable (results not shown). A suggestion to have a 
proper estimation of the composition of the sediment fraction would be to take a 
much larger sample (e.g. 10-20 g instead of 1-2 g) after vigorous stirring and blending 
of the entire sediment sample. 
4.3.2 Yield of dry matter in fractions 
The yield of dry matter in FPH and sediment fractions per 100 g wet weight of 
raw material for day one is compared to the dry matter yield produced from frozen 
and thawed raw material (Table 4).  
The yield of dry matter in hydrolysate fraction after 60 minutes hydrolysis is 
rather similar in all samples (between 10.6 and 12.3 g/100 g raw material), but there is 
0	  
1	  
2	  
3	  
4	  
5	  
6	  
7	  
8	  
0	  
30	  
60	  
Dry	  weight	  (g)	  /100g	  sample	  
Hydrolysis	  ?me	  [min]	  
DW	  of	  FPH	  frac?on/100	  g	  sample	  	  
Day	  one	  
WH-­‐W	  
MH-­‐W	  
WH-­‐A	  
MH-­‐A	  
==PAGE:49==
 
 
48 
Results	  and	  Discussion	  
Results	  and	  Discussion	  
a significant difference between 0 min and 30 min hydrolysis samples. In a study by 
Slizyte, et al. (2009), frozen cod backbone was used to produce FPH, and the yield of 
dried FPH after 60 minutes enzymatic hydrolysis was estimated to approximately 5.6 
g per 100 g wet weight of raw material. 
The lowest yield after 30 minutes hydrolysis is observed in the whole head thawed 
in water. As it is mentioned in Chapter 4.1 (Figure 12), the fractions were not 
separated properly in centrifugation and therefore, a large amount of hydrolysate 
ended up in the sediment fraction.  
Table 4. Yield of dry matter in hydrolysate and sediment fraction per 100 g wet weight of raw 
material after 0, 30 and 60 min hydrolysis; WH: frozen Whole Head; MH: frozen Minced 
Head; W: Water thawed; A: Air thawed 
 
FPH fraction 
Sediment fraction 
Day 1 
WH-W 
MH-W 
WH-A 
MH-A 
Day 1 
WH-W 
MH-W 
WH-A 
MH-A 
0-min 
9.2 
6.7 
6.3 
9.6 
8.3 
14.1 
14.7 
14.8 
12.2 
13.7 
30-min 
14.2 
4.0 
14.9 
15.2 
9.2 
9.2 
17.4 
6.3 
6.6 
12.8 
60-min 
11.0 
12.3 
10.6 
10.8 
11.3 
12.3 
9.1 
10.5 
10.9 
10.7 
The highest yield of dry matter in sediment fraction is seen in the day one sample 
and the lowest in the whole head thawed in water, where the latter showed the highest 
yield in the FPH fraction (Table 4). 
4.3.3 Mass balance 
The mass balance for the dry weight (%) of raw material and the sum of the two 
fractions (hydrolysate and sediment) after 0, 30 and 60 minutes hydrolysis is shown in 
Table 5.  
The dry matter (DM) content of the day zero (the day of delivery) cod head was 
23.4 per 100 g of raw material (results not shown) and the first column in Table 5 
shows the dry matter content of the raw material used for hydrolysis with and without 
freezing and thawing.  
The sum of the DM for the two fractions obtained after hydrolysis is supposed to 
be more or less comparable to the DM of the corresponding raw material. However, 
in some cases, there is slightly less or more DM than the raw material, which might 
==PAGE:50==
 
 
49 
Hydrolysis	  of	  Cod	  (Gadus	  Morhua)	  Head	  
be because of: either the loss of some sample during processing (e.g. distribution into 
centrifugation tubes, fractionation, evaporation, etc.), or difficulties in sampling 
(particularly for sediment fraction, Chapter 4.3.1).  
Table 5. Mass balance for dry weight of raw material and sum of all fractions after 0, 30 and 
60 min hydrolysis per 100 g of samples; WH: frozen Whole Head; MH: frozen Minced Head; 
W: Water thawed; A: Air thawed	  
Sample 
Raw material 
0 min 
30 min 
60 min 
Day 1 
20.29 
21.42 
21.4 
24.79 
WH-W 
21.41 
23.94 
22.6 
20.66 
MH-W 
21.15 
25.2 
19.72 
23.33 
WH-A 
21.76 
23.9 
19.76 
24.88 
MH-A 
22.04 
25.28 
20.72 
22.76 
4.3.4 Moisture content 
The water content in the freeze-dried FPH samples is shown in Figure 14. The 
amount of water in the samples was in the range between 2.25 and 3.79 percent of dry 
FPH, where the lowest belonged to the day one raw material and the highest was for 
the minced head thawed in water. The other dry samples showed more or less similar 
water content.  
 
Figure 14. Water content (%) in freeze-dried FPH samples after 60 min hydrolysis time with 
ProtamexTM; Error bars represent standard deviation, n=4; H: Head day 1; WH: frozen Whole 
Head; MH: frozen Minced Head; W: Water thawed; A: Air thawed 
2.25	  
2.74	  
3.79	  
2.89	  
2.73	  
0.0	  
0.5	  
1.0	  
1.5	  
2.0	  
2.5	  
3.0	  
3.5	  
4.0	  
4.5	  
H	  -­‐	  60	  
WH-­‐W-­‐60	  
MH-­‐W-­‐60	  
WH-­‐A-­‐60	  
MH-­‐A-­‐60	  
%	  sample	  
Water	  content	  %	  in	  freeze	  dried	  FPH	  
==PAGE:51==
 
 
50 
Results	  and	  Discussion	  
Results	  and	  Discussion	  
Low moisture content in the FPH powders is desirable, due to its positive 
influence on storage stability, however it might encourage lipid oxidation in samples 
with higher concentration of lipid (Arason, et al., 2009).  
In spite of using the same freeze drying procedure for all samples; there is 
variation between water content of the dried samples, which can be attributed to the 
freeze-drying process. Differences in the composition of the FPH sample could 
influence its melting point and hygroscopicity (i.e. the ability of FPH to attract and 
hold water molecules from the surrounding environment).  
The principle of freeze-drying is based on freezing the sample and then reducing 
the atmospheric pressure to allow the frozen water in the material to sublimate 
directly from the solid phase, below the melting point of the solvent to the gas state. 
Therefore, to ensure that sublimation (rather than melting) will occur, the sample 
should be cooled down below its triple point, which is the lowest temperature at 
which the three phases (gas, liquid and solid) can coexist in thermodynamic 
equilibrium. If a sample melts during primary drying step (due to its low melting 
point), it will lead to splattering of the sample, which results in sticky crumbs with 
low solubility instead of powdered sample.  
In addition, the batch-to-batch variation (e.g. variation in atmospheric pressure 
and temperature) between the different freeze drying rounds is the other possibility 
for the differences in water content of the dried samples. Since all the samples with 
different hydrolysis times and degrees were freeze dried simultaneously and under 
similar freezing and preparation conditions, some of the samples with lower melting 
point were melted when vacuum condition was applied. I would suggest to freeze-dry 
similar samples (e.g. all 30 minute hydrolysates) together, so we could adjust the 
conditions of the operation according to the characteristics of the sample. 
4.3.5 Ash content  
Regarding the ash content of the dry FPH samples, day one sample showed the 
highest ash content, whereas the whole head thawed in water contained the lowest 
concentration of ash and the other three samples were in between (Figure 15). The 
sediment fraction of hydrolysed whole heads thawed in water also contained the 
==PAGE:52==
 
 
51 
Hydrolysis	  of	  Cod	  (Gadus	  Morhua)	  Head	  
lowest percentage of ash, which can be attributed to low ash content in the 
corresponding raw material (Table 3).  
Although as mentioned before, the sediment sample might not be a good 
representative of the whole fraction, and it should be considered when comparing the 
results. 
 
Figure 15. Ash content (%) in freeze-dried FPH samples and sediment fraction for the 
samples with 60 min hydrolysis by ProtamexTM; H: Head day 1; WH: frozen Whole Head; 
MH: frozen Minced Head; W: Water thawed; A: Air thawed 
The ash content of FPH and sediment fractions represents the mineral content, 
including the mineral part of the bones and inorganic content of the raw material that 
ends up in the fraction. But the external objects might also take part in the raw 
material, for instance the gill in the raw material containing head might include small 
amount of stones, sand, shells, etc., which can add up to the total ash in the hydrolysis 
fractions. However, these types of particles are more concentrated in internal organs 
(e.g. viscera). In this project, the raw material used for hydrolysis was solely cod 
head, which consists mainly of bones.  
The importance of high ash content is due to its effect on the percentage of total 
weight of the FPH by increasing the amount of soluble components and altering the 
yield of hydrolysate fraction, which depends on the composition of ash (Slizyte, 
2004). For instance, potassium and sodium are readily water-soluble ions and can end 
up in the FPH fraction (Liaset & Espe, 2008).  
10.4	  
8.9	  
9.7	  
9.8	  
9.9	  
14.1	  
12.0	  
13.7	  
14.5	  
12.7	  
0	  
2	  
4	  
6	  
8	  
10	  
12	  
14	  
16	  
H	  -­‐	  60	  
WH-­‐W-­‐60	  
MH-­‐W-­‐60	  
WH-­‐A-­‐60	  
MH-­‐A-­‐60	  
%	  sample	  
Ash	  content	  %	  in	  freeze	  dried	  FPH	  and	  sediments	  
Dry	  FPH	  
Sediments	  
==PAGE:53==
 
 
52 
Results	  and	  Discussion	  
Results	  and	  Discussion	  
In addition, the amount of inorganic compounds can influence the composition of 
oil fraction, for example, the concentration of FAME (fatty acid methyl esters) in oil 
fraction can be strongly influenced by changes in ash and water content (Daukas, et 
al., 2004). However, the lipid content of cod head was not adequate for separation of 
oil fraction, and in this project, the composition of lipid content in neither of the 
fractions was analyzed. 
4.3.6 Lipid content  
The concentration of lipid in cod heads was not high enough to form a separate oil 
fraction after hydrolysis process, and therefore, the lipid content was distributed 
between the sediment and hydrolysate fractions. According to Slizyte (2004), in order 
to obtain the oil fraction, when cod viscera and backbone mixture is used as raw 
material, a minimum concentration of 6 g lipid per 100 g of wet weight is required. 
The cod heads used for this project had a lipid concentration of between 3.19 and 
3.91% for the different raw materials (Table 3), which is not enough to separate an oil 
fraction.  
The lipid content in the raw material was slightly different between samples, but 
the difference became more noticeable in the fractions obtained after hydrolysis, 
meaning that the distribution of lipid between the fractions was not uniform in all 
samples. The majority of lipid was extracted in the sediment fraction with lipid 
content of between 4.57 and 5.09% (Figure 16). The maximum lipid content was 
observed in the hydrolysate processed from the whole head thawed in air with 0.71% 
of dry weight, while the lipid content of the other FPH samples ranged between 0.37 
and 0.50%. Despite the highest concentration of lipid in day one raw material (3.91%, 
Table 3), the lipid content was the lowest for this FPH sample (0.37%, Figure 16).  
Regarding the freeze-dried sediment fractions, the lowest level of lipid was seen 
in the sediment of minced head thawed in water sample associated with the 
corresponding FPH sample containing the second highest lipid content among freeze 
dried hydrolysates. While day one sample contained the lowest lipid content in FPH 
and quite low proportion of lipid in its sediment fraction (second lowest lipid content 
among sediment fractions). 
==PAGE:54==
 
 
53 
Hydrolysis	  of	  Cod	  (Gadus	  Morhua)	  Head	  
Since the presence of lipid can promote lipid oxidation and formation of 
undesirable products and decrease stability of fish protein hydrolysate during storage, 
FAO suggested a limit of 0.5% lipid concentration in dry FPH (FAO, 1971). The 
results showed that the concentration of lipid is within the limit, which ensures the 
oxidative stability for all FPH powder samples except for the whole head thawed in 
air.  
 
Figure 16. Lipid content (% of dry weight) in the freeze-dried FPH and sediment samples 
after 60 min hydrolysis time with ProtamexTM; R. Raw material, H: Head day 1, WH: frozen 
Whole Head, MH: frozen Minced Head, W: Water thawed, A: Air thawed. 
4.3.7 Protein recovery in FPH powder 
Figure 17-a shows the protein concentration in the freeze-dried FPH samples after 
60 minutes hydrolysis, and Figure 17-b shows the amount of protein recovery in FPH 
samples. The highest protein content belongs to the FPH produced from fresh cod 
head (88.4%), and the lowest is seen in the whole head thawed in air (67.7%). 
However, the variation between the FPH produced from frozen samples regarding 
their protein content is rather small (67.7-71.6%).  
The difference between the samples regarding protein concentration is more 
pronounced, when the protein recovery for FPH samples is compared (Figure 17-b). 
The protein recovery is also somewhat lower in all FPH samples obtained from the 
frozen stored raw material compared to day-one hydrolysate (73.6-81.2 % vs. 85.0%). 
In addition, the lowest amount of protein recovered in FPH is seen in whole head 
0.37	  
0.43	  
0.50	  
0.71	  
0.43	  
4.62	  
5.03	  
4.49	  
4.57	  
5.09	  
0	  
1	  
2	  
3	  
4	  
5	  
6	  
H-­‐60	  
WH-­‐W-­‐60	   MH-­‐W-­‐60	  
WH-­‐A-­‐60	  
MH-­‐A-­‐60	  
%	  sample	  
Lipid	  content	  in	  FPH	  and	  sediment	  samples	  
FPH	  
sediment	  
==PAGE:55==
 
 
54 
Results	  and	  Discussion	  
Results	  and	  Discussion	  
thawed in water; while the lowest total protein content is seen in whole head thawed 
in air. 
  
 
Figure 17. Protein content (% dry matter) in: a. Freeze-dried FPH samples after 60 min 
hydrolysis time with ProtamexTM; b. Protein recovery in Freeze-dried FPH samples; R. Raw 
material, H: Head day 1, WH: frozen Whole Head, MH: frozen Minced Head, W: Water 
thawed, A: Air thawed 
The whole heads thawed in water had the same protein concentration as the day 
one raw material (Chapter 4.2, Table 3); however, after hydrolysis, the protein 
recovery is much lower than day one FPH and all other samples. It can be due to the 
interactions during frozen storage and particularly thawing, including protein-protein 
interactions and protein-lipid complexes that can reduce solubilization of protein 
content, and cause aggregation and precipitation of a part of nitrogen content in the 
sediment fraction. Although the whole head lost some particles and soluble 
88.43	  
71.53	  
69.73	  
67.73	  
71.58	  
0	  
20	  
40	  
60	  
80	  
100	  
120	  
H-­‐1-­‐60	  
WH-­‐W-­‐60	  
MH-­‐W-­‐60	  
WH-­‐A-­‐60	  
MH-­‐A-­‐60	  
%	  dry	  matter	  
PC	  in	  FPH	  
a.	  
85.05	  
73.59	  
81.04	  
79.74	  
81.22	  
66	  
68	  
70	  
72	  
74	  
76	  
78	  
80	  
82	  
84	  
86	  
H-­‐1-­‐60	  
WH-­‐W-­‐60	  
MH-­‐W-­‐60	  
WH-­‐A-­‐60	  
MH-­‐A-­‐60	  
per	  100	  g	  sample	  
Protein	  recovery	  in	  FPH	  	  
b.	  
==PAGE:56==
 
 
55 
Hydrolysis	  of	  Cod	  (Gadus	  Morhua)	  Head	  
components in water during thawing, it cannot be used as a reason for this change. 
Since the raw material sample that was taken after thawing and mincing contained 
high amount of protein. Therefore, all the changes that cause low recovery of protein 
in FPH fraction is due to interactions that occurred during hydrolysis and further 
steps. 
In a report by Slizyte (2004), protein concentration of 78 to 83% was obtained for 
FPH produced from cod backbone and liver with 6-12% lipid content. It was observed 
in a couple of projects on hydrolysis of cod byproducts that the protein concentration 
in FPH fraction is dependent on the amount of lipids in the raw material (Slizyte, et 
al., 2005) and vice versa (Slizyte, 2004). Because the lipid-protein complex can 
reduce the solubility of protein and decrease the concentration of protein in the 
hydrolysate phase (aqueous phase), while protein can entrap the oil and prevent 
separation of oil in the fractionation step. However, since the concentration of lipid in 
cod head was not sufficient to obtain a lipid fraction, the influence of these two 
substances on each other is more difficult to determine. 
4.4 
Degree of hydrolysis (DH) 
The degree of hydrolysis (DH) is defined as “the number of peptide bonds broken 
as a proportion of the total number of peptide bonds present” (Rutherfurd, 2010). In 
other words, the degree of hydrolysis is a reflection of the number of broken peptide 
bonds, and consequently the average size of the peptides in the product.  
In this study, the degree of hydrolysis was calculated for the FPH powders 
obtained from cod head, and showed a range between 13.63 and 20.60% (Figure 18). 
The two highest DH value is seen in the whole head thawed in water and minced head 
thawed in air, respectively. Both raw materials were thawed under conditions that 
provided opportunity for the endogenous enzymes to be more active prior to 
hydrolysis compared to the other raw materials.  
Since all samples were subjected to the same hydrolysis conditions, it can be 
suggested that autolysis of raw material played a role in the number of broken peptide 
bonds and cause the differences among fresh and frozen/thawed samples. In addition, 
due to freezing, there would be some damages to the cell membranes, which leads to 
better contact between substrates and endogenous enzymes. Furthermore, the reaction 
==PAGE:57==
 
 
56 
Results	  and	  Discussion	  
Results	  and	  Discussion	  
rate may be increased in the partly frozen tissue, because of the higher concentration 
of substrates in the liquid phase, because of melted water. In either case, increased 
enzyme activity leads to formation of small size peptides and increased DH.  
In a study by Sližytė, et al. (2005), the degree of hydrolysis for cod byproducts 
including viscera with and without initial inactivation of endogenous enzymes was 
measured and the results showed a rather large difference due to autolysis, namely, 
19.8 to 23.6% for FPH obtained from initially heated samples and between 31.1 and 
34.9% for initially unheated samples.  
 
Figure 18. Degree of hydrolysis for FPH samples after 60 min hydrolysis time with 
ProtamexTM; Error bars represent standard deviation, n=2; H: Head day 1; WH: frozen Whole 
Head; MH: frozen Minced Head; W: Water thawed; A: Air thawed 
Regarding the thawing of whole heads in water, they were soaked in 10ºC water 
for about 3 hours, giving enough time to the peptidases to function at a comparatively 
higher temperature. On the other hand, the minced heads were vacuum packed in a 
thin layer that provided an increased contact surface area for the defrosting medium 
(water or air), which shortened the time needed for thawing compared to the whole 
head (Chapter 3.1), causing lower autolysis rate.  
The differences between the degree of hydrolysis for FPH produced from minced 
head thawed in water and air illustrates the influence of thawing method on the raw 
material and consequently the hydrolysate. Moreover, the different DH for the whole 
head and minced head thawed in either water or air demonstrates the influence of 
mincing before freezing and storage. 
15.08	  
13.63	  
20.47	  
20.60	  
15.64	  
0	  
5	  
10	  
15	  
20	  
25	  
H	  -­‐	  60	  min	  
WH-­‐A-­‐60	  
MH-­‐A-­‐60	  
WH-­‐W-­‐60	  
MH-­‐W-­‐60	  
DH	  %	  
Degree	  of	  hydrolysis	  
==PAGE:58==
 
 
57 
Hydrolysis	  of	  Cod	  (Gadus	  Morhua)	  Head	  
4.5 
Determination of hydrolysis: TCA-solubility vs. total soluble peptides 
The extent of hydrolysis can be determined by measuring the TCA-soluble 
nitrogen (SN-TCA), which is the amount of soluble nitrogen in the presence of a 
precipitating agent (e.g. TCA), instead of measuring the number of peptide bonds 
broken. The method is based on the assumption that only amino acids and small 
peptides can be dissolved in TCA (10% trichloroacetic acid), while big-size proteins 
are precipitated. However, it is likely that a proportion of the intact proteins remain 
solubilized and participates in the result (Rutherfurd, 2010).  
Figure 19 shows the concentration of total soluble peptides versus acid soluble 
peptides in the FPH samples that were hydrolysed for zero, 30 and 60 minutes with 
ProtamexTM. 
It appears that the zero-minute FPH contains significantly lower concentration of 
both soluble peptides and acid soluble peptides, compared to the other two samples in 
each group (i.e. 30 and 60 min), which can be translated into high percentage of 
insoluble large size proteins with higher hydrophobicity and low solubility. However, 
during hydrolysis, the insoluble proteins are degraded into soluble and acid soluble 
peptides detectable by this method. 
The general pattern is more or less similar in most samples, indicating an increase 
in the percentage of both total soluble peptides and SN-TCA after 30 minutes and for 
some samples further increase after 60 minutes hydrolysis. There is a slight difference 
between acid soluble peptides in the 30 and 60 minutes hydrolysed FPH, suggesting 
that adequate degree of hydrolysis might be obtained after 30 minutes. In addition, the 
acid soluble peptide content is approximately equal to the percentage of total soluble 
peptides in most samples after 30 and 60 min hydrolysis, which indicates that a large 
portion (almost 100%) of the total soluble peptide content of the hydrolysates are 
small enough to be acid soluble. 
The highest total soluble and acid soluble peptides for all three hydrolysis times 
belonged to day one FPH sample. The cod heads received at day zero were removed 
from the body and stored at 4ºC for about 24 hours until day 1 and the first hydrolysis 
process. Although the cod heads were not frozen or stored for a long time, there was 
sufficient time for endogenous enzymes to work on the protein content of the heads 
==PAGE:59==
 
 
58 
Results	  and	  Discussion	  
Results	  and	  Discussion	  
and increase the soluble peptide content. However, it seems that the storage time was 
not long enough neither for excess degradation into volatile nitrogen compounds, nor 
for aggregation and precipitation or complex formation of protein content that would 
appear as a decrease in the soluble peptide content. 
 
Figure 19. Indirect evaluation of hydrolysis for total water soluble peptide versus TCA-
soluble peptides in dry FPH samples using Lowry method (Lowry, 1951) after 0, 30 and 60 
min hydrolysis time with ProtamexTM; H: Head day 1; WH: frozen Whole Head; MH: frozen 
Minced Head; W: Water thawed; A: Air thawed 
The amount of acid soluble peptides in the 0 min samples is the lowest at the 
minced head raw material thawed in water. If the concentration of acid soluble 
peptides in 0 min hydrolysates is an indication of endogenous enzyme activity during 
freezing and particularly thawing, it can be suggested that the enzymatic activity is 
lowest in these conditions. Since all zero-minute samples produced from frozen and 
thawed cod head showed lower total soluble and acid soluble peptides than the fresh 
raw material, it can be proposed that freezing and thawing have negative effect on the 
concentration of small size peptides in the raw material. The protein content is 
measured to be lower in the thawed samples than in fresh cod head (Chapter 4.3.7), 
therefore, it can be suggested that the protein content is either degraded further down 
into untraceable compound for this method (e.g. TVN), or denatured and aggregated 
during freezing and thawing and was separated in the sediment.  
The day one FPH samples and the ones produced from minced head raw material 
thawed in air contained slightly lower acid soluble peptides after 60 minutes 
compared to 30 minutes (Figure 19). It could be due to further degradation of the acid 
0	  
10	  
20	  
30	  
40	  
50	  
60	  
70	  
80	  
90	  
100	  
0	  
10	  
20	  
30	  
40	  
50	  
60	  
70	  
80	  
90	  
100	  
H-­‐0	  
H-­‐30	  
H-­‐60	  
WH-­‐A-­‐0	  
WH-­‐A-­‐30	  
WH-­‐A-­‐60	  
MH-­‐A-­‐0	  
MH-­‐A-­‐30	  
MH-­‐A-­‐60	  
WH-­‐W-­‐0	  
WH-­‐W-­‐30	  
WH-­‐W-­‐60	  
MH-­‐W-­‐0	  
MH-­‐W-­‐30	  
MH-­‐W-­‐60	  
Acid	  soluble	  pep?des	  
Total	  soluble	  pep/des	  %	  dry	  ma5er	  
Total	  soluble	  pep?des	  vs.	  TCA	  soluble	  pep?des	  
Total	  soluble	  pep?des	  
Acid	  soluble	  pep?des	  %	  dry	  weight	  
==PAGE:60==
 
 
59 
Hydrolysis	  of	  Cod	  (Gadus	  Morhua)	  Head	  
soluble proteins into TVN that cannot be detected in this analysis method, or 
aggregation and precipitation of the peptides in the presence of TCA. 
The nitrogen content in the fish protein hydrolysate can be divided into 4 major 
groups based on their solubility, namely: insoluble proteins, water-soluble proteins, 
peptides and amino acids (i.e. acid soluble peptides), and total volatile nitrogen 
(TVN) compounds. A great portion of the raw material belongs to the insoluble 
proteins, which can be partly transformed into soluble protein components either by 
endogenous enzymes during storage and/or also by exogenous enzymes during the 
hydrolysis process (Yin, et al., 2008). Although a very small amount of insoluble 
proteins is expected in FPH, due to difficulties in separation of sediment and 
hydrolysate phases, it is possible to have an increased amount of this kind of nitrogen 
compounds in some FPH samples (Chapter 4.1, Figure 12). 
The solubility of the small molecular size peptides is due to the presence of more 
polar residues that can form hydrogen bonds with water and contribute in the protein 
solubility (Kristinsson & Rasco, 2000). The major interactions that can influence 
solubility of the proteins are hydrophobic interactions that decrease solubility by 
promoting protein-protein interactions, and ionic interactions, which improve protein-
water interactions and therefore, increase solubility of FPH (Kristinsson & Rasco, 
2000). Ionizable carboxyl groups of amino acids are exposed by hydrolysis, which 
leads to an increase in the hydrophobicity of the fish protein hydrolysates, and 
consequently, decrease the solubility. Simultaneously, the hydrolysis process 
increases the net charge by generating two end-carbonyl and -amino groups (NH3
+ 
and COO-) and decreases the molecular size of the polypeptide chain (Kristinsson, 
2010).  
The electrostatic repulsion between ionic residues on the surface of protein 
molecules and repulsion between hydration shells around ionic groups are the causes 
for increased protein solubility. TCA changes the pH value in the solution, which 
consequently can influence the solubility of small size peptides by influencing the 
charge on the weakly acidic and basic side chain groups and increase solubility of 
proteins as pH moves away from isoelectric point (pI) (Linder, et al., 1995).  
==PAGE:61==
 
 
60 
Results	  and	  Discussion	  
Results	  and	  Discussion	  
Denaturation of protein is another factor that can influence protein size and 
solubility, and it can be induced during heat inactivation of enzymes in the end of 
hydrolysis process. According to Kristinsson (2010), fish protein muscles from cold-
water species have more tendency to denaturation (lower heat stability) compared to 
the tropical water species. Protein denaturation increases resistance to enzymatic 
breakdown, and therefore, decreases the number of small soluble peptides in 
hydrolysates (Slizyte, et al., 2005).  
On the other hand, excessive hydrolysis will cleave the peptide bonds more 
intensely resulting in a decrease in peptide size and degradation into single amino 
acids and volatile compounds. TCA-soluble peptide method cannot detect the proteins 
that are decreased into TVN, and it is suggested that determination of TVN also be 
considered to see how much of the protein has been degraded to volatile nitrogen 
compounds. 
4.6 
Degree of hydrolysis: Formol titration vs. TCA-solubility method 
Two different methods were used in this project to determine the extent of 
hydrolysis, namely formol titration and TCA-solubility measured by the Lowry 
method (Lowry, et al., 1951). In Figure 20, the relationship between the results 
obtained using these two methods is shown.  
The graph shows that there is no correlation between degree of hydrolysis and 
TCA-soluble peptides. Therefore, if the results of both methods are considered 
reliable, then the number of acid soluble peptides does not increase by the increased 
degree of hydrolysis, except for one sample that was hydrolysed from whole head 
thawed in water. However, the two methods measure different parameters that make 
them incomparable (Rutherfurd, 2010). To be specific, the formol titration method 
measures the number of NH2 groups and compares it to an estimate of the total 
number of peptide bonds. This estimate is based on the protein content. While the 
TCA-method detects the solubility of the nitrogen content in the sample, and there is a 
possibility that large size (unhydrolysed) proteins also end up in the supernatant and 
appear in the result (Rutherfurd, 2010). Therefore, the extent of hydrolysis can be 
overestimated when SN-TCA is measured, compared to formaldehyde titration. 
==PAGE:62==
 
 
61 
Hydrolysis	  of	  Cod	  (Gadus	  Morhua)	  Head	  
In a study by In, et al. (2002), three different methods including the two used in 
this project were used to determine the DH for hydrolysis of hemoglobin using a 
serial digestion with an endopeptidase (Esperase) followed by exopeptidase 
(Flavourzyme) at three different concentrations. They found out that there is very 
little correlation between the methods used; for example, the values for SN-TCA 
method were two or four times higher than those obtained using formol titration 
method, depending on the enzyme used for hydrolysis. 
 
Figure 20. Relationship between degree of hydrolysis (DH %) and TCA-soluble nitrogen 
content in FPH samples hydrolysed by ProtamexTM for 60 minutes, H: Head day 1; WH: 
frozen Whole Head; MH: frozen Minced Head; W: Water thawed; A: Air thawed 
It appears that there are a number of variables (other than the type of enzyme 
used), which can influence the result of each DH method, such as pH, extent of 
hydrolysis and the origin of protein (Rutherfurd, 2010). 
4.7 
Amount of free amino acids 
Figure 21 shows that the amount of total free amino acids (FAA) in FPH samples 
increases by time of hydrolysis, meaning that there is a higher concentration of free 
amino acids in the 60 minutes hydrolysed sample compared to 30 minutes (and 0-
min) sample for the same raw material. The highest FAA content in 60-min FPH 
belonged to the whole head thawed in air (54.3 mg/g dry FPH) and the second was the 
minced head thawed in water (53.6 mg/g dry FPH). While in 30 min samples, the 
minced head thawed in water and then minced head thawed in air had 38.9 and 38.5 
mg/g, respectively, contained the two highest concentration of total FAA. The zero 
60	  
65	  
70	  
75	  
80	  
85	  
90	  
95	  
100	  
10	  
12	  
14	  
16	  
18	  
20	  
22	  
24	  
SN-­‐TCA	  %	  FPH	  
DH	  %	  
SN-­‐TCA	  vs.	  DH	  
H-­‐60	  
WH-­‐A-­‐60	  
MH-­‐A-­‐60	  
WH-­‐W-­‐60	  
MH-­‐W-­‐60	  
==PAGE:63==
 
 
62 
Results	  and	  Discussion	  
Results	  and	  Discussion	  
min samples showed a large diversity in the total FAA content as well, ranging from 
12.5 mg/g dry FPH produced from minced head thawed in air to 16.5 mg/g in whole 
head thawed in water.  
 
Figure 21. Total amino acid content for hydrolysate samples after 0, 30 and 60 minutes 
hydrolysis; H: Head day 1; WH: frozen Whole Head; MH: frozen Minced Head; W: Water 
thawed; A: Air thawed 
In a study by Slizyte, et al. (2005), the amount of free amino acids was calculated 
for FPH produced from different combinations of cod rest raw materials (e.g. viscera, 
backbone, etc.) to a range between 15-97 mg/g dried powder. In another article, the 
amount of free amino acids was measured 66 mg/g for FPH produced from a mixture 
of cod lever and backbone (Slizyte, et al., 2008). 
The dominating free amino acid differed for 0-min and hydrolysed samples for 30 
and 60-min (Appendix II). In 0-min samples, the three top dominating amino acids 
were alanine, glycine/arginine, and serine respectively, while in 30 and 60 minute 
hydrolysed FPH, leucine was the most dominating amino acid followed by 
glycine/arginine and then alanine. 
4.8 
Suggestions to improve the process and analyses 
Some modifications and adjustments are required that can improve the process 
setting and the accuracy of the analyses results. 
The centrifugation speed and time used for fractionation of hydrolysed samples 
was not adequate, particularly for frozen whole head raw material and 30 minutes 
14.27	  
16.49	  
14.47	  
14.25	  
12.46	  
30.84	  
35.64	  
38.95	  
34.72	  
38.47	  
48.37	  
49.59	  
53.59	  
54.25	  
52.07	  
0	  
10	  
20	  
30	  
40	  
50	  
60	  
H	  
WH-­‐W	  
MH-­‐W	  
WH-­‐A	  
MH-­‐A	  
mg/g	  freeze-­‐dried	  FPH	  
Total	  free	  amino	  acid	  content	  in	  FPH	  
0	  min	  
30	  min	  
60	  min	  
==PAGE:64==
 
 
63 
Hydrolysis	  of	  Cod	  (Gadus	  Morhua)	  Head	  
hydrolysis time. Improved fractionation can enhance the yield of fish protein 
hydrolysate.  
The sediment fraction used for analysis was not mixed uniformly before sampling 
and therefore, the sample was not an appropriate representative of the whole batch. 
Particularly, since the sediment sample contains different sizes of bones. In addition, 
in some samples due to insufficient fractionation, either there was a higher liquid 
content in the sediment or some sediment was lost in the hydrolysate fraction. Other 
than more proper fractionation, there are two solutions for this problem, either blend 
the sample more thoroughly, or take a larger sample to get a better representative of 
the total sample.  
The whole heads have a smaller surface area to volume compared to the minced 
head samples (thickness), and therefore took longer time in both air and water to 
defrost. Furthermore, the whole heads immersed in running water for 3 hours lost a 
large amount of particles that differed them from the other samples. The amount of 
lost particles was not determined. Furthermore, the quality of water was not 
determined in this project.  
The suggestions to improve the process conditions and obtain more accurate and 
reproducible results can be summarized as follow: 
• The water used for thawing:  
o Using a water bath with controlled temperature 
o Indirect contact of the raw material with water 
o Quality control of water (if there is a direct contact between the 
sample and thawing water) 
• Optimization of the hydrolysis process by:  
o Using more suitable storage conditions between removing of head 
and processing 
o Adjusting the time of hydrolysis 
o Better time-speed centrifugation combination to separate the 
phases 
==PAGE:65==
 
 
64 
Results	  and	  Discussion	  
Results	  and	  Discussion	  
o Using larger blocks of minced cod heads to estimate the changes 
according to what is done in industrial practice 
• Improving the analyses:  
o Better sediments sampling 
o Additional analysis according to the usage of the end products (e.g. 
functional and bioactive properties) 
==PAGE:66==
 
 
65 
Hydrolysis	  of	  Cod	  (Gadus	  Morhua)	  Head	  
5 Conclusion  
The main objective of this study was to determine the possibility of utilizing 
frozen marine cod head for further processing into high-quality and high-yield fish 
protein hydrolysates. The project included determination of the effect of mincing 
versus whole head, frozen storage and thawing methods on the composition and yield 
of FPH. 
 The results show that freezing and thawing of cod head lead to small changes in 
the composition of raw material and consequently the resulting fish protein 
hydrolysate. The lipid content in freeze dried FPH ranged from 0.37-0.71% dry-
weight for all samples, where the lowest belonged to the day one and the highest for 
the whole head thawed in air. The protein content in freeze dried FPH was 88.4% for 
day one and in the other samples, the concentration was more or less similar and 
slightly lower than the day one sample (67.7-71.6%). While protein recovery was 
85.0% dry weight for FPH produced from fresh cod head compared to 73.6 to 81.2% 
dry weight for frozen samples.  
The degree of hydrolysis showed variations among FPHs produced from different 
raw materials and showed higher values for the whole head thawed in water and 
minced head thawed in air and rather low for the day one sample. There was no 
correlation between DH determined using formol titration and TCA-soluble peptides. 
For example, despite the low DH value, there was a very high concentration of TCA-
soluble peptides in day one sample. 
Regarding the yield of the dry matter in 60 min hydrolysed FPH factions; there is 
a slight difference between the samples (10.6-12.3%). The yield obtained in this 
project is higher than similar experiments, which makes it profitable to produce FPH 
from frozen stored cod heads. 
Economically, it is more beneficial to store and thaw the minced head using an 
appropriate thickness of packaging, because of the smaller space that is required for 
the storage of the heads on board. In addition, if the right thickness and size is used 
for packaging, the time that is needed to thaw them will be much shorter. Due to 
==PAGE:67==
 
 
66 
Conclusion	  
Conclusion	  
small differences between the compositions of minced and whole head, it is 
suggestible to store the samples in minced state. 
Some optimizations are required for the hydrolysis process and analyses, 
including using more appropriate fractionation, adjusting the time of thawing 
according to the raw material to avoid excess changes during thawing and blending of 
sediments prior to sampling for analysis. 
Everything considered, in order to determine the suitability of the used processing 
methods, and whether or not cod head can be used as raw material to produce high 
quality FPH, there should be a clear definition of “quality”. For instance, it should be 
determined in which section and for what purpose the end product is going to be 
consumed. If we are looking for the functional properties of the FPH, there are 
different characteristics that are required than when it is used for pharmaceutical 
purposes. Therefore, different analysis methods should be used to determine the 
changes in those particular required characteristics.  
 
==PAGE:68==
 
 
67 
Hydrolysis	  of	  Cod	  (Gadus	  Morhua)	  Head	  
6 Works Cited 
 
Aas,	  G.	  H.,	  &	  Kjerstad,	  M.	  (2008).	  Status	  for	  utnyttelse	  av	  restråstoff	  fra	  torskeoppdrett.	  
Ålesund:	  RUBIN,	  Norsk	  sjømatsenter.	  
Aas,	  K.,	  &	  Elsayed,	  S.	  M.	  (1969).	  Characterization	  of	  a	  major	  allergen	  (cod).	  J.	  Allergy,	  44,	  
333-­‐343.	  
Ababouch,	   L.	   (2005).	   Fish	   and	   seafood	   utilization.	   FAO,	   Fisheries	   and	   Aquaculture	  
Department.	  Rome:	  FAO.	  
Adler-­‐Nissen,	  J.	  (1984).	  Control	  of	  the	  proteolytic	  reaction	  and	  of	  the	  level	  of	  bitterness	  
in	  protein	  hydrolysis	  processes.	  Chem	  Technol	  Biotechnol,	  34	  (3),	  215–222.	  
Adler-­‐Nissen,	   J.	   (1986).	   Enzymic	   Hydrolysis	   of	   Food	   Proteins.	   Elsevier	  Applied	  Science	  
Publishers	  .	  
Akse,	  L.,	  Joensen,	  S.,	  Barstad,	  H.,	  Eilertsen,	  G.,	  &	  Johnsen,	  G.	  (2002).	  Landing	  av	  usløyd	  fisk	  
for	  utnyttelse	  av	  biproduktene.	  Fiskeriforskning.	  
Arason,	   S.,	   Karlsdottir,	   M.,	   Valsdottir,	   T.,	   Slizyte,	   R.,	   Rustad,	   T.,	   Falch,	   E.,	   et	   al.	   (2009).	  
Maximum	   resource	   utilisation	   -­‐Value	   added	   fish	   byproducts.	   Oslo:	   Nordic	   Innovation	  
Centre,	  Norden.	  
Arnesen,	  J.	  A.,	  &	  Gildberg,	  A.	  (2006).	  Extraction	  of	  muscle	  proteins	  and	  gelatine	  from	  cod	  
head.	  Process	  Biochem,	  41,	  697-­‐700.	  
Aubourg,	   S.	   P.	   (2001).	   Review:	   Loss	   of	   quality	   during	   the	   manufacture	   of	   canned	   fish	  
products.	  Food	  Science	  and	  Technology	  International,	  7	  (3),	  199-­‐215.	  
Aubourg,	  S.	  P.,	  &	  Medina,	  I.	  (1999).	  Influence	  of	  storage	  time	  and	  temperature	  on	  lipid	  
deterioration	   during	   cod	   (Gadus	   morhua)	   and	   haddock	   (Melanogrammus	   aeglefinus)	  
frozen	  storage.	  Journal	  of	  the	  Science	  of	  Food	  and	  Agriculture,	  79	  (13),	  1943-­‐1948.	  
Batista,	   I.	   (2013).	   Biological	   activities	   of	   fish-­‐protein	   hydrolysates.	   In	   S.	   Kim,	   Marine	  
proteins	  and	  peptides	  (pp.	  111	  –	  127).	  Hoboken,	  USA:	  Wiley-­‐Blackwell.	  
Bekkevold,	  S.,	  &	  Olafsen,	  T.	  (2007).	  Råvarer	  med	  muligheter.	  Trondheim:	  RUBIN	  AS.	  
Bligh,	  E.	  G.,	  &	  Dyer,	  W.	  J.	  (1959).	  A	  rapid	  method	  of	  total	  lipid	  extraction	  and	  purification.	  
Can	  J	  Biochem	  Physiol,	  37	  (8),	  911–7.	  
Borderıas,	  A.	  J.,	  &	  Sanchez-­‐Alonso,	  I.	  (2011).	  First	  Processing	  Steps	  and	  the	  Quality	  of	  
Wild	  and	  Farmed	  Fish.	  Journal	  of	  Food	  Science,	  76	  (1).	  
Choe,	  E.,	  &	  Min,	  D.	  B.	  (2006).	  Chemistry	  and	  reactions	  of	  reactive	  oxygen	  species.	  foods.	  
Crit	  Rev	  Food	  Sci	  Nutr.,	  46	  (1),	  1-­‐22.	  
==PAGE:69==
 
 
68 
Works	  Cited	  
Works	  Cited	  
Cui,	   H.	   (1996).	   The	   Influence	   of	   Degree	   of	   Hydrolysis	   on	   the	   Structural	   and	   Functional	  
Properties	  of	  Fish	  Protein	  Peptic	  Hydrolysates.	  Masters	  thesis.	  Seattle,	  WA:	  University	  of	  
Washington.	  
Damodaran,	  S.,	  Parkin,	  K.	  L.,	  &	  Fennema,	  O.	  R.	  (2007).	  Fennema's	  Food	  Chemistry	  (Four	  
ed.).	  Taylor	  &	  Francis.	  
Daukas,	   E.,	   Slizyte,	   R.,	   Rustad,	   T.,	   &	   Storrø,	   I.	   (2004).	   Bitterness	   in	   Fish	   Protein	  
Hydrolysates	  and	  Methods	  for	  Removal.	  Journal	  of	  Aquatic	  Food	  Product	  Technology,	  13	  
(2),	  101-­‐114.	  
Davies,	  K.	  J.	  (1987).	  Protein	  damage	  and	  degradation	  by	  oxygen	  radicals.	  General	  aspects.	  
J	  Biol	  Chem.,	  262	  (20),	  9895-­‐9901.	  
Digre,	   H.	   (2013,	   10	   13).	   Effective	   catch	   handling	   systems	   for	   cod,	   haddock	   and	   Saithe.	  
Retrieved	  
05	  
25,	  
2015,	  
from	  
fishinggearnetwork.net:	  
http://www.fishinggearnetwork.net/wp-­‐content/uploads/2013/06/Effective-­‐catch-­‐
handling-­‐systems-­‐for-­‐cod-­‐haddock-­‐and-­‐Saithe.pdf	  
EC.	  (2006,	  December	  19).	  Commission	  Regulation	  No.	  1881/2006/EC.	  Official	  journal	  of	  
the	  European	  Union,	  L	  364,	  pp.	  5-­‐24.	  
EC.	   (2011).	   Commission	   Regulation	   No.	   835/2011	   of	   19	   August	   2011a	   amending	  
Regulation	   (EC)	   No.	   1881/2006	   as	   regards	   maximum	   levels	   for	   polycyclic	   aromatic	  
hydrocarbons	  in	  foods.	  Official	  Journal	  of	  the	  European	  Union,	  L	  215,	  4	  –	  8.	  
EFSA.	  (2008).	  Scientific	  Opinion	  of	  the	  Panel	  on	  Contaminants	  in	  the	  Food	  Chain	  on	  a	  
request	  from	  the	  European	  Commission	  on	  Polycyclic	  Aromatic	  Hydrocarbons	  in	  Food.	  
The	  EFSA	  Journal,	  724,	  1-­‐114.	  
EFSA.	  (2011).	  Scientific	  Opinion	  on	  the	  substantiation	  of	  health	  claims	  related	  to	  foods	  
with	  reduced	  amounts	  of	  sodium	  and	  maintenance	  of	  normal	  blood	  pressure	  (ID	  336,	  
705,	   1148,	   1178,	   1185,	   1420)	   pursuant	   to	   Article	   13(1)	   of	   Regulation	   (EC)	   No	  
1924/20061.	  (N.	  a.	  EFSA	  Panel	  on	  Dietetic	  Products,	  Ed.)	  EFSA	  Journal	  2011;	  9	  (6),	  16.	  
European	   Commission.	   (2014).	   TACs	   and	   quotas.	   Retrieved	   January	   30,	   2015,	   from	  
European	  
Commission:	  
http://ec.europa.eu/fisheries/cfp/fishing_rules/tacs/index_en.htm	  
Falch,	  E.,	  &	  Slizyte,	  R.	  (2008).	  Muligheter	  for	  anvendelse	  av	  biprodukter	  fra	  oppdrettstorsk.	  
SINTEF	  Fiskeri	  og	  havbruk	  AS.	  Åpen:	  Norges	  Forskningsråd.	  
Falch,	   E.,	   Rustad,	   T.,	   Jonsdottir,	   R.,	   Shawd,	   N.	   B.,	   Dumaye,	   J.,	   Berge,	   J.	   P.,	   et	   al.	   (2006).	  
Geographical	   and	   seasonal	   differences	   in	   lipid	   composition	   and	   relative	   weight	   of	   by-­‐	  
products	  from	  gadiform	  species.	  Journal	  of	  Food	  Composition	  and	  Analysis,	  19,	  727–736.	  
Falch,	  E.,	  Sandbakk,	  M.,	  &	  Aursand,	  M.	  (2007).	  On-­‐board	  handling	  of	  marine	  byproducts	  
to	   prevent	   microbial	   spoilage,	   enzymatic	   reactions	   and	   lipid	   oxidation.	   In	   F.	   Shahidi,	  
Maximising	   the	   Value	   of	   Marine	   Byproducts	   (pp.	   47–64).	   Cambridge:	   Woodhead	  
publishing	  Limited.	  
==PAGE:70==
 
 
69 
Hydrolysis	  of	  Cod	  (Gadus	  Morhua)	  Head	  
FAO.	  (1971).	  Protein	  Advisory	  Group.	  FAO,	  Bulletin	  12.	  
Feng,	  Y.,	  &	  Hultin,	  H.	  O.	  (1997).	  Solubility	  of	  the	  proteins	  of	  mackerel	  light	  muscle	  at	  low	  
ionic	  strength.	  J.	  Food	  Biochem.,	  21,	  479.	  
Gálvez,	   R.,	   Carpio,	   F.,	   Moreno,	   P.,	   Guadix,	   A.,	   &	   Guadix,	   A.	   (2013).	   Angiotensin	   I	  
Converting	  Enzyme	  Inhibitory	  Peptides	  from	  Fish	  Byproducts.	  In	  R.	  B.	  Gálvez,	  Utilization	  
of	  fish	  waste	  (pp.	  76	  –	  1055).	  London,	  Great	  Britain:	  CRC	  Press.	  
Gildberg,	  A.	  (2002).	  Enhancing	  returns	  from	  greater	  utilization.	  In	  H.	  A.	  Bremner,	  Safety	  
and	  Quality	  Issues	  in	  Fish	  Processing	   (pp.	   425–449).	   Cambridge:	   Woodhead	   Publishing	  
Limited	  and	  CRC	  Press	  LLC.	  
Guerard,	   F.,	   Sumaya-­‐Martinez,	   M.	   T.,	   Laroque,	   D.,	   Chabeaud,	   A.,	   &	   Dufossé,	   L.	   (2007).	  
Optimization	  of	  free	  radical	  scavenging	  activity	  by	  response	  surface	  methodology	  in	  the	  
hydrolysis	  of	  shrimp	  processing	  discards.	  Process	  Biochemistry,	  42	  (11),	  1486-­‐1491.	  
Hall,	  G.	  M.,	  &	  Ahmad,	  N.	  H.	  (1992).	  Functional	  properties	  of	  fish	  protein	  hydrolysates.	  In	  
G.	   (Hall,	   Fish	   Processing	   Technology	   (pp.	   249-­‐265).	   N.Y.,	   U.S.A.:	   Blackie	   Academic	   and	  
Professional.	  
Hou,	  H.,	  Li,	  B.,	  Zhao,	  X.,	  Zhang,	  Z.,	  &	  Li,	  P.	  (2011).	  Optimization	  of	  enzymatic	  hydrolysis	  of	  
Alaska	   pollock	   frame	   for	   preparing	   protein	   hydrolysates	   with	   low-­‐bitterness.	   LWT	   -­‐	  
Food	  Science	  and	  Technology,	  44,	  421-­‐428.	  
Hoyle,	   N.	   T.,	   &	   Merritt,	   J.	   H.	   (1994).	   Quality	   of	   fish	   protein	   hydrolysates	   from	   herring	  
(Clupea	  harengus).	  J.	  Food	  Sci.,	  59,	  76-­‐79.	  
IFFO.	   (2013).	   IFFO.	   Retrieved	   November	   14,	   2013,	   from	   The	   Marine	   Ingredients	  
Organisation:	  http://www.iffo.net/fishmeal-­‐and-­‐fish-­‐oil-­‐production	  
In,	  M.	  J.,	  Chae,	  H.	  J.,	  &	  Oh,	  N.	  S.	  (2002).	  Process	  development	  for	  heme-­‐enriched	  peptide	  
by	  enzymatic	  hydrolysis	  of	  hemoglobin.	  Bioresource	  Technol.,	  84,	  63–68.	  
Jensen,	   I.-­‐J.,	   Larsen,	   R.,	   Rustad,	   T.,	   &	   Eilertsen,	   K.-­‐E.	   (2013).	   Nutritional	   content	   and	  
bioactive	   properties	   of	   wild	   and	   farmed	   cod	   (Gadus	   morhua	   L.)	   subjected	   to	   food	  
preparation.	  Journal	  of	  Food	  Composition	  and	  Analysis,	  31,	  212–216.	  
Karlsen,	  K.,	  Hermansen,	  Ø.,	  &	  Dreyer	  ,	  B.	  (2012).	  Eco-­‐labeling	  of	  seafood:	  Does	  it	  affect	  
the	  harvesting	  patterns	  of	  Norwegian	  fishermen?	  Marine	  Policy,	  36,	  1123–1130.	  
Kim,	   S.-­‐K.,	   &	   Mendis,	   E.	   (2006).	   Bioactive	   compounds	   from	   marine	   processing	  
byproducts	  –	  A	  review.	  Food	  Research	  International,	  39,	  383–393.	  
Korhonen,	  H.	  L.,	  &	  Pihlanto,	  A.	  (2003).	  Food-­‐derived	  bioactive	  peptides-­‐-­‐opportunities	  
for	  designing	  future	  foods.	  Curr	  Pharm	  Des.,	  9	  (16),	  1297-­‐308.	  
Kristinsson,	   H.	   G.,	   &	   Rasco,	   B.	   A.	   (2000).	   Fish	   protein	   hydrolysates:	   production,	  
biochemical	  and	  functional	  properties.	  Critical	  Reviews	  in	  Food	  science	  and	  Nutrition,	  43	  
(1),	  43	  –	  81.	  
==PAGE:71==
 
 
70 
Works	  Cited	  
Works	  Cited	  
Kristinsson,	   H.	   (2010).	   Value	   added	   utilization	   of	   seafood	   processing	   byproducts.	  
Atlantic	  Fisheries	  Technology	  Conference.	  St.	  Johns	  Newfoundland.	  
Kristinsson,	   H.,	   &	   Rasco,	   B.	   (2000).	   Biochemical	   and	   functional	   properties	   of	   Atlantic	  
salmon	   (Salmo	   salar)	   muscle	   proteins	   hydrolyzed	   with	   various	   alkaline	   proteases.	   J.	  
Agric.	  Food	  Chem.,	  48,	  657-­‐666.	  
Liaset,	  B.,	  &	  Espe,	  M.	  (2008).	  Nutritional	  composition	  of	  soluble	  and	  insoluble	  fractions	  
obtained	  by	  enzymatic	  hydrolysis	  of	  fish-­‐raw	  materials.	  Process	  Biochemistry,	  43,	  42–48.	  
Linder,	   M.,	   Fanni,	   J.,	   Parmentier,	   M.,	   Sergent,	   M.,	   &	   Phan-­‐Than-­‐Luu,	   R.	   (1995).	   Protein	  
recovery	  from	  veal	  bones	  by	  enzymatic	  hydrolysis.	  J.	  Food	  Sci.	  ,	  60	  (5).	  
Lowry,	  O.	  H.,	  Rosebrough,	  N.	  J.,	  Farr,	  A.	  L.,	  &	  Randall,	  R.	  J.	  (1951).	  Protein	  measurement	  
with	  the	  Folin	  phenol	  reagent.	  Journal	  of	  Biological	  Chemistry,	  193,	  265-­‐275.	  
Mohr,	  V.	  (1980).	  Enzymes	  technology	  in	  the	  meat	  and	  fish	  industries.	  Process	  Biochem,	  
15	  (6).	  
Moughan,	   P.	   J.,	   Darragh,	   A.	   J.,	   Smith,	   W.	   C.,	   &	   Butts,	   C.	   A.	   (1990).	   Perchloric	   and	  
trichloroacetic	  acids	  as	  precipitants	  of	  protein	  in	  endogenous	  ileal	  digesta	  from	  the	  rat.	  J.	  
Sci.	  Food	  Agric.,	  52,	  13–21.	  
Moughan,	   P.,	   Darragh,	   A.,	   Smith,	   W.,	   &	   Butts,	   C.	   (1990).	   Perchloric	   and	   trichloroacetic	  
acids	  as	  precipitants	  of	  protein	  in	  endogenous	  ileal	  digesta	  from	  the	  rat.	  J.	  Sci.	  Food	  Agri.,	  
52,	  13–21.	  
Neurath,	  H.	  (1989).	  Proteolytic	  processing	  and	  physiological	  regulation.	  Trends	  Biochem	  
Sci.	  ,	  14	  (7),	  268-­‐71.	  
Olafsen,	  T.,	  Richardsen,	  R.,	  Nystøyl,	  R.,	  Strandheim,	  G.,	  &	  Kosmo,	  J.	  P.	  (2014).	  Analysis	  of	  
marine	   byproducts	   2013.	   SINTEF	   Fisheries	   and	   Aquaculture	   AS,	   Kontali	   Analyse	   AS,	  
Tromsø.	  
Osnes,	   K.	   K.,	   &	   Mohr,	   V.	   (1985).	   Peptide	   hydrolysis	   of	   Antartic	   krill	   Euphasa	   superba.	  
Comb.	  Biochem.	  Physiol.,	  82B	  (4),	  599-­‐606.	  
Pedersen,	  B.	  (1994).	  Removing	  bitterness	  from	  protein	  hydrolysates.	  Food	  Tech.,	  48	  (10),	  
96-­‐98.	  
Pires	  ,	  C.,	  Clemente,	  T.,	  &	  Batista,	  I.	  (2013).	  Functional	  and	  antioxidative	  properties	  of	  
protein	   hydrolysates	   from	   Cape	   hake	   byproducts	   prepared	   by	   three	   different	  
methodologies.	  JJournal	  of	  the	  Science	  of	  Food	  and	  Agriculture,	  93,	  771–780.	  
Pires,	   C.,	   &	   Batista,	   I.	   (2013).	   Functional	   Properties	   of	   Fish	   Protein	   Hydrolysates.	  
Utilization	  of	  Fish	  Waste	  .	  
Pour-­‐El,	  A.	  (1976).	  In	  World	  Soybean	  Research;	  Hill,	  L.	  D.,	  Ed.	  Interstate,	  pp.	  918-­‐94.	  
Refsgaard,	   H.	   H.,	   Tsai,	   L.,	   &	   Stadtman,	   E.	   R.	   (2000).	   Modifications	   of	   proteins	   by	  
polyunsaturated	  fatty	  acid	  peroxidation	  products.	  Proc	  Natl	  Acad	  Sci	  USA,	  97	  (2),	  611-­‐
616.	  
==PAGE:72==
 
 
71 
Hydrolysis	  of	  Cod	  (Gadus	  Morhua)	  Head	  
Rustad,	   T.,	   &	   Hayes,	   M.	   (2012).	   Marine	   Bioactive	   Peptides	   and	   Protein	   Hydrolysates:	  
Generation,	  Isolation	  Procedures,	  and	  Biological	  and	  Chemical	  Characterizations.	  In	  M.	  
Hayes,	  Marine	  Bioactive	  Compounds,	  Sources,	  Characterization	  and	  Applications	  (pp.	  99-­‐
113).	  Springer	  US.	  
Rustad,	  T.,	  Storrø,	  I.,	  &	  Slizyte,	  R.	  (2011).	  Invited	  review	  Possibilities	  for	  the	  utilisation	  of	  
marine	  byproducts.	  International	  Journal	  of	  Food	  Science	  and	  Technology,	  46,	  2001–2014.	  
Rutherfurd,	  S.	  M.	  (2010).	  Methodology	  for	  Determining	  Degree	  of	  Hydrolysis	  of	  Proteins	  
in	  Hydrolysates:	  A	  Review.	  Journal	  of	  AOAC	  International,	  93	  (5),	  1515-­‐1522.	  
Rutherfurd-­‐Markwick	  ,	  K.	  J.,	  &	  Moughan,	  P.	  J.	  (2005).	  Bioactive	  peptides	  derived	  from	  
food.	  J	  AOAC	  Int.,	  88	  (3),	  955-­‐66.	  
Saeed,	  S.,	  &	  Howell,	  N.	  K.	  (2002).	  Effect	  of	  lipid	  oxidation	  and	  frozen	  storage	  on	  muscle	  
proteins	   of	   Atlantic	   mackerel	   (Scomber	   scombrus).	   Journal	  of	  the	  Science	  of	  Food	  and	  
Agriculture,	  82	  (5),	  579-­‐586.	  
Shahidi,	  F.	  (1994).	  Seafood	  processing	  byproducts.	  In	  F.	  Shahidi,	  &	  J.	  R.	  Botta,	  Seafoods	  
chemistry.	  London:	  Blackie	  Academic	  &	  Professional.	  
Shahidi,	   F.,	   Han,	   X.,	   &	   Synowiecki,	   J.	   (1995).	   Production	   and	   characteristics	   of	   protein	  
hydrolysates	  from	  capelin	  (Mallotus	  villosus).	  Food	  Chem.,	  53,	  285–93.	  
Shewan,	  J.	  M.	  (1961).	  The	  microbiology	  of	  seawater	  fish.	  In	  B.	  G.,	  Fish	  as	  food	  (pp.	  487–
560).	  New	  York:	  Academic	  Press.	  
SINTEF	   Fiskeri	   og	   havbruk	   AS,	   Kontali	   Analyse	   AS.	   (2014).	   Analyse	  marint	  restråstoff,	  
2013;	  Analyse	  av	  tilgang	  og	  anvendelse	  for	  marint	  restråstoff	  i	  Norge.	  SINTEF	  Fiskeri	  og	  
havbruk	  AS.	  
Slizyte,	  R.,	  Dauksˇas,	  E.,	  Falch,	  E.,	  Storrø,	  I.,	  &	  Rustad,	  T.	  (2005).	  Characteristics	  of	  protein	  
fractions	   generated	   from	   hydrolysed	   cod	   (Gadus	   morhua)	   byproducts.	   Process	  
Biochemistry,	  40,	  2021–2033.	  
Slizyte,	  R.,	  Dauksˇas,	  E.,	  Falch,	  E.,	  Storrø,	  I.,	  &	  Rustad,	  T.	  (2005).	  Yield	  and	  composition	  of	  
different	   fractions	   obtained	   after	   enzymatic	   hydrolysis	   of	   cod	   (Gadus	   morhua)	  
byproducts.	  Process	  Biochem,	  40,	  1415–24.	  
Slizyte,	  R.,	  Rustad,	  T.,	  &	  Storrø,	  I.	  (2005).	  Enzymatic	  hydrolysis	  of	  cod	  (Gadus	  morhua)	  
byproducts,	  optimization	  of	  yield	  and	  properties	  of	  lipid	  and	  protein	  fractions.	  Process	  
Biochemistry,	  40,	  3680–3692.	  
Slizyte,	  R.	  (2004).	  Hydrolysis	  of	  cod	  (Gadus	  morhua)	  byproducts:	  Influence	  of	  raw	  material	  
composition	  and	  process	  conditions.	  NTNU-­‐	  Faculty	  of	  Natural	  Sciences,	  Department	  of	  
biotechnology.	  Trondheim:	  Norwegian	  University	  of	  Science	  and	  Technology.	  
Slizyte,	  R.,	  Dauksasa,	  E.,	  Falch,	  E.,	  Storrø,	  I.,	  &	  Rustad,	  T.	  (2005).	  Yield	  and	  composition	  of	  
different	   fractions	   obtained	   after	   enzymatic	   hydrolysis	   of	   cod	   (Gadus	   morhua)	  
byproducts.	  Process	  Biochemistry,	  40,	  1415–1424.	  
==PAGE:73==
 
 
72 
Works	  Cited	  
Works	  Cited	  
Slizyte,	   R.,	   Mozuraityte,	   R.,	   Martı	  ́nez-­‐Alvarez,	   O.,	   Falch,	   E.,	   Fouchereau-­‐Peron,	   M.,	   &	  
Rustad,	   T.	   (2009).	   Functional,	   bioactive	   and	   antioxidative	   properties	   of	   hydrolysates	  
obtained	  from	  cod	  (Gadus	  morhua)	  backbones.	  Process	  Biochemistry,	  44,	  668–677.	  
Slizyte,	   R.,	   Van	   Nguyen,	   J.,	   Rustad,	   T.,	   &	   Storro,	   I.	   (2004).	   Hydrolysis	   of	   Cod	   (Gadus	  
morhud)	  Byproducts.	  Journal	  of	  Aquatic	  Food	  Product	  Technology,	  13	  (2),	  31-­‐48.	  
Souissi,	  N.,	  Bougatef,	  A.,	  Triki-­‐Ellouz,	  Y.,	  &	  Nasri,	  M.	  (2007).	  Biochemical	  and	  Functional	  
Properties	   of	   Sardinella	   (Sardinella	   aurita)	   Byproduct	   Hydrolysates.	   Food	   Technol.	  
Biotechnol,	  45	  (2),	  187–194.	  
Soyer,	  A.,	  &	  Hultin,	  H.	  D.	  (2000).	  Kinetics	  of	  oxidation	  of	  the	  lipids	  and	  proteins	  of	  cod	  
sarcoplasmic	  reticulum.	  Journal	  of	  Agricultural	  and	  Food	  Chemistry,	  48	  (6),	  2127-­‐2134.	  
Stoknes,	   I.	   S.,	   &	   Hellevik,	   A.	   H.	   (2000).	   Bearbeiding	   og	   utnyttelse	   av	   fiskehoder.	  
Møreforsking.	  
Stoknes,	  I.	  S.,	  &	  Økland,	  H.	  (2002).	  Fiskehoder.	  Kilde	  for	  konsumprodukter,	  ingredienser	  og	  
helsekost.	  Ålesund:	  Møreforsking.	  
Stoknes,	   I.	   S.,	   Økland,	   H.	   M.,	   Falch,	   E.,	   &	   Synnes,	   M.	   (2004).	   Fatty	   acid	   and	   lipid	   class	  
composition	  in	  eyes	  and	  brain	  from	  teleosts	  and	  elasmobranchs.	  Comp	  Biochem	  Physiol	  
B	  Biochem	  Mol	  Biol.,	  138	  (2),	  183-­‐91.	  
Taylor,	  W.	  H.	  (1957).	  Formol	  titration:	  An	  evaluation	  of	  its	  various	  modifications.	  The	  
Analyst,	  82,	  488–498.	  
The	  European	  Community.	  (2002).	  Council	  Regulation	  (EC).	  The	  Council	  of	  the	  European	  
Union.	  
The	  Norwegian	  Ministry	  of	  Trade,	  Industry	  and	  Fisheries.	  (2015).	  Cod	  (Gadus	  morhua).	  
Retrieved	  February	  22,	  2015,	  from	  Fisheries.no:	  http://www.fisheries.no/ecosystems-­‐
and-­‐stocks/marine_stocks/fish_stocks/cod/	  
The	   Norwegian	   Ministry	   of	   Trade,	   Industry	   and	   Fisheries.	   (2013,	   3	   19).	   Norwegian	  
Spring	  Spawning	  herring	  (Claupea	  harengus	  L.).	  Retrieved	  11,	  2,	  2014,	  from	  Fisheries.no:	  
http://www.fisheries.no/ecosystems-­‐and-­‐
stocks/marine_stocks/fish_stocks/norwegian_spring_spawning_herring/	  
Thorkelsson,	  G.,	  Slizyte,	  R.,	  Gildberg,	  A.,	  &	  Kristinsson,	  H.	  G.	  (2009).	  Fish	  proteins	  and	  
peptide	  products:processing	  methods,	  quality	  and	  functional	  properties.	  In	  J.	  B.	  Luten,	  
Marine	  Functional	  Food	  (pp.	  115–139).	  Wageningen:	  Wageningen	  Academic	  Publishers.	  
Tironi,	  V.	  A.,	  Tomas,	  M.	  C.,	  &	  Anon,	  M.	  C.	  (2002).	  Structural	  and	  functional	  changes	  in	  
myofibrillar	   proteins	   of	   sea	   salmon	   (Pseudopercis	   semifasciata)	   by	   interaction	   with	  
malonaldehyde	  (RI).	  Journal	  of	  Food	  Science,	  67	  (3),	  930-­‐935.	  
Tossavainen,	   O.,	   Syvaoja,	   E.	   L.,	   Tuominen,	   J.,	   Heinanen,	   M.,	   &	   Kalkkinen,	   N.	   (1997).	  
Determination	   of	   the	   peptide	   size	   range	   of	   an	   extensively	   hydrolyzed	   protein	  
hydrolysate.	  Milchwissenschaft,	  52	  (2),	  63-­‐67.	  
==PAGE:74==
 
 
73 
Hydrolysis	  of	  Cod	  (Gadus	  Morhua)	  Head	  
Tunhun,	  D.,	  Itoh,	  Y.,	  Morioka,	  K.,	  Kubota,	  S.,	  &	  Obatake,	  A.	  (2002).	  Gel	  forming	  ability	  of	  
fish	  meat	  oxidized	  during	  washing.	  Fisheries	  Science,	  68	  (3),	  662-­‐671.	  
Venugopal,	  V.	  (1994).	  Production	  of	  fish	  protein	  hydrolysates	  by	  microorganisms,	  in:.	  In	  
A.	  M.	  Martin,	  Fisheries	  processing:	  biotechnological	  applications	  (pp.	  223	  –	  243).	  London,	  
UK.:	  Chapman	  &	  Hall.	  
Venugopal,	  V.,	  &	  Shahidi,	  F.	  (1998).	  Traditional	  methods	  to	  process	  underutilized	  fish	  
species	  for	  human	  consumption.	  Food	  Rev.	  Int.,	  14	  (1),	  35–97.	  
World	   Fishing	   and	   Aquaculture.	   (2015).	   Fish	  Waste	  for	  Profit.	   Retrieved	   05	   20,	   2015,	  
from	  
worldfishing.net:	  
www.worldfishing.net/news101/icelandic-­‐fisheries-­‐
exhibition/icefish-­‐conference-­‐fish-­‐waste-­‐for-­‐profit	  
Yin,	  S.	  W.,	  Tang,	  C.	  H.,	  Cao,	  J.	  S.,	  Hu,	  E.	  K.,	  &	  Wen,	  Q.	  (2008).	  Effects	  of	  limited	  enzymatic	  
hydrolysis	   with	   trypsin	   on	   the	   functional	   properties	   of	   hemp	   (Cannabis	   sativa	   L.)	  
protein	  isolate.	  Food	  Chem.,	  106,	  1004–1013.	  
Økland,	  H.,	  &	  Kjerstad,	  M.	  (2002).	  Potensiale	  for	  ilandføring	  og	  utnyttelse	  av	  fiskehoder.	  
Ålesund:	  Møreforsking.	  
Yong,	   S.	   H.,	   &	   Karel,	   M.	   (1978).	   Reactions	   between	   peroxidizing	   lipids	   and	   histidyl	  
residue	  analogues:	  enhancement	  of	  lipid	  oxidation	  and	  browning	  by	  4-­‐methylimidazole.	  
Lipids,	  13	  (1),	  1-­‐5.	  
Zahara,	   R.	   M.	   (2007).	   Antioxidant	   activity	   of	   extract	   from	   brown	   alga,	   Sargassum	  
boveanum.	  African	  Journal	  of	  Biotechnology,	  6	  (24),	  2740	  –	  2745.	  
 
==PAGE:75==
 
 
74 
	  	  
APPENDIX I: Pre-experiment for freezing/thawing of whole and 
minced cod head and minced cod viscera 
Applied and ran by Per Egil Gullsvåg at SINTEF Energy AS 
Two live codfish was bought directly from the fishing boat ST-74-T, which 
was docked in Ravnkloa, approximately 6 kg (2 and 4 kg). 
The fish were gutted and headed in the lab. Furthermore, products from both 
fish were minced and placed in zip-bags and the cod heads were minced and placed in 
a separate bag. The bigger cod head of the two was kept intact, because it was easier 
to place two pieces of I-button in the head to register the freezing and thawing 
progress. Similarly was made with minced product, to record the changes in 
temperature in the core and on the surface. 
Furthermore, the products were frozen in an impingement-freezer at - 37 ° C 
for about 25 min. Then they were placed in a freezer at - 20° C to the next day to 
become equalized. 
For the thawing, the products were placed in running cold water, at 
approximately +8°C temperature. 
Table 6. Weight and size of the samples used for the pre-experiment 
 
Minced viscera 
Minced heads 
Whole head 
Weight (g) 
940 
385 
860 
L  ×  B  ×  H   cm   
22  ×  16  ×  3.5  
16  ×  10  ×  4  
17  ×  9  ×  10  
 
==PAGE:76==
 
 
75 
Hydrolysis	  of	  Cod	  (Gadus	  Morhua)	  Head	  
 
Figure 22. The graph shows the freezing progress by time, including the first 25 minutes in 
the impingement-freezer and later in the freezer-room. The log for the surface of the whole 
head was wrong and therefore it is not included here. 
 
 
Figure 23. The thawing curves, demonstrating the changes in temperature on the core and 
surface of the samples by time. The core temperature in the minced viscera sample reached 
0ºC after 3 hours. 
==PAGE:77==
 
 
76 
	  	  
 
 
Figure 24. Whole and minced cod head and viscera samples used for pre-experiment 
 
==PAGE:78==
 
 
77 
Hydrolysis	  of	  Cod	  (Gadus	  Morhua)	  Head	  
APPENDIX II: Dominating amino acids in FPH 
 
 
 
Figure 25. The dominating amino acid in freeze-dried FPH samples obtained by 0, 30 
and 60 minutes hydrolysis determined by HPLC method; performed by Maiken 
Jeanette Lindgjerdet Grøndtveit 
0	  
1	  
2	  
3	  
4	  
5	  
WH-­‐A-­‐0	   WH-­‐W-­‐0	  MH-­‐A-­‐0	   MH-­‐W-­‐0	  
H-­‐0	  
mg/g	  FPH	  
Domina?ng	  amino	  acids	  in	  FPH	  0-­‐min	  
Ser	  
Gly/Arg	  
Ala	  
Leu	  
0	  
1	  
2	  
3	  
4	  
5	  
6	  
7	  
mg/g	  FPH	  
Domina?ng	  amino	  acids	  in	  FPH	  30-­‐min	  
Ser	  
Gly/Arg	  
Ala	  
Leu	  
0	  
2	  
4	  
6	  
8	  
10	  
H-­‐0	  
WH	  W	  
MH	  W	  
WH	  A	  
mg/g	  FPH	  
Domina?ng	  amino	  acids	  in	  FPH	  60	  min	  
Gly/Arg	  
Ala	  
Leu	  
