==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
From Home Garbage to Home CHP
Vignesh Krishnamoorthy 
June 2015
==PAGE:2==
ABSTRACT
The objective of the present study is to identify and analyse whether a household
garbage based gasiﬁcation system would be feasible for use with an SOFC. VIKING
gasiﬁer was chosen as the gasiﬁer with the 2-stage gasiﬁcation process. The lowered
tar content of syngas from the 2-stage gasiﬁer makes it ideal for use with a low-
temperature SOFC.
The modeling was ﬁrst done to simulate a pyrolyzer using data from municipal solid
waste pyrolysis experiments. Two pyrolyzer models are modelled and their perfor-
mance compared. The hydrogen content in the syngas was found to be lower than
the no-pyrolyzer model. The pyrolyzer model works according to design speciﬁca-
tion and offers good results. Using the results found from the sensitivity analysis
on the main model, three cases are built. 1-,2- and 5- house systems are modelled
with optimized parameters. All the three systems showed electrical eﬃciencies of ap-
proximately 50% and plant eﬃciency at a maximum of 30%. However, overall power
production is seen to vary with the fuel composition at an inlet. Gas cleaning for
chlorine is discussed and basic properties of the model are described. Discontinuous
operation strategy is analysed for Dryer, Gasiﬁer and the SOFC subsystem. A possible
operational strategy is described as the conclusion for the system.
i
==PAGE:3==
Do not go gentle into that good night,
Old age should burn and rave at close of day,
Rage, Rage against the dying of the light.
—
Do not go gentle into that good night
Dylan Thomas
ii
==PAGE:4==
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
I’d like to express my gratitude towards my supervisors, Prof. Masoud Rokni and Prof.
Ulrik Birk Henriksen for providing insight and providing all the support needed for
completion of the thesis. Their assistance and answers to my questions have been
instrumental in providing me the direction for the research presented in this study.
I would like to express my gratitude to Tobias Thomsen for helping me with all the
experiments and his insight into the research process.
Thanks a lot to my good friends, Antonio, Michiel, Robin, Marco, Lev for being there
during lunch, snack, tea, coffee. It was a thrilling time working on the thesis, and I
express my gratitude for everyone in putting up with me during these times.
Finally but not the least, I would like to thank my family. For giving me the opportu-
nity to come far away from home; for supporting in all my decisions and helping me
from afar, supporting me and for the love they have given me.
Thank you,
Vignesh Krishnamoorthy
Kgs. Lyngy, June 2015
iii
==PAGE:5==
==PAGE:6==
CONTENTS
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background
1
1.2
Problem Statement
3
1.3
Scope
4
1.4
Content of Report
4
1.4.1
Chapter 2: Technology Overview
4
1.4.2
Chapter 3: System Characterization
5
1.4.3
Chapter 4: Component Modelling and System Design
5
1.4.4
Chapter 5: Assessment of Model and Discussion
5
1.4.5
Chapter 6: Optimized Model and Notes on Operation
5
2
Technology Overview
7
2.1
Gasiﬁcation
7
2.1.1
Gasiﬁcation Process Steps
8
2.1.2
Pre-treatment of Fuel
8
2.1.3
Gasiﬁcation Chemistry
10
2.1.4
Operational Parameters
13
2.1.5
Gasiﬁer Types
14
2.1.6
Two-Stage Gasiﬁcation
16
2.2
Gas-cleaning Components
17
2.2.1
Sulphur compounds
18
2.2.2
Nitrogen compounds
18
v
==PAGE:7==
2.2.3
Chlorides
19
2.2.4
Removal Techniques
19
2.3
Solid Oxide Fuel Cells
21
2.3.1
General Working of Solid Oxide Fuel Cell
22
2.3.2
Thermodynamics of Fuel Cells
23
2.3.3
Fuel Processing in SOFCs
26
2.4
Summary
28
3
System Characterization
29
3.1
System Description
29
3.1.1
Model Diagram
29
3.2
Fuel Characteristics
30
3.2.1
Household Waste Composition
31
3.2.2
Waste Production
32
3.2.3
Proximate Analysis
36
3.2.4
Chemical Composition of Feedstock
38
3.2.5
Calculation of Thermodynamic Property
43
3.2.6
Thermodynamic Values
45
3.2.7
Sensitivity Analysis
45
3.3
Summary
47
4
System and Thermodynamic Model
49
4.1
Input Fuel
49
4.2
Drying
49
4.3
Pyrolysis
50
4.3.1
Pyrolysis Process
52
4.3.2
Thermodynamic Model
53
4.3.3
Parameters and Input Values
63
4.4
Gasiﬁer
63
4.5
SOFC System
65
4.6
Other Components
66
4.7
Summary
68
vi
==PAGE:8==
5
Assessment and Discussion
71
5.1
Details of Assessment
71
5.1.1
Compositional Details
71
5.2
Pyrolyzer Model
72
5.2.1
Product Composition
73
5.2.2
Gas Composition
74
5.2.3
Energy Content
75
5.2.4
Discussion
76
5.3
Gasiﬁer Model
77
5.3.1
Hydrogen Fraction in Syngas
77
5.3.2
Energy Content across Dryer to Gasiﬁer
79
5.3.3
Discussion
82
5.4
System Analysis
84
5.4.1
Mass Flow
84
5.4.2
Moisture Content
86
5.4.3
Gasiﬁcation Temperature
88
5.5
Fuel Utilization Factor
90
5.5.1
Power Consumption
90
5.5.2
Cell Voltage and Current Density
92
5.5.3
Eﬃciencies - SOFC and Plant
93
5.6
Number of Cells and Number of Stacks
94
5.6.1
Power Production
95
5.6.2
Cell Voltage
97
5.7
Discussion for Systems Analysis
101
5.8
Summary
103
6
Optimized Model and Operation Strategy
105
6.1
Optimized Model
105
6.1.1
Optimized Parameters
106
6.1.2
One House System
106
6.1.3
Two House System
111
6.1.4
Five House System
115
6.2
Syngas Cleaning Strategy
118
6.2.1
Chlorine
118
vii
==PAGE:9==
6.2.2
Implementation of HCl in DNA
119
6.3
Physical Size of SOFC Stacks
121
6.4
Optimum Number of Cells and Stacks
122
6.5
Discontinuous Operation
124
6.5.1
Dryer and Gasiﬁer Subsystem
124
6.5.2
SOFC Start-up Operation and Thermal Management
129
6.6
Summary
130
7
Conclusion
133
7.1
Future Work
135
A Pyrolyzer: Average Source Model
143
B Pyrolyzer: Single Source Model
149
C DNA-Pyrolyser Model
155
C.1
Dryer and Pyrolyzer Model
155
C.2
Inlet-Gasiﬁer Model
159
D Main Working Model
165
D.1 Main System DNA Code
165
viii
==PAGE:10==
LIST OF FIGURES
1.1
The waste generated per capita per day sorted according to the income
level of the country. Adapted from World Bank Report [1] Key: HI: High
Income; UMI: Upper Middle Income; LMI: Lower Middle Income; LI:
Low Income
2
2.1
Gasiﬁcation process steps visualized. The process begins with the dry-
ing of the fuel followed by the gasiﬁcation process where the dried fuel
is the input. The gas is cleaned at the outlet before being employed in
downstream processes. Adapted from [2]
9
2.2
The different zones within the Gasiﬁer with inlet and outlet. In reality,
the zones are not physically separate (except 2-stage gasiﬁer) rather the
zones are merged together. Adapted from [2]
10
2.3
Process ﬂow of the 2-stage VIKING gasiﬁer developed by DTU with phys-
ically separate pyrolyzer, partial oxidation chamber and the gasiﬁca-
tion reactor. With lower tar content, stable operation and high cold gas
eﬃciency, the gasiﬁer is useful for fuels with a high volatile percentage.
Adapted from [3, 4]
16
2.4
Schematic diagram showing the operating principles of SOFC running
on natural gas (Taken from[5])
22
ix
==PAGE:11==
3.1
The ﬁgure shows the overall system that is under study. This system uti-
lizes the steam drying with the dried waste fed directly into the gasiﬁer
after which the steam is utilized to produce steam before being sent into
the SOFC system for producing heat and electricity.
30
3.2
Per Capita Across All Income Levels for Different Household Typology.
Nuclear, expanded and mono parental households show variation in
their per capita waste generated. The waste generation rates are consid-
erably high as the income levels go up. Data adapted from Ojeda-Benitez
et al. [6]
32
3.3
Showing the carbon and oxygen variation among the sources from the
Table 3.6. The variation is quite large for oxygen, but the numbers seem
to be agreeing on the margin of approximately 30% for oxygen and 45-
50% for carbon.
40
3.4
The moisture variation amongst the sources from Table 3.6. High mois-
ture variation is seen with few of the data incomplete as speciﬁed by
’NaN’. Here the values can be taken in the range of 30% to 40% which is
the European MSW moisture range.
41
3.5
Sensitivity analysis of moisture content with the lower heating value
across the average composition. The drop in LHV is due to increase in
the moisture and, therefore, shows the direct impact of moisture on the
LHV.
47
4.1
Component diagram of the dryer with the as-is fuel inlet and dried fuel
outlet. Steam is used for drying by generating it using heat from the
syngas.
51
4.2
The component diagram of the pyrolyser used for the system. Input is
the dried fuel and the pyrolyzed products are water, char, tar and light
permanent gases.
52
4.3
Composition of the products at different temperatures for both the sin-
gle source and the average source model are shown. Each panel corre-
sponds to the pyrolysis temperature as shown by the labels on the top.
The temperature range is from 400-900°C . At 400 °C , the single source
model did not have any data; therefore the data was ﬁtted from the val-
ues from 500-900°C . Adapted from [7, 8]
59
x
==PAGE:12==
4.4
The data ﬁtted showed inaccuracies with R-squared values. These inac-
curacies can be seen clearly with some of the total compositions going
beyond 100% of weight. Errors can be seen in all pyrolysis temperature
panels.
60
4.5
Error between the ﬁtted and actual data are visualized. Both average-
model and single-source model show large distance from the actual
model. The R-squared values can be seen on the top-left. With high de-
viation from the actual data, these formation equations are not useful
for the model.
61
4.6
Subtraction model shows less deviation between the calculated and ac-
tual values. The deviation and errors are very small to allow for use in
the pyrolyzer model.
62
4.7
Gasiﬁer Component Diagram
64
4.8
SOFC Component Diagram
66
5.1
Product wt% across pyrolysis temperature shows the overall trends of
the different products across the single model and the average model
with both Mean and M-DK compositions. Single-source model shows
more realistic proﬁle of tars with a decrease and a corresponding in-
crease in gases. Water formation rates show decrease across both models. 73
5.2
The gas composition is shown here for both ASM and SSM. The total
composition trend of no changes between the compositions can be seen
as the outlet fraction is only a function of the outlet temperature and
not of the inlet fraction. However, there are differences between ASM
and SSM in the wt% of the products at the outlet.
74
5.3
LHV of all fractions are shown across the two models. With compo-
sition, the overall inlet LHV is decreased for the M-DK composition.
And the LHV of char is also different. For SSM, the char fractions show
lower LHV and are almost constant across the temperature range but
the products also show slight increase in LHV when the composition
changes.
75
xi
==PAGE:13==
5.4
Composition of methane, hydrogen and water (steam) in the syngas for
different models. The x-axis shows the different compounds and the
bars represent the different models under study. Under both composi-
tions, the composition is highest without the pyrolyzer.
78
5.5
Inlet waste LHV is compared with the syngas LHV for both composi-
tions: Mean and M-DK. In the pyrolyzer cases, the char and tar are
mixed with different individual LHVs that lead to higher total LHV com-
pared to the No-pyrolyzer model. The syngas LHV is affected by the
gases in the mixture and H2 fraction. No-Pyrolyzer model has higher
H2 and this shows up as higher syngas LHV.
80
5.6
Cold Gas Eﬃciency (CGE) shows the potential chemical energy across
the gasiﬁcation system. With higher CGE, the amount of usable chemi-
cal energy is higher at the outlet.
81
5.7
Mass ﬂow increase shows corresponding increase in power consumed
and the power produced. With higher mass ﬂow of fuel, the increase in
air required creates higher energy costs on the Cathode-Air-Blower, pic-
tured on the left with the blue-bar. And the increased fuel content also
increases the power produced which linearly increases with increase in
mass ﬂow on the right.
85
5.8
Consumption of power due to increased moisture content and the total
power production change in the system due to change of moisture. The
decrease in power can be seen at 40% moisture due to the lowered mass
ﬂow
87
5.9
Plant eﬃciency variation due to change in moisture content. Increase in
eﬃciency is linked to the energy per kilogram available at inlet due to
moisture content. With higher moisture content, the energy is lowered
but the power produced is almost the same.
89
5.10 Change in power production and internal power consumption due to
the gasiﬁcation temperature variation
90
5.11 Impact of Gasiﬁcation temperature on the plant eﬃciency. Overall, the
plant eﬃciency does not change with variation in gasiﬁcation tempera-
ture.
91
xii
==PAGE:14==
5.12 Power consumption and power production for the plant with variation
in Utilization Factor. Power utilization increases due to the higher air
requirement for the SOFC. Power Production drops due to limits of the
fuel cell
92
5.13 The variation in voltage and current density shown with variation in
Uf. At higher factors, the cell number is not optimum thereby reducing
the voltage and increasing the current density. This leads to the lowered
power production.
93
5.14 Impact of Uf on the plant eﬃciency and the electrical eﬃciency of the
SOFC. Electrical eﬃciency drop is linked to the drop in Cell Voltage and
the plant eﬃciency increases due to increased power production and
falls as the power production drops
94
5.15 Variation of power production with cells. With the increase in cells,
there is a large increase in power production before the value stabilizes
near to 250 cells. Beyond this number, the power production would not
increase.
95
5.16 Variation of power production with an increase in stacks. With an in-
crease in stacks, there is a large increase in power production before
the value stabilizes near to 5 stacks. Beyond this number, the power
production would not increase considerably to actually choose the value. 96
5.17 Variation of cell voltage with an increase in cells. With the increase in
cells, there is a large increase in power production before the value sta-
bilizes at 0.7 V at 175 cells. Beyond 175 cells, the advantages in changes
to the number of cells is too low to be signiﬁcant
97
5.18 Variation of eﬃciencies by the change in the number of cells.
98
5.19 Variation of cell voltage and current density with increase in stacks.
The variation shows similarities with changes of the number of cells.
The increase is followed by stabilization of the value beyond which the
impact is far too negligible
99
5.20 Impact of the number of cells on the electrical and plant eﬃciency of
the system. The overall effect is lower compared to the impact of the
cell. The stabilization is clearly seen at 10 stacks for 80 cells.
100
xiii
==PAGE:15==
6.1
Power produced by a single-house system with different waste composi-
tion and number of cells. The power produced increases as the number
of cells increase since more reaction area is available thereby creating
more power.
109
6.2
Cell Voltage is lower at lower cell numbers. This value increases with
number of cells before plateauing. The voltage and the power produc-
tion have similar trend across the number of cells which indicates the
correct working.
110
6.3
Current density change is opposite to that of the voltage. The interesting
aspect of this is the lower ceiling of 0.15 A⁄cm3 which is due to the fuel
composition and mass ﬂow.
111
6.4
The plant eﬃciency of the system is the ratio between the energy avail-
able at the inlet to the net energy that is produced. Higher thermal ef-
ﬁciencies are seen as number of cells increases due to the increase in
fuel and the surface area.
112
6.5
Increase in electrical eﬃciency from the higher voltages at the SOFC
from the increase in number of cells. This electrical eﬃciency increase
is important as the higher electrical eﬃciency indicates better working
of the SOFC
113
6.6
Power produced by a two-house system with different waste composi-
tion and number of cells. The power produced increases as the number
of cells increase since more reaction area is available thereby creating
more power.
114
6.7
Plant thermal eﬃciency with different waste composition and number
of cells. The thermal eﬃciency maximum is around 30%
115
6.8
Power produced by a ﬁve-house system with different waste composi-
tion and number of cells. The power produced increases as the number
of cells increase since more reaction area is available thereby creating
more power.
116
6.9
Plant Thermal eﬃciency for a ﬁve-house system increases to a maxi-
mum around 30% with 130 cells. Further increase in cells cause a very
small increase in the eﬃciency
117
xiv
==PAGE:16==
6.10 Heat loss change with increasing insulation thickness. As insulation thick-
ness increases, the heat loss decreases until a minimum beyond which
heat loss can not be reduced further
128
6.11 Mean temperature increases with larger insulation thickness and the
surface temperature on the insulation falls. These are understandable
as very low thermal conductivity reduces the temperatures and with
lowered heat loss, the mean temperature inside the pipe is higher
129
xv
==PAGE:17==
==PAGE:18==
LIST OF TABLES
2.1
The reactions occurring in an SOFC separated at the anode and cathode
along with the overall reaction. Adapted from paper on SOFC.[5]
23
3.1
The waste composition for different regions characterized by the type.
The categories are given by the percentage by the mass composition in
the total as-received basis of waste. Adapted from [9, 10, 11, 12].
31
3.2
Waste generated per capita per day across income levels for Mexico and
Denmark. The values for Denmark have been calculated with the de-
crease in waste production found experimentally for Mexico from re-
search by Ojeda-Benitez et al. [6]
35
3.3
The breakdown of approximated household waste generation levels across
the income levels for each day of the week and the weekly total waste.
Data has been calculated using numbers adapted from the study on
waste generation levels in Mexico by Ojeda-Benitez et. al. [6]
35
3.4
The results of the proximate analysis obtained on the sample gathered
from Nybrogaard Kollegiet in Denmark on an as-received basis. Three
samples were tested according to the process detailed in section 3.2.3.
37
3.5
The results of the proximate analysis obtained on the sample gathered
from Nybrogaard student dormitory in Denmark on a dry-basis. Three
samples were tested according to the process detailed in section 3.2.3.
38
xvii
==PAGE:19==
3.6
Chemical composition of the different waste identiﬁers are given here
on a dry basis with Moisture (MOI) considered outside of the fundamen-
tal composition. All the values provided are the percentage by mass on
a dry-basis. For the samples without the chemical composition, the per-
centage values were extrapolated from common composition ranges.
39
3.7
The speciﬁc heat values of individual elementary components in the
waste system. These values were utilized in conjunction with the mass
fractions in Table 3.6 and Equation 3.6 to arrive at the speciﬁc heat
value of the waste fuel.
45
3.8
The heating values - Higher and Lower - have been calculated using the
equations in section 3.2.5. LHV has been calculated using the moisture
content in the feedstock. The data used to calculate the values are pro-
vided in the table 3.6. MD refers to the values arrived at using Modiﬁed-
Dulong correlations.
46
4.1
The data used as input to the thermodynamic model for the fuel. Based
on the data obtained in Chapter 3. This data has been adapted to arrive
at the ﬁnal input data.
50
4.2
The parameter values for the Steam drying component are shown.
50
4.3
Inlet and outlet compositions of the pyrolyser component
53
4.4
Polynomial equations of percentages of the products of the pyrolyzer.
These equations are used for the mass balance equations in the main
calculations.
58
4.5
Parameter and Input values for the pyrolyser
63
4.6
Gasiﬁer input parameters explanation
64
4.7
SOFC Parameter table
65
4.8
Parameter values chosen for compressors in the system. Three com-
pressors are used: steam compressor, gas compressor and cathode com-
pressor. They are used to generate ﬂow for the three different compo-
nents.
67
4.9
Input parameters to components in the system
69
xviii
==PAGE:20==
5.1
Mean and M-DK composition details are summarised along with the cal-
culated thermal properties of the fuel. Both these compositions are used
to identify and analyse the results of different system models. [6, 9, 10,
12, 13, 14, 15]
72
6.1
Composition fractions of the waste that are used to design the optimized
model along with their moisture contents.
107
6.2
Optimized Component Parameters used for the ﬁnal design of the three
systems.
108
6.3
Thermodynamic properties of hydrochloric acid utilized in the thermo-
prop environment in DNA. All properties are at 1 bar and 25°C unless
speciﬁed to be different (Refer footnote).
120
6.4
Polynomial coeﬃcients for HCl provided by NIST. The values can be
used in the equation of polynomial deﬁned earlier within the tempera-
ture range of 298 to 1200 K.
120
6.5
Height of the SOFC stack components along with their masses and den-
sity. Data taken from [16]
121
6.6
Using the data available in Table 6.5 and the equations, the physical
size of the system has been calculated for a single stack. The size of the
system is small enough to house it in the household. Data adapted from
[16]
122
6.7
Optimized parameters for the three different systems: 1-house system,
2-house system and a 3-house system with power production values
and the eﬃciencies. These values are provided for the composition-
MEAN. With other compositions, similar optimization will have to be
carried out. Despite such measures, these parameter values should pro-
vide close to optimal working.
123
xix
==PAGE:21==
==PAGE:22==
ABBREVIATIONS
MSW Municipal Solid Waste
MSWM Municipal Solid Waste Management
IGCC Integrated Gasiﬁcation Combined Cycle
SOFC Solid Oxide Fuel Cell
WGS Water-Gas Shift Reaction
ER
Equivalence Ratio
HHV Higher Heating Value
LHV Lower Heating Value
BFB
Bubbling Fluidized Bed
ASTM American Society for Testing and Materials
MOI Moisture Content
USA United States of America
DK
Denmark
NGR Nigeria
IRE
Ireland
WAL Wales
xxi
==PAGE:23==
MEX Mexico
NaN Not a Number - equals zero
EES
Engineering Equation Solver
DNA Dynamic Network Analysis
DTU Technical University of Denmark
ASM Average Source Model
SSM Single Source Model
CGE Cold Gas Eﬃciency
xxii
==PAGE:24==
NOMENCLATURE
Symbol
Description
δH0
Enthalpy of Reaction
δE
Enthalpy of Reaction
δG
Gibbs Free Energy
δG0
Standard Gibbs Free Energy
E
Reversible Potential
E0
Standard Reversible Potential
n
Number of moles of electron
F
Faraday’s constant
PX
Partial Pressure of Molecule X
ηel
Electrical Eﬃciency
Vcell
Voltage of SOFC cell
Videal
Ideal voltage of SOFC cell
HHV ∗
Higher Heating Value - Dry Basis
Cp,fuel
Speciﬁc Heat Capacity of fuel
Xi
Element/molecule
in
the
fuel/feed-
stock
i
Index for the elements in the composi-
tion
xxiii
==PAGE:25==
Tp
Pyrolysis Temperature
Mx
Mass of molecule/element X
Fx
Formation
polynomial
equation
of
molecule/element X
R2
Coeﬃcient of Determination
ηiso
Isentropic Eﬃciency
ηmech
Mechanical Eﬃciency
Uf
Fuel Utilization Factor
ηcg
Cold Gas Eﬃciency
TG
Gasiﬁcation Temperature
hstack
Height of the stack
hx
Height of component x in a cell
Vstack
Volume of the stack
Acell
Area of the cell
W
Drying rate
S
Weight of the solid feedstock
-dX⁄dΘ
Difference in humidity over time
Kx
Thermal conductivity of material x
Dn
Diameter of pipe with index n
U
Heat transfer Coeﬃcient
xxiv
==PAGE:26==
1
INTRODUCTION
1.1 Background
Waste is a direct result of consumption. The more we consume, the more waste we
produce. Current estimates of waste production for 3 billion residents on Earth is ap-
proximated to be about 1.2 kg per person per day. That is about 1.3 billion tonnes of
waste per year. And this number is expected to grow rapidly by the next decade.
The growth in waste volume can be attested to the rate of urbanization around the
world. Economic development, industrialization, public habits and the local climate,
all not only impact the generation of waste [1], but also affect generation volume and
the composition of the waste. Data for the current generation levels when categorized
by the income level show that the poorer countries invariably produce less waste per
person than an industrialized nation as shown in the ﬁgure 1.1.
With the growth of these countries, it is not only important to ﬁgure out ways to solve
the question of waste disposal it is also part of the solution to pursue environmen-
tally friendly methods. The current practices in waste management include source
reduction, recycling, composting, incineration and landﬁlling/dumping [1]. However,
common barriers for establishing such practices include the education of Municipal
Solid Waste Management (MSWM) Personnel, waste collection and segregation, and
government budget[17]. All the three have long development and implementation
1
==PAGE:27==
Figure 1.1: The waste generated per capita per day sorted according to the income
level of the country. Adapted from World Bank Report [1]
Key: HI: High Income; UMI: Upper Middle Income; LMI: Lower Middle In-
come; LI: Low Income
periods with low affordability for countries of low-income. In Denmark, according
to a report from 2004 by the Danish Ministry of Environment [18], over 60% of the
household waste collected was incinerated and approximately 30% of the waste was
recycled. Therefore, integrated systems that can utilize the thermal energy in the
waste can be viewed as useful. The biggest advantage of thermal disposal is that the
2
==PAGE:28==
process reduces the waste volume to manageable magnitude.
In this regard, design of a system that can improve self-suﬃciency of a household, in
energy and possibly heat, by generating energy from waste would have a number of
beneﬁts, one of which would not only be reduced reliance on the municipal systems
for waste disposal but also a large reduction in downstream processes for processing
and storage of waste. Finally, a waste-based energy system that could be potentially
used for distributed generation can lead up to 30% in energy savings compared to
focused energy systems [19].
1.2 Problem Statement
The inevitable increase in waste generated poses a signiﬁcant challenge for human
development and growth. An ideal household-level solution would include the ability
to:
• convert household waste to possible heat and electricity
• maximize self-suﬃciency in the household through reuse of waste
• improve waste management by utilizing source-reduction.
Therefore, it is beneﬁcial to investigate the possibility of a small-scale thermal-disposal
system that is small enough to be utilized in the house.
Main Objectives
The present study is characterized by the following objectives:
1. Investigate the use of a gasiﬁcation system to gasify household waste with con-
straints on size and thermodynamic performance. This investigation is to iden-
tify the size of the gasiﬁcation system, required process equipment and the per-
formance considerations of the system.
2. Investigate a pyrolyzer model and the impact of introducing a pyrolyzer model
separately from the gasiﬁer. Including the analysis of the performance and the
impact of the pyrolyzer on the gasiﬁcation process.
3
==PAGE:29==
3. Investigate syngas composition based on the heterogeneous waste composition
in order to identify and apply gas-cleaning solutions. Syngas would contain com-
pounds that are undesirable in downstream processes. Therefore, identifying
the gas composition would assist in identifying the potential gas-cleaning solu-
tions that would be needed.
4. Identify and analyze the optimum working parameters and size of the system
for different waste generation rates and households.
1.3 Scope
The present study deals with the thermodynamic analysis of a household gasiﬁcation
system to produce heat and electricity by utilizing the producer-gas in a Solid Oxide
Fuel Cell (SOFC). Household waste, usually heterogeneous, is used as the fuel in the
gasiﬁcation system. This heterogeneity cannot be taken into account as the factors of
variation are high as are the magnitude of change. Thus, to account for heterogene-
ity in the location, waste data from various locations around the world are used to
arrive at different sample compositions rather than take actual waste variation from
one location. Finally, the thermophysical properties of the fuel are calculated using
equations where there is a lack of experimental data.
1.4 Content of Report
The chapters of the document are outlined below:
1.4.1 Chapter 2: Technology Overview
The technologies under study in this thesis are reported in the context of the present
research. Functioning of the technologies is brieﬂy touched upon. The chemistry and
thermodynamics of Gasiﬁcation, fuel cells and gas cleaning are explained where they
are applicable. Gas cleaning solutions are explained with the context of the present
study with notes on the possible cleaning solutions and the optimum operational con-
ditions.
4
==PAGE:30==
1.4.2 Chapter 3: System Characterization
This chapter is dedicated to explaining the main characteristics of the system. The
proposed model for the system is designed and explained. Characteristics of fuel vari-
ation are analyzed and the method of characterizing the input fuel is discussed in de-
tail. Different mass ﬂows of the waste are deﬁned based on household sizes followed
by the compositional variation of the fuel. Finally, the different thermophysical prop-
erties of the waste are calculated and discussed.
1.4.3 Chapter 4: Component Modelling and System Design
Here, each of the components modelled in the study is explained in detail. A brief
explanation is provided for the main components along with the explanation on their
thermodynamic model according to the purposes of the study. For the components
where a model was developed, the procedure is discussed with equations and the
overall methodology. The input values used throughout the modelling are included
for each component and in the summary for the whole model used in this study.
1.4.4 Chapter 5: Assessment of Model and Discussion
In this chapter, the simulations are set-up and the obtained results are presented
and discussed. The inputs to the different simulations are presented and the assess-
ment criterion is established. Results are presented following the assessment crite-
rion along with the discussion.
1.4.5 Chapter 6: Optimized Model and Notes on Operation
Here, based on the results obtained from Chapter 5, optimized models are built for
three use cases of the present system. The performance of the system in these three
cases are presented along with the ﬁnal optimized model. Following the optimized
model, discontinuous operation model for the system is discussed brieﬂy. Start up,
operational heat losses and shutdown of the gasiﬁer and the SOFC are analyzed. A
summary is then provided for the optimized model along with the best operation
strategy applicable for a small-scale system.
5
==PAGE:31==
==PAGE:32==
2
TECHNOLOGY OVERVIEW
2.1 Gasiﬁcation
The term, gasiﬁcation, covers the conversion of carbonaceous fuel or feedstock, by
the application of heat, to a gas having usable caloriﬁc value. However, it is not to be
confused with combustion, which produces ﬂue gas of little to no energy value.
In 1609, Jan Baptiste Van Helmont, a chemist and physician from Belgium discovered
the process of producing gas from the heating of coal or wood. John Berger received
the ﬁrst patent for using "producer gas" to drive an internal combustion engine in
1791. Phillipe Lebon, in 1798, discovered the process of biomass gasiﬁcation after
gasifying wood. However, the commercial use of the process did not begin until the
start of the 19th century.
London and Westminster Gas Light & Coke Company displayed publicly the use of
town gas in lighting as a public exhibition in 1813. By 1841, town gas was ubiquitous
and it had spread rapidly to the east coast of the United States of America to cities
such as Boston, New York, and Philadelphia. Town gas was a product manufactured
using coal consisting of 50% hydrogen (H2 ), methane (CH4 ) and carbon dioxide (CO2
), with 3-6% carbon monoxide (CO ). Gasiﬁcation continued to be the primary method
of lighting until the invention of the electric bulb by Thomas Edison in the 1880s. The
invention of the electric bulb forced town gas to be retired from the indoor lighting
market.
7
==PAGE:33==
The resurgence of gasiﬁcation happened in the 1920s when Germany, blockaded from
Petroleum due to World War I, sought research into creating liquid fuels through
reﬁnement of syngas produced by gasiﬁcation. This period saw the introduction of
the Fischer-Tropsch process for manufacturing fuels from coal. After the two World
Wars, South Africa led the development of coal-to-liquid-fuels industry. In 1984, the
ﬁrst Integrated Gasiﬁcation Combined Cycle (IGCC) demonstration was carried out in
Barstow, California. By the 1990s and 2000s, the better understanding of the environ-
mental implications of conventional fuel use has led to a resurgence in the study of
gasiﬁcation technologies. The current stage of gasiﬁcation has seen the proliferation
of IGCC facilities around the world.
2.1.1 Gasiﬁcation Process Steps
Gasiﬁcation, a complex process consisting of multiple steps, as visualized in the Fig-
ure 2.1 occurs within a temperature range of 900-1200°C . The exact temperature
depends on the characteristics of the feedstock and the type of reactor utilized. Be-
ginning with drying, the process contains a number of exothermic and endothermic
reactions that occur successively forming the producer gas or synthetic gas. Figure
2.1 showcases the main processes involving the pretreatment, gasiﬁcation and the
follow-up process of cleaning the outlet gas.
2.1.2 Pre-treatment of Fuel
The moisture content of the fuel has an important role in gasiﬁcation technology
as it has both negative and positive impact. With high moisture content, the thermal
eﬃciency of the system decreases. However, a small amount of moisture in the fuel is
helpful as the steam generated during gasiﬁcation, by the phase change of moisture,
acts as a gasifying agent [20]. Therefore, it is important to dry the fuel to acceptable
levels. For biomass, the moisture content that is optimal is approximately 40 wt%
beneﬁts the gasiﬁcation process [20].
In addition to drying, grinding of the fuel is also useful. For unprocessed, household
waste, the shapes and size of the fuel are varied and heterogeneous. This variability
presents disadvantages in both drying and gasiﬁcation. By grinding, it will be easier
to dry, handle and store for use in gasiﬁcation as the bulk density of the waste would
8
==PAGE:34==
Figure 2.1: Gasiﬁcation process steps visualized. The process begins with the drying
of the fuel followed by the gasiﬁcation process where the dried fuel is the
input. The gas is cleaned at the outlet before being employed in down-
stream processes. Adapted from [2]
increase. Thermodynamically, the drying rate is inversely proportional to the surface
area available. On an as-is basis, the shape and size of the waste reduce the surface
area available leading to larger drying rates. In this situation, grinding would be ben-
eﬁcial. However, grinding would also be an additional parasitic consumption of en-
ergy of the equipment internally in the system. Therefore, the choice has to be made
based on the experimental impact of ground fuel on the performance compared to
an as-is basis fuel.
9
==PAGE:35==
Figure 2.2: The different zones within the Gasiﬁer with inlet and outlet. In reality, the
zones are not physically separate (except 2-stage gasiﬁer) rather the zones
are merged together. Adapted from [2]
2.1.3 Gasiﬁcation Chemistry
Gasiﬁcation is a complex process consisting of reactions that are predominantly based
around CO2 , CO , H2O (as steam) and H2 . Reactions occur continuously in the re-
ducing environment of the gasiﬁcation process. A low oxygen content environment is
maintained at 25-30% of ideal stoichiometric conditions. The chemical reactions oc-
curring in the gasiﬁer can be classiﬁed into several zones as shown in Figure 2.2. The
fuel passes through these zones reacting with the inlet air and the products formed.
10
==PAGE:36==
Pyrolysis or Devolatilization
The ﬁrst of the reactions occur in the pyrolysis or devolatilization zone. Devolatiliza-
tion is the process of decomposition of the fuel/feedstock into gas, liquid and solid
products in a non-oxygenated environment [2, 21]. Pyrolysis reactions are:
Feedstock −−→Char + Tars + Light Gases + H2O
∆H0 > 0
(2.1)
−−→CO + CO2 + CH4 + CxHyOz + N2
(2.2)
The feedstock is broken down into char, tars and light gases along with the evolution
of water, CO , CO2 and CH4 are the light gases and are permanent to a large extent in
the rest of the gasiﬁcation process. CO reacts with oxygen forming CO2 , which is a
highly-unreactive molecule therefore remaining as produced through all the down-
stream processes. Tars are long-chain organic compounds shown in equation 2.2 in
the general form, CxHyOz.
Char Combustion
C + 1
2O2 −−→CO
∆H0 = −111 MJ/kmol
(2.3)
C + O2 −−→CO2
∆H0 = −394 MJ/kmol
(2.4)
The char combustion reactions are partial oxidation and total combustion reactions.
During the reaction 2.3, the stoichiometric conditions are not met resulting in partial
oxidation. Under complete combustion CO2 is formed as speciﬁed by equation 2.4.
Char Gasiﬁcation
C + CO2 ←−→2CO
∆H0 = +173 MJ/kmol
(2.5)
C + H2O −−→CO + H2
∆H0 = +131 MJ/kmol
(2.6)
C + 2H2 ←−→CH4
∆H0 = −75 MJ/kmol
(2.7)
11
==PAGE:37==
The above reactions are called Boudouard reaction, steam gasiﬁcation and hydrogen
gasiﬁcation respectively [2, 22]. Steam gasiﬁcation and reforming involve the reac-
tions between water and the char produced to form CO , H2 , and CO2 . These re-
actions indicate the importance of water in the overall reaction kinetics alongside
hydrogen.
Homogeneous Reactions
Equations 2.11 and 2.12 are Water-Gas Reaction (WGS) and methanation reaction re-
spectively [2, 22]. They are important reactions as it involves the shift from light gases
to methane and formation of water respectively. It is important to note that both the
reactions look for equilibrium conditions. At equilibrium, the reactions can shift to
either side depending on the reactant and product concentrations.
CO + 1
2O2 −−→CO2
∆H0 = −283 MJ/kmol
(2.8)
H2 + 1
2O2 −−→H2O
∆H0 = −242 MJ/kmol
(2.9)
CH4 + 2O2 −−→CO2 + 2H2O
∆H0 = −283 MJ/kmol
(2.10)
CO + H2O ←−→CO2 + H2
∆H0 = −41 MJ/kmol
(2.11)
CO + 3H2 ←−→CH4 + H2O
∆H0 = −206 MJ/kmol
(2.12)
Typically, these reactions are temperature dependent. The equilibrium constant would
shift the reaction based on the temperature to the products or to the reactants. Some
of the impurities present during the process could also shift these reactions. Thus,
the temperature proﬁle maintained inside the gasiﬁer also becomes important for
the reactions taking place.
Tar Conversion
Tar is also converted during gasiﬁcation by a series of reactions forming light gases.
Partial oxidation, steam reforming, dry reforming and thermal cracking reactions
are the reactions that occur during the latter stages of gasiﬁcation which lead to the
cracking of tars. At higher temperatures, these long-chain hydrocarbons break down
12
==PAGE:38==
into smaller compounds eventually converting to light gases. Additionally, the pres-
ence of other elements, especially nitrogen and sulphur, in the waste could also play
the role of reactants and products in the gasiﬁcation process. However, their reac-
tions are not primary reactions such as the ones detailed above.
Reaction heat addition
Finally, the addition of heat to gasiﬁcation can be considered with two different meth-
ods. In indirect heating, an external heat source can be added to promote the reac-
tion. In direct heating, a balance of exothermic and endothermic reactions is used
such that the exothermic reactions provide the energy required for the endother-
mic reactions to occur. From the reactions detailed above that the reactions with a
negative-∆H0 are exothermic and the reactions with positive values are endothermic.
2.1.4 Operational Parameters
The operation of the process of gasiﬁcation can be explained by a variety of param-
eters. These parameters provide the understanding of the operation and the condi-
tions required for optimal functioning of the gasiﬁcation process.
Equivalence Ratio (ER)
The equivalence ratio is the ratio between the oxygen supply in the gasiﬁer to the oxy-
gen content required for complete stoichiometric combustion. It is important that the
oxygen supply is below the requirement for the stoichiometric combustion since it af-
fects the tar formation and synthetic-gas composition. The value of ER ranges from
0-1. When the ER is closer to the 0, the condition in the gasiﬁer supports pyrolysis of
the fuel. In case, the ER is closer to 1 or greater than 1, the conditions are stoichiomet-
ric or closer to stoichiometric combustion [23]. For large scale plants, the range of ER
that is utilized is between 0.25-to-0.35; a value in this range appears to maximize the
conversion of char to syngas [22, 24, 25]. It is important to note that char conversion
is not an isolated impact of ER since the reactor design also affects char conversion.
13
==PAGE:39==
Reactor Temperature
Reactor temperature affects the ash and the tar content of the syngas[22]. Instead of
a single operating temperature in the reactor, it usually is better to have a tempera-
ture proﬁle along the reactor. Temperatures inside the reactor have to be managed
more closely when the heating system is indirect. During start-up, the reactor tem-
perature becomes an important parameter as it needs to be closer to the combustion
temperature of the fuel in order to start the preliminary reactions.
Residence Time of gases and waste
The residence time of the gases and the waste depends on the type of reactor and
its design. The method of manipulating the residence time are solely based on vary-
ing the superﬁcial gas velocity for ﬂuidized bed reactors [22]. In case of ﬁxed bed
reactors, the design can only be varied to a certain extent.
Feedstock Composition and Physical Properties
The composition and physical properties of the feedstock have the profound effect on
the performance of the system. Ideally, the properties of the waste are homogeneous
and do not vary. In such a case, the performance impact is easier to identify. In terms
of waste, the impact might be quite considerable due to the variability of the fuel.
The parameters that are necessary for the gasiﬁcation are: elemental composition,
lower heating value (LHV), composition and content of ash, moisture content, volatile
matter content, heavy metals and other elements, bulk density, and the size.
2.1.5 Gasiﬁer Types
Gasiﬁers are of three main types. Each of the types of gasiﬁer have different perfor-
mance characteristics:
Fixed Bed Gasiﬁer
A ﬁxed bed gasiﬁer refers to the constant presence of a deep bed of feedstock present
in the gasiﬁer. Almost all of the volume of the gasiﬁer is ﬁlled with the feedstock. It
is also possible to distinguish between the different chemical reaction zones of the
14
==PAGE:40==
feedstock in the gasiﬁer. It is possible during operation that they move around in the
gasiﬁer. There are two different types of reactors for ﬁxed bed gasiﬁcation.
The updraft gasiﬁer is the type where the fuel is fed from the top and the air is fed
from the bottom. The feedstock moves in the opposite direction to that of the gases. In
the ﬁxed bed gasiﬁer, the drying occurs at the top. The drying is followed by pyrolysis
thus leaving ash at the bottom of the gasiﬁer [22, 26]. Tar-rich gas is released at the top
along with methane. A Downdraft gasiﬁer is the opposite of the updraft gasiﬁer with
the feedstock and the gases moving in the same direction. The order with which the
zones occurring in the downdraft gasiﬁer is opposite to that of the updraft gasiﬁer[22,
26]. Both the gas and the ash formed during gasiﬁcation are obtained at the bottom
of the gasiﬁer.
Fluidized Bed Gasiﬁer
The Bubbling Fluidized Bed (BFB) gasiﬁer is a type of ﬂuidized bed gasiﬁcation where
the ﬂow of gaseous oxidant is upwards. This ﬂow of oxidant is through a distributor
plate and a bed of inert material at the bottom of the gasiﬁer. The oxidant ﬂows up-
wards at a speed of 1 m/s. This speed is called the superﬁcial gas velocity, and it is the
ratio between the volumetric gas ﬂow rate and the cross-sectional area of the gasi-
ﬁer. At this velocity, there are drag forces that act on the particles in the bed causing
intense mixing allowing higher heat transfer and mass transfer [22, 26]. Product gas
or the syngas is obtained out from the gasiﬁer at the top. The advantage of the BFB
system is that there are no moving parts and it allows for the better thermodynamic
behaviour of the gases relative to the other systems.
Entrained Flow Gasiﬁer
Operating at pressures of about 25 bars, the entrained ﬂow gasiﬁcations are used to
treat coal. In an entrained ﬂow gasiﬁer, a liquid slurry with a solid concentration of
more than 60% is utilized [22]. Fine particles of fuel are added to water to create this
slurry. Water is mainly the transportation medium, but it also undergoes reaction in
the gasiﬁer. The slurry is fed at the top of the gasiﬁer alongside pressurized oxygen
or air. Heat for the reaction is provided by a ﬂame at the top which begins burning
the fuel for converting the slurry to syngas.
15
==PAGE:41==
2.1.6 Two-Stage Gasiﬁcation
Figure 2.3: Process ﬂow of the 2-stage VIKING gasiﬁer developed by DTU with physi-
cally separate pyrolyzer, partial oxidation chamber and the gasiﬁcation
reactor. With lower tar content, stable operation and high cold gas ef-
ﬁciency, the gasiﬁer is useful for fuels with a high volatile percentage.
Adapted from [3, 4]
The difference between a single-stage gasiﬁcation system and a two-stage gasiﬁca-
tion system is the separation of the pyrolysis zone and the gasiﬁcation zone. The two
zones are physically separated as shown in Figure 2.3. In between the pyrolysis and
the gasiﬁcation zone, there is a partial oxidation zone where the tars are partially
16
==PAGE:42==
oxidised. This partial oxidation causes the tars to be converted into gas [4].
The two-stage gasiﬁcation system offers a few advantages over the single-stage gasi-
ﬁcation system [3, 4]:
• Tar content in the gas is lowered (<5 mg/Nm3)
• Stable unmanned operation
• Higher cold-gas eﬃciency (>95%)
• Cleaner condensate and higher carbon conversion
Process Steps
In the two-stage gasiﬁer, the feedstock is dried with superheated steam before being
fed into a pyrolyser. In the pyrolyser, at temperatures of up to 600 °C , the dried feed
is pyrolyzed. The pyrolyzer breaks down the fuel into char, gas, tar and water. All
the products of pyrolysis are fed into the partial oxidation chamber. In the partial
oxidation zone, the products of the pyrolyser are partially oxidised. Tars decompose
in the 1100°C temperature to lighter gases. The breakdown and conversion of char
occur at temperatures of up to 1100°C . The remaining char goes to the gasiﬁcation
zone where they are further converted to produce syngas which is obtained at about
750-800 °C . The ash is ﬁnally collected at the bottom while the gases are sent to the
cleaning apparatus.
The drying, pyrolysis and the air-preheating are achieved by utilizing the heat in
the syngas as it comes out of the gasiﬁer. Once the thermal energy in the syngas is
utilized for the preheating, it is cleaned to remove of sulphur based compounds and
other undesirable impurities before being used for energy conversion processes. For
the VIKING gasiﬁer, the syngas is fed into an engine where it is burnt. The ﬂue gases
from the engine are used for the drying process.
2.2 Gas-cleaning Components
The synthesis-gas consists of carbon-based compounds, namely CO , CO2 , H2O , H2
, and CH4 . Depending on the fuel, the gas composition varies. Certain undesirable
inorganic compounds are present in the syngas. These products can inﬂuence the
17
==PAGE:43==
downstream processes especially with regards to fouling and if applicable, the poi-
soning of catalysts. Therefore, it is important to know and understand the composi-
tion of the gases. Sulphur, nitrogen compounds, and other trace compounds are the
common impurities that have an impact on processes downstream of the gasiﬁer.
2.2.1 Sulphur compounds
The sulphur compounds are poisons for most catalysts in downstream processes. In
power generation processes, the sulphur compounds end up being emitted with the
ﬂue gases in the form of SO2 and SO3. In gasiﬁcation, the sulphur contaminants occur
predominantly as hydrogen sulﬁde (H2S) and carbonyl sulﬁde (COS). The formation
of H2S and COS in the raw gas is determined by two reactions:
H2 + COS −−⇀
↽−−H2S + CO
+7 MJ/kmol
(2.13)
COS + H2O −−⇀
↽−−H2S + CO2
−34 MJ/kmol
(2.14)
Equation 2.13, is the hydrogenation reaction and Equation 2.14 is called the hydrol-
ysis equation. H2S is the more dominant form of sulphur in the raw synthesis-gas
than COS with H2S accounting for approximately 93-96% of the total raw synthesis-
gas. Sulphur based compounds are corrosive against metal surfaces and burning of
H2S leads to oxidization, forming SO2 [27]. The formation of H2S and COS have been
studied for their impact on SOFC performance. At lower levels, H2S affects the perfor-
mance negatively by being adsorbed at the anode blocking the fuel molecules from
being adsorbed. At higher levels of H2S contamination, reactions between Nickel and
H2S leads to irreversible damage to the SOFC.
2.2.2 Nitrogen compounds
NH3 and HCN are commonly found in the synthesis-gas. The kinetics behind the re-
action are not well known, however, it can be approximated based on the source of
nitrogen. The formation of NH3 and HCN is from the fuel-bound nitrogen. Molecular
nitrogen is rarely involved in these reactions. Initially, the nitrogen is converted to
HCN which decays in the presence of H2O to NHi. Under conditions involving suﬃ-
18
==PAGE:44==
cient oxygen, the NHi gets converted to NO and N2. However, in case of a large hy-
drogen surplus, the oxidation reactions do not take place and the nitrogen remains
in the syngas in the form of NH3 and HCN [27].
2.2.3 Chlorides
Chlorine is usually present in synthesis-gas where coal is the fuel. Chlorine is quite
reactive with NH3 forming ammonium chloride (NH4Cl) and formation of HCl is com-
mon compared to the formation of ammonium chloride [26]. However, low concen-
trations of chlorides do not affect the SOFCs in a negative manner. At high tempera-
tures, ammonium chloride is dissipated in the gaseous form. However, at lower tem-
peratures, approximately 250-270°C , it becomes solid and, therefore, represents a
fouling issue. At even lower temperatures, ammonium chloride becomes corrosive
as it becomes liquid. However, very low fractions of chlorine do not affect the system
adversely [26].
In waste fuels, the main source of chlorine is through the formation of hydrogen
chloride with −Cl compounds in plastics, speciﬁcally PVC. However, for the present
study, PVC is considered not to be a part of the main household waste that is used as
fuel and, therefore, can be neglected.
2.2.4 Removal Techniques
There are different removal techniques that can be used and they can be categorized
according to their basic principles of operation:
• Absorption
• Adsorption
• Membrane diffusion
• Chemical conversion
The issue with the above principles of contaminant removal is the fact that the meth-
ods are optimized for ’cold syngas’. However, the temperature drop between the
gasiﬁer and downstream processes impact the eﬃciency negatively. Therefore ’hot’
removal processes are slightly different to the above methods. Since the syngas is
19
==PAGE:45==
aimed to be used in an SOFC, where the working temperature is high, use of high-
temperature systems would be favorable. With low-temperature systems, the require-
ment of heating up the ﬂuid before SOFC inlet would not be helpful to overall ther-
mal eﬃciency. However, gas-cleaning should be viewed as an addition to the choice
of proper gasiﬁer equipment in order to maximise the reduction of particulates and
impurities in the system.
Nitrogen Removal
The main method of removal of nitrogen compounds focuses on decomposing the
ammonia that is formed during gasiﬁcation [27]. The method of removal deals with
the oxidization of nitrogen compounds with oxygen. NO, nitrogen oxide, is a good
oxidizer for thermal catalytic decomposition along with nickel and zeolites.
4NH3 + 6NO −−→5N2 + 6H2O
5H2 + 2NO −−→2NH3 + 2H2O
However, the conversion of NH3 molecules occur at temperatures above 500°C [27].
Temperatures of 700°C and 800°C allow for the avoidance of catalyst deactivation. In
this present study, the use of the syngas in SOFC allows for the usage of Ammonia as
fuel when it disassociates to N2 and H2 at the anode where the hydrogen is oxidized
[28]. Additionally, the endothermic nature of the reaction also increases the eﬃciency
of the cell operation. Therefore, it is not necessary for this present study to consider
cleaning of Ammonia due to the possibility of using ammonia as fuel.
Sulphur Removal
Sulphur compound removal processes have a few limitations with regards to the tem-
perature requirements. Zinc Oxide (ZnO) catalysts are quite useful at temperature
ranges near 573-823 K while ceria catalysts are useful for temperatures above 1073K
[28]. Carbonyl sulﬁde is converted to H2S before being removed from the syngas. The
temperature range for sulphur removal in this present study would be through ZnO
systems due to the lower temperature requirements of around 300°C . The systems
20
==PAGE:46==
involving ZnO and ceria are useful to reduce 200-300 ppm concentrations of H2S to
around 1 ppm.
The absorbents used for sulphur removal can be either disposable or regenerative.
In case of household systems, it would be useful to have a regenerative system. The
disposable absorbents are derived from calcium to be used as bulk desulphurization
agent. With metal oxides, the cleaning capability of different catalysts are reported
to be in the order of Sn< Ni<Fe< Mn< Mo< Co< Zn< Cu and Ce [28] for the temperature
range 77-650°C .
Zinc Oxide
ZnO based catalysts are good in the temperature ranges of 450-750°C with the main
disadvantage being the reduction of zinc in high temperature in fuel gas having a
high reducing atmospheres. This reduction of ZnO leads to the pollution of gas with
Zinc instead of removal of sulphur compounds. Also, the cleaning stops due to the re-
duction of zinc making the whole process unusable. However, these issues are over-
come with other absorbents like zinc titanate and zinc ferrite [28].
2.3 Solid Oxide Fuel Cells
The ﬁrst fuel cell demonstrated in 1839 by William Grove. However, the term ’fuel
cell’ was ﬁrst used 50 years after Grove’s gas battery. Mond and Langer, in 1889, used
the term to describe their device that had a porous platinum electrode with a di-
aphragm made of porous non-conducting substance to hold the electrolyte.
SOFCs were ﬁrst designed following the discovery of solid oxide electrolytes in 1899
by Nernst. It was not until 1960 that issues with the material for the electrolyte were
solved. Until 1960, the high operating temperature of 1000 C and the highly reducing
nature of the gas utilized caused problems with the materials. After 1960, there was
an uprise in the technology of ceramics including the preparation and production of
ceramic materials [5]. This led to robust SOFCs and consequently the improvement
of SOFC technology.
21
==PAGE:47==
Figure 2.4: Schematic diagram showing the operating principles of SOFC running on
natural gas (Taken from[5])
2.3.1 General Working of Solid Oxide Fuel Cell
Figure 2.4 shows an ideal working of a fuel cell. A fuel cell can be characterized as
having a solid ceramic electrolyte with an anode and a cathode. At the cathode, oxy-
gen is reduced to ions that diffuse through the ceramic metal-oxide electrolyte to the
anode. At the anode, the oxygen ions react with the fuel. Generally, the fuel at the
anode is hydrogen. The reaction at the anode produces heat and electricity along
with the production of water. Usually, the fuel at the anode is not pure hydrogen.
Hydrogen-based compounds can be utilized such as water, methane undergoing a
process called reforming before being used as fuel. The maximum theoretical eﬃ-
ciency of a fuel cell is calculated to be approximately 80%. The high eﬃciency and
22
==PAGE:48==
the ﬂexibility in fuel use are two of the advantages of the fuel cell.
2.3.2 Thermodynamics of Fuel Cells
Energy balance analysis for fuel cells varies according to the different types of fuel
cells due to the different electrochemical reactions that occur based on the type. The
total fuel cell reaction can be divided into two electrochemical half-cell reactions. The
reactions in the SOFC divided to half-cell reactions and the total reactions are given
in Table 2.1.
At anode
H2 + O2−−−→H2O + 2 e−
CO + O2−−−→CO2 + 2 e−
At cathode
O2 + 4 e−−−→2 O2−
Overall reaction
H2 + CO + O2 −−→H2O + CO2 + ∆E
Table 2.1: The reactions occurring in an SOFC separated at the anode and cathode
along with the overall reaction. Adapted from paper on SOFC.[5]
Thermodynamically, the maximum work that can be extracted is based on the change
of Gibbs free-energy associated with the overall reaction. The standard free-energy
change of a fuel cell is given by:
∆G = −nFE
(2.15)
Here, the ∆G is the change in Gibbs free-energy, n is the number of moles of electrons
involved in the reaction, F is the Faraday’s constant and E is the reversible potential.
When the reactants in the reaction are at their standard states, the equation 2.15, can
be rewritten as:
∆G0 = −nFE0
For the reactions speciﬁed in Table 2.1, we can write the change in Gibbs free energy
based on the reactions. The overall equation based on the reaction, aA + bB −−→cC
23
==PAGE:49==
+ dD, is:
∆G = ∆G0 + RT ln [C]c[D]d
[A]a[B]b
(2.16)
With the Equation 2.16, the change in Gibbs energy equation can be written for both
the half-cell reactions and the overall reaction. For the anode half-cell reaction of for-
mation of water, Table 2.1, the Gibbs free-energy change in terms of partial pressure
is given by:
∆G = ∆G0(T) + RT ln
PH2O
PH2 PO2−
Nernst Equation
The ideal performance of a fuel cell is deﬁned using the Nernst Potential. The Nernst-
equation denotes the relationship between the ideal standard potential E0 and the
ideal equilibrium potential E for the fuel cell reaction. With the ideal potential known
at standard conditions, the ideal voltage can be identiﬁed at other temperatures and
pressures. The Nernst equation for hydrogen oxidation is written as:
E = E0 + RT
2F ln PH2
PH2O
+ RT
2F ln[PO2
2−]
(2.17)
Here, E is the Equilibrium potential, E0 is the standard potential, P is gas pressure,
R the universal gas constant, T is the absolute temperature, and F is the Faraday’s
constant. The ideal standard potential for a H2 /O2 fuel cell is 1.229 V (E0) [29] with
H2O -Liquid as the product. When the by-product is H2O as steam, the potential drops
to 1.18 V.
24
==PAGE:50==
Efﬁciency
Ideally, the output of a fuel cell is the change in Gibbs free-energy which relates to
the available output of electric energy from the device. The eﬃciency of a fuel cell,
ηe, can be stated by,
ηe = ∆G
∆H
(2.18)
The eﬃciency can also be written in terms of the voltages. The useful energy utilized
would be the electric power given by Vcell · I, where I is the current. Therefore the
eﬃciency in terms of voltage is:
ηe = Useful output power
  ∆G
0.83

= Vcell · I
Videal·I
0.83
= Vcell · 0.83
Videal
(2.19)
When the ideal voltage is known, the eﬃciency of the fuel cell becomes proportional
to the Vcell with 0.83/Videal becoming a constant [30]. For a normal fuel cell, the ideal
voltage is 1.229 V and, therefore, the eﬃciency would be ηe = 0.675Vcell. The ideal
electrical eﬃciency of the SOFCs is in the range between 0.40 to 0.65.
Voltage Losses in SOFC
From the equation 2.19, voltage of the current obtained is seen to be an important pa-
rameter. The difference between the ideal voltage and the maximum obtained volt-
age is arrived at due to the losses in voltage. The voltage losses in the SOFC is given
by:
Vcell = Vopen −Vact −Vohm −Vconc
(2.20)
where the voltage of the cell is calculated by the subtraction of the three loss sources
in a fuel cell: activation polarization (Vact), concentration polarization (Vconc) and
ohmic polarization (Vohm). These losses depend on certain characteristics of the fuel
25
==PAGE:51==
cell: temperature, current density, and the concentration of species in the fuel [31].
The working voltage of the fuel cell is always lesser than the open circuit voltage due
to these losses.
2.3.3 Fuel Processing in SOFCs
SOFCs, working at an elevated temperature and the ability to utilize CO as fuel en-
ables the use of hydrocarbons directly as fuel. External methods to process the fuel
and reform the carbonaceous fuel is not required. Instead, the conversion of fuel can
occur inside the SOFC stack. This process is called Internal reformation. SOFCs can be
usually run utilizing natural gas, but possibilities do exist in using waste biogas, and
other generated gaseous forms of vegetable matter and landﬁll gas. The disadvantage
in using these forms is the possibility of sulphur content in these gases poisoning the
anode. In such a case, sulphur and sulphur compounds in the gas have to be removed
before being fed into the SOFC.
In direct reforming systems, the anode has three functions to perform as [5]:
• Reforming catalyst where the hydrocarbons are converted to CO and H2
• encourage electrocatalytic oxidation of H2 to H2O along with CO to CO2
• Conducting electrode for the electricity produced.
The eﬃciency of this process can be improved when the heat released during the
strongly exothermic electrocatalysis of H2 oxidation can be utilized for the reforming
of the hydrocarbons, the reactions of which are endothermic. The reactions are of
two types in the reforming stage. First is the reforming of the hydrocarbon followed
by the gas-water shift reaction.
CH4 + H2O −−→CO + 3H2
(2.21)
CO + H2O −−→CO2 + H2
(2.22)
After the reactions is the normal oxidation of the hydrogen with the diffused oxygen
which leads to the production of H2O as one of the by-products given in the Table 2.1.
The direct reforming method is far more eﬃcient since the heat from the exothermic
26
==PAGE:52==
reactions can be utilized immediately. In case of indirect reforming, the reforming
process is integrated upstream of the anode rather than physically occurring at the
anode functioning as the electrode. This separation of reforming and the function of
electrode is the ability to monitor and control the reactions thermodynamically.
27
==PAGE:53==
2.4 Summary
• The three subprocesses in gasiﬁcation are explained with the chemistry and the
overall thermodynamics fo the process
• Pre-treatment and the impact of the pre-treatment is identiﬁed with potential
improvements in eﬃciency due to grinding and drying
• The operational parameters that affect the performance of the system are intro-
duced and explained
• Two-stage gasiﬁcation that is utilized is explained according to the system de-
veloped by DTU - the Viking Gasiﬁer.
• The syngas composition and the impurities are brieﬂy explained along with
their impact on the performance of the system.
• Requirement of gas-cleaning systems is justiﬁed for three different impurities:
nitrogen, chlorine and sulphur.
• Chlorine and nitrogen cleaning systems are not required based on the composi-
tion of fuel considered while sulphur systems are required.
• For sulphur cleaning, three different solutions are possible based on zinc-catalysts:
zinc oxide, zinc titanate and zinc ferrite systems with all three cleaning the sul-
phur to within 1 ppm.
• SOFCs are described with the general working and the important parameters
for the hydrogen fuel cell
• The electrical eﬃciency and the voltage losses in the fuel cell are explained and
their importance to assessing the system performance is established
• Fuel processing is brieﬂy explained with respect to an internally reforming sys-
tem
28
==PAGE:54==
3
SYSTEM CHARACTERIZATION
3.1 System Description
The system under study is a small-scale gasiﬁcation with SOFC as the power-generator
with multiple process heat exchangers. The model is designed to work in a small scale
with the fuel input of household waste. A simple sizing is carried out for the model
to determine the working parameters for the small-scale system which will later be
analyzed.
3.1.1 Model Diagram
The model is as shown in Figure 3.1. The fuel is fed into the steam dryer which is
powered by the heat released from the syngas at the outlet of the gasiﬁer. The dried
waste is fed into the gasiﬁer without any intermediary process. The syngas, that is
produced by the gasiﬁer is used for two process heat exchanges. The ﬁrst heat ex-
changer is to preheat air that is mixed with steam for the gasifying agent. The second
heat exchanger generates steam for drying and the gasiﬁer. After process heat ex-
change, the syngas is cleaned. Sulphur compounds in the gas are removed and the
gas is methanated. The methanated syngas is now sent to the anode of the gasiﬁer.
Normal atmospheric air is used at the cathode of the SOFC. Before entering the cath-
ode of the SOFC, the air is preheated to the inlet working temperature of the SOFC
by the off-gases released from the SOFC. The high working temperature of the SOFC
29
==PAGE:55==
Figure 3.1: The ﬁgure shows the overall system that is under study. This system uti-
lizes the steam drying with the dried waste fed directly into the gasiﬁer
after which the steam is utilized to produce steam before being sent into
the SOFC system for producing heat and electricity.
enables this process heat exchange before the gases are sent to the stack at approxi-
mately 70-80°C .
3.2 Fuel Characteristics
The fuel utilized in the present study is the household waste. Typically, the categories
of waste generated by a household are organics, glass, metal, plastics, and other
wastes [1, 18]. In countries with municipal waste management systems, disposal of
waste by categories is enforced. In Denmark, the waste is typically separated/sorted
at the source when it is disposed of [18]. Glasses, metal and paper that are separated
at the source are recycled rather than thermally disposed. Organics are not suitable
for recycling and, therefore, are sent to the incineration facilities. This waste can be
utilized for the gasiﬁcation system. Thus, these categories which are not sorted is the
fuel considered in the study.
30
==PAGE:56==
3.2.1 Household Waste Composition
The household waste, in this present study, is considered to consist of the following
that typically found in the waste that is bundled apart from the metals, plastics and
glass. They are the vegetable waste, animal waste, paper waste, kitchen paper waste,
non-recyclable plastics, food packaging, other cardboard based wastes. Typically, the
waste produced varies according to seasons, the time of the day and the income level.
To see the data available for waste composition, different sources were analysed.
Region
Organic
Waste
Non-
recyclable
Plastics
Paper
Others
Ireland [9]
57.48
3.87
25.83
0.27
Lagos [10]
62
15
10
9
USA [11]
37.4
9.4
39.8
13.4
Denmark [12]
42
9.1
13
5
Table 3.1: The waste composition for different regions characterized by the type. The
categories are given by the percentage by the mass composition in the total
as-received basis of waste. Adapted from [9, 10, 11, 12].
Table 3.1 shows that the bulk of wastes formed includes paper and organic wastes.
These wastes are well suited for usage in waste-to-energy systems due to higher en-
ergy content. The deﬁnition of categories, however, can vary from different sources.
In this study, the categories are deﬁned as the following. Organic wastes are typically
the food leftovers, animal waste, and discards from vegetables and fruits that are
used in the kitchen. The plastics are non-recyclable plastics that are utilized for food
packaging. The paper waste takes the form of tissues, cardboard and other paper-
based products that are utilized ideally in the kitchen and are mixed with the kitchen
waste. Others, are wastes not in the previous three categories, can be summed up to
mainly contain, by wt%, diapers, rubber, leather, and other small accessories.
31
==PAGE:57==
3.2.2 Waste Production
Income Level and Household Variation
Figure 3.2: Per Capita Across All Income Levels for Different Household Typology. Nu-
clear, expanded and mono parental households show variation in their
per capita waste generated. The waste generation rates are considerably
high as the income levels go up. Data adapted from Ojeda-Benitez et al. [6]
32
==PAGE:58==
To look at the waste generation levels per household, different types of families have
to be deﬁned: nuclear, extended, and mono parental. A nuclear family can be de-
ﬁned as a household having a head of the house, spouse and unmarried children.
The extended family is one when two or more family members by the direct line,
their spouses and descendants share a house. Finally, mono parental is a house with
a single parent raising the kids [6].
Figure 3.2, shows the variation in different income levels and different family typolo-
gies. The variation in waste generation levels is mainly based on the different income
levels. The impact of the family typology can also be seen in the magnitude of waste
generated. In the low-income families, mono parental homes are not seen and, there-
fore, there is no data. However, comparing the nuclear and expanded families across
the different income levels, a few points can be noted.
• The highest waste generation rates per day is for the middle-income level with
the per-day waste generated higher than 1 kg for both mono parental and nu-
clear households
• Total waste generated is also higher in the case of middle-income level com-
pared to the other income level groups
• The highest frequency of waste generation levels is at approximately 1 kg per
person per day as shown by the histogram on the lower right
• Overall per-day waste generation per person is on the relatively lower side.
However, with multiple persons in the house, the rates would deﬁnitely be ap-
proximately 4 kg
The above points provide insight into the main variation of the waste across family
typology and income level. The authors themselves note that the trends in waste gen-
eration are diﬃcult to classify across family typology [6]. With family typology, the
overall factors contributing to waste generation are hard to arrive at and, therefore,
clear causalities are harder to establish. Therefore, the income level based variation
is much more deﬁned rather than the family typology based variation. For this study,
the impact of income level is considered to be the main driver of waste generation.
33
==PAGE:59==
Seasonal Variation
The seasonal variation is hard to study and establish a correlation. Studies in Poland
on the municipal solid waste composition and quantities show that the degree of vari-
ation in the waste is high. However, it is diﬃcult to explain why the variation occurs
[32]. In addition to that, a study by Hanc et al, shows that the bio-waste generated
across different types of urban settlement is invariable [33]. A study by Denafas et al
on the waste generation and composition in four different European cities shows the
variation to be localized. The four different cities: Kaunas (Lithuania), St. Petersburg
(Russia), Boryspil (Ukraine) and Kutaisi (Georgia), show variation across each month.
However, the trends in the variation are not shared between the cities. The authors
assert that the trends are localized to the culture, the geographical location and the
income level of the cities studied[34].
It is hard to predict or assume seasonal variation in the waste as it requires large
amounts of data obtained for each local region. Thus, the seasonal variation is not
taken into account for considering the variation of waste input in this study. For a
more accurate system study, the waste has to be analyzed on a local basis rather than
adapt the data from different studies.
Adaptation for Danish Households
The per capita waste generation per day in Denmark is 2.34 kg [1]. Taking into ac-
count that the Denmark is classiﬁed by the World Bank as High Income and Mexico
is Upper Middle Income, it is safe to assume a certain degree of correlation between
the waste production levels. However, the assumption is only for the magnitude of
waste produced and not the characteristics or composition of the waste.
The decrease in the amount of waste produced from high income to medium income
is 1.61%. The decrease from high income to low income is 16.26% for Mexico [6]. The
same degree of variation from the high-income levels for medium and low-income
levels would have the waste production levels for Danish households at:
Utilizing the trends obtained across income levels and the family typology, the weekly
34
==PAGE:60==
Country
Low Income
Middle Income
High Income
kg/capita-day
kg/capita-day
kg/capita-day
Mexico
0.886
1.041
1.058
Denmark
1.96
2.30
2.34
Table 3.2: Waste generated per capita per day across income levels for Mexico and
Denmark. The values for Denmark have been calculated with the decrease
in waste production found experimentally for Mexico from research by
Ojeda-Benitez et al. [6]
production of waste can be approximated based on the per-capita generation ob-
tained in Table 3.2. Across the income levels, the weekly production of waste on an
average is seen to be: 52.73 kg, 65.14 kg and 54.57 kg for low income, middle in-
come and high-income households respectively. The day-by-day breakdown as ap-
proximated from the data adapted from Hoornweg et al., and Ojeda-Benitez et al. are
given in Table 3.3 [1, 6]. Each of the income levels is assumed to contain 4-inhabitants
in the house.
Days
Low Income
Middle Income
High Income
kg
kg
kg
Monday
8.82
8.41
7.04
Tuesday
9.40
9.94
8.70
Wednesday
7.92
11.40
5.48
Thursday
6.57
8.30
10.18
Friday
5.58
9.29
7.87
Saturday
6.58
7.80
9.65
Sunday
7.87
9.99
5.65
Total
52.73
65.14
54.57
Table 3.3: The breakdown of approximated household waste generation levels across
the income levels for each day of the week and the weekly total waste.
Data has been calculated using numbers adapted from the study on waste
generation levels in Mexico by Ojeda-Benitez et. al. [6]
The above values provide a relative estimate wherein to vary the amount of fuel in-
put into the system to calculate the power produced. However, these values are not
35
==PAGE:61==
accurate to actual conditions that are prevalent in the households and therefore the
variation of these values would provide an estimate to how the system would func-
tion with regards to the change in the amount of fuel input. With small-scale systems,
the amount of fuel available per day would not only affect the operation but also the
method of operation of the system and these variations would provide a template to
analyze the fuel input for discontinuous and continuous operation.
3.2.3 Proximate Analysis
The proximate analysis is a standardized test that can be used to measure the suit-
ability of the fuel or feedstock for thermochemical conversion [35]. It is standardized
in ASTM E870-82 with the test yielding information regarding the moisture, volatile
matter, ash and the ﬁxed carbon content of the solid fuels. The process steps in a
proximate analysis are:
1. Drying: The material under study is dried at 105°C for 24 hours. This is to cal-
culate the moisture present in the material. The weight loss after 24 hours of
drying provides the mass of moisture held in the material.
2. Pyrolysis: After drying, the dried material is weighed and prepared for pyroly-
sis at 500°C for 4 hours with the heating rate at 6°C /min. During the pyrolysis,
the volatiles is the ﬁrst to react with oxygen and form the pyrolysis gas. The char
and ash are left over from pyrolysis
3. Annealing: The annealing process is used when the dried material is heated to
550°C in standard air atmosphere. The weight lost during the process is equal
to the amount of ﬁxed carbon in the sample. The remaining weight corresponds
to the inorganics or ash content of the fuel.
Based on the above steps of the proximate analysis, a small sample was taken from a
dormitory and a proximate analysis was undertaken. The proximate analysis is not
intended to provide experimental data for the study. It is instead used to interpret
the results and provide an understanding of the fuel input used in this study.
36
==PAGE:62==
Results of Proximate Analysis
The results of the proximate analysis are detailed in Tables 3.4 and 3.5. Three sam-
ples of waste were taken. The identiﬁers for the three samples are S1, S2, and S3
respectively. Each sample was weighed before and after drying. After the process of
pyrolysis and annealing, the sample was weighed.
Sample - Condition
Total
Weight,
kg
Moisture,
%
Volatiles,
%
Fixed
Carbon,
%
Ash, %
S1- As Received
1323.8
60.4
28.5
6.9
4.2
S2- As Received
1368.4
56.3
32.6
8
3.1
S3- As Received
1237.2
39.4
41.8
10
8.8
Table 3.4: The results of the proximate analysis obtained on the sample gathered
from Nybrogaard Kollegiet in Denmark on an as-received basis. Three sam-
ples were tested according to the process detailed in section 3.2.3.
It is seen clearly from Table 3.4, that the overall distribution of moisture is quite sim-
ilar. It is important to note that each sample differed quite a lot in the distribution
of waste. For example, sample 3 had a lot more of cartons that are used with milk,
yogurt, cream along with a lot more aluminium. This is reﬂected quite a lot on the
difference in percentage seen in Volatiles and Ash in S3 compared to S1 and S2.
With cartons, the moisture levels also decrease from drying. Since cartons are bulky,
the normal drying period of 24 hours was not quite suﬃcient leading to some pres-
ence of moisture. However, the weight loss based on moisture accounted for the
largest percentage by wt-% of the input waste.
On a dry-basis, from Table 3.5, it is seen that during pyrolysis that approximately 70%
of the weight loss is for volatiles. Volatiles are carbon compounds that are the fastest
to react with oxygen and hydrogen present in the waste during pyrolysis. They tend
to form CO , CO2 , CH4 along with the evolution of tars. The 15%-20% of the weight re-
maining after pyrolysis is the ﬁxed carbon. Finally, the metals and all other inorgan-
37
==PAGE:63==
Sample - Condition
Moisture %
Volatiles %
Fixed
Car-
bon%
Ash %
S1- Dry
0
71.9
17.6
10.5
S2- Dry
0
74.7
18.2
7.1
S3- Dry
0
69
16.5
14.5
Table 3.5: The results of the proximate analysis obtained on the sample gathered
from Nybrogaard student dormitory in Denmark on a dry-basis. Three
samples were tested according to the process detailed in section 3.2.3.
ics that do not react form the ash. Aluminium is considered to be ash as the temper-
ature levels do not allow for aluminium based reactions. Some degree of oxidation is
possible with Aluminium however that is not an important reaction to consider here.
3.2.4 Chemical Composition of Feedstock
Input data to the modeling software utilizes the chemical composition of the fuel
to calculate the molecular composition at the outlet for combustion processes and
gasiﬁcation. Based on the waste composition data available from Table 3.1, each of
the different sources was categorized according to the chemical waste composition.
The main compositional elements considered are carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitro-
gen, ash, and sulphur. The mass percentage of each composition element is consid-
ered on a dry-basis.
The chemical composition values, from the Table 3.6, were utilized for the input fuel
composition. It is clear to note that the main variations in the composition is in the
moisture levels and to some degree in the C-% present in the waste. The variation
in carbon is associated with a number of organics in the waste. With S11-NGR, the
sample is from Lagos, Nigeria which is of considerably lower income level compared
to Denmark (R09-DK)- and USA (B97-USA). This income level difference accounts for
the increased percentage of organics in the output based on carbon content. Conse-
quently, the ash content variation shows the income level difference between the dif-
ferent cases. The biggest variation is in the moisture content of the fuel which shows
38
==PAGE:64==
Sr. No.
Identiﬁer
C
H2
O
N
S
Ash
MOI
1
Y14-IRE [9]
38.67
7.23
48.13
1.17
0.20
4.57
17.40
2
B97-USA
[11]
49.87
7.07
35.98
0.96
0.23
5.90
26.25
3
R09-DK [12]
50.49
6.41
34.15
1.01
0.16
7.78
NA
4
S11-NGR
[10]
53.97
3.86
37.56
1.60
0.24
2.77
19.95
5
O08-MEX [6]
56.50
6.05
31.05
0.30
0.27
5.83
NA
6
E11-GRL
[14]
51.02
6.93
27.07
1.18
0.17
13.63
50.04
7
B03-WAL [9]
49.88
7.08
27.65
1.20
0.26
13.93
NA
8
T13-NGR
[15]
44.30
9.03
31.23
2.38
0.25
12.80
NA
9
D13-NPL
[13]
50.19
7.52
29.56
1.18
0.25
11.30
NA
Mean
48.8
6.30
36.58
1.18
0.20
6.93
23.72
Table 3.6: Chemical composition of the different waste identiﬁers are given here on a
dry basis with Moisture (MOI) considered outside of the fundamental com-
position. All the values provided are the percentage by mass on a dry-basis.
For the samples without the chemical composition, the percentage values
were extrapolated from common composition ranges.
the highest regional variation.
Figure 3.3, the overall variation across Carbon and Oxygen content in the data points
from Table 3.4 are seen. Compared to this, the variation is moisture is far higher as
seen in Figure 3.4 than the variation in carbon and oxygen. The moisture variation
is quite high however for a large chunk of data, the values are not available in the
literature as speciﬁed by ’NaN’ in the ﬁgure. In the normal case, the moisture can be
taken to be approximately in the range of 30% to 40% [36] for data obtained from
European countries.
39
==PAGE:65==
Figure 3.3: Showing the carbon and oxygen variation among the sources from the
Table 3.6. The variation is quite large for oxygen, but the numbers seem
to be agreeing on the margin of approximately 30% for oxygen and 45-
50% for carbon.
Presence of Inorganic Materials in Waste Fraction
The composition deﬁned in Table 3.6 accounts of the organic elements in the waste. In
addition to the organic wastes, the waste composition categories deﬁned also consists
of inorganic materials. Discarding the organic wastes and paper, the bulk of the rest is
made up of plastic. In this case, the plastic considered are food packaging, ﬁlms and
non-recyclable plastic. Considering the categories previously established, the main
sources of the waste considered here are: organics, paper, food packaging and other
possible knick-knacks.
In these waste groups, each of the waste can consist of trace amounts of inorganic
waste. Some of the trace elements that can be found are Ag, Al, As, Ba, Cl, Mg, Ni,
amongst others [14]. In these list of elements, the interests of this study lie towards the
elements that can be harmful to the SOFC. Sulphur has already been accounted for.
The other contaminants are mainly alkali-metals and potentially chlorine[28]. It is
thus important to look at individual waste categories and identify the waste fractions
40
==PAGE:66==
Figure 3.4: The moisture variation amongst the sources from Table 3.6. High moisture
variation is seen with few of the data incomplete as speciﬁed by ’NaN’.
Here the values can be taken in the range of 30% to 40% which is the
European MSW moisture range.
of the material.
Organics
In organics, Eisted et al., in a study on the waste characterization from Greenland
have shown that Ca, Cl and P to have a slightly high concentration in the waste. The
concentrations of the three elements are 31200 mg/kg, 7460 mg/kg and 12,950 mg/kg
respectively[14]. That is equal to 0.0746% of chlorine, 3.12% of calcium and 1.295%
of phosphorous respectively for 1 kg of organic/bio-waste.
Paper
Paper is another source where there is a lot of energy and found a lot in the waste.
In the same study by Eisted et al., from paper, the high fractions belonged to calcium,
aluminium and silicon at 10900 mg/kg, 98700 mg/kg and 12600 mg/kg respectively[14].
These translates to, 1.09% of calcium, 9.86% of aluminium and 1.26% of silicon per
41
==PAGE:67==
kilogram of paper that is collected.
Plastics - Food packaging and Non-recyclables
The plastics considered here are packaging plastics. Packaging plastics are in most
cases, polyethylene terephthalate (PET), high density polyethylene(HDPE), polyvinyl
chloride(PVC), low density poly ethylene(LDPE), polypropylene (PP) and polystyrene
(PS) [37]. The study by Eisted et al., considers in all types of plastics that the main
contaminants are calcium at 5740 mg/kg, 1780 mg/kg of chlorine and 1720 mg/kg of
sodium (Na) [14].
Chlorine Content
For this study, the chlorine content is considered to be the primary issue in the chem-
ical composition of the feedstock. Therefore, the chlorine content is analyzed. The
study of chlorine and halide-compounds has not been extensive. However, HCl im-
pacts can be summarized to cause (a) corrosion in the components of the SOFC system
and (b) be the causal agent for the degradation of SOFC anodes through reactions.
Therefore, understanding the amount of chlorine present in the system is necessary.
Eisted et al., show that the chlorine content is at:
• Paper: 838 PPM
• Cardboard: 530 PPM
• Plastic: 1780 PPM
• Organic: 7460 PPM
Assuming that the nominal composition factor in terms of the above-mentioned cat-
egories are from Table 3.1, a weighted calculation can be utilized. With a weighted
calculation, the overall concentration of chlorine in 1 kg of waste is 3430 ppm. This
value is part of the inlet waste that is being dried and then gasiﬁed in the system.
However, studies indicate that the amount of chlorine that exists as HCl in the system
can range from anywhere in 80 ppm to 200 ppm [28].
42
==PAGE:68==
3.2.5 Calculation of Thermodynamic Property
Heating Value
The heating value is a property of a fuel that deﬁnes the energy content available in
the fuel. Higher Heating Value (HHV) and the Lower Heating Value (LHV) of a fuel
help to understand the energy content in the fuel for performance modeling and cal-
culations on thermal systems. With heterogeneous fuel, detailed experimental data
is not available on their thermodynamic properties. Therefore, correlations based on
chemical composition are used.
Dulong’s Formula
HHV ∗= 0.3383C∗+ 1.443(H∗−O∗
8 ) + 0.09428S∗
MJ/kg
(3.1)
where the ’*’ in the equation refers to the wt-% of the element in the fuel on a dry-
basis.
Dulong-Berthelot Formula
HHV ∗= 0.3414C∗+ 1.4445H∗−
N∗+ O∗−1
8

+ 0.093S∗
MJ/kg
(3.2)
where the ’*’ in the equation refers to the wt-% of the element in the fuel on a dry-
basis. The modiﬁed-Dulong formula differs from the Dulong Formula by including
the effect of nitrogen fraction in the fuel to the heating value calculation.
Milne’s Formula
HHV = 0.341C + 1.322H −0.12(O + N) + 0.0686S −0.0153ASH
MJ/kg
(3.3)
Milne’s formula is a variation of the calculation of heating value using the fundamen-
tal composition. The main variation between Milne’s and the previous Dulong-based
43
==PAGE:69==
formula is the inclusion of wt-% of ash. This formula is utilized mainly in calculating
the heating value for the Pyrolyser model.
Lower Heating Value
The HHV as calculated includes the condition at which the water is condensed from
the combustion products. Due to this condensation, all the heating value of the fuel
is accounted for [38]. This includes the latent heat and the sensible heat. LHV refers
to the condition in which the water in the products remains as a steam and is not
condensed. This does not account for the latent heat. This can be seen in Equation 3.4
where the moisture is subtracted from the HHV value. Equation 3.5 includes hydro-
gen, as combustion processes form H2O through oxidation at high temperatures.
LHV = HHV (1 −MOI) −(2.447 ∗MOI)
MJ/kg
(3.4)
LHV = HHVin −(2.443) ∗(8.936 ∗H2%)/100)
MJ/kg
(3.5)
Speciﬁc Heat
The speciﬁc heat capacity is the heat required to change the temperature of a unit
mass of the substance. It is diﬃcult to ﬁnd the speciﬁc heat of wastes or use different
models available for solids. Speciﬁc heat capacity is considered as an intensive prop-
erty and it is independent of the size of the sample. In this present work to substitute
for the speciﬁc heat of waste, it is considered that the speciﬁc heat is estimated to be
the weighted average of the elementary composition of the fuel as shown by:
Cpfuel = ΣixiCpi
Σixi
kJ
kg
(3.6)
Here, the xi refers to the mass fraction of the elementary compound and Cpi the spe-
ciﬁc heat of the component i divided by the sum total mass fraction of all elementary
44
==PAGE:70==
components. The values of the speciﬁc heat capacity of the each elementary compo-
nent are in Table 3.7.
Component
Chemical Formula
Speciﬁc Heat
J/gmK
Carbon
C
0.71
Oxygen
O2
0.92
Nitrogen
N2
0.71
Hydrogen
H2
14.31
Sulphur
S
1.041
Table 3.7: The speciﬁc heat values of individual elementary components in the waste
system. These values were utilized in conjunction with the mass fractions
in Table 3.6 and Equation 3.6 to arrive at the speciﬁc heat value of the waste
fuel.
3.2.6 Thermodynamic Values
The equations in Section 3.2.5 were used to calculate the heating values of the fuel
and the speciﬁc heat. For the chemical composition, the data shown in Table 3.6 was
utilized. The results of the calculation are shown in table 3.8. The variation is quite
high especially in the case of Lower Heating Value obtained by using the equation 3.4.
The difference between the normal HHV values obtained from the Dulong’s Formula,
Dulong-Berthelot formula and Milne’s formula occurs due to the inclusion of nitrogen
and ash in the calculation[39, 40]. The difference between the Dulong-Berthelot and
Milne’s formula can be directly pointed towards the inclusion of the ash fraction. For
this present study, Dulong-Berthelot and Milne formula are used for the calculation
of the Higher Heating Value due to the inclusion of nitrogen and ash to the actual
calculation.
3.2.7 Sensitivity Analysis
There are uncertainties associated with the values of moisture as they vary quite a
lot in the fuel composition discussed here. Therefore, it is important to check the
45
==PAGE:71==
ID
HHV
HHV
MD
HHV
Milne
LHV
LHV
MD
HHV
Milne
Cp
MJ/kg
MJ/kg
MJ/kg
MJ/kg
MJ/kg
MJ/kg
Y14-IRE
14.86
17.64
16.78
11.85
14.14
13.44
1.85
B97-
USA
20.60
22.77
21.84
14.55
16.15
15.47
1.81
R09-DK
22.18
22.24
21.36
7.85
8.79
8.39
1.73
S11-
NGR
17.07
19.25
18.78
13.18
14.92
14.55
1.33
E11-
GRL
22.40
24.04
22.98
9.97
10.80
10.26
1.87
Average
19.02
21.19
20.35
13.93
15.58
14.94
1.72
Table 3.8: The heating values - Higher and Lower - have been calculated using the
equations in section 3.2.5. LHV has been calculated using the moisture con-
tent in the feedstock. The data used to calculate the values are provided in
the table 3.6. MD refers to the values arrived at using Modiﬁed-Dulong cor-
relations.
robustness of the values obtained from the mathematical models discussed above.
Figure 3.5 shows the sensitivity analysis on the lower heating value with the variation
of the moisture content. At higher moisture content, the LHV value decreases quite
rapidly. The study, therefore, should include the performance aspects of the system
due to stochastic-nature of moisture in the actual fuel.
46
==PAGE:72==
Figure 3.5: Sensitivity analysis of moisture content with the lower heating value
across the average composition. The drop in LHV is due to increase in
the moisture and, therefore, shows the direct impact of moisture on the
LHV.
3.3 Summary
• The main model is constructed with process-heat exchange and the overall sys-
tem required for cleaning and maximising production
• Fuel considered in the system is characterized. Waste production rates are seen
for variation based on seasons, income level and family typology.
• Income level is an important parameter while family typology and seasonal
variation are hard to correlate with waste generation rates.
• The waste production per day and along the week are approximated based on
data available from Mexico for Denmark.
47
==PAGE:73==
• A sample proximate analysis is carried out to understand how pyrolysis process
takes place.
• The chemical composition of the waste fuel input is collected from research pa-
pers and computed using standard composition sizes where applicable.
• Thermodynamic properties of these compositions are harder to ﬁnd based on
experimental data, therefore, computational methods are used to calculate the
properties.
• The thermodynamic properties of the fuel/feedstock is calculated. HHV is cal-
culated using three different correlations and the speciﬁc heat is approximated
using chemical composition
• Sensitivity analysis of moisture content on LHV is carried out.
48
==PAGE:74==
4
SYSTEM AND THERMODYNAMIC MODEL
4.1 Input Fuel
The input fuel, waste, varies based on income level, season, weather and habits. The
only variation is on the moisture content of the fuel. The input data for fuel used is
shown in the Table 4.1.
4.2 Drying
The moisture levels of the waste change from approximately 20% to 50% or even
more in the waste. With increased moisture level (by wt%), the energy content of
the fuel reduces thereby reducing the eﬃciency of the system. With dried fuel, the
energy content is higher. Conventional methods of drying are either using steam or
using standard air as atmosphere as shown in Figure 4.1.
The aim of the drying component is to reduce the moisture content of the feedstock to
a minimum. With waste, there is a possibility that the different composition could im-
pact the drying process negatively. This would require the waste input to be crushed
or reduced to smaller size. However, this is not taken into account in this model. The
temperature of drying is assumed to be in the range 110 °C . The operation parame-
ters of the dryer are given in Table 4.2.
49
==PAGE:75==
Parameter
Value
Unit
Mass ﬂow
3.6-18
kg/hr
Temperature
30
°C
Moisture Content
20-40
%
Chemical Composition
Mean
M-DK
Carbon
48
50.49
Hydrogen
6.30
6.41
Oxygen
36.6
34.15
Nitrogen
1.20
1.01
Sulphur
0.20
0.16
Ash
6.94
7.78
HHV [MJ/kg]
21.19
22.24
LHV [MJ/kg]
12.96
16.38
Cp
1.81
1.73
Table 4.1: The data used as input to the thermodynamic model for the fuel. Based on
the data obtained in Chapter 3. This data has been adapted to arrive at the
ﬁnal input data.
Parameter
Value
Units
Steam Inlet Temperature
200
°C
Pressure
1.01325
bar
Pressure Loss
0.05
bar
Fuel Inlet Temperature
25
°C
Fuel Moisture Content
10-45
%
Fuel Inlet Pressure
1.01325
bar
Outlet
Dryer
Tempera-
ture
110-140
°C
Table 4.2: The parameter values for the Steam drying component are shown.
4.3 Pyrolysis
Pyrolysis (or Devolatilization or Thermal decomposition) is a process that occurs up
to 700°C . The process involves thermal cracking reactions with heat and mass trans-
50
==PAGE:76==
Figure 4.1: Component diagram of the dryer with the as-is fuel inlet and dried fuel
outlet. Steam is used for drying by generating it using heat from the syn-
gas.
fers along with the release of light permanent gases (CO , CO2 , H2 , CH4 , H2O ),
tars and char. Char is the solid residue after the pyrolysis process that is present af-
ter the formation of tars and light permanent gases. The tars are long-chain organic
compounds that are created during pyrolysis. These tars are generated across the
temperature proﬁle of the pyrolysis process. At 400°C , the main products are mixed
oxygenates. 500°C produces phenolic ethers followed by alkyl phenolics at 600°C and
heterocyclic ethers at 700°C . Finally, 800°C and 900°C leads to formation of polynu-
clear aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH) and large PAH respectively [41]. As temperatures
go higher, the amount of tars in the gas is reduced [21, 41]. The long-chain compounds
which form at lower temperatures ’crack-thermally’ into lighter compounds. Tars,
light permanent gases and water in total form the volatile fraction of the fuel. The
residue char can be considered as the sum of ﬁxed carbon and ash content in the
fuel.
The reaction in the pryolyser takes place in a non-oxygenated atmosphere thereby
utilizing all the fuel-oxygen for the different reactions taking place in the component.
The component diagram of the pyrolyser used for the model is seen in Figure 4.2.
51
==PAGE:77==
Figure 4.2: The component diagram of the pyrolyser used for the system. Input is the
dried fuel and the pyrolyzed products are water, char, tar and light per-
manent gases.
4.3.1 Pyrolysis Process
The basic conversion of fuel to the products are based on reaction kinetics scheme.
The reaction scheme consists of the fuel converted to ’char’, ’tar’, and ’gas’ as shown
in Table 4.3 [42] in addition to water. In addition to the above conversions, there
are secondary reactions where tar decomposes into char and gases. However, these
reactions are unclear [42] and not utilized here.
52
==PAGE:78==
Inlet
Char
Pyrolysis Gas
Tar
C
C
CO
C
H2
H2
CO2
H2
O2
O2
CH4
O2
N2
N2
H2
S
S
Ash
Ash
Table 4.3: Inlet and outlet compositions of the pyrolyser component
4.3.2 Thermodynamic Model
The pyrolyser was modelled in the software, Engineering Equation Solver (hereon
EES) according to waste pyrolysis data available through previous research. To de-
sign the model in EES, the equations have to be created to conserve the mass, pres-
sure and energy value across the pyrolyser. Some assumptions were made for the
modelling:
1. The pyrolysis process is assumed to be isothermal.
2. The reaction scheme is taken to be the single-step reaction scheme with the fuel
forming char, tar and gas.
3. Heat is assumed to be provided by hot gaseous inlet for the initial heat to the
process before the exothermic reactions provide energy for the continuation of
the reactions.
4. Pressure is assumed to be constant across the pyrolyzer. No pressure drop is
assumed.
5. The H2 and O2 in the char is assumed to be leftover as a wt% multiplied by the
inlet mass fraction from the fuel.
6. Char, Gas, and Water formation rates are obtained through polynomial equa-
tions formed from data adapted from previous research.
7. Sulphur, nitrogen and ash in the fuel are assumed not to undergo any reactions.
8. The energy content in the tar is taken to be 20 MJ⁄kg [43].
53
==PAGE:79==
9. Composition of tar is simpliﬁed to consist of carbon, oxygen and hydrogen as a
solid.
Inputs
The input to the thermodynamic model of the pyrolyser designed are:
• Pyrolysis Temperature: TP °C .
• Inlet fuel composition, Mass fraction: C, H2 , O2, N2, S and Ash in wt%-dry.
• Moisture content of the fuel wt%-wet.
• Mass ﬂow rate of the fuel is taken to be equal to the actual mass ﬂow rate avail-
able through the waste generation data.
The pyrolysis temperature is used to calculate the formation percentages for the py-
rolysis products. The mass fraction of the solid fuel is used to calculate the wt% of the
pyrolysis products.
Equations
The fractions that are provided as input are ﬁrst converted to their mass values with
the equation:
Xmass = X% · Minlet
100
(4.1)
where X is the element in the inlet fuel and Minlet is the mass of fuel at the inlet.
Drying is not assumed to be complete. Instead, 5% of moisture is assumed to be left
in the system after drying. With the mass fractions converted, there are four different
mass ﬂows that need to be balanced with the outputs [44].
Minlet = Mgas + Mchar + Mtar + Mwat
(4.2)
the inlet fuel mass ﬂow is split into four parts: gas, char, tar and water. The for-
54
==PAGE:80==
mation of water during pyrolysis can be balanced ﬁrst since the formation can be
predicted to be formed by two sources in the reactants. The ﬁrst is that the mois-
ture content remaining in the fuel after drying. The second is the reaction between
the fuel-hydrogen and fuel-oxygen leading to the formation of water. Therefore, the
water formation can be written as:
Mwater = Mmoisture + Mf
(4.3)
Mf = FwatMinlet
(4.4)
where Fwat is the formation equation of water. The formation equation of water in
Equation 4.4 is a 2nd-order polynomial equation that identiﬁes the outlet composi-
tion of water based on the pyrolysis temperature. With the water formed, the char
wt% at outlet can be calculated from:
Mchar = Cchar + Hchar + Ochar + ASHin + Sin + Nchar
(4.5)
Mchar = FcharMinlet
(4.6)
Ochar = 0.10 · Oxygeninlet
(4.7)
Hchar = 0.01 · Hydrogeninlet
(4.8)
where Fchar is the formation equation of char based on the pyrolysis temperature.
At the outlet, it is assumed that fuel-sulphur, fuel-nitrogen and fuel-ash do not react.
Therefore, the mass of the three compounds is assumed to stay same across the py-
rolyzer. Additionally, the char-hydrogen and char-oxygen are held to be a constant
percent of their inlet masses since most of the hydrogen and oxygen react forming
water, tars and gases. O2 is held at 10% of the inlet mass of oxygen and H2 is held at
1% of the hydrogen mass at inlet. The third balance of the overall mass ﬂow is the
gas formation:
55
==PAGE:81==
Mgas = CO2 + CO + Hgas + CH4
(4.9)
CO2 = FCO2Minlet
(4.10)
CO = FCOMinlet
(4.11)
CH4 = FCH4Minlet
(4.12)
H = FH,gasMinlet
(4.13)
where FCO2, FCO, FCH4, and FH,gas are the formation equations of CO2 , CO , CH4
and H2 . These are the light permanent gases. With the different outputs and their
compositions identiﬁed, it is important to balance the hydrogen and carbon. The inlet
carbon has to be equal to the outlet carbon and the same conservation of hydrogen
is also required. Thus, the hydrogen balance equation would be:
Hin = Hchar + Htar + 0.111Mwater + 0.25CH4
(4.14)
the hydrogen at inlet has to be equal to the sum of all hydrogen in the outlet mass
ﬂows. In gas and water, hydrogen is present but only part of the compounds at
the outlet mass ﬂow. Therefore, the equation contains only the mole fraction of hy-
drogen present in the compounds CH4 and H2O denoted by the constants in the
equation 4.14. The constant 0.111 in equation 4.14 is calculated from the equation
Frac. = Atomic mass of Element/Molecular Mass of Compound. A similar balancing equation can be
written for the carbon balance:
Cin = Cchar + Ctar + 0.25CH4 + 0.428CO + 0.278CO2
(4.15)
here, the same molecular weight fraction method, used for hydrogen in equation
4.14 for the constants. All of these equations calculate the mass ﬂow of char, gas
and water. However, tar has to be calculated as well. Ideally, tar is part of the gases
consisting of long-chain hydrocarbons. Accounting for all long-chain hydrocarbons
56
==PAGE:82==
is diﬃcult. Therefore, the inlet tar is simpliﬁed and considered to be composed of
H2 , C and O2. Additionally, the tar formation is considered to be the inlet mass ﬂow
subtracted by the other outlet mass ﬂows since the other outlet ﬂows have already
been calculated.
Mtar = Minlet −(Mchar + Mgas + Mwater)
(4.16)
Mtar = Ctar + Htar + Otar
(4.17)
Equation 4.17 is the equation that equates the tar mass to its individual tar compo-
sitions. This equation is implied by Equation 4.2. All of the equations together solve
the mass ﬂow of the pyrolysis products.
Formation Equations
The formation equations given in the previous section in Equations 4.4,4.6, 4.10, 4.11,
4.12 and 4.13 are calculated in two ways to assess the different pyrolzer models. Both
the cases use data from the literature to arrive at the 2nd order polynomial equations
to identify the mass fraction.
Two models were created with the polynomials shown in Table 4.4. The two models
based on the values obtained from literature [7, 8]. The ﬁrst model - ’Average Source
Model’ - utilizes the source data from the two different studies [7, 8] and uses the
average to formulate the polynomial equations. The second model - ’Single Source
Model’ - uses only one of the sources [8] to arrive at the equations. Both are then
compared to identify the characteristics that affect the pyrolysis models.
Figure 4.3 shows the source data used to create the formation model. In the case
of the single-source model, the temperature range in the study was from 500 to 900
°C . Therefore, in order to go to the lower temperature, a 2nd-order polynomial was
devised. Consequently, the ﬁtting equation showed small errors leading to the sum
of the calculated values to be approximately 100%. This can be seen in the panel
for 400°C Tp in Figure 4.3. With the values ready, the ﬁrst pass ﬁtting equations were
created. The ﬁrst pass equations provided a set of results of the total composition that
can be seen in Figure 4.4.
57
==PAGE:83==
Pyrolyzer Model B
Average Source Model
FWater
(0.0000625*TP*TP)-(0.1057*TP)+(46.9)
Fchar
(-0.00005536*TP*TP)+(0.06675*TP)+5.157
FH2
(0.00001781*TP*TP)-(0.0151*TP)+3.785
FCO2
(-0.00006027*TP*TP)+(0.06732*TP)+1.495
FCO
(-0.00002806*TP*TP)+(0.06888*TP)-22.33
FCH4
(0.00002324*TP*TP)-(0.01153*TP)+1.301
Pyrolyzer Model B
Single Source Model
FWater
(0.0000625*TP*TP)-(0.1057*TP)+(46.9)
Fchar
(-0.00005536*TP*TP)+(0.06675*TP)+5.157
FH2
(0.00001781*TP*TP)-(0.0151*TP)+3.785
FCO
(-0.00002806*TP*TP)+(0.06888*TP)-22.33
FCO2
(-0.00006027*TP*TP)+(0.06732*TP)+1.495
FCH4
(0.00002324*TP*TP)-(0.01153*TP)+1.301
Table 4.4: Polynomial equations of percentages of the products of the pyrolyzer.
These equations are used for the mass balance equations in the main cal-
culations.
With the Figure 4.4, it was seen that there were errors with the different formation
equations. Therefore, a statistical performance parameter was used to compare the
different errors. R-squared value (Coeﬃcient of Determination) was used to compare
the different formation equations. This number is in the range of 0-1 with 0 being the
least accurate and 1 being the most accurate. Most of the ﬁtting equations showed
least error compared to the actual value with the R-squared number greater than
0.90. However, Tar-formation equations showed R-squared values less than 0.80.
These ﬁtting values thus were not accurate enough to be used and therefore were
causing the issue with the total composition. The error between the actual source
value and the ﬁtted value have been visualized in Figure 4.5.
The high deviation of the ﬁtting equation from the actual data is therefore not useful
for the model. Since all the other formation equations showed higher ﬁtting accuracy
(least deviation from actual), it was decided to utilize a subtraction model to calcu-
late the Tar fraction. Instead of using the tar formation equation, the tar would be
calculated by subtracting the sum of gas, char and water from total mass:
58
==PAGE:84==
Figure 4.3: Composition of the products at different temperatures for both the single
source and the average source model are shown. Each panel corresponds
to the pyrolysis temperature as shown by the labels on the top. The tem-
perature range is from 400-900°C . At 400 °C , the single source model did
not have any data; therefore the data was ﬁtted from the values from 500-
900°C . Adapted from [7, 8]
Mtar = 100 −(Mgas + Mwater + Mchar)
The results from the above equation are visualized in Figure 4.6. Using the subtrac-
tion method, the deviation for the tar values are lesser. Thus, the subtraction model
was used in the mass balance equations.
Energy Balance
The ﬁrst overall balancing of energy is shown by the equation:
59
==PAGE:85==
Figure 4.4: The data ﬁtted showed inaccuracies with R-squared values. These inac-
curacies can be seen clearly with some of the total compositions going
beyond 100% of weight. Errors can be seen in all pyrolysis temperature
panels.
HHV ∗= HHV ∗
char + HHV ∗
tar + HHV ∗
gas + Heat Loss
(4.18)
where the ’*’ represents the HHV calculated on a dry-basis. The higher heating values
are calculated using Milne’s Formula (3.3). In case of the HHV for the gas, the conven-
tional formula cannot be used since the Equation 3.3 uses fundamental composition
percentage instead of the gas composition percent. Instead, the HHV is calculated by:
HHVgas = CO · HHVCO + CO2 · HHVCO2 + CH4 · HHVCH4
(4.19)
60
==PAGE:86==
Figure 4.5: Error between the ﬁtted and actual data are visualized. Both average-
model and single-source model show large distance from the actual
model. The R-squared values can be seen on the top-left. With high de-
viation from the actual data, these formation equations are not useful for
the model.
where the terms CO,CO2 and CH4 represent the mass of the gases formed as calculated
during the mass balance and the HHV values of the gases are taken from known
thermodynamic data of the molecules. Similar to the mass balance, only the char and
gas HHVs are calculated. The energy content of tar is held at 30 MJ/kg [43]. Therefore,
the heat loss is the energy left after the energy transferred to the char, gas and tar.
Once they are calculated, the LHVs are calculated by using the hydrogen content as
shown in Equation 3.5.
61
==PAGE:87==
Figure 4.6: Subtraction model shows less deviation between the calculated and actual
values. The deviation and errors are very small to allow for use in the
pyrolyzer model.
Outputs
With the above detailed equations, the pyrolyzer model calculates the various com-
positions of the pyrolyzer products and the energy content in the products. Finally,
the outputs that the pyrolyzer model provides are:
• The mass ﬂow of pyrolysis products
• Mass composition of pyrolysis products
• Mass fraction of pyrolysis products
• Energy content of char, tar and heat loss at different temperatures
Results are analysed as a function of inlet composition, mass ﬂow and pyrolysis tem-
perature to look at how the model works with respect to the study conducted in this
62
==PAGE:88==
Parameter
Value
Unit
Pyrolysis
Temperature
(TP)
450-600
°C
Table 4.5: Parameter and Input values for the pyrolyser
paper and are discussed in Chapter 5.
4.3.3 Parameters and Input Values
For the pyrolyser, the input values are the composition of the fuel at inlet along with
the pressure, temperature and the mass ﬂow in addition to the same properties for
hot gases at inlet and outlet. The reaction although exothermic and can propagate
on the exothermic energy released, energy is ﬁrst required to start the process. This
energy is assumed to be from the hot gases at the inlet. The values which are the
inputs to the model is given in table 4.5.
The pyrolysis temperature is analyzed between 450-600°C as at temperatures lower
than 400°C the amount of tars formed due to the reactions is higher. Additionally, the
VIKING gasiﬁer, has a pyrolyzing temperature of 500°C [4, 3]. Therefore, the pyrolyzer
is analyzed at these temperature ranges. To keep the model simple, the pyrolyser has
been modelled without rate of reaction and equilibrium constant.
4.4 Gasiﬁer
The gasiﬁer is modelled as shown in the ﬁgure 4.7 with the Viking gasiﬁer as the tem-
plate. The Viking gasiﬁer was created and demonstrated by the Biomass Gasiﬁcation
Group at the Technical University of Denmark, Risoe [4]. To the gasiﬁer, the fuel is
sent along with steam and the oxidant. At the outlet of the gasiﬁer is the ash and the
producer gas.
The parameters for the gasiﬁer, mainly, the pressure drop and the gasiﬁcation tem-
perature are inputs that can be varied. The gasiﬁcation temperature can be varied to
obtain the sensitivity of the gasiﬁcation process to the temperature.
63
==PAGE:89==
Figure 4.7: Gasiﬁer Component Diagram
Parameter
Value
Unit
Gasiﬁcation Pressure
1
bar
Gasiﬁcation Temperature
750-to-800
°C
Pressure Loss
0.005
bar
Water-to-Fuel Ratio
0
–
Carbon Conversion Fac-
tor
1
–
Non-equilibrium
Methane
0.01
–
Table 4.6: Gasiﬁer input parameters explanation
The non-equilibrium methane is provided to offset the under-estimation of methane
in the modelling of the gasiﬁer. METHANE parameter is applied to allow for the by-
pass of methane in the gasiﬁer without undergoing any reaction [45]. This allows for
64
==PAGE:90==
tweaking with real experimental data if necessary. The pressure drop was taken from
the data obtained from research previously using the same gasiﬁer [46, 45]. The gasi-
ﬁcation temperature can vary but for the Viking Gasiﬁer which is the reference in
this research, the temperature is taken to be 750°C and 800°C respectively [3, 4]. The
variation in the temperature is seen in the experimental data of the Viking gasiﬁer
and thus taken to be reviewed and compared for this model.
4.5 SOFC System
The SOFC system includes an anode pre-heater and a cathode-preheater to utilize the
process heat in an eﬃcient manner. However, the component shown in the ﬁgure 4.8
is only the Solid Oxide Fuel Cell model. The SOFC model in DNA has the input of the
syngas along with the cathode side inlet for oxygen. Atmospheric air heated to near
the operating temperature of the SOFC is utilized at the cathode. The outlet from the
SOFC is for the off-gases and fuel-residue since not all of the fuel is utilized.
The main parameters which are inputs to the SOFC are the pressure loss across the
SOFC for the fuel and the air, the number of cells in the stacks, the total number of
stacks, temperature of the gas and the fuel-utilization factor (Uf). DNA calculates the
internal energy required to run the SOFC by itself.
Parameter
Value
Unit
Cathode
Inlet
Tempera-
ture
600
°C
Anode Inlet Temperature
600
°C
Operating Temperature
750
°C
Fuel-utilization factor
0.6-0.9
Generator Eﬃciency
97
%
Cathode Pressure drop
0.005
bar
Anode Pressure drop
0.005
bar
Table 4.7: SOFC Parameter table
Fuel-utilization factor improves the eﬃciency of the system by up to 5% from 0.6 to
0.9 thus is a relevant parameter to study [45]. With the operating temperature, the
65
==PAGE:91==
Figure 4.8: SOFC Component Diagram
results show variation in the operating voltage, which increases, and there is also a
drop in the reversible potential of the SOFC [29]. This makes it an important param-
eter to study. Operating temperature of the SOFC is an additional parameter that can
be studied. However, with a household-system, low-temperature SOFCs are better
at the small-scale than high temperature systems. The low temperature SOFCs oper-
ate between 700°C and 800°C . The temperature chosen here is 750°C and therefore
changes in temperature are not required to be undertaken.
4.6 Other Components
The other components that are used in the model are heat-exchangers and compres-
sors. The heat-exchangers are used as-is available in DNA and no parameters are
66
==PAGE:92==
changed. For the compressors as well, the parameters are taken to be a single value
to be used in the performance calculations. Table 4.8 shows the parameter values for
the compressors that have been chosen.
Parameter
Value
Steam Compressor
Isentropic Eﬃciency
0.8
Mechanical Eﬃciency
0.98
Gas Blower
Isentropic Eﬃciency
0.9
Mechanical Eﬃciency
0.98
Cathode Air Blower
Isentropic Eﬃciency
0.7
Mechanical Eﬃciency
0.95
Table 4.8: Parameter values chosen for compressors in the system. Three compres-
sors are used: steam compressor, gas compressor and cathode compressor.
They are used to generate ﬂow for the three different components.
The compressor values are taken to be constant as shown in Table 4.8. Isentropic
eﬃciency (ηiso of the compressors are taken between 0.7-to-0.9 and mechanical eﬃ-
ciencies (ηmech) are held at values greater than 0.95. Lower eﬃciencies are taken in
order to simulate an extra load on the system thereby identifying potential failure in
production due to excessive consumption from the system.
67
==PAGE:93==
4.7 Summary
• The important component and the parameter values are justiﬁed
• Pressure is taken to be atmospheric as higher pressures in a small scale system
would require more power and further potential real-world design parameters.
• Drying is considered to utilize steam and the overall drying temperature is be-
tween 110-140°C .
• Pyrolysis model is explained in detail along with the equations utilized in de-
signing the model.
• The basic chemistry behind the equations is explained followed by the balanc-
ing equations and the overall structure of the component
• Formation equations and their accuracy is visualized and the justiﬁcation for
the subtraction based model is given for the tar formation.
• Gasiﬁer parameters are provided along with justiﬁcation for choices followed
by a section on SOFC.
• SOFC operational temperature is considered to be a low-temperature SOFC there-
fore variation in SOFC operating temperature is not considered.
• The eﬃciencies of the compressors are also explained along with the values for
different parameters shown in a table.
68
==PAGE:94==
Parameter
Value
Unit
Dryer
Inlet Steam Temperature
200
°C
Pressure
1.01325
bar
Pressure Loss
0.05
bar
Fuel Inlet Temperature
25
°C
Fuel Moisture Content
20-50
%
Fuel Inlet Pressure
1.01325
bar
Outlet
Dryer
Tempera-
ture
110-140
°C
Pyrolyser
Pyrolysis Temperature
500-700
°C
Gasiﬁer
Gasiﬁcation Pressure
1
bar
Gasiﬁcation Temperature
750,800
°C
Pressure Loss
0.005
bar
Water-to-Fuel Ratio
0
–
Carbon Conversion Fac-
tor
1
–
Non-equilibrium
Methane
0.01
–
Solid Oxide Fuel Cell
Cathode
Inlet
Tempera-
ture
600
°C
Anode Inlet Temperature
600
°C
Operating Temperature
750-1000
°C
Fuel-utilization factor
0.6-0.9
–
Generator Eﬃciency
97
%
Cathode Pressure drop
0.005
bar
Anode Pressure drop
0.005
bar
Table 4.9: Input parameters to components in the system
69
==PAGE:95==
==PAGE:96==
5
ASSESSMENT AND DISCUSSION
5.1 Details of Assessment
This chapter is divided into three sections:
• Pyrolyzer Model Results
• Pyrolyzer-Gasiﬁer Results
• SOFC Model
• Discontinuous Operation
First, the pyrolyzer models that have been established in Chapter 4 is checked against
each other and the performance of the model is viewed. Following the pyrolyzer
model, the outputs are fed into a gasiﬁer model in DNA to obtain results on how the
pyrolyzer affects the gasiﬁcation process. The results of the pyrolyzer model decide
the SOFC model. An SOFC model has been built to look at the feasibility of a system
for this study.
5.1.1 Compositional Details
Two different compositions are tested in this study. The ﬁrst composition is an av-
erage of all the inlet fundamental compositions available. Second composition data
is using the data available for data available from Denmark. These compositions are
71
==PAGE:97==
labelled ’Mean’ and ’M DK’ for easy understanding from hereon in the study. The
summary of the composition data is provided in Table 5.1 and the large dataset can
be seen in Table 3.6.
Element
Mean
M DK [12]
Carbon
48.81
50.49
Hydrogen
6.30
6.41
Oxygen
36.58
34.15
Nitrogen
1.18
1.01
Sulphur
0.2
0.16
Ash
6.93
7.78
Moisture
23.72
23.72
HHV
21.19
22.24
LHV
15.58
16.38
Table 5.1: Mean and M-DK composition details are summarised along with the calcu-
lated thermal properties of the fuel. Both these compositions are used to
identify and analyse the results of different system models. [6, 9, 10, 12, 13,
14, 15]
Table 5.1 summarizes the two composition models used in the analysis. In each model
study, the composition used is given at the start and individually analyzed. In some
cases, one of the models is not studied and this is acknowledged in their respective
sections.
5.2 Pyrolyzer Model
Two pyrolyzer models are analyzed. The ’Average Source Model’ and the ’Single Source
Model’ with the difference between them being the formation equations for char, gas
and tar as detailed in Chapter 4, Section 4.3.2. The difference in the formation mod-
els affect the fractions at the outlet and the energy content in the pyrolyser products.
Here the results are compared between the pyrolyzer models and the source data to
conﬁrm accuracy.
72
==PAGE:98==
Figure 5.1: Product wt% across pyrolysis temperature shows the overall trends of the
different products across the single model and the average model with
both Mean and M-DK compositions. Single-source model shows more real-
istic proﬁle of tars with a decrease and a corresponding increase in gases.
Water formation rates show decrease across both models.
5.2.1 Product Composition
Figure 5.1, shows the overall product composition across Mean and M-DK. The for-
mation equations are based on fractions rather than actual mass at the outlet. There-
fore, the outlet compositions remain the same for Mean and M-DK in the same py-
rolysis temperature range. However, the important factors to consider are the py-
rolysis products themselves. In the case of Average-Source model (ASM), there is an
increase in the overall factor of tar which is not realistic. At higher temperatures,
the tar breaks down thermally into char and light gases which would increase the
mass/volume ﬂow of gases at the outlet. This trend is seen clearly in the Single-Source
Model (SSM). With the product composition in mind, the SSM model is realistic within
73
==PAGE:99==
the assumptions made during the formation of the model.
5.2.2 Gas Composition
Figure 5.2: The gas composition is shown here for both ASM and SSM. The total com-
position trend of no changes between the compositions can be seen as the
outlet fraction is only a function of the outlet temperature and not of the
inlet fraction. However, there are differences between ASM and SSM in
the wt% of the products at the outlet.
The gas composition ﬁgure 5.2 shows the same trend of similarities across different
compositions. However, the wt% of individual gases at exit are different. Hydrogen in
both cases is assumed to be virtually equal to 0% below 550°C . The changes although
not clearly visible pertain to the difference in Methane content, CO content and CO2
content. SSM has higher methane content compared to ASM while the CO levels are
higher in ASM and but the overall increase from 400°C to 900°C is only 50% in ASM.
For SSM, the values of CO increase approximately 110% in the same temperature
range. Finally, the drop in the CO2 fraction in the gas composition is also quite high
74
==PAGE:100==
for SSM with the CO2 fraction falling 26% compared to 20% in ASM. The hydrogen
and methane results are quite realistic as most studies indicate a similar range of
methane and hydrogen fraction in the products at the same temperature range [7,
8, 47]. However, the overall composition of tar does affect the formation of gases
especially CO and CO2 . The reduction in tars for SSM, as seen in Figure 5.1 aids in the
increase of CO and CO2 fractions in the gas composition through thermal cracking
at higher temperatures. This has been taken into account for SSM and not taken into
account of ASM therefore leading to lower values.
5.2.3 Energy Content
Figure 5.3: LHV of all fractions are shown across the two models. With composition,
the overall inlet LHV is decreased for the M-DK composition. And the LHV
of char is also different. For SSM, the char fractions show lower LHV and
are almost constant across the temperature range but the products also
show slight increase in LHV when the composition changes.
The energy content is slightly different compared to the trends seen before. In both
75
==PAGE:101==
SSM and ASM, the composition changes a lot. First, the composition affects the inlet
LHV. Consequently, the change in the composition also shows some minute changes
in the individual product LHVs. Both models have higher individual product LHVs
with M-DK composition for Char and Gas since the Tar is held constant at 30000 kJ/kg.
This increase of the LHV, although small, can be attributed to small differences in
the mass ﬂows that are calculated and the fraction of energy utilized from the inlet.
However, these small differences in heating value (HV) would affect the downstream
processes and, therefore, are important to be aware of. Finally, between ASM and
SSM, there is also additional changes. The main change is the difference in energy
content between Chars from both models. The char in ASM model has higher C , H2
and O2 fractions compared to the SSM model. This difference leads to the change in
energy content seen here. Similar changes are also seen in the LHV of Gas. With the
SSM model, Figure 5.2, the composition of CO and CO2 increases with temperature
and this increase causes the earlier rise in LHV seen in Figure 5.3.
5.2.4 Discussion
Both the Average-Source and Single-Source model show similar trends across compo-
sitions, but the difference in formation equations used makes a difference in the total
product fraction at outlet, the gas composition fraction at outlet and the energy con-
tent. The accuracy of the EES model to the ﬁtted equations is high and, therefore, the
trends are as expected from the equations described in Chapter 4. However, with the
total fractions, and the ideal reaction kinetics in pyrolysis, the overall product forma-
tion in ASM is unrealistic compared to SSM. This negative aspect of the ASM makes it
harder to utilize the model in realistic simulations. In addition to the difference in tar
formation and cracking occurring at higher temperatures, the overall gas formation
equations are also not interlinked clearly thereby showing possible variation from
real values. In this study, the comparison of the two pyrolyzer model indicates that
the SSM model is more realistic with regards to the overall product composition and
the individual gas composition. With the SSM model, some of the issues of the ASM
model such as thermal cracking, the CO2 and CO fractions are taken care of. Despite
these variations, there is considerable uncertainty regarding the energy content of
the char. This can be made accurate by the utilization of experimental results from
waste pyrolysis.
76
==PAGE:102==
5.3 Gasiﬁer Model
In order to visualize the impact of the pyrolysis products on the gasiﬁer model, it
is beneﬁcial to study how they interact with each other. To study this interaction,
a model was built connecting the EES Pyrolyzer model with the DNA model of the
Gasiﬁer. In this section, four different models are compared for their interaction with
the gasiﬁer:
• No pyrolyzer model: The waste from the dryer is sent directly to the gasiﬁer for
gasiﬁcation
• DNA-Pyrolyzer-Gasiﬁer model: A model of pyrolyzer based on biomass found in
DNA was used and the products are sent to the gasiﬁer.
• ASM-Gasiﬁer Model: the ASM model studied in this paper has been used with
the product char and tar mixed before being sent to the gasiﬁer.
• SSM-Gasiﬁer Model: the SSM model is used with the products -char and tar-
mixed together before being supplied as input to the gasiﬁer.
In order to perform these analyses, a few adjustments had to be made. In case of the
pyrolyzer model, DNA software had some issues incorporating components before
and after the pyrolyzer component. Therefore, the results given by DNA and EES for
the pyrolyzer were taken out and fed back into DNA with a solid mixer component to
mix Char and Tar. The gas is assumed to be mixed after the gasiﬁer since the gasiﬁer
model in DNA does not work with ﬂuid inputs. This transfer of data was used for the
DNA-Pyrolyzer-Gasiﬁer, ASM-Gasiﬁer and SSM-Gasiﬁer models.
5.3.1 Hydrogen Fraction in Syngas
In this study, the syngas is sent to the SOFC. With an SOFC, the main fuel component
is hydrogen (as water, molecular-hydrogen and in compound form). The hydrogen
content in the fuel should be suﬃciently high enough for actual power production in
the SOFC. Figure 5.4 shows the syngas fractions of CH4 , H2O (steam) and H2 .
Under both compositions, it is seen that the hydrogen composition is highest in the
No-Pyrolyzer model for the ’Mean’ composition. The DNA-Pyrolyzer model show lower
hydrogen content compared to ASM and SSM models. However, the methane content
77
==PAGE:103==
Figure 5.4: Composition of methane, hydrogen and water (steam) in the syngas for
different models. The x-axis shows the different compounds and the bars
represent the different models under study. Under both compositions, the
composition is highest without the pyrolyzer.
is the same across all the models. The similarity of the methane content is due to the
METHANE-parameter that has been discussed previously (Chapter 4). The METHANE-
parameter ﬁxes the methane from the gasiﬁer at 1% in the outlet.
For the water and hydrogen composition, the design of pyrolyzer models actually af-
fect the composition. In all the three pyrolyzer models, the water formed during the
pyrolysis is separated from char and tar as an additional product. This does not act
78
==PAGE:104==
as an input to the gasiﬁer. Additionally, the hydrogen in the char and tar are reduced
to low value due to the assumption that the hydrogen at outlet is virtually zero at
pyrolysis temperatures below 550°C for char. However, the hydrogen content in the
tar is high. This hydrogen content affects the ﬁnal hydrogen content in the syngas.
With the ASM model, the tar content which is higher. Increased tar content implicitly
shows the higher hydrogen content. This is the reason for the higher hydrogen found
in ASM-model in the Mean composition and the same level of hydrogen in M-DK com-
position. This is not the assumption in the case of the SSM model. With lowered Tar
content and correspondingly H2 content, the hydrogen is lower than the ASM-model
and the No-Pyrolyzer model. The temperature assumed here is 500°C for pyrolysis
thus making hydrogen virtually zero across all pyrolysis models. This translates neg-
atively to the syngas composition where the hydrogen composition is reduced.
5.3.2 Energy Content across Dryer to Gasiﬁer
Figure 5.5 shows the inlet and syngas values of energy content. The higher energy
content for the pyrolyzer-based cases is because of the data feed in for the DNA
model. The char and tar products of the pyrolyzer have higher LHV than the inlet
waste. When combined using a mixing component in DNA, the overall LHV at the
inlet of the gasiﬁer is higher.
The outlet side shows the effects of the inlet LHV being higher. The SSM, ASM and the
DNA-Pyrolyzer model show higher LHVs at the syngas. This is due to the higher inlet
LHV that is calculated using the mixer. It is however important to see the Cold-gas
eﬃciency in order to understand the variation.
Cold Gas Efﬁciency
The cold-gas eﬃciency is calculated using:
ηCGE = Mo · Eo
Mi · Ei
x100
(5.1)
where Mo is the mass ﬂow at the outlet, Eo is the energy of the product at outlet
79
==PAGE:105==
Figure 5.5: Inlet waste LHV is compared with the syngas LHV for both compositions:
Mean and M-DK. In the pyrolyzer cases, the char and tar are mixed with
different individual LHVs that lead to higher total LHV compared to the
No-pyrolyzer model. The syngas LHV is affected by the gases in the mix-
ture and H2 fraction. No-Pyrolyzer model has higher H2 and this shows
up as higher syngas LHV.
and Mi and Ei is the mass ﬂow and energy respectively at the inlet. The cold gas
eﬃciency gives the potential chemical energy of the gas at inlet and at outlet. Ideally,
the Cold Gas Eﬃciency (CGE) should be high. Figure 5.6 shows the CGE obtained for
the different models under study here.
80
==PAGE:106==
Figure 5.6: Cold Gas Eﬃciency (CGE) shows the potential chemical energy across the
gasiﬁcation system. With higher CGE, the amount of usable chemical en-
ergy is higher at the outlet.
The CGE values for the models, shown in Figure 5.6 indicate that the No-Pyrolyzer
model has high CGE of above 90% in both compositional cases. This can be attributed
to higher LHV that persists in the syngas for the No-Pyrolyzer model even when there
are compositional changes. The ASM-gasiﬁer model comes close in both M-DK and
Mean compositions to the No-pyrolyzer model. However, the CGE, in M-DK is near
80% while it is 90% in the case of Mean-composition. The reason for this difference
is hard to establish. However, the reasons can be established based on either the
compositional variation or the energy content.
The overall energy at the inlet with the two compositions is different. For the ASM-
model, the inlet LHV into the gasiﬁer was 24550 kJ/kg for Mean and 24530 kJ/kg for
M-DK. Although a very small difference, at the outlet, the syngas LHV is 5803 kJ/kg
and 5120 kJ/kg respectively for the two compositions. Thus, it can be explained by
81
==PAGE:107==
the compositional variation that causes the energy content difference at the gasiﬁer
outlet. In the ASM-Model, the outlet syngas contains 51.57% of nitrogen in the M-DK
model compared to 48.58% of nitrogen. These differences account for the difference
in the cold gas eﬃciency.
5.3.3 Discussion
• The pyrolyzer models work relatively well with the gasiﬁer
• ASM-G model and SSM-G model are the two models that are discussed here and
both show high LHV at the inlet from the Tar.
• This high inlet LHV also translates to the higher syngas outlet LHV.
• In both cases, the overall hydrogen content in the syngas is suitable for use in
SOFC with 19.42% and 16.21% for ASM and SSM in the Mean-composition. For
M-DK composition, the hydrogen is 17.48% and 14.42% respectively for ASM
and SSM model.
• The no-pyrolyzer model which is the benchmark contains 18.54% and 18.77% of
hydrogen content respectively. In both cases, the pyrolyzer models come quite
close to the benchmark value.
• The water (steam) is low in the syngas due to the removal of water from the
outlet of the pyrolyzer since the DNA gasiﬁer model does not support the input
of ﬂuids.
• Overall cold gas eﬃciency depends on the inlet composition which directly af-
fects the outlet composition. With water content in the pyrolyzer product a bet-
ter composition can be achieved.
The pyrolyzer model works better with the approximated values. With additional ex-
perimental data to verify the actual products of pyrolysis of household waste catego-
rized here, the equations can be tuned. Even with the complete agreement of the data
with the No-Pyrolyzer model, the pyrolyzer can not be used in the full system that is
modelled. With the pyrolyzer outputs, gases and water are a part as well. These when
entering the gasiﬁer, will react and, therefore, change the potential characteristics of
the syngas. Since the DNA gasiﬁer cannot handle ﬂuid inlet, bypassing of the gasi-
82
==PAGE:108==
ﬁer for gas and water could be possible. Realistic modelling would not be obtained.
Therefore, the pyrolyzer model is not included in the ﬁnal system.
83
==PAGE:109==
5.4 System Analysis
The system described in Chapter 3 Section 3.1 is analyzed here. As speciﬁed in Chap-
ter 4, the various parameters governing the components have different impact on
the performance. Some parameters have to be held constant throughout the differ-
ent analyses that are carried out:
• Mass ﬂow has been held at 0.001 kg/s (3.6 kg/hr) to simulate the minimum pos-
sible mass ﬂow from one total household
• Gasiﬁcation Temperature is held at 750 °C based on the VIKING gasiﬁer
• Drying Temperature is kept at 110 °C
• SOFC Temperature is at 800 °C and the fuel utilization factor is at 0.6
• 80 number of cells in 2 stacks is assumed for the SOFC
In addition to the above general points, the compressor values are held to the eﬃ-
ciencies deﬁned in Section 4.6. With these parameters ﬁxed, the analysis was started
with the following variations for the model:
1. Mass Flow variation
2. Moisture Content variation
3. Gasiﬁcation Temperature
4. SOFC Fuel Utilization Factor (Uf)
5. Number of Cells in SOFC
6. Number of Stacks in SOFC
5.4.1 Mass Flow
The mass ﬂow of fuel based on the waste generation rates. It is known through cal-
culations (See Chapter 3, Section 3.2.2) that the household waste mass ﬂow rates can
vary. With a 4-person household, the potential waste generated is approximately 4
kg/day. With this assumption in mind, the mass ﬂow rates were varied, starting from
3.6 kg⁄hr to a maximum of 18 kg⁄hr. The starting value of 3.6 is assumed to be a system
84
==PAGE:110==
working with only one house while 18 kg⁄hr would be with 4-5 houses. Figure 5.7 shows
the linear change between the power produced and the mass ﬂow.
Figure 5.7: Mass ﬂow increase shows corresponding increase in power consumed
and the power produced. With higher mass ﬂow of fuel, the increase in
air required creates higher energy costs on the Cathode-Air-Blower, pic-
tured on the left with the blue-bar. And the increased fuel content also
increases the power produced which linearly increases with increase in
mass ﬂow on the right.
Figure 5.7 shows the variation in power produced and power consumed with differ-
ent mass ﬂow rates. The plot on the left shows the power consumed by the various
parasitic components predominantly the compressors. With increasing mass ﬂow
rate, it is clear that the power consumed increases. In the case of gas blowers, the
increase in mass ﬂow is after the gasiﬁer. After gasiﬁcation, the overall mass of syn-
gas is higher. This higher mass of syngas has to be sent to the SOFC at the correct
pressure. Therefore increasing the gas blower consumption. The highest power con-
sumption by system components is from the Cathode Air Blower. At the cathode air
85
==PAGE:111==
blower, the consumption increases along the increase of mass ﬂow. For the SOFC, the
hydrogen present in the fuel has to be matched by oxygen at the cathode. With in-
crease mass ﬂow of fuel, the H2 mass at the anode increases as well. This increase in
mass ﬂow at the anode drives the increase of the cathode air ﬂow.
5.4.2 Moisture Content
Moisture content is an extremely important parameter with an extremely hetero-
geneous fuel such as waste. At higher moisture content, the amount of usable dry
fuel is lower. This lowered waste content affects the energy available and the energy
required during the drying process. At lower moisture content, the energy transfer
required from the steam dryer is lesser.
Power Produced and Consumed
The power produced and consumption Figure 5.8 show the trends that agree with
eﬃciency in Figure 5.9.
The highest impact of performance is for the steam and gas blower consumption.
With higher moisture content, there is an increase in steam blower consumption. The
higher moisture levels require more steam to dry the system. This increases the effort
required from the steam blower to accommodate the higher mass ﬂow rate. The gas
blower requirement is lower due to reduced mass ﬂow. The decreased mass ﬂow of
syngas to the SOFC helps in reducing the effort from the cathode air blower. This
reduced effort is seen as consumption decrease for the cathode air blower. The total
mass ﬂow in each consumption decreases since the change in power consumption
for steam and gas blower is small due to higher isentropic eﬃciency of 80% taken.
With the cathode blower, the eﬃciency of 70% shows a much larger drop in power
consumed of consistently 20% with each moisture level. The moisture level from 30%
to 40% shows a 42% drop in power consumed by the cathode air blower and at the
same time shows a 14% increase in steam blower consumption. In addition, the gas
blower consumption drops by 10%. These decreases and increases stack up leading
to the much lowering of the total consumption.
86
==PAGE:112==
Figure 5.8: Consumption of power due to increased moisture content and the total
power production change in the system due to change of moisture. The
decrease in power can be seen at 40% moisture due to the lowered mass
ﬂow
Power Production
Figure 5.8 shows the power production curve. The mass ﬂow decrease at higher mois-
ture content impacts the power production negatively leading to the dip in power
produced at moisture contents above 25%. With higher mass ﬂow rates, the ﬂow rate
would be ideal to generate electricity by offsetting the mass lost by moisture.
Plant Efﬁciency
The plant eﬃciency is calculated using the formula:
87
==PAGE:113==
ηp =
Pnet
˙Min · LHVin
(5.2)
Pnet = Psofc −Paux
(5.3)
Where the numerator, Pnet = Psofc −Paux is the net power produced and the denom-
inator, ˙Mfuel · LHVfuel,is the energy content of the inlet fuel. In this case, the energy
content varies only slightly with the moisture content. At higher moisture content,
the usable mass decreases which impact the energy content in the syngas. However,
the lower moisture values do not generate electricity. This is shown as zero eﬃciency
in Figure 5.9.
The increase in eﬃciency due to the increase in moisture is explained by the impact
of moisture content on the usable LHV. For 1 kg of fuel with 40% moisture, the LHV is
reduced from the total input LHV. However, the syngas energy content is conserved
since the cold gas eﬃciency of the gasiﬁer is above 90% in all cases. With very little
variation in the syngas LHV and the inlet waste LHV decreasing with moisture con-
tent, the overall power produced remains approximately the same level(refer Figure
5.8). This is shown as the increase in the Figure 5.9.
5.4.3 Gasiﬁcation Temperature
The reactor temperature or gasiﬁcation temperature is an important parameter. For
higher carbon conversion in the gasiﬁer and lower tar content, higher gasiﬁcation
temperatures are preferred [48].
The impact of gasiﬁcation temperature is also seen to a very small degree on the
power produced and consumed by the different components (Figure 5.10). With in-
creases in temperature, the power consumption increases but the overall increase
from 700°C to 850°C is 2.6%. Correspondingly, the power production decrease due to
the increase from 700°C to 850°C is 66.3 W; a drop of 2.5%. A drop of 66.3 W is not
large. At small scales, the overall impact of temperature on the heat losses in the
gasiﬁer is higher. Therefore, the gasiﬁcation temperature can be kept unchanged.
88
==PAGE:114==
Figure 5.9: Plant eﬃciency variation due to change in moisture content. Increase in
eﬃciency is linked to the energy per kilogram available at inlet due to
moisture content. With higher moisture content, the energy is lowered
but the power produced is almost the same.
Figure 5.11 shows the overall plant eﬃciency change due to change of gasiﬁcation
temperature. The changes seen are very low due to the increase in gasiﬁcation tem-
perature. Without any large degree of changes, it can be argued that the impact of
gasiﬁcation temperature is very low to consider the parameter an important one.
89
==PAGE:115==
Figure 5.10: Change in power production and internal power consumption due to the
gasiﬁcation temperature variation
5.5 Fuel Utilization Factor
The fuel utilization factor indicates the amount of fuel that is utilized at the anode
in the SOFC. With higher utilization factor, the amount of hydrogen that is utilized
increases. Therefore to consider higher cases of utilization a large cell and stack
number was chosen. The cell number is ﬁxed at 300 and the stack number is at 2.
Commercial system having 250-cell stack are available in the 5-kW range. Thus, the
change in cell number is in the same range as what is available in the market.
5.5.1 Power Consumption
Figure 5.12 shows the change in power consumption and the power production for
the plant with variation of Uf from 0.48 to a maximum of 0.8. The overall change
in power consumption is from the increase power use by the cathode air blower. At
90
==PAGE:116==
Figure 5.11: Impact of Gasiﬁcation temperature on the plant eﬃciency. Overall, the
plant eﬃciency does not change with variation in gasiﬁcation tempera-
ture.
higher utilization, more oxygen is needed in the system. Thus, the cathode air blower
works more to send the air to the SOFC. Logically, the power production would in-
crease with the change in fuel utilization. In this case, it can be seen at 0.7, the power
produced reaches a peak of approximately 3.5 kW and then starts to decrease. This
can be explained with the cell voltage and current density plots.
91
==PAGE:117==
Figure 5.12: Power consumption and power production for the plant with variation
in Utilization Factor. Power utilization increases due to the higher air
requirement for the SOFC. Power Production drops due to limits of the
fuel cell
5.5.2 Cell Voltage and Current Density
The power production drop seen in Figure 5.12 can be explained using the change
in voltage and current density shown in Figure 5.14. The trend of the cell voltage is
seen to be decreasing while the current density increases. The increases in the cur-
rent density are due to the lack of cell area for producing power from the increased
utilization of power. Since the current density is inversely proportional to the cell
voltage, at the higher factor, increased fuel is available which can not be utilized
properly by the current number of cells. This shows up as a voltage drop and corre-
sponding increase in current density. Both these trends can be seen in Figure 5.14.
Both these conditions have an adverse effect on the eﬃciencies.
92
==PAGE:118==
Figure 5.13: The variation in voltage and current density shown with variation in
Uf. At higher factors, the cell number is not optimum thereby reducing
the voltage and increasing the current density. This leads to the lowered
power production.
5.5.3 Efﬁciencies - SOFC and Plant
The eﬃciency plot in Figure 5.14 is linked to the power production, cell voltage and
current density seen previously. The electrical eﬃciency is directly linked to the volt-
age produced at the cell. A drop in voltage shows a lower electrical eﬃciency. This
trend is agreed by the cell voltage drop seen in Figure 5.14. With the plant eﬃciency,
the calculations are based on the net power produced and the inlet energy content.
Overall power produced is seen to increase with the fuel utilization factor which is
correct. However, the drop due to the lack of cell area at Uf above 0.70 causes the
drop in the plant eﬃciency as well.
93
==PAGE:119==
Figure 5.14: Impact of Uf on the plant eﬃciency and the electrical eﬃciency of the
SOFC. Electrical eﬃciency drop is linked to the drop in Cell Voltage and
the plant eﬃciency increases due to increased power production and
falls as the power production drops
5.6 Number of Cells and Number of Stacks
The number of cells and stacks is a realistic estimate of the number required to size
the system. For the household system in the study, the number of stacks should be low
based on size constraints, costs and overall maintenance. Therefore, realistic choice
of the stack and cell sizes are required. In the market, stacks of 80-to-100 cells per
94
==PAGE:120==
stack are available. Therefore, the 80-cell is a good starting number to analyze the
sensitivity of the results to the cell and stack number. Here, the cells are varied in the
range of 75 to 200. The stack numbers are varied between 2 to 30. These variations
can give a glimpse of how the impact is on the performance.
5.6.1 Power Production
Figure 5.15: Variation of power production with cells. With the increase in cells, there
is a large increase in power production before the value stabilizes near to
250 cells. Beyond this number, the power production would not increase.
The power production with cells and stacks have a similar trend. With both the num-
95
==PAGE:121==
bers, the value of the power produced increases quickly before stabilizing at a ceiling
beyond which there is no increase even with a higher number of cells. However, the
change of both cells and stacks would have better results. Figures 5.15 and 5.16 show
the power production ceiling achieved with changing the number of cells and num-
ber of stacks. With the change of cells, the maximum power that can be produced is
close to 3.5 kW. The same ceiling is a little above 3.5 kW with changes to the number
of stacks.
Figure 5.16: Variation of power production with an increase in stacks. With an in-
crease in stacks, there is a large increase in power production before the
value stabilizes near to 5 stacks. Beyond this number, the power produc-
tion would not increase considerably to actually choose the value.
96
==PAGE:122==
In working conditions, the comparison of the cells and stacks can be optimized fur-
ther. Looking closer at Figure 5.15, it is seen that the value of the power produced
increases rapidly for cell increases of 10. This is seen between cells 75, 85 and 95. The
power produced changes from 2.3 kW to 2.8 kW and ﬁnally to 3 kW. The percentage
increases are 17% increase between 75 and 85 and an increase of 7% between 85
and 95. In comparison, the change between 95 and 125 cells provides an increase in
power produced of 16%. Similar trends are seen in the change of stacks as well. The
change of 2 stacks to 5 yields an increase of power production of 25% compared to
all the changes after 5 stacks. Therefore, the optimization of stacks and cells has to be
carried out depending on the size of the system required.
5.6.2 Cell Voltage
Figure 5.17: Variation of cell voltage with an increase in cells. With the increase in
cells, there is a large increase in power production before the value sta-
bilizes at 0.7 V at 175 cells. Beyond 175 cells, the advantages in changes
to the number of cells is too low to be signiﬁcant
97
==PAGE:123==
Figure 5.17 is the curve obtained for the cell voltage variation with an increase in the
number of cells. Similar to the power produced, the curve increases before stabiliz-
ing. In this case, the stabilizing voltage is around 0.7 V. Just like power production, the
increase of voltage is highest between the cell numbers of 75, 85 and 95. The maxi-
mum voltage between the three is at 95 cells at 0.61 V with cor responding power pro-
duction at 3 kW. After this, the increase of cell number to 125 provides an increase
of 9% for 30 cells. The stabilization takes place around 150 cells after which the per-
centage change in cell voltage is at maximum 1%. Thus, 150 cells is an optimum that
can be utilized.
Figure 5.18: Variation of eﬃciencies by the change in the number of cells.
98
==PAGE:124==
The variation of eﬃciencies follows the trends of power production and cell voltage
that can be viewed in Figure 5.18. High cell voltage is at 150 above which the num-
ber of cells does not affect the performance in a perceptible way. Similar to the cell
voltage and power production, the eﬃciencies stabilize near to 60% and 31% for the
electrical and the overall plant respectively.
Number of Stacks
Figure 5.19: Variation of cell voltage and current density with increase in stacks. The
variation shows similarities with changes of the number of cells. The in-
crease is followed by stabilization of the value beyond which the impact
is far too negligible
The number of stacks shows similar trends to that of the number of cells with respect
to the cell voltage. However, the ﬁrst increase in cell voltage with 5 stacks is 31% com-
pared to the 17% increase between 75 and 85 cells. The voltage increases to a higher
value with more stacks. However, the current density drop is lower with higher stack
numbers. This is understandable as more stacks are added, the number of cells and,
99
==PAGE:125==
therefore, the cell area increases. With increased cell area, the overall fuel remaining
constant, each cell is required to produce far lesser current to achieve the maximum
power production. The maximum fuel content affects the potential power produced.
At 3.6 kg⁄hr, the fuel content in the SOFC does not need more stacks as the increased
cell area does not have enough fuel to actually produce more power. The maximum
possible power from the fuel mass ﬂow is at a ceiling and going beyond the ceiling
would not be possible with more addition of cells and stacks.
Figure 5.20: Impact of the number of cells on the electrical and plant eﬃciency of the
system. The overall effect is lower compared to the impact of the cell.
The stabilization is clearly seen at 10 stacks for 80 cells.
100
==PAGE:126==
For the stack number, the impact is much clearer. At 5 stacks, the system begins to
plateau with increases on either side. In reality, the size of the system can eventually
be scaled up or down depending on the ﬁnal usage scenario. However, it can be un-
derstood that the overall eﬃciency in the stack depends on the fuel content and mass
ﬂow.
5.7 Discussion for Systems Analysis
From the analysis of different parameters for the system, the importance of choosing
the right working parameter is seen to be important. A summary of different param-
eters is provided here along with the discussion on parameter choice.
Mass Flow
The mass ﬂow of the system is an important parameter. From the results, the im-
pact of the mass ﬂow is felt in both the power that is consumed and the power that
is produced. With increased mass ﬂow, the effort on the compressors is increased.
This would further increase with pressure increases in the system thereby draining
the power produced in the system. With the increase in the mass ﬂow, however, the
number of stacks and number of cells should also be increased in order to optimize
the system.
Moisture Content
The moisture content of the fuel is a stochastic value. The actual moisture content
of the waste that is obtained is far too variable in the real household operational
scenario. Therefore, the system has to be designed with the possible moisture con-
tent variations in mind. These values could vary between 20% to 40% in Europe and
might be lesser or more depending on the region, the season and the culture. For bet-
ter results, a well-documented waste composition and property data would enable
in identifying the actual properties of the waste and thereby helping to design the
system for it.
One of the interesting aspects of the moisture content is that at least 20% of moisture
in the waste would be required for powering the system. At lower values, the hydro-
gen species in the syngas is too less of a concentration to produce power from the
101
==PAGE:127==
system. To add onto these aspects, the moisture content increase also increases the
power consumption at the steam blower level due to increased drying requirement.
Thus, the variability of the moisture content has to be kept in mind to vary the system
and the overall impact.
Gasiﬁcation Temperature
The gasiﬁcation temperature is an interesting parameter. With the gasiﬁcation tem-
perature, the main impact is not substantial to warrant a speciﬁc choice in temper-
ature. The overall changes in power production and power consumption are negli-
gible. Therefore, gasiﬁcation temperature is not necessarily an important parameter
to view and to modify for getting better results.
Fuel Utilization Factor
The fuel-utilization factor is an important factor which depends on the technology
of the SOFC utilized. Current market available SOFCs have a utilization factor of ap-
proximately 0.4-to-0.55 while the range of approximately 0.6-0.7 is more realistic as
technology has improved considerably. With these values in mind, it is understand-
able that the impact of the fuel utilization factor is felt considerably on all perfor-
mance parameters. However, with higher fuel utilization factors, increased cell or
stack numbers were required in order to calculate the working conditions. Since
the minimum working parameters were chosen, the values are less with respect to
the voltage and the current density. But the magnitude of power produced with the
change in stack value in conjunction with the fuel utilization factor is higher. This is
understandable as the factor deﬁnes how much of the fuel at the anode is utilized.
Higher values would indicate higher utilization, therefore, higher production. The
consequent higher consumption of power stems from the increase in effort on the
cathode-air blower to fulﬁl the oxygen demand at the anode. For realistic working,
the values would have to vary between 0.6 and 0.75 with the highest value being the
best choice.
Number of Stacks and Number of Cells
These dimensionless parameters are very important to the performance and sizing of
the system. Without changes to mass ﬂow rate, the increase of cells and stacks reach
102
==PAGE:128==
a ceiling above which any increase in the number of cells or stacks shows negligible
change in the performance. With both these parameters, the value has to be manipu-
lated and optimized based on the requirements. Smaller systems should operate with
the lesser amount of stacks and the right number of cells for the maximum produc-
tion of power. The overall impact of the number of cells and stacks are therefore
dependent on the size of the system and the power production requirement.
5.8 Summary
• Assessment has been carried out to three models: Pyrolyser model, Pyrolyser-
Gasiﬁer model and System-model
• Pyrolyser model is assessed based on the comparison between results and the
actual source data. The differences between the models are illustrated.
• All the pyrolyser models are compared against a no-pyrolyzer model linked to a
gasiﬁer.
• No-pyrolyzer model shows better eﬃciencies and higher mole fractions of hy-
drogen in the syngas.
• The higher hydrogen fraction allows the no-pyrolyzer model to be better utilized
in the system compared to the pyrolyzer model
• The overall eﬃciency of the pyrolyzer-based gasiﬁers are also lower thereby
justifying the use of no-pyrolyzers in the ﬁnal model.
• The main model is assessed based on the variation of mass ﬂow, fuel moisture
content, gasiﬁcation temperature, fuel utilization factor, the number of cells and
number of stacks.
• All the parameters showed different impacts on the performance
• Gasiﬁcation temperature, fuel utilization factor are important operational pa-
rameters that require to be ﬁxed when optimization
• Number of cells and stacks of the SOFC is more applicable to ﬁnal optimization
as they do not affect the process optimization but rather the ﬁnal power pro-
duction.
103
==PAGE:129==
==PAGE:130==
6
OPTIMIZED MODEL AND OPERATION
STRATEGY
6.1 Optimized Model
The main parameter around which the system has to be optimized is the mass ﬂow.
Three different mass ﬂows are taken:
1. Mass Flow = 4.2 kg⁄hr: This is the mass ﬂow for one house containing 4 persons. Ac-
cording to the calculations, performed (Refer Chapter 3, Section 3.2.2) the mass
ﬂow would provide a maximum of 1 hour and 40 minutes (approx.) of working
time for the system.
2. Mass Flow = 8.4 kg⁄hr: mass ﬂow for two houses containing 4 people based on the
same calculations.
3. Mass Flow = 21 kg⁄hr: mass ﬂow for 5 houses with 4 people each.
The above values are for small enough systems that can be shared between houses.
More houses can deﬁnitely be added to the system which would in turn have higher
mass ﬂows and consequently higher power production. But, logistic issues would
have to be considered. The issues that are relevant for larger collection of houses
are:
105
==PAGE:131==
• Common waste collection system. It would be harder to set up a common waste
collection system that handles the house. It would be in reality cheaper to have
a much larger waste collection system rather than just 10-15 houses.
• Complexity of the system would be higher. The gasiﬁcation system can be kept
separated from the stacks in order to run the system. However, with more houses,
more complexity is added in order to set the system up leading to higher costs.
The above reasons were taken into account to stop the number from above 5. In
addition to the mass ﬂow rate for each system, the composition of the system was
varied. With varied composition, additional issues can be detected on how the system
responds to the waste composition. The following waste composition, categorized by
the country, are taken:
1. Mean - Composition: This is average calculated from all compositions that have
been utilized (Refer Table 3.6)
2. M-DK Composition: composition calculated for Danish household waste with
mean moisture content
3. M-NGR Composition: composition gotten for Nigerian household waste with the
moisture content
4. M-IRE Composition: composition for household waste from Ireland with the
moisture content from Ireland
The above compositions are summed up in Table 6.1. As it can be seen, the main vari-
ation between the compositions is on the moisture content followed by small mole
fraction changes in H2 , C , and O2 . The thermodynamic properties of the above
compositions can be seen at Table 3.8.
6.1.1 Optimized Parameters
The optimized parameter used for the three systems is given in Table 6.2
6.1.2 One House System
The one-house system is designed for a single house of 4-people. With this system,
the overall size of the system has to be small enough physically and still work eﬃ-
106
==PAGE:132==
Identiﬁer C
H2
O2
N2
S
Ash
Moisture
M-DK
50.49
6.41
34.15
1.01
0.16
7.78
23.72
M-IRE
38.68
7.24
48.13
1.17
0.20
4.58
17.40
M-NGR
53.97
3.86
37.56
1.60
0.24
2.77
19.95
Mean
48.81
6.30
36.58
1.18
0.20
6.93
23.72
Table 6.1: Composition fractions of the waste that are used to design the optimized
model along with their moisture contents.
ciently. Therefore, the number of stacks can not be increased. If any changes have to
be carried out, it has to be made eﬃcient in the processes. Additionally, the number
of cells can also be varied to have a single or double stack system of approximately
100 cells. In order to look at the effective size, the parameters from Chapter 5 have
been constrained and only the number of cells per stack are varied.
Power Produced
Power produced by an SOFC depends on certain factors. Of those factors, the fuel con-
tent and the overall surface area available for the reactions in an SOFC are important.
With an increase in the number of cells, the available area increases thereby utiliz-
ing more of the fuel in the reactions creating more power. However, this increase
is not unlimited. With a constant mass ﬂow rate, the energy per mass of ﬂuid be-
comes the deciding factor. Therefore, the power curve starts to hit a ceiling that is
seen clearly on all waste compositions in Figure 6.1. Above the 130-cells number, the
overall power would not increase considerably in order to be very useful. However,
without thermoeconomic considerations, it would be diﬃcult to ascertain the optimal
point.
Current Density and Cell Voltage
The cell voltage shows similar trends to that of power production. Zero values for M-
NGR and M-DK compositions occur at 85-cells where there is no power production.
This can be seen in both Figures 6.1 and 6.2. Higher voltages are better and from the
plot, it can be seen that depending on the fuel composition, the ceiling reach varies.
But, they all show the same trends except for M-NGR which reaches its maximum
107
==PAGE:133==
Parameter
Units
1-House
Sys-
tem
2-House
Sys-
tem
3-House
Sys-
tem
Dryer
Tem-
perature
°C
110
110
110
Gasiﬁcation
Temperature
°C
750
750
750
SOFC Temper-
ature
°C
750
750
750
Utilization
Factor
–
0.6
0.6
0.6
Number
of
Stacks
–
2
4
10
Number
of
Cells
–
Varied
Varied
Varied
Table 6.2: Optimized Component Parameters used for the ﬁnal design of the three
systems.
voltage with an additional 10-cells compared to M-DK, M-IRE and Mean. These trends
show the importance of the fuel-composition. When the current density is taken, Fig-
ure 6.3, the trends are opposite to that of the cell voltage.
From the current density, a few conclusions can be arrived at. With the same stack
and cell numbers, higher current density can be achieved. Nominal current densities
of 250 mA⁄cm3 exist and they would provide higher power at the same voltages. How-
ever, the factor for these current densities is the fuel available per cell. With a more
hydrogen-rich fuel, the overall current-density and therefore the power produced
would be higher.
Efﬁciencies
The thermal eﬃciency agrees with the trends seen in power production and the cur-
rent density curves. With the increase in the number of cells, the overall increase in
thermal eﬃciency is seen. From the increase in cells, the energy that can converted in
the SOFC is higher. This leads to the higher thermal eﬃciency. In Figure 6.5, the elec-
trical eﬃciency is seen to increase as the voltage increases along with the number of
108
==PAGE:134==
Figure 6.1: Power produced by a single-house system with different waste composi-
tion and number of cells. The power produced increases as the number of
cells increase since more reaction area is available thereby creating more
power.
cells.
The electrical eﬃciency of the system increases quite rapidly to a little lesser than
50% which indicates good performance from the SOFC subsystem. Increase in this
electrical eﬃciency is a direct result of the higher voltages that are reached with more
number of cells. As such, the realistic increase in electrical eﬃciency and thermal
eﬃciency is seen with the parameters. These indicate that the system operation is
109
==PAGE:135==
Figure 6.2: Cell Voltage is lower at lower cell numbers. This value increases with num-
ber of cells before plateauing. The voltage and the power production have
similar trend across the number of cells which indicates the correct work-
ing.
robust and usable in the scale speciﬁed here.
110
==PAGE:136==
Figure 6.3: Current density change is opposite to that of the voltage. The interesting
aspect of this is the lower ceiling of 0.15 A⁄cm3 which is due to the fuel com-
position and mass ﬂow.
6.1.3 Two House System
The two-house system is a larger variation of the One-House system discussed above.
Aim for the two-house system is to have a larger SOFC stack number to increase the
power produced along with a larger mass ﬂow since two-houses start to interact.
Similar to the One-house system, the main parameters that are varied are the mass
ﬂow rate and the cells. The cell variation is the same as the One-house system. The
111
==PAGE:137==
Figure 6.4: The plant eﬃciency of the system is the ratio between the energy available
at the inlet to the net energy that is produced. Higher thermal eﬃciencies
are seen as number of cells increases due to the increase in fuel and the
surface area.
number of stacks are increased to 4 to satisfy the second house. Since the single-
house system utilized 2 stacks, it is a natural increase in the stack to 4 in order to
supply power for 2 houses.
112
==PAGE:138==
Figure 6.5: Increase in electrical eﬃciency from the higher voltages at the SOFC from
the increase in number of cells. This electrical eﬃciency increase is im-
portant as the higher electrical eﬃciency indicates better working of the
SOFC
Performance
The performance of the 2-house system is similar to that of the 1-house system except
with the magnitude of power generated. With higher mass ﬂow and more stacks, the
overall power produced is doubled as seen in Figure 6.6. These higher productions
make it useful for multiple houses. With the minimum number of cells, the composi-
113
==PAGE:139==
tions of M-DK and M-NGR show zero production at 85 cells for 4 stacks. At a higher
number of cells, they recover quite quickly with the overall power production reach-
ing a maximum of 8 kW at 130 cells. For a 2-household system, the overall power is
4-kW per house. This is the same per house for the single-house system at 120 cells.
Figure 6.6: Power produced by a two-house system with different waste composition
and number of cells. The power produced increases as the number of
cells increase since more reaction area is available thereby creating more
power.
Other than the fact that the power production was higher, the trends in electrical
eﬃciency and thermal eﬃciency showed the trends and the same values as seen
114
==PAGE:140==
in Single-House system. This indicates that the system can scale up effectively with
larger mass-ﬂows and additional stacks. Figure 6.7 shows the thermal eﬃciency of
the optimized two-house system. The maximum eﬃciency reached is approximately
30% as shown with the M-IRE composition.
Figure 6.7: Plant thermal eﬃciency with different waste composition and number of
cells. The thermal eﬃciency maximum is around 30%
6.1.4 Five House System
As with the 2-house system, the system is further scaled up to 5-houses with more
stacks added and a larger mass-ﬂow. Other values optimized from the one-house and
115
==PAGE:141==
two-house system are kept the same. Main changes are to the overall mass ﬂow at
the inlet which increases to 21 kg⁄hr. This indicates that all the houses provide 4.2 kg⁄hr
of mass into the system.
Figure 6.8: Power produced by a ﬁve-house system with different waste composition
and number of cells. The power produced increases as the number of
cells increase since more reaction area is available thereby creating more
power.
The overall trends are same as seen for the other two system sizes. With the addi-
tional mass ﬂow rate and extra stacks, the power that is produced by the system
increases thereby providing more power that can be shared between the houses. At
116
==PAGE:142==
120 cells, the maximum power is 20 kW which is again 4-kW per house. The thermal
eﬃciency seems to be approximately 30% as seen in the previous two systems and
the electrical eﬃciency of around 50% is also achieved. These values indicate that the
overall performance of system has been optimized to maximum power while enable
easily scalable operation.
Figure 6.9: Plant Thermal eﬃciency for a ﬁve-house system increases to a maximum
around 30% with 130 cells. Further increase in cells cause a very small
increase in the eﬃciency
The eﬃciencies seen in the one-house system and the two-house system is seen to
be stable across the scaling up performed with the 5-house system. Figure 6.9 shows
117
==PAGE:143==
the eﬃciency to be around 30%. This indicates that all the power has been extracted
using the SOFC.
6.2 Syngas Cleaning Strategy
Aravind et al., in their study of high temperature cleaning processes for SOFC have
studied the impact of chlorine and speciﬁcally HCl on the SOFCs [28]. In their study,
the authors show that HCl content of up to 50 ppm can help achieve operation for a
few tens of hours. However, they go on to note that at concentrations of 20-160 ppm
caused a loss in performance that is recoverable [28]. Through the compiled results
in the study by Aravind et al., it can be noted that cleaning of HCl is required.
6.2.1 Chlorine
Two processes can be utilized to clean the chlorine gas from the syngas before being
fed to the SOFC:
1. Alkali compounds in the gasiﬁer as a bed to react with HCl forming salts
2. A separate reactor containing special sorbents
The increase of alkali compounds is a contamination issue and therefore not advis-
able for use with a SOFC. One study by Krishnan et al. 1, suggests the use of Na2CO3
and K2CO3 as sorbents to remove the hydrochloric acid. With the sodium and potas-
sium sorbent, the authors indicate the HCl levels to be 1.3 ppm and 0.11 ppm respec-
tively. The cleaning reaction with sodium is given by [28]:
Na2CO3(s) + 2HCl(g) −−→2NaCl(s) + CO2 (g) + water(g)
Through the above reactions, the HCl level can be lowered up to 1 ppm with the
sodium sorbent temperatures of approximately 600°C . However, emission of NaCl is
1Krishnan GN, Gupta RP, Canizales A, Shelukar S, Ayala RE. Removal of hydrogen chloride from hot
coal gas streams. Third international symposium and exhibition: gas cleaning at high temperatures;
1996. p. 405e14. Karlsruhe (Germany)
118
==PAGE:144==
possible of up to 1 ppm with the same temperature as it is part of the products. NaCl
and KCl are alkali elements and therefore form salts in the reactor. There could be
the possibility that these salts are carried with the syngas and, therefore, particulate
cleansing would also be required after the removal of HCl in a separate reactor.
6.2.2 Implementation of HCl in DNA
HCl cleaning was not implemented in the ﬁnal separator model used in the main
study due to two issues with the system:
• The gasiﬁer model does not contain relevant reaction mechanisms to model the
formation of HCl in the syngas.
• Chlorine content in the waste is hard to quantify since most studies do not con-
tain the data when performing waste characterization.
Due to the two reasons and complexity of the ﬂuid system in DNA a complete HCl
cleaning separator was not implemented. However, a small study was conducted on
whether the system could be implemented in the gas-cleaning component in DNA.
With the gas cleaning component, it is required to have data regarding the thermo-
dynamic properties of the compounds in the environment ﬁle in DNA. Thus, data
was collected regarding the required thermodynamic data for HCl; this can be seen
in Table 6.3. All the data are taken from the online webbook available for chemical
compounds from the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) 2.
The standard chemical exergy of the compound has been taken from the Appendix 1
by Szargut 3. The coeﬃcients of the polynomial deﬁnition of heat capacity are of the
form:
Cp = A + B ∗t + C ∗t2 + D ∗t3 + E/t2
where, Cp is the speciﬁc heat capacity and t is the temperature in Kelvin. The values
of t are the values temperature range for polynomial is given in Table 6.3. The coeﬃ-
cients of the polynomial are given in Table 6.4. Using the two Tables 6.3 and 6.4, the
2Taken from http://webbook.nist.gov
3Szargut, J., Egzergia. Poradnik obliczania I stosowania, Widawnictwo Politechniki Shlaskej, Gliwice
2007
119
==PAGE:145==
Property
DNA ID
Value
Unit
Reference Entropy
AS
186.90
J/(mol. K)
Reference Enthalpy
AH
-92310
J/mole
Temperature
Range
for
Polynomia
Tmin, Tmax
298,1200
K
Molar Weight
M_ MOL
36.461
kg/kmole
Lower Caloriﬁc Value
NED_ H
0.000
kJ/kmole
Standard Chemical Exergy
EXCH0
84500
J/mole
Compound Name
NAVNM
HYDCHLACID
–
Compound Name
COMPNA
HCL
–
Table 6.3: Thermodynamic properties of hydrochloric acid utilized in the thermo-
prop environment in DNA. All properties are at 1 bar and 25°C unless spec-
iﬁed to be different (Refer footnote).
Coeﬃcient
Value
A
32.12392
B
-13.45805
C
19.86852
D
-6.853936
E
-0.049672
Table 6.4: Polynomial coeﬃcients for HCl provided by NIST. The values can be used
in the equation of polynomial deﬁned earlier within the temperature range
of 298 to 1200 K.
thermodynamic properties of the system can be deﬁned.
Issues faced for Implementation
The model was not implemented in DNA as the values for HCl had to be changed in
a much detailed manner. To add the extra compound, changes were required to the
Combustion subroutine, Gasiﬁcation subroutine, Environment ﬁle, thermal proper-
ties and transport properties ﬁles in order to compile a new DNA ﬁle. Such modiﬁca-
tions would affect the overall working of the system if it is performed without under-
standing how each of the subroutines works together with each other. Therefore, the
120
==PAGE:146==
implementation of HCl in the DNA software was not fully performed. However, with
the above data, HCl can be implemented in DNA for future use.
6.3 Physical Size of SOFC Stacks
The size of the stack can be calculated using the area of the cell, thickness of a cell
and the components inside the stack. Height of the stack and the total volume of a
stack can be calculated by:
hstack = (Hic + Hanode + Hcathode + Helyte) · Ncell + 2 · Hendplates
(6.1)
V olstack = Acell · hstack
(6.2)
where the height of the stack is the sum of the interconnector, anode, cathode,
the electrolyte of all the cells and the height of the endplates at the top and the bot-
tom. The volume would be the area of the cell multiplied by the height of the stack.
The SOFC model in the system studied uses a cell area of 144cm2. The heights of the
different parts is given in Table 6.5.
Component
Material
Thickness
Mass
Density
Interconnector
Ferritic Steel
0.2
88.5
7.9
Anode
NiZrO2
0.1
40.8
6.8
Cathode
LaSrMnO3
0.01
3.22
5.4
Electrolyte
ZrO2Y2O3
0.002
1.11
5.6
End Plate
Ferritic Steel
1
790
7.9
Table 6.5: Height of the SOFC stack components along with their masses and density.
Data taken from [16]
With the data available in Table 6.5, the size of the system can be calculated. Materials
given in Table 6.5 are taken directly from the reference speciﬁed. With an exact sys-
tem deﬁnition, values can change depending on the choices made for the SOFC with
the system in this study. Therefore, these values can be taken as an approximation.
The calculated physical size of the stacks are given in Table 6.6.
It is seen from Table 6.6 that the stack size is at a maximum 42.56 cm with 130 cells.
121
==PAGE:147==
Number of
Cells
Height
of
Stack
Cell Area
Stack
Vol-
ume
Stack
Vol-
ume
Stack Mass
cm
cm2
cm3
L
kg
85
144
28.52
4107
4.1
13
95
144
31.64
4556
4.6
14
100
144
33.2
4781
4.8
15
110
144
36.32
5230
5.2
16
120
144
39.44
5679
5.7
18
130
144
42.56
6129
6.1
19
Table 6.6: Using the data available in Table 6.5 and the equations, the physical size of
the system has been calculated for a single stack. The size of the system is
small enough to house it in the household. Data adapted from [16]
For 2 stacks, the overall height would be approximately 86 cm or 0.86 m. The mass of
the stacks is at a maximum 20 kg each. Therefore, the physical size chosen to vary in
the different systems is low enough to be housed comfortably in a home. With more
than 2 stacks, the height and mass of the system is multiplied by the number of stacks.
Even with large number of stacks, the overall size of the SOFC subsystem would be of
manageable physical proportion.
6.4 Optimum Number of Cells and Stacks
The optimization of the system has been performed for three systems: 1-house, 2-
house and 5-house system. The main variability parameters are the mass-ﬂow rate
and the sizing of the system with regards to the stack and cell. With regards to the
physical dimensions of a stack and the size, it has been found that at 120 cells, they
are small and light enough to be located at a house. This in addition to being an
advantage also indicates the possibility of easy scalability for the future. Based on
the optimization and the results identiﬁed in the previous subsections, the optimized
parameters are provided for the three different systems in the Table 6.7.
From the Table 6.7, it is quite clear that the electrical eﬃciency and the thermal ef-
ﬁciencies are equal across the three systems with the same cell numbers but higher
stack numbers. When compared to the cell numbers on either side of 120, the changes
122
==PAGE:148==
Parameter
Units
Single
House
System
Two-House
System
Five-House
System
Composition
–
Mean
Mean
Mean
Mass Flow
kg⁄hr
4.2
8.4
21
Drying
Tem-
perature
°C
110
110
110
Gasiﬁcation
Temp.
°C
750
750
750
Gas-Cleaning
–
Yes
Yes
Yes
SOFC Temp.
°C
750
750
750
Optimum
Stack
–
2
4
10
Optimum
Cells
–
120
120
120
Power
[kW]
3.72
7.44
18.61
Thermal Eff.
[%]
52.34
52.35
52.33
Electrical Eff.
[%]
28.23
28.24
28.23
Stack height
cm
40
40
40
Stack Volume
cm3
5679
5679
5679
Stack Mass
kg
18
18
18
Table 6.7: Optimized parameters for the three different systems: 1-house system, 2-
house system and a 3-house system with power production values and the
eﬃciencies. These values are provided for the composition- MEAN. With
other compositions, similar optimization will have to be carried out. De-
spite such measures, these parameter values should provide close to opti-
mal working.
are not negligible unless thermoeconomic conditions are studied. When the number
of cells is 110, the power produced is 3.60 kW which is a reduction of approximately
3%. On the other side, with 120 cells, the power produced increases by approximately
2%. Compared to the physical size, the 120 stack has a heigh of 40 cm at 18 kg of mass
per stack. With 130 cells, the overall height increases to 43 cm and the mass increase
of 1 kg. Thus, a change of 2 cm and 1 kg in physical dimension provides a 2% increase
in the power produced. In real-world usage, these conditions would impact the sys-
123
==PAGE:149==
tem and therefore can be utilized since the 3% can be useful. Therefore, the choice
made for this study would be to have 120 cells but higher numbers would not cause
issues with the system size and therefore would not pose an obstacle for expanding
the system unless thermoeconomic conditions are taken into account.
6.5 Discontinuous Operation
Values of the mass ﬂow rates discussed above, the issue becomes of continuous oper-
ation. A house can generate 4.2 kg of waste per day. With 4.2 kg⁄day of waste, continuous
operation is impossible at 4.2 kg⁄hr ﬂow rate in the system. Therefore, start-stop oper-
ation should be considered. At lower mass ﬂow rates, the amount of waste into the
system is negligible at best leading to poorer eﬃciencies with potentially higher costs.
With continuous operation at 4.2 kg⁄hr of waste, there would be a necessity for 100.8 kg
of waste every day. This translates to a minimum of 24 houses. In addition to this as-
pect, the rates can deﬁnitely not be sustained everyday. Variation is high from house
to house and region to region. With such changes, the rate of 4.2 kilogram would not
even be met everyday. Some days could see higher mass ﬂows and some days could
see lower mass ﬂows. Start-stop operation of the system would potentially solve the
problem. However, start-stop operation of a complex system is diﬃcult. Thus, the
basic points that have to be considered for the start-stop operation are outlined here.
For a system discussed here, the start-stop operation has to be split into subsystems.
The ﬁrst system would be the dryer and gasiﬁer subsystem followed by the SOFC
subsystem. Each system has to be warmed up to operational temperature in order to
maximize operational eﬃciencies. This would take up the bulk of the effort.
6.5.1 Dryer and Gasiﬁer Subsystem
Both the gasiﬁcation and dryer system needs to be active for proper eﬃcient opera-
tion. With drying, when the garbage is input to the system, there would be an increase
in moisture content depending on the type of waste. In this case, the kitchen waste
has more moisture and this would actively increase the moisture. Additionally, the
input of waste might not be all at once. In some cases, the waste might be added at
different time intervals but that is beyond the scope of this study. If we assume that
124
==PAGE:150==
the waste input is full at a single time frame before startup of operation, the system
has to be operational quickly for drying the fuel.
Drying
The issue with drying is that the energy that is used for drying does not remove the
moisture at once. Instead, there is a drying rate. With drying rate, the basic founda-
tion of drying is based on the area of the solid that is exposed and the humidity before
and after. The drying rate can be equated to the area of surface by the equation 4:
W = S
A

−dX
dΘ

(6.3)
where W is the drying rate, S is the weight of solid, A the surface area exposed to
the solid and −dX/dΘ the difference in humidity with regards to time. From the equa-
tion, it is quite clear that the surface area is inversely proportional to the drying rate.
With less exposed surface area, the drying rate decreases. This would be an issue
with waste since they are not homogeneous in shape. This would cause an increase
in the drying rate thereby adding more time to actually dry the waste. However, dry-
ing can also be accelerated by adding more heat but that would add more parasitic
consumption to the system. Therefore, waste drying has to be optimized.
One option for drying is to grind the waste to smaller and more manageable shape
and size. With complex shapes and impermeability of steam or air, the drying be-
comes slower and takes more time [49, 22].
Gasiﬁer
After drying, at the gasiﬁer, the startup sequence becomes a bit more complex. For
gasiﬁcation, the temperature of the reactor must be high enough to pyrolysis or be-
gin pyrolysis and combustion before the energy balance can occur from the energy
created by the reactions themselves. In order to achieve this, ﬁrst the reactor has
to be heated to the combustion temperature of the fuel. This might vary from fuel
to fuel. For waste, it would be necessary to identify and categorize the waste before
4Taken from urlepsem.upc.edu/ assecadordesolids/angles/fonaments%20energia.html
125
==PAGE:151==
analysing the combustion temperature. Thus, for start-up sequence, it would be im-
portant to warm up the gasiﬁer to the combustion temperature of the fuel in order to
make it faster.
Losses in a Gasiﬁer
The model described here does not take into account the losses that can take place
from a gasiﬁer. Therefore, simple assumptions can be made regarding the losses oc-
curring in a gasiﬁer. A gasiﬁer can be simpliﬁed to be considered as a tube of diam-
eter ’X’ and length ’L’ with insulation of thickness ’t’. By these dimensions, the heat
losses occurring within the gasiﬁer can approximate to the heat loss from an insu-
lated pipe. Using these assumptions, a simple loss calculation was carried out in EES.
The equation for the heat transfer coeﬃcient in an insulated pipe is given by:
U =
1
D3
D1·hin +
D3·ln D2
D1
2·Kpipe +
D3·ln D3
D2
2·Kins
+
1
hair
(6.4)
where the Kpipe and Kins are the thermal conductivities of the pipe and the insulation
that is used. In this case, the insulation that is used is superwool of two different
densities: 64 kg⁄m3 and 120 kg⁄m3. The thermal conductivities of the insulating material
is given by the temperature dependent 2nd-order polynomial equation for the two
densities:
K64 = 4.286E −07 · T 2 + (−2.683E −04) · T + 0.1293
Density:64kg/m3
(6.5)
K120 = 1.432E −07 · T 2 + (−1.987E −05) · T + 0.0506
Density:64kg/m3
(6.6)
where the K is the thermal conductivity of the insulating material with the subscript
giving the density of the wool. In equation 6.4, the different diameters are D1 is the
internal diameter of the pipe, D2 is the external diameter of the pipe and D3 is the
external diameter of the pipe including the insulation 5. Using the calculated heat
5Taken from: www.chemsof.com/heat_loss_insulated_pipe.html
126
==PAGE:152==
transfer coeﬃcient, the heat loss per unit length of the pipe is calculated by6:
Q = π · D3 · U · (Tin −Tout)
(6.7)
where Q is the heat loss in the pipe that is calculated. This provides the heat losses in
unit length of the pipe. Heat loss is directly proportional to the heat transfer coeﬃ-
cient which depends on the insulation and the property of the insulation. Therefore,
with larger insulation, the overall heat transfer coeﬃcient would be lower leading to
better heat retention in the system.
Heat Loss - Curves
Based on the equations described, the heat loss has been plotted for a simpliﬁed
model of a gasiﬁer having 50 cm length and 50 cm diameter giving it a volume of
approximately 98 liters. This size would ﬁt a gasiﬁer for household usage with its suf-
ﬁciently large capacity. The insulation thickness is then varied from 20 cm to 70 cm.
Figure 6.10 shows the curve obtained. With increasing thickness of the insulation,
the heat loss falls.
The temperature proﬁles inside the pipe and on the surface of the insulation show
agreeable trends. However, the issue is again the size of insulation. The effective
doubling of the physical size is required to have lowered losses. This issue, however,
would not be as profound with larger systems. Therefore, the issue of smaller systems
having more heat loss is a disadvantage for start-stop systems.
1. Firstly, the higher heat losses would lead to a quicker drop in temperatures dur-
ing shutdown and non-operative state. Thus, heating up would require more
power.
2. With higher heat losses, the energy that is required to maintain the tempera-
tures inside at the optimal value would also be higher therefore adding extra
effort on the system.
The above two points make it important to note the thermal management of the gasi-
6Taken from http://www.wiley.com/legacy/wileychi/morvayindustrial/supp/toolbox10.pdf
127
==PAGE:153==
Figure 6.10: Heat loss change with increasing insulation thickness. As insulation
thickness increases, the heat loss decreases until a minimum beyond
which heat loss can not be reduced further
ﬁer as well. For discontinuous operation, issues of heat-loss and the energy required
at start-up have to be afforded. With actual system design, these values can be iden-
tiﬁed to see whether the net power obtained after adding the input energy makes it
worthwhile for the system. At larger heat-loss rates, the time it takes to cool-down
after shutdown is reduced. This reduction in timeframe affects the energy that is
needed at startup for the system to operate.
128
==PAGE:154==
Figure 6.11: Mean temperature increases with larger insulation thickness and the
surface temperature on the insulation falls. These are understandable as
very low thermal conductivity reduces the temperatures and with low-
ered heat loss, the mean temperature inside the pipe is higher
6.5.2 SOFC Start-up Operation and Thermal Management
SOFCs have an optimal working range of 700-1000 °C and 700-800°C for low-temperature
systems. Below 700°C , the electrical eﬃciency falls quite rapidly and the power den-
sity starts to fall as well due to the drop in voltage. To avoid this, the SOFC has to be
kept in the thermal working environment where its performance is optimal. Heating
up of the SOFC stack is required in order to bring it to the operating thermal con-
dition [50]. With ceramics, the thermal conductivity is low. Therefore, the heating
up procedure requires off-gases from burners to warm up the anode and/or cathode
ﬂow areas internally. However, a simple thermodynamic model can be constructed
for the SOFC module.
The SOFC module would have to be a small scale system. For the purposes, we can
129
==PAGE:155==
assume that the entire box of the SOFC has to be heated up to and heat losses have to
be balanced. Holtappels et al. have utilized these simpliﬁed heat loss calculations by
assuming the hotbox of the SOFC to be isothermal. Using this method, the system is
simpliﬁed to an one-dimensional system with heat transfer across the wall. Through
this method, Holtappels et al. found out the heating time taken for a system depen-
dent on the mass and the operation temperature.
A 5kW system weighing approximately 45kg would require 5.5 kWh-thermal of en-
ergy to be heated up to operational temperature of 800°C . With smaller systems this
would indeed be lower and the equations provided by Holtappels et al. can be used
to arrive at the energy that would be required to heat up the SOFC [16]. They go on to
say the heating time taken with the 5kW system heated up to operation temperature
in 7 minutes with a 10kWthermal heater [16]. However, this heating time is only for the
startup. During operation, the SOFC would have large heat losses. It can be cooled us-
ing the water that can be used at households for heating of homes and water. During
this process, heat also has to be added to make sure the SOFC runs at the optimum
operating temperature. Holtappels et al. show that a 5 kW system with insulations of
5, 10 and 15 cm have heat losses of 198, 119 and 92 W respectively [16]. So, additional
heat needs to be supplied from the SOFC or externally to offset the losses. Finally, in
the study they go on to show that after shut down of the system, immediate restart
is possible after 1.4-3 days depending on the thickness of the insulation. Smaller sys-
tems would undoubtedly cool down faster than the larger systems. Therefore, more
insulation would be required to make sure heat loss is minimized and the system
can be operated rapidly after shutdown. For a 5 kW system, Holtappels et al, show
that the cooldown time is from 9 to 19 hours depending on the insulation thickness
[16]. Once these time limits are passed, the system cools down even more thereby
requiring thermal assistance to start the SOFC. So, operation times are limited when
it comes to startup and shutdown of the system.
6.6 Summary
• With the results of the sensitivity analysis from Chapter 5, optimized models are
built along with the analysis of their performance.
• The results show uniform scaling of power with three different use cases
130
==PAGE:156==
• The variation of mass ﬂows and the uniform scaling of stacks increase the power
uniformly.
• Maximum eﬃciencies of approximately 30% thermal and 50% electric are achieved
with increases in the number of cells.
• Higher eﬃciencies would be possible with additional cells and stacks however
an thermoeconomic analysis would be required to identify the optimum.
• Physical size of the system based on available data shows that the SOFC subsys-
tem can be small enough to be used in a home.
• Discontinuous operation is discussed for the two subsystems.
• Drying rate is important as it is affected by the surface exposed which can vary
with a heterogeneous waste.
• Gasiﬁer has to be heated to combustion temperature of fuel during start-up and
heat losses can be studied by simplying the gasiﬁer.
• Assuming gasiﬁer to be an insulated pipe, the heat loss can be reduced by in-
creasing insulation thickness.
• Small systems have higher losses requiring larger insulation thicknesses with-
out which the high heat loss during shutdown would cause higher start-up en-
ergy costs
• Similar issues occur in the SOFC in a small-scale as heat losses approximated to
one-dimensional wall
• Study indicates that heat losses occur within 19-hours therefore with smart op-
erational strategy, discontinuous operation would be possible.
131
==PAGE:157==
==PAGE:158==
7
CONCLUSION
The goal of the present study was to identify whether a small-scale system running on
household waste would be possible. Household waste is gasiﬁed to produce the syn-
gas that would be used to power an SOFC generating electricity and heat. Through the
study, it was seen that a system utilizing the household waste to generate electricity
is possible.
The pyrolyzer model was designed to simulate the working. However, the separation
of the products into gas, char, tar and steam affects the inlet into the gasiﬁer model
in DNA. The results of the pyrolyzer separately were found to be accurate to the uti-
lized data. In connection with the gasiﬁer, the resulting syngas was found to have
the same or in one case higher hydrogen content. The SSM model is deemed to be
realistic due to the variation in char. Additionally it was found that the overall CGE
was approximately 80% for both Average-Source and Single-Source pyrolyzers. How-
ever, variation was noticed based on the composition used. The implementation of
the model with the gasiﬁer was not possible due to the inability of gasiﬁers in DNA
to handle solid and ﬂuid inlet. Overall, the pyrolyzer models showed agreement with
the design conditions and showed good results in comparison to the benchmark for
utilization with the gasiﬁer.
Through the sensitivity analysis, the performance of the ﬁnal model was seen to be
affected the most by the moisture content, the fuel utilization factor and the number
of cells and stacks. Gasiﬁcation temperature was found to have a very low impact on
133
==PAGE:159==
the system. The operational pressure was not a point of study since higher pressure
systems would have higher operational issues at a household. The SOFC temperature
was also not seen as an important parameter as low-temperature SOFCs work in the
range of 700-800°C . Using the results from the sensitivity analysis, three cases were
built with 1-house, 2-house and 3-houses as sample cases.
It was conﬁrmed that the system works for mass ﬂow rates of 3.6 kg⁄hr to 21 kg⁄hr which
corresponds to the waste generated by 1-,2- and 5-houses. All three systems had sim-
ilar values across the different waste compositions. This result agrees with the fact
that the system scales up uniformly with the addition of stacks. All three systems
work effectively at 30% plant eﬃciency and 60% SOFC electrical eﬃciency.
The main solution for the system would be the operation strategy. For the dryer, the
discontinuous operation is possible by external heat addition but that would involve
higher energy costs. In case of household operation, it would also be required to de-
sign a discontinuous system that dries based on the waste content in the system. In
the case of the gasiﬁer, the issue would be regarding the start and stop the equip-
ment. During startup, the reactor would have to be brought to the combustion tem-
perature of the fuel in order to begin the reactions. Also, assuming the reactor to be
similar to an insulated pipe, the overall heat loss is a function of the thickness of the
insulation. With thicker insulation, the heat loss is reduced. For a 98-liter system, the
overall thickness needs to be 50cm or higher. The same issue is seen with the SOFC
subsystem. At smaller sizes, the overall heat transfer from the SOFC is high such that
the heat is lost in a maximum of 19-hours. After which time, heat has to be added to
bring the system to operational temperature.
From the above issues, and the results, following points can be concluded. The py-
rolyzer needs more work in order to ﬁt in correctly with the gasiﬁer model for DNA.
Additional waste pyrolysis data along with an ultimate analysis of the content would
aid in building a more accurate model. Without the pyrolyzer present, the SOFC-
model shows promising and working results. All three household scenario systems
work with 30% plant eﬃciency. The system can be scaled up without issues. For scal-
ing down, the operational strategy has to be identiﬁed based on the system require-
ments. With discontinuous-operation, the system has to be studied in further detail
and sizes in order to arrive at the proper heating up and shutting down strategy to
134
==PAGE:160==
create an optimized dynamic model of a household SOFC system.
7.1 Future Work
The model studied here can be optimized further in order to study the real-world
implications of the system by taking each component in further detail.
• A thorough categorization of waste with a relatively large sample size from mul-
tiple homes would help understanding the localized wastes better.
• Ultimate and Proximate analysis of the waste sample would yield better under-
standing of the characteristics and the composition of the waste for building the
pyrolyzer model and the cleaning strategy.
• More experimental data regarding the evolution of gases, tars and production
of char during pyrolysis can help in building a dynamic pyrolysis model that
is based on the residence time. Such a system can help in designing the actual
length of the pyrolysis module.
• DNA has to be adjusted to support solid-liquid inputs for the gasiﬁer thus en-
abling the physical separation of zones such as pyrolyser and the partial oxi-
dizer. The current model does not assist in using solid+ﬂuid inputs.
• Understanding the combustion temperature of the waste will be useful in build-
ing a realistic operation strategy for the gasiﬁer
• Gasiﬁer sizing can be more accurate based on actual volume ﬂow and required
volume outﬂow of the system.
• Dynamic operation of the gasiﬁer can be modelled in order to understand the
effect of residence time and the overall requirement of operation of the gasiﬁer.
This would also require a better understanding of the start-up requirements
• Gas cleaning requires a stronger temperature dependence factor. Most gas-cleaning
technologies are eﬃcient based on temperature. The current separator does not
utilize temperature dependency in the model. Higher temperature dependent
modelling would provide a more realistic data point.
• Sizing of the heat exchangers required at the process heat exchange equipment
135
==PAGE:161==
can help in understanding the overall size of the system.
• SOFC system can be designed in detail with support on the type of cell and the
dynamic modelling of SOFC. Start-up, size and shut-down can be discussed in
more detail
• A complete dynamic model including dryer, process heat exchanger, gasiﬁer,
and SOFC with variable waste composition would be beneﬁcial in understand-
ing the overall working of the system in complete detail.
136
==PAGE:162==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[1] Daniel Hoornweg and Perinaz Bhada-Tata. A Global Review of Solid Waste Man-
agement. Technical report, World Bank, 2012.
[2] Yohan Richardson, Martin Drobek, Anne Julbe, Joël Blin, and François Pinta.
Biomass Gasiﬁcation to Produce Syngas. 2015.
[3] Jd Bentzen, R Hummelshø j, and Ub Henriksen. Upscale of the two-stage gasiﬁ-
cation process. Proc of 2 world conference and technology exhibition on biomass
for energy and industry., 10-14 May,:1004–1007, 2004.
[4] Fx Breu, S Guggenbichler, and Jc Wollmann. Status - 200 Hours of Operation
with The Viking Gasiﬁer. Vasa, pages 3–6, 2008.
[5] R Mark Ormerod. Solid oxide fuel cells. Chemical Society reviews, 32(1):17–28,
2003.
[6] Sara Ojeda-Benítez, Carolina Armijo De Vega, and Ma Ysabel Marquez-
Montenegro. Household solid waste characterization by family socioeconomic
proﬁle as unit of analysis. Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 52(7):992–999,
2008.
[7] W.K. Buah, a.M. Cunliffe, and P.T. Williams. Characterization of Products from
the Pyrolysis of Municipal Solid Waste. Process Safety and Environmental Pro-
tection, 85(5):450–457, January 2007.
137
==PAGE:163==
[8] Valerio Cozzani, Cristiano Nicolella, Luigi Petarca, Mauro Rovatti, and Leonardo
Tognotti. A Fundamental Study on Conventional Pyrolysis of a Refuse-Derived
Fuel. Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research, 34(6):2006–2020, 1995.
[9] Adeyinka Sikiru Yusuff, Wasiu John, Oluwashola Okoro, and Adedayo Ajibade.
Physico-Chemical Composition and Energy Content Analysis of Solid Waste: A
Case Study of Castlereagh District, Northern Ireland. American Journal of Engi-
neering Science and Technology Research, 2(1):1–9, 2014.
[10] L Salami, a.a. Susu, R.J. Patinvoh, and O.a. Olafadehan. Characterisation study
of solid wastes: a case of Lagos state. International journal of applied science and
technology, 1(3):47–52, 2011.
[11] R.C. Bailie, J.W. Everett, Béla G. Lipták, David H.F. Liu, F Mack Rugg, and
Michael S Switzenbaum. CH10 - Solid Waste. In Environmental Engineer’s Hand-
book, chapter Chapter 10. 1997.
[12] Christian Riber, Claus Petersen, and Thomas H. Christensen.
Chemical com-
position of material fractions in Danish household waste. Waste Management,
29(4):1251–1257, 2009.
[13] Mohan B. Dangi, Michael a. Urynowicz, and Shashidhar Belbase. Characteriza-
tion, generation, and management of household solid waste in Tulsipur, Nepal.
Habitat International, 40:65–72, 2013.
[14] Rasmus Eisted and Thomas H. Christensen. Characterization of household waste
in Greenland. Waste Management, 31(7):1461–1466, 2011.
[15] Toochukwu Chibueze Ogwueleka. Survey of household waste composition and
quantities in Abuja, Nigeria. Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 77:52–60,
2013.
[16] P. Holtappels, H. Mehling, S. Roehlich, S. S. Liebermann, and U. Stimming. SOFC
system operating strategies for mobile applications.
Fuel Cells, 5(4):499–508,
2005.
[17] Alexis Manda Troschinetz.
Twelve factors inﬂuencing sustainable recycling of
municipal solid waste in developing countries. PhD thesis, 2005.
138
==PAGE:164==
[18] Danish Ministry of the Environment. Waste Statistics 2004. Technical Report 1,
2006.
[19] Guido Pepermans, J. Driesen, D. Haeseldonckx, R. Belmans, and W. D’haeseleer.
Distributed generation: Deﬁnition, beneﬁts and issues. Energy Policy, 33(6):787–
798, 2005.
[20] Mohammad Asadullah. Barriers of commercial power generation using biomass
gasiﬁcation gas: A review. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 29:201–
215, 2014.
[21] Dezhen Chen, Lijie Yin, Huan Wang, and Pinjing He. Pyrolysis technologies for
municipal solid waste: A review. Waste Management, 34(12):2466–2486, 2014.
[22] Umberto Arena. Process and technological aspects of municipal solid waste gasi-
ﬁcation. A review. Waste Management, 32(4):625–639, 2012.
[23] T.B Reed and a. Das. Handbook of Biomass Downdraft Gasiﬁer Engine Systems.
(March):148, 1988.
[24] Thomas Reed and Ray Desrosiers. The Equivalence Ratio : The Key To Under-
standing Pyrolysis , Combustion And Gasiﬁcation of Fuels. pages 1–3, 1979.
[25] Emir Aydar, Serhat Gul, NamÄśk Unlu, Fehmi Akgun, and Haydar Livatyali. Ef-
fect of the type of gasifying agent on gas composition in a bubbling ﬂuidized bed
reactor. Journal of the Energy Institute, 87(1):35–42, 2014.
[26] Chris. Higman. Gasiﬁcation. Elsevier/Gulf Professional Pub, 2003.
[27] Patrick J. Woolcock and Robert C. Brown. A review of cleaning technologies for
biomass-derived syngas. Biomass and Bioenergy, 52:54–84, 2013.
[28] P. V. Aravind and Wiebren De Jong. Evaluation of high temperature gas cleaning
options for biomass gasiﬁcation product gas for Solid Oxide Fuel Cells. Progress
in Energy and Combustion Science, 38(6):737–764, 2012.
[29] W Winkler and P Nehter. Thermodynamics of fuel cells. Modeling Solid Oxide
Fuel Cells, pages 25–37, 2008.
139
==PAGE:165==
[30] Huayang Zhu and Robert J. Kee. A general mathematical model for analyzing
the performance of fuel-cell membrane-electrode assemblies. Journal of Power
Sources, 117(1-2):61–74, May 2003.
[31] Nguyen Duc Tuyen and Goro Fujita. Modelling a SOFC Power Unit Using Natural
Gas Fed Directly. 2012.
[32] Emilia Den Boer, Andrzej Jedrczak, Zygmunt Kowalski, Joanna Kulczycka, and
Ryszard Szpadt. A review of municipal solid waste composition and quantities
in Poland. Waste Management, 30(3):369–377, 2010.
[33] Ales Hanc, Pavel Novak, Milan Dvorak, Jan Habart, and Pavel Svehla. Compo-
sition and parameters of household bio-waste in four seasons. Waste Manage-
ment, 31(7):1450–1460, 2011.
[34] Gintaras Denafas, Tomas Ruzgas, Dainius Martuzevičius, Sergey Shmarin,
Michael Hoffmann, Valeriy Mykhaylenko, Stanislav Ogorodnik, Mikhail Ro-
manov, Ekaterina Neguliaeva, Alexander Chusov, Tsitsino Turkadze, Inga Bo-
choidze, and Christian Ludwig. Seasonal variation of municipal solid waste gen-
eration and composition in four East European cities. Resources, Conservation
and Recycling, 89:22–30, 2014.
[35] Florian-patrice Nagel. Electricity from wood through the combination of gasiﬁ-
cation and solid oxide fuel cells Systems analysis and Proof-of-concept. (17856),
2008.
[36] Fhg-ibp Fraunhofer-gesellschaft. Waste 2 Go - Waste Proﬁling. (308363), 2014.
[37] Thomas Fruergaard Edjabou, Vincent Maklawe Essonanawe; Petersen, Claus;
Scheutz Charlotte; Astrup, Morten Bang, Ramona Götze, Kostyantyn Pivnenko,
Claus Petersen, Charlotte Scheutz, and Thomas Fruergaard.
Municipal solid
waste composition: Sampling methodology , statistical analyses , and case study
evaluation. Waste Management, 36:12–23, 2015.
[38] Shahab Sokhansanj. The Effect of Moisture on Heating Values, 2011.
[39] Wanignon Ferdinand Fassinou, Laurent Van De Steene, Siaka Toure, and Eric
Martin. What correlation is appropriate to evaluate biodiesels and vegetable
oils higher heating value (HHV)? Fuel, 90(11):3398–3403, 2011.
140
==PAGE:166==
[40] S. a. Channiwala and P. P. Parikh. A uniﬁed correlation for estimating HHV of
solid, liquid and gaseous fuels. Fuel, 81(8):1051–1063, 2002.
[41] T A Milne, R J Evans, and N Abatzoglu. Biomass Gasiﬁer "Tars": Their Nature,
Formation and Conversion. Fuel and Energy Abstracts, 39(4):283, 1998.
[42] M . W . van de Weerdhof. Modeling the pyrolysis process of biomass particles.
pages 1–70, 2010.
[43] T. Waldheim, L. Nilsson. HEATING VALUE OF GASES FROM Report prepared for
: IEA Bioenergy Agreement ,. English, (May), 2001.
[44] Anthony Anukam, Sampson Mamphweli, Edson Meyer, and Omobola Okoh.
Computer Simulation of the Mass and Energy Balance during Gasiﬁcation of
Sugarcane Bagasse. Journal of Energy, 2014, 2014.
[45] Masoud Rokni.
Thermodynamic Investigation of an Integrated Gasiﬁcation
Plant with Solid Oxide Fuel Cell and Steam Cycles. Green, 2(2-3):71–86, January
2012.
[46] Masoud Rokni. Municipal Solid Waste Gasiﬁcation with Solid Oxide Fuel Cells
and Stirling Engine. In ICCE 2014 Conference, Istanbul, Turkey, number June,
pages 8–12, 2014.
[47] Paolo Baggio, Marco Baratieri, Andrea Gasparella, and Giovanni a. Longo. En-
ergy and environmental analysis of an innovative system based on municipal
solid waste (MSW) pyrolysis and combined cycle. Applied Thermal Engineering,
28(2-3):136–144, 2008.
[48] Lopamudra Devi, Krzysztof J. Ptasinski, and Frans J J G Janssen. A review of
the primary measures for tar elimination in biomass gasiﬁcation processes.
Biomass and Bioenergy, 24(2):125–140, 2002.
[49] V. Belgiorno, G. De Feo, C. Della Rocca, and R. M a Napoli. Energy from gasiﬁca-
tion of solid wastes. Waste Management, 23(1):1–15, 2003.
[50] H. Apfel, M. Rzepka, H. Tu, and U. Stimming. Thermal start-up behaviour and
thermal management of SOFC’s. Journal of Power Sources, 154(2):370–378, 2006.
141
==PAGE:167==
==PAGE:168==
A
PYROLYZER: AVERAGE SOURCE MODEL
1
FUNCTION H2(TP)
2
IF (TP<550) THEN
3
H2 = 0.000001
4
ELSE
5
// H2 = 8.929e-06*TP*TP-7.607e-03*TP+1.579e+00
6
H2 = (0.00001781*TP*TP)-(0.0151*TP)+3.785
7
ENDIF
8
END
9
{========================
10
MODEL OF A WASTE PYROLYSER - Average Formation Data
11
Inputs: temperature, waste fuel composition
12
Programmer: Vignesh Krishnamoorthy
13
Student no: s130670
14
}
15
// Hydrogen Function to Calculate the Formation of Hydrogen as a % of inlet
16
17
// Formation Polynomial Equations for CO, CO2, CH4 and Char - Average Formation
Rates version
18
19
char = ((4.821e-05*TP*TP)-(7.896e-02*TP)+6.005e+01)
{Char formation}
20
21
co = ((-3.393e-05*TP*TP)+(5.582e-02*TP)-1.479e+01)
{CO Formation}
22
23
co2 =(( -1.429e-05*TP*TP)+(9.429e-03*TP)+1.566e+01)
{CO2 Formation}
143
==PAGE:169==
24
25
ch4 = ((7.143e-06*TP*TP)-(1.571e-03*TP)-3.714e-01)
{CH4 Formation}
26
27
water = ((2.321e-05*TP*TP)-(5.161e-02*TP)+2.889e+01)
{Water Formation}
28
29
tar = ((4E-06*TP*TP)-(3.120E-03*TP)+5.960E-01)
{Tar Formation}
30
31
// TP = 500 {Pyrolysis Temperature}
32
P_fuel = 1.013 {Fuel Pressure}
33
34
// Fuel Composition - Units; X/100
35
36
{//MEAN
37
C% = 0,4881*100
38
H2%=0,0630*100
39
O2%=0,3658*100
40
N2%=0,0118*100
41
S%= 0,0020*100
42
Ash%=0,0693*100}
43
44
45
// COMP 1
46
C% = 0.5049*100
47
H2%=0.0641*100
48
O2%=0.3415*100
49
N2%=0.0101*100
50
S%= 0.0016*100
51
Ash%=0.0778*100
52
53
54
H2O_liquid = 0.0500*100
55
H2O_gas = 0*100
56
57
MOI% = H2O_liquid + H2O_gas
58
59
M_in = 0.1
60
61
{############## CALCULATIONS BELOW ############}
144
==PAGE:170==
62
63
// Energy at Inlet
64
65
HHV_in = ((0.341*C%)+(1.322*H2%)-(0.12*N2%)-(0.12*O2%)+(0.0151*S%)-(0.0211*Ash%)) {
Milne Formula MJ/Kg}
66
67
LHV_in = (HHV_in - (2.443)*(8.936*H2%)/100)*1000
{Phyllis2}
68
69
LHV_co = 10.16 {MJ/kg}
70
LHV_ch4 = 49.8553 {MJ/kg}
71
LHV_h2 = 120.09 {MJ/kg}
72
73
// Calculation of Mass of Inlet Components
74
75
C = (C%*M_in)/100
76
H2 = (H2%*M_in)/100
77
O2 = (O2%*M_in)/100
78
N2 = (N2%*M_in)/100
79
S = (S%*M_in)/100
80
Ash = (Ash%*M_in)/100
81
Moisture = (MOI%*M_in)/100
82
83
// Mass Balance Equations
84
85
M_in = M_dry + Moisture
{Inlet Dryness Balance}
86
87
M_in = M_wat + M_char + M_tar + M_gas
{Total Flow Balance}
88
89
M_tar = C_tar + H2_tar + O2_tar
{Tar Balance}
90
91
{### WATER ###}
92
93
M_wat = Moisture + (water/100)*M_dry
94
95
96
{### CHAR ###}
97
98
M_char = C_char + O2_char + H2_char + S + Ash + N2
{Char Balance}
145
==PAGE:171==
99
100
M_char = (char/100)*M_dry
101
102
O2_char = 0.10*O2
103
104
H2_char = 0.01*H2
105
106
107
{### GAS ###}
108
109
M_gas = M_co + M_co2 + M_ch4 + M_h2
{Gas Balance}
110
111
M_co = (co/100)*M_dry
112
M_co2 = (co2/100)*M_dry
113
M_ch4 = (ch4/100)*M_dry
114
M_h2 = (H2(TP)/100)*M_dry
115
116
{## Hydrogen Balance ##}
117
118
(H2 + 0.111*Moisture) = H2_char + M_h2 + 0.25*M_ch4 + H2_tar + 0.1111*M_wat {
Overall Hydrogen Balance}
119
120
{## Carbon Balance ##}
121
122
C = C_char + C_tar + 0.428*M_co + 0.75*M_ch4 + 0.273*M_co2 {Overall Carbon Balance}
123
124
// Fractions
125
126
Char% = M_char/M_in*100
127
Tar% = M_tar/M_in*100
128
Water% = M_wat/M_in*100
129
Gas% = M_gas/M_in*100
130
131
C%_char = C_char/M_char*100
132
H2%_char = H2_char/M_char*100
133
O2%_char = O2_char/M_char*100
134
S%_char = S/M_char*100
135
N2%_char = N2/M_char*100
146
==PAGE:172==
136
Ash%_char = Ash/M_char*100
137
138
CO%_gas = M_co/M_gas*100
139
CO2%_gas = M_co2/M_gas*100
140
CH4%_gas = M_ch4/M_gas*100
141
H2%_gas = M_h2/M_gas*100
142
143
C%_tar = C_tar/M_tar*100
144
H2%_tar = H2_tar/M_tar*100
145
O2%_tar = O2_tar/M_tar*100
146
147
// Energy Content
148
149
HHV_char = ((0.341*C%_char)+(1.322*H2%_char)-(0.12*N2%_char)-(0.12*O2%_char)
+(0.0151*S%_char)-(0.0211*Ash%_char))*1000 {Milne Formula kJ/Kg}
150
151
LHV_char = HHV_char - ((2.443)*(8.936*H2%_char)/100*1000)
{kJ/Kg}
152
153
LHV_gas*M_gas = ((LHV_co*M_co) + (LHV_ch4*M_ch4)+ (LHV_h2*M_h2))*1000
{kJ/kg}
154
155
// LHV_tar = (LHV_in)-((LHV_gas) + (LHV_char))
{kJ/kg}
156
LHV_tar = 30000
157
HHV_tar = LHV_tar + ((2.443)*(8.936*H2%_tar)/100*1000)
{kJ/kg}
158
159
{HHV_tar = ((0,341*C%_tar)+(1,322*H2%_tar)-(0,12*O2%_tar))*1000
160
LHV_tar = HHV_tar - ((2,443)*(8,936*H2%_tar)/100*1000)
161
LHV_tar*M_tar = (LHV_in*M_dry)-((LHV_gas*M_gas) + (LHV_char*M_char))}
162
163
164
// Molar Mass
165
166
Mol_gas = MolarMass(CO2)+MolarMass(CO)+MolarMass(H2)+MolarMass(CH4)
167
168
MF_CH4 = (CH4%_gas*Mol_gas)/MolarMass(CH4)
147
==PAGE:173==
==PAGE:174==
B
PYROLYZER: SINGLE SOURCE MODEL
1
FUNCTION H2(TP)
2
IF (TP<550) THEN
3
H2 = 0.000001
4
ELSE
5
// H2 = 8.929e-06*TP*TP-7.607e-03*TP+1.579e+00
6
H2 = (0.00001781*TP*TP)-(0.0151*TP)+3.785
7
ENDIF
8
END
9
{========================
10
MODEL OF A WASTE PYROLYSER - Cozzani Formation Data
11
Inputs: temperature, waste fuel composition
12
Programmer: Vignesh Krishnamoorthy
13
Student no: s130670
14
}
15
// Hydrogen Function to Calculate the Formation of Hydrogen as a % of inlet
16
17
// Formation Polynomial Equations for CO, CO2, CH4 and Char - Cozzani Version
18
19
char = (-0.00005536*TP*TP)+(0.06675*TP)+5.157
20
21
co = (-0.00002806*TP*TP)+(0.06888*TP)-22.33
22
23
co2 = (-0.00006027*TP*TP)+(0.06732*TP)+1.495
24
149
==PAGE:175==
25
ch4 = (0.00002324*TP*TP)-(0.01153*TP)+1.301
26
27
water = (0.0000625*TP*TP)-(0.1057*TP)+(46.9)
28
29
tar = (0.00006221*TP*TP)-(0.06758*TP)+(56.96)
30
31
{############ INPUTS #############}
32
33
//TP = 500 {Pyrolysis Temperature}
34
P_fuel = 1.013 {Fuel Pressure}
35
36
// Fuel Composition - Units; X/100
37
38
//MEAN
39
C% = 0.4881*100
40
H2%=0.0630*100
41
O2%=0.3658*100
42
N2%=0.0118*100
43
S%= 0.0020*100
44
Ash%=0.0693*100
45
46
47
//DK M1
48
{C% = 0,5049*100
49
H2%=0,0641*100
50
O2%=0,3415*100
51
N2%=0,0101*100
52
S%= 0,0016*100
53
Ash%=0,0778*100}
54
55
56
H2O_liquid = 0.0500*100
57
H2O_gas = 0*100
58
59
MOI% = H2O_liquid + H2O_gas
60
61
M_in = 0.1
62
150
==PAGE:176==
63
{############## CALCULATIONS BELOW ############}
64
65
// Energy at Inlet
66
67
HHV_in = ((0.341*C%)+(1.322*H2%)-(0.12*N2%)-(0.12*O2%)+(0.0151*S%)-(0.0211*Ash%)) {
Milne Formula kJ/Kg}
68
69
LHV_in = (HHV_in - (2.443)*(8.936*H2%)/100)*1000
70
71
LHV_co = 10.16 {MJ/kg}
72
LHV_ch4 = 49.8553 {MJ/kg}
73
LHV_h2 = 120.09 {MJ/kg}
74
75
// Calculation of Mass of Inlet Components
76
77
C = (C%*M_in)/100
78
H2 = (H2%*M_in)/100
79
O2 = (O2%*M_in)/100
80
N2 = (N2%*M_in)/100
81
S = (S%*M_in)/100
82
Ash = (Ash%*M_in)/100
83
Moisture = (MOI%*M_in)/100
84
85
// Mass Balance Equations
86
87
M_in = M_dry + Moisture
{Inlet Dryness Balance}
88
89
M_in = M_wat + M_char + M_tar + M_gas
{Total Flow Balance}
90
91
M_tar = C_tar + H2_tar + O2_tar
{Tar Balance}
92
93
{### WATER ###}
94
95
M_wat = Moisture + (water/100)*M_dry
96
97
98
{### CHAR ###}
99
151
==PAGE:177==
100
M_char = C_char + O2_char + H2_char + S + Ash + N2
{Char Balance}
101
102
M_char = (char/100)*M_dry
103
104
O2_char = 0.10*O2
105
106
H2_char = 0.01*H2
107
108
109
{### GAS ###}
110
111
M_gas = M_co + M_co2 + M_ch4 + M_h2
{Gas Balance}
112
113
M_co = (co/100)*M_dry
114
M_co2 = (co2/100)*M_dry
115
M_ch4 = (ch4/100)*M_dry
116
M_h2 = (H2(TP)/100)*M_dry
117
118
{## Hydrogen Balance ##}
119
120
(H2 + 0.111*Moisture) = H2_char + M_h2 + 0.25*M_ch4 + H2_tar + 0.1111*M_wat {
Overall Hydrogen Balance}
121
122
{## Carbon Balance ##}
123
124
C = C_char + C_tar + 0.428*M_co + 0.75*M_ch4 + 0.273*M_co2 {Overall Carbon Balance}
125
126
// Fractions
127
128
Char% = M_char/M_in*100
129
Tar% = M_tar/M_in*100
130
Water% = M_wat/M_in*100
131
Gas% = M_gas/M_in*100
132
133
C%_char = C_char/M_char*100
134
H2%_char = H2_char/M_char*100
135
O2%_char = O2_char/M_char*100
136
S%_char = S/M_char*100
152
==PAGE:178==
137
N2%_char = N2/M_char*100
138
Ash%_char = Ash/M_char*100
139
140
CO%_gas = M_co/M_gas*100
141
CO2%_gas = M_co2/M_gas*100
142
CH4%_gas = M_ch4/M_gas*100
143
H2%_gas = M_h2/M_gas*100
144
145
C%_tar = C_tar/M_tar*100
146
H2%_tar = H2_tar/M_tar*100
147
O2%_tar = O2_tar/M_tar*100
148
149
// Energy Content
150
151
HHV_char = ((0.341*C%_char)+(1.322*H2%_char)-(0.12*N2%_char)-(0.12*O2%_char)
+(0.0151*S%_char)-(0.0211*Ash%_char))*1000 {Milne Formula kJ/Kg}
152
153
LHV_char = (HHV_char - (2.443)*(8.936*H2%_char)/100)
{kJ/Kg}
154
155
LHV_gas*M_gas = ((LHV_co*M_co) + (LHV_ch4*M_ch4)+ (LHV_h2*M_h2))*1000 {kJ/kg}
156
157
// LHV_in*M_dry = LHV_gas*M_gas + LHV_char*M_char + LHV_tar
158
LHV_tar = 30000
159
160
HHV_tar = LHV_tar + ((2.443)*(8.936*H2%_tar)/100*1000)
161
162
// Molar Mass
163
164
Mol_gas = MolarMass(CO2)+MolarMass(CO)+MolarMass(H2)+MolarMass(CH4)
165
166
MF_CH4 = (CH4%_gas*Mol_gas)/MolarMass(CH4)
153
==PAGE:179==
==PAGE:180==
C
DNA-PYROLYSER MODEL
C.1 Dryer and Pyrolyzer Model
1
C ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
2
C ~~ This is an auto-generated file containing a DNA model with updated initial
guesses.
3
C ~~ The file will be over-written by next DNA run.
4
C ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
5
TITLE Dryer and Pyrolyser
6
7
C ### BUILD - 2 INCLUDING PYROLYSER ###
8
C AUTHOR: VIGNESH KRISHNAMOORTHY
9
10
C # MEDIA DEFINITIONS
11
MEDIA 1 WA 2 DWA
12
13
C # WASTE COMPOSITION #
14
15
SOLID WA C 0.4881 H 0.0630 O 0.3658 N 0.0118 S 0.0020 ASH 0.0693
16
+ LHV 15.58 CP 1.81 MOI 0.2372
17
C # DATA SOURCE: Average from Composition excel
18
19
20
C #==================#
155
==PAGE:181==
21
C ### STEAM DRYER ###
22
C #==================#
23
STRUC DRYR DRYER_03 1 50 2 51 320 0.05 0.10
24
ADDCO P 1 1.01325
25
ADDCO T DRYR 1 25
26
ADDCO M DRYR 1 0.1
27
ADDCO P 2 0.988
28
ADDCO T DRYR 50 200
29
ADDCO P 50 1.01325
30
ADDCO T DRYR 51 140
31
ADDCO Q DRYR 320 0
32
33
C # PYROLYSER CHECK #
34
35
STRUC PYR PYRO_1 52 53 2 3 4 5 90 321 0.9985 500
36
MEDIA 52 NITROGEN
37
MEDIA 3 CHR
38
MEDIA 4 PGS
39
MEDIA 5 TAR
40
41
ADDCO T PYR 52 750
42
ADDCO T PYR 53 550
43
ADDCO P 52 1.01325
44
ADDCO Q PYR 321 0
45
46
C #================================================================# }
47
C ### START VALUES: The ones with tilde are simulation updates ###
48
C #================================================================#
49
50
51
C ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
52
C ~~ Start of list of generated initial guesses.
53
C ~~ The values are the results of the latest simulation.
54
C ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
55
START M DRYR 1 0.8000000000000000E+01 {~~}
56
START P 1 0.1013250000000000E+01 {~~}
57
START H DRYR 1 -0.1952575053507264E+05 {~~}
58
START M DRYR 50 0.9188975622092740E+02 {~~}
156
==PAGE:182==
59
START P 50 0.1013250000000000E+01 {~~}
60
START H DRYR 50 -0.1309566537322502E+05 {~~}
61
START M DRYR 2 -0.4210526315789473E+01 {~~}
62
START P 2 0.9880000000000002E+00 {~~}
63
START H DRYR 2 -0.2261273471663802E+05 {~~}
64
START M DRYR 51 -0.9567922990513792E+02 {~~}
65
START P 51 0.1013250000000000E+01 {~~}
66
START H DRYR 51 -0.1321448750825286E+05 {~~}
67
START Q DRYR 320 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
68
START X_J DWA H2 0.5835660000000004E-01 {~~}
69
START X_J DWA O2 0.3700924500000002E+00 {~~}
70
START X_J DWA N2 0.1125465000000001E-01 {~~}
71
START X_J DWA CO 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
72
START X_J DWA NO 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
73
START X_J DWA CO2 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
74
START X_J DWA H2O-L 0.5000000000000001E-01 {~~}
75
START X_J DWA NH3 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
76
START X_J DWA H2S 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
77
START X_J DWA SO2 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
78
START X_J DWA CH4 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
79
START X_J DWA C2H6 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
80
START X_J DWA C3H8 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
81
START X_J DWA C4H10-N 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
82
START X_J DWA C4H10-I 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
83
START X_J DWA C5H12 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
84
START X_J DWA C6H14 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
85
START X_J DWA C7H16 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
86
START X_J DWA C8H18 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
87
START X_J DWA C2H4 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
88
START X_J DWA C3H6 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
89
START X_J DWA C5H10 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
90
START X_J DWA C6H12-1 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
91
START X_J DWA C7H14 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
92
START X_J DWA C2H2 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
93
START X_J DWA C6H6 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
94
START X_J DWA C6H12-C 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
95
START X_J DWA C 0.4583968500000002E+00 {~~}
96
START X_J DWA S 0.1983600000000001E-02 {~~}
157
==PAGE:183==
97
START X_J DWA NO2 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
98
START X_J DWA HCN 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
99
START X_J DWA COS 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
100
START X_J DWA N2O 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
101
START X_J DWA NO3 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
102
START X_J DWA SO3 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
103
START X_J DWA AR 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
104
START X_J DWA ASH 0.4991585000000003E-01 {~~}
105
START X_J DWA TAR 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
106
START M PYR 52 0.2905953197747728E+02 {~~}
107
START P 52 0.1013250000000000E+01 {~~}
108
START H PYR 52 0.9707405579898156E+03 {~~}
109
START M PYR 53 -0.2905953197747728E+02 {~~}
110
START P 53 0.1011730125000001E+01 {~~}
111
START H PYR 53 0.7930169360383377E+03 {~~}
112
START M PYR 2 0.4210526315789473E+01 {~~}
113
START H PYR 2 -0.2261273471663802E+05 {~~}
114
START M PYR 3 -0.6516291426779481E+00 {~~}
115
START P 3 0.9880000000000002E+00 {~~}
116
START H PYR 3 -0.3160623774921163E+03 {~~}
117
START M PYR 4 -0.1971929957391402E+01 {~~}
118
START P 4 0.9880000000000002E+00 {~~}
119
START H PYR 4 -0.4903958155069692E+04 {~~}
120
START M PYR 5 -0.9453632080852211E+00 {~~}
121
START P 5 0.9880000000000002E+00 {~~}
122
START H PYR 5 -0.7663164468342191E+05 {~~}
123
START M PYR 90 -0.6416040076349013E+00 {~~}
124
START P 90 0.9880000000000002E+00 {~~}
125
START H PYR 90 -0.1204168664559631E+05 {~~}
126
START Q PYR 321 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
127
START X_J CHR C 0.4519273989468147E+00 {~~}
128
START X_J CHR O2 0.1099999994039536E+00 {~~}
129
START X_J CHR H2 0.2999999932944775E-01 {~~}
130
START X_J CHR S 0.1281710631552858E-01 {~~}
131
START X_J CHR N2 0.7272234603451488E-01 {~~}
132
START X_J CHR ASH 0.3225331499697405E+00 {~~}
133
START Y_J PGS CO2 0.2269279640592541E+00 {~~}
134
START Y_J PGS CO 0.3996165971929466E+00 {~~}
158
==PAGE:184==
135
START Y_J PGS CH4 0.2851678323514637E+00 {~~}
136
START Y_J PGS H2 0.8828760639633569E-01 {~~}
137
START X_J TAR C 0.8495170349100704E+00 {~~}
138
START X_J TAR H2 0.8225872172137914E-01 {~~}
139
START X_J TAR O2 0.6822424336855047E-01 {~~}
140
C ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
141
C ~~ End of generated initial guesses.
142
C ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
C.2 Inlet-Gasiﬁer Model
1
2
MEDIA 1 CHAR
3
MEDIA 2 TAR
4
5
SOLID CHAR C 0.5035 H 0.03000 O 0.1100 N 0.0506190 S 0.008581 ASH 0.2973
6
+ LHV 0.1870E+05 CP 1.81 MOI 0
7
8
SOLID TAR C 0.6926 H 0.09180 O 0.2156
9
+ LHV 0.20E+05 CP 1.81 MOI 0
10
11
C FLUID PYRGAS CO2 0.3673 CO 0.3732 CH4 0.2321 H2 0.02736
12
13
14
STRUC SMIX SOLMIX01 1 2 3
15
MEDIA 3 COWA
16
ADDCO T SMIX 1 500
17
ADDCO M SMIX 1 0.02
18
ADDCO T SMIX 2 500
19
ADDCO M SMIX 2 0.03
20
ADDCO P 1 1.013
21
22
23
STRUC GASF GASIFI_3 8 3 26 74 4 99 301 1 3 4 6 7 9 11 36 /
24
0.998 800 0.005 0 1.0 0.01
25
C Variable constitution parameter: Number of calculated gas components 8
26
C Nodes: Inlet fuel 2; inlet water 26; inlet air 74; outlet syngas 3,
27
C outlet ash 99, heat loss 301
159
==PAGE:185==
28
C Integer Parameters: Calculated gas compounds H2 (1), N2 (3), CO (4),
29
C CO2 (6), H2O (7), H2S (9), CH4 (11), Ar (36)
30
C Real parameter: Pressure 1 bar, Eq. temperature 800 degC, Pressure loss 0.005,
31
C Water-to-fuel ratio 0, carbon conversion factor 1,
32
C non-equilibrium methane 0.01.
33
MEDIA 74 STANDARD_AIR
34
MEDIA 4 OGAS
35
MEDIA 99 ASH
36
37
ADDCO T GASF 26 180
38
ADDCO P 99 1.013
39
ADDCO T GASF 74 652.34
40
ADDCO Q GASF 301 0
41
ADDCO T GASF 99 800
42
43
44
45
46
{
47
C ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
48
C ~~ START BEGINS HERE - USER INPUT START OPTIONS
49
C ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
50
START M GASF 26 0
51
START T GASF 74 750
52
START M GASF 74 10
53
START M GASF 99 0.2
54
START T GASF 99 750
55
56
START X_J ASH ASH 0.100E+01
57
58
START Y_J OGAS AR 0.001E+00
59
START Y_J OGAS H2 0.005E+00
60
START Y_J OGAS N2 0.200E+00
61
START Y_J OGAS CO 0.150E+00
62
START Y_J OGAS CO2 0.350E+00
63
START Y_J OGAS H2S 0.050E+00
64
START Y_J OGAS CH4 0.150E+00
65
160
==PAGE:186==
66
START X_J COWA C 0.400E+00
67
START X_J COWA S 0.002E+00
68
START X_J COWA H2 0.200E+00
69
START X_J COWA ASH 0.100E+00
70
START X_J COWA O2 0.300E+00
71
72
73
C ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
74
C ~~ Start of list of generated initial guesses.
75
C ~~ The values are the results of the latest simulation.
76
C ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
77
START M SMIX 1 0.9300000000000002E+00 {~~}
78
START P 1 0.1013000000000000E+01 {~~}
79
START H SMIX 1 -0.1779340995545080E+05 {~~}
80
START M SMIX 2 0.1530000000000000E+01 {~~}
81
START P 2 0.1013000000000000E+01 {~~}
82
START H SMIX 2 -0.2102328549262453E+05 {~~}
83
START M SMIX 3 -0.2460000000000000E+01 {~~}
84
START P 3 0.1013000000000000E+01 {~~}
85
START H SMIX 3 -0.1980223498466861E+05 {~~}
86
START X_J COWA H2 0.3162786585365855E-01 {~~}
87
START X_J COWA O2 0.1258402439024391E+00 {~~}
88
START X_J COWA N2 0.9600548780487810E-02 {~~}
89
START X_J COWA CO 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
90
START X_J COWA NO 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
91
START X_J COWA CO2 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
92
START X_J COWA H2O-G 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
93
START X_J COWA NH3 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
94
START X_J COWA H2S 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
95
START X_J COWA SO2 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
96
START X_J COWA CH4 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
97
START X_J COWA C2H6 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
98
START X_J COWA C3H8 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
99
START X_J COWA C4H10-N 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
100
START X_J COWA C4H10-I 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
101
START X_J COWA C5H12 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
102
START X_J COWA C6H14 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
103
START X_J COWA C7H16 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
161
==PAGE:187==
104
START X_J COWA C8H18 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
105
START X_J COWA C2H4 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
106
START X_J COWA C3H6 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
107
START X_J COWA C5H10 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
108
START X_J COWA C6H12-1 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
109
START X_J COWA C7H14 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
110
START X_J COWA C2H2 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
111
START X_J COWA C6H6 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
112
START X_J COWA C6H12-C 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
113
START X_J COWA C 0.2886221341463416E+00 {~~}
114
START X_J COWA S 0.1693280487804879E-02 {~~}
115
START X_J COWA NO2 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
116
START X_J COWA HCN 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
117
START X_J COWA COS 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
118
START X_J COWA N2O 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
119
START X_J COWA NO3 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
120
START X_J COWA SO3 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
121
START X_J COWA AR 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
122
START X_J COWA H2O-L 0.5000000000000002E+00 {~~}
123
START X_J COWA ASH 0.4261592682926831E-01 {~~}
124
START X_J COWA TAR 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
125
START H GASF 3 -0.1260003144494696E+05 {~~}
126
START M GASF 26 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
127
START P 26 0.1003000000000000E+01 {~~}
128
START H GASF 26 -0.1313512543292168E+05 {~~}
129
START M GASF 74 0.5117905742895906E+01 {~~}
130
START P 74 0.1003000000000000E+01 {~~}
131
START H GASF 74 0.4606861623022310E+04 {~~}
132
START M GASF 4 -0.7368235382895906E+01 {~~}
133
START P 4 0.9980000000000002E+00 {~~}
134
START H GASF 4 -0.8828233668534540E+03 {~~}
135
START M GASF 99 -0.2096703600000001E+00 {~~}
136
START P 99 0.1013000000000000E+01 {~~}
137
START H GASF 99 -0.4358000000000000E+04 {~~}
138
START Q GASF 301 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
139
START ZA GASF 1 0.8170577772145582E+05 {~~}
140
START ZA GASF 2 -0.5381757809678836E+03 {~~}
141
START ZA GASF 3 0.1095876371196909E+06 {~~}
162
==PAGE:188==
142
START ZA GASF 4 0.3386713846254572E+06 {~~}
143
START ZA GASF 5 0.1481493394956441E+06 {~~}
144
START ZA GASF 6 0.2145592248726681E+06 {~~}
145
START ZA GASF 7 -0.2548467307688636E+06 {~~}
146
START Y_J OGAS H2 0.1926486250103850E+00 {~~}
147
START Y_J OGAS O2 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
148
START Y_J OGAS N2 0.4308053714636295E+00 {~~}
149
START Y_J OGAS CO 0.3351095270497336E+00 {~~}
150
START Y_J OGAS NO 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
151
START Y_J OGAS CO2 0.7955837877158077E-02 {~~}
152
START Y_J OGAS H2O-G 0.3501877335758417E-02 {~~}
153
START Y_J OGAS NH3 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
154
START Y_J OGAS H2S 0.8066568290795900E-03 {~~}
155
START Y_J OGAS SO2 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
156
START Y_J OGAS CH4 0.2410643783030607E-01 {~~}
157
START Y_J OGAS NO2 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
158
START Y_J OGAS HCN 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
159
START Y_J OGAS COS 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
160
START Y_J OGAS AR 0.5065666603949688E-02 {~~}
161
START X_J ASH C 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
162
START X_J ASH ASH 0.1000000000000000E+01 {~~}
163
C ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
164
C ~~ End of generated initial guesses.
165
C ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
163
==PAGE:189==
==PAGE:190==
D
MAIN WORKING MODEL
D.1 Main System DNA Code
1
C ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
2
C ~~ This is an auto-generated file containing a DNA model with updated initial
guesses.
3
C ~~ The file will be over-written by next DNA run.
4
C ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
5
TITLE System A
6
7
C This is a DNA model of a plant feed by wood biomass with these
8
C main components: 1. Gassification
9
C 2. SOFC
10
11
12
C ###################################################
13
C ###################################################
14
C ###################################################
15
C -----------------GASIFIER PART---------------------
16
C ###################################################
17
C ###################################################
18
C ###################################################
19
20
C Gassification of wood by means of air and steam based on VIKING2 plant
165
==PAGE:191==
21
22
C ##Media##
23
media 1 waste 2 DWA
24
media 73 STANDARD_AIR 3 syngas 99 Ash
25
26
C ##Fuel composition##
27
SOLID waste C 0.4881 H .0630 O .3658 S .0020 N 0.0118 ASH .0693
28
+ LHV 15580 CP 1.81 MOI .2372
29
30
31
C ###################################################
32
C -----------------------DRYER-----------------------
33
C ###################################################
34
STRUC woodryer DRYER_03 1 64 2 61 300 0.05 0.005
35
ADDCO M woodryer 1 0.001 {0.0306}
36
ADDCO T woodryer 1 15 P 1 1.013
37
ADDCO P 2 1.008 T woodryer 2 110
38
ADDCO Q woodryer 300 0
39
40
41
C ###################################################
42
C ---------------------GASIFIER----------------------
43
C ###################################################
44
STRUC gasifier GASIFI_3 8 2 26 74 3 99 301 1 3 4 6 7 9 11 36 /
45
0.998 750 0.005 0 1.0 0.01
46
C Variable constitution parameter: Number of calculated gas components 8
47
C Nodes: Inlet fuel 2; inlet water 26; inlet air 74; outlet syngas 3,
48
C outlet ash 99, heat loss 301
49
C Integer Parameters: Calculated gas compounds H2 (1), N2 (3), CO (4),
50
C CO2 (6), H2O (7), H2S (9), CH4 (11), Ar (36)
51
C Real parameter: Pressure 1 bar, Eq. temperature 800 degC, Pressure loss 0.005,
52
C Water-to-fuel ratio 0, carbon conversion factor 1,
53
C non-equilibrium methane 0.01.
54
55
ADDCO T gasifier 3 750
56
ADDCO T gasifier 26 150
57
ADDCO P 99 1.013
58
ADDCO Q gasifier 301 0
166
==PAGE:192==
59
60
61
C ###################################################
62
C ------------------AIR PREHEATER--------------------
63
C ###################################################
64
STRUC Gasification_Pre heatex_2 3 4 72 73 302 20 0.005 0.005
65
ADDCO Q Gasification_Pre 302 0
66
ADDCO T Gasification_Pre 72 15
67
68
69
C ###################################################
70
C ------------------STEAM HEATER---------------------
71
C ###################################################
72
C Heat generation is brought about by means of woodgas heat
73
STRUC steamgen heatex_1 4 55 63 64 303 0.005 0.005
74
MEDIA 63 STEAM-HF
75
ADDCO T steamgen 64 160 {200}
76
ADDCO Q steamgen 303 0
77
78
79
C ###################################################
80
C ------------------STEAM BLOWER---------------------
81
C ###################################################
82
STRUC steamblower COMPRE_1 61 62 304 105 0.8 0.98
83
84
85
C ###################################################
86
C --------------------SPLITTER-----------------------
87
C ###################################################
88
STRUC split SPLITTER 62 63 69
89
90
91
C ###################################################
92
C ----------------------MIXER------------------------
93
C ###################################################
94
STRUC mixer MIXER_02 73 69 74
95
MEDIA 74 steam&air
96
167
==PAGE:193==
97
98
C ###################################################
99
C -------------------GAS CLEANING--------------------
100
C ###################################################
101
C It takes away the H2S from the gasification (no SOFC poisoning)
102
STRUC gascleaner GASCLE_1 55 5 97 305 0.0049
103
C Pressure loss is taken from paper about Viking
104
MEDIA 5 syngas_clean 97 Hydrogen_Sulfide
105
ADDCO Q gascleaner 305 0
106
107
108
C *************************************************************
109
C ----------------- FUEL CELL (SOFC) PART --------------------
110
C *************************************************************
111
112
C ---------------------------Wood gas blower---------------------------------
113
STRUC woodg_blower compre_1 5 6 306 101 0.9 0.98
114
115
C -------------------- Methanator ---------------------
116
STRUC Met METHANATOR 6 60 380
117
addco Q Met 380 0
118
media 60 woodgas_met
119
120
C ---------------------------Anode preheater-----------------------------
121
{STRUC AP heatex_1 8 9 60 7 307 0.005 0.005
122
ADDCO Q AP 307 0
123
ADDCO T AP 7 800}
124
125
126
C ---------------------------Air blower---------------------------------
127
STRUC airblower compre_1 49 50 308 102 0.7 0.95
128
MEDIA 49 SIMPLE_AIR
129
ADDCO T airblower 49 15 P 49 1.013
130
131
132
C ---------------------------Cathode preheater------------------------------
133
STRUC Cathode_Pre heatex_1 52 53 50 51 309 0.01 0.01
134
ADDCO Q Cathode_Pre 309 0
168
==PAGE:194==
135
ADDCO T Cathode_Pre 51 750
136
137
138
C ---------------------------Sofc---------------------------------------
139
STRUC sofc SOFCEQ_1DN2 60 51 8 52 200 310 .6 800 .005 .01 80 2
140
MEDIA 8 OffFuel 52 OffAir
141
ADDCO Q sofc 310 0
142
ADDCO P 52 1.013
143
ADDCO P 8 1.013
144
145
146
147
148
C ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
149
C ~~ Start of list of generated initial guesses.
150
C ~~ The values are the results of the latest simulation.
151
C ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
152
START M woodryer 1 0.1000000000000000E+00 {~~}
153
START P 1 0.1013000000000000E+01 {~~}
154
START H woodryer 1 -0.8239089538620547E+04 {~~}
155
START M woodryer 64 0.8144627877260264E+00 {~~}
156
START P 64 0.9980000000000002E+00 {~~}
157
START H woodryer 64 -0.1317464517570124E+05 {~~}
158
START M woodryer 2 -0.7368421052631580E-01 {~~}
159
START P 2 0.1008000000000000E+01 {~~}
160
START H woodryer 2 -0.5334991341699311E+04 {~~}
161
START M woodryer 61 -0.8407785771997107E+00 {~~}
162
START P 61 0.9930000000000002E+00 {~~}
163
START H woodryer 61 -0.1327467524560393E+05 {~~}
164
START Q woodryer 300 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
165
START X_J DWA H2 0.5861500000000002E-01 {~~}
166
START X_J DWA O2 0.3686950000000002E+00 {~~}
167
START X_J DWA N2 0.1111500000000001E-01 {~~}
168
START X_J DWA CO 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
169
START X_J DWA NO 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
170
START X_J DWA CO2 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
171
START X_J DWA H2O-L 0.5000000000000001E-01 {~~}
172
START X_J DWA NH3 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
169
==PAGE:195==
173
START X_J DWA H2S 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
174
START X_J DWA SO2 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
175
START X_J DWA CH4 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
176
START X_J DWA C2H6 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
177
START X_J DWA C3H8 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
178
START X_J DWA C4H10-N 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
179
START X_J DWA C4H10-I 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
180
START X_J DWA C5H12 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
181
START X_J DWA C6H14 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
182
START X_J DWA C7H16 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
183
START X_J DWA C8H18 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
184
START X_J DWA C2H4 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
185
START X_J DWA C3H6 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
186
START X_J DWA C5H10 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
187
START X_J DWA C6H12-1 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
188
START X_J DWA C7H14 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
189
START X_J DWA C2H2 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
190
START X_J DWA C6H6 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
191
START X_J DWA C6H12-C 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
192
START X_J DWA C 0.4579000000000001E+00 {~~}
193
START X_J DWA S 0.2375000000000001E-02 {~~}
194
START X_J DWA NO2 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
195
START X_J DWA HCN 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
196
START X_J DWA COS 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
197
START X_J DWA N2O 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
198
START X_J DWA NO3 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
199
START X_J DWA SO3 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
200
START X_J DWA AR 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
201
START X_J DWA ASH 0.5130000000000001E-01 {~~}
202
START X_J DWA TAR 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
203
START M gasifier 2 0.7368421052631580E-01 {~~}
204
START H gasifier 2 -0.5334991341699311E+04 {~~}
205
START M gasifier 26 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
206
START P 26 0.1003000000000000E+01 {~~}
207
START H gasifier 26 -0.1319450918722706E+05 {~~}
208
START M gasifier 74 0.1312026079494932E+00 {~~}
209
START P 74 0.1003000000000000E+01 {~~}
210
START H gasifier 74 -0.2128973989102845E+04 {~~}
170
==PAGE:196==
211
START M gasifier 3 -0.2011068184758089E+00 {~~}
212
START P 3 0.9980000000000002E+00 {~~}
213
START H gasifier 3 -0.3261740848849827E+04 {~~}
214
START M gasifier 99 -0.3780000000000001E-02 {~~}
215
START P 99 0.1013000000000000E+01 {~~}
216
START H gasifier 99 -0.4358000000000000E+04 {~~}
217
START Q gasifier 301 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
218
START ZA gasifier 1 0.8034381913423241E+05 {~~}
219
START ZA gasifier 2 0.3243737185550880E+05 {~~}
220
START ZA gasifier 3 0.1110665993621768E+06 {~~}
221
START ZA gasifier 4 0.3109850962228922E+06 {~~}
222
START ZA gasifier 5 0.1536053731020269E+06 {~~}
223
START ZA gasifier 6 0.2175012226935516E+06 {~~}
224
START ZA gasifier 7 -0.3076637036368767E+06 {~~}
225
START Y_J syngas H2 0.2653593836450014E+00 {~~}
226
START Y_J syngas O2 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
227
START Y_J syngas N2 0.3042744043698672E+00 {~~}
228
START Y_J syngas CO 0.1799474487554102E+00 {~~}
229
START Y_J syngas NO 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
230
START Y_J syngas CO2 0.1107025365704574E+00 {~~}
231
START Y_J syngas H2O-G 0.1249919933904223E+00 {~~}
232
START Y_J syngas NH3 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
233
START Y_J syngas H2S 0.5850617001337629E-03 {~~}
234
START Y_J syngas SO2 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
235
START Y_J syngas CH4 0.1055462650669274E-01 {~~}
236
START Y_J syngas NO2 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
237
START Y_J syngas HCN 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
238
START Y_J syngas COS 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
239
START Y_J syngas AR 0.3584545062014867E-02 {~~}
240
START X_J Ash C 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
241
START X_J Ash ASH 0.1000000000000000E+01 {~~}
242
START M Gasification_Pre 3 0.2011068184758089E+00 {~~}
243
START H Gasification_Pre 3 -0.3261740848849826E+04 {~~}
244
START M Gasification_Pre 4 -0.2011068184758089E+00 {~~}
245
START P 4 0.9930000000000002E+00 {~~}
246
START H Gasification_Pre 4 -0.3661111953940293E+04 {~~}
247
START M Gasification_Pre 72 0.1048868184758090E+00 {~~}
248
START P 72 0.1008000000000000E+01 {~~}
171
==PAGE:197==
249
START H Gasification_Pre 72 -0.9883452766878595E+02 {~~}
250
START M Gasification_Pre 73 -0.1048868184758090E+00 {~~}
251
START P 73 0.1003000000000000E+01 {~~}
252
START H Gasification_Pre 73 0.6669075694130856E+03 {~~}
253
START Q Gasification_Pre 302 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
254
START ZA Gasification_Pre 1 0.8031625233591161E+02 {~~}
255
START M steamgen 4 0.2011068184758089E+00 {~~}
256
START H steamgen 4 -0.3661111953940293E+04 {~~}
257
START M steamgen 55 -0.2011068184758089E+00 {~~}
258
START P 55 0.9880000000000002E+00 {~~}
259
START H steamgen 55 -0.4057481599151588E+04 {~~}
260
START M steamgen 63 0.8144627877260264E+00 {~~}
261
START P 63 0.1003000000000000E+01 {~~}
262
START H steamgen 63 -0.1327251660640391E+05 {~~}
263
START M steamgen 64 -0.8144627877260264E+00 {~~}
264
START H steamgen 64 -0.1317464517570124E+05 {~~}
265
START Q steamgen 303 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
266
START ZA steamgen 1 0.7971263828882884E+02 {~~}
267
START M steamblower 61 0.8407785771997107E+00 {~~}
268
START H steamblower 61 -0.1327467524560393E+05 {~~}
269
START M steamblower 62 -0.8407785771997107E+00 {~~}
270
START P 62 0.1003000000000000E+01 {~~}
271
START H steamblower 62 -0.1327251660640390E+05 {~~}
272
START Q steamblower 304 -0.3703954276168932E-01 {~~}
273
START W steamblower 105 0.1851977138041121E+01 {~~}
274
START M split 62 0.8407785771997107E+00 {~~}
275
START H split 62 -0.1327251660640391E+05 {~~}
276
START M split 63 -0.8144627877260264E+00 {~~}
277
START H split 63 -0.1327251660640391E+05 {~~}
278
START M split 69 -0.2631578947368419E-01 {~~}
279
START P 69 0.1003000000000000E+01 {~~}
280
START H split 69 -0.1327251660640391E+05 {~~}
281
START M mixer 73 0.1048868184758090E+00 {~~}
282
START H mixer 73 0.6669075694130858E+03 {~~}
283
START M mixer 69 0.2631578947368419E-01 {~~}
284
START H mixer 69 -0.1327251660640390E+05 {~~}
285
START M mixer 74 -0.1312026079494932E+00 {~~}
286
START H mixer 74 -0.2128973989102845E+04 {~~}
172
==PAGE:198==
287
START Y_J steam&air H2 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
288
START Y_J steam&air O2 0.1480199565643915E+00 {~~}
289
START Y_J steam&air N2 0.5513475876077988E+00 {~~}
290
START Y_J steam&air CO 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
291
START Y_J steam&air NO 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
292
START Y_J steam&air CO2 0.2140047564786384E-03 {~~}
293
START Y_J steam&air H2O-G 0.2938556385393194E+00 {~~}
294
START Y_J steam&air NH3 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
295
START Y_J steam&air H2S 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
296
START Y_J steam&air SO2 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
297
START Y_J steam&air CH4 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
298
START Y_J steam&air C2H6 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
299
START Y_J steam&air C3H8 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
300
START Y_J steam&air C4H10-N 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
301
START Y_J steam&air C4H10-I 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
302
START Y_J steam&air C5H12 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
303
START Y_J steam&air C6H14 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
304
START Y_J steam&air C7H16 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
305
START Y_J steam&air C8H18 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
306
START Y_J steam&air C2H4 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
307
START Y_J steam&air C3H6 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
308
START Y_J steam&air C5H10 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
309
START Y_J steam&air C6H12-1 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
310
START Y_J steam&air C7H14 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
311
START Y_J steam&air C2H2 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
312
START Y_J steam&air C6H6 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
313
START Y_J steam&air C6H12-C 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
314
START Y_J steam&air C 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
315
START Y_J steam&air S 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
316
START Y_J steam&air NO2 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
317
START Y_J steam&air HCN 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
318
START Y_J steam&air COS 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
319
START Y_J steam&air N2O 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
320
START Y_J steam&air NO3 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
321
START Y_J steam&air SO3 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
322
START Y_J steam&air AR 0.6562812532011578E-02 {~~}
323
START Y_J steam&air ASH 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
324
START Y_J steam&air TAR 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
173
==PAGE:199==
325
START Y_J steam&air CH3OH 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
326
START M gascleaner 55 0.2011068184758089E+00 {~~}
327
START H gascleaner 55 -0.4057481599151589E+04 {~~}
328
START M gascleaner 5 -0.2009208141089967E+00 {~~}
329
START P 5 0.9831000000000002E+00 {~~}
330
START H gascleaner 5 -0.4060898400444740E+04 {~~}
331
START M gascleaner 97 -0.1860043668122272E-03 {~~}
332
START P 97 0.9831000000000002E+00 {~~}
333
START H gascleaner 97 -0.3666731023730826E+03 {~~}
334
START Q gascleaner 305 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
335
START Y_J syngas_clean H2 0.2655147261420887E+00 {~~}
336
START Y_J syngas_clean O2 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
337
START Y_J syngas_clean N2 0.3044525278834407E+00 {~~}
338
START Y_J syngas_clean CO 0.1800527907472787E+00 {~~}
339
START Y_J syngas_clean NO 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
340
START Y_J syngas_clean CO2 0.1107673423000628E+00 {~~}
341
START Y_J syngas_clean H2O-G 0.1250651642280331E+00 {~~}
342
START Y_J syngas_clean CH4 0.1056080522935501E-01 {~~}
343
START Y_J syngas_clean NO2 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
344
START Y_J syngas_clean AR 0.3586643469741047E-02 {~~}
345
START Y_J Hydrogen_Sulfide H2O-G 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
346
START Y_J Hydrogen_Sulfide NH3 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
347
START Y_J Hydrogen_Sulfide H2S 0.1000000000000000E+01 {~~}
348
START Y_J Hydrogen_Sulfide SO2 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
349
START Y_J Hydrogen_Sulfide HCN 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
350
START Y_J Hydrogen_Sulfide COS 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
351
START Y_J Hydrogen_Sulfide AR 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
352
START Y_J Hydrogen_Sulfide ASH 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
353
START M woodg_blower 5 0.2009208141089967E+00 {~~}
354
START H woodg_blower 5 -0.4060898400444739E+04 {~~}
355
START M woodg_blower 6 -0.2009208141089967E+00 {~~}
356
START P 6 0.1018090452261306E+01 {~~}
357
START H woodg_blower 6 -0.4053036653891387E+04 {~~}
358
START Q woodg_blower 306 -0.3223650036363111E-01 {~~}
359
START W woodg_blower 101 0.1611825018181891E+01 {~~}
360
START M Met 6 0.2009208141089967E+00 {~~}
361
START H Met 6 -0.4053036653891386E+04 {~~}
362
START M Met 60 -0.2009208141089967E+00 {~~}
174
==PAGE:200==
363
START P 60 0.1018090452261306E+01 {~~}
364
START H Met 60 -0.4053036653891387E+04 {~~}
365
START Q Met 380 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
366
START ZA Met 1 0.6504967391802085E+05 {~~}
367
START ZA Met 2 0.6084000223412764E+04 {~~}
368
START ZA Met 3 0.2966768749548484E+06 {~~}
369
START ZA Met 4 -0.2890321971786858E+06 {~~}
370
START Y_J woodgas_met H2 0.2175365773814548E+00 {~~}
371
START Y_J woodgas_met CO 0.9746020431717836E-01 {~~}
372
START Y_J woodgas_met CO2 0.1757890343285923E+00 {~~}
373
START Y_J woodgas_met H2O-G 0.1218526484735022E+00 {~~}
374
START Y_J woodgas_met CH4 0.5344738951184862E-01 {~~}
375
START Y_J woodgas_met N2 0.3300262281427584E+00 {~~}
376
START Y_J woodgas_met NO 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
377
START Y_J woodgas_met H2S 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
378
START Y_J woodgas_met SO2 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
379
START Y_J woodgas_met NO2 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
380
START Y_J woodgas_met HCN 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
381
START Y_J woodgas_met COS 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
382
START Y_J woodgas_met N2O 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
383
START Y_J woodgas_met NO3 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
384
START Y_J woodgas_met SO3 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
385
START Y_J woodgas_met AR 0.3887917844665315E-02 {~~}
386
START M airblower 49 0.1474046111507783E+02 {~~}
387
START P 49 0.1013000000000000E+01 {~~}
388
START H airblower 49 -0.1010527553297795E+02 {~~}
389
START M airblower 50 -0.1474046111507783E+02 {~~}
390
START P 50 0.1033232323232323E+01 {~~}
391
START H airblower 50 -0.7752696451361789E+01 {~~}
392
START Q airblower 308 -0.1825163182774120E+01 {~~}
393
START W airblower 102 0.3650326365548269E+02 {~~}
394
START M Cathode_Pre 52 0.1467496448211322E+02 {~~}
395
START P 52 0.1013000000000000E+01 {~~}
396
START H Cathode_Pre 52 0.8374258368161602E+03 {~~}
397
START M Cathode_Pre 53 -0.1467496448211322E+02 {~~}
398
START P 53 0.1003000000000000E+01 {~~}
399
START H Cathode_Pre 53 0.4681635556793972E+02 {~~}
400
START M Cathode_Pre 50 0.1474046111507783E+02 {~~}
175
==PAGE:201==
401
START H Cathode_Pre 50 -0.7752696451361789E+01 {~~}
402
START M Cathode_Pre 51 -0.1474046111507783E+02 {~~}
403
START P 51 0.1023232323232323E+01 {~~}
404
START H Cathode_Pre 51 0.7793438513406123E+03 {~~}
405
START Q Cathode_Pre 309 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
406
START ZA Cathode_Pre 1 0.1160216605653959E+05 {~~}
407
START M sofc 60 0.2009208141089967E+00 {~~}
408
START H sofc 60 -0.4053036653891386E+04 {~~}
409
START M sofc 51 0.1474046111507783E+02 {~~}
410
START H sofc 51 0.7793438513406123E+03 {~~}
411
START M sofc 8 -0.2664174470736065E+00 {~~}
412
START P 8 0.1013000000000000E+01 {~~}
413
START H sofc 8 -0.6220226576424067E+04 {~~}
414
START M sofc 52 -0.1467496448211322E+02 {~~}
415
START H sofc 52 0.8374258368161602E+03 {~~}
416
START E sofc 200 -0.4153078487703980E+02 {~~}
417
START Q sofc 310 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
418
START ZA sofc 1 0.9559516856236779E+05 {~~}
419
START ZA sofc 2 0.9449643592877370E+05 {~~}
420
START ZA sofc 3 0.1170652337393660E+06 {~~}
421
START ZA sofc 4 0.2829981613598281E+06 {~~}
422
START ZA sofc 5 -0.2038162011577510E+07 {~~}
423
START ZA sofc 6 0.8074653195488425E+00 {~~}
424
START ZA sofc 7 0.6639912207515919E+03 {~~}
425
START ZA sofc 8 0.6824345808526009E+00 {~~}
426
START ZA sofc 9 0.6298618996809763E+00 {~~}
427
START ZA sofc 10 0.5257268117162454E-01 {~~}
428
START ZA sofc 11 0.2555032304940953E+02 {~~}
429
START Y_J OffFuel H2 0.2330741826694203E-01 {~~}
430
START Y_J OffFuel CO 0.1583210050410703E-01 {~~}
431
START Y_J OffFuel CO2 0.2803552018616055E+00 {~~}
432
START Y_J OffFuel H2O-G 0.3812993129674355E+00 {~~}
433
START Y_J OffFuel CH4 0.3234176573085910E-08 {~~}
434
START Y_J OffFuel N2 0.2992059631657333E+00 {~~}
435
START Y_J OffAir O2 0.2068224776229420E+00 {~~}
436
START Y_J OffAir N2 0.7931775223770579E+00 {~~}
437
START Y_J OffAir CO2 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
438
START Y_J OffAir H2O-G 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
176
==PAGE:202==
439
START Y_J OffAir AR 0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
440
C ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
441
C ~~ End of generated initial guesses.
442
C ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
443
444
simul
445
param sofc 1 0.48
446
simul
447
param sofc 1 0.52
448
simul
449
param sofc 1 0.6
450
simul
451
param sofc 1 0.65
452
simul
453
param sofc 1 0.7
454
simul
455
param sofc 1 0.8
177
==PAGE:203==
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Section of Thermal Energy
Technical University of Denmark 
Nils Koppels Allé, Bld. 403
DK- 2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
Denmark
Phone (+45) 4525 4131
Fax  (+45) 4588 4325
www.mek.dtu.dk
