==PAGE:1==
Focus Bracketing for Robust Face
Recognition on Smartphones
Jasmina Pelivani
Kongens Lyngby 2015
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
Biometric security is widely implemented in various applications and has gained
a lot of attention in smartphone applications, using both nger and face recog-
nition.
Although this might be the case, the applications which are implemented so
far are not very robust.
The work done in this thesis is motivated by previous work using a light eld
camera, which uses multiple depth images for increasing the depth-of-eld and
eliminating out-of-focus regions.
The proposed approach of this thesis is to extend the depth-of-eld by im-
plementing software-based focus-bracketing, in order to experiment with the
biometric performance of face recognition.
Image registration and fusion are used for creating an all-in-focus image, while
three dierent feature extraction methods are used for measuring the biometric
performance.
Based on dierent experiments, the setup for a nal image capture has been
chosen and a database of frontal face images has been collected.
The results of the conducted experiments do not show a basis for improvement
of biometric security, even though the constructed images have a better focus
score.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Com-
puter Science at the Technical University of Denmark in cooperation with Gjøvik
University College in fullment of the requirements for acquiring an M.Sc. in
Computer Science Engineering.
This thesis deals with the problem of out-of-focus images in biometric recog-
nition.
It consists of a general introduction to biometrics, related work and
includes research, results and discussion of focus-bracketing experiments on an
android smartphone in regards to biometric performance.
Lyngby, 11-May-2015
Jasmina Pelivani
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
First of all, I would like to thank my supervisors Professor Christoph Busch,
Kiran Raja, Dr. Raghavendra Ramachandra and Professor Rasmus Larsen.
Thank you for oering me this project and giving guidance, inspiration and
valuable support during the hard times of working with research.
I would also like to express my thanks to the rest of the Norwegian Biometric
Laboratory at Gjøvik University College, who made my stay in Gjøvik memo-
rable.
To all the subjects in my database, thank you for participating and coming
back for the rest of the sessions. As a reward I can send you a collage of depth
images of your face.
Last but not least, dear mom, dad, rest of the family and friends, thank you for
your endless support through the duration of my studies. Without you I would
not be where I am today.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Goal / problem description
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Thesis overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Introduction to Biometric Recognition
5
2.1
Biometric systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Biometric recognition errors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Introduction to Face Recognition
13
3.1
State-of-the-art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.1.1
Segmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.1.2
Image preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.1.3
Feature extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2
Image fusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4
Proposed method
19
4.1
Related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2
Proposed approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.3
All-in-focus image
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
5
Implementation
23
5.1
Image capture on smartphone-device . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.2
Image processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.3
Feature extraction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.4
Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6
Experiments
29
6.1
Hardware Specications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
6.2
Conducted experiments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
6.3
Frontal Face Database . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
6.3.1
Size of the Database . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
6.3.2
Experimental Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6.3.3
Aquisition protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6.4
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
7
Results
37
7.1
Image fusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
7.2
Database experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
8
Discussion
41
9
Conclusion
43
10 Further Work
45
Bibliography
47
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
The growing necessity for security in the world of digital age has led to explore
many possible identication and authentication techniques. The increased us-
age of smartphones requires stronger authentication to such a device, as these
smartphones contain sensitive data.
One of the trusted ways to achieve secure authentication on the smartphones is
by using the biometric features of a legitimate user that can overcome the need
for passwords and thereby increase the usability for the user in addition to the
security.
1.1
Motivation
The two biggest smartphone manufacturers, Apple and Samsung, are already
taking the ngerprint reader to the next level - banking. Using their TouchID
technology and Apple Pay or Samsung Pay respectively, users can transfer
money to other accounts, on-line payment, pay in stores, restaurants and more.
[2]
The applications are widely used and already after one month, Apple Pay stood
for 1,7% of all mobile payments.[4] Experts say that this is the future of mobile
==PAGE:12==
2
Introduction
payment. But there is one big issue that is covered up and partially ignored -
ngerprint spoong. Only after a short while the iPhone 6 has been out, the
ngerprint sensor has been successfully fooled.[22] But after the huge success of
Apple Pay, many users seem to forget or even ignore this, due to user-friendliness
and convenience of using the application.
While this being the case, the huge security issue is still present and while the
usage of the application grows, the more alluring will it be to attack the system.
There is clearly a future for biometrics in smartphones, but it is a eld under
development which still needs improvement in security. Therefore other biomet-
ric modalities than ngerprint recognition are relevant to be investigated.
One of the statistically feasible biometric features is extracted from the hu-
man face. Face recognition is a viable approach because of the high convenience
and acceptance for data subjects.
Although there are many advantages in using the face for authentication, there
are still several challenges for this approach, which are the result of blurred,
out of focus images. Studies show a signicant drop of verication rate when
increasing blur of an image.[23]
There are many proposed solutions to tackle the problems of out-of-focus imag-
ing for face recognition with regular imaging platforms such as smartphone
embedded cameras. Some of these are very time consuming, computationally
expensive and resource intensive.
More recently a Light-Field Camera was introduced to solve the issue of out-of-
focus imaging.[19] This kind of camera has an additional array of micro lenses,
which can be used to capture the direction of each incoming light ray in addition
to the intensity. This will result in multiple depth (or focus) images that have
only one region in focus. This would enable us to create an All-in-Focus image
where all regions in the captured scene will be in focus and the depth of the
picture would be preserved.
In the absence of Light-Field Cameras on smartphones, the user is expected
to obtain images in unconstrained conditions, which results in out-of-focus
images.[23]
Pelican Imaging is a company investigating this technology for smartphones
and has investors like Nokia, who supposedly should have implemented the Ar-
ray camera in 2013.[12]
==PAGE:13==
1.2 Goal / problem description
3
1.2
Goal / problem description
"In photography, bracketing is the general technique of taking several shots of
the same subject using dierent camera settings."[28]
In this thesis, we shall explore the concept of focus bracketing on smartphones
to solve the problem of out-of-focus imaging for face recognition. The key idea
of focus bracketing relies on capturing the images with dierent focus which can
be used to create one image with best focus for face recognition.
The thesis shall also evaluate the recognition and verication performance with
the proposed approach as compared to normal imaging on the smartphone.
1.3
Thesis overview
In the rest of the thesis, rstly a general introduction to biometric security is
given, followed by the state-of-the-art in face recognition.
When the basic is stated, we will look at the proposed approach and its im-
plementation. Using this implementation, we will look at the conducted exper-
iments and their results. This will be followed up with a chapter on discussion,
which ultimately leads to a conclusion of the work done.
The thesis is rounded o with a short perspective on further work.
==PAGE:14==
4
Introduction
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2
Introduction to Biometric
Recognition
The purpose of this chapter is to get an general overview of biometrics - what
are the conditions we are looking for in a biometric characteristic, how a bio-
metric system works and how we evaluate them.
Biometric recognition, or simply biometrics, is the science of establishing the
identity of a person based on biological or behavioural attributes. The exact
denition found in [8] is:
"automated recognition of individuals based on their behavioural and biologi-
cal characteristics"
The technology is used widely in our everyday life and the eld is evolving
rapidly, because of the increasing need of digital security. Traditional means of
security like access cards, passwords and keys have many shortfalls, they can be
misplaced, stolen, hacked or duplicated and unlike an biometric characteristic
they only identify a person by their belongings or knowledge.
Biometric characteristic is dened in [24] as:
"biological and behavioural characteristic of an individual from which distin-
==PAGE:16==
6
Introduction to Biometric Recognition
guishing, repeatable biometric features can be extracted for the purpose of bio-
metric recognition"
Besides providing security, a biometric characteristic has properties like ease
of use, eciency and identies a person by "what they are".
As stated earlier, biometric characteristics can be biological or behavioural.
Behavioural attributes, as the name indicates, describe an individuals behaviour,
meaning that in order to obtain this kind of characteristic an individual needs
to be observed for a period of time. An example could be observing a persons
typing pattern on a keyboard in order to identify him, known as Keystrokes
recognition. Another example could be signature recognition.
Some of the widely used biological characteristics are face, nger, iris and veins.
The many biometric characteristics have their pros and cons which can be clas-
sied by the following conditions[10]:
• Universality Every person should posses this characteristic
• Distinctiveness No two individuals possess the same characteristic
• Permanence The characteristic should be time invariant, or at least for
a period of time
• Collectability The characteristic can be measured quantitatively and be
reproduced
• Performance Recognition accuracy and speed, in terms of error
• Acceptability An indication of the users acceptance, such that they do
not nd it obtrusive
• Circumvention Measure of how easily the characteristic can be replicated
and system can be fooled
In order for a biometric characteristic to be considered, it needs to score well in
terms of the mentioned conditions. The most widely used physical characteris-
tics are compared in the table 2.1.
2.1
Biometric systems
A biometric system can be used for dierent applications, but the goal is always
the same - we are either interested in verication or identication of a user. [10]
==PAGE:17==
2.1 Biometric systems
7
Figure 2.1: Properties of dierent biometric characteristics, classied as H, M
or L which stands for High, Medium or Low respectively. Image
from [10]
• Identication In some application contexts we are only interested in
whether a person is in the system database or not. This is done by com-
paring the provided biometric sample to all the templates stored in the
database.
This approach is used in police ngerprint databases, where a suspects
ngerprint is compared to all the references in the database.
The identication system returns a match if one was found or noties that
the subject is not in the system database.
• Verication A verication system is used to verify if a person is who he
claims he is. The presented biometric characteristic is matched with the
template for the claimed user. The system either accepts or rejects the
claim.
In order to be able to do a one-to-one or a one-to-many comparison, a database
is needed.
First let us look at the ow of a system in use.
A user needs to enrol in
the system in order to use it. The biometric characteristic is presented to a
sensor and the recorded data is stored as a template in a database, which is the
biometric reference of a subject.
==PAGE:18==
8
Introduction to Biometric Recognition
More precisely a biometric reference is dened as:
"one or more stored biometric samples, biometric templates or biometric models
attributed to a biometric data subject and used as the object of biometric com-
parison".
Now, depending on the application context the user can either be veried or
identied by presenting the biometric characteristic once again. In this context
a biometric probe is created from the presented biometric characteristic which
can be used for comparison against the stored biometric reference.
A biometric sample is dened as:
"analog or digital representation of biometric characteristics prior to biomet-
ric feature extraction"
The biometric probe and reference represent biometric features extracted from
the biometric sample.
Now let us look more closely at the architecture of a general biometric system.
An overview of such can be seen in gure 2.2, followed by an explanation of
the most important subsystems.
Figure 2.2: A general biometric system [8]
• Data Capture Subsystem collects the biometric characteristic presented
to the sensor and outputs an image or signal. The sensor(e.g. camera,
microphone, ngerprint reader) type depends on the characteristic we are
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Biometric recognition errors
9
working with. The output of the data capture subsystem are referred to
as biometric samples.
• Signal Processing Subsystem processes the biometric sample and performs
segmentation, feature extraction and quality control.
• Data Storage Subsystem holds the enrolment database which stores the
references. The references are associated with the enrolled subject and
are stores as samples or features.
• Comparison Subsystem compares the presented biometric characteristic to
the already stored reference or references, depending on the application
context. The result is a comparison score that indicates the similarity,
which is used in the Decision Subsystem.
• Decision Subsystem uses the obtained comparison score from the Com-
parison Subsystem in order to determine the outcome of the transaction,
based on a dened threshold.
2.2
Biometric recognition errors
As dened, the decision subsystem determines the outcome of the verication
or identication, based on the comparison score and a dened threshold. Since
a biometric system is automated the outcome can be wrong for various reasons.
One way to test the system or algorithms used, is to calculate dierent error
rates. This is usually done over a database of datasets, where real-life application
is simulated. The following errors are used to evaluate a system.
False Match
When an imposter is successfully veried as another subject, the system has
failed and there has been a false match. The verication system can be evalu-
ated by the false match rate, which is dened as:
"proportion of zero-eort impostor attempt samples falsely declared to match the
compared non-self template" [7]
FMR can be calculated with the following equation:
FMR = # of successful imposter transactions
# of imposter transactions
(2.1)
==PAGE:20==
10
Introduction to Biometric Recognition
Genuine Match
When a genuine probe comparison to its created biometric reference succeeds,
it is a genuine match. The genuine match rate can be computed by:
GMR = 1 −FNMR
(2.2)
When a genuine probe comparison to its created biometric reference fails, it is
a false non match (FNM). This is another attributed test to the system, which
is dened as:
"proportion of genuine attempt samples falsely declared not to match the tem-
plate of the same characteristic from the same user supplying the sample"[7]
Testing a system can be done and the false non match rate indicates the per-
formance of the system. FNMR is dened by the following equation:
FNMR = # of rejected genuine transactions for which decision
# of genuine transactions
(2.3)
Receiver Operator Characteristic and Equal Error Rate
The mentioned error rates can be used to create graphs, like a receiver operator
characteristics curve (ROC) which can be seen in gure 2.3, which describe the
performance of the system. The graph is generated by plotting GMR against
FMR at dierent thresholds. Another descriptor is Equal Error Rate(EER),
which is the value where FMR and FNMR are equal, meaning that a lower
EER is better.
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Biometric recognition errors
11
Figure 2.3: ROC-curve example from [14]
==PAGE:22==
12
Introduction to Biometric Recognition
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 3
Introduction to Face
Recognition
Face recognition is one of the most used biometric characteristics for verica-
tion. It is already widely implemented in security and access control applica-
tions, surveillance, criminal investigations and more. Hence face recognition is
one of the most researched characteristics, since the data for research is easy to
acquire because of the collectability and acceptability of this modality is high,
as shown in table 2.1.
While it has the advantage of easy capturing with most devices, face recognition
is challenged by dierent factors like facial pose, illumination, expression and
ageing.
3.1
State-of-the-art
We have looked at the general procedure of a biometric system. A biometric
characteristic is presented to a sensor, which outputs a signal or image of the
characteristic. Then a processing procedure follows and the nal output is an
acceptance or rejection in case of verication and a match or no result in case
==PAGE:24==
14
Introduction to Face Recognition
of identication.
In face recognition, the processing procedure consists generally of the follow-
ing four steps[9]:
• Segmentation
• Image preprocessing
• Feature extraction
• Comparison
There are many dierent methods for each of the steps, so in the following
section, we will look at some of the state-of-the-art approaches.
3.1.1
Segmentation
When doing face recognition, we want to limit us to the area that we want to
compare, to reduce the time it takes to preform a comparison and improve the
results by removing variables like the background. The segmentation step is
used to nd the region of interest, in our case the face. There are a lot of ways
to detect an object in an image or video-stream. The method described here
is the Viola-Jones method which is optimized for frontal face detection with a
very high detection rate and rapid results [26].
Viola-Jones
Viola-Jones is a machine learning approach for tackling object detection. It is a
feature system using Haar-like features, instead of a pixel-based system in order
to improve speed.
In Viola-Jones, they operate with rectangular features which can be seen
in Figure 3.1. There are three dierent types of features. The top two seen in
the gure are two rectangles, where the feature is the value computed by the
dierence of the pixel sum in the two regions. The vertical feature could be used
to describe the bridge of the nose, which could be described as the dierence in
contrast around the bridge. The feature with three rectangles is computed by
subtracting the pixel sum from the outer rectangles from the inner rectangles'
sum. The last feature consists of four rectangles and computes the dierence
==PAGE:25==
3.1 State-of-the-art
15
Figure 3.1: Basis rectangle Haar-features
between the diagonal pairs.
Since the features look at pixel sums, the image is rstly converted to an integral
image, which reduces the redundancy of calculating the pixel dierence. Figure
3.2 shows an example of an original image and its integral image, which for each
cell sums over the rectangle from (0,0) to the cell. Once the integral image is
(a) Original image
(b) Integral image
Figure 3.2: Images taken from [1]
produced, each feature can be calculated in constant time, since the sum of the
pixels is already calculated. Since there are over 180000 features for a 24x24
window the integral images spare a lot of valuable computation time. Many of
the features might not be too useful, therefore we are interested in nding a
small dening set of features and train the classier in knowing the features.
For this purpose, the AdaBoost algorithm is used. Given a dataset with posi-
tive and negative examples, the features that separate the positive and negative
examples are selected, reducing the feature set. The classier is then trained
and formed of the selected features.
To reduce the computational time even further and optimize the detection rate,
a cascade of classiers is formed. This means there are multiple classiers with
dierent features and an image has to test positive for each classier in order to
be detected as the object of interest. As soon as it fails any of them, the result
will be a negative. This feature makes it easy to eciently lter negatives.
The cascade classier can also use other than Haar-like features, for instance
==PAGE:26==
16
Introduction to Face Recognition
LBP, described later in this chapter.
The Viola-Jones algorithm is already widely implemented frontal face detection.
3.1.2
Image preprocessing
As mentioned earlier, face recognition has various known challenges, like illu-
mination, pose and change in facial expression. There is a lot of research done
with the aim to minimize the impact of these challenges.
The work presented in [29] considers the problem caused by variations in pose
with the proposed method Elastic Bunch Graph Matching. The method uses
graphs for describing the facial pose, where the edges are labelled with distance
information and nodes are labelled with Gabor wavelet responses. The method
looks at alteration of the pose by deforming the graph.
3.1.3
Feature extraction
When performing any form of recognition, a probe is compared to a reference,
therefore we are interested in some features we want to compare between the
two images. We will look at three dierent methods, which are some of the most
used in face feature extraction.
SIFT
Scale-invariant feature transform, or SIFT[13], is an algorithm that extracts
feature vectors from an image, which are scale and transform invariant as the
name indicates.
By localizing local maxima after a Gaussian blur, the key
points are detected. Orientation histograms for 4x4 neighbourhoods of the key
points are created, which allow for change in illumination. The histograms are
transformed into vectors and are called SIFT keys.
As we are interested in comparing two images, a reference and a probe, the
SIFT keys for both are extracted and compared.
SURF
Speeded Up Robust Features(SURF)[3] algorithm is developed after SIFT and
has better performance in terms of speed. The key points are detected using
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Image fusion
17
Hessian matrix approximation.
The feature vectors are created using Haar
waveletresponses in the neighbourhood of the detected key points.
BSIF
Binarized Statistical Image Features, (BSIF)[11] is a method which can be used
for describing the texture in images, because it looks at the intensity of a region.
Filters of dierent size are used for each region and the result of these is used
to create a binary representation of the image.
3.2
Image fusion
For this thesis, we will need to use techniques for fusing images.
There is various work and open source programs on image fusion and it is a
common technique used in the world of photography. In this section a short
description of two methods which are used for this is given.
LP
Laplacian pyramid based fusion[27] is a method used for dividing an image into
pieces of sub-images with dierent spatial resolutions.
This method rstly creates a Gaussian pyramid by low-pass ltering. From this,
the Laplacian pyramid is derived. The key idea is to decompose two images into
Laplacian pyramids and create a new pyramid by selecting the subimages from
the previous two. The fused image is then the result of the inverse Laplacian
pyramid transform on the new pyramid.
DTCWT
Dual Tree Complex Wavelet Transform (DTCWT)[17] is a known method for
creating super resolution images. As other wavelet transforms, DTCWT decom-
poses the images into low and high frequency sub bands. Interpolation is done
on the dierent sub bands and the image is then nally reconstructed using
inverse DTCWT. This can be used for image fusion, where the image recon-
struction can consider sub bands from dierent images and pick the ones with
highest energy.
==PAGE:28==
18
Introduction to Face Recognition
This approach has been used with 2D-Discrete Wavelet Transformation(DWT)
in the work of [18] which has resulted in a better performance in face recogni-
tion.
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 4
Proposed method
When using images as the biometric samples, out-of-focus images are a big chal-
lenge, since it is hard to obtain the needed information for the comparison of a
reference and a probe. Often it results in a failure-to-acquire error, which means
that another sample needs to be taken.
In an application context, retaking the probe is inconvenient and can be an-
noying to the user. Therefore, we are interested in eliminating the problem of
out-of-focus images.
Using the camera ash usually gives better images in terms of focus, but in
our context, where we will acquire close-up frontal face images, this would not
be an acceptable approach.
Most of the research on tackling the problem is by doing focus bracketing. Es-
pecially in iris-recognition, the need of the iris region to be in focus is high,
because all the information is located in one small area.
The focus-bracketing usually has a hardware-approach, using a Lytro light-eld
camera.[6] A Lytro camera compared to a regular digital camera, uses an addi-
tional array of micro-lenses to capture information about the light hitting the
sensor. This way an array of images is stored with one single capture.
The idea in focus-bracketing is to extend the depth-of-eld, which is the distance
==PAGE:30==
20
Proposed method
between the closest and further-most object in focus.
In our case, we want to construct an image of the frontal face where all the
depths between the tip of the nose and the ear are considered and are in focus.
4.1
Related work
Using a light-eld camera and choosing the best focused image of the captured
ones, has given an improvement of 4,64 % in iris recognition in work of [20].
The same approach has successfully been used in regards to surveillance and
face recognition, where detection of multiple faces can occur in dierent dis-
tances from the camera. [18]
Similar work has been done on a Nokia smart-phone, with the purpose of ex-
tending the depth-of-eld using focus bracketing, described in article [30]. The
work done shows improvement in the overall sharpness in the image.
4.2
Proposed approach
We want to eliminate the out-of-focus images in face recognition on smartphones.
Inspired by the work done using a Lytro LFC and in [30], a software based
approach to achieve the same goal is proposed.
The idea is to take multiple depth images one by one and create an all-in-focus
image with extended depth-of-eld. The proposed scheme in general can be seen
in gure 4.1. The idea is to vary the focus distance to the face, in order to hit
the distances from the nose tip to the ears.
4.3
All-in-focus image
The acquired image stack needs to be processed before we are ready for feature
extraction. The initial thought was to locate the face in the images, crop them
to the area of interest and do a fusion of the result in order to get one all-in-
focus image. After some experiments with the samples, it showed that this was
not as simple as rstly estimated. The reason for this is that when using a live
subject to take pictures of over time, some movement is introduced - meaning
if a stacking of the images was done, the resulting image would be blurry.
==PAGE:31==
4.3 All-in-focus image
21
Figure 4.1: Proposed face recognition scheme
Image alignment is a well known problem and is especially useful in medical
images, where scans from dierent aperture need to be aligned. There are var-
ious image processing solutions for this purpose and a lot of research on the
subject.
The work done in [30] suggests using SIFT features for the image
alignment. Their solution successfully takes care of the misalignment created
from the change of focus between the images. But our problem is dierent, since
movement also is introduced.
The proposed solution therefore has another step, which is image registration.
==PAGE:32==
22
Proposed method
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 5
Implementation
In this chapter, we will look at the implementation and approach of the proposed
solution. The implementation was an iterative process and will be described in
the same manner.
The implementation of the solution is divided in three parts:
• An android application for capturing the images
• An oine solution programmed in Matlab for image processing
• A Java/Android program for feature extraction, comparison and decision
The following sections will describe the implementation.
5.1
Image capture on smartphone-device
We are interested in evaluating if a smartphone device is suitable for focus-
bracketing in order to increase the biometric performance of face recognition.
The development and tests are run on the Android-platform and dierent An-
droid devices.
==PAGE:34==
24
Implementation
The rst prototype was developed using the open-source OpenCV Android
library[16] and Android 4.2 JellyBean Operating System.[5]. The Open Source
Computer Vision library (OpenCV) provides image processing functions, which
could advantageously be used for our purposes.
The interface of the prototype can be seen in gure 5.1. It allows a user to be
Figure 5.1: Application interface
added in the application, enrol and nally simulate a login. The interesting part
of the application is the image capture itself. The prototype is rstly developed
on Samsung Galaxy S5. When a user tries to enrol or login, the application
starts a camera activity.
For our implementation, we keep track of two dierent surfaces, one for the
preview and one for capturing the images. An ImageReader is repeatedly wait-
ing for images from the camera sensor and sets them on the preview surface,
which can be seen on gure 5.2. The green square indicates the desired area
for where the face should be, in order to get a good sample.
While the preview is on, the application initiates face detection. The OpenCV
for Android library provides real-time face detection on the preview feed, using
a trained Haar cascade classier. When a face is detected, the preview stops
and the capturing process begins.
The feed from the sensor is now instead used for the surface for storing the
images. The images are taken iteratively, with a manually set focus distance.
The focus stack should increase the depth-of-eld in the face area, therefore the
focus we want to vary is in range from the distance from the camera lens to the
ear and from the lens to the nose tip. All the images are rstly put in an array
and when the capture sequence is done, they are stored on the phones memory
in parallel. This is done in two steps, in order to shorten the actual capture time.
==PAGE:35==
5.2 Image processing
25
Using the Android 4.2 camera API, unfortunately there is not much control
over the hardware of the camera. The change of the focus can be set on the
camera object, by setting the values of the parameter setFocusAreas(); This
means, that the only way the focus is controlled is by dening which area is to
be focused on.
Since the scope of this project is to improve the focus in the facial area, this ap-
proach was not giving good results. See chapter 6 for further comments on this.
Android 5.0 Lolipop was launched with a new camera API, camera2. This API
has given more control over the camera, where one of the things is to manually
control the focus distance, by setting the parameter LENS_FOCUS_DISTANCE to
a oat ranging from 14.6 to 0.0, where 0.0 is the furthest away.
The camera part of the OpenCV library was programmed with the old Android
API and therefore needed to be reprogrammed in order to work with the new
one.
The whole Android application provides us with the 9 images with dierent
focus.
Figure 5.2: Image preview interface.
The green rectangle indicates the ex-
pected face area, while the red shows the detected face
5.2
Image processing
The depth images need to be merged before the feature extraction can begin.
The image processing steps can roughly be described by the following steps:
==PAGE:36==
26
Implementation
• Perform image alignment of the depth images
• Localize the region of interest(ROI) in the rst image
• Crop all the images to the size of ROI
• Image fusion
Image alignment is necessary in order to remove as much movement misalign-
ment as possible.
For this purpose, we have used two widely used Matlab
functions, imregister and imregcorr.
imregcorr is used for "estimating the geometric transformation that aligns two
2-D images using phase correlation"[15]. Then this transformation is used to
do intensity-based image registration, imregister, which uses one image as the
reference and one as the moving image.
For the focus stack, we use the rst image as the reference image and the
remaining 8 as the moving. This way, all the images are registered to the rst.
The image registration takes care of the "zoom" eect of the focus change and
somewhat compensates for subject movement.
The next step is to fuse the images. In order to optimize the processing time,
we nd the area of interest and crop the images to the face region.
The face is detected using the Viola-Jones algorithm in the rst image only.
The detected area of interest is used for cropping all the registered images.
Now that we have the segmented images, we can do the image fusion.
We have experimented with dierent fusion methods from the Matlab image
fusion toolbox, MST_SR_fusion_toolbox. The fusion is done iteratively, mean-
ing that image 1 and image 2 are fused, then the result of these is fused with
image 3 and so on. After some experiments, we added a condition for the fu-
sions. Between each fusion, the wavelet energy of the result is computed in
order to get and understanding if the focus is better after the fusion. If the
focus is better, the fusion is used for the next step, otherwise it is left out from
the fusion iteration. Using wavelet energy for a focus measure is inspired by the
work done in [19].
5.3
Feature extraction
For feature extraction, we use SIFT, SURF and BSIF, which are described in
chapter 3.
The SIFT features are extracted using the SIFT implementation found in the
==PAGE:37==
5.4 Comparison
27
OpenCV framework. It is based on the parameters proposed in [3]. Figure 5.3
shows SIFT features extracted from the face region.
An example of SURF features can be seen on on Figure 5.4.
In case of BSIF a 9x9 lter with 8-bit encoding.. An example can be seen on
Figure 5.5.
Figure 5.3: Extracted SIFT features
Figure 5.4: Extracted SURF features
5.4
Comparison
After extracting features from a reference and a probe image, the descriptors
need to be compared.
For SIFT and SURF, we compare the descriptors using the OpenCV framework.
==PAGE:38==
28
Implementation
Figure 5.5: Extracted BSIF features
We use k-nearest neighbours and compare each descriptor from the reference
image to all the descriptors in the probe image, meaning that we brute force
through all the combinations. The comparing calculates the Euclidian distance
between the descriptors and the two nearest neighbours are kept.
Many of
those can be false matches, so in addition the good matches are found, using
the proposed method by Lowe. The key idea is to look at the ratio between the
two nearest distances and only picking those which the ratio is below 0.8.
According to Lowes work, this eliminates 95 % of false matches and only 5 % of
the good matches.
The nal comparison score is then calculated by the following formula:
comparisonscore = max(# of reference features, # of probe features)
# of good features
(5.1)
The calculated score is a number from 0 to 1, where 1 is the perfect match,
meaning all the number of good features equals either all the reference features
or the probe features.
For BSIF the feature comparison uses histogram comparison with Bhattacharyya
distance [21]. The result of the comparison is 0 for the perfect match and 1 for
a bad match. For simplicity we convert the score match the meaning for SIFT
and SURF and therefore use the following as the nal score for BSIF:
nal score = 1 −computed score
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 6
Experiments
Dierent experiments have been conducted in order to come closer to the settings
we want to evaluate on.
6.1
Hardware Specications
During this thesis two smartphones have been used for development and testing,
Samsung Galaxy S5 and Motorola Nexus 6, with the specications shown in
Figure 6.1.
Smartphone
Operating System
Resolution
Samsung Galaxy S5
Android 4.2
5312 x 2988 pixels
Motorola Nexus 6
Android 5.0
4128 x 3096 pixels
Figure 6.1: Smartphone specications
==PAGE:40==
30
Experiments
6.2
Conducted experiments
On the rst prototype of the application, we could only set the areas to be fo-
cused on. We started of with basic experiments, where an object is placed in the
background and one in the foreground and a stack of two images was acquired,
shown in Figure
6.2. The result of the image fusion can also be seen and it
shows that both the face and the cup in the background are in focus, although
there are some artefacts introduced.
We were happy with this experiment, but an automatic focus change between
the images in our context would be dicult to work with. As stated earlier, we
are interested in switching the focus in the face area. But in order to prede-
ne the areas, it would be assumed that any subject would have the same face
geometry, i.e. that the dened area for where the nose/eye/chin is, should be
the same for any subject. In reality this would not be the case and in worst
case, all the predened areas could be at the same depth, which would defeat
the purpose of focus stacking.
The experiments with the rst prototype gave satisfying results in terms of focus
change, but not for the way our application was intended to make use of it. The
results were used to experiment further on the fusion of the images, since the
change of focus in the images was very visible, compared to focus change in the
face area.
(a) Focus on the face
(b) Focus on the cup
Figure 6.2: Two images showing the dierent focus settings
==PAGE:41==
6.2 Conducted experiments
31
Figure 6.3: The fusion of the two images in Figure 6.2
When we upgraded to Android 5.0 and obtained a smartphone which could sup-
port the new camera API completely, we started the experiments with changing
the focus iteratively, namely just changing the value of it, which could be inter-
preted as the distance from the lens to the focus point.
For the experiments, we turned the AUTO_FOCUS of the camera o, since we
are interested in setting the focus manually.
There are dierent ways of capturing the images and they have each their ad-
vantages and disadvantages. The interesting aspects for our context were the
following:
• Capture time - the amount of movement between the images is dependent
on this
• Focus change - the images must only be captured when the properties for
the focus of the camera lens are changed
The methods we used for capturing the images were the following:
• CaptureBurst - a sequence of requests, captured in a burst with no inter-
ruptions
• setRepeatingRequest - repeats the given request, where the settings can
be changed in between
==PAGE:42==
32
Experiments
• Capture - a simple image capture request with predened settings
For our rst condition, we want fast capture time and CaptureBurst was a
clear way to achieve this. For a predened sequence of capture requests with
dierent focus distances, the result was a fast capture as we wanted but with an
unexpected eect. Since the request is a burst of images where we programmed
the lens to move, it continuously captures images which result in the moving or
zoom motion eect.
Although the capture speed was desirable, these images would be bad for our
focus stack and therefore this was not an option we wanted to continue with.
Using setRepeatingRequest gave similar problems and it made it dicult to
keep track of the capture session. Some of the images had the moving eect but
by implementing a 0.5sec thread sleep, solved the issue. However, this resulted
in an even slower capture time.
The Capture request was implemented in a loop, where each time the the re-
quest returned to its nished callback, a new was request started. This approach
resulted in a reasonable time, slower than CaptureBurst, but the request se-
quence was easier to control and we could make sure that the image is taken
when the camera lens stopped moving, which is a very valuable trade o.
6.3
Frontal Face Database
In order to evaluate the fused images and their biometric performance, a new
database needed to be constructed.
The capturing device for the database was Motorola Nexus 6.
6.3.1
Size of the Database
The database consists of 27 subjects and the statistical distribution of it can be
seen in Figure 6.4.
For each subject in the database there were three data collection sessions. The
rst was a reference session and the last two sessions were probe sessions which
simulate a user trying to login.
The reference session consists of 5 auto focused images, taken by the embedded
camera application and 5 sets with 9 dierent depths taken with our camera
application. The two probe sessions consist of 10 auto focused images and 10
sets of 9 dierent depth images.
==PAGE:43==
6.3 Frontal Face Database
33
20 - 24
25 - 29
30 & above
5
10
Number of subjects
Male
Female
Figure 6.4: Distribution of the database by gender and age
Table 6.1 shows the number of images in the database per person, taken with
the smartphone. This are the raw images, where for each round there are taken
9 depth images. We processed the conducted database and created the nal set
Table 6.1: Size of the conducted database
Reference
Probe
Total
Auto
5
20
25
Depth images
45
180
225
Total
50
200
250
All subjects
1350
5400
6750
of images, using Matlab. The feature extraction and comparison are done on
this database, shown in table 6.2.
6.3.2
Experimental Setup
The database collection was assisted, where the subject would only have to sit
on a chair and look at the smartphone lens.
In order to eliminate as much
movement as possible between the focus stack images, we needed to construct a
controlled environment. Therefore, the smartphone was mounted onto a tripod
camera stand, which can be seen on gure 6.5, this way the camera shake was
not a variable.
==PAGE:44==
34
Experiments
Table 6.2: Size of the nal database
Reference
Probe
Total
Auto
5
20
25
Focus stack fused
5
20
25
Best from focus stack
5
20
25
Two best fused
5
20
25
Total
20
80
100
All subjects
540
2160
2700
Figure 6.5: Experiment setup
6.3.3
Aquisition protocol
For each session, rst the auto focused images were taken by me, where the
subject was informed whenever a picture was taken. The distance between the
subjects face and smartphone was 27 cm.
As for the focus stack images, the subject was informed when the caption begun
and when it ended. The following focus range was used for the focus stack:
5.5, 6, 6.3, 6.6, 7, 7.3, 7.6, 8, 8.5, 8.
The subject was also asked not to move or blink during this period. The time
it takes for the camera sensor to capture the images is around 1.3 seconds, as
stated earlier, this is how long the subject needs to sit still. After capture, the
images are stored as the largest size possible, 4610x3120 pixels, which takes a
few seconds. Since there were 5 rounds for a reference and 10 for a probe, the
==PAGE:45==
6.4 Discussion
35
subject was given at least 1 minute to relax between the rounds.
6.4
Discussion
We chose to make the experiments with the subjects assisted. Since the appli-
cation waits for a face to be presented, the user could start the image capture
process alone, but to prevent motion we kept it assisted.
Unfortunately, all the experiments could only be performed with the back cam-
era, since the front cameras do not support manual focusing, at least for now.
A front camera would make the interaction between user and application much
easier.
One thing we noticed for some subjects, was that they started to blink more than
usual if they got reminded that they should not do it. This could potentially be
a problem, but could be solved by selecting only depth images where the eyes
are open, by using eye detection to do the selection, which is also supported by
OpenCV.
==PAGE:46==
36
Experiments
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 7
Results
In this chapter, we will rstly look at the results of image fusion and then the
nal results of processing the database, concluding with a short discussion of
the results.
7.1
Image fusion
The results of the image fusions depends on the movement of the subject. Fig-
ure 7.1 shows samples of the same subject and the fusion result of two dierent
sessions.
When there is a lot of movement during the image capture, image registra-
tion can not align the images perfectly. The result of this can be seen in gure
7.1b, where the movement causes a bad fusion. For the successful fusions, im-
provement in texture could be observed, aswell as a the focus measure of the
fused image was higher than each of the focus stack images.
After examining the fused images, we found that lp_fuse gave the best re-
sults visually, in case there was motion between the images, while dtcwt_fuse
introduced some artefacts.
==PAGE:48==
38
Results
(a) Minimal movement during capture session
(b) Movement during capture session
Figure 7.1: Examples of image fusion using Laplacian Pyramide
7.2
Database experiment
For the nal results, we ran SIFT, SURF and BSIF on the whole database. The
results are reported in a detailed table, which can be seen in table 7.1. Here
we report GMR at dierent rates of FMR, spanning from 0.1 to 10, as well as
EER. The best values in the table are written in bold. The ROC graphs for
each image type is also shown in gure 7.2.
==PAGE:49==
7.2 Database experiment
39
Table 7.1: Performance of face recognition for dierent image types
Type
Feature
FMR @ 0.1
FMR @ 1
FMR @10
EER
SIFT
27,04
44,37
72,3
19,6
LP fusion 2 images
SURF
27,56
36,74
61,63
24,51
BSIF
30,89
36,15
54,52
29,71
SIFT
30,44
49,62
73,33
19,39
DTCWT fusion 2 images
SURF
29,56
39,92
63,26
23,78
BSIF
30,67
36,15
55,48
30,03
SIFT
34,67
49,32
75,91
17,13
LP fusion
SURF
28,71
36,59
62,88
23,51
BSIF
30,3
35,51
53,33
29,84
SIFT
26,52
48,91
70,71
20,01
DTCWT fusion
SURF
26,67
39,18
63,75
24,95
BSIF
29,96
36,18
54,61
29,97
SIFT
29,11
45,26
74,15
17,89
Best focused
SURF
27,56
36,97
63,11
23,04
BSIF
30,44
36,74
57,74
28,83
SIFT
45,04
53,78
73,11
18,27
Auto focus
SURF
36,52
47,33
72,07
18,49
BSIF
36,81
40,89
59,48
25,54
==PAGE:50==
40
Results
False Match Rate (%)
10-2
10-1
100
101
102
Genuine Match Rate (%)
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
SURF
SIFT
BSIF
(a) Autofocused images
False Match Rate (%)
10-2
10-1
100
101
102
Genuine Match Rate (%)
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
SURF
SIFT
BSIF
(b) Best focused image from focus stack
False Match Rate (%)
10-2
10-1
100
101
102
Genuine Match Rate (%)
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
SURF
SIFT
BSIF
(c) LP fusion of two best images
False Match Rate (%)
10-2
10-1
100
101
102
Genuine Match Rate (%)
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
SURF
SIFT
BSIF
(d) DCTWT fusion of two best images
False Match Rate (%)
10-2
10-1
100
101
102
Genuine Match Rate (%)
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
SURF
SIFT
BSIF
(e) Lp fusion of focus stack
False Match Rate (%)
10-2
10-1
100
101
102
Genuine Match Rate (%)
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
SURF
SIFT
BSIF
(f) DCTWT fusion of focus
Figure 7.2: ROC curves of the face recognition experiments
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 8
Discussion
In this chapter we will rstly discuss the results of the experiments and continue
with a general discussion of the proposed method.
Looking at the feature extraction algorithms, overall SIFT has the best perfor-
mance for any image type. For authentication applications we are interested in
the performance at a low FMR, for which BSIF gives the best values.
Comparing fusion of two images, DTCWT shows a slightly better performance
than LP. But looking at the whole focus stack fusion LP performs better. This
can be explained by the artefacts introduced from DTCWT, for each additional
image in the fusion, more and more artefacts are introduced, which do not nec-
essarily happen at the same place in the references and probes.
Picking the best focused image from the focus stack has a bad performance,
compared to simply using auto focused images. Auto focused images perform
overall better, while lp fusion has the best EER.
In general the results of the biometric performance are very low.
However,
LP was the best fusion technique both visibly and shown by the results. This
was also the nding in the work of [20].
There are many variables which could result in the bad performance.
Overall, there is session variation, since there is at least one day between each
==PAGE:52==
42
Discussion
session. This means that the data-acquisition conditions are not the same for
each session. Change in illumination and facial expression were observed, which
introduce further challenges.
One very big issue with the fusion approach is the xed focus. While we are
doing the experiments in a constricted environment and the position of the sub-
ject is validated between each session, there is no guarantee that the subject
will not move further away from the camera. This would mean that the xed
focus would not give the intended results. This could be a reason for why auto
focused images had the best performance.
One way to go around this problem is increase the number of images taken by
the application. This would give a bigger span of focus distances, meaning a
bigger DOF - but this would mean a longer capture time, leaving more room
for movement in the images. Adding quality check for movement would be too
time consuming and therefore not a viable approach.
For image registration, we wanted to rstly experiment with it and eventu-
ally add it to the smartphone application. But with the experiments the image
alignment showed to be very time consuming even when run oine, which meant
that the processing time would be even slower on a smartphone and would not
be applicable. Therefore we decided to keep the implementation oine.
At the time of the data acquisition, the only two smartphones supporting the
new Android camera API were Motorola Nexus 6 and LG Nexus 5. Even though
cameras with better camera specications could be found, the proposed method
could not be tested on those. A better camera could possibly improve the focus
stack and in case of a faster lens movement, a lower capture time could mean
improvement in terms of minimizing the movement between the images.
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 9
Conclusion
In this thesis we have investigated a software approach for focus bracketing,
with the aim to improve the biometric performance of face recognition.
The concept of a light eld camera (LFC) has been implemented as an an-
droid application on both Android 4.2 and 5.0.
Android 5.0 showed to be more useful in our application context, where the
camera allows for manual focus change.
Compared to LFC, the software approach introduced one important variable,
namely movement during the image capture. This meant that the proposed
approach was only applicable in a very restricted environment.
A database of frontal face images was acquired, using both the embedded smart-
phone camera application and the implemented application in order to compare
performances.
The depth-images needed to be registered rst before a fusion could be per-
formed, which is time consuming.
Various images were constructed using dierent fusion techniques and dierent
number of images for the fusion. Laplacian pyramide fusion and DTCWT have
been used as fusion techniques, where LP fusion gave better results.
Unfortunatley, the overall biometric performance was best using the simple auto
==PAGE:54==
44
Conclusion
focused images, although the lp fused images had the lowest EER.
The proposed method was inspired by work done with an LFC. Compared to
the work done with LFC, our method was not as successful.
Looking at the aim of this thesis, we can conclude by the experiments done in
this project that focus bracketing in an restricted environment can successfully
be implemented on a smartphone. But looking at the desired application, which
was improving performance for face recognition, the results of the experiments
show that the proposed method is not a viable approach with the currently
available technology.
==PAGE:55==
Chapter 10
Further Work
The work of this thesis was around biometric performance in face recognition.
We had hoped to implement focus bracketing for iris recognition as a smart-
phone approach, where out-of-focus images are a big issue. Previous work with
LFC has shown an improvement in performance and this approach could be
interesting to exhaust.
Unfortunately, the bad results from face recognition did not give any motivation
for continuing the work towards focus-bracketing for iris recognition.
The currently available Android smartphone devices are maybe not suitable for
this approach, but it could very well be a possibility to consider in the future.
Another usage of the focus-bracketing was formed during the work of this thesis,
namely creating depth maps of the acquired images. 3D image reconstruction
from a focus-stack is already researched and some work is shown in [25], al-
though it is not based on a smartphone camera.
This could be interesting in terms of biometrics in order to prevent face recogni-
tion spoong using a picture of a genuine subject. The depth map images could
provide information about whether a 3D subject is presented or a 2D image.
During this thesis some research has been done on the eld and it would be an
interesting approach to continue the work with.
==PAGE:56==
46
Further Work
==PAGE:57==
Bibliography
[1] https://computersciencesource.wordpress.com/2010/09/03/
computer-vision-the-integral-image/.
[2] 2015. https://www.apple.com/apple-pay/where-to-use-apple-pay/.
[3] Herbert Bay, Tinne Tuytelaars, and Luc Van Gool. Surf: Speeded up robust
features. In Computer visionECCV 2006, pages 404417. Springer, 2006.
[4] Sam Colt. Here's where people are using apple pay the most. 2014. http:
//www.businessinsider.com/apple-pay-statistics-2014-12/.
[5] Android Developers. http://developer.android.com/about/versions/
android-4.2.html.
[6] Lytro Inc. https://www.lytro.com/illum/.
[7] American National Standards Institute. Iso/iec jtc1/sc 37 n1243. 2005.
[8] American National Standards Institute. Iso/iec jtc 1/sc 37 biometrics in-
formation technology - biometrics tutorial. 2007.
[9] Anil K Jain and Stan Z Li. Handbook of face recognition, volume 1. Springer,
2005.
[10] Anil K Jain, Arun Ross, and Salil Prabhakar. An introduction to biometric
recognition. Circuits and Systems for Video Technology, IEEE Transactions
on, 14(1):420, 2004.
[11] Juho Kannala and Esa Rahtu. Bsif: Binarized statistical image features. In
Pattern Recognition (ICPR), 2012 21st International Conference on, pages
13631366. IEEE, 2012.
==PAGE:58==
48
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[12] LightFieldForum.
Pelican
imaging
array
cam-
era:
Light
eld
module
for
smartphones.
http://
lightfield-forum.com/light-field-camera-prototypes/
pelican-imaging-array-camera-light-field-module-for-smartphones/.
[13] David G Lowe. Object recognition from local scale-invariant features. In
Computer vision, 1999. The proceedings of the seventh IEEE international
conference on, volume 2, pages 11501157. Ieee, 1999.
[14] Anthony J Manseld and James L Wayman. Best practices in testing and
reporting performance of biometric devices. Centre for Mathematics and
Scientic Computing, National Physical Laboratory Teddington, Middle-
sex, UK, 2002.
[15] Matlab.
http://se.mathworks.com/help/images/ref/imregister.
html;jsessionid=4a2e47408208447812f9e74d3a6c?refresh=true.
[16] OpenCV. http://opencv.org/platforms/android.html.
[17] Mayuri D Patil, Shivkumar S Tomar, and Setu K Chaturvedi. Dual tree
complex wavelet transform (dtcwt) based adaptive interpolation technique
for enhancement of image resolution. International Journal of Computer
Applications, 80(14):3742, 2013.
[18] R Raghavendra, Kiran B Raja, Bian Yang, and Christoph Busch. Compar-
ative evaluation of super-resolution techniques for multi-face recognition
using light-eld camera.
In Digital Signal Processing (DSP), 2013 18th
International Conference on, pages 16. IEEE, 2013.
[19] R Raghavendra, Bian Yang, Kiran B Raja, and Christoph Busch. A new
perspectiveface recognition with light-eld camera. In Biometrics (ICB),
2013 International Conference on, pages 18. IEEE, 2013.
[20] Kiran B. Raja, R Raghavendra, Faouzi Alaya Cheikh, Bian Yang, and
Christoph Busch. Robust iris recognition using light eld camera. In The
Colour and Visual Computing Symposium 2013. IEEE, 2013.
[21] Kiran B Raja, R Raghavendra, Martin Stokkenes, and Christoph Busch.
Smartphone authentication system using periocular biometrics.
[22] Seth
Rosenblayy.
Apple's
touch
id
still
vulnerable
to
hack,
se-
curity
researcher
nds.
2014.
http://www.cnet.com/news/
apples-touch-id-still-vulnerable-to-hack-security-researcher-finds/.
[23] Nadezhda Sazonova, Stephanie Schuckers, Peter Johnson, Paulo Lopez-
Meyer, Edward Sazonov, and Lawrence Hornak.
Impact of out-of-focus
blur on iris recognition. In SPIE Defense, Security, and Sensing, pages
80291S80291S. International Society for Optics and Photonics, 2011.
==PAGE:59==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
49
[24] International Standard. Iso/iec 2382-37, information technology  vocab-
ulary  part 37: Biometrics. 2012.
[25] Giancarlo
Todone.
http://www.stareat.it/sp.aspx?g=
3ce7bc36fb334b8d85e6900b0bdf11c3.
[26] Paul Viola and Michael Jones. Rapid object detection using a boosted cas-
cade of simple features. In Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2001.
CVPR 2001. Proceedings of the 2001 IEEE Computer Society Conference
on, volume 1, pages I511. IEEE, 2001.
[27] Wencheng Wang and Faliang Chang. A multi-focus image fusion method
based on laplacian pyramid. Journal of Computers, 6(12):25592566, 2011.
[28] Wikipedia.
Denition of bracketing.
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Bracketing.
[29] Laurenz Wiskott, J-M Fellous, N Kuiger, and Christoph Von Der Malsburg.
Face recognition by elastic bunch graph matching. Pattern Analysis and
Machine Intelligence, IEEE Transactions on, 19(7):775779, 1997.
[30] Chao Zhang, John W Bastian, Chunhua Shen, Anton van den Hengel, and
Tingzhi Shen. Extended depth-of-eld via focus stacking and graph cuts.
In ICIP, pages 12721276, 2013.
