==PAGE:1==
Prototyping as a Development Tool 
with a Focus on Designing in Wood
- REPORT -
T
R
*
*
Æ
E
Ä
2015
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Prototyping as a Development Tool 
with a Focus on Designing in Wood
With the Danish title
Prototyping som udviklingsværktøj med fokus på design i træ
Conducted at the 
Technical University of Denmark
in the 
Design & Innovation Programme
by student
Anne Cathrine Larsen
with student ID
s092873
This report documents the work in relation to the
 Master Thesis 
on
The project is allocated with 30 ECTS credits, positioned in Denmark 
and the language is  English (UK). The project is supervised by  
Professor Per Boelskifte
Student Signature
26.01.15
The project period begins
26.06.15
And ends
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
5
Abstract - EN
Abstract - DA
This report documents the process of developing a 
height adjustable desk in wood. The process is charac­
terised by being split into three phases. By looking at 
ergonomics, market and traditions in design a holistic 
overview is generated in the first phase. Also a specif­
ic user group is found and needs and shortcomings in 
relation to height adjustable desks uncovered. In the 
second phase ideas are captured through means of cre­
ative and structured methods and evaluated against 
each other. Three ideas are chosen for conceptualis­
ation, which is influenced by the use of pretotyping. 
The three concepts are evaluated against each other 
and a final concept is chosen. Through the third phase, 
the detailing and prototyping, the concept is matured 
through freehand drawing, more pretotypes and CAD 
modelling to a stage where building a full-scale model 
is necessary to fully comprehend and evaluate the de­
sign with respect to the needs, values and traditions 
found through the research and analysis phase. The 
process of building the full-scale model generates a 
unique insight into manufacturing processes and ma­
terial characteristics. Activities for establishing a busi­
ness model are articulated through working with the 
business model canvas.
Denne rapport dokumenterer processen over ud­
viklingen af et hæve-sænke bord i træ. Processen er 
karakteriseret af at være opdelt i tre faser. Ved at ar­
bejde med perspektiver af ergonomi, marked og tra­
ditioner i design dannes et helhedsorienteret billede 
igennem første fase. En specifik brugergruppe identif­
iceres og behov og udfordringer i relation til eksister­
ende hæve-sænke borde bliver afdækket. I anden fase 
undfanges ideer igennem kreative- og strukturerede 
metoder og de evalueres i forhold til hinanden. Tre 
ideer udvælges til konceptualisering, der er præget 
af brugen af pretotyping. De tre koncepter evalueres 
i forhold til hinanden og et endeligt koncept udvælges. 
Igennem tredje fase, detaljering & prototyping, bliv­
er konceptet modnet igennem frihåndstegning, flere 
pretotypes samt CAD modellering. Dette resulterer i 
udarbejdelsen af en fuldskala model, der hjælper til at 
forstå og evaluere designet i forhold til de fundne be­
hov, værdier og traditioner afdækket i research of an­
alyse fasen. Processen med at lave fuldskala modellen 
genererer en unik forståelse og indsigt i arbejdet med 
træ og dets karakteristika. Aktiviteter for at etablere 
en forretningsmodel er italesat igennem arbejdet med 
Business Model Canvas.
==PAGE:6==
Project Intro
Acknowledgement
I will keep it short. This project wouldn’t have 
turned out the way it did without the help of these 
inspiring and helpful people:
I would like to thank for the supervision and support 
from Professor Per Boelskifte.
I would like to thank KPH for the opportunity to be a 
part of their community and everyday life. Networking 
and feedback from residents has shaped this project 
and helped it move forward.
I would like to thank GZ-huse for letting us use the 
workshop facilities.
I would like to give a special thanks to Hans-Jørgen 
Velbæk and Niels Erik Larsen for their sublime work 
on the full-scale model and for dedicating their spare 
time to the project. The process of working with them 
has taught me a great deal.
Project Trigger
Wood is a renewable resource and with consideration 
it can be manufactured and modified in a sustainable 
way. Products in wood can add a warmth and aesthet­
ics to the physical environment that ensures a good cli­
mate both in working- and leisure setting. Historically 
we in the Nordic countries have a strong tradition for 
these types of products, and continuing this tradition 
seems important.
Based on experience from courses Wood Science & 
Technology and Design in Wood this project unfolds 
within research on wood species’- and wooden joints’ 
application in industrial product design. The project 
will take in the constraints of the material.
The design task is a desk of adjustable height. Existing 
desks of adjustable height ensure good ergonomics, 
but the working atmosphere has a tendency to seem 
cold and impersonal. 
During the development process an understanding 
of the relation between human needs, technical solu­
tions and restrictions and possibilities with wood is 
sought. The use of prototyping at an early stage will 
be explored, seeking to rule out ideas of low feasibility 
within the constraints of the project.
The final solution is build as a full-scale model.
==PAGE:7==
7
Table of Contents
Acknowledgement
6
Project Trigger
6
Reading Guide
8
Learning Objectives
9
Project Management
9
Research & Analysis
10
Ergonomics in Sedentary Work
14
Market of Height Adjustable Desks
17
A Tradition for Designing in Wood
21
User Identification	

25
Identifying User Needs
28
Ideation & Conceptualisation
32
Clarifying Objectives
35
Design Specification
36
Establishing Functions
37
Image Boards
38
Ideation
40
Conceptualisation & Pretotyping
46
Detailing & Prototyping
56
Concept Investigation
60
Anthropometric Field Study
62
Modelling in Wood
63
Meeting With Skilled Workers
68
==PAGE:8==
Project Intro
Contextual Technology
71
Materrial Selection & Treatment
72
Building the Full Scale Model
74
Product Architecture
78
Business Model
81
Project Outro
86
Discussion
88
Conclusion
89
Future Work
90
Literature
91
Web Pages
93
Pictures
94
Reading Guide
This report is divided into five chapters. Project intro (PI) Research & Analysis (RA) Ideation & Conceptualisation (IC) 
Detailing & prototyping (DP) and Project Outro PO. The section is indicated in the upper left corner of the left hand page.
References to literature are stated in square bracket [author, year] and in the literature section an aphetically sorted list 
can be found. References to web pages are also stated in square brackets [domain] and full reference can be seen in the 
web pages list in the final chapter. 
An appendix will support and document work in relation to the report. References to worksheets are displayed in the 
format WS RA-08, which is the 8th worksheet for the Research & Analysis phase.
Reference to 
literature
Reference to 
Work Sheet
==PAGE:9==
9
Learning Objectives
Project Management
This project is carried out in a period of 5 months 
from 26th of January to 26th of June. The project su­
pervisor is Per Boelskifte from the Department of Me­
chanical Engineering - Section of Engineering Design 
and Product Development at the Technical University 
of Denmark - DTU. The daily setting of the project is 
at KPH Københavns Projekthus, a house for start up 
companies with a social- cultural- or environmental 
focus ensuring networking options. 
The project covers a product development process of 
three phases covering Research & Analysis, Ideation & 
Conceptualisation and finally improving and develop­
ing details. For each phase a meeting with the supervi­
sor has been held, and alternations and ideas has been 
refined and ensuring the project to move forward at all 
times. The phases are divided to ensure the alternation 
between a convergent- and divergent approach that is 
meant to shape the optimal solution space. Each phase 
has a limited period of time planned at the beginning 
of a project and for the beginning each phase a struc­
tured and detailed plan has been laid.
Learning goals have been produced, ensuring the dis­
tinctive levels in the learning progression.
1. Identify product specific user needs through a holis­
tic analysis of the context and use.
2. Analyse the market/arena and propose a strategy for 
the specific task.
3. Identify key parameters for designing in wood and 
do a screening on traditions and trends in a Nordic 
perspective.
4. Transform these into a design specification.
5. Generate ideas by means of a creative- and system­
atic approach 
6. Formulate a set of selection criteria and based on 
this choose ideas for conceptualisation.
7. Evaluate concepts through pretotyping and choose 
one concept.
8. Specify details through relevant tools and validate 
the design through a full-scale model.
==PAGE:10==
Research & 
Analysis
==PAGE:11==
==PAGE:12==
==PAGE:13==
13
The scope of this phase is to generate a holistic 
impression of users’ needs and demands and other 
stakeholders’ expectations in relation to working 
life on the case of a height adjustable desk and the 
context it operates within. The perspective of de­
signing furniture in wood in the Scandinavian coun­
tries is investigated in relation to traditions and 
current trends.
==PAGE:14==
Research & Analysis
Ergonomics in Sedentary Work
This section seeks at discover the background and 
application of a height adjustable desk.
Physical Aspects
During the last century moving along with the indus­
trialisation a change in types of work has been intro­
duced. In the industrialised countries the amount of 
jobs labelled physically hard decrease and light work is 
the predominant way of life. Physical demands change 
however the amount of musculo-skeletal disorders 
hasn’t changed [Graf et al. 1994]. Musculo-skeletal dis­
orders covers muscle-, tendon- and nerve disorders. 
These are what people normally will reflect upon as 
back-, neck- arm-, hand-/handwrist- pain. [Office-Er­
go]
The pain is caused by the nature of the movement when 
handling a computer. It calls for precision and repeti­
tive movement of small muscle groups, and results in 
stiff or locked positions of shoulders and neck, in or­
der to keep fingers on the keyboard and eyes on the 
screen seen in Figure 2. Maintaining this posture isn’t 
in general demanding for the body, but the constant 
activation of the same smaller muscle group can put 
too much stress on them and thereby induce pain. The 
risk of developing a permanent condition is highest if 
the employee spends more than ¾ of working hours by 
the computer. [JobogKrop]
Sedentary behaviour has been linked to long-term 
consequences such as premature mortality, cancer, 
obesity and other cardiovascular diseases [Ainsworth 
2012]. These are however also a consequence of gener­
al lifestyle issues, that will not be covered here. 
General Recommendations
The general recommendation is to introduce varia­
tion during the work [JobogKrop2]. Variation is in­
duced when remembering to change posture, sitting 
or standing, taking breaks from sitting at the computer 
and performing small strength exercises or stretching. 
In Figure 3 an example of an alternative posture can 
be seen. The desk is raised, and a footrest at her chair 
is used.  One should always listen to the signals from 
the body. Relaxing is important to give the small mus­
cle groups a break, and when working lightly tapping 
Figure 2  The classic reaction to neck pain from sed­
entary work
==PAGE:15==
15
the keyboard or mouse buttons should be sufficient. 
[JobogKrop2]
Standing is one of the postures one can do as to do var­
iation. When it comes to burning energy, static stand­
ing is almost equal to sitting [Ainsworth 2012], but 
while standing large muscles groups are repeatedly ac­
tivated to stabilise and hold the balance – an autonom­
ic controlled response. While being active production 
of enzymes for breaking down blood fats and glucose 
is stimulated, and while being sedentary the activity of 
these enzymes is reduced – which over time can lead to 
poor metabolic health. While standing positioning of 
the limbs are also slightly changed causing activation 
of different muscles, than while sitting.  
The Future in Working and -Furniture
Even if industrialisation has changed the type of work 
that is performed in the western countries, it doesn’t 
change the fact that we still will be working in the fu­
ture. However different styles of planning work-life are 
in these days explored, and front-movers try to break 
down the conservative style of working and recognis­
es the importance of the individual. In the extremes 
we see Google with a 20% rule [CorporateCulture­
Pros], where employees are free to do whatever project 
they find passion for in 20% of their work hours, but 
less radical companies let their employees work from 
home.
Statistics suggest that the number of people working 
from home is still increasing WS RA-01. Employees 
wish to cut the transportation time and get rid of dis­
turbing telephones, and have a more personal style of 
planning the everyday work. In Denmark in 2010   763 
000 employees had been working from home more 
than one time within the past four weeks.  Tables can 
be seen in WS RA-01 Nothing suggests that these 
numbers should be decreasing.
When working form home it puts certain demands on 
the furniture, both in relation to functionality but also 
on the matter of looks. The need for multiple functions 
incorporated into one all relate to the relative limited 
space we have as private persons, due to the increase in 
urbanization and thereby decrease in space. We need 
our furniture to be able to do more and transform 
from working desk into dinner environment and into 
gift-wrapping station [Fastcodesign]. And as the head 
of design in IKEA Marcus Engman predicts that in the 
future more and more furniture will have to become 
versatile and induce new and challenging sensations. 
Office Interior Regulations
Under the administration of the Ministry of Employ­
ment the Danish Working Environment Authority 
(WEA/Arbejdstilsynet) acts. They are in charge of 
guiding companies towards safe working environ­
ments for the employees through information and in­
spections. They have the authority to fine companies 
and even close down work in severe cases. They pro­
vide guidelines and regulations in order improve safety 
and health and prevent physical wear and absence due 
to illness.
Two guides are of interest for this project if the final 
product is to be approved for the Danish working en­
vironment:
“The interior and equipment of the workplace” 
[Arbejdstilsynet]
“Screen Work” 
[Arbejdstilsynet2]
Demands from WEA
The main measure to incorporate in the development 
is the height adjustability range: “It is advised that 
height adjustable desks have a range of [60-122] cm 
which covers 90% of the European population.“[Ar­
Figure 3  Having Height adjustable desks is a way of 
introducing different working postures
==PAGE:16==
Research & Analysis
bejdstilsynet] However more specific measures con­
cerning working area and space for feet are also stated, 
and can be seen in WS RA-02 These will be consulted 
when dimensioning for considering forbidden areas to 
use, and functional areas to support.
The desk has to be of adequate in size to perform the 
task. If the desk is shared between more employees, 
the desk has to be able to regulate the height and it is 
recommended that the employer organise the work in 
such a way that variation can be obtained. It could be 
through job rotation or changing working postures – 
both of them require desks of different height. 
Regulations state that if the work regularly is carried 
out at a home office 1 day or more at week the em­
ployer is in charge of installing necessary and approved 
equipment to support the work in a healthy and safe 
way. 1 day is also equivalent to 2 hours a day all week. 
[Arbejdstilsynet2]
Sum up Ergonomics in Sedentary Work
The reasons for using height adjustable desks have 
been explored, and standards and regulations describ­
ing work settings hatve been investigated. The main 
measure to bear in mind for the continuing work is 
that a height adjustable desk must cover [60-122] cm. 
Expectations towards future furniture and individual 
work styles were uncovered.
==PAGE:17==
17
This section seeks to cover the market of the cur­
rently existing height adjustable desks and iden­
tify opportunities of profitability on entering the 
market. 
Benchmarking
An online screening was conducted with the aim of 
mapping out existing height adjustable desks. To keep 
track of the findings a social media tool was used 
[Pinterest]. The findings are grouped and doubles 
are omitted. The grouping is based on aesthetics and 
functionality. Afterwards the screening is broadened 
and desks of static height with an aesthetic quality are 
added. The result is a benchmarking canvas that can be 
seen in Figure 4. For a larger versions see WS RA-03.
Canvas
The axes are named as the groups. At the y-axis we see 
the scale named aesthetics and on the x-axis the func­
tionality is visualised. Here the functionality refers to 
the height adjustability function and not footrests, ca­
ble management etc. The aesthetic qualities are hard to 
qualify and measure and the clustering is performed 
through personal taste. However within the quarters 
of the canvas no hierarchy has been done. Desks that 
scores high in aesthetics will have some impact in 
guiding the image board of style page 38.
Desks situated in the lower, right corner have low 
scores in aesthetics but high in functionality. Desks 
Market of Height Adjustable Desks
Aesthetic
Non-Aesthetic
Functional
Non-Functional
Figure 4  The benchmarking canvas with Aesthetic on 
the y-axis and functionality on the x-axis.
==PAGE:18==
Research & Analysis
represented here, are in general “the existing desks”, 
those that people associate to a height-adjustable desk, 
with the cold institutionalised feel, but also those that 
have a more quirky design that doesn’t give away its 
“identity” of being adjustable in height.
Desks situated in the upper right corner are placed 
according to their functionality within ergonomics 
along with the consideration within style and feel of 
it. Somehow black is dominating this field and designs 
are from Danish studios (KibiSi, Holmriis, Gubi). The 
attractive feel is ascribed to their relative simple layout, 
yet somewhat honest in the functionality.  
Desks in the upper left corner are all associated to 
what one would find in the lifestyle magazines. They 
are placed here because they have a lack in ergonomic 
functionality and are what we may recognise as static 
height desks, however they do have a certain feel or 
style element that should be considered when design­
ing the new desk. The attractive element is the way 
wood is utilised to obtain a light yet warm and wel­
coming expression.
From looking at the canvas an overview the existing 
competition on the market has been obtained, and it is 
clear to see that it is a relatively red ocean [Mauborgne 
& Kim 2005] that we are looking at diving into. Differ­
entiation is the key factor for winning profit here, but 
the canvas also reveals possibilities. None of the desks 
placed in the upper right quarter has as light a layout 
and warm expression as those in the upper left. Some 
of the desks in the upper right corner communicate 
their functionality and this quality is found attractive. 
These insights, on wooden furniture and functionality 
should help shaping and guide new possible ideas.
Trend Analysis
Current trends are explored through different medi­
as, both classic (lifestyle magazines, furniture stores) 
and modern (social medias such as Tumblr and Insta­
gram). The scope of the analysis is to see what kind of 
setting, applications and combinations wooden furni­
ture in general is being used in, and to get a closer look 
onto style elements that could be of interest. 
The material was assessed and clustered around 
themes and a collection is made in WS RA-04. Nine 
Trends and four supporting themes where concluded, 
and for the future work these will serve as inspiration­
al elements such as in the image board of style (page 
38). When reusing trends one should be careful not 
to directly copy the existing, but use them as guides 
for increasing the height of innovation. When doing 
so development can be pushed forward instead of run­
ning in circles.
Figure 5  Trends identified in the analysis “wood/met­
al” and the “wood/leather details”
DETAILS - 
WOOD/METAL
==PAGE:19==
19
Interior Store
Trend/Medias
Company
Design House
Manufacturer
Design Studio
Private 
Customer
WEA Guides & 
Regulations
Porter’s Five Forces
The Five Forces Analysis [Porter 2008] is seen from 
the perspective of a newly started design studio, look­
ing into options of profitability in the market for desks 
of adjustable height differentiated through choosing 
wood as a design material and considering a partner­
ship with an established well-branded design house. 
The studio is named TR* | TRÆ TRE TRÄ and a logo 
can be seen in Figure 7.  The flow of information be­
tween stakeholders is characterised in Figure 6.
Threat of entry
When entering a new market it forces one to evaluate 
the seven barriers that shape the threat of entry. The 
supply-side economies of scale define the cost price. 
If production numbers are high cost price can be low­
ered and vice versa. However when working with wood 
some processes calls for manual skilled labour that will 
be costly – especially if crafted in Denmark. 
The demands-side benefit of scale is what happens in 
the network around office products. If the product is 
sold through a well-established retailer/design house 
it’s automatically associated to other products repre­
sented here. It therefore makes a great difference if the 
product is in the portfolio of a company producing 
height adjustable desks like Duba-B8 or a design house 
like Paustian, GUBI etc. However if the design house 
isn’t associated with other electrical products, buyers 
might be (resentful to buy it, because they do not trust 
the company to handle such development. On the Oth­
er hand existing client network around the office sup­
ply businesses (DUBA-B8) might target to complete 
wrong segment – they might have the right technology 
to handle the development, but not the final buyer in 
the network. To use the advantage of the company’s 
position is a general approach in this market, but for 
a new studio the main focus is to get products on the 
market and create a profile.
The switching cost for the buyer in this case is only the 
price of the desk. Switching from one desk to another 
doesn’t directly involve replacing other products/sys­
tems. Therefore even though a desk can be costly the 
switching cost is considered low. Having low switching 
costs means that the buyer relatively easy can acquire a 
desk, but afterwards keeping the buyer from switching 
again requires a good strategy.
Setting up a production site is expensive. A way to keep 
capital requirements low is to use existing production 
channels of the design house. This way the required 
capital of the studio is mainly on acquiring a computer 
and sufficient programmes for product development. 
Funding is a way of getting the necessary capital and it 
also forces one to have a clear and structured mindset 
about what kind of business and value that is created. 
This way one also gets an evaluation of the idea - if it is 
good, and there is evidence of good turnovers, funding 
should be possible. The key channel of the studio to 
make profit is through having products on the market, 
since their payment comes through royalties of the de­
sign house – typically 2-5% of the depending on the 
company. 
There isn’t any direct legislation on the furniture mar­
ket, but recommendations from WEA can help pro­
mote this desk. To target the product to the European 
market it must however have the CE-stamp, which is 
obtained through keeping certain standards and meet­
ing regulations. This is relevant for machines and elec­
tronic equipment. [DS]
Figure 6  The flow of information in the market of of­
fice furniture
Figure 7  The logo of the studio TR* is named after the 
inspiration from the Nordic heritage.
T
R
*
*
Æ
E
Ä
2015
==PAGE:20==
Research & Analysis
The barriers of entry are considered relatively low, 
which in the end creates a lot of competition. More 
competition means lower profit.
Power of suppliers
Going through an existing and well-established design 
house makes use of the existing supplier channels. If 
the design house in general makes sure that it is the 
main customer at the supplier, the power of the suppli­
er is considered low. The risk of loosing a big customer 
is a risk not worth taking, when it comprises the main 
revenue. Also if the supplier has invested in unique 
tools to manufacture distinct products for the design 
house, their power is low. The unique tools cannot be 
used for other purposes, and capital of the supplier is 
tied within. When their power is low reasonable pric­
ing can be obtained.
Power of buyers
Buyers with high-volume orders have greater power 
over price. In this case different scenarios exists. If the 
buyer is a purchasing department of a large company, 
buyer power will be regarded as high, since they have 
the bargain of high quantities.
Private buyers are also concerned on pricing however 
other factors might be evaluated higher, such as so­
cial responsibility, trends, environmental impacts etc. 
[Bednárik & Kováts 2010] The product is “unique” and 
similar products are hard to come by any other place, 
therefore the power of buyers is low even if switching 
costs also are low.
Threat of substitute products
The market of height adjustable desks is well packed 
with standard solutions. This means that there will be a 
lot of different opportunities for buyers to buy any oth­
er height adjustable desk and the threat of substitute 
products is high – when the user need is a desk of ad­
justable height. Also with the low switching costs once 
a desk is bought it might easily be exchanged. However 
the key offering here is the design perspective and the 
quality and heritage of Scandinavian furniture – and 
a desk that fits different environments such as living 
room, office etc. When buying a quality good it is to a 
lesser extent subject to replacement, which will lower 
the threat of substitution. For buyers who care about 
quality and interior design these other height adjusta­
ble desks will not be considered a substitute product. 
The substitute product would be one of those placed 
in the upper left corner in the benchmarking canvas 
Figure 4.
Intensity of rivalry
As a sum up on the analysis the intensity of rivalry is 
evaluated. We saw that because of the low barriers of 
entry many competitors are present on the market and 
competition lowers the price. Putting up a strategy to 
avoid the red ocean is crucial, and the product must 
offer a differentiation to add value for the buyer [Mau­
borgne & Kim 2005]. By having a differentiated prod­
uct chances of starting production through an existing 
design house are higher, and profit can be obtained. 
The competition is dependant on the market we aim at 
targeting, however by differentiating the product the 
market is less packed and chances of a higher profit 
are there. By differentiating we offer different values 
for the buyer and especially through quality goods loy­
alty is retained, and the low switching costs are not as 
evident.
Sum up Market of Height Adjustable 
Desks
This section uncovered the market of height adjusta­
ble desks, trends and challenges present and evaluated 
options of profitability. It was seen how we by differen­
tiating the product through aesthetic qualities have a 
chance of differentiating the product on a market with 
multiple competitors. A screening onto trends was 
done in order to gain inspiration of where to take the 
development.	
==PAGE:21==
21
This section aims at framing the heritage of de­
signing in wood that is present in today’s society 
by looking at environmental impact, historical 
movements and technology in Nordic Countries. 
Environmental impact
In Figure 8 the cyclic life of wood is depicted. Trees 
are felled either for production of goods or energy and 
transported to a production plant, where it is dried, cut 
to measure, etc. The wooden products are sold and ap­
plied in construction and products that lasts a certain 
time. From here disposal is either reuse or energy-pro­
duction. From the energy production an emission of 
carbon dioxide occurs which is partly to blame for the 
global warming. Young forests (<100 years) absorb 
CO2 where Carbon is stored and Oxygen is emitted. 
The absorption lasts until the felling, however after 
approximately 80 years the trees’ absorption is falling 
again [Johansen 2014]. Sustainable forestry takes this 
into account performing rotational replanting and fell­
ing.
The fact that trees store CO2 all over its lifetime is the 
main reason for the good reviews on environmental 
impact.
In the manufacturing of wooden furniture there are 
three main factors that influences the environment. 
These are processes of manufacturing and - joining 
and treatment of surfaces. [MST 2013] Miljøtilsynet is 
A Tradition for Designing in 
Wood
performing counselling and controls that rules are met 
at the different workshops. 
Designing furniture in wood
When looking at furniture made from wood the first 
thing noticed is that it in general consists of several 
slats of a distinct shape and that these pieces some­
how relate to each other via joints and constructional 
layout. When designing in wood one is reliant on two 
things; the shaping technologies and the making of 
Figure 8  The lifecycle of wood
==PAGE:22==
Research & Analysis
joints. These along with final material of choice should 
fulfil needs in relation to application and anthropo­
metric measures [Jakobsen 1944].
One way of shaping solid wood is to remove excess 
material. Cutting technologies encompass sawing, 
drilling, milling and cutting by chisel. All these types 
can be performed either by hand, power tools or sta­
tionary machinery. Bending is a different way of shap­
ing wood. Three converging technologies exist, com­
pressing, steam bending and moulding [Trae] They 
share the fact that the wood has to be moist in order to 
dissolve the lignin binding the fibres. 
However these processes can only be applied to wood 
of a certain quality if good results must be obtained. 
The raw material has to be evaluated and checked for 
knots or defects. 
Whether joints are made manually or machined on 
thing they share is the requirement for precision when 
marking. Whether it’s the width of a beam that is 
projected or and angle that has to be moved, the pre­
cise marking and measuring is evident. Tools for this 
matter exist. A sliding bevel gauge seen in Figure 9 is 
used for copying different angles [Bullar 2013] and a 
marking gauge used for setting length measures. Also 
a try-square is a tool one cannot avoid, used for mark­
ing four sides of the piece. When marking the piece a 
pencil and a knife are used. The pencil only works for 
the rough marking, when joining the second piece to 
the first accurate marking is obtained with the knife.
For manually cut joints tools like handsaws, chisels, a 
mallet and planers are used.
The machined joints are dominated by different kinds 
of power tools or stationary machines, but joints are 
somewhat similar, whether it’s visible or invisible 
joints.
Historic Touchpoints
This section covers a few historic touchpoints that has 
generated a perspective of using and manufacturing 
furniture.
Pre-Industrialisation
Archaeological finds documents the use of wood all 
the way back to the Stone Age [Ramskou 1964]. Wood 
is easily shaped and the application is wide. Findings 
such as wall murals and sediments around the Nordic 
countries reveal constructional use in housing but also 
religious use, tools, weapons, means of transportation, 
furniture, and the production of heat through fire. The 
first type of furniture found is beds/benches, tables and 
chests. Especially the common presence of forests has 
had an impact. The most basic wooden artefacts were 
made privately, but as mankind developed more com­
plex products, the need for skilled workers grew and 
workshops opened.
 
Figure 9  A cabinet maker using a knife and a gauge 
for marking a joint
Figure 10  A bench of the Shaker community
==PAGE:23==
23
The religious sect Shakers, originally from England but 
practising in North America, found their truth through 
crafting [Andrews 1966]. With a motto Hand to work 
and hearts to God their salvation was based on the act 
of labour. Any type of labour was accepted in these 
terms whether cleaning, harvesting or crafting. They 
are especially known for their furniture and buildings 
because of their distinct style when considering their 
time (late 1700). The shakers are pre-industrialisation 
and they make all their furniture from wood. The style 
is free from ornamentation and the application of the 
furniture is directly linked to the need of the user. In 
Figure 10 a neat example of a bench can be seen. It’s 
made from pine and ash elegant yet simple shaped 
pieces. This way of producing handmade wooden 
goods applied up until the industrial revolution. 
Industrialisation
With the industrial revolution simple processes are au­
tomated leading to mass production, hence dropping 
prices for the consumer. However industrialisation 
wasn’t valued in every sector. The craftsmen feared be­
ing slaves of the machines, and the initiative behind 
the movements as Arts & Craft and Art Nouveau was 
to a great extend pushed by this. By creating organ­
ic, non-linear, decorated furniture the need for skilled 
craftsmen were high, and the machines weren’t fit for 
the job. An example is the richly ornamented chair de­
signed by Bindesbøll seen in Figure 11, that was de­
signed during the danish equivalent of Arts & Crafts. 
Meanwhile associations aimed at protecting the skilled 
craftsmen were founded all over Europe. The machines 
quickly innovate and mature and soon craftsmen are 
attracted by the fact of avoiding tedious work tasks and 
hereby the manufacturing of furniture moves from 
small workshops and into and industrialised setting. 
The opportunities within was a great subject for debate, 
but the modernism as it was named, was dominated by 
the theme of generating better living conditions for a 
larger amount of people. This was seen in the light of 
standardisation; transportation and electrical power 
supply all supporting the aim of a new type of (beauti­
ful) hygienic housing with affordable furniture.
This left no space for ornamentation or decoration, so 
the modernists also praise the form follows function 
mantra, stripping furniture down the bare minimum. 
A theme already followed by the Shakers. Contempo­
rary on the danish furniture scene tradition isn’t seen 
as constraining, it is articulated and seen as an wel­
comming lession, especially by architect Kaare Klint, 
who is characterised by conducting an amount of stud­
ies onto anthropometric measures and proportions of 
the human body. His propeller chair seen in Figure 12 
has a clear references to Guldhøjstolen (1400 b.c.) or 
other Egyptian stools at the same time.
Figure 12  The Propeller Chair by Kaare Klint 1930
Figure 11  A chair by Bindesbøll from the Danish 
equivalent of Arts & Crafts (Skønvirke)
==PAGE:24==
Research & Analysis
Scandinavian Modern
After the 2nd World War a vast amount of new mate­
rials came to market and designers started exploring 
them and applying them in new contexts[Miller 2012]. 
However in the Scandinavian countries the approach 
was a bit different. The strong heritage of craftsman­
ship was still evident and the focus of the new design­
ers was to take these processes and apply them into an 
industrialised setting. This meant that the new wood­
en products still had strong traditional references, and 
the warmth of the wood gave a softer feel than that of 
steel tubes that had strong references to the sternness 
of modernists pre-war. The clean lines were combined 
with the more gentle organic materials, such as wood, 
leather and wool. In Figure 13 Wegner’s Peacock Chair 
show the combination of an oak frame and papercord 
seat and and strong references to the classic Windsor 
Chair.
The great popularity these pieces still enjoy today is at­
tributed to facts like this [Miller 2012], and inscribed 
values are projected on to new and present design of 
today. However a strong marketing strategy should 
also take some of the credit. Multiple books and guides 
on “the good taste” were published and leading to 
the first lifestyle magazine of “Bo Bedre” in 1961, the 
common population were the target group of the new 
design classics [Hansen 2007]. This is also evident in 
the furniture series developed by Børge Mogensen for 
FDB named FDB Møbler, where a cooperative includ­
ing 400 000 members saw advertises and movies con­
cerning the ideal of the new furniture.
Sum up A Tradition for Designing in 
Wood
This section has covered historical movements seen 
in relation the wooden furniture of the Scandinavi­
an countries and defined important factors to take in 
when designing wooden furniture. The insight on the 
use of cabinet making and the application of different 
working methods serves as inspiration for the project, 
in order to create functional elements. Values found in 
the heritage of the industrialisation, such as generating 
better living conditions, is already targeted by the ex­
isting desks, but the project should as seen in history 
help promote a softer and more gentle feel through the 
application of its materials. 
Figure 13  The Peacock Chair by Wegner 1947
==PAGE:25==
25
When it’s unhealthy to be sitting more than ¾ of 
one’s working day, targeting those in risk zone is 
necessary. This section coves characteristics and 
lifestyle of the prospect end user by looking at so­
cial worlds and segmentation tools. 
Social Worlds [Clarke 2005]
In Figure 14 two social worlds are depicted. In the top 
we see the world of the home office below the Compa­
ny’s Office world. In the middle we see an overlap cov­
ering what happens when work is carried out at home.
The actors of the network are interrelated through 
their actions and through the current and emerging 
discourses the aim is to generate an overview of the so­
cial worlds they shape and outline the conflicts within. 
[Jensen 2005]
Home Office
In the Home Office World actors like Physical Space, 
Personal taste and –income and Wife Factor are acting. 
The physical Space decides if you can actually have a 
full room for office tasks, or if you have to use common 
dining table. It also decides the size of the desk and 
whether the desk has to incorporate multiple func­
tionalities. The Personal Taste along with the Personal 
Income also has a saying on this matter, however de­
pending on the relationship not only the personal taste 
but the taste of one’s partner will influence the layout 
and final choice in the interior choice in the Home Of­
User Identification	
fice World. 
This opinion towards the physical layout of the home 
office will in general create two different actor worlds; 
the Aesthetic and the Ergonomic. In the Aesthetic 
world discourses like Scandinavian Modern are defin­
ing the boundaries. In the Ergonomic world the focus 
is switched from the materiality of the furniture and 
towards the perfection of the body. We see discourses 
like My Body is My Temple that defines these bound­
aries. Since both discourses exist side-by-side an over­
Home Office
Conflicts
Company’s Office
Figure 14  Conflict can occur when two social worlds 
cross boundaries
==PAGE:26==
Research & Analysis
lap is to be expected, where people concerned with 
both a healthy body and content mind will be placed. 
These are interesting as target of the project.
Company’s Office
In the Company’s Office Arena we see actors like the 
Purchasing Department, the CSR profile of the compa­
ny, WEA Guides & Regulations, the furniture store and 
employees. Also the interior of the company’s office, 
such as light, desk, computer and work chairs is seen 
as actors. In this way well chosen interior will help the 
employee perform well, to some employees this means 
that the interior is somewhat silent, and he will only 
take notice of it, when it doesn’t work or perform the 
way it is expected to. This actor is prone to think, “it’s 
always been like this”, “Not mine” and ”I don’t decide 
anyway”. The other type of employee is one that notic­
es and appreciates well-chosen interior, and get a kick 
from this. His mind is more inspired when staying in 
“nice” surroundings and a nice atmosphere improves 
his way of working. By leaving some choices on interi­
or to the employees a more personal relation towards 
to furniture is created, and both types of employees 
can be targeted. 
The purchasing department is responsible for buying 
furniture through the furniture shop. The furniture 
shop could influence the final choice of the purchas­
ing department, by giving a discount when buying 
this instead of that or simply by the restrictions of the 
regular selection of furniture. The final choice from 
the purchasing department will also be influenced by 
the CSR profile of the company if special goals are to 
be achieved through purchasing, such as support lo­
cal production with XX$ or the like. And finally the 
Guides and Regulations from WEA are restricting the 
actual selections available.
Conflicts
The overlap between the two social worlds emerg­
es when the company introduces the working-from-
home-concept. If the work is carried out regularly at 
home (1day+ a week) WEA introduces guides on what 
kind of equipment the company should offer the em­
ployee. At the same time the Aesthetic Employee will 
have a strong opinion on what he will allow inside his 
home. In the overlap we also see evidence of the multi 
individuals [Østergård 2012] we are. When working 
the employee identifies with the specific work tasks 
and as such creates part of his identity. When mov­
ing into the Home Office World the identity is more 
subjective, and not only the work tasks are important, 
but also the setting. Therefore he might not accept the 
interior inside his home that he normally spends his 
working hours in.
Once the aesthetic employee is employed within the 
purchasing department, or the CSR profile has aesthet­
ics on the menu, higher demands to the furniture store 
arise. All of a sudden both ergonomics and aesthetics 
are in focus, and as seen in the benchmarking canvas 
Figure 4, the market is fairly narrow.
Job groups performing sedentary work
As described earlier, employees sitting more than ¾ 
of their working hours are at a higher risk of stressing 
musculo-skeleton diseases. A study [NFA 2012] groups 
people in relation to their occupation into hours seated 
at work. Depicted in WS RA-05 is the percentage of 
respondents that perform sedentary work more than 
¾ of the time. By targeting the job groups with the 
highest percentages the value proposed is more easily 
understood.
Segmentation of a fuzzy user group
The job type of a user is one characteristic, but it doesn’t 
tell us much about preferences, lifestyle or personal 
Moderne
Moderne / Individ
Traditionel
Traditionel / Individ
Traditionel / Fællesskab
Individ
Fællesskab
Moderne / Fællesskab
Figure 15  The layout of “The Compass” [GallupKom­
pas] with the 9 distinct segments
==PAGE:27==
27
values even though our job is great part of our identity. 
In order to make this fuzzy user group more tangible, 
it must be more homogenous. Designing products for 
“everyone” is an impossible task hence limiting is cru­
cial. A market segmentation tool can help clarifying 
lifestyle and values of the job groups with many hours 
of sitting. 
Different segmentation tools exist, and for this project 
it is of interest to look into those that revolve around 
personal values and lifestyle. Lifestyle segmentation 
tools are criticised for making too broad grouping 
where people only relate to parts of the assigned. For 
this project however it gives an idea of what values that 
are important for the prospect users. 
The Compass [GallupKompas] is a segmentation tool 
based on the Danish population. This makes it narrow­
er than other tools and thereby we get more specific 
description of the user. The respondent is given an on­
line questionnaire that they are to answer in the most 
honest way. After the questionnaire the result and a de­
scription is shown on the screen. There are 9 different 
segments all relating to each other as shown in Figure 
15. 
Making decisions are also affected by the life-situation 
[Østergård 2012] which means that people can act 
differently depending on the situation, e.g. if at work 
where a boss make final decisions or at home where 
decisions might be through consultation with a part­
ner.
 
Choice of Lifestyle Segment
A small survey was conducted and 16 people respond­
ed to “The Compass” an online segmentation tool[Gal­
lupKompas]. Their occupation, age and segment were 
reported back. All occupations were in the target of 
having long hours of sedentary work and fit in above 
average defined in WS RA-05. Seven groups are rep­
resented. The choice of participants greatly influences 
the result of the segmentation, when the group is of 
limited size. However the distribution of sexes is equal 
8 woman 8 men, but the age of the participants is ex­
pected to influence the result since they’re all in the 
twenties.  We do see that the people currently working 
from home are older than the group of respondents 
WS RA-01. In the near future the respondents finish 
their studies and are likely to be in a risk zone of per­
forming sedentary work. Therefore their age is consid­
Table 1	 Representation genders according to segments 
in the survey on lifestyle
ered not to be a problem.
Results
The most represented segments are modern and mod­
ern/community with 7 representations each. The dis­
tribution of sexes within these two are somewhat equal 
Table 1
Female
Male
Modern
4
5
M o d e r n /
Community
4
3
Looking over the descriptions the two segments reveal 
insights about the end user, and which segment to tar­
get WS RA-06. The modern segment is chosen as the 
target group. From the description the frequency of 
words related to this topic is higher and we can thereby 
perform better. In the modern segment we find young, 
well-educated, carrier minded people, with high wages 
and long working hours. Also apprentices and students 
have their place in this segment due to a personal drive 
of achieving more. The modern segment is concerned 
with quality goods, trends and life style products and 
they find time for exercising. They are excited when 
it comes to new technology but they will not accept 
environmental pollution.
Sum up Identifying User
In the social worlds conflicts appeared when evidence 
of multiindividuals came up showing the difference 
when personal values are at stake. To target a more 
specific group with distinct values a life style segmen­
tation tool was used on a group of representative us­
ers. Based on their replies and embedded values in the 
description the modern segment was chosen as target 
for this project with Long working hours and values 
on buying quality goods, doing exercising and being 
against environmental pollution. 
==PAGE:28==
Research & Analysis
Identifying User Needs
This section seeks to cover the information collec­
tion process and main outcomes of analysis. Data 
is collected through in-depth interviews with dif­
ferent users from the segment, stakeholders and 
“silent” observations on behaviour in an every­
day context. The data is analysed and user needs 
discovered.
Collecting Data
From the project setting at KPH observations on to 
everyday use and pain points was done. People work­
ing wasn’t asked to use their desk at any time, observa­
tions were simply done to get an insight into personal 
use and phenomena as described through follow the 
actor –method [Lindegaard 2009]. It is done to see 
people move around naturally in their context and ob­
serving when conflicts occur. Observations containing 
clearly stated conflicts are described in WS RA-08.
Observations
A girl moves from her desk to stand by a shelf working, 
it seemed as if she forgot the use of her desk or perhaps 
she likes to change context during the day. It was seen 
that when desks stand close to each other, they tend to 
have the same height, even if the users of them aren’t 
the same height. Also by having this setting paper and 
equipment was often pushed a bit over onto the next 
desk, causing problems when raising the desktop. In 
general resident of KPH didn’t use the functionality 
too much, but when they did it was mostly after lunch. 
Pain points regarding cables and positioning of sockets 
occurred often, and a phone charger connected to the 
wall got in trouble by raising a desk and tripping over 
extension cords was done on a daily basis. 
Users’ personal Desks
Besides the silent observations different users were 
asked to photograph their desk in working mode, 
whether it was their private or at their company they 
could freely choose. It was specifically asked not to 
change anything, just photograph as it stood, in order 
to see their everyday context and homemade solutions 
to conflicts if any. Some users responded with a pic­
ture of one desk and others with multiple of their own 
and of colleague’s and partner’s desks. In Figure 16 a 
Figure 16  A user with multiple screens and wires be­
tween all kinds of different office equipment.
==PAGE:29==
29
user has two screens, harddisk, keyboard, mosetrapper 
and lamp wired up at the desk. The full collection can 
be seen in WS RA-08.  Seeing how user make their 
own solutions as to working in the context, promoted 
an urge to group them according the use whether the 
scene stationary or changing. 
Semi structured interviews were held with a user and 
an occupational therapist. Afterwards the questions are 
looked through, to see if we’ve touched all the points. 
The master –apprentice method (Beyer & Holzblatt) 
was followed, letting the interviewee take the lead and 
see what he finds important.
Work Models
The collected data from fieldwork has been consolidat­
ed through relevant work models[Beyer & Holzblatt 
1998]. This section covers the main outcomes and in­
put data can be found in WS RA-09,10,11,12 Cultural 
Artefact, Sequence,  & Affinity respectively.
Cultural
The cultural Model showed that company culture in­
fluence the way employees make use of their desks. In 
a culture with small interactions between employees 
raising the desk became “topic of the day” where they 
inspired each other to make use of the functionality. 
An increased use might be obtained through challeng­
ing or priming the mindset of employees. 
Artefact
It was visible how a change in the general design of 
height adjustable desks made the user in Figure 17 un­
sure of what it was and how it worked. With a radical 
change in design the functionality must be visible or 
somehow differently communicated to the user. 
The look of the desk was regularly commented on as 
unpleasant, and nothing the user would want at home. 
The user expected any wooden height adjustable desk 
to look something like the existing and to be clumsily 
looking. He expected to have buttons in the right hand 
side to adjust the height, but has to look to find the 
distinct buttons for up and down.
Sequential
The sequential model reveals that there is a conflict be­
tween what the user expects to do, and then what he 
actually does. While raising the desk he has to stop the 
process multiple times, because of papers in the way 
or too short cables that has to be unplugged. It is clear 
that some of the links towards the context that the desk 
operates within aren’t targeted very well. A pain point 
is handling the cables.
Affinity
The input data is quotes from the stakeholder inter­
views and through clustering we see them relate to 
each other. Five themes were found that cover the 
main tendencies in users’ affiliation with height adjust­
able desks. 
My Work My Rules
I am Part of Something Bigger
Why Would I Want That
My Body sets the Limit
For Everyone to Use
It is seen how the themes are strongly influenced by 
the “I”, the ego that is nurtured in today’s society. It is 
important for users to have an influence in choice and 
usage. However they still see themselves in the context 
of other users, and act somewhat according the social 
norms and standards.
Sum up Identifying User Needs
Data was collected through different methods in the 
field. The data was analysed and consolidated through 
relevant work models and needs were identified. For 
further work the following themes and needs will be 
targeted:
Communicating functionality	
Cable management
Allow user to make personal choices
The priming of the mind towards more extensive use of 
the desk, will be kept in mind, but not directly target­
ed by the project. Very often priming evolves around 
design of systems, and this is not sought in this project 
for reasons of limiting.
Figure 17  Cocreating the artefact model with a user 
of height adjustable desks
==PAGE:30==
==PAGE:31==
31
Through the Research & Analysis phase a holistic 
view on the case has been created through looking 
at physical implication in sedentary work, challeng­
es and trends in the market, the design heritage of 
the Scandinavian countries in relation to wooden 
furniture, taken considerate choices in targeting 
towards a specific segment, based on a Danish seg­
mentation tool and discovered conflicts in users’ in­
teraction with height adjustable desks. Three needs 
have been chosen to continue with.
==PAGE:32==
Ideation & 
Conceptualisa
==PAGE:33==
ation
==PAGE:34==
Ideation & Conceptulisation
The scope of this phase is to generate new ideas and 
mature these into concepts based on the needs and 
findings from the Research & Analysis Phase. The 
work is dominated by changing thinking patterns 
altering between divergent ideas and convergent 
decisions.  The phase has its starting point in 
clarifying the design task.
==PAGE:35==
35
This section will provide a reworked descrip­
tion of the design task and show the clarification 
[Cross 2008] process of what is sought. With the 
initial fuzzy description of the project this process 
is necessary to incorporate findings from phase 
one. 
Design Task 1.1
The task is to design a wooden desk of adjustable height 
for office work that is carried out both on the private- 
and industrial market. It should invite users to interact 
and honestly communicate its functionality, to help 
users realise or remember to embedded functionality.
Design
The design should be characterised by the Danish de­
sign tradition, showing the woodwork and promote 
important joints.
Wooden
The choice of wood is both influenced by the charac­
teristic appearance and the environmental outlook. 
The final material should be sustainable both socially 
and environmentally but also the treatment. The desk 
cannot reach 100% wood due restrictions on the mo­
torisation.
Office Work
The supported work type is light such as reading, writ­
ing or creatively working with computers. The desk 
is expected to hold weight of screens and other office 
utensils as well as a leaning body. It is not expected to 
fit into a production site with heavy work. 
Private- and industrial office
The private office is meant as the office a user keeps at 
home. It could be an office provided by the employer 
for working from home and also a personal office for 
personal matters. The clue is, that it is at home, and 
that the user or other residents might have an opinion 
towards interior. Maybe the user doesn’t have the space 
to make a whole room into an office, but has to use 
space in the living room or the like.
The industrial office is at the workplace, where some­
body else than the user is deciding what interior is 
used. Some workplaces are using the open office envi­
ronment and others have smaller shared rooms.
Interact
From the sequence model interaction is thought of as 
simple, but when carried out multiple objects are dis­
turbing factors such as cables.
Communicate functionality
From the affinity it was evident that users forget the 
embedded functionality if someone (colleague, part­
ner) or something (back-pain, alarm) doesn’t remind 
them of it. It is important the user can descript the in­
scribed functionality from looking at the desk.
Users
A target segment – the modern – was chosen earlier. 
This shouldn’t keep other prospect users from buying 
it, it is only done to limit and focus the scope of the 
project.
Clarifying Objectives
==PAGE:36==
Ideation & Conceptulisation
Demands
Criteria
Comment
DESIGN
Must be adjustable in height
To fit 90% of the European population in both sitting and 
standing position for work. Ideally it should cover the 
range [60-122] cm
Must be suitable for production in 
wood
Should Communicate internal 
functionality
Should not be dangerous in relation 
to pinching
Should allow differentiation be­
tween desks to cover different style 
elements	To allow users to make 
decisions on personal taste
PRODUCTION	
Must be made from FSC certified 
wood
The higher percentage of wood the better but it will never 
reach 100% due to the demand on motorisation. Howev­
er the wood used should all be cetified for sustainability.
Must be species from tempered 
zones
To maintain an environmentally friendly story
Production processes can consist of 
both manual and automated- tech­
nology	
USE
Must be simple to assemble
To avoid user frustration and functional errors.
Must be operated with one hand 
only
To be competitive with the existing desks
Should be easy to adjust	
To avoid frustrations for the user
Should make no noise when oper­
ated
If placed in a professional setting, noise might attract too 
much attention, and make the user reluctant to use the 
functionality.
Should move at a proper 
speed	
Other desks move at 38 mm/s
The desk must be motorised
To meet demands from WEA-guide.
Has to bear loads from office setting 
Other desks are specified to carry from 80 - 125 kg
Must operate in regular indoor 
environment 
<90% relative humidity, [5-40] degrees
Has to fit normal electrical out­
let	
Should offer cable manage­
ment 	
To fit the environment of use.
By having these clearly stated objectives for the project 
a design specification is defined. The design specifica­
tion Table 2 works as a checklist, and can be updated 
whenever new insights are found.
Design Specification
Table 2	 The design specification
==PAGE:37==
37
Figure 18  The Functions-means tree [Cross 2008] for 
the project. Functions are marked by a tapered box 
and means by a rectangle. 
Establishing Functions
Create 
Workspace
Height Adjustable 
Desk
Stationary 
Desk
Level
Adjust 
Height
Provide 
Power
Configure 
Size
Join Legs to 
Surface
Manage
Cables
Control 
Height
To establish means in relations to wanted functions 
embedded in the desk a functions/ means- tree [Cross 
2008] is visualised see Figure 18. The functions are 
found from analysis in the affinity diagram in order 
to target those wanted from the prospect users. Some 
functions are incorporated to full-fill the overall func­
tion. All together the functions define the boundary 
and use of the desk. 
==PAGE:38==
Ideation & Conceptulisation
Image Boards
Four boards are produced each describing the lifestyle, 
mood, usage and style of the desk see Figure 19. The 
image boards are used as an exploration tool in defin­
ing the context of the product, but also as an inspira­
tional tool during the detailing process. 
The Lifestyle Board is concentrated on values and 
habits of the user, and helps visualising the person 
described by the segmentation. The Mood Board 
captures the feelings and sensation using the desk. It 
might seem two-sided but it aims at the use both at 
sitting and standing – and should be seen as the pro­
cess the mind undergoes during the work. The Usage 
Board shows other objects or processes performing 
somewhat similar actions. The Style Board defines a 
genre of the design, but is also more specific on details 
and their use in other products.
==PAGE:39==
39
Figure 19  The Image boards - mood - usage - style - 
lifestyle
==PAGE:40==
Ideation & Conceptulisation
Ideation
The ideation section covers the generation of new 
ideas captured thorugh means of creative- and 
structured methods. The aim is to have three 
promising ideas at the end of this section.
Association Game
Through the first phase of the project ideas were cap­
tured briefly while working, but in order to intensify 
the generation of ideas a brainstorming session was 
conducted. The brainstorm was controlled by the rules 
of an association game. The association game is based 
on capturing inspiration from existing objects or phe­
nomena’s and merging them into something use-full 
for the purpose. It is a method where all negative must 
be ruled out and excitement and energy over new ide­
as should be pushed forward to generate the next. The 
session lasts a few hours and the main elements to sup­
port it are pictures and freehand sketching. 
Inspirational words for the pictures are found through 
moving objects and can be seen in Figure 20. Since the 
nature of the desk lies in the movement restrictions 
and odd proportions are what could be expected from 
studying static objects. An object with legs can carry 
out a movement. This is often associated to a horizon­
tal movement and could be of interest to interpret into 
something vertical. Based on this the ideation relies 
mainly on animals, insects and natural phenomena’s 
but other moving objects did find its way.
The result of the association game is an idea catalogue 
that can be seen in WS IC-01. Ideas captured during 
the process are also described here. Some ideas caught 
in the association game does not meet simple func­
tional requirements (such as height adjustable) and 
are left behind before the making of the idea catalogue. 
The 17 ideas here all more or less come in the shape of 
a desk with some kind of a movement embedded. The 
quality of the ideas are not the focus in this process, 
but the quantity is.
==PAGE:41==
41
Figure 20  Grasshopper, Dragonfly, Butterfly, Gi­
raffe, Swan, Ballerina, Leaf, Creeper, Icicle, Cactus, 
Bamboo, Lenticular cloud on mountain and Light­
ning are all used as inspiration
==PAGE:42==
Figure 21  A selection of ideas from the idea catalogue
==PAGE:43==
43
Ranking
1: Flying Swan, Jumping Ballerinas
2: Caring Bamboo
3: Creeper Place, Open Cube
4: Aging Desk,
5: Helping Grasshopper, Leafs in springs, No Name
6: Bambi Stumpled, Cloud on the Mountain, Focus 
Circle, Hovering Bridge, Crawling Woodpecker, XX
7: Clever Butterfly
8: Messy icicles
Criteratia
Flying Swan
Jumping Ballerina
Helping Grasshopper
Messy Icicles
Leafs in Spring
Cloud on the Mountain
Clever Butterfly
Caring Bamboo
Creeper Place
Focus Circle
Hovering Bridge
Bambi Stumpled
Open Cube
Aging Desk
Crawling Woodpecker
No Name
XX
Late stage differentiation
+
+
+
-
-
0
-
+
+
-
0
0
-
0
-
0
0
# of motors required
-
-
-
-
+
-
-
-
-
+
-
0
-
-
-
0
0
Height adjustability range
+
+
+
+
+
+
-
+
+
+
0
-
+
+
+
0
0
Size range
+
+
0
+
+
+
+
+
+
0
0
0
+
0
+
0
0
Stability
0
+
0
+
-
-
-
0
+
-
-
-
+
0
-
0
-
Easy installation	
+
0
-
-
-
-
0
0
0
-
-
0
+
0
-
0
-
Communicating functionality
+
+
+
-
+
+
+
+
+
0
+
+
+
+
+
0
+
The X-factor (Height of Innovation)
+
+
-
-
-
-
-
+
-
-
0
-
0
0
-
0
-
Sum of +’s
6
6
3
3
4
3
2
5
5
2
1
1
5
2
3
0
1
Sum of 0’s
1
1
2
0
0
1
1
2
1
2
4
4
1
5
0
9
4
Sum of -’s
1
1
3
5
4
4
5
1
2
4
3
3
2
1
5
0
3
Score
5
5
0
-2
0
-2
-3
4
3
-2
-2
-2
3
1
-2
0
-2
Rank
1
1
5
8
5
6
7
2
3
6
6
6
3
4
6
5
6
Continue
Y
Y
N
N
N
N
N
Y
C
N
N
N
N
C
N
C
N
Evaluating Ideas
The captured ideas can be seen in Figure 21 and are 
evaluated in relation to each other and it is decided to 
develop the three most promising desks into concepts. 
To go from the initial 17 ideas and down to three a 
Pugh matrix [Burge 2009] is used see Table 3. At this 
stage it is not crucial to have a specific score, but a mere 
guideline of which direction to take is wanted. Since 
the ideas still are in the shape of ideas the selection 
criteria are very broad and mainly relates to feasibil­
ity and the design specification. Grey is the reference 
point. This one is chosen because it has a deliberate 
simplicity in construction, but might lack some of the 
x-factor/Height of innovation. This could ideal for a 
brand as IKEA.
Y | YES        N |  NO        C | Consider elements
Caring bamboo and Aging Desk rely on the same prin­
ciple. Therefore elements from the aging desk should 
be considered. The Creeper Place has the same eval­
uation as the Caring Bamboo, and since they have the 
same setup, the caring bamboo will be inspired from 
basic elements.
Table 3	 A Pugh Matrix is used for selecting three 
promising ideas
==PAGE:44==
Ideation & Conceptulisation
Morphology
From the functions-/means- tree the means fulfilling 
the lower level functions are explored in the mor­
phological chart [Cross 2008] seen in Figure 23. For 
a larger view check out WS IC-02. The exploration is 
meant to open up the solution space and is carried out 
in a brainstorming session, where principal drawings 
are preferred over writing. However limitation in un­
derstanding 3d mechanisms and application was met 
and in order to overcome this a hands-on session was 
rolled out:
Adjust height function
Thoughts on mechanical solutions are visualised in 
the morphology, but to get a hands on idea of what 
it involves, each of them is build in LEGO Technic in 
Figure 22. Not to be the final desk as such, but to get a 
better understanding of the frame the design will op­
erate within. Everything related to relative size or di­
mensions are not of interest in this part of the process.
Once the morphology chart is established a concept 
is created, by choosing one mean from each function. 
However not all means go together and some rule oth­
er ones out. This calls for considerate choices, when 
combining means to support the idea and ensure func­
tionality.
Sum Up Ideation
The three highest evaluated ideas will be explored 
further: Flying Swan, Jumping Ballerinas and Caring 
Bamboo.
Figure 22  The exploration of height adjusting mecha­
nisms and technologies done in LEGO Technic
==PAGE:45==
45
Adjust Height
Confi gure Size
Control Height
Join legs to Surface
Level
Provide Power
Manage Cables
Figure 23  The Morphology chart rolled out for a height 
adjustable desk
==PAGE:46==
Ideation & Conceptulisation
Conceptualisation & Pretotyping
This section aims at documenting the concep­
tualising the chosen ideas. The concepts consist 
of a thorough walk through of means from the 
morphology chart merged into being a part of the 
initial idea, and we thereby have a much better 
chance of evaluating and choosing the most op­
timal means for the specific idea. Each concept is 
desribed by: 
Idea with/ Idea In [Hansen & Andreasen 2002]
Morpholigical means  [Cross 2008]
Pretotyping outcome
Pretotyping
Pretotyping is an early stage development tool that can 
have multiple purposes. Each purpose has it’s own type 
of pretotype fidelity level and provides different results. 
Therefore before pretotyping it is important to bear in 
mind, what the goal with the session is? Who do you 
wish to communicate with through the prototype? 
And what do you wish to communicate. At this very 
early stage, pretotyping is a mean of communication 
between the designer’s hands and mind. While draw­
ing spatiality is hard to sense, proportions and size 
doesn’t always come along while on paper. The goal 
with these pretotypes is therefore to mature the ideas 
into concepts and to get a better understanding of the 
feasibility. The finish of them is poor to avoid focusing 
on the detail and instead map out the big picture.
Material should be cheap, to allow mistakes to occur 
often – forcing iterations and thinking while working. 
Forcing iterations improve final product [Dow et. al. 
2009]
Typical pretotyping materials such as cardboard, pa­
per and old packaging has the limitation in the phys­
ical properties. When aiming at working in wood the 
pretotyping material should have some resemblance, 
different tools and materials are seen in Figure 24. The 
tricky part is to avoid that the pretotyping material is 
defining the shape, rather than shaping the material 
towards the idea. Here the illustrations from the ide­
ation phase are important. At the same time, Follow­
ing the exact drawing can be time consuming, and not 
required at this point, so one will have to consider the 
trade off between time and accuracy. 
Figure 24  Tools at hand for pretotyping
==PAGE:47==
47
Idea With
This is not a desk. The idea with this concept is to pro­
vide elements to build a desk. It is DIY for those who 
like it and less DIY for those who likes to do it the easy 
way. The elements are a desktop and a pair of trestles 
with an installation bracket. 
The trestles are the main element. You choose either to 
buy one of the provided desktops, or simply use your 
own old antique one. Maybe you even have two desk­
tops? Or you use a front and a backside. Change it for 
the occasion of the day. 
Idea in
The Idea in the concept is a pair of trestles where the 
height is controlled via an application for a smart­
phone. Because of the nature of the design there is no 
need to level up the desk with paper or the like, be­
cause the sawhorses rest on 3 points each, and will 
therefore never be rocking. The joint to the desktop is 
a special bracket resting on the “swanhead” which en­
sures the movement of the wings. The bracket will have 
to be mounted on the bottom of the desk surface. The 
trestles are equipped with a motor each, and the power 
comes through the rear leg. This powers up both the 
motor and the wireless plate within the bracket. 
Morphological rute
Sinusoidal movement
Use existing favourite
App
Bracket and screws
3 touch points
Wireless
Power embedded in legs and provided in desktop
Insights from prototyping
Joining cylindrical elements in 3 planes are difficult 
and time consuming. Different options are tried, and 
even play dough is used to resemble a special brack­
et, but it doesn’t look like it’s made out of wood. The 
different joints would experience quite heavy stresses.
The total elevation will be very reliant on the width of 
the wings and thereby the width of the desk. 
1 | Flying Swan
==PAGE:48==
==PAGE:49==
==PAGE:50==
Ideation & Conceptulisation
2 | Jumping Ballerinas
Idea With
The idea with the jumping ballerinas is a light con­
structed frame inspired by ballet movement that allow 
the user to adjust the height to the specific working 
position. 
Idea in
The Idea in the Jumping Ballerinas is a frame build 
by triangles providing the needed stability. When the 
height is adjusted, the sides of the triangles are elongat­
ed by the use of a sliding rack. A regular linear actuator 
adjusts the height of the front legs. The frame consists 
of multiple elements, and around this cords and wires 
can move around providing power at the surface of the 
desk. 
Morphological route
Rack and pinion with sliding arm
Defined at order
Push Button
Thread
Screw
Docked power station in desktop
Insights from pretotyping
The sliding rack produces noise 
Sliding on the floor will produce noise and friction
It looks like it is made out of wood, and joints are rela­
tively easy to make
The two legs in the front need stabilising
==PAGE:51==
51
3 | Caring Bamboo
Idea With
The idea with the Caring Bamboo is to use the trendy 
material bamboo and mimic it’s growth pattern when 
adjusting the height. This way you have a bamboo for­
est growing in your office, while you work.  It has a 
strong environmental message and can help shape the 
strategy of the brand.
Idea in
The idea in Caring Bamboo is to use linear actuators 
that work in a parallel system via a control box. Each 
leg consists of hollow bamboo cane sticks of different 
diameter, one sliding either in- or outside on the oth­
er. Depending on the positioning of the canes the desk 
will have a maximal stroke of 50 cm – moving from 70 
– 120 cm covering the majority of the European height. 
Morphological route
Linear actuator/ alt. telescopic
Defined at order
Twist knob
Bracket
Level
Docked power station
Insights from Pretotyping
Installation of linear actuators is simple, and existing 
ones can be used. This is great in relation to manu­
facturing cost. If there are enough desks in an office 
it goes from 4 bamboo trees and turns into a forest. 
Could be strong sales argument, when trying to target 
businesses. 
Bamboo is extremely durable, it is used for outdoor 
applications for up to two years in ground and above 
ground it is expected to last 10 years – and indoor close 
to forever [Risør 1980]. Bamboo is however not wood 
– it is a type of grass that has properties of wood. Bam­
boo is naturally hollow, and has its strength “around 
the hole” – therefore it makes sense to use it in tele­
scopic setting. However bamboo has weak strength 
properties in tension, and joints can be hard to make.
Bamboo doesn’t fit a Nordic trend
==PAGE:52==
Ideation & Conceptulisation
Weighted Objectives Method
The weighted objectives method (WOM) [Cross 2008] 
is used to go from the three to the final concept. The 
criteria here are stated according to the design specifi­
Criteria	
Weight
Argument
Suitable for 
designing in 
wood
5
Is the design suitable for man­
ufacturing in wood?
Height adjust­
ability range
5
Valuing the height range with 
a high score makes sense, 
since this is the main function.
Communicat­
ing function­
ality
4
Many existing designed height 
adjustable desks doesn’t com­
municate that it has a func­
tion, or what the function 
actually is. 
Noise level
4
If the desk has to be in office 
landscapes, the noise level is 
important. If using the func­
tion makes you stand out 
because of annoying sounds, 
you might be reluctant to use 
it. Unless the noise/sound is 
used for communication to 
others.
Late stage 
differentiation 
(platform)
4
If we can target a wider seg­
ment with multiple products, 
but keep production simple, 
late stage differentiation is 
worth it to spend some time 
on.
Simple instal­
lation
3
If the final installation is so 
easy that the end-user can do 
it him self, we don’t need to 
spend time/money on a guy 
installing desks.
Number of 
motors
1
The number of aligned motors 
is important when consider­
ing allocated space in design. 
Motors are needed but over­
consumption is unwanted, es­
pecially with the environmen­
tal outlook when designing in 
wood.
Size ranges 
(platform)
1
Keeping a proper set of sizes 
present in the portfolio is nice 
for targeting users with differ­
ent needs/priorities, but we 
don’t need one hundred.
cation. The weight in Table 4 should be seen in relation 
to the overall design task, and therefore the same score 
can be given multiple times.
Evaluation
 The concepts are evaluated by the wieghted objectives 
in Table 5. Scores are given between zero and five, 
where zero is the absolute minimum and five the most 
optimal.
The weighted objective method posted a clear winner 
- the Jumping Ballerina – with 99 points and with 16 
points to the closest contestant. When looking over 
the scoring it performs well in the highest valued cate­
gories, however some pain points are still present and 
should be considered and rethought before the actual 
detail work begins. 
The other concepts also hold some strong qualities, but 
their pain points are fatal for fulfilling the design task. 
Going through this method has revealed the severity 
of the pain points by adding a number to the equation.
When comparing the two methods for choosing (Pugh 
and WOM) some of the criteria’s are reused. Scores 
might be given differently from one to the other be­
cause of the insights and knowledge on the nature of 
the ideas found through the conceptualisation. This 
process is extremely important for the development 
because the actual favourite or darling might not do as 
good as once expected.
Sum Up Conceptualisation & 
Pretotyping
The concept that is chosen for further work is Jump­
ing Ballerina. Through an exploration phase concepts 
were framed and evaluated by means of WOM.
Table 4	 Qualifying the criterias
==PAGE:53==
53
Criteria
Weight
Fying Swan
Jumping Ballerina
Caring Bamboo
SDW
5
It looks like casted steel
0
0
The references to 
carpentry is what 
makes this concept 
special
5
25
Bamboo is an or­
ganic material but 
not wood, and we 
might experience 
difficulties in joining 
due to the strength 
properties
1
5
HAR
5
As the concept looks 
we’re only able to support 
different sitting heights
Pretty good options, 
it will not take too 
much work to incor­
porate the full range
Pretty good options, 
it will not take too 
much work to incor­
porate the full range
CF
4
Good
5
20
Good
5
20
Good
5
20
NL
4
Depending on the design 
of the bracket between 
the trestle and the desk­
top
4
16
Scratching sounds 
from movement on 
the floor. The mean 
by which it moves 
could also induce 
noises
1
4
No more noise than 
usual height adjusta­
ble desks
4
16
LSD
4
The whole trestle will 
have to alter proportions 
and early assemblies will 
determine the size
1
4
With the current 
frame variation can 
be pushed forward, 
if the triangles can 
be reused across 
different variants
3
12
Good options. The 
variant creation is 
when installing the 
desktop
4
16
SI
3
Simply unpack the tres­
tles and add the desktop. 
Do we need to fasten 
it? Maybe through the 
bracket
4
12
ill take some work 
from the user, but 
no more than what 
you expect when 
you buy IKEA fur­
niture
3
9
Attach the legs with 
a simple click on 
mechanism and plug 
the wire. Done!
4
12
#M
1
As a minimum this con­
cept requires 2 motors, 
perhaps
4
4
As a minimum 4 
motors, but depend­
ing on the construc­
tion it might be 6
2
2
4 motors are required
3
3
SR
1
Length is decided by the 
user, but width is deter­
mined by the trestle
2
2
The frame demands 
a certain size
2
2
Legs can be attached 
to any sized surface
5
5
Total
68
99
86
Continue
NO
YES
NO
Table 5	 Evaluating the concepts with the weighted ob­
jetives
==PAGE:54==
==PAGE:55==
55
By means of creative- and structured brainstorm­
ing sessions ideas were captured and documented 
through an idea catalogue. The promising ideas were 
evaluated with a Pugh Matrix based on the design 
specification. Three ideas showed greater potential 
and were conceptualised by pretotyping and apply­
ing morphological means. The concepts were evalu­
ated through the Weighted Objectives Method and 
the project will continue on working with Jumping 
Ballerinas.
==PAGE:56==
Detailing & 
Prototyping
==PAGE:57==
==PAGE:58==
==PAGE:59==
59
The scope of this phase is to carry out a process of 
detailing the height adjustable desk according to the 
need finding conducted earlier. The construction is 
based on a concept derived in the 2nd phase and the 
objective is to build a full-scale wooden model for 
evaluation.
==PAGE:60==
Detailing & Prototyping
Version 1.0 of the Jumping Ballerina contains some 
pain points.This section aims at investigating them 
and turn them into either advantages or altered. Proto­
types are used as proof of concept.
Version 1.1
#1: The friction between floor and feet
The concept is supposed to adjust height by pushing its 
legs downwards. Due to the construction of triangles 
this will result in movement over the floor. It is investi­
gated through a small pretotype if the legs could push 
upwards instead. See Figure 25 for principal idea.
 
#2: Aligning multiple motors
With the first draft of the frame in conceptualisation, 
at least 4 if not 6 motors are required to drive the legs. 
A new setup could be to have a “ballerina” at each end 
and remove the front legs visualised in Figure 26. The 
desk will be more symmetrical and could be used from 
both sides as well and it would probably be enough 
with only two motors.
#3: Too heavy design?
Installing motors take space and require installing cov­
ers. This will take up some of the light almost hovering 
look. However stability is still an issue look wise and it 
is important that the user trusts the desk in high posi­
tion. We therefore face a challenge of meeting design 
Concept Investigation
Figure 26  Principal structure with sliders on top of 
trestles sliding upwards and a hovering desktop.
that is both light and open in the low position and sta­
ble and secure in the high position. Allowing a smaller 
area to be blinded to shield the motors could help ob­
taining this.
With these alterations the name should be reconsid­
ered once the final product is present.
All the pain points were targeted and solutions for 
them found, through changing the layout of desk. For 
ideas on joints and details refer to Figure 27
Figure 25  The arms can slide upwards instead of 
down
==PAGE:61==
61
Figure 27  Details of functional elements and joints
==PAGE:62==
Detailing & Prototyping
Anthropometric Field Study
With the concept investigation the process focus 
shifts from divergent to convergent thinking. The 
challenge ahead is restricted by the strength in the 
material, which means that existing thin-walled 
steel layouts wouldn’t be true to the wood.
A first draft on dimensions is established through 
CAD-modelling on the basis of an anthropomet­
ric field study
Measuring Users
From the WEA-guide guidelines on the height in­
terval for desks and for people were given. With the 
concept it was realised that the full interval couldn’t be 
covered by one desk only, since the maximum height 
(of 122cm) had to be more than twice the minimum 
height of (60cm). It would require an extreme width 
of the desk that is not close to a realistic size. A differ­
ent approach to the challenge is to prepare a platform, 
which support the full interval. That way the user ac­
quires a desk that fits his anthropometric measures. 
To develop the platform a group of 10 people 4 men 
and 6 women of different heights were measured, and 
results are as seen in Table 6.
 
Based on these observations a relationship between full 
height, elbow height standing and –sitting was estab­
lished and a table covering all height was produced. In 
order to limit this project the interval was chosen to fit 
90% of the Danish population covering from 1560mm 
Figure 28  (Right) The desk in high position for a standing work 
posture. 
Figure 29  (Next page) The in main dimensions of the desk, be­
fore meeting with the skilled workers.
[mm]
Stature
Standing 
E H
Sitting 
E H
Displacement
1
1750
1070
700
370
2
1800
1110
720
390
3
1825
1120
725
395
4
1670
1060
710
350
5
1640
1030
700
330
6
1900
1160
760
400
7
1770
1070
705
365
8
1860
1140
745
395
9
1810
1115
720
395
10
1670
1000
660
340
Name
Height Inter­
val [mm]
Sitting 
Interval
[mm]
Stand­
ing 
Interval
[mm]
Full Interval 
[mm]
1560-1710
658-1055
1720-1790
700-1098
1800-1830
721-1120
1840-1880
731-1148
Table 6	 People’s corresponding stature and Standing- 
and Sitting Elbow Height
of stature to 1880mm [Hansen et. al 1998]. The maxi­
mal displacement is at 400mm (for the tallest) see WS 
DP-01. This measure is used to divide the interval into 
smaller sections. Each size of desk has a displacement 
of 400mm, which gives a total of 4 desk sizes that can 
support the full interval. The sizes are seen in Table 7.
Table 7	 Four sizes that covers 90% of the Danish pop­
ulat
Since it is the higher end of the scale that needs the 
maximum displacement, the intervals here cover a 
fairly short height difference, which calls for a higher 
displacement in this end of the scale. This will however 
not be covered in the project. For further investigation 
one size is chosen to dimension. The average height 
for the Danish population is around 1750mm and this 
desk size is chosen. From this we have a realistic range 
to cover and technical drawings are developed.
Sum up Anthropometric Field Study
This section has provided a basis for dimensioning 
desk suitable for different heights, and makes up the 
basis for a platform. It is chosen to dimension a desk 
that fit the average height of the Danish population.
==PAGE:63==
63
rk 
e-
Modelling in Wood
This section gives a general introduction to the 
product shaped by the dimensioning process.
Process
A preliminary dimensioning was done and renderings 
and technical drawings were produced. The dimen­
sioning is an iterative process that for each loop gen­
erates more rules about the design, focusing firstly on 
general shaping. Once the first shaping is fulfilled the 
focus shifts onto more exact dimensioning, and choic­
es on the shaping are changed. The work took three 
models and can be seen in WS DP-02.  A thing to bear 
in mind while modelling wood in a CAD program is 
the way the assembly work is structured and where one 
part ends and another starts. A classic bottom-up ap­
proach can be challenging, when the shaping of each 
==PAGE:64==
 1700 
 700 
 84 
==PAGE:65==
 820 
 1050 
 1000 
 175  50 
 100 
DESKFULL_low
SHEET 1 OF 1
SCALE:1:10
DWG NO.
TITLE: Desk in Lowest Position
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
==PAGE:66==
piece is reliant on the next. Take for instance the legs 
of the trestles, and the angular joints. Even though the 
pieces are equal the angle between them is dimen­
sioned by the width and height. When modelling has 
to be true to the material the line between part and 
assembly has to be drawn for each piece that is cut i.e. 
the trestles are not a part, but a subassembly by this 
view. This means that using a tow-down approach for 
the modelling gives a greater result [SolidWorks].
Product
The product consists of six wooden elements. The 
trestle forms the basis of the legs with crossbars in be­
tween, the slider pushes the track upwards the track 
that positions the movement of the sliders and wooden 
cylinders locking the sliders inside the track. On top 
of the track the hovering desktop can be seen, and in 
between the track a connector helps stabilise the con­
struction. To position the desktop four rectangular 
protrusions are fastened to the track and the hovering 
illusions is created by rubber cylinders pulled back­
wards from the edge.
Once the motor is activated a worm gear starts rotat­
ing which results in displacement of the sliders up- and 
downwards according to the direction of rotation. The 
movement of the desktop can be sin in Figure 30. 
Behind the blinded area at the top of the trestle a mo­
tor and gearing should be placed.
The layout of a trestle is an old device used in many 
different applications for creating temporary working 
areas of standing height. To day many interpretations 
of trestles flourish the market, and have good success 
because of their elegant and open yet simple design.
Sum Up Modelling in Wood
This section provided a general introduction on work­
ing with the dimensioning and what elements the 
physical product consists of. Further detailing will be 
conducted from here.
Figure 30  From top and down, the desktop undergoes 
a smooth elevation and reaches its top
==PAGE:67==
67
Figure 31  Introduction to the naming convention of the elements of the desk
Trestle
Trestle Legs
Cross Bars
Sliders
Wooden 
Cylinder
Track
Keyway in track
Protrusion
Desktop
Slider Front
Slider Rear
==PAGE:68==
Detailing & Prototyping
Meeting With Skilled Workers
To evaluate the feasibility, dimensioning and 
construction a meeting with a carpenter (Lars­
en) and a cabinet-maker (Velbæk) was initiated. 
The meeting was meant as planning meeting for 
building the full-scale prototype.
Preparations
For the meeting technical drawings of the desk were 
prepared and inspiration boards for joint-types were 
taken from the trend analysis WS RA-04 and present­
ed along with a pretotype showing the functionality. 
Feedback on these was given on critical construction 
and detailing on joint types one by one in relation to 
tools and technologies at hand:
Trestle and Slider Interface
The interface between the trestle and the slider was 
discussed. Larsen and Velbæk agreed that they’d 
have to introduce a keyway in the trestle along with a 
flat-headed screw especially used in furniture making 
screwed into the slider see Figure 32.  Using a screw 
instead of a wooden element should be seen in rela­
tions to how the forces acts on the elements and by 
what direction the wood can be applied. It was decided 
to use two screws at the lower end for steering in the 
top positions.
Slider Track Interface
The suggested solution was scrapped at once. Velbæk 
and Larsen saw no reason in making a different solu­
tion from that at the trestle/slider interface, when this 
was the stronger and more robust solution. Again they 
suggest using a keyway in the track see Figure 33, but 
restricting the keyway only to one side, instead of go­
ing all the way through. The idea of using large visible 
dowels for positioning is kept.
Figure 32  The interface between trestle (lower) and 
slider (upper) for the full-scale model
Figure 33  A Crossection of the track to show the posi­
tioning of the keyway 
Track/desktop Interface
The desktop is supposed to be slightly hovering over 
the frame. The first suggestion is to use two protru­
sions fastened to the track and visible in the desktop. 
With the width of the desk they suggest to have multi­
ple point where the desktop can rest to keep it horizon­
tal. The new resting points are small rubber cylinder 
fastened to the track and pulled backwards to make it 
invisible.
Joining the trestle
Larsen and Velbæk suggest using hidden joints since 
these are durable and doesn’t take too much wood 
away in the machining. It is a dowel-like solution that 
consists of a domino slat and a slot inside both pieces 
where the domino fits. It is afterwards glued and the 
pieces have a tight fit.
Horizontal Stability
With the initial construction no connection between 
the two frames beside the desktop was made. This 
was criticised, but quickly a solution came up that 
doesn’t change the space available underneath much. 
==PAGE:69==
69
The main goal was to keep both sides open to allow 
the desk to stand in the middle of a room and avoid 
feet, legs and chairs from colliding, but also maintain 
an acceptable height between thighs and desktop. It 
was decided to introduce a connection between the 
two frames from the middle of the inner side of the 
track and across. The joint between the connector of 
the frames and the track is again the domino joint. The 
placement shouldn’t clash with any knees due to the 
width of the desk. 
Dimensioning the trestle and sliders
The initial profile of the slider was 30x30 mm and 
this was evaluated as too small. The dimension was 
increased to a 40x40mm profile and according to this 
the trestle also need an increase in width. On top of 
that Velbæk and Larsen wanted to have a bit of air be­
tween the two sliders, so the width of the trestle was 
increased from 60 to 84mm. With the increased width 
the track also needed an alternation and this will be 
visible in the protrusions in the desktop.
Motor positioning
Larsen and Velbæk were also asked to comment on 
the positioning of the motor and the means by which 
the movement is performed were shown Figure 23 on 
page 45. The original chosen mean was to use a rack 
and pinion, but considerations on noise level was ex­
pressed.
Different options were discussed and two possible 
solutions came up as their favourite; the worm gear 
and the string and pulley system. Both were systems 
they’d seen work and had experience in planning. 
Both methods require two motors and these must be 
aligned through a control box that should be fitted on 
the lower side of the desktop.
String and Pulley
The string should be made from a thin steel wire cov­
ering in a plastic tube. It should be running in the key­
way next to the screws and should be fastened at the 
lowest point possible in a pulley where the wire can be 
winded up, when in the lower position. They empha­
sized that the pulley has to be affected by a spring, to 
have a smooth motion downwards. The motor could 
be placed at the top of the triangle in the trestles and 
covered by a wooden plate dimensioned accordingly. 
The transmission will have to go through the legs of 
the trestle, but with their dimensions strength-wise 
they see no challenges.
Worm gear
The worm gear is known from the vise on every old 
workbench. It can be turned with a special tool in 
wood and a quick estimate on the diameter is set to be 
16mm. The thread is of the flat type where wear doesn’t 
affect the edges as much and the durability is increased. 
The worm gear in placed in the key way in the trestle 
that is dimensioned to fit. In the sliders the flat head­
ed furniture screws are replaced by a screw with a nut 
as head that thereby both locks the vertical placement 
and the horizontal. Again the motor can be at the up­
per end of the triangle in the trestle, and with a gearing 
in between, it can drive both worm gears at once en­
suring equal height. 
Figure 34  A crossectional view how to drive the slid­
ers up and down in a functional model with a worm 
gear
==PAGE:70==
Detailing & Prototyping
Evaluating mean for height adjustment 
Larsen and Velbæk were asked to evaluate the durabil­
ity and feasibility of each method. 
In durability they estimated that the worm gear would 
last the lifetime of a desk, and even survive some bear­
ings, which might need replacement after years of in­
tensive use. The wear and tear on the steel wire would 
result in it snapping however in indoor use, this would 
require many years use. In durability they preferred 
the worm gear.
In relation to feasibility the primary thing discussed 
was cost, since both systems exist they had no doubt 
about the possibility of installing it into the trestles. 
The worm gear is however more expensive than the 
pulley and steel wire, since the production is placed at 
a skilled worker.
The overall favourite is the worm gear.
Sum up Meeting with Skilled Workers
From the meeting with Velbæk and Larsen a lot of de­
cisions and alterations in relation to functionality and 
dimensioning were made, and new technical drawings 
were made on the basis of this. The final drawings can 
be seen in WS DP-03.
==PAGE:71==
71
Contextual Technology
To have a greater chance of success in the setting 
technological solutions and contextual elements 
are incorporated.
Driving the worm gear 
A rotation needs to be applied to the worm gear to 
make the screws move upwards. Challenge is that the 
motor only has one relative placement, which is in the 
upper triangle of the trestle. To get the correct dis­
placement the full height of the trestles/length of the 
worm gears is needed. A special gearing could handle 
this activation. The dimensioning of this gearing will 
not be covered in this project, however bevelled gear­
ing [Colvin & Stanley 1914] is  an option to create an­
gular displacement of a rotation.
Electric Circuit
The desk makes use of existing technology from cur­
rent height adjustable desks. As shown in Figure 35 the 
circuit consist of an input, a push button, connected to 
a control box C in the middle. The control box aligns 
the two motors M and provides power for all the ele­
ments from a socket. The control box is placed under­
neath the desktop, in the middle to avoid collision with 
user’s knees etc. With the motors placed in the trestles 
the cables connecting the two need fit both high- and 
low position.
Interface with User
In the conceptualisation it is decided to use a push but­
ton to control the height. This mean is known from the 
existing height adjustable desks, but in observations 
it was seen how users visually had to search the right 
up- and down button. A reason for still choosing this 
element is that users know it and automatically they 
search for the button in the right hand side of the desk. 
However small changes in the physical design of the 
push button could help guide the fingers and provide a 
tactile feedback. It could for instance be by forcing the 
finger to follow a concave outline between two protru­
sions.
Cable Management
The means by which the cable management is fulfilled 
in the morphology was considered during the con­
ceptualisation as being too superficial. A new ideation 
round of managing cables was initiated and the full 
material can be found in WS DP-04.
M
M
C
The key findings from WS RA-08 are used to ensure 
that this desk will not have these shortcomings. Two 
ways of using the desk is targeted through the cable 
management: Some users have changing settings, 
where equipment is changed a lot such as, if the desk 
works both as a dining table and an office. Some value 
a more stationary setting, where cords should be han­
dled as strict as possible, as well as we need to power 
up the desk. This means that serving both stationary 
and changing elements is important. From ideation on 
cable management the following solutions are chosen:
To handle the stationary electronic cords, cables wires 
can be placed in a fabric that is press studded under­
neath the desktop. 
Convenience sockets are provided through outlets 
placed in the track of the frame. The plugs are placed 
on the side to avoid the cleaning challenges of having 
them horizontally placed.
To wire up the control box a cord is hanging freely, but 
has a weight block that keeps it straight down.
Wiring up the motors will have to be investigated 
more deeply. The aim is that it follows the outline of 
the frame, however when moving up and down we 
need to control the extra amount of cord. Solutions to 
this problem could be found by looking at solutions 
with spiral cords as seen on lamps and stationary tele­
phones.
Sum up Contextual Technology
Means that help the desk manoeuvring in the context 
of use have been investigated by making use of exist­
ing technology and tools for ideation helped generate 
solutions as to manage cables. Further work needs to 
be made as how to handle the cords between control 
box and motors.
Figure 35  The power circuit for adjusting height, 
M=motor and C=Control Box
==PAGE:72==
Detailing & Prototyping
This section describes the thoughts and decisions 
made in relation to suitable wood species for the 
final product. 
Wood Species
A vast amount of wood species exist but their applica­
tion varies because of looks, properties and availability. 
[Risør 1980] describes 530 species and in order to limit 
the options having some parameters can help. In fur­
niture making demands for strength, stability, warping 
and looks are central, however price, machining and 
availability on both solid and veneers are also deter­
mining [Risør 1980]. 
The species described are all naturally growing in tem­
pered zones [Johansen 2014] and seen in relations to 
the demands stated above as well as density, tradition­
al application and appearance. For descriptions and 
strength charts see WS DP-05.
Two groups of wood species that commonly is applied 
in furniture design is considerated, the semi-ring po­
rous and the ring-porous. The species are European 
Oak, Elm, Cherry, Locust, Ash, chestnut and European 
Walnut. At this stage we’re leaving out the diffuse-po­
rous species for reasons on texture and appearance. As 
described in The Future in Working and -Furniture 
on page 15 the future furniture calls for tactile ex­
periences, to challenge the everyday life of touching 
smooth screens. [Fastcodesign]
Using FSC certified wood
None of the described species are restricted by any 
regulations, however in order to preserve and devel­
op our forests in a sustainable way initiatives can be 
considered. The FSC (Forest Steward Council) certifi­
cation ensures the customer against buying wood from 
unsustainable forest. In praxis this means that only as 
many trees are cut down, as the forest have resourc­
es for to reproduce. It means that animals and other 
plants are protected and that the workers have proper 
education, equipment and wages [Forbo]. All together 
it is a social- and environmental initiative that should 
ensure the future of our forests. The system is applied 
and controlled internationally. 
Price
The species are all plotted on density as oppose to price 
Materrial Selection & Treatment
via CES edupak Table 8. The species cluster around 
three price levels: 5, 14 and 50 DKK/KG. 
In 50 DKK/KG group we see cherry, walnut and oak. 
The specific oak type Quercus spp. is similar to the Eu­
ropean Oak described above.
In the 14 DKK/KG group we see chestnut, elm, ash, 
locust and oak. The oak type here Quercus Virginia is 
similar to the American Oak, and not commonly ap­
plied in furniture.
In the 5 DKK/KG group we see ash (Fraxinus Latifo­
lia), which only grows in Northern America.
Selecting
Chestnut gives challenges in machining, and locust is 
sensitive to light creating colour variations we’re not 
searching for. Elm and cherry has lower strength prop­
erties than ash, and using oak is more expensive and 
has lower modulus of elasticity.
For the frame it is selected to use ash. Because of its 
strength characteristics and elasticity modulus, vibra­
tions can be absorbed into the frame. It is regularly used 
Density (kg/
500
600
70
Price (DKK/kg)
5
10
20
50
Walnut (juglans nigr
Ash (frax
Ash (fraxinus quadrangu
Ash (fraxinus pennsylvanica) (l)
Elm (ulmus rubra) (l)
Elm (ulmus americana) (l)
Ash (fraxinus nigra) (l)
Chestnut (l)
Ash (fraxin
Walnu
Cherry (prunus avium) (l)
Cherry (prunus serotina) (l)
Table 8	 The price of different species on the screening
==PAGE:73==
73
for sports equipments and tools, but more often sought 
in furniture in recent days. It has a medium price level 
and wanted appearance from the style board.
Furniture more often than ever incorporate the option 
of expressing a personal taste. Since the largest surface 
is the desktop it makes good sense to propose different 
options to satisfy the user. It could be that the user is 
price sensitive, and a cheaper desktop would suit him 
better, or a great wood lover would prefer the solid 
board on top. Inspired by trends discovered in Trend 
Analysis on page 18 and WS RA-04 the following 
option are proposed:
Birch Plywood board with furniture linolieum [Forbo] 
on top: 
The linoleum was observed multiple times in the trend 
analysis and because it is an organic material it always 
has a warm feeling against the skin. 
Solid ash 
A desktop from solid wood consists of slats glued to­
gether. They could be as long as the desk, giving a very 
calm and stylish look or the cheaper alternative would 
be to use shorter slats as seen in e.g. kitchen tops. Using 
the shorter slats gives a more moving look and adding 
a play in colours. These two options come as standards 
at proper merchants. 
Treatment
Frame
The finishing treatment of the frame is simple. For the 
slider to be able to move over the trestle no treatment 
should be done, but applying paraffin wax onto these 
two surfaces. If any treatment is applied it will lock 
these two surfaces onto each other and work against 
the movement.
In relation to protecting the wood against marring and 
scrapes it could be considered to treat the free surfaces 
with oil containing white pigment. However dehydra­
tion of the wood could still occur through the untreat­
ed side and the wood might start warping. It would 
be important to keep moisture level constant in the 
rooms, but in regular buildings it shouldn’t be an issue.
Solid Ash Desktop
Treating the surface would be by saturating it with 
oil containing a white pigment to make the pores less 
prone to absorb possible spills and marks. Howev­
er tests should be conducted, to evaluate numbers of 
treatment, and if all of them should contain white pig­
ment, alternatively clear oil could be applied to do the 
final saturation.
Desktop Linoleum
Linoleum is natural product derived from linseed oil 
mixed with different additives to obtain different col­
ours and characteristic feel. Linoleum doesn’t demand 
any treatment, but linoleum polish can be added to 
make it more resistant depending on the final use. It is 
sensitive soaking and heavy use of soap and chemicals.
[FritzHansen]
Sum up Material Selection and Treat­
ment
The final material choice is ash. For the desktop two 
options are proposed, the cheaper is a birch plywood 
board with a layer of furniture linoleum on top creat­
ing a warm surface and the more expensive is a solid 
ash desktop made from shorter slats generating a col­
our- and pattern play. Different options for treatment 
have been identified.
(kg/m^3)
700
800
900
1000
1100
s nigra) (l)
Oak (quercus virginiana) (l)
(fraxinus americana) (l)
Ash (fraxinus excelsior) (l)
rangulata) (l)
Elm (ulmus thomasii) (l)
fraxinus latifolia) (l)
Locust (l)
Oak (quercus spp.) (l)
Walnut (juglans regia) (l)
==PAGE:74==
Detailing & Prototyping
Building the Full Scale Model
This section covers the preparations for building 
the full-scale model as well as the findings seen 
through the process. To evaluate the design pros­
pect users are presented with the model and feed­
back is given.
Preparations
To prepare for the building of the prototype a draft was 
drawn on a piece of plywood. The draft helps in laying 
out the right angles for the trestles ensuring two some­
what equal parts.
The wooden cylinders visible in the track are made 
from oak, and afterwards treated with ammonium 
hydroxide to obtain the “smoked oak” look. The treat­
ment consists of leaving the cylinder in a closed box 
where steams of the ammonium hydroxide are present. 
It shouldn’t soak only the steams are necessary. After 
12 hours the cylinders have the desired colour. In Fig­
ure 36 samples show the colour changing process.
Figure 36  Four samples of how the colour develop 
when making smoked oak.
A shopping list was also laid out to ensure the right 
amount of material. Since it is a prototype we’re build­
ing it’s not the final material that is applied. As ex­
plained earlier when prototyping price is crucial and 
making mistakes are as well. And making mistakes in 
the final material is simply too expensive. We choose to 
use Scots Pine - it’s cheap and light and present local­
ly, however not a sought material for furniture, mainly 
due to colour variation – it turns yellow when affected 
by sunlight. However for this purpose it fits, the sizes 
available in the local timber merchant suits the dimen­
sioning and the colour play when fresh is close enough 
to ash for getting an impression. 
The full prototyping process is documented in WS DP-
06 Prototyping Process. In the next spread a variety of 
pictures generates a holistic view on the process. 
Design Choices
When the pieces for the trestles were laid out angles 
for the joints were determined and cut. The crossbars 
were cut according with their height in the trestles. I 
expressed a concern, that I found that the trestles too 
compact and rigid. It was suggested to try with half the 
size of it, to give it the dimensions of the sliders instead 
of the legs. The result is seen immediately and the de­
cision is approved. 
The rectangular holes in the desktop were cut with a 
jigsaw. Placing the protrusions are done with a rule 
of thumb that says that 1/6th-1/8th from the edge is 
pleasing for the eye and optimal in strength. Placing 
the protrusions around the middle axis is also dis­
cussed, but dismissed, due to look-wise balance.
Some of the joints hadn’t been discussed at the plan­
ning session, but we quickly agreed that if they didn’t 
add any direct value to the height adjustment function, 
they shouldn’t be visible. Therefore the domino joint is 
incorporated into more joints than originally planned. 
It is a strong joint where a domino shaped dowel made 
from beech is glued into fitting slots in either side. 
Findings
Through the building of the desk critical points were 
identified and targeted by altering smaller elements. 
The overall impression is overwhelming and gives a 
much better perspective on relative sizes, than paper 
and technical drawings do. When working with wood 
one gets a better grip of the limitations structural- and 
tool-wise and the laborious work behind a relatively 
simple part or element, such as the cut-outs for the pro­
trusions, round things takes less work than squared.
Prospect Users’ evaluation
After the building an assembly process was carried out 
and the desk was installed in a meeting room at KPH 
Figure 37 with contextual elements. Resident of KPH 
was invited in to talk and leave comments concerning 
==PAGE:75==
75
the model. The aim was to see if prospect users see and 
understand the functional elements and if they find 
it aesthetically pleasing. All of those that dropped by 
immediately understood the concept, and many out­
breaks of “Can I make it go up?” revealed excitement 
and joy towards the desk. A resident walked by the 
room and before realising the purpose of the changes 
he mumbled to himself “shut up, I really feel like sit­
ting in there”, and afterwards approached to ask “if I 
had seen, what was going on in there”. A woman from 
the administration stated that she would want one at 
home, and asked how much it would cost and her col­
league said that it was okay if it stayed in the meeting 
room. Other residents (since the house is dominated 
by start-up fever) asked what they could do to pre­
pare it for production, and started planning installing 
prototypes all over the house for testing. Other people 
gave good remarks on the design, touched different 
pieces and tested the stability showing a great deal of 
curiosity which is translated into the innovative and 
original layout of the design forcing people to wonder­
ing and experiencing new sensations.
Sum up Building Full-Scale Model
Through building the full-scale model elements of the 
conceptual design were tested and some altered. Eval­
uation from prospect users showed great results and 
that one of the aims of communicating functionality 
is obtained.
Figure 37  The full-scale model in the context of KPH
==PAGE:76==
==PAGE:77==
==PAGE:78==
Detailing & Prototyping
Timber 
50x100mm
Timber 
65x125mm
Rough Dimen-
sional Cut
Material
Process
Assembly
Planing
Thickness 
Planing
Cut in Half
Plane Fresh 
Side
Drawing Up 
Keyway in 
Track
Drawing up 
Keyway in 
Trestle
Milling Keyway 
Vertically
Milling Keyway 
Horisontally
Thin section 
and Make 
Angular Fit 
Make Angular 
Section in 
Track by Chisel
Cut Final 
Length With 
Middle as ref
Sandi
Sanding
Rounding
Inside Ke
Cut at Final 
Length
Milling Domino
Sanding
Sliders
Crossbars
Cut Angle For 
Joining
Milling 
Domi
Protrusions
Plywood Board
Cut on 4 sides
Leftover Cut To 
Make Frame
Corner Cut at 
45°
Installation on 
Lower Side
Screws 
M4x25mm
Glue
Cutouts for four 
Protrusions
Sanding
!Due to the design all angles and cuts 
are positioned equally and everything 
can be laid out next to each other and 
lines are easily projected.
!Dimensions are standard and 
chosen slightly bigger than fi nal to 
allow for planing.
!Altermative material for differ-
ent desktop styles cut introduce 
changes in production.
Product Architecture
This section seeks to describe the initiatives intro­
duced to both support production complexity and 
users’ needs and preferences.
Production View
Creating variety in the portfolio helps serving differ­
ent user segments. However creating variety without 
adding unnecessary complexity in production can 
be difficult if not planned in advance [Harlou 2006]. 
Differentiation should be pushed as far ahead in the 
production line as possible and technology should be 
reused whenever possible. Having a late customer or­
der decoupling point means that lower stocked items 
are necessary. 
The production view is laid out on the basis of the 
prototyping processes in Figure 38. Minty green box­
==PAGE:79==
79
Sanding
Sanding
Mill Holes in 
Sliders Fitted 
to Track
Cut for Final 
Length
Assemble 
Slider and 
Trestle
Assemble 
Desktop, 
Protrusions, 
Connector and 
Track
Smoked Oak 
Cylinders
Final Assembly
Rubber 
Cylinders
Screw
M4x20mm
nding and 
nding End 
de Keyway
Drill Holes 
for Threaded 
Bushings
Installation in 
Sliders
Threaded 
Bushing
M6x20mm
Furniture 
Screw
M6x40mm
illing For 
Domino
Sanding
Joining
Clamping
Leave to Dry
24h
Domino
Glue
!A shape with the fi nal 
dimensions is a biprod-
uct of the production.
!Customer order de-
coupling point - At this 
stage the size of the 
desk is defi ned. 
es represent adding material or a component and the 
darker is process. The brown boxes are creation of as­
semblies, which means that two or more modules are 
assembled. The yellow exclamation marks reveal in­
sights on production in relation to the modules
Supporting Needs and Style
A proposal for a product architecture was made on the 
basis of an anthropometric field study. The need for the 
individual user proved to be different from that stated 
by the WEA guide, and it is identified that a product 
family can support the whole range of users’ statures. It 
was seen that the actual need was to raise the desktop 
[30-40] cm according to individual stature. 
While dimensioning the medium desk it was kept in 
mind the other sizes shouldn’t be varying in the cen­
tral parts but pushed to the later stages in production. 
Figure 38  A graphical overview of proposed production processes for the desk
==PAGE:80==
Detailing & Prototyping
This was met by avoiding placing the size changing el­
ements in the functional organs. In praxis this means 
that the size changing element is the final cut of the 
height of the trestle legs and slider arms. This cut en­
sures a plane surface with the floor but now also the 
final size range. This is however not directly applicable 
for the smaller sizes but should be further investigated 
in the future work.
Some users expressed concerns on having a desk made 
from wood. They preferred a more silent black look in­
stead. By supporting different kinds of desktops these 
users are also met, and changing trends or price levels 
could be incorporated. It is marked in the production 
view Figure 1 in the lower left corner.
Future Design Units
Preparing for future variants is one of the elements 
that give product platforms such a strong advantage. 
As a start the series encompass four sizes regulating 
height, one frame colour and two desktop options. In 
future variants different lengths of the desk could be 
obtained by adjusting the length of the connector of 
frames/desktop, and depending on trends the desktop 
could be offered in different colours/species. Future 
variants could also incorporate more height sizes, to 
target the last 10% of the scale, however it would take a 
closer look into the dimensioning. 
Sum up Product Architecture
By working with the product architecture we opened 
up the possibilities of proposing desks according to 
height without adding unnecessary complexity in the 
production. By making the product family two options 
for desktops can also be proposed as standard and fu­
ture colour options can be incorporated.
 
==PAGE:81==
81
Business Model
This section covers ideas on organising, capturing 
and creating value in the market of height adjust­
able desks. 
Canvas
The Business Model Canvas Figure 39 on page 82 is 
used as a tool on what topics to consider The case of 
being a newly started studio as used in Porter’s Five 
Forces on page 19 is used. The Business model is 
structured according to the activities of the Business 
Model Canvas (Osterwalder & Pigneur 2010) with 9 
activities. Post-its are used so that activities flexibly 
can move around and make room for new or to be re­
placed.
Key Activities and Resources
The desk will be developed within the newly started 
design studio named TR*. The key activities here will 
be on product design and rolling out the platform, 
prepare for future variants and –trends. The main re­
source of the studio is to generate new ideas and find 
possibilities in existing product architecture.
Value Proposition
The result of the activities is the value we are able to 
propose to customers. In time it covers mass customi­
sation with a design basis, where customers can get a 
closer bond to the product, because they are able to 
choose their personal favourite while also handling 
more basic needs such as size, two important elements 
seen in the need finding section.
Customer Segment
Regulations on the market has been incorporated and 
articulated in the design process, which means that we 
have the ability to target a wider segment than only the 
private home office segment. Also offices in industrial 
settings can meet targets on the CSR profile. 
Revenue Streams
Having two different customer segments call for in­
dividual setup. For the private customer the revenue 
streams from pure asset sale, however in the industri­
al application one could imagine a leasing agreement. 
The leasing could cover changing staff and delivery of 
a new frame that fits the newly employed, but is also 
an interesting business model for newly started com­
panies with low start-up funds.
Key Partners
Since the activities mainly rely on product develop­
ment in woodW partnering up with different stake­
holders is necessary to ensure a final product. Going 
through an established design house as described ear­
lier doesn’t take as much start-up funding, because of 
their existing agreements with sub suppliers and man­
ufacturers and established customer segment. OEM’s 
are of interest for the technology around the height 
adjustment, when existing systems can be reused or 
altered to fit this design. 
==PAGE:82==
Detailing & Prototyping
Figure 39  The ideation over activities by using the 
business model canvas.
Channels & Customer Relationship
Partnering up with a design house will also make it 
possible to use their regular sales channels such as a 
furniture store or a web shop with existing customers. 
For the two different segments different relationships 
must be maintained. In the private segment customers 
are used to use both furniture stores and web shops, 
which makes use of personal assistance and self-ser­
vice respectively. In the industrial segment with a leas­
ing contract there is a longer relationship that requires 
follow-ups and refitting according to their needs. This 
means that specially trained sales consultants could be 
beneficial for the business to do a need finding screen­
ing of the company.
Cost Structure
Cost is structured on the basis of the proposed value. 
This is common for luxury goods and the purpose for 
this desk is not to be competing with the cheaper al­
ternatives fulfilling the same needs. The desk is a life­
style-furniture and buying it is an expression of cus­
tomers’ personal taste in interior design. The customer 
is one who would prefer the functionality embedded, 
but chose not to buy an existing height adjustable desk 
because of aesthetic appeal.
==PAGE:83==
83
==PAGE:84==
==PAGE:85==
85
The initial concept was explored in order to tar­
get the pain points found through conceptualis­
ation. With the changes an iterative process of di­
mensioning was done based on an anthropometric 
field study and the technical drawings produced 
were approved and altered through a meeting 
with a furniture maker and a carpenter. 
The choice of materials for the final desk re­
flects findings from the trend analysis, but also a 
screening on traditional wood species when mak­
ing furniture seen in relation to price. The session 
of building the full-scale model was prepared by 
making drafts and do experiments with smoking 
oak, and through the process of building new in­
sights came up. These helped layout an initial plan 
for production steps. Finally activities on business 
modelling are considered, identifying opportuni­
ties of creating and organising value proposals.
==PAGE:86==
Project Outro
Project 
Outro
==PAGE:87==
87
==PAGE:88==
Project Outro
Discussion
The discussion is used for reflecting over choices 
made throughout the development process. When 
looking back choices in the beginning of the pro­
cess have shaped the way of working and given 
the final result.
Segmentation Tool
The applied segmentation tool is based upon the Dan­
ish population and values found might appeal differ­
ently when looking at the broader European market. 
Knowing the prospect users in a new field is evident, 
and smaller changes should be considered to meet 
these. It could for instance be to use a local wood spe­
cies.
Prototyping as Development Tool
The scene of prototyping was staged already in the title. 
The deliberate choice of using preto- and prototyping 
as development tools helped me as a designer to com­
municate with not only myself through the conceptu­
alisation, but also as a means of communication with 
the skilled workers and onwards with prospect users. 
Having a three dimensional model makes it easier for 
stakeholder to point at and shape pain points, and hav­
ing to build them forces one as a designer to face them, 
and push the design closer to a feasible product.
Designing in Wood
When designing in wood it has been made clear that 
some constraints must be accepted. Many of the ide­
as were not fit for designing in wood, however in the 
ideation phase it was evident to keep the horizon wide 
and open since it also had to incorporate the height 
adjustability. The choice of first evaluating for the 
height adjustability ranges and then afterwards for the 
suitability for designing in wood was deliberate seen 
in relation to the time constraint of the project. The 
pretotyping process was extremely important for the 
evaluation of suitability for designing in wood, but do­
ing it with that many different ideas would not have 
given as good a result. 
Anthropometric Field Study
In the study 10 people of different height were meas­
ured and all of them are within the 90% coverage 
provided by AMI-study. The people measured all had 
somewhat equally proportioned bodies and the cor­
relation between them is evident. However for people 
with shorter arms or longer backs having a linear range 
might not be the optimal solution.
The Stroke
The stroke is as a start dimensioned as the same for all 
of the desks. This creates some groups in the higher 
part of the range where desks only cover two different 
heights. In the beginning it was a deliberate choice to 
make use of 400mm displacement and control the final 
height via the length of the legs, however while dimen­
sioning it was found to be a challenge to make use of 
the 400mm displacement for all sizes. When dimen­
sioning the other sizes the choice using 400mm stroke 
should be re-evaluated.
Aesthetics 
Aesthetics was an important factor when designing the 
desk, but it wasn’t until seeing the historic touch points 
that the real issue revealed itself. The industrial cold 
look in the existing desks could be seen in the light 
of the modernist, where we generate better living con­
ditions and promote the use of industrial machinery. 
Seen wit the eyes of the 50’s and 60’s Scandinavian de­
signers they fail since it is neither warm nor soft, which 
mean that is lacks the human feel. The proposed desk 
makes use of traditional materials and unlike the exist­
ing height adjustable desks it has the soft glow and the 
warm feel that invites people to touch, and which it so 
characteristic for Scandinavian design.
==PAGE:89==
89
Conclusion
The focus of this project has been on using prototyping 
as a development tool when doing design in wood. The 
case was on a height adjustable desk since it was of­
ten heard that users of them wouldn’t let them in their 
houses, but gladly worked at them at work. Throughout 
the fieldwork it was seen how users still had an opinion 
towards the atmosphere the existing height adjustable 
desks create. A user segment was chosen based on oc­
cupation, lifestyle and personal values, and needs ex­
plored through observations, interviewing and users’ 
personal photographs of their desks.
Throughout the ideation phase it was sought to chal­
lenge the current linear mechanism used for lifting 
and instead focus on a more honest layout, where the 
lifting mechanism is visible and help shape the design. 
Using preto- and prototypes have both helped com­
munication with stakeholders, but also pushed the un­
derstanding of critical areas and promoted solutions 
towards these. The process of building the full-scale 
model has generated a greater insight in time-con­
suming, laborious work-processes, and physically ex­
ploring the materiality of wood generates inspiration 
for pursuing the concept. The building process helped 
shaping the production view in the product architec­
ture, and it does bear marks of the manual labour car­
ried out. The demands and criteria of the design spec­
ification were targeted and solutions where found for 
all of them. A product platform was e.g. suggested to 
encompass the full height range but also the need for 
personal differentiation.
All together the suggested is a unique and innovative 
product that makes use of traditional and well-known 
means and materials that prospect users immediate­
ly understand and appreciate and welcome to their 
homes. The layout of the desk has a neat balance, yet 
the unhidden functional areas makes the eyes wander 
and mind content.
==PAGE:90==
Project Outro
Future Work
To take this project further it is recommended to 
do make further investigation into the areas stat­
ed below.
Moving cords
The cords between the motor in the trestle and the 
control box under the desktop should be investigated, 
to see if spiral cords or other solutions by storing the 
cords inside a desk element could done, to reduce wear.
Testing of Material
The final desk should be tested with the appropriate 
loads to see if the dimensioning acts as expected. Sim­
ulation is one way of testing but with wood as the ma­
terial with its characteristic anisotropic properties it 
might be of limited use.
Final Assembly
At the moment the final assembly where the wooden 
cylinders are placed through the track in the holes of 
the sliders, locks the entire desk. Because of the press 
fitted sizing of the cylinders, they ensure stability, how­
ever disassembly cannot be done. If the desk has to be 
moved around this could cause irritation. It should be 
investigated how the stability is compromised by the 
use of a smaller cylinder.
Gearing
A special gearing will have be developed and dimen­
sioned for the case. The bevelled cogs exist, but with 
the special layout these should be investigated.
Installing Mechanical Drivers
In relation to controlling the speed of the movement 
the worm gear must be tested in the context. 
Positioning in the Track
To avoid pushing the desktop out of place, when not in 
the highest or lowest position a system for locking the 
desktop should be developed.
Planning for production
In future work the manufacturing processes for each 
element should be evaluated with respect to expected 
sales and production channels.
==PAGE:91==
91
Literature
Reference
Ainsworth 2012
Ainsworth, Barbara E. and Macera, Caroline A., 2012. Physical Activity and Public 
Health practise, by Taylor & Francis Group LLC.
Andrews 1966
Adrews, Edward Deming, Andrews, Faith. 1966. Religion in Wood: a book of Shaker 
Furniture, Indiana University Press
Bednárik & Kováts 
2010
Bednárik, Éva, Kováts, Judit Pakainé, 2010,
Consumer behaviour model on the furniture market, Acta Silvatica et Lignaria Hun­
garica vol. 6.
Beyer & Holzblatt 
1998
Beyer, Hugh, Holzblatt, Karen 1998. Contextual Design. Morgan Kaufmann Publish­
ers
Bullar 2013
Bullar, John, 2013. The Complete Guide to Joint-Making, Guild of Master Craftsman 
Publications Ltd.
Burge 2009
Burge, Stuart. 2009. The Systems Engineering Tool Box. Stuart Burge.
Clarke 2005
Clarke, Adele E. 2005. Doing Situational Maps & Analysis. Sage Publications.
Colvin & Stanley 
1914
Colvin, Fred Herbert, Stanley, Frank Arthur. 1914. American Machinists’ Handbook 
and Dictionary of Shop Terms: A Reference Book of Machine Shop and Drawing 
Room Data, Methods and Definitions, McGraw Hill Book Company
Cross 2008
Cross, Nigel. 2008.Engineering Design Methods: Strategies for Product Design. John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd.
Dow et. al. 2009
Dow, P. S., Heddleston, K., and Klemmer, S. R. 2009 The Efficiacy of Prototyping Un­
der Time Constraints. ACM Press.
Graf et al. 1994
Graf, M., Guggenbühl U., Krueger, H. 1994, An Assesment of seated activity and pos­
tures at five workplaces, Elsevier, International Journal of Ergonomics
Hansen 2007
Hansen, Per H., 2007. Den Store Danske Møbelguide, Lindhardt & Ringhof
==PAGE:92==
Project Outro
Hansen & An­
dreasen 2002
Hansen, C. T. & Andreasen, M. M. 2002, The content and nature of a design concept, 
Proceedings NordDesign 2002, published by Department of Machine Design and Ma­
terials Technology & Department of Product Design Engineering, NTNU
Hansen et. al 1998
Hansen, Klaus, Feveile, Helene, Finsen, Lotte, Jensen, Chris, Jensen, Anne, Merkel, 
Janne, Ekner, Dorte, Christensen, Hanne. 1998. Antropometriske mål på 467 danske 
arbejdstagereArbejdsmiljøinstituttet København
Harlou 2006
Harlou, Ulf, 2006. Developing Product Families based on Architectures. Department 
of Mechanical Engingeering
Jakobsen 1944
Jakobsen, Harald. 1944. Snedkerarbejde I praksis 2. Oplag, Georg Andersens Forlag 
København
Jensen 2005
Jensen, Torben Elgaard, 2005. Aktør-netværksteori, Roskilde Universitets Forlag.
Johansen 2014
Johansen, Bjarne Lund, 2014. Træ 69, Træinformation
Lindegaard 2009
Lindegaard, Hanne. 2009. Introduktion til Feltarbejde og Research, Lecture Notes 
from User oriented Desig, Technocal University of Denmark
Mauborgne & Kim 
2005
Mauborgne, Reneé, Kim, W. Chan, 2005. Blue Oceam Strategy, Harvard Business Press
Miller 2012
Miller, Judith. 2012. Mid-Century Modern, Living with mid-century modern design, 
Octopus Pub Group
Osterwalder & 
Pigneur 2010
Osterwalder, Alexander & Pigneur, Yves 2010. Business Model Generation. John 
Wiley & Sons Inc.
Porter 2008
Porter, Michael E., 2008, The Five Competitive Forces that Shape Strategy, Harvard 
Business Review
Ramskou 1964
Ramskou, Thorkild, 1964, Træ er Tradition, Træbranchens Oplysningsråd
Risør 1980
Risør, Villy E. 1980,  Træhåndbogen. Borgen
Østergård 2012
Østergård, Peter Jakobsen, Ulka, Peter. 2012. CRM2.0- håndbogen, Efficiens
==PAGE:93==
93
Reference
Arbejdstilsynet
http://arbejdstilsynet.dk/da/regler/at-vejledninger/s/d-2-3-skaermarbejde.aspx
accessed 13/5-15
Arbejdstilsynet2
http://arbejdstilsynet.dk/da/regler/at-vejledninger/a/a-1-15-arbejdspladsen-in­
dretn-og-inventar.aspx
accessed 13/5-15
CorporateCulture­
Pros
http://www.corporateculturepros.com/2013/07/the-real-secret-of-googles-corpo­
rate-culture/
accessed 15/5-15
DS
http://www.ds.dk/da/standardisering/ce-maerkning/introduktion
accessed 11/5-15
Fastcodesign
http://www.fastcodesign.com/3043407/tech-forecast/ikea-on-7-predictions-for-
what-your-home-will-look-like-in-2020
accessed 5/3-15
Forbo
http://www.forbo.com/flooring/da-dk/produkter/m-bel-og-inventarlinoleum/desk­
top/b4682r#
accessed 28/5-15
FritzHansen
http://www.fritzhansen.com/da/fritz-hansen/the-republic/vedligeholdelse-og-mate­
rialer/massivt-trae
accessed 23/6-15
FSC
https://dk.fsc.org/faq-om-fsc.159.htm 
accessed 12/6-15
GallupKompas
http://tns-gallup.dk/kompas
accessed 18/2-2015
JobogKrop
http://www.jobogkrop.dk/Ondt-i-muskler-og-led/Hvorfor-faar-vi-ondt-i-nakke-og-
skuldre/Computerarbejde accessed 
accessed 15/5-5
JobogKrop2
http://www.jobogkrop.dk/Hvad-kan-I-goere/Varier-arbejdet/Variation-forebyg­
ger-smerter  
accessed 15/5-15.
MST 2013
http://mst.dk/media/mst/65961/Tr%C3%A6-%20og%20m%C3%B8belindustri%20
rev%20%207.pdf
accessed 16/5-2015
NFA 2012
http://www.arbejdsmiljoforskning.dk/da/arbejdsmiljoedata/arbejdsmiljoe-og-hel­
bred-20/arbejdsmiljoeet-i-tal/sammenligning-af-jobgrupper/diagram?question=­
NA_SIDDERMIN_3_4&sort=Falling&year=2014
accessed 20/2-15
Office-Ergo
http://office-ergo.com/hand-wrist-arm-pain/#msds, 
accessed 14/5-2015
Pinterest
https://www.pinterest.com/nummerenfemen/
accessed 23/6-15
Web Pages
==PAGE:94==
Project Outro
Pictures
All photographs belong to the author and should be 
credited as such, unless named on this list.
Links for collages are kept via pinterest, on specific 
boards for the task. A link for the board will be provid­
ed and original pictures can be found here.
Reference
Figure 1 on page 11
http://valleyosteopathy.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2013/11/Neck-Pain.jpg
Figure 2 on page 14
http://commercial-insurance-center.com/wp-content/uploads/2010/10/Photox­
press_9765855.jpg
Figure 4 on page 17
https://www.pinterest.com/nummerenfemen/office-desks/
Figure 8 on page 21
Johansen, Bjarne Lund. Træ 69 Træinformation. 
Figure 9 on page 22
Bullar, John, 2013. The Complete Guide to Joint-Making, Guild of Master Craftsman 
Publications Ltd.
Figure 10 on page 22
Adrews, Edward Deming, Andrews, Faith. 1966. Religion in Wood: a book of Shaker 
Furniture, Indiana University Press
Figure 11 on page 23
Dickson, Thomas 2006. Dansk Design.Gyldendal
Figure 12 on page 23
Dickson, Thomas 2006. Dansk Design.Gyldendal
Figure 13 on page 24
http://www.pp.dk/index.php?page=collection&cat=2&id=35
Figure 19 on page 39
https://www.pinterest.com/nummerenfemen/tr-mood/
https://www.pinterest.com/nummerenfemen/tr-usage/
https://www.pinterest.com/nummerenfemen/tr-style/
https://www.pinterest.com/nummerenfemen/tr-lifestyle/
Figure 20 on page 41
https://www.pinterest.com/nummerenfemen/tr-association-game/
SolidWorks
http://help.solidworks.com/2013/English/SolidWorks/sldworks/c_Design_Methods.
htm
20/6-15
Trae
http://www.trae.dk/index.asp?page=/dokumenter/dokument.asp%3FDokumen­
tID%3D1050)
17/6
