==PAGE:1==
Phase Change Material Heat
Storage using Stable Supercooling
Roberta Orlando
s131142
Kongens Lyngby 2015
==PAGE:2==
Phase Change Material Heat Storage using Stable Supercooling
This report was prepared by:
Roberta Orlando
s131142
Advisors:
Simon Furbo, Associate Professor at the Department of Civil Engineering, DTU.
Mark Dannemand, Ph.D Student at the Department of Civil Engineering, DTU.
Weiqiang Kong, PostDoc at the Department of Civil Engineering, DTU.
DTU Byg
Department of Civil Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Brovej, building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel: +45 4525 1700
byg@byg.dtu.dk
Project period:
February 2015 - August 2015
ECTS:
30
Education:
MSc
Field:
Sustainable Energy - Energy Savings
Class:
Public
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial fullment of the require-
ments for graduation in the above education at the Technical
University of Denmark.
Copyrights:
c⃝Roberta Orlando, 2015
==PAGE:3==
To my beloved father
Gianfranco Orlando
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Latent Heat Thermal Energy Storage is a developing technology which can be
integrated in a solar heating system. The innovation compared to the traditional
Thermal Energy Storage consists in storing large amounts of thermal energy as
latent heat in several supercooled PCMs' units. The goal is to decrease the
usual mismatching between the heat demand and supply: the heat is collected
when the solar energy is highly available - during the summer - and the latent
heat can be stored inside a supercooled uid. During the winter, when the heat
demand is signicant, the Latent Heat Thermal Energy Storage can be activated
through several triggering methods and the stored heat exploited.
The aim of this report has been to evaluate four dierent heat storage modules,
which have been installed and tested by the Department of Civil Engineering,
Technical University of Denmark  DTU. The heat storage modules dier from
each other in the PCM with which they have been lled. Sodium Acetate Tri-
hydrate (SAT) is the main material used. One module has been lled with SAT
with addition of water. The other three have been lled with 1w% CMC, 2w%
of graphite and 5 l of paran oil as additives, added one by one and used to im-
prove the thermal performances of the LHTES. Several cycles were run and the
measurements collected have been analysed to assess the heat storage capacity,
the heat transfer and the ability of stable supercooling for each module. The
results have shown that the highest heat storage capacity has been reached by
the module that used SAT + CMC as PCM. The ability of stable supercooling
still presented some problems.
Furthermore, an economic assessment has been carried out on a solar combi-
system, evaluating the four dierent mixture of materials. Several combinations
in terms of solar collector area and number of heat storage modules were inves-
==PAGE:6==
ii
tigated and the optimal solution is represented by 45 m2 of solar collectors and
ve heat storage modules installed, for a nal cost around 25 000 e.
TES generally improves the eciency of the energy system and it has low im-
pact on the environment, characteristics that respect the fundamental aim of a
sustainable development of the society.
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Civil Engineering in fullment of the require-
ments for acquiring an M.Sc. in Engineering. The M.Sc. is called Sustainable
Energy within the studyline of Energy Savings.
The thesis deals with the investigation of a developing technology, Latent Heat
Thermal Energy Storage. Thermal performances, economic aspects and sus-
tainability are assessed and discussed.
Lyngby, 13 August-2015
Roberta Orlando
s131142
==PAGE:8==
iv
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
I gratefully acknowledge the invaluable support from my supervisors, Associate
Professor Simon Furbo, the Ph.D. student Mark Dannemand and the Postdoc
Weiqiang Kong, from the Department of Civil Engineering at the Technical
University of Denmark (DTU). Their guidance and patience have helped me
through the all thesis. Without their precious support it would not be possible
to conduct this research.
In addition I wish to express my sincere thanks to Silvia Dequino and Paolo Coc-
ito, my parents, for their unceasing encouragement, support and attention, and
to my dear atmate Louise, who always supported me in my agitated venture.
The thesis would not have been completed without them.
Finally I place on record, my sense of gratitude to one and all, who directly or
indirectly, have lent their hand throughout this experience.
==PAGE:10==
vi
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Glossary
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Project plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Thermal Energy Storages
5
2.1
Sensible and Latent Heat
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Phase Change Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.1
Basic requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.2
Classes of Materials
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.3
Sodium Acetate Trihydrate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3
Supercooling Thermal Energy Storage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.3.1
Storage Capacity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.3.2
Nucleation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.3.3
Cold Finger . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.3.4
Phase Separation Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.4
Heat of Fusion: theoretical behaviour . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.4.1
Simple Theory
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.5
Applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3
Developed Modules
31
3.1
Description of the Heat Storage Test Facility
. . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.2
The Modules
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
==PAGE:12==
viii
CONTENTS
3.2.1
Storage Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4
Experimental analysis
39
4.1
Experimental method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.1.1
Heat loss coecient
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.1.2
Charge and discharge power . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.1.3
Heat content
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.1.4
Heat exchange capacity rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5
Results
43
5.1
Test with Module 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.2
Test with Module 1 with CMC and Graphite
. . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.3
Test with Module 1 with CMC, Graphite and Oil . . . . . . . . .
62
5.4
Test with Module 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
5.5
Accuracy Analysis of the Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
5.6
Summarizing the Cycles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
5.7
Comparison with the Theoretical Behaviour . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
5.8
Comparison between the Modules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
6
Economic Analysis
95
6.1
Introduction to the TRNSYS model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
6.2
Costs' Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
6.2.1
Description of the Real System's Components . . . . . . .
99
6.2.2
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
7
Sustainability
105
7.1
Sustainable Development
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
7.2
Environmental Impact . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
7.3
TES and Sustainability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
7.3.1
Materials
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108
8
Discussion
113
9
Conclusion
117
Bibliography
119
Appendix A
127
Appendix B
133
==PAGE:13==
Glossary
List of Symbols
a1
First order heat loss coecient of the solar collector [W/m2K]
a2
Second order heat loss coecient of the solar collector [W/m2K2]
Cp
Specic heat capacity [J/kgK]
Cp(s)
Specic heat capacity of the solid phase [J/kgK]
Cp(l)
Specic heat capacity of the liquid phase [J/kgK]
Cmodule
Theoretical heat capacity of the module [J/K]
E
Total stored energy [J]
Echarge,simple
Theoretical charged thermal energy [J]
Ecorrect
Theoretical discharged heat corrected for the dierence in
sensible heat of the module material and the phase change
material in its solid state [J]
Econt(Tsupercool)
Theoretical energy released from activating a supercooled
phase change material at a specic temperature, corrected
for a dierence between the nal discharge temperature
and the temperature of the supercooled phase change
material before activation [J]
Edischarge
Theoretical energy discharged consisting in the sensible heat
of the module and the liquid phase change material [J]
Edischarge,simple
Theoretical discharged thermal energy [J]
Esupercool
Theoretical energy stored in the supercooled state [J]
E(t)
Change of the heat content in the storage system during
a specic period of time t [J]
∆E
Simplied change of the heat content in the storage
system during a specic period of time t [J]
==PAGE:14==
x
Glossary
H
Heat Exchange Capacity Rate [W/K]
Hloss
Heat loss [W]
Hloss,coeff
Heat loss coecient [W/K]
L
Latent heat of vaporization or fusion [J/kg]
m
Mass [kg]
P
Power [W]
q
general quantity -
Qaux
Energy provided by the auxiliary system [J]
QDHW
Energy used for the domestic hot water demand [J]
Ql
Stored latent heat [J]
Qs
Heat stored in the system [J]
Qsph
Energy used for the space heating [J]
s(Cp)
Uncertainty on the specic heat capacity [J/kgK]
s(P)
Uncertainty on the power [W]
s(q),(x),(y)
Uncertainty of general quantities
s(ρ)
Uncertainty on the density [kg/m3]
s(Ti)
Uncertainty on the inlet temperature [◦C]
s(To)
Uncertainty on the outlet temperature [◦C]
s(V)
Uncertainty on the volume ow rate [m3/s]
SF
Solar Fraction [-]
Tamb
Average ambient temperature [◦C]
Tappl
Temperature required by the application system [◦C]
Taverage
Mean water temperature between inlet and outlet HEX [◦C]
Tcharge
System temperature [◦C]
Tend
Storage temperature reached after discharging [◦C]
Tf
Final temperature [◦C]
Ti
Inlet temperature of the module [◦C]
Tin
Initial temperature [◦C]
Tm
Temperature calculated with the voltage signal [◦C]
Tmax
Storage mean maximum temperature reached during
the charging phase [◦C]
Tmelt
Melting temperature [◦C]
To
Outlet temperature from the module [◦C]
Ts
Storage temperature [◦C]
Tstart
Storage temperature at the beginning of the charging phase [◦C]
Tstorage
Temperature at which the module is kept in stable supercooling [◦C]
Tsupercool
Temperature at which the module is kept in stable supercooling [◦C]
V
Volume ow rate [m3/s]
w%
Weight percentage
ε
Relative uncertainty [%]
ε(P)
Relative uncertainty of the power [%]
η0
Start eciency of the solar collector [-]
ρ
Density [kg/m3]
∆τ
Time step [s]
==PAGE:15==
xi
Subscripts
bot
bottom heat exchanger
top
top heat exchanger
tot
total
Abbreviations
CMC
Carboxylmethyl Cellulose
DHW
Domestic Hot Water
EU
European Union
HCS
Hazard Communication Standard
HECR
Heat Exchange Capacity Rate
HEX
Heat Exchanger
LHTES
Latent Heat Thermal Energy Storage
M
Generic Inorganic Compound
OSHA
Occupational Safety & Health Administration
PCM
Phase Change Material
PSIND
Polar Industrial Pipe Freezing Kit
SAT
Sodium Acetate Trihydrate
SHTES
Sensible Heat Thermal Energy Storage
Super-TES
Thermal Energy Storage using stable Supercooling
TES
Thermal Energy Storage
TRNSYS
Transient System Simulation Tool
==PAGE:16==
xii
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Nowadays buildings use 40 % of the total EU energy consumption and they
produce 36 % of the CO2 emission in EU [32]. In Figure 1.1 the energy demand
is shown with respect to the application area for residential building in the EU
countries. The largest demand is required for space heating and domestic hot
water and is characterized by a low quality energy, at low temperature levels of
10-50 ◦C [68].
In order to supply this low quality energy demand, a high quality supply energy
is normally used, usually produced from fossil fuels, incurring in consequent
negative eects on the environment [68].
The use of solar energy is a highly powerful way of minimizing the use of fossil
fuels in the world; especially in Northern Europe the use of the sun to produce
electricity is not as frequent as using the energy produced to supply the heat to
buildings.
The security of supply is an issue that inuences critically the decision of de-
veloping new technologies: generally a heating system needs a Thermal Energy
Storage (TES) method that ensures good thermal performances within reason-
able costs. It becomes crucial then to nd ways to not only generate energy in a
sustainable way, but also to reduce the losses and meet properly the uctuating
heating demand throughout the year.
==PAGE:18==
2
Introduction
Figure 1.1: Energy demand by application area for residential buildings in the
EU, 2012 (Odyssee) [32].
Solar energy is an energy source that needs the use of an Energy Storage in
order to meet the demand. The property of being time-dependent results in
mismatching between supply and demand: the solar photovoltaic producing
electricity uses electrochemical batteries or the national grid as storage system,
while solar heating systems usually are relying on Thermal Energy Storages
(TES) [68].
TES contributes positively on the system from dierent point of views: it pro-
vides a higher exibility to the solar heating system, both because there is a
signicant variety of auxiliary systems that can be used, and it matches better
the energy demand, but it also increase the solar fraction of the system, that is
the percentage of demand covered by the solar resource.
Solar energy is properly dened as a seasonal resource: the sun is available espe-
cially during the summer period, while the heat generated from a solar heating
system is used mainly during the winter.
Latent Heat Thermal Energy Storage (LHTES) systems are particularly attrac-
tive especially because of the possibility to store the heat when it is generated
in large amount and use it when it is required: a seasonal Thermal Energy
Storage.
Historically, Phase Change Materials (PCM) drew attentions already in late
1940s when Telkes and Raymond started studying the possibility of storing
heat in chemicals [78]. The consideration about the topic grew only during the
late 70s, during which the energy crisis settled the priority on researching for
innovative energy sources. Nevertheless, as soon as the energy crisis ended, the
interest on PCM heat storage diminished until recently. Today, large scale ap-
==PAGE:19==
1.1 Project plan
3
plications still require to solve several issues at the research stage [72].
The analysis carried out in this project is based on the investigation of phase
change material heat storage systems using stable supercooling.
The super-
cooling phenomenon has been studied in order to develop seasonal storages,
attractive solutions that improve the possibility of capitalizing on intermittent
energy sources, as solar energy. Nevertheless, four modules were lled with dif-
ferent storage materials, and heat storage capacity, heat loss coecient and heat
exchange capacity rate were evaluated. A comparison between them was carried
out in order to understand which one reaches the best performances and can be
further investigated with the aim in the future to bring it in the market. The
evaluation was made evaluating also the economic aspects, assessing the initial
investment that characterize the system.
Then, the sustainability of TES was evaluated, considering the concept of a
sustainable development of the society.
1.1
Project plan
The thesis is structured in order to discuss several signicant aspects of the
subject analysed: the main and more developed topic is regarding the analysis
of the measurements collected in the DTU laboratory, in which the modules
were installed. Through the acquiring of the data it was possible to determine
several thermal factors that were crucial to analyse and compare the modules'
operation.
In detail, after a general introduction, Chapter 2 explains TES' background,
the supercooling and the problems that occurred developing this technology.
An overview about the past and recent works that have been evolved in the
scientic and research elds is given as well.
Chapters 3 is related to the modules and the test facility, describing the com-
ponents used in the laboratory to collect the necessary data.
It follows then Chapter 4 with the experimental method used to analyse the
measurements and collect the results.
Precisely, the chapter explain how to
determine:
• Heat loss coecient;
• Charge and discharge powers;
• Heat content;
• Heat exchange capacity rate.
==PAGE:20==
4
Introduction
The results have been investigated and described in Chapter 5, in which the
modules have been presented separately and then compared mainly from a ther-
mal performances' point of view. Several graphs have been plotted and analysed.
The thermal performances of the modules are not the only important aspect in
the case of developing a new technology: the economic point of view has been
discussed in Chapter 6 since it has always been an essential factor to look at.
Some technologies can be interesting from a technical point of view but they
can succumb to excessive costs ending in being discarded.
Furthermore, considering the life cycle of the system, the nal stage meaning
the disposal or recycle of materials but also the sustainability as a benet from
the entire system have been taken into consideration and discussed in Chapter 7.
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 2
Thermal Energy Storages
Nowadays energy conservation has become a critical subject in several elds.
Generally speaking, the technological competitiveness of a nation is tightly de-
pendent on the energy plan, as well as the economic situation of the country.
However, the energy availability, the demand and the supply, are all factors
imprecisely predicted because by nature they are approximation of the reality,
a prediction of the real conditions. It is then crucial to build an energy system
that relies on several technologies that have to full some general requirements:
high eciency; ensure energy security; and respect of the environment [25].
Thermal Energy Storage (TES) is a technology that reects those qualities and
it can reduce the energy consumption and costs. The main role is related to
the mismatch between demand and supply, especially when the energy source is
not constant but mainly intermittent. In the case of solar thermal systems, the
mismatch between production and consumption together with the unreliability
of the source, make necessary to hold the energy produced and use it later.
There are several types of TES, depending on the nature of the process. Two
main systems are the Sensible and the Latent Heat TES.
The former is depending on the temperature change of the system: the heat
is stored raising the temperature of a solid or liquid material while the latter
is relying on the energy absorbed and released while the material undergoes a
phase change process [72].
==PAGE:22==
6
Thermal Energy Storages
The thermochemical system is also quite known as it uses the energy absorbed
and released by a chemical reaction.
A Supercooling Thermal Energy Storage (Super-TES) is a unit that takes ad-
vantage of the materials' capacity to be cooled below the melting point with-
out starting the solidication. In a standard heat of fusion storage, this phe-
nomenon, called supercooling, should be avoided in order to discharge the heat
storage when the demand has to be met. In the case of long-term heat storages,
a stable supercooling can be interesting: the system stores the heat during the
summer and keeps it exploiting the supercooled state and then the energy can
be used during the winter. This kind of systems can be used for seasonal heat
storage.
Exploiting the stable supercooling behaviour of some materials results in the
possibility of gaining a heat loss free storage. When a melted salt supercools
reaching the surrounding temperature, no heat losses occur until the system is
activated [69]. More details will be discussed in Section 2.3.
The aim of this chapter is to introduce the subject, the general terms and con-
cepts behind TES and how the supercooling behaviour of some materials can
be considered an advantageous ability.
2.1
Sensible and Latent Heat
Thermal Energy Storage has been dened as "the temporary holding of energy
for later use" [24]. There are two types of TES that will be introduced in this
section: the Sensible Heat Thermal Energy Storage (SHTES) and the Latent
Heat Thermal Energy Storage (LHTES).
A system based on a SHTES is depending mainly on the heat capacity of the
material used and on the temperature change of the material during the charging
and discharging phases. The equation that represents the process just described
is
Qs
=
Z T fin
T in
mCpdT
(2.1)
=
mCp(Tfin −Tin)
(2.2)
where Qs is the heat stored in the system in J, m is the mass of the heat storage
medium in kg, Cp is the specic heat in J/kgK and Tfin and Tin are the nal
and initial temperatures respectively of the process considered.
==PAGE:23==
2.1 Sensible and Latent Heat
7
Figure 2.1: Heat storage as sensible heat bring to a proportional increase of
temperature and stored heat [56].
Figure 2.1 shows graphically the relation between the temperature of the stor-
age medium and the heat stored in a SHTES. The two variables are directly
proportional: the higher the temperature the more heat is stored in the system.
The use of SHTES is the most common way to store heat; water is the principal
material involved in this application because of the advantageous properties it
confers associated to these systems: it is a cheap solution, easy to design and
water, apart of being largely available, has a high heat capacity that allows to
not only store energy but also to transport it [68]. In detail, water has a specic
heat of 4.2 kJ/kgK. High specic heat capacity is a crucial property for the
SHTES, which means the substance has the ability to absorb heat recording a
restrained increase of temperature [82]. Anyway, above a temperature of 100
◦C, other materials as oils or metals are used [72].
A LHTES system is relying on another thermal concept, in which a phase change
is involved. The LHTES is characterised by a higher energy density compared
to SHTES [47]. As Abhat (1983) described, latent heat storages are attractive
due to their ability to store heat at a constant temperature corresponding to the
phase transition temperature of the heat storage substance [9]. The material
involved undergoes a phase change from solid to liquid or liquid to gas and vice
versa. The solid-to-liquid transformation is the one mostly used in case of a
solar heating system connected to a LHTES, because the technical solutions are
easier than with the other phase transformations. In case of vaporization, the
energy stored is signicantly larger but they are not particularly considered in
==PAGE:24==
8
Thermal Energy Storages
this eld because of the large volume change during the transition [39]. Further-
more, in case of solid-solid phase change, the low enthalpy dierences discards
the theoretical interest on the subject.
The latent heat stored through a phase change is given by the equation 2.3
Ql = L · m
(2.3)
where Ql is the stored latent heat in J, L is the latent heat of vaporization or
fusion in J/kg and m is the mass of the phase change material in kg.
The latent heat of fusion of a material that undergoes a solid-liquid transfor-
mation is the necessary added energy that breaks up the bonds between the
atoms that form the crystal structure of the solid-phase material. The energy
added increases the potential energy of the atoms. The transformation process
is isothermal: the temperature stays constant during the entire transformation.
When the crystallization occurs after several cooling cycles, the heat of fusion
is gained again at the same temperature of equilibrium between solid and liquid
phase .[67].
During the charging stage, the heat collected from the solar collector is circu-
lating through a transport medium in the heat exchanger with the purpose of
melting the PCM inside the tank. The energy is then stored as both sensible
and latent heat of fusion.
When the discharging period is started, the heat
transfer uid would receive the heat from the storage material and transport it
to the heat load [39]. The characteristic of high energy storage density is given
by the relatively large amount of heat of fusion related to the phase transition,
which leads to a reduction of needed volume and mass.
There are several methods to integrate the PCM inside the modules, each of
them has advantages and disadvantages.
One possibility consists of lling a
tank with the PCM and charge and discharge it through suitable heat exchang-
ers, properly in contact with the PCM tank. Another possibility is to place the
PCM inside an encapsulation system, that is integrated into a tank and has the
function of heat exchanger between the PCM and the heat transfer uid. It is
possible to distinguish between macro and micro-encapsulation [43].
Usually water is used as heat transfer uid, with the possibility of mixing with
an anti-freeze agent in case the system is installed in particularly cold-climate
country; for example, the propylene glycol is largely used in this eld.
As storage material there are many dierent substances that have been investi-
gated.
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Phase Change Materials
9
2.2
Phase Change Materials
The investigation about Phase Change Material (PCM) have been conducted
throughout the years on several dierent materials - especially examining alter-
natives to water. The materials that were investigated in the past usually have
the ability of storing more heat per unit compared to water [25].
A wide range of materials were analysed: parans and non-parans organic
compounds, salt hydrates, eutectics of organic and inorganic materials.
In this section the basic requirements that PCMs have to full in order to be
used as a phase change material in LHTES are discussed. Then PCMs are de-
scribed and classied in relation to their main properties and applications.
Particular attention is referred to a salt hydrate, Sodium Acetate Trihydrate,
which has been largely investigated in the literature and it is also subject matter
of the research.
2.2.1
Basic requirements
In order to be used as phase change material, some thermodynamic, kinetic
and chemical requirements have to be fullled. Needless to say, some economic
conditions have to be met. In any case, two main characteristics are fundamental
in order for the material to store and release the heat when the phase change
occurs: a suitable phase change temperature and a large melting enthalpy [56].
The physical requirements that distinguish a proper phase change material are:
• Possess of an appropriate melting temperature that met the requirement
of the application in which the unit will be involved;
• To achieve a high storage density, it is necessary to hold a large phase
change enthalpy;
• Cycling stability: the PCMs have to be used several times and the ther-
mal performances should be as stable as possible in order to reproduce the
phase change. In case of an incongruently melting salt hydrates or com-
posites, phase separation is a phenomenon that has to be avoided and it
consists in a dierent composition of the storage material from the initial
one after several cycles. Phase separation can deal to a lower capacity to
store the heat;
• In case of Supercooling Thermal Energy Storage (Super-TES), a stable
supercooling condition has to be met to ensure the seasonal heat storage;
==PAGE:26==
10
Thermal Energy Storages
• Good thermal conductivity of the storage material to ensure a relatively
high heat transfer rate in a certain volume;
• Environmental and safety issues have to be taken into account, which
means to use only non-toxic and non-ammable materials.
The construction of the storage has also to be considered and it requires some
technical expedients from the PCMs [56]:
• Mechanical stability and tightness of the PCM's container has to be pro-
vided: a low vapour pressure and a small volume change will help reducing
the requirements to full the necessities;
• A long lifetime of the PCM but also of the materials part of the system
has also to be insured: chemical stability of the PCM itself and between
the other materials is required;
The last point of view that need to be analysed is the economic aspect, to ensure
that the product has a protable role in the actual market [56]:
• The price has to be as low as possible: the competition between several
storage methods plays also on the costs;
• Recyclability has to be considered not only for economic but also for en-
vironmental purposes;
• Availability: the materials have to be accessible easily in large amount.
2.2.2
Classes of Materials
Materials have been classied as phase change material primarily suitable for
thermal storage applications, such as heating and cooling [39]. This has been
expressed throughout relevant literature where a large list of materials have
been published by various authors: Steiner et al. (1980), Abhat (1983), Zalba
et al. (2003), Sharma et al. (2004), Farid et al. (2004) and Mehing and Cabeza
(2008). There are several criteria to classify the materials, the most reasonable
is done according to the temperature range and melting enthalpy, as it is shown
in Figure 2.2
==PAGE:27==
2.2 Phase Change Materials
11
Figure 2.2: Classes of materials that can be used as PCM [56].
Nevertheless, there are three main classes of PCM, as seen in Figure 2.3.
The majority of the phase change materials will not satisfy all the criteria de-
scribed in 2.2.1: the available materials have to be used trying to make up for
the missing properties.
Organic
Inorganic
Eutectic
Paraﬃn
Compounds
Non - Paraﬃn
Compounds
Salt Hydrates
Metallics
Organic - Organic
Inorganic - Incorganic
Organic - Inorganic
PCM
Figure 2.3: Classication of PCMs
==PAGE:28==
12
Thermal Energy Storages
In general, inorganic compounds embrace a wide temperature range [56], while
organic ones are considered important as storage material because of some ad-
vantageous properties they possess, like their compatibility with common mate-
rials of construction, their self-nucleating properties or congruent melting ability
[9]. Furthermore, inorganic materials have higher melting enthalpies per volume,
due to their high density, while the melting enthalpies per mass are very similar
[56].
Despite the disadvantage of compatibility with metals, inorganic compounds
such as salt hydrates have a volumetric latent heat storage capacity between
250 - 400 kJ/dm3, almost twice the value of organic materials, in the range
125-200 kJ/dm3 [9].
Furbo and Svendsen in 1977 have listed the most important properties of a
suitable PCM, and they are presented in Table 2.1 [33].
Table 2.1: Selection criteria of phase change materials [33].
Criteria
Property
Melting Point
25 ◦C - 70 ◦C
Heat of Fusion
>130 kJ/kg
Melting Behaviour
Congruent
Corrosive, Toxic, etc..
No
Supercooling
Yes (Seasonal Storage) No (Diurnal Storage)
As Abhat also remarked in [9], salt hydrates have greater tendency to super-
cool, reason that has brought salt hydrates as main materials analysed as phase
change material for seasonal heat storages.
Organic compounds. This class of materials comprehends parans and non-
parans.
Generally speaking they are congruent melting which means they
hold the ability of melting and freezing repeatedly without phase segregation
and degradation of the latent heat of fusion. Moreover they crystallize with
small or no supercooling and they have shown non-corrosiveness properties [72].
In detail, parans are a mixture of chain n-alkanes CH3 - (CH2) - CH3. They
have shown interesting characteristics for storage applications, like high heat
of fusion, low vapour pressure during melting, negligible supercooling, chemi-
cally inert and stable below 500 ◦C. Furthermore parans are safe, reliable and
non-corrosive. Despite for the good quality, these organic compounds have low
thermal conductivity, large volume change during phase transition and they are
expensive. Concluding, cycles using parans have long freeze-melt cycle [39]
[72].
Non-parans compounds include a large variety of organic materials like acids,
alcohols, glycols and esters: it means they have a strongly varied properties,
==PAGE:29==
2.2 Phase Change Materials
13
while parans have very similar features. The properties of such materials can
be listed as: low thermal conductivity, varying level of toxicity, instability at
high temperatures, high heat of fusion and inammability [72]. Fatty acids have
shown melting point suitable for heating purpose and their heat of fusion can be
compared with the parans and salt hydrates. One main disadvantage regards
their costs, which can be three times higher than parans [9] [39].
Inorganic compounds.
They are classied in salt hydrates and metals.
Salt
hydrates are the most important PCMs that have been largely analysed as stor-
age material for LHTES [72]. They are characterized by the general formula
M · nH2O in which M is an inorganic component alloyed with water forming
a crystalline solid [72] [9]. Their rst use is dated in 1947 from Telkes [75].
The main properties that have made salt hydrates particularly suitable in this
eld are their high volumetric storage density, around 350 MJ/m3, the relatively
high thermal conductivity, circa 0.5 W/m ◦C, and reasonable cost compared to
parans [30]. The most studied are sodium sulphate decahydrate (Glauber's
salt), sodium triosulphate pentahydrate, sodium acetate trihydrate, barium hy-
droxide octahydrate and calcium chloride octahydrate in [76], [63], [42], [77] and
[9]. Due to their composition, the solid-liquid transformation thermodynami-
cally resembles a melting and freezing process, but it actually is a dehydration
or hydration of the salt [72]. Despite the advantages they present, the major
problem of salt hydrates relies in their multi-component composition, at least
salt and water. Phase separation likely occurs and consequently problems with
cycling stability [56].
Another property related to salt hydrates regards the
nucleation: they present poor nucleating properties which result in supercool-
ing of the liquid salt hydrates before crystallization. This characteristic makes
them particularly attractive in case of Super-TES [9]. Moreover they are not
highly corrosive, slightly toxic, compatible with plastic and suciently inexpen-
sive [72].
Metals have not been considered yet as phase change materials due to their
weight penalties. Some properties are still advantageous: they have high ther-
mal conductivity per unit volume, high heat of fusion per unit volume and per
unit weight and relatively low vapour pressure [72].
Eutectics. An eutectic is a mixture of two or more components, usually salts
that melt and freeze congruently and form a mixture of the component crystals
during crystallization [39] [72]. They have a great potential in terms of phase
change materials for thermal energy storage applications since their behaviour
is very similar to the congruent melting salt hydrates [39]. In fact, eutectics usu-
ally melt and freeze without segregation since they give small opportunity to the
components, a mixture of crystals, to separate [72]. The phase separation does
not occur even during melting: each component melts simultaneously. Eutetics
can be classied in: organic eutectics, inorganic eutectics and organic-inorganic
eutectics. Today these materials can be used for cooling system or passive solar
storage that works with low or medium temperature at collectors, depending
==PAGE:30==
14
Thermal Energy Storages
on the specic melting temperature of the material [39].
In Table 2.2 some materials and their properties are listed.
Table 2.2: Melting point and latent heat of fusion of some materials [72].
Material
Melting Point
(◦C)
Latent
heat
of
fusion
(kJ/kg)
Groupa
Comment
Paran - 15
10
205
II
No. of carbon
atoms 15
Paran - 34
75.9
269
II
No. of carbon
atoms 34
Glycerin
17.9
198.7
III
Non-paran
Trimystrin
33-57
201-213
I
Non-paran
Benzamide
127.2
169.4
III
Non-paran
Lauric acid
49
178
II
Fatty acid
Na2SO4 · 10H2O
32.4
241
II
Salt Hydrate
CH3COONa · 3H2O
58
265
II
Salt Hydrate
Ba(OH)2 · 8H2O
78
265
II
Salt Hydrate
Gallium
30
80.3
I
Metallic
CH3COONa
·
3H2O
+
NH2CONH2
30
200.5
I
Eutectic
-
composition
40 + 60
aGroup I, most promising; group II, promising; group III, less promising.
2.2.3
Sodium Acetate Trihydrate
Sodium Acetate Trihydrate (SAT) is the salt hydrate that is investigated in this
paper as storage material. It is considered one of the most promising thermal
energy storage materials because of its high melting enthalpy at the melting
temperature of 58 ◦C [60]. The pure salt is composed of 60% of the sodium ac-
etate in form of clear and ne minerals and 40% of the water of crystallization.
Generally SAT is a salt that satised most of the criteria described in 2.2.1.
The main disadvantage regards the incongruent or semi congruent melting that
distinguish this salt hydrate [54].
The most attractive characteristic of SAT is its tendency to supercool consid-
erably, hence a successful property when LHTES systems are considered. The
basic and most important properties of SAT are presented in Table 2.3. Com-
paring the shown value with Table 2.1 demonstrates the compatibility with the
minimum requirement for a PCM applied to LHTES [54].
==PAGE:31==
2.2 Phase Change Materials
15
Table 2.3: Properties of Sodium Acetate Trihydrate
Criteria
Property
Melting Point
58 ◦C
Heat of Fusion 1
160 - 265 kJ/kg
Melting Behaviour
Semi congruent
Corrosive, Toxic, etc
No
Supercooling
Yes
Chemical Formula
NaCH3COO · H2O
An interesting comparison between water and SAT in terms of heat storage
capacity has been developed, as shown in Figure 2.4 [36]. The graph points
out the advantage which the system can benet from the use of SAT instead
of water as storage material. The heat storage capacity of SAT is remarkably
higher than that of water [36].
Figure 2.4: Heat storage capacity of sodium acetate compared to water [36].
From Figure 2.4 it can be noticed that sodium acetate trihydrate melts at 58
◦C with a heat of fusion of 265 kJ/kg. Nevertheless, some of the energy is used
to heat up the PCM to its melting point and it is not regained in the storage
system [70].
Regarding the sensible heat, the storage capacity of water is higher then SAT:
when the storage temperature is just below the melting point, the specic storage
energy of water is 62 kJ/kg which consists of a value 64% higher than 1 kg of
1The range presented is claimed from Sharma et al. (1990) - 180 kJ/kg; Furbo & Svendsen
(1977) - 160 kJ/kg; Abhat (1983) - 249 kJ/kg; Schultz & Furbo (2007) - 265 kJ/kg.
==PAGE:32==
16
Thermal Energy Storages
sodium acetate trihydrate.
The benet from the use of PCM is appreciable
when the temperature is above the melting point [70].
Sodium acetate trihydrate is also considered particularly attractive because of
its stability of the supercooling state. Furbo has determined that the salt has to
melt completely during the charge phase in order to supercool. Moreover, the
stability of the dormant supercooling condition is gained when the salt water
mixture is heated to a minimum of 64 ◦C for at least one day [38].
2.3
Supercooling Thermal Energy Storage
A signicant part of the relevant literature about the supercooling phenomenon
has suggested the problem should be avoided or reduced through the use of
nucleating agents. This is the case especially for salt hydrates. The supercool-
ing phenomenon implies that the stored latent heat will not be released at the
freezing point, disregarding the application for traditional TES based on diurnal
storage.
Regarding salt hydrates, the supercooling behaviour is here investigated as a
advantageous feature, which can be exploited to develop supercooled thermal
energy storages.
The principle behind these systems consists in the possibility of storing large
amounts of thermal energy as latent heat in several supercooled PCMs' units
in which the activation of the system is controlled by triggering crystallization.
During the dormant supercooled phase, there are no heat losses from the storage
system even if the surrounding temperature uctuates around the average am-
bient temperature. Two main issues that need to be solved about supercooling
heat storages are then the available storage capacity but also the activation of
crystallization through several methods. Moreover, the stability of the super-
cooling state is crucial for the system: it is required that the PCM reaches a
stable supercooling state, in order to keep the heat loss free condition as long
as necessary, and activate the solidication when the heat demand requires it.
The stable supercooling condition has been investigated by Furbo et al. in 2011:
the supercooling is observed only if all the salt hydrate melts during the charg-
ing period. The condition will be stable only if the whole volume of the salt
water mixture is heated for at least one day to a temperature above 64 ◦C [38].
A metastable state of a supercooled salt hydrate is reduced in large PCM vol-
umes due to the presence of impurities in the salt hydrates, which can deal
to spontaneous nucleation, and the chance that it happens increases with the
==PAGE:33==
2.3 Supercooling Thermal Energy Storage
17
volume. It is crucial to maintain the same composition of the PCM during the
entire lifetime of the storage unit and a closed container without loss of water
through the tank material is essential to achieve the goal, especially because
heating the salt water mixture heat storage material to high temperature will
result in evaporation of crystal water and in, case of leakages, the composition of
the storage material could change. External inuences but also the diusion of
the heat transfer uid from the heat exchangers to the PCM have to be avoided
to keep the metastable condition: the tank has to be as sealed as possible.
It is also important to choose correctly the tank material: chemical reactions
and corrosion between the storage material and the tank are a real problem for
the system. Steel and stainless steel are used most of the time because they are
stable over long periods.
Another cause of unexpected nucleation could lie on the fact that a closed tank
can be subject to pressure changes and deformation, especially if the volume of
the PCM changes as the phase changes from solid to liquid. A small crack in the
tank material can lead to an activation mechanism in combination of a pressure
change. The heat transfer between the PCM and the heat transfer uid can
also decrease due to cavities inside the tank caused by volume reduction of the
storage material [23].
On the actual market an example of application as small heat storage not ap-
plied to solar systems is already existing. The pocket-size bag which is lled
with a supercooled salt hydrate. The crystallization, induced by a exing disc,
releases the stored latent heat and later the bag can be charged placing it in
boiling water until the material is completely melted.
The purpose of this section is to describe the Super-TES technology, including
the main issues that it presents and the relative possibility of solutions that have
been investigated in the past years.
2.3.1
Storage Capacity
During a melting or freezing process, the state of the system can be presented
with an enthalpy-temperature curve which distinguishes clearly the dierent
parts of the transformation, as shown in Figure 2.5. In case a typical charging
process is considered, the transformation starts with an increase of the tem-
perature of the PCM, when energy is added as sensible heat in the solid-phase
material. As second step, the latent heat of fusion is absorbed during the phase
transition from solid to liquid keeping a constant temperature called melting
point Tmelt. At the end of the melting process, more energy is gained as sensi-
ble heat in liquid phase.
==PAGE:34==
18
Thermal Energy Storages
An incongruent melting can occur by the released water of crystallization which
is not sucient to dissolve the solid phase. In this case there is a density dier-
ence between the components and the lower hydrate settles at the bottom of the
container [72]. The phenomenon is called decomposition and it is irreversible if
particular measures are adopted [8]. The temperature during the phase transi-
tion in this condition is not clearly dened, as shown in the Figure 2.5 a by the
dashed line.
Figure 2.5: (a) Stored enthalpy H (J/kg) as a function of temperature T for
a material undergoing a phase transition. The slope of the s and
l lined represents the solid and liquid phase heat capacity [68].
(b) Stored enthalpy H (J/kg) as a function of temperature T for
a melting PCM facing supercooling and later crystallization [68].
The total stored energy is then dened as a combination of sensible heat from
the solid and liquid phases and the latent heat stored in the range of temperature
between the initial temperature Ti and the nal one Tf :
E = mCp(s) · (Tmelt −Ti) + mL + mCp(l) · (Tf −Tmelt)
(2.4)
where L is the latent heat of fusion for the material, which in case of salt hydrates
is in the range from 100-280 kJ/kg [85]. A signicant increase of energy storage
density is acknowledged in the transition between a sensible heat storage and a
LHTES. This characteristic can be advantageous especially when the available
space for the unit is limited by costs or actual available area [68].
The eect of supercooling is represented in Figure 2.5b. The system temperature
is dened by Tcharge, which is higher then the PCM's melting temperature
to promote the heat transfer.
The enthalpy's trend follows the straight line
that dene the liquid phase heat capacity; the PCM releases the heat and it
==PAGE:35==
2.3 Supercooling Thermal Energy Storage
19
passes the melting point until it reaches the temperature at which will be stored,
Tstorage. Then crystallization is started and the temperature increased to the
melting point of the material: the remaining stored energy is released rst
following a isothermal transformation along the Tm-curve until solidication is
completed. Then the process continues on the solid-phase heat capacity line.
The temperature called Tappl is indicating the temperature required by the
application. If the temperature drops below that value, the heat that is released
from the PCM is wasted unless preheating is used [68].
If the degree of supercooling is particularly high, the amount of stored latent heat
will be withdrawn at a constant temperature of the phase transition. This is due
to the conversion of the stored latent heat in specic heat when the temperature
rises during the crystallization process and it is equivalent to the specic heat
that was withdrawn at the beginning of supercooling. Consequently, the higher
the degree of supercooling, the less the stored latent heat will be withdrawn
during the phase transition at a constant temperature [67].
2.3.2
Nucleation
The strong tendency of salt hydrates to supercool led the research to investigate
signicantly on nding ecient methods to activate the supercooled liquid when
it is necessary.
Depending on the application several possibilities are available: in case of the
small reusable heating bag, actually merchandised, the solidication is triggered
through a manual mechanism. Practically the operation of some system as the
Super-TES requires a controlled and automated triggering of solidication: it is
necessary to introduce a controller unit which activate the process through an
electrical signal. The mechanisms that can be adopted in the described system
are limited and they can be grouped in two categories: seeding and dynamic
nucleation. [68]. The use of additives as nucleating agents have been largely
investigated even as a method to avoid the supercooled condition. If the agent
has a crystal structure as the PCM, the procedure has been in part successful
[24]. When the crystalline seed is introduced in the supercooled liquid, the solid-
ication starts growing from the added particle, incorporating the surrounding
atoms in the process. The transformation will proceed until the temperature
lasts below the equilibrium temperature and liquid-phase material is present in
the chamber.
The second category, dened as dynamic nucleation, comprehends processes
that induce nucleation through an external dynamic stimulus [20]. The possible
interferences which can activate the nucleation vary from a simple agitation to
a friction until a shock wave or ultrasonic vibration [68].
Some of the nucleating methods are briey described.
==PAGE:36==
20
Thermal Energy Storages
Seeding: external source. The crystal growth is stimulated by an external source
of crystalline material. When the supercooled condition has to be preserved,
the seed crystals have to be physically separated from the PCM and it is pos-
sible to do it through the use of valve mechanism. The moment activation is
required, the valve is opened and the supercooled liquid can be in contact with
the seed material, beginning the solidication process. The main issue with this
triggering method is regarding the ability of crystals to grow starting from a
microscopic opening.[68].
Seeding: trigger device. The possibilities of devices are multiple and dierent
from each other. The most popular example of this method is represented from
the reusable heat pack already mentioned: the stainless steel disc inside the bag
is triggering the crystal growth by being exed. Some laboratory tests were done
by Sandnes and described in [67]. The mechanism that was investigated regards
the possibility of triggering under extreme pressure between opposite surfaces,
part of the device. The working triggers have to be opposite surfaces where
crystal seed materials are retained. There is the necessity of a mechanism for
pressing or opening the surfaces in order to facilitate the trapping or release of
the crystals. The activation can be controlled electrically, giving an automation
direction to the system.
Cavitation. The high local pressure related to collapsing cavities has explained
some of the dynamic nucleation eect from an ultrasonic vibration or shock
waves. It is known that the melting point of a material increases when the pres-
sure increases, especially for a substance that expands on melting. Therefore,
in case of pressure pulsing from a collapsed cavity, nucleation can start due to
an increased degree of supercooling. Sandnes in [68] had demonstrated that nu-
cleation by ultrasonic cavitation is not possible with a sodium acetate solution,
but only with water.
Electrical nucleation. The possibility that an electric eld could cause nucleation
of ice crystals in supercooled water has been already considered as explanation
for rainfall after a thunderstorm [68]. Considering a sodium acetate solution,
Yoshii et al. (2002) have applied voltage between two electrodes and they ex-
plained the growing crystallization as eect of the electric eld. However, it is
possible that the phenomenon is caused by retained crystals from the activation
procedure [84]. In fact the electrode releases the crystals when the voltage is
applied. The advantage of such a method comes from the use of non-moving
components. Despite this, it is possible that reaction products of the electrolysis
contaminate the PCM unit.
==PAGE:37==
2.3 Supercooling Thermal Energy Storage
21
2.3.3
Cold Finger
Particular attention is given to this activation's method, as it is the process used
in the Super-TES system analysed during the thesis project.
The approach, described in Furbo et al.(2010), consists in generating a cold spot
inside the supercooled liquid. Several tests were developed on supercooled salt
water mixture with the aim to determine the minimum temperature at which
the salt water mixture is still a supercooled liquid at atmospheric pressure. The
value has been dened between -15 ◦C and -16 ◦C . Therefore, nucleation is
activated cooling down a part of the supercooled liquid to a temperature below
-16 ◦C [37].
Figure 2.6: Schematic sketch of the activation system "cold nger" [37].
As shown in Figure 3.7, the system consists in a small brass tank placed in good
thermal contact attached to the outer side of a steel plate which represents a
container wall. The liquid which is used to cool down the storage material is
usually CO2, placed in a glass container with a temperature of 20 ◦C. The
liquid CO2 ows from the pressure container through a pipe in which a pressure
reducing valve is installed. Then a nal small pipe connects the CO2 container
to the steel plate. The pressure inside the tank is constant at 5 bar: together
with the pressure reducing valve, a back pressure valve is placed in connection
with the steel plate, connected through another small pipe. When the liquid
CO2 ows from the pressure container into the piping system, it boils at about
-78 ◦C. The evaporation of the carbon dioxide ensures a high heat transfer from
the PCM, with the result of a high decrease of temperature of the part of PCM
in direct contact with the steel wall. The nal results are strongly attractive:
in 30 seconds after the CO2 ush into the pipe system, the solidication starts
[37]. The method than is promising and it was tested in full scale, described in
[37].
==PAGE:38==
22
Thermal Energy Storages
2.3.4
Phase Separation Problem
The phase separation is a problem that has been observed in several salt hy-
drates, including sodium acetate trihydrate, studied in this paper. An incongru-
ent melting salt hydrate consists in a combination of the salt hydrate and the
corresponding crystal water. The phenomenon occurs when the solubility of the
anhydrous salt in the water at the melting point is not high enough to dissolve
the entire salt present in the crystal water. At the end of the melting process
the solution is saturated with the presence of some undissolved anhydrous salt
in the water.
In case precautions are not taken there will be a sediment of
the anhydrous salt in the storage chamber due to its higher density. When the
storage is discharged and the storage material is cooled down, a solid crust is
formed between the sediment and the solution. The crust impedes the contact
between the anhydrous salt at the bottom and the saturated solution resulting
in a part of the material inactive in the phase change process [35].
In case like a seasonal heat storage characterised by a thermocycle repetition,
the amount of solid-state material sedimentation will increase by each melt-
ing/crystallization cycle and the heat storage capacity will decrease [33].
It is necessary to nd a solution to the problem: the extra water principle has
been investigated as an attractive possibility. Moreover, the use of gelling or
thickening agents has been developed as suitable alternative to avoid segrega-
tion.
2.3.4.1
Extra water principle
The extra water principle is a method that avoids the phase separation phe-
nomenon to occur. Furbo in [35] and [34] had largely described and tested the
method in order to ensure the application of an incongruently melting salt hy-
drate as a storage material in a Super-TES.
The principle behind the method consists of adding extra water to the salt hy-
drate in order to let all the anhydrous salt dissolve in the water at the melting
point. As result, at the end of the melting process, the storage material will be
a saturated salt solution at the melting point. It is necessary to provide a soft
stirring while the material is heated or cooled, due to the slow rate of natural
mixing between the salt hydrate and the salt solution [35]. It is known that
crystallization will take place only from a saturated solution and the solubility
of the salt is depending on the temperature. In case of temperature below the
melting point, the solubility decreases the more the temperature decreases, and
solidication starts by decreasing temperature.
==PAGE:39==
2.3 Supercooling Thermal Energy Storage
23
Figure 2.7: Schematic illustration of the melting/crystallization process for
a) congruent melting salt hydrate, b) incongruent melting salt
hydrate [33].
As shown in Figure 2.7, the storage material is made by a salt hydrate solid
phase and a saturated solution for temperature below the melting point. When
heating occurs, some of the solid salt hydrate will melt but the solution will
remain stable as saturated solution also at higher temperature only if stirring is
provided [33].
Some negative consequences on the performances of the PCM are the results
of adding water to the solution. The volumetric heat storage capacity is less
than that of the pure salt hydrate due to the fact that only a part of the salt
water mixture is active in the phase change [35] [8]. The phenomenon is shown
in Figure 2.8. The ratio between the heat storage capacity of pure water and
the salt water mixture depends on the temperature interval: the smaller the
interval is around the melting point, the greater the ratio [35].
==PAGE:40==
24
Thermal Energy Storages
Figure 2.8: Heat storage capacity in the interval 0-100 ◦C of an ideal working
incongruent working salt hydrate, a salt water mixture based on
the extra water principle and water [35].
2.3.4.2
Thickening Agents
A second approach to prevent phase separation consists in adding a thicken-
ing agent or a suspension media to the salt hydrate. If the thickener is chosen
accurately, the anhydrous salt are suspended homogeneously in a way the re-
hydration is improved. One alternative consists in the use of gelling-materials:
it means that a crosslinked material as a polymer is added to the salt hydrate
in order to create a three dimensional network and hold the salt together. On
the other hand, thickening agents increase the viscosity of the material having
the same eect of holding the salt together [19]. Svensson in [74] have shown,
after an investigation on gelling salt hydrates, that the gelling-method is not
successful, which leads to further investigation on thickening agents, as cellulose
==PAGE:41==
2.4 Heat of Fusion: theoretical behaviour
25
or bentonite.
Cabeza et al. have developed an investigation about the thermal performances
of sodium acetate trihydrate when it is thickened with dierent materials: the
general results were showing a similar thermal behaviour as the salt hydrate,
having the same melting point and an enthalpy decrease between 20 % and
35 %, based on the type and amount of thickener used [19]. In the case of a
Super-TES, the use of a thickener has to be ponder because it can reduce the
supercooling.
The use of cellulose seemed to be the best chance for thickening salt hydrates;
however the maximum heating temperature during the cycle was demonstrated
to be 65 ◦C. Starch and bentonite gave successful results. Hu et al. in [44],
based on the previous investigation of Cabeza, have investigated the use or car-
boxylmethyl cellulose (CMC) as a thickener. In the experiment conducted, AIN
nanoparticles were also added as nucleating agents to prevent supercooling. The
results showed that SAT + 4wt% CMC + 5wt% AIN nanoparticles has crys-
tal size that are smaller than that of pure SAT, which helps preventing phase
segregation [44].
2.4
Heat of Fusion: theoretical behaviour
The heat of fusion or the energy content can be also calculated theoretically and
the result can be compared with the measured heat of fusion. The approach
can be distinguish in two dierent ways: the assessment could be made through
a simple correlation in which the melting is assumed to be at a specic tem-
perature. With the aim of being more realistic, a second approach relies on
the theory of the incongruent melting sat hydrates, from Furbo in [33]. In this
approach the salt hydrates change phases over a temperature range.
In this case the focus is on the initial and fully charged, supercooled and dis-
charged states and the simple theory with melting at a specic temperature
fulls the requirement to assess a good comparison.
2.4.1
Simple Theory
This theory is based on a simplication that allows to theorise the heat of fusion
in a easier way: the temperature does not change for the entire process.
The equation that represents the change of thermal energy is composed by four
main components: the sensible heat of the salt hydrate in a solid and a liquid
phase, the latent heat of fusion of the salt and the sensible heat of the module's
==PAGE:42==
26
Thermal Energy Storages
material, as equation 2.5 shows [23].
Echarge,simple = m · [(Tmelt −Tstart) · Cp(s) + L + (Tmax −Tmelt) · Cp(l)]+
Cmodule · (Tmax −Tstart)
(2.5)
where Echarge,simple is the theoretical change of thermal energy in the heat
storage in J, m is the mass of the PCM in kg, Tmelt is the characteristic melting
temperature of the PCM - SAT - of 58 ◦C, Tstart is the starting temperature of
the charging phase in ◦C, Cp(s) and Cp(l) are the specic heat of the heat storage
material respectively in the solid and liquid phase in J/kgK, L is the latent heat
of fusion in J, Cmodule is the heat capacity of the module's materials which
includes also the heat transfer uid, in J/K and Tmax is the mean maximum
temperature that the heat storage module reaches during the charging phase
[23].
In the case of discharging, the equation 2.5 changes in
Edischarge,simple = m · [(Tmax −Tmelt) · Cp(l) + L + (Tmelt −Tend) · Cp(s)]+
Cmodule · (Tmax −Tend)
(2.6)
where Tend is the mean temperature the heat storage reaches after discharging.
A specic case has to be considered: when the storage module is discharged
starting from the fully charged condition at Tmax to Tsupercool - where Tsupercool
is the temperature at which the module is kept in stable supercooling - without
facing crystallization, the energy discharged consists of the sensible heat of the
module and the liquid PCM. An assumption then is made and the physical
properties of the supercooled PCM are considered the same as the liquid phase.
The discharged energy can be expressed then as shown in equation 2.7.
Edischarge = (m · Cp(l) + Cmodule) · (Tmax −Tsupercool)
(2.7)
During the supercooled state some energy was stored and it is possible to dene
it as in equation 2.8.
Esupercool = Echarge,simple −Edischarge
(2.8)
Tstart
=
Tend
(2.9)
Tend
=
Tsupercooled
(2.10)
The the thermal energy stored during the supercooled state would be
Esupercool = m · L −m · (Cp(l) −Cp(s)) · (Tmelt −Tsupercool)
(2.11)
==PAGE:43==
2.4 Heat of Fusion: theoretical behaviour
27
There is the possibility that the nal temperature to which the storage is dis-
charged diers from the supercooled temperature.
In this situation the dis-
charged heat is corrected for the dierence in sensible heat of the module ma-
terial and the PCM in its solid state [23].
Ecorrect = (m · Cp(s) + Cmodule) · (Tsupercool −Tend)
(2.12)
Finally, the energy per unit mass released in the process is dened as the energy
released from activating a supercooled uid at a specic temperature, corrected
for a dierence between the nal discharge temperature and the temperature of
the supercooled heat storage material before activation [23].
Econt(Tsupercool) = Esupercool −Ecorrect
m
(2.13)
2.4.1.1
Material properties
The theoretical values for the material properties involved in the theory of the
heat of fusion leads to the selection of the theory of Araki [13]. Non tempera-
ture dependent heat capacities for the solid and the liquid phase of SAT were
determined as average over the relevant temperature intervals [23].
The latent heat of fusion, for 45% of water and 55% of sodium acetate, was
estimated through Araki's correlations to be 187 kJ/kg. Values are listed in
Table 2.4.
Table 2.4: Thermal properties for sodium acetate water mixture for 45% water
55% sodium acetate
Material property
Module 1
Latent heat of fusion L
187 kJ/kg
Solid specic heat Cp(s)
2.14 kJ/kgK
Liquid specic heat Cp(l)
3.04 kJ/kgK
When the standard SAT is used as storage material, the properties used are the
one listed in Table 2.5.
Table 2.5: Thermal properties for SAT for 40% water 60% sodium acetate
Material property
Module 1*
Module 1**
Module 2
Latent heat of fusion L
246 kJ/kg
246 kJ/kg
246 kJ/kg
Solid specic heat Cp(s)
2.13 kJ/kgK
2.06 kJ/kg
2.08 kJ/kg
Liquid specic heat Cp(l)
2.90 kJ/kgK
2.96 kJ/kg
3.04 kJ/kg
==PAGE:44==
28
Thermal Energy Storages
The theoretical heat capacity of the module is determined considering the spe-
cic heat of the materials that form the system. In case of CMC, it is assumed
already included in the sodium acetate trihydrate's properties. In the case of
the module with more materials involved, the used heat capacity of steel is 500
J/kgK, of graphite is 710 J/kgK, of paran oil is 510 J/kgK with a density of
0.8 kg/l and 30 litres of water are considered in the heat exchangers [3]:
Cmodule = 235.6kg · 500 J
kgK + 4.7kg · 710 J
kgK +
5l · 0.8kg
l · 510 J
kgK + 30kg · 4180 J
kgK = 248.6kJ
K
(2.14)
The equation 2.14 shows the calculation for the module that contains all the
materials.
Each module is dierent in terms of materials: Table 2.6 presents the dierent
heat capacity of the modules.
Table 2.6: Theoretical heat capacity if the modules.
Module 1
Module 1*
Module 1**
Module 2
Cmodule [kJ/K]
243.2
246.5
248.6
243.2
2.5
Applications
The literature about thermal energy storage using phase change materials gave
a wide list of possible application, which is shown in Table 2.7. The applications
of PCM-TES are clearly various, including several dierent elds, from cooling
and heating, to medical application until food agroindustry.
Zalba et al. in [85] have divided these applications into two main groups: storage
and thermal protection or inertia. The main dierence between the two groups
regards the thermal conductivity of the material involved. Storage systems are
characterised by higher thermal conductivity values while thermal protection
applications work better with lower values.
==PAGE:45==
2.5 Applications
29
Table 2.7: PCM-TES application [85].
Application
References
Thermal storage of solar energy
[50] [76] [52] [46] [28] [10] [57]
Passive storage in bioclimatic building/architecture (HDPE +
paran)
[41] [31] [58] [51] [62]
Cooling: use of o-peak rates and reduction of installed power,
ice-bank
[45] [79] [64] [40]
Heating and sanitary hot water:
using o-peak rate and
adapting unloading curves
[15] [29] [22] [65]
Safety: temperature maintenance in rooms with computers or
electrical appliances
[26]
Thermal protection of food: transport, hotel trade, ice-cream,
etc
[27] [26] [83]
Food agroindustry, wine, milk products (absorbing peaks in
demand), greenhouses
[66] [48] [49]
Thermal protection of electronic devices (integrated in the ap-
pliance)
[26] [18] [61]
Medical applications:
transport of blood, operating tables,
hotcold therapies
[18]
Cooling of engines (electric and combustion)
[61] [17] [81]
Softening of exothermic temperature peaks in chemical reac-
tions
[66]
Spacecraft thermal systems
[59]
In cold climates, in countries like Denmark, space heating constitutes a large
part of the energy consumption, characterised by a low temperature, usually
stable between 20 ◦C and 25 ◦C. The use of large radiant surfaces as oor heat-
ing keeps the system temperatures low which makes PCMs at a low temperature
around 30-40 ◦C suitable for such application. It is important in this eld to
keep the available enthalpy at high values during the phase transition but also
decrease the exergy losses associated with the temperature range of cycling: it
is crucial to keep the system temperatures to a moderate level.[68].
==PAGE:46==
30
Thermal Energy Storages
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 3
Developed Modules
At the time the work on the thesis began, the solar group of Department of
Civil Engineering, Technical University of Denmark, has developed four PCM
modules in order to investigate compact seasonal heat storage. The modules
were installed and tested in DTU Lyngby Campus, in Denmark, in the labora-
tory of building 119.
This section describes the facility and the modules analysed.
3.1
Description of the Heat Storage Test Facility
The data were collected from June 2014 to January 2015, during which the
modules were connected to a heat storage test facility. A sketch of the heat
storage test facility is shown in Figure 3.1.
An electric heating element is used to charge the storage system. Water is the
heat transfer uid that circulates in the heat exchangers. The heat demand
was simulated by a cooling system connected to the modules, which provides
an inlet temperature regulated by a thermostat valve. Valves were positioned
in the test facility in order to vary the ow rate. Moreover, the charging power
was varied from 3 kW, to 6 kW or 9 kW.
==PAGE:48==
32
Developed Modules
Figure 3.1: Sketch of the test facility.
Figure 3.2: Picture of the heat storage test facility.
==PAGE:49==
3.1 Description of the Heat Storage Test Facility
33
Figure 3.2 shows part of the test facility which was connected to the heat storage
modules. The insulation material enveloped the electric heating element, which,
through a pipe system, was connected to a pump.
The water, owing back from the heat storage module, run into the test facility
and, in case a charge phase is in process, it is pumped into the electric heating
element, where it is heated. The heated water ows again into the module. In
case of a discharge, a valve is opened and the water run into the heat exchanger,
showed in Figure 3.3, and the water cooled. The cooled water is pumped into
the heat storage module, ready to collect heat again.
Figure 3.3: Detail of the heat exchanger and the pump, part of the heat storage
test facility.
With the heat storage test facility it is possible to keep a constant volume ow
rate through the hat storage, and a constant inlet temperature to the heat
storage or a constant power to the heat storage.
==PAGE:50==
34
Developed Modules
3.2
The Modules
The modules were designed all in the same way: a at rectangular chamber,
in which the PCM is contained, made in steel and stainless steel with external
dimensions 1200 x 2400 x 60 mm and a total mass if empty of 235.6 kg. The
steel plates have a thickness of 2 mm. The internal volume of the container was
estimated to around 144 litres for the storage materials, with an extra 30 litres
in case expansion is required. At the end of the modules there is an extension
of the width of 300 mm wide and 100 mm height [23]. In gure 3.4 a sketch of
the module is presented, while Figure 3.5 shows the real module.
Figure 3.4: Sketch of the module.
The internal height of the chamber is 5 cm.
The small height and the soft
mixing of the PCM by convection during charge can hopefully prevent phase
separation.
Heat exchangers represent an important component for the system: on the
bottom surface the HEX is made by 16 parallel channels while on the top 14
channels cover the entire surface of the PCM container. Both of them are in-
stalled precisely in contact with the outer surface of the PCM chamber, in a
way to allow heat transfer through the wall and reach an uniform temperature
inside, melting all crystals. The heat transfer uid volume was estimated to 30
litres.
Spontaneous nucleation has to be avoided and the presence of cracks or gaps
combined with pressure changes inside the tank can trigger crystallization. For
this reason the inner surface of the PCM tank have been produced as smooth
as possible [23].
==PAGE:51==
3.2 The Modules
35
Figure 3.5: Module with top and bottom heat exchangers and expansion vol-
ume. Dimensions: 1200 x 2400 x 60 mm [23].
The module was lled with the PCM through three openings, which were used
also to install the tube for the expansion bag and a probe to measure the tem-
perature of the PCM inside the chamber. Then, these openings were closed with
lids and 3 mm of rubber gaskets, in order to avoid any kind of leakages. More-
over, the lling necks were placed on the top on the expansion bag to exclude
the contact with the PCM inside the chamber, in order to avoid interference
during the operation. Figure 3.6 shows the expansion volume with the detail of
the lling openings.
Figure 3.6: Expansion volume located in the front of the module [23].
The system was equipped with a container in which CO2 was stored with pres-
sure of 5-7 bars, showed in Figure 3.7. This container was part of a system used
as a triggering mechanism to activate solidication when it was required. The
liquid CO2 can, by boiling at a temperature of about -76 ◦C, cool down a small
==PAGE:52==
36
Developed Modules
part of the supercooled phase change material reaching its maximum level of
supercooling.
Figure 3.7: CO2 container, part of the system used to trigger crystallization
[23].
3.2.1
Storage Materials
During the investigation of the dierent modules, the stability of the supercool-
ing and the avoidance of phase separation were the main issues to which was
developed a solution comparing the dierent storage materials.
As discussed in section 2.3.4, the extra water principle and the use of thickening
agents are two solutions to the phase separation problem. Moreover, Sodium
Acetate Trihydrate have shown good ability on stable supercooling, combined
with a good compatibility with storage tank materials, such as steel and stain-
less steel in the presented case.
The rst storage material has been investigated in order to assess the extra wa-
ter principle: water was added to the sodium acetate trihydrate to increase the
water content from 39.7 % to 45 % by weight.
Then several additives were evaluated and three dierent combinations were
selected. At rst, pure SAT was mixed with 1 % by weight of carboxyl methyl
cellulose (CMC), which works as a thickener. Then, another module was anal-
ysed containing SAT, 1w% CMC and 2w% of graphite, which has the ability of
improving the thermal conductivity of the material, leaving the phase change
temperature and the enthalpy stable [53]. The last step was to nally add 5
litres of paran oil to the previous composition of substances, which could im-
prove the heat exchange capacity rate during solidication.
The main function of the oil is to ll the cavities inside the chamber in a way
to improve the heat transfer. During the phase change the PCM will show a
change in volume of 10%, leaving parts of the chamber lled with air during and
after solidication. Oil is sucked into the cavities, improving the heat transfer
==PAGE:53==
3.2 The Modules
37
which is better through a uid than through air.
Furthermore, it is expected to improve the stability of supercooling: the oil can
prevent the evaporation of the water from the upper surface of the PCM, which
has been recognized as one possible cause of spontaneous activation. When the
water evaporates, it can condense on the inner surfaces of the chamber and the
water on the surface can transport some PCM attached to the surface. The
pipes connection with the expansion bag can be blocked by the PCM causing
instability which can activate spontaneously the supercooled PCM in the cham-
ber.
Two modules were installed so the rst module was emptied and lled again two
times in order to test all the described materials. In Table 3.1 the four modules
combined with the respective storage material are listed.
Table 3.1: The four modules tested at DTU with respective characteristics.
Module Solution to phase separation PCM
Mass PCM [kg]
1
Extra water principle
45w%
salt
water
mixture
199.5
1*
Thickening agent
SAT + 1w% CMC
+ 2w% graphite
202
1**
Thickening agent
SAT + 1w% CMC
+ 2w% graphite +
5 l paran oil
206
2
Thickening agent
SAT + 1w% CMC
220
==PAGE:54==
38
Developed Modules
==PAGE:55==
Chapter 4
Experimental analysis
4.1
Experimental method
The measured data were inserted in several Excel sheets, divided per cycle. In
each le the data were analysed through an experimental method, consisting in
the application of several formulas, in a way to dene several parameters and
assess the thermal performances of the modules.
The aim of the following section is to describe the procedure adopted to de-
termine rst the heat loss coecient and secondly the heat content of the heat
storage module tested in DTU.
4.1.1
Heat loss coecient
To nd the heat loss coecient it was necessary to heat the module to a stable
temperature for a long period, without additional energy stored in the system.
In this way the energy balance was applied to the system: the energy added
to the storage is equal to the heat loss over the stable period. In this way the
heat loss coecient is considered constant for the module even if in reality the
storage and ambient temperatures inuence it.
The higher the heat storage
==PAGE:56==
40
Experimental analysis
temperature is, the higher the heat loss coecient will be.
Ptot
=
Hloss
(4.1)
=
Hloss,coeff · (Ts −Tamb)
(4.2)
where Ptot is the power transferred to the storage in W, Hloss,coeff is the heat
loss coecient in W/K, Ts is the mean storage temperature in ◦C and Tamb is
the mean ambient temperature in ◦C. The heat loss coecient was determined
at the temperature level of 90 ◦C.
An important factor is the volume ow rate of the heat transfer uid: in order
to determine the heat loss coecient with a reasonable accuracy it is necessary
to impose it as a low one, around 1-2 l/min.
A remarkable consideration regards the heat loss coecient: initially it was
hypothesized constant for each module, as it would have been determined during
a stable temperature period with low volume ow rate only during one cycle.
Analysing the measurements it became clear that this method would not have
given reasonable results in every cycle. The reason is hat the insulation material
did not have a xed placements during the long test period with a high number
of cycle. Due to this reason, the heat loss coecient has been calculated in
each cycle during stable temperature condition, disregarding the inuence of
the volume ow rate. In case of a specic cycle in which there was not a period
of stable temperature, it was decided to use the heat loss coecient calculated
in another measurements' le with the same or similar volume ow rate.
4.1.2
Charge and discharge power
Since the system is composed by bottom and top heat exchangers, the total
power has been calculated summing the two components.
Ptot = Pbot + Ptop
= Vbot · Cp,bot · ρbot · (Ti,bot −To,bot)+
Vtop · Cp,top · ρtop · (Ti,top −To,top)
(4.3)
where V is the volume ow rate of the heat transfer uid in m3/s, Ti is the inlet
temperature, To is the outlet temperature, both in ◦C, Cp is the specic heat
capacity in J/kgK of the heat transfer uid, water, at the mean temperature
between inlet and outlet and ρ is the water density in kg/m3 at Ti due to the
position of the ow meter in the hot side of the module. The presence of top
and bot as subscripts have the function of diversify the parameters from the
bottom heat exchanger to the top one.
==PAGE:57==
4.1 Experimental method
41
The specic heat capacity and the density of water were calculated using the
temperature-dependent correlations from [36]:
Cp
=
4203.6 −117.3 · 10−2 · Taverage + 143.2 · 10−4 · T 2
average
(4.4)
ρ
=
1000.6 −0.0128 · T 1.76
i
(4.5)
However, the temperature dierences between Ti and To were calculated using
the voltage signal measured by the thermopile and then following the formula
4.7:
Tm
=
Ti + 25.9
2
· (v)
5 · 1000
(4.6)
∆T
=
v
5 · 1000 · (25.9 −0.06Tm + 0.00027T 2
m −0.000001T 3
m)
(4.7)
It was also checked that the temperature dierence from the voltage signal and
the measured value were comparable, giving the same results and this statement
was conrmed plotting both the curves.
4.1.3
Heat content
The change of energy content of the heat storage module is determined, in a
specic time period t, as
E(t) =
Z t
0
[Ptot −Hloss,coeff · (Ts −Tamb)]dt
(4.8)
where E(t) is the change of the heat content in the storage system during a
specic period of time t, in J, Ptot is the total power as calculated from 4.3 in
W, Hloss,coeff is the heat loss coecient from equation 4.9 in W/K, Ts is the
mean storage temperature and Tamb is the mean ambient temperature, both in
◦C.
4.1.4
Heat exchange capacity rate
The heat exchange capacity rate is a factor that measure how large power can
be transferred from the heat transfer uid and the heat storage material per K
temperature dierence between them [36]. It is important in order to evaluate
the heat exchangers' functionality, one of the crucial component of the system.
==PAGE:58==
42
Experimental analysis
The heat exchange capacity rate depends on several conditions: the power, the
ow rate, the storage temperature and the material properties. Moreover, the
heat exchangers' design and geometry have an inuence on it [23].
It is preferable to reach a high heat exchange capacity rate in order to charge
fast the storage when the solar energy is available but also to discharge fast in
order to supply the required heat demand.
The heat exchange capacity rate was calculated using the equation 4.9
H = −V · cp · ρ · ln(1 −Ti −To
Ti −Ts
)
(4.9)
When the total heat exchange capacity rate was calculated, the specic heat
capacity was calculated again on the mean temperature between inlet and outlet
and the density was calculated considering the inlet temperature. The total inlet
and outlet temperature were calculated weighting the bottom and top ones on
the volume ow rate.
==PAGE:59==
Chapter 5
Results
The previous chapters have been signicant to understand the subject and the
background behind TES, the real system installed and investigated during the
project in DTU and the experimental method that has been applied to analyse
and interpret the collected measurements.
This chapter is then focusing on the results deduced from the test cycles of the
installed modules. The chapter is organized in a way to show a detail analysis
on at least one relevant cycle on each module.
During this phase, several parameters were discussed: the heat loss coecient,
the charge and discharge powers, the heat content and the heat exchange ca-
pacity rate. The temperatures' trend and the volume ow rate were also inves-
tigated.
Then, the cycles were summarised trying to transmit knowledge about the en-
tire series of measurements applied on the modules, having then a more general
view on what was pursued and obtained through the investigation.
The last part of the chapter focuses on several comparisons: the modules' per-
formances were compared between them in order to assess, at least based on
thermal characteristics, which modules gave better and more promising results.
A comparison between the experimental results and the theoretical values was
also carried out, in order to understand if the reality is close or not to the the-
oretical investigation.
Furthermore, an accuracy analysis on the results has been carried out, in a way
to understand how much the uncertainties have eected the nal ndings.
==PAGE:60==
44
Results
The modules underwent several heating and cooling cycles, dierent from each
other mainly regarding the volume ow rates and the power setting. The entire
period of data collection has started in June 2014, precisely the rst set of mea-
surement is dated June the 10th, 2014. The last data on the last module tested
have been collected January the 29th, 2015.
5.1
Test with Module 1
The rst module was tested throughout several cycles between June and August
2014. The storage material contained in this module is a salt water mixture with
45w% of water and 55w% of SAT. Therefore the module will assess the extra
water principle in term of suitable solution to the phase segregation.
On July the 24th the module experienced an interesting cycle, consisting of a
charging phase, a discharging one and the activation of the supercooled material,
with the discharge of the stored latent heat of fusion. The analysis of the cycle
starts with the assessment of the volume ow rate that was run during the cycle,
presented in Figure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: Top, bottom and total volume ow rates as a function of time.
The cycle can be divided in two dierent periods based on the ow rate: the
==PAGE:61==
5.1 Test with Module 1
45
rst 20 hours of operation were characterized by an average of 21.3 l/min as
total volume ow rate, which was split in the two heat exchangers equally. The
second period started between the 21st and 22nd hour of operation, when the
ow rate dropped to lower values, around 3.9 l/min.
Figure 5.2 shows the general temperatures' trend during the process: the storage
module started the charging phase from a temperature of 24.3 ◦C. The charging
power setting for this cycle was 6 kW.
Figure 5.2: Top/bottom inlet and outlet, ambient and mean storage temper-
atures' trend as a function of time.
Stable conditions were reached after almost six hours of charging at a volume
ow rate of 21.3 l/min, when the average storage temperature of 90.1 ◦C was
reached.
The most signicant periods are analysed more in detail.
==PAGE:62==
46
Results
Figure 5.3: Detail of module's charging - temperatures' trend.
Figure 5.4: Discharging phase - temperatures' trend.
As shown in Figure 5.3 the module underwent around 5-6 hours of charging,
while the heat exchangers reached high temperatures around 91.2 ◦C. The inlet
temperatures of the heat exchangers followed exactly the same curve, while the
outlet temperature of the bottom HEX is lower than the top one. In this phase
the bottom volume ow rate was slightly lower than the top value. However, it
is known the heat is easier transferred upwards than downwards: this explain
the lower value of the outlet temperature in the bottom HEX.
The temperatures' stability, over a period of 21 hours, allowed the calculation
of the heat loss coecient through the formula 4.2, resulting 8.0 W/K.
==PAGE:63==
5.1 Test with Module 1
47
Figure 5.5: Activation and discharging of the stored latent heat - tempera-
tures' trend.
The discharging period started around hour 21th and the inlet HEX tempera-
tures dropped to the ambient one in about ten minutes, while the outlet ones
recorded a smoother drop, see 5.4. A long stable supercooled period of 72 hours
followed the discharging of the sensible heat stored in the module, until the acti-
vation of the solidication of the salt water mixture has been provided through
the CO2 tank.
Therefore the stable supercooled condition lasted three days since activation
started around hour 93th, where the storage temperature reached 52 ◦C, as
shown in Figure 5.5. A decrease of the melting point was noticed: the pure
SAT has the melting point at 58 ◦C. The storage temperature after the end of
the activation was the same as during the stable supercooling: the heat released
was the latent heat stored in the system, without sensible heat involved in the
process.
The power transferred from and to the heat storage is considered an important
factor also because it inuences the heat transfer through the heat exchange
capacity rate. Each phase has been separately considered in order to approach
and quantify the diversities of the process.
The power involved in the storage system has been calculated as the formula
4.3, always considering the voltage signal for the temperature dierences.
As rst, the heat storage has been charged through an initial signicant input,
resulting from a consistent ow rate, that led up to a peak of about 75 kW.
Then the charging power stabilised between 4 and 5 kW for the rst ve hours,
during which bottom and top heat exchanger showed a specular trend, as clear
from Figure 5.6. A second settlement was recorded around the 5th hour , when
==PAGE:64==
48
Results
the temperature-stable period started and the charging power was reduced to
0.5 kW.
Figure 5.6: Transferred power during the charging period.
Figure 5.7: Transferred power during the discharging period.
==PAGE:65==
5.1 Test with Module 1
49
The temperature-stable period ended when the discharge of the sensible heat
stored in the system begun. Figure 5.7 points out a dierent tendency of the
discharging phase compared with the charging: the former was characterized by
a steep drop o from the maximum power of almost 16 kW. In this process the
top HEX was transferring more power than the bottom one, with an average
extra heat transfer of 27 %, which was an expected trend due to the upwards
heat direction. After the 26th hour the power has reached again a very low
value, below 0.3 kW, and it has been stable with a low value during the entire
supercooling period.
The last stage begun between the 93th and the 94th hour, when after 72 hours
of stable supercooling, the module has been activated and the system released
the latent heat stored during the cycle. In this phase the bottom and top HEX
were characterized by very similar power, as shown in Figure 5.8.
Figure 5.8: Activation of the PCM and discharging of the stored latent heat.
As discussed in section 2.3, the energy storage capacity is an important factor
in case of the assessment of a thermal energy storage. The total energy stored
in the system after the charging period amount to 94 MJ. The heat content has
been plotted as function of time in Figure 5.9. As previously mentioned, the
heat loss coecient determined during this cycle is equal to 8.0 W/K.
During the discharging phase, from the end of the stable high temperature
period to the beginning of the stable supercooling condition, 58 MJ were dis-
charged from the system, as sensible heat. After the long supercooled state, the
crystallization was started through boiling CO2 and the energy discharged as
latent heat, with a ow rate around 2 l/min in each heat exchanger, amount to
38 MJ in around 5 hours and a half. At this point the storage temperature was
stable around 26 - 27 ◦C.
==PAGE:66==
50
Results
The heat content curve gave feedback about the accuracy of the analysis: if the
heat loss coecient has been determined correctly, the heat content during the
hot stable period must be constant and the requirement is fullled. However
the fact that the nal part of the cycle gave negative heat content values, with
the assessed temperature level, is not reasonable from the system point of view:
the system can not discharge more than what it has been charged and still the
nal temperature is higher than the initial one. This topic will be discussed
again for the other modules and at the end of the Chapter an accuracy analysis
on the measurements has been presented in order to explain the heat content
trends.
Figure 5.9: Heat content in the heat storage as a function of time calculated
using the heat loss coecient.
The system has to be analysed also from the heat exchangers' point of view:
when the solar energy is available or there is a heat demand to supply, the heat
exchangers have to charge or discharge the module as quick as possible. The
heat exchange capacity rate is the factor that expresses this ability in term of
amount of heat the water with a certain ow rate can release or absorb per
temperature dierence between the water and the storage material.
The heat exchange capacity rate is presented as function of time, during the ini-
tial charging and discharging phases of the module and during the activation of
the supercooled uid and the consequent discharging of the stored latent heat,
in Figure 5.10, Figure 5.11 and Figure 5.12.
==PAGE:67==
5.1 Test with Module 1
51
The charging phase was characterized by values uctuating around 220-240
W/K for the rst four hours, followed by a sudden increase with a peak around
945 W/K in the last thirty minutes.
The discharging phase has started between hour 21 and 22 and it lasted until
the 27th hour of operation: the heat exchange capacity rate showed two peaks
corresponding to the powers' peaks but generally the trend was a slow decrease
from values close to 400 W/K, reaching 50 W/K at the end of the process.
Figure 5.10: Heat exchange capacity rate as a function of time during the rst
part of the cycle.
Figure 5.11: Heat exchange capacity rate as a function of time during the
discharging phase.
==PAGE:68==
52
Results
The tendency of the heat exchange capacity rate during the nal stage of the
cycle was dierent from the previous charging and discharging phases. With
an initial peak of 350 W/K, the heat exchange capacity rate experienced a
steeper initial decrease that brought it around 200 W/K, followed by a smoother
reduction until it reached values below 50 W/K after 7 hours.
Figure 5.12: Heat exchange capacity rate as a function of time during the
activation of the supercooling uid.
The theoretical thermal energy storage has been calculated as explained in
Chapter 2.4.
The measured energy content results to be 7.4 % higher than
the theoretical value, while the discharged sensible heat and latent heat are 6.1
% and 18.8 % higher respectively, as shown in Table 5.1.
Table 5.1: Comparison between measured and theoretical values for the heat
stored and discharged.
Heat stored
Sensible H.
Latent H.
[MJ]
[MJ]
[MJ]
Measured
94
58
38
Theoretical
88
55
32
%
+ 7.4%
+ 6.1%
+ 18.8%
Since only one cycle is not enough to assess the module operation and per-
formance, more cycles have been investigated. The energy content reached its
==PAGE:69==
5.1 Test with Module 1
53
maximum in the tenth cycle with an increase compared to the analysed one of
11%.
In only four out to twelve cycles the stable supercooling was experienced in the
module. During the 11th cycle a short charging period was tested to understand
how it aected the supercooling state, which was not reached.
The sponta-
neous activation of the heat storage material represented a signicant issue for
the system, as only in another cycle the stability of the supercooling gave the
possibility to adopt the CO2 system to trigger the crystallization.
==PAGE:70==
54
Results
5.2
Test with Module 1 with CMC and Graphite
When the Module 1 has been fully tested, it has been emptied and lled again
with a dierent storage material, consisting in pure Sodium Acetate Trihydrate
with 1w% of CMC and 2w% of graphite. The thickening agent added in the
module is going to be assessed, while graphite is supposed to improve the ther-
mal conductivity of the storage material and consequently also the heat transfer.
The new module was tested from the end of October 2014 to the end of 2014.
The measurements collected from the cycle of November the 18th were anal-
ysed. It underwent three main phases: charging, discharging and a spontaneous
activation of the supercooled heat storage material, following a period of stable
supercooling. Again, the rst parameter discussed is the volume ow rate in
order to clearly assess the trend of the cycle, see Figure 5.13.
Figure 5.13: Top, bottom and total volume ow rates as a function of time.
The rst period, which include a charging phase and discharging of the sen-
sible stored heat, was characterised by a total volume ow rate around 21.3
l/min. During this phase the bottom HEX's volume ow rate was slightly lower
compared to the top heat exchanger's values. The ow rate dropped after 23
hours to a low value of 2.3 l/min, divided equally in the two heat exchangers.
Then, after almost two days of operation, the volume ow rate was switched o
completely, until the end of the cycle, giving a passive feature to the rest of the
cycle. It means that there was no heat exchange between the heat exchangers
==PAGE:71==
5.2 Test with Module 1 with CMC and Graphite
55
and the module: the heat was wasted in the surrounded environment.
The temperatures' trend is shown in Figure 5.14: the temperatures drastically
increased for 5 hours due to the module's charging; then a stable period was
following, lasting around 18 hours, ending with the storage temperature stable
at around 92.2 ◦C. Generally, it can be noticed that the storage temperature
after the activation showed a gap of around 20 ◦C with the HEX temperatures.
Figure 5.14: Top/bottom inlet and outlet, ambient and mean storage temper-
atures' trend as a function of time.
The entire cycle lasted for almost six days; the charging period, characterized by
a high ow rate, as shown in Figure 5.15, consisted in a period of time of about
5-6 hours. The storage temperature increased with a more linear pattern than
the HEX temperatures. The former reached slowly the hot stable temperature
of 92.2 ◦C.
Between the 23rd and the 24th hour of collection of data, the discharge of the
module begun, characterized by a low volume ow rate, around 2.3 l/min. The
temperatures' trend during the process is shown in Figure 5.16: the inlet bottom
HEX recorded a fast drop to 26.5 ◦C. The mean storage temperature stabilised
around 24 ◦C in a longer period of time. After discharging a stable supercooled
period was following, which lasted for around 70 hours and it was characterised
by a zero ow rate in the heat exchangers.
==PAGE:72==
56
Results
Figure 5.15: Detail of module's charging - temperatures' trend.
Figure 5.16: Discharging - temperatures' trend.
During this cycle a spontaneous activation has been registered after 100 hours
of operation, see Figure 5.17. When the crystallization started, the storage tem-
perature reached around 58 ◦C, which is the usual temperature as melting point
for sodium acetate trihydrate. The cycle ended with the storage temperature
still at high values, around 43.5 ◦C.
The storage temperature behaviour during the activation was dierent from
==PAGE:73==
5.2 Test with Module 1 with CMC and Graphite
57
the one noticed in the Module 1: in Module 1 the maximum melting temper-
ature was reached in ten minutes and in seven hours it was again close to the
value before solidifying. Here the temperature reached its maximum in almost 5
hours, during which it was closely uctuating around it, and it started decreas-
ing slowly in a way that at the end of the cycle, 18 hours after the activation,
the storage temperature was still 43.5 ◦C. The phenomenon was due to the
zero ow rate in the heat exchangers: the module was exchanging heat with the
ambient through the insulation material and the heat ow was characterised by
totally dierent condition: the air ow rate around the module and the heat
loss must be considered.
Figure 5.17: Activation of the crystallization process - temperatures' trend.
Regarding the power involved in the cycle, as rst, the heat storage has been
charged with an initial peak input of 23.1 kW. Then the charging power sta-
bilised around 7 kW for the rst three hours, during which the bottom HEX
showed a higher contribution to the total power involved, as it appears from
Figure 5.18. The charging power decreased until just after the 5th hour and it
settled to low values, close to zero, corresponding to the stable period with high
temperatures.
==PAGE:74==
58
Results
Figure 5.18: Transferred power during the charging period
Figure 5.19: Transferred power during the discharging period.
The discharging period begun with a total power peak of 9.3 kW and it lasted
for 5 hours, as presented in Figure 5.19. The top HEX was transferring more
power than the bottom heat exchanger, which can be explained again with the
preferable upwards direction of the heat transfer.
The last and longest part of the cycle was characterized by zero volume ow
rate which means there was only heat loss involved.
==PAGE:75==
5.2 Test with Module 1 with CMC and Graphite
59
Figure 5.20: Heat content as a function of time calculated using heat loss
coecient.
The heat content has been plotted as function of time in Figure 5.20. The de-
termination of the heat loss coecient gave as result a value around 8.7 W/K.
The amount of energy stored in the system after the charging period was 103
MJ. During the discharging phase 63 MJ were discharged from the system, as
sensible heat, until the 40th hours of operation, so in 17 hours.
During the supercooled state, the heat storage content slightly decreased of 4
MJ. When the volume ow rate was imposed to zero the cycle was experienc-
ing the supercooling condition. Then spontaneous activation occurred and the
crystallization resulted in the release of the stored heat inside the module. The
consequence of having no volume ow rate in the HEX means that the heat
released was wasted from the module in a linear way and the total discharge of
the heat took place in 40 hours.
The heat exchange capacity rate has been plotted again as function of time, only
during the charging and discharging phases, see Figure 5.21 and 5.22. The trend
of the parameter analysed was similar to the previous module investigated. The
charging was characterised by values that tend to stabilize below 200 W/K,
reaching 140 W/K after 4 hours of charging. The last hour of charging, when
the charging power start decreasing, was characterised by higher heat exchange
capacity rate, around 270 W/K.
During the rst hours of discharging the heat exchange capacity rate tended to
stabilise around 300 W/K, decreasing to lower value together with the dimin-
==PAGE:76==
60
Results
ishing of the discharging power.
Figure 5.21: Heat exchange capacity rate as a function of time during the rst
part of the cycle.
Figure 5.22: Heat exchange capacity rate as a function of time during the
discharging phase.
==PAGE:77==
5.2 Test with Module 1 with CMC and Graphite
61
Again the theoretical thermal energy storage has been calculated and compared
to the measured values, which result to be 4.6 % higher than the theoretical
value, while the discharged sensible heat is 9.3 % higher, as shown in Table 5.2.
Table 5.2: Comparison between measured and theoretical values for the heat
stored and discharged.
Heat stored
Sensible H.
Latent H.
[MJ]
[MJ]
[MJ]
Measured
103
62
-
Theoretical
98
56
-
%
+ 4.6%
+ 9.3%
-
Giving a preliminary comparison with the rst module, it has been noticed that
the energy stored in the system has increased from 94 MJ to 103 MJ, that rep-
resents an increment of the 8.7 %. The reason of the extra water in the rst
tests decreased the heat content compared to the heat content of sodium acetate
trihydrate without extra water.
It is not just in this cycle that this module has worked with better performances
compared to the rst module: the rest of the cycles have resulted in always
higher energy stored in the system, even after it underwent several cycle. The
cycling stability is then improving, as well as the supercooling: half of the cycles
have experienced a stable supercooled period, even if the spontaneous activation
was still a consistent problem. The CO2 tank system was never adopted on this
module.
==PAGE:78==
62
Results
5.3
Test with Module 1 with CMC, Graphite and
Oil
The third combination of materials tested in Module 1 consisted in sodium
acetate trihydrate mixed with three dierent additives: 1w% of CMC, 2w% of
graphite and 5 litres of paran oil. The addition of oil had the expected function
to improve the heat transfer between the module and the heat exchangers, lling
the cavities inside the chamber. Moreover, it is possible it could improve the
ability of stable supercooling.
It was the last module tested, mainly in January 2015. The analysis of the
measurements collected January the 19th was chosen to be presented. The cycle
was shorter than the others: it lasted totally less than 50 hours. The beginning
was characterised by 15 hours of high volume ow rate, with an average of 21.4
l/min. The volume ow rate then suddenly dropped to values around 4 l/min
until the end of the cycle, as shown in Figure 5.23.
Figure 5.23: Top, bottom and total volume ow rates as a function of time.
The temperatures were developing in the usual way for this kind of cycle as
shown in Figure 5.24.
The hot stable period was characterised by a mean storage temperature of 88.4
◦C, which was a lower maximum temperature compared to the other cycles for
the previous two modules, and it lasted for a relative short period of 7 hours
==PAGE:79==
5.3 Test with Module 1 with CMC, Graphite and Oil
63
and a half. It is notable from Figure 5.24 that the charging phase led to a more
gradual temperature increase inside the storage. In fact, the HEX temperatures
reached the hot stability in less than 3 hours, while the storage temperature
reached the stability in almost 8 hours, as presented also in Figure 5.25.
Figure 5.24: Top/bottom inlet and outlet, ambient and mean storage temper-
atures' trend as a function of time.
Figure 5.25: Detail of module's charging - temperatures' trend.
==PAGE:80==
64
Results
Figure 5.26: Discharging - temperatures' trend.
The discharging of the sensible heat started around hour 15. From Figure 5.26 it
is shown that after almost ten hours the discharging begun, another interference
as discharging power made the temperatures decrease faster.
Figure 5.27: Activation and discharging of latent heat - temperatures' trend
The activation of the crystallization begun after 30 hours of operation, when
the storage temperature reached as maximum 58.1 ◦C. In this case the volume
ow rate was stable around 4 l/min; the storage temperature started the solid-
ication from 25.0 ◦C and it reached its maximum in an hour. Ten hours after
==PAGE:81==
5.3 Test with Module 1 with CMC, Graphite and Oil
65
the activation the storage temperature was back to the initial temperature and
it kept diminishing until it reached 22 ◦C.
The beginning of the cycle was characterised by a power peak input of 8.6 kW,
the lowest peak between the three modules analysed until here. Then the charg-
ing power recorded a similar trend as for the other modules analysed, with the
bottom heat exchanger having a higher inuence on the system than the top
HEX. After 8 hours of operation the power was stable around 0.6 kW, shown in
Figure 5.28.
In this cycle the discharging power showed a higher peak compared to the be-
ginning of the process: the total highest peak was equal to 15.5 kW. The two
heat exchangers shared the power equally during this phase.
As previously
mentioned between the 24th and the 25th the system registered another small
discharge, with a peak of 1 kW, notable in Figure 5.29.
Figure 5.28: Transferred power during the charging period.
==PAGE:82==
66
Results
Figure 5.29: Transferred power during the discharging period.
Figure 5.30: Activation of the PCM and discharging of the stored latent heat.
The activation happened with a power peak of almost 5 kW, and the power then
came back to zero after 7 hours of discharging, see Figure 5.30. In this case the
activation was spontaneous and it started during the discharging of the sensible
heat, without reaching a stable supercooled condition.
The maximum heat stored in the system was 104 MJ, reached after the charg-
ing period. Comparing this value with the previous modules, the addition of
oil helped in term of storage capacity, since the absolute value was the highest
==PAGE:83==
5.3 Test with Module 1 with CMC, Graphite and Oil
67
registered. Oil is used to increase the heat exchange capacity rate during solid-
ication. If the dierence is very low most likely the increase of heat content
is the heat content of the oil. Moreover the temperature interval in which this
module has worked was not as ample as in the other cases. The discharging of
the heat content can be divided in three phases, recognisable from Figure 5.31.
A rst steep discharging of 58 MJ of sensible heat, then a second small peak
that led to the discharge of 4 MJ of energy. There was not a stable supercooling
period during this cycle and the discharging of the latent heat brought to the
emptying of the module in around 8 hours, discharging 47 MJ. The heat loss
coecient during this cycle was 8.6 W/K.
Again the module ended with a slightly negative heat content, which might be
explain by accuracy of the measurements.
Figure 5.31: Heat content as a function of time calculated using heat loss
coecient.
The heat exchange capacity rate during the charging phase is more stable than
the previous modules, presenting a smoother trend than before, see Figure 5.32.
The average value is around 148 W/K, with a maximum value of 205 W/K and
a minimum of 100 W/K. The two discharging periods presented a similar trend,
starting from the highest point and present an exponential decrease reaching
values close to zero, see Figure 5.33 and 5.34. The activation phase showed a
highest value of 238 W/K. It is not possible to compare the HECR with the pre-
vious module since it was characterized by zero ow rate during activation. The
use of CMC, comparing this module with the salt water mixture case (Module
==PAGE:84==
68
Results
1), has inuenced negatively the heat transfer, which was expected.
Figure 5.32: Heat exchange capacity rate as a function of time during the
charging phase.
Figure 5.33: Heat exchange capacity rate as a function of time during the
discharging of the sensible heat.
==PAGE:85==
5.3 Test with Module 1 with CMC, Graphite and Oil
69
Figure 5.34: Heat exchange capacity rate as a function of time during the
activation of the supercooled module.
The theoretical thermal energy storage results to be 5.5 % lower than the mea-
sured value, while the discharged sensible heat and latent heat are 15.2 % and
2.9 % lower respectively, as shown in Table 5.3.
Table 5.3: Comparison between measured and theoretical values for the heat
stored and discharged.
Heat stored
Sensible H.
Latent H.
[MJ]
[MJ]
[MJ]
Measured
104
63
46
Theoretical
98
53
45
%
+ 5.5%
+ 15.2%
+ 2.9%
As already mentioned, this module and the cycle analysed have shown good
thermal performance from the storage capacity point of view: the highest abso-
lute value between the three cases analysed. In order to have a better overview
it is necessary to assess also the other cycles the module underwent: regarding
the storage capacity it is undeniable that the module experienced the best result
in its third cycle with 105 MJ of heat stored. However, the stable supercool-
ing condition was perceived only three times, while the spontaneous activation
dominated the performances.
==PAGE:86==
70
Results
5.4
Test with Module 2
The second module was lled once with a mixture of SAT and 1w% of CMC
and it was never emptied until the end of the experiments. The module was
tested intermittently during July, August and September, in total for seven cy-
cles. Therefore this module was testing only a thickening additive, without the
addition of agents regarding the heat transfer.
The cycle that was chosen to be examined is the second, tested on July the 4th,
during which the module underwent a charging period, then an active discharg-
ing period and the activation of the supercooled module. There was no stable
supercooling. The charging power setting for the heating element was 3 kW.
The cycle was characterised by a relative low volume ow rate, with a rst
phase of 6.9 l/min as average from the beginning of the test to the 97th hour
of operation, see Figure 5.35. Then the system worked for more than 20 hours
with a total volume ow rate slowly decreasing from a value around 4 l/min to 2
l/min. Around hour 120 a sudden increase was registered: the volume ow rate
had an average of 14 l/min for 45 minutes; then it fell around 4 l/min and it
kept diminishing until the end of the cycle where the volume ow rate reached
3.2 l/min.
Figure 5.35: Top, bottom and total volume ow rates as a function of time.
The temperatures' trends from the inlet to the outlet, from bottom to top, were
following the expected trends of the examined periods. As shown in Figure 5.36,
==PAGE:87==
5.4 Test with Module 2
71
rst phase was a charging of the module from the beginning to the 20th hour,
the storage temperature started from a relative high temperature of 27.3 ◦C
and it reached its maximum at 89.2 ◦C. Then a stable hot period was following,
at which end the discharging of the sensible stored heat started, around the
97th hour.
The 121th hour was characterized by the activation of the PCM
through the CO2 system and the mean storage temperature suddenly increased
reaching the melting temperature. The stable supercooled condition was not
faced: as soon as the discharge of sensible heat was stabilizing, crystallization
was triggered.
Figure 5.36: Top/bottom inlet and outlet, ambient and storage temperatures'
trend as a function of time.
In Figure 5.37 details of the charging period was presented in term of tempera-
tures' trend. Both inlet HEX temperatures showed higher values than the outlet
ones for the heat exchanger, while the phase change material followed a similar
inclination laying on lower value. Being a charging phase the HEX tempera-
tures' tendency was claried. Again the outlet bottom HEX showed lower value
than the top HEX, a phenomenon already explained during the analysis of the
rst module tested.
During the discharging period, as expected, the temperatures' situation in the
heat exchanger was inverted: the top heat exchanger was contributing more then
the bottom one and the temperatures reected the behaviour. Moreover, the
storage temperature manifested a smoother decrease, resulting in the highest
==PAGE:88==
72
Results
temperature between the showed ones in Figure 5.38.
Figure 5.37: Detail of the charging period: temperatures as a function of time.
Figure 5.38: Detail of the discharging period: temperatures as a function of
time.
The activation of the phase change material was characterized by the growth of
the storage temperature until 58.4 ◦C, see Figure 5.39. In this case the temper-
ature at which the activation started was 26.5 ◦C and, after the crystallization,
the solid phase reached the same temperature and it kept decreasing until the
end of the cycle which stopped at 25.3 ◦C.
==PAGE:89==
5.4 Test with Module 2
73
Figure 5.39: Detail of the activation and discharging period: temperatures as
a function of time.
The rst period of twenty hours was characterized by the module's charging,
with a peak of 3.9 kW, the absolute lowest value. Since the bottom heat ex-
changer was the favourite in the charging process, the power respected this
trend and the bottom heat exchanger had highest inuence on the total power,
as shown in Figure 5.40. Between hours 20th and 100th there was no power
transferred to and from the heat storage, since the system underwent a hot
stable period.
Figure 5.40: Transferred power during the charging period.
==PAGE:90==
74
Results
Thereafter the sensible heat stored in the storage was discharged with a peak
of 13.7 kW, see Figure 5.41. In the discharging phase the top HEX was work-
ing more because of the upwards direction of heat and the results reected this
behaviour.
The last peak of 4.4 kW of discharging power was measured when the solidi-
cation was initiated, see Figure 5.42, which shows the power in the period after
the start of the solidication.
Figure 5.41: Transferred power during the discharging period.
Figure 5.42: Activation of the PCM and discharging of the stored latent heat.
==PAGE:91==
5.4 Test with Module 2
75
The heat loss coecient was calculated again taking into consideration the sta-
ble period between hours 23th and 97th, and it was equal to 7.3 W/K. The plot
of the heat content is shown in Figure 5.43. After the charging period, the heat
stored in the system was equal to 109 MJ. It is the highest value of the four
dierent modules, suggesting this storage material as the best in term of storage
capacity.
The amount of sensible heat discharged was 63 MJ, while during the crystal-
lization process 54 MJ of latent heat was discharged. At the end of the cycle
the storage material was stable around 25.3 ◦C.
Figure 5.43: Heat content as a function of time calculated using the heat loss
coecient.
The charging phase of this module is the longest of the analysed charged periods:
it lasted twenty hours. The heat exchange capacity rate in this period uctuated
with a large amplitude between a maximum of 267 W/K and a minimum of 102
W/K, see Figure 5.44.
==PAGE:92==
76
Results
Figure 5.44: Heat exchange capacity rate as a function of time during the rst
part of the cycle.
Again the discharging periods showed similar tendency of the heat exchange
capacity rate, which decreased from the highest values to a nal stable condition
close to zero. In case of the discharging of the sensible heat, the heat exchange
capacity rate rst uctuated strongly then it decreased from around 400 W/K
to low values around 10 W/K at the end of the discharging phase, see Figure
5.45. The maximum peak during the activation of the supercooled uid is equal
to 227 W/K, see Figure 5.46.
Figure 5.45: Heat exchange capacity rate as a function of time during the
discharging phase.
==PAGE:93==
5.4 Test with Module 2
77
Figure 5.46: Heat exchange capacity rate as a function of time after the acti-
vation of the supercooled heat storage material.
The results from the measurements were again compared to the theoretical
results using the simple theory explained in Chapter 2.4. The measured heat
storage capacity was 5.4 % higher than the theoretical heat storage capacity,
while the discharging of the sensible heat and of the latent heat are higher but
with dierent percentage: 10.0 % and 15.1 % , as shown in Table 5.4.
Table 5.4: Comparison between measured and theoretical values for the heat
stored and discharged.
Heat stored
Sensible H.
Latent H.
[MJ]
[MJ]
[MJ]
Measured
109
63
54
Theoretical
103
57
46
%
+ 5.4%
+ 10.0%
+ 15.1%
The necessity of having a wide view on the modules and their performances
brought to the analysis of several cycles, after which it was possible to compare
the dierent PCMs with more knowledge about their actual thermal perfor-
mances. Before the summarizing of the rest of cycles, it was considered nec-
essary to analyse the accuracy of the measurements, which is the topic of the
following section.
==PAGE:94==
78
Results
5.5
Accuracy Analysis of the Measurements
It has been noticed during the analysis of the modules that some results are
unexpected and the reason could be the accuracy of the measurements.
The measuring of uncertainty is crucial especially in a scientic eld. The obser-
vation and analysis of phenomenons are inuenced by the measuring equipments,
the measuring conditions or the person which is involved in the calibrations of
the tools and the measurements. Moreover, the method applied on the mea-
surements is built with approximations and assumptions that are sources of
uncertainty on the nal results.
The method used in this situation is called "General Uncertainty Propagation"
and it is built on the assumption that the errors are random and independent.
Then, when a general quantity q is analysed, this quantity is expressed through
the variables which it is depending on.
q = f(x, y, ..., z)
(5.1)
The uncertainty of the general quantity q has the same unit as q and it is then
expressed as
s(q) =
s ∂q
∂xs(x)
2
+ ... +
∂q
∂z s(z)
2
(5.2)
where s(x) and s(z) represent the absolute uncertainty on the specic variable
considered.
Then the measured value would be
q = q ± s(q)
(5.3)
where q is the measured value.
Last important denition concerns the relative uncertainty, which is the measure
of the uncertainty of measurement compared to the size of the measurement [11]:
ε = s(q)
|q|
(5.4)
The energy content, which was usually calculated through the equation 4.8, was
divided in time steps and the equation was simplied as the variation of the
energy content for a specic time step:
∆E = P · ∆τ −Hloss,coeff · (Ts −Tamb) · ∆τ
(5.5)
which presents the variables on which the energy content is depending on.
Starting from the most certain value, the time step has a relative uncertainty
which is very small (ε(∆τ) ≃0.0005) and the temperature measurements are
aected by the typical uncertainty from the thermocouple, which is equal to
==PAGE:95==
5.5 Accuracy Analysis of the Measurements
79
0.5 K. However, it is important to remember the complication from the evalua-
tion of the storage module temperature by a single thermocouple measurement,
which does not ensure a real homogeneous temperature inside the storage, but
more an approximation that could bring to incorrect results.
The power and the heat loss coecient are the two factors which have unknown
uncertainties and they need to be calculated.
The heat loss coecient has been calculated assuming a non-dependent relation
with the temperature, which is unrealistic but necessary to evaluate the mea-
surements. The general formula to calculate the heat loss coecient come from
the steady state condition of the hot stable period:
Hloss,coeff = ρcpV (Ti −To)
Ts −Tamb
(5.6)
while the power is described as
P = ρcpV (Ti −To)
(5.7)
The calculation of the heat loss coecient's uncertainty can be applied only on
the period on which the steady state equilibrium is valid.
The relative uncertainties of density, specic heat capacity and volume ow rate
are all assumed equal to 1 %: the rst two are depending on the fact that water's
quantities are well known and the last is the relative uncertainty for the ow
meter used.
The total inlet and outlet temperatures have been calculated weighted on the
volume ow rate, which means:
Ti
=
Ti,topVtop + Ti,botVbot
Vtop + Vbot
(5.8)
To
=
To,topVtop + To,botVbot
Vtop + Vbot
(5.9)
The application of the General Uncertainty Propagation has conducted to the
nal equations 5.10, 5.11 and 5.12, and the results shown in Table 5.5.
s(Ti) =
sh
Vbot
Vbot + Vtop
· s(Ti,bot)
i2
+
h
Vtop
Vbot + Vtop
· s(Ti,top)
i2
+
shTi,botVtop −Ti,topVtop
(Vbot + Vtop)2
· s(Vbot)
i2
+
shTi,topVbot −Ti,botVbot
(Vbot + Vtop)2
· s(Vtop)
i2
(5.10)
==PAGE:96==
80
Results
s(To) =
sh
Vbot
Vbot + Vtop
· s(To,bot)
i2
+
h
Vtop
Vbot + Vtop
· s(To,top)
i2
+
shTo,botVtop −To,topVtop
(Vbot + Vtop)2
· s(Vbot)
i2
+
shTo,topVbot −To,botVbot
(Vbot + Vtop)2
· s(Vtop)
i2
(5.11)
s(H) = H·
shs(ρ)
ρ
i2
+
hs(Cp)
Cp
i2
+
hs(V )
V
i2
+
h s(Ti)
Ti −To
i2
+
sh s(To)
To −Ti
i2
+
h
s(Ts)
Tamb −Ts
i2
+
h s(Tamb)
Ts −Tamb
i2
(5.12)
Table 5.5: Results from the uncertainties' assessment on Ti, To and Hloss,coeff
Module
s(Ti)
s(To)
Hloss,coeff [W/K]
ε(Hloss,coeff)
1
0.35 K
0.35 K
8.0 ± 9.2
114.1 %
1*
0.35 K
0.35 K
8.7 ± 8.2
93.7 %
1**
0.35 K
0.35 K
8.6 ± 9.1
105.9 %
2
0.35 K
0.35 K
7.3 ± 3.5
48.1 %
The uncertainties on the temperature are reasonable values, comparable to the
uncertainties from the thermocouple's measurements.
Indeed, the heat loss coecient has shown an incredibly high uncertainty, due
to the assumption made and already explained. However, there is a dierence
between the modules: the last one showed half the uncertainty compared to
the rst three modules. This is due to the volume ow rate applied on the
test facility during the hot stable period: the Module 2 is characterized by a
relatively low volume ow rate during the charging phase and the stable period
with hot temperatures (6.9 l/min), while the other modules worked with values
around 21 l/min. It was already mentioned that low volume ow rate could help
in the accuracy of the heat loss coecient and it has been proved. However, the
low level of accuracy on the results in still signicant for all the four modules,
causing imprecise results on the energy storage capacity of the heat storage
system.
==PAGE:97==
5.5 Accuracy Analysis of the Measurements
81
The accuracy on the power has been also assessed with the nal equation 5.13.
s(P) = P·
shs(ρ)
ρ
i2
+
hs(Cp)
Cp
i2
+
hs(V )
V
i2
+
sh s(Ti)
Ti −To
i2
+
h s(To)
To −Ti
i2
(5.13)
The evaluation of the accuracy on the power has been developed only on the
important periods, which values are signicant for the cycles.
Figure 5.47 represents the relative uncertainty during the charging period of
the Module 1*. The rst period of charging is characterized by around 10 % of
uncertainty on the results, which is an acceptable value. The more the charging
power decreased, the more the relative uncertainty increased, which means that
certain periods are characterized by less accurate results.
Figure 5.47: Relative uncertainty and respective charging power as a function
of time during the 6th cycle Module 1*, containing SAT, CMC
and graphite.
However, these periods with higher uncertainty are the less important concern-
ing the aim of investigating the thermal performances, because the power is
decreasing to zero. The last stage of charging is characterized by an uncertainty
about 40%. In the other modules, during charging, the situations are very sim-
ilar, with slightly dierent upper and lower bounds. The module containing
the oil had an almost equal trend compared to Figure 5.47. Module 1 had a
constant 15 % of uncertainty for the majority of the time, to nally increase to
30 % while the module containing only CMC - Module 2 - is characterized by a
slow linear increase from 5 % to 20 %. The graphs are located in Appendix A.
==PAGE:98==
82
Results
Figure 5.48: Relative uncertainty and respective discharging power as a func-
tion of time during the 7th cycle Module 1**, containing SAT,
CMC, graphite and oil.
The discharging of the sensible heat is characterized usually in the rst period
by a high accuracy, with relatives uncertainties around 2 %, increasing expo-
nentially while the power decreases to reach around 20 % at the end of the
process.
Figure 5.48 represents the relative uncertainty for the Module 1**.
The remaining graphs are shown in Appendix A.
Figure 5.49: Relative uncertainty and respective discharging power after the
activation of the supercooled uid, as a function of time. It is
the 7th cycle Module 1**, containing SAT, CMC, graphite and
oil.
==PAGE:99==
5.6 Summarizing the Cycles
83
After the activation of the supercooled PCM, the uncertainty on the results is
around 5% in each case, and it followed the same exponential increase until it
reached around 20 %, as shown in Figure 5.49. Again, the rest of the graphs
are included in Appendix A.
The accuracy analysis has shown that there is a problem on the uncertainties,
mainly from the heat loss coecient but also from the power: they can explain
why the energy content of the modules have presented values which are not
exactly coherent. It is important also that the uncertainty on the power had
low values during the most inuencing period of charging, discharging and after
activation. It means the results are still reliable. It is therefore important to
take these conclusions into consideration when analysing and comparing the
thermal performances of the developed modules.
5.6
Summarizing the Cycles
In the previous sections one cycle for each module has been presented and anal-
ysed in detail. However each module underwent several cycles and the mea-
surements collected were all investigated in order to have a full overview about
the modules' operation and performances. The results were then summarized
in Table 5.6, Table 5.7, Table 5.8 and Table 5.9.
The rst table summarizes the results on the Module 1, that represented the
application of the extra water principle. The module underwent 12 dierent
cycles: the rst three cycle have shown diculties in reaching a stable super-
cooling condition, because of spontaneous activation of the salt water mixture,
while during the fourth cycle the module experienced the rst stable supercool-
ing period that lasted 15 hours.
Particular attention was given on the sixth cycle, which represented the rst
experience of the activation through the CO2 tank system after a long period
of stable supercooling that lasted for around six days. This cycle released the
maximum amount of stored heat after the activation, for the module investi-
gated: 45 MJ. However, the amount of latent heat is lower than the total value
because the nal temperature was lower than the initial one, so there was a part
of sensible heat from the solid phase.
The seventh cycle gave good results in terms of supercooling. Anyway, the sta-
bility of supercooling has not been signicantly satised for the module: apart
for the last cycle in which the module underwent again a long stable super-
cooling without facing activation, the spontaneous triggering of crystallization
happened often, suggesting the necessity of solving the issue through the use of
==PAGE:100==
84
Results
additives that help the material on being stabler.
The thermal performance in terms of stored heat of the module can be aected
by the number of cycles the module underwent, especially in case of incongruent
melting. It happens if a layer of liquid is formed on top of the phase change
material, leaving part of the storage material deactivated in the transformation.
The extra water principle seemed working from this point of view: the highest
value from the tenth cycle is 104 MJ. The last and twelfth cycle, after the usual
ve hours of charging, reached an energy content higher then the seventh cycle
of 98 MJ. The two cycles are comparable: even if they have worked in similar
but not same range of temperatures, they worked with analogous volume ow
rates.
It has been noticed that two cycle, the 9th and the 11th have stored only 57 MJ,
but it is due to charging immediately after activation without discharge of the
stored latent heat, which means it was still stored inside the PCM.
The eleventh cycle has been run in a way to reach the hot stable period for a
very short period of time without giving the storage temperature the possibility
to stabilize to hot temperature. Stable supercooling was not faced even if the
test facility applied a long period of low temperatures.
Regarding the heat loss coecients, the module kept a stability around 8 W/K.
The heat loss was also listed in Table 5.6: the highest amounts were from cycles
that underwent a passive discharge. It has been noticed also that the highest
share of losses are coming from the charging phase: when only activation or
active discharging was faced in a cycle, the heat losses were very low.
The second module summarised was containing Sodium Acetate Trihydrate
with 1w % of CMC and 2w % of graphite as agents to prevent the phase sep-
aration and to increase the thermal conductivity. The module experienced 10
dierent cycles, as shown in Table 5.7.
The rst four cycles have never faced a stable supercooling and the activation
was always happening spontaneously during the discharge phase.
It has been noticed that the activation had often taken place on the front part
of the module. The pipe which connects the module with the expansion bag
was positioned close to where crystallization started. The expansion bag had
the function of allowing the sodium acetate trihydrate to expand without pres-
sure changes inside the chamber. However, the pipe connection was positioned
without being in contact with the salt material but there was a layer of air
between the PCM and the junction. It was possible that some dust was present
in the air and it reacted with the salt uid on the contact surface, working as
triggering source. Furthermore, if during an expansion or crystallization, one or
more seed crystals sat on the internal walls of the chamber, it is possible that
in a second moment they entered in contact with the PCM supercooled uid
triggering solidication.
==PAGE:101==
5.6 Summarizing the Cycles
85
Table 5.6: Summarizing of cycles on Module 1: SAT + water.
Cycle
Flow rate
Power/
Temp
Energy
Discharged
Heat Loss
Heat
Supercooling
Energy
Temp
Comments
ch./disch./
temperature
interval -
Stored
Energy
coe.
Loss
and
discharged after
interval - after
activ. [l/min]
setting
Charg.
[MJ]
[MJ]
[W/K]
[MJ]
activation
activ. [MJ]
activation
1
22.0 / 5.9 / 0
9 kW / 90 ◦C
23.1 ◦C - 85.9 ◦C
94
71
8.0
31
Activated
sponta-
neously
3
14 ◦C - 44.1 ◦C
Charge
-
Active
dis-
charge - very low stor-
age
temperature
after
discharging - activation
without ow rate.
2
4.1 / 15.6 (0) / 15.6
9 kW / 92 ◦C
30.9 ◦C - 88.0 ◦C
90
71
10.2
60
Activated
sponta-
neously - no stable
supercooling
27
33.1 ◦C - 32.8 ◦C
Charge
-
Active
dis-
charge
-
high
uctua-
tions of the heat loss co-
ecient.
3
4.0 / 14.2 / 14.2
3 kW / 92 ◦C
52.5 ◦C - 84.7 ◦C
71
47
9.8
144
Activated
sponta-
neously - no stable
supercooling
45
32 ◦C - 23.9 ◦C
Charge started from 54
◦C - Active discharge -
Activation started dur-
ing discharging.
4a
21.6 / - / -
3 kW / 94 ◦C
24.0 ◦C - 90.4 ◦C
97
-
8.0
34
-
-
-
Charging phase only.
4b
- / 15.2 (0) / -
na
-
-
60
-
2.1
Stable
supercool-
ing - no activation
-
-
Discharging phase only.
5
- / 3.5 / 3
na
-
-
46
8.8
15
Activated
spon-
taneously
after
stable
supercool-
ing period
9
31.3 ◦C - 53 ◦C
Started from stable hot
temperature then active
discharging.
6a
21.5 / 3.5 / -
6 kW / 94 ◦C
26.5 ◦C - 90.5 ◦C
95
61
8.3
41
Long stable super-
cooling without ac-
tivation
-
-
Started
with
discharg-
ing
and
then
charge
again.
6b
- / - / 3.7
na
-
-
-
-
4
Activation
with
CO2 tank
45
28.7 ◦C - 20.1 ◦C
Discharge of the stored
latent heat
7
21.3 / 3.8 / 3.8
6 kW / 94 ◦C
24.3 ◦C - 90.6 ◦C
94
38
8.0
61
Stable
supercool-
ing
-
Activation
with CO2 tank
38
26.4 ◦C - 26.3 ◦C
Charge
-
Active
dis-
charge
-
Discharge
of
the stored latent heat.
8
21.3 / 0.2 - 0 / 0
6 kW / 94 ◦C
26.3 ◦C - 90.6 ◦C
95
-
7.8
86
Activated
sponta-
neously
-
-
Charge with high ow -
Passive discharge.
9
21.3 / 0 / -
9 kW / 96 ◦C
53.2 ◦C - 92.1 ◦C
58
-
8.4
89
No
activation
no
stable supercooling
-
-
Charge with high ow
from
just
activated
-
Passive discharge.
10
21.3 / 0 / 0
na / 96 ◦C
25.3 ◦C - 92.6 ◦C
104
-
7.9
130
No
stable
super-
cooling - activated
spontaneously
-
-
Active
discharge
after
spontaneous
activation
- Charge - Passive dis-
charge
11
21.3 / 0 / 0
na / 96 ◦C
53.8 ◦C - 92.3 ◦C
57
-
7.9
123
No
stable
super-
cooling - activated
spontaneously
-
-
Charge
after
spon-
taneous
activation
-
Passive
discharge
-
short
charging:
no
supercooling.
12
21.3 / 4 / -
9 kW / 96 ◦C
27.5 ◦C - 92.2 ◦C
98
55
8.0
36
Long stable super-
cooling without ac-
tivation
-
-
Charge
(not
stable
before
starting)-
Dis-
charge.
==PAGE:102==
86
Results
The second module have gained an improvement in terms of heat content com-
pared with the rst module: the stored energy has been higher throughout the
cycles. The minimum amount of stored energy was 98 MJ, which is larger than
the majority of the rst module amounts. The highest amount of energy stored
was 105 MJ.
After 10 cycles the energy stored was decreased by 6.4 % from the maximum
reached during the fourth cycle. Nevertheless, the last cycle has been working
in a range of temperature dierent from the fourth, as shown in the Table 5.7,
which could also explain part of the decrease.
Even if there was a decrease in storage capacity, the more cycles were run, the
more stable supercooling was experienced. However, activation have been al-
ways spontaneous, again on the front part of the module: the CO2 tank system
has never been applied on this module.
The module has demonstrated a very stable heat loss coecient throughout the
cycles, with an average slightly higher than the rst module: 8.5 W/K. The
absolute value then got an increase by 6 % from the average of the rst module.
The heat losses were incredibly high during the eighth cycle.
The last two cycles were run trying to investigate again the eect of the hot
stable period on the supercooling condition: the last cycle, which had not being
stabilized to hot temperature, has faced supercooling but the activation hap-
pened again spontaneously.
The seventh cycle, which discharged 45 MJ of energy after activation, released
only latent heat. In the previous module, the seventh cycle, which has a com-
parable temperature level, discharged 38 MJ, a reduction of 15.7 %.
The evaluation of the third module gave the possibility to evaluate the addition
of paran oil as additive to the previous mixture of SAT, CMC and graphite,
to increase the heat transfer. The module experienced 10 cycles, as shown in
Table 5.8.
The storage capacity of this combination of materials as PCM gave good results,
with a peak of 105 MJ stored with high ow rate (21.1 l/min).
The last cycles showed a reduction by 42%: a rst approach to the results sug-
gested a problem of cycling stability, but it is actually due to the fact that the
latent heat gained into the PCM storage module during the cycle 8, has never
been discharged and the following charging phases are consisting in only sensible
heat.
The module gained in terms of storage capacity absolute values: the maximum
amount of stored heat is 105 MJ, during the third cycle, which represents a small
increase of 0.6 % from the previous module and a more signicant improvement
of 8.1% from the salt water mixture's best result. However, the module without
oil have reached higher values in more cycle compared to the module with oil.
==PAGE:103==
5.6 Summarizing the Cycles
87
Table 5.7: Summarizing of cycles on Module 1*: SAT + CMC + Graphite.
Cycle
Flow rate
Power/
Temp
Energy
Discharged
Heat Loss
Heat
Supercooling
Energy
Temp
Comments
ch./disch./
temperature
interval -
Stored
Energy
coe.
Loss
and
discharged after
interval - after
activ. [l/min]
setting
Charg.
[MJ]
[MJ]
[W/K]
[MJ]
activation
activ. [MJ]
activation
1
21.0 / 3.8 / 3.8
9 kW / 96 ◦C
22.5 ◦C - 91.7 ◦C
103
59
8.6
53
Activated
sponta-
neously - no stable
supercooling
46
31.3 ◦C - 21 ◦C
Charge
-
Active
dis-
charge - Activation dur-
ing discharge from front
right
2
21.2 / 4.2 / 4.2
9 kW / 96 ◦C
21.1 ◦C - 92.2 ◦C
104
64
8.5
60
Activated
sponta-
neously - no stable
supercooling
45
21.8 ◦C - 20.6 ◦C
Charge
-
Active
dis-
charge
-
Activation
from the front
3
21.3 / 2.2 / 2.2
9 kW / 96 ◦C
21.3 ◦C - 92.4 ◦C
105
65
8.4
53
No activation - no
supercooling
45
24.1 ◦C - 18.2 ◦C
Charge
-
Active
dis-
charge
-
Activation
started
during
dis-
charging.
4a
21.3 / - / -
9 kW / 96 ◦C
22.0 ◦C - 92.2 ◦C
104
-
8.5
41
-
-
-
Charging phase and sta-
ble
period
with
hot
temperature.
4b
- / 1.1 / 1.1
na / 96 ◦C
-
-
62
-
20
Activated
sponta-
neously - no stable
supercooling
45
24.3 ◦C - 22.9 ◦C
Discharging
phase
and
spontaneous
activation
from the front.
5
21.3 / 4.4 / -
na / 96 ◦C
22.8 ◦C - 92.3 ◦C
104
57
8.7
59
Stable
super-
cooling
without
activation
-
-
Charge and active dis-
charge
6
21.3 / 2.3 / 0
na / 96 ◦C
24.7 ◦C - 92.3 ◦C
103
62
8.7
100
Stable
supercool-
ing
with
sponta-
neous activation
-
-
Charge and active dis-
charge
-
spontaneous
activation
from
front
left
side
without
ow
rate.
7
- / 1.6 / 1.6
na / 96 ◦C
-
-
61
-
28
Stable
supercool-
ing
with
sponta-
neous activation
44
24.8 ◦C - 24.9 ◦C
Discharge
phase
and
spontaneous
activation
from front left side.
8
21.3 / 2.1 / 0
na / 98 ◦C
24.9 ◦C - 94.3 ◦C
104
64
8.6
175
Stable
supercool-
ing
for
2
days
then
spontaneous
activation
-
-
Charge
-
Active
dis-
charge - No discharge of
the
stored
latent
heat
- activation from front
right.
9
21.2 / 3.5 / 3.5
na / 98 ◦C
25.4 ◦C - 94.2 ◦C
103
28
8.5
43
Activated
sponta-
neously - no stable
supercooling
51
41.8 ◦C - 23.3 ◦C
Charge
-
Active
dis-
charge
-
Activation
from front right side -
hot
period:
no
super-
cooling.
10
21.2 / 3.8 (0) / 10.3
3 kW / 98 ◦C
24.1 ◦C - 88.9 ◦C
98
58
8.5 from cycle 9
65
Stable
supercool-
ing
with
sponta-
neous activation
52
23.6 ◦C - 31.1 ◦C
Charge - Partly active
discharge
-
Activation
from the front and ac-
tive discharge of part of
the
stored
latent
heat
- no hot stable period:
yes supercooling.
==PAGE:104==
88
Results
The general aim for the use of oil is to increase the heat exchange capacity rate
and try to stabilize the supercooling. The heat transfer did not seem to improve
much: the heat exchange capacity rate did not signicantly increase.
The supercooling condition was not reached as much as in the case without
paran oil: the eighth and ninth cycles are the only one that have reached a
stable supercooling without showing any spontaneous crystallization. The sixth
cycle have already registered a lower energy storage capacity but it was due to
the reduced maximum temperature in which the storage material was working.
The heat loss coecient showed an average value of 8.4 W/K, very similar to
the previous modules, but with a wider range of values.
The Module 2 have been lled and investigated with only one storage material,
consisting in SAT with the addition of 1 w% of CMC. The module have been
tested for 7 entire cycle, which have been distributed in a longer period of time
compared to the other three modules.
This Module has shown the best results in terms of storage capacity, reaching
values close or above 110 MJ in the majority of the cycles.
The most interesting cycle in terms of stability of supercooling is the last one:
the module has been charged at the end of September and the activation took
place at the beginning of December, after a long period of stable supercooling.
The seventh cycle gave also good results in terms of storage capacity: 115 MJ
have been stored. This result distanced itself from the other cycles and also from
the other modules: here the last cycle was the one that registered the highest
amount of energy stored (the third one underwent two charging phases without
activation), between all the four modules.
The seventh cycle was the only one for the module that recorded a very long
stable supercooled period, followed by the discharge of 71 MJ of pure latent
heat when the supercooled uid was activated using the boiling CO2. In the
other cycles the supercooling have never been experienced.
Finally, it can be said that the Module 2 should have been tested few more
cycles in order to have the whole picture of it.
==PAGE:105==
5.6 Summarizing the Cycles
89
Table 5.8: Summarizing of cycles on Module 1**: SAT + CMC + Graphite + Oil.
Cycle
Flow rate
Power/
Temp
Energy
Discharged
Heat Loss
Heat
Supercooling
Energy
Temp
Comments
ch./disch./
temperature
interval -
Stored
Energy
coe.
Loss
and
discharged after
interval - after
activ. [l/min]
setting
Charg.
[MJ]
[MJ]
[W/K]
[MJ]
activation
activ. [MJ]
activation
1a
21.1 / 4.0 /-
9 kW / 96 ◦C
23.3 ◦C - 92.3 ◦C
103
58
8.4
54
Reached stable su-
percooling without
activation
-
-
Charge
-
Active
dis-
charge.
1b
- / - / 4 (and slowly decrease)
9 kW / 96 ◦C
-
-
-
-
-
Activated
with
CO2 tank
49
38.3 ◦C - 19.3 ◦C
Active discharge of the
stored latent heat
2
21.3 / 4.2 / 4.2
9 kW / 94 ◦C
23.5 ◦C - 90.4 ◦C
103
107
8.4
70
Activated
sponta-
neously - no stable
supercooling
64
38.3 ◦C - 19.3 ◦C
Charge
-
Active
dis-
charge
-
Activation
started
during
dis-
charging then ow rate
to
zero
and
long
cold
period.
3
21.1 / 0.2-3.6 / 3.6
9 kW / 94 ◦C
19.3 ◦C - 90.3 ◦C
105
24
8.6
66
Activated
sponta-
neously - no stable
supercooling
54
35.3 ◦C - 26.2 ◦C
Charging - First period
of discharge with very
low
ow
rate
then
increased.
Activation
during discharging and
partial
discharge
of
stored latent heat.
4
21.3 / 4.2 / 4.2
9 kW / 94 ◦C
23.1 ◦C - 90.4 ◦C
103
55
8.4
64
Activated
sponta-
neously - no stable
supercooling
56
36.9 ◦C - 22.6 ◦C
Charge
-
Active
dis-
charge - Activation dur-
ing discharging and to-
tal
discharge
of
latent
heat
5
21.3 / 4 / 4
9 kW / 80 ◦C
22.5 ◦C - 76.5 ◦C
91
35
7.8
46
Activated
sponta-
neously - no stable
supercooling
58
42.7 ◦C - 25 ◦C
Charge
-
Active
dis-
charge - Activation dur-
ing discharging and to-
tal
discharge
of
latent
heat
6
21.4 / 0.1 / 0.1
9 kW / 75 ◦C
24.7 ◦C - 70.7 ◦C
85
91
7.9
85
Activated
sponta-
neously - no stable
supercooling
81
54.7 ◦C - 21.8 ◦C
Charge and passive dis-
charge
(very
low
ow
rate) - Charge and ac-
tive discharge.
Activa-
tion during discharging
and
total
discharge
of
latent heat.
7
21.4 / 4 / 4
9 kW / 94 ◦C
21.2 ◦C - 89.5 ◦C
104
62
8.6
30
Activated
sponta-
neously - no stable
supercooling
46
25 ◦C - 24.4 ◦C
Discharge
phase
and
spontaneous
activation
from front left side.
8
21.3 / 4.7 / -
9 kW / 94 ◦C
21.9 ◦C - 90.2 ◦C
103
61
8.4
32
Stable
super-
cooling
without
activation
-
-
Charge and active dis-
charge. Reached stabil-
ity.
9
21.2 / 4.4 / -
9 kW / 94 ◦C
23.5 ◦C - 90.3 ◦C
60
61
8.5
32
Stable
super-
cooling
without
activation
-
-
Charge and active dis-
charge. Reached stabil-
ity.
10
21.2 / 11.8 / 11.8
9 kW / 94 ◦C
21 ◦C - 90.5 ◦C
63
60
8.5
39
Activated
sponta-
neously - no stable
supercooling
43
34.4 ◦C - 52.2 ◦C
Charge
-
Active
dis-
charge - Activation dur-
ing discharge.
==PAGE:106==
90
Results
Table 5.9: Summarizing of cycles on Module 2: SAT + CMC.
Cycle
Flow rate
Power/
Temp
Energy
Discharged
Heat Loss
Heat
Supercooling
Energy
Temp
Comments
ch./disch./
temperature
interval -
Stored
Energy
coe.
Loss
and
discharged after
interval - after
activ. [l/min]
setting
Charg.
[MJ]
[MJ]
[W/K]
[MJ]
activation
activ. [MJ]
activation
1
3.5 / 1.9 / 1.9
3 kW / 94 ◦C
24.3 ◦C - 86.9 ◦C
101
46
7.7
111
Spontaneous
acti-
vation without su-
percooling
64
45.3 ◦C - 30.7 ◦C
Initial
stable
tempera-
ture
period
around
50
◦C.
Then charge,
ac-
tive discharge and dis-
charge of latent heat.
2
6.9 / 2.3 / 2.3
3 kW / 94 ◦C
25.3 ◦C - 89.2 ◦C
109
63
7.3
158
Activated
with
CO2
tank
-
no
supercooling
54
26.5 ◦C - 25.3 ◦C
Charge,
active
dis-
charge
and
trigger
crystallization.
3
21.2 / 3.7 / -
6 kW / 94 ◦C
25.2 ◦C - 90.7 ◦C
187
-
7.3
94
Stable
super-
cooling
without
activation
-
-
Charging
and
active
discharging
-
stable
supercooling
and
new
charging phase.
4
- / 3.8 / 3.8
na
-
-
35
-
6
Activated
sponta-
neously
43
na - 25.1 ◦C
Start front the activa-
tion and then discharge
the
module
-
there
is
a period of passive dis-
charge.
5a
21.4 / - / -
6 kW / 94 ◦C
25.1 ◦C - 90.5 ◦C
113
-
6.8
33
No Activation
-
-
Only
charging
high
ow.
5b
- / - / 3.9
na / 96 ◦C
-
-
-
-
7
Activated
with
CO2 tank - no sta-
ble supercooling
55
28.8 ◦C - 26.3 ◦C
Only activation and dis-
charge.
6a
21.2 / 4.2 / -
9 kW / 96 ◦C
26.2 ◦C - 92.4 ◦C
114
66
6.8
117
No
activation,
al-
most stable super-
cooling
-
-
Charge and active dis-
charge.
6b
- / - / 4
na / 96 ◦C
-
-
-
-
9
Activation
with
CO2
55
23.7 ◦C - 24.4 ◦C
Only activation and dis-
charge
7a
21.1 / - / -
9 kW / 96 ◦C
24.3 ◦C - 92.6 ◦C
114
-
7.3
32
No activation
-
-
Only charging with sta-
ble
period
with
hot
temperature.
7b
- / - / 3.9
na / 98 ◦C
-
-
-
-
29
Activation
af-
ter
long
stable
supercooling
70
22.5 ◦C - 22.6 ◦C
Only activation and dis-
charge.
==PAGE:107==
5.7 Comparison with the Theoretical Behaviour
91
5.7
Comparison with the Theoretical Behaviour
The theory behind the heat of fusion have been explained in section 2.4. It has
been then applied to the four cycles described in the previous sections. The
results are shown in Table 5.10.
The rst general assessment came from the characteristic of each measurement
results of being higher then the theoretical values. The general explanation that
can be applied to the whole set of results is regarding the heat loss coecient,
which has been determined through the assumption of being constant during
each dierent cycle while it is actually a temperature-dependent factor. It seems
reasonable to assess that this method gave generally a more optimistic percep-
tion of the gained performances, compared with the theoretical predictions.
Moreover, the theoretical latent heat of SAT, calculate with the Araki's correla-
tions [13], gave a value of 246 kJ/kg, while the majority of the relevant literature
has stated a value of 265 kJ/kg.
The charged energy have never reached higher discordance than 7.4 % with the
theory, while the discharged heat have registered even 15.2 % of increase, which
is the highest discordance observed. The energy from the activation of the su-
percooled uid have a range of results that uctuates between 2.9% and 18.8%.
Concluding, the results from measurements have presented acceptable values
after the comparison with the theoretical approach: it is known that both the
theory and the experimental method have some constraints due to assumptions
that have been made which distanced the prediction from the real performances.
Table 5.10: Results from the comparison between the measurements and the
theoretical behaviour.
Module
Echarge
%
Edisch
%
Esuperc
%
[MJ]
[MJ]
[MJ]
1
Meas.
94
+7.4 %
58
+6.1 %
38
+18.8%
Theory
88
55
32
1*
Meas.
103
+4.6%
62
+9.3%
-
-
Theory
98
56
-
1**
Meas.
104
+5.5%
63
+15.2%
46
+ 2.9%
Theory
98
53
45
2
Meas.
109
+5.4%
63
+10.0%
54
+15.1%
Theory
103
57
46
==PAGE:108==
92
Results
5.8
Comparison between the Modules
The thermal performances analysis of the four dierent modules have produced
a wide amount of results. It is important to nally compare them, trying to
give a nal assessment on which could be the optimal solution.
Regarding the heat storage capacity of the modules, the best range of values
has been obtained by the module that has been lled with SAT and 1w% of
CMC, with a minimum of 101 MJ and a maximum of 115 MJ of stored energy.
The module which has investigated the extra water principle has resulted in the
worst thermal performances from the heat storage capacity point of view, while
the two remaining modules have shown similar outcomes, with lower absolute
values compared to the Module 2 (SAT + CMC) but better than the module
without addition of agents. It can be concluded that the addiction of graphite
and oil have decreased the storage capacity performances.
No module has shown high depreciation of the heat content throughout the
cycles, which gave positive feedback to both the extra water principle and the
addition of CMC ad thickener as solutions to the phase separation phenomenon.
The heat exchange capacity rate has been analysed and it has been noticed a
similar trend in the four modules. The charging phases have been characterized
by values with a general average of 200-220 W/K, except for the module that
has used oil, that registered a mean value slightly lower, around 150 W/K.
The rst-discharging phases presented initial values around 400 W/K and de-
creased from it during the process. The module that has investigated SAT +
CMC + graphite has reached a maximum value of 300 W/K, which was the
lowest in this case. These results for graphite and oil were not expected since
these two additives were used to increase the heat exchange capacity rate and
improve the heat transfer.
The discharging after the activation of the supercooled uid showed the highest
heat exchange capacity rate value in the Module 1, with a salt water mixture
as PCM, of 350 W/K. The module with oil was the second highest value, with
238 W/K as a peak, while the Module 2 (SAT + CMC) had 227 W/K. These
are the expected outcome: the use of CMC decreased the HECR compared to
the salt water mixture but the oil helped in having better performances.
Therefore, all the four modules have typical heat exchange capacity rate be-
tween 200 W/K and 400 W/K.
The last comparison regards the ability of facing a stable supercooling condi-
tion.
It is clear after the analysis that the stable supercooling is still the most di-
cult requirement to full in case of a Latent Heat Thermal Energy Storage. The
==PAGE:109==
5.8 Comparison between the Modules
93
modules analysed have faced supercooling in few cycles. In case of the module
using SAT with CMC and graphite, the CO2 activation system has never been
used to trigger crystallization because it was always spontaneous in the cases
the supercooling was reached. The use of oil improved the stability compared
to the module without, facing few times a stable supercooling but still with
spontaneous activation.
Interesting results has been obtained from Module 2, testing SAT and CMC:
a supercooling stable condition has been prolonged from the end to September
to the beginning of December, when it was activated and discharged of 71 MJ,
which was the highest amount discharged after activation.
It can be conclude that the module testing sodium acetate trihydrate with the
addition of CMC has resulted in some good performances which suggested as
the best solution. However, the module still presented some problem regard-
ing supercooling and it was tested for a low number of cycles. Moreover, the
addition of graphite and then oil in the PCM have not resulted in drastically
worst performances compared to it, which means they cannot be excluded, but
more investigation is needed in terms of testing the modules and combination
of substances to reach an optimal solution.
==PAGE:110==
94
Results
==PAGE:111==
Chapter 6
Economic Analysis
The thermal performances of the Latent Heat Thermal Energy storage have
been assessed and the results have been shown and analysed in the previous
chapter. However, the feasibility of a developing technology is not assessed only
through such an investigation but it requires wider boundaries, including also
other system's aspects.
The economic analysis of the investigated technology represents a critical point
that deserves an evaluation, in a way also to actualize the project on the actual
market conditions.
A TES system introduces a possibility of increasing the eciency of the thermal
facilities, actively contributing on improving the energy-saving ability of the
thermal systems on the market.
The concept of energy-saving, particularly important for this eld of studies, is
respected and improved by the use of Thermal Energy Storages, which results
in a range of benets from an economic perspective. TES is the best solution in
terms of lling the mismatching between supply and demand of thermal energy:
it contributes in meeting the society's needs in an ecient and sustainable way
[25].
However, TES is a technology that has several methods of application, the
main one could be identied in the distinction between a diurnal and a seasonal
storage. A daily-based TES is characterised by some advantages such as low
capital investment and energy losses and smaller units which allows for the
==PAGE:112==
96
Economic Analysis
possibility of o-site manufacturing. In case of a seasonal storage, it requires a
more careful analysis, because it may require a costly distribution network in
case of multi-dwellings application or a higher initial investment due to the use
of particular materials and a more complicated system conguration compared
to the diurnal storage [25].
The studied case is a latent heat TES connected to a solar system, which optimal
case is represented by minimizing the cost of the nal delivered energy, once the
backup and storage systems are installed. The costs of the equipments may be
found from manufacturers.
To evaluate the entire system it is useful to analyse a realistic case in which a
solar combi-system with a PCM storage is involved, through a TRNSYS model.
In this way, it is possible to simulate and analyse the system considering a
realistic heat demand that has to be fullled, the solar collector area involved,
the solar fraction that is desired to gain, including the climatic conditions with
which the system is working.
The aim is to assess the optimal solution in terms of solar collector area, number
of modules installed and - depending also on the heat exchange capacity rate -
to evaluate the best combination and then the costs involved.
The TRNSYS model and results used are apprehended from the study of Mark
Dannemand at al. in [55]. Following this, a cost analysis is carried out.
6.1
Introduction to the TRNSYS model
In order to include the cost analysis it is crucial to understand the previous
work from Dannemand [55] and relate it to the present work.
The system design considered is shown in Figure 6.1.
Figure 6.1: Diagram of TRNSYS model for the solar combi system [55].
==PAGE:113==
6.1 Introduction to the TRNSYS model
97
The solar collectors were at plate collectors with specic characteristics, shown
in Table 6.1. The eective heat loss coecient for both the PCM storage and
the DHW tank was equal to 0.4 W/m2K2. In the solar collector loop water was
circulating as heat transfer uid with a ow rate set to 1800 kg/h. The heat
exchange capacity rate was aected by the heat exchanger design and the PCM
properties: it has been varied between 200 and 400 W/K hence, the range that
agrees with the results found in Chapter 5.
Each PCM storage module with sodium acetate trihydrate had a volume of 150
l. The PCM heat storage volume was divided in smaller sub sections in a way
to activate a part of the total storage volume when it was needed and saving
the other supercooled sub-volumes for later use.
The system was equipped with a Domestic Hot Water (DHW) tank of 180 l,
which was installed to meet the demand of the hot water draw os making it
easier to discharge with higher power from the tank instead directly from the
PCM storage.
Table 6.1: Characteristics of the simulated solar collectors.
Solar collector
η0
a1 [W/m2K] a2 [W/m2K2] Orientation Collector Tilt
Flat plate
0.82
2.44
0.005
South
75◦
The simulated DHW demand was based on a daily consumption of 99 l/day,
distributed as 33 l at 7 am, 12 am and 6 pm. As required from the Danish
standard, the hot DHW temperature was set to 50 ◦C, while the cold tempera-
ture was 10 ◦C. The result was an annual DHW energy consumption equal to
1677 kWh. When solar energy was available there were two possibilities: the
energy could be used to charge the PCM storage or the solar collector loop can
be connected to the demand loop and used to either charge the DHW tank or
meet the space heating demand.
The space heating demand was evaluated on hourly basis considering a low
energy house which fullled the passive house standard simulated in a Danish
climate. The space heating system is a low temperature system with a heating
demand of 2008 kWh per year [55]
The main aim of the simulation was to achieve 80 % solar fraction for the combi-
system. The solar fraction is dened as the energy supplied by the solar part of
the system on the total system load, as shown in equation 6.1 [7].
SF = 1 −
Qaux
QDHW + Qsph
(6.1)
where Qaux is the energy provided by the auxiliary system, QDHW is the energy
==PAGE:114==
98
Economic Analysis
used for the domestic hot water demand and Qsph is the energy used for the
space heating.
Dannemand et al. have developed a sensitivity analysis on several parameters
but the interesting results for the cost analysis is regarding the possibilities of
combination of solar collector area and number of modules. The aim is to reach
80 % of solar fraction, varying the heat exchange capacity rate from 250 W/K
and 400 W/K. The upper and lower bounds of the range of the heat exchange
capacity rate have been investigated. The results from [55] on which it is going
to implement the analysis of the cost are shown in Figure 6.2 and listed in Table
6.2.
Figure 6.2: Results from the optimization on the system using 80 % of solar
fraction [55]
Table 6.2: Results from the sensitivity analysis with 80 % of solar fraction,
from [55].
Case
HECR
Number of PCM
Solar Collector Area
[W/K]
modules
[m2]
1
400
4
60
2
400
5
45
3
400
6
40
4
400
7
36
5
400
11
30
6
250
5
70
7
250
6
55
8
250
8
45
9
250
14
36
10a
250
6
36
aExtra case: double-size module with a volume of 300 l.
==PAGE:115==
6.2 Costs' Analysis
99
6.2
Costs' Analysis
The general method used to assess the costs of a project consists in dividing the
costs between the capital costs, which are the initial xed cost for equipments
and components, and the operational costs, which consists in the maintenance,
the installation cost and all the costs which are protracted during the lifetime
of the system. In this case, the operational costs are neglected, since it is more
signicant for the actual analysis to understand the initial investment costs in-
volved in a LHTES.
6.2.1
Description of the Real System's Components
The analysis of the costs begun with the denition of the boundaries of the
system. It is possible to dene the system as made by several subsystems that
interact with each other and each of them is made by several components. They
are listed and described separately.
Figure 6.3: Types
and
location
of
valves and expansion ves-
sel in the solar collector
loop [73].
The solar heating system is composed
by the solar collectors and the heat
transfer uid, which is a propylene
glycol - water mixture, which is used
in countries like Denmark where the
cold outdoor temperature can freeze
the heat transfer uid inside the pipe
system.
Then the pipe system con-
nects it to the PCM storage sys-
tem or to the demand loop, in both
cases through heat exchangers.
The
solar collectors' price may vary de-
pending on the choice made from
the wide range of possibilities existing
on the market. Some characteristics
have been provided from the TRN-
SYS model, as the type, which is a
at plate solar collector. It was nally
chosen to give a general average cost
per m2 instead of selecting a specic
solar thermal collector.
==PAGE:116==
100
Economic Analysis
The Danish Energy Agency (DEA), in a report from 2010, has stated that the
cost of solar collectors, pipes included, in 2015 will be 227 e/m2 for solar dis-
trict heating. In 2030 the cost is excepted to decrease to 156 e/m2 (DEA 2010)
[6]. The cost was chosen considered the system to be on the market in the near
future, when the price will decrease. Furthermore, a small system has higher
costs per m2 compared to a solar district heating plant and it is not including
pipes, which have been included separately. The cost considered reasonable is
250 e/m2. Apart from the solar collector, the solar heating system is equipped
with a pump in the solar collector loop, an expansion vessel, and several dier-
ent valves, which are presented in Figure 6.3. Moreover, a control system and
an estimation of 20 m of pipes are considered. In Table 6.3 the costs are shown.
The components of the PCM storage system taken into consideration in the
costs' analysis are the modules, the phase change materials involved, the acti-
vation system, the expansion tank, estimated 30 l of volume and one valve and
3 m of pipes for each module. There are two modules assessed: a small version,
with a volume of 150 l, with a cost of 1500 e, and a double-size module, 300
l of volume and 2500 e. The cost of the heat exchangers is assumed included
in these prices. Only one motorized valve has been considered for each module
because the perspective is to have a system with one only heat exchanger in-
stead of two. All the components which are part of the PCM storage system
change in quantity with the number of modules installed, so the choice of the
equipments has to be addressed carefully because it will considerably aect the
nal costs. The CO2 activation system has been considered through a Polar
Industrial Pipe Freezing Kit (PSIND), which is assumed to be modied accord-
ingly to the system's necessity.
The DHW system is taken into consideration as cost of the DHW tank, which
is the most expensive component of the subsystem, and 20 m of pipes are in-
cluded in the costs' assessment. The selected tank has included in the price the
pressure valves.
The two remaining subsystems are the space heating system and the auxiliary
system, which in terms of costs are not considered since it is an expense that
would be addressed in each case.
==PAGE:117==
6.2 Costs' Analysis
101
Table 6.3: Costs for the PCM heat storage system.
Subsystem
Component
Specications
Cost
Reference
Solar Heating Solar Thermal Collector
-
200 e/m2 [DEA 2010], [6]
System
Pump
CAM 60E
935 e
[Catch Solar]
Plumb Mechanical Package Including a
430 e
[Radiantec Inc.]
Pipes
Copper pipes
3.65 e/m [G&X Metal Product Co.]
Solar Control Package
SH-08V3b
685 e
[Radiantec Inc.]
PCM Heat
Module
150 l
1500 e
[DTU]
Storage
Module
300 l
2500 e
[DTU]
Valve
Motorized Valve ≃60 e
[Honeywell]
Pipes
Copper pipes
3.65 e/m [G&X Metal Product Co.]
Expansion Vessel
Zilmet 35 L
70 e
[Zilmet USA]
SAT
-
0.50 e/kg [DTU]
CMC
-
62.5 e/kg [1]
Graphite
-
1.25 e/kg [4]
Paran Oil
-
1.37 e/kg [2]
CO2 system
PSIND
330 e
[Cranefords.com]
DHW
Tank
all incl.
1735 e
[HotWaterCylinder NZ]
Pipes
Copper pipes
3.65 e/m [G&X Metal Product Co.]
aIncludes drain and ll valve, shut-o valve, Air-eliminator, expansion tank, pressure relief valve,
pressure gauge, pump anges, and one-way valve.
bIncludes dierential with variable speed control, 4 sensors, heat dump valve, high-temp override, and ttings.
6.2.2
Results
The costs' analysis have been nally carried out on ten dierent cases, including
an extra case for a double-size heat storage module. The nal costs for Module
1, which contained only SAT and water, are shown in Figure 6.4, underlining
the share between the heat storage modules and the solar collector loop. The
graphs regarding the other modules are included in Appendix B.
The general trend is particularly aected by the number of modules installed
in the system. The total cost is increasing the more the solar collector area
decrease and the higher number of storage modules are involved. However, the
optimal solution is not represented by the combination with lowest number of
heat storage module and highest solar collector area. The optimal solution is
the second possibility, which consists in ve heat storage modules and 45 m2 of
solar collector area, in case of 400 W/K as heat exchange capacity rate.
It means that, below a certain number of heat storage modules installed - which
is ve or six depending on the heat exchange capacity rate - , the solar collector
area has a higher inuence on the nal cost than the TES system.
Considering similar conditions in terms of combination of solar collector area
and number of heat storage modules, but shifting from a heat exchange capacity
rate of 250 W/K to 400 W/K, the more expensive systems are with lower heat
==PAGE:118==
102
Economic Analysis
Figure 6.4: Final cost for Module 1, containing only SAT and water.
The
total cost is presented showing the share between the dierent
subsystems.
exchange capacity rate.
The lower the heat exchange capacity rate, the more solar collector area is
needed to obtain the 80 % of solar fraction with a certain number of modules.
Two case can be investigated in detail: the case of 5 and 6 PCM modules
installed are investigated for both 250 W/K and 400 W/K. Shifting from the
highest to the lowest HECR value, the area is increasing by 55 % and 37.5 % in
case of 5 and 6 modules installed respectively.
The second evaluation on the cost can be done considering the dierent PCMs:
it has been noticed that the addition of materials which can improve the thermal
performances of the system, did not aect much the nal cost. As predictable,
the lower the total cost, the higher the inuence materials have on the predicted
expenditure. However, the inuence never reaches 1%. The detail of the results
can be seen in Appendix A.
The last case analysed represented the possibility of installing a heat storage
module with a double volume, 300 l. The solar fraction achieved is always 80%
and the case investigated worked with 250 W/K as heat exchange capacity rate.
The case was compared considering the same solar collector area and it resulted
more convenient than the ninth case, which has 14 installed modules of 150 l.
However, in case of having a better heat exchange capacity rate (400 W/K), the
fourth combination - with seven smaller modules - resulted cheaper than the
==PAGE:119==
6.2 Costs' Analysis
103
double-size module possibility.
The most convenient combination has a signicant nal cost of 25 100 e in case
of a salt water mixture as PCM. The three other modules cost about 25 300 e.
The most expensive system recorded an increase from the lowest of 61 % of the
price, reaching a cost around 40 000 e.
==PAGE:120==
104
Economic Analysis
==PAGE:121==
Chapter 7
Sustainability
The Latent Heat Thermal Energy Storage system has been assessed from a
thermal and economic point of views, and yet the analysis is not complete. The
evaluation of a new technology has to include also the impacts on the society and
the environment around it, which are aected by technologies' development.
The main inuential concept regards the sustainability of each improvement
which is applied on the technologies that support the human society. When
energy is then involved, the attention should be paid on the resources of energy
supply that are involved in the society. They have to full some requirements
in order to be in line with the concept of sustainability.
In this Chapter the topic is addressed from the general concept of sustainable
development to the more specic notions about environmental impact. TES is
always related to the discussion; however at the end of the Chapter the present
project is analysed in order to give some quantitative value - apart from the
qualitative - to the evaluation of the system's sustainability.
7.1
Sustainable Development
The concept of "sustainable development" has become a decisive matter in the
society during the 1980s, during which its denition was reported as "a devel-
==PAGE:122==
106
Sustainability
opment that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability
of the future to meet their own needs" [12]. In other terms, the concept of sus-
tainable development refers to something which is capable of being continued
[25].
Moreover, it is important to dene sustainability contextualizing the concept.
Geographically, sustainability could have a global or a local meaning, depend-
ing on area on which the system considered has inuence. An activity can be
locally unsustainable when it aects the local environment in terms of air pollu-
tion or noise level, while it may be globally unsustainable when the impacts on
the society, the environment or the economy, are extended to the entire planet,
aecting the habitability of the world. [25].
As predicted from what just explained, the concept of sustainability or sustain-
able development could be entirely applied when related to the environment, the
society and the economy around it. These components are connected to each
other also in terms of cause-and-eect, which implies that the three of them
have to be considered together.
Concerning the energy eld, which is the relevant topic in this report and also
an important factor when sustainable development is considered, the secure of
supply is also a signicant aspect which has to be considered about the develop-
ment of a society. However, sustainability has here an important role: it refers
to the supply energy sources involved, which should be as sustainable as possi-
ble. Therefore, the equilibrium between sustainability and secure of supply is
the aim that a modern society should set as priority.
Improving the eciency of an energy system is then a way to maximise the
advantages which an energy source provides from utilizing it and in the same
time to minimize the negative eects associated to it [25]. In this way it is also
possible to achieve a longer contribution from the energy source in the energy
system: the availability of the source would last longer if the eciency has im-
proved. The concept of a long-term supply from an energy source is essential
when considering a sustainable choice: it has to be a resource that in long-term
is sustainably available at a reasonable cost, without causing negative impact
on the society [25]. By denition fossil fuels and uranium are not a sustainable
possibility, while sunlight, wind and falling water are renewable and then sus-
tainable in a long-term perspective.
Considering then LHTES, the entire concept just explained is fullled by this
technology, which can be integrated to a solar system, a sustainable and endless
energy source. Moreover, TES increases the eciency of the energy system in
which is installed, again an important concept to be considered sustainable.
==PAGE:123==
7.2 Environmental Impact
107
7.2
Environmental Impact
The main topic that is likely to discuss in this Chapter regards the connection
between the energy system's planning and the eects on the environment. En-
vironmental issues have become a crucial point of discussion in the last decades
from several parts of the society, from the public and the industries to the
governments: the entire society shares the costs and the impacts derived from
pollution.
The environmental impacts have grown drastically due to several factors, in-
cluding also non-energetic causes, as the increase of the world population or the
industrial activities.
The most harmful and known pollutants regard the emissions of SO2, CO, ni-
trogen oxides known as NOx and particulates. Moreover, it is necessary to keep
under control the micro-air pollutants which can be highly damaging in small
doses or also from a global point of view, as CO2 [25]. There are several envi-
ronmental problems which aect dierent areas. The main ones are concerning
the global warming and the climate change, the stratospheric ozone depletion
and the acid rain. Other issues regard the air quality and the air pollutants, as
well as water pollution and land use impact [25].
Recognising the issues is not solving the problem, while nding some potential
solutions bring the discussion to a higher level as critical approach. As already
assessed, the use of renewable energy technologies, as well as the increase of the
eciency of the energy utilization processes, improve the level of sustainability
of an energy system and then reduce the negative environmental impacts. An
improvement of the eciency causes a reduction of energy losses, which repre-
sents a benet from two point of views: the energy input is reduced per unit
output, which means the generated pollutants are also reduced. Secondly, when
a life cycle is assessed, the increase of eciency bring to a reduction of the en-
vironmental impacts through dierent stages of the life cycle [25]. Moreover,
the use of TES technologies results in an environmental benets, which will be
further discussed in the succeeding section. Recycling of materials is also an
important step that helps in the process of decreasing the human inuences on
the environment.
7.3
TES and Sustainability
The benets which TES brings to the thermal energy system are many and
involving several aspects: from the reduction of energy costs to the improve-
ment of the indoor air quality of buildings, then TES increases the exibility of
==PAGE:124==
108
Sustainability
operation and it decreases the equipment size, used also in a more ecient way.
However, the main two advantages from the use of TES are:
• Reduction of fossil fuels use, through increase of eciency or fuel substi-
tution;
• Less emission of pollutants like CO2, NOx, SO2 and CFCs.
The reduction of CO2 emissions have been investigated specically in the UK
and it has been assessed a reduction of 14 % - 46 % of CO2 shifting the elec-
tric load to o-peak periods, through the use of TES [16]. CFCs have been
mentioned because, in a wider range of applications, TES is applied to cooling
systems and it reduces the amount of installed chillers, limiting the use of CFCs.
It is important to evaluate the life cycle of the system analysed, in order to com-
pare the inputs that are required to operate the system compared to the actual
benets obtained as output, contextualizing the discussion in an environmental
assessment. In this study, it has been decided to assess specically the mate-
rials involved, which are the main characteristic that dene this technology as
dierent from the traditional TES.
7.3.1
Materials
The aim of this section is to assess the impact that the implementation of a
technology like the LHTES analysed in this paper may have on the environ-
ment and the society.
The approach which is developed consists in the analysis of the materials in-
volved, in terms of production, usage and nal disposal.
7.3.1.1
Sodium Acetate Trihydrate
The Sodium Acetate Trihydrate (SAT) is the main material of the PCM storage
assessed: each module contains around 200 kg of SAT.
The Occupational Safety & Health Administration (OSHA) - part of the United
States Department of Labour - has classied Sodium Acetate Trihydrate as a not
hazardous mixture, accordingly to Hazard Communication Standard (HCS)[21].
SAT is a commonly used material in several kind of industries, especially in the
food and pharmaceutics industries. The production's process of SAT consists in
the reaction of sodium hydroxide, sodium carbonate or sodium bicarbonate with
==PAGE:125==
7.3 TES and Sustainability
109
acetic acid. The chemical reactions are shown respectively in 7.1, 7.2 and 7.3.
The product of those chemical reaction is Sodium Acetate, with which addition
of 3·H2O gives Sodium Acetate Trihydrate.
It is an inexpensive procedure,
which is largely practised in the industrial sector, because of the wide range of
the applications SAT can be used in. SAT then is a widely available material
on the actual market.
CH3COOH + NaOH →CH3COONa + H2O
(7.1)
2CH3COOH + Na2CO3 →2CH3COONa + H2CO3
(7.2)
CH3COOH + NaHCO3 →CH3COONa + H2CO3
(7.3)
The transportation of such a harmless material is handle in tightly closed con-
tainer and can be easily moved and transported even on ships if necessary. The
storage has to be organized in a way the material is not exposed to high tem-
perature: the containers have to be stored in a dry and cool ambient, far form
direct sunlight or source of heat or possibilities of freezing.
Apart for evaluating the ways of productions and management of the material,
the nal displacement of the heat storage material has to be assessed. Recycling
or disposal are the two possibilities discussed.
The recycling of SAT is not a simple task to realize, due to necessity of pure
SAT in the majority of its applications. Moreover, it is well known that, using
the material for high number of cycles, the deterioration of the material causes
a high worsening of the performances.
Furthermore, the recycle of the heat
storage material has to include rst a chemical process to divide the dierent
components, in case there was an addition of some agents, which is a costly
procedure.
The remaining possibility is the disposal of SAT. SAT can be easily dissolved
in water and removed through the drainage system. The environmental eects
of sodium acetate have been assessed in [14], and it has been concluded that
negative eects on both aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems are minimal. How-
ever it depends on which are the additives mixed with SAT and the amount
of material which is involved. In this case there is around 200 kg of PCM in
each module. In case of a wide application of TES on the energy systems in
a long-term prospective, it could become a complex problem to not aect the
sodium level in the ground and in the water without causing any damage.
The society can be aected by the use of a specic material when it can aect
the human health. In this case, if SAT enters in contact with eyes, skin, or if
inhaled or ingested, could cause mild irritation, causing symptoms as stinging,
tearing or redness, especially if the exposure lasts long period. The digestive
==PAGE:126==
110
Sustainability
system can be damaging in terms of irritation of the tissues. Due to these rea-
sons, it is important to handle the material safely, avoiding the direct contact
with dust and using adequate precautions.
In conclusion, it is possible to say that the use of SAT in long-term heat storages
has not a big impact on the environment and on the society, which make it easier
to promote this technology on the market. Moreover, the increase of eciency
plays an important role as explained in section 7.1: high eciency and minimal
impact environment are considered the right direction to a sustainable society.
7.3.1.2
Additives: Carboxyl Methyl Cellulose (CMC), Graphite and
Paran Oil.
The Sodium Acetate Trihydrate is not the only material involved in the system.
The three additives mentioned are also included in the sustainability analysis;
however, their use is limited compared to SAT.
The Carboxyl Methyl Cellulose is a common used material in food and phar-
maceutical industries and in various products as toothpaste, detergents and
water-based plants as a thickener or stabilizer emulsion. It is a non-toxic ma-
terial, which could still damage the skin, the eyes, the respiration and digestive
system if humans get in contact with it.
CMC usually ends up in wastewater treatment plants or in the environment,
due to the fact that it degrades completely at low rates [80].
The graphite is a largely used material in several industrial applications, espe-
cially in thermochemical process, due to its high thermal conductivity. It is a
slightly hazardous material, damaging especially for the respiratory and cardio-
vascular system.
The most damaging impact on the environment from the use of graphite con-
sists in the mining condition. Graphite is mined using open pit mines, which
means the vegetation has to be removed, damaging the air quality and the an-
imals natural habitat. Moreover, soil contamination is a real issue because of
the chemical used during the milling process or due to spilled powder [5].
The paran oil has also a wide industrial application, even as a cosmetic ad-
ditive. It is highly hazardous for the human respiratory system, that implies
safety precautions when handle it.
It does not cause very harmful eect on
the environment: both terrestrial and aquatic organism are not highly aected.
Moreover, in the long term it is expected to be biodegradable.
Therefore, it is suggested to take into consideration the idea of chemically di-
==PAGE:127==
7.3 TES and Sustainability
111
vide at least the graphite from the SAT mixture before the disposal is realized.
It depends on the real cost of the industrial procedure. However, SAT can be
easily dissolved in water and removed through the drainage system, while CMC
and the paran oil are biodegradable. Graphite can be recycled at lower cost
compared to its disposal.
Considering the concept of a sustainable development of the society, TES fulls
the discussed denition, because it helps improving the eciency of the energy
system, while the environmental impacts are restrained. However, some local
impacts in the long-term are possible to arise, concerning mainly the sodium
concentration in water and ground, and the graphite addition in the PCM.
==PAGE:128==
112
Sustainability
==PAGE:129==
Chapter 8
Discussion
The results collected during the thermal performance analysis, the economic
evaluation and the sustainability assessment have not always fullled the expec-
tations.
The assumption made on the heat loss coecient - it was supposed independent
from the temperature - have aected the results on the thermal performances.
The fact that the insulation material had not a xed placement during long
test periods has also inuenced the determination of the heat loss coecient
because it was not possible to nd an optimal single value for each module with
high accuracy - which was possible if the tests were done for a charge with low
volume ow rate in the heat exchangers.
The heat storage capacity, the heat transfer and the ability of stable supercool-
ing are three signicant properties that were investigated and compared between
the modules. It was expected to improve the heat transfer adding graphite and
oil in the PCM, while the heat exchange capacity rate was expected to give the
best results in case of the salt water mixture. The graphite and the oil were
supposed to improve the heat exchange capacity rate and the stability of the
PCM during supercooling; the results from the module analysed in detail have
shown some contradictory trend. A new set of cycles was analysed to have at
least another comparison to work with. Table 8.1 shows the developed compar-
ison between cycles that were comparable in terms of power, volume ow rates
==PAGE:130==
114
Discussion
and temperature levels - see summarizing tables in section 5.6.
Table 8.1: Heat exchange capacity rate's comparison between the relevant
modules.
Module
Cycle
Charging
Discharging
Activation
Module
1:
salt
water
mixture
6a, 6b
First three hours
between
400
W/K
and
200
W/K,
than
increased
and
uctuated
with
two
maximum
values
around
870
W/K
and
1000 W/K and a
minimum around
290 W/K
First
two
hours
from 600 W/K to
200 W/K. Then
peak of 400 W/K
and slow decrease
to 80 W/K
Peak
of
350
W/K,
then
decrease
and
stable
to
90
W/K
until
the end of the
process
Module
2:
SAT + CMC
3, 4
Average
at
the
beginning
of
charging
:
150
W/K. Final peak
400 W/K
Initial peak: 574
W/K.
Exponen-
tial decrease until
40 W/K
Peak:
86
W/K
Module
1*:
SAT + CMC
+ graphite
3
Beginning
of
changing: 130 ÷
250
W/K.
Two
nal peaks:
530
W/K, 790 W/K.
Two initial peaks:
300
W/K,
350
W/K.
Exponen-
tial decrease until
40 W/K.
Peak
125
W/K.
Module
1**:
SAT + CMC
+ graphite +
oil
2
Beginning
of
charging : 130 ÷
230 W/K. Final
peak: 600 W/K.
Initial peak: 840
W/K. Fast expo-
nential
decrease,
then long period
200 ÷ 400 W/K.
Peak:
260
W/K.
The results collected from these cycles have shown an improvement of the heat
transfer using graphite and oil, especially concerning the discharging after the
activation of solidication. The highest peak in this phase was reached by the
module which used both graphite and paran oil. However, during the charging
phases the conditions are very similar between the modules, in particular Module
1* and Module 1** had not shown signicant dierences, except for the initial
peak for Module 1**. Anyway, high values have lasted for a very short period.
This nal evaluation of the heat exchange capacity rates has given promising
results regarding the possibility of improvement of the heat transfer. The highest
improvement has been registered after the activation of solidication, which is
==PAGE:131==
115
regarding the long-term heat stored in the system that should supply the heat
demand.
Some assumptions were stated also using the simple theory for the theoretical
assessment of the heat of fusion.
The materials' properties were calculated
using Araki's theory in [13]. The latent heat of fusion for the Sodium Acetate
Trihydrate was 246 kJ/kg, while the majority of the relevant literature states
that SAT has a heat of fusion of 265 kJ/kg[71].
When the measured values were compared with the theoretical values in the
report, the discordances were in some cases evident and it was chosen to have
another set of theoretical results using 265 kJ/kg for the SAT heat of fusion.
Table 8.2: Comparison between measured and theoretical values for the heat
stored and discharged, using a SAT heat of fusion of 265 kJ/kg.
Heat stored
Latent H.
[MJ]
[MJ]
Module 1*: SAT + CMC + graphite
Measured
103
-
Theoretical (265 kJ/kg)
102
-
%
+ 0.9%
-
former % (246 kJ/kg)
+ 4.6%
-
Module 1**: SAT + CMC + graphite + oil
Measured
104
46
Theoretical (265 kJ/kg)
102
48
%
+1.9 %
-5.2 %
former % (246 kJ/kg)
+5.5%
+2.9 %
Module 2: SAT + CMC
Measured
109
54
Theoretical (265 kJ/kg)
107
50
%
+ 1.6%
+ 5.4%
former % (246 kJ/kg)
+ 5.4%
+15.1 %
It is clear from Table 8.2 that the new value used as SAT heat of fusion gives
better results compared to the value found applying Araki's method: the mea-
sured amounts of heat stored in the modules are closer to the theoretical results,
and the same for the latent heat discharged. The only incoherence is represented
by the latent heat discharged in the Module 1**, which, with the new result,
has increased the dierence between theory and measurement.
The economic analysis which was developed is only a preliminary evaluation,
which could be further improved. Some costs have not been considered, such as
==PAGE:132==
116
Discussion
transportation of the materials, installation of the system on situ, maintenances
which have to be provided during the life time of the combi-system.
The cost of the propylene-glycol has not been included, which anyway would be
a minimal cost on the total system.
The nal cost is dependent on the decisions made selecting the real components,
which are just one possibility on the wide amount of items sold on the market.
The total cost can be highly aected by the selection of the solar thermal col-
lector or the DHW tank.
The module cost is still high: as every developing technology the initial cost is
not usually aordable or competitive on the market; the more a new technology
is developed and present on the market, the more the cost usually decreases,
becoming a real alternative to the "standard solutions".
It is then predictable that with time the module cost will decrease and it will
be more competitive compared to a standard solar combi-system. An initial
investment of around 25 000 e can not be considered a cheap solution for a
residential building.
A nal improvement on the sustainability assessment of LHTES could be reached
carrying out an entire Life Cycle Assessment of the system, extending the bound-
aries to the transportation and delivery of all the materials and components in-
volved. An important step could be the evaluation of the CO2 emission through-
out the all life cycle. Comparing the results from the used technology with a
sustainable alternative system, such as for example a geothermal heat pump,
could give a more precise idea of the actual benets TES could bring to the
society.
Future work
Since the beginning of this study, it has been clear that seasonal heat storages
using LHTES is an interesting and promising technology which is still at a
development stage and facing some problems which have to be solved in order
to be largely included in the global energy system.
The stable supercooling is an actual issue, especially because in the past it has
been approached mainly as a condition which has to be avoided in order to meet
the demand when necessary, considering a daily TES. The literature has not
provided a good amount of previous studies about the stability of supercooling:
it is necessary then to test further additives and materials which could be helpful
in nding optimal solutions.
Four modules are now installed and tested at DTU connected to a real solar
thermal system. The four modules are lled with dierent thickening additives.
They will provide a new set of measurements to be investigated, trying to nd
new way to improve the performances of the system.
==PAGE:133==
Chapter 9
Conclusion
The aim of this Thesis has been to analyse and compare the thermal perfor-
mances of four dierent heat storage modules. The investigated technology is
a Latent Heat Thermal Energy Storage, which uses Phase Change Materials to
store and release heat, connected to a solar thermal system.
The rst part of the report focused on TES, describing the concepts behind it
and the technical problems around it. A literature review is important to under-
stand which are the critical point and the advantages coming from a developing
technology, such as LHTES.
The modules tested in DTU are described, providing details about the test fa-
cility and the materials used in the dierent modules.
The experimental method applied to the collected measurements consisted in
the evaluation of the heat loss coecient, the charge and discharge powers, the
heat content and the heat exchange capacity rate. In this way it was possible to
assess both the heat storage capacity of the modules and the heat exchangers'
operation.
The results from the thermal performances' assessment have evaluated the ad-
dition of water or a thickening agent - in this case CMC - as solutions to the
phase separation problem, which seemed to be both successful as the cycling
stability of the modules was fullled.
Graphite and oil were added to the PCM to improve the thermal conductiv-
==PAGE:134==
118
Conclusion
ity and the heat transfer between the heat transfer uid and the PCM inside
the module, with good possibility of improving also the stability of supercool-
ing. The heat content of the module containing only SAT and CMC presented
higher values than for modules with the addition of oil and graphite or the salt
water mixture module. The supercooled condition was faced with good long-
term stability again in the module containing only CMC as additive.
The tests conrmed that graphite and oil increased the heat exchange capacity
rate, especially after activation of the solidication, while the supercooling was
still critically unstable.
An economic evaluation was also carried out in terms of initial investment for
a solar thermal combi-system. The results from a TRNSYS analysis were im-
ported from a previous work [55]. The aim was to nd the cheapest solution
between ten dierent cases which presented several combinations of solar col-
lector area and number of heat storage modules. Each of the case reached 80 %
of solar fraction.
The optimal solution consisted of 45 m2 solar collector and four heat storage
modules - each 150 l - with a heat exchange capacity rate of 400 W/K and a
total cost around 25 000 e. The level of heat exchange capacity rate as a high
eect on the nal cost of the system.
The concepts of sustainable development and environmental impact were dis-
cussed. The sustainability of the system was assessed as life cycle of the materials
used as PCM. The Sodium Acetate Trihydrate is not a toxic material, harmless
for the terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems. However, it could be mixed with
at least three additives which have dierent properties. CMC and the paran
oil are biodegradable and not harmful for the environment, while the graphite
could bring more problem during the nal stage of the system's life.
The disposal of the PCM could be realized through the dissolution of the PCM
in water and removed through the drainage system. However, it has to be con-
sidered the separation from graphite, which can be recycled in several industrial
processes.
Concluding, LHTES represents an interesting and promising technology, which
still has some technical constraints that make it dicult to implement it in the
market nowadays. A further development could be reached testing more mod-
ules with dierent characteristics, from the PCMs used to the general design of
the modules.
However, TES generally improves the eciency of the energy system and it has
low impact on the environment, characteristics that respect the fundamental
aim of a sustainable development of the society.
==PAGE:135==
Bibliography
[1] Alibaba group. Available online at http://www.alibaba.com, July 2015.
[2] Alibaba group. Available online at http://www.alibaba.com/showroom/
paraffin-oil-price.html, July 2015.
[3] The
engineering
toolbox.
Available
online
at
http://www.
engineeringtoolbox.com/, Accessed: 2015-06-02.
[4] Northern graphite. Available online at www.northerngraphite.com, July
2015.
[5] What is the environmental impact of mining graphite?
Available
online at www.answers.com/Q/What_is_the_environmental_impact_of_
mining_graphite, Accessed: 2015-07-30.
[6] Fact sheet on solar heat (in danish), 2010.
Available online at www.
solvarmecenter.dk.
[7] ISO 9488:1999(E/F). Solar energy  vocabulary, 1999.
[8] A. Abhat. Short term thermal energy storage. Revue de Physique Appliquée,
15(3):477501, 1980.
[9] A Abhat. LOW TEMPERATURE LATENT HEAT THERMAL ENERGY
STORAGE : HEAT STORAGE. 10(4):313332, 1983.
[10] A. Abhat, S. Aboul-Enein, and N. A. Malatidis.
Heat-of-fusion storage
systems for solar heating applications. Thermal Storage of Solar Energy:
Proceedings of an International TNO-Symposium, pages 157171, 1981.
==PAGE:136==
120
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[11] Ph.D.
Anne
Marie
Helmenstine,
2015.
Available
online
at
http://chemistry.about.com/od/chemistryglossary/g/
Relative-Uncertainty-Definition.htm, Accessed 2015-08-02.
[12] Anon. Our common future.
[13] N Araki, M Futamura, A Makino, and H Shibata. Measurements of Ther-
mophysical Properties of Sodium Acetate Hydrate. Internaltional Journal
of Thermophysics, 16(6):14551466, 1995.
[14] S. S. Bang and D. Johnston.
Environmental eects of sodium ac-
etate/formate deicer, ice shear. Archives of Environmental Contamination
and Toxicology, 35(4):580587, 1998.
[15] JP Bedecarrats, F. Strub, B. Falcon, and JP Dumas. Phase-change ther-
mal energy storage using spherical capsules: Performance of a test plant.
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF REFRIGERATION-REVUE INTER-
NATIONALE DU FROID, 19(3):187196, 1996.
[16] C. B. Beggs. Ice thermal storage: impact on united kingdom carbon diox-
ide emissions.
Building Services Engineering Research and Technology,
15(1):1117, 1994.
[17] J. Bellettre, V. Sartre, F. Biais, and A. Lallemand. Transient state study
of electric motor heating and phase change solid-liquid cooling. APPLIED
THERMAL ENGINEERING, 17(1):1731, 1997.
[18] L.F. Cabeza, J. Roca, M. Nogues, B. Zalba, and J.M. Marin. Transporta-
tion and conservation of temperature sensitive materials with phase change
materials: state of the art. IEA ECES IA Annex 17 2nd Workshop, 2002.
[19] Luisa F Cabeza, Gustav Svensson, Stefan Hiebler, and Harald Mehling.
Thermal performance of sodium acetate trihydrate thickened with dier-
ent materials as phase change energy storage material. Applied Thermal
Engineering, 23(13):16971704, September 2003.
[20] B. Chalmers. PRINCIPLES OF SOLIDIFICATION. 1964(REPR.1967).
[21] Inc. Compliance Education. Safety Data Sheet Material Name : Sodium
Acetate , Trihydrate. pages 19, 2015.
[22] M. Costa, D. Buddhi, and A. Oliva. Numerical simulation of a latent heat
thermal energy storage system with enhanced heat conduction. ENERGY
CONVERSION AND MANAGEMENT, 39(3-4):319330, 1998.
[23] Mark Dannemand, Weiqiang Kong, Jianhua Fan, Jakob Berg Johansen,
and Simon Furbo.
Laboratory test of a prototype heat storage module
based on stable supercooling of sodium acetate trihydrate. ScienceDirect,
00, 2015.
==PAGE:137==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
121
[24] I. Dincer and M.A. Rosen. Thermal energy storage : Systems and applica-
tions. Wiley, 2002.
[25] Ibrahim Dincer and Marc A. Rosen. Thermal energy storage: systems and
applications. Wiley, 2010.
[26] M. Dominguez, J. Culubret, D. Garcia, C. Garcia, and A. Soto. La acu-
mulacion de frio, importante elemento de seguridad en instalaciones de
climatizacion. El instalador, 2000.
[27] P. Espeau, D. Mondieig, Y. Haget, and M. A. Cuevas-Diarte.
'active'
package for thermal protection of food products.
Packaging Technology
and Science, Pack Technol Sci, Packag Technol Sci, Packaging Technology
and Science, Packag. Technol. Sci, 10(5):253260, 1997.
[28] M. M. Farid. Solar energy storage with phase change. Journal of Solar
Energy Research, 4(1):1129, 1986.
[29] MM Farid and RM Husian. An electrical storage heater using the phase-
change method of heat-storage.
ENERGY CONVERSION AND MAN-
AGEMENT, 30(3):219230, 1990.
[30] Mohammed M Farid, Amar M Khudhair, Siddique Ali K Razack, and Said
Al-Hallaj. A review on phase change energy storage: materials and appli-
cations. Energy Conversion and Management, 45(9-10):15971615, June
2004.
[31] D. Feldman, M. M. Shapiro, and D. Banu. Organic phase change materials
for thermal energy storage. Solar Energy Materials, 13(1):110, 1986.
[32] Co funded by the Intelligent Energy Europe. Programme of the Euro-
pean Union.
Energy Eciency Trends and Policies in the Household
and Tertiary Sectors. An Analysis Based on the ODYSSEE and MURE
Databases. (June), 2015.
[33] S Furbo and S Svendsen. Report on heat storage in a solar heating system
using salt hydrates. Technical report, 1977.
[34] Simon Furbo. Investigations of Heat Storages with salt hydrate as storage
medium based on the extra water principle.
Technical report, Thermal
Insulation Laboratory, Technical University of Denmark, 1978.
[35] Simon Furbo. HEAT STORAGE WITH AN INCOIIGRUENTLY MELT-
ING SALT HYDRATE AS STORAGE MEDIUM BASED ON THE EX-
TRA WATER PRINCIPLE. (December), 1980.
[36] Simon Furbo. Heat Storage for Solar Heating Systems. 2005.
==PAGE:138==
122
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[37] Simon Furbo, Janne Dragsted, Ziqian Chen, Jianhua Fan, Elsa Andersen,
and Bengt Perers. Towards seasonal heat storage based on stable super
cooling of sodium acetate trihydrate. In EUORSUN Congress Prodeedings,
2010.
[38] Simon Furbo, Janne Dragsted, Jianhua Fan, Elsa Andersen, and Bengt
Perers.
Experimental studies on seasonal heat storage based on stable
supercooling of a sodium acetate water mixture. ISES Solar World Congress
2011 Proceedings, 2011.
[39] S M Hasnain.
REVIEW ON SUSTAINABLE THERMAL ENERGY
STORAGE TECHNOLOGIES , PART I : HEAT STORAGE MATERI-
ALS AND TECHNIQUES. 39(11), 1998.
[40] SM Hasnain. Review on sustainable thermal energy storage technologies,
part ii: Cool thermal storage. ENERGY CONVERSION AND MANAGE-
MENT, 39(11):11391153, 1998.
[41] DW Hawes, D. Feldman, and D. Banu. Latent-heat storage in building-
materials. ENERGY AND BUILDINGS, 20(1):7786, 1993.
[42] D. Heine and A. Abhat. Investigation of physical and chemical properties
of phase change materials for space heating/cooling applications.
Sun,
Mankind's Future Source of Energy, Proc of the Int Sol Energy Soc Congr,
(1):500506, 1978.
[43] A Heinz and W Streicher. APPLICATION OF PHASE CHANGE MATE-
RIALS AND PCM-SLURRIES FOR THERMAL ENERGY STORAGE.
[44] Peng Hu, Da-Jie Lu, Xiang-Yu Fan, Xi Zhou, and Ze-Shao Chen. Phase
change performance of sodium acetate trihydrate with AlN nanoparti-
cles and CMC. Solar Energy Materials and Solar Cells, 95(9):26452649,
September 2011.
[45] K. A R Ismail and Antonio Batista De Jesus. Parametric study of solidi-
cation of pcm around a cylinder for ice-bank applications. International
Journal of Refrigeration, Int J Refrig, 24(8):809822, 2001.
[46] M. Kamimoto, Y. Abe, S. Sawata, T. Tani, and T. Ozawa. Latent heat
storage unit using form-stable high density polyethylene for solar thermal
applications. Proceedings of the International Symposium on Thermal Ap-
plication of Solar Energy, pages 325330, 1985.
[47] Mikko Keinänen. LATENT HEAT RECOVERY FROM SUPERCOOLED
SODIUM ACETATE TRIHYDRATE USING A BRUSH HEAT. PhD the-
sis, 2007.
==PAGE:139==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
123
[48] Ahmet Kürklü. Energy storage applications in greenhouses by means of
phase change materials (pcms): a review. Renewable Energy, 13(1):89 
103, 1998.
[49] A. Kurklu.
Short-term thermal performance of a built-in solar storage
for frost prevention in a greenhouse. INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF
ENERGY RESEARCH, 22(2):169174, 1998.
[50] George A Lane. Solar heat storage latent heat material Vol 1, volume 9141.
1983.
[51] CH Lee and HK Choi. Crystalline morphology in high-density polyethy-
lene/paran blend for thermal energy storage. POLYMER COMPOSITES,
19(6):704708, 1998.
[52] Jing-Hua Li, Gui-En Zhang, and Jin-Yun Wang. Investigation of a eutectic
mixture of sodium acetate trihydrate and urea as latent heat storage. Solar
Energy, 47(6):443445, 1991.
[53] Wei Hua Li, Jin Feng Mao, Li Jun Wang, and Lu Yan Sui. Eect of the
Additive on Thermal Conductivity of the Phase Change Material. Advanced
Materials Research, 399-401:13021306, November 2011.
[54] Lars-Erik Lunde. of PCM modules for Seasonal Heat Storage Master The-
sis. 2012.
[55] Simon Furbo Mark Dannemand, Jørgen M Schultz, Jakob Berg Johansen.
Long term thermal energy storage with stable supercooled sodium acetate
trihydrate. 2015.
[56] Harald Mehling and Luisa F Cabeza. Heat and cold storage with PCM An
up to date introduction into basics and applications. 2008.
[57] V. H. Morcos. Investigation of a latent heat thermal energy storage system.
Solar and Wind Technology, 7(2-3):197202, 1990.
[58] Y. Morikama, H. Suzuki, F. Okagawa, and K. Kanki.
Development of
building elements using pcm. Proceedings of the International Symposium
on Thermal Application of Solar Energy, pages 331336, 1985.
[59] JC Mulligan, DP Colvin, and YG Bryant.
Microencapsulated phase-
change material suspensions for heat transfer in spacecraft thermal systems.
JOURNAL OF SPACECRAFT AND ROCKETS, 33(2):278284, 1996.
[60] Tetsuo Munakata and Shinichi Nagata. Electrical initiation of solidica-
tion and preservation of supercooled state for sudium acetate trihydrate.
Wasingtin, 2010.
==PAGE:140==
124
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[61] D. Pal and Y. Joshi. Application of phase change materials for passive
thermal control of plastic quad at packages: A computational study. NU-
MERICAL HEAT TRANSFER PART A-APPLICATIONS, 30(1):1934,
1996.
[62] K. Peippo, P. Kauranen, and PD Lund. A multicomponent pcm wall opti-
mized for passive solar heating. ENERGY AND BUILDINGS, 17(4):259
270, 1991.
[63] K. K. Pillai and B. J. Brinkworth. Storage of low grade thermal energy
using phase change materials. Appl Energy, 2(3):205216, 1976.
[64] S. B. Riat, S. A. Omer, and X. Ma. A novel thermoelectric refrigeration
system employing heat pipes and a phase change material: An experimental
investigation. Renewable Energy, Renew. Energy, 23(2):313323, 2001.
[65] T. Saitoh and K. Hirose. Spherical capsule-type latent heat thermal energy
storage/heat pump system with application to solar system. Proceedings
of the International Symposium on Thermal Application of Solar Energy,
pages 319323, 1985.
[66] I. O. Salyer, A. K. Sircar, P. A. Nelson, W. W. Schertz, and R. H. Till.
Phase change materials for heating and cooling of residential buildings and
other applications. 4:236241, 1990.
[67] B Sandnes and J Rekstad. Supercooling salt hydrates: Stored enthalpy as
a function of temperature. Solar Energy, 80(5):616625, May 2006.
[68] Bjø rnar Sandnes. Exergy Ecient Production , Storage and Distribution
of Solar Energy. DTU Master Thesis, (November), 2003.
[69] Jørgen M Schultz and Simon Furbo. Investigation of heat of fusion storage
for solar low energy buildings. Proceedings of the Solar World Congress
2005: Bringing Water To the World, Including Proceedings of 34th Ases
Annual Conference and Proceedings of 30th National Passive Solar Con-
ference, Proc. Sol. World Congr.: Bringing Water World, Incl. Proc. Ases
Annu, 3:18331838, 2005.
[70] Jørgen Munthe Schultz and Simon Furbo. Heat of Fusion Storage with
High Solar Fraction for Solar Low Energy Buildings. Eurosun 2006, 2006.
[71] Jorgen Schultz and Simon Furbo. Solar heating systems with heat of fusion
storage with 100% solar fraction for solar low energy buildings. In ISES
Solar World Congress 2007 Proceedings, 2007.
[72] Atul Sharma, V V Tyagi, C R Chen, and D Buddhi. Review on thermal
energy storage with phase change materials and applications. Renewable
and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 13(2):318345, February 2009.
==PAGE:141==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
125
[73] W. Streicher. Iea - shc task 26.
[74] G. Svensson. Personal communication, 2002.
[75] M. Telkes. Solar house heating  problem of heat storage. Heating and
Ventilating, 44(5):6875, 1947.
[76] M. Telkes. Thermal storage for solar heating and cooling, proceedings of the
workshop on solar energy storage subsystems for the heating and cooling
of buildings,. Charlottesville (Virginia Usa), 1975.
[77] M. Telkes. Thermal-energy storage in salt hydrates. SOLAR ENERGY
MATERIALS, 2(4):381393, 1980.
[78] M. Telkes and E. Raymond. Storing solar heat in chemicals  report on
dover house. Heating and Ventilating, 46(11):8086, 1949.
[79] S. M. Vakilaltojjar and W. Saman.
Analysis and modelling of a phase
change storage system for air conditioning applications. Applied Thermal
Engineering, Appl Therm Eng, 21(3):249263, 2001.
[80] Cornelis G. VanGinkel and Sarah Gayton. The biodegradability and non-
toxicity of carboxymethyl cellulose (ds 0.7) and intermediates. Environ-
mental Toxicology and Chemistry, 15:270  274, 1996.
[81] LL Vasiliev, VS Burak, AG Kulakov, DA Mishkinis, and PV Bohan. La-
tent heat storage modules for preheating internal combustion engines: ap-
plication to a bus petrol engine. APPLIED THERMAL ENGINEERING,
20(10):913923, 2000.
[82] Ester Estévez Vega. Seasonal Heat Storage Phanse Change Materials. PhD
thesis, Lappeenranta University of Technology, 2011.
[83] Cold water thermal storage with phase change materials using nocturnal
radiative cooling for vegetable cooling. Kowata, h. and sase, s. and ishii,
m. and moriyama,h. Proceedings of the World Renewable Energy Congress
WII, 2002.
[84] Yuusuke Yoshii, Michihiro Kuraoka, Kyouzo Sengoku, and Tadashi Ohachi.
Induction time and three-electrode current vs. voltage characteristics for
electrical nucleation of concentrated solutions of sodium acetate trihydrate.
Journal of Crystal Growth, 237-239:414418, April 2002.
[85] Belén Zalba, José Ma Marín, L F Cabeza, and Harald Mehling. Review on
thermal energy storage with phase change: materials, heat transfer analysis
and applications. Applied Thermal Engineering, 23(3):251283, 2003.
==PAGE:142==
126
BIBLIOGRAPHY
==PAGE:143==
Appendix A
Relative Inaccuracy of the Power
Charging Phase
Figure A.1: Relative uncertainty and respective discharging power as a func-
tion of time during the 7th cycle Module 1, containing SAT and
water.
==PAGE:144==
128
Appendix A
Figure A.2: Relative uncertainty and respective discharging power as a func-
tion of time during the 7th cycle Module 1**, containing SAT,
CMC, graphite and oil.
Figure A.3: Relative uncertainty and respective discharging power as a func-
tion of time during the 2nd cycle Module 2, containing SAT and
CMC.
==PAGE:145==
129
Discharging Phase
Figure A.4: Relative uncertainty and respective discharging power as a func-
tion of time during the 7th cycle Module 1, containing SAT and
water.
Figure A.5: Relative uncertainty and respective discharging power as a func-
tion of time during the 6th cycle Module 1*, containing SAT,
CMC, and graphite.
==PAGE:146==
130
Appendix A
Figure A.6: Relative uncertainty and respective discharging power as a func-
tion of time during the 2nd cycle Module 2, containing SAT and
CMC.
Discharging Phase after Activation
Figure A.7: Relative uncertainty and respective discharging power after the
activation of the supercooled uid, as a function of time. It rep-
resents the 7th cycle Module 1, containing SAT and water.
==PAGE:147==
131
Figure A.8: Relative uncertainty and respective discharging power after the
activation of the supercooled uid, as a function of time. It rep-
resents the 2nd cycle Module 2, containing SAT and CMC.
==PAGE:148==
132
Appendix A
==PAGE:149==
Appendix B
Total Costs
Figure B.1: Final cost for Module 2, containing SAT and CMC. The total cost
is presented showing the share between the dierent subsystems.
==PAGE:150==
134
Appendix B
Figure B.2: Final cost for Module 1*, containing SAT, CMC and Graphite.
The total cost is presented showing the share between the dierent
subsystems.
Figure B.3: Final cost for Module 1**, containing SAT, CMC, Graphite and
Paran Oil. The total cost is presented showing the share be-
tween the dierent subsystems.
