==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
Joining of sheets by resistance projection welding
Michal Jan Banski
July 2015
==PAGE:2==
I 
 
ABSTRACT 
A comprehensive experimental study on projection welding of thin HSLA340 sheets has been 
conducted. Different cases with different shape and number of projections for parallel and 
perpendicular sheet welding configurations has been examined. In parallel projection welding 
cases with 1, 2 and 3 circular projections were examined while in perpendicular projection 
welding cases with 2 longitudinal projections were studied. In total, 190 experimentas were 
carried out and the weldability range were obtained for both parallel and perpendicular 
projection weldings. The lower limit of weldability was checked by simple drop test and 
the upper limit of weldability was obtained considering splash. Setdown has been caluculated 
for all parallel projection welding cases. Weld nugget size was measured for a number 
of parallel and perpendicular projection welding cases using metallography analysis. 
Moreover, in order to validate the material property tensile and hardness tests were performed.   
In order to emboss circular and longitudinal projections, a press set-up system was designed 
and manufactured. Welding supports were made to support the sheets in parallel 
and perpendicular welding positions. A spring supporting system was also designed as a 
solution for loading problem in the welding machine. 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
II 
 
Resume (in Danish) 
En omfattende eksperimental undersøgelse af projektion svejsning af tynde HSLA340 ark er 
blevet gennemført. Forskellige sager med forskellige former og antal af projektioner for parallel 
og vinkelret ark svejsning er blevet undersøgt. I parallel projektion svejsning er sager med 1, 2 
og 3 cirkulære projektioner studeret mens i vinkelret projektion svejsning er sager med 2 
længderetning projektioner studeret. Total blev der foretaget 190 eksperimenter og 
svejsbarheden var fundet for både parallel og vinkelret projektion svejsninger. Den nedre 
grænse af svejsbarhed var undersøgt ved simple drop test og den øvre grænse af svejsbarhed 
blev fundet ved at overveje splash. Setdown er blevet beregnt for alle parallel projektion 
svejsninger sagerne. Svejsning nugget størrelse var målt for et antal af parallel og vinkelret 
projektion svejsning sager ved at bruge metallografi analyse. Ydermere for at validere 
materialet’s egenskaber blev trækstyrke og hårdhed test udført. 
For at udføre prægning af cirkulære og længderetning projektioner var et tryk set-up system 
designet og fabrikeret. Svejning supportere var lavet for at supporte arkene i parallel og 
vinkelret svejsning positioner. Et spring support system var også designet som en løsning på 
belastningsproblemet i svejsemaskinen. 
 
    
 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
III 
 
List of contents 
 
I. 
Abstract………………………………………………………… 
II. 
Resume…………………………………………………………. 
III. 
List of contents…………………………………………………. 
IV. 
Nomenclature…………………………………………………... 
 
 
1. Introduction………………………………………………………... 
1.1 Resistance welding…………………………………………………………. 
1.2 Projection welding………………………………………………………….. 
1.3 Motivation and objectives………………………………………………...… 
1.4 Outline of the remaining chapters……………………………………...…… 
2. Specimen specification…………………………..………………… 
2.1  Projection dimensions……………………………………………………… 
2.1.1 Circular projection dimensions……………………………………. 
2.1.2 Elongated projection dimensions………………………………….. 
2.2  Specimens dimensions and number of projections…………………………. 
2.3  Material ……………………………………………………………………. 
2.3.1 Tensile tests……………………………………………………….. 
2.3.2 Hardness test………………………….…………………………… 
2.4 Summary ………………………….………………………………………... 
3. Welding machine………………………….……………………….. 
3.1  Choice of welding machine………………………….……………………... 
3.2  Welding machine set-up………………………….………………………... 
3.3  Spring supporting system ………………………….………………………. 
3.3.1 Spring force measurement………………………….……………... 
3.3.2 Spring supporting system design………………………………….. 
3.3.3 Spring supporting system evaluation……………………………… 
3.4  Summary………………………….………………………….……………. 
4. Design of press set-up and supporting system..………………………. 
4.1  Press set-up system………………………….……………………………... 
4.1.1 Table base………………………….……………………………… 
4.1.2 Dies………………………….………………………….………… 
4.1.3 Punch ………………………….……………………………….…. 
4.1.4 Punch support………………………….……………………….…. 
4.1.5 Sliders ………………………….………………………….……… 
4.2 Welding support system………………………….………………….……… 
4.2.1 Wooden block base………………………….…………….………. 
4.2.2 Wooden slider………………………….…………………….……. 
4.3 Summary………………………….……………………….……………….. 
I 
II 
III 
V 
 
 
1 
1 
3 
4 
5 
6 
6 
7 
7 
8 
9 
9 
12 
14 
15 
15 
16 
20 
20 
23 
24 
25 
27 
27 
29 
29 
31 
32 
33 
34 
35 
36 
37 
==PAGE:5==
IV 
 
5. Experimental measurements………………………….……….….. 
5.1 Current and force measurement………………………….………………… 
5.2 Projection height and setdown measurement ……………………………… 
5.3 Weld quality determination………………………………………………… 
5.4 Metallography analysis…………….………………………………………..  
5.5 Summary………………………….………………………………………... 
6. Measurement results………………………….……………………….…… 
6.1 Parallel projection welding………………………….……………………... 
6.1.1 One projection welding……………………….…………………... 
6.1.2 Two projections welding……………………….………………… 
6.1.3 Three projections welding………………………….…………….. 
6.2  Perpendicular projection welding………………………….……………… 
6.3  Summary………………………….……………………….………………. 
7. Future work………………………….…………..…….…………... 
8. References………………………….…………………………….… 
Appendix A…………………….……………………….………………………… 
Appendix B…………………….…………………………………...…………….. 
Appendix C…………………….……………………….……………..………….. 
Appendix D…………………….……………………………...………………….. 
Appendix E…………………….……………………….………………...……….. 
 
38 
39 
40 
42 
43 
45 
46 
46 
46 
53 
56 
62 
66 
67 
71 
72 
75 
76 
80 
93 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
V 
 
Nomenclature 
 
ρ 
Electrical resistivity 
[Ωmm] 
A 
First projection name 
[-] 
A1 
Deformation area during Vickers Hardness Test 
[mm2] 
B 
Second projection name 
[-] 
C 
Third projection name 
[-] 
d 
Length of diagonal of deformed area during Vickers test 
[mm] 
dp 
Projection diameter 
[mm] 
D 
Die diameter 
[mm] 
FD 
Force being measured during specimen loading 
[N] 
FE 
Force adjusted in Expert machine 
[N] 
Ff 
Friction force of the expert system 
[N] 
Fg 
Weight of the upper table 
[N] 
FU 
Output Expert force during specimen unloading 
[N] 
h 
Height  
[mm] 
HV Vickers number 
[kg/mm2]
J 
Current density 
[A/mm2] 
k 
Spring constant 
[N/m] 
m1 
Amount of the material to be taken in milling 
[mm] 
P 
Force applied during Vickers tests 
[kg] 
S 
Setdown 
[%] 
q 
Energy per unit volume 
[J/mm3] 
t 
Time 
[s] 
xs 
Spring deflection 
[mm] 
x 
Nugget width 
[mm] 
xp 
Distance of the projection to specimen edge 
[mm] 
y 
Nugget height 
[mm] 
yl 
Nugget height in the lower sheet 
[mm] 
yu 
Nugget height in the upper sheet 
[mm] 
z 
Distance between welding machine tables 
[mm] 
 
 
==PAGE:7==
1 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1 
 
Introduction 
As resistance welding is a widely applied joining technique, the topic has been of interest 
to a wide group of researchers. Among resistance welding techniques, spot welding has become 
the main subject of investigations, while not much attention has been given to projection 
welding. This chapter presents the basics of resistance welding as well as reviews the research, 
motivation, objectives and outline of the thesis.  
 
 
1.1 Resistance welding 
Resistance welding is the welding process in which heat in the parts to be welded is generated 
by the resistance of the parts to passage of an electrical current. Therefore, based on Joul’s law, 
welding current heats the contact area of the workpieces compressed by the electrode force 
for defined time.  
𝑞(𝑡) = ∫𝜌(𝑡)𝐽(𝑡)2
𝑡2
𝑡1
𝑑𝑡 
(1.1) 
 
where q is the accumulated energy during a specific time due to the electrical resistivity 
𝜌 in the material caused by the electrical field with a specific current density J.[1] The Joule’s 
==PAGE:8==
2 
 
law covers two physical aspects of the resistance welding which are electricity and heat transfer. 
The third aspect is mechanics by applying the force causing the initial contact of the parts, 
further deformation and resulting stresses.  
The heat concentration plays an important role in the welding process and mostly depends 
on the electrical resistance. The heat can be accumulated by the electrode shape, as in case 
of spot welding, or by pre-embossed projections on the metal sheets, similar to projection 
welding process. Both types of resistance welding are presented in Fig 1.1. In resistance 
welding the electrode material should be characterized by lower resistance and high heat 
conduction compering to the welding material. Therefore, electrodes are mostly manufactured 
from the copper alloys. The heat generated in the specimens increases its temperature, 
which results in higher resistance between sheets interfaces. Moreover, the resistance 
is increased due to the surfaces films, oils and oxides which cover the surface of workpieces. 
As the result, generated heats cause material melting in the faying surfaces and nugget develops 
across the sheets interfaces [1]. 
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
  
Fig. 1.1. (a) Spot welding and (b) projection welding process [2]. 
 
The different stages in resistance welding are shown in Fig. 1.2: 
 Pre-squeeze stage (1-2) in which the upper electrode is moving down toward 
the workpieces causing the initial contact between electrode and parts 
 Squeeze stage (2-3) where the force is applied at the desired level 
 Weld stage (3-4) in which the force remains stable and current is applied. In Fig. 1.2 
an alternating current is given as an example, nevertheless, during the welding process 
direct current or the middle frequency direct current can be applied as well 
 Hold stage (4-5) where the current is cut off while force remains constant. In the stage 
the weld is solidified and cooled down under maintained force. 
 Release stage (5-6) is the stage in which the force is released by moving up the upper 
electrode and thereby completing the welding cycle. 
 
Electrodes 
Sheets 
Sheets 
==PAGE:9==
3 
 
 
Fig. 1.2. Welding cycles in resistance welding [3]. 
 
1.2 Projection welding 
Projection welding is the resistance welding process in which the heat and the current 
are accumulated in pre-embossed projections on the welded specimens. Baser on the above, 
the size and shape of the electrode being used is not as important as the workpiece preparation 
before the welding process [4].  
The main advantage of projection welding is the easiness of achieving desired heat balance 
between sheets, even if specimens material or thicknesses  differ, as projection size 
and placement can be adjusted in simple way. Possibility of welding couple of welds 
simultaneously reduces the occurrence of shunt effect which influences the strength and thus 
reliability of the welds. Shunt effect occurs when couple of the resistance welds are processed 
in short distance from each other. The previously done welds eliminate the interface resistance, 
splitting the current. Described situation is equivalent to the parallel resistances obeying Ohm’s 
law where the current takes few parallel paths in an inverse proportion to their resistances. 
Additionally, reduction of the shunt effect allows closer welds placement than in spot welding. 
Furthermore, for the simultaneously done welds, the machine efficiency rises as it is easier 
to control force and current division for projection rather than for flat surfaces. Ability 
of performing couple welds at the same time as well as the large, flat contact surfaces between 
the workpieces and electrodes extend the life of electrodes [4]. 
Projection welding found its applications for joining elements, where at least one them 
is formed during punch or stamp process. While the part gets its final shape, dedicated stamps 
or punches emboss projections at the same time. Furthermore, projections can be achieved 
in turning process made on screw machine by a form tool. The part can be assembled to flat 
==PAGE:10==
4 
 
or formed sheet in the stamping process afterwards. Moreover, dedicated bolts and nuts 
with the projections found a number of applications in the automotive and the heavy appliance 
industry.  
 
1.3 Motivation and objectives 
For the past years, resistance welding process has been applied in wide range of the industry 
sectors like automotive, aerospace, electronic, electrical and mechanical industry [5]. 
A lot of research work has focused on resistance spot welding, while projection welding was 
of second interest. Additionally, High Strength Low Alloy steel, which is widely used especially 
in automotive industry, has not been examined for optimal welding parameters. 
Additionally, growing demand for resistance welding process utilization had influence 
on the rapid development of modelling and simulation of the process. Modelling and simulation 
of resistance welding allows the understanding of the process and optimization the parameters 
before real welding tests are performed. An example of software being used for finite element 
method analysis is SORPAS. Although SORPAS reliability has been proven for spot resistance 
welding, none of projection welding simulations has been verified with real case welding 
measurements. As an example, Song [5] and Nielsen [1] simulated how unequal height 
of the projections influence nugget development. Additionally, Nielsen [1] investigated 
industrial case provided by Japanese company in which two perpendicular high strength low 
alloy steel sheets were welded by longitudinal embossment. From the comparison of simulation 
performed with SORPAS and microstructure of the real case cross section it was visible that 
the isothermal lines achieved from SORPAS corresponds with the border lines between 
the different microstructure. On the  other hand, the difference between shape and volume 
of the squeezed material was notified. Mikno [6] analysed the effect of non-parallelism 
of electrodes for the projection welding process. Based on SORPAS simulations he underlined 
the necessity of parallel electrode set-up. Nevertheless, the results has not been confirmed 
by experiments.    
Considering the above, projection welding has a lot of room for investigation among resistance 
welding processes. This fact in combination with undefined welding parameters for high 
strength low alloy steel was the main motivation for this thesis. 
 
==PAGE:11==
5 
 
This thesis, considers projection welding of two high strength low alloy steel sheets, faced 
to each other parallel or perpendicular. The main objective of this thesis was to: 
 Design a set-up which allows to emboss circular and longitudinal projections 
 Design a system which supports and positions specimens during welding process 
 Perform first welds by one of the available welding machine 
 Determine most optimal welding parameters for parallel and perpendicular projections 
welding  
 
1.4 Outline of the remaining chapters 
In the following Chapter 2, projection types and its dimensions are presented. 
Additionally, the number of projections in investigated cases together with the specimens sizes 
are given for circular and elongated embossments. Furthermore, material properties 
and characteristics of the specimens are described as well. Chapter 3 explains factors 
influencing choice of welding machine. Moreover, specification of the welding machine 
are given together with description of designed supporting system as a solution for the machine 
limitations. Afterwards, designed press and welding set-ups are described. Chapter 5 focuses 
on experimental welding measurements and shows steps that were taken for metallography. 
Results of the measurements are presented and discussed in Chapter 6. The most optimal 
welding parameters are given based on the nugget size dimensions. Finally, Chapter 7 
concludes the thesis and recommendations are made for future work.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:12==
6 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 2 
 
Specimen specification 
Projection dimensions determination was initial step of the project. Number of embossments 
and its placement on the specimen established the wokpieces size. Moreover, based 
on projection dimensions, the press set-up was designed. Finally, size and number 
of embossments had main influence on the range of welding parameters during welding 
measurements.  
 
2.1 Projection dimensions 
Projection dimensions depend mainly on the sheet thickness and were determined based 
on the dimensions suggested by The Resistance Welder Manufacturers’ Association [4].  
The project investigates welding of the specimens on which one of the projections’ type 
is embossed: circular (called as well “bubble type”) projections or elongated (known also as 
longitudinal) projections.  
 
==PAGE:13==
7 
 
2.1.1 Circular projection dimensions 
Circular projection, shown in Fig 2.1 is the simplest and the most commonly used projection 
type having four variations depending on the punch type used for embossing them [4]. 
Therefore, investigated projection is embossed by punch with small spherical radius. 
The remaining types of projections are stamped with conical, truncated or significantly large 
spherical radius punches. Therefore, an investigated cases examine welding of two parallel 
HSLA sheets of equal thickness 1 mm. Thus, the projection height is 0.9 mm while its diameter 
is equal to 2.8 mm. Fig 2.1 shows the bubble projection with its dimensions. 
 
Fig. 2.1. Bubble projection.  
 
Additionally, according to [4], the minimum distance between the neighboring projections 
in the same workpiece is 13 mm and minimum contacting overlap is 10 mm. Fig. 2.2 explains 
how the minimum weld spacing is considered while Fig. 2.3 describes an idea of minimum 
contacting overlap. 
  
 
 
 
Fig. 2.2. Minimum weld spacing [4]. 
Fig. 2.3. Minimum contacting overlap [4]. 
 
 
2.1.2 Elongated projection dimensions 
Elongated projection shown in Fig 2.4 was used for the resistance welding of two perpendicular 
HSLA sheets. The projection width was 2.8 mm and its height equal to 0.9 mm. It was decided 
to emboss elongated projection of lengths equal to 10 mm such that the center 
of the perpendicularly welded sheet was placed 5 mm from the horizontal sheet edge. 
The minimum weld spacing and contacting overlap corresponds with the circular projection. 
0.9 
2.8 
13 
10 
nuggets 
sheets 
sheets 
nugget 
==PAGE:14==
8 
 
 
Fig. 2.4. Elongated projection. 
 
2.2 Specimens dimensions and number of projections  
The specimens minimum dimensions are determined by the number of projections being 
embossed on single sheet. Therefore, in the project, workpieces of one, two and three embossed 
projections were used during the welding measurements. For the one projection case, 
the specimen of 30 mm × 30 mm was used with the projection located in the center (Fig. 2.5a). 
For the two projections, the samples of the dimensions 30 mm × 45 mm were used. In the case 
the projection were placed centrally within distance of 15 mm from each other (Fig.2.5b). 
Finally, the three projections case consider specimens of the dimensions 45 mm × 45 mm. 
The distance between projections was equal to 15 mm, however the distance from the edges 
varied from 15 mm up to 22.5 mm (Fig.2.5c). Moreover, the distances between projections 
for two and three projections firmly exceeds the minimum weld spacing equal to 13 mm 
described in section 2.1.  
 
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
Fig. 2.5. Specimens dimensions for a) 1 projection b) 2 projections c) 3 projections. 
 
In perpendicular projection welding, vertical and horizontal specimens were welded together. 
On the horizontal specimens two longitudinal projections were embossed with 15 mm distance 
between them. Both, vertical and horizontal sheets had dimensions of 30 mm× 45 mm. Fig 2.6a 
shows two perpendiculary welded specimens while Fig. 2.6b presents dimensions 
of the horizontal specimen with the elongated embossments. 
10 
2.8 
0.9 
==PAGE:15==
9 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
Fig 2.6. Perpendicular projection welding a) vertical and horizontal specimens, b) dimensions of 
horizontal specimen. 
 
2.3 Material  
In the project High Strength Low Alloy steel (HSLA) 340 SAE+Z100 M B were used, where 
Z100 corresponds to total zinc coating 100 g/m2 (50 g/m2 per side). The material is most 
commonly used in the automotive industry for such parts as the structural elements, 
a suspension systems, a cross members or a longitudinal beams. 
 
2.1.3 Tensile test  
Although HSLA 340 steel was ordered, producer delivered the product with enclosed the HSLA 
240 specification. In order to verify the product specification tensile test was performed. 
For tensile test 6 identical specimens were used. The dimensions of the specimens were based 
on DIN 50125 standard enclosed in [7]. The specimen dimensions are shown in Fig. 2.7. 
All the dimensions are in mm.  
Vertical 
specimen 
Longitudinal 
projections 
Horizontal 
specimen 
==PAGE:16==
10 
 
Grip section 
Grip section 
Reduced section 
 
Fig. 2.7. Tensile test specimen dimensions. 
 
Tensile tests were performed using the INSTRON 8516 servo-hydraulic machine with 
MTS Hydraulic Wedge Grips. The machine was controlled with the valves while the data were 
collected by a data acquisition system. The displacement between pistons and applied tensile 
load were registered during the experiment. In total, six measurements were performed. 
The first part of the tests was elastic behavior of the specimen. In this part an extensometer 
of 12.5 mm distance between its arms was used. The piston moved with the speed equal 
to 0.5 mm/min. After reaching yield, which was recognized by observing the graph being 
plotted on the computer screen, the extensometer was cut off and the second section began with 
higher piston speed.  
Ultimate strength was determined on the base of the gathered data. An INSTRON 8516 testing 
machine has its local coordinate system determined by the gauges position. The beginning 
of the local coordinate system is located when both gauges touch each other. Therefore, after 
the specimen was located between gauges the starting position according to local coordinate 
system was different from 0, which required translation of the gathered position values from 
machine coordinate system into the normalized one (see Fig. 2.8). This was achieved 
by equalization of the first gathered position value to 0, while all the following values were 
the differential of the current gauge position and the initial one.  
==PAGE:17==
11 
 
 
Fig. 2.8. Initial position of the specimens. 
 
Table 2.1 presents the adjusted speed in both parts and calculated ultimate strength of each 
measurement. 
Table 2.1. Measurement speed and calculated ultimate strength. 
Test 
No. 
1st section speed 
[mm/min] 
2nd section speed 
[mm/min] 
Ultimate strength 
[MPa] 
1 
0.5 
0.5 
420 
2 
0.5 
15 
426 
3 
0.5 
8 
425 
4 
0.5 
8 
423 
5 
0.5 
8 
421 
6 
0.5 
8 
424 
 
Afterwards, the stress was calculated from the collected loads values divided by the specimen 
initial cross section area. The results of tensile test for one of the cases are shown in Fig. 2.9. 
The results of the remaining measurements are enclosed in Appendix A. The final values 
of the ultimate strength of each test are presented in the last column of Table 2.1. 
Moreover, Fig. 2.10 shows the mechanical properties of different HSLA types taken from the 
producer datasheets [9].  
Extensometer 
Gauges 
Beginning of local 
coordinate system  
==PAGE:18==
12 
 
 
Fig. 2.9. Dependence between measured stress and piston position for the first measurement.  
 
Fig. 2.10. Technical specification for HSLA [8]. 
 
From the last column of Table 2.1 it is visible that all ultimate strength results are above 
420 MPa. Comparing the values with datasheets of HSLA from Fig. 2.10 it was deducted that 
material used in the project is HSLA 340, as the ultimate strength value range is between 
420 MPa and 490 MPa.  
 
2.1.4 Hardness test  
The second way to determine the ultimate strength is the hardness test. Among available types 
of hardness measurement methods, the Vickers Hardness Test was chosen, which is dedicated 
for the hard materials. The method uses a pyramid-shaped diamond indenter of the cone angle 
equal to 136° to which a standard pressure is applied. The result of this is that the material 
surface is deformed leaving a diamond shape appearance, which area had to be calculated by 
measuring its diagonals. The hardness is represented by the Vickers number HV which 
is a relation between applied force P and deformation area A1 presented in formula (2.1).  
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
Position  [mm]
Stress [N/mm2]
==PAGE:19==
13 
 
HV = P
𝐴1
 
(2.1) 
 
By knowing the diagonals and the angle between the opposite sides of the square pyramid 
indenter, the area can by calculated as follows: 
𝐴1 =
𝑑2
2sin⁡(136°
2 )   
(2.2) 
 
After denominator calculation in formula (2.2) and substituting it into formula (2.1) 
the generalized formula for the Vickers number is: 
𝐻𝑉= 1,854 𝑃
𝑑2 
 (2.3) 
 
Another form of the Vickers number determination are conversion tables from which Vickers 
number can be determined based on the relation between the applied load and measured 
diagonals length of the deformed square.  
The hardness test machine is shown in Fig. 2.11a. The specimen was placed on the adjustable 
table, such that its face touched the indenter tip. Afterwards, the specimen was deformed by 
the predetermined force. As the machine has built-in magnification system, the deformation 
was seen in the upper window with magnification of 70 times, presented Fig. 2.11b. 
The window was equipped with a ruler allowing measuring diagonals lengths.  
 
    
 
 
                (a)                                                  (b) 
(c) 
Fig. 2.11. Hardness test equipment parts a) the whole equipment, b) rotary table with indenter, 
c) magnification window. 
==PAGE:20==
14 
 
In the test two loads of 50 kg and 30 kg were applied respectively. For each test two diagonals 
were measured four times from which the average value was calculated. Afterwards, in order 
to find the Vickers number, computed values were matched with applied load in the conversion 
table. Table 2.2 shows the diagonals measurements result, the average value and corresponding 
Vickers number. 
 
Table 2.2. Hardness test results. 
Applied Load [kg] 
30 
50 
Diagonal  
d1 
d2 
d1 
d2 
Measured diagonal #1 [mm] 
0.62 
0.62 
0.81 
0.82 
Measured diagonal #2 [mm] 
0.61 
0.60 
0.82 
0.81 
Measured diagonal #3 [mm] 
0.61 
0.62 
0.83 
0.80 
Measured diagonal #4 [mm] 
0.61 
0.61 
0.82 
0.81 
Average diagonal value [mm] 
0.613 
0.815 
HV [kg/mm2] 
146.14 
141.32 
  
For the performed tests, the calculated Vickers number slightly differs (1% difference), due to 
the diagonals measurements done by the ruler which has limited precision. Thus, by knowing 
the Vickers number the yield strength can be determined, which is approximately equal to 1/3 
of the hardness. Therefore, the tensile strength is equal to 424 MPa for Vickers number achieved 
from 50 kg load. This confirms that material being used during the project is HSLA 340. 
 
2.2 Summary 
In this chapter, specimen sizes and projection dimensions for different welding cases in parallel 
and perpendicular projection welding are determined. The specimens size differed depending 
on number of projections. In parallel projection welding, the circular projections were designed 
to have a height of 0.9 mm and diameter of 2.8 mm. In case of perpendicular projection welding, 
two elongated projections were designed to have a height of 0.9 mm, width of 2.88 mm and 
length of 10 mm. Besides, tensile and hardness tests have been done to validate the material 
property.  
 
==PAGE:21==
15 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 3 
 
Welding machine 
In resistance projection welding, welding parameters are mostly determined by the specimens 
material and thickness as well as the number of projections being welded. In order to achieve 
satisfactory weld, it is of great importance to use the machine that is able to adjust welding 
parameters. Thus, the following chapter presents the machine being used for the resistance 
welding project. 
 
3.1 Choice of welding machine  
Two machines were taken into consideration to be used for projection welding: Expert 170 kVA 
with Harms & Wende HWI 2000 control unit (hereafter called Expert) and 8105 Tecna 
250 kVA with TE 180 control unit (hereafter called Tecna). The machines differ from each 
other due to the source of applied force and the type of welding current.  During the projection 
resistance welding process, in which the projections soften and melt due to high temperatures, 
the constant force needs to be applied, therefore, the constant electrode movement has to be 
ensured. In case of the Tecna, which is equipped with pneumatic source of force without any 
supporting systems, this condition is not satisfied. In case of sudden melt, the electrode 
movement is not constant which results in not properly developed contact area between 
==PAGE:22==
16 
 
workpieces being welded. Additionally, high current results in temperature increase, causing 
high splash on the free surfaces. The problem does not take place in the Expert machine which 
is equipped with hydraulic system together with disc springs located between a machine piston 
and the electrode. While projections melts, the load in the spring increases resulting in disc 
expansion which allows to follow the specimen weld.  
The second difference between the two machines is the type of welding current. Tecna supplies 
an AC welding current, while Expert supplies middle frequency 1 kHz welding current, which 
is close to DC current. In projection welding, AC current is not desirable, due to the periodically 
changeable current directions. During the time between the peaks, the heat is not maintained 
which affects weld by cooling it down. Considering the above-mentioned differences, 
the welding process was conducted in the Expert machine. The main differences between two 
machines are summarized in Table 3.1. 
 
Table 3.1. Comparison of two welding machines. 
Machine 
Tecna 
Expert 
Force source 
Pneumatic 
Hydraulic + disc springs 
Welding current 
AC current 
Middle frequency current 
Differences 
- Constant force not supplied during 
the eventual material collapse 
- Constant force ensured due to the disc 
springs 
 
- Changeable current supplied during 
welding process 
- Constant current supplied during 
welding process  
 
3.2 Welding machine set-up 
Expert welding machine is composed of two electrodes, Piezoelectric sensor, located 
in the housing under the bottom electrode, and Rogowski coil. The lower electrode is fixed while 
the upper electrode moves up and down applying the force to the specimen. Expert welding 
machine is shown in Fig. 3.1.  
 
==PAGE:23==
17 
 
 
Fig 3.1. Expert welding machine, A) C0-type electrode, B) Piezoelectric sensor, C) Rogowski coil. 
 
For welding of investigated cases C0 electrodes with the outer diameter of 31 mm and wall 
thickness of 8 mm were used. For welding the specimens which projection have to be welded 
simultaneously, and welding area exceed C0 electrode area a new electrode was designed. 
By the electrode, 4 projections placed in the row can be welded at the same time. Described 
electrodes are shown in Figs. 3.2a and 3.2b respectively. The technical drawing 
of designed electrode is attached in Appendix B.   
 
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
Fig. 3.2. Electrodes a) C0 electrode b) rectangular electrode 
 
A 
C 
B 
==PAGE:24==
18 
 
The current and force data from the measurements were transmitted by the dedicated data 
acquisition system to the LabView program. For the reliability of force measurements 
the transducer was calibrated first by applying the load up to 1500 kg with 100 kg intervals on 
the press. For each interval step values of voltage from voltmeter and force from amplifier were 
noted down. Afterwards, the applied load vs voltage was plotted. The values from the trend line 
equation were used as a factors in the LabView program. The trend lines’ slope equal to 2.16 
corresponds to the force constant, while  trend line constant equal to 0.55 relates to the force 
offset. Fig. 3.3 shows the calibration curve for the piezoelectric sensor used in the experiments. 
 
 
Fig. 3.3. Calibration curve for piezoelectric sensor. 
 
Depending on the material thickness and the number of the projections being welded 
the adjusted current and force differs so as more projections require higher current and force. 
Expert welding machine has limitations for setting up current and force. The minimum 
measured current value was around 3.5 kA which was only sufficient for 1 projection to achieve 
satisfactory welds. Due to this fact, it is believed that in case of 1 projection welding, robust 
welds can be attained for current lower than 3.5 kA. Nevertheless, the measurements have to be 
conducted to confirm the hypothesis. As the range of applied current satisfied welding 
requirements for investigated cases, force adjustment had its limitations which would unable 
to conduct all considered measurements. The minimum force that the Expert machine can 
deliver is 2 kN, while for the cases of one and two circular projection electrode force of 1.5 kN 
and 1.9 kN are required [4]. The other problem of Expert welding machine is that a constant 
force is not achievable for values below 2.7 kN. Another problem associated with low force 
y = 2.16x + 0.55
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Voltage [V] 
Load [kN]
==PAGE:25==
19 
 
was that the upper electrode wan not able to move up after welding which resulted in changing 
the force by increasing it so the upper electrode moved up. In order to explain the reasoning 
behind the Expert problems, the simple model presented in Fig. 3.4 is used. The model 
is simplification of Expert hydraulic system consisting of rod which is moving vertically in 
the cylinder. In the second end of the rod, Expert upper table is assembled. The model presents 
acting forces for loading (Fig. 3.4a) and unloading (Fig 3.4b) situations. 
 
 
(a)                                           (b) 
Fig. 3.4. Simplified model of Expert hydraulic cylinder and the table a) moving down b) moving up. 
 
Based on the force indication shown in Fig 3.4 following formulas can be applied. 
FD=FE-Ff+Fg 
(3.1) 
 
FU=-FE+Ff+Fg 
(3.2) 
Formula (3.1) describes force balance in loading situation, while formula (3.2) presents relation 
between forces in case of unloading. FD and FU indicate force being measured to loading and 
unloading situations respectively. Additionally, FE is the force being adjusted in Expert 
machine, while Ff is friction force opposing table movement and Fg corresponds to the weight 
of the upper table. By assuming that Ff and Fg are constant, FD  become greater than FU as in 
case of unloading the table gravity force is opposing the movement. In case of performing 
couple of measurements, without force adjustment, Force FU from previous measurements 
become FD of the following measurement, therefore, FE is decreased. The situation is repeated 
up to the point in which the Ff and Fg together  are equal or greater than FE. The last described 
condition corresponds to the problem where Expert upper electrode is not moving up, therefore, 
new force adjustment is required. 
==PAGE:26==
20 
 
3.3 Spring supporting system design  
Due to the problems described in section 3.2 it was decided to use two identical springs to apply 
extra force to help the upper table to move up. The graphical representation of the force balance 
including spring system is presented in Fig. 3.5. The high force being applied by Expert 
machine is opposed by force from the spring system. As a result, the measured force during 
welding is the difference between forces.  The spring elasticity calculations and spring 
supporting system design are described in the following sections. 
 
 
Fig. 3.5. Force balance in welding machine including spring system. 
 
3.3.1 Spring force measurement 
In order to check the possibility of using springs as auxiliary force three springs of the same 
total height of 150 mm were selected. In the first step, the stiffness of springs were measured. 
For this purpose, each of the springs was compressed separately on the press up to 80kg. Fig. 3.6 
presents the spring in initial stage of compressing. The deflection of the spring was measured 
by crankshaft gauge. The linear dependence between applied load and deflection was used to 
determine the springs constant which is the slope of plots presented in Fig. 3.7. The results 
of the measurement and the spring constants are presented in Table 3.2.  
 
Fig 3.6. Spring deflection test. 
==PAGE:27==
21 
 
Table 3.2. Deflection measurements for three springs. 
Load [kg] 
Deflection [mm] 
Spring 1 Spring 2 
Spring 3 
20 
- 
1.40 
2.30 
30 
4.00 
2.35 
2.72 
40 
- 
3.28 
3.34 
50 
- 
5.10 
3.93 
60 
6.67 
5.10 
4.55 
70 
7.58 
5.93 
5.17 
80 
8.50 
- 
5.81 
Spring const. [kN/mm] 
9.16 
9.23 
6.06 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 3.7. Plots representing deflection measurement vs load for a) Spring 1, b) Spring 2, c) Spring 3. 
y = 9.16x + 1.29
0,0
0,2
0,4
0,6
0,8
0
2
4
6
8
10
Load [kN]
Deflection [mm]
y = 9.24x - 0.39
0
0,2
0,4
0,6
0,8
0
2
4
6
8
10
Load [kN]
Deflection [mm]
y = 6.06x + 1 
0
0,2
0,4
0,6
0,8
0
2
4
6
8
10
Load [kN]
Deflection [mm]
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
==PAGE:28==
22 
 
 
From the results it was concluded that the springs 1 and 2 possess the same stiffness. The small 
difference between their deflection factors might have been result of the small misalignment 
while loading the spring. Additionally, the load was adjusted manually, thus, the applied values 
may have varied slightly. Finally, the deflection values were read from the analogue gauge, 
therefore, the device has its limited measuring precision comparing to the digital one. The 3rd 
spring characterizes lower elasticity which means it has the greatest force resistance. Further 
analysis was focused on the deflection calculation of the springs in order to meet the force 
requirement suggested in [4] for one and two projections cases with 1.5 kN and 1.9 kN force 
respectively. It was assumed, that the Expert machine is able to deliver minimum load of 2.7 kN 
which corresponds to the minimum measured force during sequence of performed welds done 
one after another without necessity of force adjustment in between. Thus, the difference 
between 2.7 kN and the required force, depending on the number of projections, was 
determined. The schematic relation between the forces is presented in Fig. 3.5. By knowing 
the forces each spring has to handle and their constants it was possible to calculated the springs 
deflections with applying Hooks low:  
F=k×xs 
(3.3) 
 
where k is the spring constant and xs is the deflection. The results of the calculated force 
differences as well as the deflections are presented in Tables 3.3 and 3.4 respectively.  
 
Table 3.3. Force calculation. 
Number of projections 
1 
2 
Load applied by the Expert [kN] 
2.7 
2.7 
Required force [kN] 
1.5 
1.9 
Force difference [kN] 
1.2 
0.8 
 
Table 3.4. Required spring deflection results.  
Spring 
1 
2 
3 
Spring constant 
9.16 
9.23 
6.06 
Deflection for 1 projection [mm] 
13.10 
13.00 
19.80 
Deflection for 2 projections [mm] 
8.70 
8.70 
13.20 
==PAGE:29==
23 
 
 
From the Table 3.4 it is concluded that any of three single springs can be used, as the deflections 
are less than 15% of the total spring height while it was assumed that the spring can be deflected 
maximally 50% due to the safety reasons. In such a case, in order to avoid misalignment while 
applying the force by the upper electrode the spring should be placed align with the electrodes. 
Nevertheless, with the already existing welding set-up, adjustment of the external supporting 
system with one spring would be complicated and might impact already existing set-up 
elements. However, by using two the same springs in parallel simplifies the system design and 
solves the springs placement problem, as the springs can be placed symmetrically from the 
electrode. Therefore, it was decided to use spring 1 and 2 simultaneously and place them in both 
sides of the electrode with even distance from the electrode canter. Such solution is preferable 
due to the symmetrical action of the opposing force acting against the force applied by 
the Expert.   
 
3.3.2 Spring system design 
The minimum distance between the bottom and the top table during welding process 
was the main requirement during designing the system. Therefore, the total height of the spring 
system together with maximally compressed spring had to be equal to 270 mm. Bearing in mind 
the spring compression for 1 projection and assuming that the springs 1 and 2 are the same, 
the supporting system has to have the minimum total height of 127 mm during welding. 
The value was achieved from the formula (3.3). 
z-hspring+xmax= hsystem 
(3.3) 
 
where z is the distance between the tables (270 mm), hspring is the spring height (150 mm), 
xmax is the maximal spring deflection (6.5 mm) and hsystem is the total height of the system. 
Finally, it was decided to design the system of the total height equal to 130 mm, consisting 
of one bottom and two top parts for each spring. Fig. 3.8 shows spring support system adjusted 
in the Expert welding machine. 
 
 Bottom part 
The bottom part is responsible for the spring placement in the Experts bottom table. 
The diameter of the lower part was adjusted to make sure that the spring would not slide 
down during load application when the inner spring diameter gets bigger due to deflection. 
==PAGE:30==
24 
 
The longitudinal part of the element has height of 90 mm which ensures that the spring do 
not to jump out from the support during load application. Moreover, the part is fixed 
to the table by dedicated rectangular head shaped M12 screw located in the centre 
of the element. The technical drawing of the part is enclosed in the Appendix C, drawing 1. 
 
 Top parts 
Top parts consists of two elements, a nylon element and a steel cylinder, which are placed 
in the other side of the springs. The steel cylinder is directly fixed to the top table 
of the Expert machine, while to the other side of the element, the nylon part is assembled. 
The nylon was chosen for the part material due to the insulation of the system. In case 
of using conductive material the spring system would be an open loop system preventing 
welding. Due to this fact, the counter bore hole was drilled in the part, which ensures that 
the M12 screw would not have contact with the rest conductive elements. Similarly 
as in case of the bottom part, the diameter of the top elements was adjusted to ensure 
the spring not to slide down during the compression. The technical drawings of the part are 
enclosed in the appendix C 
 
 
Fig. 3.8. The spring support system parts. 
 
3.3.3 Spring supporting system evaluation 
In order to check the effectiveness of the designed spring system a series of force measurements 
were carried out by applying force without current. The tests were performed in three sequences 
for three different force values in which singe HSLA 340 steel plate was placed on the lower 
electrode. The first sequence considers the measurements without spring supporting system. 
After reaching the repeatable force value minimum 3 times in the row, the spring supporting 
Bottom part 
Steel cylinder  
Spring 
Nylon element 
==PAGE:31==
25 
 
system was adjusted to the Expert machine, thereby beginning the second sequence. 
The measurements were performed at least 3 times in the row. Afterwards, the third sequence 
begun by disassembling the spring support system and conducting at least 3 measurements 
without machine settings change. It needs stressing that for the second and third sequence 
the force values were repeatable from the first measurement in the sequence. Table 3.5 presents 
measurements results. From the gathered data it is visible, that the spring supporting system 
decrease the measured force significantly around 4.4 kN. Additionally, measured forces 
in the first and the third sequence are nearly equal, therefore,  the supporting system 
does not influence the machine force settings. Moreover, one more measurement was conducted 
in which the force value in the first sequence was equal to 4.65 kN, however, in the second 
sequence due to too low force applied, data were not collected, therefore the results 
are not included in Table 3.5.  
 
Table 3.5. Measurement results for the spring support system evaluation test. 
Sequence 
number 
Force [kN] 
1 
2 
3 
1 
6.05 
7.15 
8.52 
1 
6.05 
7.17 
8.54 
1 
6.07 
7.16 
8.54 
2 
1.80 
2.81 
3.95 
2 
1.80 
2.81 
3.95 
2 
1.78 
2.82 
3.93 
3 
6.10 
7.20 
8.52 
3 
6.05 
7.17 
8.59 
3 
6.08 
7.12 
8.56 
 
3.4 Summary 
During the projection resistance welding process, in which the projections soften and melt 
due to high temperatures, the constant force needs to be applied. Therefore, the constant 
electrode movement has to be ensured. In this work, Expert machine with  hydraulic system 
supported by disc springs located between the machine piston and the electrode were used. 
The welding machine supplies middle frequency 1 kHz welding current which is preferable 
instead of AC current which deliver insufficient heat between the current peaks. Furthermore, 
==PAGE:32==
26 
 
the welding current supplied by the Expert is at least 3.5 kA which allows to weld specimens 
with one, two or more number of the projections. The lowest possible applied force is 2 kN. 
Nevertheless, in case of conducting a series of welding measurements in a row with the constant 
force, the force below 2.7 kN is not repeatable, thereby force settings have to be adjusted after 
each measurement. As a solution to this problem the spring supporting system was designed 
consisting of two similar springs placed symmetrically at the sides of the electrode. The spring 
system acts as an opposing force towards table movement, which decreases 4.3 kN 
of the applied force. As a result, the welding measurements in which the applied force had to be 
kept constant below 2.7 kN for a number of measurements in a row became possible.  
 
==PAGE:33==
27 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 4 
 
Design of press set-up and supporting system 
 
Projections are usually embossed in punching or stamping process. In order to emboss 
projection punch, to which force is applied, and die are required. The tools dimensions are 
mainly determined by projections size that are supposed to be welded. Moreover, in order to 
achieve satisfactory weld, the position of the sample according to the electrode have great 
importance. The following chapter present design of the press set-up responsible for circular 
and longitudinal projection embossment as well as welding supporting system that positions 
specimens during parallel and perpendicular projection welding.   
 
4.1 Press set-up system 
In this section, the design set-up for embossing circular and elongated projections on metal 
sheets is described. Technical drawings of the setup are attached in the Appendix D. 
As the project required embossing of projections of specific size which were described 
in section 3.2, a system for embossing projections had to be designed. Two presses were 
considered to be used: the hydraulic press and the manual mechanical press. Due to the fact that 
hydraulic press requires assistance of the operator while using it as well as the load range 
exceeds the loads needed for projection embossments it was decided to use the manual press. 
==PAGE:34==
28 
 
The load is delivered by a lever which moves the screw in vertical direction in the range 
of 450 mm. The manual press is shown in Fig. 4.1.  
 
 
Fig. 4.1. Manual mechanical press for projection embossment. 
 
The manual mechanical press had to be adjusted to emboss the projections. Thus, for both 
circular and longitudinal projections, the set-ups were designed. Fig. 4.2 (a) presents the circular 
projection set-up and Fig. 4.2 (b) the longitudinal projection set-up. Both set-ups are using 
the same table base with the locating blocks and the sliders. Due to the projection shape 
difference the die, the punch and the punch support had to be designed as the separate parts.  
 
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
Fig. 4.2. Projection press set-up (a) circular projections, (b) longitudinal projection.  
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:35==
29 
 
4.4.1 Table base 
The table base is a rectangular steel plate of dimensions 170 mm × 200 mm × 20 mm presented 
in Fig. 4.3. The table base is assembled to the press by rectangular and cylindrical blocks. 
The holes in the table base for the rectangular block are countersunk type while the one used 
for cylindrical block is a counterbore hole of the oval shape which ensures flexible adjustment 
of the table according to the press screw. The holes are designed in a way that they allow smooth 
movement of the sliders. Moreover, the designed blocks arrangement stabilize the set-up 
by not allowing the table base dislocations during the projection embossment. Finally, to the 
table dies and sliders, described in subsections 4.1.2 and 4.1.5 respectively, are assembled.  
 
(a) 
 
 
(b) 
Fig 4.3. Table base a) upper surface, b) fixing blocks. 
 
4.1.1 Die 
Die is the tool used to shape projections. In the project two types of welded projections are 
investigated, therefore, two dies were designed: the circular die for circular projections and the 
longitudinal die forming longitudinal projections. The dimensions of the dies were determined 
Slider holes 
Dies holes 
Cylindrical fixing block hole 
Cylindrical fixing block 
Rectangular fixing block 
Rectangular holes 
==PAGE:36==
30 
 
by standards found in Resistance Welding Manual [4]. Due to carrying high loads during 
the projection production, both dies had to be hardened up to 52 HRC. Fig. 4.4 presents the die 
dedicated for circular projections while Fig. 4.5 shows the die used for longitudinal projection 
embossing. 
 
 Circular die 
During die design two requirements were considered. Firstly, the dimensions of the central 
hole had to be adjusted so as to emboss required height of the projection. Therefore, 
dimensions suggested by Resistance Welding Manufactures Associations [4] were used. 
Dimensions of designed circular die are enclosed in Appendix D drawing 1A. 
What is more, the die has two levels: top and bottom rings as distinguished in Fig. 4.4. 
The diameter of the top ring is adjusted so as, in case of couple projections in one specimen, 
the minimum distance between neighbouring projections is 11 mm which is 2 mm less than 
minimum recommended by [4]. The bottom cylindrical part has fixing function. Thus, three 
M3 countersunk holes were drilled which allows for smooth movement of the top part 
of the slider. The height of the die levels were designed so as not to conflict with already 
embossed projections in the workpiece.  
 
 
 
Fig. 4.4. Circular die. 
 
 Longitudinal die 
Similarly to the cylindrical die, the dimensions of the longitudinal slot were designed 
according to [4]. The cross section of the slot has the same dimensions as the cylindrical 
one. Dimensions of designed longitudinal die are enclosed in Appendix D drawing 1b. 
The length of the slot is 25 mm which allows embossing longitudinal projections 
of different lengths. Due to the longitudinal shape of the slot, the rectangular shape 
Top ring 
Bottom ring 
==PAGE:37==
31 
 
of the die was chosen. As shown in Fig. 4.5 the die consists of two levels: top and bottom 
level. In case of at least two projections in one workpiece, the width of the top part was 
adjusted to emboss the projections with minimum distance of 11 mm from each other. 
The height of the level was designed so as, in case of embossing few projections, 
the embossed one, would not conflict with already produced projections. In the bottom part 
four countersink M3 holes were drilled with by which the die is fixed to the table and 
smooth movement of the top part of the slider is possible. Finally, chosen dimensions 
ensure easiness of manufacturing the part in the workshop.  
 
 
Fig. 4.5. Longitudinal die. 
 
4.1.2 Punch  
Punch is the tool responsible for shaping the projections, therefore, its dimensions needs 
to match the die dimensions. As in the project welding of two projection shapes are investigated, 
the circular and the longitudinal punches were designed. While forming projection, the punch 
is affected by high loads, therefore, the parts were made of 52 HRC hardened steel. The punch 
dimensions are based on standards included in [4]. Dimensions of the designed circular and 
longitudinal punches are enclosed in Appendix D, drawings number 6A and 6B respectively. 
As no information was found about the length of the punches, it was decided to set the length 
so as the tip of the punch protrude remarkable from the punch support. Afterwards, 
the protrusion was adjusted by adding washers (in case of the cylindrical punch) and metal foils 
(in case of the longitudinal punch) between the flat cylinder and the punch support which 
allowed to achieve desired height of the produced projections. Fig. 4.6 shows cylindrical and 
longitudinal punches.  
Top level 
Bottom level 
==PAGE:38==
32 
 
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
Fig. 4.6. Punch a) cylindrical, b) longitudinal.          
 
4.1.3 Punch support 
The punch support is the part linking the press screw with the punch. By two M5 screws 
it is screwed to the press screw. Its inner diameter was selected to fit the press screw diameter. 
The wall thickness of 10 mm guarantee robustness and rigidity of the part. The bottom part 
of the punch support was adjusted to the dimensions of the top parts of the dies. Fig. 4.7 
represents the cylindrical and longitudinal punch supports fixed to the press screw together 
with the punches inside.  
 
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
Fig. 4.7. Punch support used for embossing of a) circular projections b) longitudinal projections. 
==PAGE:39==
33 
 
4.1.4 Sliders  
The sliders are parts of the set-up used for adjusting the specimen position according 
to the centre of the press screw. For proper workpiece position adjustment two identical sliders 
are used. Each of them is moving along fixed horizontal line in the perpendicular directions. 
The slider consists of two parts. The bottom part has two longitudinal holes of length equal 
to 20 mm which extends the adjustment flexibility. Additionally, two M3 holes were drilled 
which are used in order to assemble the top part. The top part is rectangular block with two M3 
countersunk holes.  
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Fig. 4.8.  Circular die with sliders a) minimum distances b) maximum distances. 
 
Slider movement 
13 
13 
64 
55 
==PAGE:40==
34 
 
On the other hand, due to the longitudinal slot and the rectangular shape of the longitudinal die, 
the distance is measured from the slot circular edge. Hence, the minimum distance is 7 mm, 
while the maximum equals to 49 mm. Fig. 4.8 and Fig 4.9 shows minimum and maximal 
distances for circular and the longitudinal dies respectively.  
 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Fig. 4.9.  Longitudinal die with sliders a) minimum distance b) maximum distance. 
 
4.2 Welding support system 
In order to support the workpieces during welding it was necessary to design and manufacture 
welding supports. The material requirement for the parts was to sustain high temperature and 
be fire resistant for sparks and splashes that may occur during welding. Finally, the material 
cannot conduct the current so it has to belong to insulation group of materials. Bearing those 
64 
49 
7 
15 
==PAGE:41==
35 
 
facts in mind, as well as due to the easiness of manufacturing, it was decided to manufacture 
the parts from the hard wood. Fig. 4.10 shows the welding support system for circular (a) and 
longitudinal (b) projection welding. The technical drawings of elements of welding support 
system are enclosed in Appendix E. 
 
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
Fig. 4.10. welding support system for a) circular projection welding, b) longitudinal projection 
welding. 
 
4.2.1 Wooden block base 
The block base is responsible for long workpiece support during welding, in case the specimen 
exceeds the electrode area. Moreover, it is used as the base for the sliders which adjust 
the workpiece positions. The base is used for both: the circular and the longitudinal projection 
welds, as showed in Fig. 4.10. Additionally, depending on the number of projections and 
the distance between them, it can be used for both: the circular and rectangular electrode. 
The block is supported by the nut which screws the electrode holder to the housing in which 
the piezoelectric sensor is placed (see Fig 3.1). Hence, the distance between the top 
of the electrode and the nut was the requirement for the height of the wooden block. It needs 
to be stressed, that the electrode protrude about 3.5 mm from the base to close electric circuit 
between the electrodes. As visible in Fig. 4.11 six holes of 5.5 mm diameter were drilled which 
are used to adjust the slider position. The holes placed in the corners of the cut of rectangle 
were designed for manufacturing simplicity.  
 
==PAGE:42==
36 
 
 
Fig. 4.11. Wooden table base. 
 
4.2.2 Wooden slider 
The wooden slider, similarly as the one described in section 4.1.5, was used to position 
the workpieces being welded according to the canter of the electrode. Thus, two sliders are used 
moving parallel to the wooden block sides. This ensures range of movement of 30 mm along 
longer side while along shorter one vary from 8 mm, in case of circular electrode, up to 18 mm 
for rectangular electrode. Although the slider moving parallel to the shorter block edge 
is universal for both parallel and perpendicular (longitudinal projections) welding, the one used 
along the longer side of the block needs to be turned for 180 degrees while changing the position 
of the welding elements from parallel to perpendicular sheets set-up. As shown in Fig. 4.12a 
the top part of the slider consists of two wooden blocks with 1.2 mm gap between them. In case 
of welding perpendicular sheets, the gap holds the element perpendicular to the electrodes (see 
Fig. 4.10 b). Due to the total slider height, the minimum width of the metal perpendicular 
specimen is 18 mm. Otherwise, the electrode can damage the top part of the slider while moving 
down as it reaches the wooden part before the specimen. Fig. 4.12 b) and c) present slider 
position used for welding the parallel  and perpendicular workpieces respectively.  
 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
Fig. 4.12. Slider a) top view b) adjusted for parallel sheets welding c) adjusted for perpendicular 
sheets welding. 
 
==PAGE:43==
37 
 
4.3 Summary 
In order to emboss circular and longitudinal projections a press set-up was designed. The set-
up was designed in a way that a number of projections could be embossed on one workpiece 
with the minimum distance of 11 mm between them. Using the sliders, the position 
of the projections in the specimen could be adjusted. The minimum distance from the slider 
edge to the die centre is 13 mm. The maximum position of the sliders according to the die centre 
along the longer edge of the table base is 64 mm for both dies. The distance along the shorter 
table base edge varies depending on the projection being made. Thus, the minimum position 
between slider edge and the circular die canter is 13 mm and the maximum is 55 mm. In case 
of the longitudinal die, the distance is measured from the rounded slot edge and slider edge. 
Therefore, the minimum distance is 7 mm while the maximum is 49 mm.  
Welding support system holds specimens in correct positions during both parallel and 
perpendicular projection welding. Additionally, it has been designed in a way that it is usable 
for circular and rectangular electrode. The specimens could be located in correct position using 
sliders. The range of movement of sliders along longer side is equal to 30 mm while along 
shorter side varies from 8 mm, in case of circular electrode, up to 18 mm for rectangular 
electrode. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:44==
38 
 
 
 
Chapter 5 
 
Experimental measurements 
For the projection welding, parameters influencing weld quality are welding current, force, time 
and projection height. Nugget size is a direct measure of the weld strength. The bigger 
the nugget size, the stronger the weld is. Although the nugget measurements are the most 
reliable measure of weld quality, there are also some other factors such as setdown that could 
define the weld quality. In this chapter, experimental measurements of welding current, force, 
projection height and setdown are described in detail. For a limited number of cases, the nugget 
size has been measured by metallography analysis. Table 5.1 presents the number 
of measurements in each category.  
Table 5.1. Number of experimental measurements for different welding cases 
Welding  
type 
No. of 
projections 
No. of 
measurements 
No. Of 
metallography 
Parallel 
1 
37 
5 
2 
24 
3 
3 
100 
6 
Perpendicular 
2 
34 
4 
 
 
==PAGE:45==
39 
 
5.1  Welding current parameters 
Current value, squeeze, welding and hold time and number of pulses were adjusted in the Expert 
machine in the automated panel. The values for current were adjusted in kA with one decimal 
precision, while for time in ms . The applied current was measured by Rogowski coil, while 
data were collected by data acquisition system. The current was measured in root mean square 
(RMS). The squeeze time, hold time and number of pulses remained constant and equal to 3000 
ms, 200 ms and 1 pulse respectively. Additionally, for welding the parallel sheets, the welding 
time was equal to 180 µs, while for welding the  perpendicular specimens was equal to 120 µs. 
As far as the force measurement is concerned, the force was adjusted mechanically by knob 
in the Expert machine. As in the Expert machine, there was no display showing the value 
of the adjusted force, the value was identified after force measurement.  
The force was measured by piezoelectric sensor placed in the bottom housing as described 
in section 3.2. Similarly as in case of current, the data were collected by the data acquisition 
system. The force being of an interest was force applied during the welding time. 
Due to the material melting during welding time, the force behavior was not stable, therefore, 
the averaged force value was considered. Additionally, there was force drop before and after 
welding time due to the nugget development, as during welding time it become softer and can 
tolerate less force than in solid state. The force behavior during the welding process is presented 
in Fig. 5.1. 
 
 
 
Fig. 5.1. Force behavior during projection welding process. 
0
2
4
6
8
0
0,1
0,2
0,3
0,4
0,5
0,6
0,7
Current [kA]
Time [ms]
0
0,5
1
1,5
2
2,5
3
3,5
4
0
0,1
0,2
0,3
0,4
0,5
0,6
0,7
Force [kN]
Time [ms]
==PAGE:46==
40 
 
5.2 Projection height and setdown measurements 
As described in section 4.1, the projections were embossed using the manual press, in which 
the force was applied mechanically. Since the projections were embossed manually, it was 
difficult to obtain a unique projection height for all the cases and variations were observed 
in projection height for different cases. In order to check the differences in projection height 
of different cases, each embossed projection was measured with a micrometer. 
For two and three projections specimens the effort was made to emboss projections of the same 
height. 
For each pair of the specimens being welded only one of them had embossments. For welding 
of parallel and perpendicular sheets, the specimen with the projections were always placed 
on the lower electrode. As far as the welding of the parallel sheets is concerned, before and after 
welding process, the height of each pair of the specimens was measured with the micrometer. 
Depending on the number of the projections on the specimens, the location of the measurement 
differed. Therefore, the specimens with one projection had its height measured 
in the embossment location, while the specimens with two projections between them. In case 
of three projections, the embossments create equilateral triangle, therefore, the specimens pair 
height was measured in the center of the triangle. In Fig. 5.2 the crosses point the measurements 
placement, while letters A, B, C indicate the projection number used for projection height 
distinction in further analysis. 
 
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
Fig. 5.2. Location of the height measurement in case of a) one projection b) two projections 
c) three projections specimens.  
 
The height measurement of the specimens was necessary for setdown calculation. Setdown 
determines how much the projection was compressed. Additionally, in case of welding 
measurements in which for different currents the same force is applied, setdown is an indirect 
measure of the heat input. The setdown is calculated from the formula (5.1). 
A 
A 
B 
B 
C 
==PAGE:47==
41 
 
𝑆= ℎ1 −ℎ2
ℎ2 −2  
  (5.1) 
 
where h1 is the total height of the specimens before welding, h2 is the total height 
of the specimens after welding, while -2 in the dominator refers to the thicknesses of the two 
specimens sheets. The setdown values are expressed in percentage. The greater the setdown 
value, the bigger the projection compression. 
In case of welding of perpendicular sheets, setdown is considered to be inaccurate and 
unreliable measure of the projection compression. During the projection welding, the edge 
of the vertical specimen were facing the longitudinal projections. After force and current 
application, the vertical specimen was melting around the projections which caused 
the specimen moving down towards the specimen with embossments, always until the edge 
of the vertical specimen faced the plane of the horizontal sheet. Additionally, applied force 
bended vertical specimen welding them not perfectly perpendicular. Therefore, in case 
of the perfectly perpendicular specimens weld, the setdown would be equal to 100%, otherwise, 
for specimens being welded not perfectly perpendicular, the setdown value would be over 
100%.    
 
 
Fig. 5.3. Welding of perpendicular specimens. 
 
Vertical specimen 
Horizontal specimen 
Melting regime 
==PAGE:48==
42 
 
5.3 Weld quality determination 
As far as welding of parallel specimens is concerned, the main factors determining the welds 
quality were a splash or a spark occurrence during the welding process, positive results from 
the “drop test” and the setdown value. The spark or splash during welding process may occur 
due to too high current adjustment for the force being applied, therefore, there is to high current 
density for the contact area. The contact area mostly depends on the force being applied. 
The higher the force is the bigger contact area. The second factor determining the weld quality 
was “drop test” which was simple measure of weld strength. The welded specimens were 
dropped from height approximately 1 m couple of times in the row. If the welded specimens 
did not disassemble during the test, the test result was positive. Negative result of the test mostly 
corresponded to the setdown value below 85%. As far as the setdown as a factor is concerned, 
the higher the value the better weld quality. However, high setdown values may be achieved 
by applying high compressive force together with low current value which will result in small 
nugget dimension and therefore poor weld quality. Fig. 5.4 shows current versus setdown 
relation in which 3 regions are distinguished:  
 Drop test failure in which no nugget or too weak nugget was developed. 
 Satisfactory regime in which specimen sustained the “drop test” and no spark or splash 
was observed. These cases were considered as acceptable welds. In this region, welds 
with highest setdown value are the most interested ones. 
 
Splash/spark regime in which sparks, splashes and explosions occur due to too high 
current or low force adjustment.
Fig. 5.4. Different regions in terms of setdown-current relation. 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Setdown [%] 
Current [kA]
OK
SPLASH
DROP TEST FAIL
Drop test fail 
Satisfactory weld 
Splash 
Desired results 
==PAGE:49==
43 
 
The items mentioned above represent primary criteria to determine the weld quality. 
Nevertheless, in order to determine the nugget size the metallography had to be performed.  
 
5.4  Metallography analysis 
The aim of the metallography analysis was the nugget measurement in the middle of the weld 
for both circular and longitudinal projection. From the selected specimens, the weld being 
analyzed was cut out. For each sample the dimensions distinguished in Fig. 5.5 were noted 
down as they were used for declaration of the amount of the material to be milled in the next 
steps. 
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
Fig. 5.5. Cut of sample symbolic dimensions a) circular projection b) longitudinal projection. 
In the next step, the cut out samples were cleaned with ethanol, dried and clamped with the metal 
holder. The specimens were placed in the clamping with the weld directed downstairs, so as 
both, the clamping and the sample edge were touching the surface. Such prepared samples were 
molded in the transparent polymer ClaroFast one after another. The machine being used in this 
process was Struers ProntoPress-20 which was programed to deliver 20 kN load for 6 min 
in 180°C temperature. The next step was milling the molded samples. The amount 
of the material to be taken by the milling (m1) was determined by formula (5.2) while 
the annotations correspond to the symbols from Fig. 5.2, while 0.5 corresponds to 0.5 mm 
to be taken by grinding and polishing which is the next step of the process.  
𝑚1 = 𝑥𝑝−
𝑑𝑝
2 −0.5    
(5.2) 
 
 
Grinding and polishing process was conducted on Struers RotoPol-22 machine. The machine 
is equipped with automated sample holder Struers Rotos RotoForc- 4 which is able to handle 
six specimens at the same time. For gridding process, the machine cycle was programed for 
3 minutes in which samples were pressed with load 10 kN to the plate or paper rotating with 
speed equal to 150 RPM. Grinding process consisted of 5 cycles in which the plates and papers 
xp m1 
dp 
dp 
xp 
m1 
==PAGE:50==
44 
 
of different grain density were used. Therefore, in first three cycle plates were used with 
the grain density equal to 120, 600 and 1200. Afterwards, plates were substituted by sandpapers 
of density equal to 1000 and 4000 grains. Subsequently, the specimens were polished 
on the same machine. The machine was programed for the cycle of 3 minutes in which force 
of 10 kN was applied for the first two minutes, while for the last minute force was equal to 5kN. 
Similarly as in case of grinding, the rotary speed of the machine was equal to 150 RPM. 
The polishing process consisted of two cycles in which two different cloth were used 
(mol and nap respectively). For the both cycles Green lubricant with different diamonds grain 
size were automatically dosed by Struer Multidoser machine. Therefore, in the first cycle, 
the mol cloth with 3 µm diamond was used, while in the second one nap cloths with 1 µm 
diamond size was applied. The last step was etching samples with 2% HNO3 dissolved 
in ethanol for 4 seconds.  
Such prepared samples were ready for the nugget measurement. For this purpose, 
the stereomicroscope Leica DFC 450C was used from which the magnified picture was 
displayed on the screen. With the Paintshop PRO7 software the pictures of the nuggets were 
taken and nugget dimensions were measured. The unit of the measurements was number 
of pixels which, depending on the magnification, was converted into the mm. Each sample was 
magnified 20 times, therefore, 370 pixels were corresponding to 1 mm. An example nugget 
picture is presented in Fig. 5.6a with the indication of the measured dimensions. Therefore, x is 
the nugget width, y it he total nugget height, while yl, yu corresponds to nugget height developed 
in the lower and upper sheet respectively. In case of the longitudinal projections, only the nugget 
height y was measured as it is shown in Fig 5.6b. 
 
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
Fig. 5.6. An example of the nugget picture for a) circular projection and b) longitudinal projection. 
 
x 
y 
yu 
yl 
y 
==PAGE:51==
45 
 
5.5 Summary 
During projection welding, the main investigated parameters were welding current measured 
in terms of RMS, welding force and welding time. The squeeze time, hold time and number 
of pulses were kept constant and were equal to 3000 ms, 200 ms and 1 pulse, respectively. 
For parallel projections welding 180 µs welding time was adjusted, while for the welding 
of perpendicular specimens welding time was considered 120 µs.  
In order to measure the setdown, the total height of each pair of the specimens was measured 
before and after welding. Setdown was the measure of projection compression and heat input 
to some extent. In order to determine the weld quality “drop test” was performed, in which 
the separation of two sheets after being dropped on the floor represented poor weld quality. 
The lower part of weldability region was defined by the current and forces for which 
the specimen did not sustain the drop test. Splash and spark occurrence was considered 
as the upper limit of weldability. The nuggets size in different cases was measured 
by metallography analysis.  
 
 
==PAGE:52==
46 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 6 
 
Measurements results 
Measurements results for parallel and perpendicular projection welding cases are presented in 
this chapter. Parallel projection welding cases included 1, 2 and 3 circular projections while in 
perpendicular projection welding, cases with 2 longitudinal projections were examined.  
 
6.1  Parallel projection welding 
In total 160 parallel projection welding measurements were conducted. For the chosen pairs 
of parameters, the measurements were repeated to confirm the results. From all parallel 
projection welding measurements 15 samples were selected for metallography analysis in order 
to evaluate the setdown-current and setdown-force relations. 
 
6.1.1 One projection welding 
For one projection welding case the spring supporting system was used. By adjusting the current 
and the applied force, 37 measurements were conducted in total including measurements being 
repeated due to the confirmation of results for specific pair of the welding parameters. 
Due to the Expert limitations described in section 3.2 the minimum applied current was in the 
range of 3.5 kA. Additionally, all the measurements in which current of 3.5 kA was applied had 
==PAGE:53==
47 
 
positive results of drop test, and depending on the applied force the setdown varied from 85% 
up to 93%. In view of the above, it is believed that by correct force adjustment the satisfactory 
weld result can be achieved even for lower current values. On the other hand, the maximum 
applied current was equal to 5.2 kA, however the splash occurrence was noticed. The maximum 
applied current for which the splash was not observed was around 4.7 kA. Fig. 6.1 shows 
the results of welding with different current and force values for one projection welding case. 
The plot gives general view of the range of the parameters being used with distinction between 
the correct welds, the welds with splashes occurrence and poor welds which had negative result 
of the drop test. The cases selected for metallography analysis are highlighted with blue cross.  
As it is visible in Fig. 6.1 two measurements are marked with triangle as they had negative 
results from the “drop test”.  The specimens for which force and current were equal to 2.3 kN 
and 3.78 kA respectively separated after falling on the ground (drop test) due to poor weld 
strength. High applied force resulted in high projection compression, and therefore, too big 
contact area between specimens for the applied low current value. The measured setdown value 
of 85% confirms the weld low strength.  
 
 
Fig. 6.1. Force-current configuration for all measurements. 
 
In the second measurement marked as the “drop test fail” no current was applied which 
was intended to measure the magnitude of projection collapse due to force. Thus, for the force 
equal to 2.63 kN the projection was compressed by 30%. The same measurement was included 
in Fig. 6.2a which presents the setdown measurements for different current application while 
measured force was kept constant and was approximately equal to 2.1 kN. The reason 
0
0,5
1
1,5
2
2,5
3
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Force [kN]
Current [kA]
DROP TEST FAIL
SPLASH
OK
==PAGE:54==
48 
 
for including setdown measurement for force 2.63 kN in Fig. 6.2a is related with explanation 
from section 5.1 which states, that the force value before current application is greater than 
the average force being measured during the welding time. Therefore, 2.6 kN corresponds 
to the force before current application, while 2.1 kN force is the welding time force. Moreover, 
for the investigated force, the lowest applied current resulting in the satisfactory weld was 
3.7 kA while the highest measured current was 4.75 kA. For values higher than this sparks were 
noticed. Setdown values vary from 85% for the lowest current applied, up to 92% for the highest 
current applied in the satisfactory weld regime. Remarkable high setdown around 90% was 
achieved for current range 3.85 kA. In view of the above, for the investigated cases three 
samples were chosen to have their nugget measured. The nugget dimensions together with the 
welding parameters, setdown and projection height are presented in Table 6.1. The 
corresponding cross section of the samples welds are shown in Fig. 6.3.   
 
Table 6.1. Nugget dimensions for chosen measurements. 
Measurement 
number 
Projection 
height [mm] 
Setdown 
% 
F 
[kN] 
RMS 
[kA] 
Nugget dimensions [mm] 
x 
y 
yu 
yL 
7 
1.907 
92.3 
2.08 
4.72 
2.55 
1.00 
0.74 
0.26 
10 
1.909 
91.6 
2.05 
3.81 
2.71 
1.14 
0.86 
0.28 
11 
1.903 
89.6 
2.02 
3.85 
3.09 
1.22 
1.00 
0.23 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:55==
49 
 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Fig. 6.2. Current-setdown graph for force a) 2.1kN, b) 1.92 kN. 
 
Measurements 10 and 11 had nearly similar welding parameters. From the setdown 
measurements it was concluded that better weld was achieved in measurement 10. Nevertheless, 
by comparing the nugget dimensions, bigger nugget was developed in sample from 
measurement 11. Sample from measurement 11 had smaller projection height and lower force 
was applied, while the adjusted current was slightly higher. Therefore, for the smaller contact 
area, higher welding current was adjusted, which resulted in bigger nugget development.  
Among compared measurements, the highest setdown value was achieved for sample 7. 
However, contrary to the setdown results the smallest nugget was developed. Unfortunately due 
to the poor etching of sample number 7, the nugget dimensions are not reliable (Fig. 6.3a).  
 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Setdwon [%]
Current [kA]
DROP TEST FAIL
SPLASH
OK
METALLOGRAPHY
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Setdown [%] 
Current [kA]
SPLASH
OK
METALLOGRAPHY
==PAGE:56==
50 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
Fig. 6.3. Nugget cross sections for measurements a) 7, b) 10, c) 11. 
 
In Fig 6.2b the relation between setdown and current is plotted for the force value around 
1.9 kN. By compering plots 6.2a with 6.2b it is visible that for the low force the splash occurs 
for lower current range due to high contact resistance which results in rapid heat increase. 
Furthermore, in the investigated range, it was expected to achieve the highest setdown values 
for the current values just before splash. Nevertheless, among performed measurements, with 
force 1.92 kN, higher setdown values were achieved for lower current value (around 3.5 kA) 
rather than higher current values (4.15 kA) what is presented in Table 6.2. By analyzing pair 
of parameters from Table 6.2 the general tendency was observed that by lowering force, 
the setdown decreased as well. However, some exceptions were noticed. By comparing 
measurement 27 with 25, it is observed that setdown value is lower for lower current value. 
While comparing measurements 26 with 21 shows an opposite relation where for lower current 
higher setdown was measured. Moreover, the setdown difference between the highest 
and lowest values is 4% only which corresponds to 0.036 mm difference in the projection 
compression. When the measurement difference between best and worst measurements is 
in the range of 4%, not only the accuracy of the measurement but keeping other parameters 
constant have great influence on the measurement result. Therefore, by bearing in mind the fact 
that the standard deviation of the applied force was 3%, the measurements should be repeated 
with smaller force deviation. Nevertheless, the results show the effect of parameters values 
on welding results.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:57==
51 
 
Table 6.2. Welding setdown for different currents in a limited force range. 
Measurement 
number 
Projection 
height [mm] 
Setdown 
% 
Force 
[kN] 
Current 
[kA] 
17 
1.908 
88.5 
1.96 
3.51 
26 
1.906 
87.6 
1.94 
3.84 
36 
1,910 
87.0 
1.92 
3.48 
20 
1.903 
86.4 
1.85 
3.51 
21 
1.904 
85.3 
1.94 
4.17 
27 
1.910 
84.5 
1.91 
4.11 
25 
1.906 
84.1 
1.91 
3.85 
 
Fig. 6.4 presents relation between the applied force and setdown for two constant welding 
currents equal to 3.5 kA and 4.7 kA. In both cases with increasing force the setdown decreased 
as the contact area of the compressed projection and specimen increases while the current stays 
contact. Therefore, the current density and contact resistance decrease what reduces the heat 
generation and nugget size. The statement above is confirmed by the measured nugget sizes 
for current equal to 3.5 kA. In the measurement 34 force equal to 1.65 kN was applied 
developing bigger nugget than in measurement 17 in which adjusted force was equal to 1.96 kN. 
Moreover, measurements 7 and 34 has similar setdown value, but the nugget size significantly 
differs. In measurement 7 high setdown value is because of mechanical compression of the 
projection provided by high applied force. The nugget cross section of specimen 7 is presented 
in Fig. 6.3a, while the nugget cross sections from measurements 17 and 34 in Fig. 6.5.  
 
Table 6.3. Nugget dimensions for chosen measurements. 
Measurement 
number 
Projection 
height [mm] 
Setdown 
% 
F 
[kN] 
RMS 
[kA] 
Nugget dimensions [mm] 
x 
y 
yu 
yl 
7 
1.907 
92.3 
2.08 
4.72 
2.55 
1.00 
0.74 
0.26 
17 
1.908 
88.5 
1.96 
3.51 
3.28 
1.27 
0.90 
0.37 
34 
1.905 
92.7 
1.65 
3.47 
3.34 
1.26 
0.97 
0.29 
==PAGE:58==
52 
 
 
Fig. 6.4. Force-setdown relation. 
 
To sum up, the best weld based on the nugget dimensions was achieved for 1.65 kN force and 
current 3.47 kA. Comparable good results were reached for force 1.96 kN and current 3.51 kA. 
For the applied force 2.1 kN, satisfactory welds were achieved up to 4.72 kA, while for the 
force 1.9 kN up to 4.1 kA. Moreover, conducted measurements show that for 1 projection 
welding small parameters variation strongly affect size of the weld nugget.  
 
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
Fig. 6.5. Nugget cross section for measurements a) 17, b) 34. 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
1,2
1,4
1,6
1,8
2
2,2
2,4
Setdown [%]
Force [kN]
I= 4.7 kA
I= 3.5 kA
METALLOGRAPHY
==PAGE:59==
53 
 
6.1.2 Two projections welding 
For two projections welding, similar to the case of one projection, the spring supporting system 
was used because of low range of applied force. For two projection cases the minimum applied 
force was 2.15 kN, while the maximum 3.15 kN. The minimum measured welding current was 
4.16 kA, where the specimens were not welded. The lowest current value to which satisfactory 
welding was achieved was equal to 4.15 kA.  The highest applied current value was in the range 
of 6.7 kA, however big splash was observed. The highest adjusted current value in which splash 
did not occur was equal to 6.15 kA. Additionally, the projections height was embossed so as 
the difference between their heights was less than 0.5%. For the two projections welding 24 
measurements were conducted in total. Fig. 6.6 presents all force-current configurations being 
measured during the two projections welding process. The plot gives general view of the range 
of the parameters being used with distinction between the reliable welds, the welds with 
splashes occurrence and poor welds which had negative result of the drop test. Moreover, 
the welds being analyzed in the metallography process are distinguished with the frame.  
 
 
Fig. 6.6. Force-current graph for all measurements. 
 
In Fig. 6.6 two measurements are marked as the drop test fail measurements. For the current 
equal to 4.16 kA and force 2.29 kN the developed weld war broken after the “drop test”. 
Before the test, the measured setdown was equal to 80% what is presented in Fig 6.7 as well, 
which shows the relation between the current and the setdown while the measured force 
was around 2.2 kN. The poor weld was the result of too small current applied, and therefore, 
low current density which reduces the heat generation. The second measurement marked 
0
0,5
1
1,5
2
2,5
3
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Force [kN]
Current [kA]
DROP TEST FAIL
SPLASH
OK
METALLOGRAPHY
==PAGE:60==
54 
 
as drop test fail, was done without current in order the measure the projection compression 
by force 2.7 kN which was equal to 12%. The measurement is included in Fig. 6.7 as well, 
because the force applied before welding time is larger than average force measured during 
current application what is explained in subsection 5.1. Therefore, for the analyzed case 
in which average force from the welding time is in the range of 2.2 kN, force 2.7 kN corresponds 
to the force value from the squeeze time.  
 
 
Fig. 6.7. Current-setdown for force equal to 2.2 kN. 
 
For the adjusted force, the splash occurred for welding current 6.1 kA, however, by decreasing 
current to 6.07kA no sparks were noticed and highest setdown of 92% was measured. 
Nevertheless, small variations of the parameters may cause the splash occurrence. On the other 
hand, basing on the positive dropping test result, the smallest current in which satisfactory 
quality weld was achieved, was equal to 4.67 kA. Therefore, the sample was chosen to have 
its nugget measured, however, it  was disassembled during cutting, which corresponds with 
poor weld quality. For the force equal to 2.2 kN, despite the measurement described above, 
the measurements setdown results were in the range of 90%. Therefore, two samples were 
chosen (measurement number 3 and 5) which nugget dimensions were compared. Table 6.4 
presents the nuggets dimensions while Fig. 6.9 nuggets cross section for chosen measurements. 
Symbols A and B correspond to the specific projection  number presented in Fig. 5.2b while 
the nugget dimensions symbols are correlated with symbols used in Fig 5.6.  
 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Setdown [%]
Current [kA]
OK
SPLASH
DROP TEST FAIL
METALLOGRAPHY
==PAGE:61==
55 
 
Table 6.4. Nuggets dimensions for chosen measurements. 
Measurement 
number 
Projection height [mm] Setdown 
% 
F 
[kN] 
RMS 
[kA] 
Nugget dimensions [mm] 
A 
B 
x 
y 
yu 
yl 
3 
1.909 
1.902 
91.1 
2.20 
5.72 
3.01 
1.17 
0.71 
0.45 
5 
1.907 
1.912 
91.7 
2.23 
6.07 
2.85 
1.09 
0.66 
0.43 
17 
1.900 
1.900 
95.0 
2.37 
6.08 
3.38 
1.26 
0.83 
0.44 
 
By comparing sample 3 and 5 the same force was applied, while current differed for 0.35 kA. 
Both specimens are characterized by nearly the same setdown value, based on which the bigger 
nugget should be developed in the specimen 5 due to bigger applied current. Nevertheless, 
the nuggets dimensions show that bigger nugget was developed in specimen 3. For both 
specimens the projection heights differs. In the specimen 3, projection height A is greater than 
B, while in workpiece 5, projection A is smaller than B. Additionally, the nugget dimensions 
of sample 3 and 5 regard the projections number B. The height difference between 
the projections is 0.1 mm, while sample 3 has shorter projection. In view of the above, although 
bigger setdown was measured the higher current was applied for sample 5, the projection height 
was main determinant for nugget development.  
Fig. 6.8 present relation between the force and setdown for welding current of the range 6.1 kA. 
Due to the small force difference (measurement range between 2.2 kN to 2.5 kN), decreasing 
trend is not recognizable as it is in Fig. 6.4. Moreover, high setdown values proves good weld 
quality what is supported by nugget size dimension for measurement 5 and 17 presented 
in Table 6.4.  
 
 
Fig. 6.8. Force-setdown for welding current 6.1 kA. 
 
0
20
40
60
80
100
2,2
2,3
2,4
2,5
Setdown [%]
Force [kN]
METALLOGRAPH
Y
==PAGE:62==
56 
 
Although high setdown value corresponds with bigger nugget dimensions, the results contradict 
theory.  According to the theory, due to the higher force adjustment, the projection compresses 
more what effects in greater contact area. For constant welding current value, the greater contact 
area, the lower current density. Low current density result in low contact resistance and 
reduction of heat generation. As the result poorer weld should be achieved. As to specimen 17 
the higher force was applied, the developed nugget should be smaller than nugget from 
measurement 5. Similarly as in comparison of samples 3 and 5, the projection height was main 
factor influencing the nugget generation. As sample 17 had  not only shorter but equally 
embossed projections, larger nugget developed.  Nuggets size comparison for two projections 
presents how great effect the projections height has on the nugget development and therefore 
weld quality. 
To sum up, the best weld based on the nugget dimensions was achieved for force equal 
to 2.37 kN and current adjusted to 6.08 kA which corresponds with the highest measured 
setdown. For force 2.2 kN the satisfactory weld regime is between 4.5 kA and 6.1 kA. 
Moreover, the parameter mostly affecting nugget development was projection heights.  
 
 
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
Fig. 6.9. Nuggets cross section for measurements a) 3, b) 5, c) 17. 
 
6.1.3 Three projections welding 
As it was described in section 3.3 the Expert machine has its force application limitation (stable 
force application above 2.7 kN). Moreover, welding of three projections requires force 
adjustment that can be repeatability applied by the Expert machine. In view of the above, the 
three projection welding measurements were performed as the first one, before the spring 
supporting system was designed and manufactured. In total 100 measurements were performed 
with the current range between 6.1 kA and 10.2 kA and force between 2.5 kN and 4.5 kN. 
Fig. 6.10 presents all force-current configurations being applied during the 3 projections 
measurements.  
==PAGE:63==
57 
 
 
 
Fig. 6.10. Force-current graph for all measurements. 
 
During the measurements the relation between the current and the setdown was analyzed for 
two constant forces in the range of 3.5 kN and 2.6 kN. The relation is shown in Fig. 6.11a and 
6.11b respectively. As far as the measurements for force 3.5 kN are concerned, samples below 
85% were easily disassembled. Such setdown values were achieved for the welding current 
below 6.1 kA. Between 6.1 kA and 6.7 kA the welds had negative result of the drop test, 
however some samples welds were strong enough to sustain the drop. As in case of welding 
one and two projections, poor welds were the reason of  small heat generation due to too low 
current density. Therefore, by increasing the current, the nugget size increases. For the force 
equal to 3.5 kN, the current regime in which the results of the drop test were positive, no sparks 
were noticed and setdown values were increasing, was between 7 kA and 10 kA. Afterwards, 
the splash occurred due to too high current density. 
 
 
0
0,5
1
1,5
2
2,5
3
3,5
4
4,5
5
5,5
6
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Force [kN]
Cuurent [kA]
OK
DROP TEST FAIL
SPLASH
==PAGE:64==
58 
 
  
(a)  
 
(b) 
Fig. 6.11. Current-setdown graph for force a) 3.5 kN b) 2.65 kN. 
 
For the investigated case, the measurements  80, 82, 92 were chosen to measure the nugget size 
for three different currents: 8.69 kA, 6.69 kA, 7.63 kA respectively. Table 6.5 presents 
projections heights, welding parameters and nuggets dimensions for selected measurements. 
The projections  height symbols corresponds to the symbols from Fig. 5.2c while the nuggets 
dimension symbols are correlated with Fig. 5.6a. The corresponding nugget cross sections 
are presented in Fig. 6.12.  
 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Setdown [%] 
Current [kA]
OK
SPLASH
DROP TEST FAIL
METALLOGRAPHY
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Setdown [%]
Current [kA]
OK
SPLASH
DROP TEST FAIL
METALLOGRAPHY
==PAGE:65==
59 
 
Table 6.5. Nuggets dimensions for chosen measurements. 
Measurement 
number 
Projection height [mm] Setdown 
% 
F 
[kN] 
RMS 
[kA] 
Nugget dimensions [mm] 
A 
B 
C 
x 
y 
yu 
yl 
80 
1.903 
1.902 
1.901 
92.0 
3.84 
8.69 
3.30 
1.43 
0.97 
0.45 
92 
1.901 
1.908 
1.910 
89.5 
3.92 
7.63 
2.98 
1.27 
0.96 
0.32 
82 
1.907 
1.907 
1.907 
86.6 
3.87 
6.69 
2.77 
1.17 
0.86 
0.31 
 
By comparing data in Table 6.5 the nuggets size corresponds with the setdown values. 
Therefore, the biggest nugget was developed for the highest current value, while the smallest 
nugget for the lowest current values. Additionally, for sample 80 and 82, nearly equal projection 
heights confirm the measurement robustness. Nevertheless, as the difference between 
projection heights in the sample 92 is in the range that significantly influenced the nuggets 
dimensions for two projection  welding, the result might be undermine. Moreover, despite force 
variation in range of 3.5%, due to larger number of projections, the variation does not have 
as great influence as it has for 1 projection case.  
 
 
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
Fig. 6.12. Nuggets cross section for measurements a) 80, b) 82, c) 90. 
 
As far as the low range of applied force equal to 2.65 kN is concerned, for the measured welding 
currents setdown values are lower comparing to the values for measurement with applied force 
3.5 kN due to the smaller projection compression. On the other hand, positive results of the drop 
test are achieved for the lower current values, as for the lower applied force, smaller contact 
area is, therefore the current density with resistance increases developing nugget of bigger size. 
What is more, for the higher current values, the splash was experienced for the same current 
range, nevertheless, more measurements have to be conducted to confirm the observation.  
In order to check the influence of the force on the nugget generation the measurements were 
performed adjusting constant current 8.7 kA. The applied force varied from 2.5 kN up to 4 kN, 
while the measured setdown values were mostly above 90%. (see Fig. 6.13). 
==PAGE:66==
60 
 
Among the measurements, three of them were chosen to compare the nugget size: 38, 80, 85. 
Table 6.6 presents nuggets dimensions for selected measurements together with projections 
heights and welding parameter. The projections  height symbols corresponds to the symbols 
from Fig. 5.2c while the nuggets dimension symbols are correlated with Fig. 5.6a. Fig 6.13a 
presents nugget cross section of specimen 80, while Fig 6.14 a and Fig 6.14b nuggets 38 and 
85 respectively.  
  
 
Fig. 6. 13. Force-setdown for welding current 6.1 kA. 
 
Table 6.6. Nuggets dimensions for measurements 38, 80 and 85. 
Measurement 
number 
Projection height [mm] Setdown 
% 
F 
[kN] 
RMS 
[kA] 
Nugget dimensions [mm] 
A 
B 
C 
x 
y 
yu 
yl 
85 
1.905 
1.903 
1.913 
92.6 
2.84 
8.71 
2.90 
1.21 
0.78 
0.43 
80 
1.903 
1.902 
1.901 
92.0 
3.84 
8.69 
3.30 
1.43 
0.97 
0.45 
38 
1.906 
1.902 
1.910 
89.6 
2.64 
8.67 
3.41 
1.64 
1.20 
0.44 
 
Bearing in mind setdown values, the biggest nugget should be developed for workpiece 85 and 
the smallest nugget in the specimen number 38. However, the nuggets dimensions present 
opposite tendency. The biggest nugget developed in the sample 38 what agrees with theory. 
As the force applied during measurement 38 was the lowest among comparing cases, therefore, 
the smallest contact area between samples developed due to low compression. In case 
of constant welding current, smaller contact area corresponds with higher current density, 
and therefore, higher contact resistance and greater heat generation. In view of the above, 
sample 38 had the biggest nugget diameter. The low setdown value of the specimen 38 could 
be result of not symmetrical projection shape as it is visible in Fig 6.14a and the lowest applied 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
2
2,5
3
3,5
4
4,5
Setdown [%]
Force [kN]
METALLOGRAP…
==PAGE:67==
61 
 
force.  Moreover, due to medium force application among compared samples, sample 85 should 
have second biggest developed nugget. However, according to performed measurements 
the nugget had the smallest diameter. It needs stressing, that the biggest nugget diameter 
is measured in the center of the projection. By taking detail look on  Fig. 6.14b 
an unmanufactured tip of the projection can be recognized. In view of the above, the conclusion 
can be drawn that during the metallography not enough material was taken, therefore, 
the presented cross section does not show the center of the developed nugget. That fact explains 
small nugget dimensions for sample 85. As far as sample 80 is concerned the nugget dimensions 
seems to be reasonable especially due to nearly perfectly equal projection heights.  
To sum up, among investigated samples, the biggest generated nugget was for force 2.64 kN 
and current equal to 8.67 kA. For the constant force 3.5 kN the satisfactory weld regime is 
achieved for current between 7 kA and 10 kA, while for force 2.65 kN is between 6.5 kA and 
10kA. Due to greater number of projections the three projection welding was less sensitive 
for parameters variations rather than one or two projection welding. 
 
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
Fig. 6.14. Nuggets cross section for measurements a) 38, b) 85. 
 
For parallel projection welding cases, the optimal welding parameters were obtained based 
on the nugget size. These data with the corresponding setdown are presented in Table 6.  
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:68==
62 
 
Table 6.8. Optimal parameters achieved for 1, 2 and 3 projection welding cases. 
Measurement 
number 
Projection height 
[mm] 
Setdown 
% 
F 
[kN] 
RMS 
[kA] 
Nugget dimensions 
[mm] 
A 
B 
C 
x 
y 
yu 
yl 
34 
1.905 
- 
- 
92.7 
1.65 
3.47 
3.34 1.26 0.97 
0.29 
17 
1.900 
1.900 
- 
95.0 
2.37 
6.08 
3.38 1.26 0.83 
0.44 
38 
1.906 
1.902 1.910 
89.6 
2.64 
8.67 
3.41 1.64 1.20 
0.44 
 
The weldability range for different cases with 1, 2 and 3 projections in parallel projection 
welding are presented in Table 6.9. It is worth mentioning that for a combination of too high 
forces and low current resulted in poor weld in parallel projection welding. On the contrary, 
in case of high current or low force splash was observed.  
Table 6.9. Range of current and force for acceptable weld in 1, 2 and 3 projections welding. 
Number of 
projections 
Force 
[kN] 
Current [kA] 
Lower limit 
Upper limit 
1 
1.90 
- 
4.10 
1 
2.10 
- 
4.75 
2 
2.20 
4.50 
6.10 
3 
2.65 
6.50 
10.00 
3 
3.50 
7.00 
10.00 
 
6.2  Perpendicular projection welding 
For perpendicular projection welding 34 measurements were performed in total. 
The measurements were conducted for welding current between 4.5 kA and 6.5 kA, while 
adjusted force varied from 3 kN up to 5.5 kN. Fig 6.15 presents all parameters pairs being 
adjusted for the perpendicular projection welding. Due to the reasons described in section 5.1 
setdown was not reliable measure of compression and heat input. Therefore, the analysis 
of welding perpendicular sheets was based on the observations from the measurements 
and conclusions were drawn from the metallography results. It needs stressing, that in most 
of the measurements at least small sparks occurred. The sparks could be consequence 
of the adjusted parameters or the result of vertical specimen sloping during force application. 
Nevertheless, only big splashes were notified as undesirable welds which are marked 
==PAGE:69==
63 
 
in diamonds in Fig. 6.15. As in case of parallel projection welding the measurements marked 
in frames had their nugget measured.  
 
Fig. 6.15. Force-current graph for welding time 120 µsec. 
 
During the measurements there were four cases investigated. First two cases consider constant 
current adjustment, while force was a changing variable. For lower current value 5.1 kA splash 
was notified due to too small force adjustment (2.9 kN). Too small force adjustment resulted 
in insufficient contact area, therefore, due to the high current density, the splash occurred. 
Similar situation took place for constant current value 5.5 kA. The splash was notified for force 
values between 2.9 kN up to 3.45 kN. Afterwards, in the investigated cases, by increasing 
the force, no splashes were noticed. During the measurements two heavy explosions took place 
due to too high current adjustment. Too high current application (6.3 kA and 6.5 kA) resulted 
in high current density and big material resistance generating significant heat which soften 
the material. Due to the applied force, the specimens were bended and explosion took place. 
In the remaining two cases the force was kept constant while current was adjusted for every 
measurement. An investigated forces were 3.2 kN and 4.2 kN. For the lower force, satisfactory 
welds were achieved up to 6.1 kA, while in case of higher force no splashes were noticed during 
the measurements. Nevertheless, based on the parameters value to which explosions 
was experienced, the splashes would be expected around 6.4 kA. From the conducted 
measurements 4 specimens were chosen to have their nuggets measured. The specimens 
were chosen based on the visual evaluation of the squeezed out material. For the perfectly 
0
0,5
1
1,5
2
2,5
3
3,5
4
4,5
5
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Force [kN]
Current [kA]
OK
SPLASH
METALLOGRAPHY
==PAGE:70==
64 
 
welded specimen, the material is squeezed out evenly around both projections in both sides 
of the vertical specimens as it is shown in Fig. 6.16a.  
 
Fig. 6.16 Perpendicular projection welding. 
 
 Due to applied force, the specimens were not welded perfectly perpendicular. Therefore, 
the slope of the vertical specimen after welding was measured, together with the distance 
of the vertical specimen to the edge. This is shown in Fig. 6.17. The measurement results are 
presented in Table 6.7. 
 
Fig. 6.17 Misalignment of vertical sheet. 
 
Table 6.7. Welding parameters and geometry dimensions for perpendicular projection welding. 
Measurement 
number 
Projection 
height [mm] 
F 
[kN] 
RMS 
[kA] 
α 
Dimensions [mm] 
A 
B 
LA 
LB 
xA 
xB 
y 
8 
1.932 1.929 
2.98 
6.03 
88°25' 
9.45 9.50 5.35 
4.95 0.64 
11 
1.922 1.913 
3.23 
5.09 
87°15' 
9.40 9.50 5.35 
5.10 0.54 
36 
1.915 1.919 
3.04 
5.10 
89°30' 
9.80 9.95 4.95 
5.20 0.65 
38 
1.929 1.914 
3.19 
4.54 
91°30' 
9.95 9.75 4.25 
3.95 0.50 
A 
B 
xB 
xA 
LA 
LB 
==PAGE:71==
65 
 
Based on the data presented in the table 6.7 all the welded samples had misalignments from 
being vertical. The reason for welding the specimens not perfectly perpendicular is due 
insufficient support of the vertical specimens against the applied loads. In these cases because 
of the shape of the nugget it was difficult to measure a nugget dimensions by metallography 
analysis. In Fig 6.18 the specimens cross sections are presented in which white vertical arrows 
indicates measured height. Due to the poor visibility, samples 8, 36 and 38 were etched twice. 
Based on the measured nuggets heights, the biggest nuggets was developed for sample 8 and 
39 (0.65 mm and 0.64 mm respectively). In the measurements the force of the range 3 kN was 
applied, while the adjusted current for sample 36 was 5.10 kA and for sample 8 was equal 
to 6.04 kA. As the nugget area was not clearly recognizable, the measurements are 
approximations of the nugget size. For the remaining two samples the same range of force was 
applied equal to 3.2 kN, while adjusted current was 5.1 kA for sample 11 and 4.5 kA for 
measurement number 38.  The nuggets heights were measured equal to 0.54 mm for sample 11 
and 0.50 mm for sample 38 respectively. Moreover, based on the visual observations of the 
nuggets cross sections, the material was squeezed out not symmetrically which can 
be influenced by misaligned sheet not welded in vertical position. For sample number 8 
(Fig. 6. 18a) a crack was observed in HAZ and FZ. The crack could have been developed due 
to incomplete melting or inappropriate electrode pressure [9]. For sample 11 (Fig 6.18b) 
insufficient melting was observed on the right side of specimen (shown in white circle). In this 
case, the nugget was developed in the left side of the weld area which shows that the heat was 
not concentrated in the center of the desired welding area maybe due to the sheet misalignment. 
In all the four cases part of the material was squeezed out of the weld area. This could be part 
of the base material or coating squeezed out during the welding.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:72==
66 
 
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
 
 
(c) 
(d) 
Fig.6 18. Longitudinal nugget cross section for measurements a) 8, b) 11, c) 36, d) 38. 
 
6.3 Summary 
The optimum welding parameters were obtained for parallel and perpendicular projection 
welding. In case of parallel projection welding the biggest nugget size for one projection case 
was developed for 1.65 kN force and 3.47 kA current. In case of two projections welding the 
best welding parameters were 2.37 kN force and 6.08 kA current. Finally, for three projections 
welding, 2.64 kN force and 8.67 kA current were found as the most optimal values.  
High setdown values does not always corresponded to biggest nugget generation, as it can be 
result of the mechanical projection compression instead of bigger nugget generation. This is 
more observed for cases with high force values. Setdown was measured considering force or 
current constant. But as far as keeping current or force constant using Expert machine was 
difficult small variations were observed for current and force during the measurements. These 
small variations affected the nugget size considerably in case of one projection welding. But 
for the cases of two and three projections the nugget size was not affected that much by the 
==PAGE:73==
67 
 
current and force variations. In case of two projections welding it was observed that the nugget 
size is more influenced by the projection height. It is worth mentioning that these observations 
are based on limited number of experiments for each group of 1, 2 and 3 projections therefore 
more experiments is needed to be carried out in order to generalize the results. 
In case of perpendicular projection welding, among conducted measurements, the biggest 
nugget was obtained for 3.5 kN force and 5.1 kA current. However, because of the nugget shape 
developed in perpendicular welding cases it is difficult to measure the nugget diameter and the 
measurements approximate some extent.  
 
 
==PAGE:74==
68 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 7 
 
Conclusions and future work 
The aim of the current project was to obtain optimum welding parameters for parallel and 
perpendicular projection welding of thin HSLA 340, to design a set-up for embossing circular 
and longitudinal projections and a supporting system for holding the specimens during 
the parallel and perpendicular welding cases. The designed press set-up is able to emboss 
circular and longitudinal projections with the desired dimensions. With the help of the sliders 
the projections can be precisely located on the specimens, while wide range of sliders 
adjustment allows embossing few projections on one specimen.  
Welding supporting system assures accurate positioning of samples for both parallel 
and perpendicular projection welding. It can be used with circular and rectangular electrode. 
Nevertheless, in case of welding perpendicular samples, the supporting system does not ensure 
samples to remain perfectly vertical during welding and the vertical specimen may tilt due to 
high force. 
Using Expert welding machine parallel and perpendicular projection welding can be performed. 
However, for cases in which low force range is required, external spring supporting system has 
to be used. With the aid of spring support system welding with forces over 1 kN becomes 
possible. Additionally, the springs ensure stable force application in whole range of applied 
force without necessity for force readjustment.  
==PAGE:75==
69 
 
In case of parallel projection welding, setdown corresponds with weld quality evaluation 
if welding variables are kept constant. When welding current and force experience small 
changes, the setdown reliability decreases. The above was especially observed for one and two 
projections welding. For three projections welding measurements, the highest setdown 
corresponded to the largest nugget size. Setdown was not measured for perpendicular projection 
welding cases, as in these cases the vertical specimen melts at the edge facing the projections, 
so in the end, the edge meets always the horizontal specimen while projection itself 
is compressed insignificantly.  
Number of projections influences not only welding parameters but also the sensitiveness 
of welding parameters variations. For one projection welding, small variations of adjusted 
welding current and force influenced nugget size.  In case of two projections welding, the 
projections heights had the greatest influence on nugget size. Finally, in three projections 
welding smallest the nugget size was not affected considerably by the change of welding current 
and force variations. For three projections welding, the most reliable welds were based 
on setdwon measurements, which were confirmed by biggest nugget size.  
For further investigation, the attention has to be paid for the height of embossed projections. 
Incase of embossing a number of projections on one specimen, efforts should be done 
to minimize the height difference for different projections. Additionally, performing 
metallography analysis for all projections from the same specimen can help to understand the 
influence of the projections height difference on nugget diameter. Similar examination should 
be done for the projections embossed with variable distance from each other. Therefore, 
the critical distances would allow to determine range of most optimal welds.  
More experiments can be done to investigate the effect of different welding parameters such as 
welding current, force and time in the ranges that has not been examined in this study. 
For example, different welding times can be considered and its effect on weld nugget can 
be studied. 
Furthermore, the supporting system for perpendicular projection welding needs to be designed 
in a way to assure the perpendicularity of two specimens during welding. It is suggested 
to support the vertical specimens from the both sides. Additionally, increasing the contact area 
between the support and the vertical specimens would eliminate bending of the specimen 
to some extent.  
==PAGE:76==
70 
 
Since sparks were observed in most of the perpendicular welding cases, it is suggested to find 
the welding parameters to produce welds without sparks. Since perpendicular projection 
welding has been performed for the cases with 2 longitudinal projections thus cases with 
different number of embossments are desired. The effect of vertical specimen width on welding 
parameters could be investigated.    
Finally, performed measurements can be used to run SORPAS simulations, which would 
evaluate software reliability with dealing with projection welding of parallel and perpendicular 
sheets.  
 
 
==PAGE:77==
71 
 
References 
 
[1] 
Nielsen CV (2012) 3D modeling and testing of contact problems in resistance welding. 
PhD Thesis. Technical University of Denmark. 
 
[2] 
Ruukki 
Resistance 
welding 
manual 
(2009) 
Retrieved 
from 
http://www.ruukki.com/~/media/Files/Steel-products/Cold-rolled-metal-colour-
coated-instructions/ 
 
[3] 
Van Rymenant P (2011) Mechanical characterisation and modelling of resistance 
welding. PhD Thesis. Cranfield University. 
 
[4] 
Resistance Welding Manufactures’ Association (2003) Resistance welding manual. 
RWMA, Philadelphia. 
 
[5] 
Song Q, (2003) Testing and modeling of contact problems in resistance welding. PhD 
Thesis. Technical University of Denmark. 
 
[6] 
Mikno Z, (2014) Analysis of Projections Welding in Relation to Non-parallelism of 
Electrodes. Proccedings of the 8th International Seminar on Advances in Resistance 
Welding, Baveno, Italy, pp. 147-160. 
 
[7] 
Potrykus J, (2005) Poradnik mechanika. REA s.j., Warszawa, Polska (in Polish) 
 
[8] 
ArcelorMittal 
Automotive 
product 
offer 
(200) 
Retrived 
from 
http://automotive.arcelormittal.com/saturnus/sheets/ 
 
[9] 
Al-Mukhtar AM., Doos QM, (2013) Cracking phenomenon in spot welded joints of 
austenitic stainless steel, Scientific Research, 4(19), pp. 656-662. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:78==
 
 
72 
 
APPENDIX A 
Tensile test results 
 
Fig. A.1. Dependence between measured stress and piston position. 
Measurement 1 UTS=420 MPA 
 
Fig. A.2. Dependence between measured stress and piston position. 
Measurement 2 UTS=426 MPA 
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
Position [mm]
stress [N/mm2]
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
Position  [mm]
Stress [N/mm2]
==PAGE:79==
 
 
73 
 
 
Fig. A.3. Dependence between measured stress and piston position. 
Measurement 3 UTS=423 MPA 
 
Fig. A.4. Dependence between measured stress and piston position. 
Measurement 4 UTS=423 MPA 
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
Position [mm]
Stress [N/mm2]
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
Position [mm]
Stress [N/mm2]
==PAGE:80==
 
 
74 
 
 
Fig. A.5. Dependence between measured stress and piston position. 
Measurement 5 UTS=421 MPA 
 
Fig. A.6. Dependence between measured stress and piston position. 
Measurement 1 UTS=424 MPA 
 
 
 
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
Position [mm]
Stress[N/mm2]
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
Position [mm]
Stress [N/mm2]
==PAGE:81==
 
 
75 
 
APPENDIX B 
 
==PAGE:82==
 
 
76 
 
APPENDIX C 
Spring supporting system 
 
==PAGE:83==
 
 
77 
 
 
==PAGE:84==
 
 
78 
 
 
==PAGE:85==
 
 
79 
 
 
==PAGE:86==
 
 
80 
 
 
APPENDIX D 
Press set-up design 
 
==PAGE:87==
 
 
81 
 
 
==PAGE:88==
 
 
82 
 
 
==PAGE:89==
 
 
83 
 
 
==PAGE:90==
 
 
84 
 
 
==PAGE:91==
 
 
85 
 
 
==PAGE:92==
 
 
86 
 
 
==PAGE:93==
 
 
87 
 
 
==PAGE:94==
 
 
88 
 
 
==PAGE:95==
 
 
89 
 
 
==PAGE:96==
 
 
90 
 
 
==PAGE:97==
 
 
91 
 
 
==PAGE:98==
 
 
92 
 
 
==PAGE:99==
 
 
93 
 
 
APPENDIX E 
Welding supporting system 
 
==PAGE:100==
 
 
94 
 
 
==PAGE:101==
 
 
95 
 
 
==PAGE:102==
 
 
96 
 
 
==PAGE:103==
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Section of Manufacturing Engineering
Technical University of Denmark 
Produktionstorvet, Bld. 427A
DK- 2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
Denmark
Phone (+45) 4525 4763
Fax  (+45) 4593 0190
www.mek.dtu.dk
ISBN: 978-87-7475-412-1
