==PAGE:1==
Concatenating 
dialogue with 
brands across 
social media 
Thesis 
s082717 
Shum Stra 
DTU, Technical University of Denmark 
15th January 2015 
==PAGE:2==
Abstract 
In the attention economy of today, knowing who your 
audience are and what they are saying about you is valuable 
information.  
But this information doesn’t show up by itself if you choose to 
publish your content on a self-owned, self-controlled website 
rather than on a third-party-owned social network. In this 
thesis, I try to build a prototype web service that transparently 
brings relevant social network data to self-owned web sites in 
order to make the open web platform more attractive as a 
publishing platform, and describe the challenges I 
encountered doing that. 
==PAGE:3==
Concatenating dialogue with brands across social media 
 Shum Stra 
                                                               
Table of contents 
 
Motivation 
6 
                                                                    
Proposal 
10 
                                                                      
Thesis statement 
11 
                                                                                              
Scope 
13 
                                                                           
Mapping out the problem space 
13 
                                                                     
Mapping out who would be using Socializer 
15 
                                                
Mapping out what tasks would need to be accomplishable using 
Socializer 
18 
                                                                                                                    
Limiting the scope 
19 
                                                                                            
Choice of tools 
21 
                                                             
Client software language 
21 
                                                                                 
Server software language 
22 
                                                                                
Architecture 
24 
                                                                
Front-end architecture 
25 
                                                                                     
Back-end architecture 
28 
                                                                                      
page   of  
3
67
==PAGE:4==
Concatenating dialogue with brands across social media 
 Shum Stra 
                                                               
Table of contents 
 
Building Socializer 
35 
                                                       
Setting up the basics 
35 
                                                                                        
Tracking code 
36 
                                                                                                     
Turning visits into useful data 
39 
                                                                        
Handling external redirects 
42 
                                                                             
Discovering reactions on Twitter 
44 
                                                                    
Choosing when to search for new reactions to a URL 
48 
                                 
Keeping an eye on found reactions 
49 
                                                                
Creating charts 
50 
                                                                                                  
Testing my implementation 
53 
                                                                            
Discovering reactions on other social networks 
55 
           
Facebook 
55 
                                                                                                             
Google+ 
56 
                                                                                                               
YouTube 
57 
                                                                                                              
Reddit 
57 
                                                                                                                  
Tumblr 
57 
                                                                                                                
LinkedIn 
58 
                                                                                                             
The web as a social network 
58 
                                                                           
page   of  
4
67
==PAGE:5==
Concatenating dialogue with brands across social media 
 Shum Stra 
                                                               
Table of contents 
 
 
 
Appendix A  Large ﬁgures 
 
                                                 
Appendix B  Source code 
 
                                                   
Appendix C  Trying out Socializer 
 
                                     
Appendix D  Installing Socializer 
 
                                      
Appendix E  Business report 
 
                                             
Discussion 
60 
                                                                   
Future work 
61 
                                                                                                        
Bibliography 
63
                                                                
page   of  
5
67
==PAGE:6==
Concatenating dialogue with brands across social media 
 Shum Stra
                                                               
Motivation 
The arrival of the World Wide Web in the 1990s has been shaking up a media 
landscape rooted in physical media publications in the decades since. 
Consumption of physical media has generally steadily declined to a point of 
near-irrelevance in past years, but the winners and losers of the digital media 
world has far from been chosen yet. 
The abundancy of freely available information and entertainment on the web 
has important implications for the business models of online media 
companies. When information is abundant and free, the truly scarce resource 
in the digital media equation is attention; there are time and energy limits to 
how much a human can see, hear and do in a day.  
Directly monetizing the basic web interaction – following a link to a piece of 
information or entertainment – has proven hard. Incidentally, the attention 
spent by users following a link to your content is worth something – after all, 
this attention now can’t be spent anywhere else. Attempts to sell off pieces of 
attention to people who intend to convert the attention to monetary value – an 
activity most people would call “selling ads” – has so far proven to be a fairly 
successful strategy if done right. The attention economy  is in full effect, and 
1
those who get a lot of attention tends to be able to directly ot indirectly proﬁt 
monetarily off of it. 
As more and more consumer attention moves to online media of different 
kinds, some companies have managed to capture large amounts of it. Big 
players include: 
• social network giant Facebook, who claims to have 1.35 · 109 monthly active 
users, 8.64 · 108 daily active users , and is used 40 minutes per day on 
2
average by its US users  as of September 2014. 
3
==PAGE:7==
Concatenating dialogue with brands across social media 
 Shum Stra
                                                               
• Twitter, who claims 2.84 · 108 monthly active users and 5 · 108 tweets sent 
daily , 
4
• YouTube, who claims more than 109 monthly unique users and 6 · 109 hours 
of video watched every month  (which works out to 6 monthly hours per 
5
unique user on average), 
• and a plethora of other content networks, publications and online television 
competitors like Netﬂix and its often nationally-bounded competitors. 
What’s common for all of these massively successful players is that they are 
built on top of the free, intentionally non-commercial World Wide Web, and 
that an essential requirement for their success is that they capture as much 
regular attention from as many people as possible. 
The tension between network channels and self-owned channels 
As a player in the attention economy – whether you are trying to sell goods 
(monetizing attention), trying to sell attention to others, or are trying to gather 
attention for non-ﬁnancial reasons, you have a lot of options on how to reach 
people. 
Using social networks like Facebook and Twitter, who already captures a lot of 
daily attention from its users, a lot of publication and analysis tools are at your 
disposal, and users can easily react and spread your content even further. The 
companies operating these networks try to make it as easy as possible for 
people and companies to participate in the social network, which can be very 
advantageous in trying to reach and engage people. 
Facebook and Twitter both offer ways of expanding your reach (and thus, 
attention share) by paying them money to show your content (posts, pictures 
etc.) to more users. Facebook has chosen to take this one step further by 
actively limiting your posts to reach a severely-reduced semi-random subset of 
your followers if you don’t pay Facebook to boost the reach of your content.  
6
Through network-owned channels, your attention economy efforts are in the 
hands of the network owners – for good and bad. While you can use their tools 
to reach an audience, your efforts will also be constrained by the limits set up 
by the platform owners, and making money by selling parts of the attention 
your content gets on these networks is in many respects next to impossible, 
page   of  
7
67
==PAGE:8==
Concatenating dialogue with brands across social media 
 Shum Stra
                                                               
since you would then be encroaching on the business model of the network 
owner. 
The popular alternative is to operate on the same level as the networks 
themselves – on the open web. Setting up a self-owned channel on the web 
means setting up a web site accessible by an URL, and getting attention 
generally translates to getting people to visit the URL. 
Publishing on a self-owned channel means giving up the typical “free” social 
network advantages of easy publishing tools, being able to fairly easily reach 
some kind of audience and being able to capitalize on network effect 
mechanics built into the social network’s products. However, a self-owned 
channel gives you the freedom to create any kind of web presence you want to 
create. While a poorly executed web presence might not do you any favors, a 
compelling, content-tailored web presence might be able to do more for your 
attention economy efforts than a sole Facebook page ever could. Your attention 
economy efforts will not be limited to the attention network(s) you choose to 
publish through are already afforded by its users. And you have complete, 
unfettered access to the back-catalog of content you create for your channel 
forever – not just until your network of choice falls out of favor with the public 
or its owners and is closed down, as has happened with web services in the 
past  . It’s harder, but the returns can ultimately be greater. 
7 8
Luckily, with some effort, you can do both. By always publishing your content 
on a self-owned channel, and either cross-posting it or linking to it on your 
social network channels, you get the attention beneﬁts of having a social 
network presence while retaining the advantages of channel independence. 
And with the use of software plugging into the APIs of the social networks, you 
can harvest back some of the network data your content has generated – such 
as the number of likes or favorites, and the comments people have made on 
your stuff. 
However, there is a deﬁcit of tools that helps with this in a generally accessible 
way. The IndieWeb movement, which speciﬁcally promotes building tools upon 
the basic principle of enriching self-owned channels with network 
advantages , is still relatively obscure and mostly backed by tool-making 
9
hobbyists building a community.  
page   of  
8
67
==PAGE:9==
Concatenating dialogue with brands across social media 
 Shum Stra
                                                               
I believe there’s a strong case to be made for powerfully interoperable self-
owned channels on the web in the commercial space as well[See Appendix E]. This 
thesis project is about creating a tool for exactly that frontier. 
page   of  
9
67
==PAGE:10==
Concatenating dialogue with brands across social media 
 Shum Stra
                                                               
Proposal 
As a brand manager or other marketing entity trying to optimize your efforts in 
the attention economy, it can be very valuable  to get an answer to these 
10
questions: Who is paying attention to me now? What are they saying? And 
why? 
If you’re primarily publishing your content on a self-owned channel, answering 
these questions can be difﬁcult. If you have a commenting feature on your site 
like many blogs do, it might only attract the voices of your most polarized 
visitors, and generally, comments need to be moderated somehow to sustain a 
constructive discussion . Due to the closed nature of most popular social 
11
networks, the purely-referer-based referrals features of existing popular web 
analytics packages like Google Analytics also only offer a small peek into the 
potential world of people discussing your content outside your own channel . 
12
If you posted your content directly on Facebook, you would easily be able to see 
who publicly liked your post, shared it and commented on it. On Twitter, you 
would be able to see who retweeted and who favorited your tweet – as well as 
receive any replies to your original tweet. This can be useful information in 
ﬁguring out who your audience in these channels are, and what they like. 
Using the APIs of these social networks, I believe there is a way to extract 
equivalent information about content published on your own site – at least to 
some degree. And that would allow us to (at least partially) answer the 
questions of “Who is paying attention to me (my content) now?” and “What are 
they saying?” for potential customers with self-owned web presences. 
==PAGE:11==
Concatenating dialogue with brands across social media 
 Shum Stra
                                                               
Thesis statement 
Brands need to interact with potential and existing customers in a 
way that reﬂects the shift that has happened in the attention 
economy to social media channels from print advertisement and 
traditional digital display advertising like ad banners and popup 
ads. 
Currently, various tools exist to help brands discover when they are 
mentioned on social networks, and to help them efﬁciently publish 
content onto their social media channels. 
Brands that doesn’t just publish content directly on social 
networks but also choose to publish content on their own web-
based channels, have little or no tools accessible to keep an eye on 
the reactions and activity that their content on self-owned 
channels eventually fosters in various social networks. 
In this project, I will develop a prototype of a service that aims to 
solve this problem by tracking and collecting social activity on 
social networks that is instigated by a link to a piece of content on 
the brand’s own self-owned web-based channel. The service should 
present these data in a way that can support a feedback loop 
where brands can discover which pieces of content that has had an 
effect – and what effect – on its audience. 
I expect to build the prototype as a web application using HTML, 
CSS and JavaScript, as well as PHP and MySQL on the server side. I 
also expect to use APIs from Facebook, Twitter and perhaps Tumblr 
for data collection. 
Boiling the thesis statement down to a value proposition would look like this: 
page  
 of  
11
67
==PAGE:12==
Concatenating dialogue with brands across social media 
 Shum Stra
                                                               
“Gather and monitor the reactions your content gets in order to 
ﬁgure out what is well-received, what isn’t, and most importantly, 
why.” 
I have given the service I intend to build the working title Socializer. 
page  
 of  
12
67
==PAGE:13==
Concatenating dialogue with brands across social media 
 Shum Stra
                                                               
Scope 
Mapping out the problem space 
With the preliminary market research and analysis work done in my business-
centric report on this topic[Appendix E], I have mapped out the problem space to be 
solved with my proposed project using the index-card-based techniques 
outlined in . You can see the results of this exercise in Figure 1. Here’s a 
13
summary of the thoughts behind it. 
 
Figure 1. What does Socializer do? 
The basic feature of Socializer is to ﬁnd reactions to your web pages, outside your 
web pages. To do this, Socializer would need to intelligently query the APIs of 
popular social networks, using strategies tailored for the API limitations of 
each. 
Find reactions to your 
web pages 
– outside your web pages.
What does Socializer do?
On social networks
through APIs
and referral info
On the web
through referral info, 
crawling, webmentions
Find reactions to reactions 
to your web pages 
Numbers of 
Likes, retweets, favourites,
comments, replies, etc.
– and over time
Who is writing?
What are they writing?
(sentiment analysis etc.)
Find the impact of 
“reactions” 
Impact of referrals and 
reactions on visitor numbers 
and visitor quality
Ad stats: tracking code on 
an incoming link that tracks 
views, clicks and viewing 
times
Analyze visitor quality by 
pages visited
Where we are now
Show reactions to your web 
pages publicly
if approved for public 
display
Public reaction box feature:
==PAGE:14==
Concatenating dialogue with brands across social media 
 Shum Stra
                                                               
Since Socializer is intended as a tool supporting self-owned web presences, it 
could make sense to extend Socializer to also be able to ﬁnd reactions to your 
web pages on other self-owned web pages. There are a couple of strategies for 
doing this; sifting through referral data, various crawling strategies, and 
implementing a simple technology called webmentions, which is intended for 
this exact use. 
Once you have the reactions to your web pages, we can provide further value 
by tracking the reactions to these reactions – the likes, comments, shares, 
retweets, favorites, replies, etc. that reactions to your page foster. This can give 
you an idea of the conversations that are spawned by your content in different 
social circles, and if we track the development of these over time, the 
information could eventually be useful in discovering and researching 
information cascades ; that is, how information spreads through networks, 
14
and which players (people) are prime catalysts of spreading information and 
opinions – knowing this can (among other things) assist you in ﬁguring out 
which people you need to inﬂuence into liking your offerings for maximal 
return on investment. 
Once we have a sizable of reactions to a given site, it might make sense to offer 
analysis tools that answer the quantitative questions of which population 
segments are the most vocal (who is reacting?), and perhaps quantitatively 
analyze (what they are saying?) using sentiment analysis and/or other 
techniques. Unfortunately, these features would be hard to execute well 
technically. 
In a scenario where many reactions to a certain topic appear, it would make 
sense to further analyze the reactions we ﬁnd and track in order to determine 
which ones have the largest impact – i.e., are most important. We can try to 
estimate this by considering the follower counts of the user accounts posting 
the reactions, comparing the amount of sub-reactions they generate, and by 
comparing visitor data before and after the reaction in question. In case we can 
directly track the trafﬁc a reaction sends to our site, we can factor that into our 
impact considerations as well. And if we extend this trafﬁc analysis a little, we 
could decide to give higher impact scores to reactions that result in visitors 
that end up viewing multiple pages on our site compared to reactions where 
visitors mostly leave our site quickly after arriving. 
page  
 of  
14
67
==PAGE:15==
Concatenating dialogue with brands across social media 
 Shum Stra
                                                               
If we want to take this even further, purposely planted ads on external sites 
could be considered a special case of “reactions” that could be tracked even 
further; with some tracking code included on the external page, we could 
collect data on how many users view the “reaction”, how long they view it for, 
how many times, and how many click through to the site the reaction links to. 
Finally, in a twist on the original concept, once we know what reactions exist to 
a web page, we can offer site owners a way to show these reactions on the web 
page itself. This public reaction box feature would have many similarities to a 
traditional comment box feature, but with reactions originating from the site 
visitors’ social network platform of choice. Compared to a traditional 
comments box, the reaction box would likely not be able to support a coherent 
conversation between different parties on different networks. On the other 
hand, showing reactions publicly (if any) could have a legitimizing effect on the 
web page itself, a bit like testimonials on a business website might. If so, a 
feature like this might be interesting for site owners trying to directly sell a 
product or service. 
Considering the anarchic nature of people on the web , site owners would 
15
probably prefer to be able to approve reactions for public display. Implementing 
a moderation queue would therefore be essential to making this a useful 
feature. 
Mapping out who would be using Socializer 
A clear deﬁnition of the problem space is useful, but to build a product, we also 
need to have an idea of who our customers will be, and which basic types of 
users our product will have. 
Using the analysis done in [Appendix E] and the card-based techniques from 
before, I have created a diagram that summarizes who we aim to have as our 
customers and users. You can see the diagram in Figure 2. Here’s a summary of 
the thoughts behind it: 
page  
 of  
15
67
==PAGE:16==
Concatenating dialogue with brands across social media 
 Shum Stra
                                                               
 
Figure 2. Who is Socializer for? 
Customers 
Marketing departments and ad agencies have a large interest in capturing not 
just as much attention in the attention economy, but ideally, the right kind of 
attention (positive in some form) from the right kind of people (the ones who 
will end up resulting in more business for their parent companies/clients) – 
after all, that’s why they exist. We will be offering them a way to use more 
powerful self-owned channels while being able to get an idea of how their 
audience is reacting to their speciﬁc marketing efforts. 
Like marketers, online publishing businesses also have a vested interest in 
capturing as much attention as possible, often using helpful, interesting or 
entertaining content as their primary attraction. Unlike marketers, their 
business plan often involves selling off a sliver of that attention to marketers, 
who will pay real money to get attention that might convert to more money 
down the road. 
To do well in the attention economy, online publishing businesses also need to 
optimize for getting as much attention as possible. While many large-scale 
internet-only publishers are optimizing for getting as large raw numbers as 
Marketing departments
and ad agencies
Who is Socializer for?
Customers:
Online publishing 
businesses
news, magazines, blogs
Small businesses
to help their online 
marketing efforts
Users:
The boss
The head of 
marketing
Content creators
The tech people
Us
How are we 
doing?
Summaries
(dashboards,
email summaries)
Which pages (and 
social media 
posts) work well?
Which channels 
give the best/
most valuable 
response?
Which reactions 
do our content 
produce?
How can we 
improve, 
marketing-wise?
Sets up Socializer 
tracking and user 
accounts
(Develops things 
that make use of 
the Socializer API)
Support our users, 
maintain and 
improve the 
service
Where we are now
Public reaction box 
feature:
Moderator
picks which 
reactions to show 
publicly
page  
 of  
16
67
==PAGE:17==
Concatenating dialogue with brands across social media 
 Shum Stra
                                                               
possible onto their sites – because their advertisers pay by the pageview  and/
16
or clicks  – other, less sensational publishers might want to try to be more 
17
nuanced in their approaches to getting attention. Getting a better picture of the 
concerns of their potential audience by seeing how they react to your content 
around the web could inform their content strategy as well as their own 
marketing efforts. 
Finally, while small businesses may have similar goals to the marketing 
department category we mentioned above, building a product that is also 
useful for them necessitates considering their circumstances. In small 
businesses, there are often only one person to do all the jobs of a marketing 
department, and building a product that is as helpful as possible while 
demanding as little of their time as is feasible will be a big help in positioning 
our product for this category – while simultaneously improving our product’s 
value for other customer categories. 
Users 
Since these customer segments are all businesses, it’s worth making the 
distinction between these and the actual real people that will be using our 
product. Here are the basic categories of users I expect the product could have. 
In small organizations, one person might inhabit multiple roles. 
Enabling a way for the boss to feel he/she has a handle on how the company is 
currently doing in the attention economy is a big win. The boss tends to a lot of 
different things, so he/she appreciates a product that puts him/her in touch 
with how the company is doing in a time-efﬁcient way.   
The focus of the head of marketing (or marketing strategist, or editor) is to create 
and adjust a strategy for what content should be created on the self-owned 
channel, and how. By giving this user a nuanced answer to which pieces of 
their content does well, which social media channels give the best reaction 
and/or trafﬁc results, and who their current audience actually are, enables 
them to make better decisions regarding the overall strategy. 
Of course, the content on your web site isn’t created by itself, and content 
creators could also get value out of Socializer. By enabling content creators to 
see what a wide variety of people are saying about their content, they are 
page  
 of  
17
67
==PAGE:18==
Concatenating dialogue with brands across social media 
 Shum Stra
                                                               
better qualiﬁed to identify potential problems and points of misunderstanding 
in their content. 
In case the customer is using the proposed public reaction box feature, a new 
user role will be created – one that will also need some manpower within the 
organization. A moderator will regularly need to look through incoming 
reactions and pick ones to show publicly. This may turn out to be an important 
drawback to this feature. 
Finally, the tech people in the customer’s organization are the people who will 
end up being responsible for enabling Socializer for a given website and setting 
up user accounts for other people in the organization. If we offer a Socializer 
API, this category would also include developers responsible for creating 
integrations with an organization’s web content management system or 
intranet. 
For Socializer to be a real, sellable product, I would need to either create a 
company around it (or integrate it into an existing company) that would be able 
to offer support for current customers (customer service), make sure the 
service keeps functioning (sysadmins and developers) and develop 
improvements to the service to make sure it stays relevant in the digital media 
world (developers and product design). To some extent, the people of 
Socializer’s owning company can be considered a special kind of user with 
special needs. By keeping support, maintenance and improvement needs in 
mind when building the product, we can hopefully keep the future costs of 
these activities reasonable. 
Mapping out what tasks would need to be 
accomplishable using Socializer 
With a clear idea of the problem space and the intended users of the product, I 
can start creating user stories that combine these. User stories are short 
descriptions of tasks to be accomplishable with your system, and they often 
involve a user type, an activity and an outcome.  
18
In an effort to get an overview of the possible user stories, I did a brainstorm 
and created a user story map  that presents a (probably incomplete) collection 
19
page  
 of  
18
67
==PAGE:19==
Concatenating dialogue with brands across social media 
 Shum Stra
                                                               
of user stories that have spawned from the problem/user space described 
above. You can see the result in Figure A1[Appendix A]. There’s a lot of them, so I 
will not go into greater detail about them all here. 
Limiting the scope 
Given the limited time scope of this thesis project, ﬁnishing all the proposed 
features before the deadline arrived would be unrealistic.  
To help me prioritize which parts of the product to build during this project 
period, I have picked out a few basic user stories that my system needs to 
support. By focusing on building for these, I will hopefully have a basic, but 
usable and useful product at the end of the project period that I will be able to 
move forward with afterwards. 
The user stories I have chosen to limit my prototype product to are: 
•  Set Socializer up for a web site 
Without being able to do this, using Socializer would depend on hard-
coding things or inserting sites into the database by hand. I believe it would 
make for a more impressive prototype if it is theoretically usable by anyone 
from day one. 
•  See reactions to a speciﬁc web page 
This is the cornerstone of most of the features listed earlier in this report, 
and it’s a large part of the product’s value proposition. Implementing this is 
not trivial, but essential to implementing all other user stories. 
•  See how reactions affect visits (to a page or site) 
Since the reaction discovery techniques I will outline later in this report 
make it trivial to also collect (mostly quantitative) visitor information, we 
can present the information we have about when visits to a page (or the 
entire site) has happened and juxtapose it with the reactions we have 
discovered to show any correlation between reactions and visitor numbers. 
On Figure A1[Appendix A], I have highlighted the user stories that make it into the 
prototype with a dashed green path. 
page  
 of  
19
67
==PAGE:20==
Concatenating dialogue with brands across social media 
 Shum Stra
                                                               
These user story limits has an effect on which user types will be serviced by 
my prototype. On Figure 2, I have drawn a dashed green line around the user 
types that are relevant to the prototype. 
And, of course, these user story limits also affect the problem space my 
prototype actually touches. As on the other diagrams, I have drawn a dashed 
green line around the prototype’s problem space on Figure 1.  
To make meeting the deadline feasible, I had to also restrict the number of 
social networks that my prototype will be able to ﬁnd reactions on. I picked 
Twitter as my initially supported social network due to the fair balance 
between its number of users and the seeming complexity of discovering 
reactions on it. 
page  
 of  
20
67
==PAGE:21==
Concatenating dialogue with brands across social media 
 Shum Stra
                                                               
Choice of tools 
There are lots of ways to build software. Here’s how I’ve chosen to structure my 
prototype. 
Building something that tracks things on the web over time means running 
software either continuously or at somewhat regular intervals. In other words, 
we need to run some software on a server. 
To build a service that regular people can interact with, we need to build an 
interface to the data and functionality our service will provide that runs on a 
platform accessible to our users. This is the client software. 
Client software language 
To spend my time as wisely as possible, I have decided to use web technologies 
to build the client software. Using the HTML, CSS and JavaScript languages 
means that any user with a web browser will – if I use the technologies 
responsibly – be able to interact with my service. 
Building a web-based client also gives us some operational efﬁciency when 
building the parts that will integrate the service with our customers’ web sites. 
This way, both the integration solution and the client software will interact 
with my server software using the HTTP protocol. 
Of course, building the client software using another platform would also be a 
feasible choice; using the development kits for any mobile or desktop operating 
system would afford some advantages as rich user interface libraries are 
available for most platforms. The largest downside to this approach is the 
comparatively narrow potential user base I would end up with no matter 
which operating system I chose to develop for. Like many web service 
companies have done before me, I could develop client software for multiple 
==PAGE:22==
Concatenating dialogue with brands across social media 
 Shum Stra
                                                               
platforms, but that would require even more time and/or resources. To keep my 
development process lean , starting with the web platform is clearly the right 
20
choice. It also helps that I’m already very familiar with web technologies and 
can build something usable with them fairly quickly. 
Server software language 
Picking a language and set of tools to build the server side software might be 
less obvious at this point;  
The only hard requirement for my choice of language and tool-chain for my 
server software is that it will need to be able to communicate with my client 
software over HTTP. Of course, it would also be a big help if the things I want to 
accomplish with my server-side software is relatively easy to do. 
I would prefer working with a high-level, memory-managed language, since I 
want to be able to handle large, complex sets of data without a lot of 
scaffolding code. And it would be nice to have it be a popular, established, 
relatively-stable one where libraries are available for boring edge-tasks that 
aren’t central to what my application will be doing, and help and 
documentation is readily available on the web when I run into problems. 
Finally, if any of my prototype is to survive after the end of this thesis project, it 
would be nice if the language I pick will continue to be well-supported many 
years into the future. 
The above requirements disqualify C, C++ and Objective-C for not being 
memory-managed, and Java and C# for being too strictly typed to allow easy 
data processing. 
While it is possible to use JavaScript on the server using toolchains like Node.js, 
my research into Node.js revealed that while the environment is promising, 
their API is still in ﬂux, and their implementation of key functionality like 
setInterval() still has rough edges. Furthermore, while JavaScript’s simple 
prototyped object model might not be an issue for what I am trying to 
accomplish, I’m wary that I might end up appreciating the additional tools 
available in languages with non-prototyped object models. 
page  
 of  
22
67
==PAGE:23==
Concatenating dialogue with brands across social media 
 Shum Stra
                                                               
Python would be a fair choice of language for this task, since it’s high-level, 
popular and has many libraries relevant to my task at hand available. 
PHP has many of the same advantages of Python, but in a slightly less coherent 
and “beautiful” language. It also lacks proper threading support. On the other 
hand, it typically runs much faster than Python, and while it’s imperfect, it’s a 
language that I’m intimately familiar with. That means I’ll be able to start 
building my application using best practices for the languages from the start. 
Since my development time is limited, this is the language I have picked to 
build my prototype with. 
I must admit that there are many programming languages – like Haskell, F# and 
Go – that I have not properly researched before making this decision. So far 
though, I’m pretty satisﬁed with my choice. 
I will let standard web server software like Apache or nginx handle the details 
of implementing the HTTP protocol and serving up static ﬁles. 
page  
 of  
23
67
==PAGE:24==
Concatenating dialogue with brands across social media 
 Shum Stra
                                                               
Architecture 
The overall architectures of most web applications follow a multi-tiered 
architecture pattern , with different designs placing more or less work in each 
21
of the tiers. Here’s the typical three tiers involved in a web application: 
•
On users’ computers, the front-end will run after being downloaded from 
the web server. This is generally how the user interacts with the application 
and sees its output. (In my deﬁnition of a web application, this part can be 
built using open web technologies like HTML, CSS and JavaScript, with 
closed, in-browser technologies like Flash, or with native platform 
technologies like Cocoa on iOS.) 
•
On a server, a web server (like Apache or nginx) allows for the back-end 
software to be interacted with using HTTP commands sent over a network 
(the internet). 
•
The back-end software can use any number of data store mechanisms for 
persistence between requests. Possible data store mechanisms involve 
database servers and caching servers, which usually run as separate 
processes from the back-end software. In some cases, they might even run 
on separate machines from the back-end software. 
==PAGE:25==
Concatenating dialogue with brands across social media 
 Shum Stra
                                                               
 
 
Figur 3. Three-tiered architecture pattern 
Front-end architecture 
The front-end of my prototype comprises the HTML, CSS and JavaScript that 
ends up running in users’ browsers. 
Progressive enhancement 
To enable me to build a stable client with limited resources, my front-end 
architecture adheres to the principle of progressive enhancement  almost 
22
everywhere.  
There are innumerable platforms, browsers and browser versions that my 
users might end up using to interact with my web application – including 
browsers that haven’t yet been released as I write this. Building my web 
application in a progressively enhanced way means making sure that my 
application will still be usable in a browser that lacks browser features and 
technologies that I might use in my application.  
On a large, practical scale, that means building my application so the JavaScript 
part of my application is technically optional. In case some part of my 
JavaScript breaks – either due to the browser not supporting a feature or the 
entire language being disabled for some reason – my HTML, CSS and server-
side should be built to enable doing most things in my web application. While 
Front end
Running in web browser
Back end
Running on web server
Database server
Presentation tier
Logic tier
Data tier
HTTP
page  
 of  
25
67
==PAGE:26==
Concatenating dialogue with brands across social media 
 Shum Stra
                                                               
the JavaScript-less use case might require way clunkier interactions, my 
product will still be usable, which is inﬁnitely better than not being at all 
usable. 
(I could also choose to take this philosophy one step further and try to make 
sure that the parts of my JavaScript that is dependent on newer browser 
technologies are bypassed in case a browser doesn’t support them yet – 
however, this can quickly lead to messy code if not done in moderation.) 
Taking this a step further, that also means structuring my content sensibly 
with HTML, so that in case of CSS failing to load or parse – or actively being 
discarded for one reason or another – my page will still make structural sense 
even though it might not look at all like I intended it to. Users with alternative 
browsers and/or input/output devices – like blind, poorly-sighted, or partially 
paralyzed people – will also beneﬁt from my HTML making sense, widening my 
potential user base (if only marginally). 
JavaScript 
JavaScript is responsible for in-browser interactivity that doesn’t necessarily 
involve waiting for a response from the server. 
Given my time constraints, I have decided to not employ JavaScript to a wider 
extent than strictly necessary to implement the basics of my user interface 
ideas. Since all of my application should work without JavaScript, making it 
work better and smoother with JavaScript can come at a later point. 
The JavaScript that I have employed is managed through a pattern called 
Asynchronous Module Deﬁnitions  as implemented by a third-party library 
23
called require.js . This pattern involves deﬁning the JavaScript parts and 
24
libraries of your web application as modules that clearly deﬁne their 
dependencies by listing other modules that need to be loaded for the module to 
work, and clearly deﬁne their interfaces by returning a JavaScript object of 
methods and values the module offers to the outside. It’s not perfect , but it’s 
25
simple to work with, and much easier to debug than code running in multiple 
ﬁles in random order that might touch the same parts of the page for different 
reasons. 
These parts of my web application depend on JavaScript functionality: 
page  
 of  
26
67
==PAGE:27==
Concatenating dialogue with brands across social media 
 Shum Stra
                                                               
•
Drawing the charts offered by the timeline feature (charts.js) 
•
Folding out the project picker in the Socializer sidebar (sidebar.js) 
•
Folding out module-speciﬁc conﬁguration panels on the Module settings 
page (sidebar.js) 
•
The tracking code inserted on customers’ web pages (socializer/
tracker.js) 
Moreover, JavaScript code loaded from Twitter’s servers enable showing pretty, 
interactive previews of tweets in lists of discovered reactions. 
CSS 
CSS is responsible for deﬁning presentational aspects of web pages. 
Given my time constraints, I have intentionally decided to not spend vast 
amounts of time trying to perfect the CSS for my prototype. Though I have 
tried to lay out the pages tastefully, picked my fonts and colors with care and 
made my tables pretty, there are some elements that have not been given 
much love. Buttons, form layout, form elements and the reaction lists are 
purposely unstyled, as these presented non-trivial design problems that I felt 
could wait until later. 
I have used the third party tool SASS  to enable some shortcuts during CSS 
26
development. While I’m developing, SASS’ SCSS compiler turns my enhanced 
code into regular CSS for browsers to parse. 
HTML 
HTML is the language used for structuring the content of web pages. 
The HTML involved in Socializer’s user interface is generated by the back-end, 
and is mostly simple and semantically sensible. In most lists, I use simple table 
markup to present the tabular data I want to present – simple CSS rules then 
ensure all my tables are fairly pretty as a baseline. 
I have chosen my HTML tags based on the recommendations from WHATWG’s 
HTML living standard  (previously known as HTML 5). This notably means 
27
treating every <section> as a new <h1-­‐6> scope, which means my <h1>, <h2> 
etc. tags are to be considered relative to the section they are inside of. 
page  
 of  
27
67
==PAGE:28==
Concatenating dialogue with brands across social media 
 Shum Stra
                                                               
Back-end architecture 
My back-end application is built using an experimental app framework of my 
own invention. By doing that, I could test my web development-related ideas in 
a project of nearly real-world scale, and thus, I managed to turn this project 
into a software engineering learning experience that might not present itself 
often in real-world client projects. 
Framework 
My app framework is currently unnamed, unreleased and mostly 
undocumented, though I have properly commented some parts of the source 
code. It’s the result of months of experiments and thoughts on how to improve 
on the architectural choices I typically see in PHP-based web applications, 
some of it predating the thesis project period. It’s not the main focus of this 
thesis, so I will not delve into every detail of it, but in the following, I will 
outline the key concepts and how they ﬁt together. 
My framework is built on plain PHP 5.6 and a single class called Modular. 
Modular does two things: 
•
Statically, Modular offers to run module ﬁles and return their results with 
the Modular::get(modulename,	  filename) method. Once a ﬁle/property is 
loaded once, subsequent calls fetch the cached result. It can optionally be 
called with an extra argument to override the folder it looks for modules in.  
•
When instantiated, Modular objects act as event queues : 
28
•
Call $Modular-­‐>on(‘eventname’,	  function($args){}) to bind a closure 
to a certain event name, then call  
•
$Modular-­‐>trigger(‘eventname’,	  [$args]) to run all event handlers,  
•
$Modular-­‐>process(‘eventname’,	  [$args]) to run all event handlers 
in a manner where the $args variable is carried over between event 
handlers, or  
•
$Modular-­‐>ask(‘eventname’,	  [$args]) to run event handlers in the 
order they were bound until one handler returns a non-null value. 
page  
 of  
28
67
==PAGE:29==
Concatenating dialogue with brands across social media 
 Shum Stra
                                                               
As a combination of these two basic abilities, event handlers can be loaded into 
Modular instances by calling $Modular-­‐>bindModules([list	  of	  modulenames]). 
This will load each module’s bind.php ﬁle and bind the event handlers deﬁned 
in that ﬁle to the Modular instance in question. 
If used creatively, these basic tools ease the creation of extensible and loosely-
coupled  components. 
29
In Modular parlance, modules are folders of classes, scripts and sub-modules with 
a well-deﬁned area of responsibility. When applicable, a module may offer an 
interface for its components to be extended by triggering Modular events in 
some way. 
Modules are intended to be functional building blocks that can be combined to 
build a web application back-end with. When essential to the module’s core 
functionality, scripts and classes in a module may depend on classes in other 
modules. When inessential to the module’s core functionality, the module may 
extend functionality in other modules by responding to their events if 
triggered. Loosely coupling modules when possible enables us to install the 
exact modules relevant to a given web back-end project, while still enjoying 
interoperability where anticipated, and enabling extensions when modules 
doesn’t do everything from the start. 
Figure A2[Appendix A] provides an overview of the modules involved in my 
Socializer prototype, and their included classes and scripts. Module-level 
dependencies are illustrated with solid arrow lines, while event-based 
interoperability is illustrated with dashed lines. 
In the source code, modules are located in the top-level modules/ folder. 
Database schema  
To make modules properly plug-and-play, I realized I had to make sure they 
could transparently make sure that the data store structures their functionality 
might depend on is available when they need it. In terms of the prototype, that 
means ensuring that needed database tables and ﬁelds are available and 
deﬁned as expected when in use. To enable this, modules can include install 
scripts that use QB\Table objects to create queries that carefully creates or 
converts existing database tables and ﬁelds in order to ensure a certain 
page  
 of  
29
67
==PAGE:30==
Concatenating dialogue with brands across social media 
 Shum Stra
                                                               
schema. This has the added beneﬁt of making sure the entire database schema 
of a given site is deﬁned alongside the source code that will interact with it – a 
problem that the concept of database migrations also try to solve. 
When modules are added to a site (or updated), their install scripts can be 
run by a site administrator through a command-line shell or web interface.  
You can see the entire database schema of my prototype in Figure A4[Appendix A]. 
The ﬁgure also shows references/foreign keys between tables, and illustrates 
how different modules are responsible for different areas of the schema. As 
database schemas go, this one is fairly simple and serves to support the 
features described later in as lightweight a way as possible – no stored 
procedures and no MySQL-speciﬁc features involved. Feel free to refer back to 
Figure A4 while reading the rest of the report. 
MVC pattern 
While the module-oriented architecture might suggest otherwise at ﬁrst, my 
Socializer prototype also largely adheres to what could be characterized as an 
extended Model-View-Controller pattern . While reading the following, please 
30
refer to Figure A3[Appendix A]. 
Models 
Actually handling data is done by two different constructs:  
•
subclasses of Item and Items to represent data fetched from the database 
(or, in theory, any other data store). Item to represent single items (single 
database rows), and Items for sets of items (multiple database rows) 
retrieved in one call. 
•
subclasses of Action to actually modify data. Treating data changes as Units 
of Work  to complete translates well to the stateless RESTful  nature of 
31
32
web applications, and enables creating actions that can be extended by 
event handlers in modules. 
Compared to a typical object-oriented software architecture, this splits what 
would traditionally be a single class into a read-only-representation (Item), a 
read-only-set-representation (Items), and potentially multiple unit-of-work-
classes (Action) to (permanently) manipulate data of the particular kind. 
page  
 of  
30
67
==PAGE:31==
Concatenating dialogue with brands across social media 
 Shum Stra
                                                               
While this might appear excessive at ﬁrst, this approach has had the effect of 
ordering my data handling code by when it’s relevant rather than just what data 
it works on, making it easier for me to deduce where a given piece of code 
might belong in my code base. 
As part of my experiment in modularity, the ModularAction abstract class that 
extends the basic Action abstract class implements a Modular-based interface 
that allows any bound modules (as determined by a subclass) to extend any 
Action class that inherits it. While this approach to data binding  turned out 
33
to easily be able to become somewhat unmanageable, it also quite beautifully 
enables safe handling of data types that might not be centrally deﬁned, as well 
as enables an administrator or code to enable or disable certain parts of a 
reusable data type when appropriate. 
Comparably, the ItemsWithQB abstract class that extends the basic Items class 
implements a simple Modular-based interface that allows modules to deﬁne 
additional ways to query sets of a certain data type. 
The data representation and manipulation classes in the Socializer prototype 
are presented inside the “Model” area of Figure A3. 
Views 
Since my web application back-end is responsible for generating HTML to be 
sent to the user’s browser which then interprets it, it makes sense to 
characterize any classes and scripts that deal with generating HTML as View 
components. 
In order to avoid writing <table> markup more than once throughout my 
system, I have implemented a simple TableListView class that takes a list of 
associative arrays (or an Items object) as input, and then allows choosing 
which ﬁelds to show in the generated table. This enables me to reorder and 
turn columns on and off at leisure without worrying about changing my 
markup in multiple places. To enable presenting ﬁelds in a datatype-speciﬁc 
way when desired, various subclasses of TableListView implement table-cell-
scoped view code for Socializer’s data types. 
Some view code is specialized enough that it might not make sense to wrap it 
in a class for the sake of being object-oriented. To support extensible view code 
page  
 of  
31
67
==PAGE:32==
Concatenating dialogue with brands across social media 
 Shum Stra
                                                               
in these cases, the Templating class in my Site module enables complex 
templating behaviour across site ﬁles in an explicitly scoped way.  
As an example, pages that are supposed to have sidebars use the Templating 
class to wrap their content in the page-­‐with-­‐socializer-­‐sidebar template, 
while the page-­‐with-­‐socializer-­‐sidebar template uses the same basic, 
conﬁgurable <head> markup that every other page uses by wrapping its sidebar 
markup in the base template. Pages can wrap themselves in other pages as 
well; this allows a Socializer project subpage like the list of reactions (pages/
socializer/project/tracked-­‐pages.php) to wrap itself in the project-speciﬁc 
sidebar (pages/socializer/project.php) while also allowing the project-
speciﬁc sidebar to be shown by itself when the user hasn’t picked a page to 
show yet.  
The Templating class doesn’t just allow multiple layers of templates, it also 
allows using multiple templates and deﬁning multiple payloads when applying 
a template. It’s not perfect, and things can get complicated, but it has enabled 
me to keep things DRY  so far. 
34
A fairly accurate representation of which pages and templates wrap 
themselves in other pages and templates is depicted in Figure A3. 
Controllers 
In MVC parlance, controllers are the glue that ties together models and views to 
make an application. In my prototype, controllers would include the ﬁles in 
pages/ that answer to correspondingly named HTTP endpoints, parts of the 
data-crunching Socializer procedures that run behind the scenes, and the 
various modules that answer to the Site module’s request resolution events to 
enable various endpoints. The utility classes and request bootstrapping 
functionality of the Site module can also be considered controller code. 
Scripts 
Contrary to strictly object-oriented languages like C# and Java, my Modular-
based architecture (and PHP in general, which many professional PHP 
developers seem to mostly dislike) allows for procedural code to exist 
alongside classes. 
page  
 of  
32
67
==PAGE:33==
Concatenating dialogue with brands across social media 
 Shum Stra
                                                               
In particular, Modular modules can deﬁne scripts which might return a data 
structure of some kind. Some module scripts do just that; return an associative 
array with values for external use, or return a closure for later evaluation by 
the calling script. Other module scripts, like the Socializer procedures located 
in /modules/Socializer/procedures/, merely run upon request and return 
nothing. 
Where scripts really shine is in page/endpoint-speciﬁc code that it wouldn’t 
make sense to uniquely name, instantiate and pass around. The page scripts in 
/pages/ and template scripts in /site/templates/ are just that. 
Modules 
My Socializer prototype makes use of a few modules that I have developed 
during the project and should mention in the report, but which I’m not going 
to go into great detail on. Here they are; Feel free to refer to Figure A2[Appendix A] 
while reading this. 
•
The Users module implements base data structures and Actions for users. 
•
The Auth module extends the database schema and the Actions deﬁned by 
Users as well as hooking up to the “Site:initialize” event to enable logging in 
as users in the system. Its authentication algorithm has been brought over 
from an earlier project of mine . 
35
•
The Articles module is intended as the barebones beginnings of a modular 
content management system. Its basic building blocks are Articles, which 
would typically correspond to pages on a web site, and Sections, which are 
a hierarchical construct that can contain Articles and other Sections. What 
made this simple CMS worth building is that it involves close to no 
website-speciﬁc functionality at its base, but Sections can deﬁne a list of one 
or more modules that extend Actions done on Sections and Articles placed 
inside that particular Section. This allows for inﬁnite permutations of 
functionality enabled and disabled on both wholly separate and nested 
parts of a given site’s CMS setup, and I look forward to experimenting 
further with this idea in the future. 
•
The QB classes included as a sub-module of the Items module are query 
builders that I ended up writing myself because I couldn’t ﬁnd any existing 
query builders that emphasized non-linearity (which can be immensely 
page  
 of  
33
67
==PAGE:34==
Concatenating dialogue with brands across social media 
 Shum Stra
                                                               
helpful for modular query building in particular), being able to output an 
actual query as a string, and allowing the use of raw SQL for the cases 
where you know what you want to do in a query and the library either 
doesn’t or only supports it in a weird, hack-ish way. The QB classes are not 
perfect, but have been very helpful, and the Table class in particular offers 
functionality I haven’t seen in any other PHP library yet. In the coming 
months, I hope to clean up the code and interface and release QB to the 
public as a maintained open source project. 
•
The Scheduler static class in the Site module is a wrapper for the UNIX 
utility crontab that takes care of carefully adding and removing lines from 
crontab without touching crontab lines irrelevant to the site installation at 
hand, and deduplicating lines when possible. It’s not rocket science, but it’s 
useful enough that I hope to release it as an open source project in the near 
future. 
page  
 of  
34
67
==PAGE:35==
Concatenating dialogue with brands across social media 
 Shum Stra
                                                               
Building Socializer 
Setting up the basics 
As a web service that will eventually host multiple customers on one server 
instance, we need some way to compartmentalize different users’ site data on 
our server. 
With basic CMS building blocks already implemented in the Articles module, I 
ﬁgured that a Socializer project might as well be implemented as a Section that 
has the Socializer module enabled, and a project’s tracked pages could be 
represented as Article entries inside that Section.  
Piggybacking on these simple structures will also enable me to include 
Socializer as one of multiple Section modules in future web projects, where 
Articles that represent Socializer tracked pages could also contain other or all 
of a page’s data. 
Enabling setting up a Socializer project 
Implementing a “Create new Socializer project” function thus involves using a 
NewSectionAction to create a section. To keep things organized CMS-wise, all 
Socializer-created sections are created with the same parent section, a dummy 
section called “Socializer”. This will allow me to use a separate Section/Article 
hierarchy for any future site functionality that might involve Sections and 
Articles in another conﬁguration.  
Tracked pages are created inside sections using a NewArticleAction. 
==PAGE:36==
Concatenating dialogue with brands across social media 
 Shum Stra
                                                               
Tracking code 
Gathering URLs 
One of the ﬁrst problems I had to solve when building Socializer was the 
following: 
To search for occurrences of a given web page’s URL, you need to know what 
that URL might be when the page is mentioned.  
Even though it is considered best practice to only have one URL per web page , 
36
CMSes might allow multiple routes to resolve to the same page. Add various 
permutations of query parameters  to the mix, and we potentially have a lot 
37
of different URLs to look for. 
To deal with this, Socializer assumes that every web page we want to keep an 
eye on has multiple alternate URLs. 
But how do we catch these? We could require site owners to manually enter 
every possible permutation for each page they wanted to track – or force them 
to create a script that did the same – but that wouldn’t be very user-friendly, 
and would effectively make Socializer near impossible to use in a real-world 
setting. 
There’s a better solution (which incidentally also provides other beneﬁts): 
requiring Socializer customers to insert a tracking code onto their web pages 
similar to the ones required by most popular web site analytics packages. This 
tracking code could, if it knew what the ideal URL for a given page would be, 
report back to our server when it detects that someone visited that exact page 
using a different URL. Over time, we could use these reports to build a list of 
alternate URLs seen in the wild. 
Taking this idea one step further, we could build our list of ideal URLs the same 
way; if the server hadn’t seen a particular ideal URL before, it could create an 
entry for it in the database so we can refer back to it in the future. But this 
introduces another problem: How would the server know which project the 
ideal URL belonged to?  
We could require site owners to deﬁne which domain names their Socializer 
site would be run on, and then match the domain name of the visited URL to 
page  
 of  
36
67
==PAGE:37==
Concatenating dialogue with brands across social media 
 Shum Stra
                                                               
the domain names our Socializer sites claim to be collecting visits for. This 
would be an implementable solution, but we would have to make sure 
Socializer users couldn’t claim domains that weren’t their own, as that might 
introduce user experience problems if the actual owners of a claimed site 
became a customer in the future. Domain veriﬁcation could be implemented 
through DNS TXT records and/or placing a certain text ﬁle in your domain’s 
web server root folder – that’s how Google does it in their Google Apps for Work 
offering . 
38
This seemed a bit too complicated for my prototype, so as a quick and easy 
solution, I decided to simply make the tracking code include the ID of the 
Socializer project that the page should belong to. 
 
Figure 3. Example of tracking code 
Gathering more than URLs 
Now that we have JavaScript code on our customers’ web pages, we can do a 
whole lot more. If the page visitor came to the page from another page, the 
visitor’s browser (usually) includes a Referer: HTTP header that indicates to 
the server which web page the user followed a link on to get here . We can 
39
record this and get an idea of which pages and URLs around the web might 
refer to this web page. And this turns out to be useful when trying to discover 
reactions on Twitter. 
If we are already storing some kind of timestamped token for every visit our 
tracking code reacts to, we end up having a permanent record of our visitor 
numbers over time that we can do further analysis on and present to the user 
at a later point. 
page  
 of  
37
67
==PAGE:38==
Concatenating dialogue with brands across social media 
 Shum Stra
                                                               
While my prototype doesn’t, we could also store other readily-available 
information about the browser, the visitor is using to view the page, and use 
that for later analysis. And using a tracking cookie like Google Analytics does  
40
would mean being able to track user’s movement through pages on the site, as 
well as detecting whether they are return visitors, which could be used for 
some potentially very interesting analysis features at a later point. 
The tracking code in action 
When someone visits a page with a Socializer tracking code, the JavaScript that 
makes up the tracking code is run immediately when the page has loaded. 
The running code cleverly inserts a new <script> tag that asynchronously 
loads a JavaScript ﬁle (/public/js/socializer/tracker.js) from the Socializer 
web server. It also deﬁnes a mechanism for calls to window.socializer() to be 
queued until the script loads, deﬁnes the function and picks up the call queue. 
Finally, it “calls” window.socializer(‘track’,	  (sectionid),	  
(canonical_url)); 
This partially obfuscated tracking code is heavily inspired by Google Analytics’ 
tracking code. After having Google engineers trying to optimize it for years, I 
saw no reason to reinvent the wheel, so I deciphered it and tweaked it to do 
what I need to do. 
When the JavaScript ﬁle from the server has loaded, it deﬁnes the function that 
will become window.socializer(), makes sure the queue of calls to 
window.socializer() is evaluated with the actual function, and puts the 
function itself in window.socializer. 
The window.socializer() function then sends an asynchronous HTTP POST 
request to “http://socializer.framery.net/get/socializer/track” with the 
given sectionid, canonical URL, the actual visited URL, and the current visitor’s 
referrer URL (if any). 
The ﬁle that ends up responding to the request is /modules/Socializer/
procedures/track-­‐callback, which creates a new entry in the visits database 
table with the given information by creating and executing a NewVisitAction. 
In a measure of extreme precaution, once I was pretty sure my tracker.js ﬁle 
worked properly across browsers, I wrapped the entire ﬁle in a big try/catch 
page  
 of  
38
67
==PAGE:39==
Concatenating dialogue with brands across social media 
 Shum Stra
                                                               
block in order to make sure that should it fail, it would never introduce 
potentially web-page-breaking JavaScript errors on the web pages it will be 
loaded into. I am fully aware that every experienced programmer in the world 
would characterize this as an anti-pattern, but I am not yet sure enough of my 
code in tracker.js that I can guarantee it will never cause a page-breaking 
JavaScript error in every JavaScript engine out there. When I’m actually 
working on the code in tracker.js, the try/catch lines are commented out. 
Turning visits into useful data 
At this point, we have a tracking code workﬂow that logs a lot of raw page 
visits for us. It’s time to make them useful. 
To do that, a couple of scripts run at regular intervals (triggered by the UNIX 
system utility cron) to process data in batches. 
The ﬁrst, process-visits-job, looks at newly logged, as-yet unprocessed visits and 
processes them by doing the following: 
- First, for each visit, the tracked page that it belongs to is identiﬁed by the 
canonical_url stored in the visit and the Article that represents the tracked 
page. 
- Next, the visited URL of each visit is added to the visit’s article as an alternate 
URL if it isn’t one already. 
- Then, the referrer_urls of the visits we are processing are aggregated into a 
shorter list of distinct referrer_urls. 
- For the referrer_urls that are already stored as referrals in the database, the 
number of attributed visits stored with these referrals are updated. 
- For the referrer_urls that are not already stored as referrals in the database, 
we’ll add them as referrals to this page.  
- Finally, all visits that were successfully processed during the run are marked 
as processed in the database. 
page  
 of  
39
67
==PAGE:40==
Concatenating dialogue with brands across social media 
 Shum Stra
                                                               
In theory, we could accomplish the same immediately every time we register a 
visit if we did the above inside the track-­‐callback script described earlier. 
Doing this would be far more performance-intensive, and could easily overload 
the server in situations where a lot of visits happen in a short period of time. 
Batching data processing tasks allow us to run these as often or as seldom as 
our servers can handle. Decoupling these procedures from each other also 
allows us to run them on separate servers from the web server handling the 
track-­‐callbacks, as long as they connect to the same data store. 
We now not only have a giant list of page visits, but also have readily available 
lists of unique alternate URLs and referring URLs encountered for their 
respective pages. 
page  
 of  
40
67
==PAGE:41==
Concatenating dialogue with brands across social media 
 Shum Stra
                                                               
 
 
Figure 4. Screenshot of tracked pages list in Socializer. 
page  
 of  
41
67
==PAGE:42==
Concatenating dialogue with brands across social media 
 Shum Stra
                                                               
 
Figure 5. Screenshot of a list of alternate URLs for a tracked page in Socializer. 
Handling external redirects 
As mentioned earlier, knowing the URLs that resolve to the pages we want to 
track is essential to Socializer working. With the above technology, we do – 
almost. 
In the real world, some URLs might redirect to a page we want to track. In that 
case, for completeness sake, we also want to know what these redirecting URLs 
might be, so we can detect any mentions of these on the networks of the 
world. In particular, the widespread use of link shorteners like bit.ly, Google’s 
goo.gl and Twitter’s t.co make this an essential task. In our system, we want 
redirects to our page to be another form of alternate URLs for a given page. 
How do we discover redirects to our page? Well, we have some clues to this 
already, since we have a list of URLs that site visitors have visited right before 
arriving at our page. If a visitor click on a link to a redirect to a tracked page, 
the visitor’s browser will name the URL that redirects to the tracked page as the 
referrer. In other words, some subset of our referrals are redirects to our page. 
So, how do we ﬁgure out which of the referrals are redirects to our page? We 
could try to maintain a list of known link shorteners and automatically treat 
referrals from these domains as alternate URLs to our page – and while that 
page  
 of  
42
67
==PAGE:43==
Concatenating dialogue with brands across social media 
 Shum Stra
                                                               
might be a worthwhile shortcut to add in the future, it’s not a complete 
solution. 
To be complete, we will have to get our hands dirty and try sending a HTTP 
request to every one of a page’s referral URLs to see if it responds with a 
redirect to our tracked page. 
This is what happens in the examine-referrals-job procedure. After fetching a 
batch of as yet unexamined referrals, the script tries to ﬁlter out referrals that 
might already have been marked as alternate URLs for other pages (in case a 
redirect has changed since then), and then proceeds to send an HTTP request 
to each referral URL in order to see what is returned. 
If the response turns out to be a redirect to another URL, we’ll check if that 
other URL is a known alternate URL for any page we are tracking. If it is, we’ll 
add the redirecting URL as an alternate URL for that page, and mark the 
referral as being a redirect for good measure. If the response does seem to 
redirect, but to a URL unknown to us, we’ll give up by marking it as an 
unconﬁrmable_redirect and move on. 
Since we are already making requests to our referrals, we might as well check 
to see if the URL being referred to is present in the HTML returned to us. If it is, 
we’ll mark the referral as a ‘public_link’ (since everyone including our script was 
able to ﬁnd it on the page). If it isn’t, the referral might originate from a page 
that requires some kind of authentication to see (like some forums or 
Facebook). Or, it might originate from a script somewhere incorrectly visiting 
pages with an incorrect Referer: header in order to spam our referral tracking 
in case it’s publicly available – a scheme called referrer spam . In any case, if 
41
the URL isn’t mentioned on the page or the request fails in any way, we’ll mark 
the referral as ‘unconﬁrmable’. 
In the future, we could be more nuanced in how we handle these 
‘unconﬁrmable’ situations, and perhaps retry failed requests multiple times at 
increasing intervals to gracefully handle a server being temporarily 
unavailable. 
The HTTPS problem 
Looking at referrer URLs like we do above is not without its limits. One of the 
biggest roadblocks to getting a complete overview of incoming referrals is not 
page  
 of  
43
67
==PAGE:44==
Concatenating dialogue with brands across social media 
 Shum Stra
                                                               
just links sparked by native apps (which by nature have no URL), but links from 
sites accessed through HTTPS.  
HTTPS is, to put it brieﬂy, a way to communicate using the HTTP protocol 
wrapped in TLS encryption . This means that while the IP/domain name a 
42
browser is connected to might be considered public knowledge (since the 
browser needs to initially contact the server in an unencrypted fashion to set 
up the encrypted connection anyway), the actual page paths – the part of a web 
page URL after the IP/domain name – are requested through encrypted HTTP 
commands and are therefore considered private information on principle. 
As a consequence, browsers do not include more than the domain name in the 
Referer: header when following a link to another site from a site visited using 
HTTPS.  
43
This means that we have to live with the fact that some referrals will only be 
identiﬁable by originating domain name. In the examine-referrals-job, we skip 
trying to fetch more information about these referrals and simply mark them 
as ‘https’. 
With Google promoting the use of HTTPS on all sites , not just sites dealing 
44
with sensitive data, the ratio of HTTPS-to-HTTP trafﬁc will likely grow in the 
future. 
Discovering reactions on Twitter 
With an arsenal of easily queryable data about pages, visits, alternate URLs and 
referrals, we are equipped to start ﬁnding mentions of our tracked pages on 
social networks. 
Different social network APIs and API limitations necessitates different 
strategies for ﬁnding reactions on each. To avoid a spaghetti scenario of 
network-speciﬁc code, I have collected my Twitter-speciﬁc code in a module 
named “Socializer/Twitter” that is called in a module-agnostic way by the main 
Socializer procedures and back-end UI code. As Socializer starts supporting 
other networks in the future, these would get their own modules.  
page  
 of  
44
67
==PAGE:45==
Concatenating dialogue with brands across social media 
 Shum Stra
                                                               
Devising a discovery strategy 
Twitter’s public REST APIs offers a lot of entrypoints to Twitter’s large data set, 
but most of them are personal in one way or another, in that they are scoped 
around what a certain user might be interested in.  This makes a lot of sense 
45
for the typical traditional Twitter client, but is largely irrelevant to what we are 
trying to accomplish. 
Twitter’s public REST APIs does include a GET endpoint named “search/
tweets” , which can be used to search for words appearing in tweets across 
46
Twitter – but only as far back as the search index goes, which is currently 
around 6-9 days into the past. 
When you post a link in a tweet, Twitter transparently replaces the link with a 
shortened, t.co version of the link in your tweet to help you stay within the 
SMS-dictated 140-character limit . In the ofﬁcial Twitter clients (and most 
47
others), these shortened links are shown with their original URLs – this 
functionality is widespread due to Twitter including information about the 
original URL when requesting information about a tweet through their API. 
Unfortunately, the public search API doesn’t know about that feature, and only 
searches through the raw text bodies of tweets. To ﬁnd a link using the public 
search API, you have to ﬁnd it by its t.co version.  
That, of course, means we can’t ﬁnd any mentions of our tracked pages 
without knowing which t.co URLs redirect users to them. Fortunately, this 
predicament was what lead me to build the examine-referrals-job procedure 
described earlier. With the data gained from that, any t.co URLs redirecting 
people to one of our tracked pages will be stored as alternate URLs for the page 
in question. Our Socializer/Twitter module simply needs to do a search for each 
alternate URL starting with “http://t.co” to ﬁnd any mentions of the 
corresponding page on Twitter. 
As mentioned, the Twitter search API only allows us to ﬁnd tweets that aren’t 
too old to be included in the search index. This means tweet harvesting for a 
given page’s URLs can’t happen too seldomly if we don’t want to risk missing a 
tweet at some point. It also means that Socializer will generally not be able to 
ﬁnd tweets posted way before Socializer’s tracking code has been placed on a 
page. 
page  
 of  
45
67
==PAGE:46==
Concatenating dialogue with brands across social media 
 Shum Stra
                                                               
Alternative strategies 
One way to get around the limitations of the search API endpoint would be to 
use the search features of Gnip’s historical tweet archive . This, however, 
48
would only increase the search API time limit to a month, and costs enterprise-
grade money, so it would likely not be ﬁnancially viable for this reason alone. 
Twitter’s Streaming API offers a “statuses/ﬁlter” endpoint that can be used to 
keep a real-time eye on up to 400 keywords (which would be t.co URLs in our 
use case), 5000 userids and 25 geographical areas . This would not solve the 
49
issue of ﬁnding tweets in the past, since the Streaming APIs only return new 
tweets made after a connection has been established, and it would limit us to 
keeping an eye on 400 t.co URLs at a time per connection. Establishing multiple 
connections with different access tokens might be a workaround to that limit, 
but there’s a clear limit to the number of TCP connections we can feasibly have 
open at the same time on a single server, and it might not compare to the 
number of t.co URLs we might want to look out for once we sign up a handful 
of customers with large, page-rich sites. 
Finally, getting permission from Twitter to access the “statuses/ﬁrehose” 
Streaming API endpoint would allow us to store all tweets from when we start 
collecting them, and we could then build a specialized search index on top of 
these that would allow us to search for links in our giant tweet database. It 
goes without saying that handling data amounts of this magnitude is much 
easier said than done, and so would probably require a larger-than-a-few-
people operation. A slightly more manageable variant of this strategy would be 
to use Gnip as a middleman and use their Link Stream API  to continuously 
50
collect all tweets that include certain t.co links. 
Access tokens 
Almost all Twitter’s public APIs require some kind of authentication to use. 
Twitter’s REST APIs generally require using OAuth to authenticate requests.  
To send OAuth-enabled requests, we need to implement a process in which we 
procure a request token, use the request token to direct the end user to a page 
where he/she approves our app’s use of the end user’s Twitter account, and 
ﬁnally receive an access token once the user approves . These tokens, and their 
51
corresponding token secrets which together comprise a public key encryption 
scheme , are used to verify that all three legs of the authentication process are 
52
page  
 of  
46
67
==PAGE:47==
Concatenating dialogue with brands across social media 
 Shum Stra
                                                               
who they say they are, making it a fairly safe proposition to send personal 
information to the requesting application in later requests. 
I will not go into the details of the OAuth protocol, as it wasn’t a main focus of 
mine in the development of my prototype. While I did end up implementing 
the user authentication process myself (mostly located in the ﬁles /modules/
Socializer/Twitter/add-­‐access-­‐token.php and /modules/Socializer/
Twitter/add-­‐access-­‐token-­‐callback.php), I have delegated the nitty-gritty of 
sending and receiving OAuth requests and responses to third-party libraries. 
Though the search API is not user-speciﬁc, it still requires an access token of 
some form to use it for rate limiting purposes . Twitter offers access tokens on 
53
a user-speciﬁc basis, with search API requests limited to 180 requests per 15-
minute window, and on an app-wide basis with limits increased to 450 
requests per 15-minute window . 
54
I therefore have two choices:  
A.  Procure a single, app-wide access token with a hard, app-wide rate limit. 
B.  Require Socializer customers to put access tokens into the system using 
their own Twitter account(s). 
While option B requires more work on the part of the customers, it’s also 
substantially more scaleable than option A, where the app-wide rate limits 
could become a severe bottleneck as soon as a couple of customers sign up for 
Socializer. I have therefore chosen to implement option B.  
Socializer users can add an access token to a Socializer project by navigating to 
the project’s Module settings page, opening the Twitter module’s conﬁguration 
panel, clicking the “Authenticate with Twitter” button and then go through the 
OAuth authentication process. 
Multiple access tokens can be added to a Socializer project. When Twitter API 
requests are made, an access token from the Socializer project corresponding 
to the request-related page or tweet is used. In case a Socializer project 
requires making a large amount of Twitter API requests in a short time period, 
having multiple access tokens to pick between effectively increases the rate 
limits imposed by the Twitter API. 
page  
 of  
47
67
==PAGE:48==
Concatenating dialogue with brands across social media 
 Shum Stra
                                                               
While access tokens are currently stored as belonging to Socializer projects, it 
might make sense in the future to bind access tokens to Socializer users as 
well, since one Socializer user with one Twitter account might have multiple 
sites they want to track with Socializer, and making the user go through the 
same authentication process to get what will amount to be the same access 
token for every Socializer project could then be avoided. 
Choosing when to search for new reactions to a 
URL 
Of course, we can’t just search for reactions once per URL and consider 
ourselves done; new reactions might appear after we’ve searched. To be 
complete in our reaction discovery, we need to re-run the discovery process at 
intervals. 
But at which intervals? It might make sense to search for reactions every ﬁve 
minutes while a tracked page is fresh, but not when it’s been around for 
months. 
To reach a reasonable compromise between the two, I chose to implement a 
throttling algorithm for every URL/module pair we might want to collect new 
reactions for. Its basic rules are simple:  
•
If new reactions were found when a speciﬁc module searched for a speciﬁc 
URL, let’s half the time we’ll wait (the update interval) until letting the 
module try to ﬁnd mentions of that URL again.  
•
If reactions were found that we already knew about, but their basic 
information had changed, we will let the update interval stay the same.  
•
If nothing new was found, let’s increase the update interval by multiplying it 
by 1.5. 
(To keep the update interval from becoming untenably short or long, the update interval 
is numerically clamped before being stored.) 
To store these URL/module tuples and their related update_intervals, I have 
created a database table with the URL/module tuple as its primary key. 
page  
 of  
48
67
==PAGE:49==
Concatenating dialogue with brands across social media 
 Shum Stra
                                                               
Every time we let a module collect mentions of a speciﬁc URL, we’ll update the 
timestamps stored in the database table’s last_update and next_update ﬁelds. 
The table in question is called “duedates_urls_modules” in the database. Please 
refer to Figure A4[Appendix A] for a complete deﬁnition. 
When the ﬁnd-mentions-job procedure is run, it takes all URL/module tuples 
whose next_update timestamps are in the past, runs the corresponding 
modules’ collect-new-reactions script with the given URL, and updates the 
update_interval-related values afterwards. 
A consequence of this approach is that the existence of rows in the 
duedates_urls_modules table is essential to reactions being found. In order to 
ensure that, rows are created/replaced in the table whenever: 
•
Alternate URLs are added – this is done by the awkwardly-named update-
url-due-rows-job procedure. 
•
The list of enabled Socializer modules for a given section is changed. 
Keeping an eye on found reactions 
Once we have found reactions to our tracked pages, we can possibly uncover 
interesting information about how these reactions impact their audiences by 
tracking the changes in their basic information over time. For example, we 
could plot how many retweets a certain tweet has over a period of time, or at 
which time of day a reaction is most frequently commented upon. 
To support these future features, I have set up the basic scaffolding for 
updating what we know about reactions over time. It uses the same throttling 
concepts as the reaction discovery, but with timestamps stored directly on the 
reaction database rows instead of in a separate table. The update-reactions 
procedure takes care of running a reaction’s module’s update-reaction script 
once enough time has gone since the reaction was last updated. 
My current prototype does not store a timeline of reactions’ key metrics, but it 
does beneﬁt from this by always having mostly up-to-date reaction 
information stored. 
page  
 of  
49
67
==PAGE:50==
Concatenating dialogue with brands across social media 
 Shum Stra
                                                               
 
Figure 6. Screenshot of a list of reactions in Socializer. 
Creating charts 
Now that we have the reactions and the visits data, we can fulﬁll our 
prototype’s remaining user story: “See how reactions affect visits to a page or site”. 
By presenting a visual chart with time on the x-axis, numbers of visits on the 
y-axis and our found reactions placed appropriately, we can allow the user to 
deduce correlations between reactions and visit numbers. 
(Of course, this chart would be even more useful if the chart showed which 
part of the visitor numbers originated from the reactions in question, but I was 
not able to add this feature in time for the prototype.) 
Generating the data 
Before we can draw a chart, we have to generate some data to draw in the 
chart. Doing this is the purpose of the /get/socializer/timeline-­‐data 
endpoint, implemented in /modules/Socializer/get/timeline-­‐data.php. 
page  
 of  
50
67
==PAGE:51==
Concatenating dialogue with brands across social media 
 Shum Stra
                                                               
Seeing some commonalities between the different kinds of data we might 
want for charts, I have deliberately parameterized the timeline-data script to be 
able to serve up different data sets depending on the scope of data, time frame, 
time grouping and data type(s) you might want to present in a chart. 
The scope of data deﬁnes which item’s data we want to have a look at. 
Currently implemented are: 
- section: See data for all [data type]s across an entire Socializer-enabled site. 
- article: See data relevant to a single tracked page. 
I expect to want to also implement scoping by reaction, referral_domain (to create 
charts about visits originating from certain domains) and modules (to create 
administratively helpful charts showing rate limiting stats over time). 
The time frame of data is fairly self-explanatory – what should our window on 
the x-axis be? These limits are also used to limit the amount of data to fetch 
and process in the timeline-data script. 
The time grouping determines whether our numbers should be grouped by 
hour, by day, or by week. Grouping by minute, 15-minute interval and by month 
is also available, even if it isn’t immensely useful with the data set I have 
available currently. 
The data type(s) given determines which numbers we want to return. Currently 
implemented are: 
- visits: Number of visits over time 
- reactions: Reactions within the given time frame 
I anticipate wanting to implement many other data types over time, including 
a type that shows the number of reactions to a page over time, reaction-related 
data such as likes and number of retweets, and many other kinds of data. 
Finally, the timeline-data script supports enabling a cumulative mode where 
numbers – you guessed it – are added up over time. 
The actual grouping and ordering is done in two simple loops at the end of the 
script. There might be room for optimization here; while upper-bound running 
page  
 of  
51
67
==PAGE:52==
Concatenating dialogue with brands across social media 
 Shum Stra
                                                               
time is only O(m · n) where m is the number of data types requested, and n is 
the number of requested data points to consider, I presume my current 
algorithm would run into memory usage-related problems when dealing with 
large data sets such as visits data for a properly popular site. To make this 
robust for large data sets, we might need to implement a way to get visitor 
numbers over time without having to count them all every time. Storing 
relevant counts over time in some format might be the way to go, but picking 
the most useful numbers to store could be a challenge. 
To make the data easily parsable by the JavaScript code that will draw the 
chart, the data returned by the timeline-data script is exported to JSON by the 
“Site:resolveURI:get” Modular event handler that was originally responsible for 
mapping the HTTP request to the timeline-data script. 
Creating the visuals 
To create the chart visuals, JavaScript code on the client side (charts.js) requests 
the chart data it wants from the server, converts it to an SVG-based graphic 
and places it on the page. My JavaScript code is helped in this task by using the 
powerful third-party data manipulation and visualization library D3. 
SVG is a text-based vector graphics format that is styleable with CSS . D3’s 
55
way of generating SVG for charts tries its best to stay out of the way, which 
results in a framework that feels low-level, is hard to get started with, but has 
limitless applications. 
As I only needed a fairly basic two-dimensional linear line chart for my 
prototype, I could have picked an easier, lighter, but more assumption-rich 
framework to build my charts like Chart.js , Chartist  or the commercial 
56
57
Highcharts . After doing research on all of these, I am convinced that D3 will 
58
turn out to be the right choice in the long run, as I can see myself not 
struggling to make improvements and new, custom-tailored charts with the 
framework in the future. 
page  
 of  
52
67
==PAGE:53==
Concatenating dialogue with brands across social media 
 Shum Stra
                                                               
 
Figure 7. Screenshot of a timeline chart showing visits and reactions in Socializer 
Testing my implementation 
To try out my implementation with real-world data, I set up the Socializer 
prototype software on a virtual machine I already had running on Microsoft’s 
Azure platform, and installed the Socializer tracking code on Comicing, a 
community-based website that I built in collaboration with DTU alumnus 
Lasse Valentini Jensen and have been running since its launch in 2013. The site 
is in Danish and isn’t widely popular, but it does have a regular cast of users 
that seem to enjoy the site. 
My prototype has been collecting visits data for Comicing since the middle of 
December 2014, and has, after a few adjustments (a lot of bug ﬁxes) been 
analyzing the visits data and collecting Twitter reactions automatically for a 
while now. Since my audience is small and largely doesn’t use Twitter, very few 
reactions have ended up being posted while Socializer was live – but I made 
sure there was at least a couple, and Socializer managed to discover those 
automatically as intended. 
page  
 of  
53
67
==PAGE:54==
Concatenating dialogue with brands across social media 
 Shum Stra
                                                               
To ﬁnish off this chapter of the report, I strongly recommend trying out my live 
Socializer installation with the Comicing data set. It’s very straightforward – 
see my instructions in Appendix C. 
page  
 of  
54
67
==PAGE:55==
Concatenating dialogue with brands across social media 
 Shum Stra
                                                               
Discovering reactions on 
other social networks 
While I have only implemented a reaction discovery strategy for one social 
network, I have done some research on the strategies required to support other 
social networks. 
Facebook 
The obvious next network to start supporting would be Facebook due to its 
sheer usage share. However, discovering reactions on Facebook will not be 
nearly as trivial discovering them on Twitter. 
Facebook offers a Graph API endpoint that takes a URL and returns basic public 
information about that URL , including what its Open Graph ID on Facebook is, 
59
the number of times it has been shared in aggregate across Facebook, and any 
public comments to the link directly – not comments to posts mentioning the 
link. We could automate ﬁnding this and track these numbers over time. 
Unfortunately, as I read the Graph API documentation, there are no general 
ways to ﬁnd public posts that includes a given link or domain, neither through 
some kind of search API or otherwise . 
60
Crawling user feeds manually to ﬁnd links is only a possibility to the extent 
that we can gather user feeds of authenticated users that have granted us 
access to look at their friend lists. In order to get anywhere doing this, we 
would have to collect access tokens given to us by site visitors for some other 
reason, and then re-use them to regularly harvest the contents of their friends’ 
posts. That’s probably a bit too involved to be an option for most sites, however, 
and frankly, it’s kind of creepy, which means it’s probably not allowed by the 
==PAGE:56==
Concatenating dialogue with brands across social media 
 Shum Stra
                                                               
terms of service of the API – which means we could be blocked from using the 
API at Facebook’s discretion.  
Facebook states in its API documentation that there’s a Public Feed API that 
provides a stream of public user and page status updates as they are posted to 
Facebook . It might be possible to build a discovery strategy upon this API if it 
61
wasn’t for the fact that Facebook on the same page states that “Access to the 
Public Feed API is restricted to a limited set of media publishers and usage requires 
prior approval by Facebook. You cannot apply to use the API at this time.” As I see it, 
there’s no signiﬁcant ﬁnancial incentives for Facebook to begin allowing new 
parties access to this API, so I’m not optimistic on that front. 
Overall, the prospects for a fully-featured link-centric Facebook module for 
Socializer is bleak. We could implement a Socializer/Facebook module that tracks 
general link stats and gathers link posts from the authenticated user’s own 
feed and Facebook pages, but the resulting data is guaranteed to not be as 
interesting as what we can ﬁnd with the Twitter module. 
Google+ 
Google offers Google+ Ripples , a web site that shows who has shared a given 
62
Google+ post or URL on Google+ – in other words, precisely what we might want 
to track in a Socializer/Google+ module. Unfortunately, my research has not 
revealed any public API that the Google+ Ripples data is available through. 
Since Google+ Ripples fetches its data in JSON form and does not require 
authentication, there’s the option of reverse engineering the requests the 
Google+ Ripples web app makes, but it will require vigilant maintenance, and 
the implementation could change overnight to one that we can’t harvest data 
from. 
Since Google+ is only being actively used in certain circles – most notably 
among Google employees  – supporting it does not necessarily need to be high 
63
priority. 
page  
 of  
56
67
==PAGE:57==
Concatenating dialogue with brands across social media 
 Shum Stra
                                                               
YouTube 
YouTube’s public API offers a fairly straightforward search endpoint that can be 
used to detect links in video descriptions , so this module would be easy to 
64
implement given the existing prototype. 
However, compared to other networks, YouTube video descriptions are 
seldomly used to share links to other web pages than ones of the uploader, so 
our YouTube module would rarely yield surprising results. 
URLs have traditionally not been allowed in YouTube comments, but as of fairly 
recently , they are. Unfortunately, there are no methods in the current version 
65
of the public YouTube API that expose searching YouTube comments. 
Reddit 
Finding link posts on Reddit that point to our tracked pages and their 
alternative URLs is straightforward with Reddit’s public /search.json?q=(url) 
API endpoint. A Reddit module would be straightforward to implement given 
the existing prototype, and we could easily track interesting stats like number 
of comments and Reddit score over time. 
Since Reddit is a huge and very active community, implementing this module 
would make a lot of sense. 
Tumblr 
Tumblr’s public API does not provide any endpoints that allow us to search 
Tumblr posts for URLs . However, Tumblr blogs are usually accessed without 
66
the use of HTTPS, which means we can devise a strategy to ﬁnd Tumblr posts 
using referrals. Extending the examine-referrals-job to detect the post IDs of 
Tumblr-based referrals could be a way to implement a Tumblr reaction 
discovery strategy. 
page  
 of  
57
67
==PAGE:58==
Concatenating dialogue with brands across social media 
 Shum Stra
                                                               
LinkedIn 
LinkedIn offers a company search API that allows ﬁnding companies by their 
given website URL , as well as a job search API that allows ﬁnding job listings 
67
by their included link to a job application form . Since these are both data 
68
types where the same people who owns the linked website have created the 
LinkedIn postings, whatever we might ﬁnd with these APIs wouldn’t be 
reactions as much as they would be self-planted referrals. 
LinkedIn also provides a People Search API  that allows doing a keyword 
69
search on LinkedIn proﬁle information. This API is only available for vetted 
corporate partners of LinkedIn, and I suspect that means it costs a lot of money 
to get access.  
Luckily, due to the nature of content on the LinkedIn network, I anticipate 
discovering links from LinkedIn will not be a high priority for most potential 
Socializer customers. 
LinkedIn Pulse 
LinkedIn recently launched Pulse , a blogging platform that seems to be a 
70
direct competitor to Medium, but with a focus on “professionals”. Pulse has no 
public API, and all pages are served using HTTPS, making referral discovery 
next to impossible. 
The web as a social network 
If we consider the open web an abstract social network by itself, you could 
consider the referrals we detect to be reactions by their own right. And to some 
extent, that would be appropriate; links from blog posts, news articles and 
other web pages probably should count as some kind of reaction, whereas the 
opaque redirect referrals we get from silos like Facebook shouldn’t count as 
reactions by themselves. 
Unfortunately, the otherwise-beneﬁcial onward march of HTTPS will eventually 
eradicate much of the valuable referral information we could have gathered 
otherwise. Of course, that shouldn’t discourage us from gathering what we can. 
page  
 of  
58
67
==PAGE:59==
Concatenating dialogue with brands across social media 
 Shum Stra
                                                               
Fortunately, a simple solution to the problem Socializer tries to solve – the 
“who’s linking to my pages on the web?” question – has appeared from the 
IndieWeb community and is slowly being adopted by content management 
systems. It’s called webmentions, and the basic principle is that every time a 
post that refers to another web page is published using a content management 
system, the system automatically sends a notiﬁcation to the mentioned web 
server with information about the post.  
71
Of course, this will never give a complete picture of mentions around the web, 
as it requires site owners to choose to use content management systems that 
implement webmentions. However, webmention support extensions are 
currently available for many popular publishing systems , and I personally 
72
hope this tech picks up steam in the future, as it ﬁlls part of the void caused by 
HTTPS’ hamstringing of the Referer: header. 
If webmentions continue to take off, it would make a lot of sense to somehow 
enable a future version of Socializer to pick up on webmention notiﬁcations 
sent to a customer’s web server and create reactions based on these. 
page  
 of  
59
67
==PAGE:60==
Concatenating dialogue with brands across social media 
 Shum Stra
                                                               
Discussion 
My work in building the Socializer prototype has showed that it is indeed 
possible to realize a functional, marketable service of the kind proposed in my 
thesis statement to some extent. 
Additionally, while not relevant to my thesis statement, through my 
experiments with software architecture, I was able to validate (and in some 
cases invalidate) ideas I had about how one might be able to put together a 
system that combines object-oriented software patterns, the procedural-style-
friendly nature of the HTTP protocol, and the loose coupling of event-based 
architectural patterns. 
However, my research into reaction discovery strategies for popular siloed 
content networks shows that my product will likely never be able to detect 
mentions on certain networks due to intentional API limitations.  
Most disappointingly, discovering link posts on Facebook has turned out to be 
impossible without resorting to dubious data harvesting methods. Since 
Facebook is currently the most popular social network in the world, this is 
potentially devastating for Socializer’s prospects as a stand-alone product in 
the future – unless we pivot and amend the value proposition to ﬁt this reality. 
That said, there is some value in the data Socializer would be able to procure in 
the future, even if it might be hard to market as a stand-alone service. 
Developing support for the networks we can support and for mentions on the 
open web, Socializer could have a future as a commercial or open source library 
used in content management systems and social media monitoring suites. 
==PAGE:61==
Concatenating dialogue with brands across social media 
 Shum Stra
                                                               
Future work 
While what I have built is merely intended as a prototype, it is architecturally 
of a quality that I believe justiﬁes continuing to work on it rather than starting 
over from scratch. 
However, many parts of it need more polish and more features to properly 
fulﬁll the value propositions and use cases outlined earlier in this report. For 
example: 
•
Anti-fudging measures like domain ﬁltering ought to be implemented in 
the tracking mechanism to protect against any third parties that might 
eventually want to mess with a customer’s data.  
•
Socializer needs to support multiple users having access to a Socializer 
project in order to support use by large teams. Currently, only the user that 
has created a Socializer project and administrator users have access to it. 
•
the Socializer user interface would also beneﬁt from some general 
improvements; properly styled forms, a mobile-friendly page layout and 
sortable tables are a few obviously useful next steps. Small improvements 
to the user experience can matter as much as large ones.  
73
•
Adding an optional third value to the tracking code that deﬁnes a given 
page’s title would make it easier for Socializer users to identify the page in 
the back-end at a later point. 
Overall, Socializer would probably beneﬁt as a product offering by gaining 
features in the following areas: 
•
Adding support for more social networks through additional modules. 
•
More advanced data analysis tools in general, in part powered by tracking 
more information about visits to a site. 
•
More advanced charting tools that would allow users to see a larger array of 
data types and break their visual representation into categories if 
interesting 
page  
 of  
61
67
==PAGE:62==
Concatenating dialogue with brands across social media 
 Shum Stra
                                                               
•
Allow for charts that show long-term numbers aggregated for over a 24-
hour, week or month period in order to uncover any cyclical patterns in the 
data. 
•
Dashboard functionality that would help users keep an eye on the metrics 
they want to keep an eye on. 
•
Offering a Socializer API would allow for integration with content 
management systems and other social media monitoring suites with better 
sales teams[see Appendix E]. 
Most importantly, though, ﬁguring out the business side of the Socializer 
product should take priority. If Socializer is not to become a stand-alone 
service as imagined originally, priorities might change once a better image of 
Socializer’s commercial prospects have emerged from discussions with 
industry professionals and market research. Like most things in life, knowing 
the why is imperative to identifying the right what. 
page  
 of  
62
67
==PAGE:63==
Concatenating dialogue with brands across social media 
 Shum Stra
                                                               
Bibliography 
All URLs have been fetched for archival on 15-01-2015. 
 Michael H. Goldhaber (1997). “Attention Shoppers!”, Wired Magazine. 
1
http://archive.wired.com/wired/archive/5.12/es_attention.html
 “Company Info | Facebook” (2014). http://newsroom.fb.com/company-info/
2
 Josh Constine (2014). “American Users Spend An Average Of 40 Minutes Per Day On 
3
Facebook”. TechCrunch. 
http://techcrunch.com/2014/07/23/facebook-usage-time/
 “About Twitter, Inc.” https://about.twitter.com/company
4
 “Statistics – YouTube” https://www.youtube.com/yt/press/statistics.html
5
 James Robinson (2014). “Facebook is gradually eliminating organic reach for brands. 
6
Obviously.” Pando Daily. 
http://pando.com/2014/04/02/facebook-is-gradually-eliminating-organic-reach-
for-brands-obviously/
 “Site-Deaths”. IndieWebCamp. https://indiewebcamp.com/site-deaths
7
 Ken Gagne (2009). “Yahoo GeoCities closes on Oct. 26”. Computerworld.  
8
http://www.computerworld.com/article/2468045/e-commerce/yahoo-geocities-
closes-on-oct--26.html
 “POSSE”. IndieWebCamp. https://indiewebcamp.com/POSSE
9
 Davenport, T. H.; Beck, J. C. (2001). “The Attention Economy: Understanding the 
10
New Currency of Business.” Harvard Business School Press. ISBN 1-57851-441-X.
 David Sax (2011). “Comment Moderator, the Dirtiest Job on the Internet”. 
11
BloombergBusinessweek.  
http://www.businessweek.com/magazine/comment-moderator-the-dirtiest-
job-on-the-internet-12012011.html
 “Acquisition reports”. Google Analytics Help. https://support.google.com/
12
analytics/answer/3196909?hl=en-GB
==PAGE:64==
Concatenating dialogue with brands across social media 
 Shum Stra
                                                               
 Jeff Patton and Peter Economy (2014). “User Story Mapping”. O’Reilly Media. 
13
ISBN 978-1-491-90490-9.
 Pelle G. Hansen, Vincent F. Hendricks and Rasmus Rendsvig (2013). 
14
“Infostorms”. University of Copenhagen.
 “Greater Internet Fuckwad Theory”. Know Your Meme.  
15
http://knowyourmeme.com/memes/greater-internet-fuckwad-theory
 “CPM”. MarketingTerms.com.  
16
http://www.marketingterms.com/dictionary/cpm/
 “Pay-per-click”. MarketingTerms.com.  
17
http://www.marketingterms.com/dictionary/pay_per_click/
 Scott W. Ambler. “User Stories: An Agile Introduction”.  
18
http://www.agilemodeling.com/artifacts/userStory.htm
 Same as 13.
19
 Mary Poppendieck & Tom Poppendieck (2003). “Lean Software Development: An 
20
Agile Toolkit”, Addison Wesley. ISBN 078-5-342-15078-0.
 Ariel Ortiz Ramirez (2000). “Three-Tier Architecture”. Linux Journal.  
21
http://www.linuxjournal.com/article/3508
 Aaron Gustafson (2008). “Understanding Progressive Enhancement”. A List Apart. 
22
http://alistapart.com/article/understandingprogressiveenhancement
 “Asynchronous Module Deﬁnition API” 
23
https://github.com/amdjs/amdjs-api
 “Require.js”  
24
http://requirejs.org
 Tom Dale (2012). “AMD is Not the Answer”.  
25
http://tomdale.net/2012/01/amd-is-not-the-answer/
 “Sass (Syntactically Awesome StyleSheets)”. 
26
http://sass-lang.com/documentation/ﬁle.SASS_REFERENCE.html
 “HTML Living Standard” (2015). WHATWG. https://html.spec.whatwg.org/
27
multipage/
 Robert Nystrom (2014). “Game Programming Patterns”. Genever Benning. ISBN 
28
978-0-990-58290-8. 
Note: Referenced chapter is available at 
http://gameprogrammingpatterns.com/event-queue.html
page  
 of  
64
67
==PAGE:65==
Concatenating dialogue with brands across social media 
 Shum Stra
                                                               
 “Loose Coupling”. Wikipedia.  
29
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Loose_coupling
 “Model–view–controller“. Wikipedia. 
30
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Model–view–controller
 Martin Fowler. “Unit of Work”.  
31
http://www.martinfowler.com/eaaCatalog/unitOfWork.html
 M. Elkstein (2008). “Learn REST: A Tutorial”. 
32
http://rest.elkstein.org
 “What Is Data Binding?”. Microsoft Developer Network. http://
33
msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/ms752347.aspx#what_is_data_binding
 Andrew Hunt et al. “Don’t Repeat Yourself”. 
34
http://c2.com/cgi/wiki?DontRepeatYourself
 Lasse Valentini Jensen and Shum Stra (2011). “Community-based website”. 
35
(Bachelor’s thesis). DTU.
 “Use canonical URLs”. Google Webmaster Tools Help.  
36
https://support.google.com/webmasters/answer/139066?hl=en
 T. Berners-Lee et. al (2005). “RFC 3986, Section 3.4: Query”. IETF. 
37
http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3986#section-3.4
 “Verify domain ownership”. Google Apps Help. https://support.google.com/a/
38
answer/60216?hl=en
 R. Fielding et. al (2014).“RFC 7231, Section 5.5.2: Referer”. IETF. 
39
http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7231#section-5.5.2
 “Google Analytics Cookie Usage on Websites”. Google Developers.  
40
https://developers.google.com/analytics/devguides/collection/analyticsjs/
cookie-usage
 “Referer spam”. Wikipedia. 
41
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Referer_spam
 E. Rescorla et. al (2000). “RFC 2818: HTTP over TLS”. IETF. 
42
https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2818
 R. Fielding, et al (1999). “RFC 2616, Section 15.1.3: Encoding Sensitive Information 
43
in URI’s”. IETF.  
http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2616#section-15.1.3
page  
 of  
65
67
==PAGE:66==
Concatenating dialogue with brands across social media 
 Shum Stra
                                                               
 Zineb Ait Bahajji and Gary Illyes (2014). “HTTPS as a ranking signal”. Google 
44
Webmaster Central Blog. http://googlewebmastercentral.blogspot.dk/2014/08/
https-as-ranking-signal.html
 “REST APIs”. Twitter.  
45
http://dev.twitter.com/rest/public
 “The Search API”. Twitter.  
46
https://dev.twitter.com/rest/public/search
 “t.co links”. Twitter. 
47
https://dev.twitter.com/overview/t.co
 “Historical Twitter Data Access”. Gnip. 
48
https://gnip.com/sources/twitter/historical/
 “POST statuses/ﬁlter”. Twitter. 
49
https://dev.twitter.com/streaming/reference/post/statuses/ﬁlter
 “Realtime Twitter Data Access”. Gnip.  
50
https://gnip.com/sources/twitter/realtime/
 “Implementing Sign in with Twitter”. Twitter.  
51
https://dev.twitter.com/web/sign-in/implementing
 “Public-key cryptography”. Wikipedia.  
52
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Public-key_cryptography
 “API Rate Limits”. Twitter.  
53
https://dev.twitter.com/rest/public/rate-limiting
 “Rate Limits: Chart”. Twitter. 
54
https://dev.twitter.com/rest/public/rate-limits
 “SVG”. Mozilla Developer Network. 
55
https://developer.mozilla.org/en/docs/Web/SVG
 “Chart.js” 
56
http://www.chartjs.org
 “Chartist.js” 
57
http://gionkunz.github.io/chartist-js/
 “Highcharts” 
58
http://www.highcharts.com
 “Graph API URL Object”. Facebook. 
59
https://developers.facebook.com/docs/graph-api/reference/v2.2/url
page  
 of  
66
67
==PAGE:67==
Concatenating dialogue with brands across social media 
 Shum Stra
                                                               
 “Using the Graph API”. Facebook. 
60
https://developers.facebook.com/docs/graph-api/using-graph-api/v2.2
 “Public Feed API”. Facebook. 
61
https://developers.facebook.com/docs/public_feed/
 “Google+ Ripples”. Google. 
62
https://plus.google.com/ripple/details
 Ann Smarty (2014). “The Huge List of Google Employees at Google Plus to Follow”. 
63
Internet Marketing Ninjas Blog.  
http://www.internetmarketingninjas.com/blog/google/huge-list-google-
employees-google-plus-follow/
 “Search: list – YouTube”. Google Developers.  
64
https://developers.google.com/youtube/v3/docs/search/list
 Amanda Evans (2013). “Can You Post Links In YouTube Comments?”.  
65
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XKt25ubObdU 
(I couldn’t ﬁnd a non-video source to cite for this; seems like young people do get away 
with not reading and writing these days)
 “Tumblr API”. Tumblr. 
66
https://www.tumblr.com/docs/en/api/v2
 “Company Search”. LinkedIn Developers.  
67
https://developer.linkedin.com/documents/company-search
 “Job Search API”. LinkedIn Developers.  
68
https://developer.linkedin.com/documents/job-search-api
 “People Search API”. LinkedIn Developers.  
69
https://developer.linkedin.com/documents/people-search-api
 Ankit Gupta (2013). “LinkedIn and Pulse Integration: Professional News Tailored to 
70
You”. LinkedIn Ofﬁcial Blog. 
http://blog.linkedin.com/2013/11/13/introducing-linkedin-pulse-profesional-
news-tailored-to-you/
 “Webmention 0.2 (RC1)”. 
71
http://webmention.org/
 “Webmention: Libraries”. IndieWebCamp. http://indiewebcamp.com/
72
webmention#Libraries
 Dan Saffer (2014). “Microinteractions”. O’Reilly Media. ISBN 978-1-491-94592-6.
73
page  
 of  
67
67
