==PAGE:1==
Improving Label Propagation
Performance with naive Bayes
Generated Observations
Øyvind G. Woller
Kongens Lyngby 2016
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
DTU Compute
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
This thesis deals with machine learning in relation to the value of generating ob-
servations. The thesis examines how to generate observations using naive Bayes.
Label Propagation is then used to test whether the generated observations are
useful for increasing its performance as a classier.
The generated observations are tested on two datasets. Firstly, the MNIST digit
dataset, which is used extensively in machine learning, is chosen as a benchmark.
Secondly, the MLSP Schizophrenia dataset, which is a dataset where generating
observations is much cheaper than gathering new observations.
The MNIST results show that generated observations are useful when there
are very few observations in the training set. As the size of the training set
increases, the generated observations begin to decrease performance. Observa-
tions generated based on the Principal Components of the dataset are valuable
for longer than observations generated from the original dataset, but require
more observations in the training set to be useful.
The MLSP schizophrenia dataset indicates that generated observations improve
Label Propagation, but the results suer from a lot of variance. Because of
the variance in the results and the small size of the dataset, no conclusions
can be drawn about the relation of training set size to the value of generated
observations.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Summary (Danish)
Dette speciale omhandler machine learning i relation til det at generere observa-
tioner. Opgaven undersøger hvordan man kan generere observationer med naive
Bayes. Label Propagation bliver så brugt til at teste hvorvidt de genererede
observationer kan bruges til at forbedre en machine learning classier.
Det at generere observationer bliver testet på to datasæt. Først bliver MNIST
tal datasættet, der bliver brugt i stor grad indenfor machine learning, brugt som
et udganspunkt. Derefter bliver MLSP skizofreni datasættet brugt, da dette er
et eksempel på et datasæt hvor genererede observationer er meget billigere end
at indsamle nye observationer fra den virkelige verden.
MNIST resultaterne viser at genererede observationer har værdi når der er få
observationer i træningssættet. Når størrelsen af træningssættet øger, så begyn-
der de genererede resultater at gøre classieren dårligere. Observationer baseret
på principal komponenterne i datasættet fungerer bedre end observationer der
er genereret direkte fra det oprindelige datasæt, men kræver ere observationer
i træningssættet før de har værdi.
MLSP skizofreni datasættet indikerer at genererede observationer forbedrer La-
bel Propagation, men resultaterne har meget varians. På grund af variansen i
resultaterne og datasættets lille størrelse, kan der ikke drages konklusioner om
nogen relation mellem de genererede observationer og størrelsen på trænings-
sættet.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fullment of the requirements for
acquiring an M.Sc. in Engineering.
The thesis was conducted from September 1st 2015 to February 1st 2016 under
supervision of Lars Kai Hansen. The thesis deals with machine learning and the
use of generated observations in improving a classier.
Lyngby, 01-February-2016
Øyvind G. Woller
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor Lars Kai Hansen, Ph.D. student Mar-
tin Christian Axelsen, and post-doc Nikolaj Bak, for their help and guidance
throughout this thesis.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Summary (Danish)
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
Method
5
2.1
Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
MNIST
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.2
MLSP Schizophrenia Challenge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Ensuring a Valid Result . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.1
Cross-Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.2
Learning Curves
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.3
Principal Component Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2.4
Multiple Iterations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3
The scikit-learn library . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3
Theory
19
3.1
Discriminative and Generative
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.1.1
Generating Observations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.1.2
When are Generated Observations Useful . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Machine Learning Classiers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2.1
Label Propagation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2.2
Naive Bayes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
==PAGE:12==
x
CONTENTS
4
Results
41
4.1
Results for MNIST . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.1.1
Tuning Label Propagation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.1.2
With Unlabelled Observations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.1.3
Adding Generated Observations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.1.4
With Generated and Unlabelled Observations . . . . . . .
50
4.2
Transforming MNIST
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.2.1
Cross-Validation Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
4.2.2
Results on Reduced MNIST . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
4.3
MLSP Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
5
Discussion
67
5.1
Discussion of Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
5.1.1
How to Improve Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
5.2
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
6
Conclusion
71
A Code Changes
73
B Full Size Images
77
B.1
MNIST Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
B.1.1
Semi-supervised Label Propagation . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
B.1.2
Label Propagation with Generated Observations
. . . . .
80
B.1.3
Label Propagation with PCA Generated Observations . .
83
B.1.4
Label Propagation with Generated and Unlabelled Obser-
vations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
B.1.5
Label Propagation with PCA Generated and Unlabelled
Observations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
B.1.6
Comparison of PCA and non-PCA Observations
. . . . .
92
B.1.7
Class Plots for MNIST . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
B.2
Reduced MNIST Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
B.2.1
Learning Curves for Classes 0 and 1 . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
B.2.2
Class Plots for Classes 0 and 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
B.2.3
Learning Curves for Classes 4 and 9 . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
B.2.4
Class Plots for Classes 4 and 9 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
B.3
MLSP Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
B.3.1
Learning Curve for FNC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
B.3.2
Class Plots for FNC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
B.3.3
Learning Curve for SBM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
B.3.4
Class Plots for SBM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
Bibliography
111
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1
Introduction
There are many denitions of machine learning. In his book Machine Learning
[Mit97], Tom Mitchell wrote:
The eld of machine learning is concerned with the question of how
to construct computer programs that automatically improve with
experience.
This indicates the learning aspect of machine learning, and that more experience,
or data, leads to better performance. However, it ignores the statistical aspect,
as it is very programming oriented.
In The Elements of Statistical Learning: Data Mining, Inference, and Prediction[HTF09a],
Hastie, Tibshirani and Friedman write:
Vast amounts of data are being generated in many elds, and the
statisticians' job is to make sense of it all: to extract important
patterns and trends, and to understand "what the data says". We
call this learning from data.
This is a very precise denition and covers many aspects of machine learning.
Extracting patterns and trends from the data, and understanding "what the
==PAGE:14==
2
Introduction
data says" is very much at the heart of machine learning. But this denition
does not at all consider improving with more data, or the computer science
aspect of machine learning.
The quotes so far cover aspects of machine learning from the programmers and
the statisticians perspective, but as Bishop writes [Bis06]:
Pattern recognition has its origins in engineering, whereas machine
learning grew out of computer science. However, these activities can
be viewed as two facets of the same eld. . .
In other words, machine learning can not be explained only from the statis-
ticians' or the programmers' perspective, but rather encompasses both. The
interdisciplinary aspect of machine learning is further elaborated by Marsland
[Mar09]:
One of the most interesting features of machine learning, is that it lies
on the boundary of several dierent academic disciplines, principally
computer science, statistics, mathematics, and engineering.
This is important in relation to this thesis, as the results are reached using
programming which is based on statistics. Since the main topic of the thesis
is machine learning, it is therefore important to put the thesis into the greater
context of machine learning. For the purpose of this thesis I dene machine
learning as
Machine learning is an interdisciplinary eld, which uses programs
based on statistics to train models which are learned from data. The
models improve with more data, and these models are used to make
decisions.
This denition covers machine learning as used in this thesis. This denition
together with the previous denitions are useful for adding context, but do not
explain what machine learning is in practice. What follows is an introduction
to the basics of machine learning.
Consider a dataset X which consists of many observations xi which have some
number of features fxi. Now suppose we know some information about each of
the observations in X, i.e., labels that split the observations into disjoint groups
or classes. Let us call these labels y. The datasets X and y are known as a
training set.
==PAGE:15==
3
The most straightforward machine learning method is known as supervised
learning. Supervised learning is using a model or algorithm to learn the pattern
that relates X and y in such a way that given a new point xz it is possible to
predict which label, yz, it should be given. Learning the patterns in the dataset
is also known as tting. This type of machine learning problem is known as
a classication problem, and the algorithm or model used to learn and predict
is known as a classier. Generally, the performance of a classier is measured
using what is known as a test set. A test set consists of a dataset Xtest and
matching labels ytest, and the classier is scored on how many labels it correctly
predicts for the observations in Xtest.
Supervised learning is contrasted by unsupervised learning. Unsupervised learn-
ing similarly uses a training set X, but has no labels y. Rather than attempting
to nd a pattern that relates X and y, it attempts to group the observations in
X in some way as to maximize some measure for how related each observation
in a group is. Often a distance measure is used, and the groups are chosen so
that the distance between observations within a group is minimal.
The combination of supervised and unsupervised learning is known as semi-
supervised learning.
Semi-supervised learning also uses X and labels y, but
there is not a label for every observation. Semi-supervised learning attempts to
use the unlabelled observations to improve a classiers model, instead of using
only labelled observations.
The advantage of this approach is that in many real world problems, labelled
observations are scarce, while unlabelled observations are abundant. Therefore,
being able to use unlabelled data to improve a classier is much cheaper and
easier than having to gather and label more observations manually.
In some cases, even unlabelled observations can be hard to gather. One example
is in the medical world, where data is often the result of using expensive instru-
ments. Here it is not feasible to gather large amounts of unlabelled observations.
Rather a dierent approach is needed.
Some machine learning algorithms attempt to model the joint probability dis-
tribution P(X, y). Given a specic class in y, yc these algorithms can generate
a new observation xc. This generated observation can be used to expand the
dataset X. Generated Observations are sometimes known as synthetic observa-
tions.
This thesis will use a combination of supervised and semi-supervised learning to
examine the eectiveness of generated data in machine learning. To learn the
dataset and classify new points, the Label Propagation algorithm will be used.
To generate new observations naive Bayes will be used. The eectiveness of
==PAGE:16==
4
Introduction
generated observations will be compared to both having unlabelled observations
and to having only the original, labelled observations.
Generated observations will be created in two ways. Directly from the distribu-
tions of the data in X. And from the transformation of the data to its principal
components.
The testing will be done on two separate datasets. First, on the MNIST dataset,
a dataset of handwritten digits. This dataset is chosen because it is very com-
monly used in machine learning, and it will be easy to consider generated obser-
vations. Secondly, on the MLSP datasets from Kaggle's MLSP 2014 Schizophre-
nia Challenge.
This is chosen as it represents a case where gathering more
observations is expensive, also in the unlabelled case.
Chapter 2, will begin with an explanation of the MNIST and MLSP datasets,
followed by the methods and processes used during this thesis in order to get
valid results. The programming tools used in this thesis will also be mentioned
briey.
Chapter 3 begins with how to generate observations. The characteristics of a
dataset and classier that are required, for generated observations to be useful,
are also discussed. This is followed by a detailed examination of the machine
learning algorithms Label Propagation and naive Bayes. Examples of observa-
tions generated by naive Bayes for the MNIST dataset are shown.
With theory and method described, Chapter 4 contains the results. First, the
results on the full MNIST dataset are shown. This is followed by the results on
two MNIST classes, in order to compare with the MLSP datasets. Finally, the
results of the MLSP datasets are shown and compared to the MNIST results.
In Chapter 5 the results and future work will be discussed. The thesis is con-
cluded in Chapter 6.
The appendix contains changes made to the scikit-learn code for Label Prop-
agation. At the very end, the learning curves and class plots from the results
section are collected in larger sizes.
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 2
Method
This chapter describes the methods and processes used in this thesis. It de-
scribes the datasets used for the learning algorithms, and why these specic
datasets were chosen. Thereafter, the techniques used to ensure valid results
are detailed. Finally the scikit-learn python library and the code used in this
thesis is described briey.
2.1
Datasets
This section contains information on the data sets used in this thesis. The two
datasets used are the handwritten digit dataset MNIST and Kaggle's MLSP
Schizophrenia data.
2.1.1
MNIST
The MNIST dataset is a large dataset of handwritten numbers. It consists of
a training set of 60000 digits, a validation set of 10000 digits, and a test set
of 10000 digits. Each digit, or observation, is represented by a 28 by 28 grey
==PAGE:18==
6
Method
Figure 2.1: Examples of observations from the MNIST dataset [YL].
scale pixel array, a total of 784 pixels. These pixels are the features for each
observation. Figure 2.1 shows examples of how the MNIST observations look.
The numbers have been centred, scaled, and aligned, so that the results of
using the dataset are focused on the machine learning performance, and not the
eectiveness of any alignment or rotation algorithms.
Because the MNIST dataset is so large, it is very good for testing the general-
izability and performance of a classier. It allows testing with large amounts
of unlabelled data, and many dierent combinations of labelled and unlabelled
data. By using dierent combinations and training sets, the probability that the
performance can be generalized to the whole digit recognition domain increases.
MNIST has been used as a benchmark for many machine learning algorithms.
The original creators of MNIST have a list of some of the machine learning
articles where MNIST has been used, along with the results. [YL]
MNIST is a visual recognition problem, which is a class of machine learning
problems. A classier that performs well on MNIST is by no means guaranteed
to perform equally on other problems. This is a general truth about machine
learning; what works well for some datasets and observations may not work for a
dierent dataset. For the datasets in this thesis, this means that the relationship
between the features in MNIST, i.e. pixels, will not be the same relationship
that is between the features in the MLSP Schizophrenia Challenge described
below. Therefore, the results may not be entirely comparable. This should be
kept in mind when comparing the results of MNIST and MLSP.
==PAGE:19==
2.1 Datasets
7
2.1.2
MLSP Schizophrenia Challenge
Kaggle[kaga] is a website that hosts data science problems which scientists
around the world can attempt to solve. One of these problems is the MLSP
2014 Schizophrenia Challenge. This challenge was "an ocial competition of the
IEEE International Workshop on Machine Learning for Signal Processing"[kagb].
The MLSP Schizophrenia Challenge consists of two separate featuresets for each
labelled observation. One featureset consists of Functional Network Connectiv-
ity (FNC) values. The FNC values are described in the following way:
These values are correlation values that summarize the overall con-
nection between independent brain maps over time. Therefore, the
FNC feature gives a picture of the connectivity pattern over time
between independent networks (or brain maps)[...] In a way, FNC
indicates a subject's overall level of 'synchronicity' between brain
areas."
The other featureset consists of Source-Based Morphometry (SBM) values. SBM
values are described as:
Source-Based Morphometry (SBM) loadings correspond to the weights
of brain maps obtained from the application of independent compo-
nent analysis (ICA) on the gray-matter concentration maps of all
subjects. [...] SBM loadings are considered a structural modality
feature (i.e., they describe patterns of the brain structure).
The goal of the MLSP 2014 Schizophrenia Challenge is to use these two datasets
to be able to dierentiate between patients with schizophrenia and those with-
out.
There are 86 observations in the MLSP datasets, which is a very small number
compared to the 60000 in MNIST. Each observation has two separate datasets,
one with the 378 "FNC" features and the other with the 32 "SBM" features.
In this thesis each of the datasets will be considered separately for testing gen-
erated observations.
==PAGE:20==
8
Method
2.2
Ensuring a Valid Result
As seen in the previous section, there is a large dierence in the size of the
datasets used in this thesis. While the MNIST dataset consists of many thou-
sands of observations, the MLSP datasets consist of only 86 observations.
Qualifying the results on the MLSP datasets is extremely important. This is
because there are not enough observations in the dataset to end up with an
accurate measure of the performance of a classier directly.
Qualifying the
results can be done using several techniques, some of which will be discussed in
this section.
First, cross-validation will be described, then the value of running multiple
iterations of each experiment is explained. This is followed by an explanation
of learning curves, how they relate to a classiers performance, and how they
can be used to compare classiers and the value of adding observations to the
datasets. Then, Principal Component Analysis is described, along with its uses.
Finally, the importance of running multiple iterations of each test is explained.
2.2.1
Cross-Validation
The ideal situation for training a classier, is to have a large training set to
train the classier, and a large distinct test set to evaluate it on.
However,
when there are few observations, splitting the dataset into a training set and a
test set results in training and test sets which are very small. This could lead
to very varying results since which observations end up in the training set may
have a large impact on the classiers performance.
One method for evaluating classiers when the there are few observations is
cross-validation.
There are many dierent variations of cross-validation, but
they are all based on the same principle. Split the dataset into multiple train-
ing and test sets, then train and score the algorithm on each pair of sets. The
scores from each pair of sets can be averaged, and the standard deviation, or
standard error, can be calculated. Some of the dierent cross-validation tech-
niques are[skl]:
• Leave-one-out (LOO): Each split leaves out a single observation, which is
used as the test set. This is quite time consuming, as if the training set
is size n, then it results in n splits. It is also susceptible to high variance,
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Ensuring a Valid Result
9
Figure 2.2: Figure taken from [CFO06]
as the performance is highly dependent on which observations are in the
test set.
• Leave-P-out (LPO): Each split leaves P observations out. LOO is a special
case of LPO where P = 1. LPO reduces the variance, compared to LOO,
at the cost of increased bias.
• Leave-One-Label-Out (LOLO): Leaves one label out of the training set.
This label is not to be confused with the target labels, or classes, y. Instead
it is an indicator of some meta data about the observations. This could for
instance be because the observations are from dierent experiments, and
there is a wish to validate each experiment. Labels for the observations,
detailing which experiment each belongs to, could be supplied to LOLO
in order to split the data along experiments.
• Leave-P-Label-Out (LPLO): LPLO leaves P labels out of each fold. LOLO
is a special case of LPLO where P = 1.
• k-fold: Splits the data in k dierent splits, or folds of equal size. The
prediction function is then learned on k −1 folds and tested on the last
fold. See gure 2.2 for an example of 5-fold cross-validation.
• Stratied k-fold: Stratied k-fold is similar to k-fold, but ensures roughly
equal numbers of each label, or class, in each fold. This is very useful in
order to avoid cases where one label is completely missing from the training
set, as this would skew the performance of the classier negatively. This
is clear, as any observation in the test set that has the missing label would
be predicted incorrectly.
• Label k-fold: Creates folds like in k-fold, but can also ensure that some
==PAGE:22==
10
Method
Figure 2.3: Figure taken from [Koh95]
meta label is guaranteed to be in either only the training set or only the
test set, much like LOLO.
Because the MNIST dataset is so large, the results obtained are quite accurate,
and cross-validation is not necessary. However, for the MLSP datasets which
only have 86 samples, cross-validation is important to be able to evaluate a
classier.
In [Koh95] Kohavi concludes that reasonable values for k in k-fold cross-validation
are 5 and 10, and in general both are preferable to LOO. Figure 2.3 shows the
bias over varying k for folds and P for LPO. While LOO or LPO may have
lower bias, they are more likely to have high variance. In this thesis I will follow
Kohavi's advice and use stratied 10-fold cross-validation. Ensuring that I do
not have folds that do not contain both labels, which is quite likely when the
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Ensuring a Valid Result
11
Figure 2.4: Figure taken from [HTF09a]
dataset is as small as the MLSP datasets.
Even with stratied k-fold there is an issue that with small datasets cross-
validation is likely to overestimate the error of the classier. This is because
increasing the size of the training set when there are few observations will have a
greater impact on the classiers performance than adding an extra observation
when there are already many observations. Using cross-validation to determine
the classiers performance when the dataset is small, will therefore lead to a
poorer result than the real performance, as the size of the training set is reduced
by the split. Figure 2.4 shows this graphically, with the use of a hypothetical
learning curve[HTF09b]. Learning curves will be explained in more detail in the
next section.
2.2.2
Learning Curves
Plotting the performance of a classier against a variable, such as the number
of observations in the training set, is known as a learning curve. A learning
curve shows how quickly the classier improves as the chosen variable changes
value. Learning curves are very common in machine learning literature. Figure
==PAGE:24==
12
Method
Figure 2.5: Figure taken from [NMTM00]
Figure 2.6: Examples of learning curves used in literature
2.6 shows an example from an article that has used learning curves.
In this thesis, the variable will be the number of labelled observations from
the original dataset. Intuitively, the more observations the better the classier
performs, as the observations cover more of the feature space.
This will be
plotted against the classication error, i.e., the fraction of observations in the
test set that were misclassied. In most cases a learning curve will start high and
quickly fall as the number of observations grows, until it reaches its asymptotic
error rate below which it will not fall, no matter the size of the training set.
By plotting several learning curves in the same plot, many interesting compari-
son can be drawn.
By plotting two classiers against each other, the learning curves can show the
asymptotic performance of each, and which one will perform best. However,
this is assuming there are enough observations in the training set. In addition,
the curves show which classier is best when there are few observations in the
training set. Some classiers approach their asymptotic error quickly, but have
a poor asymptotic error. Others approach their asymptotic error slower, but
have better asymptotic error. By plotting them against each other, it is easy to
see at which training set sizes each classier is preferred.
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Ensuring a Valid Result
13
By plotting the performance of the same classier twice, where one is trained
only on labelled data, and the other on labelled and unlabelled data, the value
of adding unlabelled data, for that classier and dataset, can be seen. This is
equivalent to plotting the supervised classier versus the semi-supervised classi-
er, as mentioned in Chapter 1. Plotting the classier with varying amounts of
unlabelled data visualizes to what extent unlabelled data is valuable. This will
show both what amount is necessary to see an eect, and also when the eect of
adding more unlabelled data no longer increases performance of the classier.
The same can be done with generated data to show the eect of adding gener-
ated observations to the training set. By plotting curves with varying amounts
of generated observations against the supervised classier without generated
observations, the value of the generated observations can be seen.
The combination of unlabelled and generated observations can be plotted to see
any benets of combining the unlabelled and generated observations. It is pos-
sible that adding generated observations would improve the value of unlabelled
observations, and vice versa.
All of these learning curve plots have been used throughout this project, both
for testing and in the results chapter.
2.2.3
Principal Component Analysis
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) is used extensively in machine learning.
The intuition of PCA is to create a new subspace of the feature space by nd-
ing the eigenpairs of the data and choosing the eigenvectors with the highest
eigenvalues as the new axes of the data. In this way it is possible to project the
features of the observations on to the most signicant vectors, while retaining
as much information about the observations as possible.
PCA is useful for several reasons. First, the complexity of machine learning
algorithms depends on the number of features for each observation, reducing
the features can therefore be used to improve the classier. The eect of the
number of features on classier performance is described in more detail in the
next chapter in regards to bias and variance. Secondly, PCA can be used to plot
high dimensional data, by only considering the two or three principal compo-
nents (PCs) with the highest eigenvalues, giving a visual representation of the
relationship between the observations and classes in the dataset.
In this thesis PCA will be used for plotting the observations and also for a dif-
ferent purpose. To examine the eect of generated observations, I will use PCA
==PAGE:26==
14
Method
to generate observations based on the PCA transform of the data. Observations
generated in the PCA space should hopefully perform better than observations
generated straight from the dataset, as it focuses on the most important aspects
of each class.
In the next section, the mathematics behind PCA is explained.
2.2.3.1
How PCA is Performed
Following is the mathematical explanation of how PCA is performed. The co-
variance matrix of the dataset X is given by
C = X⊤X
n −1
(2.1)
The covariance matrix is symmetric, and can therefore be diagonalized by
C = V LV ⊤
(2.2)
where V is the matrix of eigenvectors and L is the diagonal matrix of eigenvalues,
λi, belonging to each eigenvector. The eigenvectors are sometimes known as the
principal axes, and by projecting the data onto the principal axes we get the
principal components. Projecting the data is simply done by calculating
PCs = XV
(2.3)
In this thesis I use the python library scikit-learn to perform PCA. PCA in
scikit-learn is implemented through Singular Value Decomposition [WRR03].
Singular value decomposition calculates
X = USV ⊤
(2.4)
where S is the diagonal matrix of singular values si. The relation to the covari-
ance matrix is easily shown using equations 2.1 and 2.2 by
C = V SU ⊤USV ⊤
n −1
= V
S2
n −1V ⊤
(2.5)
In other words the right singular vectors V are the eigenvectors and S is related to
the eigenvalues of the covariance matrix by λi =
s2
i
n−1 The principal components
can then be found by
XV = USV ⊤V = US
(2.6)
==PAGE:27==
2.2 Ensuring a Valid Result
15
It should be noted that SVD only works when X is centred, i.e. only when the
mean vector has been subtracted from X
X = X −µX
(2.7)
To reduce the dimensionality, the rst k columns from U and the rst k × k
sub-matrix of S are selected. Their product reduces the original data to the k
eigenvectors with highest eigenvalue.
To inverse the transformation from the principal axes back to the original feature
space, compute the reverse of the transformation
X = PCs V ⊤+ µX
(2.8)
2.2.4
Multiple Iterations
When examining the learning of semi-supervised classiers, it is useful to have
a large labelled dataset, and mimic unlabelled data by removing labels. This
allows comparison both of the benet and cost of using unlabelled data. How-
ever, which labels are removed has an impact on the performance and result
of the classier. Therefore, the classier is run multiple times with a dierent
subset of the data being unlabelled.
The same is true of using generated observations. Generated observations are
non-deterministic, and will not be identical each time they are generated. It is
therefore necessary to run multiple iterations to cover multiple generations of
observations, as the dierence in what observations are generated could be the
dierence between improving or worsening the classier.
The main advantage of using multiple iterations is that it gives an average
result over the iterations. This average is more precise, and more general, as
it brings to light the variance in the classier. By running multiple iterations,
multiple generations of observations are examined, as well as multiple selections
of unlabelled observations.
With multiple iterations the mean and standard error for the performance can
be calculated. By plotting the standard error as an uncertainty bar, or error
bar, the variance of the classiers become apparent and a more realistic value
for the performance is shown.
Figure 2.7 shows a hypothetical example of why using a single iteration may be
problematic, giving a result that is inaccurate and does not generalize well. It
==PAGE:28==
16
Method
(a) The classication error plotted against
sample size.
(b) The learning curve of the simulated
data.
Figure 2.7: Simulated data used to give a visualisation of why running a single
tting and scoring of a classier can give a poor indication of the
actual performance of a classier. The result is a jagged learning
curve with no information as to the validity of the result.
shows simulated results for a classier whose performance diers greatly between
iterations. In gure 2.7a the results are shown in isolation. In gure 2.7b the
learning curve is plotted based on these simulated results. This yields a jagged
learning curve which does not show how probable the result is.
Now consider if multiple iterations had been run. This would lead to more data
for each sample size. Figure 2.8 plots these simulated result data points. The
original results are highlighted in blue. This plot shows how running multiple
iterations gives a distribution of data points at each sample size. At each training
set size the mean and the standard error are calculated. These values are plotted
in 2.8b, showing the learning curve of the mean and with error bars showing
the standard error. This learning curve is a much better representation of the
actual performance of the classier, and includes an indication of how probable
a result is.
Because multiple iterations give a more valid result, they are used when tuning
the parameters of Label Propagation, to ensure that a single lucky result is not
falsely assumed to be the best choice for the given parameter.
==PAGE:29==
2.3 The scikit-learn library
17
(a) The classication error from multiple
ttings. The original iteration is high-
lighted, showing how it compares with
other results.
(b) The mean of the iterations plotted in
2.8a, plotted as a learning curve with
the standard error as the error bars.
Figure 2.8: Simulated data used to give a visualisation of why running multiple
iterations can give a better result, with more information, than
a single iteration. The result of multiple iterations is a smooth
learning curve with information as to how much variance there is
in the result of the classier and what the expected value is.
2.3
The scikit-learn library
In this thesis the scikit-learn library for the Python programming language is
used extensively. It has basic implementations of many machine learning algo-
rithms and techniques. The implementation of these algorithms expose their
parameters and attributes, allowing detailed looks at the results.
These at-
tributes and parameters make generating data possible for generative methods,
as well. This will be described further in the next chapter.
The specic code used was for Stratied k-fold, Gaussian naive Bayes, Label
Propagation, and Principal Component Analysis. The code for Label Propaga-
tion was rewritten for this thesis, as it did not accurately reect Label Propaga-
tion as detailed in the original paper by Zhu et al. [ZG02]. The exact changes
are described further in Chapter 3.
==PAGE:30==
18
Method
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 3
Theory
This chapter begins with an explanation of the concepts of discriminative and
generative machine learning algorithms. This includes how they relate to each
other and why both types have been used. This is followed by a simple look at
why generative algorithms allow generating observations, and when generating
observations may be useful.
This is followed by an in-depth view of the the classiers used in this thesis.
Several versions of Label Propagation are mentioned and the reason for choosing
the original is explained. Then an introduction to naive Bayes, and the version
used in this thesis are detailed. Finally, the specics of generating observations
with naive Bayes are explained.
3.1
Discriminative and Generative
One way to classify machine learning algorithms is to split them into generative
and discriminative algorithms. Generative and discriminative relates to which
probabilities the algorithms attempt to model. Given a training set, X and
labels y, generative algorithms attempt to model the joint probability distribu-
tion of X and y, P(X, y). For a new observation x, generative algorithms must
==PAGE:32==
20
Theory
calculate P(y|x), known as the posterior probability, using Bayes Rule [NJ02],
and pick the most probable y for x.
In contrast, discriminative algorithms model the posterior probability directly,
or a direct map of X to y.
It is a commonly believed that discriminative classiers are always preferable to
generative ones. This is due to the fact that you only need to model the posterior
probability to be able to guess the label of a new observation x. Modelling the
joint distribution can therefore be seen as doing unnecessary work. However, it
has been showed that this is not always the case [NJ02]. Although discriminative
algorithms have a lower asymptotic bound than generative models, they tend to
reach them more slowly. This means that if there are few observations in X, then
a generative algorithm may yield a better result. As although its asymptotic
error may be poorer, a generative algorithm will often approach the asymptotic
error much faster.
In some articles [KT06], [YBZ12], [RSNM03] this trade o between generative
and discriminative methods has been used to create hybrid algorithms that
combine generative and discriminative classiers to choose the best result at
both high and low observations. In several cases these hybrid classiers have
shown better performance at all training set sizes, than either generative or
discriminative can produce on their own.
For this thesis another aspect of generative methods will be used extensively,
which is that generative algorithms can create synthetic observations. This is a
property of the fact that generative algorithms model the joint distribution of
X and y. First, how to generate observations, and when and why they may be
of value, will be explained.
3.1.1
Generating Observations
In Chapter 2 how to handle low sample sizes through cross-validation was dis-
cussed. Cross-validation helps to get an accurate measure of how well the clas-
sier performs. In this section it is seen how increasing the size of the training
set is an obvious, but not always straightforward solution to dealing with low
numbers of observations.
In some cases generating observations can be an intuitive, straightforward, and
simple process. For MNIST, more samples can be done by handwriting a lot of
samples of each digit, or digitally by typing digits in various typefaces, styles,
and on dierent backgrounds.
For digit recognition it is obvious that these
==PAGE:33==
3.1 Discriminative and Generative
21
generated observations may be indistinguishable from the original training set,
and as such can help improve the performance of a classier.
However, for the MLSP Schizophrenia Challenge data the situations is more
complicated, since the original observations are created through expensive and
time consuming MRI scans. This data cannot be gathered or be easily created
manually. However, it is still possible to generate observations through the use
of a generative algorithm.
In the most simple case, x is a continuous variable, and the generative model
has learned the probability distribution of x for a given y.
To generate an
observation for label y all that needs to be done is to sample from the probability
distribution of x given y, P(x|y). Later we will see how this works in practice
for more Gaussian naive Bayes, which directly calculates P(x|y).
3.1.2
When are Generated Observations Useful
Something that it is important to consider before spending a lot of time generat-
ing more observations is to what extent new observations will help improve the
classiers performance [Ng07]. To gure out whether or not more observations
will help, it is crucial to understand variance and bias, and what they mean in
machine learning.
3.1.2.1
Bias and Variance
Bias and variance are perhaps most easily described using the dart-board anal-
ogy. Figure 3.1 shows an illustration of the dart-board analogy, taken from the
Encyclopaedia of machine learning [CS10].
In this case each dot on the dart-board represents one of our machine learning
models. With high variance, the model is likely to land far from the target, with
high bias, it is targeting the wrong place.
To put it another way; bias is a measure of how far from the correct value the
models are centred, and variance is a measure of how spread out the models
are. Dierent machine learning algorithms are more or less prone to bias or
variance. Generally, if the model can achieve low bias, it comes at the cost of
high variance and vice versa. This is known as the bias-variance trade-o.
The concepts of bias and variance lead to the concepts of undertting and
==PAGE:34==
22
Theory
Figure 3.1: Image taken from the Encyclopaedia of machine learning [CS10]
overtting.
Undertting
is the problem of having a poor classier because it does not
nd the correct relation between the observations in X and the labels y. In the
dart-board example, this is equivalent to targeting the wrong part of the board,
i.e. it is equivalent to high bias.
Overtting
is when the model ts the observations X so well that it gener-
alizes poorly. In this case, the resulting model relies too strongly on the values
of the features in the observations and therefore the results will vary wildly
depending on which observations are in X.
Some semi-supervised algorithms work by tting a classier on the labelled data
Xl, and then slowly adding more of the unlabelled data Xu to Xl by choosing
some number of predictions on observations in Xu that it is condent about.
This measure could be a threshold for the probability that the label is correct.
This is known as self training. A danger of self training is that it can lead to
increased bias. If the bias is already skewing the model, then using the model
to predict on the unlabelled set, and using these predictions as real labels will
exacerbate the problem.
Bias is also a problem with generated observations as they are generated based
on the model that the classier has created. This is why in this thesis a dier-
ent algorithm, namely Label Propagation, is used to learn from the generated
observations.
With an understanding of bias and variance, it is possible to determine when
==PAGE:35==
3.2 Machine Learning Classiers
23
(a) Points plotted in 2d
space
(b) The points coloured
based on distance
(c) A new point needs to
be coloured
Figure 3.2: An unsupervised example of labelling
generated observations will be useful. For generated observations to be useful
the ideal case is high variance and low bias, i.e. overtting as seen above.
In this case more observations will help because the bias is low, and the classier
will learn from the generated observations. Because the classier will learn from
the generated observations they will help to lower the variance of the classier,
by providing more examples which help to regularize the classier.
3.2
Machine Learning Classiers
In this section the machine learning classiers used in this thesis are detailed and
examined. First Label Propagation, and some newer variations are discussed.
The original algorithm is examined in detail, with proof of convergence. The
reason for choosing the original Label Propagation for this thesis is also argued.
Finally, Gaussian naive Bayes is introduced and the mathematics explained
along with how it can be used to generate observations.
3.2.1
Label Propagation
Since the original article about Label Propagation, several dierent label propa-
gation algorithms have been developed. Common for all of them is the assump-
tion that data that lies close to each other in the feature space will have the same
label, and data which is far apart will have dierent labels. This is a common
assumption in semi-supervised and unsupervised machine learning algorithms,
known as the smoothness assumption. A special case of the smoothness assump-
tion is the cluster assumption. The cluster assumption is the assumption that
==PAGE:36==
24
Theory
classes tend to cluster in feature space, therefore points within the same cluster
are likely to have the same class [CSZ06].
Let us look at a simulated unsupervised example to show how this may look in
practice. In gure 3.2a the observations in X are plotted in 2d space.
Now assume they are coloured based on a clustering algorithm that attempts
to group the points based on some distance measure. In gure 3.2b we can see
how the data has been grouped into two separate classes.
Suppose we add a new observation to the dataset. In gure 3.2c it is shown as
a new white dot. The goal is then to colour this new observation, based on the
previous colouring of points.
Label propagation algorithms work intuitively on the smoothness and cluster
assumptions. They construct a graph over the dataset and observations, where
each observation is a node, and the edges are a distance measure or similarity
score between each pair of nodes. The labels are propagated labels from labelled
nodes to unlabelled nodes, based on a "seed" of initially labelled nodes. This
continues until no observations change labels between iterations, i.e., until the
algorithm converges. Figure 3.3 shows two examples from the original Label
Propagation article where Label Propagation has converged.
The exact method for propagating the labels is how the Label Propagation algo-
rithms dier. Generally, they assign each nodes labels based on their neighbours
labels weighted by the distance measure. This could be a simple k-neighbours
measure where the k-nearest neighbours have weight 1, and others 0, or an
inversely proportional weight function.
3.2.1.1
Label Propagation by Zhu et al.
First, we consider the original Label Propagation algorithm proposed by Zhu
and Ghahramani[ZG02]. Zhu et al. create a weight matrix, Wij of size n × n
where n is the number of observations, and each element in Wij represents the
weight from observation xi to xj.
Which distance measure to use should be chosen according to the domain. Zhu
and Ghahramani suggest using euclidean distance, but mention that other op-
tions are possible, and may be more suitable if the features are known to be
positive or discreet. For the proof of convergence, explained below, it is impor-
tant that the values of each element in Wij > 0.
==PAGE:37==
3.2 Machine Learning Classiers
25
Figure 3.3: Examples of Label Propagation from the original article [ZG02]
In this thesis a simple Gaussian kernel, sometimes known as a radial basis
function, was used to get the weight between points
wij = e−γ(||xi−xj||)2
This distance measure for weight is inversely proportional to how similar the two
observations are. If they are identical, the distance xi −xj is 0 and the weight
becomes e0 = 1. The matrix diagonal is therefore all ones, and no element will
be 0 upholding the requirement for the proof of convergence below.
The parameter γ aects the values for the weights in Wij. The higher the value
of γ the smaller the weights.
Using a low value for γ is analogous to using
a smoothing function on Wij. The right value for γ is therefore important as
it controls the distance at which each observation's label inuences the other
observations' labels. How to nd the correct value for γ depends on the dataset.
Intuitively, the value should be high enough that it causes labels within a class
to propagate strongly to each other, but low enough to not strongly propagate
labels between classes.
One way to decide a value for γ is using a simple search. Generally, very low
values of γ will perform poorly, as they smooth too much. Depending on the
size of the dataset, it may be dicult to nd the best value for γ as it could
very well be overt to the distances in the training set.
Zhu and Ghahramani then construct a label distribution, L, for each input
vector. This is represented by a matrix of size n × nclasses where nclasses is the
number of unique classes in the labelled set. For the labelled observations, a 1
is set for the correct label and 0 otherwise, known as one-hot encoding.
==PAGE:38==
26
Theory
For the unlabelled set the initial values are unimportant. The reason for this is
shown in the convergence proof below.
The Zhu and Gharahmani Label Propagation algorithm iterates over the fol-
lowing three steps:
1. All nodes propagate once Lt+1 ←WijLt
2. Row normalize Y
3. Clamp labelled set back to initial values
Convergence
This proof of convergence is heavily based on the proof from
Zhu and Gharahmani [ZG02] To prove that the algorithm converges, consider
the following. Steps 1 and 2 can be combined to L =
¯
WijL where
¯
Wij =
Wij
ΣkWik
the row normalized graph matrix. Assume that the labelled observations, Ll are
the rst 1, 2..l in Wij and the last l + 1, l + 2..u are the unlabelled observations,
Lu.
Because of the clamping in step 3, the values of Ll will not change. We are
therefore only interested in Lu. With this assumption in mind, split Wij after
the lth column and lth row. This results in the following four sub-matrices.
¯W =
Wll
Wlu
Wul
Wuu
Through simple rewriting, the value of Lu during the algorithm can be shown
to be Lu = ¯WuuLu + ¯WulLl. In other words, the value of the unlabelled obser-
vations is determined by the value of the labelled neighbours and the unlabelled
neighbours. To show that the initial values of Wuu are unimportant, we need to
show that while the algorithm runs, the values of propagation from unlabelled
to unlabelled observations tends towards zero.
This is clear, as unlabelled observations can only propagate to other unlabelled
observations, since the labelled observations are clamped.
Therefore, if the
unlabelled to unlabelled propagation tends towards zero, it does not matter
which value the unlabelled observations begin with, as eventually the eect of
the initial label will be negligible.
Consider Lu again. As the algorithm iterates Lu has the following property
Lu = lim
n→∞
¯W n
uuL0 +
h
Σn
i=1 ¯W (i−1)
uu
i
¯WulLl
(3.1)
==PAGE:39==
3.2 Machine Learning Classiers
27
where L0 is the initial label distribution. To show that propagation between
unlabelled nodes is unimportant, we need to show that ¯W n
uuL0 →0.
Because ¯W is row normalized, all elements in ¯W > 0 and Wuu is a sub-matrix
of ¯W it must be true that ∃α < 1 such that
u
X
j=1
¯Wuuij ≤α, ∀i = 1..u
In other words, since all elements in a row of ¯W are positive and sum to 1, then
a sub-matrix must sum to some value which is smaller than one.
Consider the case of the n'th iteration of ¯Wuu. This can be written P
j ¯W n
uuij.
X
j
¯W n
uuij =
X
j
X
k
¯W n−1
uuik ¯Wuukj
This is rewriting the n'th iteration as the n−1 iteration times one more iteration.
These sums can be split as P
j only aects one of the factors.
X
k
¯W n−1
uuik
X
j
¯Wuukj
We showed earlier that P
j ¯Wuukj ≤α. Therefore, replacing this term will at
most be the same size.
≤
X
k
¯W n−1
uuikα ≤αn
This shows that the row sums of ¯W n
uu tend to zero, and therefore ¯W n
uuL0 →0.
This is what we set out to prove, and therefore the initial L0 is unimportant for
Lu. Equation 3.1 can be rewritten through simple matrix algebra
Lu = (I −¯Wuu)−1 ¯WulLl
which must be a xed point. This is the unique solution to the iterative Label
Propagation algorithm.
The reason this xed point can not be calculated directly is that the matrix sizes
are often very large. For MNIST, with all observations in the training set, the
size of W is 60, 000 × 60, 000 and it is therefore infeasible to do this calculation
directly.
==PAGE:40==
28
Theory
3.2.1.2
Label Propagation Bengio et al.
A dierent label propagation algorithm was proposed in [Del06].
Instead of
having ones in the diagonal of the weight matrix, they force the diagonal to
be 0. They do not clamp the initial observations to keep their original values,
which allows the labels to oat. Finally, they add a regularization term ϵ to
avoid numerical problems like oat rounding errors.
The algorithm looks similar to before but with a few extra initializations.
1. Choose α ∈(0, 1)
2. Calculate µ ←
α
1−α
3. Compute the diagonal matrix A by AiiI[l](i) + µDii + µϵ
4. Propagate by calculating:
Lt+1 ←A−1(µWLt + L0) until convergence
5. Label point xi by the label with highest value.
There are a few advantages of this updated version of Label Propagation com-
pared to the original.
If the training data is known to be weakly labelled, or that the labels may
include some noise, this algorithm may be able to x it by letting the heavier
weighted neighbours, i.e. closer neighbours, decide the labels. This may lead to
desirable corrections as the solution will be "smoother". This also allows labels
to propagate through the originally labelled nodes, because the labelled nodes
are not clamped back to initial values after every step.
However, if it is known that the original labels are correct, and one wants the
original labels to be the sources for all new labels, then this may not be desirable,
as it may relabel the initial observations incorrectly.
3.2.1.3
Label Spreading
Label spreading is a third variation on Label Propagation. It was proposed by
Zhou in 2004[ZBL04]. It is similar to both Label Propagation methods discussed
earlier, again with some minor variations.
1. Compute the normalized graph Laplacian L ←D−1/2WD−1/2
==PAGE:41==
3.2 Machine Learning Classiers
29
2. Choose a parameter α ∈[0; 1)
3. Propagate by calculating:
Lt+1 ←αLLt + (1 −α)L0 until convergence.
The advantages of label spreading are very similar to the updated algorithm
proposed above, as labels are allowed to oat.
In general, label propagation algorithms have a complexity of O(kn2) where k is
the number of neighbours in the graph. This means that the construction of W
will aect the complexity of the algorithm. If a complete graph is constructed,
then the complexity of the algorithms is O(n3) as k = n. In this thesis W is
determined by the radial basis kernel, and therefore acts as a complete graph.
3.2.1.4
Label Propagation for the Purpose of this Thesis
For this project the original Label Propagation algorithm was used. Despite the
advantages of propagation through initially labelled nodes, the initial labels are
known to be correct in the datasets used in this thesis, and therefore forcing the
labelled observations to keep their initial labels is preferable.
The Label Propagation version in scikit-learn does not strictly follow any of
the above algorithms, but rather seems to be a mixture of Label Spreading and
Label Propagation.
The issue arises in the iteration algorithm used. The graph is constructed using a
Gaussian kernel as the similarity measure, and the label distribution is initialized
with a one-hot encoding. However, the iteration algorithm is the same for the
Label Propagation algorithm as for the Label Spreading algorithm. This seems
to be an oversight, as this means that it is not Label Propagation as described by
Zhu and Ghahramani [ZG02], and not Label Spreading by Zhou et al. [ZBL04].
There does not seem to be an article describing the scikit-learn variation of
Label Propagation.
Using the same algorithm notation as above, the scikit-learn algorithm is as
follows.
1. Construct graph W using a Gaussian kernel
2. Initialize one-hot encoded label distribution L
3. Choose a parameter α ∈[0; 1)
==PAGE:42==
30
Theory
4. Initialize clamping weights as 1 for labelled observations and α for unla-
belled.
5. Initialize ystatic as 1 −α for labelled observations and 0 for unlabelled
6. Propagate by calculating:
Lt+1 ←αLLt + (1 −α)L0
7. Row normalize L
8. Calculate labels using argmax, on each row in L
In addition to being a mixture of two dierent Label Propagation algorithsm,
there is an error in the scikit-learn code. At the very least, the code does not
match the documentation.
The documentation on label clamping says "In the "Hard Clamp" mode, the
true ground labels are never allowed to change. [...] Hard clamp is [...] alpha
set to 1."
However, it can be seen above that setting α to 1 will cause ystatic to be 0 and
the clamp weights to all be 1. Rather than hard clamping, this is the complete
opposite. All observations are weighted evenly, and there is no additional value
added to the known label of the labelled observations. Figure 3.4 shows how
this may aect the labels in a simple example.
Initially, the labels are given by the input y. After some iterations, the propa-
gation changes the label of the point at (0,2) from 0 to 1. After more iterations
the label of the last point (0,4) also changes from 0 to 1. All points are labelled
1 when the algorithm converges. The speed at which convergence is reached
depends on the value of γ; the higher the value, the slower it converges. This
means that when predicting the label of a new point, the prediction will always
be 1, even though we know that some observations should have label 0.
So rather than hard clamping the labels, setting α to 1 allows the labels to oat.
As mentioned above, this is not at all desirable for the MLSP and MNIST data,
as the initial labels are known to be correct. Therefore, the scikit-learn Label
Propagation code has been rewritten for this thesis, so that it follows the Label
Propagation algorithm proposed by Zhu et al. in 2002.[ZG02]
The changes made are quite simple, remove α, the clamp weights and ystatic,
row normalize after each iteration and set the values of the labelled observations
back to the initial one-hot encoding. This matches the algorithm proposed by
Zhu in [ZG02]
==PAGE:43==
3.2 Machine Learning Classiers
31
(a) Initial labelling of ob-
servations
(b) Labelling after some
iterations
(c) Final Labelling after
more iterations
Figure 3.4: The issue with oating labels when the correct labels are known.
The original scikit-learn code, and the exact changes made can be seen in Ap-
pendix A.
3.2.1.5
Comparison of Sci Kit and Zhu et al.
Because no articles about the specic implementation of Label Propagation that
scikit-learn uses were found, they were compared shortly in the process of this
thesis. In gure 3.5 their learning curves on the MNIST dataset are plotted.
The results seem to indicate that on the MNIST dataset, their performance is
equal. There is no obvious dierence in which performs better. The two classi-
ers continually switch on which performs better as the number of observations
increases. This is perhaps not surprising as MNIST data is likely well clustered
in each class, and oating labels will not cause any problems.
For the most part both algorithms predict the same label for all observations.
There is one observation especially which often leads to dierent predictions.
The original Label Propagation guesses correctly that it is a 7, whereas the
scikit-learn variation predicts a 1. The observation can be seen in gure 3.7
3.2.1.6
Predicting the Label of a New Observation
There are two common ways that Label Propagation algorithms can be used to
predict the label of a new observation: transduction and induction [Del06].
Transduction
Transduction is the process of running the whole Label Propa-
gation algorithm, but with the new observation added to the dataset. If we used
==PAGE:44==
32
Theory
Figure 3.5: Learning curve comparison of Sci kit and Zhu et al.
(a) Dierence at 100 observations
(b) Dierence at 1400 observations
Figure 3.6: Zoomed in on low and high number of observations
==PAGE:45==
3.2 Machine Learning Classiers
33
Figure 3.7: Observation which leads to dierent predictions
MNIST as the dataset, then attempting to nd the label for a new observation
would require running Label Propagation on all 60,001 observations. This is an
extremely slow approach, and all but useless for character recognition, as it may
take hours to predict a label. It was mentioned earlier that the complexity of
Label Propagation as used in this thesis is O(n3), which shows how much time
adding just one extra observation could cost.
Induction
A much quicker way is known as induction. Induction uses the
previously calculated label distribution, L, to quickly predict a label for the new
observation through simple matrix multiplication. It works by rst calculating
a new weight matrix, W, that contains the distances from the new observation
to the original training set. This will create a vector of size Observations × 1.
Using this weight vector, all the original observations are allowed to propagate
once to the new observation. To do this the weight matrix is transposed and
matrix multiplied with the label distribution, W ⊤· L.
The result is the probability of each possible label for the new observation. This
is similar to the value of one of the observations in Lu after each step of the
propagation algorithm. The predicted label is easily found as the label with the
highest probability.
This method for predicting a label is clearly much faster than transduction, as
the only new calculations that must be done are constructing a weight matrix W
and computing the matrix multiplication result between W and the previously
computed L. In fact this induction method runs in linear, O(n), time.
The complexity is found when considering the steps of induction.
1. The distance between the old observations and the new observation is cal-
==PAGE:46==
34
Theory
culated. The distance calculation takes constant time, so only the number
of comparisons vary with the input size. The number of comparisons is
clearly O(n), as the new observation must be compared to each of the
existing observations once.
2. This is followed by matrix multiplication which considers each element in
W once. W is size n, and therefore this matrix multiplication is O(n)
3. Adding an observation does not aect the size of y and therefore y has no
impact on the complexity of induction.
However, the result is likely less accurate as the new observation was not in-
cluded in running the algorithm, where it may have aected how the labels
propagated, as labels would have been able to propagate through this observa-
tions node.
It should be noted that if the distance measure was a k-nearest neighbour
function, then labelling the new observation reduces to k-nearest neighbour
classication. If the distance measure is a Gaussian kernel it is equivalent to
Parzen windows or Nadaraya-Watson non parametric regression[Del06]. There-
fore, what sets Label Propagation apart from these simpler methods is the fact
that it incorporates the unlabelled observations into the labelling process.
This covers the explanation of the classier, Label Propagation, used in this
thesis. With a classier to train, it is now necessary to generate observations.
The following section describes how observations in this thesis were generated
using naive Bayes.
3.2.2
Naive Bayes
Another very popular method for machine learning is naive Bayes. Naive Bayes
assumes strong independence between each feature in an observation. This is
often not the case, which is why it is "naive".
The following explains the mathematics and probability behind naive Bayes as
a classier. It is based heavily on the description by Zhang in "The Optimality
of Naive Bayes" [Zha04].
Assume we have our observation, X that consists of the features x1, .., xn, and
our labels Y that consists of two labels. Let y be the value of Y
==PAGE:47==
3.2 Machine Learning Classiers
35
Using Bayes rule, the probability of X belonging to class y is given by
p(y|X) = p(X|y) × p(y)
p(X)
That is, the posterior, p(y|X), can be calculated from the likelihood, p(X|y),
multiplied by the prior, p(y), divided by the evidence, p(X).
The classication of X is easily found as the most probable class, which can be
calculated by substituting y above with each class and choosing the class which
gives the highest value.
Bayes rule shows that the posterior can be calculated using the probability of
X given the class, P(X|y).
Based on the assumption that the features are
independent, this can be calculated as
p(X|y) = p(x1, x2, ..xn|y) = Πn
i=1p(xi|y)
The prior, p(y), is simply the number of observations in the dataset with class
y out of the whole set.
p(y) =
#y
#observations
If the prior of the general problem is known this can also be used, rather than
calculated from the dataset.
Finally, the probability p(X) does not depend on y so for the purpose of calcu-
lating p(y|X), p(X) is eectively constant. The numerator is therefore the only
part of interest.
This means that p(y|X) can be calculated from
#y
#observationsΠn
i=1p(xi|y)
And therefore the class for X, ¯y can be predicted by
argmaxk∈{0,1}p(y)Πn
i=1p(xi|y)
Although naive Bayes is very simple, it has some properties that make it useful
in a variety of circumstances.
One advantage of naive Bayes is that, while the asymptotic error is not very
good, it approaches this error much faster than many other algorithms. This
means that Naive Bayes performs well even on datasets with very few observa-
tions.
==PAGE:48==
36
Theory
Figure 3.8: Figure taken from [NJ02]
Figure 3.8 from [NJ02] compares naive Bayes and logistic regression, which are
known as a generative-discriminative pair. It shows how the generative model
of naive Bayes usually outperforms the discriminative Logistic Regression until
some number of observations are in the training set.
Another advantage of naive Bayes is that it is extremely quick. Unlike many
other machine learning techniques, it does not use gradient descent or an itera-
tive solution like we have seen in Label Propagation.
Instead naive Bayes directly calculates probability distributions from the data
set. The distributions calculated depend on which variation of naive Bayes is
used. These variations will be described below. Which variation is chosen should
be based on the features in the dataset.
Because I wish to study the Kaggle MLSP datasets where we assume that each
feature has a Gaussian distribution, Gaussian naive Bayes is used. This may
not be the most suitable for the MNIST dataset, but for consistency Gaussian
naive Bayes will be used on MNIST as well.
Other commonly used variations of Naive Bayes are Bernoulli and Multinomial.
Multinomial assumes that the dataset represents a histogram, where the value
of each feature is a measure of how many times that feature was observed for
a particular observation. This is popular for document classication, where it
==PAGE:49==
3.2 Machine Learning Classiers
37
maps to how many times certain words occur in a text.
Bernoulli naive Bayes, assumes that features are independent true or false values.
So either the input has the property of a given feature or it does not.
Gaussian naive Bayes learns the training set by calculating the mean, µy, and
standard deviation, σy, for each feature of a given a class. So in the case of
MNIST where there are 784 features per observation, then we will have 784
pairs of µy and σy for each class y.
Assuming that the observation consists of a single continuous variable k, then
calculating which class, y, a new observation, x, belongs to, is done using a
normal distribution with σy and µy for y which were calculated during the
tting:
P(k = x|y) =
1
q
2πσ2y
e
−
(x−µy)2
2σ2y
Although naive Bayes is much faster than many other machine learning algo-
rithms, there are other reasons why it is not good for more complicated obser-
vations. In many real world datasets, the features are not independent which
is the main assumption of naive Bayes. The result of the naive Bayes classier
will therefore often be poor as it does not handle dependence between features.
Despite this, it is very good to use as a benchmark due to its speed, and often
performs better than expected given that it is naive. Naive Bayes is a proven
classier and is well known, having been used in many articles and on many
datasets. This makes it a good initial choice for examining and comparing other
classiers on a dataset.
3.2.2.1
Generating Observations with Naive Bayes
For the purpose of this thesis, another advantage of naive Bayes is that it is
generative.
As mentioned earlier, this means that it is possible to generate
observations. These observations can then be used to increase the size of the
training set.
In the case of Gaussian naive Bayes, the method for generating data from a
label is very straightforward. For each class, y, the mean, µy, and standard
deviation,σy, of each feature is calculated. With the assumption that the fea-
tures in the observations are Gaussian, generating a new value for a feature is
simply sampling from a Gaussian distribution given by:
1
q
2πσ2y
e
−
(x−µy)2
2σ2y
==PAGE:50==
38
Theory
Figure 3.9: Observations generated by Gaussian Naive Bayes
By sampling the Gaussian distribution for each feature a new observation xn+1
with the label y is generated.
The issue of independence between features for naive Bayes become very ap-
parent when generating observations. Attempting to generate observations for
the MNIST training set using this method does not give a very good result, as
clearly the value of neighbouring pixels is not independent. This means that the
more independent the features are, the more reliable the data generated from
naive Bayes will be.
In fact, generating data in this way for MNIST is similar to taking the average
pixel values of a class, or digit, and adding some noise, as seen in gure 3.9.
In order to get a better result of generating data, Principal Component Analysis
can be used to project the data on to its principal axes. Naive Bayes can then
be t on the transformed dataset and generate observations in this transformed
space.
The transformation can be reversed to return to the original feature
space. These generated observations should give a better result than the ones
generated from the original data.
It should be noted that PCA does not take into account labels, but rather is
used on the whole dataset regardless of class. The principal components may
dier between classes, so the principal components found will not represent any
class well. Therefore, when generating data on the principal components, it is
important that PCA is done on each class separately and the observations are
generated specically for the given class.
The number of principal components to use for generating observations was de-
==PAGE:51==
3.2 Machine Learning Classiers
39
(a) First
compo-
nent
(b) First two com-
ponents
(c) First
three
components
(d) First four com-
ponents
Figure 3.10: Observations generated by Gaussian Naive Bayes on the principal
components. Using the two rst principal components gives the
best result.
termined empirically. Figure 3.10 shows observations for the digit 1 on two,three,
and four principal components.
The best result is clearly obtained when using 2 principal components. When
using more principal components, the noise in the dataset begins to cause un-
wanted eects, such as white areas which are normally coloured by the digits,
or the background receiving a darker colour than usual, which is generally not
the case for the digits. These changes in colour are likely to smooth the areas
between classes, weakening the cluster assumption.
==PAGE:52==
40
Theory
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 4
Results
Having understood the theory behind Label Propagation, and how to generate
observations with naive Bayes, we can now examine how it works in practice.
First we will see how well Label Propagation performs on MNIST, and compare
the use of unlabelled and generated observations in training Label Propagation
on MNIST. The combination of unlabelled and generated observations will be
examined as well.
To compare the eect of generated observations on MLSP and MNIST, a cross-
validation algorithm for calculating results will be introduced.
Taking two
classes from MNIST, an attempt to simulate the conditions of the MLSP data
will be made. The algorithm will be run on the smaller MNIST dataset and
the results interpreted, before the same algorithm will be used to calculate the
results on the Kaggle MLSP datasets.
4.1
Results for MNIST
This section contains the results obtained on the MNIST dataset. It begins
with tuning the γ parameter of Label Propagation.
This is followed by the
==PAGE:54==
42
Results
results of semi-supervised Label Propagation, Label Propagation with gener-
ated observations, and nally on the combination of unlabelled and generated
observations.
4.1.1
Tuning Label Propagation
To get good results from Label Propagation one must rst tune the γ parameter.
This was done using a simple search across the values from 0 to 2, with increasing
training set size. Figure 4.1, plotting the results from 0 to 1, shows that apart
from choosing very low values for γ most values do fairly well. To get a clearer
view of which value is the best, gure 4.2 shows the graph zoomed in on the
performance at 200 and 1400 labelled observations.
The zoomed in points show that consistently, values around 0.5 perform the
best, and therefore this value is chosen for calculating the learning curves. It
may be possible to nd a better value, by being more precise and using smaller
increments. However, because the dierence in performance for dierent gamma
values is quite minute, a more ne tuned value may not make a big dierence,
and may in fact cause overtting as it will likely be too specic for the given
observations.
With a value for γ determined the next step is to calculate the learning curves for
the various combinations of observation types. Label propagation was performed
on the datasets with increasing amounts of labelled MNIST observations. After
Label Propagation converged, the classier was scored on the MNIST test set
using the induction method described in Chapter 3.
This propagation and
scoring was iterated 40 times and the average and standard error over each
iteration are used to plot results as described in Chapter 2.
To get a better idea of the actual performance of the classier, the choice of which
observations from the MNIST dataset to use is chosen by random sampling. The
class sizes are not considered, meaning that there is a higher probability of class
imbalance in the training set when there are few total observations. This issue
is mitigated by running multiple iterations. It should be noted that the class
sizes are not entirely equal in the original MNIST dataset either.
4.1.2
With Unlabelled Observations
The rst results are the learning curves for semi-supervised Label Propagation.
The learning curves were calculated with only labelled data as a benchmark.
==PAGE:55==
4.1 Results for MNIST
43
Figure 4.1: Results of tuning γ, with values from 0 to 1, on MNIST.
(a) Zoomed in on 200 observations
(b) Zoomed in on 1400 observations
Figure 4.2: Gamma parameter tuning
==PAGE:56==
44
Results
Figure 4.3: Learning curves of semi-supervised Label Propagation on MNIST
with varying amounts of unlabelled data.
Then the curves for semi-supervised Label Propagation were calculated. The
percentage of unlabelled data was varied over 20, 40, 50, 60, and 80%. The
learning curves are plotted in gure 4.3.
The classication error is plotted
against the number of labelled observations. Taking the learning curve for 80%
unlabelled observations as an example, this means that at the 1000 tick on the
horizontal axis, there are a total of 5000 observations in the training set. 1000
which are labelled and 4000 unlabelled.
The gure shows that there is a denite advantage to using unlabelled data. In
gure 4.4 the graph is zoomed in on dierent training set sizes. By zooming in
the advantage of the unlabelled data is much clearer.
At all values of the graph, 80% unlabelled data performs the best.
This is
expected as more unlabelled observations should improve Label Propagation as
a classier, as there are more observations to learn from.
As, assuming the
cluster assumption is correct, see Chapter 3, the unlabelled observations can be
used to further improve the model as to the distribution of observations in the
classes.
From about 600 observations and out the curves are ordered exactly as expected;
==PAGE:57==
4.1 Results for MNIST
45
(a) Zoomed in on 100 labelled obser-
vations
(b) Zoomed in on 950 labelled obser-
vations
Figure 4.4: Zoomed in on dierent observation point on gure 4.3 to show how
the learning curves compare.
the more unlabelled data, the better the performance.
However, up until this point it seems that no unlabelled data may be better
than having only some unlabelled data, as the fully labelled curve performs
second best. It should be noted that the standard error bars are overlapping, it
is therefore possible that the reason no unlabelled data performs better is due
to chance.
It should be noted that assuming the total size of the training set was equal, it is
still better to have a fully labelled training set. This can be seen by comparing
the performance when the total training set size is equal. For example, by com-
paring the value of the 80% unlabelled curve at 100 labelled observations with
the fully labelled curve at 500 observations. Comparing these values shows that
the fully labelled case has signicantly better performance. This is expected, as
real labelled observations should always be preferable. The unlabelled observa-
tions are still of value as, mentioned previously, it is easier to gather unlabelled
observations than labelled observations.
4.1.3
Adding Generated Observations
Having shown the value of unlabelled observations, the next curves to calculate
are for added naive Bayes generated observations, as described in Chapter 3.
The procedure for generated observations matches the procedure used above for
semi-supervised learning. The percentage of generated observations is varied
==PAGE:58==
46
Results
Figure 4.5: Learning curves of Label Propagation on MNIST with varying
amounts of generated observations.
between 20, 40, 50, 60, and 80%. This procedure results in the learning curves
shown in gure 4.5.
The general trend seems to be that when there are few observations, perfor-
mance is improved by using generated observations, while when there are more
observations, the performance is decreased by using generated observations. In
gure 4.6 the graph is zoomed in on points of the graph to see the eect of
generated observations at dierent training set sizes.
The gures show that adding generated data is quite helpful when there are few
observations in the training set. Interestingly, generating 20% of the observa-
tions performs better than generating 80%. One likely reason for this is that
data generated by naive Bayes will be centred around the class mean. If the
class mean does not accurately describe the class, the generated observations
are likely to worsen performance, as it will cause a cluster of observations that
propagate their labels strongly in an incorrect area.
==PAGE:59==
4.1 Results for MNIST
47
(a) Zoomed in on 300 labelled obser-
vations
(b) Zoomed in on 950 labelled obser-
vations
Figure 4.6: Zoomed in on dierent points on gure 4.5 to show how the learn-
ing curves for generated observations compare.
To visualise the issue of why generating many observations can lead to worse
performance, PCA is used to transform the data to two dimensions. The dif-
ference between generated observations and the MNIST observations can be
visualised by plotting the original data, and comparing with the plot of added
generated observations. Figure 4.7 shows how the generated data is much more
clustered around the center of each class in the training set. This leads to bias,
as the class center of the training set may not match the center of the whole
domain. The increase in observations around the center will also skew Label
Propagation performance, as the generated data will propagate very strongly in
the area around the center.
It was shown earlier that using PCA to generate observations should yield a
better result than generating observations directly from the dataset. Figure 4.8
shows the learning curves for varying amounts of PCA generated observations.
The dierence to the previously seen generated observations is clear. For PCA
generated observations the more observations that are generated, the better. In-
terestingly, 20% PCA generated observations performs poorer than no generated
observations.
The curve for 80% PCA generated observations continues to perform best until
shortly after 600 original labelled observations are in the training set. From
600 original labelled observations, the curves begin to cross and indicate that
they will end with less generated observations being better. However, the PCA
generated observations increase performance for much longer than the non-PCA
generated observations.
==PAGE:60==
48
Results
(a) Original data
(b) With generated data
Figure 4.7: MNIST observations plotted on two principal components. Figure
4.7a shows the original MNIST observations and 4.7b shows the
original observations along with the naive Bayes generated obser-
vations.
Figure 4.8: Learning curves of Label Propagation on MNIST with varying
amounts of PCA generated data.
==PAGE:61==
4.1 Results for MNIST
49
(a) Zoomed in on 300 labelled obser-
vations
(b) Zoomed in on 950 labelled obser-
vations
Figure 4.9: Zoomed in on dierent points from gure 4.8 to show how the
PCA generated learning curves compare.
Figure 4.9a shows that the more PCA observations are generated the better
when there are 300 MNIST labelled observations in the training set. Figure
4.9b shows that at 950 observations, less PCA observations is beginning to
perform better than having more, but all PCA generated curves perform better
than using only MNIST observations.
The class plots for generated PCA observations have a distinctly dierent look
than the class plots for observations generated from the non PCA dataset. Fig-
ure 4.10 shows how the PCA generated observations aect the MNIST class
plots. The observations generated on two principal components have far more
variance than the generated observations we saw earlier. Some of the generated
observations follow a trend; generated observations for digit 5 lie on a straight
line, as do those generated for class 6. The observations generated for class 4
seem to follow a bottom left to top right pattern, but with more variance. There
are two reasons the PCA generated observations behave like this.
Firstly, the variance in the observations is a result of variance in the MNIST
dataset.
When projecting the dataset onto its principal axes, the axes will
include noise from the dataset that contributes to variance in the observations.
When generating, this may cause a change in value of features which on average
are not common, but cause high variance.
One possible cause could be the
background colour of the MNIST observations. If a few of the observations have
diering background colours, this will cause a high variance, as there are many
background pixels. For most observations the background is white, so changes
in the background colour will have a large eect on the principal components.
==PAGE:62==
50
Results
(a) Original data
(b) With PCA generated data
Figure 4.10: MNIST observations plotted based on two principal components.
Figure 4.10a shows the original MNIST observations and 4.10b
shows the original observations along with the PCA generated
observations.
Secondly, if the variance in the observations is low and mostly focused on very
few features, the naive Bayes generated observations will tend towards the mean
values for the observations. This is similar to the class plots we saw earlier, where
the generated observations clustered around the centres of the classes. As the
PCA generated observations are generated based on the two axes in the dataset
that cause the most variance, it is likely that much of the minor variance has
been lost. This leads to the lines we see in the class plots of the PCA generated
observations.
The results so far show that using unlabelled data in Label Propagation is
helpful at all observation sizes, and that naive Bayes generated observations can
improve this further at low observation sizes.
However, as explained in the previous chapter, Label Propagation is only in-
teresting in the semi-supervised case. Therefore, the test is rerun on combined
unlabelled and generated observations, in order to take advantage of the benets
of Label Propagation, and to see how generated observations help in the actual
propagation.
4.1.4
With Generated and Unlabelled Observations
Figure 4.11 shows how increasing the amount of generated observations aects
the performance of Label Propagation when the dataset consists of 33% unla-
==PAGE:63==
4.1 Results for MNIST
51
Figure 4.11: Learning curves of semi-supervised Label Propagation on MNIST
with varying amounts of generated data.
belled observations and 66% labelled observations. When the legend says that a
curve is "50% generated and 50% unlabelled", it means that when there are 100
original MNIST observations in the training set, 50 unlabelled observations and
50 generated observations have been added. The graph shows that combining
unlabelled observations and observations generated directly from the dataset,
results in a mitigation of the extremes. The positive eect of generated obser-
vations when the training set is small is reduced, as is the negative eect of the
generated observations when the training set is large.
Compared to the combination of unlabelled and generated observations gener-
ated directly from the dataset, the combination of PCA generated and unla-
belled observations gives a better result. Figure 4.12 shows the learning curves
for the combination of unlabelled and PCA generated observations.
Compared with the non-PCA generated observations, the combination of PCA
generated and unlabelled observations, shows a positive eect. The graph shows
==PAGE:64==
52
Results
Figure 4.12: The learning curve for PCA generated observations with 50%
unlabelled observations.
==PAGE:65==
4.1 Results for MNIST
53
that combining PCA generated and unlabelled observations results in better
performance than either separately. In other words, it seems that adding PCA
observations to the dataset increases the value of the unlabelled observations,
thereby improving performance further.
In addition, the curves show that as more labelled observations are added to the
training set it is better to have fewer generated observations. For this plot, the
curves with generated observations all have better performance than the MNIST
curve even at 950 MNIST observations. It seems that the PCA generated obser-
vations can work as a cheap placeholder for the actual MNIST observations, but
that replacing the generated observations with MNIST observations improves
performance further.
These MNIST results have shown that generating data is useful on the MNIST
dataset. Before testing on the MLSP datasets, it would be interesting to trans-
form the MNIST dataset to something more similar to the MLSP datasets. In
the next section this transformation and the results on the transformed dataset
are shown.
A clearer comparison of the unlabelled observations with added generated ob-
servations can be seen in gure 4.13. The gure clearly shows how non PCA
generated observations are most useful at very small training set sizes, and
quickly overtaken by the PCA generated observations.
The PCA generated
observations continue to improve performance up to the 950 MNIST labelled
observations shown on the gure.
==PAGE:66==
54
Results
Figure 4.13: Comparison of unlabelled observations and added generated ob-
servations
==PAGE:67==
4.2 Transforming MNIST
55
4.2
Transforming MNIST
The above results are useful as far as seeing how naive Bayes generated observa-
tions help to improve Label Propagation's performance on the MNIST dataset.
However, this is not translatable to the MLSP datasets for several reasons.
Firstly, results on datasets within dierent domains do not necessarily translate.
As an example, a good result on image recognition does not mean that a good
result on document classication is guaranteed. MNIST is an image recognition
dataset, and therefore the results may not translate well to the MLSP, where
the relationship between features is very dierent from that of an image.
Secondly, MNIST has 10 classes, whereas MLSP only has 2. This is a smaller
discrepancy between the datasets, but it may still inuence the performance of
Label Propagation, as it needs to learn more classes.
Finally, the MNIST dataset is very large compared to MLSP. There are so many
observations in the dataset that most classiers should be able to approach their
asymptotic error rate. In MLSP, the fact that there are only 86 observations,
means that most classiers will not approach their asymptotic error rate.
The rst point is a fact of the datasets, and cannot be changed. Points two and
three, however, can be taken into account. Before testing Label Propagation on
the MLSP observations, we can transform the MNIST dataset, so that it more
closely matches MLSP. In this way, the results are more comparable.
The transformation is quite simple. Choose two classes from MNIST, say 0 and
1, i.e., all observations of the digits 0 and 1. Create a new dataset containing
only these two classes. This xes point two, of having too many classes.
Next, reduce the size of the dataset so that each class only has a chosen number
of observations.
Because we have changed the dataset to only contain two classes we need to
retune the γ parameter, as the distance between classes has changed.
Because the dataset is now much smaller, it is a good idea to use cross-validation
in order to ensure an accurate result. Cross-validation will be used for the MLSP
datasets too. Therefore, using it on the reduced MNIST dataset helps make the
results comparable.
Cross-validation only yields a single result for a specic training set size. This
training set size depends on the number of folds and the size of the dataset.
==PAGE:68==
56
Results
As we want to create learning curves using the data, a special cross-validation
algorithm is created. This algorithm is described in the next section.
4.2.1
Cross-Validation Algorithm
The cross-validation method used will be Stratied k-fold. As seen in Chapter
2, a good choice of k is k = 10. This creates a split of 9 folds in the training
set, and 1 in the test set.
Each of the 9 folds in the training set is further subdivided into training sets
of increasing size, to be able to create a learning curve for the data.
Each
subdivided fold has a certain percentage of the subdivided training set removed.
The observations that are removed are used as unlabelled data for the semi-
supervised Label Propagation.
This reduced number of observations is what is used to generate observations.
So the whole process can be described as follows:
1. Create a stratied k-fold split of dataset on classes
2. Subdivide each of the k-folds into training sets of increasing size
3. Remove percentage of observations in each subdivision
4. Generate observations with naive Bayes
5. Fit Label Propagation on the datasets:
• Reduced subdivision
• Reduced subdivision with unlabelled observations
• Reduced subdivision with generated observations
• Reduced subdivision with unlabelled and generated observations
The generated observations include both PCA generated and observations gen-
erated from the original dataset.
To show the algorithm in practice a simple example is shown below.
Assume the dataset X consists of 10 observations, which all have labels, y ∈
{0, 1}. Five observations have label 0 and ve have label 1, as shown below.
==PAGE:69==
4.2 Transforming MNIST
57
y = 0
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
X = (0, 0)
(5, 5)
(0, 1)
(4, 5)
(1, 0)
(5, 4)
(1, 1)
(5, 4)
(1, 2)
(6, 6)
Step one is to create a stratied k-fold split of the dataset. We choose 5 folds
for this example, as it gives a cleaner example. Clearly, each fold will contain
2 observations, one of each label.
There will be 4 folds in the training set,
and 1 fold in the test set. For ease, assume that the observations are sorted
so that every other observation's label is 1 or 0. Removing an even number
of observations still upholds the label proportions of the stratication. In the
actual code the splitting, and choice of observations, is random. One example
of a split would be:
ysplit = 0
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
Xsplit = (0, 0)
(5, 5)
(0, 1)
(4, 5)
(1, 0)
(5, 4)
(1, 1)
(5, 4)
(1, 2)
(6, 6)
In step two, the training set is subdivided into smaller sets of increasing size.
In this case, reasonable sizes would be 4 and 8. This gives three data points for
plotting the learning curve. If we take the split from before and consider the
training set, the subdivisions could be the rst 4 observations, and the second
would be the whole training set.
We then remove a certain percentage of the observations from each subdivision.
These will be used as unlabelled observations later. For the example we are
using, we choose that 1
2 of the observations are removed. The new sizes of the
subdivisions are 2 and 4.
yreduced = 0
1
0
1
Xreduced = (0, 0)
(5, 5)
(0, 1)
(4, 5)
Each of the reduced subdivisions are used to t naive Bayes.
A number of
observations, equal to the ones removed, are generated.
So in this case, it
generates 2 examples for the rst subdivision and 4 for the second. That way,
when we run Label Propagation, there is an equal amount of generated and
unlabelled observations.
Finally, the results are calculated on the dierent sets we want to compare. We
begin with the smallest subdivision, of size 4. First Label Propagation is t to
the reduced training set and scored on the test fold. Then the observations that
were removed are added back to the training set, as unlabelled observations.
The training set is now of size 4. The same tting and scoring procedure is
done. Finally, the generated naive Bayes observations are added to the reduced
training set so that it is size 4 as well. Again the tting and scoring is performed.
==PAGE:70==
58
Results
This tting and scoring procedure is done for each of the subdivisions of the
current split, before running the same steps on the next stratied split.
The result is a 2-d matrix of results, with subdivision size down one axis, and
k-fold induced split down the other. In our example this is a 2x5 matrix. This
is because there are 3 sizes of training set, and 10 dierent combinations of
training and test folds.
To get a validated result, the results of each subdivision are averaged over each
of the cross-validation splits, and the standard error is calculated. With a cross-
validated result at each subdivision size, a learning curve can be plotted.
Because there are few observations, and each fold will have even fewer ob-
servations, the variance will be high.
Therefore, multiple iterations of this
cross-validation algorithm are run. The result matrix will therefore be of size
subdivisions×folds·iterations. The average and standard error are there-
fore not calculated over just the folds, but also over the iterations. This gives a
better average and standard error to plot the learning curves and variability of
the results.
4.2.2
Results on Reduced MNIST
With the cross-validation algorithm explained, it is time to apply it to the
actual data. For the calculation the amount of subdivisions was determined
by the amount of observations from each class. The class size was determined
empirically while the subdivisions were chosen to result in a smooth learning
curve. Each run had enough iterations so that the standard error did not overlap
at key points, namely when there are very few observations and when there are
many observations.
The rst classes chosen are 0 and 1, as used in the algorithm example. Figure
4.14 shows the resulting learning curves.
The curves show that at very low
observations, generating data directly from the dataset performs best. Quickly,
this simple way of generating data is surpassed by PCA generated data. As the
size of the original observations passes 100, unlabelled data is of most value and
continues to be so as more observations are added to the training set. Between
300 and 400 observations, even the PCA generated data performs worse than
using just the labelled data. Shortly after 400 MNIST observations, the curves
have approached their asymptotic error to a degree where they no longer cross
each other. At this point, adding unlabelled data improves the performance,
while adding generated data decreases performance. PCA generated observa-
tions decrease performance less than observations generated directly from the
==PAGE:71==
4.2 Transforming MNIST
59
(a) Learning curve for training sets up
to size 90
(b) Learning curve for training sets
from size 200 to 900
Figure 4.14: Learning curve for classes 0 and 1 from cross-validation algorithm
dataset.
These learning curves used 0 and 1 as the reduced MNIST classes. The results
seem to be quite clear, but when considering the classication error, it is so
small that the results are prone to variance. To explain why, we consider the
similarity of the classes. Using PCA to transform the data to two principal
components, the observations can be plotted. Figure 4.15a shows clearly how
distinct the two classes are in the original dataset, and gure 4.15b shows that
with generated data, the datasets are still very distinct. This is an example of
the clustering hypothesis with very large distances between classes. As discussed
earlier, this is an assumption for Label Propagation, and when the classes are so
far apart, Label Propagation will always perform very well. Therefore, it should
be no surprise that generated data is not especially helpful, nor hurtful, to the
performance of Label Propagation.
To nd a combination of classes that is more interesting, plots of dierent com-
binations of classes are made. The plots showed that 4 and 9 are the classes
with the most overlap. This seems intuitive as well, as the dierence between 4
and 9 when handwritten is often just the closing of the 4 at the top. The PCA
plot of 4 and 9 can be seen in gure 4.16. The classes before and after gener-
ating data are very overlapping, and it is clear that considering the two most
important principal components is not enough to distinguish the classes. Using
these classes will give a better indication of how well generated observations
work.
The results of MNIST cross-validation on classes 4 and 9 can be seen in gure
4.17.
The plot of the learning curve shows much the same picture as with
classes 0 and 1. In gure 4.17a we can see that when there are very few labelled
==PAGE:72==
60
Results
(a) Original data
(b) With generated data
Figure 4.15: Classes 0 and 1 plotted based on two principal components. Fig-
ure 4.15a shows the original MNIST data and 4.15b shows the
original data along with the generated data.
(a) Original data
(b) With generated data
Figure 4.16: Classes 4 and 9 plotted based on two principal components. Fig-
ure 4.16a shows the original MNIST data and 4.16b shows the
original data along with the generated data.
==PAGE:73==
4.2 Transforming MNIST
61
observations, observations generated from the dataset improve the performance
of the classier. Interestingly, this is most strongly seen in the combination
of unlabelled and generated observations, whereas using only unlabelled data
performs signicantly worse than all other curves. This seems to indicate that
using the generated observations helps Label Propagation distinguish the classes,
and therefore allows it to give the correct label to the unlabelled observations.
This improves the performance of the classier as it is now able to use the
unlabelled data to improve its model for classication.
As seen for classes 0 and 1, the PCA generated observations eventually out-
perform the observations generated from the dataset. This happens at a later
point for classes 4 and 9, indicating that some minimum of information about
the classes is required for PCA generation to be useful, and that the more similar
the classes the more information is required. At 90 original MNIST observa-
tions, generated observations still help improve the classier, and help more
when unlabelled data is present.
Figure 4.17b shows the performance when there are many observations in the
training set. As opposed to the 0 and 1 class graph, the curves for 4 and 9 have
not yet approached their asymptotic error. This is easily seen as the curves cross
at 850, and there is a dierence in the steepness of the curves that indicates that
eventually the same ordering of the curves will appear as in the 0 and 1 case.
The graph shows clearly that only using generated data gives poor results for 4
and 9, when there are over 200 MNIST observations in the training set. This
is not surprising, because as mentioned earlier, 4 and 9 can easily be confused
by noise around the top of the 4. It is quite likely that when generating a lot of
observations directly from the dataset, that 4's with somewhat closed top and
9's with open tops will appear, washing out the boundary between the classes.
This is a bigger problem for the observations generated from the dataset, as the
Gaussian noise is random, whereas for the PCA generated observations random
noise is not added to each pixel.
The results for 4 and 9 seem to indicate that the more similar the classes are,
the longer PCA generated data is helpful. Not until roughly 800 observations
is it better to only use unlabelled observations, rather than adding PCA gen-
erated observations. The same is seen when comparing using only the original
MNIST observations versus adding PCA generated observations, where at 800
observations the MNIST curve outperforms the curve using MNIST and added
PCA observations.
Having seen that generating data is useful for MNIST classication using Label
Propagation, the next section will examine whether this extends to the MLSP
datasets.
==PAGE:74==
62
Results
(a) Learning curve for training sets up
to size 90
(b) Learning curve for training sets
from size 200 to 900
Figure 4.17: Learning curve for classes 4 and 9 from cross-validation algo-
rithm.
4.3
MLSP Results
There are two datasets in the MLSP challenge, the SBM dataset and the FNC
dataset. Each dataset will be used to get results. First, the FNC dataset will
be used, and secondly the SBM dataset.
As the MLSP observations dier from the MNIST observations, the rst thing
that must be done is to retune the γ parameter to the MLSP observations. The
process is the same as for MNIST, and the result is a γ value of 0.8 as seen in
gure 4.18. Because of the low number of observations, the choice of γ is prone
to overtting. In other words, the value for γ found here, may not be the best
choice for the general problem.
Having tuned the γ parameter, the next step is to calculate the learning curves
for the FNC dataset using the cross-validation algorithm described in the pre-
vious section. The amount of unlabelled and generated data is limited to 20%
for the MLSP data, as otherwise the amount of labelled data was too small to
achieve reasonable results. For the PCA generated data, 2 components were
used, since this was also used for MNIST. It should be noted however, that this
may not be the best choice. Choosing how many principal components to use
will be discussed further in Chapter 5.
The results can be seen in gure 4.19. The curves show that data generated
using naive Bayes in the original feature space performs best. Using only the
original observations, or adding unlabelled observations, the performance is very
at with little indication that more observations helps the performance of Label
Propagation in any way. Generating data based on the principal components
==PAGE:75==
4.3 MLSP Results
63
Figure 4.18: Gamma plot for FNC data.
Figure 4.19: Learning curve for FNC observations from cross-validation algo-
rithm.
==PAGE:76==
64
Results
(a) The
FNC
observa-
tions
(b) With generated ob-
servations
(c) With PCA generated
observations
Figure 4.20: FNC data plotted on two principal components. Figure 4.20a
shows the FNC data, 4.20b includes Bayes generated observa-
tions, and 4.20c shows observations generated in the PC space
performs signicantly worse than not generating any data at all.
This may
mean that PCA generated observations are poorer than observations generated
directly from the original dataset, or may mean that the number of principal
components chosen is a bad choice for the FNC dataset.
The plot indicates that generated data works well as a regularization of the
classier on the FNC dataset. Generated data seems to be of great value espe-
cially from 30 FNC observations and larger. Unlabelled data seems to worsen
the performance of the classier slightly. This was seen in the MNIST results,
as well, at small dataset sizes, and it may therefore be the case that unlabelled
data would be more benecial if more labelled data was available. Since there
is not more labelled data available, it seems that generating observations may
be very benecial to get better results from the FNC data.
In gure 4.20a the FNC data is plotted along the two main principal compo-
nents. Figures 4.20b and 4.20c show the FNC data plotted with 50 observations
generated from the dataset and from PCA, respectively. The class plots look
much as expected, reminiscent of the plots seen for MNIST.
Having tested on the FNC data, the nal remaining dataset is the SBM dataset.
The γ value is recalculated for the SBM dataset, giving a value of 0.8. The plot
of the gamma values is shown in gure 4.21. The gamma plot shows a curios
trend of the classication performance decreasing after a certain number of
observations are included in the training set. With the γ value established the
cross-validation algorithm is run. The learning curves for SBM are plotted in
gure 4.22.
The results show that for the SBM data, observations generated in the PC
==PAGE:77==
4.3 MLSP Results
65
Figure 4.21: Gamma plot for SBM data.
Figure 4.22: Learning curve for SBM observations from cross-validation algo-
rithm.
==PAGE:78==
66
Results
(a) The
SBM
observa-
tions
(b) With generated ob-
servations
(c) With PCA generated
observations
Figure 4.23: SBM data plotted on the 2 most important principal compo-
nents. Figure 4.23a shows the SBM data, 4.23b includes Bayes
generated observations, and 4.23c shows observations generated
in the PC space.
space provide signicantly better results than using only existing data, or adding
unlabelled data. PCA generated data has much larger impact than unlabelled
data, with the two curves with PCA generated data clearly outperforming all
the others.
The plots of the classes on the two principal components, with and without
generated observations, is shown in gure 4.23. The plots show that generated
data is more spread out in SBM data. This could likely be due to fewer features
in the SBM data than in MNIST and FNC data.
==PAGE:79==
Chapter 5
Discussion
In this chapter the results seen previously will be discussed. It begins with an
attempt at a general explanation of the results. This is followed by a discussion
about when to use generated data.
How the results could be improved and
dierent possible design choices will be discussed, along with areas of the thesis
that would be interesting to research further than was possible in the time and
scope of this thesis.
5.1
Discussion of Results
The general trend in the results is that generating observations is especially
useful when the training set is small. As the size of the training set increases,
unlabelled observations outperform generated observations.
The more unla-
belled data, the better Label Propagation performs; the more generated data
the worse Label Propagation performs.
The results show that when there are few observations, generated data works as
regularization on the classier. This regularization does not improve the classi-
er when there are many observations, because it is likely that most variations
within a class are described in these observations. In this case, generated ob-
servations cause worse performance as the regularization reduces the t of the
==PAGE:80==
68
Discussion
classier when the t is very accurate. Unlabelled data also helps more when
there are more labelled observations in the training set, as the classier already
has a good description of each class which can be extended through the use of
the unlabelled observations.
This change for generated observations, from increasing to decreasing perfor-
mance, causes the crossover of unlabelled and generated data that is seen in the
MNIST results. The point at which this crossover happens depends strongly
on the dataset. In the MLSP datasets this point is not reached. In fact, the
MLSP datasets produce very odd learning curves, that are very at or eventu-
ally worsen with increased training set size. The MNIST plots are cleaner, and
give a clearer result. For MNIST the graphs indicate that using PCA to gener-
ate observations is better the more similar the classes are, assuming a certain
number of observations in each class. When there are very few observations,
generating observations directly from the dataset gives better results, as they
are better at preventing overtting.
Generating observations is very cheap compared to gathering new results, espe-
cially in datasets like MLSP where the observations are the result of expensive
brain scans. As such, it seems that generated data is a very useful and cheap
way to improve a classier when there are few observations in the training set.
It should be noted that for all graphs, assuming equal training set sizes, it is
always preferable to have real world, labelled, observations. In other words,
there is a cost associated with replacing labelled observations with unlabelled
or generated observations.
5.1.1
How to Improve Results
The number of principal components to use when generating observations was
determined empirically for the MNIST dataset. A visualization of the gener-
ated digits quickly showed why using 2 components gave the best result. For
the MLSP datasets, 2 components were used as well. For the SBM data using 2
components seemed to perform very well, causing the PCA generated observa-
tions to outperform the other learning curves. For the FNC data, however, using
2 components performed very poorly signicantly worse than not using any gen-
erated observations. Whether or not the poor performance on the FNC data
was due to the number of principal components would require more experiments
to determine.
The number of principal components to use could be estimated using some
measure of the data described by the PCA. Dierent measures could be used, a
==PAGE:81==
5.2 Future Work
69
percentage of data included in the principal components, or one could include
principal components that describe more than some percentage of information.
The number of principal components could also be determined through cross-
validation, Akaike Information Criteria, or Bayesian Information Criteria.
The amount of variance in the observations generated by PCA may indicate that
in the case of classes 4 and 9 in MNIST, some of the generated observations
resemble a 4 more than a 9 and vice versa.
If this is the case, using Label
Spreading instead of Label Propagation may improve the results, as they would
be relabelled to the class they are most similar to, and this would improve the
propagation.
5.2
Future Work
In this thesis Label Propagation was used as the classier and naive Bayes as
the observation generator. Label Propagation is a very simple classier, and it
would be very interesting to see how a more advanced and complex classier
would perform. In the medical world SVMs and Forrests, and other ensemble
methods, have been used to classify diabetes patients[LZ07][CSZ06].
More advanced ways to generate data than a naive Bayes generator could be
used to examine if the generated data could be valuable for larger training sets.
The two schizophrenia datasets used refer to the same labels. This means that
in reality, each label has two separate datasets that could be used for classi-
cation. Combining both datasets in a multi modal classier would be very
interesting. This would allow combinations of generated observations for one or
both datasets, and seeing whether the generated observations perform better or
worse than using only a single dataset at a time.
In addition to combining the FNC and SBM datasets, other datasets should be
tested. There are many dierent types of machine learning problems, and the
usefulness of generated data in each would be very interesting to pursue.
The amount of observations to generate would be another interesting topic.
The amount would depend on the dataset, but could be determined through
cross-validation by varying the amounts of generated observations and nding
the peak where adding more generated observations will not improve the per-
formance. It would be interesting to nd this point for dierent datasets and
compare.
==PAGE:82==
70
Discussion
==PAGE:83==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
The purpose of this thesis was to examine the usefulness of naive Bayes generated
observations in improving the classication of the Label Propagation algorithm.
The generated observations were tested on two datasets, MNIST and the 2014
MLSP Schizophrenia Challenge.
On MNIST, a dataset of the digits from 0 to 9, generated data was shown to be
helpful when there were few observations. As more observations are added to
the training set, the value of generated observations decreases, while the value of
unlabelled observations increases. When there is an abundance of observations;
large amounts of unlabelled data performs better than small amounts; no extra
data performs worse than unlabelled data, and the more generated data the
worse the performance. Observations generated in the PCA subspace of the
feature space, generally performed better than observations generated directly
from the dataset.
On the MLSP datasets, the variance in the data made training Label Propaga-
tion dicult, and resulted in odd learning curves. For the FNC data, observa-
tions generated directly from the dataset helped Label Propagation outperform
using unlabelled or original observations. The PCA generated data performed
poorly, but this may be the result of a bad choice for the number of principal
components used when generating data. For the SBM dataset, PCA generated
data was a far better choice, outperforming the others combinations of gener-
==PAGE:84==
72
Conclusion
ated and unlabelled data by a signicant amount. For both SBM and FNC data,
the learning curves are somewhat erratic. This is likely due to high variance in
observations in the datasets.
==PAGE:85==
Appendix A
Code Changes
This chapter contains the code changes to Label Propagation in scikit-learn.
The changes are marked with #CHANGED.
def fit(self, X, y):
X = np.asarray(X)
self.X_ = X
# actual graph construction (implementations
# should override this)
graph_matrix = self._build_graph()
# label construction
# construct a categorical distribution
# for classification only
classes = np.unique(y)
classes = (classes[classes != -1])
self.classes_ = classes
n_samples, n_classes = len(y), len(classes)
==PAGE:86==
74
Code Changes
y = np.asarray(y)
unlabeled = y == -1
#CHANGED
#clamp_weights = np.ones((n_samples, 1))
clamp_weights = np.zeros((n_samples, 1))
clamp_weights[unlabeled, 0] = self.alpha
# initialize distributions
self.label_distributions_ = np.zeros((n_samples, n_classes))
for label in classes:
self.label_distributions_[y == label,
classes == label] = 1
y_static = np.copy(self.label_distributions_)
if self.alpha > 0.:
#CHANGED
#y_static *= 1 - self.alpha
y_static *= self.alpha
y_static[unlabeled] = 0
l_previous = np.zeros((self.X_.shape[0], n_classes))
remaining_iter = self.max_iter
while (_not_converged(self.label_distributions_,
l_previous, self.tol)
and remaining_iter > 1):
l_previous = self.label_distributions_
self.label_distributions_ = safe_sparse_dot(
graph_matrix, self.label_distributions_)
# clamp
self.label_distributions_ = np.multiply(
clamp_weights, self.label_distributions_) + y_static
#CHANGED
#normalize
normalizer = np.sum(self.label_distributions_,
axis=1)[:, np.newaxis]
self.label_distributions_ /= normalizer
remaining_iter -= 1
# set the transduction item
==PAGE:87==
75
transduction = self.classes_[np.argmax(self.label_distributions_,
axis=1)]
self.transduction_ = transduction.ravel()
self.n_iter_ = self.max_iter - remaining_iter
return self
==PAGE:88==
76
Code Changes
==PAGE:89==
Appendix B
Full Size Images
This appendix contains full sized images from the thesis.
B.1
MNIST Results
This section contains the plots of the MNIST Results.
B.1.1
Semi-supervised Label Propagation
This section contains the images of semi-supervised Label Propagation.
==PAGE:90==
78
Full Size Images
==PAGE:91==
B.1 MNIST Results
79
==PAGE:92==
80
Full Size Images
B.1.2
Label Propagation with Generated Observations
This section contains the images of Label Propagation with naive Bayes gener-
ated observations.
==PAGE:93==
B.1 MNIST Results
81
==PAGE:94==
82
Full Size Images
==PAGE:95==
B.1 MNIST Results
83
B.1.3
Label Propagation with PCA Generated Observa-
tions
This section contains the images of Label Propagation with naive Bayes PCA
generated observations.
==PAGE:96==
84
Full Size Images
==PAGE:97==
B.1 MNIST Results
85
==PAGE:98==
86
Full Size Images
B.1.4
Label Propagation with Generated and Unlabelled
Observations
This section contains the images of semi-supervised Label Propagation with
naive Bayes generated observations.
==PAGE:99==
B.1 MNIST Results
87
==PAGE:100==
88
Full Size Images
==PAGE:101==
B.1 MNIST Results
89
B.1.5
Label Propagation with PCA Generated and Unla-
belled Observations
This section contains the images of semi-supervised Label Propagation with
naive Bayes PCA generated observations.
==PAGE:102==
90
Full Size Images
==PAGE:103==
B.1 MNIST Results
91
==PAGE:104==
92
Full Size Images
B.1.6
Comparison of PCA and non-PCA Observations
Comparison of learning curves for PCA and non-PCA generated observations
for semi-supervised Label Propagation.
==PAGE:105==
B.1 MNIST Results
93
B.1.7
Class Plots for MNIST
==PAGE:106==
94
Full Size Images
==PAGE:107==
B.2 Reduced MNIST Results
95
B.2
Reduced MNIST Results
This section contains the plots of MNIST with two classes.
B.2.1
Learning Curves for Classes 0 and 1
==PAGE:108==
96
Full Size Images
==PAGE:109==
B.2 Reduced MNIST Results
97
B.2.2
Class Plots for Classes 0 and 1
==PAGE:110==
98
Full Size Images
==PAGE:111==
B.2 Reduced MNIST Results
99
B.2.3
Learning Curves for Classes 4 and 9
==PAGE:112==
100
Full Size Images
==PAGE:113==
B.2 Reduced MNIST Results
101
B.2.4
Class Plots for Classes 4 and 9
==PAGE:114==
102
Full Size Images
==PAGE:115==
B.3 MLSP Results
103
B.3
MLSP Results
This section contains the plots of the results of the MLSP datasets.
B.3.1
Learning Curve for FNC
==PAGE:116==
104
Full Size Images
B.3.2
Class Plots for FNC
==PAGE:117==
B.3 MLSP Results
105
==PAGE:118==
106
Full Size Images
B.3.3
Learning Curve for SBM
==PAGE:119==
B.3 MLSP Results
107
B.3.4
Class Plots for SBM
==PAGE:120==
108
Full Size Images
==PAGE:121==
B.3 MLSP Results
109
==PAGE:122==
110
Full Size Images
==PAGE:123==
Bibliography
[Bis06]
Christopher Bishop. Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning.
Springer-Verlag New York, 2006.
[CFO06]
George Casella, Stephen Fienberg, and Ingram Olkin.
Springer
Texts in Statistics, volume 102. 2006.
[CS10]
Georey Webb Claude Sammut. Encyclopaedia of Machine Learn-
ing. Springer US, 2010.
[CSZ06]
O. Chapelle, B. Schölkopf, and A. Zien. Semi-supervised learning,
volume 2. 2006.
[Del06]
Olivier Delalleau. 11 Label Propagation and Quadratic Criterion.
Compute, pages 185207, 2006.
[HTF09a]
Trevor Hastie, Robert Tibshirani, and Jerome Friedman. The Ele-
ments of Statistical Learning. Springer 2001, 18(4):746, 2009.
[HTF09b]
Trevor Hastie, Robert Tibshirani, and Jerome Friedman. The Ele-
ments of Statistical Learning. Elements, 1:337387, 2009.
[kaga]
About kaggle.
[kagb]
Mlsp 2014 schizophrenia classication challenge.
[Koh95]
R Kohavi. A study of cross-validation and bootstrap for accuracy
estimation and model selection. Ijcai, 1995.
[KT06]
C Kang and J Tian. A Hybrid Generative/Discriminative Bayesian
Classier. FLAIRS Conference, 2006.
==PAGE:124==
112
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[LZ07]
M Li and ZH Zhou. Improve computer-aided diagnosis with machine
learning techniques using undiagnosed samples. Systems, Man and
Cybernetics, Part A: Systems . . . , 2007.
[Mar09]
Stephen Marsland. Machine Learning: An algorithmic perspective.
Chapman and Hall/CRC, 2009.
[Mit97]
Tom Mitchell. Machine Learning. McGraw-Hill Education, 1997.
[Ng07]
Andrew Ng. Advice for applying Machine Learning. I Can, 153:141
146, 2007.
[NJ02]
Andrew Y Ng and Michael I Jordan. On Discriminative vs. Genera-
tive Classiers: A comparison of logistic regression and naive Bayes.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 14, pages 841
848, 2002.
[NMTM00] K Nigam, AK McCallum, S Thrun, and T Mitchell. Text classi-
cation from labeled and unlabeled documents using EM. Machine
learning, 2000.
[RSNM03]
Rajat Raina, Yirong Shen, Andrew Y Ng, and Andrew McCal-
lum. Classication with Hybrid Generative / Discriminative Mod-
els. Proc of Neuro Information Processing Systems (NIPS), pages
18, 2003.
[skl]
Cross-validation: evaluating estimator performance.
[WRR03]
Me Wall, Andreas Rechtsteiner, and Lm Rocha.
Singular value
decomposition and principal component analysis. A Practical Ap-
proach to Microarray Data Analysis, pages 91109, 2003.
[YBZ12]
SH Yang, J Bian, and H Zha.
Hybrid generative/discriminative
learning
for
automatic
image
annotation.
arXiv
preprint
arXiv:1203.3530, 2012.
[YL]
Christopher Burges Yann LeCun, Corina Cortes.
The mnist
database of handwritten digits.
[ZBL04]
D Zhou, O Bousquet, and TN Lal. Learning with local and global
consistency. Advances in neural . . . , 2004.
[ZG02]
X Zhu and Z Ghahramani. Learning from labeled and unlabeled
data with label propagation. 2002.
[Zha04]
Harry Zhang. The Optimality of Naive Bayes. Proceedings of the
Seventeenth International Florida Articial Intelligence Research
Society Conference FLAIRS 2004, 1(2):1  6, 2004.
