==PAGE:1==
A Survey of Man in the Middle
Attacks
Viktor Lesyk
Kongens Lyngby 2015
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
The Man-In-The-Middle attack (MITM) is one the most well known attacks in
computer security and is one of the biggest concerns for security professionals.
MITM targets not only the actual data that ﬂows between endpoints, but also
the conﬁdentiality and integrity of the data itself. Depending from used commu-
nication channels, MITM may be executed as a single attack on protocol, or as
a complex set of diﬀerent kinds of attacks.
In this paper, we explore the scope of the MITM attack and attempt to combat
it. We classify MITM based on how the attacker impersonates endpoints, and
for each MITM type we discuss their execution algorithms. We survey existing
countermeasures and propose our categorisation of them, based on used preven-
tion or detection approaches. Finally, we draw conclusions and discuss possible
directions for future research.
==PAGE:4==
ii
Summary (English)
==PAGE:5==
Summary (Danish)
Man-In-The-Middle attack (MITM) er et af de mest kendte angreb i edb-sikkerhed
og er en af de største bekymringer for sikkerhed fagfolk. MITM mål ikke kun den
faktiske data, der ﬂyder mellem endpoints, men også fortroligheden og integri-
teten af de data selv. Afhængig fra brugte kommunikationskanaler kan MITM
udføres som et enkelt angreb på protokol, eller som et komplekst sæt af forskel-
lige former for angreb.
I dette papir, vi undersøge mulighederne for MITM angreb og forsøge at bekæmpe
den. Vi klassiﬁcerer MITM baseret på, hvor angriberen efterligner endpoints,
og for hver MITM type, vi diskutere deres udførelse algoritmer. Vi overskue
eksisterende modforanstaltninger og foreslå vores kategorisering af dem, baseret
på brugte forebyggelse eller afsløring tilgange. Endelig vil vi drage konklusioner
og diskutere mulige retninger for fremtidig forskning.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fulﬁlment of the requirements for
acquiring an M.Sc. in Engineering, Security and Mobile Computing.
The thesis deals with Man-in-the-Middle attack, and consists of:
• A deﬁnition of the Man-in-the-Middle attack and related aspects.
• A survey reviewing attack on all layers of Internet and cellular networks.
• A classiﬁcation of the Man-in-the-Middle attacks based on the imperson-
ation techniques, location of the attacker in network, nature of communi-
cation channel.
• A comparison and categorisation of prevention mechanisms against Man-
in-the-Middle attack.
Padova, Italy, 26-June-2015
==PAGE:8==
vi
Viktor Lesyk
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor Prof. Nicola Dragoni for all his support and
patience. He have been extremely helpful and pushed me on, to get the best out
of this project.
Special thanks to Prof. Mauro Conti, my co-supervisor for having welcomed me
at University of Padua to carry out my master thesis and for the eﬀort in helping
me reaching a valuable result. Thanks to the SPRITZ Research Group for time
spent on improving my work.
Thanks to the Erasmus Mundus and NordSecMob programmes for giving me
opportunity to study in NTNU and DTU universities. Great thanks to the Eu-
ropean Commission for covering my expenses during my Masters degree studies.
I wish to thank my NordSecMob coordinator Mona Nordaune for helping in any
time, to solve any problem.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Summary (Danish)
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Contribution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Problem Deﬁnition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4.1
An eﬀective example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.5
Thesis structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Spooﬁng-based MITM attack
9
2.1
ARP spooﬁng-based MITM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2
ARP spooﬁng prevention mechanisms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.1
Detection of ARP spooﬁng
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.2
Cryptographic solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2.3
Voting-based
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.2.4
Hardware . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.2.5
Server-based
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.2.6
Host-based
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.3
DNS spooﬁng-based MITM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
==PAGE:12==
x
CONTENTS
2.4
DNS spooﬁng prevention mechanisms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.4.1
Detection of DNS spooﬁng
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.4.2
Entropy increasing mechanisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.4.3
Cryptographic solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.4.4
Artiﬁcial neural network solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.5
DHCP spooﬁng-based MITM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.6
DHCP spooﬁng prevention mechanisms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.7
IP spooﬁng-based MITM
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
2.8
IP spooﬁng prevention mechanisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
2.8.1
Router-based . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
2.8.2
Host-based
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
2.8.3
Host and router based . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3
SSL/TLS MITM attack
33
3.1
SSL/TLS protocol
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.2
SSL/TLS MITM attack . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.3
Prevention mechanisms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.3.1
Detection of forged certiﬁcates
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.3.2
Certiﬁcate pinning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.3.3
Multi-path probing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.3.4
Force SSL/TLS connection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.3.5
TLS extensions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4
BGP MITM attack
41
4.1
BGP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.2
BGP MITM attack . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.3
Prevention mechanisms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.3.1
Detection solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.3.2
Proactive prevention . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5
FBS-based MITM
51
5.1
GSM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.2
MITM attack on GSM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.3
GSM MITM prevention mechanisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5.4
UMTS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5.5
MITM on combined GSM/UTMS network . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5.6
GSM/UMTS MITM prevention mechanisms . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
6
Conclusions
63
6.1
Future works
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
Bibliography
67
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1
Introduction
This chapter deﬁnes the context of the problem, in order to better understand
the research motivation, which is given next. Then it describes our contribution
and gives the deﬁnition of the man-in-the-middle attack with a detailed example.
Finally, we clarify structure of the thesis.
1.1
Context
On 2015, 25 billion devices will be connected to each other, while by 2020 this
number will be doubled to 50 billions according to the Cisco CEO [Eva]. During
the last decade computer network technology have grown exponentially and be-
come one of the most popular technologies. According to [net], 3.2 billion people
use Internet, moreover, cellular networks are even more spread: last mobility re-
port [mob] states, that GSM covers more than 90% of the world population. The
Internet and cellular networks not only have revolutionised our way of commu-
nication, by providing high-speed data services and connectivity anywhere, and
anytime, but also have raised lots of technical challenges to be solved, mostly,
due to the complexity of the deployed architecture and the heterogeneity of the
==PAGE:14==
2
Introduction
employed technologies.
During the last decade, the Internet together with cellular networks have expe-
rienced an increase in sophisticated attacks, subverting stability and correctness
of provided services. One of the reasons is that the Internet originally was built
for another purpose (connect academic and military institutions) than used now
(e-commerce and e-banking). From the beginning, Internet was a trust network,
main goal of which has been connection of two endpoints. This have resulted in
the lack of its architectural strength, and consequently attackers use this weak-
ness for their own purposes. For example, Internet Control Message Protocol
(ICMP) Redirect message, was designed for specifying better routing paths, but
quite often was used for Denial-of-Service (DoS) attacks. Also, the wireless and
cellular networks are prone to a number of intrusions due to openness of the
medium - air. Therefore, false base station and evil twin attacks appeared. An-
other truth is that the adoption rate of security updates is not fast enough to
avoid massive attacks, (for instance, installation of wiﬁrouters ﬁrmware), the lack
of knowledge and awareness possessed by the end-user, makes security question
extremely disturbing.
Today, almost each aspect of a daily life may be associated with the usage of
Internet or cellular network. For instance, we use home banking, entertainment,
shopping, social networks.
All these services store or transfer user’s sensitive
information, which is the target for intruders. Most of the time developers in
companies manage to protect data, but attackers are looking for the best forms
of decryption and attack models to gain access to people’s private data.
Be-
sides individuals, hackers target also enterprises and organisations, which leads
to big economical loss. One of the most successful attacks is man-in-the-middle
(MITM), which results in gaining control over end-users’ information and re-
sources.
The name "man-in-the-middle" is derived from the basketball scenario, where
two players intend to pass a ball to each other, while one player between them
tries to seize it. MITM attacks are sometimes referred to as "bucket brigade
attacks" or "ﬁre brigade attacks" [NNS10]. Those names are derived from the
ﬁre brigade operation of dousing oﬀthe ﬁre by passing buckets from one person
to another, between the water source and the ﬁre. MITM attack is also known
as: Monkey-in-the-middle attack, Session hijacking, TCP hijacking, TCP session
hijacking.
==PAGE:15==
1.2 Motivation
3
1.2
Motivation
The MITM ﬁrstly was mentioned in papers around 1994, and with each year
number of citations increases. Nevertheless, today there is no publication, which
will give overview of the attack for each Internet layer or each generation of cellu-
lar network. There exist researches that describe the problem within one speciﬁc
protocol, like MITM attacks on Address Resolution Protocol (ARP) [Wag01], or
studies within speciﬁc technology like bluetooth [HH08]. On the other hand, there
are small surveys of the MITM, which do not go into details of used methods,
and provide small coverage of the problem, for example [OV03] presentation.
In Verizon’s data investigation report [BHH+11] and in [CAP], researchers showed
that MITM is one of the most common types of hacking actions. Frankel et al.
[FEOS07] described MITM as one of the major threats against network security.
Such publications alongside with previously speciﬁed awarenesses clearly show
that MITM is important and quite widespread, and needed to be studied.
1.3
Contribution
This paper presents the overview of the current state of the MITM attacks across
each layer of the Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) model, and each genera-
tion of the cellular network. We propose the categorisation of MITM based on
impersonation techniques. Following chapters besides detailed description of the
attacks also include countermeasures for their prevention.
Our work is in that sense unique as, to the best of our knowledge, it is a ﬁrst
extensive study of the MITM attack. When we compare our work to the existing
body of research, we see the following. Abad et al.[AB07] analysed the schemes
for detecting and preventing ARP spooﬁng-based MITM attacks, where they also
speciﬁed requirements for an ideal solution. Herzberg et al. [HS12a] performed a
critical study of the prominent defence mechanisms against Domain Name Server
(DNS) spooﬁng-based MITM, and proposed taxonomy of them.
In [YBX13],
[Pat15], [EL09], researchers surveyed Internet Protocol (IP) spooﬁng preven-
tion mechanisms and proposed classiﬁcation of them. Most recently, Dinu et al.
[DT14] surveyed solutions that aim to make Dynamic Host Conﬁguration Proto-
col (DHCP) more secure, and presented their own approach. Clark et al.[CvO13]
executed one of the most signiﬁcant surveys of defence schemes against SSL/TLS
MITM attack. Authors reviewed the spectrum of issues concerning trust model
==PAGE:16==
4
Introduction
between certiﬁed authorities and browsers. Also, in [COE],[HREJ14], [KC14],
researchers carried out small studies of detecting and defeating mechanisms of
SSL/TLS MITM attack. In [SRS+04], [HRA11] reviewed security mechanisms
for BGP, gave detail description of each weakness, and suggested improvements
to the protocol. In [LSC12], [SXW+12], researchers made surveys of IP hijacking
detection solutions, which consequently will prevent BGP MITM attack. Sax-
ena et al.
[SC13] reviewed GSM protocols, pointed out their weaknesses and
strong sides. In [SC14b], researchers collected proposals, which prevent MITM
on GSM/UMTS networks. Hence, there is no paper, which compares attack and
defence approaches across diﬀerent protocols. Our work ﬁlls this gap, it pro-
vides a classiﬁcation of the MITM attacks, and a categorisation of the prevention
mechanisms.
1.4
Problem Deﬁnition
Man-in-the-middle (MITM, also abbreviated to MIM, MiM, MitM or MITMA)
is the kind of attack, when the attacker secretly connects to the communication
channel of endpoints and makes all traﬃc go through it. Besides intercepting
exchanged data, the attacker can modify, change, or replace the traﬃc (this
distinguishes MITM from the eavesdropping).
MITM can be executed in diﬀerent communication channels such as Global Sys-
tem for Mobile Communications (GSM), Universal Telecommunications Stan-
dard (UMTS), Long-Term Evolution (LTE), Bluetooth, Near Field Communica-
tion (NFC), and Wi-Fi. The attack targets not only the actual data that ﬂows
between endpoints, but also the conﬁdentiality and integrity of the data itself
[PKB10]. MITM aims to compromise [CAP], [Gre05]:
• Conﬁdentiality – by eavesdropping on the communication.
• Integrity – by intercepting the communication and modifying messages.
• Availability – by intercepting and destroying messages or modifying mes-
sages to cause one of the parties to end communication.
There are two ways of MITM execution: passive and active [Cia09]. In the passive
attack, the attacker captures the data that is being transmitted, records it, and
then sends it to the original recipient without his presence being detected. In the
==PAGE:17==
1.4 Problem Deﬁnition
5
active attack, the contents are intercepted and altered before they are sent to the
recipient.
On Blackhat Conference Ornaghi et al. [OV03] proposed one of ways to classify
MITM, based on the actual location of the attacker (from where it will execute
the attack). We updated their categorisation based on our research:
• Local area network1 2: ARP/DNS spooﬁng-based MITM.
• From local to remote (through a gateway)3 4: ARP/DNS/DHCP/IP
spooﬁng-based MITM.
• Remote5: DNS spooﬁng-based MITM, BGP MITM.
Further in the thesis we will use another categorisation - based on impersonation
techniques, or in other words, how the attacker invisibly gets in between of two
victims. Such classiﬁcation groups MITM attacks in a way that shows weaknesses
across protocols, or used schemes.
Thus, it simpliﬁes the process of creating
prevention mechanisms, or applying them against similar attacks. MITM may
be divided into:
• Spooﬁng-based MITM is an attack in which the attacker intercepts a le-
gitimate communication between two hosts by the means of spooﬁng attack,
and controls transferred data, while hosts are not aware of a middle man
existence. In some cases (DNS spooﬁng), attacker spoofs devices, which
are between victims, in other (ARP spooﬁng) it spoofs directly victims’
devices.
• SSL/TLS MITM is a form of active network interception, where the
attacker inserts itself into the communication channel between the victim
client and the server. The attacker establishes two separate SSL connections
with the client and the server, and relays messages between them, in a way
such that both the client and the server are unaware of the middleman.
This setup enables the attacker to record all messages on the wire, and
even selectively modify the transmitted data.
1STP mangling is not real MITM, since the attacker is able to receive only unmanaged traﬃc
[OV03].
2Port stealing was considered as a part of the ARP spooﬁng attack.
3ICMP redirection and IRDP spooﬁng were considered as ICMP spooﬁng, which in its turn
is a part of IP spooﬁng attack.
4Route mangling was considered as a DNS spooﬁng.
5Traﬃc tunnelling and route mangling were considered as a DNS spooﬁng and IP hijacking.
==PAGE:18==
6
Introduction
• BGP MITM is an attack, which is based on BGP routing hijacking, but
where attacker makes stolen traﬃc to be delivered to the destination. Thus,
traﬃc goes through attacker’s autonomous station (AS), where it can be
manipulated.
• FBS-based MITM is the attack, where third party forces victim to con-
nect to the fake BTS (in other words executes FBS attack), and then using
this station attacker manipulates victims traﬃc.
In Table 1.1, we list MITM attacks depending on the nature of communication
channel on which they are executed.
MITM Attacks
Application
DHCP/DNS spooﬁng-based MITM,
BGP MITM
Presentation
SSL/TLS MITM
OSI Layer
Transport
IP spooﬁng-based MITM
Network
Data Link
ARP spooﬁng-based MITM
Cellular networks
GSM
FBS-based MITM
GSM/UTMS
Table 1.1: MITM attack on diﬀerent layers of OSI model and types of cellular
networks.
1.4.1
An eﬀective example
In order to better understand the attack, let us consider the following example
(see Figure 1.1): a network consists of Alice, Bob and Eve (attacker). Suppose,
that Eve has control over communication channel, then attack is performed in
next way:
1. Alice asks Bob for his public key. However, Eve intercepts the message.
2. Eve sends forged message to Alice and claims that she is Bob, and instead
of Bob’s public key she includes hers.
3. Eve sends the message to Bob with hers public key and asks him for his
public key, claiming that she is Alice.
==PAGE:19==
1.5 Thesis structure
7
4. Alice believes that this is Bob’s key, encrypts her message using it, and
sends it to Bob. However, Eve prevents further delivery.
5. Bob sends his public key to Alice, but Eve intercepts it.
6. Eve deciphers Alice’s message using hers private key. Now she can make
modiﬁcations to the message. Next, Eve enciphers new message using the
Bob’s public key, and send it to him.
Figure 1.1: MITM attack.
As a result, Eve has convinced both Alice and Bob that they use secure channel,
but in reality she has access to all encrypted messages. Moreover, if Eve will lose
control over the channel Bob and Alice can not communicate further, because
they do not have Eve’s private key, they are required to reestablish keys.
1.5
Thesis structure
The thesis structure consists of next chapters:
Chapter 1 introduces the background of the research and gives the problem
deﬁnition.
Chapter 2 describes spooﬁng attack and its connection to the MITM, overviews
ARP, DNS, DHCP, and IP spooﬁng-based MITM, and provides algorithms of
==PAGE:20==
8
Introduction
their execution. Based on our categorisation, chapter lists prevention mechanisms
against ARP, DNS, DHCP, and IP spooﬁng.
Chapter 3 gives a brief introduction of the SSL/TLS protocol, describes SSL/TLS
MITM attack, overviews prevention mechanisms against SSL/TLS MITM.
Chapter 4 overviews the BGP protocol and the IP hijacking attack, describes
algorithm of the BGP MITM execution, lists prevention mechanisms against BGP
MITM attack.
Chapter 5 gives a brief description of the FBS attack and its connection to the
MITM attack, overviews GSM and UMTS networks, introduces FBS spooﬁng-
based MITM, lists prevention mechanisms against FBS spooﬁng-based MITM.
Chapter 6 draws the conclusions over the MITM attack and proposed solutions,
gives a brief insight on the future researches.
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 2
Spooﬁng-based MITM
attack
This chapter describes spooﬁng attack and its connection to the MITM. Then
it overviews ARP, DNS, DHCP, and IP spooﬁng-based MITM, and provides al-
gorithms of their execution. Finally, based on our categorisation, chapter lists
prevention mechanisms against ARP, DNS, DHCP, and IP spooﬁng, which will
also prevent MITM attacks.
Spooﬁng attack is an impersonation of a device or a user in the network by a
malicious party. It is usually done to steal data, spread malware, bypass access
controls, or launch attacks against network hosts.
Spooﬁng attack is used as
an opening for other attacks, such as DoS, MITM, or session hijacking attacks
[RN05]. There are several types of spooﬁng attack that malicious parties use:
ARP spooﬁng, DNS spooﬁng, DHCP spooﬁng, IP spooﬁng. The main reason for
spooﬁng attack existence is a lack of mechanisms for authentication of source and
destination messages in protocols. On the other hand, more encryption makes
message delays to grow, as a consequence, a lot of protocols from TCP/IP stack
do not use this precaution and are vulnerable.
Some papers [CG03], [RN05], [GT05], [YKMC06], [AB07], [TEH07], [LEM07],
==PAGE:22==
10
Spooﬁng-based MITM attack
[OMCA09], [HRR+10], [CW10], [CYMK11], [XXF11] describe spooﬁng as a ﬁrst
step or one of steps for execution of MITM attack.
Other papers [TPBH],
[AQ13], [Phi07], [WYWC11] name spooﬁng as an equivalent of MITM. How-
ever, in [HT09], [NKK10], [KP11], [BHS+11], [YML+12], [NJK+12], [NDP13]
authors deﬁne spooﬁng-based MITM attack as a spooﬁng attack, which leads to
the MITM attack. Further in this thesis we stick with the last naming.
Spooﬁng-based MITM is an attack in which the attacker intercepts a legitimate
communication between two hosts by the means of a spooﬁng attack, and controls
transferred data, while hosts are not aware of a middle man existence.
In our work, we review ARP, DNS, DHCP, and IP spooﬁng, where each of them
leads to the spooﬁng-based MITM. In further sections, we go into details of each
attack, and describe prevention mechanism against them.
2.1
ARP spooﬁng-based MITM
Network devices use ARP to map network addresses to media access control
(MAC) addresses. This protocol is crucial in LAN communications, because each
frame that leaves a host must contain a destination MAC address [OMCA09].
ARP is a trusted protocol and was not designed to cope with a malicious hosts
[FR12].
The ARP spooﬁng attack is used to modify the cached <IP, MAC> pairings in
the local ARP cache table. An attacker can associate a malicious host’s MAC
address with IP of a target host by modifying its ARP cache to add/update an
entry with an <IP, MAC> mapping. Consequently, the attacker can launch DoS
attack, perform MITM attack and gain access to conﬁdential information [AB07].
ARP spooﬁng attack may be divided into two types [SY]: cheating the gateway,
and cheating the host of the internal network.
When a host requires to communicate with another host on the same network,
whose MAC address is unknown, it broadcasts an ARP request to all hosts con-
nected by the same network. Only the host with the same IP is expected to
issue a reply, which includes its MAC address. When ARP cache is managed in
dynamic mode, cache entries can be easily fabricated by forged ARP messages,
since proper authentication mechanism is missing [OKHC12]. At the same time,
the source machine saves the IP to MAC entry in its local cache, so the next time
communication can be speed up, by avoiding the broadcasts.
==PAGE:23==
2.2 ARP spooﬁng prevention mechanisms
11
ARP is a stateless protocol and has a lack of security in caching system, number
of papers [HT09], [YML+12], [CYMK11], [CW10], [TPBH], [KVT13] showed in
practice how to use those weaknesses for achieving MITM attack. Suppose, we
have the next network (see Figure 2.1): the attacker Eve: IP = 10.0.0.4, MAC =
EE:EE:EE:EE:EE:EE; user Alice: IP = 10.0.0.2, MAC = AA:AA:AA:AA:AA:AA;
Bob: IP = 10.0.0.3, MAC = BB:BB:BB:BB:BB:BB. The next steps are necessary
to complete ARP spooﬁng-based MITM attack:
1. Eve sends an ARP reply message to Alice, which says that IP: 10.0.0.3
has MAC address: EE:EE:EE:EE:EE:EE. This message will update Alice’s
ARP table.
2. Eve also sends an ARP reply message to Bob, which says that IP: 10.0.0.2
has MAC address: EE:EE:EE:EE:EE:EE. This message will update Bob’s
ARP table.
3. When Alice wants to send a message to Bob, it will go to Eve’s MAC
address EE:EE:EE:EE:EE:EE, instead of Bob’s BB:BB:BB:BB:BB:BB.
4. When Bob wants to sends a message to Alice, it will also go to Eve.
2.2
ARP spooﬁng prevention mechanisms
Abad et al. [AB07] done one of the most signiﬁcant ARP security surveys. They
analysed the schemes for detecting and preventing ARP spooﬁng attacks, and
speciﬁed requirements for an ideal solution. In [OKHC12], authors showed new
defence approach, and made comparison of previously proposed methods. Most
of schemes may be classiﬁed from two perspectives: way of implementation (cryp-
tographic, voting-based, hardware), and location of solution (server-based, and
host-based). In Table 2.1, we combined two categorisations and showed com-
parison of solutions. In next sections we update previous researches, propose
our classiﬁcation, and include unmentioned methods, focusing on schemes that
prevent ARP from MITM attacks.
2.2.1
Detection of ARP spooﬁng
Carnut et al.
[CG03] proposed one of the ﬁrst detection mechanism.
They
presented an architecture based on switched networks, which does not require
==PAGE:24==
12
Spooﬁng-based MITM attack
Figure 2.1: ARP spooﬁng-based MITM attack.
special software to be installed on the network hosts. Instead, it delegates the
task of detection to one or more detection station. Their experiments showed that
the architecture detects ARP attacks properly, without generating false positives
(alarms that turn out to be not a part of attacks). However, attackers could hide
behind volume traﬃc to remain undetected for reasonably long periods. Also,
authors have not made their software widely available.
ARP-Guard [ARPa] and ARPDefender system [arpb] are commercial products
that use a sensor-based architecture to detect and localise several internal network
attacks, including ARP spooﬁng attack. Solutions analyse the information from
the LAN and Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP) sensors, and in
case of the attack the management systems alert administrators.
Arpwatch [G+] is an open source computer software program that helps to mon-
==PAGE:25==
2.2 ARP spooﬁng prevention mechanisms
13
itor Ethernet traﬃc activity on the network and maintains a database of Ether-
net/IP address pairings. When suspicious <IP, MAC> pairings change occurs
the network administrator receives alert. This tool is very lightweight and widely
available, but it depends on the network administrators’ ability to diﬀerentiate
non-malicious events and ARP spooﬁng attacks, and to take appropriate mea-
sures when the attack occurs. Hou et al. [HJT10] proposed similar approach,
where they expanded the original ARP spooﬁng plugins in network Intrusion
Detection System (IDS) Snort by adding an ARP inspection module.
Belenguer et al. [BC07] introduced low-cost embedded IDS, which is able to de-
tect and prevent ARP spooﬁng attacks automatically and eﬃciently, but requires
to be plugged into a switch or a hub. Device has two ﬁrmware variants that oﬀer
diﬀerent functionality: reactive and proactive. In reactive mode the IDS scans
all the packets ﬂowing through the network. In proactive the IDS periodically
refreshes the IP to MAC mappings of all active hosts to repair them.
Also,
authors pointed out that IDSs (like ARP-Guard [ARPa], ARPDefender system
[arpb], Arpwatch [G+], Snort [HJT10]) tend to generate a great amount of false
positives. Moreover, IDSs’ ability to detect ARP spooﬁng is limited [SF03], as
they may not be able to detect all of the attack forms.
Firstly, in [RN05] and later in [HRR+10] Ramachandran et al. proposed a scheme
for detecting ARP spooﬁng through the mismatch of the ARP request/response
packet and the <IP, MAC> pairs of TCP SYN. When no ARP attacks exist, the
destination MAC and IP pairs in the TCP SYN packet is the same as reported in
ARP message. Checking this rule gives clear vision if there are any ARP spooﬁng
attacks. However, this approach would create a heavy traﬃc on the LAN if ARP
DoS attacks are continuously generated to probe the network.
Carnut et al. [CG03] suggested another method, which delegates the detection of
ARP spooﬁng to specialised detection/test stations. Later, Trabelsi et al. [TS06]
improved their approach. In both cases detection works in two phases: detection
of hosts with enabled IP packet routing and detection of ARP cache poisoning
attack. In ﬁrst phase, test station generates trap ICMP echo request packets. If
hosts send back the received trap ICMP packets, then it has enabled IP packet
routing, and considered suspicious. In second phase, test host analyses traﬃc
generated by a suspicious host to identify whether or not it has performed ARP
spooﬁng against target hosts in the network.
Kalajdzic and Patel [KP11] proposed system, where instead of relying on the
test host, each host performs detection by itself. They proposed two methods for
detection ARP spooﬁng: reverse ARP poisoning with active IP probing and IP
==PAGE:26==
14
Spooﬁng-based MITM attack
probing with CAM table poisoning. However, methods are week against certain
MITM attacks, and accuracy of detection depends on the size of probing.
In [BRR+11], authors suggested another method, which checks the integrity and
authenticity of ARP replies using a combination of digital signatures and one time
passwords based on hash chains. The proposed IDS runs on hosts and ensures the
genuineness of the <IP, MAC> pairing by an active veriﬁcation mechanism. The
IDS sends veriﬁcation messages to probe requests upon receiving ARP requests
and ARP replies. Veriﬁcation messages includes digital signatures, which help to
identify ARP origin.
The most recently, Song et al. [SLJ+14] introduced detection scheme for ARP
spooﬁng attack by the means of a routing trace, named DS-ARP. The detection
module periodically keeps the ARP cache table under surveillance and checks
changed items. Once a change in the ARP cache table is identiﬁed, the DS-ARP
determines whether an ARP spooﬁng attack has taken place through a routing
trace. If the attack occurred then the protection module converts the <IP, MAC>
pairs’ information back to the valid states. It prevents ARP spooﬁng attacks by
changing the link type from a dynamic state to a static state.
2.2.2
Cryptographic solutions
This category covers solutions which use cryptography as a main countermea-
sure against ARP spooﬁng attack. Figure 2.2 shows evolution of cryptographic
approaches.
Figure 2.2: Cryptographic protocols evolution.
S-ARP [BOR03] is a backward compatible extension to ARP that relies on public-
key cryptography to authenticate ARP replies. All hosts create public and private
key pairs during the initial contact of the network and send them with signed
==PAGE:27==
2.2 ARP spooﬁng prevention mechanisms
15
certiﬁcates to the Authoritative Key Distributor (AKD). Using public-key cryp-
tography anyone can identify whether the transmitted request is from a valid
user. Thus, the ARP spooﬁng attack can be prevented.
Gouda et al. [GH03] proposed another approach that resolves the security prob-
lems of MAC and IP pairs within the Ethernet. The scheme consists of a security
server, which uses two protocols Invite-accept and Request-reply to connect all
hosts inside the network. Each host checks the IP and MAC addresses from the
security server, thereby enhancing security. However, the solution is not practical,
as it requires to chang the ARP protocol implementation of every host. Another
disadvantage is that the secure server represents a Single Point Of Failure (SPOF)
in the network, and becomes an obvious target for DoS attacks.
In [GT05], authors presented enhanced S-ARP with lower computational cost.
The scheme is based on the combination of digital signatures, one time passwords,
and hash chains. To avoid additional computations solution allows to use same
digital signature several times over multiple ARP replies, during a predeﬁned
time period. To authenticate client to the untrusted server solution uses Lamport
Hashes [Lam81] (one time password system), which enchases security signiﬁcantly
in comparison to S-ARP. Although, since proposal still uses AKD it has SPOF
weakness.
Lootah et al. [LEM07] introduced another method to reduce the computational
cost of S-ARP by employing the concept of tickets (centrally generated <IP,
MAC> address mapping attestation). This approach uses a local ticket agent
(LTA), and a key management server (KMS) to issue a public key to obtain
the <IP, MAC> pair from the ticket. This approach is backward compatible
with existing ARP, but it is susceptible to replay attacks and adds performance
overhead.
Another solution is CLL [JLSM08], a layer 2/3 security extension for LANs,
which provides authentication and conﬁdentiality to the hosts in the LAN by
safeguarding all layer 2 traﬃc including ARP and DHCP handshakes. CLL em-
ploys public key cryptography to identify all hosts based on their IP/MAC address
pairs. Hosts authenticate each other, exchange cryptographic parameters, and
negotiate symmetric session keys to protect their following unicast packets with a
message authentication code and an optional cipher. Broadcast packets are also
secured by CLL using digital signatures.
In [LL11], researchers presented new scheme named P-ARP. Proposal is based on
ARP authentication, but with few changes. P-ARP uses in addition magic num-
==PAGE:28==
16
Spooﬁng-based MITM attack
ber, nonce, and hash function HMAC, which produces the authentication data.
In order to hide the target IP address in the APR request message, hash func-
tion creates nonce, and HMAC values. The defect is the ineﬀectiveness against
ARP DoS attacks, and solution slows down the overall network throughput to an
unacceptable level in practice.
2.2.3
Voting-based
Voting-based solutions apply voting algorithms to make decisions which actions
to execute. Figure 2.3 shows evolution of voting-based protocols.
Figure 2.3: Voting-based protocols evolution.
Nam et al. [NKK10] proposed MR-ARP, which is a ﬁrst voting-based ARP spoof-
ing resistant protocol. If an ARP request or reply message arrives and declares
a new MAC address for an IP address, MR-ARP queries the corresponding ma-
chine (machine with old MAC address), and checks if that IP address is still
used by that machine (this process is based on Antidote’s [Tet] method). In case
when the MR-ARP machine receives the ARP request or reply declaring an <IP,
MAC> mapping for a new IP address, it requests neighbour machines to vote
for the new IP address to make the correct decision for the corresponding MAC
address. For this mechanism, the voting can be fair only when the voting traﬃc
rates of the responding machines are almost the same. This condition can be
satisﬁed in the Ethernet, but may not be valid in the 802.11 network due to the
traﬃc rate adaptation based on the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR).
Later in [NJK+12], researchers tried to overcome the limitation of MR-ARP
by introduction of EMR-ARP. The new protocol improves the voting proce-
dure through the incorporation of computational puzzles, besides authors also
achieved:
• mitigation of ARP spooﬁng attacks in wired or wireless LAN;
• backward compatibility with existing ARP;
• minimal infrastructure upgrade cost;
==PAGE:29==
2.2 ARP spooﬁng prevention mechanisms
17
• incremental deployability;
• no need of manual conﬁguration for newly joining nodes.
On the other hand, EMR-ARP requires too much computational time from de-
vices. The condition is that the computation power of the neighbour machines
may diﬀer no more than a factor of 2. In the year of publication, this assumption
was not valid among the popular tablets, not even mobile phones, thus proposal
was inapplicable.
The year after researchers presented GMR-ARP [NDP13] protocol with next
improvements:
• increased the fairness of voting compared to MR-ARP, due to dropping too
early reply packets and determining voting related parameters analytically;
• decreased voting traﬃc overhead, which is lover than in previous voting
protocols (MR-ARP, EMR-ARP);
• overcome the condition of the computational power, by avoiding the com-
putational puzzle;
• in contrast to MR-ARP, GMR-ARP can protect upgraded machines when
the wired nodes and wireless nodes coexist in the same subnet.
However, this approach would create additional overhead in wireless mesh net-
works, especially in large-scale, since the voting requests are issued in broadcast
[PA14].
2.2.4
Hardware
Some switches implemented a feature called Dynamic ARP Inspection (DAI) to
provide additional security. DAI safeguards the network from many commonly
known ARP spooﬁng-based MITM attacks [Bha].
It ensures only valid ARP
requests and responses are forwarded. The Ethernet switch monitors the validity
of the received ARP packet based on the trusted <IP, MAC> mapping database.
However, this database is either manually managed or dynamically managed
through DHCP snooping (see Section 2.6).
Also, this approach may not be
eﬀective, if the ARP spooﬁng occurs among the wireless nodes connected via the
same access point (AP) [Cat].
==PAGE:30==
18
Spooﬁng-based MITM attack
2.2.5
Server-based
One of the server-based approaches is Antidote [Tet]. It is a non-cryptographic
solution, which attempts to prevent ARP spooﬁng by contacting and giving a
higher priority to the previous owner of a given IP address in the case of MAC
conﬂicts. However, Antidote cannot prevent spooﬁng for a new IP address if a
malicious ARP reply arrives ﬁrst [BOR03].
Kwon et al. [KAC04] proposed similar to [GH03] approach. They suggested to use
an agent, which retrieves genuine <IP, MAC> pairs from a host and forwards
them to the manager to construct reliable <IP, MAC> mappings.
Then the
manager implements monitoring based on the mappings and licensed hosts.
Another approach shown in [DL05] requires installation of three additional servers
in the network: a gateway protection, client protection, and server protection.
Gateway protection creates vaccines for valid <IP, MAC> mappings.
These
vaccines are passed to the network endpoints using client protection. The server
protection plays role of monitor, and checks for any active ARP spooﬁng. In case
when it founds the attack, the client protection provides vaccines to the users
in the network. The drawback of the proposal besides the maintenance of three
additional machines is that it can not work with wireless networks.
In [OMCA09], authors proposed method that can be used to prevent ARP spoof-
ing attacks in small oﬃce LANs. The scheme consists of a server and a switch
with the OpenWrt ﬁrmware installed. The server listens to ARP requests in the
network and responds with an <IP, MAC> mapping from the ARP cache, while
switch blocks all ARP messages. However, Ortegathey et al. have not described
how the server collects the correct <IP, MAC> mappings, so that it may generate
correct replies to the incoming ARP requests.
2.2.6
Host-based
Tripunitara et al. [TD99] proposed a middleware host-based approach of asyn-
chronous detection and prevention of ARP spooﬁng attacks. The solution de-
pends on duplicates in order to detect the attacks.
Thus, if host is already
spoofed, or under DoS attack, system will not secure it. Moreover, the solution
is not practical, as it requires Streams based protocol stack [Su05] and changes
on all the hosts in the network.
==PAGE:31==
2.2 ARP spooﬁng prevention mechanisms
19
Anticap [ant] is a kernel patch for various UNIX-based operating systems that
prevents ARP spooﬁng attacks. The solution rejects ARP updates, which contain
a MAC address diﬀerent from the current table entry for that IP address. Still
Anticap does not work in dynamic DHCP-enabled networks and is available for
a limited number of operating systems.
Trabelsi et al. [TEH07] introduced a stateful ARP cache management mecha-
nism based on a fuzzy logic. The stateful ARP cache, unlike existing and stateless
ARP cache, does not update ARP cache entries upon receiving ARP requests. In-
stead, fuzzy logic controller aggregates various host properties to detect malicious
hosts. However, it is quite hard to implement the scheme, since the complexity
of decision making, which host is important and can be trusted.
In [Phi07], authors showed how to prevent ARP spooﬁng in wireless LAN by
implementing the defence mechanism in the AP. The basic idea is as follows: the
AP constructs the list of correct <IP, MAC> address mappings by monitoring
DHCP ACK messages or referring to the DHCP leases ﬁle. Then AP blocks all
ARP packets with a false mappings based on the constructed list. The drawbacks
include that it does not support hosts that have static IP addresses, and it was
designed to work only with Linksys routers.
Pansa and Chomsiri [PC08] proposed revision of the DHCP deﬁnition.
They
suggested to include authentication of network devices and inclusion of mapping
information between IP and MAC addresses. Although, ﬂawless in concept, it
would cause serious compatibility problems, since DHCP’s legacy.
In [XZL10], researchers presented a scheme that captures and ﬁlters ARP packets
using the WinPcap library. When ARP response packet is received and the cache
requires the update, it ﬁrstly compared against the correct <IP, MAC> address
pairs. In case when they diﬀer, network administrator will get warning about
spooﬁng attack, and update will not occur.
Agent-based Secure ARP cache management (ASA) [OKHC12] is host-based,
cryptographic approach, which essentially blocks the unauthenticated exchange
of ARP requests and replies among hosts. ASA ﬁlter blocks all of ARP messages
inside the network, but instead uses datagram protocol (UDP). Hosts send UDP
packets, which contain <IP, MAC> pairs encrypted by a symmetric key, then
local ASA agents update the ARP cache table. The proposed technique poses
no compatibility problems, and solves ARP spooﬁng weaknesses. Also, authors
pointed out that authentication of the UDP packet exchange will make system
more secure.
==PAGE:32==
20
Spooﬁng-based MITM attack
2.3
DNS spooﬁng-based MITM
DNS is a hierarchical naming system for the Internet based on an underlying
client-server architecture [ABK+10]. The main function of a DNS server is to
perform url-resolution (a process of translating a url or a domain name). For in-
stance, portalen.dtu.dk into a physical IP address, such as 130.225.90.135. DNS
servers and domain names are organised hierarchically in terms of top-level do-
mains and subordinate, lower-level domains, respectively dk, dtu, portalen in our
example.
One of the most prominent and dangerous attacks against DNS is DNS spooﬁng
[SS10], which is executed via cache poisoning (DNS spooﬁng quite often named as
DNS poisoning). DNS service uses cache system for improving performance, but
it has various weak sides. DNS spooﬁng results in storage by DNS resolver the
invalid or malicious mappings between symbolic names and IP addresses. DNS
spooﬁng may be categorised in three diﬀerent execution ways [Ste03], [JSLS07]:
1. hijacking or sniﬃng of packets in the process of query response (between
the recursive DNS and authoritative DNS);
2. cache poisoning through the birthday attack [Cho14];
3. hacking on authorised DNS.
Further in this section we discus only ﬁrst category of the DNS spooﬁng attack.
To execute DNS spooﬁng attackers need to override local DNS’s routing entries
with fraud data, which will lead victim to use rogue server. DNS renew its cache
depending on TTL of entries, thus from time-to-time it asks other DNSs for
updates. Attacker may use this for the execution of the DNS spooﬁng attack.
There are two methods of poisoning the cache:
• insert rogue DNS server in the network, which will produce fraud data
(may lead to spreading it not only to target DNS, but further to neighbour
DNSs);
• send fake DNS answer right before real DNS will send valid one (by default
DNS accepts ﬁrst answer, and discards further automatically [NUI+12]).
==PAGE:33==
2.3 DNS spooﬁng-based MITM
21
Let us consider the next example (based on Kaminsky method [Kam08]): we
have network of two name servers, attacker Eve, and victim Alice (see Figure
2.4). Also, let us suppose that local DNS do not have the address query, which is
asked for, and the authoritative name server (ANS) is deployed by the attacker.
Then to execute DNS spooﬁng Eve should perform the next steps:
1. Eve generates a query for the DNS server to know the IP of a speciﬁc
website (dtu.dk).
2. Local DNS server do not have the address, then query is forwarded to the
ANS to resolve it.
3. The ANS reply with fake information (IP of dtu.dk is 204.2.22.23), option-
ally adding few more ﬁelds. Local DNS saves data into cache for the time
TTL.
4. Alice generates a query to ﬁnd the IP address of the dtu.dk.
5. Compromised DNS respond with 204.2.22.23, and Alice will be directed to
attacker’s server.
Figure 2.4: DNS spooﬁng attack.
At this point Eve has access only on one endpoint, which uses her rogue server.
To extend attack to DNS spooﬁng-based MITM, the attacker should implement
on server phishing website or service, which will communicate with the original
one.
Our example shows scheme with insertion of rogue DNS in the network, but let
say that Eve is not owner of the ANS. Then she can send spoofed message to
local DNS right after it requests for data from the ANS. Thus, local DNS will
==PAGE:34==
22
Spooﬁng-based MITM attack
overwrite caches and will block answer from valid ANS, as a protection from
replay attack.
2.4
DNS spooﬁng prevention mechanisms
Herzberg et al. [HS12a] performed a critical study of the prominent defence mech-
anisms against DNS spooﬁng, and proposed taxonomy of them. They divided
protection methods into two groups: against spooﬁng and against MITM. Based
on their study and categorisation in the following sections we provide updates to
the current research. Section 2.4.1 shows overview of the DNS forgery detection,
Section 2.4.2 describes entropy increasing mechanisms, and Section 2.4.3 presents
cryptographic solutions. Recently, Bai et al. [BHS+11] suggested a new way of
defence, which we propose to consider as a new category, see Section 2.4.4.
2.4.1
Detection of DNS spooﬁng
Antonakakis et al. proposed a real-time solution Anax [ADL+10] that uses ma-
chine learning techniques.
Testing results showed very low false positive rate
(0.6% of all new resource records), and a high detection rate (91.9%). Cache Poi-
soning Detection System (CPDS) [JSLS07] is another real-time scheme, which
has lower dependency, higher security, and applicability in comparison to Anax.
Also as separate subcategory we can consider next solutions, which implement the
collaborative peer-to-peer (P2P) approach. According to which the authenticity
of a DNS response is validated by distributing the DNS requests across hosts
in the network, or by consulting a set of trusted peers, and then taking the
majority to give an answer. The basic ideas behind these methods are similar to
ARP voting-based protocols (see Section 2.1).
Park et al.
presented one of the ﬁrst solutions a CoDNS [PPPW04].
Later
in [PP06], researchers showed method based on it, but with improved security.
However, Kaminsky introduced new type of DNS cache poisoning [Kam08], and
demonstrated that both proposals are not strong enough. In [SCCL09], authors
presented DepenDNS protocol, but Alfardan et al.
[AP11] discovered that it
does not protect against the DNS spooﬁng attack.
Another solution is DoX
[YKMC06], where cache updating is based on the trust between resolvers.
==PAGE:35==
2.4 DNS spooﬁng prevention mechanisms
23
2.4.2
Entropy increasing mechanisms
Entropy increasing mechanisms are the solutions, which add more randomness to
DNS packets, in order to entangle the injection of invalid DNS response. During
the last years researchers have published a numerous proposals, the most notably:
source port randomisation (SPR) [Ber], source/destination IP address randomisa-
tion (IPR), DNS 0x20 encoding [DAV+08], WSEC-DNS [PALL09], DNS-cookies
[EA14]. Nevertheless, production of signiﬁcant extra entropy to DNS requests
does not protect from the DNS spooﬁng, the attacker may still be able to poison
high value domain names [HS12b]. Therefore, exists the need in alternative or
additional technique of defence.
2.4.3
Cryptographic solutions
DNS cryptographic solutions are similar to previously described ARP crypto-
graphic solutions (see Section 2.2.2), they also use cryptography as a main coun-
termeasure against spooﬁng attack.
TSIG [VGEW00] is a cryptographic solution that involves authentication based
on shared secret keys installed at both endpoints (requester and server), and one
way hashing. SIG(0) [E+00] is another proposal that uses public key authen-
tication, where the public keys are stored in DNS as KEY Resource Records
(RRs), and a private key is stored at the signer. SIG(0) in comparison to TSIG
involves relatively expensive asymmetric operations, while TSIG uses keyed hash
authentication codes, which are relatively inexpensive to compute.
Recently,
Shrivastava et al. [SS14] published more detailed comparison of symmetric key
usage for DNS.
Arends et al. presented Domain Name System Security Extensions (DNSSEC)
[AAL+05], which addresses the cache poisoning vulnerability in DNS. It provides
data integrity and origin authenticity via cryptographic digital signatures over
DNS resource records [SW14]. All messages from DNSSEC servers are digitally
signed by public keys. By checking the signature, a DNSSEC resolver is able to
validate if the information originated from a legitimate server, and if it identical
to the data on the authoritative DNS server [AM07]. However, both servers and
resolvers must use the DNSSEC protocol to maintain data origin authenticity,
and integrity. Also, DNSSEC does not provide protection from buﬀer overruns,
DoS attacks, nor provide conﬁdentiality [KHM09]. Moreover, DNSSEC can not
be actually deployed in a short period of time [XXF11].
==PAGE:36==
24
Spooﬁng-based MITM attack
Bernstein proposed DNSCurve [DNS] as an alternative to DNSSEC. The solution
uses high-speed elliptic curve cryptography, and simpliﬁes the key management
problem that aﬀected DNSSEC. DNSCurve implements per-packet encryption
for all DNS queries, while DNSSEC does not. Moreover, DNSCurve’s algorithm
for public-key encryption is much faster and has smaller keys than the RSA
algorithm used in DNSSEC. In [AKKG12], researchers give detailed comparison
of two methods.
Sun et al. [SCCL09] proposed another solution S-DNS that is based on Identity-
Based Encryption (IBE) [BF01] key management scheme. S-DNS is a simple
security solution with low computation and communication overheads. It targets
the diﬀerent DNS query interaction models from iterative, recursive, and caching
schemes. The method decreases the success probability of DNS spooﬁng, and
provides a backward compatibility.
In [SCCL09], authors made comparison among other DNS spooﬁng solutions,
from which we can make conclusion that cryptographic solutions have fast rate
of spooﬁng discovery, but on the other hand create encryption overhead.
2.4.4
Artiﬁcial neural network solution
Recently, Bai et al. [BHS+11] described an Artiﬁcial Neural Networks (ANN)
defence against DNS spooﬁng attacks. Researchers managed to construct a 3-
layered ANN: input, hide, output. The input consists of three parameters: AN-
SWER, AUTH, ADD, which present: number of authority RRs, answer RRs, and
additional information. The network output layer corresponds to 10 possible cat-
egories, which predict the reliability of packets from the least reliable (0) to the
most reliable (10). Packets below category 5 are considered forged, and will be
discarded, while the others are considered right and are accepted. After training,
the neutral network generates weights for these DNS response packet ﬁelds. Af-
ter testing conﬁgurations the performance testing showed excellent results. The
average identifying ratio is 98% for both valid and forged packets.
2.5
DHCP spooﬁng-based MITM
DHCP is the protocol that provides network conﬁguration parameters to a newly
connected hosts. Parameters include IP address, subnet mask, default gateway,
==PAGE:37==
2.5 DHCP spooﬁng-based MITM
25
DNS server, and leased time. DHCP provides a client/server structure in which
4 DHCP packets exchanged between DHCP server and hosts to assign above
parameters automatically.
DHCP plays an important part in the network management. However, it was
not designed with security perspective, as a result, there are several attacks on
it. DHCP does not have authentication of origins of DHCP messages. On one
hand, DHCP clients can not guarantee that they are connected to a trusted
DHCP server. On the other hand, DHCP server is not able to ensure that it
communicates with a legitimate client. Moreover, each DHCP message is trans-
mitted in cleartext [DKH11]. Figure 2.5 shows classiﬁcation of DHCP spooﬁng
[JLSM08].
Figure 2.5: DHCP spooﬁng classiﬁcation.
Execution of DHCP spooﬁng-based MITM is possible via the rogue DHCP server.
The attacker tries to reply to a DHCP request faster than the legit DHCP server
of the local network.
Let us consider following example: network consists of
Victim host, Legitimate DHCP Server and Rogue DHCP Server (see Figure 2.6).
Next, attacker requires to execute next steps:
1. Client broadcasts DHCP Discovery.
2. Rogue Server sends DHCP Oﬀer (Unicast).
3. Client broadcasts DHCP Request.
4. Rogue Server sends DHCP ACK (Unicast).
As addition, attacker may run DoS attack on Legitimate DHCP Server to ensure
that Victim host will not get answer from it. Another option is to run DHCP
starvation attack, the case when attacker exhausts the allocated pool of IP ad-
dresses oﬀered by the DHCP server, so that new host machines fail to obtain IP
addresses [MSI12].
==PAGE:38==
26
Spooﬁng-based MITM attack
Figure 2.6: Rough DHCP server attack.
At this point attacker may provide three misconﬁgurations for the host [Bha07]:
1. Wrong Default Gateway,
2. wrong DNS server,
3. wrong IP Address.
First and second misconﬁgurations lead to the MITM, while third results into
DoS attack. In ﬁrst case, attacker is the gateway, where it can modify traﬃc
that goes through. In second case, attacker is a DNS server, where it can route
victims to malware websites (see Section 2.3).
2.6
DHCP spooﬁng prevention mechanisms
Most recently, Dinu et al. [DT14] surveyed solutions that aim to make DHCP
more secure, and presented their own approach. Based on their work we would
like to propose our classiﬁcation of DHCP spooﬁng prevention methods, see Ta-
ble 2.2. All presented solutions are cryptographic, we divided them based on the
classes of cryptography and support of legacy. Also there is one more solution,
which may help prevent attacks - DHCP snooping. It is a security feature that
acts like a ﬁrewall between untrusted hosts and trusted DHCP servers [Cat12].
DHCP snooping blocks DHCP responses from ports that do not have DHCP
servers associated with them [ONTN13]. Moreover, DHCP snooping works to-
gether with DAI (see Section 2.2.4).
==PAGE:39==
2.7 IP spooﬁng-based MITM
27
2.7
IP spooﬁng-based MITM
IP is the primary protocol in the Internet, which operates at the network layer
of the OSI model. It has the task of delivering packets from the source host to
the destination host solely based on the IP addresses in the packet headers. IP
deﬁnes packet structures that encapsulate the data to be delivered. It also deﬁnes
addressing methods that used to label the datagram with source and destination
information. IP uses a connectionless model, meaning there is no information
regarding transaction state, which is used to route packets on a network. IP
speciﬁes no method for validating the authenticity of the packet’s source. This
implies that the attacker could forge the source address to be any it desires.
IP spooﬁng-based MITM is an attack, where malicious party intercepts a legit-
imate communication between two friendly parties, controls the ﬂow of commu-
nication, and can eliminate or alter the information sent by one of the original
participants, without the knowledge of either of original endpoints. To achieve
such results, attacker uses sets of IP spooﬁng techniques, which may be classiﬁed
as follows [Tan03]:
• Blind and Non-Blind spooﬁng: usually used for DDOS attacks, but
also work as a data mining phase for IP spooﬁng-based MITM. The dif-
ference between Blind and Non-Blind is that in Non-Blind spooﬁng, the
attacker is in the same subnet as a victim, which opens opportunity to sniﬀ
on sequence and acknowledgement numbers.
Blind spooﬁng requires an
attacker to ﬁrstly send requests to a network, and then be able to analyse
the transmission sequence.
• ICMP spooﬁng. IP uses ICMP to send one-way informational messages
to implement various error-reporting, feedback and testing capabilities.
ICMP has redirect messages, which are typically used to notify routers of a
better route. These messages may be abused for execution of MITM, since
ICMP does not provide authentication mechanisms. The attacker spoofs
ICMP redirect messages to route the victim’s traﬃc through its router,
where it can be eavesdropped and modiﬁed.
• TCP Sequence-Number prediction.
The idea of Sequence-Number
Prediction is to ﬁnd the algorithm of generation sequence numbers (TCP
uses sequence numbers for data acknowledgement, data loss reduction, and
reliability improvement), and then use that knowledge to intercept an ex-
isting session (often referred to as Hijacking an authorised session attack).
==PAGE:40==
28
Spooﬁng-based MITM attack
2.8
IP spooﬁng prevention mechanisms
IPSec and Ingress Filtering are the main mechanisms against IP spooﬁng for
last decade. Ingress Filtering ﬁlter the inbound packets at the border router of
the AS, and generally enabled on the edge devices. It can be deployed using
two techniques: Access Control List (ACL) and Unicast Reverse Path forward-
ing (uRPF). ACL contains set of rules, based on which packets will be ﬁltered
[LBV14]. uRPF reversely uses the forwarding table for ﬁltering. This technique
will work correctly, if forwarding paths are symmetric, but under route asymme-
try uRPF may drop valid packets. Best Current Practices (BCPs) [Fer00] and
[BS04] paper describe in more details Ingress Filtering. Other similar technique
is Egress Filtering, which checks outbound packets.
Yao et al. [YBX13] proposed next classiﬁcation: ﬁltering-on-path (mechanisms
ﬁlter packets before they aggregated at victim network) and end-to-end authen-
tication (mechanisms validate the source address at the other end of communi-
cation). However, in [Pat15], [EL09], researchers divided prevention mechanisms
based on the location: host-based, router-based, and based on both hosts and
routers.
In further sections we stick with the second classiﬁcation.
In Table
2.3, we extend previous comparisons by introduction cryptography category for
solutions, which use encryption or hash functions.
2.8.1
Router-based
Park et al. introduced Distributed Packet Filtering (DPF) [PL01], which ﬁlters
packets based on the binding between preﬁx/ﬂow and interface. Solution checks
if packets have traveled from their source to destination in an unexpected route,
if so they are dropped. Later in [DYC06], authors described Inter-Domain Packet
Filter (IDPF), an extension to the DPF concept. It builds inter-domain ﬁlter-
ing rules based on the valley-free feature of inter-domain routing and the BGP
announcement ﬁltering rules.
Li et al. proposed Source Address Validation Enforcement (SAVE) [LMW+02],
a new protocol for networks, which propagates valid network preﬁxes along the
same paths that data packets will follow. Routers which are on the paths con-
struct ﬁlters by using preﬁxes and paths information. BGP Anti Spooﬁng Ex-
tension (BASE) [LKHP07] is the combination of marking and ﬁltering approach,
which is based on BGP update messages. BASE is similar to SAVE, however
instead of treating the incoming interface, as the incoming direction, each BASE
==PAGE:41==
2.8 IP spooﬁng prevention mechanisms
29
router marks packets with a unique key and uses the key as the incoming direc-
tion.
Spooﬁng Prevention Method (SPM) [BBL05] is a mechanism, which inserts AS
tag into data packet, and validates the bindings between address preﬁx and AS
tag at the destination AS. For each packet that arrives at the destination, routers
verify the key in the packet.
Packet Passport System (Passport) [LLYW08] is an approach based on sym-
metric cryptography and hash algorithms. According to [KSK+15] solution can
not provide protection against spooﬁng, if the origin AS does not deploy it.
Therefore, attackers in non-deploying ASs can spoof any IP address of any other
non-deploying AS.
2.8.2
Host-based
Jin et al. introduced Hope Count Filtering (HCF) [WJS07], which checks the
validation of source preﬁx based on the binding between preﬁx and hop count
value.
The method produces signiﬁcant number of false negatives, since the
forged network and the attacker can be located on the same distance from the
destination. Moreover, HCF can be bypassed by attackers, who modify the initial
TTL value.
2.8.3
Host and router based
Stack Path identiﬁer (Pi) [YPS03] is a reactive scheme, where each router uses
IP identiﬁcation ﬁeld for marking. Such method will guarantee that the packets
travelling along the same path will have same marking. Although, if number of
attacks increases, it is more possible that any given Pi mark will receive some
attack packets, which will cause all valid packets to be dropped.
Accountable Internet Protocol (AIP) [ABF+08] is a cryptographic mechanism,
in which each address of the Internet is the combination of the hash values of the
public keys of the domain and the host. Network host can validate the correctness
of the address by running a challenge-response protocol, where a nonce is sent to
the domain or host requesting a digital signature of the nonce with the private
key.
==PAGE:42==
30
Spooﬁng-based MITM attack
Approach
Category
Protocol
Concerns/Problems
S-ARP
[BOR03]
C
ARP*
Performance overhead, is not fea-
sible for a wireless network.
[GH03]
C/S
ARP*
SPOF, DoS.
CLL
[JLSM08]
C
ARP,
DHCP
Requires unnecessary time to se-
lect the appropriate algorithm
[Wah10].
(Authors were consid-
ering management of large scale
Ethernet network.)
[GT05]
C
ARP*
SPOF.
TARP
[LEM07]
C/S
ARP
Performance overhead.
P-ARP
[LL11]
C
ARP
DoS, slows down the network
throughput to an unacceptable
level.
[DL05]
S
ARP
Does
not
work
with
wireless
nodes.
[KAC04]
S
ARP
[OMCA09]
S/Ha
ARP
Uncompleted.
[PC08]
S/H
ARP,
DHCP*
SPOF, DoS, DHCP compatibil-
ity.
[TEH07]
H
ARP
Diﬃcult to decide the level of
trustiness and importance of each
host.
[Phi07]
H
ARP
No static IP addresses support,
works only with Linksys routers.
Anticap [ant]
H
ARP
Applicable only to UNIX sys-
tems.
WinPcap
[XZL10]
H
ARP
Vulnerable to ARP packet spoof-
ing using RAW socket [BK11].
ASA
[OKHC12]
C/H
UDP, ARP
UDP authentication.
MR-ARP
[NKK10]
V/H
ARP
DoS.
EMR-ARP
[NJK+12]
V/H
ARP
The diﬀerence in computation
power of the neighbour machines
should not be more than a factor
of 2.
GMR-ARP
[NDP13]
V/H
ARP
Additional overhead.
DAI
[Cat],
[Bha]
Ha
ARP
Partially
works
with
wireless
nodes, can only be used with cer-
tain switch types.
Table 2.1: Comparison of ARP spooﬁng defence approaches. C - Cryptography,
S - Server-based, H - Host-based, V - Voting; Ha - Hardware, * -
protocol should be modiﬁed.
==PAGE:43==
2.8 IP spooﬁng prevention mechanisms
31
Approach
Category
Concerns/Problems
[KS02]
S
Legitimate hosts must register in advance, adds
additional message ﬂow, hard to manage for large
number of hosts.
[DKH11]
S
[DGLR+13]
S
Additional
communication
between
DHCP
server, DHCP client, and authentication server.
[JH07]
S/RFC
The authors did not describe how the random
value is determined. (The number, which used
by the server and client to compute the session
key.)
[HLAT00]
S/RFC
Additional communication between the DHCP
server and Kerberos server.
[WXM11]
A/RFC
Additional ﬂow with trusted server.
[GHS03]
A/RFC
Was not implemented and the authors did not
discuss how the digital certiﬁcates are transmit-
ted between the DHCP client and server, given
the fact that a digital certiﬁcate size can easily
exceed a DHCP packet length.
[DT14]
A/RFC
Increases chances of a DoS attack.
[JLSM08]
A
Requires unnecessary time to select the appro-
priate algorithm [Wah10].
(Authors were con-
sidering management of large scale Ethernet net-
work.)
[ARM07]
A
The paper does not present the way used to
transmit the public key or the digital certiﬁcate
of the server.
[DKH11]
A
Approach does not take into account the fact
that a digital certiﬁcate size could exceed the
DHCP message size.
[SKG+09]
A
Additional communication between the DHCP
client and authentication service.
Table 2.2: Comparison of DHCP spooﬁng prevention approaches.
A -
asymmetric/public-key cryptography, S - symmetric/private-key
cryptography, RFC - based on DHCP authentication standard
[D+01].
==PAGE:44==
32
Spooﬁng-based MITM attack
Approach
Location
Method
Ingress [BS04]
Router-based
Filtering-on-path
Egress [Fer00]
Router-based
Filtering-on-path
DPF [PL01]
Router-based
Filtering-on-path
IDPF [DYC06]
Router-based
Filtering-on-path
SAVE [LMW+02]
Router-based
Filtering-on-path
BASE [LKHP07]
Router-based
Filtering-on-path/Cryptography
Passport [LLYW08]
Router-based
Filtering-on-path/Cryptography
SPM [BBL05]
Router-based
End-to-end auth
HCF [WJS07]
Host-based
End-to-end auth
AIP [ABF+08]
Host and Router based
End-to-end auth/Cryptography
Stack Pi [YPS03]
Host and Router based
End-to-end auth
Table 2.3: Comparison of IP spooﬁng defence approaches.
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 3
SSL/TLS MITM attack
This chapter gives a brief introduction of the SSL/TLS protocol. Then describes
SSL/TLS MITM attack, and based on our classiﬁcation, overviews prevention
mechanisms against SSL/TLS MITM.
3.1
SSL/TLS protocol
Secure Socket Layer (SSL), or its successor, Transport Layer Security (TLS), is an
encryption protocol designed to provide secure communication and data transfers
over the Internet. Both protocols were created for setting up a secure channel
between two communicating parties: the client and the server, or between two
clients.
Netscape Communications developed SSL in 1990s, later in 1999 based on SSL
3.0 IETF TLS working group introduced ﬁrst version of the TLS. In fact, the
version ﬁeld of the TLS 1.0 protocol is 3.1 [DA99], and was considered originally
as an update of the SSL. Both protocols have a lot in common, as a result,
==PAGE:46==
34
SSL/TLS MITM attack
in some papers [OHB06], [PK09], [BJK11] researchers use SSL and TLS terms
interchangeably. SSL/TLS protocols provide the main services as follow [DLH11]:
• authenticate users and servers, to ensure that data is sent to the correct
destination;
• encrypt data to prevent data ﬁlch during transmission;
• maintain data integrity during transmission to ensure data is not changed.
The SSL/TLS protocols establish session in the way of combining four proto-
cols: Record protocol (ensures that connection is conﬁdential and trustworthy),
Handshake protocol (responsible for negotiating session variables between clients
through a handshaking process), Change Cipher Spec protocol (instantiates the
newly negotiated connection state) and Alert protocol (notiﬁes an entity of an
error). The X.509 certiﬁcate delivers public key in order to prevent attacks on it.
Certiﬁcates are produced by third parties, named certiﬁcate authorities (CAs).
A communicating party assumes a certiﬁcate as veriﬁed if the signature of the
certiﬁcate can be traced back through a certiﬁcate validity chain (named certiﬁ-
cation path) up to a trusted CA.
This certiﬁcates validation method is the de facto standard in the Internet, and
has been regarded as secure for decades [COE]. Although, a number of security
concerns regarding X.509 public key infrastructure (PKI) usage have arisen in
the last years. Since certiﬁcates issued through hundreds of CAs, where every
single one has the ability to issue trusted certiﬁcates to any website on the Internet
[HREJ14]. In case if one of trusted CAs is compromised (has issued a replacement
certiﬁcate that contains a rogue key), it can undermine the security provided by
any certiﬁcates used in SSL/TLS.
The weaknesses of the X.509 PKI for SSL/TLS have been described in several
research papers. Most recently, Holz et al. [Hol14] carried out empirical anal-
ysis of X.509 PKI, discussed weak sides, and proposed improvements to it. In
[GIJ+12], researchers presented an in-depth study of SSL connection authenti-
cation in non-browser software, and concluded that SSL certiﬁcate validation is
completely broken in many critical software applications and libraries. Huang et
al. [HREJ14] presented the ﬁrst analysis of forged SSL certiﬁcates in the wild,
which gave statistics about real usage of forged certiﬁcates. During the study it
was discovered that 0.2% of real-world connections were substituted with unau-
thorised forged certiﬁcates. In [SS12], authors based on weaknesses of X.509 PKI
described compelled certiﬁcate creation attack. The attack in which government
==PAGE:47==
3.2 SSL/TLS MITM attack
35
agencies may compel a certiﬁcate authority to issue false SSL/TLS certiﬁcates,
and later use them to covertly intercept and hijack individuals’ secure web-based
communications.
They also showed the prevention mechanism, a lightweight
browser add-on that detects and thwarts such attacks.
3.2
SSL/TLS MITM attack
The security guarantees oﬀered by SSL/TLS depend on the validation of the
certiﬁcate. Consequently, one of the attack’s objectives is to hijack, or to forge
the certiﬁcate. In [KC14], authors proposed the following categorisation of the
SSL/TLS MITM.
• MITM+certiﬁcate:
(i) Attacker holds a valid certiﬁcate to the target web server. This case
is possible if the attacker compromises a CA, or is able to force it to issue
such certiﬁcate.
(ii) Attacker holds an invalid certiﬁcate. In this scenario attacker may
succeed if the victim will ignore the security warnings, which is a common
phenomenon [SEA+09].
• MITM+key: attacker has a private key to legitimate server.
While we are not aware of incidents involving server key compromise, let us
consider example of SSL/TLS MITM with illegitimately generated certiﬁcate
(see Figure 3.1). Suppose, network consists of victim’s browser, HTTPS server,
and attacker (positioning itself in between).
First of all the attacker intercepts SSL/TLS ClientHello message from the browser
(message 1), and responds to it using invalid certiﬁcate (message 4). If the vic-
tim accepts the forged certiﬁcate (ignores the security warnings of the browser),
the attacker ﬁnishes connection setup (messages 5 and 8). In parallel, attacker
establishes its own SSL/TLS connection with the server (messages 2,3,6,7). As a
result, the attacker has two active SSL/TLS connections: with victim’s browser,
and with the server. At this point, the attacker relays all encrypted messages
between them (messages 9,10,11,12). In the middle, attacker decrypts messages
from the client, and then re-encrypts them before sending to the server and vice-
versa. Therefore, the attacker can access private information of the victim, or
even modify it.
==PAGE:48==
36
SSL/TLS MITM attack
Figure 3.1: Example of SSL/TLS MITM Attack.
Cases when attacker has valid certiﬁcate or private key are implemented in similar
scheme. In messages 4 and 5 attacker should not use its certiﬁcate, but a valid
one instead.
3.3
Prevention mechanisms
A number of proposed solutions use third-party entities that provide various ben-
eﬁts: protection of the ﬁrst connection to a new domain, scalable attestation of
certiﬁcates for all public domains, and minimal requirements for web applica-
tions. On the other hand, they raise new challenges: deployment and operational
costs, more complex trust model and certiﬁcate revocation procedures, new pri-
vacy risks.
In [DAT12], researchers surveyed of both sides of the third-party
solutions.
Clark et al. [CvO13] carried out one of the most signiﬁcant surveys of defence
against SSL/TLS MITM attack. Authors reviewed the spectrum of issues con-
cerning trust model between CA and browsers, they focused on the certiﬁcate
==PAGE:49==
3.3 Prevention mechanisms
37
pinning approach. In Section 3.3.2 we provide a brief overview of their work.
In [COE], [HREJ14], [KC14], researchers carried out small studies of detecting
and defeating mechanisms of SSL/TLS MITM attack. In next sections, based on
their work, we propose our own classiﬁcation and add unmentioned schemes.
3.3.1
Detection of forged certiﬁcates
Detection of forged certiﬁcates use data mining for evaluation of the validity of
a certiﬁcate. For instance, Certiﬁcate Transparency (CT) [Lan12] proposed to
create a central audit log of HTTPS certiﬁcates, which is veriﬁably append-only
and maintained by independent monitors. Other one is ICSI Certiﬁcate Notaries
Service [ICS], which passively collects certiﬁcates at multiple independent Inter-
net sites, and then aggregates them into a central database almost in real-time.
EFF SSL Observatory [EFF], or Crossbear [HRKC12] proposals actively scan the
Internet either by querying the TLS-enabled servers or asking users to submit
the certiﬁcates that they see. All these solutions provide additional data about
certiﬁcates and help to validate their origin, but they use third-party entities.
Detection schemes in other protocols discussed in sections 2.2.1, 2.4.1, and 4.3.1.
3.3.2
Certiﬁcate pinning
This approach deals with the MITM attack by associating hosts with their ex-
pected X.509 certiﬁcates or public keys. In such scheme, servers publish certiﬁ-
cates and public keys (which will be used for future SSL/TLS handshakes), then
users can detect if there were any changes to them. In [CvO13], authors proposed
next categorisation of the certiﬁcate pinning approach:
• Server-based. A method, when pins are stored on servers. In [EP11],
[Mar13], [COE] papers researchers oﬀered various implementation of the
scheme.
• Client History based.
A scheme, when browser remembers the last
browser-acceptable public key encountered for a particular site and warns
the user if this information changes. In practice, based on this approach,
Soghoian et al. [SS12] implemented a Firefox plugin.
• Preloaded-based. Browser vendors may include a list of pins within the
browser itself. For example, Google Chrome currently pins a number of
==PAGE:50==
38
SSL/TLS MITM attack
certiﬁcates for its own domains, as well as others by request [Lan11].
• DNS-based. A method, when servers pin their public key in their DNSSEC
record.
In practice, the DNS-based Authentication of Named Entities
(DANE) protocol was implemented [HS12c].
In [COE], authors point out two problems with certiﬁcate pinning technique:
the demand for the secure associations database maintenance, and complexity of
trust between the associations.
3.3.3
Multi-path probing
The SSL/TLS MITM is usually executed as a targeted attack, rather than as a
global. This means that the attacker needs to convince only one, or few victims in
validity of certiﬁcate, while all other users are not eﬀected. As a result, distributed
voting approach may be eﬀective against SSL/TLS MITM attack. This methods
are similar to ARP voting-based algorithms (see Section 2.2.3). Wendlandt et
al.
[WAP08] proposed system named Perspectives, which is distributed over
the Internet, and acts as notaries. Each notary maintains a local database of
known certiﬁcates. Depending on the voting mechanism of notaries certiﬁcates
are rejected or accepted. Solution was presented as a Firefox plugin. Convergence
[Mar11] posses similar approach: it is a Firefox extension with more general
architecture and crowdsourcing functionality. Another solutions are DoubleCheck
[AK09] and The DetecTor Project [det]. Both of them work together with Tor
anonymity network. The DetecTor Project makes every client to act as their
own notary. It uses Tor network to check the authenticity of servers’ certiﬁcates,
due to the ability of making connections from diﬀerent network locations. Multi-
path probing can detect local certiﬁcate substitution attacks, but not attacks
where all traﬃc to the host is modiﬁed. Also, notary approaches might produce
false positives when servers switch between alternative certiﬁcates. Moreover,
clients may experience slower SSL/TLS connection times due to querying multiple
notaries during certiﬁcate validation [HREJ14].
3.3.4
Force SSL/TLS connection
This category of solutions force communicating parties to use the SSL/TLS con-
nection. ISAN-HTTPSEnforcer [PS12] is a proposal, which uses the Javascript
==PAGE:51==
3.3 Prevention mechanisms
39
API to enforce redirection to HTTPS. When the web server responds to a request
from the user’s browser it also responds with messages and scripts to indicate
redirection to HTTPS. The drawback of the method is that the ﬁrst connection
from the user is made over insecure HTTP. The attacker may strip the call to
JavaScript API in the response packet, which leaves a chance to execute the
SSL/TLS MITM attack. Another problem is that JavaScript may be disabled in
the browser’s conﬁgurations. Similar solution is HTTP Strict Transport Security
(HSTS) [HJB12], a proposal which allows websites to instruct browsers to make
SSL/TLS connections mandatory on their sites. The web server attaches a spe-
cial header in the response packet. This header gives the list of sub-domains and
forces user’s browser to make connection to them over HTTPS. The method has
the same weakness as ISAN-HTTPSEnforcer - initial connection is over HTTP.
Sugavanesh et al. introduced SHSHTTPS Enforcer (SHSE) [SRS13] to overcome
this. SHSE is a local daemon, which enforces URL redirection before the request
ﬂows over the insecure protocol.
3.3.5
TLS extensions
Firstly, Dietz et al. [DCBW12] proposed Origin-Bound Certiﬁcates approach,
but later Balfanz and Hamilton modiﬁed it to Channel IDs extension [BH13]. It
is a TLS extension, which strengthens client authentication, but as was shown
in [KC14] it can not fully prevent MITM attacks. In brief, browser stores pri-
vate/public key pairs, which were created during the TLS handshake with a
TLS-enabled web server. Public keys are called Channel IDs, they are used for
identiﬁcation of browser across multiple TLS connections. Thus, the approach
blocks most of the existing MITM, since attackers can not impersonate the client
(without stealing the self-signed private key from the legitimate browser). How-
ever, it does not prevent an impersonated server from supplying a cacheable
malicious JavaScript ﬁle to the client, which later executes in the context of the
victim website, and potentially exﬁltrates data by reconnecting to the legitimate
server [HREJ14]. Addressing this problem Karapanos et al. [KC14] proposed
Server Invariance with Strong Client Authentication (SISCA). The main idea be-
hind the SISCA is to ensure that the browser communicates only with one entity,
either the legitimate server, or the attacker, but not with both simultaneously.
==PAGE:52==
40
SSL/TLS MITM attack
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 4
BGP MITM attack
This chapter brieﬂy overviews the BGP protocol and the IP hijacking attack.
Then in details describes algorithm of the BGP MITM execution, and based on
our classiﬁcation, lists prevention mechanisms against BGP MITM attack.
4.1
BGP
The Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) is an inter-autonomous systems’ routing
protocol, the primary function of which is to exchange network reachability in-
formation with other BGP systems. This information is suﬃcient to construct
a graph of AS connectivity from which routing loops may be pruned, and some
policy decisions at the AS level may be enforced [RL95]. BGP is the core rout-
ing protocol for the Internet, it helps to choose fastest paths through the ASs
to deliver data. BGP usually selects a route that traverses the least number of
ASs (more speciﬁc routes addresses over less speciﬁc one), named the shortest
AS path. Every organisation owes its Internet connectivity to the BGP protocol
and there are no alternatives.
==PAGE:54==
42
BGP MITM attack
BGP was designed before the Internet environment became perilous, thus, origi-
nal proposal has little considerations for protection of the information it carries.
According to [Mur06], BGP does not provide protection against MITM attacks,
because it does not perform peer entity authentication. This serious security vul-
nerability in BGP was brought to the light in 2008 by Pilosov and Capela [PK08]
on the Defcon conference, where they demonstrated an Internet scale MITM at-
tack. In their presentation, researchers succeed in redirecting legitimate network
traﬃc to an unauthorised AS, recording it, and then sending it to the intended
destination. All of this can be done without any approval or authorisation from
service providers or end users. Such technique besides MITM attack may result
into: generation of DoS traﬃc, sending spam, network unreachability, or service
failure.
Later in 2012, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) chairman has
stated that the three top cyber threads are botnets, domain name fraud, and
Internet protocol hijacking1 [Gen]. He called on network operators to develop and
adopt new technical standards that will secure Internet routing. FCC proposed
to establish the secure BGP standards with certiﬁed registry that will enable
ISPs to validate the authenticity of routing information.
4.2
BGP MITM attack
The BGP MITM attack is based on the IP hijacking, also known as BGP hijack-
ing, route hijacking, preﬁx hijacking. IP hijacking occurs when a compromised or
misconﬁgured BGP speaker announces to its peers that its AS can reach highly
speciﬁc routes (long network preﬁxes) [BFZ07]. As a result, the traﬃc destined
for the speciﬁc IP address space never will reach the destination. Also, attack-
ers can accept network traﬃc from the hijacked preﬁx, which can be used for
manipulation of the data, eavesdropping and the MITM attack.
In [MY07], authors divided IP hijacking into preﬁx hijacking and AS path falsi-
ﬁcation. Preﬁx hijacking involves an attacker falsifying the NLRI ﬁeld of a BGP
Update message [HJH13]. AS path falsiﬁcation occurs when the attacker changes
a path attribute in the Update message. In [HZ09], researchers mentioned two
possible variants of the hijacking attack: hijack unused (but maybe assigned) IP
space and hijack currently used IP space. Both types of hijack allow an attacker
1BGP MITM is based on IP hijacking, and it is only known way how to execute MITM on
BGP.
==PAGE:55==
4.2 BGP MITM attack
43
to attract all traﬃc bound for the hijacked space.
Based on [PK08], let us consider network, which consists of 8 ASs, where AS100
is the attacker, and Target AS200 is the destination point of the traﬃc. Target
AS200 originates 10.10.220.0/20 address, and announces its way to AS20 and
AS30 (see Figure 4.1). To Attacker’s AS100 this propagation goes through the
map (see Figure 4.2). After converging, the view of forwarding information base
(FIB) for 10.10.220.0/22 will look like on Figure 4.3.
Figure 4.1: Target AS200 announce (blue arrows) its way to AS20 and AS30.
Figure 4.2: Propagation map of network (blue arrows).
To execute BGP MITM on this network, attacker should ﬁrstly conﬁgure routers
to advertise availability of network addresses owned by the target (Target AS200).
Then it should advertise slightly more speciﬁc routes within the global Internet
routing table, thus, become destination (preﬁx hijacking). In our example, At-
tacker’s AS100 will announce longer preﬁx 10.10.220.0/24, and consequently, this
==PAGE:56==
44
BGP MITM attack
Figure 4.3: FIB (dotted arrows) after converging.
AS will become recipient for any network traﬃc destined to the original hijacked
preﬁx (10.10.220.0/20).
Next, attacker needs to deliver network traﬃc to its appropriate destination.
One of the options is to plan a return path through the Internet. To do this, the
attacker should identify path between its AS and the destination network (from
Attacker’s AS100 to Target AS200 through AS10 and AS20). Also, this AS path
must then be prepended to all BGP advertisements for the hijacked preﬁxes.
As a result, we have the next BGP MITM attack scheme: AS100 has on input
data from AS30, AS40, AS50, AS60, which can be manipulated and redirected
to Target AS200 (see Figure 4.4). One more thing, which may be added to the
attack is the TTL adjustment. Using it attacker may remove tracks from the
hijacked traﬃc, otherwise, packets will give Target AS200 the detour of the ﬂow.
Figure 4.4: BGP MITM attack.
==PAGE:57==
4.3 Prevention mechanisms
45
The drawback of such scheme is the loss of some part of Internet (because of
return path), but on the other hand, it still has quite signiﬁcant size of hijacked
traﬃc.
4.3
Prevention mechanisms
Previously, Subramanian et al. [SRS+04] reviewed security mechanisms for BGP.
Most recently, Huston et al. [HRA11] carried out survey of the BGP security,
they went into details of each weakness, and suggested ways to make protocol
more secure. In [LSC12], and [SXW+12], researchers made surveys of IP hijack-
ing detection solutions and presented diﬀerent categorisation of them. Liux et
al. suggested to divide methods based on timing: preventions before the attack,
detections during the attack, and reactions after the attack. Shi et al. divided ap-
proaches on: cryptographic based prevention, anomaly mitigation, and anomaly
detection. Based on these researches, we decided that from MITM attack per-
spective the best way to classify is to divide on detection solutions, and proactive
mechanisms. In further sections, we survey both types of prevention methods.
4.3.1
Detection solutions
The most number of papers, concerning BGP vulnerabilities are published in
detection or monitor ﬁelds. Detection solutions are similar to previously discussed
detection methods (see sections 2.2.1, 2.4.1, and 3.3.1). From the viewpoint of
detection approach solutions may be divided into [HJH13]:
• victim-centric: detects the hijacking of its own IPs;
• infrastructure-based: relies on a centralised database, or a set of vantage
locations distributed over the Internet;
• peer-centric: detects the hijacking of communication peer IPs, based on the
analysis of routing messages.
In [SXW+12], authors proposed another categorisation - based on the type of
used information (in further sections we stick with it):
==PAGE:58==
46
BGP MITM attack
• control-plane: an AS announces BGP routes to network preﬁxes that it
does not own;
• data-plane:
continuously probes target networks from multiple vantage
points, looking for discrepancies that may arise;
• combination of both: hybrid system that correlates the results from both
perspectives to reduce the number of false positives;
• correlation: correlates the control-plane route and data-plane reachability
on a number of distributed diagnosis nodes in realtime.
Based on [SXW+12], we outline pros and cons of hijacking detection methods in
Table 4.1.
==PAGE:59==
4.3 Prevention mechanisms
47
Methods
Control-plane
[KMRV03],
[LMP+06]
Data-plane
[ZJP+07],
[ZZH+08]
Combination
[HM07], [HJH13]
Correlation
[SXW+12]
Detection delay
Realtime
Minutes
Minutes
Realtime
Attacker Information
✓
x
✓
✓
Accuracy
Low
Medium
High
High
Sub-preﬁx hijacking
✓
x
✓
✓
Scalability
Good
Poor
Good
Good
Deployment
Easy
Easy
Hard
Easy
Table 4.1: Pros and cons of hijacking detection methods.
==PAGE:60==
48
BGP MITM attack
4.3.1.1
Control-plane
Lad et al. proposed the Preﬁx Hijacking Alert System (PHAS) [LMP+06], which
alerts preﬁx owners when Multiple Origin AS (MOAS) conﬂicts detected. The
schema collects updates about the network from RouteViews and RIPE reposi-
tories (centralised databases, that collects real-time information about the global
routing system from several diﬀerent backbones).
Kruegel et al. [KMRV03] introduced the IP hijacking detection algorithm named
Topology. The solution ﬁnds invalid AS path contained in BGP Update messages
that do not exist in AS topology of the Internet. However, attackers can fake valid
routing information, and approach has low accuracy, because of the dependence
on statistical data.
4.3.1.2
Data-plane
Zheng et al. [ZJP+07] proposed approach based on path disagreement and hop
count instability during IP hijacking. The solution monitors the network from
multiple points, and calculate paths to ASs together with hop counts.
Then
mechanism analyse similarities before and after the routing update.
In case
number of inconsistencies cross curtain threshold alarms are raised. A bit later
the same authors presented new victim-centric approach named ISPY [ZZH+08].
The solution uses preﬁx-owner-based probing to monitor network reachability
from external transit networks. However, both solutions suﬀer from inaccuracy
of the probing results.
4.3.1.3
Combination of control-plane and data-plane
Hu et al.
[HM07] introduced real-time solution, which includes both control-
plane and data-plane schemas. When monitoring systems sense suspicious routing
updates, they collect ﬁngerprints from the preﬁx owner’s ASs, thus, to avoid rogue
ASs in the future routing. However, researchers have not produced appropriate
ﬁngerprinting method for detection, and have not described how to solve problem
with ﬁrewalls, which may block data collection.
Hong et al. [HHJ11], [HJH13] proposed network reachability-based IP hijack-
ing detection together with ﬁngerprinting methods.
The scheme collects host
==PAGE:61==
4.3 Prevention mechanisms
49
and network ﬁngerprints to develop network reachability tests. Then, through
the ﬁngerprint comparison, approach can conclusively detect the IP hijacking
occurrence.
4.3.1.4
Correlation
Shi et al. [SXW+12] pointed out the deep-rooted reason of the control-plane and
data-plane methods ineﬃciency - it is a lack of close and pervasive correlation
between them. Authors presented solution named Argus, which is an extended
combination method. The main idea is to calculate the relations between the
routes (control-plane) and the reach-abilities (data-plane) in diﬀerent ASs, which
may be regarded as a ﬁngerprint of a route event. Based on this ﬁngerprint,
system decides whether a route change is actually caused by the IP hijacking.
Besides, Argus system is easy to deploy in comparison to other solutions.
4.3.2
Proactive prevention
Proactive prevention systems, in contrast, block attacks from propagation in the
ﬁrst place. Pretty Good BGP (PGBGP) [KFR06] is non-cryptographic technique,
which can mitigate BGP’s most critical vulnerabilities. The main idea behind
the protocol is to make process of adoption of new route information for routers
more cautious, when origin of AS is unfamiliar. Such mechanism may help to stop
spreading the attack, but more preventive techniques are cryptographic, which
we describe in next section.
4.3.2.1
Cryptographic solutions
Kent et al. [KLS00] performed one of the major studies of domain routing se-
curity, and proposed ﬁrst cryptographic solution named Secure BGP (sBGP). In
this approach, BGP speakers verify the identities of other BGP speakers, AS ad-
ministrators and address preﬁx owners by authorisation. To achieve this, sBGP
uses digital signatures, X.509 certiﬁcates and PKIs (so-called basic security frame-
work). Also, sBGP requires a PKI for address allocation, where every address
assignment is reﬂected in an issued certiﬁcate (so-called veriﬁcation framework)
[SLK01]. The drawback of the mechanism - is the performance capability of the
routing systems, which appeared to be too slow.
==PAGE:62==
50
BGP MITM attack
Later, based on sBGP researchers presented Secure Origin BGP (soBGP) [Whi03],
where they tried to make protocol faster and less heavy for computation.
In
soBGP, authors reduced the amount of validated material in the BGP Update
message, consequently, reduced the processing overhead for Update message vali-
dation [HRA11]. However, protocol still has vulnerability to the DoS attack, and
demands for changes in the existing BGP infrastructure. Both sBGP and soBGP
are not deployed.
In [vOWK07], authors proposed another update to sBGP, named Pretty Secure
BGP (psBGP). Protocol introduces the notion of usage the reputation scheme in
place of a hierarchical address PKI (in [HRA11], researchers discuss infeasibility
of hierarchical PKI for addresses).
The solution uses complex inter-AS cross
certiﬁcation with preﬁx assertion lists, which cast doubts about reliability of the
veriﬁcation and treatment of conﬁdence. Table 4.2 shows comparison between
BGP, soBGP, psBGP security design principles.
BGP security design principles
sBGP
[KLS00]
soBGP
[Whi03]
psBGP
[vOWK07]
BGP peer authentication
✓
x
x
BGP Update message integrity
✓
x
✓
IP preﬁx origin authentication
✓
✓
✓
Route advertisement authorisation
✓
✓
x
AS-Path Validation
✓
✓
✓
AS-Policy compliance check
✓
✓
x
Table 4.2: Comparison of sBGP, soBGP, psBGP security design principles.
Taken from [SMSG+15].
Another cryptographic solution is to use Resource Publication Infrastructure
(RPKI) [WMS12], but the proposed method for BGP origin validation is not
intended to secure the routing system against attackers, who are faking their
origin AS. One more proposal BGP Security (BGPSEC) [Lep14] is still under
development. It is based on PKI mechanism. However, on early stages of proto-
col drafts, recent paper [MOAM14] showed possible MITM attack on BGPSEC
using route leak vulnerability.
The common problems with cryptographic solutions are added computation, and
memory overhead for all routers. As a result, detection and reaction methods are
more often used, which leaves unlikelihood of cryptographic approaches massive
deployment.
==PAGE:63==
Chapter 5
FBS-based MITM
This chapter gives a brief description of the FBS attack and its connection to the
MITM attack. Then it overviews GSM, UMTS networks, and introduces FBS
spooﬁng-based MITM on them. Finally, based on our categorisation, chapter lists
prevention mechanisms against FBS spooﬁng-based MITM.
False Base Station attack (FBS) (also known as Fake Base Station) is an attack,
when malicious third party masquerades its Base Transceiver Station (BTS) as
a real network’s BTS [Mit01]. A fake BTS system is an equipment that can act
as a real BTS, it broadcasts BTS signal over the air and make the mobile phones
in covered area to communicate with it [YXZ11]. FBS attack may include the
real-time jamming system [PCGCdV98], which blocks all active carries in the
area. Using jamming system, attacker can drown legal BTSs and force victim to
connect to fake one.
Systems with one-way authentication, where connected nodes can not validate
authenticity of the serving network show weakness to FBS attack. For instance,
GSM and GSM/UMTS combined networks are vulnerable to this attack.
FBS-based MITM is the attack, where third party forces victim to connect to
the fake BTS (in other words executes FBS attack), and then using this station
==PAGE:64==
52
FBS-based MITM
attacker manipulates victims traﬃc. To execute such MITM attacker may use
few fake BTSs with diﬀerent protocols.
5.1
GSM
European Telecommunications Standards Institute in early 90s introduced GSM
as a second generation (2G) telecommunication standard. Today, according to
mobility report [mob], GSM covers more than 90% of the world population. There
are two basic types of services oﬀered through GSM: telephony and data bearer.
The GSM experienced gradual improvements that leaded to several versions such
as GSM1800, HSCSD (High Speed Circuit Switched Data), EDGE (Enhanced
Data rates for GSM Evolution), GPRS (General Packet Radio Service), and
consequently, to the third generation of cellular networks (see Section 5.4).
The GSM architecture (see Figure 5.1) consists of mobile stations (MS) and BTS,
which communicate with each other through radio links. Each BTS connects to
the Base Station Controller (BSC). BSC links to the Mobile Switching Center
(MSC), responsible for routing signals to and from ﬁxed networks [Sem97]. Home
Location Register (HLR) and the Visitor Location Register (VLR) are the two
major databases for each mobile service provider in the GSM architecture. HLR is
responsible for maintaining the subscriber information and their current location.
VLR is responsible for keeping the visiting users information [KSKS06]. MSC
acts as a bridge between wireless and wired networks. Each of GSM subscribers
has the secret key, which is stored in Subscriber Identity Module (SIM) card
of MS. The authentication center (AUC) has other secret key, which is shared
with the subscriber and AUC. AUC generates the set of security parameters for
execution of encryption and authentication. Also MSC includes other parts, but
details about them are out of the thesis scope.
GSM was built with security considerations in mind, to provide the privacy and
integrity of the cellular network [Ved93]. In comparison to ﬁrst generation, it
solved number of attacks, for instance, phone cloning. Requirements of GSM is
to provide next security services: a) anonymity, b) authentication, c) privacy, d)
user data and signalling protection. Although, [VAPCDV+02], [BBK03], [Pei04],
[CLC05], [SA06], [BC06b], [TB08], [Xen08], [Cha11] papers showed main security
issues in GSM:
• Conﬁdentiality.
Communications between the MS and BTS must be
==PAGE:65==
5.1 GSM
53
Figure 5.1: GSM architecture.
encrypted by using long shared authentication key, thus, not be divulged
to third parties. However, in [Pai10]1, authors showed that French carrier
SFR sends SMS in cleartext, also all Indian carriers send GSM voice and
data traﬃc without any encryption at all.
• Subscriber identity authentication. Good identity authentication sys-
tem can guarantee that no fraudulently unauthorised user gets required
services from the GSM system.
Although, GSM only authenticates the
MS to the network, and not vice versa, which leads to FBS, MITM, DoS
attacks.
• Weak cryptographic algorithms. Barkan et al. [BBK03] reported that
some GSM encryption algorithms are easy to break.
Paper describes a
cipher-text-only attack on A5/2 that requires a few dozen milliseconds of
encrypted oﬀ-the-air cellular conversation and ﬁnds the correct key on a
personal computer in less than a second.
Also, authors discussed weak
spots in other ciphers, like A5/1 and A5/3. Later, Toorani et al. [TB08]
showed that A3 and A8 algorithms, which used in GSM, are also crackable.
From the perspective of MITM attack the main issue in GSM is a lack of authen-
tication. Used mechanism is unidirectional and users can not verify the serving
network. Also user authentication information and cipher-suits may be reused.
1Paper published in 2009.
==PAGE:66==
54
FBS-based MITM
Consequently, GSM network is vulnerable to FBS-based MITM attack, in next
section we describe it in details.
5.2
MITM attack on GSM
The main idea behind the attack is to impersonate same mobile network code as
the legitimate GSM network to false BTS (or IMSI cather [Str07]) and convince
victim that this station is the real one. Let us consider the next example (see
Figure 5.2): network consists of Legitimate MS, Legitimate BTS, False BTS, and
False MS. Attacker is a combination of False BTS and False MS. While in stand-
by mode the MS connects to the best received BTS. Therefore, false BTS should
be more powerful than original one, or closer to the target. If victim is already
connected, than attacker requires to drawn any present real stations.
Figure 5.2: FBS-based MITM attack on GSM overview. Direct link between
Legitimate MS and Legitimate BTS dropped, instead connected
through False BTS and False MS.
The algorithm of FBS-based MITM attack on GSM is the following (see Figure
5.3):
1. Attacker sets-up connection between False BTS and Legitimate MS.
==PAGE:67==
5.2 MITM attack on GSM
55
2. False MS impersonates the victim’s MS to the real network by resending
the identity information, which was received from the step 1.
3. Victim’s MS sends its authentication information and cipher-suites to the
False BTS.
4. Attacker replays message 3 to Legitimate BTS, with changed authentication
abilities of MS to do not support encryption (A5/0 algorithm [Lut]), or to
weak encryption algorithm (like A5/2).
5. Legitimate MS and Legitimate BTS exchange authentication challenge (RAND)
and authentication response (SRES), attacker forwards them.
Figure 5.3: FBS-based MITM attack on GSM step-by-step.
Finally, the authentication is ﬁnished. All following messages between victim and
real network are going through attacker’s entities, with encryption speciﬁed by
attacker, or no encryption at all. This manipulation is possible, since GSM does
not provide the data integrity [CGZY07], as a result, attacker can catch, modify,
and resend messages.
At the designing phase of the GSM protocol, FBS seemed impractical due to
costly required equipments, but currently this kind of attack is completely appli-
cable since costs decreased [TB08]. In [Pai10], authors besides describing GSM
security concerns, pointed out that attackers now are better equipped. Among
the reasons are open-source projects (like OpenBTS [Ope]) and low-cost hard-
ware (like Ettus Research [Ett]). In particular, attacker can build its own false
BTS for less than $1000.
==PAGE:68==
56
FBS-based MITM
5.3
GSM MITM prevention mechanisms
To prevent MITM on GSM researchers work in two directions: better authenti-
cation protocols and better encryption algorithms. Further, we will describe ﬁrst
direction, while second one is pure cryptographic problem, which is out of the
thesis scope.
In [HTL00], authors proposed approach, which make authentication of the VLR
by MS using certiﬁcates generated by HLR and a temporary secret key. However,
mutual authentication takes place only for the ﬁrst communication. Later Chang
et al.
[CLC05] improved solution, thus, mutual authentication is carried out
for every communication. However, protocol is weak against brute force attack
[BC06a], and in [FBG15], researchers introduced new attack, which leads to
MITM. Kumar et al. [KSKS06] proposed one more improvement to [HTL00].
The main idea of their method is to make MS and VLR authenticate each other
and establish a session key.
Although, the approach requires changes to the
architecture and does not work with roaming users.
Later in [FBG09], researchers proposed a solution based on the symmetric poly-
nomials. In approach, each MS and VLR stores a share of the symmetric polyno-
mial, and during authentications requests MS and VLR authenticate each other
using them. Most recently, same authors proposed a novel mutual entity authen-
tication using the TESLA protocol [FBG15]. The proposed solution not only
provides secure bilateral authentication, but also decreases the call setup time
and the required connection bandwidth.
Lee et al. in their paper [LLH11] described GSM mutual authentication protocol,
which is MITM resistant. To accomplish this, researchers added identiﬁcation of
the legability to VLR, and authorisation for VLR to authenticate the MS without
knowing the secret key (Ki) of the MS. Also, VLR keeps only a copy of temporary
secret key (TKi) to identify the MS. To verify the legality of the visited VLR, the
HLR gives it a certiﬁcate CERTV LR that will be authenticated by the MS. On
the other hand, the VLR can verify the MS by the received signed result (SRES).
Both VLR and MS are protected, unless Ki or TKi is known. Therefore, no one
can pretend to be the legal VLR to fool the MS and get the MS’s credentials.
Saxena et al. [SC13] introduced new secure authentication and key agreement
protocol named SAKA. Similarly to previous approaches, SAKA has Ki and
VLRs’s certiﬁcates (V LRC), but have added additional checks. Firstly, before
issuing V LRC to VLR, HLR veriﬁes if MS is valid based on Ki. Secondly, VLR
==PAGE:69==
5.4 UMTS
57
maintains a counter count, which helps MS to validate VLRs (counter does not
require synchronisation). Using these measurements SAKA is able to prevent
replay, MITM, redirection, and impersonation attacks.
5.4
UMTS
In early 2000s the 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) developed UMTS,
which is a part of the third generation (3G) telecommunication standards. Ac-
cording to [UMT] in 2011 more than 45% of population is covered by 3G and
in 2017 this number will reach 85%. The process of increasing UMTS resulted
in existence of one or both GSM, UMTS base stations in some areas. Also for
better coverage 3G devices mostly support GSM roaming.
UMTS is a direct successor of GSM standard, but it provides signiﬁcant enhance-
ments to overcome vulnerabilities. While GSM supports only subscriber authen-
tication and encryption of the radio interface between a MS and a BTS, UMTS
provides additional features: authentication token and integrity protection of the
signalling traﬃc [MW04a]. Also, UMTS have stronger cryptographic primitives
and bigger cipher key sizes (128 bits) [ASS09]. Besides, UMTS networks have
much higher speeds for communication.
From the beginning the UMTS authentication and key agreement (AKA) proce-
dure was designed to resist MITM attacks [3GP]. Meyer et al.[MW04a] stated
that the mutual authentication and the data integrity of signalling messages in
radio interface are the keys for protection against MITM attack. The mutual
authentication uses an authentication quintet, which helps to ensure that a bill is
issued to the correct person. It consists of the user challenge (RAND), expected
user response (X(RES)), the encryption key (CK), the integrity key (IK) and the
authentication token for network authentication (AUTN).
The support of GSM networks in UMTS leads to vulnerabilities. Integration of
two standards allows them to interconnect, but this in fact, is roaming between
two systems that are not equally well protected against malicious attacks. As
a result, some of the security issues in GSM may be exploited in the UMTS
networks to execute MITM attack. In next section we describe in details FBS-
based MITM attack on combined GSM/UMTS network.
==PAGE:70==
58
FBS-based MITM
5.5
MITM on combined GSM/UTMS network
Meyer et al. [MW04a], [MW04b] described MITM attack on combined GSM/UMTS
network, which is based on FBS attack. In [ASS09] and [ASS10] researchers intro-
duced new method for real-time eavesdropping, but without ability to transform
data. In both cases, attacks are directed on UMTS subscriber and may be exe-
cuted only while victim uses GSM, since its weaknesses.
UMTS ensures origin and freshness of authentication due to means of AUTN.
AUTN contains message authentication code (MAC) and sequence number (SQN).
A correct MAC indicates that the legitimate network originally generated the au-
thentication token, and SQN shows how old is the AUTN. Both values are checked
on MS side, but the mechanism of AUTN may be compromised if the subscriber
is in GSM network.
To execute MITM on combined GSM/UMTS attacker has two diﬃculties: steal-
ing AUTN and ensuring that no encryption is used after the authentication. First
problem may be solved by impersonating victim’s MS to false MS. Second can
be achieved by sending false information about the encryption capabilities of vic-
tims’s MS, which will lead to the no encryption mode (in further example we will
suppose that victims’s MS supports such mode).
Let us consider next example: network consists of Legitimate 3G BTS, Legitimate
MS, False 3G BTS, False 2G BTS, and False MS. Attacker is a combination of
False 3G BTS, False 2G BTS, and False MS. As well as in MITM attack on GSM
(see Section 5.2) Legitimate MS should not be connected to local real station.
The algorithm of MITM attack on combined GSM/UMTS is next (see Figure
5.4):
1. Attacker catches International Mobile Subscriber Identity (IMSI) of the
victim’s MS, and launches 3G False BTS. Then begins the authentication
handshake with Legitimate MS, and after getting required data it drops the
connection.
2. Attacker uses victim’s IMSI (from step 1) and impersonates victim’s MS
to False MS. Then it fetches AUTN from real network (from HLR using
connection with Legitimate 3G BTS), and after receiving data it breaks the
connection. At this point attacker has AUTN value, which will prove for
the Legitimate MS that false 2G BTS is real network.
==PAGE:71==
5.5 MITM on combined GSM/UTMS network
59
3. Attacker starts 2G false BTS and forces victim to connect. After victim’s
MS successfully veriﬁes authentication token, attacker sends message of
preferred encryption, or no encryption (since GSM does not provide the
data integrity [CGZY07]).
In the end, to ﬁnish MITM, attacker should
provide access to real network due to connection False MS to legitimate
network.
Figure 5.4: MITM attack on combined GSM/UMTS networks. 1) IMSI catch-
ing, 2) obtaining valid AUTN, 3) GSM impersoniﬁcation.
Last step of the method has obvious drawback, since it leaves traces. Using False
MS for redirection of intercepted traﬃc will uncover Universal Subscriber Iden-
tity Module (USIM). Also, attacker should take into consideration that AUTN
contains SQN and it is crucial that victim has not made authentication between
obtaining AUTN and GSM impersoniﬁcation. Otherwise, token might be out of
the range and will be rejected by Legitimate MS.
==PAGE:72==
60
FBS-based MITM
5.6
GSM/UMTS MITM prevention mechanisms
Previously, in [SC14b], researchers had collected proposals, which prevent MITM
on GSM/UMTS networks. In following passages we overview their work and add
unmentioned approaches. Table 5.1 shows MITM prevention approaches versus
diﬀerent attacks. All these solutions as well as GSM proposals are cryptographic.
Prevent from
Cocktail-
AKA
[OHJ10]
S-AKA
[HSS11]
[HG14]
NS-AKA
[SC14a]
Secure-
AKA
[SC14b]
MITM attack
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Replay attack
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Active attack in
corrupt network
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Redirection
at-
tack
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
DoS attack
x
Partially
x
x
✓
Table 5.1: MITM prevention approaches versus diﬀerent attacks.
Ou et al.
[OHJ10] presented Cocktail-AKA to congenital defects of UMTS-
AKA. The protocol is based on authentication vectors (AVs), but in compari-
son to UMTS-AKA it decreases computational and communicational overheads.
Cocktail-AKA uses two kinds of AVs: Medicated AV (MAV) and Prescription AV
(PAV). MAV calculated in advance by service network (SN), PAV calculated by
home environment (HE). Once the authentication stage is initiated, the SN dis-
tributes MAV, HE distributes PAV, and they produce an eﬀective AV for mutual
authentication with the MS. In [SC14b], researchers include protocol to cate-
gory Prevent MITM attack, but Wu et al. [WZP10] stated that Cocktail-AKA is
vulnerable to impersoniﬁcation attacks, which usually lead to MITM.
In [HSS11], authors introduced new authentication and key agreement mechanism
named S-AKA to defeat the redirection, MITM and DoS attacks. In protocol, SN
must continually generate random numbers to challenge MS to reply correspond-
ing responses for every authentication. However, the S-AKA reduces bandwidth
consumption up to 38 % and also increases the number of messages required in
authenticating mobile subscribers.
Hwang et al. [HG14] proposed another AKA, which is MITM resistant. Re-
searchers introduced additional keys (K or Kuvperm), which are negotiated be-
tween the serving GPRS support node (SGSN) and MS (during the initial authen-
==PAGE:73==
5.6 GSM/UMTS MITM prevention mechanisms
61
tication between victim, VLR and HLR). Thus, step 3 in MITM on GSM/UMTS
algorithm (Section 5.5) will not work. With K or Kuvperm, the SGSN has to
encrypt the payload prior to transmission, even if none encryption command is
speciﬁed by any GSM BTS. Hence, data conﬁdentiality between MS and SGSN
can be assured.
In [SC14a], researchers presented another approach named NS-AKA. Protocol
solved MITM due to usage of additional EK key between MS and VLR. Also,
approach is free from redirection and impersonation attacks. Saxena et al. anal-
ysed the message exchanged ratio during the authentication process and discov-
ered that NS-AKA reduces 60% of the messages exchanged ratio in comparison
to UMTS-AKA protocol. Although, solution does not provide resistance against
DoS attack. Later, authors based on NS-AKA proposed another protocol Secure-
AKA [SC14b], where they solved DoS problem.
==PAGE:74==
62
FBS-based MITM
==PAGE:75==
Chapter 6
Conclusions
In this thesis, we analysed MITM and presented a comprehensive classiﬁcation
of MITM attack (see Section 1.4).
Also, we provided various MITM defence
mechanisms along with their descriptions. In Table 6.1, we collected all MITM
prevention mechanism, and divided them based on used methods, and location
of applicability.
To sum it up, we collected most eﬀective approaches in the
following list:
• Use strong mutual authentication to always fully authenticate endpoints of
any communications channel.
• Exchange public keys using a secure channel.
• Use few secure channels for verifying if data was not compromised.
• Sign public keys by a certiﬁed authority.
• Use certiﬁcate pinning.
• Encrypt your communication using cryptography.
• Examine behaviour of endpoints.
==PAGE:76==
64
Conclusions
Approaches
Detection
Cryptography
Voting
Hardware
Other
Application
BGP: [LMP+06], [KMRV03],
[ZJP+07], [ZZH+08], [HM07],
[HHJ11], [HJH13], [SXW+12].
DNS:
[ADL+10],
[JSLS07],
[PPPW04], [PP06], [SCCL09],
[YKMC06].
BGP: [KLS00], [Whi03], [vOWK07],
[WMS12], [Lep14].
DNS: [VGEW00], [E+00], [AAL+05],
[DNS], [SCCL09], [SCCL09].
DHCP: [KS02], [DKH11], [DGLR+13],
[JH07],
[HLAT00],
[WXM11],
[GHS03], [DT14], [JLSM08], [ARM07],
[DKH11], [SKG+09].
DNS:
[PPPW04],
[PP06],
[SCCL09],
[YKMC06].
DHCP:
[Cat12].
BGP: [KFR06].
DNS: [Ber], [DAV+08],
[PALL09],
[EA14],
[BHS+11].
Presentation
SSL/TLS:
[Lan12],
[ICS],
[EFF], [HRKC12].
SSL/TLS:
[HS12c],
[DCBW12],
[BH13], [KC14].
SSL/TLS:
[WAP08],
[Mar11], [AK09], [det].
SSL/TLS:
[CvO13],
[EP11],
[Mar13],
[COE], [SS12], [Lan11],
[PS12],
[HJB12],
[SRS13].
OSI Layers
Transport
IP: [LKHP07], [LLYW08], [ABF+08].
IP:
[BS04],
[Fer00],
[PL01],
[BBL05],
[WJS07],
[YPS03],
[DYC06], [LMW+02].
Network
Data Link
ARP: [CG03], [ARPa], [G+],
[HJT10],
[BC07],
[RN05],
[CG03],
[TS06],
[KP11],
[BRR+11], [SLJ+14].
ARP:
[BOR03],
[GH03],
[GT05],
[Lam81], [LEM07], [JLSM08], [LL11],
[OKHC12].
ARP:
[NKK10],
[NJK+12], [NDP13].
ARP:
[BC07],
[Cat],
[OMCA09],
[Bha].
ARP:
[Tet],
[DL05],
[KAC04],
[PC08],
[TEH07],
[Phi07],
[ant], [XZL10], .
GSM
[HTL00],
[CLC05],
[KSKS06],
[FBG09], [FBG15], [LLH11], [SC13]
Cellular networks
UMTS
[OHJ10], [HSS11], [HG14], [SC14a],
[SC14b]
Table 6.1: MITM prevention mechanisms.
==PAGE:77==
6.1 Future works
65
6.1
Future works
This section provides objectives that could be natural extensions of this thesis,
or possible further research based on the work of this thesis.
• First of all, we covered MITM attack not in all communication channels.
During literature surveying we found a big number of papers concerning
the MITM attack in next communication channels: LTE, WiMax, WLAN,
VoIP, RFID, Bluetooth, NFC, and combinations of them; and in next pro-
tocols: SIP, HB-like. Consequently, full MITM taxonomy is still needed to
be done.
• Also a number of papers were covering MITM attacks against cryptography
ﬁelds (quantum and elliptic curve), key exchange/distribution, and new
authentication methods. There is a point for making comparison analyses
of such solutions, and possibility of their implementation in protocols.
• All of previously discussed MITM have same traﬃc ﬂow - traﬃc goes
through middle man, but in some papers (e.g. [SBN12]), authors discuss
diﬀerent models. Thus, another research direction is novel MITM schemes.
==PAGE:78==
66
Conclusions
==PAGE:79==
Bibliography
[3GP]
3g security; security threats and requirements.
[AAL+05]
Roy Arends, Rob Austein, Matt Larson, Dan Massey, and Scott
Rose.
Dns security introduction and requirements.
Technical
report, RFC 4033, March, 2005.
[AB07]
Cristina L Abad and Rafael I Bonilla. An analysis on the schemes
for detecting and preventing arp cache poisoning attacks.
In
Distributed Computing Systems Workshops, 2007. ICDCSW’07.
27th International Conference on, pages 60–60. IEEE, 2007.
[ABF+08]
David G Andersen, Hari Balakrishnan, Nick Feamster, Teemu
Koponen, Daekyeong Moon, and Scott Shenker.
Accountable
internet protocol (aip). In ACM SIGCOMM Computer Commu-
nication Review, volume 38, pages 339–350. ACM, 2008.
[ABK+10]
Nikolaos Alexiou, Stylianos Basagiannis, Panagiotis Katsaros,
Tushar Dashpande, and Scott A Smolka. Formal analysis of the
kaminsky dns cache-poisoning attack using probabilistic model
checking. In High-Assurance Systems Engineering (HASE), 2010
IEEE 12th International Symposium on, pages 94–103. IEEE,
2010.
[ADL+10]
Manos Antonakakis, David Dagon, Xiapu Luo, Roberto Perdisci,
Wenke Lee, and Justin Bellmor. A centralized monitoring in-
frastructure for improving dns security. In Recent Advances in
Intrusion Detection, pages 18–37. Springer, 2010.
==PAGE:80==
68
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[AK09]
Mansoor Alicherry and Angelos D Keromytis.
Doublecheck:
Multi-path veriﬁcation against man-in-the-middle attacks.
In
Computers and Communications, 2009. ISCC 2009. IEEE Sym-
posium on, pages 557–563. IEEE, 2009.
[AKKG12]
Marios Anagnostopoulos, Georgios Kambourakis, Elisavet Kon-
stantinou, and Stefanos Gritzalis. Dnssec vs. dnscurve: a side-
by-side comparison.
Situational Awareness in Computer Net-
work Defense: Principles, Methods and Applications: Principles,
Methods and Applications, page 201, 2012.
[AM07]
Suranjith Ariyapperuma and Chris J Mitchell. Security vulner-
abilities in dns and dnssec. In Availability, Reliability and Se-
curity, 2007. ARES 2007. The Second International Conference
on, pages 335–342. IEEE, 2007.
[ant]
anticap naive arp poisoning mitigation.
[AP11]
Nadhem J AlFardan and Kenneth G Paterson. An analysis of
dependns. In Information Security, pages 31–38. Springer, 2011.
[AQ13]
Saleh Alshomrani and Shahzad Qamar.
Investigation of dhcp
packets using wireshark. 2013.
[ARM07]
Tuomas Aura, Michael Roe, and Steven J Murdoch. Securing
network location awareness with authenticated dhcp. In Secu-
rity and Privacy in Communications Networks and the Work-
shops, 2007. SecureComm 2007. Third International Conference
on, pages 391–402. IEEE, 2007.
[ARPa]
Arp-guard.
[arpb]
What is arpdefender R⃝designed for?
[ASS09]
Zahra Ahmadian, Somayeh Salimi, and Ahmad Salahi. New at-
tacks on umts network access. In Wireless Telecommunications
Symposium, 2009. WTS 2009, pages 1–6. IEEE, 2009.
[ASS10]
Zahra Ahmadian, Somayeh Salimi, and Ahmad Salahi. Security
enhancements against umts–gsm interworking attacks. Computer
Networks, 54(13):2256–2270, 2010.
[BBK03]
Elad Barkan, Eli Biham, and Nathan Keller. Instant ciphertext-
only cryptanalysis of gsm encrypted communication. In Advances
in Cryptology-CRYPTO 2003, pages 600–616. Springer, 2003.
==PAGE:81==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
69
[BBL05]
Anat Bremler-Barr and Hanoch Levy.
Spooﬁng prevention
method. In INFOCOM 2005. 24th Annual Joint Conference of
the IEEE Computer and Communications Societies. Proceedings
IEEE, volume 1, pages 536–547. IEEE, 2005.
[BC06a]
Valer Bocan and Bocan Cretu. Threats and countermeasures in
gsm networks. Journal of Networks, 1(6):18–27, 2006.
[BC06b]
Valer Bocan and Vladimir Cretu. Mitigating denial of service
threats in gsm networks. In Availability, Reliability and Security,
2006. ARES 2006. The First International Conference on, pages
6–pp. IEEE, 2006.
[BC07]
Jorge Belenguer and Carlos T Calafate. A low-cost embedded ids
to monitor and prevent man-in-the-middle attacks on wired lan
environments. In Emerging Security Information, Systems, and
Technologies, 2007. SecureWare 2007. The International Confer-
ence on, pages 122–127. IEEE, 2007.
[Ber]
D. J. Bernstein. Dns forgery.
[BF01]
Dan Boneh and Matt Franklin. Identity-based encryption from
the weil pairing.
In Advances in Cryptology—CRYPTO 2001,
pages 213–229. Springer, 2001.
[BFZ07]
Hitesh Ballani, Paul Francis, and Xinyang Zhang. A study of pre-
ﬁx hijacking and interception in the internet. In ACM SIGCOMM
Computer Communication Review, volume 37, pages 265–276.
ACM, 2007.
[BH13]
D Balfanz and R Hamilton. Transport layer security (tls) channel
ids. IETF Draft, 2013.
[Bha]
Yusuf Bhaiji. Security features on switches.
[Bha07]
Yusuf
Bhaiji.
Understanding,
preventing,
and
defending
against
layer
2
attacks.
In
Cisco,
http://www.
nanog.
org/meetings/nanog42/presentations/Bhaiji_Layer_2_Attacks.
pdf, 2007.
[BHH+11]
Wade Baker, Alexander Hutton, C David Hylender, Joseph Pa-
mula, D Ph, Marc Spitler, Mark Goudie, Christopher Novak,
Mike Rosen, Peter Tippett, Calvin Chang, and Jason Fisher.
Data breach investigations report. Methodology, Band 36:1–63,
2011.
==PAGE:82==
70
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[BHS+11]
Xiaolong Bai, Liang Hu, Zixing Song, Feiyan Chen, and Kuo
Zhao. Defense against dns man-in-the-middle spooﬁng. In Web
Information Systems and Mining, pages 312–319. Springer, 2011.
[BJK11]
Kevin Benton, Juyeon Jo, and Yoohwan Kim. Signaturecheck:
a protocol to detect man-in-the-middle attack in ssl.
In Pro-
ceedings of the Seventh Annual Workshop on Cyber Security and
Information Intelligence Research, page 60. ACM, 2011.
[BK11]
SG Bhirud and Vijay Katkar. Light weight approach for ip-arp
spooﬁng detection and prevention. In Internet (AH-ICI), 2011
Second Asian Himalayas International Conference on, pages 1–5.
IEEE, 2011.
[BOR03]
Danilo Bruschi, Alberto Ornaghi, and Emilia Rosti.
S-arp: a
secure address resolution protocol. In Computer Security Appli-
cations Conference, 2003. Proceedings. 19th Annual, pages 66–74.
IEEE, 2003.
[BRR+11]
FA Barbhuiya, S Roopa, R Ratti, N Hubballi, S Biswas, A Sur,
S Nandi, and V Ramachandran. An active host-based detection
mechanism for arp-related attacks. In Advances in Networks and
Communications, pages 432–443. Springer, 2011.
[BS04]
Fred Baker and Pekka Savola. Ingress ﬁltering for multihomed
networks. Technical report, BCP 84, RFC 3704, March, 2004.
[CAP]
Capec-94: Man in the middle attack.
[Cat]
Catalyst 6500 release 12.2sx software conﬁguration guide.
[Cat12]
Cisco Catalyst.
6500 series switches.
Catalyst Switched
Port Analyzer(SPAN) Conﬁguration Example. Disponível em:<
http://www. cisco. com/image/gif/paws/10570/41. pdf>. Acesso
em, 20, 2012.
[CG03]
M Carnut and J Gondim. Arp spooﬁng detection on switched
ethernet networks: A feasibility study. In Proceedings of the 5th
Simposio Seguranca em Informatica, 2003.
[CGZY07]
Zhen Chen, Shize Guo, Kangfeng Zheng, and Yixian Yang. Mod-
eling of man-in-the-middle attack in the wireless networks. In
Wireless Communications, Networking and Mobile Computing,
2007. WiCom 2007. International Conference on, pages 2255–
2258. IEEE, 2007.
==PAGE:83==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
71
[Cha11]
Praphul Chandra. Bulletproof Wireless Security: GSM, UMTS,
802.11, and Ad Hoc Security. Elsevier, 2011.
[Cho14]
Alexander Chopra. Man in the middle (mitm) dns spooﬁng ex-
plained. 2014.
[Cia09]
Mark Ciampa. Comptia security+ 2008 in depth. Cengage Learn-
ing, 2009.
[CLC05]
Chin-Chen Chang, Jung-San Lee, and Ya-Fen Chang. Eﬃcient
authentication protocols of gsm.
Computer Communications,
28(8):921–928, 2005.
[COE]
NATO CCD COE. Detecting and defeating advanced man-in-
the-middle attacks against tls.
[CvO13]
Jeremy Clark and Paul C van Oorschot.
Sok: Ssl and https:
Revisiting past challenges and evaluating certiﬁcate trust model
enhancements. In Security and Privacy (SP), 2013 IEEE Sym-
posium on, pages 511–525. IEEE, 2013.
[CW10]
Wei-Lin Chen and Quincy Wu. A proof of mitm vulnerability
in public wlans guarded by captive portal. Proceedings of the
Asia-Paciﬁc Advanced Network, 30:66–70, 2010.
[CYMK11]
Ming-Hsing Chiu, Kuo-Pao Yang, Randall Meyer, and Tristan
Kidder. Analysis of a man-in-the-middle experiment with wire-
shark. In Proceedings of the 2011 International Conference on
Security and Management (SAM’11), pages 461–464, 2011.
[D+01]
R Droms et al. Authentication for dhcp messages; rfc3118. txt.
IETF Standard, Internet Engineering Task Force, IETF, CH,
2001.
[DA99]
Tim Dierks and Christopher Allen. Rfc 2246: The tls protocol.
IETF, January, 1999.
[DAT12]
Italo Dacosta, Mustaque Ahamad, and Patrick Traynor. Trust
no one else: Detecting mitm attacks against ssl/tls without third-
parties. In Computer Security–ESORICS 2012, pages 199–216.
Springer, 2012.
[DAV+08]
David Dagon, Manos Antonakakis, Paul Vixie, Tatuya Jinmei,
and Wenke Lee. Increased dns forgery resistance through 0x20-
bit encoding: security via leet queries.
In Proceedings of the
==PAGE:84==
72
BIBLIOGRAPHY
15th ACM conference on Computer and communications secu-
rity, pages 211–222. ACM, 2008.
[DCBW12]
Michael Dietz, Alexei Czeskis, Dirk Balfanz, and Dan S Wallach.
Origin-bound certiﬁcates: A fresh approach to strong client au-
thentication for the web. In USENIX Security Symposium, pages
317–331, 2012.
[det]
Detector.io.
[DGLR+13]
Kathryn De Graaf, John Liddy, Paul Raison, John C Scano, and
Sanjay Wadhwa.
Dynamic host conﬁguration protocol (dhcp)
authentication using challenge handshake authentication proto-
col (chap) challenge, October 8 2013. US Patent 8,555,347.
[DKH11]
Surakarn Duangphasuk, Supakorn Kungpisdan, and Sumeena
Hankla. Design and implementation of improved security proto-
cols for dhcp using digital certiﬁcates. In Networks (ICON), 2011
17th IEEE International Conference on, pages 287–292. IEEE,
2011.
[DL05]
Thomas Demuth and Achim Leitner. Arp spooﬁng and poisoning:
Traﬃc tricks. Linux magazine, 56:26–31, 2005.
[DLH11]
Jiang Du, Xinghui Li, and Hua Huang. A study of man-in-the-
middle attack based on ssl certiﬁcate interaction. In Instrumen-
tation, Measurement, Computer, Communication and Control,
2011 First International Conference on, pages 445–448. IEEE,
2011.
[DNS]
Dnscurve: Usable security for dns.
[DT14]
Dumitru Daniel Dinu and Mihai Togan. Dhcp server authenti-
cation using digital certiﬁcates. In Communications (COMM),
2014 10th International Conference on, pages 1–6. IEEE, 2014.
[DYC06]
Zhenhai Duan, Xin Yuan, and Jaideep Chandrashekar.
Con-
structing inter-domain packet ﬁlters to control ip spooﬁng based
on bgp updates. In INFOCOM, 2006.
[E+00]
Donald E Eastlake et al. Dns request and transaction signatures
(sig (0) s). 2000.
[EA14]
Donald Eastlake and Mark Andrews. Domain name system (dns)
cookies. 2014.
==PAGE:85==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
73
[EFF]
Eﬀ. the eﬀssl observatory.
[EL09]
Toby Ehrenkranz and Jun Li. On the state of ip spooﬁng defense.
ACM Transactions on Internet Technology (TOIT), 9(2):6, 2009.
[EP11]
Chris Evans and Chris Palmer. Public key pinning extension for
http. 2011.
[Ett]
Ettus research.
[Eva]
Dave Evans. The internet of things how the next evolution of the
internet is changing everything.
[FBG09]
Ali Fanian, Mehdi Berenjkoub, and T Aaron Gulliver. A new mu-
tual authentication protocol for gsm networks. In Electrical and
Computer Engineering, 2009. CCECE’09. Canadian Conference
on, pages 798–803. IEEE, 2009.
[FBG15]
Ali Fanian, Mehdi Berenjkoub, and T Aaron Gulliver. A tesla-
based mutual authentication protocol for gsm networks. The ISC
International Journal of Information Security, 1(1), 2015.
[FEOS07]
Sheila Frankel, Bernard Eydt, Les Owens, and Karen Scarfone.
Establishing wireless robust security networks: a guide to ieee
802.11 i. National Institute of Standards and Technology, 2007.
[Fer00]
Paul Ferguson.
Network ingress ﬁltering: Defeating denial of
service attacks which employ ip source address spooﬁng. 2000.
[FR12]
Faheem Fayyaz and Hamza Rasheed.
Using jpcap to prevent
man-in-the-middle attacks in a local area network environment.
Potentials, IEEE, 31(4):35–37, 2012.
[G+]
LNR Group et al. Arpwatch, the ethemet monitor program; for
keeping track of ethemet/ip address pairings.
[Gen]
Julius Genachowski. Fcc csric makes recommendations regarding
isp cyber security.
[GH03]
Mohamed G Gouda and Chin-Tser Huang.
A secure address
resolution protocol. Computer Networks, 41(1):57–71, 2003.
[GHS03]
Glenn Glazer, Cora Hussey, and Roy Shea.
Certiﬁcate-based
authentication for dhcp, 2003.
==PAGE:86==
74
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[GIJ+12]
Martin Georgiev, Subodh Iyengar, Suman Jana, Rishita Anub-
hai, Dan Boneh, and Vitaly Shmatikov.
The most dangerous
code in the world: validating ssl certiﬁcates in non-browser soft-
ware. In Proceedings of the 2012 ACM conference on Computer
and communications security, pages 38–49. ACM, 2012.
[Gre05]
Ian Green. Dns spooﬁng by the man in the middle. 2005.
[GT05]
Vipul Goyal and Rohit Tripathy. An eﬃcient solution to the arp
cache poisoning problem. In Information Security and Privacy,
pages 40–51. Springer, 2005.
[HG14]
Tzonelih Hwang and Prosanta Gope.
Provably secure mutual
authentication and key exchange scheme for expeditious mobile
communication through synchronously one-time secrets. Wireless
personal communications, 77(1):197–224, 2014.
[HH08]
Keijo MJ Haataja and Konstantin Hypponen. Man-in-the-middle
attacks on bluetooth: a comparative analysis, a novel attack,
and countermeasures. In Communications, Control and Signal
Processing, 2008. ISCCSP 2008. 3rd International Symposium
on, pages 1096–1102. IEEE, 2008.
[HHJ11]
Seong-Cheol Hong, James Won-Ki Hong, and Hongtaek Ju. Ip
preﬁx hijacking detection using the collection of as characteris-
tics. In Network Operations and Management Symposium (AP-
NOMS), 2011 13th Asia-Paciﬁc, pages 1–7. IEEE, 2011.
[HJB12]
JeﬀHodges, Collin Jackson, and Adam Barth. Http strict trans-
port security (hsts). URL: http://tools. ietf. org/html/draft-ietf-
websec-strict-transport-sec-04, 2012.
[HJH13]
Seong-Cheol Hong, Hongtaek Ju, and James Won-Ki Hong. Net-
work reachability-based ip preﬁx hijacking detection. Interna-
tional Journal of Network Management, 23(1):1–15, 2013.
[HJT10]
Xiangning Hou, Zhiping Jiang, and Xinli Tian. The detection
and prevention for arp spooﬁng based on snort. In Computer
Application and System Modeling (ICCASM), 2010 International
Conference on, volume 5, pages V5–137. IEEE, 2010.
[HLAT00]
Ken Hornstein, Ted Lemon, Bernard Aboba, and Jonathan Tros-
tle. Dhcp authentication via kerberos v. WORK IN PROGRESS
Internet Draft draft-hornstein-dhc-kerbauth-02. txt, 2000.
==PAGE:87==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
75
[HM07]
Xin Hu and Zhuoqing Morley Mao. Accurate real-time identiﬁca-
tion of ip preﬁx hijacking. In Security and Privacy, 2007. SP’07.
IEEE Symposium on, pages 3–17. IEEE, 2007.
[Hol14]
Ralph-Günther Holz. Empirical analysis of Public Key Infras-
tructures and investigation of improvements. PhD thesis, Uni-
versitätsbibliothek der TU München, 2014.
[HRA11]
GeoﬀHuston, Mattia Rossi, and Grenville Armitage. Securing
bgp—a literature survey. Communications Surveys & Tutorials,
IEEE, 13(2):199–222, 2011.
[HREJ14]
Lin Shung Huang, Alex Rice, Erling Ellingsen, and Collin Jack-
son. Analyzing forged ssl certiﬁcates in the wild. In Security and
Privacy (SP), 2014 IEEE Symposium on, pages 83–97. IEEE,
2014.
[HRKC12]
Ralph Holz, Thomas Riedmaier, Nils Kammenhuber, and Georg
Carle. X. 509 forensics: Detecting and localising the ssl/tls men-
in-the-middle. In Computer Security–ESORICS 2012, pages 217–
234. Springer, 2012.
[HRR+10]
Neminath Hubballi, S Roopa, Ritesh Ratti, Ferdous A Barb-
huiya, Santosh Biswas, Arijit Sur, Sukumar Nandi, and Vivek
Ramachandran. An active intrusion detection system for lan spe-
ciﬁc attacks. In Advances in Computer Science and Information
Technology, pages 129–142. Springer, 2010.
[HS12a]
Amir Herzberg and Haya Shulman. Antidotes for dns poisoning
by oﬀ-path adversaries. In Availability, Reliability and Security
(ARES), 2012 Seventh International Conference on, pages 262–
267. IEEE, 2012.
[HS12b]
Amir Herzberg and Haya Shulman. Unilateral antidotes to dns
poisoning. In Security and Privacy in Communication Networks,
pages 319–336. Springer, 2012.
[HS12c]
Paul Hoﬀman and Jakob Schlyter. The dns-based authentication
of named entities (dane) transport layer security (tls) protocol:
Tlsa. Technical report, RFC 6698, August, 2012.
[HSS11]
Yu-Lun Huang, Chih-Ya Shen, and Shiuhpyng Winston Shieh. S-
aka: a provable and secure authentication key agreement protocol
for umts networks. Vehicular Technology, IEEE Transactions on,
60(9):4509–4519, 2011.
==PAGE:88==
76
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[HT09]
Guo Hao and Guo Tao. Principle of and protection of man-in-
the-middle attack based on arp spooﬁng.
JIPS, 5(3):131–134,
2009.
[HTL00]
Min-Shiang Hwang, Yuan-Liang Tang, and Cheng-Chi Lee. An
eﬃcient authentication protocol for gsm networks.
In EURO-
COMM 2000. Information Systems for Enhanced Public Safety
and Security. IEEE/AFCEA, pages 326–329. IEEE, 2000.
[HZ09]
Clint Hepner and Earl Zmijewski. Defending against bgp man-
in-the-middle attacks. In Black Hat DC Conference, 2009.
[ICS]
The icsi certiﬁcate notary.
[JH07]
HongIl Ju and JongWook Han.
Dhcp message authentication
with an eﬀective key management. World Academy of Science,
Engineering and Technology, 8:570–574, 2007.
[JLSM08]
Yves Igor Jerschow, Christian Lochert, Björn Scheuermann, and
Martin Mauve.
Cll: A cryptographic link layer for local area
networks. In Security and Cryptography for Networks, pages 21–
38. Springer, 2008.
[JSLS07]
Yong Wan Ju, Kwan Ho Song, Eung Jae Lee, and Yong Tae
Shin. Cache poisoning detection method for improving security of
recursive dns. In Advanced Communication Technology, The 9th
International Conference on, volume 3, pages 1961–1965. IEEE,
2007.
[KAC04]
Kyohyeok Kwon, Seongjin Ahn, and Jin Wook Chung. Network
security management using arp spooﬁng. In Computational Sci-
ence and Its Applications–ICCSA 2004, pages 142–149. Springer,
2004.
[Kam08]
Dan Kaminsky. It’s the end of the cache as we know it. Presen-
tation at Blackhat Brieﬁngs, 2008.
[KC14]
Nikolaos Karapanos and Srdjan Capkun. On the eﬀective preven-
tion of tls man-in-the-middle attacks in web applications. IACR
Cryptology ePrint Archive, 2014:150, 2014.
[KFR06]
Josh Karlin, Stephanie Forrest, and Jennifer Rexford.
Pretty
good bgp: Improving bgp by cautiously adopting routes.
In
Network Protocols, 2006. ICNP’06. Proceedings of the 2006 14th
IEEE International Conference on, pages 290–299. IEEE, 2006.
==PAGE:89==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
77
[KHM09]
Suresh Krishnaswamy, Wes Hardaker, and Russ Mundy. Dnssec
in practice: Using dnssec-tools to deploy dnssec. In Conference
For Homeland Security, 2009. CATCH’09. Cybersecurity Appli-
cations & Technology, pages 3–15. IEEE, 2009.
[KLS00]
Stephen Kent, Charles Lynn, and Karen Seo. Secure border gate-
way protocol (s-bgp). Selected Areas in Communications, IEEE
Journal on, 18(4):582–592, 2000.
[KMRV03]
Christopher Kruegel, Darren Mutz, William Robertson, and
Fredrik Valeur. Topology-based detection of anomalous bgp mes-
sages. In Recent Advances in Intrusion Detection, pages 17–35.
Springer, 2003.
[KP11]
K Kalajdzic and A Patel. Active detection and prevention of so-
phisticated arp-poisoning man-in-the-middle attacks on switched
ethernet lans. In Proceedings of the Sixth International Work-
shop on Digital Forensics and Incident Analysis (WDFIA 2011),
page 81. Lulu. com, 2011.
[KS02]
Tadashi Komori and Takamichi Saito. The secure dhcp system
with user authentication.
In Local Computer Networks, 2002.
Proceedings. LCN 2002. 27th Annual IEEE Conference on, pages
123–131. IEEE, 2002.
[KSK+15]
Jonghoon Kwon, Dongwon Seo, Minjin Kwon, Heejo Lee, Adrian
Perrig, and Hyogon Kim.
An incrementally deployable anti-
spooﬁng mechanism for software-deﬁned networks.
Computer
Communications, 2015.
[KSKS06]
K Phani Kumar, G Shailaja, A Kavitha, and Ashutosh Saxena.
Mutual authentication and key agreement for gsm.
In Mobile
Business, 2006. ICMB’06. International Conference on, pages
25–25. IEEE, 2006.
[KVT13]
Rajneesh Kumar, Shekhar Verma, and Geetam Singh Tomar.
Thwarting address resolution protocol poisoning using man in
the middle attack in wlan. International Journal of Reliable In-
formation and Assurance, 1(1):8–19, 2013.
[Lam81]
Leslie Lamport. Password authentication with insecure commu-
nication. Communications of the ACM, 24(11):770–772, 1981.
[Lan11]
Adam Langley. Public key pinning. ImperialViolet (blog), 2011.
==PAGE:90==
78
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Lan12]
A Langley. Certiﬁcate transparency. imperialviolet, 2012.
[LBV14]
Bingyang Liu, Jun Bi, and Athanasios V Vasilakos. Toward in-
centivizing anti-spooﬁng deployment. Information Forensics and
Security, IEEE Transactions on, 9(3):436–450, 2014.
[LEM07]
Wesam Lootah, William Enck, and Patrick McDaniel.
Tarp:
Ticket-based address resolution protocol. Computer Networks,
51(15):4322–4337, 2007.
[Lep14]
Matt Lepinski. Bgpsec protocol speciﬁcation. 2014.
[LKHP07]
Heejo Lee, Minjin Kwon, Geoﬀrey Hasker, and Adrian Per-
rig.
Base: An incrementally deployable mechanism for viable
ip spooﬁng prevention.
In Proceedings of the 2nd ACM sym-
posium on Information, computer and communications security,
pages 20–31. ACM, 2007.
[LL11]
P Limmaneewichid and W Lilakiatsakun. P-arp: A novel en-
hanced authentication scheme for securing arp. In Proceedings
of International Conference on Computer Communication and
Management (ICCCM 2011), 2011.
[LLH11]
Cheng-Chi Lee, I-En Liao, and Min-Shiang Hwang. An eﬃcient
authentication protocol for mobile communications. Telecommu-
nication Systems, 46(1):31–41, 2011.
[LLYW08]
Xin Liu, Ang Li, Xiaowei Yang, and David Wetherall. Passport:
Secure and adoptable source authentication. In NSDI, volume 8,
pages 365–378, 2008.
[LMP+06]
Mohit Lad, Daniel Massey, Dan Pei, Yiguo Wu, Beichuan Zhang,
and Lixia Zhang. Phas: A preﬁx hijack alert system. In Usenix
Security, 2006.
[LMW+02]
Jun Li, Jelena Mirkovic, Mengqiu Wang, Peter Reiher, and Lixia
Zhang.
Save:
Source address validity enforcement protocol.
In INFOCOM 2002. Twenty-First Annual Joint Conference of
the IEEE Computer and Communications Societies. Proceedings.
IEEE, volume 3, pages 1557–1566. IEEE, 2002.
[LSC12]
Yujing Liux, Jinshu Su, and Rocky KC Chang. Ldc: Detect-
ing bgp preﬁx hijacking by load distribution change.
In Par-
allel and Distributed Processing Symposium Workshops & PhD
Forum (IPDPSW), 2012 IEEE 26th International, pages 1197–
1203. IEEE, 2012.
==PAGE:91==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
79
[Lut]
Braden Luthi. Improving security of mobile devices.
[Mar11]
Moxie Marlinspike. Ssl and the future of authenticity. Black Hat
USA, 2011.
[Mar13]
Moxie Marlinspike. Trust assertions for certiﬁcate keys. 2013.
[Mit01]
Chris Mitchell. The security of the gsm air interface protocol.
Univ. of London, Royal Holloway, RHUL-MA-2001-3, 2001.
[MOAM14]
Danny McPherson, Eric Osterweil, Shane Amante, and Dave
Mitchell. Route-leaks & mitm attacks against bgpsec. 2014.
[mob]
Ericsson mobility report.
[MSI12]
Husameldin Mukhtar, Khaled Salah, and Youssef Iraqi. Mitiga-
tion of dhcp starvation attack. Computers & Electrical Engineer-
ing, 38(5):1115–1128, 2012.
[Mur06]
Sandra Murphy. Bgp security vulnerabilities analysis. 2006.
[MW04a]
Ulrike Meyer and Susanne Wetzel. A man-in-the-middle attack
on umts. In Proceedings of the 3rd ACM workshop on Wireless
security, pages 90–97. ACM, 2004.
[MW04b]
Ulrike Meyer and Susanne Wetzel. On the impact of gsm encryp-
tion and man-in-the-middle attacks on the security of interoper-
ating gsm/umts networks. In Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio
Communications, 2004. PIMRC 2004. 15th IEEE International
Symposium on, volume 4, pages 2876–2883. IEEE, 2004.
[MY07]
Taka Mizuguchi and Tomoya Yoshida. Inter-domain routing se-
curity˜ bgp route hijacking˜. In Proceedings of Asia Paciﬁc Re-
gional Internet conference on Operational Technologies (APRI-
COT 2007), 2007.
[NDP13]
Seung Yeob Nam, Sirojiddin Djuraev, and Minho Park. Collab-
orative approach to mitigating arp poisoning-based man-in-the-
middle attacks. Computer Networks, 57(18):3866–3884, 2013.
[net]
Ict facts and ﬁgures – the world in 2015.
[NJK+12]
Seung Yeob Nam, Sirojiddin Jurayev, Seung-Sik Kim, Kwonhue
Choi, and Gyu Sang Choi. Mitigating arp poisoning-based man-
in-the-middle attacks in wired or wireless lan. EURASIP Jour-
nal on Wireless Communications and Networking, 2012(1):1–17,
2012.
==PAGE:92==
80
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[NKK10]
Seung Yeob Nam, Dongwon Kim, and Jeongeun Kim. Enhanced
arp: preventing arp poisoning-based man-in-the-middle attacks.
Communications Letters, IEEE, 14(2):187–189, 2010.
[NNS10]
G Nath Nayak and Shefalika Ghosh Samaddar. Diﬀerent ﬂavours
of man-in-the-middle attack, consequences and feasible solutions.
In Computer Science and Information Technology (ICCSIT),
2010 3rd IEEE International Conference on, volume 5, pages
491–495. IEEE, 2010.
[NUI+12]
T Naqash, FB Ubaid, A Ishfaq, et al. Protecting dns from cache
poisoning attack by using secure proxy. In Emerging Technolo-
gies (ICET), 2012 International Conference on, pages 1–5. IEEE,
2012.
[OHB06]
Rolf Oppliger, Ralf Hauser, and David Basin.
Ssl/tls session-
aware user authentication–or how to eﬀectively thwart the man-
in-the-middle.
Computer Communications, 29(12):2238–2246,
2006.
[OHJ10]
Hsia-Hung Ou, Min-Shiang Hwang, and Jinn-Ke Jan. A cocktail
protocol with the authentication and key agreement on the umts.
Journal of Systems and Software, 83(2):316–325, 2010.
[OKHC12]
Myeongjin Oh, Y-G Kim, Seungpyo Hong, and S Cha.
Asa:
agent-based secure arp cache management. IET communications,
6(7):685–693, 2012.
[OMCA09]
Andre P Ortega, Xavier E Marcos, Luis D Chiang, and Cristina L
Abad. Preventing arp cache poisoning attacks: A proof of con-
cept using openwrt.
In Network Operations and Management
Symposium, 2009. LANOMS 2009. Latin American, pages 1–9.
IEEE, 2009.
[ONTN13]
Michael Oche, Mostofa Kamal Nasir, Abubakar Bello Tambawal,
and Raﬁdah Md Noor. Securing voip network: An overview of
applied approaches and analysis. In Information Science, Com-
puting and Telecommunications (PACT), 2013 Pan African In-
ternational Conference on, pages 104–109. IEEE, 2013.
[Ope]
Openbts.org.
[OV03]
Alberto Ornaghi and Marco Valleri. Man in the middle attacks.
In Blackhat Conference Europe, 2003.
==PAGE:93==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
81
[PA14]
Marnel PERADILLA and J William ATWOOD. Secure mobil-
ity management application capable of fast layer 3 handovers for
mipv6-non-aware mobile hosts. IEICE Transactions on Commu-
nications, 97(7):1375–1384, 2014.
[Pai10]
Michael Paik. Stragglers of the herd get eaten: Security con-
cerns for gsm mobile banking applications.
In Proceedings of
the Eleventh Workshop on Mobile Computing Systems & Appli-
cations, pages 54–59. ACM, 2010.
[PALL09]
Roberto Perdisci, Manos Antonakakis, Xiapu Luo, and Wenke
Lee. Wsec dns: Protecting recursive dns resolvers from poison-
ing attacks. In Dependable Systems & Networks, 2009. DSN’09.
IEEE/IFIP International Conference on, pages 3–12. IEEE,
2009.
[Pat15]
Sonal Patel.
Various anti ip spooﬁng techniques.
Journal of
Engineering Computers & Applied Sciences, 4(1):7–31, 2015.
[PC08]
Detchasit Pansa and Thawatchai Chomsiri.
Architecture and
protocols for secure lan by using a software-level certiﬁcate and
cancellation of arp protocol. In Convergence and Hybrid Infor-
mation Technology, 2008. ICCIT’08. Third International Con-
ference on, volume 2, pages 21–26. IEEE, 2008.
[PCGCdV98]
JM Pousada-Carballo, FJ Gonzblez-Castaiio, and F Isasi de Vi-
cente. Jamming system for mobile communications. Electronics
Letters, 34(22):2166–2167, 1998.
[Pei04]
Alberto Peinado. Privacy and authentication protocol provid-
ing anonymous channels in gsm.
Computer Communications,
27(17):1709–1715, 2004.
[Phi07]
Roney Philip. Securing wireless networks from arp cache poison-
ing. 2007.
[PK08]
Alex Pilosov and Tony Kapela.
Stealing the internet:
An
internet-scale man in the middle attack. NANOG-44, Los Ange-
les, October, pages 12–15, 2008.
[PK09]
Thor Siiger Prentow and Mads Vering Krarup. Mitm attacks on
ssl/tls related to renegotiation. 2009.
[PKB10]
Stacy Prowell, Rob Kraus, and Mike Borkin. Seven Deadliest
Network Attacks. Elsevier, 2010.
==PAGE:94==
82
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[PL01]
Kihong Park and Heejo Lee. On the eﬀectiveness of route-based
packet ﬁltering for distributed dos attack prevention in power-
law internets. In ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication
Review, volume 31, pages 15–26. ACM, 2001.
[PP06]
Lindsey Poole and Vivek S Pai. Conﬁdns: Leveraging scale and
history to improve dns security. In WORLDS, 2006.
[PPPW04]
KyoungSoo Park, Vivek S Pai, Larry L Peterson, and Zhe Wang.
Codns: Improving dns performance and reliability via coopera-
tive lookups. In OSDI, volume 4, pages 14–14, 2004.
[PS12]
Somnuk Puangpronpitag and Nattavut Sriwiboon. Simple and
lightweight https enforcement to protect against ssl striping at-
tack.
In Computational Intelligence, Communication Systems
and Networks (CICSyN), 2012 Fourth International Conference
on, pages 229–234. IEEE, 2012.
[RL95]
Yakov Rekhter and Tony Li. A border gateway protocol 4 (bgp-
4). 1995.
[RN05]
Vivek Ramachandran and Sukumar Nandi. Detecting arp spoof-
ing: An active technique. In Information Systems Security, pages
239–250. Springer, 2005.
[SA06]
S Muhammad Siddique and Muhammad Amir.
Gsm security
issues and challenges. 2006.
[SBN12]
Naga Rohit Samineni, Ferdous A Barbhuiya, and Sukumar
Nandi.
Stealth and semi-stealth mitm attacks, detection and
defense in ipv4 networks. In Parallel Distributed and Grid Com-
puting (PDGC), 2012 2nd IEEE International Conference on,
pages 364–367. IEEE, 2012.
[SC13]
Neetesh Saxena and Narendra S Chaudhari. Saka: a secure au-
thentication and key agreement protocol for gsm networks. CSI
transactions on ICT, 1(4):331–341, 2013.
[SC14a]
Neetesh Saxena and Narendra S Chaudhari.
Ns-aka: An im-
proved and eﬃcient aka protocol for 3g (umts) networks. In In-
ternational conference on advances in computer science and elec-
tronics engineering (CSEE’14), Kuala Lampur, Malaysia, pages
220–224, 2014.
==PAGE:95==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
83
[SC14b]
Neetesh Saxena and Narendra S Chaudhari. Secure-aka: An ef-
ﬁcient aka protocol for umts networks. Wireless Personal Com-
munications, 78(2):1345–1373, 2014.
[SCCL09]
Hung-Min Sun, Wen-Hsuan Chang, Shih-Ying Chang, and Yue-
Hsun Lin. Dependns: Dependable mechanism against dns cache
poisoning. In Cryptology and Network Security, pages 174–188.
Springer, 2009.
[SEA+09]
Joshua Sunshine, Serge Egelman, Hazim Almuhimedi, Neha Atri,
and Lorrie Faith Cranor. Crying wolf: An empirical study of ssl
warning eﬀectiveness.
In USENIX Security Symposium, pages
399–416, 2009.
[Sem97]
Javier Gozalvez Sempere.
An overview of the gsm system.
Glsagow, Scotland, 1997.
[SF03]
Tomoaki Sato and Masa-aki Fukase. Reconﬁgurable hardware im-
plementation of host-based ids. In Communications, 2003. APCC
2003. The 9th Asia-Paciﬁc Conference on, volume 2, pages 849–
853. IEEE, 2003.
[SKG+09]
Craig Shue, Andrew J Kalafut, Minaxi Gupta, et al.
A uni-
ﬁed approach to intra-domain security. In Computational Sci-
ence and Engineering, 2009. CSE’09. International Conference
on, volume 3, pages 219–224. IEEE, 2009.
[SLJ+14]
Min Su Song, Jae Dong Lee, Young-Sik Jeong, Hwa-Young Jeong,
and Jong Hyuk Park. Ds-arp: a new detection scheme for arp
spooﬁng attacks based on routing trace for ubiquitous environ-
ments. The Scientiﬁc World Journal, 2014, 2014.
[SLK01]
Karen Seo, Charles Lynn, and Stephen Kent.
Public-key in-
frastructure for the secure border gateway protocol (s-bgp). In
DARPA Information Survivability Conference &amp; Exposition
II, 2001. DISCEX’01. Proceedings, volume 1, pages 239–253.
IEEE, 2001.
[SMSG+15]
MS Siddiqui, D Montero, R Serral-Gracià, X Masip-Bruin, and
M Yannuzzi. A survey on the recent eﬀorts of the internet stan-
dardization body for securing inter-domain routing. Computer
Networks, 80:1–26, 2015.
==PAGE:96==
84
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[SRS+04]
Lakshminarayanan Subramanian, Volker Roth, Ion Stoica, Scott
Shenker, and Randy Katz. Listen and whisper: Security mecha-
nisms for bgp. In Proc. First Symposium on Networked Systems
Design and Implementation (NSDI), page 11, 2004.
[SRS13]
B Sugavanesh, Hari Prasath R, and S Selvakumar.
Shs-https
enforcer: enforcing https and preventing mitm attacks.
ACM
SIGSOFT Software Engineering Notes, 38(6):1–4, 2013.
[SS10]
Sooel Son and Vitaly Shmatikov. The hitchhiker’s guide to dns
cache poisoning. In Security and Privacy in Communication Net-
works, pages 466–483. Springer, 2010.
[SS12]
Christopher Soghoian and Sid Stamm. Certiﬁed lies: Detecting
and defeating government interception attacks against ssl (short
paper). In Financial Cryptography and Data Security, pages 250–
259. Springer, 2012.
[SS14]
Manish Shrivastava and Vineeta Singh. Dns server cryptography
using symmetric key cryptography. 2014.
[Ste03]
Joe Stewart. Dns cache poisoning–the next generation, 2003.
[Str07]
Daehyun Strobel. Imsi catcher. Chair for Communication Secu-
rity, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, page 14, 2007.
[Su05]
N Su. Streams programming guide. 2005.
[SW14]
Haya Shulman and Michael Waidner. Towards forensic analysis of
attacks with dnssec. In Security and Privacy Workshops (SPW),
2014 IEEE, pages 69–76. IEEE, 2014.
[SXW+12]
Xingang Shi, Yang Xiang, Zhiliang Wang, Xia Yin, and Jianping
Wu. Detecting preﬁx hijackings in the internet with argus. In
Proceedings of the 2012 ACM conference on Internet measure-
ment conference, pages 15–28. ACM, 2012.
[SY]
Shradha Shukla and Indresh Yadav. An innovative method for
detection and prevention against arp spooﬁng in manet.
[Tan03]
Matthew Tanase. Ip spooﬁng: an introduction. Security Focus,
11, 2003.
[TB08]
Mohsen Toorani and A Beheshti. Solutions to the gsm security
weaknesses.
In Next Generation Mobile Applications, Services
and Technologies, 2008. NGMAST’08. The Second International
Conference on, pages 576–581. IEEE, 2008.
==PAGE:97==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
85
[TD99]
Mahesh V Tripunitara and Partha Dutta.
A middleware ap-
proach to asynchronous and backward compatible detection and
prevention of arp cache poisoning. In Computer Security Appli-
cations Conference, 1999.(ACSAC’99) Proceedings. 15th Annual,
pages 303–309. IEEE, 1999.
[TEH07]
Zouheir Trabelsi and Wassim El-Hajj. Preventing arp attacks us-
ing a fuzzy-based stateful arp cache. In Communications, 2007.
ICC’07. IEEE International Conference on, pages 1355–1360.
IEEE, 2007.
[Tet]
Ilya Teterin. arp spooﬁng defence.
[TPBH]
ND Thuc, NC Phu, TN Bao, and VT Hai. A sofware solution
for defending against man-in-the-middle attacks on wlan.
[TS06]
Zouheir Trabelsi and Khaled Shuaib. Nis04-4: Man in the middle
intrusion detection. In Global Telecommunications Conference,
2006. GLOBECOM’06. IEEE, pages 1–6. IEEE, 2006.
[UMT]
Traﬃc and market report.
[VAPCDV+02] Javier Vales-Alonso, José M Pousada-Carballo, Fernando Isasi
De Vicente, Manuel J Fernández-Iglesias, et al.
Real-time in-
terception systems for the gsm protocol. Vehicular Technology,
IEEE Transactions on, 51(5):904–914, 2002.
[Ved93]
Klaus Vedder. Security aspects of mobile communications. In
Computer Security and Industrial Cryptography, pages 193–210.
Springer, 1993.
[VGEW00]
Paul Vixie,
Olafur Gudmundsson,
D Eastlake,
and Brian
Wellington. Secret key transaction authentication for dns (tsig).
Technical report, RFC 2845, May, 2000.
[vOWK07]
Paul C van Oorschot, Tao Wan, and Evangelos Kranakis. On in-
terdomain routing security and pretty secure bgp (psbgp). ACM
Transactions on Information and System Security (TISSEC),
10(3):11, 2007.
[Wag01]
Robert Wagner. Address resolution protocol spooﬁng and man-
in-the-middle attacks. The SANS Institute, 2001.
[Wah10]
Khan Ferdous Wahid. Rethinking the link security approach to
manage large scale ethernet network. In Local and Metropolitan
==PAGE:98==
86
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Area Networks (LANMAN), 2010 17th IEEE Workshop on, pages
1–6. IEEE, 2010.
[WAP08]
Dan Wendlandt, David G Andersen, and Adrian Perrig.
Per-
spectives: Improving ssh-style host authentication with multi-
path probing. In USENIX Annual Technical Conference, pages
321–334, 2008.
[Whi03]
Russ White. Securing bgp through secure origin bgp (sobgp).
Business Communications Review, 33(5):47–53, 2003.
[WJS07]
Haining Wang, Cheng Jin, and Kang G Shin. Defense against
spoofed ip traﬃc using hop-count ﬁltering. IEEE/ACM Trans-
actions on Networking (ToN), 15(1):40–53, 2007.
[WMS12]
Matthias Wählisch, Olaf Maennel, and Thomas C Schmidt. To-
wards detecting bgp route hijacking using the rpki. ACM SIG-
COMM Computer Communication Review, 42(4):103–104, 2012.
[WXM11]
Marcus Wong, Yixian Xu, and Serge Manning. An authentication
method based on certiﬁcate for dhcp. 2011.
[WYWC11]
Libing Wu, Tianshui Yu, Dan Wu, and Jing Cheng.
The re-
search and implementation of arp monitoring and protection. In
Internet Technology and Applications (iTAP), 2011 International
Conference on, pages 1–4. IEEE, 2011.
[WZP10]
Shuhua Wu, Yuefei Zhu, and Qiong Pu. Security analysis of a
cocktail protocol with the authentication and key agreement on
the umts. IEEE Communications Letters, 14(4):366–368, 2010.
[Xen08]
Christos Xenakis. Security measures and weaknesses of the gprs
security architecture. IJ Network Security, 6(2):158–169, 2008.
[XXF11]
Yu Xi, Chen Xiaochen, and Xu Fangqin. Recovering and pro-
tecting against dns cache poisoning attacks.
In Information
Technology, Computer Engineering and Management Sciences
(ICM), 2011 International Conference on, volume 2, pages 120–
123. IEEE, 2011.
[XZL10]
Wenjian Xing, Yunlan Zhao, and Tonglei Li. Research on the
defense against arp spooﬁng attacks based on winpcap. In Ed-
ucation Technology and Computer Science (ETCS), 2010 Sec-
ond International Workshop on, volume 1, pages 762–765. IEEE,
2010.
==PAGE:99==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
87
[YBX13]
Guang Yao, Jun Bi, and Peiyao Xiao. Vase: Filtering ip spooﬁng
traﬃc with agility. Computer Networks, 57(1):243–257, 2013.
[YKMC06]
Lihua Yuan, Krishna Kant, Prasant Mohapatra, and Chen-Nee
Chuah. Dox: A peer-to-peer antidote for dns cache poisoning
attacks. In Communications, 2006. ICC’06. IEEE International
Conference on, volume 5, pages 2345–2350. IEEE, 2006.
[YML+12]
Y Yang, K McLaughlin, T Littler, S Sezer, Eul Gyu Im, ZQ Yao,
B Pranggono, and HF Wang. Man-in-the-middle attack test-bed
investigating cyber-security vulnerabilities in smart grid scada
systems. 2012.
[YPS03]
Abraham Yaar, Adrian Perrig, and Dawn Song. Pi: A path iden-
tiﬁcation mechanism to defend against ddos attacks. In Security
and Privacy, 2003. Proceedings. 2003 Symposium on, pages 93–
107. IEEE, 2003.
[YXZ11]
Song Yubo, Hu Xili, and Lan Zhiling.
The gsm/umts phone
number catcher. In Multimedia Information Networking and Se-
curity (MINES), 2011 Third International Conference on, pages
520–523. IEEE, 2011.
[ZJP+07]
Changxi Zheng, Lusheng Ji, Dan Pei, Jia Wang, and Paul Fran-
cis.
A light-weight distributed scheme for detecting ip preﬁx
hijacks in real-time. In ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communi-
cation Review, volume 37, pages 277–288. ACM, 2007.
[ZZH+08]
Zheng Zhang, Ying Zhang, Y Charlie Hu, Z Morley Mao, and
Randy Bush. Ispy: detecting ip preﬁx hijacking on my own. In
ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review, volume 38,
pages 327–338. ACM, 2008.
