==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Environmental Engineering
Spatial variability of arsenic in groundwa-
ter of the gold mining area of Poura, Burk-
ina Faso (West Africa)
Lucien Stolze (s131577)
Kongens Lyngby 2015
==PAGE:2==
DTU Environment
Department of Water Resources
Technical University of Denmark
Miljoevej
Building 113
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 1600
info@env.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This Master Thesis was written in the Environmental Department of the Tech-
nical University of Denmark (DTU) and in collaboration with the Swiss Federal
Institute for Aquatic Science and Technology (EAWAG). The work has been car-
ried out from the 1st of March to the 31st of July 2015.
The supervisors of this project were Massimo Rolle (associate professor at
DTU Environment), Mario Schirmer (associate professor at the University of
Neuchâtel), Annette Johnson (Senior Scientist at the Water Resources and Drink-
ing Water Department of EAWAG) and Anja Bretzler (PhD student at EAWAG).
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I am very grateful to the many outstanding people I met at DTU, EAWAG and
abroad, who supported and encouraged me during my work and contributed to
this Thesis.
My greatest gratitude goes to my Advisor Massimo Rolle for his trust, wise
guidance and inspiration throughout the entire project. I would like to particu-
larly thank him for his constant attention and advices despite the inconvenience
of distance work, but also for having giving me the freedom to ﬁnd my own way
throughout the entire project.
I am very grateful to Annette Johnson and Mario Schirmer who welcomed
me at EAWAG in their respective work groups. I especially thank them for their
trust and generosity through the provision of useful material and software and
for their kind review of the near-completed version of this report.
I also kindly thank my colleague and friend Anja Bretzler for her convivial
company during our stay in Burkina Faso and for giving me the opportunity to
discover an awesome country. She also provided useful comments on the near-
completed version of this report.
I would like to thank Christian Moeck for sharing his time and knowledge
during discussions about hydrogeology and computer sciences. The literature he
provided me and his useful advices have allowed me to achieve several hydrogeo-
logical modeling assessments.
I am grateful to Julien Nikiéma, Professor at the University of Ouagadougou,
for his availability and patience when helping us to carry ﬁeld work in Poura and
for providing me useful literature.
A special thanks goes to Nouma Pfenninger for the super-accurate ICP-MS
measurements and his friendly company although he had to stand for my presence
in his laboratory during nearly four months. Thanks also to Denise Freudemann
for the IC, DOC and TIC measurements and for the nice atmosphere she was
==PAGE:6==
iv
Acknowledgements
oﬀering in the lab. Moreover, I want to express my gratitude to Dirk Radny
for his great advices on the ﬁeld material choice and sampling procedure as well
as for sharing his knowledge about the bailer technology. I also would like to
mention the secretarial staﬀof EAWAG, Claire Wedema and Arianne Ederhardt,
who made my stay in Zürich very comfortable.
Moreover, I would like to thank the 2IE University of Ouagadougou for allow-
ing me to carry work in their buildings and labs and to enjoy their air conditioning.
The latter was of importance in order to remain eﬃcient during the two months
I have spent in Burkina. A special thanks goes to Franck Lalane, Professor at
2IE, for his logistical support.
Many people in Burkina Faso also contributed to this project by providing
crucial data, logistics or contacts. Thanks to Hermann Kambou from the NGO
Wateraids, to Annick Giradeau from the French ambassad in Ouagadougou, to
Adama Tapsoba from the Direction Générale des Ressources en Eau (DGRE) and
to the many others that I have met on the phone or in person using my faithful
motorbike. I am particularly grateful to the inhabitants of Poura and the mayor,
Ferdinand Nikiema, for their comprehension, their interest in the sampling pro-
cedure and their help for dismantling the wells. A special thanks goes to Boro
and Etienne, our dedicated driver and mechanic respectively, without who, ﬁeld
work wouldn’t have been so pleasant. Burkinabés, thank you for your integrity
and for being so welcoming!
I sincerely thank Laura Saputelli for supporting me spiritually when writing
this thesis and for making me enjoyed her beloved country, Switzerland. I am
also very thankful to Katja Luxem for her relevant review of this work and for
the various enriching discussions we shared during my stay in Zürich.
My deepest gratitude goes to my parents, Annick and Christophe, and grand-
parents, Maleine and Camille, for their love and encouragements throughout my
studies.
Lucien Stolze
Zürich, July 2015
==PAGE:7==
Abstract
A sampling campaign carried out in 2014 revealed high-arsenic concentrations in
the groundwater of the gold-mineralized area of Poura. Because of the strong
dependence on groundwater for domestic needs in this arid region, it is crucial
to highlight the mechanism of the As geogenic contamination. Previous studies
focusing on local hydrogeochemistry determined that the contamination results
from the oxic dissolution of sulphide minerals present in quartz veins. In this
thesis, the groundwater system was assessed and combined with chemical mea-
surements in order to describe the sources and spatial variability of arsenic around
Poura.
To complement the chemical measurements from previous sampling campaigns
and measure the water levels and total depths of the wells required for hydro-
geological modeling, ﬁeld work was carried out in Spring 2015.
The water is
generally oxic and almost all As was present as As(V). The arsenic concentra-
tions in groundwater samples were relatively low, ranging from <0.5 µg/L to
317 µg/L. Five among 17 boreholes exceeded the WHO guideline for arsenic
(i.e. 10 µg/L). Two had concentrations higher than 50 µg/L. In comparison, dug
wells have As concentrations lower than 10 µg/L. Signiﬁcant diﬀerences were ob-
served between the groundwater compositions of deeper (boreholes screened in
ﬁssured/fractured bedrocks) and shallow parts of the aquifer (dug wells screened
in the weathered overburden). This likely results from the greater interactions of
deep groundwater with primary silicate minerals preserved from weathering with
depth. Similarly, the low As concentrations for shallowest depths are likely to be
the result of a depth increasing presence of sulphide minerals.
Data collected from the ﬁeld work and the recent conceptualization of hard
rock aquifers were used to produce a steady state model the groundwater ﬂow
around Poura on catchment scale. The model was developed using MODFLOW
and coupled with a non-reactive, conservative transport model using the parti-
cles tracking utility MODPATH. A digital elevation model was developed and
simpliﬁed vertical petrographical proﬁles were interpolated in order to deﬁne the
structural geology. The ﬁssured/fractured basement was considered as an equiv-
alent porous medium and the heterogeneities were then modeled through pilot
==PAGE:8==
vi
Abstract
points approach. Potential sources of arsenic were identiﬁed from the positions
of quartz veins reported in the literature and from ﬁeld observations.
Using the groundwater ﬂow model results, geological map and correlations
between arsenic and relevant physico-chemical parameters, the spatial variability
of arsenic is found to be primarily controlled by the lateral positions of the veins.
The exploration of the model uncertainty shows a satisfying potential to predict
contaminated zones, although mapping of the quartz veins representing sources
of arsenic was only partial due to lacking geological data. Moreover, the min-
eral assemblage is expected to change among quartz veins, making it diﬃcult to
identify precisely the arsenic sources. High-As concentrations are also expected
to be limited to the close vicinity (i.e. few hundreds of meters) of a vein source.
Indeed, considering the dominant oxic groundwater conditions, As is expected to
be strongly sorbed to the mineral assemblage while remobilization of As though
reductive dissolution of secondary oxides is restricted.
Current mining activities are limited to the smallscale of hand-dug tunnels
and pits on small scale. Although this activity puts workers at high risk and
requires more regulation, it was not expected to result in groundwater As con-
tamination. However, remnants of the past industrial mining activities exists
as ﬂooded abandoned quarries and tailings. These surface water entities were
found with high As concentrations ([18 ; 382] µg/L) which are likely to result
from the dissolution of As-bearing sulphides present in mine wastes exposed to
the atmosphere.
Considering that groundwater demand is expected to increase in West Africa
in the near future, eﬃcient mitigation strategies to insure safety of the ground-
water supply should be deﬁned. On local scale, drilling of As-safe wells could be
supported by hydrogeological modeling, although knowledge about the geology
should be gained and database accessibility for scientiﬁc research must ﬁrst be
facilitate.
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface
i
Acknowledgements
iii
Abstract
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
Arsenic release and transport in groundwater of West Africa: a literature review
3
3
Site description
7
3.1
Location . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Physiography, landuse and climate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.3
Geology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.4
Hydrology and hydrogeology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4
Methods
19
4.1
Digital elevation model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.2
Measurements and sampling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.3
Water chemistry and statistical analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.4
Boreholes technical data collection and management . . . . . . . .
29
4.5
Hydrogeological assessment: aquifer characteristics and groundwa-
ter ﬂow direction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.6
Localization of the potential sources of arsenic
. . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.7
Hydrogeological model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5
Results
47
5.1
Digital Elevation Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.2
Piezometric map and aquifer characteristics . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.3
Localization of arsenic sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.4
Groundwater chemistry
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.5
Hydrogeological modeling and transport of arsenic . . . . . . . . .
62
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
6
Discussion
77
6.1
Arsenic
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
6.2
Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
6.3
Chemical measurements, sampling and analysis . . . . . . . . . . .
89
6.4
Mitigation strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
7
Conclusion and future work
91
Bibliography
93
A
Geology
101
B
Field Work and observations
103
C
Database
107
D
Appendix D: Hydrology and hydrogeology
123
E
Hydrogeological model
125
F
DEM
129
G
Chemical measurements
131
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Arsenic (As) contamination of groundwater is a major public health threat en-
countered in many regions worldwide. A signiﬁcant increase in cases of cancers in
the skin, bladder and kidney (NRC, 1999; WHO, 1981) as well as dermatological,
cardiovascular, neurological and respiratory diseases (Smedley et al., 1996) has
long been noticed and reported where As contaminated groundwater is used as
drinking water. This pollution has been primarily attributed to a natural mobi-
lization occurring in diﬀerent areas and several geochemical mechanisms related
to the occurrence of As-rich groundwater concentrations have been identiﬁed. It
is now well understood that As release and transport are essentially controlled
by the oxidation-reduction and pH conditions (Smedley and Kinniburgh, 2002).
For instance, the reductive dissolution of As-bearing minerals found on sediments
and occurring on large scale in Asia have been under focus of many recent studies
(Guo et al., 2013; Kocar et al., 2008; Rodriguez-Lado et al., 2013). In other areas
and more locally (e.g. Korea (Ahn and Cho, 2012), New England (Ayotte et al.,
2006), Alaska (Verplanck et al., 2008), Ghana (Smedley et al., 1996), Burkina
Faso (COWI, 2005; Smedley et al., 2007)), As-rich groundwater has been linked
to the oxidation and dissolution of As-bearing sulphide minerals.
The phenomenon of sulphide oxidation leading to As-rich groundwater is
frequently observed in West Africa where the basement is composed of crys-
talline rocks including the so-called hard-rock aquifers (Courtois et al., 2010).
Recent work has shown that the gold-mineralized zones in the Birimian volcano-
sedimentary sequence are particularly aﬀected by this pollution (COWI, 2005;
Smedley and Kinniburgh, 2002; Smedley et al., 1996, 2007) as the ore mineral-
izations are usually correlated with the presence of sulphide minerals (Bourges
et al., 1998; Béziat et al., 2008). For instance, Smedley et al. (1996) reported this
pollution in a gold-mining area of Northern Ghana with As concentrations up to
64 µg/L. In a similar area of Northern Burkina Faso, COWI (2005) and Smedley
et al. (2007) have also measured As concentrations exceeding up to 160 times the
WHO provisional guideline value for arsenic (i.e. 10 µg/L) adopted in Burkina
Faso in 2006. The signiﬁcance and the density of the mining activities in West
Africa reveal the importance of ore mineralization and, consequently, shows that
As-rich groundwater is likely to be a widespread environmental problem in these
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
countries (Smedley and Kinniburgh, 2002; Smedley et al., 1996).
While most of the studies concerning As-rich groundwater have focused on
young reducing sedimentary aquifers, research concerning the sources and mech-
anisms of transport of arsenic in West African mineralized basement is relatively
recent and the processes are not suﬃciently understood. However, in such arid
areas, groundwater from hard rocks aquifers represents the major resource for
drinking purposes although it is underexploited with a demand rapidly growing
(Barbier et al., 2006; Courtois et al., 2010). Recent drilling programs have led
in particular to massive construction of deep boreholes instead of the traditional
shallow dug wells. These changes in groundwater usage and demand reinforce the
need for a better assessment of this pollution by acquiring knowledge about the
sources and mechanisms of transport in order to develop an eﬃcient mitigation
strategy and to conduct better drilling programs in the future.
The district of Poura in the Mouhoun province of Burkina Faso is particularly
known for its important gold deposit and past industrial mining activities that
were carried out in the 80’s (Bourges et al., 1998; Béziat et al., 2008; Sanogo
and Prost, 1993). From sampling campaigns performed between May 2014 and
February 2015 by the Swiss Federal Institute for Aquatic Science and Technology
(EAWAG) in Burkina Faso, As concentrations exceeding the WHO provisional
guideline up to 30 times were found in groundwater in the vicinity of Poura mine.
In addition, Kagambega et al. (2014b) reported cases of soils and surface water
pollution in this area as well as the phenomenon of acid mine drainage due to
piles of mine tailings exposed to the atmosphere.
The present thesis aims to improve knowledge about the sources, transport
mechanisms and spatial variability of As in groundwater of West African crys-
talline basement through the case study of Poura. Based on the recent concep-
tualization of the hydrodynamic properties of hard rock aquifers, 3-D geological
and hydrogeological models were developed for a portion of the catchment in
the vicinity of Poura in order to study the likely As distribution together with
ﬁeld observations and the achievement of a geochemical analysis. Identiﬁcation
of factors that are expected to lead to high As concentrations were discussed in
order to formulate proposal for eﬃcient mitigation strategy.
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2
Arsenic release and transport
in groundwater of West Africa:
a literature review
In the last decade, geochemical studies have brought knowledge about the pro-
cesses of oxidation and dissolution of altered As-bearing sulphide minerals as
arsenopyrite (FeAsS, the most abundant As ore mineral). This section oﬀers a
review of the geochemical processes that have been identiﬁed.
In West Africa, arsenic occurrence in groundwater has been primarily associ-
ated with Au-bearing quartz veins containing massive sulphide mineralization1
(COWI, 2005; Smedley and Kinniburgh, 2002; Smedley et al., 1996, 2007). Nat-
ural dissolution of these minerals takes place when they are brought into contact
with oxic water (Smedley et al., 2007):
FeAsS + 3O2 + 4H2O →Fe(OH)3 + SO2−
4
+ H2AsO−
4 + 3H+
(2.1)
The speciation of As(V)/As(III) is primarily controlled by the redox condi-
tions, As(V) prevailing under oxic conditions as shown by Equation 2.1 and Figure
2.1 (COWI, 2005; Smedley and Kinniburgh, 2002; Smedley et al., 2007). Note
that another possible oxidant for sulphide minerals under anaerobic conditions
would be nitrate (NO−
3 ) (Appelo and Postma, 2010) resulting from agricultural
activities and/or wastewater leaching.
The chemical Equation 2.2 shows the dissolution of pyrite (FeS2) and the
generation of hydrous ferric oxides (HFO) Fe(OH)3 occurring at pH>4 under
oxic conditions (Appelo and Postma, 2010).
FeS2 + 15/4O2 + 7/2H2O →Fe(OH)3 + 2H2SO4
(2.2)
1Arsenic is a major constituent in more than 200 minerals, mostly of ore type or their
alteration products. As concentrations in rocks, sediments and soils are generally low (Smedley
and Kinniburgh, 2002).
==PAGE:14==
4
2 Arsenic release and transport in groundwater of West Africa: a literature review
Ferric hydroxides, produced by the dissolution of pyrite and arsenopyrite, are
generally found on the surface of suspended sediments and of minerals in soils
and sediments (Wilkie and Hering, 1996). It can then tend to a more crystalline
form by undergoing slow transformation into minerals such as goethite, hematite
(i.e. ferric oxides). Both As(III) and As(V) are known to be strongly sorbed to
iron oxides/hydroxides over the pH range 4 - 9 (Dixit and Hering, 2003; Smedley
et al., 2007; Wilkie and Hering, 1996) and, to a lesser extent, to Al and Mn
precipitates, calcite and clays (Smedley and Kinniburgh, 2002).
The common generalization stating that As (III) is more mobile than As(V)
is, however, too simplistic when such sorption sites exists. Indeed, as many trace
elements, arsenic transport is controlled by the pH, redox conditions, mineral sol-
ubility, kinetics and surface reactions (i.e. diﬀerence in sorption isotherms, com-
petition with other anions for sorption sites) (Smedley and Kinniburgh, 2002;
Smedley et al., 2007). For instance, Dixit and Hering (2003) and Wilkie and
Hering (1996) observed that As(V) sorption into Fe oxides/hydroxides is more
favoured under acidic to slightly acidic pH (i.e. [4 ; 6.5]) than As(III) with the
greatest adsorption occurring at pH 4. Under acidic, oxic conditions, arsenic can
also coprecipitate to form secondary As-bearing minerals as scorodite which was
observed by Verplanck et al. (2008) in aquifer of an ore zone in Alaska.
Arsenic can then be remobilized as hydro-geochemical conditions change. For
instance, As can be released from the Fe oxides through reductive dissolution or
a change in pH. Therefore, Fe oxides are often considered as secondary sources
of As in groundwater or to retard the As transport (Appelo and Postma, 2010;
Smedley and Kinniburgh, 2002; Smedley et al., 2007; Verplanck et al., 2008).
The presence of other anions (e.g. HCO−
3 , SO−4
2 , PO−
4 ) in groundwater would
also lead to higher As concentrations through the competition for sorption sites
(Dixit and Hering, 2003; Wilkie and Hering, 1996).
Although As occurrence has been primary attributed to natural processes,
anthropogenic sources have also been noticed through mining activities. The lat-
ter might enhance the oxidation of sulphide minerals when they are exposed to
the atmosphere through mine tailings or gold washing inducing soil, surface and
groundwater pollution. Moreover, the common technique of gold cyanidation to
facilitate gold extraction can also lead to As pollution and presents the risk of
releasing other contaminants (e.g. CN−, Hg) (Smedley and Kinniburgh, 2002;
Smedley et al., 1996, 2007). In the presence of tailings exposed to the atmo-
sphere, the percolation of rainwater can lead to the formation of highly acidic
and polluted eﬄuent called acid mine drainage (AMD) (Coussy, 2012; Smedley
and Kinniburgh, 2002). Indeed, the dissolution of sulphide leads to production of
==PAGE:15==
2 Arsenic release and transport in groundwater of West Africa: a literature review
5
Figure 2.1: Eh-pH diagram for aqueous As species in the system As-O2-H2O at
25 C and 1 bar total pressure (Smedley and Kinniburgh, 2002).
protons and for pH<4, ferric iron does not precipitate and can play the role of an
highly reactive oxidant (i.e. indirect reaction, Equation 2.3). Tailings and AMD
were already observed in the vicinity of Poura mine by Kagambega et al. (2014b).
FeS2 + 14Fe3+ + 8H2O →15Fe2+ + 2SO2−
4
+ 16H+
(2.3)
Strong seasonal climatic variations might also oﬀer a favourable dynamic pat-
tern for the release of As in groundwater. Indeed, the decrease of water level
during the dry season might lead to oxidation of sulphide minerals in the un-
saturated zone enabling the release of As directly to the aqueous phase or the
formation of intermediate As-bearing minerals such as scorodite under acidic pH.
During the rainy season, as water level increase, scorodite might dissolve under
neutral groundwater conditions, releasing the As (Verplanck et al., 2008). This
process is also reported by Smedley and Kinniburgh (2002) in tailings where
scorodite could dissolved during the rainy season forming eﬄuents.
==PAGE:16==
6
2 Arsenic release and transport in groundwater of West Africa: a literature review
In the ore zones of Ouahigouya in Northern Burkina Faso and of Obuasi in
Ghana, As concentrations tended to be higher for deeper boreholes drilled in the
fractured basement rock, the As concentrations in shallow dug wells being gener-
ally under the WHO guideline (Smedley et al., 1996, 2007). This was interpreted
as a result of a) a large amount of ferric oxides present in the weathered over-
burden, strongly binding As and b) of a lower residence time of the water in this
horizon than in the basement rocks. However, Verplanck et al. (2008) noted that
the groundwater residence time was not controlling the arsenic chemistry as no
correlation was found between groundwater conductivity and As concentration.
As the redox, climate and geochemical conditions as well as human activities
change among ore ﬁelds, it is not possible to formulate one common rule for the
release and transport of As. However, factors favouring the occurrence of high
As concentrations in groundwater can be identiﬁed in order to predict the spatial
variability of arsenic locally or regionally.
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 3
Site description
3.1
Location
The study area is located in the Balé Province of Burkina Faso, 160 km South-
West of the capital Ouagadougou. It lies between longitudes 2 ◦40’ W to 2◦51’ W
and latitudes 11◦30’ N to 11◦41’ N (coordinate system UTM zone 30 P North),
on the east bank of the Mouhoun river.
Figure 3.1: Location of the study area.
==PAGE:18==
8
3 Site description
3.2
Physiography, landuse and climate
The landscape of Poura region is mostly made of a large and regular planation
surface with the east side of the area boarded with some hills. The elevation
ranges between 230 and 330 m with a median of 266 m. The topography can be
divided into low, middle and high land surface units. The high unit is composed
of rare lateritic plateaus or scarps between 285 m and 330 m in height separated
from the middle unit by steep edges. The low and middle units form together
the planation surface gently sloping West to the Mouhoun river.
The lowest
elevations correspond to the two deep quarries remaining from the past mining
activities (Bamba et al., 2002).
Figure 3.2: Monthly averages of the evapotranspiration, rainfall, temperature
measured at Boromo (30 km N-W of Poura).
The climate is seasonal tropical and has a bimodal pattern shared between a
dry season (October-May) and a well-deﬁned wet season (June-September). From
measurements of the period 2003 - 2013 performed at Boromo, a locality close to
Poura, monthly precipitations are constant over the years. Evapotranspiration
greatly exceeds the precipitation over the year (i.e. annual precipitations and
evapotranspiration are 900 and 1800 mm respectively) except during the rainy
season (i.e. July-September) during which precipitation exceeds the evapotran-
spiration by a factor 2 (Figure 3.2). During the study period placed in the dry
season, rainfall is extremely rare although it can occur as short events from which
the water is lost to evapotranspiration without having time to percolate. Daily
temperatures range from 20 ◦C in the night to 45 ◦C during daylight (Direction
==PAGE:19==
3.3 Geology
9
Générale de la Météorologie du Burkina, 2014, personal communication).
The district of Poura counts about 10000 inhabitants shared among small
villages (Inforoute-communale, 2015) well distributed over the study area. The
main locality is Poura mine which is adjoined to Poura village. From 1961 to
1966 and from 1984 to 1996, important mining activities were run in the close
surroundings supported with the creation of the ﬁrst industrial mine of the coun-
try. The mining activity was stopped due to the decline of the gold exchange
rate although gold kept being informally mined. Indeed, industrial mining opera-
tions were progressively replaced by informal mining, the local inhabitants using
hand-dug pits and tunnels at depth ranging from 20 to 60 m (Bamba, 1996) and
processing the gold ore (i.e. gold washing) in various places spread over the study
area (Figure B.5).
The vegetation cover is an open wooded savannah (Bamba et al., 2002) which
is denser in the close vicinity of the Mouhoun river. There is also presence of
traditional agriculture that is usually performed at the end of the rainy season
(i.e. September-October) as well as traditional livestock farming although a large
part of the population has converted their work into mining.
3.3
Geology
3.3.1
Lithology
Poura is located on the Boromo-Goren belt (lower Proterozoic, 2300-2150 Ma)
(Bourges et al., 1998; Béziat et al., 2008).
The latter are zones of volcano-
sedimentary rocks variably metamorphosed and folded during the Eburnian pe-
riod (ca. 2150-2095 Ma) (Bamba et al., 2002; Kote et al., 2003; Ouédraogo et al.,
2003; Sanogo and Prost, 1993; Smedley et al., 2007). From a more detailed study
of the geological map of the site (Figure 3.4, the slightly metamorphosed base-
ment is mostly composed of andesite and andesitic tuﬀs with calc-alkano aﬃnity
(neutral volcanic rock) and of lower presence of rhyolite, rhyodacite (acid volcanic
rock). There is also minor presence of volcano-sedimentary schist and Tarkwaïan
rocks (i.e. conglomerate of coarse-clastic1 sedimentary rocks 150 m thick) and
minor intrusive tonalities of plutonic rocks that consist in gabbro-diorite as well
as ultrabasic rocks. The main structural features are the North - South strik-
ing verticalization of the stratiﬁcation together with a subparallel schistosity2
1Fragments
2Geological foliation of metamorphic rocks with alignment of the minerals.
==PAGE:20==
10
3 Site description
Figure 3.3: Simpliﬁed geological map of Burkina Faso showing the location of
Birimian volcano-sedimentary rocks and Eburnian granitoids as well as Poura
(Béziat et al., 2008).
(Bamba et al., 2002; Kote et al., 2003; Ouédraogo et al., 2003).
In the vicinity of the study area, a diﬀerent lithology is found. Eastern, it
is composed of later Eburnian plutonic granitoïds.
South of the Poura area,
metabasalt, a typical Upper Birimian unit, is found while the Western lithology
mainly consists in sedimentary rocks (sandstone and metaschist) of the Lower
Birimian.
==PAGE:21==
3.3 Geology
11
Figure 3.4: Lithology of the study area in the district of Poura (adapted from
Kote et al. (2003) and Ouédraogo et al. (2003)).
3.3.2
The fractured/ﬁssured basement
The crystalline paleoproterozoic basement of the study area as in the major part
of Africa is fractured/ﬁssured. Subhorizontal and subvertical fractures were origi-
nally explained by the structural stresses (lithostatic decompression and tectonic
forces) and rock cooling that took place during the Birimian-Eburnian period.
Recent researches have however invalidated this single hypothesis and showed
that the ﬁssures and fractures observed in the bedrocks primarily result from the
==PAGE:22==
12
3 Site description
long alteration and weathering process correlated to ancient climatic conditions.
In several studies, an higher density of ﬁssured was particularly observed at the
top of the basement rocks as a consequence of the weathering (Ahmed et al.,
2008; Carrier et al., 2008; Courtois et al., 2010; Dewandel et al., 2006; Koïta
et al., 2013a; Sharp, 2014; Wright and Burgess, 1992).
Table 3.1: Literature values of the ﬁssured layer thickness.
Author
Lithology
Location
Scale
Thickness [m]
Courtois et al. (2010)
All
Burkina Faso
Country
[25 ; 37]
Koïta et al. (2013a)
Volcanic
metasedimentary
Ivory Coast
Regional
[5 ; 40]
Bamba et al. (2002)
Metaandesite
Poura
Local
321
Dewandel et al. (2006)
Granite
India
Local
[15 ; 20]
Table 3.1 exhibits some ﬁssured layer thickness found in the literature. It is
important to specify that the bottom of the so-called ﬁssured layer is more demar-
cated by a statistical limit representing the most productive part of the aquifer
(i.e. the useful thickness) than by a real geological limit (Courtois et al., 2010)
as the geology is closely related to the hydrogeological process. The thickness
of the ﬁssured zone highly varies between the ﬁeld locations as a result of the
diﬀerence in a) the succession of weathering and erosion cycles and the intensity
of these processes and b) the type of lithology (Koïta et al., 2013a). However, on
the relatively small scale of the study area, the thickness of this horizon is likely
to be regular as a result of the homogeneity of the weathering front (Dewandel
et al., 2006; Maréchal et al., 2004). Aperture and density of the ﬁssures also
generally increase upwards as a result of the higher intensity of the weathering
process, the few top meters of this weathered zone being generally characterized
by a dense horizontal ﬁssured sequence (Ahmed et al., 2008; Carrier et al., 2008;
Courtois et al., 2010; Dewandel et al., 2006, 2011; Maréchal et al., 2004; Sharp,
2014; Wright and Burgess, 1992). Figure 3.5 shows the recent conceptualization
of a geological weathering proﬁle. The bedrocks lying beneath this ﬁssured layer
are called the fresh basement and can be aﬀected by some rare deeper vertical
tectonic fractures (Carrier et al., 2008; Dewandel et al., 2006, 2011).
Important structural faults with a general North-South orientation are also
found in the study area and primarily aﬀect Birimian formations (Figure 3.4).
Heterogeneities as these faults or smaller lineaments (e.g. brittle fractures) could
1This value was reported in a ﬁeld 5 km away from the study site from the study of one
petrological proﬁle.
==PAGE:23==
3.3 Geology
13
Figure 3.5: Conceptual model of a partly eroded paleo-weathering proﬁle on hard
rocks (Wyns et al., 1999).
lead to a local enhancement and deepening of the weathering process at the periph-
ery of these entities (Dewandel et al., 2011; Sharp, 2014). Moreover, the appear-
ance of brittle and ductile shear zones in the various host sequences (metased-
imentary and metavolcanic) of the area has led to ﬂow of hydrothermal ﬂuids
resulting in the formation of mesothermal quartz veins and in the deposit of ore
and gangue minerals (Bamba et al., 2002). In fact, gold-free deposit associated
with the presence of most of the sulphide minerals such as arsenopyrite is pri-
marily hosted within many of these veins in the study area (Bourges et al., 1998;
Béziat et al., 2008; Kote et al., 2003; Sanogo and Prost, 1993; Smedley et al.,
2007).
3.3.3
The lateritic weathered overburden
Like elsewhere in Burkina Faso, the crystalline basement in the vicinity of Poura
is overlain by an altered lateritic cover (or overburden horizon) composed by
various stratiform horizons of weathered material although basement rocks can
rarely and locally show on the surface in the vicinity of Poura (Bamba et al.,
2002; Gueye, 1984; Kote et al., 2003). Petrological proﬁles of this weathered
overburden are shown in Figure 3.6. Note that lateritic soil is the term employed
to describe the deeply weathered reddish or yellowish soil containing clay minerals,
oxyhydroxyde iron and aluminium minerals and which is widespread within the
==PAGE:24==
14
3 Site description
tropics (Bonsor et al., 2013). It is the result of multiple changes in the tropical
seasonal climate occurring at large time scale. From bottom to top, the layers
found in the study area are the following:
• The saprolite (or alterite or regolith (Dewandel et al., 2006)) lies on the
ﬁssured crystalline basement. It is a clayey horizon, which results from a
prolonged in-situ decomposition of the bedrocks through weathering. This
process involves biogeochemical hydrolysis of the mineral constituents of the
rocks and their mineral transformations at new surface conditions. There-
fore, the formation of this material is closely related to the development
of the ﬁssured layer and its lower part retained the structure of the parent
rock (Bamba et al., 2002; Dewandel et al., 2006, 2011; Kote et al., 2003;
Wright and Burgess, 1992). The content of clay mineral (i.e. kaolinite)
generally decreases with depth while the size of the quartz grains increase
dividing the saprolite layer into an upper and a lower part, respectively the
alloterite and the isalterite (Bamba, 1996; Carrier et al., 2008; Dewandel
et al., 2006, 2011; Koïta et al., 2013a; Kote et al., 2003).
• The alloterite is also closely related to the thin mottled clay layer about 1 -
2 m thick observed in Figure 3.6 and which covers the saprolite. Its porosity
is partially ﬁlled with secondary clay ferruginous material composed mostly
of kaolinite making this horizon compact (Bamba, 1996; Kote et al., 2003;
Smedley et al., 2007).
• A ferricrete cover (or laterite or cuirasse or iron crust) with thickness usu-
ally ranging from 1 to 5 m forms a hardened horizon on the top of the
mottled clay (Kote et al., 2003).
It results from the ferruginization of
allochtonous material produced and distributed by the erosion of ancient
bauxitic plateaus that occurred prior to the kaolinic weathering process
(Bamba et al., 2002; Koïta et al., 2013a). Its thickness can in rare cases
reach 10 m in the area of higher elevations forming remaining ferricrete
scarps or hills. They are the residuals that resisted to the regressive ero-
sion and dismantling of ancient bauxitic plateaus occurring under arid and
semi-arid climatic conditions (Bamba et al., 2002; Kote et al., 2003). These
features form principally the hills located on the East side of Poura demar-
cating the Mouhoun valley. Consequently, the thickness of the ferricrete
layer is expected to decrease from the upper units to the drainage system
where it can be absent or covered by a thin layer of soil.
Close to the
mottled clay layer, the ferricrete consists in a thin layer of highly altered
assemblage of clay - ferruginous matrix called soft ferricrete which includes
Fe-Al minerals such as kaolinite, goethite and hematite as well as quartz
grains. From bottom to top, the ferricrete is more altered and, thus, more
==PAGE:25==
3.3 Geology
15
porous adopting, in the case of complete proﬁle, a nodular or alveolar struc-
ture.
Figure 3.6: Petrographic vertical sections of the weathered overburden found at
three locations of diﬀerent topographical units (So, soil; SFr, soft ferricrete; Mc,
mottled clay horizon; Sa, saprolite; nFr, nodular ferricrete; avFr, alveolarferri-
crete) (Bamba et al., 2002).
Bamba et al. (2002) reported discrete petrographic vertical sections of the la-
teritic proﬁle corresponding to locations in the vicinity of the study site. Figure
3.6 show signiﬁcant similarities between the proﬁles. This suggests a general ho-
mogeneity in the weathering proﬁle composition over the entire area. According
to Koïta et al. (2013a), the presence of Birimian formations (i.e. volcanic and
metasedimentary rocks) is linked with an important development of iron crusts
as well as a high content of kaolinite in the saprolite layer. This conﬁrms the
good agreement between the description of the lateritic layer made by Bamba
et al. (2002) and the geology of the basement. The presence of iron crust also
protects the weathered rocks from dismantling (Koïta et al., 2013a) reinforcing
the expectation of a preserved saprolite as well as a constant ﬁssured layer thick-
ness over the entire study area.
Alluvium deposits composed of gravels, sand and clay are also found over a
distance of 400 m on the banks of the Mouhoun river. It corresponds to the
==PAGE:26==
16
3 Site description
ﬂoodplain appearing during the rainy season and covers andesitic rocks (Aurouet
et al., 2005; Kote et al., 2003; Ouédraogo et al., 2003).
3.4
Hydrology and hydrogeology
3.4.1
Hydrology
The Mouhoun is one of the major rivers of the country and the only perennial
hydrological features found in the study area. It is ﬂowing North to South 4 to
5 km west of Poura and has a sinuous watercourse. During the study period (i.e.
dry season), its width is about 15 m within the considered area. As the Mouhoun
river is perennial while it takes source hundreds of kilometers upstream and ac-
cording to the seasonal arid climate, the scarcity of the contributing streams and
the topography, the groundwater is expected to feed the river (AEM, 2014). The
non-permanent Sambayourou river, tributary of the Mouhoun and ﬂowing East
to West is found about 8 km south of Poura mine and is therefore located outside
the area of interest.
Some relatively large open dug pits partially ﬁlled with water are observed
in the study area. They correspond to abandoned quarries of the past mining
activities and are about 40 to 50 m deep (Kote et al., 2003). The two major
quarries (i.e B1 and B2) are found a few hundreds meters far from Poura mine
and are respectively 5.6 and 2.2 hectares while a smaller quarry (i.e B3) is found
in the vicinity of Bologo (Figure 3.7). According to the depths of these quarries,
the water contained in it is likely to interact with the aquifer system.
3.4.2
Hydrogeology
In this area, as in large parts of Africa, the population is strongly dependent on
groundwater enclosed in so-called hard rock aquifers that are closely related to the
development of the weathering proﬁle (Sharp, 2014). During the time of the study
(i.e. dry season), the saturated zone typically lies within the saprolite and the
fractured/ﬁssured bedrock within the ﬁrst 100 m below ground surface forming a
composite aquifer. It is generally admitted that the groundwater ﬂow is enhanced
in the fractured/ﬁssured bedrocks (the bedrock matrix being inherently impervi-
ous) while the capacity of the aquifer is represented by the saturated saprolite
as it is clayey (Ahmed et al., 2008; Carrier et al., 2008; Dewandel et al., 2006;
Smedley et al., 2007; Wright and Burgess, 1992). Carrier et al. (2008) contrasts
this statement by underlining the fact that the saturated saprolite can present a
==PAGE:27==
3.4 Hydrology and hydrogeology
17
Figure 3.7: Hydrology and locations of the boreholes and wells in the study area
of Poura. B1, B2 and B3 are quarries partially ﬁlled with water.
higher transmissivity in the case of the aquifer having a greater thickness in this
entity than in the saturated fractured bedrock. Moreover, the transition between
the saprolite and the weathered overburden can be at varying locations sharp or
transitional regarding the density of the fractures as well as the clogging of frac-
tures by secondary clay minerals (Carrier et al., 2008; Wright and Burgess, 1992).
In order to collect this resource, two diﬀerent types of wells exist. First, tra-
ditional shallow dug wells with large diameter and having a depth ranging from
5 to 25 m receive water from the weathered overburden. Second, more recent
drilling programs have installed deep boreholes (Figure D.1) with diameter of a
few decimeters and depth ranging from 35 to 90 m receiving groundwater from
the deepest aquifer zone (i.e. the ﬁssured bedrocks). The locations of these wells
within the study area are indicated on Figure 3.7. Considering the predominance
of boreholes rather than shallow dug wells, this layer is expected to play a major
role in the hydrodynamics of the aquifer.
==PAGE:28==
18
3 Site description
The weathered bedrocks having a higher density of ﬁssures in its upper part,
conductivity is expected to be higher in this zone. However, as described above,
these ﬁssures can also be ﬁlled with secondary clay deposit which would limit the
groundwater ﬂow (Carrier et al., 2008; Wright and Burgess, 1992). It is also well
known that the heterogeneity in the fractures system increases the complexity
of the conceptualization of groundwater ﬂow in such aquifer as the aperture and
the connectivity among fractures spatially vary (Ahmed et al., 2008). Eventual
presence of dykes, quartz veins intrusion and tectonic faults (lineaments) in the
hard-rock aquifer also constitute impervious boundaries or lead to local enhance-
ments and deepening of the groundwater ﬂow. In fact, some of these features
might present a higher density of fractures in their vicinity due to intensiﬁcation
of the weathering process (Dewandel et al., 2011). In addition the fresh basement
underlying the basement rocks could be permeable locally where deep shear zones
are present although these features are of low occurrence and only present locally
(Courtois et al., 2010; Dewandel et al., 2006). However, regarding the relatively
low size of the study area, the aquifer can also be considered as unique with a
good connectivity between the ﬁssures. Indeed, the ﬁssured weathered bedrocks
are expected to be well preserved due to the good development of the weathered
overburden (Dewandel et al., 2006; Koïta et al., 2013a).
During the study period, groundwater recharge is expected to be non-existent
as the small rainfall events dispersed in time are quickly lost by direct or subse-
quent evapotranspiration occurring in the vadose zone. In fact, the percolation
of rain water is expected to be slow due to the clayey characteristics of the weath-
ered overburden. Recharge of the aquifer is more expected to primarily take place
during the rainy season. Note that during heavy rainfall small perched aquifer
can appear locally in the ferricrete layer (Carrier et al., 2008; Sharp, 2014).
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 4
Methods
4.1
Digital elevation model
An accurate description of the terrain surface is obtained by generating a digital
elevation model (DEM) of the area of interest. In fact, a DEM gives a quanti-
tative representation of the earth’s surface by providing the elevation value for
a particular location. Therefore, it allows an assessment of the groundwater sys-
tem by the study of the topography as well as the conversion of the measured
groundwater levels into hydraulic heads.
4.1.1
Choice of the DEM data
The ﬁrst near-gobal high-resolution DEM produced by synthetic aperture radar
during the NASA’s Shuttle Radar Topography Mission (SRTM) is used to gener-
ate the DEM of the area. The SRTM data consist in a recent open source DEM
of Earth oﬀering wide range of possibilities for modeling. It is obtained in raster
format which consists of a set of square cells, each containing a speciﬁc elevation
value resulting in a continuous spatial coverage of the area. SRTM data is ref-
erenced horizontally to the WGS84 datum and vertically to the EGM96 geoid
reference surface (Mukherjee et al., 2013; Slater et al., 2006).
The 1 Arc-Second SRTM Global elevation data have an horizontal resolution
of 30 m and a vertical resolution of 1 m. The speciﬁed accuracy requirements
from the NASA were less than 16 m absolute vertical error (90 percent linear er-
ror), 20 m absolute horizontal error (90 percent circular error) and 10 m relative
vertical error. Elevation errors in the SRTM product is mostly due to speckling
or system noise in the form of spikes and wells although large voids and anoma-
lous points are automatically corrected during the SRTM data editing process
(Falorni et al., 2005; Slater et al., 2006). Falorni et al. (2005), Mukherjee et al.
(2013), and Slater et al. (2006) veriﬁed the vertical accuracy of the 1-arc SRTM
data at regional scale and found that it signiﬁcantly exceeds the requirements for
area of low slopes and low altitudes. For instance, Slater et al. (2006) reported
an absolute vertical accuracy of 7 m or less (91.7 percent linear error) and of 10
m or less (99.4 percent linear error) with all cells having vertical accuracy values
==PAGE:30==
20
4 Methods
falling between 3 and 15 meters. In addition, limited amount of data voids and
limited speckling are expected in the study area as steep slopes and water bodies
are not signiﬁcantly present (Falorni et al., 2005).
Vertical errors due to the
presence of vegetation and buildings are considered insigniﬁcant as these features
are rare over the study area.
Considering the general ﬂat topography of the terrain, presence of noise could
signiﬁcantly impact the modeled groundwater direction ﬂow by negatively aﬀect-
ing a) the piezometric levels converted from the measured water levels (Section
4.5) and b) the conceptual geological model derived from the terrain elevation
(Section 4.7).
Modeled hydrogeology is particularly known to be sensitive to
the modeled land surface morphology as the water table is in general closely re-
lated to it (Kuniansky et al., 2009). Thus, noise should be removed in order
to allow the DEM to provide an accurate general representation of the terrain
slope and curvature. Regarding the cost of an accurate DEM and considering the
topology of the area of interest oﬀering the best conditions for generating SRTM
DEM with optimal accuracy, the SRTM open source product with application of
post-processing methods for noise removal seems to represent the best choice for
generating the terrain model.
4.1.2
Processing of the DEM data
The SRTM dataset can be processed by ﬁltering methods in order to eﬃciently re-
move the noise (Falorni et al., 2005; Gallant, 2011). A large variety of computed
methods for reducing DEM noise can be found in the literature. They result in
smoothing the raw surface by removing extreme values although ﬁltering has to
be chosen regarding the desired scale level and sharpness required. For instance,
cliﬀs are features that can be particularly aﬀected by smoothing processes. How-
ever, considering the low relief topography of the area, ﬁltering is expected to be
well adapted by accurately removing the noise as real sharp artefacts are rare in
the area of interest (Falorni et al., 2005; Gallant, 2011). Filtering representing a
simpliﬁcation in the terrain surface also result in a computational requirements
advantage for the hydrogeological model as the later is developed using the DEM.
The area size of the treated DEM was extended to 254 km2 in order to cover
all locations at which water measurements were performed. All the geographic
data were projected in the UTM zone 30N coordinate system. Note that this
projection is used throughout the present study in order to facilitate dimensional
representation of the area. The presence of voids, speckling and noise are initially
revealed by visual inspection of the 3D surface, the terrain slope and contour
lines generated from the SRTM raw data using the softwares ArcGIS and Matlab
==PAGE:31==
4.1 Digital elevation model
21
(Falorni et al., 2005). In order to minimize the computational power requirements
for the treatment and the manipulation of the elevation data between the various
software (i.e. importation of the DEM into Matlab and GMS MODFLOW), the
number of raster cells is reduced by aggregation into new cells with 60 m side
size using the software ArcGIS. The aggregation is performed by attributing to
new cells the average elevation values of the 4 corresponding cells with 30 m side
as recommended by Kuniansky et al. (2009).
Figure 4.1: Part of the raw SRTM DEM with aggregated cells of the study area
and with z magniﬁcation set to 10 for better visualization. Scalebar in [m].
DEM perceived as a 2-D signal can be ﬁltered by applying wavelets which
are derived from the ﬁeld of signal processing (Falorni et al., 2005; Kalbermatten
et al., 2011). The elevations at the centroïd of the generated cells were sampled
and imported to the Matlab software in order to perform the SRTM DEM noise
reduction using the Wavelet Toolbox utility (Falorni et al., 2005). As suggested
by Falorni et al. (2005), a 5.5 biorthogonal ﬁlter was applied although the level of
decomposition was set to 2 regarding the DEM quality required. For each level
of decomposition a speciﬁc threshold adapted to the sharpness of the ﬁgure was
calculated and applied.
The main objective of the smoothing process was deﬁned as to obtained a
simpliﬁed smoothed representation of the terrain with a general low slope oriented
towards the Mouhoun river. Considering that no ground control points or DEM
==PAGE:32==
22
4 Methods
with better accuracy were available for the considered area, diﬀerent assessments
for the evaluation of the DEM quality were performed:
• A qualitative assessment was made by visually evaluating the treated DEM
surface as well as the elevation and slope contour plots.
• The distribution of the elevations of the raw SRTM data should be optimally
preserved in order to avoid a loss of information. Therefore, the maximum,
minimum, average, median elevations as well as standard deviations and
skewness of the raw and denoised DEM were compared. The percentage of
elevations within 10 m range for both DEMs were also plot in a comparison
histogram.
• In order to quantify the change of elevations, the mean absolute diﬀerence
(MAD), the root mean square diﬀerence (RMSD) ( Equations 4.1 and 4.2)
as well as the minimum and maximum diﬀerences were calculated between
elevations of the raw and treated DEMs. This calculation was performed
for a) the entire range of the raw DEM elevations b) for raw DEM eleva-
tions between the 2.5-th and 97.5-th percentiles and c) for the raw DEM
elevations between the lower and upper quartiles.
MAD = 1
n
n
∑
i=1
(rawi −treatedi)
(4.1)
RMSD =
v
u
u
t 1
n
n
∑
i=1
(rawi −treatedi)2
(4.2)
where n is the number of cells, rawi is the elevation value of the raw DEM at
cell i and treatedi is the elevation value of the treated DEM at cell i.
4.2
Measurements and sampling
4.2.1
Methodology of ﬁeld work and objectives
Field work was performed during a total of 8 days between the 21st of April and
the 16th of May 2015 close to the end of the dry season. In order to conduct
rigorous measurements and analysis a simple sampling plan was developed.
The localization of the wells which were not identiﬁed during the past analysis,
was achieved by obtaining their coordinates from the Direction Générale des
==PAGE:33==
4.2 Measurements and sampling
23
Ressources en Eau (DGRE, 2014, personal communication) and by beneﬁting
from the help of the inhabitants and the local authorities. Locations and IDs of
the wells used for ﬁeld work are shown in Figure 4.2.
(a) Boreholes
(b) Dug wells
Figure 4.2: IDs and locations of the wells used for ﬁeld work except for A-83
which was only used during the previous sampling campaigns1.
.
Priority was set on sampling the wells that were not considered during the
previous campaign in order to complete the database and to obtain a better
knowledge about the distribution of arsenic contamination over the study area
regarding the water composition and the geology. In parallel, an assessment of
the ﬁeld hydrogeology (i.e. type of aquifer, groundwater ﬂow direction, deﬁni-
tion of the watershed) was performed by measuring groundwater levels and well
1Boreholes with IDs PO-1 to PO-12 and A-x were already sampled in February 2015
==PAGE:34==
24
4 Methods
dimensions in order to develop an hydrogeological model.
Secondary objective was set on carrying out groundwater sampling and anal-
ysis at multilevel depths in order to study the vertical proﬁle of the groundwater
composition and change in the arsenic concentration. Indeed, the fractured/ﬁs-
sured aquifer is likely to lead to stratiﬁed groundwater ﬂow and, therefore, to
signiﬁcant geochemical diﬀerences. This type of analysis was not performed in
previous studies concerning arsenic occurrence in African hard rocks aquifers (e.g.
COWI (2005) and Smedley et al. (2007)).
4.2.2
Positioning
The positions of wells, informal gold mining, tailings, abandoned quarries and
springs were systematically recorded using a GPS Garmin Etrex 10. This device
possess a horizontal accuracy of 3 m (read on the GPS) which is satisfying re-
garding the study scale and the 60 m horizontal accuracy of the treated DEM.
The position of the river and quarries were digitized from satellite imagery and
veriﬁed using ﬁeld GPS measurement.
4.2.3
Groundwater and surface water levels
Water level measurements in wells were performed among 27 boreholes and 10 dug
wells. The presence of electrical pumping representing signiﬁcant level of ground-
water abstraction was not found in the area. However, sporadic hand-pumping is
performed along the day for domestic needs. Thus, it was not possible to prevent
water abstraction before performing the measurements although hand-pumping
is not expected to signiﬁcantly aﬀect groundwater level. In fact, the ﬂow rate of
such pump is relatively limited (less than 1 m3/h) regarding the speciﬁc yield of
the boreholes ([0.64 ; 14] ; median: 6.2 m3/h). This was also veriﬁed by mea-
suring constant groundwater level while pumping for few minutes. Some of the
water levels were also measured a second time in the early morning (i.e. 5 a.m)
prior to any pumping. IDs and characteristics of the wells used for this analysis
can be found in Appendix C.
The water levels were measured from the top of the casing using a water
level dipper with centimetre accuracy. According to Fetter (2003), all water level
measurements should preferably be performed within a short time interval in or-
der to avoid water level changes. Regarding the constant dry seasonal weather
and the ﬁeld work period, this requirement is assumed to be respected and the
water level is not expected to change signiﬁcantly during the measurement period.
==PAGE:35==
4.2 Measurements and sampling
25
The total depths of the wells were measured from the top of the casings us-
ing the graduated tether cable of a point source bailer with meter accuracy. The
weight attached to the cable consisted in the bailer itself or a thinner item such as
a spanner in order to minimize groundwater mixing when performing multilevel
sampling. This measurement is considered accurate considering the uncertainty
on the real depth of the borehole due to sedimentary deposit.
The approximate surface water elevations at the two main quarries and of the
Mouhoun river were qualitatively determined through observations made in the
ﬁeld and by using the DEM:
• The water surface of the Mouhoun river was assumed to be constant over
the study area as its slope is relatively low. Its elevation was determined
using the DEM elevations as the surface water is almost equal to the banks
elevation (Figure D.3d)
• The water elevation of each quarry read on the raw DEM among cells
centroïds was highly variable. This could be due to the shadow of the cliﬀs
resulting in low light emission or to speckling due to light reﬂection on water
bodies (Falorni et al., 2005). Therefore, their elevations were qualitatively
determined using a) diﬀerences in GPS measurements (i.e. by measuring
elevations at the surface water body and at a ”ground control point” within
a short amount of time and by using the DEM to vertically reference the
ground control point), b) the range of raw DEM elevations of the surface
water, c) height measurement performed at the cliﬀof quarry B2 and by
vertically referencing the location of measurement using the DEM, d) by
visual estimate of the depth of the quarries.
Quarries B1 and B2 were
assumed to have equal surface water elevations regarding the relatively
short distance separating them and as they are linked by ﬂooded mining
tunnels.
4.2.4
Water chemistry ﬁeld measurements, sampling and
analysis
Two distinct types of sampling and measurements were performed in order to
achieve distinct analysis on the average water composition and on the change in
groundwater composition with depth.
The average composition of the water was determined by sampling the water
in the 3 quarries, in 3 shallow dug wells using a grab sampler (i.e. bailer) and in
18 boreholes using the integrated hand-pumping systems. In the last case, a ﬂow
==PAGE:36==
26
4 Methods
through cell was connected to the integrated hand-pump system in order to min-
imize the contact with the atmosphere. A multi-parameter meter connected to
probes measuring O2, pH, Eh, EC, T was used in order to visualize stabilization
of the parameters while applying constant pumping and to insure representative
sampling of the groundwater (Figure B.2). Once these parameters were relatively
stable, groundwater was sampled.
Multilevel sampling was performed among 5 boreholes (PO-1, PO-6, PO-7,
PO-10, PO-32) found contaminated by arsenic and/or located along the same
W-E line (i.e. assumed to be the approximate groundwater ﬂow direction) in
order to assess the fate and kinetics of arsenic transport in groundwater. A point
source bailer1 was used for this application.
The target depth intervals were
speciﬁcally deﬁned for each well regarding the water level, total depth and screen
interval. However, as the later information was not available for the majority
of the boreholes at the time of measurements, the target depths were arbitrary
deﬁned in order to cover the entire water column. The sampling points were also
suﬃciently spaced (i.e. minimum intervals of 10 m) in order to minimize water
mixing. When retrieving the bailer, O2, pH, Eh, EC, T were measured and the
turbidity of the groundwater was checked before sampling.
For both the average composition and the multilevel analysis, samples were
taken and conserved using three methods :
• in 30 mL polyethylene (PE) bottles: groundwater was ﬁltered using 0.45
µm pore size membrane for particulates removal, together with a disposable
anion exchange cartridge in order to selectively remove As(V) from the
sample by speciation of the inorganic arsenic species III and V. This allows
the measurement of As(III) concentration only. As the rate of oxidation
of As(III) to As(V) is very slow (Smedley et al., 1996), this method is
expected to be accurate. The sample was acidiﬁed to pH < 2 using nitric
acid HNO3. This method is consistent with the methodology outlined in
Kim et al. (2012).
• in 30 mL PE bottles: groundwater was ﬁltered using 0.45 µm pore size
membrane and syringe and the sample was acidiﬁed to pH < 2 using HNO3.
This allow the measurement of major cations (Na, K, Ca, Mg) and other
trace elements in particular the concentration of total arsenic AsT and total
iron concentration FeT .
1The Solinst Model 429 made of stainless steel, about 1.2 meter long and with a capacity
of 2 L
==PAGE:37==
4.3 Water chemistry and statistical analysis
27
• in 125 mL PE bottles: groundwater was kept non acidiﬁed and non ﬁltered
in order to measure the concentration of anions and the total inorganic
carbon (TIC). As the pH was found in the range of 6 to 7, TIC is mostly
present as HCO−
3 and can therefore be assumed to represent the alkalinity
(Appelo and Postma, 2010).
The samples were kept refrigerated until measurements (ca. 3 weeks). The
latter were all performed at EAWAG. Concentrations of anions (i.e. Cl−, SO2−
4 ,
F−, Br−, NO−
3 , PO3−
4 ) were measured with ion chromatography (IC) while ma-
jor cations (Na, K, Ca, Mg) and other trace elements (Fe, Si, B, Ba, Li, La, Ce
Sr, Al, Cu, Mn, Zn, Au, As, Be, Sb, Sc, Cd, Co, Cr, Mo, Pb, Rb, Sr, Tl, U, V,
W) were determined by inductively-coupled plasma mass spectrometer (ICP-MS).
Total inorganic carbon (TIC) was measured by acidifying the solution trans-
forming the inorganic carbon into CO2 which was subsequently measured. All
inorganic carbon was assumed to be present as HCO−
3 according to the circum-
neutral property of the water (Appelo and Postma, 2010). Thus, HCO−
3 mg/L
was calculated by dividing TIC [mg C/L] with the molar mass of carbon (i.e. 12
g/mol) and multiplying by the molar mass of HCO−
3 (61 g/mol).
Dissolved organic carbon (DOC) is measured by oxidizing all soluble mat-
ter to CO2 which is then measured (Appelo and Postma, 2010). As(III) was
measured by ICP-MS in a similar manner as the total concentration of arsenic
using the speciated sample. The concentration of As(V) was then determined by
subtracting As(III) from As(T ).
4.3
Water chemistry and statistical analysis
The ground and surface water geochemical analysis was performed using the re-
cent measurements (April-May 2015) and data collected during the February 2015
sampling campaign. Regarding the latter measurements, O2 and Eh parameters
were not used in this analysis as ﬂow through cell was not used.
4.3.1
Measurements accuracy
Electroneutralities of the samples are veriﬁed by calculating the electrical balance
(E.B.) using the concentrations of major ions Na+, K+, Mg2+, Ca2+, Cl−, HCO−
3 ,
SO2−
4 , NO−
3 (Appelo and Postma, 2010):
==PAGE:38==
28
4 Methods
E.B.[%] = Sumcations −Sumanions
Sumcations −Sumanions
× 100
(4.3)
The assumption that TIC is being exclusively present as HCO−
3 is likely to
be erroneous for lower pH as inorganic carbon might be present as H2CO3 under
acidic conditions (Appelo and Postma, 2010). The latter specie does not play a
role in the E.B. due to its electro-neutrality. Therefore, E.B. was plotted against
the pH in order to verify if unbalanced electro-neutrality was induced by other
parameters.
4.3.2
Physico-chemical parameters, major ion chemistry and
trace elements
The major characteristics of the ground and surface water are determined by pro-
ducing Piper diagrams. The analysis was broadened for boreholes groundwater
by investigating correlations between ECs and major ions. HCO−
3 concentrations
were also plot versus the borehole piezometric levels and depths in order to deter-
mine patterns between the groundwater composition and the residence time of
the groundwater . The total dissolved solids (TDS) in mg/L were calculated by
multiplying ECs by 0.65 (Fitts, 2002). Composition of the waters from boreholes,
dug wells and basins were compared.
In order to visualize the minerals saturation indexes (S.I.) for the boreholes
samples, speciation calculations using the software PHREEQC were performed.
For this application, physico-chemical parameters (pH, T) and major species
(HCO−
3 , Ca, Cl, K, Mg, Na, NO−
3 , Si, SO2−
4 , O2) of the samples were deﬁned
and the electrode potential pe was left to its initial value default (i.e. pe = 4)
and its real value was calculated from the species present in solution.
In order to investigate change in water composition when groundwater ﬂows
into the basin, a simple batch experiment was performed using PHREEQC by
simulating equilibrium between representative groundwater samples (i.e. ground-
water in boreholes located close to the quarries) and the atmosphere. The atmo-
sphere was deﬁned by entering the activity corresponding to the partial pressure
of CO2 (i.e. PCO2 = log(10−3.5)1 (Appelo and Postma, 2010)) and the activity
corresponding to the partial pressure of O2 (i.e. PO2=-0.68).
1The CO2 atmospheric pressure is 10−3.5.
==PAGE:39==
4.4 Boreholes technical data collection and management
29
The concentrations of the species were also compared with the WHO guide-
lines. As discussed in Chapter 2, As release is likely to be due to the dissolution
of sulphide minerals which also generates Fe and SO2−
4 . Therefore, a speciﬁc
analysis is performed on the occurrence of Fe and SO2−
4
with respect to Eh and
pH.
4.3.3
Arsenic
The predominant arsenic specie (i.e. As(III) or As(V)) was determined by com-
paring the redox conditions and the As redox diagram and by visualizing the
measured As(III) and AsT .
Particular attention was brought on correlations
between As and species related to ore bodies (i.e. W, Mo, Sb), to sulphide min-
eralization (i.e. SO2−
4 , Fe) and to reductive dissolution of As-bearing oxides (i.e.
Mn, Fe) (COWI, 2005; Smedley et al., 2007; Verplanck et al., 2008). Relation-
ships between As and physico-chemical parameters (i.e. O2 and pH) were also
investigated.
The spatial distribution of arsenic was studied by plotting As concentrations
and discussed with respect to the identiﬁed potential sources and computed ﬂow
paths whereas the vertical distribution was discussed regarding the depths of the
contaminated boreholes and the diﬀerences in groundwater chemistry between
shallow dug wells and boreholes.
4.4
Boreholes technical data collection and
management
As no open source database containing technical details of boreholes (i.e. bore-
hole lithologs, total depths and screen intervals) were available for the study area,
informations were collected from several organizations and actors working in the
management of water resources as, for instance, DGRE (2015), WaterAid (2015),
personal communication.
Similarly as reported by Courtois et al. (2010), the main diﬃculty in this
study lay in the low amount of data available as well as their poor accuracy. For
instance, over a total of 16 lithologs found for the study area, 15 provided only
information about the total thickness of the weathered overburden. Informations
such as coordinates, screen intervals, total depths of the boreholes were also often
missing. Moreover, geological descriptions found in lithologs should be used with
==PAGE:40==
30
4 Methods
caution as this information often presents lack of accuracy.
By combining the collected borehole informations and establishing compari-
son with the measurements and observations made on the ﬁeld (i.e. total depths,
locations, type of pump, year of realisation), a database containing the approxi-
mate technical characteristics of boreholes was created (see Appendix C).
29 detailed borehole lithologs found for a larger area extent than the study
site (Table C.5) as well as the literature were also used to determine general
characteristics of the geological horizons and boreholes. This analysis resulted in
the following observations and assumptions:
• Boreholes are usually drilled down to the fresh basement in order to opti-
mize the collection of groundwater by crossing a maximal number of frac-
tures with high productivity. Therefore, using the thickness of the alterite
and the total depth of the corresponding borehole, the approximate thick-
ness of the ﬁssured layer can be determined at the considered location.
However, some boreholes and, in particular, the ones of higher depths, can
be drilled about 10 meters across the fresh basement or zone with a low
density of ﬁssures.
• According to Ahmed et al. (2008), Dewandel et al. (2006), Koïta et al.
(2013a), and Sharp (2014), the isalterite thickness is lower than the one
of the alloterite although this could not be conﬁrmed from the analysis of
the various lithologs. Indeed, the saprolite thickness highly varies within
short distances and none of these horizons was found generally thicker than
another. This could be a consequence of the alternation between the weath-
ering and erosion cycles with erosion partly impacting this layer resulting
in a multiphase weathering proﬁle as suggested by Ahmed et al. (2008) and
Dewandel et al. (2006).
• The lateritic cuirasse has a thickness in the range [2 ; 18] m with a median
value of 4 m showing the relatively low occurrence of ferricrete scarps (i.e.
highest thickness). This is in accordance with Bamba et al. (2002), Kote
et al. (2003), and Smedley et al. (2007) who reported that this horizons is
usually in the range [1 ; 5] m. According to the relative ﬂat topography of
the terrain, apart from the hills located in the east part of the study area,
the ferricrete thickness is expected to be in this range.
• The boreholes are exclusively screened between the base of the saprolite
and their total depths. The screen top position varies whereas the bottom
of the screen usually corresponds to the bottom of the borehole. It can
==PAGE:41==
4.5 Hydrogeological assessment: aquifer characteristics and groundwater ﬂow direction
31
also be divided into several intervals which likely correspond to conductive
ﬁssures parts.
4.5
Hydrogeological assessment: aquifer
characteristics and groundwater ﬂow direction
Ground water heads were obtained by subtracting the measured water levels from
the corresponding ground elevations obtained from the generated DEM. Thus, all
the water level data were managed referring to the Geoid datum. As no intensive
pumping was observed in the study area, all wells were considered of interest for
the hydrogeological assessment although water levels observed to change were
disregarded from the analysis. Considering the relative vertical accuracy of the
DEM, the calculated heads were considered whether realistic or not regarding
the expected general water ﬂow direction (i.e. towards the Mouhoun river).
First, the type of aquifer (i.e. unconﬁned, conﬁned) was assessed by compar-
ing the measured water levels with respect to the topography. A potentiometric
surface map (i.e. ﬂow net) was developed in order to estimate the groundwater
ﬂow direction by obtaining constant heads line (i.e. equipotential lines). How-
ever, such approach is only valid if the geological media can be assumed isotropic,
if the considered wells are screened in the same aquifer and if the groundwater
ﬂow is predominantly horizontal (Fetter, 2003; Fitts, 2002). Despite the presence
of local heterogeneity due to ﬁssures/fractures, the aquifer was considered as a
continuum equivalent porous medium on the scale of the study in order to obtain
an approximate direction of the groundwater ﬂow. Indeed, as discussed above
a relatively good conductivity between the ﬁssures is expected. Moreover, only
the boreholes were considered for this application as they are screened across the
ﬁssured layer whereas the dug wells receive water from the weathered overburden
and as the ﬁssured zone plays the major role for groundwater transmissivity. The
existence of horizontal ﬂow was assessed by comparing the range of piezometric
heads with the size of the study area.
As the aquifer thickness is expected to be low (i.e. less than 100 m) and as
the dug wells and boreholes are strictly screened respectively in the saprolite and
in the ﬁssured zone, comparing the piezometric levels measured at boreholes and
at dug wells for close locations would allow to determine the presence of a unique
or distinct aquifers.
==PAGE:42==
32
4 Methods
4.6
Localization of the potential sources of arsenic
4.6.1
Quartz veins
In West Africa, gold mineralization has been for long associated with the locations
of quartz veins and with the sulphide/arsenide minerals deposition, pyrite and
arsenopyrite being the dominant ore minerals (Béziat et al., 2008; Oberthür et al.,
1997). Conversely, the detection of arsenic is often considered as a good indica-
tor for the presence of gold. The main gold mineralization of the Poura area is
particularly associated with mesothermal quartz veins hosting rare polymetallic
sulphides and controlled by shear structures (Bamba, 1996; Bourges et al., 1998;
Béziat et al., 2008; Sanogo and Prost, 1993). As discussed above, oxidation and
dissolution of these sulphide minerals are expected to be the main source of As
in groundwater. Thus, by locating the quartz veins, the potential point sources
of arsenic can be determined.
Major gold deposits can be identiﬁed and located from the ancient mining
activities and from the descriptions and maps made by Bamba (1996), Gueye
(1984), Kote et al. (2003), and Sanogo and Prost (1993). Three principal gold
lodes, which are found close to each others, are usually identiﬁed as: the ”Plaine”,
”Ouest” and ”Montagne” deposits (Béziat et al., 2008; Gueye, 1984; Roy, 2000;
Sanogo and Prost, 1993). The former was the most exploited during industrial
mining and its location corresponds to the two abandoned quarries in the vicinity
of Poura-mine. The ”Ouest” and ”Montagne” deposits are found in the southern
extension of the Plaine deposit (Figure A.1). These major gold lodes are com-
posed of quasi-continuous steeply-dipping quartz veins (Béziat et al., 2008) with
depth of at least 400 m (Roy, 2000). It is therefore assumed that the quartz veins
vertically cross the entire hard rock aquifer. The main lodes found in the Poura
area are also narrow, having lateral dimensions that do not exceed the tenth of
meter. Some authors have reported approximate dimensions: the operated lode
ﬁlon ”Plaine” has a total strike length of about 2000 m and a width ranging from
0.5 to 8 m with an average of 2 m (Kote et al., 2003; Roy, 2000). ”Filon Ouest”
and Filon Montagne” have lengths of 250 m and 300 m and widths in the range
[0.8 ; 3], [0.8 ; 6] m respectively (Gueye, 1984).
Figure 3.4 shows that numerous other minor quartz veins are likely to be dis-
tributed over the study area as well as they can occur in all lithologies (Béziat
et al., 2008). However, the dimensions of the veins shown in this Figure don’t
seem realistic (i.e. widths of about 150 m) and it might only indicate zones with
potential quartz mineralization. Bamba (1996) indicated with a better accuracy
the position of quartz veins showing on the surface on a geomorphological map
==PAGE:43==
4.6 Localization of the potential sources of arsenic
33
(Figure A.2). Therefore, these quartz veins positions were digitized and consid-
ered as potential As point sources. Descriptions of Gueye (1984) and Sanogo and
Prost (1993) were also used to more accurately deﬁne the positions of the main
lodes and borehole lithologs were studied to reveal wells crossing quartz veins.
Moreover, the oxidation of sulphide minerals can be assumed to occur over the
entire saturated zone as the groundwater is typically oxic in this type of aquifer
(Roy, 2000; Smedley et al., 2007).
Localization of informal mining activity in the ﬁeld was also used as an in-
dicator to locate potential gold mineralization. Indeed, according to Kote et al.
(2003), informal gold mining occurs at locations of the veins associated with gold-
free deposit and oxidized sulphide minerals. Hand dug mining is performed using
pits and tunnels across the altered horizons and reaching depth of 20-30 m cor-
responding to the hydrostatic groundwater level.
4.6.2
Other potential sources
Arsenic could also be found in various host rocks into As-bearing disseminated
sulphide mineralization (Smedley and Kinniburgh, 2002). For instance, the Tark-
waïan rocks in the vicinity of Poura can locally show a disseminated gold mineral-
ization together with sulphide minerals (Kote et al., 2003; Oberthür et al., 1997).
Large zones of the andesite were also altered by hydrothermal ﬂuids (Figure 3.4).
This has led to disseminated sulphides (especially pyrite) deposits within the
schistosity without being associated with large quartz veins Kote et al. (2003).
Thus, these large zones might constitute diﬀuse As sources
Evidences for direct and indirect pollution by mining activities were also col-
lected by observations of the ongoing informal mining and by locating remnants
of the past industrial activities. Indeed, according to Kagambega et al. (2014b),
mine wastes were observed to be a signiﬁcant source of arsenic contamination
in the surroundings of Poura. Thus, their location was assessed in the ﬁeld and
compared with the As distribution.
4.6.3
Model-based interpretation
The likelihood of the As sources was assessed by the development of an hydroge-
ological model in order to observe the potential lateral transport of arsenic and
by comparing these results with the distribution of measured As concentrations.
The latter were also plotted on a geological map.
==PAGE:44==
34
4 Methods
4.7
Hydrogeological model
A static hydrogeological model was developed to assess the sources and the spatial
distribution of arsenic by simulating its transport through groundwater regard-
ing the location of the identiﬁed quartz veins and the distribution of arsenic
concentrations in groundwater.
4.7.1
Model code
To simulate the groundwater ﬂow system and the interaction between groundwa-
ter and surface water, the MODFLOW-2000 code together with the Groundwater
Modeling System (GMS) graphical user interface (GUI) were chosen.
MOD-
FLOW is a three dimensional, ﬁnite diﬀerence, block centered model which has
been developed since 1984 by the U.S Geological Survey. It solves the three di-
mensional groundwater ﬂow equation (Equation 4.4) designed to simulate aquifer
systems assuming constant density and dynamic viscosity. The solver applies a
ﬁnite-diﬀerence method, using the law of mass balance and Darcy’s Law, to a
discretized aquifer domain in order to describe the ﬂow from cell to cell.
∂
∂x · (Kxx
∂h
∂x) + ∂
∂y · (Kyy
∂h
∂y ) + ∂
∂z · (Kzz
∂h
∂z ) −W = SS · ∂h
∂t
(4.4)
where:
• Kxx, Kyy, Kzz are the hydraulic conductivity along the x, y and z coordi-
nate axes, which are assumed to be parallel to the major axes of hydraulic
conductivity [m/day]
• h is potentiometric head [m]
• W is the volumetric ﬂux per unit volume representing the sources and/or
sinks of water [1/day]
• Ss is the speciﬁc storage [1/m]
• t is the time [day]
The layer property ﬂow (LPF) package is used as it calculates conductance
coeﬃcients at the node of each model cell and allows the deﬁnition of vertical/hor-
izontal anisotropy in the hydraulic conductivity.
==PAGE:45==
4.7 Hydrogeological model
35
4.7.2
Conceptual model
4.7.2.1
Layers deﬁnition
As discussed in Sections 3.3 and 3.4, the recent research results having included
the underlying ﬁssured layer as part of the weathering proﬁle have resulted in a
better conceptualization of hard rock aquifers (Ahmed et al., 2008; Sharp, 2014).
Indeed, the alteritic horizons and the ﬁssured bedrock together are assumed to
form a composite stratiform aquifer with variable hydrogeological properties. A
conceptual model of the aquifer at catchment scale was developed using the GMS
interface by creating a simpliﬁed 3D geological model over which hydrogeological
parameters were assigned.
Due to the uncertainties remaining on the geology discussed in Section 4.4,
the geological model was kept to a simple complexity level by only considering the
two main stratiform weathered layers (i.e. the saprolite and the ﬁssured layer)
as well as the fresh basement (Figure 4.3). This simpliﬁcation also presented the
advantage to minimize the number of cells and parameters leading to a decrease
in the computational power requirements. The geological model was obtained by
interpolation of 16 simpliﬁed petrological proﬁles deﬁned at locations where the
ﬁssured layer thickness could be determined and by using the DEM as the upper
surface.
The saprolite layer was deﬁned as an isotropic porous medium (Ahmed et al.,
2008; Compaore et al., 1997; Wright and Burgess, 1992) and assumed to cover
the bedrocks over the entire study area. The soil, ferricrete and mottled clay
horizons were disregarded and considered as part of the saprolite as expected to
be of low inﬂuence on the model output. In fact, saturated zones in the soil and
ferricrete are not expected during the time of the study and due to the relatively
similar clayey content of the weathered overburden horizons (Bamba et al., 2002),
their hydrodynamic properties are likely to be similar. The diﬀerence between
the alloterite and isalterite was disregarded as no clear distinction could be de-
ﬁned.
The productive weathered ﬁssured/fractured basement is represented as an
equivalent porous medium analogously to a similar model in Ahmed et al. (2008).
Its thickness was considered constant as discussed in Section 3.3. However, ac-
cording to the data collected, the weathered overburden thickness ([6 ; 50] ;
median: 23 m) and the borehole depths ([36 ; 89] ; median: 47 m) don’t linearly
vary between the boreholes. Substracting the alterite thickness from the total
depths of the corresponding boreholes to determine the ﬁssured layer thickness
gives a range of [21 ; 49] m. Thus, an approximate constant thickness of 30 m was
==PAGE:46==
36
4 Methods
calculated as the median of these diﬀerences. This result is in accordance with
Bamba et al. (2002) who observed, in the vicinity of the study area, a ﬁssured
layer thickness of 32.5 m. A distinct upper part of the bedrocks having an higher
density of ﬁssures as reported in the literature was not included in the model as
no information could be obtained about the vertical fractures distribution within
the study area and as lateral heterogeneity of ﬁssures is expected to play the
deterministic role in groundwater ﬂow.
Regarding the scale of the study and the scarcity of deep tectonic fractures,
the fresh unfractured basement was considered impervious which is in accordance
with Maréchal et al. (2004). The alluvium was also disregarded as it constitutes
a clayey superﬁcial layer not well developed, located close to the river boundary.
Figure 4.3:
Geological proﬁle considered over the model domain.
The ﬁs-
sured/fractured weathered bedrocks and the fresh basement have constant thick-
ness while the saprolite has a variable thickness.
==PAGE:47==
4.7 Hydrogeological model
37
4.7.2.2
Heterogeneity
Heterogeneities in the weathered bedrocks are particularly expected to play an
important role in controlling ﬂow and solute movement in the subsurface (Moeck
et al., 2015) considering that the transmissivity of the aquifer is primary assured
by the ﬁssures/fractures. This was modeled by attributing laterally variable hy-
draulic conductivities (K) to the model grid. Two distinct conceptual approaches
were used to model the heterogeneity:
• According to Ahmed et al. (2008), for numerical groundwater ﬂow mod-
elling and transport processes in such environments, the aquifer should be
divided and discretized into a number of subvolumes having uniform prop-
erties. As the latter couldn’t be measured in the ﬁeld, the aquifer domain
was divided manually according to the diﬀerent entities of the lithology
shown on the geological map (Doherty, 2003; Koïta et al., 2013b). This di-
vision was applied similarly on the saprolite and the ﬁssured layers as their
properties are closely related to the type of basement rocks (Ahmed et al.,
2008; Koïta et al., 2013b). Subareas were deﬁned for i) rhyolite and rhyo-
dacite, ii) andesitic tuﬀ, iii) andesite1, iv) Tarkwaian rocks, v) Quartzite,
vi) Volcano-sedimentary schist according to Figure 3.4. Faults appearing
on the geological map (Figure 3.4) were also included in the model by at-
tributing speciﬁc K to the corresponding cells of the ﬁssured layer. In fact,
according to Ahmed et al. (2008) and Sharp (2014) this major geological fea-
tures could have increased the weathering process in their vicinity resulting
in zones of enhanced hydraulic conductivities.
• Spatial variation of hydraulic properties can also be modeled through an
inverse modeling approach known as pilot points. This method consists
in attributing speciﬁc hydraulic conductivity values to points distributed
over the study area. K contained in the pilot points are assigned to the
grid elements through spatial interpolation and their values are determined
through calibration (Doherty, 2003; Moeck et al., 2015).
191 regularly
distributed pilot points spaced by about 500 m were deﬁned over the model
domain (Figure 4.4). This number was chosen as a reasonable compromise
between eﬃcient model-run time, the low amount of observed data and the
recommendations found in the literature. Indeed, Doherty (2003), Doherty
et al. (2010a), and Moeck et al. (2015) advised to use a high number of
pilot points in the case of a complex heterogeneous system in order to
minimize artifacts associated with oversimpliﬁcation.
For instance, this
aims to avoid the presence of ”bulls eyes” (i.e. artifacts of extreme hydraulic
conductivities) in the calibrated model and to obtain a smoothed spatial
1the andesite included also the hydrothermalized andesite
==PAGE:48==
38
4 Methods
repartition of the hydraulic properties. Ks were spatially interpolated to the
model grid using the ordinary Kriging method based on a log variogram
of the exponential type (Doherty et al., 2010b) with a range of 1000 m
and a nugget of zero.
This means that each pilot point inﬂuences the
K distribution over a distance of 1 km from its location although it has
a much greater inﬂuence on K in its close vicinity. This variogram was
arbitrary designed in order to obtain a smoothed K distribution as it was
not possible to produce an experimental variogram due to the absence of K
measurements.
4.7.3
Model domain, sources and sinks
Figure 4.4: Model domain with locations of the 14 observed wells (black dots),
regularly distributed 191 pilot points (squares). Constant head boundaries are
shown by the solid lines. The dashed lines consist of no ﬂow boundaries.
The boundaries of the model correspond to the watershed delimitation de-
scribed in Section 5.2. The west boundary coincides with the Mouhoun river and
was deﬁned as constant head of 240 m. The remaining boundaries (i.e. north,
==PAGE:49==
4.7 Hydrogeological model
39
south and east) of the model were set at the expected limit of the watershed cor-
responding to groundwater divides and were represented as no-ﬂow boundaries.
As no recharge is expected during the study period and as the groundwater
ﬂows towards the Mouhoun river, a constant head boundary corresponding to an
equipotential line of 270 m was deﬁned on the east side of the model domain in
order to create a groundwater inﬂow.
The three quarries representing signiﬁcant water surface features were deﬁned
as constant speciﬁed head in the model.
4.7.4
Grid deﬁnition
Each layer was divided into 45545 square meshes with 38 - m size over the model
domain. This was chosen as a reasonable compromise between the minimization
of the computational power requirement (i.e. by limiting this number to 100,000)
and the representation of the ﬁssured layer heterogeneity on the catchment scale.
The number and size of cells in the vertical direction correspond to the deﬁned
geological layers.
4.7.5
Model aquifer characteristics
No hydraulic tests could be carried out on the ﬁeld in order to deﬁne the hydro-
dynamic properties of the aquifer. Moreover, as the developed model is steady
state, hydraulic conductivity (K) is the only parameter having an inﬂuence on the
spatial head repartition and dynamic parameters such as storativity were disre-
garded. Therefore, values from the literature were used to deﬁne the calibration
range of Ks assigned to each of the conceptual layers. Table 4.1 presents ranges
of conductivity for the saprolite and the ﬁssured layer estimated from various
tests and lithology.
Many hydrodynamic data from various ﬁeld tests are available for the sapro-
lite layer. As shown in Table 4.1, its K is highly variable having a total range of
[2E-10 ; 1E-5] m/s which is due to the variance in the kaolinite content (Wright
and Burgess, 1992). As a few meters of groundwater was measured in the shallow
dug wells crossing this layer, the latter is expected to exhibit a suﬃcient trans-
missivity to recharge those wells. Thus, lowest value of K, as proposed by Koïta
et al. (2013a), don’t seem realistic for the considered area. The lower bound was
therefore arbitrary ﬁxed to 1E-8 m/s to account for very low conductivity while
the upper bound was deﬁned to 1E-5 m/s which is of same order of magnitude
==PAGE:50==
40
4 Methods
Table 4.1: Geometric means and range of hydraulic conductivities (K) in [m/s]
of the saprolite and the ﬁssured layer for hard rock aquifers.
References
Lithology
Location
K
Methods
Saprolite
Ahmed et al. (2008)
Granite
India
[8E-7 ; 5E-6]
Model calibration
Compaore et al. (1997)
Granite
Burkina Faso
1E-6 [7E-8 ; 1E-5]
Pumping tests
Wright and Burgess (1992)
Hard rock
Africa
4E-6 [2E-7 ; 4E-5]
Pumping tests
Koïta et al. (2013a)
Metasediments
Ivory Coast
5.6E-8 [2E-10 ; 8E-7]
Pumping tests
Fissured layer
Ahmed et al. (2008)
Granite
India
[1E-7 ; 3E-5]
Model calibration
Dewandel et al. (2006)
Granite
India
2E-5 [5E-6 ; 9E-5]
Flowmeter tests
Howard et al. (1992)
Hard-rock
Ouganda
1E-7 [1E-9 ; 3E-5]
Packers test
Maréchal et al. (2004)
Granite
India
4.4E-6 [2E-8 ; 5E-4]
Slug tests
Maréchal et al. (2004)
Granite
India
2.1E-5 [6.9E-10 ; 1E-4]
Pumping tests
Koïta et al. (2013a)
Metasediments
Ivory Coast
6E-7 [2E-7 ; 3E-6]
Pumping tests
Koïta et al. (2013a)
Volcanic-rocks
Ivory Coast
9.7E-7 [1.2E-7 ; 4E-6]
Pumping tests
as the highest value of conductivity found in the literature.
The K of the fractured/ﬁssured layer primary depends on the fracture density
and geometry, the rock matrix being impervious (Ahmed et al., 2008). Very low
Ks as reported by Howard et al. (1992) and Maréchal et al. (2004) are likely to
correspond to the aquifer characteristics in the impervious rock matrix. How-
ever, the ﬁssured layer was considered vertically homogeneous and no evidence
of impervious weathered bedrocks was observed in the ﬁeld as no wells were dry.
Permeability was therefore allowed at all location considering that conductivity
in the weathered bedrocks is expected to be higher than in the saprolite. Thus,
the lower bound of this layer was ﬁxed to 10E-7 m/s in order to be higher than
the lower bound of the saprolite layer. The upper bound was deﬁned equal to
5E-4 m/s as the highest K found in the literature (Table 4.1). This large range
of Ks enables realistic ﬂexibility for the calibration of the ﬁssured layer in order
to simulate the signiﬁcant heterogeneity of the ﬁssures/fractures. Note also that
these K values are statistical values accounting for the bedrock matrix and the
ﬁssures/fractures. It is therefore expected that the real K of a single fracture is
much higher than this statistical value.
Regarding the structural geology of the area and the general orientation North-
South of the vertical schistosity and faults, an anisotropy in the hydraulic con-
ductivity might be expected. As discussed above, many authors have also argued
that the upper part of the weathered bedrocks is aﬀected by a dense horizontal
ﬁssuring while the ﬁssures density decreases with depth (Courtois et al., 2010;
==PAGE:51==
4.7 Hydrogeological model
41
Dewandel et al., 2006, 2011; Maréchal et al., 2004; Wyns et al., 1999). Such
anisotropy was particularly observed by Dewandel et al. (2011) who found a ra-
tio Kh/Kv up to 10 from pumping test. Therefore, a vertical anisotropy was
deﬁned in the ﬁssured layer. However, due to the uncertainty remaining on the
orientation of the ﬁssures in the present study the calibration range was ﬁxed to
[0.1 - 10]. The conductivity of the fresh basement was ﬁxed to 10−9 m/s in order
deﬁne it as impervious.
4.7.6
Model calibration
4.7.7
Calibration procedure
The model was calibrated for both conceptual approach using the automated
nonlinear parameter estimation software PEST so that the model output ﬁts the
measured hydraulic heads. The objective function to be minimized is deﬁned as
(Doherty, 2003):
Φm = (d −M(p)))tQ1(d −M(p))
(4.5)
where d is a vector of ﬁeld measurements (in our case, the observed heads), p
is the vector of parameters that are calibrated, M describes the model action on
the parameters to generate outputs similar to d, Q1 incorporates the weights as-
signed to the various observations according to their contribution in minimizing
Equation 4.5 for an optimal parameter set. The parameters optimised were the
diﬀerent hydraulic conductivities assigned to the saprolite and weathered ﬁssured
bedrocks as well as the anisotropic term deﬁned for the ﬁssured layer.
As the use of pilot points result in a number of parameters to be estimated
greatly exceeding the number of observations, a ”regularization objective func-
tion” (Equation 4.6) has to be added to Equation 4.5 in order to form a global
objective function (Equation 4.7) (Doherty, 2003). The regularization function
adds a number of additional mathematical constraints on the parameters variance
required to perform calibration by achieving parsimony and to ensure numerical
stability (Doherty, 2003).
Φr = (e −R(p)))tQ2(e −R(p))
(4.6)
where R is a ”regularization operator” acting on the parameters vector p
and e expresses some ”default system state”. Q2 contains the weights that are
assigned to the various ”regularization observations” contained in e. Diﬀerent
regularization techniques were used together:
==PAGE:52==
42
4 Methods
• The nonlinear homogeneous Tikhonov regularization scheme aims at min-
imizing the number of possible parameters set solution by adding an ho-
mogeneity constraint on the parameters (i.e. the values assigned to pilot
points that are close to each other should be similar) (Doherty, 2015).
• The preferred value Tikhonov regularization scheme allows to constrain the
parameter value near its initial value in order to avoid it to hit its bound
(Doherty, 2015).
• The subspace regularization technique Singular Value Decomposition (SVD)
limits the number of linear combinations of the estimated parameters based
on the information content of the data available for calibration. This re-
sults in reducing the parameter space by the consideration of parameter
combinations rather than parameters themselves (Doherty, 2015).
.
Φg = Φm + µΦr
(4.7)
where µ is a value numerically calculated by PEST along the calibration pro-
cess.
The SVD-Assist scheme was used in parallel to the regularization techniques
in order to reduce the number of estimated parameters and, thus, of model runs
by generating super-parameters.
4.7.7.1
Initial parameter values and observed data
As no speciﬁc information about the hydrodynamic properties of the considered
aquifer could be found, the initial parameter values were deﬁned as the geomet-
rical means of K range listed in Table 4.1 as well as the initial anisotropy was
deﬁned to one. This was decided in order to minimize the inﬂuence of the initial
value on the calibration.
Head data from 15 boreholes screened in the ﬁssured layer were used as steady
state head targets. As PO-8 and PO-9 are very close to each others and as PO-
8 exhibits a slightly higher head, PO-9 was disregarded in order to reduce the
weight of observations at this location.
Observed heads deﬁned in the model
can be found in Table E.2. The uncertainty range was ﬁx to ±1 m with 95%
conﬁdence interval assuming that the error was only generated by water levels
measurements.
==PAGE:53==
4.7 Hydrogeological model
43
4.7.8
Validation of the model
4.7.8.1
Model performance
The model performance and validation was evaluated through multi-performance
criteria as recommended by Bennett et al. (2013) and Moeck et al. (2015).
The global objective function value Φg was analyzed to evaluate the conver-
gence of the calibration. The bias, mean absolute error (MAE) and root mean
square error (RMSE) between observed and computed heads calculated by PEST
were used for direct value comparison between observed and computed heads.
Note that the MAE and RMSE are calculated similarly as in Equations 4.1 and
4.2 while bias is the average of the diﬀerences between observed and computed
heads. The diﬀerence in computed and observed heads were also checked individ-
ually in order to observe where the model performs the worse.
Considering the scarcity and the poor reliability of the data, a qualitative
assessment of the model output is performed. Scatter and residual plots were
ﬁrst used in order to reveal unmodeled behaviour. The realism of the hydraulic
conductivity distribution of the ﬁssured layer over the domain was then veriﬁed
visually by plotting K of the ﬁssured layer over the model domain.
For the speciﬁc qualitative assessment of the pilot point approach, the pres-
ence of eventual bull’s eyes (i.e. point artefacts exhibiting extreme values) in
the K distribution was checked. The range, geometrical means and geometric
standard deviation of K were also used to describe the distribution. Comparison
between the spatial hydraulic conductivity distribution and the geological entities
was also considered as a good indicator of the output likelihood.
4.7.8.2
Model uncertainty
Multiple sets of parameters might lead to similar minimizations of the objective
function through the existence of several local minima (Doherty et al., 2010a,b).
This is particularly the case here as important conceptual and spatial simpliﬁca-
tions were made and as low mathematical constraints on parameter estimation
through regularization were deﬁned.
The weak regularization primary results
from the absence of information about the hydrogeology and geology and the low
number of observed heads. The various sets of solution parameters can be de-
composed in two subsets: ”the calibration solution space” that can be estimated
uniquely and ”the calibration null-space” accounting for parameters or combi-
nations of parameters that cannot be estimated on the basis of the calibration
==PAGE:54==
44
4 Methods
dataset (Doherty et al., 2010a). Indeed, the null-space has a low sensitivity on the
model output and does not aﬀect the calibrated state. However, the existence of
diﬀerent K distribution leads to multiple possibilities of groundwater ﬂow paths.
It is therefore of particular importance to test the variance of model output while
maintaining the calibrated state in order to estimate the uncertainty on model
prediction as well as the likelihood of the spatial occurrence of arsenic.
The predictive uncertainty analysis of the model is performed through the
exploration of the null-space, known as the High-resolution Monte Carlo analysis,
in order to generate a probability distribution of the solution (Refsgaard et al.,
2012). By varying the initial values assigned to the pilot points and running
diﬀerent calibration process, various sets of optimized parameters are generated.
With the purpose to reduce the computational power requirements and simu-
lation time, only ten sets of initial parameters were generated. Random initial
parameter values for pilot points were generated using the RANDPAR (i.e. RAN-
Dom PARameter) utility supplied with PEST by specifying the range of hydraulic
conductivity of the ﬁssured layer deﬁned above.
Once the solutions were generated, the simulations presenting poor-calibration
performances were rejected for the predictive uncertainty analysis. The diﬀerent
K distributions of the converging solutions were qualitatively compared by plot-
ting them on surface contour maps. Maximum, minimum and geometric means of
Ks were also compared. The distribution of the K dispersion among the converg-
ing solutions was qualitatively assessed by calculating and plotting the geometric
standard deviations (GSD) of Ks for each cell considering all converging models
using Equation 4.8). Thus, zones with signiﬁcant variations in K were identiﬁed.
The mean, median, maximum and minimum values of these GSDs were also used
to quantitatively assess the K dispersion.
σg = exp
√∑n
i=1(ln Ki
µg )2
n
(4.8)
with n is the number of solutions presenting a good convergence, K is the hy-
draulic conductivity attributed to the considered cell, µg is the geometric mean
of Ks attributed to the considered cell among the converging solutions.
The variations in the saprolite Ks and of the ﬁssured layer anisotropy for
converging models were also assessed by observations of the range, geometric
mean (or mean in the case of the saprolite).
==PAGE:55==
4.7 Hydrogeological model
45
4.7.8.3
Sensitivity analysis
A sensitivity analysis was performed in order to complete the predictive uncer-
tainty analysis of the model.
In fact, uncertainty on the modeled hydraulic
conductivity distribution also arises from the presence of troublesome parame-
ters insensitive to the model or parameters that are highly correlated with others
(Doherty et al., 2010b). These insensitive parameters might lead to stable Ks
attributed to the model grid poorly representative of the reality as insensitive pa-
rameters are hold constant by PEST utilities during the calibration. Estimating
the sensitivity of the parameters therefore support the evaluation of the model
outcome likelihood by deﬁning zones where K is likely to be erroneous and where
more observations should be performed.
According to the large number of parameters (i.e. pilot points) and the non
linear relationship between parameters and output due to the mathematical con-
straints (i.e. synergistic eﬀect) between the parameters, the simple approach by
which one parameter at a time is varied to test the model output is not adapted.
Instead, the composite sensitivities of the parameters calculated with respect to
all observations (Doherty, 2015) were used to perform the sensitivity analysis.
All considered converging solutions were also used in this analysis. The sensitiv-
ities were ﬁrst normalized dividing their values by the sum of the sensitivities of
the respective simulations. The median and range of sensitivities of the saprolite
K and of the ﬁssured layer anisotropy were analyzed by comparison of the pilot
points median composite sensitivities of th pilot points. The latter were also plot
using graduated symbols in order to distinguish zones where parameters have
lower sensitivities.
4.7.9
Arsenic transport
Besides the uncertainty analysis of the groundwater ﬂow, the MODPATH utility
together with the MODFLOW models presenting a satisfying convergence were
used to generate forward several sets of potential ﬂow paths transporting As in
order to delineate zones of probable contamination. The sources of arsenic were
deﬁned at the cells of the ﬁssured layer corresponding to positions of the quartz
veins digitized from Bamba (1996). The choice of generating the particles sources
only at the ﬁssured layer results from that the groundwater transmissivity func-
tion is essentially insured by this horizon and that the boreholes were the only
wells to be found contaminated.
16 particles were generated at the center of
each cell. In a similar manner, particles were generated backwards from the wells
found contaminated in order to determine the sources locations. The various
==PAGE:56==
46
4 Methods
generated particles ﬂow paths were then plotted on maps together with the As
distribution measured among the boreholes in order to observe correlations be-
tween the quartz veins positions and contamination.
A simple average model was developed using the various converging model
outputs in order to compute the most probable case of ﬂow paths. This was
performed by the calculation of the geometric mean of Ks and of the median
value of the anisotropy predicted by the diﬀerent simulations. These parameters
were then re-allocated to the mesh. According to Refsgaard et al. (2012), this is
a very robust model prediction resulting in a larger, and more realistic estimate
of the prediction uncertainty than using a single model. All models considered
as presenting a satisfying convergence were equally weighted for the calculation.
Indeed, it is not because a model performs best against the observation data, that
it will similarly performed best for the prediction of K or As transport (Refsgaard
et al., 2012).
A speciﬁc study was performed on quartz veins that are supposed to lead
to a signiﬁcant pollution of groundwater. These veins were selected based on
potential As ﬂow paths appearing from their locations and crossing positions of
contaminated boreholes. The residence time of the groundwater from the veins
to the river was calculated and diﬀerence in As concentrations among the wells
locating in the considered ﬂow path were compared.
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 5
Results
5.1
Digital Elevation Model
This section presents the general characteristics and the quality assessment of the
treated DEM obtained after application of a wavelet ﬁltering.
Figure 5.1: Part of the denoised DEM of the study area with z magniﬁcation set
to 10 for better visualization. Scalebar in [m].
From a qualitative assessment of the treated DEM (see Figure 5.1), the ﬁl-
tering process of the raw SRTM DEM was eﬃcient. The Mouhoun valley is now
well delimited with the terrain gently sloping to the river bed whose location can
now be observed.
According to Table 5.1, the range of elevation of the raw SRTM DEM and the
denoised DEM are respectively [228.50 ; 332.75] m and [235.93 ; 323.39] m. This
narrower elevations interval show the eﬀectiveness of removing extreme values by
==PAGE:58==
48
5 Results
Table 5.1: Elevations sampled at the centroid of the aggregated cells of the raw
SRTM DEM and the treated DEM. All values are given in [m]
Raw SRTM DEM
Denoised DEM
Maximum
332.75
323.39
Minimum
228.50
235.93
Median
264.00
263.98
Mean
264.63
264.63
Standard deviation
14.02
13.84
Skewness
0.35
0.36
use of the wavelet ﬁltering and aggregation of cells. The median, mean, standard
deviation and skewness of the raw and treated DEMs elevations are very similar
showing that the smoothing process was successful in conserving the elevation
distribution. This is conﬁrmed by observing the elevations distribution (see Fig-
ure 5.2).
Figure 5.2: Distribution of the elevations sampled at the centre of the cells.
Table 5.2 presents a summary of the residuals criteria calculated between the
raw SRTM and treated DEM elevations. This shows that the smoothing of the
DEM is eﬀective over the entire range of elevations by modifying values by about
==PAGE:59==
5.2 Piezometric map and aquifer characteristics
49
10 m. Treatment of the DEM has slightly less impacted the elevations for the
narrower range of elevations [253.25 ; 274.50] according to the MAD and RMSE
values.
Table 5.2:
Mean absolute diﬀerence (MAD), Root mean square diﬀerence
(RMSD), minimimum (Min) and maximum (Max) diﬀerences between elevations
of the raw SRTM DEM and treated DEM. All: results obtained from calculations
performed over the entire range of raw DEM elevations [228.50 ; 332.75] m, Per-
centiles: results obtained from calculations performed with raw DEM elevations
between the 2.5-th and 97.5-th percentiles [242.50 ; 293.00] m, Quartiles: results
obtained from calculations performed with raw DEM elevations between lower
and upper quartiles [253.25 ; 274.50] m.
All
Percentiles
Quartiles
MAD [m]
1.68
1.57
0.82
RMSD [m]
2.17
2.06
1.49
Min [m]
-15.24
-14.06
-10.39
Max [m]
14.19
13.00
10.49
In conclusion, treatment of the raw SRTM DEM provided a satisfying ap-
proximate terrain representation by obtaining a smooth topography sloping to
the river bed. The overall distribution of elevations of the raw SRTM DEM has
been conserved while extreme values have been removed.
5.2
Piezometric map and aquifer characteristics
Figure 5.3 presents the distribution of measured heads over the study area. The
measured water level at borehole PO-37 was not counted in the analysis as a
change in the water level was observed during measurement.
The distribution of these piezometric levels conﬁrms that the groundwater
ﬂow is oriented towards the river. Moreover, the measured water levels are found
in a narrow range [5.95 ; 15.88] m regarding the total longitudinal distance (ca
5 km) and the range of terrain elevations at the boreholes [248 ; 282] m. It can
therefore be inferred that the position of the water table follows the general shape
of the topography. This is usually an intrinsic property of an unconﬁned aquifer
(Fetter, 2003). As another consequence of the low total variation of piezometric
heads regarding the total longitudinal distance, horizontal ﬂow is expected to
==PAGE:60==
50
5 Results
predominate in the aquifer.
Over the study area, the borehole yields are in the range [0.64 ; 14] with a
median of 6.2 m3/h (see Table C.4). No borehole was observed to be dry. This
shows that the hydraulic properties are relatively similar over the study area and
reinforce the hypothesis of a laterally unique aquifer entity over the study area.
(a) Boreholes and approximate ﬂow map
(b) Shallow dug wells
Figure 5.3: Piezometric heads distribution, watershed boundary and estimated
surface water elevation
Figure 5.3 shows that the water levels measured at dug wells and boreholes
close from each other are very similar. This suggests a good connectivity between
the ﬁssured layer and the weathered overburden and the existence of a vertically
unique aquifer which is in accordance with the description found for hard rock
aquifers in the literature (e.g. (Ahmed et al., 2008; Carrier et al., 2008; Sharp,
2014)). The range of piezometric heads [236 ; 270] m is also relatively narrow
regarding the longitudinal distance of the area (ca. 5 km) which suggests an
horizontal groundwater ﬂow.
The water table being closely related to the topography, the aquifer or sub-
aquifer domain of interest could be delineated from the analysis of the terrain ele-
vation. East of the study area, the hills delimiting the Mouhoun valley are likely
==PAGE:61==
5.3 Localization of arsenic sources
51
to represent a boundary where the groundwater divides. South, a groundwater di-
vide is also expected as measured piezometric decrease towards the Sambayourou
river. According to Figure D.2, watershed boundaries proposed by Kagambega et
al. (2014b) are in accordance with these observations while Ahmed et al. (2008)
stated that for this type of aquifer the groundwater watershed corresponds to
the topographical basin or sub-basin limits. Therefore, the boundaries given by
Kagambega et al. (2014b) were used to delimit the aquifer domain boundaries of
the study area (see Figure 5.3).
According to the properties of the aquifer cited above and using the distribu-
tion of heads measured at boreholes, a water table map of the aquifer is shown
in Figure 5.3. This provides an estimate of the general groundwater ﬂow direc-
tion over the entire area although the heterogeneity due to ﬁssures and fractures
are expected to play a major role in controlling the ﬂow direction locally. For
instance the head distribution between boreholes A-82 (267 m), PO-28 (265 m),
PO-21 (269 m) could suggest a local enhancement of the groundwater ﬂow along
a line equidistant from A-82 and PO-28 and passing by PO-21. In fact, this ﬁts
with the position of a major fault drawn on the geological map (see Figure 3.4).
In addition, the water contained in the quarries are expected to interact with the
groundwater as the surface water level was found to be less than the piezometric
heads measured in its vicinity, the quarries acting consequently as sink for the
groundwater ﬂowing from the East side.
5.3
Localization of arsenic sources
Figure 5.4 shows the locations of the identiﬁed features that are potential ar-
senic sources. Positions of the quartz veins showing on the surface digitized from
Bamba (1996) and acquired by GPS show that these entities are well distributed
over the area and mostly oriented NW-SE. The major lode (i.e. the Plaine de-
posit) is represented as the longest quartz vein at the center of the map. Its
position corresponds to the abandoned quarries (i.e. Basin 1 and Basin 2). Note
that the litholog of borehole PO-6 revealed the presence of a quartz vein within
the borehole proﬁle.
==PAGE:62==
52
5 Results
Figure 5.4: Map of the potential sources for As in groundwater. Locations of the
quartz veins with (1): digitized from Bamba (1996) and (2): located from GPS
measurement and borehole litholog. The size of the features was exaggerated for
better representation. The font corresponds to the map found in (Bamba, 1996).
Bologo, a village located about 4 km South West of Poura-Mine (See Figure
3.7) was the site of minor industrial mining operations (Kote et al., 2003) that
have resulted in the abandoned quarry B3 shown in Figure 5.4). The position of
two quartz veins located nearby this quarry matches with the locations of impor-
tant hand dug mining activities. Moreover, according, to Ouédraogo et al. (2003),
this corresponds to a network of small quartz veins of white and grey colours.
Contrary to the case of Bologo, observed hand-dug mining activity cannot be
all considered for locating quartz veins or signiﬁcant sulphide minerals deposit.
Indeed, some mining tunnels were observed without any evidence of activity and
might only be remnants of gold exploration as well as mining can only be super-
ﬁcial within the weathered overburden (i.e. 1 - 2 m deep). Moreover, tailings
washing for gold collection was also observed locally (see Figure B.5). This is
mostly performed at the surface water banks of the quarries.
Important mine tailings were also observed on the edges of the quarries B1 an
B2 (Kafando, 2012) and a 3000 m2 open-air landﬁll for cyanide-containing waste
is located about 1 km south from them. These wastes were generated during
the past industrial mining activities (i.e. 80’s and 90’s) and could constitute an
important load of heavily polluted eﬄuents through the percolation of rainwater
which might reach the surface or/and groundwater.
==PAGE:63==
5.4 Groundwater chemistry
53
5.4
Groundwater chemistry
5.4.1
Accuracy
First the results of the chemical analysis are consistent with the values reported
by (Smedley et al., 2007) and support the fact that measurement errors have
been minimized. According to Table 5.3, E.B is satisfying, moderately satisfying
and unsatisfying for measurements performed at basins, boreholes and dug wells
respectively.
Table 5.3: Statistical summary of electrical balances (E.B.) calculated from mea-
surements performed at 30 boreholes, 3 wells and 3 basins.
Borehole
Well
Basin
Max [%]
16
38
6
Min [%]
2
7
1
Median [%]
6
12
3
Mean [%]
7
19
3
< 5 % [%]
33
0
67
<10% [%]
87
33
100
Nb. meas.
30
3
3
Figure 5.5: Electrical balance against measured pH.
Figure 5.5 shows that the poor quality of some E.B. is correlated with the
pH. This is particularly visible for the acidic groundwater of the dug wells. In
addition, for all solutions HCO−
3 is present in highest concentration (See Figure
5.6 and Table 5.5). Thus, poor quality of the E.B. mostly comes from the as-
sumption that the TIC was found exclusively as HCO−
3 .
==PAGE:64==
54
5 Results
5.4.2
Physico-chemical parameters and major constituents
Summary of statistical data calculated from ﬁeld measurements and laboratory
analysis is listed in Table 5.5. The major constituents are presented individually
for boreholes, wells and basins.
(a) Boreholes
(b) Dug wells
(c) Basins
Figure 5.6: Trilinear diagrams for samples taken at boreholes, dug wells and
basins
==PAGE:65==
5.4 Groundwater chemistry
55
5.4.2.1
Boreholes
The groundwater from boreholes is circumneutral (pH ranging from 6.25 to 7.37)
and oxic/sub-oxic with O2 varying in the range [0.4 ; 6.26] mg/L with a median
of 1.2 mg/L and Eh in the range [69 ; 299] mV with a median of 260 mV. Thus,
groundwater can be mildly reducing. The TDS concentrations are moderate ([127
; 406] mg/L) conﬁrming that the groundwater is fresh, respecting the aesthetic
criteria of <500 mg/L and showing that the groundwater has undergone interac-
tions with the weathered rocks.
Figure 5.7: Most signiﬁcant correlations found between EC and major ions.
Figure 5.6 shows that the groundwater is of calcium carbonate or Ca-Mg-
Na-HCO3 types with high concentrations of silica ([7.61 ; 28.87], median: 19.95
mg/L) and from speciation calculations (shown in Appendix G), it appears that
the groundwater is saturated with calcite (CaCO3), dolomite (CaMg(CO3)2), and
quartz (SiO2). This is consistent with the correlations calculated between major
constituents and EC and plotted in Figure 5.7. The formation of bicarbonate
and the dissolution of calcium and magnesium minerals seems to primary con-
trol the major chemistry. The correlation coeﬃcients between Na and EC and
between Si and EC are lower with R-Na+ = 0.52 and R-Si = 0.44 respectively
while correlation with other major ions are not found (R-K+ = -0.09, R-Cl−=
0.13, R-SO2−
4
= 0.33).
The groundwater characteristics typically reﬂect the action of silicate weath-
ering from metasedimentary and volcanic rocks (e.g. biotite and calcic or epidotic
==PAGE:66==
56
5 Results
plagioclase is particularly found within the andesitic formations present over most
of the study area (Kote et al., 2003)) as described by Appelo and Postma (2010):
• Silicate weathering consumes protons (i.e. buﬀers the pH) leading to the for-
mation of bicarbonate. It leads in this case to the production of carbonate
such as calcite or dolomite which would also buﬀer the pH.
• Silica is produced from the weathering of silicate rocks although it might
not be signiﬁcantly correlated to EC as it is partially taken by the secondary
clay mineral residue kaolinite.
• Low Cl−concentrations don’t balance Na+ due to low occurrence of Cl in
the rock composition.
• K+ is a minor constituent due to low weathering potential of K-feldspar.
• Calcium plagioclase has high weathering potential reﬂecting the higher Ca2+
concentrations.
HCO−
3 does not seem to covary with the boreholes piezometric heads (Figure
5.8a) and depths (Figure 5.8b). It can therefore be concluded that the length of
the ﬂow path (oriented towards the river) is not expected to play a major role in
the groundwater chemistry as well as groundwater recharging deeper boreholes
don’t have generally undergone more interaction with the rocks. As the ﬂow rate
is relatively low and heterogeneous in hard rock aquifers, groundwater interaction
with the host rocks can change locally.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.8: HCO−
3 against piezometric levels and depths of the boreholes.
NO−
3 concentrations are usually low ([0.1 ; 33.05] mg/L, median of 3.73 mg/L)
although it exceeds 10 mg/L in 6 boreholes. This is likely due to leakage of human
==PAGE:67==
5.4 Groundwater chemistry
57
wastewater due to the absence of sewage system and as agricultural activity and
the use of fertilizers are of low occurrence. NO−
3 would be mostly stable consider-
ing the O2 concentrations and redox potentials (Appelo and Postma, 2010). The
amount of dissolved organic carbon (DOC) among boreholes is low (<2.84 mg/L).
According to the redox conditions, sulfur (S) is exclusively present as SO2−
4
(Appelo and Postma, 2010) although the concentrations of SO2−
4
are low vary-
ing within [0.1 ; 11.1] mg/L, median: 1 mg/L. The highest concentrations could
reﬂect the local oxidation and dissolution of sulphide minerals. The low concen-
trations of Cl−also reﬂect the low-Cl rainfall of continental origin (Smedley et al.,
2007).
5.4.2.2
Dug wells
The groundwater from dug wells is acidic to neutral (pH in the range [5.05 ; 7.28])
and shows oxidizing conditions with O2 varying in the range [0.81 ; 3.9] mg/L
and Eh in the range [255 ; 305] mV. Figure 5.6 shows that the groundwater is of
Ca-Na-Mg-HCO3 type although one well is found with higher concentrations of
Cl−(i.e. 52.1 mg/L against [1.74 ; 4] mg/L). The TDS concentrations vary in a
wider range [42.9 ; 315.25] mg/L than for boreholes.
The deepest dug well (i.e. 13.3 m) has a neutral pH and major anions con-
centrations similar to the boreholes. Thus, groundwater found in it has certainly
undergone interaction with primary silicate minerals.
Lowest TDS and acidic pH can be explained by low contact of the shallow
groundwater with primary silicate minerals and by the low weathering potential
of secondary silicate minerals (i.e. kaolinite) forming the weathered overburden
(Appelo and Postma, 2010). Indeed, the two shallowest wells (i.e. 7.7, 6.7 m)
have relatively low concentrations of Si, HCO−
3 , Ca2+, Mg2+. The lower potential
for buﬀering the pH and the equilibrium with atmospheric CO2 lead to acidic
conditions. One of these shallowest wells has high TDS due to presence of elevated
NO−
3 and Cl−concentrations: 51.33 mg/L and 52.1 mg/L respectively. This well
was particularly found in a small agricultural area located nearby habitation.
Thus, the presence of NO−
3 could be explained by waste water leakage while high
Cl−would be due to higher evapotranspiration and dry deposition (Appelo and
Postma, 2010). Note also that the NO−
3 concentration of 51.33 mg/L exceeds the
WHO guideline of 50 mg/L.
==PAGE:68==
58
5 Results
5.4.2.3
Basins
The surface water from the basins are oxic, basic and of Ca-Na-Mg-HCO3 type.
The major species composition shows slight diﬀerences with groundwater as hav-
ing lower Ca2+ and HCO−
3 concentrations.
According to the batch experiments performed with PHREEQC (shown in
Appendix G), the increase in pH and decrease in major species is explained by
degassing of CO2 occurring through equilibrium with the atmosphere. This de-
gassing leads to the precipitation of carbonate minerals linked with the decrease
of HCO−
3 .
The relatively high concentrations of SO4 in basins B1 and B2 suggest an im-
portant dissolution of sulphide minerals. An accumulation of SO4 in the basins
would also be likely according to the high rate of evaporation and as this specie
does not seem to undergo transformation at new conditions considering the batch
experiments. However, concentrations in basin B3 were relatively low and com-
parable to the ones measured in groundwater. Therefore, the ﬁrst hypothesis is
favoured.
5.4.3
Arsenic
Table 5.4: Statistical summary of As measurements performed in the vicinity of
Poura mine in boreholes, dug wells and basins during the 2014-2015 sampling
campaigns. ND: non detected concentrations (i.e. 0.02 µg/L)
Borehole
Dug well
Basin
Min [µg/L]
ND
ND
18.35
Max [µg/L]
317.5
6.5
381.7
Median [µg/L]
2.9
0.4
274.3
Arithmetic mean [µg/L]
17.4
2.3
224.8
Number samples
29
3
3
% > 5 µg/L
28
33
100
% > 10 µg/L
17
0
100
% > 50 µg/L
7
0
67
Table 5.4 presents a statistical summary of the measured concentrations of
arsenic. The As concentrations in dug wells don’t exceed the WHO guideline
while As concentrations in boreholes is highly variable. More than 70% of the
boreholes have As concentrations of less than 5 µg/L, 17% exceeds the WHO
==PAGE:69==
5.4 Groundwater chemistry
59
guideline and only two boreholes have concentrations exceeding 50 µg/L. More-
over, the surface water present in the abandoned quarries are all found to be
aﬀected by As contamination with the two main basins B1 and B2 next to Poura
mine having similar high As concentrations equal to 274.3 µg/L and 381.7 µg/L
respectively. From the ﬁeld measurements and according to the redox conditions,
the dominant form of arsenic is arsenate (As(V)) against arsenite (As(III)).
The lateral distribution of arsenic concentrations is shown on a map with
computed As ﬂow paths (Figure 5.18) and on a geological map (Figure 6.2).
5.4.3.1
Other trace elements
The concentrations of trace elements are usually very low in all water bodies.
In particular, the species associated with Au gold mineralization and, thus, to
As-bearing sulphides such as Sb, W, Mo (Smedley et al., 2007) are low although
W can reach up to 16.89 µg/L which is an unusual concentration (Smedley et al.,
2007). Their relationships with As concentrations are discussed in Section 6.
Total iron concentrations are generally very low (median: 0.01 mg/L) but are
found in higher concentrations in 4 boreholes (i.e. [0.22 ; 2.95] mg/L). Consider-
ing the mildly reducing conditions and pHs with the Fe redox diagram, Fe2+ can
be stable locally. Indeed, Figure 5.9 shows that highest concentrations of Fe are
found for low Eh, pH and O21. Under this conditions, it could be assumed that
high Fe concentrations mostly correspond to Fe2+. This was also shown by the
speciation calculation performed with PHREEQC.
Moreover, signiﬁcant sources of Fe are expected to be only local, corresponding
to oxidation and dissolution of sulphide minerals (Smedley et al., 1996). However,
according to Figure 5.9d, no correlation is found between SO4 and Fe. Thus, high
Fe concentrations could be due to reductive dissolution of iron oxides whereas
high SO4 concentration with low Fe concentrations could result from the precipi-
tation of Fe into hydroxides under oxic conditions. Also note that the highest Fe
concentration is almost equal to the WHO guideline and corresponds to the well
PO-02 located hundred meters far from PO-01 which has an high As concentra-
tion.
1Eh and O2 were not measured from the previous sampling campaign, from which some
high Fe concentrations were found. Therefore, the plots Fe versus Eh and Fe versus O2 are
incomplete.
==PAGE:70==
60
5 Results
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.9: Correlation plots between Fe and (a): Eh, (b): pH, (c): O2, (d): SO4.
Circles: boreholes; Diamonds: dug wells ; Triangles: basins.
==PAGE:71==
5.4 Groundwater chemistry
61
Table 5.5: Summary statistics for samples analysis (i.e. 30 boreholes, 3 dug wells
and 3 basins). P: provisional WHO guideline.
Parameter
Unit
Borehole
Well
Basin
WHO
Min
Median
Max
Min
Median
Max
Min
Median
Max
pH
6.25
6.94
7.37
5.05
5.98
7.28
8.49
8.66
9.14
O2
[mg/L]
0.4
1.2
6.3
0.8
3.8
3.9
7
7
9.4
EC
[uS/cm]
195
393
624
66
367
485
304
320
454
Eh
[mV]
69
271
299
255
283
305
163
214
215
T
[C]
30.3
31.4
32.9
29.4
30.3
30.9
31.5
33
33.4
TDS
[mg/L]
127
255
406
43
239
315
198
208
295
TIC
[mg C/L]
30
53.6
87.9
7.7
16.7
65.8
27.3
41.5
44.2
HCO3
[mg/L]
153
272
446
39
85
334
139
211
224
Na
[mg/L]
4.2
19.4
68.6
4.5
23.1
35.9
28.9
29
38.5
250
Mg
[mg/L]
9.8
19.9
41.5
1.5
7.2
19.5
14.2
19.2
26
Ca
[mg/L]
15.4
36.4
61.7
2.7
13.9
44.2
11.3
19.9
23.1
K
[mg/L]
0.16
0.35
1.38
0.97
1.17
4.63
2.11
2.75
5.05
Cl
[mg/L]
<0.1
0.7
9
1.7
4.0
52.1
2
22.6
22.6
SO4
[mg/L]
<0.1
1
11.1
<0.1
2.6
5.3
0.7
14.8
33.2
250
NO3
[mg/L]
<0.1
3.7
33.1
0.9
17.9
51.3
0.2
0.3
0.3
50
Si
[mg/L]
7.6
20
28.9
6.8
7.4
28.8
9.4
9.8
10
DOC
[mg/L]
<0.5
1.21
2.84
1.92
2.17
2.99
3.3
4.25
6.32
Al
[µg/L]
<0.1
2
16.3
<0.1
0.7
60.1
12.9
30.7
59.2
200
As(III)
[µg/L]
<0.02
0.03
15.29
<0.02
0.17
0.69
<0.02
<0.02
1.75
10(P)
As(V)
[µg/L]
<0.02
1.17
302.16
<0.02
0.25
6.93
<0.02
<0.02
16.6
10(P)
AsT
[µg/L]
<0.02
2.95
317.45
<0.02
0.42
7.62
18.35
274.3
381.7
10(P)
B
[µg/L]
<5
13.2
34.8
<5
6.5
24.2
22.4
42.9
65.6
500(P)
Ba
[µg/L]
<0.1
0.8
245.9
7.6
23.9
147.4
47.9
108.6
122.9
700
Br
[mg/L]
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
0.21
0.26
0.3
Cd
[µg/L]
<0.01
<0.01
0.75
0.010
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
0.02
3
Ce
[µg/L]
<0.01
0.011
0.076
<0.01
<0.01
0.635
0.013
0.155
0.162
Co
[µg/L]
<0.02
0.029
1.318
0.089
2.002
2.166
0.140
0.233
0.876
Cr
[µg/L]
<0.02
0.06
1.19
<0.02
0.09
1.09
0.08
0.40
0.59
50(P)
Cu
[µg/L]
<0.1
0.4
3.2
0.4
0.6
2.1
0.5
1.2
4.3
2000
F
[mg/L]
<0.1
<0.1
0.25
<0.1
<0.1
0.169
0.221
0.292
0.622
1.5
Fe
[µg/L]
<0.3
10.8
2953
<0.3
0.3
86.7
6.2
39.9
49.1
La
[µg/L]
<0.01
0.01
0.05
<0.01
<0.01
0.56
<0.01
0.08
0.08
Li
[µg/L]
2.01
9.77
44.93
0.58
2.01
8.91
6.03
6.05
27.28
Mn
[µg/L]
0.1
2.9
147.4
0.04
18.8
46.5
6.4
6.5
26
400
Mo
[µg/L]
<0.02
0.73
5.96
0.13
0.2
0.46
0.87
3.73
5.06
70
Ni
[µg/L]
<0.02
0.18
1.98
0.66
2.03
3.09
0.34
0.60
3.26
70
Pb
[µg/L]
<0.02
0.026
0.21
<0.02
<0.02
0.189
<0.02
<0.02
0.403
10
PO4
[mg/L]
<0.1
<0.1
0.15
<0.1
<0.1
0.401
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
Sb
[µg/L]
<0.02
0.1
0.94
0.11
0.38
0.4
0.46
0.51
0.55
20
Se
[µg/L]
<0.02
0.12
0.99
<0.02
0.08
0.08
0.05
0.07
0.09
10
Sn
[µg/L]
<0.01
0.2
0.47
0.19
0.21
0.45
0.23
0.42
0.83
Sr
[µg/L]
54.9
145
312.7
14.5
98.2
168.4
117.2
364.2
366.2
Tl
[µg/L]
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
0.14
<0.02
<0.02
0.13
U
[µg/L]
<0.02
<0.02
0.06
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
0.024
0.038
0.08
15(P)
V
[µg/L]
0.09
3.85
33.78
0.15
0.77
6.16
1.52
1.98
4.21
W
[µg/L]
<0.02
<0.02
16.89
<0.02
2.34
10.55
<0.02
<0.02
0.15
Zn
[µg/L]
<0.1
4.3
740.5
<0.1
3
9.1
0.4
2.4
40.2
==PAGE:72==
62
5 Results
5.5
Hydrogeological modeling and transport of
arsenic
5.5.1
Hydraulic conductivity zonation
The performance of the hydrogeological model by decomposing the domain into
zones of equal hydraulic conductivities was evaluated. Figures 5.10a and 5.10b
show that the obtained ﬁt between simulated and observed heads is poor. This
can also be observed through the calculation of the high RMSE and MAE (i.e
7.1 and 6 m respectively). Moreover, according to Figure 5.11, some boundaries
are marked by abrupt hydraulic conductivity changes which does not seem to be
realistic as the hydraulic conductivity distribution of the ﬁssured layer is more
likely to be smoothed.
(a) Simulated vs observed heads.
(b) Residuals of all observation wells.
Figure 5.10: Plots representing the ﬁt between observed and computed heads.
The geological map used to deﬁne the diﬀerent zones might constitute a too
simplistic representation of the lithology on this scale and an accurate description
of the hydraulic property heterogeneity cannot be expected for this application.
Indeed, only few major faults are mapped while other lineaments might exist,
from which minor brittle shear zones are expected to play a major role in the
heterogeneity of the hydraulic conductivity.
Indeed, as discussed above these
features normally enhance the weathering process in their vicinity resulting in a
higher density of fractures in their neighbourhoods.
In order to accurately deﬁne zones of similar hydrodynamic properties, in par-
ticular for the ﬁssured layer, elaborate ﬁeld work for data collection (i.e. hydraulic
==PAGE:73==
5.5 Hydrogeological modeling and transport of arsenic
63
conductivity measurements), a detailed database or precise knowledge about the
structural geology and the lithology would be required (Ahmed et al., 2008).
Figure 5.11: Distribution of the hydraulic conductivity assigned to the ﬁssured
layer [m/s].
5.5.2
Pilot points approach
Using the inverse modeling process together with the pilot points approach, a
much better ﬁt between observed and computed heads is obtained (Figure 5.12).
The maximal individual error is 1.8 m while the ME, MAE and RMSE are -0.05,
0.65 and 1.15 m, respectively. This conﬁrms the very good agreement between
the computed and observed heads and shows that the model does not have the
tendency to underestimate or overestimate the hydraulic heads.
Table E.2 also displays the RMSE and MAE between individual computed
and observed heads for diﬀerent model calibrations. It can be seen that the model
performs the less well for head at PO-21.
Figure 5.13 shows that the spatial K distribution of the ﬁssured layer is
smoothed and no presence of bull’s eye is found over the model domain.
K
varies in the range [1.0E-7 ; 4.7E-4] m/s with a geometrical mean and a geomet-
ric standard deviation of 3.2E-6 m/s and 3.56 respectively. Thus, the optimized
==PAGE:74==
64
5 Results
(a) Simulated vs observed heads.
(b) Residuals of all observation wells.
Figure 5.12: Plots representing the ﬁt between observed and computed heads.
parameters don’t reach the upper bounds ﬁxed for the calibration while the ge-
ometrical mean points out that K is also skewed to its lower interval. The low
geometric standard deviation points out that, over the model domain, the ﬁs-
sured layer K slightly varies.
Figure 5.13 also allows the comparison between the lithology and the K dis-
tribution of the ﬁssured layer by superposition of the K distribution and the
geological map. It can be ﬁrst inferred that the K distribution is similarly ori-
ented with the structural geology in the N-S direction2. Hypothesis about the
relationship between the geological entities and the K distribution can also be
formulated. For instance, K seems to be highest along the hydrothermalized an-
desite and lowest in the rhyolite and rhyodacite. Volcano-sedimentary schist also
appears to exhibit high K. This could be due to the typical well-conserved weath-
ered zone in these formations, protected from erosion due to the development of
a thick weathered overburden (Koïta et al., 2013a; Kote et al., 2003). However,
as discussed above, the geological map accuracy is likely too low for a satisfying
comparison. Indeed, Figure 5.13b exhibits other faults.
Figure 5.14 represents the head distribution obtained after calibration of the
parameters. The groundwater ﬂows toward the Mouhoun river and the quarries
seem to act as sinks on the groundwater ﬂow.
2As discussed in Section 3.3, the structural geology is the result of the intrusion of plutons
on both East and West sides of the study area have led to a general lengthen of the geology
and a system of faults primary oriented North to South.
==PAGE:75==
5.5 Hydrogeological modeling and transport of arsenic
65
(a) Superposition of the K distribution in m/s and the geological map.
(b) Simpliﬁed geological map
from Béziat et al. (2000).
Figure 5.13: K distribution [m/s] and geological maps.
5.5.3
Model uncertainty
Figure 5.15 displays the K distributions of the ﬁssured layer obtained from 10
calibrated models as well as their respective ﬁnal objective function value Φg
expressing the degree of convergence. Φg of Solutions 4 and 6 showed that the
calibration converged badly for these simulations regarding Φg = 20 obtained for
the initial model previously described. Thus, solutions 4 and 6 are rejected while
the 9 other solutions are considered for the predictive uncertainty analysis. Note
that Φg is calculated from the diﬀerence between observed and computed heads
and is therefore correlated with the RMSE calculated for the corresponding sim-
ulation.
Signiﬁcant trends in the distributions can be observed between models with
satisfying convergence.
The range of K for the converging solutions is about
[1E-7 ; 5E-4] m/s. However, while the geometrical means of 8 of the converging
solutions are in the range [1.3E-6 ; 6.8E-6] m/s, solution 2 exhibits a geometrical
==PAGE:76==
66
5 Results
Figure 5.14: Simulated head distribution using pilot points and the Kriging in-
terpolation. Scale bar in [m].
mean of 3E-5 m/s. This diﬀerence can also be seen in Figure 5.15b with an overall
increase in hydraulic conductivity although the general pattern in relative K
distribution is preserved. Thus, this solution is not expected to present signiﬁcant
change in the predicted groundwater ﬂow path whereas it would induce diﬀerences
in the residence time of the groundwater.
==PAGE:77==
5.5 Hydrogeological modeling and transport of arsenic
67
(a) Solution 1, Φg = 106
(b) Solution 2, Φg = 62
(c) Solution 3, Φg = 88
(d) Solution 4, Φg = 273
(e) Solution 5, Φg = 21
(f) Solution 6, Φg = 1660
Figure 5.15: Hydraulic conductivity distributions for multiple calibrated models
using 191 pilot points with respective minimized target functions (Scale bar in
[m/s]). This display was chosen in order to facilitate the qualitative comparison
between the diﬀerent distributions (continued on next page).
==PAGE:78==
68
5 Results
(g) Solution 7, Φg = 75
(h) Solution 8, Φg = 46
(i) Solution 9, Φg = 38
(j) Solution 10, Φg = 51
Figure 5.15: (continued)
Figure 5.16 displays the distribution of the geometric standard deviation of hy-
draulic conductivities using the 9 solutions presenting a good convergence. The
variation in hydraulic conductivity for similar locations between the diﬀerent
model is in general relatively low with a median geometric standard deviation
and mean geometric standard deviation of 3.9 and 4.2 respectively. However, at
discrete locations the variance in hydraulic conductivity can be high with the
geometric standard deviation reaching up to 14. The positions of the observation
wells are also generally correlated with zones where the hydraulic conductivity
varies the less. For instance, this is particularly visible in the vicinity of the 4
close observation heads in the East part of the model domain.
For all models considered as calibrated, the saprolite K varies in the range
[1.78E-8 ; 2.04E-6] m/s with a geometrical mean of 1.83E-7 m/s. The upper
==PAGE:79==
5.5 Hydrogeological modeling and transport of arsenic
69
Figure 5.16: Geometric standard deviation of the hydraulic conductivity calcu-
lated for each cell using the converging solutions. The black dots represent the
locations of the observation wells
bound of this range corresponds to the highest value of solution 2 which ex-
hibits an overall higher conductivity in the ﬁssured layer. The vertical anisotropy
(Kh/Kv) of the ﬁssured layer varies over the full range set for calibration [0.1 ;
10] with a median of 0.69. The upper bound of this range corresponds also to
the anisotropy obtained from Solution 2 while all values are below 1.14. The
low median value of the anisotropy shows, for all converging models, that the
ﬁssured layer tends to have higher vertical hydraulic conductivity which could be
accordance with the structural geology (i.e. vertical schistosity). The saprolite
Ks and the ﬁssured layer anisotropy are displayed in Table E.1
5.5.4
Sensitivity analysis
In order to allow a better comparison between the composite sensitivities of
the diﬀerent parameters, the normalized sensitivities are multiplied by a factor
1000. Among all converging models, the composite sensitivity of the ﬁssured layer
anisotropy is found in the range [0.27 ; 27.04] with a median of 3.65 and all values
below or equal to 7.03 except 27.04. The composite sensitivity of the saprolite K
is found in the range [1.27 ; 10.04] with a median of 4.92. The median composite
==PAGE:80==
70
5 Results
sensitivities for all parameters and for each simulation vary in the range [3.22 ;
5.32] with an average of 4.09. The median sensitivities of the saprolite K and the
ﬁssured layer anisotropy having their values close to the average median of all sen-
sitivities, it could be inferred that these 2 parameters are signiﬁcantly sensitive
to the model when considering all parameters independently. However, regard-
ing the number of total parameters (i.e. 193) and considering that the saprolite
and the anisotropy were homogeneously assigned over the model domain, their
inﬂuence are relatively low with respect to the pilot points that are individually
sensitive to the model for lower areas extent.
Figure 5.17: Median composite sensitivity of the pilot points represented by
graduated symbols divided in sextiles.
Figure 5.17 displays the relative median composite sensitivities and locations
of the pilot points with the use of graduated symbols. It can be observed that
zones where pilot points are of lesser sensitivity and, consequently, more likely
to have an hydraulic conductivity distribution poorly representing the reality are
correlated with areas where the density of observations is low. The latter is par-
ticularly the case over the West part of the model domain. However, according
to Figure 5.16, these zones are not correlated with areas exhibiting larger varia-
tions of hydraulic conductivities among the simulations. This can be due to the
fact that a) PEST utilities, as SVD-assist, hold parameters of low sensitivities
constant or/and b) the number of simulations is not suﬃcient to observe a cor-
relation between variations in hydraulic conductivity and pilot points with low
==PAGE:81==
5.5 Hydrogeological modeling and transport of arsenic
71
sensitivities.
5.5.5
Arsenic transport
Using the groundwater model developed with the pilot points approach, the trans-
port of arsenic from identiﬁed quartz veins was simulated to determine the zones
with potential contamination.
The diﬀerent As ﬂow paths generated forward
from the quartz veins and backward from the contaminated boreholes using the
9 converging solutions are shown in Figures 5.18 and 5.19 respectively.
Figure 5.18: Range of possible ﬂow paths for arsenic transport in groundwater
obtained by generating particles forwards from the quartz veins with distribution
of measured As concentrations.
From Figures 5.18 and 5.19, it could be observed that:
• the north part of the model domain is more likely to be impacted by oc-
currence of arsenic. This is primarily due to a majority of quartz veins
occurring in this zone.
• borehole PO-6 that was found contaminated is drilled across a quartz vein
and no ﬂow path ﬂowing from another potential source cross this borehole.
Therefore, this vein is likely to be an As source.
==PAGE:82==
72
5 Results
• PO-28, PO-30 and PO-36 that were found with As concentrations exceed-
ing the WHO provisional guideline are not found to be crossed by particles
ﬂow paths. The ﬂow paths generated backwards from PO-28, PO-30 and
PO-36 indicate potential locations for unidentiﬁed quartz veins. On the
other hand, the uncontaminated boreholes PO-11, PO-12, PO-31 and PO-
37 are found in the potential contaminated zone.
• north east, distinction between As ﬂow paths and wells is not clear as a
network of small quartz veins (i.e. 100-150 m long) are located in between
PO-29, PO-31 and PO-32 that were found uncontaminated. In this part of
the domain the groundwater ﬂow is north oriented and PO-29 and PO-32
are not found crossed by particle ﬂow paths. However, PO-31 is observed
in a zone of concentrated As ﬂow paths ﬂowing from quartz veins located
about 250-400 m south.
• the quarries B1, B2 and B3 that were found contaminated and acting as
sinks, are receiving groundwater ﬂowing from various quartz veins located
around them. Considering the proximity of PO-36 and B3 with the network
of quartz veins of Bologo where hand dug mining is performed (i.e. about
150 m far from PO-36), it is likely that both entities are aﬀected by the
same As source although the model primary show a groundwater drainage
and the resulting particles ﬂow paths oriented toward B3. This implies that
the water level of quarry B3 is likely to be underestimated.
• The most aﬀected borehole PO-1 is located about 150-300 m far from two
quartz veins from which particles ﬂow paths cross this borehole. The parti-
cles generated backwards from PO-1 show in particular that one these veins
is likely to be the main source of arsenic contaminating this borehole.
==PAGE:83==
5.5 Hydrogeological modeling and transport of arsenic
73
Figure 5.19: Range of possible ﬂow paths for arsenic transport in groundwater
obtained by generating particles backwards from the contaminated boreholes (i.e.
with As exceeding the WHO provisional guideline value) with distribution of
measured As concentrations.
Due to the proximity of the veins located close to PO-1, both are likely to be
sources of arsenic. However, some of the modeled particles cross boreholes PO-2
and PO-5 where low As concentrations were measured (see Figure 5.20). There-
fore, the uncertainty of the prediction in the vicinity of PO-1, PO-2 and PO-5 is
explored by computing the probability distribution of the distance between PO-1
and particles along segment [AB] in order to determine the most likely ﬂow paths
of arsenic (see Figure 5.20). [APO-1] and [BPO-1] are of lengths 590 and 350 m
respectively.
Figure 5.21 shows that the peak of particles ﬂow paths is shifted 57 m (i.e.
median distance of the particles) from PO-1 towards A. This supposes that the
location of PO-1 is not where the highest contamination occurs. From calcula-
tion of the percentiles, the minimum distances from PO-1 where particles are
not predicted with 95% conﬁdence interval are 244 and 195 m towards A and
B respectively. No particles were computed at distances higher than 389 m and
277 m towards A and B respectively. This relatively centered distribution also
shows that As ﬂow paths are more likely to be oriented towards PO-1 rather than
towards PO-2 and PO-5.
The computed ﬂow paths from the average model solution are displayed in
==PAGE:84==
74
5 Results
Figure 5.20: Range of possible ﬂow paths for arsenic transport in groundwater
obtained by generating particles from the quartz veins for a speciﬁc area where
high As concentration was measured in borehole PO-1 and position of the virtual
segment [AB].
Figure 5.21: Kernel distribution density function plot and histogram of distances
separating PO-1 and particles located on segment [AB].
Figure 5.22. PO-2, PO-5 and PO-12 are not observed to be crossed by simulated
As ﬂow paths which is in accordance with the measured As concentration and
with the probability density function showed in Figure 5.21.
==PAGE:85==
5.5 Hydrogeological modeling and transport of arsenic
75
The residence time of the groundwater is also found to be relatively long which
is in agreement with the low conductivity of the hard rock aquifer. Indeed, from
the average model solution, it is estimated that:
• it takes between 700 and 900 years for the particles ﬂowing from the veins
located close to PO-1 and PO-2 to reach the Mouhoun river. This represents
ﬂow paths of about 3.5 km and particles velocity of about 5 m/year (see
Figure E.1).
• it takes between 10 and 35 years for the particles ﬂowing from these veins
to reach segment [AB] (i.e. approximative position of PO-1) located about
300 m away from the veins.
==PAGE:86==
76
5 Results
Figure 5.22: Most probable As ﬂow paths from quartz veins and distributions of measured As concentrations.
==PAGE:87==
CHAPTER 6
Discussion
6.1
Arsenic
6.1.1
Chemical analysis
In order to study the spatial variability of arsenic, relationships between As and
physico-chemical parameters were ﬁrst identiﬁed by producing correlation plots
and by calculating R2 coeﬃcients shown in Figure 6.1.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 6.1: Plots of As concentrations versus physico-chemical parameters and
species concentrations and R2 coeﬃcients. Circles: boreholes; Diamond: dug
wells ; Triangles: basins ; Dotted line: As WHO guideline (continued on next
page).
==PAGE:88==
78
6 Discussion
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
Figure 6.1: (continued)
Arsenic is not found to depend on the content of groundwater O2 concentra-
==PAGE:89==
6.1 Arsenic
79
tions as the latter are generally low and as high As occurs for O2 < 2 mg/L
(Figure 6.1a). In basins, high As concentrations are observed under oxic condi-
tions (i.e. O2>7 mg/L).
Arsenic seems to show some relationship with pH. It is particularly observed
for the basins exhibiting high As concentrations under basic pH and for acidic
groundwater having very low As concentrations. This can be explained by the
decreasing As(V) sorption into Fe oxide/hydroxides with increasing pH (Appelo
and Postma, 2010; Dixit and Hering, 2003).
As release does not seem to be primarily induced by reductive dissolution of
oxides/hydroxides. Considering the pH and O2 concentrations measured among
boreholes and regarding the Mn redox diagram, reductive dissolution of Mn does
not seem possible. Although highest As and Mn correlations were measured from
the same sample (Figure 6.1e) this might only result from the local oxidation of
Mn-rich silicates. Similarly, the predominance of oxic conditions limit the reduc-
tive dissolution of HFO and As does not seem not correlated with Fe (Figure
6.1f) although no measurements of the iron speciation were performed.
Arsenic shows some relationships with antimony (Sb) and molybdenum (Mo)
whereas As does not seem correlated with W (Figures 6.1g, 6.1h and 6.1i). Ac-
cording to Verplanck et al. (2008), Sb is related to the Au mineralization through
the sulphide mineral stibnite (Sb2S3). However, the Sb concentrations are found
very low and might therefore be impacted by measurements bias as well as it
is likely that Sb minerals are of low occurrence in Burkina Faso Au-mineralised
areas which is also suggested by Smedley et al. (2007).
Mo is present in ore
bodies as the sulphide mineral MoS2 and stable under aerobic neutral-pH as the
anion MoO2−
4 .
The good agreement between high As and Mo concentrations
as already observed by Smedley et al. (2007) in northern Burkina Faso support
the fact that As is derived from ore mineralization. W is usually present in the
ore bodies as wolframite ((Fe,Mn)WO4) and scheelite (CaWO4)) (Smedley et al.,
2007). The fact that Smedley et al. (2007) observed a relationship between As
and W in northern Burkina Faso contrary to the present study shows well that
the mineralization of the ore bodies highly varies. Similarly, no correlation was
observed between As and other trace metals linked with sulphide mineralization
(i.e. Cu, Ni, Zn, Co (Smedley et al., 1996)).
The relatively high R2 coeﬃcient between As and SO4 is mostly due to the
high concentrations occurring in the abandoned quarries. However, no apparent
correlation between these species is found in groundwater (Figure 6.1j) although
they are both produced by the dissolution of As-bearing minerals. As sulphate
==PAGE:90==
80
6 Discussion
is released by an higher number of sources as, for instance, the dissolution of
As-barren sulphides and/or leachate from the sewage system, thus, it is present
in much greater quantity (mg/L) than As (µg/L). However, As and sulphate con-
centrations in B1 and B2 are high supporting the hypothesis that large As-rich
sulphide mineral dissolution is occurring around their location and that these
species are transported towards these basins.
6.1.2
Lateral variability
From the simulated As ﬂow paths (Figures 5.18 and 5.20), the distribution of
As compared with the lithology (Figure 6.2) and correlations between As and
relevant trace elements, the spatial variability of arsenic seems to be primarily
controlled by the locations of the quartz veins. As the median As concentration
in boreholes is 2.95 µg/L, smaller sources of arsenic certainly exist over the entire
study area through diﬀuse sulphide mineralization in the host rocks. However, it
does not seem that large parts of the lithology as the hydrothermalized andesite
represent signiﬁcant sources of arsenic.
From the realistic distribution of hydraulic conductivity and the ﬁt between
some contaminated boreholes and generated ﬂow paths, it can be inferred that
groundwater ﬂow model can be developed on catchment scale to predict As risk
zones. However, in the absence of mining exploration, the localization of the
quartz veins is likely to be only partial. In the present work, the sources of ar-
senic were only deﬁned as quartz veins showing on the surface reported from one
author. The facts that a) borehole PO-6 was found to be drilled on an unmapped
quartz veins and that b) wells were found contaminated while not being crossed
by simulated particles ﬂow paths (i.e. PO-30, PO-28) reinforce the hypothesis
that quartz veins localization is incomplete. The management and the knowledge
of the ore resources are a sensitive matter and documents accurately quantifying
and locating these resources are usually limited to unpublished internal company
reports (Béziat et al., 2008). This represents a main limitation for the assess-
ment of As contamination and the application of a local mitigation strategy over
mineralized areas on catchment scale.
Diﬀerences in the magnitude of As concentrations among boreholes drilled
close to veins are also high. This is likely due to diﬀerences in the veins mineraliza-
tion. For instance, homogeneous milky massive white quartz was reported as not
containing any gold mineralization whereas grey quartz is more commonly associ-
ated with the ore deposit (Béziat et al., 2008; Gueye, 1984; Kabore, 1989). This
diﬀerence has been shown to be related to the structural type of the veins with the
==PAGE:91==
6.1 Arsenic
81
Figure 6.2: Lithology of the study area and distribution of arsenic concentra-
tion in groundwater and surface water found during the sampling campaigns of
February and April - May 2015 (adapted from Bamba (1996) and Ouédraogo
et al. (2003)).
Au-bearing veins having undergone deformation whereas Au-barren veins being
undeformed (Béziat et al., 2008; Gueye, 1984; Oberthür et al., 1997; Verplanck et
al., 2008). The orientation of the quartz veins could therefore be related to their
sulphide minerals content. Figure 6.2 shows that the veins are primarily oriented
==PAGE:92==
82
6 Discussion
in the N-S direction with the major lodes in the direction NW-SE. However, no
distinct orientation is found linked with the occurrence of high As concentrations.
Considering the general oxic and near-neutral pH conditions, arsenic is ex-
pected to be sorbed to Al, Fe or Mn mineral oxides/hydroxides or clays along
its transport (Smedley and Kinniburgh, 2002). Although reductive dissolution
of Fe hydroxides seems possible, its predominance as As source seems unlikely
regarding the scarcity of mildly reducing conditions and the poor correlation be-
tween As and Fe. Thus, contaminated wells should be found close to the sources
as hypothesized by Smedley et al. (2007), especially when considering the long
residence time of the water. This could explain the fact that PO-11 and PO-37
located in a simulated As ﬂow path and relatively far from quartz veins were
found uncontaminated.
6.1.3
Vertical variability
Smedley et al. (1996) and Smedley et al. (2007) suggested that the As concentra-
tions covary with the boreholes total depths as deeper borehole receives ground-
water having undergone more interaction with the rocks and, thus, having more
potential to be in contact with sulphides.
Arsenic does not seem to covary with HCO−
3 (Figure 6.1d) although high-
est As concentrations occur with high HCO−
3 concentrations (i.e. > 250 mg/L).
Correlation between As concentrations and boreholes total depths is not found
(Figure 6.1c)1. Moreover, HCO−
3 does not show any relationship with the bore-
holes total depths (Figure 5.8b). These results are therefore in disagreement with
Smedley et al. (1996) and Smedley et al. (2007).
Considering that the groundwater ﬂow is mostly horizontal and that the
quartz veins are vertical, the residence time of the water is not likely to con-
trol the As distribution through higher interactions with sulphides. First, deeper
boreholes could exhibit higher As concentrations only as a function of depth in-
creasing As-bearing sulphide minerals. Indeed, the minerals present at shallower
depth might have been more protected from weathering. Second, it is believed
that HCO−
3 concentrations is a function of both the residence time of groundwa-
ter and the interactions with silicate rocks. Positive correlation between HCO−
3
1Note that the depths weren’t obtained for all boreholes having high As concentrations.
However, some of the highest As concentrations are found for the relatively shallow boreholes
PO-30 and PO-36, 45.5 and 55.6 m deep respectively
==PAGE:93==
6.1 Arsenic
83
and As could exist through anions competition for sorption sites (COWI, 2005).
The vertical positions of the quartz veins together with the screen extensions
of the wells could also inﬂuence the distribution of As measurements. Although
all veins were considered as uniformly crossing the entire ﬁssured layer in order
to observe only the lateral contamination, veins can also be shallowly dipping.
In this case, the veins having limited vertical extension could generate arsenic
towards a close borehole without contaminating it if the screen is receiving un-
contaminated groundwater water from a diﬀerent ﬁssures set. Simulating the
vertical transport of arsenic would require to model the various ﬁssures set of
weathered bedrocks which does not seem realistic although distinct layers could
be deﬁned if a general behaviour in the fractures/ﬁssures density with depth is
noticed (e.g. depth decreasing ﬁssures density).
6.1.4
Dug wells
Arsenic concentrations found in shallow dug wells are all below 7.6 µg/L which
is consistent with Smedley et al. (2007) who hypothesized that these low concen-
trations are due to the short residence time of the groundwater in the weathered
overburden and to the capacity of As to be bound to secondary Fe oxides. Indeed,
as quartz veins are crossing the weathered overburden (Bamba, 1996), As can be
generated in groundwater within this horizon. However, the residence time of the
groundwater is not likely to play a major role in the groundwater composition as
this aquifer typically exhibits low conductivity, particularly in the saprolite layer
(i.e. capacitive function) and the groundwater would have time to undergone
interaction with the veins.
Goethite is found in the weathered overburden (i.e. ferricrete and saprolite)
oﬀering sorption sites for As at slightly acidic pH (Appelo and Postma, 2010;
Dixit and Hering, 2003) although goethite content decreases with depth (Bamba
et al., 2002). Similarly, kaolinite would also oﬀer sorption sites of lower signif-
icance and its content decrease with depth as the structure of the parent rock
is more conserved with depth. Thus, the shallowest dug wells drilled across the
horizon where large amounts of goethite are present seem to be preserved from
signiﬁcant As contamination.
Diﬀerently, groundwater of the deepest dug well seems to have undergone
interaction with primarily silicate minerals and exhibits the highest As concen-
trations. Thus, it is believed that signiﬁcant As concentrations can also occur
in dug wells depending on the well depth and the saprolite thickness due to the
==PAGE:94==
84
6 Discussion
decrease in goethite and kaolinite within the saprolite depth. This would also
depend on the alteration level of the sulphide minerals with depth as it can be
expected that sulphides are more consumed close to the surface (Bamba et al.,
2002).
6.1.5
Mining activity
The presence of current mining activity in the vicinity of Poura is exclusively per-
formed on small scale with the use of hand-dug tunnels and pits. Ore is manually
extracted from the quartz veins and disseminated gold is collected by rudimen-
tary tailings washing at various place around points of extraction (Figure B.5).
Whereas As groundwater pollution from tailings washing is not likely due to the
high content of Al and Fe oxides present in the weathered overburden strongly
sorbing As (Smedley et al., 2007), this work was observed on the banks of the
quarries B1 and B2 and could represent an input of As in surface water. However,
when comparing the density of this activity with the high As concentrations and
the size of the quarries, tailings washing is not likely to be the only responsible
for surface water pollution.
Gold washing could also pollute shallow dug wells through direct waste input
when performed in their vicinity as reported by Smedley et al. (2007) although
this was not observed in the ﬁeld. In addition, the application of polluting chem-
icals (i.e. Hg, CN−) facilitating gold extraction was not observed neither and,
therefore, not taken in the analysis although their use in Poura was reported by
Kafando (2012).
The main human pollution likely resides in the presence of abandoned quar-
ries and wastes disposal left from the past industrial activities. It can be assumed
that direct As transport to groundwater through rainwater percolation does not
occur due to sorption in the weathered overburden regarding the mining activ-
ities time scale (Smedley et al., 2007). However, waste disposals are likely to
pollute the surface water from direct runoﬀcarrying trace elements during the
rainy season with potential for acid mine drainage as observed by Kagambega
et al. (2014b).
The pollution of surface water from tailings dissolution is particularly ex-
pected for the quarries B1 and B2 considering their high As and SO4 concen-
trations1 as well as the presence of tailings on their edges whereas the landﬁll
might not represent a risk for surface water pollution as located too far from the
1The low SO4 concentrations in B3 show that the sulphate occurrence is not due to rainfall
input. Thus, high SO4 concentrations are expected to result from minerals dissolution.
==PAGE:95==
6.2 Model
85
basins. It could also be hypothesised that As and SO4 originates from quartz
veins and are transported through groundwater as the quarries are in a zone of
important gold mineralization and as they act as sink. However, when comparing
the expected total amount of groundwater ﬂowing into the basin and the amount
of groundwater ﬂowing through discrete quartz veins, arsenic and sulphate con-
centration would remain low through dilution.
During the rainy season, the groundwater system is expected to signiﬁcantly
change with a general increase of groundwater levels and surface water eleva-
tions. It could be supposed that the quarries turn into signiﬁcant As sources
for groundwater if the surface water levels exceed the groundwater levels during
occurrence of heavy rainfall. However, if the quarries don’t turn into a source for
the groundwater system, accumulation of As might be expected over time due to
the high evaporation.
Despite the fact that gold washing and mine waste disposal are not likely
to directly induce a groundwater contamination through eﬄuents percolation in
soils, it might lead to important soil pollution as observed by Kagambega et al.
(2014b). Other pollutants having an higher mobility might also leached from the
landﬁll to the groundwater.
Mining activities also represent a direct health threat. According to Kafando
(2012) and local inhabitants, the remnants of industrial mining as well as informal
gold mining are also sites of a signiﬁcant number of accidents. Injuries or deaths
regularly occur from the collapsing of unsecured abandoned hand dug tunnels or
as people fall in the basins due to crumbling of the cliﬀs. In addition, the quarries
are infested by caïmans that could represent a risk for the inhabitants working
nearby.
6.2
Model
The developed model and the applied calibration procedure based on pilot-points
have led to a good ﬁt between the modeled and observed heads together with
a smoothed distribution of the hydraulic conductivity. The uncertainty analysis
has also shown that the model is relatively robust considering the similarities in
K distributions among the various generated outputs although the results could
be implemented by gaining knowledge from further ﬁeld observations.
==PAGE:96==
86
6 Discussion
6.2.1
DEM and observed heads
As discussed in Section 5.1, the removal of noise from the raw SRTM DEM re-
sulted in a narrower range of elevations. This is of low impact on the piezometric
heads calculation and, consequently, on the hydrogeological model results as a)
these elevations correspond to features as scarps or quarries which are of rare
occurrence over the study area, b) piezometric heads are not calculated from wa-
ter levels measured at these locations simply because boreholes are not drilled on
steep slopes or hill tops, c) the areas of lowest elevations representing the quarries
can be disregarded as light reﬂection on water bodies or shadow are expected to
result in erroneous elevations in the raw SRTM DEM and as these water bodies
were redeﬁned in the hydrogeological model.
While random errors on measured water levels were optimally minimized (i.e.
dm accuracy) by testing variations and by performing measurements within a
short period, the systematic error on DEM elevations could signiﬁcantly aﬀect
the accuracy of the piezometric heads. Indeed, the smoothing process does not
increase the accuracy of the elevations which was evaluated by Slater et al. (2006)
to be less than 10 m for ﬂat areas. This potential error is high in comparison
with the range of terrain elevations and water levels, [228.50 ; 332.75] m and [5.95
; 15.88] m, respectively.
The obtained distribution of piezometric levels seemed, however, realistic and
allowed a converging calibration of the hydrogeological model although meter-
changes in observed piezometric levels might result in change in the predicted As
ﬂow paths. It would therefore be necessary to apply diﬀerent ﬁltering intensity
and to generate several model solutions with the various DEM produced in order
to test the prediction uncertainty related to the terrain representation. Accurate
ground control point elevations could also be measured in the ﬁeld at strategic
locations by using a static GPS in order to calibrate the DEM on these elevations.
6.2.2
Model uncertainty
6.2.2.1
Parameter uncertainty and local heterogeneities
The predictive uncertainty of the model due to parameters values was assessed
by computing 9 solutions with diﬀerent parameter sets whereas this analysis
should normally be performed using an higher number of independent simula-
tions (e.g.
thousand in Christensen and Cooley (2002)) in order to obtain a
representative statistical distribution of the solutions. As recommended by Ref-
sgaard et al. (2012), for this type of analysis, the model space should, however,
not be overpopulated and the number of poor and/or almost identical models
==PAGE:97==
6.2 Model
87
should be limited. Moreover, as performed in this study, simulations shouldn’t
be weighted when using them together to make predictions as a better converg-
ing model would not necessarily result in the best representation of As ﬂow paths.
Depending on the considered scale, the simulated spatial transport of As can
be more related to the modeled heterogeneities than on the parameters uncer-
tainty (Refsgaard et al., 2012). The allocation of pilot points regularly spaced by
500 m intervals as well as the regularization constraints and Kriging interpolation
were approximately deﬁned regarding the low density of observed data and in or-
der to obtain a smoothed representation of the ﬁssured layer heterogeneity on
catchment scale. Indeed, no detailed information about the spatial distribution
of the ﬁssured weathered bedrock heterogeneity could be obtained. This allows
the deﬁnition of high risk zones for As contamination although the model cannot
be expected to accurately simulate arsenic transport for smaller local-scale het-
erogeneities (i.e. 10th of meter). For instance, those could be taken into account
by reﬁning the spatial density of pilot points where (Doherty, 2003; Doherty et
al., 2010b):
• high density of the ﬁssured layer heterogeneities are expected
• accurate predictions have to be made
• higher density of observed heads is deﬁned
However, regular placement of pilot-points was chosen in order to easily in-
terpret the model output whereas use of an irregular distribution is a subjective
approach which would require better knowledge about the structural geology and
the intrinsic heterogeneity of the lithological units.
In order to restrain the range of parameter sets and to reduce the model
output error/uncertainty due to unmodeled local scale heterogeneity, it is of im-
portance to gain knowledge about the ﬁssured layer hydraulic conductivity. For
instance, this could be achieved by performing pumping tests at strategic loca-
tions for assessing the K distribution.
First, it would allow a more accurate
deﬁnition of the pilot points interpolation variogram by assessing the scale of
heterogeneity in order to allow a more realistic K distribution. Second, deﬁnition
of observed K values would result in restraining the range of K obtained from
the various simulations by ﬁxing pilot points values prior to calibration. Zones
where parameters sensitivities are low and where the K variance is high give an
estimation of locations where ﬁeld measurements should be achieved in order to
eﬃciently reduce the number of troublesome parameters and the range of possi-
ble parameter sets.
==PAGE:98==
88
6 Discussion
6.2.2.2
Geological structures
Another source of signiﬁcant prediction uncertainty and systematic error is ex-
pected to lie within the simpliﬁed geological structures. While accurate head
distribution can be achieved by compensation of the geological model structure
by the hydraulic parameters ﬁt, geological structure is expected to highly inﬂu-
ence the predictions beyond the scope of the calibration (Refsgaard et al., 2012).
Thus, the uncertainty on the arsenic transport prediction due to geological struc-
tures should be explored.
First, as As transport is expected to primarily occur within the ﬁssured weath-
ered bedrocks, this layer could be discretized for accounting the ﬁssures vertical
density variability. Second, the diﬀerent entities of the weathered overburden (i.e.
ferricrete, alloterite, isalterite) could be deﬁned. The latter would particularly be
of importance when using the model for rainy season in order to accurately model
the aquifer recharge. The development of these alternative structures would how-
ever require a better knowledge about the geology as the vertical frequency of
fractures remains unknown and as no clear saprolite composition could be deter-
mined. Refsgaard et al. (2012) also reported that a better discretization of the
geology would diminish the importance of local scale heterogeneity.
6.2.3
Conceptualization and observed parameters
One major systematic error is likely to lie in the deﬁnition of the water surface
elevations. In fact, these features were qualitatively deﬁned as constant head
and seem to have a signiﬁcant impact on the solution by draining the ground-
water and, consequently, aﬀect the As ﬂow paths. For instance, in the vicinity
of Bologo, the ﬂow paths were found exclusively oriented towards B3 although
groundwater in PO-36 was found contaminated with similar As concentrations.
In order to obtain accurate surface water elevations, static GPS measurements
should be performed in the ﬁeld.
Groundwater levels could not be measured for large zones of the study area.
This poor distribution impacted the model accuracy in two ways: First, the com-
puted heads in zones where no observed heads were deﬁned might be of poor
quality (i.e. due to low sensitivity of pilot points and variable modeled hydraulic
conductivity). This could particularly be the case in the southern and northern
extensions of the model domain whereas more weight is attributed on the calibra-
tion where high concentration of observed heads is found (e.g. north east part of
the model domain). Second, the model domain delimitation could be a signiﬁcant
source of systematic error as groundwater divide couldn’t be visualized for most
==PAGE:99==
6.3 Chemical measurements, sampling and analysis
89
of the boundaries. A better investigation would require additional drilling which
is not realistic regarding the costs as well as the logistical requirements implied.
Heterogeneities in the saprolite are also likely to exist as its composition is
related to the type of mother rock and the weathering process in a similar manner
as for the ﬁssure layer. As the saprolite is a porous material, its heterogeneities
are likely to be of less importance than for the ﬁssured layer. In addition, the
saprolite does not insure the transmissive function of the aquifer. Thus, lower
pilot points density could be deﬁned within this horizon (Doherty et al., 2010b).
Vertical interpolation between pilot points of the saprolite and of the ﬁssured layer
could be deﬁned (Doherty et al., 2010a) as these horizons are related through their
formations.
6.3
Chemical measurements, sampling and
analysis
The inherent hand-pumping systems of the boreholes were used to extract the
groundwater when collecting the samples used for average composition analysis.
This system could possibly let the groundwater interact with the atmosphere
leading to its oxidation and modiﬁcation of its chemistry (e.g. precipitation of
Fe2+. However, the ﬂow through cell and continuous O2 measurements insured
that a constant oxygen concentration was reached and as O2 was often very low,
insigniﬁcant interaction with the atmosphere is expected. Moreover, as ground-
water is extracted along the day, it is expected that stagnant water in the well is
constantly purged.
The number of basins and dug wells used for the analysis might be too low
in order to obtain accurate statistical representation for general interpretation.
This would also constitute a limitation for the analysis of high As occurrence as
a low number of boreholes were found contaminated.
Moreover, depth proﬁle analysis of the water composition performed with the
bailer was not conclusive due to a lack of boreholes data and to the potential
presence of numerous random errors when sampling (Section G).
6.4
Mitigation strategy
Considering the strong dependence for groundwater under the arid climate of
West Africa and the predictions of an increase water stress, it is crucial to insure
==PAGE:100==
90
6 Discussion
access to safe drinking water.
Mitigation strategies could be deﬁned on local and regional scales. Locally,
answers have to be adapted to the particularities of the ﬁeld, the detected con-
tamination variability and the irregularities in the As sources distribution. Re-
gionally, policies and programs should be adopted in order to face and limit As
contamination when developing new drilling programs. This could be applied
over risk zones deﬁned by statistical analysis (e.g. global risk maps) or corre-
sponding to the Birimian greenstone belts linked to As occurrence (COWI, 2005)
and covering an area of 70000 km2 in Burkina Faso (i.e. 10 % of the land area)
(Smedley et al., 2007).
As an example for local mitigation, the speciﬁc case of Poura is considered.
Arsenic concentrations exceeding the WHO guideline can be considered of low
occurrence (i.e. 17%) and, mainly, of low magnitude. Considering the low eco-
nomical resources and scarcity of groundwater, mitigation should only focus on
the closure or replacement of PO-1 and PO-30 presenting the highest As concen-
trations (317.5 and 51.9 µg/L respectively). The closest boreholes from PO-1
and PO-31 are respectively 200 m and 500 m far from them and could therefore
represent ﬁrst temporary replacement. Regarding PO-1, recommendations for
its replacement could be supported by the As distribution predictions discussed
above. Moreover, the inhabitants had a lot of interest in the sampling performed
on the ﬁeld, many oﬀered their help and were aware of our arrival. Indeed, hu-
man communication is very important in this region and could represent a crucial
vector for informing the population (e.g. prioritize the use of another well).
On regional scale, simple measures for arsenic mitigation could be proposed:
• Systematically analyse the groundwater quality when drilling and minimize
the placement of wells on or near quartz veins (require collection of geolog-
ical data and ﬁeld observations).
• Maximize the use of treated water surface supply.
• Close the contaminated boreholes and relocate groundwater abstraction
point. If the new location is too far for the population, shallow dug wells
could be developed although they are at higher risks for bacterial and other
contaminations.
• Provide centralized equipped zone for gold-washing in areas of intensive
hand dug mining (e.g. Bologo) and regulate this work by the deﬁnition of
standards.
==PAGE:101==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion and future work
The spatial variability of arsenic in the gold-mining area of Poura was evaluated
through the development of a groundwater ﬂow and nonreactive conservative
transport model together with a geochemical analysis. Data collection was per-
formed through ﬁeld work during the dry season. Arsenic is found as As(V) and
most groundwaters have low As content (i.e.
< 10 mug/L) with the highest
concentration reaching 317 µg/L. Arsenic in groundwater exceeding the WHO
guideline for drinking water is primarily expected to be of geogenic natural oc-
currence through dissolution of sulphide minerals contained in the quartz veins.
Regarding the obtained As distribution together with the identiﬁed quartz veins
as well as the long residence time of groundwater, the contamination is expected
to be limited in the close vicinity of the veins locations. This results in a large
lateral variability of As occurrence controlled by the locations of the quartz veins
bearing sulphidic mineralization. The diﬃculty in locating As sources as well as
the change in the quartz veins mineralization and in the dissolution of As-bearing
minerals represent the main limitation to predict the distribution and magnitude
of the As groundwater contamination on local-scale. In addition, As concentra-
tions could increase as a function of depth due to the expected depth increasing
preservation of sulphides from weathering.
In this work, quantiﬁcation of As-travel distances and assessment of the geo-
chemical dynamics (i.e. description of the spatial and temporal evolution of the
transport) were not performed due to the low amount of available data. Similarly
to (Postma et al., 2007; Wallis et al., 2010, 2011), reactive transport models (i.e.
1D, 2D and/or 3D using the software PHT3D) coupled to a groundwater ﬂow
model (i.e. using MODFLOW) could be developed at a ﬁeld-scale to describe the
transport of arsenic in fractured media of West Africa. The area deﬁned as an
As-risk zone in the vicinity of the most aﬀected borehole (i.e. PO-1) represents a
trial site of interest for data collection. This would required a) pumping tests to
assess the hydrogeological heterogeneity and b) the drilling of monitoring bore-
holes to allow groundwater sampling and mineral assemblage (i.e. sediments and
cores) analysis as well as to gain knowledge about the geological structure.
The strong bimodal seasonal patterns shared between a dry and a rainy season
==PAGE:102==
92
7 Conclusion and future work
resulting in signiﬁcant hydrological and geochemical changes in the West African
region probably plays a major role in the pathways of arsenic in groundwater.
This expected mechanism, as for instance reported by Verplanck et al. (2008) in
Alaska, could be investigated through the study of the groundwater dynamics
(e.g. transient hydrogeological model), together with the observation of changes
in the geochemistry during the rainy season.
Because As contamination is highly localized, high-arsenic groundwater oc-
currence is not expected to be widespread in Burkina Faso. Indeed, considering
the present and previous surveys (COWI, 2005; Smedley et al., 1996, 2007), As
contamination is likely to be spotted in the many gold mineralized areas present
over the Birimian formations (Smedley et al., 2007). The development of a na-
tional statistical arsenic predictive risk map for Burkina Faso, as existing for
China (Rodriguez-Lado et al., 2013) and Korea (Ahn and Cho, 2012), could rep-
resent a powerful tool for public services in order to develop eﬃcient mitigation
strategies. Zones expected to be impacted by high-As occurrence in groundwater
should beneﬁt from speciﬁc drilling programs in order to insure drinking water
safety. On local scale, the positions of the known quartz veins and direction of
groundwater ﬂow should particularly be taken into account when installing new
boreholes and groundwater composition should systematically be evaluated when
drilling. Cooperation between the mining companies and the public services in
charge of providing access to drinking water could represent an eﬃcient strategy
for locating potential sources of arsenic.
As past mining activities also seem to lead to signiﬁcant As surface water
pollution through the dissolution of As-bearing sulphides present in the tailings,
remediation of abandoned sites should be achieved. Furthermore, considering
the apparent level of risks of traditional hand dug mining and the potential use
of chemicals such as Hg and CN’, this activity should be regulated by eﬃcient
policies to insure safety for the workers and to limit potential anthropogenic pol-
lution.
==PAGE:103==
Bibliography
AEM (2014). “Schéma directeur de l’aménagement et de la gestion de l’eau de
l’espace de compétence de l’Agence de l’Eau de Mouhoun (2014-2030).” Min-
istère de l’Eau des Aménagements Hydrauliques et de l’Assainissement, Se-
crétariat général, Agence de l’eau du Mouhoun (AEM), pp. 1–191.
Ahmed, S., Jayakumar, R., and Salih, A. (2008). Groundwater dynamics in hard
rock aquifers, Sustainable Management and Optimal Monitoring Network De-
sign. Dordrecht: Springer.
Ahn, J.S. and Cho, Y.-C. (2012). “Predicting natural arsenic contamination of
bedrock groundwater for a local region in Korea and its application.” Environ-
mental Earth Science, 68, pp. 2123–2132.
Appelo, C.A.J. and Postma, D. (2010). Geochemistry, groundwater and pollution.
2nd ed. London: CRC press.
Aurouet, A., Devineau, J.-L., and Vidal., M. (2005). “Characterization of weath-
ering proﬁle in granites and volcanosedimentary rocks in West Africa under
humid tropical climate conditions. Case of the Dimbokro Catchment (Ivory
Coast).” Science Planétaire - Sécheresse, 16(3), pp. 199–207.
Ayotte, J.D., Nolan, B.T., Nuckols, J.R., Cantor, K.P., Robinson, G.R., Baris, D.,
Hayes, L., Karagas, M., Bress, W., Silverman, D.T., and Lubin, J.H. (2006).
“Modeling the probability of arsenic in groundwater in New England as a
tool for exposure assessment.” Environmental Science and Technology, 40(11),
pp. 3578–3585.
Bamba, O. (1996). “L’or disséminé dans les albitites de Larafella (Burkina Faso),
évolution dans les altérites et les cuirasses ferrugineuses. Métallogénie, pétrolo-
gie, géomorphologie.” Phd Thesis, Université de Poitiers.
Bamba, O., Parisot, J.-C., Grandin, G., and Beauvais, A. (2002). “Ferricrete gene-
sis and supergene gold behaviour in Burkina Faso, West Africa.” Geochemistry:
Exploration, Environment, Analysis, 2(3), pp. 3–14.
Barbier, B., Dembelé, Y., and Compaoré, L. (2006). “L’eau au Burkina Faso:
usages actuels et perspectives.” Sud Sciences et Technologies, (14), pp. 20–29.
==PAGE:104==
94
Bibliography
Bennett, N.D., Croke, B.F.W., Guariso, G., Guillaume, J.H.A., Hamilton, S.H.,
Jakeman, A.J., Marsili-Libelli, S., Newhama, L.T.H., Norton, J.P., Perrin,
C., Pierce, S.A., Robson, B., Seppelt, R., Voinov, A.A., Fath, B.D., and An-
dreassian, V. (2013). “Characterising performance of environmental models.”
Environmental Modelling and Software, 40, pp. 1–20.
Bonsor, H.C., MacDonald, A.M., and Davies, J. (2013). “Evidence for extreme
variations in the permeability of laterite from a detailed analysis of well be-
haviour in Nigeria.” Hydrological Processes, 28, pp. 3563–3573.
Bourges, F., Debat, P., Tollon, F., Munoz, M., and Ingles, J. (1998). “The geology
of the Tapako gold deposit, Birimian greenstone belt, Burkina Faso, West
Africa.” Mineralium Deposita, 33, pp. 591–605.
Béziat, D., Bourges, F., Debat, P., Lompo, M., Martin, F., and Tollon, F. (2000).
“A paleoproterozoic ultramaﬁc-maﬁc assemblage and associated volcanic rocks
of the Boromo greenstone belt: fractionates originating from island-arc vol-
canic activity in the West African craton.” Precambrian Research, 101, pp. 25–
47.
Béziat, D., Dubois, M., Debat, P., Nikiéma, S., Salvi, S., and Tollon, F. (2008).
“Gold metallogeny in the Birimian craton of Burkina Faso (West Africa).”
Journal of African Earth Sciences, 50, pp. 215–233.
Carrier, M.A., Lefebvre, R., Racicot, J., Canada, Asare, E.B., and Ghana (2008).
“Northern Ghana hydrogeological assessment project.” 33rd WEDC Interna-
tional Conference, Accra, Ghana.
Christensen, S. and Cooley, R.L. (2002). “Experience gained in testing a theory
for modelling groundwater ﬂow in heterogeneous media.” In: Kovar K, Hrkal
Z, editors. Calibration and reliability in groundwater modelling: a few steps
closer to reality. IAHS Publ. 277, pp. 22–27.
Compaore, G., Lachassagne, P., Pointet, T., and Travi, Y. (1997). “Evaluation
du stock d’eau des altérites. Expérimentation sur le site granitique de Sanon
(Burkina Faso).” IASH, 241. In: Rabat IASH Conference, pp. 37–46.
Courtois, N., Lachassagne, P., Wyns, R., Blanchin, R., Bougaïré, F.D., Somé, S.,
and Tapsoba, A. (2010). “Large-scale mapping of hard-rock aquifer properties
applied to Burkina Faso.” Ground Water, 48(2), pp. 269–283.
Coussy, S. (2012). “Stabilisation de rejets miniers pollués à l’arsenic à l’aide de
sous-produits cimentaires : étude de l’inﬂuence de la cristallochimie sur le
risque de mobilisation des polluants.” HAL. INSA de Lyon; Université du
Québec en Abitibi-Témiscamingue. French. Available at: www.tel.archives-
ouvertes.fr.
==PAGE:105==
Bibliography
95
COWI (2005). “Etude approfondie dans 8 villages de la région Nord ayant des
forages à taux d’arsenic élevés.” COWI Engineering A/S, Copenhagen.
Dewandel, B., Lachassagne, P., Wyns, R., Maréchal, J.C., and Krishnamurthy,
N.S. (2006). “A generalized 3-D geological and hydrogeological conceptual
model of granite aquifers controlled by single and multiphase weathering.”
Journal of Hydrology, 330, pp. 260–284.
Dewandel, B., Lachassagne, P., Zaidi, F.K., and Chandra, S. (2011). “A concep-
tual hydrodynamic model of a geological discontinuity in hard rock aquifers:
example of a quartz reef in granitic terrain in South India.” Journal of Hy-
drology, 405(2), pp. 474–487.
Dixit, S. and Hering, J.G. (2003). “Comparison of Arsenic(V) and Arsenic(III)
sorption onto iron oxide minerals: implications for arsenic mobility.” Environ-
mental Science and Technology, 37(18), pp. 4182–4188.
Doherty, J.E. (2003). “Ground water model calibration using Pilot Points and reg-
ularization.” Ground Water, 41(2). Available at: http://info.ngwa.org, pp. 170
–177.
— (2015). “Calibration and uncertainty analysis for complex environmental mod-
els. PEST: complete theory and what it means for modelling the real world.”
Watermark Numerical Computing.
Doherty, J.E., Hunt, R.J., and Tonkin, M.J. (2010a). “Approaches to highly
parametrized inversion: a guide to using PEST for model-parameter and
predictive-uncertainty analysis.” U.S. Geological Survey, Reston, Virginia, Sci-
entiﬁc Investigations Report 2010–5211. Available at: http://pubs.usgs.gov/,
pp. 1–71.
Doherty, J.E., Fienen, M.N., and Hunt, R.J. (2010b). “Approaches to highly
parametrized inversion: pilot-point theory, guidelines, and research directions.”
U.S. Geological Survey, Reston, Virginia, Scientiﬁc investigations report 2010-
5168. Available at: http://pubs.usgs.gov/, pp. 1–36.
Falorni, G., Teles, V., Vivoni, E.R., and Bras, R.L. (2005). “Analysis and char-
acterization of the vertical accuracy of digital elevation models from the
Shuttle Radar Topography Mission.” Journal of Geophysical Research, 110.
doi:10.1029/2003JF000113, pp. 1–20.
Fetter, C.W. (2003). Applied Hydrogeology. 4th ed. Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle
River N.J.
Fitts, C.R. (2002). Groundwater Science. 1st ed. California USA: Academic Press,
an imprint of Elsevier Science.
==PAGE:106==
96
Bibliography
Gallant, J. (2011). “Adaptive smoothing for noisy DEMs.” Geomorphometry.
Available at: http://www.geomorphometry.org.
Gueye, D. (1984). “Etude géologique du gisement d’or de Poura, Mémoire de ﬁn
d’étude.” Ecole nationale d’ingénieurs.
Guo, H., Weng, D., Liu, Z., Jia, Y., and Guo, Q. (2013). “A review of high arsenic
groundwater in Mainland and Taiwan, China: Distribution, characteristics
and geochemical processes.” Applied Geochemistry, 41, pp. 196–217.
Howard, K.W.F., Hughes, M., Charlesworth, D.L., and Ngobi, G. (1992). “Hydro-
geologic evaluation of fracture permeability in crystalline basement aquifers
of Uganda.” Journal of Hydrology, 1, pp. 55–65.
Inforoute-communale (2015). “Liste des villages de la région de la boucle du
Mouhoun.” Available at: www.inforoute-communale.gov.bf.
Kabore, B. (1989). “Minerai aurifère profond du gisement de Poura (Burkina
Faso). Etude minéralogique préparatoire à la valorisation.” Ecole nationale
supérieure de géologie de l’Université de Nancy, Centre d’enseignement supérieur
en exploration et en valorisation des ressources minérales.
Kafando, R. (2012). “Exploitation aurifère à Poura : Une dette sociale et écologique
diﬃcile à apurer.” Lefaso. Available at: www.lefaso.net.
Kagambega, N., Sawadogo, S., Bamba, O., Zombre, P., and Galvez, R. (2014a).
“Acid mine drainage and heavy metals contamination of surface water and
soil in southwest Burkina Faso - West Africa.” International Journal of Mul-
tidisciplinary Academic Research, 2(3).
Kagambega, N., Sayouba, S., and Ardjima, G. (2014b). “High arsenic enrich-
ment in water and soils from Sambayourou watershed - Burkina Faso (West
Africa).” International Journal of Environmental Monitoring and Analysis, 2.
doi: 10.11648/j.ijema.s.2014020601.12, pp. 6–12.
Kalbermatten, M., Van De Ville, D., Turberg, P., Tuia, D., and Joost, S. (2011).
“Multiscale analysis of geomorphological and geological features in high reso-
lution digital elevation models using the wavelet transform.” Geomorphology,
138, pp. 352–363.
Kim, K., Kim, S.-H., Jeong, G.Y., and Kim, R.-H. (2012). “Relations of As con-
centrations among groundwater, soil and bedrock in Chungnam, Korea: Im-
plications for As mobilization in groundwater according to the As-hosting
mineral change.” Journal of Hazardous Materials, (199-200), pp. 25–35.
Kocar, B.D., Polizzotto, M.L., Benner, S.G., Ying, S.C., Ung, M., Ouch, K., Sam-
reth, S., Suy, B., Phan, K., Sampson, M., and Fendorf, S. (2008). “Integrated
==PAGE:107==
Bibliography
97
biogeochemical and hydrologic processes driving arsenic release from shallow
sediments to groundwaters of the Mekong Delta.” Applied geochemistry, 23,
pp. 3059–3071.
Koïta, M., Jourde, H., Koﬃ, K.J.P., Silveira, K.S. Da, and Biaou, A. (2013a).
“Characterization of weathering proﬁle in granites and volcanosedimentary
rocks in West Africa under humid tropical climate conditions. Case of the
Dimbokro Catchment (Ivory Coast).” Journal of Earth System Science, 122(3),
pp. 841–854.
Koïta, M., Jourde, H., and Rossier, Y. (2013b). “Relative importance of weath-
ering proﬁles and major fracture zones to ﬁt the water balance of a hydro-
geological catchment in hard rocks.” International Journal of Environmental
Sciences, 4(3), pp. 296–314.
Kote, S., Ouédraogo, I., Donzeau, M., Metour, J. Le, Castaing, C., Egal, E.,
Thieblemont, D., Tegyey, M., Guerrot, C., Chevremont, O., Milesi, J.P., Billa,
M., Itard, Y., and Ki, J.C. (2003). Notice explicative de la carte géologique du
Bukina Faso à 1/200000 ; Feuille Léo.
Kuniansky, E.L., Lowery, M.A., and Campbell, B.G. (2009). “How processing
digital elevation models can aﬀect simulated water budget.” Ground Water,
41(1), pp. 97–106.
Maréchal, J.C., Dewandel, B., and Subrahmanyam, K. (2004). “Use of hydraulic
tests at diﬀerent scales to characterize fracture network properties in the
weathered-fractured layer of a hard rock aquifer.” Water Resources Research,
40(11), pp. 1–7.
Moeck, C., Hunkeler, D., and Brunner, P. (2015). “Tutorials as a ﬂexible alterna-
tive to GUIs: An example for advanced model calibration using Pilot Points.”
Environmental Modelling and Software, (66), pp. 78–86.
Mukherjee, S., Joshi, P.K., Mukherjee, S., Ghosh, A., Garg, R.D, and Mukhopad-
hyay, A. (2013). “Evaluation of vertical accuracy of open source Digital El-
evation Model (DEM).” International Journal of Applied Earth Observation
and Geoinformation, 21, pp. 205–217.
NASA (2014). “Open source SRTM data.” National Aeronautics and Space Ad-
ministration Land Processes Distributed Active Archive Center. Available at
https://lta.cr.usgs.gov.
Nielsen, D.M. and Nielsen, G.L. (2006). “Ground-water sampling”. In: D.M. Nielsen
(Ed.), Practical Handbook of Environmental Site Characterization and Ground-
Water Monitoring, 2nd ed., CRC Press, Taylor & Francis Group, LLC, pp. 960–
1112.
==PAGE:108==
98
Bibliography
NRC (1999). “Arsenic in drinking water.” National Academic Press, Washington,
D.C.
Oberthür, T., Weiser, T., Amanor, J.A., and Chryssoulis, S.L. (1997). “Miner-
alogical siting and distribution of gold in quartz veins and sulﬁde ores of
the Ashanti mine and other deposits in the Ashanti belt of Ghana: genetic
implications.” Mineralium Deposita, 32, pp. 2–15.
Ouédraogo, I., Kote, S., Kabore, E.B., Donzeau, M., Metour, J. Le, Castaing, C.,
Milesi, J.P., Billa, M., and Zida, B. (2003). Carte géologique du Burkina Faso
à 1/200000 ; Feuille Léo.
Postma, D., Larsen, F., Hue, N.T.M., Due, M.T., Viet, P.H., Nhan, P.Q., and
Jessen, S. (2007). “Arsenic in groundwater of the Red River foodplain Viet-
nam: Controlling geochemical processes and reactive transport modeling.”
Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, (71), pp. 5054–5071.
Refsgaard, J.C., Christensen, S., Sonnenborg, T.O., Seifert, D., Højberg, A.L.,
and Troldborg, L. (2012). “Review of strategies for handling geological un-
certainty in groundwater ﬂow and transport modeling.” Advances in Water
Resources, 36, pp. 36–50.
Rodriguez-Lado, L., Sun, G., Berg, M., Zhang, Q., Xue, H., Zheng, Q., and John-
son, C.A. (2013). “Groundwater Arsenic Contamination Throughout China.”
Science, 341, pp. 866–868.
Roy, W.D. (2000). “Using Geostatistics to Estimate the Resources of a Narrow
Vein Gold Deposit.” A Thesis submitted to the Faculty of Engineering in
partial fulﬁlment of the requirements for the Degree of Master of Applied
Science Department of Mining and Metallurgical Engineering. Halifax, Nova
Scotia. Available at: http://www.minetechint.com/.
Sanogo, A.D. and Prost, A.E. (1993). “Evolution synchrone des déformations et
des minéralisations dans le ﬁlon aurifère de Poura.” Pangea Communication,
20, pp. 23–29.
Sharp, J.M. (2014). Fractured Rock Hydrogeology. 1st ed. International association
of hydrogeologists selected papers. CRC Press.
Slater, J.A., Garvey, G., Johnston, C., Haase, J., Heady, B., Kroenung, G., and
Little, J. (2006). “The SRTM Data “Finishing” Process and Products.” Pho-
togrammetric Engineering & Remote Sensing, 72(3), pp. 237–247.
Smedley, P.L. and Kinniburgh, D.G. (2002). “A review of the source, behaviour
and distribution of arsenic in natural waters.” Applied Geochemistry, 17, pp. 517–
568.
==PAGE:109==
Bibliography
99
Smedley, P.L., Edmunds, W.M., and Pelig-Ba, K.B. (1996). “Mobility of arsenic
in groundwater in the Obuasi gold-mining area of Ghana: some implications
for human health.” Geological Society Special Publication. In: Appleton, J.D.,
Fuge, R., McCall, G.J.H. (Eds.), Environmental Geochemistry and Health,
Geological Society Special Publication No 113, Vol. 163-181. Geological Soci-
ety, London.
Smedley, P.L., Knudsen, J., and Maiga, D. (2007). “Arsenic in groundwater from
mineralised Proterozoic rocks of Burkina Faso.” Applied Geochemistry, 22,
pp. 1074–1092.
Verplanck, P.L., Mueller, S.H., Goldfarb, R.J., Nordstrom, D.K., and Youcha,
E.K. (2008). “Geochemical controls of elevated arsenic concentrations in ground-
water, Ester Dome, Fairbanks district, Alaska.” Chemical Geology, 255, pp. 160–
172.
Wallis, I., Prommer, H., Simmons, C.T., Post, V., and Stuyfzand, P.J. (2010).
“Evaluation of conceptual and numerical models for arsenic mobilization and
attenuation during managed aquifer recharge.” Environmental science and
Technology, 44(13), pp. 5035–5041.
Wallis, I., Prommer, H., Pichler, T., Post, V., Norton, S., Annable, M.D., and
Simmons, C.T. (2011). “Process-based reactive transport model to quantify
arsenic mobility during aquifer storage and recovery of potable water.” Envi-
ronmental science and Technology, 45, pp. 6924–6931.
WHO (1981). “Environmental Health Criteria 18: Arsenic.” World Health Orga-
nization, Geneva.
Wilkie, J.A. and Hering, J.G. (1996). “Adsorption of arsenic into hydrous ferric
oxide: eﬀects of adsorbate/adsorbent ratios and co-occuring solutes.” Colloids
and surfaces A, 107, pp. 97–110.
Wright, E.P. and Burgess, W.G. (1992). “The hydrogeology of crystalline base-
ment aquifers in Africa.” Geological society. London Special Publication, 66,
pp. 1–27.
Wyns, R., Gourry, J.-C., Baltassat, J.-M., and Lebert, F. (1999). “Caractérisation
multiparamètres des horizons de subsurface (0–100 m) en contexte de socle
altéré.” BRGM, I.R.D., MC, U.P. (Eds.), 2ème Colloque GEOFCAN. Orléans,
France, pp. 105 –110.
==PAGE:110==
100
==PAGE:111==
APPENDIX A
Geology
This Appendix presents data and maps used to assess the geology and to locate
the quartz veins of the study area.
Table A.1 shows thickness values of the
saprolite and its components (i.e. alloterite and isalterite) found in the literature.
Figures A.1 and A.2 represent the maps that were used to digitize the quartz
veins.
Table A.1: Literature values of the saprolite thickness
Author
Lithology
Location
Scale
Thickness [m]
Alloterite
Isalterite
Bamba et al. (2002)
Andesite
Poura
Local
ca. 211
Koïta et al. (2013a)
Volcanic rock
Ivory Coast
Regional
[20 - 45]
[20 - 35]
Koïta et al. (2013a)
Metasedimentary rock
Ivory Coast
Regional
[15 - 30]
[10 - 30]
Courtois et al. (2010)
Various
Burkina Faso
National
tens of meters
Carrier et al. (2008)
Birimian, Tarkwaian rocks
Northern Ghana
Regional
[12 - 33]
Kote et al. (2003)
Various
Poura
Regional
up to 30 - 40
Figure A.1: Map of the main gold lodes (Sanogo and Prost, 1993).
1This value was deduced by subtracting the saprolite thickness from the total thickness of
the weathered zone reported in a ﬁeld 5 km away from the study site from the study of one
petrological proﬁle.
==PAGE:112==
102
A Geology
Figure A.2: Geomorphological map used to deﬁne the locations of the quartz veins (Bamba, 1996).
==PAGE:113==
APPENDIX B
Field Work and observations
Figures B.1 and B.2 show part of the equipment used during ﬁeld work. The
choice of the bailer rather than a pump was made regarding ﬁeld practical issues
(i.e.
temperature, ease and rapidity of use, accessibility of the boreholes and
wells). Figure B.2 shows how the measurement of the EC, Eh, pH and T pa-
rameters were performed in bores. By using the inherent pumping system of the
borehole and by maintaining a constant pressure in the pipes by hand-pumping,
a stabilization of the parameters could be reached. Also, some groundwater lev-
els were measured while pumping in order to assess if hand-pumping resulted in
signiﬁcant groundwater drawdown.
Figure B.1: Part of the material used for measurements and sampling in the ﬁeld.
==PAGE:114==
104
B Field Work and observations
Figure B.2: Measurements of the EC, Eh, pH, T using ﬂow-through cell.
Figures B.3 and B.4 display document used on the ﬁeld to facilitate the sam-
pling and measurements procedure.
Figure B.3: Example of a map indicating the locations of boreholes. The target
and the tick represent the wells to be and already sampled respectively.
==PAGE:115==
B Field Work and observations
105
Figure B.4: Field analyses sheet for one borehole. The ﬁrst table aims to list
the technical characteristics of the borehole when available. The second table is
used to write the parameters read on the multimeter when stabilization is reach
using the ﬂow through cell for analyses of the average groundwater composition.
The third table is used to write the parameters read on the multimeter for each
discrete selected depth interval when performing multilevel sampling.
==PAGE:116==
106
B Field Work and observations
Figure B.5 displays the rudimentary tool used for gold washing. The use of
speciﬁc chemicals to facilitate gold extraction wasn’t observed.
Figure B.5: Location of gold washing on the banks of the abandoned quarries.
==PAGE:117==
APPENDIX C
Database
This Appendix presents all technical data relative to the wells gathered during the
study. Table C.1 contains the coordinates of the boreholes and dug wells in the
districts of Poura and Fara. For each well used in the present study, Tables C.2,
C.3, C.4 display the ID, the location (i.e. name of the village, coordinates), the
height obtained from the DEM, the type of well (i.e. borehole or dug well), the
type of pump, the year of construction, the measured water level, the total depth,
the obtained water level from the literature and the corresponding month of
measurement, the converted piezometric level from the measured water level, the
thickness of the ﬁssured layer, the thickness of the weathered overburden deduced
from the thickness of the ﬁssured layer and the total depth of the borehole, the
depth of the top position of the screen or the depth interval of the screen. Table
C.5 shows the thickness of simpliﬁed horizons deduced from detailed lithologs for
a larger area extent than the considered study area.
Table C.1: Coordinates and locations of all wells in the region of the study area
(DGRE, 2015, personal communication) (Continued on next page).
Commune
X
Y
Village
Type
Year
Sample ID
Poura
522741
1283065
Basnere
Borehole
2008
PO-10
Poura
522956
1283566
Basnere
Borehole
2011
PO-11
Poura
524454
1281313
Basnere
Borehole
2014
PO-12
Poura
522706
1283400
Basnere
Dug-well
1987
PO-25
Fara
539051
1259222
Bilatio
Borehole
2011
Fara
540038
1257742
Bilatio
Borehole
2011
Fara
538185
1258327
Bilatio
Borehole
1995
Fara
533882
1257923
Bouzourou
Borehole
1986
Fara
533973
1258230
Bouzourou
Dug-well
1974
Fara
533700
1258752
Bouzourou
Borehole
1995
Fara
534883
1257064
Bouzourou
Dug-well
1993
Fara
534213
1258031
Bouzourou
Borehole
2007
Fara
533390
1267828
Bouzourou
Borehole
2010
Fara
524993
1270538
Daho
Dug-well
2002
==PAGE:118==
108
C Database
Table C.1: (Continued)
Commune
X
Y
Village
Type
Year
Sample ID
Fara
524932
1270785
Daho
Borehole
2009
Fara
524932
1270354
Daho
Dug-well
1982
Fara
525265
1270446
Daho
Borehole
1984
Fara
524750
1270520
Daho
Borehole
2007
Fara
529145
1268699
Dakayes
Borehole
1985
Fara
529660
1268484
Dakayes
Dug-well
2000
Fara
528963
1268791
Dakayes
Borehole
1995
Fara
528114
1269281
Dakayes
Borehole
1995
Fara
528934
1267623
Dakayes
Dug-well
2001
Fara
529956
1269016
Dakayes
Borehole
2008
Fara
525504
1274670
Dakayes
Borehole
2012
Poura
526645
1286236
Darsalam
Borehole
1985
A-80
Poura
527252
1285253
Darsalam
Borehole
1993
PO-37
Fara
526435
1278464
Diansi
Borehole
2011
PO-13
Fara
526480
1278492
Diansi
Dug-well
2000
PO-14
Fara
526433
1277911
Diansi
Borehole
1994
PO-15
Fara
525812
1275969
Fara
Borehole
2007
A-83
Fara
521610
1280403
Fara
Borehole
2000
PO-36
Fara
525536
1276303
Fara
Borehole
2010
PO-39
Fara
527299
1272414
Fara
Borehole
2007
Fara
524895
1274743
Fara
Borehole
2009
Fara
517813
1269897
Fara
Borehole
1995
Fara
521843
1268632
Fara
Borehole
2000
Fara
525447
1273660
Fara
Borehole
2008
Fara
525359
1273966
Fara
Borehole
2008
Fara
524747
1274270
Fara
Dug-well
2008
Fara
525909
1275546
Fara
Borehole
2014
Fara
527484
1272940
Fara
Borehole
2007
Fara
527677
1273370
Fara
Dug-well
2007
Fara
526219
1274741
Fara
Dug-well
1990
Fara
519589
1273877
Fara
Dug-well
2005
Fara
528588
1274240
Fara
Dug-well
2011
Fara
520309
1270301
Fara
Borehole
2011
Fara
521706
1274129
Fara
Borehole
2010
Fara
527493
1272936
Fara
Dug-well
2010
Fara
522526
1258853
Fara
Dug-well
2007
==PAGE:119==
C Database
109
Table C.1: (Continued)
Commune
X
Y
Village
Type
Year
Sample ID
Fara
524744
1274273
Fara
Borehole
2004
Fara
524945
1273245
Fara
Dug-well
2007
Fara
525980
1273841
Fara
Borehole
2001
Fara
525806
1275485
Fara
Dug-well
2007
Fara
527432
1276088
Fara
Borehole
2001
Fara
527324
1272414
Fara
Borehole
1987
Fara
527263
1272568
Fara
Borehole
1997
Fara
525898
1274255
Fara
Dug-well
1984
Fara
525838
1273949
Fara
Borehole
1971
Fara
525959
1273733
Fara
Dug-well
2001
Fara
526020
1273979
Fara
Borehole
2004
Fara
526110
1274010
Fara
Dug-well
2001
Fara
525444
1273672
Fara
Borehole
Fara
525535
1273702
Fara
Dug-well
2007
Fara
524703
1272965
Fara
Borehole
2001
Fara
527654
1275578
Fara
Borehole
2000
Fara
526657
1272567
Fara
Borehole
1988
Fara
525262
1275054
Fara
Borehole
1985
Fara
520444
1276709
Fara
Borehole
2002
Fara
519992
1273974
Fara
Borehole
1985
Fara
518296
1274004
Fara
Borehole
1999
Fara
519416
1273851
Fara
Borehole
2001
Fara
519447
1273944
Fara
Borehole
1988
Fara
520052
1274527
Fara
Borehole
1996
Fara
525535
1273549
Fara
Borehole
2007
Fara
526640
1274862
Fara
Borehole
2007
Fara
527630
1275587
Fara
Borehole
1984
Fara
525353
1273948
Fara
Borehole
2011
Fara
528927
1267627
Fitien
Borehole
2007
Fara
536236
1266627
Fitien
Borehole
1994
Fara
536025
1266003
Fitien
Borehole
1999
Fara
526634
1264366
Kabourou
Dug-well
2014
Fara
527078
1262468
Kabourou
Borehole
2012
Fara
532870
1278283
Kabourou
Borehole
2011
Fara
525809
1275955
Kabourou
Borehole
2008
Fara
526664
1264314
Kabourou
Borehole
2007
==PAGE:120==
110
C Database
Table C.1: (Continued)
Commune
X
Y
Village
Type
Year
Sample ID
Fara
526451
1261980
Kabourou
Borehole
2006
Fara
525547
1258999
Kabourou
Borehole
2006
Fara
527141
1262941
Kabourou
Borehole
1995
Fara
526968
1263599
Kabourou
Borehole
1984
Fara
526241
1263045
Kabourou
Borehole
2003
Fara
527332
1262493
Kabourou
Borehole
1977
Fara
526726
1262462
Kabourou
Dug-well
1989
Fara
526696
1262400
Kabourou
Borehole
1995
Fara
526453
1262493
Kabourou
Borehole
2006
Fara
525938
1262553
Kabourou
Borehole
1969
Fara
526575
1262032
Kabourou
Dug-well
1995
Fara
526818
1261847
Kabourou
Borehole
2008
Fara
527332
1262493
Kabourou
Borehole
1995
Poura
529207
1283150
Kankele
Borehole
1980
PO-29
Poura
528529
1283059
Kankele
Borehole
1992
PO-30
Poura
528907
1283444
Kankele
Borehole
2011
PO-31
Poura
529559
1283259
Kankele
Borehole
2009
PO-32
Fara
539690
1266776
Kapa
Borehole
2006
Fara
548823
1266346
Kapa
Borehole
2002
Fara
522547
1258803
Karaba
Dug-well
2000
Fara
522216
1255824
Karaba
Borehole
1969
Fara
522579
1256531
Karaba
Dug-well
1995
Fara
522397
1256469
Karaba
Borehole
2007
Fara
522493
1257922
Karaba
Borehole
2002
Fara
522547
1258822
Karaba
Dug-well
2011
Fara
522526
1258855
Karaba
Borehole
2003
Fara
522427
1257759
Karaba
Dug-well
1995
Fara
533900
1269994
Konzena
Borehole
2006
Fara
534072
1270049
Konzena
Dug-well
2014
Fara
534085
1269843
Konzena
Dug-well
1969
Fara
522608
1258496
Koumbia
Dug-well
2010
Fara
522229
1258345
Koumbia
Borehole
1994
Fara
522547
1258466
Koumbia
Borehole
2002
Fara
522547
1258466
Koumbia
Dug-well
1994
Fara
522305
1258527
Koumbia
Borehole
1996
Fara
517371
1248081
Laro
Borehole
2000
==PAGE:121==
C Database
111
Table C.1: (Continued)
Commune
X
Y
Village
Type
Year
Sample ID
Fara
516886
1248112
Laro
Borehole
2011
Fara
517301
1248204
Laro
Borehole
2007
Fara
522941
1242150
Laro
Borehole
2007
Fara
517708
1247592
Laro
Borehole
2000
Fara
522467
1243661
Laro
Borehole
1994
Fara
521133
1243660
Laro
Borehole
1994
Fara
518128
1248511
Laro
Borehole
1990
Fara
517492
1248449
Laro
Borehole
2011
Fara
517401
1247297
Laro
Borehole
1969
Fara
517765
1248265
Laro
Dug-well
2001
Poura
522185
1282666
Mouhoun 3
Dug-well
PO-26
Poura
522176
1282255
Mouhoun 3
Dug-well
1988
PO-27
Poura
522198
1282462
Mouhoun 3
Borehole
2007
PO-8
Poura
522219
1282676
Mouhoun 3
Borehole
2010
PO-9
Poura
521279
1283455
Mouhoun 3
Borehole
2011
Fara
530481
1265383
Nabou-Nouni
Borehole
2010
Fara
521046
1255239
Nabou-Nouni
Borehole
2010
Fara
530621
1264618
Nabou-Nouni
Borehole
2008
Fara
530545
1265045
Nabou-Nouni
Borehole
1994
Fara
530542
1265045
Nabou-Nouni
Borehole
2002
Fara
530421
1264891
Nabou-Nouni
Borehole
1995
Fara
530421
1264708
Nabou-Nouni
Borehole
2000
Fara
530875
1265137
Nabou-Nouni
Borehole
1995
Fara
531602
1265354
Nabou-Peulh
Borehole
2005
Fara
528585
1274245
Nanano
Borehole
2011
Fara
529508
1275447
Nanano
Dug-well
2009
Fara
528820
1276279
Nanano
Borehole
2004
Fara
533270
1275476
Nanano
Borehole
1995
Fara
534116
1274140
Nanano
Borehole
2005
Fara
530319
1276102
Nanano
Borehole
2003
Fara
529230
1274873
Nanano
Borehole
1995
Fara
533288
1275461
Nanano
Borehole
1995
Fara
529956
1275242
Nanano
Borehole
1996
Fara
534189
1274537
Nanano
Borehole
2004
Fara
519706
1252004
Naouya
Borehole
2007
Fara
530466
1264935
Naouya
Borehole
2005
==PAGE:122==
112
C Database
Table C.1: (Continued)
Commune
X
Y
Village
Type
Year
Sample ID
Fara
520163
1252079
Naouya
Borehole
2010
Fara
519448
1251617
Naouya
Borehole
2005
Fara
520097
1251830
Naouya
Borehole
2000
Fara
519824
1251890
Naouya
Dug-well
2001
Fara
519915
1252290
Naouya
Borehole
1994
Fara
520612
1252107
Naouya
Dug-well
1974
Fara
520063
1252744
Naouya
Borehole
2005
Fara
546242
1261778
Nasma
Borehole
1995
Fara
546248
1261769
Nasma
Borehole
1995
Fara
542065
1257840
Nassene
Borehole
2003
Fara
543425
1260484
Nassene
Borehole
1995
Fara
538036
1256330
Pia
Borehole
2003
Poura
527580
1291120
Pig-Pore
Borehole
1991
A-79
Poura
527852
1291335
Pig-Pore
Borehole
1984
Fara
520391
1265713
Pomain
Borehole
1998
Fara
522888
1265109
Pomain
Borehole
2007
Fara
523316
1264698
Pomain
Borehole
2007
Fara
522573
1264332
Pomain
Borehole
1995
Fara
522937
1264670
Pomain
Dug-well
2004
Fara
523058
1264240
Pomain
Dug-well
2003
Fara
520333
1262395
Pomain
Borehole
1997
Fara
520149
1265068
Pomain
Dug-well
2003
Fara
523119
1264332
Pomain
Dug-well
2003
Poura
526165
1280774
Poura
Borehole
2012
A-82
Poura
526642
1279751
Poura
Borehole
2010
PO-16
Poura
526735
1280311
Poura
Borehole
2006
PO-17
Poura
526635
1280549
Poura
Dug-well
PO-18
Poura
527069
1280634
Poura
Borehole
2008
PO-19
Poura
526360
1281090
Poura
Dug-well
PO-20
Poura
526192
1281731
Poura
Borehole
2011
PO-21
Poura
525882
1281423
Poura
Dug-well
PO-22
Poura
525882
1281392
Poura
Dug-well
PO-23
Poura
525954
1281368
Poura
Dug-well
PO-24
Poura
527538
1281887
Poura
Borehole
2013
PO-28
Poura
523779
1280864
Poura
Borehole
2007
PO-35
Poura
526738
1280481
Poura mine
Dug-well
==PAGE:123==
C Database
113
Table C.1: (Continued)
Commune
X
Y
Village
Type
Year
Sample ID
Poura
526178
1283412
Poura village
Borehole
1984
PO-1
Poura
526375
1283354
Poura village
Borehole
2013
PO-2
Poura
526829
1283748
Poura village
Borehole
2000
PO-3
Poura
526432
1283944
Poura village
Borehole
2010
PO-5
Poura
526951
1283957
Poura village
Borehole
2001
PO-6
Poura
527860
1283478
Poura village
Borehole
2010
PO-7
Poura
526829
1283871
Poura village
Dug-well
1995
Fara
521652
1255259
Sadon-Bobo
Borehole
2011
Fara
521670
1255559
Sadon-Bobo
Borehole
2011
Fara
521040
1255243
Sadon-Bobo
Borehole
2012
Fara
521428
1255884
Sadon-Bobo
Borehole
2000
Fara
520549
1256037
Sadon-Bobo
Borehole
1994
Fara
521761
1255670
Sadon-Bobo
Dug-well
2002
Fara
521670
1256100
Sadon-Bobo
Dug-well
1969
Fara
527475
1252017
Sadon-Bobo
Borehole
2010
Fara
529507
1269713
Tialla
Borehole
1995
Fara
530480
1269523
Tialla
Borehole
2008
Fara
529822
1269618
Tialla
Borehole
2010
Fara
529265
1269130
Tialla
Dug-well
Poura
527278
1289737
Toecin
Borehole
1984
PO-33
Poura
527487
1289750
Toecin
Borehole
2008
PO-34
Fara
533072
1278870
Ton
Borehole
1995
Fara
527329
1262499
Ton
Borehole
2007
Fara
533816
1277341
Ton
Borehole
2008
Fara
533710
1277120
Ton
Dug-well
1980
Fara
533232
1271406
Ton
Dug-well
1978
Fara
533436
1278901
Ton
Borehole
1984
Fara
533284
1279146
Ton
Borehole
1994
Fara
533226
1276781
Ton
Borehole
1994
Fara
532547
1277269
Ton
Borehole
2008
Fara
523609
1257268
Tone
Borehole
2004
Fara
525535
1258996
Tone
Borehole
2010
Fara
523650
1258650
Tone
Borehole
2002
Fara
524434
1256609
Tone
Borehole
2007
Fara
524576
1257389
Tone
Borehole
2002
Fara
524548
1258006
Tone
Dug-well
1969
==PAGE:124==
114
C Database
Table C.1: (Continued)
Commune
X
Y
Village
Type
Year
Sample ID
Fara
524215
1257821
Tone
Borehole
1984
Fara
523700
1257391
Tone
Borehole
2009
Fara
523912
1257085
Tone
Borehole
1997
Fara
524033
1257422
Tone
Dug-well
1984
Fara
524154
1257545
Tone
Borehole
2000
==PAGE:125==
C Database
115
Table C.2: IDs, locations, types and installation dates of the wells used in the present study. Z is the DEM elevation
(continued on next page).
Borehole
Location
Type
Pump
Installation date
X
Y
Z
PO-1
Poura Village
Borehole
India
1984
526178
1283412
271
PO-3
Poura Village
Borehole
Volonta
2000
526829
1283748
270
PO-6
Poura Village
Borehole
Vergnet
2001
526951
1283957
266
PO-7
Kankele
Borehole
India
2010
527860
1283478
261
PO-8
Mouhoun 3
Borehole
Volonta
2007
522198
1282462
250
PO-9
Mouhoun 3
Borehole
Volonta
2009
522219
1282676
250
PO-10
Basnere
Borehole
Volonta
2008
522741
1283065
260
PO-11
Basnere
Borehole
Volonta
2011
522956
1283566
257
PO-13
Diansi
Borehole
India
2011
526435
1278464
278
PO-14
Diansi
Dug Well
2000
526480
1278492
278
PO-15
Diansi
Borehole
India
1994
526433
1277911
270
PO-16
Poura Mine
Borehole
Volonta
2009
526642
1279751
282
PO-17
Poura Mine
Borehole
Volonta
2006
526735
1280311
277
PO-18
Poura Mine
Dug Well
526635
1280549
275
PO-19
Poura Mine
Borehole
Volonta
2008
527069
1280634
277
PO-20
Poura Mine
Dug Well
526360
1281090
272
PO-21
Poura Mine Ecole
Borehole
India
2011
526192
1281731
278
PO-22
Poura Mine
Dug Well
525882
1281423
269
PO-23
Poura Mine
Dug Well
525882
1281392
269
PO-24
Poura Mine
Dug Well
525954
1281368
268
PO-25
Basnere
Dug Well
1987
522706
1283400
255
PO-26
Mouhoun 3
Dug Well
522185
1282666
250
==PAGE:126==
116
C Database
Table C.2: (Continued)
Borehole
Location
Type
Pump
Installation date
X
Y
Z
PO-27
Mouhoun 3
Dug Well
1988
522176
1282255
251
PO-28
Poura Abattoir
Borehole
India
2013
527538
1281887
277
PO-29
Kankele
Borehole
Volonta
1980
529207
1283150
270
PO-30
Kankele
Borehole
Volonta
1992
528529
1283059
265
PO-31
Kankele
Borehole
India
2011
528907
1283444
267
PO-32
Kankele
Borehole
Volonta
2009
529559
1283259
272
PO-33
Toecin
Borehole
Volonta
1984
527273
1289757
249
PO-34
Toecin
Borehole
Volonta
2008
527486
1289751
249
PO-35
Signore
Borehole
Volonta
2007
523776
1280865
267
PO-36
Bologo
Borehole
Vergnet
2000
521610
1280403
249
PO-37
Darsalam
Borehole
India
1993
527225
1285267
252
A-82
Poura Mine Maternelle
Borehole
India
2012
526171
1280777
276
PO-38
Poura Mine
Dug Well
526738
1280481
275
A-80
Darsalam
Borehole
Volonta
1985
526631
1286232
249
PO-39
Fara Sigivoss
Borehole
India
2010
525537
1276304
268
PO-40
Ton
Borehole
India
1994
533294
1279142
274
==PAGE:127==
C Database
117
Table C.3: IDs, depths, water levels (W.L) and converted piezometric levels from measured W.L. of the wells used
in the present study. The date indicates the time of W.L. measurements found in the literature (continued on next
page).
Borehole
Total depth [m]
Measured W.L. [m]
Litterature W.L [m]
Piezometric level [m]
PO-1
73.27
15.88
16.1
Nov-12
256
PO-3
56.31
21.47
Jan-14
PO-6
68.2
14.65
251
PO-7
50.89
9.24
4.83
Nov-10
252
PO-8
74.67
8.91
241
PO-9
69.7
9.98
240
PO-10
80.5
12.64
12.27
May-08
247
PO-11
53.95
9.30
248
PO-13
52.17
10.37
9.93
Dec-11
268
PO-14
13.3
9.54
268
PO-15
49
11.77
259
PO-16
72.67
12.07
270
PO-17
72.9
9.20
268
PO-18
7.7
6.20
269
PO-19
58.39
7.24
4.74
May-08
270
PO-20
7
6.67
265
PO-21
43
8.50
269
PO-22
6.7
5.95
263
PO-23
10.5
9.26
259
PO-24
6.6
6.18
262
PO-25
24.78
8.32
246
==PAGE:128==
118
C Database
Table C.3: (Continued)
Borehole
Total depth [m]
Measured W.L. [m]
Litterature W.L [m]
Piezometric level [m]
PO-26
10.14
8.29
241
PO-27
24.6
15.77
236
PO-28
12.15
265
PO-29
53.35
12.56
258
PO-30
45.46
7.84
257
PO-31
76.74
15.39
4.1
Dec-11
252
PO-32
41.65
15.03
257
PO-33
36.31
10.40
238
PO-34
45.34
11.28
13.23
May-08
238
PO-35
89.18
9.24
12.5
May-06
258
PO-36
55.64
8.82
240
PO-37
45.36
12.74
239
A-82
8.94
267
PO-38
8.41
7.91
267
A-80
43.37
8.47
11.69
May-08
240
PO-39
12.99
255
PO-40
49.05
12.74
261
Max
-
15.88
21.47
-
270
Min
-
5.95
4.1
-
236
Average
-
10.36
11.09
-
255
Median
-
9.30
11.98
-
257
==PAGE:129==
C Database
119
Table C.4: IDs, technical data and simpliﬁed lithologs of the wells used in the present study. The ﬁssured layer thickness was
calculated using the alterite thickness and the total depth of the borehole (continued on next page).
Borehole
Screen
top/interval [m]
Alterite
thickness
[m]
Fissured layer
thickness
[m]
Yield
[m3/h]
Pump
depth
[m]
Note
PO-1
[55 ; 72]
50
23.27
14
35
PO-3
31
25.31
13
30
PO-6
20.46
47.74
6.2
Quartz vein
PO-7
[34.4 ; 48.90]
PO-8
[45.1 ; 50.9] [56.7 ; 65.5] [69.3 ; 72.2]
40.3
34.37
PO-9
PO-10
53.66
48.28
32.22
30
PO-11
PO-13
12
24
PO-14
PO-15
[25.40 ; 43.16]
18
31
1.61
PO-16
PO-17
[50.28 ; 53.19] [56.1 ; 61.92] [64.83 ; 70.65]
30.06
42.84
PO-18
PO-19
44.64
35.24
23.15
30
PO-20
PO-21
[26.4 ; 41]
22
21
2.8
PO-22
PO-23
PO-24
PO-25
==PAGE:130==
120
C Database
Table C.4: (Continued)
Borehole
Screen
top/interval [m]
Alterite
thickness
[m]
Fissured layer
thickness
[m]
Yield
[m3/h]
Pump
depth
[m]
Note
PO-26
PO-27
PO-28
PO-29
[41 ; 53]
14
39.35
6
PO-30
PO-31
PO-32
PO-33
22.00
7.00
29.31
0.64
PO-34
22.21
14.75
30.59
21
PO-35
[68.58 ; 71.49] [74.40 ; 80.22] [83.13 ; 88.95]
40.60
48.58
3.6
PO-36
23.00
32.64
13.5
15
PO-37
A-82
PO-38
A-80
[31.00 ; 43.00]
6.00
37.37
12
20
PO-39
PO-40
[31.19 ; 43.13]
26.00
23.05
9.8
Max
-
50.00
48.58
14.00
35
Min
-
6.00
21.00
0.64
15
Average
-
26.67
32.61
7.93
26
Median
-
24.50
31.61
8.00
27
==PAGE:131==
C Database
121
Table C.5: Thickness of horizons found from various lithologs and relative lithology (Wateraids, 2015, personal communication) (Continued
on next page).
Lithology
Depth
Fresh
Weathered
Saprolite
Alloterite
Isalterite
Isalterite
Fissured
[m]
bedrocks [m]
overburden [m]
[m]
[m]
[m]
content [%]
layer [m]
Green rock
54.53
3.53
3
15
-
-
-
33
Schiste
72.45
12.45
8
12
-
-
-
40
Schiste
60.65
10.65
3
17
4
13
0.76
30
Granite
43
4
14
6
-
6
-
19
Granite
57.8
21.8
10
14
3
11
0.79
12
Sandstone
45.55
4.55
3
17
17
-
-
21
Granite
60.54
6.54
4
19
7
12
0.63
31
Green rock
50
2
8
24
3
21
0.88
16
Granite
57.43
3.43
2
9
9
-
-
43
Green rock
45.66
6.66
3
16
5
11
0.69
20
Green rock
57.62
6.62
5
15
2
13
0.87
31
Green rock
75.75
10.75
2
6.8
4
2.8
0.41
56.2
Granite
90.75
15.75
2
5.55
5.55
-
-
67.45
Sandstone
66.75
17.75
3
14.85
10
4.85
0.33
31.15
Green rock
54.75
12.75
3
26.85
15
11.85
0.44
12.15
Green rock
66.66
8.66
12
28
22
6
0.21
30
Granite
63.65
3.65
5
18
9
9
0.50
37
Green rock
66.44
7.44
18
22
22
-
-
19
Granite
60.75
12.75
3
23.85
21
2.85
0.12
21.15
Schiste
72.75
3.75
5
45.85
40
5.85
0.13
18.15
Granite
63.75
6.75
7
40.85
7
33.85
0.83
9.15
==PAGE:132==
122
C Database
Table C.5: (Continued)
Lithology
Depth
Fresh
Weathered
Saprolite
Alloterite
Isalterite
Isalterite
Fissured
[m]
bedrocks [m]
overburden [m]
[m]
[m]
[m]
content [%]
layer [m]
Granite
57.75
0
3
5.85
9
-
-
39.9
Granite
60.75
12.75
3
35.85
30
5.85
0.16
9.15
Granite
73.75
10.75
4
13.85
8
5.85
0.42
45.15
Granite
63.75
10.75
7
25.85
17
8.85
0.34
20.15
Green rock
60.75
9.75
3
26.85
17
9.85
0.37
21.15
Granite
60.75
5.75
14
27.35
24
3.35
0.12
13.65
Schiste
60.75
4
3
29.85
18
11.85
0.40
23.9
Granite
60.75
28.75
6
14
6.6
7.4
0.53
12
Mean
6
22
13
10
0.47
27
Max
18
46
40
34
0.88
67
Min
2
7
2
3
0.12
9
Median
4
23
9
9
0.42
21
==PAGE:133==
APPENDIX D
Appendix D: Hydrology and
hydrogeology
(a) Borehole.
(b) Shallow dug well.
Figure D.1: Wells found in the district of Poura.
==PAGE:134==
124
D Appendix D: Hydrology and hydrogeology
Figure D.2: Deﬁnition of the watershed boundary proposed by Kagambega et al.
(2014b).
(a) Basin 1
(b) Basin 2
(c) Basin 3
(d) Mouhoun river
Figure D.3: Surface water entities (i.e. abandoned quarries and river) found in
the vicinity of Poura.
==PAGE:135==
APPENDIX E
Hydrogeological model
This Appendix presents results obtained from the hydrogeological model. Table
E.1 displays the hydraulic conductivity values of the saprolite and the anisotropy
values of the ﬁssured layer resulting from the converging calibrations. Table E.2
shows the observed and computed heads as well as the errors calculated from
their diﬀerences.
Table E.1: Obtained hydraulic conductivities of the saprolite and anisotropies of
the ﬁssured layer for converging calibrations.
Solution
K saprolite [m3/s]
Anisotropy ﬁssured layer
0
1.78E-08
0.69
1
7.73E-08
0.1
2
2.04E-06
10
3
2.04E-07
0.43
5
3.78E-07
1.07
7
2.05E-07
0.43
8
9.03E-08
0.89
9
4.83E-07
0.36
10
1.19E-07
1.14
Geo. mean and median
2.44897E-07
0.66
==PAGE:136==
126
E Hydrogeological model
Table E.2: Observed and computed heads generated by the converging models calibrated using pilot points ; The right column shows the
MAE and RMSE calculated between speciﬁc observed and computed heads ; The bottom line shows RMSE calculated between observed
and computed heads for each simulation.
Solutions and computed heads
Individual
Observed
0
1
2
3
5
7
8
9
10
RMSE
MAE
PO-1
256
256.04
254.11
254.63
252.58
255.71
253.87
255.66
255.59
255.76
1.57
1.12
PO-6
251
251.25
252.16
252.00
252.53
251.18
252.20
251.24
251.42
251.75
0.88
0.75
PO-7
252
251.98
253.17
252.51
252.78
252.33
252.76
252.27
252.40
251.69
0.60
0.51
PO-8
241
241.12
241.99
242.41
241.33
241.90
242.44
241.45
241.72
241.19
0.87
0.73
PO-11
248
247.74
247.14
246.78
247.05
247.18
246.79
247.11
247.50
245.41
1.21
1.04
PO-21
269
267.23
266.95
267.03
267.07
267.69
266.67
266.96
267.17
268.12
1.84
1.79
PO-28
265
265.92
266.44
266.01
264.75
265.17
266.68
266.98
265.80
264.98
1.13
0.92
PO-29
258
258.16
256.21
257.91
257.82
257.27
257.60
256.71
256.81
256.48
1.02
0.81
PO-30
257
257.10
256.06
257.45
256.81
257.07
256.72
257.20
256.09
256.91
0.48
0.36
PO-31
252
251.91
254.39
253.11
253.29
252.11
252.45
252.65
252.46
251.83
1.03
0.75
PO-32
257
257.08
256.42
255.55
257.26
257.61
256.97
257.57
257.76
257.35
0.66
0.52
PO-35
258
257.92
258.29
257.93
257.96
258.02
257.97
257.89
258.12
257.82
0.13
0.10
PO-36
240
240.00
241.10
239.60
239.98
240.03
239.64
239.93
239.81
240.00
0.41
0.24
A-82
267
267.97
268.34
267.86
268.26
268.09
267.71
267.48
268.18
267.20
0.97
0.90
PO-10
247
247.15
246.96
247.29
246.81
246.97
246.71
247.11
246.66
245.43
0.56
0.34
RMSE
-
0.59
1.36
1.03
1.23
0.61
1.14
0.90
0.81
0.94
-
-
simulation
==PAGE:137==
E Hydrogeological model
127
Figure E.1: Simulated transport of arsenic from the quartz veins expected to lead
to the contamination of PO-1 using the average model solution.
==PAGE:138==
128
==PAGE:139==
APPENDIX F
DEM
Figure F.1 illustrates the diﬀerences of the raw and ﬁltered DEMs through the
display of the contour maps.
(a) Raw SRTM
(b) Treated
Figure F.1: Contour maps of the DEMs.
==PAGE:140==
130
==PAGE:141==
APPENDIX G
Chemical measurements
This Appendix contains results of the chemicals measurements performed at bore-
holes, dug wells and basins. Tables G.1, G.2, G.3, G.4 display the average chem-
istry of the ground and surface waters. The speciation calculations performed
for a relevant groundwater composition and the batch experiment are presented
below.
==PAGE:142==
132
G Chemical measurements
PO-01
PO-02
PO-03
PO-05
PO-06
PO-07
PO-08
PO-09
PO-10
PO-11
Type
-
Bore
Bore
Bore
Bore
Bore
Bore
Bore
Bore
Bore
Bore
X
[m]
526178
526375
526829
526432
526951
527860
522198
522219
522741
522956
Y
[m]
1283412
1283354
1283748
1283944
1283957
1283478
1282462
1282676
1283065
1283566
Piezo
[m]
256
-
-
-
251
252
241
240
247
248
Depth
[m]
73
-
56
-
68
51
75
70
81
54
pH
NaN
7.13
6.25
7.08
6.26
7.1
7.24
6.39
6.88
6.94
6.48
O2
[mg/L]
0.51
-
-
-
1.69
-
-
-
-
-
EC
[uS/cm]
493
195
386
318
399
506
242
417
378
305
Eh
[mV]
250
-
-
-
285
-
-
-
-
-
T
[C]
31.2
32
31.7
31.5
31.7
31.7
32.3
32.4
31.3
32.2
TDS
[mg/L]
320.45
126.75
250.9
206.7
259.35
328.9
157.3
271.05
245.7
198.25
TIC
[mg C/L]
69.93
30.04
50.82
51.95
51.56
66.11
38.19
59.33
52.44
44.73
HCO3
[mg/L]
355.2
152.6
258.2
263.9
261.9
335.8
194
301.4
266.4
227.2
Na
[mg/L]
19.33
6.78
20.13
11.53
22.62
33.75
14.37
28.57
27.02
24.58
Mg
[mg/L]
25.65
9.78
13.36
20.38
11.96
21.07
13.94
21.51
16.39
11.52
Ca
[mg/L]
44.81
15.36
39.45
25.62
38.80
43.54
15.7
30.44
28.09
23.24
K
[mg/L]
0.34
0.18
0.29
0.78
0.23
0.36
0.55
0.64
0.65
0.44
Cl
[mg/L]
0.43
0.59
0.84
0.43
1.8
4.75
0.1
<0.1
0.13
0.14
SO4
[mg/L]
6.5
<0.1
0.4
11.1
1
3.5
<0.1
0.3
0.3
<0.1
NO3
[mg/L]
0.9
3.8
8.4
0.2
14.4
0.7
0.1
<0.1
0.7
3.9
Si
[mg/L]
13.5
16.2
21
7.6
20.2
21
15.9
18.2
17.4
12.7
DOC
[mg/L]
1.23
<0.5
<0.5
<0.5
1.63
<0.5
<0.5
<0.5
<0.5
<0.5
Al
[µg/L]
2.53
0.85
1.06
1.95
2.05
0.84
1.44
3.5
1.68
2.36
As(III)
[µg/L]
15.3
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
0.4
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
As(V)
[µg/L]
302.2
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
28.3
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
AsT
[µg/L]
317.5
2.4
9.5
<0.02
28.7
4.8
1.4
3.1
4.2
1.2
B
[µg/L]
12.32
6.01
7.37
8.02
9.01
30.7
7.47
15.14
10.31
6.79
Table G.1: Chemical analysis of the samples ; Part 1 (continued on next page).
==PAGE:143==
G Chemical measurements
133
PO-01
PO-02
PO-03
PO-05
PO-06
PO-07
PO-08
PO-09
PO-10
PO-11
Ba
[µg/L]
4.65
0.43
0.15
3.07
<0.1
0.36
1.57
2.06
0.51
1.91
Br
[mg/L]
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
Cd
[µg/L]
0.018
0.015
<0.01
0.063
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
0.753
Ce
[µg/L]
0.019
<0.01
<0.01
0.033
<0.01
<0.01
0.013
0.076
0.015
0.024
Co
[µg/L]
1.318
0.089
<0.02
0.246
<0.02
<0.02
0.102
0.156
<0.02
<0.02
Cr
[µg/L]
0.036
0.043
0.057
0.154
0.046
0.032
0.062
0.064
0.065
0.113
Cu
[µg/L]
0.77
0.99
0.38
0.76
0.25
1.25
0.43
0.34
0.18
0.43
F
[mg/L]
0.088
<0.1
<0.1
0.219
0.026
0.104
0.114
0.190
0.213
0.253
Fe
[µg/L]
14.8
2953
12.4
8.5
10.4
140.7
26.9
3.7
2.5
3.6
La
[µg/L]
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
0.028
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
0.05
0.017
0.031
Li
[µg/L]
13.57
19.24
9.34
25.27
7.91
11.71
38.50
44.93
39.06
30.29
Mn
[µg/L]
147.4
30.14
0.29
31.7
0.24
2.7
12.37
67.35
3.54
1.31
Mo
[µg/L]
5.96
0.17
0.15
<0.02
0.68
0.86
0.41
1.49
1.74
0.78
Ni
[µg/L]
1.8
0.87
0.1
1.98
<0.02
0.18
0.46
0.55
0.2
0.28
Pb
[µg/L]
0.128
0.028
<0.02
0.21
<0.02
0.097
0.057
0.045
0.031
0.063
PO4
[mg/L]
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
0.154
Sb
[µg/L]
0.94
0.04
0.117
<0.02
0.309
0.099
<0.02
<0.02
0.026
<0.02
Se
[µg/L]
0.089
<0.02
0.190
0.057
0.580
0.191
<0.02
0.086
0.986
0.032
Sn
[µg/L]
0.41
0.19
0.191
0.195
0.439
0.191
0.19
0.189
0.189
0.191
Sr
[µg/L]
118
58.6
145.6
54.9
143.7
209.2
130
159.8
187.7
221.4
Tl
[µg/L]
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
U
[µg/L]
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
0.036
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
V
[µg/L]
0.31
1.35
9.38
0.47
10.06
3.97
0.3
0.14
0.65
1.11
W
[µg/L]
<0.02
<0.02
3.76
<0.02
<0.02
0.10
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
Zn
[µg/L]
20.35
34.17
2.55
51.13
12.63
51.12
3.6
4.43
2.05
3.7
Table G.1: (Continued)
==PAGE:144==
134
G Chemical measurements
PO-12
PO-13
PO-15
PO-16
PO-17
PO-19
PO-21
PO-28
PO-29
PO-30
Type
-
Bore
Bore
Bore
Bore
Bore
Bore
Bore
Bore
Bore
Bore
X
[m]
524454
526435
526433
526642
526735
527069
526192
527538
529207
528529
Y
[m]
1281313
1278464
1277911
1279751
1280311
1280634
1281731
1281887
1283150
1283059
Piezo
[m]
-
268
259
270
268
270
269
265
258
257
Depth
[m]
-
52
49
73
73
58
43
-
53
45
pH
NaN
6.35
6.75
6.92
7.05
7.13
6.72
6.87
7.01
6.99
7.03
O2
[mg/L]
-
6.26
0.84
0.53
0.4
0.67
0.83
0.82
1.24
1.55
EC
[uS/cm]
281
381
599
470
501
376
339
331
590
473
Eh
[mV]
-
234
69
215
208
217
88
291
294
288
T
[C]
31.1
32.8
32.9
30.6
30.3
31.4
31.7
31
31.3
31
TDS
[mg/L]
182.65
247.65
389.35
305.5
325.65
244.4
220.35
215.15
383.5
307.45
TIC
[mg C/L]
46.93
54.11
84.66
67.36
70.75
56.58
48.7
74.8
84.96
58.72
HCO3
[mg/L]
238.4
274.9
430.1
342.2
359.4
287.4
247.4
380.0
431.6
298.3
Na
[mg/L]
8.16
17.67
30.13
24.44
44.48
8.78
28.32
33.44
14.54
10.89
Mg
[mg/L]
15.93
16.64
19.72
12.67
17.93
22.04
14.37
20.07
41.54
35.87
Ca
[mg/L]
24.85
34.44
61.7
54.08
45.38
39.97
25.15
55.32
48.68
33.53
K
[mg/L]
0.38
1.38
0.42
0.49
0.77
0.23
0.26
0.27
0.22
0.31
Cl
[mg/L]
0.11
3.15
1.71
0.31
0.19
0.18
0.35
0.88
0.81
4.61
SO4
[mg/L]
<0.1
1
4.7
1.5
3.7
1
1
8
1.2
1.1
NO3
[mg/L]
<0.1
5.8
9.6
0.3
<0.1
0.2
0.8
0.8
5.8
32.8
Si
[mg/L]
15
27.1
25
19.7
17.9
9.4
28.3
16.5
24.3
24.5
DOC
[mg/L]
<0.5
2.84
1.2
1.4
1.31
0.92
1.34
1
2.07
1.9
Al
[µg/L]
1.31
1.11
<0.1
<0.1
9.06
14.58
16.30
4.39
6.19
8.74
As(III)
[µg/L]
<0.02
0.04
0.1
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
0.3
0.2
<0.02
0.6
As(V)
[µg/L]
<0.02
1.6
1.3
1
2.9
0.1
5.3
10.3
1.4
52.4
AsT
[µg/L]
0.2
1.7
1.4
1
2.9
0.1
5.6
10.6
1.4
52.9
B
[µg/L]
12.3
33.17
31.45
17.42
18.91
25.86
14.06
19.64
29.26
27.87
Table G.2: Chemical analysis of the samples ; Part 2 (continued on next page).
==PAGE:145==
G Chemical measurements
135
PO-12
PO-13
PO-15
PO-16
PO-17
PO-19
PO-21
PO-28
PO-29
PO-30
Ba
[µg/L]
18.78
1.07
245.9
245.9
0.77
1.11
0.5
1.21
0.54
0.55
Br
[mg/L]
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
Cd
[µg/L]
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
Ce
[µg/L]
0.069
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
0.030
0.025
0.014
0.013
0.010
0.011
Co
[µg/L]
0.411
0.037
0.021
<0.02
0.04
0.05
0.022
0.035
<0.02
<0.02
Cr
[µg/L]
0.115
0.082
<0.02
<0.02
0.072
0.372
0.073
0.059
0.836
0.752
Cu
[µg/L]
<0.1
0.97
0.1
0.15
0.36
0.27
0.22
0.11
0.64
0.26
F
[mg/L]
0.154
0.137
0.168
0.082
0.204
0.039
0.041
0.041
<0.1
<0.1
Fe
[µg/L]
137
<0.3
<0.3
<0.3
10.2
15.9
747.6
4.4
14.5
31.7
La
[µg/L]
0.039
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
0.016
0.011
<0.01
0.013
<0.01
<0.01
Li
[µg/L]
12.69
7.21
10.2
14.67
8.29
5.91
7.9
18.42
3.67
3.39
Mn
[µg/L]
51.45
1.5
5.84
24.06
6.61
4.69
13.19
3.18
0.32
0.29
Mo
[µg/L]
0.12
0.37
0.68
0.68
2.39
0.31
1.01
2.16
0.80
0.44
Ni
[µg/L]
1.29
1.19
<0.02
<0.02
0.1
0.3
0.2
0.11
0.05
0.02
Pb
[µg/L]
0.024
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
0.123
0.027
<0.02
PO4
[mg/L]
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
Sb
[µg/L]
<0.02
0.52
0.386
0.386
0.106
0.079
0.199
0.107
0.087
0.186
Se
[µg/L]
<0.02
0.153
0.08
0.08
0.141
0.026
0.161
0.18
0.062
0.153
Sn
[µg/L]
0.198
0.217
0.192
0.192
0.425
0.423
0.421
0.418
0.426
0.444
Sr
[µg/L]
144.3
114.3
246.8
246.8
218.8
125.9
120.4
264.5
223.5
126.2
Tl
[µg/L]
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
U
[µg/L]
<0.02
<0.02
0.06
0.06
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
0.024
<0.02
V
[µg/L]
0.14
14.58
3.63
1.57
3.73
0.88
33.78
1.63
5.7
5.37
W
[µg/L]
<0.02
16.89
5.26
5.26
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
Zn
[µg/L]
21.46
0.26
<0.1
<0.1
2.91
3.1
15.96
38.73
5.59
1.05
Table G.2: (Continued)
==PAGE:146==
136
G Chemical measurements
Table G.3: Chemical analysis of the samples ; Part 3 (continued on next page).
PO-31
PO-32
PO-33
PO-34
PO-35
PO-36
PO-37
A-82
A-80
A-83
Type
-
Bore
Bore
Bore
Bore
Bore
Bore
Bore
Bore
Bore
Bore
X
[m]
528907
529559
527273
527486
523776
521610
527225
525812
526631
525812
Y
[m]
1283444
1283259
1289757
1289751
1280865
1280403
1285267
1275969
1286232
1275969
Piezo
[m]
252
257
238
238
258
240
239
255
240
-
Depth
[m]
77
42
36
45
89
56
45
-
43
-
pH
NaN
7.1
6.91
6.82
6.93
6.7
7.21
7.08
6.72
7.12
7.37
O2
[mg/L]
1.2
1.2
1.32
0.74
2.76
1.2
6.2
-
-
-
EC
[uS/cm]
607
466
610
420
366
624
370
348
357
456
Eh
[mV]
291
294
288
281
299
246
260
-
-
-
T
[C]
30.9
31
31
31
31.9
31.3
31.1
31.8
31.2
31.6
TDS
[mg/L]
394.55
302.9
396.5
273
237.9
405.6
240.5
226.2
232.05
296.4
TIC
[mg C/L]
87.87
58.69
80.26
51.24
52.23
87.82
38.54
44
35
53
HCO3
[mg/L]
446.4
298.1
407.7
260.3
265.3
446.1
195.8
223.5
177.8
269.2
Na
[mg/L]
45.19
11.89
18.14
12.14
19.56
68.61
28.52
4.25
14.53
13.19
Mg
[mg/L]
35.34
22.39
35.84
22.08
13.44
30.16
11.38
20.89
14.15
23.96
Ca
[mg/L]
39.77
44.51
52.54
35.94
36.95
30.82
29.88
33.06
34.1
39.87
K
[mg/L]
0.16
0.29
0.31
0.51
0.42
0.37
0.18
0.24
0.19
0.38
Cl
[mg/L]
0.58
3.42
3.95
2.17
0.45
1.17
8.68
0.49
8.97
8.07
SO4
[mg/L]
1.4
1.6
5.7
5.6
1.1
8.5
1
0.2
0.6
0.5
NO3
[mg/L]
3.7
26.4
29.4
19.9
0.7
0.5
32.9
12.1
33.1
23.1
Si
[mg/L]
22.2
25
26.1
25
10.1
17.6
20.3
10.2
21.1
28.9
DOC
[mg/L]
1.53
2.24
2
1.72
2.59
2.52
1.28
<0.5
<0.5
<0.5
Al
[µg/L]
7.37
<0.1
6.53
<0.1
11.63
6.49
4.21
0.79
0.88
1.06
As(III)
[µg/L]
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
0.1
<0.02
0.2
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
As(V)
[µg/L]
3.4
2.4
1.3
2.9
1.0
29.2
4.9
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
AsT
[µg/L]
3.4
2.4
1.3
3
1
29.4
4.9
0.2
6.1
4.4
B
[µg/L]
34.8
23.73
9.36
10.39
19.35
20.18
8.71
8.76
<5
<5
==PAGE:147==
G Chemical measurements
137
Table G.3: (Continued)
PO-31
PO-32
PO-33
PO-34
PO-35
PO-36
PO-37
A-82
A-80
A-83
Ba
[µg/L]
0.73
0.23
0.25
0.86
2.12
0.99
<0.1
0.26
0.82
6.13
Br
[mg/L]
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
Cd
[µg/L]
0.01
<0.01
0.016
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
0.018
0.011
<0.01
Ce
[µg/L]
0.012
<0.01
0.013
<0.01
0.028
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
Co
[µg/L]
0.034
0.03
0.027
0.049
<0.02
0.049
<0.02
0.088
<0.02
<0.02
Cr
[µg/L]
1.185
0.053
0.062
0.024
0.058
0.039
0.052
0.023
<0.02
0.086
Cu
[µg/L]
0.36
0.67
0.43
0.63
0.49
0.6
0.1
3.25
0.14
0.6
F
[mg/L]
0.009
0.049
0.046
0.103
0.21
0.04
0.1
<0.1
0.216
0.181
Fe
[µg/L]
11.2
<0.3
20.0
<0.3
8.7
19.2
7.4
1145
<0.3
223.1
La
[µg/L]
0.014
<0.01
0.012
<0.01
0.048
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
Li
[µg/L]
4.27
7.04
2.71
2.01
14.65
18.71
7.22
11.56
6.13
6.49
Mn
[µg/L]
1.24
0.82
0.61
14.16
0.68
1.32
0.8
13.42
0.09
1.66
Mo
[µg/L]
0.91
0.33
0.4
2.31
0.93
1.64
1.85
0.18
0.18
1.50
Ni
[µg/L]
1.03
0.06
0.19
0.03
0.17
0.07
0.18
0.52
0.04
0.08
Pb
[µg/L]
0.038
<0.02
0.039
<0.02
0.089
<0.02
<0.02
0.036
<0.02
0.126
PO4
[mg/L]
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
Sb
[µg/L]
0.097
0.380
0.084
0.385
0.073
0.911
0.113
0.053
0.063
0.049
Se
[µg/L]
0.244
0.093
0.175
0.378
0.066
0.163
0.248
0.033
0.549
0.109
Sn
[µg/L]
0.414
0.191
0.472
0.195
0.451
0.423
0.417
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
Sr
[µg/L]
185.5
164.4
186.7
85.1
115.6
312.7
112.7
107.1
127.4
200
Tl
[µg/L]
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
U
[µg/L]
0.037
<0.02
0.034
0.021
<0.02
0.038
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
0.037
V
[µg/L]
10.09
15.47
12.11
10.12
1.77
8.96
10.85
0.09
6.86
22.62
W
[µg/L]
<0.02
2.64
<0.02
3.8
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
0.22
0.28
0.67
Zn
[µg/L]
10.55
0.44
21.64
<0.1
1.19
4.16
9.20
740.5
2.01
21.71
==PAGE:148==
138
G Chemical measurements
Table G.4: Chemical analysis of the samples ; Part 4 (continued on next page).
Basin 1
Basin 2
Basin 3
PO-14
PO-18
PO-22
Type
-
Basin
Basin
Basin
Dug well
Dug well
Dug well
X
[m]
-
-
-
526480
526635
525882
Y
[m]
-
-
-
1278492
1280549
1281423
Piezo
[m]
-
-
-
268
269
263
Depth
[m]
-
-
-
13.3
7.7
6.7
pH
NaN
8.49
8.66
9.14
7.28
5.05
5.98
O2
[mg/L]
7
7
9.4
0.81
3.82
3.9
EC
[uS/cm]
454
320
304
485
66
367
Eh
[mV]
214
215
163
255
305
283
T
[C]
33.4
31.5
33
29.4
30.9
30.3
TDS
[mg/L]
295.1
208
197.6
315.25
42.9
238.55
TIC
[mg C/L]
44.17
27.27
41.5
65.79
7.7
16.7
HCO3
[mg/L]
224.4
138.5
210.8
334.2
39.1
84.8
Na
[mg/L]
38.49
28.95
28.87
23.07
4.48
35.93
Mg
[mg/L]
26.02
14.19
19.15
19.46
1.48
7.17
Ca
[mg/L]
23.05
19.9
11.26
44.18
2.66
13.89
K
[mg/L]
2.75
5.05
2.11
1.17
0.97
4.63
Cl
[mg/L]
22.63
22.61
1.96
1.74
4
52.1
SO4
[mg/L]
33.2
14.8
0.7
2.6
<0.1
5.3
NO3
[mg/L]
0.3
0.3
0.2
0.9
17.9
51.3
Si
[mg/L]
9.8
9.4
10
28.8
6.8
7.4
DOC
[mg/L]
4.249
6.316
3.3
2.17
1.92
2.99
Al
[µg/L]
12.9
30.72
59.23
0.74
<0.1
60.1
As(III)
[µg/L]
0.0
0.02
1.75
0.69
<0.02
0.17
As(V)
[µg/L]
0.0
0.020
16.599
6.93
<0.02
0.25
AsT
[µg/L]
274.3
381.7
18.4
7.6
<0.02
0.4
B
[µg/L]
65.58
42.92
22.4
24.24
<5
6.53
==PAGE:149==
G Chemical measurements
139
Table G.4: (Continued)
Basin 1
Basin 2
Basin 3
PO-14
PO-18
PO-22
Ba
[µg/L]
108.6
122.9
47.94
7.58
23.87
147.4
Br
[mg/L]
0.296
0.259
0.21
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
Cd
[µg/L]
<0.01
0.02
0.01
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
Ce
[µg/L]
0.013
0.155
0.162
<0.01
<0.01
0.635
Co
[µg/L]
0.14
0.88
0.23
0.089
2.166
2.002
Cr
[µg/L]
0.075
0.585
0.396
<0.02
0.092
1.085
Cu
[µg/L]
0.50
4.34
1.20
0.39
0.63
2.05
F
[mg/L]
0.292
0.221
0.622
0.169
<0.1
<0.1
Fe
[µg/L]
6.2
39.9
49.1
<0.3
<0.3
86.7
La
[µg/L]
<0.01
0.082
0.077
<0.01
<0.01
0.562
Li
[µg/L]
27.280
6.034
6.1
8.91
2.01
0.58
Mn
[µg/L]
6.49
25.97
6.35
0.04
18.83
46.5
Mo
[µg/L]
5.06
3.73
0.87
0.46
0.13
0.20
Ni
[µg/L]
0.34
3.26
0.6
0.66
2.03
3.09
Pb
[µg/L]
0.020
0.403
0.020
<0.02
<0.02
0.189
PO4
[mg/L]
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
0.401
<0.1
<0.1
Sb
[µg/L]
0.456
0.511
0.547
0.400
0.379
0.112
Se
[µg/L]
0.09
0.05
0.07
0.084
<0.02
0.076
Sn
[µg/L]
0.419
0.829
0.23
0.209
0.19
0.449
Sr
[µg/L]
366.2
364.2
117.2
168.4
14.5
98.2
Tl
[µg/L]
0.02
0.02
0.13
<0.02
<0.02
0.138
U
[µg/L]
0.038
0.024
0.080
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
V
[µg/L]
1.5
1.98
4.21
6.16
0.15
0.77
W
[µg/L]
<0.02
<0.02
0.149
10.55
2.34
<0.02
Zn
[µg/L]
0.35
40.21
2.43
<0.1
3.03
9.07
==PAGE:150==
140
G Chemical measurements
------------------------------------
% Input for speciation calculation PO-01
------------------------------------
SOLUTION 1
temp
31.7
pH
6.87
pe
4
redox
pe
units
ug/kgw
density
1
Alkalinity 247.4 mg/kgw
Ca
25.15 mg/kgw
Cl
0.35 mg/kgw
Fe
0.75 mg/kgw
Mn
13.19
K
0.26 mg/kgw
Mg
14.37 mg/kgw
N(5)
0.84 mg/kgw
Na
28.32 mg/kgw
O(0)
0.81 mg/kgw
S(6)
0.5 mg/kgw
Si
28.27 mg/kgw
water
1 # kg
END
------------------------------------
% Solution for speciation calculation PO-01
------------------------------------
-----------------------------Solution composition------------------------------
Elements
Molality
Moles
Alkalinity
4.943e-03
4.943e-03
Ca
6.275e-04
6.275e-04
Cl
9.872e-06
9.872e-06
Fe
1.343e-05
1.343e-05
K
6.649e-06
6.649e-06
Mg
5.911e-04
5.911e-04
Mn
2.401e-07
2.401e-07
N(5)
5.997e-05
5.997e-05
Na
1.232e-03
1.232e-03
O(0)
5.063e-05
5.063e-05
S(6)
5.205e-06
5.205e-06
Si
4.705e-04
4.705e-04
==PAGE:151==
G Chemical measurements
141
----------------------------Description of solution----------------------------
pH
=
6.870
pe
=
4.000
Specific Conductance (µS/cm, 31°C)
= 449
Density (g/cm³)
=
0.99543
Volume (L)
=
1.00507
Activity of water
=
1.000
Ionic strength
=
5.469e-03
Mass of water (kg)
=
1.000e+00
Total carbon (mol/kg)
=
6.209e-03
Total CO2 (mol/kg)
=
6.209e-03
Temperature (°C)
=
31.70
Electrical balance (eq)
=
-1.324e-03
Percent error, 100*(Cat-|An|)/(Cat+|An|)
= -15.42
Iterations
=
10
Total H
= 1.110193e+02
Total O
= 5.552571e+01
---------------------------------Redox couples---------------------------------
Redox couple
pe
Eh (volts)
O(-2)/O(0)
12.9582
0.7838
----------------------------Distribution of species----------------------------
Log
Log
Log
mole V
Species
Molality
Activity Molality Activity
Gamma
cm³/mol
H+
1.450e-07
1.349e-07
-6.839
-6.870
-0.031
0.00
OH-
1.333e-07
1.230e-07
-6.875
-6.910
-0.035
-3.86
H2O
5.551e+01
9.998e-01
1.744
-0.000
0.000
18.10
C(4)
6.209e-03
HCO3-
4.871e-03
4.507e-03
-2.312
-2.346
-0.034
25.15
CO2
1.273e-03
1.275e-03
-2.895
-2.895
0.001
27.64
CaHCO3+
2.962e-05
2.744e-05
-4.528
-4.562
-0.033
9.93
MgHCO3+
2.458e-05
2.269e-05
-4.609
-4.644
-0.035
5.67
NaHCO3
2.770e-06
2.774e-06
-5.557
-5.557
0.001
1.80
FeHCO3+
2.512e-06
2.319e-06
-5.600
-5.635
-0.035
(0)
CO3-2
2.419e-06
1.773e-06
-5.616
-5.751
-0.135
-4.76
CaCO3
1.508e-06
1.510e-06
-5.822
-5.821
0.001
-14.58
MgCO3
7.785e-07
7.795e-07
-6.109
-6.108
0.001
-17.09
FeCO3
2.186e-07
2.189e-07
-6.660
-6.660
0.001
(0)
NaCO3-
5.652e-08
5.218e-08
-7.248
-7.282
-0.035
-0.47
MnHCO3+
5.390e-08
4.984e-08
-7.268
-7.302
-0.034
(0)
==PAGE:152==
142
G Chemical measurements
MnCO3
1.745e-08
1.747e-08
-7.758
-7.758
0.001
(0)
Ca
6.275e-04
Ca+2
5.961e-04
4.367e-04
-3.225
-3.360
-0.135
-17.96
CaHCO3+
2.962e-05
2.744e-05
-4.528
-4.562
-0.033
9.93
CaCO3
1.508e-06
1.510e-06
-5.822
-5.821
0.001
-14.58
CaSO4
2.696e-07
2.699e-07
-6.569
-6.569
0.001
7.73
CaOH+
5.818e-10
5.371e-10
-9.235
-9.270
-0.035
(0)
CaHSO4+
2.867e-13
2.647e-13
-12.543
-12.577
-0.035
(0)
Cl
9.872e-06
Cl-
9.872e-06
9.108e-06
-5.006
-5.041
-0.035
18.26
FeCl+
7.008e-11
6.470e-11
-10.154
-10.189
-0.035
(0)
MnCl+
4.979e-12
4.604e-12
-11.303
-11.337
-0.034
-1.63
MnCl2
1.828e-17
1.830e-17
-16.738
-16.737
0.001
78.40
FeCl+2
3.259e-18
2.383e-18
-17.487
-17.623
-0.136
(0)
FeCl2+
8.517e-23
7.875e-23
-22.070
-22.104
-0.034
(0)
MnCl3-
4.966e-23
4.592e-23
-22.304
-22.338
-0.034
43.12
FeCl3
7.164e-29
7.173e-29
-28.145
-28.144
0.001
(0)
Fe(2)
9.748e-06
Fe+2
6.992e-06
5.146e-06
-5.155
-5.289
-0.133
-21.63
FeHCO3+
2.512e-06
2.319e-06
-5.600
-5.635
-0.035
(0)
FeCO3
2.186e-07
2.189e-07
-6.660
-6.660
0.001
(0)
FeOH+
2.128e-08
1.968e-08
-7.672
-7.706
-0.034
(0)
FeSO4
3.409e-09
3.413e-09
-8.467
-8.467
0.001
12.57
FeCl+
7.008e-11
6.470e-11
-10.154
-10.189
-0.035
(0)
Fe(OH)2
2.192e-12
2.195e-12
-11.659
-11.659
0.001
(0)
FeHSO4+
3.379e-15
3.120e-15
-14.471
-14.506
-0.035
(0)
Fe(OH)3-
6.972e-16
6.447e-16
-15.157
-15.191
-0.034
(0)
Fe(3)
3.682e-06
Fe(OH)3
1.978e-06
1.980e-06
-5.704
-5.703
0.001
(0)
Fe(OH)2+
1.684e-06
1.559e-06
-5.774
-5.807
-0.034
(0)
Fe(OH)4-
1.882e-08
1.742e-08
-7.725
-7.759
-0.034
(0)
FeOH+2
6.775e-10
4.953e-10
-9.169
-9.305
-0.136
(0)
Fe+3
1.346e-14
7.037e-15
-13.871
-14.153
-0.282
(0)
FeSO4+
3.192e-16
2.952e-16
-15.496
-15.530
-0.034
(0)
Fe2(OH)2+4
1.808e-17
5.036e-18
-16.743
-17.298
-0.555
(0)
FeCl+2
3.259e-18
2.383e-18
-17.487
-17.623
-0.136
(0)
Fe(SO4)2-
2.375e-20
2.192e-20
-19.624
-19.659
-0.035
(0)
Fe3(OH)4+5
6.600e-21
8.959e-22
-20.180
-21.048
-0.867
(0)
FeHSO4+2
1.475e-22
1.072e-22
-21.831
-21.970
-0.139
(0)
FeCl2+
8.517e-23
7.875e-23
-22.070
-22.104
-0.034
(0)
FeCl3
7.164e-29
7.173e-29
-28.145
-28.144
0.001
(0)
H(0)
2.411e-25
H2
1.205e-25
1.207e-25
-24.919
-24.918
0.001
28.60
K
6.649e-06
K+
6.649e-06
6.133e-06
-5.177
-5.212
-0.035
9.24
KSO4-
1.728e-10
1.599e-10
-9.762
-9.796
-0.034
34.28
Mg
5.911e-04
==PAGE:153==
G Chemical measurements
143
Mg+2
5.653e-04
4.157e-04
-3.248
-3.381
-0.134
-21.93
MgHCO3+
2.458e-05
2.269e-05
-4.609
-4.644
-0.035
5.67
MgCO3
7.785e-07
7.795e-07
-6.109
-6.108
0.001
-17.09
MgSO4
3.813e-07
3.817e-07
-6.419
-6.418
0.001
6.07
MgOH+
2.181e-08
2.021e-08
-7.661
-7.694
-0.033
(0)
Mn(2)
2.401e-07
Mn+2
1.686e-07
1.241e-07
-6.773
-6.906
-0.133
-20.13
MnHCO3+
5.390e-08
4.984e-08
-7.268
-7.302
-0.034
(0)
MnCO3
1.745e-08
1.747e-08
-7.758
-7.758
0.001
(0)
MnSO4
8.263e-11
8.273e-11
-10.083
-10.082
0.001
19.84
MnOH+
4.361e-11
4.033e-11
-10.360
-10.394
-0.034
(0)
MnCl+
4.979e-12
4.604e-12
-11.303
-11.337
-0.034
-1.63
Mn(NO3)2
1.484e-15
1.486e-15
-14.828
-14.828
0.001
39.40
MnCl2
1.828e-17
1.830e-17
-16.738
-16.737
0.001
78.40
Mn(OH)3-
8.660e-22
8.007e-22
-21.063
-21.097
-0.034
(0)
MnCl3-
4.966e-23
4.592e-23
-22.304
-22.338
-0.034
43.12
Mn(3)
1.910e-28
Mn+3
1.910e-28
9.984e-29
-27.719
-28.001
-0.282
(0)
N(5)
5.997e-05
NO3-
5.997e-05
5.526e-05
-4.222
-4.258
-0.036
30.11
Mn(NO3)2
1.484e-15
1.486e-15
-14.828
-14.828
0.001
39.40
Na
1.232e-03
Na+
1.229e-03
1.136e-03
-2.910
-2.945
-0.034
-1.10
NaHCO3
2.770e-06
2.774e-06
-5.557
-5.557
0.001
1.80
NaCO3-
5.652e-08
5.218e-08
-7.248
-7.282
-0.035
-0.47
NaSO4-
2.122e-08
1.964e-08
-7.673
-7.707
-0.034
13.84
NaOH
1.395e-20
1.397e-20
-19.855
-19.855
0.001
(0)
O(0)
5.063e-05
O2
2.531e-05
2.534e-05
-4.597
-4.596
0.001
30.89
S(6)
5.205e-06
SO4-2
4.529e-06
3.309e-06
-5.344
-5.480
-0.136
15.39
MgSO4
3.813e-07
3.817e-07
-6.419
-6.418
0.001
6.07
CaSO4
2.696e-07
2.699e-07
-6.569
-6.569
0.001
7.73
NaSO4-
2.122e-08
1.964e-08
-7.673
-7.707
-0.034
13.84
FeSO4
3.409e-09
3.413e-09
-8.467
-8.467
0.001
12.57
KSO4-
1.728e-10
1.599e-10
-9.762
-9.796
-0.034
34.28
MnSO4
8.263e-11
8.273e-11
-10.083
-10.082
0.001
19.84
HSO4-
5.462e-11
5.043e-11
-10.263
-10.297
-0.035
40.71
CaHSO4+
2.867e-13
2.647e-13
-12.543
-12.577
-0.035
(0)
FeHSO4+
3.379e-15
3.120e-15
-14.471
-14.506
-0.035
(0)
FeSO4+
3.192e-16
2.952e-16
-15.496
-15.530
-0.034
(0)
Fe(SO4)2-
2.375e-20
2.192e-20
-19.624
-19.659
-0.035
(0)
FeHSO4+2
1.475e-22
1.072e-22
-21.831
-21.970
-0.139
(0)
Si
4.705e-04
H4SiO4
4.698e-04
4.704e-04
-3.328
-3.328
0.001
51.56
H3SiO4-
6.964e-07
6.428e-07
-6.157
-6.192
-0.035
28.13
H2SiO4-2
6.725e-13
4.929e-13
-12.172
-12.307
-0.135
(0)
==PAGE:154==
144
G Chemical measurements
------------------------------Saturation indices-------------------------------
Phase
SI** log IAP
log K(304 K,
1 atm)
Anhydrite
-4.49
-8.84
-4.35
CaSO4
Aragonite
-0.73
-9.11
-8.38
CaCO3
Calcite
-0.59
-9.11
-8.52
CaCO3
Chalcedony
0.15
-3.33
-3.48
SiO2
Chrysotile
-6.97
24.42
31.39
Mg3Si2O5(OH)4
CO2(g)
-1.36
-2.89
-1.53
CO2
Dolomite
-1.00
-18.24
-17.24
CaMg(CO3)2
Fe(OH)3(a)
1.57
6.46
4.89
Fe(OH)3
Goethite
7.69
6.46
-1.23
FeOOH
Gypsum
-4.25
-8.84
-4.59
CaSO4:2H2O
H2(g)
-21.80
-24.92
-3.12
H2
H2O(g)
-1.34
-0.00
1.33
H2O
Halite
-9.56
-7.99
1.58
NaCl
Hausmannite
-17.17
42.24
59.41
Mn3O4
Hematite
17.42
12.91
-4.50
Fe2O3
Jarosite-K
-7.70
-17.41
-9.71
KFe3(SO4)2(OH)6
Manganite
-7.64
17.70
25.34
MnOOH
Melanterite
-8.64
-10.77
-2.13
FeSO4:7H2O
O2(g)
-1.66
-4.60
-2.94
O2
Pyrochroite
-8.37
6.83
15.20
Mn(OH)2
Pyrolusite
-11.76
28.57
40.33
MnO2:H2O
Quartz
0.56
-3.33
-3.88
SiO2
Rhodochrosite
-1.50
-12.66
-11.15
MnCO3
Sepiolite
-4.85
10.73
15.59
Mg2Si3O7.5OH:3H2O
Sepiolite(d)
-7.93
10.73
18.66
Mg2Si3O7.5OH:3H2O
Siderite
-0.11
-11.04
-10.93
FeCO3
SiO2(a)
-0.67
-3.33
-2.66
SiO2
Sylvite
-11.19
-10.25
0.93
KCl
Talc
-2.89
17.77
20.65
Mg3Si4O10(OH)2
**For a gas, SI = log10(fugacity). Fugacity = pressure * phi / 1 atm.
For ideal gases, phi = 1.
------------------
End of simulation.
------------------
------------------------------------
% Input batch experiment PO-21
------------------------------------
==PAGE:155==
G Chemical measurements
145
SOLUTION 1
temp
31.7
pH
6.87
pe
4
redox
pe
units
ug/kgw
density
1
Alkalinity 247.4 mg/kgw
Ca
25.15 mg/kgw
Cl
0.35 mg/kgw
Fe
0.75 mg/kgw
Mn
13.19
K
0.26 mg/kgw
Mg
14.37 mg/kgw
N(5)
0.84 mg/kgw
Na
28.32 mg/kgw
O(0)
0.83 mg/kgw
S(6)
0.5 mg/kgw
Si
28.27 mg/kgw
water
1 # kg
EQUILIBRIUM_PHASES 1
CO2(g)
-3.5 10
O2(g)
-0.68 100
END
------------------------------------
% Speciation of the solution PO-21
------------------------------------
-----------------------------Solution composition-------
Elements
Molality
Moles
Alkalinity
4.943e-03
4.943e-03
Ca
6.275e-04
6.275e-04
Cl
9.872e-06
9.872e-06
Fe
1.343e-05
1.343e-05
K
6.649e-06
6.649e-06
Mg
5.911e-04
5.911e-04
Mn
2.401e-07
2.401e-07
N(5)
5.997e-05
5.997e-05
Na
1.232e-03
1.232e-03
O(0)
5.187e-05
5.187e-05
S(6)
5.205e-06
5.205e-06
Si
4.705e-04
4.705e-04
==PAGE:156==
146
G Chemical measurements
----------------------------Description of solution-------
pH
=
6.870
pe
=
4.000
Specific Conductance (µS/cm, 31°C)
= 449
Density (g/cm³)
=
0.99543
Volume (L)
=
1.00507
Activity of water
=
1.000
Ionic strength
=
5.469e-03
Mass of water (kg)
=
1.000e+00
Total carbon (mol/kg)
=
6.209e-03
Total CO2 (mol/kg)
=
6.209e-03
Temperature (°C)
=
31.70
Electrical balance (eq)
=
-1.324e-03
Percent error, 100*(Cat-|An|)/(Cat+|An|)
= -15.42
Iterations
=
10
Total H
= 1.110193e+02
Total O
= 5.552571e+01
---------------------------------Redox couples---------------------------------
Redox couple
pe
Eh (volts)
O(-2)/O(0)
12.9608
0.7839
----------------------------Distribution of species----------------------------
Log
Log
Log
mole V
Species
Molality
Activity Molality Activity
Gamma
cm³/mol
H+
1.450e-07
1.349e-07
-6.839
-6.870
-0.031
0.00
OH-
1.333e-07
1.230e-07
-6.875
-6.910
-0.035
-3.86
H2O
5.551e+01
9.998e-01
1.744
-0.000
0.000
18.10
C(4)
6.209e-03
HCO3-
4.871e-03
4.507e-03
-2.312
-2.346
-0.034
25.15
CO2
1.273e-03
1.275e-03
-2.895
-2.895
0.001
27.64
CaHCO3+
2.962e-05
2.744e-05
-4.528
-4.562
-0.033
9.93
MgHCO3+
2.458e-05
2.269e-05
-4.609
-4.644
-0.035
5.67
NaHCO3
2.770e-06
2.774e-06
-5.557
-5.557
0.001
1.80
FeHCO3+
2.512e-06
2.319e-06
-5.600
-5.635
-0.035
(0)
CO3-2
2.419e-06
1.773e-06
-5.616
-5.751
-0.135
-4.76
CaCO3
1.508e-06
1.510e-06
-5.822
-5.821
0.001
-14.58
MgCO3
7.785e-07
7.795e-07
-6.109
-6.108
0.001
-17.09
FeCO3
2.186e-07
2.189e-07
-6.660
-6.660
0.001
(0)
NaCO3-
5.652e-08
5.218e-08
-7.248
-7.282
-0.035
-0.47
MnHCO3+
5.390e-08
4.984e-08
-7.268
-7.302
-0.034
(0)
MnCO3
1.745e-08
1.747e-08
-7.758
-7.758
0.001
(0)
==PAGE:157==
G Chemical measurements
147
Ca
6.275e-04
Ca+2
5.961e-04
4.367e-04
-3.225
-3.360
-0.135
-17.96
CaHCO3+
2.962e-05
2.744e-05
-4.528
-4.562
-0.033
9.93
CaCO3
1.508e-06
1.510e-06
-5.822
-5.821
0.001
-14.58
CaSO4
2.696e-07
2.699e-07
-6.569
-6.569
0.001
7.73
CaOH+
5.818e-10
5.371e-10
-9.235
-9.270
-0.035
(0)
CaHSO4+
2.867e-13
2.647e-13
-12.543
-12.577
-0.035
(0)
Cl
9.872e-06
Cl-
9.872e-06
9.108e-06
-5.006
-5.041
-0.035
18.26
FeCl+
7.008e-11
6.470e-11
-10.154
-10.189
-0.035
(0)
MnCl+
4.979e-12
4.604e-12
-11.303
-11.337
-0.034
-1.63
MnCl2
1.828e-17
1.830e-17
-16.738
-16.737
0.001
78.40
FeCl+2
3.259e-18
2.383e-18
-17.487
-17.623
-0.136
(0)
FeCl2+
8.517e-23
7.875e-23
-22.070
-22.104
-0.034
(0)
MnCl3-
4.966e-23
4.592e-23
-22.304
-22.338
-0.034
43.12
FeCl3
7.164e-29
7.173e-29
-28.145
-28.144
0.001
(0)
Fe(2)
9.748e-06
Fe+2
6.992e-06
5.146e-06
-5.155
-5.289
-0.133
-21.63
FeHCO3+
2.512e-06
2.319e-06
-5.600
-5.635
-0.035
(0)
FeCO3
2.186e-07
2.189e-07
-6.660
-6.660
0.001
(0)
FeOH+
2.128e-08
1.968e-08
-7.672
-7.706
-0.034
(0)
FeSO4
3.409e-09
3.413e-09
-8.467
-8.467
0.001
12.57
FeCl+
7.008e-11
6.470e-11
-10.154
-10.189
-0.035
(0)
Fe(OH)2
2.192e-12
2.195e-12
-11.659
-11.659
0.001
(0)
FeHSO4+
3.379e-15
3.120e-15
-14.471
-14.506
-0.035
(0)
Fe(OH)3-
6.972e-16
6.447e-16
-15.157
-15.191
-0.034
(0)
Fe(3)
3.682e-06
Fe(OH)3
1.978e-06
1.980e-06
-5.704
-5.703
0.001
(0)
Fe(OH)2+
1.684e-06
1.559e-06
-5.774
-5.807
-0.034
(0)
Fe(OH)4-
1.882e-08
1.742e-08
-7.725
-7.759
-0.034
(0)
FeOH+2
6.775e-10
4.953e-10
-9.169
-9.305
-0.136
(0)
Fe+3
1.346e-14
7.037e-15
-13.871
-14.153
-0.282
(0)
FeSO4+
3.192e-16
2.952e-16
-15.496
-15.530
-0.034
(0)
Fe2(OH)2+4
1.808e-17
5.036e-18
-16.743
-17.298
-0.555
(0)
FeCl+2
3.259e-18
2.383e-18
-17.487
-17.623
-0.136
(0)
Fe(SO4)2-
2.375e-20
2.192e-20
-19.624
-19.659
-0.035
(0)
Fe3(OH)4+5
6.600e-21
8.959e-22
-20.180
-21.048
-0.867
(0)
FeHSO4+2
1.475e-22
1.072e-22
-21.831
-21.970
-0.139
(0)
FeCl2+
8.517e-23
7.875e-23
-22.070
-22.104
-0.034
(0)
FeCl3
7.164e-29
7.173e-29
-28.145
-28.144
0.001
(0)
H(0)
2.411e-25
H2
1.205e-25
1.207e-25
-24.919
-24.918
0.001
28.60
K
6.649e-06
K+
6.649e-06
6.133e-06
-5.177
-5.212
-0.035
9.24
KSO4-
1.728e-10
1.599e-10
-9.762
-9.796
-0.034
34.28
Mg
5.911e-04
Mg+2
5.653e-04
4.157e-04
-3.248
-3.381
-0.134
-21.93
==PAGE:158==
148
G Chemical measurements
MgHCO3+
2.458e-05
2.269e-05
-4.609
-4.644
-0.035
5.67
MgCO3
7.785e-07
7.795e-07
-6.109
-6.108
0.001
-17.09
MgSO4
3.813e-07
3.817e-07
-6.419
-6.418
0.001
6.07
MgOH+
2.181e-08
2.021e-08
-7.661
-7.694
-0.033
(0)
Mn(2)
2.401e-07
Mn+2
1.686e-07
1.241e-07
-6.773
-6.906
-0.133
-20.13
MnHCO3+
5.390e-08
4.984e-08
-7.268
-7.302
-0.034
(0)
MnCO3
1.745e-08
1.747e-08
-7.758
-7.758
0.001
(0)
MnSO4
8.263e-11
8.273e-11
-10.083
-10.082
0.001
19.84
MnOH+
4.361e-11
4.033e-11
-10.360
-10.394
-0.034
(0)
MnCl+
4.979e-12
4.604e-12
-11.303
-11.337
-0.034
-1.63
Mn(NO3)2
1.484e-15
1.486e-15
-14.828
-14.828
0.001
39.40
MnCl2
1.828e-17
1.830e-17
-16.738
-16.737
0.001
78.40
Mn(OH)3-
8.660e-22
8.007e-22
-21.063
-21.097
-0.034
(0)
MnCl3-
4.966e-23
4.592e-23
-22.304
-22.338
-0.034
43.12
Mn(3)
1.910e-28
Mn+3
1.910e-28
9.984e-29
-27.719
-28.001
-0.282
(0)
N(5)
5.997e-05
NO3-
5.997e-05
5.526e-05
-4.222
-4.258
-0.036
30.11
Mn(NO3)2
1.484e-15
1.486e-15
-14.828
-14.828
0.001
39.40
Na
1.232e-03
Na+
1.229e-03
1.136e-03
-2.910
-2.945
-0.034
-1.10
NaHCO3
2.770e-06
2.774e-06
-5.557
-5.557
0.001
1.80
NaCO3-
5.652e-08
5.218e-08
-7.248
-7.282
-0.035
-0.47
NaSO4-
2.122e-08
1.964e-08
-7.673
-7.707
-0.034
13.84
NaOH
1.395e-20
1.397e-20
-19.855
-19.855
0.001
(0)
O(0)
5.187e-05
O2
2.594e-05
2.597e-05
-4.586
-4.586
0.001
30.89
S(6)
5.205e-06
SO4-2
4.529e-06
3.309e-06
-5.344
-5.480
-0.136
15.39
MgSO4
3.813e-07
3.817e-07
-6.419
-6.418
0.001
6.07
CaSO4
2.696e-07
2.699e-07
-6.569
-6.569
0.001
7.73
NaSO4-
2.122e-08
1.964e-08
-7.673
-7.707
-0.034
13.84
FeSO4
3.409e-09
3.413e-09
-8.467
-8.467
0.001
12.57
KSO4-
1.728e-10
1.599e-10
-9.762
-9.796
-0.034
34.28
MnSO4
8.263e-11
8.273e-11
-10.083
-10.082
0.001
19.84
HSO4-
5.462e-11
5.043e-11
-10.263
-10.297
-0.035
40.71
CaHSO4+
2.867e-13
2.647e-13
-12.543
-12.577
-0.035
(0)
FeHSO4+
3.379e-15
3.120e-15
-14.471
-14.506
-0.035
(0)
FeSO4+
3.192e-16
2.952e-16
-15.496
-15.530
-0.034
(0)
Fe(SO4)2-
2.375e-20
2.192e-20
-19.624
-19.659
-0.035
(0)
FeHSO4+2
1.475e-22
1.072e-22
-21.831
-21.970
-0.139
(0)
Si
4.705e-04
H4SiO4
4.698e-04
4.704e-04
-3.328
-3.328
0.001
51.56
H3SiO4-
6.964e-07
6.428e-07
-6.157
-6.192
-0.035
28.13
H2SiO4-2
6.725e-13
4.929e-13
-12.172
-12.307
-0.135
(0)
==PAGE:159==
G Chemical measurements
149
------------------------------Saturation indices-------------------------------
Phase
SI** log IAP
log K(304 K,
1 atm)
Anhydrite
-4.49
-8.84
-4.35
CaSO4
Aragonite
-0.73
-9.11
-8.38
CaCO3
Calcite
-0.59
-9.11
-8.52
CaCO3
Chalcedony
0.15
-3.33
-3.48
SiO2
Chrysotile
-6.97
24.42
31.39
Mg3Si2O5(OH)4
CO2(g)
-1.36
-2.89
-1.53
CO2
Dolomite
-1.00
-18.24
-17.24
CaMg(CO3)2
Fe(OH)3(a)
1.57
6.46
4.89
Fe(OH)3
Goethite
7.69
6.46
-1.23
FeOOH
Gypsum
-4.25
-8.84
-4.59
CaSO4:2H2O
H2(g)
-21.80
-24.92
-3.12
H2
H2O(g)
-1.34
-0.00
1.33
H2O
Halite
-9.56
-7.99
1.58
NaCl
Hausmannite
-17.17
42.24
59.41
Mn3O4
Hematite
17.42
12.91
-4.50
Fe2O3
Jarosite-K
-7.70
-17.41
-9.71
KFe3(SO4)2(OH)6
Manganite
-7.64
17.70
25.34
MnOOH
Melanterite
-8.64
-10.77
-2.13
FeSO4:7H2O
O2(g)
-1.65
-4.59
-2.94
O2
Pyrochroite
-8.37
6.83
15.20
Mn(OH)2
Pyrolusite
-11.76
28.57
40.33
MnO2:H2O
Quartz
0.56
-3.33
-3.88
SiO2
Rhodochrosite
-1.50
-12.66
-11.15
MnCO3
Sepiolite
-4.85
10.73
15.59
Mg2Si3O7.5OH:3H2O
Sepiolite(d)
-7.93
10.73
18.66
Mg2Si3O7.5OH:3H2O
Siderite
-0.11
-11.04
-10.93
FeCO3
SiO2(a)
-0.67
-3.33
-2.66
SiO2
Sylvite
-11.19
-10.25
0.93
KCl
Talc
-2.89
17.77
20.65
Mg3Si4O10(OH)2
**For a gas, SI = log10(fugacity). Fugacity = pressure * phi / 1 atm.
For ideal gases, phi = 1.
------------------------------------
% Solution of the batch experiment
------------------------------------
-------------------------------Phase assemblage--------------------------------
Moles in assemblage
Phase
SI log IAP log K(T, P)
Initial
Final
Delta
CO2(g)
-3.50
-5.03
-1.53
1.000e+01
1.000e+01
1.778e-03
==PAGE:160==
150
G Chemical measurements
O2(g)
-0.68
-3.62
-2.94
1.000e+02
1.000e+02 -2.175e-04
-----------------------------Solution composition------------------------------
Elements
Molality
Moles
C
4.431e-03
4.431e-03
Ca
6.275e-04
6.275e-04
Cl
9.872e-06
9.872e-06
Fe
1.343e-05
1.343e-05
K
6.649e-06
6.649e-06
Mg
5.911e-04
5.911e-04
Mn
2.401e-07
2.401e-07
N
5.997e-05
5.997e-05
Na
1.232e-03
1.232e-03
S
5.205e-06
5.205e-06
Si
4.705e-04
4.705e-04
----------------------------Description of solution----------------------------
pH
=
8.922
Charge balance
pe = 11.151
Adjusted to redox equilibrium
Specific Conductance (µS/cm, 31°C)
= 420
Density (g/cm³)
=
0.99541
Volume (L)
=
1.00502
Activity of water
=
1.000
Ionic strength
=
5.151e-03
Mass of water (kg)
=
1.000e+00
Total alkalinity (eq/kg)
=
4.934e-03
Total CO2 (mol/kg)
=
4.431e-03
Temperature (°C)
=
31.70
Electrical balance (eq)
=
-1.324e-03
Percent error, 100*(Cat-|An|)/(Cat+|An|)
= -16.86
Iterations
=
16
Total H
= 1.110193e+02
Total O
= 5.552259e+01
----------------------------Distribution of species----------------------------
Log
Log
Log
mole V
Species
Molality
Activity Molality Activity
Gamma
cm³/mol
OH-
1.501e-05
1.387e-05
-4.824
-4.858
-0.034
-3.86
H+
1.283e-09
1.196e-09
-8.892
-8.922
-0.031
0.00
H2O
5.551e+01
9.999e-01
1.744
-0.000
0.000
18.10
C(-4)
0.000e+00
CH4
0.000e+00
0.000e+00 -142.126 -142.126
0.001
32.22
==PAGE:161==
G Chemical measurements
151
C(4)
4.431e-03
HCO3-
3.974e-03
3.685e-03
-2.401
-2.434
-0.033
25.15
CO3-2
2.213e-04
1.635e-04
-3.655
-3.786
-0.131
-4.77
CaCO3
1.156e-04
1.157e-04
-3.937
-3.937
0.001
-14.58
MgCO3
6.474e-05
6.482e-05
-4.189
-4.188
0.001
-17.09
CaHCO3+
2.009e-05
1.865e-05
-4.697
-4.729
-0.032
9.93
MgHCO3+
1.808e-05
1.672e-05
-4.743
-4.777
-0.034
5.67
CO2
9.227e-06
9.238e-06
-5.035
-5.034
0.001
27.64
NaCO3-
5.193e-06
4.804e-06
-5.285
-5.318
-0.034
-0.47
NaHCO3
2.261e-06
2.264e-06
-5.646
-5.645
0.001
1.80
MnCO3
2.117e-07
2.119e-07
-6.674
-6.674
0.001
(0)
MnHCO3+
5.783e-09
5.358e-09
-8.238
-8.271
-0.033
(0)
FeCO3
3.244e-18
3.247e-18
-17.489
-17.488
0.001
(0)
FeHCO3+
3.298e-19
3.051e-19
-18.482
-18.516
-0.034
(0)
Ca
6.275e-04
Ca+2
4.915e-04
3.630e-04
-3.308
-3.440
-0.132
-17.96
CaCO3
1.156e-04
1.157e-04
-3.937
-3.937
0.001
-14.58
CaHCO3+
2.009e-05
1.865e-05
-4.697
-4.729
-0.032
9.93
CaSO4
2.296e-07
2.298e-07
-6.639
-6.639
0.001
7.73
CaOH+
5.444e-08
5.037e-08
-7.264
-7.298
-0.034
(0)
CaHSO4+
2.160e-15
1.999e-15
-14.666
-14.699
-0.034
(0)
Cl
9.872e-06
Cl-
9.872e-06
9.128e-06
-5.006
-5.040
-0.034
18.26
MnCl+
6.548e-13
6.067e-13
-12.184
-12.217
-0.033
-1.63
MnCl2
2.415e-18
2.418e-18
-17.617
-17.617
0.001
78.40
FeCl+
1.128e-23
1.043e-23
-22.948
-22.982
-0.034
(0)
FeCl+2
7.371e-24
5.433e-24
-23.132
-23.265
-0.132
(0)
MnCl3-
6.560e-24
6.078e-24
-23.183
-23.216
-0.033
43.12
FeCl2+
1.942e-28
1.800e-28
-27.712
-27.745
-0.033
(0)
FeCl3
1.641e-34
1.643e-34
-33.785
-33.784
0.001
(0)
Fe(2)
5.080e-18
FeCO3
3.244e-18
3.247e-18
-17.489
-17.488
0.001
(0)
Fe+2
1.116e-18
8.280e-19
-17.952
-18.082
-0.130
-21.63
FeOH+
3.855e-19
3.572e-19
-18.414
-18.447
-0.033
(0)
FeHCO3+
3.298e-19
3.051e-19
-18.482
-18.516
-0.034
(0)
Fe(OH)2
4.489e-21
4.494e-21
-20.348
-20.347
0.001
(0)
FeSO4
5.620e-22
5.626e-22
-21.250
-21.250
0.001
12.57
Fe(OH)3-
1.607e-22
1.489e-22
-21.794
-21.827
-0.033
(0)
FeCl+
1.128e-23
1.043e-23
-22.948
-22.982
-0.034
(0)
FeHSO4+
4.927e-30
4.559e-30
-29.307
-29.341
-0.034
(0)
Fe(HS)2
0.000e+00
0.000e+00 -293.719 -293.718
0.001
(0)
Fe(HS)3-
0.000e+00
0.000e+00 -433.941 -433.975
-0.034
(0)
Fe(3)
1.343e-05
Fe(OH)4-
6.921e-06
6.417e-06
-5.160
-5.193
-0.033
(0)
Fe(OH)3
6.460e-06
6.467e-06
-5.190
-5.189
0.001
(0)
Fe(OH)2+
4.867e-08
4.513e-08
-7.313
-7.346
-0.033
(0)
FeOH+2
1.725e-13
1.271e-13
-12.763
-12.896
-0.132
(0)
==PAGE:162==
152
G Chemical measurements
Fe+3
3.015e-20
1.601e-20
-19.521
-19.796
-0.275
(0)
FeSO4+
7.426e-22
6.881e-22
-21.129
-21.162
-0.033
(0)
FeCl+2
7.371e-24
5.433e-24
-23.132
-23.265
-0.132
(0)
Fe2(OH)2+4
1.151e-24
3.318e-25
-23.939
-24.479
-0.540
(0)
Fe(SO4)2-
5.658e-26
5.235e-26
-25.247
-25.281
-0.034
(0)
FeCl2+
1.942e-28
1.800e-28
-27.712
-27.745
-0.033
(0)
Fe3(OH)4+5
1.193e-29
1.709e-30
-28.923
-29.767
-0.844
(0)
FeHSO4+2
3.022e-30
2.215e-30
-29.520
-29.655
-0.135
(0)
FeCl3
1.641e-34
1.643e-34
-33.785
-33.784
0.001
(0)
H(0)
0.000e+00
H2
0.000e+00
0.000e+00
-43.324
-43.324
0.001
28.60
K
6.649e-06
K+
6.649e-06
6.147e-06
-5.177
-5.211
-0.034
9.24
KSO4-
1.770e-10
1.641e-10
-9.752
-9.785
-0.033
34.28
Mg
5.911e-04
Mg+2
5.057e-04
3.748e-04
-3.296
-3.426
-0.130
-21.94
MgCO3
6.474e-05
6.482e-05
-4.189
-4.188
0.001
-17.09
MgHCO3+
1.808e-05
1.672e-05
-4.743
-4.777
-0.034
5.67
MgOH+
2.214e-06
2.056e-06
-5.655
-5.687
-0.032
(0)
MgSO4
3.522e-07
3.526e-07
-6.453
-6.453
0.001
6.07
Mn(2)
2.401e-07
MnCO3
2.117e-07
2.119e-07
-6.674
-6.674
0.001
(0)
Mn+2
2.200e-08
1.632e-08
-7.658
-7.787
-0.130
-20.16
MnHCO3+
5.783e-09
5.358e-09
-8.238
-8.271
-0.033
(0)
MnOH+
6.456e-10
5.982e-10
-9.190
-9.223
-0.033
(0)
MnSO4
1.113e-11
1.114e-11
-10.953
-10.953
0.001
19.84
MnCl+
6.548e-13
6.067e-13
-12.184
-12.217
-0.033
-1.63
Mn(NO3)2
1.961e-16
1.963e-16
-15.708
-15.707
0.001
39.40
Mn(OH)3-
1.631e-16
1.511e-16
-15.788
-15.821
-0.033
(0)
MnCl2
2.415e-18
2.418e-18
-17.617
-17.617
0.001
78.40
MnCl3-
6.560e-24
6.078e-24
-23.183
-23.216
-0.033
43.12
Mn(3)
3.496e-22
Mn+3
3.496e-22
1.857e-22
-21.456
-21.731
-0.275
(0)
N(-3)
0.000e+00
NH4+
0.000e+00
0.000e+00
-66.585
-66.620
-0.035
18.16
NH3
0.000e+00
0.000e+00
-66.742
-66.741
0.001
24.64
NH4SO4-
0.000e+00
0.000e+00
-70.946
-70.980
-0.034
39.49
N(0)
1.847e-25
N2
9.237e-26
9.248e-26
-25.034
-25.034
0.001
29.29
N(3)
3.144e-17
NO2-
3.144e-17
2.903e-17
-16.503
-16.537
-0.035
25.30
N(5)
5.997e-05
NO3-
5.997e-05
5.538e-05
-4.222
-4.257
-0.035
30.10
Mn(NO3)2
1.961e-16
1.963e-16
-15.708
-15.707
0.001
39.40
Na
1.232e-03
Na+
1.224e-03
1.134e-03
-2.912
-2.945
-0.033
-1.10
NaCO3-
5.193e-06
4.804e-06
-5.285
-5.318
-0.034
-0.47
==PAGE:163==
G Chemical measurements
153
NaHCO3
2.261e-06
2.264e-06
-5.646
-5.645
0.001
1.80
NaSO4-
2.166e-08
2.008e-08
-7.664
-7.697
-0.033
13.82
NaOH
1.571e-18
1.573e-18
-17.804
-17.803
0.001
(0)
O(0)
4.820e-04
O2
2.410e-04
2.413e-04
-3.618
-3.617
0.001
30.89
S(-2)
0.000e+00
HS-
0.000e+00
0.000e+00 -142.259 -142.293
-0.034
20.89
H2S
0.000e+00
0.000e+00 -144.356 -144.356
0.001
37.19
S-2
0.000e+00
0.000e+00 -145.962 -146.094
-0.132
(0)
Fe(HS)2
0.000e+00
0.000e+00 -293.719 -293.718
0.001
(0)
Fe(HS)3-
0.000e+00
0.000e+00 -433.941 -433.975
-0.034
(0)
S(6)
5.205e-06
SO4-2
4.601e-06
3.390e-06
-5.337
-5.470
-0.133
15.38
MgSO4
3.522e-07
3.526e-07
-6.453
-6.453
0.001
6.07
CaSO4
2.296e-07
2.298e-07
-6.639
-6.639
0.001
7.73
NaSO4-
2.166e-08
2.008e-08
-7.664
-7.697
-0.033
13.82
KSO4-
1.770e-10
1.641e-10
-9.752
-9.785
-0.033
34.28
MnSO4
1.113e-11
1.114e-11
-10.953
-10.953
0.001
19.84
HSO4-
4.950e-13
4.580e-13
-12.305
-12.339
-0.034
40.70
CaHSO4+
2.160e-15
1.999e-15
-14.666
-14.699
-0.034
(0)
FeSO4+
7.426e-22
6.881e-22
-21.129
-21.162
-0.033
(0)
FeSO4
5.620e-22
5.626e-22
-21.250
-21.250
0.001
12.57
Fe(SO4)2-
5.658e-26
5.235e-26
-25.247
-25.281
-0.034
(0)
FeHSO4+
4.927e-30
4.559e-30
-29.307
-29.341
-0.034
(0)
FeHSO4+2
3.022e-30
2.215e-30
-29.520
-29.655
-0.135
(0)
NH4SO4-
0.000e+00
0.000e+00
-70.946
-70.980
-0.034
39.49
Si
4.705e-04
H4SiO4
4.032e-04
4.037e-04
-3.394
-3.394
0.001
51.56
H3SiO4-
6.727e-05
6.222e-05
-4.172
-4.206
-0.034
28.13
H2SiO4-2
7.284e-09
5.382e-09
-8.138
-8.269
-0.131
(0)
------------------------------Saturation indices-------------------------------
Phase
SI** log IAP
log K(304 K,
1 atm)
Anhydrite
-4.56
-8.91
-4.35
CaSO4
Aragonite
1.16
-7.23
-8.38
CaCO3
Calcite
1.29
-7.23
-8.52
CaCO3
CH4(g)
-139.23
-142.13
-2.89
CH4
Chalcedony
0.08
-3.39
-3.48
SiO2
Chrysotile
5.08
36.47
31.39
Mg3Si2O5(OH)4
CO2(g)
-3.50
-5.03
-1.53 CO2 Pressure
0.0 atm, phi 1.000
Dolomite
2.80
-14.44
-17.24
CaMg(CO3)2
Fe(OH)3(a)
2.08
6.97
4.89
Fe(OH)3
FeS(ppt)
-147.54
-151.45
-3.92
FeS
Goethite
8.20
6.97
-1.23
FeOOH
Gypsum
-4.32
-8.91
-4.59
CaSO4:2H2O
==PAGE:164==
154
G Chemical measurements
H2(g)
-40.21
-43.32
-3.12
H2
H2O(g)
-1.34
-0.00
1.33
H2O
H2S(g)
-143.24
-151.22
-7.98
H2S
Halite
-9.56
-7.99
1.58
NaCl
Hausmannite
10.91
70.32
59.41
Mn3O4
Hematite
18.45
13.94
-4.50
Fe2O3
Jarosite-K
-12.29
-22.00
-9.71
KFe3(SO4)2(OH)6
Mackinawite
-146.80
-151.45
-4.65
FeS
Manganite
4.79
30.13
25.34
MnOOH
Melanterite
-21.42
-23.55
-2.13
FeSO4:7H2O
N2(g)
-21.82
-25.03
-3.21
N2
NH3(g)
-68.40
-66.74
1.66
NH3
O2(g)
-0.68
-3.62
-2.94 O2 Pressure
0.2 atm, phi 1.000
Pyrite
-244.23
-262.52
-18.30
FeS2
Pyrochroite
-5.14
10.06
15.20
Mn(OH)2
Pyrolusite
9.87
50.20
40.33
MnO2:H2O
Quartz
0.49
-3.39
-3.88
SiO2
Rhodochrosite
-0.42
-11.57
-11.15
MnCO3
Sepiolite
3.07
18.66
15.59
Mg2Si3O7.5OH:3H2O
Sepiolite(d)
-0.00
18.66
18.66
Mg2Si3O7.5OH:3H2O
Siderite
-10.94
-21.87
-10.93
FeCO3
SiO2(a)
-0.74
-3.39
-2.66
SiO2
Sulfur
-108.94
-104.21
4.73
S
Sylvite
-11.18
-10.25
0.93
KCl
Talc
9.03
29.68
20.65
Mg3Si4O10(OH)2
**For a gas, SI = log10(fugacity). Fugacity = pressure * phi / 1 atm.
For ideal gases, phi = 1.
------------------
End of simulation.
------------------
==PAGE:165==
G Chemical measurements
155
Tables G.5 and G.6 display the chemical measurements performed at speciﬁc
depths in the 5 boreholes selected for the chemistry multilevel analysis. However,
the groundwater ﬂow line that was assumed to pass through these boreholes at
the time of ﬁeld work was found incorrect by comparing the positions of these
boreholes and the hydrogeological model result.
As the groundwaters in PO-
01 and PO-06 are found contaminated, the depth proﬁle analysis was therefore
restrained to these two boreholes. Figures G.1 and G.2 show the depth proﬁles
of relevant chemical species measured in PO-1 and PO-6 respectively.
==PAGE:166==
156
G Chemical measurements
Table G.5: Multilevel chemical measurements of boreholes PO-1 and PO-6 (continued on next page).
Screen : [55 - 72] m
Screen : ?
PO-01 A
PO-01 B
PO-01 C
PO-01 D
PO-06 A
PO-06 B
PO-06 C
Depth
[m]
22
35
53
65
30
50
70
pH
7.32
7.32
7.23
7.22
6.94
6.94
6.87
O2
[mg/L]
3.45
2.97
1.65
1.63
3.98
2.29
2.26
EC
[uS/cm]
514
506
500
503
294
336
347
Eh
[mV]
258
257
258
263
318
295
311
T
[C]
33
32.1
31.9
31.5
31.6
31.3
31.2
DOC
[mg/L]
2.1
1.8
1.7
1.4
1.3
1.7
1.5
TIC
[mg C/L]
71.8
71.3
70.1
70.6
39.2
40.5
48.5
HCO3
[mg/L]
364.5
362.3
356.0
358.8
199
205.6
246.6
F
[mg/L]
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
0.12
0.12
<0.1
Cl
[mg/L]
2.18
1.34
0.62
0.58
1.35
1.59
2.13
Br
[mg/L]
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
NO3
[mg/L]
0.77
0.82
1.03
1.08
9.71
10.22
12.62
SO4
[mg/L]
6.68
6.54
6.32
6.51
1.74
6.39
6.24
PO4
[mg/L]
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
0.44
0.42
<0.1
Li
[µg/L]
13.93
13.45
13.75
13.01
7.05
7.03
7.91
B
[µg/L]
12.67
12.64
12.81
12.28
<5
<5
8.59
Na
[µg/L]
21.1
19.86
19.9
19.72
21.15
21.12
21.1
Mg
[µg/L]
26.19
25.56
26.12
25.69
13.88
13.8
12.38
Al
[µg/L]
1.32
4.43
2.36
6.08
4.98
9.2
<0.1
Si
[µg/L]
14.11
13.55
13.95
13.25
23.88
24
21.78
K
[µg/L]
0.71
1.07
0.39
0.48
0.34
0.34
0.39
Ca
[µg/L]
46.74
46.35
45.44
44.49
17.69
18.43
35.34
V
[µg/L]
0.596
0.503
0.788
0.507
23.33
22.75
14.2
Table G.5: Multilevel sampling analysis results; Part 1 (continued on next page).
==PAGE:167==
G Chemical measurements
157
Table G.5: (Continued)
PO-01 A
PO-01 B
PO-01 C
PO-01 D
PO-06 A
PO-06 B
PO-06 C
Cr
[µg/L]
0.554
0.441
0.172
0.274
0.191
0.211
0.056
Mn
[µg/L]
13.23
21.28
103.4
111.5
17.2
21.95
1.31
Fe
[µg/L]
0.74
3.91
12.43
8.64
11.42
15.85
<0.3
Co
[µg/L]
0.136
0.19
0.947
1.051
0.198
0.282
0.026
Ni
[µg/L]
2.06
1.78
2.67
3.91
1.97
2.31
0.95
Cu
[µg/L]
1.09
1.74
1.05
1.2
1.72
2.31
0.53
Zn
[µg/L]
28.85
55.7
25.47
40.49
33.2
35.58
19.73
AsT
[µg/L]
312.5
307.2
300.9
300.2
5.7
5.8
28.6
As(III)
[µg/L]
6.0
7.0
9.6
10.9
0.2
0.1
0.2
As(V)
[µg/L]
306.5
300.1
291.3
289.3
5.5
5.7
28.4
Se
[µg/L]
0.12
0.084
0.104
0.096
0.065
0.073
0.498
Sr
[µg/L]
125.2
123.3
121.7
118.6
118.2
120
135.8
Mo
[µg/L]
6.24
6.02
6.26
6.05
0.56
0.51
0.51
Cd
[µg/L]
0.018
0.016
0.017
0.018
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
Sn
[µg/L]
0.574
0.478
0.690
1.015
0.566
1.126
0.201
Sb
[µg/L]
1.024
0.925
0.910
0.892
0.184
0.185
0.514
Ba
[µg/L]
8.435
6.877
5.403
5.65
2.053
2.408
2.109
La
[µg/L]
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
0.015
0.017
<0.01
Ce
[µg/L]
<0.01
<0.01
0.011
<0.01
0.029
0.032
<0.01
W
[µg/L]
104.2
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
1.56
Tl
[µg/L]
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
Pb
[µg/L]
<0.02
0.321
0.726
0.892
5.655
5.25
<0.02
U
[µg/L]
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
Table G.5: (Continued)
==PAGE:168==
158
G Chemical measurements
Table G.6: Multilevel chemical measurements of boreholes PO-7, PO-10 and PO-32 (continued on next page).
Screen : [34.4 - 48.9] m
Screen : [53.7 - 80.5]
Screen : ?
PO-7 A
PO-7 B
PO-10 A
PO-10 B
PO-10 C
PO-32 A
PO-32 B
Depth
[m]
35
45
33
59
73
35
20
pH
7.17
7.24
6.93
7.02
6.95
7.03
7.03
O2
[mg/L]
3.1
2.95
1.65
2.56
1.23
1.7
2.1
EC
[uS/cm]
511
501
397
385
386
469
459
Eh
[mV]
281
292
242
260
259
299
296
T
[C]
31.9
31.6
32.9
32.4
33
31.1
30.2
DOC
[mg/L]
1.6
1.9
2.1
1.8
2.6
1.6
1.6
TIC
[mg C/L]
68.0
68.3
54.0
53.8
54.9
59.7
55.7
HCO3
[mg/L]
345.4
346.9
274.1
273.1
278.7
303.1
283.0
F
[mg/L]
<0.1
<0.1
0.21
0.2
0.2
<0.1
<0.1
Cl
[mg/L]
6.05
4.97
6.84
0.88
1.32
3.56
4.2
Br
[mg/L]
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
NO3
[mg/L]
0.85
0.88
0.76
0.52
0.62
27.05
30.86
SO4
[mg/L]
1.74
1
1.63
1.53
1.59
1.48
1.56
PO4
[mg/L]
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
Li
[µg/L]
9.65
9.83
35.56
33.06
33.83
6.63
6.78
B
[µg/L]
23.53
24.13
44.47
16.97
14.61
26.76
26.72
Na
[µg/L]
33.29
32.24
26.19
27.38
27.3
12.99
13.02
Mg
[µg/L]
19.85
19.83
15.64
15.85
16.01
24.3
24.18
Al
[µg/L]
7.44
3.41
<0.1
8.47
7.77
8.58
9.16
Si
[µg/L]
20.1
20.27
17.23
17.09
17.46
25.05
25.21
K
[µg/L]
0.59
0.44
0.78
1.11
0.75
0.32
0.35
Ca
[µg/L]
41.06
41.56
30.29
28.18
28.88
43.53
43.42
V
[µg/L]
4.52
4.4
0.487
0.661
0.619
15.83
16.38
Table G.6: Multilevel sampling analysis results; Part 2 (continued on next page).
==PAGE:169==
G Chemical measurements
159
Table G.6: (Continued)
PO-7 A
PO-7 B
PO-10 A
PO-10 B
PO-10 C
PO-32 A
PO-32 B
Cr
[µg/L]
0.157
0.089
0.146
2.262
0.158
0.199
0.317
Mn
[µg/L]
10.44
6.35
77
39.35
29.77
14.78
12.6
Fe
[µg/L]
90.23
31.59
<0.3
8.76
5.46
11.33
20.34
Co
[µg/L]
0.265
0.143
0.039
0.266
0.224
0.168
0.18
Ni
[µg/L]
2.7
1.55
38.39
13.63
18.15
1.57
2.58
Cu
[µg/L]
1
0.53
2.04
1.88
0.89
0.63
1.15
Zn
[µg/L]
316.7
192.3
1593
582.7
980.4
18.5
32.58
AsT
[µg/L]
6.3
5.6
2.6
3.5
3.8
3.1
2.8
As(III)
[µg/L]
2.4
1.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
As(V)
[µg/L]
3.9
4.5
2.4
3.4
3.7
2.9
2.7
Se
[µg/L]
0.234
0.197
1.56
1.41
1.5
0.076
0.081
Sr
[µg/L]
207.1
209.4
192.3
191.8
198.4
177.8
176.4
Mo
[µg/L]
1.52
1.4
2.87
2.93
2.76
0.51
0.72
Cd
[µg/L]
<0.01
<0.01
0.123
0.057
0.067
<0.01
<0.01
Sn
[µg/L]
0.446
0.419
0.192
1.883
0.911
0.751
0.449
Sb
[µg/L]
0.371
0.306
0.432
0.224
0.192
0.097
0.099
Ba
[µg/L]
25.14
14.52
2.902
1.191
0.7881
6.247
3.128
La
[µg/L]
0.016
<0.01
0.018
0.218
0.17
0.014
0.023
Ce
[µg/L]
0.023
0.015
0.014
0.052
0.044
0.026
0.053
W
[µg/L]
<0.02
<0.02
0.81
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
Tl
[µg/L]
<0.02
<0.02
0.036
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
Pb
[µg/L]
2.760
1.202
0.055
7.054
23.92
2.274
3.591
U
[µg/L]
0.04
0.03
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
<0.02
Table G.6: (Continued)
==PAGE:170==
160
G Chemical measurements
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure G.1: Depth proﬁles of representative chemical species in borehole PO-1.
The horizontal dotted lines represent the top and bottom of the well screen.
The groundwater in PO-1 and PO-6 are both oxic with O2 concentrations
above 1 mg/L. Figure G.1 shows that the composition of the groundwater in PO-
1 is relatively stable with depth whereas Figure G.2 shows more changes in the
groundwater composition of PO-6 with depth. In particular, the concentration
of arsenic is lower than the WHO guideline value for shallower depth and exceeds
it at depth of 70 m.
==PAGE:171==
G Chemical measurements
161
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure G.2: Depth proﬁles of representative chemical species in borehole PO-6.
The position of the screen was not found for this borehole.
The increase in As concentration with depth in PO-6 seems to be correlated
with an increase in Mo and SO4 which could show a dissolution of sulphide min-
erals speciﬁcally at deeper level. However, the very low concentrations of Mo
don’t allow to conclude accurately about this relationship. Moreover As concen-
==PAGE:172==
162
G Chemical measurements
trations seems to be negatively correlated with species (Fe, Mn, Al) that oﬀer
sorption sites under oxyhydroxides forms although the chemical analysis don’t
oﬀer details about the speciations of these species. The higher concentration of
HCO3 at deeper level in PO-6 is not likely to play a role in the As increase though
competition for sorption sites. Indeed, HCO3 concentrations are high along the
entire water column and lower concentrations at shallowest level could be due to
CO2 degassing due to the contact with the atmosphere.
The absence of knowledge about the screen positions in the boreholes during
the time of ﬁeld work represent the main limitation for interpretations of these
results. In the case of PO-1, the screen is relatively short and only one sample can
be considered representing fresh groundwater entering the bore. In the case of
PO-6, it is not possible to determine if the sampled groundwater represent aquifer
conditions (i.e. dynamic groundwater entering the bore) or stagnant groundwa-
ter.
The action of retrieving the pumping system and of lowering and withdraw-
ing the grab sampler might also lead to mixing and agitation of the groundwater
column, to mobilization of previously aquifer matrix materials, to resuspension of
sediments and to aeration of the groundwater (Nielsen and Nielsen, 2006). This
was particularly observed in borehole PO-7 in which the Fe hydroxides were re-
mobilized. As the boreholes are constantly used by the population along the day,
no time could be spent for natural conditions recovery.
These measurements limitations are sources of random and systematic errors
which are likely to result in numerous misinterpretations. Therefore, it is not
possible to conclude about the change in groundwater composition with depth.
Considering the time required for and the complexity of this analysis, this study
requires speciﬁc ﬁeld work for which the following recommendations can be for-
mulated:
• The screen position should be known prior to perform gab sampling.
• The well should be purged after retrieving the inherent pumping system
in order to remove the remobilized particles that were ﬁxed to the tubing
system.
• Sampling should be repeated in time to evaluate the presence of random
error.
• Measurements should be performed in order to evaluate the speciation of
the species involved in the As sorption mechanisms (Fe, Mn, Al).
==PAGE:173==
==PAGE:174==
