==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Grafting of ionic monomers onto ePTFE
for improvement of facial implants
Katarzyna Kępa (s120534)
Kongens Lyngby 2015
==PAGE:2==
DTU Chemical Engineering
Department of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Soltofts Plads
Building 229
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 2800
kt@kt.dtu.dk
www.kt.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract (English)
Facial disfigurements affect millions of people around the world and can negatively influ-
ence their lives. Facial implants serve as a solution to augment the affected regions and
are widely used in the surgical procedures. Despite a range of implantation materials
an ideal material has not yet been found. Currently used implants posses limited ability
to integrate with both soft and hard tissue. Complications after implantation are asso-
ciated with lack of anchoring to the bone. The commercially used implant biomaterials
are mainly designed for their bulk properties. In order to improve fixation of the im-
plants their surface properties should be researched further. This project is concerned
with the surface modifications of ePTFE via radiation induced grafting with the goal of
introducing two different ionic functional groups: carboxylate and amine. The aim is
to optimise the grafting process with respect to improved surface properties. Grafting
was facilitated by simultaneous γ-irradiation of acrylic acid (AAc) and 2-aminoethyl
methacrylate hydrochloride (AEMA) onto the surface of ePTFE. The radiation was car-
ried out at various doses, from 2-5 kGy, in the presence and absence of Mohr’s salt and
sulfuric acid. Bone bonding ability was assessed by in vitro mineralization.
The introduction of AAc functionalities was confirmed through chemical analyses.
The characteristic peaks of the carboxyl group were present in the ATR-FTIR and XPS
spectra. An SEM assessment of the sample’s morphology after grafting found that it had
been altered by a heterogeneous layer of the graft co-polymer. An increase in graft yield
was observed with an increase inirradiation dose for the samples grafted in presence of
sulfuric acid. No effect of dose was observed in the absence of this additive. The extent of
surface coverage was not affected by the dose, but it increased after addition of sulfuric
acid, as compared to without. A 1% solution of Mohr’s salt was found to effectively
control homopolymer formation. A 0.5 M sulfuric acid solution was found to have an
enhancing effect on the graft yield. Mechanical properties of the samples grafted with
AAc were significantly altered; the Young’s modulus was increased by over 20 times,
yielding lower elongation and higher brittleness as compared to ungrafted ePTFE. The
introduction of the amine functionality was performed by one- and two-step grafting
methods. Both methods proved to successfully modify the substrate. For the samples
grafted by one-step method the highest amount of nitrogen, over 3%, was found on when
sulfuric acid was added at a 5 kGy dose. The amount of nitrogen obtained by the two-
step technique varied between 3-4%. Nearly full coverage of the substrate with grafted
chains was obtained by the two-step method, as revealed by XPS. Modification of the
ePTFE with ionic functional groups resulted in the formation of nucleation sites for
mineral formation by chelation of calcium ions by the carboxylate groups. No mineral
==PAGE:4==
ii
Abstract (English)
formation was observed in the SEM images, however, XPS showed peaks characteristic
for Ca, P and Mg.
This research demonstrated a successful modification of ePTFE by introduction of
carboxyl and amine functionalities by the simultaneous γ-irradiation technique. The
modification improved the bioactivity in vitro of the membrane showing promising prop-
erties with regard to facial prosthesis.
==PAGE:5==
Resumé (Dansk)
Ansigt vansiring påvirke millioner af mennesker over hele verden, og har en negativ ind-
flydelse på deres liv. Ansigt implantater tjene som en løsning til at forbedre de berørte
regioner, og er meget udbredt i kirurgiske procedurer. På trods af at en række mate-
rialer er i brug, et ideelt materiale er endnu ikke blevet fundet. I øjeblikket anvendes
implantater der besidder begrænset evne til at integrere med både blødt og hårdt væv.
Komplikationer efter implantering er forbundet med mangel på forankring til knoglevæv.
De kommercielt anvendte implantat biomaterialer er primært designet med hensyn til
deres masse-egenskaber. For at forbedre fiksering af implantaterne deres overfladeegen-
skaber bør undersøges yderligere. Dette projekt omhandler overfladen modifikationer
af ePTFE via stråling fremkaldt podning med det formål at introducere to forskellige
ioniske funktionelle grupper: carboxylat og amin. Målet er at optimere podningspro-
cessen med hensyn til at forbedrede overfladeegenskaberne for en ePTFE implantat.
Podning blev opnået ved γ-bestråling af acrylsyre (AAc) og/eller 2-aminoethylmetha-
crylathydrochlorid (AEMA) i tilstedeværelse af ePTFE. Strålingen blev udført ved forskel-
lige doser, 2-5 kGy, i nærvær og fravær af Mohr salt og svovlsyre. Knogle vævsbindings
evnen blev vurderet ved in vitro mineralisering.
Indførelsen af carboxylat funktionaliteter blev bekræftet gennem kemiske analyser.
De karakteristiske signaler af carboxylgruppen var til stede i ATR-FTIR og XPS-spektre.
En SEM vurdering af prøvens morfologi efter podningen fandt, at den var blevet ændret
med et heterogent lag af co-polymeren. Stigende strålingsdosis gav andledning til at pod-
ningsudbyttet blev øgetfor de prøver der var podet i nærværelse af svovlsyre. Ingen effekt
af dosis blev observeret i fravær af dette tilsætningsstof. Omfanget af overfladedækning
var ikke påvirked af dosis, men steg efter tilsætning af svovlsyre, sammenlignet med
prøver uden dette. En 1% opløsning af Mohr salt var effektivt i at kontrollere homo-
polymer dannelse. Tilsætning af 0.5 M svovlsyre havde en forstærkende virkning på
pode udbyttet. Mekaniske egenskaber for prøver podet med AAc blev væsentligt æn-
dret; Young’s modul blev forøget over 20 gange, hvilket gav lavere forlængelse og højere
skørhed i forhold til upodet ePTFE.
Indførelsen af aminfunktionaliteten blev udført ved en- og to-trins metoder. Begge
disse metoder har vist sig at kunne ændre substratet. For de prøver der var podede med
et-trins fremgangsmåden, den højeste mængde kvælstof, over 3% (fra XPS), blev fundet,
når svovlsyre blev tilsat ved en 5 kGy dosis. Mængden af kvælstof opnået ved to-trins
teknikken varierede mellem 3-4%. Næsten fuld dækning af underlaget med co-polymeren
blev opnået ved to-trins-metoden; dette var evalueret ved hjælp af XPS.
Ændring af ePTFE med ioniske funktionelle grupper resulterede i dannelsen af kernedan-
==PAGE:6==
iv
Resumé (Dansk)
nende steder, for mineraldannelse ved kelering af kalcium ioner af carboxylat grupperne.
Mineraldannelse blev ikke observeret ved hjælp af SEM men XPS viste signaler der er
karakteristiske for Ca, P og Mg.
Denne forskning viste en vellykket modifikation af ePTFE ved indføring af carboxyl-
og aminfunktionaliteter ved en γ-bestrålings teknik. Modifikationen forbedret bioak-
tivitet in vitro og den modificerede membran viser lovende egenskaber med hensyn til
en ideel ansigts protese.
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This Master Thesis was prepared in fulfilment of the requirements for acquiring a Mas-
ter of Science in Engineering degree in Chemical and Biochemical Engineering at the
Technical University of Denmark. The work was done in a collaboration with the Uni-
versity of Queensland, Australia, at the School of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences.
The Thesis was created in the period from 15 June 2015 to 30 November 2015 at the
University of Queensland with supervision of Lisbeth Grøndahl (Australia) and Anne
Ladegaard Skov (Denmark).
Kongens Lyngby, November 30, 2015
Katarzyna Kępa (s120534)
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my very great appreciation to my supervisor Assoc. Prof. Lisbeth
Grøndahl for her guidance, useful comments, enthusiasm and engagement through the
learning process of this master thesis.
Furthermore I would like to thank Assoc. Prof. David Hill for his constructive sugges-
tions and sharing his immense knowledge.
I would also like to thank my supervisor from the ”other” side of the world Assoc. Prof.
Anne Ledegaard Skov for her help in commencing this project and patience before I
could officially start.
My sincere thanks go to Dr. Barry Wood for introducing me to the topic of XPS as well
for the support on the way.
Many thanks and appreciation for the members of Grøndahl group for assistance in the
lab.
I would like to express my grattitude to my former collegues who gave me the ”bug” to
explore the world of science and were incredible teachers. Without their motivation and
inspiration I would not be at this point.
Last but not the least, I would like to thank my parents for all the support and moti-
vation throughout writing this thesis and my my life in general. And to Matt for his
encouragement and support.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Abstract (English)
i
Resumé (Dansk)
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
Contents
ix
List of Abbreviations
xiii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Related work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1.1
Concluding remarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Theoretical Background
5
2.1
Biomaterials and biocompatibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Fluoropolymers in biomaterials application . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.2
Facial implants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.3
Tissue response to artificial materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Properties of PTFE and ePTFE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Surface modifications of polymers by grafting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3.1
Radiation grafting methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3.2
γ-irradiation induced grafting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4
Characterization methods of modified materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4.1
Attenuated total reflectance infrared spectroscopy (ATR-FTIR)
.
14
2.4.2
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3
Experimental
17
3.1
Materials
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.1.1
Substrate material
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.1.2
Chemical reagents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2
Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2.1
Pre-treatment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2.2
Monomer grafting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
==PAGE:12==
x
Contents
3.2.3
Post-treatment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3
Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3.1
Graft yield . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3.2
Chemical characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3.2.1
Attenuated total reflectance infrared spectroscopy (ATR-
FTIR) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3.2.2
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3.3
Mechanical testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3.4
Wettability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3.4.1
Contact angle measurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3.4.2
Degree of swelling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3.5
In-vitro mineralization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3.6
Morphology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3.7
Statistical analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4
Results and Discussion
25
4.1
Grafting of acrylic acid onto ePTFE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.1.1
Chemical characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.1.1.1
Attenuated Total Reflectance Fourier Transform Infrared
Spectroscopy (ATR-FTIR) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.1.1.2
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) . . . . . . . . .
28
4.1.2
Wettability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.1.3
Degree of overall grafting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.1.4
Morphology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.1.5
Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.1.6
Effect of irradiation dose . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.1.6.1
Degree of grafting: graft yield . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.1.6.2
Degree of grafting: chemical characterization
. . . . . .
36
4.1.6.3
Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.1.7
Effect of additives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.1.7.1
Homopolymerization control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.1.7.2
Graft yield enhancement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.1.8
Monomer concentration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.1.9
Mechanical properties
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.1.9.1
Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.2
Grafting of 2-aminoethyl methacrylate and acrylic acid onto ePTFE . . .
48
4.2.1
One-step and two-step grafting techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.2.2
Degree of swelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
4.3
In vitro mineralization study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
5
Conclusion
65
6
Future Work
67
==PAGE:13==
Contents
xi
A
An Appendix
69
A.1 ePTFE high resolution XPS scans . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
A.2 Absorbance of the COOH/CF II results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
Bibliography
73
==PAGE:14==
xii
==PAGE:15==
List of Abbreviations
AAc
Acrylic Acid
AEMA
2-Aminoethyl Methacrylate Hydrochloride
ATR-FTIR
Attenuated Total Reflectance Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy
BSP
Bone Sialoprotein
CA
Contact Angle
CAD-CAM
Computer-assisted design/computer-assisted manufacturing
Ch4S
Choindrin-4-sulfate
DSC
Differential Scanning Calorimetry
ePTFE
Expanded Polytetrafluoroethylene
ESCA
Electron Spectroscopy for Chemical Analysis
FDA
Food and Drug Authority, United States of America
FEP
Fluorinated ethylene-propylene
FTIR
Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy
FWHM
Full Width at Half Maximum
GE
Graft Extent
GY
Graft Yield
MEHQ
Methyl Ether of Hydroquinone
OC
Osteocalcin
OPN
Osteipontin
pAAc
Polyacrylic Acid
pAEMA
Poly 2-aminoethyl methacrylate
PBS
Phosphate Buffered Solution
PCTFE
Polychlorotrifluoroethylene
PP
Polypropylene
PTFE
Polytetraflouroethylene
PVDF
Polyvinylidene flouride
OPN
Osteopontin
RSF
Relative Sensitivity Factors
SBF
Simulated Body Fluid
SEM
Scanning Electron Microscope
TGA
Thermogravimetric Analysis
UTS
Ultimate Tensile Test
XPS
X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy
==PAGE:16==
xiv
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Craniofacial surgeries are amongst the most frequent surgical procedures.[1] In 2014 the
total aesthetic/cosmetic procedures conducted on the face and head was over 4.2 million
worldwide.[2] Among these are procedures which require placing an implant in order to
augment certain features of the face. The use of facial implants has recently increased,
owing to the development of new materials. In the United States alone a total of 12, 999
cheek implant, 18, 136 chin augmentation and 26, 025 lip augmentation procedures with
the use of implants were performed in 2014.[1] The aesthetic aspects of such interventions
rise their popularity as more and more people seek to have impeccable facial appearance.
Attractive image has a significant effect on the public perception. People with abnor-
mal facial features are perceived as less employable, less trustworthy, less honest and less
optimistic.[3] It should not be forgotten that having the idealized, youthful, ’magazine-
cover look’ as portrayed by the surrounding media is not the only motive that compels
people to improve their appearance. Facial disfigurements can result from cancer, bone
disease, trauma or congenital features and may require craniofacial intervention. Repair
of the afflicted regions is important to maintain the protective, aesthetic and structural
function of the face. For example, the condition of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
can cause a complication resulting in facial lipoatrophy (loss of facial soft tissue). The
consequences are not only visible changes in the appearance, with deep folds and hollows,
but also psychological and social.[4, 5] Facial disfigurement has a tremendous negative
effect on the satisfaction with life. It influences the quality of life often leading to low
self-esteem, issues in relationships and even depression.[5, 6]
Facial augmentation includes surgical, nonsurgical, temporary and permanent pro-
cedures. The temporary, nonsurgical methods such as injections with hyaluronic acid
or autologous fat will not provide appropriate solution to patients who lack skeletal
development to support the soft tissue or have major fatty tissue deficiency. Therefore
in such cases there is need for permanent solutions that will restore lost volume and
aesthetic look of the face and facial implants serve this role.[7]
Over the years many alloplastic materials with different physical and chemical prop-
erties for facial augmentation have been developed. One of the materials that has gained
much interest for facial prostheses is expanded polytetrafluoroethylene (ePTFE). Early
in vivo animal studies revealed the possibility of the use of this material for maxillo-facial
surgery. Later, it was confirmed that ePTFE is advantageous in soft-tissue augmenta-
tion due to its porosity, strength and biological inertness.[8] Currently PTFE is the most
commonly used material in facial augmentation. It is produced in a variety of shapes
marketed by Gore as Gore-Tex® Subcutaneous Augmentation Material (SAM) and by
Atrium Medical Corporation as Advanta implants.[9] Although the material shows good
==PAGE:18==
2
1 Introduction
biocompatibility and is well tolerated upon implantation, possible side effects still may
occur. The complications include: infection, inadequate healing, excessive swelling and
bruising as well as lack of sufficient integration with the underlying bone.[10, 4]
To overcome the adverse effects of biomaterials and enhance tissue integration it was
suggested to modify the surface of the material. A good biomaterial-tissue interface can
be obtained by introduction of functional groups that can increase surface bioactivity.
For materials intended to obtain bone bonding ability the functional groups are those
found in biological macromolecules implicated in biomineralization.[11] Surface modifica-
tion technique depends on the substrate and the intended outcome. Surface grafting of
polymers with ionic monomers is a commonly used technique in the area of biomaterials
science due to its versatility.[4] Despite this knowledge, most of the commercially avail-
able implants are still based on bulk properties. Modification of the surface properties
in the implantable medical devices is rare. However, one example is ePTFE immobilized
with heparin by the technology known as Carmeda® BioActive Surface, which showed
improvement in the performance of a vascular graft.[12, 13] The research and science
have evolved to meet the need of facial and reconstructive surgery and the investigation
to engineer the ideal solution is still progressing.
1.1
Related work
There is a need to engineer an implant with ideal surface properties and a substantial
amount of research has been dedicated to find a solution to this problem. The current
status of relevent research and reported literature on the surface modifications of poly-
mers is presented within this section. It focuses on PTFE functionalised with anionic
groups.
There are numerous reviews that summarize the current work and understanding con-
cerned with surface modification of polymers for biomedical applications.[14, 15, 11, 16,
17] Various monomers have been introduced to the surface of PTFE in order to employ
it in medical devices and achieve specific functional requirements. Introduction of phos-
phate groups by phosphorous-containing monomers such as mono(2-acryloyloxyethyl)
phosphate (MAEP) or 2-(methacryloyloxy) ethyl phosphate (MOEP) is a common func-
tionalisation in the literature.[11, 18] Modification through the simultaneous irradiation
of PTFE received a lot of attention with phosphorous-containing monomers. In a series
of articles grafting of ePTFE was reported with MOEP, which achieved good surface
coverage.[19, 20] MAEP monomer was also successfully functionalised to ePTFE but
with a relatively low degree of grafting.[18, 21] Another commonly introduced group is
the sulfonic functional group.[11, 22, 23] There is a lack of radiation grafting modifica-
tion of this group reported, and its introduction in the literature is performed mainly
by solution-based sulfonation. [22, 23] The introduction of a carboxylate group to the
surfce of monomers has drawn particular focus in the reported literature. Acrylic acid
is a well studied vinyl monomer in grafting to various substrates for the application in
biomedical devices and other applications.[11, 16] The research undertaken by Park et
==PAGE:19==
1.1 Related work
3
al. modified ePTFE by γ-irradiation of polyethylene oxide to improve biocompatibility
of cardiovascular prostheses.[24] Simultaneous irradiation grafting with the use of γ-rays
is a common way to graft AAc chains to a substrate. A significant amount of research
has been devoted to the study of different grafting parameters in the irradiation grafting
of AAc onto ePTFE.[25, 26, 18]
As outlined, there are a number of studies related to the grafting of a single monomer
onto a polymeric surface. The application of a facial implant is complex therefore as
more groups with different functionalities are introduced to the polymer surface there is
a potential to create an advantage of such a material. A study by Luk et al. employed
two-step irradiation grafting of polycaprolactone (PCL) with AAc and 2-aminoethyl
methacrylate hydrochloride (AEMA) for the application as a scaffold material.[27] An-
other monomer, N,N-dimethylaminoethyl methacrylate (DMAEMA) was also grafted
along with AAc by a one- and a two-step process onto a fluoropolymer.[28] An intro-
duction of AAc and N-isopropyl acrylamide (NIPAAm) onto PTFE was reported, by
the radiation grafting one-step method to induce the bioactivity of the material bioac-
tivity.[29] The same monomers were grafted onto PTFE by the two-step methods and
various parameters were studied.[30]
Water is a common solvent for grafting of AAc. However, other solvents were also
studied in the relavent literature. The research that used ethanol as a solvent, showed
reduced grafting yields compared to water and the use of methanol as the solvent did not
show grafting.[31] Introduction of double functionalities by grafting AAc and AEMA was
undertaken in water and yielded satisfactory results.[27] Grafting of PTFE with AAc
and NIPAAm was also performed in an aqueous solution.[29, 30]
Various parameters of grafting were studied in the previously reported literature.
The total irradiation dose was studied with respect to the influence on the graft yield
by Hidzir et al. [32] An increase from 2 to 10 kGy dose enhanced the graft yield of AAc
onto ePTFE. A study on grafting polyethersulfone with AAc showed an increase in graft
yield with the total irradiation up to around 23 kGy.[33]
As observed in the literature, the graft yield is increased with irradiation dose. How-
ever, at high doses the problem of homopolymerization has been observed and eventually
the homopolymer formation affects grafting yield.[34] To overcome this problem and sup-
press homopolymer formation the use of metal salts has been report.[34]
Various metals salts were investigated in the literature. Goel et al. examined the
addtion of Ferrous ammonium sulfate (Mohr’s salt), cupric sulfate and cuprous sulfate
and found Mohr’s salt to be most effective in the irradiation grafting of AAc on a
polypropylene membrane.[34] The author found that 4% concentration of Mohr’s salt
showed the maximum increase in graft yield.[34] Other studies, showed that 1% of Mohr’s
salt is sufficient to give satisfactory results in grafting of AAc.[14, 32, 34] The study by
Hidzir et al. where AAc was grafted onto ePTFE with the addition of 1% Mohr’s salt
showed much higher graft yields when compared to a study where no Mohr’s salt was
used.[18, 32]
The use of acid has been reported to increase graft yield but its action is not com-
pletely understood.[14, 34] Goel et al. found, that out of three common inorganic acids,
sulphuric acid showed the greatest increase in graft yield at 0.5 M concentration.[34]
==PAGE:20==
4
1 Introduction
The addition of various inorganic acids were examined by Nasef et al. on grafting of
styrene onto fluorinated polymers in different solvents. It was found that the added acids
increase the local partition coefficient of styrene therefore, increases the concentration
of this monomer around the growing chains.[35] As outlined, a small number of studies
have been published on the effect of addition of the acid on grafting but no information
appears to be available in the literature on ePTFE-g-AAc.
Monomer concentration can affect the outcome of grafting as a higher concentration
of monomer molecules means more accessibility for the polymer backbone radicals to
the monomer. However, it was observed that too high a concentration of a monomer
may also be prevalent to homopolymerization if not enough active sites are generated on
the polymer surface.[34] Grafting of AAc (1-20%) onto a PTFE membrane showed an
increase of graft yield with the increasing monomer concentration but no change in the
external surface coverage, which indicates higher grafting in the bulk with obtained by
a higher concentration of the monomer.[18] Similarly, grafting the same monomer onto
ePTFE by Hidzir et al. with the concentrations ranging from 2 −40% resulted in an
increase of the graft yield until around 10 −20%. Above these concentrations the graft
yield levelled off.[32]
In order to evaluate the performance of the material with regard to its behaviour in
vivo and bone bonding abilities a simulated body fluid (SBF) technique is commonly
used.[36, 37]. This technique allows for the in vitro mineralization of the material at
conditions similar to those of human blood plasma (ion concentrations, pH, tempera-
ture).[38]. The SBF was used on various of substrates including ionically functionalised
ePTFE.[19] For an in depth review of previous literature the readers are refered to the
review completed by the author of this thesis, titled ”In vitromineralization of functional
polymers”(2015).
1.1.1
Concluding remarks
Considering the previous literature outlined above it is apparent that a study of parame-
ters affecting simultaneous γ-irradiation grafting of AAc and AEMA onto ePTFE should
be done in order to improve the biomimetic properties of this promising material with
regard to facial implants. Concluding the reported work the following grafting parame-
ters form the basis of the research methodology within this thesis. Water will be used
as a solvent for both monomers and addition of Mohr’s salt and sulfuric acid will be
examined, at various monomer concentrations and irradiation doses. Double function-
alization will be introduced by one- and two-step methods. The one-step method will
involve grafting in a binary solution of AAc and AEMA. The two-step method will be
performed by firstly introduction AAc functionality followed by the AEMA in seperate
experiments.
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 2
Theoretical Background
2.1
Biomaterials and biocompatibility
Biomaterials research has been occuring for over 50 years, and is an interdisciplinary
field. It incorporates materials and medical science with engineering to improve the
quality of life of the users. There are many definitions of a biomaterial found in current
literature. IUPAC broadly defines a biomaterial as a ”material exploited in contact with
living tissues, organisms, or microorganisms”.[39] Park and Lakes, defined the concept
of a biomaterial as a ”synthetic material used to replace part of a living system or to
function in intimate contact with living tissue”.[40] Biomaterials create an opportunity
to improve human health. However, there are challenges to ensure the safe and effective
use of such materials within patients.
Biomaterials constitute various materials of different origins, such as metals, glasses,
ceramics and polymers. Biomaterials find application in temporary and permanent solu-
tions such as, contact lenses, catheters, dental, vascular, orthopaedic and maxillofacial
implants. The aim of a biomaterial is to restore the healthy functions of the human
body. Synthetic polymers have gained popularity as biomaterials due to their perfor-
mance, ease of modification, and capability to form different shapes.
There are specific requirements that a material has to meet in order to find appli-
cation as a biomaterial and this depends on its final functionality. These requirements
apply to bulk and surface properties. One of these factors is the material’s mechanical
properties, which are important especially when a force is applied to the material, for
example in hip replacements. When in contact with human tissue it should not elicit
protein fouling causing bacterial infections and undesired immune responses which are
dependent on the surface properties. In addition, a biomaterial that is used for cardiovas-
cular applications should not cause thrombosis (blood clotting). The porosity is another
property which plays a significant role in the material’s ability to integrate with the sur-
rounding tissue. Finally, the degradation properties are a crucial requirement of any bio-
material and depending on its application can be biodegradable or non-biodegradable.[4,
41, 42]
The aforementioned requirements are incorporated into the the definition of biocom-
patibility. Biocompatibility is defined as the ability of a material to behave in a desired
way upon incorporation into the host with respect to the specific application.[43] As
there are a myriad of medical devices and applications, it is not possible to explicitly
describe the properties for a material to be biocompatible.
However, a biomaterial
or medical device should not be harmful for the body or cause any adverse reactions.
==PAGE:22==
6
2 Theoretical Background
Any material brought in contact with a human body should also be non-toxic and
non-carcinogenic. It should also perform in the host for a specified duration. Biocom-
patibility can be evaluated through various test procedures relevant to the application
and assessed through standards defined by regulatory bodies such as the Food and Drug
Administration (FDA).[44]
2.1.1
Fluoropolymers in biomaterials application
Fluoropolymers are defined as polymers that contain carbon (C) and fluorine (F). They
can be fully fluorinated having only C-F and C-C bonds (also referred to as perfluo-
ropolymers), or partially fluorinated by containing one or more other atoms such as
hydrogen, chloride, or oxygen bonded to carbon in the form of functional group for
example ether. The common example of a fully fluorinated material in this family is
polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) known under the trade name Teflon®. There are few
examples of partially fluorinated polymers including: polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF),
polychlorotrifluoroethylene (PCTFE) and fluorinated ethylene-propylene (FEP).
The properties of fluoropolymers depend on their chemistry - the type, amount and
combination of monomers which the fluoropolymer consist of.[45] Fluorine shielding in
fluoropolymers enhances chemical resistance making the materials chemically inert. This
provides good performance when in contact with body fluids. The presence of hydrogen
usually increases the stiffness, while fully fluorinated polymers show higher elongation.
Other unique properties include high hydrophobicity and oxygen permeability, good
biocompatibility, temperature resistance and durability.[46, 47] However, only certain
fluoropolymers show characteristics which facilitate their use as biomaterials. The most
commonly known and used fluoropolymer is PTFE. It is used in luminal access systems
such as catheters, vascular and bypass grafts, bone-regeneration, hernia membranes, and
as tissue space-filler in soft tissue reconstruction.[16] FEP is used in catheters and other
applications in place of PTFE. However, it posses a higher friction coefficient. PVDF is
also commonly used in medical applications such as surgical meshes for tissue and organ
repair and vascular sutures.[48, 49]
2.1.2
Facial implants
Facial implants are medical devices that can fill the lost volume in the facial region
creating a natural appearance and provide structural support. Facial implants are per-
manent, non-biodegradable solutions. However, they can be reversed by removal, which
can be an advantage compared to injectable fillers or autologous fat. Another advantage
of facial implants is that they can be fabricated to suit a particular patient shape and
size. This is achieved using computer-assisted design/computer-assisted manufacturing
(CAD-CAM) technologies.[50] The face is the organ that defines human identity and
therefore it should be treated with the utmost care. There are many aspects which need
to be considered for a suitable implant material to be safe and effective, importantly
the materials surface which creates an interface with the body. The fundamental char-
==PAGE:23==
2.1 Biomaterials and biocompatibility
7
acteristic of an implant is its integrity and compatibility with the surrounding tissues
which must be developed shortly after implantation. In order to maintain the biomate-
rial in the body, a bond must be developed between the material and the tissues.[51]
The mechanism of integration is mediated by proteins, as outlined in section 2.1.3. In
addition, a soft-tissue augmentation material should create satisfactory, reproducible
cosmetic results and be approved by the FDA or other required regulatory bodies.[52]
Due to the complex nature of the material-body interactions, an ideal facial implant
biomaterial has not yet been found.
Over the years, many alloplastic materials for facial augmentation have been de-
veloped. The commonly used materials in facial reconstruction at present procedures
include expanded polytetrafluoroethylene (Gore-Tex®) silicone (Silastic), polyethylene
(Medpor®), polymethacrylate, mesh polymers (Marlex®, Mersilene®), metals and hy-
droxyapatite materials.[53, 54] Each of these materials exhibit different chemical and
physical characteristics. As a result they all have individual advantages and disadvan-
tages. Polymeric materials are especially important constituents in the biomaterials field
and are continuously being meliorated to obtain safe and effective outcomes. Recently,
ePTFE has gained an increased interest to be used as a facial implant material. It is
used in versatile applications such as facial contouring and filling of soft-tissue defects,
nasal and lip augmentations.[46, 9, 55] The use of ePTFE in facial cosmetic surgery
has been reported to be safe, induce cellular integration with no major inflammatory
responses and yield good aesthetic appearance.[9]
2.1.3
Tissue response to artificial materials
The placement of an implant in the body requires surgical procedure which injures the
surrounding tissues. As a result of the procedure, the general body response is inflam-
mation, wound healing, and foreign body response.[56] The latter can either lead to
incorporation or elimination of the implant. The protection mechanism of the the host
organism usually aims to remove the foreign body.[57] Successful integration includes
clinical, mechanical and biological stability.[58] Clinical stability is achieved by either
integration with the hard tissue (osseointegration) or the soft tissue, whereas biologi-
cal stability represents the performance after tissue integration with the implant.[58]
Implant integration with the body depends on the host response and the material’s
properties.
Craniofacial implants have to serve roles both of a soft tissue filler and of a material
at the soft-hard tissue interface.[4] This means that they have to integrate with the
surrounding muscles, skin and bone. The body response to facial implant is implicated
by cells and proteins interacting at the tissue-biomaterial interface. Cells, such as leuko-
cytes or macrophages target bacteria, microbes and other foreign substances to prevent
inflammation shortly after the surgical procedure.[57, 59, 60] Plasma proteins attach to
the implanted material, referred to as protein adsorption, which can render the material
biologically recognized.[61] They can subsequently promote tissue repair and adhesion
to a biomaterial by attachment of fibroblasts or osteoblasts.[62, 63]
==PAGE:24==
8
2 Theoretical Background
In the wound healing of soft tissue, fibroblasts and endothelial cells proliferate at the
site of the implanted biomaterial to form new connective tissue and blood vessels.[56] The
integration of a material to a bone requires new bone formation achieved by osteoblasts
and supporting connective tissue. Bone consists of organic and inorganic components.
The mineralized inorganic component of bone is carbonated hydroxyapatite. The most
abundant organic component in bone is collagen, mainly Type I.[4] Mineralization is a
process which leads to the production of inorganic components in bone formation.[64]
In mammalian organisms, bone mineralization is directed by non-collagenous matrix
proteins. Those proteins are biological macromolecules with anionic functional domains
which either enhance or inhibit bone formation. These include: bone sialoprotein (BSP),
Osteocalcin (OC), Osteopontin (OPN) and Choindrin-4-sulfate (Ch4S). The molecules
implicated in the mineralization process have carboxylate, phosphate or sulfate func-
tional groups. Based on those anionic groups of the biomacromolecules, in order to
mimic the biological interaction and obtain bone bonding to synthetic implant, much
research has reported functionalisation of polymers with the anionic groups.[16, 17, 11]
This kind of surface modification can ameliorate biological reactions to enhance protein
binding, thus it is important in the development of medical implants.[17]
2.2
Properties of PTFE and ePTFE
The discovery of PTFE in 1938 revolutionized the world of polymers. Plenty of appli-
cations were quickly discovered including a non-stick cookware, medical devices, elec-
tronics, textiles and chemical processes.[65] Teflon® found uses as a biomaterial, also in
facial implant surgeries. However, several years later a superior material for this appli-
cation was discovered. This material was expanded PTFE (ePTFE), firstly reported by
Japanese researchers in 1963, and introduced as a product by the commercial name of
GORE-TEX® in the United States in 1969.[47, 65] Expanded PTFE was first used in
biomedical applications in 1972 as a venous graft replacement.[66]
The versatility of ePTFE is due to its unique physical and chemical properties as
a fluoropolymer. It is important to note, that most of the properties of ePTFE are
similar to PTFE and those that differ will be described later in this section. The C-
F bond has a dissociation energy of 116 kcal/mol and is one of the strongest carbon
bonds.[67] This makes the polymer highly resistant to chemicals and thermally stable.
As outlined previously, PTFE is composed of CF2 groups and its chain conformation is a
twisting helix which is composed of 13 CF2 groups per 180o.[45] The molecular structure
is presented in Figure 2.1. This highly crystalline polymer has a linear, non-branched
structure.
The material exhibits very low polarity and has one of the lowest surface energies
among polymers. Therefore, it is an extremely hydrophobic polymer. The larger size of
fluorine and tightly packed molecular structure enables the molecules to slip and makes
it an extremely lubricious polymer having low coefficient of friction.[67, 47] Unfortu-
nately this causes an undesirable feature, namely cold flow or creep. Creep may lead
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Properties of PTFE and ePTFE
9
Figure 2.1: Molecular structure of PTFE.
[47]
to shrinkage or migration of the material. Table 2.1 outlines some of the important
properties of PTFE.
Table 2.1: Properties of PTFE.
Property (unit)
Value
Density (g/cm3)
2.1-2.3 [67]
Crystallinity (%)
92-98 [67]
Melting point (oC)
1st 342 [67]
2nd 327 [67]
Coefficient of friction
0.08 static [67]
0.01 dynamic [67]
Critical surface tension (mN/m)
18.6 [68]
Dynamic contact angle (o)
116 advancing [68]
92 receding [68]
Tensile strength (MPa)
17-34 [68],a
Tensile modulus (GPa)
340 [68],a
Elongation at break (%)
200-400 [68],a
a at 23oC
An ePTFE membrane is obtained by the fabrication of a PTFE sheet and subse-
quently stretching in the axial directions at high temperatures and rates. The structure
of ePTFE is maintained by a heat treatment called an amorphous locking step, to re-
strain shrinkage.[69] This creates a microstructure of fibrils connected by nodes with
various pore sizes, which retains liquid droplets but enables gaseous molecules to pass
==PAGE:26==
10
2 Theoretical Background
through. ePTFE fibres exhibit high tensile strength and a broad range of moduli - pro-
viding both tough and strong properties for the material. The density of the expanded
part can be controlled.[70] Some of the properties of ePTFE are presented in Table 2.2.
Table 2.2: Properties of expanded PTFE.
Property (unit)
Value
Porosity (%)
1-99 [69]
Pore size (µm)
0.02-40 [69]
Melting point (oC)
385 [68]
The porous structure of ePTFE enables better tissue ingrowth and fixation when
compared with an ordinary PTFE, and makes it a lightweight material.[4] The tensile
strength and creep resistance are greatly improved when compared with PTFE. It is
also very flexible and highly resistant to stretching. ePTFE provides good biocompat-
ibility and minimal inflammatory response therefore it has continuously been used for
many years in medical devices.[70, 53, 46] The failure of the material used as implant
in subcutaneous tissue has been reported to be minimal.[46] Despite all the advantages
a high rate of complications has been reported after the use of ePTFE as a static fa-
cial suspension.[71] Problems also occur with the micromovements of the ePTFE, and
the tissue and bacterial infections, which caused early and late complications.[72] The
biocompatibility of this material in the application of facial implants, especially for the
facial implants interfacing with bone, needs improvement for better adequacy for this
use.
2.3
Surface modifications of polymers by
grafting
The key to a successful implantation of a biomaterial lies in the interface between the
material and the host organism. The surface properties of a material have to be very
specific in order to develop an appropriate biological response.
However, numerous
materials acquire good bulk properties but lack the necessary ability to adhere to bone
or soft tissue. Surface modifications create an opportunity to alter the surface of the
material without adversely changing its bulk properties.
The introduction of anionic functional groups to the surface of a polymer aims to
mimic the interaction of biological macromolecules implicated in the process of mineral-
ization to improve biocompatibility and obtain bone bonding ability. Polymer surface
modifications can be achieved by various techniques such as physico-chemical, mechani-
cal or biological methods. The physico-chemical methods are classified into active gases
==PAGE:27==
2.3 Surface modifications of polymers by grafting
11
and vapour treatment, radiation, and chemical solution or bulk phase desorption treat-
ments.[73] Most of the chemical agents are not able to attain the initiation rates high
enough to modify the properties of PTFE. Therefore, due to its inertness high energy
reactions are required. Among various outlined methods, radiation induced grafting has
been widely used for the functionalization of biomaterials surfaces.[73, 11, 74]
Grafting techniques can introduce polymer chains to the surface of a substrate.[15].
Grafting of a new specific functional polymer chain on a polymer surface can be ob-
tained by grafting it to the substrate or by propagation of a chain from the substrate.
These methods are called ”grafting to” and ”grafting from”.
In the first case a an
end-functionalised polymer chain is first grown in the mixture from monomer and sub-
sequently attached to a functional group on the substrate. In the latter, a polymer
chain is grown on the surface of the grafted material. Both methods create covalently
attached polymer chains.[75] Graft polymerization can be initiated by chemical, photo-
chemical, plasma or radiation techniques to name just a few.[76] Radiation methods
include plasma, UV, X-rays, electron and ion beams, and γ-rays.[14] In this work the
focus will be on the high energy γ-ray irradiation methods.
2.3.1
Radiation grafting methods
There are generally three approaches used in radiation grafting. The first is a simultane-
ous grafting technique whereby the polymer substrate and monomer are simultaneously
exposed to ionizing radiation (Figure 2.2 A [77]). This leads to the formation of a graft
polymer but also provides contaminating homopolymer. The second approach is the per-
oxy/hydroperoxy method whereby the polymer is exposed to radiation in the presence of
air or oxygen. This produces peroxy radicals/hydroperoxy groups that decompose when
subjected to heat and create the grafted polymer in the presence of a monomer ((Figure
2.2 B [77]). The third concept is the pre-irradiation, also reffered to as post-irradiation
grafting (Figure 2.2 C [77]). This method requires exposure of the substrate to ionizing
radiation as the first step and formation of trapped radicals. It can be achieved either
in a vacuum or in an inert gas. After the radicals are generated on the surface, the
substrate is exposed to the monomer. The homopolymer formation is overcome in this
case. Typically, the highest graft yields are obtained with the simultaneous method as
there is a lower radical loss due to decomposition.[14, 78]
==PAGE:28==
12
2 Theoretical Background
Figure 2.2: Mechanisms of irradiation grafting. A) Simultaneous grafting B) peroxy/hy-
droperoxy method C) pre-irradiation grafting. [77]
2.3.2
γ-irradiation induced grafting
The source of radiation comes from an atom which looses its energy. Irradiation tech-
niques which utilize γ-rays are classified as ionizing radiation from unstable atoms. These
atoms have an excess of mass or energy and the radiation produced can remove electrons
from other atoms or molecules producing ions.[73] The source of atoms is usually 60Co
which is a synthetic, radioactive isotope of cobalt. γ-irradiation can penetrate the surface
and bulk of the material.
Exposure of polymeric substrate to γ-rays produces active sites in the polymer in
the form of primary free radicals.[12] In the case of simultaneous grafting of PTFE this
means a fluorine abstraction. The monomer present in the solution also forms primary
free radicals due to the γ-radiation. Subsequently, the polymer radical and monomer
molecule form an initiated graft chain. The steps are called initiation and are shown in
Equations 2.1-2.3, where Equation 2.2. refers to homopolymer initiation and Equations
2.1 and 2.3 refer to polymer initiation. Propagation occurs when the initiated graft chain
reacts with monomers and forms a growing graft copolymer. Another possibility is that
==PAGE:29==
2.3 Surface modifications of polymers by grafting
13
the monomer radical combines with a monomer molecules in the solution to form a
growing homopolymer chain. This is shown in Equations 2.4 and 2.5, respectively. The
termination step represents the process when the reactive intermediates in the chain
propagation are consumed. This takes place when two radicals combine as presented in
Equations 2.6-2.9. In addition to the polymer substrate and the monomer, the radicals
can be formed by dissociation of water, other solvents or additives. The terminating
radical X• represents any radical species present.[14, 35]
Initiation
P
γ −rays
−−−−−→P•
(2.1)
M
γ −rays
−−−−−→M•
(2.2)
P• + M −−→PM•
(2.3)
Propagation
PM• + M −−→PM •
n
(2.4)
M• + M −−→MM•
(2.5)
Termination
PM•
n+1 + X• −−→PX
(2.6)
M•
n+1 + X• −−→PX
(2.7)
P• + X• −−→PX
(2.8)
PM• + X• −−→PX
(2.9)
Upon ionizing radiation, PTFE may undergo chain scission, defluorination, oxidation
or crosslinking.[35, 14] Irradiation at room temperature, mainly in air and to a lesser
extent in vacuum is associated with chain scission, whereas above the crystalline melting
point it has been reported that PTFE undergoes crosslinking.[79] Chain scission causes
the decrease in the mechanical properties of the material which is suggested to be due
to the decrease in molecular weight.[79] Other undesirable reactions include monomer
homopolymerization and scavenging of the active sites by other ions.[35, 14]
In PTFE, the stable radicals that can initiate graft polymerization of end-functionalised
polymers are proposed to be located mainly in the mid chain (-CF2-C ˙F-CF2-) or end
chain (-CF2-C ˙F 2-). The mid chain radicals are formed due to the cleavage of fluorine-
carbon bond and the end chain - due to the cleavage of carbon-carbon bond.[14]
==PAGE:30==
14
2 Theoretical Background
2.4
Characterization methods of modified
materials
Surface analysis techniques provide information on the grafting outcome. Depending on
the technique applied different information can be obtained for example about the change
in chemistry of the sample or the extent of modification after grafting. Among the most
commonly used chemical characterization techniques of polymers for biomedical use are
Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
(XPS).[12, 80]
2.4.1
Attenuated total reflectance infrared
spectroscopy (ATR-FTIR)
Attenuated total reflectance Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (ATR-FTIR) anal-
ysis provides information about the functional groups present in the analysed samples.
It can be conducted at ambient temperature, and analyses a depth of up to 1-2 µm.
The principle of the method is illustrated in the Figure 2.3. The infrared beam enters
the ATR crystal which is transparent for this electromagnetic wavelength. It reflects at
the sample surface, which is in contact with the ATR base, and the infrared beam is
redirected to the detector. The fraction of light that reaches the sample and penetrates
it (the amount into the sample as illustrated in Figure 2.3 until the yellow dashed line)
resulting in the evanescence wave.[80] Depending on the structure, molecules absorb
the beam of different frequencies corresponding to the vibrational frequencies of their
chemical moieties. The adsorbed energy over a wavelength range gives the spectrum
of various intensity peaks and provides information on the molecular structure of the
sample.[81]
Figure 2.3: The principle of ATR-FTIR technique.[81]
==PAGE:31==
2.4 Characterization methods of modified materials
15
2.4.2
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS)
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis, also known as electron spectroscopy
for chemical analysis (ESCA) provides quantitative information on the elemental compo-
sition and the local bonding of atoms.[12] It can detect all the elements except hydrogen
and helium.[82] The XPS technique requires ultra high vacuum and analyses a depth of
typically up to 5-10 nm. The analysed sample is exposed to a beam of X-rays, which
results in emission of photoelectrons from the surface atoms of the sample. The kinetic
energy, Ek, of the emitted photoelectrons is the quantity characteristic for the element
from which the photoelectron comes. The energy is given as a spectrum of peaks at
specific positions and intensities providing information on the analysed sample.[82, 83]
The principle of this technique is depicted in Figure 2.4
Figure 2.4: The principle of XPS technique.[84]
Both analyses are troublesome when the chemistry of the substrate and grafted
material are very similar. In such cases, the binding energies (XPS) or band positions
(FTIR) of the substrate and grafted group may be similar and overlap creating difficult
to asses functionalisation. However, grafting of ePTFE with acrylic acid or 2-aminoethyl
methacrylate does not impose obstacles due to distinct chemical structures.[32]
==PAGE:32==
16
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 3
Experimental
The experimental theory of the project was based on the previously undertaken research
in the group and the available literature. The substrate was subjected to surface mod-
ification via high energy radiation. The resulting outcome was evaluated by various
analytical techniques to evaluate if its performance fulfil the requirements in the appli-
cation of a facial implant.
3.1
Materials
3.1.1
Substrate material
The substrate material used in the project is an expanded polytetrafluoroethylene (ePTFE)
membrane obtained from Pall Corporation. The membrane by the commercial name
Zefluor™1µm, lot number T128741, was supported with a PTFE backing film on one
side. Only the ePTFE membrane was of interest in the project. The thickness of the
ePTFE after delamination was 0.022 ± 0.002 mm. The structure of the ePTFE film
comprises of nodes and fibrils, with 1 µm pore size. A SEM image of the substrate is
presented in Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of ePTFE film.
==PAGE:34==
18
3 Experimental
3.1.2
Chemical reagents
Acrylic acid (AAc) of a 99% purity, containing 200 ppm of mono methyl ether of hydro-
quinone (MEHQ) as polymerization inhibitor, and ammonium iron (II) sulfate hexahy-
drate (Mohr’s salt) 99% were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich. 2-Aminoethyl methacrylate
hydrochloride (AEMA), of a 90% purity, containing 500-1000 ppm of phenothiazine
stabilizer was obtained from Acros Organics. Sulfuric acid, 98%, was obtained from
RCI Labscan.
Methyl alcohol (MeOH), 99.8% used for washing was obtained from
Chem-Supply. Phosphate buffered saline 10x concentrated (10x PBS) solution was feom
Lonza. For the mineralization study the following chemicals were used: sodium chlo-
ride 99%, potassium hydrogenphosphate trihydrate ≥99%, hydrogen chloride 32% and
sodium sulfate 99% were obtained from Ajax Finechem and sodium bicarbonate 99.7%
from APS Ajax Finechem. Potassium chloride 99.5% from Merck, magnesium chloride
hexahydrate 98% from Sigma Aldrich, calcium chloride 93% from Chem-Supply and
tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane 99.8% from Spectrum Chemical MFG Corporation.
The deionized water was obtained with Purelab flex system from Elga Veolia and used
throughout the project.
3.2
Methods
3.2.1
Pre-treatment
The PTFE carrier was carefully separated from the ePTFE film before each experiment.
The film was cut to approximately 1x1.5 cm samples. The samples were subjected to
washing overnight in methanol at 50oC to remove contaminations. Then, they were
placed on a petri dish, covered, and dried in the oven at 40oC until constant weight, for
at least two days.
3.2.2
Monomer grafting
Grafting of the monomer was conducted by simultaneous γ-irradiation method. The
preparation for grafting was as follows: Mohr’s salt was weighed in a glass test tube to
obtain 1% w/v in the total volume. An appropriate amount of the monomer was added
(by weight) to the test tube. For AAc 10% and 20% w/v, and for AEMA 10% w/v was
used in this project. 4 mL of solvent (deionized water or 0.5 M H2SO4) was added to
the tube, closed with a cap and shaken vigorously until dissolved. Double grafting was
employed by two techniques: one-step or two-step grafting. One-step grafting involved
placing the substrate in an aqueous binary solution of monomers 10% AAc, 10% AEMA
and 1% Mohr’s salt. A 0.5 M H2SO4 was added to selected samples. Two-step grafting
method was obtained by firstly, grafting the substrate in an aqueous solution of 10%
AAc, 1% Mohr’s salt with or without sulfuric acid. Secondly, after washing and drying
the sample was subjected to grafting in a 10% AEMA aqueous solution with no additives.
==PAGE:35==
3.3 Analysis
19
A washed and dried ePTFE sample was mounted with a wire, by placing the sample in
a loop and tightening it. The sample was immersed in the solution and the tube sealed
with suba-seal septa and bubbled with nitrogen for 5 minutes to remove the dissolved
oxygen from the solution. The test tube was then furthermore sealed with parafilm.
γ-irradiation induced grafting was performed in a Nordion Gammacell 220 instru-
ment. The irradiation dose rates of the instrument varied from 0.8227 to 0.7764 kGy h-1
throughout the course of the project. The total doses applied to the samples were 2, 5
and 10 kGy.
For the convenience of the reader, throughout this thesis, the samples will be named
ePTFE-g-XAAc-Y, where X states the concentration of monomer in the grafting solution
and Y - the total irradiation dose.
3.2.3
Post-treatment
After irradiation each sample was placed in a clean test tube and subjected to a cleaning
procedure. First, a small amount of methanol was added and the sample was left for 1
hour. Then, methanol was replaced, filled to approximately 3/4 of the glass tube and
placed in a 50oC bath overnight. Next, methanol was replaced by deionized water. The
sample was immersed in fresh water three times for 1 hour, then left in water at 60oC
overnight. Finally, the sample was placed on a plastic weighing boat and dried in a
desiccator over three days or until constant weight.
3.3
Analysis
3.3.1
Graft yield
The graft yield or the degree of grafting was determined from a weight measurement of
the sample before and after grafting to find the amount of grafted polymer. The weight
was obtained using Metler Toledo XS205 Dualrange balance (d±0.01 mg). The results
presented are the average and the standard deviation of at least 3 measurements. The
graft yield was calculated based on the weight increase according to the Equation 3.1.
GY (%) = Wg −Wi
Wi
· 100%
(3.1)
Where: Wg is the weight of sample after grafting, Wi is the initial weight of the
sample (before grafting).
==PAGE:36==
20
3 Experimental
3.3.2
Chemical characterization
3.3.2.1
Attenuated total reflectance infrared spectroscopy
(ATR-FTIR)
To evaluate the chemical composition of the samples attenuated total reflectance infrared
spectroscopy (ATR-FTIR) was carried out using PerkinElmer Spectrum 400 Spectrom-
eter. The spectra were obtained in transmittance mode, in the frequency range of 4000-
550 cm-1 at 4 cm-1 resolution and accumulation of 8 scans per analysis. The instrument
was equipped with an ATR Imaging Accessory using a diamond crystal window. The
spectra were recorded at ambient temperature and analysed on Spectrum software.
The intensity ratio of carboxyl to fluorocarbon group was calculated from a spectrum
in the absorbance mode. For this purpose the intensity of the band characteristic of
the carbonyl group of carboxylic acid present at 1710 cm-1 was related to the bands
characteristic for pure PTFE.[18, 85] The PTFE bands are present approximately at
1145 and 1200 cm-1 and are characteristic of the CF2 symmetric stretching and CF2
asymmetric stretching, respectively.[85] These two bands were refereed to as CF I and
CF II throughout this thesis.
The presented results are the average values and the
standard deviation of at least three replicates.
3.3.2.2
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS)
The X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy was performed at the Center of Microscopy and
Microanalysis facility (CMM). The analysis was done on Kratos Axis ULTRA X-ray
Photoelectron Spectrometer. The incident radiation was Monochromatic Al Kα X-rays
(1486.6 eV photon energy) working at 225 W (15 kV, 15 mA), with a vacuum system
at a base pressure during analysis of 10-9 torr. The sample was placed in the vacuum
system one day before the experiment. Survey (wide) scans were carried out over a
binding energy range of 1200-0 eV, and pass energy of 160 eV, with 1.0 eV steps and a
dwell time of 100 ms. Multiplex (narrow) scans were performed at a pass energy of 20
or 40 eV (if the noise signal was too high), with 0.05 eV steps and 250 ms dwell time.
The technique provided information on the elemental composition of the samples.
The CasaXPS software version 2.3.14 was used for curve fitting of the high resolution
data and to calculate the atomic concentrations. The peak shape and background was
acquired with use of a Shirley baseline and a least squares fitting method with Kratos
library Relative Sensitivity Factors (RSFs). The analysed binding energy peaks of the
samples were corrected based on the value for CF2 of PTFE at 292.5 eV.[86] The position
and the full width at half maximum (FWHM) were estimated with the help of published
data.[87, 86, 88]
The graft extent on the surface of the sample was evaluated from the XPS data
of the carbon narrow scan. The results presented are the average and the standard
deviation of at least two measurements unless stated otherwise. The calculations were
done according to Equation 3.2.
==PAGE:37==
3.3 Analysis
21
GE(%) = Call −CC−F
Call
· 100%
(3.2)
Where: Call is the total amount (percent concentration) of carbon bonded compo-
nents in the sample, CC-F is the amount of carbon bonded to fluorine (percent concen-
tration).
3.3.3
Mechanical testing
The mechanical analysis was performed at the Australian Institute of Bioengineering
and Nanotechnology (AIBN) with an Instron 5543 testing system. The instrument was
used for analysis of the tensile properties of the sample. The tests were performed with
a 5 N load cell at 10 mm min-1 displacement rate. The samples were transported to
the testing lab in a desiccator to avoid exposure to changes in humidity. The tests were
performed in dry mode at ambient temperature and humidity.
Specimens for the tensile tests were cut to a typical dog-bone shape as shown in
Figure 3.2 with a standard ISO 37-Type 4 cutter. The specimen gage length was 12 mm
and the diameter 2 mm.
Figure 3.2: The geometry of the tensile specimen used in the mechanical testing [89]
The tensile tests were performed with the use of Bluehill 2 software. The raw data
of the tensile extension and load were generated by the software. The test method had
specified the diameter of the sample, gage length, displacement rate and thickness of the
sample. The gage length in the test method was set to 10 mm as the samples were brittle
or shrunk after grafting. The thickness of all the ungrafted samples was set to 0.022 mm
and the thickness of each grafted sample was corrected in the calculations according
to the measurement. The thickness was measured with an automatic digital calliper
(d±0.001 mm). The presented results are the average and the standard deviation of at
least three measurements.
The ultimate tensile strength (UTS), the percentage elongation at break (ϵ) and
Young’s modulus (E) were determined from the raw data with the use of self-written
code in MatLab software.
==PAGE:38==
22
3 Experimental
3.3.4
Wettability
3.3.4.1
Contact angle measurement
Contact angle (CA) measurements were performed on a Dataphysics instrument with
the use of SCA20 software. The method used was static sessile drop. The liquid used in
the analysis was deionized water. 10 µL of water was dispensed with a syringe at 1 µL
s-1 rate.
3.3.4.2
Degree of swelling
A degree of swelling (absroption) was evaluated by immersing approximately 10x15 mm
samples in 5 mL of PBS solution at 37oC for 24 hours. After removal from the solution
a filter paper was used to remove any drops of liquid ”hanging” from the sample. The
degree of swelling (Q) was calculated according to Equation 3.3.
Q(%) = Ws −Wd
Wd
· 100%
(3.3)
Where Ws is the weight of the swollen sample, Wd is weight of a dry sample. The
results are presented as an average and a standard deviation of a duplicate measurement.
3.3.5
In-vitro mineralization
An in vitro mineralization study was performed by immersing the grafted samples in a
1.5 times the concentration of simulated body fluid solution (1.5 SBF). The procedure
and composition of the solution was based on the article by Kokubo and Takadama
[38]. All the glass, plastic bottles and other equipment used were flushed with 10% HCl
solution, deionized water and air dried. A total of 500 ml of solution was prepared.
First, 375 ml of deionized water was heated in a plastic beaker to 37oC. The beaker
was covered with parafilm to keep any contamination away. The list of reagents used is
shown in Table 3.1. Reagents 1-8 were dissolved slowly, one by one, making sure that
each was fully dissolved. Subsequently, water was filled to reach 450 ml and reagents 9
and 10 were dissolved. The pH was adjusted to 7.4 by adding 1M NaOH and solution
was filled to 500 mL with deionized water.
The size of every sample used for this experiment was approximately 1.5x2 cm, except
for the samples grafted in one-step method, which were smaller (about 1x1.5 cm). The
samples were attached with a wire to avoid floating and placed in falcon tubes with 10
mL of the 1.5 SBF. The samples were kept in a water bath at 37oC. After 7 days the
samples were take out, thoroughly washed with water and placed in a fresh 1.5 SBF
solution. After additional 7 days the samples were washed with water again and dried
in a desiccator until a constant weight was achieved.
==PAGE:39==
3.3 Analysis
23
Table 3.1: Amounts and order of reagents for preparation 500 mL of 1.5 SBF.[38]
Order no.
Reagent
Amount
0
H2O
375 mL
1
NaCl
5.997 g
2
NaHCO3
0.2625 g
3
KCl
0.168 g
4
K2HPO4·3H2O
0.171 g
5
MgCl2·6H2O
0.229 g
6
1 M HCl
30 cm3
7
CaCl2
0.2085 g
8
Na2SO4
0.0535 g
9
Tris
4.543 g
10
1 M NaOH
appropriate amount
3.3.6
Morphology
To investigate the morphology of the samples scanning electron microscope (SEM) anal-
ysis was performed on a Jeol NeoScrope JCM-5000 system. The samples were sputter
coated with platinum for 2 minutes in order to improve conductivity of the material. The
SEM analysis was performed in high-vacuum mode at 10 kV. The images were taken at
various magnifications as depicted in the pictures.
3.3.7
Statistical analysis
The statistical analysis of the obtained results (except tensile tests) was performed in
Excel. The data are expressed by an average and standard deviation. Sets of data were
compared with the use a two-tailed student’s t-Test (T.TEST function) with a hypoth-
esis that the means of two populations are equal. The variances were first determined
by the F.TEST function to determine equality/inequality. Samples were considered
statistically different if the p-value >0.05, i.e. at 95% confidence level. The error propa-
gation method was used in order to define the uncertainty for results combined of many
quantities. If the reproducibility error was larger than the error calculated according to
error propagation, the values were estimated based on the reproducibility error.
Graft yield, absorbance ratio, graft extent, ultimate tensile strength, percentage
elongation at break and Young’s modulus were calculated on the basis of at least three
replicates. Contact angle was calculated from the left and right angle of a drop of at
least 2 replicates unless stated otherwise.
==PAGE:40==
24
3 Experimental
For the graft yield and tensile analysis calculation outliers were excluded on the basis
that the point was distant by more than the average ± two times the standard deviation.
The average and standard deviation of the tensile test results were calculated in MatLab.
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 4
Results and Discussion
The aim of the project was to obtain a modification with anionic groups of a synthetic
polymer by γ-induced grafting. In the following chapter the most important results will
be presented and discussed. The order of the chapter will be as follows. Firstly, the work
done on grafting with acrylic acid and the effect of grafting parameters will be presented
and analysed. Secondly, the results on double functionalisation by grafting with acrylic
acid and 2-aminoethyl methacrylate will be given. Finally, the outcome of the in vitro
mineralization of the grafted membranes will be presented.
4.1
Grafting of acrylic acid onto ePTFE
In this chapter the results of grafting a ePTFE membrane with acrylic acid (AAc) will be
presented. The acrylic acid monomer (IUPAC name prop-2-enoic acid) has the molecular
formula C3H4O2 and is the simplest unsaturated carboxylic acid. It consists of vinyl
group (-CH=CH2) directly connected with the carboxyl group. Its chemical formula
is presented in Figure 4.1 The AAc monomer is a colourless liquid soluble in water,
alcohols, ethylene glycol and acetic acid.[90] It can react with other AAc molecules
to form polyacrylic acid (pAAc) by breaking its vinyl double bond. The product of
polymerization can be a linear or cross-linked homopolymer. pAAc is an anionic polymer,
which in water can loose its protons and become a negatively charged polyelectrolyte.
It has strong water absorption properties and can swell many times over its original
volume.[91]
Figure 4.1: Chemical structure of acrylic acid.
==PAGE:42==
26
4 Results and Discussion
4.1.1
Chemical characterization
Chemical characterization, with techniques such as FTIR and XPS, contact angle, and
graft yield calculation were used to identify to which extent the ePTFE’s surface had
been modified.
The original films, and grafted samples were analysed to imply the
occurrence of functionalisation.
4.1.1.1
Attenuated Total Reflectance Fourier Transform Infrared
Spectroscopy (ATR-FTIR)
Figure 4.2 presents the ATR-FTIR spectra of the untreated ePTFE sample after wash-
ing and drying, and the grafted sample with 10% monomer in water with 1% Mohr’s
salt irradiated at 10 kGy. Spectra of both samples in the transmittance mode show the
characteristic strong peaks of CF2 asymmetric and symmetric stretching vibrations at
1203 and 1148 cm-1, respectively.[85, 92, 18] The samples also reveal the CF2 wagging
at around 638 cm-1 and CF2 deformation at around 553 cm-1.[85, 18] The weak broad
peak around 775-715 cm-1 was suggested in the literature to provide information about
the PTFE’s scissoring vibration between the CF2 group.[93]. In the ePTFE-g-AAc spec-
trum new peaks were observed. The very broad and weak peak from 3500-2850 cm-1
comprises of two superimposed bands. The band at 3500-3000 cm-1 is attributed to the
OH stretching vibration of the carboxylic acid or water bounded in the grafted chains.
The aliphatic CH group stretching vibration is assigned to approximately 3000-2850
cm-1.[94, 95, 92] The band at 1710 cm-1 wavelength is characteristic for carbonyl group
stretch of carboxylic acid. The peak observed at 1452 cm-1 is assigned to methylene
stretches.[94, 18] The analysis provides evidence that there is a presence of acrylic func-
tionalisation. The peaks position and the main functional groups assigned are presented
in Table 4.1
==PAGE:43==
4.1 Grafting of acrylic acid onto ePTFE
27
Figure 4.2: ATR-FTIR spectrum of washed and dried untreated ePTFE (grey) and
ePTFE-g-10AAc-10 with 1% Mohr’s salt (red).
Table 4.1: FTIR-ATR peaks assigned to PTFE and AAc [94, 95, 85, 92, 18]
Wavenumber cm-1
Type of vibration
Peaks assigned to PTFE
1203
CF2 asymmetric stretching
1148
CF2 symmetric stretching
638
CF2 wagging
553
CF2 deformation
Peaks assigned to AAc
3500-3000
O-H stretching of COOH
3000-2850
C-H stretching aliphatic
1710
C=O stretching of COOH
1452
C-H stretching of CH2
The surface modification of the ePTFE film with ionic groups, assigned to carboxylic
acid was confirmed. The penetration depth of this technique is 1-2 µm. Therefore, any
conclusions are only valid to this surface depth. This is equivalent to around 5-10% of the
total sample thickness. The area of the analysis in this technique is several micrometers
squared. Therefore, the result is also dependent on the analysed spot. On a small number
of samples variations in the relative peak intensities were observed, when an analysis was
==PAGE:44==
28
4 Results and Discussion
performed on two different spots. This indicates a heterogeneous spread of the attached
group in the grafted samples. Previous research on grafting of polytetrafluoroethylene
porous membranes with acrylic acid reported presence of bands assigned to PTFE and
AAc at similar wavenumbers as those presented in the obtained results, which serves as
a further confirmation of achieving surface modification in the current project.[18,32,26]
4.1.1.2
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS)
The second technique used to evaluate the presence of surface grafting was XPS. This
analysis identifies the surface of 5-10 nm in depth. Figure 4.3 illustrates the survey
scan of a cleaned ePTFE film before grafting. The spectrum shows F 1s and C 1s peaks
indicating presence of only two elements - carbon and fluorine. The fluorine peak appears
at 690 eV and the carbon peak at 292 eV which is in accordance with the literature.[87]
The two peaks to the left of the F 1s peak are the F KLL Auger peaks, which represent
the energy due to the Auger effect. This effect is a transition of electrons in an excited
atom caused by the x-rays. When the photon affects the atom an electron can be ejected
from the core shell (K) of an atom. Due to this being an unstable energy state, an atom
from an outer shell (L) then fills the hole, which is coupled with an ejection of an electron
from the L shell to conserve the energy.[96] The minor peak at 36 eV is the F 2s (from
the electron configuration of fluorine).[87] The high resolution spectra gave singular,
symmetrical peaks (Figure A.1 and A.2 in the Appendix A.1.). The peaks were assigned
to C-C bonds and F-C-F bonds (CF2) for C 1s and F 1s respectively, which confirmed
that the only chemical bonds present in the film are between carbon and fluorine.
The theoretical fluorine to carbon ratio for Teflon is 2:1. This is expected from the
molecular structure: -(CF2)n-. The atomic percent of fluorine to carbon in the analysed
film was 69.5 and 30.5 respectively. The F/C ratio of the observed peaks was 2.3 which is
higher than the expected value. However, Hidzir et al. reported a value of 2.4 on the same
type of membrane, thereby providing validity to the obtained results.[25] The reason for
the difference in the atomic concentration can be attributed to an instrumental error.
The acquisition of XPS data requires a number of variables, which may contribute to
the quality of spectrum and the signal-to-noise ratio. This includes X-ray flux, analyser
pass energy, and the area of the analysed sample.[83] The XPS error can be up to 10% of
the measured value. It should be noted, that the chain end of PTFE has three fluorine
atoms bonded to a single carbon atom. This however, is not likely to cause a significant
difference in the percent atomic ratios due to the high molecular mass of the polymer. In
addition, there was no evidence of the CF3 component in the high resolution spectrum
of fluorine.
The XPS survey scan of the grafted sample reveals additional peaks, and is illustrated
in Figures 4.3 and 4.4. The major peaks in the spectrum are assigned to fluorine, oxygen,
and carbon and a minor peak to silicon. The sample shows 12% atomic concentration
of oxygen. The carbon content increased to 41%, and the fluorine content decreased by
over 20% giving 47% compared to the untreated sample. More than one carbon peak
==PAGE:45==
4.1 Grafting of acrylic acid onto ePTFE
29
can be observed for the grafted sample. According to the survey scan, trace amounts of
silicon are also present on the sample surface, which is acknowledged to be an unknown
impurity possibly originating from the ambient environment.
Figure 4.3: XPS survey scans of untreated ePTFE film.
Figure 4.4: XPS survey scans of ePTFE-g-10AAc-5 with 1% Mohr’s salt.
The high resolution carbon and oxygen scans of the ePTFE-g-10AAc-5 are shown in
Figures 4.5 and 4.6. In the C 1s spectrum the peak at 292.5 eV is assigned to CF2 (Figure
4.5). Curve fitting revealed a manifold of peaks appearing between binding energies of
==PAGE:46==
30
4 Results and Discussion
290-286 eV. The carbon-carbon (C-C) bonding component is present at 285 eV. The
C-COO at 286 eV and the COO at 289 eV are due to the oxygen functional groups. The
C-C, C-COO and COO are the characteristic components of polyacrylic acid as expected
from its linear structure.[88] In the curve fitting the C-COO and the COO peaks were
set to have an equal fractional intensities, based on the chemical formula of pAAc. The
peak at 287 eV cannot be attributed to a linear pAAc. Its origin is unknown and was
investigated based on previously reported data. It was present in all the acquired spectra.
The atomic percentage of the component at 287 eV was between 3.1-14.9% of all the
carbon components and ratio relative to C-C component ∼0.3.
The 287 eV peak was also found in the XPS analysis of pAAc in the previous litera-
ture.[97, 32, 25, 26, 98, 99] Leadley et al. studied polyacrylic acid on metal substrate and
claimed that presence of peak at 286.7 eV was associated with either hydroxyl or ether
group. The mechanism proposed by the authors was cross linking of pAAc due to X-ray
degradation during prolonged XPS analysis. The degradation can lead to formation of
hydroxyl functionalities.[97] This is in accordance with earlier research, which showed
that for monomers containing one α-H atom (like AAc) cross linking occurs during radi-
olysis, while for monomers without α-H degradation is predominant. The cross-linking
is explained to happen between a formed radical (after hydrogen loss) and a radical of
an adjacent molecule or polymer chain.[100] Hidzir et al. reported a small peak at 287
eV when grafted AAc to ePTFE in an aqueous solutions.[32, 25, 26] However, according
to Hidzir et al. the unknown peak did not change intensity after prolonged exposure
to the X-ray beam.[32] The authors rejected oxidation of the substrate as there was
no presence of the peak for a sample radiated in pure water.[26] The cross-linking can
therefore be suggested to occur during radiation induced grafting.
To evaluate presence of cross linking, Hidzir et al.
proposed comparison of the
theoretical and experimental values of the atomic ratios for oxygen containing groups
to carbon-carbon components. The theoretical COO/C-C for linear pAAc is 1 and C-
O/C-C for a cross linked polymer is 0.5.[32] The values obtained in this research were
on average 0.8 for both. It is less than the value for a linear and more than than the
cross-linked pAAc. Therefore, it is possible that a small part of the grafted polymer
has a cross linked structure. In the most recent research by Hidzir, the 287 eV peak of
ePTFE-g-AAc sample is suggested to be a CH-CFn component.[26] Introduction of AAc
onto poly 3-hydroxybutyrate-co-3-hydroxyvalerate (PHVB) and polyvinylidene fluoride
(PVDF) also resulted in the peak at binding energy ∼287 eV and was attributed to
C-O functionality.[99, 98].
The XPS O 1s in high resolution spectra (Figure 4.6) of the ePTFE-g-10AAc-5
shows two components. The peak at 532.5 eV is attributed to O=C and at 534 eV to
O-C of the carboxylic acid.[88] The spectrum and the position of the peaks correlate
well with the previously published work for pAAc.[32, 25, 26] The atomic concentrations
for this sample are 44 and 56 for the O=C and O-C components, respectively. This is
in agreement with the theoretical values.[88]
==PAGE:47==
4.1 Grafting of acrylic acid onto ePTFE
31
Figure 4.5: XPS C 1s narrow scans of the sample ePTFE-g-10AAc-5 with 1% Mohr’s
salt.
Figure 4.6: XPS O 1s narrow scans of ePTFE-g-10AAc-5 with 1% Mohr’s salt.
4.1.2
Wettability
In the initial phase of the project, a contact angle (CA) analysis was investigated to
evaluate the grafting outcome of the ePTFE-g-AAc films. The cleaned and dried film
had a CA of 142o ± 4o. The CA of this low surface energy solid was observed to be higher
than reported in the literature for PTFE with water. Bernett and Zisman observed a CA
between 112-114o.[101] A collection of literature between 1950-2000 reported CA values
==PAGE:48==
32
4 Results and Discussion
between 100-117o.[102] However, it is close to the values reported on ePTFE tubes which
are approximately between 120 and 140o.[103] This could be attributed to the porous
structure of ePTFE. The roughness of the material, including at the microscopic level,
has a high influence on the apparent (measured) CA. As described by the Wenzel theory,
the roughness of a surface increases the apparent CA.[104] Therefore, the increase in
hydrophobicity of the tested material, when compared to the PTFE in the literature,
can be attributed to the porous structure of tested ePTFE. .
The hydrophobic surface of ePTFE is not ideal in the application of a facial implant
material. Therefore, the attachment of functional groups to the surface of ePTFE was
aimed to make it less hydrophobic. The analysis was difficult to perform due to the
grafted samples being brittle or curled. Therefore, a flat surface was hard to obtain.
Upon straightening, some of the samples started to break or crack. For some specimens
due to the difficulties in handling it was possible to obtain only one measurement. Each
grafted sample, for which a CA was able to obtain, exhibited a lower CA value than
the virgin ePTFE. The analysis revealed that the CA values of two identically treated
samples were statistically different with the p<0.05. This can be attributed to an uneven
surface or heterogeneous grafting. The heterogeneous surface coverage was observed on
a large number of the samples to be a ”patchy” surface with white spots of varying
intensity. Further FTIR and XPS analyses confirmed an uneven graft coverage of the
samples. It was determined that CA analysis is not suitable for the grafted samples and
this method was discarded for the remainder of the research for this project.
4.1.3
Degree of overall grafting
The weight increase was evaluated for each sample subjected to grafting. This provided
information on the degree of grafting. All the samples grafted with acrylic acid in the
presence of Mohr’s salt (when grafted according to the earlier described procedure) ex-
hibited a weight increase (graft yield, GY) of at least 23%.
Both of the chemical analyses described in section 4.1.1 (ATR-FTIR and XPS) pro-
vide information on a different depth of the sample. Therefore, the ”surface” which
corresponds to the one analysed by FTIR cannot be directly compared to the ”surface”
as analysed by XPS. Since ePTFE is a highly porous material, attachment of the in-
troduced groups can occur on the surface or inside the pores (referred to as the bulk
of the material throughout this thesis). The degree of grafting, measured by GY, gives
the information of the total functionalisation in the bulk and surface of the material.
Therefore, a comparison of GY and either of the described chemical techniques above
can be used to evaluate whether the monomer is grafted on the surface or within the
bulk of ePTFE.
==PAGE:49==
4.1 Grafting of acrylic acid onto ePTFE
33
4.1.4
Morphology
The morphology of untreated and grafted samples were evaluated using scanning electron
microscope (SEM) analysis. The images were taken at various magnifications as depicted
in the pictures. Evident changes were observed in the surface topography of the AAc
grafted samples. Figures 4.7 a and b illustrates untreated ePTFE membrane, after being
washed and dried. The fibril and nodes structure can be observed. The SEM image of
sample grafted in presence of 10% AAc and 1% Mohr’s salt at 5 kGy is shown in Figures
4.7 c and d. At lower magnification, no change is observed as compared to the ungrafted
sample (Figure 4.7 c). Morphology differences can be observed at higher magnification
(Figure 4.7 d). The fibrils of the membrane are covered in a deposited graft, which looks
like filaments. The porous structure of the membrane remains visible but it is covered by
the grafted polymer. The modification seems to be obtained at various depths. Figures
4.7 e and f shows the sample grafted at the same conditions as the previous previous
sample, but in presence of sulfuric acid.
The sample shows interesting morphology
difference, with a patchy but smooth appearance which is already observed at a lower
magnification (Figure 4.7 e). The pores of the membrane are partly covered and are less
observable. There is an increased amount of grafted monomer covering the surface of
the sample.
==PAGE:50==
34
4 Results and Discussion
Figure 4.7: SEM image of sample (a,b) ePTFE (c,d) ePTFE-g-10AAc-5 with 1% Mohr’s
salt (e,f) ePTFE-g-10AAc-5 with 1% Mohr’s salt and 0.5 M H2SO4.
4.1.5
Conclusions
Each grafted sample was analysed by ATR-FTIR and showed the carbonyl stretch band
of the carboxyl group. Selected samples were also characterised by XPS showing the
presence of oxygen and a peak at a binding energy characteristic for the carboxyl group
carbon-oxygen bonds. Overall, the CA of each grafted sample was lower than the virgin
==PAGE:51==
4.1 Grafting of acrylic acid onto ePTFE
35
ePTFE and presented a decrease of hydrophobicity. The morphology of the samples
after grafting is significantly altered. Less fibrillar regions are observed for the sample
grafted in the presence of sulfuric acid when compared to the sample where the additive
was not added. From the above analysis, it was concluded that γ -irradiation grafting
of acrylic acid to ePTFE in water with the presence of Mohr’s salt at the applied con-
centrations and irradiation doses successfully introduces the desired anionic group to
the surface of the polymer material. Therefore, further investigations of the effect of
grafting parameters on the outcome of grafting were conducted, as part of this research
4.1.6
Effect of irradiation dose
4.1.6.1
Degree of grafting: graft yield
The effect of the total irradiation dose on the grafting outcome was studied at three
doses: 2, 5 and 10 kGy. Figure 4.8, illustrates the variation in the graft yield at various
doses at the solvent concentrations of 10 or 20% (w/v) in an aqueous solution containing
Mohr’s salt with and without the addition of sulfuric acid. The data is presented as an
average of all performed grafting experiments and standard deviation. It is demonstrated
that the effect of dose in the AAc grafting is different when sulfuric acid is present in
the solution compared to when pure water is used. For the samples grafted in 10% of
monomer in water the dose did not show an effect of the degree of grafting (p>0.05). For
the 10% AAc with the addition of sulfuric acid the graft yield increased with increasing
irradiation dose (p<0.05). Similarly to 10% AAc, in the 20% monomer solution, without
sulfuric acid, there was no effect of dose (p>0.05). However, for the samples grafted with
20% monomer and additive, the dose had an effect on the graft yield, which is increasing
from 2 to 5 kGy and 2 to 10 kGy, but there was no significant increase from 5 to 10
kGy.
Radiation induced grafting of AAc onto a similar ePTFE membrane was reported by
Hidzir et al. The results showed an increase of the graft yield with an increasing dose
for 2-40% monomer in water with 1% of Mohr’s salt.[32] Turmanova et al. observed
an increase of the degree of grafting 40% AAc on PTFE with the dose, until around
40 kGy when it levelled off.[105] Similar behaviour was demonstrated with grafting
AAc on polyethersulfone (PES) where the maximum graft yield was obtained at around
25 kGy.[33] The graft yield also increased with dose for AAc grafted polypropylene
membranes.[34]
The reason why in the current project, the effect of dose was not present at compa-
rable conditions as reported by Hidzir (10% AAc aqueous solution with 1% Mohr’s salt)
can be attributed to different pore size and thickness of the ePTFE membrane. The re-
sults of the GY reported by Hidzir, at the outlined conditions were: 23±1%, and 34±2%
for the samples grafted at 2 and 10 kGy, respectively. In this project, at the same condi-
tions the results were 38±3% and 36±9% for 2 and 10 kGy, respectively. The standard
deviation for the sample grafted at 5 kGy, in the current project, is relatively higher to
the rest of the samples. This high standard deviation can also be attributed to the lack
==PAGE:52==
36
4 Results and Discussion
Figure 4.8: Effect of irradiation dose on graft yield with 1% Mohr’s salt as an additive,
at 10% and 20% monomer concentration in water, with and without sulfuric acid.
of increasing effect of dose. It is acknowledged that this phenomena could be caused by
a random error. It can be observed that the obtained values are generally higher than
those in the reported study by Hidzir. This can be attributed to a difference in the
dose rate. The irradiation dose rate used in this thesis was approximately half of that
reported by Hidzir.[32] Nasef et al. observed a decrease in the degree of grafting styrene
onto PTFE with increasing dose rate. Similar observations were reported by Hegazy for
γ-irradiation grafting of AAc on polytetrafluoroethylene-ethylene copolymer.[106] It has
been suggested by Nasef et al. that the free radicals formed at high dose rates survive
a shorter amount of time than those formed at low dose rates due to the decay by re-
combination.[35] At high dose rates, there are overall more radicals formed in a shorter
amount of time. The formed radicals can be “deactivated” by termination. At high dose
rates there is not sufficient time for the monomer to diffuse and react with the radicals
on the polymer backbone. A high dose rate can also lead to homopolymer formation,
which increases the viscosity of the solution, therefore can decrease the diffusion and
mobility of the monomer.[35, 106]
4.1.6.2
Degree of grafting: chemical characterization
The ATR-FTIR analysis can be used to obtain quantitative data on the near surface
composition of the sample.
Based on the ATR-FTIR results the transmittance was
translated to the absorbance and the maxima of characteristic peaks were found. The
intensity ratios of the carbonyl group stretch at 1710 cm-1 to the CF2 stretch at 1145
and 1200 cm-1 (CF I and CF II, respectively) were calculated. Figure 4.9, depicts the
==PAGE:53==
4.1 Grafting of acrylic acid onto ePTFE
37
dose effect on the COOH/CF I of the grafted samples. Data is presented as an average
and standard deviation. All the samples were grafted with the addition of 1% Mohr’s
salt in water as a solvent.
For the 10% AAc grafted samples without the additive, there is no effect of the dose.
This also applies to the 10% monomer with sulfuric acid from 2 to 5 kGy. However,
there is significant difference between the absorbance ratio values for samples grafted
with 10% AAc and sulfuric acid between 5 to 10 kGy and 2 to 10 kGy (p<0.05) In
the case of the 20% monomer grafted samples the results are slightly different. For the
samples grafted without additive the only significant increase of dose is for the 20% AAc
grafted samples prepared at 2 and 5 kGy. For those grafted with sulfuric acid the effect
is present between 2 to 5 kGy and 2 to 10 kGy(p<0.05). Similar behaviour was observed
for the ratio of COOH/CF II and the Figure is shown in Appendix A.2 Figure A.3.
Figure 4.9: Effect of irradiation dose on absorbance ratio for the samples grafted with
1% Mohr’s salt as an additive, at 10% and 20% monomer concentration in water, with
and without sulfuric acid.
==PAGE:54==
38
4 Results and Discussion
No data on similar comparisons with the use of FTIR analysis were found in the
available literature on grafting of AAc on ePTFE. The method gives a good evaluation
of the chemical composition of the modified samples. However, heterogeneity in the
spread of grafted chains on the samples, as mentioned in section 4.1.1.1 can contribute
to high variations in the results. As can be seen, the absorbance ratios are ≤0.1. This
indicates that, at the analysed depth, all the grafted samples exhibited new functional
groups characteristic for carboxylic acid in the spectra at ∼1710 cm-1. There is a ten-
dency of an increasing amount of COOH group in the samples grafted with addition of
sulfuric acid, however statistical analysis revealed that no effect present from 2 to 5 kGy
(for 10% AAc) and 5 to 10 kGy (for 20% AAc). The effect is present for those samples
between 2 and 10 kGy. This suggests that the intermediate dose does not significantly
impact the amount of COOH groups. It may be attributed to the spread between the
doses not being big enough to see the difference.
XPS analysis was performed in order to characterize the chemistry with regard to
the elemental composition and to gain quantitative data about the samples. The analy-
sis with regard to dose dependence was performed for the samples grafted with of 10%
monomer in the solution. It should be noted that only selected samples were analysed by
XPS. Minimum of 3 samples were characterized. Figure 4.10 illustrates the dependence
of the graft extent on the irradiation dose as an average and standard deviation. From
the figure it can be seen that the graft extent does not depend on the dose, neither for
the samples with the use of sulfuric acid or the samples without. The statistical analysis
confirmed that the results for those two sets of samples were not significantly different
(p>0.05).
Figure 4.10: Effect of irradiation dose on the graft extent for samples grafted with 10%
AAc and 1% Mohr’s salt in pure water (blue) and in water with sulfuric acid (red).
==PAGE:55==
4.1 Grafting of acrylic acid onto ePTFE
39
The analysis of the relative oxygen and fluorine content was performed from the
survey spectra of the samples grafted with 10% AAc at different doses with and without
addition of sulfuric acid. The results are presented in Figure 4.11 for oxygen and Figure
4.12 for fluorine. It can be observed that the trend of the O and F content at different
doses correlates with the GE. The only result, which does not correlate is for the ePTFE-
g-10AAc-5 with the presence of sulfuric acid. This sample shows smaller amount of O
and higher amount of F than for the sample grafted at 2 kGy.
Figure 4.11: Relative amount of oxygen in the samples grafted with 10% AAc at various
doses with and without addition of sulfuric acid.
==PAGE:56==
40
4 Results and Discussion
Figure 4.12: Relative amount of fluorine in the samples grafted with 10% AAc at various
doses with and without addition of sulfuric acid.
The results of the GE are in accordance with the previously reported findings. The
total irradiation dose in grafting of AAc onto ePTFE at similar conditions (10% AAc
and 1% Mohr’s salt in water) did not have an effect on the extent of grafting on the
surface as measured by XPS.[32] This can be explained by the grafting front mechanism.
Grafting in the simultaneous γ-induced method occurs first at the surface of the polymer
substrate, where the active sites form first. Then, it gradually continues to proceed
inward, to the bulk of the material as it swells.[14] Therefore, the results indicate that
a 2 kGy dose is efficient to establish grafting at the 5-10 nm depth, as analysed by XPS.
Any further increase in dose, does not increase the amount of polyacrylic acid chains on
the surface. The results also suggest that the thickness of the grafted layer is at least
that of the analysed depth. However, a full coverage by the grafted chains of the ePTFE
is not obtained as the GE did not reach 100% i.e. the peak indicating CF2 bonds in the
XPS spectrum still appears.
4.1.6.3
Conclusions
At the applied concentrations, the total irradiation dose did not have an effect on the
graft yield of AAc on ePTFE in water. This result is not in agreement with the previously
reported observations, which may be due to a different substrate thickness, a random
error in the experiment or dose rate used. An effect of dose was present from 2 to 10 kGy
with the addition of sulfuric acid. According to the statistical analysis the absorbance
values of COOH/CF showed discrepancies when the effect of dose is concerned. However,
it is important to notice that the general trends observed correlate with the trends
observed for GY. No effect of dose was observed on the graft extent of pAAc on the
substrate. The independence of graft extent on dose rate can be explained by the small
==PAGE:57==
4.1 Grafting of acrylic acid onto ePTFE
41
analysed depth and the grafting front mechanism. Therefore it can be concluded that for
these samples the grafting took place in the bulk. The schematic illustration of the same
surface graft coverage (graft extent) and different graft density (graft yield)is presented
in Figure 4.13. The absorbance ratio values vary between 0.11-0.66. The maximum
was obtained for 20% AAc with sulfuric acid. For the remainder of the samples the
ratio is below 0.5. This indicates, that the depth of the grafted layer reaches at least
the information depth of this method (which is 1-2 µm). According to XPS analysis a
full coverage of the substrate surface (5-10 nm) with pAAc grafted chains at was not
obtained.
(a)
surface
bulk
(b)
Figure 4.13: Illustration of the same surface graft coverage (GE) and different graft
density (GY) (a) lower GY (b) higher GY.
4.1.7
Effect of additives
4.1.7.1
Homopolymerization control
Addition of Mohr’s salt (ammonium iron(II) sulfate hexahydrate) with the formula
(NH4)2Fe(SO4)2 · 6H2O to the grafting solution was investigated to see its effect on
homopolymerization inhibition.
The samples were immersed in an aqueous solution
containing 10 or 20% AAc and 0.5 M H2SO4 with or without 1% Mohr’s salt. The irra-
diation dose was 5 kGy. The results on the effect of Mohr’s salt in the grafting solution
are presented in Table 4.2.
It was observed that the absence of Mohr’s salt during grafting dramatically de-
creased the graft yield. Samples grafted with 1% Mohr’s salt, did not exhibit any visible
changes in their appearance after being irradiated at 5 kGy. These samples were clear,
with no distinguishable change in the viscosity of the solution as illustrated in Figure
4.14 (a). In contrast, samples grafted without Mohr’s salt, after irradiation were visibly
distinct compared to before irradiation. They were difficult to extract from the glass
tubes due to formation of a very dense, white, soft gel as depicted in Figure 4.14 (b).
One sample (using 20% AAc) was stuck in the gel and could not be retrieved. Except
==PAGE:58==
42
4 Results and Discussion
Table 4.2: Details of Mohr’s salt addition experiment.
Mohr’s salt(%)
AAc(%)
GY(%)
1%
10
56
1%
20
116
0%
10
4
0%
20
-
from the observable difference in the appearance, weight measurement revealed a low
degree of grafting for the sample grafted without Mohr’s salt. The occurrence of the gel
is suggested to be due to formation of AAc homopolymer.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.14: Appearance of samples without visible homopolymerization (a) and with
homopolymerization (b).
The formation of a white gel and the difficulty to retrieve the sample, after radiation
induced grafting of AAc on polypropylene (PP) membrane, in the presence of acid at a
very low dose of 0.6 kGy, was previously reported.[34] When the simultaneous irradiation
technique is used, the radical yields, G(R), of the monomer and the polymer substrate
influence the grafting outcome. When the G(R) of the monomer is greater than that of
the substrate, homopolymer can be formed. Acrylic acid is a very reactive monomer and
undergoes fast homopolymerization.[34] Excessive formation of a homopolymer decreases
the graft yield as a result of increased viscosity, which restrains the accessibility of
the monomer to the active sites on the substrate.[14] To avoid this, inorganic metal
salts have been commonly used in AAc grafting.[34, 14, 32] The homopolymerization
mechanism includes initiation by the H• and OH• radicals formed by the radiolysis of the
==PAGE:59==
4.1 Grafting of acrylic acid onto ePTFE
43
solvent, in this case water.[107] One of the proposed mechanisms of homopolymerization
inhibition is attributed to the scavenging effect of metal cations on the OH• radicals.[34]
Mohr’s salt has also an influence on the formation of the grafted polymer chains. Too
high concentrations of Mohr’s salt may impede grafting. However, at the concentration
used in the project this is not dominating. Mohr’s salt has induced a positive effect
on grafting yield as the homopolymer is suppressed to a greater extent.
Previously
reported simultaneous grafting of AAc onto PTFE membranes without the addition
of metal salt resulted in similar degree of grafting.citeGrondahl2003 At a 10 and 20%
monomer concentration and 10 kGy dose (without H2SO4) the reported graft yields were
2.4 and 14.9% respectively, whereas in this project, similar conditions gave a yield of
3.8%. On the basis of these findings the following experiments were done with the use
of 1% Mohr’s salt.
4.1.7.2
Graft yield enhancement
To evaluate the effect of acid on graft yield enhancement, the addition of H2SO4 to the
aqueous solution was used, at a concentration of 0.5 M. According to the literature sulfu-
ric acid has been found to have the biggest effect on the graft yield on polypropylene.[34]
Addition of sulfuric acid at the present concentration had a strong effect on the GY as
shown in Figure 4.8. Its presence increased the graft yield for all studied parameters.
The strongest effect was for 20% AAc solution irradiated at 10 kGy, where addition of
sulfuric acid increased the GY by over 50%. The results obtained on the graft yield
enhancement of sulfuric acid are in accordance with the literature.[34, 14] The effect of
inorganic acid on the outcome of the total grafting yield on a variety of substrates has
been investigated, but no information was reported on the ePTFE-g-AAc system.[108,
14] The addition of acid has been attributed to enhance grafting by two mechanisms.
One of those mechanisms assumes that in the presence of acid the electrons generated
in the solution by radiolysis are converted into H• radicals which can subsequently ab-
stract hydrogen from the polymer substrate forming more active sites on the backbone.
This explanation however, does not apply in the case of PTFE which does not posses
hydrogen in the backbone. The second explanation suggests that the inorganic acid in
the solution enhances the partition coefficient of the monomer between the substrate
and the bulk of the solution. As a result the local concentration of the monomer in the
vicinity of the growing chains on the substrate increase, and the graft yield also increases.
This mechanism can be applied to the ePTFE-g-AAc system.
To examine the full picture of the addition of sulfuric acid on the grafting outcome
ATR-FTIR and XPS analyses were performed.
The ATR-FTIR spectra of samples
grafted with and without sulfuric acid in 10% AAc at 5 kGy and in 20% AAc at 10
kGy are presented in Figure 4.15 and 4.16, respectively. It was observed that the C=O
stretching band of carboxylic acid at ∼1710 cm-1 were pronounced after grafting with
the additive. Other bands characteristic of the presence of carboxyl group, as described
before in section 4.1.1.1 were also enhanced. At the same time the relative intensity
of the characteristic symmetric and asymmetric stretching band of PTFE at ∼1150
==PAGE:60==
44
4 Results and Discussion
cm-1 and ∼1200 cm-1 respectively, have decreased. According to the absorbance ratio
and the statistical analysis, the presence of the acid significantly increased the relative
COOH/CF for both monomer concentrations at 5 and 10 kGy and for 20% AAc at 2
kGy. Only samples grafted with 10% monomer at 2 kGy did not show a significant
difference between samples grafted in the presence or absence of sulfuric acid (p>0.05).
Figure 4.15: ATR-FTIR spectra of the ePTFE-g-10AAc-5 with (purple) and without
(green) the addition of 0.5 M H2SO4.
Figure 4.16: ATR-FTIR spectra of the ePTFE-g-20AAc-10 with (blue) and without
(red) the addition of 0.5 M H2SO4.
The XPS data and statistical analyses revealed that there was no significant increase
in the GE for the samples grafted in the presence of 10% AAc irradiated at 5 and 10
kGy (p>0.05) when sulfuric acid was present compared to those without the additive.
The samples irradiated at 2 kGy did show a significant difference between the presence
and absence of sulfuric acid (p<0.05). Graphically presented results are presented in
Figure 4.10.
It can be observed (Figures 4.11 and 4.12 that the relative amount of oxygen increased
upon the addition of sulfuric acid at 2 and 10 kGy doses.
However, there was no
==PAGE:61==
4.1 Grafting of acrylic acid onto ePTFE
45
significant difference for samples grafted at 5 kGy. The fluorine content of the samples
mirrors these findings and shows a reverse trend to oxygen. At 2 and 10 kGy irradiation
dose its amount in the presence of additive decreased, and no change was observed at 5
kGy.
The discrepancies between the GE and the relative O and F ratios as revealed by
the statistical analysis may relate to the relatively high instrument error in XPS (10%),
experimental error or heterogeneity of the grafted chains on the surface, which was
previously explained (Section 4.1).
4.1.8
Monomer concentration
The study on the effect of monomer concentration was performed at 10 and 20% AAc
to establish an optimum. Previous research by Hidzir reported dependence of the GY
and GE on monomers at various doses using 2 to 40% AAc. They concluded that the
GY does not change from 10-40%.[77, 32] In this project, the concentration of monomer
did not have an effect for samples grafted at 2 and 10 kGy, and at 2 and 10 kGy in the
presence of acid. But a significant difference was observed for samples grafted at 2 kGy
without and at 5 kGy with sulfuric acid. Absorbance intensity ratio of the characteristic
bands showed no significant difference for any sample set except for the 10% AAc grafted
at 5 kGy dose. The monomer concentration yielding the highest GY and GE on ePTFE
was established to be between 10-40% AAc.[77, 32] In this project only 10 and 20%
monomer was investigated and the outcome was observed to be dependent on other
grafting parameters.
4.1.9
Mechanical properties
The mechanical properties were studied to evaluate the effect of grafting parameters on
the bulk properties of the grafted samples. The results of the tensile analysis of the
ungrafted ePTFE and ePTFE-g-AAc at different doses, with and without sulfuric acid
are presented in Table 4.3, along with the GY.
The ultimate tensile strength (UTS) is consistent with the ungrafted ePTFE for the
samples grafted without sulfuric acid. The samples grafted in the presence of sulfuric
acid show higher UTS values. The increase in the maximum stress is assigned to the
samples becoming more brittle when grafted in presence of the sulfuric acid. Generally,
the samples after grafting with AAc became more ”crisp”. This could caused by an
increase in the grafted chains in the bulk of the samples, as indicated by the GY and
GE (showed earlier).
The elongation at break (ϵ) was the highest for the ungrafted samples. All of the
ePTFE-g-AAc showed much lower ϵ (by more than 10 times). The Young’s modulus
(E) for the ungrafted sample is much lower than for the grafted samples (by at least an
order of magnitude). This is in accordance with decrease in ϵ of the grafted samples
as compared to untreated ePTFE.The value of E is similar for all the samples grafted
==PAGE:62==
46
4 Results and Discussion
without the addition of sulfuric acid. In the presence of the acid, there is an increasing
tendency of the E.
The mechanical properties of ePTFE are strongly influenced by the morphology of
the membrane.[32, 77] The pore size, and internodal distance have an affect on the ϵ and
UTS. The ungrafted ePTFE exhibits higher porosity as compared to the AAc grafted
membranes, hence a high decrease in the ϵ is observed for the ePTFE-g-AAc. In the
study by Hidzir, an ePTFE membrane with 1 µm pore size a much higher UTS, 30
MPa, and E, 57 MPa was reported.[25] The reason of such a difference migh be due to
different thickness. In another study an ePTFE of similar thickness to that of current
project, but different pore size (0.5 µm) was analysed giving a UTS of 18 MPa and E
of 29 MPa, which are still higher than the obtained values in this project.[32] In the
same study testing of samples grafted with 10% AAc and 1% Mohr’s salt at 10 kGy was
evaluated. The E as compared to this project was nearly four times lower. It means that
the material was more ductile, which could be contributed to the lower GY obtained in
the mentioned study.
Few of the samples showed interesting behaviour during the tensile test. After reach-
ing a certain value of the tensile stress, the value decrease suddenly, but then started to
increase again. It was observed that the sample was elongating as the second increase
took place. Those samples, did not obtain an even grafting i.e. the gage was grafted
only on the edges and the ungrafted part of the sample showed different behaviour. The
final result was disrupted, therefore those samples were disregarded from the analysis.
The surface of the samples was visually assessed before each experiment. What it more,
it should be noted, that the material after grafting was very difficult to handle. It was
easily broken or cracked during preparation for the tensile test. Event slight failure of
the gage edge of the specimen could induce further breaking at that point, which can
have an effect on the final results.
Table 4.3: Mechanical properties and GY of the ePTFE and ePTFE-g-AAc at various
doses grafted with 1% Mohr’s salt, with and without addition of sulfuric acid.
Sample
Dose (kGy)
GY (%)
UTS (MPa)
ϵ (%)
E (MPa)
ePTFE
-
7 ± 3
174 ± 65
12 ± 6
10% AAc
2
38 ± 3
8.2 ± 0.4
15 ± 5
218 ± 75
5
34 ± 3
9 ± 1
7 ± 4
208 ± 71
10
36 ± 9
10 ± 2
7 ± 3
306 ± 30
10% AAc
0.5M H2SO4
2
51 ± 8
17 ± 3
9.1 ± 0.3
467 ± 157
5
74 ± 16
16 ± 5
5 ± 1
618 ± 352
10
121 ± 6
17 ± 6
6 ± 2
530 ± 120
==PAGE:63==
4.1 Grafting of acrylic acid onto ePTFE
47
4.1.9.1
Conclusions
The study on the effect of inclusion of two additives in the process of simultaneous
grafting of AAc on ePTFE gave two important findings. The first one is that addition of
Mohr’s salt effectively reduced formation of the homopolymer and consequently increases
the degree of grafting. Secondly, addition of 0.5 M H2SO4 greatly enhanced the graft
yield at both AAc concentrations and various irradiation dose rates. It was observed
that incorporation of both additives has provided an increased performance with respect
to graft yield. Lack of Mohr’s salt though, drastically decreased GY implying that the
polymerization of AAc in the presence of sulfuric acid was much faster. The synergistic
effect of Mohr’s salt and sulfuric acid was previously observed.[14] No literature was
found that would related any of the outlined surface analyses to the effect of addition
of inorganic acid during radiation grafting. Therefore, the results cannot be validated
against previous studies. The trends in the surface analyses (ATR-FTIR and XPS) of
the samples, when the presence of sulfuric acid is compared to its absence, correlate
with the graft yield enhancement effect reported in the literature. The studied monomer
concentrations, generally did not show an effect on the graft yield. The only effect was
observed for the samples grafted in the presence of sulfuric acid at 5 kGy. The results
obtained by from the tensile analysis suggest that grafting of the membrane with AAc
resulted in embrittelement of the graft copolymers, which was greater for the samples
grafted in presence of sulfuric acid. High variations in the results can be caused by
heterogeneous grafting or failure of the material.
==PAGE:64==
48
4 Results and Discussion
4.2
Grafting of 2-aminoethyl methacrylate
and acrylic acid onto ePTFE
The results and analysis of grafting ePTFE with acrylic acid and 2-aminoethyl methacry-
late hydrochloride (AEMA) are outlined in this chapter. AEMA is an acrylic monomer
containing a vinyl group and a primary amine. Its molecular formula is C6H12ClNO2.
AEMA is a common methacrylate studied in the biomaterials field. Its cationic amine
group provides as a good site for immobilization of biological molecules.[109]. Its chem-
ical structure is presented in Figure 4.17. Similarly to acrylic acid, AEMA polymerizes
via breakage of its double bond to form poly(2-aminoethyl methacrylate) (pAEMA).
Grafting of ePTFE with AAc and AEMA was performed via either a one-step or a two-
step grafting processes. The one-step grafting involves placing the ePTFE substrate
in a binary mixture of both monomers (and additives if used) and subjection to radi-
ation simultaneously. The two-step technique involves grafting the substrate with one
monomer at a time as explained in section 3.2.2.
Figure 4.17: Chemical formula of 2-aminoethyl methacrylate hydrochloride.
4.2.1
One-step and two-step grafting techniques
For the double grafting of ePTFE, concentrations of 10% of AAc and 10% of AEMA
were chosen based on the obtained results and available literature.[27] In the one-step
grafting technique the grafting solution contained both monomers, 1% Mohr’s salt and in
some samples 0.5 M H2SO4. The solvent was deionized water. For the two-step grafting
method, AAc was first grafted in an aqueous solution containing 1% Mohr’s salt and in
some samples 0.5 M H2SO4. AEMA was grafted secondly, in deionized water, without
the additives. Grafting was conducted at 2, 5 and 10 kGy doses.
After the one-step grafting process it was observed that the solution which was irra-
diated at 2 kGy in water became slightly cloudy and viscous. After irradiation at 5 and
10 kGy the solution also became slightly cloudy, very viscous (gel-like) and samples were
covered in the gel after retrieving them from the glass vials. This observation suggests
that an increased formation of homopolymer occurred during the one-step grafting in
water. The solutions where sulfuric acid were added in the grafting medium was clear
after irradiation and no change in the viscosity was observed compared to before the
experiment. However, upon placing the samples in methanol for washing, it became
cloudy and flaky. These samples had to be washed in fresh methanol a couple of times
==PAGE:65==
4.2 Grafting of 2-aminoethyl methacrylate and acrylic acid onto ePTFE
49
until no more material peeled away from the grafted film. It was also noted that all the
samples grafted by the one-step technique were difficult to flatten on the drying boats as
they curled and shrivelled up. This behaviour could be due to the film being sticky and
adhered to itself. This observation was not seen for any other sample. The samples were
analysed with regard to the degree of grafting, surface coverage and nitrogen content
and the results are presented in Table 4.4.
From the results it can be observed that the degree of grafting correlates increasingly
with the irradiation dose in the one-step procedure. The presence of acid had an enhanc-
ing effect on the GY for the samples grafted at 2 kGy. At 5 kGy, the additive does not
have a significant effect on the graft yield. The extent of surface coverage (GE) on the
samples grafted at 2 kGy with and without sulfuric acid, and at 5 kGy without acid are
similar. A much higher graft extent is observed at 5 kGy with H2SO4. The value of 97%
means an almost complete coverage of the sample was obtained at the 5-10 nm depth,
with little underlying substrate visible by this technique. Similarly to the graft extent,
the relative nitrogen content is only significantly different for the samples grafted at 5
kGy in the presence of sulfuric acid. It is higher than for the rest of the samples.
Table 4.4: Graft yield, graft extent and amount of nitrogen for the samples grafted using
the one-step method with 10% AAc, 10% AEMA and 1% Mohr’s salt.
Dose (kGy)
Solvent
GY (%)
GE (%)
N (%)
2
water
25 ±1
86±15
1.41±0.01
5
39±3
88±2
1.5±0.4
10
47±1
-
-
2
water with
0.5M H2SO4
30±1
83±4
1.3±0.7
5
49±10
97±1
3.3±0.6
In the two-step grafting method no change of the solution after irradiation with
AEMA was observed. Although AEMA was grafted without homopolymerisation in-
hibitor there was no increase in the viscosity, which suggests that homopolymerization
does not occur at this concentration of the monomer. The samples after washing were
easily flattened and after drying they were mostly flat, unlike the samples after the one-
step grafting. A comparison of the appearance of the samples after one- and two-step
grafting is depicted in Figure 4.18.
==PAGE:66==
50
4 Results and Discussion
Figure 4.18: A comparison of samples after one- and two-step grafting. 1) one-step 2)
one-step grafted in presence of sulfuric acid 3) two-step 4) two-step grafted in presence
of sulfuric acid.
The results of the two-step grafting procedure are outlined in Table 4.5.
For a
comparison the graft yield and graft extent after the first AAc grafting step are also
shown.
The GY of AEMA is similar with the dose increasing from 2 to 5 kGy for
samples grafted both in the presence and in the absence of sulfuric acid. Higher graft
yield of AEMA was observed on the samples which showed higher degree of grafting with
AAc. These were the samples grafted in the presence of sulfuric acid in the first step. It
is suggested, that the addition of sulfuric acid resulted in more grafting in the bulk of
the substrate (according to the previous observations - increase in GY, but stable GE).
Therefore, more available sites are present for the attachment of the second functionality
with the introduction of AEMA. The graft extent in the two-step method is similar for
all the studied parameters. Because the graft extent is a value limited to the surface
coverage at the depth of the analysis it can only be a maximum of 100%, which would be
a full coverage (as explained in section 3.3.2, Equation 3.2) In each of the obtained result
for the total GE (after both steps) a nearly full coverage of the sample was obtained.
The relative amount of nitrogen was similar for all the samples.
The total graft extent and the relative amount of nitrogen obtained are generally
higher for the samples grafted in the two-step procedure. However, the sample grafted
in the one-step at 5 kGy dose when AAc was grafted in the presence of sulfuric acid
shows comparable results. No literature, according to our knowledge, is avalable on the
double functionalization of PTFE with AAc and AEMA for validation of the results.
But studies were done with similar parameters. Luk et al. reported functionalisation of
polycaprolactone (PCL) films with 6% AAc (with addition of 1% Mohr’s salt) and 10%
AEMA via a two-step grafting process, which is similar to the conditions in this project.
The author reported an atomic N 1s content of 7.3±0.5%.[27] A one- and a two-step
grafting process introducing a monomer containing amine functionality and AAc on a
porous fluoropolymer was studied by γ-irradiation with various grafting parameters.[28]
It was concluded that the degree of grafting increases with the increasing dose and
monomer concentration.[28] However, the study cannot be directly related to this project
==PAGE:67==
4.2 Grafting of 2-aminoethyl methacrylate and acrylic acid onto ePTFE
51
due to variations in the monomer, substrate and grafting parameters.
The AEMA
monomer was also introduced as single modification to the surface of PCL by other
graft polymerization technique.[109] The final nitrogen amount of the films varied from
1-6%.[110]
Table 4.5: Graft yield, graft extent and amount of nitrogen for the samples grafted in
two-step with 10% AAc and 1% Mohr’s salt following by 10% AEMA.
Dose (kGy)
GYAAc (%)
GYAEMA (%)
GEAAc (%)
GEtot (%)
N (%)
AAc grafted in water
2
36∗
11∗
48∗
96∗
4∗
5
30±5
13±2
75±14
95±2
3.6±0.3
AAc grafted in water with 0.5 M H2SO4
2
56∗
14∗
89∗
97∗
3∗
5
85±19
17±2
86±6
99.3±0.2
2.8±0.5
* A single measurement.
Grafting of ePTFE by both methods can yield a different copolymer composition of
the final product. In grafting by the one-step methods it is expected that the AAc and
AEMA monomers form a random copolymer as they are introduced at the same time.
The two-step grafting architechture outcome is expected to form a block copolymer. In
the first step pAAc chains are formed, to which pAEMA chains are linked by addition
of the AEMA monomer. Figure 4.19 shows the expected architechture outcome of the
one-step (a) and the two-step grafting (b).
Figure 4.19: Illustration of probable architectures by (a) one-step (b) two-step grafting.
==PAGE:68==
52
4 Results and Discussion
The chemical composition of the samples was analysed by XPS. The extent of surface
coverage obtained from XPS is presented above in this section. A detailed analysis of
the spectra revealed interesting findings. Figure 4.20 shows the survey spectra of the
sample grafted in one-step procedure (with 10% AAc, 10% AEMA, 1% Mohr’s salt in
the presence of sulfuric acid) and Figures 4.21 and 4.22 show the high resolution spectra
of C 1s and N 1s of that sample. Introduction of AEMA in the one-step grafting method
gave rise to new nitrogen peak appearing in the survey scans between 402 to 399 eV
in every sample. Moreover, five samples out of six analysed by XPS required fitting
an additional peak in the C multiplex scans. This new peak occurred at 288 eV. The
possible explanation of absence of this peak in one of the spectra could be due to high
noise, which occurred in this sample. This sample was disregarded from the analysis.
The high resolution scans of nitrogen required two peaks for the curve fitting and these
were assigned as one, between 402-401 eV, and a second between 400-399 eV. The latter
was always much smaller (∼1/3 or less relative percentage area of the N 1s peak in
total).
The introduction of nitrogen to samples grafted using the two-step method was also
observed. Figures 4.23 and 4.24 show the survey and C 1s spectra, respectively of a
sample after introduction of AAc (10%AAc, 1% Mohr’s at 5 kGy). Figure 4.25 shows
a survey scan of that sample after the second step, and Figures 4.26 and 4.27 the high
resolution spectra of C 1s and N 1s, respectively. It can be observed that after the
first step, prior to introduction of AEMA, no nitrogen was present for the samples.
Functionalisation with AEMA gave rise to appearance of nitrogen in the spectrum. The
N 1s peak in the survey scan appears at 402 eV. In the N multiplex scans two peaks were
assigned: one at 402 and one at 400 eV. In the C multiplex scan after grafting with AEMA
an additional peak is present at 288 eV, as compared to prior AEMA functionalisation.
The high resolution spectra of O 1s did not show significant differences as compared to
the single functionalisation, which is due to the overlap of peaks in the oxygen region.
The samples grafted by the one- and two-step grafting methods show similar charac-
teristics. Therefore both methods are suggested to be introducing carbon, oxygen and
nitrogen containing groups.
Literature findings were analysed in order to validate the results.
Luk, reported
functionalisation of PCL films with AAc and AEMA via a two-step grafting process the
N 1s peak was found at 399 eV and similarly no nitrogen was found on the sample prior
to the second step.[27] In another study the N 1s peak was observed at 400 eV.[98] The
additional peak at 288 eV was also found after ammonia treatment or amide introduction
and was associated with N-C=O (amide) bond of carbonyl group.[98, 29] In the high
resolution spectra of nitrogen, they assigned the peak at 398.9 eV to amine, 399.8 eV to
amide and 400.5 eV to imide components.[98] According to the spectra of polyacrylamide,
the amide peak is present at 399.8 eV binding energy.[86] An amine group was also
previously assigned binding energy at 399 eV.[111, 86] The study by Luk associated
peak at 401.5 eV to a protonated amine.[27]
The nitrogen peaks in the survey spectra were observed at similar binding energies
as those in the available literature. The small shift can be attributed to electrostatic
charging of the sample. The chemistry of the substrate can attribute to the shifts in the
==PAGE:69==
4.2 Grafting of 2-aminoethyl methacrylate and acrylic acid onto ePTFE
53
XPS spectrum. Therefore, the results of a study done on a material containing ester
functional group (PCL) may differ compared to the use of fluoropolymer. The multiplex
scans of C and N revealed more findings. The peak present at binding energy 288 eV in
the C 1s high resolution scan is assigned to a N-C=O (amide) group, which is consistent
with the literature. The peak in all the spectra was minor (area percentage ≤3%). After
a comprehensive analysis it is suggested that the presence of the peaks at binding energy
402-401 eV (area percentage ∼75%) in the N 1s scans contribute to a primary amino
group in a form of protonated amine (NH3+). The origin of the second peak at binding
energy 400-399 eV (area percentage ∼75%) is inconclusive. It could be assigned to an
amide functionality, based on the C 1s scan, but there is no clear evidence from the N
1s spectra. The presence of the protonated amine in the ePTFE-g-AAc-AEMA system
was expected and was also revealed by ATR-FTIR analysis as will be explained in the
next paragraph.
Figure 4.20: XPS survey scan of sample grafted in the one-step process with 10% AAc,
10% AEMA, 1% Mohr’s salt in the presence of sulfuric acid.
==PAGE:70==
54
4 Results and Discussion
Figure 4.21: XPS high resolution C 1s scan of sample grafted in the one-step process
with 10% AAc, 10% AEMA, 1% Mohr’s salt in the presence of sulfuric acid.
Figure 4.22: XPS high resolution N 1s scan of sample grafted in the one-step process
with 10% AAc, 10% AEMA, 1% Mohr’s salt in the presence of sulfuric acid.
==PAGE:71==
4.2 Grafting of 2-aminoethyl methacrylate and acrylic acid onto ePTFE
55
Figure 4.23: XPS survey scan after the first step of grafting ePTFE-g-10-AAc-5.
Figure 4.24: XPS high resolution C 1s scan after the first step of grafting ePTFE-g-10-
AAc-5.
==PAGE:72==
56
4 Results and Discussion
Figure 4.25: XPS survey scan after the second step of grafting ePTFE-g-10-AAc-5 with
10% AEMA.
Figure 4.26: XPS high resolution C 1s scan after the second step of grafting ePTFE-g-
10-AAc-5 with 10% AEMA.
==PAGE:73==
4.2 Grafting of 2-aminoethyl methacrylate and acrylic acid onto ePTFE
57
Figure 4.27: XPS high resolution N 1s scan after the second step of grafting ePTFE-g-
10-AAc-5 with 10% AEMA.
All the samples were examined by ATR-FTIR analysis to gain more information
about their chemistry. The samples grafted using one-step method in water with 1%
Mohr’s salt exhibit additional peaks in the ATR-FTIR spectrum compared to the sample
ePTFE-g-10AAc-5. The additional peaks appear for the samples at every irradiation
dose around 1365 cm-1 and 1000 cm-1.
The latter being mostly pronounced for the
samples grafted at 5 and 10 kGy. The spectra are presented in Figure 4.28.
The samples grafted by the one-step method, with the sulfuric acid was present in
the solution, exhibit two additional peaks compared to ePTFE-g-10AAc-5 with 0.5 M
H2SO4. One of them appears at 1550 cm-1 and another at 1355 cm-1. The spectra are
illustrated in Figure 4.29. There is no observable peak at 1000 cm-1 as compared to the
previous sample.
Samples, grafted using the two-step method, by grafting AAc in the first step and
AEMA in the second step show slightly different spectra after the second grafting step.
After introduction of AEMA additional peaks are present at 1550 cm-1, 1410 cm-1 and
also a peak at 998 cm-1. The spectra are presented in Figure 4.30, for the samples grafted
at 2 kGy and Figure 4.31, at 5 kGy.
The peaks observed around 1550 cm-1 and 1540 cm-1 suggest the presence of a car-
boxylate anion (COO-).[112, 113, 114] This could be attributed to the carboxyl group
of pAAc.[114] Keen et al. attributed the bands at 1560 cm-1 and 1415 cm-1 to the an-
tisymmetric and symmetric stretching vibrations of COO-, respectively.[98] Moreover,
the peak present at ± 1550 cm-1 can be attributed to the N-H bending vibrations, but is
expected to be overlapped with the carboxylate vibration.[113, 112]. The peak present
±1000 cm-1 is attributed to the methylene group present in the samples after copoly-
merization.[28] The origin of the peaks at 1365 cm-1 has not been confirmed.
==PAGE:74==
58
4 Results and Discussion
The presence of carboxylate anion is expected due to the electrostatic interactions
with the amine functionality.
As outlined in section 4.2.1, there is an indication of
presence of a protonated amine functionality (XPS analysis). These two ionic COO-
and NH3+ are expected to be present as a result of double functionalisation of the
substrate.
Figure 4.28: ATR-FTIR spectra of ePTFE-g10AAc-5 (red) and samples grafted with
10% AAc and 10% AEMA in one-step with 1% Mohr’s salt at 2 kGy (dark blue), 5 kGy
(blue), 10 kGy (pink).
==PAGE:75==
4.2 Grafting of 2-aminoethyl methacrylate and acrylic acid onto ePTFE
59
Figure 4.29: ATR-FTIR spectra of ePTFE-g10AAc-5 in the presence of 0.5 M H2SO4
(red) and samples grafted with 10% AAc and 10% AEMA in one-step with 1% Mohr’s
salt in the presence of 0.5 M H2SO4 at 2 kGy (dark blue), 5 kGy (gree).
Figure 4.30: ATR-FTIR spectra of samples grafted by two-step method with 10% AAc
and 1% Mohr’s salt in the first step (dark blue) and 10% AEMA in second step (red) at
2 kGy.
==PAGE:76==
60
4 Results and Discussion
Figure 4.31: ATR-FTIR spectra of samples grafted by two-step method with 10% AAc
and 1% Mohr’s salt in the first step (dark blue) and 10% AEMA in second step (red) at
5 kGy.
4.2.2
Degree of swelling
The swelling (Q) of samples in PBS solution after 24 hour immersion at ambient temper-
ature was evaluated. The results are presented in Table 4.6. The absorption of liquid in
PBS was found to be high (>700%). The swelling measurement results show very high
standard deviations. At these high variations of the values a conclusion towards which
sample exhibits the highest absorption in PBS is difficult to be drawn. A water uptake
over the mass of the grafted PAAc on ePTFE membrane was reported, and showed
lower values (300-400%) than swelling in the current study.[32] This difference can be
assigned to the differences in the obtained graft yields and shorter time of immersion.
The pAAc is known to be a very good water absorber.[91] In addition, this polymer
is highly sensitive to pH changes which effects its swelling behaviour.[115, 113] Chen
et al. found that the swelling of PP-g-AAc-DMAEMA) (poly(N,N-dimethylaminoethyl
methacrylate)) increased with an increase of the pH buffer solution.[113] the introduc-
tion of the AEMA functionality could be attributed to imply changes in the samples
to which double functionalisation was introduced by one-step, as these samples show
generally higher Q (if the standard deviations are disregarded).
==PAGE:77==
4.3 In vitro mineralization study
61
Table 4.6: Swelling in PBS by the grafted polymers
Sample
Q(%)
10% AAc
1000±200
10% AAc a
700±100
one-step
1200±200
one-step a
1300±700
two-step
1200±600
two-step b
1000±200
a Grafting in the presence of 0.5 M H2SO4.
b First step grafting in the presence of 0.5 M H2SO4.
4.3
In vitro mineralization study
Biomaterials, which exhibit at layer of hydroxyapatite (HAP, Ca10(PO4)6(OH)2) on
their surface show enhanced ability to bind with the bone.[11] The simulated body fluid
(SBF) technique is the most commonly used method for testing of apatite formation on a
material in vitro.[11] The original SBF solution contains inorganic ions in a concentration
similar to that of the human blood plasma.
The composition of SBF solution was
established by Kokubo and Takadama [38] The details of the ion concentrations in human
blood plasma (HBP), SBF and 1.5 SBF are presented in Table 4.7. The deposition of
Ca and P ions on the surface was observed to be greater for anionic groups.
The
highest effect on mineralization induction was found for phosphate groups followed by
carboxyl groups. [116] The mechanism of mineralization is explained by the electrostatic
interactions between the anionic groups and Ca2+ ions. The negatively charged groups
induce nucleation of Ca2+ from the solution, which subsequently results in precipitation
of calcium-phosphate (CaP).
Table 4.7: Ion concentrations (mM) in HBP, SBF and 1.5 SBF.
Ion
Na+
K+
Mg2+
Ca2+
Cl-
HCO3-
HPO42-
SO42-
HBP
142.0
5.0
1.5
2.5
103.0
27.0
1.0
0.5
SBF
142
5.0
1.5
2.5
125.0
27.0
1.0
0.5
1.5 SBF
213.0
7.5
2.3
3.8
221.7
6.3
1.5
0.8
The in vitro mineralization study was performed to investigate the ability of the
ePTFE grafted membranes to induce CaP growth. The formation of mineral was exam-
ined for the ePTFE-10AAc-5 grafted with and without addition of sulfuric acid, samples
==PAGE:78==
62
4 Results and Discussion
grafted in the one-step method with and without sulfuric acid at 5 kGy, and the sam-
ples grafted by the two-step method with and without addition of sulfuric acid in the
first step at 5 kGy. The study was performed using 1.5 SBF for 2 weeks of immersion.
In a previous study a correlation was found between the weight increase after SBF im-
mersion and GE. It has been shown that a higher weight increase was obtained for the
samples which exhibited a lower GE.[19] The samples were chosen to be grafted at 5
kGy (intermediate dose) for this experiment.
The results of the weight increase of the samples after 1.5 SBF immersion are pre-
sented in Figure 4.32. Each of the samples after immersion in 1.5 SBF for two weeks
exhibited weight increase. The increase in mass of the samples was between 10-15%.
Generally, a higher weight increase is observed for the samples in which preparation
sulfuric acid was present during grafting. This can be attributed to the higher presence
of pAAc, and therefore more available sites for Ca2+ nucleation.
Figure 4.32: The results of weight increase for the samples after 2 weeks immersion in
1.5 SBF.
The ATR-FTIR analysis was performed on the samples after 1.5 SBF immersion to
evaluate its outcome on the grafted membranes. Figure 4.33 shows the spectra of the
samples grafted with AAc (blue), by one-step (red) and by two-step (green) after 2 weeks
of immersion in 1.5 SBF. It can be observed that the band assigned to the carboxylic
acid group vibrations at 1710 cm-1 has significantly decreased. Instead, a band appeared
at ∼1550 cm-1 in every spectrum. This shift is assigned to the formation of carboxylate
anion (COOH-).[112, 98] Moreover, another additional peak is observed at 1410 cm-1.
As previously outlined, this peak was also assigned to the carboxylate vibrations.[98]
The shift and presence of the band characteristic for carboxylate group is an indication
that mineralization of the samples started to occur. The carboxylic acid in the SBF
==PAGE:79==
4.3 In vitro mineralization study
63
solution substitutes its protons with Ca2+ ions. This results in chelation of the COOH-
with the Ca2+ and as a results formation of nucleation sites for mineral growth.
A
similar behaviour of PTFE-g-AAc was previously reported.[77, 18] It was also observed
that on the ePTFE-g-AAc samples a shoulder started to form between 1100-1000 cm-1.
This shoulder is difficult to distinguish for other samples as some of them showed a peak
around 1000 cm-1 before mineralization study. This shoulder could be a sign of a HAP
formation.[77] A very broad band at 3500-3000 cm-1 is attributed to the OH stretching
vibrations of water bound in the sample.
Figure 4.33: The ATR-FTIR spectra of samples after 2 weeks immersion in 1.5 SBF.
Sample grafted with 10% AAc (blue), one-step (red), two-step (green).
The XPS survey scans of the grafted membranes confirmed presence of Ca and P
after 1.5 SBF immersion. The atomic percentage of each of those atoms and a Ca/P
ratio is presented in Table 4.8. The amount of Ca is relatively higher than P, and the
obtained ratio was not in accordance of the theoretical Ca/P of hydroxyapatite which is
1.67 and suggested excess of calcium ions. In the study by Wentrup-Byrne et al. after 2
weeks of immersion in a SBF solution (lower ion concentrations than in the present one)
PTFE-g-AAc the obtained Ca/P ratio was 2.7.[18] According to the XPS analysis other
components were present in the samples after in vitro mineralization, namely sodium,
and magnesium.
During the preparation of the 1.5 SBF solution problems were encountered. The
solution had to be prepared a couple of times, due to a precipitate formation in the
late stages of mixing the components. It is acknowledged that these problems can be
attributed to inadequate purity of the deionized water. Possible, the water used for
the experiment contained Ca2+ ions which influenced the final composition of 1.5 SBF.
Therefore, the high Ca/P ratio can also be explained.
==PAGE:80==
64
4 Results and Discussion
Table 4.8: Atomic concentrations of C, P and the Ca/P ratio of the samples afer 2 weeks
of 1.5 SBF immersion.
Sample
10% AAc
10% AAca
one-step
one-stepa
two-step
two-stepb
Ca (%)
3.0
1.8
2.7
0.9
1.3
1.8
P (%)
0.3
0.05
0
0.02
0.2
0
Ca/P
12.2
36.6
-
45.0
7.3
-
a Grafting in the presence of 0.5 M H2SO4.
b First step grafting in the presence of 0.5 M H2SO4.
A comparison of the SEM images of the samples before and after immersion in 1.5
SBF did not show any changes in the morphology of those sample. Previously, a forma-
tion of mineral was visible on ePTFE-g-10AAc-10 and ePTFE-g-2AAc-10 after 4 weeks
of immersion in 1.5 SBF. The mineral appeared as a distinctive globular shape.[77]
Another reason contributing to the difference of Ca/P and lack of visible mineral for-
mation can be due to difference in the sample size or GY. In this project, higher GYs
were obtained as compared to those reported by Hidzir.[32] The mineralization test was
followed by the protocol, which stated a 10 mL of the 1.5 SBF solution for immersion of
the samples. Due to obtained higher amounts of graft copolymer on the surface, more
nucleation sites were obtained. Therefore, it has been determined that there was not
enough ions present in the solution to continue mineral deposition.
==PAGE:81==
CHAPTER 5
Conclusion
This research study investigated the influence of grafting parameters on the simultane-
ous γ-irradiation grafting of AAc and AEMA monmers onto ePTFE. The effect of the
irradiation dose, presence of additives and monomer concentrations were investigated
by a single grafting of AAc. It was found that, an increase in graft yield was dependent
on the increase in total irradiation dose. However, it was found that this was only valid
for for samples grafted with the addition of sulfuric acid. The absorbance values of
the COOH/CF groups generally showed a correlating trend with the graft yield. No
enhancing dose effect was observed with regard to the extent of surface coverage. The
chemical analysis revealed that the depth of the grafted chains is at least 1-2 µm. The
use of homopolymerization inhibitor - Mohr’s salt was required to obtain satisfactory
results of the total GY. Sulfuric acid added to the grafting medium enhanced the GY
by up to 50%. The morphology of the samples grafted with the addition of sulfuric acid
was different to those grafted in the absence of the acid. Additonal grafting occured at
the surface of the samples grafted with sulfuric acid. The mechanical properties prop-
erties were strongly affected by the introduction of pAAc to the substrate. The UTS
remained unchanged for the samples grafted without acid. However, for the samples
with the addition of the acid the UTS approximately doubled. The elongation at break
ϵ, decreased drastically after grafting as compared to the untreated membrane. The
young’s modulus showed a mirroring behavior to the ϵ, i.e. it increased after grafting
with AAc. The graft copolymer resulted in an embrittelement of the samples, which was
pronounced for those grafted in presence of sulfruic acid.
Double functionalization of the ePTFE membrane was investigated by a one- and a
two-step grafting method. The total amount of nitrogen in the samples and the total GE
was found to be higher for the samples grafted by two-step. However, similar values were
found in the case of the one-step grafting in the presence of sulfuric acid at 5 kGy dose.
The chemical analysis revealed precence of carboxylate and protonated amine groups.
The anionic group present at the surface of the samples induced chelation of a calcium
cation from the SBF solution, therefore implied a start of mineralization process. No
visible mineral was observed in the SEM images but the calcium and phosphorus atoms
were observed on the surface.
Multiple challenges were resolved during the course of the research experiments. The
final results and conclusions drawn provide a valuable contribution to the field of chemi-
cal and biochemical engineering, and present important information for the modification
of ePTFE for facial prostheses.
==PAGE:82==
66
==PAGE:83==
CHAPTER 6
Future Work
The studies of this thesis determined the grafting parameters to optimize graft yield
and the extent of grafted chains on the surface of ePTFE. Grafting the membrane in
water did not show dependency on irradiation dose. It is recommended that for future
studies in this field, a larger range of the irradiation dose should be applied in order to
determine the effect of AAc graft yield in water.
Conducting the scope of mechanical tests covered in this thesis proved to be difficult.
It was observed that as the modulus increased after grafting with AAc the material
became brittle and difficult to handle. It was easily susceptible to damage, which led
to incidences of uncontrolled failure. It is recommended that conducting the test in
a wet environment would make the analysis easier and reduce the risk of uncontrolled
damage. A tensile analysis of the samples in a PBS solution could serve as an estimation
of the real environment in which the final product would be. In addition, future research
should include the tensile analysis of samples before and after mineralization to evaluate
the performance after formation of the mineral.
It is recommended that the in vitro mineralization of the samples should be performed
for a longer duration to determine if hydroxyapatite will be formed on the surface.
It is proposed that future research should include an increased thorough analysis of
the grafted samples e.g. by surface topography with atomic force microscope (AFM).
This analysis has the potential to provide more accurate mechanical analysis.
The
information on the length and the density of the grafted chains could provide valuable
knowledge in the development of the new material.
It is recommended, that in future research, an important change should be employed
in the post-treatment of the grafted sample.
The pAAc polymer chains grafted on
ePTFE retain water strongly. It is suggested that drying of the samples in a desiccator
was not enough to draw all the water out. The remaining water could interfere with the
obtained graft yield. It is therefore recommended that the samples should be dried in a
high-vacuum oven.
==PAGE:84==
68
==PAGE:85==
APPENDIX A
An Appendix
A.1
ePTFE high resolution XPS scans
Figure A.1: The high resolution C 1s scan of ePTFE sample
==PAGE:86==
70
A An Appendix
Figure A.2: The high resolution F 1s scan of ePTFE sample
==PAGE:87==
A.2 Absorbance of the COOH/CF II results
71
A.2
Absorbance of the COOH/CF II results
Figure A.3: Effect of irradiation dose on absorbance ratio for the samples grafted with
1% Mohr’s salt as an additive, at 10% and 20% monomer concentration in water, with
and without sulfuric acid.
==PAGE:88==
72
==PAGE:89==
Bibliography
[1]
American Society of Plastic Surgeons. 2014 Plastic Surgery Statistics Report. url:
http://www.plasticsurgery.org/Documents/news-resources/statistics/
2014-statistics/plastic-surgery-statsitics-full-report.pdf (visited
on July 14, 2015).
[2]
The International Society of Aesthetic Plastic surgery (ISAPS). ISAPS Interna-
tional Survey on Aesthetic/Cosmetic Procedures Performed in 2014. March 21,
2011. url: http://www.isaps.org/Media/Default/global- statistics/
2015%20ISAPS%20Results.pdf (visited on July 10, 2015).
[3]
M.Rankin. “Perceived functional impact of abnormal facial appearance”. In: Plas-
tic and Reconstructive Surgery 111 (7 2003), pages 2140–2146.
[4]
C.P.Sharma. “Biointegration of medical implant materials: Science and design”.
In: edited by A.Chandler-Temple E. Wentrup-Byrne L.Grondahl. Woodhead Pub-
lishing Limited, 2010. Chapter 3:Replacement materials for facial reconstruction
at the soft tissue-bone interface, pages 51–85.
[5]
S.Peterson C.R.Martins J.Cofrancesco Jr. “Lipodystrophy in the Patient with
HIV: Social, Psychological, and Treatment Considerations”. In: Aesthetic Surgery
28 (4 2008), pages 443–451.
[6]
E.Levine L.Degustis T.Pruzinsky J.Shin J.Persing. “Quality of Life and Facial
Trauma: Psychological and Body Image Effects”. In: Annals of Plastic Surgery 54
(5 2005), pages 502–510.
[7]
B.B.Chisholm. “Cosmetic Surgery”. In: edited by A.Di Giuseppe M.A.Shiffman.
Springer Berling Heidelberg, 2013. Chapter 26: Facial Implants, pages 393–404.
[8]
M.A.Petroff. “Gore-tex ® implants: Applications in facial paralysis rehabilitation
and soft-tissue augmentation”. In: Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery 102 (1992),
pages 1185–1189.
[9]
III J.Niamtu. “Advanta ePTFE Facial Implants in Cosmetic Facial Surgery”. In:
Oral Maxillofacial Surgery 64 (2006), pages 543–549.
[10]
DermNet New Zealand. Polytetrafluoroethylene implants. December 29, 2013.
url: http://dermnetnz.org/procedures/polytetrafluoroethylene.html
(visited on October 26, 2015).
[11]
K.Kepa R.Coleman L.Grondahl. “In vitro mineralization of functional polymers”.
In: Biosurface and Biotribology 1 (2015), pages 214–227.
==PAGE:90==
74
Bibliography
[12]
L.Grondahl J.Z.Luk. “Biointerfaces - where materials meets biology”. In: edited by
D.W.Hutmacher W.Chrzanowski. Royal Society of Chemistry, 2015. Chapter 11:
grafting of functional monomers on biomaterials, pages 312–342.
[13]
P.C.Begovac R.C. Thomson J.L.Fisher A.Hughson A.Gallhagen. “Improvements
in GORE-TEX Vascular Graft Performance by Carmeda BioActive Surface Hep-
arin Immobilization”. In: European Journal of Vascular and Endovascular Surgery
25 (2003), pages 432–437.
[14]
T.R.Dargaville G.A.George D.T.Hill A.K.Whittaker. “High energy radiation graft-
ing of fluoropolymers”. In: Progress in polymer science 28 (2003), pages 1355–
1376.
[15]
Y.ikada. “Surface modification of polymers for medical applications”. In: Bioma-
terials 15 (1995), pages 725–736.
[16]
I.Cassady N.M.Hidzir L.Grondahl. “Enhancing expanded poly(tetrafluoroethylene)
(ePTFE) for Biomaterials Applications”. In: Applied Polymer Science (2014),
pages 1–14.
[17]
Y.-P. Jiao F.-Z.Chen. “Surface modification of polyester biomaterials for tissue
engineering”. In: Biomedical Materials 2 (2007), pages 24–37.
[18]
L. Grondahl F.Cardona K.Chiem E.Wentrup-Byrne. “Calcium phosphate nucle-
ation on surface-modified PTFE membranes”. In: Journal of Materials Science:
MAterials in Medicine 14 (2003), pages 503–510.
[19]
S.Suzuki M.R.Whittaker L.Grondahl M.M.Monteiro E.Wentrup-Byrne. “Synthe-
sis of soluble phosphate polymers by RAFT and their in vitro mineralization”. In:
Journal of Biomacromolecules 7 (2006), pages 3178–3187.
[20]
E.Wentrup-Byrne S.Suzuki J.J.Suwanasilp L.Grondahl. “Novel phosphate-grafted
ePTFE copolymers for optimum in vitro mineralization”. In: Journal of Biomed-
ical Materials 5 (2010), pages 1–11.
[21]
L.Grondahl F.Cardona K.Chiem E.Wentrup-Byrne. “Preparation and character-
ization of the copolymers obtained by grafting of monoacryloxyethyl phosphate
onto polytetrafluoroethylene membranes and poly(tetrafluoroethylene-co-hexafluoropropylene)
films”. In: Journal of Applied Polymer Science 86 (2002), pages 2550–2556.
[22]
I.B.Leonor H.-M.Kim F.Balas M.Kawashita R.L.Reis T.Kokubo T.Nakamura.
“Formation of bone-like apatite on polymeric surfaces modified with sulfonic
groups”. In: Materials Science Forum (2006).
[23]
I.B.Leonor H.-M.Kim F.Balas M.Kawashita R.L.Reis T.Kokubo T.Nakamura.
“Functionalization of different polymers with sulfonic groups as a way to coat
them with a biomimetic apatite layer”. In: Journal of Materials Science Materi-
als in Medicine 18 (2007), pages 1923–1930.
[24]
K.Park H.S.Shim M.K.Dewanjee N.L.Eigler. “In vitro and in vivo studies of PEO-
grafted blood-contacting cardiovascular prostheses”. In: Journal of Biomaterials
Science, Polymer Edition 11 (2000), pages 1121–1134.
==PAGE:91==
Bibliography
75
[25]
N.M.Hidzir D.J.Hill E.Taran D.Martin L.Grondahl. “Argon plasma treatment-
induced grafting of acrylic acid onto expanded poly(tetrafluoroethylene) mem-
branes”. In: Polymer 54 (2013), pages 6536–6546.
[26]
N.M.Hidzir Q.Lee D.J.Hill F.Rasoul L.Grondahl. “Grafting of Acrylic Acid-co-
Itaconic Acid onto ePTFE and characterization of water uptake by the graft
copolymers”. In: Journal of Applied Polymer Science 2015 (2014), pages 1–12.
[27]
J.Z.Luk J.Cork J.Cooper-White L.Grondahl. “Use of two-step grafting to fabri-
cate dual-functional films and site-specific functionalized scaffolds”. In: Langmuir
31 (2015), pages 1746–1754.
[28]
G.M.Estrada-Villegas E.Bucio. “Comparative study of grafting a polyampholyte
in a fluoropolymer membrane by gamma radiation in one or two-steps”. In: Jour-
nal of Radiation Physics and Chemistry 92 (2013), pages 61–65.
[29]
E.Adem M.Avalos-Borja E.Bucio G.Burillo F.F.Castillon L.Cota. “Surface char-
acterizaton of binary grafting of AAc/NIPAAm onto poly(tetrafluoroethyloene)
(PTFE)”. In: Journal of Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research
B 234 (2005), pages 471–476.
[30]
E.Bucio G.Burillo. “Radiaiton study of pH and thermosensitive N-isopropylacrylamide
and acrylic acid onto PTFE film by two-steps process”. In: Journal of Radiation
Physics and Chemistry 76 (2007), pages 1724–1727.
[31]
Z.Hou S.Chen. “Distribution of acrylic acid grafted chains introduced into polyethy-
lene film by simultaneous radiation grafting with water and ethanol as solvents”.
In: Journal of Applied Polymer Science 103 (2006), pages 1570–1577.
[32]
N.M.Hidzir D.J.Hill D.Martin L.Grondahl. “Radiation-induced grafting of acrylic
acid onto expanded poly(tetrafluoroethylene) membranes”. In: Polymer 53 (2012),
pages 6063–6071.
[33]
B.Deng J.Li Z.Hou S.Yao L.Shi G.Liang K.Sheng. “Microfiltration membranes
prepared from polyethersulfone powder grafted with acrylic acid by simultane-
ous irradiation and their pH dependance”. In: Journal of Radiation Physics and
Chemistry 77 (2008), pages 898–906.
[34]
N.K.Goel Y.K.Bhardwaj R.Manoharan V.Kumar K.A.Dubey C.V.Chaudhari S.Sabharwal.
“Physicochemical and electrochemical characterization of battery separator pre-
pared by radiation induced grafting of acrylic acid microporous polypropylene
membranes”. In: eXPRESS Polymer Letters 3 (2009), pages 268–278.
[35]
M.M.Nasef. “Effect of solvents on radiation-induced grafting of styrene onto flu-
orinated polymer films”. In: Polymer International 50 (2001), pages 338–346.
[36]
O.N.Tretinnikov K.Kato Y.Ikada. “In vitro hydroxyapatite deposition onto a film
surface-grafted with organophosphate polymer”. In: Journal of Biomedical Mate-
rials Research 28 (1994), pages 1365–1373.
==PAGE:92==
76
Bibliography
[37]
S.Kamei N.Tomita S.Tamai K.Kato Y.Ikada. “Histologic and mechanical evalu-
ation for bone bonding of polymer surfaces grafted with a phosphate-containing
polymer”. In: Journal of Biomedical Mateials Research 37 (1997), pages 384–393.
[38]
T.Kokubo. “How useful is SBF in predicting in vivo bone bioactivity?” In: Journal
of Biomaterials 27 (2006), pages 2907–2915.
[39]
M.Vert Y.Doi K.-H.Hellwich M.Hess P.Hodge P.Kubisa M.Rinaudo F.Schue. “Ter-
minology for biorelated polymers and applications (IUPAC Recommendations
2012”. In: Pure and Applied Chemistry 84.2 (2012), pages 377–410.
[40]
R.S.Lakes J.B.Park. “Biomaterials”. In: Springer, New York, 2007. Chapter 1:
Introduction, pages 1–16.
[41]
V.C.Quatela J.Chow. “Synthetic Facial Implants”. In: Facial Plastic Surgery Clin-
ics of North America 16 (2008), pages 1–10.
[42]
Proxy Biomedical. Biomaterials Properties. url: http : / / proxybiomedical .
com/biomaterials-properties/ (visited on July 22, 2015).
[43]
B.D.Ratner A.S.Hoffman F.J.Schoen J.E.Lemons. “Biomaterials Science An In-
troduction to Materials in Medicine 2nd Edition”. In: Elsevier Academic Press,
2004. Chapter Introduction: Biomaterials Science: A Multidisciplinary Endeavor,
pages 1–9.
[44]
D.Williams. “Biocopatibility and performace of medical devices 1st Edition”. In:
Woodhead Publishing Limited, 2012. Chapter 1: Concepts in biocompatibility:
new biomaterials, new paradigms and new testing regimes, pages 3–17.
[45]
A.L.Moore. “Fluoroelastomers: The Definitive User’s Guide and Databook”. In:
William Andrew, Incorporated, 2015. Chapter 2: Fluoroelastomers Composition
and Properties, pages 13–22.
[46]
W.L.Garner Plastic Surgery Educational Foundation DATA Committee. Gore-
Tex Facial Implants. Report. December 1997.
[47]
F.Liu D.W.Grainger. “Biomaterials Science 3rd Edition”. In: Academic Elsevier,
2013. Chapter 1.1.2C:Fluorinated Biomaterials, pages 92–103.
[48]
U.Klinge B.Klosterhalfen A.P.Ottinger K.Junge V.Schumpelick. “PVDF as a new
polymer for the construction of surgical meshes”. In: Biomaterials 16 (2002),
pages 3487–3493.
[49]
G.Laroche Y.Marois R.Guidoin M.W.King L.Martin T.How Y.Douville. “Polyvinyli-
dene fluoride (PVDF) as a biomaterial: from polymeric raw material to monofila-
ment vascular suture”. In: Biomedical Materials Research 12 (1995), pages 1525–
1536.
[50]
J.Niamtu. “Cosmetic Facial Surgery”. In: edited by J.Niamtu. Elsevier Mosby,
2011. Chapter 10: Facial Implants, pages 369–433.
[51]
G.Stynes G.K.Kiroff W.A.J.Morrison M.A.Kirkland. “Tissue compatibility of bio-
materials: benefits and problems of skin biointegration”. In: ANZ Journal of
Surgery 78 (2008), pages 654–659.
==PAGE:93==
Bibliography
77
[52]
A.Klein M.L.Elson. “The history of substances for soft tissue augmentation”. In:
Journal of Dermatological Surgery 26 (2000), pages 1096–1105.
[53]
W.J.Binder. “Cosmesis of the Mouth, Face and Jaws”. In: edited by S.A.Guttenberg.
John Wiley and Sons, Inc, 2012. Chapter 8: Aesthetic Facial Implants, pages 94–
114.
[54]
C.C.Moore M.G.Brandt. “Implants in facial skeletal augmentation”. In: Current
Opinion in Otolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery 21 (4 2013), pages 396–
399.
[55]
A.Panossian W.L.Garner. “Polytetrafluoroethylene Facial Implants: 15 Years Later”.
In: Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery 113 (2004), pages 347–349.
[56]
B.D.Ratner A.S.Hoffman F.J.Schoen J.E.Lemons. “Biomaterials Science An In-
troduction to Materials in Medicine 2nd Edition”. In: Elsevier Academic Press,
2004. Chapter 4: Host Reactions to Biomaterials and Their Evaluation, pages 296–
304.
[57]
J.Park R.S.Lakes. “Biomaterials An Introduction”. In: Springer, 2007. Chapter 10:
Tissue response to implants, pages 265–290.
[58]
J. Han M.Lulic N.P.Lang. “Factors influencing resonance frequency analysis as-
sessed by Osstell™mentor during implant tissue integration: II. Implant sur-
face modifications and implant diameter”. In: Clinical Oral Implants Research 21
(2010), pages 605–611.
[59]
The Free Encyclopedia Wikipedia. White blood cell. October 15, 2015. url:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/White_blood_cell (visited on October 17,
2015).
[60]
The Free Encyclopedia Wikipedia. Macrophage. October 12, 2015. url: https:
//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Macrophage (visited on October 17, 2015).
[61]
B.D.Ratner A.S.Hoffman F.J.Schoen J.E.Lemons. “Biomaterials Science An In-
troduction to Materials in Medicine 2nd Edition”. In: Elsevier Academic Press,
2004. Chapter 3: Some Background Concepts, pages 237–238.
[62]
The Free Encyclopedia Wikipedia. Protein adsorption. September 2, 2015. url:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Protein_adsorption (visited on Octo-
ber 17, 2015).
[63]
L.C.Wang X.G.Chen Q.C.Xu C.S.Liu L.J.Yu Y.M.Zhou. “Plasma protein adsorp-
tion pattern and tissue-implant reaction of poly(vinyl alcohol)/carboxymethyl-
chitosan blend films”. In: Biomaterials Science, Polymer Edition 19 (2008), pages 113–
129.
[64]
Wikipedia. Mineralization (biology). url: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Mineralization_(biology) (visited on September 22, 2015).
[65]
N.Clough W.L.Gore and Associates Inc. Introducing a NEW Family of GORE
ePTFE Fibers. online: https://gore.com. 2007.
==PAGE:94==
78
Bibliography
[66]
T.Soyer M.Lempinen P.Cooper L.Norton B.Eiseman. “A new venous prosthesis”.
In: Journal of Surgery 72 (1972), pages 864–871.
[67]
S.Ebnesajjad FLuoroConsultants Group LLC. “Applied Plastics Engineering Hand-
book”. In: Elsevier Inc., 2011. Chapter 4: Introduction to Fluoropolymers, pages 49–
60.
[68]
C.A.Sperati. “Polymer handbook”. In: edited by J.Brandrup E.H.Immergut. John
Wiley and Sons, USA, 1989. Chapter Physical Constants of FLuoropolymers,
pages 35–44.
[69]
M.Wikol B.Hartmann J.Brendle M.Crane U.Beuscher J.Brake T.Schickel W.L.Gore
and Associates Inc. “Filtration and Purification in the Biopharmaceutical Indus-
try, 2nd. Edition”. In: edited by M.W.Jornitz T.H.Meltzer. CRC Press, 2007.
Chapter 23:Expanded Polytetrafluoroethylene Membranes and Their Applica-
tions, pages 619–640.
[70]
N.E.Clough. Innovations in ePTFE Fiber Technology. online: https://gore.com.
October 2015.
[71]
M.Constantinides S.K.Galli P.J.Miller. “Complications of static facial suspen-
sions with expanded polytetrafluoroethylene (ePTFE)”. In: The Laryngoscope
111 (2001), pages 2114–2121.
[72]
L.A.Salata P.V.Hatton. “In vitro and in vivo evaluation of ePTFE and alkali-
cellulose membranes for guided bone regeneration”. In: Journal of Clinical Oral
Implants Research 12 (2001), pages 62–68.
[73]
S.K.Jaganathan A.Balaji M.V.Vellayappan A.P.Subramanian A.A.John M.K.Asokan
E.Supriyanto. “Review: Radiation-induced surface modification of polymers for
biomaterial application”. In: Journal of Materials Science 50 (2015), pages 2007–
2018.
[74]
V.Y.Kabanov R.E.Aliev V.N.Kudryavtsev. “Present status and development trends
of radiation-induced graft polymerization”. In: Radiation Physics and Chemistry
37 (1991), pages 175–192.
[75]
S.Minko. “Polymer syrfaces and interfaces”. In: edited by M.Stamm. Springer,
2008. Chapter 11: Grafting on solid surfaces: ”grafting to” and ”grafting from”
methods, pages 215–234.
[76]
A.Bhattacharya B.N.Misra. “Grafting: a versatile means to modify polymers.
Techniques, factors and applications”. In: Progress in polymer science 29 (2004),
pages 767–814.
[77]
N.M.Hidzir. “Radiation induced grafting of expanded fluoromer material”. doc-
toral thesis. The University of Queensland Australia: School of Chemistry and
Molecular Biosciences, 2013.
[78]
J.L.Garnett. “Grafting”. In: Radiation Physics and Chemistry 14 (1979), pages 79–
99.
==PAGE:95==
Bibliography
79
[79]
J.S.Forsythe D.J.T.Hill. “The radiation chemistry of fluoropolymers”. In: Progress
in Polymer Science 25 (2000), pages 101–136.
[80]
C.Werner H.-J.Jacobasch. “Surface characterization of polymers for medical de-
vices”. In: The Internation Journal of Artificial Organs 22 (1999), pages 160–
176.
[81]
Bruker Optics. Application Note AN no. 79 Attenuated Total Reflection (ATR)-a
versatile tool for FT-IR spectroscopy. online.
[82]
D.A.Skoog J.J.Leary. “Principles of Instrumental Analysis, thEdition”. In: Saun-
ders College Publishing, 1992. Chapter 16A-1 Principles of Electron Spectroscopy,
pages 384–392.
[83]
Kratos Analytical Ltd. X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS). 2015. url: http:
//www.kratos.com (visited on November 10, 2015).
[84]
B.D.Ratner D.G.Castner. “Electron Spectroscopy for Chemical Analysis”. In: edited
by J.C.Vickerman I.Gilmore. Wiley, 2009. Chapter 3: Electron Spectroscopy for
Chemical Analysis, pages 47–101.
[85]
C.Y Liang S.Krimm. “Infrared Spectra of high Polymers. III. Polytetrafluoroethy-
lene and Polychlorotrifluoroethylene”. In: Journal of Chemical Physics 25 (1956),
pages 563–571.
[86]
G.Beamson D.Briggs. High Resolution XPS of Organic Polymers The Scienta
ESCA300 Database. Wiley and Sons. 1992.
[87]
C.Girardeaux J.-J.Pireaux. “Analysis of Poly(tetrafluoroethylene) (PTFE) by
XPS”. In: Surface Science Spectra 4 (1997), pages 138–141.
[88]
G.Beamson D.Briggs. High Resolution XPS of Organic Polymers The Scienta
ESCA300 Database. Wiley and Sons. 110-111. 1992.
[89]
J.R.Davis Davis and Associates. “Tensile Testing Second Edition”. In: ASM In-
ternational, 2004. Chapter 1: Introduction to tensile testing, pages 1–8.
[90]
National Center for Biotechnology Information. PubChem Compound Database;
CID=6581. 2015. url: https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/6581
(visited on November 17, 2015).
[91]
D.Santhiya G.Nandini. “Effect of polymer molecular weight on the absorption
of polyacrylic acid at the alumina water interface”. In: Journal of Colloids and
Surfaces 133 (1998), pages 157–165.
[92]
D.Lin-Vien N.B.Colthup W.G.Fateley J.G.Grasselli. “The Handbook of Infrared
and Raman Characteristic Frequencies of Organic Molecules”. In: Elsevier Science,
1991. Chapter 9: Compounds containing the Carbonyl Group, pages 137–141.
[93]
J.Mihaly S.Sterkel H.M.Ortner L.Kocsis L.Hajba E.Furdyga J.Mink. “FTIR and
FT-Raman Spectroscopic Study on Polymer Based High Pressure Digestion Ves-
sels”. In: Croatica Chemica Acta 79 (2006), pages 497–501.
==PAGE:96==
80
Bibliography
[94]
M.R.Alexander S.Payan T.M.Ducl. “Interfacial interactions of plasma-polymerized
acrylic acid and an oxidized aluminium surface investigated using XPS, FTIR and
poly(acrylic acid) as a model compound.” In: Surface and Interface Analysis 26
(1998), pages 961–973.
[95]
D.Lin-Vien N.B.Colthup W.G.Fateley J.G.Grasselli. “The Handbook of Infrared
and Raman Characteristic Frequencies of Organic Molecules”. In: Elsevier Science,
1991. Chapter 2:Alkanes, pages 9–10.
[96]
Wikipedia The Free Encyclopedia. 18. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Augereffect.
November 2015.
[97]
S.R.Leadley J.F.Watts. “The use of XPS to examine the interaction of poly(acrylic
acid) with oxidised metal substrates”. In: Journal of Electron Spectroscopy and
Related Phenomena 85 (1997), pages 107–121.
[98]
I.Keen P.Broota L.Rintoul P.Fredericks M.Trau L.Grondahl. “Introducing amine
functionalities on a poly(3-hydroxybutyrane-co-3-hydroxyvalerate) surface: Com-
paring the use of ammonia plasma treatment and ethylenediamine aminolysis”.
In: Biomacromolecules 7 (2006), pages 427–434.
[99]
M.-Cl.Clochard J.Begue A.Lafon D.Caldemaison C.Bittencourt J.-J.Pireaux N.Betz.
“Tailoring bulk and surface grafting of poly(acrylic acid) in electron-irradiated
PVDF”. In: Polymer 45 (2004), pages 8683–8694.
[100]
A.A.Miller E.J.Lawton J.S.Balwit. “Effect of chemical structure of vinyl polymers
on crosslinking and degradation by ionizing radiation”. In: Journal of Polymer
Science 14 (1954), pages 503–504.
[101]
M.K.Bernett W.A.Zisman. “Relation of wettability by aqueous solutions to the
surface constitution of low-energy solids”. In: Journal of Physical Chemistry 63
(1959), pages 1241–1246.
[102]
Diversified Enterprises. Surface Energy Data for PTFE: Polytetrafluoroethylene.
2009. url: http://www.accudynetest.com/polymer_surface_data/ptfe.pdf
(visited on November 5, 2015).
[103]
K.Yasudab T.Matsudac M.Kogoma E.Njatawidjajaa M.Kodamaa K.Matsuzakib.
“Hydrophilic modification of expanded polytetrafluoroethylene (ePTFE) by at-
mospheric pressure glow discharge (APG) treatment”. In: Surface and Coatings
Technology 201 (2006), pages 699–706.
[104]
R.N.Wenzel. “Resistance of solid surfaces to wetting by water”. In: Industrial and
engineering chemistry 28 (1936), pages 988–994.
[105]
S.Turmanova A.Trifonov O.Kalaijiev G.Kostov. “Radiation grafting of acrylic
acid onto polytetrafluoroethylene films for glucose oxidase immobilization and its
application in membrane biosensor”. In: Journal of Membrane Science 127 (1997),
pages 1–7.
==PAGE:97==
Bibliography
81
[106]
E.-S.A.Hegazy A.M.Dessouki N.B.El-Assy N.M.El-sawy M.A.Abd El-Ghaffar. “Radiation-
induced graft polymerization of acrylic acid onto fluorinated polymers. I. Ki-
netic study on the grafting onto poly(tetrafluoroethylene-ethylene) copolymer”.
In: Journal of Polymer Science 30 (1973), pages 1969–1976.
[107]
M.B.Huglin B.L.Johnson. “Role of cations in radiation grafting and homopoly-
merization”. In: Journal of polymer science 7 (1969), pages 1379–1384.
[108]
M.M.Nasef E.-S.A.Hegazy. “Preparation and application of ion exchange mem-
branes by radiation-induced graft copolymerization of polar monomers onto non-
polar films”. In: Progress in Polymer Science 29 (2004), pages 499–561.
[109]
T.Desmet T.Billiet E.Berneel R.Cornelissen D.Schaubroeck E.Schacht P.Dubruel.
“Post-plasma grafting of AEMA as a versatile tool to biofunctionalise polyesters
for tissue engineering”. In: Journal of Macromolecular Bioscience 10 (2010), pages 1484–
1494.
[110]
T.Desmet T.Billiet E.Berneel R.Cornelissen D.Schaubroeck E.Schacht P.Dubruel.
“Post-plasma grafting of AEMA as a versatile tool to biofunctionalise polyesters
for tissue engineering”. In: Journal of Macromolecular Bioscience 10 (2010), pages 1484–
1494.
[111]
G.Lawrie L.Grondahl B.Battersby I.Keen M.Lorentzen P.Surawski M.Trau. “Tai-
loring surface properties to build colloidal diagnostic devices: controlling inter-
particle associations”. In: Langmuir 22 (2006), pages 497–505.
[112]
D.H.Williams I.Fleming. “Spectroscopic methods in organic chemistry”. In: The
McGraw-Hill Companies, 1996. Chapter 2: Infrared spectra, pages 28–62.
[113]
J.Chen Z.Wu L.Yang Q.Zhang L.Wang Y.Lu. “Grafting copolymerization of dimethy-
laminoethyl methacrylate and acrylic acid onto preirradiated polypropylene film
by two-step reaction”. In: Journal of Radioanalytical and Nuclear Chemistry 275
(2008), pages 81–88.
[114]
S.Francis B.R.Dhanawade D.Mitra L.Varshney S.Sabharwal. “Radiation induced
grafting of DADMAC onto AAc grafted polyethyleen”. In: Journal of Radion
Physics and Chemistry 78 (2009), pages 42–47.
[115]
E.Jabbari S.Nozari. “Swelling behaviour of acrylic acid hydrogels prepared by
gamma-radiation crosslinking of polyacrylic acid”. In: European Polymer Journal
36 (2000), pages 2685–2692.
[116]
M.Tanahashi T.Yao T.Kokubo M.Minoda T.Miyamoto T.Nakamura. “Apatite
coated on organic polymers by biomimetic process: Improvement in its adhesion
to substrated by NaOH treatment”. In: EJournal of Applied Biomaterials 5 (1997),
pages 339–347.
==PAGE:98==
