==PAGE:1==
How to unify geological understanding and solute  
transport modelling in an upper bryozoan limestone aquifer 
Grith Martinsen and Benjamin A. Hunner 
Master Thesis by 
July 2015 
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Master thesis
How to unify geological understanding
and solute transport modelling in an
upper bryozoan limestone aquifer
A MSc. Thesis by
Grith Martinsen, s082852
Benjamin Aske Hunner, s071872
July 2015
Supervisors:
Professor Philip John Binning
Professor Poul Løgstrup Bjerg
Technical University of Denmark
DTU Environment
Department of Environmental Engineering
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This report is a 30 ECTS master thesis conducted at the Department of Environmental Engi-
neering at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). It has been carried out in collaboration
with both NIRAS and Region Sjælland, with whom we have collaborated regarding execution
and interpretation of ﬁeldwork.
The locality of the ﬁeld work has been a chlorinated solvent contaminated site in Ølsemagle
near Køge, Denmark. NIRAS has been the main contractors of the remediation at the locality,
and have furthermore been very collaborative in the process of knowledge building, data sharing
and professional assistance throughout the thesis. Region Sjælland has been the environmental
authority in charge of the site, and has generously let us take part in their ﬁeld work and shared
all their knowledge and expertise with us.
We would like to thank our supervisors at DTU, Philip J. Binning and Poul L. Bjerg, for sharing
their great knowledge and experience in the ﬁeld of groundwater contamination and modelling.
Post doc. Klaus Mosthaf and PhD Nicola Balbarini have also been very helpful during our model
work.
We would like to send great thanks to all the kind and helpful people at NIRAS; Anders L. Lund,
Anders G. Christensen, Søren Jensen, Mie Winstrup, Jens Bischoﬀand especially Peter Tyge.
Further we would like to thank Susanne R. Pedersen and most of all Hasse Milter from Region
Sjælland for company in the ﬁeld and interesting discussions on geology and hydrogeology.
The software used for this study’s data processing and -presentation are Microsoft EXCEL and
ArcGIS, while the modelling tools used are COMSOL Multiphysics and I-GIS GeoScene3D.
We would also like to thank I-GIS for providing us with a free temporary software license for
GeoScene3D.
2nd of July 2015
Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
Benjamin A. Hunner 2.7.2015
Grith Martinsen 2.7.2015
i
==PAGE:6==
Abstract
Approximately one third of the drinking water in Denmark originates from groundwater ab-
stracted from limestone aquifers. Studies of anthropogenic contamination of the Danish ground-
water resources has so far been focused on near-surface sedimentary aquifers. The heterogeneous
and distinctively diﬀerent geology of the limestone aquifers requires a redeﬁnition of the previ-
ously developed risk assessment approaches.
This thesis explores the advantages and limitations of including the heterogeneous geology in
numerical groundwater models. As a basis of conducting ﬁeld activities, a site in the small town
of Ølsemagle near Køge, Denmark, was chosen. The site is relevant because of its near-surface
bryozoan limestone, approximately 3 meter below terrain, which was recently subject of a chlo-
rinated solvent spill, contaminating the aquifer. Previous studies and groundwater models of
the site have not been able to describe the propagation of the plume, which is contrary to the
hydraulic gradient.
To unmask smaller scale geological characteristics and hydrogeological properties of the upper
aquifer, an area of 10x10 meters, served as the base for several ﬁeld work activities. A tracer test
was conducted, using inert salts (NaCl and NaBr), to estimate the hydrogeological parameters.
From the tracer test a maximum hydraulic conductivity of 6.14 ·10−2 m/s and peak velocity
of 0.18 m/h were found. Breakthrough curves were found to show steep rising peaks and long
tailing, indicating preferential ﬂow and back diﬀusion. These eﬀects are expected to origin from
a highly crushed and/or fractured limestone aquifer.
An excavation, down to 4.5 meter below terrain, of the tracer test area, combined with detailed
borehole sample analysis of tracer wells, formed the basis of a 12 layered conceptual geological
model. Summarising the geology of the site, it is strongly inﬂuenced by glaciotectonic crush-
ing and fracturing. The upper two to three meter thick till layer is transitioning into a highly
crushed and sludgy limestone layer with discontinuous ﬂint horizons and nodules. At 4.5 me-
ter below terrain a continuous ﬂint horizon appears followed by a fractured limestone sequence,
showing similarities to the bryozoan limestone sequences found in the Karlstrup quarry, 7 km
north-northeast of Ølsemagle.
The conceptual geological model was digitalised successfully, using the geological interpolation
tool GeoScene3D, and further simpliﬁed and parameterised into a 7 layered hydrostratigraphic
model. The hydrostratigraphic model was imported to the ﬁnite element tool COMSOL Mul-
tiphysics. In Comsol an equivalent porous medium, ﬂow and solute transport model was made
in order to simulate the tracer breakthrough curves. The model proved successful in simulating
breakthrough times as well as peak concentrations by calibrating hydraulic conductivity and total
porosity. Exploring the parameterisation of the seven diﬀerent geological layers revealed a strong
inﬂuence of the hydraulic conductivity on diﬀusion between layers as well as on breakthrough
curve shapes. A multimodal eﬀect from the seven layers could also be observed on the simulated
breakthrough curves.
Being both an advantage and a limitation of the resulting groundwater model, the simulations
were highly inﬂuenced from the diﬀerent sets of layer speciﬁc parameters. The detailed geology
proved possible, but cumbersome to parameterise based on literature values and a substantial
geological knowledge of the site. The advantage of a detailed geological geometry was simulations
of solute transport interactions which might otherwise had been left unnoticed.
ii
==PAGE:7==
Resume
De danske kalkmagasiner udgør kilden for cirka en tredjedel af den ˚arlige grundvandsudvinding.
Tidligere studier af grundvandsforurening har mest beskæftiget sig med overﬂadenære sedimen-
tære aﬂejringer, som geologisk set adskiller sig fra de mere heterogene kalkmagasiner. Det har
derfor været nødvendigt at revurdere tidligere risikovurderings værktøjer til brug i grundvans-
forurening, hvor forureningen n˚ar disse kalkmagasiner.
Dette speciale fokuserer p˚afordele og udfordringer ved at implementere en detaljeret geologi i
numeriske grundvandsmodeller. Som basis for dette studie er en lokalitet i den lille by Ølsemagle
nær Køge, Danmark, valgt p˚a grund af dens særligt overﬂadenære bryozokalk, cirka 3 meter
under tærren.
En relativt ny forurening, med chlorinerede opløsningsmidler, af grundvandet
p˚alokaliteten har udvist overraskende spredningsmønstre i forhold til den hydrauliske gradient.
Tidligere studier har endnu ikke kunnet simulere dette spredningsmønster tilfredsstillende.
For at undersøge de geologiske og hydrogeologiske egenskaber af det øvre bryozokalk p˚a lokaliteten,
blev der foretaget et sporstoﬀorsøg p˚a en mindre skala af 10x10 meter. Sporstoﬀørsøget benyttede
sig af konservative salte (NaCl og NaBr) til at estimere de hydrogeologiske parametre. Baseret
p˚a data fra moniteringsboringerne var den højest estimerede hydrauliske ledningsevne 6,14 ·10−2
m/s med en tilsvarende peakhastighed p˚a 0,18 m/t. Gennembrudskurverne udviste en stejl front
sammen med en lang hale, hvilket tyder p˚a sprækketransport og tilbage diﬀusion fra matrix til
sprække.
Den selvsamme geologi hvori sporstoﬀørsøget blev udført, blev udgravet ned til 4,5 meter un-
der terræn. Baseret herp˚a, sammen med prøver fra nærliggende borehuller, blev der opstillet
en konceptuel geologisk model. Generelt set var den overﬂadenære geologi p˚avirket af glaciale
forstyrrelser, hvor en 2 til 3 meter overlejrende moræneler, i en glidende overgang, gik over i
stærkt knust og v˚ad bryozokalk, med varierende ﬂinte indhold. Ved 4,5 meters dybde s˚as en
karakteristisk ﬂintehorisont, hvorunder man fandt en opsprækket bryozokalk, lig den man ﬁnder
i kalkbruddet i den nærliggende by Karlstrup.
Den konceptuelle geologiske model blev digitaliseret til en 12 lags model, ved hjælp af det geolo-
giske interpolationsprogram GeoScene3D. Den digitaliserede geologiske model blev senere simpli-
ﬁceret til en 7 lags hydrostratigraﬁsk model og importeret til det numeriske ﬁnite element mod-
elleringsprogram COMSOL Multiphysics. I Comsol blev der opstillet en enkeltporøs strømnings-
og stoftransportmodel til at simulere sporstoﬀørsøgets gennembrudskurver.
Modellen kunne
simulere b˚ade gennembrudstider og peakkoncentrationer ved at kalibrere for hydraulisk ledning-
sevne og porøsitet. Ved at udforske forskellige kombinationer af parametersæt for de geologiske
lag s˚a man en stærk indﬂydelse fra hydraulisk ledningsevne p˚a diﬀusion lagene imellem, s˚avel
som p˚a gennembrudskurvernes form. Desuden kunne ﬂere peaks genﬁndes p˚a en enkelt gennem-
brudskurve for˚arsaget af forskellige stoftransporthastigheder i de forskellige lag.
Værende b˚ade en fordel og en udfordring viste de numeriske simuleringsresultater sig stærkt
p˚avirkelige af de valgte parametersæt af de geologiske lag.
En detaljeret geologi var mulig,
men krævende en parametrisering p˚a baggrund af litteraturstudier og en konceptuel geologisk
forst˚aelse af lokaliteten. Fordelen ved at indkorporere en detaljeret geologisk geometri i grund-
vandsmodellen var at interaktioner lagene imellem kunne simuleres, som ellers kunne være g˚aet
up˚aagtet hen.
iii
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Contents
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Geo- and hydrogeological background and model approaches
5
2.1
Limestone in Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
Formation of the Danish bryozoan limestone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
Fractures, tectonics and glaciotectonics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Characteristics of limestone hydrogeology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
Porosity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
Hydraulic conductivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
Preferential ﬂow and scale dependency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3
Flow and transport modelling in limestone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
Model approaches
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
Groundwater ﬂow equations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
Solute transport equations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.4
Good practices in groundwater modelling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3
Ølsemagle site
21
Previous conceptual models at Ølsemagle
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
Field work activities at Ølsemagle
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4
Geological data
25
4.1
Geological ﬁeld work and interpretation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
Karlstrup quarry - Conceptional bryozoan mound propagation
. . . . . . . . . .
25
The 2015 Ølsemagle excavation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
Borehole proﬁles of the T wells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2
2D conceptual geological proﬁles
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5
Digitised geological model
37
5.1
The process of digitising the geological model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.2
The resulting digitised geological model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6
Hydrogeological data
45
6.1
Hydraulic heads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.2
Tracer test
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
Experimental setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
Data collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
Results of the tracer test and hydrogeological interpretation . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
iv
==PAGE:9==
CONTENTS
Reﬂections on tracer plume direction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
7
Hydrostratigraphic model
55
7.1
Hydrodstratigraphic model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
7.2
Parameterisation of the hydrostratigraphic model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
8
Flow and solute transport model
61
8.1
Assumptions about the hydrogeology in Ølsemagle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
8.2
Choice of modelling software and numerical scheme . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
8.3
Boundary and initial conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
8.4
Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
8.5
Results and comparison with observations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
Modelling groundwater ﬂow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
Modelling solute transport . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
Exploring the eﬀects of hydraulic parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
Findings from the numerical model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
9
Discussion
81
10 Conclusion
87
Bibliography
91
A Geological timeline
95
B Literature review
97
C Timeline and overview of historical events on Ølsemaglevej 52
101
D Previous conceptual geological models of the Ølsemagle area
103
E Excavation at Ølsemaglevej 52, 2015
107
F Planned ﬁeld activities for the 2015 excavation
113
G Lithology of NIRAS borehole samples
115
H GeoScene3D geological model
124
I
Tracer test setup, ﬁeld observations and data processing
126
J
Hydraulic heads - Data and interpretation
139
K Overview of data collected at Ølsemalgevej 52 in 2015
149
L
MiHpt
151
M Parameters used in Comsol for the Ølsemagle model
153
N NIRAS borehole proﬁle journals
155
v
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
Part 1
Introduction
Denmark is strongly dependent on its groundwater resources and their quality, mainly because of
the political strategy of protecting the sources before using advanced water treatment technolo-
gies (Danish Ministry of the Environment, 2015). Approximately one third of the groundwater
for drinking water purposes in Denmark is abstracted from limestone aquifers (Rosenbom and
Jakobsen, 2000; Vangkilde-Pedersen et al., 2011) which are found both in great depths as well as
near-surface in the Danish underground. Based on the strategic identiﬁcation of anthropogenic
contaminated areas, carried out by the Regions, a contamination risk towards many of the near-
surface limestone aquifers have been identiﬁed (ATV Jord og grundvand, 2014). Groundwater
contamination is not a new challenge, but risk assessment of contaminants towards the ground-
water resources has so far mostly been applied to sedimentary aquifers. Therefore there exists a
knowledge gap between present methods for risk assessment of groundwater contamination and
the forthcoming threats of the groundwater resources in near-surface limestone aquifers (ATV
Jord og grundvand, 2014).
Many groundwater risk assessment approaches are supported by groundwater ﬂow and transport
models, which can help the prediction of the spatial and temporal development of a contaminant
plume in an aquifer. Limestone aquifers are heterogeneous as they often consist of a matrix and
a fracture domain. This double domain property has led to the development of more advanced
numerical groundwater models, one being the double porosity model concept, which mimics the
diﬀusion dynamics between aquifer matrix and fractures (Gerke and Genuchten, 1993). Another
is the discrete fracture model which includes discretised fracture systems, enabling modelling of
head gradient based preferential ﬂow in fractures as well as diﬀusive exchange (Neuman, 2005).
The highly heterogeneous characteristics of the limestone aquifers suggest the importance of
incorporating detailed geology in the groundwater models. Limestone formations vary in their
properties based on deposition environment and age. Several kinds of limestone are present in
the Danish underground. The three most abundant are the more homogeneous, less fractured
and ﬁnely grained chalk, the ﬁnely grained but more heterogeneous ”Kalksandskalk” and the
bryozoan limestone, characteristic for its undulating mounds (Vangkilde-Pedersen et al., 2011).
For this study a focus on bryozoan limestone has been chosen, which is found near terrain on
Sealand and therefore vulnerable to anthropogenic contamination. As found from literature, only
limited studies focusing on the the bryozoan limestone formation under Sealand, Denmark have
been published.
1
==PAGE:12==
The area was ﬁrst investigated in 1988 as a tracertest study between two boreholes in the lime-
stone under Risø, Roskilde (Milter, 2007; Jakobsen, 1991). Since then Jakobsen (1991) have
studied the top 25 m of the bryozoan limestone formation near Karlstrup quarry, with a focus of
quantifying hydraulic and mass transport characteristics of the aquifer. Following the results of
the study, Brettmann and Jensen (1992) and Brettmann et al. (1993) constructed a 3D ground-
water ﬂow and mass transport model to simulate the tracer test from Jakobsen (1991). It was
found that only by using a dual-porosity model the right shape of tracer breakthrough curves
could be reproduced correctly. Newer investigations have deﬁned hydraulic parameters for the
bryozoan limestone near Karlstrup quarry (Larsen et al., 2006; Roskilde amt, 2005, 2001b,a,
2002). Latest Milter (2007) has deﬁned hydrogeological parameters of the bryozoan aquifer at
Lille Skensved near Køge, through lab experiments and ﬁeld tracer test and subsequent mod-
elling using a discrete fracture model. A main reference for this study has, besides the above
mentioned studies, been Galsgaard et al. (2014) which is a sum-up of the existing knowledge of
groundwater ﬂow in limestone formations west of Copenhagen, Denmark.
A ﬁeld site serving as a suitable study site for geological and hydrogeological ﬁeld work in the
bryozoan limestone has been found in Ølsemagle near Køge. At this site the bryozoan limestone
is particularly near-surface, and has been subject to a chlorinated solvent contamination, mainly
of perchloroethylene (PCE) (NIRAS, 2012a,c,b). Predicting the spreading of the contaminant
plume has not been satisfactory based on the previous geo- and hydrogeological knowledge. At
the Ølsemagle locality Balbarini and Rosenberg (2014) carried out an extensive study of the use
of single- and double porosity models as well as discrete fracture models to simulate the PCE
plume at the site. They found a one layered single porosity model with anisotropy and a two
layer model with a fault describing the PCE contaminant plume most satisfying.
The previous studies of Milter (2007) and Balbarini and Rosenberg (2014) have both shown
the importance of geological knowledge in the interpretation of groundwater ﬂow and transport
in the area, and demonstrated the use of advanced modelling compartments such as double-
porosity and discrete fractures. To further investigate groundwater ﬂow and transport modelling
approaches to limestone aquifer contamination, this study will explore the inﬂuence on model
performance from detailed geo- and hydrogeological understanding of the aquifer. In other words,
how to unify geological knowledge and groundwater modelling. This will be done by emphasising
geological and hydrogeological characterisation and parameterisation through ﬁeld work at the
contaminated Ølsemagle locality. The eﬀect of including detailed geology in a numerical model
will be evaluated based on the model performance simulating a tracer test conducted at the ﬁeld
site.
2
==PAGE:13==
Aim
The overall aim of this study has been deﬁned in the following question:
Does an in depth understanding of the geo- and hydrogeological properties of a bryozoan limestone
aquifer improve groundwater modelling?
The approach of this study is focused towards exploring the question above, also guiding its
content and structure.
Answering the question will be approached by
• Literature review on the experiences with ﬁeld work and groundwater modelling in Danish
bryozoan limestone aquifers.
• Geological characterisation of the upper bryozoan limestone aquifer on a contaminated site
in Ølsemagle, Denmark.
• Conducting and analysing a tracer test to characterise hydrogeological properties of the
upper bryozoan limestone aquifer at the Ølsemagle site.
• Translating the geo- and hydrogeological knowledge into a groundwater model using good
practices of geological modeling
• Demonstrating and calibrating the groundwater ﬂow and transport model by simulating
the tracer test at the Ølsemagle site.
3
==PAGE:14==
How to read this thesis
Generally the bullet points of the aim are followed in the structure of this thesis. The presentation
of the content follows the recommended work ﬂow in groundwater modelling, according to good
practices. This will give the reader an experience of the natural work process when setting up a
groundwater model based on literature studies and ﬁeld activities.
The Introduction brieﬂy sums up existing knowledge of groundwater modelling and ﬁeld work
experiences in Danish bryozoan limestone. Part 2 provides a more detailed background knowl-
edge on bryozoan limestone geology in Denmark, hydrogeological concepts and parameterisation
of the same. Here, also numerical model approaches and a brief summary of good modelling
practice in groundwater modelling are found. This is done to prepare the reader with a basic
knowledge for the forthcoming results and discussions.
Part 3 presents the site in Ølsemagle and the ﬁeld work activities carried out at this site during
this study, as well as previous activities there.
During Part 4 the geological data will be presented, representing both an excursion to Karlstrup
quarry, an excavation at the Ølsemagle site and lithological characterisation of borehole samples
from the site. In the end a conceptual geological model based on the above geological ﬁeld work
will be presented.
The conceptual geological model is digitised in Part 5 using the geological interpolation software
GeoScene3D. This part also present a description of the work ﬂow of creating a digitised spatial
geological model.
Part 6 concerns the hydrogeological data of the Ølsemagle site, consisting of hydraulic head data
as well as the set-up, monitoring and interpretation of the tracer test. This part further demon-
strates parameter estimation based on the tracer breakthrough curves.
In Part 7 the digitised spatial geological model is simpliﬁed and parameterised into a hydros-
tratigraphic model. This is done using the parameters found from literature studies as well as
the resulting parameter estimates from the tracer test in Part 6.
Lastly, the numerical ﬂow and solute transport groundwater model of the site is presented and
discussed in Part 8. This part is followed by the overall Discussion and Conclusion. The discussion
will be dedicated to adding perspective to this study and its applicability, since the main ﬁndings
of each part will be discussed continuously throughout the thesis.
As an extensive amount of material and reﬂections are found in the appendices, the reader is
recommended to use it actively, when further documentation and elaboration is sought. It follows
the chronological order of appearance in the main report, and will especially support the ﬁeld
work activities and interpretation of data in Part 4 and 6.
4
==PAGE:15==
Part 2
Geo- and hydrogeological
background and model
approaches
The ﬁeld of groundwater modelling is highly multidisciplinary, why it is often carried out as a
collaborative work between geologists and modellers. In the context of this study’s aim, of uni-
fying geological understanding and groundwater modelling approaches, background knowledge
in the ﬁelds of geology, hydrogeology and numerical modelling are equally important.
Looking at the groundwater modelling process upside down, the numerical model needs to be
parameterised, using parameters backed up by experiences from hydrogeology. Again, this hy-
drogeology is a consequence of the characteristics of the speciﬁc geology. Therefore this section
will represent the relevant knowledge from the interrelated ﬁelds of geology, hydrogeological pa-
rameterisation and numerical modelling to support the understanding of groundwater modelling
in a heterogeneous porous medium as bryozoan limestone. Further an overview of good modelling
practices in groundwater modelling will be introduced, serving as a guideline for the rest of this
study’s structure.
2.1
Limestone in Denmark
Denmark has during the late Mesozoic and early Cenozoic era (see the geological timeline in Fig-
ure A.1 in Appendix A), been inﬂuenced by marine deposits forming the limestone formations
of Denmark, i.e. the tertiary deposits. Through time, glacial disturbances and deposits from
the ice sheets of the quaternary ice age have re-bedded and eroded the tertiary deposits and left
Denmark covered in glacial deposits of till, sand, clay and gravel. The changing climatic and
environmental conditions have led to the uplifting and erosion of the Danish basement which
has resulted in shallow limestone with water storing and conducting properties which forms the
basis of our highly valued drinking water source: The groundwater aquifers.
As seen in Figure 2.1, a belt covering Sealand, Funen and the Limfjord area of Jutland com-
pose the near-surface Paleocene deposits (Heilmann-Clausen, 2010). This belt consists of several
limestone formations such as the ”København kalk”, ”Kalksandskalk”, ”Koralkalk”, bryozoan lime-
stone and chalk. The main focus of this section will be the formation of limestone deposits during
5
==PAGE:16==
2.1.
LIMESTONE IN DENMARK
the Danian age and the subsequent tectonic inﬂuences in the area of interest, i.e. Ølsemagle area.
Figure 2.1: Map of the pre-quaternary layers in Denmark. Modiﬁed from Heilmann-Clausen (2010).
Formation of the Danish bryozoan limestone
After the end of the Cretaceous period, with the extinction of the dinosaurs approximately 65
mil. years ago, the age Danian of the Paleogene period began. Denmark was covered by the
North Sea and the climate was subtropical to tropical (Heilmann-Clausen, 2010). It is likely that
a link from the North Sea to southern and warmer seas have been present at the time of Danian
bringing warm and nutrient rich waters to the North Sea from the south (Heilmann-Clausen,
2010). In the relative deep sea, colonies of benthic organisms started growing, forming large
mounds (Bjerager and Surlyk, 2007). The mounds formed a diverse community of ﬂora and
fauna, dominated by bryozoans (Bjerager and Surlyk, 2007). The bryozoans are a diverse group
of moss animals of varying shapes from delicate branching to disc shaped (Bjerager and Surlyk,
2007). Bryozoan limestone are though mostly recognised by the branching bryozoans in fossils
which are often found 1 cm long with a 1 mm diameter (Roskilde amt, 2001a; Jakobsen, 1991).
The benthic organisms ﬁltrated the nutrient rich waters and grew against the direction of the
currents, steepening the mound in the end facing the current, having a more smooth lee side
(Heilmann-Clausen, 2010; Vangkilde-Pedersen et al., 2011). The branching bryozoans captured
sediments, why the bryozoan mounds consist of a substantial amount of clay and sand particles
(Galsgaard et al., 2014). Often the fragments of bryozoan organisms make up 20 to 45 % of the
bryozoan limestone (Galsgaard et al., 2014).
The bryozoan mound deposits have been divided into three complexes, complex 1, 2 and 3,
where 1 is the youngest(Galsgaard et al., 2014). The complexes have varying length to width
6
==PAGE:17==
2.1.
LIMESTONE IN DENMARK
ratio depending on the conditions at the time of formation (Galsgaard et al., 2014; Vangkilde-
Pedersen et al., 2011). The oldest sequence of bryozoan mounds are the ones found in for example
Karlstrup quarry, in Western Sealand near Køge Bay, which have the most assymetrical shape
(Galsgaard et al., 2014). These bryozoan mounds are up to 5 to 10 m tall (Heilmann-Clausen,
2010; Bjerager and Surlyk, 2007), with a width of 45-110 m and a length of 50-300 m (Galsgaard
et al., 2014).
The bryozoan mounds propagated north to south and northwest to southeast (Heilmann-Clausen,
2010; Bjerager and Surlyk, 2007) towards the nutrient rich currents, as illustrated in Figure 2.2.
As the mounds propagated towards the current they would overlap each other and form the
bryozoan formations which we see today in outcrops at Stevns Klint and Karlstrup quarry in
Denmark.
Figure 2.2: Propagation of bryozoan mounds in the Danish bryozoan limestone formations. The larger
white arrows shows the direction of the bottom sea currents, while the asymmetrical formations show
the bryozoan mound propagation going against the current (Galsgaard et al., 2014).
The bryozoan mounds have a high content of ﬂint, which varies between approximately 20-30
% (Galsgaard et al., 2014; Vangkilde-Pedersen et al., 2011) and 10-20 % (Jakobsen, 1991). The
ﬂint is precipitates, probably of silicate sponges, in the burrows of the mound sediments (Dansk
Naturfredningsforening, 2015). It therefore often follows the shape of the mounds and can be
found in both continuous layers and nodules with varying thickness from a few centimetres up
7
==PAGE:18==
2.1.
LIMESTONE IN DENMARK
to a meter (Vangkilde-Pedersen et al., 2011). Low sedimentation rates allowed larger and more
extensive burrows resulting in higher thickness of the resulting ﬂint layers. In periods of low
sedimentation, layers of hardgrounds are also found, hardened by the long-term exposure as sea
ﬂoor (Galsgaard et al., 2014).
Following the Danian age the environmental and climatic conditions changed, and the sea cover-
ing Denmark was now recipient of clay deposits from the surrounding land surfaces (Heilmann-
Clausen, 2010). Uplift and lowering of the basins and changing sea levels resulted in deposits and
erosions of layer sequences, among others, erosion of chalk, rebedded as a ﬁnely grained marl
layer throughout Denmark (Heilmann-Clausen, 2010). The results of the dynamics is seen in
Figure 2.1 where Eastern and Northern Denmark has near-surface limestone formations because
of the uplifting and subsequent erosion.
Fractures, tectonics and glaciotectonics
In addition to sediment deposition the subsurface is highly inﬂuenced by processes such as tec-
tonics, glaciotectonics and weathering. In addition to rebedding and deformation these processes
can result in fracturing of diﬀerent kind in the subsurface geology. A general characterisation of
fractures in limestone can be divided into the three types. These are listed below along, with
their most probable cause of origin (Galsgaard et al., 2014):
• Vertical fractures from tectonics
• Horizontal fractures from relief of melting ice sheets
• Crushing from glaciotectonics
The vertical and horizontal fractures can be divided into 1st, 2nd and 3rd order fractures according
to size. These will have diﬀerent propagation patterns and lengths (Jakobsen and Klitten, 1999)
which will be described for the speciﬁc categories below.
Vertical fractures
One of the most distinct tectonic formations in Denmark is the Sorgenfri-Tornquist zone, the
edge of the Fennoscandian shield. In connection to this tectonic zone several faults have been
created with resulting oﬀsets in the lithology of the limestone formations (Galsgaard et al., 2014;
Vangkilde-Pedersen et al., 2011; Jakobsen and Klitten, 1999). In areas near faults it is likely to
ﬁnd parallel vertical fractures in the same orientation as the near-by faults (Galsgaard et al.,
2014). The greatest faults on Sealand are the Carlsberg and Roskilde faults which propagates
through Copenhagen and Eastern Sealand, respectively, resulting in vertical fractures of 1st and
2nd order. The 1nd order fractures will be longer than 2 m with apertures greater than 2 mm,
often ﬁlled with the above lying sediments (Jakobsen and Klitten, 1999; Vangkilde-Pedersen
et al., 2011). 2nd order fractures will be of meters length, sometimes intersecting with geological
layers (Galsgaard et al., 2014; Vangkilde-Pedersen et al., 2011; Jakobsen and Klitten, 1999). 3rd
order fractures are only found in single beds and not through ﬂint (Jakobsen and Klitten, 1999).
The area between the two faults, Carlsberg and Roskilde, has been inﬂuenced by the Neogene
uplift (Jakobsen and Klitten, 1999), thus it is relative higher compared to the areas west of the
Roskilde fault and east of the Carlsberg fault. Erosion has exposed some of the older deposits
such as the limestone formations in this area (Galsgaard et al., 2014). The area of Ølsemagle is
falling in between these two faults, as can be seen in Figure 2.3, thus the bryozoan limestone is
especially near terrain in this area. No information on the fault size or exact propagation near
the Ølsemagle site has been found.
8
==PAGE:19==
2.1.
LIMESTONE IN DENMARK
Figure 2.3: Tectonic map of the greatest faults of Denmark and the Sorgenfri-Tornquist zone. Note
that Ølsemagle localised as a red dot, just near the Roskilde fault and with the Carlsberg fault located
to the east. Modiﬁed from Galsgaard et al. (2014).
Horizontal fractures
The horizontal fractures in bryozoan mounds are found to propagate along the shape of the mound
layers (Galsgaard et al., 2014; Vangkilde-Pedersen et al., 2011). The fractures often follow ad-
jacent layers of diﬀerent hardness and ﬂint layers (Galsgaard et al., 2014; Vangkilde-Pedersen
et al., 2011). From the relief of the pressure of above lying ice sheets and/or sediments, uplift and
expansion of layers have created these horizontal fracture networks (Galsgaard et al., 2014) which
is why they are found with decreasing density in depth (Jakobsen and Klitten, 1999). The 1st
order horizontal fractures have been observed to propagate more than 50 m, up to 200 m (Jakob-
sen and Klitten, 1999). In bryozoan mounds these fractures will often be of shorter propagation
than in other limestone formations (Vangkilde-Pedersen et al., 2011), since fractures propagate
along the layers and structures of the mounds (Galsgaard et al., 2014; Vangkilde-Pedersen et al.,
2011). The 2nd order fractures will often not be longer than a few meters (Jakobsen and Klitten,
1999).
9
==PAGE:20==
2.1.
LIMESTONE IN DENMARK
Crushed limestone
Most of Denmark, except Western Jutland, was covered by ice, during the most recent ice age
of the quaternary period, approximately 20.000 years ago (Bennike, 2011). The movement of
the ice sheets have left large amounts of glacial sediments of the quaternary period, such as till,
above the tertiary deposits. These massive ice sheets have reached the upper limestone forma-
tions of Eastern Sealand which resulted in the crushing, mixing and general disturbances of the
stratigraphy (Galsgaard et al., 2014). A conceptual sketch of the impacts of these glaciotectonics
can be seen in Figure 2.4. In addition to the forces of the moving ice sheet, crushing may have
been enhanced by the continuously thawing and freezing of the subsurface during the late glacial
(Jakobsen and Klitten, 1999).
Figure 2.4: Conceptual sketch of the crushing of upper limestone from ice sheet movements. The sketch
illustrates a limestone layer with a thin upper hardened layer (light red color). Limestone formations
with a thicker upper hardened layer will show less impact from the glaciotectonic crushing, but can be
impacted by fracturing. Modiﬁed from Galsgaard et al. (2014).
As demonstrated in Figure 2.4 the resulting transition zone between the till deposits and the
deeper hardened limestone is a chaotic sequence of increased fracturing and mixing through the
limestone layer (Galsgaard et al., 2014; Vangkilde-Pedersen et al., 2011). Further, fragments of
limestone in the till layer will increase in amount and size with depth. In this highly heteroge-
neous geology, possible displacement of bigger limestone and ﬂint fragments can also be found. In
the transition zone it is hydrogeologically complicated, not only by fracturing and displacement
of layer sequences, but also by the mixing of till within the fractures of the crushed limestone
(Galsgaard et al., 2014; Vangkilde-Pedersen et al., 2011). Fractures in the deeper layers will be
less inﬂuenced by ﬁlling of till deposits and will most probably be caused by either uplifting or
tectonics, as already described. Several studies of bryozoan limestone at Limhamn in Sweden,
chalk at Stevns and bryozoan limestone in Karlstrup, both in Denmark, have showed a decreasing
fracture intensity with depth in the upper ten meters, with the uppermost meters being crushed
10
==PAGE:21==
2.2.
CHARACTERISTICS OF LIMESTONE HYDROGEOLOGY
(Galsgaard et al., 2014; Vangkilde-Pedersen et al., 2011; Jakobsen, 1991). The characteristics of
the transition zone from quaternary deposits to hard limestone can vary between sites with more
or less crushing and mixing. This depends not only on the tectonic processes but also on the
thickness of the upper, more hardened layer of the limestone, making the limestone less eﬀected
by glaciotectonics, as also explained in the text of Figure 2.4.
The fracture system of the subsurface will often have a high impact on the hydrogeological prop-
erties of the geological layers. Not only fracture lengths and aperture is a critical parameter,
but also the connectivity of vertical and horizontal fractures creates a zone of highly fractured,
and thereby, highly hydraulic conductive geology (Galsgaard et al., 2014; Vangkilde-Pedersen
et al., 2011). A review of three diﬀerent studies of fractures in bryozoan limestone in Denmark
showed fracture apertures of less than a millimetre to ﬁve millimetres and spacing of 0.1 to 7
m between hydraulically active fractures (Galsgaard et al., 2014). Studies have also shown how
bryozoan mound directions inﬂuence ﬂow and transport in bryozoan limestone layers resulting in
anisotropy with preferential ﬂow along the length of the mound (Jakobsen, 1991). The diﬀerences
in hardness and preferential ﬂow of the layers in bryozoan mounds are further elaborated on in
the following section, where implications of bryozoan geology for ﬂow is presented.
The ﬁndings above all indicate that bryozoan limestones are heterogeneous both as a result of
their formation environment and subsequent disturbances from ice sheets an/or tectonics. When
dealing with bryozoan limestone in groundwater modelling, it is therefore important to have an
understanding of its content and orientation of dominating fractures, degree of crushing, mound
propagation and content of ﬂint, since these properties are expected to be inﬂuential on the ﬂow
patterns (Vangkilde-Pedersen et al., 2011)
2.2
Characteristics of limestone hydrogeology
The geological understanding is not suﬃcient to quantify the governing hydrological processes of
the ﬂow of water and other solutes in the geological media. Therefore the science of hydrogeology
deals with the quantiﬁcation of water ﬂow in soils and rocks. This is done through parameteri-
sation and conceptual understanding of the pathways and interactions of water in and with the
underground.
Water in rock and sediments ﬂow through pore spaces and cavities generalised as porous medi-
ums. One of the main hydrological characteristics of a limestone aquifer is that it most often
is considered a fractured porous medium, where primary ﬂow happens within fractures and sec-
ondary ﬂow within the limestone matrix. On a small scale groundwater ﬂow can greatly be
determined by fracture orientation and aperture, whereas on a larger scale, the eﬀect of fractures
becomes less distinct and groundwater ﬂow through highly crushed limestone can be simulated
as a single porous medium(Milter, 2007; Berkowitz, 2002). The focus of this chapter will be to
describe the main hydrogeological characteristics which govern the ﬂow in limestone aquifers.
Porosity
The total porosity of a sedimentary rock is deﬁned as the ratio of void space out of the total
volume of the media, and can range from zero up to forty percent, depending on the degree of
compaction of grains, particle size distribution and the shape of the grains (Schwartz and Zhang,
2003). As not all voids are interconnected, they cannot be considered to actively contribute to
11
==PAGE:22==
2.2.
CHARACTERISTICS OF LIMESTONE HYDROGEOLOGY
the groundwater ﬂow, which brings up the concept of eﬀective or mobile porosity, deﬁned as the
ratio of interconnected interstices to the total volume of the medium.
For a fractured porous medium, such as the bryozoan limestone, the eﬀective porosity may be
redeﬁned, as several porous domains are recognised, making it meaningful to subdivide the total
bulk porosity to a matrix porosity and a fracture porosity, as can be observed in Figure 2.5. The
matrix porosity refers to the inter granular pore space within the rock, and the fracture porosity
refers to the fraction of the total rock volume which is comprised of fracture cavities, usually due
to mechanical or chemical processes, such as tectonic stress or solution channeling (Brettmann
et al., 1993).
For Danish limestone formations bulk porosities are dominated by matrix porosities reaching
ranges between 22 to 40 %, where fracture porosities have only been estimated from models
and pump tests to comprise of about 1-1.5 % (Galsgaard et al., 2014). Although the fracture
porosities only make up for a small percentage of the total bulk porosity, it is often found that
the most rapid groundwater ﬂow is within the fracture network (Brettmann et al., 1993).
Figure 2.5: Conceptual understanding of a double porous medium (a) and a double permeable medium
(b). The double porous medium consist of a fracture porosity and a matrix porosity with much lower per-
meability. The multi permeable medium consist of several permeabilities representing highly permeable
horizons and fractures (Vangkilde-Pedersen et al., 2011).
Hydraulic conductivity
Hydraulic conductivity may be deﬁned as the ease with which water ﬂows through a porous
medium, and is introduced through Darcy’s law as a proportionality constant which relates the
hydraulic gradient to the speciﬁc discharge. The hydraulic conductivity is deﬁned as a veloc-
ity in units length per time, and can vary in several orders of magnitude from 10−2 m/s for a
highly hydraulic conductive sand to 10−13 m/s for a low hydraulic conductive shale (Schwartz
and Zhang, 2003).
As with the porosity, hydraulic conductivity is also highly inﬂuenced by the degree of fracturing.
Bulk hydraulic conductivity can also be subdivided into a matrix conductivity and a fracture
conductivity. In the uppermost crushed limestone, it is found that the fracture permeability is
12
==PAGE:23==
2.2.
CHARACTERISTICS OF LIMESTONE HYDROGEOLOGY
considered much greater, giving rise to higher hydraulic conductivity and essentially governing
the preferential ﬂow in the aquifer (Vangkilde-Pedersen et al., 2011).
The interaction between high porosity in the matrix and high conductivity within the fracture
network is well conceptualised in Figure 2.5. In reality this is strictly a conceptual understanding,
as a very crushed limestone can show characteristics of multiple porosities and multiple conduc-
tivities as the formation is highly heterogeneous. Studies by Milter (2007) has though shown
that on a large scale this heterogeneity can satisfyingly be modelled as a single porous medium.
For bryozoan limestone formations it should furthermore be mentioned that the degree of cemen-
tation, which varies within and between layers (Larsen et al., 2006), decreases both porosity and
the hydraulic conductivity, which essentially eﬀects hardness and the preferential ﬂow within or
between bryozoan mounds (Galsgaard et al., 2014; Larsen et al., 2006).
Preferential ﬂow and scale dependency
The tangent law of refraction
By applying the theory of ﬂow lines, when water passes from one media to another with diﬀerent
hydraulic conductivity, the direction of the ﬂow line will change, obeying the tangent law of
refraction in Equation 2.1, illustrated in Figure 2.6 (Fetter, 2001; Schwartz and Zhang, 2003).
K1
K2
= tanσ1
tanσ2
(2.1)
where K1 and K2 represent two diﬀerent hydraulic conductivities of two media.
Figure 2.6: (a) Refraction of a ﬂow line crossing a conductive boundary. (b) refraction of a ﬂow line
crossing a boundary from low to high conductivity. (c) refraction of a ﬂow line crossing a boundary from
high to low conductivity. Interpreted from Fetter (2001).
The eﬀect of this law on a highly conductive bryozoan limestone with varying low conductive
horizons, as seen in Figure 2.7, will result in horizontal ﬂow lines within a limestone layer being
refracted to a vertical ﬂow through the lower conductive layers, as observed in Figure 2.6c. For
ﬂow this implies that the hydraulic gradient in the lower conductive layer is steepened to fulﬁll
the ﬂow crossing the geological boundary from the surrounding higher conductive layer.
Cases of anisotropy
In aquifers where the magnitude of the hydraulic conductivity is seen to follow a speciﬁc direc-
tion in space, anisotropy is deﬁned. This can be observed in limestone formations where fracture
13
==PAGE:24==
2.2.
CHARACTERISTICS OF LIMESTONE HYDROGEOLOGY
systems and faults are pronounced. Dependent on the fracture system orientation, an aquifer
can show highly varying degree of anisotropy sometimes yielding a 2-3 times higher conductivity
in the longitudinal ﬂow direction compared to the transversal (Vangkilde-Pedersen et al., 2011).
Further, as can be seen in Figure 2.7, the gas permeability, which can be related to the hy-
draulic conductivity, has been found to vary by more than a factor 10 over 1 meter in depth, in
a bryozoan limestone layer within a speciﬁc mound (Larsen et al., 2006). This indicates strong
anisotropy within one layer, where it is also worth noting that the combination of several layer
sequences of conductive limestone and low conductive ﬂint horizons brings in further anisotropy
as also observed in Figure 2.7.
Figure 2.7: Porosity and gas permeabilities of the Danian limestone formation in Karlstrup quarry.
Samples are taken as horizontal proﬁles in one limestone layer within the same bryozoan mound. Observe
the high correlation between porosity and permeability through the proﬁle where values are highest near
contact to the ﬂint surface.
Furthermore note the relatively heterogeneous distribution through the
proﬁle (Larsen et al., 2006).
In general it is seen that anisotropy makes it diﬃcult to geographically map the dominant ﬂow
direction of an aquifer, as especially horizontal anisotropy can have a big impact on a local scale.
Scale dependency
As hydrogeological parameters are all bound to the scale from which they were obtained, the
dependency of scale is something which should be considered when parametrising geological fea-
tures and layers. The observations can often be highly detailed on a small ﬁeld site, but may, due
to the heterogeneous characteristics of the limestone, introduce large uncertainty when extrapo-
lated to a larger scale. As of today, there is no clear up-scaling method which can be applied, to
upscale parameters found from point observations to a larger eﬀective parameter (Sonnenborg
and Henriksen, 2005).
A study of hydraulic conductivity in heterogeneous porous carbonate
rocks at diﬀerent sites and scales, seen in Figure 2.8, illustrates this clear scale dependency of
hydrogeological parameters. A tendency in increased hydraulic conductivity with up-scaling is
also observed from the ﬁgure.
14
==PAGE:25==
2.2.
CHARACTERISTICS OF LIMESTONE HYDROGEOLOGY
Figure 2.8: Relationship between estimated hydraulic conductivity and scale in heterogeneous, porous
carbonate rocks. A relationship between increasing hydraulic conductivity and increasing scale is seen
(Schulze-Makuch and Cherkauer, 1998).
Fracture ﬂow and solute transport in a fractured media
Despite the fractures often being the dominant pathway for groundwater ﬂow and solute trans-
port, it is found that the matrix adjacent to the fracture plays an important role in the solute
transport (Grisak and Pickens, 1980). As solute transport follows the path of fractures through
the fractured media, a diﬀusive exchange process, due to the concentration gradient between
fracture and matrix, is observed, as seen in Figure 2.9. Over time, as the solute is washed out
of the fracture network, it gives rise to a negative concentration gradient, resulting in a back
diﬀusive process from the matrix into the fracture. Due to the previously mentioned storage
eﬀect of the the matrix porosity, this back diﬀusive exchange process may act as a secondary
source of solute transport.
Figure 2.9: Schematic understanding of solute diﬀusion into in the matrix of a fractured medium, with
a constant source input of C0. Modiﬁed from Grisak and Pickens (1980).
15
==PAGE:26==
2.3.
FLOW AND TRANSPORT MODELLING IN LIMESTONE
2.3
Flow and transport modelling in limestone
Although water stored within the matrix porosity accounts for the most volume of the aquifer, it
is not seen to contribute most in terms of groundwater ﬂow, as matrix permeability is often low
making water in the matrix more or less static (Brettmann et al., 1993). As exchange between
static and active water is not only governed by advection and dispersion, but also a secondary
diﬀusive processes, static water can be considered as a natural long term reservoir, which plays
an important role especially when considering solute retention.
Through time, ﬂow and solute transport in the fractured limestone aquifers of Denmark have
been conceptualised and numerically modelled in several diﬀerent ways by (Brettmann et al.,
1993; Roskilde amt, 2005; Milter, 2007; Balbarini and Rosenberg, 2014). A brief summary of
the main principles behind these models can be viewed in Figure 2.10 and are explained in the
following sections.
Model approaches
To start with the simplest, the equivalent porous medium or equivalent continuum model, is
conceptualised with one porosity and one hydraulic conductivity representing both fractures and
matrix of the geological medium. The model assumes that ﬂow occurs in the pore spaces and
can be modelled with a single ﬂow equation for the geological medium. Several geological mate-
rials with diﬀerent hydraulic properties can be combined to represent the required formation, see
Figure 2.10a. As the equivalent porous medium model does not include all of the processes of a
heterogeneous media, the use of this model on fractured limestone is best applied on a suﬃciently
larger scale or where fractures are more densely related and more interconnected, making the
fracture ﬂow behave like a porous media (Berkowitz, 2002; Christiansen and Wood, 2006; Milter,
2007).
Another class of models is the double porosity model, which, as the name refers to, is represented
by two homogeneous overlapping porous materials. The model is often conceptualised as sugar
cube blocks, as observed in Figure 2.5, where the matrix (blocks) are assigned one porosity and
the fractures between the matrix another porosity. The ﬂow and transport exchange between
matrix and fracture domains can be explained by a transfer function, which gives more ﬂexibility
to represent diﬀusive processes (Brettmann et al., 1993; Gerke and Genuchten, 1993; Christiansen
and Wood, 2006; Balbarini and Rosenberg, 2014).
Lastly a fractured limestone aquifer can be conceptualised by a discrete fracture model, seen in
Figure 2.10c, where discrete fractures or fracture networks often simulate the governing ﬂow and
transport. Diﬀusive processes are coupled perpendicular to the fractures into the less permeable,
but homogeneous, matrix porous medium (Berkowitz, 2002; Milter, 2007). This type of model
requires a high degree of detail and data to represent the actual geology, with speciﬁc knowledge
to fracture locations or geostatistics describing discrete fracture networks (Neuman, 2005).
16
==PAGE:27==
2.3.
FLOW AND TRANSPORT MODELLING IN LIMESTONE
Figure 2.10: Conceptual overview of the equivalent porous model (a), double porous model (b) and
the discrete fracture model (c).
The double porosity and discrete fracture model classes have the ability to describe some of the
relevant governing processes of a fractured medium, as highlighted throughout the hydrogeo-
logical section. One signiﬁcant disadvantage, when applying these kinds of modelling classes,
is the need for additional input data and parameterisation. The process of collecting data and
identifying suitable parameters can be cumbersome and time consuming. Thus, this study has
applied the equivalent porous medium model, as a starting point, to describe the complex ge-
ological structures of the bryozoan limestone. The use of this model approach has though not
been without awareness on the processes left out, which will be discussed throughout the thesis.
In order to fully understand the equivalent porous medium model approach, the following section
will describe the governing groundwater ﬂow equations which determine ﬂow and transport in a
porous medium.
Groundwater ﬂow equations
Governed by the laws of physics, laminar groundwater ﬂow through a porous medium can be
described by Darcy’s law, relating the hydraulic gradient and the mediums hydraulic conductivity
(Fetter, 2001; Schwartz and Zhang, 2003).
Q = −KA∆h
∆l
(2.2)
Where Q is the ﬂow rate, A is the cross sectional area perpendicular to the ﬂow direction, K is the
hydraulic conductivity and ∆h
∆l is the hydraulic gradient. Under anisotropic conditions, where K
is directional dependent, the Darcy ﬂux, q, at a speciﬁc point may be formulated with cartesian
coordinates as
q = −K∇h
(2.3)
where K represents a hydraulic conductivity tensor, and ∇h is the hydraulic gradient, as ∇=
 ∂
∂x, ∂
∂y, ∂
∂z

As the ﬂow rate is a function of both time and space it is often described in literature by
diﬀerential equations and the principle of mass conservation or the continuity principle. From
Fetter (2001, p.125) the principle states that ”there can be no net change in the mass of a ﬂuid
17
==PAGE:28==
2.3.
FLOW AND TRANSPORT MODELLING IN LIMESTONE
contained in a small volume of an aquifer”. This implies that for a conﬁned aquifer, with a
speciﬁc storage, Ss, hydraulic head, h, hydraulic conductivity, K, and a source/sink term, E, that
ﬂow in a three dimensional (x,y,z) porous medium, thus can be explained by
∂
∂x

Kx
∂h
∂x

+ ∂
∂y

Ky
∂h
∂y

+ ∂
∂z

Kz
∂h
∂z

+E(x,y,z,t) = Ss
∂h
∂t
(2.4)
Under steady state conditions, where ∂h
∂t = 0, occur in the aquifer, Equation 2.4 simpliﬁes to
∇·(K∇h)+E = 0
(2.5)
Where K represents a hydraulic conductivity tensor for anisotropic systems, and a constant for
isotropic homogenous conditions (Kx = Ky = Kz).
Solute transport equations
For solute transport the two main processes are advection and diﬀusion.
For a solute with
concentration, C, traveling with a velocity vector, v, through a unit area with a porosity, n, the
conservative advective mass ﬂux, Jadv is written as
Jadv = nCv
(2.6)
Just like Darcy’s law describes the governing groundwater propagation, there is an equivalent
rule which describes the diﬀusive mass ﬂux according to the concentration gradient, known as
Fick’s law of diﬀusion (Schwartz and Zhang, 2003). For water ﬁlled sediments with an eﬀective
porosity, n, a tortuosity, τ, a molecular diﬀusion tensor, Dm, and a concentration gradient, ∇C,
the diﬀusive ﬂux, Jdi f , through a porous media may be written as
Jdif = −nτDm∇C
(2.7)
As the solute moves through the porous media a secondary mechanical mixing and dilution
process is introduced, termed mechanic dispersion, Jmdis which is a product of the porosity,
dynamic dispersivity, Ddisp and concentration gradient.
Jmdis = −nDdisp∇C
(2.8)
As the two processes of mechanic mixing and diﬀusion are inseperable for ﬂowing water, they
have been summed up in the term hydrodynamic dispersion, where the total dispersive ﬂux, Jdis
is given by Fetter (2001) and Schwartz and Zhang (2003).
Jdis = Jmdis +Jdif = −n(Ddisp +τDm)∇C = −nD∇C
(2.9)
where the dispersion coeﬁcient tensor, D for a three dimensional system is a function of the
velocity vector | v |, diﬀusion coeﬃcient, Dm, and dispersivities in the longitudinal, αL, transverse
horizontal, αT, and vertical direction, αV, as represented in the mathematical theory of dispersion
by Schwartz and Zhang (2003, p.455).
D =


Dx
Dxy
Dxz
Dyx
Dy
Dyz
Dzx
Dzy
Dz


(2.10)
18
==PAGE:29==
2.4.
GOOD PRACTICES IN GROUNDWATER MODELLING
where
Dx = αL
v2
x
| v | +αT
v2
y
| v | +αV
v2
z
| v | +τDm
(2.11)
Dy = αL
v2
y
| v | +αT
v2
x
| v | +αV
v2
z
| v | +τDm
(2.12)
Dz = αL
v2
z
| v | +αT
v2
y
| v | +αV
v2
x
| v | +τDm
(2.13)
Dxy = Dyx = (αL −αT)vxvy
| v |
(2.14)
Dxz = Dzx = (αL −αV)vxvz
| v |
(2.15)
Dyz = Dzy = (αL −αV)vyvz
| v |
(2.16)
| v |=
q
v2x +v2y +v2z
(2.17)
The complete mass transport rate, J, for dispersion and advection may be formulated by the
sum of mass ﬂuxes
J = Jdis +Jadv = −nD∇C +nCv
(2.18)
Just like the groundwater ﬂow equations, solute transport can also be described by the principle
of mass conservation. To sum up, the resulting diﬀerential equation for mass transport in a
porous media can be deﬁned as
R∂C
∂t +∇.(J)+M = 0
(2.19)
where M represents a mass source term, and R denotes the retardation factor approximating
solute sorption.
2.4
Good practices in groundwater modelling
A thorough understanding of physical properties of the geology and the governing processes of the
hydrology within, is the starting point of a good groundwater model. The background knowledge
on geology, hydrogeology and modelling serves as the backbone in the process of groundwater
modelling, to ensure informed choices and priorities throughout the modelling process.
The process of setting up a groundwater model can be approached step-wise.
Initially, new
and existing geological and hydrogeological data are gathered, conceptualised into a geological
model. Parameterising the geological model into a hydrostratigraphic model can facilitate the
application of numerical simulation schemes to solve ﬂow and solute transport.
19
==PAGE:30==
2.4.
GOOD PRACTICES IN GROUNDWATER MODELLING
Figure 2.11: The iterative process of building the groundwater model. In ares of weak knowledge, data
must be collected gradually, and integrated to the models. Based on ﬁgures from Jørgensen et al. (2008).
It is though important to acknowledge the beneﬁts of introducing an iterative work ﬂow to the
process of setting up a groundwater model, which is exempliﬁed in Figure 2.11.
The iterative process of building up a geological model for use in groundwater modelling is
still focused on the three main processes; The conceptual geological model, the spatial digitised
geological model and the hydrostratigraphic model, which is used in the groundwater model (Jør-
gensen et al., 2008). The backbone of these steps are the input geological- and hydrogeological
data which, together with the aim of modelling, will deﬁne the quality and applicability of the
resulting groundwater model. The iterative work ﬂow though makes the process highly dynamic
and time consuming. The resulting groundwater model can further reveal areas of insuﬃcient
knowledge or data, and the iterative process must be repeated.
Good practices of geological- and groundwater modelling has been applied in this study to ensure
an ongoing evaluation of the applicability and quality of the model through the modelling steps.
Previous studies of bryozoan limestone, as well as modelling studies near Ølsemagle has already
been described in the Introduction. New data, to fulﬁll the aim of this study, is therefore needed
in order to construct the conceptual geological model. The ﬁeldwork carried out in Ølsemagle
and the conceptual models based hereon is described in the following parts.
20
==PAGE:31==
Part 3
Ølsemagle site
To have a basis for setting up the groundwater model, a site was chosen which could give easy
access to both geo- and hydrogeological data of the bryozoan limestone. Further, the site was
relevant because of its history of contamination, and the unexplained propagation of the con-
taminant plume, which is contrary to the hydraulic gradient. In this section the site chosen for
this study’s ﬁeld work will be introduced, more speciﬁcally the site in the small town of Ølsemagle.
Figure 3.1:
Overview map of the location of Ølsemagle, Ll.
Skensved and Karlstrup on Sealand,
Denmark.
The location of Ølsemagle town near Køge, 40 km south-southwest of Copenhagen, can be seen
in Figure 3.1. The ﬁgure also shows the location of the near-by towns Ll. Skensved and Karlstrup
where previous studies has examined geo- and hydrogeological properties of the bryozoan lime-
stone (Jakobsen, 1991; Milter, 2007; Larsen et al., 2006; Roskilde amt, 2005, 2001b,a, 2002). The
21
==PAGE:32==
site in Ølsemagle where the ﬁeld work was carried out was of speciﬁc interest, given a relative re-
cent soil and groundwater contamination, discovered on the private property of Ølsemaglevej 52
in the year 2011, originating back to 2007. The contamination, consisting of mainly chlorinated
solvents, primarily PCE and its degradation products, was found to leak into the upper ground-
water reservoir. The plume, somewhat, followed the hydraulic gradient eastward towards two
groundwater abstraction wells (DGU no.213.607 and DGU no. 213.608), essentially threatening
a private water supply work serving 2.600 households (NIRAS, 2014), reaching an extent of more
than 700 meters eastwards (NIRAS, 2014). As a remediation strategy the contamination source
was dug out in 2013, with subsequent pump-and-treat, in the old source area, and downstream
from there, see remediation wells (AFV) in Figure 3.2.
Figure 3.2: Location of the well network established by NIRAS and the drinking water supply wells
aﬀected by the contamination plume. The area of speciﬁc interest is magniﬁed in lower right corner.
A network of wells has previous to this study been established on the site for extensive monitoring
and sampling. The network includes wells for monitoring of the contaminant plume (M wells),
for monitoring the hydraulic heads (P wells), for pump-and-treat remediation (AFV wells), and
for tracer injection and monitoring (T wells). The entire network of wells can be seen in Figure
3.2 and has been useful in the collection of geo- and hydrogeological data such as hydraulic heads,
water samples and borehole proﬁles for this study.
In Figure C.1, Appendix C, a time line has been assembled for an overview of the historical
events and the development of the contamination, remediation and further ﬁeld investigations
22
==PAGE:33==
on the case site in Ølsemagle. In addition to the continuous monitoring of the contamination and
the eﬀect of the remediation, Balbarini and Rosenberg (2014) studied the application of several
numerical groundwater model approaches to simulate transport of the contaminant plume.
Previous conceptual models at Ølsemagle
To build on top of previous knowledge of the site, projects performed by Balbarini and Rosenberg
(2014) and NIRAS (2014) have served as a basis for both the conceptual geological and the
hydrogeological understanding. Previous conceptual geological models of the area can be seen
in Figure D.2 and D.3 in Appendix D. Additionally, a comprehensive study of an aquifer with
similar characteristics, in the nearby town Ll. Skensved, by Milter (2007) has also served as a
main reference for the conceptual understanding. These existing models have been useful in the
preliminary project deﬁnition, as well as to clarify which additional data was needed for this
study’s aim. Several ﬁeld campaigns were carried out at the Ølsemagle site during this study,
which served to ﬁll out some of the existing knowledge gaps of the sites geo- and hydrogeology.
Field work activities at Ølsemagle
NIRAS has provided this study with a large amount of borehole, head and water sample data.
In addition hereto, two ﬁeld work campaigns were carried out at the site. One serving the pur-
pose of supporting the conceptual geological model, and one for investigating the hydrogeological
properties of the aquifer. The geo- and hydrogeological ﬁeldwork has been focused on the area
between the T wells, seen magniﬁed in lower right corner of Figure 3.2, thus this area is deﬁned
as the area of speciﬁc interest.
Region Sjælland carried out an excavation between the T wells at the site, for the purpose of
studying remediation techniques. The purpose of the excavation was not within the scope of this
study, but it exposed the upper geology of the site, down to 4.5 meters below terrain (m.b.t.),
providing geological data for the conceptual geological model. Prior to the excavation, a tracer
test was conducted and monitored in collaboration with NIRAS between the same T wells, from
T01 to the downstream wells, which gave a highly valuable impression of the same geology’s
hydrogeological properties. Through these ﬁeld campaigns a detailed geo- and hydrogeological
data set was collected of the area of approximately 10x10 m between the T wells.
In the following parts of the thesis, the setup and results of the ﬁeld work will be presented, as
well as the resulting conceptual models.
23
==PAGE:34==
==PAGE:35==
Part 4
Geological data
4.1
Geological ﬁeld work and interpretation
This section will present and interpret all geological ﬁeld and lab activities carried out in con-
nection with this study. In addition to the geological excavation already introduced in Part 3,
lithological characterisation of the T well borehole samples down to a depth of 6 m.b.t. has been
carried out in the lab. Karlstrup quarry has also been the subject of an excursion to support the
conceptual understanding of large scale bryozoan mound propagation, in addition to the litera-
ture study. As the geological data from the Ølsemagle site only reaches vertical depths of 6 m.b.t.
they are constrained to the upper, and mainly glacial disturbed, geology. Therefore observations
from Karlstrup quarry serves as a basis for a conceptual understanding of these deeper layers of
the limestone aquifer in Ølsemagle. The three diﬀerent sources of geological data are presented
in this part, which will form the basis of the conceptual and digitised geological model in Part 5.
Karlstrup quarry - Conceptional bryozoan mound propagation
A ﬁeld excursion to Karlstrup quarry, which is located approximately 7 km north-northeast of
Ølsemagle, was undertaken together with the hydrogeologist Hasse Milter from Region Sjælland.
Given the close proximity both spatially and in geological time of formation of the Ølsemagle and
Karlstrup bryozoan limestone, it is justiﬁable to compare and extrapolate mound propagation
and characteristics from Karlstrup to Ølsemagle.
The northern and eastern outcrops of Karlstrup quarry were, during the excursion, measured
for strike and dip along a continuous layer. This revealed downwards inclining mounds, away
from the quarry on both the northern and eastern outcrop. It was observed that the northern
outcrop consisted mainly of horizontal layers, while the eastern and western outcrops showed the
distinct wavy characteristics of the bryozoan mounds, see Figure 4.1. Bearing in mind that the
bryozoan mounds of the Karlstrup area are longer than wide and propagating in a west-northwest
to east-southeast direction, as explained in Section 2.1, the observations are likely to show a cut
through the long end of a bryozoan mound on the northern outcrop and the propagating front
at the eastern outcrop. This indicates very long bryozoan mounds of up to 300 meters length.
As expected from literature, the bryozoan mounds embedded ﬂint, both in continuous horizons
as well as nodules. Despite their varying geometry and propagation, the ﬂint was observed to
25
==PAGE:36==
4.1.
GEOLOGICAL FIELD WORK AND INTERPRETATION
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.1: North (4.1a) and east (4.1b) outcrop of Karlstrup limestone quarry.
appear steadily down through the outcrops with intervals of 20 cm to a bit more than a meter,
following the shape of the mounds. The bryozoan limestone mounds were varying in hardness in
between and within layers, but hardness of the outcrop must be interpreted with care because
of the long time of exposure and weathering. Interpreting fractures in a quarry as Karlstrup is
also something that should be limited to conceptual observations. Human and environmental
induced and enhanced fracturing will highly exaggerate the impression of fracture aperture and
density.
Conceptually it can though be said that fractures were especially pronounces along
layers, especially ﬂint layers.
The above ﬁndings are supported by earlier studies of the Karlstrup quarry outcrops in Larsen
et al. (2006) and Jakobsen (1991).
The observations at Karlstrup quarry can support the conceptual understanding of the bryozoan
limestone at Ølsemagle. The rest of this section will focus on the geological data of the Ølsemagle
site, which only covers a depth down to 6 m.b.t. and is highly inﬂuenced by glaciotectonics and
mixing with the quaternary layers. Below the crushed layers, the geology is expected to show
similar characteristics to the Karlstrup bryozoan mound layer sequences. Previous conceptual
geological models of the Ølsemagle area do not give any detailed indication on ﬂint horizons or
mound propagation, but do show undulating upper boundary of the hard limestone formation,
see Figure D.2 from NIRAS (2014) and Figure D.2 from Balbarini and Rosenberg (2014) in Ap-
pendix D.
26
==PAGE:37==
4.1.
GEOLOGICAL FIELD WORK AND INTERPRETATION
The 2015 Ølsemagle excavation
To expose the limestone formation at the site in Ølsemagle an excavation was performed late
March 2015 by Region Sjælland. The excavation extended 10x10 meters from T01 to the three
other T wells, planned with a depth of 7 meters. From hydraulic head measurements in the T
wells the water table was known to be located less than 3 m.b.t. around the time of dredging,
which is why a dramatic lowering of the groundwater table was necessary. The set-up of the ex-
cavation can be seen in Figure E.1 in Appendix E. A total pumping rate of 30 m3/h was applied
to AFV1, directly to the excavation and to another well placed within the old excavation of the
contaminant source from 2013, denoted as ”domestic well”. The old excavation was performed as
a part of the remediation strategy of the site in 2013 and was subsequently ﬁlled with pea gravel,
sand and topsoil (NIRAS, 2013). Its extent can be seen in Figure 4.2 as well as the extent of the
2015 excavation.
Figure 4.2: The old excavation from 2013 is plotted with dots. Its outer boundary shows its shallow
extend, while the inner boundary shows the extent of the deeper excavation. The striped square shows
the extend of the 2015 excavation from which much of this study’s geological interpretation is based.
The pumping upstream of the 2015 excavation, in AFV1 and the domestic well, resulted in the
water table being lowered down to the bottom of the domestic well. Unfortunately it was not
possible to lower the groundwater table in the new excavation to 7 m.b.t., as planned, with
the given pumping capacities. The excavation therefore only exposed proﬁles to a depth of 4.5
m.b.t., leaving the excavation water-ﬁlled down to 7 m.b.t. Consequently quantitative measures
of fractures and layers from the fractured limestone could not be attained as originally planned,
27
==PAGE:38==
4.1.
GEOLOGICAL FIELD WORK AND INTERPRETATION
due to the challenges of draining the excavation (original ﬁeld plan can be found in Appendix
F). Furthermore, the wet circumstances of the excavation site made it impossible to get an exact
measurement of the the vertical reference in the bottom of the excavation. Approximate mea-
surements were however achieved with tape and rod measures.
The excavation did however reveal many interesting observations of layer sequences and conti-
nuity as well as hydraulic activities of fractures and as their propagation just below the water
surface in the excavation. The main points from the ﬁeld campaign have been summarized below
and are further supported by photos in Appendix E.
Figure 4.3: Eastern wall of the Ølsemagle excavation. Key details of have been highlighted, were (a)
and (b) indicate ﬂint horizons, and (c) highlights the brown and white marl clay. It should be noted
that ﬂint horizon (b) is continuous below the water surface, whereas ﬂint (a) is discontinuous suggesting
a fault line, where ﬂint (a) is pushed above the two clays. The red and white stick in the middle of the
image has an approximate length of 120 cm.
Layer sequences and continuity
Beneath a thin layer of topsoil the top three meters were dominated by till deposits with an
increasing content of bryozoan grains with depth. The most dominant features were the contin-
uous meandering ﬂint layer which could be identiﬁed just above and below the water surface,
at approximately 4.5 m.b.t, on all four exposed walls of the excavation. Above the continuous
ﬂint layer a discontinuous ﬂint layer, located approximately 4 m.b.t., can be observed in Figure
4.3 where the southern most located part of the ﬂint is seen to the right. Larger groups of ﬂint
nodules could also be observed at this depth. The two ﬂint layers observed above the the water
table were separated by an approximately 0.2 m thick layer with clay sized grains. An overview
28
==PAGE:39==
4.1.
GEOLOGICAL FIELD WORK AND INTERPRETATION
of the continuity of the ﬂint layers as well as the clayey horizon can be seen in Figure E.4 in
Appendix E, where the ﬂint layer 4.5 m.b.t. can be identiﬁed just above and below the water
surface on all sides of the excavation. A wavy deformation of the clayey layer between the ﬂint
can also be seen. To support the conceptual observations of the layer sequences, these have been
pointed out in Figure 4.4a.
From the excavation a substantial amount of sludgy bryozoan grains were dug up. The sludgy
material was very wet, but did also contain a lot of sand to gravel sized bryozoan fragments
as seen in Figure 4.4b. The characteristic grains were also identiﬁed in T01 and T02 borehole
samples, which will be presented in the following section and can be found in Appendix G. It
was not possible to specify whether the grainy material makes up a continuous layer, since it was
dug out from below the water surface of the excavation, and was only found in two of the four
T well borehole proﬁles. Based on the substantial amount that was dug out, it though indicates
a layer or a lens.
The natural geological lithology is disrupted on the western exposed wall where the outskirt of
the old 2013 excavation is dug free, revealing ﬁll of sand and pea gravel, see Figure E.3. The
2015 excavation further revealed the connection between the T01 well screen and the ﬁll from
the 2013 excavation, which might have inﬂuenced the tracer test, presented in Section 6.2. This
is further investigated in Part 8 during model simulations.
Formation geology
Most of the exposed proﬁles revealed a highly chaotic geology. The heterogeneous excavation
proﬁle with top layers of till with bryozoan grains and smaller limestone fragments transitioning
into crushed limestone, showed inﬂuences from glaciotectonics. Observations in the deeper, hard
limestone could have revealed some interesting changes in fracture patterns, originating more
from stress and strain of the ice sheet compared to the crushing of the upper formations by ice
movements (Galsgaard et al., 2014). Indications of this changed fracture pattern with depth can
though be seen from the picture and video footage taken just below the water surface, see Figure
4.4c, where larger and less densely separated vertical fractures can be identiﬁed.
The clayey layer was found to dip under the south-most part of the discontinuous ﬂint layer as
seen in Figure 4.3. After a discussion with excavation hydrogeologist Hasse Milter, a hypothesis
was raised to whether the discontinuity of the upper ﬂint sequence, was caused by a local fault,
displacing the geological sequence. This could result in the clayey layer dipping under the ﬂint
layer on the hanging side of the fault.
From the excavation a substantial amount of free-standing bryozoan grains were dug out, as
seen in Figure 4.4b. The grains were dug out with a lot of wet clayey limestone. The formation
of these substantial amounts of clayey material and bryozoan grains might be from mechanic
grinding of a limestone layer, originating from violent glacial disturbances. Such free-standing
bryozoan grains found in bryozoan mounds can also originate from wash-out and/or dissolution
of the matrix, the latter indicating large fractures (Galsgaard et al., 2014).
From the excavation back in 2013, seen in Figure E.8, a several meter large hardened limestone
block, was revealed in approximately 2 m of depth in the southwestern corner. Without any
signiﬁcant evidence it is possible to imagine this major block being separated from its deposition
environment and become mixed in the greater quaternary deposits during ice sheet movement.
29
==PAGE:40==
4.1.
GEOLOGICAL FIELD WORK AND INTERPRETATION
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4.4: 4.4a Proﬁle of the excavation, conceptualising the changing layer sequence. 4.4b Finely
sorted bryozoan grains of approximately 1-5 mm from the excavation. 4.4c Pictures from camera under
water showing larger limestone blocks, with 10-30 cm horizontal spacing, just under the continuous
ﬂint horizon. 4.4d Excavated blocks of limestone from below 4.5 m.b.t. with ocher blackish staining,
indicating hydraulic pathways around the blocks.
The above observations all underpin the assumption of violent glacial disturbances of the top
geology at the site.
Hydraulic active geology
Flow in a speciﬁc geological layer is strongly dependent on porosity, homogeneity, fracture density
and aperture as well as the amount of dead-end pores. Ocher and blackish stained fractures from
iron and manganese precipitates, respectively, could be observed in both ﬂint and limestone lay-
ers. Preferential ﬂow and possible fracture ﬂow, was clearly seen on samples of limestone blocks
from the excavation. In Figure 4.4d blocks collected from the excavation shows ocher to blackish
color stains on up to four of their six surfaces, indicating highly fractured media with preferential
ﬂow paths around the blocks. These small scale samples were dug out by the excavator, which
is why its vertical reference is uncertain. They are though originating from somewhere between
4.5 to 7 m.b.t. and resemble the blocks seen from underwater videos in Figure 4.4c. Just below
the ﬁll from the 2013 excavation, under well T01, a sample seen in Figure E.7, in Appendix E,
was found in the 2015 excavation, a limestone block with a highly ocher/blackish stained hole
30
==PAGE:41==
4.1.
GEOLOGICAL FIELD WORK AND INTERPRETATION
in it, clearly indicating a hydraulically active pathway. Additionally ﬂint blocks below 4 m.b.t.
showed clear patterns of ocher staining, especially along fractures and layer boundaries, adding
to the assumption of hydraulically active pathways along layer boundaries.
Hydraulic activities could also be observed from turbulence in the groundwater ﬁlled excavation.
When additional pumping was applied to the excavation, turbulence of turbid water ﬂowing into
the excavation from upstream was seen. Video recordings have documented this, but is also indi-
cated in Figure E.6, where a snapshot of several localised turbid clouds are seen. These observed
hydraulically active fractures were spaced horizontally under the water surface along the western
wall with approximately a few to 30 cm distance apart.
The excavation gave a lot of valuable conceptual understanding of the site’s upper geology, as
well as exact data of layer propagation and continuity. These ﬁndings will be combined with the
borehole sample analysis into two conceptual geological proﬁles in the end of this part.
Borehole proﬁles of the T wells
In preparation to the tracer test performed in February 2015, NIRAS drilled four boreholes us-
ing an auger drill. One tracer injection well, named T01, along with three dose response wells,
T02, T03 and T04, placed on a north to south oriented alignment approximately nine meters
downstream, as seen in Figure 4.2. Samples from these four boreholes were collected from the
auger drill at approximately every half meters depth, resulting in soil samples as seen in Figure
4.5. The samples were stored for 3-4 months before before a more detailed characterisation of
the boreproﬁle samples was done at DTU lab facilities.
The boreproﬁle journals for all auger- and down-the-hole (DTH) drilled boreholes at the Ølsema-
gle site, made by NIRAS, can be found in appendix N.
Figure 4.5: Samples from tracer boreholes being examined in the lab.
31
==PAGE:42==
4.1.
GEOLOGICAL FIELD WORK AND INTERPRETATION
The depth separated samples of the T wells were arranged in a fumehood to avoid possible toxic
fumes from the PCE/TCE contamination. Additionally the gas in the sample bags were measured
with a photoionization detector (PID) before opening, showing no detectable contamination. A
standardised lithological characterisation was developed based on Vejledning i ingeniørgeologisk
prøvebeskrivelse (Larsen et al., 1988) and ISO standard Identiﬁcation and classiﬁcation of soil
2002 (ISO, 2002), and is summarised in Appendix G. The methodology is applied consistently
on all soil samples. The samples should though be interpreted keeping in mind that they will
never contain fragments larger than the drill, even though the original layer might contain much
larger fragments. Further, the samples can have been ﬂushed or have moisture content not rep-
resentative for the true geology. Lined auger drills, as used by NIRAS, are though known to
allow for relative precise deﬁnitions of layer boundaries and lithological descriptions (Jørgensen
et al., 2008).
An overview of all samples from the T boreholes, T01, T02, T03 and T04, can be seen in Figure
4.6. This ﬁgure illustrates the highly diverse geology of the site, where rapid changes in grain
size and texture in every half meter are seen in most boreholes. The auger drill cannot drill
into hard rock, thus the T samples represents the layers above the hardened limestone, i.e. the
quaternary deposits and crushed limestone.
As already illustrated by Figure 4.2, T01 is placed in the most eastern wing of the old excavation,
so its top four meters consist of ﬁll ranging from sand to gravel. The samples originating deeper
than four meters below terrain are to a great extend similar in the proﬁles of T02, T03 and T04.
These three boreholes, T02, T03 and T04, show high similarity in their lithological sequence
and content. In general a top till layer transitions into a crushed limestone layer with increasing
content of bryozoan grains and limestone with depth. A crushed sequence of bryozoan limestone
with varying colouring from white to yellow and clay content is propagating down to the bottom
of the borehole with varying contents of ﬂint. The ﬂint is generally highest in content in four
to ﬁve m.b.t. and especially hard in T04, where a ”ﬂint block” is noted from the drilling, see
Appendix N. In two boreholes, T01 and T02, a distinct sample consisting of bryozoan grains is
found at approximately 6 m.b.t. This sample is not recognised in T03, and T04 does not have
samples at depth 5.5 and 6 m.b.t. A more thorough lithological description of each borehole can
be seen in Appendix G.
A summary of the four T boreholes lithology, representing the overall lithological geology of the
site, and its associated representativity, can be seen in Figure 4.7. The representativity scale il-
lustrates how many of the four T boreholes that are similar to the overall lithological description
at the speciﬁc depth in Figure 4.7, on a scale from one out of four to four out of four. The colour
representativity scale can be used as an indicator of continuity, shown as an example by the clear
green color around depth 4 to 5 m.b.t. where the ﬂint horizon is present in all four T boreholes.
The 1D borehole proﬁles underlines the strongly heterogeneous geology at the site changing
rapidly from quaternary deposits to limestone in textures from crushed and gravel size grains to
the top of the fractured limestone, all containing ﬂint of diﬀerent intensities.
32
==PAGE:43==
4.1.
GEOLOGICAL FIELD WORK AND INTERPRETATION
OVERVIEW OF T WELL SOIL SAMPLES
Figure 4.6: Overview of borehole samples from T01, T02, T03 and T04. The axis left of the proﬁles
shows the sample origin in meters below terrain. The small scale bar in the lower right corner indicates the
scale of the soil sample pictures, where the scale bar represents 3 cm. A detailed lithological description
of each borehole can be found in Appendix G.
33
==PAGE:44==
4.1.
GEOLOGICAL FIELD WORK AND INTERPRETATION
SUMMARISING LITHOLOGY OF THE T WELLS
Figure 4.7: A summary of the lithology for T01, T02, T03 and T04. The lithology represents the
overall geology of the site, and a representativity indication is seen as a color scale to the left indicating
if the lithology is supported by one, two, three or all four of the borehole samples at the speciﬁc depth.
34
==PAGE:45==
4.2.
2D CONCEPTUAL GEOLOGICAL PROFILES
4.2
2D conceptual geological proﬁles
Based on the ﬁeld observations from the excavation and T well borehole samples, conceptual
2D geological proﬁles of the exposed northern and eastern walls were made. They can be seen
in Figure 4.8 and Figure 4.9. Most of the two proﬁles are directly validated from the exposed
wall of the excavation, but the layer beneath the water surface, i.e. beneath the continuous ﬂint
layer, is not supported by observations of the same validity. A bryozoan grain and sludge layer
is depicted 6 m.b.t. where it is identiﬁed in borehole samples of T02 and T01, and represents
the vast amount of dug-out bryozoan grains and sludge from the excavation.
The expected
fractures in the fractured limestone layer have been included in the conceptual model based on
the observations from the section on hydraulic activity in the excavation. It is expected that the
fractures in the hard limestone propagates downwards with decreasing fracture density, based on
knowledge gained from literature studies of Part 2.
Figure 4.8: Conceptual geology of the eastwall of the 2015 excavation. The illustration is made based on
ﬁeld notes and pictures from the ﬁeld work during the excavation. Note that depths are approximations.
35
==PAGE:46==
4.2.
2D CONCEPTUAL GEOLOGICAL PROFILES
Figure 4.9:
Conceptual geology of the northwall of the 2015 excavation.
The illustration is made
based on ﬁeld notes and pictures from the ﬁeld work during the excavation.
Note that depths are
approximations, and the distance between T01 and T02-T04 is approximately 10 m. The ﬁgure is not
to scale. The transparent part of the proﬁle is a free interpretation and interpolation between known
geology.
36
==PAGE:47==
Part 5
Digitised geological model
5.1
The process of digitising the geological model
Referring back to Section 2.4, describing the iterative process of setting up a groundwater model,
the digitised geological model is based on a conceptual geological model. The conceptual model
of the Ølsemagle area has already been deﬁned in the previous part and the digitisation of the
conceptual model will therefore build on top of this conceptual understanding of the geology.
Digitisation of geology should be done with care, in order to keep the intended geological in-
terpretation. The iterative work ﬂow of this study’s digitisation of the geology is documented
through this part, and the resulting digitised geological model presented.
Choice and use of software
Several numerical groundwater models have a geological interpolation compartment, whereas the
geological modelling and visualisation software GeoScene3D, from I-GIS, is developed explicitly
for this task. It has been chosen as the software for digitising the geological model because of its
ﬂexibility in interpolating between various geological data. It further has a strong toolbox envi-
ronment where subsequent manipulation and ﬁne tuning of interpolated layers can be done. It is
a state of the art software and is used by both the Geological Survey of Denmark and Greenland,
and the Danish Environmental Protection Agency (Jørgensen et al., 2010). The software enables
representation of geology in both layers and volumetric pixels. The layer model has been chosen
since the geology observed in the ﬁeld showed layer characteristics, and the ﬁeld work chosen for
this study did not include geological input data in pixel format, as with geophysical data.
Deﬁnition of GeoScene3D layer sequence for interpolation
To accustom the geological data for interpolation in GeoScene3D a layer sequence must be de-
ﬁned where crossover of layers are avoided. The preliminary geological layer sequence can be seen
in Table 5.1, deﬁned based on the conceptual geological models in Figure 4.8 and 4.9. The diﬀer-
entiation between sludge and crushed limestone is based on the characterisation of the borehole
samples in Part 4. Distinct colours were applied to the interpreted geology, not using standardised
GeoScene3D colours. Applied colours for the speciﬁc layers in GeoScene3D are found in Table 5.1.
37
==PAGE:48==
5.1.
THE PROCESS OF DIGITISING THE GEOLOGICAL MODEL
Table 5.1: Layer deﬁnitions and sequence in Geoscene3D.
Geoscene3D layer ID
Geological layer
Colour
Till
Till
Brown
Crush
Upper crushed limestone layer
Gray
Sludge
Upper crushed and sludgy limestone
layer
Yellow
Flint
First discontinuous ﬂint layer
Black
Sludge 2
Sludgy limestone layer deﬁned as
marl clay based on the excavation
Yellow
Crush 2
Mid crushed limestone layer
Gray
Flint 2
Continuous ﬂint layer
Black
Crush 3
Lower crushed limestone layer
Gray
Sludge 3
Lower crushed and sludgy limestone
layer
Yellow
Grain
Layer expected to consist of bry-
ozoan grains
Pink
Hard
Beginning of the fractured limestone
White
Input data to GeoScene3D
The extent of the layer interpolation must be deﬁned by a scene extent, which is our model
boundary. The model boundary deﬁnitions are explained later in Part 8 but can be seen indi-
cated by a green line in lower left corner of Figure 5.1. The geological input data used in the
GeoScene3D model are the borehole proﬁles of the T wells and the adjacent wells: AFV1 and
AFV2. Further the conceptual geological models of the excavation walls presented in Figure
4.8 and Figure 4.9 has been included. Based on these data four proﬁles has been created in
GeoScene3D as illustrated in Figure 5.1. As one might notice, the geological data covers a small
area of the whole scene extent. This smaller area is though well covered by a dense geological
data set. The geology within this smaller area, earlier deﬁned as the area of speciﬁc interest, is
extrapolated to the boundary of the scene extent. The lack of geological data outside this area
will not aﬀect the scope of the model simulations.
38
==PAGE:49==
5.1.
THE PROCESS OF DIGITISING THE GEOLOGICAL MODEL
Figure 5.1:
The four proﬁles making up the basis for the interpolation of the geological layers in
GeoScene3D. The four proﬁles are representing the T02, T03 and T04 well data, the northern and
eastern excavation walls as well as the proﬁle crossing through the AFV wells, T01 and T03.
The
proﬁles and excavation are shown as a zoom of the whole scene extent, seen in lower left corner.
The main feature in the spatial geological layer model is the elevation points, which must be
deﬁned in each proﬁle for the speciﬁc geological layers. The layers are deﬁned by the use of
points in GeoScene3D which can be divided into three diﬀerent categories; snapped points,
free points and supporting points according to Jørgensen et al. (2008).
The snapped points are referred to a speciﬁc data point in the proﬁle, in our case the borehole
proﬁles. The snapped data points will refer to the data to which it is snapped, i.e. the borehole,
and not to the proﬁle. This will have an inﬂuence on the interpolation since boreholes most of-
ten will be projected onto the proﬁles with a certain threshold distance. This threshold distance
should therefore be kept as low as possible. An example of snapped data can be seen in Figure
5.2a of the T wells proﬁle interpolation.
The free points are placed where there is no speciﬁc geological data point but it is interpreted
that the geological layer will exist between data points (Jørgensen et al., 2008). Figure 5.3a
shows the use of points which are somewhat well deﬁned by the excavation proﬁle and somewhat
interpreted. The points in the eastern wall proﬁle are placed according to the conceptual sketches
of the geology from the excavation, shown in the background of Figure 5.3.
39
==PAGE:50==
5.1.
THE PROCESS OF DIGITISING THE GEOLOGICAL MODEL
Both proﬁles in Figure 5.3 and 5.2 are using the supporting points, which are helping the
interpolation in the direction of the geological interpretation of the layer sequences. There will
always be a degree of geological uncertainty outside snapped points. Some extent of geological
interpretation is present in all points which are not snapped to borehole proﬁles or walls of the
excavation with precisely deﬁned layer sequences. Even borehole proﬁles can have some degree of
uncertainty to the exact positions and interpretation of layers, which will vary with the drilling
method applied.
Interpolation of layers
The data points are all used as input for the interpolation of geological layers and weighted
equally.
Based on the above deﬁned layer sequence and points an interpolation is made in
GeoScene3D which is illustrated in Figure 5.2b and 5.3b. Figure 5.2 shows the T well proﬁle
which is being interpolated mainly using points snapped to borehole data, while Figure 5.3 shows
the East wall proﬁle which is being interpolated based on points representing the layers of the
conceptual excavation proﬁle of the east wall. Interpolation procedures for all four GeoScene3D
proﬁles can be seen in Figure H.1 in Appendix H. The interpolation is done using the 2D inverse
distance weighting interpolation algorithm with an exponent of 3. The exponent is kept relatively
low to avoid steep peaks, still the layers are not smoothed using the smoothing factor. Beyond
areas with geological data, the layers have been extrapolated with a constant height, to the
boundaries of the model scene extent, seen in Figure 5.1. The interpolation grid is made with a
node spacing of 0.5 m.
Adjustment and ﬁne tuning of geological model - an iterative process
The resulting digitised layers after the ﬁrst interpolation process were evaluated with hydroge-
ologist Hasse Milter. A few layer’s propagation did not ﬁt well with the suggested geological
hypothesis of deposition and re-bedding, through a fault, at the locality. New data points were
deﬁned and interpolated resulting in the ﬁnal geological layers for all four proﬁles, which are
presented throughout this part, as well as in Figure H.1, Appendix H. The interpolation was ﬁne
tuned using the toolbox setting ”Grid adjustment and evaluation”. This was necessary since the
interpolation resulted in crossover of layers despite the carefully placed points. Initial crossover
of the pink Grain layer and the yellow Sludge 3 layer can be noticed in Figure H.1h in Appendix H.
40
==PAGE:51==
5.1.
THE PROCESS OF DIGITISING THE GEOLOGICAL MODEL
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.2:
GeoScene3D data point deﬁnitions (5.2a), interpolations (5.2b) and layer adjustments
(5.2c) of the T well proﬁle. Colour deﬁnitions can be found in Table 5.1.
41
==PAGE:52==
5.1.
THE PROCESS OF DIGITISING THE GEOLOGICAL MODEL
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.3:
GeoScene3D data point deﬁnitions (5.3a), interpolations (5.3b) and layer adjustments
(5.3c) of the eastern wall. Colour deﬁnitions can be found in Table 5.1.
42
==PAGE:53==
5.2.
THE RESULTING DIGITISED GEOLOGICAL MODEL
5.2
The resulting digitised geological model
The resulting digitised spatial geological model is exempliﬁed in the east wall proﬁle in Figure
5.4. Still being in the initial state of creating the groundwater model, the process of building
a geological model showed to be highly iterative, with a continuous veriﬁcation of the geolog-
ical model with the previously collected and conceptualised geological data. For this purpose
GeoScene3D proved a ﬂexible and useful tool for setting up a digitised spatial geological model.
This model will serve as the basis of the hydrostratographic model in Part 7.
Figure 5.4: The redeﬁned digitised spatial geological model. The model is shown only for the east wall
proﬁle, as an example of the ﬁnal layer sequences of the digitised geological model.
43
==PAGE:54==
==PAGE:55==
Part 6
Hydrogeological data
To link the digitised geological model to a numerical groundwater model it needs to be parame-
terised. This is often done by creating a hydrostratigraphic model based on the geological model.
Hydrogeological parameterisation can be done in various ways based on literature studies, pump
tests, lab scale core experiments and Membrane-Interface Probe and Hydraulic Proﬁling Tool
(MiHpt), to mention a few. In this section the hydrogeological ﬁeld work carried out in con-
nection with this study is presented. It counts an interpretation of the hydraulic head data in
Ølsemagle, over the year as well as just before the initialisation of the tracer test. The tracer
test will result in estimates of site speciﬁc hydrogeological parameters, forming the base of the
subsequent hydrostratigraphic model.
6.1
Hydraulic heads
The hydraulic heads of the T, P and M wells have been continuously monitored at the Ølsemagle
site from May 2013 to April 2015, nearly two consecutive years. The groundwater table has
through much of this period been under inﬂuence of the pumping in the three AFV wells during
the pump-and-treat remediation, which was initiated the 02.05.2013 (Balbarini and Rosenberg,
2014) and ended ultimo-December 2014 (NIRAS, 2015b). The pump-and-treat was ended to
recover a natural groundwater table before initiating a planned tracer test at the T wells, see
Section 6.2. A plot of the full time series of all well hydraulic head data can be seen in Figure J.1,
Appendix J. From the borehole descriptions in Appendix N the screen depth of all wells can be
identiﬁed. All AFV wells have long screens of approximately 6 m starting just below the upper
boundary of the limestone layer. The T and M wells all have screens of 2 m, most of them lo-
cated just above or below the upper boundary of the limestone layer, i.e. in the crushed limestone.
The eﬀects of the activities at the site, such as the pump-and-treat and the pumping associated
with the excavation carried out by Region Sjælland in 2015, can be identiﬁed from the hydraulic
head time series in the nearby wells. A yearly variation during the pump-and-treat has been
between ± 0.5 to 1 m for all wells. As also seen in Figure J.1 the groundwater table is rising
after the end of the pump-and-treat, which indicates a higher groundwater table under natural
conditions. The seasonal patterns might also be diﬀerent without the inﬂuence of anthropogenic
pumping eﬀects. The natural ﬂow ﬁeld of the site has therefore been examined based on the head
data from 02.02.2015 prior to the excavation and tracer test activities, which shows an eastwards,
slightly northwards curving groundwater ﬂow as seen in Figure 6.1. One might notice the often
lower head in AFV wells compared to the adjacent T or M well. This indicates a downward
45
==PAGE:56==
6.2.
TRACER TEST
Figure 6.1: Hydraulic equipoteniallines, based on hydraulic heads measured the 02.02.2015, prior to the
tracer injection, and the interpretated groundwater ﬂow line direction of the tracer test area. All wells
are labeled with their respective hydrualic head the 02.02.2015, with respect to the vertical reference,
DVR90.
vertical ﬂow since the AFV well screens are located deeper in all cases. For further elaboration
on hydraulic heads, equipotential lines and ﬂow lines at the Ølsemagle site, see Appendix J.
6.2
Tracer test
From geological and contaminant plume investigations made by NIRAS (2012b), it was found that
the aquifer below Ølsemaglevej 52 showed signs of high hydraulic conductivity. To investigate
the overall aquifer characteristics, but also to unmask small scale eﬀects on solute transport
in the crushed limestone aquifer, a multiple dose response tracer test was planned by NIRAS,
and executed and monitored collaboratively with the authors of this study. The outcome of the
tracer investigation resulted in speciﬁc hydrogeological parameters such as hydraulic conductivity,
peak concentrations, average velocities and most importantly concentration breakthrough curves
which are used later as a means to calibrate the solute transport compartment of the groundwater
model in Part 8.
46
==PAGE:57==
6.2.
TRACER TEST
Experimental setup
In Figure 6.2 an overview map has been assembled, showing the location of both the injection
well (T01), the dose response wells (T02-T04), located approximately 9.4 m downstream, and
the monitoring wells (M1-M5, AFV2, AFV3, M4 and M5). An in depth description with photo
documentation of the tracer test can be found in Appendix I, including further ﬁeld observations,
raw data and a step by step walkthrough of how data was processed.
Figure 6.2: Overview map of the tracer test setup. Dose response wells (T02-T04) are located in a
fan approximately 9.4 m downstream from the injection well (T01). The two sets of monitoring wells
M1,M2,M3, AFV3 and M4, M5 are located approximately 60 and 100 m downstream, respectively.
The experimental setup was based on utilising two soluble salts with low reactivity, sodium chlo-
ride (NaCl) and sodium bromide (NaBr), as a pulse injection to produce a momentaneous peak in
electrical conductivity in the downstream dose response wells. A primary beneﬁt of the multiple
tracer was that the signal could be monitored both collectively by the electronic conductivity
response, but also selectively by a bromide (Br−) speciﬁc probe and water sample analysis. On
top of this the tracer solution was heated above the local groundwater temperature, to boost the
temperature response signal in the monitoring wells. Consequently the multiple tracers chosen
could be monitored by automated down-the-hole data loggers, allowing for a cost eﬀective method
where continuous logging could be performed at a high resolution. The eﬀect of the temperature
boost was insigniﬁcant in the downstream dose response wells, why the temperature tracer has
not been used for further interpretation.
47
==PAGE:58==
6.2.
TRACER TEST
On the day of injection approximately 5 m3 abstracted and treated groundwater was mixed with
6.4 kg NaBr and 25 kg NaCl in a mixing tank to achieve an expected concentration of 1015 mg
Br/l and 3098 mg Cl/l. The tank volume was heated to an average temperature of 17°C prior
to injection, to diﬀer from the in-situ groundwater temperature of 9.5°C. The tracer pulse was
injected at 13:20 (03/02/15) in borehole T01, and was regulated to an average injection ﬂow of
1.8 l/min with a duration of 46 h and 40 min. The injection ﬂow was kept relatively low, to
avoid disturbances of the natural groundwater ﬂow ﬁeld.
Data collection
Following the tracer injection, water sampling and lab conductivity measurements were done
approximately three times a week, for a period of four weeks. Furthermore water samples were
sent to Højvang laboratorier A/S for further analysis of bromide and chloride following procedure
DS/EN ISO 10304-1:2009 (ion-chromotography).
Data loggers measuring electric conductivity, temperature and depth were programmed to collect
observations every two minutes starting 21 hours before tracer injection. As only ﬁve data log-
gers were available, the tracer campaign was split in two collection periods. The ﬁrst 22 days of
monitoring, loggers were located in near the injection well (AFV1, T01, T02, T03, T04), where-
after loggers were moved further downstream to the monitoring wells, in an attempt to capture
the tracer. Figure K.1 shows the geographical placement of loggers throughout the tracer ex-
periment. The monitoring period was ended approximately 50 days after injection. In Figure
K.2 of Appendix K a time line summary of the entire tracer data collection period may be viewed.
Results of the tracer test and hydrogeological interpretation
The breakthrough curves of the dose response wells T02, T03 and T04 can be seen in Figure
6.3. It depicts the electric conductivity measured by the data loggers. The data loggers have
been calibrated against samples analysed in the lab for electric conductivity, in accordance with
Figure I.9 in Appendix I.
The reason for the diﬀerence in initial electric conductivity of the three data loggers, as seen in
Figure 6.3, are not fully clariﬁed, but is expected to originate from calibration issues. Such issues
can also be identiﬁed from the T04 electric conductivity, ending lower than its initial value. Since
background concentrations and - electric conductivity measurements have been challenging to
ﬁnd, these are ignored for now, but elaborated on later in this section. In the analyses of this
section the data logger series are left with diﬀerent initial values, but are normalised to their
respective initial values later, for use in numerical model calibration.
48
==PAGE:59==
6.2.
TRACER TEST
Figure 6.3:
Electric conductivity in well T02, T03 and T04 over time.
The data loggers electric
conductivity measurements have been calibrated against lab electric conductivity measurements of the
ﬁeld water samples. Note that Cl−concentrations from Højvang laboratories A/S are plotted on the
right y-axis and seem to follow a similar trend as the electric conductivity.
Based on the data logger series, the tracer test revealed a much faster breakthrough of the tracer
plume than expected from literature and groundwater models performed by NIRAS at Ølsema-
gle. The breakthrough was not observed to occur simultaneously in all three dose response wells,
and were especially delayed in T02. This well, the most southern located, also showed a distinct
broader peak, whereas the front of the T03 and T04 peaks were steep. The diﬀerences in peak
shapes indicate that the breakthrough in T02 is more inﬂuenced by diﬀusive processes, and the
center of mass is expected to arrive faster for T03 and T04.
The peak electric conductivity signal was observed to arrive in T03 and T04 approximately 51
and 59 hours after injection, yielding ﬁrst estimates of peak velocities of 4.4 m/d and 3.8 m/d,
respectively. Electric conductivity measurements from T02 showed a peak arrival time of ap-
proximately 121 h. Judging not only on the arrival times, also the shape of the breakthrough
curves tells something about the transport processes inﬂuencing the tracer plume.
All three well observations show a skewness and long tailing, specially pronounced in T03 and
T04.
The data logger series of T03 does not even recover to its initial level after the more
than 500 h of logging. The long tailing is an expression of a retardation eﬀect on the solute
transport. This retardation can be a cause of diﬀerent reasons such as diﬀusion between mobile
and immobile fractions of a medium, diﬀusion between layers of diﬀerent hydrogeological prop-
erties, sorption and dispersion. When combining the above observations it seems likely that the
breakthrough curves indicates a highly crushed and/or fractured geology. A strong preferential
ﬂow toward east-northeast with a fast breakthrough time could indicate fracture orientation or
mound propagation, forcing the solute ﬂow rapidly towards T03 and T04. The ﬂat, slow and
49
==PAGE:60==
6.2.
TRACER TEST
diﬀusive peak of T02 indicates that the tracer observed here is the fringe of the plume or a result
of diﬀusion from the matrix bound tracer solute.
As also seen in Figure 6.3, water samples were collected approximately every third day. The
sample chloride (Cl−) concentrations follow the same shape and skewness as the data loggers,
indicating a constant fraction of Cl−in the tracer solute, which implies that no geochemical ex-
change with the aquifer matrix is taking place. This makes the hypothesis of retardation caused
by a change in aquifer geochemical equilibrium unreliable for this case. Unfortunately there was
not data available for setting up a ion balance, which could have clariﬁed this.
As the tracer volume was partly injected in the highly porous pea gravel pit from the old excava-
tion (seen just upstream from T01 in Figure 6.2), some of the tailing eﬀect could originate from
dilution of the tracer back and up into the old excavations sand and gravel pit. This would then
slowly discharge downstream through a large contact area with the aquifer. This hypothesis is
examined later in Part 8
To conclude, the tailing seen from the tracer test is expected to originate from diﬀusive eﬀects of
double-porous properties of the aquifer, which again underpin the aquifer being crushed and also
fractured due to the fast and steep breakthrough. Additionally breakthrough curves of T02, T03
and T04 all look similar to breakthrough curves found by Jakobsen (1991) in diﬀerent depths
of bryozoan limestone in Karlstrup.
This supports the hypothesis of the tracer ﬂowing in a
crushed and/or fractured limestone. To identify more quantitative measures of hydrogeological
parameters, the breakthrough curves are converted from electric conductivity to tracer solute
concentrations.
Correlation of tracer salt concentrations
Prior to injection it was assumed that the two tracer salts would behave similarly in the aquifer,
making it possible to boost the electric conductivity signal from Br−by adding Cl−. It was con-
trarily observed that, when plotting the water sample concentrations from Højvang laboratorier
A/S against each other in Figure 6.4, the correlation between Br−and Cl−(R2=0.86) did not
seem linear. At higher concentration the correlation showed linear tendencies, whereas in the
low concentration range Br−showed no change with increasing Cl−concentrations. The same
tendency is found in the analysis of the tracer solution, measured in the mixing tank, seen in Ta-
ble I.1, where Cl−concentration reached 2600 mg/l but Br−was observed below detection limit
where it was supposed to be at its maximum concentration. This suggests that the Cl−peak
might be shadowing over Br−. If this was the case, the relative concentration diﬀerence between
Cl−and Br−can be prescribed to the diﬃculty of separation between two ion concentrations in
the ion-chromatography method used by Højvang laboratories A/S.
50
==PAGE:61==
6.2.
TRACER TEST
Figure 6.4: Correlation between Br−and Cl−concentrations from water samples, measured externally
by Højvang Laboratorier A/S. There seems to be a poor correlation between Br−and Cl−in the observed
samples, especially during higher concentration.
As Br−and Cl−did not correlate linearly as expected, and Br−was not observed above detection
limit in the injection solution, it was decided to neglect the Br−data, and solely focus on the
eﬀects of Cl−in the further use of tracer test data. Trusting in the non-linear correlated data
would suggest the two salts to propagate diﬀerently, which is not expected.
Converting electrical conductivity to chloride concentrations
It was assumed that the laboratory measurements of Cl−from Højvang laboratories A/S and
the electric conductivity measured by the data loggers were representative of the average concen-
tration within the respective well at the speciﬁc time of observation. From this assumption the
electric conductivity measurement could directly be translated, through a linear regression line,
to a Cl−concentration. A good correlation was found in T03 and T04, between measured electric
conductivity and Cl−concentration with R2 ≈0.99. On the contrary it should be stressed that
in well T02 a relatively weaker correlation between electric conductivity and Cl−concentration
was seen, with R2 ≈0.87. The weaker correlation in T02 might be caused by the general low
response in this well, why other ions might inﬂuence the electric conductivity signals measured
by the data logger leading to a lower correlation with Cl−speciﬁcally. The plot of the correlation
between measured electric conductivity and Cl−concentrations for the T wells can be seen in
Figure I.10, Appendix I.
The correlations between electric conductivity and Cl−concentrations were used to calibrate
logger data of electric conductivity, as seen in Figure 6.3, into a continuous time series of Cl−
concentrations as seen in Figure 6.5. The correlation includes background concentrations of Cl−,
which has not been corrected for. This is especially because of the weak data set on background
concentrations, as elaborated on brieﬂy in Appendix I. Figure 6.5 is of key importance, as it will
be used in a normalised state, as the basis for calibration and validation of the numerical ﬂow
and solute transport model in Part 8.
51
==PAGE:62==
6.2.
TRACER TEST
Figure 6.5: Cl−concentrations based on the data loggers located in wells T02, T03 and T04, from
their electric conductivity correlation with Cl−concentration of water samples measured by Højvang
laboratories A/S.
Estimates of average velocities, mobile porosity and hydraulic conductivity
One of the main objectives of the tracer study in Ølsemagle was to reveal and quantify hydroge-
ological characteristics of the geology of the aquifer. As observed from the breakthrough curves
in Figure 6.5, tracer response is not instant or box shaped like a plug-ﬂow, but is a result of
mass transfer behavior between mobile and immobile pore spaces. Migration from mobile to im-
mobile pores slows the tracer propagation, essentially shaping the breakthrough curves (Payne
et al., 2008). Even though a equivalent porous medium is assumed for the groundwater model,
parameters representing a fractured geology is estimated for comparison with literature values
and further reﬂections.
Payne et al. (2008) suggest one method to quantify the characteristics of a conductive aquifer,
which have been followed to estimate the parameters of mobile porosity, θmobile, total porosity,
θtotal, time of the center of mass, tcenterofmass, mobile velocity, Vmobile and average velocity, Vaverage.
The equations for the above parameters are presented here for clariﬁcation on the methodology
of identifying these values.
The mobile porosity, θmobile was quantiﬁed by:
θmobile = Volinjection50%
π ·r2 ·h
(6.1)
”where Volin jection50% is the volume injected at the time the observed concentration reached 50 per-
cent of its maximum”(Payne et al., 2008, p.280). r is the radial distance from the injection well to
52
==PAGE:63==
6.2.
TRACER TEST
the dose response well and h is the thickness of the injected interval represented as the well screen.
Groundwater velocities can be estimated by quantifying the center of mass from the tracer
breakthrough curves. For this tracer test the time of arrival of the center of mass, tcenterofmass, is
calculated by
tcentero fmass = m1 ·t1 +m2 ·t2 +...+mn ·tn
mtotal
(6.2)
where t denotes the temporal midpoint between observations and m, the mass beneath the
concentration-time curve between the respective observations (Payne et al., 2008).
The relation between average groundwater velocity, Vaverage (found from r and tcenterofmass), and
the velocity in the mobile fraction, Vmobile is found by:
Vmobile = Vaverage
θmobile
θtotal
(6.3)
where θtotal is based on core analysis from limestone in Karlstrup quarry by Brettmann et al.
(1993) and are in good agreement with similar analysis by Larsen et al. (2006).
In order to give a general estimate of the hydraulic conductivity, K, for the section of the aquifer
where the tracer is propagating, Darcy’s law has been applied, assuming a porous homogeneous
medium, where equations are seen in Appendix I. The estimates of the above hydrogeological
parameters can be found in Table 6.1.
Table 6.1: Porosity, velocity and hydraulic conductivity estimates from the dose response wells T02,
T03 and T04. Not that peak concentrations, Cpeak, are given relative to the wells respective baseline
concentrations, i.e. respective initial logger concentration.
unit
T02
T03
T04
Distance from T01
m
9.83
9.17
9.21
Baseline Cl−concentration
mg/l
81.3
12.7
74.2
Cpeak relative to baseline
mg/l
21.3
201.2
104.6
tpeak
h
121
51
59
tcentero fmass
h
215
208
38
θmobile
0.57%
0.47%
0.66%
θtotal
25%
25%
25%
Vaverage
m/h
0.05
0.04
0.24
Vpeak
m/h
0.08
0.18
0.16
Vmobile
m/h
2.01
2.36
9.18
K
m/s
6.83·10−3
1.02·10−2
6.14·10−2
The results in Table 6.1 show that the mobile porosity is only a small fraction of the total poros-
ity. This could suggest that the top Ølsemagle limestone is not only a conductive aquifer, but
also a highly fractured one, which is consistent with the relatively high Vpeak. It should be stated
that the theory applied, Equation 6.1, is for a spherical tracer plume, whereas the observed
plume in this setup was assumed more elliptical, thus the mobile porosity in Table 6.1 is a lower
estimate of a mobile porosity. When comparing θmobile to previous studies by Brettmann and
53
==PAGE:64==
6.2.
TRACER TEST
Jensen (1992) in Karlstrup quarry it was found from pump tests, that fracture porosities of the
upper crushed limestone aquifer were about 1.6%, and later calibrated through modeling as 1.1
%, whereas porosities of the lower fractured zone was assumed to be 0.1%, which is in good
agreement with values found in Table 6.1.
Although Vpeak values were fast, results from Brettmann and Jensen (1992) of the uppermost
crushed limestone in Karlstrup showed Vpeak of 0.7 m/h, with averages around 1.5 m/h for the
lower layers. No literary values were found for Vmobile in the bryozoan limestone, but the results
indicates that groundwater in the mobile pores seems to travel magnitudes faster than the aver-
age velocities.
The estimated hydraulic conductivity, K, is also found to be larger than the earlier applied hy-
draulic conductivities of 2.5 −4 · 10−4 m/s for crushed and fractured limestone in groundwater
models at the same site by NIRAS (2015b). The hydraulic conductivitie of 1.4·10−3, found by
Milter (2007) for a crushed limestone found in Lille Skensved seem to be more comparable
Reﬂections on tracer plume direction
The general direction of the tracer plume has already been discussed based on breakthrough
curves of the dose response wells. Fracture orientation and propagation will inﬂuence the plume
direction in a fractured medium, and propagation of hydraulic conductive geological layers like-
wise. Another factor which can inﬂuence the direction of a tracer plume is its vertical density
driven ﬂow.
The injection ﬂow was kept low, to avoid too big an injection mass, but still density driven ﬂow,
based on the density gradient between the tracer plume and the surrounding groundwater, can
show an eﬀect.
Therefore a simpliﬁed method from Kjeldsen and Christensen (1996) was applied to estimate
the direction of the resulting velocity vector between the tracers relative density surplus and the
groundwater gradient. Calculations can be found in Appendix I. By utilising the initial concen-
tration from the injection solution, and not considering any mixing or dilution processes, it was
found that the initial angle of movement downward relative to horizontal was approximately 67°.
Although this is only a very rough estimate, it does highlight that the initial tracer plume is
aﬀected by the density surplus.
The velocity vector estimated based on the density gradient is applicable to a homogeneous
porous medium. As already described, the tracer is expected to travel through a highly hetero-
geneous aquifer at Ølsemagle. When knowing that the bryozoan mound direction at Ølsemagle,
based on knowledge about Karlstrup quarry, propagate west to east or northwest to southeast,
bryozoan mounds do not seem to be the controlling factor of the tracer plume direction, which
is curbing slightly northwards. It seems more likely that the aquifer is highly crushed and frac-
tured, causing a preferential ﬂow, not inﬂuenced by bryozoan mound propagation, but more
likely hydraulic gradient and vertical fracture orientation. The density eﬀect is dampened by
this preferential ﬂow, but its eﬀects could have been clariﬁed by having deeper dose response
wells, and multilevel data logger sampling.
54
==PAGE:65==
Part 7
Hydrostratigraphic model
7.1
Hydrodstratigraphic model
The ﬁnal link from geological and hydrogeological data to the groundwater model is the hydros-
tratigraphic model. The hydrostratigraphic model is based on the geological model but includes
interpretation of hydrogeological properties, also in areas not backed up by geological data (Jør-
gensen et al., 2008). Additionally it is focused on the hydrogeological properties of the geology
which is why adjustments might need to be made compared to the geological model.
At ﬁrst a very detailed hydrostratigraphic model was deﬁned. A hydrostratigraphic model cor-
responding to the digitised geological model was initially imported to the numerical modelling
software. Since some layers of the geological model merges others, a few layers overlapped after
the import to the numerical modelling software and others were judged diﬃcult to distinguish in
the hydrogeological parameterisation, the hydrostratigraphic model was re-evaluated. The geo-
logical model were, based on these challenges, simpliﬁed to a 7 layer sequence as seen in Figure
7.1. The crushed and sludgy layers are merged into crushed limestone layers because of diﬃcul-
ties in distinguishing their hydrogeological parameterisation (gray). Further, the last limestone
layer (light gray), earlier deﬁned as hard limestone (white), is deﬁned as a fractured limestone
layer. The top, discontinuous Flint 1 is merged with the Sludge 2 layer to represent an almost im-
permeable layer representing both the marl clay and ﬂint at this part of the geological sequence.
The pink Grain layer is ignored in the hydrostratigraphic model because of the uncertainties in
its spatial extent and localisation, as well as diﬃculties with identifying suitable hydrogeological
parameters. The modiﬁcations of the geological model into the ﬁnal hydrostratigraphic model
was done in GeoScene3D.
55
==PAGE:66==
7.2.
PARAMETERISATION OF THE HYDROSTRATIGRAPHIC MODEL
Figure 7.1: The resulting hydrostratigraphic model, based on the digitised spatial geological model
seen in the upper right corner. An enlarged version of the digitised spatial geological model can be seen
in Figure 5.4 in Part 5. Parameter intervals of the hydrostratigraphic model layers are found in Table
7.1. The extent of the topsoil layer is not visualised in the hydrostratigraphic model, as this layer is not
located in the saturated aquifer.
7.2
Parameterisation of the hydrostratigraphic model
A summary of the parameter intervals of hydraulic conductivity and porosity, estimated for
the geology at Ølsemagle represented by the hydrostratigraphic model in Figure 7.1, is seen in
Table 7.1. The choice of parameter intervals is elaborated on in the following. For the upper
geological layers such as till, sources from other Danish sites have also been included. For the
hydrogeological parameters of the near-surface bryozoan limestone on Sealand, an overview is
found in the table of Figure B.1, Appendix B. The scale of data in Figure B.1 has been kept in
mind during the choice of parameters since this is an often inﬂuencing factor in hydrogeological
parameterisation (Schulze-Makuch and Cherkauer, 1998). Several of the hydraulic conductivities
and porositites of Figure B.1 have been based on lab scale core experiments, why these are not
used for parameterising our geological layers, which will be validated by numerical modelling of
a scale of ten meters. For a comparison, the estimated hydraulic conductivity of the geological
sequence where the tracer has traveled through, deﬁned as ”Tracer geology”, is also included in
Table 7.1.
56
==PAGE:67==
7.2.
PARAMETERISATION OF THE HYDROSTRATIGRAPHIC MODEL
Table 7.1: Hydrogeological parameter summary. Values in italic are not based on the speciﬁed sources
but on Lille Skensved model simulations from Milter (2007) and Ølsemagle model simulations by Bal-
barini and Rosenberg (2014).
Geological layer
K [m/s]
ntotal [%]
τ [-]
ρ [g/cm3]
Sources
Till
10−8-10−6
20-40
0.2-0.5
1.7-1.8
(Milter,
2007;
Roskilde amt, 2002;
Christiansen
and
Wood, 2006)
Crushed limestone
1.4·10−3
30-40
0.65
1.6
(Milter,
2007;
Roskilde amt, 2002)
Flint
10−10-10−9
5-10
0.65
1.6
Estimated based on
Milter (2015)
Marl clay
10−9-10−6
20-40
0.65
1.6
(Milter, 2007; Chris-
tiansen
and
Wood,
2006)
Fractured limestone
2·10−4-1.4·10−3
22-33
0.65
1.6
(Milter,
2007;
Roskilde amt, 2001a,
2002; Jakobsen et al.,
1993;
Brettmann
et al., 1993; Jakob-
sen, 1991)
Hard limestone
10−8-10−5
20-40
0.68
1.6
as
in
”Fractured
limestone”
Tracer geology
6.83·10−3-1.02·10−2
25
0.68
1.6
Table 6.1 in Section
6.2
Till layer
Till layers at localities near Ølsemagle are parameterised in numerical simulations from 1.16·10−8
m/s (Milter, 2007) to the magnitude of 1.16·10−6 and 1.16·10−5 m/s in the horizontal and vertical
direction respectively (Roskilde amt, 2002). The same studies have parameterised the porosity
and tortuosity of till to 0.3 and 0.5 (Milter, 2007) and the porosity over the tortuosity as 0.2
(Roskilde amt, 2002). Based on a literature summary by Christiansen and Wood (2006) of sev-
eral Danish tills overlying limestone formations, the upper, weathered meters of the till deposits
are often found to be in the range of 10−5 to 10−7 m/s, the porosity between 0.2 and 0.4 and a
bulk density of 1.7 to 1.8 g/cm3.
Crushed limestone
The upper crushed limestone is very inﬂuenced by crushing and mixing from glaciotectonics and
is a smooth transition from the above till layer to the less crushed and mixed limestone layers
below. From Figure 4.3 and borehole descriptions in Figure 4.6 it is seen how the layer consist
of bigger limestone fragments as well as silty, sandy and till material. Literature parameterising
this transition zone of highly heterogeneous geology has been diﬃcult to identify. The upper-
most crushed limestone has by Milter (2007) been parameterised with a hydraulic conductivity
of 1.4·10−3 m/s and a porosity of 0.3 in numerical simulations, which is used as a guideline in
the Ølsemagle model parameterisation.
57
==PAGE:68==
7.2.
PARAMETERISATION OF THE HYDROSTRATIGRAPHIC MODEL
Continuous ﬂint horizon
Flint is in most studies either not included in numerical simulations or modelled as an imperme-
able formation (Milter, 2007). The impermeable characteristics are suitable for the ﬂint matrix,
but layers of ﬂint can facilitate hydraulic activity through fractures along and through the ﬂint
horizons and/or nodules. From the excavation observations in Section 4.1, ocher precipitates
were observed within and along the ﬂint horizons, so a porosity of 0.1 or less could be realistic
to represent the total volume of fractures in the ﬂint layer. The layer itself is facilitating both
horizontal ﬂow along the layer and vertical ﬂow through fractures in the matrix. These complex
structures of the ﬂint matrix results in anisotropy, which can be implemented in the model for
this layer. Referring to the description of the tangent law of refraction in Section 2.2 a relative
low hydraulic conductivity will facilitate a vertical ﬂow. Hydraulic conductivities are further
expected to be lower than the clay layers resulting in magnitudes of 10−10-10−9 m/s
Marl clay
The marl clay layer is a layered clay layer unlike the till layers. It is expected to have a low
hydraulic conductivity, similar to other layers of clay particles. These will often be in the lower
ranges of clay hydraulic conductivity because of the absence of fractures. Estimated ranges will
therefore be 10−6-10−9 m/s for hydraulic conductivities and porosities of 0.2 to 0.4 (Milter, 2007;
Christiansen and Wood, 2006).
Fractured limestone
Several studies have showed a decreasing hydraulic conductivity with depth in the near-surface
and glacial disturbed bryozoan limestone in the Ølsemagle region (Roskilde amt, 2001a, 2002),
why the upper fractured limestone layer is expected to be in the higher range of limestone hy-
draulic conductivities. The highest horizontal hydraulic conductivities from each reference in
the table in Figure B.1 range from 1.4 · 10−3 to 2 · 10−4 m/s and porositites of 0.22 to 0.33.
Many studies have pointed out the relative higher hydraulic conductivity in upper limestone
formations inﬂuenced by glaciotectonics (Metroselskabet, 2009; Vangkilde-Pedersen et al., 2011;
Roskilde amt, 2005; Brettmann and Jensen, 1992), why it is assumed likely that this layer will
have parameters similar to the uppermost limestone in other studies. As observed from the ﬁeld
(Figure 4.4c) inﬂuential vertical fractures were observed just below the continuous ﬂint layer,
supporting the assumption of a fractured and highly conductive geology.
Hard limestone
The limestone is, as already mentioned, expected to be less and less fractured with depth why
lower hydraulic conductivities can be applied to the hard limestone. The hydraulic conductivitites
will probably range in the order of 10−5 to 10−8, decreasing with depth, based on Figure B.1.
Porositites are expected to be somewhat lower with less fracturing, but the general porosity of
bryozoan limestone of 0.2 to 0.4 (Vangkilde-Pedersen et al., 2011; Galsgaard et al., 2014) can be
applied.
The above estimates of hydrogeological parameters are backed up by MiHpt measurements at
the Ølsemagle site showing varying hydraulic conductivities in the upper till layer followed by
low hydraulic resistivities down through the crushed and fractured limestone, only disturbed
by regular but limited sequences of high hydraulic resistivities, which is likely to represent ﬂint
horizons or nodules. Detailed interpretation and data of MiHpt can be seen in Appendix L.
As indicated in the above, several of the layers are likely to be inﬂuenced by processes as back-
58
==PAGE:69==
7.2.
PARAMETERISATION OF THE HYDROSTRATIGRAPHIC MODEL
diﬀusion and fracture ﬂow.
The restricted time frame of the project has limited the model
simulations to the more simple equivalent porous medium models, why parameters applied are
chosen to represent the properties of governing equations of single-porosity ﬂow.
Several numerical simulation studies with discrete fracture models in the Ølsemagle area has
showed that hydraulic conductivity and porosity have been sensitive parameters to the model
results (Milter, 2007; Balbarini and Rosenberg, 2014), so that most focus has been put on deter-
mining these parameters through literature studies. Bulk density, ρ, and tortuosity, τ, has been
ﬁxed according to previous experiences with the Ølsemagle area models. Changing bulk density
values would be more relevant when working with double porosity models and solute transport
of sorbing contaminants as done by Balbarini and Rosenberg (2014).
59
==PAGE:70==
==PAGE:71==
Part 8
Flow and solute transport model
As the ﬁnal step in the process of creating a groundwater and solute transport model, the 7
layered hydrostratigraphic model must be imported to the numerical modelling software. With
the overall aim of simulating the tracer test from Section 6.2, the following section will be devoted
to describing the assumptions, methods and results of the ﬂow and transport model of the aquifer
at the Ølsemagle site.
8.1
Assumptions about the hydrogeology in Ølsemagle
When building the ﬂow and solute transport mode of the Ølsemagle sitel, several assumptions
have been made. These assumptions are stated and discussed below.
Conﬁned aquifer
The aquifer is assumed to be conﬁned despite the water table being located 2.5 m.b.t.
(see
Appendix J), at the time of simulation, not reaching the above lying low-permeable till layer.
This assumption is necessary for applying the stated governing equations of the numerical model,
and can be justiﬁed by the observations made in the following; The water table varied very little
during the simulation period, and the head gradient likewise. There were almost no precipitation
during the ﬁrst 20 days of the modelling period, supported by Figure J.10, thus inﬁltration has
been ignored.
It should though be noted, that the source excavation of PCE contamination in 2013, removed
the natural geology and ﬁlled an area, as already illustrated in Figure 4.2, with a more permeable
ﬁll of topsoil, sand, gravel and a felt liner, just upstream of T01.
Fully saturated zone
It is assumed that the groundwater level from Figure 6.1 represents the fully saturated zone of
the aquifer. Therefore the groundwater ﬂow model is setup over the domain depth from 5.6 m
(vertical reference: DVR90) down to -3 m, implying that the topsoil and approximately half of
the till layer of the geological model are in the unsaturated zone, and therefore not included in the
groundwater model. The bottom (z-direction) of the model is extrapolated further downwards
than where the plume is expected to propagate, to avoid eﬀects from the bottom boundary
61
==PAGE:72==
8.2.
CHOICE OF MODELLING SOFTWARE AND NUMERICAL SCHEME
conditions. This results in the fractured limestone being extrapolated to a depth of -3 m, even
though the characteristics of the geology in this depth is unknown.
Stationary groundwater ﬂow
From the study of head data found in Appendix J it was found that the groundwater potential
did not vary signiﬁcantly over the modelling period. Further variations were found to be uniform
within the entire domain, as observed in Figure J.8 in Appendix J. Resultantly, a constant
groundwater gradient over the modelling period has been applied. From the injection well, T01,
approximately 5 m3 tracer were injected over 46 h and 40 min resulting in an injection ﬂow of
1.8 l/min, which is relatively small compared to the approximately 15,000 m3 of total water in
the aquifer, assuming an aquifer depth of 10 m and a porosity of 0.3. Furthermore, no signiﬁcant
inﬂuence was observed in Figure J.9 of the head data time series from the injection of tracer
in well T01. Given these observations steady state ﬂow conditions were assumed throughout
simulation period.
Constant water density
As the injected tracer was a highly saline solution of NaBr and NaCl, the ﬂow ﬁeld might have
been inﬂuenced by a density driven ﬂow, rather than a hydraulic gradient ﬂow. However due
to the complexity of modelling, time constraints and lack of computational power, the tracer in
the solute transport model was assumed to be conservative and have a constant density equal to
that of the groundwater in Ølsemagle.
Transient solute transport
The conservative tracer was assumed to be well mixed pre-injection, and have a uniform ﬂux out
through the entirety of the screen ﬁlling around the well screen of T01. The solute transport was
assumed to be aﬀected by, only, advection and dispersion.
8.2
Choice of modelling software and numerical scheme
The ﬁnite element modelling software, COMSOL Multiphysics v. 5.1 (Comsol), was chosen to
compute ﬂow and solute transport in the 7-layered equivalent porous medium model. The reason
for choosing this software is that it is a well documented physics based platform used in ﬂuid ﬂow
applications and is speciﬁcally well suited for solving partial diﬀerential equation. The software
can moreover operate with complex geometries which is needed to represent the geological layers
from the GeoScene3D geological model.
The procedure of solving a numerical model in Comsol using a complex geological geometry can
be divided into three categories of 1: Building the geological surface geometry, 2: Parameterising
the model domain and mesh, and lastly 3: Solving the model and interpreting the results. The
procedure can be viewed in Figure 8.1 where the iterative process of the scheme should be
emphasised.
62
==PAGE:73==
8.2.
CHOICE OF MODELLING SOFTWARE AND NUMERICAL SCHEME
Import X,Y, Z surface 
grids from Geoscene3D 
Make interpolation 
function of each 
surface grid  
Construct layer geometry based 
on interpolation function 
Repair conflicting 
geometry 
Solve model and 
Interpret results 
Geometry 
Parameterization 
Define variables, initial 
conditions and 
boundary conditions 
Define element sizes for 
mesh calculation  
Interpretation 
Figure 8.1: The iterative numerical modelling procedure in Comsol multiphysics.
Building the geological geometry
From the x, y, z grid points exported from each layer in the GeoScene3D model, a linear interpo-
lation function is generated in Comsol to represent each speciﬁc surface layer. The ”parametric
surface” tool in Comsol is used to make the geometric surface based on x,y, and the interpolation
function f(x,y) yielding the z coordinate, with a relative tolerance of 1 · 10−5m and 200 knots.
The 7 layer model, is represented by 6 surfaces and can be seen in Figure 8.2.
63
==PAGE:74==
8.2.
CHOICE OF MODELLING SOFTWARE AND NUMERICAL SCHEME
Figure 8.2: 6 parametric surfaces representing the lower boundary of each geological layer. The high
amount of detail around the T-wells is a result of the spatial extent of the input geological data, and the
surfaces are extrapolated beyond this area of interest. The box located in the top left corner represent
the sand domain from the old excavation in 2013. Note that the z axis is scaled by a factor 10, to
emphasise surface details, and that the lowest surface represent the top of the hard limestone, indicating
that the model extends below this surface.
As many of the imported surfaces initially gave rise to errors in Comsol, due to overlapping
surfaces or surface peaks being represented with very sharp geometry, several modiﬁcations were
applied to the original geometry. The problem of intersecting surfaces in Comsol, due to merging
layers in the GeoScene3D model can be seen from Figure 8.3.
This problem can be addressed with two methods. The ﬁrst method is to increase the amount of
knots representing each surface layer in Comsol. This results in surfaces that are more true to the
GeoScene3D model, where surface intersection can be avoided. The downside to this option is
the required higher computational eﬀort and/or longer simulation time, especially when building
a mesh and running the numerical solver. The second method is to separate the intersecting
geological surfaces, with a marginal value. The surfaces can hereby be represented with a much
coarser grid, easing the computational eﬀort signiﬁcantly. Using this option, layers which are
not in the conceptual geological model, will be represented as very thin layers. Due to limited
computational power and restricted time frame of this study, the second method is chosen when
building the geometry in the numerical model. Each surface is vertically displaced by +1 cm,
which is a marginal change considering the 0.5 m discretisation of soil samples from the T-wells
seen in Figure 4.6.
64
==PAGE:75==
8.2.
CHOICE OF MODELLING SOFTWARE AND NUMERICAL SCHEME
Figure 8.3: Intersecting layers from the numerical model. The highlighted area shows both overlapping
and crossing of the two layers Crushed limestone 1 (represented in purple) and Flint 1 (represented in
green), giving rise to errors of both layer geometry and mesh formation. Note that a layer is made
transparent to better observe the intersecting surface geometry.
The mesh
Building the mesh is also an iterative process, where it is important to deﬁne several reﬁned
mesh sub sizes to represent the complex geometry of sub geometries, such as layer boundaries
and well screens. In order to solve the numerical model without errors, three mesh reﬁnements,
deﬁned by a maximum and minimum element size, are used:
mesh size1 ∈[0.445; 1.49 cm] Free tetrahedral mesh used in the injection well
mesh size2 ∈[0.667; 2.22 cm] Free tetrahedral mesh used on the geological layer surfaces
mesh size3 ∈[0.89; 2.89 cm] A ﬂuid dynamics based mesh over the remaining domain
The entire model domain for both ﬂow and solute transport was constructed with 301326 ele-
ments. The mesh resulted in a computation time of 1 min for the steady state ﬂow model, and
approximately 20 min for the solute transport model.
65
==PAGE:76==
8.3.
BOUNDARY AND INITIAL CONDITIONS
Figure 8.4: The mesh of the numerical model in Ølsemagle
8.3
Boundary and initial conditions
Based on the assumptions stated previously, it is decided to model the tracer test with a steady
state ﬂow model coupled with a transient solute transport model. The area with detailed geolog-
ical data covers the extent of the four T wells, AFV1, AFV2, and is based on the four geological
proﬁles in Figure 5.1, Section 5.1. Therefore the boundaries of the numerical model domain is ex-
tended beyond the area of detailed geological data, to avoid inﬂuence from boundary conditions
on the numerical computations in the area of interest, i.e. the tracer test area. Additionally
as the solute transport compartment is used to simulate the tracer plume, the eastern model
boundary is placed far downstream for the contaminant not to leave the model domain during
the simulation period. The resulting model domain can be seen in Figure 8.5a, whereas the initial
and boundary conditions of the two coupled models will be explained in the following sections.
Steady state ﬂow model
The boundary conditions of the steady state ﬂow model are seen in Figure 8.5a. The blue east
and west boundaries represent ﬁxed head boundaries (Dirichlet boundary condition), following
isopotential lines as thoroughly explained in Appendix J. The western boundary has a ﬁxed head
of 5.6 m, whereas the eastern boundary has a head of 5.39 m, resulting in ﬂow from west to east.
The green north and south boundaries, which follow the ﬂow lines, as well as the top and bottom
of the domain are deﬁned as zero ﬂux boundaries (Neumann boundary condition). Lastly a ﬁxed
ﬂux boundary (Neumann boundary condition) of 1.8 l/min is placed as a cylindrical surface to
represent the ﬁlter sand and ﬁlter screen of the T01 injection well.
An initial condition of 5.5 m was given to the entire domain, representing the average head be-
tween the two ﬁxed head boundaries.
Transient solute transport model
The boundary conditions for the solute transport domain are seen in Figure 8.5b. Assuming
that no concentration enters the domain except from the injection well, the western boundary
is set as a zero concentration boundary (Dirichlet boundary condition). The eastern boundary
66
==PAGE:77==
8.3.
BOUNDARY AND INITIAL CONDITIONS
(a) Groundwater ﬂow model boundaries
(b) Solute transport model boundaries
Figure 8.5: Figure 8.5a and Figure 8.5b show boundary conditions for the steady state ﬂow model
domain and solute transport model resepectively. The T01 well boundary is modelled with a ﬁxed ﬂux
of 1.8 l/min and a time dependent ﬁxed concentration of 2600 mg/l.
is deﬁned as an advective ﬂux boundary, implying that no dispersion takes place in the bound-
ary, but only movement according to the advective groundwater ﬂow. Lastly both the north,
south, top and bottom domain boundaries are deﬁned as zero ﬂux, as the tracer should not
leave the model domain. The tracer injection is simulated as a ﬂux source in T01, as in the
67
==PAGE:78==
8.4.
SIMULATION
steady state ﬂow model, with a ﬁxed concentration of 2,600 mg Cl−/l for a duration of 46 h
and 40 min. For elaboration on the injection concentration see Section 6.2. An initial condition
of 0 mg Cl−/l was set over the entire domain, as no tracer was meant to be present prior injection.
8.4
Simulation
With the overall goal of simulating the tracer plume, the model was manually re-calibrated by
trial-and-error for diﬀerent sets of hydraulic parameters. From the calibration results, three main
simulations have been selected which will be described in the following sections.
As it was discovered from the tracer test in Section 6.2, the ﬁeld site is highly conductive in
the distance of 9.4 m from T01 to T01. Therefore the ﬁrst main simulation was carried out
by applying the highest hydraulic conductivity, and lowest porosities found from literature, see
Table 7.1, to each geological layer. The second main simulation was conducted with parameters
estimated from the tracer test, as found in Table 6.1. Values were applied to the lower crushed
and fractured limestone layers, as these layers were assumed to represent the highest degree of
solute transport. In this simulation a boxed pea gravel domain was inserted just upstream of
T01 to represent the 2013 excavation, as can be viewed in Figure 8.2, which showed a marginal
eﬀect on the simulation results. In the third main simulation, parameters were used freely to
manually obtain the best peak concentration ﬁt of the tracer breakthrough curves. Furthermore
the eastern head boundary condition was ﬁxed with a head of 5.2 m to represent the velocity
ﬁeld between the injection and observation T wells. The three main simulations have been given
names according to the parameters used, and are summarised in Table 8.1. The remaining ﬁxed
model parameters can be found in Appendix M.
Literature parameters Based on highest K, and lowest n from Table 7.1.
Tracer test parameters Hydraulic conductivities from the tracertest, Table 6.1.
Peak concentration ﬁt Parameters ﬁtted freely to obtain the best ﬁt of the tracer concentra-
tion and tailing.
Table 8.1: Model parameters for the three simulations
Literature
Tracer test
Peak
values
parameters
concentration ﬁt
τ [-]
K [m/s]
ntotal [% ]
K [m/s]
ntotal [% ]
K [m/s]
ntotal [% ]
Till
0.50
1.16·10−5
30
1.16·10−7
25
1.16·10−5
25
Crushed limestone 1
0.68
2.00·10−4
30
1.04·10−4
25
2.00·10−4
25
Marl
0.50
1.00·10−6
20
1.00·10−8
20
1.00·10−6
20
Crushed limestone 2
0.68
1.40·10−3
20
1.02·10−2
20
1.40·10−3
20
Flint
0.68
1.00·10−7
10
1.00·10−9
10
1.00·10−7
10
Fractured limestone
0.68
9.00·10−5
24
1.02·10−2
20
9.00·10−3
19
Hard limestone
0.68
1.00·10−5
20
1.00·10−5
20
1.00·10−5
20
Excavation 2013 ﬁll
0.68
-
-
2.89·10−3
30
-
-
68
==PAGE:79==
8.5.
RESULTS AND COMPARISON WITH OBSERVATIONS
8.5
Results and comparison with observations
Modelling groundwater ﬂow
In order to compare the modelled steady state groundwater ﬂow ﬁeld, simulated heads from the
tracer test parameter simulation were held against the observed heads in the top of the saturated
observation well screens from Figure 6.1, and can be seen in Table 8.2 and Figure 8.6. The
comparison shows that the hydraulic heads are almost identical in the observation wells, only
T02 deviates by 1 cm from the observed value. In T01 the head does however deviate by 5 cm.
The well is modelled as an injection well with a ﬁxed ﬂux resulting in a higher head, and the
observed head was measured a day prior to injection, resulting in a natural head. The eﬀects of
this deviation results in a modelled groundwater gradient that is approximately 0.6 % between
T01 and T03 as opposed to the natural gradient of 0.1 %. As discussed in Appendix J, based on
Figure J.9, the logger data does not seem to imply such a drastic increase in T01 head. The ﬂow
simulations of the numerical model therefore might overestimate the hydraulic gradient between
the T wells, but this aspect is not further acted on, since the steepening of the gradient can be
very local and the data logger data also have a uncertainty of ± 0.5 cm.
Table 8.2: Simulated hydraulic heads from the top of the saturated observation well screens, based on
a model simulation with tracer test parameters compared with measured hydraulic heads in the ﬁeld.
T01
T02
T03
T04
Observed heads [m]
5.57
5.55
5.56
5.56
Simulated heads [m]
5.62
5.56
5.56
5.56
From Figure 8.6 it is observed that the general ﬂow ﬁeld has a direction from west to east,
following the groundwater gradient as expected from the deﬁned boundary conditions.
The
simulated head compare well with the measured heads observed heads on the 02.02.2015 seen in
Figure 6.1.
69
==PAGE:80==
8.5.
RESULTS AND COMPARISON WITH OBSERVATIONS
Figure 8.6: Simulated hydraulic heads over the entire domain, based on a model simulation with tracer
test parameters.
Modelling solute transport
The results of the three main simulations of the solute transport model are presented in the
following section as concentration breakthrough curves. Simulated breakthrough has been repre-
sented as an averaged well screen concentration of the three respective dose response wells. The
screens were averaged, to represent the well mixed dose response wells from the tracer ﬁeld study.
In order to compare the solute transport model with the observed tracer test concentrations, the
observed data logger Cl−concentration equivalents were plotted as a concentration relative to
the initial concentration prior tracer injection. This results in all concentration curves initiating
at zero concentration, at time zero.
The results of the three main simulations are generally compared on a qualitative basis to the
observed data from the tracer ﬁeld test. The comparison is presented in Figure 8.7, and will be
discussed in the following.
70
==PAGE:81==
8.5.
RESULTS AND COMPARISON WITH OBSERVATIONS
(a) Literature parameters.
(b) Tracertest parameters.
(c) Peak concentration parameters.
Figure 8.7: Comparison of simulated breakthrough curves by use of (a) Literature parameters, (b)
Tracertest parameters and (c) Peak concentration parameters.
71
==PAGE:82==
8.5.
RESULTS AND COMPARISON WITH OBSERVATIONS
By simulating the transport model with literature parameters it is seen in Figure 8.7a that mod-
elled tracer breakthrough of T03 arrives approximately 24 hours later compared to observations,
and furthermore has a less step rising limb, more smooth peak and lower maximum concentra-
tion compared to the observed concentration. T03 does seem to show eﬀects of tailing, possibly
due to solute exchange from the less conductive marl layer. In T02 model the breakthrough
arrives approximately 48 h after the observed, but both the rising limb, peak and tailing seems
to follow the observed tracer to some extent. As generally noticed, a very poor ﬁt is observed
for T04 model who’s breakthrough is approximately 72 hours delayed compared to the observed
and does not replicate the shape of the observed breakthrough curve.
When utilising the tracer test parameters in the solute transport model, seen in Figure 8.7b, a
good ﬁt is obtained for both initial breakthrough and slope of the rising peak in T03 model. It
was observed from 3D model images seen in Figure 8.8, that the modelled tracer was divided into
two plumes, one propagating fast in the lower crushed limestone 2, and one propagating slower
in the till and upper crushed limestone 1. The top, and slower, plume show an almost circular
diﬀusive movement in the top of the injection well, and does to some extent move upstream into
the pea gravel. The modelled graphics show that only the fast moving plume is represented in
the breakthrough curve in Figure 8.7b, as the second plume arrives much later than the 300
hour simulation time. This explains why the concentration peak is not as high in the modelled
data. It also gives an impression that the high conductive layers have a plug-ﬂow like eﬀect on
the curve, owing to the lack of retardation, making the simulation unable to mimic the observed
tailing eﬀect.
Lastly results in Figure 8.7c from the simulation with peak concentration parameters, show that
the initial tracer breakthrough time in T03 follows the observed. The maximum peak concentra-
tion in T03 is replicated by the model, but due to less steep slope of the rising limb, the modelled
peak arrives approximately 36 h after the observed peak. A slight tailing eﬀect is observed in
T03 model after approximately 164 h, which turns into second peak towards the end of the
simulation period. The second peak is also observed in T02 and T04, indicating that the plume
primarily propagates in the lower crushed limestone 2 and the fracture limestone, but secondarily
moves in the upper crushed limestone 1 giving rise to a bimodal breakthrough curve, as a result
of the diﬀerent arrival times.
72
==PAGE:83==
8.5.
RESULTS AND COMPARISON WITH OBSERVATIONS
XY-view
ZX-view
Time=45h
Time=100h
Time=300h
mg/L
Cl Concentration
Figure 8.8: Examples of the solute transport simulation, using the tracer test parameters. Note in the
ZX-view how the tracer plume propagates faster in the lower crushed limestone 2 and is separated after
100 hours, due to the high conductivity in this layer.
73
==PAGE:84==
8.5.
RESULTS AND COMPARISON WITH OBSERVATIONS
Exploring the eﬀects of hydraulic parameters
From the breakthrough curves it was emphasised how deﬁning appropriate hydraulic properties
of the geological layers plays an important role on the model ability to simulate solute transport.
To understand how the solute transport model can be used to simulate transport of a tracer,
model runs have been carried out to show the qualitative eﬀects on the breakthrough curves by
using diﬀerent dispersion coeﬃcients, porosities and hydraulic conductivities.
Figure 8.9: The eﬀect of dispersive mixing on simulated Cl−concentrations. Simulation 1: αL=1 m,
αT =0.1m, αV =0.01 m and Simulation 2: αL=10 m, αT =1 m, αV =0.1 m. Note that the y axis shows
concentration in [g Cl−/l].
The eﬀect of changing dispersivity
To explore the eﬀect of dispersive mixing in the solute transport model a series of two simulations
has been carried out with tracer test parameters, but with varying dispersivities. The two simu-
lations deviate in dispersivity coeﬃcients by a factor 10, where Simulation 1: αL=1 m, αT=0.1m,
αV=0.01 m and Simulation 2: αL=10 m, αT=1 m, αV=0.1 m. Results of the two simulations
can be seen in Figure 8.9. It is seen that, by increasing the dispersive mixing from Simulation 1
to Simulation 2 produces a less steep rising front for all three wells. For T03 the peak plateau
is much lower and drops abruptly with a steep gradient down to a ﬁxed concentration, where a
long tailing is observed. T02 and T04 show higher Cl−concentration due to more plume mix-
ing in the transverse horizontal direction. Secondly, in all observation wells and especially T04
two peaks are observed, where the second peak could be a tailing eﬀect from breakthrough in
adjacent geological layers, enhanced by the transversal mixing of the tracer front. It is generally
observed that increasing the dispersivity coeﬃcients, increases the tailing eﬀect on the plume,
74
==PAGE:85==
8.5.
RESULTS AND COMPARISON WITH OBSERVATIONS
which eﬀectively spreads through several conductive layers.
The eﬀect of changing porosity
By moving on with the porosity, a total of six simulations have been carried out with tracertest
parameters, combining a varying K=10−2, 10−3, 10−4 m/s and n=0.2, 0.3 for the upper crushed
limestone 1 and the lower crushed limestone 2 layers, seen in Figure 7.1. The results of these
simulations have been summarised in Figure 8.10.
Figure 8.10: The eﬀect of varying hydraulic conductivity and porosity in the upper crushed limestone
1 and lower crushed 2. Each breakthrough curve represents one 300 h simulation, resulting in six simu-
lations with varying n=0.2, 0.3 and K=10−2, 10−3, 10−4 m/s. Note that the y axis shows concentration
in [g Cl−/l].
Figure 8.10 illustrates that the qualitative eﬀect of lowering the porosity causes a steeper rising
peak, with a higher and more pointed concentration peak. The steeper rising peak is specially
noticed when comparing the two breakthrough curves from K=10−4 m/s, whereas the sharpen-
ing and increased maximum concentration can be noticed on the two breakthrough curves with
K=10−3 m/s. Generally it is seen that low porosity leads to faster eﬀective velocity, results in
earlier peak arrival time. The eﬀect of lowering porosity seems to have a bigger inﬂuence on the
breakthrough curve when K becomes lower, where a longer simulation run would have revealed
the eﬀects more clearly.
75
==PAGE:86==
8.5.
RESULTS AND COMPARISON WITH OBSERVATIONS
The eﬀect of changing hydraulic conductivity
Figure 8.10 shows that by lowering K from 10−2 to 10−3 m/s, results in later initial breakthrough
times, 2-3 times higher peak concentration, a larger area under the peak (total mass) and a more
pronounced tailing eﬀect. The eﬀect is also observed in the crushed limestone layers of the model,
as the plume propagates slower and is more controlled by diﬀusion compared to advective trans-
port. To understand this behaviour it is necessary to revert back to the theory about ﬂow lines
and the tangent law of refraction from Equation 2.1 in Section 2.2.
When simulating with K=10−2 m/s, the relative diﬀerence between hydraulic conductivity of the
crushed limestone layers and the till and ﬂint is large, resulting in a fast horizontal ﬂow in the
crushed limestone layers and a more vertical ﬂow in the till and ﬂint layer. Applying solute trans-
port to this theory will results in a fast observed breakthrough in the crushed limestone layers,
but a slow vertical transport from the ﬂint and marl, as seen in Figure 8.11b. This essentially
results in a retarding eﬀect from these adjacent layers of relative lower hydraulic conductivity.
By simulating with K=10−3 m/s the relative diﬀerence of hydraulic conductivity between the
crushed limestone layers and the marl and ﬂint becomes smaller, resulting in more horizontal
ﬂow lines in the less permeable layers. The consequence of this eﬀect on the solute transport, is
later initial tracer breakthrough, but a much larger peak and area under the peak, due to ﬂow
lines oriented relatively more in the same direction. Resulting in mass contribution to the peak
from several layers simultaneously
By lowering K further from 10−3 to 10−4 m/s, the same pattern is observed in Figure 8.10, with
even later initial arrival times and less steep slope of the rising tracer peak, indicating a slower
peak velocity, which is closer to the average velocity of the other layers. A pattern begins to arise,
that changing the hydraulic conductivity of one layer, aﬀects the ﬂow lines of the adjacent layers.
In this way it is possible to shape the curve of the tracer breakthrough by choosing appropriate
parameter sets of the geological layers.
Reﬂecting on this in a broader perspective, it is not only important to focus on parameterising
a single geological layer with high precision, but equal emphasis should be put on all geological
layers of the model, to get a representative picture of the plume.
76
==PAGE:87==
8.5.
RESULTS AND COMPARISON WITH OBSERVATIONS
(a) K=10−2 m/s
Κ=1.16!105"
Κ=1.00!106"
Κ=1.00!107"
Κ=9.00!105"
Κ=1.00!105"
Κ=1.00!102"
Κ=1.00!102"
(b)
(c) K=10−3 m/s
Κ=1.16!105"
Κ=1.00!106"
Κ=1.00!107"
Κ=9.00!105"
Κ=1.00!105"
Κ=1.00!103"
Κ=1.00!103"
(d)
(e) K=10−4 m/s
Κ=1.16!105"
Κ=1.00!106"
Κ=1.00!107"
Κ=9.00!105"
Κ=1.00!105"
Κ=1.00!104"
Κ=1.00!104"
(f)
Figure 8.11: The eﬀect of varying hydraulic conductivity in the upper crushed limestone 1 and lower
crushed limestone 2, from (a) K=10−2 m/s, (c) K=10−3 m/s and (e) K=10−4 m/s with a ﬁxed n=0.2,
observed 100 h after tracer injection. Figures (b), (d) and (f) depict conceptual ﬂow lines of the model
domaine. The tracer plume in (a) and (b) moves horizontally fast in the crushed limestone, resulting in
vertical ﬂowlines in adjacent layers. As K becomes smaller ((e) and (f)), and closer to the the value of
adjacent layers, the ﬂow lines align more horizontally.
77
==PAGE:88==
8.5.
RESULTS AND COMPARISON WITH OBSERVATIONS
Findings from the numerical model
From the experiences of modelling the Ølsemagle tracer test several lessons were learned. By
using the 7 layered equivalent porous medium model, the breakthrough curves of the tracer could
be simulated well for both breakthrough time and peak concentration, but was not proven with
a good ﬁt for both simultaneously, during this study’s model simulations. The large amount
of ”free variables”, as a consequence of the detailed geology, increased the complexity and time
necessary for achieving a good ﬁt. The parameters could though be guided by literature and
tracer test values.
Direct eﬀects from including the detailed spatial geology in the model were seen from the mul-
timodal eﬀect resulting in double peaks. As well complex dispersivity patterns between layers
resulting in a mimic of tailing eﬀects, as well as eﬀects of the tangent law of refraction from
the relative diﬀerences between layer hydraulic conductivities were observed when exploring the
model parameterisation. These ﬁndings stresses the importance of not only parameterising the
geological layer in which solute transport is expected to occur, but also the adjacent layers, when
including a detailed geology. Still, making a geological detailed model can reveal possible so-
lute pathways and processes, which might have been left unexplored. Some consideration must
though be done on chosing appropriate software for both the geological and numerical model,
which can relieve issues as conﬂicting layers experienced from the speciﬁc import of GeoScene3D
data to Comsol.
As discussed throughout this thesis, the aquifer of Ølsemagle was expected to show double porous
properties. It was clear from the simulations of the tracer peak, that by not including double
porosity characteristics in our model limited the ability to simulate the tailing. This underlines
the importance of this modelling concept when such tailing is observed. This observation can
however also be used to underline the validity of the assumption of the aquifer being fractured
and/or crushed. Further, the preferential ﬂow towards T04 in comparison to T02 could not be
simulated by the model, without including anisotropy. With a substantial knowledge on local
fracture patterns and propagation it could probably also have been simulated using discrete frac-
tures, since the preferential ﬂow is expected to originate from vertical fractures in the upper
limestone, as discussed during Section 6.2.
Comparing with tracer simulations to Milter (2007), who used a discrete fracture model, and
Brettmann et al. (1993), who used a 3D double porous model, the shortcomings of the equivalent
porous medium model is exempliﬁed. Their models were very simple including straight propagat-
ing fractures in the study by Milter (2007) and only two layers in the model by Brettmann et al.
(1993).
These models were calibrated, achieving a good ﬁt to their respective breakthrough
curves. This further emphasises the use of these more advanced model classes. They should
though be chosen with care, taking into account the time available for calibration as well as
the amount of geological and hydrogeological data available, since both studies shows that the
fracture and diﬀusive parameters are highly sensitive parameters in the models (Milter, 2007;
Brettmann et al., 1993).
The above knowledge gained from this study can be used to describe localised hydrogeological
eﬀects on a scale of approximately ten meters, but is not expected to be directly transferable
to other sites and scales.
The site is expected to be inﬂuenced by ﬂow in crushed medium
and fractures, in which the inﬂuence on ﬂow, as we learned from literature studies, is highly
scale dependent. It is probably diﬃcult to ﬁnd one ”true” set of hydrogeological parameters for
78
==PAGE:89==
8.5.
RESULTS AND COMPARISON WITH OBSERVATIONS
a groundwater model with a detailed geology. Including a detailed geology in the groundwa-
ter model is though recommended, especially when model ﬁts forces parameters out of realistic
ranges and/or when data used for model comparison show more complex patterns and shapes
such as double peaks and tailing.
79
==PAGE:90==
==PAGE:91==
Part 9
Discussion
Throughout the thesis, the results and data have been thoroughly discussed in the end of each
section. This discussion therefore serves a broader perspective on the applicability of the study
results in geological- and groundwater modelling.
Advantages and disadvantages of the applied methods for this study
The numerical ﬂow and solute transport model is based on a preliminary and extensive ﬁeld
work campaign, serving as both a base for conceptual understanding as well as hydrogeological
parameterisation. Before conducting any of these ﬁeld activities their cost and ease of execution
must be evaluated against their applicability and yield.
The excursion to Karlstrup quarry gave a valuable impression of the large scale and three dimen-
sional bryozoan mound formation. This kind of excursion is cheap and easy accessible and can
be backed up by relevant supporting literature. For collecting quantitative data, several good
and detailed publications about a location as Karlstrup quarry already exist, which would be
cumbersome to reproduce, why the focus of the excursion was solely on the conceptual impression.
Soil samples from the boreholes at the Ølsemagle site was an additional information to the al-
ready characterised borehole proﬁles performed by NIRAS. Usually geological models are build
on these borehole proﬁles with deﬁned layer boundaries. In this case it was though a useful
experience to see the transition between layers and heterogeneity represented by the samples.
Handling the samples in lab, the focus was on the small scale properties and grain sizes, which
was a valuable element in the whole conceptual understanding. In general the analysis of samples
gave a small scale perspective which should not be underestimated in the conceptual understand-
ing.
The excavation performed by Region Sjælland was an extensive and expensive project including
oﬃcial permissions and rental of external equipment and personnel. It had not been carried out
for this study if Region Sjælland did not already plan to do the excavation for purposes of testing
remediation techniques. Keeping in mind, that such an excavation will most probably not be
carried out under normal conditions it was highly informative and the major contributor to the
conceptual understanding of the geology. It revealed layer continuity and fractures which were
not possible to identify from the borehole samples, neither from most other kind of geological
81
==PAGE:92==
ﬁeld work. The fact that the excavation did not reach the fractured limestone layers, as otherwise
planned, underpin the complexity and diﬃculties of intrusive geological ﬁeld work. The exca-
vation gave us an unique understanding of the geology, but is not recommended as a standard
ﬁeld methodology. A note should also be made on the fact that the outcome of the excavation
for this study was originally to be fracture characterisation and measurements for including dis-
crete fractures in the groundwater model. Luckily the value of the excavation for the conceptual
understanding of the geology still supported us in setting up a numerical groundwater model,
without including discrete fractures.
A less invasive hydrogeological characterisation of the site was obtained through the at-site tracer
test. Again the tracer test demanded a certain amount of equipment set-up and monitoring for
obtaining results. The set-up and planning was performed by NIRAS, and must be designed in
order to fulﬁll the speciﬁc purpose of the tracer test. Some aspects of the tracer test could have
been modiﬁed for serving the purpose of this study’s aim. The monitoring of the dose response
wells could have been depth speciﬁc with several loggers in depth instead of the actual depth
integrated logging, to get a better understanding of the plume propagation. Further the loggers
should have been carefully calibrated and background concentrations measured beforehand in
each well. Despite not being able to inﬂuence the design of the tracer test, it yielded valuable
results for understanding the hydrogeological characteristics of the aquifer and a possibility to
quantify the aquifer characteristics unlike the purely geological investigations. The parameters
obtained from the tracer test were rough estimates including several assumptions. The tracer
test yielded not only parameters, but also supported a conceptual understanding through shapes
and arrival times of breakthrough curves.
So why not just use literature values? The parameters estimated from the tracer test actually
helped obtaining a good ﬁt for especially the breakthrough time of the tracer, which were not
obtained using purely literature values. The literature values were carefully selected, based on
literature studies, but diﬀerences in scales and aquifer characteristics makes it uncertain to di-
rectly transfer literature parameters from other locations and aquifers. These values though serve
as a good guidance, and must be used in addition to parameters obtained from ﬁeld work, as the
tracer test. The tracer test describes the geology which the tracer plume has traveled through,
and without depth speciﬁc measurements in the dose response wells, it is not possible to know
which layer this is or whether the transport took place in several layers. This can though be
explored using the solute transport model. Parameters estimated from the tracer test is not the
truth, but is useful when calibrating and ﬁtting a groundwater model. The modelling aspect will
be discussed further in the following discussion points.
The above discussions all underpin the importance of site speciﬁc geological and hydrogeological
ﬁeld work when setting up a groundwater model.
The strength and weaknesses of GeoScene3D for use in geological mod-
elling
As opposed to building the geological representation directly with borehole interpolation in
the groundwater modelling software, as with Comsol, GMS modﬂow or FEFLOW, the use of
GeoScene3D brings in a lot of ﬂexibility for geological interpretation. With ﬂexibility also comes
responsibility. As already mentioned the main advantages of the GeoScene3D modelling software
is that it lets the user implement spatial points to represent geological features on a conceptual
82
==PAGE:93==
level. It is though found when implementing the geological surfaces into the numerical model,
that discontinuities, and merging of very small geological layers generated many numerical errors,
which had to be repaired or removed, essentially compromising the conceptual geological model.
In cases where the eﬀect of glaciotectonics have had high impact on the geology, and hetero-
geneity is pronounced, it is not possible to represent the lithology as a layered sequence, and the
software interpolation feature becomes increasingly inconvenient to work with. This issues might
be better addressed by using a diﬀerent class of conceptual models, such as the volume pixel
model, which can represent a geological feature in a pixel domain, much like a lego brick model.
This is however better suited for a completely diﬀerent input data set, such as geophysical data
or geostatistics, in order to get a spatial variability.
What can our model do, and what can it not do?
The groundwater model is set up as an equivalent porous medium model, including several layers
of diﬀerent characteristics. By deﬁning an equivalent porous medium model, several processes
are left out. In our case, inclusion of governing equations for double porous properties would be
diﬃcult to parameterise, due to lack of knowledge about diﬀusion coeﬃcients between matrix
and fractures. Parameterisation of the double porous processes would therefore depend highly
on ﬁtting during the calibration, based on literature values. During the exploration of our model
parameterisation, it was found that diﬀerences in plume arrival times in several geological layers
could mimic the eﬀect of double porosities. This might not represent the true double porous
processes, which are expected in the crushed and fractured layers, but highlights the inﬂuence
from modelling several geological layers.
As elaborated on throughout the thesis the equivalent porous medium model also does not in-
clude fracture ﬂow, which would have enabled a fast breakthrough with high concentrations, as
well as inﬂuencing the ﬂow direction. The model can simulate a fast breakthrough, but cannot
distinguish ﬂow in a fast and a slower fraction of a single geological layer, why again, the tailing
eﬀect from a single geological layer cannot be simulated.
From previous discussions it was found that several geological layers enables a multimodal eﬀect,
which can be utilised to mimic tailing eﬀect and also identify diﬀerent and less signiﬁcant travel
paths of the solute. To fully exploit this model property, depth separated sampling is needed.
This demands a more comprehensive input data set, as well as hydrogeological parameter esti-
mation of more layers. It complicates the calibration process, but can also be exploited in cases
where such multimodal eﬀects needs clariﬁcation.
The groundwater model were not able to represent the preferential ﬂow seen from the very
diﬀerent observed breakthrough curves of T02 and T04, and their peak concentrations. This
might have been modelled using discrete fractures, which again would demand knowledge or
assumptions about fracture propagation and apertures. Such assumptions, when lacking data,
are avoided using the equivalent porous medium model. Anisotropy could have been included
though, to represent a preferential ﬂow. An eﬀect from our model which has not been further
examined is the high detail of the geometry of the speciﬁc geological layers. From 3D illustra-
tions of our numerical model simulations it is seen how the contaminant plume spreads with the
curvature of the layers. This eﬀect might have been easier to look into if the sampling were depth
separated. It is therefore diﬃcult to conclude on the importance of the eﬀort in realistic layer
83
==PAGE:94==
geometries compared to a more simple layer geometry.
Lastly, the groundwater model is representative of a scale of approximately ten meters, repre-
senting the area between injection well T01 and the dose response wells, which have been used
for model calibration. The parameters of the geology is therefore limited to this speciﬁc site and
scale. The hydraulic conductivity was estimated much greater than expected from literature and
other groundwater models, indicating that we are simulating a highly localised hydrogeological
eﬀect. Thus, experiences and conceptual results is therefore applicable to other similar sites, but
exact parameters should be used with care.
If a model is good or not is highly dependent on its use, and the pre-deﬁned aim of setting up the
model. Keeping in mind that the model is calibrated against a tracer test for a speciﬁc geograph-
ical area, it is not expected to perform well on predicting the spreading of the PCE contaminant
plume. The applicability of the model could still have been tested through a model comparison.
For this an independent data set should be used in comparison with our model simulation. Data
on the PCE contamination over time has been collected by NIRAS, but is diﬃcult to simulate
using our model, since sampling was initiated several years after the contaminant spill, where the
PCE plume was already far beyond our model area in extent. A validation of our model results
against an independent data set has not been possible other than what can be inferred from
comparison with literature. Therefore, the model cannot be used as a predictive tool, but can
serve as a conceptual study of modelling in a heterogeneous upper bryozoan limestone aquifer,
which was also the purpose of the study.
Why does geology matter?
Geology is the media in which water ﬂows, and knowledge about the geology is therefore impor-
tant for the understanding of groundwater ﬂow and solute transport. Experience from ground-
water modelling has shown that a missing or misinterpreted geological understanding has given
rise to a high degree of uncertainty (Jørgensen et al., 2008). This underlines that geology does
matter, and that we need to improve our ability to incorporate geological understanding into our
models. Not necessarily stating that all of the gained geological knowledge should be included
into the groundwater model, but stating the necessity of having the insight to make a qualiﬁed
judgment of what may be essential for the model. In a broader perspective the lack of geological
knowledge of a speciﬁc site makes it less comparable to other geographic areas and literature
in general, and diminishes the broader understanding and development in groundwater modelling.
Geological knowledge about the medium subject to hydrogeological ﬁeld investigations are cru-
cial. Without a conceptual geological understanding, the value of doing hydrogeological ﬁeldwork,
as for example a tracer test, is diminished. As the test will only give a rough idea about which
layer/media the tracer travels in, the parameters derived from the test will be less applicable
to other geographical areas of same geological structure and can as well be subject to erroneous
conclusions, without a thorough geological understanding.
In groundwater modelling, especially when dealing with solute transport, the scale dependence
of hydrogeological parameters also becomes highly inﬂuential.
Small scale geological hetero-
geneities can force solutes in directions conﬂicting with the overall hydraulic gradients, and can
act as a solute retention factor through dead-end pores and discontinuities. Such eﬀects on the
hydrogeological parameters can only be known from a detailed geological understanding of the
84
==PAGE:95==
underground. It is always easier to deﬁne hydrogeological parameters on smaller scales, but the
complicated steps arises when applying hydrogeological parameters on larger scales for risk- and
groundwater resource assessment. When up-scaling, it does not make sense to include smaller
fractures and geological features, neither because of the aspect of vast amounts of input data nor
for the unreasonable computation time and eﬀort it brings along. As already elaborated on, this
model is restricted to its scale of origin. On this smaller scale, of approximately 10x10 m, the
estimated hydrogeological parameters will serve as a lower boundary, see the scale dependence
seen in Figure 2.8 in Section 2.2. This study shows how surprisingly high hydraulic conductivities
can be identiﬁed on this smaller scale, creating awareness on the localised eﬀects of the geology.
A study by Rosenbom and Jakobsen (2000) have argued for using the geological knowledge of
formation and propagation of geological structures for up-scaling, whereas spatial variability of
hydrogeological parameters has been explored using geostatistics, such as the variogram, by sev-
eral studies (Srivastava et al., 2004; Ptak et al., 2004; Neuman, 2005; Frykman, 2001). Diﬀerent
levels of geological knowledge are necessary for applying these up-scaling methodologies, but is
essentially necessary to avoid wrong conclusions.
For our model, the calibration process revealed that the tailing would not be represented cor-
rectly without including the process of fracture ﬂow. The model therefore served as a clarifying
tool, not only for parameterisation but also for the conceptual geology. During ﬁtting and cali-
bration, diﬃculties occurred when deciding how to deﬁne parameter values, and which ones to
ﬁne-tune, when seven geological layers were included. Seven geological layers, each with multiple
geological and hydrogeological parameters to calibrate leaves a highly over-parameterised model.
In our case, with a detailed geological understanding and characterisation before setting up the
model, the amount of ”free” parameters becomes limited and thereby lessen the risk of faulty
parameterisation (Sonnenborg and Henriksen, 2005).
So, the geology does matter in groundwater modelling. Not just for the conceptual understand-
ing and as a guidance in parameterisation, but also in regards of the model results. Exploring
the numerical groundwater model in Part 8, the multimodal eﬀect was seen, along with eﬀects
of the tangent law of refraction resulting in diﬀerent solute transport interactions between ge-
ological layers from changing sets of parameterisation. The amount of geological detail in the
groundwater model is therefore also highly inﬂuential on the model performance.
Recommendations for further studies
This study has bridged the understanding between geo- and hydrogeological properties of a bry-
ozoan limestone aquifer, which may be used as an inspiration for building groundwater and solute
transport models in future studies. To further expand on the hydrogeological understanding of
the bryozoan limestone aquifer, the following recommendations are proposed:
Improvements on the Ølsemagle model
More in depth parameterisation of hydraulic conductivities on the speciﬁc geological layers, and
more thorough calibration of the solute transport model, with a special focus on the interrelation
between high an low conductive layers. It may be valuable to explore the hydraulic conductivities
estimated from the MiHpT, for a depth separated indication of conductive layers.
85
==PAGE:96==
Expand the 7 layered equivalent porous model to a double porous model, and include estimated
mobile porosities found during the tracer test in Table 8.1 as the the fracture porosity. This
could reveal both fast breakthrough times, representing the observed tracer breakthrough, but
may also represent tailing eﬀects better, due to back diﬀusion from the matrix.
By including the double porosity processes in the groundwater model it would be relevant to
estimate diﬀusion parameters. This could be done on a lab scale basis with samples from the
ﬁeld.
Reformulate the governing groundwater ﬂow equation with a link to the solute transport equa-
tion, for exploring the eﬀects of a density driven solute transport. The density driven ﬂow would
reveal a more vertical preferential ﬂow, which could reveal a more representable parameterisation
of the geological media from the model calibration.
86
==PAGE:97==
Part 10
Conclusion
To conclude whether an in depth understanding of the geo- and hydrogeological properties of a
bryozoan limestone aquifer improves groundwater modelling, a substantial overview and knowl-
edge in the ﬁeld of groundwater modelling is necessary. This implies the necessity of both a
comprehensive geo- and hydrogeological ﬁeld work campaign as well as an extensive exploration
of diﬀerent model approaches. Within the limited time frame of this study, some clarifying con-
clusions on these issues have been found, and are presented below.
The literature study proved an essential, and necessary, background knowledge for the subsequent
interpretations and discussions of the thesis. It provided a detailed geological understanding of
bryozoan limestone formation and hydrogeological characteristics. Further it clariﬁed that bry-
ozoan limestone showing fractured and/or crushed characteristics can be modelled using equiva-
lent porous models, dual porosity models and discrete fracture models, the choice depending on
input data and hydrogeological characteristics. From experiences with previous model simula-
tions in bryozoan limestone it was found that hydrogeological parameters must be chosen with
care, keeping in mind that hydrogeological parameters are scale dependent, and representative of
their locality. Looking into previous experiences with groundwater modelling at the Ølsemagle
site, it also became clear that the existing knowledge of the site was not suﬃcient to capture geo-
and hydrogeological characteristics in the existing groundwater models.
A comprehensive geological ﬁeld campaign and characterisation of the upper bryozoan limestone
aquifer in Ølsemagle carved out that
• The excavation of the upper bryozoan limestone aquifer at Ølsemagle showed clear inﬂuence
of glacial disturbances. From the excavation the lower exposed layers around 4.5 m.b.t.
showed a similar sequences of layering as found in Karlstrup quarry, indicating similar
deeper geology at the two localities.
• The diﬃculties of lowering the water table supported the assumption of highly conductive
geological features. Evidence of fracture ﬂow was seen from ocher and manganese staining
in the excavation, as wells as turbulence from underwater fractures.
87
==PAGE:98==
• A detailed lithological characterisation of borehole samples revealed a sequence of glacial
till, crushed and sludgy limestone with varying ﬂint content down to the harder limestone,
found approximately 6 m.b.t., in all T wells.
• The applied geological ﬁeld activities at the Ølsemagle site proved valuable for both the
conceptual geological understanding as well as for setting up the digitised geological model.
An excavation, as performed at the Ølsemagle site, is though a highly invasive method,
which should not be carried out without weighting the value of the exposed geology against
the associated expenses.
For hydrogeological parameterisation of the Ølsemagle site, a tracer test was conducted and
monitored, leading to the ﬁndings below
• Breakthrough curves of the tracer test revealed steep peaks and surprisingly fast break-
through times as well as signiﬁcant tailing eﬀect in both T03 and T04. T02 showed a more
diﬀusive and and lower peak, indicating preferential, and possible fracture ﬂow, for T03
and T04. The shape of the breakthrough curves with a long tailing, probably originating
from back diﬀusion, indicates double-porous properties of the aquifer.
• The breakthrough curves revealed peak velocities of 0.18 m/h, 0.16 m/h and 0.08 m/h from
injection well T01 to T03, T04 and T02, respectively.
• Hydraulic conductivity of the upper Ølsemagle aquifer were estimated based on the tracer
test breakthrough curves to 1.02·10−2 m/s, 6.14 ·10−2 m/s and 6.83 ·10−3 m/s for T03,
T04 and T02, respectively.
The process of translating ﬁeld work into the groundwater model was done through the three
steps of (1) constructing a conceptual geological model, (2) digitising the geological model and
(3) hereon building and parameterising a hydrostratigrahic model. From the experiences with
digitising and parameterising the geology it was found that
• A suﬃciently dense geological data set of the area of interest was present for constructing a
geological model with limited interpretations and uncertainties. The GeoScene3D software
proved a valuable and ﬂexible tool in interpolating geological data into a digitised spatial
geological model.
• The layered characteristic of the aquifer was successfully represented in the digitised model,
despite discontinuities of the geological sequences. A resulting 12 layer geological model,
was later simpliﬁed to a 7 layer hydrostratigraphic model, mainly because of diﬃculties in
ﬁnding suitable hydrogeological parameters.
With the aim of demonstrating and calibrating a groundwater ﬂow and solute transport model,
based on the tracer test experiment, the 7 layered equivalent porous medium model led to the
following conclusions
88
==PAGE:99==
• The steady state ﬂow model could successfully simulate observed hydraulic head and gra-
dient at the Ølsemagle site of interest.
• Based on a qualitative comparison to the shape of the tracer breakthrough curves, the
equivalent porous medium model could not represent the observed tailing, but could mimic
tailing eﬀects from its multimodal properties.
The model could most convincingly be
used to model peak concentrations and breakthrough times.
Both peak concentrations
and breakthrough times were though not ﬁtted simultaneously, most probably because of
limited time for the calibration process.
• The 7 layered equivalent porous medium model could not simulate the preferential ﬂow
towards northeast, as observed from a higher and faster peak in T04 compared to T02.
• Diﬀerent combinations of hydraulic conductivities on the geological layers showed to be
an important factor in the temporal as well as spatial propagation of the solute plume.
Relatively higher conductivities in some geological layers caused preferential ﬂow in these,
leading to a fast breakthrough, but also a retarding eﬀect, on the total solute mass, in
the adjacent layers of lower hydraulic conductivities. More uniform conductivities of the
geological layer sequence led to more simultaneous breakthroughs in all layers, resulting in
higher peak concentrations.
• From the above conclusion point follows that, due to the exchange eﬀect between geological
layers, it is not only important to specify one layer with high hydrogeological detail, but
the entire layer sequence, when incorporating detailed geology.
89
==PAGE:100==
==PAGE:101==
Bibliography
Appelo, C. and Postma, D. (1993), Geochemistry, groundwater and pollution, Balkema.
ATV Jord og grundvand (2014), ‘Forurening i vores kalkmagasiner - hvad er problemet, og
hvordan handler vi?’, web page: http://www.atv-jord-grundvand.dk/ [accessed 26.06.15].
Balbarini, N. and Rosenberg, L. (2014), Modelling of contaminant transport from a PCE source
in a fractured limestone aquifer, Master’s thesis, Technical university of Denmark, Department
of environmental engineering.
Bennike, O. (2011), Geoviden nr. 3 - klimaændringer i fortid og nutid, Technical report, Geocenter
Danmark.
Berkowitz, B. (2002), ‘Characterizing ﬂow and transport in fractured geological media: A review’,
Advances in water resources, 25 pp. 816–884.
Bjerager, M. and Surlyk, F. (2007), ‘Benthic palaeoecology of danian deep-shelf bryozoan mounds
in the danish basin’, Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 250, 184–215.
Bjerg, P. L., Broholm, M. M., Lange, I. V., Troldborg, M., Janniche, G. S., Lemming, G.,
Santos, M. and Binning, P. J. (2011), Forekomst af fri fase og kvantiﬁcering af forureningsﬂux
for chlorerede opløsningsmidler, Technical report, DTU and Region Hovedstaden.
Brettmann, K., Jensen, K. H. and Jakobsen, R. (1993), ‘Tracer test in fractured chalk - 2.
numerical analysis’, Nordic Hydrology, 24 pp. 275–296.
Brettmann, K. L. and Jensen, K. H. (1992), Lossepladsprojektet - modelering af stoftransport i
opsprækket kalk, Technical Report Rapport M3, Institut for strømningsmekanik og vandbygn-
ing, DTH.
Christiansen, C. and Wood, J. S. A. (2006), Environmental fracturing in clay till deposits, Master
thesis, Technical university of Denmark.
Danish Meteorological Institute (2015), ‘Precipitation data from february 2015’, web page:
http://www.dmi.dk/vejr/arkiver/vejrarkiv/ [accessed 29.06.2015.
Danish
Ministry
of
the
Environment
(2015),
‘Grundvand’,
web
page:
http://naturstyrelsen.dk/vandmiljoe/vand-i-hverdagen/grundvand/ [accessed 29.06.2015.
Dansk
Naturfredningsforening
(2015),
‘Stevns
klint
-
geologi’,
web
page:
http://www.dn.dk/Default.aspx?ID=3022 [accessed 29.06.15].
Fetter, C. W. (2001), Applied Hydrogeology, 4. edn, Pearson education, Prentice-Hall, inc., Upper
saddle river, New jersey 07458.
91
==PAGE:102==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Frykman, P. (2001), ‘Spatial variability in petrophysical properties in upper maastrichtian chalk
outcrops at stevns klint, denmark’, Marine and petroleum geology, 18 pp. 1041–1062.
Galsgaard, J., Rohde, M., Jakobsen, R. and Jakobsen, P. R. (2014), Strømning og stoftransport
i kalklagene p˚a den københavnske vestegn, Rapport 1 GEO project nr.37208, GEO and Geus,
Maglebjergvej 1, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby.
Gerke, H. H. and Genuchten, M. T. V. (1993), ‘A dual porosity model for simulating the prefer-
ential movement of water and solutes in structured porous media’, Water resources research,
29 (2), 305–319.
Grisak, G. E. and Pickens, J. F. (1980), ‘Solute transport through fractured media - the eﬀect
of matrix diﬀusion’, Water resources research, 16 (4), 719–730.
Heilmann-Clausen, C. (2010), Geoviden nr. 3 - danmarks geologiske udvikling fra 65 til 2,6 mio
før nu, Technical report, Geocenter Danmark.
International Commission on Stratography (2015), ‘International chronostratigraphic chart’, web
page: http://www.stratigraphy.org/index.php/ics-chart-timescale [accessed 29.06.2015].
ISO (2002), Geotechnical investigation and testing - Identiﬁcation and classiﬁcation of soil - Part
1: Identiﬁcation and description, ﬁrst edn. ISO 14688-1:2002(E).
Jakobsen, P. R. and Klitten, K. (1999), ‘Fracture systems and groundwater ﬂow in the københavn
limestone formation’, Nordic hydrology, 30 pp. 301–316.
Jakobsen, R. (1991), ‘Lossepladsprojektet - hydraulik og stoftransport i en opsprækket kalkbjer-
gart’, Rapport H9, Miljøstyrelsen .
Jakobsen, R., Jensen, K. H. and Brettmann, K. (1993), ‘Tracer test in fractured chalk - 1.
experimental design and results’, Nordic Hydrology, 24 pp. 263–274.
Jørgensen, F., Møller, R. R., Sandersen, P. B. E. and Nebel, L. (2010), ‘3D geological modelling of
the Egebjerg area, Denmark, based on hydrogeophysical data’, Geological Survey of Denmark
and Greenland Bulletin, 20 pp. 27–30.
Jørgensen, F., Kristensen, M., Højbjerg, A. L., Klint, K. S., Hansen, C., Jordt, B. E., Richardt,
N. and Sandersen, P. (2008), GEO-VEJLEDNING 3 - opstilling af geologiske modeller til
grundvandsmodellering, Technical report, GEUS, Øster voldgade 10, 1350 København K.
Jørgensen, F., Møller, R. R., Nebel, L., Jensen, N.-P., Christiansen, A. V. and Sandersen, P.
B. E. (2013), ‘A method for cognitive 3d geological voxel modelling of aem data’, Bulletin of
Engineering Geology and the Environment, 72 pp. 421–432.
Kjeldsen, P. and Christensen, T. H. (1996), Projekt om jord og grundvand fra miljøstyrelsen:
Kemiske stoﬀers opførsel i jord og grundvand, Bind 1 20, Miljø og energi ministeriet.
Koestler, A. G. and Reksten, K. (1995), ‘Fracture-network 3d characterization in a deformed
chalk reservoir analogue - the lagerdorf case’, Society of petroleum engineers, Formation eval-
uation pp. 148–152.
Larsen, F., Sonnenborg, T., Madsen, P., Ulbak, K. A. and Klitten, K. (2006), Saltvandsgrænsen i
kalkmagasinerne i nordøstsjælland. saltvandsudvaskning i danienkalk og skrivekridt - detailun-
dersøgelse i karlslunde værkstedsomr˚ade., Delrapport 6, Insititue for miljø og ressourcer, DTU
and Danmarks og Grønlands geologiske undersøgelser and Miljøministeriet, København.
92
==PAGE:103==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Larsen, G., Frederiksen, J., Villiumsen, A., Fredericia, J., Gravesen, P., Foged, N., Knudsen,
B. and Baumann, J. (1988), Vejledning i ingeniørgeologisk prøvebeskrivelse, Technical report,
Danish geotechnical society.
Lawrence, A. R., Stuart, M. E., Barker, J. A. and Tester, D. J. (1996), ‘Contamination of chalk
groundwater by chlorinated solvents: A case study of deep penetration by non-aqueous phase
liquids’, J. CIWEM, 10 pp. 263–272.
Manoli, G. (2009), Modelling the timeframe for remediation of a contaminated site located in
a clay till, Master’s thesis, Department of environmental engineering, Technical university of
Denmark.
McCall, W., Christy, T. M., Pipp, D., Terkelsen, M., Christensen, A., Weber, K. and Enelsen, P.
(2014), ‘Field application of the combined membrane-interface probe and hydraulic proﬁling
tool (mihpt)’, Groundwater Monitoring and Remediation p. 11.
Metroselskabet (2009), Cityringen. cw-pi-4 - hydrogeological analysis, Technical report, COWI.
Milter, H. (2007), Transport af en tracer gennem opsprækket bryozokalk, Master’s thesis, Uni-
versity of Copenhagen, Geological institute.
Milter, H. (2015), ‘Personal conversations throuhgout the project period of 02/02/2015 to
02/07/2015’.
Neuman, S. P. (2005), ‘Trends, prospects and challenges in quantifying ﬂow and transport
through fractured rocks’, Hydrogeology Journal, 13 pp. 124–147.
NIRAS (2006), Hellestedvej 22, hellested - stimuleret reduktiv dechlorering. fase 1: Supplerende
undersøgelser, Technical report, Storstrøms Amt, Miljøstyrelsen.
NIRAS (2012a), Vandvæket Lyngen - Kildeplads ved Ølsemagle. Opsporing af kilde til forurening
af indvindingsboringer med PCE, Technical Report 124149073, Region Sjælland, Sortemosevej
19, 3450 Allerød.
NIRAS (2012b), Vandvæket Lyngen - Kildeplads ved Ølsemagle. PCE kildeopsporing, Technical
Report 125695435, Region Sjælland, Sortemosevej 19, 3450 Allerød.
NIRAS (2012c), Vandvæket Lyngen - Kildeplads ved Ølsemagle. Poreluftscreening ved oplag af
metalskrot omkring Ølsemaglevej 52, Technical Report 124149073, Region Sjælland, Sortemo-
sevej 19, 3450 Allerød.
NIRAS (2013), Ølsemaglevej 50-52, 4623 Lille Skensved, Køge. Selvhjælpshandlinger - gennem-
førte undersøgelser og afværge, Technical Report 128146600, Køge kommune, Teknik og Miljø-
forvaltningen, Sortemosevej 19, 3450 Allerød.
NIRAS (2014), Ølsemaglevej 50-52, 4623 Lille Skensved, Køge - status og oplæg til pumpestop
og tracerforsøg, Technical Report 125695435, Region Sjælland, Sortemosevej 19, 3450 Allerød.
NIRAS (2015a), ‘Data exchange with NIRAS from the Ølsemagle case site’. facilitated by Peter
Tyge.
NIRAS (2015b), Ølsemaglevej 50-52, Lille Skensved, Køge - Afværge og monitering af PCE
forurening, Technical Report 125695435, Region Sjælland, Sortemosevej 19, 3450 Allerød.
93
==PAGE:104==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Payne, F. C., Quinnan, J. A. and Potter, S. T. (2008), Remediation hydraulics, isbn: 978-0-8493-
7249-0 edn, CRC press, Taylor and Francis Group, 6000 Broken Sound Parkway NW, suite
300, Boca Raton, FL 33487-2742.
Pedersen, C. and Hørl¨uck, M. (2012), Modellering af skalaafhængig stoftransport i opsprækket
kalk, Master’s thesis, AAlborg University.
Ptak, T., Pieoenbrink, M. and Martac, E. (2004), ‘Tracer tests for the investigation of heteroge-
neous porous media and stochastic modelling of ﬂow and transport - a review of some recent
developments’, Journal of hydrology, 294 pp. 122–163.
Rosenbom, A. and Jakobsen, P. R. (2000), Geologi, nyt fra geus - kalk, sprækker og termograﬁ,
Technical report, Geological Survey of Denmark and Greenland.
Roskilde
amt
(2001a),
Geologiske
og
hydrolgeologiske
forhold
i
kalkmagasinet
under
hjørneg˚ardsvej 13, Technical report, Hedeselskabet.
Roskilde amt (2001b), Videreg˚aende undersøgelser kortlagt areal nr.259.163, Hjørneg˚ardsvej 13,
4623 Lille Skensved, Technical report, Hedeselskabet, Miljø og Energi as.
Roskilde amt (2002), Prøvepumpning og modelberegninger Hjørneg˚ardsvej 13, Technical report,
Hedeselskabet.
Roskilde amt (2005), Nikkelmobilitet i kalk - hovedrapport, Technical report, Hedeselskabet and
Geologisk institute.
Schulze-Makuch, D. and Cherkauer, D. S. (1998), ‘Variations in hydraulic conductivity with scale
of measurement during aquifer tests in heterogeneous, porous carbonate rocks’, Hydrogeology
journal, 6 pp. 204–215.
Schwartz, F. W. and Zhang, H. (2003), Fundamentals of ground water, John wiley and sons,
John wiley and sons, inc., 605 third ave, New York, NY 10158-0012.
Sonnenborg, T. O. and Henriksen, H. J. (2005), H˚andbog i grundvandsmodellering, Technical
Report 80, Geological Survey of Denmark and Greenland and Danish Ministry of the Envi-
ronment.
Srivastava, R. M., Frykman, P. and Jensen, M. (2004), ‘Geostatistical simulation of fracture
networks’, Geostatistics Banﬀpp. 295–304.
Vangkilde-Pedersen, T., Mielby, S., Jakobsen, P. R., Hansen, B., Iversen, C. H. and Nielsen, A. M.
(2011), GEO-VEJLEDNING 8 - kortlægning af kalkmagasiner, Technical report, GEUS, Øster
voldgade 10, 1350 København K.
94
==PAGE:105==
Appendix A
Geological timeline
95
==PAGE:106==
Figure A.1: Geological time line from the International Commission on Stratigraphy (International Commission on Stratography, 2015).
96
==PAGE:107==
Appendix B
Literature review
This appendix is devoted to our main ﬁndings from a literary study of how to unify geologic
understanding and contaminant transport models in a fractured limestone.
Neuman (2005): Thorough review of parameter estimation and hydrogeologic models of frac-
tured rocks (hard rocks and sediments). Advocates against DFN models since it is diﬃcult to
determine fractures in the ﬁeld, and the hydraulic properties are not always consistent with mea-
surable apertures. Advocated tracer tests and bulk properties. Mention intersection/ellipsoid
theory (pp. 131). Explains geostatistic as a tool for describing discrete, random, correlated bulk
properties of fractures medium.
Pedersen and Hørl¨uck (2012): Scale dependent estimates of geo-hydrologic parameters in
unspeciﬁed chalk. Six small cores gives average hydraulic conductivity of 5.2 · 10−3m/s and to-
tal porosity of 0.44. Medium core gives hydraulic conductivity of 2.6·10−5m/s and an eﬀective
porosity of 0.03. Push-and-pull tracer test gives hydraulic conductivity of 1.1 · 10−3m/s and an
eﬀective porosity of 0.014. The values are compared to other near-site values, which shows scale
dependent values and variations. Test three diﬀerent ﬂow/transport models; analytical, GMS
incl. sorption, GMS incl. double porosity. The medium scale lab experiments shows strong
inﬂuence from diﬀusion between fractures and matrix. This eﬀect is though not seen in the
tracer test because of its short time scale. Saturated chalk will have bigger apertures because of
erosion, apertures near borehole also bigger because of drilling,
Highlights: Comprehensive hydrological theory and modelling part.
Lawrence et al. (1996): Site investigation of DNAPL contamination to the deeper chalk
groundwater in Sawston, Cambridgeshire. The paper investigates and discusses the relative in-
ﬂuence of matrix, fractures and ﬁssures on DNAPL transport.
Highlights: Good background knowledge on DNAPLs, interesting with ﬁssures, and uplifting
geological beds along with a downward ﬂowing hydraulic gradient. The article proposes DNAPL
migration through the chalk aquifer to be mainly density driven, where porewater concentration
proﬁles showed clear evidence to conﬁrm this, even though a strong upward groundwater ﬂow
was present.
Frykman (2001): It focus a lot on comparing Stevns Klint to marine chalk. Good geological
explanations of Bryozoan limestone. Appendix with explanations of variograms, a geostatistical
method.
97
==PAGE:108==
Larsen et al. (2006): sub report of a bigger investigation in Northeast Sealand, focusing on
the saltwater boundary in chalk aquifers (Skrivekridt and Danian) on the case site in Karlslunde,
Denmark. Both a conceptual and numerical models was setup to model the out washing of salt-
water over geologic time, and determine parameters which will be used to gain stability in future
numerical simulations of the saltwater boundary in relation to groundwater pumping. The report
models have been based on previously published investigations on other case sites with similar
geology on Sealand (Karlstrup Kalkgrav and Stevns Klint) as well as original hydrogeological
investigations on the case site.
· Geological survey of aperture, slope etc. in the chalk in Karlstrup Kalkgrav and Stevns Klint
· Model parameters are based on literature and 2 new drillings, 1 at Tune by and 1 at Karlslunde
mose.
· Hydraulic parameters are based on drilling core material, test pumping and geophysical bore-
hole loggings on site.
· Models include: one 2D numerical model for the ”out washing of residual porewater”, built
and simulated in the software FRACTRAN, and another model based on a double porous
principle with discrete placement of fractures with a fracture spacing of between 5-10m
based on observed televiewer logs.
interesting points: Detailed descriptions of televiewer logs are used to describe dominant fractures
and ﬂint pockets in lime and chalk boreholes (speciﬁcally on p.53). It is however revealed through
calculations that the hydraulic aperture is signiﬁcantly smaller (0,3-0,4mm) than the visually
observed fractures (5mm).
Srivastava et al. (2004): A geostatistical method developed by Ontario Power Generation
to create 3D FNM’s is evaluated on a chalk outcrop in Germany. The statistical methods are
described, and seems to give satisfying results. The geostatistical code might be secret/expensive
since the study is supported by the oil industry.
Ptak et al. (2004): A review of others and own results from diﬀerent tracer tests, especially
depth integrated and multilevel set-ups with forced- and natural hydraulic gradients. Advocates
the use of tracer test before detailed deterministic models. Emphasizes the use of several tracers
as well as new methods (DNA). Geostatistics are exempliﬁed on a gravel/sand/silt aquifer.
Highlights: Pro/cons table of tracer test methods and their speciﬁc applications. Retardation
factors. Discussion on DNAPL.
Koestler and Reksten (1995): An evaluation of the realization of geostatistics based on
parameters such as fracture orientations, fracture frequency and fracture length from ﬁeld ob-
servations and borehole logs. Field observations are based on a wall of out-crop ”sliced” into 12
layers in depth. The method is evaluated as promising, but is not validated through ﬂow- or
transport simulations.
Highlights: Good geological considerations on fracture geometry and aperture, explanations on
the data behind the geostatistical parameters.
Roskilde amt (2001b): A historical summary and explanation of the further investigation on
the property at Hjørneg˚ardsvej 13, 4623 Ll. Skensved, and neighbouring properties. The report
spans from the initial contamination in 1974 focusing mainly on Trichlorethylene (TCE) to the
further investigations of pore gas concentrations and drillings through the primary groundwater
98
==PAGE:109==
aquifer 2001. Highlights: Good summary of the historical contamination events in Ll. Skensved.
A lot of focus on pore gas concentrations and spreading of the contaminant plume.
NIRAS (2012a): Preliminary investigations of the contaminated site identiﬁed by Lyngen wa-
ter supplt, Køge. The source is not identiﬁed in this report, but results from the investigations
of source area presented.
Highlight: Identiﬁcation of PCE in deep well screens, approximately 60 m.b.g.l.
NIRAS (2012c): Investigation of tree cores and soil air at the contaminated site identiﬁed by
Lyngen water supplt, Køge. The investigations conﬁrms the assumptions about a PCE, BTEX
and freon contamination, and the high levels also indicates existance of free-phase DNAPL.
Highlight: Assumption about free-phase DNAPL.
Bjerg et al. (2011): A summarizing report about DNAPL phase contamination and exempli-
ﬁed case studies about diﬀerent modeling approaches (exponential, fracture etc.). Goes through
state-of-the-art of DNAPL identiﬁcation and quantiﬁcation (Sudan, FLUTe, televiewer, geo-
physics, ﬂux estimates etc.).
Jørgensen et al. (2008): The report consists of four chapters. In the second chapter a thor-
ough walk-through of good-practice in geological and hydrostratigraphic modeling is found. The
third chapter describes general properties of danish limestone. Page 14 has interesting comments
on regional scale low permeable layers in limestone. In chapter 4.1.3 and 4.2.1 it is discussed how
to identify/map structures in chalk formations. Highlights:In chapter 2 it is especially useful to
read about uncertanties and landscape analysis. Page 81-83 gives a ﬁeld strategy to identify and
describe fractured chalk. Anisotropy is some times a cause for the groundwater ﬂow to go in
another direction than the hydraulic gradient. Remember to describe coatings of fractures, since
this indicates hydraulic activity. Mentions a strategy on analyzing hydraulic gradients called
”Geo-Vejledning nr. 4 ”Potentialekortlægning. Vejledning i udarbejdelse af potentialekort”.
Manoli (2009): A MSc. thesis on risk assessment and evaluation of reductive dechlorination
on a contaminated site in a clay till, based on two hydrological models; A three dimensional
groundwater model, and a two dimensional discrete fracture model. Where the latter fracture
network is generated by superimposing one-dimensional line elements onto a triangular mesh.
The hydrological models are well described and presented, though only with a brief description of
the geological model, which holds a complex geological layering presented by Region Syddanmark.
NIRAS (2006): Technical report from Niras about tracer test and equivalent porous model at
a TCE contaminated ﬁeld site. Tracer test using ﬂuorescent uranium, model not taking fractures
into account, and ”doubtful” ﬁt...
Jørgensen et al. (2013): Article about AEM data as input to a 3D geological model. The
article mainly focus on the advantages and disadvantages of the voxel method, using the octree
algorithm in Geoscene 3D. Voxels can be subdivided into very small volumes, but this results
in high computation time and subjective and time consuming interpretations from the modeler.
Main interest lies in ”Introduction”, ”Octree modelling” and ”Discussion” parts.
Highlighting
were not possible in this article edition.
99
==PAGE:110==
Bryozoan(
limestone
In(the(fractured(
but(no(longer(
crushed(limestone(
depth
5([m]
Ll.(Skensved,(
DK
K_bulk
1.93*10^J5
Linear(correlation(plot(of(field(
data((dh/dx(vs.(q)
Tracer(test((KBr)(in(lab(
on(limestone(core
(Milter,(2007)
Few(big,(more(small(fractures(were(
hydraulic(active.(120(d(duration.
K_isotropisk(
(matrix)
1.2*10^J7
Fixed(K(value.(during(discrete(
fracture(model(fitting(of(above(
core(experiment.
Fitting(interval(based(on(Madsen((2003).
K_matrix,(n
1.4*10^J3(and(1.4*10^J
7
30(and(24 Fitted(matrix(parameters(in(
equivalent(porous(medium(
model(with(discrete(fractures.(
Tracer(test((KBr)(in(field(
with(well(distance(of(13(
m
Fitting(data(from(45(d(duration(tracer(test.(
Break(through(after(2½(d.(Porosity(is(fitted.
Bryozoan(
limstone
H2(hardness(and(
with(much(flint.(
Limestone(begins(
at(3.5J7.5(mb.t.
5J10([m]
Ll.(Skensved,(
DK
K_h,(n
1*10^J7(to(2*10^J6
39(to(44
Lab(measurements(of(
cores
(Roskilde(amt,(2002)
4J13([m]
K_h
2*10^J4(to(1*10^J6
Packertest(in(well(in(
the(field
Kh(values(are(logarithmic(decreasing(with(
depth
Bryozoan(
limestone
Moraine(on(top,(
first(ten(m.b.t.(of(
less(and(less(
crushedlimestone.(
Similar(to(
Ølsemagle
3J22([m]
Karlstrup
K_h,(n_matrix
10^J7(to(10^J8
20(to(35
small(plug(experiments(
in(lab
(Jakobsen(et(al.,(1993)
no(info
K_h
1*10^J3((upper(10(m(
limestone)(and(5*10^J
5((below)
SIT(test(in(field
Highest(value(in(upper(10(m.(90%(of(flow(in(
this(section(of(the(aquifer.(High(
conductivity(layer(indicating(fractures.
Bryozona(
limestone
similar(to(the(
above
Karlstrup
K_h,(K_v((0(to(J6(
m.b.t.(/(J6(to(J18(
m.b.t.)
8.1*10^J4/8.1*10^J5,(
1.16*10^J5/1.6*10^J6
Fitting(of(dualJporosity(model
Two(well(tracer(test,(
natural(gradient
(Brettmann(et(al.,(1993) Tracer(test,(duration(21(d(using(lithium(
chloride.(25(m(distance(btw(wells.
n_fracture,(
n_matrix
1.1%,(4%
Fitting(of(dualJporosity(model
Fitted(by(modelling.(Matrix(n(very(different(
from(lab(result,(but(represents(the(active(
porosity(in(the(numerical(simulation.(
Fracture(n(very(sensitive
Bryozoan(
limestone
From(bryozoan(
"bench"(in(
Karlstrup(quarry
6(m(
through(
one(mound
Karlstrup(
quarry
K_h,(n_tot(
0.7*10^J6(to(2.5*10^J8 21(to(45.8 Porosity(measured(in(lab(using(
"EPS(Helium(Gas(Expansion(
Porosimeter”.(Conductivity(in(
lab(by(”EPS(Coresystems(DGP(
200(Digital(Gas
Permeameter”.(Both(on(core(
samples.
(Larsen(et(al.,(2006)
Mention(a(strong(correlation(with(flint(
horisons(of(both(parameters.(High(porosity(
and(high(conductivity(goes(along.
Bryozoan(
limestone
In(four(different(
DGU(wells
12,(24,(12(
and(15([m]
1(km(NNE(of(
Karlstrup(
quarry
K
3.5*10^J7,(2.4*10^J7,(
4*10^J8(and(2.9*10^J8
Sampled(from(core(drilling(of(the(well(why(
only(measured(the(harder/less(permeable(
fraction,(which(was(still(intact.(Relative(
uncertainty(of(20(%.
n
24,(33,(22(
and(23
(Jakobsen,(1991)
The(article(do(not(assign(any(
interpretation/meaning(to(the(spatial(
correlation(etc.(Absolute(uncertainty(of(1%.
n_fracture
0.016(to(
1.6
S(and(T(equations
Test(pumping
Parameter
Limestone,
type
Characteristics
below,
terrain
Region
Hydraulic,conductivity,
[m/s]
Porosity,
[%]
Method,for,parameter,
estimate
Data,source
Study
Comments
Figure B.1: Overview of hydrogeological parameters in literature from modeling and ﬁeld experiments i Danish bryozoan limestone.
100
==PAGE:111==
Appendix C
Timeline and overview of
historical events on Ølsemaglevej
52
101
==PAGE:112==
Historical*event
2011
PCE'detection'at'Lyngen'waterworks
Spring
Location'of'Source
May
Remediation
Phytoscreening
Aug
Poregas'screening
Sept
Remediation'pumping
May
June
Water'sampling
Apr
May
May
June
Soil'samples
Drillings
Intact'drillcore'samples
Mar
remedial'drilling'(AFV)
May
Monitoring'drillholes'(M)
Apr
Pejleboring'(P)
Apr
MiHPT/Geoprobe
May
Handdrillings'(B)
Feb
Mar
Excavations
Main'excavation'of'point'source
June
2nd'excavation'of'source
Aug
Geological*Investigation
Tracer'test
Feb
Geological'comparison'to'Karlstrup'
Mar
Geological'excavation'of'tracer'site
Mar
In*charge*of*remediation
Region'Sjælland
June
Køge'municipality
Consultant
Niras
May
2012
2015
2014
2013
Figure C.1: Timeline of the historical events and ﬁeldwork connected to the contamination in Ølsemaglevej 52. As the remediation work was
carried out by Køge Kommune in a transition phase from late 2012 to mid 2013 no speciﬁc month is labeled to this period.
102
==PAGE:113==
Appendix D
Previous conceptual geological
models of the Ølsemagle area
Figure D.1: Conceptual geological west to east proﬁle of the Ølsemagle area made by NIRAS after
their remediation campaign (NIRAS, 2014).
103
==PAGE:114==
(a)
(b)
Figure D.2: Conceptual geological north to south proﬁle, between wells P1 and P3 (D.2a) and wells
M1 and M3 (D.2b), of the Ølsemagle area made by NIRAS after their remediation campaign (NIRAS,
2014).
104
==PAGE:115==
(a)
(b)
Figure D.3: Conceptual geological models of the Ølsemagle and Køge area by Balbarini and Rosenberg
(2014).
105
==PAGE:116==
==PAGE:117==
Appendix E
Excavation at Ølsemaglevej 52,
2015
Excavation set-up
The excavation set-up consisted of an excavator, three pumps submerged into the excavation, the
AFV1 well and an old domestic well, two containers acting as settling tanks, two carbon ﬁlters
and tubes for diverting the post-settled water as seen in Figure E.1.
Figure E.1: Set-up for the dredging and pumping prior to the 2015 excavation. The picture to the left
shows the excavator with the settling tanks (yellow containers) and carbon ﬁlters in the background. To
the right illustrates the pumping from the domestic well located in the old 2013 excavation.
Figure E.2: Measurement rod with tape measure for scale reference. One color bar represents approx-
imately 8 cm.
107
==PAGE:118==
Exposed walls of excavation
Figure E.3: The picture to the left shows the ﬁrst break through of water from upstream the 2015
excavation. It was noted during the ﬁeld work that it was a strong localized ﬂow just beneath the ﬁll in
the 2013 excavation. The picture to the right shows the exposed 2013 excavation after more water has
entered the new excavation site.
Figure E.4: Exposed walls of the excavation. Left picture shows the northern end and right picture
shows the southern end. Notice the dark colored band just above the groundwater table, representing a
continuous ﬂint horizon.
108
==PAGE:119==
Figure E.5: Close-up of continuous ﬂint horizon just above the groundwater surface in the 2015 exca-
vation. Notice the low fracture density.
Under water observations
Figure E.6: Picture of turbid water ﬂowing in from upstream the excavation. Arrows indicates hydraulic
active frcatures.
109
==PAGE:120==
Small scale observations
Figure E.7: Sample of limestone block found just below the 2013 excavation ﬁll at T01 in the 2015
excavation. Notice the ocher/black stained hole in the block.
110
==PAGE:121==
Excavation 2013
Figure E.8: Excavation from 2013, revealing a massive limestone block in its southwestern corner.
111
==PAGE:122==
Excavation 2015 overview
Topview -Ølsemaglevej 50  & 52
Sideview of excavation
Eastwall of excavation
Figure E.9: Overview of the 2015 excavation site.
112
==PAGE:123==
Appendix F
Planned ﬁeld activities for the
2015 excavation
113
==PAGE:124==
Excavation Program.pdf Excavation Program.pdf
Timetable 
 
Day 
Activity 
Field Activity 
 
Monday 
23.03 
7:00 Excavation starts Development of 
excavation 
-Timelapse photos of excavation progression (setup GoPro) 
-GPS, plane and profile drawing of excavation 
- Note hydraulic activity 
Tuesday 
24.03 
 
Overview of geology 
 
-Observe hydraulic activity under pumping 
-Overview photos of excavation. Survey rods 1m apart 
- Description of layers (depth, hardness, mixing) 
- bag samples 
 
 
Wednesday 
25.03 
Technical advisor 
Flemming Møller 
visit 
Fracture Description 
-Setup horizontal/vertical profiles (A,B,C,D etc.) 
-Type of fracture (Vertical, Horizontal, Glacially disturbed, Manmade) 
-Strike 
-Dip 
-Aperture 
-Visual inspection (Redox, Mineral deposits, water, clay etc.) 
-Connectivity to other fractures 
-Inward Depth of fracture (also note tortuosity) 
Thursday 
26.03 
DTU staff visit 
Limestone description 
Frequency of Fractures 
Classification of limestone (Bryozoan, flint, glacially disturbed etc.) 
Dip 
Strike 
Layer thickness 
 
Frequency of fracture analysis 
 
Friday 
27.03 
7:00 Closing 
excavation 
 
 
 
Figure F.1: Time schedule of the planned ﬁeld activities at the Ølsemaglevej 52 excavation 2015. Many of the ﬁeld activities were not carried out
because of the ﬂooding of the excavation, revealing only the top 4.5 meters and made it impossible to measure and take samples in the excavation.
114
==PAGE:125==
Appendix G
Lithology of NIRAS borehole
samples
LITHOLOGICAL CHARACTERISATION STANDARD
MAIN SOIL/ROCK COMPONENT
the soil/rock type which is the most
dominant fraction of the sample
hardness of the main component
scale of H1-H5 based on
Larsen et al. (1988)
grain size of main component
noted as gravel, sand, silt, clay
BICOMPONENT
ﬂint, grain of bryozoans, sand,
sludge, organics etc.
structure
beds, lenses etc.
colour
CaCO3 content (when not the main-/bicomponent)
weak (w.), moderate (m.), strong (st.)
115
==PAGE:126==
Figure G.1: Half meter depht separated soil samples from borehole T01
116
==PAGE:127==
Figure G.2: Half meter depth separated soil samples from borehole T02
117
==PAGE:128==
Figure G.3: Half meter depth separated soil samples from borehole T03
118
==PAGE:129==
Figure G.4: Half meter depth separated soil samples from borehole T04
119
==PAGE:130==
Figure G.5: Lithological description of T01 based on borehole samples from Figure G.1
120
==PAGE:131==
Figure G.6: Lithological description of T02 based on borehole samples from Figure G.2
121
==PAGE:132==
Figure G.7: Lithological description of T03 based on borehole samples from Figure G.3
122
==PAGE:133==
Figure G.8: Lithological description of T04 based on borehole samples from Figure G.4
==PAGE:134==
Appendix H
GeoScene3D geological model
GeoScene3D proﬁles
124
==PAGE:135==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
(l)
Figure H.1: GeoScene3D data point deﬁnitions (1st column), interpolations (2nd column) and layer
adjustments (3rd column) of (a)-(c) the T well proﬁle, (d)-(f) the N-S wall, (g)-(i) the AFV and T well
proﬁle and (j)-(l) the W-E wall.
==PAGE:136==
Appendix I
Tracer test setup, ﬁeld
observations and data processing
Tracer test setup
On December 23, approximately two months prior to the tracer injection, all contaminant reme-
diation pumping at the site was stopped, and the aquifer was left to recover to natural conditions.
The 2nd of February preparatory work was done at the ﬁeld site of the tracer test. All wells were
sampled for analysis of chlorinated solvents and groundwater table levels were measured using a
dip-meter. Furthermore, pipes for the injection well were lain and insulated with rockwool mats
to prevent freezing eﬀects, as can be viewed in Figure I.1. Pressure loggers were installed in wells
P2, T01, T02, T03, T04, M2, M5, AFV1 and in the storage tank for the tracer solution. CTD-
diver loggers were also installed in T01, T02, T03, T04 and AFV1, to measure both conductivity,
temperature and pressure. Preliminary calculations of tracer amounts, expected dilution factors
etc. was done by NIRAS and have been accessible to us through their intranet.
Figure I.1: The 2nd of February preparatory work: Insulation of the injection tube was necessary to
prevent freezing eﬀects and maintain stable tracer temperature throughout the injection period. The
groundwater table was measured with dip-meter prior to injection
126
==PAGE:137==
Figure I.2: Setup of the serially connected tracer storage tank (6 m3 yellow tank), water heater (80L
white tank), water pump (blue pressure tank with pump attached) and regulation valve (black nozzle)
leading out into the thin white plastic injection tube.
The tracer solvent used was groundwater, extracted from site on the 30.
juni 2014, treated
through an activated carbon ﬁlter at-site, and stored in a 6 m3 cylindrical tank until injection.
A set-up with an 80 L water heater and a small air heater were coupled to ensure a heat pulse
from the injected water. All tanks and heaters were installed in a container near the T02, T03
and T04 wells. A pump (Selekta HN5893) with a ﬂow of approximately 50 l/min was set in a
serial connection between the storage tank and the water heater and ﬂow was regulated down
by the capacity of the heater. Once the water had gone through the heater, the ﬂow was further
regulated by a valve on its way to the injection pipe, to ensure a uniform ﬂow. At T01, where
the tracer was injected, the ﬂow was checked using a timer and a bucket to be 3 l/min. The
ﬂow increased when the pipe was lowered into the borehole and has been calculated based on
the tracer tank dimensions and the pressure logger within to be 1.8 l/min. The ﬂow showed to
be too high for the water heater to keep the initial heat pulse of approximately 60°C, which soon
decreased and stabilised at 17°C, which was much lower than the intended 50°C. A few hours after
the initiation of the tracer test an electrical shortage caused the pump and water heater to stop
for a few minutes which only aﬀected the ﬂow shortly. Thus it was not expected to inﬂuence the
injection signiﬁcantly, considering the relatively long injection period of approximately 2 days.
Post injection, water samples were collected and EC was measured approximately 3 times per
week.
127
==PAGE:138==
(a)
(b)
Figure I.3: Water samples collected from T04 with a peristaltic pump into the sample valve. EC-meter
measuring a ﬁeld sample.
In summary details of the test setup can be viewed in the following:
Dimensions of monitoring area: 100m x 50m
Tracer type: Br−, Cl−and temperature contrasted water
Logging method: Automated data logging and periodic grab sampling of EC and temperature.
Injection volume: ≈5m3
Injection ﬂow and duration: 1.8 L/min for 46hours and approximately 40min
Injection well: T01
Dose response wells: T02, T03 and T04
Monitoring wells: M1-M5, AFV1 and AFV2
Monitoring period from 02/02/15 at 16:00 to 25/03/2015 at 11:22:00
Raw data
All raw tracer data processing was carried out in microsoft excel, and can be found in the
following ﬁles:
Tracer ﬁeld logger Niras.xlsx: Includes data from the data loggers
Ølsemagle Plot af bromid og chlorid fra Højvang.xls: Includes data from water samples
A summary of the electrical conductivities from the dose response wells is presented in Figure I.4.
The second logger dataset from the monitoring wells are plottet in Figure I.5. Lastly analysis
128
==PAGE:139==
of chloride and bromide concentrations from Højvang laboratorier A/S can be found in Table I.1.
In order to check the validity of the analysis method, it was attempted to setup an ion balance of
positive and negative ions, to check for electron neutrality, as suggested by Appelo and Postma
(1993).
This attempt was however not possible as the only data found with a full analysis
of dominating ions (Ca2+, Mg2+, Na+, K+ or Cl−, SO2−
4 , HCO−
3 , NO−
3 ) was made in 2005
and located approximately 250 m downstream of the case site, making it unreliable for any
conclusions.
Dose response wells - the ﬁrst data set
Figure I.4: Raw data of electric conductivity from the tracer injection well and dose response wells.
Continous logger data is represented by the curved lines, wheres water samples measured in the ﬁeld
and and at NIRAS laboratory are denoted by points. Note that loggers are not calibrated, and EC for
the injection well, T01, exceeds the y-axis due to scaling.
Observation wells - the second data set
As also observed in the ﬁrst set of tracer data from the T-boreholes, it was noted prior to the tracer
injection, that the logger data from T01 was signiﬁcantly higher than any of the other boreholes,
signaling that the loggers were not co-calibrated, and that this logger speciﬁcally measured a fair
amount higher than the the other loggers. Therefore in order to compare the relative tendencies
among the boreholes of the second set of tracer data, each EC-log was calibrated in reference to
the initial value of that speciﬁc hole, when the log was lowered into the borehole. Resulting in a
129
==PAGE:140==
comparative plot, where each single log starts with a zero conductivity, and progresses in time
relative to the reference value, essentially showing the tendency of the observation.
All monitoring logs were referenced to show a relative change according to the reference time:
25/02/2015 16:02:00. The speciﬁc time was chosen based on the time where all loggers with
certainty were submerged under the groundwater table.
Figure I.5: Raw data from the second set of logger data, from the monitoring wells. Note that in
order to observe the small changes in EC signal, the data is plotted relative to the loggers respective EC
measurement on the 25/02/15 16:02.
Figure I.6:
Water samples which were sent to Højvang laboratorier A/S, collected from the dose
repsonse wells in the ﬁeld through the period 5/2 to 25/2 2015. Results from the analysis are displayed
in Table I.1
130
==PAGE:141==
Table I.1: Cl−and Br−concentrations measured by Højvang laboratories A/S. Conductivity measure-
ments were measured at the NIRAS laboratory. Note that the detection limit for Br−is 0.02 mg/l
Sample ID
Chloride [mg/l]
Bromide [mg/l]
Conductivity [µS/cm]
Cl/Br ratio
Injektion
2600
<0.02
9530
-
T02, 5/2 2015
97
1.3
1260
28.5
T02, 7/2 2015
100
0.97
1236
41.2
T02, 9/2 2015
98
0.36
1230
105.6
T02, 13/2 2015
90
0.12
1207
250
T02, 25/2 2015
79
<0.02
1151
-
T03, 5/2 2015
210
28
1562
5.4
T03, 7/2 2015
110
5.4
1206
9.3
T03, 9/2 2015
88
<0.02
1131
-
T03, 13/2 2015
73
<0.02
1074
-
T03, 25/2 2015
60
<0.02
1018
-
T04, 5/2 2015
160
8.3
1456
12
T04, 7/2 2015
120
1.8
1272
33.3
T04, 9/2 2015
92
0.42
1181
76.2
T04, 13/2 2015
79
0.043
1131
441.9
T04, 25/2 2015
66
0.31
1067
19.4
Data processing
The following section is a walk-through guide of how data was processed to generate the ﬁgures
of Section 6.2.
Through this tracer test, data was processed according to the following:
1. Measure raw EC data
2. Calibrate data loggers
3. Convert EC signal to Cl concentration response
4. Deﬁning background Cl concentrations
Raw data from each single CTD diver logger was loaded onto the computer as observed in Figure
I.7.
131
==PAGE:142==
Figure I.7: Excel screenshot of raw data from the data logger located in T03.
As the diver loggers were not initially calibrated to a standard liquid with a known conduc-
tivity/concentration of ions, each logger had to be calibrated to the same Electric conductivity
meter (WTW Multi 3420 electrode model with temperature corrections). The raw EC lab mea-
surements of water samples collected in the ﬁeld are displayed in Figure I.8
laboratory measurement of ﬁt the observed conductivities from water samples taken throughout
the sampling period.
Figure I.8: Excel screen shot of EC measured in the lab from collected water samples during the logging
period. All measurements were conducted after acclimatisation to room temperature with a WTW Multi
3420 electrode model with temperature corrections.
Correlation between EC of logger and lab measurements can be observed in Figure I.9, where the
132
==PAGE:143==
linear regression line from each well is further used to calibrate the speciﬁc loggers EC accordingly.
Figure I.9: Correlation between logger and lab measurements of EC. Note that T03 and T04 show
good correlation, whereas T02 shows poor correlation R2 ≈0.70
Once the EC data logger was calibrated, concentrations of Cl and Br were measured from water
samples sent to Højvang laboratorier A/S, and were used to get a conversion equation from EC
to Cl concentration as can be observed in Figure I.10
Figure I.10: Correlation and linear ﬁt between electric conductivity and Cl−concentrations in T02,
T03 and T04.
As an example, the entire EC calibration, EC to Cl concentration and validation of measurements
has been summed in Figure I.11, for the data logger located in T03.
Black elements in the
ﬁgure represent EC and red elements represent Cl concentrations. Note the vertical downward
displacement from the raw EC data (black line) to the calibrated EC data. To sum up it was
found that converted logger data and Cl concentration measurements by Højvang were found
to show the same trend through time, and moreover almost consistently align onto the same
concentration line.
133
==PAGE:144==
Figure I.11: Data processing and validation of data logger in T03. Black nuances represent electric
conductivity noted on the left Y-axis, where the black line represents raw logger EC measurements, and
the gray shows calibrated logger EC. The red line illustrates converted EC to Cl concentrations and
are plotted on the right Y-axis, together with Højvang laboratorier A/S measured Cl concentrations for
validation.
Essentially the same process was repeated for all 3 dose response wells, and can be viewed in the
Figure I.12.
134
==PAGE:145==
Figure I.12: Calculated chloride concentrations from the CTD loggers located in wells T02-T04, com-
pared to the water samples measured by Højvang Laboratorier A/S.
The background concentrations of Cl has been diﬃcult to identify since the most recent water
sample analysis of T well Cl concentrations has been performed on the 28.11.2014, which is
before the end of the pump-and-treat and even longer before the initiation of the tracer test.
The measured concentrations of Cl and Br on that date can be seen in Table I.2. A signiﬁcant
higher Cl concentration is observed in T01, the cause being unknown.
Table I.2: Cl−and Br−background concentrations, in samples originating from the 28.11.2014, mea-
sured by Højvang laboratories A/S (NIRAS, 2015a).
Sample ID
Chloride [mg/l]
Bromide [mg/l]
T01
110
<0.02
T02
60
<0.02
T03
58
<0.02
T04
55
<0.02
Estimation of hydraulic conductivies
Hydraulic conductivities, K, for the aquifer responsible for tracer propogation were estimated
from ﬂow through a porous medium, ie. Darcys law:
vcentero fmass = vavg = Q
A = −K · dh
dL
(I.1)
135
==PAGE:146==
K = vavg
dh
dL
(I.2)
where average velocities were calculated from the arrival of the center of mass of the tracer plume.
An example assuming horizontal ﬂow with a hydraulic gradient 0.01% between T01 and T03,
observed in Figure 6.1, and Vavg of 0.04 m/h, a horizontal hydraulic conductivity of 1.02 · 10−2
m/s is obtained.
Estimation tracer direction
From Kjeldsen and Christensen (1996) a simple rough estimate of the resultant angle of the
two velocity vectors, αv, for the percolates relative density deﬁcit, ∆ρ
ρ0 , and the groundwater table
gradient, dh
dx. By not including mixing or dilution processes, and utilising the initial concentration
from the injection solution, and a approximated groundwater density of 1 g/cm3, the following
equation was setup
αv = arctanvz
vx
= arctan

∆ρ
ρ0 ·( dh
dx)

= arctan

0.0026
1·(0.0011)

= 67°
(I.3)
As no tracer was observed in M2 in the secondary logging campaign, two hypothesis have been
proposed to the direction of the tracer plume, and are represented in Figure I.13 and Figure I.14.
The ﬁrst hypothesis (coloured green in the ﬁgure) is that the tracer plume moves in a/along
permeable zones within the crushed and fractured limestone (the same layer it is injected in),
and passes above M2. Hypothesis 2 (yellow) is that the tracer sinks due to the density diﬀerence
and follows the groundwater ﬂow in the fractured limestone and hard limestone, and passes below
M2.
136
==PAGE:147==
Figure I.13:
Hypothesis of tracer propagation on a West/East transect of the Ølsemagle geology.
Hypothesis 1 (Green): the tracer propagates in/along permeable zones in the crushed limestone, and
moves above the M2 screen. Hypothesis 2 (yellow) is that the tracer sinks due to the density diﬀerence
and follows the groundwater ﬂow in the fractured and hard limestone, and passes below the M2 screen.
Modiﬁed from NIRAS (2014).
137
==PAGE:148==
Figure I.14: Hypothesis of tracer propagation on a North/South transect of the geology. Hypothesis 1
(Green): the tracer moves above the M2 screen. Hypothesis 2 (yellow) the tracer passes below the M2
screen. Modiﬁed from NIRAS (2014).
138
==PAGE:149==
Appendix J
Hydraulic heads - Data and
interpretation
Hydraulic potentials
Hydraulic heads of the Ølsemagle area have been monitored by NIRAS since the pump-and-treat
remediation was initiated in April 2013 as seen in the timeline in appendix C. All the P, M and
AFV wells, including local water supply wells have been continuously monitored for the period
23.04.2013 to 25.03.2015, see ﬁgure J.1.
Seasonal variations of ± 1 to 0.5 meter can be observed for the individual wells. The hydraulic
heads of AFV1 and AFV2 increases after pump-and-treat is stopped mid December 2014. Fur-
ther the pumping during the excavation from the 23.03.2015 to the 27.03.2015, with an extand
seen in Figure 4.2, is observed in the last data point of the time series of AFV1 and AFV2 heads
on the 25.03.2015 as a drastic decrease in hydraulic head.
139
==PAGE:150==
Figure J.1: Hydraulic heads in all wells at Ølsemagle measured from 23.04.2013 to 25.03.2015 (NIRAS,
2015a)
The hydraulic heads in ﬁgure J.1 represents the local potentials during the pump-and-treat,
which was initiated the 02.05.2013 (Balbarini and Rosenberg, 2014), and after its halt. A major
constraint for the conceptual model is the boundary hydraulic gradients and groundwater ﬂow
direction of the area. The limited extent of the observation wells for hydraulic head, as seen on
Figure 3.2, requires interpretation of the hydraulic equipotential lines from all the available data.
Originating from Køge municipality, a regional hydraulic potential map from 2012 was acquired
from Balbarini and Rosenberg (2014) and is seen in ﬁgure J.2.
140
==PAGE:151==
Figure J.2: Regional hydraulic heads based on 2012 data from Køge municipality. A zoom of the
Ølsemagle site is seen in the upper left corner including the regional potential lines for this area in 2012.
Its large spatial extent, and head data from many diﬀerent depths, makes it doubtful as an
equipotential map for our case site. It can though support the overall indication of a groundwa-
ter ﬂow from west to east, ﬂowing from inland towards the coastline. On a regional scale there
are many anthropogenic disturbances inﬂuencing the potential map, but the local zoom in the
upper left corner shows an east-northeast ﬂow direction at the Ølsemagle site in 2012, based on
regional data.
Balbarini and Rosenberg (2014) examined the hydraulic equipotential lines at a more local scale,
using observed groundwater heads in the monitoring wells compared with simulation results of
the hydraulic heads from their numerical model. The results of their model simulations using
redeﬁned boundaries and a one-layer model both before and after the initiation of pump-and-
treat in May 2013 is seen in ﬁgure J.3. The simulated potential lines do not correspond exactly
with the potentials from observed heads, which are drawn with a dashed line, but this is not of
particular relevance. The more interesting is the ﬂow direction of the observed hydraulic heads.
The potentials before the pump-and-treat will probably show similarities to the ﬂow ﬁeld today,
after the pump-and-treat has been stopped, and shows similar tendencies as observed before;
The ﬂow lines are going in an east-northeast direction.
141
==PAGE:152==
Figure J.3:
Simulated heads (solid lines) from a one-layer 2D numerical model by Balbarini and
Rosenberg (2014) compared with observed head potential lines (dashed lines) in monitoring wells before
and after initiation of pump-and-treat.
A ﬁnal external source of data that can be used as an indication on groundwater ﬂow direction
is the extent and direction of the PCE contaminant plume. It is seen on ﬁgure J.4 that a general
east wards ﬂow is seen with a drastic northeast turn of the plume further downstream from the
source area (Balbarini and Rosenberg, 2014). The propagation of the contaminant plume should
though be interpreted with care, since this represents the contaminant transport, which will not
always behave similar to the hydraulic gradient of a groundwater system.
Figure J.4: Indication of the PCE plume January 2014 based on measured PCE and TCE concentra-
tions from water samples (Balbarini and Rosenberg, 2014).
142
==PAGE:153==
Recent hydraulic head monitoring have only been performed on the near-source wells, limiting
the extent and validity of potential lines for the area. The day before the tracer injection, the
02.02.1015, all T, P and AFV wells were measured for hydraulic heads, as well as the nearest M
wells. Based on these data potential lines drawn by hand can be seen in ﬁgure J.5.
Figure J.5:
Hand drawings of potential lines based on measured hydraulic heads in the wells the
02.02.2015.
The hand drawn potential lines are subjective, as opposed to a more objective interpolation
algorithm. An attempt to use such method for representing potential lines for our data has been
applied using the kriging interpolation algorithm in ArcGIS 10. Kriging was performed using a
linear semivariogram model. The result, seen in pink, along side hand drawn potential lines, in
black, can be seen in ﬁgure J.6. The interpolated potential lines can be used as a good indicator
for the steepness of the hydraulic gradient, but is much aﬀected by the limited extent of our
hydraulic head data. Therefore more validity has been put into the hand drawn interpretations,
why these have been used to determine the numerical head boundaries. These are also seen in
ﬁgure J.6 with blue lines in the east and west end of the model boundaries indicating ﬁxed head
and no ﬂow boundaries in the north and south model boundaries indicated by green color. The
ﬁxed head boundaries have been laid along a ﬁxed potential line, while the no ﬂow boundaries
are laid along ﬂow lines, going perpendicular to the potential lines.
143
==PAGE:154==
Figure J.6:
Figure showing hand drawn potential lines (black) based on measured heads, kriging
interpolated potential lines (pink) with hydraulic heads shown for every 0.1 m and head boundary
conditions for the numerical model with ﬁxed head boundary in the east and west end of the model
boundary (blue) and no ﬂow boundary in the south and north end of the model boundaries (green). All
head data are based on measurements the 02.02.2015.
Pressure logger data
The pressure loggers from the ﬁrst logger campaign of the tracer test, installed in T01, T02, T03
and T04, have been calibrated using the barometric pressure logger in free air in the injection
tank and two hand measured data points of hydraulic head in each well. The logger data have
been corrected for barometric pressure using the following equation:
pwatercolumn = hlogger,reference +(plogger −pbarometric,T04)
(J.1)
where hlogger,re ference is the height of the installed logger above the respective vertical reference in
each well based on the DVR90 reference, found from:
hlogger,re ference = htoppipe,reference −hlogger,toppipe
(J.2)
where htoppipe,re ference is the height of the top of the well pipe above the reference and hlogger,toppipe
is the distance from the top of the well pipe to the logger.
The barometric pressure corrected data has been further corrected using a calibration curve
based on logger measurement corrected for barometric pressure vs. heads measured in the ﬁeld
as seen in ﬁgure J.7.
144
==PAGE:155==
Figure J.7:
Calibration curve for pressure logger data in the T wells during the ﬁrst tracer test
monitoring campaign.
The calibration curves are limited by the fact that only two hand measurements of the hydraulic
head were done during the ﬁrst tracer test monitoring campaign. The regressions from ﬁgure
J.7 have been used to calibrate the logger pressure data yielding time series of all four T wells’
hydraulic heads, see ﬁgure J.8. A decreasing trend is observed in all T wells, which follows each
other well over the whole time series.
145
==PAGE:156==
Figure J.8:
Calibrated hydraulic heads for T01, T02, T03 and T04 from the period 3.2.2015 to
25.2.2015. Hand measured heads are also plotted in red.
Looking into only T01 heads during and right after the injection of the tracer, 72 hrs after the
initiation, it is seen how the hydraulic head is little aﬀected by the tracer, see ﬁgure J.9. Just
when the tracer injection is initiated one point in the time series, which is logged every 2nd
minute, shows a high peak value about 7 cm higher than the neighboring data points. Since this
is only a single data point its inﬂuence on the interpretation is neglected. Right at the end of the
tracer injection period a section of the head data is signiﬁcantly lower than the rest of the time
series. Since this is where the injection tube is removed from the T01 well pipe, it is expected
that the lower head in this period is caused by the pressure logger being shifted a bit upwards
in the pipe during disturbances from terminating the tracer injection.
146
==PAGE:157==
Figure J.9: Zoom of the T01 head data time series of the ﬁrst 72 hrs after the initation of the tracer
test.
Precipitation data during the logging period
147
==PAGE:158==
Figure J.10: Precipitation data during the logging period over the greater region of sealand. Note the
low amount of precipitation during the middle of february. Data was translated from Danish Meteoro-
logical Institute (2015)
148
==PAGE:159==
Appendix K
Overview of data collected at
Ølsemalgevej 52 in 2015
Figure K.1: Geographical overview of the data logging using pressure, temperature and conductivity
loggers.
The black wells were logged during the ﬁrst logging campaign of the tracer test from the
2/2/2015 to the 25/2/2015, the gray during the second logging campaign from the 25/2/2015 to the
25/3/2015 and the white wells were not monitored using loggers.
149
==PAGE:160==
Well/Date
(2/2 (3/2 (4/2 (5/2 (6/2 (7/2 (8/2 (9/2 (10/2 (11/2 (12/2 (13/2 (14/2 (15/2 (16/2 (17/2 (18/2 (19/2 (20/2 (21/2 (22/2 (23/2 (24/2 (25/2 …………25/3
Logger
Head
?
Conductivity
Water(sample
Logger
Head
Conductivity
Water(sample
?
?
?
Logger
Head
?
Conductivity
Water(sample
?
?
?
Logger
Head
Conductivity
Water(sample
?
?
?
Logger
Head
Conductivity
Water(sample
Logger
Head
Conductivity
Water(sample
Logger
Head
Conductivity
Water(sample
Logger
Head
Conductivity
Water(sample
Logger
Head
Conductivity
Water(sample
Logger
Head
Conductivity
Water(sample
Logger
Head
Conductivity
Water(sample
Logger
Head
Conductivity
Water(sample
M6
Water(sample
M7
Water(sample
M8
Water(sample
M9
Water(sample
M10
Water(sample
M11
Water(sample
M12
Water(sample
M13
Water(sample
M14
Water(sample
M15
Water(sample
M16
Water(sample
M17
Water(sample
M18
Water(sample
M19
Water(sample
Head
?
Water(sample
Head
?
Water(sample
Head
?
Water(sample
P2
P3
T1
P1
T2
T3
T4
AFV1
AFV2
AFV3
M1
M2
M3
M4
M5
Figure K.2: Overview of data collected at Ølsemaglevej 52 during the tracer test ﬁeld campaign in
early 2015. Dates of data are noted as well as the collection method using data loggers for pressure,
temperature and electric conductivity (Logger), manual head measurements using a well sounder (Head),
conductivity measurements from water samples using an electrode in NIRAS lab facilities (Conductivity)
and analysis of chlorinated solvent, Cl and Br from Højvang laboratories A/S (Water sample). The
question marks denotes data known to exist, but which could not be documented.
150
==PAGE:161==
Appendix L
MiHpt
MiHpt proﬁles: Data interpretation
During the initial remediation process of the PCE contamination in 2012, NIRAS conducted 6
MiHpt probings within a 10-20 radius of the source area. Drillings were carried out with a GEO-
Probe reaching down to the top of the harder bryozoan limestone at depths of 5.5 to 7.5 m.b.t.
(NIRAS, 2012b). The main probe loggings from the campaign are setup in a 20m proﬁle from
north to south intercepting the original contaminant source area, and can be found in Figure L.1
in Appendix L.
In the MiHpt probings from terrain down to 2-3 m.b.t. the hydraulic resistivity was seen to
greatly vary from 50 kPa to 200 kPa within 10 cm of depth increment. This high variance of
resistivity within a short depth increment indicates high glacially disturbed lithology. Within
the top 3 m.b.t. hydraulic resistance was found to be in the higher end, indicating glacial silt to
moraine deposits, which concurs with the observations found throughout the 2015 excavation.
Below the 3 m.b.t., resistance clearly drops down to almost zero, signalling the start of crushed
limestone with high hydraulic conductivity. This trend continues down to the bottom of each
log, only disrupted by small ﬂuctuations of higher resistance every 1-1.5 m, possibly due to less
conductive ﬂint nodules/layers or sludge lenses. The small ﬂuctuations in resistivity fall within
a 0.2 m range between each log, revealing a sense of resistivity continuity between the logs.
This continuity can not necessarily be ascribed to continuos ﬂint layers, as the site is highly
glacially disturbed, but the relatively close spacing between the logs does give some insight of
less permeable zones. Although the HPT method calculates hydraulic conductivity based on a
simple empirical model, which should not be used directly, it does give a quantiﬁable estimate,
which is approximately 20-30 m/day in the depth of fractured limestone (NIRAS, 2012b)(McCall
et al., 2014).
151
==PAGE:162==
Figure L.1:
6 MiHpt hydraulic resistance logs located on a 20m proﬁle from North to South, intercepting the PCE contaminant source in
Ølsemagle. Logs reveal high hydraulic resistance in the top 2-3m.b.t. indicating glacial silt or moraine deposits represented by the orange line.
Resistivity drops below the orange line indicating the start of the crushed limestone zone. Note that the number labels (1),(2) and (3) seem to
show increased resistivity in the same depth, which could represent a sense of continuity from either ﬂint nodules or sludge lenses. Data is modiﬁed
from NIRAS (2012b)
152
==PAGE:163==
Appendix M
Parameters used in Comsol for
the Ølsemagle model
Parameter'ID
expression
unit
Description
T01_flow
3e10^,6
m3/s
injection6in6T01
T01_area_screen
2.9456
m2
surf.6area6of6T01
T01_radius_screen
0.1524
m
radius6T01
Tracer_conc
2.6 kg/m3
Tracer6cl6conc.
T01_screen_h
3
m
Screen6height6T01
aL
1
m
longitudinal6dispersion
aT
0.1
m
horizontoal6dispersion
aV
0.01
m
vertical6dispersion
vx
,K/n*hx
m/s
Velocity,x
vy
,K/n*hy
m/s
Velocity,y
vz
,K/n*hz
m/s
Velocity,z
absv
sqrt(vx^2+vy^2+vz^2+eps)
m/s
dispersion
Dxx
(alphaL*vx^2+alphaT*vy^2+alphaV*vz^2)/absv
m2/s
dispersion
Dxy
(alphaL,alphaT)*vx*vy/absv
m2/s
dispersion
Dxz
(alphaL,alphaV)*vx*vz/absv
m2/s
dispersion
Dyy
(alphaT*vx^2+alphaL*vy^2+alphaV*vz^2)/absv
m2/s
dispersion
Dyz
(alphaL,alphaV)*vy*vz/absv
m2/s
dispersion
Dzz
(alphaT*vx^2+alphaT*vy^2+alphaL*vz^2)/absv
m2/s
dispersion
H1
5.6
m
west6head6bnd.
H2
5.18
m
east6head6bnd.
R
1+rhob*kd/n
retardation
kd
0 m3/kg
sorption6coef.
Dw
6.23E,10
m2/s
diffusion6coef.6Water
Dm
tau*Dw
m2/s
effective6diff.6Coef.
Figure M.1: Fixed parameters used in Comsol for the Ølsemagle model
153
==PAGE:164==
==PAGE:165==
Appendix N
NIRAS borehole proﬁle journals
155
==PAGE:166==
Geo- & Miljøboringer
T01
PTY
PTY
GeoGIS2005 2.3.47 - sql - PSTGDK - 02-12-2014 11:11:14
Ølsemaglevej 50-52, Ll. Skensved
214136
14.11.14
6'' foret snegleboring
Kote
(m)
Dybde
(m)
1: ø63 +8,22
1
10
100
1000
PID (ppm)
Boremetode:
Koordinatsystem:
(A): Prøve sendt til analyselaboratorium
-  : ingen mislugt
*  : svag mislugt
** : middel mislugt
***: kraftig mislugt
Borejournal
Sag:
Boret af:
Boredato:
Rev.:
DGU-nr.:
Boring:
Udarb. af:
Kontrol:
Godkendt:
Dato:
Forsøgsresultater
Jordart   Karakterisering
Filtersætning
Geologi
Prøve
Nr.
Aflejring
Alder
Lugt
Misfarv.
s. 1/1
+1
+2
+3
+4
+5
+6
+7
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
ca. +7,72 m
20141128
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Fy
Re
FYLD: MULD, leret, brun
Fy
Re
FYLD: SAND, mellem, sv. gruset, grå
Fy
Re
FYLD: SAND         -   -
Fy
Re
FYLD: SAND         -   -
Fy
Re
FYLD: SAND         -   -
Fy
Re
FYLD: SAND         -   -
Fy
Re
FYLD: GRUS, (ærtesten), grå
Fy
Re
FYLD: GRUS         -   -
Fy
Re
FYLD: GRUS         -   -
Gl
Gc
KALK, knust, sv. leret, FLINT, våd, gulligbrun
Gl
Gc
KALK, knust, sv. leret, FLINT, våd, gullighvid
Gl
Gc
KALK         -   -
Ma
Da
KALK: FLINT, hård, gullighvid
==PAGE:167==
Geo- & Miljøboringer
T02
PTY
PTY
GeoGIS2005 2.3.47 - sql - PSTGDK - 02-12-2014 11:11:17
Ølsemaglevej 50-52, Ll. Skensved
214136
14.11.14
6'' foret snegleboring
Kote
(m)
Dybde
(m)
1: ø63 +8,00
1
10
100
1000
PID (ppm)
Boremetode:
Koordinatsystem:
(A): Prøve sendt til analyselaboratorium
-  : ingen mislugt
*  : svag mislugt
** : middel mislugt
***: kraftig mislugt
Borejournal
Sag:
Boret af:
Boredato:
Rev.:
DGU-nr.:
Boring:
Udarb. af:
Kontrol:
Godkendt:
Dato:
Forsøgsresultater
Jordart   Karakterisering
Filtersætning
Geologi
Prøve
Nr.
Aflejring
Alder
Lugt
Misfarv.
s. 1/1
+1
+2
+3
+4
+5
+6
+7
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
ca. +7,50 m
20141128
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Fy
Re
FYLD?: MULD, leret, brun
Fl
Sg
LER, siltet, sv. sandet, morænepræget, gulbrun
Gl
Gc
MORÆNESAND, siltet, kalkkorn, stenet, gråbrun
Gl
Gc
MORÆNESAND         -   -
Gl
Gc
KALK, sv. sandet, morænepræget, FLINT, gullighvid
Gl
Gc
KALK, knust, FLINT, våd, gullighvid
Gl
Gc
KALK, st. knust, enk. flint, hvid
Gl
Gc
KALK, knust, sandslire, hvid
Gl
Gc
KALK, knust, hvid
Gl
Gc
KALK         -   -
Gl
Gc
KALK, knust, mange flint, hvid
Ma
Da
KALK: FLINT, hård, gullighvid
==PAGE:168==
Geo- & Miljøboringer
T03
PTY
PTY
GeoGIS2005 2.3.47 - sql - PSTGDK - 02-12-2014 11:11:21
Ølsemaglevej 50-52, Ll. Skensved
214136
14.11.14
6'' foret snegleboring
Kote
(m)
Dybde
(m)
1: ø63 +7,87
1
10
100
1000
PID (ppm)
Boremetode:
Koordinatsystem:
(A): Prøve sendt til analyselaboratorium
-  : ingen mislugt
*  : svag mislugt
** : middel mislugt
***: kraftig mislugt
Borejournal
Sag:
Boret af:
Boredato:
Rev.:
DGU-nr.:
Boring:
Udarb. af:
Kontrol:
Godkendt:
Dato:
Forsøgsresultater
Jordart   Karakterisering
Filtersætning
Geologi
Prøve
Nr.
Aflejring
Alder
Lugt
Misfarv.
s. 1/1
+1
+2
+3
+4
+5
+6
+7
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
ca. +7,37 m
20141128
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
-
-
-
-
(*)
(*)
-
-
-
-
-
-
Fl
Sg
MULD, leret, brun
Fl
Sg
LER, siltet, sv. sandet, stenet, morænepræget, gulbrun
Gl
Gc
KALK, sandet, FLINT, morænepræget, gullighvid
Gl
Gc
KALK         -   -
Gl
Gc
KALK         -   -
Gl
Gc
KALK, knust, sandslirer, FLINT
Gl
Gc
KALK, st. knust, FLINT, våd, hvid
Gl
Gc
KALK         -   -
Gl
Gc
KALK         -   -
Gl
Gc
KALK         -   -
Gl
Gc
KALK: FLINT, hård, (blok), hvid
Gl
Gc
KALK, knust, FLINT, hvid
Gl
Gc
KALK         -   -
==PAGE:169==
Geo- & Miljøboringer
T04
PTY
PTY
GeoGIS2005 2.3.47 - sql - PSTGDK - 02-12-2014 11:11:24
Ølsemaglevej 50-52, Ll. Skensved
214136
14.11.14
6'' foret snegleboring
Kote
(m)
Dybde
(m)
1: ø63 +7,92
1
10
100
1000
PID (ppm)
Boremetode:
Koordinatsystem:
(A): Prøve sendt til analyselaboratorium
-  : ingen mislugt
*  : svag mislugt
** : middel mislugt
***: kraftig mislugt
Borejournal
Sag:
Boret af:
Boredato:
Rev.:
DGU-nr.:
Boring:
Udarb. af:
Kontrol:
Godkendt:
Dato:
Forsøgsresultater
Jordart   Karakterisering
Filtersætning
Geologi
Prøve
Nr.
Aflejring
Alder
Lugt
Misfarv.
s. 1/1
0
+1
+2
+3
+4
+5
+6
+7
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
1
ca. +7,42 m
20141128
PID
PID
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
-
--
12
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Fl
Sg
MULD, leret, brun
FLINT, fræsning i blok
Fl
Sg
LER, sandet, st. kalkh., gulbrun - hvid
Gl
Gc
KALK, sandet, FLINT, morænepræget, gullighvid
Gl
Gc
KALK         -   -
Gl
Gc
KALK         -   -
Gl
Gc
KALK, knust, FLINT, gråhvid
Gl
Gc
KALK         -   -
Gl
Gc
KALK         -   -
Gl
Gc
KALK         -   -
Gl
Gc
KALK         -   -
Gl
Gc
KALK         -   -
ingen prøve
ingen prøve
Ma
Da
KALK: FLINT, hård, gullighvid
==PAGE:170==
Afværgeboringer
==PAGE:171==
==PAGE:172==
==PAGE:173==
==PAGE:174==
Pejle- og moniteringsboringer
==PAGE:175==
==PAGE:176==
==PAGE:177==
==PAGE:178==
==PAGE:179==
==PAGE:180==
==PAGE:181==
==PAGE:182==
==PAGE:183==
==PAGE:184==
==PAGE:185==
==PAGE:186==
==PAGE:187==
==PAGE:188==
==PAGE:189==
==PAGE:190==
==PAGE:191==
==PAGE:192==
==PAGE:193==
==PAGE:194==
==PAGE:195==
==PAGE:196==
==PAGE:197==
