==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
Experimental and Numerical Study of 
Mixed Mode I/III Crack Propagation
Lasse Specht Jensen
February 2015
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Summary
The main purpose of this master thesis is to investigate plate tearing including ductile
fracture in aluminum and how crack propagation takes place in a mixed mode I and mode
III loading (tension and torsion). A special crack propagation phenomenon is seen, where
two shear bands form in front of the crack tip in the cross-section. The crack grows in one
of the 45◦shear band and along crack propagation it changes to the opposite 45◦shear
band. This is investigated with mixed mode I/III loading experiments using double edge
notched tensile specimens (DENT specimens) in aluminum 6082. In this 6xxx-series, heat
treatment can change the material's yield strength, hardening behaviour and nal failure.
To acquire more insight in the heat treatment process, the heat treatment is carried out
both in a conventional oven and in an oil bath. The dierence in treatment is examined by
hardness measurements in the cross section of the specimen. The natural age hardening
of aluminum 6082 is also examined by hardness measurement which was found to happen
quickly.
A numerical model is set up based on the modelling of the cross section in the DENT
specimen. The model applies Gurson damage to simulate a porous material, which is
the case in aluminum. This Gurson model simulates micromechanical behaviour as void
nucleation, growth and coalescence. It is further combined with the Power law hardening.
A correlation is found between crack propagation direction, rotational direction, and the
torsional load in both the experiments and numerical analysis.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Resumé
Målet for denne kandidatafhandling er at undersøge duktile brud i aluminium samt hvor-
dan revnedannelse tager sig ud i en kombination af træk- og torsionsbelastning (mode
I og mode III). I litteraturen ses et fænomen, hvor revnen vokser i et 45◦tværbånd og
langs revnedannelse skifter til det modsatte 45◦tværbånd. Dette belyses i afhandlingen
gennem kombinationsbelastningen I/III, hvor der er gennemført eksperimenter med dob-
beltkantrevneemner (DENT-emner) i aluminiumslegeringen 6082. I denne 6xxx-serie er
det med varmebehandling muligt at ændre materialets ydespænding, hærdningsforløb
samt udfaldet for endeligt brud. For at opnå mere indsigt i varmebehandlingsprocessen er
den udført både i en almindelig ovn og i et oliebad, hvorefter forskellen på behandling i
ovn og oliebad er undersøgt ved hårdhedsmålinger i tværsnittet af DENT-emnet. Den na-
turlige modningshærdning af aluminium 6082 er ligeledes undersøgt ved hårdhedsmåling.
Denne modningshærdning har vist sig at ske hurtigt.
Der er opstillet en numerisk model, som tager udgangspunkt i modellering af tværsnittet i
DENT-emnet. Den gør brug af Gurson skadesmodellen til at simulere et porøst materiale,
hvilket er tilfældet i aluminium. Denne Gurson model simulerer mikromekanisk opførsel
som hulrumsnukleation, udvikling og sammenvoksning. Den er yderligere kombineret med
Power law hærdning.
Der er fundet en sammenhæng mellem revnedannelsesretning, rotationsretning og den
torsionelle belastning i både eksperimenter og numeriske analyser.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This master thesis is prepared at the department of Mechanical Engineering, section of
Solid Mechanics, at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) in fullment of the
requirements for acquiring a Master in Science (M.Sc.) equivalent to 30 ECTS. The thesis
has been supervised by Associate Professor Kim Lau Nielsen and Associate Professor
Christian Frithiof Niordson. The work is carried out from September 1st to February 1st.
I would specially like to thank Associate Professor Kim Lau Nielsen for help and guidance
throughout the diculties encountered during the present study, and further for his quick
and useful response on my questions. The technical sta at DTU has been helpful in pro-
duction of DENT specimens and assistance for tensile (mode I) testing. For guidance in
macro and micro hardness testing, a thanks to Steen S. Munch, Senior Metallographer at
DTU-MEK. The testing facilities at DTU Risø has kindly been presented by Steen Ras-
mussen, Development Engineer, and Professor Povl Brøndsted. During all tensile/torsion
testing, Steen Rasmussen has been very helpful. Finally, I would like to thank my dear
family and friends for their help, support and patience during the last 5 months.
Kgs. Lyngby, February 2015
Lasse Specht Jensen
==PAGE:8==
vi
Contents
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Resumé
iii
Preface
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Research Question
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.1.1
Experimental Study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.1.2
Numerical Study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Theory
7
2.1
Aluminum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Heat Treatment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Fracture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3.1
Ductile Fracture Micromechanisms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4
Plasticity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.4.1
Gurson Damage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.5
Finite Element Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3
Experimental study
25
3.1
DENT Specimens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2
Basis of Heat Treatment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2.1
Oven Observation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2.2
Quenching of Large DENT specimens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.3
Basis of Hardness Testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.3.1
Natural Ageing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
3.4
Cross-Section Variation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.5
Basis of Tensile/Torsion Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.6
Initial Mode I Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.7
Mixed Mode I/III Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.7.1
Mode III Output In Mode I Loading
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.7.2
Mixed Mode I/III, Study Rotation Rate
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
3.7.3
Apply Mode III at Initial Plastic Deformation . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
3.7.4
Second Rotation at Initial Plastic Deformation . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
3.7.5
Second Rotation at Initial Crack Propagation
. . . . . . . . . . . .
46
3.7.6
Quick Secondary Rotation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
3.7.7
Mode III Output In Mode I Loading: Large DENT Specimens . . .
49
3.7.8
Mixed Mode I/III Loading: Large DENT Specimens
. . . . . . . .
50
3.8
Tomography Scanning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4
Numerical study
53
4.1
2D Plane Strain Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.1.1
Imperfections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.1.2
Gurson Damage Modelling in ANSYS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
4.2
Mode I Loading . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
4.2.1
Model Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
4.2.2
First Shear Band Formation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
4.2.3
Parameter Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
4.3
Mixed Mode I/III Loading . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
5
Discussion and Concluding Remarks
65
Bibliography
68
A Timetable and Progress Description
71
B Technical drawing DENT specimen
75
C Experimental Plans and DENT Specimen Photographs
77
D Hardness Measurements
85
E Input script for ANSYS
87
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Aluminum is a commonly used material in many production companies within the area of
aerospace, car, ship engineering etc. It has a good strength to weight ratio and it is often
used in lightweight constructions. Another benet is a good corrosion resistance. This
master thesis deals with plate tearing in aluminum using a mixed mode I/III loading. It
conducts an experimental study as well as a numerical study. Experimental work is per-
formed at DTU Lyngby and DTU Risø. With enhanced knowledge regarding mechanical
behaviour and failure mode, products and structures can be optimized even better.
There are several mechanisms taking place in a loaded ductile material leading to failure.
Focussing on the hardening behaviour, necking will appear in the weakest region, when
the load exceeds the materials ultimate tensile strength. As the material gets thinner
and thinner, the load carrying capacity decreases and nally, the material fails showing a
specic failure mode.
The failure mode depends on material properties together with loading condition. The
following failure modes exists: cup-cone, cup-cup and slant. In cup-cone failure a triaxial
stress state is seen upon necking in the center from where the crack propagates. This will
create a plateau like mid area. As the crack grows closer to the edges, nal failure happens
at 45◦in relation to the tensile axis dening the cup and cone. The same mechanisms
exists in cup-cup failure. The slanted failure exhibits crack growth in a 45◦angle from a
cross-sectional view, see Figure 1.1. The crack grows along one of the shear bands all way
==PAGE:12==
2
Introduction
Figure 1.1: Cross-sectional view. Appearance of two shear bands at 45◦.
through the thickness. A special case is seen, where the crack ips from propagation in
one shear band and continues in the other. Several ips can take place. So basically, the
slanted crack propagates along one of the shear bands, and if it ips, the secondary shear
band becomes active and the crack will continue to grow there.
The ipping behaviour has been observed in both edge crack specimens (ECS) as well
as center crack specimens (CCS) both produced from a normal strength steel plate (see
Simonsen and Törnqvist (2004)). Moreover, they have shown the ipping in an aluminum
5083 for an edge crack specimen (ECS), as shown in Figure 1.2. It is clear along crack
growth, that the crack ips from growing in one shear band to the other. The active shear
band changes multiple times with a more or less constant distance between the ips. All
experiments were carried out in mode I loading.
To study this specic failure mode an aluminum 6082 is considered in the following.
Aluminum alloys are found in many dierent variations. The 6xxx-series is chosen since
it is possible to heat treat fairly easy and common to these are, that a heat treatment
treatment changes the material properties due to the forming of precipitates. Hence, only
the yield stress and hardening behaviour will vary according to the specic heat treatment
parameters, while the voids and Young's modulus cannot be changed from heat treating
the material. This will limit the number of parameters to be changed. The practical
heat treatment process is studied using both air and oil as articial ageing medium, and
hardness proles are carried out across the thickness to study consistency, see Section 3.4.
==PAGE:13==
3
(a)
(b)
Figure 1.2: Flipping behaviour in ECS under mode I loading, material: (a) aluminum
5083 (b) normal strength steel (NS steel), Simonsen and Törnqvist (2004).
Initial experiments will handle mode I loading, nding a specic articial ageing interval
creating a slant fracture. Next step is looking at a mixed mode I/III loading, to investigate
how it will inuence the failure mode. Controlled crack growth is studied in relation to
the active shear band and mode III loading direction using the combined loading. The
complete experimental study is found in Chapter 3.
The materials aluminum 1050A and normal strength steel in mode I loading is studied by
El-Naaman and Nielsen (2013) where an asymmetry near the crack tip is discussed. The
asymmetry is said to induce slight mode III loading of the crack tip, even though it is
only loaded in mode I. It should be noted, that no data for mode III are obtained. Having
this in mind, it is even more interesting looking at a combined mode I/III loading.
The second part of the present study carries out a numerical model to simulate ductile
failure, which is found in Chapter 4. The numerical model is created using the commercial
available nite element software ANSYS. The entire double edge notched tensile specimen
(DENT specimen) is not modelled, instead a 2D cross-section is applied. The cross-section
is modelled some distance into the plate, looking from the initial crack tip. The 2D model
will help computations by limiting the total number of degrees of freedom compared to a
full 3D model. Anyhow, it is by no mean trivial to model the case of ductile fracture as the
problem is highly non-linear in terms of material behaviour and geometry. Plane strain
conditions are assumed for modelling in front of the crack tip. Aluminum is known in the
category of ductile materials and will experience void nucleation, growth and coalescence.
The Gurson damage model handles these phenomena and is taken into account to help
==PAGE:14==
4
Introduction
describing the micromechanical behaviour. The damage model is combined with isotropic
hardening behaviour using the Power law hardening model. Using isotropic hardening,
the yield surface expands in the plastic region. Gurson damage has the opposite eect on
the yield surface. It is supposed to weaken the material.
All experimental and numerical work in the present study are carried out in a period
of 5 months. A timetable with the initial plan and updated activities can be found in
Appendix A together with a progress description.
1.1
Research Question
Aluminum is a porous material and dicult to model including void growth, nucleation
and coalescence. In a loaded ductile specimen, the material starts to neck upon its ultimate
tensile strength. Two shear bands form upon the necking. At a point one of the shear
bands will dominate and crack growth initiates along this shear bands. The phenomenon
where the crack ips is recently discovered. At ipping, an instability among the shear
bands is seen, the crack growth continues along the other. At several ips, the two shear
bands changes to be active multiple times. What triggers this ipping behaviour is not
fully understood and a combined mode I/III loading will give more insight to the subject.
The aim is to get a better understanding of ductile fracture in thin sheet metals and
contribute to the research herein.
1.1.1
Experimental Study
Experiments are carried out in a tensile and a tensil/torsion testing machine, where the
torsion corresponds to mode III loading. The fracture outcome is highly depended on the
material properties.
Double edge notched tensile specimens (DENT specimens) are used in the experimental
study. A sketch of the specimens can be found in Figure 1.3. The DENT specimens are
produced in aluminum 6082, being a heat treatable aluminum series.
Heat treatment of aluminum requires three important steps: solution treatment, quench-
==PAGE:15==
1.1 Research Question
5
Figure 1.3: Double edge notched tensile specimen (DENT specimen).
ing and precipitation hardening. A heat treatment process changes the yield stress and
hardening behaviour in aluminum. As an outcome, the specimens are desired to be as
homogeneous as possible. The specimens are to be articially precipitation hardened in
both air and oil. This is to investigate the dierence between heat transferring mediums.
The objectives for the experimental study are:
1. Heat treatment of DENT specimens to obtain specic material behaviour
2. Investigation of cross-section to study the dierence regarding articial ageing in
dierent mediums
3. Study heat eect of dierent heat treatments on the material hardness and obtain
slant fracture in mode I loading
4. Apply mixed mode I/III loading and investigate the inuence of the mixed loading
1.1.2
Numerical Study
In the numerical study, a slant failure is desired together with a ip indication.
The
modelling is important for capturing the failure mode. A geometrical perfect model will
not capture the failure mode, it will instead depend on computational errors. Geometrical
imperfections are a way to provoke it in a certain direction. The numerical model uses
a 2D plane strain model of the cross-section in front of the crack tip. It will initially
simulate mode I loading looking at material behaviour including plasticity with Power
law hardening, Gurson damage and model convergence. And nally, mode III loading will
be applied. The objectives for the numerical study are:
==PAGE:16==
6
Introduction
1. Create suitable geometry with imperfections for analysis of the cross-section
2. Implement plasticity model and Gurson damage with void growth, nucleation and
coalescence
3. Show slant fracture in mode I loading and
(a) Create mesh convergence study
(b) Carry out a parameter study
4. Apply mixed mode I/III loading and study its inuence on the localization of plastic
ow and damage
The present study is to be thoroughly described in order for others to reproduce respec-
tively, the experiments and/or the numerical model. Observations and ndings will be
noted to help easier reproduction.
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 2
Theory
Specic theory and knowledge is used throughout this master thesis in the study of exper-
iments and the numerical modelling. This chapter covers among others fracture, including
ductile fracture, plastic material behaviour, Gurson damage, aluminum properties for heat
treatment and nite element analysis. Some sections are more related to certain aspects
of the thesis others. The sections Aluminum and Heat Treatment are strongly related
to the experimental study whereas the section Finite Element Analysis is related to the
numerical study.
Theory is presented to the extent of tting this specic master thesis picking out relevant
bits, not covering everything within e.g. fracture or nite element theory.
2.1
Aluminum
The research in this master thesis covers ductile fracture in aluminum. The double edge
notched tensile specimens (DENT specimens) are machined from an aluminum plate, to
be used in the experiments. Aluminium is often preferred in lightweight constructions
and places where high corrosion resistance is needed. It has its limits in high tempera-
ture constructions as the melting point is below 700◦C. Specic melting temperature is
depended on the chosen alloy.
==PAGE:18==
8
Theory
Aluminum has the face-centered cubic crystal structure (FCC), whereas steel for instance
has the body-centered cubic crystal structure (BCC). FFC crystal structures are known to
be ductile and easy deformable due to the atoms alignment. Aluminum can in general be
placed in two categories; cast or wrought. Since the test specimens will be produced from
rolled plates, the focus will be on wrought aluminum alloys. They are specied in 8 series,
dened in numbers starting from the 1xxx-series, 2xxx-series, and so on, until the 8xxx-
series. The 1xxx-series is the most basic one and contains all most only pure aluminium.
Within each series the composition of elements varies. In Table 2.1 an overview can be
found. Regarding whrought aluminum, attention should be payed to the rolling direction.
Rolled aluminum shows an anisotropic material behaviour, and it is important to have in
mind how it is loaded according to the rolling direction. And further, that the specimens
are produced in the same way.
Aluminum is used chosen for its ductile material properties and possibilities for additional
treatment. Heat treatment will change the behaviour in a specic alloy, which is explained
in the following section. The specic alloy should be chosen carefully, since not every
series have the possibility for heat treatment. Heat treatable series are (Davis, 1993):
2xxx-series, 6xxx-series and 7xxx-series.
In the 2xxx-series, magnesium is often the secondary addition to copper. The yield
strength increases in a heat treatment process, but loss in elongation is seen and tensile
strength is not that great. The corrosion resistance is neither good compared to other alu-
minum series. Regarding manufacturing, it has limited weldability, but the machinability
is good.
The 6xxx-series with silicon and magnesium in the right amounts will form Mg2Si,
Table 2.1: List of Aluminum series and the main alloyed element(s).
Aluminum series
Main alloyed element(s)
1xxx
Pure Al
2xxx
Cu
3xxx
Mn
4xxx
Si
5xxx
Mg
6xxx
Mg/Si
7xxx
Zn
8xxx
Li
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Heat Treatment
9
making alloys heat treatable and stronger. Though, they do not have the same strength
as some 2xxx and 7xxx alloys, not even in a heat treated condition. The 6xxx alloys have
their benets in manufacturing, showing good performance in both welding, forming and
machining. Corrosion resistance is good.
Alloys in the 7xxx-series are known to be the strongest. Adding magnesium besides zinc
makes the potential for heat treatment. It is often used in high stress applications. The
yield strength can be up to 4 times higher than pure aluminum.
In this project the aluminum 6082 is chosen, which is a highly popular alloy in the
aerospace and automotive industry. It has the heat treatment possibilities and it is a
commonly available series on the market. Even though it is a specic alloy in the 6xxx-
series, the alloying elements can vary from one maufactureres to other. Alloying elements
and composition range for aluminum 6082 can be found in Table 2.2.
2.2
Heat Treatment
There are 3 important steps in the heat treatment process: solution heat treatment,
quenching and precipitation hardening, as seen in Figure 2.1. Each step is specic regard-
ing temperature and time. The purpose of the heat treatment is to change the material
properties: yield strength and hardening behaviour. In general applications, a stronger
material is desired. The strength is increased by formation of second phase particles in the
original matrix (Callister and Rethwisch, 2007). The newly formed particles are named
precipitates. All mechanisms happen at a micro scale.
Table 2.2: Heat treatable aluminum 6082 and alloying elements (CES EDUPack, 2014).
Element
Aluminum 6082 [wt%]
Al
95.2-98.3
Cr
0-0.25
Cu
0-0.1
Fe
0-0.5
Mg
0.9
Mn
0.4-1
Si
0.7-1.3
Ti
0-0.1
Zn
0-0.2
==PAGE:20==
10
Theory
Figure 2.1: Steps in the heat treatment process: (a) solution heat treatment (b) quench-
ing (c) precipitation hardening
Solution heat treatment is about creating a pure α structure. From the hypothetical
phase diagram in Figure 2.2, the α structure is obtained from heating to the temperature
T1 and keeping it at that level for an adequate time. Every θ particle must be dissolved.
The structure is now homogeneous with the alloying element evenly distributed among the
aluminum atoms. To maintain the α structure, rapidly cooling is needed, else precipitates
starts to form. The state is a supersaturated solid solution and is hence unstable (Brooks,
1991)
Quenching is the fast rate cooling process.
A material is often quenched in water.
A ow in the water reservoir will prevent steam pockets from occurring on the metal
surface, cooling in steam is more similar to air-cooling. The most important temperature
cooling range is from 450◦C to 200◦C, where the maximum precipitate grow rate occurs
(Sjölander and Seifeddine, 2010). This temperature range must be passed as quickly as
possible. Precipitation growth is avoided at a fast cooling rate.
Precipitation or age hardening, both covering the same subject, is the nal step in
the complete heat treatment process. Precipitation hardening can be performed either
naturally (at room temperature) or articially. For articial hardening, the temperature
is elevated, normally in the range from 150◦C - 210◦C for a suitable time. Micromechanical
behaviour happens faster in the high temperature range. In Figure 2.1 and Figure 2.2 the
articial hardening temperature is T2.
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Heat Treatment
11
Figure 2.2: Hypothetical phase diagram. T1 showing the solution treatment tempera-
ture and T2 the precipitation hardening temperature.
Precipitation hardening takes place below the solvus line and must contain a certain
amount of alloying element referring to X % in Figure 2.2. Hardening is not possible
for small amounts alloying element corresponding to lower-left from the solvus line. In
the two-phase region, α + θ, the second phase precipitates θ starts to nucleate and grow.
The precipitates creates the increase in mechanical strength by dislocations in the crystal
structure. Over ageing can occur if the temperature is kept for too long. The strength
will peak at a certain time and decrease afterwards. For some alloys two peaks are seen.
An aluminum 6082 plate will always be in either T4 (naturally hardened) or T6 (articially
hardened) condition from a commercial manufacturer. When doing the solution treatment,
the material will be 'reset' to its original α condition, without any inuence of the previous
ageing treatment. It is possible to go over this process multiple times. As mentioned
earlier, the heat treatment will change the yield strength and hardening behaviour in the
material. It is the clever feature using aluminum 6082, where dierent material properties
can be obtained from the same basic material.
Further, it is in the category of high
strength aluminum, not showing severe necking, and thereby giving better opportunities
for showing dierent failure modes than the classic cup-cone fracture.
==PAGE:22==
12
Theory
2.3
Fracture
Fracture has always existed in structures and failure by fracture is a critical problem.
Cracks will propagate in structures either from a high single load or cyclic loads causing
fatigue failure.
This section handles the single load case. Fracture occurs in high stress concentrations,
when a material is loaded upon its ultimate tensile strength. How the fracture occurs
and develops is dependent on the specic material, the corresponding material behaviour,
and the applied load case. An increasingly loaded specimen will follow a curve having
an elastic and a plastic region. A ductile material experiences a hardening behaviour,
whereas a brittle is dierent.
It will experience very little or no plastic deformation.
Micromechanical behaviour has an important role for plastic development in a ductile
material including void growth, nucleation and coalescence. It is further explained in the
following section (2.3.1)
In general fracture mechanics 3 loading modes are dened: (I) opening, (II) in-plane
shear and (III) out-of-plane shear. They are graphically shown in Figure 2.3. Pure mode
I loading and mixed mode I/III loading is handled in the experimental and numerical
study.
In plate tearing, the fracture can physically turn out in dierent ways called fracture
modes. The cup-cone fracture is the most known one for a specimen in mode I loading.
Other fracture modes are cup-cup and slanted. The dierent fracture modes are shown
in Figure 2.4. In the most extreme case of ductile fracture, the material necks down to
a single point before separating into two parts as in Figure 2.4 (a). It is seen in very
high purity materials, but most materials have some degree of impurity.
In cup-cone
and cup-cup failure, large plastic deformations are seen before nal failure. The fracture
Figure 2.3: Loading modes. From left, Mode I: Opening, Mode II: In-plane shear and
Mode III: Out-of-plane shear (Anderson, 2005).
==PAGE:23==
2.3 Fracture
13
Figure 2.4: Fracture modes: (a) severe necking in highly ductile and pure materials (b)
cup-cone fracture (c) cup-cup fracture (d) slant fracture.
propagates initially from the center of the material, in a plane perpendicular to the loading
direction where voids nucleate, grow, and coalesce. The crack growth propagates towards
the edges and shear bands form in the outer parts holding two pieces together. Final
fracture takes place in forming shear bands giving the specic shape in the outer region
of the specimen.
The slant failure mode is a little dierent from the others. For instance, cup-cone failure
has two dominant processes, high center void formation perpendicular to the loading direc-
tion and nal shear band failure, whereas slant failure only experiences crack propagation
in a shear band.In slant failure, two shear bands starts to form when the material passes
som way upon necking. The shear bands will be in an angle of ± 45◦in a cross-sectional
view as shown in the Introduction, Figure 1.1. Looking at a microscopic level, voids starts
to grow faster in the shear bands (Anderson, 2005). As the load increases and the voids
grow bigger and coalesce it results in failure in one of the shear bands. Normally, the
voids grows faster in the area around a crack tip and fracture will thereby initiate here.
The slanted failure occurring in one of the shear bands upon necking in either ± 45◦. An
unstable behaviour can occur in the shear bands during crack propagation. One shear
band takes over from the other, resulting in a ip. Several ips can take place along crack
propagation. In general, ipping is not fully understood and needs more research.
==PAGE:24==
14
Theory
2.3.1
Ductile Fracture Micromechanisms
The micromechanical behaviour is highly important in this master thesis. The ductile
fracture mechanisms takes place in the experiments and are included in the numerical
study using the Gurson damage model, which is explained mathematically in Section 2.4.1.
Failure in ductile materials is usually caused by a combination of nucleation, growth and
coalescence of microscopic voids. Seen from a macroscopic level, the voids grow together
leading to nal fracture. Anderson (2005), page 219, lists the following stages in ductile
fracture:
1. Formation of free surface at an inclusion or second-phase particle by either interface
decohesion or particle cracking.
2. Growth of the void around the particle, by means of plastic strain and hydrostatic
stress.
3. Coalescence of the growing void with adjacent voids.
Some materials have well bonded inclusions and second-phase particles resulting in failure
immediately after voids formation. When weak bonds exists, the voids form earlier and
failure is controlled by void growth and nucleation. The voids starts to grow initially giving
a more porous material. At a point, an instability occurs between the voids and suddenly
they grow together, coalescence, resulting in even bigger voids and a more weak material.
The mechanisms of void nucleation, growth and coalescence is illustrated in Figure 2.5.
Specially precipitation hardened aluminum is said by Anderson (2005) to contain large
intermetallic particles and ne dispersion of submicron second-phase precipitates.
Figure 2.5: Mechanisms in a ductile material: (a) initial porous material, (b) void nu-
cleation, (c) void growth, and (d) void coalescence.
==PAGE:25==
2.4 Plasticity
15
Looking at the surface morphology of a ductile fracture, the voids are seen as 'holes'.
Some are bigger than others, and the big ones indicates an inclusion from where a void
has nucleated. The dimples as shown in the microscopic fractograph in Figure 2.6 are
known to be micro void coalescence.
2.4
Plasticity
Fracture includes among others a non-linear material behaviour. The elastic region is
linear whereas the plastic region is non-linear. The two regions are characterized before
and after the yield stress. The elastic region is reversible and unloading will follow the
same path as loading. For the plastic region, permanent deformation is seen which is
irreversible. In unloading, the curve will go towards zero following the same slope as the
Young's modulus. Power law hardening is used in the numerical studies to describe the
plastic hardening behaviour and it is dened by
ε =





σ
E
for σ ≤σy
σy
E
 σ
σy
n
for σ > σy
(2.1)
The elastic case for stresses lower than the yield stress, σ ≤σy, is given by Hooke's law
where E is the Young's modulus. The plastic case valid for σ > σy, denes the non-linear
behaviour. In Equation (2.1) n is the hardening exponent which varies according the
given material and gives the slope in the non-linear region. For metals it is typically in
the range from 0.05 to 0.3. The yield stress, σy, is as well depended on the material.
Figure 2.6: SEM micro photography by Mr. Sun Yongqi (Anderson, 2005).
==PAGE:26==
16
Theory
How the model behave in loading conditions like unloading, compression, resumed loading
in the same or another direction is described dierently. In plasticity one distinguishes
between isotropic and kinematic hardening. In isotropic hardening, the yield surface keeps
expanding in all directions. If the material is unloaded and loading is resumed, the newly
dened yield stress will apply in every direction. In compression it has the same numerical
value for the yield stress, as the newly obtained one. Kinematic hardening translates the
yield surface in the loading direction instead of expanding it.
The yield strength in
compression is double the initial yield strength. Isotropic and kinematic hardening are
illustrated in Figure 2.7.
Figure 2.7: Hardening behaviour: (a) isotropic, compressive yield strength is double
σmax (b) kinematic, compressive yield strength is double σy (c) isotropic,
expansion of yield surface (d) kinematic, translation of yield surface.
==PAGE:27==
2.4 Plasticity
17
It should be noted, that the specimens considered in the present study are monotonically
loaded in the positive directions and the inuence of compression will be very limited.
Unloading may be present in the wake of the crack tip and after failure when the complete
structure experiences global elastic unloading.
The simplest plasticity theory is perfect plasticity, but it does not take expansion of the
yield surface into account. The yield surface will always stay as its initial surface. J2-ow
theory is one step more sophisticated, where the material behaviour often is dened by
isotropic hardening. Due to its non-linearity, calculation are performed at an incremental
state. The total strain increment is the sum of the elastic and plastic strain increments
˙εij = ˙εE
ij + ˙εP
ij
(2.2)
The elastic strain increment is linearly depended on the stress increment and given by
(Tvergaard, 2001)
˙εE
ij = Mijkl ˙σkl
(2.3)
where the rst part is the elastic exibility tensor and is assumed to follow Hooke's law
Mijkl = 1
E
1 + ν
2
(δikδjl + δilδjk) −νδijδkl

(2.4)
here, δ is the Kronecker delta, E is Young's modulus, and ν is Poisson's ratio. The plastic
strain increment according to J2-ow theory is written as (Tvergaard, 2001)
˙εP
ij = β 9
4σ2
e
 1
Et
−1
E

sijskl ˙σkl
(2.5)
==PAGE:28==
18
Theory
where,
β =
(
1
for σe = (σe)max
and ˙σe ≥0
0
for σe < (σe)max
or
˙σe < 0
(2.6)
and the tangent modulus is Et = dσ/dε. While, the von Mises stress is σe, and (σe)max is
the maximum obtained von Mises stress so far in the loading history. The stress deviator
is dened by
sij = σij −δij
σkk
3
(2.7)
Mentioned formulas gives the fundamental overview for J2-ow theory. Essentially, J2-ow
theory does not take any loss in load carrying capacity or damage of the material into
account. It will just keep expanding the yield surface. This is can be added subsequently
by a damage model.
2.4.1
Gurson Damage
To model a porous material Gurson (1977) developed a damage model, which later has
been modied by Tvergaard and Needleman (1984). All mechanisms on a microscopic
level, like void growth, nucleation and coalescence is turned into macroscopic plasticity
behaviour. Said in another way, local behaviour is controlled at a global level. It is based
on a void volume fraction. A high void volume fraction is equivalent to a high material
damage resulting in a weak material. In general, it is known as a damage model and
this specic model is called Gurson damage. The yield surface for the modied Gurson
damage model is given by
Φ =
σe
σy
2
+ 2q1f ∗cosh
3q2σm
2σy

−
 1 + (q3f ∗)2
(2.8)
where σe is the macroscopic von Mises stress, σm the macroscopic mean stress, f* the
void volume fraction dened from 0 to 1. If it is reduced to zero, f∗= 0, the two last
==PAGE:29==
2.4 Plasticity
19
terms vanish and the standard von Mises yield criterion is left. This will correspond to a
fully dense material. A void volume fraction of 1 means 100 % voids, resulting in no load
carrying capacity at all. In a simple form where the void volume fraction stays as the
initial void volume fraction, f∗= f0, no changes during loading are taken into account.
The parameters q1, q2 and q3 are known as Tvergaard-Needleman constants.
The void volume fraction must be in relation to the micromechanisms in order to capture
the material behaviour during loading. It is a parameter which changes as a combination
of void growth and nucleation of new voids. The incremental rate of the void volume
fraction can be written as
˙f = ˙fgrowth + ˙fnucleation
(2.9)
Assuming the material is plastically incompressible, the growth rate is
˙fgrowth = (1 −f) ˙εP
kk
(2.10)
Void nucleation is based on a statistical distribution dened as
˙fnucleation =
fN
SN
√
2πexp

−1
2
εP
M −εN
SN
2
˙εP
M
(2.11)
where fN is the nucleation void volume fraction. Nucleation follows a normal distribution
having a mean value εN and standard deviation SN. The eective strain is εP
M.
Last micro mechanism to be covered is void coalescence which gives rapidly loss in material
strength, leading to nal failure for a porous ductile material.
The micromechanical
behaviour inuences the yield surface, giving that Equation (2.8) shrinks.
Tvergaard
(1990) has illustrated the loss of stress carrying capacity, where yield surface shrinks to a
point, see Figure 2.8.
==PAGE:30==
20
Theory
Figure 2.8: Coalescence inuence, f ∗(f), on the yield surface for hydrostatic tension
(Tvergaard, 1990)
To model coalescence, a critical void size, fc, is assumed. At this value coalescence among
voids starts. Tvergaard and Needleman (1984) splits the void volume fraction, f ∗(f), into
two intervals depended on the critical void size
f ∗(f) =





f
for f ≤fc
fc −f ∗
u −fc
fF −fc
(f −fc)
for f > fc
(2.12)
Complete loss in material load carrying capacity is dened by nal void volume fraction fF.
The plastic instability accelerates when f > fc showing the strong eect of coalescence.
The parameter f ∗
u is dened as 1/q1. The micromechanical behaviour is available in the
software used in the numerical study which builds on the nite element method.
2.5
Finite Element Analysis
The nite element method is about discretization of a continuum model into a nite
number of nite elements. This will help calculations in structures, where analytical ex-
pressions cannot be found. This section gives the basic theory behind the nite element
method. It uses 4-node 2D plane elements, with 8 degrees of freedom per element, trans-
lation in two directions. It is the same elements used initially in the numerical study. The
==PAGE:31==
2.5 Finite Element Analysis
21
system to solve is consists of a stiness matrix, a displacement vector, and a force vector
[K]{D} = {R}
(2.13)
In general for this section, capital letters describes equations at a global level, a [
]-
bracket denes a matrix, and a {
}-bracket denes a vector. The global system is an
assembly of local contributions.
In 2D linear elasticity assuming small displacements,
strains are
{ε} =





ε11
ε22
ε12





=





∂u
∂x
∂v
∂y
∂u
∂y + ∂v
∂x





(2.14)
Hooke's law denes the relation between stresses and strains
{σ} = [E]{ε}
(2.15)
Where [E] is the constitutive matrix. For an isotropic material in plane strain it is given
as
[E] =
E
1 −ν2


1 −ν
ν
0
ν
1 −ν
0
0
0
(1−2ν)
2


(2.16)
Here, E is Young's modulus and ν is Poisson's ratio.
For material non-linearity, the
constitutive matrix is replaced with an elastic-plastic one [E] = [Eep]. The principle of
virtual work establishes the nite element relations and applies for a kinematic admissible
displacement, not violating compatibility or boundary condition. The inner virtual work
equals the outer work given as
Z
{δε}T{σ}dV =
Z
[δu]T[F]dV +
Z
{δu}T{Φ}dS
(2.17)
==PAGE:32==
22
Theory
Here [F] is body forces and {Φ} surface tractions. The virtual change in strain can be
written as
{δε}T = [B]T{δd}T
(2.18)
Where [B] is the strain displacement matrix. The displacement has the form
{δu}T = [N]T{δd}T
(2.19)
And [N] contains the shape functions. The principle of virtual work can be rewritten by
Equation (2.18) and (2.19) (Cook et al., 2002)
{δd}T(
Z
[B]T[E][B]dV {d} −
Z
[B]T[E]{ε0}dV
+
Z
[B]T{σ0}dV −[N]T{F}dV −[N]T{Φ}dS) = 0
(2.20)
The shape functions are dened from each node in an element. For the 4-node 2D plane
element it is dened according to Figure 2.9 as
N1 = 1
4 (1 −ξ) (1 −η)
N2 = 1
4 (1 + ξ) (1 −η)
N3 = 1
4 (1 + ξ) (1 + η)
N4 = 1
4 (1 −ξ) (1 + η)
(2.21)
and in matrix form it is given as
N =
"
N1
0
N2
0
N3
0
N4
0
0
N1
0
N2
0
N3
0
N4
#
(2.22)
==PAGE:33==
2.5 Finite Element Analysis
23
Figure 2.9: Denition of shape functions together with Equation (2.21) in a 4-node 2D
plane element.
For one element, the displacement eld can be obtained as
{u} = [N]{d}
(2.23)
Element strains are {ε} = [B]{d} and the strain displacement matrix can be found as
[B] =


∂
∂ξ
0
0
∂
∂η
∂
∂η
∂
∂ξ

[N]
(2.24)
Equivalent to to global system in Equation (2.13), the local system can be described as
[k]{d} = {r}
(2.25)
where element stiness matrix [k] is given by
[k] =
Z
[B]T[E][B]dV
(2.26)
Then, all local elements can be assembled to a complete global structure. It should be
mentioned, the numerical model in Chapter 4 uses geometrical non-linearity as well.
==PAGE:34==
24
Theory
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 3
Experimental study
This chapter deals with experimental testing in double edge notched tensile specimens.
The specimens are heat treated, which will change the yield stress and hardening behaviour
during the 3-step process utilizing solution treatment, quenching, and precipitation hard-
ening. To investigate consistency within each step, hardness testing is conducted at micro
and macro level. It is further used to estimate the materials yield stress. The rst sections
are about the heat treatment process followed by a section of load testing.
The initial mode I testing investigates at which parameters a slant fracture can be ob-
tained, and if pure mode I loading will aect mode III. They are arranged starting from
pure mode I loading and ending in mixed mode I/III loading. The nal study of mixed
mode I/III loading will use dierent parameters for mode III to investigate how it will
inuence nal failure. Results using the mixed mode I/III loading are found in Section
3.7. At the end of this chapter, a tomography scanning of crack growth is illustrated. The
scanning is carried out in a test specimen, not exceeding nale failure.
Through the experiments, knowledge and experience is gained. Findings and observations
are described within the dierent aspects of the experimental work to help a reproduction.
==PAGE:36==
26
Experimental study
3.1
DENT Specimens
The double edge notched tensile specimens or DENT specimens are produced from a rolled
aluminum 6082 plate. The overall size is 150 mm x 80 mm x 3 mm. The ligament size is
40 mm, dening the length between the notches. This is from where crack propagation
initiates. The initial crack tip is circular having a diameter of 1 mm. This means crack
growth will initiate from a blunt crack tip. In fact, the crack will propagate from both
notches at the same time. A technical drawing of the specimen can be found in Appendix
B. The specimens are cut identical from the large plate, having the rolling direction in-line
with the ligament (resulting in crack growth along the rolling direction). The aluminum
6082 plate is in T6 condition (articially aged) from the manufacturer.
Additional wider DENT specimens are produced, when it was experienced the testing
machine at DTU Risø had a higher load capacity than the one at DTU Lyngby. A wider
specimen gives a longer distance for each crack propagation. The larger specimens has the
size 150 mm x 140 mm x 3 mm, with a 100 mm ligament. The large DENT specimens are
presented separately. If nothing is mentioned, it is about the standard DENT specimens
with a 40 mm ligament.
Before any heat treatment and load testing, every DENT specimen is given an engraved
number on top and below the left notch. This will make it easier to control the single
specimen and its treatment throughout the whole process. Not every specimen is men-
tioned in this study, for instance due to undesirable failure. While needed, the specimens
are given a name to give a better understanding. If one has the physical specimen, it is
labelled with the name as well.
3.2
Basis of Heat Treatment
In the solution treatment a conventional oven is used. With a self-constructed steel rack
4 specimens can be treated at once. The rack ensures the specimens to have equal space
and to be well placed regarding the heating elements (left and right side). In Figure 3.1, 4
specimens are seen in the rack. Having 4 specimens in the oven seem reasonable in terms
of oven volume and for one person to quench afterwards. The specimens are solution
treated at 520◦C in 24 hours.
==PAGE:37==
3.2 Basis of Heat Treatment
27
Figure 3.1: Conventional oven with rack and 4 DENT specimens inside. Note the heat-
ing elements to the left and right.
After the 24 hours solution treatment, the specimens are quenched in water. Next step is
articial ageing which utilizes a conventional oven and heating in oil. The temperature is
set to 180◦C giving a fair compromise between precipitation growth and time. At lower
temperatures, the precipitation growth happens slower and the specimens will have to stay
at the lower temperature for a longer time in the oven or oil. At higher temperatures, the
growth will happen fast and can be harder to control.
3.2.1
Oven Observation
During heat treatment some interesting observations were made. The temperature was
discovered to be unstable at some points using the conventional oven. For instance during
the ageing treatment, where the temperature is set 180◦C, the oven puts a lot of energy
into reaching that temperature level. It overshoots and reaches a temperature level around
190◦C. After some time it nally stabilises to the chosen level. The problem is avoided by
ramping to the desired temperature level. A ramping rate of 1◦C per 5 seconds worked
out well.
Another issue was discovered while placing the specimens into the oven. When the oven
door is open, the temperature drops and the oven ramps up fast to reach the temperature
level which again results in temperature overshooting. A solution to this overshooting was
to heat the oven to 182◦C, turn it o, put the specimen in and close the oven door. After
a couple of minutes the oven reaches a level of 180◦C just by the heat already obtained in
the oven walls. Meanwhile, the temperature is changed to 180◦C and the oven is turned
on again and this time the temperature is better stabilised and overshooting signicantly
decreased.
==PAGE:38==
28
Experimental study
3.2.2
Quenching of Large DENT specimens
The self-constructed rack did not t the large DENT specimens. Instead, 4 specimens
were stacked on top of each other to quenched all at once (still stacked). This turned out
to be a bad idea, resulting in highly distorted specimens after quenching, as pictured in
Figure 3.2. The reason might be an uneven cooling of the specimen. The outer surface
cools faster and thereby shrinks faster resulting in a bend specimen. The top and bottom
specimen in the stack were mostly distorted. The rack showed itself very useful to take
the specimens out from the oven one-by-one. New specimens had to be produced to go
over the process once again, taking the large specimens out of the oven one at a time.
3.3
Basis of Hardness Testing
The main purpose of hardness testing in this thesis is to investigate how homogeneous
the specimens are after solution and precipitation hardening. Further, the hardness tells
something about the yield stress. There is a rule of thumb saying hardness Vickers hard-
ness times 3 is approximately the yield stress in MPa. A hardness test is non-destructive
only making very little plastic deformation in the specimen. It will not aect the results
in subsequent experiments.
All macro hardness measurements are worked out on an Otto Wolpert Werke machine as
shown in Figure 3.3. Vickers hardness is measured, where a pyramid shaped indention is
made from a steel pin with a diamond tip. The indention weight is 5 kg in all cases. To
do the indention, the handle is released and 5 seconds after complete indention, the pin
is lifted again. The two diagonal lengths are measured via the optical microscope in the
machine to be averaged afterwards. A special ruler is tted which takes the optical mag-
Figure 3.2: Distorted large DENT specimens after quenching 4 at once from 520◦C.
==PAGE:39==
3.3 Basis of Hardness Testing
29
nication into account. The hardness is found taking 3 measurements in every specimen
which are averaged, giving the nal hardness. The Vickers Hardness is dened as force
per surface area
HV = F
A
(3.1)
where the force, F, is in kilograms applied from the test machine. When the surface area
is inserted, the hardness can be rewritten as
HV = 1.854 F
d2
(3.2)
Here d is dened by the mean diameter in millimeters from the two diagonal lengths.
In the precipitation hardening, both air and oil are used as heat transferring medium. The
dierence is studied between them by micro hardness testing in the cross-section. The
variation in micro hardness from one side to the other will describe how homogeneous
the specimens are. In micro hardness testing, the indention area is much smaller than for
macro hardness testing. This will allow many measurements in a relatively short distance,
which are needed having a 3 mm plate thickness.
Figure 3.3: Otto Wolpert Werke machine used for Vickers hardness test. Indention is
seen in the top via the microscope. Indention release handle is at lower right
position and indention load is selected by a button at the rear end.
==PAGE:40==
30
Experimental study
The basic principles in macro and micro hardness are the same making a pyramid shaped
indention. Though, in micro hardness testing the force range spans from 1 to 1000 grams.
Micro hardness is measured in a testing machine from Future-Tech Corp., see Figure 3.4
(a). The read-out of the two diagonal lengths is worked out on a computer connected to
the testing machine's microscope. For testing a specimen some preparations are needed.
A small piece of the DENT specimen is cut out, then cast into epoxy to be grinded and
polished at the end. The test machine has a micrometer screw to dene the distance
between indentations. It is electronically connected to a measurement box for easily read-
out of the distance between indentations, as shown in Figure 3.4 (b). It can measure a
distance as low as 0.5 µm, which is more than needed in relation to indention size, but it
makes sure that the distance between indentations is very accurate.
3.3.1
Natural Ageing
Natural ageing was experienced to happen quickly in the DENT specimens. The rst 20-30
specimens were solution treated, then put aside in room temperature for 1-2 weeks. These
specimens were then hardness tested all at once. The results were consistent. Additional 4
specimens were solution treated, quenched and hardness tested within half an hour after
quenching. The Vickers hardness was signicantly lower, but the process seems to be
the same. The newly tested specimens were put aside at room temperature for around 24
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.4: Equipment used for micro hardness testing: (a) Micro hardness testing ma-
chine from Future-Tech Corp. (b) Measurement box to dene distance be-
tween indentations.
==PAGE:41==
3.3 Basis of Hardness Testing
31
hours. A new hardness test was deducted showing a higher Vickers hardness as illustrated
in Figure 3.5.
Further, it was investigated if something was gone wrong in the quench process. The water
temperature was measured before and after quenching. The 4 specimens were quenched
in the same bucket of water with an initial temperature of 24◦C. They seem to cool down
quickly, by only turning water into steam in a period less than half a second.
All 4
specimens were put in the bucket of water in approximately 5 seconds after opening the
oven door. The end water temperature is 27.5◦C giving an increase of 3.5◦C which is
reasonable, and the quench process is found to be acceptable.
The natural ageing behaviour is investigated by macro hardness testing.
Two DENT
specimens are hardness tested over time to validate if the measurements and specimens
are consistent. In every rst 8 hours, the hardness shows the most signicant increase,
which is graphically illustrated in Figure 3.6. The hardness increases from 45 HV to 62
HV, in those few hours. Though, the highest increase of almost 25 % is seen within the
rst hour. It converges slowly after 8 hours and after 24 hours it stabilizes around 66-68
HV. This is the eect of maximum precipitation growth at room temperature. Natural
ageing was not expected to happen that quickly and at that level but has now been proven
by hardness testing.
1
2
3
4
0
20
40
60
80
100
DENT specimen
Hardness [HV]
 
 
Solution treatment
1 day later
Figure 3.5: Same specimens hardness tested within half an hour after quenching and
approximately 24 hours later.
==PAGE:42==
32
Experimental study
0
10
20
30
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
Natural aging time [h]
Hardness [HV]
 
 
DENT A
DENT B
Figure 3.6: Natural ageing investigated by hardness measurements. Two specimens has
been tested for consistency. Precipitates grows a lot in the rst 8 hours at
room temperature.
3.4
Cross-Section Variation
The specimens are desired to be as homogeneous as possible in the heat treatment process.
Articial ageing in air and oil is compared looking at micro hardness in the cross-section.
The idea is to investigate the inuence of transferring heat in two dierent ways, and with
two dierent mediums. The conventional oven uses air and natural convection whereas
the oil heater uses oil and forced convection. It will as well be studied, if there is a change
close to the edges. Firstly, a naturally aged specimen and a virgin specimen (T6 condition
from the manufacturer) are tested as upper and lower bound. Two ageing intervals are
tested for articial ageing, giving a total of 6 tests. The specimen condition for each test
is specied below
• Naturally aged
• Virgin, T6 (articial aged) from manufacturer
• Articial ageing temperature: 180◦C, medium: air in 16 hours
• Articial ageing temperature: 180◦C, medium: oil in 16 hours
• Articial ageing temperature: 180◦C, medium: air in 18 hours
• Articial ageing temperature: 180◦C, medium: oil in 18 hours
==PAGE:43==
3.4 Cross-Section Variation
33
As shown in Figure 3.7, a small piece measuring 10 mm x 10 mm x 3 mm is cut out
from the DENT specimen and moulded in epoxy for micro hardness testing. From each
specimen, 45 indentions has been made along the 3 mm thickness. Within 0.5 mm from
the edges the resolution is increased. Step-sizes are shown in Table 3.1. An indention load
of 10 grams is used for all 6 cut outs.
The results from the measuring of micro hardness in the cross-section are graphically
shown in Figure 3.8.
The initial experiment investigating a naturally aged specimen,
where the material has been solution treated at 520◦C for 24 hours and naturally aged
for 4 weeks is found in Figure 3.8 (a). In the same plot the virgin specimen is shown,
for which the heat treatment condition is unknown. As expected, the hardness is at to
dierent levels, where the virgin is the stronger one. The virgin hardness varies more close
to the edges, which can indicate rolling after articial ageing.
In Figure 3.8 (b) and Figure 3.8 (c) articially aged specimens at 180◦C for 16 and 18
hour are shown. Articial ageing in air or oil does not seem to aect the hardness looking
at the graphs for both time intervals.
Figure 3.7: A small DENT specimen cut out piece is seen moulded in epoxy. Additional
5 similar pieces are produced.
Table 3.1: Step-sizes throughout the cross section. Close to the edges the step-size de-
creases, giving a higher resolution.
Cross-sectional distance [mm]
Step-size [mm]
0.02 - 0.50
0.04
0.50 - 2.50
0.10
2.50 - 2.98
0.04
==PAGE:44==
34
Experimental study
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
0
50
100
Cross-section [mm]
Hardness [HV]
 
 
Naturally aged
Virgin, T6
(a)
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
0
50
100
Cross-section [mm]
Hardness [HV]
 
 
180◦C/16h, air
180◦C/16h, oil
(b)
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
0
50
100
Cross-section [mm]
Hardness [HV]
 
 
180◦C/18h, air
180◦C/18h, oil
(c)
Figure 3.8: Cross-section experiment comparing dierent age hardening methods. Micro
hardness is meassured along the cross-section. (a) comparing natural ageing
and virgin T6 condition (b) articial ageing in oil and air at 180◦C for 16
hours (c) articial ageing in oil and air at 180◦C for 18 hours
In Table 3.2 mean values and standard deviation can be found for all tests, and neither
here a dierence between articial ageing in air or oil is seen. Further, it is found that
articial ageing in 16 or 18 hours looks basically the same. It could be, that only small
==PAGE:45==
3.5 Basis of Tensile/Torsion Test
35
Table 3.2: Mean hardness and standard deviation for cross-section experiment. No dif-
ference is seen from using air or oil in precipitation hardening.
Specimen
Mean hardness [HV]
Standard deviation
Naturally aged
72.8
3.1
Virgin, T6
107.2
5.7
180◦C / 16h, air
98.2
3.7
180◦C / 16h, oil
100.0
4.4
180◦C / 18h, air
98.9
4.2
180◦C / 18h, oil
98.9
3.1
internal precipitation growth happens between the to time intervals. The virgin specimen
has the highest standard deviation, being least uniform in the cross-section. This may be
due to strong precipitation growth, apart from the rolling as discussed earlier.
A benet from articial ageing in oil is there more constant initial temperature. The
temperature only drops a few degrees, when putting the specimens into the oil but sta-
bilizes quickly afterwards. It can be concluded, that it is more a question of easiness in
production to choose between air or oil for articial ageing. For instance, the conventional
oven required some practical experience, which is not the case for ageing in oil. The eect
on the end product is the same using air or oil as ageing medium. Following specimens
are precipitation hardened in oil.
3.5
Basis of Tensile/Torsion Test
The experiments for this master thesis have been carried out in the structural labs at DTU
Lyngby and DTU Risø. At DTU Lyngby, initial experiments in uni-axial tensile loading
or mode I are carried out in a MTS testing machine. For tensile/torsion or mode I/III
loading at DTU Risø, Instron test eqiupment is used. During test the DENT specimen
is loaded to exceed nial failure. In the process along, data is logged to be processed
afterwards.
The MTS testing machine is equipped with a 250 kN load cell. The DENT specimen
is carefully aligned in the lower grip by special-cut metal pieces. The position for the
upper part is marked on the specimen beforehand to ensure the initial position is the
same for all tests. The initial free length is 55 mm. For static testing, the displacement
==PAGE:46==
36
Experimental study
rate is set to 0.5 mm/minute. The MTS testing machine was experienced to give incorrect
force response, when it was compared to the data obtained for the Instron testing. The
results were around a factor three lower. Though, the most important thing to look at
initially is how the failure mode physically turns out, which can be found in Section 3.6.
It is preferable to have initial test sorted out at DTU Lyngby, to spend time as best as
possible at DTU Risø.
The Instron test equipment is used at DTU Risø for mixed mode I/III loading. The
test machine is tted with a 250 kN load cell in tension and 2000 Nm in torsion. The
displacement rate is here as well 0.5 mm/minute, whereas the rotation will be at dierent
levels. According to their license as an ocial laboratory, they measure correct values
from 1 % of the load cells maximum capacity. Measurements below 1 % will still give an
output, but it will not be as correct as measurements above 1 %. Though, it is possible to
compare the tendency between multiple tests below 1 %. The specimen is always placed
the same way in the machine, knowing which way is up, down, front, and backwards.
Displacement and rotation is controlled from the lower part. When the specimen is xed
in the testing machine just before running a test, the force and moment is taken as close
to zero as possible. The load cell measuring force and moment is placed at the upper part.
Displacement and rotation is controlled from the lower part. The directions in relation to
the data output is discussed in Section 3.7
The free length between the grips is 45 mm. Strain is measured at both sides of the
specimen ligament via 2 extensometers. They are hold in place by 4 rubber bands. The 2
measurements are in most cases almost identical. If a dierence is seen, it could indicate
something wrong in the specimen alignment. The initial length between the extensometers
is 10 mm and they are placed with the ligament in center, as shown in Figure 3.9 (a). The
strain measurements are limited to one direction, only measuring the length direction not
taking out-of-plane strain into account. Initially, the strain was planned to be calculated
from the piston displacement, but the results were not as expected. In Figure 3.9 (b)
the dierence can be seen from strain based on extensometers and position of the piston.
Elastic deformation in the testing machine inuences the result. The mechanical grips
has an eect as well, they do their nal clamping at loading.
The test machines provides simple text les with output data such as: time, force, dis-
placement, strain, rotation and torque. Data logging is recorded at 20 Hz. The output
les are in general used for plotting a strain-stress relation.
==PAGE:47==
3.5 Basis of Tensile/Torsion Test
37
(a)
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0
10
20
30
40
50
∆L / L0
Force [kN]
 
 
From extensometers
From piston position
(b)
Figure 3.9: Test set-up showing (a) DENT specimen with extensometers and (b) ∆L/L0
calculated based on piston displacement data and extensometer data.
The force is turned into a normalized stress
σn =
F
A0σy
(3.3)
where A0 is the initial ligament area, i.e. engineering stresses are calculated, and σy is the
yield stress based on hardness measurement. Strains are dened by
ε = ∆L
L0
(3.4)
which are likewise in an engineering manner. Torque is presented when mode III is engaged
in a nondimensionalized form
Tn =
T
0.5b0A0σy
(3.5)
the parameter b0 is the initial ligament size and only the half is used, because the crack
propagates from each notch and meets at the center. The data from the initial mode I
experiment is rejected due to incorrect output.
==PAGE:48==
38
Experimental study
3.6
Initial Mode I Experiment
The DENT specimens used in the cross-section investigation, 180◦C/16h, 180◦C/18h, and
the naturally aged are used for initial mode I experiments as well. Additionally, two more
specimens are tested respectively one at 180◦C/10h and one at 180◦C/24h.
During testing, each specimen is given a displacement rate of 0.5 mm per minute from
the piston in the testing machine. Final failure occurs within 2 mm displacement corre-
sponding to a total test time less than 4 minutes. This is considered to be adequate for
static testing.
Every specimen is placed carefully in the testing machine, knowing exactly which way it is
oriented. All specimen photographs are taken from the same orientation, using the upper
part DENT specimen, having the front side upwards presenting the engraved number.
In Figure 3.10 failure modes for all 5 specimens are shown. The naturally aged specimen
is taken as an extra, since observation of material characteristic was discovered to change
rapidly in room temperature. Figure 3.10 (a) Naturally aged, (c) 180◦C/16h and (d)
180◦C/18h, shows all most the same result. From one crack tip, a slant crack is seen
growing towards the middle. From the other crack tip, a slant crack with one ip towards
the center is seen. The small dimple in the middle is from the two cracks meeting each
other.
Figure 3.10 (b) 180◦C/10h shows two ips close to the center. In Figure (e) 180◦C/24h it
starts as a cup-cone like fracture and then turns to slanted crack growth.
A few experiments showed a slanted crack growing in opposite shear bands from each
crack tip. The best result is seen in the specimens aged for 16 and 18 hours, where only
one ip towards center is present. The following experiments will use an articial ageing
time of 16 hours.
==PAGE:49==
3.6 Initial Mode I Experiment
39
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 3.10: Uni-axial mode 1 tensile testing in DENT specimens in dierent condi-
tions: (a) Naturally aged (b) 180◦C/10h (c) 180◦C/16h (d) 180◦C/18h (e)
180◦C/24h.
==PAGE:50==
40
Experimental study
3.7
Mixed Mode I/III Experiment
In the experiments where mode III is engaged, there is an extra parameter to be aware
o: mode III is controlled by rotation. It can be dierent in terms of rate, direction,
and timed initiation. Before the experiments, plans were carefully created and printed
to bring along for testing at DTU Risø. The experimental plans have been adjusted and
commented ongoing. They are all electronically updated and attached in Appendix C.
All specimens are precipitation hardened at 180◦C for 16 hours as a result of the previous
experiment. The mean value from hardness testing after ageing shows 100.7 HV with
a standard deviation of 1.21. In all experiments, the yield stress is estimated from the
Vickers hardness measurement by the mentioned factor 3 dierence. The yield stress is
individual for each specimen. Hardness data and yield stress can be found in Appendix
D.
The rotation and displacement is controlled from the lower piston and grip. It is a bit
tricky to explain how the rotation is denes in relation to direction and torque, so stay
focussed:
• A positive rotation is a clockwise rotation in the lower grip seen from top and down-
wards. The clockwise (CW) rotation causes a positive torque, and positive
45◦slant crack growth seen from the right-hand side towards the center, see
Figure 3.11 (a).
• A negative rotation is a counter-clockwise rotation in the lower grip seen from top
and downwards. The counter-clockwise (CCW) rotation causes a negative
torque, and negative 45◦slant crack growth seen from the right-hand side
towards the center, see Figure 3.11 (b).
Photographs of all specimens can be found in Appendix C. Only the most relevant ones will
included in this chapter. The photographs are all taken from the top-part of the DENT
specimens, with the engraved number facing upwards. When looking at the specimen, the
middle part seems strange for some DENT specimens due to the crack tips approaching
each other. In the following sections the results are presented. They are arranged and
grouped by specic mode III focusses. In all the following experiments, mode I loading
rate is kept constant at 0.5 mm/minute as previous. Therefore, only the mode III rate
will be mentioned.
==PAGE:51==
3.7 Mixed Mode I/III Experiment
41
Figure 3.11: Description of rotation and torque in experimental testing where (a) is
rotated clockwise (CW) giving a positive torque, and crack growth at +45◦
in the cross-section, and (b) is rotated counterclockwise (CCW) giving
a negative torque, and crack growth at -45◦in the cross-section.
The
specimen is always placed this way according the engraved numbers on top
and bottom of the left notch.
3.7.1
Mode III Output In Mode I Loading
This experiment is similar to the initial mode I test (Section 3.6). However, it is dierent
by having the possibility to log the torque via the load cell in the tensile/torsion testing
machine.
Thereby, it is investigated if mode III loading is induced, when the DENT
specimen is loaded in pure mode I. The rotation is set at a xed position with no initial
pre-torque.
The strain-stress results from 3 tested specimens are shown in Figure 3.12 (a). The curves
are all most identical and very constant for experimental testing. The torque curves in
Figure 3.12 (b) are a little dierent.
DENT 14 and DENT 15 has a negative torque
curve turning physically out in a -45◦crack propagation looking from the right-hand side.
Surprisingly, the DENT 15 has crack propagation in the same shear band from both the
left-hand and right-hand side, as seen in Figure 3.13. DENT 16 has positive torque, but
crack propagation in -45◦as the two others. It is not in-line with the following experiments
where rotation is initiated. DENT 16 is seen to be a bit up-and-down initially, but has
relatively clean fracture surface. This could indicate shear band instability.
==PAGE:52==
42
Experimental study
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
∆L / L0
F/(A0σy)
 
 
DENT 14
DENT 15
DENT 16
(a)
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
−6
−4
−2
0
2
4
6
x 10
−6
∆L / L0
T/(0.5b0A0σy)
 
 
DENT 14
DENT 15
DENT 16
(b)
Figure 3.12: Results from experiment with 0 rotation and read-out of induced torque
for DENT 14, 15, 16: (a) strain-stress relation and (b) torque is seen from
every specimen, though DENT 16 is in the opposite direction.
Figure 3.13: DENT 15 showing slant fracture in same direction from both crack tips.
The out-o-plane strain discussed by El-Naaman and Nielsen (2013) is denitely a valid
point shown from these results. Please notice, the torque output is below the test equip-
ments 1 % level and is thereby not guaranteed to be correct. Still it is for sure, that there
is a dierence among the 3 tests, and the torque direction is correct.
3.7.2
Mixed Mode I/III, Study Rotation Rate
In the mixed mode I/III focus, mode I is supposed to be the dominant loading mode.
Both loading modes are initiated at the same time. When rotating the DENT specimen
from the beginning, the crack is forced to grow in a specic shear band. This specic
shear depends on the rotational direction, as explained earlier according to Figure 3.11.
The rotation rates are [0.5◦;
2◦;
1◦] per minute is investigated.
==PAGE:53==
3.7 Mixed Mode I/III Experiment
43
From the strain-stress relation in Figure 3.14 (a), the DENT 17 (0.5◦/min CW) is seen
to fail earlier than the others. This is not caused by rotation rate, it is more a question
of dierent material behaviour. The hardening apex is dierent as well for DENT 17.
A high rotation rate in DENT 18 (2◦/min CW) is attening the surface physically and
concluded to be too high, when mode I is supposed to be the dominant loading mode.
DENT 19 (1◦/min CW) and DENT 20 (1◦/min CCW) shows all most the same value in
torque in the two directions, in Figure 3.14 (b). This is expected given the same rotation
rate, yet in dierent directions. Furthermore, it corresponds to crack growth in opposite
shear bands as seen in Figure 3.15. The dierence in torque is consistent with 0.5◦/min
CW in DENT 17 showing the least torque and so forth. A rotation rate of 1◦/min is the
optimum, when initiating rotation from the beginning.
3.7.3
Apply Mode III at Initial Plastic Deformation
From the previous experiments, a sucient rotation rate was found, when rotating from
start. In this experiment it is investigated, what the eect is from initiating the rotation
at early plastic deformation. The rotation rate needs to be higher than previous to have
an eect of mode III, because the rotation is initiated some time into the experiment.
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
∆L / L0
F/(A0σy)
 
 
DENT 17
DENT 18
DENT 19
DENT 20
(a)
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
−4
−2
0
2
4
x 10
−5
∆L / L0
T/(0.5b0A0σy)
 
 
DENT 17
DENT 18
DENT 19
DENT 20
(b)
Figure 3.14: Results from experiments, where (a) is strain-stress and (b) is torque. Ro-
tation is initiate from the beginning at dierent rates and rotational direc-
tions. DENT 17: 0.5◦/min CW. DENT 18: 2◦/min CW. DENT 19:
1◦/min CW. DENT 20: 1◦/min CCW.
==PAGE:54==
44
Experimental study
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.15: Rotational direction corresponds to a specic shear band failure seen from
the right-hand side (a) DENT 17 CW, +45◦slant fracture, and (b)
DENT 20 CCW, -45◦slant fracture.
Rotation rates of 2◦and 3◦/min are tested, clockwise and counter-clockwise. Rotation is
initiated at ∆L/L0 = 0.004.
The initial part of the torque curve shows all DENT specimens going to negative torque
in Figure 3.16 (b). When rotation starts, DENT 21 (2◦/min CW) and DENT 25 (3◦/min
CW) changes to positive torque. It could indicate a change in the active shear band before
crack propagation and a reason for the specimens to fail earlier as seen in Figure 3.16 (a).
The torque curve increases in a non-linear way corresponding to rotation in the plastic
region.
The physical failure mode is slant in the shear band according to the rotational direction
and torque operational sign. If one is only looking at the rotational direction, results in
DENT 21 (CW) and DENT 25(CW) are equal, as well as DENT 26 (CCW) equalling
DENT 24 (CCW). It can be seen from the psychical fracture surface in Figure 3.17, that
the rotational direction is dierent in DENT 21 (CW) and DENT 24 (CCW).
Though, it is graphically indicated that the active shear band changes, it did not change
during crack propagation because of the early shear band activity. A rotation in one
direction followed by a rotation in the other direction might result in a dierent outcome.
==PAGE:55==
3.7 Mixed Mode I/III Experiment
45
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
∆L / L0
F/(A0σy)
 
 
DENT 21
DENT 25
DENT 26
DENT 24
(a)
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
−2
−1
0
1
2
x 10
−5
∆L / L0
T/(0.5b0A0σy)
 
 
DENT 21
DENT 25
DENT 26
DENT 24
(b)
Figure 3.16: The rotation is started at ∆L/L0 = 0.004 in dierent rates and rotational
directions. DENT 21: 2◦/min CW, DENT 25: 3◦/min CW, DENT
26: 2◦/min CCW, DENT 24: 3◦/min CCW.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.17: Crack propagation in dierent shear bands according to rotational direction
in two specimens: (a) DENT 25: 3◦/min CW and (b) DENT 24: 3◦/min
CCW.
3.7.4
Second Rotation at Initial Plastic Deformation
In these experiments the DENT specimens are rotated clockwise from the beginning at
1◦/min followed by a second counter-clockwise rotation at initial plastic deformation, 1◦
and 2◦/min. The rst rotation rate is based on the experience from Section 3.7.2. The
idea is to investigate, if the change of direction in rotation during the experiment will
change the active shear band and reveal a ip. The second counter-clockwise rotation is
initiated at ∆L/L0 = 0.004.
==PAGE:56==
46
Experimental study
It is clearly seen from the torque curve in Figure 3.18, that DENT 28 (1◦/min CW
followed by 2◦/min CCW) has the highest rate in the second counter-clockwise rotation.
The second rotation for DENT 27 (1◦/min CW followed by 1◦/min CCW) does not seem
to have an eect other than neutralizing the moment. The physical failure mode does not
show anything more interesting than previous experiments. The second rotation seems to
take place too early in the process to show diversity in the failure mode.
3.7.5
Second Rotation at Initial Crack Propagation
Acknowledging the previous nding, the second rotation is initiated at ∆L/L0 = 0.02. The
rst rotation stays at 1◦/min CW. In this conguration, the crack will have grown some
distance before changing rotational direction. The counter-clockwise rotation is tested by
the rates 1◦and 3◦/min.
The DENT 29 (1◦/min CW followed by 1◦/min CCW) shows a slant failure mode in the
same shear band towards the center. It can also be seen from the torque in Figure 3.19
(b) where it stays positive. The second rotation rate is too small for initiating a ip.
The DENT 31 (1◦/min CW followed by 3◦/min CCW) showed a highly interesting result,
where the crack made a ip along propagation. The torque is seen change direction as
well. To check if it was a coincidence, it was repeated with the same test parameters in
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
∆L / L0
F/(A0σy)
 
 
DENT 27
DENT 28
(a)
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
−1.5
−1
−0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
x 10
−5
∆L / L0
T/(0.5b0A0σy)
 
 
DENT 27
DENT 28
(b)
Figure 3.18: The rst rotation is from the beginning and second opposite rotation is
initiated at ∆L/L0 = 0.004. DENT 27: 1◦/min CW followed by 1◦/min
CCW, DENT 28: 1◦/min CW followed by 2◦/min CCW.
==PAGE:57==
3.7 Mixed Mode I/III Experiment
47
DENT 32. Revealing the same tendency, DENT 31 was not just a one time test. Both
DENT 31 and 32 fracture surfaces are shown in Figure 3.20. The strain-stress relations
in Figure 3.19 (a) are consistent, but DENT 32 (1◦/min CW followed by 3◦/min CCW)
decreases a bit earlier.
This is the rst experiment showing controlled crack growth including a ip, where the
active shear band changes during crack propagation. The ip is strongly depended on the
opposite rotation rate.
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
∆L / L0
F/(A0σy)
 
 
DENT 29
DENT 31
DENT 32
(a)
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
−2
−1
0
1
2
x 10
−5
∆L / L0
T/(0.5b0A0σy)
 
 
DENT 29
DENT 31
DENT 32
(b)
Figure 3.19: Rotation changes direction at ∆L/L0 = 0.02 with dierent rates. DENT
29: 1◦/min CW followed by 1◦/min CCW, DENT 31: 1◦/min CW fol-
lowed by 3◦/min CCW, DENT 32: 1◦/min CW followed by 3◦/min CCW.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.20: Slant crack propagation is changing active shear band in the early part of
crack growth. Same test parameters are used (a) DENT 31: 1◦/min CW
followed by 3◦/min CCW, (b) DENT 32: 1◦/min CW followed by 3◦/min
CCW.
==PAGE:58==
48
Experimental study
3.7.6
Quick Secondary Rotation
A new experiment is conducted to investigate the inuence of a faster second rotation than
used so far. The second rotation is initiated at the same elongation as in the previous
experiment at ∆L/L0 = 0.02. In the rst rotation, where the crack has propagated a small
distance, the rotation has reached 2.5◦at the mentioned elongation. In this experiment
it is rotated to the same level in the other direction in 1 second, staying in that position
towards nal failure.
This gives a rotation rate in the counter-clockwise direction of
5◦/min. A single specimen is tested, DENT 33.
A small drop is seen in the stress at the counter-clockwise rotation in Figure 3.21 (a), but
it stabilizes again quickly. A highly induced torque is seen when the rotation changes di-
rection as illustrated in Figure 3.21 (b). This is another successfully attempt in controlled
slant ip where the crack changes active shear band along propagation.
In Figure 3.22 the fracture surface shows that crack growth in the initial part is shorter
than before as a result of the quick rotation. The ip can be a bit dicult to see due to
the relatively short distance, where a lot is going on. Investigation of a longer distance
where the crack can grow, is the next step to look into.
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
∆L / L0
F/(A0σy)
 
 
DENT 33
(a)
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
x 10
−5
∆L / L0
T/(0.5b0A0σy)
 
 
DENT 33
(b)
Figure 3.21: Results from DENT 33: 1◦/min CW followed by 5◦/sec CCW for 1 second
and stay in obtained position.
==PAGE:59==
3.7 Mixed Mode I/III Experiment
49
Figure 3.22: Controlled crack propagation showing a ip from both sides in the specimen
DENT 33: 1◦/min CW followed by 5◦/sec CCW for 1 second and stay in
the obtained position.
3.7.7
Mode III Output In Mode I Loading: Large DENT Speci-
mens
In tests using the large DENT specimens the test set-up is the same, only the specimen
size is dierent. Mode I loading is tested to investigate for the torque. Experiments with
large DENT specimens is seen not to be as consistent as the standard specimens. All tests
are xed in the rotational position, and a large virgin specimen has been added, DENT
47. Remaining large specimens used here and in the following section are precipitation
hardened at 180◦C for 16 hours.
The specimens were seen to open more initially in the right notch, resulting in crack
propagating from there as well. Crack propagation from the left notch started a bit later
into the testing. Ideally, they would start propagating at the same and meet in the center,
which has also been the case for the previous standard DENT experiments. Results are
shown in Figure 3.23. The virgin specimen DENT 47 is seen to be the least ductile one,
failing at around ∆L/L0 = 0.02. The DENT 41 and 42 fails at dierent level.
An induced torque is seen in the large specimens, revealing more in DENT 41 and 47
than in DENT 42. Still, it is hard to conclude anything according to the physical crack
direction because of the uneven loading of the specimens. The fracture surface is not
antisymmetric along the crack.
==PAGE:60==
50
Experimental study
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
−0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
∆L / L0
F/(A0σy)
 
 
DENT 41
DENT 42
DENT 47
(a)
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
−10
−5
0
5
x 10
−6
∆L / L0
T/(0.5b0A0σy)
 
 
DENT 41
DENT 42
DENT 47
(b)
Figure 3.23: DENT 41, 42 and 47, all xed at 0 rotation.
3.7.8
Mixed Mode I/III Loading: Large DENT Specimens
Mode III is activated by rotation at dierent rates and number of rotation changes. All 4
large DENT specimens are loaded initially at 1◦/min CW and then afterwards rotated:
• DENT 43: 3◦/min/CCW
• DENT 44: 5◦/min/CCW and 5◦/min/CW
• DENT 45: 2◦/sec/CCW, 2◦/sec/CW and 2◦/sec/CCW
• DENT 46: 2◦/sec/CCW, 2◦/sec/CW and 2◦/sec/CCW
DENT 43 and 44 have maximum rotation limits at ± 2.5◦from the starting point. DENT
45 and 46 have limits at ± 2◦. During testing the extensometers showed dierent outputs.
In some tests one of extensometers even showed a non-linear behaviour in the initial elastic
loading. The strain is either based on extensometer 1, 2 or the average, according the one
being most reasonable. Strain-stress and torque results are found in Figure 3.24.
The best result is obtained from DENT 43 (3◦/min/CCW ), which shows an antisymmetric
crack growth from the two crack tips with a single ip, as seen in Figure 3.25. From the
torque curve in Figure 3.24 (b), the ip is indicated as well, and further shows the direction
of the ip. The crack growth is controlled, as it was seen from the standard specimens. The
three remaining specimens did not show an antisymmetric pattern. It was expected for
all experiments, but it did not show the same tendency as the standard DENT specimens.
==PAGE:61==
3.7 Mixed Mode I/III Experiment
51
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
−0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
∆L / L0
F/(A0σy)
 
 
DENT 43
DENT 44
DENT 45
DENT 46
(a)
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
x 10
−5
∆L / L0
T/(0.5b0A0σy)
 
 
DENT 43
DENT 44
DENT 45
DENT 46
(b)
Figure 3.24: Rotation at dierent rates, all starts initially at 1◦/min CW and then
DENT 43: 3◦/min/CCW, DENT 44: 5◦/min/CCW and 5◦/min/CW,
DENT 45: 2◦/sec/CCW, 2◦/sec/CW and 2◦/sec/CCW and DENT 46:
2◦/sec/CCW, 2◦/sec/CW and 2◦/sec/CCW.
Figure 3.25: DENT 43: 3◦/min/CCW, showing antisymmetric crack propagation.
Though, rotational changes can still be seen in the torque curve. The DENT 45 was seen
to have a lower hardness from indentation testing, and it is seen to elongate mostly before
nal failure.
During the uneven crack growth, the crack was consequently initiating from the right
notch. It was discussed, if the large DENT specimens slipped in the grips, but it did not
seem to be a problem when looking at the grip marks. The grips in the testing machine
are 100 mm wide, which is the same as the ligament width. The specimens are additional
40 mm wide, giving 20 mm free, non-clamped region at the left and right-hand side.
It can further be added, that no other experiments has been carried out in the testing
machine between testing the standard and large DENT specimens. The set-up is thereby
identical for both test series.
==PAGE:62==
52
Experimental study
3.8
Tomography Scanning
In tomography scanning, X-rays are passed though an object. On the opposite site of
the X-ray beam, a detector records the transmitted intensity. A 2D image can be created
based on the absorption in density. If the object is scanned from several directions, a 3D
image can be created by post-processing computationally.
A Tomography scanning gives insight regarding the fracture process. A scanning is per-
formed in a DENT specimen in pure mode I loading, which did not exceed nal failure.
The loading was simply stopped at a small distance crack propagation. To make the
scanning easier, the crack and small surrounding area was cut out from the whole DENT
specimen. In scanning, it basically creates slices of the specimen which makes it possible
to visualize the cross-section, without doing further structural damage to the specimen.
The resolution of each slice eects the scanning time, together with total number of slices.
In Figure 3.26, three scanning pictures are chosen from a complete scanning. The crack
is seen to propagate initially from the center in the shear band at 45◦. It propagates
towards the edges in the second scanning picture, and here propagation has a slightly S-
shaped failure mode. The third picture shows nal failure where the two parts are totally
disconnected.
Figure 3.26: Tomography scanning of crack in the DENT specimen.
==PAGE:63==
Chapter 4
Numerical study
A numerical model is a representation of a real-life model. They will never be exactly
the same, but when being specic about the material behaviour and micromechanisms it
will bring them closer together. This chapter carries out a nite element analysis, dealing
with fracture modes in the aluminum DENT specimen. A numerical model is congured
in the commercial nite element software ANSYS Mechanical v. 15.0. The model denes
the DENT cross-section in 2D for simplicity and computational eciency.
The analysis will initially handle mode I loading looking at model validation, a para-
meter study, and nally simulate mixed mode I/III loading. It features plasticity by an
incremental solution using Power law hardening. ANSYS has a build-in material model
dening the micromechanics in Gurson damage including void nucleation, growth and
coalescence. The model uses an asymmetric geometry to capture the fracture mode.
The graphical user interface in ANSYS Mechanical is known not to be the best.
It
is preferred to write an input script instead, providing commands in an ANSYS-way.
Thereby, it is easy to change parameters such as dimensions, hardening exponent, initial
porosity i.e. in a robust manner. A basic input script used to carry out the numerical
study can be found in Appendix E. Further, nodal values has been extracted to be plotted
externally in Matlab.
==PAGE:64==
54
Numerical study
4.1
2D Plane Strain Model
In the experiments, the DENT specimens are in 3 dimensions dened by a width, length,
and thickness. The numerical model does not model the full DENT specimen in 3D,
instead a 2D plane strain approximation is modelled. A 2D model is computationally
more ecient, but does not tell anything about deformation in the third dimension. In
the experiments, the crack propagates from a blunted crack tip, which is not taken into
account in the numerical model. The model describes the DENT specimen cross-section
in front of the crack tip, as seen in Figure 4.1. That is also why no notches are present.
The stress level cannot be directly compared to the experimental results.
The 2D cross-section is discretized using both a 4-node and 8-node element. The elements
are respectively known as PLANE182 and PLANE183 in ANSYS. Both elements have
two degrees of freedom per node describing displacement in x- and y-direction. Failure is
observed by prescribing a displacement in the upper part of the model. The bottom part
is constrained in the y-direction. The top and bottom part of the centerline is constrained
in the x-direction to ensure necking, and failure is concentrated at the middle area. A
sketch containing displacement and boundary conditions can be found in Figure 4.2.
It is dicult to capture the details from the failure process due to non-linearity and
small scale damage in the material. It is as well dicult to solve from a computational
view. Thus, an incremental displacement is implemented in solving the problem. The
analysis features Power law hardening, Gurson damage and non-linear geometry.
For
every analysis, displacement in top nodes and force for every bottom node is written to a
separate le. The output data is post-processed in Matlab to show a strain-stress relation.
Figure 4.1: The 2D cross-section of the DENT specimen is modelled numerically in front
of the crack tip. The model is geometrically dened by plate thickness and
length.
==PAGE:65==
4.1 2D Plane Strain Model
55
Figure 4.2: Sketch of numerical model including boundary conditions.
A input script is used for ANSYS to easily change parameters in the model. A quick
description is found here to give an overview of the script found in Appendix E:
1. Dening geometrical parameters including size of imperfections
2. Give elastic parameters, Power law hardening and Gurson damage with void growth,
nucleation and coalescence
3. Chose element type, either PLANE182 or PLANE183, with plane strain condition
4. Create geometry from geometrical parameters
5. Apply boundary conditions
6. Dene incremental displacement and solve analysis for each increment via a loop
7. Write displacement and force to separate les
The script is congured specically to the individual analysis. The geometry is important
to get the desired failure mode.
4.1.1
Imperfections
For a model with perfect geometry no necking or specic failure mode is seen.
The
model will just elongate and if necking shows the failure mode will be more depended on
numerical errors and noise. In relation to a real physical structure, it is neither perfect in
geometry.
==PAGE:66==
56
Numerical study
The model is roughly set-up with 6 keypoints in ANSYS dening the outline of the cross-
section. The keypoints will later be turned into nodes together with the complete meshed
model. The 4 corner keypoints are placed symmetrically in the x- and y-plane, and the last
2 middle keypoints denes the imperfect model, as illustrated in Figure 4.3. The middle-
left keypoint is placed lower than the center line towards the middle, and the middle-right
keypoint is placed higher than the center line towards the middle. The 2 middle keypoints
are thereby imperfect in both x- and y-direction. The standard imperfect geometrical
relation in the present numerical study is found in Table 4.1, where the o-set compared
to a perfect geometry is stated.
4.1.2
Gurson Damage Modelling in ANSYS
ANSYS has a build-in Gurson damage material model to dene a ductile porous ma-
terial. It is based on the theory presented in Section 2.4.1. The material model uses
the micromechanisms void growth, nucleation and coalescence. It works numerically by
changing the stiness in the individual element. For instance, if an area experiences a
high degree of coalescence, the elements will reduce its stiness signicantly.
Figure 4.3: Sketch of imperfections in the numerical model. Imperfections are sketched
larger for illustrative purpose.
Table 4.1: Geometrical imperfections, where the 2 middle keypoints are imperfect in
relation to Figure 4.3. The o-set values in both directions are found.
x-direction, o-set
y-direction, o-set
Left-middle keypoint
t / 1000
- L / 1000
Right-middle keypoint
- t / 1000
L / 1000
==PAGE:67==
4.2 Mode I Loading
57
The Gurson damage model has several user dened parameters. From real-life point of
view they are of course related to a specic material, which are often unknown and cannot
be changed. Tvergaard-Needleman constants will stay constant in all analysis. A basis
model denes the parameters for the ANSYS script as:
SIGMA_Y
= 200
![MPa] YIELD STRESS
F_0
= 0.01
!INITIAL POROSITY
Q1
= 1.5
!FIRST TVERGAARD CONSTANT
Q2
= 1.0
!SECOND TVERGAARD CONSTANT
Q3
= 2.25
!THIRD TVERGAARD CONSTANT
!PARAMETERS FOR STRAIN CONTROLLED NECLEATION MODEL
F_N
= 0.01
!NUCLEATION POROSITY
STRAIN_N
= 0.3
!MEAN STRAIN
S_N
= STRAIN_N/3
!STRAIN STANDARD DEVIATION
!PARAMETERS FOR COALESCENCE
F_C
= 0.15
!CRITICAL POROSITY
F_F
= 1/Q1
!FAILURE POROSITY
!HARDENING LAW
N
= 0.1
!POWER LAW EXPONENT
These parameters are the standard, basis parameters in the present numerical study. If a
parameter is not specically mentioned, it is dened by the basis parameter.
4.2
Mode I Loading
In mode I loading, shear bands are desired to localize in the model. The shear bands
will form upon necking and nal fracture occurs in the shear band, resulting in a slant
fracture mode. A suitable model will be congured in the early stage of the numerical
study. When the model is validated and trusted, it will be further analyzed regarding
damage and other parameters.
==PAGE:68==
58
Numerical study
4.2.1
Model Validation
In general nite element analysis, it is important to validate the model. A nite element
model represent a real physical model in a discrete structure. A correct solution would
be obtained by an innite number of elements which is not possible. Having a nely
discretized model is demanding in terms of computational power. It is all about nding
the optimal state, minimizing the error. It is known, that a coarser discretization results
in a stier structure.
The model in the present study is validated using two dierent element types, thus visu-
alizing how necking and the shear band localizes. Further, a mesh renement analysis is
carried out. Plasticity uses Power law hardening with the hardening exponent n = 0.1.
Gurson damage is included without void nucleation and coalescence.
Firstly, the element type is varied between a 4-node element and a 8-node element, together
with 3 dierent initial porosities for the Gurson damage model: f0 = [0.005; 0.01; 0.02].
The relation between strain and stresses can be found in Figure 4.4, where the rst part
of the curves are all most identical, whereas dierence is seen towards nal failure. A zero
stress level is not reached numerically for any simulation. The elements in the damaged
region will always have some stiness left, but they are imagined as failed. The 8-node
element is found to be the best option so far, where the 4-node element is being a bit too
sti.
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
∆L/L0
F/(A0σy)
 
 
4-node element
8-node element
f0 = 0.01
f0 = 0.02
f0 = 0.005
Figure 4.4: 4-node and 8-node element for 3 initial porosities, f0 = [0.005; 0.01; 0.02]
==PAGE:69==
4.2 Mode I Loading
59
How the two element dissolves necking and shear band localization for the 3 initial porosi-
ties are shown in Figure 4.5. For an initial porosity at f0=0.005 both element types show
failure in the center part. For f0=0.01 both cases indicate slightly a shear band from
low left to high right. The 4-node element still has more deformation in the center. For
f0=0.02 the shear band shows more, but width is a little dierent, where the 8-node el-
ement is the thinnest. The 8-node element is chosen to be used further in the numerical
study, as it captures the micromechanical behaviour better.
With the chosen element type, a suitable mesh size is found. The critical area is the
middle-section, where a large amount of plastic work is going on. The upper and lower
part does not need the degree of renement. An example of the renement is shown in
Figure 4.6, which is carried out several times for a ner mesh.
By rening the middle-section, it is investigated how many elements are needed. The
initial porosity stays xed at f0=0.01. The results can be obtained in Figure 4.7, where
a low number of elements gives a sti structure in the nal phase. The stresses follow
a close-to-vertical drop from ε=1.7 towards nal failure for a high number of elements.
There is no doubt, if the number of elements are increased further, it will even be more
vertical. The nal renement requires a lot of elements and thereby a lot of computational
power. A mesh size of 6228 elements is sucient to be used in the following analysis.
(a) 4-node, f0=0.005
(b) 4-node, f0=0.01
(c) 4-node, f0=0.02
(d) 8-node, f0=0.005
(e) 8-node, f0=0.01
(f) 8-node, f0=0.02
Figure 4.5: Mesh in the middle section for both 4-node and 8-node elements using dif-
ferent initial porosities.
==PAGE:70==
60
Numerical study
Figure 4.6: Mesh renement shown in the middle section for half a model. This entire
model consists of 552 elements.
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
∆L/L0
F/(A0σy)
 
 
180 Elem.
552 Elem.
1104 Elem.
4152 Elem.
6228 Elem.
10380 Elem.
Figure 4.7: Mesh convergence analysis. 6228 elements are sucient.
4.2.2
First Shear Band Formation
In this analysis, the initial porosity xed at f0=0.01. The model is the same as before,
not including void nucleation and coalescence. It is studied how the model physically
develops corresponding at chosen points in the strain-stress relation. In Figure 4.8 the
curve is presented and 4 points are marked, where the mesh is shown. Point (b) is in the
initial plastic region, where the model is elongated permanently. Necking begins already
at curve apex, where the highest load is seen.
Visually, it only shows as very small
deformation. In the curve, it is further progressed in point (c). In point (d) the shear
band starts to localize. The fracture develops towards nal failure in point (e), where
elongated elements are seen in the shear band.
==PAGE:71==
4.2 Mode I Loading
61
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0
0.5
1
1.5
∆L/L0
F/(A0σy)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 4.8: Model behaviour at selected points in the strain-stress relation. Upper and
lower part of the mesh has been cut away (a) strain and normalized stress
relation (b) initial plastic deformation (c) necking is seen in the middle (d)
necking continues and shear band localization (e) elongated elements in the
shear band shows ductile failure progression.
When knowing how the model behaves at certain points, it is about making the model
more advanced by adding void nucleation and coalescence. And further, to analyze the
eect of these.
4.2.3
Parameter Study
So far in the numerical study, some parameters have already been studied. In the model
validation there has been looked into initial porosity, element type, and total number of
elements. The micromechanical behaviour, void nucleation and coalescence has not been
==PAGE:72==
62
Numerical study
taken into account yet, but it will be included from now and onwards. Only 1 parameter
is varied in the individual analysis to keep it simple. The remaining parameters are xed
according to the basic parameters. This parameter study will focus on the inuence of:
1. Appearance of new voids by changing the nucleation porosity
F_N = [0.005; 0.010; 0.020]
2. The porosity at which voids coalesce (grows together)
F_c = [0.10; 0.15; 0.20]
3. The Power Law hardening exponent
N = [0.05; 0.10; 0.20]
4. Changing the mean strain for void nucleation, εN or
STRAIN_N = [0.25; 0.30; 0.35]
When all micromechanical behaviour is included, the simulations are experienced to be
more unstable. Especially, when the parameters are increased, and thereby having larger
damage in the model. The computational time increased as well, and the incremental
solution needed more increments to converge.
All results from the analysis are shown graphically in Figure 4.9. The nucleation porosity
aects the nal failure and on-set of shear band localization, as seen in Figure 4.9 (a).
When the nucleated void volume fraction is larger, the model looses it load carrying ca-
pacity earlier. This makes physically sense as well. The void coalescence porosity analysis
is not as expected. In Figure 4.9 (b), it is seen that changing the parameter does not
aect anything in the loading curve. The Power law hardening exponent changes the
response already from the initial plastic region in Figure 4.9 (c). It does also change the
point of necking, shear band localization, and nal failure signicantly. It is seen to have
a strong aect on the overall strain-stress relation. In Figure 4.9 (d) the void nucleation
mean strain is varied. In the chosen parameter range, the result are close by each other.
A small change is seen in the last part of the curve, where the highest mean strain makes
the model a little stronger before it reaches nal failure.
==PAGE:73==
4.3 Mixed Mode I/III Loading
63
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0
0.5
1
1.5
∆L/L0
F/(A0σy)
 
 
fN=0.005
fN=0.010
fN=0.020
(a)
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0
0.5
1
1.5
∆L/L0
F/(A0σy)
 
 
fc=0.10
fc=0.15
fc=0.20
(b)
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
∆L/L0
F/(A0σy)
 
 
n=0.05
n=0.10
n=0.20
(c)
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0
0.5
1
1.5
∆L/L0
F/(A0σy)
 
 
εN=0.25
εN=0.30
εN=0.35
(d)
Figure 4.9: Parameter study looking at (a) nucleation porosity, (b) coalescence porosity,
(c) Power law hardening exponent and (d) nucleation mean strain.
4.3
Mixed Mode I/III Loading
Mode III loading is added to the numerical model. It is implemented in the incremental
solution by moving the upper constraints either in positive or negative x-direction. All
micromechanical behaviour is included and the parameters are the same as the basic
model. Further, mode I is supposed to be dominant, and thus displacement of mode III
will be mode I/10 if nothing else is mentioned.
In the pure mode I analysis, the active shear band was depended on the imperfections.
The rst analysis here investigates the inuence of mode III loading direction. The active
==PAGE:74==
64
Numerical study
shear band is strongly depended on the loading direction as shown in Figure 4.10. A
positive load in the x-direction gives active shear band in +45◦, and a negative load in
x-direction gives -45◦shear band. Further, the opposite non-active shear band is also
slightly seen in the Figure 4.10. It should be noticed, the imperfections are exactly the
same for the two results according to the earlier mentioned o-set in Table 4.1.
The active shear band is found to depend on imperfection and mode III loading direction.
It is the same tendency observed during the experiments. It is desired to analyse mode
III loading initiation around on-set of shear band localization.
A new incremental solution was created, where the loading begins in pure mode I and
mode III is initiated at a desired state in the solution process.
The rst shear band
formation is supposed to depend on the imperfection whereas the mode III load should
provoke failure towards the other shear band. The purpose is to analyze, if plastic ow
can indicate a ip upon rst shear band formation. The rst shear band occurs in a
narrow interval in the incremental solution. Multiple solutions were performed, where the
number of increments were raised to be very specic about the mode III initiation, trying
out dierent options. The size of mode III (x-displacement) was investigated at dierent
rates as well. Anyhow, the results showed the same tendency as already seen. It was
either depended on the imperfection or mode III, and not a combination.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.10: Mixed mode I/III loading, plastic strains are shown, where (a) has mode
III loading in the positive x-direction and (b) has mode III loading in the
negative x-direction.
==PAGE:75==
Chapter 5
Discussion and Concluding Remarks
In completion of this master thesis, plate tearing has been investigated both experimen-
tally and numerically. The overall subject to be enlightened was the inuence of a mixed
mode I/III loading in ductile fracture, using aluminum 6082.
The material properties were changed during a heat treatment process and thus, natural
ageing in the materiel was experienced. For future research, it will be interesting looking
even more into this process, for instance to investigate the failure mode of a pure α
structure. This will anyhow require a very short time between quenching and load testing,
or additionally cooling in between, to slow down precipitation growth as much as possible.
The natural ageing behaviour is most likely depended on the specic alloy, giving that
applying another alloy might change the natural ageing behavior.
For all experiments, the articial ageing was initiated after convergence in natural ageing.
It was consistent for all experiments. Future research can reveal, if shorter dierence
in time between solid solution treatment and articial ageing will aect the material.
Articial ageing can again be claried by hardness testing, where dierent hardening
initiation time intervals can be tested. Further, it can be loaded in a tensile/torsion testing
machine to study the failure mode. It should be added, that in the present study there
was found no dierence in the use of air or oil as heat transferring medium for articial
ageing. The DENT specimens are made from a rolled plate and it can be questioned, if
the rolling has less inuence due to the heat treatment. From the manufacturer it is most
==PAGE:76==
66
Discussion and Concluding Remarks
likely rolled after heat treatment. Some of the dislocation caused by rolling may vanish
from the solution treatment, creating an initially homogeneous α structure.
In the initial mode I experiment several articial ageing intervals were tested. An interval
giving a slant fracture was chosen. Towards the center, where the crack tips approaches,
it seemed like crack propagation from one side aected the other. Though, the specimen
thickness might have been too thin for showing consequent slant fracture all way to the
center. Therefore, it will be interesting looking into thicker specimens. The thickness is
originally estimated from experimental tension/torsion machine capability at DTU Lyng-
by, which unfortunately broke down. At DTU Risø, the experimental machine had a
higher capability and thicker specimens could be tested.
In mode I testing at DTU Risø with read-out of torque, it did not show a completely clear
relation between torque load and slant fracture direction. A thicker specimen might have
shown more consistency for mode III data output in pure mode I loading. It will as well
create a higher torque in the load cell. Depending on the thickness, the torque is supposed
the reach the level as required for completely accurate measurements in relation to 1 % of
the maximum torque capacity. In the experiments, the measurement of strain is limited
to one direction, where the change in length is measured. Digital image correlation can
be used to capture the complete displacement eld. This might also enlighten the issues
discovered while testing large DENT specimens. Moreover, out-of-plane strain can be
discovered.
The mixed mode I/III experiments using the standard DENT specimen showed adequate
results.
A relation was found between rotational direction, induced torque and slant
crack propagation. Via a change in direction, the slant failure changed active shear band
resulting in a ip.
The large DENT specimens were not as successful as the standard DENT specimens. The
large specimens are wider than the grips in the testing machine. To achieve better results,
an option could be to test a DENT specimen size which is in between the ones already
tested, where the DENT width does not exceed the grip width. Further, the grips were
mechanical ones having a load limit close to the obtained one in the large DENT specimen.
A change to hydraulic grips could give other results and make the testing process easier.
Tomography scanning produced insight about the fracture process, which would be di-
cult to obtain in another way. The scanning is performed after load testing. If possible,
==PAGE:77==
67
scanning during loading could give even more valuable insight.
A 2D plane strain numerical model was congured with imperfect geometry for appearance
of failure mode.
The model was validated and conrmed by analyzing two elements
and mesh size. It included the micromechanical behaviour void growth, nucleation and
coalescence by the Gurson damage model. The inuence of the micromechanisms was
further analyzed in a parameter study.
Specic shear band localization was shown, but a ip indication was very dicult to
capture. The incremental solution was even divided into many increments, which enables
mode III initiation at a specication time in the solution.
For at future extension of this study, one could look more into dierent hardening models.
The implicit solution will not experience complete loss in stiness. A future extension
can be to create a model, which has the capability of turning the stiness in elements
completely o.
The analysis studying mode I loading illustrated that shear band formation is depended on
the imperfection. In the mixed mode I/III loading case, an agreement was seen in active
shear band and mode III loading direction. The active shear band changed according
loading direction in the same way, as it was seen in the experimental study.
==PAGE:78==
68
Bibliography
==PAGE:79==
Bibliography
Anderson, T. L., 2005. Fracture mechanics: fundamentals and applications. CRC press.
Brooks, C. R., 1991. Principles of heat treating of nonferrous alloys. ASM Handbook 4,
823840.
Callister, W. D., Rethwisch, D. G., 2007. Materials Science and Engineering: An Intro-
duction. Vol. 7. John Wiley & Sons.
Cook, R. D., Malkus, D. S., Plesha, M. E., Witt, R. J., 2002. Concepts and Applications
of Finite Element Analysis. John Wiley & Sons.
Davis, J. R., 1993. ASM Specialty Handbook: Aluminum and Aluminum Alloys. ASM
International.
El-Naaman, S. A., Nielsen, K. L., 2013. Observations on mode i ductile tearing in sheet
metals. European Journal of Mechanics a - Solids 42, 5462.
Gurson, A. L., 1977. Continuum theory of ductile rupture by void nucleation and growth:
Part iyield criteria and ow rules for porous ductile media. Journal of engineering
materials and technology 99 (1), 215.
Simonsen, B. C., Törnqvist, R., 2004. Experimental and numerical modelling of ductile
crack propagation in large-scale shell structures. Marine Structures 17 (1), 127.
Sjölander, E., Seifeddine, S., 2010. The heat treatment of alsicumg casting alloys.
Journal of Materials Processing Technology 210 (10), 12491259.
Tvergaard, V., 1990. Material failure by void growth to coalescence. Advances in applied
Mechanics 27 (1), 83151.
==PAGE:80==
70
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Tvergaard, V., 2001. Plasticity and Creep In Structural Materials. Department of Me-
chanical Engineering, Solid Mehcanics, Technical University of Denmark.
Tvergaard, V., Needleman, A., 1984. Analysis of the cup-cone fracture in a round tensile
bar. Acta metallurgica 32 (1), 157169.
==PAGE:81==
Appendix A
Timetable and Progress Description
In this master thesis, a Gantt chart was created in the early project phase to give an
overview of the project progress. The project activities was written together with an time
estimate on how long it will take to complete an individual activity. The Gantt chart
has been updated, to give insight about the thesis process. The chart shows how the
activity was planned originally and how it went. Relevant activities are commented in
this appendix, in relation to how they went dierent from the initial plan. The Gantt
chart is found in the end of this appendix
The rst delay to notice is the production of the DENT specimens. All specimens was
produced in the wrong aluminum alloy from the workshop at DTU, and it took some
time before I realised that something was wrong. It is impossible to tell one alloy from
another by looking at it. The one I got was an aluminum 1050 which is not heat treatable,
and thereby not usable for this study. Then there was some trouble getting the correct
aluminum 6082 alloy, which was found from another supplier.
When getting the DENT specimens late, all experiments was delayed as well. Therefore,
the heat treatment was initiated right at specimens arrival. The solution treatment was
carried out for all specimens with 4 at a time. The precipitation hardening was initially
about treating 1 specimen, and checking the failure mode from mode I loading, and then
estimate a time interval change for the following specimen, before starting the process
again. To study the specimens after heat treatment, hardness testing took more time
==PAGE:82==
72
Timetable and Progress Description
than expected due to the natural ageing observation.
From the beginning, the plan was to do both mode I and mixed mode I/III experiments
at DTU Lyngby. A testing machine was available for this purpose. I spend a lot of time
learning the test equipment, dealing with smaller problems, and making changes to the
set-up. When I was about to get everything under control, the lower grip got stuck in
its closed position and repairment had long prospects. Unfortunately, no other testing
machine at DTU Lyngby had the option for mixed mode I/III loading. Then I decided to
switch and learn a uni-axial test machine at DTU Lyngby for initial mode I experiments
from which I could draw conclusions for further experiments.
I made connection to DTU Risø to explore possibilities there. The sta at DTU Risø were
very help full, and showed a tension-torsion testing machine with an even higher force and
moment capacity than the machine at DTU Lyngby. This was also the reason for testing
specimens with a wider ligament. All experiments at DTU Risø was carried out within 4
weeks of submission date, and nal experiment was in the same week as submission. In
an optimal process, it would have been preferred to get all results a few weeks before.
Further it can be added, that it took a lot of time and eort to make agreements regarding
all experiments from the heat treatment process to nal mode I/III loading, and to nd
the right person for the specic problem. Even so, I still gained a lot of experience from
it.
The overall thesis progressed ne during the total 5 months, though the nal month was
hectic. I have gained a lot of knowledge about aluminum, the ductile failure process,
numerical analysis, and experimental tesing.
==PAGE:83==
73
 Period Highlight 22
Plan
Actual
% Complete
Actual (beyond plan)
% Complete (beyond plan)
PLAN
PLAN
ACTUAL
ACTUAL
PERCENT
ACTIVITY
START DURATION START
DURATION COMPLETE
Week
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22
Study previous experiment
1
3
1
3
100%
Technical drawing DENT
2
2
2
2
100%
Production of DENT-spec.
3
3
3
8
100%
Project description 
3
1
3
1
100%
Investigate exp. possibilities 
4
2
4
3
100%
Heat-treatment DENT
5
3
10
10
100%
Hardness test
6
3
10
10
100%
Experiment(1): DENT consisten slant
6
4
11
7
100%
Data processing experiment(1)
8
3
16
3
100%
Make report structure
5
5
5
5
100%
Experiement(2):  Mixed mode I/III
13
3
19
4
100%
Data processing experiment(2)
14
4
19
4
100%
Investigate ANSYS material model
8
2
8
3
100%
2D plane strain numerical model
11
10
11
11
100%
Cross-section experiment
12
5
12
5
100%
Finalize report
20
3
20
3
100%
0%
Timetable
==PAGE:84==
74
Timetable and Progress Description
==PAGE:85==
Appendix B
Technical drawing DENT specimen
Department of Mechanical Engineering
DK 2800 Kgs.Lyngby
Technical University of Denmark
80
74,5
20
1
3
R0,5
150
1
Skala 1:20
1
40 stk
Drawing no.
Format: A4
DENT-specimen
Title:
Draw.(DB): DRW0001
Gen. tol 
0,1 
Alu 6082
Matr:
PRT0001
DB-name:
lasse.specht(a)gmail.com 
Tlf 25531993
Lasse Specht Jensen
Name:
==PAGE:86==
76
Technical drawing DENT specimen
==PAGE:87==
Appendix C
Experimental Plans and DENT
Specimen Photographs
This appendix contains the experimental plans used at DTU Risø and photographs of the
DENT specimens for the mixed mode I/III experiments.
==PAGE:88==
Experiments at DTU Risø, January 2015, Lasse Specht Jensen 
Specimen 
number 
Displacement 
rate 
Rotation rate 
Note 
Comments 
13 
0.5 mm / min 
0 
Investigate  influence of initial length 
Measure possible moment 
No extensometers 
14 
0.5 mm / min 
0 
Investigate  influence of initial length 
Measure possible moment 
Back-side turned forward 
15 
0.5 mm / min 
0 
Investigate  influence of initial length 
Measure possible moment 
Slant crack growth in same 
direction 
16 
0.5 mm / min 
0 
Investigate  influence of initial length 
Measure possible moment 
 
17 
0.5 mm / min 
0.5° / min / clockwise 
Check if rotation rate seems 
reasonable 
Positive direction according to the 
machine. Lower grip turns 
clockwise seen from above. 
18 
0.5 mm / min 
2° / min / clockwise 
 
2° / min is too much 
19 
0.5 mm / min 
1° / min / clockwise 
 
1° / min seems best 
20 
0.5 mm / min 
1° / min / counter-clockwise 
 
 
21 
0.5 mm / min 
2° / min / clockwise 
Start rotation at plastic initiation 
 
22 
0.5 mm / min 
3° / min /  clockwise 
Start rotation at  plastic  initiation, 
strain = 0.4 % 
Small plate slipped from beginning 
23 
0.5 mm / min 
2° / min /  counter-clockwise 
Start rotation at  plastic  initiation 
Small plate slipped from beginning 
24 
0.5 mm / min 
3° / min /  counter-clockwise 
Start rotation at  plastic initiation 
 
==PAGE:89==
Experiments at DTU Risø, January 2015, Lasse Specht Jensen 
Specimen 
number 
Displacement 
rate 
Rotation rate 
Note 
Comments 
25 
0.5 mm / min 
3° / min /  clock-wise 
Start rotation at crack propagation, 
strain = 0.4 % 
Retake of DENT 22 
26 
0.5 mm / min 
2° / min /  counter-clock-wise 
Start rotation at crack propagation, 
strain = 0.4 % 
Retake of DENT 23 
27 
0.5 mm / min 
1° / min /  clock-wise 
1° / min /  counter-clock-wise 
From start 
At initial plastic deformation 
 
28 
0.5 mm / min 
1° / min /  clock-wise 
2° / min /  counter-clock-wise 
From start 
At initial plastic deformation 
 
29 
0.5 mm / min 
1° / min /  clock-wise 
1° / min /  counter-clock-wise 
From start 
At initial crack propagation  
 
At strain = 0.02 
31 
0.5 mm / min 
1° / min /  clock-wise 
3° / min /  counter-clock-wise 
From start 
At initial  crack propagation 
 
At strain = 0.02 
32 
0.5 mm / min 
1° / min /  clock-wise 
3° / min /  counter-clock-wise 
From start 
At initial  crack propagation 
 
At strain = 0.02 
33 
0.5 mm / min 
1° / min /  clock-wise 
5° / sec /  counter-clock-wise 
0 
From start 
At initial  crack propagation 
 
At strain = 0.02, in 1 second 
After  5° rotation strain is kept 
constant 
==PAGE:90==
Experiments at DTU Risø, January 2015, Lasse Specht Jensen 
Specimen 
number 
Displacement 
rate 
Rotation rate 
Note 
Comments 
25 
0.5 mm / min 
3° / min /  clock-wise 
Start rotation at crack propagation, 
strain = 0.4 % 
Retake of DENT 22 
26 
0.5 mm / min 
2° / min /  counter-clock-wise 
Start rotation at crack propagation, 
strain = 0.4 % 
Retake of DENT 23 
27 
0.5 mm / min 
1° / min /  clock-wise 
1° / min /  counter-clock-wise 
From start 
At initial plastic deformation 
 
28 
0.5 mm / min 
1° / min /  clock-wise 
2° / min /  counter-clock-wise 
From start 
At initial plastic deformation 
 
29 
0.5 mm / min 
1° / min /  clock-wise 
1° / min /  counter-clock-wise 
From start 
At initial crack propagation  
 
At strain = 0.02 
31 
0.5 mm / min 
1° / min /  clock-wise 
3° / min /  counter-clock-wise 
From start 
At initial  crack propagation 
 
At strain = 0.02 
32 
0.5 mm / min 
1° / min /  clock-wise 
3° / min /  counter-clock-wise 
From start 
At initial  crack propagation 
 
At strain = 0.02 
33 
0.5 mm / min 
1° / min /  clock-wise 
5° / sec /  counter-clock-wise 
0 
From start 
At initial  crack propagation 
 
At strain = 0.02, in 1 second 
After  5° rotation strain is kept 
constant 
==PAGE:91==
81
DENT 13
DENT 14
DENT 15
DENT 16
DENT 17
DENT 18
DENT 19
DENT 20
==PAGE:92==
82
Experimental Plans and DENT Specimen Photographs
DENT 21
DENT 22
DENT 23
DENT 24
DENT 25
DENT 26
DENT 27
DENT 28
==PAGE:93==
83
DENT 29
DENT 31
DENT 32
DENT 33
Large DENT 41
Large DENT 42
Large DENT 43
==PAGE:94==
84
Experimental Plans and DENT Specimen Photographs
Large DENT 44
Large DENT 45
Large DENT 46
Large DENT 47
==PAGE:95==
Appendix D
Hardness Measurements
In this appendix hardness measurements and estimated yield stress can be found in the
following page. The data is from the DENT specimens used at DTU Risø.
==PAGE:96==
DENT-specimen experiment
By Lasse Specht Jensen, DTU master thesis 2014-2015
Number
Hardness 
after prec. 
Hardening. 
[HV]
Estimated 
yield stress
13
100,6
301,8
14
99,7
299,2
15
100,6
301,8
16
100,8
302,4
17
102,3
307,0
18
101,9
305,7
19
100,1
300,4
20
101,2
303,7
21
101,7
305,0
22
99,1
297,2
23
100,2
300,5
24
101,3
303,8
25
101,9
305,7
26
98,4
295,3
27
99,1
297,2
28
101,9
305,7
29
101,7
305,1
31
98,9
296,6
32
100,6
301,7
33
102,3
302,4
41
100,8
302,4
42
100,6
301,7
43
98,4
295,3
44
100,6
301,7
45
90,4
271,2
46
100,8
302,5
47
106,0
317,9
==PAGE:97==
Appendix E
Input script for ANSYS
FINISH
/CLEAR, NOSTART
/TITLE, 2D Plane Strain Fracture Model
! Made by Lasse Specht Jensen
! Master thesis 2014/2015
!-----------------DIMENSION PARAMETERS-----------------!
W = 3
![mm] WIDTH
H = W*4
![mm] HEIGHT
OFFSET_L = W/1000
![mm] OFFSET MIDT POINT LEFT
OFFSET_R = -W/1000
![mm] OFFSET MIDT POINT RIGHT
!-----------------MESH PARAMETERS----------------------!
NELX_C = 4
!NO OF ELEMENTS IN X FOR COARSE SECTION
NELY_C = 10
!NO OF ELEMENTS IN Y FOR COARSE SECTION
/PREP7
!-----------------ELASTIC MATERIAL PROPERTIES----------!
E
= 70E3
![MPa] YOUNG'S MODULUS
NU = 0.3
!POISSONS RATIO
MP,EX,1,E
MP,PRXY,1,NU
!-----------------MATERIAL MODEL-----------------------!
!PARAMETERS FOR GURSON MODEL
SIGMA_Y
= 200
![MPa] YIELD STRESS
F_0
= 0.01
!INITIAL POROSITY
Q1
= 1.5
!FIRST TVERGAARD CONSTANT
Q2
= 1.0
!SECOND TVERGAARD CONSTANT
Q3
= 2.25
!THIRD TVERGAARD CONSTANT
!PARAMETERS FOR STRAIN CONTROLLED NECLEATION MODEL
F_N
= 0.01
!NUCLEATION POROSITY
STRAIN_N
= 0.3
!MEAN STRAIN
S_N
= STRAIN_N/3
!STRAIN STANDARD DEVIATION
==PAGE:98==
88
Input script for ANSYS
!PARAMETERS FOR COALESCENCE
F_C
= 0.15
!CRITICAL POROSITY
F_F
= 1/Q1
!FAILURE POROSITY
!HARDENING LAW
N
= 0.1
!POWER-LAW EXPONENT
!DEFINING MATERIAL MODELS
TB,GURSON,1,1,5,BASE
!GURSON MODEL
TBDATA,1,SIGMA_Y,F_0,Q1,Q2,Q3
!TB,GURSON,1,1,3,SNNU
!STRAIN CONTROLLED NUCLEATION
TBDATA,1,F_N,STRAIN_N,S_N
!TB,GURSON,1,1,2,COAL
!COALESCENCE
TBDATA,1,F_C,F_F
TB,NLISO,1,,2,POWER
!POWER-LAW MODEL
TBDATA,1,SIGMA_Y,N
!-----------------ELEMENT TYPE-------------------------!
ET,1,PLANE183
KEYOPT,1,3,2
!PLANE STRAIN
!-----------------AREAS--------------------------------!
BLC4,0,0,W,H/3
BLC4,0,(H/3)*2,W,H/3
!-----------------KEYPOINTS----------------------------!
K,,0+OFFSET_L,H/2-OFFSET_L
!MIDT KEYPOINT LEFT
K,,W+OFFSET_R,H/2-OFFSET_R
!MIDT KEYPOINT RIGHT
!-----------------AREA---------------------------------!
A,4,3,10,9
!MAKE MIDT SECTION TO AN AREA
A,9,10,6,5
!-----------------LINE DIVISION------------------------!
LD_HORI = NELX_C
!LINE DIVISION HORIZONTAL
LD_VERT = NELY_C
!LINE DIVISION VERTICAL
LESIZE,1,,,LD_HORI,,,,,
LESIZE,2,,,LD_VERT,,,,,
LESIZE,3,,,LD_HORI,,,,,
LESIZE,4,,,LD_VERT,,,,,
LESIZE,5,,,LD_HORI,,,,,
LESIZE,6,,,LD_VERT,,,,,
LESIZE,7,,,LD_HORI,,,,,
LESIZE,8,,,LD_VERT,,,,,
LESIZE,9,,,LD_VERT/2,,,,,
LESIZE,10,,,LD_HORI,,,,,
LESIZE,11,,,LD_VERT/2,,,,,
LESIZE,12,,,LD_VERT/2,,,,,
LESIZE,13,,,LD_VERT/2,,,,,
!-----------------MESH---------------------------------!
AMESH,ALL
!MESH REFINEMENT
ASEL,S,LOC,Y,(1/3)*H,(2/3)*H
AREFINE,ALL,,,,1,3,1
AREFINE,ALL,,,,3,3,1
*get,total_elem,elem,,count
!LIST TOTAL NUMBER OF ELEMENTS
!-----------------BOUNDARY CONDITIONS------------------!
NSEL,S,LOC,X,W/2-0.01,W/2+0.01
!SELECT ALL NODES IN W/2
NSEL,U,LOC,Y,0.2*H,0.8*H
!UNSELECT MID NODES
==PAGE:99==
89
D,ALL,,,,,,UX,,,,,
!FIX IN X-DIRECTION
NSEL,ALL
NSEL,S,LOC,Y,0
!SELECT BOTTOM NODES
D,ALL,,,,,,UY,,,,,
!FIX IN Y-DIRECTION
NSEL,ALL
FINISH
/SOL
!-----------------INCREMENTAL LOAD DATA----------------!
D = 0.30*H
!TOTAL DISPLACEMENT
incr = 1
!Increment
end = 50
!End of increment
X = 0
*DO,STEP,incr,end,incr
X = X + (D/end)
!----------LOADS---------------!
NSEL,S,LOC,Y,H
D,ALL, ,X, , , ,UY, , , , ,
NSEL,all
!----------ANALYSE-TYPE--------!
ANTYPE,0
NSUBST,10,1000,1
! Number of load steps
OUTRES,ALL,ALL
! Output data for all load steps
AUTOTS,1
! Auto time stepping on
LNSRCH,1
! Line search on
NEQIT,1000
! 1000 iteration maximum
NLGEOM,ON
SOLVE
*ENDDO
FINISH
/POST26
!-----------------OUTPUT TO FILE----------------------!
NSEL,S,LOC,Y,0
!SELECT BOTTOM NODES
*GET,N_BOTTOM,NODE,0,NUM,MAX
!NUMBER OF BOTTOM NODES
NSEL,ALL
!GET THE TOTAL NUMBER OF TIMESTEPS INCLUDING SUBSTEPS
*GET,TIME_STEPS,ACTIVE,0,SOLU,NCMIT
*DIM,FORCE_Y,ARRAY,TIME_STEPS,N_BOTTOM,1,,,
!DEFINE FORCE_Y ARRAY SIZE
*DIM,DISP_Y,ARRAY,TIME_STEPS,1,1
!DEFINE DISPLACEMENT ARRAY
*DO,I,1,N_BOTTOM,1
RFORCE,2,I,F,Y,FY_%CHRVAL(I)%
!GET ALL REACTION FORCES IN BOTTOM
VGET,FORCE_Y(1,%CHRVAL(I)%),2,1
!MOVE INTO FORCE ARRAY
*ENDDO
*CREATE,ansuitmp
*MWRITE,FORCE_Y,RFORCE_Y,TXT,,jik,N_BOTTOM,TIMESTEPS,1
!WRITE TXT FILE
(40(E15.6',')E15.6)
*END
/INPUT,ansuitmp
NSEL,S,LOC,Y,H
!SELECT TOP NODES
NSEL,R,LOC,X,0
!SELECT UPPER LEFT NODE
*GET,TOP_NODE,NODE,0,NUM,MIN
!GET NODE NUMBER
==PAGE:100==
90
Input script for ANSYS
NSOL,3,TOP_NODE,U,Y,UY,
!DISPLACEMENT IN Y-DIRECTION
VGET,DISP_Y,3,1
*CREATE,ansuitmp
*MWRITE,DISP_Y,DISPLACEMENT_Y,TXT,,jik,1,TIMESTEPS,1
!WRITE TXT FILE
(1(E15.6))
*END
/INPUT,ansuitmp
