==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
Numerical study of hydrodynamic 
forces on complex structures with 
application to objects in moonpool
Ann-Sofi e Bjørke
March 2015
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Numerical study of hydrodynamic
forces on complex structures with
application to objects in moon-
pool
M.Sc. in Civil Engineering - 30 ECTS
Project period: 15.09.2014 - 08.03.2015
Completed at
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
2800-DK Kgs. Lyngby
In collaboration with
Statoil ASA
7053-NO Ranheim
MARINTEK
7052-NO Trondheim
Supervisors
Professor Erik Damgaard Christensen
Technical University of Denmark
Rolf Baarholm, Specialist Platform Technology
Statoil ASA
Trygve Kristiansen, Senior Research Scientist
Reza Firoozkoohi, Researcher
MARINTEK
Submitted 08.03.2015 by
Ann-Soﬁe Bjørke, s092101
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
As subsea production solutions become more prevalent in the oﬀshore oil and gas
industry, the need for operation of support vessels for installation and maintenance of
the facilities increases. In order to save costs, it is crucial for operators to be able to
access subsea production facilities from support vessels at all times.
Many support vessels are equipped with a moonpool which serves as an access route
for equipment and structures such as subsea modules to enter the sea. Due to vessel
motions, sloshing may occur in a moonpool making operations diﬃcult and potentially
unsafe. A special cause for concern is the piston mode sloshing in which the water in
the moonpool oscillates vertically as a rigid body. In consideration of this, operational
limits in terms of signiﬁcant wave heights are imposed on moonpool vessel.
It is
desirable to develop tools for accurate prediction of vessel and moonpool dynamics
in order to apply more rational operational limits and thus eliminating the use of
excessively conservative ones.
It has been shown that the presence of a structure such as a subsea module in the
moonpool will signiﬁcantly decrease the amplitude of the piston mode motion. In
order to predict this eﬀect, the forces exerted on the structure when exposed to the
oscillatory ﬂow are to be predicted. A rational expression for this force prediction is
therefore desired. The aim of this thesis is to investigate the parameters governing the
forces exerted on structures placed in a moonpool experiencing piston mode sloshing.
Based on the ﬁndings, suggestions for an approach to developing a rational force
prediction are made.
The study is performed as a two-dimensional study using the open source CFD code
OpenFOAM. The structures are modelled as clusters of cylinders with square cross-
sections placed in a tunnel with forced oscillatory ﬂow. The relevant parameters to
investigate are identiﬁed through dimensional analysis of the problem. Results are
presented in terms of force coeﬃcients found by Morison ﬁt to the produced force time
series.
It is shown that interaction and blockage eﬀects signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the in-line force
exerted on a structure consisting of multiple members in close proximity exposed to
a conﬁned oscillatory ﬂow. Blockage eﬀects are shown to increase the force on the
structure compared to a free stream Morison prediction. The interaction eﬀects are
shown to cause shielding which decreases the total force on the structure. In order
to employ the Morison equation for prediction of the forces exerted on a complex
structure in a moonpool, corrections of the force coeﬃcients are needed to account for
the interaction and blockage eﬀects.
iii
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis is submitted as a partial fulﬁlment of the requirements for obtaining the
degree of Master of Science in Civil Engineering. Including a defence and examination,
the thesis makes up 30 ECTS. The thesis consists of a report including appendices, all
found in the present document.
The project has been performed in a collaboration between the Technical University of
Denmark and the two Norwegian companies Statoil ASA and Marintek. The project
work has been carried out at the Department of Mechanical Engineering at the Tech-
nical University of Denmark between September 2014 and March 2015.
I would like to thank my supervisor at DTU, Professor Erik Damgaard Christensen, for
patient and competent guidance throughout the project and for always being available
for a discussion of results and steps forward. I would also like to thank my supervisor
from Statoil, Rolf Baarholm, for initiating the project and providing relevant feedback
along the way. A sincere thank you is also due to my two supervisors from Marintek,
Trygve Kristiansen and Reza Firoozkoohi, for guiding me through diﬃcult parts of the
project and for taking the time to discuss numerous results and considerations along
the way.
I would also like to thank Postdoc Bjarne Jensen and Ph.D. student Xerxes Mandvi-
walla from the Department of Mechanical Engineering at DTU for invaluable help on
all OpenFOAM related challenges.
Ann-Soﬁe Bjørke, s092101
v
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
List of symbols
A
Area of cylinder
Ap
Amplitude of piston mode motion
Ah
Amplitude of heave motion
Atot
Area of total structure
B
Width of hull
BD
Width of computational domain
CD
Drag coeﬃcient for single cylinder
CDtot
Drag coeﬃcient for full structure
CM
Inertia coeﬃcient for single cylinder
CMtot
Inertia coeﬃcient for full structure
Cm
Hydrodynamic mass coeﬃcient
Co
Courant number
D
Diameter of cylinder
Dx
Cross-ﬂow diameter of structure
Dy
In-line diameter of structure
F
In-line force
FD
Drag force
FL
Lift force
H
Distance between sinks
I
Turbulence intensity
KC
Keulegan-Carpenter number related to single cylinder
KCtot
Keulegan-Carpenter number related to full structure
L
Turbulence length scale
LD
Length of computational domain
N
Total number of cylinders
Re
Reynolds number
St
Strouhal number
T0
Natural period
Tw
Period of oscillating ﬂow
U
Flow velocity
˙U
Flow acceleration
Uf
Friction velocity
Um
Maximum velocity of oscillating ﬂow
b
Width of moonpool
dx
Cross-ﬂow distance
dy
In-line distance
vii
==PAGE:10==
f
Friction factor
fv
Vortex shedding frequency
g
Gravitational acceleration, 9.81 m/s2
h
Draught of moonpool
k
Turbulent kinetic energy
m′
Hydrodynamic mass
p
3D porosity
y+
Non-dimensional wall distance
α
Alignment parameter
β
Viscous frequency parameter
γ
Blockage ratio
ϵ
Energy dissipation per unit mass
µ
Dynamic viscosity
ν
Kinematic viscosity, 1.5 × 10−6 m2/s
νT
Turbulence viscosity
ρ
Density of water, 1027 kg/m3
σD
Standard deviation of cylinder diameters
τ
Shear stress
φ
Phase
ω
Energy dissipation per unit turbulent energy
ω0
Natural angular frequency
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Abstract
iii
Preface
v
List of symbols
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
Theoretical background
5
2.1
Piston mode sloshing in moonpool . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Flow around structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.1
Unidirectional ﬂow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.2
Oscillatory ﬂow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.3
Interaction eﬀects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.4
Blockage eﬀect
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3
Numerical model
17
3.1
Governing equations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.1.1
Reynolds-averaged equations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.1.2
Turbulence models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.1.3
Flow near walls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Computational Fluid Dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2.1
Discretization schemes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2.2
Solution schemes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2.3
Set-up in OpenFOAM
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4
Model validation
29
4.1
Empty domain
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2
Unidirectional ﬂow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2.1
Initial investigations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2.2
Implementing k-ω-SST turbulence model . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
ix
==PAGE:12==
4.2.3
Validation results for unidirectional ﬂow
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.3
Oscillatory ﬂow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3.1
Validation results for oscillatory ﬂow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.4
Concluding remarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5
Dimensional analysis
43
5.1
Initial analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.2
General analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6
Results and analysis
49
6.1
Initial analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
6.1.1
Interaction eﬀects - dx/D and dy/D . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
6.1.2
Blockage - b/D
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
6.2
General analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
6.2.1
Blockage ratio γ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
6.2.2
Porosity p . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
6.2.3
Alignment α . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
6.2.4
Varied number of cylinders and cylinder diameter . . . . . . . .
88
6.2.5
Alternative deﬁnition of porosity palt
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
6.3
Comparison to Morison prediction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
6.3.1
Results of Morison prediction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
6.3.2
Analysis of Morison prediction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
7
Discussion
107
7.1
Suggestions regarding the development of a rational expression for force
prediction on complex structure in moonpool . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
8
Conclusion
113
8.1
Further work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114
References
117
x
==PAGE:13==
A Dimensional analysis of in-line force function
121
A.1 Initial analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121
A.2 General analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 122
B Calculation cases
123
B.1 Basic cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 124
B.2 Additional cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 125
C Simulation challenges and solutions
127
D Results for force coeﬃcients
129
E OpenFOAM set-up
141
F Investigation of 2x1 in-line force
145
xi
==PAGE:14==
==PAGE:15==
1
Introduction
As oﬀshore oil and gas production moves into deeper waters, a preferred solution tends
to be subsea production. With this solution control and monitoring of the production
is performed through subsea modules installed on the seabed. Forecasts state that
despite the recent slide in oil price, the subsea market will grow signiﬁcantly within
the coming years, Inﬁeld (2015).
An increase in subsea production will entail an
increased need for installation, maintenance and survey vessels to operate and access
the deep water locations. For the operator it is crucial to be able to access the site at
any time in order to save costs related to vessel chartering and lost production time.
Many survey, installation and diver support vessels are equipped with a moonpool,
which is a large hole on the hull of the vessel. An example of a moonpool vessel is
shown in Figure 1.1. The moonpool serves as an access route for equipment such as
Remotely Operated Vehicles, diving bells and subsea structures to enter the sea, as an
alternative to vessel side crane operations. The use of a moonpool operation will reduce
the forces on the equipment due to the pitch and roll motions of the vessel compared
to a vessel side operation (Duncan, 1986). However, sloshing in the moonpool, caused
by wave action and vessel motion, may still pose a risk in the operation. The primary
concern is the so-called piston mode sloshing where the water body in the moonpool
oscillates vertically as a rigid body. The amplitude of the motions can become very
large under resonant conditions. For this reason, operational limitations are imposed
on moonpool vessels.
In order to save costs, it is desired to expand the current recommended operational lim-
its for moonpool vessels. These limits are typically based on a simple signiﬁcant wave
height criterion. Availability of tools for accurately predicting vessel and moonpool
dynamics based on relevant sea states would enable operators to use more rational
operational limits based on critical response. This should lead to less conservative
estimates of when moonpool operations are safe for workers and equipment. Addi-
tionally, a more accurate prediction of moonpool dynamics will be useful in the design
of moonpool vessels.
A signiﬁcant amount of research has previously been performed on the subject. Piston
mode moonpool sloshing has been described by, amongst others, Molin (2001) and
Faltinsen and Timokha (2009). Presently, a project with the aim of enhancing the
modelling of moonpool dynamics is being carried out by Marintek for Statoil. The
project focuses on predicting the amplitude of the piston mode sloshing. Marintek has
developed a computational tool PVC3D for this purpose (Kristiansen and Faltinsen,
2012a; Kristiansen et al., 2013).
It has been shown that potential theory severely
overestimates the amplitude of the piston mode motion because signiﬁcant damping
will be present due to viscous eﬀects such as separation at the inlet. In order to account
for this, PVC3D combines potential ﬂow modelling of the free wave surface with a full
Navier-Stokes solution in areas where viscous eﬀects are expected to be present.
It has been shown through physical and numerical experiments that the presence
of a structure, such as a subsea module as the one shown in Figure 1.2, inside the
moonpool signiﬁcantly decreases the piston mode amplitude (Kristiansen et al., 2015).
1
==PAGE:16==
1 Introduction
An objective of the presently ongoing Statoil/Marintek project is the development of
a method for predicting this eﬀect. One way of doing so is to predict the forces on
the structure.
The results can then be implemented in the PVC3D simulation as
pressure drop coeﬃcients in the moonpool domain. This will signiﬁcantly reduce the
required computational capacity compared to a detailed modelling of the ﬂow around
the structure. The development of a rational expression for predicting the forces on
structure such as a typical subsea module is therefore desired. The present thesis seeks
to contribute to this objective by investigating the forces exerted on subsea structures
placed in a moonpool experiencing resonant piston mode sloshing. A suggestion for
an approach to developing a rational expression for the forces is made based on the
ﬁndings.
Figure
1.1:
Rendering of multi-
purpose vessel designed by Ulstein Sea
of Solutions.*
Figure 1.2: Subsea tree designed by
Argus Subsea.**
*:
www.offshoreenergytoday.com/photo-petrofacs-new-derrick-lay-barge/
**:
www.designworldonline.com/hydraulic-rod-locks-secure-underwater-oilfield-trees/
The study is performed as a two-dimensional study using the open source CFD code
OpenFOAM. The piston mode sloshing is seen as a forced vertically oscillating motion
without regard to interaction with the region outside the moonpool or to free surface
eﬀects. The moonpool is thus modelled as a 2D tunnel with forced oscillatory ﬂow.
Diﬀerent structures will be placed in the moonpool tunnel and forces exerted on them
investigated. Since it is assumed that structures being transported through a moon-
pool are braced against side-ways forces by rails, only forces acting vertically on the
structure are considered. The subsea structures are represented by arrays of square
cylinders in close proximity. A study of the parameters governing the forces on the
structure is performed based on a dimensional analysis of the problem.
The investigations are performed for a moonpool size of 7 by 7 m with a draught of 6
m. The natural period for this moonpool is found using the theory presented by Molin
(2001), and this period is used as the period of the oscillatory ﬂow for all calculations.
2
==PAGE:17==
1 Introduction
As an introduction to the project, a theoretical background on piston mode sloshing
and ﬂow around structures is provided in Section 2. A description of the numerical
model is given in Section 3. The validation of the moonpool model is documented in
Section 4. The dimensional analysis of the forces exerted on a structure consisting
of several square cylinders, representing a subsea module, is presented in Section 5.
The dimensional analysis forms the basis for the conﬁgurations of cylinders chosen to
investigate. In Section 6 the results of the numerical calculations are presented and
analysed. It is sought to describe the inﬂuence of the parameters governing the force
exerted on the structure. In Section 7 the results are discussed and considerations
regarding the development of a rational expression for force prediction are presented.
Concluding remarks and suggestions for further work are found in Section 8.
3
==PAGE:18==
==PAGE:19==
2
Theoretical background
As an introduction to the thesis problem, a theoretical background on ﬂow in moon-
pools and ﬂow around structures is provided.
2.1
Piston mode sloshing in moonpool
As described by Faltinsen and Timokha (2009) sloshing is a phenomenon to consider
when liquid is held in conﬁned space which undergoes movement of any kind.
In
the special case of a moonpool, the ﬂuid is directly connected to the external water
domain enabling a ﬂux in and out of the conﬁned space where the liquid is contained.
This enables the most critical sloshing mode for moonpools, the piston mode. In this
type of sloshing the water body in the moonpool moves up and down as a rigid body,
taking in and letting out water to and from the surrounding sea. This sloshing mode
is the premise for the investigations of forces on structures in this project. To perform
simulations of the ﬂow in a typical moonpool, the natural period and amplitude of
motion related to resonant piston mode sloshing is therefore described in the following.
Natural period and amplitude
A deﬁnition sketch for the cross-section of a two-dimensional moonpool is seen in
Figure 2.1.
b
h
B
x
y
Figure 2.1: Deﬁnition sketch of moonpool. B: width of hull, b: width of moonpool,
h: draught of moonpool.
Molin (2001) developed an expression for estimating the natural frequency of the 2D
piston mode sloshing based on the draught-to-width ratio h/b of the moonpool. The
expression is based on linearized potential theory, assuming that the beam of the hull,
B, is much larger than the dimension of the moonpool b. The mass ﬂux into and
out of the moonpool is modelled by implementing two sinks some distance away from
5
==PAGE:20==
2 Theoretical background
the hull at x = ±H/2 = ±λB/2 where λ is somewhat larger than 1. Given these
assumptions, and referring to deﬁnitions in Figure 2.1, the natural angular frequency
ω0 is approximated by
ω0 =
r
g
h + (b/π)(3/2 + ln(H/2b))
(2.1)
where g is the gravitational acceleration.
In the present project, the treated moonpool is assumed to have the following speciﬁ-
cations
b
=
7 m
h
=
6 m
H/b
=
4.5
According to (2.1) this moonpool has a natural frequency ω0 = 0.938 rad/s giving the
natural period
T0 = 6.7 s
(2.2)
In the case of forced heave motion of the vessel, experiments indicate that around
resonance the ratio of the amplitude of the piston mode motion to that of the motion
of the vessel may be in the order of 5-10 (Kristiansen and Faltinsen, 2012a). Assuming
a vessel heave motion with amplitude Ah = 0.5 m, this means the amplitude of the
piston mode motion Ap can be up to
Ap = 10Ah = 5.0 m
(2.3)
Assuming the ﬂow motion to be fully sinusoidal this leads to a maximum velocity of
Um = 2πAp
T0
= 4.7 m/s
(2.4)
2.2
Flow around structures
In this project, a complex structure such as a subsea module is modelled as an arrange-
ment of several cylinders with square cross-section. To determine the forces exerted on
the structure by the oscillatory ﬂow, the forces on each cylinder must be determined.
In the following, the ﬂow around cylinders and the forces exerted by this ﬂow are
described.
The ﬂow in a moonpool during piston mode sloshing will be oscillating and the main
focus is therefore on ﬂow around and forces on cylinders in oscillatory ﬂow. This is the
focus of Section 2.2.2. However, as a ﬁrst step in the validation of the model used in
this thesis, the case of unidirectional ﬂow around a single square cylinder is treated. To
this end, a description of unidirectional ﬂow is also included in Section 2.2.1. Sections
2.2.1 and 2.2.2 are based on Sumer and Fredsøe (2006), unless otherwise stated. The
eﬀect of interaction between cylinders and blockage eﬀects due to conﬁned space in
the moonpool environment are treated in Sections 2.2.3 and 2.2.4.
6
==PAGE:21==
2 Theoretical background
2.2.1
Unidirectional ﬂow
A unidirectional ﬂow around a cylinder is characterized by the Reynolds number
Re = UD
ν
(2.5)
where U is the free stream ﬂow velocity, D is a characteristic dimension of the cylinder
- in the case of a square cylinder, the side length; for a circular cylinder, the diameter
- and ν is the kinematic viscosity of the ﬂuid, taken to be 1.5×10−6 m2/s.
For circular cylinders at very low Reynolds numbers (Re < 5), the ﬂow will creep
around the cylinder without separation. For higher Reynolds numbers, there will be
vortex formation. For a sharp-edged cylinder such as a square cylinder, there will
always be separation at the sharp edges, and consequently vortices will always form.
For suﬃciently high Reynolds numbers, vortices will be shed on the downstream side
of the cylinder. This occurs when the ﬂow is separated from the cylinder and the
vorticity in the boundary layer causes the separated ﬂow to curl up into a vortex.
Vortex shedding alternates between the two sides of the cylinder as the vortices take
turn cutting oﬀthe vortex from the opposite side. The shedding is characterized by
the non-dimensional shedding frequency, the Strouhal number
St = fvD
U
(2.6)
where fv is the vortex shedding frequency in which shedding period is taken from the
shedding of a vortex on one side to the next shedding on the same side. An illustration
of ﬂow with vortex shedding behind a square cylinder is seen in Figure 2.2.
Figure 2.2: Visualization of ﬂow behind square cylinder. From Dutta et al. (2008)
The ﬂow induces forces on the cylinder in both the in-line (drag force) and cross-ﬂow
(lift force) directions. The drag force is caused by the pressure distribution on the
cylinder and the shear force exerted by the viscous ﬂuid. For most practical cases, the
pressure contribution will be dominating. The drag force will oscillate at a frequency
7
==PAGE:22==
2 Theoretical background
of twice the vortex shedding frequency with a mean drag force which can be expressed
as
FD = 1
2ρDCDU 2
(2.7)
where ρ is the density of the ﬂuid, and CD is a drag coeﬃcient dependent on the shape
of the cylinder as well as Reynolds number.
The lift force is caused by the alternating vortex formation creating a variation in the
pressure distribution on the cylinder shifting the resulting force direction between the
two sides. For a free and symmetric cylinder, the mean lift force will be zero. The lift
force will oscillate at the vortex shedding frequency.
For a circular cylinder, ﬂow separation occurs due to the adverse pressure gradient
acting as the ﬂow moves along the surface and the points of separation will be de-
termined by the ﬂow regime, which again is governed by the Reynolds number. As
the ﬂow moves into the critical ﬂow regime, the separation points move closer to each
other on the downstream side of the cylinder. This causes a signiﬁcant change in the
vortex shedding frequency as well as the forces exerted on the cylinder. For a cylinder
with sharp edges, such as a square cylinder, however, the separation points will be
ﬁxed at these edges. Consequently, the Reynolds number has less inﬂuence on both
forces and Strouhal number for such cylinders.
Other parameters that will inﬂuence the ﬂow around cylinders are surface roughness,
ﬂow angle, turbulence level in incoming ﬂow and proximity to a wall or other structures.
2.2.1.1
Calculating drag coeﬃcient and Strouhal number
As described above, for a uni-directional ﬂow, the drag force will oscillate with the
vortex shedding, such that
FD = FD + F ′
D
(2.8)
where FD is the mean drag force and F ′
D is the oscillating part of the drag force. The
drag coeﬃcient CD is deﬁned based on the mean drag force by
FD = 1
2ρCDDU 2
(2.9)
where U is the free stream velocity, D is the diameter of the cylinder and ρ is the
density of water.
From the time series of the drag force on the cylinder produced either from experiments
or numerical calculations, the mean drag force is found by averaging over a suﬃcient
amount of periods. Based on the mean drag force, the drag coeﬃcient CD is found
from (2.9).
To ﬁnd the Strouhal number (2.6), the shedding frequency fv is found. fv can be
determined in several ways - all based on the lift force time series: The ﬁrst method is
to simply determine the period for each oscillation in the time series, then determine
the mean period and inverting it to a frequency. The second method is to perform
a Fourier transformation of the lift force signal, calculating the energy spectrum and
8
==PAGE:23==
2 Theoretical background
taking the shedding frequency as the peak frequency. In the third method, a mean
frequency is determined from the energy spectrum by
f = m1
m0
(2.10)
where m0 and m1 are the zero’th and ﬁrst moment of the energy spectrum respectively.
2.2.2
Oscillatory ﬂow
The ﬂow around a cylinder exposed to oscillatory ﬂow is governed by the Keulegan-
Carpenter number which relates the stroke of the ﬂow to the characteristic dimension
of the cylinder
KC = UmTw
D
(2.11)
where Tw is the oscillation period for the ﬂow.
As for unidirectional ﬂow, the oscillatory ﬂow is also governed by the Reynolds number
which is now deﬁned as
Re = UmD
ν
(2.12)
where Um is the maximum velocity of the oscillatory ﬂow.
An other parameter used to characterize oscillatory ﬂow around a cylindrical structure
is the viscous frequency parameter β given by
β = Re
KC = D2
νT
(2.13)
For suﬃciently high KC numbers, vortex shedding will also occur in oscillatory ﬂow.
The vortex shedding ﬂow regimes are determined based on the number of vortices shed
per ﬂow cycle which is governed by the KC number. For circular cylinders, the KC
boundaries between ﬂow shedding regimes will change with changing Re. For sharp-
edged cylinders such as a square cylinder, separation takes place at the sharp edges.
Consequently vortices always form at the edges but may for low KC numbers not be
shed. The ﬂow reversal will however, in most cases, free the vortex from the cylinder
and it will be released into the surrounding ﬂow, (Graham, 1980). Two examples of
ﬂow visualization for oscillatory ﬂow around a square cylinder are shown in Figure 2.3,
one at low KC where vortex shedding does not occur and one at KC suﬃciently high
for vortex shedding to occur.
As for the unidirectional ﬂow, forces act on the cylinder in the in-line and cross-ﬂow
direction when exposed to oscillatory ﬂow. The in-line force in this case consists of
the drag force corresponding to that for the unidirectional ﬂow as well as an inertia
force consisting of the hydrodynamic mass force and the Froude-Krylov force
F = 1
2ρCDU|U| + m′ ˙U + ρA ˙U
(2.14)
9
==PAGE:24==
2 Theoretical background
Figure 2.3: Visualization of ﬂow around a square cylinder at zero free stream ve-
locity. Left: KC = 2.2, β = 148. Right: KC = 14.1, β = 148. From Okajima et al.
(1998).
where ˙U is the acceleration of the ﬂuid and m′ is the hydrodynamic mass, i.e. the
mass of the surrounding water which has to be accelerated due to the presence of
the cylinder. A is the cross-sectional area of the cylinder and the last term in (2.14)
represents the Froude-Krylov force which is the force exerted on the cylinder due to
the pressure gradient related to the acceleration of the outer ﬂow.
The hydrodynamic mass is given by
m′ = ρCmA
(2.15)
where Cm is the hydrodynamic mass coeﬃcient. (2.14) is therefore re-written as the
well-known Morison formula consisting of a drag and an inertia term (Morison et al.,
1950)
F = 1
2ρCDU|U| + ρACM ˙U
(2.16)
where CM = Cm + 1 is the inertia coeﬃcient.
Dependent on the KC range of the ﬂow, either the drag or the inertia term may
be dominating the in-line force. For very low KC (≪20) the inertia term will be
dominating, while for large KC (> 20-30) the drag term will be dominating. CD and
CM will depend on KC and Reynolds number. For the same reasons as mentioned
previously, the Reynolds dependency is expected to be negligible for a cylinder with
sharp edges.
The in-line force follows the frequency of the outer ﬂow but may have smaller oscilla-
tions superimposed due to vortex shedding.
The lift force on a cylinder in oscillatory ﬂow is caused by vortex shedding, as for
unidirectional ﬂow, but additionally a lift force will occur when a vortex is washed
over the cylinder as the ﬂow is reversed. For this reason the lift frequency, in the case
of vortex shedding regimes,will be higher than the vortex shedding frequency.
2.2.2.1
Calculating drag and inertia coeﬃcients
In the present project, the analysis of forces on complex structures will be based on
comparisons of the hydrodynamic force coeﬃcients CD and CM of diﬀerent structures
10
==PAGE:25==
2 Theoretical background
modelled as clusters of single cylinders. The method to determine these coeﬃcients
for each individual cylinder as well as the full structure is given below.
Single cylinder
As described in Section 2.2.2, for oscillatory ﬂow, the in-line force oscillates due to the
outer ﬂow oscillation. It can be described by the Morison equation (2.16).
The two force coeﬃcients, drag coeﬃcient CD and inertia coeﬃcient CM, can be found
from the in-line force time series produced in the numerical calculations for each indi-
vidual cylinder. This is done by ﬁtting a Morison equation to the force time series. To
this end, the time derivative of the velocity is needed. Therefore a ﬁt to the velocity
time series is performed initially, to determine the amplitude and phase of the velocity
signal. The velocity signal has the form
U(t) = Um cos(ω0t + φ)
(2.17)
where Um is the amplitude of the velocity, φ is the phase shift, and ω0 is the angular
frequency of the oscillation given by
ω0 = 2π
T0
(2.18)
When the amplitude, frequncy and phase shift are found, the time derivative of the
velocity can be modelled as
˙U(t) = −Umω sin(ω0t + φ)
(2.19)
Based on the velocity and acceleration time series, a ﬁt to the Morison equation is
performed using the least squares method (Sumer and Fredsøe, 2006). This is done
by solving the equation system
fd
X
U 4(t) + fi
X
U(t)|U(t)| ˙U(t) =
X
U(t)|U(t)|Fm(t)
fd
X
U(t)|U(t)| ˙U(t) + fi
X ˙U 2(t) =
X ˙U(t)Fm(t)
(2.20)
where Fm is the measured in-line force and
fd = 1
2ρCDD
fi = ρCMA
(2.21)
For a single square cylinder, D is taken as the side length. To be able to compare
with results from the literature, the area is taken as that of a circular cylinder with
diameter D such that
A = π
4 D2
(2.22)
11
==PAGE:26==
2 Theoretical background
Full porous structure
An example of a structure consisting of several cylinders is shown in Figure 2.4. To
determine the force coeﬃcients for the full structure, the forces on the individual
cylinders are added and the total time series is used for a Morison ﬁt as described
above.
The diameter of the total structure, used for the determination of the drag coeﬃcient,
is taken as the span of the structure in the cross-ﬂow direction, Dx as illustrated in
Figure 2.4. The total area is taken to be
Atot = π
4 D2
x
(2.23)
u
Dy
Dx
Figure 2.4: Total diameter of structure.
For determining the Keulegan-Carpenter number related to the full structure KCtot,
the in-line diameter Dy is used as the characteristic length.
2.2.3
Interaction eﬀects
When several cylinders are placed in proximity of each other - which will be the case
for a complex structure such as a subsea module like the one shown in Figure 1.2 - the
ﬂow around each cylinder will be aﬀected by the presence of the remaining cylinders.
This has been the subject of numerous studies due to the relevance of the subject
in many ﬁelds, not least in regard to oﬀshore installations such as jacket structures.
While studies regarding interaction of circular cylinders in steady currents are plentiful,
a more scarce selection is available of studies regarding interaction of cylinders in
oscillatory ﬂow, particularly regarding sharp-edged cylinders in such. Design guidelines
on the sibject are also scarce. The recommended practice on environmental loads on
oﬀshore structures, Det Norske Veritas (2010), brieﬂy states that wake and group
eﬀects should be taken into account, giving an expression for reduced ﬂow velocity in
the wake of a cylinder, with reference to Schlichting (1968). Eﬀects in the case of wave
action are not mentioned.
12
==PAGE:27==
2 Theoretical background
Unidirectional ﬂow
Zdravkovich (1977) reviewed the ﬂow interference between two circular cylinders in
diﬀerent arrangements exposed to a steady ﬂow. Referencing Biermann and Herrnstein
(1933), he describes the interaction of two cylinders in a side-by-side arrangement, i.e.
arranged on a line across the ﬂow direction as shown in Figure 2.5a: the drag on the
cylinders is aﬀected for spacings d/D < 4 between the cylinders (distance measured
from surfaces of cylinders). The drag coeﬃcient on the cylinders is increased with
decreasing spacing, until a certain critical spacing d/D = 1.25. Below the critical
spacing, a bi-stable state is obtained where drag coeﬃcient can either be increased or
decreased. Sarpkaya and Isaacson (1981) add that in this bi-stable region, the wakes
of the cylinders interfere inducing a non-zero mean lift force on the cylinders.
u
d
D
D
(a) Side-by-side conﬁguration.
u
d
D
D
(b) Tandem conﬁguration.
Figure 2.5: Deﬁnition sketches for interaction of two cylinders.
For two cylinders in a tandem arrangement, i.e. placed in line with the ﬂow direction
as shown in Figure 2.5b, Sarpkaya and Isaacson (1981) report that the drag on both
the upstream and downstream cylinder will be aﬀected by the presence of the other
cylinder. This holds for a spacing below the critical spacing of d/D ≈2.5. The limit
may be Reynolds dependent. For larger spacings, only the downstream cylinder is
aﬀected.
For a more general overview of the possible staggered conﬁguration of two cylinders,
Zdravkovich (1977) references Hori (1959) who produced the overview shown in Figure
2.6. Depending on the placement of a cylinder relative to an other stationary cylinder,
the drag force may be increased or decreased, and a lift force may be induced in either
of the transverse directions.
Oscillatory ﬂow
With reference to Sarpkaya et al. (1980), Sarpkaya and Isaacson (1981) describe the
interference of two circular cylinders in oscillatory ﬂow. In tandem arrangement the
drag and inertia coeﬃcients depend on KC number as well as relative spacing. When
the spacing is increased to the same order of magnitude as the ﬂow amplitude, the
interference eﬀects vanish. Two cylinders in a side-by-side arrangement with spacing
less than 1.5D also show interference eﬀects in oscillatory ﬂow.
Chern et al. (2010) performed a numerical investigation of oscillatory ﬂow around
two square cylinders in a side-by-side arrangement. It was concluded that Reynolds
number was of little signiﬁcance for the ﬂow pattern, while both Keulegan-Carpenter
13
==PAGE:28==
2 Theoretical background
Figure 2.6: Summary of interference eﬀects. From Hori (1959). Interference eﬀects
are proportional to vectors. Vector from left to right: Increased drag compared to
isolated cylinder. Vector from right to left: Decreased drag. Top half, upwards vector:
Repulsive, positive lift force. Top half, downwards vector: Negative lift force. Bottom
half, downwards vector: Positive, repulsive lift force. Bottom half, upwards vector:
Negative lift force.
number and relative spacing of the cylinders inﬂuenced the ﬂow patterns signiﬁcantly.
No interference eﬀect was found for a spacing of d = 2D but for both d = 1D and 0.5D.
The presence of the gap between the cylinders creates a jet like ﬂow which inﬂuences
the vortex formation.The vortex systems were seen to turn chaotic for increased KC,
and a decrease in gap ratio meant an earlier transition into chaotic behaviour. The
total in-line force coeﬃcient was seen to be inversely proportional to KC and to
increase slightly with decreasing gap ratio.
No reports have been found of numerical or experimental investigations of a square
conﬁguration of four or more sharp-edged cylinders. However, Anagnostopoulos and
Dikarou (2011) reported on a numerical investigation of oscillatory ﬂow around a
square conﬁguration of four circular cylinders with cylinder distance from d = 1D
to 4D. The results show interference eﬀect from low KC numbers, with decreasing
interference for increasing cylinder distance. Studies of the vorticity ﬁelds in the ﬂow
show that the interference comes from vortices of the four cylinders interacting with
each other. For low KC numbers (KC < 5) the symmetry around the domain center
line is kept but the symmetry around each cylinder center line is not. This causes non-
zero mean transverse force and an aperiodicity in both the in-line and transverse force
signal. It is concluded that these eﬀects are caused by interference since oscillatory
ﬂow around a single cylinder under similar conditions did not show these eﬀects (Iliadis
14
==PAGE:29==
2 Theoretical background
and Anagnostopoulos, 1998). No signiﬁcant inﬂuence of the cylinder spacing on the
drag coeﬃcient was found and results were correlating with those for a single cylinder.
An interference eﬀect was however seen on the inertia coeﬃcient which increased with
increasing spacing for KC < 4.
2.2.4
Blockage eﬀect
When a structure is placed in a conﬁned space such as a moonpool, the conﬁnement
of the ﬂow around the structure will cause a blockage eﬀect. This means that the ﬂow
around the structure will change characteristics compared to the ﬂow around the same
structure in an unconﬁned ﬂow. The blockage eﬀect is a function of the blockage ratio
or solidity ratio deﬁned as D/b with reference to deﬁnitions in Figure 2.7.
u
D
b
Figure 2.7: Deﬁnition sketch for blockage ratio.
Maskell (1963) described the phenomenon related to unidirectional ﬂow around bluﬀ
bodies in wind tunnels. He described two causes for the blockage eﬀect. The conﬁne-
ment causes a speed-up of the ﬂow around the structure such that the ﬂow character-
istics resemble those of an unconﬁned ﬂow at higher free stream velocity. Additionally,
the conﬁnement aﬀects the wake development which in turn aﬀects the hydrodynamic
forces on the structure. Davis et al. (1984) performed a numerical and experimental
investigation of blockage eﬀects on rectangular cylinders for blockage ratios D/b = 1/4
and 1/6. They demonstrated the inﬂuence of conﬁnement on the wake structure and
found that an increase in blockage ratio increased the drag coeﬃcient CD for a given
Reynolds number.
Few studies have been performed on the blockage eﬀect in oscillatory ﬂow. Anag-
nostopoulos and Minear (2004) performed a numerical investigation of blockage eﬀect
from domain boundaries in oscillatory ﬂow around a single circular cylinder. Blockage
ratios of 0.1, 0.2, 0.3 and 0.5 were investigated. For blockage ≤0.2 no signiﬁcant
blockage eﬀect was detected. For higher blockage ratios, the blockage was seen to
change the ﬂow ﬁeld so that it resembled the ﬂow ﬁeld of an unblocked ﬂow at higher
KC - similarly to the results described for unidirectional ﬂow. The blockage was seen
to increase the drag coeﬃcient CD, but decrease the total in-line force and inertia
coeﬃcient CM. The latter was explained by the smaller ﬂuid mass being accelerated
due to the blockage.
15
==PAGE:30==
==PAGE:31==
3
Numerical model
In this section the numerical model used for the prediction of forces on structures in a
moonpool is described. Section 3.1 describes the governing equations along with the
chosen turbulence model. The numerical approach to solving the governing equations
is described in Section 3.2, where a description of the speciﬁc OpenFOAM set-up used
in the project is also found.
3.1
Governing equations
As described in Section 2.2 the forces acting on a cylinder exposed to a viscous ﬂow are
induced by the pressure distribution and viscous forces acting on the cylinder. To ﬁnd
the acting forces, the pressure and velocity ﬁelds are to be solved for. The equations
governing these are described in the following with reference to Wilcox (1994).
For an incompressible ﬂuid, the continuity equation in Cartesian coordinates is ex-
pressed as
∂u
∂x + ∂v
∂y + ∂w
∂z = 0
(3.1)
where u, v and w are the velocities in the x, y and z direction, respectively.
The equation of motion for a Newtonian ﬂuid is the Navier-Stokes equation given as
ρ
∂ui
∂t + uj
∂ui
∂xj

= ρgi −∂p
∂xi
+ ∂
∂xj
(2µsji)
(3.2)
where ρ is the density of the ﬂuid, g is the body force acting on the ﬂuid, p is the
pressure, µ is the dynamic viscosity of the ﬂuid, and sji is the strain rate tensor given
by
sji = 1
2
∂ui
∂xj
+ ∂uj
∂xi

(3.3)
In (3.2) and (3.3) Einstein summation is used, meaning repeated indices in a term are
to be summed. As an example of the summation, (3.2) is written in full for the x
direction, i.e. for i = 1:
ρ
∂u
∂t + u∂u
∂x + v∂u
∂y + w∂u
∂z

=
ρgx −∂p
∂x+µ
∂2u
∂x2 + ∂2u
∂y2 + ∂2u
∂z2 + ∂2u
∂x∂x + ∂2v
∂y∂x + ∂2w
∂z∂x

(3.4)
Where the last three terms on the right hand side become zero due to continuity.
3.1.1
Reynolds-averaged equations
In many practical cases, including that of piston mode motion in a moonpool, the
ﬂow will be turbulent. Turbulence can be taken into account by solving the governing
17
==PAGE:32==
3 Numerical model
equations (3.1) and (3.2) completely using Direct Numerical Simulation. This, how-
ever, takes tremendous computational capacity and will for most practical cases not
be feasible. A less computationally demanding method for solving the equations is
by use of Large Eddy Simulation, where the large eddies are solved completely while
the eddies in the more uniform small scale turbulence are modelled. However, this
may also be excessively demanding in terms of computational capacity. Therefore, in
most cases a modelling approach is taken to include turbulence. For this purpose the
Reynolds-averaged equations are introduced as described in the following.
A turbulent ﬂow can be described by means of Reynolds decomposition as a mean
ﬂow plus a ﬂuctuating ﬂow such that, at a given point, the time dependent velocity of
a steady ﬂow is given by
ui(t) = ui + u′
i(t)
(3.5)
where ui is the time averaged ﬂow velocity in direction i and u′
i(t) is the time dependent
ﬂuctuating part caused by turbulence. For a non-steady ﬂow, the mean velocity will
also be time dependent and should be found by ensemble averaging or, for periodic
ﬂows, by phase averaging.
Most engineering problems will concern the mean ﬂow characteristics. It is therefore
desirable to express the continuity equation (3.1) and the equation of motion (3.2) in
terms of the average ﬂow.
Averaging the continuity equation is straight forward:
∂ui
∂xi
= ∂ui
∂xi
= 0
(3.6)
Averaging the Navier-Stokes equation (3.2) is a little more cumbersome. Using the
chain rule and (3.6), the second term on the left-hand-side of (3.2) can be re-written
uj
∂ui
∂uj
=
∂
∂xj
(ujui) −ui
∂uj
∂xj
=
∂
∂xj
(ujui)
(3.7)
Using (3.7) and time averaging, (3.2) becomes
ρ
∂ui
∂t + ∂
∂xj
(uiuj)

= ρgi −∂p
∂xi
+ ∂
∂xj
(2µsji)
(3.8)
Employing (3.5) the second term on the left-hand-side can be re-written to
∂
∂xj
(ρuiuj) = ρuj
∂ui
∂xj
+ ∂
∂xj
(ρu′
iu′
j)
(3.9)
ultimately leading to the Reynolds-averaged Navier-Stokes equation
ρ∂ui
∂t + ρuj
∂ui
∂xj
= ρgi −∂p
∂xi
+ ∂
∂xj
 2µsji −ρu′
iu′
j

(3.10)
The term −ρu′
iu′
j is the Reynolds stress which is induced by the momentum transport
caused by the turbulent ﬂuctuations. For a three-dimensional ﬂow (3.10) will be a
18
==PAGE:33==
3 Numerical model
system of three equations, and the Reynolds stresses will have six unknown components
since −ρu′
iu′
j = −ρu′
ju′
i.
The mean ﬂow is thus characterized by four equations: The continuity equation (3.6)
and the Reynolds-averaged Navier-Stokes equations (3.10). The unknowns are the
pressure p, the three velocity components ui and the six Reynolds stress components
−ρu′
iu′
j. As this makes ten unknowns with only four equations, the system is not
closed.
3.1.2
Turbulence models
The state of ten unknowns with only four equations, as described above, is known as
the closure problem; to model the ﬂuid behaviour by solving the four equations, a way
of modelling the Reynolds stresses is required in order to close the problem. This is
done using a turbulence model.
Two fundamentally diﬀerent approaches to turbulence modelling exist; algebraic mod-
els and energy equation models. Both types are based on the Boussinesq eddy-viscosity
approximation which introduces an analogy to the Newtonian expression for viscous
shear stress in a ﬂuid. This is done by modelling the Reynolds stress as the product
of the turbulent viscosity νT and the strain rate tensor.
The diﬀerence between the two approaches lies in the chosen method for determining
the turbulent viscosity. The most common algebraic models use the mixing length
theory, where the turbulent viscosity is modelled as a function of a characteristic
length for the ﬂow. The characteristic length is chosen based on physical properties
of the ﬂow which are to be speciﬁed in the model. The model is in other words ﬂow
dependent and therefore incomplete.
In the energy equation models, the turbulent viscosity is calculated based on the
turbulent kinetic energy k
k = 1
2(u′
iu′
i)
(3.11)
and the primary objective is to model this quantity using the turbulence energy equa-
tion model
ρ∂k
∂t + ρuj
∂k
∂xj
= τij
∂ui
∂xj
−ρϵ + ∂
∂xj

µ ∂k
∂xj
−1
2ρu′
iu′
iu′
j −p′u′
j

(3.12)
For this purpose, both one-equation models and two-equation models exist.
Since
one-equation models are incomplete for the same reason as the mixing length model,
these will not be treated further here.
Two-equation models relate the turbulent
kinetic energy, the turbulence length scale and the dissipation in order to formulate
expressions for two of the three to close the system (closure coeﬃcients are required).
Several versions of two-equation models exist, of which the k-ϵ, employing expressions
for the turbulent kinetic energy and the dissipation rate, and the k-ω, employing
19
==PAGE:34==
3 Numerical model
expressions for the turbulent kinetic energy and the speciﬁc dissipation rate, are the
most commonly used. Here, ϵ is dissipation per unit mass, deﬁned as
ϵ = ν ∂u′
i
∂xk
∂u′
i
∂xk
(3.13)
and ω is the dissipation per unit turbulent kinetic energy. The eddy viscosity is found
as a relation between the energy production and dissipation.
In the present project, a modiﬁed turbulence model, employing both of these model
types depending on location in the ﬂow, is used. This is called the k-ω-SST model
and was developed by Menter (1994). It is described in the following.
k-ω-SST turbulence model
Menter (1994) developed the k-ω-SST model based on an empirical approach in an
attempt to make two major improvements to the existing k-ϵ and k-ω models.
The ﬁrst improvement is to combine the two models to take advantage of the fact that
they each have areas of superior performance compared to the other. The k-ω model
is the starting point such that
νT = k
ω
(3.14)
where ω is deﬁned as
ω =
ϵ
kβ∗
(3.15)
where β∗is a model closure constant.
As the k-ω model shows superior qualities in modelling the viscous sub-layer and
logarithmic layer in adverse pressure gradient ﬂows, this model is chosen in these
regions. For ﬂow in wake region and free shear layers, a version of the k-ϵ model
- transformed into a k-ω formulation - is used. The transition between the two is
handled by a blending function F1. The model then consists of the two equations for
energy production and dissipation:
ρ∂k
∂t + ρui
∂k
∂xi
= τij
∂ui
∂xj
−β∗ρωk + ∂
∂xi

(µ + σkµt) ∂k
∂xj

(3.16)
ρ∂ω
∂t + ρui
∂ω
∂xi
= γ
νT
τij
∂ui
∂xj
−βρω2 + ∂
∂xj

(µ + σωµt) ∂ω
∂xj

+2ρ(1 −F1)σω2
1
ω
∂k
∂xj
∂ω
∂xj
(3.17)
where τij is the Reynolds stress tensor
τij = µt
∂ui
∂xj
+ ∂uj
∂xi
−2
3
∂uk
∂xk
δij

−2
3ρkδij
(3.18)
The blending function is deﬁned to be unity in the sub-layer and logarithmic layer and
gradually change to zero in the wake region, see Menter (1994). σk, σω, σω2, β, β∗and
20
==PAGE:35==
3 Numerical model
γ are all model constants deﬁned for each of the two models and weighted according
to the blending function.
The second improvement introduced by Menter (1994) is the account for shear stress
transport (SST) in the boundary layer. A reformulation of the eddy viscosity in the
boundary layer is introduced so as to take into account the increased production of
turbulent kinetic energy in the case of adverse pressure gradient ﬂows in order to better
model the ﬂow separation. The eddy viscosity is modiﬁed according to
νT =
a1k
max(a1ω; ΩF2)
(3.19)
where Ωis the absolute value of vorticity, a1 is a constant, and F2 is a blending function
which is unity for boundary layer ﬂow and zero for free stream ﬂow, see Menter (1994).
3.1.3
Flow near walls
The ﬂow needs speciﬁc treatment in the vicinity of walls in order to be modelled
correctly. When a uniform ﬂow approaches a surface such as a plate or a wall with no-
slip conditions, a boundary layer will develop with a non-uniform velocity proﬁle. A
short description of the ﬂow in this boundary layer is provided along with a description
of how this is modelled.
Flow in boundary layer
As a ﬂow approaches a boundary with no-slip condition a boundary layer of height
h will develop. Within the boundary layer at distances y ≪h away from the wall,
a constant shear stress layer will be present. In this layer the shear stress is approx-
imately constant and equal to the sum of the viscous shear stress and the Reynolds
stresses. In two dimensions this is expressed as
τ = µdu
dy + (−ρu′v′)
(3.20)
In the constant shear stress layer, the velocity distribution is governed by the law of
the wall which dictates that the non-dimensional velocity is a function of the non-
dimensional distance to the wall
u
Uf
= f(y+)
(3.21)
where y+ is the non-dimensional distance to the wall deﬁned as
y+ = yUf
ν
(3.22)
and Uf is the friction velocity which is a velocity formulation of the wall shear stress
Uf =
rτwall
ρ
(3.23)
21
==PAGE:36==
3 Numerical model
A viscous sub-layer exists very close to the wall, i.e. for y+ < 5. In this sub-layer the
shear stress is dominated by the viscous part of (3.20) and the turbulent part can be
neglected. This leads to a linear velocity proﬁle in this layer
u
Uf
= y+
(3.24)
Further away from the wall, for y+ > 30 −70), the shear stress is dominated by the
Reynolds stresses. This leads to a logarithmic velocity proﬁle
u
Uf
= a ln y+ + b
(3.25)
where a and b are constants. This layer is therefore called the logarithmic layer.
When a ﬂow is oscillating over a boundary, a new boundary layer will be developed
over each half period as the ﬂow returns. The viscous sub-layer and logarithmic layer
will be present but will develop over the half period.
Wall functions
In order to avoid decomposing the viscous sub-layer and the logarithmic layer close
to the walls in the computational domain - which would in many cases require very
ﬁne meshes - wall functions can be applied to determine the turbulence parameters
and thereby the correct turbulent viscosity near the walls. In the present project,
a k-ω-SST model is used, and wall functions are therefore applied for the turbulent
parameters k and ω.
The wall function for k simply implements a zero gradient boundary condition.
The wall function for ω calculates omega as
ω =
q
ω2
vis + ω2
log
(3.26)
where
ωvis = 6ν
β1y2
(3.27)
ωlog =
√
k
C0.25
µ
κy
(3.28)
β1, Cµ and κ are constants and y is the ﬁrst point from the wall, i.e. the ﬁrst com-
putational node as described below in Section 3.2. When the turbulent values are
determined in the ﬁrst point away from the wall, the turbulent viscosity can be de-
termined. This is done by using the logarithmic law (3.25). It is therefore important
that the ﬁrst point away from the wall is placed inside the logarithmic layer. This is
ensured by ensuring that the center of the ﬁrst computational cell has a value of y+
between 30 and 300. To determined this, the friction velocity Uf should be determined
according to (3.23). The wall shear stress is determined as
τwall = fρU 2
∞
2
(3.29)
22
==PAGE:37==
3 Numerical model
where f is the friction factor given by
f = 0.026
Re1/7
(3.30)
Re is the Reynolds number found using the characteristic dimension of the ﬂow and
the ﬂow velocity. For oscillatory ﬂow the maximum ﬂow velocity is used.
3.2
Computational Fluid Dynamics
In the numerical model, the governing equations are solved for a given set of initial
and boundary conditions. This is done by discretizing the computational domain into
a mesh of nodes. The solutions to the governing equations are found at each node.
These values are then taken to represent the average values within the cell surrounding
the node.
An example of part of a two-dimensional mesh is seen in Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: 2D mesh deﬁnition. From Versteeg and Malalasekera (2007).
3.2.1
Discretization schemes
Spatial discretization
In order to solve the governing equations for each node, the equations are discretized
using the ﬁnite volume method. This is done by integrating the governing equations
over each volume. The general transport equation reads (Versteeg and Malalasekera,
2007)
∂ρφ
∂t + div(ρφu) = div(Γgrad(φ)) + Sφ
(3.31)
where φ is a property of the ﬂuid. Each term is integrated over a control volume (CV)
and Gauss’ divergence theorem is used
Z
CV
div(a) dV =
Z
A
n.a dV
(3.32)
23
==PAGE:38==
3 Numerical model
where n is the vector normal to the surface. This gives
Z
CV
∂ρφ
∂t dV +
Z
A
n.(ρφu)dA =
Z
A
n.(Γgrad(φ))dA +
Z
CV
SφdV
(3.33)
The remaining volume integrals after the re-formulation can simply be written as
Z
CV
∂ρφ
∂t dV = ∂ρφ
∂t ∆V
(3.34)
Z
CV
SφdV = Sφ∆V
(3.35)
where ∆V is the cell volume.
The surface integrals are calculated as the sum of the ﬂux through the surfaces. As-
suming uniform value on the entire surface, the ﬂux is found as the product of the
surface value and the surface area. For a 2D mesh in cartesian coordinates with rect-
angular cells, the normal vector is taken as unity in the given direction. Referring to
deﬁnitions in Figure 3.1, the surface integrals from (3.33) can for the node P in a 2D
ﬂow be written as
Z
A
n.(ρφu)dA = (ρφu∆y)w −(ρφu∆y)e + (ρφv∆x)s −(ρφv∆y)n
(3.36)
and
Z
A
n.(Γgrad(φ))dA =

Γ∂φ
∂x∆y

w
−

Γ∂φ
∂x∆y

e
+

Γ∂φ
∂y ∆x

s
−

Γ∂φ
∂y ∆x

n
(3.37)
where w, e, s and n denote values on the west, east, south and north surface of the
control volume surrounding node P.
The numerical approximation enters when numerically determining the values of the
property φ and the derivative of this on the cell faces. Diﬀerent numerical schemes
can be chosen for this, each with diﬀerent accuracy and stability properties.
The simplest discretization scheme is the central diﬀerencing scheme in which the
surface value is determined as the average of the values of the two neighbouring points,
e.g.
φw = φW + φP
2
(3.38)
and the derivative of the surface is taken as the linear slope between the two surround-
ing points, e.g.
∂φ
∂x

w
= φW + φP
∆x
(3.39)
The central diﬀerencing scheme is second order accurate.
However, an issue with
the scheme is that it does not take into account the ﬂow direction (Versteeg and
Malalasekera, 2007). When the transport is dominated by convection, the property at
a given cell interface will be dominated by the property value at the upstream node
24
==PAGE:39==
3 Numerical model
rather than the downstream node. An alternative to the central diﬀerencing scheme
which takes into account the ﬂow direction, is the upwind diﬀerencing scheme.
This scheme sets the property value on the cell face equal to the property value of the
upstream node. This can be used for the convective term, e.g. assuming that the ﬂow
direction is from east to west in Figure 3.1
φw = φP
(3.40)
A problem with the upwind diﬀerencing scheme is its low accuracy (ﬁrst order) which
may lead to inaccurate results due to false diﬀusion.
An alternative to the ﬁrst order upwind diﬀerencing scheme is the linear upwind
diﬀerencing scheme. This includes the two nearest upwind points, such that e.g.
φw =

φP + φP −φE
∆x
1
2∆x

(3.41)
The linear upwind diﬀerencing scheme is second order accurate. Higher order schemes
are less stable than lower order schemes and may produce over- and under-shoots in
the solutions. To overcome this issue and still maintain the higher order accuracy,
the total variation diminishing scheme (TVD) was developed. This introduces
a limiter function which is to ensure second order accuracy and boundedness. The
limiter function is a function of the ratio between the upstream and downstream
property gradient. For further description, see Versteeg and Malalasekera (2007).
Temporal discretization
For transient problems, the temporal derivative in (3.33) is treated using Euler im-
plicit discretization, (Nabla Ltd., 2015)
∂ρφ
∂t ∆V = ρφn −φ0
∆t
∆V
(3.42)
where φn is the property value at time t + ∆t and φ0 is the property value at time t.
3.2.2
Solution schemes
In the present project, the PISO (Pressure Implicit with Splitting of Operators) algo-
rithm is used to solve the discretized equations. The method is brieﬂy outlined here
with reference to Versteeg and Malalasekera (2007).
The solution at a given time step is initially based on a guessed pressure ﬁeld. A ﬁrst
approximation to the velocity ﬁeld is found based on the guessed pressure ﬁeld. A
ﬁrst pressure correction is made to correct the guessed velocity ﬁeld in order to satisfy
continuity. An improvement on the solution is made by performing a second pressure
correction and the velocity ﬁelds are found from the pressure ﬁeld. The correction step
can be performed as many times as needed. When the ﬁnal pressure and velocities are
determined, transport equations for other properties are solved.
25
==PAGE:40==
3 Numerical model
3.2.3
Set-up in OpenFOAM
In this section a general description of the OpenFOAM set-up used for the calculations
performed in this project is given. An example of a computational domain is seen in
Appendix E.
Domain
The domain boundaries are deﬁned using blockMesh. snappyHexMesh is used to set
up the structure in the domain and to introduce reﬁnement areas. No layers are added
in snappyHexMesh.
The domain length is determined based on the size of the structure in order to avoid
boundary eﬀects. A length of 20 times the total diameter of the structure on each side
of the structure in the stream-wise direction is taken to be suﬃcient. The width of
the domain is set according to the assumed moonpool size of 7 m. For the validation
calculations, the domain width is set to ensure free stream conditions.
Boundary conditions
The walls of the moonpool and the walls of the structure are set to have no-slip condi-
tions. Wall functions are applied for k and ω. It is ensured that the cell size adjacent
to the wall satisﬁes the requirements described in Section 3.1.3.
In the validation
calculations, slip condition is applied to the sides of the domain.
The oscillatory ﬂow is created using the boundary condition oscillatingFixedValueX
in which an amplitude and frequency of the oscillatory motion are deﬁned. The in-
let values for the turbulence model parameters, turbulence intensity I and length
scale L are deﬁned using the function turbulentIntensityKineticEnergyInlet and
turbulentMixingLengthFrequencyInlet respectively. Pressure is deﬁne as zero gra-
dient on one inlet/outlet boundary and ﬁxed total pressure on the other.
For the validation calculations with unidirectional ﬂow, an inlet velocity is speciﬁed on
the inlet boundary, while a zero velocity gradient is speciﬁed on the outlet boundary.
Pressure is deﬁned as zero gradient on the inlet boundary and ﬁxed value on the outlet
boundary.
Discretization schemes
An overview of the employed discretization schemes is seen in Table 3.1.
26
==PAGE:41==
3 Numerical model
Table 3.1: Discretization schemes used.
Term
OpenFOAM name
Description
Temporal
Euler
Backward Euler
Gradient
Gauss linear
Central diﬀerencing
Divergence (φ, U)
Gauss limitedLinearV 1
TVD
Divergence (φ, k)
Gauss upwind
Upwind diﬀerencing
Divergence (φ, ω)
Gauss upwind
Upwind diﬀerencing
Laplacian
Gauss linear corrected
Central diﬀerencing
Solution schemes and control
The solution algorithm used is PISO whith three or four corrector steps depending
on the ﬂow velocities, and one non-orthogonal corrector step. For speciﬁcation of the
solvers used for pressure, velocity and turbulence parameters see Appendix E.
The maximum Courant number is set to Comax = 0.2. The Courant number is deﬁned
as
Co = ∆t
3
X
i=1
ui
xi
(3.43)
Output
The forces acting on the individual elements of the treated structure are determined
and output from OpenFOAM using the forces function. This integrates the pressure
and skin friction forces on the patches making up the structure and outputs the forces
separately. In order to determine the total force acting on a given element, the pressure
and skin friction contributions are simply added.
The ﬂow velocity is probed in speciﬁc locations and output from OpenFOAM using
the probe function.
Solutions for pressure, velocity and turbulence parameters are output for the full
domain with 0.2 s intervals for visualisation purposes.
27
==PAGE:42==
==PAGE:43==
4
Model validation
In this section the OpenFOAM model is validated to ensure consistency in the calcu-
lations performed later. Initially, an empty domain is set up with uni-directional and
oscillatory ﬂow respectively. Then a single square cylinder is placed in the domain and
validation is performed for unidirectional ﬂow around the cylinder, subsequently for
oscillating ﬂow around the cylinder. The model is considered validated when model
results reproduce experimental results within acceptable accuracy.
4.1
Empty domain
To ensure the starting point of the model, it is shown that a two-dimensional domain
can be set up with a steady current as well as a continuously oscillating ﬂow with
correct velocity amplitude and frequency. A domain of 2 x 4 m is set up. Unidirectional
and oscillatory ﬂow is set up by implementing boundary conditions as described in
Section 3.2.3. Flow characteristics are:
U
=
1 m/s
Um
=
1 m/s
T0
=
6.7 s
The ﬂuid properties used for validation and calculations are:
ρ
=
1027 kg/m3
ν
=
1.5 × 10−6 m2/s
Walls are given either slip or no-slip conditions. Results are seen in Figure 4.1 and
4.2.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
0.9
0.92
0.94
0.96
0.98
1
1.02
1.04
1.06
1.08
1.1
t [s]
U [m/s]
 
 
(5,0.5,0.05)
(0.5,0.5,0.05)
(a) Unidirectional current. Inlet velocity 1
m/s. Slip condition on walls.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
0.993
0.994
0.995
0.996
0.997
0.998
0.999
1
1.001
t [s]
U [m/s]
 
 
(5,0.5,0.05)
(0.5,0.5,0.05)
(b) Unidirectional current. Inlet velocity 1
m/s. No-slip condition on walls.
Figure 4.1: Velocity measurements for unidirectional ﬂow at two locations, one in
the center of the domain, one close to the wall.
29
==PAGE:44==
4 Model validation
0
20
40
60
80
100
−2.5
−2
−1.5
−1
−0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
t [s]
U
[m/s]
 
 
Center
Bottom corner
Top corner
(a) Oscillating current.
Max.
velocity 1
m/s, oscillation period 6.7 s. Slip condition
on walls.
0
20
40
60
80
100
−2.5
−2
−1.5
−1
−0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
t [s]
U
[m/s]
 
 
Center
Bottom corner
Top corner
(b) Oscillating current. Max. velocity 1 m/s,
oscillation period 6.7 s. No-slip condition on
walls.
Figure 4.2: Velocity measurements for oscillatory ﬂow at three locations, one in the
center of the domain, one close to the bottom left corner, one close to the top right
corner. Velocity amplitude and period marked.
From Figure 4.1 it is seen that the unidirectional current quickly reaches stability. In
the case of no-slip wall conditions, as expected the velocity close to the wall is slightly
lower than the inlet velocity, while the velocity away from the wall is slightly higher.
Figure 4.2 shows that the desired amplitude and period of the oscillatory ﬂow is ob-
tained for two of the three measurement locations. The top corner location, however,
shows varying amplitude. This is due to proximity to the boundary where the oscil-
lating ﬂow condition is applied. Further investigation reveals that this only aﬀects the
ﬁrst few rows of cells and that ﬂow in the remaining domain is not aﬀected.
4.2
Unidirectional ﬂow
To validate the model for unidirectional ﬂow, a single cylinder with D = 1 m is placed
in the domain and exposed to a steady ﬂow. The drag coeﬃcient CD and Strouhal
number St for the cylinder are found using the approach described in Section 2.2.1.1.
The model is considered validated when the values for these parameters found from
experiments are reproduced with acceptable accuracy. The experimental values used
for comparison are summarized in Table 4.1. A sketch of the model domain is seen in
Figure 4.3.
4.2.1
Initial investigations
Initial calculations were performed without implementing a turbulence model. Flow
velocity was set to 1 m/s corresponding to a Reynolds number of 6.7×105.
A check for boundary eﬀects was performed by increasing, with reference to Figure
4.3, ld, lu and b one at a time until no eﬀect was seen when increasing further. For
30
==PAGE:45==
4 Model validation
Table 4.1: Drag coeﬃcient CD and Strouhal number St found from experiments and
reported in literature.
Reference
Re
CD
St
Lee (1975)
1.76 × 105
2.04
0.122
Bearman and Trueman (1972)
2.4 × 104
2.2
0.125
Knisely (1990)
1.8 × 104
-
0.125
BD
LD
B1
B2
L1
L2
b
b
lu
ld
D
l1u
l2u
l1d
l2d
U
Figure 4.3: Domain for validation. Diagonal hatch: Reﬁnement area 1. Cross hatch:
Reﬁnement area 2.
this, a grid size of 8 cells/m in the outer region, 16 cells/m in reﬁnement area 1 and
32 cells/m in reﬁnement area 2 was used.
The eﬀect of increasing the reﬁnement areas, i.e. L1, B1, L2 and B2, was also inves-
tigated. The ﬁnal dimensions of the domain and reﬁnement areas are seen in Table
4.2.
Table 4.2: Dimensions of domain and reﬁnement areas. Measures in m.
Domain
Reﬁnement 1
Reﬁnement 2
BD
LD
lu
ld
B1
L1
l1u
l1d
B2
L2
l2u
l2d
12
18
7
10
7
12
3
8
5
9
2
6
31
==PAGE:46==
4 Model validation
When increasing grid reﬁnement it was seen that the vortex shedding was suppressed;
after separation at the front corners, the ﬂow reattached on the sides of the cylinder.
This led to a higher pressure on the lee side of the cylinder and thereby a very low
drag force and hence CD. It was sought to initiate the vortex shedding by introducing
an initial skewness in the ﬂow without great eﬀect. Even when vortex shedding was
present, the oscillations in the drag force seemed to be superimposed by smaller oscil-
lations. It was concluded that the introduction of a turbulence model was most likely
necessary in order to diminish these additional oscillations.
4.2.2
Implementing k-ω-SST turbulence model
The k-ω-SST, as described in Section 3.1.2, is implemented. Wall functions are applied
to the surfaces of the cylinder, observing the criteria for cell size described in Section
3.1.3.
It is found that the values speciﬁed for k and ω in the inlet ﬂow have a signiﬁcant
inﬂuence on the results for especially CD but perhaps also St. An increase in the
speciﬁed turbulent energy in the inlet ﬂow seems to make the vortex shedding in-
creasingly structured. In the extreme, specifying an excessive k value will suppress
the vortex shedding in the calculations. A complete elimination of vortex shedding is
not physical, but it has been determined by Lee (1975) that the turbulence level in
the incoming ﬂow aﬀects the vortex shedding intensity as well as the drag force on a
square cylinder.
For the validation case it is chosen to keep the turbulence level low so as to reproduce
the parameters of a free ﬂow where no additional turbulence is added. k is deﬁned as
k = 1
2
 u′2 + v′2 + w′2
(4.1)
where u′, v′ and w′ are the ﬂuctuating velocities in the x, y and z direction respectively.
ω is deﬁned as (3.15).
An estimate of (the maximum value of) k can be found by assuming that
u′ ≈v′ ≈w′ ≈0.1u
(4.2)
This is valid near a wall.
It is assumed that the turbulence in the free stream -
which would be the case for the inlet - is less than this.
The k found using this
assumption is therefore a maximum value which mainly provides an estimate of the
order of magnitude
kmax ≈3
2(0.1u)2
(4.3)
The ω value for the inlet ﬂow is chosen to be in the order of 103 larger than k.
32
==PAGE:47==
4 Model validation
4.2.3
Validation results for unidirectional ﬂow
The uniform ﬂow around a single square cylinder with D = 1 m is validated for several
Reynolds numbers to cover the range which will be applied during the project. The
validation cases are seen in Table ??. It is noted that Case 1.1-4 all have two reﬁnement
areas while Case 1.5 has ﬁve reﬁnement areas.
Table 4.3: Validation cases for unidirectional ﬂow around a single square cylinder.
Inlet velocity U, Reynolds number Re, turbulence model parameters k and ω for inlet
ﬂow, grid size variation, and y+ for the cell height by the cylinder boundary.
Case
U
Re
k
ω
Grid
y+
[m/s]
[-]
[m2/s2]
[s−1]
[cells/m]
[-]
1.1
0.03
2×104
1.4×10−5
0.01
8-16-32
35
1.2
0.075
5×104
8×10−5
0.08
10-20-40
66
1.3
0.15
105
3×10−4
0.3
10-20-40
125
1.4
0.45
3×105
2×10−3
2.0
12-24-48
289
1.5
4.3
3×106
0.1
100
12-24-48-96-192-384
294
Results from the ﬁve validation cases are summarized in Table 4.4. Sections of the
drag and lift force time series are shown in Figure 4.4-4.8. The Strouhal number is
determined with the three methods described in Section 2.2.1.1, method 1 being period
averaging, method 2 taking peak frequency of lift force spectrum, and method 3 taking
mean frequency of lift force spectrum.
Table 4.4: Results for drag coeﬃcient CD and Strouhal number St for validation
cases.
Case
Re
CD
St1
St2
St3
1.1
2×104
2.03
0.122
0.130
0.131
1.2
5×104
2.06
0.123
0.128
0.129
1.3
105
2.01
0.120
0.125
0.127
1.4
3×105
2.02
0.125
0.124
0.126
1.5
3×106
2.03
0.122
0.124
0.128
Comparing the model results shown in Table 4.4 to the experimental values given
in Table 4.1, a good correlation is found. The CD values correspond well with that
found by Lee (1975) while they are within 10 % of the results found by Bearman and
Trueman (1972). It is noted that the three methods for determining the Strouhal
number give slightly varying results. However, all are within 10 % of the values given
in Table 4.1.
33
==PAGE:48==
4 Model validation
The time series shown in Figures 4.4-4.8 show reasonable behaviour of both drag and
lift force.
It is noted that for high Reynolds numbers, a form of slight aliasing is
observed. Since magnitude and frequency of the drag force is seen to be in line with
expectations, this is however not taken as cause for concern.
5000
5500
6000
6500
7000
7500
−0.1
−0.05
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
t [s]
FL
[N]
5000
5500
6000
6500
7000
7500
0.085
0.09
0.095
0.1
0.105
0.11
0.115
t [s]
FD
[N]
Figure 4.4: Lift and drag force for Case 1.1, Re = 2 × 104.
3500
4000
4500
5000
−0.8
−0.6
−0.4
−0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
t [s]
FL
[N]
3500
4000
4500
5000
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
t [s]
FD
[N]
Figure 4.5: Lift and drag force for Case 1.2, Re = 5 × 104.
2500
3000
3500
−2
−1
0
1
2
t [s]
FL
[N]
2500
3000
3500
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3
t [s]
FD
[N]
Figure 4.6: Lift and drag force for Case 1.3, Re = 105.
34
==PAGE:49==
4 Model validation
2000
2100
2200
2300
2400
2500
−30
−20
−10
0
10
20
30
40
2000
2100
2200
2300
2400
2500
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
t [s]
FD
[N]
Figure 4.7: Lift and drag force for Case 1.4, Re = 3 × 105.
40
50
60
70
80
90
−3000
−2000
−1000
0
1000
2000
3000
t [s]
FL
[N]
40
50
60
70
80
90
1400
1600
1800
2000
2200
2400
2600
2800
3000
t [s]
FD
[N]
Figure 4.8: Lift and drag force for Case 1.5, Re = 3 × 106.
4.3
Oscillatory ﬂow
To validate the model for oscillatory ﬂow, the cylinder with D = 1 m is now exposed to
a ﬂow with sinusoidally varying velocity. The validation is performed by ensuring that
the in-line force on the cylinder can be modelled reasonably by the Morison equation
(2.16) with drag and inertia coeﬃcients, CD and CM, corresponding to those found
in the literature. The drag and inertia coeﬃcients of the cylinder are found using the
approach described in Section 2.2.2.1. The model is considered validated when the
values for these coeﬃcients found from experiments are reproduced with acceptable
accuracy.
While experimental data in the literature for circular cylinders is abundant, the data
for cylinders with a square cross-section is more scarce. The primary reference for
the validation is Bearman et al. (1984). The authors report CD and CM values for a
square cylinder with sharp edges at ﬂows with β = 213 and KC in the range 1-100.
The set-up for the validation of oscillating ﬂow is similar to that for the unidirectional
ﬂow. Since the ﬂow will now be directed in both directions, the domain is expanded
to be symmetrical around the cylinder in both the in-line and cross-ﬂow direction. As
are the reﬁnement areas. Initial studies showed an eﬀect of increasing the width of
35
==PAGE:50==
4 Model validation
the domain. In order to ensure conditions corresponding to a free cylinder with no
blockage eﬀects, the domain size was therefore increased to the point where further
increase did not inﬂuence results. Referring to Figure 4.3, the domain dimensions are
as shown in Table 4.5.
Table 4.5: Dimensions of domain for validation of oscillating ﬂow.
BD
LD
lu
ld
b
21
21
10
10
10
In order to validate for conditions relevant for the further calculations, the oscillation
period is kept constant for all validation calculations at the natural period of the
moonpool found in Section 2.1.
T = 6.7 s
This gives β = 99500 which is several orders of magnitude larger than the β-value
of Bearman et al. (1984). Eﬀectively this means that comparing the results from the
model for a given KC number to those of Bearman et al. (1984) for the same KC
number, will mean comparing results with signiﬁcantly diﬀerent Reynolds number.
However, it is assumed that this is not of signiﬁcance since the ﬂow around a sharp-
edged cylinder should be insensitive to changes in Reynolds number, as described in
Section 2.2. Comparison of the model results to the experimental results of Bearman
et al. (1984) will therefore be the basis for validation.
A k-ω-SST turbulence model is used for all calculations. Since ﬂow velocity is now
varying, the turbulence intensity and dissipation at the inlets are set to vary as function
of ﬂow velocity. The functions are
k = 1.5(I|U|)2
ω =
√
k
c0.25
u
L
(4.4)
where I is the turbulence intensity, cu = 0.09, and L is length scale. I and L are
speciﬁed in the set-up in OpenFOAM and are chosen to be such that I is in the order
of 5 % while L is in the order of 5 % of the domain length, i.e. in the order of 1 m.
4.3.1
Validation results for oscillatory ﬂow
The validation cases are summarized in Table 4.6. A section of the time series for
the in-line force is shown for each case in Figures 4.11-4.12 along with the Morison
ﬁt. The drag and inertia coeﬃcients found from the Morison ﬁt are shown in Figures
4.9-4.10 where they are compared to experimental data from Bearman et al. (1984).
It is noted that the cases have diﬀerent numbers of reﬁnement areas. For Case 2.1, it
was chosen to resolve all the way to y+ = 1 since a value of 30-300 would lead to a
very coarse grid and thereby inaccurate results in the force integration.
From Figure 4.9 it is seen that there is an overall acceptable correlation between model
results and experimental data for KC values above 1. It is noted that results for KC
36
==PAGE:51==
4 Model validation
Table 4.6: Validation cases for oscillatory ﬂow around a single square cylinder. Max-
imum velocity Um, Keulegan-Carpenter number KC, turbulence model parameters I
and L for inlet ﬂow, grid size variation, and y+ for the center of the ﬁrst cell on the
cylinder boundary.
Case
Um
KC
I
L
Grid
y+
[m/s]
[-]
[-]
[m]
[cells/m]
[-]
2.1
0.002
0.01
0.05
1.0
12-24-48
1
2.2
0.02
0.1
0.05
1.0
12
32
2.3
0.15
1
0.05
1.0
8-16
157
2.4
0.3
2
0.05
1.0
12-24-48
99
2.5
0.9
6
0.02
1.5
12-24-48-96
138
2.6
1.5
10
0.05
1.0
10-20-40-80
266
2.7
3.0
20
0.05
1.0
10-20-40-80-160
253
2.8
4.5
30
0.05
1.0
13-26-52-104-208
283
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
KC
CD
 
 
Bearman et al.
OpenFOAM
Figure 4.9:
Values obtained for drag coeﬃcient using OpenFOAM compared to
experimental values from Bearman et al. (1984). KC values 1, 2, 6, 10, 20, 30.
of 0.01 and 0.1 are omitted since the force in these cases will be dominated by the
inertia term, cf. Section 2.2.2, and hence the modelling of CD will be very inaccurate.
This is also taken to be the reason for the large deviation between experimental and
model results seen for KC = 1 in Figure 4.9. The results for KC = 2, 6 and 10 are all
within 0-7 % deviation from experiments. For the higher KC values, larger deviations
are seen. It was later in the project realized that this may be due to boundary eﬀects
due to an insuﬃcient stream wise length of the domain. Since the main focus of the
project will be on KC up to 10, it has not been a priority to test this.
37
==PAGE:52==
4 Model validation
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
KC
CM
 
 
Potential theory
Bearman et al.
OpenFOAM
Figure 4.10: Values obtained for drag coeﬃcient using OpenFOAM compared to
experimental values from Bearman et al. (1984) and potential theory.
KC values
0.01, 0.1, 1, 2, 6, 10, 20, 30.
Figure 4.10 shows the model results for CM. For KC ≥1 the results are compared to
those found experimentally. For KC = 0.01 and 0.1, the comparison is made to the
solution from potential ﬂow theory (Bearman et al., 1984). It is seen that all model
results are within 1-4 % deviation of the experimental, with the exception of the result
for KC = 20 which deviates by 11 %. This may either be due to the boundary eﬀects
as described above or to the fact that at this KC level, the force is increasingly drag
dominated, making the modelling of the inertia term more uncertain.
Figures 4.11 and 4.12 show sections of the in-line force time series for each validation
case together with the Morison ﬁt used to ﬁnd CD and CM. It is noted that for higher
KC numbers the Morison equation becomes increasingly inaccurate in modelling the
peaks of the in-line force.
This is expected since the shortcoming of the Morison
equation in separated ﬂows has been previously established, Sumer and Fredsøe (2006).
38
==PAGE:53==
4 Model validation
90
100
110
120
130
140
150
−5
0
5
t [s]
F
[N/m]
(a) Case 2.1. KC = 0.01.
90
100
110
120
130
140
150
−50
0
50
t [s]
F
[N/m]
(b) Case 2.2. KC = 0.1.
90
100
110
120
130
140
150
−400
−300
−200
−100
0
100
200
300
400
t [s]
F
[N/m]
(c) Case 2.3. KC = 1.
340
350
360
370
380
390
400
−800
−600
−400
−200
0
200
400
600
800
t [s]
F
[N/m]
(d) Case 2.4. KC = 2.
Figure 4.11: In-line force for validation case 2.1-2.4. —: OpenFOAM result. —:
Morison ﬁt.
39
==PAGE:54==
4 Model validation
220
230
240
250
260
270
280
−3000
−2000
−1000
0
1000
2000
3000
t [s]
F
[N/m]
(a) Case 2.5. KC = 6.
290
300
310
320
330
340
350
−6000
−4000
−2000
0
2000
4000
6000
t [s]
F
[N/m]
(b) Case 2.6. KC = 10.
120
130
140
150
160
170
180
−2
−1.5
−1
−0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2x 10
4
t [s]
F
[N/m]
(c) Case 2.7. KC = 20.
90
100
110
120
130
140
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4x 10
4
t [s]
F
[N/m]
(d) Case 2.8. KC = 30.
Figure 4.12: In-line force for validation case 2.1-2.4. —: OpenFOAM result. —:
Morison ﬁt.
40
==PAGE:55==
4 Model validation
4.4
Concluding remarks
Based on the results shown above for both unidirectional and oscillatory ﬂow, the
OpenFOAM model is considered to yield reliable results for forces on a single cylinder.
In the numerical experiments to be performed, the grid ﬁneness and reﬁnement area
sizes will be kept in line with those used in the validation. The turbulence intensity
values I will also be kept the same. The length scale L is supposedly dependent on
the domain size, but since there seems to be very varying guidelines for the relation
between the characteristic domain dimension and L, it is chosen to keep the values
used in the validation.
41
==PAGE:56==
==PAGE:57==
5
Dimensional analysis
It is the objective for this project to investigate the forces on complex structures
exposed to conﬁned oscillatory ﬂow in order to contribute to the development of a
rational expression for this force.
It is wished to base the expression on the ﬂow
parameters and characteristic parameters of the structure which are easily identiﬁed.
Inspiration for the development of the expression is found in the work by Kristiansen
and Faltinsen (2012b) who developed a rational expression for forces on a 2D truss
structure. The expression used a screen type model for the structure and was based
on the solidity ratio, ﬂow angle and Reynolds number, taking into account shielding
and speed-up eﬀects.
In this section a dimensional analysis is performed in order to identify the parameters
governing the forces exerted on a complex structure such as a subsea module like that
shown in Figure 1.2. An initial analysis is performed for a simpliﬁed model in Section
5.1, while a more general analysis is performed in Section 5.2.
5.1
Initial analysis
Initially, a simple model of the structure is chosen: The structure is modelled as a
number of cylinders of same size placed in rows with equal spacing between cylinders
and between rows. A varying number of cylinders and varying mutual distance is used.
It is chosen to employ square cylinders to avoid the challenges of correctly determining
separation points which may emerge for circular cylinders.
A deﬁnition sketch of the model type is seen in Figure 5.1 for a structure consisting of
N square cylinders with distance dx between them in the cross-ﬂow direction and dy
between them in the in-line direction. The structure is placed in a moonpool of width
b.
An initial identiﬁcation of the parameters that inﬂuence the in-line force F on the
structure consisting of cylinders 1 to N yield the following list:
D
Side length of individual cylinder
b
Width of moonpool
dx
Distance between cylinders in x-direction
dy
Distance between cylinders in y-direction
nx
Number of cylinders in x-direction
ny
Number of cylinders in y-direction
T0
Period of oscillatory ﬂow
Um
Maximum velocity of oscillatory ﬂow
ρ
Density of ﬂuid
ν
Viscosity of ﬂuid
ks
Roughness of cylinder
43
==PAGE:58==
5 Dimensional analysis
D
dx
dy
b
N
...
1
2
x
y
u
Figure 5.1: Deﬁnition sketch for initial dimensional analysis.
For sharp-edged cylinders it is assumed that the eﬀect of viscosity ν, i.e. Reynolds
number eﬀect, is negligible, and the viscosity is therefore not considered further. It is
also assumed that the primary inﬂuence of the roughness of the cylinder ks is related
to the placement of the separation points for circular cylinders. Since the separation
points are ﬁxed for sharp-edged square cylinders, the roughness parameter is not taken
into further account.
This leaves the in-line force F on the structure as a function
F = f1(D, b, dx, dy, nx, ny, T0, Um, ρ)
(5.1)
Dimensional analysis of (5.1) gives the following non-dimensional function
F
ρU 2
m
= f2
 b
D, dx
D , dy
D , nx, ny, UmT0
D

(5.2)
The full dimensional analysis can be seen in Appendix A.
The expression (5.2) forms the basis for the choice of conﬁgurations to investigate.
The basic conﬁgurations are (in the format ny x nx): 1x2, 1x3, 2x1, 3x1, 2x2 and 3x3
cylinders with diameter D = 1.
The last non-dimensional term in (5.2) is the Keulegan-Carpenter number for each
individual cylinder KC. The eﬀect of this parameter is investigated by running cal-
culations for KC = 0.1, 1, 2, 6, 10. The basic diameter of the cylinders used for
the calculations is chose to be D = 1 m. With the period T0 = 6.7 s and maximum
velocity Um = 4.7 m/s found in Section 2.1, this gives a maximum KC =31. For this
reason it was a wish to increase the KC range, but this has not been possible due to
time constraints and limited computational resources.
44
==PAGE:59==
5 Dimensional analysis
It is chosen to investigate the cylinder distances dx/D and dy/D by running the con-
ﬁgurations with up to three diﬀerent values as the overview in Table 5.1 shows.
Table 5.1: Variation of cylinder distances dx/D and dy/D
Set-up
1x2
1x3
2x1
3x1
2x2
3x3
dx/D
0.5
1
2
0.5
1
-
-
-
-
-
-
0.5
1
2
0.5
1
dy/D
-
-
-
-
-
0.5
1
2
0.5
1
2
0.5
1
2
0.5
1
The ratio between cylinder diameter D and moonpool width b is investigated by run-
ning the conﬁgurations 1x2, 1x2, 2x2 ans 3x3 with three diﬀerent cylinder diameters,
D = 0.5, 0.75 and 1 m. In the cases with varying diameter size the distances are kept
constant at dx/D = 1 and dy/D = 1.
An overview of all basic calculation cases which will be treated in this project is seen
in Appendix B.
5.2
General analysis
The simple model of a subsea structure that forms the basis for the initial analysis will
be lacking in several aspects in regard to representing an actual subsea module. The
members of the subsea structure may vary in size and may not be aligned in rows and
columns such as is the case for the simple model. In order to deﬁne parameters which
can take into account these variations, a second dimensional analysis is performed. In
this analysis the structure is viewed as a whole. A deﬁnition sketch is seen in Figure
5.2. Members of the structure are still assumed to be sharp-edged square cylinders.
Dx
b
x
y
Dy
u
Figure 5.2: Deﬁnition sketch for general dimensional analysis.
The in-line force F on a structure of dimension Dy in the in-line direction and Dx in
the cross-ﬂow direction placed in a moonpool of width b and exposed to an oscillatory
ﬂow is taken to depend on the following parameters:
45
==PAGE:60==
5 Dimensional analysis
Dy
Dimension of structure in-line with ﬂow direction
Dx
Dimension of structure across the ﬂow direction
b
Width of moonpool
p
Porosity of the structure
N
Total number of members of the structure
σD
Standard deviation of member diameters
α
In-line alignment of the individual members of the structure
T0
Period of oscillatory ﬂow
Um
Maximum velocity of oscillatory ﬂow
ρ
Density of ﬂuid
For the same reasons as in the initial analysis, viscosity and roughness eﬀects are
neglected. The in-line force F on the structure is therefore taken to be a function
F = f1(Dx, Dy, b, p, N, σD, α, T0, Um, ρ)
(5.3)
Dimensional analysis leads to
F
ρU 2
m
= f2
Dx
Dy
, b
Dy
, p, N, σD, α, UmT0
Dy

(5.4)
The full dimensional analysis can be seen in Appendix A.
The last term in (5.4) involving the ﬂow velocity Um and period T0 is the Keulegan-
Carpenter number related to the total structure, denoted KCtot to distinguish it from
the Keulegan-Carpenter number for a single cylinder treated in the previous section.
It is noted that the standard deviation should be non-dimensionalized, e.g. by the
mean value.
The 3-dimensional porosity p is here deﬁned as
p = 1 −
PN
i=1 Ai
Atot
(5.5)
where Ai is the cross-sectional area of each member and Atot = DxDy is the total
cross-sectional area of the structure.
In order to estimate the blockage eﬀect, the blockage ratio of the structure is also
considered. This is the part of the moonpool cross-section that is taken up by the
structure, i.e. the extent of the structure in the cross-ﬂow direction relative to the full
moonpool width. The blockage ratio, here called γ, is therefore taken to be
γ = Dx
b
(5.6)
It is seen that the two ﬁrst parameters of f2 in (5.4) can be combined to give γ.
(5.4) can thus be written as
F
ρU 2
m
= f3
Dx
Dy
, γ, p, N, σD, α, KCtot

(5.7)
46
==PAGE:61==
5 Dimensional analysis
The in-line alignment of the members α will inﬂuence shielding and interaction between
the cylinders and may therefore inﬂuence the total force on the structure. A suggestion
for a measure of the alignment is made here but it is stressed that this parameter could
be deﬁned in several ways. For simplicity, in the determination of the alignment it is
again assumed that the cylinders are placed on identiﬁable rows in the structure. The
alignment factor then relates the solidity ratio of each row of cylinders to the solidity
ratio seen from one end of the structure
α =
Pny
i=1 Sri
ny
Srtot
(5.8)
where Sri = nxD/b is the solidity ratio for each row of cylinders, and Srtot is the
solidity ratio seen from one end of the structure. The limits for α are [1
b;1]. The
parameter is illustrated by Figure 5.3 and the following example calculation.
A
A
B
B
C
C
A-A
B-B
C-C
Figure 5.3: Alignment example.
Example calculations of α: With deﬁnitions as deﬁned in Figure 5.1, the alignment
parameter of the structure shown in Figure 5.3 is calculated. The solidity ratio of each
row, A-A and B-B, is:
Sr1 = Sr2 = 2D
b
Solidity ratio seen from the end of the structure, C-C, is:
Srtot = 4D
b
(5.9)
Alignment, α, is the average row solidity related to the total solidity
α = (Sr1 + Sr2)/2
Srtot
= 0.5
The parameters in (5.7) can all be determined for the basic calculation set-ups de-
scribed in Section 5.1 and given in Appendix B. This will be done for the 2x2 and 3x3
structures to study the parameters related to the general analysis. To further evaluate
the parameters from the general analysis, some additional cases are set up. To see the
eﬀect of alignment α, the conﬁgurations 2x2 and 3x3 are set up with α =0.5 and 0.75.
A full study of the parameters N and σ is not feasible within the limits of the present
47
==PAGE:62==
5 Dimensional analysis
project. However, to estimate the eﬀect of these parameters, a case is set up with the
same dimensions Dx and Dy and porosity p as one of the 3x3 case, but instead of 9
cylinders, it consists of one large cylinder with D =
√
5 surrounded by four cylinders
with D = 1. For investigation of porosity, some 3x3 cases are run with constant dx/D
but varying dy/D. Furthermore, it was late in the project realized that additional
cases were necessary to isolate the porosity parameter, as will be explained in Section
6.2.2. Therefore two 3x3 cases were set up with constant overall dimensions Dx and
Dy but varying cylinder diameter D in order to change porosity in an isolated manner.
An overview of the additional cases as well as deﬁnition sketches are seen in Appendix
B.
48
==PAGE:63==
6
Results and analysis
In this section the results of the simulations of the cases listed in Appendix B are
presented and an analysis of the parameters governing the hydrodynamic forces is
performed.
In the simulations, the forces acting on each member of the treated structure are
recorded, and the free stream velocity is probed near the end of the domain. The
results are presented in terms of force coeﬃcients found from a Morison ﬁt to the force
time series from the simulations, using the method outlined in Section 2.2.2.1. All
simulations are run for 150 s, and the Morison ﬁt is based on the last 15 periods of
the simulation.
In Section 6.1 an analysis related to the initial dimensional analysis in Section 5.1
is performed, focusing on the basic cases listed in Appendix B.1. In order to assess
the interaction eﬀects and the inﬂuence of cylinder distance, dx/D and dy/D, on
this eﬀect, special attention is paid to the conﬁgurations consisting of two and three
cylinders placed in a row either perpendicular to or in-line with the ﬂow direction
(set-ups 1x2, 1x3, 2x1 and 3x1). The analysis will relate the results to the theory on
interaction reported in Section 2.2.3. The results are presented as force coeﬃcients,
CD and CM - either for each individual cylinder or as a mean value for all cylinders.
The results are related to the Keulegan-Carpenter number for a single cylinder KC.
In Section 6.2 an analysis related to the general dimensional analysis in Section 5.2
is performed for the basic set-ups 2x2 and 3x3 and the additional set-ups listed in
Appendix B.2. The primary focus for this analysis is the blockage ratio γ, porosity
p and alignment α. A single set-up is related to the number of structure members
N and variation of member diameter σD. This set-up will be treated lastly. It is
sought to compare set-ups where only one parameter is changed at a time. Since the
general dimensional analysis did not form the basis for determining which set-ups to
investigate - this analysis was performed late in the project - the amount of set-ups
that vary only one parameter is unfortunately not as large as could have been desired.
This is subject to future work. The available results are presented as force coeﬃcients
for the full structure, CDtot and CMtot, related to the Keulegan-Carpenter number for
the whole structure KCtot.
As a ﬁnal aspect, the results for the total structure coeﬃcients found from the simu-
lations are compared to the total structure coeﬃcients found by a Morison prediction.
The prediction is made by applying single cylinder free stream force coeﬃcients found
in the literature to each member of the structure and thereby predicting the force on
the total structure based on the free stream velocity. This comparison is presented in
Section 6.3.
Remarks on the challenges met during the execution of the simulations are found in
Appendix C. The domain lengths used for each case are seen in the case overview in
Appendix B. The grid sizes used are seen from Table E.1 in Appendix E.
All results for individual cylinder coeﬃcients are provided in table format in Appendix
D.
49
==PAGE:64==
6 Results and analysis
6.1
Initial analysis
Results are presented for forces acting on the basic cases listed in Appendix B.1.
Firstly, the interaction eﬀects and the inﬂuence of cylinder distance dx/D and dy/D are
investigated. Special focus is put on the structures consisting of one row of cylinders
in order to investigate interaction eﬀects and determine if the indications from the
literature reported in Section 2.2.3 can be recognised in the present results. The results
are presented in terms of in-line force coeﬃcients, CD and CM, for each individual
cylinder in the structure. Additionally, sections of the force time series are presented
for the single row structures to shine further light on interaction eﬀects.
Secondly, the eﬀect of cylinder diameter to moonpool width ratio b/D is investigated.
This term relates to the blockage eﬀect treated in Section 2.2.4.
The results are
presented in terms of mean force coeﬃcients for the cylinders in the structure.
6.1.1
Interaction eﬀects - dx/D and dy/D
The interaction eﬀects of two or more square cylinders are investigated, and the inﬂu-
ence of cylinder distance on this eﬀect is investigated. Results for the set-ups 1x2, 1x3,
2x1 and 3x1 are presented in terms of force coeﬃcients for each cylinder as function
of KC as well as in terms of mean force coeﬃcient as function of cylinder distance.
Force time series are also presented for these cases. The results for the set-ups 2x2
and 3x3 are presented in terms of mean force coeﬃcients for the cylinders as function
of KC as well as cylinder distance. A conclusion on the ﬁndings is presented at the
end of the section.
6.1.1.1
1 by 2 cylinders
The force coeﬃcients CD and CM are presented for each individual cylinder in the 1
by 2 cylinder conﬁguration. The set-up is sketched in Figure 6.1.
D
dx
1
Dy
2
b
Dx
Figure 6.1:
Deﬁnition sketch for 1 by 2 cylinders.
Cylinder diameter D, total
structure in-line diameter Dy and cross-ﬂow diameter Dx, cross-ﬂow cylinder distance
dx and moonpool width b.
50
==PAGE:65==
6 Results and analysis
Table 6.1 shows the characteristics for the three 1 by 2 cylinder set-ups with varying
distance dx/D.
Table 6.1: Parameters for 1 by 2 cylinders with constant diameter D = 1 m and
varying distance dx/D.
dx/D
[-]
0.5
1
2
Dy
[m]
1
1
1
Dx
[m]
2.5
3
4
D/b
[-]
1
7
1
7
1
7
Force coeﬃcients
The force coeﬃcients for each cylinder are shown as function of KC in Figure 6.2.
From the ﬁgure it is seen that the development of the coeﬃcients with increasing KC
qualitatively resembles that for a single cylinder in the moonpool. It is however seen
that the drag coeﬃcient CD for each of the two cylinders in the 1 by 2 conﬁguration
is higher than the drag coeﬃcient for a single cylinder. The presence of the second
cylinder inﬂuences the ﬂow and increases the drag. It is noted that the values for CD
found at very low KC (KC = 0.1, 1 and perhaps also 2) are most likely not physical
since the in-line force in this range is highly inertia dominated.
Observing the values shown for CM in Figure 6.2, it is clear that the presence of the
second cylinder also increases the inertia coeﬃcient compared to a single cylinder. The
eﬀect seems to vanish abruptly for KC = 10, except for the closely spaced cylinders
(dx/D = 0.5), where CM is increased even further. This could perhaps be explained
by the cylinders being in such close proximity of each other that they act almost as a
single large structure.
0
2
4
6
8
10
0
5
10
15
KC
CD
0
2
4
6
8
10
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
KC
CM
Figure 6.2: Force coeﬃcients CD and CM for two side by side cylinders with D = 1.
As function of Keulegan-Carpenter number.
⋄□: dx/D = 0.5, ⋄□: dx/D = 1,
⋄□: dx/D = 2, △: Single cylinder in 7 m moonpool. Diamond shape is cylinder 1,
square is cylinder 2.
51
==PAGE:66==
6 Results and analysis
In Figure 6.3 the mean values of CD and CM for the two cylinders are shown as function
of the distance dx/D. It is noted that the CD values for KC = 0.1 are not included in
the plot. It is seen from the ﬁgure that a decrease in distance between the cylinders
leads to an increase in CD; the change from largest to smallest distance is in the order
of 15 %. The increase may be due to the speed-up created by the jet like ﬂow between
the cylinders, as described in Section 2.2.3. The speed-up will be larger for smaller
gaps, thus leading to larger drag force. It is noted that for KC = 2 a decrease from
dx/D = 1 to 0.5 yields the opposite eﬀect, i.e. a decrease in CD. The reason for this
is not clear.
It is seen that a similar eﬀect occurs for the inertia coeﬃcient CM which also decreases
with increasing distance. The change from largest to smallest distance is in the order
of 5 %. The largest eﬀect is seen when increasing the distance from dx/D = 0.5 to
1. This indicates that the interaction eﬀect decreases with distance and that it will
vanish at a certain distance. It is noted that barely any eﬀect is seen on the inertia
coeﬃcient when increasing distance for KC = 6. The results for KC = 10 are also
seen to behave diﬀerently than those for the lower KC numbers. This must be related
to the abrupt change in CM seen at this KC.
The results correspond well with those found by Chern et al. (2010) and reported
in Section 2.2.3. They described the total in-line force as decreasing with increasing
distance between two square cylinders in a side-by-side arrangement.
Comparing the values for CD and CM in the two-cylinder set-up to the single cylinder
values also shown in Figure 6.3, it is clear that all three distances yield higher results
for the two-cylinder set-up than for the single cylinder. This may indicate interaction
eﬀects for all three distances, thus contradicting the results reported by Sarpkaya
and Isaacson (1981), who indicated that interference only occurs for dx/D < 1.5 (for
circular cylinders), and Chern et al. (2010) who found no interference for dx/D = 2
(for square cylinders). The increased value for the two cylinder set-up may however
also be due to the increased blockage compared to the single cylinder.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
2
3
4
5
6
7
dx/D
CD
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
dx/D
CM
Figure 6.3: Mean values of force coeﬃcients CD and CM for two side by side cylinders
with D = 1. As function of distance dx/D. □: KC = 0.1, ⋄: KC = 1, △: KC = 2,
▽: KC = 6, ◦: KC = 10. Single cylinder results are shown with ﬁlled markers.
52
==PAGE:67==
6 Results and analysis
Force time series
The force time series in Figure 6.5 show the in-line and lift forces acting on the two
cylinders in a side-by-side conﬁguration exposed to a ﬂow of KC = 6. The time series
clearly show an interference between the two cylinders at dx/D = 0.5 and 1, as a
non-zero mean lift force is induced on the cylinders. It is also seen that this eﬀect
is decreasing with increasing distance dx/D with the eﬀect being barely detectable
for dx/D = 2. This corresponds with the ﬁndings by Chern et al. (2010) reported in
Section 2.2.3. The increased values of the force coeﬃcients for dx/D = 2, treated above
can thus be taken to be caused by the increased blockage rather than interference.
It is noted that the non-zero mean force acting on one cylinder is directed toward the
other cylinder. A study of the pressure and ﬂow ﬁeld reveals that the large peaks in
the lift force, which occur with the same period as the ﬂow, are caused by a large
separation bubble forming between the two cylinders.
This can be seen from the
pressure ﬁeld plot shown in Figure 6.4. The separation bubble is most likely created
due to the speed-up of the ﬂow. The bubble takes turns forming on one cylinder in one
half period, then on the other cylinder in the next half period. The large separation
bubble only forms on the side of the cylinder toward the other cylinder, thus creating
a pressure diﬀerence seen and thereby the resulting force.
Figure 6.4: Pressure ﬁeld visualization of 1x2 case with dx/D = 0.5 at t = 135 s.
Vectors indicate ﬂow velocity.
53
==PAGE:68==
6 Results and analysis
100
110
120
130
140
150
−400
−300
−200
−100
0
100
200
300
400
t [s]
F
[N]
(a) In-line force. dx/D = 0.5.
100
110
120
130
140
150
−150
−100
−50
0
50
100
150
t [s]
FL
[N]
(b) Lift force. dx/D = 0.5.
100
110
120
130
140
150
−400
−300
−200
−100
0
100
200
300
400
t [s]
F
[N]
(c) In-line force. dx/D = 1.
100
110
120
130
140
150
−200
−150
−100
−50
0
50
100
150
200
t [s]
FL
[N]
(d) Lift force. dx/D = 1.
100
110
120
130
140
150
−400
−300
−200
−100
0
100
200
300
400
t [s]
F
[N]
(e) In-line force. dx/D = 2.
100
110
120
130
140
150
−150
−100
−50
0
50
100
t [s]
FL
[N]
(f) Lift force. dx/D = 2.
Figure 6.5: Time series of in-line and lift force for 1 by 2 cylinders at KC = 6. —
Cylinder 1, — Cylinder 2.
6.1.1.2
1 by 3 cylinders
The force coeﬃcients CD and CM are also presented for each individual cylinder in
the 1 by 3 cylinder conﬁguration. The set-up is sketched in Figure 6.6.
54
==PAGE:69==
6 Results and analysis
D
dx
1
Dy
2
b
3
dx
Dx
Figure 6.6:
Deﬁnition sketch for 1 by 3 cylinders.
Cylinder diameter D, total
structure in-line diameter Dy and cross-ﬂow diameter Dx, cross-ﬂow cylinder distance
dx and moonpool width b.
Table 6.2 shows the characteristics of the two set-ups of 1 by 3 cylinders with varying
cross-ﬂow distance dx/D. Due to the constraint of the moonpool width, only dx/D =
0.5 and 1 are possible.
Table 6.2: Characteristics for 1 by 3 cylinders with constant diameter D = 1 m and
varying distance dx/D.
dx/D
[-]
0.5
1
Dy
[m]
1
1
Dx
[m]
4
5
D/b
[-]
1
7
1
7
Force coeﬃcients
Figure 6.7 shows the force coeﬃcients CD and CM for each individual cylinder in the
1 by 3 set-up as a function of the Keulegan-Carpenter number KC. It is seen that the
development of both coeﬃcients qualitatively follows that of a single cylinder - except
the inertia coeﬃcient for dx/D = 1 which drops abruptly at KC = 10, similarly to
what was seen in the 2 by 2 case treated in the previous section. KC = 10 thus seems
to be a critical point in regard to the inertia coeﬃcient CM where the results seem to
be more dependent on the distance than for the remaining KC values.
It is seen that the drag as well as the inertia coeﬃcient is signiﬁcantly increased
compared to that of a single cylinder. Furthermore, it is seen that the coeﬃcients for
the middle cylinder are higher than those for the two surrounding cylinders, and that
this is more pronounced for the close spacing of dx/D = 0.5 than the larger spacing of
dx/D = 1. This is explained by the increased speed-up around this cylinder.
Figure 6.8 shows the mean value of the force coeﬃcients for the three cylinders as a
function of spacing dx/D. Only two values for each KC value are available but these
55
==PAGE:70==
6 Results and analysis
0
2
4
6
8
10
0
5
10
15
20
KC
CD
0
2
4
6
8
10
2
3
4
5
6
KC
CM
Figure 6.7: Force coeﬃcients CD and CM for three side by side cylinders with D = 1.
As function of Keulegan-Carpenter number. ⋄□◦: dx/D = 0.5, ⋄□◦: dx/D = 1,
△: Single cylinder in 7 m moonpool. Diamond shape is cylinder 1, square is cylinder
2, and circle is cylinder 3.
show a very clear tendency for both CD and CM to decrease with increasing spacing,
both in the order of 5-10 % for. For all KC the absolute change in CD is approximately
the same going from the smaller to the larger ratio. This is also the case for CM except
for KC = 10 which, as stated above, shows a stronger dependency on distance with a
larger increase going from the small to the large distance.
Comparing the mean values of CD and CM to the single cylinder values also shown in
Figure 6.8, it is clear that the 1 by 3 set-up shows signiﬁcantly higher values. This is
assumed to be largely due to the increased blockage, but the decrease in coeﬃcients
going from the smaller to the larger spacing indicates a certain level of interference as
well.
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
2
4
6
8
10
dx/D
CD
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
dx/D
CM
Figure 6.8:
Mean values of force coeﬃcients CD and CM for three side by side
cylinders with D = 1. As function of distance dx/D. □: KC = 0.1, ⋄: KC = 1,
△: KC = 2, ▽: KC = 6, ◦: KC = 10. Single cylinder results are shown with ﬁlled
markers.
56
==PAGE:71==
6 Results and analysis
Force time series
Figure 6.9 shows sections of the time series of the in-line and lift force exerted on the
cylinders in the 1 by 3 cylinder set-up at KC = 6. It is seen that the in-line force
for the center cylinder (cylinder 2) is larger than for the two surrounding cylinders,
supporting the results for the force coeﬃcients shown in Figure 6.7. This is due to the
speed-up caused by the presence of the surrounding cylinders. The increase is seen to
be slightly more pronounced for the distance dx/D = 0.5 than for dx/D = 1.
Comparing the magnitudes of the lift forces in the two cases, it is seen that the lift
forces exerted on the cylinders in the closer spacing (dx/D = 0.5) are larger compared
to the larger spacing (dx/D = 1). This is assumed to be caused by a separation bubble
formation similar to that seen in the 1x2 case.
100
110
120
130
140
150
−600
−400
−200
0
200
400
600
t [s]
F
[N]
(a) In-line force. dx/D = 0.5.
100
110
120
130
140
150
−300
−200
−100
0
100
200
300
t [s]
FL
[N]
(b) Lift force. dx/D = 0.5.
100
110
120
130
140
150
−600
−400
−200
0
200
400
600
t [s]
F
[N]
(c) In-line force. dx/D = 1.
100
110
120
130
140
150
−300
−200
−100
0
100
200
300
t [s]
FL
[N]
(d) Lift force. dx/D = 1.
Figure 6.9: Time series of in-line and lift force for 1 by 3 cylinders at KC = 6. —
Cylinder 1, — Cylinder 2, — Cylinder 3.
6.1.1.3
2 by 1 cylinders
The force coeﬃcients CD and CM are presented for each individual cylinder in the 2
by 1 cylinder conﬁguration. The set-up is sketched in Figure 6.10.
57
==PAGE:72==
6 Results and analysis
dy
b
1
Dy
2
D
Dx
Figure 6.10: Deﬁnition sketch for 2 by 1 cylinders. Cylinder diameter D, struc-
ture in-line diameter Dy and cross-ﬂow diameter Dx, in-line cylinder distance dy and
moonpool width b.
Table 6.3 shows the characteristics for the 2 by 1 cylinder set-ups with constant diam-
eter D = 1 m.
Table 6.3: Characteristics for 2 by 1 cylinders with constant cylinder diameter D = 1
m and varying in-line distance dy/D.
dy/D
[-]
0.5
1
2
Dy
[m]
2.5
3
4
Dx
[m]
1
1
1
D/b
[-]
1
7
1
7
1
7
Force coeﬃcients
Figure 6.11 shows the force coeﬃcients CD and CM for each cylinder in the 2 by 1
conﬁguration as function of the Keulegan-Carpenter number KC. From the ﬁgure it is
seen that the drag coeﬃcient follows the same qualitative development with increasing
KC as for the single cylinder. However, the values are seen to be lower for the cylinders
in the 2 by 1 set-up. The decrease in CD compared to the single cylinder is seen
to diminish with increasing KC.
This is contrary to what Sarpkaya and Isaacson
(1981) reported as described in Section 2.2.3; the interference eﬀect should be most
obvious where the distance between the cylinders is small compared to the ﬂow motion
amplitude, i.e. the eﬀect should be more obvious for higher KC numbers.
From Figure 6.11 it is seen that CM also follows the same qualitative development with
KC as that for a single cylinder - except when KC = 10 is reached; here a decrease
in CM is seen for the two smaller distances. An overall decrease in CM is also seen
compared to the single cylinder. This eﬀect seems to be increasing with increasing
KC, in accordance with the results reported by Sarpkaya and Isaacson (1981).
58
==PAGE:73==
6 Results and analysis
0
2
4
6
8
10
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
KC
CD
0
2
4
6
8
10
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
KC
CM
Figure 6.11: Force coeﬃcients CD and CM for two cylinders with D = 1 placed in
line with ﬂow. As function of Keulegan-Carpenter number. ⋄□: dy/D = 0.5, ⋄□:
dy/D = 1, ⋄□: dy/D = 2, △: Single cylinder in 7 m moonpool. Diamond shape is
cylinder 1, square is cylinder 2.
In Figure 6.12 the mean values of the force coeﬃcients CD and CM are shown as
function of the in-line cylinder distance dy/D. It is seen that values for both CD and
CM are approaching the values for a single cylinder as the distance is increased. The
most signiﬁcant eﬀect is seen when increasing the distance from dx/D = 0.5 to 1. Since
all results, except CD for KC = 10 at dy/D = 2, show lower values than the single
cylinder, it is concluded that interference between the cylinders occurs for distances at
least up to dy/D = 2 in the investigated KC range. It is clear that the exact distance
between the cylinders may be very inﬂuential, as the increase in drag coeﬃcient from
smallest distance to largest distance is in the order of 40 %, while the corresponding
change for the inertia coeﬃcient is in the order of 10 %.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
1
2
3
4
5
dy/D
CD
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
dy/D
CM
Figure 6.12: Mean values of force coeﬃcients CD and CM for cylinders with D = 1
placed in line with ﬂow. As function of distance dy/D. □: KC = 0.1, ⋄: KC = 1,
△: KC = 2, ▽: KC = 6, ◦: KC = 10. Single cylinder results are shown with ﬁlled
markers.
59
==PAGE:74==
6 Results and analysis
Force time series
The sections of force time series in Figure 6.13 show the in-line and lift forces acting
on the two cylinders in tandem arrangement exposed to a ﬂow of KC = 6. The in-line
force shows a shift away from having a mean value of zero for both cylinders, indicating
the interaction/shielding eﬀect. The mean force is - somewhat counter-intuitively -
directed away from the other cylinder. This is investigated further in the section below
to determine the responsible mechanism. The interaction eﬀect is most clear in the
dy/D = 0.5 and decreasingly so for increasing distance, underlining the results for
the force coeﬃcients discussed above. The time series of the lift force reveal no clear
interaction eﬀects.
60
==PAGE:75==
6 Results and analysis
100
110
120
130
140
150
−300
−200
−100
0
100
200
300
t [s]
FD
[N]
(a) In-line force. dy/D = 0.5.
100
110
120
130
140
150
−100
−50
0
50
100
t [s]
FL
[N]
(b) Lift force. dy/D = 0.5.
100
110
120
130
140
150
−300
−200
−100
0
100
200
300
t [s]
FD
[N]
(c) In-line force. dy/D = 1.
100
110
120
130
140
150
−100
−50
0
50
100
t [s]
FL
[N]
(d) Lift force. dy/D = 1.
100
110
120
130
140
150
−300
−200
−100
0
100
200
300
t [s]
FD
[N]
(e) In-line force. dy/D = 2.
100
110
120
130
140
150
−100
−50
0
50
100
t [s]
FL
[N]
(f) Lift force. dy/D = 2.
Figure 6.13: Time series of in-line and lift force for 2 by 1 cylinders at KC = 6. —
Cylinder 1, — Cylinder 2.
Investigation of in-line force for closely spaced cylinders
As can be seen from Figure 6.13, the in-line force on the two cylinders in the dy/D = 0.5
arrangement acts somewhat counter-intuitively: The mean value of the in-line force
acting on each cylinder is not zero - which is expected due to the close proximity of the
cylinders. From Figure 6.13a it is clear that the resulting mean force on each cylinder
is directed away from the other cylinder.
I.e.
the force acting on cylinder 1 (the
61
==PAGE:76==
6 Results and analysis
lower cylinder) is larger when this cylinder is placed downstream (when ﬂow direction
is downwards) than when it is in a downstream position. The intuitive assumption
may be the opposite, that the force acting on a cylinder is smaller when this cylinder
is placed downstream of the other cylinder, due to a shielding eﬀect. Some eﬀort is
therefore put into investigating why this is not the case.
Comparing Figure 6.13a and e shows that this eﬀect vanishes when dy/D = 2, as the
in-line forces in this case look very similar for the two cylinders, i.e. no resulting force
directed away from the other cylinder occurs. A comparison between these two cases
is therefore a means of ﬁnding the source to the resulting force in the dy/D = 0.5 case.
In Figure 6.14a and 6.14b the force time series for dy/D = 0.5 is plotted together with
the free stream velocity. It is seen from Figure 6.14a that the maximum force occurs
when the free stream velocity is close to zero. This means that the force is inertia
dominated at this time, since this is the time where acceleration is largest. This is
however also seen to be the case for dy/D = 2 so this is not the explanation for the
resulting force.
100
110
120
130
140
150
−400
−300
−200
−100
0
100
200
300
400
t [s]
FD
[N]
(a) dy/D = 0.5
100
110
120
130
140
150
−400
−300
−200
−100
0
100
200
300
400
t [s]
FD
[N]
(b) dy/D = 2
Figure 6.14: 2x1 case. In-line force for cylinder 1 (—) and cylinder 2 (—). Free
stream velocity multiplied by a factor 100 (—). Times marked are t = 131 s and
t = 134.6 s.
In Appendix F visualizations of the velocity and pressure ﬁelds around the two cylin-
ders are shown for both cases for the two times marked in Figure 6.14. The velocity
ﬁelds show that the ﬂow in the gap between the two cylinders is not fully developed in
the case of the close spacing dy/D = 0.5 where as it seems to be for the larger spacing
dy/D = 2. This can be illustrated by probing the velocity in the center of the gap in
both cases. The gap velocities in both x and y direction are shown in Figures 6.15a and
6.15b. From these ﬁgures it is clear that the ﬂow does not develop fully for the smaller
spacing. Studying the pressure distributions in the plots in Appendix F furthermore
reveals that this lack of ﬂow development also means that the vortex formation behind
the upstream cylinder, i.e. in the gap, does not develop fully for the small spacing.
This means that the pressure does not drop in front of this cylinder nearly as much
as it would if the ﬂow was fully developed. This results in an overall lower resulting
62
==PAGE:77==
6 Results and analysis
force on the upstream cylinder compared to the downstream - i.e. opposite of what
was described as the intuitive assumption. This is taken to be the explanation for
the resulting force acting on each cylinder directed away from the other cylinder in
tandem arrangements with small gaps.
100
110
120
130
140
150
−1
−0.5
0
0.5
1
t [s]
u
[m/s]
(a) dy/D = 0.5
100
110
120
130
140
150
−1
−0.5
0
0.5
1
t [s]
u
[m/s]
(b) dy/D = 2
Figure 6.15: 2x1 case. Gap velocity in x-direction (—) and y-direction (—). Times
marked are t = 131 s and t = 134.6 s.
6.1.1.4
3 by 1 cylinders
The force coeﬃcients CD and CM are presented for each individual cylinder in the 3
by 1 cylinder conﬁguration. The set-up is sketched in Figure 6.16.
dy
b
1
Dy
2
D
3
dy
Dx
Figure 6.16: Deﬁnition sketch for 3 by 1 cylinders. Cylinder diameter D, total
structure in-line diameter Dy and cross-ﬂow diameter Dx, in-line cylinder distance dy
and moonpool width b.
Table 6.4 shows the characteristics for the 3 by 1 cylinder set-ups with constant diam-
eter D = 1 m.
63
==PAGE:78==
6 Results and analysis
Table 6.4: Characteristics for 3 by 1 cylinders with varying distance dy/D.
dy/D
[-]
0.5
1
2
Dy
[m]
4
5
7
Dx
[m]
1
1
1
D/b
[-]
1
7
1
7
1
7
Force coeﬃcients
Figure 6.17 shows the force coeﬃcients CD and CM for each cylinder in the 3 by 1
conﬁguration as function of the Keulegan-Carpenter number KC. As was the case for
the 2 by 1 set-up, it is seen that the drag coeﬃcient in the 3 by 1 set-up follows the same
qualitative development with increasing KC as for the single cylinder. However, the
values are seen to be lower for the cylinders in the 3 by 1 set-up for all three distances
dy/D. It is also seen that the center cylinder shows a lower drag coeﬃcient than the
two surrounding cylinders. This eﬀect is caused by shielding of the center cylinder by
the surrounding cylinders and is seen to be enhanced with decreasing spacing.
The development of CM with KC is seen to be qualitatively corresponding to that for
a single cylinder for KC ≤0.2. For larger KC deviations are seen compared to the
single cylinder results, namely for the center cylinder for dy/D = 0.5 and 1. This is
assumed to be caused by shielding.
0
2
4
6
8
10
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
KC
CD
0
2
4
6
8
10
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
KC
CM
Figure 6.17: Force coeﬃcients CD and CM for three cylinders with D = 1 placed in
line with ﬂow. As function of Keulegan-Carpenter number. ⋄□◦: dy/D = 0.5, ⋄
□◦: dy/D = 1, ⋄□◦: dy/D = 2, △: Single cylinder in 7 m moonpool. Diamond
shape is cylinder 1, square is cylinder 2, and circle is cylinder 3.
In Figure 6.18 the mean values of the force coeﬃcients CD and CM are shown as
function of the in-line cylinder distance dy/D. There is a clear tendency for both
values to increase with increasing distance. As was the case for the 2 by 1 set-up as
well, it is seen that values for both CD and CM are approaching the values for a single
cylinder as the distance is increased. Due to the increased shielding of the middle
cylinder, the mean value does not reach as close to the single cylinder value in the 3
64
==PAGE:79==
6 Results and analysis
by 1 set-up as in the 2 by 1 set-up. Based on the results shown in Figure 6.18 it is
concluded that interaction eﬀects occur at least for spacings up to dy/D = 2. It is also
seen that, just as for the 2x1 set-up, the distance between the cylinders has a large
inﬂuence on the force coeﬃcients; increase from smallest to largest distance leads to
an increase in drag coeﬃcient in the order of 90 % and an increase in inertia coeﬃcient
in the order of 10-15 %.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
0
1
2
3
4
5
dy/D
CD
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
dy/D
CM
Figure 6.18: Mean values of force coeﬃcients CD and CM for three cylinders with
D = 1 placed in line with ﬂow. As function of distance dy/D. □: KC = 0.1, ⋄:
KC = 1, △: KC = 2, ▽: KC = 6, ◦: KC = 10. Single cylinder results are shown
with ﬁlled markers.
Based on these results, it is clear that shielding eﬀects on ”internal” structure members,
such as the center cylinder in the 3 by 1 set-up, may be signiﬁcant, reducing the in-line
force coeﬃcients for these members substantially and thereby also reducing the overall
force on the structure.
Force time series
The sections of force time series in Figure 6.19 show the in-line and lift forces acting
on the three cylinders in the 3 by 1 set-up exposed to a ﬂow of KC = 6. The in-line
force for dy/D = 0.5 clearly shows the shielding of the center cylinder which shows
lower force magnitude than the two surrounding cylinders. A tendency like that seen
for the 2 by 1 case, where the mean force acting on the two surrounding cylinders is
shifted away from zero, is also seen. These eﬀects are decreased for dy/D = 1 and
virtually undetectable for dy/D = 2. The time series of the lift force reveal no clear
interaction eﬀects.
65
==PAGE:80==
6 Results and analysis
100
110
120
130
140
150
−400
−300
−200
−100
0
100
200
300
400
t [s]
FD
[N]
(a) In-line force. dy/D = 0.5.
100
110
120
130
140
150
−150
−100
−50
0
50
100
150
t [s]
FL
[N]
(b) Lift force. dy/D = 0.5.
100
110
120
130
140
150
−400
−300
−200
−100
0
100
200
300
400
t [s]
FD
[N]
(c) In-line force. dy/D = 1.
100
110
120
130
140
150
−150
−100
−50
0
50
100
150
t [s]
FL
[N]
(d) Lift force. dy/D = 1.
100
110
120
130
140
150
−400
−300
−200
−100
0
100
200
300
400
t [s]
FD
[N]
(e) In-line force. dy/D = 2.
100
110
120
130
140
150
−150
−100
−50
0
50
100
150
t [s]
FL
[N]
(f) Lift force. dy/D = 2.
Figure 6.19: Time series of in-line and lift force for 3 by 1 cylinders at KC = 6. —
Cylinder 1, — Cylinder 2, — Cylinder 3.
66
==PAGE:81==
6 Results and analysis
6.1.1.5
2 by 2 cylinders
The 2 by 2 cylinder set-up is sketched in Figure 6.20. The set-up is run with varying
distances dx/D = dy/D. The parameters for the set-ups can be seen in Table 6.5.
dx
dy
b
1
Dy
2
3
4
D
Dx
Figure 6.20: Deﬁnition sketch for 2 by 2 cylinders. Cylinder diameter D, structure
in-line diameter Dy and cross-ﬂow diameter Dx, in-line cylinder distance dy, cross-ﬂow
cylinder distance dx and moonpool width b.
Table 6.5: Characteristics for 2 by 2 cylinders with varying distance dy/D and dx/D.
dx/D
[-]
0.5
1
2
dy/D
[-]
0.5
1
2
Dy
[m]
2.5
3
4
Dx
[m]
2.5
3
4
D/b
[-]
1
7
1
7
1
7
In Figure 6.21 the mean value of the force coeﬃcients in each set-up is shown as a
function of the Keulegan-Carpenter number KC related to a single cylinder. The stan-
dard deviation for each set-up and KC is marked with bars. The standard deviation
is calculated as
σ =
v
u
u
t1
n
n
X
i=1
(Ci −C)2
(6.1)
where Ci denotes either the drag or inertia coeﬃcient for cylinder i.
From Figure 6.21 it is seen that the force coeﬃcient development with KC is overall
qualitatively corresponding to that for a single cylinder. It is also seen that the coef-
ﬁcients have very small standard deviations, which is expected since theoretically, all
four cylinders should be equally exposed to the ﬂow in a 2 by 2 symmetric set-up.
Figure 6.22 shows the mean force coeﬃcients as function of the distance d/D = dx/D =
dy/D. Opposite to what was reported by Anagnostopoulos and Dikarou (2011) for
circular cylinders in a 2 by 2 arrangement, an inﬂuence is found from cylinder distance
67
==PAGE:82==
6 Results and analysis
0
2
4
6
8
10
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
KC
CD
0
2
4
6
8
10
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
KC
CM
Figure 6.21: Mean force coeﬃcients CD and CM for individual cylinders with D = 1
placed in a 2x2 conﬁguration. As function of Keulegan-Carpenter number. •: dx/D =
dy/D = 0.5, •: dx/D = dy/D = 1, •: dx/D = dy/D = 2, •: Single cylinder in 7 m
moonpool. Standard deviations are marked with bars.
on drag coeﬃcient. An increase in CD is seen as a result of increasing distance. This
can be explained by the eﬀect which was seen for the 2x1 set-up in Section 6.1.1.3;
increasing distance lessens the interference between in-line cylinders, which thereby
leads to increase in drag coeﬃcient. Comparing the values of CD for the 2 by 2 case to
those of a single cylinder, it is clear that the 2 by 2 coeﬃcients are higher - opposite
to what was the case for the 2x1 set-up. This must be explained by the increased
blockaged caused by the additional cylinders and the interference eﬀects shown for the
1x2 set-up.
From Figure 6.22 it is also seen that an increase in distance means an increase in
inertia coeﬃcient CM - except for KC = 6 where a small decrease is seen going from
d/D = 1 to 2. The overall result corresponds to ﬁndings from Anagnostopoulos and
Dikarou (2011).
Overall, the 2 by 2 case shows a combination of the eﬀects from 1x2 and 2x1. The eﬀect
of increasing cylinder distance in these two cases are opposite; an increase in distance
means a decrease in coeﬃcients for the 1x2 case, but an increase in coeﬃcients for
the 2x1. All coeﬃcients for the 2 by 2 case are higher than the corresponding single
cylinder values. This is related to the 1x2 eﬀect, i.e. side-by-side interaction and
blockage. But the coeﬃcients increase with increased distance. This is related to the
2x1 eﬀect, i.e. shielding.
68
==PAGE:83==
6 Results and analysis
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
1
2
3
4
5
6
d/D
CD
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
2.8
3
3.2
3.4
3.6
3.8
4
d/D
CM
Figure 6.22: Mean values of force coeﬃcients CD and CM for 2 by 2 cylinders with
D = 1. As function of distance d/D = dx/D = dy/D. □: KC = 0.1, ⋄: KC = 1,
△: KC = 2, ▽: KC = 6, ◦: KC = 10. Single cylinder results are shown with ﬁlled
markers.
6.1.1.6
3 by 3 cylinders
The 3 by 3 cylinder set-up is sketched in Figure 6.23. The set-up is run with varying
distances dx/D = dy/D. The parameters for the set-ups can be seen in Table 6.6.
dy
b
2
Dy
5
D
8
dy
1
4
dx
7
3
6
dx
9
Dx
Figure 6.23: Deﬁnition sketch for 3 by 3 cylinders. Cylinder diameter D, in-line
structure diameter Dy and cross-ﬂow diameter Dx, in-line cylinder distance dy, cross-
ﬂow cylinder distance dx and moonpool width b.
In Figure 6.24 the mean value of the force coeﬃcients in each set-up is shown as a
function of the Keulegan-Carpenter number KC related to a single cylinder. The stan-
dard deviation for each set-up and KC is marked with bars. The standard deviation
is calculated using (6.1).
From Figure 6.24 it is seen that the standard deviation in most cases is signiﬁcantly
larger than was the case for the 2 by 2 set-up.
This indicates that the cylinders
are aﬀected very diﬀerently by the ﬂow depending on their placement in the structure.
This can be further investigated by observing the individual values for force coeﬃcients
listed in Table D.8 and D.9 in Appendix D. It is seen that the deviations are largest
69
==PAGE:84==
6 Results and analysis
Table 6.6: Characteristics for 3 by 3 cylinders with varying distance dy/D and dx/D.
dx/D
[-]
0.5
1
dy/D
[-]
0.5
1
Dy
[m]
4
5
Dx
[m]
4
5
D/b
[-]
1
7
1
7
for the close spacing dx/D = dy/D = 0.5. For this case it is even seen that a Morison
ﬁt to the force time series for KC = 10 leads to slightly negative drag coeﬃcients for
cylinders 4 and 6. The shielding eﬀect is thus very signiﬁcant for these cylinders. The
center cylinder (cylinder 5) will also be shielded but shows higher drag coeﬃcients
than cylinder 4 and 6, which is assumed to be due to the speed-up of the ﬂow being
larger around this cylinder.
0
2
4
6
8
10
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
KC
CD
0
2
4
6
8
10
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
KC
CM
Figure 6.24: Mean force coeﬃcients CD and CM for individual cylinders with D = 1
placed in a 3x3 conﬁguration. As function of Keulegan-Carpenter number. •: dx/D =
dy/D = 0.5, •: dx/D = dy/D = 1, , •: Single cylinder in 7 m moonpool. Standard
deviations are marked with bars.
Figure 6.25 shows the mean force coeﬃcients as function of the distance d/D = dx/D =
dy/D. As was the case for the 2 by 2 set-up, the drag coeﬃcient CD is seen to increase
when increasing the distance between the cylinders. This is explained by the eﬀect
that was seen in for the 3x1 set-up, where an increase in in-line distance decreased the
shielding eﬀect.
Figure 6.25 shows very little inﬂuence on the inertia coeﬃcient CM when increasing
distance between the cylinders. This may be caused by the close proximity of the walls
and the signiﬁcant blockage eﬀect.
The overall development of the force coeﬃcients with increasing cylinder distance can
be seen to be a combination of the eﬀects shown for the 1x3 and 3x1 set-ups.
70
==PAGE:85==
6 Results and analysis
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
d/D
CD
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
d/D
CM
Figure 6.25: Mean values of force coeﬃcients CD and CM for 3 by 3 cylinders with
D = 1. As function of distance d/D = dx/D = dy/D. □: KC = 0.1, ⋄: KC = 1,
△: KC = 2, ▽: KC = 6, ◦: KC = 10. Single cylinder results are shown with ﬁlled
markers.
6.1.1.7
Conclusions
For the cases with cylinders placed in a row perpendicular to the ﬂow direction, i.e.
1x2 and 1x3, an interference eﬀect was seen for distances lower than dx/D = 2. Force
coeﬃcients were generally higher than those found for a single cylinder - partly due to
blockage. A decrease in cylinder distance was seen to increase both drag and inertia
coeﬃcients, indicating that interaction occurs. Additionally, the middle cylinder in
the 1x3 set-up showed further increase in force coeﬃcients due to increased speed-up.
For the cases with cylinders placed in-line with the ﬂow direction, i.e. 2x1 and 3x1, an
interference eﬀect was seen for distances up to dy/D = 2. With decreasing interference
with increasing distance. The force coeﬃcients were generally seen to be lower than
those for a single cylinder. As the distance increased, the values approached those of
a single cylinder. It was shown by investigating the 2x1 case that, in the treated KC
range, the shielding actually aﬀects the upstream cylinder such that the resulting force
on two closely spaced cylinders is directed away from the center of the set-up. For the
3x1 set-up a signiﬁcant decrease in force coeﬃcients was seen for the middle cylinder.
This became more explicit with decreasing spacing.
The 2x2 set-up showed a combination of the eﬀects from the 1x2 and 2x1 cases when
increasing distance. An increase in the cylinder distance was seen to increase both
drag and inertia coeﬃcients. This is caused by the decrease in shielding eﬀect as seen
in the 2x1 set-up. However, the mean values for the coeﬃcients were higher than
those for a single cylinder which is caused by the increased blockage and side-by-side
interaction as seen for the 1x2 set-up.
The 3x3 set-up showed a signiﬁcant shielding of the internal structure members. How-
ever, the mean value of the force coeﬃcients was still higher than for the single cylinder.
This is assumed to primarily be due to blockage eﬀects. Increasing cylinder distance
increased the drag coeﬃcient but had no signiﬁcant eﬀect on the inertia coeﬃcient.
71
==PAGE:86==
6 Results and analysis
6.1.2
Blockage - b/D
To estimate the inﬂuence of the parameter b/D, the basic set-ups are investigated
with diﬀerent cylinder diameters D and constant relative distance. This changes the
parameter b/D with reference to the initial dimensional analysis, Section 5.1. The
parameter is the inverse blockage ratio for each cylinder D/b. The blockage ratio D/b
is used to relate the results directly to blockage. The results are presented in terms
of mean force coeﬃcients as function of the blockage ratio. It is noted that the direct
comparison between the results for the same KC for cylinders with diﬀerent diameter
D is only valid due to the assumption of negligible Reynolds dependency.
6.1.2.1
1 by 2 cylinders
An overview of the parameters of the three set-ups is seen in Table 6.7.
Table 6.7:
Parameters for 1 by 2 cylinders with varying cylinder diameter and
constant dx/D = 1.
D
[m]
0.5
0.75
1
Dy
[m]
0.5
0.75
1
Dx
[m]
1.5
2.25
3
D/b
[-]
1
14
3
28
1
7
Figure 6.26 shows the mean force coeﬃcients CD and CM as a function of blockage
ratio for the individual cylinder D/b. The results for CD at KC = 0.1 are left out.
From the ﬁgure it is seen that - with one exception - an increased blockage leads to
an increase in both drag and inertia coeﬃcients. This partly contradicts the results
reported by Anagnostopoulos and Minear (2004) who found an increased drag coeﬃ-
cient but a decreased inertia coeﬃcient for increased blockage ratio of a single circular
cylinder. A decreased inertia coeﬃcient with increased blockage is however seen for
KC = 10. The increase is seen to be slightly higher going from D/b = 3/28 to 1/7
than for going from D/b = 1/14 to 3/28.
The eﬀects of blockage appear to be less signiﬁcant than those seen for the change in
cylinder distance. Going from the lowest to highest blockage ratio leads to an increase
in drag coeﬃcient in the order of 5-10 % and only 2-5 % for the inertia coeﬃcient.
It is seen that the force coeﬃcients for the 1 by 2 cylinder are all higher than the single
cylinder results. This also holds for the case of D = 0.5 m, which takes up the same
part of the cross-section as the single cylinder of D = 1 m. It can thus be concluded
that part of the increase in force coeﬃcients stems from interaction and not only from
blockage.
72
==PAGE:87==
6 Results and analysis
0.05
0.1
0.15
2
3
4
5
6
7
D/b
CD
0.05
0.1
0.15
2.8
3
3.2
3.4
3.6
3.8
4
D/b
CM
Figure 6.26:
Mean values of force coeﬃcients CD and CM for two side by side
cylinders with varying diameter. As function of cylinder diameter to moonpool width
ratio D/b. □: KC = 0.1, ⋄: KC = 1, △: KC = 2, ▽: KC = 6, ◦: KC = 10.
Single cylinder results are shown with ﬁlled markers.
6.1.2.2
1 by 3 cylinders
The 1 by 3 cylinder set-up is investigated with diﬀerent cylinder diameters D and
constant distance dx/D, thus changing the parameter b/D with reference to the initial
dimensional analysis, Section 5.1. An overview of the parameters of the three set-ups
is seen in Table 6.8.
Table 6.8:
Parameters for 1 by 3 cylinders with varying cylinder diameter and
constant dx/D = 1.
D
[m]
0.5
0.75
1
Dy
[m]
0.5
0.75
1
Dx
[m]
2.5
3.75
5
D/b
[-]
1
14
3
28
1
7
The mean value of the force coeﬃcients for the three cylinders are seen as function of
the blockage ratio of each cylinder D/b in Figure 6.27. It is seen that CD increases
with increasing blockage ratio approximately linearly. Going from the lowest to highest
blockage ratio leads to an increase in the order of 30 %. The case of KC = 1 has a
higher increase in CD with increased blockage - as was also seen for the 1 by 2 set-up.
It is however noted that the ﬂow for KC = 1 is inertia dominated and the CD value
in this range is therefore not of high signiﬁcance.
CM is also seen to increase with increasing blockage in all cases except going from
D/b = 3/28 to 1/7 for KC = 10 where CM decreases. This underlines the previous
statement about KC = 10 seemingly being a critical point where the inﬂuence of
spacing and blockage may change character. The increase in CM going from lowest to
highest blockage ratio is in the order of 5 %.
73
==PAGE:88==
6 Results and analysis
It is seen that all force coeﬃcients for the 1 by 3 set-up are higher than those for the
single cylinder.
0.05
0.1
0.15
2
4
6
8
10
D/b
CD
0.05
0.1
0.15
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
D/b
CM
Figure 6.27: Mean values of force coeﬃcients CD and CM for three side by side
cylinders with varying diameter. As function of cylinder diameter to moonpool width
ratio D/b. □: KC = 0.1, ⋄: KC = 1, △: KC = 2, ▽: KC = 6, ◦: KC = 10.
Single cylinder results are shown with ﬁlled markers.
6.1.2.3
2 by 2 cylinders
The 2 by 2 cylinder set-up is investigated with diﬀerent cylinder diameters D and
constant distance dx/D = dy/D = 1, thus changing the parameter b/D with reference
to the initial dimensional analysis, Section 5.1. An overview of the parameters of the
three set-ups is seen in Table 6.9.
Table 6.9: Parameters for 2 by 2 cylinders with varying cylinder diameter D and
dx/D = dy/D = 1.
D
[m]
0.5
0.75
1
Dy
[m]
1.5
2.25
3
Dx
[m]
1.5
2.25
3
D/b
[-]
1
14
3
28
1
7
Figure 6.28 shows the mean force coeﬃcients for the four cylinders in the 2 by 2
set-ups with varying cylinder diameter D. A very clear tendency for both the drag
coeﬃcient CD and inertia coeﬃcient CM to increase with increasing blockage is seen.
The development is approximately linear, only the - somewhat unreliable - data for
CD at low KC shows a less clear tendency.
The results are compared with those for a single cylinder with D = 1 m, i.e. D/b = 1/7.
It is seen that the 2 by 2 results for both coeﬃcients for the smallest diameter, D = 0.5
m and D/b = 1/14, are lower than the single cylinder values. The results for the
middle diameter, D = 0.75 m and D/b = 3/28, are in the same order of magnitude as
74
==PAGE:89==
6 Results and analysis
the single cylinder values. Finally, the results for the largest diameter, D = 1 m and
D/b = 1/7, are seen to be higher than the single cylinder values. This clearly indicates
the importance of the blockage eﬀect. Since the low diameter values give lower force
coeﬃcients even though they are in the same relative distance as the other set-ups, it
is indicated that the main reason for increase in coeﬃcients in a 2 by 2 conﬁguration is
blockage rather than interference. The interference may even give rise to a decrease in
coeﬃcients due to shielding. This can be realized by noticing that for the 1x2 set-up
results with all three cylinder sizes were above the single cylinder value.
0.05
0.1
0.15
1
2
3
4
5
6
d/D
CD
0.05
0.1
0.15
2.8
3
3.2
3.4
3.6
3.8
4
d/D
CM
Figure 6.28: Mean force coeﬃcients CD and CM for total structure consisting of 2
by 2 cylinders with varying diameter D. As function of cylinder diameter to moonpool
width ratio. □: KC = 0.1, ⋄: KC = 1, △: KC = 2, ▽: KC = 6, ◦: KC = 10.
Results for single cylinder with D/b = 1/7 are marked with ﬁlled markers.
6.1.2.4
3 by 3 cylinders
The 3 by 3 cylinder set-up is investigated with diﬀerent cylinder diameters D and
constant distance dx/D = dy/D, thus changing the parameter b/D with reference to
the initial dimensional analysis, Section 5.1. An overview of the characteristics of the
three set-ups is seen in Table 6.10.
Table 6.10: Parameters for 3 by 3 cylinders with varying cylinder diameter D and
constant dx/D = dy/D = 1.
D
[m]
0.5
0.75
1
Dy
[m]
2.5
3.75
5
Dx
[m]
2.5
3.75
5
D/b
[-]
1
14
3
28
1
7
Figure 6.29 shows the mean force coeﬃcients for the 3 by 3 set-up as function of single
cylinder blockage D/b. The results show tendencies very similar to those for the 2 by
2 set-up treated in the previous section. However, for the 3 by 3 set-up the increase
in especially CM going from D/b = 3/28 to D/b = 1/7 seems larger compared to the
2 by 2 case - thus making the development less linear.
75
==PAGE:90==
6 Results and analysis
0.05
0.1
0.15
0
2
4
6
8
d/D
CD
0.05
0.1
0.15
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
d/D
CM
Figure 6.29: Force coeﬃcients CD and CM for total structure consisting of 3 by
3 cylinders with varying diameter D. As function of cylinder diameter to moonpool
width ratio D/b. □: KC = 0.1, ⋄: KC = 1, △: KC = 2, ▽: KC = 6, ◦: KC = 10.
Results for single cylinder with D/b = 1/7 are marked with ﬁlled markers.
6.1.2.5
Conclusions
The overall tendency is, as expected, that an increase in blockage D/b leads to an
increase in force coeﬃcients. This is most likely mainly due to the speed-up of the
ﬂow due to the smaller passage around the structure. A means of accounting for this
speed-up is to predict the actual maximum ﬂow velocity and use this in the prediction
of the forces. A suggestion for an expression for this corrected ﬂow velocity Ucor related
to the basic cases is
Ucor =
Um
1 −nxD
b
(6.2)
6.2
General analysis
In this section the results for the basic 2x2 and 3x3 cases as well as the additional
cases listed in Appendix B.2 are treated in relation to the general dimensional analysis
in Section 5.2.
The results are primarily presented as force coeﬃcients for the total structure, CDtot
and CMtot. Where relevant the results are presented as mean force coeﬃcients for the
individual cylinders. The total structure coeﬃcients are deﬁned related to the overall
dimensions of the structure, see Figure 5.2. The drag coeﬃcient is thus related to the
cross-ﬂow diameter of the structure Dx, while the inertia coeﬃcient is related to the
total area of the structure Atot. To be consistent with methods in the literature, the
total area is deﬁned as that of the circle with diameter Dx:
Atot = π
4 D2
x
(6.3)
The Keulegan-Carpenter number is related to the total in-line diameter of the structure
Dy as stated in Section 5.2.
76
==PAGE:91==
6 Results and analysis
Each of the parameters blockage ratio γ, porosity p and alignment α are investigated in
Sections 6.2.1-6.2.3. The aspect ratio Dx/Dy is not treated separately but in connec-
tion with the porosity in Section 6.2.2. In Section 6.2.4 a comparison is made between
two cases with the same porosity, blockage and aspect ratio but with varying number
of cylinders and cylinder diameter, to assess the inﬂuence of parameters N and σD.
As previously stated, the general dimensional analysis was performed as an additional
aspect late in the project. The chosen simulation set-ups were therefore not designed
to isolate each parameter of this analysis. Especially cases where only porosity is varied
are scarce. To have some results that isolate the porosity parameter, some additional
calculations were set up toward the end of the project in which only p was altered.
These are added to the list of additional cases and treated in Section 6.2.2. As an
additional aspect in the analysis of the porosity parameter, an alternative deﬁnition
of porosity palt is presented and discussed in Section 6.2.5.
6.2.1
Blockage ratio γ
The eﬀect of the blockage ratio on the forces exerted on a structure placed in a moon-
pool and exposed to an oscillatory ﬂow is investigated. The blockage ratio is deﬁned
as (5.6)
γ = Dx
b
i.e. the part of the moonpool width which is taken up by the structure. The eﬀect of γ
is investigated by determining the forces on the two set-ups 2x2 and 3x3 in variations
where only γ is changed. The porosity p, alignment α as well as aspect ratio Dx/Dy
and number of cylinders N are all kept constant. This is obtained by varying the
cylinder diameter D.
The results presented here are based on the results already reported in Section 6.1.2.3
and 6.1.2.4 where the mean values of the force coeﬃcients CD and CM were presented.
Here the force coeﬃcients CDtot and CMtot for the structure as a whole are presented
and related to the Keulegan-Carpenter number for the total structure KCtot.
All
cases are run with velocities giving the single cylinder KC values of 0.1, 1, 2, 6 and
10 respectively, thus giving varying KCtot due to varying structure sizes.
6.2.1.1
2 by 2 cylinders
The parameters for the three set-ups are shown in Table 6.11.
Figure 6.30 shows the total structure force coeﬃcients as function of the blockage ratio
γ. The results for drag coeﬃcient for KCtot = 0.03 are left out. The ﬁgure shows the
same tendency as was seen for the mean coeﬃcient values in Section 6.1.2.3; both
drag and inertia coeﬃcient increase with increasing blockage. This must be seen as a
result of the increased speed-up caused by the blockage. Both coeﬃcients seem to be
increasing approximately linearly with increasing blockage ratio, with the exception of
CDtot for KCtot = 0.34 which shows a larger increase when increasing to the highest
blockage ratio.
77
==PAGE:92==
6 Results and analysis
Table 6.11:
Parameters for 2 by 2 cylinders with varying cylinder diameter D.
N = 4, σD = 0.
D
[m]
0.5
0.75
1
Dy
[m]
1.5
2.25
3
Dx
[m]
1.5
2.25
3
p
[-]
5
9
5
9
5
9
γ
[-]
3
14
9
28
3
7
α
[-]
1
1
1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
2
3
4
5
6
7
γ
CDtot
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
γ
CMtot
Figure 6.30: Force coeﬃcients CDtot and CMtot for total strcuture consisting of 2 by
2 cylinders. As function of blockage ratio γ. □: KCtot = 0.03, ⋄: KCtot = 0.34, △:
KCtot = 0.67, ▽: KCtot = 2.0, ◦: KCtot = 3.3.
6.2.1.2
3 by 3 cylinders
The parameters for the three set-ups are shown in Table 6.12.
Table 6.12: Characteristics for 3 by 3 cylinders with varying cylinder diameter D.
N = 9, σD = 0.
D
[m]
0.5
0.75
1
Dy
[m]
2.5
3.75
5
Dx
[m]
2.5
3.75
5
p
[-]
16
25
16
25
16
25
γ
[-]
5
14
15
28
5
7
α
[-]
1
1
1
Figure 6.31 shows the total structure force coeﬃcients as a function of the blockage
ratio.
As was also the case for the 2 by 2 set-up, a clear tendency for the force
coeﬃcients to increase with increasing blockage is seen for the 3 by 3 set-up. In this
78
==PAGE:93==
6 Results and analysis
case, however, it seems that the increase is not linear. Especially for CMtot the increase
from γ = 15/28 to γ = 5/7 is larger than the increase from the lower γ = 5/14 to
γ = 15/28. Approximately same behaviour is seen for all treated KCtot, with the
exception of CDtot for KCtot = 0.20.
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
γ
CDtot
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
γ
CMtot
Figure 6.31: Force coeﬃcients CDtot and CMtot for total strcuture consisting of 3 by
3 cylinders. As function of blockage ratio γ. □: KCtot = 0.03, ⋄: KC = 0.20, △:
KC = 0.40, ▽: KC = 1.2, ◦: KC = 2.0.
6.2.1.3
Conclusions
As already indicated in the initial analysis in Section 6.1.2, the general tendency is
increased force coeﬃcients when increasing blockage. In the present section, this was
shown to hold for full structure coeﬃcients CDtot and CMtot as well. The primary cause
for the increase in force coeﬃcients is assumed to be the increased speed-up of the
ﬂow. It is clear that this eﬀect should be taken into account when predicting forces
on a structure placed in a moonpool with oscillatory ﬂow. Namely in cases where
the structure takes up a large part of the moonpool cross-section, as the increase
in coeﬃcients was seen to be larger for changes in higher blockage ratios. A way of
including the eﬀect could be to correct the ﬂow velocity by including γ in the corrected
term. A suggestion could be
Ucor =
Um
1 −γ
(6.4)
This would however most likely overestimate the speed-up of the ﬂow, since the block-
age is deﬁned as that of the whole structure relative to the cross-section and not the
absolute blockage. I.e. the porosity of the structure should most likely also be taken
into account when calculating the corrected velocity. This will be discussed further in
Section 7.
6.2.2
Porosity p
Some diﬃculties are met when trying to isolate the porosity parameter p in the results
from the basic cases 2x2 and 3x3. When increasing the distance between cylinders,
the porosity increases but so does the blockage ratio as it is deﬁned here. It may
79
==PAGE:94==
6 Results and analysis
therefore be diﬃcult to separate the eﬀects from each other. It can however be argued
that since the absolute blockage, i.e. the part of the cross-section taken up by solid
material (the two or three cylinders in the cross-ﬂow direction) does not change when
simply changing the distance between the cylinders, the main eﬀect seen from this
should be from the change in porosity.
Furthermore when increasing the distance between the cylinders in the y direction,
the in-line diameter of the structure Dy changes which means that calculations with
the same maximum velocity of the oscillatory ﬂow have diﬀerent KCtot. Results for
the basic cases with D = 1 m are therefore not directly comparable in terms of full
structure results. In order to still compare these as functions of KCtot, curve ﬁts may
be used for increased overview of the results which will be scattered over the KCtot
range.
With this introduction the results for the 2 by 2 and 3 by 3 cylinder set-ups are shown
for diﬀerent porosities as function of KCtot to assess the eﬀect of changing the porosity.
This is done in Section 6.2.2.1. In Section 6.2.2.2 the cases where porosity is changed
by changing the aspect ratio are treated. In Section 6.2.2.3 the later added cases where
only porosity is changed are treated.
6.2.2.1
Changing porosity by changing dx/D and dy/D
2 by 2 cylinders
The parameters for the three cases of 2 by 2 cylinders with D = 1 m are presented
in Table 6.13. As was stated in the introduction to this section, when changing the
porosity p by changing the distance between the cylinders, the blockage ratio γ is
also changed. However, the absolute blockage which is the total area taken up by the
cylinders in the cross-section will not change as long as the number of cylinders and
cylinder diameter are not changed. Therefore, the primary eﬀect seen by changing the
distance between the cylinders can be assumed to be the eﬀect of changing porosity.
It was seen in Section 6.1.1.5 that increasing the distance between the cylinders, and
thereby the porosity, in the 2 by 2 set-up led to an increase in the individual cylinder
force coeﬃcients. Here it is investigated if the same eﬀect is seen when observing the
full structure force coeﬃcients.
Table 6.13: Characteristics for 2 by 2 cylinders with varying distance dy/D and
dx/D. For all cases D = 1, α = 1, N = 4, σD = 0.
dx/D
[-]
0.5
1
2
dy/D
[-]
0.5
1
2
Dy
[m]
2.5
3
4
Dx
[m]
2.5
3
4
p
[-]
9
25
5
9
3
4
γ
[-]
5
14
3
7
4
7
80
==PAGE:95==
6 Results and analysis
Figure 6.32 shows the total structure coeﬃcients CDtot and CMtot as function of the
Keulegan-Carenter number for the total structure KCtot. For improved overview of the
results curve ﬁts are employed. From the ﬁgure it is seen that the total drag coeﬃcient
decreases slightly with increasing porosity. This is despite the fact that it was shown
in Section 6.1.1.5 that increase in distance between the cylinders in the 2 by 2 set-up
resulted in increased CD for the individual cylinders. When the full structure is taken
into account, the overall drag coeﬃcient decreases due to the larger diameter of the
structure.
From Figure 6.32 it is seen that the increased porosity means a signiﬁcant decrease
in total inertia coeﬃcient CMtot. As with the drag coeﬃcient this is despite the fact
that it was seen in Section 6.1.1.5 that the increase in distance led to an increase in
individual cylinder inertia coeﬃcient CM. This is again related to the much larger
area used for determining the total structure coeﬃcient when increasing the porosity
by increasing distance between the cylinders.
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
5
10
15
KCtot
CDtot
0
1
2
3
4
5
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
KCtot
CMtot
Figure 6.32: Force coeﬃcients CDtot and CMtot for total structure consisting of 2
by 2 cylinders. As function of KCtot.
■: p =
9
25, ■: p =
3
4, ■: p =
9
25. Fit type:
y = axb + c.
3 by 3 cylinders
The parameters for the two cases of 3 by 3 cylinders with D = 1 m are presented in
Table 6.14.
Figure 6.33 shows the total structure coeﬃcients CDtot and CMtot as function of the
Keulegan-Carenter number for the total structure KCtot. It is seen that the increased
porosity does not seem to signiﬁcantly change the drag coeﬃcient CDtot. This means
that the increase in individual cylinder CD when increasing the distance between the
cylinders makes up for the increase in total structure diameter.
From Figure 6.33 it is seen - as was also the case for the 2 by 2 set-up - that the total
structure inertia coeﬃcient CMtot is signiﬁcantly decreased when increasing porosity.
81
==PAGE:96==
6 Results and analysis
Table 6.14: Characteristics for 3 by 3 cylinders with varying distance dy/D and
dx/D. For all cases D = 1, α = 1, N = 9, σD = 0.
dx/D
[-]
0.5
1
dy/D
[-]
0.5
1
Dy
[m]
4
5
Dx
[m]
4
5
p
[-]
7
16
16
25
γ
[-]
4
7
5
7
0
1
2
3
0
5
10
15
20
KCtot
CDtot
0
1
2
3
1
1.5
2
2.5
KCtot
CMtot
Figure 6.33: Force coeﬃcients CDtot and CMtot for total structure consisting of 3 by
3 cylinders. As function of KCtot. ■: p =
7
16, ■: p = 16
25. Fit type: y = axb + c.
6.2.2.2
Changing porosity by changing dy/D
Some set-ups of 3 by 3 cylinders with D = 1 m are run with constant dx/D = 0.5 but
varying dy/D = 0.5, 1 and 2. This varies both porosity p and aspect ratio Dx/Dy.
Table 6.15 shows the parameters for the three 3 by 3 set-ups with constant cross-ﬂow
distance and varying in-line distance. The porosity p and aspect ratio Dx/Dy are
both changed in the set-ups, but the blockage ratio γ is constant. So is the cross-
ﬂow diameter Dx = 4 m and the total area Atot = π/4D2
x.
This means that the
diameter and area that the force coeﬃcients are related to do not change between
the set-ups, making the results more comparable. The set-ups are run with the same
maximum velocities. Since the in-line diameter Dy changes between cases, this also
means that the total Keulegan-Carpenter number KCtot changes between cases. The
direct comparison between the cases is therefore based on the mean value of the force
coeﬃcients for the individual cases CD and CM and related to the individual cylinder
KC number - which will be the same for all three set-ups. However, he total structure
coeﬃcients are also presented as function of KCtot using curve ﬁts.
Figure 6.34 shows the total force coeﬃcients CDtot and CMtot as function of the total
Keulegan-Carpenter number KCtot. A clear tendency is seen for both drag and inertia
coeﬃcients to increase with increasing porosity (and decreasing aspect ratio). The
82
==PAGE:97==
6 Results and analysis
Table 6.15: Characteristics for 3 by 3 cylinders with varying distance dy/D. For all
cases D = 1, dx/D = 0.5 α = 1, N = 9, σD = 0.
dy/D
[-]
0.5
1
2
Dy
[m]
4
5
7
Dx
[m]
4
4
4
p
[-]
7
16
11
20
19
28
γ
[-]
4
7
4
7
4
7
main eﬀect of increasing porosity by increasing in-line distance between cylinders is
a lessened interaction eﬀect. In Section 6.1.1.4 the interaction eﬀect was shown to
decrease both drag and inertia coeﬃcients for the individual cylinders in a 3 by 1
set-up. The interaction became less signiﬁcant as the distance between the cylinders
was increased. The same eﬀect is clearly seen for the 3x3 set-up treated here.
The drag coeﬃcient CDtot is seen to follow the same qualitative development with
KCtot for all three cases, corresponding to that seen for previously treated set-ups.
The inertia coeﬃcient CMtot however shows a strange behaviour for the two cases of
higher porosity (p = 11/20 and 19/28, i.e. red and green markers, respectively). They
seem to continuously increase with increasing KCtot rather than level oﬀas is seen for
the lower porosity case (p = 7/16, blue markers). The reason for this has not been
investigated.
0
1
2
3
0
10
20
30
40
KCtot
CDtot
0
1
2
3
1.8
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3
KCtot
CMtot
Figure 6.34: Force coeﬃcients CDtot and CMtot for total structure consisting of 3 by
3 cylinders with varying distance dy/D. As function of KCtot. ■: p =
7
16, ■: p = 11
20,
■: p = 19
28. Fit type: y = axb + c.
Since the KCtot for each of the three set-ups will diﬀer, the results as function of
porosity are shown in Figure 6.35 as mean values of individual cylinder coeﬃcients CD
and CM and related to the single cylinder KC. The results in the ﬁgure show a clear
tendency for the force coeﬃcients on each cylinder to increase with increasing porosity
(and decreasing aspect ratio).
83
==PAGE:98==
6 Results and analysis
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
2
4
6
8
p
CD
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
p
CM
Figure 6.35: Mean value of force coeﬃcients CD and CM for individual . As function
of porosity p. □: KC = 0.1, ⋄: KC = 1, △: KC = 2, ▽: KC = 6, ◦: KC = 10.
6.2.2.3
Changing only porosity
Some additional calculations were added towards the end of the project to have a few
results where only porosity p was changed. Due to time constraint it has only been
possible to achieve results up to KC = 6 for a cylinder of D = 1 m, corresponding
to KCtot = 1.2. The porosity was changed for the 3 by 3 cylinder set-up by varying
cylinder diameter but maintaining the overall dimension of the structure Dx and Dy,
thus changing the distance between the cylinders. In this way porosity changes but
all other parameters are kept at: Dx = Dy = 5 m, γ = 5
7, α = 1, N = 9, σD = 0.
Cylinder diameters are changed between D = 1, 0.75 and 0.5. Porosities are shown in
Table 6.16.
Table 6.16: Characteristics for 3 by 3 cylinders with varying porosity p. For all cases
Dx = Dy = 5 m, γ = 5
7, α = 1, N = 9, σD = 0.
D
[m]
1
0.75
0.5
dx/D
[-]
1
11
6
7
2
dy/D
[-]
1
11
6
7
2
p
[-]
16
25
319
400
91
100
p
[%]
64
80
91
Figure 6.36 shows the total structure force coeﬃcients CDtot and CMtot as function of
the Keulegan-Carpenter number related to the total structure KCtot. It is clear that
all three set-ups follow the same qualitative development with KCtot. The inﬂuence
of p is clear from the plots; increased porosity leads to lower force coeﬃcients. This is
illustrated further in Figure 6.37 where the results are plotted as function of porosity.
Figure 6.37 shows a very clear dependency on the porosity p. In the three set-ups
where only porosity is changed, the force coeﬃcients for the total structure decrease
with increasing porosity. CDtot is seen to decrease more for KCtot = 0.20 and 0.40
(corresponding to KC = 1 and 2 for each cylinder) than for KCtot = 1.2 (corre-
84
==PAGE:99==
6 Results and analysis
0
0.5
1
1.5
0
5
10
15
20
KCtot
CDtot
0
0.5
1
1.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
KCtot
CMtot
Figure 6.36: Force coeﬃcients CDtot and CMtot for total structure consisting of 3 by
3 cylinders with varying porosity p. As function of KCtot.
■: p = 16
25, ■: p = 319
400, ■:
p = 91
00.
sponding to KC = 6 for single cylinder). All seem to decrease approximately linearly
with increasing p. The inertia coeﬃcient CMtot is also seen to decrease with increasing
porosity. For CMtot the decrease also appears linear and with approximately the same
slope for all KCtot.
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
p
CD
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
p
CM
Figure 6.37: Force coeﬃcients CDtot and CMtot for total structure. As function of
porosity p. □: KCtot = 0.03, ⋄: KCtot = 0.20, △: KCtot = 0.40, ▽: KCtot = 1.2.
The results presented here are the clearest indication of the eﬀect of porosity p: When
p is decreased without changing any other parameters, the force on the total structure
decreases.
There seems to be an approximately linear relation between force and
porosity.
6.2.2.4
Conclusions
It is clear that when porosity p of a structure is increased, the force coeﬃcients of
the structure CDtot and CMtot are decreased. The results shown here for 3 by 3 case
indicate a linear decrease in force coeﬃcients with increasing porosity, but additional
investigations are needed to determine if this holds generally.
85
==PAGE:100==
6 Results and analysis
It was shown that increasing porosity by increasing the distance between the structure
members, and thereby also increasing the overall dimensions of the structure, led
to decrease in the total structure force coeﬃcients. This was due to the increased
dimensions of the structure rather than a decrease in the forces on the individual
members, since it was shown previously that the individual cylinder force coeﬃcients
increased with increasing distance.
It was also shown that increasing porosity by decreasing the aspect ratio Dx/Dy yielded
larger total structure force coeﬃcients. This was due to the decreased shielding eﬀect
when increasing the in-line distance between the cylinders leading to larger forces on
the individual members of the structure.
6.2.3
Alignment α
Based on the theory of interaction between cylinders in close proximity, and especially
the theory on interaction between cylinders in a staggered arrangement, the in-line
alignment was from the onset of the project - i.e. even before the general dimensional
analysis was performed - assumed to be a parameter to take into account in the force
prediction. Due to this consideration, the two cases of 2x2 and 3x3 cylinders were set
up with varying alignment. The results of these are presented in this section and an
analysis of the inﬂuence of the alignment parameter α is performed.
6.2.3.1
2 by 2 cylinders
A comparison of the 2 by 2 set-ups with varying alignment α is performed. All three
cases have the same remaining parameters: D = 1 m, dx/D = dy/D = 1, Dx = Dy = 3
m, p = 5
9, γ = 3
7, N = 4, σD = 0.
Figure 6.38 shows the total structure force coeﬃcients CDtot and CMtot as functions
of the alignment α. A clear tendency for the drag coeﬃcient CDtot to increase with
decreasing alignment is seen.
This can be explained by the shielding eﬀect being
decreased as the cylinders are shifted out of line with each other. The tendency is
a little less clear for the inertia coeﬃcient CMtot. For KCtot ≤0.67 (corresponding
to KC ≤2 for the individual cylinders), the inertia coeﬃcient also increases with
decreasing alignment. But for KCtot = 2.0 and 3.3 (corresponding to KC = 6 and
10), the inertia coeﬃcient is the same or even slightly higher for α = 1 than for
α = 0.75, while it still has the highest value for α = 0.5. The explanation for this
behaviour is not clear.
86
==PAGE:101==
6 Results and analysis
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
2
4
6
8
10
α
CDtot
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8
α
CMtot
Figure 6.38: Force coeﬃcients CDtot and CMtot for total structure consisting of 2 by
2 cylinders. As function of alignment α. □: KCtot = 0.03, ⋄: KCtot = 0.34, △:
KCtot = 0.67, ▽: KCtot = 2.0, ◦: KCtot = 3.3.
6.2.3.2
3 by 3 cylinders
A comparison of the 3 by 3 set-ups with varying alignment α is performed. All three
cases have the same remaining parameters: D = 1 m, dx/D = dy/D = 1, Dx = Dy = 5
m, p = 16
25, γ = 5
7, N = 9, σD = 0.
The results for the 3 by 3 case are less clear than those for the 2 by 2. Figure 6.39 shows
the total structure force coeﬃcients CDtot and CMtot as functions of the alignment α.
The drag coeﬃcient CDtot is seen to generally decrease with increased alignment. The
increase is larger for KCtot = 2.0 going from α = 0.5 to 0.75 than for all other changes.
For KCtot = 0.4, the drag coeﬃcient increases going from α 0.75 to 1.
For KCtot ≤0.4 the inertia coeﬃcient CMtot is seen to decrease with increasing align-
ment. For larger KCtot the results are more unclear. For KCtot = 1.2 an increase in
inertia coeﬃcient is seen with increasing alignment. For KCtot = 2.0 an increase in
seen going from α = 0.5 to 0.75, while a slight decrease is seen going from α = 0.75 to
1. The reason for this rather unpredictable behaviour is not clear.
6.2.3.3
Conclusions
The overall tendency seems to be that force coeﬃcients increase when the in-line
alignment α of the members of a structure is decreased. This result is however not
seen to hold for all Keulegan-Carpenter numbers. The opposite may be true for the
inertia coeﬃcient at suﬃciently high KCtot, i.e. decreased alignment leads to lower
inertia coeﬃcients in some of these cases. Further investigation of this is suggested.
87
==PAGE:102==
6 Results and analysis
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
4
6
8
10
12
14
α
CDtot
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
α
CMtot
Figure 6.39: Force coeﬃcients CDtot and CMtot for total structure consisting of 2 by
2 cylinders. As function of alignment α. □: KCtot = 0.03, ⋄: KCtot = 0.20, △:
KCtot = 0.40, ▽: KCtot = 1.2, ◦: KCtot = 2.0.
6.2.4
Varied number of cylinders and cylinder diameter
A comparison is performed of two cases with same porosity p = 16
25 and blockage γ = 5
7
but with diﬀerent number of cylinders N and standard deviation in cylinder diameter
σD. The ﬁrst set-up is the basic 3 by 3 set-up with distance dx/D = dy/D = 1. The
second is the set-up sketched in Figure 6.40. The parameters for the two cases are given
in Table 6.17. It is noted that the alignment of the structures are also signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent from each other which may cause part of the diﬀerence in results.
b
Dy
2
4
3
5
1
Dx
Figure 6.40: Set-up with varying cylinder size.
88
==PAGE:103==
6 Results and analysis
Table 6.17: Parameters for compared cases.
Case
3x3
Mixed
Dy
[m]
5
5
Dx
[m]
5
5
p
[-]
16
25
16
25
γ
[-]
5
7
5
7
α
[-]
1
0.49
N
[-]
9
5
σD
[-]
0
0.55
Figure 6.41 compares the total structure force coeﬃcients, CDtot and CMtot, for the
mixed set-up and the 3 by 3 set-up. A very signiﬁcant diﬀerence in drag coeﬃcients
is seen; the mixed case shows a drag coeﬃcient in the order of three times as large as
that of the 3 by 3 case. An increase is also seen in inertia coeﬃcient in the mixed case
compared to the 3 by 3 case for all KCtot except KCtot = 0.40. The increase in inertia
coeﬃcient is however signiﬁcantly smaller than the increase in drag coeﬃcient. Based
on these results, it is concluded that the size variation of members of the structure as
well as most likely also the alignment of the members are very signiﬁcant parameters
to take into account when predicting forces on the structure.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
0
5
10
15
20
25
KCtot
CDtot
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.9
KCtot
CMtot
Figure 6.41: Force coeﬃcients CDtot and CMtot for total structure. As function of
KCtot. ■: 3x3, ■: mixed.
The drag coeﬃcient results for the mixed case seem extremely high, and the cause for
this is therefore investigated. The case of KCtot = 2.0 is chosen for further investiga-
tion. This case corresponds to a KC number of 10 for the cylinders with D = 1 m
and a KC number of 4.5 for the cylinder in the mixed set-up with D =
√
5.
A section of the force time series from the calculations is seen in Figure 6.42. The
ﬁgure also shows the free stream velocity.
Observing the forces in the mixed set-up in Figure 6.42a, it is seen that the forces
on the small cylinders, i.e. the lower magnitude forces, are approximately in phase
89
==PAGE:104==
6 Results and analysis
130
135
140
145
150
−6000
−4000
−2000
0
2000
4000
6000
t [s]
F
[N]
(a) Mixed
130
135
140
145
150
−6000
−4000
−2000
0
2000
4000
6000
t [s]
F
[N]
(b) 3x3
Figure 6.42: Time series of in-line force on mixed case and 3 by 3 case. Free stream
velocity (multiplied by a factor 500) shown as dashed line.
with the velocity. This indicates that the forces acting on these are drag dominated,
indicating a de facto KC number higher than the one dictated by the free stream
velocity. The force on the large cylinder is seen to be slightly out of phase with the
velocity, indicating a larger degree of inertia contribution but still a signiﬁcant drag
contribution. Observing the forces on the cylinders in the 3 by 3 set-up in Figure
6.42b, the same behaviour is not seen. First of all, the magnitudes are seen to be
signiﬁcantly smaller than the forces acting on the cylinders of the same size in the
mixed set-up. Secondly, the forces are more out of phase with the velocity, indicating
a larger inertia contribution. This all points to the speed-up in the mixed case being
signiﬁcantly larger than in the 3 by 3 case.
Figure 6.43 shows the ﬂow ﬁeld in the two cases at the times indicated in Figure 6.42.
As can be seen by the scale in the two cases, signiﬁcantly larger ﬂow velocities indeed
occur in the mixed case compared to the 3 by 3 case. This explains the much larger
total force on the mixed structure: The blockage of the rows in the mixed structure
increases the ﬂow speed around the cylinders. This is also the case for the 3 by 3 but is
seen to be more signiﬁcant for the mixed case. This might partly be explained by the
lower number of cylinders giving fewer separation points which gives less energy loss
due to turbulence. Additionally, the cylinders in the mixed structure are placed such
that very little shielding occurs, adding to the total force exerted on each cylinder and
thereby the total structure.
90
==PAGE:105==
6 Results and analysis
(a) t = 135 s
(b) t = 135.4 s
(c) t = 134.6 s
(d) t = 135.4 s
Figure 6.43: Velocity ﬁeld visualizations for mixed (a) and (b) and 3x3 set-up (c)
and (d).
6.2.5
Alternative deﬁnition of porosity palt
As an additional aspect to the investigation of the inﬂuence of the porosity of the
structure, an alternative deﬁnition of the parameter is suggested.
The alternative
deﬁnition, denoted palt, is deﬁned based on the full moonpool cross-section as
palt = 1 −
PN
i=1 Ai
bDy
(6.5)
with reference to deﬁnitions in Figure 5.2. The porosity palt is thus seen as an overall
porosity of the part of the moonpool cross-section where the structure is placed. It
can therefore be argued that this porosity deﬁnition takes into account the eﬀect of
both porosity and blockage.
The results for 2 by 2 and 3 by 3 cylinders with alignment α = 1 are presented as
function of palt. This is done to evaluate if this deﬁnition of the porosity may be
suﬃcient to quantify the inﬂuence of the structure set-up on the forces exerted on
it. Results are presented as full structure coeﬃcients CDtot and CMtot as well as mean
values of single cylinder coeﬃcients CD and CM.
6.2.5.1
2 by 2 cylinders
Five diﬀerent 2 by 2 set-ups have been calculated. The porosities palt are given in
Table 6.18.
All ﬁve set-ups have been calculated with maximum velocities corresponding to single
cylinder KC = 0.1, 1, 2, 6 and 10. Since set-ups 2x21-3 have the same D but diﬀerent
overall dimension Dy, this means that the calculations for these set-ups do not have
the same KCtot. In order to be able to compare all results, it is therefore chosen to
present the results as mean values of single cylinder coeﬃcients CD and CM related to
the single cylinder KC. This is done in Figure 6.44. From Table 6.18 it is seen that
91
==PAGE:106==
6 Results and analysis
Table 6.18: Parameters for 2 by 2 cylinders with α = 1.
Set-up
2x21
2x22
2x23
2x24
2x25
D
[m]
1
1
1
0.5
0.75
Dy
[m]
2.5
3
4
1.5
2.25
Dx
[m]
2.5
3
4
1.5
2.25
palt
[-]
17
35
17
21
6
7
19
21
6
7
palt
[%]
77
81
86
90
86
the two set-ups 2x23 and 2x25 have the same porosity palt = 0.86. From Figure 6.44 it
is seen that these two cases give very diﬀerent results for CD and CM. The parameter
palt is therefore not a suﬃcient parameter for describing the mean force exerted on
individual members of a structure - even when the parameter α is the same.
0.75
0.8
0.85
0.9
0.95
1
2
3
4
5
6
palt
CD
0.75
0.8
0.85
0.9
0.95
2.8
3
3.2
3.4
3.6
3.8
4
palt
CM
Figure 6.44: Mean force coeﬃcients CD and CM for 2 by 2 cylinders. As function
of porosity palt.□: KC = 0.1, ⋄: KC = 1, △: KC = 2, ▽: KC = 6, ◦: KC = 10.
In Figure 6.45 the results of the three cases 2x22, 2x24 and 2x25 are shown as function
of palt. Here, the full structure coeﬃcients CDtot and CMtot are shown, since all three
cases have been run for the same KCtot, making them directly comparable. A clear
tendency with increasing porosity palt is seen; both CDtot and CMtot are decreasing
approximately linearly with increasing palt. It is noted that the results presented here,
are the same as the results presented as function of blockage ratio γ in Section 6.1.2.3,
underlining the inclusion of blockage in porosity deﬁnition palt.
92
==PAGE:107==
6 Results and analysis
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
palt
CDtot
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.9
palt
CMtot
Figure 6.45: Force coeﬃcients CDtot and CMtot for total strcuture consisting of 2 by
2 cylinders. As function of porosity palt.□: KC = 0.1, ⋄: KC = 1, △: KC = 2, ▽:
KC = 6, ◦: KC = 10.
6.2.5.2
3 by 3 cylinders
Four diﬀerent 3 by 3 set-ups have been calculated. The porosities are given in Table
6.19.
Table 6.19: Parameters for 3 by 3 cylinders.
Set-up
3x31
3x32
3x33
3x34
D
[m]
1
1
0.5
0.75
Dy
[m]
4
5
2.5
3.75
Dx
[m]
4
5
2.5
3.75
palt
[-]
19
28
26
35
61
70
167
210
palt
[%]
68
74
87
81
Figure 6.46 shows the mean force coeﬃcients for individual cylinders in the 3 by 3 set-
ups as function of palt. As for the 2 by 2 set-ups treated above, no clear dependency
is seen on palt when looking at all four cases, supporting the conclusion that this
parameter is not unambiguous in itself.
In Figure 6.47 the full structure coeﬃcients CDtot and CMtot for the three cases 3x32,
3x33 and 3x34 are shown as function of palt, noting that these results are the same
as those presented as a function of γ in Section 6.1.2.4. Once again a clear tendency
for decreasing force coeﬃcients with increasing porosity is seen. The development is
slightly less linear than for the 2 by 2 set-ups.
93
==PAGE:108==
6 Results and analysis
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
0.9
0
2
4
6
8
palt
CD
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
0.9
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
palt
CM
Figure 6.46: Mean force coeﬃcients CD and CM for 3 by 3 cylinders. As function
of porosity palt.□: KC = 0.1, ⋄: KC = 1, △: KC = 2, ▽: KC = 6, ◦: KC = 10.
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
0.9
0.95
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
palt
CDtot
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
0.9
0.95
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
palt
CMtot
Figure 6.47: Total force coeﬃcients CDtot and CMtot for structure consisting of 3 by
3 cylinders. As function of porosity palt.□: KC = 0.1, ⋄: KC = 1, △: KC = 2, ▽:
KC = 6, ◦: KC = 10.
6.3
Comparison to Morison prediction
A simple way of estimating forces on a structure with multiple members is to perform
a prediction using Morison’s formula for forces in oscillatory ﬂow on each member
and then summing up the forces on the individual members to give the total force
on the structure. The prediction is then based on the free stream velocity and the
free stream force coeﬃcients found in the literature. To estimate the validity of this
method, such a prediction is made for the the basic cases with D = 1 m as well as
for the case of mixed cylinder sizes, and the results are compared to the numerically
predicted results.
The Morison prediction is calculated using the probed velocities U. Using the phase,
period and amplitude of the velocity signal, the acceleration ˙U is found. Using force
coeﬃcients for a square cylinder in unconﬁned oscillatory ﬂow at the relevant KC
number, the force for cylinder i can be found as
Fi = 1
2ρDiCDiU|U| + ρAiCMi ˙U
(6.6)
94
==PAGE:109==
6 Results and analysis
The total predicted force is then
Fpre =
N
X
i=1
Fi
(6.7)
When the artiﬁcial force time series Fpre is found, the force coeﬃcients for the total
structure are found from a Morison ﬁt to this time series, using the overall diameter
Dx and area Atot of the structure.
The force coeﬃcients for unconﬁned ﬂow used for the Morison prediction are shown
in Table 6.20.
Table 6.20: Force coeﬃcients for square cylinder based on Keulegan-Carpenter num-
ber for the cylinder KC. Coeﬃcients from Bearman et al. (1984).
KC
0.1
1
2
6
10
CD
2.9
2.9
3.2
2.2
1.8
CM
2.79
2.8
3.0
3.3
3.4
A recommended practice, Det Norske Veritas (2011), suggests a correction of the force
coeﬃcients to account for the conﬁnement of the ﬂow experienced when the structure
is placed in a moonpool. The corrected coeﬃcients CDcor and CMcor are given as
CDcor =
 
1 −0.5 Ab
Am
(1 −Ab
A )2
!
CD
(6.8)
CMcor =
 
1 + 1.9
 Ab
Am
 9
4!
CM
(6.9)
where Am is the cross-sectional area of the moonpool and Ab is the total area of solid
body of the structure.
Morison predictions using the corrected force coeﬃcients CDcor and CMcor are presented
together with the Morison prediction using free stream coeﬃcients CD and CM. The
two-dimensional version of the two areas Am and Ab are taken to be the moonpool
width b and the sum of cylinder diameters in the cross-ﬂow direction nxD.
For the calculation of the full structure coeﬃcients, the cross-ﬂow diameter Dx and
the total structure area Atot = π
4D2
x are used.
The results are presented in Section 6.3.1 and discussed in Section 6.3.2.
6.3.1
Results of Morison prediction
The results of the two Morison predictions are compared to the results found in the
numerical calculations.
95
==PAGE:110==
6 Results and analysis
Single cylinder
Figure 6.48 shows the force coeﬃcients CD and CM found for a single cylinder placed
in the treated moonpool. The results are compared to the single cylinder free stream
coeﬃcients shown in Table 6.20 as well as these coeﬃcients corrected according to
(6.8) and (6.9).
0
2
4
6
8
10
1
2
3
4
5
KC
CD
0
2
4
6
8
10
2.5
3
3.5
4
KC
CM
Figure 6.48: Single cylinder force coeﬃcients CD and CM as function of Keulegan-
Carpenter number KC.
■: Numerical results, ▲: Free stream values, •: Corrected
values.
From Figure 6.48 it is seen that as expected, the free stream coeﬃcients are lower
than the calculated which is explained by the blockage eﬀect. The large deviations
seen for the drag coeﬃcient at KC ≤2 are partly explained by the force being inertia
dominated in this KC region, making the CD estimate based on the calculations rather
uncertain. The free stream CD (for KC > 2) is in the order of 10 % lower than the
calculated, while the free stream CM is in the order of 5 % lower.
Figure 6.48 also shows that the correction suggested by Det Norske Veritas (2011)
gives an overestimate of the drag coeﬃcient CD in the order of 20 %, while it gives an
underestimate of the inertia coeﬃcient CM in the order of 3 %. The underestimation
of the inertia coeﬃcient seems to be increasing with increasing KC.
96
==PAGE:111==
6 Results and analysis
1 by 2 cylinders
The 1 by 2 set-ups with D = 1 with parameters shown in Table 6.1 are treated.
0
2
4
6
8
10
1
2
3
4
5
6
KCtot
CDtot
0
2
4
6
8
10
0.8
0.9
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
KCtot
CMtot
0
2
4
6
8
10
1
2
3
4
5
6
KCtot
CDtot
0
2
4
6
8
10
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
KCtot
CMtot
0
2
4
6
8
10
1
2
3
4
5
6
KCtot
CDtot
0
2
4
6
8
10
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
KCtot
CMtot
Figure 6.49: 1 by 2 cylinders. Comparison of total structure force coeﬃcients CDtot
and CMtot found from numerical calculations to those found by Morison prediction
using free stream coeﬃcients and corrected coeﬃcients. ■: dx/D = 0.5, ■: dx/D = 1,
■: dx/D = 2, ▲: Morison prediction with free stream coeﬃcients, •: Morison prediction
with corrected coeﬃcients.
97
==PAGE:112==
6 Results and analysis
1 by 3 cylinders
The 1 by 3 set-ups with D = 1 with parameters shown in Table 6.2 are treated.
0
2
4
6
8
10
0
2
4
6
8
KCtot
CDtot
0
2
4
6
8
10
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
KCtot
CMtot
0
2
4
6
8
10
0
2
4
6
8
KCtot
CDtot
0
2
4
6
8
10
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
KCtot
CMtot
Figure 6.50: 1 by 3 cylinders. Comparison of total structure force coeﬃcients CDtot
and CMtot found from numerical calculations to those found by Morison prediction
using free stream coeﬃcients and corrected coeﬃcients. ■: dx/D = 0.5, ■: dx/D = 1, ▲:
Morison prediction with free stream coeﬃcients, •: Morison prediction with corrected
coeﬃcients.
98
==PAGE:113==
6 Results and analysis
2 by 1 cylinders
The 2 by 1 set-ups with D = 1 with parameters shown in Table 6.3 are treated.
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
2
4
6
8
KCtot
CDtot
0
1
2
3
4
5
5
5.5
6
6.5
7
7.5
8
KCtot
CMtot
0
1
2
3
4
0
2
4
6
8
KCtot
CDtot
0
1
2
3
4
5
5.5
6
6.5
7
7.5
8
KCtot
CMtot
0
1
2
3
0
2
4
6
8
KCtot
CDtot
0
1
2
3
5
5.5
6
6.5
7
7.5
8
KCtot
CMtot
Figure 6.51: 2 by 1 cylinders. Comparison of total structure force coeﬃcients CDtot
and CMtot found from numerical calculations to those found by Morison prediction
using free stream coeﬃcients and corrected coeﬃcients. ■: dy/D = 0.5, ■: dy/D = 1,
■: dy/D = 2, ▲: Morison prediction with free stream coeﬃcients, •: Morison prediction
with corrected coeﬃcients.
99
==PAGE:114==
6 Results and analysis
3 by 1 cylinders
The 3 by 1 set-ups with D = 1 with parameters shown in Table 6.4 are treated.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
2
4
6
8
10
12
KCtot
CDtot
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
7
7.5
8
8.5
9
9.5
10
10.5
11
KCtot
CMtot
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
2
4
6
8
10
12
KCtot
CDtot
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
7
7.5
8
8.5
9
9.5
10
10.5
11
KCtot
CMtot
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
2
4
6
8
10
12
KCtot
CDtot
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
7
7.5
8
8.5
9
9.5
10
10.5
11
KCtot
CMtot
Figure 6.52: 2 by 1 cylinders. Comparison of total structure force coeﬃcients CDtot
and CMtot found from numerical calculations to those found by Morison prediction
using free stream coeﬃcients and corrected coeﬃcients. ■: dy/D = 0.5, ■: dy/D = 1,
■: dy/D = 2, ▲: Morison prediction with free stream coeﬃcients, •: Morison prediction
with corrected coeﬃcients.
100
==PAGE:115==
6 Results and analysis
2 by 2 cylinders
The 2 by 2 set-ups with D = 1 m with parameters given in Table 6.13 are treated.
0
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
KCtot
CDtot
0
1
2
3
4
5
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
KCtot
CMtot
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
KCtot
CDtot
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
KCtot
CMtot
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
KCtot
CDtot
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
KCtot
CMtot
Figure 6.53: 2 by 2 cylinders. Comparison of total structure force coeﬃcients CDtot
and CMtot found from numerical calculations to those found by Morison prediction
using free stream coeﬃcients and corrected coeﬃcients.
■: dx/D = dy/D = 0.5, ■:
dx/D = dy/D = 1, ■: dx/D = dy/D = 2, ▲: Morison prediction with free stream
coeﬃcients, •: Morison prediction with corrected coeﬃcients.
101
==PAGE:116==
6 Results and analysis
3 by 3 cylinders
The results for total structure coeﬃcients, CDtot and CMtot, are shown as function of
KCtot.
0
1
2
3
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
KCtot
CDtot
0
1
2
3
1.5
2
2.5
KCtot
CMtot
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
KCtot
CDtot
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
KCtot
CMtot
Figure 6.54: 3 by 3 cylinders. Comparison of total structure force coeﬃcients CDtot
and CMtot found from numerical calculations to those found by Morison prediction
using free stream coeﬃcients and corrected coeﬃcients.
■: dx/D = dy/D = 0.5, ■:
dx/D = dy/D = 1, ▲: Morison prediction with free stream coeﬃcients, •: Morison
prediction with corrected coeﬃcients.
102
==PAGE:117==
6 Results and analysis
Mixed cylinders
The set-up with mixed cylinder sizes and parameters as shown in Table 6.17 is treated.
For cylinder 1 which has diameter D =
√
5 the force coeﬃcients shown in Table 6.21
are used.
Table 6.21:
Force coeﬃcients for square cylinder with D =
√
5 based on the
Keulegan-Carpenter number for this cylinder KCcyl1. Coeﬃcients from Bearman et al.
(1984).
KCcyl1
0.06
0.45
0.90
2.7
4.5
CD
2.9
2.9
2.9
3.0
2.4
CM
2.79
2.8
2.8
2.9
3.0
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
0
5
10
15
20
25
KCtot
CDtot
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
KCtot
CMtot
Figure 6.55: Mixed cylinder set-up. Comparison of total structure force coeﬃcients
CDtot and CMtot found from numerical calculations to those found by Morison prediction
using free stream coeﬃcients and corrected coeﬃcients. ■: Numerical results for mixed
set-up, ▲: Morison prediction with free stream coeﬃcients, •: Morison prediction with
corrected coeﬃcients.
6.3.2
Analysis of Morison prediction
From the results presented in Section 6.3.1 it is clear that the calculated and the
predicted total structure force coeﬃcients in most cases follow the same qualitative
development with increasing KCtot. However, some rather substantial deviations in
coeﬃcient values are seen.
In an attempt to quantify the deviations seen in the ﬁgures in the previous section,
the mean deviations for the two structure force coeﬃcients are calculated for each
case. By deviation is meant the deviation of the Morison predictions compared to
the numerical results. The mean value of deviations is not a highly qualiﬁed measure
for comparison, but merely provides and overview of tendencies. The deviations for
103
==PAGE:118==
6 Results and analysis
Morison prediction using free stream coeﬃcient values are seen in Table 6.22. The
deviations for Morison prediction using corrected coeﬃcient values are seen in Table
6.23. It is noted that the analysis of CDtot only takes into account the values found for
the two highest KCtot since the remaining relate to a single cylinder KC value of 2 or
lower, which means the force on each cylinder is inertia dominated, making the drag
coeﬃcient predictions rather uncertain.
Table 6.22: Deviations between results from Morison prediction using free stream
coeﬃcients CD and CM relative to calculation results. Deviations are given in %. d/D
symbolizes dx/D or dy/D or both as ﬁt for the given set-up.
Coeﬀ.
Case
1x2
1x3
2x1
3x1
2x2
3x3
mixed
CDtot
d/D = 0.5
-44
-64
+39
+90
-2.8
-9.3
-
d/D = 1
-38
-58
+16
+33
-18
-33
-
d/D = 2
-33
-
-7.1
-9.8
-35
-
-
mixed
-
-
-
-
-
-
-82
CMtot
d/D = 0.5
-19
-31
+12
+20
-7.5
-18
d/D = 1
-14
-22
+3.0
+5.3
-11
-21
-
d/D = 2
-12
-
-3.0
-2.5
-12
-
-
mixed
-
-
-
-
-
-
-28
Looking at the deviations of the Morison prediction using the free stream coeﬃcients,
presented in Table 6.22, some tendencies are clear: For the set-ups 1x2 and 1x3, i.e.
where several cylinders are placed in a line across the ﬂow direction, the Morison pre-
diction with free stream coeﬃcients rather severely underestimates both the drag and
inertia coeﬃcient. This is expected due to the blockage and interaction eﬀects shown
in these cases. For the set-ups 2x1 and 3x1, i.e. in-line conﬁgurations, the free stream
prediction overestimates for the two closer spacings due to the interaction/shielding
eﬀects present in these cases. For the larger spacing where the interference is not
signiﬁcant, the free stream prediction underestimates just as with a single cylinder
due to the blockage eﬀect. In the set-ups 2x2 and 3x3 both signiﬁcant blockage and
interaction occurs, and the two eﬀects just described, which lead to under- and over-
estimation respectively, may cancel out each other. This is seen to approximately be
the case for the 2x2 set-up with d/D = 0.5 in which the Morison prediction is within
acceptable deviations of the numerical results. However, a general underestimation
is seen using the free stream values for the Morison prediction in these cases. For
the mixed set-up, the Morison prediction with free stream values is seen to grossly
underestimate the drag coeﬃcient and - to a lesser extent - the inertia coeﬃcient.
The deviations of the results of the Morison prediction using force coeﬃcients corrected
according to Det Norske Veritas (2011) are presented in Table 6.23. It is seen that
the use of the corrected results leads to a much closer prediction of the forces on the
structure consisting of only one cross-ﬂow row of cylinders, i.e. 1x2 and 1x3. The
primary eﬀect on these structures is that of blockage leading to speed-up of the ﬂow.
104
==PAGE:119==
6 Results and analysis
Table 6.23:
Deviations between results from Morison prediction using corrected
coeﬃcients CDcor and CMcor relative to calculation results. Deviations are given in %.
d/D symbolizes dx/D or dy/D or both as ﬁt for the given set-up.
Coeﬀ.
Case
1x2
1x3
2x1
3x1
2x2
3x3
mixed
CDtot
d/D = 0.5
-6.5
-14
+75
+140
+63
+120
-
d/D = 1
+3.5
+1.5
+46
+68
+38
+62
-
d/D = 2
+13
-
+17
+14
+8.7
-
-
mixed
-
-
-
-
-
-
-68
CMtot
d/D = 0.5
-9.6
-12
+15
+23
+3.0
+5.1
-
d/D = 1
-3.7
+0.20
+5.4
+7.6
-0.39
+0.92
-
d/D = 2
-2.2
-
-0.7
-0.35
-1.7
-
-
mixed
-
-
-
-
-
-
-18
This is the eﬀect which is considered in the suggested correction and this leads to results
within ±13 % of the numerically predicted. For the structures of in-line rows, 2x1 and
3x1, it is however seen that the suggested correction leads to a sever overestimation
of the drag coeﬃcient, namely for the smaller spacings. This is because the shielding
eﬀect is not taken into account in the correction of force coeﬃcients. A less severe
deviation is seen for the inertia coeﬃcient which for distances larger than dy/D = 0.5
gives acceptable predictions. For the 2x2 and 3x3 cases, using the corrected coeﬃcients
is seen to give a gross overestimation of the total drag coeﬃcient for distances of
d/D = 0.5 and 1, while acceptable results are seen for the 2x2 case with d/D = 2.
This is again assumed to be due to the lack of consideration for shielding eﬀects. The
total structure inertia coeﬃcients seem to be predicted within acceptable accuracy by
using the corrected coeﬃcients. For the mixed case, though the underestimation is
not as severe as when using the free stream coeﬃcients, it is clear that the corrected
coeﬃcients also give a large underestimate of the drag coeﬃcient and a smaller, but
still signiﬁcant, underestimate of the inertia coeﬃcient for this structure. It is noted
again that the 3x3 set-up with d/D = 1 and the mixed set-up have the same porosity
p and blockage ratio γ. However, it is clear that the forces in these two cases are very
diﬀerent, and the quality of the Morison prediction for the two cases is therefore also
very diﬀerent. This underlines the inﬂuence of other parameters such as the alignment,
the cylinder size distribution and the number of cylinders.
105
==PAGE:120==
==PAGE:121==
7
Discussion
The results presented in Section 6 display the complexity of the task of predicting
forces on complex structures exposed to conﬁned oscillatory ﬂow. The results reveal,
as expected, that blockage eﬀects may increase the loads substantially. This eﬀect is
also taken into account in the guideline of Det Norske Veritas (2011) where a correction
of force coeﬃcients is suggested. Interaction between the members of a structure is
seen to play an important role as well, with shielding of closely placed members being
the most signiﬁcant phenomenon. This eﬀect decreases the force on the structure.
Furthermore, the distribution of the solid part of the structure, i.e. the number and
size of the structure members, seems to play a very important role as well. So does
the in-line alignment of the structure members.
It was clear that the distance between individual members, dx/D and dy/D, is a
relevant parameter to take into consideration in regard to interaction and shielding of
the simple structures investigated initially. It was also shown that the cylinder size
relative to the moonpool width, D/b, is relevant in regard to blockage.
When attempting to describe the force on a structure in terms of parameters related
to the overall structure, the picture becomes a little less clear. The porosity p of a
structure was clearly seen to be an important parameter, and as expected an increased
porosity led to a decreased force on the structure. However, the interaction eﬀects
shown to exist have opposite eﬀects on the force depending on whether the interaction
occurs for cylinders in side-by-side arrangement (interaction increases force) or in-line
arrangement (interaction decreases force). Changing porosity will often mean changing
both the cross-ﬂow and in-line distance of the members of the structure, which thus
may lead to opposite eﬀects. This indicates that the porosity deﬁned as in (5.5) may
be a somewhat ambiguous parameter. As an example of this, the two structures in
Figure 7.1 can be observed.
With the deﬁnition of porosity p used here, the two
structures (a) and (b) have the same porosity. However, based on the results found
on interference, signiﬁcant shielding will occur and decrease the force on structure (b).
This example shows the need for the porosity parameter to be supplemented by other
parameters. Based on the interaction eﬀects shown, an increased porosity in the cross-
ﬂow direction will decrease the forces on the structure, while an increased porosity in
the in-line direction has the opposite eﬀect. In the example shown in Figure 7.1, the
aspect ratio Dx/Dy will diﬀer for the two structures. The porosity could therefore be
corrected according to this parameter in order to quantify the distribution of porosity
between the two directions. The aspect ratio has not been investigated in an isolated
manner in this project but it is clear that this parameter has an eﬀect and should be
investigated further.
The blockage ratio γ, as it is deﬁned here for the overall structure, was also seen to be
an inﬂuential parameter. When changed in an isolated manner, an increase in blockage
ratio was seen to increase the forces on the structure. However, looking to the example
structures in Figure 7.1, it is clear that structure (b) has a signiﬁcantly larger blockage
ratio than structure (a). Yet, as stated above, the force exerted on structure (a) will
most likely be larger than that exerted on structure (b). This means that the blockage
107
==PAGE:122==
7 Discussion
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.1: Example of structures with same porosity p.
eﬀect should be related to the cross-ﬂow porosity somehow. Relating to the porosity
alone is not suﬃcient since the porosity in the two cases is the same. The blockage
should thus be seen related to the porosity corrected for aspect ratio.
The alignment α seems to be a more straightforward parameter which is less dependent
on the remaining parameters. A decrease in alignment seems for most cases to lead
to larger forces on the structure. The challenge of this parameter is its quantiﬁcation.
A deﬁnition is suggested here which is fairly easily identiﬁed for the simple type of
structures which has been treated, but may be diﬃcult to quantify for an actual
subsea structure. The deﬁnition of the parameter suggested here may also prove to
be insuﬃcient for its purpose which primarily is to quantify the reduction in shielding
eﬀects. To exemplify this, the case of 3x3 cylinders with α = 0.5, shown in Figure
B.1b, is compared to the mixed set-up with α = 0.49, shown in Figure B.2. The
alignment parameters for these structures are almost identical. But clearly a much
larger degree of shielding will occur in the 3x3 set-up. Further investigations into this
parameter are needed and alternative deﬁnitions should be considered.
Only a single investigation is performed on the mass distribution parameters, number
of structure members N and standard deviation of member diameter σD. This inves-
tigation reveals that these parameters may have a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the forces
exerted on the structure as well. A part of the reason for this may be that fewer
structure members mean fewer separations of the ﬂow and thereby less vorticity and
turbulence. An other contributing factor may be a changed interaction eﬀect between
cylinders of varying sizes. The eﬀect of mass distribution in the structure should be
investigated further.
The results found lead to the overall conclusion that no single parameter from the
general analysis governs the force exerted on a complex structure exposed to conﬁned
oscillatory ﬂow. Considering the three parameters porosity, blockage ratio and align-
ment, which were chosen as the main focus of the result analysis, is seen to not be
108
==PAGE:123==
7 Discussion
suﬃcient either. The parameters found in the general dimensional analysis should be
suﬃcient to fully describe the force but additional investigations are needed in which
each parameter is isolated and investigated further. By curve ﬁtting to the data for
each parameter it may be possible to ﬁnd the dependence of the force on each. A
suggestion for a rational expression for the forces exerted on the structure can then
be made by including factors accounting for each parameter. In the following some
considerations regarding the approach to developing such an expression are presented.
7.1
Suggestions regarding the development of a rational ex-
pression for force prediction on complex structure in moon-
pool
Several approaches can be taken to developing a rational expression for the forces on a
complex structure exposed to oscillatory ﬂow in a moonpool. One approach is to make
Morison predictions for each structure member and adding the force contributions to
achieve the total force on the structure. It was shown in Section 6.3 that doing this
by simply applying free stream force coeﬃcients and ﬂow velocity leads to an under-
estimate of the forces on the structure in cases with more than one cylinder in the
cross-ﬂow direction. Better results were seen when using coeﬃcients corrected accord-
ing to Det Norske Veritas (2011), namely for structures of only one cross-ﬂow row of
cylinders. However, when used on structures with several cylinders in the in-line direc-
tion, this approach overestimates the forces on the structure due to an overestimate of
the drag coeﬃcient. On the other hand, when the corrected coeﬃcients were used for
predicting the force on the mixed set-up, the total force was clearly underestimated.
In order to use the approach of a Morison prediction for each structure member, ad-
ditional correction of the force coeﬃcients is therefore needed. The corrections should
take into account all of the parameters of the general dimensional analysis presented
in this project.
An alternative approach to the development of a rational expression for the force on a
complex structure could be to take starting point in the full structure rather than the
individual members. It was seen from the results presented as force coeﬃcients for the
full structure that the development of these as function of the full structure Keulegan-
Carpenter number qualitatively follows that of the force coeﬃcients for a single square
cylinder. A Morison prediction could be made based on force coeﬃcients related to
the overall dimensions of the structure and corrected for the eﬀects of the relevant
parameters. This would eliminate the need for considering the individual members
and summing the forces on these, thus making the approach considerably simpler. A
concern in regard to this approach could however be that using the force coeﬃcients
for a cylinder with the full structure dimensions may provide an incorrect starting
point. The KC number for each member of the structure will most likely be much
larger than that for the total structure KCtot. The total structure force coeﬃcients
would be based on KCtot. This means that the force coeﬃcients for each individual
member may diﬀer from that of the total structure. As it is in fact the sum of the
forces acting on the individual cylinders that make up the total force on the structure,
109
==PAGE:124==
7 Discussion
it could be argued that one should instead use the force coeﬃcient for the individual
members as a starting point. In order to assess this approach, the results found in the
present project could be compared to those found using a Morison prediction based
on the full structure diameter and area and either the full structure force coeﬃcients
or force coeﬃcients representative of the individual structure members. This has not
been feasible within the limits of this project but is subject to further work.
Questions could be - and have previously been - raised regarding the general validity of
the Morison model (see e.g. Sumer and Fredsøe (2006) and further references herein).
It is clear that for higher KC numbers the Morison equation becomes a poorer ﬁt
to the actual in-line force time series. This eﬀect is enhanced when ﬁtting to time
series from cylinders in proximity of other cylinders.
This is illustrated in Figure
7.2 which displays examples of force time series produced in the calculations of this
project and the Morison ﬁt used to ﬁnd the force coeﬃcients.
It is seen that the
peaks of the force time series are not captured by the Morison ﬁt. This could be an
argument for completely abandoning the Morison approach in the development of the
force expression.
100
110
120
130
140
150
−4000
−3000
−2000
−1000
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
t [s]
F
[N/m]
(a) Cylinder in 1x2 set-up.
100
110
120
130
140
150
−2000
−1000
0
1000
2000
3000
t [s]
F
[N/m]
(b) Cylinder in 2x1 set-up.
Figure 7.2: Morison ﬁt (—) to force time series (—) for a single cylinder in a two
cylinder set-up at KC = 6.
A third option for a rational expression for the forces on a complex structure in os-
cillatory ﬂow could be to treat the structure as a porous media, thus abandoning the
Morison formulation. Van Gent (1995) developed a model in which a porous media
exposed to wave action is treated as a continuum which exerts forces on the ﬂuid in-
teracting with it. The force is predicted by modelling the resistance of the structure
using the extended Darcy-Forchheimer equation. A recent review and improvement of
the model can be found in the work by Jensen et al. (2014). For this approach to be
applicable, the porosity of the structure might have to be lower than the structures
treated in this project. This will not be treated further here but could be subject to
future investigations.
The results and analyses presented in this project are most suited for attempting to
follow one of the Morison based approaches. As discussed above, corrections for all
parameters in the general analysis should be incorporated. For this purpose, several
110
==PAGE:125==
7 Discussion
additional investigations are necessary, and a full development and testing of a rational
expression is therefore not feasible within the scope of this project.
Some simple attempts at correction of force coeﬃcients for the individual cylinders
have however been performed. In these attempts the eﬀect of blockage was sought
incorporated by correcting the velocity and acceleration by a factor cf = (1−p)/(1−γ).
This corresponds to correcting the drag coeﬃcient by cf 2 and the inertia coeﬃcient
by cf. This is merely one suggestion for a correction factor and was not seen to give
satisfactory results. Especially when testing for the mixed case, the predictions were
oﬀmark. This was sought adjusted for by incorporating a correction for alignment by
dividing the force coeﬃcients by α. This did not yield satisfactory results either. It
is clear that more corrections are needed. It is clear that two important eﬀects which
inﬂuence the force on the structure are shielding and blockage.
The importance of the shielding eﬀect was illustrated by the example shown in Figure
7.1. The shielding eﬀect will be dependent on porosity and aspect ratio as discussed
above but also alignment.
A means of estimating the shielding eﬀect could be to
study the change of the velocity proﬁle in the wake of the cylinders of the structure
in more detail.
This may help describe the shielding eﬀect as function of in-line
distance between cylinders and thus a function of the porosity and aspect ratio. By
determining the change in the ﬂow ﬁeld behind the members of the structure, the
corresponding change in force coeﬃcients for structures placed in the wake can be
estimated. Inspiration for this study could be found in the work by Løland (1993)
who presented a model for determining the velocity proﬁle in the wake behind a screen
consisting of a mesh of trusses. The model presented by Løland (1993) is based on the
wake model presented by Schlichting (1968) which is extended to apply for the screen.
The same principles may be used for estimating the reduction of the velocity which
should be accounted for in a complex structure with members in close proximity in the
in-line direction. The model should however be adjusted to be applicable in oscillatory
ﬂow and to account for several ”screens”, i.e. rows of cylinders, in close proximity.
It was shown in Section 6.3 that compared to the unconﬁned ﬂow, the eﬀect of the
blockage due to the conﬁnement of the moonpool is signiﬁcant. This eﬀect should be
more straightforward to quantify than the shielding eﬀect. As mentioned, an attempt
at incorporating this eﬀect was made by employing the factor cf in Morison predic-
tions. This did not yield satisfactory results. When the blockage eﬀect is isolated, as in
the 1x2 and 1x3 cases, it however seems to be rather well modelled with the suggested
correction from Det Norske Veritas (2011). This correction could be a starting point
for the blockage correction. It is noted that this is not based on the blockage ratio γ
as it is deﬁned here but rather the absolute blockage of the structure in the moonpool.
This absolute blockage can be reached by combining γ with porosity and aspect ratio.
The data from this project is insuﬃcient to fully characterize the inﬂuence of the solid
distribution in the structure, i.e. parameters N and σD. Further investigations are
needed to determined the eﬀect of these parameters on the shielding and blockage.
111
==PAGE:126==
==PAGE:127==
8
Conclusion
Two dimensional numerical experiments have been performed to investigate the in-
line forces exerted on complex structures placed in a moonpool experiencing resonant
piston mode sloshing. The structures were modelled as clusters of square cylinders
in a variety of arrangements. The oscillatory ﬂow in the moonpool was simulated by
placing the structures in a tunnel with forced sinusoidally oscillating ﬂow. The tunnel
was given a width of 7 m, representing a typical moonpool dimension, and an extent
suﬃciently long to avoid boundary eﬀects. The period of the oscillatory ﬂow was 6.7
s and Keulegan-Carpenter numbers up to KC = 10 for a single square cylinder were
investigated. Results were presented in terms of drag and inertia coeﬃcients found by
a Morison ﬁt to the numerical force time series.
Interaction eﬀects were shown to signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the force exerted on the struc-
tures. Interaction of cylinders placed side-by-side relative to the ﬂow direction was
seen to increase both drag and inertia coeﬃcients of the cylinders.
Interaction of
cylinders placed behind each other in line with the ﬂow was seen to decrease the force
coeﬃcients of the cylinders. The shielding eﬀect was enhanced for internal cylinders,
i.e. cylinders placed between two other cylinders.
The size of the cylinders relative to the moonpool width was shown to inﬂuence the
force. This is assumed to primarily be caused by a blockage eﬀect increasing the ﬂow
velocity around the structure.
Through dimensional analysis the following parameters for a structure consisting of
square cylinders were identiﬁed as signiﬁcant for the total in-line force on the struc-
ture: Keulegan-Carpenter number, porosity, blockage ratio, in-line alignment of the
members of the structure, aspect ratio of the structure and mass distribution in the
structure.
Determining force coeﬃcients for the full structures and plotting them as function
of the Keulegan-Carpenter number showed a qualitative development with increasing
KC corresponding to that of a single square cylinder.
In the treated KC range,
this means a decrease in drag coeﬃcient and an increase in inertia coeﬃcient with
increasing Keulegan-Carpenter number.
It is concluded that interaction and blockage eﬀects signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the forces
exerted on complex structures exposed to conﬁned oscillatory ﬂow. An increase in
porosity of a structure was seen to decrease the force on the structure. This is assumed
partly to be a consequence of decreased interaction as well as blockage. An increase
in blockage ratio was seen to increase the force on the structure due to speed-up of
the ﬂow around the structure. A decrease in alignment of the structure members was,
with few exceptions, seen to entail an increase in the force due to decreased shielding
eﬀects. The aspect ratio and mass distribution were not investigated in detail but
evidence was found indicating that these parameters are potentially very signiﬁcant.
Prediction of the force on the total structure found by Morison prediction on each
individual member was assessed. It was seen that applying free stream velocity and
113
==PAGE:128==
8 Conclusion
force coeﬃcients for unconﬁned ﬂow in the Morison prediction yielded a severe under-
estimation of the total force on the structure. Using free stream velocity and force
coeﬃcients corrected for blockage according to Det Norske Veritas (2011) was seen to
overestimate the force on the structure due to an overestimate of the drag coeﬃcient.
The overestimation is most likely caused by the shielding eﬀects not being accounted
for in the coeﬃcient correction.
It is suggested that a rational expression for the force on a complex structure is based
on a Morison force prediction. The force coeﬃcients should be corrected to account for
blockage and shielding. It is concluded that the parameters identiﬁed in this project
all inﬂuence these eﬀects and thereby the total force exerted on the structure. Further
investigations are needed to determine the dependency on each parameter and ﬁnd
the exact formulation of force coeﬃcient corrections. The option of taking the force
coeﬃcients and dimensions of the full structure as a starting point for the Morison
prediction should be investigated as an alternative to performing a Morison prediction
for each structure member.
8.1
Further work
Some suggestions are made for further work with the aim of developing a rational ex-
pression for the forces exerted on a complex structure exposed to piston mode sloshing
in a moonpool.
A main objective for future work should be to perform physical experiments in the
laboratory to support the numerical ﬁndings of this project and any future numerical
results.
As described above, it is suggested that the parameters identiﬁed in the general di-
mensional analysis are investigated further. Namely the eﬀect of mass distribution
in the structure should be considered. This should be done by setting up additional
experiments in which only one parameter is changed at a time.
The calculations in this project have only covered Keulegan-Carpenter numbers up
to KC = 10. In future work it would be desirable to increase this range to cover all
relevant KC numbers for resonant piston mode sloshing.
An interesting aspect in future work could be to perform numerical calculations of
forces on complex structures in unconﬁned ﬂow in order to compare to the forces on
the same structures in a moonpool. This could contribute to the assessment of both
blockage and interaction eﬀects.
In the present project the problem of a complex structure placed in a moonpool is
simpliﬁed by regarding it as a two-dimensional problem. However, it is expected that
three-dimensional eﬀects will be present and inﬂuence the force on the structure in an
actual moonpool which has a ﬁnite dimension in both directions. Future work should
therefore include three-dimensional investigations.
114
==PAGE:129==
8 Conclusion
As actual subsea structures normally will consist of structure members of diﬀerent
cross-sectional shapes, including in many cases circular, an aim should be to include
Reynolds eﬀects in the force prediction.
Finally, it could be interesting to investigate the option of modelling a subsea structure
as a porous media as an alternative to the force prediction using Morison. Options
to incorporate porous structures of a given resistance already exist for tools such as
OpenFOAM. This could be an advantage in the moonpool modelling if a porosity
model is shown to give reasonable predictions of the forces on a subsea structure.
115
==PAGE:130==
==PAGE:131==
References
Anagnostopoulos, P. and Dikarou, C. (2011).
Numerical simulation of viscous os-
cillatory ﬂow past four cylinders in square arrangement.
Journal of Fluids and
Structures, Vol. 27, 212-232.
Anagnostopoulos, P. and Minear, R. (2004). Blockage eﬀect of oscillatory ﬂow past a
ﬁxed cylinder. Applied Ocean REsearch, Vol. 26, 147-153.
Bearman, P. W., Graham, J. M. R., Obasaju, E. D., and Drossopoulos, G. M. (1984).
The inﬂuence of corner radius on the forces experienced by cylindrical bluﬀbodies
in oscillatory ﬂow. Applied Ocean Research, Vol. 6, No. 2, 83-89.
Bearman, P. W. and Trueman, D. M. (1972). An investigation of the ﬂow around
rectangular cylinders. Aeronautical Quarterly, Vol. 23, Issue AUG, 229-237.
Biermann, D. and Herrnstein, W. H. (1933). The interference between struts in various
combinations. National Advisory for Aeronautics, Tech. Rep. 468.
Chern, M.-J., Kanna, P. R., Lu, Y.-J., Cheng, I.-C., and Chang, S.-C. (2010). A cfd
study of interaction of oscillatory ﬂows with a pair of side-by-side cylinders. Journal
of Fluids and Structures, Vol. 26, 626-643.
Davis, R. W., Moore, E. F., and Purtell, L. P. (1984). A numerical-experimental study
of conﬁned ﬂow around rectangular cylinders. Physics of Fluids, Vol. 27, Issue 1,
46-59.
Det Norske Veritas (2010). Recommended Practice: Environmental conditions and
environmental loads. DNV-RP-C205.
Det Norske Veritas (2011). Recommended Practice: Modelling and analysis of marine
operations. DNV-RP-H103.
Duncan, N. (1986). Rovs and moonpools - an operators viewpoint. In Proceedings of
the ROV ’86 Conference, pages 41–50. Graham & Trotman for Marine Technology
Society, the Society for Underwater Technology and the Assosication of Oﬀshore
Diving Contractors, London, UK.
Dutta, S., Panigrahi, P. K., and Muralidhar, K. (2008). Experimental investigation
of ﬂow past a square cylinder at an angle of incidence.
Journal of Engineering
Mechanics, Vol. 134, Issue 9, 788-803.
Faltinsen, O. M. and Timokha, A. N. (2009). Sloshing. Cambridge University Press,
NY, USA.
Graham, J. M. R. (1980). The forces on sharp-edged cylinders in oscillatory ﬂow at low
keulegan-carpenter numbers. Journal of Fluid Mechanics, Vol. 97, Part 1, 331-346.
Hori, E. (1959). Experiments on ﬂow around a pair of parallel circular cylinders. Proc.
9th Japan National Congress for Applied Mechanics, 231-234.
117
==PAGE:132==
References
Iliadis, G. and Anagnostopoulos, P. (1998). Viscous oscillatory ﬂow around a cicrular
cylinder at low keulegan-carpenter numbers and frequency parameters. International
Journal for Numerical Methods in Fluids, Vol. 26, 403-442.
Inﬁeld (2015).
Inﬁeld subsea market report to 2019.
http://www.infield.com/
market-forecast-reports/subsea-market-report. Accessed: 2015-02-06.
Jensen, B., Jacobsen, N. G., and Christensen, E. D. (2014). Investigations on the
porous media equations and resistance coeﬃcients for coastal structures. Coastal
Engineering, Vol. 84, 56-72.
Knisely, C. W. (1990). Strouhal numbers of rectangular cylinders at incidence: A
review and new data. Journal of Fluids and Structures, Vol. 4, 371-393.
Kristiansen, T., Berget, K., Ommani, B., and Baarholm, R. (2015). An experimental
and numerical investigation of a box-shaped object in moonpool; a three-dimensional
study. Not yet published. Submitted for the ASME 2015 34th International Confer-
ence on Oean, Oﬀshore and Arctic Engineering.
Kristiansen, T. and Faltinsen, O. M. (2012a).
Gap resonance analyzed by a new
domain-decomposition method combining potential and viscous ﬂow. Applied Ocean
Research, Vol. 34, 198-208.
Kristiansen, T. and Faltinsen, O. M. (2012b). Modelling of current loads on aquacul-
ture net cages. Journal of Fluids and Structures, Vol. 34, 218-235.
Kristiansen, T., Sauder, T., and Firoozkoohi, R. (2013). Validation of a hybrid code
combining potential and viscous ﬂow with application to 3d moonpool. Proceedings
of the ASME 2013 32nd International Conference on Oean, Oﬀshore and Arctic
Engineering, Vol. 9, OMAE2013-10748.
Lee, B. E. (1975). The eﬀect of turbulence on the surface pressure ﬁeld of a square
prism. Journal of Fluid Mechanics, Vol. 69, Part 2, 263-282.
Løland, G. (1993). Current forces on, and water ﬂow through and around, ﬂoating
ﬁsh farms. Aquaculture International, Vol. 1, 72-89.
Maskell, E. C. (1963). A theory of the blockage eﬀects on bluﬀbodies and stalled wings
in a closed wind tunnel. Aeronautical Research Council Reports and Memoranda,
No. 3400.
Menter, F. R. (1994). Two-equation eddy-viscosity turbulence models for engineering
applications. AIAA Journal, Vol. 32, No. 8, 1598-1605.
Molin, B. (2001). On the piston and sloshing modes in moonpools. Journal of Fluid
Mechanics, Vol. 430, 27-50.
Morison, J. R., O’Brien, M. P., Johnson, J. W., and Schaaf, S. A. (1950). The forces
exerted by surface waves on piles. Transactions of the American Institute of Mining
and Metallurgical Engineers, Vol. 189, 149-154.
118
==PAGE:133==
References
Nabla Ltd. (2015).
Foam programmer’s guide.
http://www.foamcfd.org/Nabla/
guides/ProgrammersGuidese9.html. Accessed: 2015-02-09.
Okajima, A., Matsumoto, T., and Kimura, S. (1998). Force measurement and ﬂow
visualization of circular and square cylinders in oscillatory ﬂow. JSME International
Journal, Series B, Vol. 41, No. 4, 796-805.
Sarpkaya, T., Cinar, M., and Ozkaynak, S. (1980). Hydrodynamic interference of two
cylinders in harmonic ﬂow. Oﬀshore Technology Conference Paper, No. 3775.
Sarpkaya, T. and Isaacson, M. (1981). Mechanics of wave forces on oﬀshore structures.
Van Nostrand Reinhold, NY, USA.
Schlichting, H. (1968). Boundary Layer Theory. McGraw Hill Book Company Inc.,
NY, USA.
Sumer, B. M. and Fredsøe, J. (2006). Hydrodynamics around cylindrical structures.
World Scientiﬁc Publishing, Singapore.
Van Gent, M. R. A. (1995). Wave Interaction with Permeable Coastal Structures. PhD
thesis, Delft University of Technology, Netherlands.
Versteeg, H. K. and Malalasekera, W. (2007). An introduction to computational ﬂuid
dynamics. Pearson Education Limited, Harlow, England.
Wilcox, D. C. (1994). Turbulence Modeling for CFD. DCW Indsutries, CA, USA.
Zdravkovich, M. M. (1977). Review of ﬂow interference between two circular cylinders
in various arrangements. Transaction of the ASME. Series 1, Journal of Fluids
Engineering, Vol. 99, Issue 4, 618-633.
119
==PAGE:134==
==PAGE:135==
A
Dimensional analysis of in-line force function
A.1
Initial analysis
The in-line force F on a structure consisting of ny by nx square cylinders of diameter
D, with cross-ﬂow spacing dx and in-line spacing dy, placed in a moonpool of width b
and exposed to an oscillatory ﬂow of maximum velocity Um and period T0, is governed
by the function
F = f1(D, b, dx, dy, nx, ny, T0, Um, ρ)
(A.1)
As the problem is treated in two dimensions, the force is given in N/m and the density
is kg/m2. The basic dimensions for length, time and mass are denoted L, T and M.
The dimensions of (A.1) are
MT −2 = f1(L, L, L, L, 1, 1, T, LT −1, ML−2)
(A.2)
where 1 denotes a dimensionless quantity. To eliminate the mass dimension, the force
is normalized by ρ
F
ρ = f2(D, b, dx, dy, nx, ny, T0, Um)
(A.3)
with dimensions
L2T −2 = f2(L, L, L, L, 1, 1, T, LT −1)
(A.4)
To make the force non-dimensional, it is normalized by U 2
m
F
ρU 2
m
= f3(D, b, dx, dy, nx, ny, T0, Um)
(A.5)
with dimensions
1 = f3(L, L, L, L, 1, 1, T, LT −1)
(A.6)
The time dimension is eliminated by multiplying the velocity with the period. This
makes the period the only variable in time dimension and it can therefore be omitted
as independent
F
ρU 2
m
= f4(D, b, dx, dy, nx, ny, UmT)
(A.7)
with dimensions
1 = f4(L, L, L, L, 1, 1, L)
(A.8)
Now the remaining parameters are made non-dimensional by normalizing with the
cylinder diameter D
F
ρU 2
m
= f5( b
D, dx
D , dy
D , nx, ny, UmT
D )
(A.9)
121
==PAGE:136==
A Dimensional analysis of in-line force function
A.2
General analysis
The in-line force on a structure of in-line dimension Dy and cross-ﬂow dimension
Dx, consisting of N members with diameters with standard deviation σD giving a
3-dimensional porosity p, placed in a moonpool of width b and exposed to oscillatory
ﬂow, is governed by the function
F = f1(Dx, Dy, b, p, N, σD, α, T0, Um, ρ)
(A.10)
with dimensions
MT −2 = f1(L, L, L, 1, 1, 1, 1, T, LT −1, ML−2)
(A.11)
Eliminating the mass dimension and non-dimensionalizing the force gives
F
ρU 2
m
= f2(Dx, Dy, b, p, N, σD, α, T0, Um)
(A.12)
with dimensions
1 = f2(L, L, L, 1, 1, 1, 1, T, LT −1)
(A.13)
Eliminating time dimension leads to
F
ρU 2
m
= f3(Dx, Dy, b, p, N, σD, α, UmT0)
(A.14)
with dimensions
1 = f3(L, L, L, 1, 1, 1, 1, L)
(A.15)
non-dimensionalizing remaining parameters by dividing by Dy gives
F
ρU 2
m
= f4
Dx
Dy
, b
Dy
, p, N, σD, α, UmT0
Dy

(A.16)
122
==PAGE:137==
B
Calculation cases
An overview of the treated calculation cases is provided. Number of cylinders in in-
line direction ny and cross-ﬂow direction nx, cylinder diameter D, cross-ﬂow cylinder
distance dx/D, in-line cylinder distance dy/D, moonpool width to cylinder diameter
ratio b/D, total in-line structure diameter Dy and cross-ﬂow diameter Dx, structure
porosity p and blockage ratio γ and the length of the computational domain LD are
provided for all cases. α is provided as well for the additional cases.
Basic cases are shown in B.1 and additional cases are shown in B.2.
123
==PAGE:138==
B Calculation cases
B.1
Basic cases
Table B.1: Overview of basic cases.
nyxnx
D
dx/D
dy/D
b/D
Dy
Dx
p
γ
LD
1x2
1
0.5
-
7
1
2.5
0.20
0.36
101 m
1
1
-
7
1
3
0.33
0.43
121 m
1
2
-
7
1
4
0.50
0.57
121 m
0.5
1
-
14
0.5
1.5
0.33
0.21
61 m
0.75
1
-
9.33
0.75
2.25
0.33
0.32
91 m
1x3
1
0.5
-
7
1
4
0.25
0.57
161 m
1
1
-
7
1
5
0.40
0.71
201 m
0.5
1
-
14
0.5
2.5
0.40
0.36
101 m
0.75
1
-
9.33
0.75
3.75
0.40
0.54
151 m
2x1
1
-
0.5
7
2.5
1
0.20
0.14
103 m
1
-
1
7
3
1
0.33
0.14
123 m
1
-
2
7
4
1
0.50
0.14
125 m
3x1
1
-
0.5
7
4
1
0.25
0.14
165 m
1
-
1
7
5
1
0.40
0.14
205 m
1
-
2
7
7
1
0.57
0.14
205 m
2x2
1
0.5
0.5
7
2.5
2.5
0.36
0.36
141 m
1
1
1
7
3
3
0.56
0.43
169 m
1
2
2
7
4
4
0.75
0.57
169 m
0.5
1
1
14
1.5
1.5
0.56
0.21
63 m
0.75
1
1
9.33
2.25
2.25
0.56
0.32
93 m
3x3
1
0.5
0.5
7
4
4
0.44
0.57
231 m
1
1
1
7
5
5
0.64
0.71
287 m
0.5
1
1
14
2.5
2.5
0.64
0.36
141 m
0.75
1
1
9.33
3.75
3.75
0.64
0.54
213 m
124
==PAGE:139==
B Calculation cases
B.2
Additional cases
Table B.2: Overview of additional cases.
nyxnx
D
dx/D
dy/D
b/D
Dy
Dx
p
γ
α
LD
2x2
1
1
1
7
3
3
0.56
0.43
0.5
201 m
1
1
1
7
3
3
0.56
0.43
0.75
181 m
3x3
1
1
1
7
5
5
0.64
0.71
0.5
317 m
1
1
1
7
5
5
0.64
0.71
0.75
297 m
1
0.5
1
7
5
4
0.55
0.57
1
241 m
1
0.5
2
7
7
4
0.68
0.57
1
241 m
0.5
3.5
3.5
14
5
5
0.91
0.71
1
287 m
0.75
1.8
1.8
9.3
5
5
0.80
0.71
1
287 m
mixed
-
-
-
-
5
5
0.64
0.71
0.49
287 m
b
1
Dy
2
3
4
Dx
(a) 2x2 conﬁguration with α = 0.5.
b
2
Dy
5
8
1
4
7
3
6
9
Dx
(b) 3x3 conﬁguration with α = 0.5.
Figure B.1: Deﬁnition sketches for conﬁgurations with varied alignment.
125
==PAGE:140==
B Calculation cases
b
Dy
2
4
3
5
1
Dx
Figure B.2: Deﬁnition sketch for the ’mixed’ case.
126
==PAGE:141==
C
Simulation challenges and solutions
Some challenges were met when running the ﬁrst calculations of forces on structures
consisting of several cylinders. These are brieﬂy described along with their solutions.
For low KC numbers (up to KC = 2), the in-line and lift force showed small os-
cillations (O(0.15 N)) around the time where the velocities are highest, which means
around the time where the pressure gradient turns. It is assumed to be caused by os-
cillations in the pressure during turnaround caused by the presence of the cylinder(s).
The oscillations apparently become more distinct when the number of cylinders is in-
creased. For some cases, the lift force showed oscillations through the entire period. It
has been sought to resolve this issue by several means: changing the pressure boundary
condition on the boundary without the oscillating velocity boundary condition from
totalPressure to fixedValue; oscillating ﬂow with body forcing instead of oscillat-
ing velocity boundary condition, changing divergence scheme from limitedLinearV to
linearUpwindV; generating mesh with regular blockMesh instead of snappyHexMesh;
increasing number of inner correctors and non-orthogonal correctors. None of these
changes eliminated the small oscillations. It was also tried to run the calculations as
laminar calculations to assess if the wall functions were the cause. This was not seen
to be the case as the laminar results showed even more distinct oscillations. It was also
tried to increase the grid reﬁnement. This gave smaller amplitudes of the oscillations.
Close investigation of the validation results revealed that this type of very small os-
cillations were in fact also present in some of these. Since the oscillations are small
and mainly aﬀect the lift force which is not the target of investigation, and since the
validation results were satisfactory despite the presence of the oscillations, it is decided
to proceed with the results without eliminating the oscillations in the lift force.
For high KC numbers (KC = 6-10), some of the simulations became unstable, showing
a very chaotic behaviour when visualizing the results. This was seen to be caused by
boundary eﬀects. For the ﬁrst attempts at calculations, the tunnel domain was not
suﬃciently long.
After consulting with supervisors, it was decided to increase the
domain to extent 20 structure diameters from the structure in each direction. For
structures with large spacing between cylinders, i.e. d/D = 2, the domain size of the
structure with spacing d/D = 1 is however used. This is considered to be suﬃcient
due to the assumption that for this spacing the cylinders do not act entirely as a whole
structure.
In the calculations no-slip conditions are employed at the sides of the tunnel. This is
done using ﬁxed zero velocity, zero pressure gradient and wall functions for k and ω.
In order for the wall functions to be valid the center of the ﬁrst cell adjacent to the
wall should be in the logarithmic layer, i.e. have y+ between approximately 30 and
300. This is attended to in the mesh generation. y+ is calculated assuming a friction
factor of f = 0.005. The correct cell size is only implemented in the part of the mesh
that is near the structure, i.e. in the original 7x21 m domain. This is because this is
the area where a boundary layer may inﬂuence the ﬂow around and thereby forces on
the structure.
127
==PAGE:142==
==PAGE:143==
D
Results for force coeﬃcients
1 cylinder
Table D.1: Drag coeﬃcient CD and inertia coeﬃcient CM for single cylinder placed
in moonpool.
KC
CD
CM
0.1
11.4
2.89
1
4.70
2.90
2
4.52
3.14
6
2.46
3.54
10
1.88
3.68
129
==PAGE:144==
D Results for force coefficients
1 by 2 cylinders
Table D.2: Drag coeﬃcient CD and inertia coeﬃcient CM for 1 by 2 cylinders.
D
dx/D
KC
CD
CM
Cyl 1
Cyl 2
Cyl 1
Cyl 2
1
0.5
0.1
12.6
12.6
3.47
3.47
1
6.86
6.86
3.49
3.49
2
5.79
5.80
3.67
3.67
6
3.76
3.72
4.01
4.00
10
3.47
3.42
4.17
4.20
1
1
0.1
12.1
12.1
3.26
3.26
1
6.36
6.36
3.28
3.28
2
6.05
6.07
3.57
3.56
6
3.56
3.60
3.97
3.97
10
2.84
2.97
3.58
3.68
1
2
0.1
11.7
11.7
3.13
3.13
1
5.83
5.83
3.14
3.14
2
5.67
5.65
3.49
3.48
6
3.11
3.07
4.02
3.94
10
2.89
2.79
3.64
3.77
0.5
1
0.1
26.8
26.8
3.19
3.19
1
4.97
4.97
3.18
3.18
2
5.97
5.96
3.41
3.41
6
3.10
3.14
3.85
3.87
10
2.37
2.50
3.95
3.74
0.75
1
0.1
20.6
20.6
3.19
3.19
1
5.33
5.33
3.18
3.18
2
5.92
5.86
3.47
3.47
6
3.26
3.27
3.94
3.80
10
2.72
2.50
3.63
3.75
130
==PAGE:145==
D Results for force coefficients
1 by 3 cylinders
Table D.3: Drag coeﬃcient CD and inertia coeﬃcient CM for 1 by 3 cylinders.
D
dx/D
KC
CD
CM
Cyl 1
Cyl 2
Cyl 3
Cyl 1
Cyl 2
Cyl 3
1
0.5
0.1
14.3
15.1
14.3
3.87
4.19
3.87
1
9.30
10.3
9.30
3.90
4.21
3.90
2
8.09
9.43
8.58
4.15
4.59
4.20
6
5.65
6.42
5.51
4.54
5.55
4.42
10
5.02
5.83
5.15
4.95
5.53
4.73
1
1
0.1
13.1
14.3
13.1
3.57
3.69
3.57
1
8.28
8.78
8.28
3.60
3.73
3.60
2
7.61
8.53
7.61
3.95
4.23
3.95
6
4.75
5.61
4.74
4.10
4.82
4.16
10
4.48
4.68
4.14
3.91
4.20
3.65
0.5
1
0.1
26.8
26.0
26.8
3.31
3.49
3.31
1
5.47
5.99
5.47
3.30
3.48
3.30
2
6.59
7.20
6.58
3.57
3.79
3.57
6
3.43
4.38
3.40
3.94
4.40
4.02
10
2.75
3.43
2.86
3.77
4.09
3.92
0.75
1
0.1
20.7
21.8
20.7
3.37
3.54
3.37
1
6.23
6.88
6.23
3.36
3.53
3.36
2
6.74
7.36
6.82
3.67
3.87
3.66
6
3.93
4.58
4.29
4.04
4.58
4.29
10
3.29
4.16
3.34
3.98
4.46
3.93
131
==PAGE:146==
D Results for force coefficients
2 by 1 cylinders
Table D.4: Drag coeﬃcient CD and inertia coeﬃcient CM for 2 by 1 cylinders.
D
dy/D
KC
CD
CM
Cyl 1
Cyl 2
Cyl 1
Cyl 2
1
0.5
0.1
6.89
6.90
2.52
2.52
1
2.88
2.87
2.53
2.53
2
3.00
2.79
2.76
2.65
6
1.53
1.70
2.94
2.92
10
1.33
1.23
2.89
2.92
1
1
0.1
8.26
8.27
2.69
2.69
1
3.60
3.60
2.69
2.69
2
3.81
3.77
2.88
2.90
6
1.92
1.96
3.33
3.32
10
1.52
1.54
3.29
3.25
1
2
0.1
10.1
10.1
2.83
2.83
1
4.31
4.31
2.83
2.83
2
4.41
4.41
3.14
3.14
6
2.36
2.39
3.44
3.49
10
1.94
1.91
3.52
3.49
132
==PAGE:147==
D Results for force coefficients
3 by 1 cylinders
Table D.5: Drag coeﬃcient CD and inertia coeﬃcient CM for 3 by 1 cylinders.
D
dy/D
KC
CD
CM
Cyl 1
Cyl 2
Cyl 3
Cyl 1
Cyl 2
Cyl 3
1
0.5
0.1
6.91
2.48
6.92
2.5
2.16
2.5
1
2.86
1.19
2.86
2.5
2.16
2.5
2
2.84
1.05
2.61
2.68
2.31
2.59
6
1.41
0.71
1.4
3.04
2.2
2.97
10
1.33
0.1
1.38
2.96
2.22
2.9
1
1
0.1
8.25
5.14
8.25
2.68
2.49
2.68
1
3.57
2.54
3.57
2.68
2.49
2.68
2
3.81
2.89
3.79
2.89
2.65
2.89
6
1.98
1.46
1.98
3.26
3.13
3.28
10
1.52
0.786
1.45
3.49
2.79
3.55
1
2
0.1
10.1
8.75
10.1
2.82
2.76
2.82
1
4.3
3.92
4.3
2.83
2.76
2.83
2
4.4
4.04
4.4
3.14
3.05
3.14
6
2.44
2.24
2.51
3.38
3.59
3.32
10
2.14
1.95
2.01
3.53
3.65
3.49
133
==PAGE:148==
D Results for force coefficients
2 by 2 cylinders
Basic cases
Table D.6: Force coeﬃcients CD and CM for each cylinder in the basic 2x2 conﬁgu-
rations.
D
d/D
KC
CD
CM
Cyl 1
Cyl 2
Cyl 3
Cyl 4
Cyl 1
Cyl 2
Cyl 3
Cyl 4
1
0.5
0.1
7.95
7.95
7.99
7.99
3.05
3.05
3.05
3.05
1
4.18
4.18
4.18
4.18
3.06
3.06
3.06
3.06
2
3.90
3.93
3.99
3.99
3.28
3.29
3.27
3.27
6
2.03
2.33
2.39
2.08
3.65
3.46
3.36
3.61
10
2.01
1.86
1.78
1.95
3.62
3.59
3.43
3.80
1
1
0.1
9.15
9.15
9.17
9.17
3.08
3.08
3.08
3.08
1
5.19
5.19
5.19
5.19
3.09
3.09
3.09
3.09
2
5.12
5.12
4.84
4.85
3.34
3.34
3.29
3.29
6
2.78
2.68
2.76
2.83
3.73
3.75
3.71
3.66
10
2.09
2.09
2.17
2.13
3.95
3.95
3.84
3.81
1
2
0.1
10.8
10.8
10.8
10.8
3.10
3.10
3.10
3.10
1
5.64
5.64
5.64
5.64
3.12
3.12
3.12
3.12
2
5.61
5.59
5.60
5.57
3.45
3.46
3.46
3.46
6
3.26
3.21
3.38
3.37
3.69
3.73
3.38
3.67
10
2.76
2.84
2.82
2.77
3.90
3.83
3.85
4.07
0.5
1
0.1
17.1
17.1
17.2
17.2
2.92
2.92
2.92
2.92
1
3.74
3.74
3.74
3.74
2.91
2.91
2.91
2.91
2
4.67
4.67
4.22
4.22
3.06
3.06
3.05
3.05
6
2.20
2.32
2.11
2.46
3.13
3.45
3.20
3.37
10
1.71
1.73
1.70
1.72
3.51
3.49
3.44
3.50
0.75
1
0.1
14.2
14.2
14.2
14.2
2.97
2.97
2.97
2.97
1
4.20
4.20
4.20
4.20
2.96
2.96
2.96
2.96
2
5.11
5.17
4.44
4.53
3.20
3.10
3.16
3.18
6
2.43
2.52
2.48
2.51
3.36
3.50
3.50
3.63
10
1.94
1.97
1.85
1.82
3.63
3.61
3.71
3.63
134
==PAGE:149==
D Results for force coefficients
Additional cases
Table D.7: Force coeﬃcients CD and CM for each cylinder in the additional 2x2
conﬁgurations.
D
d/D
KC
α
CD
CM
Cyl 1
Cyl 2
Cyl 3
Cyl 4
Cyl 1
Cyl 2
Cyl 3
Cyl 4
1
1
0.5
0.1
10.0
11.0
11.1
10.1
3.13
3.33
3.33
3.13
1
5.82
6.80
6.80
5.82
3.15
3.35
3.35
3.15
2
5.51
6.16
6.24
5.47
3.41
3.62
3.64
3.41
6
3.65
3.79
3.89
3.27
3.76
3.95
4.04
3.56
10
3.25
3.81
3.87
3.26
4.14
3.83
3.80
4.10
1
1
0.75
0.1
9.30
9.46
9.48
9.33
3.08
3.13
3.13
3.08
1
5.29
5.42
5.43
5.29
3.09
3.15
3.15
3.09
2
4.79
5.19
5.26
4.87
3.30
3.39
3.39
3.29
6
3.27
2.71
2.80
3.30
3.48
3.99
3.93
3.39
10
2.52
2.56
2.60
2.58
3.77
3.91
3.81
3.86
135
==PAGE:150==
D Results for force coefficients
3 by 3 cylinders
Basic cases
Table D.8: Drag coeﬃcient CD for each cylinder in the basic 3x3 conﬁgurations.
*Value for cylinder 3 disappeared in calculations. Cylinder 3 taken to have same value as cylinder 1.
D
d/D
KC
Cyl 1
Cyl 2
Cyl 3
Cyl 4
Cyl 5
Cyl 6
Cyl 7
Cyl 8
Cyl 9
1
0.5
0.1
9.62
9.78
9.62
5.45
5.87
5.45
9.65
9.84
9.65
1
5.95
6.28
5.95
3.43
3.70
3.43
5.96
6.28
5.96
2
5.17
5.68
5.57
3.41
3.35
3.54
5.66
5.64
5.33
6
3.29
3.43
3.25
0.58
0.85
0.15
3.24
3.55
3.66
10
2.91
2.92
*2.91
-0.03
0.24
-0.03
2.93
3.06
2.79
1
1
0.1
10.9
11.5
10.9
8.64
8.78
8.64
10.9
11.5
10.9
1
7.47
7.68
7.47
6.69
6.85
6.69
7.47
7.68
7.47
2
7.53
7.25
7.34
6.65
6.71
6.50
7.54
7.21
7.34
6
3.57
3.95
4.16
3.08
3.16
3.09
3.76
3.99
3.51
10
2.86
2.70
2.83
1.61
1.44
1.82
2.99
2.79
3.03
0.5
1
0.1
17.1
15.9
17.1
8.67
7.47
8.67
17.2
16.0
17.2
1
4.10
4.35
4.10
3.16
3.51
3.16
4.09
4.34
4.09
2
5.21
5.48
5.06
3.53
4.38
3.98
4.93
5.28
4.70
6
2.50
2.92
2.37
1.99
2.16
1.78
2.32
2.89
2.40
10
1.85
2.03
1.84
1.14
1.22
1.09
1.87
2.01
1.89
0.75
1
0.1
14.7
14.9
14.7
9.18
8.89
9.18
14.8
15.0
14.8
1
5.10
5.40
5.10
4.17
4.63
4.17
5.09
5.40
5.09
2
6.01
6.27
5.91
4.92
5.57
5.09
5.91
5.90
5.94
6
3.05
3.37
2.80
2.15
2.34
2.30
2.78
3.33
2.93
10
2.33
2.36
2.12
1.19
1.29
1.17
2.19
2.30
2.33
136
==PAGE:151==
D Results for force coefficients
Table D.9: Inertia coeﬃcient CM for each cylinder in the basic 3x3 conﬁgurations.
D
d/D
KC
Cyl 1
Cyl 2
Cyl 3
Cyl 4
Cyl 5
Cyl 6
Cyl 7
Cyl 8
Cyl 9
1
0.5
0.1
3.48
3.63
3.48
3.19
3.36
3.19
3.48
3.63
3.48
1
3.51
3.64
3.51
3.21
3.39
3.21
3.51
3.65
3.51
2
3.68
3.94
3.75
3.61
3.76
3.60
3.77
3.97
3.73
6
4.26
4.34
3.97
3.45
3.90
3.47
4.15
4.35
4.05
10
3.88
4.27
3.88
3.90
4.03
3.93
3.83
4.40
3.80
1
1
0.1
3.49
3.56
3.49
3.42
3.46
3.42
3.49
3.56
3.49
1
3.52
3.59
3.52
3.44
3.49
3.44
3.52
3.59
3.52
2
3.90
3.88
3.86
3.76
3.75
3.76
3.90
3.91
3.85
6
3.98
4.52
4.21
4.20
4.24
4.29
4.06
4.44
4.05
10
4.10
4.23
4.07
4.63
5.11
4.33
4.16
4.29
4.19
0.5
1
0.1
3.02
3.13
3.02
2.85
2.97
2.85
3.02
3.13
3.02
1
3.01
3.12
3.01
2.85
2.96
2.85
3.01
3.12
3.01
2
3.18
3.29
3.18
2.97
3.10
2.95
3.19
3.31
3.18
6
3.67
3.79
3.37
3.10
3.42
3.02
3.42
3.75
3.59
10
3.56
3.76
3.49
3.41
3.36
3.41
3.53
3.93
3.59
0.75
1
0.1
3.19
3.28
3.19
3.05
3.15
3.05
3.19
3.28
3.19
1
3.18
3.27
3.18
3.04
3.13
3.04
3.18
3.27
3.18
2
3.44
3.56
3.42
3.28
3.38
3.29
3.43
3.54
3.44
6
3.77
4.01
3.50
3.43
3.66
3.43
3.57
3.99
3.82
10
3.61
4.08
3.74
3.79
3.55
3.91
3.86
4.16
3.61
137
==PAGE:152==
D Results for force coefficients
Additional cases
Table D.10: Drag coeﬃcient CD for each cylinder in the additional 3x3 conﬁgura-
tions. All have D = 1 m.
D
dx/D
dy/D
α
KC
Cyl 1
Cyl 2
Cyl 3
Cyl 4
Cyl 5
Cyl 6
Cyl 7
Cyl 8
Cyl 9
1
1
1
0.5
0.1
11.2
12.6
13.7
9.90
10.0
9.90
13.7
12.6
11.2
1
7.44
8.67
9.85
7.67
7.80
7.68
9.85
8.67
7.44
2
6.75
7.68
9.58
7.53
7.69
7.62
9.48
8.02
6.66
6
4.80
5.55
6.08
4.07
4.42
4.23
6.35
5.77
4.88
10
4.56
5.49
6.16
5.19
5.97
5.34
6.19
5.40
4.44
1
1
1
0.75
0.1
10.8
11.6
11.3
8.80
8.90
8.80
11.3
11.6
10.8
1
7.28
7.77
7.90
6.82
7.01
6.82
7.89
7.77
7.28
2
6.73
7.26
6.76
5.92
6.45
5.92
6.86
7.39
6.89
6
3.79
4.52
4.49
3.12
3.33
3.15
4.55
4.64
3.90
10
3.33
3.28
3.67
2.03
1.67
1.88
3.67
3.27
3.21
1
0.5
1
1
0.1
11.3
11.4
11.3
8.58
8.43
8.58
11.3
11.4
11.3
1
7.65
8.05
7.65
6.40
6.52
6.40
7.64
8.05
7.64
2
7.42
7.45
7.24
5.38
5.47
6.54
6.23
6.84
7.25
6
3.66
3.92
4.02
2.71
2.88
2.80
3.88
3.72
3.69
10
3.16
3.72
3.30
1.54
1.82
1.66
3.18
3.79
3.23
1
0.5
2
1
0.1
13.1
13.3
13.1
11.9
11.6
11.9
13.1
13.3
13.1
1
8.79
9.30
8.79
8.37
8.47
8.37
8.79
9.30
8.79
2
8.35
8.93
8.37
8.27
8.44
8.25
8.17
8.74
8.17
6
5.39
5.62
5.40
5.12
4.77
5.30
5.26
5.72
5.30
10
5.06
5.23
5.06
4.66
5.23
4.68
5.12
5.39
4.94
0.5
3.5
3.5
1
0.1
8.15
9.13
8.15
7.65
8.28
7.63
8.15
9.13
8.15
1
3.96
3.99
3.96
3.94
3.95
3.94
3.96
3.99
3.96
2
3.33
3.28
3.34
3.28
3.24
3.29
3.32
3.26
3.32
6
2.38
2.53
2.38
2.53
2.83
2.74
2.45
2.54
2.51
0.75
1.8
1.8
1
0.1
9.44
10.3
9.44
8.34
8.68
8.34
9.43
10.3
9.43
1
5.56
5.65
5.56
5.40
5.46
5.41
5.56
5.65
5.56
2
5.16
5.31
5.10
5.24
5.24
5.31
5.15
5.29
5.21
6
3.27
3.38
3.29
3.29
3.37
3.31
3.21
3.38
3.25
138
==PAGE:153==
D Results for force coefficients
Table D.11: Inertia coeﬃcient CM for each cylinder in the additional 3x3 conﬁgu-
rations.
D
dx/D
dy/D
α
KC
Cyl 1
Cyl 2
Cyl 3
Cyl 4
Cyl 5
Cyl 6
Cyl 7
Cyl 8
Cyl 9
1
1
1
0.5
0.1
3.42
3.67
3.92
3.53
3.58
3.53
3.92
3.67
3.42
1
3.44
3.69
3.94
3.55
3.60
3.55
3.94
3.70
3.44
2
3.70
4.02
4.42
3.83
3.81
3.87
4.47
4.06
3.69
6
3.86
3.95
4.23
3.82
3.38
3.84
4.31
4.18
3.93
10
3.25
3.41
3.46
3.06
3.35
3.16
3.71
3.57
3.70
1
1
1
0.75
0.1
3.44
3.57
3.58
3.43
3.48
3.43
3.58
3.57
3.44
1
3.47
3.60
3.61
3.45
3.50
3.45
3.61
3.60
3.47
2
3.72
3.89
3.96
3.79
3.77
3.79
3.97
3.90
3.73
6
3.93
4.40
4.41
4.34
4.36
4.27
4.47
4.48
3.92
10
4.08
4.11
4.25
4.48
4.66
4.52
4.24
4.10
4.10
1
0.5
1
1
0.1
3.67
3.85
3.67
3.52
3.64
3.52
3.67
3.85
3.67
1
3.70
3.87
3.70
3.54
3.65
3.54
3.70
3.87
3.70
2
3.97
4.15
4.00
3.88
3.93
3.83
3.90
4.14
3.91
6
4.08
4.41
4.25
3.66
3.88
3.78
4.31
4.33
4.20
10
4.34
5.18
4.48
4.95
4.29
4.53
4.45
5.28
4.50
1
0.5
2
1
0.1
3.81
4.05
3.81
3.75
3.92
3.75
3.81
4.05
3.81
1
3.84
4.07
3.84
3.78
3.95
3.78
3.84
4.07
3.84
2
4.12
4.50
4.12
4.10
4.38
4.10
4.11
4.49
4.11
6
4.44
4.83
4.43
4.44
4.32
4.51
4.44
4.95
4.32
10
4.71
5.35
4.64
5.10
5.02
4.98
5.02
5.43
4.73
0.5
3.5
3.5
1
0.1
3.04
3.04
3.04
3.04
3.04
3.04
3.04
3.04
3.04
1
3.10
3.10
3.10
3.10
3.10
3.10
3.10
3.10
3.10
2
3.60
3.66
3.59
3.57
3.66
3.57
3.60
3.66
3.60
6
3.54
3.42
3.46
3.47
3.39
3.30
3.37
3.37
3.35
0.75
1.8
1.8
1
0.1
3.20
3.23
3.20
3.18
3.20
3.18
3.20
3.23
3.20
1
3.24
3.26
3.24
3.22
3.23
3.22
3.24
3.26
3.24
2
3.58
3.69
3.57
3.51
3.57
3.50
3.59
3.71
3.61
6
3.92
4.11
3.94
4.15
4.12
4.19
4.03
4.09
4.00
139
==PAGE:154==
D Results for force coefficients
Mixed set-up
Table D.12: Drag coeﬃcient CD for each cylinder in the mixed set-up.
KC
Cyl 1
Cyl 2
Cyl 3
Cyl 4
Cyl 5
0.1
24.4
15.8
15.8
15.9
15.9
1
20.9
10.8
10.8
10.8
10.8
2
20.8
9.50
9.50
9.40
9.40
6
19.0
10.3
7.60
10.0
7.50
10
16.4
9.40
9.80
9.70
9.80
Table D.13: Inertia coeﬃcient CM for each cylinder in the mixed set-up.
KC
Cyl 1
Cyl 2
Cyl 3
Cyl 4
Cyl 5
0.1
3.83
3.75
3.75
3.75
3.75
1
3.55
3.57
3.57
3.57
3.57
2
3.83
3.75
3.76
3.78
3.77
6
5.07
3.51
3.89
3.49
4.40
10
5.79
4.52
3.42
3.78
3.90
140
==PAGE:155==
E
OpenFOAM set-up
Example of computational domain
An example of a computational domain with a single square cylinder and one reﬁne-
ment area is shown in Figure E.1. Graded mesh size is used with cell sizes increasing in
the ﬂow direction toward the ends of the domain in order to save computational time.
This can be done because no signiﬁcant disturbances are expected in the oscillatory
ﬂow near the boundaries.
Figure E.1: Example of computational domain.
The grid size used for the calculations in this project are determined based on the re-
quirement for ﬁrst cell size away from the wall, described in 3.1.3. The grid reﬁnements
used for each KC number related to a single cylinder are shown in Table E.1.
141
==PAGE:156==
E OpenFOAM set-up
Table E.1: Finest grid size used for each KC.
KC
0.1
1
2
6
10
Cells/m
16
16
48
96
96
Solution schemes
/∗−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−∗−C++ −∗−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−∗\
| =========
|
|
|
\\
/
F i e l d
| OpenFOAM: The Open Source CFD Toolbox
|
|
\\
/
O peration
|
Version :
2 . 2 . 2
|
|
\\
/
A nd
| Web:
www.OpenFOAM. org
|
|
\\/
M anipulation
|
|
\∗−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−∗/
FoamFile
{
version
2 . 0 ;
format
a s c i i ;
c l a s s
dictionary ;
l o c a ti on
”system ”;
object
fvSolution ;
}
// ∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗
//
s o l v e r s
{
p
{
s o l v e r
GAMG;
tolerance
1e −6;
relTol
0 . 0 ;
smoother
GaussSeidel ;
nPreSweeps
1;
nPostSweeps
1;
cacheAgglomeration on ;
agglomerator
faceAreaPair ;
nCellsInCoarsestLevel
10;
mergeLevels
1;
}
pFinal
{
s o l v e r
GAMG;
tolerance
1e −6;
relTol
0 . 0 ;
smoother
GaussSeidel ;
nPreSweeps
1;
nPostSweeps
1;
cacheAgglomeration on ;
agglomerator
faceAreaPair ;
nCellsInCoarsestLevel
10;
mergeLevels
1;
142
==PAGE:157==
E OpenFOAM set-up
}
/∗
p
{
s o l v e r
PCG;
preconditioner
DIC;
tolerance
1e −06;
relTol
0 . 0 5 ;
}
pFinal
{
s o l v e r
PCG;
preconditioner
DIC;
tolerance
1e −06;
relTol
0;
}
∗/
”(U| k | omega)”
{
s o l v e r
PBiCG;
preconditioner
DILU;
tolerance
1e −06;
relTol
0;
}
”(U| k | omega) Final ”
{
$U;
tolerance
1e −06;
relTol
0;
}
/∗
ep sil on
{
s o l v e r
PBiCG;
preconditioner
DILU;
tolerance
1e −05;
relTol
0;
}
epsilonFinal
{
s o l v e r PBiCG;
preconditioner
DILU;
tolerance
1e −05;
relTol
0;
}
∗/
}
PIMPLE
{
momentumPredictor yes ;
nOuterCorrectors
1;
nCorrectors
3;
143
==PAGE:158==
E OpenFOAM set-up
nNonOrthogonalCorrectors
1;
pRefCell
0;
pRefValue
0;
}
// ∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗//
144
==PAGE:159==
F
Investigation of 2x1 in-line force
Figure F.1: Case 2x1 with dy/D = 0.5. Velocity and pressure ﬁeld around cylinders
at t = 131 s.
145
==PAGE:160==
F Investigation of 2x1 in-line force
Figure F.2: Case 2x1 with dy/D = 2. Velocity and pressure ﬁeld around cylinders
at t = 131 s.
146
==PAGE:161==
F Investigation of 2x1 in-line force
Figure F.3: Case 2x1 with dy/D = 0.5. Velocity and pressure ﬁeld around cylinders
at t = 134.6 s.
147
==PAGE:162==
F Investigation of 2x1 in-line force
Figure F.4: Case 2x1 with dy/D = 2. Velocity and pressure ﬁeld around cylinders
at t = 134.6 s.
148
==PAGE:163==
==PAGE:164==
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Section of Fluid Mechanics, Coastal and Maritime Engineering
Technical University of Denmark 
Nils Koppels Allé, Bld. 403
DK- 2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
Denmark
Phone (+45) 4525 1360
Fax  (+45) 4588 4325
www.mek.dtu.dk
