==PAGE:1==
Multi-Agent Systems and
Logic Programming
Andreas Viktor Hess
Kongens Lyngby 2015
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
The goal of this thesis is to develop a framework, named Visual Prolog Agent
Framework (ViPAF), for multi-agent programming in Visual Prolog inspired
by existing languages and frameworks for multi-agent systems development.
This framework includes functionality for developing multi-threaded intelligent
social agents using a logic programming implementation of the Belief-Desire-
Intention agent architecture. Agent environments and basic support for agent
organizational concepts are also part of ViPAF, such that the framework provides
support for abstractions on multiple levels of multi-agent programming.
To demonstrate the utility of ViPAF, a multi-agent system for the new Multi-
Agent Programming Contest 2015 has been developed. This multi-agent system
is tested against itself in the current beta version of the contest, and through this
demonstration it is shown that it is possible to develop a multi-agent system,
using the abstractions provided by ViPAF, that is capable of competing in a
non-trivial competition.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Summary (Danish)
Målet for denne afhandling er at udvikle et framework, navngivet Visual Prolog
Agent Framework (ViPAF), for multi-agent programmering i Visual Prolog
der er inspireret af eksisterende programmeringssprog og frameworks for multi-
agent systems udvikling.
Dette framework inkluderer funktionalitet til at udvikle multi-trådede intelli-
gente sociale agenter ved hjælp af en logik-programmerings implementering af
Belief-Desire-Intention agent arkitekturen. Agent miljøer og grundlæggende un-
derstøttelse af agent organisationelle koncepter er også en del af ViPAF, sådan
at ﬂere niveauer af multi-agent programmering er understøttet.
For at demonstrere brugbarheden af ViPAF, er et multi-agent system for det
nye Multi-Agent Programming Contest 2015 blevet udviklet. Dette multi-agent
system er testet mod sig selv i den nuværende beta version af konkurrencen, og
gennem denne demonstration er det vist at det er muligt at udvikle et multi-
agent system, ved brug af abstraktionerne i ViPAF, som er i stand til at konkur-
rere i en ikke-trivielt konkurrence.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fulﬁllment of the requirements
for acquiring an M.Sc. in Engineering.
The thesis deals with designing and implementing a framework for multi-agent
systems development in the object-oriented logic programming language Visual
Prolog in cooperation with Prolog Development Center A/S.
The project has spanned the period from 31 March 2015 to 31 August 2015
corresponding to 30 ECTS with Jørgen Villadsen as supervisor.
It is expected that the reader is familiar with the Prolog logic programming
language.
Lyngby, 31-August-2015
Andreas Viktor Hess
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor Jørgen Villadsen from DTU for support
and guidance throughout the project, Koen Hindriks from TU Delft for meetings
during my stay abroad at TU Delft and Goal in general, and Jürgen Dix’s group
at TU Clausthal for creating the Multi-Agent Programming Contest which I
have used during my B.Sc. project, this M.Sc. thesis, and courses throughout
my studies.
I would also like to thank Finn Grønskov, Leo Schou-Jensen, Thomas Linder
Puls, John Bruntse Larsen, Hans Dybkjær, Johannes S. Spurkeland, and Henrik
Pilegaard from Prolog Development Center A/S for comments and help with
Visual Prolog.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Summary (Danish)
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
Multi-Agent Systems
3
2.1
Intelligent Agents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Agent Communication & Organizations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Belief-Desire-Intention Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Visual Prolog
13
3.1
Object-Oriented Concepts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Domains & Facts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
Support Pattern
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.4
Monitors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.5
Examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4
Multi-Agent Programming
21
4.1
Agent-Oriented Programming Languages . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.1.1
The Go! Language . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.1.2
The Goal Language . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.1.3
The Jason Language
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2
Environment Programming
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.3
Organizational Modeling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5
Visual Prolog Agent Framework (ViPAF)
35
5.1
MAS Execution Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.2
Representing MAS Concepts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
==PAGE:12==
x
CONTENTS
5.3
MAS Programming Implementation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.4
Implementing Messaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.5
BDI Reasoning Cycle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.5.1
Event Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.5.2
Option Ordering & Selection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.5.3
Plan Execution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.6
Environment Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.7
Organization Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.7.1
Norm Compliance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
6
Test Case: MAPC 2015
59
6.1
Scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
6.2
Developed MAS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
6.2.1
Goals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
6.2.2
Organizational Roles & Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
6.2.3
Plans
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
6.3
Test Setup & Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
7
Discussion
71
7.1
The MAPC 2015 Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
7.2
Potential Interface Misuse . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
7.3
Concurrency Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
7.4
Agent Messaging System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
7.5
Norm Speciﬁcation & Enforcement Limitations . . . . . . . . . .
74
7.6
BDI Implementation Reactiveness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
7.7
Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
8
Conclusion
77
A Framework Code Listings
79
A.1 Framework Interfaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
A.2 Basic Environment Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
A.3 Basic Organization Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
A.4 BDI Agent Implementation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
A.5 Additional Classes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
B MAS Examples Code Listings
99
B.1
Blocks World Example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
B.2
Domestic Robot Example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
C MAPC 2015 MAS Code Listings
111
Bibliography
141
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Agents are, to some extent, autonomous systems situated in an environment.
They perceive and act autonomously to change the state of their environment
and further their design objectives.
Intelligent agents furthermore react to
changes in their environment while being proactive through goal-directed be-
havior and social through communication. A multi-agent system (MAS) con-
sists of multiple interacting agents that are situated in the same environment
and actively communicate and organize to coordinate, compete, or achieve com-
mon goals. Thus intelligent agent and MAS tools are well-suited for modeling
complex distributed systems such as systems for travel management decision
support [VPWa] or autonomous systems that must be able to handle potential
failures such as space probes [Woo13, chapter 1].
The Visual Prolog programming language is a strongly typed, object-oriented,
logic programming language based on Prolog. Currently it has no support
for agent-oriented programming and multi-agent development. In this thesis a
framework for multi-agent systems development, named Visual Prolog Agent
Framework (ViPAF), has been designed and implemented in Visual Prolog.
There exist three diﬀerent levels of multi-agent programming; the agent level,
the environment level, and the social level. At the agent level ViPAF provides
a logic programming implementation of the Belief-Desire-Intention (BDI) agent
architecture, which is inspired by existing BDI languages such as Goal [Hin09]
and Jason [BHW07]. This enables development of intelligent social agents by
providing a plan library to accomplish means-end reasoning and deliberation as
required by the BDI model. At the environment level ViPAF provides means for
agents to connect to entities, perceive the environment, and execute actions. At
==PAGE:14==
2
Introduction
the social level, basic support for agent organizational concepts, such as roles,
norms, and objectives, is provided.
To demonstrate the utility of the framework, an MAS for the new Multi-Agent
Programming Contest (MAPC) 2015 [map] has been developed. This contest
provides an environment in which two teams of agents control vehicles that move
through the streets of a realistic city. These teams compete to complete jobs
by buying, assembling, transporting, and delivering items at diﬀerent facilities
spread throughout the map. The developed MAS has been tested against itself
in the current beta version of the contest, and through this demonstration it is
shown that it is possible to develop an MAS, using the abstractions provided
by ViPAF, that is capable of competing in a non-trivial competition.
The report is structured as follows:
• The second chapter introduces intelligent agents, MAS, agent commu-
nication and organizations, and the Belief-Desire-Intention (BDI) agent
architecture.
• The third chapter introduces relevant concepts of Visual Prolog used
to develop the framework.
• The fourth chapter determines the functionality needed by an MAS frame-
work by comparing and analyzing existing programming languages and
tools for multi-agent programming using current books and research liter-
ature in the ﬁeld of MAS.
• The ﬁfth chapter analyses and presents how the framework can be, respec-
tively has been, implemented in Visual Prolog.
• The sixth chapter evaluates the framework using the newest beta version
of the MAPC 2015 as test case, with the goal of demonstrating the utility
of the framework by developing an MAS using the framework.
• The seventh chapter discusses the results of the testing and reﬂects on the
design of the framework.
• Finally, the eight chapter concludes the project.
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2
Multi-Agent Systems
This chapter provides the necessary theoretical background of multi-agent sys-
tems (MAS) needed for this thesis.
In the ﬁrst section the notion of an intelligent agent, agent environments, multi-
agent systems, and related concepts are introduced.
The second section introduces social aspects of agents such as agent communi-
cation and agent organizations.
The third section explains the Belief-Desire-Intention (BDI) agent architecture
which is commonly used as a model for programming intelligent agents.
2.1
Intelligent Agents
In [Woo13] an agent is deﬁned as follows:
An agent is a computer system that is situated in some environment,
and that is capable of autonomous action in this environment in
order to achieve its delegated objectives.
This deﬁnition of an agent is vague and encompasses a broad class of systems,
especially when environments need not be physical. For example, a software
==PAGE:16==
4
Multi-Agent Systems
environment
observation
effectors/
actuators
sensors
?
percepts
perception
decision
action
actions
Figure 2.1: An illustration of an agent in its environment. The agent takes
sensory input from the environment, and produces, as output,
actions that aﬀect it. The interaction is usually an outgoing, non-
terminating one. Figure from [Woo13, p. 5].
service that listens to changes to a ﬁle and responds by writing to some other ﬁle
is included in the above deﬁnition of an agent, even though it may not normally
be desirable to think of such software services as agents. It is therefore useful
to distinguish between agents and intelligent agents. Additional properties for
an agent to be considered intelligent are explained in [Woo13, p. 8]:
1. Proactiveness: Intelligent agents should be able to exhibit goal-directed
behavior by taking the initiative in order to satisfy their delegated objec-
tives.
2. Reactivity: Intelligent agents should be able to perceive their environment
and respond in a timely fashion to changes that occur in it in order to
satisfy their delegated objectives.
3. Social ability: Intelligent agents should be capable of interacting and co-
operating with other agents in order to satisfy their delegated objectives.
To diﬀerentiate between an agent’s own mental capabilities - such as beliefs,
goals, plans, etc. - and the embodiment of the agent in its environment, the
latter is referred to as the entity of the agent.
==PAGE:17==
2.1 Intelligent Agents
5
A number of diﬀerent properties to classify agent environments are explained
in [Woo13, p. 6]. Mainly, agent environments are often inaccessible (also called
partially observable), dynamic, and multi-agent. This means that most domains
where an agent could be situated are too complex or too restricted for the agent
to observe completely, and the agent should be able to act intelligently even
though the environment may change through events outside of the agent’s con-
trol. Environments may even be non-deterministic, meaning that there may be
uncertainty about the eﬀects of actions performed by an agent. An illustration
of an agent situated in an environment can be seen in Figure 2.1.
The information available to an agent through its sensors is referred to as per-
cepts, while an agent’s actions are the possible movements of its actuators that
the agent is able to perform to manipulate its environment. To prevent an agent
from performing impossible or illegal actions, and to update its mental model
after an action has been performed with the immediate eﬀects of the action on
its beliefs, an action schema [RN09, p. 367] can be used. Such a schema con-
sists of action rules, each of which consists of an action (the name of the action,
including any parameters the action may have), a set of preconditions (condi-
tions that must be met before the action can be executed), and a postcondition
(eﬀects of the action on the mental model of the agent).
An agent’s beliefs are statements that the agent assumes are correct about the
environment, itself, and other agents at a given moment. A more comprehensive
deﬁnition can be found in [BD13, p. 593]:
Beliefs are used to represent the information currently available to
the agent, regarding the current state of the agent itself and its envi-
ronment (including other agents sharing the same environment), as
well as any past information that the agent may need to recall. The
abstraction covering and agent’s informational state is termed belief
because in dynamic, unpredictable environments (as in most areas
of applications of multiagent systems) it is in general not possible
to ensure an agent will have complete and only correct information
about its environment.
In addition to beliefs another important characteristic of agents is that they
possess goals. A goal is said to be adopted if the agent intends to pursue it.
If for some reason an agent decides to no longer pursue a goal it can be said
to be dropped. The most common type of goal used in agent programming is
that of a declarative achievement goal [BD13, p. 594]. Such a goal denotes
a certain state of aﬀairs - therefore declarative - that the agent wishes to be
true. Declarative achievement goals can be pursued by agents through courses
==PAGE:18==
6
Multi-Agent Systems
of actions, i.e. plans, that should result in the achievement of the goal. Three
types of declarative goals are identiﬁed in [DVRM06]:
1. A perform goal generates a set of plans without demanding that the plans
must reach the state denoted by the goal. The attitude of an agent to-
ward a perform goal is thus to generate plans after which the goal will be
dropped.
2. An achieve goal denotes a state that the agent is supposed to reach. The
emphasis here is that the goal will not be dropped until the state denoted
by it is achieved. This is in contrast to perform goals which can be dropped
once the plans generated for it have been executed, regardless of whether
the perform goal was achieved.
3. With a maintain goal the agent is supposed to ensure that the state de-
noted by the goal holds and continues to hold. Plans should be generated
and executed if the state denoted by the maintain goal is threatened not to
hold, rather than waiting and taking action once the state does not hold.
A rational agent is deﬁned as an agent that acts so as to achieve the best
outcome, or at least the best expected outcome when there is uncertainty [RN09,
p. 4]. With regards to goals, it is important to ensure that an agent only adopts
and pursue goals that it believes can be accomplished or are otherwise beneﬁcial.
It is also important that an agent drops goals that have failed, i.e. that the agent
believes can no longer be accomplished and is not worth the eﬀort to continue
pursuing.
In a multi-agent system (MAS) several agents inhabit a shared environment.
They may e.g. cooperate, negotiate, and/or compete with each other to achieve
their goals. MASs are much more complex than single-agent systems as agents
must take into account that other agents can change the state of the environ-
ment. It also introduces a social aspect; agents in an MAS could potentially
communicate with each other to further their own or other’s desires. Further-
more, an MAS is inherently distributed; it is not necessary that agents are
executed on the same physical processor as they are independent of each other.
The illustration in Figure 2.2 gives an overview of an MAS. The bottom of the
ﬁgure illustrates the shared environment that the agents occupy. The agents
do not have complete knowledge of the state of the environment, only parts of
the environment that they are able to control or partially control through their
entities, as illustrated by the "spheres of inﬂuence". These spheres may overlap,
illustrating the situation where multiple agents may jointly control parts of the
environment, thereby complicating the objectives that each agent is trying to
accomplish.
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Agent Communication & Organizations
7
Figure 2.2: An illustration of a typical structure of a multi-agent system. The
ﬁgure depicts relationships between agents (e.g. organizations) and
the environment in addition to the overall system structure. In
addition, the agents may not be situated in the same place or have
the same view of the environment as illustrated by the spheres of
inﬂuence. Based on the ﬁgure from [BHW07, p. 6].
2.2
Agent Communication & Organizations
Agents in an MAS have the possibility of engaging in social interactions through
communication. Direct agent communication is commonly based on speech act
theory (also known as communicative act theory [CS13, p. 106]) using agent
communication languages such as KQML [FMF92] or FIPA-ACL [ON98]. In
this form of agent communication a ﬁxed number of specialized message types
are deﬁned as primitives that make up a common language for communication.
A message then consists of a performative verb - such as inform, request, query,
etc. - and the message contents itself.
To interpret the contents of a message, it is important for agents to share a com-
mon vocabulary or ontology. A deﬁnition of ontology [Hug14] is the following:
==PAGE:20==
8
Multi-Agent Systems
An ontology deﬁnes the basic terms and relations comprising the
vocabulary of a topic area as well as the rules for combining terms
and relations to deﬁne extensions to the vocabulary.
Agents in an MAS act independently and autonomously to achieve personal
goals. However, it can be beneﬁcial to coordinate and regulate the behavior of
the agents to aid in achieving common desired goals. Multi-agent organizations
can be used for these purposes.
Above the illustrated environment in Figure 2.2, the agents are partitioned into
groups representing organizational relationships between the agents. The agents
are part of organizations in which they play roles and communicate with other
agents to achieve organizational objectives.
Organizational approaches as presented in [DP13] can be partitioned into agent-
centric approaches and organization-centric approaches. In the former the or-
ganization emerge implicitly through communication and collaboration between
the agents while the latter provides an explicit representation of the organiza-
tion.
In the organization-centric approach, agents can enact roles and conform to cer-
tain norms in the organization. Norms are behavioral standards that the agents
ought to uphold. The roles are normally related through relations and include
objectives that the agents playing the roles are in charge of fulﬁlling. Agents
are free to decide whether they want to enact or leave roles in an organization,
but the organization can determine whether an agent is allowed to play a role
in the organization or not. Thus, an organization exists as a separate entity
that agents can participate in.
Furthermore, as agents are independent and
autonomous it may be the case that the organization can only validate whether
or not the participants comply with the norms through observing their external
behavior. Desired behavior of an organization should therefore be guaranteed
by the organizational structure.
2.3
Belief-Desire-Intention Architecture
One of the key problems facing an agent is that of deciding which of its actions
to perform in order to best satisfy its delegated objectives. Many diﬀerent ap-
proaches to building intelligent agents exist [Woo13, p. 13], such as logic-based
architectures and reactive architectures. However, the most popular approaches
in the MAS research community stem from Belief-Desire-Intention (BDI) archi-
tectures [Hin14b]:
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Belief-Desire-Intention Architecture
9
Algorithm 1 An algorithm for the BDI architecture from [Woo13]. It returns
an action if and only if there is any executable intentions in I.
1: function action(p)
2:
B ←brf (B, p)
3:
D ←options(B, I)
4:
I ←ﬁlter(B, D, I)
5:
return execute(I)
Another deﬁning notion in our ﬁeld of research has been the
notion of a Belief-Desire-Intention (BDI) agent. The notion of a
BDI agent is about the internal, cognitive structure of an agent that
consists, among others, of an agent’s beliefs and can be viewed as a
reﬁnement of a pro-active agent to an agent that has a motivational
state that consists of, e.g., desires, goals, and/or intentions. The idea
is that an agent aims at achieving something it wants and therefore
emphasises the rationality of agents instead of their autonomy.
In BDI architectures an agent is said to possess beliefs as explained previously,
desires which are objectives that the agent might like to fulﬁll, and intentions
which are objectives that the agent wants and intends to fulﬁll. Thus desires
can be thought of as the available options that the agent may want to pursue,
while intentions are goals among the available options that the agent has chosen
and, to some extent, committed to accomplish.
The process of deciding what action to perform to further one’s goals is named
practical reasoning and consists of two processes; deliberation and means-end
reasoning i.e. planning. That is, deciding, respectively, on what intention to
pursue and on how to achieve them.
An agent that does not reconsider its options suﬃciently often may try to achieve
intentions even after it is clear that the intentions cannot be achieved. However,
an agent that constantly reconsiders its intentions may actually spend an insuf-
ﬁcient amount of time working towards achieving any of its intentions. Thus it
is important to ﬁnd a balance between reactive and pro-active behavior.
BDI agents achieve practical reasoning through seven main components as seen
in Algorithm 1:
1. A set B ⊆Bel of current beliefs representing information about the agent’s
environment, etc.
2. A belief revision function (brf : 2Bel ×P →2Bel) that generates a new set
==PAGE:22==
10
Multi-Agent Systems
of beliefs from the agent’s current beliefs and a perceived external event
p ∈P.
3. An option generation function (options : 2Bel × 2Int →2Des), whose main
purpose is means-end reasoning, and which determines an agent’s desires
based on its current mental state.
4. A set D ⊆Des of current options representing possible courses of actions
available to the agent.
5. A ﬁlter function (ﬁlter : 2Bel × 2Des × 2Int →2Int) which represents the
agent’s deliberation process.
6. A set I ⊆Int of current intentions.
7. An action selection function (execute : 2Int →A) that selects and executes
executable intentions.
The above components are subject to some additional constraints [Woo13]:
• The three sets (B, D, I) comprising an agent’s mental state should have
a notion of consistency, such that it is possible to e.g. determine whether
an intention of achieving x is consistent with a belief y.
• The ﬁlter function should satisfy the following constraint: ∀B ∈2Bel, D ∈
2Des, I ∈2Int : ﬁlter(B, D, I) ⊆I ∪D. That is, the ﬁlter function should
not introduce new intentions. Additionally, it should drop intentions that
are no longer achievable or not expected to be worth the eﬀort to pursue.
Thirdly, it should retain intentions that are not achieved but still expected
to be beneﬁcial. Finally, it should adopt new intentions, either to achieve
current intentions or to exploit new opportunities.
• The options function should also satisfy a couple of constraints. First, the
options generated must be consistent with the agent’s current beliefs and
current intentions. Secondly, it must be opportunistic; it should recognize
when environmental circumstances change advantageously and then oﬀer
the agent new ways of achieving intentions. Additionally, as some of the
generated options will become intentions themselves which feedbacks into
the function, the function should continuously reﬁne intentions into more
speciﬁc options on how to actually achieve them until the intentions can
be directly executed as actions.
In the BDI algorithm Algorithm 1 planning happens by continual reﬁnement of
intentions until they can be directly executed. This, however, is not a prac-
tical solution for developing intelligent agents. Therefore, practical BDI agent
==PAGE:23==
2.3 Belief-Desire-Intention Architecture
11
architectures such as the Procedural Reasoning System (PRS) include a plan
library, which enables an agent to generate options using predeﬁned plans for
achieving intentions. In the PRS means-end reasoning is accomplished through
plans, while deliberation is achieved through the use of meta-level plans which
are able to modify an agent’s intention structure at run-time in order to change
the focus of the agent’s practical reasoning [Woo13, p. 35].
==PAGE:24==
12
Multi-Agent Systems
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 3
Visual Prolog
Visual Prolog is a strongly-typed multi-paradigm programming language.
It supports both logic programming and object-oriented programming styles.
However, in contrast to ordinary Prolog implementations Visual Prolog is
statically typed and compiled which prevents the construction of some ordinary
logic programming data objects such as terms containing unbound variables.
This chapter introduces concepts of Visual Prolog used to develop the multi-
agent framework ViPAF.
3.1
Object-Oriented Concepts
An empty class c1 in Visual Prolog residing in a class ﬁle c1.cl can be
deﬁned as follows:
1 class c1 : i1
2
open core
3 constructors
4
new : ().
5 end class c1
This class constructs objects of type i1 by calling the new constructor as speciﬁed
by the constructor type following the colon on the ﬁrst line. Specifying the new
constructor of arity zero is redundant as it is created by default, but it is shown
in the above example to illustrate the constructors section.
==PAGE:26==
14
Visual Prolog
The constructor types are speciﬁed using interfaces in .i ﬁles, e.g.:
1 interface i1
2
open core
3 predicates
4
x : ().
5
y : ().
6 end interface i1
where x and y are public functions - a special case of predicates - that classes
of this interface must implement. Static predicates can be deﬁned in classes in
class predicates sections
Classes are implemented in class implementation sections, which normally reside
in ﬁles with ﬁle extension .pro. These class implementations can inherit other
classes, thereby inheriting the functionality of the inherited class implementa-
tion, e.g.:
1 implement c1 inherits c2
2
open core
3 clauses
4
x() :- ...
5 end implement c1
where the clauses section contains the implementation of the x function. The
y function of i1 must in this case be provided by c2.
Interfaces can also inherit from other interfaces using the supports keyword,
e.g.:
1 interface i2 supports i3
2
open core
3 end interface i3
In addition to functions and predicates, interfaces can also provide properties.
These are speciﬁed in properties sections of an interface.
3.2
Domains & Facts
Domains [VPWa] are used to deﬁne types in Visual Prolog. Algebraic data
types are speciﬁed using compound domains in domains sections of Visual
Prolog programs. For example, a tree data structure of integers can be de-
ﬁned as tree = leaf ; node(integer Data, tree* Children) where tree*
denotes a list of tree.
==PAGE:27==
3.3 Support Pattern
15
Predicate domains, which are speciﬁed in predicates sections, declare predicate
names and their types. Predicates have associated modes and ﬂows that restrict
their application. Predicates with the procedure mode always succeed exactly
once; the multi mode succeeds at least once through backtracking; determ ei-
ther fails or succeeds once; and nondeterm either fails or succeeds at least once
through backtracking. Flows determine which arguments can be provided as
input and which are meant to be output. The procedure mode where all ar-
guments are input only is the default. For example, f:
(integer, integer)
nondeterm (i,o) (i,i) denotes a non-deterministic predicate where the ﬁrst
argument is always an input argument, while g :
(integer) -> integer de-
notes a function type from integers to integers.
Grounded terms can be stored as facts [VPWb] in a fact database.
Facts,
like predicates, have modes. The allowed modes are determ, nondeterm, and
single, where the last mode ensures that the fact always have exactly one value.
Facts can be declared in facts sections of the class implementation. These facts
can be queried, inserted using assert, asserta, or assertz, and removed using
retract, similarly to Prolog.
Types can also be parameterized [VPWc]. For example, tree = leaf ; node(
@Data Data, tree* Children) would be a generic tree parameterized by @Data.
3.3
Support Pattern
The support pattern [VPWe] is an object-oriented design pattern frequently used
in Visual Prolog. Its purpose is to implement target classes supporting a
common site interface using a support class to implement common functionality.
This is accomplished by;
1. inheriting functionality implemented in a support class, while
2. implementing the site functionality required by the support class to realize
the target interface.
For example, to implement a class c
1 class c : target
2
open core
3 end class c
constructing objects of the target type
==PAGE:28==
16
Visual Prolog
1 interface target
2
open core
3 predicates
4
x : ().
5 end interface target
a site interface can be deﬁned
1 interface site
2
open core
3 predicates
4
y : ().
5 end interface site
that can be used by a support class and objects
1 interface support
2
open core
3 predicates
4
z : ().
5 end interface support
6
7 class support : support
8
open core
9 constructors
10
new : (site Site).
11 end class support
12
13 implement support
14
open core
15 facts
16
siteFact : site.
17 clauses
18
new(Site) :- siteFact := Site.
19 clauses
20
z() :-
21
...
22
siteFact:y(), % Site functionality used to implement support predicates
23
...
24 end implement support
to provide support for implementing classes constructing target objects
1 implement c inherits support supports site
2
open core
3 clauses
4
new() :- support::new(This). % The c object is provided to the super class
during initialization
5 clauses
6
x() :-
7
...
==PAGE:29==
3.4 Monitors
17
8
z(), % The support predicate can be used to implement the target
predicate
9
...
10 clauses
11
y() :- ... % Class c must implement y from site
12 end implement c
Furthermore, in the special case that the support interface inherits from the
target interface, i.e. interface support supports target in the above ex-
ample, the example support implementation would implement the x predicate
instead. In this case, z could e.g. be used to implement y while y could be used
to implement x.
3.4
Monitors
A monitor [VPWd] is a language construct used to synchronize access to a
shared mutable resource between two or more threads.
If an interface is declared as a monitor interface then its exported predicates
are protected by locks such that at most one thread is allowed to execute a
predicate at a time. Thus if multiple threads request access to the monitor at
the same time then only one is granted access while the other threads wait.
Monitor predicates can be protected by guards which are deterministic predi-
cates that determine whether or not the associated predicate can be executed.
If the guard fails then the caller thread will wait until the guard succeeds. Other
threads can gain access to the monitor in the meantime. This guarantees that
the invariant speciﬁed by the guard is true when a thread gains access to the
associated predicate.
However, there are some restrictions to monitor interfaces; classes cannot inherit
from a class supporting a monitor interface and monitor interface predicates
cannot be non-deterministic.
This prevents the support pattern from being
used together with monitor support interfaces, as the site would not be able to
inherit from the support class.
==PAGE:30==
18
Visual Prolog
3.5
Examples
A simple, thread-safe, type parameterized stack, although not an asymptotically
optimal implementation, can be seen in Listing 1.
This stack uses monitor interfaces to synchronize access to its operations, thereby
making it thread-safe. The push procedure inserts the supplied element to the
top of the stack, by inserting the element into a fact database using asserta.
The pop procedure, which removes and returns the top element of the stack, is
guarded by a guard which guarantees that the stack is non-empty when pop-
ping. The deterministic tryPop predicate, however, simply fails if the stack is
empty.
The stack can then safely be used in multi-threaded applications, see e.g. List-
ing 2 where multiple threads pop the stack in parallel. The execution of the
program begins in the goal section, which in this example executes the run
procedure.
==PAGE:31==
3.5 Examples
19
Listing 1 An example of a thread-safe generic stack in Visual Prolog.
1
monitor interface collection{@Elem}
2
predicates
3
push : (@Elem).
4
pop : () -> @Elem.
5
tryPop : () -> @Elem determ.
6
end interface collection
7
8
% The stack class constructs objects of the collection interface
9
class stack{@Elem} : collection{@Elem}
10
end class stack
11
12
implement stack{@Elem}
13
facts
14
data : (@Elem) nondeterm. % The elements of the stack
15
16
clauses
17
push(Data) :- asserta(data(Data)).
18
19
clauses
20
% Fails when the stack is empty,
21
% otherwise returns the top element of the stack
22
tryPop() = X :- retract(data(X)), !.
23
24
clauses
25
% Stalls when the stack is empty until an element exists
26
pop guard { :- data(_), !}.
27
pop() = X :- X = tryPop(), !.
28
pop() = _ :-
29
% This should never be executed but it is necessary
30
% to fulfill the mode requirement of the predicate
31
exception::raise_error("Impossible").
32
end implement stack
==PAGE:32==
20
Visual Prolog
Listing 2 An example of a multi-threaded Visual Prolog program using the
thread-safe stack found in Listing 1
1
implement main
2
open core
3
4
domains
5
point = point(integer,integer).
6
7
class predicates
8
consumer : (integer, collection{point}).
9
10
clauses
11
run() :-
12
Stack = stack{point}::new(),
13
foreach X = std::between(1,10), Y = std::between(1,10) do
14
Stack:push(point(X,Y))
15
end foreach,
16
foreach I = std::between(1,5) do
17
_ = thread::start({:- consumer(I,Stack)})
18
end foreach,
19
programControl::sleep(5000).
20
21
clauses
22
consumer(I,Stack) :-
23
stdio::writef("Thread % got %\n",I,Stack:pop()),
24
consumer(I,Stack).
25
26
end implement main
27
28
goal
29
console::runUtf8(main::run).
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 4
Multi-Agent Programming
MASs provide high-level abstractions to model and develop complex distributed
systems. When developing MASs the development tools need to provide the
right means for the agent developer to successfully develop MASs. [BD13] and
the survey [Das14] identify and describe three important levels of programming
MASs. Each level provides speciﬁc abstractions that facilitate the development
of diﬀerent parts of an MAS.
The agent level consists of communicating individual agents, and provides ab-
stractions concerning the mental model and reasoning capabilities of agents, the
two most fundamental abstractions being beliefs and goals.
The environment level is concerned with the actions that agents can perform,
the percepts that the agents receive, the entities that the agents control, and
the artifacts that agents can interact with.
At the social level the interaction between and structuring of agents are con-
sidered, especially concerning agent organizations that regulate the behavior of
individual agents. This level provides abstractions such as roles and norms.
This chapter is concerned with analyzing and comparing existing programming
languages and tools for MAS development, with the goal of understanding what
functionality can be expected of an MAS framework.
The ﬁrst section describes and compares some of the existing languages and
frameworks for developing agents at the agent level. The second section con-
siders existing tools for the environment level, while the third section considers
==PAGE:34==
22
Multi-Agent Programming
some of the existing languages for organizational modeling.
4.1
Agent-Oriented Programming Languages
The key idea of the agent-oriented programming paradigm is that agents are
programmed in terms of mentalistic notions that represent the properties of
agents using e.g. the BDI architecture [Woo09, p. 55]. The design of a program
is focused on designing intelligent agents that exhibit the characteristics deﬁned
previously. Primarily that the agents are autonomous, reactive, proactive, and
social.
A relatively large number of languages and frameworks for developing MASs us-
ing the agent-oriented paradigm exist. A recent survey [Das14] presents and dis-
cusses some of them. Concerning the agent level, these frameworks can be par-
titioned into imperative-style, declarative-style, and hybrid-style programming
frameworks.
Imperative-style frameworks include Jade [BBCP05], Jadex [PBL05], and JACK
[Win05]. All of these frameworks extend the Java language with programming
constructs for developing agents. In Jade agent developers provide sets of be-
haviors for agents that are subsequently executed concurrently within an agent
management system. Jadex extends Jade with BDI abstractions. Both Jadex
and JACK are based on the BDI architecture and provide means for declaring
beliefs, events, and selecting and executing plans. Agents are executed following
the sense-decide-act loop, i.e. processing events, selecting relevant and applica-
ble plans, and executing applicable plans. Beliefs and goals in these languages
do not have any logical semantics such that agents cannot reason about their
beliefs and goals, implying that agents cannot achieve their goals gradually in
terms of subgoals according to the survey. However, the lack of logical seman-
tics should not necessarily imply that another way of decomposing goals into
subgoals cannot be deﬁned.
Moreover, consistency and rationality is left to
the agent programmer to develop. Imperative programming languages are most
suited for implementing procedural parts of an agent such as actions and plans,
as plans by deﬁnition are procedural courses of actions.
Declarative-style frameworks are mainly based on computational logics and logic
programming. One of the frameworks mentioned in the survey is also BDI based.
Declarative programming languages are most suited for implementing an agent’s
reasoning and decision making mechanism, e.g. using a logic programming lan-
guage such as Prolog.
==PAGE:35==
4.1 Agent-Oriented Programming Languages
23
Hybrid-style frameworks combine both imperative and declarative programming
styles. This class includes Goal [Hin09] and Jason [BHW07] which will be
explained in detail in the following sections.
4.1.1
The Go! Language
Go! [CM04] is another hybrid-style BDI agent programming language not men-
tioned in [Das14]. This language is multi-paradigm and strongly-typed similarly
to Visual Prolog, and is therefore interesting to consider when designing an
MAS framework for Visual Prolog.
Beliefs, desires, and intentions are declared using algebraic datatypes, and e.g.
belief stores are created from these types. For example, an agent maleDancer
in Listing 3 is used as an example in [CM04], where ::= denotes algebraic type
declaration.
In this example the agent has e.g. a Belief type that can be used to create a
belief base (belief=$linda[belief]([])) that in turn can be used to query
the beliefs of the agent (belief.mem(B)).
4.1.2
The Goal Language
The following abstract from [Hin09] concisely explains the rationale behind the
Goal language:
The agent programming language Goal is a high-level program-
ming language to program rational agents that derive their choice
of action from their beliefs and goals. The language provides the
basic building blocks to design and implement rational agents by
means of a set of programming constructs. These programming con-
structs allow and facilitate the manipulation of an agent’s beliefs
and goals and to structure its decision-making. Goal agents are
called rational because they satisfy a number of basic rationality
constraints and because they decide to perform actions to further
their goals based upon a reasoning scheme derived from practical
reasoning. The programming concepts of belief and goal incorpo-
rated into Goal provide the basis for this form of reasoning and are
similar to their common sense counterparts used everyday to explain
the actions that we perform. In addition, Goal provides the means
==PAGE:36==
24
Multi-Agent Programming
for agents to focus their attention on speciﬁc goals and to commu-
nicate at the knowledge level. This provides an intuitive basis for
writing high-level agent programs.
Agents in Goal are structured using modules which can contain sections such
as knowledge, beliefs, goals, and program. The ﬁrst three of these sections
contain initial knowledge, beliefs, and goals of the agent for a speciﬁc module,
while the last contains rules for the behavior of the agent. Agents then decide
on what actions to perform using if-then rules in the program sections that con-
stitute the agent’s planning capability. The language used for representing the
beliefs, knowledge, and goals is usually SWI-Prolog. The logical semantics of
Prolog then enables Goal agents to satisfy rationality constraints concerning
the consistency of goals and beliefs and automatic removal of goals that have
been achieved.
The conditions of these if-then rules can query the beliefs, knowledge, and
goals of an agent so that an agent can decide on actions to perform. For ex-
ample, the rule if a-goal(on(X,table)), bel(on(X,Y), Y \= table) then
move(X,table) expresses that the agent has an achievement goal of on(X,table)
and will try to move X onto table if it believes that X is on top of something
else.
When a program section is executed the ﬁrst of its rules whose condition holds
is chosen, and the action associated with the rule is executed if it is applicable,
that is, if the precondition of the action holds. If the precondition does not
hold then the next rule will be evaluated for execution instead until an action
is performed or no applicable rule and action combination is available. Actions
can be speciﬁed with pre- and post-conditions in an action schema section of
modules called action-spec.
The agents of a Goal program are also executed according to a sense-decide-act
loop i.e. reasoning cycle. That is, the agent ﬁrst handles percepts and incoming
messages, if any, by executing the action rules in a program section of an event
module. During the execution of the event module, percepts can be queried
using bel(percept(P)) where P is a percept, and received messages can likewise
be queried using bel(received(A,M)) where A is the sending agent and M is its
message. Hence these action rules can act as belief-revision and goal-updating,
similar to the brf and parts of the options functions of the BDI architecture,
using internal actions such as insert(B), delete(B), adopt(G), and drop(G),
where B is a belief and G is a goal.
However, these internal actions are not
restricted to the event module which diﬀers from the BDI architecture. Next,
the program section of the main module is executed and ends when an action is
performed, thus beginning the next iteration of the loop. An init module can
==PAGE:37==
4.1 Agent-Oriented Programming Languages
25
be speciﬁed which is executed exactly once when the agent is instantiated. This
module is used to, for example, specify knowledge, initial beliefs, and initial
goals.
The goals of agents are adopted using a blind commitment strategy. That is,
agents are committed to their goals until they believe that the goals have been
successfully achieved. However, goals can be dropped at any time using the
built-in drop action if needed.
Messages to other agents in the system can be sent using a built-in messaging
action. Messages sent at a previous reasoning cycle can be processed at the
next cycle. Optionally, the message contents can be annotated with a mood
[Hin14a]. Three diﬀerent moods, with their preﬁxes stated in parenthesis, are
available: indicative (:), declarative (!), and interrogative (?). The indicative
mood annotation is used by default, and thus does not need to be preﬁxed. Its
meaning is simply to state a fact. The meaning of the declarative mood is to
communicate goals. That is, a state the sending agent wants to achieve. The
interrogative mood is meant to inquire the receiving agent of the contents of the
message. For example, the following rule would ask agent b for the amount of
milk left whenever the sending agent does not know about the amount of milk
left:
if not(bel(amountLeft(milk,_))) then a.send(?amountLeft(milk,_))
while the following rule would request agent a to get ﬁve cartons of milk when-
ever the sending agent believes that it is out of milk:
if bel(amountLeft(milk,0)) then a.send(!amountLeft(milk,5))
An example of an agent written in Goal for the Blocks World domain can be
seen in Listing 4, which is based on the agent found in [Hin09]. The environ-
ment of the Blocks World domain consists of a table on which multiple blocks
lie. These blocks can be stacked on top of each other or placed on the table.
Given an initial conﬁguration of these blocks an agent situated in this environ-
ment is supposed to move the blocks one at a time to e.g. reach a desired ﬁnal
conﬁguration. For simplicity the environment is not shown in the example.
==PAGE:38==
26
Multi-Agent Programming
4.1.3
The Jason Language
Jason [BHW07] is a BDI agent-programming language based on AgentSpeak
[Rao96].
AgentSpeak itself is based on the Procedural Reasoning System
[Woo13]. In Jason an agent is composed of rules, plans, and initial beliefs and
achievement goals. The rules and beliefs are predicates in a logic programming
language similar to Prolog, while plans are composed of a sequence of actions
or sub-plans that are necessary to achieve a goal. A plan in Jason consists of
three distinct parts: the triggering event, the context, and the body. The syntax
is as follows: triggering_event :
context <- body.
The triggering event expresses which type of event the plan is triggered by.
There are six diﬀerent kinds of events: belief addition/deletion, achievement-
and test-goal addition/deletion. The notation is respectively +l, -l, +!l, -!l,
+?l, and -?l, for a literal l. Belief events happen e.g. when the agent perceives
the environment and would thus correspond to the belief revision function of
the BDI architecture. Goal events are triggered e.g. by another plan, an initial
goal, or as a response to a request from another agent. Test goals are deﬁned
as queries to the belief base while achievement goals are goals that the agent
intends to fulﬁll.
The context of a plan determines in which mental state the plan is applicable.
That is, it is a query to the belief base of the agent such that the plan can be
chosen for execution only if this query happens to be true. This is similar to
the condition of if-else rules in the Goal language.
The body of a plan deﬁnes a course of action for the agent to take when a
corresponding triggering event happens and the agent believes the corresponding
context to be true. This course of action is represented by a sequence of formulae
that decomposes the plan into smaller parts. These parts in turn will be added
as intentions that can be chosen as an event in the next reasoning cycle of the
agent. Jason therefore diﬀers from Goal in that agents react to both external
and internal events while Goal agents does not have a concept of internal
events.
The next intention to consider is chosen among the available intentions according
to a selection function which can be replaced by the developer if necessary. The
agent can have multiple intentions from which to choose from if, for example,
it has more than one initial goal, where initial goals are speciﬁed by initial
triggering events. Percepts are added to the agent as events that the agent can
choose to act on.
Agents in Jason are executed using a reasoning cycle which proceeds in steps:
==PAGE:39==
4.1 Agent-Oriented Programming Languages
27
1. Perceiving the environment and updating beliefs.
2. Receiving and selecting messages from other agents.
3. Selecting an event.
4. Selecting an applicable plan for the event.
5. Selecting an intention for further execution.
6. Executing one step of an intention.
It thus functions similarly to the sense-decide-act loop of other agent-oriented
languages. That is, external events are ﬁrst processed, thereby generating new
internal events. Then an event among the internal events are selected to up-
date the agent’s intentions, one of which are afterwards executed. However, in
contrast to Goal, the percepts generate events (by default - this can be cus-
tomized [, chapter 4] [BHW07]) for belief-revision plans, such that a percept p
which is not currently in the belief base generates a +p event while any belief b
not among the percepts generates a -b event.
Messages to other agents in the system can be sent using a built-in messaging
action called .send. Messages in Jason are based on KQML [FMF92], so a
message includes a performative verb in addition to the contents of the message.
Similarly to the moods of messages in Goal the performatives of Jason can be
used to attach a predeﬁned meaning to a message. However, in contrast to Goal
in which agents must explicitly process the performative of a message, a message
in Jason denotes a diﬀerent triggering event depending on the performative of
the message.
For example, in the following plan the triggering event is the
reception of a message n(M) from the agent incrementer with the intention of
making the receiving agent act out its plan for n.
+!n(M)[source(incrementer)] : n(N) <- -+n(M); !request
The context is that the receiving agent already believes n(N) for some N, while
the body signiﬁes that the agent ﬁrst replaces its belief of n(N) with n(M) and
then begins its request plan. This plan can be triggered by the incrementer
agent by sending a message with an achieve performative and the corresponding
goal, e.g.:
+!increment(N)[source(A)] <- .send(A,achieve,n(N+1)).
A Blocks World Jason agent similar to the previous example Listing 4 can be
seen in Listing 5.
==PAGE:40==
28
Multi-Agent Programming
4.2
Environment Programming
The survey [Das14] identiﬁes two diﬀerent tools available for programming
multi-agent environments. These are CArtAgO (Common Artifact Infrastruc-
ture for Agent Open Environment) and EIS (Environment Interface Standard).
While CArtAgO is a generic framework for developing multi-agent environ-
ments, EIS is a proposed interface standard for multi-agent environments.
CArtAgO is based on the A&A (Agents and Artifacts) model [RPVO09]. In
this model the agent environment consists of workspaces which contain arti-
facts. An artifact encapsulates speciﬁc functionality that can be dynamically
interacted with and modiﬁed by the agents at runtime. For example, an artifact
could have support for executing certain operations on the artifact or subscrib-
ing to events generated by the artifact. Workspaces can similarly be joined and
left at runtime by the agents. An advantage of this is that the workspaces of an
environment can be distributed across multiple processors over a network. Fur-
thermore, CArtAgO distinguishes between work environments, constituting
the environment that the agents interact with, and the real environment. The
agents then interact with the real environment through the artifacts available
to them in the workspaces of the work environment.
EIS provides a standardized generic interface for agent environments instead
[BHB+12].
Many agent environments are developed ad-hoc which makes it
diﬃcult to reuse these environments for other applications.
By providing a
standardized interface between the agent environment and the agents, EIS hopes
to make environments reusable between agent platforms. EIS provides methods
through its interface for:
1. Attaching, detaching, and notifying observers listening on the environ-
ment, e.g. to attach agent observers that facilitates sending percepts to
agents.
2. Registering and unregistering agents with the environment.
3. Adding and removing entities from the environment.
4. Managing agent-entities relations, e.g. associating a registered agent with
one or several entities.
5. Performing actions and receiving percepts.
6. Managing the environment.
==PAGE:41==
4.3 Organizational Modeling
29
In contrast to CArtAgO, EIS does not have any concept of artifacts. On the
other hand, CArtAgO does not have any concept of entities. CArtAgO thus
seems to opt for a more abstract representation of the underlying environment
than EIS, such that the agents interact with the real environment through
artifacts in the working environment instead of through controlling entities.
4.3
Organizational Modeling
Besides frameworks for developing intelligent agents and their environments
the survey [Das14] also surveys current available methods for developing agent
organizations.
ISLANDER is an organizational modeling language that speciﬁes multi-agent
organizations in terms of organizational rules and norms.
ISLANDER spec-
iﬁcations are then executed on the execution platform AMELI. AMELI also
supports communication between agents while facilitating their participation in
the organization. The key aspect of ISLANDER is that norms can never be
violated by agents thereby restricting the autonomy of agents. This approach
therefore undermines a fundamental property of agents, namely their autonomy.
Moise+ is another approach that speciﬁes multi-agent organizations by means
of social and organizational concepts. This modeling language can be used to
specify MAS through three organizational dimensions:
1. The Structural Dimension, which speciﬁes roles, groups, and links within
organizations, subgroup relation, and the number of agents that can play
a role.
2. The Functional Dimension, which includes goals, missions, and social
schemes specifying structured sets of goals.
3. The Deontic Dimension, which speciﬁes norms, obligations, and prohibi-
tions within organizations.
Moise+ speciﬁcations are then implemented and executed using other frame-
works such as ORG4MAS.
Another organizational modeling language is OperA, which can be developed
using the OperettA [AD11] tool. OperA consists of three diﬀerent interre-
lated models, the ﬁrst of which seemingly fulﬁll similar intentions to the di-
==PAGE:42==
30
Multi-Agent Programming
Id
PC_member
Objectives
paper_reviewed(Paper,Report)
Sub-objectives
{read(P), report_written(P,Rep),
review_received(Org,P,Rep)}
Rights
access_confmanagement_system(me)
Norms &
PC_member OBLIGED understand_english
Rules
PC_member OBLIGED review_paper BEFORE deadline
IF paper_by_colleague
THEN PC_member FORBIDDEN review_paper
Table 4.1: An example of a role description in OperA [DP13, table 2.2].
This description deﬁnes the objectives, norms, and rules of the
PC_member role.
mensions of Moise+; the Organizational Model, the Social Model, and the
Interaction Model.
1. The Organizational Model describes the desired behavior of the organiza-
tion in terms of objectives, norms, roles, interactions, and ontologies.
2. The Social Model maps organizational roles to agents and describes agree-
ments concerning the role enactment and other conditions in social con-
tracts.
3. The Interaction model speciﬁes the interaction agreements between role
enacting agents as interaction contracts.
In the Organizational Model of OperA roles are speciﬁed with a role descrip-
tion with associated objectives and norms that agents enacting the role should
conform to. An OperA role description for a program committee member of a
conference management organization can be seen in Table 4.1. This role has the
objective of reviewing papers written in English. Furthermore, agents enact-
ing the role must review papers before a given deadline and should not review
papers from their colleagues.
==PAGE:43==
4.3 Organizational Modeling
31
Listing 3 An example of an agent in Go!. From [CM04].
1
maleDancer(MyNm,MyDesires){
2
Belief::= hasDesires(symbol, list[Desire]) |
3
haveDanced(dance,symbol) |
4
bandPlaying(dance) |
5
ballOver.
6
dance::= polka | jive | waltz | ...
7
Desire::= toDance(dance,number) | barWhen(dance).
8
Intention ::= toDanceWith(dance,symbol) |
9
toBarWith(dance,symbol).
10
Sex::= male | female.
11
belief=$linda[Belief]([]).
12
believe(B):-belief.mem(B).
13
desire=$linda[Desire]([]).
14
want(D):-desire.mem(D).
15
intention=$linda[Intention]([]).
16
intend(I):-intention.mem(I).
17
maleIntention=maleIntention..{
18
-- inner module to be given}.
19
DSinterface= DSinterface..{
20
-- inner module to be given}.
21
satisfyDesires=satisfyDesires..{
22
-- inner module to be given}.
23
start() ->
24
(Des on MyDesires *> desire.add(Des));
25
spawn {maleIntention()} as hdl(‘execTh’,MyNm);
26
spawn {satisfyDesires()} as hdl(‘negTh’,MyNm);
27
spawn {DSinterface()};
28
waitfor(hdl(‘execTh’,MyNm)).
29
}
==PAGE:44==
32
Multi-Agent Programming
Listing 4 A Goal agent for the Blocks World domain. It is not situated in an
environment.
1
init module{
2
knowledge{
3
block(X) :- on(X,_).
4
5
clear(X) :- block(X), not(on(_,X)).
6
clear(table).
7
8
tower([X]) :- on(X,table).
9
tower([X,Y|T]) :- on(X,Y), tower([Y|T]).
10
}
11
beliefs{
12
% Initial beliefs
13
on(b1,b4). on(b2,table). on(b3,table). on(b4,b2).
on(b5,b1).
,→
14
}
15
goals{
16
% Initial goals
17
on(b1,b2), on(b2,b3), on(b3,table), on(b4,table),
on(b5,b4).
,→
18
}
19
actionspec{
20
move(X,Y){
21
pre { clear(X), clear(Y), on(X,Z), not(on(X,Y)),
not(X = Y) }
,→
22
post{ not(on(X,Z)), on(X,Y) }
23
}
24
}
25
}
26
27
main module[exit=nogoals]{
28
% The annotation "exit=nogoals" ensures that the agent,
29
% and therefore the whole MAS in this example,
30
% terminates after achieving all its goals
31
program{
32
if a-goal(tower([X,Y|T])), bel(tower([Y|T])) then
move(X,Y).
,→
33
if a-goal(tower([X|T])) then move(X,table).
34
}
35
}
==PAGE:45==
4.3 Organizational Modeling
33
Listing 5 A Jason agent for the Blocks World domain similar to the Goal
agent in Listing 4.
1
/* Initial beliefs */
2
on(b1,b4). on(b2,table). on(b3,table). on(b4,b2). on(b5,b1).
3
4
/* Initial rules */
5
block(X) :- on(X,_).
6
7
clear(X) :- block(X) & not(on(_,X)).
8
clear(X) :- X = table.
9
10
/* Initial goals */
11
!tower([b1,b2,b3]). !tower([b5,b4]).
12
13
/* Plans */
14
+!move(X,Y) : on(X,Y). /* No need to move the block */
15
@move[atomic] /* Ensures that the belief revision happens
atomically */
,→
16
+!move(X,Y)
17
: clear(X) & clear(Y) & on(X,Z) & not(on(X,Y)) & not(X = Y)
18
<- -on(X,Z); +on(X,Y).
19
20
+!on(X,Y) : on(X,Y).
21
+!on(X,Y) <- !clear(X); !clear(Y); !move(X,Y).
22
23
+!clear(X) : clear(X).
24
+!clear(X) : on(Y,X) <- !on(Y,table); !clear(X).
25
26
+!tower([X]) <- !on(X,table).
27
+!tower([X,Y|T]) <- !tower([Y|T]); !on(X,Y).
==PAGE:46==
34
Multi-Agent Programming
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 5
Visual Prolog Agent
Framework (ViPAF)
This chapter concerns the implementation of ViPAF in Visual Prolog and
the associated analysis. The version of Visual Prolog used in this thesis is
the development version 8 step 5.
Visual Prolog has previously been used to design and implement a multi-
agent framework for travel management decision support systems [Yan09]. That
framework is thus specialized to a single application domain. The framework
proposed in this thesis, however, is not designed to suit one single application.
There are many problems to consider when designing a framework for multi-
agent development such as:
1. Degree of concurrent and distributed execution: MASs are naturally suited
for distributed execution as agents are autonomous and independent en-
tities that encapsulate their mental state and capabilities.
Supporting
distributed MASs would greatly impact the design of the framework.
2. Agent architectures for developing intelligent agents: Agent-oriented pro-
gramming provides abstractions to develop agents using architectures de-
signed to implement some kind of intelligence. Many such architectures
exist. BDI architectures, however, are some of the most popular archi-
tectures as seen in the previous chapter, and how to implement a BDI-
like architecture has therefore been an important point of analysis in this
==PAGE:48==
36
Visual Prolog Agent Framework (ViPAF)
project.
3. Environment programming support: Agents are by deﬁnition situated in an
environment. How to develop and interface with environments is therefore
necessary to consider.
4. Social capabilities of agents: The social level of agent programming, where
agent communication and organizational capabilities reside, is also impor-
tant to consider as social ability is one of the key notions of intelligent
agents.
5. Programming style: It would be desirable to program agents in a simi-
lar fashion to agent-oriented programming languages such as Goal and
Jason. Furthermore, an MAS framework should control the execution
of the MAS so it must necessarily be supplied with the agents, environ-
ment, and organizations created using the abstractions provided by the
framework. How to best implement these features should be considered.
Additional problems to consider could be whether the framework should comply
with existing standards such as FIPA [ON98] (Foundation for Intelligent Phys-
ical Agents) and EIS, or whether it is necessary to consider which application
domains the framework would be applied to, as this would necessarily inﬂuence
the design of the framework. However, also considering these problems appear
to be outside the scope of the project. Thus all but these last two problems just
mentioned will be considered in this chapter.
5.1
MAS Execution Analysis
Agent-oriented programming normally oﬀers computationally heavy abstrac-
tions with autonomous, independently acting agents and logic programming for
representing mental concepts and implementing reasoning capabilities of agents.
Moreover, agents encapsulate their own mental state thereby making them suit-
able for distributed execution.
Concurrent execution of agents can be accomplished relatively easily through
multi-threaded programming in Visual Prolog. However, safely executing
agents that are distributed across multiple processes that may run on physically
separated processors, and communicate over a network, would be much more
diﬃcult to implement. Preferably this would be the case in an MAS, but it
would require an infrastructure for distribution and agent communication such
as Jade. Visual Prolog cannot interface easily with Jade as Visual Pro-
log does not execute on the Java Virtual Machine in contrast to Jade. Thus
==PAGE:49==
5.1 MAS Execution Analysis
37
it has been deemed outside the scope of this project. Instead, concurrent com-
puting through multi-threading has been pursued, where each agent is executed
by its own thread.
Multi-threaded programming in Visual Prolog poses its own problems, as it
is important to restrict and synchronize access to shared mutable data while
minimizing the overhead required to do so.
Mutual exclusion through locks
or monitors can be used for this purpose, but they must be used sparingly or
the code may become too sequentialized and thereby negating the beneﬁts of
multi-threading.
Thus it is important that the framework abstractions ensure thread-safety when
developing MASs. The functionality provided to the agent programmer must
therefore be safe to use in any manner that the framework allows. Regarding the
Visual Prolog support pattern it is important to consider how to manually
ensure thread safety with locks as monitors cannot be used in combination with
the support pattern. When using locks inside the support implementation of
the target predicates it is crucial that no attempt to acquire the same lock will
be made while inside the critical region protected by the lock. Otherwise, the
aﬀected thread will not be able to proceed execution as it would stall trying to
acquire the lock again. For example, if the support implementation implements
the following public predicates of the target interface:
1 x() :-
2
lock:enter(),
3
...
4
site:z(),
5
...
6
lock:leave().
7
8 y() :-
9
lock:enter(),
10
...
11
lock:leave().
then the site could potentially call the y predicate inside its implementation of
z creating a deadlock. Reentrant locks would allow the same thread to acquire
the lock multiple times. However, the site could potentially call y from another
thread, meaning that reentrant locks cannot solve the problem. The site should
therefore never be called while using a lock that can potentially be acquired
through the site. Another important point to consider is that all locks that
are acquired in a predicate must be released again. This can be problematic
for nondeterm and multi predicates as the program can backtrack over such
predicates, potentially while a lock is acquired and have not been released yet.
The simplest solution would be to ensure that all computations inside critical
regions protected by locks can never fail or backtrack.
Furthermore, as the
==PAGE:50==
38
Visual Prolog Agent Framework (ViPAF)
site can call the public predicates of the support (and potentially the target)
interface, it is important that the support implementation does not call the site
through these public predicates. Otherwise, the site could potentially create an
inﬁnite loop.
5.2
Representing MAS Concepts
There are many abstractions that need to be represented in the framework,
and also need to be consistent across the agents, the environment, and the
organizations in an MAS. For example, percepts and actions are concepts that
are related to both agents and their environments, and when programming
agents using the agent-oriented programming paradigm the concepts of goals
and beliefs are frequently encountered.
Other concepts of interest would be
entities, artifacts, desires, intentions, roles, and objectives as these appear in
agent environments, BDI architectures, and agent organizations, respectively.
The framework should thus provide support for these usual basic abstractions.
These abstractions are usually represented as Prolog-like terms in agent-
oriented programming languages supporting logic programming such as Goal
and Jason. This also implies that there is no type distinction between beliefs
and goals in these languages. These properties allow for the construction of
declarative goals representing states that can be entailed by the agent’s beliefs.
For example, the deﬁnition of the tower goal for the Blocks World Goal agent
as seen in Listing 4 is deﬁned as a predicate relating the beliefs to the goal:
1 tower([X]) :- on(X,table).
2 tower([X,Y|T]) :- on(X,Y), tower([Y|T]).
It is also sometimes useful to represent negative goals, which is possible in
Goal using Prolog with negation-as-failure. For example, in the Blocks World
domain, the agent may have a goal stating that block a is on top of block b while
block a is on top of something other than the table: on(b, a) ∧¬on(a, table).
However, in Go! these concepts can be represented as statically typed algebraic
data types. This latter representation would have the advantage that the type
system would ensure that the agents, environment, and organizations share the
same concepts when implemented in Visual Prolog. However, one disadvan-
tage is that heterogeneous agents using diﬀerent types for the same concepts
cannot share the same MAS, as the abstractions cover the whole MAS. It would
also be diﬃcult to e.g. extend the beliefs during runtime, but this latter dis-
advantage can be somewhat alleviated by deﬁning a suﬃciently large type for
==PAGE:51==
5.2 Representing MAS Concepts
39
beliefs with e.g. strings.
The abstractions can therefore be represented as compound domains in Visual
Prolog. Also, goals and beliefs especially will need to be updated throughout
the lifetime of an agent. Visual Prolog would be able to support such updates
through fact databases. A drawback of using compound domains is that they
do not have any inherent logical semantics which must necessarily be provided
by the MAS programmer. However, while logical declarative goals are desirable
they cannot always easily be represented in Visual Prolog for the following
reasons:
• Partially instantiated data, e.g. on(_, block(a)), cannot be stored in Vi-
sual Prolog variables, in contrast to Prolog which can represent terms
with unbound variables.
• Predicates and fact databases are separate constructs in Visual Prolog
meaning that e.g. tower([a, b, c]), where tower is deﬁned in terms of on,
can never follow logically from the beliefs.
Alternatively, the concepts could be implemented using classes which could then
contain the necessary semantics, but this would be cumbersome as it would e.g.
be diﬃcult to pattern match on the contents of the classes in plans.
The concepts of percepts and beliefs frequently overlap. For example, in the
Blocks World scenario the percept on(a, table) would correspond to the same
belief. It would therefore be simpler to represent both concepts as the same type.
However, some beliefs are not percepts, such as tower([a, b]) which corresponds
to e.g. on(a, b) and on(b, table).
Desires, intentions, and organizational objectives are all concepts similar to goals
and could therefore also be represented as the same goal type. Goals themselves
should not necessarily be represented as beliefs as some goals, e.g. the tower
goal, correspond to predicates and therefore not necessarily any subset of the
belief type.
Entities, agent names, artifacts, and roles are not necessarily needed in every
MAS. Furthermore, whenever these concepts act as identiﬁers it is suﬃcient to
represent them as strings instead of custom compound domains.
Thus the framework has support for specifying three diﬀerent concepts using
compound domains; beliefs, goals, and actions.
For example, the beliefs, actions, and goals of an MAS for the Blocks World
==PAGE:52==
40
Visual Prolog Agent Framework (ViPAF)
domain can be speciﬁed with compound domains in Visual Prolog as follows:
1 bwBlock = a ; b ; c ; d ; e ; f ; g.
2 bwObject = block(bwBlock) ; table.
3
4 bwBelief = ready ; on(bwBlock,bwObject).
5 bwGoal = tower(bwBlock*) ; on(bwBlock,bwObject) ; clear(bwBlock).
6 bwAction = move(bwBlock,bwObject).
By providing this representation it is possible for the agents, the environment,
and the organizations, to share the same vocabulary through parameterized
classes, e.g. a generic environment environment{@Belief,@Goal,@Action} for
the Blocks World domain could be instantiated with the above types environment{
bwBelief,bwGoal,bwAction}. Similarly a generic agent interface could be in-
stantiated with the same types: agent{bwBelief,bwGoal,bwAction}.
5.3
MAS Programming Implementation
When programming an agent in Goal or Jason the programmer supplies plans
and initial beliefs, goals, and knowledge of the agent. These constructs are then
interpreted and executed by a built-in agent engine at runtime. However, in
addition to providing an agent program for the agent engine to execute, the
agent program itself query the beliefs, goals, and other structures at runtime,
through the interpreter. For example, in Goal an agent is able to query its
beliefs and goals at runtime through the bel and goal operators, respectively,
while the if-then rules that make use of these operators are supplied beforehand.
A similar solution would be desirable to implement in ViPAF.
One potential solution would be to implement an interpreter for an agent lan-
guage, but this would mean designing and implementing a whole agent language
and therefore negating most of the beneﬁts of implementing the framework in a
compiled language like Visual Prolog. Another solution would be to exploit
the support pattern. That is, an agent can be developed by inheriting from
a BDI agent support class that uses a user-supplied agent-functionality site to
realize a generic target agent interface. Then the site would be able to use in-
herited predicates from the support class, e.g. predicates analogous to the bel
and goal operators from Goal, to implement plans that themselves are used by
the support class. However, the support implementation must necessarily im-
plement thread safety manually for the public predicates of the target, as it is
illegal in Visual Prolog to inherit from classes constructing monitor objects.
So, ViPAF provides three top-most target interfaces:
==PAGE:53==
5.3 MAS Programming Implementation
41
Predicate/property
Type
Interface: agent{@Belief,@Goal}
perceive
:
(@Belief* Percepts)
send
:
(message)
addAgent
:
(agent{@Belief,@Goal})
name
:
string
Interface: bdiAgent{@Belief,@Goal,@Action}
believes
:
(@Belief) nondeterm
intention
:
(@Goal, decision* Plan) nondeterm
insert
:
(@Belief)
delete
:
(@Belief)
adopt
:
(@Goal)
drop
:
(@Goal)
message
:
(string Agent, messageContents)
Interface: planLibrary{@Belief,@Goal,@Action}
perceived
:
(@Belief Percept) multi
received
:
(string Agent, messageContents) nondeterm
plan
:
(@Goal) -> decision* PlanElaboration nondeterm
isAchieved
:
(@Goal) nondeterm
hasFailed
:
(@Goal, decision* Plan) nondeterm
decide
:
() -> @Goal nondeterm
precondition
:
(@Action) nondeterm
postcondition
:
(@Action) multi
Table 5.1: A slightly simpliﬁed overview of the three agent interfaces of ViPAF.
Argument ﬂows are not shown. bdiAgent supports agent and de-
pends on a planLibrary. By implementing a class that constructs
planLibrary objects and inherits from bdiAgent, the support pat-
tern is used to implement an agent using a agent-oriented program-
ming style.
==PAGE:54==
42
Visual Prolog Agent Framework (ViPAF)
Predicate/property
Type
Interface: agentEnvironment{@Belief,@Goal,@Action}
start
:
() -> event TerminationLock determ
attach
:
(agent{@Belief,@Goal}, string Entity) determ
detach
:
(agent{@Belief,@Goal}, string Entity)
perform
:
(agent{@Belief,@Goal}, @Action) determ
Interface: basicEnvironment{@Belief,@Goal,@Action}
sendPercepts
:
(agent{@Belief,@Goal}, @Belief* Percepts)
broadcastPercepts
:
(@Belief* Percepts)
agent
:
(agent{@Belief,@Goal}, string Entity) nondeterm
stopEnvironment
:
()
Interface: basicEnvironmentSite{@Belief,@Goal,@Action}
attached
:
(agent{@Belief,@Goal}, string Entity)
detached
:
(agent{@Belief,@Goal}, string Entity)
performed
:
(agent{@Belief,@Goal}, string Entity, @Action)
initialize
:
()
Table 5.2: An overview of the environment interfaces of
ViPAF. Argu-
ment ﬂows are not shown.
basicEnvironment supports agent
Environment and depends on a basicEnvironmentSite. The sup-
port pattern can then be used to construct agent environments by
implementing a class that constructs basicEnvironmentSite ob-
jects and inherits from basicEnvironment.
1. The agent interface, Table 5.1, which has a support implementation bdiAgent
implementing a BDI architecture agent using a custom planLibrary site.
2. The agentEnvironment interface, Table 5.2, which has a support im-
plementation basicEnvironment using a custom basicEnvironmentSite
site.
3. The agentOrganization interface, Table 5.3, which has a support imple-
mentation basicOrganization using a custom basicOrganizationSite
site.
5.4
Implementing Messaging
The most widely used form of communication in MAS programming languages
is direct agent communication through messages. [Hug14].
Jason and Goal both implement means for communicating using performa-
tives. These performatives, or moods in Goal, generally concern three diﬀerent
kinds of communication; to inform, to inquire, and to request.
==PAGE:55==
5.4 Implementing Messaging
43
Predicate/property
Type
Monitor interface: agentOrganization{@Belief,@Goal,@Action}
availableRoles
:
string*
enactRole
:
(agent{@Belief,@Goal},
agentEnvironment{@Belief,@Goal,@Action},
@Belief* Qualifications,
string Role) -> tuple{@Goal* InitialObjectives,
agentEnvironment{@Belief,@Goal,@Action} Wrapped} determ
leaveRole
:
(agent{@Belief,@Goal}, string Role)
fulfilledObjective
:
(agent{@Belief,@Goal}, string Role, @Goal RoleObjective)
-> @Goal* NewObjectives determ
Monitor interface: basicOrganization{@Belief,@Goal,@Action}
actionAllowed
:
(agent{@Belief,@Goal}, @Action) determ
messageAllowed
:
(message, agent{@Belief,@Goal} Receiver) determ
Interface: basicOrganizationSite{@Belief,@Goal,@Action}
role
:
(string Role, @Goal* InitialObjectives,
string* RoleRelations) nondeterm
objectiveAchieved
:
(agent{@Belief,@Goal}, string Role, @Goal RoleObjective)
-> @Goal* NewObjectives
canEnact
:
(playingAgent*, agent{@Belief,@Goal},
@Belief Qualifications, string Role) determ
canPerform
:
(playingAgent*, agent{@Belief,@Goal}, @Action) determ
canSend
:
(playingAgent*, message, agent{@Belief,@Goal} Receiver) determ
Table 5.3: An overview of the organization interfaces of
ViPAF. Argu-
ment ﬂows are not shown.
basicOrganization supports agent
Organization and depends on a basicOrganizationSite.
In
contrast
to
BDI
agents
and
agent
environments
the
agent
Organization interface is a monitor interface.
==PAGE:56==
44
Visual Prolog Agent Framework (ViPAF)
A common vocabulary - though not necessarily a complete ontology - can simply
be deﬁned using the belief and goal types in ViPAF. Thus it would be possible to
inform, request, or inquire an agent of a belief, or request that the agent adopts
or rejects a goal. Therefore, the following performatives are used in ViPAF to
create a message domain:
1 messageContents = tell(@Belief) ; untell(@Belief) ; ask(@Belief) ; adopt(@Goal) ;
drop(@Goal).
2 message = message(agent{@Belief,@Goal} Sender, messageContents Message).
with default semantics, which can be overridden by the received predicate of
the planLibrary interface:
1 if Message = tell(Belief) then insert(Belief)
2 elseif Message = untell(Belief) then delete(Belief)
3 elseif Message = ask(Belief) then
4
if believes(Belief) then message(Sender:name, tell(Belief))
5
else message(Sender:name, untell(Belief))
6
end if
7 elseif Message = adopt(Goal) then adopt(Goal)
8 elseif Message = drop(Goal) then drop(Goal)
9 end if
The messaging system implementation must be thread-safe. For example, it
would be unwise to implement agent communication such that the receiving
agent A handles an incoming message while the sending agent B is forced to
wait until A has ﬁnished handling the message. If so, then A could possibly
send a response using the same communication mechanism while handling the
incoming message, and A would therefore have to wait for B to ﬁnish handling
the response. This would result in a deadlock as B would already be waiting
on A. Agent communication should therefore be decoupled from the execution
of the agents.
One possible solution is to handle messaging through a separate message man-
agement system. An advantage of this approach would be that the implemen-
tation of agents would not be concerned with how messages are sent to other
agents. Another advantage is in enforcing interaction-related norms as an orga-
nization would be able to intercept and process messages through the message
management system. A central messaging system, however, may risk sequential-
ization of messaging as the access to the messaging system must be thread-safe.
Another solution would be to use thread-safe queues for passing messages. That
is, each agent could contain a thread-safe queue that other agents could enqueue
messages on. This would enable thread-safe messaging without one singular lock
which any message-sending agent must acquire before sending messages. Then
the sending agent could directly send a message to another agent while only
==PAGE:57==
5.5 BDI Reasoning Cycle
45
waiting for access to the queue, though the agents must contain references to
other agents in order for this to work.
5.5
BDI Reasoning Cycle
Listing 6 Part of the source code for the reasoning cycle in Figure 5.1. The
run predicate ensures that the agent will wait for external input whenever it
cannot proceed further with its plans, i.e. when the reason predicate has ﬁnished
executing.
1
run() :-
2
reason(),
3
externalEventQueue:waitUntilNonempty(),
4
run().
5
6
reason() :-
7
% 1) Belief revision and option generation
8
processEvents(externalEventQueue:dequeueAll()),
9
10
% 2) Option filtering and selection
11
Goal = planSite:decide(),
12
intention_(Goal,CurrentPlan),
13
14
% 3) Intention execution
15
executePlan(Goal,CurrentPlan), !,
16
17
% 4) Loop
18
reason().
19
reason().
Listing 7 The constructor for the BDI agent implementation. It spawns a new
thread that executes the agent reasoning cycle seen in Listing 6.
1
new(Name,Plans,Environment) :-
2
name_ := Name,
3
planSite := Plans,
4
environment := Environment,
5
addAgent(This),
6
thread::start(run).
A BDI architecture has been chosen as the basis for agents in ViPAF as the BDI
architecture is a popular choice for agent-oriented programming languages. In a
BDI-like architecture it is important to implement deliberation and means-end
reasoning, the latter which can be implemented through a plan library.
==PAGE:58==
46
Visual Prolog Agent Framework (ViPAF)
Goal base
(goals with associated plan stacks)
Percepts
Messages
Belief base
External 
events 
queue
Query
and update
Dequeue
Event processing
Update,
adopt,
and drop
goals
Desires
Option 
ordering
Next
intention
Pop plan 
stack for 
intention
If action
Execute
action
Query and update
Send action to environment
If goal
Check 
applicable 
plans
Backtrack if none
Query
If any
Execute plan
Push
updated
plan
Send messages to agents
Backtrack if precondition fails
Figure 5.1: A slightly simpliﬁed diagram of the reasoning cycle for the BDI
agent implementation. The plan library is not shown. First beliefs
are revised and options are generated during processing of external
events by updating the belief base and goal base.
Then these
options are ordered and ﬁltered. These two steps corresponds to
the deliberation process of the agent. Finally, one of the options is
executed by updating the intentions associated with the plan for
the selected option, using predeﬁned plans encoding the means-
end reasoning capabilities of the agent. After the last step the
reasoning cycle loops.
==PAGE:59==
5.5 BDI Reasoning Cycle
47
By using the support pattern, development of a BDI agent can be realized by
only developing the plan library, i.e. planLibrary, similar to how agents are
developed in Jason and Goal.
The BDI agent implementation, bdiAgent,
acts as the support constructing target agent objects and which is used by the
supplied plan library site, planLibrary, to control the agent. The plan library
is supplied during instantiation of the BDI agent as seen in Listing 7, where the
bdiAgent spawns a new thread to execute the agent after initialization.
Many of the agent-oriented programming languages in the previous chapter
make use of the sense-decide-act loop. That is, each agent is executed according
to a reasoning cycle in which it ﬁrst processes percepts and messages, then
deliberates, and then acts, after which the cycle loops. Such a cycle has also
been implemented in ViPAF and can be seen in the diagram at Figure 5.1.
The cycle consists of three overall parts; event processing, option selection,
and plan execution. These three parts can also be seen in the reasoning cycle
implementation Listing 6.
The constraints that the functions of the BDI model should satisfy, e.g. con-
sistency of beliefs and goals, and reﬁnement and updating of intentions, are
diﬃcult to implement. This stems from the fact that the compound domains
used to represent beliefs and goals does not have any inherent logical semantics
and no inherent notion of consistency. However, the planLibrary interface does
provide means for deﬁning predicates to satisfy most of the constraints:
1. Consistency of beliefs can be maintained during belief revision in the
perceived and received event processing predicates.
2. Adopting and dropping intentions can likewise happen during event pro-
cessing.
3. Consistency of goals should be deﬁned using goal achievement and failure
deﬁnitions using isAchieved and hasFailed.
4. Reﬁnement of intentions happens through the deﬁnitions of plans.
However, the constraint that ﬁltering should not introduce new intentions is
diﬃcult to satisfy as the bdiAgent implementation does not have a separate
ﬁltering function, but this is not much diﬀerent from e.g. Goal where goals can
be adopted and dropped at any if-then rule.
==PAGE:60==
48
Visual Prolog Agent Framework (ViPAF)
5.5.1
Event Processing
The ﬁrst step of the reasoning cycle updates beliefs and generates options for
further ﬁltering. Together with ﬁltering this achieves the deliberation require-
ment as modifying the belief and goal base changes the focus of the agent. It
also changes which plans are applicable and therefore available for execution
later on.
In an MAS messages can be considered external events and can thus be pro-
cessed similarly to percepts in the system. Thus there are two diﬀerent kinds
of events that the agent can react to. These events can be sent to the agent
through the perceive and send predicates provided by the agent interface.
In bdiAgent these predicates enqueue the supplied event on a monitor queue,
externalEventQueue, for later processing:
1 perceive(Percepts) :- externalEventQueue:enqueue(percepts(Percepts)).
2 send(Message) :- externalEventQueue:enqueue(msg(Message)).
This allows the object calling one of these predicates to only wait for access to
the queue before continuing its execution, thereby making these predicates asyn-
chronous - in the sense that the receiving agent does not handle the event before
the sender continues its execution - and also prevents deadlocks from happening
as explained earlier, as long as all message-receiving agents are bdiAgents.
During event processing belief revision and goal updating happen through the
processEvents predicate which iterates over dequeued events from the external
EventQueue and processes the events using the planLibrary one by one until
the queue is empty:
1 processEvents([Event|Events]) :-
2
if Event = percepts(Ps) then
3
foreach Percept in Ps do
4
planSite:perceived(Percept), !
5
end foreach
6
if Event = msg(message(Sender,Message)) then
7
...
8
if not(planSite:received(Sender:name,Message)) then
9
... % Default message handling
10
end if
11
end if,
12
updateGoals(),
13
processEvents(Events).
14 processEvents([]).
where planSite is the user-supplied planLibrary.
==PAGE:61==
5.5 BDI Reasoning Cycle
49
updateGoals uses goal achievement and failure conditions provided by the plan
library to ensure that the agent does not pursue goals that are either already
achieved or cannot be achieved given the current plan. That is, updateGoals
drop achieved intentions and re-adopt failed intentions, similar to the blind-
commitment strategy of Goal wherein goals are never implicitly dropped unless
they are achieved.
The achievement and failure conditions are speciﬁed through the isAchieved
respectively hasFailed predicates of the planLibrary. These predicates are
supposed to query the beliefs and goals of the agents to determine whether a
goal, and the current plan associated with the goal, follows from or contradicts
with its current mental state. That is, isAchieved(G) should usually determine
whether goal G follows from the current beliefs while hasFailed(G) should
determine whether G cannot be achieved. updateGoals then updates the goal
base after every event processing and plan execution using these predicates.
The perceived and received predicates of the planLibrary can then in turn
update the belief and goal bases of the agent through the bdiAgent interface.
For example, in the Blocks World domain, an agent perceiving that a block A
is on top of B, i.e. on(A, B), may update its belief base as follows:
1 perceived(on(A,B)) :-
2
if believes(X), X = on(A,C), B <> C then
3
delete(on(A,C))
4
end if,
5
insert(on(A,B)).
This removes the belief on(A,C) using the delete predicate from the bdiAgent
interface whenever the agent believes that A is on top of C ̸= B. The new
percept is subsequently inserted into the belief base using insert. Goals can
be similarly queried and updated using intention, adopt, and drop.
The belief and goal bases of the agent are implemented using the fact bases
belief_ respectively intention_:
1 facts
2
belief_ : (@Belief Belief) nondeterm.
3
intention_ : (@Goal Goal, decision* CurrentPlan) nondeterm.
where a goal has a stack of associated intentions for achieving the goal.
Operations on these Visual Prolog fact databases can then be implemented
as follows:
1 believes(Belief) :- belief_(Belief).
2 intention(Goal, CurrentPlan) :- intention_(Goal, CurrentPlan).
==PAGE:62==
50
Visual Prolog Agent Framework (ViPAF)
3 insert(B) :- if not(belief_(B)) then assertz(belief_(B)) end if.
4 delete(Belief) :- retractAll(belief_(Belief)).
5 adopt(G) :- if not(intention_(G,_)) then assertz(intention_(G,[achieve(G)])) end
if.
6 drop(Goal) :- retractAll(intention_(Goal,_)).
where the non-deterministic believes and intention predicates query the
belief- and goal-base respectively.
As seen in the adopt predicate, whenever an intention G is adopted the current
plan is set to [achieve(G)]. The purpose of this is to initialize planning for G
with a perform goal which will later be expanded during planning.
5.5.2
Option Ordering & Selection
After processing events the agent will sort the current goals according to a
meta-level planning predicate; decide.
This predicate, which is supplied by the planLibrary site, should order the
available goals in the goal base. Each goal has an associated stack of intentions
for achieving the goal.
This stack consists of goals and actions for further
decomposition respectively action execution on the environment. If there is any
applicable plan for the intended mean on top of the stack then the reasoning
cycle continues to the plan execution step. That is, in the case of an action the
precondition must hold, and in the case of a goal an applicable plan must exist.
Otherwise, the reasoning cycle will backtrack over the decide predicate to select
and try a new goal. Thus the ordering of goals can be speciﬁed declaratively.
If none of the goals are applicable then the reason predicate in Listing 6 will
ﬁnish execution and thereby forcing the agent to wait for external events in the
run predicate. That is, it is assumed that in the same mental state of the agent
the decide predicate of the plan library will select the same goals. This makes
it possible to wait for external events whenever the agent cannot proceed further
with any of the goals selected by the decide predicate, instead of simply busy
waiting by executing reasoning cycles.
5.5.3
Plan Execution
After a goal is selected the reasoning cycle proceeds to the plan execution step.
Predeﬁned plans provide the means for the agent to perform means-end reason-
==PAGE:63==
5.5 BDI Reasoning Cycle
51
ing as in PRS. Plans in ViPAF consists of three parts as in Jason: the event, the
context, and the plan reﬁnement. In Jason, a plan to achieve a goal would have
the form +!goal :
context <- body. In ViPAF the syntax is plan(goal) =
body :- context, where goal is an element of the goal type. For example,
the following plans in Jason for the Blocks World domain, where move is an
environment action:
1 +!on(X,Y) : on(X,Y).
2 +!on(X,Y) <- !clear(X); !clear(Y); move(X,Y).
3
4 +!clear(X) : X = table.
5 +!clear(X) : not(on(_,X)).
6 +!clear(X) : on(Y,X) <- !on(Y,table); !clear(X).
7
8 +!tower([X]) <- !on(X,table).
9 +!tower([X,Y|T]) <- !tower([Y|T]); !on(X,Y).
can be translated into equivalent plans in ViPAF with goal achievement deﬁni-
tions:
1 isAchieved(tower([X])) :- isAchieved(on(X,table)).
2 isAchieved(tower([X,Y|T])) :- isAchieved(on(X,Y)), isAchieved(tower([Y|T])).
3 isAchieved(on(X,Y)) :- believes(on(X,Y)).
4 isAchieved(clear(X)) :- X = table ; not((believes(B), B = on(_,X))).
5
6 plan(on(X,Y)) = [achieve(clear(X)),achieve(clear(Y)),perform(move(X,Y))].
7
8 plan(clear(X)) = [achieve(on(Y,table)),achieve(clear(X))] :-
9
believes(B), B = on(Y,X).
10
11 plan(tower([X])) = [achieve(on(X,table))].
12 plan(tower([X,Y|T])) = [achieve(tower([Y|T])),achieve(on(X,Y))].
The goal achievement predicate isAchieved deﬁnes when a goal is entailed by
the mental state of the agent, similarly to how a declarative achievement goal
would be achieved when it follows from the agent’s beliefs. Maintain goals can
be represented as well; they would simply have an achievement deﬁnition that
is always false as they should never be dropped from the agent’s goal base, and
the context of their plans would deﬁne when the goal is threatened.
The plan body is a sequence of new intentions in the form of perform goals
and actions that are needed to achieve the overall goal. This enables gradual
reﬁnement of intentions until they are either achieved or can be executed on the
environment. The reasons for using perform goals instead of achievement goals
in the plan body are the following:
1. It would be diﬃcult to create plans for perform goals that should only be
expanded at most once using achievement goals. Achievement goals would
==PAGE:64==
52
Visual Prolog Agent Framework (ViPAF)
necessarily have to be retried if a previous course of action fails to achieve
them.
2. Achievement goal-like semantics can easily be recovered by appending the
plan goal to the plan body, e.g. plan(G) = [...,achieve(G)] :- ...,
and maybe providing appropriate failure conditions through the hasFailed
predicate of the planLibrary interface to ensure that alternative plans for
the overall achievement goal will eventually be tried.
The top of the plan stack for the current intention selected by the option ordering
is checked if it is applicable, and if so then it is executed and the plan updated:
1 executePlan(Goal, [achieve(Subgoal)|Rest]) :-
2
if planSite:isAchieved(SubGoal) then
3
Elaboration = []
4
else
5
Elaboration = planSite:plan(Subgoal), !
6
end if,
7
NextPlan = list::append(Elaboration,Rest),
8
drop(Goal),
9
asserta(intention_(Goal,NextPlan)),
10
updateGoals().
11 executePlan(Goal, [perform(Action)|Rest]) :-
12
planSite:precondition(Action), !,
13
environment:perform(This,Action),
14
planSite:postcondition(Action), !,
15
drop(Goal),
16
asserta(intention_(Goal,Rest)),
17
updateGoals().
To ensure that the agent can focus on achieving the currently selected intention
the goal with the updated plan stack is inserted ﬁrst into the goal base, using
asserta, such that it is selected ﬁrst whenever the goal base is queried. Thus the
agent could potentially focus on one goal at a time by deﬁning option ordering
as follows:
decide() = Goal :- intention(Goal,_).
Preconditions for actions are useful to prevent illegal actions from being ex-
ecuted.
Postconditions are also useful as it may be valuable to update the
belief base immediately after action execution. For example, when performing a
move(X, Y ) action in a single-agent, deterministic, Blocks World environment it
may be valuable to update the beliefs about the position of block X and block
(or table) Y so that the agent can immediately continue planning instead of
waiting for environment updates. The precondition for the move(X, Y ) action
could be ¬on(_, X) ∧¬on(_, Y ). This precondition would necessarily need to
be implemented using a predicate in Visual Prolog. Thus ViPAF provides
==PAGE:65==
5.6 Environment Implementation
53
means for deﬁning precondition and postcondition predicates through the
planLibrary interface.
5.6
Environment Implementation
Current tools considered in the previous chapter provide two diﬀerent environ-
ment programming approaches; the agents and artifacts approach of CArtAgO
and the agents and entities approach of EIS. Taking inspiration from EIS,
ViPAF provides an interface, agentEnvironment, Table 5.2, that allows attach-
ment and detachment of agents to entities, performing actions on the environ-
ment, and starting the environment after an initialization period. Artifacts and
workspaces as in CArtAgO could also have been valuable to implement, but
as the framework is not distributed the simpler solution of providing an en-
vironment interface inspired by EIS and a support implementation has been
chosen.
The support implementation, basicEnvironment, allows for the creation of
agent environments using the support pattern by creating a class that inherits
the basicEnvironment and constructs basicEnvironmentSite objects. This
site implementation can then be used by the support implementation to react
to events such as an agent performing an action. In turn, the site can use the
predicates of the support interface to send percepts back to the agents.
The agentEnvironment interface then provides methods for starting the envi-
ronment, attaching and detaching agents to entities, and performing actions.
Regarding the additional features of EIS such as attachment of observers, reg-
istration of agents, adding and removing entities, and additional methods for
managing the environment, these are not supported in ViPAF for the following
reasons:
1. The main thread in Visual Prolog which usually sets up the ViPAF
MAS and starts the environment must be kept alive or the whole MAS
will terminate. If the main method ﬁnishes execution then the main thread
is terminated. Therefore the start predicate of the agentEnvironment
interface returns a lock-like object that the main thread can use to stall
its execution until the environment releases the lock whenever the MAS
is supposed to terminate. Stopping the environment is then supported
through the basicEnvironment support implementation instead, so that
the environment site can determine when the MAS is supposed to termi-
nate.
==PAGE:66==
54
Visual Prolog Agent Framework (ViPAF)
2. Observer attachment and agent registration have been ignored for simplic-
ity and to focus on the agent-entity attachment and detachment function-
ality instead.
3. For simplicity, agents are supplied at environment instantiation and cannot
be modiﬁed at runtime.
To ensure that the agents do not wait unnecessarily when the environment
is processing e.g. an action, a basicEnvironment runs in a separate thread
when the environment is started.
Furthermore, each predicate of the agent
Environment and basicEnvironment interfaces as implemented by the basic
Environment support, enqueues events on a monitor queue for future processing,
similarly to the external events of the bdiAgent support implementation. Each
event is then eventually dequeued and processed by the environment thread.
This ensures that access to the environment happens nearly asynchronously,
which is important as the environment may take a long time to update its state
whenever an agent performs and action. An asynchronous solution then allows
multiple agents to send actions without potentially sequentializing the whole
MAS whenever the environment is accessed. This also decouples the thread
calling the public predicates of agentEnvironment and basicEnvironment from
the basicEnvironmentSite, thereby preventing problems arising from the site
calling these predicates.
5.7
Organization Implementation
As with the two other levels of MAS programming ViPAF provides a target
interface agentOrganization for organizations and a support implementation
basicOrganization of an organization.
Some of the most basic components of an organizational model are concerned
with regulating role enacting agents and structuring roles to achieve organi-
zational objectives.
Roles in a basicOrganization are inspired by the role
descriptions of the Organizational Model of OperA; they have associated ob-
jectives, associated communication relationships between roles needed to fulﬁll
their objectives, and basic norms that the agents should comply with.
The agentOrganization interface provides support for agents to:
1. Enact roles using a deterministic predicate enactRole that succeeds and
returns role objectives whenever the agent in question is allowed to enact
the role.
==PAGE:67==
5.7 Organization Implementation
55
2. Leave roles using leaveRole.
3. Receive new objectives through fulfilledObjective for enacted roles
whenever the role enacting agent has fulﬁlled an organizational objective.
In contrast to the agent and agentEnvironment target interfaces agentOrganization
is a monitor interface. This simpliﬁes the implementation of the basicOrganization.
However, this also implies that basicOrganizationSite cannot inherit from
basicOrganization. Instead, the basicOrganization provides the necessary
information about the current role playing agents to the site whenever it is used.
An organization with a PC_member role similar to the example in Table 4.1 can
then be programmed by implementing a basicOrganizationSite as follows.
1 role("PC_member", InitialObjectives, roleRelations("PC_member")) :-
2
InitialObjectives = [choosePaper(papers)].
3
4 objectiveAchieved(Agent, "PC_member", choosePaper(Papers) =
5
[read(Papers:getChosen(Agent:name))] :- !.
6 objectiveAchieved(_
, "PC_member", read(P)) =
7
[writeReport(P)] :- !.
8 objectiveAchieved(Agent, "PC_member", writeReport(P)) =
9
[receiveReview(P,P:getReport(Agent:name))] :- !.
10 objectiveAchieved(_
, "PC_member", receiveReview(_,_)) =
11
[choosePaper(papers)] :- !.
12
13 canEnact(_, _, Qualifications, "PC_member") :-
14
understand(english) in Qualifications.
15
16 canPerform(PlayingAgents, Agent, Action) :-
17
tuple(Agent:name,"PC_member") in PlayingAgents,
18
!,
19
if Action = access(System) then
20
System = confManagementSystem
21
else if Action = reviewPaper(P,_Report) then
22
not(paperByColleague(P)),
23
not(deadlineExceeded(P))
24
end if.
25 canPerform(_, _, _)
26
27 canSend(_, _, _).
where the predicates roleRelations, paperByColleague, deadlineExceeded,
and the collection papers of paper objects, are deﬁned elsewhere.
In this example, the deterministic basicOrganizationSite predicates canEnact
and canPerform encode and enforce the norms of the PC_member role by restrict-
ing role enactment to agents understanding English and only allowing actions
related to the role that fulﬁlls the role’s obligations. Furthermore, the objectives
==PAGE:68==
56
Visual Prolog Agent Framework (ViPAF)
and sub-objectives of the role is deﬁned using the role and objectiveAchieved
predicates, such that a PC_member playing agent ﬁrst chooses a paper to review,
then reads the paper, then writes a report, and then ﬁnally receives a review
after which the process begins anew.
Because of the lack of partially bound terms in Visual Prolog, it is diﬃcult
to deﬁne role objectives in the organization with unbound variables, such as
the achievement goal paper_reviewed(Paper,Report) in the original example
in Table 4.1 where the variable Report is unbound until the report is written.
Instead, the above example solves these problems by passing objects representing
papers that the role-playing agents can choose and attach reports to.
5.7.1
Norm Compliance
Role enacting agents ought to comply with norms associated with their roles.
However, as an organization is a separate entity from the participating agents
and do not necessarily know the internals of the agents the organization can
at most observe the external behavior of the agents to determine whether they
comply with the rules of the organization. To determine whether a role enacting
agent in a basicOrganization comply with its norms the organization wraps
the agent’s environment in an actionGuard, Listing A.9, when the agent enacts
a role. This actionGuard acts as an environment, by supporting the agent
Environment interface, which only performs an action whenever it is allowed by
the organization:
1 availableEntities() = environment:availableEntities().
2 start() = environment:start().
3 attach(A,E) :- environment:attach(A,E).
4 detach(A,E) :- environment:detach(A,E).
5 perform(Agent, Action) :-
6
if organization:actionAllowed(Agent, Action) then
7
environment:perform(Agent, Action)
8
end if.
The basicOrganization then consults the supplied custom organization im-
plementation, site, to determine whether the agent can perform the action or
not:
1 actionAllowed(Agent,_) :- not(playingAgent_(Agent,_)), !.
2 actionAllowed(Agent,Action) :-
3
site:canPerform([tuple(A,R) || playingAgent_(A,R)],Agent,Action).
where the agents participating in the basicOrganization are stored using
a fact database: playingAgent_ :
(agent{@Belief,@Goal}, string Role)
==PAGE:69==
5.7 Organization Implementation
57
nondeterm.
Similarly, the basicOrganization wraps the participating agents themselves in
a messageGuard, Listing A.15, which constructs objects of the agent interface:
1 name() = agent:name.
2 addAgent(_).
3 perceive(_).
4 send(Message) :-
5
if organization:messageAllowed(Message,agent) then
6
agent:send(Message)
7
end if.
Whenever an agent successfully enacts a role the organization will inform the
agent of the other participating agents that are part of the role relationship
with the newly enacted agent, and also inform the relevant participating agents
of the new agent. Through this process the organization is able to only share
messageGuard-wrapped agents and can thus listen to and control the communi-
cation between the agents in the organization. The BDI agent implementation
ensures that the organization is informed of fulﬁlled objectives, and that the
agent communicates and acts through the norm-enforcement mechanisms.
==PAGE:70==
58
Visual Prolog Agent Framework (ViPAF)
==PAGE:71==
Chapter 6
Test Case: MAPC 2015
To demonstrate the utility of the framework an MAS has been developed for
the new Multi-Agent Programming Contest (MAPC) 2015 [map]. This MAS
uses the abstractions provided by the framework to form a team of agents that
cooperate to achieve common objectives in a partially observable, dynamic, and
multi-agent environment.
The MAPC is a yearly contest in the ﬁeld of MAS that attempts to stimulate
research in the area of MAS development and programming. It consists of a
server running simulations wherein two teams of agents compete to win. The
agents can connect to the server, receive percepts in the form of XML documents,
and send actions back to the server. A simulation proceeds in steps where the
agents ﬁrst perceive the state of the environment and themselves that their
entities can perceive, and then executes an action before a given deadline is
reached that signals the end of the step. When the last step is ﬁnished the
team with the highest score receives tournament points and a new simulation
is started.
After all the simulations are completed the team with the most
tournament points wins.
The ﬁrst section introduces the current MAPC 2015 scenario. The second sec-
tion analyses and describes an MAS for competing in the scenario developed
using ViPAF. The third section explains how the MAS have been benchmarked
and presents the results.
==PAGE:72==
60
Test Case: MAPC 2015
Figure 6.1: A screenshot of the scenario, showing the agents moving through
the streets of London with facilities spread throughout the map.
6.1
Scenario
In previous competitions the scenario consisted of a graph wherein two teams
of agents compete to gain control of certain areas of the graph. During MAPC
2013 I and a group of other students participated as the GOAL-DTU team
[ABSdB+13] [VJC+13]. This year a new scenario has been created, Figure 6.1,
which consists of two teams of agents moving through the streets of a realistic
city.
The overall goal of each team is to earn as much money as possible by completing
jobs - that is, items, as seen in Table 6.3, that need to be delivered to certain
locations - that are posted throughout the simulation. These jobs comprise the
acquisition, assembling, and transportation of goods. During the simulations
the teams have to decide which job to complete and how to complete the job,
i.e. where to acquire resources and how to navigate the map. There are diﬀerent
facilities on the map Table 6.1 providing diﬀerent services to the agents. These
facilities enable the agents to e.g. recharge, buy items, and deliver items. Some
==PAGE:73==
6.1 Scenario
61
Facility
Usage
Shop
Buying items
Storage
Mainly to deliver items for jobs
Charging Station
Recharging
Workshop
Assembling items
Dump Location
Removing items from inventory
Table 6.1: The facilities available in the current beta version of the MAPC
2015 scenario.
predeﬁned jobs are made available by the server throughout the simulation,
but each team can also choose to post jobs for the other team. Both methods
produce indistinguishable job postings, so the teams do not know whether the
environment or the other team posted a job. There are two diﬀerent kinds of
jobs:
• Priced jobs, which have a ﬁxed reward given to the ﬁrst team to deliver
the items at the storage location speciﬁed by the job.
• Auction jobs, which proceed in stages. First, the teams can bid on the
job until a certain number of steps are reached. Then the team with the
lowest bid is assigned the job. The job then proceeds as a priced job and
if delivered successfully the team that won the job will earn their bid.
The teams have to decide which jobs to complete and how to do that, i.e. where
to get the resources and how to navigate the map considering targets like shops,
warehouses, charging stations, storage facilities. The available facilities can be
seen in Table 6.1. A team consists of four diﬀerent types of agents as seen in
Table 6.2 that diﬀer in their speed, how they travel, their battery charge, the
volume of goods they can carry, and which tools they can employ to craft other
goods. Goods can be bought, crafted, given to a teammate, stored, delivered as
part of a job completion, recovered from a storage facility, and dumped.
The following quote from the MAPC 2015 documentation at [map] explains the
process of assembling items:
The crafting of an item requires the use of other goods, some
which serve as prime matter and some which serve as tools. Since
==PAGE:74==
62
Test Case: MAPC 2015
Entity role
Usable tools
Traveling
Speed
Battery
Load
method
capacity
capacity
Car
tool1, tool2
Roads
3
500
550
Drone
tool1
Straight lines
5
250
100
Motorcycle
tool1, tool3
Roads
4
350
300
Truck
tool2, tool3
Roads
1
1000
3000
Table 6.2: The roles available to the agents in the current beta version of the
MAPC 2015 scenario.
each kind of agent can only handle a subset of the tools, the crafting
of some goods require the explicit collaboration of 2 or more agents.
Agents possess a battery charge that gets decreased as they move
around from one place to another. They need to make sure they
never run out of charge, and therefore should plan their visits to the
charging stations accordingly.
6.2
Developed MAS
To decrease development time and complexity some simpliﬁcations have been
made:
1. Auction jobs are ignored.
2. The agents will never post jobs.
3. Storing items for later retrieval is ignored.
4. Agents will commit to, and never reconsider, completing every priced job
that becomes available.
Each agent, using the bdiAgent implementation, is attached to a basicEnvironment
that connects to the MAPC server and translates between the XML used by the
server and the representation used by the agents. In addition to the basicEnvironment
thread that waits for input from the agents another thread is spawned that waits
for input from the server over a socket. Thus three threads are needed for each
agent in the MAS.
The percepts and actions available to the agents, denoted mapcBelief respec-
tively mapcAction, can be deﬁned similarly to their speciﬁcation in the MAPC
2015 documentation.
==PAGE:75==
6.2 Developed MAS
63
Item
Volume
Assembled by
Tools
Consumables
tool1
10
Not assembled
tool2
100
Not assembled
tool3
30
-
8 × base1
base1
10
Not assembled
base2
10
Not assembled
base3
10
Not assembled
material1
10
1 × tool1
5 × base1
material2
20
1 × tool3
10 × base1
material3
100
1 × tool1
2 × material1
1 × tool2
2 × base2
1 × tool3
1 × base3
Table 6.3: The available items with their load requirements and required items
for assembly.
Tools are not consumed during assembly.
The
material items are used as deliverables for the default jobs in the
beta version of the MAPC 2015 package.
Note that assembling
material3 requires coordination between multiple agents because
of the required tools.
The agents can enact roles in a basicOrganization that explicitly deﬁne roles
used to control the behavior of the whole MAS and inform agents about the
speed and tools associated with their entity role.
All of the code for the MAS can be seen in Appendix C.
6.2.1
Goals
To complete jobs and earn money the agents need to successfully acquire, as-
semble, transport, and deliver items.
Furthermore, some items can only be crafted by collaboration between agents
by sharing items and tools necessary for assembling. Agents, of course, also
need to consider recharging and, as they have a ﬁnite load capacity for carrying
items, the ability to rid themselves of unneeded items by e.g. dumping them at
dumping locations.
Completing jobs can be decomposed into delivering certain or all items, assisting
an assembling agent with certain items and tools, and delegating these tasks
among the agents. These parts can then be accomplished by deﬁning relevant
==PAGE:76==
64
Test Case: MAPC 2015
achievement goals and plans for achieving them; deliver, deliverPartial,
assist, and delegateJob.
The deﬁnition of the goals and actions can be seen in Listing 8. These goals
are divided into goals loosely corresponding to actions, goals for job completion,
and role objectives for the agent organization.
6.2.2
Organizational Roles & Objectives
The overall objective of the MAS is to earn money by completing as many jobs
as possible whenever they become available.
As it is easier to delegate tasks for completing a job using a single agent than
to explicitly coordinate agents among themselves, a job scheduler role is deﬁned
which can only be enacted by a single agent.
This role has the sole objective of ensuring that the agents can complete jobs
by ﬁrst ﬁnding jobs and then delegating tasks. For delegating tasks the role
requires communication with agents that can complete the tasks. Thus the job
scheduler knows about agents enacting worker roles.
Each of the entity roles deﬁned in the MAPC 2015 documentation is made
available to enact by agents as workers. The purpose of a worker is to explore
shops so that the workers know where to buy items, acquire tools usable by
its entity role, and await and complete tasks received from the job scheduler.
Because the worker roles correspond to the entity roles each agent should only
be allowed to enact at most one worker role. As the current beta version of the
MAPC 2015 server does not inform the agents of their speed and tools available
to their roles, the organization will ensure that agents enacting worker roles are
informed of these attributes of their respective entity role.
6.2.3
Plans
After deﬁning the goals and the organizational roles and objectives, plans for
achieving goals can be developed. Each of the goals has an associated deﬁnition
of achievement and plan decomposition.
For example, the goal of delivering the items for a job can be broken down into
subgoals depending on the current state of the agent: 1) If the agent is carrying
==PAGE:77==
6.2 Developed MAS
65
deliverables necessary for the job then move towards the storage location men-
tioned in the job description and then perform a deliverJob action, 2) Acquire
more deliverables if possible, 3) Move towards a dump location and perform
dump actions if the agent is carrying too many unnecessary items that prevent
it from carrying deliverables. That is, the plans without contexts would be:
1 plan(deliver(Job)) = [achieve(goto(Storage)),perform(deliverJob(Job))] :- ...
2 plan(deliver(Job)) = [achieve(acquire(Item,Amount)),achieve(deliver(Job))] :- ...
3 plan(deliver(Job)) = [achieve(dump(Item)),achieve(deliver(Job))] :- ...
where the last two plans ensure that the deliver goal will be expanded later
after partially completing the goal by appending the deliver goal to the plan
body.
Movement must take into account the amount of charge consumed during travel.
Therefore, if the agent at some point while traveling does not believe that it can
successfully reach the target and then subsequently reach a charging-station,
it will intend to recharge ﬁrst at the nearest charging-station before traveling
further towards its destination. However, the agents do not perceive the nodes
of the map unless they are already traveling, in which case they will perceive the
current traveling route. This makes it impossible, given the information received
from the server, to calculate the real distance between facilities unless the agent
has previously begun traveling between those facilities. It is possible, however,
to calculate the straight line distance between facilities, i.e. the shortest distance,
as their coordinates are known, but this makes is possible for the agents to run
out of charge in some situations. To slightly alleviate the problem, the agents
will record the distances of the routes they travel between facilities, and they
will otherwise calculate the shortest distance times a constant larger than one.
When delegating tasks for completing jobs, the job scheduler agent will delegate
tasks according to the algorithm described in Algorithm 2. This task delegation
algorithm is a goal which is achieved when the tasks have been successfully
computed and sent to the agents. The agents are requested through messages
to inform the job scheduling agent about their speed, usable tools and items, and
their remaining capacity that they are willing to use for the job. By overriding
the default messaging behavior for those speciﬁc messages the agents are able
to respond to the requests:
1 received(Agent,ask(jobRequest(Job))) :-
2
...
3
if believes(B1), B1 = roleTools(Tools), not(IsBusy()) then
4
...
5
message(Agent, tell(jobReply(Job,name,Items,Tools,loadCapacity()-Load,
speed())))
6
else
7
message(Agent, tell(jobReply(Job,name,[],[],0,0)))
==PAGE:78==
66
Test Case: MAPC 2015
Job ID
Posted
Deadline
Deliverables
(step)
(step)
job1
20
420
3 × material1, 3 × material2
job2
30
430
2 × material3
job3
400
800
7 × base3
Table 6.4: The custom jobs that become available during the test simulations.
The rewards are not shown as the ﬁnal score is not part of the test.
(a) London
(b) Hannover
(c) Clausthal
Figure 6.2: The available maps in the current beta version of the MAPC 2015
package.
8
end if.
6.3
Test Setup & Results
The current version of the MAPC 2015 contest, and therefore the version used
for testing, is beta 0.1.5 (software package massim-2015-0.1.5).
The MAS and MAPC server have been executed during testing on a VirtualBox
virtual machine running Windows 7 (64-bit) with 2 GB RAM and an Intel Core
i7-4702MQ 2.20 GHz CPU with four virtual processors available to the virtual
machine.
There are three available simulation maps for the tournament: London (Fig-
ure 6.2a), Hannover (Figure 6.2b), and Clausthal (Figure 6.2c). Each job has
400 steps to be completed, to ensure that the agents have an adequate amount
of time to complete the jobs.
The jobs that will be available during the simulations can be seen in Table 6.4.
==PAGE:79==
6.3 Test Setup & Results
67
job1 should test if the agents can assemble and deliver multiple diﬀerent items.
job2 should test if the agents can coordinate and assist in assembling the items,
as material3 requires explicit cooperation between the agents to be assembled.
job3 should test if the agents can handle partial deliveries as the total load
of the deliverables exceeds the highest load capacity available to any entity.
Furthermore, job1 and job2 will be available at nearly the same steps of the
simulation, which should also test if the agents can handle multiple jobs at the
same time.
Every agent has 2750 ms to send an action to the server after each step has
begun. When the deadline is reached the server will begin simulating the next
step. This is the default deadline in the current beta version of the MAPC.
The developed MAS was tested against itself, controlling both teams, in three
diﬀerent tournaments of three simulations each, each tournament diﬀering in the
number of agents per role per team; one, two, and four. This may demonstrate
some diﬀerences in task delegation between diﬀerent team sizes, and should also
demonstrate that ViPAF can successfully execute the MAS when it is controlling
16 agents while still performing the required actions each step before the step
deadline.
Three diﬀerent tests for each tournament were performed to record diﬀerences
between identical tournaments. The results of the testing can be found in Ta-
ble 6.5. Elapsed time was measured using the Bash time command while exe-
cuting the MAPC server shell script in Cygwin.
A bug in ViPAF or the development version of Visual Prolog used during
testing was encountered thrice, and resulted each time in an agent crashing
with an access violation exception. The aﬀected tests were retried.
==PAGE:80==
68
Test Case: MAPC 2015
Elapsed
Agents
Tournament results (job completion step and team)
time
per
London
Hannover
Clausthal
(seconds)
team
131
4
job1:
167, B
job1:
240, B
job1:
147, B
job2:
257, B
job2:
372, B
job2:
260, B
job3:
610, B
job3:
Out of charge
job3:
617, B
130
4
job1:
167, A
job1:
240, A
job1:
147, B
job2:
272, A
job2:
349, A
job2:
257, B
job3:
609, A
job3:
Out of charge
job3:
618, B
130
4
job1:
167, A
job1:
240, A
job1:
147, A
job2:
257, A
job2:
349, A
job2:
257, A
job3:
609, A
job3:
Out of charge
job3:
617, A
199
8
job1:
167, A
job1:
239, A
job1:
146, A
job2:
194, B
job2:
238, A
job2:
156, B
job3:
610, A
job3:
Out of charge
job3:
615, A
207
8
job1:
167, A
job1:
239, B
job1:
146, B
job2:
181, B
job2:
238, B
job2:
156, A
job3:
610, A
job3:
Out of charge
job3:
615, B
182
8
job1:
193, A
job1:
251, A
job1:
146, A
job2:
168, B
job2:
238, A
job2:
156, A
job3:
611, A
job3:
Out of charge
job3:
616, A
355
16
job1:
237, A
job1:
249, A
job1:
146, A
job2:
168, B
job2:
258, A
job2:
170, A
job3:
599, B
job3:
Out of charge
job3:
532, B
396
16
job1:
167, B
job1:
249, A
job1:
146, B
job2:
Failed assembly
job2:
238, A
job2:
170, A
job3:
598, B
job3:
Out of charge
job3:
616, A
391
16
job1:
263, A
job1:
239, B
job1:
146, A
job2:
168, A
job2:
238, B
job2:
170, A
job3:
596, B
job3:
Out of charge
job3:
532, B
Table 6.5: The test results. Three test tournaments for each of the three dif-
ferent team sizes were performed. One tournament for the 4 agents
per team and two for the 16 agents per team failed to run due to
access violations and had to be retried.
==PAGE:81==
6.3 Test Setup & Results
69
Listing 8 The goals and actions available to the agents in the MAPC 2015
MAS, deﬁned using composite domains in Visual Prolog.
1
mapcAction =
2
assemble(string ItemId) ;
3
assistAssemble(string AgentId) ;
4
buy(string ItemId, integer Amount) ;
5
charge ;
6
deliverJob(string JobId) ;
7
dump(string ItemId, integer Amount) ;
8
store(string ItemId, integer Amount) ;
9
goto(string FacilityId) ;
10
skip.
11
12
mapcGoal =
13
% Basic agent goals
14
skip ;
15
gotoOnce(string Facility) ;
16
goto(string Facility) ;
17
recharge ;
18
acquire(string Item, integer Quantity) ;
19
assemble(string Item, integer Quantity) ;
20
dump(string Item) ;
21
assistAssemble(string Entity) ;
22
23
% Job completion tasks
24
delegateJob(string Job) ;
25
assist(string Job, string Entity, tuple{string Item, integer
Quantity}* Items) ;
,→
26
deliver(string Job) ;
27
deliverPartial(string Job, string Item) ;
28
29
% Organizational objectives
30
exploreShops ;
31
findJob.
==PAGE:82==
70
Test Case: MAPC 2015
Algorithm 2 Task assignment algorithm description.
1. Ask agents for their remaining load capacity, the tools available to their
roles, and their speed, if this has not been done before
2. When all the replies bave been received the task delegation plan can con-
tinue
3. Assign agents for delivering the required items
(a) If any agents are currently carrying deliverables then request them
to adopt the goal of delivering their currently held items for the job
(b) Assign the task of delivering the deliverables to the fastest agent that
can carry them
4. Assign items among the agents for buying or assembling the deliverables
(a) Calculate a shopping list of items needed for buying and/or assem-
bling the remaining deliverables
(b) Assign the tools needed for assembling the deliverables among the
agents
(c) Assign shopping list items to agents already carrying needed items
(d) Assign the remaining shopping list items among the agents who can
assemble the items if the items require assembling, where the agents
are sorted by largest remaining load capacity
5. Inform the agents of their assignments
(a) Send assistance goals to every agent that should assist the delivery
agent
(b) Tell the delivery agent about which agents are assisting and with
what items
(c) Inform the delivery agent that it should adopt the goal of delivering
the job
6. If an assignment of tasks could not be found then reset the job delegation
plan
==PAGE:83==
Chapter 7
Discussion
This chapter discusses and reﬂects on the testing and design of the framework.
The ﬁrst section discusses the results of the previous chapter while the rest of
the sections contain reﬂections and future work of the framework.
7.1
The MAPC 2015 Tests
Every agent was able to send actions in time at every step in all the tests,
implying that the framework can successfully execute at least two teams of
sixteen agents each in the new MAPC scenario.
As can be seen from the test results at Table 6.5 the agents were able to complete
the jobs most of the time. Furthermore, when the teams have additional agents
at their disposal they are able to complete multiple jobs in parallel and therefore
deliver the items faster for some of the jobs. This is to be expected as, in the case
with four agents, there are not enough agents to deliver both job1 and job2 at
the same time after the ﬁrst job has been delegated among the agents while this
is not the case with eight or sixteen agents. Thus, by modeling job scheduling
as an achievement goal that requires messaging other agents of their current
available resources, it has been possible to implement a delegation algorithm
that, to some extent, scales with the number of agents and handles an arbitrary
number of jobs. In addition, the behaviors of the two teams are very similar as
they are both executed using the same program and there is no randomization
==PAGE:84==
72
Discussion
of the maps.
Sometimes the teams diﬀered in who completed the jobs. One of the causes
could stem from the fact that similar agents from both teams sometime buy
the same items during the same step.
When some agents buy all the items
available at the shop, another agent buying at the same step fails at acquiring
the items. Thus, the agent that failed to buy the items must necessarily buy
the items at another shop or wait until the items become available again. These
unforeseen failures then leads to replanning in the aﬀected agents as they are
able to dynamically change their course of actions using plans to achieve their
goals. For example, in the ﬁrst simulation of the fourth test agents b1, a5, and
b5 are at shop3 where they try to buy one tool2 item each at the same step.
However, only two tool2 is available. b1 therefore fails to buy the item. Thus
b1 is forced to replan and therefore proceeds towards shop1 which has the item
for sale, demonstrating that b1 was able to dynamically change its course of
action when its previous action failed to produce the expected results.
Unfortunately, not all jobs were successfully completed. job2 in the ﬁrst sim-
ulation of the eight tournament failed to be delivered, seemingly because of a
bug in the item acquisition during assembly assistance goals. job3 in the Han-
nover map consistently failed to be delivered because the agent of each team
tasked with delivering the items for the job ran out of charge while moving to-
wards a charging station. The distance calculations are mostly approximate as
the agents do not know the underlying graph of the map, thus this may have
been the cause of the above problem. However, the majority of the jobs were
successfully completed in time.
7.2
Potential Interface Misuse
The default interfaces for the agents, environment, and organizations, provide
public predicates for diﬀerent and disjoint uses. However they do not prevent
misuse of these predicates.
For example, the agent interface, which can be seen in Listing A.2, contains a
method for perceiving percepts and one for sending messages. However, noth-
ing prevents a custom agent for the agent interface from calling the perceive
method, thereby triggering the percept processing functionality in the receiv-
ing agent even though the percept did not originate from the environment.
This should ideally not be possible, though the bdiAgent interface does prevent
leaking the agent interface to the planLibrary preventing such problems from
arising when using bdiAgents.
==PAGE:85==
7.3 Concurrency Model
73
Another example is the agentEnvironment interface, Listing A.1, where it con-
tains methods for starting the environment and enabling agents to interact with
the environment. Moreover, agentEnvironment does not prevent an agent from
e.g. performing actions for another agent given that the former agent have a ref-
erence to the latter agent.
7.3
Concurrency Model
The concurrency model currently used in ViPAF may not scale well. Each agent
is executed in its own thread thereby increasing context switching overhead with
the number of agents in the MAS. This may hurt reactivity of agents in a large
MAS.
A potential solution to this problem would be to execute the agent using a
thread pool. On a thread pool a ﬁxed number of threads would wait to execute
tasks enqueued on a thread-safe queue. Through this pool it may be possible
to better exploit the cores of a processor to maximize agent execution perfor-
mance regardless of the amount of agents in the MAS. However, the bdiAgent
implementation may need to be signiﬁcantly altered to ensure that every agent
is executed properly when the number of agents exceed the number of available
threads. For example, the run predicate of the bdiAgent currently waits on a
queue for external events whenever the agent cannot proceed further with its
goals to prevent busy waiting, which would be problematic with a ﬁxed number
of threads. Simply busy waiting by always enqueueuing the run predicate on
the thread pool would not be a satisfactory solution. Information about exter-
nal events would necessarily need to be enqueued on the thread pool to prevent
this, potentially sequentializing events for the whole MAS. Another potential
problem would be the reason predicate which may execute for an extended pe-
riod of time with the current implementation, hurting reactiveness of suspended
agents.
In a recent paper [ZRH15] diﬀerent concurrency conﬁgurations for a simple BDI
implementation has been tested and the results suggest that diﬀerent concur-
rency conﬁgurations may excel at diﬀerent tasks. The best concurrency model
may therefore depend on the application on the MAS.
==PAGE:86==
74
Discussion
7.4
Agent Messaging System
One of the reasons for adopting a messaging system wherein agents communicate
directly through method calls was that it, if implemented correctly, would allow
for quick concurrent messaging by enqueueing messages to a thread-safe event
queue owned by the receiving agent. However, this may not be the case for
custom agent architectures in ViPAF. It may have been possible to implement
a central messaging system with a similar amount of sequentialization to the
current implementation by simply sharing event queues through a messaging
system. Then the agent interface itself would not be concerned with handling
messages, as messages would then be sent through the messaging system.
As explained in previous chapters, speech act-based communication is a popular
method for agent communication. However, a small, ﬁxed number of performa-
tives speciﬁed in an agent communication language are inadequate [CS13, p.
107]. Often the meaning of the verbs change depending on the application, and
thus MAS developers often adopt additional ad hoc, hard-coded, meanings of
messages into their agents. Furthermore, the compound domains for the beliefs
and goals used for messaging cannot by themselves deﬁne relationships using
predicates between diﬀerent elements of the types, making them unsuitable for
representing a complete ontology. As a result, the agents become tightly coupled
with each other, creating diﬃculties when swapping out agents dynamically and
potentially negating the beneﬁt of using agent communication languages. Other
methods for agent communication also exists, such as commitment protocols
[CS13] and indirect communication [MF14, section 3], which may be beneﬁcial
to implement.
7.5
Norm Speciﬁcation & Enforcement Limita-
tions
The basicOrganization implementation and the agentOrganization interface
does not provide means for an agent to be informed of the norms and rules of a
role before deciding whether to enact the role. Similarly, the organization have
no means of ensuring that an agent enacting a role actually possess the necessary
capabilities for a given role at the time of role enactment. Norms could have
been implemented using compound domains and associated predicate deﬁnitions
similarly to beliefs and goals. However, in that case the bdiAgent would have
been parameterized with a norm type, necessitating specifying a norm type when
using bdiAgent, which is undesirable as not every MAS needs an organization.
==PAGE:87==
7.6 BDI Implementation Reactiveness
75
Additionally, after role enactment, the participating agents can easily circum-
vent the norm enforcement mechanisms, by simply not using the wrapped envi-
ronment and by noticing that the sender of a message is not wrapped. A central
messaging and action execution system, where an organization could be allowed
to observe and determine whether the events should be allowed, would have pre-
vented these problems. On the other hand it may not be desirable to prevent
norm deﬁance as norm enforcement restricts an agent’s autonomy, weakening a
fundamental property of agency.
7.6
BDI Implementation Reactiveness
The external event processing of the bdiAgent implementation may make agent
reactiveness problematic if events are added with a high frequency. In such cases
the agent would process many events at each reasoning cycle before furthering
its intentions. This could be problematic if the agent needs to respond quickly
to changes in the environment.
However, it may also be important that an agent processes all events before
deliberation and planning, as this would maintain a state of its beliefs that
corresponds to the part of the environment that it can see, enabling it to be
as rational as possible. For example, consider an agent in the Blocks World
domain that believes on(a, c) ∧on(b, table) ∧on(c, table) and the agent receives
the percepts on(a, table), on(b, a), and on(c, table) in that order. If the agent
has a goal of on(c, a) and it only processes the ﬁrst percept before acting, then
it may try to move block c on top of block a, even though this action would
fail. In the above example, performing a wrong action might not be much of
a problem, but in other domains performing the wrong actions may have huge
consequences.
7.7
Related Work
There exist many languages and tools for programming MASs on each of the
three levels of MAS programming. Only some tools have been explored in this
thesis as there are simply too many to consider. On the other hand, it was
suﬃcient during this project to only examine a few of those tools to design
ViPAF.
However, there also exists a complete MAS framework for developing MASs that
uniﬁes these three levels of MAS programming that have not been examined
==PAGE:88==
76
Discussion
either. This framework, JaCaMo [BBHR14], merges Jason, CArtAgO, and
Moise to provide means for programming at the agent level, environment level,
and social level, respectively.
While the three components of JaCaMo, especially Jason, have all to some
extend inﬂuenced the design of ViPAF, JaCaMo itself has not been consid-
ered. It may therefore be valuable, as future work, to explore how JaCaMo
accomplishes integration of its three components into a uniﬁed framework.
==PAGE:89==
Chapter 8
Conclusion
The aim of this project was to design and implement a framework for program-
ming MAS in the Visual Prolog programming language.
First, the theory of MAS and Visual Prolog necessary to understand the
implementation of the framework was presented.
Then several existing programming languages, modeling languages, and frame-
works for developing MAS on the three levels of multi-agent programming were
presented and compared.
Afterwards it was shown through an analysis and implementation of the func-
tionality of a framework how it has been implemented in Visual Prolog. This
framework, ViPAF, provides means for development on all three levels of MAS
programming.
Then ViPAF was used to develop an MAS for the Multi-Agent Programming
Contest to show that the framework can successfully be used to create an MAS
to solve a non-trivial problem. This developed multi-agent system was then
shown through tests, to be capable of competing in a reduced scenario of the
contest, but not without some bugs.
Finally, the test results were discussed and reﬂections on the framework design
were discussed.
Speciﬁcally, issues regarding running each agent in its own
thread, how the interfaces for the agent, environment, and organizations may be
misused, how messaging is implemented, and how norm enforcement is limited
in ViPAF.
==PAGE:90==
78
Conclusion
==PAGE:91==
Appendix A
Framework Code Listings
The directory structure for the code of the Visual Prolog framework project
is as follows, created using the tree Linux utility. Visual Prolog project ﬁles
and header have been omitted.
.
|-- agentEnvironment.i
|-- agent.i
|-- agentOrganization.i
|-- basicEnvironment
|
|-- basicEnvironment.cl
|
|-- basicEnvironment.i
|
|-- basicEnvironment.pro
|
`-- basicEnvironmentSite.i
|-- basicOrganization
|
|-- actionGuard.cl
|
|-- actionGuard.pro
|
|-- basicOrganization.cl
|
|-- basicOrganization.i
|
|-- basicOrganization.pro
|
|-- basicOrganizationSite.i
|
|-- messageGuard.cl
|
`-- messageGuard.pro
|-- bdiAgent
|
|-- bdiAgent.cl
|
|-- bdiAgent.i
==PAGE:92==
80
Framework Code Listings
|
|-- bdiAgent.pro
|
|-- eventQueue.cl
|
|-- eventQueue.i
|
|-- eventQueue.pro
|
`-- planLibrary.i
|-- rwLock
|
|-- rwLock.cl
|
|-- rwLock.i
|
`-- rwLock.pro
`-- syncout
|-- syncout.cl
`-- syncout.pro
.i ﬁles are interfaces, .cl ﬁles deﬁne the classes which usually each supports
an interface from a corresponding .i ﬁle, and .pro ﬁles are the implementation
of the corresponding classes in .cl ﬁles.
A.1
Framework Interfaces
Listing A.1: agentEnvironment.i
1 interface agentEnvironment{@Belief,@Goal,@Action}
2
open core
3
4 properties
5
availableEntities : string* (o).
6
7 predicates
8
start : () -> event TerminationLock determ.
9
attach : (agent{@Belief,@Goal} Agent, string Entity) determ.
10
detach : (agent{@Belief,@Goal} Agent, string Entity).
11
perform : (agent{@Belief,@Goal} Agent, @Action Action) determ.
12
13 end interface agentEnvironment
Listing A.2: agent.i
1 interface agent{@Belief,@Goal}
2
open core
3
4 domains
5
messageContents = tell(@Belief) ; untell(@Belief) ; ask(@Belief) ; adopt(
@Goal) ; drop(@Goal).
6
message = message(agent{@Belief,@Goal} Sender, messageContents Message).
7
8 predicates
==PAGE:93==
A.2 Basic Environment Implementation
81
9
perceive : (@Belief* Percept).
10
send : (message Message).
11
addAgent : (agent{@Belief,@Goal} Agent).
12
13 properties
14
name : string (o).
15
16 end interface agent
Listing A.3: agentOrganization.i
1 monitor interface agentOrganization{@Belief,@Goal,@Action}
2
open core
3
4 domains
5
playingAgent = tuple{agent{@Belief,@Goal}, string Role}.
6
7 properties
8
availableRoles : string* (o).
9
10 predicates
11
enactRole : (agent{@Belief,@Goal} Agent, agentEnvironment{@Belief,@Goal,
@Action}, @Belief* Qualifications, string Role) -> tuple{@Goal*
InitialObjectives, agentEnvironment{@Belief,@Goal,@Action}} determ.
12
leaveRole : (agent{@Belief,@Goal} Agent, string Role).
13
fulfilledObjective : (agent{@Belief,@Goal} Agent, string Role, @Goal
RoleObjective) -> @Goal* NewObjectives determ.
14
15 end interface agentOrganization
A.2
Basic Environment Implementation
Listing A.4: basicEnvironment.cl
1 class basicEnvironment{@Belief,@Goal,@Action} : basicEnvironment{@Belief,@Goal,
@Action}
2
open core
3
4 constructors
5
new : (basicEnvironmentSite{@Action}, string* Entities).
6
7 end class basicEnvironment
Listing A.5: basicEnvironment.i
1 interface basicEnvironment{@Belief,@Goal,@Action} supports agentEnvironment{
@Belief,@Goal,@Action}
2
open core
3
4 predicates
==PAGE:94==
82
Framework Code Listings
5
sendPercepts : (string Agent, @Belief*).
6
broadcastPercepts : (@Belief*).
7
agent : (string Agent, string Entity) nondeterm (i,i) (i,o) (o,i) (o,o).
8
stopEnvironment : ().
9
10 end interface basicEnvironment
Listing A.6: basicEnvironment.pro
1 implement basicEnvironment{@Belief,@Goal,@Action} inherits thread
2
open core
3
4 domains
5
envEvent =
6
percepts(agent{@Belief,@Goal}, @Belief*) ;
7
action(agent{@Belief,@Goal}, @Action) ;
8
finishAttaching(agent{@Belief,@Goal}, string Entity) ;
9
finishDetaching(agent{@Belief,@Goal}, string Entity) ;
10
terminateEnv.
11
12 predicates
13
run : runnable.
14
allAgents : () -> tuple{agent{@Belief,@Goal} Agent, string Entity}*.
15
handleEvent : (envEvent).
16
handlePostponedEvents : ().
17
debugPrint : (string Format [formatString], ...).
18
19 facts
20
entities : string* := erroneous.
21
terminationEvent : event := event::create(false,false).
22
running : boolean := false.
23
startLock : criticalSection := criticalSection::new().
24
agentRWLock : rwLock := rwLock::new().
25
agent_ : (agent{@Belief,@Goal}, string Entity) nondeterm.
26
newEvents : monitorQueue{envEvent} := monitorQueue::new().
27
postponedEvents : monitorQueue{envEvent} := monitorQueue::new().
28
site : basicEnvironmentSite{@Action}.
29
30 clauses
31
new(Site,Entities) :-
32
site := Site,
33
entities := Entities,
34
thread::start(run).
35
36 clauses
37
%%%%%%%%%%
38
%
39
% Helper predicates
40
%
41
%%%%%%%%%%
42
debugPrint(Format,...) :-
43
syncout::writef(string::concat("Environment: ",Format,"\n"),...).
44
45
allAgents() = L :-
46
agentRWLock:enterRead(),
==PAGE:95==
A.2 Basic Environment Implementation
83
47
L = [tuple(A,E) || agent_(A,E)],
48
agentRWLock:leaveRead().
49
50 clauses
51
%%%%%%%%%%
52
%
53
% Target interface
54
%
55
%%%%%%%%%%
56
availableEntities() = L :-
57
Attached = allAgents(),
58
L = [Entity || Entity in entities, not(tuple(_,Entity) in Attached)].
59
60
start() = terminationEvent :-
61
running = false,
62
startLock:enter(),
63
if running = false then
64
debugPrint("Starting environment"),
65
running := true, % It is crucial that this happens before the call to
site:initialize() as it ensures
66
% that calling start() inside site:initialize
() does not stall the thread
67
site:initialize(),
68
startLock:leave()
69
else
70
startLock:leave(),
71
fail
72
end if.
73
74
perform(Agent, Action) :-
75
running = true,
76
newEvents:enqueue(action(Agent,Action)).
77
78
attach(Agent,Entity) :-
79
not(agent(_,Entity)),
80
Entity in availableEntities,
81
!,
82
agentRWLock:requestWrite(),
83
agentRWLock:enterWrite(),
84
assertz(agent_(Agent,Entity)),
85
agentRWLock:leaveWrite(),
86
newEvents:enqueue(finishAttaching(Agent,Entity)),
87
debugPrint("Attached agent %",Agent:name).
88
89
detach(Agent,Entity) :-
90
agentRWLock:requestWrite(),
91
agentRWLock:enterWrite(),
92
retractAll(agent_(Agent,Entity)),
93
agentRWLock:leaveWrite(),
94
newEvents:enqueue(finishDetaching(Agent,Entity)),
95
debugPrint("Detached agent % from entity %",Agent:name,Entity).
96
97 clauses
98
%%%%%%%%%%
99
%
==PAGE:96==
84
Framework Code Listings
100
% Support interface
101
%
102
%%%%%%%%%%
103
agent(Agent, Entity) :- tuple(A,Entity) in allAgents(), Agent = A:name.
104
105
sendPercepts(Agent,Percepts) :-
106
if tuple(A,_) in allAgents(), A:name = Agent then
107
newEvents:enqueue(percepts(A,Percepts))
108
end if.
109
110
broadcastPercepts(Percepts) :-
111
foreach tuple(Agent,_) in allAgents() do
112
sendPercepts(Agent:name,Percepts)
113
end foreach.
114
115
stopEnvironment() :- newEvents:enqueue(terminateEnv).
116
117 clauses
118
%%%%%%%%%%
119
%
120
% Implementation
121
%
122
%%%%%%%%%%
123
run() :-
124
running = false,
125
!,
126
handleEvent(newEvents:dequeue()),
127
if running = true then
128
handlePostponedEvents()
129
end if,
130
run().
131
run() :-
132
handleEvent(newEvents:dequeue()),
133
run().
134
135
handleEvent(finishAttaching(Agent,Entity)) :- site:attached(Agent:name,
Entity).
136
handleEvent(finishDetaching(Agent,Entity)) :- site:detached(Agent:name,
Entity).
137
handleEvent(terminateEnv) :-
138
foreach tuple(Agent,Entity) in allAgents() do
139
detach(Agent,Entity)
140
end foreach,
141
terminationEvent:setSignaled(true).
142
handleEvent(percepts(Agent,Ps)) :-
143
if running = true then
144
Agent:perceive(Ps)
145
else
146
postponedEvents:enqueue(percepts(Agent,Ps))
147
end if.
148
handleEvent(action(Agent,Action)) :-
149
if running = true then
150
foreach tuple(Agent,Entity) in allAgents() do
151
site:performed(Agent:name,Entity,Action)
152
end foreach
==PAGE:97==
A.3 Basic Organization Implementation
85
153
else
154
postponedEvents:enqueue(action(Agent,Action))
155
end if.
156
157
handlePostponedEvents() :-
158
Event = postponedEvents:tryDequeue(),
159
!,
160
handleEvent(Event),
161
handlePostponedEvents().
162
handlePostponedEvents().
163
164 end implement basicEnvironment
Listing A.7: basicEnvironmentSite.i
1 interface basicEnvironmentSite{@Action}
2
open core
3
4 predicates
5
attached : (string Agent, string Entity).
6
detached : (string Agent, string Entity).
7
performed : (string Agent, string Entity, @Action).
8
initialize : ().
9
10 end interface basicEnvironmentSite
A.3
Basic Organization Implementation
Listing A.8: actionGuard.cl
1 class actionGuard{@Belief,@Goal,@Action} : agentEnvironment{@Belief,@Goal,@Action
}
2
open core
3
4 constructors
5
new : (agentEnvironment{@Belief,@Goal,@Action},basicOrganization{@Belief,
@Goal,@Action}).
6
7 end class actionGuard
Listing A.9: actionGuard.pro
1 implement actionGuard{@Belief,@Goal,@Action}
2
open core
3
4 facts
5
environment : agentEnvironment{@Belief,@Goal,@Action}.
6
organization : basicOrganization{@Belief,@Goal,@Action}.
7
8 clauses
==PAGE:98==
86
Framework Code Listings
9
new(Environment, Organization) :-
10
environment := Environment,
11
organization := Organization.
12
13 clauses
14
availableEntities() = environment:availableEntities.
15
start() = environment:start().
16
attach(A,E) :- environment:attach(A,E).
17
detach(A,E) :- environment:detach(A,E).
18
19
perform(Agent, Action) :-
20
if organization:actionAllowed(Agent, Action) then
21
environment:perform(Agent, Action)
22
end if.
23
24 end implement actionGuard
Listing A.10: basicOrganization.cl
1 class basicOrganization{@Belief,@Goal,@Action} : basicOrganization{@Belief,@Goal,
@Action}
2
open core
3
4 constructors
5
new : (basicOrganizationSite{@Belief,@Goal,@Action}).
6
7 end class basicOrganization
Listing A.11: basicOrganization.i
1 monitor interface basicOrganization{@Belief,@Goal,@Action} supports
agentOrganization{@Belief,@Goal,@Action}
2
open core
3
4 predicates
5
actionAllowed : (agent{@Belief,@Goal}, @Action) determ.
6
messageAllowed : (agent{@Belief,@Goal}::message, agent{@Belief,@Goal}
Receiver) determ.
7
8 end interface basicOrganization
Listing A.12: basicOrganization.pro
1 implement basicOrganization{@Belief,@Goal,@Action}
2
open core
3
4 facts
5
site : basicOrganizationSite{@Belief,@Goal,@Action}.
6
playingAgent_ : (agent{@Belief,@Goal}, string Role) nondeterm.
7
normGuards_ : (agent{@Belief,@Goal}, agentEnvironment{@Belief,@Goal,@Action},
agent{@Belief,@Goal}) nondeterm.
8
9 clauses
10
new(Site) :-
==PAGE:99==
A.3 Basic Organization Implementation
87
11
site := Site.
12
13 clauses
14
%%%%%%%%%%
15
%
16
% Target interface
17
%
18
%%%%%%%%%%
19
availableRoles() = [Role || site:role(Role,_,_)].
20
21
enactRole(Agent, Env, Qualifications, Role) = tuple(InitObjs,EnvGuard) :-
22
site:role(Role,InitObjs,Links),
23
not(playingAgent_(Agent, Role)),
24
Agents = [tuple(A,R) || playingAgent_(A,R)],
25
site:canEnact(Agents, Agent, Qualifications, Role),
26
if not(normGuards_(Agent,_,_)) then
27
G1 = actionGuard::new(Env,This),
28
G2 = messageGuard::new(Agent,This),
29
assert(normGuards_(Agent,G1,G2))
30
end if,
31
normGuards_(Agent,EnvGuard,Guard),
32
!,
33
assert(playingAgent_(Agent, Role)),
34
foreach playingAgent_(Agent2,Role2), normGuards_(Agent2,_,Guard2), site:
role(Role2,_,Links2) do
35
if Role2 in Links then
36
Agent:addAgent(Guard2)
37
end if,
38
if Role in Links2 then
39
Agent2:addAgent(Guard)
40
end if
41
end foreach.
42
43
leaveRole(Agent, Role) :-
44
retractAll(playingAgent_(Agent,Role)).
45
46
fulfilledObjective(Agent, Role, Objective) = NewObjectives :-
47
playingAgent_(Agent,Role),
48
site:role(Role,_,_),
49
!,
50
NewObjectives = site:objectiveAchieved(Agent, Role, Objective).
51
52 clauses
53
%%%%%%%%%%
54
%
55
% Support interface
56
%
57
%%%%%%%%%%
58
actionAllowed(Agent,_) :- not(playingAgent_(Agent,_)), !.
59
actionAllowed(Agent,Action) :-
60
site:canPerform([tuple(A,R) || playingAgent_(A,R)],Agent,Action).
61
62
messageAllowed(agent::message(Agent,_),_) :- not(playingAgent_(Agent,_)), !.
63
messageAllowed(Message,Agent) :-
64
site:canSend([tuple(A,R) || playingAgent_(A,R)],Message,Agent).
==PAGE:100==
88
Framework Code Listings
65
66 end implement basicOrganization
Listing A.13: basicOrganizationSite.i
1 interface basicOrganizationSite{@Belief,@Goal,@Action}
2
open core, agentOrganization{@Belief,@Goal,@Action}
3
4 predicates
5
role : (string Role, @Goal* InitialObjectives, string* RoleRelations)
nondeterm (i,i,i) (i,o,o) (o,o,o).
6
objectiveAchieved : (agent{@Belief,@Goal}, string Role, @Goal Objective)
-> @Goal* NewObjectives.
7
canEnact : (playingAgent*, agent{@Belief,@Goal}, @Belief* Qualifications,
string RoleName) determ.
8
canPerform : (playingAgent*, agent{@Belief,@Goal}, @Action) determ.
9
canSend : (playingAgent*, agent{@Belief,@Goal}::message, agent{@Belief,
@Goal} Receiver) determ.
10
11 end interface basicOrganizationSite
Listing A.14: messageGuard.cl
1 class messageGuard{@Belief,@Goal,@Action} : agent{@Belief,@Goal}
2
open core
3
4 constructors
5
new : (agent{@Belief,@Goal},basicOrganization{@Belief,@Goal,@Action}).
6
7 end class messageGuard
Listing A.15: messageGuard.pro
1 implement messageGuard{@Belief,@Goal,@Action}
2
open core
3
4 facts
5
agent : agent{@Belief,@Goal}.
6
organization : basicOrganization{@Belief,@Goal,@Action}.
7
8 clauses
9
new(Agent,Organization) :-
10
agent := Agent,
11
organization := Organization.
12
13 clauses
14
name() = agent:name.
15
addAgent(_).
16
perceive(_).
17
18
send(Message) :-
19
if organization:messageAllowed(Message,agent) then
20
agent:send(Message)
21
end if.
==PAGE:101==
A.4 BDI Agent Implementation
89
22
23 end implement messageGuard
A.4
BDI Agent Implementation
Listing A.16: bdiAgent.cl
1 class bdiAgent{@Belief,@Goal,@Action} : bdiAgent{@Belief,@Goal,@Action}
2
open core
3
4 constructors
5
new : (string Name, planLibrary{@Belief,@Goal,@Action} Plans,
agentEnvironment{@Belief,@Goal,@Action} Environment).
6
7 end class bdiAgent
Listing A.17: bdiAgent.i
1 interface bdiAgent{@Belief,@Goal,@Action} supports agent{@Belief,@Goal}
2
open core
3
4 domains
5
decision = achieve(@Goal) ; perform(@Action).
6
7 predicates
8
believes : (@Belief Belief) nondeterm (i) (o).
9
believesAll : (@Belief* Beliefs) nondeterm.
10
intention : (@Goal Goal, decision* CurrentPlan) nondeterm (i,i) (i,o) (o,i) (
o,o).
11
12
insert : (@Belief Belief).
13
delete : (@Belief Belief).
14
deleteAll : ().
15
adopt : (@Goal Goal).
16
drop : (@Goal Goal).
17
dropAll : ().
18
message : (string Agent, messageContents Message).
19
broadcast : (messageContents Message) -> string* ReceivingAgents.
20
21
tryEnactRole : (agentOrganization{@Belief,@Goal,@Action} Organization,
@Belief* Qualifications, string Role) determ.
22
leaveOrganization : (agentOrganization{@Belief,@Goal,@Action}).
23
24 end interface bdiAgent
Listing A.18: bdiAgent.pro
1 implement bdiAgent{@Belief,@Goal,@Action} inherits thread
2
open core
3
==PAGE:102==
90
Framework Code Listings
4 domains
5
externalEvent = msg(message) ; percepts(@Belief*).
6
communicationStatus = knownAgent ; unknownAgent.
7
8 predicates
9
run : ().
10
reason : ().
11
processEvents : (externalEvent*).
12
executePlan : (@Goal, decision*) determ.
13
isAchieved : (@Goal) -> @Goal* NewGoals determ.
14
updateGoals : ().
15
16 facts
17
planSite : planLibrary{@Belief,@Goal,@Action}.
18
name_ : string.
19
environment : agentEnvironment{@Belief,@Goal,@Action}.
20
externalEventQueue : eventQueue{externalEvent} := eventQueue::new().
21
agentLock : rwLock := rwLock::new().
22
23
belief_ : (@Belief Belief) nondeterm.
24
intention_ : (@Goal Goal, decision* CurrentPlan) nondeterm.
25
26
agent : (agent{@Belief,@Goal}, communicationStatus) nondeterm.
27
enactedRole : (agentOrganization{@Belief,@Goal,@Action}, string Role, @Goal*
CurrentObjectives) nondeterm.
28
29 clauses
30
%%%%
31
%
32
% Constructors
33
%
34
%%%%
35
new(Name,Plans,Environment) :-
36
name_ := Name,
37
planSite := Plans,
38
environment := Environment,
39
addAgent(This),
40
thread::start(run).
41
42 clauses
43
%%%%
44
%
45
% Exported BDI agent interface, to be used by the plan library
46
%
47
%%%%
48
adopt(Goal) :-
49
if not(intention_(Goal,_)) then
50
assertz(intention_(Goal,[achieve(Goal)]))
51
end if.
52
53
drop(Goal) :-
54
retractAll(intention_(Goal,_)).
55
56
dropAll() :-
57
retractAll(intention_(_,_)).
==PAGE:103==
A.4 BDI Agent Implementation
91
58
59
broadcast(Message) = [Agent:name || Agent in ReceivingAgents] :-
60
agentLock:enterRead(),
61
ReceivingAgents = [Agent || agent(Agent,knownAgent)],
62
agentLock:leaveRead(),
63
foreach Agent in ReceivingAgents do
64
Agent:send(agent::message(This,Message))
65
end foreach.
66
67
message(AgentName, Message) :-
68
agentLock:enterRead(),
69
if agent(Agent,_), Agent:name = AgentName then
70
Agent:send(agent::message(This,Message))
71
end if,
72
agentLock:leaveRead().
73
74
insert(Belief) :-
75
if not(belief_(Belief)) then
76
assertz(belief_(Belief))
77
end if.
78
79
delete(Belief) :-
80
retractAll(belief_(Belief)).
81
82
deleteAll() :-
83
retractAll(belief_(_)).
84
85
intention(Goal, CurrentPlan) :-
86
intention_(Goal, CurrentPlan).
87
88
believes(Belief) :-
89
belief_(Belief).
90
91
believesAll(Beliefs) :-
92
list::all(Beliefs, {(B) :- believes(B), !}).
93
94
tryEnactRole(Organization, Qualifications, Role) :-
95
not(enactedRole(Organization, Role, _)),
96
tuple(Objectives,NewEnv) = Organization:enactRole(This, environment,
Qualifications, Role),
97
environment := NewEnv,
98
foreach Obj in Objectives do
99
adopt(Obj)
100
end foreach,
101
assertz(enactedRole(Organization, Role, Objectives)).
102
103
leaveOrganization(Organization) :-
104
foreach Role in [R || enactedRole(Organization,R, _)] do
105
Organization:leaveRole(This,Role),
106
retractAll(enactedRole(Organization,Role, _))
107
end foreach.
108
109 clauses
110
%%%%
111
%
==PAGE:104==
92
Framework Code Listings
112
% Exported agent interface, to be used to control the agent
113
%
114
%%%%
115
name() = name_.
116
117
perceive(Percepts) :-
118
externalEventQueue:enqueue(percepts(Percepts)).
119
120
send(Message) :-
121
externalEventQueue:enqueue(msg(Message)).
122
123
addAgent(Agent) :-
124
agentLock:requestWrite(),
125
agentLock:enterWrite(),
126
if not((agent(A,_), A:name = Agent:name)) then
127
assertz(agent(Agent,knownAgent))
128
end if,
129
agentLock:leaveWrite().
130
131 clauses
132
%%%%
133
%
134
% Reasoning cycle implementation
135
%
136
%%%%
137
run() :-
138
reason(),
139
externalEventQueue:waitUntilNonempty(),
140
run().
141
142
% Executes reasoning cycles until no plan is applicable
143
reason() :-
144
% 1) Belief revision and option generation
145
processEvents(externalEventQueue:dequeueAll()),
146
147
% 2) Option filtering and selection
148
Goal = planSite:decide(),
149
intention_(Goal,CurrentPlan),
150
151
% 3) Intention execution
152
executePlan(Goal,CurrentPlan), !,
153
154
% 4) Loop
155
reason().
156
reason().
157
158
processEvents([Event|Events]) :-
159
if Event = percepts(Ps) then
160
foreach Percept in Ps do
161
planSite:perceived(Percept), !
162
end foreach
163
elseif Event = msg(message(Sender,Message)) then
164
agentLock:enterRead(),
165
if not((agent(S,_), S:name = Sender:name)) then
166
agentLock:leaveRead(),
==PAGE:105==
A.4 BDI Agent Implementation
93
167
% Temporarily insert the sending unknown agent so that the
receiving agent can respond to its messages
168
agentLock:requestWrite(),
169
agentLock:enterWrite(),
170
asserta(agent(Sender,unknownAgent)),
171
agentLock:leaveWrite()
172
else
173
agentLock:leaveRead()
174
end if,
175
if not(planSite:received(Sender:name,Message)) then
176
% Default message handling
177
if Message = tell(Belief) then
178
insert(Belief)
179
elseif Message = untell(Belief) then
180
delete(Belief)
181
elseif Message = ask(Belief) then
182
if believes(Belief) then
183
message(Sender:name, tell(Belief))
184
else
185
message(Sender:name, untell(Belief))
186
end if
187
elseif Message = adopt(Goal) then
188
adopt(Goal)
189
elseif Message = drop(Goal) then
190
drop(Goal)
191
end if
192
end if,
193
agentLock:requestWrite(),
194
agentLock:enterWrite(),
195
retractAll(agent(Sender,unknownAgent)),
196
agentLock:leaveWrite()
197
end if,
198
updateGoals(),
199
processEvents(Events).
200
processEvents([]).
201
202
executePlan(Goal, [achieve(Subgoal)|Rest]) :-
203
if planSite:isAchieved(SubGoal) then
204
Elaboration = []
205
else
206
Elaboration = planSite:plan(Subgoal),
207
!
208
end if,
209
NextPlan = list::append(Elaboration,Rest),
210
drop(Goal),
211
asserta(intention_(Goal,NextPlan)),
212
updateGoals().
213
executePlan(Goal, [perform(Action)|Rest]) :-
214
planSite:precondition(Action),
215
!,
216
environment:perform(This,Action),
217
planSite:postcondition(Action),
218
!,
219
drop(Goal),
220
asserta(intention_(Goal,Rest)),
==PAGE:106==
94
Framework Code Listings
221
updateGoals().
222
223 clauses
224
%%%%
225
%
226
% Helper predicates
227
%
228
%%%%
229
isAchieved(Goal) = NextObjSet:asList :-
230
planSite:isAchieved(Goal), !,
231
232
% Inform organizations whenever a goal has been achieved
233
NextObjSet = setM_fact::new(),
234
foreach tuple(Org, Role, Objectives) in [tuple(O,R,G) || enactedRole(O,R,
G)] do
235
if Goal in Objectives, NextObjectives = Org:fulfilledObjective(This,
Role,Goal) then
236
NewObjectives = list::append(list::remove(Objectives,Goal),
NextObjectives),
237
foreach Objective in NextObjectives do
238
NextObjSet:insert(Objective)
239
end foreach,
240
retractAll(enactedRole(Org,Role,Objectives)),
241
assert(enactedRole(Org,Role,NewObjectives))
242
end if
243
end foreach.
244
245
% Updates goals, to be used after an event processing or plan execution
246
updateGoals() :-
247
% Drop fulfilled goals
248
X = [tuple(Goal,NewGoals) || intention_(Goal,_), NewGoals = isAchieved(
Goal)],
249
foreach tuple(Goal,NewGoals) in X do
250
drop(Goal),
251
foreach NewGoal in NewGoals do
252
adopt(NewGoal)
253
end foreach
254
end foreach,
255
256
% Retry failed goals
257
Y = [Goal || intention_(Goal,Plan), (Plan = [] orelse planSite:hasFailed(
Goal,Plan))],
258
foreach Goal in Y do
259
drop(Goal),
260
adopt(Goal)
261
end foreach.
262
263 end implement bdiAgent
Listing A.19: eventQueue.cl
1 class eventQueue{@Elem} : eventQueue{@Elem}
2
open core
3
4
==PAGE:107==
A.4 BDI Agent Implementation
95
5 end class eventQueue
Listing A.20: eventQueue.i
1 monitor interface eventQueue{@Elem}
2
open core
3
4 predicates
5
waitUntilNonempty : ().
6
enqueue : (@Elem).
7
dequeueAll : () -> @Elem*.
8
9 end interface eventQueue
Listing A.21: eventQueue.pro
1 implement eventQueue{@Elem}
2
open core
3
4 facts
5
data : (@Elem) nondeterm.
6
7 clauses
8
waitUntilNonempty guard {:- data(_), !}.
9
waitUntilNonEmpty().
10
11
dequeueAll() = [H|T] :-
12
retract(data(H)), !, T = dequeueAll().
13
dequeueAll() = [].
14
15
enqueue(E) :- assertz(data(E)).
16
17 end implement eventQueue
Listing A.22: planLibrary.i
1 interface planLibrary{@Belief,@Goal,@Action}
2
open core
3
4 predicates
5
perceived : (@Belief Percept) multi.
6
received : (string AgentName, agent{@Belief,@Goal}::messageContents Message)
nondeterm.
7
plan : (@Goal Goal) -> bdiAgent{@Belief,@Goal,@Action}::decision*
PlanElaboration nondeterm.
8
isAchieved : (@Goal Goal) nondeterm.
9
hasFailed : (@Goal Intention, bdiAgent{@Belief,@Goal,@Action}::decision*
CurrentPlan) nondeterm.
10
decide : () -> @Goal nondeterm.
11
precondition : (@Action) nondeterm.
12
postcondition : (@Action) multi.
13
14 end interface planLibrary
==PAGE:108==
96
Framework Code Listings
A.5
Additional Classes
Listing A.23: rwLock.cl
1 class rwLock : rwLock
2
open core
3
4
5 end class rwLock
Listing A.24: rwLock.i
1 monitor interface rwLock
2
open core
3
4 predicates
5
enterRead : ().
6
enterWrite : ().
7
requestWrite : ().
8
leaveRead : ().
9
leaveWrite : ().
10
11 end interface rwLock
Listing A.25: rwLock.pro
1 implement rwLock
2
open core
3
4 facts
5
readers : integer := 0.
6
writer : boolean := false.
7
writeRequest : integer := 0. % Favor access for writers
8
9 clauses
10
enterRead guard {:- writeRequest = 0, writer = false}.
11
enterRead() :-
12
readers := readers+1.
13
14 clauses
15
leaveRead() :-
16
if readers > 0 then
17
readers := readers-1
18
end if.
19
20 clauses
21
requestWrite() :-
22
writeRequest := writeRequest+1.
23
24 clauses
25
enterWrite guard {:- readers = 0, writer = false}.
26
enterWrite() :-
27
writer := true.
==PAGE:109==
A.5 Additional Classes
97
28
29 clauses
30
leaveWrite() :-
31
if writeRequest > 0 then
32
writeRequest := writeRequest-1
33
end if,
34
writer := false.
35
36 end implement rwLock
Listing A.26: syncout.cl
1 monitor class syncout
2
open core
3
4 predicates
5
write : (...).
6
writef : (string Format [formatString], ...).
7
8 end class syncout
Listing A.27: syncout.pro
1 implement syncout
2
open core
3
4 clauses
5
write(...) :- stdio::write(...).
6
writef(Format, ...) :- stdio::writef(Format, ...).
7
8 end implement syncout
==PAGE:110==
98
Framework Code Listings
==PAGE:111==
Appendix B
MAS Examples Code Listings
This appendix lists the example implementations in ViPAF of MASs for the
Blocks World environment and the Domestic Robot environment.
B.1
Blocks World Example
Listing B.1: Deﬁnition of the beliefs/percepts, actions, and goals deﬁned in
the interface deﬁnition bwEnvironment.i for the Blocks World
environment.
1 interface bwEnvironment supports agentEnvironment{bwBelief,bwGoal,bwAction}
2
open core
3
4 domains
5
bwBlock = a ; b ; c ; d ; e ; f ; g.
6
bwObject = blk(bwBlock) ; table.
7
bwBelief = ready ; on(bwBlock,bwObject).
8
bwGoal = tower(bwBlock*) ; on(bwBlock,bwObject) ; clear(bwBlock).
9
bwAction = move(bwBlock,bwObject).
10
11 end interface bwEnvironment
Listing B.2: An
agent
implementation
for
the
Blocks
World
domain
(bwAgent.pro), making use of the support pattern.
It imple-
ments a planLibrary that is used by the inherited bdiAgent
class. BDI functionality provided by bdiAgent can easily be used
by the plan library because of the inheritance.
==PAGE:112==
100
MAS Examples Code Listings
1 implement bwAgent inherits bdiAgent{bwBelief,bwGoal,bwAction} supports
planLibrary{bwBelief,bwGoal,bwAction}
2
open core, bwEnvironment
3
4 predicates
5
isStacked : (bwBlock*) determ.
6
7 clauses
8
new(Name,InitialDesires,Environment) :-
9
bdiAgent::new(Name,This,Environment),
10
foreach Desire in InitialDesires do
11
adopt(Desire)
12
end foreach.
13
14 clauses
15
isStacked([X]) :- believes(on(X,table)), !.
16
isStacked([X,Y|R]) :- believes(on(X,blk(Y))), !, isStacked([Y|R]).
17
18 clauses
19
%%%%
20
%
21
% Clauses supplied by the agent programmer
22
%
23
%%%%
24
precondition(_) :- believes(ready).
25
postcondition(_) :- delete(ready).
26
27
decide() = Goal :-
28
believes(ready), intention(Goal,_).
29
30
isAchieved(tower([X|T])) :-
31
isStacked([X|T]), not((believes(B), B = on(_,blk(X)))).
32
isAchieved(on(X,Y)) :-
33
believes(on(X,Y)), !.
34
isAchieved(clear(X)) :-
35
not((believes(B), B = on(_,blk(X)))).
36
37
hasFailed(_,_) :- fail.
38
39
perceived(P) :-
40
if P = on(A,B), believes(X), X = on(A,C), B <> C then
41
delete(on(A,C))
42
end if,
43
insert(P).
44
45
received(_Sender,_Message).
46
47
plan(tower([X])) = [
48
achieve(on(X,table)),
49
achieve(clear(X))].
50
plan(tower([X,Y|R])) = [
51
achieve(tower([Y|R])),
52
achieve(on(X,blk(Y))),
53
achieve(clear(X))].
==PAGE:113==
B.1 Blocks World Example
101
54
55
plan(on(X,Y)) = [achieve(on(Z,table)),achieve(on(X,Y))] :-
56
believes(B), B = on(Z,blk(X)).
57
plan(on(X,blk(Y))) = [achieve(on(Z,table)),achieve(on(X,blk(Y)))] :-
58
believes(B), B = on(Z,blk(Y)).
59
plan(on(X,Y)) = [perform(move(X,Y))].
60
61
plan(clear(X)) = [achieve(on(Y,table)),achieve(clear(X))] :-
62
believes(B), B = on(Y,blk(X)).
63
64 end implement bwAgent
Listing B.3: An implementation bwEnvironment.pro of an environment for
the Blocks World domain, using the supplied basicEnvironment
class.
1 implement bwEnvironment inherits basicEnvironment{bwBelief,bwGoal,bwAction}
supports basicEnvironmentSite{bwAction}
2
open core
3
4 predicates
5
tower : (bwBlock*) nondeterm anyflow.
6
printState : ().
7
prettify : (bwAction) -> string.
8
9 facts
10
on_ : (bwBlock,bwObject) nondeterm.
11
12 clauses
13
on_(a,table).
14
on_(b,table).
15
on_(c,blk(b)).
16
on_(d,blk(e)).
17
on_(e,blk(f)).
18
on_(f,blk(g)).
19
on_(g,table).
20
21 clauses
22
new() :-
23
basicEnvironment::new(This,["BWRobot0","BWRobot1"]),
24
printState().
25
26 clauses
27
tower([X]) :- on_(X,table).
28
tower([X,Y|R]) :- on_(X,blk(Y)), tower([Y|R]).
29
30 clauses
31
prettify(move(X,table)) = string::format("move(%,table)",X).
32
prettify(move(X,blk(Y))) = string::format("move(%,%)",X,Y).
33
34 clauses
35
printState() :-
36
Towers = list::sort([T || tower(T), not(tower([_|T]))]),
37
syncout::writef("Environment: Current state: %\n",Towers).
==PAGE:114==
102
MAS Examples Code Listings
38
39 clauses
40
performed(Agent, Entity, move(X,Y)) :-
41
Action = prettify(move(X,Y)),
42
if not(on_(_,blk(X))), (Y = table ; not(on_(_,Y))) then
43
syncout::write("Environment: ",Agent," performed action ",Action, "
for entity ",Entity,"\n"),
44
retractAll(on_(X,_)),
45
asserta(on_(X,Y)),
46
broadcastPercepts([on(X,Y)])
47
else
48
syncout::write("Environment: ",Agent," performed non-applicable or
unknown action ",Action,"\n")
49
end if,
50
sendPercepts(Agent,[ready]),
51
printState().
52
53 clauses
54
attached(Agent, _) :- sendPercepts(Agent,[on(X,Y) || on_(X,Y)]).
55
56 clauses
57
detached(_,_).
58
59 clauses
60
initialize() :- broadcastPercepts([ready]).
61
62 end implement bwEnvironment
B.2
Domestic Robot Example
Listing B.4: Deﬁnitions for the beliefs/percepts, actions, and goals deﬁned in
the interface deﬁnition for the Domestic Robot environment.
1 interface domesticRobotEnvironment supports agentEnvironment{drBelief,drGoal,
drAction}
2
open core
3
4 constants
5
robotName : string = "Robot".
6
ownerName : string = "Owner".
7
supermarketName : string = "Supermarket".
8
9
robotEntity : string = "RobotEntity".
10
ownerEntity : string = "OwnerEntity".
11
supermarketEntity : string = "SupermarketEntity".
12
13 domains
14
beverage = beer ; wine ; water.
15
location = owner ; fridge ; supermarket.
16
drBelief =
17
delivered(string Name, beverage) ;
==PAGE:115==
B.2 Domestic Robot Example
103
18
ordered(beverage) ;
19
consumed(unsigned Quantity) ;
20
at(location) ;
21
holdingBeverage ;
22
stock(location, beverage, unsigned Quantity).
23
drGoal =
24
order(beverage, unsigned Quantity, string Requester) ;
25
has(location,beverage) ;
26
drink(beverage) ;
27
at(location) ;
28
send(string Agent, agent{drBelief,drGoal}::messageContents Message).
29
drAction =
30
deliver(beverage,unsigned Quantity) ;
31
get(beverage) ;
32
sip(beverage) ;
33
handIn(beverage) ;
34
moveTowards(location) ;
35
terminateMAS(drBelief).
36
37 end interface domesticRobotEnvironment
Listing B.5: A Robot agent implementation for the Domestic Robot example.
1 implement robotAgent inherits bdiAgent{drBelief,drGoal,drAction} supports
planLibrary{drBelief,drGoal,drAction}
2
open core, domesticRobotEnvironment
3
4 predicates
5
tooMuch : () determ.
6
7 facts
8
beverageLimit : unsigned := 10.
9
10 clauses
11
tooMuch() :-
12
believes(B), B = consumed(N),
13
!,
14
N >= beverageLimit.
15
16 clauses
17
new(Name,Environment) :-
18
bdiAgent::new(Name,This,Environment),
19
insert(consumed(0)).
20
21 clauses
22
decide() = Goal :- intention(Goal,_).
23
24 clauses
25
isAchieved(has(owner,X)) :-
26
believes(delivered(name,X)),
27
!,
28
delete(delivered(name,X)).
29
isAchieved(at(X)) :-
30
believes(at(X)), !.
31
==PAGE:116==
104
MAS Examples Code Listings
32
hasFailed(_,_) :- fail.
33
34 clauses
35
precondition(terminateMAS(_)) :- tooMuch.
36
precondition(get(_)) :- not(believes(holdingBeverage)).
37
precondition(handIn(_)) :- believes(holdingBeverage).
38
precondition(_).
39
40
postcondition(terminateMAS(B)) :- insert(B).
41
postcondition(get(_)) :- insert(holdingBeverage).
42
postcondition(handIn(X)) :-
43
insert(delivered(name,X)),
44
delete(holdingBeverage),
45
(believes(B), B = consumed(N) orelse N = 1),
46
delete(consumed(N)),
47
insert(consumed(N+1)).
48
postcondition(moveTowards(_)) :-
49
if believes(B), B = at(_) then delete(B) end if.
50
postcondition(_).
51
52 clauses
53
plan(has(owner,X)) = [perform(terminateMAS(delivered(name,X)))] :-
54
tooMuch.
55
plan(has(owner,X)) = [achieve(at(fridge)),achieve(has(owner,X))] :-
56
not(believes(holdingBeverage)),
57
believes(B1), B1 = at(Loc), Loc <> fridge.
58
plan(has(owner,X)) = Subplan :-
59
not(believes(holdingBeverage)),
60
believes(at(fridge)),
61
believes(stock(fridge,X,0)),
62
not(believes(ordered(X))),
63
Subplan = [
64
achieve(send(supermarketName,adopt(order(X,5,name)))),
65
achieve(has(owner,X))
66
].
67
plan(has(owner,X)) = [perform(get(X)),achieve(at(owner)),perform(handIn(X))]
:-
68
not(believes(holdingBeverage)),
69
believes(at(fridge)),
70
believes(B1), B1 = stock(fridge,X,N), N > 0,
71
believes(B2), B2 = consumed(_).
72
73
plan(at(X)) = [perform(moveTowards(X)),achieve(at(X))] :-
74
believes(B), B = at(_),
75
not(believes(at(X))).
76
77
plan(send(Agent,Message)) = [] :-
78
Message = adopt(order(X,_,_)),
79
message(Agent,Message),
80
insert(ordered(X)).
81
82 clauses
83
received(A,M) :- syncout::writef("%: got message % from %\n",name,M,A), fail.
84
85 clauses
==PAGE:117==
B.2 Domestic Robot Example
105
86
perceived(stock(Loc,Beverage,N)) :-
87
if believes(ordered(Beverage)) then
88
delete(ordered(Beverage)),
89
perceived(stock(Loc,Beverage,N))
90
elseif believes(B), B = stock(Loc,Beverage,M) then
91
delete(stock(Loc,Beverage,M)),
92
perceived(stock(Loc,Beverage,N))
93
else
94
insert(stock(Loc,Beverage,N))
95
end if.
96
perceived(at(Location)) :-
97
if believes(B), B = at(Loc) then
98
delete(at(Loc)),
99
perceived(at(Location))
100
else
101
insert(at(Location))
102
end if.
103
perceived(_).
104
105
106 end implement robotAgent
Listing B.6: A Owner agent implementation for the Domestic Robot example.
1 implement ownerAgent inherits bdiAgent{drBelief,drGoal,drAction} supports
planLibrary{drBelief,drGoal,drAction}
2
open core, domesticRobotEnvironment
3
4 clauses
5
new(Name,Environment) :-
6
bdiAgent::new(Name,This,Environment).
7
8 clauses
9
decide() = Goal :- intention(Goal,_).
10
11 clauses
12
isAchieved(drink(Beverage)) :-
13
believes(stock(owner,Beverage,0)), !.
14
15
hasFailed(_,_) :- fail.
16
17 clauses
18
precondition(_).
19
20
postcondition(sip(Beverage)) :-
21
if believes(B), B = stock(owner,Beverage,_) then
22
delete(B)
23
end if.
24
postcondition(_).
25
26 clauses
27
plan(drink(Beverage)) = [perform(sip(Beverage)),achieve(drink(Beverage))] :-
28
believes(B), B = stock(owner,Beverage,N), N > 0.
29
30 clauses
==PAGE:118==
106
MAS Examples Code Listings
31
received(A, M) :-
32
syncout::writef("%: ignoring message % from %\n",name,M,A).
33
34 clauses
35
perceived(stock(owner,Beverage,N)) :-
36
if believes(B), B = stock(owner,Beverage,M) then
37
delete(stock(owner,Beverage,M))
38
end if,
39
if N = 0, Beverage = beer then
40
message(robotName,adopt(has(owner,beer)))
41
else
42
adopt(drink(beer))
43
end if,
44
insert(stock(owner,Beverage,N)).
45
perceived(_).
46
47 end implement ownerAgent
Listing B.7: A Supermarket agent implementation for the Domestic Robot
example.
1 implement supermarketAgent inherits bdiAgent{drBelief,drGoal,drAction} supports
planLibrary{drBelief,drGoal,drAction}
2
open core, domesticRobotEnvironment
3
4 clauses
5
new(Name,Environment) :-
6
bdiAgent::new(Name,This,Environment).
7
8 clauses
9
decide() = Goal :-
10
intention(Goal,_), Goal = order(_,_,_).
11
12 clauses
13
isAchieved(order(Beverage,_,_)) :-
14
believes(delivered(name,Beverage)),
15
!,
16
delete(delivered(name,Beverage)).
17
18
hasFailed(_,_) :- fail.
19
20 clauses
21
precondition(_).
22
23
postcondition(deliver(B,_)) :- insert(delivered(name,B)).
24
postcondition(_).
25
26 clauses
27
plan(order(B,Quantity,Agent)) = [
28
perform(deliver(B,Quantity)),
29
achieve(send(Agent,tell(delivered(name,B))))
30
].
31
32
plan(send(Agent,Message)) = [] :-
==PAGE:119==
B.2 Domestic Robot Example
107
33
message(Agent,Message).
34
35 clauses
36
received(_,_) :- !, fail.
37
38 clauses
39
perceived(_).
40
41 end implement supermarketAgent
Listing B.8: The environment implementation for the Domestic Robot imple-
mentation.
1 implement domesticRobotEnvironment inherits basicEnvironment{drBelief,drGoal,
drAction} supports basicEnvironmentSite{drAction}
2
open core
3
4 predicates
5
ownerPerformed : (string Agent, drAction) determ.
6
robotPerformed : (string Agent, drAction) determ.
7
supermarketPerformed : (string Agent, drAction) determ.
8
9 facts
10
stock : (location, beverage, unsigned Quantity) nondeterm.
11
at : (string Entity, location) nondeterm.
12
robotHasBeverage : boolean := false.
13
14 clauses
15
stock(owner,beer,0).
16
stock(fridge,beer,2).
17
stock(supermarket,beer,100).
18
stock(supermarket,wine,100).
19
stock(supermarket,water,100).
20
at(ownerEntity,owner).
21
at(robotEntity,owner).
22
at(supermarketEntity,supermarket).
23
24 clauses
25
new() :-
26
basicEnvironment::new(This,[robotEntity,supermarketEntity,ownerEntity]).
27
28 clauses
29
initialize() :-
30
foreach agent(Agent,Entity), at(Entity,Location), stock(Location,Beverage
,Quantity) do
31
sendPercepts(Agent,[at(Location),stock(Location,Beverage,Quantity)])
32
end foreach.
33
34 clauses
35
performed(Agent,Entity,Action) :-
36
syncout::writef("% performed action % for entity %\n",Agent,Action,Entity
),
37
fail.
38
performed(_Agent,_Entity,terminateMAS(_)) :-
==PAGE:120==
108
MAS Examples Code Listings
39
stopEnvironment(),
40
!.
41
performed(Agent, Entity, Action) :-
42
if Entity = ownerEntity then
43
ownerPerformed(Agent,Action), !
44
elseif Entity = robotEntity then
45
robotPerformed(Agent,Action), !
46
else
47
supermarketPerformed(Agent,Action), !
48
end if.
49
performed(Agent, Entity, Action) :-
50
syncout::writef("WARNING: % (%) performed illegal action %\n",Agent,
Entity,Action).
51
52 clauses
53
ownerPerformed(Agent, sip(Beverage)) :-
54
stock(owner,Beverage,N), N > 0,
55
retract(stock(owner,Beverage,N)),
56
assert(stock(owner,Beverage,N-1)),
57
!,
58
foreach at(Entity,owner), agent(Agent,Entity) do
59
sendPercepts(Agent, [stock(owner,Beverage,N-1)])
60
end foreach.
61
62
robotPerformed(_, get(Beverage)) :-
63
robotHasBeverage = false,
64
at(robotEntity,fridge),
65
stock(fridge,Beverage,N),
66
N > 0,
67
retract(stock(fridge,Beverage,N)),
68
assert(stock(fridge,Beverage,N-1)),
69
!,
70
robotHasBeverage := true,
71
foreach at(Entity,fridge), agent(Agent,Entity) do
72
sendPercepts(Agent, [stock(fridge,Beverage,N-1)])
73
end foreach.
74
robotPerformed(_, handIn(Beverage)) :-
75
robotHasBeverage = true,
76
at(robotEntity,owner),
77
retract(stock(owner,Beverage,N)),
78
assert(stock(owner,Beverage,N+1)),
79
!,
80
robotHasBeverage := false,
81
foreach at(Entity,owner), agent(Agent,Entity) do
82
sendPercepts(Agent, [stock(owner,Beverage,N+1)])
83
end foreach.
84
robotPerformed(Agent, moveTowards(Loc)) :-
85
Loc <> supermarket,
86
retract(at(robotEntity,_)),
87
assert(at(robotEntity,Loc)),
88
!,
89
sendPercepts(Agent, [at(Loc)|[stock(Loc,Beverage,N) || stock(Loc,Beverage
,N)]]).
90
91
supermarketPerformed(_, deliver(Beverage,Quantity)) :-
==PAGE:121==
B.2 Domestic Robot Example
109
92
stock(supermarket,Beverage,N),
93
N - Quantity >= 0,
94
retract(stock(fridge,Beverage,M)),
95
retract(stock(supermarket,Beverage,N)),
96
assert(stock(fridge,Beverage,M+Quantity)),
97
assert(stock(supermarket,Beverage,N-Quantity)),
98
!,
99
foreach at(Entity,supermarket), agent(Agent,Entity) do
100
sendPercepts(Agent, [stock(supermarket,Beverage,N-Quantity)])
101
end foreach,
102
foreach at(Entity,fridge), agent(Agent,Entity) do
103
sendPercepts(Agent, [stock(fridge,Beverage,M+Quantity)])
104
end foreach.
105
106 clauses
107
detached(_, _).
108
109 clauses
110
attached(_, _).
111
112
113 end implement domesticRobotEnvironment
==PAGE:122==
110
MAS Examples Code Listings
==PAGE:123==
Appendix C
MAPC 2015 MAS Code
Listings
The MAPC 2015 MAS consists of the following classes:
1. mapc2015Demo: Sets up and executes the MAS.
2. mapcAgent: The plan library for the agents.
3. mapcOrganization: A basicOrganization used by the agents.
4. massimInterface: A basicEnvironment that provides an interface to the
MAPC 2015 server.
5. perceptParser: Provides functionality for translating the XML received
from the server into percepts.
Listing C.1: mapc2015Demo.cl
1 class mapc2015Demo
2
open core
3
4 predicates
5
run : core::runnable.
6
7 end class mapc2015Demo
Listing C.2: mapc2015Demo.pro
==PAGE:124==
112
MAPC 2015 MAS Code Listings
1 implement mapc2015Demo
2
open core, massimInterface
3
4 class facts
5
terminationEvents : event* := [].
6
7 class facts - masConfig
8
server : (string IP, integer Port) determ.
9
team : (string* Agents, string Password) nondeterm.
10
11 clauses
12
run() :-
13
console::init(),
14
try
15
file::consult("masconfig.txt",masConfig)
16
catch _ do
17
S1 = "Error reading server configuration file \"masconfig.txt\"",
18
S2 = "Create configuration file first, e.g.:",
19
S3 = "server(\"127.0.0.1\",12300).",
20
S4 = "team([\"a1\",\"a2\",\"a3\",\"a4\"],\"1\").",
21
S5 = "team([\"b1\",\"b2\",\"b3\",\"b4\"],\"1\").",
22
syncout::writef("%\n%\n%\n%\n%\n",S1,S2,S3,S4,S5),
23
fail
24
end try,
25
(server(IP,Port) orelse syncout::write("ERROR: Invalid server
configuration\n"), fail),
26
foreach team(Agents,Password) do
27
Org = basicOrganization::new(mapcOrganization::new()),
28
foreach Name in Agents do
29
Env = massimInterface::new(IP,Port,Name,Password),
30
Agent = mapcAgent::new(Name,Env,Org),
31
if Env:attach(Agent,Name), Event = Env:start() then
32
terminationEvents := [Event|terminationEvents]
33
else
34
syncout::writef("WARNING: Could not attach agent %\n",Name)
35
end if
36
end foreach
37
end foreach,
38
!,
39
foreach Event in terminationEvents do
40
_ = Event:wait()
41
end foreach,
42
syncout::writef("Program finished\n"),
43
programControl::sleep(1000).
44
run().
45
46 end implement mapc2015Demo
Listing C.3: mapcAgent.i
1 interface mapcAgent supports agent{mapcBelief,mapcGoal}
2
open core, massimInterface
3
4 end interface mapcAgent
==PAGE:125==
113
Listing C.4: mapcAgent.cl
1 class mapcAgent : mapcAgent
2
open core, massimInterface
3
4 constructors
5
new : (string Name, agentEnvironment{mapcBelief,mapcGoal,mapcAction},
agentOrganization{mapcBelief,mapcGoal,mapcAction}).
6
7 end class mapcAgent
Listing C.5: mapcAgent.pro
1 implement mapcAgent inherits bdiAgent{mapcBelief,mapcGoal,mapcAction} supports
planLibrary{mapcBelief,mapcGoal,mapcAction}
2
open core, massimInterface
3
4 facts
5
organization : agentOrganization{mapcBelief,mapcGoal,mapcAction}.
6
7
routeDist : (string Facility1, string Facility2, real RouteDistance)
nondeterm.
8
9
team : string := "".
10
currentStep : integer := -1.
11
12
knownSpeed : optional{integer} := none.
13
14
lastActionInfo : (string ActionName, string Params, string Result) determ.
15
16
latitude : real := 0.
17
longitude : real := 0.
18
19
currentCharge : integer := 0.
20
knownBatteryCapacity : optional{integer} := none.
21
22
currentLoad : integer := 0.
23
knownLoadCapacity : optional{integer} := none.
24
25
inFacility : optional{string} := none.
26
wasInFacility : optional{string} := none.
27
28
routeLength : integer := 0.
29
route : node* := [].
30
31 predicates
32
enactRoles : ().
33
34
approximatelyEqualWaypoints : (real Lat1, real Lon1, real Lat2, real Lon2)
determ.
35
d : (real FromLat, real FromLon, real ToLat, real ToLon) -> real
EuclideanDistance.
36
d : (real FromLat, real FromLon, node* Route) -> real EuclideanDistance.
37
38
loadCapacity : () -> integer determ.
==PAGE:126==
114
MAPC 2015 MAS Code Listings
39
batteryCapacity : () -> integer determ.
40
speed : () -> integer determ.
41
42
shouldRecharge : (string ToFacility, string ChargingStation) determ (i,o).
43
44
isFacility_nd : (string Name, real Latitude, real Longitude) nondeterm (i,o,o
) (o,o,o).
45
isFacility : (string Name, real Latitude, real Longitude) determ (i,o,o) (o,o
,o).
46
isFacility : (mapcBelief,string Name, real Latitude, real Longitude) determ (
i,o,o,o) (i,i,o,o).
47
48
nearestFacility_nd : (real Lat, real Lon, string Facility, real Distance)
nondeterm (i,i,o,o).
49
nearestChargingStation_nd : (real Lat, real Lon, string Station, real
Distance) nondeterm (i,i,o,o).
50
nearestWorkshop : (real Lat, real Lon, string Workshop, real Distance) determ
(i,i,o,o).
51
chargingStationBetween : (real Lat1, real Lon1, real Lat2, real Lon2, string
Station, real Distance) determ (i,i,i,i,o,o).
52
53
maxCarryableAmount : (string Item, integer MaxAmount, integer Amount, integer
ItemLoad) determ (i,i,o,o) (i,i,i,o).
54
maxCarryableAmount : (string Item, integer ExtraLoad, integer MaxAmount,
integer Amount, integer ItemLoad) determ (i,i,i,o,o) (i,i,i,i,o).
55
56
hasAmount : (string Item) -> integer Amount.
57
hasAssistanceAmount : (string Item) -> integer AssistedAmount.
58
missingDeliveryAmount : (string Job, string Item) -> integer Missing determ.
59
volume : (string Item) -> integer Volume determ.
60
assembly : (string Item, item* Consumed, item* Tools) determ (i,o,o).
61
allConsumed : (string Item) -> string* ConsumedItems determ.
62
manufacturingLoad : (string Item) -> integer Volume determ.
63
64 clauses
65
new(Name,Env,Org) :-
66
bdiAgent::new(Name,This,Env),
67
organization := Org.
68
69 clauses
70
enactRoles() :-
71
WorkerRoles = ["Truck","Car","Drone","Motorcycle"],
72
EntityRoles = [truck,car,drone,motorcycle],
73
NonWorkers = [R || R in organization:availableRoles, not(R in WorkerRoles
)],
74
believes(B), B = role(EntityRole),
75
Worker = list::tryGetNth(list::tryGetIndex(EntityRole,EntityRoles),
WorkerRoles),
76
foreach Role in [Worker|NonWorkers] do
77
if tryEnactRole(organization,[B],Role) then
78
syncout::writef("%: Enacted role %\n",name,Role)
79
end if
80
end foreach,
81
!.
82
enactRoles().
==PAGE:127==
115
83
84 clauses
85
approximatelyEqualWaypoints(Lat1,Lon1,Lat2,Lon2) :-
86
math::abs(Lat1-Lat2) < 0.0001, math::abs(Lon1-Lon2) < 0.0001.
87
88
d(FromLat,FromLon,ToLat,ToLon) = Dist :-
89
% Known route distance between two facilities
90
routeDist(F1,F2,Dist),
91
isFacility_nd(F1,F1Lat,F1Lon), approximatelyEqualWaypoints(FromLat,
FromLon,F1Lat,F1Lon),
92
isFacility_nd(F2,F2Lat,F2Lon), approximatelyEqualWaypoints(ToLat,ToLon,
F2Lat,F2Lon),
93
!.
94
95
d(FromLat,FromLon,ToLat,ToLon) = 1.2*Dist :-
96
% Unknown distance, so calculate the lower bound and assume the distance
is longer as a precaution
97
D1 = FromLat-ToLat, D2 = FromLon-ToLon, Dist = math::sqrt(D1*D1+D2*D2).
98
99
d(FromLat,FromLon,Route) = TotalDist :-
100
EuclDist = {(n(_,X1,Y1),tuple(X0,Y0,D)) = tuple(X1,Y1,D+d(X0,Y0,X1,Y1))},
101
tuple(_,_,TotalDist) = list::fold(Route,EuclDist,tuple(FromLat,FromLon
,0.0)).
102
103 clauses
104
loadCapacity() = C :- knownLoadCapacity = some(C).
105
batteryCapacity() = C :- knownBatteryCapacity = some(C).
106
speed() = S :- knownSpeed = some(S).
107
108 clauses
109
isFacility(B,N,Lat,Lon) :-
110
(B = chargingStation(N,Lat,Lon,_,_,_,_) or B = dumpLocation(N,Lat,Lon,_)
111
or B = shop(N,Lat,Lon,_) or B = storage(N,Lat,Lon,_,_,_,_) or B =
workshop(N,Lat,Lon,_)).
112
113
isFacility_nd(N,Lat,Lon) :- believes(B), isFacility(B,N,Lat,Lon).
114
115
isFacility(N,Lat,Lon) :- isFacility_nd(N,Lat,Lon), !.
116
117 clauses
118
nearestFacility_nd(Lat,Lon,Facility,d(Lat,Lon,FLat,FLon)) :-
119
L = [tuple(BName,BLat,BLon) || isFacility_nd(BName,BLat,BLon)],
120
S = list::sortBy({(tuple(_,X0,Y0),tuple(_,X1,Y1)) = compare(d(X0,Y0,Lat,
Lon),d(X1,Y1,Lat,Lon))},L),
121
tuple(Facility,FLat,FLon) in S.
122
123 clauses
124
nearestChargingStation_nd(Lat,Lon,Station,Dist) :-
125
nearestFacility_nd(Lat,Lon,Station,Dist), believes(B), B =
chargingStation(Station,_,_,_,_,_,_).
126
127 clauses
128
nearestWorkshop(Lat,Lon,Workshop,Dist) :-
129
nearestFacility_nd(Lat,Lon,Workshop,Dist), believes(B), B = workshop(
Workshop,_,_,_), !.
==PAGE:128==
116
MAPC 2015 MAS Code Listings
130
131 clauses
132
chargingStationBetween(Lat1,Lon1,Lat2,Lon2,MinStation,MinDist) :-
133
L1 = [tuple(N1,D1) || nearestChargingStation_nd(Lat1,Lon1,N1,D1)],
134
L2 = [tuple(N2,D2) || nearestChargingStation_nd(Lat2,Lon2,N2,D2)],
135
L3 = [tuple(N3,D1+D2) || tuple(N3,D1) in L1, tuple(N3,D2) in L2],
136
L3 = [_|_],
137
tuple(MinStation,MinDist) = list::minimumBy({(tuple(_,D1),tuple(_,D2)) =
compare(D1,D2)},L3).
138
139 clauses
140
shouldRecharge(ToFacility,ChargingStation) :-
141
% Check if we're en route to a non-charging station facility
142
isFacility(ToFacility,ToLat,ToLon),
143
not((believes(B), B = chargingStation(ToFacility,_,_,_,_,_,_))),
144
Condition1 = {:- lastActionInfo("goto",string::concat("facility=",
ToFacility),"successful")},
145
Condition2 = {:- n(_,LastLat,LastLon) = list::tryGetLast(route),
approximatelyEqualWaypoints(LastLat,LastLon,ToLat,ToLon)},
146
(Condition1() orelse Condition2()),
147
148
% Approximate expected charge consumption for journey to target +
charging station
149
StepsToTarget = routeLength/speed(),
150
StepsToTarget > 0.0,
151
ApproxDistPerStep = d(latitude,longitude,route)/StepsToTarget,
152
ApproxDistPerStep > 0.0,
153
nearestChargingStation_nd(ToLat,ToLon,_,CDist1), !,
154
ApproxStepsToStation1 = CDist1/ApproxDistPerStep,
155
156
% Check if we cannot reach the target and subsequent charging station
157
GotosRemaining = math::floor(currentCharge/10) - 5, % Steps remaining for
moving, with a threshold
158
StepsToTarget+ApproxStepsToStation1 > GotosRemaining,
159
160
% See if we can reach a charging station while moving towards the target
161
% If not, just move towards the nearest charging station
162
chargingStationBetween(latitude,longitude,ToLat,ToLon,CStation2,CDist2),
163
ApproxStepsToStation2 = CDist2/ApproxDistPerStep,
164
if ApproxStepsToStation2 < GotosRemaining then
165
ChargingStation = CStation2
166
else
167
nearestChargingStation_nd(latitude,longitude,ChargingStation,_), !
168
end if.
169
170 clauses
171
maxCarryableAmount(Item,MaxAmount,Amount,ItemLoad) :-
172
maxCarryableAmount(Item,0,MaxAmount,Amount,ItemLoad).
173
maxCarryableAmount(Item,ExtraLoad,MaxAmount,Amount,Amount*Volume) :-
174
believes(B), B = product(Item,Volume,Assembly),
175
!,
176
if Assembly = assembledBy(Consumed,_) then
177
SumList = {(L) = list::fold(L,{(X,Y) = X+Y},0)},
178
ConsumedLoad = SumList([math::min(Needed,hasAmount(I)) || item(I,
quantity(Needed)) in Consumed]),
==PAGE:129==
117
179
Load = currentLoad - ConsumedLoad + ExtraLoad
180
else
181
Load = currentLoad + ExtraLoad
182
end if,
183
if MaxAmount*Volume+Load <= loadCapacity() then
184
Amount = MaxAmount
185
else
186
Amount = std::between(0,MaxAmount),
187
Amount*Volume+Load <= loadCapacity(),
188
(Amount+1)*Volume+Load > loadCapacity(),
189
!
190
end if.
191
192 clauses
193
hasAmount(I) = A :- (believes(B), B = hasItem(I,A) orelse A = 0).
194
hasAssistanceAmount(I) = list::fold([Q || believes(B), B = hasAssistance(_,_,
L), tuple(I,Q) in L],{(X,Y) = X+Y},0).
195
missingDeliveryAmount(Job,Item) = Needed - Delivered :-
196
believes(B), B = pricedJob(Job,_,_,_,_,Items),
197
item(Item,delivered(Needed,Delivered)) in Items, !.
198
missingDeliveryAmount(Job,Item) = Needed - Delivered :-
199
believes(B1), B1 = pricedJob(Job,_,_,_,_,Items),
200
believes(B2), B2 = hasDelivered(Job,DeliveredItems),
201
item(Item,quantity(Needed)) in Items,
202
tuple(Item,Delivered) in DeliveredItems, !.
203
volume(I) = V :- believes(B), B = product(I,V,_), !.
204
assembly(I,C,T) :- believes(B), B = product(I,_,assembledBy(C,T)), !.
205
allConsumed(I) = [I] :- not(assembly(I,_,_)), !.
206
allConsumed(I) = list::removeDuplicates(list::append([X || item(X,_) in C],L)
)
:-
207
assembly(I,C,T),
208
L = list::appendList([allConsumed(X) || item(X,_) in list::append(C,T)]).
209
manufacturingLoad(I) = V :- believes(B), B = product(I,V,notAssembled), !.
210
manufacturingLoad(I) = math::max(Sum:value,V) :-
211
believes(B), B = product(I,V,assembledBy(C,T)),
212
!,
213
Sum = varM_integer::new(0),
214
foreach item(P,quantity(Q)) in list::append(C,T), PL = manufacturingLoad(
P) do
215
Sum:add(Q*PL)
216
end foreach.
217
218 clauses
219
% Most goals should not be achieved before belief revision is finished at
each step
220
isAchieved(Goal) :- not(believes(requestAction)), !, Goal = skip.
221
isAchieved(goto(Facility)) :- inFacility = some(Facility).
222
isAchieved(gotoOnce(Facility)) :- isAchieved(goto(Facility)).
223
isAchieved(recharge) :- currentCharge >= batteryCapacity().
224
isAchieved(exploreShops) :-
225
believes(B1), B1 = shop(_,_,_,[_|_]),
226
not((believes(B2), B2 = shop(_,_,_,Items), item(_,noItemInfo) in Items)).
227
isAchieved(findJob) :- believes(B), B = jobDelegated(_), !, delete(B).
228
isAchieved(deliver(Job)) :-
229
believes(B1), B1 = pricedJob(Job,_,_,End,_,Items),
==PAGE:130==
118
MAPC 2015 MAS Code Listings
230
FailedJob = {:- End < currentStep orelse lastActionInfo("deliver_job",_,"
failed_job_status")},
231
CompletedJob = {:- list::all(Items,{(item(I,_)) :- missingDeliveryAmount(
Job,I) <= 0})},
232
(FailedJob() orelse CompletedJob()),
233
foreach believes(B2), B2 = hasAssistance(Job,_,_) do delete(B2) end
foreach,
234
if FailedJob() then
235
foreach believes(B3), B3 = hasItem(Item,_), item(Item,_) in Items do
236
adopt(dump(Item))
237
end foreach
238
end if.
239
isAchieved(deliverPartial(Job,Item)) :-
240
(0 = hasAmount(Item) orelse missingDeliveryAmount(Job,Item) <= 0 orelse
isAchieved(deliver(Job))).
241
isAchieved(assist(Job,_,_)) :- isAchieved(deliver(Job)).
242
isAchieved(assemble(Item,Quantity)) :- Quantity <= hasAmount(Item).
243
isAchieved(acquire(Item,Quantity)) :- Quantity <= hasAmount(Item)+
hasAssistanceAmount(Item).
244
isAchieved(dump(Item)) :- 0 = hasAmount(Item).
245
246 clauses
247
hasFailed(_,_) :- fail.
248
249 clauses
250
precondition(_) :- believes(requestAction).
251
252 clauses
253
postcondition(deliverJob(Job)) :-
254
if believes(B1), B1 = pricedJob(Job,_,_,_,_,Items) then
255
insert(deliveryAttempt(Job,[tuple(I,Q) || believes(B2), B2 = hasItem(
I,Q), item(I,_) in Items]))
256
end if,
257
delete(requestAction).
258
postcondition(_) :- delete(requestAction).
259
260 clauses
261
decide() = Goal :- believes(requestAction), intention(Goal,Plan), Plan = [
perform(_)|_].
262
decide() = findJob :- believes(requestAction), intention(findJob,_).
263
decide() = Goal :- believes(requestAction), intention(Goal,_), Goal <> skip.
264
decide() = skip :- believes(requestAction), adopt(skip).
265
266 clauses
267
%%%%%
268
%
269
% Action performing plans
270
%
271
%%%%%
272
plan(skip) = [perform(skip)].
273
274
plan(recharge) = [perform(charge),achieve(recharge)] :-
275
believes(B), B = chargingStation(Facility,_,_,_,_,_,_), inFacility = some
(Facility),
276
currentCharge < batteryCapacity().
==PAGE:131==
119
277
278
279
%%%%%
280
%
281
% Movement plans
282
%
283
%%%%%
284
plan(gotoOnce(ToFacility)) = [achieve(goto(ChargingStation)),achieve(recharge
)] :-
285
shouldRecharge(ToFacility,ChargingStation).
286
plan(gotoOnce(Facility)) = [perform(goto(Facility))].
287
288
plan(exploreShops) = [achieve(gotoOnce(Shop)),achieve(exploreShops)] :-
289
nearestFacility_nd(latitude,longitude,Shop,_),
290
believes(B), B = shop(Shop,_,_,Items),
291
item(_,ItemInfo) in Items,
292
(ItemInfo = quantity(_) or ItemInfo = noItemInfo),
293
not(inFacility = some(Shop)).
294
295
plan(goto(Facility)) = [achieve(gotoOnce(Facility)),achieve(goto(Facility))].
296
297
298
%%%%%
299
%
300
% Item acquisition plans
301
%
302
%%%%%
303
plan(acquire(Item,Quantity)) = [perform(buy(Item,Amount)),achieve(acquire(
Item,Quantity))] :-
304
% Buy the items at the current shop if possible
305
inFacility = some(Shop),
306
believes(B), B = shop(Shop,_,_,Items),
307
item(Item,sale(MaxAmount,_,_)) in Items, MaxAmount > 0,
308
Amount = math::min(Quantity-hasAmount(Item)-hasAssistanceAmount(Item),
MaxAmount),
309
Amount > 0.
310
plan(acquire(Item,Quantity)) = [achieve(gotoOnce(Shop)),achieve(acquire(Item,
Quantity))] :-
311
% Buy the items at the nearest shop
312
nearestFacility_nd(latitude,longitude,Shop,_),
313
not(inFacility = some(Shop)),
314
believes(B), B = shop(Shop,_,_,Items),
315
item(Item,sale(MaxAmount,_,_)) in Items, MaxAmount > 0.
316
plan(acquire(Item,Quantity)) = [achieve(assemble(Item,Quantity))] :-
317
% Try to manufacture the items
318
believes(B), B = product(Item,_,assembledBy(_,_)).
319
plan(acquire(Item,Quantity)) = [achieve(gotoOnce(Shop)),achieve(acquire(Item,
Quantity))] :-
320
% Shops may need to be explored first
321
nearestFacility_nd(latitude,longitude,Shop,_),
322
believes(B), B = shop(Shop,_,_,Items),
323
(Items = [] or item(_,noItemInfo) in Items).
324
325
plan(assemble(Item,Quantity)) = [perform(assemble(Item)),achieve(assemble(
Item,Quantity))] :-
==PAGE:132==
120
MAPC 2015 MAS Code Listings
326
% Just try assembling again if previous assemble action failed
327
% Assembling is never supposed to be performed unless every required item
is (promised to be) available
328
lastActionInfo("assemble",Params,Result),
329
string::hasPrefix(Result,"failed",_),
330
Params = string::format("item=%",Item).
331
plan(assemble(Item,Quantity)) = [achieve(acquire(Item,Quantity))] :-
332
% The item is not assemblable
333
believes(B), B = product(Item,_,notAssembled).
334
plan(assemble(Item,Quantity)) = Subplan :-
335
% Assemble items when every requried item is either carried by the agent
or obtained through an assisting agent
336
believes(B1), B1 = product(Item,_,assembledBy(Consumed,Tools)),
337
HasItem = {(item(I,quantity(Needed))) :- Needed*(Quantity-hasAmount(I))
<= hasAmount(I)+hasAssistanceAmount(I), !},
338
HasTool = {(item(I,quantity(Needed))) :- Needed <= hasAmount(I)+
hasAssistanceAmount(I), !},
339
list::all(Consumed,HasItem),
340
list::all(Tools,HasTool),
341
if inFacility = some(Workshop), believes(B2), B2 = workshop(Workshop,_,_,
_) then
342
Subplan = [perform(assemble(Item)),achieve(assemble(Item,Quantity))]
343
else
344
nearestWorkshop(latitude,longitude,Workshop,_),
345
Subplan = [achieve(goto(Workshop)),achieve(assemble(Item,Quantity))]
346
end if.
347
plan(assemble(Item,Quantity)) = list::append(AcquisitionPlan,[achieve(
assemble(Item,Quantity))]) :-
348
believes(B1), B1 = product(Item,_,assembledBy(Consumed,Tools)),
349
350
MissingConsumable = {(item(I,quantity(Needed))) = Needed*Quantity -
hasAmount(I) - hasAssistanceAmount(I)},
351
MissingTool = {(item(I,quantity(Needed))) = Needed - hasAmount(I) -
hasAssistanceAmount(I)},
352
Missing1 = [tuple(I,Needed,MissingTool(X)) || X in Tools, X = item(I,
quantity(Needed))],
353
Missing2 = [tuple(I,Needed*Quantity,MissingConsumable(X)) || X in
Consumed, X = item(I,quantity(Needed))],
354
MissingItems = list::append(Missing1,Missing2),
355
356
TotalLoad = varM_integer::new(0),
357
foreach tuple(I,_,M) in MissingItems, M > 0, V = manufacturingLoad(I) do
TotalLoad:add(V) end foreach,
358
TotalLoad:value+currentLoad <= loadCapacity(),
359
360
AcquisitionPlan = [achieve(acquire(I2,Q2)) || tuple(I2,Q2,M2) in
MissingItems, M2 > 0],
361
AcquisitionPlan = [_|_].
362
363
364
%%%%%
365
%
366
% Job scheduler plans
367
%
368
%%%%%
==PAGE:133==
121
369
plan(findJob) = [achieve(delegateJob(Job))] :-
370
believes(B), B = pricedJob(Job,_,_,End,_,_),
371
currentStep < End,
372
not(believes(jobTaken(Job))),
373
not(believes(jobDelegated(Job))),
374
insert(jobTaken(Job)).
375
376
plan(delegateJob(Job)) = [] :-
377
believes(jobTaken(Job)),
378
not(believes(jobDelegated(Job))),
379
believes(B1), B1 = pricedJob(Job,_,_,_,_,JobItemsRaw),
380
CurrentReplies = [B || believes(B), B = jobReply(Job,_,_,_,_,_)],
381
HasReplied = {(Agent) :- jobReply(Job,Agent,_,_,_,_) in CurrentReplies,
!},
382
believes(B2), B2 = hasRequested(Job,ReceivingAgents),
383
list::all(ReceivingAgents,HasReplied),
384
385
% Process replies
386
AgentTools = mapM_redBlack::new(),
387
AgentCapacities = mapM_redBlack::new(),
388
AgentSpeeds = mapM_redBlack::new(),
389
AgentAssignments = mapM_redBlack::new(),
390
AgentItems = mapM_redBlack::new(),
391
CurrentItems = mapM_redBlack::new(),
392
foreach jobReply(_,A,AI,AT,AC,AS) in CurrentReplies do
393
AgentTools:set(A,AT),
394
AgentCapacities:set(A,AC),
395
AgentSpeeds:set(A,AS),
396
AgentAssignments:set(A,[]),
397
AgentItems:set(A,AI),
398
foreach tuple(I,Q) in AI do
399
CurrentItems:set(I,CurrentItems:get_default(I,0)+Q)
400
end foreach
401
end foreach,
402
403
% Create shopping lists
404
ToDeliver = mapM_redBlack::new(),
405
ToBuy = mapM_redBlack::new(),
406
ToUse = setM_fact::new(),
407
LargestDeliveryLoad = varM_integer::new(0),
408
DeliveryLoadSum = varM_integer::new(0),
409
foreach item(I,Info) in JobItemsRaw, (Info = quantity(Q) or Info =
delivered(Q,_)) do
410
Needed = varM_integer::new(Q),
411
HasItems = [tuple(A,AQ) || A in ReceivingAgents, AI = AgentItems:
tryGet(A), tuple(I,AQ) in AI, AQ > 0],
412
foreach tuple(A,AQ) in HasItems do
413
message(A,adopt(deliverPartial(Job,I))),
414
Needed:sub(AQ),
415
AgentItems:set(A,list::remove(AgentItems:get(A),tuple(I,AQ)))
416
end foreach,
417
if Needed:value > 0 then
418
ToDeliver:set(I,Needed:value)
419
end if
420
end foreach,
==PAGE:134==
122
MAPC 2015 MAS Code Listings
421
foreach tuple(I,Q) in ToDeliver:asList, Q > 0, V = volume(I) do
422
LargestDeliveryLoad:max(V),
423
DeliveryLoadSum:add(V),
424
if assembly(I,Consumed,Tools) then
425
foreach item(CI,quantity(CQ)) in Consumed do
426
ToBuy:set(CI,CQ*Q+ToBuy:get_default(CI,0))
427
end foreach,
428
ToUse:insertList([TI || item(TI,_) in Tools])
429
end if
430
end foreach,
431
432
% Assign the items to the fastest agent that can deliver them
433
AssignDelivery = {(Volume) = tuple(A,Volume:value) :-
434
tuple(A,_) in list::sortBy({(tuple(_,X),tuple(_,Y)) = compare(X,Y)},
AgentSpeeds:asList,descending),
435
Volume:value <= AgentCapacities:tryGet(A),
436
!
437
},
438
(tuple(DeliveryAgent,DeliveryLoad) = AssignDelivery(DeliveryLoadSum)
439
orelse tuple(DeliveryAgent,DeliveryLoad) = AssignDelivery(
LargestDeliveryLoad)),
440
NewCap = AgentCapacities:get(DeliveryAgent)-DeliveryLoad,
441
AgentCapacities:set(DeliveryAgent,NewCap),
442
443
CanAssemble = {(I) = L :-
444
(assembly(I,_,Tools) orelse Tools = []),
445
L = [tuple(A,ACapacity,AgentSpeeds:tryGet(A)) ||
446
tuple(A,ACapacity) = AgentCapacities:getAll_nd(),
447
list::all(Tools,{(item(T,_)) :- T in AgentTools:tryGet(A), !})
448
],
449
L <> []
450
},
451
BySpeed = {(L) = list::sortBy({(tuple(_,_,X),tuple(_,_,Y)) = compare(X,Y)
},L,descending)},
452
ByCapacity = {(L) = list::sortBy({(tuple(_,X,_),tuple(_,Y,_)) = compare(X
,Y)},L,descending)},
453
454
% Assign tools to agents
455
foreach Tool in ToUse do
456
if A in ReceivingAgents, tuple(Tool,AQ) in AgentItems:tryGet(A), AQ >
0 then
457
L = [tuple(Tool,1)|AgentAssignments:get(A)],
458
AgentAssignments:set(A,L),
459
ToUse:remove(Tool)
460
end if
461
end foreach,
462
foreach Tool in ToUse, V = manufacturingLoad(Tool) do
463
CanUse = [tuple(A,ACap,ASpeed) ||
464
tuple(A,ATools) = AgentTools:getAll_nd(), Tool in ATools,
465
ACap = AgentCapacities:tryGet(A),
466
ASpeed = AgentSpeeds:tryGet(A)
467
],
468
if tuple(A,ACapacity,_) in BySpeed(CanUse), V <= ACapacity then
469
AgentCapacities:set(A,AgentCapacities:get(A)-V),
470
L = [tuple(Tool,1)|AgentAssignments:get(A)],
==PAGE:135==
123
471
AgentAssignments:set(A,L),
472
ToUse:remove(Tool)
473
end if
474
end foreach,
475
ToUse:isEmpty(),
476
477
% Assign shopping list items to agents already carrying the items
478
foreach tuple(I,Q) in ToBuy:asList, Q > 0 do
479
Needed = varM_integer::new(Q),
480
foreach A in ReceivingAgents do
481
if Needed:value > 0, AI = AgentItems:tryGet(A), tuple(I,AQ) in AI
, AQ > 0 then
482
AssistQ = math::min(Needed:value,AQ),
483
Needed:sub(AssistQ),
484
L = [tuple(I,AssistQ)|AgentAssignments:get(A)],
485
AgentAssignments:set(A,L)
486
end if
487
end foreach,
488
ToBuy:set(I,math::max(0,Needed:value))
489
end foreach,
490
491
% Assign shopping list items to the agents with most capacity and
capabilities
492
foreach tuple(I,Q) in ToBuy:asList, Q > 0, ItemLoad = manufacturingLoad(I
), L = CanAssemble(I) do
493
Needed = varM_integer::new(Q),
494
foreach tuple(A,RestLoad,_) in ByCapacity(L) do
495
if Needed:value > 0 then
496
CanCarry = math::floor(RestLoad/ItemLoad),
497
AssistQ = math::min(Needed:value,CanCarry),
498
if AssistQ > 0 then
499
Needed:sub(AssistQ),
500
L2 = [tuple(I,AssistQ)|AgentAssignments:get(A)],
501
AgentAssignments:set(A,L2)
502
end if
503
end if
504
end foreach,
505
ToBuy:set(I,math::max(0,Needed:value))
506
end foreach,
507
if tuple(_,Q) = ToBuy:getAll_nd(), Q > 0 then fail end if,
508
509
% Send assignments
510
Assistances = mapM_redBlack{string,mapM{string,integer}}::new(),
511
foreach tuple(Agent,Assignment) = AgentAssignments:getAll_nd(), Agent <>
DeliveryAgent, Assignment <> [] do
512
Msg = assist(Job,DeliveryAgent,Assignment),
513
message(Agent,adopt(Msg)),
514
foreach tuple(Item,Quantity) in Assignment do
515
(X = Assistances:tryGet(Agent) orelse X = mapM_redBlack::new()),
516
X:set(Item,Quantity+X:get_default(Item,0)),
517
Assistances:set(Agent,X)
518
end foreach
519
end foreach,
520
foreach tuple(Agent,AssistanceMap) = Assistances:getAll_nd() do
521
Msg = hasAssistance(Job,Agent,AssistanceMap:asList),
==PAGE:136==
124
MAPC 2015 MAS Code Listings
522
message(DeliveryAgent,tell(Msg))
523
end foreach,
524
message(DeliveryAgent,adopt(deliver(Job))),
525
insert(jobDelegated(Job)).
526
plan(delegateJob(Job)) = [achieve(delegateJob(Job))] :-
527
believes(jobTaken(Job)),
528
not(believes(jobDelegated(Job))),
529
not((believes(B1), B1 = hasRequested(Job,_))),
530
believes(B2), B2 = pricedJob(Job,_,_,End,_,_),
531
currentStep < End,
532
533
% Ask agents for their remaining load capacity, their role tools, and
their speed
534
ReceivingAgents = broadcast(ask(jobRequest(Job))),
535
ReceivingAgents <> [],
536
insert(hasRequested(Job,ReceivingAgents)).
537
plan(delegateJob(Job)) = _ :-
538
believes(jobTaken(Job)),
539
not(believes(jobDelegated(Job))),
540
CurrentReplies = [B || believes(B), B = jobReply(Job,_,_,_,_,_)],
541
HasReplied = {(Agent) :- jobReply(Job,Agent,_,_,_,_) in CurrentReplies,
!},
542
believes(B1), B1 = hasRequested(Job,ReceivingAgents),
543
list::all(ReceivingAgents,HasReplied),
544
delete(B1),
545
foreach Reply in CurrentReplies do delete(Reply) end foreach,
546
fail.
547
548
549
%%%%%
550
%
551
% Item delivering plans
552
%
553
%%%%%
554
plan(deliverPartial(Job,_Item)) = [achieve(goto(Storage)),perform(deliverJob(
Job))] :-
555
believes(B), B = pricedJob(Job,Storage,_,_,_,_).
556
557
plan(dump(Item)) = [achieve(goto(Dump)),perform(dump(Item,hasAmount(Item)))]
:-
558
nearestFacility_nd(latitude,longitude,Dump,_), believes(B), B =
dumpLocation(Dump,_,_,_).
559
560
plan(deliver(Job)) = [achieve(goto(Storage)),perform(deliverJob(Job))] :-
561
% Deliver currently carrying items when we have acquired as many of the
deliverables as we can carry
562
Partial = {(I) = P :- (believes(B), B = hasDelivered(Job,L), tuple(I,P)
in L orelse P = 0)},
563
believes(B1), B1 = pricedJob(Job,Storage,_,_,_,Items),
564
DeliveryStatus = [tuple(I,hasAmount(I),Required-Delivered) ||
565
item(I,Info) in Items,
566
(Info = quantity(Required), Delivered = Partial(I) orelse Info =
delivered(Required,Delivered))
567
],
568
tuple(_,HasAmount,_) in DeliveryStatus, HasAmount > 0,
==PAGE:137==
125
569
Missing = [tuple(I,Q,R) || tuple(I,Q,R) in DeliveryStatus, R > 0],
570
if Missing <> [] then
571
MaxLoad = {(tuple(I,Q,R)) :- (R <= Q orelse maxCarryableAmount(I,R,0,
_))},
572
list::all(Missing,MaxLoad)
573
end if.
574
plan(deliver(Job)) = [achieve(acquire(Item,Amount)),achieve(deliver(Job))] :-
575
% Acquire some of the deliverables
576
Partial = {(I) = P :- (believes(B), B = hasDelivered(Job,L), tuple(I,P)
in L orelse P = 0)},
577
believes(B1), B1 = pricedJob(Job,_,_,_,_,Items),
578
item(Item,Info) in Items,
579
(Info = quantity(Required), Delivered = Partial(Item) orelse Info =
delivered(Required,Delivered)),
580
Delivered < Required,
581
maxCarryableAmount(Item,Required-Delivered,Amount,_),
582
Amount > hasAmount(Item).
583
plan(deliver(Job)) = [achieve(dump(Item)),achieve(deliver(Job))] :-
584
% Maybe there is not be enough load capacity left to carry any
deliverable, so get rid of some unnecessary item
585
believes(B1), B1 = pricedJob(Job,_,_,_,_,Items),
586
believes(B2), B2 = hasItem(Item,_),
587
believes(B3), B3 = roleTools(Tools),
588
not(Item in Tools),
589
not(item(Item,_) in Items).
590
591
592
%%%%%
593
%
594
% Assistance plans
595
%
596
%%%%%
597
plan(assist(_,Entity,Items)) = list::append(AcquisitionPlan,[achieve(
assistAssemble(Entity))]) :-
598
AcquisitionPlan = [achieve(acquire(I,Q)) || tuple(I,Q) in Items,
hasAmount(I) < Q].
599
600
plan(assistAssemble(Entity)) = [perform(assistAssemble(Entity)),achieve(
assistAssemble(Entity))] :-
601
inFacility = some(Workshop),
602
believes(B1), B1 = workshop(Workshop,WLat,WLon,_),
603
believes(B2), B2 = entity(Entity,team,ELat,ELon,_),
604
approximatelyEqualWaypoints(WLat,WLon,ELat,ELon).
605
plan(assistAssemble(Entity)) = [achieve(goto(Workshop)),achieve(
assistAssemble(Entity))] :-
606
believes(B1), B1 = entity(Entity,team,ELat,ELon,_),
607
nearestWorkshop(ELat,ELon,Workshop,_),
608
inFacility <> some(Workshop).
609
610
611 clauses
612
received(_,tell(speed(Speed))) :- knownSpeed := some(Speed).
613
received(Agent,tell(shop(Shop,Lat,Lon,Items))) :-
614
if Agent <> name then
615
if believes(B), B = shop(Shop,_,_,_) then delete(B) end if,
==PAGE:138==
126
MAPC 2015 MAS Code Listings
616
insert(shop(Shop,Lat,Lon,Items))
617
end if.
618
received(Agent,tell(hasDelivered(Job,Items))) :-
619
if Agent <> name then
620
if believes(B), B = hasDelivered(Job,_) then delete(B) end if,
621
insert(hasDelivered(Job,Items))
622
end if.
623
received(Agent,ask(jobRequest(Job))) :-
624
IsBusy = {:-
625
intention(G,_), (G = deliver(_) or G = deliverPartial(_,_) or G =
assist(_,_,_) or G = assistAssemble(_))
626
},
627
if believes(B1), B1 = roleTools(Tools), not(IsBusy()) then
628
ItemGoals = [tuple(I,Q) || intention(G,_), (G = acquire(I,Q) or G =
assemble(I,Q))],
629
Needed = list::removeDuplicates(list::appendList([allConsumed(I) ||
tuple(I,_) in ItemGoals])),
630
Items = [tuple(I,Q) || believes(B2), B2 = hasItem(I,Q), not(I in
Needed)],
631
AnticipatedLoad = varM_integer::new(0),
632
foreach tuple(I,Q) in ItemGoals, V = manufacturingLoad(I) do
633
AnticipatedLoad:add(V*Q)
634
end foreach,
635
Load = currentLoad + AnticipatedLoad:value,
636
message(Agent, tell(jobReply(Job,name,Items,Tools,loadCapacity()-Load
,speed())))
637
else
638
message(Agent, tell(jobReply(Job,name,[],[],0,0)))
639
end if.
640
641 clauses
642
perceived(batteryCapacity(X)) :- knownBatteryCapacity := some(X).
643
perceived(loadCapacity(X)) :-
knownLoadCapacity := some(X).
644
perceived(role(X)) :- insert(role(X)), enactRoles().
645
perceived(team(X)) :- team := X.
646
perceived(latitude(X)) :- latitude := X.
647
perceived(longitude(X)) :- longitude := X.
648
perceived(routeLength(X)) :- routeLength := X.
649
perceived(load(X)) :- currentLoad := X.
650
perceived(lastAction(A,P,R)) :-
651
retractAll(lastActionInfo(_,_,_)),
652
assert(lastActionInfo(A,P,R)),
653
if string::hasPrefix(P,"job=",Job), believes(B1), B1 = deliveryAttempt(
Job,Attempted) then
654
% For some reason partial deliveries are not visible in the job
percepts sent from the server as they should be,
655
% so the agent has to keep track of successful partial deliveries
itself
656
if A = "deliver_job", string::hasPrefix(R,"success",_) then
657
if believes(B2), B2 = hasDelivered(Job,HadDelivered) then
658
X = [tuple(I,Q) || tuple(I,Q) in Attempted, not(tuple(I,_) in
HadDelivered)],
659
Y = [tuple(I,Q1+Q2) || tuple(I,Q1) in HadDelivered, (tuple(I,
Q2) in Attempted orelse Q2 = 0)],
660
NowDelivered = list::append(X,Y),
==PAGE:139==
127
661
delete(B2)
662
else
663
NowDelivered = Attempted
664
end if,
665
insert(hasDelivered(Job,NowDelivered)),
666
_ = broadcast(tell(hasDelivered(Job,NowDelivered)))
667
end if,
668
delete(B1)
669
end if,
670
if string::hasPrefix(R,"failed",_) then syncout::writef("%: WARNING: Last
action failed! (%,%,%)\n",name,A,P,R) end if.
671
perceived(charge(X)) :- if X = 0 then syncout::writef("%: WARNING: Out of
charge!\n",name) end if, currentCharge := X.
672
perceived(inFacility(X)) :-
673
wasInFacility := inFacility,
674
if inFacility <> X then inFacility := X end if.
675
perceived(route(X)) :- route := X.
676
perceived(hasItem(I,Q)) :- if believes(B), B = hasItem(I,_) then delete(B)
end if, insert(hasItem(I,Q)).
677
perceived(P) :- P = entity(N,T,_,_,_), if believes(B), B = entity(N,T,_,_,_)
then delete(B) end if, insert(P).
678
perceived(P) :-
679
% Only update shops when item prices are perceived or if the shop was
previously unknown
680
P = shop(Facility,_,_,Items),
681
if item(_,sale(_,_,_)) in Items, believes(B), B = shop(Facility,_,_,_)
then
682
delete(B),
683
insert(P),
684
_ = broadcast(tell(P))
685
elseif not((believes(B), B = shop(Facility,_,_,_))) then
686
insert(P)
687
end if.
688
perceived(P) :-
689
not(P = shop(_,_,_,_)), isFacility(P,Name,_,_),
690
if believes(B), isFacility(B,Name,_,_) then delete(B) end if, insert(P).
691
perceived(simEnd) :-
692
dropAll(),
693
deleteAll(),
694
retractAll(routeDist(_,_,_)),
695
retractAll(lastActionInfo(_,_,_)),
696
leaveOrganization(organization).
697
perceived(step(X)) :-
698
% This percept is always the first percept to be perceived during a new
step
699
% Belief revision during matches starts with this percept and ends with
the requestAction percept
700
% It is important that goals cannot be achieved in the meantime as some
beliefs will not exist before certain percepts are processed
701
currentStep := X,
702
foreach believes(B), B = hasItem(_,_) do delete(B) end foreach.
703
perceived(requestAction) :-
704
% This percept is always the last percept to be perceived during a new
step
705
insert(requestAction),
==PAGE:140==
128
MAPC 2015 MAS Code Listings
706
WasInside = {() = tuple(F,FLat,FLon) :- wasInFacility = some(F),
isFacility(F,FLat,FLon) },
707
EnRouteTo = {() = F :-
708
n(_,LastLat,LastLon) = list::tryGetLast(route),
709
isFacility(F,FLat,FLon),
710
approximatelyEqualWaypoints(LastLat,LastLon,FLat,FLon)
711
},
712
RouteDist = {(F1Lat,F1Lon,F1,F2) = d(F1Lat,F1Lon,route) :- not(routeDist(
F1,F2,_))},
713
if tuple(F1,X1,Y1) = WasInside(), F2 = EnRouteTo(), Dist = RouteDist(X1,
Y1,F1,F2) then
714
assert(routeDist(F1,F2,Dist)),
715
assert(routeDist(F2,F1,Dist))
716
end if.
717
perceived(P) :- (P = product(_,_,_) or P = pricedJob(_,_,_,_,_,_)), insert(P)
.
718
perceived(ranking(X)) :- syncout::writef("%: Ranking: %\n",name,X).
719
perceived(score(X)) :- syncout::writef("%: Score: %\n",name,X).
720
perceived(_).
721
722 end implement mapcAgent
Listing C.6: mapcOrganization.i
1 interface mapcOrganization supports basicOrganizationSite{mapcBelief,mapcGoal,
mapcAction}
2
open core, massimInterface
3
4 end interface mapcOrganization
Listing C.7: mapcOrganization.cl
1 class mapcOrganization : mapcOrganization
2
open core
3
4
5 end class mapcOrganization
Listing C.8: mapcOrganization.pro
1 implement mapcOrganization
2
open core, massimInterface, agent{massimInterface::mapcBelief,massimInterface
::mapcGoal}
3
4 facts
5
workerTools : string** := [["tool2","tool3"],["tool1","tool2"],["tool1","
tool3"],["tool1"]].
6
workerSpeed : integer* := [1,3,4,5].
7
workerRoles : string* := ["Truck","Car","Motorcycle","Drone"].
8
jobSchedulerRole : string := "JobScheduler".
9
10 clauses
11
role(jobSchedulerRole,[findJob],workerRoles).
12
role(Worker,[exploreShops],workerRoles) :- Worker in workerRoles.
==PAGE:141==
129
13
14
objectiveAchieved(_, jobSchedulerRole, findJob) = [findJob] :- !.
15
objectiveAchieved(_, Role, exploreShops) = [acquire(Tool,1) || Tool in Tools]
:-
16
Tools = list::nth(list::tryGetIndex(Role,workerRoles),workerTools), !.
17
objectiveAchieved(_, _, _) = [].
18
19 clauses
20
canEnact(PlayingAgents,_,_,jobSchedulerRole) :-
21
not(tuple(_,jobSchedulerRole) in PlayingAgents),
22
!.
23
canEnact(PlayingAgents,Agent,_,WorkerRole) :-
24
WorkerRole in workerRoles,
25
not((tuple(Agent,Role) in PlayingAgents, Role in workerRoles)),
26
I = list::tryGetIndex(WorkerRole,workerRoles),
27
Tools = list::nth(I,workerTools),
28
Speed = list::nth(I,workerSpeed),
29
Agent:send(message(Agent,tell(roleTools(Tools)))),
30
Agent:send(message(Agent,tell(speed(Speed)))),
31
!.
32
33
canPerform(_,_,_).
34
35
canSend(_,_,_).
36
37 end implement mapcOrganization
Listing C.9: massimInterface.i
1 interface massimInterface supports agentEnvironment{mapcBelief,mapcGoal,
mapcAction}
2
open core
3
4 domains
5
agentRole = car ; drone ; motorcycle ; truck.
6
node = n(integer Index, real Latitude, real Longitude).
7
itemInfo =
8
quantity(integer Amount) ;
9
sale(integer Amount, integer Cost, integer Restock) ;
10
stored(integer Stored, integer Delivered) ;
11
delivered(integer Amount, integer Delivered) ;
12
noItemInfo.
13
item = item(string Name, itemInfo).
14
productAssembly = notAssembled ; assembledBy(item* Consumed, item* Tools).
15
16
mapcBelief =
17
% Simulation information percepts
18
requestAction ;
19
simStart ;
20
simEnd ;
21
tournamentFinished ;
22
role(agentRole) ;
23
team(string) ;
24
product(string Name, integer Volume, productAssembly Subparts) ;
25
steps(integer Steps) ;
==PAGE:142==
130
MAPC 2015 MAS Code Listings
26
ranking(integer Ranking) ;
27
score(integer Score) ;
28
29
% Self percepts
30
money(integer Amount) ;
31
jobTaken(string Id) ;
32
jobPosted(string Id) ;
33
step(integer Step) ;
34
batteryCapacity(integer) ;
35
charge(integer) ;
36
fPosition(integer) ;
37
inFacility(optional{string}) ;
38
latitude(real) ;
39
load(integer) ;
40
loadCapacity(integer) ;
41
longitude(real) ;
42
name(string) ;
43
routeLength(integer) ;
44
hasItem(string Name, integer Amount) ;
45
route(node*) ;
46
entity(string Name, string Team, real Latitude, real Longitude, agentRole
Role) ;
47
lastAction(string Action, string Param, string Result) ;
48
49
% Facilities
50
chargingStation(string Name, real Lat, real Lon, integer Rate, integer
Price, integer Slots, optional{integer} QueueSize) ;
51
dumpLocation(string Name, real Lat, real Lon, integer Price) ;
52
shop(string Name, real Lat, real Lon, item* Items) ;
53
storage(string Name, real Lat, real Lon, integer Price, integer
TotalCapacity, integer UsedCapacity, item* Items) ;
54
workshop(string Name, real Lat, real Lon, integer Price) ;
55
56
% Jobs
57
auctionJob(string Id, string Storage, integer Begin, integer End, integer
Fine, integer MaxBid, item* Items) ;
58
pricedJob(string Id, string Storage, integer Begin, integer End, integer
Reward, item* Items) ;
59
60
% Role beliefs
61
speed(integer Speed) ;
62
roleTools(string* Tools) ;
63
64
% Other non-percept agent beliefs
65
hasAssistance(string JobId, string Agent, tuple{string Item, integer
Quantity}* Items) ;
66
jobRequest(string JobId) ;
67
hasRequested(string JobId, string* ReceivingAgents) ;
68
jobReply(string JobId, string Agent, tuple{string Item, integer Quantity
}* HasItems, string* AvailableTools, integer RestLoad, integer Speed) ;
69
jobDelegated(string JobId) ;
70
deliveryAttempt(string JobId, tuple{string Item, integer Quantity}*
DeliveredItems) ;
71
hasDelivered(string JobId, tuple{string Item, integer Quantity}* Items).
72
==PAGE:143==
131
73
mapcAction =
74
assemble(string ItemId) ;
75
assistAssemble(string AgentId) ;
76
buy(string ItemId, integer Amount) ;
77
charge ;
78
deliverJob(string JobId) ;
79
dump(string ItemId, integer Amount) ;
80
store(string ItemId, integer Amount) ;
81
goto(string FacilityId) ;
82
skip.
83
84
mapcGoal =
85
% Basic agent goals
86
skip ;
87
gotoOnce(string Facility) ;
88
goto(string Facility) ;
89
recharge ;
90
acquire(string Item, integer Quantity) ;
91
assemble(string Item, integer Quantity) ;
92
dump(string Item) ;
93
assistAssemble(string Entity) ;
94
95
% Job completion tasks
96
delegateJob(string Job) ;
97
assist(string Job, string Entity, tuple{string Item, integer Quantity}*
Items) ;
98
deliver(string Job) ;
99
deliverPartial(string Job, string Item) ;
100
101
% Organizational objectives
102
exploreShops ;
103
findJob.
104
105 end interface massimInterface
Listing C.10: massimInterface.cl
1 class massimInterface : massimInterface
2
open core
3
4 constructors
5
new : (string IP, integer Port, string Username, string Password).
6
7 end class massimInterface
Listing C.11: massimInterface.pro
1 implement massimInterface inherits basicEnvironment{mapcBelief,mapcGoal,
mapcAction} supports basicEnvironmentSite{mapcAction}
2
open core
3
4 domains
5
serverResponse =
6
authAccept ;
==PAGE:144==
132
MAPC 2015 MAS Code Listings
7
authReject ;
8
newSim(mapcBelief* InitialPercepts) ;
9
endSim(mapcBelief* Percepts) ;
10
actionRequest(integer Id, mapcBelief* Percepts) ;
11
serverStop.
12
13 facts
14
attachedAgent : string := erroneous.
15
username : string.
16
password : string.
17
server : communications\socket := communications\socket::newTcpIp().
18
currentId : integer := 0.
19
currentMsg : string := "".
20
21 predicates
22
setup : (string IP, integer Port, string Username, string Password).
23
serverSend : (string).
24
serverReceive : () -> optional{serverResponse}.
25
formatAction : (mapcAction, string Action, string Param) procedure (i,o,o).
26
sendAction : (string Action, string Param).
27
authenticate : () determ.
28
run : ().
29
30 clauses
31
new(IP,Port,Username,Password) :-
32
basicEnvironment::new(This,[Username]),
33
setup(IP,Port,Username,Password).
34
35 clauses
36
setup(IP,Port,Username,Password) :-
37
username := Username,
38
password := Password,
39
server:connect(IP,Port),
40
syncout::writef("Environment: % connected\n",username).
41
42 clauses
43
serverReceive() = Response :-
44
Msg = server:receive(),
45
currentMsg := string::concatList([currentMsg|binary::binary8ToStringList(
Msg)]),
46
(MsgSuffix = "</message>" or MsgSuffix = "type=\"bye\"/>"),
47
Pos = string::search(currentMsg,MsgSuffix),
48
XML = string::subString(currentMsg,0,Pos+string::length(MsgSuffix)),
49
string::hasPrefix(currentMsg,XML,Rest),
50
regEx::search("type=\"[[:alpha:]-]+",currentMsg,TypeS,TypeL),
51
Type = string::subString(currentMsg,TypeS+6,TypeL-6),
52
!,
53
if Type = "auth-response", _ = string::search(XML,"<authentication result
=\"ok\"/>") then
54
Response = some(authAccept)
55
elseif Type = "auth-response", _ = string::search(XML,"<authentication
result=\"fail\"/>") then
56
Response = some(authReject)
57
elseif Type = "bye" then
58
Response = some(serverStop)
==PAGE:145==
133
59
elseif Percepts = perceptParser::extractPercepts(XML) then
60
if Type = "sim-start" then
61
Response = some(newSim(Percepts))
62
elseif Type = "sim-end" then
63
Response = some(endSim(Percepts))
64
elseif Type = "request-action", regEx::search("id=\"[[:digit:]]+",XML
,IdS,IdL) then
65
Id = toTerm(integer,string::subString(XML,IdS+4,IdL-4)),
66
Response = some(actionRequest(Id,Percepts))
67
else
68
Response = none
69
end if
70
else
71
Response = none
72
end if,
73
currentMsg := Rest.
74
serverReceive() = serverReceive().
75
76 clauses
77
serverSend(Msg) :- _ = server:send(toBinary(string8::toUtf8(Msg))).
78
79 clauses
80
formatAction(goto(Id),"goto",string::format("facility=%",Id)).
81
%formatAction(gotoLocation(Lat,Lon)) = tuple("goto",string::format("lat=% lon
=%",Lat,Lon)).
82
formatAction(buy(Id,Amount),"buy",string::format("item=% amount=%",Id,Amount)
).
83
%formatAction(give(Ag,It,Am),"give",string::format("agent=% item=% amount=%",
Ag,It,Am)).
84
%formatAction(receive,"receive","").
85
formatAction(store(It,Am),"store",string::format("item=% amount=%",It,Am)).
86
%formatAction(retrieve(It,Am),"retrieve",string::format("item=% amount=%",It,
Am)).
87
%formatAction(retrieveDelivered(It,Am),"retrieve_delivered",string::format("
item=% amount=%",It,Am)).
88
formatAction(dump(It,Am),"dump",string::format("item=% amount=%",It,Am)).
89
formatAction(assemble(It),"assemble",string::format("item=%",It)).
90
formatAction(assistAssemble(Ag),"assist_assemble",string::format("assembler
=%",Ag)).
91
formatAction(deliverJob(Id),"deliver_job",string::format("job=%",Id)).
92
formatAction(charge,"charge","").
93
formatAction(skip,"skip","").
94
95 clauses
96
sendAction(Action,Param) :-
97
Header = "<?xml version=\"1.0\" encoding=\"UTF-8\"?>",
98
if Param = "" then
99
Body = string::format("<action id=\"%\" type=\"%\"/>",currentId,
Action)
100
else
101
Body = string::format("<action id=\"%\" type=\"%\" param=\"%\"/>",
currentId,Action,Param)
102
end if,
103
Message = string::format("%\n<message type=\"action\">\t\n%\n</message>",
Header,Body),
==PAGE:146==
134
MAPC 2015 MAS Code Listings
104
serverSend(Message).
105
106 clauses
107
authenticate() :-
108
Header = "<?xml version=\"1.0\" encoding=\"UTF-8\" standalone=\"no\"?>",
109
Body = string::format("<authentication password=\"%\" username=\"%\"/>",
password,username),
110
Message = string::format("%\n<message type=\"auth-request\">\t\n%\n</
message>",Header,Body),
111
serverSend(Message),
112
some(authAccept) = serverReceive().
113
114 clauses
115
run() :-
116
Msg = serverReceive(),
117
if Msg = some(actionRequest(Id,Percepts)) then
118
currentId := Id,
119
if not(isErroneous(attachedAgent)) then
120
sendPercepts(attachedAgent, Percepts)
121
end if
122
elseif Msg = some(newSim(Percepts)) then
123
syncout::writef("Environment: New match for %\n",username),
124
if not(isErroneous(attachedAgent)) then
125
sendPercepts(attachedAgent, Percepts)
126
end if
127
elseif Msg = some(endSim(Percepts)) then
128
syncout::writef("Environment: Match finished for %\n",username),
129
if not(isErroneous(attachedAgent)) then
130
sendPercepts(attachedAgent, Percepts)
131
end if
132
elseif Msg = some(serverStop) then
133
syncout::writef("Environment: Contest finished for %\n",username),
134
if not(isErroneous(attachedAgent)) then
135
sendPercepts(attachedAgent, [tournamentFinished])
136
end if,
137
stopEnvironment()
138
else
139
syncout::writef("Environment: % failed to handle server response:\n%\
n",username,currentMsg)
140
end if,
141
run().
142
143 clauses
144
initialize() :-
145
if authenticate() then
146
syncout::writef("Environment: Running simulation for %\n",username),
147
_ = thread::start(run)
148
else
149
syncout::writef("Environment: % failed to connect\n",username),
150
stopEnvironment()
151
end if.
152
153 clauses
154
performed(Agent,_Entity,AgentAction) :-
155
formatAction(AgentAction,Action,Param),
==PAGE:147==
135
156
if AgentAction <> skip then
157
syncout::writef("Environment: (#%) % performed %\n",currentId,Agent,
AgentAction)
158
end if,
159
sendAction(Action,Param).
160
161 clauses
162
attached(Agent, _) :- attachedAgent := Agent.
163
164 clauses
165
detached(_, _).
166
167 end implement massimInterface
Listing C.12: perceptParser.cl
1 class perceptParser
2
open core
3
4 predicates
5
extractPercepts : (string XML) -> massimInterface::mapcBelief* determ.
6
7 end class perceptParser
Listing C.13: perceptParser.pro
1 implement perceptParser
2
open core, xmlLite, massimInterface
3
4 domains
5
xmlTree = xmlNode(string LocalName, map{string Name,string Value} Attributes,
xmlTree* Children).
6
7 class predicates
8
readXML : (xmlReader, string EndElement) -> xmlTree* determ.
9
readAttributes : (xmlReader) -> mapM{string Name, string Value} Attributes.
10
toPercept : (string Functor, string Argument) -> mapcBelief determ.
11
traverseXML : (xmlTree) -> mapcBelief* Percepts determ.
12
parseItems : (xmlTree*) -> item* Items determ.
13
parseRoute : (xmlTree*) -> node* Route determ.
14
parseJobs : (xmlTree*) -> string* JobIds determ.
15
16 clauses
17
readXML(R,EndElement) = [] :-
18
R:getNodeType() = endElement,
19
R:getLocalName() = EndElement,
20
!.
21
readXML(R,_) = [xmlNode("message",Attr,[])] :-
22
R:getNodeType() = element,
23
R:getLocalName() = "message",
24
R:isEmptyElement(),
25
Attr = readAttributes(R),
26
!.
27
readXML(R,E) = [xmlNode(LN,Attributes,Children)|readXML(R,E)] :-
==PAGE:148==
136
MAPC 2015 MAS Code Listings
28
R:getNodeType() = element,
29
!,
30
LN = R:getLocalName(),
31
Attributes = readAttributes(R),
32
R:moveToElement(),
33
if R:isEmptyElement() then
34
_ = R:tryRead(),
35
Children = []
36
else
37
_ = R:tryRead(),
38
(Children = readXML(R,LN) orelse Children = [])
39
end if.
40
readXML(R,E) = Rest :-
41
(_ = R:tryRead(), Rest = readXML(R,E) orelse Rest = []).
42
43 clauses
44
readAttributes(R) = Attributes :-
45
R:tryMoveToNextAttribute(),
46
!,
47
Name = R:getLocalName(),
48
Value = R:getValue(),
49
Attributes = readAttributes(R),
50
Attributes:set(Name,Value).
51
readAttributes(_) = mapM_redBlack::new().
52
53 clauses
54
extractPercepts(XML) = Percepts :-
55
S = string8::toUtf8(string::trim(XML)),
56
Input = inputStream_binary::new_pointer(uncheckedConvert(pointer,S),
sizeOfDomain(char8)*string8::length(S)),
57
XMLReader = xmlReader::new(),
58
XMLReader:setInput(Input),
59
try
60
[Tree|_] = readXML(XMLReader,"message"),
61
Percepts = traverseXML(Tree)
62
catch TraceId do
63
Stream = outputStream_string::new(),
64
exceptionDump::dump(Stream, TraceId),
65
syncout::writef("WARNING: Caught exception while parsing XML:\n%\n%\n
",Stream:getString(),XML),
66
fail
67
end try.
68
69 clauses
70
toPercept(Functor,Val) = toTerm(mapcBelief,string::format("%(%)",Functor,Val)
) :-
71
Functor in ["steps","money","batteryCapacity","charge",
72
"fPosition","load","loadCapacity",
73
"routeLength","ranking","score"], !.
74
toPercept(Functor,Val) = toTerm(mapcBelief,string::format("%(\"%\")",Functor,
Val)) :-
75
Functor in ["team","name"], !.
76
toPercept("inFacility",Val) = inFacility(Facility) :-
77
(Val = "none", Facility = none orelse Facility = some(Val)), !.
78
toPercept("lat",Val) = latitude(toTerm(real,Val)) :- !.
==PAGE:149==
137
79
toPercept("lon",Val) = longitude(toTerm(real,Val)) :- !.
80
toPercept("role","Car") = role(car) :- !.
81
toPercept("role","Motorcycle") = role(motorcycle) :- !.
82
toPercept("role","Drone") = role(drone) :- !.
83
toPercept("role","Truck") = role(truck) :- !.
84
85 clauses
86
% NB: The ordering of percepts is important!
87
% The current step or simStart should always be the first percept while
requestAction should always be the last.
88
traverseXML(xmlNode(Name,Attr,Children)) = list::append(HeadPs,TailPs) :-
89
Name in ["sim-result","perception","team","products",
90
"entities","facilities","jobs"],
91
!,
92
HeadPs = [toPercept(K,V) || tuple(K,V) in Attr:asList],
93
TailPs = list::appendList([traverseXML(Child) || Child in Children]).
94
traverseXML(xmlNode("simulation",Attr,Children)) = list::append(StepP,HeadPs,
TailPs) :-
95
!,
96
(StepP = [step(toTerm(integer,Attr:tryGet("step")))] orelse StepP = []),
97
HeadPs = [toPercept(K,V) || tuple(K,V) in Attr:asList],
98
TailPs = list::appendList([traverseXML(Child) || Child in Children]).
99
traverseXML(xmlNode("message",Attr,Children)) = Percepts :-
100
T = Attr:tryGet("type"),
101
!,
102
(Children = [SimNode], Rest = traverseXML(SimNode) orelse Rest = []),
103
if T = "sim-start" then Percepts = [simStart|Rest]
104
elseif T = "sim-end" then Percepts = [simEnd|Rest]
105
elseif T = "bye" then Percepts = [tournamentFinished]
106
elseif T = "request-action" then Percepts = list::append(Rest,[
requestAction])
107
else Percepts = Rest
108
end if.
109
traverseXML(xmlNode("product",Attr,Children)) = [product(Name,Volume,Parts)]
:-
110
!,
111
Name = Attr:tryGet("name"),
112
Volume = toTerm(integer,Attr:tryGet("volume")),
113
Assembled = toTerm(boolean,Attr:tryGet("assembled")),
114
if Assembled = true then
115
(xmlNode("consumed",_,CItems) in Children orelse CItems = []),
116
(xmlNode("tools",_,TItems) in Children orelse TItems = []),
117
Consumed = parseItems(CItems),
118
Tools = parseItems(TItems),
119
Parts = assembledBy(Consumed,Tools)
120
else
121
Parts = notAssembled
122
end if.
123
traverseXML(xmlNode("self",Attr,Children)) = list::append(LastActionP,SelfPs
,[SelfRoute|SelfItems]) :-
124
!,
125
if A = Attr:tryGet("lastAction"), P = Attr:tryGet("lastActionParam"), R =
Attr:tryGet("lastActionResult") then
126
LastActionP = [lastAction(A,P,R)]
127
else
==PAGE:150==
138
MAPC 2015 MAS Code Listings
128
LastActionP = []
129
end if,
130
SelfPs = [toPercept(Key,Val) || tuple(Key,Val) in Attr:asList],
131
(xmlNode("items",_,Items) in Children orelse Items = []),
132
(xmlNode("route",_,Route) in Children orelse Route = []),
133
SelfItems = [hasItem(IN,IA) || item(IN,quantity(IA)) in parseItems(Items)
],
134
SelfRoute = route(parseRoute(Route)).
135
traverseXML(xmlNode("jobs-taken",_,Children)) = [jobTaken(JobId) || JobId in
parseJobs(Children)] :- !.
136
traverseXML(xmlNode("jobs-posted",_,Children)) = [jobPosted(JobId) || JobId
in parseJobs(Children)] :- !.
137
traverseXML(xmlNode("entity",Attr,_)) = [entity(Name,Team,Lat,Lon,Role)] :-
138
!,
139
Name = Attr:tryGet("name"),
140
Team = Attr:tryGet("team"),
141
Lat = toTerm(real,Attr:tryGet("lat")),
142
Lon = toTerm(real,Attr:tryGet("lon")),
143
role(Role) = toPercept("role",Attr:tryGet("role")).
144
traverseXML(xmlNode("chargingStation",Attr,Children)) = [chargingStation(Name
,Lat,Lon,Rate,Price,Slots,QSize)] :-
145
!,
146
Name = Attr:tryGet("name"),
147
Lat = toTerm(real,Attr:tryGet("lat")),
148
Lon = toTerm(real,Attr:tryGet("lon")),
149
Rate = toTerm(integer,Attr:tryGet("rate")),
150
Price = toTerm(integer,Attr:tryGet("price")),
151
Slots = toTerm(integer,Attr:tryGet("slots")),
152
if xmlNode("info",InfoAttr,_) in Children, QSizeVal = InfoAttr:tryGet("
qSize") then
153
QSize = some(toTerm(integer,QSizeVal))
154
else
155
QSize = none
156
end if.
157
traverseXML(xmlNode("dumpLocation",Attr,_)) = [dumpLocation(Name,Lat,Lon,
Price)] :-
158
!,
159
Name = Attr:tryGet("name"),
160
Lat = toTerm(real,Attr:tryGet("lat")),
161
Lon = toTerm(real,Attr:tryGet("lon")),
162
Price = toTerm(integer,Attr:tryGet("price")).
163
traverseXML(xmlNode("shop",Attr,Children)) = [shop(Name,Lat,Lon,Items)] :-
164
!,
165
Name = Attr:tryGet("name"),
166
Lat = toTerm(real,Attr:tryGet("lat")),
167
Lon = toTerm(real,Attr:tryGet("lon")),
168
(Items = parseItems(Children) orelse Items = []).
169
traverseXML(xmlNode("storage",Attr,Children)) = [storage(Name,Lat,Lon,Price,
TotalCapacity,UsedCapacity,Items)] :-
170
!,
171
Name = Attr:tryGet("name"),
172
Lat = toTerm(real,Attr:tryGet("lat")),
173
Lon = toTerm(real,Attr:tryGet("lon")),
174
Price = toTerm(integer,Attr:tryGet("price")),
175
TotalCapacity = toTerm(integer,Attr:tryGet("totalCapacity")),
==PAGE:151==
139
176
UsedCapacity = toTerm(integer,Attr:tryGet("usedCapacity")),
177
(Items = parseItems(Children) orelse Items = []).
178
traverseXML(xmlNode("workshop",Attr,_)) = [workshop(Name,Lat,Lon,Price)] :-
179
!,
180
Name = Attr:tryGet("name"),
181
Lat = toTerm(real,Attr:tryGet("lat")),
182
Lon = toTerm(real,Attr:tryGet("lon")),
183
Price = toTerm(integer,Attr:tryGet("price")).
184
traverseXML(xmlNode("auctionJob",Attr,Children)) = [auctionJob(Id,Storage,
Begin,End,Fine,MaxBid,Items)] :-
185
!,
186
Id = Attr:tryGet("id"),
187
Storage = Attr:tryGet("storage"),
188
Begin = toTerm(integer,Attr:tryGet("begin")),
189
End = toTerm(integer,Attr:tryGet("end")),
190
Fine = toTerm(integer,Attr:tryGet("fine")),
191
MaxBid= toTerm(integer,Attr:tryGet("maxBid")),
192
(xmlNode("items",_,ItemNodes) in Children, Items = parseItems(ItemNodes)
orelse Items = []).
193
traverseXML(xmlNode("pricedJob",Attr,Children)) = [pricedJob(Id,Storage,Begin
,End,Reward,Items)] :-
194
!,
195
Id = Attr:tryGet("id"),
196
Storage = Attr:tryGet("storage"),
197
Begin = toTerm(integer,Attr:tryGet("begin")),
198
End = toTerm(integer,Attr:tryGet("end")),
199
Reward = toTerm(integer,Attr:tryGet("reward")),
200
(xmlNode("items",_,ItemNodes) in Children, Items = parseItems(ItemNodes)
orelse Items = []).
201
traverseXML(xmlNode(Name,Attr,Children)) = _ :-
202
!,
203
X = Attr:asList,
204
Y = list::length(Children),
205
syncout::writef("WARNING: Failed to parse XML because of node % with
attributes % and % children.",Name,X,Y),
206
fail.
207
208 clauses
209
parseItems([]) = [].
210
parseItems([xmlNode("item",Attr,[])|Rest]) = [item(Name,delivered(Amount,
Delivered))|parseItems(Rest)] :-
211
Name = Attr:tryGet("name"),
212
Amount = toTerm(integer,Attr:tryGet("amount")),
213
Delivered = toTerm(integer,Attr:tryGet("delivered")),
214
!.
215
parseItems([xmlNode("item",Attr,[])|Rest]) = [item(Name,stored(Stored,
Delivered))|parseItems(Rest)] :-
216
Name = Attr:tryGet("name"),
217
Stored = toTerm(integer,Attr:tryGet("stored")),
218
Delivered = toTerm(integer,Attr:tryGet("delivered")),
219
!.
220
parseItems([xmlNode("item",Attr,[])|Rest]) = [item(Name,quantity(Amount))|
parseItems(Rest)] :-
221
Name = Attr:tryGet("name"),
222
Amount = toTerm(integer,Attr:tryGet("amount")),
==PAGE:152==
140
MAPC 2015 MAS Code Listings
223
!.
224
parseItems([xmlNode("item",Attr,[xmlNode("info",Info,_)|_])|Rest]) = [item(
Name,sale(Amount,Cost,Restock))|parseItems(Rest)] :-
225
Name = Attr:tryGet("name"),
226
Amount = toTerm(integer,Info:tryGet("amount")),
227
Cost = toTerm(integer,Info:tryGet("cost")),
228
Restock = toTerm(integer,Info:tryGet("restock")),
229
!.
230
parseItems([xmlNode("item",Attr,_)|Rest]) = [item(Name,noItemInfo)|parseItems
(Rest)] :-
231
Name = Attr:tryGet("name"),
232
!.
233
234 clauses
235
parseRoute([]) = [].
236
parseRoute([xmlNode("n",Attr,_)|Rest]) = [n(I,Lat,Lon)|parseRoute(Rest)] :-
237
I = toTerm(integer,Attr:tryGet("i")),
238
Lat = toTerm(real,Attr:tryGet("lat")),
239
Lon = toTerm(real,Attr:tryGet("lon")).
240
241 clauses
242
parseJobs([]) = [].
243
parseJobs([xmlNode("job",Attr,_)|T]) = [JobId|parseJobs(T)] :-
244
JobId = Attr:tryGet("id").
245
246 end implement perceptParser
==PAGE:153==
Bibliography
[ABSdB+13] Tobias
Ahlbrecht,
Christian
Bender-Saebelkampf,
Maiquel
de Brito,
Nicolai Christian Christensen,
Jürgen Dix,
Mar-
iana Ramos Franco,
Hendrik Heller,
Andreas Viktor Hess,
Axel Heßler,
Jomi Fred Hübner,
Andreas Schmidt Jensen,
Jannick
Boese
Johnsen,
Michael
Köster,
Chengqian
Li,
Lu Liu, Marcelo Menezes Morato, Philip Bratt Ørum, Fed-
erico Schlesinger, TiagoLuiz Schmitz, Jaime Simão Sichman,
Kaio Siqueira de Souza, Daniela Maria Uez, Jørgen Villadsen,
Sebastian Werner, Øyvind Grønland Woller, and Maicon Rafael
Zatelli.
Multi-Agent Programming Contest 2013:
The Teams
and the Design of Their Systems. In Massimo Cossentino, Amal
El Fallah Seghrouchni, and Michael Winikoﬀ, editors, Engineering
Multi-Agent Systems, volume 8245 of Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, pages 366–390. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2013.
[AD11]
Huib Aldewereld and Virginia Dignum. OperettA: Organization-
Oriented Development Environment. In Languages, Methodolo-
gies, and Development Tools for Multi-Agent Systems, pages 1–18.
Springer, 2011.
[BBCP05]
Fabio
Bellifemine,
Federico
Bergenti,
Giovanni
Caire,
and
Agostino Poggi. Jade - A Java Agent Development Framework. In
Rafael H. Bordini, Mehdi Dastani, Jürgen Dix, and Amal El Fal-
lah Seghrouchni, editors, Multi-Agent Programming, volume 15 of
Multiagent Systems, Artiﬁcial Societies, and Simulated Organiza-
tions, pages 125–147. Springer US, 2005.
[BBHR14]
Olivier Boissier, Rafael H. Bordini, Jomi F. Hübner, and Alessan-
dro Ricci.
Unravelling Multi-agent-Oriented Programming.
In
Onn Shehory and Arnon Sturm, editors, Agent-Oriented Software
Engineering, pages 259–272. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2014.
==PAGE:154==
142
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[BD13]
Rafael H. Bordini and Jürgen Dix. Programming Multiagent Sys-
tems. In Gerhard Weiss, editor, Multiagent Systems. MIT Press,
2nd edition, 2013.
[BHB+12]
Tristan M. Behrens, Koen V. Hindriks, Rafael H. Bordini, Lars
Braubach, Mehdi Dastani, Jürgen Dix, Jomi F. Hübner, and
Alexander Pokahr.
An Interface for Agent-Environment Inter-
action.
In Rem Collier, Jürgen Dix, and Peter Novák, editors,
Programming Multi-Agent Systems, volume 6599 of Lecture Notes
in Computer Science, pages 139–158. Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
2012.
[BHW07]
Rafael H. Bordini, Jomi Fred Hübner, and Michael Wooldridge.
Programming Multi-Agent Systems in AgentSpeak using Jason,
volume 8. John Wiley & Sons, 2007.
[CM04]
K.L. Clark and F.G. McCabe. Go! — A Multi-Paradigm Program-
ming Language for Implementing Multi-Threaded Agents. Annals
of Mathematics and Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 41(2-4):171–206, 2004.
[CS13]
Amit K. Chopra and Munindar P. Singh. Agent Communication.
In Gerhard Weiss, editor, Multiagent Systems. MIT Press, 2nd
edition, 2013.
[Das14]
Mehdi Dastani. A Survey of Multi-agent Programming Languages
and Frameworks.
In Onn Shehory and Arnon Sturm, editors,
Agent-Oriented Software Engineering, pages 213–233. Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, 2014.
[DP13]
Virginia Dignum and Julian Padget. Multiagent Organizations.
In Gerhard Weiss, editor, Multiagent Systems. MIT Press, 2nd
edition, 2013.
[DVRM06]
Mehdi Dastani, M. Birna Van Riemsdijk, and John Jules Ch
Meyer.
Goal types in agent programming.
Proceedings of the
International Conference on Autonomous Agents, Proc Int Conf
Autonom Agents, 2006:1285–1287, 2006.
[FMF92]
Tim Finin, Don McKay, and Rich Fritzson. An overview of KQML:
A knowledge query and manipulation language. Technical report,
Citeseer, 1992.
[Hin09]
Koen V. Hindriks. Programming Rational Agents in GOAL. In
Multi-Agent Programming: Languages, Tools and Applications,
pages 119–157. Springer, 2009.
==PAGE:155==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
143
[Hin14a]
Koen
V.
Hindriks.
Programming
Cognitive
Agents
in
Goal.
http://ii.tudelft.nl/trac/goal/raw-attachment/
wiki/WikiStart/Guide.pdf, 2014. Accessed: 2015-08-21.
[Hin14b]
Koen V. Hindriks. The Shaping of the Agent-Oriented Mindset.
In Fabiano Dalpiaz, Jürgen Dix, and M. Birna van Riemsdijk,
editors, Engineering Multi-Agent Systems, volume 8758 of Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, pages 1–14. Springer International
Publishing, 2014.
[Hug14]
Marc-Philippe Huget. Agent Communication. In Onn Shehory
and Arnon Sturm, editors, Agent-Oriented Software Engineering,
pages 101–133. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2014.
[map]
Multi-Agent
Programming
Contest.
http://www.
multiagentcontest.org/ 05-08-2015.
[MF14]
Jörg P. Müller and Klaus Fischer. Application Impact of Multi-
agent Systems and Technologies:
A Survey.
In Onn Shehory
and Arnon Sturm, editors, Agent-Oriented Software Engineering,
pages 27–53. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2014.
[ON98]
Patrick D O’Brien and Richard C Nicol. FIPA - towards a stan-
dard for software agents.
BT Technology Journal, 16(3):51–59,
1998.
[PBL05]
Alexander Pokahr, Lars Braubach, and Winfried Lamersdorf.
Jadex: A BDI Reasoning Engine. In Rafael H. Bordini, Mehdi
Dastani, Jürgen Dix, and Amal El Fallah Seghrouchni, editors,
Multi-Agent Programming, volume 15 of Multiagent Systems, Ar-
tiﬁcial Societies, and Simulated Organizations, pages 149–174.
Springer US, 2005.
[Rao96]
Anand S. Rao. AgentSpeak(L): BDI Agents Speak Out in a Logi-
cal Computable Language. In Agents Breaking Away, pages 42–55.
Springer, 1996.
[RN09]
Stuart Russell and Peter Norvig. Artiﬁcial Intelligence: A Modern
Approach. Prentice Hall Press, Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA, 3rd
edition, 2009.
[RPVO09]
Alessandro Ricci, Michele Piunti, Mirko Viroli, and Andrea
Omicini. Environment Programming in CArtAgO. In Multi-Agent
Programming:, pages 259–288. Springer, 2009.
[VJC+13]
Jørgen Villadsen, Andreas Schmidt Jensen, Nicolai Christian
Christensen,
Andreas Viktor Hess,
Jannick Boese Johnsen,
==PAGE:156==
144
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Øyvind Grønland Woller, and Philip Bratt Ørum. Engineering
a Multi-Agent System in GOAL. In Massimo Cossentino, Amal
El Fallah Seghrouchni, and Michael Winikoﬀ, editors, Engineering
Multi-Agent Systems, volume 8245 of Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, pages 329–338. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2013.
[VPWa]
Visual
Prolog
Language
Reference:
Domains.
http:
//wiki.visual-prolog.com/index.php?title=Language_
Reference/Domains. Accessed: 2015-07-21.
[VPWb]
Visual
Prolog
Language
Reference:
Facts.
http:
//wiki.visual-prolog.com/index.php?title=Language_
Reference/Facts. Accessed: 2015-07-21.
[VPWc]
Visual Prolog Language Reference:
Generic Interfaces and
Classes.
http://wiki.visual-prolog.com/index.php?title=
Language_Reference/Generic_Interfaces_and_Classes.
Ac-
cessed: 2015-07-21.
[VPWd]
Visual
Prolog
Language
Reference:
Monitors.
http:
//wiki.visual-prolog.com/index.php?title=Language_
Reference/Monitors. Accessed: 2015-07-21.
[VPWe]
Visual
Prolog
Language
Reference:
Support
Pattern.
http://wiki.visual-prolog.com/index.php?title=Support_
pattern. Accessed: 2015-07-21.
[Win05]
Michael Winikoﬀ.
Jack™Intelligent Agents:
An Industrial
Strength Platform.
In Rafael H. Bordini, Mehdi Dastani, Jür-
gen Dix, and Amal El Fallah Seghrouchni, editors, Multi-Agent
Programming, volume 15 of Multiagent Systems, Artiﬁcial Soci-
eties, and Simulated Organizations, pages 175–193. Springer US,
2005.
[Woo09]
Michael Wooldridge. An Introduction to MultiAgent Systems. Wi-
ley Publishing, 2nd edition, 2009.
[Woo13]
Michael Wooldridge. Intelligent Agents. In Gerhard Weiss, editor,
Multiagent Systems. MIT Press, 2nd edition, 2013.
[Yan09]
Li Yan. Application of Multi-Agent for Travel Management Deci-
sion Support System. 2009 International Forum on Information
Technology and Applications, volume 2, proceedings, 2:492–495,
2009.
[ZRH15]
Maicon R. Zatelli, Alessandro Ricci, and Jomi F. Hübner. Evalu-
ating Diﬀerent Concurrency Conﬁgurations for Executing Multi-
Agent Systems. In Engineering Multi-Agent Systems, pages 169–
185. 2015.
