==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Master Thesis
Experimental Investigation of SI Engine Performance with
Ammonia-Gasoline Blend as Fuel
Author:
Lars Kjemtrup
s103400
Supervisor:
Associate Professor
Anders Ivarsson
July 26, 2015
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Project:
Master Thesis - 35 ECTS points
Location:
Technical University of Denmark,
Department of Mechanical Engineering,
Section of Thermal Energy
Carried out by:
Lars Kjemtrup, s103400
Project title:
Experimental Investigation of SI Engine Performance
with Ammonia-Gasoline Blend as Fuel
Supervisor:
Associate Professor Anders Ivarsson
Project time frame:
26th of January 2015 - 26th of July 2015
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This master thesis deals with the theoretical and experimental investigation of ammo-
nia in gasoline solubility. The European Union has set a 2020-target for the transport
sector. The goal is reaching 10 % energy coming from renewable energy sources.
Theory regarding the underlying mechanisms of reﬁning processes in petroleum prod-
ucts will be treated. A theoretical study of the Reid Vapor Pressure (RVP) of diﬀerent
gasoline surrogates will be conducted using a chemical software, SPECS v5.63, devel-
oped on Technical University of Denmark.
A method for experimental investigation of RVP conforming with the ASTM D-323
standard will be made. RVP tests of regular gasoline and several reﬁned fuel mixtures
will be conducted. Fuel mixtures containing between 0.16 % and 4.82 % ammonia by
mass has been reﬁned The ammonia energy content ranged from 0.07 % to 3.17 %.
All of the fuel mixtures treated comply with current legislation on RVP, lying between
15 kPa for pure ethanol and 87 kPa for Winter grade gasoline.
SI engine performance tests of six fuel mixtures; three without and three with ammo-
nia, has been conducted. Results revealed greater knocking resistance, better brake
engine eﬃciency, longer combustion duration, lower CO2 emissions and higher CO and
HC emissions with fuels containing ammonia.
i
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Resum´e
Denne rapport er skrevet som afrapporteringen af afgangsprojektet Eksperimentel un-
dersøgelse af benzinmotors ydeevne ved anvendelse af benzin-ammoniak blanding som
brændstof, der er gennemført p˚a kandidatuddannelsen i Konstruktion og Mekanik p˚a
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet.
Projektet udspringer fra EU’s 2020-krav om, at der skal være 10 % energi fra ved-
varende kilder inden for transportsektoren. Projektet undersøger muligheden for at
anvende ammoniak som et alternativ eller supplement til den bioethanol, der vil være
den primære kilde til vedvarende energi i 2020.
Lovkrav omkring Reid damptryk (RVP), som er damptrykket ved 37.8 ◦C (100 ◦F),
dikterer at det ikke m˚a overstige 70 kPa og 95 kPa hhv. sommer og vinter i Danmark.
I projektet undersøges ammoniaks opløselighed i benzinsurrogater. Et kemisk pro-
gram, SPECS v5.63, anvendes til termodynamiske ligevægtsberegninger og til bestem-
melse af RVP. En 2 koeﬃcients UNIFAC VLE model med temperaturafhængighed er
anvendt, da den er i stand til at arbejde med det polære ammoniak. Teoretisk studie
viste at opløseligheden for ammoniak i benzinsurrogater med RVP mellem 90 kPa og
100 kPa ligger mellem 1.0 % og 4.3 % p˚a massebasis.
Der er blevet designet og fremstillet et apparatur til praktisk bestemmelse af RVP i
overensstemmelse med ASTM D-323 standard. Benzin er blevet afgasset for bedre
forst˚aelse af begrebet damptryk og benzins kompleksitet. Afgasning er foreg˚aet ved
brug af kolbe, varmekappe og kondenseringsspiral, s˚a ikke alle benzinens komponenter
blev afgasset. Der er blevet opstillet apparatur til praktisk opløsning af ammoniak i
væskeblandinger. Rensebenzin er valgt pga. dets lave damptryk til at blive anvendt
som benzinlignende produkt i stedet for færdigraﬃneret benzin.
Flere brændstoﬀer, indeholdende mellem 0.16 % og 4.82 % ammoniak p˚a masseba-
sis, er blevet blandet. P˚a energibasis svarer det til mellem 0.07 % og 3.17 %. Tre
af blandingerne og tre af deres tilsvarende blandinger, uden ammoniak, er blevet
underlagt eksperimentel kørsel p˚a en Cooperative Fuel Research (CFR) motor. Sam-
menligning mellem teoretisk og eksperimentel bestemmelse af RVP viste afvigelser,
men tendenser var sammenlignelige. Afvigelsen kan tilskrives manglende kendskab til
kompositionen af benzindelen i blandingen.
Ammoniak har et oktantal p˚a over 130, derfor forventes større bankemodstand. Analy-
sen af brændstoﬀerne p˚a benzinmotoren er fokuseret p˚a bestemmelse af denne tendens.
Kompressionsforholdet varieres fra 7:1 til 12.5:1, desuden varieres tændingstidspunk-
tet fra -40◦til 0◦fra topdødpunkt. Brændstof med ammoniak viste generelt større
bankemodstand, bedre ydeevne, længere forbrændingsvarighed, lavere emissioner fra
CO2 og højere emissioner fra CO og HC.
iii
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
Preface
This project is a result of the work conducted during a Master Thesis conducted at
the Technical University of Denmark. The project Experimental Investigation of SI
Engine Performance with Ammonia-Gasoline Blend as Fuel has extended over the
period from 26th of January 2015 until 26th of July 2015.
This thesis is primarily aimed for the censor and supervisor of the project.
The
project deals with investigation of possibilities for fulﬁlling the EU ”20-20-20”-targets
of reaching 10 % renewable energy in the transport sector in year 2020.
This thesis documents work done regarding investigation of ammonia solubility in
gasoline and similar products. An important part of this project has been the ex-
perimental work conducted within the ﬁelds of Reid Vapor Pressure determination of
petroleum products, reﬁning fuel mixtures in a chemical laboratory and experimental
investigation of their performance on a SI engine in the motor laboratory.
A special thanks to supervisor Associate Professor Anders Ivarsson, who have been
greatly committed and passionate about the work conducted during this master thesis.
A thanks to Postdoc Claus Suldrup Nielsen, Ph.d. Student Mads Carsten Jørgensen
and Associate Professor Jesper Schramm for useful sparring and suggestions to work.
A thanks to the employees of the workshop in the mechanical department on DTU
who have helped with manufacturing of several components for the project.
In addition to the main report an appendix is enclosed where the following can be
found; drawings of parts manufactured, the SI Engine Test Scheme, a section regarding
Gas Chromatography and Matlab Code used in data analysis.
Lyngby, 26-July-2015
Lars Kjemtrup
v
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Abstract
i
Resum´e
iii
Preface
v
Nomenclature
x
1
Introduction and Background
1
1.1
2020 Climate and Energy Package . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Energy Consumption and Biofuels in the European Union
. . . . . . .
2
1.2.1
Biofuel Types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theory
5
2.1
Ammonia
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Properties of Ammonia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.2
Safety Concerns Regarding Ammonia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.3
Production of Ammonia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.4
CO2 Emission from Ammonia Production
. . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2
Petroleum Reﬁning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.1
Octane Rating . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.2
Fuel Properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3
Partial Pressure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3.1
Vapor Pressure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3.2
Solubility of Gases in Liquids
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3.3
Chemical Equilibrium
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.3.4
Metastability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.4
Reid Vapor Pressure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.4.1
Pure Components Used in Master Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
vii
==PAGE:12==
2.4.2
Legislation on Reid Vapor Pressure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.4.3
Evaporative Emissions Control - EVAP System
. . . . . . . . .
18
2.5
Theory Concerning Solvents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.5.1
Deﬁnition of Polarity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.5.2
Properties of Solvents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.6
Theoretical Investigation of RVP
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.6.1
UNIFAC Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.6.2
Using SPECS v5.63
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.6.3
Preliminary Study of Ammonia with Water using SPECS
. . .
23
2.6.4
Preliminary Study of Ammonia Mixed with n-Alkanes using
SPECS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.6.5
Investigation of RVP for Simple Gasoline Surrogates
. . . . . .
25
3
Experimental Method
29
3.1
Reid Vapor Pressure Measuring Cylinder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.1.1
RVP Test Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.2
Mixing Ammonia with Fuel
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.2.1
Measuring Mass of Dissolved Ammonia . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.2.2
Ammonia Gas Detector
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.3
Degassing Gasoline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.4
CFR Engine for Fuel Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.4.1
Test Schedule . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.4.2
Measuring Uncertainty during Fuel Testing . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4
Results
43
4.1
Degassing Gasoline Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.1.1
Adding Ammonia First Time
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.1.2
Degassing Gasoline with Ammonia Added
. . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.2
Mixing Fuels Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.2.1
Ethanol+Water in Gasoline or Petroleum Naphtha
. . . . . . .
57
4.3
CFR Engine Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
4.3.1
Results of Testing at CR 7 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
4.3.2
Eﬃciency when Varying CR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
4.3.3
Knocking Determination from Frequency Analysis . . . . . . . .
75
viii
==PAGE:13==
5
Discussion, Future Work and Conclusion
81
5.1
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
5.2
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
5.3
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
References
87
6
Appendix
89
6.1
Appendix A - Production and Assembly of RVP Apparatus . . . . . . .
89
6.2
Appendix B - Gas Chromatography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
6.3
Appendix C - Drawings of Plates for Mounting Gas Detector . . . . . . 109
6.4
Appendix D - SI Engine Test Scheme . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113
6.5
Appendix E - MatLab Code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 117
ix
==PAGE:14==
==PAGE:15==
Nomenclature
ω
Acentric factor, [-]
ρ
Density, [kg/m3]
εr
Relative Permittivity, [-]
C
Concentration of gas
k
Equilibrium Constant
M
Molar mass, [kg/kmol]
n
Amount of moles, [mol]
p
Pressure, [Pa]
V
Volume, [m3]
Vm
Molar volume, [m3/kmol]
AHRR
Apparent Heat Release Rate, [J/◦]
ASTM
American Society for Testing and Materials
b/d
Oil barrels pr. day
BAT
Best Available Technology
BP
Brake Power, [kW]
CFR
Cooperative Fuel Research
CR
Compression Ratio, [-]
EES
Engineering Equation Solver
EOS
Equation Of State
FCC
Fluid Catalytic Cracker
GC
Gas Chromatograph
HHV
Higher Heating Value, [MJ/kg]
xi
==PAGE:16==
IDLH
Immediately Dangerous to Life or Health, [ppm]
ILUC
Indirect Land Usage Change
LEL
Lower Explosion Limit, [%]
LHV
Lower Heating Value, [MJ/kg]
LPG
Liqueﬁed Petroleum Gas
MBT
Maximum Brake Torque
Mha
Million hectare, equal to 10.000 km2
N
Engine Speed, [rpm]
ODV
Odor Threshold Value, [ppm]
RVP
Reid Vapor Pressure, [kPa]
SEC
Speciﬁc Energy Consumption
SI
Spark Ignition
SRK
Soave-Redlich-Kwong
SSAS
Solid State Ammonia Synthesis
TDC
Top Dead Center
toe
Tonnes of oil equivalent, equal to 41.87 GJ
TVP
True Vapor Pressure, [kPa]
UCST
Upper Critical Solution Temperature, [◦C]
UEL
Upper Explosion Limit, [%]
UNIFAC
UNIQUAC Functional-group Activity Coeﬃcients
VLE
Vapor Liquid Eguilibria
VOC
Volatile Organic Compound
VVT
Variable Valve Timing
W
Weight, [kg]
xii
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 1
Introduction and Background
1.1
2020 Climate and Energy Package
In March 2007 leaders of EU committed Europe to be pioneers on the climate and
energy front. The ”20-20-20”-targets, for year 2020[1] are:
• A 20% reduction in EU greenhouse gas emissions from 1990 levels
• Raising the share of EU energy consumption produced from renewable resources
to 20%
• A 20% improvement in the EU’s energy eﬃciency
In 2009 the goals above were enacted in the Climate and Energy Package. In order to
reach the goals a series of suggestions have been presented.
For this master thesis the most important goal is the one for the transport sector.
A share of 10% renewable energy is required in order to reach the overall goals set.
The reason for the share not being 20%, is that the EU climate panel know that it is
impossible to phase out the vehicles running on fossil fuels before year 2020.
The purpose of this project is to reﬁne a fuel mixture consisting of ammonia. Ammonia
is carbon free and can be produced from several renewable energy sources such as
hydro-, wind- or solar power. The fuel mixture will undergo performance tests on a
Cooperative Fuel Research (CFR) spark ignition (SI) engine.
This master thesis has a series of main targets:
• Theoretical study of petroleum products and the underlying chemistry.
• Applying a chemical software for predictions of vapor pressures.
• Experimental work for determining the Reid Vapor Pressure.
• Experimental work in laboratory for reﬁning fuel mixtures containing ammonia.
• Experimental investigation of mixed fuels on a CFR engine.
.
The following sections will present the current situation in renewable fuels in Europe.
1
==PAGE:18==
1.2
Energy Consumption and Biofuels in the Eu-
ropean Union
Research has concluded that the current CO2 and CH4 concentrations in the atmos-
phere have not been higher for the last 400.000 years. The total energy demand in
the EU has increased to be 16-fold the consumption in 1900. The current energy
consumption in the road transport sector in the EU is 300 Mtoe[2].
Ethanol is currently one of the most important biofuels in the EU. The 10 % share
of renewable energy in the transport sector will undoubtedly be fulﬁlled by mostly
bioethanol. Research within the ﬁeld of sustainable bioethanol production has been of
great interest the recent years. And advances have been made in the ﬁeld of especially
2nd-generation bioethanol.
1.2.1
Biofuel Types
Biofuels are split into three categories; 1st-, 2nd- and 3rd-generation.
1st-generation biofuel is produced from edible parts of agricultural crops. Bioethanol
is normally produced from starch and sugar. Biodiesel is normally produced from oil
crops, such as rape seed or sunﬂower.
2nd-generation biofuel is produced from lignocellulosic biomass from non-food crops,
such as agricultural waste (husks and straw), grasses or woody crops.
3rd-generation biofuel is produced from industrialised production of algae.
The current status, for the production of liquid fuels, is that only 1st-generation bio-
fuels are in commercial-scale production. The general perception is that commercial-
scale production of 2nd-generation biofuels is at least 10 years away[2].
An European Advisory Council has investigated the possibilities of fulﬁlling the 10 %
goal with biofuels. Conclusions are that the current state of 2nd-generation bioethanol
production is nowhere near the demand of the targets. Which means the target of
10 % renewable energy is likely to come entirely from 1st-generation biofuels.
The Council working group recommends that future studies should be focusing on
more advanced 2nd- and 3rd-generation biofuels technologies. This in order to phase
out 1st-generation biofuel, due to the inevitable increase in food demand.
Additionally the working group recommends changing or revising the current 10 %
target, aiming at ﬁnding a more sustainable target, not exhausting food-supplies.
Research within the ﬁeld of alternative fuels for transport could be of high interest
the coming years. This is why this master thesis is conducted. Here an analysis of the
possibility and potential of adding ammonia to gasoline is made.
2
==PAGE:19==
Biofuel Productions Impact on Environment
EU prohibits taking raw materials from land with high biodiversity value, such as:
• Forest or wooded land, where native species reside.
• Areas of nature protection, e.g. Natura 2000 areas (18 % of EU land).
• Land with high biodiversity.
• High carbon stock areas, e.g. peat land.
The current contribution from biofuels to EU’s road transport energy is 10 Mtoe.
The estimated size of land for producing 10 Mtoe of energy is 7 Mha. In order to
achieve the 10 % target set for 2020, it is estimated that 21 Mha of land is needed, if
it is assumed that 100 % of the required biomass is produced within the EU and the
current technologies are applied.
The size of the arable land within EU is 100 Mha, which indicates that 21 % is needed
for biomass production[2]. This corresponds to 1/3 the size of France. As can be seen
it would require huge modiﬁcations of the current agricultural distribution. Changes
that raise ethical questions, such as is it fair using food for biofuel?
Producing 1 MJ of energy for gasoline from crude oil causes approximately 87.5 g CO2,
this value can be considered as reference for the production of biofuels. Many credible
studies of the impacts of biofuel production have been made the latter years. Several
studies also consider indirect land usage change (ILUC), which occurs when existing
plantations are changed to biomass cultivation for biofuels. Table 1.1 gives an overview
of the greenhouse gas emissions from production of diﬀerent types of biofuels compared
to the reference case, numbers are given in grams CO2 equivalent/MJ (CO2e/MJ) and
percent.
Table 1.1: CO2 reductions and energy equivalents from lifecycle assesments inclu-
ding eﬀects of ILUC[2]
Max. greenhouse
Emission from
gas emissions from
biofuel, relative
production, [g CO2e/MJ]
to ref. case [%]
Reference Case:
87.5
-
1st-gen. biodiesel:
83-105
-5 to +20
1st-gen. bioethanol:
35-43
-60 to -50
2nd-gen. biofuels from
20-23
-77 to -74
ﬁeld plant material:
2nd-gen. biodiesel and
9
-90
bioethanol from non-
land sources
3
==PAGE:20==
EU has set targets for the reduction in carbon emission from biofuel production relative
to the reference case. Table 1.2 shows the targets in CO2e/MJ reduction relative to
reference case set by the EU.
Table 1.2: Greenhouse
gas
reductions
and
energy
equivalents
from
biofuel
production[2]
Equivalent max.
Target reduction
greenhouse gas
in carbon emission
emissions from
from biofuel production,
production, [g CO2e/MJ]
relative to ref. case [%]
Reference Case:
87.5
-
2012:
56.9
35
2017:
43.7
50
2018:
35.0
60
An alternative or supplement to the current biofuel research and production could be
by implementing ammonia in the energy consideration. Ammonia emits no carbon
upon combustion and is potentially a viable solution or contributor to the ”20-20-
20”-targets. The following sections will consider ammonia from a theoretical point of
view.
4
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 2
Theory
2.1
Ammonia
Ammonia ranks second, after sulfuric acid, as the most produced chemical in the world.
In 2012 the production was estimated to 198 million tonnes, corresponding to 0.55
million t/d[3]. For comparison the daily production of oil was in 2012 approximated
to 76 million b/d[4], equivalent to 8.5 million t/d. By mass the ammonia production
corresponds to 6.5 % of the oil production.
Approximately 80 % of ammonia is utilized for fertilizer. Due to the vast agricultural
production throughout the world, fertilizer is needed almost anywhere. Hence there
is a complex infrastructure for transportation of ammonia.
2.1.1
Properties of Ammonia
Ammonia consists of one nitrogen and three hydrogen atoms, NH3, and is therefore
an interesting hydrogen carrier, see ﬁgure 2.1.1.
Figure 2.1.1: Molecular structure of ammonia, the polar properties are clearly seen
Nitrogen has ﬁve outer electrons, three of which bonds to hydrogen, the last two
make up a lone electron pair that repel more strongly, therefore the bond angle is
not 109.5◦but 106.7◦. This shape gives ammonia a dipole moment, which makes it
a polar molecule. This polarity makes ammonia highly soluble in water. Ammonium
5
==PAGE:22==
hydroxide is a commercialized cleaning agent sold as 25 % ammonia in water. The
high polarity can cause issues when mixing with fossil fuels, which mostly consist
of nonpolar molecules. Solubility of ammonia will most likely increase when adding
ethanol, which is fully miscible with gasoline and water, respectively.
Ammonia has the ability to become liquid at moderate pressure, this allows ammonia
to contain more hydrogen pr. volume than cryogenic liquid hydrogen or compressed
hydrogen[5]. Combustion of ammonia will not directly contribute to CO2 or carbon
particulate matter emissions.
In table 2.1 some important properties of ammonia are listed.
Table 2.1: Properties of ammonia[6][7]
Molar Mass:
[g/mol]
17.03
Boiling Point:
[◦C]
-33.34
Vapor Pressure at 20 ◦C:
[kPa]
857.3
Reid Vapor Pressure:
[kPa]
1461
Lower Heating Value:
[MJ/kg]
18.65
Octane Rating (RON):
[-]
>130
Especially the vapor pressures are of great concern in this master thesis. The Reid
vapor pressure deﬁnes the volatility of a compound at 37.8 ◦C, see also section 2.4.
Ammonia has a relatively low ﬂame speed of 0.12 m/s at stoichiometric conditions,
therefore a combustion promoter can be advantageous at some engine speeds. When
dissolving into regular gasoline, this will be working as promoter.
Anhydrous ammonia is known to react rapidly with zinc- and copper-containing al-
loys. The ammonia corrodes brass ﬁttings, and should for this reason not be used for
handling the gas. Additionally liquid ammonia is known to have rubber and certain
plastic deteriorating properties.
2.1.2
Safety Concerns Regarding Ammonia
Ammonia is classiﬁed as dangerous for the environment. The toxicity of ammonia
does normally not cause problems for humans. The odor threshold value (ODV)1
for ammonia is 46.8 ppm.
The immediately dangerous to life or health (IDLH)2
concentration is 300 ppm.
1ODV is the concentration for which it is possible for humans to detect the chemical substance.
2IDLH is deﬁned as: ”an atmosphere that poses an immediate threat to life, would cause irreversible
adverse health eﬀects, or would impair an individual’s ability to escape from a dangerous atmosphere”
6
==PAGE:23==
The lower and upper ﬂammable/explosive limits are the range for which a substance,
gas or vapor, will burn or explode if an ignition source is introduced at 20 ◦C and
atmospheric pressure.
The value is given in vol-%.
In table 2.2 the lower/upper
explosion limits (LEL/UEL) are showed for some important substances.
Table 2.2: Lower
and
upper
ﬂammable/explosive
limits
for
some
chemical
substances[8]
Substance:
LEL [vol-%]
UEL [vol-%]
Ammonia:
15
28
Ethanol:
3.3
19
Gasoline:
1.2
7.1
Methanol:
6.7
36
Naphtha (petroleum):
1.0
6.7
As can be seen from the table, ammonia has a relatively narrow range for combustion.
It starts at a high vol-%, which compared to ethanol and methanol are advantageous
seen from a safety perspective.
2.1.3
Production of Ammonia
Ammonia production consumes about 1% of all man-made power. The current pro-
duction of ammonia is by far dominated by fossil fuels. In 2009 about 70% of ammonia
produced was made from natural gas and the bulk of the remainder was produced from
coal. This type of production is not CO2-neutral, which is what the EU requires for
future fuels. Alternative and more sustainable methods for producing ammonia are
of great interest, if the sustainability criteria of the ”20-20-20”-targets is to be met.
Ammonia is normally synthesized by reacting nitrogen with hydrogen, usually through
the Haber-Bosch process in the following way:
N2 + 3 H2 →2 NH3

∆H = −92.4 kJ
mol

(2.1.1)
Nitrogen is normally obtained from air, and hydrogen is obtained from various sources,
mostly being gaseous, liquid or solid hydrocarbon fuels. Diﬀerent ways of producing
ammonia will be presented below.
The three processes mainly used for ammonia
production is; steam reforming of natural gas, partial oxidation of heavy fuel oil or
coal gasiﬁcation.
The most widely used is the steam reforming of natural gas, which will be described
next.
7
==PAGE:24==
Ammonia Production using Natural Gas
Nitrogen, N2, is obtained by distillation of air. Air is liqueﬁed at around -190 ◦C and
can afterwards be separated into oxygen and nitrogen. Where nitrogen is the most
volatile of the two.
The hydrogen is produced from methane, CH4, or natural gas using steam reforming.
Steam, H2O, at 700-1100 ◦C reacts with methane in an endothermic reaction yielding
syngas:
CH4 + H2O →CO + 3 H2
(2.1.2)
A second stage exothermic reaction at approximately 360 ◦C, produces additional
hydrogen. This reaction is called the water gas shift reaction:
CO + H2O →CO2 + H2
(2.1.3)
This process provides energy to maintain the endothermic reaction in equation (2.1.2),
though additional heat is required, which normally comes from burning of methane.
Ammonia production eﬃciency is highly dependent on the region of production. The
most eﬃcient plants are found in Europe, USA and Southern Asia respectively[9]. The
best available technology (BAT) require about 28 GJ of energy to produce one tonne
of ammonia.
8
==PAGE:25==
Ammonia Production using Electrolysis
In the early days of ammonia production where natural gas was not an abundant
resource, the production of ammonia in Europe was dominated by hydrogen produced
from electrolysis. The Norwegian 60 MW hydroelectric plant at Vemork, see ﬁgure
2.1.2[10], produced around 400 t/d, where a typical ammonia plant nowadays produces
around 1000-1500 t/d[9].
Figure 2.1.2: The Norwegian hydroelectric plant facility at Vemork produced 400
tonnes of ammonia each day
About 4 % of hydrogen gas produced worldwide is produced by electrolysis, and is usu-
ally used onsite. With conventional electrolysis it requires 12 MWh of electric energy,
equivalent to 43.2 GJ. Using the electrolysis process 1.6 m3 of water is needed for the
production of 1 tonne of ammonia. For comparison the water consumption is about
0.8 m3 when applying the steam reforming of natural gas for ammonia production.
The Haber-Bosch process is usually applied for producing ammonia after having pro-
duced hydrogen from the electrolysis. The nitrogen is often obtained using air sepa-
ration, via cryogenic methods.
Ammonia Production using Solid State Ammonia Synthesis
There are alternative methods for ammonia production under development. One of
them is called the solid state ammonia synthesis (SSAS). The SSAS combines the
electrolyzer and the Haber-Bosch process into one process. The step of producing
hydrogen is eliminated and therefore the ammonia production eﬃciency is increased.
The SSAS uses a metal electro-catalyst for electrochemical ammonia synthesis. Diﬀer-
ent surfaces such as, Fe (iron), Ru (ruthenium), Mo (molybdenum) and Rh (rhodium)
have shown high activity although formation of gaseous hydrogen reduced the Faradaic
eﬃciency. The Faradaic eﬃciency describes the eﬃciency with which charge are trans-
ferred in a system driving an electrochemical reaction.
9
==PAGE:26==
More speciﬁcally the SSAS uses a proton-conducting membrane heated to 500-600 ◦C.
Nitrogen and water vapor is admitted to each side of the membrane. The water vapor
dissociates into oxygen and protons, H+. The protons are driven by voltage through
the membrane and reacts with adsorbed N2 to form ammonia.
With SSAS the required energy is approximately 7.5 MWh pr. tonne, equivalent to
27 GJ[11]. Studies need to be conducted for optimizing the SSAS technology, before
introducing it to industrial production of ammonia, see [12, Garagounis et al.].
2.1.4
CO2 Emission from Ammonia Production
CO2 emissions are of great concern these days. The primary driving force for the 2020-
goals presented by the EU commission is to reduce the emissions of CO2. Since the
eﬃciency of ammonia production has high regional dependencies the carbon dioxide
emissions vary greatly too. In table 2.3 speciﬁc energy consumption (SEC) and CO2
emissions from production of ammonia using fossil fuels and technology from the
period of 1991-1996 are presented.
Table 2.3: CO2 emissions for diﬀerent technologies and regions. The data is from
1991-1996[9]. BAT stands for best available technology
Fuel:
Technology:
Region:
SEC
Emission factor
CO2
[GJ/t NH3]
[gCO2/MJ]
[t/t NH3]
Natural gas
Steam ref.
USA
41.3
55.7
2.3
EU
34.9
55.7
1.9
BAT
EU
28.0
55.7
1.6
India
38.7
55.7
2.2
Heavy fuel oil
Partial oxi.
India
59.8
78.6
4.7
Coal
Partial oxi.
India
165.9
100.7
16.7
As can be seen from the table, the production of ammonia leaves a substantial carbon
footprint.
10
==PAGE:27==
The greenhouse gas emission from production of ammonia in g CO2e/MJ fuel are
presented in table 2.4.
Table 2.4: CO2 emission in grams per MJ, using NH3 as fuel
Region:
Greenhouse
gas emissions from
production, [g CO2e/MJ]
Reference Case:
-
87.5
Natural gas
USA
123.7
EU
102.2
using BAT
EU
83.9
India
118.3
HFO
India
252.8
Coal
India
898.3
These numbers are presented so they can be compared with the numbers in table 1.1.
It can be concluded that the production of ammonia using fossil fuels is not sustainable
if compared to the goals set by the EU commission. Only the best available technology
is below the reference case, but not below the desired target of 35.0 g CO2e/MJ set
for 2018.
This underlines the necessity of producing ammonia using technologies such as elec-
trolysis or the SSAS where the power comes from sustainable sources e.g. hydro-,
wind- or solar power where the CO2 slip is minimal or non-existing.
2.2
Petroleum Reﬁning
The global oil production was in 2012 approximately 76 million b/d[4]. Reﬁneries
are enormous indsturial complexes with a wide variety of processing units, auxiliary
facilities and storage tanks. The largest modern reﬁneries are capable of handling
800-900.000 b/d of crude oil.
Each reﬁnery process crude oil in its own unique way, the combination of reﬁning pro-
cesses are greatly dependent on the location of the reﬁnery, the desired end products
and economics. This great variation in plant lay out has a direct impact on the ﬁnal
products, i.e. gasoline, diesel, fuel oils, liqueﬁed petroleum gas (LPG), kerosene and
jet fuel. Analyzing gasoline, e.g. using Gas Chromatography (GC), from diﬀerent
locations can reveal variations in gasoline constituents.
Most of the products produced in reﬁneries are regulated by law, it can be sulfur
content in diesel, Reid Vapor Pressure of gasoline (see section 2.4), oxygenate content
in gasoline etc.
The remainder of this section will focus on the reﬁning of gasoline for automotive
transport. In general crude oil contain 10-40 % hydrocarbon constituents which lie
11
==PAGE:28==
in the gasoline range. These are distilled from the crude oil directly using a crude oil
distillation unit. Other important processing units for gasoline reﬁning are:
• Catalytic reforming unit, it converts desulfurized naphtha molecules into high-
octane molecules producing reformate for gasoline.
• Alkylation unit, it converts i-Butane and butylene into alkylate, a very high-
octane constituent in gasoline.
• Isomerization unit, it converts linear hydrocarbons into higher-octane branched
molecules, e.g. n-Butane into i-Butane3.
• Fluid catalytic cracker (FCC) unit, it converts high molecular weight hydrocar-
bons into smaller and more volatile compounds. These can be further processed
for obtaining liquid gasoline-sized hydrocarbons.
The combination of the above listed processing units can increase the overall yield of
gasoline to 70 % from crude oil.
2.2.1
Octane Rating
Octane rating of a fuel is essential to understand when working with fuels running
on spark-ignited (SI) engines. The eﬃciency of an SI engine is highly dependent on
the compression ratio, hence it is of great interest to increase the ratio as much as
possible. The octane rating of a fuel is an expression for its resistance to auto-ignite.
The octane rating scale has two marks set by two chemical compounds, i-Octane has
octane rating 100 and n-Heptane has octane rating 0.
In spark-ignited engines a mixture of air and fuel is heated and compressed in the
compression stroke. At a certain point the compressed air and fuel is ignited by a
spark plug. In modern vehicles the peak pressure is desired at a few degrees after
top dead center (TDC), maximizing torque transferred to the crankshaft. If, for some
reason, a fuel with a lower octane rating is used in an engine with a high compression
ratio the spark or even the compression stroke can trigger the air-fuel-mixture to
auto-ignite. Auto-ignition can be detected by inspecting pressure curves from the
combustion. It can also be observed by the ’knocking’ or ’pinging’ sounds coming
from the engine. The shockwaves generated from this can be harmful to the engine
leading to failure of the engine.
Technologies for achieving better performance with high octane fuels, while keeping
the capability of using lower octane rating fuels can be by implementing variable
valve timing (VVT), turbocharging or varying the time of ignition. The latter will be
applied in experiments conducted on a Cooperative Fuel Research (CFR) engine in
this master thesis, see section 3.4 and 4.3.
A drawback of high octane ratings can be that compression ratios are maximized,
leading to peak temperatures that are suitable for NOx formation, which is highly
unwanted.
3i-Butane has a RON of 102 and RVP of 496 kPa and n-Butane has a RON of 94 and RVP of
359 kPa
12
==PAGE:29==
Modifying Octane Ratings in Oil Reﬁning
In the reﬁning processes of crude oil to gasoline one of the main parameters are to
deliver a product with a suﬃcient octane rating. The alkylation process converts lower
octane products to higher octane products using a Bronsted acid catalyst, where either
sulfuric acid or hydroﬂuoric acid is used. Typically the catalyst protonates alkenes
yielding reactive carbocations, which can alkylate the low octane constituents. An
example being butylene reacting with i-Butane yielding i-Octane (Octane rating 100).
The ﬁnal product is called alkylate. It is composed of various high octane constituents,
being branch-chained paraﬃnic hydrocarbons, such as i-Heptane or i-Octane. The
reﬁning process of gasoline is highly complex and vary from reﬁnery to reﬁnery. This
means there is no exact same batch of gasoline, making it diﬃcult to predict its exact
properties theoretically.
All of the constituents in the complex composition of gasoline contribute diﬀerently
to the overall octane rating. Some isomers of an alkane have enhanced octane rating
properties. The reason for the change can be explained by the process of combustion.
The temperature and pressure conditions under combustion in an engine produce a
variety of free radicals. A higher concentration of free radicals result in a greater
probability of uncontrolled chain reactions, e.g. auto ignition and thereby knocking.
2.2.2
Fuel Properties
The properties of the various constituents contributing to the ﬁnal gasoline product
are of great importance. Among the important parameters are; heat of combustion,
boiling point, vapor pressure (see chapter 2.3) and octane rating. In this section a
selection of properties for fuels are presented.
The heat of combustion is the amount of energy released as heat when a compound
undergoes complete combustion under standard temperature and pressure. There are
two primary measures of heat of combustion, either expressed as higher heating value
(HHV) or lower heating value (LHV).
The HHV is determined by bringing all of the combustion products back to pre-
combustion temperature, meaning especially that water vapor condenses. The LHV is
determined by subtracting the heat of vaporization of the water vapor from the HHV.
In this master thesis all values presented are LHV.
The heat of combustion is determined experimentally using a bomb calorimeter. In
this master thesis a variation of chemical compounds are applied for mixing the fuels
used in tests on CFR engine and for RVP tests. Some of their properties are listed in
table 2.5.
13
==PAGE:30==
Table 2.5: Various properties for selected fuels and chemical compounds[13], Note:
For Petroleum Naphtha only starting boiling point is listed and the LHV
is assumed to be equal to Undecane (C11H24), the RON is assumed from
actual tests (see Chapter 4.3)
Petroleum
Property
Ethanol
Gasoline
Ammonia
Naphtha
Chemical Formula
C2H5OH
C4 to C12
NH3
C9 to C14
Molecular Weight [g/mol]
46.07
100-105
17.03
128-198
Density, 20 ◦C [kg/m3]
789
720-780
0.73
712
Boiling Temperature, 1 atm [◦C]
78.37
27-225
-33.34
83-105
Reid Vapor Pressure [kPa]
15.2
45-100
1470
9.28
Heat of Vaporization [kJ/kg]
910
330-400
1371
300-340
Lower Heating Value [MJ/kg]
28.865
43.950
18.646
44.194
Research Octane No. (RON)
108.6
86-95
>130
60-80
Flame Speed at Stoich.[14] [m/s]
n/a
0.62
0.12
n/a
2.3
Partial Pressure
Regular gasoline consists of more than 100 organic compounds, the bulk consists of
hydrocarbons (CxHy), mainly between four and 12 carbon atoms per molecule. It is
predominantly alkanes, aromatics and alkenes.
All these molecules have various boiling points and physical properties which mean
that they will contribute diﬀerently to the vapor pressure of the gasoline. For better
understanding of vapor pressures the principal of partial pressure is crucial.
In a mixture of gases each gas has a partial pressure, which can be considered the
hypothetical pressure the gas would exert if it alone occupied the volume. In ideal
gases the sum of partial pressures would equal the total pressure of the gas mixture,
which is expressed in Dalton’s law of partial pressures. This law arises from the fact
that most molecules in ideal gases are so far apart that they will not interact with one
another. The RVP of gasoline would be the sum of various partial pressures coming
from gases such as, nitrogen, oxygen, water vapor, and the gases that gasoline consists
of e.g. butane, pentane etc. at 37.8 ◦C:
RVP = p37.8◦C = pN2 + pO2 + pH2O + pC4H10 + pC5H12 + ...
(2.3.1)
Partial pressure of a gas is a measure of the thermodynamic activity of the molecules
in the gas. Gases react, dissolve and diﬀuse according to their partial pressures, not
according to their concentrations in a gas mixture or liquid. Partial pressures follow
the isotherm relation:
Vx
Vtot
= px
ptot
= nx
ntot
(2.3.2)
14
==PAGE:31==
2.3.1
Vapor Pressure
The vapor pressure is the pressure of a vapor in equilibrium with its non vapor phases;
liquid or solid. It is often used as a measure of a liquid’s tendency to evaporate. The
higher the vapor pressure, the higher is the tendency of molecules and atoms to escape
from its liquid or solid phase, see section 2.4 on Reid Vapor Pressure.
2.3.2
Solubility of Gases in Liquids
Gases can dissolve into liquids in smaller or larger quantities. Gas in liquid solubility
decreases with increasing temperature.
One of the best examples are soft drinks
containing carbon dioxide, here CO2 is added and stored pressurized under lid. When
the soft drink is opened the pressure is relieved and the solubility of CO2 decreases,
hence the CO2 leaves the drink as bubbles, see ﬁgure 2.3.1[15].
Figure 2.3.1: Carbon dioxide leaving sparkling water, due to decrease in gas-in-
liquid solubility
Gases dissolve in liquids to an extent determined by the equilibrium between the
undissolved gas and the solvent, i.e. the gas that is dissolved in the liquid. Henry’s
law describes the equilibrium constant:
k = px
Cx
(2.3.3)
Where px is the partial pressure of the gas x in equilibrium with a solution containing
some of the gas x. Cx is the concentration of gas x in the liquid solution. As can
be seen from equation (2.3.3) the concentration of the gas in the liquid is directly
proportional to the partial pressure of that gas above the solution.
It is important to state that this law is only applicable for dilute, ideal solutions and
for solutions where the liquid does not react chemically with the gas being dissolved.
15
==PAGE:32==
When considering gasoline and its chemical composition it is highly complex and
diﬃcult to predict the solubility of any compound. This master thesis will therefore
focus on theoretical investigation of ammonia solubility in simpler gasoline surrogates
and afterwards on experimental investigation of ammonia gas solubility in gasoline
and products similar to gasoline.
2.3.3
Chemical Equilibrium
As shown above with the gas solubility in liquids there is an equilibrium point, which
is described by the equilibrium constant. Chemical equilibrium is a state where both
reactants and products are present in concentrations which have no further tendency
to change over time. Meaning that any reaction in one direction will happen as quickly
as the reverse reaction, hence no change in overall concentrations can be measured.
Chemical equilibrium is obtained when the free energy is at a minimum, see ﬁgure
2.3.2[16], meaning that the total sum of chemical potentials is zero.
1
2
3
X
E
Figure 2.3.2: A metastable state of weaker bonds in a chemical reaction can occur,
see point 1, a transitional ’saddle’ conﬁguration is seen in point 2,
and chemical equilibrium with stronger bonds is obtained in point 3,
state of least energy
Chemical potential is a potential energy that is absorbed or released during a chemical
reaction. The chemical potential can be deﬁned as the slope of the free energy of a
system with respect to a change in the number of moles of that species. From ﬁgure
2.3.2 the slope is zero at point 3, which indicated chemical potential is zero.
2.3.4
Metastability
Metastability is a phenomenon that occurs when a chemical reaction spends an ex-
tended period of time in a conﬁguration other than its state of least energy.
A
metastable period can be explained by point 1 in ﬁgure 2.3.2.
Chemical systems
involving change in chemical bonds can be in a metastable state. Thermal motion or
molecular vibrations can make the system ascent the ’saddle’, point 2 in ﬁgure 2.3.2,
16
==PAGE:33==
which will lead it to the stable least energy state. Isomerism of molecules is a common
type of metastability. Molecules can change over time to other isomers.
Metastability of a system is highly dependent on the surrounding temperature and
pressure. This can inﬂuence the state the mixed fuel will be in, since it is mixed under
pressure in a closed system, see chapter 3.2.
2.4
Reid Vapor Pressure
Reid vapor pressure (RVP) is a measure of the volatility of a chemical product. It is
deﬁned as the absolute vapor pressure exerted by a liquid at 37.8 ◦C (100 ◦F). For
more thorough understanding of partial pressures see chapter 2.3. RVP diﬀers from
the true vapor pressure (TVP) due to sample vaporization, presence of water vapor
and air in the conﬁned space of the test equipment, see Chapter 3.1. The TVP is the
equilibrium partial pressure exerted by a volatile organic liquid.
The American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) have set a standard for
testing the RVP, it is deﬁned in standard ASTM D-323.
The RVP of a fuel is of great importance, especially when running on gasoline engines.
In the Winter time higher tendency of vaporization is desired, this is due to the
necessity of gasoline vaporization in the combustion chamber in order to get optimum
ignition and combustion. In the Summer time too much vaporization will make vapor
locks, which will cause diﬃculties pumping the fuel.
2.4.1
Pure Components Used in Master Thesis
In this section an overview of the pure chemicals utilized in this master thesis is
presented. Table 2.6 gives an overview of the RVP and the purities of the chemicals.
Table 2.6: Reid Vapor Pressure and purity of pure chemicals used in master thesis
RVP
Purity:
Species:
[kPa]
[%]
Ammonia:
1461
100
Ethanol:
15.86
>99.5
2-Ethylhexanol:
0.069
n/a
n-Hexane:
34.47
>98.5
i-Propanol:
13.10
>99.8
Toluene:
7.58
99.95
Water:
6.60
Distilled
As can be seen from table 2.6 ammonia is clearly the most volatile component utilized
in this work.
17
==PAGE:34==
2.4.2
Legislation on Reid Vapor Pressure
The RVP deﬁnes how volatile a petroleum product is, a higher volatility will lead
to higher evaporative emissions coming from a speciﬁc fuel.
The volatile organic
compounds4 (VOCs) found in fuels are major contributors to ground level ozone,
also known as smog. Some VOCs are of great health concern, since they can posses
carcinogenic eﬀects, these include e.g. benzene found in both unburned and burned
fossil fuels.
The maximum limit of RVP is regulated by law in several countries, table 2.7 presents
the values that are given for Summer and Winter gasoline.
Table 2.7: Maximum limit for RVP for several countries [17] [18] [19] [20] [21],
span in USA is due to state laws
Summer RVP:
Winter RVP:
Country:
[kPa]
[kPa]
Denmark:
45-70
65-95
Finland:
70-80
90-100
Germany:
60
90
Norway:
70
100
Sweden:
70-80
90-100
USA:
48-62
<103
It can be seen that the diﬀerence between Summer and Winter gasoline is approxi-
mately 20-30 kPa. Reﬁneries primarily adjust to seasonal changes by adding butane.
Butane is abundant and relatively inexpensive, has a high octane rating and RVP,
making it ideal for adjusting the total RVP of a fuel. In this master thesis the RVP
will be adjusted by substituting butane and other volatile compounds with ammonia
or alternatively the fuel utilized will be composed by a few chemical compounds, see
section 4.2.
2.4.3
Evaporative Emissions Control - EVAP System
Cars running on gasoline have since early 1970’s5 had a fully sealed fuel system with
a charcoal-lined canister installed. The system is fully sealed in order to avoid any
fuel vapors escaping, leading to harmful HC-emissions.
Expanding fuel vapors are collected in a charcoal-lined canister, which is purged with
fresh air into the intake manifold and subsequently burned in the engine, see ﬁgure
2.4.1. Purging is usually done when the engine has reached normal operating condi-
tions.
4Any organic compound with a vapor pressure of 10 Pa or more at 20 ◦C
5All U.S. vehicles since 1971.
18
==PAGE:35==
Pressure
Sensor
EVAP Charcoal
Canister
Canister Close
Valve (CCV)
Air Filter
Fuel Cap
Rollover
Valve
ORVR
Valve
Fuel Filter
To Fuel Rail
Catch Tank
EVAP
Canister
Purge Valve
To Engine
Manifold
Vacuum
Fuel Tank
Figure 2.4.1: Schematic diagram of EVAP system on board an automobile
The evaporative control system is obliged to have a special ﬁlling cap, which also seals
the fueling inlet.
2.5
Theory Concerning Solvents
To understand the complexity of blends of diﬀerent chemical compounds, their in-
teraction and to be able to make ideal mixtures6 it is necessary to understand the
concept solvents.
A solvent is a chemical substance capable of dissolving a chemically diﬀerent com-
pound, the solute, and the two makes a solution. When two substances are incapable
of dissolving a two phase system is present, e.g. the familiar case with oil in water.
In a solution the solvent and solute interact chemically on a molecular level, they are
evenly distributed, meaning molecules of the solvent arranges around molecules of the
solute.
2.5.1
Deﬁnition of Polarity
Solvents are classiﬁed into two main categories; polar and nonpolar. Water at 20 ◦C
has a relative permittivity, εr, of 80.1. The relative permittivity7 is the ratio of the
capacitance of a capacitor using the material (solvent) as a dielectric compared to a
similar capacitor that has vacuum as its dielectric. Solvents are generally considered
to be nonpolar when having a relative permittivity of less than 15.
Additionally the polarity, dipole moment, of a chemical compound determines what
types of compounds it can dissolve and with what solvents it is miscible. The polarity
is measured in debye, D. 1 D is equal to 3.33564·10−30 C·m. Dipoles occur when atoms
6Ideal mixture in this sense is understood by a blend of chemical constituents that do not separate
into two phases, which would make it diﬃcult to utilize in an engine
7Is also commonly known as the dielectric constant, which is deprecated in physics and engineering
19
==PAGE:36==
in molecules have a substantially diﬀerent electronegativity, when an atom attracts
electrons more than the other.
Polar solvents can be subdivided into protic and aprotic. Protic solvents solvate anions
strongly using hydrogen bonding. Aprotic solvents tend to have large dipole moments
and is thereby able to solvate positively charged species with their negative dipole.
2.5.2
Properties of Solvents
In table 2.8 the polar properties described in the preceding section are presented for
a selection of solvents.
Table 2.8: Chemical formula, boiling point, relative permittivity (at 20 ◦C) and
dipole moment for selected solvents
Chemical
Boiling
Relative
Dipole
Solvent:
Formula:
Point:
Permittivity:
Moment:
Nonpolar Solvents:
n-Pentane:
CH3-CH2-CH2-CH2-CH3
36 ◦C
1.85
0.00 D
n-Hexane:
CH3-CH2-CH2-CH2-CH2-CH3
69 ◦C
1.88
0.00 D
Toluene:
C6H5-CH3
111 ◦C
2.38
0.36 D
Diethyl Ether:
CH3-CH2-O-CH2-CH3
35 ◦C
4.30
1.15 D
Polar Aprotic Solvents:
Acetone:
CH3-C(=O)-CH3
56 ◦C
21.0
2.88 D
Polar Protic Solvents:
i-Propanol:
CH3-CH(-OH)-CH3
82 ◦C
18.0
1.66 D
Ethanol:
CH3-CH2-OH
79 ◦C
24.6
1.69 D
Water:
H-O-H
100 ◦C
80.1
1.85 D
Solvents from the table utilized in this master thesis include; n-Hexane, toluene, i-
Propanol, ethanol and water. See section 4.2 for the properties of the mixed fuels.
i-Propanol is known as a major ingredient in ’gas drying’ fuel additives. Water in fuel
and fuel tanks can cause problems, since it can freeze in fuel supply lines. The alcohol
solubilizes water in gasoline making it a single phase fuel. Additionally production
of i-Propanol from biomass has been subject to research the latter years[22], which
could be of interest when the EU goals of 2020 should be met.
In this master thesis it is of interest to dissolve ammonia in gasoline or similar chemical
compounds. Ammonia is a carbon free molecule which can be produced without using
fossil fuels, has a relative permittivity of 17.0 and a dipole moment of 1.42 D.
20
==PAGE:37==
2.6
Theoretical Investigation of RVP
In this section a chemical software, SPECS v5.63, developed at the Center for Phase
Equilibria and Separation Processes (IVC-SEP), Department of Chemical Engineering,
Technical University of Denmark will be used for analyzing the behavior of various
mixtures with or without ammonia.
SPECS is developed for analysis of complex
mixtures, such as polar, nonpolar and oil-mixtures.
A theoretical investigation of the RVP for several mixtures will be conducted using
a 2 coeﬃcient UNIFAC Vapor Liquid Equilibrium (VLE) model with temperature
dependency. The algorithm for calculating bubble pressure will be utilized in this
study.
2.6.1
UNIFAC Model
UNIFAC is an abbreviation for UNIQUAQ Functional-group Activity Coeﬃcients.
The UNIFAC model was ﬁrst published 1975 by Fredenslund, Jones and Prausnitz,
researchers from University of California. The model is a semi-empirical system for
prediction of non-electrolyte activity in non-ideal mixtures. UNIFAC is developed to
provide a ﬂexible liquid equilibria model for chemical calculation purposes and for
predicting solution behavior when working with binary, or higher, mixtures where no
experimental information is available.
UNIFAC is an example of a model using the group-contribution method for prediction
of liquid phase activity coeﬃcients. The liquid mixture is considered to be a solution
of structural/functional groups like, OH and CH3. The constituents of the liquid mix-
ture is build up using the superposition principle, adding the structural groups which
ﬁnally form the parent molecule. The properties of the mixture is calculated from
the properties of the structural groups rather than from properties of the molecule.
The latter form the strength of the model, by applying the structural groups the
sheer number of binary interactions that would be needed to be measured is reduced
substantially.
UNIFAC is a free energy prediction model. Its group-interaction parameters have
been estimated from experimental Vapor-Liquid Equilibria data, which explains why
it is called a semi-empirical model. An activity coeﬃcient of components in a real
solution is a correction factor that accounts for deviations from an ideal solution. It
splits the activity coeﬃcients for each species in the system into a combinatorial γc
and a residual component γr.
The combinatorial term accounts for diﬀerences in molecular shape and size, it is
a function of the liquid composition and the group volume and surface area. The
residual term accounts for energetic interactions between groups and molecules. It is
a function of the composition, the group volumes and surface areas, temperature and
the interaction between the functional groups.
21
==PAGE:38==
2.6.2
Using SPECS v5.63
For the analysis conducted in this master thesis SPECS’ three speciﬁcation steps are
applied:
• Components
• Models
• Tasks
Components:
In the components section the chemical constituents of the liquid mixture that is to be
analysed need to be selected. SPECS has a default database containing a wide range
of chemical constituents, some of which have been used in this master thesis in actual
experimental work. It is possible to create new molecules if constants are known.
In the case of working with the model UNIFAC VLE with temperature dependency
2 coeﬃcients the number of times a subgroup is represented in a molecule and the
subgroup number must be known.
Models:
SPECS is capable of working with a wide range of thermodynamic models, from simple
One equation of state for all phases to Thermodynamic model in liquid vapor phases. A
great part of the work conducted in this master thesis contain ammonia, therefore the
UNIFAC VLE with temperature dependency 2 coeﬃcients has been chosen. The Soave-
Redlich-Kwong (SRK) equation of state (EOS) is applied in the analysis. G. Soave
devised the original Redlich-Kwong EOS to ﬁt the vapor pressure data of hydrocarbons
by implementing a term that depends on temperature and the acentric factor, ω, of
the species.
Tasks:
SPECS is able to calculate various things, including dew point pressure/temperature,
fugacity coeﬃcient, viscosity and bubble pressure. The RVP is predicted by using
the latter calculation of bubble pressure at 310.93 K equivalent to 100 ◦F, see section
2.4. Furthermore the function T(x, y) is used for predicting the upper critical solution
temperature, see section 2.6.4.
SPECS works on a molar basis, and therefore the vol-% needs to be converted into
mol-%, this is done using the molar volume, Vm,i, for each species, i:
Vm,i = Mi
ρi
(2.6.1)
Where Mi is the molar mass [kg/kmol] and ρi is the density [kg/m3] for the ith species.
Blend eﬀects are neglected, meaning that the total volume is equal to the sum of the
added volumes.
22
==PAGE:39==
2.6.3
Preliminary Study of Ammonia with Water using SPECS
Experimental studies of ammonia in water have been conducted as early as the be-
ginning of the 20th century. It is chosen to work with ammonia in water using the
program SPECS in order to see its capabilities.
Ammonia solubility has been experimentally investigated by Thomas A. Wilson[23].
He made a study of the vapor pressure of the mix between water and ammonia in 1925.
The study of the vapor pressure of the mixture as a function of molal concentration of
ammonia at 40 ◦C has been replicated using the theoretical model UNIFAC in SPECS.
The results are seen in ﬁgure 2.6.1.
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
500
1000
1500
2000
Molal Concentration of Ammonia [mol-%]
Vapor Pressure [kPa]
SPECS v5.63
Wilson, Thomas A. [23]
Figure 2.6.1: Vapor pressure of mixture of water and ammonia at 40 ◦C
As can be seen from the plot above, SPECS predicts the vapor pressure correctly
at 0 mol-%, 50 mol-% and 100 mol-%. Between these values the curviness is not as
well predicted. The theoretical investigation seem to have a more linear trend from
40 mol-% to 100 mol-%. The overall trend is reasonably predicted using SPECS. This
indicates that the software is capable of calculating equilibrium of ammonia with other
polar species such as water.
23
==PAGE:40==
2.6.4
Preliminary Study of Ammonia Mixed with n-Alkanes
using SPECS
Experimental studies have been conducted with ammonia solubility in various n-
Alkanes. Yokohama et Al.[24] have investigated the Upper Critical Solution Temper-
ature (UCST) of mixtures between ammonia and n-Octane, n-Hexane and n-Pentane
respectively. The UCST is the critical temperature above which the constituents of
a mixture are miscible in all proportions. This section compare the results obtained
experimentally with the ones obtained using the software SPECS. The temperature is
obtained using the function T(x, y) where x and y are the molar concentration of the
liquid and vapor phase respectively. The comparison can be seen in ﬁgure 2.6.2.
0
20
40
60
80
100
n-Octane
n-Hexane
n-Pentane
20
30
40
50
60
70
Weight Percentage of Ammonia [%]
Temperature [◦C]
SPECS v5.63
Yokohama et Al.[24]
Figure 2.6.2: Upper Critical Solution Temperature of ammonia with three n-
Alkanes
It can be seen from the plot, that the software predicts the UCST rather precisely in
the range between 10 % and 80 % for all three n-Alkanes. For n-Pentane the point
calculated at approximately 90 % deviates by 10 ◦C. From this it can be argued that
the software could be capable of working with solutions containing highly nonpolar
species such as n-Alkanes together with the polar ammonia.
It should though be mentioned that the mixtures that have been made in this master
thesis mostly work in the range 0 % to 10 % ammonia, which is not presented here.
24
==PAGE:41==
2.6.5
Investigation of RVP for Simple Gasoline Surrogates
In theoretical studies of gasoline mixtures simpliﬁcations need to be made, due to the
complexity and numerous chemical constituents they contain. In the literature various
gasoline surrogates have been used for investigating gasoline properties theoretically.
In table 2.9 a few rather simple surrogates are presented.
Table 2.9: Surrogates of gasoline, A (H/C-ratio ≈1.87 as regular gasoline), B
RON=94.7, C RON=94.6
A[25]:
B[26]:
C[27]:
Species:
[vol-%]
[vol-%]
[vol-%]
i-Octane:
55
50
25
Toluene:
35
10
45
n-Heptane:
10
20
20
Ethanol:
-
20
-
Diisobutylene:
-
-
10
The RVP of the surrogates in table 2.9 are investigated using the UNIFAC model. The
bubble pressure is found as dictated in the ASTM D-323 standard. SPECS v5.63 does
not have all chemical species in its library, therefore alternative constituents need to
be applied. In this analysis the species listed in table 2.9 are substituted by one of its
isomers. This can cause erroneous results, since isomers not necessarily have identical
RVP. These errors are not accounted for in any way. i-Octane and Diisobutylene are
substituted by n-Octane and 1-Octene respectively.
The RVP of the simple gasoline surrogates in table 2.9 can be seen in table 2.10.
Table 2.10: RVP of Surrogates from table 2.9
A[25]:
B[26]:
C[27]:
[kPa]
[kPa]
[kPa]
RVP:
6.68
18.5
7.74
The results of the RVP are considerably lower than for regular gasoline, being between
45 kPa and 100 kPa. This indicates that the complexity of the surrogates needs to
be altered in order to make reasonable predictions of the RVP. As presented earlier
butane is an important contributor to the overall RVP of gasoline, therefore a more
complex surrogate is developed in order to emulate a plausible RVP of gasoline, see
table 2.11.
25
==PAGE:42==
Table 2.11: Complex surrogate structure, inspired by [28], Mi is molar mass in
[kg/kmol]
Species:
Mi:
[wt-%]:
[mol-%]:
n-Butane:
58.1
10.0
14.3
n-Pentane:
72.2
28.2
32.4
n-Hexane:
86.2
17.5
16.8
2-Methylpentane:
86.2
4.71
4.53
Toluene:
92.1
9.49
8.54
n-Heptane:
100.2
7.82
6.46
p-Xylene:
106.2
16.5
12.9
n-Octane:
114.2
4.99
3.62
Naphthalene:
128.2
0.78
0.50
RVP [kPa]
75.4
The RVP of the more complex surrogate containing 10 % by mass n-Butane yields a
result of 75.4 kPa, which is close to the statutory limits presented in table 2.7.
Ethanol can be utilized as an eﬃcient solubilizer for ammonia in gasoline. Studies of
the impact on RVP, when ethanol is added to gasoline have been conducted several
times, see ﬁgure 2.6.3[29].
Figure 2.6.3: Reid Vapor Pressure mixing ethanol with gasoline[29]
An increase in RVP is seen when adding ethanol to the gasoline, even though ethanol
has a RVP considerably lower than gasoline.
This phenomenon can be explained
by the interference of the nonpolar hydrocarbons in gasoline with the intramolecular
hydrogen bonding between the polar ethanol molecules. The interference by ethanol
26
==PAGE:43==
with molecular interactions between hydrocarbons can also aﬀect in this way. The
phenomenon is suppressed so the RVP is lower when compared to pure gasoline at
approximately 45 % (v/v). The deviations between the curves in ﬁgure 2.6.3 can be
caused by diﬀerences in the chemical compositions of the utilized gasolines.
A similar study has been conducted using SPECS, see ﬁgure 2.6.4.
It is done by
adding ethanol to the gasoline surrogate, seen in table 2.11. It can not be directly
compared to ﬁgure 2.6.3 since it is in vol-%.
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Weight Percentage of Ammonia [%]
Reid Vapor Pressure [kPa]
Figure 2.6.4: Reid Vapor Pressure mixing ethanol with gasoline surrogate from
table 2.11
The same trend is seen, and the RVP peaks at approximately 9 %. The RVP is lower
compared to pure gasoline surrogate, when it passes 44 %, which seem highly plausible
when compared to previous studies.
The idea of adding ethanol as a solubilizer between ammonia and the gasoline surro-
gate was implemented. A theoretical analysis of the RVP when adding two diﬀerent
amounts of ethanol, 4.76 % and 44.45 %, and afterwards adding ammonia has been
conducted on the surrogate in table 2.11, see ﬁgure 2.6.5. Additionally a degassing is
made. The meaning of this is a removal of the volatile n-Butane. The same amount
of ethanol is added to see the diﬀerence between a ’normal’ gasoline surrogate and
a degassed gasoline surrogate. It should be noted that the ethanol concentration is
diluted when adding ammonia. The percentages 4.76 % and 44.5 % is only true at
0 % ammonia. The ﬁfth curve (orange) in the plot show pure ethanol mixed with
ammonia.
27
==PAGE:44==
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Weight Percentage of Ammonia [%]
Reid Vapor Pressure [kPa]
4.76 % EtOH
44.5 % EtOH
4.76 % EtOH Deg.
44.5 % EtOH Deg.
Ethanol
Figure 2.6.5: Reid Vapor Pressure when adding ethanol and afterwards adding
ammonia, pure ethanol together with ammonia is seen too, note
the ethanol concentration is diluted, so the percentages 4.76 % and
44.5 % is only true at 0 % ammonia
Firstly it is observed that a theoretical solubility of ammonia in all of the mixtures,
when having a RVP between 90 kPa and 100 kPa lie between 1 % and 4.3 %. It is clear
that the gasoline with little ethanol can contain less ammonia. When increasing the
mass percentage of ethanol to 44.5 % an increase in ammonia solubility is observed.
When removing the n-Butane from the surrogate and adding ethanol a decrease in
RVP is observed. This makes sense since n-Butane is highly volatile. The red and
blue curves seem parallel but shifted, the same is seen between the green and black
curves, both indicating that ammonia aﬀect the RVP in the same manner.
In the experimental work in this master thesis petroleum naphtha is used as a sub-
stitute for regular gasoline, the reason for this is explained in the subsequent section
4.2. Petroleum naphtha consists of molecules having sizes between C9-C14. In the
theoretical study of petroleum naphtha, n-Decane is assumed for simpliﬁcation. In
section 4.2 a simple mixture consisting of 48.79 % petroleum naphtha, 48.79 % ethanol
and 2.42 % ammonia is mixed. The measured RVP of this blend was found to be 61.94
kPa. The program SPECS predicts the RVP to be 64.63 kPa which is fairly close to
the measured value. This indicates that for simple blends the software can predict the
vapor pressure.
28
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 3
Experimental Method
3.1
Reid Vapor Pressure Measuring Cylinder
One of the tasks during this project is to design an apparatus that will make it
possible to measure the RVP of a petroleum product reliably.
The ASTM D-323
standard deﬁnes dimensions of the test apparatus, see ﬁgure 3.1.1[30], these have
been considered and utilized in the design and drawing of the test equipment. The
volume of the apparatus has to be so that the ratio of the volume of the vapor chamber
to the volume of the liquid chamber lie between 3.8 and 4.2.
E, Coupling
B
A
H, Coupling
D
G, Coupling
Figure 3.1.1: Vapor and liquid chamber (left and right respectively), see table 3.1
for dimensions of keys: A, B, D, E, G and H
29
==PAGE:46==
Table 3.1: Dimensions of vapor pressure apparatus
Key:
Description:
Dimension [mm]:
A
Vapor chamber length
254±3
B+D
Vapor and liquid chamber ID
51±3
E
Coupling ID min.
4.8 (3/16”)
G
Coupling OD
12.7 (1/2”)
H
Coupling ID
12.7 (1/2”)
Actual RVP Cylinder Design
The chosen dimensions for the test apparatus can be seen in table 3.2.
Table 3.2: Chosen dimensions of vapor pressure apparatus
Key:
Description:
Dimension [mm]:
A
Vapor chamber length
254
B+D
Vapor and liquid chamber ID
53
E
Coupling ID
6.4 (1/4”)
G
Coupling OD
12.7 (1/2”)
H
Coupling ID
12.7 (1/2”)
The dimensions of the two chambers yields a vapor volume to liquid volume ratio
of 4.0.
The wall thickness of the chambers are 3.65 mm.
The two chambers can
be seen in ﬁgure 3.1.2. All drawings and assemblies of the chambers can be found
in Appendix A. Drawings have been made using the CAD software SolidWorks 2014.
The test apparatus has been pressure tested to 7 bar according to the standard D-323.
30
==PAGE:47==
Figure 3.1.2: Figure showing the vapor and liquid chamber. The vapor chamber
has to openings, one for pressure gauge and one for connecting the
liquid chamber
3.1.1
RVP Test Setup
The test cylinder described in section 3.1 is essential for testing the RVP. The testing
can not be carried out without the use of a heating element and a container large
enough to fully submerge the RVP cylinder in water. Additionally a pressure gauge
is needed to measure the RVP.
Heating Element
A crucial part of the testing of RVP, is to be able to control the temperature of the
ﬂuid the RVP cylinder is submerged into. Various conﬁgurations have been on the
table of ideas. Among other; a heating unit with a temperature controller connected
to a thermocouple, expensive chemical laboratory equipment, which is able to control
bath temperatures precisely. The issue with these are the relatively small bath sizes.
A suitable heating element with integrated pump was found. It is developed for Sous
Vide cooking, the model is SV100Pro developed by Steba. It is able to control the
temperature as precisely as dictated in the D-323 standard. The heating unit has the
following speciﬁcations:
• Temperature precision: ±0.1 ◦C
• Capacity: 30 L of water
• Pumping capacity: 7.5 L/min
31
==PAGE:48==
• Power: 1500 W
• Temperature range: 5-99 ◦C
A suitable container made of plastic was found, and the test setup is seen in ﬁgure
3.1.3.
Figure 3.1.3: Reid vapor pressure test setup, with container containing water,
heating unit and RVP cylinder with pressure pickup attached to it
Pressure Pickup and Calibration
The Reid Vapor Pressure is measured with a Danfoss pickup of the type 060G3041
with a range of -1-9 bar. The pickup delivers a milliampere signal output between
4-20 mA. For ease of use, this signal is converted into 1-5 V output, which can be
measured with a voltmeter. The pickup has been calibrated using two identical Fluke
sensors.
32
==PAGE:49==
3.2
Mixing Ammonia with Fuel
This section describes the method for mixing ammonia into e.g. gasoline. Additionally
the technique for measuring the amount dissolved will be presented.
Ammonia is a volatile light gas under standard temperature and pressure. This com-
plicates the dissolving process, since simple pouring of two liquid ﬂuids is not possible.
The ammonia is stored in a gas cylinder under pressure, which makes it possible to
use connecting hoses between a mixing cylinder and the gas cylinder, see ﬁgure 3.2.1
where a schematic diagram of the experimental setup is seen.
A
B
B
B
C
D
B
Figure 3.2.1: Schematic diagram of experimental setup for adding ammonia to
gasoline. A is an ammonia gas cylinder, B is a valve, C is a 1
gallon (3.785 liter) mixing cylinder, D is a pressure pickup
The experimental setup for mixing ammonia into gasoline consists of a 1 gallon (3.785
liter) cylinder, a Danfoss pressure pickup of the type 060G1003 with a range from
-1-6 bar, three Swagelok ﬁttings and assorted ﬁttings and hoses for connection. The
ﬁnal setup looks as in ﬁgure 3.2.2. Additionally a regulating valve, a solenoid valve
and a 3-way valve is placed on the ammonia cylinder outlet.
C
B
B
B
D
Figure 3.2.2: Mixing cylinder (C) with 3 valves (B) and pressure pickup (D)
33
==PAGE:50==
The ﬁlling process is controlled by the pressure pickup, where the pressure can be
observed when ammonia is dissolved in the fuel. The pressure is increased by opening
the valve to the ammonia cylinder, afterwards it is closed and a pressure drop can
be observed. It is advantageous to shake the cylinder. This will increase the reacting
surface area between liquid and vapor phase. When an intermediate equilibrium is
obtained a new pressurizing is made and the procedure is repeated until the desired
equilibrium pressure is obtained.
3.2.1
Measuring Mass of Dissolved Ammonia
The method for determining the amount of ammonia added to the fuel is by applying
a weight, the volume of the fuel added to the mixing cylinder and a pressure pickup.
The diﬃcult part of measuring the added ammonia is to distinguish between the
ammonia in the liquid phase and the ammonia in the vapor phase. The total mass of
added ammonia is easily measured using a weight. The applied weight measures with
a precision of 0.1 g.
The density of fuel that has not been modiﬁed with ammonia is measured with the
weight just before poured into the mixing cylinder, see ﬁgure 3.2.3. This is done in
order to determine the volume added, since a considerable volume of fuel can hang on
the walls of the ﬂasks used.
Figure 3.2.3: Measuring density of fuel using 1000 mL ﬂask with an accuracy of
±0.4 mL and a weight
The total weight of fuel and cylinder is measured and the total pressure after having
poured the fuel into the cylinder is noted. It requires some time before equilibrium is
obtained, approximately 1-2 hours.
After having added ammonia the weight is measured again. The increase in volume
of the liquid phase in the cylinder is negligible, and the original volume is used in the
calculations for the ammonia in the vapor phase. The pressure pickup measures the
34
==PAGE:51==
total pressure in the cylinder. The partial pressure of ammonia is assumed to be the
pressure diﬀerence, before/after adding ammonia. Density of ammonia is determined
using partial pressure and temperature by use of the thermodynamic program, En-
gineering Equation Solver (EES). Mass of ammonia in the vapor phase is calculated
from vapor phase volume and the density and this is subtracted from the total mass.
Finally the ammonia solubility in grams NH3 per liter fuel [g/L] can be calculated.
The measuring technique in list form:
1. Pour fuel into mixing cylinder, note volume
2. Wait for equilibrium (appr. 1 hour), note total pressure and total mass
3. Add ammonia in several steps, note pressure
4. After reaching equilibrium, note total pressure and new total mass
5. Using EES, determine ammonia density and vapor phase mass
6. Subtract vapor phase mass, calculating solubility in g/L
It would be convenient to be able to verify the added ammonia mass by an alternative
method. This is presented and discussed in the subsequent section 3.3.
During the master thesis gas chromatography (GC) has been utilized for determination
of boiling point distribution and composition of the fuel mixtures. The GC available,
a Shimadzu GC-9A, does not have a cooling unit. For this reason it can not work at
subzero temperatures, which is necessary for most volatile petroleum products, such as
the fuel mixtures made in this master thesis. A section dealing with GC has therefore
been omitted in the main report. It can instead be found in Appendix B.
3.2.2
Ammonia Gas Detector
For safety reasons an ammonia gas detector has been installed in the vicinity of the
ammonia gas cylinder outlet.
The detector system has been developed by Geopal
System A/S.
A panel for mounting the safety system has been drawn in SolidWorks 2014 and
produced in the workshop. A 20 mm thick 140x140 mm aluminum plate is mounted
on top of the gas cylinder on this a 500x300 mm 2 mm thick stainless steel plate is
mounted, see drawings in Appendix C. The ﬁnal setup can be seen in ﬁgure 3.2.4.
The system consists of two detector units, one for ammonia gas and one for hydrogen.
The hydrogen detector is not actively used in this study. The ammonia gas detector
gives an output of 4-20 mA, which reﬂects a concentration of ammonia between 0-
200 ppm. The detectors are connected to a relay, that can supply 230 V equipment.
35
==PAGE:52==
B
E
F
G
A
H
Figure 3.2.4: Ammonia gas detector (G) connected to relay (F), with regulating
valve (H) solenoid valve (E) and 3-way valve (B) installed on am-
monia gas cylinder (A)
The forementioned solenoid valve is wired to this relay, so that it closes if ammonia is
detected.
The ammonia gas detector has been calibrated using a gas cylinder with a concentra-
tion of 200 ppm ammonia. At calibration the output signal from the detector unit is
measured with an ampere meter. Two alarm levels are set in the relay. First alarm
level is at 50 ppm, equivalent to an output of 8 mA. The second alarm level is at
100 ppm, equivalent to an output of 12 mA. The ammonia gas detector has addi-
tionally been tested using ammonium hydroxide, water with 25 % ammonia mixed
in.
3.3
Degassing Gasoline
In this section the method for degassing gasoline is presented.
The degassing of
gasoline is conducted due to the fact that fresh gasoline is made for distribution
directly. This means that it will comply with current legislation on RVP, see table
2.7. Newly bought gasoline will have a RVP just below the maximum limit. The
gasoline used in this master thesis was octane 95 bought on a local Statoil gas station.
The properties of the gasoline can be seen from [17, Data Sheet From Statoil].
Gasoline consist of more than 100 diﬀerent organic compounds, which vary in vola-
tility. Some of the most volatile compounds are the smaller alkanes e.g. Butane and
Pentane. Butane is especially contributing to the overall RVP. It has been a part of
36
==PAGE:53==
this master thesis to top oﬀgasoline (degas) so that a substantial part of the most
volatile compounds are separated from the less volatile parts of gasoline. Remember
that gasoline has molecules in the range C4 to C12, see table 2.5.
The degassing process chosen for this project is carried out using an adjustable hea-
ting mantel (max 550 W), a 3 liter round ﬂask and a condenser that condense the
compounds with a boiling point above approximately 20 ◦C. A schematic diagram of
the experimental setup is seen in ﬁgure 3.3.1.
B
C
D
E
A
F
2
Figure 3.3.1: Schematic diagram of experimental setup for degassing gasoline. A
is a heating mantel, B is a 3 liters round ﬂask, C is cooling water
inlet, D is cooling water outlet, E is a thermocouple placed at outlet
of condenser, F is a thermocouple placed in gasoline
As can be seen in ﬁgure 3.3.1, thermocouples are placed in the gasoline and above
the condenser opening. These are installed for better surveillance of the degassing
process. The temperature is manually recorded. Additionally the mass of the gasoline
is continuously monitored, by weighing the round ﬂask on the weight seen in ﬁgure
3.2.3.
The degassing is carried out starting with 1.4-2.1 liters of gasoline, and is degassed
until a mass decrease of around 15-20 % is obtained.
The degassing procedure could be a possible way of determining the mass of added
ammonia to the gasoline blend. By making thorough recordings of temperature and
mass during the degassing and comparing them to a degassing procedure conducted
on a mix with ammonia, the slopes can be calculated and compared.
3.4
CFR Engine for Fuel Testing
So far, diﬀerent fuels, their composition and properties have been addressed. Another
essential part of this master thesis is the testing of the blended fuels in order to see
their impact on performance of a running SI engine.
The engine used is a Cooperative Fuel Research (CFR) Engine, see ﬁgure 3.4.1.
37
==PAGE:54==
Figure 3.4.1: CFR engine used for testing in this master thesis
It was developed more than 80 years ago for fuel rating, which today remains the
standard for testing the anti-knock qualities of gasoline fuels, fuel constituents and
alternative fuels. The engine is made for testing fuels, by being able to adjust the
compression ratio (CR). The CR is changed using a hand crank, see ﬁgure 3.4.2, the
actual CR is measured using a micrometer mounted on the engine. The micrometer
reading can be converted to actual CR using a calibration sheet.
Figure 3.4.2: CR is altered using a hand crank, actual CR is measured using a
micrometer and reading the actual value from a calibration sheet
38
==PAGE:55==
Additionally the ignition/spark timing can be altered manually from -40◦to 0◦with
respect to TDC, see ﬁgure 3.4.3. When having a too early ignition the fuel can auto-
ignite in parts of the combustion chamber making undesirable pressure oscillations,
that can be harmful to the engine.
Figure 3.4.3: Ignition timing is changed manually from -40◦to 0◦with respect to
TDC
During testing the air-fuel equivalence ratio, λ, is adjusted. This is done by turning
the fuel restrictor knob on the carburetor, see ﬁgure 3.4.4. The knob is made of brass
and is seen at the bottom of the ﬁgure.
Figure 3.4.4: The air-fuel ratio is adjusted turning the brass knob on the carburetor
Adjustment of the air-fuel ratio is crucial when switching between two diﬀerent fuels,
e.g. the air-fuel ratio by mass for regular gasoline is 14.7:1, for ethanol it is 9:1 and
39
==PAGE:56==
for ammonia it is 6:1. The air-fuel ratio and emissions; HC, CO2, CO and O2 are
measured using a Bosch Emissions Tester.
The pressure is acquired using a Kistler water cooled pressure pickup. The sample
frequency is for every 0.5◦, therefore 1440 measurements on a full 4-stroke cycle.
3.4.1
Test Schedule
The testing of the fuels are carried out in a manner so the octane rating can be
identiﬁed relative to each other. The precise octane rating will not be identiﬁed. For
testing the actual octane rating a modiﬁcation of the test engine needs to be made. It
would require a tank system capable of mixing n-Heptane and i-Octane in a precise
way. The composition of the blend consisting of the two fuels yields the actual octane
rating.
The testing is conducted by altering the compression ratio and the ignition timing
respectively. This means that a test starts at one CR and then the ignition timing is
swept from 0◦from TDC until knocking, normally in steps of 5◦. The identiﬁcation of
knocking is either by listening or inspecting pressure curves live on the data acquisition
computer. Subsequent analysis of knocking from acquired data can be seen in section
4.3.3. The engine runs at 1000 rpm during all tests. The CR is swept from 7:1 to a
maximum of 12.5:1 in steps of 0.5. Tests are carried out running air-fuel equivalence
ratio, λ=1. The reason for this is that a lean mixture burns slower and is more diﬃcult
to ignite. Another reason is that the exhaust after treatment in automobiles with a
3-way catalyst requires a fuel air ratio of 1.
The idea for making the test in this way is to plot all fuels in a CR/ignition timing
coordinate system. By doing this the line of knocking will appear and the fuels octane
rating can be compared with respect to each other.
During testing the fuel consumption is measured using a 30 mL glas, which is timed
with a stopwatch- This is done for every three to ﬁve alterings of the ignition timing.
It is not done for every test, due to time consumption and the fact that it does not
change much. Figure 3.4.5 show the fuel line and 30 mL measuring glas.
40
==PAGE:57==
Figure 3.4.5: Fuel line with measuring glas, where the fuel consumption is mea-
sured using a stopwatch
The brake power of the engine is calculated using a measured weight found manually
from a weight connected to the dynamometer mounted on the engine shaft, see ﬁgure
3.4.6.
Figure 3.4.6: Weight measuring the torque on dynanometer connected to the shaft
The brake power, BP, is calculated using the following equation:
BP = W · N
2000 · 0.746
[kW]
(3.4.1)
Where W is the measured weight and N is the engine speed in rpm.
A test at a speciﬁc CR and ignition timing can be conducted as soon as temperatures
have reached equilibrium. It takes between three to ﬁve minutes. Temperatures are
measured with type K thermocouples. An example of the data collected can be seen
in the SI test scheme in Appendix D, where the data for testing a Summer grade
gasoline is given.
41
==PAGE:58==
3.4.2
Measuring Uncertainty during Fuel Testing
During the engine testing several diﬀerent things are measured. Measuring is associ-
ated with uncertainty. It is of great importance to remember that the results presented
in section 4.3 are aﬀected by the measurement made. This section suggests the sizes
of the uncertainties. Table 3.3 presents the uncertainty associated with diﬀerent mea-
surements.
Table 3.3: Diﬀerent measuring uncertainties aﬀecting the results in section 4.3
Measurement:
Unit:
Absolute Measured Value:
Uncertainty:
Timing of Fuel Consumption
[s]
45.8-70.9
± 0.5
Weight for BP Calculation
[kg]
6.28-9.66
± 0.02
Compression Ratio, CR
[-]
7.0-12.5
± 0.15
Engine Speed, N
[rpm]
1000
± 5
Ignition Timing
[◦]
0-40
± 0.5
Temperatures
[◦C]
16-663
± 0.5
When considering the weight and the engine speed alone the uncertainty of the BP,
will in the worst case vary with ±0.8 %.
Additionally, the eﬃciencies, ηi and ηb, presented in the result section 4.3 will be
inﬂuenced by BP uncertainty and also the timing of the fuel consumption and the
assumed lower heating value of the fuel.
42
==PAGE:59==
Chapter 4
Results
4.1
Degassing Gasoline Results
The preliminary work conducted in this master thesis was to ﬁnd out how to degas
gasoline, this was done as described in section 3.3. The degassing process of gasoline
was carried out in order to get a better understanding of how gasoline behaves upon
heating. Here the results of degassing 1500 g of gasoline (2.05 L) is presented. One
easy way to ensure that a change in the overall gasoline composition has found place is
to ﬁnd the density before and after degassing the gasoline. Additionally measurements
of the RVP of the gasoline has been conducted, using the method described in section
3.1.1. The degassing stretched over two separate tests. Therefore three density and
three RVP measurements are recorded, see table 4.1.
Table 4.1: Density and RVP measurements carried out before, after ﬁrst, after
second degassing procedure and after adding ammonia
Density
RVP
[kg/m3]
[kPa]
Fresh Gasoline
736.9
87.21
After 1st Degassing
749.5
54.67
After 2nd Degassing
755.9
41.88
After adding NH3
n/a
86.27
As can be seen the gasoline becomes more dense when degassing. This can be explained
by the fact that the portion of the most volatile constituents leaves the liquid phase.
They contribute to the density by making the overall density lighter. The volatile
constituents contribute the most to the RVP therefore a substantial decrease in RVP
can be observed.
The temperatures above the condenser and in the gasoline during the ﬁrst degassing
test are presented in ﬁgure 4.1.1.
43
==PAGE:60==
0
100
200
300
400
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Time [min]
Temperature [◦C]
Temp. above Condenser
Temp. of Gasoline
Figure 4.1.1: Temperature development of 1st degassing of gasoline, the curve is
broken due to a break in test
The reason for the curve is broken from 140-210 min is due to a break during the
test. There are some clear and interesting tendencies that need explanation. The ﬁrst
noticeable is the temperature drop in the red curve 0-40 min. This is most likely due to
the most volatile components in gasoline. They will rapidly escape the gasoline. The
most volatile constituents are e.g. Butane, Pentane and Hexane, molecules having four
to six carbon atoms. This is also the reason for the density change seen in table 4.1.
The temperature drop is then explained by the relatively greater mass ﬂow passing
the thermocouple.
The temperature of the gasoline rapidly increases at start and then ﬂattens. During
the degassing 6x5 mL tests are taken, in order to be able to analyze the composition
afterwards, e.g. by GC analysis. The mass of the gasoline has been recorded ﬁve times
during the test, see ﬁgure 4.1.2.
44
==PAGE:61==
0
100
200
300
400
1300
1350
1400
1450
1500
1550
Time [min]
Mass [g]
Observed mass
Figure 4.1.2: Mass decrease when degassing gasoline, two red squares indicate a 5
mL sample is collected
As can be seen it looks like the mass curve ﬂattens in the same manner as the tem-
perature curve does. The mass during the ﬁrst degassing test decreased by 11.5 %.
After ending this test the RVP was measured to 55 kPa, showing a signiﬁcant drop
from 87 kPa for fresh gasoline.
The idea of trying to investigate the mass of ammonia added by analyzing the tem-
perature and mass curves, was an incentive to make a more thorough record of both
temperature and mass for the second degassing test. The temperature development
is presented in ﬁgure 4.1.3
45
==PAGE:62==
0
50
100
150
200
250
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Time [min]
Temperature [◦C]
Temperature above Condenser
Temperature of Gasoline
dT/dt=0.763 ◦C/h, R2=0.994
Figure 4.1.3: Temperature development when degassing gasoline second time,
trend line added from 63-232 min
It can be observed that the temperature is more thoroughly recorded with a higher
frequency than in ﬁgure 4.1.1. The drop in the temperature above the condenser as
in the ﬁrst degassing (0-40 min) is not observed. This is most likely not seen since the
most volatile constituents have escaped the gasoline in the ﬁrst test. After approxi-
mately 60 min a linear trend in the gasoline temperature development is observed. A
trend line is inserted with a slope of 0.76 ◦C/h. In ﬁgure 4.1.4 the mass recordings
are plotted.
46
==PAGE:63==
0
50
100
150
200
250
1250
1260
1270
1280
1290
1300
1310
Time [min]
Mass [g]
Observed mass
dm/dt=-0.202 g/min, R2=0.999
Figure 4.1.4: Mass decrease when degassing gasoline, trend line added from 62-230
min
Again the high frequency of recordings allow a trend line to be inserted, the slope being
-0.2 g/min. It is this slope that is of interest when comparing with the degassing test
with gasoline containing ammonia. The mass decreased by only 4 % during this test.
After ending the second degassing procedure a new measurement of the density and
RVP was made, yielding 755.9 g/L and 42 kPa. This low RVP was decided to be of
use for further reﬁning of gasoline containing ammonia. Therefore the mixing cylinder
was used for adding ammonia.
4.1.1
Adding Ammonia First Time
The degassed gasoline was poured into the cylinder as described in section 3.2. The
ﬁlling process is surveyed using measurements of the pressure increase in the cylinder,
see ﬁgure 4.1.5.
47
==PAGE:64==
0
10
20
30
40
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Time [min]
Pressure [kPa]
Figure 4.1.5: Pressure development during gasoline ammonia mixing, pressure
above atmospheric
The pressure at equilibrium in the cylinder converges toward the pressure at pressu-
rizing. During this test a total of 6.33 g of ammonia was added to the gasoline. An
additional pressurizing was conducted reaching an equilibrium pressure of 82.6 kPa,
yielding a total of 12.2 g ammonia added. Whereof 1.8 g is in the vapor phase inside
the cylinder. This means that 10.4 g is dissolved into the gasoline, yielding a solubility
of 6.6 g/L gasoline, corresponding to approximately 0.9 % by mass. The RVP of the
gasoline with ammonia was measured and was found to 86 kPa, conﬁrming the high
volatility of ammonia.
48
==PAGE:65==
4.1.2
Degassing Gasoline with Ammonia Added
After having added ammonia using a pressurized cylinder the gasoline with 6.6 g/L of
ammonia is degassed one more time. This is done in order to try to verify the content
of ammonia added. The temperature development is seen in ﬁgure 4.1.6.
0
20
40
60
80
100
−10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Time [min]
Temperature [◦C]
Temperature above Condenser
Temperature of Gasoline
dT/dt=0.964 ◦C/h, R2=1.000
dT/dt=0.723 ◦C/h, R2=1.000
Figure 4.1.6: Temperature development when degassing gasoline with ammonia A
trend line is added from 59-80 min and from 82-91 min, due to jump
in temperature
A distinct drop in temperature can be seen in the temperature above the condenser.
This might indicate that a signiﬁcant mass leaves the gasoline, which is anticipated
due to the addition of the volatile ammonia, remember it has a RVP of 1461 kPa, well
above regular gasoline between 50-100 kPa.
49
==PAGE:66==
The temperature of the gasoline develops smoothly until a sudden jump at 80 min,
which can not be explained from any observations. The slopes are added from 60 min,
they are directly comparable to the slopes of the gasoline before adding ammonia, see
ﬁgure 4.1.7 below, which is a cut out of the ﬁrst 100 minutes from ﬁgure 4.1.3.
0
20
40
60
80
100
−10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Time [min]
Temperature [◦C]
Temperature above Condenser
Temperature of Gasoline
dT/dt=0.763 ◦C/h, R2=0.994
Figure 4.1.7: Temperature development when degassing gasoline (containing no
ammonia), trend line added from 63-100 min
50
==PAGE:67==
The mass development when degassing gasoline with ammonia is seen in ﬁgure 4.1.8.
0
20
40
60
80
100
940
950
960
970
980
990
Time [min]
Mass [g]
Observed mass
dm/dt=-0.154 g/min, R2=1.000
Figure 4.1.8: Mass decrease when degassing gasoline with ammonia, trend line
added from 64-92 min
The mass decreases dramatically between 10 and 50 minutes. 28 g leaves the gasoline
in 40 minutes. The decrease can not be explained by the ammonia added, since it
according to measurements was 6.6 g/L. For comparison the degassing of gasoline with
no ammonia decreased by 18 g in the ﬁrst 100 minutes, see ﬁgure 4.1.9, which is a cut
out of ﬁgure 4.1.4.
0
20
40
60
80
100
1260
1270
1280
1290
1300
1310
Time [min]
Mass [g]
Observed mass
dm/dt=-0.202 g/min, R2=0.999
Figure 4.1.9: Mass decrease when degassing gasoline, trend line added from 62-100
min
51
==PAGE:68==
The incentive of making thorough measurements of mass and temperature develop-
ment before and after adding ammonia was to see, if it was possible to make a veriﬁca-
tion of the added ammonia mass by other means than using a weight. As can be seen
from the great diﬀerence between the two degassing tests it is not directly applicable
using this method. Replicating the results on additional batches of gasoline could be
of high interest to see if the same results reveal. Further studies could be made in
order to verify if the reﬁning of gasoline with ammonia makes such a great change in
the composition.
The results of the analysis conducted above have revealed interesting trends when
working with gasoline. Gasoline reﬁning is very sensitive as it can be seen from the
plots.
The following section presents the results obtained for all fuel mixtures made in this
master thesis.
4.2
Mixing Fuels Results
During this master thesis several fuel compositions have been mixed. All fuel mixtures
are composed on mass basis, since the volume of a mixed fuel can diﬀer from the
summation of the volumes of the pure chemical components. This is explained by the
fact that diﬀerent molecules can pack diﬀerently when mixed together.
Table 4.2 presents all mixed fuels that have undergone engine testing. Additionally the
partial pressure of ammonia, pNH3, in the ﬁlling process, measured density, theoretical
LHV, measured RVP, theoretical RVP and the energy content from ammonia are
presented. In table 4.3 mixtures that has not undergone engine testing is presented.
These are conducted for comparison of real RVP measurements and RVP prediction
of the UNIFAC model made in SPECS v5.63.
52
==PAGE:69==
Table 4.2: Properties for fuel mixes with compositions presented in mass percentage of the chemical constituent, ﬁgure in parenthesis
in Gasoline column represents fresh gasoline (not degassed). The partial pressure of ammonia, pNH3, is shown since it
reveals how much potential there is in the ﬁlling process of ammonia. The fuel mixes shown in this table has undergone
engine testing
Fuel
Degassed
Petroleum
Ethanol
Water
2-Ethyl-
NH3
pNH3
ρ
LHV
RVP
RVPth.
ENH3
Mix
Gasoline
Naphtha
Hexanol
[kPa]
[kg/m3]
[MJ/kg]
[kPa]
[kPa]
[%]
7
-
50.00
50.00
-
-
-
-
745.0
36.53
n/a
14.49
-
8
-
48.79
48.79
-
-
2.42
47.04
n/a
36.10
61.94
64.63
1.25
9
-
41.34
47.60
4.12
6.93
-
-
762.2
34.65
22.32
n/a
-
10
-
39.92
45.96
3.98
6.66
3.48
72.02
761.2
34.09
71.22
n/a
1.90
11
(100.0)
-
-
-
-
-
-
742.4
43.95
66.71
n/a
-
12
-
-
100.0
-
-
-
-
789.0
28.87
11.03
15.15
-
13
-
-
95.18
-
-
4.82
69.36
778.0
28.37
58.93
120.0
3.17
53
==PAGE:70==
Table 4.3: Properties for fuel mixes with compositions presented in mass percentage of the chemical constituent, ﬁgure in parenthesis
in Gasoline column represents fresh gasoline (not degassed). The partial pressure of ammonia, pNH3, is shown since it
reveals how much potential there is in the ﬁlling process of ammonia. The fuel mixes shown in this table has not undergone
any engine testing
Fuel
Degassed
Petroleum
Ethanol
n-Hexane
i-Propanol
Toluene
NH3
pNH3
ρ
LHV
RVP
RVPth.
ENH3
Mix
Gasoline
Naphtha
[kPa]
[kg/m3]
[MJ/kg]
[kPa]
[kPa]
[%]
1
(100.0)
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
736.9
43.95
87.21
n/a
-
2
100.0
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
749.5
n/a
54.67
n/a
-
3
100.0
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
755.9
n/a
41.88
n/a
-
4
99.14
-
-
-
-
-
0.86
78.58
n/a
43.72
86.27
n/a
0.36
5
-
100.0
-
-
-
-
-
-
712.3
44.19
9.28
n/a
-
6
-
99.84
-
-
-
-
0.16
84.70
n/a
44.15
16.05
n/a
0.07
14
-
-
25.00
25.00
20.00
30.00
-
-
766.0
36.67
27.59
30.14
-
15
-
-
24.14
24.14
19.31
28.97
3.45
84.35
764.4
36.05
81.00
54.66
1.76
54
==PAGE:71==
As can be seen from some of the fuel blends the amount of ammonia dissolved is
very low. The mass determination of dissolved ammonia is associated with uncer-
tainty. During some of the fuel mixture processes the amount of ammonia dissolved
is marginal. The low mass of ammonia dissolved is comparable to the amount of am-
monia in the vapor phase in the cylinder. This increases the uncertainty signiﬁcantly.
The weight measuring the mass of added ammonia has a precision of 0.1 g.
The
ammonia energy content for the fuel mixtures tested on the CFR engine are 1.25 %,
1.90 % and 3.17 %. This indicates that it is diﬃcult to solubilize the necessary amount
of ammonia to reach the ”20-20-20”-target of 10 %.
For testing the ammonia in gasoline solubility degassed gasoline was used as one of
the ﬁrst experiments conducted, see Fuel mix no. 4 in table 4.3. The solubility is
calculated when the fuel mixture is still in the mixing cylinder, as described in section
3.2.1. The experiment yielded a solubility of 6.5 g/L. Instead of degassing gasoline
in large quantities in order to be able to make suﬃcient fuel for actual engine tests
a substitute was found. Petroleum naphtha was chosen for its low RVP of 9.28 kPa.
The data sheet for petroleum naphtha can be found in [31, Data Sheet for Petroleum
Naphtha].
The ammonia in petroleum naphtha solubility revealed even poorer solubility limits
than regular gasoline, see Fuel mix no. 6 in table 4.3. The solubility was found to be
1.1 g/L. Despite this ﬁnding petroleum naphtha was used for further mixing studies.
Solubility of ammonia in a mixture of 50 % petroleum naphtha and 50 % ethanol was
found to be 18.6 g/L, see Fuel mix no. 8 in table 4.2.
An attempt of improving the ammonia solubility in a fuel was done by mixing water
into the fuel blend.
Previous studies[32] have been made ﬁnding the solubility of
diﬀerent purities of ethanol in regular gasoline. From this study a solution with an
ethanol purity of 90 % was chosen. 5 % of ethanol was substituted with water, thus
having 50 % petroleum naphtha 45 % ethanol and 5 % water as feedstock. This was
not a useful solution, it separated into two phases see ﬁgure 4.2.1.
Figure 4.2.1: Phase separation when mixing 50 % petroleum naphtha with 45 %
ethanol and 5 % water
Figure 4.2.1 shows the upper phase, containing mostly petroleum naphtha, to be
completely saturated with a mix of ethanol and water. The upper phase can not
55
==PAGE:72==
contain any additional water, therefore the lower and heavier phase, containing mostly
ethanol and water, separates. A mixture consisting of two phases can not be used for
engine testing, since the fuel properties will change from one phase to the other.
Therefore a change in the overall composition was made yielding the composition seen
as Fuel mix no. 9 in table 4.2. The chemical 2-Ethylhexanol was used for its capability
to solubilize the water rich phase with the petroleum rich phase. The solubility of
ammonia was found to be 27.5 g/L.
Fuel mix no. 12 is absolute ethanol (with a purity of 99.5 %). SPECS underpredicts
the RVP of ethanol by 4 kPa. Fuel mix no. 13 is ethanol with 4.83 % ammonia
dissolved. The measured RVP is approximately half of the measured. This can be
explained by it being measured a day after the mixture was blended. Maybe a leakage
has caused the pressure reduction.
Fuel mix no. 14 was made in order to make a direct comparison of a real RVP measure-
ment and a UNIFAC predicted RVP. The fuel mix is composed of four constituents,
all available in the default UNIFAC coeﬃcients library. The theoretical RVP of 30.14
kPa lies 9 % above the measured value of 27.59 kPa. Fuel mix no. 15 is the same
base as no. 14, but 3.45 % ammonia has been added. The measured RVP of 81.00
kPa lies 48 % above the predicted RVP. Challenges have earlier been encountered
in RVP predictions using UNIFAC of mixtures containing i-Propanol[33]. Results of
predictions generally lie below the actual RVP value.
Fuel mix no. 1 in table 4.3 and no. 11 in table 4.2 are pure regular gasoline bought in
diﬀerent months. No. 1 is from April and no. 11 is from June. The diﬀerence in the
measured RVP can be explained by the fact that the RVP is adjusted when changing
from Winter to Summer Gasoline.
The results from the predicted RVP in the theoretical study in section 2.6.5 is pre-
sented again here in ﬁgure 4.2.2 on the next page. The measured RVP and mass
percentage for fuel mix no. 8, 10 and 13 are plotted too.
56
==PAGE:73==
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Weight Percentage of Ammonia [%]
Reid Vapor Pressure [kPa]
4.76 % EtOH
44.45 % EtOH
4.76 % EtOH Deg.
44.45 % EtOH Deg.
Ethanol
Mix no.8
Mix no.10
Mix no.13
Figure 4.2.2: Reid Vapor Pressure of surrogate with ethanol when adding ammo-
nia. Note ethanol concentration is diluted, percentages 4.76 % and
44.5 % is only true at 0 % ammonia. Pure ethanol with ammonia
is seen too. Measured values for fuel mix no. 8, 10 and 13
The black curve is the one that is most similar to the mixtures no. 8 and no. 10
composed in this master thesis. It can be seen that the actual RVP measurements
are lower than the predicted RVP. It should be remembered that the predicted RVP
is made from assumptions of the composition, which can diﬀer from reality. The pure
ethanol case is not predicting precisely. The prediction is over the actual measurement,
which has been seen in previous studies using UNIFAC[33].
Section 4.2.1 presents a study of the solubility of impure ethanol in gasoline and
petroleum naphtha respectively.
4.2.1
Ethanol+Water in Gasoline or Petroleum Naphtha
This section presents a comparison of dissolving ethanol and water into fresh gasoline,
degassed gasoline and petroleum naphtha. The experiment is carried out to see if there
is any diﬀerence between dissolving ethanol+water in petroleum naphtha or gasoline.
The solubility experiments are conducted using a weight and a 200 mL beaker. The
temperature of the mixture lies within 18-20 ◦C. The results are presented in a table
containing the composition of the system when in one phase and when in two phases.
See tables 4.4, 4.5 and 4.6 for compositions when having one or two phases.
57
==PAGE:74==
Table 4.4: Ethanol and water solubility in fresh gasoline
1 phase
2 phases
Gasoline:
49.4 %
Gasoline:
49.6 %
Ethanol:
44.5 %
Ethanol:
44.2 %
Water:
6.03 %
Water:
6.27 %
Ethanol purity:
88.1 %
Ethanol purity:
87.6 %
Table 4.5: Ethanol and water solubility in degassed gasoline (11.3 % mass de-
gassed)
1 phase
2 phases
Gasoline:
49.6 %
Gasoline:
49.5 %
Ethanol:
44.0 %
Ethanol:
43.9 %
Water:
6.39 %
Water:
6.63 %
Ethanol purity:
87.3 %
Ethanol purity:
86.9 %
Table 4.6: Ethanol and water solubility in petroleum naphtha
1 phase
2 phases
Petroleum Naphtha:
50.1 %
Petroleum Naphtha:
49.9 %
Ethanol:
47.2 %
Ethanol:
47.0 %
Water:
2.77 %
Water:
3.05 %
Ethanol purity:
94.5 %
Ethanol purity:
93.9 %
From the tables it can be seen that the solubility of ethanol+water is substantially
higher in gasoline compared to petroleum naphtha. The separation limit for fresh
gasoline is when ethanol purity is 87.6-88.1 %, for degassed gasoline it is 86.9-87.3 %
and for petroleum naphtha it is 93.9-94.5 %. The phases seen in ﬁgure 4.2.1 occurs
when the purity drops below the limits.
It should be mentioned that the gasoline used in this master thesis can contain up
to 5 vol-% bioethanol according to [17]. Comparing to earlier studies[32] the results
obtained here for gasoline are plausible.
These results indicate that the wider range of C-molecule sizes in regular gasoline is
beneﬁcial for the solubility of ethanol and water. The C-molecule sizes in petroleum
naphtha range from C9-C14, where in regular gasoline they range from C4-C12. The
poor solubility is most likely due to petroleum naphtha containing more and longer
n-Alkanes which are highly nonpolar.
58
==PAGE:75==
4.3
CFR Engine Results
The fuel mixtures shown in table 4.2 in section 4.2 have all been tested on the CFR
engine. Remember that the three pairwise fuel mixtures have been tested. No. 7
with no. 8, no. 9 with no. 10 and no. 12 with no. 13, for all three cases the highest
number is the case with ammonia. Regular gasoline (no. 11) has also been tested
until knocking. The MatLab code for loading data and making data analysis is found
in Appendix E.
In the following sections the results of the engine testing are presented, various engine
parameters are plotted and commented subsequently.
4.3.1
Results of Testing at CR 7
Compression ratio 7 is the only CR-step that all fuel mixtures were capable of running
at throughout the full ignition timing range from -40◦to 0◦. In ﬁgure 4.3.1 the indi-
cated eﬃciency is plotted for the fuel mixtures. The indicated eﬃciency is calculated
by ﬁnding the indicated work by integration of the pressure curve from BDC of the
compression stroke to BDC of the expansion stroke and dividing by the heat coming
from the injected fuel.
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
0.2
0.22
0.24
0.26
0.28
0.3
0.32
0.34
Ignition Timing [◦]
ηi [-]
Mix no. 7
Mix no. 8
Mix no. 9
Mix no. 10
Mix no. 11
Mix no. 12
Mix no. 13
Figure 4.3.1: Indicated eﬃciency as a function of the ignition timing at CR 7
By making a pairwise comparison of the fuels it is possible to suggest what the am-
monia does to combustion. Comparing Fuel mix no. 7 and no. 8 indicates that the
59
==PAGE:76==
eﬃciency is slightly better without ammonia. The opposite is seen when comparing
Fuel mix no. 9 and no. 10 between -40◦and -15◦. Also for ethanol containing am-
monia (Fuel mix no. 13) the eﬃciency is better than for pure ethanol. Generally the
eﬃciency when running with regular gasoline lies below the rest.
In ﬁgure 4.3.2 the brake engine eﬃciency, ηb, is plotted for the seven fuels.
The
eﬃciency is calculated as the brake power, BP, delivered to the shaft divided by the
power coming from fuel injection.
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
0.17
0.18
0.19
0.2
0.21
0.22
0.23
0.24
Ignition Timing [◦]
ηb [-]
Mix no. 7
Mix no. 8
Mix no. 9
Mix no. 10
Mix no. 11
Mix no. 12
Mix no. 13
Figure 4.3.2: Brake engine eﬃciency as a function of the ignition timing at CR 7
An interesting trend is that the brake engine eﬃciency for all mixtures containing
ammonia is clearly above the corresponding fuel without ammonia.
60
==PAGE:77==
The exhaust gas temperature as a function of ignition timing for CR 7 is shown in
ﬁgure 4.3.3.
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
540
560
580
600
620
640
660
680
Ignition Timing [◦]
Exhaust Gas Temperature [◦C]
Mix no. 7
Mix no. 8
Mix no. 9
Mix no. 10
Mix no. 11
Mix no. 12
Mix no. 13
Figure 4.3.3: Exhaust gas temperature at CR 7
Gasoline clearly has the highest exhaust temperature. This is mainly due to the heat
of vaporization of ethanol compared to gasoline. The lowest exhaust temperatures are
seen for Fuel mix no. 12 and 13. The exhaust temperature for Fuel mix no. 7 to 10
lie between gasoline and ethanol. This makes sense since they contains approximately
50 % ethanol. There is not a clear trend when comparing fuel mixture no. 7 with no.
8 and no. 12 with no. 13. It seems that the exhaust temperature of no. 10 (with
ammonia) lies above the temperature of no. 9, which contradicts the higher heat of
vaporization of ammonia, see table 2.5.
Combustion Duration and Ignition Delay at CR7
Combustion duration and ignition delay of the fuels tested have been analyzed. Firstly
ﬁgure 4.3.4 on the following page, show the Apparent Heat Release Rate (AHRR) for
the fuels tested during the master thesis.
61
==PAGE:78==
-60
-40
-20
-35◦
-20◦
0◦
0
20
40
60
-50
0
50
100
Mix no. 7
Mix no. 8
-60
-40
-20
-35◦
-20◦
0◦
0
20
40
60
-50
0
50
100
Apparent Heat Release Rate [J/◦]
Mix no. 9
Mix no. 10
-60
-40
-20
-35◦
-20◦
0◦
0
20
40
60
-50
0
50
100
Crank Angle Degree [◦]
Mix no. 12
Mix no. 13
Figure 4.3.4: Apparent Heat Release Rate from -60◦to 60◦at CR 7
Firstly it is noted that the red curve in the top plot contains much noise. This is a
result of running the CFR engine at the same time as another engine in the motor
laboratory. The noise originates from an electrical brake connected to the other engine.
62
==PAGE:79==
This makes it diﬃcult to conclude any strong trends in the top plot. From the AHRR
plots for fuel mix no. 10 and no. 13 (both with ammonia) it can be seen that the slopes
are less steep than for the fuel without ammonia. This indicates that the combustion
occurs over a longer period of time.
The combustion duration is analyzed and is calculated as the number of crank angle
degrees it takes for the combustion to combust from 10 % to 90 % of the fuel. The
dashed lines in ﬁgure 4.3.5 represent the points where 10 % and 90 % of the fuel has
been burned. The mass fraction burned is shown for regular gasoline, with ignition
timing -15◦and CR7. The distance between the two lines is the combustion duration,
∆CA10−90.
-10
0
10
20
30
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Crank Angle Degree [◦]
Mass Fraction Burned [-]
∆CA10−90
Figure 4.3.5: Mass fraction burned for regular gasoline with ignition timing -15◦
and CR 7
In the test presented in ﬁgure 4.3.5 the ∆CA10−90=16.5◦
63
==PAGE:80==
The combustion durations for all fuels are seen in ﬁgure 4.3.6.
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
Ignition Timing [◦]
Combustion Duration, ∆CA10−90 [◦]
Mix no. 7
Mix no. 8
Mix no. 9
Mix no. 10
Mix no. 11
Mix no. 12
Mix no. 13
Figure 4.3.6: Combustion duration, ∆CA10−90, for all fuel mixtures as function
of ignition timing at CR 7
It can be seen that the combustion duration for gasoline, Fuel mix no. 11, lie in the
lower part of the calculated combustion durations. This indicates that it combusts
faster, probably due to a higher ﬂame speed of gasoline compared to ethanol and
ammonia.
64
==PAGE:81==
The combustion duration of the pairwise fuel mixtures are plotted in ﬁgure 4.3.7. It
is easier to see the trends, when comparing the two fuels directly.
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
15
20
25
Mix no. 7
Mix no. 8
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
15
20
25
Mix no. 9
Mix no. 10
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
15
20
25
Ignition Timing [◦]
Combustion Duration, ∆CA10−90 [◦]
Mix no. 12
Mix no. 13
Figure 4.3.7: Combustion duration, ∆CA10−90, as a function of ignition timing
at CR 7
The combustion duration is marginally longer for the fuel containing ammonia in the
top plot. The middle and top plot reveal the same trend. The fuel mixture containing
ammonia has a longer combustion duration. Remember that fuel mix no. 8 contain
65
==PAGE:82==
2.4 % ammonia, fuel mix no. 10 contain 3.5 % and fuel mix no. 13 contain 4.8 %. A
slower combustion does not necessarily result in lower eﬃciency. If the ignition timing
is optimized to a slower combusting fuel it can be nearly as eﬀective as a quickly
combusting. This is due to fact that the piston moves very little near TDC. So as long
as the combustion duration is reasonable there is not much improvement in eﬃciency
when increasing combustion speed[34].
The ignition delay for all fuels have been plotted too, see ﬁgure 4.3.8.
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
4
6
8
10
12
Ignition Timing [◦]
Ignition Delay [◦]
Mix no. 7
Mix no. 8
Mix no. 9
Mix no. 10
Mix no. 11
Mix no. 12
Mix no. 13
Figure 4.3.8: Ignition delay, as a function of ignition timing at CR 7
The ignition delay is here plotted as the number of crank angle degrees from ignition
timing to the ﬁrst observed increase in the mass fraction burned or AHRR, see also
ﬁgure 4.3.5, where the ﬁrst observed combustion is at -8.5◦from TDC, since the
ignition is timed to -15◦then the ignition delay is 6.5◦.
There is no clear trend in the ignition delay plot. It ﬂuctuates between 4◦and 8.5◦
throughout the ignition timing sweep.
In a spark ignition engine actual ignition delay is not present, since the ﬂame progresses
from the instant of the spark. The observed ignition delay is explained by the fact
that the pressure measurements can not detect the small mass burned in the initial
combustion phase.
66
==PAGE:83==
Emissions at CR7
In this section the emissions measured by the Bosch Emissions Tester will be presented.
In ﬁgure 4.3.9 the CO2 in vol-% for all fuel mixtures are shown.
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
13
14
15
16
17
18
Ignition Timing [◦]
CO2 Emissions [vol-%]
Mix no. 7
Mix no. 8
Mix no. 9
Mix no. 10
Mix no. 11
Mix no. 12
Mix no. 13
Figure 4.3.9: CO2 emissions in vol-% for all mixtures as a function of ignition
timing at CR 7
Gasoline yields constantly a CO2-emission of approximately 15 vol-% throughout the
ignition timing sweep. The six test fuel mixtures lie between 13.5 vol-% and 14.5
vol-% and it seems that the fuel containing ammonia give less CO2 emissions. To
better distinguish between fuels they are plotted pairwise separately in ﬁgure 4.3.10
on the following page.
67
==PAGE:84==
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
13.5
14
14.5
15
Mix no. 7
Mix no. 8
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
13.5
14
14.5
15
Mix no. 9
Mix no. 10
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
13.5
14
14.5
15
Ignition Timing [◦]
CO2 Emissions [vol-%]
Mix no. 12
Mix no. 13
Figure 4.3.10: CO2 emissions in vol-% as a function of ignition timing at CR 7
It is expected that the CO2 emissions after combustion of fuels containing much am-
monia will be less than that of regular gasoline. Ammonia contain no carbon, so CO2
is not a combustion product. When looking at the three plots, the distance between
the fuel with and without ammonia becomes larger when adding ammonia to the fuel
mixture. Remember that Mix no. 8, Mix no. 10 and Mix no. 13 contain 2.4 %, 3.5
% and 4.8 % respectively.
68
==PAGE:85==
In ﬁgure 4.3.11 the CO emissions are plotted for all mixtures including gasoline.
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Ignition Timing [◦]
CO Emissions [vol-%]
Mix no. 7
Mix no. 8
Mix no. 9
Mix no. 10
Mix no. 11
Mix no. 12
Mix no. 13
Figure 4.3.11: CO emissions in vol-% for all mixtures as a function of ignition
timing at CR 7
Here it is noted that especially fuel mix no. 12 and 13 lie well above gasoline and the
rest of the fuel mixtures. Again they are plotted separately, see ﬁgure 4.3.12.
69
==PAGE:86==
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Mix no. 7
Mix no. 8
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Mix no. 9
Mix no. 10
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Ignition Timing [◦]
CO Emissions [vol-%]
Mix no. 12
Mix no. 13
Figure 4.3.12: CO emissions in vol-% as a function of ignition timing at CR 7
The CO emissions are almost constant throughout the ignition timing sweep. The
fuels tested in the top plot show that the CO emissions are a little higher for fuel with
ammonia, the opposite is seen in the middle plot. From these two scenarios no ﬁrm
trend can be concluded. The bottom plot reveal that the fuel containing ammonia
emits much CO. A reason for this must be poor combustion, it could seem like that
the fuel-air mixture might burn a little rich since it does not combust completely. But
this is not supported by the exhaust gas temperature that would be expected to be
lower for rich/lean combustion, see ﬁgure 4.3.3.
70
==PAGE:87==
More carbon emissions are not expected when ﬁlling the fuel with ammonia.
The HC emissions in ppm are plotted for all fuels in ﬁgure 4.3.13.
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
50
100
150
200
250
Ignition Timing [◦]
HC Emissions [ppm]
Mix no. 7
Mix no. 8
Mix no. 9
Mix no. 10
Mix no. 11
Mix no. 12
Mix no. 13
Figure 4.3.13: HC emissions in ppm for all mixtures as a function of ignition
timing at CR 7
Here gasoline lies in the upper portion of the tested fuels. For comparison between
fuel pairs, they are plotted in ﬁgure 4.3.14 on the following page.
71
==PAGE:88==
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
0
50
100
150
Mix no. 7
Mix no. 8
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
0
50
100
150
Mix no. 9
Mix no. 10
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
0
50
100
150
Ignition Timing [◦]
HC Emissions [ppm]
Mix no. 12
Mix no. 13
Figure 4.3.14: HC emissions in ppm as a function of ignition timing at CR 7
The clear trend for all three fuel pairs is that the HC emissions are higher for the
fuel containing ammonia.
Again this might indicate that the fuel-air mixture has
been burning rich, meaning that not enough oxygen has been available for complete
combustion.
72
==PAGE:89==
4.3.2
Eﬃciency when Varying CR
In this section the indicated eﬃciency is plotted as a function of compression ratio.
In ﬁgure 4.3.15 the indicated eﬃciency is plotted at varying CR, all points are at
Maximum Brake Torque (MBT), but the dashed line indicate that the result is either
in the vicinity or at knocking running conditions.
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
0.3
0.31
0.32
0.33
0.34
0.35
0.36
Compression Ratio [-]
ηi [-]
Mix no. 7
Mix no. 8
Mix no. 9
Mix no. 10
Mix no. 11
Mix no. 12
Mix no. 13
Figure 4.3.15: Indicated eﬃciency for all mixtures as a function of Compression
Ratio at MBT, the dashed line is not at optimum timing
It can be seen that gasoline lies below or near the bottom compared to the rest of the
fuel mixtures. Note that the ignition timing is not optimum when the line is dashed.
Dashed line indicate that the fuel is aﬀected by knocking at the normal optimum
ignition (usually -15◦from TDC). This is the reason for the ﬂuctuations of the plots.
73
==PAGE:90==
The pairwise fuel mixtures are plotted in ﬁgure 4.3.16 for better comparison.
7
7.5
8
8.5
9
9.5
0.32
0.33
0.34
0.35
Mix no. 7
Mix no. 8
7
7.5
8
8.5
9
9.5
0.31
0.32
0.33
0.34
ηi [-]
Mix no. 9
Mix no. 10
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
0.3
0.32
0.34
0.36
Compression Ratio [-]
Mix no. 12
Mix no. 13
Figure 4.3.16: Indicated eﬃciency as a function of Compression Ratio at MBT,
the dashed line is not at MBT
The dashed lines indicate that the fuel is aﬀected by knocking at the normal optimum.
Therefore the plots deviate from the normal trend, when increasing CR. In the top
plot, where Fuel mix no. 8 with relatively little ammonia 2.4 % lie below or near the
corresponding fuel without ammonia. The middle and bottom plots show nearly the
same trend, but here in favor of the fuel mixtures containing ammonia. This might
indicate that ammonia boosts the knocking resistance and thus increases the eﬃciency.
This could be utilized in an engine optimized for running at a speciﬁc CR.
74
==PAGE:91==
4.3.3
Knocking Determination from Frequency Analysis
When testing the octane rating of fuels a so called knocking meter is used.
The
CFR engine that has been used for testing does not have this installed therefore an
alternative method for determination of knocking has been used.
It is not always clear when knocking occurs, and it can be diﬃcult for the human ear
to hear, if harmful pressure oscillations occur in the cylinder. When severe knocking
is occurring it is easily heard, due to the pinging/knocking sound the engine emits.
A frequency analysis of the pressure ﬁles have been utilized for stating if knocking
occurs. In the following, two cases, one without knocking and one with knocking will
be presented.
75
==PAGE:92==
Gasoline CR 7 Ignition Timing -15◦and CR 8 Ignition Timing -10◦
A case where no knocking occurs can be seen when running the engine with regular
gasoline at CR 7 and ignition timing -15◦from TDC, see top plot in ﬁgure 4.3.17. A
case where knocking occurs can be seen when running the engine with regular gasoline
at CR 8 and ignition timing -10◦from TDC, see bottom plot in ﬁgure 4.3.17. In both
plots 19 recorded pressure cycles are plotted.
-150
-100
-50
0
50
100
150
0
10
20
30
40
50
Pressure [bar]
-150
-100
-50
0
50
100
150
0
10
20
30
40
50
Crank Angle Degree [◦]
Pressure [bar]
Figure 4.3.17: Pressure cycles when testing regular gasoline at CR 7, ignition tim-
ing -15◦from TDC (Top) and at CR 8, ignition timing -10◦from
TDC (Bottom)
From the top plot in ﬁgure 4.3.17 a smooth pressure curve can be observed, which
indicates that no severe knocking occurs. The bottom pressure curves reveal that
knocking occurs, since the pressure pickup has acquired severe pressure oscillations.
76
==PAGE:93==
In ﬁgure 4.3.18 the Apparent Heat Release Rate (AHRR) for the same two cases are
plotted.
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
-50
0
50
100
150
Apparent Heat Release Rate [J/◦]
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
-50
0
50
100
150
Crank Angle Degree [◦]
Figure 4.3.18: AHRR of test with gasoline at CR 7 and ignition timing -15◦from
TDC and at CR 8 and ignition timing -10◦from TDC
Again a relatively smooth combustion can be observed in the top plot. The bottom
plot shows clear signs of knocking, since the curve oscillates.
77
==PAGE:94==
In ﬁgure 4.3.19 a frequency analysis of the pressure curves are shown. The top plot
show the case with no knocking and the bottom plot show the case with knocking.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
Peak to Peak Amplitude of Spectra [bar]
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Frequency [kHz]
Figure 4.3.19: Frequency analysis of test with gasoline at CR 7, ignition timing
-15◦from TDC and at CR 8, ignition timing -10◦from TDC, the
top plot is for case without knocking, bottom plot for case with
knocking. Note: Diﬀerent scaling on y-axis
Note that the two plots in ﬁgure 4.3.19 do not have the same scaling of y-axis. There
are clear distinct peaks in the frequency analysis in the bottom plot. This further
indicates that knocking occurs.
78
==PAGE:95==
An averaging of the individual frequency analysis curves can show the same picture,
see ﬁgure 4.3.20
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
Peak to Peak Amplitude of Spectra [bar]
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
Frequency [kHz]
Figure 4.3.20: Averaging the frequency analysis in ﬁgure 4.3.19 yields the curves
seen above. Top plot is case without knocking, bottom plot is case
with knocking
For convenience the scaling for the two plots in ﬁgure 4.3.20 are the same, this stresses
the clear sign of knocking when running on gasoline with CR 8 and ignition timing
-10◦. A distinct peak is seen at a frequency of approximately 4 kHz.
Deﬁning Knocking
Throughout the knocking determination using frequency analysis a limit of 0.035 bar
in the range 1.5-5.4 kHz has been used as boundary for knocking. If a value of the
averaged curve (see ﬁgure 4.3.20) in the frequency range exceed 0.035 bar that speciﬁc
test is considered to be running with knocking.
79
==PAGE:96==
As mentioned in section 3.4.1 the testing was planned in order to determine the octane
ratings of the fuels relative to each other. A plot revealing the line, that separates
knocking from not knocking engine running is seen in ﬁgure 4.3.21.
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
Ignition Timing [◦]
Compression Ratio [-]
Mix no. 7
Mix no. 8
Mix no. 9
Mix no. 10
Mix no. 11
Mix no. 12
Mix no. 13
Figure 4.3.21: Plot showing the line that separates knocking engine running from
not knocking
The plot show that the fuels containing ammonia has a knock resisting eﬀect. When
the CFR engine runs on a fuel with ammonia it is possible to increase the compression
ratio and/or advance the ignition timing. The reason why the engine starts knocking
when the compression is too high or the ignition timing is too early, is that pres-
sure and temperature becomes too high. The fuel starts to auto-ignite and detonate
uncontrollably leading to severe internal damage of the engine.
Gasoline has the poorest knocking resistance. This means that all of the composed
fuels in this master thesis have an octane rating greater than 95. It can be seen that
Fuel mix no. 7 and no. 8 are almost identical, but a slight knocking resistance is seen
for the fuel with ammonia.
For fuel no. 10 the knocking resistance is clearly seen, since the line does not intersect
with the line for fuel mix no. 9. For ethanol mixed with ammonia the trend is seen
too.
The data presented here is made from only one set of data for each fuel. Replication
of tests will be beneﬁcial for certainty of the results.
80
==PAGE:97==
Chapter 5
Discussion, Future Work and
Conclusion
5.1
Discussion
In this section a variety of subjects will be discussed in order to get a critical point of
view.
In the theoretical study of ammonia solubility in gasoline only one model has been ap-
plied. The utilized model is a 2 coeﬃcient UNIFAC Vapor Liquid Equilibrium (VLE)
model with temperature dependency. This model is known to possess great modeling
capabilities of phase equilibria including Reid Vapor Pressure[35]. A study of diﬀerent
models could be of great use to see the impact on the predicted RVP. Previous studies
have revealed challenges when predicting RVP of gasoline using UNIFAC models[33].
Especially when mixtures contain strongly hydrogen-bonded additives, e.g. ethanol
and i-Propanol, the UNIFAC model can have diﬃculties with the prediction of RVP.
The model does not take these special hydrogen-interactions into account.
Predicting RVP using theoretical analysis software is related with high uncertainty,
especially when the composition of the sample that is under investigation is unknown,
which undoubtedly is the case with gasoline in this master thesis. Several constituents
that are found in regular gasoline is not available in the default library of SPECS and
the UNIFAC coeﬃcients are not readily available e.g. online. The idea of working
with SPECS v5.63 was to get an estimate for the ammonia solubility before working
experimentally. If theoretical studies are to be used in relation with petrochemical
installations, more experimental work is going to be conducted, so that the software
for prediction of RVP can become more accurate.
In the experimental work conducted in this master thesis several diﬀerent fuel mixtures
containing ammonia have been made. The setup for making the fuel blends consists of
a stainless steel cylinder with a volume of 3.785 L. During the mixing process, it is only
possible to ﬁll the cylinder to approximately half of that volume or else spills will occur.
This means that approximately 1.9 L of fuel mixture can be made at each ammonia
ﬁlling process. The fuel testing on the CFR engine requires between 6-10 L in order to
complete a test schedule. The uncertainty on the amount of dissolved ammonia in the
fuel increases when several ﬁllings and thereby measurements are conducted. It will be
81
==PAGE:98==
advantageous and necessary to design a new and larger fuel mixing container, capable
of being pressurized. The uncertainty of the ammonia content in the fuel mixtures
could be eliminated by using a CHNO Elemental Analyzer. A CHNO Analyzer is
capable of distinguishing between the constituents on an atomic level, which would
be highly beneﬁcial for precise determination of the nitrogen content in the fuel.
The fuel mixtures made, have mostly been made from simpler chemical constituents;
ethanol, i-Propanol, water, 2-Ethylhexanol and mostly petroleum naphtha, even though
regular gasoline seemed to have a relatively higher ammonia solubility compared to
petroleum naphtha. It would have been useful to be able to make fuel blends from a
non-commercial grade gasoline, not completely reﬁned and with a known composition.
The fuel testing on the CFR engine is completed once for each fuel mixture. For
statistical and better scientiﬁc veriﬁcation of the results, it would be necessary to
replicate the measurements. The fuels containing ammonia, all show the same overall
trend, when compared to its counter fuel without ammonia. Replication of fuel testing
to state if these trends are unique cases is therefore necessary.
The CFR engine testing has only been conducted at a constant speed, stoichiometric
combustion and at fuel throttle. Part load running, lean and rich combustion and
various engine speeds could be of interest to investigate. This, in order to see if the
probable lower ﬂame speed of ammonia has any signiﬁcance.
82
==PAGE:99==
5.2
Future Work
Gas chromatography experiments have unsuccessfully been used in the investigation
of boiling point distribution and composition for gasoline, fuel mixtures and other
chemical components. The reason for this is that the GC applied in this master thesis
is not able to reach subzero temperatures which are necessary for getting reasonable
retention times and thereby for investigation of relatively volatile petroleum products,
see also Appendix B. A GC with a cryogenic cooling unit would be advantageous to
analyze the fuels composed, thereby to see any quantitative diﬀerences.
Additional studies of mixtures containing a gasoline like product would be highly
interesting. If a not fully reﬁned gasoline product with a known composition was
available a measure of the potential of ammonia could be found.
This might be
possible if contacting and involving gasoline reﬁning producers. Alternative solvents
such as acetone and methanol could be utilized in the attempt of dissolving even more
ammonia in the fuel blends. A short experimental study of i-Propanol have been
conducted. Further investigation would be interesting, since research in the ﬁeld of
i-Propanol production from biomass is currently being done.
It could be very beneﬁcial to involve companies specializing in production of organic
solvents. By including their expertise, new potentially viable ways to solubilize am-
monia in gasoline could be discovered and utilized for fulﬁlling the ”20-20-20”-targets.
The ”20-20-20”-targets can be reached in many ways, but as it looks now, the primary
contributor to the 10 % energy, that is required in the transport sector, will primarily
come from ethanol and a great part from ﬁrst generation[2]. The study conducted in
this master thesis has focused primarily on ammonia, with ethanol as solubilizer in
gasoline or similar products. The main purpose has been to fulﬁll the statutory limits
on RVP, so the fuel mixture will be able to run on the current car ﬂeet without greater
modiﬁcations. Alternatives to ammonia are plentiful, a few could be dimethyl-ether
(DME), Methanol, Propanol and biodiesel from third generation.
The impact on materials; ﬁttings, hoses and pipes on a SI engine running on fuel
containing ammonia should be investigated before any commercialization of the fuel.
83
==PAGE:100==
5.3
Conclusion
The incentive for the work conducted in this master thesis is the target of reaching
10 % renewable energy in the transport sector by year 2020. The target is sought
achieved using ammonia, NH3.
Properties of ammonia have been investigated. Several methods of ammonia produc-
tion have been presented and their CO2 emissions are compared to emissions from
ethanol production from biomass. Ideally ammonia can be completely CO2-neutral if
produced using wind-, hydro- or solar power.
Regulations regarding gasoline volatility have been presented, especially the term Reid
Vapor Pressure (RVP), an expression for the volatility of a petroleum product has been
utilized in the study.
A theoretical study of the RVP using a 2 coeﬃcient UNIFAC model in the software
package, SPECS v5.63, developed at Technical University of Denmark has been con-
ducted. Diﬀerent simpler gasoline surrogates have undergone theoretical study. The
theoretical analysis revealed a limited potential in ammonia solubility in gasoline or
similar products, ranging from 1.0 % to 4.3 % by mass, when reaching RVP between
90 and 100 kPa.
During the work a design of a test apparatus for experimental investigation of RVP
was developed and manufactured. The RVP apparatus conforms with ASTM D-323
for determining Reid Vapor Pressure of petroleum products.
RVP of Winter and
Summer grade gasoline was determined to 87 kPa and 67 kPa respectively.
A great part of the work has been to understand gasoline complexity, this has been
investigated by degassing gasoline using heating mantel, a ﬂask and a condenser. Re-
ﬁning of fuel mixtures with RVP similar to gasoline have been made with petroleum
naphtha as feedstock. Diﬀerent pure chemicals, such as ethanol, 2-Ethylhexanol, i-
Propanol and water have been utilized as solubilizer for ammonia in petroleum naph-
tha. Actual ammonia solubility was found to range between 0.16 % for pure petroleum
naphtha to 4.82 % for pure ethanol.
The predicted theoretical RVP deviate from actual RVP measurements either due
to the unknown composition of the mixture, or the fact that the UNIFAC model has
diﬃculties with predictions of RVP when mixtures contain ethanol and/or i-Propanol.
It can be concluded that better fuel composition needs to be known if theoretical
prediction of RVP should be possible. If data on RVP are to be used for designing
expensive petrochemical installations, a cost-beneﬁt analysis may reveal that it is
worthwhile to conduct expensive experimental work.
Experimental investigation of SI engine performance with fuel mixtures containing
ammonia between 2.4 % and 4.8 % by mass was conducted. The ammonia energy
content was between 1.25 % and 3.17 %. All fuel mixtures containing ammonia showed
the same overall trend, better knocking resistance, longer combustion duration, better
brake engine eﬃciency, lower CO2 emissions and higher CO and HC emissions. The
better knocking resistance can be explained by the octane rating of 130 for ammonia.
The longer combustion duration is probably due to slower ﬂame speed ammonia.
84
==PAGE:101==
References
[1] The 2020 climate and energy package. http://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/
package/index_en.htm, 2008. [Online; accessed 2015-04-13].
[2] European Academies Science Advisory Council. The current status of biofuels in
the European Union, their environmental impacts and future prospects; EASAC
policy report 19. Number December. 2012.
[3] Ceresana.
Market
study:
Ammonia.
http://www.
ceresana.com/en/market-studies/agriculture/ammonia/
ammonia-market-study-analysis-trends.html.
[Online;
accessed 2015-
04-13].
[4] Oil
&
Gas
Journal.
Global
oil
production
up
in
2012
as
re-
serves
estimates
rise
again.
http://www.ogj.com/articles/
print/vol-110/issue-12/special-report-worldwide-report/
global-oil-production-up-in-2012-as.html,
2012.
[Online;
accessed
2015-04-13].
[5] Joe McClintock and John Holbrook.
Alternative fuels:
Taking a second
look at ammonia. http://www.nationaldefensemagazine.org/archive/2008/
August/Pages/AlternativeFuelsTakingASecondLookatAmmonia.aspx,
2008.
[Online; accessed 2015-04-15].
[6] AMA. Ammonia, anhydrous. http://cameochemicals.noaa.gov/chris/AMA.
pdf, 1999. [Online; accessed 2014-11-16].
[7] J. W. Hodgeson. Is ammonia a transportation fuel for the future?, 1973. [ASME
Paper No. 73-ICT-65].
[8] Mathesontrigas.
Lower and upper explosive limits for ﬂammable gases
and vapors (lel/uel). https://www.mathesongas.com/pdfs/products/Lower-%
28LEL%29-&-Upper-%28UEL%29-Explosive-Limits-.pdf.
[Online;
accessed
2015-04-15].
[9] Islam Raﬁqul, Christoph Weber, Bianca Lehmann, and Alfred Voss.
Energy
eﬃciency improvements in ammonia production—perspectives and uncertainties.
Energy, 30(13):2487–2504, 2005.
[10] Vemork.
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vemork, 2015.
[Online; accessed
2015-05-25].
85
==PAGE:102==
[11] Hydroworld.
Renewable fuels:
Manufacturing ammonia from hydropower.
http://www.hydroworld.com/articles/hr/print/volume-28/issue-7/
articles/renewable-fuels-manufacturing.html, 2009.
[Online; accessed
2015-05-10].
[12] Garagounis et al.
Electrochemical synthesis of ammonia in solid electrolyte
cells. http://www.hydroworld.com/articles/hr/print/volume-28/issue-7/
articles/renewable-fuels-manufacturing.html, 2009.
[Online; accessed
2015-05-10].
[13] Heat of combustion. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Heat_of_combustion,
2015. [Online; accessed 2015-06-16].
[14] Shawn M. Grannell, Dennis N. Assanis, Stanislav V. Bohac, and Donald E. Gille-
spie. The operating features of a stoichiometric, ammonia and gasoline dual fu-
eled spark ignition engine. In ASME 2006 International Mechanical Engineering
Congress and Exposition, pages 15–27. American Society of Mechanical Engineers,
2006.
[15] Resilux pet packaging. http://www.resilux.com/EN/products/markets.html,
2015. [Online; accessed 2015-05-25].
[16] Metastability. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Metastability, 2015. [Online;
accessed 2015-05-25].
[17] STATOIL. miles 92 og 95, benzin. 2014.
[18] World Bank and Asif Faiz. Air pollution from motor vehicles: Standards and
technologies for controlling emissions, March 1998.
[19] Stefan Van Woenzel. The oil traders’ word(s): Oil trading jargon, June 2012.
[20] Summer gasoline - usa.
http://www.epa.gov/otaq/fuels/gasolinefuels/
volatility/standards.htm, 2014. [Online; accessed 2014-11-16].
[21] Winter gasoline - usa. http://www.theoildrum.com/node/1776, 2006. [Online;
accessed 2014-11-16].
[22] A. M. Lopez Contreras, W. Kuit, M. A. J. Siemerink, S. W. M. Kengen,
J. Springer, and P. A. M. Claassen. Production of longer-chain alcohols from
biomass—butanol, isopropanol and 2, 3-butanediol, p 415–460. Bioalcohol pro-
duction. Woodhead Publishing Ltd, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2010.
[23] Thomas A. Wilson. The total and partial vapor pressures of aqueous ammonia
solutions. New York, 22(23):1–49, 1925.
[24] Chiaki Yokohama, Sho ichi Hosaka, Gen ichi Kaminishi, and Shinji Takahashi.
Liquid-liquid mutual solubilities of binary mixtures of ammonia with n-pentane,
n-hexane, and n-octane up to upper critical solution temperature. 1990.
86
==PAGE:103==
[25] Chen Huang, Valeri Golovitchev, and Andrei Lipatnikov.
Chemical model of
gasoline-ethanol blends for internal combustion engine applications. 2010.
[26] Ida Truedsson, Martin Tuner, and Bengt Johansson. Emission formation study
of hcci combustion with gasoline surrogate fuels. 2013.
[27] Bei-Jing Zhong and Dong Zheng. A chemical mechanism for ignition and oxida-
tion of multi-component gasoline surrogate fuels. 2014.
[28] Jimmy H. Wong, Chin Lim, and Greg L. Nolen. Design of Remediation Systems.
CRC Press, 1997.
[29] V. F. Andersen, J. E. Anderson, T. J. Wallington, S. a. Mueller, and O. J. Nielsen.
Vapor pressures of alcohol-gasoline blends. Energy and Fuels, 24(6):3647–3654,
2010.
[30] ASTM. Standard Test Method for Vapor Pressure of Petroleum Products (Reid
Method) ASTM D-323. 08(July):1–10, 2013.
[31] Harald Nyborg. Sikkerhedsdatablad for Rensebenzin. pages 1–9, 2014.
[32] Ulrik Larsen, Troels Johansen, and Jesper Schramm. Ethanol as a Fuel for Road
Transportation. (May), 2009.
[33] Ioannis Hatzioannidis, Epaminondas C Voutsas, Euripides Lois, and Dimitrios P
Tassios. Measurement and prediction of reid vapor pressure of gasoline in the
presence of additives. Journal of Chemical & Engineering Data, 43(3):386–392,
1998.
[34] Spencer C Sorenson.
Engine principles and vehicles.
Technical University of
Denmark. Department of Mechanical Engineering, 2008.
[35] Azizul Azri Mustaﬀa, Raﬁqul Gani, and Georgios Kontogeorgis. Development
and Analysis of Group Contribution Plus Models for Property Prediction of Or-
ganic Chemical Systems. Technical University of DenmarkDanmarks Tekniske
Universitet, Department of Applied ChemistryInstitut for Anvendt Kemi, 2013.
[36] Sigma-Aldrich Co. Simulated Distillation of Petroleum Products by Packed Col-
umn and Capillary Column GC. 1393:1–8, 1995.
87
==PAGE:104==
==PAGE:105==
Chapter 6
Appendix
6.1
Appendix A - Production and Assembly of RVP
Apparatus
Appendix A - Production and
Assembly of RVP Apparatus
89
==PAGE:106==
==PAGE:107==
 9 
 3 
 14 
Skal drejes ned så plan flade opnås
totallængde på 26 mm
 
12 
1/2" male fitting
Lars Kjemtrup
WEIGHT: 
A4
SHEET 1 OF 1
SCALE:2:1
DWG NO.
Component is supposed to be turned, so it can be 
welded onto assembly.
- 1/2" male fitting (given)
Should be turned to a length of 26 mm in total.
Is to be welded on end plate with Ø12 mm hole, 
which is placed on liquid cylinder (length 66 mm)
REVISION
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
MATERIAL:
STAINLESS STEEL (316L)
DATE
SIGNATURE
NAME
DEBUR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
CONTACT Lars Kjemtrup:
Phone: 40536701
Mail: s103400@student.dtu.dk
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR: +/- 0.5 mm
Q.A
MFG
APPV'D
CHK'D
DRAWN
SolidWorks Student Edition.
 For Academic Use Only.
==PAGE:108==
 
52.90 
 
12 
 
60.30 
0.50 X 45°
 2 
 4 
 2 
Affasning må gerneændres,
hvis det gør svejsning lettere
End plate Ø12
WEIGHT: 
A4
SHEET 1 OF 1
SCALE:1:1
DWG NO.
End plate with Ø12 hole, for use with 1/2" male fitting. 
The chamfercan be varied if desired.
The chamfer is made for welding seam.
REVISION
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
MATERIAL:
STAINLESS STEEL (316L)
DATE
SIGNATURE
NAME
DEBUR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
CONTACT Lars Kjemtrup:
Phone: 40536701
Mail: s103400@student.dtu.dk
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR: +/- 0.5 mm
Q.A
MFG
APPV'D
CHK'D
DRAWN
Lars Kjemtrup
SolidWorks Student Edition.
 For Academic Use Only.
==PAGE:109==
0.50 X 45°
0.50 X 45°
 66 
 
60.30 
 
53 
Affasning på 
indre diameter
i begge ender
Affasning laves for, at lave plads til svejsesøm,
størrelsen på affasning må derfor gerne ændres,
hvis det gør svejsning lettere.
cylinder_66mm
WEIGHT: 
A4
SHEET 1 OF 1
SCALE:1:1
DWG NO.
Cylinder for liquid cylinder.
Cylinder cut from pipe with dimensions 60.3 x 3.65 mm
Length of cut is 66 mm.
The chamfer can be varied if desired.
The chamfer is made for welding seam.
REVISION
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
MATERIAL:
STAINLESS STEEL (316L)
DATE
SIGNATURE
NAME
DEBUR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
CONTACT Lars Kjemtrup:
Phone: 40536701
Mail: s103400@student.dtu.dk
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR: +/- 0.5 mm
Q.A
MFG
APPV'D
CHK'D
DRAWN
Lars Kjemtrup
SolidWorks Student Edition.
 For Academic Use Only.
==PAGE:110==
 4 
 2 
 2 
0.50 X 45°
Affasning må gerne ændres,
hvis det gør svejsning lettere
 
60.30 
 
52.90 
end plate with no hole
WEIGHT: 
A4
SHEET 1 OF 1
SCALE:1:1
DWG NO.
End plate with no hole, for use on liquid cylinder with
 length of 66 mm.
The chamfer can be varied if desired.
The chamfer is made for welding seam.
REVISION
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
MATERIAL:
STAINLESS STEEL (316L)
DATE
SIGNATURE
NAME
DEBUR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
CONTACT Lars Kjemtrup:
Phone: 40536701
Mail: s103400@student.dtu.dk
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR: +/- 0.5 mm
Q.A
MFG
APPV'D
CHK'D
DRAWN
Lars Kjemtrup
SolidWorks Student Edition.
 For Academic Use Only.
==PAGE:111==
A
A
Termisk
sammenføring
Termisk
sammenføring
1/2" thread
 66 
 2 
 2 
 4 
 4 
 26 
SECTION A-A
SCALE 1 : 1
 
60.30 
Termisk
sammenføring
Assembly_liq_60_3mm
WEIGHT: 
A4
SHEET 1 OF 1
SCALE:1:1
DWG NO.
The liquid cylinder is assembled by the following:
- 66mm length of 60.3 x 3.65 piping
- end plate without hole
- endplate with Ø12 hole
- 1/2" male fitting (turned (26 mm length)
End plates are welded in groove, and fitting is welded also
REVISION
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
MATERIAL:
STAINLESS STEEL (316L)
DATE
SIGNATURE
NAME
DEBUR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
CONTACT Lars Kjemtrup:
Phone: 40536701
Mail: s103400@student.dtu.dk
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR: +/- 0.5 mm
Q.A
MFG
APPV'D
CHK'D
DRAWN
Lars Kjemtrup
SolidWorks Student Edition.
 For Academic Use Only.
==PAGE:112==
 16.20 
 
26.45 
1/2" thread is already made
1/2" female fitting
Lars Kjemtrup
WEIGHT: 
A4
SHEET 1 OF 1
SCALE:4:1
DWG NO.
1/2" female fitting for mounting on end plate with
Ø18 mm hole and air cylinder with cylinder length of
258 mm.
REVISION
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
MATERIAL:
DATE
SIGNATURE
NAME
DEBUR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
CONTACT Lars Kjemtrup:
Phone: 40536701
Mail: s103400@student.dtu.dk
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:
Q.A
MFG
APPV'D
CHK'D
DRAWN
SolidWorks Student Edition.
 For Academic Use Only.
==PAGE:113==
 4 
 2 
 2 
0.50 X 45°
Affasning må gerne ændres, 
hvis det gør svejsning lettere
 
52.90 
 
60.30 
 
18 
End plate Ø18
WEIGHT: 
A4
SHEET 1 OF 1
SCALE:1:1
DWG NO.
End plate with Ø18 hole, for use with 1/2" female fitting.
The chamfer can be varied if desired.
The chamfer is made for welding seam.
REVISION
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
MATERIAL:
STAINLESS STEEL (316L)
DATE
SIGNATURE
NAME
DEBUR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
CONTACT Lars Kjemtrup:
Phone: 40536701
Mail: s103400@student.dtu.dk
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR: +/- 0.5 mm
Q.A
MFG
APPV'D
CHK'D
DRAWN
Lars Kjemtrup
SolidWorks Student Edition.
 For Academic Use Only.
==PAGE:114==
 258 
0.50 X 45°
0.50 X 45°
 
60.30 
 
53 
Affasning på
indre diameter
i begge ender
Affasning laves for, at lave plads til svejsesøm,
størrelsen på affasning må derfor gerne ændres, 
hvis det gør svejsning lettere.
cylinder_258mm
WEIGHT: 
A4
SHEET 1 OF 1
SCALE:1:5
DWG NO.
Cylinder for air cylinder.
Cylinder cut from pipe with dimensions 60.3 x 3.65 mm
Length of cut is 258 mm.
The chamfer can be varied if desired.
The chamfer is made for welding seam.
REVISION
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
MATERIAL:
STAINLESS STEEL (316L)
DATE
SIGNATURE
NAME
DEBUR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
CONTACT Lars Kjemtrup:
Phone: 40536701
Mail: s103400@student.dtu.dk
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR: +/- 0.5 mm
Q.A
MFG
APPV'D
CHK'D
DRAWN
Lars Kjemtrup
SolidWorks Student Edition.
 For Academic Use Only.
==PAGE:115==
 16.20 
 
20.20 
1/4" thread is already made
1/4" female fitting
Lars Kjemtrup
WEIGHT: 
A4
SHEET 1 OF 1
SCALE:5:1
DWG NO.
1/4" female fitting for mounting on end plate with
Ø12 mm hole and air cylinder with cylinder length of 
258 mm.
The part is given, should be turned to length of 16.2 mm
REVISION
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
MATERIAL:
DATE
SIGNATURE
NAME
DEBUR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
CONTACT Lars Kjemtrup:
Phone: 40536701
Mail: s103400@student.dtu.dk
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR: +/- 0.5 mm
Q.A
MFG
APPV'D
CHK'D
DRAWN
SolidWorks Student Edition.
 For Academic Use Only.
==PAGE:116==
 4 
 2 
 2 
0.50 X 45°
Affasning må gerneændres,
hvis det gør svejsning lettere
 
60.30 
 
52.90 
 
12 
End plate Ø12
WEIGHT: 
A4
SHEET 1 OF 1
SCALE:1:1
DWG NO.
End plate with Ø12 hole, for use with 1/4" female fitting. 
The chamfercan be varied if desired.
The chamfer is made for welding seam.
REVISION
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
MATERIAL:
STAINLESS STEEL (316L)
DATE
SIGNATURE
NAME
DEBUR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
CONTACT Lars Kjemtrup:
Phone: 40536701
Mail: s103400@student.dtu.dk
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR: +/- 0.5 mm
Q.A
MFG
APPV'D
CHK'D
DRAWN
Lars Kjemtrup
SolidWorks Student Edition.
 For Academic Use Only.
==PAGE:117==
A
B
B
Termisk
sammenføring
 
20.20 
Termisk
sammenføring
 
60.30 
 
26.45 
Termisk
sammenføring
DETAIL A
SCALE 2 : 1
Termisk
sammenføring
 2 
 258 
 2 
 16.20 
 16.20 
 4 
 4 
 
12 
 
18 
SECTION B-B
SCALE 1 : 2
1/4" female
fitting
1/2" female
fitting
Assembly_air_60_3mm
WEIGHT: 
A4
SHEET 1 OF 1
SCALE:1:2 and detail is 2:1
DWG NO.
The air cylinder is assembled by:
- 258mm of 60.3 x 3.65 piping
- 1/4" female fitting (turned to 16.20 mm length)
- 1/2" female fitting (given)
- end plates with holes, Ø12 and Ø18 respectively
End plates are welded in groove, and fittings are welded too
REVISION
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
MATERIAL:
STAINLESS STEEL (316L)
DATE
SIGNATURE
NAME
DEBUR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
CONTACT Lars Kjemtrup:
Phone: 40536701
Mail: s103400@student.dtu.dk
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR: +/- 0.5 mm
Q.A
MFG
APPV'D
CHK'D
DRAWN
Lars Kjemtrup
SolidWorks Student Edition.
 For Academic Use Only.
==PAGE:118==
==PAGE:119==
6.2
Appendix B - Gas Chromatography
Appendix B - Gas Chromatography
103
==PAGE:120==
==PAGE:121==
Gas Chromatography
In this master thesis gas chromatographic (GC) analysis have been utilized in the
analysis of some fuel types. Petroleum naphtha has been analyzed using this method,
in order to determine the boiling point distribution and composition.
Principle of Gas Chromatography
A GC is a chemical analysis instrument for separating chemicals in a sample with
a wide variety of chemical components. In this GC setup the model Shimadzu GC-
9A is used. The GC instrument consists of several important components, such as
the sample injector, capillary column, oven and detector. In ﬁgure 6.2.1 a simpliﬁed
diagram of the GC setup is shown.
Output
Detector
Capillary Column
Carrier Gas
Flow Controller
Column Oven
Sample Injector
Figure 6.2.1: Schematic diagram of Gas Chromatograph, with carrier gas, sample
injector, capillary column placed in oven and detector
The analyte is injected through the sample injector. From here it passes into a narrow
tube, or capillary column.
The column is a fused silica capillary column Supelco
PetrocolTM EX2887 5 m x 0.53 mm x 0.1 µm ﬁlm thickness. The chemical constituents
pass through the column in a gas stream. Helium is used as carrier gas in this setup.
Each chemical constituent has some speciﬁc chemical and physical properties and
interaction with the walls of the column or the stationary phase in the column. The
stationary phase/walls in the column causes the analyte to separate into its diﬀerent
components, causing each to exit the column at diﬀerent times, called the retention
time.
When the chemical constituent exits the column a detector is used for monitoring.
The time of exit and quantity is determined by the detector. The signal is converted
into an electrical signal which is stored on a computer and can be monitored live in
the output window.
105
==PAGE:122==
A ﬂame ionization detector (FID) is used in the GC setup utilized in this master thesis.
The ﬂows for the carrier gas, hydrogen and air for the FID-unit is controlled manually
using the pressure regulating valves, see ﬁgure 6.2.2.
The detector has electrodes
situated adjacent to the ﬂame fueled by H2 and air, near the exit of the capillary
column. When carbon containing compounds leave the column they are pyrolyzed
by the ﬂame. The electrodes measure the current generated by cations and electrons
upon pyrolysis. The increase in current can be translated and appears as a peak in a
chromatogram.
Hydrogen
Air
Helium
Oven
Electrical Controller Section
PC
Valves
Injection
Figure 6.2.2: Gas Chromatographic analysis instrument, Shimadzu GC-9A
In the actual GC setup the pressure regulating valves are seen at the round manome-
ters. Additionally the injection port is seen, and the capillary oven with the column
inside on the left. The data acquisition is managed with Matlab using the PC on the
right. Above the GC and PC the Gas Cylinders with, helium, hydrogen and air are
seen. The hydrogen and air are used for the ﬂame in the ionization detector.
Challenges During GC Analysis
Gasoline and other fuel type products consist of a wide variety of chemical constituents.
Many of these are fairly volatile and possess chemical and physical properties that
make it diﬃcult to detect them using the GC setup used in this master thesis. The
most volatile components elute too quickly making them impossible to detect, they
do not get a reasonable retention time.
The reason for this is that the GC applied can not work with column temperatures
below ambient temperature. Ideal GC analysis for gasoline or similar products have a
column temperature starting at -20 ◦C. Starting at subzero temperatures require the
use of cooling systems, typically being cryogenic cooling.
106
==PAGE:123==
When having a setup with the possibility of reaching subzero starting temperatures
a qualitative calibration mix can look as in ﬁgure 6.2.3, here volatile components are
seen clearly with individual retention times.
1
2
3
10
12
16
17
0
2
4
6
8
10
Time [min]
4
5
6
7
8
9
11
13
14
15
19
18
1. n-Propane
2. 2-Methylpropane
3. n-Butane
4. 2-Methylbutane
5. n-Pentane
6. 2-Methylpentane
7. n-Hexane
8. 2,4-Dimethylpentane
9. n-Heptane
10. Toluene
11. n-Octane
12. p-Xylene
13. n-Propylbenzene
14. n-Decane
15. n-Butylbenzene
16. n-Dodecane
17. n-Tridecane
18. n-Tetradecane
19. n-Pentadecane
Figure 6.2.3: Chromatogram for D3710 Qualitative Calibration Mix, Catalog No.
48884[36]
In ﬁgure 6.2.3 the column Supelco PetrocolTM 3710 10 m x 0.75 mm ID glass x 5.0 µm
ﬁlm thickness has been applied using a column temperature program going from -
20 ◦C to 200 ◦C at 20 ◦C/min. Additionally nitrogen is used as carrier gas and the
detector is a FID type. The sample size volume injected is 0.1 µL.
107
==PAGE:124==
==PAGE:125==
6.3
Appendix C - Drawings of Plates for Mounting
Gas Detector
Appendix C - Drawings of Plates
for Mounting Gas Detector
109
==PAGE:126==
==PAGE:127==
 2 
A
A
Dimension på slids kan ændres, 
kan være bredde på savklinge
 
10 
 15 
 R40 
 140 
 140 
Ø80 hul placeres i
center af plade.
 25 
 25 
 25 
 115 
B
SECTION A-A
SCALE 1 : 2
ISO M8
gevind
Ø10 hul uden gevind
 
6.80 
 
6.80 
 15 
 20 
 15 
VIEW B
SCALE 1 : 2
I de to Ø6.8 huller, skal
der skæres gevind ISO M8
Alle kanter og hjørner må gerne affases 
ammonia_cylinder_plate_alu
WEIGHT: 
A4
SHEET 1 OF 1
SCALE:1:2
DWG NO.
Alu plate 140x140 and 20 mm thick.
REVISION
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
MATERIAL:
Aluminium
DATE
SIGNATURE
NAME
DEBUR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
CONTACT Lars Kjemtrup:
Phone: 40536701
Mail: s103400@student.dtu.dk
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR: +/- 0.5 mm
Q.A
MFG
APPV'D
CHK'D
DRAWN
Lars Kjemtrup
SolidWorks Student Edition.
 For Academic Use Only.
==PAGE:128==
 500 
 300 
 
8 
 
8 
 195 
 195 
 10 
 10 
 R30 
 R30 
 R30 
 R30 
 2 
Afrundinger i hjørner er foreslået til R30, har ikke noget praktisk formål,
må derfor gerne have anden dimension.
De er kun til, for ikke at komme til skade på skarpe kanter.
stainless_plate_back
WEIGHT: 
A4
SHEET 1 OF 1
SCALE:1:5
DWG NO.
Stainless steel back plate with dimensions 500x300.
For installation on 140x140 alu plate.
REVISION
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
MATERIAL:
STAINLESS STEEL
DATE
SIGNATURE
NAME
DEBUR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
CONTACT Lars Kjemtrup:
Phone: 40536701
Mail: s103400@student.dtu.dk
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR: +/- 0.5 mm
Q.A
MFG
APPV'D
CHK'D
DRAWN
Lars Kjemtrup
SolidWorks Student Edition.
 For Academic Use Only.
==PAGE:129==
6.4
Appendix D - SI Engine Test Scheme
Appendix D - SI Engine Test
Scheme
113
==PAGE:130==
==PAGE:131==
Group
p_atm [Pa]
Date 
[yyyymmdd]
Fuel
Engine speed 
[RPM]
DAQ folder
1
102800
20150702
gasoline
1000
2015_07_02_gasoline
Test nr.
Ignition timing 
[°BTDC]
Lambda    [-]
CR [V/V]
Weight [kg]
Air mass flow 
[kg/s]
Δt fuel 
[s/30ml]
T_atm [°C]
T_oil [°F]
T_exh [°C]
T_head [°C]
T_cool out [°C] T_cool in [°C]
Cool flow [l/h]
Bosch   HC 
[ppm]
Bosch CO2 [%] Bosch   CO [%] Bosch    O2 [%] p_man [mbar]
Knock [1/0]
Pressure file
Optimum ign. 
timing [1/0]
Motoring
file
1
0
0.999
7
7.03
0.0042
70.6
27
134
663
99
87
21
53
140
14.97
0.474
0.42
0
gasoline_085748
0
CR7_132237
2
5
1
7
7.8
0.00413
28
135
639
99
87
21
53
142
14.98
0.404
0.43
15
0
gasoline_090445
0
CR7_132237
3
10
1
7
8.23
0.00406
28
135
623
99
88
21
53
140
14.98
0.416
0.42
0
gasoline_091043
0
CR7_132237
4
15
1
7
8.34
0.00402
27
134
606
99
89
21
53
140
14.98
0.384
0.4
21
0
gasoline_091617
1
CR7_132237
5
20
0.998
7
8.24
0.00396
70.3
27
134
594
99
90
21
50
133
14.96
0.412
0.38
0
gasoline_092523
0
CR7_132237
6
25
1
7
7.98
0.003945
27
133
587
99
91
21
50
129
14.95
0.418
0.4
18
0
gasoline_092940
0
CR7_132237
7
30
1
7
7.54
0.00392
27
133
581
99
92
21
50
125
14.93
0.435
0.4
0
gasoline_093344
0
CR7_132237
8
35
1
7
7.08
0.00389
27
133
578
99
93
21
50
118
14.95
0.305
0.39
0
gasoline_093744
0
CR7_132237
9
40
1
7
6.55
0.00387
70.9
27
133
577
99
93
21
50
111
14.94
0.403
0.38
0
gasoline_094205
0
CR7_132237
10
0
1
7
7.12
0.00398
27
133
662
99
89
22
50
88
14.94
0.44
0.39
0
gasoline_095216
0
CR7_132237
11
0
1
7.5
7.5
0.00395
28
133
650
99
87
21
50
139
14.9
0.366
0.38
0
gasoline_100451
0
CR7_5_132845
12
5
1
7.5
8.18
0.00397
28
134
628
99
88
22
50
139
14.94
0.33
0.36
0
gasoline_100917
0
CR7_5_132845
13
10
1
7.5
8.55
0.00394
70.5
28
134
609
99
89
22
50
141
14.9
0.398
0.38
0
gasoline_101435
0
CR7_5_132845
14
15
1.001
7.5
8.58
0.00391
28
134
593
99
90
22
50
139
14.92
0.305
0.37
1
gasoline_101944
0
CR7_5_132845
15
0
1.002
7.5
7.52
0.00393
28
134
651
99
89
22
50
116
14.96
0.292
0.36
0
gasoline_102858
0
CR7_5_132845
16
0
1
8
7.84
0.00399
28
133
634
99
86
22
50
88
14.96
0.372
0.33
0
gasoline_104612
0
CR8_133137
17
5
1.002
8
8.44
0.00398
69.1
28
133
616
99
88
22
50
90
14.96
0.346
0.35
0
gasoline_105103
0
CR8_133137
18
10
0.999
8
8.75
0.00397
29
133
596
99
90
22
50
90
14.95
0.413
0.33
1
gasoline_105821
0
CR8_133137
19
0
1
8
7.86
0.00399
29
133
642
99
89
23
50
81
14.99
0.393
0.33
0
gasoline_110429
0
CR8_133137
20
0
1
8.5
8.08
0.003943
29
133
631
99
89
23
50
115
14.88
0.318
0.33
0
gasoline_111732
0
CR8_5_133340
21
5
1.002
8.5
8.58
0.00394
29
133
608
99
89
23
50
114
14.88
0.292
0.35
1
gasoline_112339
0
CR8_5_133340
22
0
1.002
8.5
8.08
0.00393
29
133
632
99
89
23
50
104
14.9
0.273
0.34
0
gasoline_112847
0
CR8_5_133340
23
0
1.001
9
8.38
0.00389
69.9
29
134
621
99
88
23
50
111
14.87
0.327
0.35
1
gasoline_114308
0
CR9_133655
24
2
0.999
9
8.66
0.00387
29
134
610
99
89
23
50
111
14.88
0.355
0.33
1
gasoline_114711
0
CR9_133655
SI test scheme
==PAGE:132==
==PAGE:133==
6.5
Appendix E - MatLab Code
Appendix E - MatLab Code
117
==PAGE:134==
==PAGE:135==
Engine Data Loading
1 % SI assignment
2
c l o s e
a l l ;
c l e a r
a l l ;
c l c ;
3
t i c
4
5
BuildRawDataBase = 0 ;
6
LoadRawDataBase =
1 ;
7
RawDataBaseFileName =
’ dbraw ’ ;
8
9
BuildWorkDataBase = 0 ;
10
LoadWorkDataBase = 1 ;
11
WorkDataBaseFileName =
’ db ’ ;
12
13
x l s v e r s i o n
=
’ x l s 9 7 ’ ; % Options
are
’ xls97 ’
and
’ xls95 ’ .
MAC should . . .
14 % use
’ xls95 ’
15 %
========================================================================
16 % Either
l o a d i n g
a l l
data
from
e x c e l s h e e t s
and
LabView
f i l e s
i n t o
a
17 % Matlab
s t r u c t u r e
or
from
a
p r e v e o u s l y
generated
Mat
f i l e
18
i f
BuildRawDataBase
19
c l e a r
db
20
21
% P r o p e r t i e s
o f
the
e x c e l s h e e t s
that
should
be
s t r i p p e d
22
E x c e l P r o p e r t i e s = {
23
% ( path \) f i l e n a m e
1 s t
header
row
2nd
header
row
24
’ S I e n g i n e e x e r c i s e s c h e m e C R . x l s ’ , ’
sheet 1 ’
2
4
25
’
S I
e n g i n e
e x e r c i s e
s c h e m e
g a s o l i n e
2 0 1 5
0 7
0 2
. x l s ’ , ’ she et1 ’
2
4
26
’
S I e n g i n e e x e r c i s e s c h e m e 5 0 p e r 5 0 p e r 2 0 1 5 0 6 1 4
. x l s ’ , ’ she et1 ’
2
4
27
’
S I e n g i n e e x e r c i s e s c h e m e 4 8 p e r 4 8 p e r 4 p e r 2 0 1 5 0 6 2 4
. x l s ’ , ’ she et1 ’
2
4
28
’
SI engine exercise scheme mix w ammonia 2015 06 28
. x l s ’ , ’ she et1 ’
2
4
29
’
SI engine exercise scheme mix wo ammonia 2015 06 28
. x l s ’ , ’ she et1 ’
2
4
30
’
S I e n g i n e e x e r c i s e s c h e m e e t h a n o l 2 0 1 5 0 7 0 8
. x l s ’ , ’ she et1 ’
2
4
31
’
S I e n g i n e e x e r c i s e s c h e m e e t h a n o l a m m o n i a 2 0 1 5 0 7 1 0
. x l s ’ , ’ she et1 ’
2
4
32
} ;
33
34
%
l i s t
o f
v a r i a b l e
names
f o r
the
g e n e r a l
data
belonging
to
the
1 s t
header
35
V a r i a b l e L i s t 1 = {
36
’ Group ’ , ’ p atm ’ , ’ Date ’ , ’ Fuel ’ , ’N ’ , ’
DAQ Folder ’
37
} ;
38
39
%
l i s t
o f
v a r i a b l e
names
f o r
the
t e s t
data
belonging
to
the
2nd
header
40
V a r i a b l e L i s t 2 = {
41
’ t e s t n r ’ , ’ i g n i t i o n
t i m i n g ’ , ’ lambda ’ , ’
CR ’ , ’ Weight ’ , . . .
42
’ A i r m a s s f l o w ’ , ’ d e l t a
t
f u e l ’ , ’ T atm ’
, ’ T o i l ’ , ’ T exh ’ , . . .
43
’ T head ’ , ’ T c o o l o u t ’ , ’ T c o o l i n ’ , ’
Cool flow ’ , ’ Bosch HC ’ , . . .
44
’ Bosch CO 2 ’ , ’ Bosch CO ’ , ’ Bosch O 2 ’ , ’
p man ’ , ’ Knock ’ , . . .
45
’ p r e s s u r e
f i l e ’ , ’ Optimum ign timing ’ , ’
m o t o r i n g
f i l e ’
46
} ;
47
48
% s t r i p p i n g
a l l
e x c e l
data
i n t o
a
s i n g l e
s t r u c t u r e
49
dbraw =
e x c e l s t r i p ( E x c e l P r o p e r t i e s ,
V a r i a b l e L i s t 1 , V a r i a b l e L i s t 2 , x l s v e r s i o n ) ;
50
51
% adding
p r e s s u r e
f i l e s
to
the
s t r u c t u r e
52
dbraw . p r e s s u r e
f i l e . val =
c e l l ( s i z e ( dbraw .
p r e s s u r e
f i l e . txt ) ) ;
53
dbraw . m o t o r i n g
f i l e . val =
c e l l ( s i z e ( dbraw .
p r e s s u r e
f i l e . txt ) ) ;
54
dbraw . h i
r e s
p r e s s u r e
f i l e . val =
c e l l ( s i z e
( dbraw . p r e s s u r e
f i l e . txt ) ) ;
55
dbraw . Dp flowmeter . val =
c e l l ( s i z e ( dbraw .
p r e s s u r e
f i l e . txt ) ) ;
56
57
f o r
i
= 1 : l e n g t h ( dbraw . p r e s s u r e
f i l e . txt )
58
i f
˜ isempty ( dbraw . p r e s s u r e
f i l e . txt { i
})
59
dbraw . p r e s s u r e
f i l e . val { i }
= . . .
60
dlmread ( [ dbraw . DAQ Folder . txt {
i } , ’ / ’ , dbraw . p r e s s u r e
f i l e . txt { i } , ’ . t d f ’ ] )
;
61
dbraw . m o t o r i n g
f i l e . val { i }
= . . .
62
dlmread ( [ dbraw . DAQ Folder . txt {
i } , ’ / ’ , dbraw . m o t o r i n g
f i l e . txt { i } , ’ . t d f ’ ] )
;
63
end
64
end
65
66
save ( RawDataBaseFileName , ’ dbraw ’ ) ;
67
68
e l s e i f
LoadRawDataBase
69
70
c l e a r
db
71
load ( RawDataBaseFileName ) ;
72
73
end
74 %
===========================================================
75 % Either
moving
data
from
raw
database
i n t o
a
working
database ,
adding
some
76 % g e n e r a l
data
and
doing
some
g e n e r a l
c a l c u l a t i o n s
or
l o a d i n g
the
working
77 % database
from
a
p r e v i o u s l y
made MAT
f i l e
78
i f
BuildWorkDataBase
79
c l e a r
db
80
81
% engine
s p e c s
82
db . L =
0 . 2 5 4 ; % m
83
db . S =
0 . 1 1 4 3 ; % m
84
db .B =
0 . 0 8 2 6 ; % m
85
db .R = db . S / 2 ; % m
86
%db . Vd = pi /4∗db .Bˆ2∗db . S ; % mˆ3
87
db .CR = dbraw .CR. val ; % mˆ3/mˆ3
88
%db . Vc = db . Vd . / ( db .CR−1) ; % mˆ3
89
db .N = dbraw .N. val ; % rpm
90
db . gamma =
1 . 3 ;
% heat
c a p a c i t y
r a t i o
91
db .BP = ( dbraw . Weight . val ( : ) . ∗dbraw .N. val
( : ) /2000) ∗0 . 7 4 6 ; % BP
in
[kW]
92
db . Fuel=dbraw . Fuel . txt ;
93
94
% f u e l
s p e c s
95
db . r h o g a s o l i n e
=
7 4 2 . 4 ; % kg/mˆ3
d e n s i t y
o f
Summer
Gasoline
96
db . r h o 5 0 p e r 5 0 p e r =
7 4 7 . 1 ; % kg/mˆ3
97
db . r h o 4 8 p e r 4 8 p e r 4 p e r =
7 4 7 . 1 ; % kg/mˆ3
assuming
same
d e n s i t y
as
with
no
ammonia
98
db . rho mix w ammonia =
7 6 1 . 1 ; % kg/mˆ3
assuming
same
d e n s i t y
as
with
no
ammonia
99
db . rho mix wo ammonia =
7 6 2 . 1 ; % kg/mˆ3
assuming
same
d e n s i t y
as
with
no
ammonia
100
db . r h o e t h a n o l = 789; % kg/mˆ3
101
db . rho ethanol ammonia = 778; % kg/mˆ3
102
db . LHV gasoline = 4 3 . 9 5 ∗1 0 ˆ 6 ; % J/kg
103
db . LHV ethanol = 28 .8 6 5 ∗1 0ˆ 6; % J/kg
104
db . LHV ammonia = 1 8. 6 46 ∗1 0ˆ 6; % J/kg
105
db . LHV 50per 50per = 44.194∗10ˆ6∗0.5+ db .
LHV ethanol ∗0 . 5 ; % J/kg
50 % undecane
and
50 % ethanol
106
db . LHV 48per 48per 4per = db .
LHV 50per 50per ∗(1 −0.02427)+db . LHV ammonia
∗0 . 0 2 4 2 7 ; % J/kg
48.79 % undecane
and
48.79 % ethanol
and
2.42 % ammonia
107
db . LHV mix w ammonia = 44.194∗10ˆ6∗0.3992+
db . LHV ethanol ∗0.4596+38.044∗10ˆ6∗0.0666+
db . LHV ammonia ∗0 . 0 3 4 8 ; % J/kg
39.92 %
undecane ,
45.96 % ethanol ,
6.66 % 2−
Ethylhexanol ,
3.98 % water
and
3.48 %
ammonia
108
db . LHV mix wo ammonia =
44.194∗10ˆ6∗0.4134+ db . LHV ethanol
∗0.4760+38.044∗10ˆ6∗0.0693; % J/kg
41.34 %
undecane ,
47.60 % ethanol ,
6.93 % 2−
Ethylhexanol
and
4.12 % water
109
db . LHV ethanol ammonia = (1 −0.04815226855)
∗db . LHV ethanol +0.04815226855∗db .
LHV ammonia ;
110
111
% g e n e r a l
data
112
db . t o t a l t e s t s
= l e n g t h ( dbraw . t e s t n r . val ) ;
113
114
% g e n e r a l
c a l c u l a t i o n s
o f
f u e l
mass
flow
115
%
i n d i c i e s
with
ethanol
as
f u e l
119
==PAGE:136==
116
i=strcmp ( db . Fuel , ’ ethanol ’ ) ;
117
db . mf ( i ) = db . r h o e t h a n o l ∗. . .
118
( dbraw . d e l t a
t
f u e l . val ( i ) /30) .ˆ( −1)
/1000; % g/ s
119
db . Q in ( i )=db . mf ( i ) . ∗db . LHV ethanol /1000;
% f u e l
input ,
Q in ,
in
J/ s
120
121
%
i n d i c i e s
with
50 % ethanol
and
50 %
petroleum
naphtha
as
f u e l
122
i=strcmp ( db . Fuel , ’ 50 p e r 5 0 p e r ’ ) ;
123
db . mf ( i ) = db . r h o 5 0 p e r 5 0 p e r ∗. . .
124
( dbraw . d e l t a
t
f u e l . val ( i ) /30) .ˆ( −1)
/1000; % g/ s
125
db . Q in ( i )=db . mf ( i ) . ∗db . LHV 50per 50per
/1000; % f u e l
input ,
Q in ,
in
J/ s
126
127
%
i n d i c i e s
with
50 % ethanol
and
50 %
petroleum
naphtha
as
f u e l
128
i=strcmp ( db . Fuel , ’ 48 p e r 4 8 p e r 4 p e r ’ ) ;
129
db . mf ( i ) = db . r h o 4 8 p e r 4 8 p e r 4 p e r ∗. . .
130
( dbraw . d e l t a
t
f u e l . val ( i ) /30) .ˆ( −1)
/1000; % g/ s
131
db . Q in ( i )=db . mf ( i ) . ∗db .
LHV 48per 48per 4per /1000; % f u e l
input ,
Q in ,
in
J/ s
132
133
%
i n d i c i e s
with
50 % ethanol
and
50 %
petroleum
naphtha
as
f u e l
134
i=strcmp ( db . Fuel , ’ mix w ammonia ’ ) ;
135
db . mf ( i ) = db . rho mix w ammonia ∗. . .
136
( dbraw . d e l t a
t
f u e l . val ( i ) /30) .ˆ( −1)
/1000; % g/ s
137
db . Q in ( i )=db . mf ( i ) . ∗db . LHV mix w ammonia
/1000; % f u e l
input ,
Q in ,
in
J/ s
138
139
%
i n d i c i e s
with
50 % ethanol
and
50 %
petroleum
naphtha
as
f u e l
140
i=strcmp ( db . Fuel , ’ mix wo ammonia ’ ) ;
141
db . mf ( i ) = db . rho mix wo ammonia ∗. . .
142
( dbraw . d e l t a
t
f u e l . val ( i ) /30) .ˆ( −1)
/1000; % g/ s
143
db . Q in ( i )=db . mf ( i ) . ∗db . LHV mix wo ammonia
/1000; % f u e l
input ,
Q in ,
in
J/ s
144
145
%
i n d i c i e s
with
g a s o l i n e
as
f u e l
146
i=strcmp ( db . Fuel , ’ g a s o l i n e ’ ) . . .
147
|
strcmp ( dbraw . Fuel . txt ( : ) , ’Uno−X
Octane
95 ’ ) ;
148
db . mf ( i ) = db . r h o g a s o l i n e ∗. . .
149
( dbraw . d e l t a
t
f u e l . val ( i ) /30) .ˆ( −1)
/1000; % g/ s
150
db . Q in ( i )=db . mf ( i ) . ∗db . LHV gasoline /1000;
% f u e l
input ,
Q in ,
in
J/ s
151
152
%
i n d i c i e s
with
ethanol
and
ammonia
as
f u e l
153
i=strcmp ( db . Fuel , ’ ethanol ammonia ’ ) ;
154
db . mf ( i ) = db . rho ethanol ammonia ∗. . .
155
( dbraw . d e l t a
t
f u e l . val ( i ) /30) .ˆ( −1)
/1000; % g/ s
156
db . Q in ( i )=db . mf ( i ) . ∗db .
LHV ethanol ammonia /1000; % f u e l
input ,
Q in ,
in
J/ s
157
158
r e s o l u t i o n e n c o d e r
=
0 . 5 ;
%r e s o l u t i o n
o f
encoder
159
TDC shift =
0 . 5 ;
%TDC
s h i f t
in
d e g r e e s
160
g a in p ic ku p = 1 0 ; %bar /V
161
162
f o r
i
= 1 : db . t o t a l t e s t s
163
[ db . p
f i r e d ( : , : , i ) , db . m e a n p f i r e d ( : , i
) , db . p rep ( : , i ) , . . .
164
db . theta ]= p r e s s u r e ( dbraw .
m o t o r i n g
f i l e . val { i } , . . .
165
dbraw . p r e s s u r e
f i l e . val { i } ,
r e s o l u t i o n e n c o d e r , . . .
166
TDC shift , dbraw . p atm . val ( i )
/100000 , g ai n p ic ku p ) ;
167
end
168
169
f o r
i= 1 : db . t o t a l t e s t s
170
U=i ;
171
[ db .IMEP( i ) , db .PMEP( i ) , db . V cyl ( : , i ) ,
db .AHRR( : , i ) , db .AHR( : , i ) , . . .
172
db . T mean ( : , i ) ]= motorspecs ( db .
theta , db . m e a n p f i r e d ( : , i ) , . . .
173
db . S , db . B, db . L , db .CR( i ) , dbraw .
T atm . val ( i ) +273 ,db . gamma) ;
174
end
175
176
% Moving HC,
CO,
T exh
from
dbraw
to
db :
177
db .HC=dbraw . Bosch HC . val ;
178
db .CO=dbraw . Bosch CO . val ;
179
db . T exh=dbraw . T exh . val ;
180
db . i g n t i m i n g=dbraw . i g n i t i o n
t i m i n g . val ;
181
182
db . V d=max( db . V cyl ( : , 1 ) )−min ( db . V cyl
( : , 1 ) ) ; % Disp .
volume
[mˆ 3 ]
183
184
% Factor
f o r
c o n v e r t i n g MEP’ s
to
P’ s :
185
db .MEP P=db . V d∗db .N( 1 ) /120;
186
187
db .IMEP=db .IMEP . ’ ;
188
db .PMEP=db .PMEP. ’ ;
189
190
db .BMEP=db .BP.∗120/(1200∗db . V d ) ; % BMEP
in
[ kPa ]
191
db .FMEP=db . IMEP−db .BMEP; % FMEP in
[ kPa ]
192
db .MFMEP=db .FMEP−abs ( db .PMEP) ; % MFMEP in
[ kPa ]
193
194
% C a l c u l a t i n g
P’ s
using
c o n v e r t i n g
f a c t o r :
195
db .MFP=db .MFMEP∗db .MEP P;
196
db . IP=db .IMEP∗db .MEP P;
197
db .PP=db .PMEP∗db .MEP P;
198
199
% C a l c u l a t i n g
e f f i c i e n c i e s :
200
db . e t a b =(db .BP∗1000) . ’ . / db . Q in ;
201
db . e t a
i =(db . IP ∗1000) . ’ . / db . Q in ;
202
203
% C a l c u l a t i n g
c y l i n d e r
head
heat
l o s s ,
CHHL:
204
c p w at e r = 4182; %
s p e c i f i c
heat
o f
water
in
J/kg−K
205
d e l t a T c o o l
= dbraw . T c o o l o u t . val−dbraw .
T c o o l i n . val ;
206
mf cool = dbraw . Cool flow . val /3600∗1000; %
c o o l
flow :
from
l /h
to
g/ s
207
db .CHHL = c p w at e r /1000∗d e l t a T c o o l . ∗
mf cool /1000; % in kW
208
209
% C a l c u l a t i n g
exhaust
heat
l o s s ,
EHL:
210
c p exh = 1140; %
s p e c i f i c
exhaust
gas
in
J/kg−K
211
delta T exh = dbraw . T exh . val−dbraw . T atm .
val ;
212
db . mf exh = dbraw . A i r m a s s f l o w . val ∗1000+
db . mf . ’ ;
% c o o l i n g :
l /h
to
g/ s
213
db .EHL = c p exh /1000∗delta T exh . ∗db .
mf exh /1000; % in kW
214
215
db . Q in=db . Q in . ’ / 1 0 0 0 ; % input
in kW
216
% C a l c u l a t i n g
unburned
hydrocarbons ,
assuming
mass
f r a c t i o n
o f HC:
217
i=strcmp ( db . Fuel , ’ ethanol ’ ) ; %
i n d i c i e s
with
ethanol
as
f u e l
218
db .UHCP( i ) =((db . mf exh ( i ) /1000000.∗db .HC( i
) ) /1000∗db . LHV ethanol ) / . . .
219
1000; %Unburned HC in kW
220
221
i=strcmp ( db . Fuel , ’ 50 p e r 5 0 p e r ’ ) ; %
i n d i c i e s
with
ethanol
as
f u e l
222
db .UHCP( i ) =((db . mf exh ( i ) /1000000.∗db .HC( i
) ) / 1 0 0 0 ∗. . .
223
db . LHV 50per 50per ) /1000; %Unburned HC
in kW
224
225
i=strcmp ( db . Fuel , ’ 48 p e r 4 8 p e r 4 p e r ’ ) ; %
i n d i c i e s
with
ethanol
as
f u e l
226
db .UHCP( i ) =((db . mf exh ( i ) /1000000.∗db .HC( i
) ) / 1 0 0 0 ∗. . .
227
db . LHV 48per 48per 4per ) /1000; %
Unburned HC in kW
228
229
i=strcmp ( db . Fuel , ’ mix w ammonia ’ ) ; %
i n d i c i e s
with
ethanol
as
f u e l
230
db .UHCP( i ) =((db . mf exh ( i ) /1000000.∗db .HC( i
) ) / 1 0 0 0 ∗. . .
231
db . LHV mix w ammonia ) /1000; %Unburned
HC in kW
232
233
i=strcmp ( db . Fuel , ’ mix wo ammonia ’ ) ; %
i n d i c i e s
with
ethanol
as
f u e l
234
db .UHCP( i ) =((db . mf exh ( i ) /1000000.∗db .HC( i
) ) / 1 0 0 0 ∗. . .
235
db . LHV mix w ammonia ) /1000; %Unburned
HC in kW
236
237
i=strcmp ( db . Fuel , ’ g a s o l i n e ’ )
|
strcmp (
dbraw . Fuel . txt ( : ) , . . .
238
’Uno−X Octane
95 ’ ) ; %
i n d i c i e s
with
g a s o l i n e
as
f u e l
239
db .UHCP( i ) =((db . mf exh ( i ) /1000000.∗db .HC( i
) ) /1000∗db . LHV gasoline ) / . . .
240
1000; %Unburned HC in kW
241
242
i=strcmp ( db . Fuel , ’ ethanol ammonia ’ ) ; %
i n d i c i e s
with
ethanol
and
ammonia
as
f u e l
243
db .UHCP( i ) =((db . mf exh ( i ) /1000000.∗db .HC( i
) ) / 1 0 0 0 ∗. . .
244
db . LHV ethanol ammonia ) /1000; %
Unburned HC in kW
120
==PAGE:137==
245
246
db .UHCP=db .UHCP. ’ ;
247
db .SUM P=db .BP+db .EHL+db .CHHL+db .MFP;+ abs (
db .PP)+db .UHCP; % in kW
248
db . P unaccount=db . Q in−db .SUM P;
249
250
% Energy
balance
c a l c u l a t i o n s :
251
db . percent .BP=db .BP. / db . Q in ∗100;
252
db . percent .CHHL=db .CHHL. / db . Q in ∗100;
253
db . percent .EHL=db .EHL. / db . Q in ∗100;
254
db . percent .MFP=db .MFP. / db . Q in ∗100;
255
db . percent .PP=abs ( db .PP) . / db . Q in ∗100;
256
db . percent .UHC=db .UHCP. / db . Q in ∗100;
257
db . percent .UL=db . P unaccount . / db . Q in ∗100;
258
259
db . lambda=dbraw . lambda . val ;
260
db . o p t i g n t i m i n g=dbraw . Optimum ign timing
. val ;
261
db . T o i l=dbraw . T o i l . val ;
262
263
save ( WorkDataBaseFileName , ’ db ’ ) ;
264
265
e l s e i f
LoadWorkDataBase
266
267
load ( WorkDataBaseFileName ) ;
268
269
end
270
271
c l e a r v a r s
BuildRawDataBase
BuildWorkDataBase
LoadRawDataBase
. . .
272
LoadWorkDataBase
RawDataBaseFileName
TDC shift U
. . .
273
WorkDataBaseFileName
i
g ai n p ic k up
r e s o l u t i o n e n c o d e r
x l s v e r s i o n . . .
274
V a r i a b l e L i s t 1
V a r i a b l e L i s t 2
E x c e l P r o p e r t i e s
c p w at e r
d e l t a T c o o l . . .
275
mf cool
c p exh
delta T exh
276
toc
121
==PAGE:138==
Stripping Excel Sheets
1
f u n c t i o n
dbraw =
e x c e l s t r i p ( E x c e l P r o p e r t i e s ,
V a r i a b l e L i s t 1 , V a r i a b l e L i s t 2 , x l s v e r s i o n )
2 % Written
by
Anders
I v a r s s o n
3 % S t r i p s
data
from
a
l i s t
o f
e x c e l
workbooks
and
c o l l e c t
a l l
the
data
i n t o
a
4 % s i n g l e
data
s t r u c t u r e
( dbraw ) .
The
e x c e l
s h e e t
has
to
f o l l o w
some
standards :
5 % −
I t
should
contain
two
t a b l e s :
6 %
1)
The
f i r s t
t a b l e
should
have
one
header
row
and
below
that ,
one
data
row .
7 %
The
width
o f
the
t a b l e
i s
unlimited
and
i t
does
not
have
to
s t a r t
8 %
in
f i r s t
column
o f
the
s h e e t .
9 %
2)
The
second
t a b l e
should
have
one
header
row
and
below
that ,
unlimited
10 %
number
o f
data
rows .
The
width
o f
the
t a b l e
i s
unlimited
but
i t
11 %
should
s t a r t
in
the
same
column
as
the
f i r s t
t a b l e .
12 % −The
header
c e l l s
should
not
contain
nummeric
data .
The
data
c e l l s
may
contain
13 %
nummeric
data
or
t e x t .
Empty
c e l l s
within
the
t a b l e
w i l l
become NaN and
[ ]
in
14 %
the
data
s t r u c t u r e
( dbraw ) ;
15 %
16 %
=============================================================================
17 % Arguments
18 %
19 % E x c e l p r o p e r t i e s :
C e l l
array
c o n t a i n i n g
the
f i l e n a m e
o f
the
e x c e l
workbook
( with
20 % or
without
path )
in
the
f i r s t
column .
Sheetname
or
index
number
o f
worksheet
in
21 % the
second
row .
Third
and
f o u r t h
column
should
contain
the
index
number
f o r
the
22 %
f i r s t
and
second
t a b l e
header
row ,
r e s p e c t i v e l y .
23 %
24 % Example :
25 % E x c e l P r o p e r t i e s = {
26 %
’ Group
1\HCCI
t e s t
scheme1200
rpm . xls ’
’ Sheet1 ’
2
5
27 %
’ Group
1\HCCI
t e s t
scheme1200
rpm . xls ’
’ Sheet2 ’
2
5
28 %
’ Group
3\HCCI
t e s t
scheme1800
rpm . xls ’
’ Sheet1 ’
2
5
29 %
’ Group
3\HCCI
t e s t
scheme1800
rpm . xls ’
’ Sheet2 ’
2
5
30 %
’ . . \ l a s t
year \Group
3\HCCI
t e s t
scheme1800
rpm . xls ’
1
4
9
31 %
’ . . \ l a s t
year \Group
3\HCCI
t e s t
scheme1800
rpm . xls ’
2
4
9
32 %
’ . . \ l a s t
year \Group
3\HCCI
t e s t
scheme1800
rpm . xls ’
3
4
9
33 % } ;
34 %
35 % V a r i a b l e L i s t 1 :
Should
contain
a
c e l l
array
with
v a r i a b l e
names
that
you
wish
to
g i v e
36 % the
column
data
from
the
f i r s t
t a b l e
o f
the
s h e e t .
V a r i a b l e L i s t 1
should
have
at
l e a s t
37 % same
l e n g t h
as
the
f i r s t
t a b l e
in
the
s h e e t
with
the
widest
t a b l e .
38 %
39 % Example :
40 % V a r i a b l e L i s t 1 = {
41 %
’ operator ’ , ’ T atm ’ , ’ p atm ’ , ’ date ’ , ’N’ , ’CR’ , ’
f u e l ’ , ’ p r e s s u r e
f i l e
d i r ’ , ’ m o t o r i n g f i l e ’
42 % } ;
43 %
44 % V a r i a b l e L i s t 2 :
Same
as
V a r i a b l e L i s t 1
but
with
regard
to
the
second
t a b l e .
45 %
46 % x l s v e r s i o n :
Options
are
’ xls97 ’
and
’ xls95 ’ .
’ xls95 ’
i s
˜5x
f a s t e r
than
’ xls97 ’
47 % but
a l s o
l e s s
f l e x i b l e
r e g a r d i n g
data
c o m p a t i b i l i t y .
48 %
49 % MAC u s e r s
has
to
run
x l s 9 5
and
make
sure
that
the
workbook
i s
saved
as
so .
To
50 % ensure
t h i s
save
the
s h e e t
as
95
v e r s i o n
xls
,
c l o s e
the
s h e e t
and
reopen
51 % and
save
i t
again . . . . . .
Don ’ t
ask
me why
i t
i s
n e c e s s a r y
to
save
i t
two
times
52 % as
95
v e r s i o n
to
e n f o r c e
i t
to
happen .
Ask
B i l l
Gates .
53 %
54 %
========================================================================
55 % Output
56 % dbraw
i s
a
s i n g l e
data
s t r u c t u r e
c o n t a i n i n g
a l l
the
data
from
a l l
the
57 % the
s p e c i f i e d
e x c e l s h e e t s .
58 %
59 % dbraw
w i l l
contain
s u b s t r u c t u r e s
with
the
names
s p e c i f i e d
in
V a r i a b l e L i s t 1
60 % and
V a r i a b l e L i s t 2 .
Each
s u b s t r u c t u r e
contain
t h r e e
f i e l d s :
head ,
txt
and
val .
61 % −head
i s
a
c e l l
array
o f
header
t e x t
from
the
r e s p e c t i v e
s h e e t
and
column .
62 % −txt
i s
a
c e l l
array
o f
c e l l
t e x t
from
the
r e s p e c t i v e
sheet ,
column
and
row .
63 % −val
i s
a
v e c t o r
with
nummeric
value
from
the
r e s p e c t i v e
sheet ,
column
and
row .
64 %
65 % In
a d d i t i o n
to
the
s u b s t r u c t u r e s
s p e c i f i e d
in
V a r i a b l e L i s t 1
and
V a r i a b l e L i s t 2
66 %
f i e l d s
are
made
with
the
names :
GeneralDataHeader ,
GeneralDataTxt ,
GeneralDataVal ,
67 % TestHeader ,
TestDataTxt ,
TestDataVal .
68 % They
contain
l a r g e
c e l l
a r r a y s
with
a l l
s h e e t
content
as
e i t h e r
header
text ,
69 %
c e l l
t e x t
or
nummeric
v a l u e s .
GeneralData
means
data
from
the
f i r s t
t a b l e
in
70 % the
e x c e l
s h e e t s .
TestData
means
data
from
the
second
t a b l e .
General
data
from
71 % each
s h e e t
has
been
copied
to
f i t
the
number
o f
t e s t
data
rows .
72 %
73 % A
f i e l d
c a l l e d
xlsFileName
i s
made .
I t
c o n t a i n s
the
f i l e n a m e
with
p a r t i a l
path
74 %
r e l a t i v e
to
the
working
d i r e c t o r y .
75 % e x c e l s h e e t
from
which
the
row
data
has
been
s t r i p p e d .
76 %
77 % A
f i e l d
c a l l e d
WorkingDir
contain
the
f u l l
path
o f
the
working
d i r e c t o r y
78 % where
the
matlab
s c r i p t
was
run .
79
80
TestDataVal = {};
81
TestDataTxt = {};
82
TestDataHeader = {};
83
TestDataSizes =
[ ] ;
84
85
GeneralDataVal = {};
86
GeneralDataTxt = {};
87
GeneralDataHeader = {};
88
GeneralDataSizes =
[ ] ;
89
90
xlsFileName = {};
91
x l s S h e e t = {};
92
93
f o r
i
= 1 : s i z e ( E x c e l P r o p e r t i e s , 1 )
94
95
s h e e t = E x c e l P r o p e r t i e s { i , 2 } ;
96
header1row = E x c e l P r o p e r t i e s { i , 3 } ;
97
header2row = E x c e l P r o p e r t i e s { i , 4 } ;
98
99
i f
strcmp ( x l s v e r s i o n , ’ x l s 9 5 ’ )
100
[ dum, dum, raw ]
= x l s r e a d ( E x c e l P r o p e r t i e s { i
, 1 } , sheet , ’A1 : B2 ’ , ’ b a s i c ’ ) ;
101
e l s e i f
strcmp ( x l s v e r s i o n , ’ x l s 9 7 ’ )
102
[ dum, dum, raw ]
= x l s r e a d ( E x c e l P r o p e r t i e s { i
, 1 } , s h e e t ) ;
103
e l s e
104
[ dum, dum, raw ]
= x l s r e a d ( E x c e l P r o p e r t i e s { i
, 1 } , s h e e t ) ;
105
end
106
107
raw1 = raw ( header1row : header1row +1 ,:) ;
108
t e x t c e l l s 1
=
c e l l f u n ( @isstr , raw1 ) ;
109
r a w 1 s t r l e s s
= raw1 ;
110
r a w 1 s t r l e s s ( t e x t c e l l s 1 ) = { ’−’ } ;
111
e m p t y c e l l s 1 =
c e l l f u n ( @isnan , r a w 1 s t r l e s s ) ;
112
v a l c e l l s 1
= ˜ e m p t y c e l l s 1 & ˜ t e x t c e l l s 1 ;
113
f i r s t c o l
=
f i n d ( any (˜ emptycells1 , 1 ) ,1 , ’ f i r s t
’ ) ;
114
l a s t c o l
=
f i n d ( any (˜ emptycells1 , 1 ) ,1 , ’ l a s t ’ )
;
115
raw1 = raw1 ( : , f i r s t c o l : l a s t c o l ) ;
116
e m p t y c e l l s 1 = e m p t y c e l l s 1 ( : , f i r s t c o l : l a s t c o l
) ;
117
t e x t c e l l s 1
=
t e x t c e l l s 1 ( : , f i r s t c o l : l a s t c o l ) ;
118
v a l c e l l s 1
= ˜ e m p t y c e l l s 1 & ˜ t e x t c e l l s 1 ;
119
120
121
raw2 = raw ( header2row : end , : ) ;
122
t e x t c e l l s 2
=
c e l l f u n ( @isstr , raw2 ) ;
123
r a w 2 s t r l e s s
= raw2 ;
122
==PAGE:139==
124
r a w 2 s t r l e s s ( t e x t c e l l s 2 ) = { ’−’ } ;
125
e m p t y c e l l s 2 =
c e l l f u n ( @isnan , r a w 2 s t r l e s s ) ;
126
f i r s t c o l
=
f i n d ( any (˜ emptycells2 , 1 ) ,1 , ’ f i r s t
’ ) ;
127
l a s t c o l
=
f i n d ( any (˜ emptycells2 , 1 ) ,1 , ’ l a s t ’ )
;
128
l a s t r o w =
f i n d ( any (˜ emptycells2 , 2 ) ,1 , ’ l a s t ’ )
;
129
raw2 = raw2 ( 1 : lastrow , f i r s t c o l : l a s t c o l ) ;
130
e m p t y c e l l s 2 = e m p t y c e l l s 2 ( 1 : lastrow , f i r s t c o l
: l a s t c o l ) ;
131
t e x t c e l l s 2
=
t e x t c e l l s 2 ( 1 : lastrow , f i r s t c o l :
l a s t c o l ) ;
132
v a l c e l l s 2
= ˜ e m p t y c e l l s 2 & ˜ t e x t c e l l s 2 ;
133
134
headerraw = raw2 ( 1 , : ) ;
135
dataraw = raw2 ( 2 : end , : ) ;
136
TestDataSizes =
[ TestDataSizes ;
s i z e ( dataraw
) ] ;
137
138
TestDataHeader{ i } =
c e l l ( headerraw ) ;
139
TestDataHeader{ i }( t e x t c e l l s 2 ( 1 , : ) ) =
headerraw ( t e x t c e l l s 2 ( 1 , : ) ) ;
140
TestDataHeader{ i } = repmat ( TestDataHeader{ i
} , TestDataSizes ( i , 1 ) , 1 ) ;
141
142
TestDataVal{ i } = nan ( s i z e ( dataraw ) ) ;
143
TestDataVal{ i }( v a l c e l l s 2 ( 2 : end , : ) ) =
[
dataraw{ v a l c e l l s 2 ( 2 : end , : ) } ] ;
144
145
TestDataTxt{ i } =
c e l l ( s i z e ( dataraw ) ) ;
146
TestDataTxt{ i }( t e x t c e l l s 2 ( 2 : end , : ) ) =
dataraw ( t e x t c e l l s 2 ( 2 : end , : ) ) ;
147
148
headerraw = raw1 ( 1 , : ) ;
149
dataraw = raw1 ( 2 , : ) ;
150
GeneralDataSizes =
[ GeneralDataSizes ;
s i z e (
dataraw ) ] ;
151
152
GeneralDataHeader { i } =
c e l l ( headerraw ) ;
153
GeneralDataHeader { i }( t e x t c e l l s 1 ( 1 , : ) ) =
headerraw ( t e x t c e l l s 1 ( 1 , : ) ) ;
154
GeneralDataHeader { i } = repmat (
GeneralDataHeader { i } , TestDataSizes ( i , 1 ) , 1 )
;
155
156
GeneralDataVal { i } = nan ( s i z e ( dataraw ) ) ;
157
GeneralDataVal { i }( v a l c e l l s 1 ( 2 , : ) ) =
[ dataraw
{ v a l c e l l s 1 ( 2 , : ) } ] ;
158
GeneralDataVal { i } = repmat ( GeneralDataVal { i
} , TestDataSizes ( i , 1 ) , 1 ) ;
159
160
GeneralDataTxt{ i } =
c e l l ( s i z e ( dataraw ) ) ;
161
GeneralDataTxt{ i }( t e x t c e l l s 1 ( 2 , : ) ) = dataraw
( t e x t c e l l s 1 ( 2 , : ) ) ;
162
GeneralDataTxt{ i } = repmat ( GeneralDataTxt{ i
} , TestDataSizes ( i , 1 ) , 1 ) ;
163
164
xlsFileName { i } = repmat ( E x c e l P r o p e r t i e s ( i , 1 )
, TestDataSizes ( i , 1 ) , 1 ) ;
165
x l s S h e e t { i } = repmat ( E x c e l P r o p e r t i e s ( i , 2 ) ,
TestDataSizes ( i , 1 ) , 1 ) ;
166
167
end
168
169
dbraw . g e n e r a l . head = {};
170
dbraw . g e n e r a l . txt = {};
171
dbraw . g e n e r a l . val =
[ ] ;
172
173
dbraw . t e s t . head = {};
174
dbraw . t e s t . txt = {};
175
dbraw . t e s t . val =
[ ] ;
176
177
dbraw . xlsFileName = {};
178
dbraw . x l s S h e e t = {};
179
180
GeneralMaxRows = max( GeneralDataSizes ( : , 2 ) ) ;
181
TestMaxRows = max( TestDataSizes ( : , 2 ) ) ;
182
183
f o r
i
= 1 : s i z e ( E x c e l P r o p e r t i e s , 1 )
184
185
dbraw . g e n e r a l . head =
[ dbraw . g e n e r a l . head ; . . .
186
[ GeneralDataHeader { i }
c e l l ( TestDataSizes ( i
, 1 ) , GeneralMaxRows−GeneralDataSizes ( i , 2 ) )
] ] ;
187
dbraw . g e n e r a l . txt =
[ dbraw . g e n e r a l . txt ;
. . .
188
[ GeneralDataTxt{ i }
c e l l ( TestDataSizes ( i , 1 )
, GeneralMaxRows−GeneralDataSizes ( i , 2 ) ) ] ] ;
189
dbraw . g e n e r a l . val =
[ dbraw . g e n e r a l . val ;
. . .
190
[ GeneralDataVal { i }
nan ( TestDataSizes ( i , 1 ) ,
GeneralMaxRows−GeneralDataSizes ( i , 2 ) ) ] ] ;
191
192
dbraw . t e s t . head =
[ dbraw . t e s t . head ; . . .
193
[ TestDataHeader{ i }
c e l l ( TestDataSizes ( i , 1 )
, TestMaxRows−TestDataSizes ( i , 2 ) ) ] ] ;
194
dbraw . t e s t . txt =
[ dbraw . t e s t . txt ;
. . .
195
[ TestDataTxt{ i }
c e l l ( TestDataSizes ( i , 1 ) ,
TestMaxRows−TestDataSizes ( i , 2 ) ) ] ] ;
196
dbraw . t e s t . val =
[ dbraw . t e s t . val ;
. . .
197
[ TestDataVal{ i }
nan ( TestDataSizes ( i , 1 ) ,
TestMaxRows−TestDataSizes ( i , 2 ) ) ] ] ;
198
199
dbraw . xlsFileName =
[ dbraw . xlsFileName ;
xlsFileName { i } ] ;
200
dbraw . x l s S h e e t =
[ dbraw . x l s S h e e t ;
x l s S h e e t { i
} ] ;
201
202
end
203
204
f o r
i
= 1 : l e n g t h ( V a r i a b l e L i s t 1 )
205
206
dbraw =
s e t f i e l d ( dbraw , V a r i a b l e L i s t 1 { i } ,
s t r u c t ( ’ head ’ ,{ dbraw . g e n e r a l . head ( : , i )
} , . . .
207
’ txt ’ ,{ dbraw . g e n e r a l . txt ( : , i ) } , ’ val ’ ,{
dbraw . g e n e r a l . val ( : , i ) }) ) ;
208
209
end
210
211
f o r
i
= 1 : l e n g t h ( V a r i a b l e L i s t 2 )
212
213
dbraw =
s e t f i e l d ( dbraw , V a r i a b l e L i s t 2 { i } ,
s t r u c t ( ’ head ’ ,{ dbraw . t e s t . head ( : , i ) } , . . .
214
’ txt ’ ,{ dbraw . t e s t . txt ( : , i ) } , ’ val ’ ,{ dbraw
. t e s t . val ( : , i ) }) ) ;
215
216
end
217
218
wd = what ;
219
dbraw . WorkingDir = wd . path ;
123
==PAGE:140==
Calculating Pressure
1
f u n c t i o n
[ p f i r e d , mean p fired , p rep , theta ]=
p r e s s u r e ( . . .
2
m o t o r e d p r e s s u r e s i g n a l ,
f i r e d
p r e s s u r e
s i g n a l , r e s o l u t i o n e n c o d e r
, . . .
3
TDC shift , p atm , g ai n p ic k up )
4 % Input :
5
dim = l e n g t h ( m o t o r e d p r e s s u r e s i g n a l ) ;
6
n o c y c l e s
=
s i z e ( f i n d p e a k s (
m o t o r e d p r e s s u r e s i g n a l , ’MINPEAKDISTANCE ’
, . . .
7
1350) , 1 ) ;
8
dim data = dim/ n o c y c l e s ;
9
10 % Reshaping
data :
11
f i r e d
p r e s s u r e
s i g n a l
n e w=reshape (
f i r e d
p r e s s u r e
s i g n a l , dim/ n o c y c l e s , . . .
12
n o c y c l e s ) ;
13
m o t o r e d p r e s s u r e s i g n a l n e w=reshape (
m o t o r e d p r e s s u r e s i g n a l , dim / . . .
14
n o c y c l e s , n o c y c l e s ) ;
15
16 % Averaging
data :
17
mean fired=mean( f i r e d
p r e s s u r e
s i g n a l
n e w , 2 ) ;
18
mean motored=mean( m o t o r e d p r e s s u r e s i g n a l n e w
, 2 ) ;
19
20 % Finding
index ,
I ,
o f
maximum
value :
21
[C, I ]=max( mean motored ) ;
22 % Adding TDC
s h i f t :
23
I TDC=I+TDC shift / r e s o l u t i o n e n c o d e r ;
24
25
[ C f i r e , I
f i r e ]=max( mean fired ) ;
26
27 % Adjusting
i f
360
d e g r e e s
s h i f t
i s
p r e s e n t :
28
i f
I
f i r e >dim data /2
29
i f
abs ( I
f i r e −I TDC) >300 & mean fired (
I
f i r e )>mean fired ( I
f i r e −. . .
30
dim data /2) ;
31
I TDC=I TDC+720;
32
end
33
end
34
35 % Cutting
o f
data ,
i f
needed :
36
[M, L]=max( mean fired ) ;
37
38 A=z e r o s ( dim data , n o c y c l e s −1) ;
39
40
i f
L( 1 )<dim data /2
41
i f
abs (I TDC−I
f i r e )<dim data / 4 ;
42
f o r
i =1: n o c y c l e s −1
43
A( 1 : end , i )=f i r e d
p r e s s u r e
s i g n a l ( (
I TDC−dim data /2) + . . .
44
dim data ∗( i ) : ( I TDC+dim data
/2−1)+dim data ∗( i ) ) ;
45
Z=1;
46
end
47
e l s e
abs (I TDC−I
f i r e )>dim data / 4 ;
48
f o r
i =1: n o c y c l e s −1
49
A( 1 : end , i )=f i r e d
p r e s s u r e
s i g n a l ( (
I TDC−dim data )+dim data ∗. . .
50
( i ) : ( I TDC−1)+dim data ∗( i ) ) ;
51
Z=1;
52
end
53
end
54
e l s e
L( 1 )>dim data / 2 ;
55
f o r
i =1: n o c y c l e s −1
56
A( 1 : end , i )=f i r e d
p r e s s u r e
s i g n a l ( (
I TDC−dim data /2)+dim data ∗. . .
57
( i −1) : ( I TDC+dim data /2−1)+
dim data ∗( i −1) ) ;
58
Z=2;
59
end
60
end
61
62 % M ul tip ly in g
A with
gain
( bar /V)
to
obtain
p r e s s u r e :
63
p
f i r e d=A∗g ai n p ic ku p ;
64
65 % Adjusting
to
atmospheric
pressure ,
at
p o s i t i o n
j u s t
b e f o r e
low
p r e s s u r e
66 % TDC:
67
f o r
i =1: s i z e ( p f i r e d , 2 )
68
s h i f t=mean( p
f i r e d ( 1 : 5 , i ) )−p atm ;
69
p
f i r e d ( 1 : end , i )=p
f i r e d ( 1 : end , i )−s h i f t ;
70
end
71
72 % Averaging
p r e s s u r e s :
73
m e a n p f i r e d=mean( p f i r e d , 2 ) ;
74
75 % R e p r e s e n t a t i v e
c y c l e :
76
f o r
i =(1: n o c y c l e s −1)
77
Stnd dev ( i , 1 )
= sum ( ( m e a n p f i r e d ( : , 1 ) −
p
f i r e d ( : , i ) ) . ˆ 2 ) / . . .
78
( dim data −1) ;
79
end
80
81
best cy cle nu mber =
f i n d ( Stnd dev == min (
Stnd dev ) ) ;
82
p rep =
p
f i r e d ( : , b est cy cle nu mber ) ;
83
84 % Creating
theta
v e c t o r :
85
theta=t r a n s p o s e ( l i n s p a c e ( −360 ,359.5 , dim data ) )
;
86
87 % C a l c u l a t i n g
volume
as
f u n c t i o n
o f CAD ( theta
) :
88 B=(82.6) ∗10ˆ( −3) ;
%Cylinder
bore
[m]
89
L=254∗10ˆ(−3) ;
%Connecting
rod
l e n g t h
[m]
90
S=114.3∗10ˆ( −3) ;
%Stroke
[m]
91 R=S / 2 ;
%Crank
s h a f t
arm
[
m]
92
e p s i l o n =7;
%Compression
r a t i o
[ −]
93
V d=pi ∗Bˆ2/4∗S ;
%Displacement
volume
[mˆ 3 ]
94
V c=V d /( e p s i l o n −1) ;
%Compression
volume
[mˆ 3 ]
95
96
f o r
i =1: dim data
97
V( i )=V c+pi ∗Bˆ2/4∗(R∗(1−cosd ( theta ( i ) ) )+R
ˆ2/(2∗L) ∗sind ( theta ( i ) ) ˆ2) ;
98
end
124
==PAGE:141==
Calculating AHRR, AHR and MEP’s
1
f u n c t i o n
[ imep , pmep ,V,AHRR,AHR,T]= motorspecs (
theta , mean p fired , S , B, L , . . .
2
e p s i l o n , T intake , lambda ) %AHR s u b s t i t u t e d
with
AHR new
3
dim data=s i z e ( mean p fired , 1 ) ;
%Dimension
o f
data
4
mean p fired Pa=m e a n p f i r e d ∗100000;
%
Pressure
in
Pa
5
I TDC=dim data / 2 ;
%Index
o f TDC
6
7 R=S / 2 ;
%Crank
s h a f t
arm
[
m]
8
V d=pi ∗Bˆ2/4∗S ;
%Displacement
volume
[mˆ 3 ]
9
V c=V d /( e p s i l o n −1) ;
%Compression
volume
[mˆ 3 ]
10
11 % C a l c u l a t i n g
volume
as
a
f u n c t i o n
o f
theta :
12
f o r
i =1: s i z e ( theta , 1 )
13
V( i , 1 )=V c+pi ∗Bˆ2/4∗(R∗(1−cosd ( theta ( i ) ) )+
Rˆ2/(2∗L) ∗sind ( theta ( i ) ) ˆ2) ;
14
end
15
16 % C a l c u l a t i n g
the
in−c y l i n d e r
mean
gas
temperature :
17 T=mean p fired Pa . ∗V/(mean( mean p fired Pa (
I TDC−I TDC/2 −10:I TDC−I TDC / . . .
18
2+10) . ∗V(I TDC−I TDC/2 −10:I TDC−I TDC
/2+10) ) / T intake ) ;
19
20 % C a l c u l a t i n g
imep :
21
i=theta >−180 & theta <180;
22
W i tot=sum( mean p fired Pa ( i ) . ∗g r a d i e n t (V( i ) )
) ;
23
imep=( W i tot /V d ) /1000;
%
imep
in
( kPa )
24
25 % C a l c u l a t i n g
pmep :
26
i=theta <−180
|
theta >180;
27
W pmep=sum( mean p fired Pa ( i ) . ∗g r a d i e n t (V( i ) ) )
;
28
pmep=(W pmep/V d ) /1000;
%
pmep
in
( kPa )
29
30 % C a l c u l a t i n g
apparent
heat
r e l e a s e
r a t e
(AHRR
) :
31
dVdtheta=g r a d i e n t (V) . / g r a d i e n t ( theta ) ;
32
dpdtheta=g r a d i e n t ( mean p fired Pa ) . / g r a d i e n t (
theta ) ;
33
g r a d t h e t a=g r a d i e n t ( theta ) ;
%
Finding
g r a d i e n t
o f
theta
34 % AHRR
i s
in
[ J/CAD] :
35 AHRR=z e r o s ( s i z e ( theta , 1 ) , 1 ) ;
36
f o r
i =1: s i z e ( dVdtheta , 1 )
37 AHRR( i )=(lambda /( lambda −1)∗mean p fired Pa ( i ) ∗
dVdtheta ( i ) +1/(lambda −1) ∗. . .
38
V( i ) ∗dpdtheta ( i ) ) ; % Normally
lambda
i s
c a l l e d
gamma !
39
end
40
41 % C a l c u l a t e
apparent
heat
r e l e a s e
(AHR) ,
c o r r e c t e d
with
g r a d i e n t
o f
theta :
42 AHR=cumsum(AHRR( : ) ) ∗g r a d t h e t a ( 1 ) ;
43
44 % Finding
min−and max−value
to
determine
l o c a t i o n
f o r
heat
r e l e a s e :
45
[ Vmin , Lmin]=min (AHR(I TDC/2 −100:I TDC/2+50) ) ;
46
Lmin=Lmin+I TDC/2 −100;
47
[ Vmax, Lmax]=max(AHR) ;
48
49 % The
apparent
heat
r e l e a s e
from
min
to
max ,
with
o f f s e t :
50
AHR new=z e r o s ( s i z e ( theta , 1 ) , 1 ) ;
51
AHR new( Lmin : Lmax)=AHR( Lmin : Lmax)−Vmin ;
52
53
end
125
==PAGE:142==
Calculating Knocking
1
c l e a r
a l l ;
c l o s e
a l l ;
c l c ;
2
e n g i n e d a t a t r i a l c o m b d u r
3
4
passbands = [ 0
1500
1
1 ] ;
% passband
f o r
f i l t e r i n g
5
tbw=500; % T r a n s i t i o n
band
width
6
f o r
i =1:db . t o t a l t e s t s
7
i f
˜ isempty ( dbraw . p r e s s u r e
f i l e . txt { i })
8
f o r
O=1:19
9
dbraw . time new ( : ,O, i )=l i n s p a c e
(0 ,2∗60/ db .N( i ) ,1440) ;
10
end
11
dbraw . p
r e p
f i l t ( : , : , i )=f f t B P f i l t e r (
dbraw . time new ( : , : , i ) , db . p
f i r e d ( : , : , i ) ,
passbands , tbw , ’ p l o t
o f f ’ ) ;
12
end
13
end
14
15
f o r
i =13:db . t o t a l t e s t s
16
17
i f
db . i g n t i m i n g ( i )==0
18
i n t e r v a l
= 720 −10:720+129;
19
e l s e i f
db . i g n t i m i n g ( i )==3
20
i n t e r v a l
= 720 −15:720+124;
21
e l s e i f
db . i g n t i m i n g ( i )==5
22
i n t e r v a l
= 720 −16:720+123;
23
e l s e i f
db . i g n t i m i n g ( i )==8
24
i n t e r v a l
= 720 −17:720+122;
25
e l s e i f
db . i g n t i m i n g ( i )==10
26
i n t e r v a l
= 720 −20:720+119;
27
e l s e i f
db . i g n t i m i n g ( i )==12
28
i n t e r v a l
= 720 −25:720+114;
29
e l s e i f
db . i g n t i m i n g ( i )==15
30
i n t e r v a l
= 720 −30:720+109;
31
e l s e i f
db . i g n t i m i n g ( i )==20
32
i n t e r v a l
= 720 −40:720+99;
33
e l s e i f
db . i g n t i m i n g ( i )==25
34
i n t e r v a l =720 −50:720+89;
35
e l s e i f
db . i g n t i m i n g ( i )==30
36
i n t e r v a l =720 −60:720+79;
37
e l s e i f
db . i g n t i m i n g ( i )==35
38
i n t e r v a l =720 −70:720+69;
39
e l s e i f
db . i g n t i m i n g ( i )==40
40
i n t e r v a l =720 −80:720+59;
41
e l s e
42
i n t e r v a l
= 720 −40:720+99;
43
end
44
% i n t e r v a l
=
1 : 1 4 4 0 ;
45
p ( : , : , i )=db . p
f i r e d ( i n t e r v a l , : , i )−dbraw .
p
r e p
f i l t ( i n t e r v a l , : , i ) ;
46
fsample=db .N(55) ∗360∗2/60;
% Sample
frequency
47
[ f , f f t p ( : , : , i ) ]
= FFTanalyze ( p ( : , : , i ) ,
fsample ) ;
48
end
49
50
fftp mean = mean( f f t p ( : , : , : ) , 2 ) ;
51
52
f o r
i 1 =1:db . t o t a l t e s t s
53
i f
max( fftp mean ( 5 0 0 : 1 8 5 0 , : , i 1 ) ) >0.035
54
knock ( i 1 ) =1;
55
e l s e
56
knock ( i 1 ) =0;
57
end
58
end
59 %%
60 % i =16
61 % f i g u r e ( 1 ) ;
c l f ;
62 % subplot ( 2 , 1 , 1 ) ;
63 % s e t ( gca , ’ FontSize ’ ,
16)
64 % p l o t ( f /1000 , f f t p ( : , : , i ) )
65 % x l a b e l ( ’ Frequency
[ kHz ] ’ , ’ i n t e r p r e t e r ’ , ’
latex ’ )
66 % %y l a b e l ( ’ Peak
to
Peak Amp.
o f
Spectra
[ Bar
] ’ , ’ i n t e r p r e t e r ’ , ’ latex ’ )
67 % y l a b e l ( ’ Peak
to
Peak ’ , ’ i n t e r p r e t e r ’ , ’ latex ’ )
68 % g r i d
69 % xlim ( [ 0
6 ] )
70 % ylim ( [ 0
0 . 4 ] )
71 % %PlotToFileColorPDF ( gcf , s p r i n t f ( ’
f r e q u e n c y
g a s o l i n e
i g n
t i m%i CR%i
a l l ’ , db .
i g n t i m i n g ( i ) , db .CR( i ) ) ,1 6 ,11 )
72 %
73 % %f i g u r e ( 1 ) ; c l f ;
74 % subplot ( 2 , 1 , 2 ) ;
75 % s e t ( gca , ’ FontSize ’ ,
16)
76 % p l o t ( f /1000 , fftp mean ( : , : , i ) )
77 % x l a b e l ( ’ Frequency
[ kHz ] ’ , ’ i n t e r p r e t e r ’ , ’
latex ’ )
78 % %y l a b e l ( ’Av .
Peak
to
Peak Amp.
o f
Spectra
[
Bar ] ’ , ’ i n t e r p r e t e r ’ , ’ latex ’ )
79 % g r i d
80 % xlim ( [ 0
6 ] )
81 % ylim ( [ 0
0 . 2 ] )
82 % PlotToFileColorPDF ( gcf , s p r i n t f ( ’
f r e q u e n c y
g a s o l i n e
i g n
t i m%i CR%i both ’ , db
. i g n t i m i n g ( i ) , db .CR( i ) ) ,2 0 ,15 )
83 % %PlotToFileColorPDF ( gcf , s p r i n t f ( ’
f r e q u e n c y
g a s o l i n e
i g n
t i m%i CR%i mean ’ , db
. i g n t i m i n g ( i ) , db .CR( i ) ) ,1 6 ,11 )
84 % h=f i g u r e ( 2 ) ;
85 % p l o t ( f /1000 , f f t p ( : , : , i ) , ’ b ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ , 2 )
86 % s e t ( gca , ’ FontSize ’ ,
16)
87 % %legend ( ’ Pressure
[ bar ] ’ )
88 % x l a b e l ( ’ Frequency
[ kHz ] ’ , ’ i n t e r p r e t e r ’ , ’
latex ’ )
89 % y l a b e l ( ’ Peak
to
peak
amplitude
o f
the
s p e c t r a
[ Bar ] ’ , ’ i n t e r p r e t e r ’ , ’ latex ’ )
90 % %legend ( ’N=1750 ,
\lambda =6 ’ , ’N=900 ,
\lambda
=6 ’ , ’N=1300 ,
\lambda =6 ’ , ’N=1750 ,
\lambda
=12 ’ , ’N=900 ,
\lambda =12 ’ , ’N=1300 ,
\lambda
=12 ’ , ’ Location ’ , ’ SouthWest ’ )
91 % hold
o f f
92 %
93 % h=f i g u r e ( 3 ) ;
94 % p l o t ( f /1000 , fftp mean ( : , : , i ) , ’ b ’ , ’ LineWidth
’ , 2 )
95 % s e t ( gca , ’ FontSize ’ ,
16)
96 % %legend ( ’ Pressure
[ bar ] ’ )
97 % x l a b e l ( ’ Frequency
[ kHz ] ’ , ’ i n t e r p r e t e r ’ , ’
latex ’ )
98 % y l a b e l ( ’ Peak
to
peak
amplitude
o f
the
s p e c t r a
[ Bar ] ’ , ’ i n t e r p r e t e r ’ , ’ latex ’ )
99 % %legend ( ’N=1750 ,
\lambda =6 ’ , ’N=900 ,
\lambda
=6 ’ , ’N=1300 ,
\lambda =6 ’ , ’N=1750 ,
\lambda
=12 ’ , ’N=900 ,
\lambda =12 ’ , ’N=1300 ,
\lambda
=12 ’ , ’ Location ’ , ’ SouthWest ’ )
100 % hold
o f f
101
102 %% P l o t t i n g
knocking
l i n e :
103 CR = db .CR;
104
i g n t i m i n g = db . i g n t i m i n g ;
105
106
i n d e x 5 0 5 0=strcmp ( dbraw . Fuel . txt , ’ 50 p e r 5 0 p e r
’ )&dbraw . Knock . val ==1; %I n d i c e s
with
50/50
as
f u e l
107
i n d e x 5 0 5 0=f i n d ( i n d e x 5 0 5 0==1)
108
109
i n d e x 4 8 4 8 4=strcmp ( dbraw . Fuel . txt , ’ 48
p e r 4 8 p e r 4 p e r ’ )&dbraw . Knock . val ==1; %
I n d i c e s
with
4 8 . 7 5 / 4 8 . 7 5 / 2 . 5
as
f u e l
110
i n d e x 4 8 4 8 4=f i n d ( i n d e x 4 8 4 8 4 ==1)
111
112
index mix wo NH3=strcmp ( dbraw . Fuel . txt , ’
mix wo ammonia ’ )&dbraw . Knock . val ==1; %
I n d i c e s
with
mix w.
ammonia
as
f u e l
113
index mix wo NH3=f i n d ( index mix wo NH3==1)
114
115
index mix w NH3=strcmp ( dbraw . Fuel . txt , ’
mix w ammonia ’ )&dbraw . Knock . val ==1; %
I n d i c e s
with
mix w.
ammonia
as
f u e l
116
index mix w NH3=f i n d ( index mix w NH3==1)
117
118
i n d e x g a s o l i n e=strcmp ( dbraw . Fuel . txt , ’ g a s o l i n e
’ )&dbraw . Knock . val ==1; %I n d i c e s
with
g a s o l i n e
as
f u e l
119
i n d e x g a s o l i n e=f i n d ( i n d e x g a s o l i n e ==1)
120
121
i n d e x e t h a n o l=strcmp ( dbraw . Fuel . txt , ’ ethanol ’ )
&dbraw . Knock . val ==1; %I n d i c e s
with
ethanol
and
ammonia
as
f u e l
122
i n d e x e t h a n o l=f i n d ( i n d e x e t h a n o l ==1)
123
124
index ethanol ammonia=strcmp ( dbraw . Fuel . txt , ’
ethanol ammonia ’ )&dbraw . Knock . val ==1; %
I n d i c e s
with
ethanol
and
ammonia
as
f u e l
125
index ethanol ammonia=f i n d (
index ethanol ammonia==1)
126
127
CR 50 50 =
[CR( i n d e x 5 0 5 0 ( 2 ) ) CR( i n d e x 5 0 5 0
( 1 ) ) CR( i n d e x 5 0 5 0 ( 3 ) ) CR( i n d e x 5 0 5 0 ( 4 ) )
CR( i n d e x 5 0 5 0 ( 5 ) ) ] ;
128
i g n k n o c k 5 0 5 0 = [−i g n t i m i n g ( i n d e x 5 0 5 0 ( 2 ) )
−i g n t i m i n g ( i n d e x 5 0 5 0 ( 1 ) ) −i g n t i m i n g (
i n d e x 5 0 5 0 ( 3 ) ) −i g n t i m i n g ( i n d e x 5 0 5 0 ( 4 )
) −i g n t i m i n g ( i n d e x 5 0 5 0 ( 5 ) ) ] ;
129
130
CR 48 48 4 =
[CR( i n d e x 4 8 4 8 4 ( 1 ) ) CR(
i n d e x 4 8 4 8 4 ( 2 ) ) CR( i n d e x 4 8 4 8 4 ( 3 ) ) CR(
i n d e x 4 8 4 8 4 ( 4 ) ) CR( i n d e x 4 8 4 8 4 ( 5 ) ) ] ;
131
i g n k n o c k 4 8 4 8 4 = [−i g n t i m i n g ( i n d e x 4 8 4 8 4
126
==PAGE:143==
( 1 ) ) −i g n t i m i n g ( i n d e x 4 8 4 8 4 ( 2 ) ) −
i g n t i m i n g ( i n d e x 4 8 4 8 4 ( 3 ) ) −i g n t i m i n g (
i n d e x 4 8 4 8 4 ( 4 ) ) −i g n t i m i n g (
i n d e x 4 8 4 8 4 ( 5 ) ) ] ;
132
133
CR mix w NH3 =
[CR( index mix w NH3 ( 1 ) ) CR(
index mix w NH3 ( 2 ) ) CR( index mix w NH3 ( 3 ) )
9 . 5 ] ;
134
ign knock mix w NH3 = [−i g n t i m i n g (
index mix w NH3 ( 1 ) ) −i g n t i m i n g (
index mix w NH3 ( 2 ) ) −i g n t i m i n g (
index mix w NH3 ( 3 ) )
−6.5];
135
136
CR mix wo NH3 =
[CR( index mix wo NH3 ( 4 ) ) CR(
index mix wo NH3 ( 3 ) ) CR( index mix wo NH3
( 2 ) )
9 CR( index mix wo NH3 ( 1 ) ) ] ;
137
ign knock mix wo NH3 = [−i g n t i m i n g (
index mix wo NH3 ( 4 ) ) −i g n t i m i n g (
index mix wo NH3 ( 3 ) ) −i g n t i m i n g (
index mix wo NH3 ( 2 ) )
−6.5 −i g n t i m i n g (
index mix wo NH3 ( 1 ) ) ] ;
138
139
CR gasoline =
[CR( i n d e x g a s o l i n e ( 1 ) ) CR(
i n d e x g a s o l i n e ( 2 ) ) CR( i n d e x g a s o l i n e ( 3 ) )
CR( i n d e x g a s o l i n e ( 4 ) ) ] ;
140
i g n k n o c k g a s o l i n e
= [−i g n t i m i n g (
i n d e x g a s o l i n e ( 1 ) ) −i g n t i m i n g (
i n d e x g a s o l i n e ( 2 ) ) −i g n t i m i n g (
i n d e x g a s o l i n e ( 3 ) ) −i g n t i m i n g (
i n d e x g a s o l i n e ( 4 ) ) ] ;
141
142 %CR ethanol =
[CR( i n d e x e t h a n o l ( 1 ) ) CR(
i n d e x e t h a n o l ( 2 ) ) CR( i n d e x e t h a n o l ( 3 ) ) CR(
i n d e x e t h a n o l ( 4 ) ) CR( i n d e x e t h a n o l ( 6 ) ) CR(
i n d e x e t h a n o l ( 5 ) ) ] ;
143 %i g n k n o c k e t h a n o l = [−i g n t i m i n g (
i n d e x e t h a n o l ( 1 ) ) −i g n t i m i n g (
i n d e x e t h a n o l ( 2 ) ) −i g n t i m i n g (
i n d e x e t h a n o l ( 3 ) ) −i g n t i m i n g (
i n d e x e t h a n o l ( 4 ) ) −i g n t i m i n g (
i n d e x e t h a n o l ( 6 ) ) −i g n t i m i n g (
i n d e x e t h a n o l ( 5 ) ) ] ;
144
145
CR ethanol = [ 9
9 . 5
10
10.5
11
11.5
12
1 2 . 5 ] ;
146 %i g n k n o c k e t h a n o l = [ −17.5
−15 −12 −10 −8
−7.5 −6
−5];
147
i g n k n o c k e t h a n o l = [−15
−15 −10
−7.5 −7 −6 −6
−5];
148
149
CR eth amm =
[CR( index ethanol ammonia ( 1 ) ) CR(
index ethanol ammonia ( 2 ) ) CR(
index ethanol ammonia ( 3 ) ) CR(
index ethanol ammonia ( 4 ) ) CR(
index ethanol ammonia ( 6 ) ) CR(
index ethanol ammonia ( 5 ) ) ] ;
150
ign knock eth amm = [−i g n t i m i n g (
index ethanol ammonia ( 1 ) ) −i g n t i m i n g (
index ethanol ammonia ( 2 ) ) −i g n t i m i n g (
index ethanol ammonia ( 3 ) ) −i g n t i m i n g (
index ethanol ammonia ( 4 ) ) −i g n t i m i n g (
index ethanol ammonia ( 6 ) ) −i g n t i m i n g (
index ethanol ammonia ( 5 ) ) ] ;
151 %%
152
f i g u r e ( 1 ) ;
c l f ;
153
s e t ( gca , ’ FontSize ’ ,
16)
154
t1 = p l o t ( ign knock 50 50 , CR 50 50 , ’ rs−’ , ’
MarkerSize ’ ,7 , ’ MarkerFaceColor ’ , ’ r ’ ) ;
155
hold
on ;
156
t2 = p l o t ( i g n k n o c k 4 8 4 8 4 , CR 48 48 4 , ’ go−’ , ’
MarkerSize ’ ,7 , ’ MarkerFaceColor ’ , ’ g ’ ) ;
157
t3 = p l o t ( ign knock mix wo NH3 , CR mix wo NH3 , ’
b∗−’ , ’ MarkerSize ’ ,7 , ’ MarkerFaceColor ’ , ’ b ’ )
;
158
t4 = p l o t ( ign knock mix w NH3 , CR mix w NH3 , ’ kd
−’ , ’ MarkerSize ’ ,7 , ’ MarkerFaceColor ’ , ’ k ’ ) ;
159
t5 = p l o t ( i g n k n o c k g a s o l i n e , CR gasoline , ’m<−’
, ’ MarkerSize ’ ,7 , ’ MarkerFaceColor ’ , ’m’ ) ;
160
t6 = p l o t ( i g n k n o c k e t h a n o l , CR ethanol , ’ yv−’ , ’
MarkerSize ’ ,7 , ’ Color ’ , [ 1 , 0 . 5 , 0 ] , ’
MarkerFaceColor ’ , [ 1 , 0 . 5 , 0 ] ) ;
161
t7 = p l o t ( ign knock eth amm , CR eth amm , ’ c>−’ , ’
MarkerSize ’ ,7 , ’ MarkerFaceColor ’ , ’ c ’ ) ;
162
hold
o f f ;
163
g r i d
164
ylim ( [ 6 . 5
1 3 ] )
165
xlim ([ −40
0 ] )
166 %t i t l e ( ’ Unstructured
mesh ’ )
167
x l a b e l ( ’ I g n i t i o n
Timing
[ $ˆ\ c i r c $ ] ’ , ’
i n t e r p r e t e r ’ , ’ l a t e x ’ )
168
y l a b e l ( ’ Compression
Ratio
[ −] ’ , ’ i n t e r p r e t e r ’ , ’
l a t e x ’ )
169
legend ( [ t1 , t2 , t3 , t4 , t5 , t6 , t7 ] , { s p r i n t f ( ’ Mix
no
.
7 ’ ) , s p r i n t f ( ’ Mix
no .
8 ’ ) , s p r i n t f ( ’ Mix
no
.
9 ’ ) , s p r i n t f ( ’ Mix
no .
10 ’ ) , s p r i n t f ( ’ Mix
no .
11 ’ ) , s p r i n t f ( ’ Mix
no .
12 ’ ) , s p r i n t f ( ’
Mix
no .
13 ’ ) } , ’ Location ’ , ’ NorthWest ’ )
170
PlotToFileColorPDF ( gcf , s p r i n t f ( ’ CR ign timing ’
) ,16 , 11)
171
172
f i g u r e ( 4 )
173
s e t ( gca , ’ FontSize ’ ,
16)
174
t1 = p l o t ( knock , ’ rs−’ , ’ MarkerSize ’ ,5 , ’
MarkerFaceColor ’ , ’ r ’ ) ;
175 %%
176
f i g u r e ( 5 )
177
s e t ( gca , ’ FontSize ’ ,
16)
178
p l o t ( f /1000 , fftp mean ( : , : , 1 8 6 ) , f /1000 ,
fftp mean ( : , : , 1 8 7 ) , f /1000 , fftp mean
( : , : , 1 8 8 ) )
127
==PAGE:144==
FFT Analysis
1
f u n c t i o n
f i l t s i g n a l
=
f f t B P f i l t e r ( time , s i g n a l ,
bandpasses , bw , p l o t f l a g )
2 % Written
by
Anders
I v a r s s o n
3 % time :
Column
v e c t o r
were
each
element
contain
a
time
[ s ]
that
4 %
correspond
to
elemnts
in
the
s i g n a l
v e c t o r .
Also
i f
the
5 %
s i g n a l
i s
multidimensional
array ,
the
time
has
to
a
s i n g l e
6 %
column
v e c t o r
that
a p p l i e s
to
a l l
the
s i g n a l
columns .
7 %
8 % s i g n a l :
Column
v e c t o r
with
even
number
o f
elements
c o n t a i n i n g
the
9 %
s i g n a l
to
be
p r o c e s s e d .
The
s i g n a l
may
a l s o
be
two
or
t h r e e
10 %
dimensional
a r r a y s
but
then
the
f i l t e r i n g
w i l l
be
performed
11 %
columnwise .
12 %
13 % bandpasses :
Matrix
with
4
columns
and
a
number
o f
rows
correspond ing
to
14 %
the
number
bandpasses
to
be
used
.
Each
row
d e f i n e s
a
bandpass
15 %
by
f i r s t
and
second
element
being
the
lower
and
upper
band
16 %
f r e q u e n c i e s
[ Hz ] .
Third
and
f o u r t h
element
d e f i n e s
the
17 %
p a s s f a c t o r s
( between
0
and
1)
at
lower
and
upper
band
18 %
f r e q u e n c i e s .
P a s s f a c t o r s
between
the
band
l i m i t s
w i l l
be
19 %
i n t e r p o l a t e d
l i n e a r l y .
20 %
21 % bw :
Bandwidth
[ Hz ]
o f
the
f i l t e r
k e r n e l
as
w e l l
as
the
bandwidth
22 %
o f
the
t r a n s i t i o n s
in
the
frequency
respons .
The
t r a n s i t i o n
23 %
bandwidth
w i l l
be
s y m e t r i c a l
around
the
s p e c i f i e d
bandpass
24 %
l i m i t .
25 %
26 % p l o t f l a g :
Options :
’ plot on ’
or
’ p l o t
o f f
’ .
Determines
whether
or
not
27 %
p l o t s
that
show
the
f i l t e r
performance
w i l l
be
generated .
28 %
The
p l o t
option
w i l l
only
d i s p l a y
the
f i l t e r p e r f o r m a n c e
o f
29 %
the
s i g n a l
in
the
f i r s t
column
i f
a
multidimensional
s i g n a l
30 %
array
i s
used .
31
32
L =
s i z e ( s i g n a l , 1 ) ;
33
i f
round (L/2)
˜= L/2
34
e r r o r ( ’ The
s i g n a l
must
have
an
even
number
o f
elements ’ )
35
end
36
fmax = (L/2) / d i f f ( time ( [ 1 , end ] ) ) ;
37 M = 2∗round (2/(bw/(2∗fmax ) ) ) ;
38
i f M > L
39
M = L ;
40
end
41
f
=
[ 0 : L/2 −1] ’/ d i f f ( time ( [ 1 , end ] ) ) ;
42
43 KERNEL = z e r o s (L/2 ,1) ;
44
f o r
i
=
1 : l e n g t h ( bandpasses ( : , 1 ) )
45
index =
f >= bandpasses ( i , 1 )
&
f <
bandpasses ( i , 2 ) ;
46
KERNEL( index ) = i n t e r p 1 ( [ 1
f i n d ( index , 1 , ’
l a s t ’ ) ] ’ , bandpasses ( i , 3 : 4 ) ’ , f i n d ( index ) ’ , ’
l i n e a r ’ ) ;
47
end
48 KERNEL =
[KERNEL;
KERNEL( end : −1:1) ] ;
49 KERNEL = KERNEL +
j ∗KERNEL;
50
51
k e r n e l =
r e a l ( i f f t (KERNEL) ) ;
52
black = blackman (M) ;
53
black =
[ black (M/2+1: end ) ;
z e r o s (L−M, 1 ) ;
black
( 1 :M/2) ] ;
54
k e r n e l = k e r n e l . ∗black ;
55
56 KERNEL =
f f t ( k e r n e l ) ;
57
58
i f
0
59
k e r n e l 2 =
i f f t (KERNEL. ˆ 2 ) ;
60 KERNEL2 =
f f t ( k e r n e l 2 ) ;
61
k e r n e l = k e r n e l 2 ;
62
end
63
64
KERNELlong =
f f t ( [ k e r n e l ( 1 : L/2) ;
z e r o s (2∗M, 1 ) ;
k e r n e l (L/2+1: end ) ] ) ;
65
KERNELlong = repmat (KERNELlong , [ 1 , s i z e ( s i g n a l
, 2 ) , s i z e ( s i g n a l , 3 ) ] ) ;
66
s i g n a l l o n g
=
[ repmat ( s i g n a l ( 1 , : , : ) , [M, 1 , 1 ] ) ;
s i g n a l ;
repmat ( s i g n a l (L , : , : ) , [M, 1 , 1 ] ) ] ;
67
i
s i g n a l
=
l o g i c a l ( [ z e r o s (M, s i z e ( s i g n a l , 2 ) ,
s i z e ( s i g n a l , 3 ) ) ;
ones ( s i z e ( s i g n a l ) ) ;
z e r o s
(M, s i z e ( s i g n a l , 2 ) , s i z e ( s i g n a l , 3 ) ) ] ) ;
68
69
70
f f t s i g n a l l o n g
=
f f t ( s i g n a l l o n g ) ;
71
f i l t s i g n a l l o n g
=
i f f t ( f f t s i g n a l l o n g . ∗
KERNELlong) ;
72
f i l t s i g n a l
= z e r o s ( s i z e ( s i g n a l ) ) ;
73
f i l t s i g n a l ( : )
=
f i l t s i g n a l l o n g ( i
s i g n a l ) ;
74
75
i f
strcmp ( p l o t f l a g , ’ p l o t o n ’ )
76
77
f i g u r e
78
p l o t ( f , abs (KERNEL( 1 : L/2) ) )
79 % p l o t ( f , abs (KERNEL( 1 : L/2) ) , ’−b ’ , f , abs (KERNEL2
( 1 : L/2) ) , ’ −r ’ )
80
t i t l e ( ’ Frequency
res po nse
o f
f i l t e r
k e r n e l ’ )
81
x l a b e l ( ’ Frequency
[ Hz ] ’ )
82
y l a b e l ( ’ Normalized
amplitude ’ )
83
84
b e f o r e = 2∗abs ( f f t ( s i g n a l ( 1 : L) ) /L) ;
85
a f t e r
= 2∗abs ( f f t ( f i l t s i g n a l ( 1 : L) ) /L) ;
86
f i g u r e
87
p l o t ( f , b e f o r e ( 1 : L/2) , ’−k ’ , f , a f t e r ( 1 : L/2) , ’−r
’ )
88
legend ({ ’ U n f i l t e r e d ’ , ’ F i l t e r e d ’ })
89
t i t l e ( ’ S i n g l e
s i d e d
amplitude
spectrum
o f
s i g n a l
b e f o r e
and
a f t e r
f i l t e r i n g ’ )
90
x l a b e l ( ’ Frequency
[ Hz ] ’ )
91
y l a b e l ( ’ Amplitude
[ Same
u n i t s
as
i n g o i n g
s i g n a l ] ’ )
92
xlim ( [ 0
f ( end ) ] )
93
maxy = 10∗max(mean( b e f o r e ) ,mean( a f t e r ) ) ;
94
ylim ([ −0.01∗maxy
1.2∗maxy ] )
95
96
f i g u r e
97
p l o t ( time , s i g n a l ( 1 : L) , ’−b ’ , time , f i l t s i g n a l
( 1 : L) , ’−r ’ )
98
t i t l e ( ’ S i g n a l
in
time
domain
b e f o r e
and
a f t e r
f i l t e r i n g ’ )
99
legend ({ ’ U n f i l t e r e d ’ , ’ F i l t e r e d ’ })
100
x l a b e l ( ’ Time
[ s ] ’ )
101
y l a b e l ( ’ S i g n a l
u n i t s ’ )
102
103
end
1
f u n c t i o n
[ f , f f t p ]
= FFTanalyze (p , fsample )
2 % Written
by
Anders
I v a r s s o n
3 % FFT
a n a l y s i s
o f
c y l i n d e r
p r e s s u r e
curves
( or
other
s i g n a l s ) .
4 %
5 % p :
v e c t o r
or
matrix
with
collumnwise
p r e s s u r e
data .
6 % fsample :
sample
frequency
in
1/ s
7 % f :
f r e q u e n c i e s
o f
the
s p e c t r a
in
Hz .
8 %
f f t p :
peak
to
peak
amplitude
o f
the
s p e c t r a
with
same
u n i t s
as
p .
9 %
10
11
[ L ,W]
=
s i z e ( p ) ;
12 hamm = repmat ( blackman (L , ’ p e r i o d i c ’ ) , [ 1 W] ) ;
13
p = hamm. ∗p ;
14
15 NFFT = 2ˆ( nextpow2 (L) +4) ; % Next
power
o f
2
from
l e n g t h
o f
y
16
f f t p
=
f f t (p ,NFFT) /L ;
17
f f t p
= 4∗abs ( f f t p ( 1 :NFFT/ 2 , : ) ) ;
18
f
= fsample /2∗l i n s p a c e ( 0 , 1 ,NFFT/2) ’ ;
128
