==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Coupling of Weather Forecasts and Smart 
Grid Control of Wastewater Flow to Kolding 
Central WWTP 
 
 
 
Master Thesis 
Julie Evald Bjerg, s093196 
Department of Environmental Engeneering 
Technical University of Denmark 
July 2015 
 
==PAGE:2==
 
2
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
 
I
Preface 
This report constitutes the completion of the Master Degree in Environmental Engineering from the 
Technical University of Denmark. The study that formed the basis for this report was conducted in the 
period of 29th January – 20th July 2015 by master student Julie Evald Bjerg (s093196). The report 
represents a workload of 30 ECTS credits and was conducted in cooperation with the department of 
Environmental Engineering (DTU Environment) and Krüger A/S. The project was supervised by 
Assistant Professor at DTU Environment, Luca Vezzaro, Professor at DTU Environment, Peter Steen 
Mikkelsen and Innovation Manager at Krüger A/S, Morten Grum.   
 
 
Julie Evald Bjerg, s093196 
July 20th, 2015 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
 
II 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
 
III 
Acknowledgement  
I would like to thank my supervisors; Luca Vezzaro, Peter Steen Mikkelsen and Morten Grum for their 
great help and guidance throughout this project.   
Thanks to Krüger A/S for providing me with a workstation and allowing me to take part in the present 
project. Especially thanks to the team at Krüger A/S working with the implementation of Smart Grid 
control in Kolding for involving me in meetings and shearing data and results with me. 
A great thanks to Blue Kolding (formerly known as Kolding Spildevand A/S) for allowing me to use 
them in my case study and for providing essential information for the study.  
Further more I would like to thank PhD student at DTU Environment, Vianney Augustin Thomas 
Courdent for providing numerical weather predictions for the area of Kolding and for shearing his 
knowledge and experience with regards to weather predictions.   
More over I thank Industrial Postdoc at DTU Compute, Rasmus Fogtmann Halvgaard for his aid in the 
understanding of electricity trading and the intricate power markets. 
Also a big thanks to Senior Process Engineer at Krüger A/S, Jan Pedersen for sharing his great 
knowledge within the field of wastewater treatment and practices at wastewater treatment plants.    
Lastly I would like to thank Pernille Rehné Jensen and Caroline Poulsen Lunn for proofreading this 
report and to Troels Vang Jørgensen for his great support throughout this project.  
 
 
==PAGE:6==
 
IV 
 
 
==PAGE:7==
 
V 
Abstract 
The increasing focus on renewable energy sources has caused many countries to initiate a shift to a 
more intelligent and flexible electricity system – the Smart Grid. This makes it possible to take 
advantage of the fluctuation in electricity prices and optimize the electricity consumption accordingly.  
In this study four strategies for control of the wastewater flow to Kolding Central wastewater 
treatment plant are investigated. The control strategies use the storage volume in the pipe system 
upstream of the wastewater treatment plant to detain water during hours with high electricity prices, 
in accordance with the Smart Grid concept.  
A simple conceptual WaterAspects model was constructed and calibrated based on data from an 
existing highly detailed hydrodynamic Mike Urban model of the area of Kolding and used to assess the 
performance of each of the  four control strategies. The Model was found to perform very well in the 
simulation of dry-weather conditions and wet-weather conditions from upstream nodes and nodes 
emptied by gravitational force. However, it was found to be less suited for simulating the wet-weather 
conditions for nodes affected by backwater and had some challenges with mimicking the conditions at 
some of the nodes controlled by the existing real time control.  
The performance of the four control strategies was evaluated based on the savings achieved in cost 
and kg CO2 equivalents. To estimate both the full- and the realistic potential of the control strategies 
they were tested with perfect forecast, “radar” forecast and numerical weather predictions (NWP), 
dependent on the required forecast horizon.    
The biggest savings obtained was 833 EUR/month and 3909 kg CO2 equivalents/month, which was 
achieved by sending wastewater to the treatment plant during the six cheapest hour of the day 
(control strategy III), which required a storage volume of 20,000 m3. It is estimated that the pipes 
upstream of the treatment plant can contain 4,000 m3 of water. This control would therefore require 
an expansion of the sewer system, or the implementation of additional storage volume further 
upstream in the system.  Additionally, this control strategy showed great increases in combined sewer 
overflow when tested with NWP.  
Of the control strategies that only utilized a storage volume of 4,000m3 a control strategy that used a 
Dynamically Dimensioned Search algorithm for optimization of flow (control strategy IV), performed 
the best. Due to time constraints it was only possible to test this control strategy for a time period of 1 
month. For that month control strategy IV generated savings of 300 EUR and 910 kg CO2 equivalents. 
This is slightly higher than the 282 EUR and 587 kg CO2 equivalents that were generated with a control 
strategy that scaled the flow based on mean electricity price (control strategy II).  
Control strategy I attempted diurnal flow equalization and yielded the smallest savings of the 
investigated control strategies, of 65 EUR/month and 196 kg CO2 equivalents/month. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:8==
 
VI 
Table of Content 
1. INTRODUCTION 
1 
2. BACKGROUND 
2 
2.1 SMART GRID – AN INTELLIGENT NETWORK 
2 
2.2. NORD POOL MARKET 
3 
2.2.1 ELSPOT MARKET 
4 
2.2.2 BALANCING MARKET 
5 
2.2.3 ELBAS MARKET 
6 
2.3. SEWER CONTROL 
6 
2.4 WEATHER FORECAST 
7 
2.4.1 RAIN GAUGES 
7 
2.4.2 RADAR FORECAST 
8 
2.4.3 NUMERICAL WEATHER PREDICTION 
8 
2.5 OPTIMIZATION ALGORITHM 
10 
3. CATCHMENT, EXISTING MODEL AND DATA PRESENTATION 
11 
3.1 THE CATCHMENT AREA AND SYSTEM 
11 
3.2 ELECTRICITY TRADING 
13 
3.3 MIKE URBAN MODEL 
13 
3.4 DATA PRESENTATION 
15 
4. METHODS 
18 
4.1 MODELLING TOOLS 
18 
4.2 CONSTRUCTION AND CALIBRATION OF WATERASPETS MODEL 
18 
4.3 PERFORMANCE INDICATORS FOR CONTROL STRATEGIES 
20 
4.4 CONTROL STRATEGIES 
21 
4.4.1 CONTROL STRATEGY I – DIURNAL FLOW EQUALIZATION 
22 
4.4.2 CONTROL STRATEGY II – FLOW SCALING BASED ON MEAN ENERGY PRICE 
22 
4.4.3 CONTROL STRATEGY III – FLOW DURING SIX CHEAPEST HOURS OF THE DAY 
23 
4.4.4 CONTROL STRATEGY IV –OPTIMIZATION USING DYNAMICALLY DIMENSIONED SEARCH ALGORITHM 
24 
4.5 IMPLEMENTATION OF CONTROL STRATEGIES AND FORECASTS IN WA MODEL 
25 
5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
26 
5.1 EVALUATION OF WATERASPECTS MODEL 
26 
5.1.1. DRY-WEATHER FLOW 
26 
5.1.2. WET-WEATHER FLOW 
27 
5.2 EVALUATION OF CONTROL STRATEGIES 
30 
5.2.1 CONTROL STRATEGY I – DIURNAL FLOW EQUALIZATION 
32 
5.2.2 CONTROL STRATEGY II – FLOW SCALING BASED ON MEAN ENERGY PRICE 
33 
5.2.3 CONTROL STRATEGY III – FLOW DURING SIX CHEAPEST HOURS OF THE DAY 
33 
5.2.4 CONTROL STRATEGY IV –OPTIMIZATION USING DYNAMICALLY DIMENSIONED SEARCH ALGORITHM 
34 
5.2.5 ANNUAL VARIATION 
34 
==PAGE:9==
 
VII 
5.2.6 FORECAST PERFORMANCE 
36 
5.2.7 EVALUATION OF ASSUMPTIONS AND SIMPLIFICATIONS 
37 
6. FURTHER OUTLOOK 
38 
7. CONCLUSION 
40 
8. REFERENCES 
42 
APPENDIX I - CURRENT CONTROL 
48 
APPENDIX II – SYSTEM OVERVIEW 
54 
APPENDIX III – MODEL CONSTRUCTION 
55 
APPENDIX IV – IMPLEMENTATION OF CONTROL STRATEGIES IN WA 
62 
APPENDIX V – WATERASPECTS CALIBRATION RESULTS 
67 
APPENDIX VI – CONTROL STRATEGY RESULTS 
71 
==PAGE:10==
1 
 
1. Introduction 
An increasing, global focus is put on renewable energy sources (UNEP, 2015). In the EU the member 
countries have committed to a EU target of 20 % energy consumption from renewable sources by 
2020 and a target of 27 % has already been set for 2030 (European Commission, 2015). Denmark has 
set an even more ambitious target: To cover half of the electricity consumption with wind power by 
2020 and to completely rely on renewable energy sources for the energy supply, by 2050 (Klima-, 
Energi- og Bygningsministeriet, 2015). 
The implementation of renewable energy puts a lot of pressure on the existing electricity network, 
which is generally too rigid and not well suited for this shift in electricity production. As a 
consequence, many countries are making efforts to implement a more intelligent and flexible 
electricity network – the Smart Grid (Dansk Energi and Energinet.dk, 2010; ENBALA Power Networks, 
2011).  
In Denmark the water sector accounts for 2.4 % of the total Danish energy consumption (Danva, 2015; 
Energinet.dk, 2015). It is therefore important that the water sector tackles the water-energy nexus and 
takes steps to ensure a successful implementation of a Smart Grid in Denmark.  
In the literature review of this study only a few studies have been uncovered that deals with the 
potential of Smart Grid control on wastewater treatment plants (WWTP) (Leu et al., 2009; ESWA. 
2014; Aymerich et al., 2015; Rieger et al., 2015). The findings have generally been positive, but 
somewhat limited by the inflexibility in process operations and restrict storage capacity at the plants 
(Leu et al., 2009). No publications was uncovered that investigates the potential for utilizing the 
storage capacity of urban drainage networks to optimize the electricity consumption of WWTP. 
In this study the uncharted use of the sewer system is investigated. This is done by testing different 
control strategies that utilize the storage volume of the urban drainage network to control wastewater 
flow to the WWTP to optimize the electricity consumption for transport to and treatment at the 
WWTP.  
The control strategies are tested on the case area of Kolding (Denmark). For this purpose a simple 
conceptual WaterAspects model is constructed and calibrated based on data from an existing highly 
detailed hydrodynamic Mike Urban model of the area as well a measured flow data. This is done to 
achieve shorter computation times, while retaining an acceptable level of accuracy in the system flow 
description. The WaterAspects model is used to evaluate the performance of the control strategies and 
ensure that no increase in combined sewer overflow is observed as a result of the control strategies. 
The effect of the control strategies is evaluated based on savings in the cost and savings in CO2 
equivalents.     
 
 
 
==PAGE:11==
2 
 
2. Background 
In this section the underlying theory for the study is presented. The theory covers the concept of 
Smart Grid, how the electricity prices are established and the fundamentals of sewer control and 
weather predictions. 
2.1 Smart Grid – An Intelligent Network 
Renewable energies, like wind and solar, are generally characterized by their intermittency. This poses 
a challenge in ensuring a reliable electricity supply and adapting to the diurnal fluctuations in 
consumption. Additionally it is expected to see a significant increase in the use of electric cars and heat 
pumps in the future, which will put added pressure on the existing electrical network. (Klima-, Energi- 
og Bygningsministeriet, 2015). These challenges have initiated a paradigm shift in the general 
structure of the electricity network towards a more flexible consumption (Hadjsaid and Sabonnadiere, 
2013).      
A Smart Grid is an electrical network that is able to ensure a more flexible and optimised energy 
consumption and production through gathering and communication of data and information (Hadjsaid 
and Sabonnadiere, 2013). In this way Smart Grid transforms the electricity network from a one-way 
delivery system into a two-way communication channel between producer and consumer (ENBALA 
Power Networks, 2011). In doing so the end consumer goes from being a passive customer with no 
contribution to the system management to a more active consumer that is able to interact with the 
system (Hadjsaid and Sabonnadiere, 2013).     
Dansk Energi and Energinet.dk has estimated that the implementation of a Smart Grid network is the 
most economic and efficient approach to adapt to the future electricity production and consumption in 
Denmark. This is in accordance with the conclusions reached in a number of other countries (ENBALA 
Power Networks, 2011; Covrig et al., 2014), as the implementation of a Smart Grid is found to avoid 
costly investments in enlargement of the current electrical network (Dansk Energi and Energinet.dk, 
2010).  
 
At present it is often necessary to use stand-by plants to meet the demand during peak hours. This 
production is both inefficient and polluting, and it is therefore desirable to reduce or completely avoid 
this (Teknologirådet, 2006). One of the fundamental objects of Smart Grid is to even out the electricity 
consumption to reduce the peak-hour-demand. This is to be done by providing the end consumer with 
an economic incentive to move non-essential electricity consumption to hours of the day where the 
system is less strained. This will give a better utilization of the system capacity (Klima-, Energi- og 
Bygningsministeriet, 2015), reduce the risk of “Brownouts” (where the electricity supply is 
interrupted in periods of shortage) (Teknologirådet, 2006) and give the end consumer an economic 
profit (Klima-, Energi- og Bygningsministeriet, 2015).  
 
For this to be feasible it is essential to have a communication of the fluctuation in electricity prices to 
the end consumer, and the end consumer must be able to react to this. The latter require a shift to 
hourly reading and settling of the electricity consumption (Klima-, Energi- og Bygningsministeriet, 
2015). In Denmark all companies with an annual consumption above 100.000 MWh is already 
required by law to have hourly reading (Energinet.dk, 2012).  
==PAGE:12==
3 
 
The electricity price is based on supply and demand (see Section 2.2), hence, during peak hours, where 
there is a high demand, the price will be high as well. This makes it profitable to use less efficient 
productions, like the stand-by plants. During hours of the day where there is a high production from 
renewable energies the price will be low and it will not be profitable to use the polluting power plants. 
As a result there is a clear connection between the electricity price and the fraction of renewable 
energy. This can be seen from Figure 1 that shows the Danish share of wind power as a function of the 
hourly electricity price for 2014.  Moving the electricity consumption from strained and expensive 
hours of the day to cheaper hours will therefore not only yield an economic benefit but is likely to also 
give environmental benefits as well. 
 
Figure 1. Wind power share as a function of energy price. Blue values are based on data for Denmark (DK1) in 2014 
(Energinet.dk(a),2015)  and black line shows average values.   
2.2. Nord Pool Market 
The fluctuation in electricity prices is essential for the implementation of a successful Smart Grid 
(Klima-, Energi- og Bygningsministeriet, 2015). This can be achieved through electricity markets 
where the hourly price is determined based on supply and demand. In the Nordic countries most 
electricity trading takes place on the Nord Pool markets (Zugno, 2013).   
Nord Pool is the leading power market of Europe and the largest by volume traded, number of 
members and market share (Nord Pool Spot (d), 2015). The market works as an auction where 
participants submit bids for sale or purchase of power. Nord Pool sets a market price, based on the 
submitted bids, whereby establishing balance between supply and demand (Nord Pool Spot (c), 2015).    
In the Nordic area the Nord Pool market covers seven countries (Norway, Denmark, Finland, Estonia, 
Lithuania, Latvia and Sweden) that is divided into fifteen bidding areas, see Figure 2. The division into 
bidding areas is based on transmission capacity and gives and indication of constrains in the 
transmission system. Thus eastern and western Denmark has been split into two bidding areas by the 
Great Belt (Nord Pool Spot (a), 2015).    
 
==PAGE:13==
4 
 
 
Figure 2. Overview of the 15 bidding areas in the Nordic and Baltic countries (Nord Pool Spot (a), 2015) 
2.2.1 Elspot Market 
Elspot is Nord Pool’s day-ahead market where power is being traded for each hour of the following 
day. It works as an auction based exchange that carries out the task of balancing supply and demand 
with a certain scope of forward planning (Nord Pool Spot (c), 2015).  
Before noon (12:00 CET) the day before delivery the participants must submit 24 bids (1 bid for each 
hour of the day) for the subsequent day starting at 00:00 CET. A bid states the participants willingness 
to purchase or sell a specified energy volume in a specific bidding area at a specified price in a given 
delivery hour of the applicable delivery day. Prior to the opening of an auction Nord Pool sets an hour 
specific price-range within which the bids must be. A bid is made up of an order curve that states the 
energy volume the participant is willing to sell or purchase at the lower order price limit and at the 
upper order price limit, respectively. Additional points can be set within the fixed price range. Linear 
interpolation is applied between these points (Nord Pool Spot AS, 2014).     
When all bids have been submitted Nord Pool computes aggregated sales and purchase curves for a 
specific hour by sorting sales bids according to increasing price and purchase bids according to 
decreasing price. The interaction between the two curves gives the system price (Zugno, 2013), see 
Figure 3. All purchase bids higher than this price and all sales bids lower than this price are accepted. 
The system price does not take into account the transmission capacity between the bidding areas and 
therefore denotes an unconstrained market (no bottlenecks) clearing price (Nord Pool Spot (b), 2015). 
The available transmission capacity in an area may vary, causing congestion of the flow between 
bidding areas. When this occurs different area prices are established (market splitting) (Nord Pool 
Spot (b), 2015).     
The area price is determined in almost the same way as the system price. The bids in the bidding area 
are aggregated into supply and demand curves. In a deficit area a volume corresponding to the trading 
capacity of the constrained connection is added as a price independent sale. This shifts the sales curve 
to the right, leading to a higher price at the interaction between the sale and purchase curves. In a 
surplus area the volume is added as a price independent purchase, causing a shift of the purchase 
==PAGE:14==
5 
 
curve to the left and gives an interaction between the curves at a lower price. This causes members in 
deficit areas to sell more and purchase less power, while the opposite holds true for the surplus areas 
(Nord Pool Spot (b), 2015). 
 
Figure 3 The system price is determined as the price at which the aggregated sales and purchase curves interact 
(Nord Pool Spot (b), 2015) 
At 12:42 CET the price list, covering the following day, is published and the bids for consumption or 
production of energy that comply with the system price are accepted. (Nord Pool Spot (e), 2015).  
2.2.2 Balancing Market 
The purpose of the balancing market is to settle imbalances from planned deliveries between 
consumers and producers. In the Nordic system suppliers with imbalances are required to settle these 
with the local Transmission System Operator (TSO). In Denmark the only TSO is Energinet.dk 
(Energinet.dk, 2008).  
The regulation of the power market is achieved by the local TSOs activation of previous submitted bids 
for up or down regulation, placed by Balance Responsible Parties (BRPs). The BRPs are required to 
submit bidding notifications for consumption or production for the subsequent 24-hour period. The 
bids must be submitted no later than 17:00 CET the day before delivery, but adjustments can be 
entered up to 45 minutes prior to the upcoming delivery hour (Energinet.dk, 2008). The bid states the 
power volume (between 10-50 MW) the BRP is willing to activate and the price required for doing so. 
Additionally the BRP must be able to fully activate the bid within a 15-minute timespan from 
activation of the bid by the TSO (Energinet.dk, 2008).  
Energinet.dk forwards the Danish bids to the Nordic Operation Information System (NOIS), which 
makes up a list of bids from Danish, Finnish, Norwegian and Swedish BRPs. In the occurrence of 
imbalances in the Nordic countries the local TSO activates (buys) the cheapest bid on the NOIS list, 
taking the restrictions in the interconnections between the countries into consideration (Energinet.dk, 
2008).       
It is determined, based on the sum of activated bids on the NOIS list weather it has been an hour of 
upward or downward regulation or if there has been no regulation at all. Consequently the local 
==PAGE:15==
6 
 
demand is not determining for the regulation direction, which is based on the aggregated net 
regulation in the Nordic area (Energinet.dk, 2008).       
Provided there are no bottlenecks in the system the market price is set to be the price of the most 
recently activated bid from the NOIS list. For a bid to be price-defining for a given hour, the regulation 
must have been active for 10 consecutive minutes of the hour in question. In the occurrence of a 
bottleneck the regulating power market is split, given the affected area its own market price 
corresponding to the most recent bid activated from the NOIS list, prior to the development of the 
bottleneck (Energinet.dk, 2008).    
2.2.3 Elbas Market 
In addition to the Elspot and Balancing market, Nordpool also have an Intra-day market; Elbas. At the 
Elbas market trading is possible up until 1 hour prior to delivery. The prices are set based on a first-
come, first-served principle, where lowest sell price and highest buy price comes first, regardless of 
when an order is placed (Zugno, 2013). 
It has been found by many that the design of the Intra-day market, with the high flexibility and gate 
closure closer to the delivery time, is the most suitable for large integration of renewable energy 
sources (Weber, 2010 and Dirjan, 2012). The liquidity of Elbas is, however, limited as its trading 
volume only accounts for 1 % of the total consumption in Scandinavia. This is in in accordance with 
most other European intra-day markets (Zugno, 2013). 
2.3. Sewer Control 
Real Time Control (RTC) of sewer networks is an established technology that has been applied for 
decades (Brueck et al., 1982). 
The implementation of sewer control is done to improve the performance and efficiency of existing 
drainage networks and is generally seen as an inexpensive alternative to traditional pipe and capacity 
expansion (Vezzaro and Grum et al., 2014). The most common objectives for implementation of sewer 
controls are to prevent flooding, reduce combined sewer overflow (Duchesne et al., 2001; Martinez et 
al., 2007; Vezzaro and Grum et al., 2014) and to optimize the management of WWTP during wet-
weather conditions (Vezzaro and Grum, 2014).   
Sewer control generally includes monitoring and measurement of specific variables in the system that 
is used to operate actuators in the system. The control strategy consist of a number of control rules 
where set-point values are determining for the action of the regulator (Butler and Davis, 2011).  
If the control only relies on data from the site of the actuator, and does not take the state of the 
remaining system into account it is called a local control (Butler and Davies, 2011). A control that 
coordinates the action of all actuators in the network is called a system-wide control (Mollerup et al., 
2015). If the control is influenced by measurements taken from outside the system the control is said 
to be an integrated control (Butler and Davies, 2011). 
 
In the traditional rule-based RTC the set-points are pre-determined and fixed (Klepiszewski and 
Schmitt, 2002). In later years Real Time Optimization of the set-points has starting to gain footing 
(Celestini et al., 2014). Here real time measurements are used to determine the optimal set-points 
taking the state of the entire system into account. This optimization is able to consider the variation in 
==PAGE:16==
7 
 
sensitivity and importance of different areas of the system (Korte, 2010).  
  
The performance of RTC can often be improved when future inputs or the future state of the system is 
included. This approach is known as Model Predictive Control (MPC) (Duchesne et al., 2001; Vieux and 
Vieux, 2004; Courdent et al., 2014 and Vezzaro and Grum et al., 2014).  
 
In the MPC framework the control goals are given as a numerical optimization problem. Based on the 
predictions and the current state of the system a cost minimizing control strategy is found for the 
finite time horizon (Nikolaou, 2001). A MPC strategy thus consists of three steps; measurement or 
estimation of the current state of the system, prediction of the future system behaviour and, based on 
this, the determination of the optimal control of the system for the finite time horizon (Zamora et al., 
2010). 
Some of the models that can be applied for MPC in urban drainage systems are; radar-based rainfall 
nowcast models, hydrodynamic models nowcasting flow in drainage systems (Vezzaro and Grum et al., 
2014) and models that predict wet weather flow from numerical weather models (Liguori et al., 2012). 
2.4 Weather Forecast 
When using the storage capacity of the sewer for storage of wastewater it is important that it does not 
lead to an increase in combined sewer overflow (CSO). It is therefore essential to be able to predict the 
occurrence of rain to empty out the system beforehand.    
2.4.1 Rain Gauges  
To predict the future state of the sewer system has been desirable for a long time (Einfalta et al., 
2004). Initially the precipitation forecasts were based on interpolation between rain gauge 
measurements. The accuracy of the forecast would hence be heavily reliant on the density of the rain 
gauge network (Eugenio et al., 2005).  
In Denmark the Metrological Institute of Denmark (DMI) and the Wastewater Committee (SVK) has 
been managing a network of rain gauges since 1979 (Winther et al., 2006). The network currently 
counts 145 SVK rain gauges spread across the country (DMI(c), 2015).  
The SVK rain gauges are used to measure and register the time and intensity of a rain event. The 
precipitation is collected through a funnel and channelled to a tipping beam made up of two basins. 
When one basin fills up it tips down and empties, driving the other basin in position to collect the 
rainwater. The time of each tip is registered and collected in a central database. The resolution of the 
rain data collected by the SVK rain gauges is 0.2 mm, which is the amount of water required to cause a 
tip. The rain gauges register the tips on a 1 minutely basis and sends data to the central database every 
10th minute (DMI(c), 2015). The intensity of a given rain event can then be determined based on the 
number of tips in a given minute (Winther et al., 2006).  
It should be kept in mind that the rain gauges only describe the conditions in a given point. Intense 
showers, which often cover an area of few square km can therefore easily be missed by the rain gauges 
(Rambøll, 2012). Moreover the data can be influence by obstacles in the surrounding area (Winther et 
al., 2006).  
==PAGE:17==
8 
 
Historical rain series are often used for calibration and verification of models within the field of urban 
drainage (Butler and Davis, 2011). Additionally historic rain series is used as perfect forecasts to do 
retro perspective assessments of model forecasting and model performance (Wang et al., 2011; Bravo 
et al., 2009; Fiorellia et al., 2013). 
2.4.2 Radar Forecast 
The idea of using radar for the detection of precipitation was first suggested in 1941 (ETHW, 2015), 
but it is only in the last decade that the technology has been sufficiently accurate to really find use in 
the optimisation of sewer networks (Berne et al., 2004; Einfalta et al., 2004; Eugenio et al., 2005). 
Though earlier examples of the application of radar-based forecasts in sewer control does exist 
(Redder, 1999; Sempere-Torres et al., 1999; Aspegren et al., 2001). 
The radar works by emitting small bursts of energy in the form of a radio wave into the atmosphere 
(DMI(b), 2015). When the waves collides with an object, like rain or ice, part of the wave will be 
reflected back to the radar. The radar is able to estimate the intensity of a rain event based on the 
amount of energy reflected and the location of the precipitation based on the time it took for the signal 
to be reflected. Using the Doppler effect the radar is also able to estimate in what direction the water is 
moving and how quickly (WeatherWorks, 2013).  
The DMI have had a radar system in place since 2011 with 5 radars covering the majority of Denmark. 
The radar data is available every 10th minute with a resolution of 1x1 km with the possibility of a 
resolution of 500x500m (DMI(a), 2015).  
Experience shows that the forecasts can predict fronts with a good accuracy for a time horizon of 3 
hours. It is however more difficult to predict showers and cloudbursts, as these can develop very 
quickly. In this situation it is often only possible to give accurate forecasts for a time horizon of 
approximately 1 hour (DMI, 2012). 
In Denmark the first radar based forecast of flow and water level in a sewer system was implemented 
in 2009 (Thorndahl et al., 2009). Here the rainfall was successfully forecasted for lead times of 1-2 
hours (Thorndahl et al., 2009). This is still the time horizon that can be expected for radar forecast, 
with sufficient accuracy, today (Thorndahl et al., 2013).  
2.4.3 Numerical weather prediction  
To increase the lead times of rain forecasts, attempts are being made to use forecasts based on 
Numerical Weather Prediction (NWP) models (Liguori et al., 2012; Thorndahl et al., 2013; Courdent et 
al., 2014). 
NWP models uses prognostic equations of thermodynamics and fluid mechanics to describe the 
atmospheric processes and predict the future behaviour of the system, given initial atmospheric 
conditions (Voss, 2015).  
The Danish Metrological Institute (DMI) uses the High Resolution Limited-Area Model (HIRLAM), 
which was developed in cooperation with 10 other meteorological institutes in Europe (Hirlam.org, 
2015). It simulates the dynamic and physical processes in the atmosphere based on the atmospheric 
equations of energy, motion and mass conservation in a discrete and approximated approach (Sattler 
and Feddersen, 2003).  
==PAGE:18==
9 
 
The HIRLAM model is run in a number of different versions that covers different geographic areas 
(DMI(b), 2015). The HIRLAM-S05 model covers the Scandinavian countries and North and Central 
Europe, see Figure 4. The weather predictions used for this study are based on the HIRLAM-S05 
model. The model has a resolution of approximately 5 km (0.05°) and runs every 6th hour (4 times a 
day) (Feddersen, 2009) with a maximum forecast length of up to 54 hours (Courdent et al., 2014). The 
small-domain HIRLAM-S05 model is nested into the large-domain HIRLAM-T15 model, which is 
nested into the global European Centre for Medium range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF) model for the 
estimation of model boundary conditions (Feddersen, 2009). 
Due to the high complexity of the atmospheric system, and because it is impossible to adequately 
observe and describe the state of the atmosphere at a given point in time, errors occur in the 
estimation of initial conditions (Sattler and Feddersen, 2003). Furthermore errors arise due to the 
limited and imperfect representation of the atmospheric processes in the model description (Sattler 
and Feddersen, 2003). Initial conditions and the parameterization of condensation and convection are 
regarded as the most significant sources of error, with regards to quantitative precipitation 
predictions (Sattler and Feddersen, 2003).   
 
Figure 4. Overview of the geographical areas covered by the HIRLAM-S05 and HIRLAM-T15 models (Feddersen, 
2009). 
The uncertainty of NWP is often tackled by using an ensemble of forecasts to estimate future 
development, rather than a single “best guess” forecast (Sattler and Feddersen, 2003). The different 
ensemble members are produced by perturbation of initial conditions (Feddersen, 2009). The DMI 
uses initial condition perturbation based on scaled lagged average (SLA) forecast (Feddersen, 2009), 
which means that information from previous forecasts are included (Hoffman and Kalnay, 1983). The 
DMI uses weighted information from the 6-hour and 12-hour old forecasts, giving four perturbed 
==PAGE:19==
10 
 
initial conditions, in addition to an unperturbed control forecast (Feddersen, 2009). This approach 
tends to maximize the ensemble dispersion, so that the individual ensemble members yield less likely, 
but more extreme outcomes (Feddersen, 2009).  
Each of the five initial conditions is run twice using the STRACO scheme and the Kain-Fritsch/Rasch-
Kristjansson schemes for convection and condensation, giving ten ensemble members. Each member 
is subsequently run with inclusion of stochastic physics resulting in a total of twenty ensemble 
members (Feddersen, 2009). Additionally five ensemble members are dedicated to studying the 
impact of perturbing the roughness lengths for urban areas. For each of these, roughness lengths 
between 0.05-1.1 m are randomly chosen at the start of the forecast (Feddersen, 2009). Hence, the 
HIRLAM model generates 25 scenarios based on realistic initial values (Courdent et al., 2014), that 
predicts precipitation with a resolution of 1 hour. 
The ensemble members that include stochastic physics tend to show increased frequencies of extreme 
events and precipitation amounts. Generally the model underestimates the periods with no 
precipitation and overestimates the small precipitation events.   
Thorndahl et al. (2013) has investigated the performance of the HIRLAM-S05 model for use of flow 
forecasts in a sewer system in Copenhagen, Denmark. Forecasts with lead times of up to 24 hours was 
tested and found to be acceptable for real-time operations. The best performance was found for lead 
times between 6-12 hours (Thorndahl et al., 2013). 
2.5 Optimization Algorithm  
Both Real Time Optimization and MPC require optimization tools to determine the best control 
strategy. Generally an optimization problem consists of three parts; the objective function that is to be 
maximized or minimized; the decision variables that are to be determined to maximize or minimize 
the objective function; and the constraints that act on and confine the decision variables (Fiorelli et al., 
2013). 
To determine the decision variables an optimization algorithm is employed. In this study only one 
control strategy employs MPC, which is done using the Dynamically Dimensioned Search (DDS) 
Algorithm. The DDS algorithm is a simple stochastic single-solution based heuristic global search 
algorithm. The algorithm starts out by searching globally and then become more local as the number 
of iterations approaches the maximum permitted function evaluations. This is done by randomly and 
dynamically reducing the number of dimensions in the neighborhood. The dimensions correspond to 
the number of decision variables that is changed to generate a new search neighborhood.  Solutions 
are created by perturbation of previous solutions, where the perturbation magnitudes are selected 
from a normal distribution (Tolson and Shoemaker, 2007). 
The scalar neighborhood size perturbation parameter (r) is the only algorithm parameter that needs 
to be set. This defines the random perturbation size as a fraction of the decision variable range. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:20==
11 
 
3. Catchment, Existing Model and Data Presentation  
In this section the catchment area of Kolding is presented together with the Mike Urban model that 
exists of the area and the data that will be used throughout this study.   
3.1 The catchment area and system 
Kolding is located in the Triangle Region of Jutland and is the 7th largest city of Denmark. The city has a 
population of 58,000 (Danmarks Statestik, 2013) while 90,000 people lives within the municipality 
(Kolding Spildevand, 2013).  
For a number of the suburbs surrounding Kolding the wastewater is treated at one of the local 
WWTPs, but the majority is treated at Kolding Central WWTP, see Figure 5. The water is first let to the 
pre-treatment at Kolding Åpark in central Kolding and subsequently transported 8 km to Kolding 
Central WWTP (Kolding Spildevand AS, 2013), see Figure 5. The water is pumped 6 km and 36 vertical 
meters to than gravitate the last 2 km. Due to the water filled pipe in the first part of the stretch, the 
delay in flow from the pre-treatment plant to Kolding Central WWTP is only 30 min, whereas the 
residence time is approximately 3 hours.   
At the pre-treatment plant the water is treated for larger particles, sand and fat before it undergoes 
chemical and biological treatment at Kolding Central WWTP. The WWTP has a capacity of 125,000 
person equivalent (PE) and an average load rate of 65 % (Kolding Spildevand AS, 2013). The WWTP 
has an annual energy consumption of just under 3 GWh and the transport of wastewater from the pre-
Figure 5. Left: Contour of Kolding municipality (Kolding Kommune, 2012). Water from orange areas is treated at 
local WWTP, while water from green and purple areas are treated at Kolding Central WWTP. The location of the 
WWTPs is indicated with red dots and the main pipes of the sewer system are indicated with red lines. Right: 
Location of the pre-treatment plant and Kolding Central WWTP. 
==PAGE:21==
12 
 
treatment plant caves an annual energy consumption of approximately 1.5 GWh (Kolding Spildevand 
AS, 2013). 
The sewer system of Kolding city consists of three main pipes that receives water from several large 
catchments located in the northern, southern and eastern part of the city, respectively. The water is 
transported to the area around downtown, where the pre-treatment plant is located (Nielsen et al., 
2010). The system covers a drainage area of 1,300 ha and the sewer system is made up of more than 
1,300 km of pipes (Kolding Spildevand AS, 2013). The pre-treatment plan receives wastewater from 
an additional area of 2,000 ha (separate system) (Nielsen et al., 2010).  
 
There are two entries into the pre-treatment plant; pumping station 1 (P1) and pumping station 2 (P2) 
At each of these entry points five pumps are located, with a total maximum pumping capacity of 1500 
L/s. During dry-weather conditions P2 is closed and all water is redirected to P1. In the pipe system, 
just upstream of P1, a total storage capacity of 4000 m3 has been estimated. This storage volume in the 
pipes leading down to P1 is the storage volume that is utilised in the control strategies presented later 
in Section 4.4.     
 
Figure 6.  Overview of the sewer network at the pre-treatment plant. The three main sewer pipes are redirected to 
P1 during wet-weather condition. In the pre-treatment plant the water is treated for sand and other large particles 
barefore reaching ”UDPUMP” from where it is pumpted to Kolding Central WWTP  (Krüger A/S, 2015)  
The pumps at the pre-treatment plant are responsible for the transportation of water from the pre-
treatment plant to Kolding Central WWTP, and like P1 and P2 has a maximum capacity of 1500 L/s. If 
the pumps at the pre-treatment plant are unable to keep up, excess water is pumped to a detention 
basin with a capacity of 2700 m3. If overflow occurs at the pre-treatment plant it goes into the Kolding 
River. 
==PAGE:22==
13 
 
Since 2011 a system-wise RTC has been implemented in the Kolding sewer network (Kolding 
Spildevand AS, 2013). The control aims at reducing discharge of CSO from the system during rain 
events. Additionally, the control ensures that most of the discharge to the Kolding River occurs at the 
pre-treatment plant. In this way the water undergoes a mechanical cleaning before discharging 
(Nielsen et al., 2010). 
  
Additionally a RTC for optimization of the treatment processes at Kolding Central WWTP is in place to 
ensure that the treatment is done as energy efficient as possible (Kolding Spildevand AS, 2013). Tests, 
where water has been detained in the Kolding sewer system have shown that this control allows hold 
back of wastewater in the sewer system for 12 hours, possibly longer, without affecting the treatment. 
3.2 Electricity Trading 
Kolding Spildevand A/S does not currently operate at the Elspot market. Instead it buys its energy 
through an intermediary; EnergiDanmark (Halvgaard and Munk-Nielsen, 2015). EnergiDanmark 
trades on the Elspot market on behalf of a number of companies in a geographic area (DK1, see Figure 
2) and buys electricity corresponding to the expected consumption of the following day. This means 
that EnergiDanmark, like all other traders on the Elspot market, needs to be in compliance with the 
consumption plane submitted, but that there is no obligation from the individual companies to follow 
a set consumption plan. The companies will, however, still be settled in accordance with the hour 
prices of the Elspot market (Halvgaard and Munk-Nielsen, 2015).   
As energy cannot be stored efficiently it is important that the electricity network is in constant 
balance. EnergiDanmark is therefore obliged to settle any difference in planed and actual electricity 
consumption.  This is done at the Balancing market, and the cost hereof is split among 
EnergiDanmarks costumers in the geographic area (Therkelsen, 2015).         
3.3 Mike Urban Model 
A Mike Urban (MU) model of the Kolding area was provided by Krüger A/S. In Figure 5 in the previous 
section the area covered by the MU model is indicated with purple. The model does not include a 
number of smaller catchment areas that also discharge to Kolding Central WWTP. These areas are 
indicated with green in Figure 5. 
The MU model had been constructed for the purpose of accurately describing the flow of water in the 
system upstream of the pre-treatment plant. For the original purpose of the MU model it was therefore 
not relevant to include the part of the system that is located downstream of the pre-treatment plant. 
The pre-treatment plant hence represents the most downstream point of the system. The transport of 
water from the pre-treatment plant is simply represented as an outlet node.   
The model contains 2597 nodes, 93 basins, 77 pumps of which 32 are controlled by RTC, 106 weirs 
and 21 orifices, of which 19 are controlled by RTC. The RTC implemented in the system is given in 
Appendix I.  The model has a total reduced catchment area of 645 ha and 128713 PE. An overview of 
the MU model is given in Figure 7. 
==PAGE:23==
14 
 
 
Figure 7. Overview of the Mike Urban model of Kolding. The model formed the basis for the construction of the 
WaterASpects model used in this study. 
 
==PAGE:24==
15 
 
3.4 Data Presentation 
Table 1. Overview of the data used in the study 
 
Data type 
Content 
Time period 
Resolution 
Application 
Source 
[1] 
Flow data 
Flow [m3/hour] 
01-01-14 to 31-
12-14 
2 min Calibration of WA model (dry-
weather) 
Krüger Sewerview  
[2] 
3-year CDS rain 
Rainfall intensity 
[μm/s] 
17-02-15 00:00 
to 08:15 
1 min Calibration of WA model (wet-
weather) 
Reginal_CDS_ver_3_2
_1.xlsx 
[3] 
Rectangular rain 
Rainfall intensity 
[μm/s] 
17-02-15 00:00 
to 08:15 
1 min Calibration of WA model (wet-
weather) 
Self produced  
[4] 
Historic rain series 
Rainfall intensity 
[μm/s] 
01-01-1995 to 
31-12-2004 
1 min Calibration of WA model (wet-
weather) 
Rain gauge 5279 
[5] 
Historic rain series 
Rainfall intensity 
[μm/s] 
01-01-2014 to 
31-05-2015 
1 min Perfect forecast for evaluation 
of control strategies  
Rain gauge 5251 
[6] 
Historic rain series 
Rainfall intensity 
[μm/s] 
01-01-2014 to 
31-05-2015 
1 min “Radar” forecast for evaluation 
of control strategies 
Rain gauge 5247 
[7] 
NWP forecast 
Rainfall intensity 
[mm/h] 
01-06-2014 to 
30-04-2015 
1 hour NWP forecast for evaluation of 
control strategies 
DMI-HIRLAM-S05 
[8] 
Hourly electricity prices  
Electricity price 
[DKK/MWh] 
01-01-2014 to 
31-05-2015 
1 hour Estimation of potential cost 
savings 
(Nord Pool Spot (f), 
2015) 
[9] 
Primary, local and wind 
power production 
Energy production 
[MWh/h] 
01-01-2014 to 
31-05-2015 
1 hour Estimation of potential savings 
in CO2 equiv. 
(Energinet.dk (a), 
2015) 
==PAGE:25==
16 
 
[1] Measurement of flow going into the pre-treatment plant. The data was extracted from the sewer 
view database that contains flow and water level data for selected locations in the sewer system of 
Kolding. The data is used to determine the average dry-weather flow to the pre-treatment plant.  
[2] The 3-year CDS rain was constructed using the IDA excel-sheet (Reginal_CDS_ver_3_2_1). The rain 
was constructed using the standard settings, with exception of the return period, which was set to 3 
years. It is expected that a rain event with a 3-year return period will be big enough to cause overflow 
in the system, but still small enough to adequately evaluate the existing RTC. This rain was used to 
evaluate how the system and the RTC reacted to intense rainfall. The CDS rain event has a duration of 
4 hours with an average intensity of 8.14 mm/hour and maximum intensity of 144 mm/hour.  
[3] The rectangular rain was constructed with an intensity that is twice that of the average intensity of 
the CDS-rain (16.27 mm/hour), but the same duration. This was done to estimate how the system and 
the existing RTC reacted to a continued, intense runoff input.    
[4]. Historic rain series from rain gauge 5279, located in Herning. The calibration of wet-weather 
condition is done by comparison of Mike Urban data (see Section 3.3), and not real measurements 
from the area. It was therefore not essential that the rain file be representative of the area. As a rain 
file and joblist already existed for the Herning area, these were used for convenience and to save time. 
The rain file contains a total of 2308 rain events. 
[5] Historic rain series from rain gauge 5251, located at the pre-treatment plant, see Figure 8. The rain 
file contains 339 rain events.  
[6] Historic rain series from rain gauge 5247, located approximately 3 km north of the pre-treatment 
plant, see Figure 8.  The rain file contains 311 rain events. 
[7] The NWP forecasts is given for the 5km×5km grid point 1700, the location of which is indicated on 
Figure 8. A new forecast is produced every 6 hours, giving four ensemble forecasts a day, with a 
forecast horizon of 54 hours. The forecast files are given as 25×54 matrixes indicating the 
precipitation depth predicted by each of the 25 ensemble members in a given hour.  
[8] Hourly electricity prices from the Elspot market. The prices are given in DKK/MWh and converted 
into EUR/MWH using a rate of 7.46 DKK/EUR (Valutakurser.dk, 2015). 
[9] Primary production is the sum of production from central power stations in Western Denmark 
(DK1) in a given hour. The local production is the summed production from local Combined heat and 
power plants (CHPs) in Western Denmark in a given hour. Wind power is the sum of wind power 
production in Eastern Denmark (Energinet.dk (b), 2015). 
==PAGE:26==
17 
 
 
Figure 8. Location of rain gauge stations in the Kolding area (blue circle) and centre of the 5×5 km grid points used 
by the DHI-HIRLAM -S05 model (red cross). 
 
 
 
==PAGE:27==
18 
 
4. Methods 
In this section it is described how the WA model is constructed and how the control strategies are 
implemented. Additionally it is described how the performance of the WA model and the different 
control strategies are evaluated.   
4.1 Modelling Tools 
To ensure that the tested control strategies do not lead to increase in CSO it is necessary to use a 
model that, to a certain extent, is able to accurate describe the flow patterns of the catchment area.  
The Kolding sewer system, with its existing RTC is a relatively complex system to model, due to the 
interaction between up- and down stream nodes. For the implementation of MPC it is essential to have 
short computation times that allows for a large number of scenarios to be run within a short time 
period to determine the best approach. High accuracy often yields longer computations times and it is 
therefore often necessary to find a balance between a sufficient degree of accuracy and an acceptable 
computation times (Marinaki and Papageorgiou, 2005).  
As described in Section 3.3 a detailed MU model of the Kolding study area was provided by Krüger 
A/S. MU is a water modelling software developed by the Danish Hydrological Institute (DHI) for the 
simulation of unsteady flow in pipes and channels (DHI, 2015). It is one of the most employed 
software for modelling of water distribution systems in Denmark (Winther et al., 2006). The model 
gives a high accuracy in the description of water flow, but has long computation times (DHI, 2015). 
Running the MU model with the 10-year historic rain series presented in Section 3.4, took 2.5 days. 
To reduce the computation time it was necessary to construct a simpler model of the Kolding system. 
This was done using the program WaterAspects (WA), developed by PH Consult (Grum et al., 2004). 
WA uses a more simplistic approach for the description of water movement and therefore has short 
computation times. In Table 2 the main features of the two programmes are compared.   
4.2 Construction and Calibration of WaterAspets Model 
A schematic of the sewer system was constructed based on the MU model. This was used to give an 
overview of the structure of the system and the distribution of connected catchment areas. The 
overview is given Appendix II and the method for determining/calculating relevant data is given in 
Appendix III.   
Subsequently the model was manually constructed in WA, and the current RTC was implemented. A 
detailed description of how this was done is also given in Appendix III. The model is run with time 
steps of 1 min. 
In the MU model a diurnal flow pattern input for wastewater during weekdays and weekends, 
respectively, was available. These was used for the initial wastewater flow pattern for the simulation 
of dry-weather conditions. In this study only the wastewater flow to the pre-treatment plant is 
relevant. The diurnal flow input from the MU model was therefore calibrated to fit the average 
measured flow data to the pre-treatment plant (see Appendix III). The calibration aimed at achieving a 
good visual agreement between the modeled and measured flows and equal flow volumes.  
To describe wet-weather conditions the WA model was calibrated using the 3-year CDS-rain, the 
rectangular rain and the 10-year historic rain series presented in Section 3.4. The parameters used for  
==PAGE:28==
19 
 
Table 2. Comparison of the modelling programs Mike Urban and WaterAspects. 
Mike Urban 
WaterAspects 
Catchments 
 
A number of sub-catchments are 
connected to the pipe system upstream of 
or directly to the basin/structure. 
 
One single catchment connected directly 
to the basin/ structure. 
Runoff from catchment 
 
Hydrograph based on the time-area 
method (DHI,2015). 
 
Hydrograph based on the time-area 
method (Grum, 2015).  
Basin outlet flow 
 
The outlet from a basin is dependent on 
the water level in the basin and 
determined by the Saint-Venant 
equations (DHI,2015). 
 
The maximum outlet capacity must be 
given as an input. The outlet will be equal 
to the maximum outlet capacity if the 
available water volume in a time step is 
equal to or above the maximum outlet 
capacity, regardless of the water level 
(Grum, 2015). 
Overflow 
 
Calculated from half-empirical equations 
based on the Energy equation (Brorsen 
and Larsen, 2009).  
 
Makes a water balance at each time step 
to estimate the amount of water going in, 
out and flowing over (Grum, 2015). 
Water movement in pipes 
 
Uses the Saint-Venant equations to 
describe the motion of water (DHI,2015). 
 
Based on geometric information of the 
system the model is able to estimate 
transport times in the system. 
 
Takes into account the storage volume in 
the pipes. 
 
Needs transport time as an input. The 
model divides the transport from one 
point to another into n steps, where n 
equals the transport time divided by the 
length of the time step employed by the 
model. For every time step the water is 
moved one step (Grum, 2015). 
 
Does not take the storage volume in the 
pipes into account. This volume must be 
added to the downstream basin. 
Backwater 
 
The Saint-Venant equations are able to 
take backwater into account in the 
simulation of water flow (DHI,2015). 
 
Is not able to take backwater into account 
(Grum, 2015). 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:29==
20 
 
calibration was; time of concentration (Tconc.), transport time (Ttrans.), time-area (TA) curves and outlet 
capacities (including calibration of set-points for the controllable devices). These parameters had been 
roughly estimated based on data from the MU model, which was used as initial first guesses. A more 
detailed description of the parameters and how they were estimated is given in Appendix III.  
First each node in the system was calibrated using the rectangular and 3 year CDS rain. The 
rectangular rain was used to get a better indication of the calibrated parameters by fitting the outlet 
flow graph and the overflow graph of each node in the WA model to the graphs produced by the MU 
model for that same node. The nodes was calibrated to obtain flow patterns that was visually similar 
to the flow patterns produced by the MU model and to achieve total outlet flow volumes and overflow 
volumes that was within 10 % of the volumes estimated by the MU model. Compliance in flow volumes 
was checked using a tool in the WA model that gives the total area under a graph. 
Once a visual similar flow pattern and flow volumes had been achieved using the rectangular rain, the 
CDS rain was used to check that the same hold true for this type of rain. In cases where a good fit was 
not observed for the 3-year CDS rain, the parameters were calibrated again to achieve a better fit. The 
node was than re-tested using the rectangular rain and the 3-year CDS rain until a good fit was 
achieved for both events. In cases where it was not possible to obtain a good fit for both the 
rectangular rain and the 3-year CDS rain more weight was put on mimicking the conditions during the 
3-year CDS rain.  
This calibration was done for all nodes, starting at the most upstream nodes and working ones way 
down towards the pre-treatment plant, which constitutes the most downstream point in the system. 
Due to the RTC implemented in the system some upstream nodes are dependent on the state of 
downstream nodes. Calibration of a downstream node would therefore often require a re-calibration 
of a number of upstream nodes, which would than effect the downstream situation. The calibration of 
nodes was therefore done as an iterative process.    
Once the outlet flow and overflow had been calibrated for each node, the system was calibrated using 
the 10-year historic rain series presented in in Section 3.4. Comparison were done on the average 
overflow volume and number of overflow events from each node. Again the calibration was done to 
achieve values similar to the ones given by the MU model and the same parameters (Tconc., Ttrans., TA-
curves and outlet capacities ) were used for the calibration. The calibration targeted a difference in 
total overflow volume and number of events under 30 %.  
Again the calibration of the nodes was done as an iterative process, starting with upstream nodes and 
recalibrating them after calibration of downstream nodes. After agreement had been reached between 
the overflow statistics of the WA model and the MU model, the out and overflow curves of the WA 
model was again checked with the rectangular rain and the 3-year CDS rain to ensure that no 
significant visual difference was observed.  
4.3 Performance Indicators for Control Strategies 
The performance of the control strategies are evaluated based on cost savings and savings in CO2 
equivalents compared to the status model (existing situation).  
To do this it was necessary to be able to translate flow volumes [m3] into an electricity consumption 
[MWh]. For this a conversion factor was used. In this study the transportation of wastewater from the 
==PAGE:30==
21 
 
pre-treatment plant and the treatment of wastewater at Kolding Central WWTP are the only energy 
consuming processes included. In the period 2009 to 2013 an average of 10,200,000 m3 water/year 
was transported from the pre-treatment plant to Kolding Central WWTP (Kolding Spildevand AS, 
2013). In this period the average electricity consumption used for pumping of water from the pre-
treatment was 1470 MWh/year. A linear relation between the water volume and the energy 
consumption is assumed. This gives a conversion factor for the pre-treatment plant (FPre) of 1.44e-4 
MWh/m3. In the same period the total electricity consumption of the Kolding Central WWTP was 2725 
MWh/year. Aeration is the stage in the treatment processes that is the most energy consuming and 
accounts for the majority of the electricity used for treatment of the wastewater (Siemens, 2015). It is 
estimated that the aeration process on average accounts for approximately 60-70 % of the WWTPs 
total electricity consumption (Siemens, 2015). The electricity consumption used for treating 
wastewater is therefore assumed to be 65 % of Kolding Central WWTP´s total electricity consumption. 
For this study the cleaning process is assume to occur instantaneously as the wastewater reaches the 
WWTP and again a linear relation is assumed between water volume and consumption. This gives a 
conversion factor for Kolding Central WWTP (FKC) of 1.74e-4 MWh/m3. 
As the delay in flow from the pre-treatment plant to Kolding Central WWTP is 30 min the electricity 
cost or the amount of MWh produced from wind power, in a given time step (i), can be calculated using 
Eq. 1. 
                                     
Eq. 1 
Qi = Flow from pre-treatment plant in time step i and Qi-30 min = Flow from pre-treatment plant 30 
minutes ago. 
To calculate the electricity cost in a given time step (Yi = total electricity cost in time step i) Xi denotes 
the electricity price in time step i (Pi ) and Xi-30 min denotes the electricity price 30 minutes ago (Pi-30 min). 
To calculate the amount of wind power in a given time step (Yi = total amount of wind power in time 
step i) Xi denotes the fraction of wind power in time step i (Wi ) and Xi-30 min denotes the fraction of 
wind power 30 minutes ago (Wi-30 min). The fraction of wind power in a given hour was determined by 
dividing the wind power production of a given hour with the sum of the primary-, local- and wind 
power production of that hour.  
The energy shifted to wind power was translated into kg saved CO2 equivalents by using a factor of 
0.542 kg CO2 saved for each kWh. (rensmart, 2015). 
4.4 Control Strategies 
Four control strategies to optimize the wastewater flow from the pre-treatment plant were 
investigated in this project. 
All the control strategies utilise the storage volume in the pipe system just upstream of pumping 
station P1 to store wastewater during unfavourable periods of the day (periods with high power 
prices). The control strategies control the outlet capacity of pumping station P1, which is equivalent to 
the flow into the pre-treatment plant.  
==PAGE:31==
22 
 
It is of the utmost importance that the control strategies do not lead to increases in the number of 
overflow events or overflow volume. To ensure this, the strategies are only active during dry weather 
periods. In case of rain the system is emptied out and the control returns to the exiting RTC.  
It is not the aim of the investigated control strategies to optimise the flow during rain events or reduce 
overflow events, nor to reduce the energy consumption. Instead the strategies rearrange the 
wastewater flow to move the energy consumption to cheaper and more sustainable hours of the day.  
4.4.1 Control Strategy I – Diurnal Flow Equalization 
Studies have showed that even small shifts in peak hour consumption could result in considerable cost 
savings (Spees and Lave, 2008). This control strategy therefore aims at equalizing the flow throughout 
the day.  
The control keeps a constant outlet capacity from P1 of 239 L/s during weekdays and 228 L/s in the 
weekend. 1 hour prior to a rain event the system is emptied out with a capacity of 1000 L/s. 
In case of a rain event the existing RTC is activated at the beginning of the event and will be governing 
until the system is completely emptied.   
Control Type 
Integrated Rule Based RTC with a scope of forward planning 
Outlet Capacity 
Constant 
Storage volume 
4,000 m3 
Precipitation forecast horizon 
1 hour  
Precipitation forecast types 
Perfect forecast and “Radar” forecast 
Existing TRC active 
During the rain event and until the system is emptied out  
Emptying of system if P1 is full 
No 
 
4.4.2 Control Strategy II – Flow Scaling Based on Mean Energy Price  
This control strategy determines the outlet capacity of P1 for a given hour based on how the electricity 
price of that hour deviates from the average electricity price of that particular day.   
If the electricity price of a given hour is X % lower than average electricity price of that day the outlet 
capacity from P1 is set  X % higher than the average wastewater flow of that day. The opposite holds 
true if the hourly electricity price is higher than the average electricity price of the day, see Eq. 2. 
                                                
          
  
Eq. 2 
 
Where QOut(hour;day) is the outlet capacity of a specific hour of a specific day; Qave(day) is the average 
wastewater flow of that day; Pave(day) is the average electricity price of that day and P(hour;day) is the 
electricity price of the specific hour of that day.  
==PAGE:32==
23 
 
To test the impact of available storage capacity this control strategy is tested with a storage capacity of 
4,000 m3 and 20,000 m3. For the version with a storage volume of 4,000 m3 a 2-hour forecast horizon 
is used. If rain is detected in the subsequent 2 hours the outlet capacity of P1 is set to 1250 L/s to 
empty the system. In the version with a storage volume of 20,000 m3 a forecast horizon of 6 hours is 
used and the outlet capacity is set to 1250 if rain is detected in the subsequent 6 hours. 
The existing RTC is activated at the beginning of the rain event and will be governing until the system 
is once again emptied.   
For both versions the outlet capacity is set to 500 L/s for the duration of 1 hour, if the storage volume 
of P1 is full. This is done to ensure that the control strategy does not store more water in the system 
than what the capacity allows. 
Control Type 
Integrated Rule Based RTC with a scope of forward planning 
Outlet Capacity 
Dependent on the hourly electricity price 
Storage volume 
4,000 m3 and 20,000 m3 
Precipitation forecast horizon 
2 hour and 6 hours  
Precipitation forecast types 
Perfect forecast, “Radar” forecast and NWP 
Existing TRC active 
During the rain event and until the system is emptied out 
Emptying of system if P1 is full 
Yes. Outlet capacity set to 500 L/s for 1 hour if P1 is full 
 
4.4.3 Control Strategy III – Flow During Six Cheapest Hours of the Day   
This control only leads water to the pre-treatment plant during the six cheapest hours of the day. 
During these hours the outlet capacity is set to 1000 L/s. 
This control strategy means that wastewater potentially will be retained for 18 consecutive hours. 
Therefore, a substantial storage capacity of 20,000 is required. A 6-hour forecast horizon is used and 
the outlet capacity is set to 1250 L/s if rain is forecasted in the following 6 hours.  
In the case of rain the existing RTC is activated. This control is only governing for the duration of the 
rain event. The rainwater that remains in the sewer system once the rain event ends will therefore be 
controlled in accordance with control strategy III.  
To prevent overflow from the system the outlet capacity is raised to 500 L/s for the duration of 1 hour, 
if the storage volume is full.  
Control Type 
Integrated Rule Based RTC with a scope of forward planning 
Outlet Capacity 
Dependent on the hourly electricity price 
==PAGE:33==
24 
 
Storage volume 
20,000 m3 
Precipitation forecast horizon 
6 hours  
Precipitation forecast types 
Perfect forecast and NWP 
Existing TRC active 
During the rain event 
Emptying of system if P1 is full 
Yes. Outlet capacity set to 500 L/s for 1 hour if P1 is full 
 
4.4.4 Control Strategy IV –Optimization using Dynamically Dimensioned Search Algorithm 
This strategy uses the DDS algorithm to optimize the flow from P1. A Fourier series was used to 
express the wastewater flow from P1, see Eq. 3.  
             
 
                   
 
            
 
Eq. 3 
The DDS algorithm determines the variables μ, a0, b0, a1, and b1 to minimize the objective function 
(electricity cost, see Eq. 4) over a time horizon of 1440 minutes, starting at 00:00. The perturbation 
parameter is set to 0.05 and a maximum number of function evaluations to 200. 
 
                                       
    
   
 
Eq. 4 
To ensure that the control strategy does not lead to increased CSO a constraint is set, stating that the 
stored volume is never to exceed the storage volume and that the outlet capacity is not to exceed the 
total pumping capacity of P1 and the pre-treatment plant (both 1500 L/s). 
To empty out the system prior to a rain event the existing RTC is set to be governing if rain is expected 
in the following 6 hours and until the end of the rain event.  
Control Type 
Integrated MPC 
Outlet Capacity 
Optimized using genetic algorithm 
Storage volume 
4,000 m3 
Precipitation forecast horizon 
2 hours  
Precipitation forecast types 
Perfect forecast 
Existing TRC active 
6 hours prior to and during the rain event. 
Emptying of system if P1 is full 
Constraints ensures storage volume is not exceeded  
 
==PAGE:34==
25 
 
4.5 Implementation of Control Strategies and Forecasts in WA Model 
The control strategies had to be implemented in the WA model in the same way as the current RTC. 
This was done using expression dependency variables and inequality criteria to determine if the new 
control strategy should be active, if the existing RTC should be active or if the system should be 
emptied out. A detailed description of how the control strategies were implemented is given in 
Appendix IV. 
The control strategies were all investigated using the historic rain series from rain gauge 5251. To 
estimate the full potential of each of the control strategies they were tested with a perfect forecast. 
This was done by shifting the rain series from rain gauge 5251 1 day forward in time and using it as a 
forecast. To get a more realistic indication of potential savings, the control strategies were also tested 
using “radar” forecast and NWP. Radar data was not available for this study. To mimic the uncertainty 
of radar forecasts the historic rain series from the nearby rain gauge 5247 was used. As with the rain 
series from rain gauge 5251, the rain series was shifted 1 day forward in time. 
For the NWP to be applied by the WA model it had to be transformed into a contiguous forecast series. 
Only information regarding the time of a rain event was needed, not the expected precipitation 
amount. For each of the NWP forecast files the number of ensemble members indicating the 
occurrence of rain was counted for each hour. Due to the uncertainty of the NWP, estimates of rain 
events with a depth of less than 0.5 mm were disregarded and seen as a prediction of no rain. For the 
NWP to indicate rain in a given hour two, or more, ensemble members would have to estimate rain 
depths of 0.5 mm or higher. When this was the case the hour would be given an indicator value of 1, 
otherwise the hour was given an indicator value of 0. For the tested control strategies the maximum 
forecast horizon was 6 hours. For each hour the indicator values of the subsequent 6 hours was 
therefore summed. Sums of 1 or higher indicated rain in the following 5-6 hours whereas 0 indicated 
that no rain was expected in the next 5-6 hours. For this to be implemented in the WA model this value 
(stating whether rain was expected in the following 5-6 hours) was taken for the first 6 hours of each 
forecast file and pasted together into a consecutive forecast series. 
To evaluate the accuracy of the “radar” forecast and NWP it was determined how often the forecast 
were correct in their prediction of rain or no rain.  For the “radar” forecast a time step was given a 
value of 1 if rain was predicted within the next 2 hours and for the NWP a time step was given the 
value 1 if rain was predicted in the subsequent 6 hours. The same was done using the perfect forecast 
(both with a forecast horizon of 2 and 6 hours). By summing the value of a time step produced by the 
perfect forecast and the “radar” forecast or NWP it is possible to evaluate the accuracy. Time steps that 
sum to 2 indicate that both the perfect forecast and the “radar” forecast or NWP estimates rain within 
the relevant forecast horizon. Time steps that sum to 0 indicates that both the perfect forecast and the 
“radar” forecast or NWP estimates no rain within the relevant forecast horizon. Time steps that sum to 
1 indicate disagreement between the perfect forecast and the “radar” forecast or NWP. Time steps that 
summed to 1 were multiplied by the value of the perfect forecast. Time steps with a value of 1 thereby 
indicate that the “radar” forecast or NWP did not predict rain within the relevant time horizon, despite 
the perfect forecast showing rain and a value of 0 indicate that the “radar” forecast or NWP predicts 
rain within the relevant time horizon contrary to what the perfect forecast shows.   
 
==PAGE:35==
26 
 
5. Results and Discussion  
In this section the performance of the constructed WA model and the investigated control strategies 
are presented and discussed. Evaluation of the WA model is done by comparison to the MU model that 
formed the basis for the WA model, and measured flow data. It is estimated if the model is able to 
mimic dry- and wet-weather flow conditions. Subsequently, the performance of the four investigated 
control strategies is evaluated based on savings in cost and CO2 equivalents compared to the status 
model and the advantages and challenge of each of the control strategies is examined. 
5.1 Evaluation of WaterAspects Model 
The model of Kolding was constructed in WA to achieve shorter computation times, which was 
achieved. The 10-year historic rain series, which took the MU model 2.5 days to simulate was hence 
done by the WA model in just 30 min. It is important that the reduced computation time has not 
resulted in an inaccurate description of flows in the system. The model constructed in WA is therefore 
evaluated on how well it is able to mimic the conditions in the system, both during dry-weather and 
wet-weather flow. This is done by comparison with measured data and data modelled using the MU 
model of the Kolding area.  
5.1.1. Dry-Weather Flow 
In Figure 9 the average wastewater flow during dry periods of 2014, is shown. It was found that there 
was a significant difference in the wastewater flow-pattern during the weekdays (Monday to Friday) 
and weekends (Saturday to Sunday). It is important for the evaluation of the tested control strategies 
that the wastewater flow is accurate on an hourly basis. Based on the measured data it was therefore 
decided to incorporate two different wastewater diurnal flow patterns (one for weekdays and one for 
weekends) to adequately depict dry weather conditions.    
 
 
Figure 9. Wastewater flow to P1 for modeled by the Mike Urban model, the WaterAspect model and measured data 
for 2014. Weekdays flow modeled by Mike Urban (dark blue), modeled by WaterAspects (green) and measured data 
(red). Weekend flow modeled by Mike Urban (orange), modeled by WaterAspects (purple) and measured data 
(blue). 
In the MU model likewise a distinction had been made between the wastewater flow during weekdays 
and the weekend. By comparing the measured wastewater flow to the pre-treatment plant to the flow 
modelled by the MU model, it was found that the MU model overestimated the wastewater flow 
throughout the day. The MU model estimates a daily wastewater flow of 23702 m3 both during 
==PAGE:36==
27 
 
weekdays and weekends whereas the measured data from 2014 showed a daily wastewater flow of 
20346 m3 during weekdays and 19494 m3 during weekends. Hence, the MU model overestimates the 
flow during weekdays by 16.5 % and in the weekend by 21.6 %. Furthermore it was found that the 
flow pattern of the MU model was not in agreement with the pattern of the measured flow, see Figure 
9. 
 
Due to the difference in MU modelled and measured flow volume and flow pattern it was decided to 
calibrate the wastewater flow in the WA model to better fit the measured data. In Figure 9 the 
resulting WA modelled wastewater flow is compared to the measured and MU modelled wastewater 
flow. It was possible to achieve a wastewater flow in the WA model that closely resembled the 
measured flow. The WA model gives 20446 m3/day during weekdays and 19693 m3/day during the 
weekend, which corresponds to a 0.5 % overestimation of wastewater flow during weekdays and a 1 
% overestimation of the flow during weekends.   
5.1.2. Wet-Weather Flow 
The WA models simulation of wet-weather flow is evaluated by comparison of flow values from the 
MU model. Additional figures and results are given in Appendix V. 
In Figure 10 the MU and WA modelled outlet flows and overflows are shown from selected nodes 
during the 3-year CDS rain used for calibration. A CDS rain is based on measured data and uses the 
entire set of duration-intensity values for a particular frequency, making it more realistic than a 
rectangular rain (Proanovic and Simonovic; 2004). For that reason the figures shown in Figure 10 and 
in Appendix V show the conditions during the CDS rain and not the rectangular rain that was also used 
for the calibration.    
From Figure 10 and Appendix V it can be seen that good agreements between flow patterns were 
achieved for upstream nodes and nodes emptied by gravitational force (SB0001 and OB0012). 
However, the WA model generally gave shorter and more intense overflows than the MU model both 
using the CDS rain and the rectangular rain. WA is not able to simulate backwater. For this reason the 
WA model is not well suited for simulating the flow conditions around backwater basins like OB1008, 
see Figure 10. 
Due to the complex RTC in the Kolding system and the simplistic representation of flow in the WA 
model there were some challenges with mimicking flows from controlled structures. In the Kolding 
system the most important, controlled structures are P1 and P2 (flow into the pre-treatment plant) 
and UDPUMP (flow out of the pre-treatment plant). Using the 3-year CDS rain the WA model 
overestimated the flow from P1 by 28 % and the flow from P2 by 2 %, compared to the MU model. The 
flow from P1 during a rain event is approximately twice that of P2 and the total flow to the pre-
treatment plant was therefore overestimated by 19 % compared to the MU model. Using the 
rectangular rain the WA model overestimated the flow from P1 by 26 % and underestimated the flow 
from P2 by 17 %, giving a total overestimation of the flow to the pre-treatment plant by 9 %. During 
the 8-hour simulation time P1 and P2 did not completely empty and it is therefore possible that better 
fits could be achieved with longer simulation times.            
The WA model overestimated the outlet flow from UDPUMP by 16 %, when run with the 3-year CDS 
rain and by 4 % using the rectangular rain. As with P1 and P2 it is possible that better fits would have 
been achieved with longer simulation times. 
==PAGE:37==
28 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10. Comparison of Mike Urban and WaterAspects outlet flow and overflow from selected nodes during a 3-year CDS-rain.  Green: Mike Urban outlet flow, 
red: WaterAspects outlet flow, blue; Mike Urban overflow, black: WaterAspects overflow. 
 
==PAGE:38==
29 
 
 
 
Figure 11 Deviation in number between MU and WA model of overflow events (red) and in total overflow volume (blue). Positive values indicate that the WA 
model overestimates the number of overflow events or overflow volume compared to the MU model, whereas negative values indicate that the WA model 
underestimates the number of overflow events or overflow volume compared to the MU model. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:39==
30 
 
Using the 10-year historic rain series the number of overflow events and total overflow volume was 
compared for the WA and MU model. For the majority of the nodes a percentage-wise deviation of less 
than 30 % was achieved, see Figure 11. 
For node II02802 the overflow volume deviates with -99.7 % from the volume given by the MU model, 
see Appendix V. This difference corresponds to a volume of just under 15 m3/year and was therefore 
found to be acceptable, in spite of the high deviation in percent.  
In Table 5 in Appendix V a number of nodes with high deviations in CSO have been marked. These are 
nodes that are without overflow structures in the MU model. When these nodes are full water will 
therefore start to hold up in the upstream pipe system. As mentioned backwater is not possible to 
mimic in WA. In the WA model these nodes therefore had to be constructed with a point input that 
corresponds in volume to the overflow volume of that node in the previous time step. Comparison of 
number of overflow events and overflow volumes will therefore not make sense for these nodes.  
Not including these nodes and node II02802 a RMS of 13.2 % was achieved for the number of overflow 
events and 12.7 % for the overflow volumes. On average the WA model underestimated the number of 
overflow events by 7.1 % and overestimated the overflow volume by 5.3 %.  
5.2 Evaluation of Control Strategies  
The four control strategies have been tested on the Kolding case and evaluated based on the achieved 
cost reduction and reduction in CO2 equivalent. The average monthly reductions for each of the control 
strategies are presented in Table 3. In Appendix VI results is presented for each of the tested months 
for each of the control strategies.  
To investigate if the performance of the control strategies varied throughout the year perfect forecasts 
and “radar” forecasts was used that covered the period from January 2014 to May 2015. NWPs were, 
however, only available for the period of June 2014 to Marts 2015. To accurately evaluate the 
performance of the control strategies, both the average savings of the period January 2014 to May 
2015 and the average savings of the period June 2014 to Marts 2015 are given in Table 3. For the 
implementation of MPC, used in control strategy IV, a special module had to be provided for WA. Due 
to challenges in the development of this modules, and significantly longer computation times than the 
remaining control strategies, it was only possible to generate results for January 2014 for control 
strategy IV. For this reason the results for January are also presented in Table 3 for each of the control 
strategies.     
In Table 3 the average difference in overflow is presented and in Table 7 - Table 10 in Appendix VI the 
total overflow for each month is given. This value expresses the sum of overflow from all nodes in the 
model. This includes intern overflow within the system and overflow from nodes where overflow is 
not possible, but has been implemented in the WA model to simulate backwater (indicated in Table 5). 
Hence, this overflow volume does not necessarily show the volume of CSO that exits the system. This 
distinction between intern and extern overflow was realized late in the process and it is therefore not 
possible to evaluate if increases in CSO will affect the CSO discharged to the recipient.   
==PAGE:40==
31 
 
Table 3. The average difference in CSO from the system, the reduction in total cost, how many kWh has been moved to wind power, reduction in CO2 equivalents      
presented for each of the tested control strategies. Values are express as monthly averages.  
 
* Average based on the period from January 2014 to May 2015. 
** Average based on the period from June 2014 to Marts 2015. 
***Values for January 2014. 
 
 
 
Control 
Strategy 
I 
(4,000 m3)     
Control 
Strategy 
I 
(4,000 m3)   
Control 
Strategy II 
(4,000 m3)   
Control 
Strategy II 
(4,000 m3)   
Control 
Strategy II  
(20,000 m3) 
Control 
Strategy II 
(20,000 m3) 
Control 
Strategy III 
(20,000 m3)  
Control 
Strategy III 
(20,000 m3)   
Control 
Strategy IV 
(4,000 m3)     
 
Perfect 
forecast 
“Radar” 
forecast 
Perfect 
forecast 
“Radar” 
forecast 
Perfect 
forecast 
NWP 
Perfect 
forecast 
NWP 
Perfect 
forecast 
Diff. in CSO 
[m3/ month] 
* 
0 
4 
0 
848 
0 
- 
0 
- 
- 
** 
0 
0 
0 
20 
0 
2,399 
0 
471,656 
- 
*** 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
- 
0 
- 
0 
Cost red. 
[EUR/ month] 
* 
65 
65 
207 
211 
215 
- 
833 
- 
- 
** 
69 
68 
210 
204 
212 
171 
857 
689 
- 
*** 
99 
97 
282 
279 
330 
- 
1172 
- 
300 
Energy 
moved to 
wind power 
[kWh/month] 
* 
361 
339 
1,326 
1,344 
1,390 
- 
7212 
- 
- 
** 
501 
506 
1,552 
1,575 
1,612 
979 
8314 
6,563 
- 
*** 
335 
400 
1,082 
1,230 
1,023 
- 
5124 
- 
1.678 
Emiss. red. 
[kg CO2 eq./ 
month] 
* 
196 
184 
719 
729 
753 
- 
3909 
- 
- 
** 
271 
274 
841 
854 
874 
531 
4506 
3,557 
- 
*** 
181 
217 
587 
667 
555 
- 
2777 
- 
910 
Max stored water 
volume [m3] 
- 
- 
- 
- 
10,422 
10,422 
19,813 
19,813 
- 
==PAGE:41==
 
 
32 
5.2.1 Control Strategy I – Diurnal Flow Equalization 
From Table 3 and Appendix VI it can be seen that the effect of control strategy I (diurnal flow 
equalization) is very limited, both with regards to cost savings and reduction in CO2 equivalents. With 
this control strategy monthly savings of 65 EUR and 196 kg CO2 equivalents can be expected.  
Control strategy I is based on the assumption that the wastewater flow to the pre-treatment plant is 
high during the periods of the day where the electricity is generally high and low when the electricity 
price is generally low (during the night). By equalizing the flow the idea is to increase the wastewater 
flow during cheap hours and decrease the wastewater flow during expensive hours.  
In Figure 12 the hourly average electricity price is plotted against the average wastewater flow out of 
the pre- treatment plant (UDPUMP) and the average inlet flow to Kolding Central WWTP. From that it 
can be seen that with control strategy I a lot of the water, that is currently transported and treated 
during the most expensive hours of the day, will be moved to the cheap hours from 00:00 to 07:00. 
From Figure 12 it is, however, also seen that during the expensive hours (above average) from 07:00 
to 10:00 the current flow pattern is lower than the equalized flow. This means that, in this time period 
control strategy I increase the wastewater flow during expensive hours, contrary to the main idea 
behind the control strategy. In Figure 12 the periods of the day where control strategy I is not in 
compliance with the main idea behind the strategy is indicated in red, and the periods that are in 
compliance are indicated in green.   
 
Figure 12. The average wastewater flow from the pre-treatment plant (light blue) and the same flow shifted 30 
minutes to indicate the inlet flow at Kolding Central WWTP (dark blue) plotted against the average wastewater flow 
(black) and the average electricity price of a given hour based on data for DK 1 in 2014. The hours that, on average, 
have a higher electricity price than the average electricity price of 2014 are shown in red and the hours that, on 
average, are cheaper than the average electricity price of 2014 is shown in green. the periods of the day where 
control strategy I is not in compliance with the main idea behind the strategy is indicated in red, and the periods that 
are in compliance are indicated in green.   
The limited savings achieved with control strategy I is assumed to be due to these periods where the 
current flow pattern gives a more optimal flow than achieved by the flow equalization. Additionally it 
can be seen from Figure 12 that currently the period of the day with the most intense wastewater flow 
coincides with a local minimum in electricity price, which contributes to the limited effect of control 
strategy I. Based in this it is assessed that the conditions in Kolding is not well suited for a flow 
equalization strategy.   
==PAGE:42==
 
 
33 
5.2.2 Control Strategy II – Flow Scaling Based on Mean Energy Price 
Where control strategy I is based on an assumption of the relation between the wastewater pattern 
and the average electricity price, control strategy II bases the outlet capacity on the actual electricity 
price of a given hour. Generally the savings in cost and CO2 equivalents achieved by control strategy II 
are 3-4 times higher than what was achieved by control strategy I.  
Control strategy II was tested with 4,000 m3 and 20,000 m3 storage volume in the pipe system 
upstream of the pre-treatment plant. From Figure 12 it can be seen that increasing the storage volume 
had very little effect on the savings achieved. Furthermore it can be seen that the control strategy at no 
time utilizes the full 20,000 m3 storage volume. In Appendix VI it is shown that for a number of the 
investigated months the storage volume did not even exceed the 4,000 m3 storage volume that is 
currently in place in the Kolding sewer system. The limited water volume stored in the system is, 
however, most likely the reason why only a modest increase in overflow is observed when the control 
strategies were tested with “radar” forecast and NWP.      
5.2.3 Control Strategy III – Flow During Six Cheapest Hours of the Day   
Control strategy III gives an average saving of 833 EUR/month and 3909 kg CO2 equivalents/month 
and hence yields the biggest savings of the tested control strategies.   
In Figure 13 is given an overview of which hours of the day are most often among the six cheapest. It is 
evident that the hours from 00:00 to 06:00 are generally the cheapest hours of the day. This indicates 
that that the six cheapest hours of a day will frequently be placed as six consecutive hours, which 
means that the control strategy requires adequate storage volume to hold 18 hours of wastewater. 
This is supported by Table 3 and Table 10 in Appendix IV, which show that the control strategy uses 
the full storage capacity every month (the basin is emptied when the water volume exceeds 99% of the 
20,000 m3). To implement control strategy III in Kolding would therefore require an expansion of the 
existing system or incorporation of further upstream storage volumes in the control strategy.      
 
Figure 13. Overview of how often the different hours are among the six cheapest of the day in the period January 
2014 to May 2015.  
Based on Figure 13 it would be expected that a control strategy that only sent water to Kolding Central 
WWTP during the night would yield similar results as those achieved with control strategy III.     
==PAGE:43==
 
 
34 
5.2.4 Control Strategy IV –Optimization Using Dynamically Dimensioned Search Algorithm 
As mentioned control strategy IV was only tested for January 2014 due to time limitations. For this 
reason it is not possible to give a thorough evaluation of the performance of this control strategy.  
However, based of the results for January 2014, control strategy IV is the strategy achieves the biggest 
savings of the control strategies that only has a storage volume of 4,000 m3. The savings are, however, 
in the same range as the savings achieved for January 2014 with control strategy II. 
The distinction between intern and extern overflow was realized prior to running control strategy IV 
and a variable summing the extern overflows was therefore implemented. Based on total overflow, 
control strategy IV caused a significant increase in overflow of 20.195 m3 in January. However, the 
extern overflow out of the system showed not to increase.  
In Figure 14 the outlet flow from P1, the outlet flow recommended by control strategy IV (outlet 
capacity) and the variables affecting the recommended flow is shown for the period 16th- 22nd January 
2014. Generally a good relation between outlet capacity and the hourly electricity price is observed. 
This can be seen on the 21st January where the control strategy increases outlet capacity during a local 
minimum in electricity prices, to hinder a large outlet in the subsequent expensive hours. The figure 
shows that there is not always sufficient water in the system to follow the control strategy. This was 
the case on the 19th January where the control strategy recommends a high outlet flow during very 
cheap hours, which was not observed due to the limited amount of water. 
 
Figure 14. Control strategy IV run with perfect forecast. The graph shows: outlet capacity from P1 (red), Outlet flow 
from P1 (blue), Overflow from P1 (dark blue), Degree of filling of P1 (purple), hourly electricity price (green) and an 
indication of whether rain is coming in the subsequent 6 hours (yellow)  for the period of 16nd -21st January 2014. 
Figures similar to that of Figure 14 is presented for the other control strategies in Appendix IV. 
5.2.5 Annual Variation 
The four control strategies where only tested for a period of 17 months (with the exception of control 
strategy IV, which was only tested for one month). Based on this it is not possible to make any 
conclusions with regards to annual variations in the control performance. In this section it will 
==PAGE:44==
 
 
35 
therefore not be the aim to make any conclusive statements with regards to annual variations, but 
simply to review and discuss the variations that is observed.  
 
Figure 15.  Variation in cost savings(left) and saved CO2 equivalents (right) over the period January 2014 to May 
2015. Control strategy I (blue), Control strategy II storage volume of 4,000 m3 (red), Control strategy II storage 
volume of 20,000 m3 (green) and Control strategy III (purple)  
In Figure 15 the performance of control strategy I-III over the period of January 2014 to May 2015 is 
presented.  It can be seen that generally all of the control strategies show the same fluctuations and 
that the fluctuations in saved kg CO2 equivalents is generally more extreme than the fluctuation in cost 
savings.  As mentioned it is difficult to deduce anything regarding annual variations based on the 
available data. However, the cost savings in Figure 15 shows that from January 2014 to Marts 2014 the 
performance of control strategies was declining to then increase significantly in April and May, where 
many of the control strategies yielded the biggest savings. The same decline in performance is 
observed from November 2014 to Marts 2015. But contrary to May 2014 the cost savings of May 2015 
are generally the lowest of the entire period. This could indicate that the performance of the control 
strategy is not dependent on the time of the year.  
In Figure 16 the performance of the control strategies are plotted against the number of events in the 
month and the monthly average in difference between the cheapest and most expensive hour of the 
day. All the control strategies are set to empty out the system prior to a rain event. It could therefore 
be expected that the performance of the control strategies would decrease during periods with 
frequent rain events, as this could entail high energy consumption during unfavorable hours. From 
Figure 16 it can be seen that the performance of the control strategies does indeed seem to be 
inversely proportional to the number of rain events in a month. The goodness of fit (r2) for the linear 
regression based on the average performance of the control strategies is however only 0.051 for cost 
savings and 0.053 for saved kg CO2 equivalent. It is therefore not possible to determine whether the 
performance of the control strategies depend on the number of rain events.   
The idea behind the control strategies is to exploit the daily fluctuation in electricity prices. It would 
therefore be expected that the control strategies performs better during periods with large 
fluctuations. From Figure 16 it can be seen that the control strategies appear to perform better during 
months with large differences between daily minimum and daily maximum electricity price. Again the 
goodness of fit for the linear regression based on the average performance of the control strategies is 
quite low; r2= 0.226 for cost savings and r2= 0.146 for saved kg CO2 equivalent. This would indicate 
that the performance of the control strategies is more dependent on the fluctuation in electricity 
prices than on the number of rain events. However, more data would be required to assess such a 
==PAGE:45==
 
 
36 
relation adequately. As the control strategies aim at optimize the flow for the time span of a day it is 
possible that a more pronounced relation would be observed if the savings in cost and CO2 equivalent 
where tested against the fluctuation in price on a daily basis, contrary to a monthly basis.     
 
 
Figure 16. Top: The monthly saving achieved with the four control strategies run with perfect forecasts as a function 
of the number of rain events in that month. Left: cost saving. Right: savings in CO2 equivalents. Bottom: The monthly 
saving achieved with the four control strategies run with perfect forecasts as a function of the monthly average 
difference between daily minimum and daily maximum electricity price . Left: cost saving. Right: savings in CO2 
equivalents. Control strategy I (blue), Control strategy II storage volume of 4,000 m3 (red), Control strategy II 
storage volume of 20,000 m3 (green), Control strategy III (purple) and control strategy IV (orange) and average 
value (blue circle). The linear regression of the average values is shown for each of the figures (black line).      
 
5.2.6 Forecast Performance 
The control strategies was tested with ”radar” forecast and NWP to test if storing wastewater in the 
system during dry-weather would cause increased overflow during rain events, due to the uncertainty 
of weather forecasts. In Table 4 the accuracy of the “radar” forecast and the NWP is presented.  
The “radar” forecast showed to be correct 96.2 % of the time while the NWP was correct 81.4 % of the 
time. The NWP wrongly predicted dry weather conditions 14.4 % of the time which indicates that the 
value, set to 0.5 mm/hour, to clean the forecast for noise was possibly to high. This explains why 
control strategy III showed significant increases in overflow when tested with the NWP. From Table 4 
it can be seen that the NWP already falsely predicts precipitation 14.1 % of the time. By decreasing the 
value used for cleaning the NWP forecast it is likely that the forecast will increase the occurrence of 
falsely predicted rain events. This could cause the control strategy to empty the system during 
unfavourable hours of the day, which will further reduce the performance of the control strategies.  
==PAGE:46==
 
 
37 
In the evaluation of the NWP it is important to keep in mind that the perfect forecast, which is used for 
the evaluation of the “radar” forecast and NWP, is based on measurements from just 1 rain gauge. The 
perfect forecast therefore only gives accurate predictions for that point, whereas the NWP estimates 
the precipitation for an area of 5×5 km.     
Table 4. Performance the ”radar” forecast and NWP used for evaluation of the control strategies. The values indicate 
how much of the time the forecasts were correct or incorrect in its prediction of precipitation.  
 
“Radar” forecast 
Time horizon of 2 hours 
NWP  
Time horizon of 6 hours 
Correct forecasting of rain 
88.2 % 
67.3 % 
Correct forecasting of dry weather 
8.0 % 
14.1 % 
Incorrect forecasting of rain 
2.0 % 
4.2 % 
Incorrect forecasting of dry weather 
1.8 % 
14.4 % 
 
5.2.7 Evaluation of assumptions and simplifications  
 
As mentioned the majority of the energy consumed during treatment at the WWTP is used for 
aeration to induce nitrification (biological oxidation of ammonium). The energy required to 
treat a volume of water is therefore highly dependent on the concentration of ammonium in 
the water. The control strategies tested in this project are all based on flow values and assumes 
a linear relation between water volume and energy consumption. This entails an assumption 
of a homogeneous concentration of ammonium throughout the day. According to Henze et al. 
(2006) the concentration in ammonium in wastewater generally fluctuates between 20 gN/m3 
- 60 gN/m3. Assuming a homogeneous concentration is therefore a great simplification of the 
real situation.     
 
 
The FKC value is based on the total annual flow to Kolding Central WWTP, thereby assuming 
that rainwater and wastewater will be equally energy consuming. As just pointed out the 
energy consumption for the treatment of a given volume of water will be highly dependent on 
the concentration of ammonium in the water. The treatment of wastewater will therefore be 
much more energy consuming than the treatment of rainwater. Based on the average dry-
weather flow from 2014, used in this study, it is estimated that only 72 % of the total flow to 
Koling Central WWWTP is wastewater flow. Assuming that the energy consumption is only 
used to treat the 72 % FKC would be 2.43e-4 MWh/m3. Changing FKC would increase the 
estimated energy consumptions with 22 %. This would mean that the net savings for each of 
the rule based control strategies (I-III) would be bigger, though the percent-wise saving would 
be unaltered.    
 
 
For the estimation of cost savings and reductions in CO2 equivalents it is assumed that the 
energy consumption for treatment of the water occurs instantaneously when the water 
reaches Kolding Central WWTP. The treatment of wastewater does, however, take several 
hours (Pedersen, 2015). Moving the transport of wastewater to cheap hours therefore does 
not necessarily give the most optimal treatment with regards to electricity prices.   
 
 
==PAGE:47==
 
 
38 
6. Further Outlook 
 
 
Some of the tested control strategies casus big fluctuations in wastewater load to the WWTP. 
This can affect the efficiency of the treatment, potentially leading to inefficient energy 
consumption and increases in nutrient discharge to the recipient. It could therefore be 
considered to implement communication between the sewer control and the WWTP. In this 
way it would be possible to prepare the WWTP for the significant increases in wastewater load 
and the control strategy could receive information on the state of the WWTP, ensuring that no 
more water was let to the WWTP than what the current/future capacity permits.      
 
In the Kolding case a large volume for storing water is available very fare downstream in the 
system and it is possible to control the outlet capacity from this point using the existing pumps. 
This cannot be expected for the existing systems of other cities. For the implementation of 
similar controls in other systems it is therefore likely that the storage of water would have to 
occur further upstream in the system and possibly at a number of different locations. This 
would give a more complex control strategy, due to the increase in the number of control 
points. Doing so would, however, make the control strategies applicable to a lot of sewer 
systems that does not resemble the system in Kolding. As the investigated control strategies 
was only able to yield limited savings with the storage capacity of 4,000 m3 the inclusion of 
upstream storage volume could also be a possible solution for increasing the available storage 
volume in the sewer system of Kolding.       
 
This study has not focused on the chemical and biological processes in wastewater. When 
storing stagnant wastewater for a long period of time it could, however, be relevant to 
investigate the development of gasses in the sewer system. Especially the gasses methane and 
hydrogen sulphide. Methane is produced by bacterial degradation of organic material under 
anaerobe conditions (Jørgensen, 2009). The production of methane in the sewer due to the 
storage of wastewater would be problematic as methane is increasingly being recovered at the 
WWTP and used for the production of CO2 neutral energy in the form of biogas (Jørgensen, 
2009). It is therefore important the control strategies do not lead to a decreased production of 
biogas. Hydrogen sulphide is also formed by bacterial degradation of organic matter under 
anaerobe conditions (Danva, 2008). Hydrogen sulphide can cause odour nuisances, be harmful 
for animals and humans and can cause corrosion of cement and electrical constellations 
(Danva, 2008). It would therefore be sensible to investigate the risk of developing any of these 
gasses before implementing a control strategy that stores large volumes of wastewater.    
 
The large penetration of renewable energy on the energy market, that is anticipated in the 
near future, would be expected to cause greater fluctuations in the hourly electricity prices. 
The results of this study indicated that there could be a correlation between the fluctuation in 
electricity price and the performance of the control strategies. It is therefore possible that 
greater savings could be expected in the future.     
 
In Denmark maximum permissible value for nitrogen, phosphorus and organic material 
(estimated as BOD5) are established for the effluent from WWTPs (Kolding Spildevand AS, 
2013). In addition an effluent tax is put on total discharge of nitrogen, phosphorus and organic 
==PAGE:48==
 
 
39 
material, regardless of these values being in compliance with maximum permissible value 
(skat.dk, 2014). This means that the wastewater is often treated to far below the maximum 
permissible value, as it is more economic to treat the wastewater, than to pay the effluent tax 
(Kolding Spildevand AS, 2013 and Poulsen, 2015). A successful implementation of a smart grid 
control in a sewer system in Denmark should therefore take this into account to ensure that 
the profit generated by the control strategy is not spend on additional taxation.    
 
 
==PAGE:49==
 
 
40 
7. Conclusion 
A WaterAspects model of the Kolding sewer system was constructed on the basis of a Mike Urban 
model. The model was calibrated for dry-weather conditions using flow measurements from the 
system and for wet-weather conditions by comparison to the values given by the Mike Urban model.  
The WaterAspecs model was able to mimic the wastewater flow to the pre-treatment plant very well 
and modeled a daily wastewater flow to the pre-treatment plant of 20446 m3 during weekdays and 
19693 m3 during weekends. This corresponds nicely to the measured values that gave an average flow 
of 20346 m3/day during weekdays and 19494 m3/day during weekends.  
The WaterAspects model showed to model the flow during wet-weather conditions very well from 
upstream nodes and nodes emptied by gravitational force. The model was less suited for mimicking 
the conditions in nodes that was affected by backwater. Some difficulties were experienced with the 
implementation of the current RTC in the WaterAspects model. This meant that flow to the pre-
treatment plant was overestimated by 19% and 9% when the model was run with the 3-year CDS rain 
event and the rectangular rain event used for the calibration of the model. This result is, however, 
affected by the use of too short simulation times. On average the WaterAspects model underestimated 
the number of overflow events by 7.1 % and overestimated the overflow volume by 5.3 %. 
Four different control strategies to optimize the electricity consumption by controlling the wastewater 
flow to Kolding Central WWTP were investigated using the WaterAspects model.  Three of the control 
strategies were tested with a storage volume of 4,000 m3, corresponding to the storage volume 
estimated to be available in the pipe system just upstream of the pre-treatment plant. Moreover, two 
of the control strategies were tested with a storage capacity of 20,000 m3. 
The performance of the control strategies was evaluated based on savings in costs and savings in kg 
CO2 equivalents. To estimate both the full- and the realistic potential of the control strategies they 
were tested with perfect forecast, “radar” forecast and NWP, dependent on the required forecast 
horizon.    
The largest savings were achieved with control strategy III, which gave average savings of 833 
EUR/month and 3909 kg CO2 equivalents/month. This control strategy only sent wastewater to 
Kolding Central WWTP during the six cheapest hours of the day and required a storage capacity of 
20,000 m3. However, this control strategy showed great increases in CSO when tested with NWP. 
Of the control strategies that had a storage volume of 4,000m3 control strategy IV performed the best. 
This control strategy used a dynamically dimensioned search algorithm to optimize the flow and was 
the only control strategy to employ MPC. Due to time constraints it was only possible to test control 
strategy IV for January 2014. For this month the control strategy generated savings of 300 EUR and 
910 kg CO2 equivalents. This is slightly higher than the 282 EUR and 587 kg CO2 equivalents that were 
generated with the version of control strategy II with storage volume of 4,000m3 that same month.   
The control strategy that yielded the smallest savings was control strategy I, which on average saved 
65 EUR/month and 196 kg CO2 equivalents by equalizing the wastewater flow. 
The results indicated that the savings in cost and CO2 equivalents achieved with the control strategies 
were inversely proportional to the number of rain events in a month. Also the results suggested that 
==PAGE:50==
 
 
41 
the savings were proportional to the difference between the daily minimum and maximum electricity 
price. Based on the limited data of this study it is, however, not possible to determine such a relation 
with sufficient accuracy.    
Based on the results obtained in this study it is concluded that only relatively limited savings in cost 
and CO2 equivalents should be expected by implementing a control strategy in Kolding sewer system, 
that only use the 4,000m3 of storage volume upstream of the pre-treatment plant. To yield greater 
savings it will be necessary to increase the storage capacity of the system or implement further 
upstream storage volumes into the control strategy. 
It is also concluded that, to adequately evaluate the performance of the control strategies it will be 
necessary to take the variation in ammonium into account and describe the conditions at the WWTP in 
more detail.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:51==
 
 
42 
8. References 
Aymerich, I., Rieger, L., Sobhani, R., Rosso, D., Corominas, L. (2015) The difference between energy 
consumption and energy cost: Modelling energy tariff structures for water resource recovery 
facilities. Water Research. Volume 81, p. 113-123. doi: 10.1016/j.watres.2015.04.033 
 
Bravo, J., Paz, A. R., Collischonn, W., Uvo, C. B., Pedrollo, O. C. and Chou, S. C. (2009) Incorporating 
Forecasts of Rainfall in Two Hydrologic Models Used for Medium-Range Streamflow Forecasting. 
Hydrologic Engineering. Volume 14 (issue 5). p 435-445. doi: 10.1061/(ASCE)HE.1943-
5584.0000014 
 
Brorsen, M. and Larsen, T. (2009). Lærebog I Hydraulik. 2. Edition. Aalborg: Aalborg Universitetsforlag. 
Brueck, T. M., Peterson, D. F. and Nye, J. A. (1982) Computer-based implementation of combined sewer 
control. Water Pollution Control  Federation. Volume 54 (issue 2). p. 198-205. doi: 
10.2307/25041262 
Butler, D. and Davis, J. W. (2011) Urban Drainage. 3. Edition. Abingdon: Spon Press  
 
Celestini, R., Silvagni, G. and Volpi, F. (2014) The development of integrated real time control to 
optimise storm water management for the combined sewer system of Rome. Wit Transactions on 
the Built Environment. Volume 139. p. 317-328. doi: 10.2495/uw140271 
 
Covrig, C. F., Ardelean, M., Vasiljevska, J., Mengolini, A., Fulli, G. and Amoiralis, E. (2014). Smart Grid 
Projects Outlook 2014. European Commission, Joint Research Centre, Institute for Energy and 
Transport. ISBN 978-92-79-38374-8. Available from: 
https://ec.europa.eu/jrc/sites/default/files/ld-na-26651-en-
n_smart_grid_projects_outlook_2014_-_online.pdf [Accessed on: June 17, 2015] 
Courdent, V. Luca Vezzaro, Peter Steen Mikkelsen, Ane Loft Mollerup, Morten Grum (2014) Long 
forecast horizon to improve Real Time Control of urban drainage systems. Proceedings of 
Optimization of the Sewerage Systems for the Protection of Receiving Water Bodies, 2014 
 
Danish Hydraulic Institute (DHI). Mike Urban - Modelling of storm water drainage networks and sewer 
collection systems. [Online] Available from: http://www.mikepoweredbydhi.com/-
/media/shared%20content/mike%20by%20dhi/flyers%20and%20pdf/software%20flyers/cit
ies/mikebydhi_productflyer_mikeurban_stormwaterandwastewater.pdf [Accessed on: April 3, 
2015] 
Danmarks statestik (2013). Gennemsnitsalderen Falder i De Store Byer [Online] Available from: 
http://www.dst.dk/pukora/epub/Nyt/2013/NR231.pdf [Accessed on: July 17, 2015] 
Dansk Energi and Energinet.dk (2010). Smart Grid i Danmark [Online] Available from:  
https://www.energinet.dk/SiteCollectionDocuments/Danske%20dokumenter/El/Det%20intell
igente%20elsystem%20-%20SmartGrid%20i%20Danmark%20rapport.pdf [Accessed on: 
January 29, 2015] 
Dansk Vand- og Spildevandsforening (Danva). Energiforbrug. [Online] Available from: 
http://www.danva.dk/Presse/Tal-og-analyser/Energiforbrug.aspx?q=energiforbrug [Accessed 
on: June 4, 2015] 
Dansk Vand- og Spildevandsforening (Danva) (2008) Eksplosiv atmosfære I kloakker. [Online] 
Available from: http://www.energibesparelser-
==PAGE:52==
 
 
43 
vand.dk/Files/Filer/Udgivelser/Eksplosiv_atmosfære_i_kloakker_samlet_rapport.pdf [Accessed 
on: July 15, 2015] 
Dirjan, R. 2012. The Challenges of Integrating Wind Generation Into the European Electricity Markets – 
Implications for the Market Arrangement. [Online] Available from: 
http://www.jdsupra.com/legalnews/wind-power-integration-into-the-european-93767/ 
[Accessed on: February 7, 2015] 
Danish Metrological Institute (DMI). (2012). Radarens styrker og svagheder. [Online] Available from:  
http://www.dmi.dk/nyheder/arkiv/nyheder-2012/radarens-styrker-og-svagheder/ [Accessed 
on: July 8, 2015] 
 
Danish Metrological Institute (DMI) (a). (2015). Forsyninger og Spildevand. [Online] Available from:   
http://erhverv.dmi.dk/meteorologiske-services/forsyninger-og-spildevand/ [Accessed on: July 
8, 2015] 
Danish Metrological Institute (DMI) (b). Nedbør. [Online] Available from: 
http://www.dmi.dk/erhverv/anvendelse-af-vejrdata/nedboer/ [Accessed on: July 7, 2015] 
 
Danish Metrological Institute (DMI) (c). Spildevandskomitéens regnmålersystem. [Online] Available 
from: http://www.dmi.dk/erhverv/anvendelse-af-vejrdata/spildevandskomiteens-
regnmaalersystem/ [Accessed on: July 7, 2015] 
 
Duchesne, S., Mailhot, A., Dequidt, E., Villeneuve J. P. (2001) Mathematical modeling of sewers under 
surcharge for real time control of combined sewer overflows. Urban Water. Volume 3 (issue 4). 
p. 241-252. 
ENBALA Power Networks. (2011) Smart Grid: The Future of the Electric Power System - An Introduction 
to the Smart Grid. [Online] Available from: 
http://www.enbala.com/contents/subs/RESOURCES/White_Papers/Whitepaper-03-
Smart%20Grid-The%20Future%20of%20the%20Electric%20Power%20System.pdf [Accessed 
on: January 29, 2015] 
Energinet.dk (2008) Regulation C2: The balancing market and balance settlement [Online] Available 
from:http://www.energinet.dk/SiteCollectionDocuments/Engelske%20dokumenter/El/Regulat
ion%20C2%20The%20balancing%20market%20and%20balance%20settlement.pdf. [Accessed 
on: March 9, 2015] 
Energinet.dk. (2012) Metodeanmeldelse af forskrift D1: Afregningsmåling. [Online] Available from: 
http://energitilsynet.dk/fileadmin/Filer/0_-_Nyt_site/EL/Hoeringer/2015-01_-
_Metoder_ENDK/D1_-_Metodeanmeldelse.pdf [Accessed on: March 9, 2015] 
Energinet.dk (a) (2015) Download of market data. [Online] Available at: 
http://energinet.dk/EN/El/Engrosmarked/Udtraek-af-markedsdata/Sider/default.aspx 
[Accessed on: February 23, 2015] 
Energinet.dk (b)  (2015) Introduction to download of market data. [Online] Available from: 
http://www.energinet.dk/SiteCollectionDocuments/Engelske%20dokumenter/El/Introduction
%20to%20download%20of%20market%20data.pdf [Accessed on: July 2, 2015] 
 
Energy Smart Water Utilities (ESWA) (2014) ESWA - Energy Smart Water Utilities. [Online] Available 
from: http://energinet.dk/SiteCollectionDocuments/Danske%20dokumenter/Forskning%20-
%20PSO-projekter/10738%20Slutrapport%20–%20ESWA.pdf. [Accessed on: June 10, 2015] 
==PAGE:53==
 
 
44 
European Commission. Renewable energy - Moving towards a low carbon economy. [Online] Available 
from: https://ec.europa.eu/energy/en/topics/renewable-energy [Accessed on: April 27, 2015] 
Fiorellia, D., Schutza, G., Klepiszewskib, K., Regnerib, M. and Seiffertb, S. (2013). Optimised real time 
operation of a sewer network using a multi-goal objective function. Urban Water Journal. 
Volume 10 (issue 5). p. 342–353. 
 
Grum, M. (2015). Personal communication with Morten Grum, Innovation Manager at Krüger A/S 
[Conversation]. Krüger A/S headoffice,  Gladsaxevej 363;  2860 Søborg. [March 9, 2015]   
 
Grum, M., Longin, E., Linde, J. J, (2004) A Flexible and Extensible Open Source Tool for Urban Drainage 
Modelling: www.WaterAspects.org. 6th International Conference on Urban Drainage Modeling, 
Dresden, Germany, 15-17 Sept. 2004.  
Hadjsaïd, N. and Sabonnodiere, J.-C. (2013). Smart Grids. John Wiley and Sons. [Online book] Avialble 
from:http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com.proxy.findit.dtu.dk/book/10.1002/9781118562581;jsessio
nid=BACFA230826139EBF284BF0E60A8EDC9.f04t03   
Halvgaard, R. and Munk-Nielsen, T. (2015). Kolding  Spildevand – Smart Grid på renseanlægget. [In-
house note from Krüger A/S] 
Henze, M., Harremoës, P., Jansen, J. L. C and Arvin, E. (2006) Teoretisk Spildevandsrensning – Biologiske 
og kemiske processer. 3. Edition. Polyteknisk forlag.  
Hydrocad (2015) Time of Concentration. [Online] Available from: http://www.hydrocad.net/tc.htm 
[Accessed on February 28, 2015] 
 
Jørgensen, P. J. (2009) Biogas – grøn energy Proces • Anlæg • Energiforsyning • Miljø. 2. Udgave. 
Digisource Danmark A/S.  
 
Klepiszewski, K. and Schmitt, T. G. (2002) Comparison of conventional rule based flow control with 
control processes based on fuzzy logic in a combined sewer system. Water Science and 
Technology. Volume 46 (Issue 6–7). P. 77–84  
 
Klima-, Energi- og Bygningsministeriet. Hovedrapport for Smart Grid Netværkets Arbejde. [Online] 
Available from: 
http://www.energinet.dk/SiteCollectionDocuments/Danske%20dokumenter/Forskning/DK%2
0Hovedrapport%20Smart%20Grid%20Netværket.pdf [Accessed on: April 27, 2015] 
Kolding Kommune (2012). Spildevandsplan 2012-2019 - Kolding Kommune.[Online] Available from: 
https://www.kolding.dk//images/dokumenter/Borger/Miljoe_natur_klima/Spildevand/SPILDE
VANDSPLAN%202012%20SAMLET%20TIL%20TRYK.pdf [Accessed on: Marts 2, 2015] 
Kolding Spildevand AS (2013). Miljø- og arbejdsmiljøredegørelse. [Online] Available from: 
http://greennetwork.dk/wp-content/uploads/2014/11/Milj---ogarbejdsmilj--redeg--relse-
2013.pdf [Accessed on: Marts 12, 2015] 
Korte, K. (2010) Integrated control of sewer system and WWTP with SmaRTControl. Proceeding - 
Novatech 2010 - 7th International Conference on Sustainable Techniques and Strategies for 
Urban Water Management, Lyon, France, June 2010. 
 
Krüger A/S. (2015) Kolding Smart Grid [PowerPoint Presentation] 
 
==PAGE:54==
 
 
45 
Leu, S.Y., Rosso, D., Larson, L.E., Stenstrom, M.K. (2009) Real-time aeration efficiency monitoring in the 
activated sludge process and methods to reduce energy consumption and operating costs. Water 
Environment Research. Volume 81 (issue 12) p. 2471-2481. 
Liguori, S.; Rico-Ramirez, M.A.; Schellart, A.N.A.; Saul, A.J. (2012) Using probabilistic radar rainfall 
nowcasts and NWP forecasts for flow prediction in urban catchments. Rainfall in the Urban 
Context: Forecasting, Risk and Climate Change. Volume 103, pp. 80-95. 
Marinaki, M. and Papageorgiou, M. (2005) Optimal Real-time Control of Sewer Networks. London. 
Springer.  
 
Mollerup, A. L., Mikkelsen, P. S., Thornberg, D. and Sin, G. (2015) Regulatory control analysis and 
design for sewer systems. Envionmental Modelling and Software. Volume 66. p. 153-166. 
Nielsen, N. H., Ravn, C. and Mølbye, N. (2010) Implementation and design of a RTC strategy in the 
sewage system in Kolding, Denmark. Proceeding - Novatech 2010 - 7th International Conference 
on Sustainable Techniques and Strategies for Urban Water Management, Lyon, France, June 
2010. 
 
Nikolaou, M. (2001) Model predictive controllers: A critical synthesis of theory and industrial needs. 
Advances in Chemical Engineering. Volume 26. p. 131-204. 
Nord Pool Spot AS (2014) Elspot Market Regulations. [Online] Available from: 
http://www.nordpoolspot.com/globalassets/download-center/rules-and-regulations/trading-
appendix-2a---elspot-market-regulations-effective-from-18-november-2014.pdf [Accessed on: 
Marts 8, 2015] 
Nord Pool Spot (a). Bidding Areas. [Online] Available from: http://www.nordpoolspot.com/How-does-
it-work/Bidding-areas/ [Accessed on: Marts 8, 2015] 
Nord Pool Spot (b). Price Calculation. [Online] Available from: 
http://www.nordpoolspot.com/TAS/Day-ahead-market-Elspot/Price-calculation/ [Accessed 
on: Marts 8, 2015] 
Nord Pool Spot (c). Price formation in Nord Pool Spot. [Online] Available from: 
http://www.nordpoolspot.com/How-does-it-work/Day-ahead-market-Elspot-/Price-formation-
in-Nord-Pool-Spot/ [Accessed on: Marts 8, 2015] 
Nord Pool Spot (d). Trading. [Online] Available from: http://www.nordpoolspot.com/TAS/ [Accessed 
on: Marts 8, 2015] 
Nord Pool Spot (e). Day-ahead market Elspot. [Online] Available from: 
http://www.nordpoolspot.com/TAS/Day-ahead-market-Elspot/ [Accessed on: June 4, 2015] 
Nord Pool Spot (f).Elspot Prices. [Online] http://www.nordpoolspot.com/Market-data1/Elspot/Area-
Prices/ALL1/Hourly/?view=table [Accessed on: June 4, 2015] 
Pedersen, J. (2015). Personal communication with Jan Pedersen, Senior Process Engineer at Krüger 
A/S [Conversation]. Krüger A/S headoffice,  Gladsaxevej 363;  2860 Søborg. [June 15, 2015]   
 
Proanovic, P. and Simonovic, S. P. (2004) Generation of Synthetic Design Storms for the Upper Thames 
River Basin CFCAS Project: Assessment of Water Resources Risk and Vulnerability to Changing 
Climatic Condition. The University of Western Ontario Department of Civil and Environmental 
Engineering. [Online] Available from: 
==PAGE:55==
 
 
46 
http://www.eng.uwo.ca/research/iclr/fids/publications/products/Report%20V2.pdf [Accessed 
on: June 30, 2015] 
Rambøll. (2012) Valg af regnmåler og sikkerhedsfaktorer til beregninger på afløbssystemer. [Online] 
Available from:  
http://www.kerteminde.dk/Files/Filer/miljo%20og%20teknik/Milj/spildevand/Godk%20plan
%202014-2017/Bilag%202%20-
%20Valg%20%20af%20regnmåler%20samt%20sikkerhedsfaktorer.pdf [Accessed on: July 7, 
2015] 
 
Rensmart. (2015) KWH To CO2 Conversion. [Online] Available from: 
http://www.rensmart.com/Information/KWHToCO2Conversion [Accessed on: February 25, 
2015] 
 
Rieger, L., Aymerich, I., Sobhani, R., Rosso, D., Schraa, O., Corominas, L. (2015) Lower Energy 
Consumption but Higher Energy Bills? The Impact of Energy Tariffs on WRRF Operating Costs. 
Proceedings - Water Environment Association of Ontario Annual Conference 2015, At Toronto 
ON, Canada.   
Siemens (2015). Aeration. [Online] Available from: 
http://www.energy.siemens.com/br/en/compression-expansion/special-
applications/aeration/waste-water-treatment.htm [Accessed on: January 14, 2015] 
 
Skat.dk (2014) Forhøjelse af afgiften på spildevand pr. 1. oktober 2014. [Online] Available from: 
http://www.skat.dk/skat.aspx?oId=2162021&vId=0+. [Accessed on: July 15, 2015] 
Spees, K. and Lave, L. (2008) Impacts of responsive load. In PJM: load shifting and real time pricing. 
Energy Journal. Volume 29 (issue 2) p. 101-121. 
 
Teknologirådet (2006) Dansk energiforbrug i fremtiden [Online] Available from: 
http://www.tekno.dk/pdf/projekter/p05_Danske_Energisystem_hoering-energiforbrug.pdf 
[Accessed on: July 11, 2015] 
 
Therkelsen, J. (2015). Personal communication with Jens Therkelsen, Analyst at EnergiDanmark 
[Telephone conversation]. [Accessed on: May 29, 2015]   
 
Tolson, B. A. and Shoemaker, C. A. (2007) Dynamically Dimensioned Search Algorithm for 
Computationally Efficient Watershed Model Calibration. Water Resources Research. Volume 43 
(issue 1). 
 
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) (2015). Global Trends in Renewable Energy 
Investment. [Available from]: http://fs-unep-centre.org/publications/global-trends-renewable-
energy-investment-2015 [Accessed on: April 9. 2015] 
Valutakurser.dk. Valutakurser. [Online] Available from: http://www.valutakurser.dk/ [Accessed on: 
June 4, 2015] 
 
Vezzaro, L., Grum, M. (2014) A generalised Dynamic Overflow Risk Assessment (DORA) for Real Time 
Control of urban drainage systems. Journal of Hydrology. Volume 515. p. 292-303. 
 
Vieux B. E. and Vieux J. E. (2005). Statistical evaluation of a radar rainfall system for sewer system 
management. Atmospheric Research. Volume 77 (Issue 1-4). p.  322– 336. 
==PAGE:56==
 
 
47 
 
Wang, E., Zhang, Y., Luo, J., Chiew, F. H. S. and Wang Q. J. (2011) Monthly and seasonal streamflow 
forecasts using rainfall-runoff modeling and historical weather data. Water Resources Research. 
Volume 47 (Issue 5).  
 
Weber, C. 2010. Adequate intraday market design to enable the integration of wind energy into the 
European power systems. Energy Policy. Volume 38 (issue 7). p. 3155-3163. 
WeatherWorks (2013) Weather Radars Explained [Online] Available from: 
http://www.weatherworksinc.com/how-radar-works [Accessed on: July 7, 2015]  
 
Winther, L., Linde, J. J., Jensen, H. T., Mathiasen, L. L. And Johansen, N. B. (2006) Afløbsteknik. 5. Edition. 
Polyteknisk forlag. 
Zamora, C., Giraldo J. M., Leirens S. (2010) Model predictive control of water transportation networks. 
Proceeding – IEEE ANDESCON 2010 - Bogota, Colombia, September 2010. 
Zugno, M. (2013) Optimization Under Uncertainty for Management of Renewables in Electricity Markets. 
PhD thesis. Technical University of Denmark. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:57==
 
 
48 
Appendix I - Current Control 
Pumps 
Pump PS0605p1 
If the level in basin SB0602 < 37.2 m and the level in NYTBAS > 0.675 the pump stops (start level = 100 
m and stop level = 90 m). Ells the start level = 35.54 m and stop level = 35.19 m. Constant pump flow of 
0.04 m3/s  
 
Pump PS0607p1 
If the level in basin SB0601 < 55.15 m and the level in NYTBAS > 0.675 the pump stops (start level = 
100 m and stop level = 90 m). Ells the start level = 54.81 m and stop level = 54.41 m. Constant pump 
flow of 0.012 m3/s  
 
Pump PS0607p1 
If the level in basin SB0601 < 55.15 m and the level in NYTBAS > 0.675 the pump stops (start level = 
100 m and stop level = 90 m). Ells the start level = 54.91 m and stop level = 54.41 m. Constant pump 
flow of 0.01 m3/s. 
 
Pump PS0712p1 
If the level in basin SB0701 < 34.7 m and the level in NYTBAS > 0.675 the pump stops (start level = 100 
m and stop level = 90 m). Ells the start level = 31.90 m and stop level = 31.20 m. Constant pump flow of 
0.0486 m3/s. 
 
Pump PS0712p2 
If the level in basin SB0701 < 34.7 m and the level in NYTBAS > 0.675 the pump stops (start level = 100 
m and stop level = 90 m). Ells the start level = 31.90 m and stop level = 31.20 m. Constant pump flow of 
0.0486 m3/s. 
 
Pump PS0004p1 
If the level in basin SB0003 < -0.900 m and the level in NYTBAS > 0.855 the pump stops (start level = 
100 m and stop level = 90 m). Ells the start level = -2.4 m and stop level = -2.8 m. Constant pump flow 
of 0.051 m3/s. 
 
Pump PS0004p2 
If the level in basin SB0003 < -0.900 m and the level in NYTBAS > 0.855 the pump stops (start level = 
100 m and stop level = 90 m). Ells the start level = -2.35 m and stop level = -2.8 m. Constant pump flow 
of 0.024 m3/s. 
 
Pump SØ_Bassin_p1 
Pumps if the level in II02700 < 25 m. Constant pump flow of 0.1 m3/s. 
 
Pump SB0005p1 
If the level in SB0003 > 0.2 m and the level in SB0005 < 0.82 m the start level is 100 and the stop level 
is 90 (pump stops). Ells the start level = -1.15 and stop level = -1.5 m. Constant pump flow of 0.022 
m3/s. 
==PAGE:58==
 
 
49 
 
Pump SB0005p2 
If the level in SB0003 > 0.2 m and the level in SB0005 < 0.82 m the start level is 100 and the stop level 
is 90 (pump stops). Ells the start level = -1.1 and stop level = -1.5 m. Constant pump flow of 0.008 
m3/s. 
 
Pump PS0001p1 
If the level in node X711900 > - 0,381 than start level = 100 m and stop level = 90 m (pump stops). Ells 
start level = -1.63 m and stop level = -2,08 m. Constant pump flow of 0.05 m3/s.  
 
Pump PS0001p2 
If the level in node X711900 > - 0,381 than start level = 100 m and stop level = 90 m (pump stops). Ells 
start level = -1.08 m and stop level = -1,83 m. Constant pump flow of 0.022 m3/s.  
 
Pump PS0712p1 
If the level in NYTBAS < 4 m and the level in node X000D00 < -1.66 m start level = 31.90 m and stop 
level = 31.20 m. If the level in NYTBAS > 0.675 and the level is SB0701 < 34.7 m start level = 100 and 
stop level = 90 m (pump stops). Ells start level = 31.90 m and stop level = 31.20 m.  
 
Pump PS0712p2 
If the level in NYTBAS < 4 m and the level in node X000D00 < -1.66 m start level = 32 m and stop level 
= 31.20 m. If the level in NYTBAS > 0.675 and the level is SB0701 < 34.7 m start level = 100 and stop 
level = 90 m (pump stops). Ells start level = 32 m and stop level = 31.20 m.  
 
Pump PS0401p1 
If the level in SB0004a > 1.4 m and the level in SB0401 < 36.5 the start level = 100 m and stop level = 
90 m (pump stops). Ells the start level = 34.5 m and the stop level = 34.0 m. Constant pump flow of 
0.028 m3/s. 
 
Pump PS0401p2 
If the level in SB0004a > 1.4 m and the level in SB0401 < 36.5 the start level = 100 m and stop level = 
90 m (pump stops). Ells the start level = 34.7 m and the stop level = 34.0 m. Constant pump flow of 
0.01 m3/s. 
 
Pump PS0521p1 
If the level in OB0502 < 2.149 m the start level = -1.55 m and the stop level = -1.85 m. Ells the start 
level = 100 m and the stop level = 90 m (pump stops). Constant pump flow of 0.04 m3/s. 
 
Pump PS0521p2 
If the level in OB0502 < 2.149 m the start level = -1.55 m and the stop level = -1.85 m. Ells the start 
level = 100 m and the stop level = 90 m (pump stops). Constant pump flow of 0.017 m3/s. 
 
Pump PS10022p1 
==PAGE:59==
 
 
50 
If the level in SB0004a > 1.5 m and the level in SB1001 < 1.11 m the start level = 100 and the stop level 
= 90 m (pump stops). Ells the start level = -0.09 m and the stop level = -0.99 m. Constant pump flow of 
0.056 m3/s. 
 
Pump PS10022p2 
If the level in SB0004b > 1.5 m and the level in SB1001 < 1.11 m the start level = 100 and the stop level 
= 90 m (pump stops). Ells the start level = -0.09 m and the stop level = -0.99 m. Constant pump flow of 
0.014 m3/s. 
 
Pump P1p1 
If the level in X700D00 > -1.411 m and the level in P1 < -0.6 m and pump P1p3 is active the start level 
= 100 m and stop level = 90 m. If the level in P1 > -0.601 m the start level = -0.65 m and stop level = -
0.7 m. If the level in X700D00 > -1.411 m and the pump P1p3 is not active start level = -2.5 m and stop 
level = -2.6 m if the level in P1 < -0.801 m. Ells the start level = -2.5 m and stop level = -2.6 m if the level 
in X700D00 < -1.411 m. If the level in P1 < -3 m the pump flow is 0 m3/s. If the level in P1 is between -
3 m and -2 m the pump flow is 0.06 m3/s. If the level in P1 > -2 m the flow is 0.25 m3/s. 
 
Pump P1p2 
If the level in X700D00 > -1.411 m and the level in P1 < -0.6 m and pump P1p3 is active the start level 
= 100 m and stop level = 90 n (pump is off). If the level in P1 > -0.6 m the start level = -0.65 m and stop 
level = -0.7 m. If the level in X700D00 < -0.6 m and pump P1p4 is active the start level =100 m and stop 
level = 90 m. Ells the start level = -2.5 m and stop level = -2.6 m is the level in P1 < -1.411 m. If the level 
in P1 < -3 m the pump flow is 0 m3/s. If the level in P1 is between -3 m and -2 m the pump flow is 0.06 
m3/s. If the level in P1 > -2 m the flow is 0.25 m3/s. 
 
Pump P1p3 
If the level in X700D00 < -1.411 the start level = 100 m and the stop level = 90 m (pump is off). If the 
level in P1 < -0.8 m and pump P1p5 is active the start level = 100 m and stop level = 90 m. Ells the start 
level = -1.42 m and stop level = -1.41 m. Pump flow is 0 m3/s if the level in P1 < -0.6 m and 0.8 m3/s if 
the level in P1 > -0.6 m. 
 
Pump P1p4 
If the level in P1<-0.6 m and pump P2p4 is active and pump P1p6 is not active the start level = 100 m 
and stop level = 90 m (pump is off). Ells the start level = -1.42 m and stop level = -2.6 m. Constant 
pump flow = 0.5 m3/s   
 
Pump P1p5 
Constant pump flow off 0.001 m3/s 
 
Pump P2p1 
If orifice Riberdyb_1 is closed the pump is on if the level in X710D00 < -0.955 m. If the discharge from 
NYTBAS > 0m3/s the start level = 100 m and stop level = 90 m (pump is off). If the level in X710D00 > -
0.961 m and the level in P2 < -1.001 m and pump P2p3 is active start level = 100 m and stop level = 90 
m. If the level in P2 > -1.001 m start level = -2,5 m and stop level = -2.6 m. Ells the pump is on if the 
==PAGE:60==
 
 
51 
level in X710D00 < -0.955 m. If the level in P1 < -2 m the flow is 0 m3/s. If the level in P1 > -2 m the 
flow is 0.25 m3/s. 
 
Pump P2p2 
If the discharge from NYTBAS > 0 m3/s start level = 100 and stop level = 90 m (pump is off). If the 
level in X710D00 > -0.961 m and the level in P2 < -1.001 and pump P2p3 is active start level = 100 and 
stop level = 90 m (pump is off). If the level in P2 > 1-001 start level =-2.5 m and stop level = -2.6 m. If 
pump P2p1 is active start level = 100 and stop level = 90 m (pump is off). Ells the pump start level = -
2,5 m and stop level = -2.6 m if the level in X710D00 < -0.955 m. If the level in P1 < -2 m the flow is 0 
m3/s. If the level in P1 > -2 m the flow is 0.25 m3/s. 
 
Pump P2p3 
If the discharge from NYTBAS > 0 m3/s start level = 100 m and stop level = 90 m (pump is off). If the 
level in X710D00 > -0.961 m start level = -4.1 m and stop level = -5.1 m. Ells the start level = 100 m and 
stop level = 90m (pump is off). If the level in P1 < -1 m the flow is 0 m3/s. If the level in P1 > -1 m the 
flow is 0.8 m3/s. 
 
Pump P2p4 
If the discharge from NYTBAS > 0 m3/s start level = 100 m and stop level = 90 m (pump is off). If pump 
P1p4 is active and pump P2p5 is not active and the level in P2 < - 1 m start level = 100 m and stop level 
= 90 m. Ells the pump is on if the level in X710D00 < -0.965 m. Constant pump flow of 0.5 m3/s.  
 
Pump P2p5 
If the level in P2 < -2.6 m the flow is 0.05 m3/s. Ells the flow is 0 m3/s. 
 
Orifices 
Orifice SB0801o1 
If the level in NYTBAS < 1.8 m and the level in X000D00 < -1.66 the position is 3.6 m (open). If the level 
in NYTBAS < 0.855 and the level in basin SB0801 is < 5.580 m the position is 3.4 m (closed). Ells the 
position is 3.6 m (open). 
 
Orifice X711900o1 
If the level in node X711900 > -0.631 the position is -1.18 m (closed). If the flow in link X711500|1 and 
link  X712000|1 is > 0.02 m3/s the position is -1.18 m (closed). Ells the position is – 0.48 m (open). 
 
Orifice SØ_Bassino1 
If the level in SØ_Bassin is > 23.1 m the position is 23.27 m (open). If the level in NYTBAS < 4.3 m and 
the level in node X000D00 < -1.56 the position is 23.27 m (open) if the level in OB0301 is between -10 
m and 1.8 m and the position is 22.92 (closed) if the level in OB0301 is between 2.1 m and 10. If the 
level in NYTBAS > 0.67 m the position is 22.92 m (closed). Ells the position is 23.27 m (open) if the 
level in OB0301 is between -10 m and 1.8 m and the position is 22.92 (closed) if the level in OB0301 is 
between 2.1 m and 10. 
 
Orifice SB0302o1 
==PAGE:61==
 
 
52 
If the level in SB0303 > 27 m the position is 37.7 m (closed). If the level in SB0302 < 39.5 m and the 
level in SB0303 > 24.71 m the position is 37.7 m (closed). If the level in SB0302 < 39.3 m and the level 
in SB0303 > 24.26 m the position is 37.7 m (closed). If the level in SB0302 < 39 m and the level in 
SB0303 > 23.8 m the position is 37.7 m (closed). If the level in SB0302 < 38.7 m and the level in 
SB0303 > 23.42 m the position is 37.7 m (closed). Ells the position is 37.92 (open) if the level in 
IK03437 is between 0-36 m and the position is 37.7 m (closed) if the level in IK03437 is between 36.2 
– 50 m.  
 
Orifice SB0303o2 
If the level in SB0303 > 25.25 m the position is 30.18 m (open). If the level in NYTBAS < 4.3 and the 
level in SB0303 > 24.54 m and the level in node X000D00 < -1.56 the position is 30.18 m (open) if the 
level in node 1J0020X is between -10 m and -0.4 m and the position is 29.98 m (closed) if the level is 
between -0.35 m and 10m. If the level in NYTBAS > 0.67 the position is 29.98 m (closed. Ells the the 
position is 30.18 m (open) if the level in node 1J0020X is between -10 m and -0.4 m and the position is 
29.98 m (closed) if the level is between -0.35 m and 10m.    
 
Orifice OB1001o1 
If the level in NYTBAS > 0.4 m and the level in SB0004a > -0.1 m the position of the orifices is set to 
achieve a level of 34.5 m in node Agt3 (open). Ells the position of the orifice is set to achieve a level of 0 
m in node Agt3 (closed).  
 
Orifice Braendkj_o2 
If the level in NYTBAS < 3.67 m and the level in SB0004a > 1.6 m the position is 4.75 (closed). If the 
level in NYTBAS < 2.08 m and the level in SB0004a > 1.44 m the position is 4.75 (closed). If the level in 
NYTBAS < 1.55 m and the level in SB0004a > 0.94 m the position is 4.75 (closed). If the level in 
NYTBAS < 1.01 m and the level in SB0004a > 0.28 m the position is 4.75 (closed). 
Ells the position is 5.25 m (open). 
 
Orifice SB0803o1 
If the level in NYTBAS < 2.65 m and the level in X000D00 < -1.66 m the position is -0.85 m (open). If 
the level in NYTBAS > 0.855 m and the level in SB0803 < 0.3 m the position is -1.15 m (closed). Ells the 
position is -0.85 m (open). 
 
Orifice Riberdyb_3 
If the level in NYTBAS < -0.1 m and the level in BR1 < -2.4 m the position is -3.1 m (closed). If the level 
in NYTBAS > -0.1 and the level in BR1 > -2.4 m the position is -3.10 m (closed) if the level in BR1 is 
between -10 m and 0.5 m, the position is -2.80 m (30 % open) if the level in BR1 is between 0.7 m and 
0.9 m and the position is -2.1 m (open) if the level in BR1 is between 1.5 m and 10 m. If the level in 
NYTBAS < 0.1 m and the level in BR1 > -2,4 m the position is -2.5 m (60 % open) if the level in BR1 is 
between -10 m and -1.86 m and the position is -2.8 m (30  % open) if the level in BR1 is between -1.85 
m and 10 m. Ells the position is -3.1 m (closed).   
 
Orifice SB0004o1 
If the level in NYTBAS > 3.67 m and the level in SB0004a < 1.6 m the position is -0.9 m (closed). If the 
level in NYTBAS > 2.08 m and the level in SB0004a < 1.44 m the position is -0.9 m (closed). If the level 
==PAGE:62==
 
 
53 
in NYTBAS > 1.55 m and the level in SB0004a < 0.94 m the position is -0.9 m (closed). If the level in 
NYTBAS > 1.01 m and the level in SB0004a < 0.28 m the position is -0.9 m (closed). Ells the position is -
0.4 m (open). 
 
Orifice O1600_1 
If the level in X00D00 > 0.439 m the position is -1.37 m (open). If the level in X700D00 > -1.851 m the 
position is -1.37 m (open). If the level in X710D00 > -0.211 m the position is -1.37 m (open). If the level 
in X00D00 > -1.961 m and the level in X700D00 > -2.061 m and the level in X000C00 > -2.101 m the 
position is -1.37 m (open). Ells the position is -2.97 m (closed). 
 
Orifice O1600_2 
If orifice O1600_1 is open the position of orifice O1600_2 is -1.37 m (open). If P1p6 is active the 
position is -1.37 m (open). Ells the position is -2.97 m (closed). 
 
Orifice Riberdyb_2 
If the level in X700D00 > -1.851 the position is -2.33 m (open). If the level in X000D00 > -1.661 m the 
position is -2.33 m (open). If the level in X710D00 > -1.861 m the position is -2.33 m (open). If the level 
in NYTBAS > -0.101 m the position is -2.33 m (open). If the discharge in RIST2I4 > 0.001 m3/s the 
position is -2.33 m (open). Ells the position is -3.53 m (closed). 
 
Orifice Kanal 
If the discharge from pipe RIST2I1 > 0.001 m3/s the position is 2.9 m (open). Ells the position is 1.4 m 
(closed). 
 
Orifice Skakto1 
If the discharge from pipe NYTBASI1 > 0 m3/s the position is set to achieve a level of 3.3 m in SF. If the 
discharge from RIST2I1 > 0.001 m3/s the position is set to achieve a level of 2.8 m in SF. Ells the 
position is set to achieve a level of 3.3 m in SF. 
 
Orifice Riberdyb_1 
If the level in X000D00 > 0.439 m the position is -1.88 m (open). If the level in X700D00 > -1.761 m the 
position is -1.88 m (open). If the level in X710D00 > -0.211 the position is -1.88 m (open). If the level in 
X710D00 > -2.011 and the level in X710C00 > -2.101 m the position is      -1.88 m (open). If the level in 
NYTBAS > 0.101 m the position is -1.88 m (open). Ells the position is -3.08 m (closed). 
 
Orifice Riberdyb_2 
If the discharge from NYTBAS > 0 m3/s the position is -1.71 m (open). If the level in X700D00 < -1.86 
m the position is -1.71 (open). If the position of orifice Riberdyb_1 > -1.901 m (open) and the position 
of orifice O1600_1 > -1.401 m (open) the position is -3.21 m (closed). Ells the position is -1.71 m 
(open). 
 
 
 
==PAGE:63==
 
 
54
Appendix II – System Overview 
 
Figure 17Simplistic overview of the Kolding sewer system that formed basis for the construction of the WA model 
 
==PAGE:64==
 
55 
Appendix III – Model Construction 
Krüger A/S provided a Mike Urban model of the sewer system of Kolding. The model entails the 
majority of Kolding and a number of minor suburbs and has formed basis for the construction of a 
simple WaterAspects model.  
 
 
Figure 18. Overvies of the Mike Urban model of Kolding sewer system.  
 
Data collection 
To be able to construct a simple model an overview have been created through data collection and 
calculations of necessary data. The data was: 
 
- 
Basin volume (VBas) To get an accurate estimation of the potential storage volume in the 
system, and to identify essential locations, the effective storage volume was estimated for each 
basin. This was done by determining the maximum water level that could be attained without 
causing overflow. The effective storage volume was than determined from the V-H curves from 
==PAGE:65==
 
56 
the MU model, which relates basin volume to water level. For basins and structures with direct 
overflow the level was set equal to the crest level of the weir. For basins with overflow to an 
adherent basin the level was set equal to the crest level of the weir of the down stream basin. 
For basins with no weirs (e.g. backwater basins) the level was set equal to the ground level.   
  
- 
Upstream pipe volume (VPipe) The movement of water in WaterAspects is relative simple. 
The model does therefore not include for the storage volume in the pipes. To take this volume 
into account the upstream pipe volume has been calculated for each of the basins and 
structures. The pipe volume was calculated to the same level as the effective basin volume. To 
do this, an excel document was provided by Krüger A/S. The excel sheet is able to load 
information of the pipe geometry of all pipes in the system from a MEX file. Given a level and 
the up- and downstream nodes of the pipes, the excel sheet is able to calculate the available 
volume. 
   
- 
Catchment area (Atotal) In the MU model a number of separate catchments are discharging 
directly to the basin/ structure or to the upstream pipe system. In the WA model only one 
catchment is connected to each basin orstructure. The area of this catchment was set equal to 
the sum of all the MU catchments discharging to that basin or structure. In cases where the 
catchment was discharging to split manholes (manholes where the connected pipes goes to 
two different structure) the catchment area was split between the two structures 
corresponding to the ratio between the pipes cross sectional areas.   
 
- 
Reduced catchment area (Ared) When rain falls on a catchment only part of it will enter the 
sewer system, while the rest will infiltrate into the ground or evaporate back into the sky. 
Generally it is assumed that all the water that falls on impervious area (road, roof, sidewalk 
etc.) will run to the sewer. It is therefore common to determine the impervious area (Aimp) of a 
catchment to estimate the amount of water going to the sewer. This had already been done for 
each of the catchments in the MU model. Aimp was found for each of the WA catchments by a 
weighted average of Aimp dependent on the catchment area of the corresponding MU 
catchments. As Aimp is not always accurate for estimating the flow from a catchment a 
hydrologic reduction factor can be multiplied (Grum, 2015). Hydrological reduction factors 
were also given for each of the MU catchments and calculated for the WA catchments as a 
weighted average. The reduced catchment is found as the product of the total area, Aimp and 
the hydrological reduction factor.     
 
- 
Maximum outlet capacity (QMax) For pumping stations and basins with pumps the maximum 
outlet capacity has been set equal to the pump capacity. For pumping stations and basins with 
more than one pump the maximum outlet capacity was set equal to the sum of the pump 
capacities. For basins and structures emptied by gravitational force the maximum outlet 
capacity was set equal to the full flowing capacity of the pipe determined by the following 
equations: 
 
                 
 
==PAGE:66==
 
57 
   
  
 
v = velocity of a full pipe 
R = Hydraulic radius 
I = energy gradient (assumed equal to the slope of the pipe) 
d = inner diameter 
 
Population equivalent (PE) To simulate the wastewater flow from a specific area the 
population equivalent (PE) is used. PE is an indicator of the oxygen demand required to treat 
the wastewater flow from a certain catchment. One PE is equal to the average oxygen demand 
of the wastewater produced by one person in one day (kilde ??). In the MU model a PE values 
was assigned to each catchment. Where catchments are connected to split manholes the PE 
was split between the relevant basins and structures in accordance with the ratio between the 
pipes cross sectional area. 
 
- 
Time of transportation (TTrans.) Due to the simplistic imitation of water movement in 
WaterAspects it is necessary to state the transportation time of water between two points. 
This was estimated by determining the path length between a structure and the next 
downstream structure in the sewer system, and assuming an average transport speed of 0.8 
m/s. The transportation time was set to 0 min when the transport between two points is solely 
through pumps, because the pressurised pipes will always be water filled. In cases of internal 
overflow (overflow from one structure directly into another) the transportation time was set 
to 30 sec.   
 
- 
Time of concentration (TConc.) Time of concentration is generally defined as the time it takes 
for water to travel from the most remote point in the sub catchment to the point of collection 
(Hydrocad, 2015). Time of concentration was determined from the MU model by determining 
the length of the longest travel path for each of the basins or structures and assuming an 
average flow speed of 0.8 m/s. Additionally 7 min was added to account for the time it takes 
for the water to enter the sewer system. 
 
To be able to create a simple WaterAspects model it was necessary to construct an overview that 
shows how the different structures are connected and where internal overflow occurres.  Additionally 
the overview shows the location of pumps and orifices and indicates which of these is under real time 
control. The overview can be seen in Appendix III.  
 
Model construction 
In WaterAspects each basin or structure was implemented as a SAMBA node, see Figure 19. Each 
SAMBA node is made up of: 
 
- 
A detention basin: The detention basin requires information on basin volume and outlet 
capacity. As the storage volume in the pipes are not included in the WA’s simplistic description 
of water movement, the basin volume is set to be the sum of the basin volume and the 
upstream pipe volume. 
==PAGE:67==
 
58 
 
- 
A catchment module: The catchment requires information on total catchment area, 
imperviousness, reduction factor, time of concentration and TA-curve.  
 
- 
A Wastewater module: This gives a wastewater input to the specific basin. In the MU model a 
diurnal wastewater flow was implemented. The wastewater flow for one person was 
implemented in the WaterAspects model as a variable, which was subsequently multiplied by 
the PE of the specific catchment area.   
 
- 
A transport module: WaterAspects is able to run fast simulations as it has a simplified 
representation of the water flows. Therefore, the transport module requires input of the 
transport time. 
 
There are two flows out of the SAMBA node; an outlet flow and an overflow. The outlet flow or 
overflow from one SAMBA node can be directly connected to another node. It is only possible to 
connect one inlet flow to a node. To connect inlet flows from several SAMBA nodes to one node the 
flows must first be merged by a “joiner”. In situations where one flow goes to more than one structure 
it is possible to split one flow into two using a “splitter”.   
 
Connections between SAMBA nodes cannot be circular. This means that water cannot flow from a 
downstream node to an upstream node. An example is in the case of a backwater basin whose outlet is 
connected to a downstream basin, but also receives the overflow from this same basin. In these cases a 
point input was connected to the basin and set equal to the outlet or overflow volume of the 
“upstream” structure in the previous time step. 
 
 
Figure 19. Screen shot from WaterAspects, showing an overview of a SAMBA node. 
==PAGE:68==
 
59 
As the WaterAspects model is not able to restrict the outlet flow from a node due to backwater in the 
system, this was done manually by using a “Tabular dependency” for the relevant basins. The outlet 
capacity of the node is thereby set to be dependent on the degree of filling (or another parameter) of 
the downstream node, see Figure 20.     
 
Figure 20. Tabular dependency to make the outlet capacity of a node dependent on the degree of filling of a 
downstream node. 
Wastewater flow  
As the tested control strategies aim at optimising the dry weather flow it is important that the 
WaterAspetcs model is able to mimic these conditions well. For calibration of the dry-weather flow the 
measured flow data to the pre-treatment plant was used. The data was cleaned for wet-weather 
periods by visual inspection of flow intensities and removal of flow data above or below set values. 
The flow pattern was found to vary throughout the year and the cut off values therefore also varied. 
From January up to and including June all flow values above 1300 L/s or below 400 L/s was removed. 
For the rest of the period the lower cut off value was set to 200 L/s, see Figure 21.   
The measured flow data was given with intervals of two minutes and the diurnal flow pattern was 
determined by averaging the flow value of a given 2 min timeslot of the day. A distinction was made 
between weekdays (Monday to Friday) and weekends (Saturday and Sunday).  This resulted in two 
diurnal flow patterns, showing the average wastewater flow to the pre-treatment plant for weekdays 
and weekends in 2014, respectively.    
 
==PAGE:69==
 
60 
 
 
Figure 21. Top: Flow to the pre-treatment plant mesured in 2014. Bottom: Cleaned flow to the pre-treatment plant 
used to determine average wastewater flow to the pre-treatment plant. 
To implement the flow patterns in the WA model each of the diurnal 
flow patterns was implemented as a diurnal variable. This variable 
indicated the amount of wastewater produced at a specific hour of the 
day per PE. 
 
 This means that we have one variable that gives the wastewater flow 
for a weekday as a function of the hour of the day (QWeekdays(hour)) and 
a variable that gives the wastewater flow in the weekends as a function 
of the hour of the day (QWeekend(hour)). 
WA is not able to determine the weekday based on a date. This was 
therefore done manually by producing a file covering the relevant time 
period. This file indicated weekdays with the value 0 and weekends 
with the value 1, see Figure 22. This file works as a day-factor variable 
(f(day)).  
 
From this it is possible to express a wastewater flow that is dependent 
on the day of the week and the hour of the day (Qww(day, hour)): 
 
 
                                                                         
Figure 22. Manually produced 
file for indication of weekdays 
and weekends. 
==PAGE:70==
 
61 
 
This flow was then connected to each of the WA nodes as a wastewater input and multiplied by the PE 
of the adherent catchment. 
 
Current Real Time Control Implementation 
In the Kolding sewer system there is currently a real time control (RTC) on 20 pumps and 10 orifices. 
In the MU model the RTC set points is primary based on water levels in 
manholes and basins. In the WA model, this has been translated into 
degree of filling in basins or discharges from basins, joiners and 
splitters. 
 
The pump and orifice controls are implemented as constrains for the 
outlet capacity of the adherent basins/strucutres and as diversion 
degree of the splitters.  
 
In the WA model the control of a pump or orifice consists of a number of 
statements that each consists of a number of conditions, see Figure 23. 
The conditions are implemented in the WA model as “inequality 
criterions” that returns a value of 1 if the condition is true, meaning that 
the pump is on or the orifice is open. Ells it returns a value of 0, meaning that the pump is off or the 
orifice is closed. All of the conditions, under a statement, must return the value 0 for that statement to 
have a value of 0. If one or more statements return the value 0 the overall control is 0, meaning that 
the pump is off or the orifice is closed. The current control of the Kolding sewer system is given in 
Appendix ??. 
 
 
 
Figure 23.  An outline of how 
the RTC was implimented in 
==PAGE:71==
 
62 
Appendix IV – Implementation of Control Strategies in WA 
Control Strategy I 
A variable is created that contains the existing RTC (ExistingRTC).  
Another variable was created that showed how the outlet capacity of P1 should be according to the 
control strategy, assuming no obstacles e.g. rain within the forecast horizon or the storage volume of 
P1 was full, (OutletStrategy). 
For control strategy I this variable was constructed in the same way as the wastewater flow was 
implemented (see Appendix 2) using the same variable to distinguish between weekdays and 
weekends (f(day)). The control strategy aims at an outlet capacity of 239 L/s during weekdays and 
228 L/s during weekends. 
OutletStrategy = 239 L/s – 239 L/s * f(day) + 228L/s* f(day) 
In case of rain in the following hour the system is to be emptied out, which was done by setting the 
outlet capacity to 1 m3/s. 
The rainfall files that had been displaced by 1 day were imported as a text input. For the perfect 
forecast the rain file from rain gauge 5251 was used and for “Radar” forecast the rain file from rain 
gauge 5247 was used. To know if rain was expected in the following 1 hour a variable was created 
(SummedRain) that summed the rain intensity with a lag time between 1380 time steps (23 hours) 
and 1440 time steps (24 hours). An inequality criterion (RainIn1Hour) was set to be true (give a 
value of 1) if “SummedRain” > 0, ells a value of 0 if the statement was not true.  
To include the empting of the system another variable was created (ControlWithEmpty)  
ControlWithEmpty =  OutletStrategy – OutletStrategy * RainIn1Hour + 1 * RainIn1Hour 
Control strategy I is only to be active during dry-weather conditions, whereas the existing RTC is to be 
active during rain and until the system empties out. To evaluate when the system was completely 
emptied out a variable was constructed in the calibrated status model that summed the degree of 
filling for all nodes in the system (SystemFilling). This variable was extracted from the status model 
for the entire period (01-01-2014 to 31-05-2015) and imported, as a text input into the model 
containing the new control strategy. A variable was created (FillingOrRain) that summed 
SystemFilling and the runoff flow from the catchment of P1, for each time step. An inequality criterion 
(WetWeatherCondition) set to be true if “FillingOrRain” > 0.   
The outlet capacity of P1 (P1OutletCapacity) is set to 
P1OutletCapacity = ControlWithEmpty – ControlWithEmpty  * WetWeatherCondition + 
ExistingRTF * WetWeatherCondition. 
Control Strategy II 
Control Strategy II is tested both with a storage capacity of 4,000 m3 and 20,000m3.  
==PAGE:72==
 
63 
Version With 4,000 m3 Storage Capacity  
In the version with a 4,000 m3 storage capacity control strategy II was implemented in the same way 
as control strategy I, with a few alterations: 
The outlet capacity of a given hour was calculated using excel and subsequently implemented as a text 
input. The variable OutletStrategy was then set equal to this input. 
To ensure that the control strategy does not store more water in the system than what the storage 
capacity allows the outlet capacity was set to 500 L/s if the stored water volume exceeded 99 % of the 
storage volume. This means that this control strategy has two situations where it will start to empty 
the system; If P1 is full (outlet capacity of 500 L/s for 1 hour) and if rain is predicted in the subsequent 
2 hours ((outlet capacity of 1250 L/s for 2 hours). 
As this strategy uses a 2-hour time horizon to empty the system prior to a rain event the variable 
SummedRain was change to sum the rain intensity with a lag time between 1320 time steps (22 
hours) and 1440 time steps (24 hours). The inequality criterion RainIn1Hour was thereby changed to 
RainIn2Hours 
A variable was constructed (EmptyStrategy) that gave a value of 1250 L/s if rain was expected in the 
following 2 hours and ells gave a value of 500 L/s 
EmptyStrategy = 500 L/s – 500 L/s * RainIn2Hours + 1250 L/s * RainIn2Hours 
An inequality (Full) was set to be true if the water volume stored in P1 > 99 % of the basin volume at 
P1. 
A variable (FillingOrRainOrFull) was created that summed Full and FillingOrRain. An inequality 
criterion (Empty) was set to be true if FillingOrRainOrFull> 0.   
The variable ControlWithEmpty was then changed to: 
ControlWithEmpty =  OutletStrategy – OutletStrategy * Empty + EmptyStrategy * Empty 
Version With 20,000 m3 Storage Capacity 
A new detention basin (P1_Big) with a basin volume of 20,000 m3 and a transport time of 0 was added 
just upstream of P1.  
The outlet capacity of P1 was based on the same equations as used for the 4,000 m3 version, with the 
alteration that Full was set to be true if the water volume stored in P1_Big > 99 % of the basin volume 
at P1_Big. 
The outlet capacity of P1_Big was set equal to the outlet capacity of P1 during dry-weather condition 
and set to 250 m3/s during wet-weather conditions (from rain event begins to system is empty). This 
was done to ensure that no water was stored in P1_Big during rain. 
The construction of a new basin was done fore 2 reasons;  
1. The existing RTC is very affected by the conditions around P1. In the WA model this is 
primarily described as a function of degree of filling of the storage volume at P1. To make sure 
==PAGE:73==
 
64 
that the enlargement of the storage capacity at P1 did not affect the existing RTC during wet-
weather conditions a new basin was added instead of expanding the existing basin.  
2. By simply increasing the storage volume of P1 more water could be stored during rain events 
giving decreased overflow. This could give an incorrect impression of the efficiency of the 
tested control strategy.  
Due to the large storage volume P1_Big a forecast horizon of 6 hours was used to empty the system.  
When run with the perfects forecast the variable SummedRain was change to sum the rain intensity 
with a lag time between 1080 time steps (18 hours) and 1440 time steps (24 hours). When run with 
the NWP the NWP forecast had been made in excel as described in Section 4.5. This was imported in 
the model as a text input and called NWPForecast. As the value for a given hour in the NWP forecast 
already included information on the following 6 hours SummedRain was set equal to NWPForecast.    
Control Strategy III 
Control strategy III was constructed in the same way as the version of control strategy II with a 
storage volume of 20,000 m3, with minor alterations.  
As with control strategy II the outlet capacity had been calculated using excel and was implemented to 
the model as a text input, which the variable OutletStrategy was set equal to. 
Unlike the previous control strategies the current RTC is only to be active during the rain event, and 
not until the system is completely emptied. The variable SystemFilling was therefore deleted from the 
variable FillingOrRainOrFull, which then changed name to RainOrFull. 
Other then that control III was implemented exactly as the version of control strategy II with a basin 
volume of 20,000 m3.     
Control Strategy IV 
The control strategy optimizes the flow using an optimizer module that employs the DDS algorithm. 
A variable (Optimized_Flow) is made using a double sinus variable, in accordance with Eq. 3. This 
variable has 5 variables affiliated to it; mean, Amplitude_0, Phase_0, Amplitude_1 and Phase_1, 
corresponding to μ, a0, b0, a1, and b1 in Eq. 3. These are the variables that are to be determined by the 
optimizer.  
Optimized_Flow = mean + Amplitude_0 * sin(2π (TimeOfDay()+Phase_0))+Amplitude_1*sin(4π 
(TimeOfDay()+ Phase_1)) 
Where TimeOfDay() gives the time step of the day 
The objective function to be minimized is the cost function of Eq. 4 that depends on the flow from the 
pre-treatment plant (which depend on the flow from P1). To ensure that the optimization does not 
minimize the objective function by producing negative flow values, a flow variable 
(OptimizedFloeOnlyPositive) that to only contain the positive flow values is made and used in the 
objective function. 
An inequality criterion (OptimizedFlowPositive) is set to be true if Optimized_Flow > 0 
==PAGE:74==
 
65 
OptimizedFloeOnlyPositive = Optimized_Flow * OptimizedFlowPositive 
The objective function (ObjectiveFunction) is made in accordance with Eq. 4 
ObjectiveFunction = OptimizedFlowOnlyPositive * Price * 0.000144 + 
OptimizedFlowOnlyPositive(30) * Price * 0.000174 
Where Price is the electricity price of the time step and OptimizedFlowOnlyPositive(30) is the flow 
value given by OptimizedFlowOnlyPositive 30 time step ago. 
In the optimizer module ObjectiveFunction is set as the variable the be minimized, the variables 
mean, Amplitude_0, Phase_0, Amplitude_1 and Phase_1 is set as parameters. The model is to optimize 
with a time horizon of 24 hours and a frequency of 24 hours. Prediction horizon is therefore set to 
1440 and Estimation frequency is set to 1440.  
To ensure that the control strategy does not lead to overflow during dry weather conditions a 
constraint is included as an inequality criteria (P1NotFull) that is true if the degree of filling in P1 < 
0.9. 
Additionally a constraint is included that says that the outlet flow is not to exceed the maximum 
capacity of the pumps (1500 L/s). This is done as an inequality criterion (FlowLessThanMax) that is 
true if OptimizedFlowOnlyPositiv < 1.5. 
In the case of rain in the following 6 hours or if the storage volume of P1 is full the existing control 
strategy is to be governing to empty out the system. The variable SummedRain from control strategy 
II was used in an inequality criterion (NoRainInForecast) that is true if SummedRain > 0. To indicate 
if control strategy IV should be active a Logical AND criterion (UseEnergyOptimizedFlow) is set to be 
true if both NoRainInForecast and P1NotFull are true.   
P1OutletCapacity = UseEnergyOptimizedFlow * OptimizedFlowOnlyPositive + (1- 
UseEnergyOptimizedFlow) * ExistingRTC 
Result files  
Like most other modeling tools applied within the field of urban drainage WA is generally used to 
simulate the conditions in the sewer system during rain events. A traditional jobfile will indicate the 
initiation and end (adding a few hours before and after the event) of all rain events within a given time 
period. To save time the model will then only simulate the time slots indicated by the joblist and skip 
over periods with dry-weather conditions Adding time prior to the event is done because the model 
will assume that no water is in the system when a job starts. By adding a few hours in the beginning of 
an event a bit of wastewater flow has time to enter the system, making the state of the system, when 
the rain event starts, more realistic.  
For the purpose of this study it is necessary to simulate the conditions during dry-weather conditions 
as well. A joblist file was constructed for each month within the tested time period. Each jobfile would 
only contain 1 job starten 1-2 weeks before to the relevant month and ending 1-2 after the end of the 
relevant month. After running the model with a joblist file the results was extracted. To evaluate the 
control strategies and for the purpose of error detection the following information was extracted:   
==PAGE:75==
 
66 
Rain fall, Summed degree of filling of the system, total overflow from the system, costs (calculated 
using Eq. 1), the hourly electricity price, outlet flow from UDPUMP, outlet flow from P1, overflow from 
P1, Degree of filling of P1, outlet flow from SF, overflow from SF and Degree of filling of SF. 
As the joblists covered a entire month plus 1-2 weeks before and after some of the results was 
overlapping. As the control strategies stores water in the system during dry-weather periods the 
results file could not just be pasted together at any given point in time. Instead the overlapping time 
periods was compared and it was identified at was time the two result files had identical values for all 
of the variables. This would often be following a rain event where the system had been emptied out.       
 
 
==PAGE:76==
 
67 
Appendix V – WaterAspects Calibration Results 
 
Table 5. Comparison of number of overflow and total overflow volume given by the MU model and the WA model 
after calibration. 
 
WaterAspects 
Mike Urban 
Difference 
ID 
Events/ 
year 
Overflow 
volume/ 
year 
Events/ 
year 
Overflow 
volume/ 
year 
Events [no.] 
Events 
[%] 
Volume 
[m3] 
Volume [%] 
BR1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
BR2 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
BR3 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
BR32 
36 
39935.36 
47.7 
32392.69 
-11.7 
-24.5 
7542.7 
23.3 
BR5 
40.3 
26643.47 
48.2 
21907.49 
-7.9 
-16.4 
4736.0 
21.6 
II02700 
27.9 
25370.07 
38.2 
23407.68 
-10.3 
-27.0 
1962.4 
8.4 
II02700Z 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
II02802 
0.1 
0.05 
0.1 
14.70324 
0 
0 
-14.7 
-99.7 
IK11601 
0.2 
159.6736 
0.2 
198.5955 
0 
0 
-38.9 
-19.6 
IT11100 
37.6 
84777.68 
46.5 
81153.5 
-8.9 
-19.1 
3624.2 
4.5 
JA00800 
18 
11377.71 
22.2 
10350.66 
-4.2 
-18.9 
1027.1 
9.9 
JJ00400 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
KANAL 
0 
0 
53.5 
557631 
-53.5 
-100.0 
-557631.0 
-100.0 
NYTBAS 
11.2 
24772.15 
8.7 
39565.77 
2.5 
28.7 
-14793.6 
-37.4 
OB0001 
4.9 
883.6 
6.1 
827.1051 
-1.2 
-19.7 
56.5 
6.8 
OB0003 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
OB0006 
0.5 
27.25199 
0.6 
23.23509 
-0.1 
-16.7 
4.0 
17.3 
OB0007 
26.2 
15324 
47 
11056.69 
-20.8 
-44.3 
4267.3 
38.6 
OB0008 
4.4 
1266.941 
3.8 
1417.66 
0.6 
15.8 
-150.7 
-10.6 
OB0012 
10.8 
1208.396 
12.1 
1162.456 
-1.3 
-10.7 
45.9 
4.0 
OB0013 
0.7 
233.4111 
0.9 
203.624 
-0.2 
-22.2 
29.8 
14.6 
OB0015 
6.7 
645.4122 
8.6 
522.763 
-1.9 
-22.1 
122.6 
23.5 
OB0016 
14.5 
904.7139 
19.9 
720.3227 
-5.4 
-27.1 
184.4 
25.6 
OB0101 
32.8 
11503.5 
37.7 
9830.782 
-4.9 
-13.0 
1672.7 
17.0 
OB0102 
15.5 
702.7713 
17.6 
561.7813 
-2.1 
-11.9 
141.0 
25.1 
OB0301 
32.5 
5846.701 
27.9 
5871.526 
4.6 
16.5 
-24.8 
-0.4 
OB0401 
39.5 
8514.779 
45.2 
6933.666 
-5.7 
-12.6 
1581.1 
22.8 
OB0402 
1.8 
235.1321 
1.6 
309.0554 
0.2 
12.5 
-73.9 
-23.9 
OB0405 
6.2 
117.1869 
6.2 
144.4102 
0.0 
0.0 
-27.2 
-18.9 
OB0406 
24.8 
281.9151 
20.5 
334.7553 
4.3 
21.0 
-52.8 
-15.8 
OB0407 
41.4 
70006.49 
55.4 
65786.82 
-14.0 
-25.3 
4219.7 
6.4 
OB0408 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
OB0502 
36.1 
12386.1 
40 
12286.66 
-3.9 
-9.8 
99.4 
0.8 
OB0505 
33.6 
3899.144 
44.2 
3562.467 
-10.6 
-24.0 
336.7 
9.5 
OB0507 
24.7 
5699.965 
30.5 
4882.86 
-5.8 
-19.0 
817.1 
16.7 
OB0701 
29.7 
35610.86 
39.1 
27689.28 
-9.4 
-24.0 
7921.6 
28.6 
OB1001 
0.3 
58.24346 
0.3 
78.38085 
0 
0 
-20.1 
-25.7 
OB1002 
25.1 
2731.305 
35.1 
2317.92 
-10.0 
-28.5 
413.4 
17.8 
OB1006 
28.3 
909.8179 
30.3 
826.8593 
-2.0 
-6.6 
83.0 
10.0 
==PAGE:77==
 
68 
 
WaterAspects 
Mike Urban 
Difference 
ID 
Events/ 
year 
Overflow 
volume/ 
year 
Events/ 
year 
Overflow 
volume/ 
year 
Events [no.] 
Events 
[%] 
Volume 
[m3] 
Volume [%] 
OB1008 
10.4 
3972.477 
14.2 
3138.214 
-3.8 
-26.8 
834.3 
26.6 
OB1009 
41.5 
11964.19 
57 
9944.546 
-15.5 
-27.2 
2019.6 
20.3 
OB1012 
38.9 
3849.18 
53.7 
3137.236 
-14.8 
-27.6 
711.9 
22.7 
P1 
1.5 
422632.4 
0 
0 
1.5 
100.0 
422632.4 
100.0 
P2 
18.8 
56995.99 
0 
0 
18.8 
100.0 
56996.0 
100.0 
PS0007 
1.1 
7599.317 
0 
0 
1.1 
100.0 
7599.3 
100.0 
PS0016 
10.9 
2760.069 
12.3 
2645.748 
-1.4 
-11.4 
114.3 
4.3 
PS0502 
7.6 
1998.942 
14.3 
1340.969 
-6.7 
-46.9 
658.0 
49.1 
PS0503 
24.9 
7915.975 
27 
6385.397 
-2.1 
-7.8 
1530.6 
24.0 
PS0504 
17.3 
2572.628 
17.3 
2163.787 
0 
0 
408.8 
18.9 
PS0506 
31.6 
8921.611 
38.6 
7513.044 
-7.0 
-18.1 
1408.6 
18.7 
PS0607 
24.7 
6799.08 
28.6 
6693.623 
-3.9 
-13.6 
105.5 
1.6 
PSTBAS 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Rist1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
RIST2 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
SB0001 
8.8 
12616.13 
8.8 
13027.32 
0 
0 
-411.2 
-3.2 
SB0002 
1.4 
104.6099 
1.3 
107.5681 
0.1 
7.7 
-3.0 
-2.8 
SB0003 
1.9 
1121.18 
2.4 
995.4246 
-0.5 
-20.8 
125.8 
12.6 
SB0003X 
14.8 
15608.86 
15.9 
13651.62 
-1.1 
-6.9 
1957.2 
14.3 
SB0004a 
16.3 
5846.42 
14.7 
5814.022 
1.6 
10.9 
32.4 
0.6 
SB0004b 
10.4 
8016.403 
7.2 
13385.08 
3.2 
44.4 
-5368.7 
-40.1 
SB0005 
1.2 
523.1069 
0.9 
671.7243 
0.3 
33.3 
-148.6 
-22.1 
SB0201 
9.1 
845.8105 
9.6 
775.7781 
-0.5 
-5.2 
70.0 
9.0 
SB0202 
0.1 
17.99513 
0.1 
19.51591 
0 
0 
-1.5 
-7.8 
SB0302 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
SB0303 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
SB0401 
10.6 
12873.99 
10.6 
15387.87 
0 
0 
-2513.9 
-16.3 
SB0508 
12.8 
3663.436 
13.2 
2916.18 
-0.4 
-3.0 
747.3 
25.6 
SB0509 
2 
748.164 
1.7 
896.2684 
0.3 
17.6 
-148.1 
-16.5 
SB0602 
3.2 
654.6378 
3.6 
614.6634 
-0.4 
-11.1 
40.0 
6.5 
SB0701 
9.8 
9174.481 
10.7 
7554.674 
-0.9 
-8.4 
1619.8 
21.4 
SB0801 
0.7 
209.9149 
0.7 
218.6792 
0.0 
0.0 
-8.8 
-4.0 
SB0801Z 
18.2 
5384.764 
23.4 
5099.42 
-5.2 
-22.2 
285.3 
5.6 
SB0802 
7.7 
2274.041 
7.6 
2259.822 
0.1 
1.3 
14.2 
0.6 
SB0803 
3.5 
3253.333 
4.9 
3203.989 
-1.4 
-28.6 
49.3 
1.5 
SB1001 
8.4 
4185.427 
7.6 
3723.516 
0.8 
10.5 
461.9 
12.4 
SF 
38.7 
4867442 
1 
3138663 
37.7 
3770.0 1728778.5 
55.1 
SFOV 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
SØ_Bassin 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
UDPUMP 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
 
 
 
==PAGE:78==
 
69
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 24. Comparison of Mike Urban and WaterAspects outlet flow and overflow from selected nodes during a 3-year CDS-rain.  Green: Mike Urban outlet flow, 
red: WaterAspects outlet flow, blue; Mike Urban overflow, black: WaterAspects overflow
==PAGE:79==
 
 
70 
Table 6. Difference in outlet flow and overflow from the nodes presented in Figure 10 and Figure 24. 
 
3-year CDS rain 
 
Outlet flow 
Overflow 
 
WaterAspects Mike Urban 
Difference WaterAspects 
Mike Urban 
Difference 
 
[m3] 
[m3] 
[%] 
[m3] 
[m3] 
[%] 
OB0012 
1426 
1303 
9 
862 
821 
5 
OB1008 
334 
-531 
-163 
1276 
2011 
-37 
SB0001 
2175 
2044 
6 
4698 
5142 
-9 
OB0008 
2826 
2850 
-1 
1505 
1626 
-7 
OB0407 
572 
532 
8 
4647 
4561 
2 
P1 
31196 
24334 
28 - 
- 
- 
P2 
12880 
12676 
2 - 
- 
- 
UDPUMP 
30857 
26642 
16 
0 
0 
0 
 
Rectangular rain 
 
Outlet flow 
Outlet flow 
 
WaterAspects Mike Urban 
Difference WaterAspects 
Mike Urban 
Difference 
 
[m3] 
[m3] 
[%] 
[m3] 
[m3] 
[%] 
OB0012 
2721 
2612 
4 
1772 
1898 
-7 
OB1008 
235 
-1879 
-113 
2955 
4899 
-40 
SB0001 
2105 
2103 
0 
11599 
13015 
-11 
OB0008 
3479 
4437 
-22 
3929 
5066 
-22 
OB0407 
581 
537 
8 
10184 
10207 
0 
P1 
42348 
33696 
26 - 
- 
- 
P2 
17708 
21297 
-17 - 
- 
- 
UDPUMP 
34889 
33444 
4 
0 
0 
0 
 
 
==PAGE:80==
 
 
71
Appendix VI – Control Strategy Results 
Table 7. Results for control strategy I run with perfect forecast and "radar" forecast. The table presents total CSO from the system, the difference in CSO from the 
system compared to the status model, the total cost for transport and treatment of the water, the reduction in cost compared to the status model, the amount of 
energy moved to wind power compared to the status model and what this corresponds to in kg CO2. 
 
Control Strategy I – Diurnal Flow Equalization 
Perfect forecast 
Radar forecast 
Total 
System 
CSO  
Diff. 
in 
CSO 
Total 
Cost 
Cost 
reduction 
Moved 
to wind 
power 
Emission 
reduction 
Total 
System 
CSO 
Diff. in 
CSO 
Total 
cost 
Cost 
reduction 
Moved 
to wind 
power 
Emission 
reduction 
[m3] 
[m3] 
[EUR] 
[EUR] 
[kWh] 
[kg CO2 
eq.] 
[m3] 
[m3] 
[DKK] 
[DKK] 
[kWh] 
[kg CO2 
eq.] 
Jan-14 
198977 
0 
7452 
99 
335 
181 
198977 
0 
7454 
97 
400 
217 
Feb-14 
29254 
0 
6164 
72 
590 
320 
29254 
0 
6156 
80 
707 
383 
Mar-14 
7241 
0 
5464 
51 
350 
190 
7241 
0 
5465 
51 
273 
148 
Apr-14 
23409 
0 
6314 
45 
19 
10 
23480 
70 
6313 
45 
19 
10 
May-14 
5722716 
0 
8839 
78 
154 
83 
5722716 
0 
8842 
75 
-15 
-8 
Jun-14 
1846330 
0 
7704 
86 
402 
218 
1846330 
0 
7708 
82 
410 
222 
Jul-14 
1060609 
0 
7617 
57 
-197 
-107 
1060609 
0 
7622 
52 
-147 
-79 
Aug-14 
2047844 
0 
9165 
54 
622 
337 
2047844 
0 
9166 
53 
600 
325 
Sep-14 
3192 
0 
7700 
63 
111 
60 
3192 
0 
7704 
58 
17 
9 
Oct-14 
1525295 
0 
9118 
64 
380 
206 
1525295 
0 
9115 
66 
386 
209 
Nov-14 
24333 
0 
6557 
115 
812 
440 
24333 
0 
6564 
108 
842 
457 
Dec-14 
200455 
0 
7323 
86 
632 
343 
200455 
0 
7313 
95 
702 
380 
Jan-15 
54302 
0 
6090 
70 
821 
445 
54302 
0 
6089 
71 
867 
470 
Feb-15 
7255 
0 
5579 
66 
704 
382 
7255 
0 
5578 
67 
864 
468 
Mar-15 
91969 
0 
6645 
29 
717 
388 
91969 
0 
6644 
29 
513 
278 
Apr-15 
1005943 
0 
5452 
38 
81 
44 
1005945 
2 
5456 
34 
113 
61 
May-15 
384384 
0 
5926 
36 
-397 
-215 
384382 
-2 
5918 
44 
-782 
-424 
Total 
14233507 
0 
119107 
1108 
6136 
3326 
14233577 
70 
1191
07 
1107 
5771 
3128 
Average 
837265 
0 
7006 
65 
361 
196 
837269 
4 
7006 
65 
339 
184 
==PAGE:81==
 
 
72 
 
Figure 25. Control strategy I run with perfect forecast. The graph shows: outlet capacity from P1 (red), Outlet flow 
from P1 (blue), Overflow from P1 (dark blue), Degree of filling of P1 (purple), hourly electricity price (green) and an 
indication of whether rain is coming in the subsequent 1 hour (yellow) for the period of 16th -22st January 2014. 
 
 
Figure 26. Control strategy I run with “radar” forecast. The graph shows: outlet capacity from P1 (red), Outlet flow 
from P1 (blue), Overflow from P1 (dark blue), Degree of filling of P1 (purple), hourly electricity price (green) and an 
indication of whether rain is coming in the subsequent 1 hour (yellow)  for the period of 16th -22st January 2014.
==PAGE:82==
 
 
73
Table 8. Results for control strategy II with a storage capacity of 4,000 m3 run with perfect forecast and "radar" forecast. The table presents total CSO from the 
system, the difference in CSO from the system compared to the status model, the total cost for transport and treatment of the water, the reduction in cost compared 
to the status model, the amount of energy moved to wind power compared to the status model and what this corresponds to in kg CO2. 
 
Control Strategy II – Flow Scaling Based on Mean Energy Price (4,000 m3 storage volume) 
Perfect forecast 
Radar forecast 
Total 
System 
CSO  
Diff. 
in 
CSO 
Total 
Cost 
Cost 
reduction 
Moved 
to wind 
power 
Emission 
reduction 
Total 
System 
CSO 
Diff. in 
CSO 
Total 
cost 
Cost 
reduction 
Moved 
to wind 
power 
Emission 
reduction 
[m3] 
[m3] 
[EUR] 
[EUR] 
[kWh] 
[kg CO2 
eq.] 
[m3] 
[m3] 
[DKK] 
[DKK] 
[kWh] 
[kg CO2 
eq.] 
Jan-14 
198977 
0 
7268 
282 
1082 
587 
198977 
0 
7271 
279 
1230 
667 
Feb-14 
29254 
0 
6060 
177 
1608 
871 
40919 
11665 
6036 
200 
1803 
977 
Mar-14 
7241 
0 
5340 
175 
1934 
1048 
7414 
173 
5339 
177 
1929 
1045 
Apr-14 
23409 
0 
6115 
243 
-359 
-195 
24110 
701 
6112 
246 
-359 
-195 
May-14 
5722716 
0 
8654 
263 
1058 
574 
5722716 
0 
8660 
256 
808 
438 
Jun-14 
1846330 
0 
7538 
252 
2109 
1143 
1846330 
0 
7544 
246 
2114 
1146 
Jul-14 
1060609 
0 
7554 
120 
-20 
-11 
1060609 
0 
7567 
107 
73 
39 
Aug-14 
2047844 
0 
9022 
197 
1378 
747 
2047844 
0 
9026 
193 
1326 
719 
Sep-14 
3192 
0 
7592 
170 
644 
349 
3192 
0 
7592 
170 
657 
356 
Oct-14 
1525295 
0 
8985 
196 
1118 
606 
1525295 
0 
8977 
205 
1188 
644 
Nov-14 
24333 
0 
6371 
301 
2380 
1290 
24333 
  
6378 
  
2325 
1260 
Dec-14 
200455 
0 
7156 
253 
1751 
949 
200472 
17 
7099 
310 
1959 
1062 
Jan-15 
54302 
0 
5924 
236 
1902 
1031 
54302 
0 
5924 
236 
1877 
1017 
Feb-15 
7255 
0 
5414 
231 
2258 
1224 
7255 
0 
5414 
231 
2263 
1226 
Mar-15 
91969 
0 
6526 
148 
1998 
1083 
92128 
159 
6536 
138 
1971 
1069 
Apr-15 
1005943 
0 
5318 
172 
1930 
1046 
1005943 
0 
5318 
172 
1929 
1046 
May-15 
384384 
0 
5861 
101 
-232 
-126 
384384 
  
5862 
  
-239 
-130 
Total 
14233507 
0 
116697 
3518 
22540 
12217 
14246222 
12716 
116657 
3164 
22853 
12386 
Average 
837265 
0 
6865 
207 
1326 
719 
838013 
848 
6862 
211 
1344 
729 
 
 
 
==PAGE:83==
 
 
74 
 
Figure 27. Control strategy II with a storage volume of 4,000 m3 run with perfect forecast. The graph shows: outlet 
capacity from P1 (red), Outlet flow from P1 (blue), Overflow from P1 (dark blue), Degree of filling of P1 (purple), 
hourly electricity price (green) ) and an indication of whether rain is coming in the subsequent 2 hours (yellow) for 
the period of 16th -22st January 2014. 
 
Figure 28. Control strategy II with a storage volume of 4,000 m3 run with “radar” forecast. The graph shows: outlet 
capacity from P1 (red), Outlet flow from P1 (blue), Overflow from P1 (dark blue), Degree of filling of P1 (purple), 
hourly electricity price (green) ) and an indication of whether rain is coming in the subsequent 2 hours (yellow) for 
the period of 16th -22st January 2014. 
==PAGE:84==
 
 
75
Table 9. Results for control strategy II with a storage capacity of 20,000 m3 run with perfect forecast and NWP. The table presents total CSO from the system, the 
difference in CSO from the system compared to the status model, the total cost for transport and treatment of the water, the reduction in cost compared to the 
status model, the amount of energy moved to wind power compared to the status model, what this corresponds to in kg CO2 and what the maximum stored volume 
of water was for a given month. 
 
Control Strategy II – Flow Scaling Based on Mean Energy Price (20,000 m3 storage volume) 
Perfect forecast 
NWP 
Total 
System 
CSO  
Diff. 
in 
CSO 
Total 
Cost 
Cost 
red. 
Moved 
to wind 
power 
Emiss. 
red. 
Max 
stored 
volume 
Total 
System 
CSO 
Diff. in 
CSO 
Total 
cost 
Cost 
red. 
Moved 
to wind 
power 
Emission 
red. 
Max 
stored 
volume 
[m3] 
[m3] 
[EUR] 
[EUR] 
[kWh] 
[kg CO2 
eq.] 
[m3] 
[m3] 
[m3] 
[DKK] 
[DKK] 
[kWh] 
[lg CO2 
eq.] 
[m3] 
Jan-14 
198977 
0 
7220 
330 
1023 
555 
7624 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Feb-14 
29254 
0 
6038 
198 
2085 
1130 
7053 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Mar-14 
7241 
0 
5341 
175 
2021 
1095 
5046 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Apr-14 
23409 
0 
6095 
263 
-359 
-195 
6108 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
May-14 
5722716 
0 
8619 
298 
1156 
626 
5054 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Jun-14 
1846330 
0 
7546 
244 
2238 
1213 
4122 
1866202 
19872 
7546 
244 
781 
423 
3916 
Jul-14 
1060609 
0 
7554 
120 
-16 
-9 
2806 
1060609 
0 
7600 
74 
583 
316 
2806 
Aug-14 
2047844 
0 
9023 
196 
1400 
759 
3737 
2052392 
4548 
9043 
176 
55 
30 
3737 
Sep-14 
3192 
0 
7597 
165 
664 
360 
3906 
3192 
0 
7634 
129 
79 
43 
3734 
Oct-14 
1525295 
0 
8963 
218 
1212 
657 
6210 
1525295 
0 
8985 
196 
569 
308 
6210 
Nov-14 
24333 
0 
6368 
304 
2306 
1250 
6210 
24333 
0 
6428 
243 
1905 
1032 
3859 
Dec-14 
200455 
0 
7135 
273 
1700 
922 
5932 
200455 
0 
7253 
155 
904 
490 
5556 
Jan-15 
54302 
0 
5945 
215 
2376 
1288 
10278 
54302 
0 
6014 
145 
1723 
934 
10278 
Feb-15 
7255 
0 
5408 
238 
2216 
1201 
10422 
6823 
-431 
5418 
227 
2097 
1136 
10422 
Mar-15 
91969 
0 
6526 
148 
2023 
1097 
3506 
91969 
0 
6549 
125 
1098 
595 
3506 
Apr-15 
1005943 
0 
5318 
172 
1936 
1049 
5428 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
May-15 
384384 
0 
5866 
96 
-359 
-195 
5428 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Total 
14233507 
0 
116563 
3652 
23622 
12803 
  
6885572 
23989 
72472 
1714 
9793 
5308 
 
Average 
837265 
0 
6857 
215 
1390 
753 
5816 
688557 
2399 
7247 
171 
979 
531 
5402 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:85==
 
 
76 
 Figure 29. Control strategy II with a storage volume of 20,000 m3 run with perfect forecast. The graph shows: outlet 
capacity from P1 (red), Outlet flow from P1 (blue), Overflow from P1_Big (dark blue), Degree of filling of P1_Big 
(purple), hourly electricity price (green) and an indication of whether rain is coming in the subsequent 6 hours 
(yellow)  for the period of 2nd -7th November 2014. 
 
Figure 30. Control strategy II with a storage volume of 20,000 m3 run with perfect forecast. The graph shows: outlet 
capacity from P1 (red), Outlet flow from P1 (blue), Overflow from P1_Big (dark blue), Degree of filling of P1_Big 
(purple), hourly electricity price (green) and an indication of whether rain is coming in the subsequent 6 hours 
(yellow)  for the period of 2nd -7th November 2014. 
==PAGE:86==
 
 
77
Table 10. Results for control strategy III run with perfect forecast and NWP. The table presents total CSO from the system, the difference in CSO from the system 
compared to the status model, the total cost for transport and treatment of the water, the reduction in cost compared to the status model, the amount of energy 
moved to wind power compared to the status model, what this corresponds to in kg CO2 and what the maximum stored volume of water was for a given month. 
 
Control Strategy III – Flow During Six Cheapest Hours of the Day   
Perfect forecast 
NWP 
Total 
System 
CSO  
Diff. 
in 
CSO 
Total 
Cost 
Cost 
red. 
Moved 
to wind 
power 
Emiss. 
red. 
Max 
stored 
volume 
Total 
System 
CSO 
Diff. in 
CSO 
Total 
cost 
Cost 
red. 
Moved 
to wind 
power 
Emission 
red. 
Max 
stored 
volume 
[m3] 
[m3] 
[EUR] 
[EUR] 
[kWh] 
[kg CO2 
eq.] 
[m3] 
[m3] 
[m3] 
[DKK] 
[DKK] 
[kWh] 
[kg CO2 
eq.] 
[m3] 
Jan-14 
198977 
0 
6379 
1172 
5124 
2777 
19803 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
Feb-14 
29254 
0 
5557 
679 
6638 
3598 
19814 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
Mar-14 
7241 
0 
4867 
649 
8474 
4593 
19813 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
Apr-14 
23409 
0 
5421 
937 
-571 
-309 
19813 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
May-14 
5722716 
0 
7816 
1100 
8730 
4732 
19807 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
Jun-14 
1846330 
0 
6526 
1264 
9056 
4908 
19810 
2766636 
920306 
6697 
1092 
6706 
3635 
19810 
Jul-14 
1060609 
0 
6854 
820 
-200 
-108 
18488 
1074113 
13504 
7129 
545 
2497 
1353 
18488 
Aug-14 
2047844 
0 
8680 
539 
10175 
5515 
18067 
2047844 
0 
8821 
398 
5423 
2939 
16261 
Sep-14 
3192 
0 
6861 
901 
2804 
1520 
19803 
392608 
389416 
7051 
711 
917 
497 
19803 
Oct-14 
1525295 
0 
8522 
659 
4923 
2668 
19803 
3791059 
2265764 
8453 
728 
2752 
1492 
19803 
Nov-14 
24333 
0 
5494 
1178 
15032 
8147 
19813 
910225 
885893 
5641 
1031 
11935 
6469 
19813 
Dec-14 
200455 
0 
6444 
964 
7698 
4172 
18595 
200601 
146 
6812 
596 
4368 
2368 
18595 
Jan-15 
54302 
0 
5217 
943 
10386 
5629 
19813 
57554 
3252 
5514 
646 
10609 
5750 
19812 
Feb-15 
7255 
0 
4819 
827 
14460 
7838 
19813 
7255 
0 
4931 
714 
12547 
6800 
19812 
Mar-15 
91969 
0 
6198 
475 
8809 
4775 
19812 
330253 
238284 
6241 
433 
7880 
4271 
19812 
Apr-15 
1005943 
0 
4914 
576 
8592 
4657 
19813 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
May-15 
384384 
0 
5493 
469 
2476 
1342 
19813 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
Total 
14233507 
0 
106062 
14153 
122607 
66453 
 
11578148 
4716565 
67720 
6895 
65634 
35574 
 
Average 
837265 
0 
6239 
833 
7212 
3909 
19558 
1157815 
471656 
6729 
689 
6563 
3557 
19201 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:87==
 
 
78 
 Figure 31. Control strategy III with a storage run with perfect forecast. The graph shows: outlet capacity from P1 
(red), Outlet flow from P1 (blue), Overflow from P1_Big (dark blue), Degree of filling of P1_Big (purple), hourly 
electricity price (green) and an indication of whether rain is coming in the subsequent 6 hours (yellow)  for the 
period of 2nd -7th November 2014. 
 
 
Figure 32. Control strategy III with a storage volume of 20,000 m3 run with perfect forecast. The graph shows: outlet 
capacity from P1 (red), Outlet flow from P1 (blue), Overflow from P1_Big (dark blue), Degree of filling of P1_Big 
(purple), hourly electricity price (green) and an indication of whether rain is coming in the subsequent 6 hours 
(yellow)  for the period of 2nd -7th November 2014. 
==PAGE:88==
 
 
79 
Table 11. Results for control strategy IV run with perfect forecast and NWP. The table presents total CSO from the 
system, the difference in CSO from the system compared to the status model, the total cost for transport and 
treatment of the water, the reduction in cost compared to the status model, the amount of energy moved to wind 
power compared to the status model and what this corresponds to in kg CO2. 
 
Control Strategy IV 
Perfect forecast 
Total 
System 
CSO  
Diff. in 
CSO 
Total 
Cost 
Cost 
reduction 
Moved 
to wind 
power 
Emission 
reduction 
[m3] 
[m3] 
[EUR] 
[EUR] 
[kWh] 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
Jan-14 
219173 
20195 
7250 
300 
1678 
910 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:89==
 
 
80 
 
