==PAGE:1==
Javier Fernández Álvarez, S131867
Phaseless Planar Near-Field
Antenna Measurements
Master’s Thesis, April 2015
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Javier Fernández Álvarez, S131867
Phaseless Planar Near-Field
Antenna Measurements
Master’s Thesis, April 2015
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Phaseless Planar Near-Field Antenna Measurements,
This report was prepared by
Javier Fernández Álvarez, S131867
Supervisors
Professor Olav Breinbjerg, EMS, DTU Elektro
Associate Professor Sergey Pivnenko, EMS, DTU Elektro
Release date:
April 16, 2015
Category:
1 (public)
Edition:
First
Comments:
This report is part of the requirements to achieve the Master of
Science in Engineering (M.Sc.Eng.) at the Technical University
of Denmark. This report represents 30 ECTS points.
Rights:
©Javier Fernández Álvarez, 2015
Department of Electrical Engineering
Centre for Electric Technology (CET)
Technical University of Denmark
Elektrovej building 325
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
www.elektro.dtu.dk/cet
Tel:
(+45) 45 25 35 00
Fax:
(+45) 45 88 61 11
E-mail: cet@elektro.dtu.dk
==PAGE:6==
Contents
1
Introduction
5
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2
Justiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3
Statement of purpose . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.4
Range of the project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Theoretical aspects
8
2.1
Planar near-ﬁeld measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
The planar scanner . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Plane Wave Expansion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3.1
Mathematical formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3.2
Discrete-form plane wave expansion
. . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.4
Phaseless measurements and phase retrieval . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.4.1
Ambiguity of phaseless measurements
. . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.5
Antenna under test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.6
Coordinate system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.7
Mathematical model of the AUT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.8
Separation of AUT and probe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.9
Probe correction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.9.1
Particularities of probe correction for phaseless measure-
ments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.9.2
Receiving characteristics of the probe
. . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.10 Dual-polarized probe and probe calibration
. . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.11 Uncertainty and sources of error
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
2.12 Summary of chapter 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3
Iterative algorithm
29
3.1
Initial guess . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.2
Convergence criteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.3
Use of supplementary information of the AUT . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.4
The Fast Fourier Transform . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.5
Summary of chapter 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4
Performed tests and results
39
4.1
Data obtained at the planar scanner . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.2
Eﬀects of probe correction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.2.1
Probe correcting before phase retrieval . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.2.2
Probe correcting after phase retrieval
. . . . . . . . . . .
47
2
==PAGE:7==
4.3
Impact of initial guess . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.4
Eﬀects of distance between planes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
4.5
Use of additional information of the AUT . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
4.6
Error study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
4.6.1
Rotation of the AUT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
4.6.2
Displacement of AUT center
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
4.6.3
Inaccuracy in AUT/probe distance . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
4.7
Double iteration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
4.8
Summary of chapter 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
5
Measurements with dual-polarized probe at 48GHz
86
5.1
Results of probe calibration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
5.1.1
Orthomode transducer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
5.1.2
Waveguide switch
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
5.1.3
Flanged cables
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
5.1.4
Dual polarized probe pattern . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
5.1.5
Channel balance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
5.2
Measurements and analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
5.3
Summary of chapter 5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
6
Conclusions
100
6.1
Summary and conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
6.2
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
List of Figures
104
A The Fourier Transform and MATLAB’s Discrete Fourier Trans-
form
108
A.1 One-dimensional FT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108
A.2 Generalization of the previous result . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111
B Polarization calibration as a three antenna measurement
114
C MATLAB source code
116
C.1 Iterative algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 116
C.2 Error metric . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 119
C.3 Plane Wave Expansion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 120
C.4 Near-ﬁeld to far-ﬁeld transformation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121
C.5 2-dim Fourier Transform . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121
C.6 2-dim Inverse Fourier Transform
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 123
C.7 Probe correction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 124
C.8 Horn AUT model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 125
C.9 AUT far-ﬁeld model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 127
C.10 Hertzian dipole . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 129
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1
Introduction
2
1.1
Background
With the rise of wireless communications in the past century, the need for precise
and accurate characterization of antennas has become one of the most crucial
problems in the ﬁeld of telecommunications engineering. Out of the multiple
ways in which antenna measurements can be performed, the so-called near-ﬁeld
techniques have become the standard practice owing to the several advantages
it provides, compared to other far-ﬁeld techniques. Far-ﬁeld conditions are typ-
ically considered for distances longer than the Fraunhofer distance d = 2D2/λ,
where D represents the largest physical dimension of the antenna and λ the
wavelength of the radiated ﬁeld. Under this condition, the electric and mag-
netic ﬁelds are considered orthogonal and also perpendicular to the direction of
propagation. In the far-ﬁeld region of an antenna, the angular ﬁeld distribution
is considered as essentially independent of the distance from the antenna.[4,
p.34]
This obvious advantage is however countered when high frequency measure-
ments are needed, as the Fraunhofer distance becomes so large it is eventually
impractical to perform antenna measurements at such a range.
In this sce-
nario, the introduction of near-ﬁeld techniques allows not only the performance
of antenna measurements at a distance much smaller than required for far-ﬁeld
measurements, but also to conduct the measurement in a controlled environment
less prone to outside perturbations: due to the large distance required for far-
ﬁeld measurements, these are typically conducted outdoors, thus introducing a
number of external sources of error such as reﬂections from the ground or other
objects, interference from other radio sources in the vicinity or environmen-
tal eﬀects that introduce noise into the measurement. Conversely, moving the
probe into the near-ﬁeld of the antenna under test, only a few metres away from
the antenna under test (AUT), allows indoors measurements in radio anechoic
chambers specially ﬁtted with absorbers to eliminate reﬂections from inside the
chamber, and likewise shielded from other radiation coming from the outside.
To obtain the resulting far-ﬁeld radiation patterns from the measured near-ﬁeld
data a number of mathematical calculations are used, most frequently involving
5
==PAGE:10==
analytical Fourier techniques although other approaches have been developed
that will not be discussed here.
Out of the three most widely used NF methods (planar, cylindrical and
spherical ranges), this report will explore the use of planar near-ﬁeld measure-
ment techniques, which, as the name implies, consist of measuring the complex
values of the two orthogonal components of an antenna’s electric ﬁeld over a
well-deﬁned plane at a certain distance of the AUT. This is a mature technology
which allows for a high degree of accuracy, and which counters its setbacks in
relation to other techniques with a comparatively simpler mathematical formu-
lation and a simpler measuring set-up.
The focus of this report is more speciﬁcally on phaseless planar near-ﬁeld
measurements, that is, measurements of only the amplitude of the ﬁeld, ignoring
the phase information. The origins of phaseless measurements lie in the ﬁeld
of electronic microscopy, where it was ﬁrst proposed by Saxton ang Gerchberg
that the phase distribution of a certain ﬁeld could be determined unambiguously
from two independent measurements of said signal on two diﬀerent planes[7].
The Gerchberg-Saxton algorithm, initially introduced for the problem of re-
constructing phase from two intensity measurements was later adapted to a
number of related problems[6], including by Anderson and Sali for the purpose
of near-ﬁeld antenna measurements on their 1985 paper[3].
For this reason, an algorithm for phase retrieval will be proposed and dis-
cussed, with the aim of complementing a phaseless measurement with a tech-
nique to retrieve the phase distribution of the AUT by means other than direct
measurement with a probe, and free from the expected sources of error. This
algorithm involves the calculation of the complex far-ﬁeld pattern starting from
phaseless data of the AUT measured at two diﬀerent distances from the probe,
the introduction of an initial guess for the phase distribution of the ﬁelds, and an
iterative algorithm based on a Fourier technique. The speciﬁcs of this algorithm
will be discussed further on.
Additionally, the eﬀectiveness of this algorithm is evaluated in a number of
ways, both with real data obtained from phaseless measurements of an horn
antenna performed at the planar scanner facility at the Technical University of
Denmark (DTU), and with simulated antenna data obtained from a theoretical
model developed speciﬁcally for this project. The software has been created with
the purpose of providing a versatile tool that can generate diﬀerent scenarios
and introduce a variety of perturbation factors, such as noise level, inaccuracy
in the separation of the antennas, or alignment errors. This allows to assess the
eﬃciency of the phase retrieval algorithm in terms of both the accuracy of the
result and the robustness against the diﬀerent kinds of altering factors.
1.2
Justiﬁcation
What makes phaseless techniques interesting is the increasing diﬃculty of mea-
suring the phase diﬀerences within an acceptable margin of reliability. Especially
with ever increasing frequencies of operation, the perturbations caused by cable
bending, thermal drift, etc, and the resulting impedance mismatch introduce
uncertainty in the measurement procedure. While the module of the measured
signal might not be signiﬁcantly aﬀected by these errors, the fast-changing phase
becomes more and more diﬃcult to determine accurately. It is therefore of great
6
==PAGE:11==
interest to develop a phase retrieval algorithm which can be used to conduct
measurements on the U-band (40-60GHz).
It has also been noted that there is not an extensive body of work concern-
ing probe correction applied to phaseless measurements. Probe correction is a
standard technique used to compensate for the inﬂuence of the probe antenna
on the measured data, however it requires a complex ﬁeld in order to be applied
which makes it not straightforward for the case of phaseless, amplitude-only
measurements, and in the particular case of phaseless planar measurements no
existing literature has been found. Hence, an investigation on this topic will be
conducted in parallel to phase retrieval.
1.3
Statement of purpose
The purpose of this report is on the one hand to obtain numerical and exper-
imental experience on the ﬁeld of planar phaseless measurements using data
obtained at DTU’s planar scanner facility, and on the other hand study the
application of probe correction on the problem of phaseless measurements. The
main objectives of this report are the following.
• To develop a phase retrieval algorithm that can be used to obtain a reliable
phase distribution for an AUT horn designed to operate at the U-band.
• To investigate possible ways in which probe correction can be applied to
planar phaseless measurements.
• To conduct phaseless measurements of said AUT both with a single-port
probe and also with a dual-polarized probe assembly, capable of cutting
by half the time needed for a complete measurement.
1.4
Range of the project
In chapter 2 the theoretical background of the project is reviewed in further de-
tail, with a mathematical formulation of the theory behind planar measurements
and probe correction, along with other aspects of the problem at hand.
Chapter 3 deals with the iterative algorithm and the diﬀerent aspects of the
proposed solution to the problem of phase retrieval.
Chapter 4 addresses a number of practical aspects of the project, including
data retrieval and post-processing. The results from the characterization of the
dual probe assembly are also presented in this chapter.
The results of the tests performed with the phase retrieval algorithm for
single-port measurements at 60GHz are presented and discussed in chapter 5,
where the algorithm is analyzed in terms of the diﬀerent variables involved.
In chapter 6 an additional retrieval experiment is conducted on dual-port
measurements at 48GHz.
Finally, the closing chapter includes a summary and conclusions from the
project, along with a number of proposals for future work. After each individual
chapter a short summary will also be found.
7
==PAGE:12==
Chapter 2
Theoretical aspects
2.1
Planar near-ﬁeld measurements
Planar near-ﬁeld measurements are among the most commonly used systems
for NF antenna measurements, along with spherical and cylindrical, all of which
are preferable because they enable separation of the vector Helmholtz equation
and, in more practical terms, the positioner subsystems that employ them can
be conveniently constructed[8]. In all of the cases, the near-ﬁelds are acquired
by moving a probe around a certain grid and, at each position, measuring the
diﬀerence of potential between a reference and the probe, on which a current
is excited by the electric ﬁelds that surround it. By sampling two orthogonal
complex values over a well-deﬁned surface at regular intervals, it is possible to
determine the amplitudes and phases of an angular spectrum of plane (or cylin-
drical/spherical) waves using the principle of modal expansion. This spectrum
can be used to calculate the electric or magnetic ﬁelds at any distance from the
AUT[8]. The true far-ﬁeld pattern results in said computation for a distance
inﬁnitely far away from the AUT.
In the speciﬁc case of planar measurements, the AUT is placed on a plat-
form which allows for horizontal movement on the z-axis but is kept otherwise at
rest during a measurement, while an electrically small probe antenna is scanned
across the aperture of the AUT. This procedure is opposite to a spherical mea-
surement, when the probe rests on top o a probe tower while the AUT is rotated
around the φ and θ axes. If the scan surface is deﬁned by two rectilinear, orthog-
onal axes sampled at regular intervals, the system is known as planar rectilinear
measurements. This is the conﬁguration of the planar scanner at the Technical
University of Denmark, which is utilized on this project. This conﬁguration
is the most demanding, as the position and orientation of the probe at each
of the sampling positions will crucially inﬂuence the accuracy of the far-ﬁeld
pattern[8]. For this reason, it is of utmost importance that the planarity of
the scan surface is kept as perfect as possible, ideally down to a few parts of a
millimetre.
The AUT acts as a transmitter, and its amplitude, phase and polarization
remain constant for all the positions of the probe during a complete scan. On the
probe, a quasi-spherical wave is measured at each sample, and a probe response
to the plane wave is synthesized by superposition of the probe responses to all
8
==PAGE:13==
these quasi-spherical waves. This process is repeated after rotating the AUT
by 90 degrees to form an orthogonally polarized wave because it is necessary to
obtain the two orthogonal tangential components in order to determine the full
polarization properties of the AUT[8].
Unlike near-ﬁeld measurements on a spherical range, planar measurements
can only allow for measurements on the forward hemisphere of the antenna, as
near-ﬁeld measurements over a ﬁnite surface are unable to measure a certain
portion of the propagating near-ﬁeld.
It is therefore a common practice to
assume a zero-value for the electric ﬁelds outside the scan plane, but this is
not strictly true, and the truncation errors that are thus introduced reduce the
coverage of the obtained patterns to less than 180 degrees.
Despite the previously mentioned, planar NF measurements is the most
widely used technique today, its setbacks compensated by its high accuracy
within the mathematical simplicity of planar wave expansion, which makes it
computationally much less complex than its cylindrical and spherical counter-
parts.
2.2
The planar scanner
In this section the planar scanner is introduced and its operation described. The
device consists of a probe antenna mounted on two linear actuators that allow
movement on a vertical XY plane. The moving parts are powered by a pair
of step servomotors which can provide a spatial resolution of 0.0125mm, which
according to the Nyquist sampling theorem would allow antenna measurements
at frequencies as high as 12THz.
The motors are controlled by the planar
scanner software (implemented in MATLAB) via an Ethernet connection, and
each of them is used to drive one of the two axes over which the probe can be
displaced. The total area of the scanning plane is 0.8m x 1.5m and its planarity
is estimated at a few tenths of a millimeter.
This relatively small sampling
area can reduce the eﬀects of cable twisting and bending on the accuracy of
the measurements by keeping the variations on cable position and form to a
minimum.
The AUT is currently mounted on top of a rail that allows displacement
along the z-axis. The system is somewhat rudimentary, with a scale that allows
accuracy of ±0.5mm and possibly less than perfect alignment with the probe
axis once the AUT sits on top of the rail. If that was the case, it would result
in a pointing error on the measurements.
The planar scanner facility is not a full anechoic chamber. Instead, absorbers
are placed only behind and around the AUT antenna, but none are placed
in the forward direction of radiation of the AUT. The scanner is contained
within a shielded room, meaning that the walls and doors are metallic in order
to minimize outside interference on the measurements.
These metallic walls
may introduce unwanted reﬂections into the measurements as the AUT radiates
straight in the direction of a PEC.
This PNF facility has recently been upgraded by incorporating an Agilent
VNA model E8361A with a frequency range of up to 67 GHz. Using a VNA
proves to be advantageous over alternative solutions for antenna measurements
at frequencies above 20 GHz [12] as it allows for measurements over an extended
9
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.1: Diagram of the planar scanner
frequency band with a simple setup that requires only two cables and an open-
ended U-band waveguide with a frequency range of 40 to 60 GHz. Alternatively,
it is necessary to make use of of frequency multipliers and harmonic mixers in
order to reduce cable loss and improve the dynamic range of the setup, but
this approach has the disadvantage that the mentioned devices usually work in
standard waveguide bands and therefore the total number of parts that need to
be interchanged in order to cover several frequency bands is much higher.
The cables used have 1.85 mm connectors and are operational in a range of
up to 65 GHz, and the probe is a circular U-band waveguide based on a WR-19
waveguide Orthomode Transducer. Furthermore, when used in conjunction with
a waveguide switch as is introduced during the course of this project, the OMT
will allow for dual-port operation of the scanner, reducing the time needed to
conduct a complete measurement by measuring the two orthogonal tangential
components of the electrical ﬁeld at the same time. In order to interconnect the
OMT and the WG switch, a pair of ﬂanged cables are also used, which consist
on a section of semi-rigid coaxial cable and two coaxial-to-waveguide transitions.
The electrical characteristics of these components, as well as the pair of ﬂanged
cables required for the OMT and switch will be discussed on section 2.10.
2.3
Plane Wave Expansion
The initial step of a planar near-ﬁeld to far-ﬁeld technique (NF/FF) is measuring
the tangential components of the electrical ﬁeld of the AUT over a well-deﬁned
surface in the near ﬁeld. This surface is divided into a regular grid and the ﬁeld
is sampled at each point, with a maximum spatial period of ∆x = ∆y = λ/2
for the sampling. This sampled E-ﬁeld is then used to determine a spectrum
of plane waves by the principle of modal expansion. [4, p.705] The plane wave
spectrum thusly obtained permits the calculation of the radiated ﬁeld at any
distance from the antenna.
It is known that any monochromatic wave can be represented as a superpo-
sition (spectrum) of plane waves of the same frequency but otherwise arbitrary
10
==PAGE:15==
directions of propagation and amplitudes. Plane Wave Expansion (PWE) refers
to the calculation of these unknown directions of propagation and amplitudes,
referred to as modes, which together conform the modal expansion of the wave.
The most commonly adopted approach to antenna measurement is to sample
the electric ﬁeld produced by an antenna over a certain surface and then try to
determine the properties of said ﬁeld in the remaining points in space. Gener-
ally this is a diﬃcult task but not for certain types of elemental ﬁelds, or modes.
For instance, given tha the amplitude, phase and direction of propagation of a
plane wave are known, it becomes possible to determine the properties of this
ﬁeld everywhere in space. Thus, if the complex ﬁeld distribution associated with
some radiator can be decomposed into a summation of plane waves propagating
in diverse directions, the properties of this complex ﬁeld can be obtained as a
summation of the properties of the individual modes of the ﬁeld, and from this
the far-ﬁeld pattern of the radiator can be found as well by solving this modal
expansion for an inﬁnite distance[8].
The advantages of PWE are clear in that it constitutes a generic approach
to far-ﬁeld pattern characterization, avoiding the complex calculations usually
derived from Maxwell’s equations and the need for extensive knowledge of the
mechanical structure of the antenna.
2.3.1
Mathematical formulation
In the source free region of space the ﬁeld E(x, y, z)of a monochromatic wave
radiated by the aperture can be written as a superposition of modes of the
form f(kx, ky)ejkzz, that is, plane waves weighed by an unknown weigh function
f(kx, ky) = fx+fy+fz[4]. These modes are solutions to the Helmholtz equation
in Cartesian coordinates.
Cartesian coordinates
Fourier-transformed
∇· E = 0
δEx
δx + δEy
δy + δEz
δz = 0
kxfx + kyfy −j δfz
δz = 0
∇2E + k2
0E = 0

δ2
δx2 + δ2
δy2 + δ2
δz2 + k2
0

E(x, y, z) = 0

δ2
δz2 +
 k2
0 −k2
x −k2
y

f(kx, ky, z) = 0
f(kx, ky, z) is the FT of E with respect to x and y.
k2
0 = k2
x + k2
y + k2
z
The function f(kx, ky) is the vector amplitude of the wave, and kx and ky are
the spectral frequencies which are deﬁned over the entire frequency spectrum
(−∞≤kx, ky ≤∞).
The Helmholtz equation is fulﬁlled by any sum of these plane waves, and
additionally any ﬁeld that satisﬁes the Maxwell equations can too be expressed
in terms of these solutions. In the table above, the wave equation is written in
Cartesian coordinates and then Fourier-transformed with respect to x and y,
by multiplying by e+j(kxx+kyy) and integrating over the whole domain in each
dimension. It is then obtained
11
==PAGE:16==
 δ2
δz2 +
 k2
0 −k2
x −k2
y

f(kx, ky, z) = 0
(2.1)
This expression is only true if either the bracket equals zero or, trivially, if
f(kx, ky, z) = 0. Now let k2
z = k2
o −k2
x −k2
y. Equation 2.1 becomes
 δ2
δz2 + k2
z

f(kx, ky, z) = 0
(2.2)
The general solution to 2.2 is in the form previously mentioned. By substi-
tuting on the two previous equations the following result is obtained.[4]
kxfx + kyfy + kzfz = 0
(2.3)
fz = −kxfx −kyfy
kz
(2.4)
kz =
q
k2
0 −k2x −k2y
(2.5)
The condition for propagating waves: k2
0 > k2
x + k2
y
This simpliﬁcation of the problem means that only two of the three unknown
components are independent, so it is possible to solve the equations for the z-
component of the PWS once the x and y-components are known, obtained from
the measured tangential components of the E-ﬁeld.
The electric ﬁeld in any forward direction can be expressed in terms of its
PWS as follows.
E(x, y, z) =
1
4π2
Z ∞
−∞
Z ∞
−∞
f(kx, ky)e−jk·rdkx dky
(2.6)
k = ˆaxkx + ˆayky + ˆazkz r = ˆaxx + ˆayy + ˆazz
The objective of Plane Wave Expansion is to determine the unknown am-
plitudes and the directions of propagation of the plane waves. f(kx, ky) is the
plane wave spectrum of the electric ﬁeld, and it can be expressed as follows.
f(kx, ky) = fx(kx, ky) ˆax + fy(kx, ky) ˆay + fz(kx, ky) ˆaz
(2.7)
Where fx, fy and fz are the x, y and z−components of the PW spectrum.
As the NF technique involves only the measuring of the tangential components
of the E-ﬁeld, then it is only possible to determine the x and y-components of
the PW spectrum in terms of the NF electric ﬁeld and the Fourier transforms,
as given by the following expressions.[4]
12
==PAGE:17==
fx(kx, ky) =
Z b/2
−b/2
Z a/2
−a/2
Exs(x′, y′, z = 0)e+j(kxx′+kyy′)dx′dy′
(2.8a)
fy(kx, ky) =
Z b/2
−b/2
Z a/2
−a/2
Eys(x′, y′, z = 0)e+j(kxx+kyy)dx′dy′
(2.8b)
Here, a and b deﬁne the boundaries of a surface over which the tangential
components of the electrical ﬁeld, Exs and Eys are measured. Likewise, the
tangential components of the E-ﬁeld over the plane of measurement at a distance
of z = z0 are written as follow in terms of the PWS of the ﬁeld.
Exs(x, y, z = z0) =
Z ∞
−∞
Z ∞
−∞
fx(kx, ky)e−j(kxx′+kyy′)dkx dky
(2.9a)
Eys(x, y, z = z0) =
Z ∞
−∞
Z ∞
−∞
fy(kx, ky)e−j(kxx′+kyy′)dkx dky
(2.9b)
In order to obtain the far-ﬁeld pattern from the near-ﬁeld data, the steps
are as follow.
• Obtain measured amplitude and phase of the tangential x and y compo-
nents of the electric ﬁeld over a given surface of measurement.
• Determine fx and fy, the PWS functions of the wave.
• Determine kz and fz the unknown directions of propagation and ampli-
tudes of the z component of the ﬁeld.
• Determine radiated ﬁeld at any point by inverse-Fourier transforming the
complete expression of the PWS functions.
For observations in the far-ﬁeld, expression 2.6 is evaluated asymptotically
for large values of kr using the method of stationary phase[4]. The method
assumes that integral 2.6 is contributed mainly by the values of kx and ky
where k ·r remains stationary. For other values, k ·r changes very rapidly so the
exponeltial ejk·r oscillates very rapidly between -1 and 1, and so the contribution
to the integral from those regions are negligible, and as the observation point
approaches inﬁnity all contributions other than from the stationary points are
zero.
In order to determine the stationary points, k · r is written as
k · r = ( ˆaxkx + ˆayky + ˆazkz) = r(kx sin θ cos φ + ky sin θ sin φ + kz cos θ) (2.10)
Substituting kz into the previous yields
k · r = r(kx sin θ cos φ + ky sin θ sin φ +
q
k2
0 −k2x −k2y cos θ)
(2.11)
13
==PAGE:18==
The stationary points are then found by diﬀerentiating 2.11 with respect to
kx and ky.
∂k · r
∂kx
= 0
(2.12a)
∂k · r
∂ky
= 0
(2.12b)
The solutions to 2.12a and 2.12b are given by
kx = kz
sin θ cos φ
cos θ
(2.13a)
ky = kz
sin θ sin φ
cos θ
(2.13b)
Now 2.5 can be written in terms of 2.13a and 2.13b to solve kz.
k2 = k2
z + k2
x + k2
y = k2
z

1 + sin2 θ
cos2 θ

(2.14)
k2
z = k cos(θ)
(2.15)
So now the stationary points can be simpliﬁed to
kx = k sin θ cos φ = k1
(2.16a)
ky = k sin θ sin φ = k2
(2.16b)
Integral 2.6 can be approximated around the stationary point given by kx =
k1, ky = k2 by expanding k·r into a Taylor series about the stationary point that
can be approximated by the zero, ﬁrst and second order terms. The integral
can then be evaluated with the method of stationary phase (see [4], Appendix
VIII) yielding the following result
E(r, θ, φ) ≃j ke−jkr
2πr
[cos θf(k1, k2)]
(2.17)
The θ and φ components of 2.17 are written in terms of fx and fy.
fθ = fx cos φ + fy sin φ
cos θ
(2.18a)
fφ = −fx sin φ + fy cos φ
(2.18b)
So ﬁnally an expression for the far-ﬁeld of the antenna is derived, for its θ
and φ components, in terms of the plane wave spectrum
E(r, θ, φ) ≃j ke−jkr
2πr
[ ˆaθ(fx cos φ + fy sin φ) + ˆaφ cos θ(−fx sin φ + fy cos φ)]
(2.19)
14
==PAGE:19==
2.3.2
Discrete-form plane wave expansion
From the description of the planar scanner in 2.2 it can be inferred that, unlike
the equations in 2.3.1, on a real scenario the measured electric ﬁelds are not
given by a continuous spatial function but by a set of discrete points over a
grid in a ﬁnite region in space. The immediate consequence of this is that the
previous equations for the Plane Wave Expansion are no longer obtained in
terms of inﬁnite integrals but of summations over the well-deﬁned boundaries
of the measurement plane.
As the diagram 2.1 illustrates, the points deﬁne a rectangular grid with
sampling densities of ∆x and ∆y. A matrix of [MxN] points is thus created on
the x and y dimensions. For this reason, the discrete Plane Wave Spectrum of
the electrical ﬁeld is deﬁned as follows.
f(kx, ky) = ∆x∆y
X
m
X
n
Ea(x, y, z0)ej(kxxm+kyyn)
(2.20)
The following considerations are to be taken regarding the discrete PWS.
• The maximum sampling density is λ/2 as per the sampling theorem.
• kx =
2πm
M∆x, dim[M].
• ky =
2πn
N∆y, dim[N].
• From the previous two, fx, fy dim[MxN].
kx and ky have a given number of spectral points which are determined by the
size of the measurement surface and the spatial sampling density of the ﬁelds.
The spectral resolution, ∆kx and ∆ky does not depend on the spatial resolution,
which is demonstrated with a simple example: if the ﬁelds are sampled with
double density on a measurement surface along the X-axis then ∆x becomes
half its previous value, but the total number of samples, M, becomes twice as
large and ∆kx remains constant as these two factors cancel out. Hence, the only
possible way to achieve superior spectral resolution is by increasing the size of
the measurement planes, providing a greater set of samples while keeping spatial
resolution unchanged. If bigger measurements are unattainable due to physical
limitations of the equipment or excessively high measuring times, it is possible
to increase spectral resolution by adding artiﬁcial data sampling points to the
measurement, in the form of zero-padding around the original data set.
Once kx and ky are calculated then kz and fz can be computed from the
equations 2.3, 2.4 and 2.5, as a pair of complex value matrices with dimensions
[MxN]. The ﬁnal step is putting together equation 2.20 with the previously
computed in order to obtain the electrical ﬁeld at any given point through
propagation of the plane wave spectrum.
E(xm, yn, z) =
X
m
X
n
f(kx, ky)e−j(kxxm+kyyn)e−jkzz
(2.21)
15
==PAGE:20==
And, since from the vector equation of the ﬁeld the three orthogonal com-
ponents are separable, then it is possible to compute the x and y−components
of the ﬁeld at any point as follows.
Ex(xm, yn, z) = ejkzz X
m
X
n
fx(kx, ky)ej(kxxm+kyyn)
(2.22a)
Ey(xm, yn, z) = ejkzz X
m
X
n
fy(kx, ky)ej(kxxm+kyyn)
(2.22b)
The MATLAB scripts used to calculate the plane wave expansion of a given
ﬁeld over a planar rectangular surface, as well as to obtain the far-ﬁeld patterns
of said ﬁeld are included in Appendix C, sections C.3 and C.4.
2.4
Phaseless measurements and phase retrieval
From the previously discussed, it is obvious that, in order to arrive at the far-
ﬁeld expressions of the AUT, information of both module and phase are needed.
When only the module is measured, phase information needs to be found else-
where.
This problem is named phase retrieval and to this end a number of
diﬀerent approaches have been developed. On this report the so-called Itera-
tive Fourier Technique (IFT) is used to determine the phase distribution of the
AUT. It requires that two diﬀerent amplitude measurements of the tangential
components of the tangential E-ﬁeld are taken at two scan planes with diﬀerent
distances to the aperture of the AUT. As the PWS of the ﬁelds at both planes
are related to each other through the propagation formula [13] they allow to
deploy an iterative method where the ﬁelds are propagated back and forth be-
tween the two surfaces, with the error between the retrieved and the measured
ﬁeld at each surface ideally decreasing after each iteration.
Since no initial phase information is available from the measurements, it is
necessary to input an initial guess into the phase retrieval algorithm. While a
series of diﬀerent methods for determining an optimal initial guess have been
developed, such as applying the diﬀerential evolutionary algorithm or DEA [13]
to determine an optimal phase guess, this aspect is out of the scope of this
project and therefore only a limited number of initial guessed will be explored
and assessed in terms of its eﬃciency coupled with the IFT algorithm.
2.4.1
Ambiguity of phaseless measurements
Some consideration needs to be taken into the question of whether or not a
certain phase distribution can be retrieved with the certainty that it provides
a unique solution for the given electrical ﬁeld. If a single set of measured ﬁeld
points over one surface are considered, then in principle it is possible to generate
an inﬁnite set of complex functions by multiplying the measured ﬁeld amplitude
by any arbitrary phase distribution, such as E(x, y) = M(x, y)eΦ(x,y).
Given an object denoted as E(x, y), any translation of this object, E(x −
x0, y −y0), its twin image E ∗(−x −x0, −y −y0) or any of these multiplied by
16
==PAGE:21==
a constant of unit magnitude ejΦc all have an identical PWS module. While
this creates an ambiguity on the object, they only change its position or orien-
tation, but not its appearance, and therefore a solution is considered ambigu-
ous only if it diﬀeres from this object in a manner diﬀerent from these trivial
ambiguities[15].
If no information is known of the ﬁeld then phase retrieval is generally am-
biguous, but in many cases a priori knowledge puts constrains on the number
of possible solutions. In the case of phaseless antenna measurements, the ﬁeld
is known to be zero outside of some ﬁnite area. Another strong limitation is
imposed on the number of possible phase distributions by the fact that near-
ﬁeld signals are band-limited[14]. Further limitations are imposed by parameters
such as antenna size and geometry or, most interesting to the case of this report,
by a second measurement over a diﬀerent surface.
The question of the ambiguity of phase retrieval is explored on [14] where it is
concluded that for two diﬀerent measurements linked by the free-space propaga-
tion formula of the PWS then a unique solution for a retrieved phase distribution
can be assumed to exist with a very high probability. Another approach cited
by Seldin and Fienup in [15] is to use the iterative Fourier technique to test for
practical uniqueness of a retrieved phase. If multiple solutions are possible for
a given module, then the Fourier algorithm tends to ﬁnd them if many runs
are performed, each starting with a diﬀerent, random guess. But, as in most
instances the reconstructed solution was essentially the same, it gives strong ev-
idence to the uniqueness of the reconstructed phase. Other developments, such
as the one proposed by Bruck and Sodin in [?] assimilates the 2D-Fourier trans-
form to a polynomial of two complex variables and the problem of uniqueness
of phase retrieval to the factorability of a two-dimensional polynomial, arguing
that because said polynomial are rarely factorable then multiple solutions in the
case of two-dimensional phase retrieval are also rare.
In general, no absolute proof is given to the question of uniqueness, instead
relying on strong (but still not deﬁnitive) evidence.
2.5
Antenna under test
The antenna studied on this project is a U-band pyramidal horn designed for a
frequency range of 40 to 60 GHz. The pyramidal horn has a number of advan-
tages, the main of which is its high directivity which makes it suitable for the it-
erative algorithm. If the AUT is not greatly directive, such as a Hertzian dipole,
the algorithm has been found to perform much poorlier. Secondly, the posibility
to create a simple software model of the AUT using plane wave expansion of an
aperture ﬁeld in order to simulate a measured ﬁeld in a surface perpendicular to
the antenna z-axis at a given distance, similarly to how the ﬁelds are propagated
between the measuring surfaces in the iterative Fourier technique. Thirdly, an
aperture antenna such as this presents well deﬁned physical boundaries which
can allow for more reﬁned data processing such as described in section 3.3.
The basic dimensions and frequency speciﬁcations of the antenna are de-
scribed in table 2.5.
The AUT has an aperture ﬁeld distribution in the form of
17
==PAGE:22==
Name
Symbol
Unit
Aperture width on E-plane
b1
30mm
Aperture width on H-plane
a1
41mm
Waveguide width on E-plane
b
2.4mm
Waveguide width on H-plane
a
4.8mm
Length of waveguide section
l
8mm
Total length of the horn
L
180mm
Frequency
f
60GHz
Wavelength
λ
4.9965mm
Table 2.1: Physical and frequency parameters of the AUT horn
Ea(x′, y′) = E0 cos( π
a1y′)e−j[k(x′2/ρ1+y′2/ρ2)/2]
(2.23)
This expression indicates a uniform aperture ﬁeld distribution along the E-
plane (and any given plane parallel to it) while the H-plane presents a cosine
taper, with the ﬁeld becoming zero at the edges. Furthermore, the phase has
a quadratic dependence of both the x and y component. This quadratic phase
has been a standard for many years due to its good results and simplicity, as it
it leads to closed form expressions for the far-ﬁeld patterns of the horn in terms
of sine and cosine Fresnel integrals [4].
2.6
Coordinate system
In order to unequivocally deﬁne the geometry of the problem and identify each
point in the matrices of data, a coordinate system needs to be deﬁned. As the
antenna under test is an aperture-type, it is the most simple and intuitive to
deﬁne the z-axis perpendicular to its aperture plane, with the coordinate origin
at the intersection of both so that the separation between the AUT and probe
aperture planes is exactly the positive z-coordinate.
The remaining two axes are chosen parallel to the sides of the rectangular
aperture. The coordinate origin is placed at the geometrical center of the an-
tenna, with the practical eﬀect that when an odd number of samples are taken
along the x or y axis the central sample will coincide with the origin of coordi-
nates. The x and y axes are interchangeable and of no great importance, but,
as shown in ﬁgure 2.2, the x-axis is chosen to be parallel the co-polar compo-
nent of the aperture ﬁeld so that the AUT is considered x-polarized. The y-axis
is therefore parallel to the aperture ﬁeld H-vector. On the z-axis, the x-unit
vector corresponds with the θ-unit vector, making the co-polar component of
the x-polarized ﬁeld correspond with the θ-component on the E-plane. On the
other hand, the co-polar component on the H-plane will be φ-polarized.
Furthermore, the positive x and y directions are chosen naturally so that
they are respectively upwards and to the right of the origin of coordinates,
18
==PAGE:23==
Figure 2.2: Coordinate system in the center point of the AUT, showing direction
of x-polarized E-ﬁeld
when observing the AUT at its boresight direction from the point of view of the
probe antenna.
2.7
Mathematical model of the AUT
Part of the study work of this project has involved developing a mathematical
model of the AUT using MATLAB as a tool. Out of the several ways in which
the ﬁeld of a horn can be represented two of them were explored.
The most straight-forward is to directly implement formulas 13.48b and
13.48c from [4] which directly give the far-ﬁeld θ and φ components of an AUT
with a cosine taper on the H-plane and a quadratic phase distribution in terms
of the Fresnel integrals. These expressions are not valid for the near-ﬁeld but
they provide a good theoretical reference for the far-ﬁeld, but is not very ﬂexible
because they only describe this particular case of aperture ﬁelds. For this reason,
a complementary near-ﬁeld model of a horn antenna has been implemented
making use of the PWE theory in order to simulate ﬁelds propagating from an
aperture antenna into a measurement surface at any given distance.
An aperture ﬁeld is created by a pair of m and n-element vectors of points
in space which deﬁne a complex m by n matrix of aperture ﬁeld samples.
The maximum separation between points is given by the sampling theorem at
∆x = ∆y = λ/2. The aperture size is much smaller than the measuring planes
so it needs to be padded by adding zero-value samples along the horizontal and
vertical dimensions of the matrix, until the number of points, MxN, is the same
as the chosen size of the scan planes. This is a necessary condition because the
ﬁeld propagation (translation of the FFT of the ﬁelds) implemented on MAT-
LAB works on the basis of a point-to-point correspondence between analogous
samples on the diﬀerent surfaces. Once the aperture plane is well deﬁned, its
PWS is calculated, as well as the propagation terms on the z-direction, kz, as
another MxN matrix. With this data the spectrum of the AUT ﬁeld at the
aperture can be propagated to any other plane orthogonal to the z-axis and
transformed into the spatial domain to obtain the electric ﬁeld at said plane, at
a distance of z0 from the aperture.
This MATLAB model has a series of advantages over the previous because it
closely resembles the experimental procedure for obtaining measured data over a
number of surfaces. The surface ﬁelds simulated in such a way have an identical
format to the actual measured data, and can be fed into the iterative algorithm
as input data as a complement to said measurements. Simulated data obtained
19
==PAGE:24==
from this model has been extensively used during the early stages of the project
in order to test and debug the phase retrieval program. Furthermore, the horn
model is used to generate most of the initial phase guesses used on this project.
Another beneﬁt of this model is its high versatility.
It is not limited to
a cosine-taper, quadratic phase aperture distribution but it can in principle
generate any other kind of aperture ﬁeld, and for diﬀerent shapes and sizes of
the horn. Additionally, in order to test the sensitivity of the iterative algorithm
against sources of error, a number of diﬀerent perturbations can be simulated
such as displacement or rotation of the AUT, pointing errors, noise level, or the
eﬀects of a non-ideal probe, a feature that can be useful when determining or
ruling out causes of error in a real scenario.
2.8
Separation of AUT and probe
It is an open question how separation between probe and AUT inﬂuences the
outcome of the phase retrieval, and what pair of distances would result in opti-
mal retrieval. There is a great degree of freedom allowed by the planar scanner
setup in terms of antenna separation, but it is a necessary restriction that the
smallest separation is greater than two or three wavelengths, in order to ensure
the probe is suﬃciently far apart from the reactive zone of the AUTgregson.
It should also be self-evident that at least one of the surfaces needs to be in
the near-ﬁeld region of the AUT, as two far-ﬁeld measurements would feature
identical amplitude/phase regardless of distance. For practical reasons due to
the physical size of the planar installation both measurements are taken within
the NF region. Similarly, it is not desirable that two measurements are taken
with a very small separation because the variation of the electric ﬁeld across the
medium will not be signiﬁcant.
One possible criterion to evaluate the eﬀect of distance between surfaces
on the retrieval algorithm can be the number of iterations it takes for the al-
gorithm to achieve a convergent solution, which in practical terms means the
number of iterations necessary for the computed error metric of the algorithm
to fall below a given success threshold. The reciprocal approach, and perhaps
a more straightforward one, is to compare the value of the error metric after a
given number of iterations, with the implication that a lower error means faster
convergence.
A preliminary study of convergence versus distance was performed using sim-
ulated data that was processed by the iterative algorithm. An experiment was
designed in which a pair of simulated ﬁelds at diﬀerent distances is introduced
into the iterative algorithm and the variation of the computed error after a ﬁxed
number of iterations in relation to the distance between the planes is displayed
in ﬁgure 2.3. In the ﬁgure, each plot corresponds to a ﬁxed distance from the
AUT to the nearest plane, while the other is moved progressively further away.
The low number of iterations was chosen so that the value of the error metric
does not become so small that the diﬀerences lose their meaning, while at the
same time being suﬃcient to ensure the process of convergence to already be
underway. The initial guess is a cosine-tapered amplitude and a uniform phase
distribution on the aperture of the pyramidal horn.
The theoretical results indicate that a greater distance is desirable between
the two scan planes in order to enhance the eﬀectiveness of the iterative algo-
20
==PAGE:25==
Figure 2.3: Variation of computed error after 200 iterations versus separation
between planes.
Each plot corresponds to a diﬀerent distance of the closest
surface to the AUT.
rithm, and that a minimum distance of two wavelengths results in much better
performance in terms of mean square error: simply by moving the scan plane
of the probe from 1λ to 2λ the computed error metric after 200 iterations is
divided by a factor of 5.
The study of antenna separation, as well as the mean square error (MSE)
metric will be presented in further detail in subsequent sections of the report.
2.9
Probe correction
There are some requirements that an antenna needs to fulﬁll in order to be
suitable for use as a probe for planar near-ﬁeld measurements. Among them
are [8]
• Time invariant gain and mechanically rigid.
• Electrically small, ie: low directivity, no pattern nulls in the forward di-
rection of the probe.
• Low scattering cross-section (to minimize multiple reﬂexions).
• Low reﬂection coeﬃcient, well matched with small return loss (not usually
satisﬁed over a wide bandwidth).
• Good polarization purity, ideally more so than the AUT.
• Good front-to-back ratio. While this point is at odds with point 2, it is a
desirable characteristic in order to minimize sensitivity to the position of
the probe and multiple reﬂections.
The data collected at the planar scanner does not correspond with a true
measured ﬁeld, rather, what comes out is a probe signal, the level of electric ﬁeld
measured by this particular probe at all the given points. The probe antenna,
same as the AUT has its very own radiation pattern which is diﬀerent from that
21
==PAGE:26==
Figure 2.4: Eﬀect of probe pattern on measured probe signal
of the elemental antenna, the Hertzian dipole.
The receiving characteristics
of a Hertzian dipole are well-known, and thus, probe correction is designed
to compensate for the diﬀerence in the radiation patterns of the probe and
the elemental dipole at any given direction. In the case of planar near-ﬁeld
measurements, probe correction is necessary in order to accurately determine
the radiated far-ﬁelds in the region outside of the main beam, regardless of the
separation between the AUT and the probe[16].
In terms of plane wave expansion, the incident ﬁeld measured at the scan
plane can be thought of as a superposition of inﬁnite propagating and evanes-
cent plane waves with unknown amplitudes, expressed in terms of its angular
spectrum f(kx, ky). The probe output at a point in the scan plane can then be
written as a superposition of the incident plane-wave amplitudes weighted by
the plane-wave receiving characteristic of the probe. Each value of the probe
output provides one equation for determining the unknown plane-wave ampli-
tudes in the plane-wave expansion of the incident ﬁeld at that point in the scan
plane. From this single equation for a nonideal probe it is not possible to de-
termine the unknown incident plane-wave amplitudes, and the ﬁeld at a point
in the scan plane cannot be determined from the probe output at that point. It
is then necessary to determine a set of probe-corrected equations which allow
to write the ﬁeld in terms of the output of the probe, which is assumed to be
known, in the scan plane z = z0[10].
We deﬁne the vector output of the probe at a given point, b(xm, yn, z0) as
the vector summation of the two independent components of the ﬁeld.
b(xm, yn, z0) = bx(xm, yn, z0)ˆx + by(xm, yn, z0)ˆy
(2.24)
Then, this probe output is written in terms of the plane wave spectrum of
the ﬁelds radiated by the AUT ﬁeld, weighed by the receiving characteristics of
the probe, where f0 denotes the former and fr denotes the latter.
b(xm, yn, z0) =
X
m
X
n
fr(kx, ky)f0(kx, ky)e−j(kxxm+kyyn)e−j(kzz0)
(2.25)
In order to solve 2.22 for the AUT spectrum, the next step is to perform
the Fourier transform of b(xm, yn, z0) in order to obtain the total probe output
spectrum, which is the product of the two aforementioned spectra.
22
==PAGE:27==
fr(kx, ky)f0(kx, ky) = ej(kzz0) X
m
X
n
b(xm, yn, z0)ej(kxxm+kyyn)
(2.26)
And from this point, f0 can be determined simply by dividing the resulting
spectrum by the receiving characteristic of the probe.
f0(kx, ky) = ej(kzz0)f −1
r
(kx, ky)
X
m
X
n
b(xm, yn, z0)ej(kxxm+kyyn)
(2.27)
By applying the inverse Fourier transform to equation 2.27 the ﬁnal, probe-
corrected, AUT electric ﬁeld is obtained in terms of the measured probe signal.
In the previous process, it is assumed that the distance between the probe
and the test antenna is large enough so that multiple reﬂections between the
test antenna and the probe do not change the output of the probe and can be
neglected.
2.9.1
Particularities of probe correction for phaseless mea-
surements
In the speciﬁc case of phaseless near-ﬁeld measurements and phase retrieval,
some particularities need to be considered when applying probe correction. As
previously mentioned, the measured ﬁelds at two diﬀerent surfaces are linked by
the equation of free-space propagation, which is the basis for the phase retrieval
algorithm. This is however not necessarily true for the probe output, a fact that
underlines the necessity for probe correction in order to retrieve a correct phase
distribution of the AUT ﬁeld. As indicated in equation 2.9 the probe signal has
a dependence on the AUT spectrum and the probe characteristics, appearing
inside of an integral (or summation when implemented on a real setting). The
probe signal at two diﬀerent, arbitrary distances is
b1(xm, yn, z1) =
X
m
X
n
fr(kx, ky)f0(kx, ky)e−j(kxxm+kyyn)e−j(kzz1)
(2.28a)
b2(xm, yn, z2) =
X
m
X
n
fr(kx, ky)f0(kx, ky)e−j(kxxm+kyyn)e−j(kzz2)
(2.28b)
As neither the AUT nor probe characteristics depend of the distance, and
if the size of the measurement plane is the same in both measurements, then
the only varying term on the previous equations is the propagation exponential,
ej(kzz). The reason why probe correction is necessary is because b1 and b2 are
not necessarily related by the FFT translation at the core of the algorithm. This
seems to create a dilemma since a complex probe signal is required for probe
correcting before running the iterative algorithm, while at the same time the
problem of phase retrieval means that no phase information is available from
the measurements.
One possibility is to work under the assumption that if the distance between
the two surfaces z2−z1 is small enough then the probe, which is approximated to
23
==PAGE:28==
a point source and therefore assumed to be much smaller than the aperture of the
AUT will see approximately the same picture, i.e: the region of validity will be
the same in both cases, and therefore it becomes possible to propagate b1 and b2
between planes as is required because the diﬀerence between the two propagation
exponentials can be neglected. As a following step to the iterative algorithm,
the retrieved complex signal, which can be assumed to still represent a probe
signal, can be probe-corrected following the standard procedure to obtain a
ﬁnal, retrieved electric ﬁeld of the AUT. Ostensibly, the previously explained is
in contradiction with the study in 2.8 in which greater distance between surfaces
generally yielded smaller error, although the data of the said investigation is a
simulated ﬁeld free from probe eﬀects or other perturbations.
Another option to be considered is whether it is possible to probe-correct the
signals before executing the iterative algorithm. It could in principle be possible
to generate a pair of complex electric ﬁelds from the measured amplitudes and
the initial guess(es), obtained from the MATLAB model, and apply probe-
correction. Afterwards, the probe-corrected modules can be extracted and used
as input for the iterative algorithm. However, the initial guess does not generally
correspond with the adequate phase distribution of the measured ﬁeld.
For
instance, in one case the initial guess can be that of a horn with uniform phase
distribution at its aperture, while the AUT is actually a horn with a quadratic
phase distribution. In section 4.2.1 results will be presented that indicate the
incorrectness of this approach in most of the possible cases.
An additional proposed solution is to run the iterative algorithm twice. In
the ﬁrst run no probe correction is performed on the probe signals that are
iteratively propagated back and forth between the two surfaces.
Thus, the
program provides a retrieved ﬁeld which may be incorrect due to lack of probe
correction, but that nevertheless has a suitable retrieved phase for the purpose
of probe correction which is much like the actual AUT phase. These results can
be probe-corrected and the resulting AUT ﬁelds subsequently fed back into the
iterative algorithm as the input parameters.
In other words, faced with the lack of a proper initial guess with which to
perform probe correction and arrive to an accurate retrieval, it is possible to
run the iterative algorithm with a potentially invalid set of data(in terms of
the equation of electromagnetic ﬁeld propagation not holding true) and use the
result as a good initial guess for the probe-corrected iterative process, which will
in principle fulﬁll the ﬁeld equations and return a result with a higher degree of
accuracy.
2.9.2
Receiving characteristics of the probe
The open-ended circular waveguide is measured to obtain its receiving char-
acteristics, which are later use to compensate for in measurements taken with
said antenna as the probe. In order to obtain said characteristics, the probe is
measured at a spherical range as an AUT, using another auxiliary antenna as a
probe, the characteristics of which can be approximated to a Hertzian dipole.
Figure 2.6 represents the probe characteristics plotted against the kx and ky
axis. Once the receiving characteristics of the probe are determined, essentially
calculating the angular spectrum of the probe, compensation of measured data
is done by dividing the plane wave spectrum of the measured probe signal by
the probe characteristics, therefore acquiring a corrected measurement of the
24
==PAGE:29==
Figure 2.5: Flow diagram of proposed double-iterative method.
true electric ﬁeld.
The image shows a certain variation of the phase of the
spectrum on the vertical direction. This variation indicates that the center of
the probe was slightly displaced upwards, resulting in a phase variation of the
far-ﬁeld pattern. This variation thus carries into the spectrum of the AUT from
probe correction, and ultimately into its far-ﬁeld patter. Although the probe is
considered to be perfectly aligned for the purposes of probe correction in this
report, a certain phase asymmetry of the AUT patterns should be expected
because of the previously mentioned.
2.10
Dual-polarized probe and probe calibration
A dual-polarize probe with an orthomode transducer (OMT) and a waveguide
switch allow for a 50% reduction in measurement time as it allows for two
orthogonal components to be measured concurrently, but this comes at the cost
of adding extra complexity into the measurements due to the switch, which is
needed to excite the two orthogonal ports. The amplitude and phase entering
the ports of the probe will not be the same, and it is necessary to compensate
for this diﬀerence in any measurement where this probe is used, in addition to
the standard probe correction.
As introduced in 2.9, probe correction needs to be performed on the mea-
sured probe signal due to the eﬀect of the probe’s own radiation characteris-
tics. The probe which is employed throughout the course of this project is an
open-ended circular U-band waveguide with a small conical section at its end.
A regular open-ended waveguide typically possesses a reﬂection coeﬃcient of
around -10 to -12dB but it has been observed that introducing a conical section
25
==PAGE:30==
Figure 2.6: Spectral receiving characteristics of the open-ended WG probe.
with a few degrees of slope can reduce it down to -15dB specially at the higher
end of the frequency band, where the aperture of the waveguide becomes elec-
trically bigger. A similar approach, perhaps easier to implement in practice, is
to create a diameter step by appending a section on the end of the waveguide
with a smaller aperture diameter instead of a conical transition.
The probe calibration process consists of two parts: pattern and polarization
calibration, both of which are performed at the spherical range at DTU.
In order to determine the probe pattern, a full spherical measurement of
the probe itself as an AUT is carried out with an auxiliary antenna as probe.
This auxiliary probe needs to be considered a Hertzian dipole in order to break
the seemingly endless cycle that would arise if the auxiliary probe’s radiation
receiving characteristics were also required.
The Hertzian dipole’s receiving
characteristics, on the other hand, are well known. In order for this approxima-
tion to be valid it is necessary that the auxiliary probe is an electrically small
antenna, and that the measuring distance is suﬃciently large.
Polarization calibration refers to the process of determining the probe’s axial
ratio and tilt angle, which describe the relation between the magnitude of the
two orthogonal components of the electric ﬁeld and their phase diﬀerence. When
the probe is connected to an OMT it is capable of operating as a dual-polarized
probe, where the excited signals on each of the two ports of the OMT are
orthogonally polarized. Thus, the excited signal on port 1 (x-polarized) should
be the same as in port 2 (y-polarized), although in reality this will not be
the case due to the diﬀerent paths of the signals, coupling, etc, resulting in
diﬀerent measured amplitude and phase at each port. Polarization calibration
becomes then necessary to evaluate how these imperfections aﬀect the dual-
polarization characteristics of the probe and to compensate for eﬀects such as
cable mismatching, gain and phase diﬀerences between the channels, cross-talk
or poor isolation inside the OMT or the switch.
To perform polarization calibration a three antenna measurement needs to be
performed with the probe and two standard gain horns (SGHs). In consequence,
there are three polarization ratios that need to be calculated. In this process,
the antennas are placed with their z-axis pointing toward each other and one
of the antennas is rotated 360 degrees around its z-axis, obtaining the copolar
26
==PAGE:31==
E-ﬁeld pattern. The two antennas need to be on the far-ﬁeld of each other. The
complete process of the three-antena measurement is described in further detail
in appendix B.
In section 5.1 the results of probe calibration will be discussed. It has been
determined that dual probe operation is not suitable for measurements of 60GHz
because the available OMT has a lower cut-oﬀon the second port which makes
the highest usable frequency around 49GHz. For this reason, all experiments
performed with a dual-polarized probe will use a working frequency of 48GHz
instead of the intended 60GHz.
2.11
Uncertainty and sources of error
Among the chief causes of uncertainty are:
• The noise from the measurements. The noise ﬂoor has been measured to
be ca. 50dB below the peak value of the measurements.
• Uncertainty in the distances from the probe to the AUT. The setup is
ﬁtted with a somewhat limited scale that goes only to millimetres, so the
expected uncertainty can be signiﬁcant, considering that at the frequency
of operation of 60 GHz the wavelenght is only of 5mm. If the distances that
are introduced into the program as input parameters do not correspond
exactly with the actual separations of the probe then a perturbation will
be introduced into the ﬁnal result.
• Other systematic errors in pointing and alignment of the antennas will
result in additional perturbations of the retrieval. The algorithm relies
on the assumption that the two surfaces are parallel between themselves
and also perpendicular to the antennae axis. For instance, if the AUT
axis is misaligned by α degrees then the distance from the AUT to the
measurement plane in the boresight direction of the AUT would increase
by a factor of sin−1α and furthermore the boresight direction would no
longer be the closest distance from AUT to probe.
• Drift refers to the systematic error due to the physical conditions of the
experiment slowly changing during the duration of said experiment, such
as the eﬀect of the internal temperature of the VNA or other equipment,
or changes in room temperature during the several hours in which the
operation takes place. This means that the measured signal diﬀerent de-
pending on which point in space the probe is, but also depending on time.
Ideally, if the ﬁeld is measured at a same point over time its value should
Figure 2.7: Possible situation of axis misalignment
27
==PAGE:32==
remain constant throughout but due to drift that will not be the case.
This drift can be mitigated to a fairly good extent by allowing suﬃcient
time for the measuring setup to warm up and settle before conducting
the experiment but nevertheless it can be expected that, after the initial
warmup time, the phase will change by approximately four degrees during
the course of three hours [12].
• The cables connecting the VNA to the probe and the AUT do not have
constant properties throughout because any change in its shape, such as
the twisting or bending that occurs as the actuators move the probe an-
tenna along the plane will modify its electrical properties. Changes in the
intrinsic impedance of the medium results in a reﬂected wave as the cable
is no longer perfectly adapted. This eﬀect becomes more and more promi-
nent at higher frequencies and, while the eﬀect on the measured module
is not so signiﬁcant, the phase is rather susceptible, which is one of the
reasons why phase retrieval can be an interesting tool for high-frequency
measurements.
• Finally, the eﬀect of the multiple reﬂections between AUT and probe, al-
though explicitly neglected in previous sections of this report can actually
add uncertainty to the results, specially if the antennas are tilted. The
general reﬂection level is estimated to be at around -30dB.
2.12
Summary of chapter 2
In this chapter the theory behind the project is laid down and a mathematical
formulation is given for the techniques of plane wave expansion and probe cor-
rection, both in general form and in discrete variable for numerical MATLAB
methods. A brief bibliographic research on the topic of the ambiguity of phase-
less measurements is conducted, concluding that uniqueness of phase retrieval
is highly likely despite lack of absolute proof. The AUT is introduced and the
geometry of the problem is established. The probe antenna is also discussed
regarding its use with a dual-polarization assembly for measurements of two
components of the ﬁeld. Finally, some of the chief causes of uncertainty and
measurement errors are commented.
28
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 3
Iterative algorithm
The iterative algorithm for phase retrieval based on Fourier propagation is the
core of this project. On its very basic form, it consists of a while loop where
the operations of propagating the ﬁelds and module substitution are performed
iteratively until a certain condition is met. This condition can be the reaching
of a maximum number of iterations, or as an alternative, the algorithm can
stop when the computed error metric at the current iteration falls below a
certain chosen threshold. The input parameters to the MATLAB routine are
the following ones:
• An initial guess for the target ﬁeld consisting of the measured module at
one of the two surfaces, plus a guess for its phase distribution.
• Two sets of measured amplitudes at two distances, z1 and z2, from the
AUT.
• The computed kz matrix of propagation constant values from plane wave
expansion.
The only geometrical information that the algorithm requires is the dimen-
sions of the scan plane and the separation between AUT and probe for each
measurement surface. It is nevertheless necessary to determine the complete
geometry of the problem, especially when complementing real data with simu-
lated results. It is obviously necessary to have well-known measurement surfaces
in order to compute the plane wave expansion of the ﬁelds and to obtain the kz
parameters, but this can be done (and is, in fact, done) as a previous operation
to the iterative algorithm in order to reduce the complexity of the code.
The iterative algorithm consists of the following steps:
• The initial guess is constructed from the measured module at surface 1
and a guess for the phase.
E1,1 = |Ems1| ejΦguess
(3.1)
• Fourier transform the initial guess, E1,1(x, y) into the spectral domain
to obtain the plane wave spectrum T1,1(kx, ky). Propagate the spectrum
forward by ∆z = z2 −z1 to the second surface.
T2,1 = T1,1e−jkz∆z
(3.2)
29
==PAGE:34==
Figure 3.1: Flow diagram of the iterative algorithm. Each diagonal arrow repre-
sents a propagation of the PWS of the ﬁeld to said surface and Fourier operations
are omitted.
• Inverse transform the propagated spectrum into the spatial domain to
obtain E2,1(x, y) and calculate the error metric in the current step.
• If the stopping condition(s) are not met, the module of the propagated
ﬁeld is discarded and a new ﬁeld is created by appending the propagated
phase to the measured amplitude of the ﬁeld at the second surface.
E′
2,1 = |Ems2| ejΦE2,1
(3.3)
• The new ﬁeld is Fourier transformed and propagated backwards by −∆z
to the ﬁrst surface.
T1,2 = T ′
2,1e+kz∆z
(3.4)
• The backprojected spectrum is inverse transformed to obtain E1,2 and the
error metric is calculated again.
• If the stopping conditions(s) are not met, the module is again swapped
with the measured amplitude at surface one.
E′
1,2 = |Ems1| ejΦE1,2
(3.5)
• The algorithm jumps to the second step.
This process is further illustrated by the ﬂow diagram on 3.1.
The ﬁnal output of the algorithm once the criteria of convergence or max-
imum iterations are met is a complex matrix of retrieved near-ﬁeld values at
whichever surface the ﬁeld was propagated last before stopping. The calculated
values of the error metric are stored in a vector and give information on the
convergence of the algorithm.
30
==PAGE:35==
In addition to this, it is possible to reﬁne the algorithm with additional data
processing if needed. For instance, spatial or spectral ﬁltering can be performed
after each iterative step. For certain types of antennas which present well deﬁned
apertures, it is possible to add extra steps into the algorithm by performing
spatial ﬁltering at the aperture plane. An example of a more complex variation
of the iterative algorithm including this treatment is discussed in section 3.3.
3.1
Initial guess
The initial guess, as previously introduced, refers to an hypothesis of what the
phase distribution of the electric ﬁeld is prior to the iterative processing. As
the magnitude-only ﬁeld measurements provide no information of the required
phase distribution, it needs to be obtained from a mathematical model and then
applied to a suitable amplitude distribution to generate an initial guess. This
amplitude can be either of the two sets of measured data obtained from the
AUT, and the initial phase is the only guess that needs to be done regarding
the phase retrieval algorithm.
Choosing an initial guess is one of the very crucial aspects of phase retrieval,
since it will enormously aﬀect the outcome of the algorithm, directly inﬂuencing
how fast a convergent solution is found, or even whether the result will converge
at all.
A possible way to evaluate the appropriateness of an initial guess is
in terms of the number of iterations necessary for the solution to meet the
convergence criteria, with the implication that an initial guess is more suitable
when a solution is reached within a smaller number of iterations. The details of
the convergence criteria are discussed in section 3.2.
A hypothesis regarding the initial guess is that its eﬀectiveness will depend
on how similar it is to the expected phase of the AUT. To test this proposition,
a series of tests will be run with diﬀerent initial phases, and the performance of
the algorithm evaluated. Among the studied initial guesses will be
• Constant phase distribution: the measured ﬁeld is coupled with a zero (or
other value) constant phase distribution at the beginning of iterations.
• Hertzian dipole phase distribution: an x-oriented Hertzian dipole is placed
at the origin of coordinates. The ﬁeld of this dipole is calculated in the
initial surface and its phase distribution is appended to the measured ﬁeld
in that given surface to create the initial guess.
• Horn antenna with constant amplitude and phase aperture ﬁeld: a model
of the horn antenna with the same dimensions as the AUT is created and
centered around the origin of coordinates with constant amplitude and
phase aperture ﬁeld. This aperture ﬁeld is propagated to the initial surface
via PWS. The propagated phase at said measuring surface is chosen as
initial guess.
• Horn antenna with tapered amplitude and constant phase distribution:
a cosine taper is introduce in the H-plane of the previous model. The
remaining steps are the same.
• Horn antenna with tapered amplitude and quadratic phase distribution:
the phase in this case has a quadratic dependence with the x and y coor-
dinates in the aperture. This is an exact model of the actual AUT.
31
==PAGE:36==
The previous guesses are listed in order from, a priori, less similar to more
closely resembling the AUT. The results of this study are analized in 4.3.
3.2
Convergence criteria
Convergence criteria referes to a number of possible conditions that can be
evaluated in order to determine when a convergent solution for the reconstructed
phase has been found. The typical way in which this is done is to compared
the ﬁeld retrieved after each iteration with a given reference, and to deﬁne the
error between them in any of the possible ways. On each subsequent iteration of
the algorithm, the retrieved ﬁeld is theoretically expected to converge towards
the correct solution of the AUT phase. This means that each time the ﬁeld
is propagated from one surface to the other the computed error between the
retrieved ﬁeld and the reference ﬁeld becomes monotonically smaller. This is a
favourable situation as in principle it should only be necessary to set an error
threshold which will halt the program after the error has become small enough,
and since it always decreases then this threshold can be arbitrarily small, and a
convergent result can be always expected after a certain number of iterations.
However, this ideal scenario does not correspond with the situation on a practical
setting because it does not take into consideration the experimental uncertainty
that is present in all the measurements, and which can greatly aﬀect the outcome
of the retrieval. Generally, a result is reached when the value of the computed
error approximates the error level of the measurements, as more precise results
can not be obtained after this point.
It is important to choose a suitable reference ﬁeld with which to compare the
retrieved matrix on each iteration. There are two obvious approaches to this
question. The ﬁrst is to use an absolute reference such as the measured ﬁeld
modules and the second to use the retrieved ﬁeld on the previous iteration as
a relative reference. The advantages and shortcomings of each option are now
discussed:
• Using the modules as reference forces to limit the comparison to only the
module of the retrieved, because it is meaningless to compare a complex
ﬁeld with a ﬁeld module. Therefore convergence can only be checked using
the ﬁeld amplitudes (retrieved vs measured), under the assumption that
there is a single solution for the retrieved phase and that this phase will
converge to its single solution at the same time as the modules converge.
• The second approach has the advantage of providing a complete complex
reference ﬁeld with a module and a phase. However, it has an important
setback which in practice makes it not suitable: the reference ﬁeld is not
constant throughout the whole course of the program, as it will change
with each iteration. It can be easily inferred that by comparing two con-
secutive results of the algorithm, it is only possible to conﬁrm whether
the output is converging into a solution (because the diﬀerence between
two iterations will become ever so smaller) but as no absolute reference is
provided (such as a measured ﬁeld) then it is impossible to assess whether
the solution is correct or not.
Because of the previously stated, it is exclusively the measured ﬁelds which
are chosen as the reference for convergence.
32
==PAGE:37==
The second aspect of the convergence algorithm to be analyzed is the error
metric itself, the magnitude that is to be minimized when comparing the two
ﬁelds. To this end there are a number of diﬀerent approaches and metrics and
a most suitable one must be selected with regards to the characteristics of the
problem.
For this project, the considered error matric is the mean squared error
(MSE),formulated as follows.
ϵi =
NP
n=1
(|Ei|−Er)2
NP
n=1
Er2
(3.6)
Where Ei is the calculated retrieved ﬁeld at the i-eth iteration and Er is the
reference ﬁeld, which in this case is the measured ﬁeld magnitude at the given
scan plane. At each iteration the computed value is normalized by the total
measured power over the surface.
This metric is well suited for the problem of phase retrieval because ﬁrstly
it assumes noise follows a gaussian distribution, as is indeed the case. Secondly
squaring the values is equivalent to applying a weighing ﬁlter which places more
relevance on the central values of the matrix which have a higher ﬁeld level while
minimizing the outer samples, which have much slower ﬁeld values (of the order
of -20dB at a vertical distance of 30mm from the probe to the axis of the AUT)
and are moreover further away from the validity region. As will be shown at a
later point in the results discussion section of the report the retrieved phase is
generally markedly susceptible to noise outside of the area immediately around
the AUT aperture, so this weighing eﬀect of the MSE metric is indeed desirable.
A threshold on this magnitude is then used as the criterion for stopping
the iterative algorithm, with the purpose of halting the execution when the
computed error is small enough that further iterations become irrelevant to the
ﬁnal result. It becomes necessary to discern where this point lies and to this
end the behaviour of the metric is analysed by computing the MSE over an
extended amount of iterations. For reasons of clarity, the error metric is repre-
sented on a double-logarithmic scale because its evolution becomes then much
more evident. As As shown in ﬁgure 3.2 there are three distinct stages regard-
ing the pace at which the MSE changes with iterations: from the ﬁrst step to
log(iterations) = 1.5 (approximately after 30 iterations), from that point into
approximately log(iterations) = 3.25 (approximately 1700 iterations) where the
negative slope becomes more steep indicating a more pronounced rate of change
and from 1700 iterations onwards where the curve becomes horizontal and sta-
bilizes at a very small value below -90dB. It was experimentally determined that
when one of the most favourable initial guesses is inserted into the algorithm
then a solution is reached that can be considered convergent in terms of agree-
ment with the reference measured electric ﬁeld. When this is the case, the error
settles at a value slightly below -90dB. For less favourable initial guesses this
33
==PAGE:38==
Figure 3.2: MSE vs number of iterations on double logaritmic scale. Case of
most favorable initial guess.
Figure 3.3: Diﬀerence between computed MSE on two consecutive iterations.
Case of most favorable initial guess.
34
==PAGE:39==
value is never reached as the error becomes stable at a higher level, as will be
shown in section 4.3.
For this reason, it was decided to set a value of -90dB on the MSE as a con-
vergence threshold. The question remains of whether the solution is convergent
or not when this value is not met. As was previously explained, the output
of the algorithm can be said to converge into a given solution when it remains
essentially unchanged with iterations, but still be far from a correct solution in
terms of agreement with the reference ﬁeld.
In this situation, it can be determined that the solution is convergent when
the error level stabilizes at a given level for a signiﬁcant amount of iterations.
This by itself would not indicate convergence in all cases, but further analysis can
back this assertion by computing the diﬀerence of the MSE between consecutive
iterations, as it can be shown that it becomes exceedingly small at some point
which coincides roughly with the third stage where the error falls below -90dB.
At this point the diﬀerence from one step to the next falls below -150dB and
is in fact so small that the plot becomes noiselike, as can be seen in ﬁgure 3.3,
indicating that the diﬀerence between two iterations is negligible and thus the
criterion for convergence has been met.
In this example the initial guess used to demonstrate the behaviour of the
algorithm is a favourable one, which assumes an aperture with a cosine-tapered
amplitude on the H-plane and uniform phase. For less favourable guesses it can
be expected that convergence will be reached at a level above the threshold,
which indicates that the solution is not satisfactory. While, theoretically, the
error metric will reach the threshold after a given number of iterations, however
large it might be, in practice this is not the case due to the error level present
in the measurements, or due to an exceedingly large number of iterations which
will by far surpass the maximum number.
A typical problem of threshold-based decisions is false-positives: results that
satisfy the threshold condition but are nevertheless incorrect. The MSE metric
has the characteristic of positively weighing samples with higher ﬁeld values
over those with smaller values due to the squaring operation at the core of its
expression: as the distance from the center of the AUT aperture increases, the
measured ﬁeld values become smaller, and thus the diﬀerence between reference
and retrieved ﬁelds become smaller in absolute terms and as a consequence,
its inﬂuence on the computed value of the MSE over the total surface becomes
smaller after squaring than the points around the main beam where the mea-
sured modules are up to 30dB higher. Therefore convergence will be determined
mostly by the samples around the main beam, while the outside area of the plane
is considered less critical, but these small errors might nevertheless cause sig-
niﬁcant eﬀects on the far-ﬁeld patterns. This aspect is expanded upon, in the
light of the relevant experimental results, in section 4.4.
3.3
Use of supplementary information of the AUT
In addition to the measured data from the AUT, it is in principle possible to
include more information of the AUT into the iterative algorithm in order to
reﬁne its performance. The more knowledge about the AUT is included into the
iterative algorithm, the better the result will be in terms of error, and in turn
the retrieved phase will be obtained after a much smaller number of iterations.
35
==PAGE:40==
If the AUT is an aperture type antenna, it will be possible to incorporate the
aperture plane into the iterative algorithm, as in this case it is well-deﬁned.
However this technique can not be carried out in all types of antennas, as for
instance wire antennas or arrays will not have such well-deﬁned boundaries.
When measuring an aperture antenna, it is possible to backproject the re-
constructed ﬁeld after each iteration into the aperture plane, and then apply
spatial ﬁltering at the aperture by discarding all measuring points outside of
the aperture. Afterwards, this newly ﬁltered ﬁeld can be projected from the
aperture into the next measuring surface and then module-swapped as usual.
The advantage of spatial ﬁltering is that it is possible to enforce at every step
the condition that the ﬁeld at the aperture plane is zero outside said aperture,
so that the only fraction of the ﬁeld left is the most reliable. However, due to
the strong diﬀraction eﬀects that can arise due to the fact that there might still
be a signiﬁcant ﬁeld value on the boundaries of the aperture that gets ﬁltered
oﬀ, this approach gives best results in cases like a tapered aperture ﬁeld, where
the distribution actually becomes zero at the edges.
3.4
The Fast Fourier Transform
The discrete Fourier Transform in MATLAB and its related functions are im-
plemented as part of the FFTW library. FTTW is a free library written in
the C language for computing the discrete Fourier transform (DFT) in one or
more dimensions, of arbitrary input size, and of both real and complex data
[1]. To compute an N-point FFT (with N = N1N2), it decomposes the problem
using the Cooley-Tukey algorithm, which ﬁrst computes N1 transforms of size
N2, and then computes N2 transforms of size N1. The decomposition is applied
recursively to both the N1 and N2-point DFTs until the problem can be solved
using one of several machine-generated ﬁxed-size "codelets" [2]. This algorithm
is fastest for a problem size which is a power of two (N = 2k) and slowest when
N is a prime number.
Additionally, the two-dimensional FFT is implemented by the MATLAB
fft2. This routine is straightforward and simply computes the regular FFT of
each of the columns of the matrix, then of each row of the result.
The FFT operation is deﬁned in equation 3.4. Due to the diﬀerent way of
implementation with regards to the traditional Fourier Transform, there are a
series of aspects that need to be considered.
FFT(m) =
N
X
n=1
f(n)e−j2π(m−1)(n−1)/N
(3.7)
This algorithm (here deﬁned for the one-dimensional case) outputs an array
with the same length as the input f(n) which is ordered from m = 0 to M
2 −1 and
then from −M
2
to -1. The frequency is hence deﬁned in the strictly positive range
with the DC (zero frequency) component as the ﬁrst element of the array. More
conventionally, the range of frequencies is deﬁned on a positive and negative
range, and the DC component takes the place of the center value.
36
==PAGE:41==
Figure 3.4: fftshift on a two-dimensional matrix. ifftshift reverses this
transformation. Picture source: Mathworks.
In the case of the 2-dimensional FFT the lower frequency components appear
at the corners of the corresponding matrix that is returned by the fft2 function.
Since kx and ky are deﬁned respectively within [−π/∆x, π/∆x] and [−π/∆y, π/∆y]
there is no correspondence between the independent variables and the output.
Additionally, fft(f(x)) assumes that the ﬁrst element of f(x) corresponds to
x = 0 (which means that the signal is also deﬁned over a positive spatial range),
making it necessary to rearrange the vectors and matrices accordingly.
The
same is true when reversing the Fourier Transform as MATLAB’s ifft likewise
assumes the ﬁrst element of the input array corresponds to kx = 0.
The pair of MATLAB functions meant for this task are fftshift and
ifftshift. fftshift is meant to transform a signal deﬁned in a positive range
to a positive and negative range. Therefore it should be only applied on a sig-
nal deﬁned over a positive range, be it a function of either space or frequency.
Conversely, ifftshift is designed to transform a signal from a positive and
negative space/frequency range to a strictly positive one and should only be
used in this speciﬁc case.
Misuse of these functions is a common source of error, due to the diﬀerent
manner in which the shifting is done depending on whether the size of the
problem is an even or an odd number. The symmetry axis over which the N-
point vector is shifted is calculated as the ceiling of N/2. Meanwhile, ifftshift
uses the ﬂoor of N/2. This leads to erroneous recovery of the original signal
if the operations are not performed in the appropriate order. If N is an even
number then it follows that the result of either operation is the same and both
can be used indistinctly. However if N is odd then each will return a diﬀerent
vector as the shifting axis will be one element apart.
Let the following be an example of erroneous and proper Fourier shifting.
A = [0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9]
B = [0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10]
C = fftshift(A) = [5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4]
D = ifftshift(A) = [5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4]
E = fftshift(B) = [6 7 8 9 10 0 1 2 3 4 5]
F = ifftshift(B) = [5 6 7 8 9 10 0 1 2 3 4]
It should be clear from this example that using fftshift or its inverse two
consecutive times will not result in the original signal. Indeed:
fftshift(fftshift(A)) = [0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9]
fftshift(fftshift(B)) = [1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 0]
fftshift(ifftshift(B)) = [0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10]
37
==PAGE:42==
While the previous example is demonstrated on a one-dimensional vector,
the two-dimensional shifting is illustrated on ??.
In the scenario of this report, the sampling space is deﬁned with the axis
direction of the antenna as the center value of the data matrices so as a previ-
ous step to being Fourier-processed they need to be conveniently shifted. The
MATLAB instruction that can correctly perform the necessary operations is as
follows.
Tx=fftshift(fft2(ifftshift(Ex)));
• First the signal is transformed from a positive/negative range to strictly
positive. This corresponds to the inner ifftshift instruction.
• Secondly the signal is Fourier-transformed into a frequency signal over a
positive frequency range.
• Lastly the frequency signal is transformed into a more convenient posi-
tive/negative range. This corresponds to the outer fftshift instruction.
The inverse process when utilizing ifft2 is exactly analogous to the previous
one and will not be discussed.
3.5
Summary of chapter 3
On this chapter an algorithm for phase retrieval based on the iterative Fourier
technique is proposed and its main aspects discussed. It is proposed than a
wisely chosen initial guess is crucial for retrieving a correct phase. The concept of
convergence is explained and an error metric is chosen, over which a threshold is
deﬁned to make the decision of when a convergent solution for the reconstructed
phase has been found.
38
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 4
Performed tests and results
In this section, the conducted experimental work will be described in reference
to the variables being tested, and the results discussed in accordance. First
the set of measured data is introduced and described. Secondly, the diﬀerent
experiments performed with the measured data will be presented and analysed
in relation to the performance of the phase retrieval algorithm.
The following is a list of the variables involved in the phase retrieval process
that will be evaluated.
• Probe correction: the point at which it is attempted to compensate for
the probe inﬂuence. Two possibilities are explored: before applying the
iterative algorithm and after its execution.
• Initial guess: which of the several considered initial guesses needs to be
used in order to achieve a better result.
• Plane distances: what pair of distances from AUT to scan plane works
better for phase retrieval.
• Use of additional knowledge of the AUT: the AUT horn allows for spatial
ﬁltering at the aperture after each step, thus it is possible to enhance the
algorithm.
For each of these experiments only one of the previous variables will be
analyzed, while the remaining factors are constant.
An additional factor which directly inﬂuences the algorithm is the size of
the considered scan planes. Quantitatively, it is suspected that the size of the
scan plane will aﬀect the performance of phase retrieval, while qualitatively, it
is clear that this size determines the region of validity of measurements taken at
a certain distance. A smaller plane means a smaller angular region of validity,
therefore limiting the range over which phase retrieval will be successful. Since
the previously stated was deemed a satisfactory explanation, this particular
aspect was not investigated further, focusing instead on other variables.
This chapter also includes a section dedicated to error study, in which several
causes of errors in planar measurements are simulated using the AUT model in
order to identify possible causes of observed errors in the measured data, and
another ﬁnal section dedicated to exploring the consecutive use of two instances
of the iterative algorithm, with probe correction applied in between.
39
==PAGE:44==
Figure 4.1: Measured magnitude and phase at a separation of 6λ from AUT, no
probe correction
Figure 4.2: Measured magnitude and phase at a separation of 8λ from AUT
, no probe correction
4.1
Data obtained at the planar scanner
This section presents a series of magnitude and phase measurements that have
been conducted at the PNF facility. The available phase information is used for
reference purposes, as the complete ﬁelds can provide a measure the accuracy
of reconstructed ﬁelds. The measurements are taken at diﬀerent separations of
AUT and probe over an identical plane because the retrieval algorithm requires a
one-to-one correspondence between the data points on each of the surfaces. The
separation distances at which measurements are taken correspond to 6λ, 8λ, 9λ,
10λ and 11λ. At a frequency of 60GHz, the wavelength is 5mm.
Figures 4.1 and 4.1 are bi-dimensional color plots of the measured E-ﬁeld
probe signal (non probe-corrected) at the 6 and 8 wavelenghts scan planes.
Magnitudes are presented in linear scale while phase diﬀerences are measured
in radians. The distance of 6 wavelengths is the least of all considered and was
chosen out of convenience early on. The other separation of 8 wavelengths is
chosen because distances smaller than 2λ were hinted to produce a greater error
when introduced into the iterative algorithm as there is not enough variation
on the E-ﬁelds. The ﬁelds have been normalized to the maximum value of the
nearest one to illustrate decreasing maximum peak value with distance.
Figure 4.3 shows the main cuts of the AUT on the 6 wavelenghts square
40
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.3: E and H-plane cuts of measured ﬁeld at separation of 6λ from AUT
Figure
4.4:
E
and
H-plane
cuts
of
measured
ﬁeld
at
separation
of
6λ, 8λ, 9λ, 10λ, 11λ from AUT
41
==PAGE:46==
scan plane. The AUT is highly directive and the value of the ﬁelds quickly falls
30dB below the maximum for a horizontal distance of 42mm from the boresight
direction of the AUT in the case of the E-plane, or 30mm on the H-plane. A
dip in the amplitude is observed on axis in the E-plane that might occur due
to the contribution to the E-ﬁeld from the center of the antenna being added in
counterphase with oﬀ-axis contributions, resulting in a local minimum.
Figure 4.4 presents the same E and H-cuts for the remaining surface dis-
tances, although in this case the data has been normalized to itself in order to
draw comparisons. It is observed that the aforementioned on-axis dip on the
E-plane tends to disappear the further away the measuring plane is from the
AUT. There is no signiﬁcant anomaly in the behaviour of the ﬁelds with in-
creasing distances, something which is further conﬁrmed by ﬁgures 4.5 and 4.7
where the NF data is transformed into the far-ﬁeld to produce the respective E
and H-cuts.
Said ﬁgures present far-ﬁeld data in a format that will be standard through-
out the report. On those, module and phase data are presented simultaneously
as a function of angular variable θ, albeit not on the whole range. The calculated
reliable region of the far-ﬁeld diagrams is of θ ∈[−38, 38], for greater angular
values the far ﬁelds become increasingly inaccurate and therefore phase retrieval
is erratic and little meaning can be extracted from those points. Hence, for bet-
ter clarity the diagrams only show the angular region of θ ∈[−50, 50] where
most of the meaningful results are contained.
Phase diagrams are processed to compensate for the phase center of the
AUT, by moving the origin of coordinates to said phase center (or as close
as possible) in order to obtain a ﬂattened phase diagram which allows better
readability. This is done by multiplying the E-ﬁeld by a factor of ejkdcos(θ),
where d represents the distance from the aperture of the AUT to its phase
center. It is desirable to represent phase data with reference to the phase center
because at said point the ﬁelds radiated by the antenna are spherical waves
with ideal spherical wave fronts, and makes the phase variation of the signal,
Φ(θ, φ) independent of θ and φ. Despite this, ﬁnding the phase point of an
antenna is rather diﬃcult and possible only in some cases[4]. For a horn AUT,
it can be found along its z−axis, between its apex point and its aperture. As
the process of accurately determining the phase center of the AUT falls outside
of the scope of this project, only an approximation was sought that was able
to give a ﬂattened phase diagram inside the reliable region and the main beam
area. The phase center is increasingly diﬃcult to ﬁnd if the z−axis of the AUT
is not correctly aligned, and for each of the two main planes the location will be
diﬀerent due to the taper amplitude of the H-plane versus the uniform amplitude
of the E-plane.
Lastly, all the displayed results correspond with the co-polar component on
the corresponding plane, unless otherwise stated. probe corrected unless stated,
and the amplitude and phase diagrams are normalized to 0dB and zero phase
in the on-axis direction.
As previously stated, the co-polar ﬁeld on the z-axis corresponds with the
θ component of E. These FF plots, which have been probe-corrected, show
satisfactory agreement within the reliable region, which is calculated to be of
39 degrees. In this case it is noted that the H-plane cut corresponding to the
11λ measurement deteriorates severely after the ﬁrst secondary lobe, which can
be attributed to the noisiness of the measurements.
42
==PAGE:47==
Figure 4.5: E-plane module cut of electric ﬁeld obtained from measurements at
diﬀerent distances from the AUT
Figure 4.6: E-plane phase cut of electric ﬁeld obtained from measurements at
diﬀerent distances from the AUT
43
==PAGE:48==
Figure 4.7: H-plane module cut of electric ﬁeld obtained from measurements at
diﬀerent distances from the AUT
Figure 4.8: H-plane phase cut of electric ﬁeld obtained from measurements at
diﬀerent distances from the AUT
44
==PAGE:49==
Figure 4.9:
Zoom-in of main-beam and sidelobes of E-cuts obtained from
mesurements at diﬀerent distances.
The far-ﬁeld diagrams obtained from the measured data show a noticeable
vertical asymmetry between the left and the right halves of the diagrams, spe-
cially noticeable in the E-plane cuts due to higher level of sidelobes compared
to the H-plane. The phase diagrams also show an obvious asymmetry. This
is demonstrated on ﬁgure 4.9 where two horizontal black plots underline the
left-to-right increase in level. In the case of the ﬁrst sidelobe this diﬀerence goes
from 0.19dB diﬀerence of peak value from left to right in the case of 9λ, and up
to 0.74dB for 8λ. This is a systematic error that is present in all measures and
tends to become more signiﬁcant further away from the axis, with several dBs
of diﬀerence at the third minor lobe.
The causes of this systematic error are not easy to determine but they have
been speculated to be one or more of the following:
• A rotation of the AUT: for an aperture parallel to the scan plane, two
points on the aperture symmetrical with respect to the AUT center will
have identical propagation paths to the probe located opposite to the
AUT, but this is not true for an aperture that is rotated on the x or y
axes, as one of the points is closer to the probe than the other. This creates
a linear variation on amplitude and phase of the measured points over the
scan plane due to the diﬀerent propagation distances of the points.
• Systematic scattering due to probe absorber plate: the probe is mounted
on a moving support which includes a metal plate on which an absorber
is placed, held in position by some screws. This plate is potentially not
perfectly parallel to the AUT aperture plane and the scanning planes. Due
to the less than ideal eﬃciency of the absorbing material there will still be
a reﬂected wave from the plate. This eﬀect results in a multiple reﬂection
45
==PAGE:50==
but since the plate is not parallel its alignment will depend on the relative
position of the probe as it is moved with respect to the AUT.
• Eﬀect of cables: due to the twisting and bending of the cables as the
probe is moved across the scan surface, their electric properties tend to
vary, resulting in diﬀerent reﬂection coeﬃcient as their shape is changed.
The eﬀect of cable ﬂexing has been quantiﬁed as a 0.25dB change in the
S22 reﬂection coeﬃcient and a maximum of 2 degree diﬀerence at the
maximum distance allowed by the planar scanner, which is 850mm[12],
but since the size of the scan plane during the course of most experiments
is much smaller, of 150mm by 150mm, the inﬂuence of cable shape should
be minimal.
• Drift: the eﬀects of measurement drift over several hours has been mea-
sured to be a deviation of approximately 0.02dB in the measured signal
level after 4 hours, and a maximum of 12 degrees drift in the measured
phase after said amount of time[12].
Some of these possible errors are studied in section 4.6. However, others
such as the scattering of unparallel absorber plates are diﬃcult to quantify or
simulate.
4.2
Eﬀects of probe correction
This section is an investigation on the eﬀects of probe correction to the outcome
of the phase retrieval algorithm, by applying the diﬀerent approaches presented
in 2.9.1 to real data obtained in the planar scanner.
4.2.1
Probe correcting before phase retrieval
In this experiment, the measured signals are probe-corrected as a previous step
to applying the iterative technique, in order to test whether AUT electric ﬁelds
will behave better than probe signals when subjected to propagation between
the scan planes.
The two sets of measured data at the start are the probe signals at distances
of 6 and 8 wavelengths. Because theoretically no phase data should be available,
the module of the probe signals is combined with the initial phase guess of a
horn located at the origin with a constant aperture module and phase. This
aperture distribution is determined in 4.3 to be a good compromise between
performance and minimal information of the AUT.
These complex signals are then probe-corrected by the standard procedure,
resulting in two complex ﬁelds. The modules of said ﬁelds are taken as input for
the iterative algorithm. The complex ﬁeld at z1 is fed into the algorithm as its
starting point, and it is subsequently run with a maximum of 2000 iterations.
The result is compared with the reference measured complex ﬁelds, both before
and after probe-correcting, to evaluate the suitability of the procedure.
It is noted that applying the guess phase into a measured module creates
a non-Maxwellian ﬁeld which is then Fourier-transformed, probe-corrected and
Inverse-transformed to obtain the pair of necessary corrected modules. It is
evident that the plane wave spectrum of this ﬁeld will be unlike the original, and
46
==PAGE:51==
Figure 4.10: NF E-cut of pre-corrected ﬁeld versus uncorrected probe signal and
simulated electric ﬁeld at z = 6.
thus the original module information is lost. As ﬁgure 4.10 clearly demonstrates
by comparing the result of this operation with a theoretical, simulated electric
ﬁeld at the same surface. Ideally, the pre-corrected module should become much
like this simulated true ﬁeld, but instead the result clearly diverges from this
theoretical reference so the phase retrieval algorithm can be expected to fail.
Indeed, ﬁgures 4.11 and 4.12 clearly show an erroneous retrieval when probe
correction is performed before the iterative algorithm is run. By pairing a given
magnitude of the probe signal with a phase other than its natural, the resulting
plane wave expansion will be fundamentally diﬀerent from the PWS of the
original signal both in terms of module and phase, and more so after dividing
by the probe characteristics of the probe. Thus, if any convergence occurs at
all during the course of the algorithm, it will be to a ﬁeld other than either the
probe signal or the true, probe-corrected AUT ﬁeld, so the result will be by
nature meaningless. This approach is henceforth rejected.
4.2.2
Probe correcting after phase retrieval
As mentioned in 2.9.1, the success of this particular way of applying probe-
correction relies in the truth of the assumption that, for a suﬃciently small ∆z
the variation of the propagation exponential along the z-dimension, e−jkz∆z,
between the two surfaces is so small as to be neglected, so the probe-signal can
be assumed to propagate as plane waves in a way similar to the true electric
ﬁeld. The conditions of this experiment will be similar to 4.2.1 with the excep-
tion that probe correction will not be performed on the input data, but on the
output of the retrieval algorithm. The results will be similarly compared to the
reference ﬁelds as on the previous case.
47
==PAGE:52==
Figure 4.11: E-plane module cuts of reconstructed ﬁeld obtained from "pre-
corrected" amplitude measurements, plotted against raw and probe-corrected
reference ﬁelds.
Figure 4.12: H-plane cut of reconstructed ﬁeld obtained from "pre-corrected"
amplitude measurements, plotted against raw and probe-corrected reference
ﬁelds.
48
==PAGE:53==
Figure 4.13: Amplitude and phase distributions of retrieved ﬁeld at z1 = 6λ,
no probe correction
Figure 4.14: Amplitude and phase distributions of probe corrected retrieved
ﬁeld at z1 = 6λ
49
==PAGE:54==
Figures 4.13 and 4.14 show the results obtained from performing phase re-
trieval with a pair of uncorrected modules.
Comparing this result with the
reference ﬁeld at z = 6λ from 4.1 it is clear that iteratively propagating the
probe signal leads to a signiﬁcant amount of phase noise outside the central
region of the surface. Furthermore, probe correction rises the overall level of
the outside areas of the measured ﬁelds, which have a lower signal level and
a higher signal to noise ratio, and creates a markedly deteriorated and noisy
signal, although interestingly this worsening does not seem to translate into the
far-ﬁeld radiation patterns of the probe-corrected retrieved ﬁelds.
Quite on the contrary, ﬁgures 4.15 and 4.17 indicate a remarkably better
agreement between a probe-corrected electric ﬁeld of the AUT and the result of
the phase retrieval algorithm after probe correction has been carried out. The
reconstructed ﬁeld closely follows along the reference with little error within
the region of validity, although it can be seen that the inherent asymmetry of
the far-ﬁeld cuts is magniﬁed up to 1.29dB diﬀerence on the levels between the
left and right ﬁrst side-lobes, as opposed to the 0.66dB of the reference ﬁeld.
Agreement is overall better along the E-plane than the H-plane.
From this subsection, and in the light of the previous results it is derived
that probe correction is more suitably applied only after the iterative process,
regardless of the fact that propagating a probe signal might lead to failure of
the algorithm unless a condition on the distance between planes is met. In spite
of this, it is expected that this condition will be satisﬁed within the range of
distances allowed by the planar setup used for this project. To conclude this in-
vestigation, the previous technique ensures that the result will converge towards
the actual measured probe data as long as these signals do not undergone any
other kind of transformation, and probe correction seems to function well with
the obtained solution.
50
==PAGE:55==
Figure 4.15: E-plane module cuts of reconstructed and probe-corrected ﬁeld ob-
tained from raw probe signals, versus raw and corrected reference measurements
Figure 4.16: E-plane phase cuts of reconstructed and probe-corrected ﬁeld ob-
tained from raw probe signals, versus raw and corrected reference measurements
51
==PAGE:56==
Figure 4.17: H-plane module cuts of reconstructed and probe-corrected ﬁeld
obtained from raw probe signals, versus raw and corrected reference measure-
ments
Figure 4.18: H-plane phase cuts of reconstructed and probe-corrected ﬁeld ob-
tained from raw probe signals, versus raw and corrected reference measurements
52
==PAGE:57==
Figure 4.19: Evolution of mean squared error over 2000 iterations for diﬀerent
starting guesses
4.3
Impact of initial guess
To study how the diﬀerent initial guesses inﬂuence the outcome of the algorithm,
a scenario is constructed where the only varying parameter is said phase guess.
The remaining parameters are separation between surfaces, number of iterations
and size of the surface of measurements, and they are unchanged throughout
this study. The maximum number of iterations is chosen to be 2000. While it
is an arbitrary choice, it has been experimentally determined that convergence
can be reached satisfactorily within this amount of iterations. The separation
between surfaces is set at 6λ and 8λ. The measuring planes have a dimension
of 150mm by 150mm which generate a square grid of 60 by 60 points. This is
the size that will be used in most of the experiments. The set of initial guesses
put under test are described in section 3.1.
The starting point for the algorithm is taken at the closest surface and hence
the initial guess is created by pairing the measured module at z1 = 6λ with the
corresponding simulated phase.
Convergence is evaluated in terms of the evolution of the mean squared error.
The results in ﬁgure 4.19 are presented in a double-log scale to discriminate
the diﬀerent stages of convergence more clearly.
In some of these cases the
convergence can be assumed to occur since the calculated MSE reaches the
threshold set at -90dB before the maximum number of iterations are achieved.
This is the case for all the guesses where the phase is assumed to be that of some
sort of aperture placed at the origin of coordinates. The Hertzian dipole proves
to be unsuitable as it clearly reaches an error plateau after approximately 1000
iteration where the error metric becomes almost constant. The MSE settles
at a level of -50dB, 30dB less than its starting value of -20dB, but also 30dB
higher than any of the other guesses after 2000 iterations. The far-ﬁeld diagrams
conﬁrm that the result is grossly diﬀerent from the measured reference.
As was expected, the results are overall better when the initial guess more
53
==PAGE:58==
closely resembles the AUT, which is evidently why convergence is reached in
less than 700 steps when the initial guess is a model of the AUT itself. Figures
4.22 and 4.24 showcase accurate phase reconstruction when the initial guess is
some variation of the aperture ﬁeld of a horn with the same dimensions as the
AUT.
Figure 4.20: E-plane cut of electric ﬁeld for diﬀerent initial guesses
Lastly, a zero-phase initial guess stabilizes at a level below -80dB for the
MSE. This is signiﬁcantly higher than the previously mentioned but it still
results in better retrieval than a Hertzian dipole guess. While the FF patterns
in this instance show overall poor agreement, the H-plane pattern is surprisingly
accurate, both in terms of modul and phase, in the region of the main beam.
This poorer performance notwithstanding, a zero-phase initial guess is still an
interesting choice because it requires no information of the AUT to be known
beforehand.
A general conclusion that can be drawn from this section is that the result of
phase retrieval greatly depends on the choice of initial guess, and it is desirable
that the assumption approximates the actual AUT as this will lead to better
and faster convergence. However, this poses a problem in that more a priori
knowledge of the AUT is required, such as physical dimensions or aperture ﬁeld
distributions. More general initial guesses result in less favourable results, so a
relation of compromise can be established between performance and indepen-
dence from knowledge of the AUT. The proposed optimal initial guess under
these circumstances is an aperture with a uniform amplitude and phase, which
produces results comparable to more complicated initial guesses after a high
enough number of iterations while still requiring only minimal knowledge of
the AUT, namely the physical dimensions of the AUT aperture, but no further
54
==PAGE:59==
Figure 4.21: H-plane cut of electric ﬁeld for diﬀerent initial guesses
assumptions about the aperture distribution other than a constant value.
It is obvious that such a guess is not possible in the case of other types of
antennas such as arrays or wire antennas which do not present a well-deﬁned
aperture and in this case a zero-phase initial guess, or even a Hertzian dipole
guess can be more appropriate initial guesses.
55
==PAGE:60==
Figure 4.22: E-plane module cuts of electric ﬁeld for diﬀerent initial guesses
Figure 4.23: E-plane phase cuts of electric ﬁeld for diﬀerent initial guesses
56
==PAGE:61==
Figure 4.24: H-plane module cuts of electric ﬁeld for diﬀerent initial guesses
Figure 4.25: H-plane phase cuts of electric ﬁeld for diﬀerent initial guesses
57
==PAGE:62==
Figure 4.26: MSE versus iterations for diﬀerent distances between measurement
planes
4.4
Eﬀects of distance between planes
In section 2.8 a preliminary research on the inﬂuence of separation between
planes was carried out with simulated data from the mathematical model of the
AUT and a hypothesis was made that greater distance between AUT and probe
is desirable in order to achieve faster convergence of the iterative algorithm.
However, from the discussion in section 2.9, it is possible that great distances
between scan planes result in failure of the algorithm when it can be no longer
assumed that the probe signal propagates as plane waves between the two sur-
faces. Therefore, in this section the performance of the algorithm is evaluated in
terms of this distance, while all the other parameters (initial guess, scan plane
size, etc) remain unchanged. The initial guess is a horn with uniform amplitude
and phase at the aperture, and correction of the probe signal is performed after
the phase has been retrieved.
In ﬁgure 4.26 the behaviour of the iterative algorithm is represented in terms
of the computed MSE over each consecutive iteration. The results are split in
two diﬀerent plots for better readability. As the threshold on the error metric
is deﬁned at -90dB, some of the experiments actually end before the maximum
number of iterations are reached. Table 4.4 collects, for each tested scenario,
the number of necessary iterations to reach convergence (if at all) and the value
of the error metric when the execution of the algorithm ends.
From these results, best retrieval seem to occur when the horizontal sepa-
ration of the measurement planes is respectively z = [6λ, 8λ], z = [6λ, 10λ] and
z = [8λ, 10λ]. In particular, the last one would indicate exceptionally good re-
sults, surpassing the convergence threshold within one order of magnitude less
iterations than any other studied case. The best results tend to occur when the
distance between the AUT and each of the scan planes is a multiple of 2λ, at
which point both measured ﬁelds and the AUT aperture ﬁeld would be in phase.
Conversely, the case when the plane distances are z = [9λ, 11λ] is abnormally
inferior at -84.68dB, more than 5dB above the threshold and more than 2dB
58
==PAGE:63==
z1[wavelengths]
z2[wavelengths]
∆z[wavelengths]
Iterations
MSE [dB]
6
8
2
1556
-90
6
9
3
2000
-89.81
6
10
4
1514
-90
6
11
5
2000
-86.83
8
9
1
2000
-87.4
8
10
2
488
-90
8
11
3
2000
-87.69
9
10
1
2000
-89.31
9
11
2
2000
-84.68
10
11
1
2000
-89.65
above the average despite the distance between planes being also 2λ, possibly
because both surfaces are respectively in counterphase with the aperture plane.
If the result that corresponds to z = [8λ, 10λ] is taken as the best, that
reaches the threshold with minimum iterations, it should be expected that,
studying the far-ﬁeld patterns on 4.32 obtained from it, the likeness with the
reference should be better than, or at least comparable to, another case of worse
convergence. However ﬁgure 4.27 shows a diﬀerent situation in which [6, 8] or
[6, 9] would better approximate the measured ﬁelds: it is clear that these curves
follow the reference more closely in the angular interval of the region of validity.
The H-plane patterns on ﬁgure 4.29 indicate overall good convergence around
the main-beam that quickly deteriorates after the ﬁrst sidelobe. The AUT, with
its cosine taper on the H-plane, results in a much lower side lobe level than
on the E-plane and in the case of the side lobe at θ = 20ž its peak value is
already 28dB below the maximum and for these low ﬁeld values the retrieval is
expected to become more and more inaccurate. For this speciﬁc sidelobe there is
already signiﬁcant variation on the retrieved ﬁelds, with [6, 8] resulting in better
agreement (although with a peak value 1dB higher than the measured). Other
cases present pronounced asymmetry and lower retrieved levels throughout. At
the second sidelobe, closer to the boundary of the region of validity and with a
ﬁeld level of -35dB the results become inaccurate and mixed so further meaning
can be extracted from them.
It is clear from 4.32 and 4.33 that retrieval fails more pronouncedly as dis-
tance to the AUT increases: if separation from the aperture plane to the probe
is 8λ or higher then the retrieved solution only approximates the reference in a
small angular area close to the main beam. A reason might lie in the evolution of
the near-ﬁeld amplitudes, as they vary quite rapidly with distance while closer
to the aperture but tend to become more alike with increasing distance from
the AUT, culminating with two measurements obtained at far-ﬁeld distances,
which would be exactly the same. As ﬁgure 4.4 shows, the similarity between
the main cuts at a distance of 6 and 8 wavelengths is much less than for 9 and
11, and hence, results seem to indicate more optimal retrieval when at least one
of the planes is closer to the aperture, with the single best ﬁt occurring for the
distances of 6 and 8 wavelengths.
For the case of the retrieved ﬁeld corresponding to a pair of scans at 8 and
10 wavelenghts, shown in 4.32, it was shown that it unequivocally reached the
threshold level ﬁve times before any other instance of this experiment at only 488
iterations. But aside from presenting good agreement in the mean beam region
59
==PAGE:64==
Figure 4.27: Reconstructed E-plan module cuts for diﬀerent surface separations
with nearest distance z = 6λ
Figure 4.28: Reconstructed E-plane phase cuts for diﬀerent surface separations
with nearest distance z = 6λ
60
==PAGE:65==
Figure 4.29: Reconstructed H-plane module cuts for diﬀerent surface separations
with nearest distance z = 6λ
Figure 4.30: Reconstructed H-plane phase cuts for diﬀerent surface separations
with nearest distance z = 6λ
61
==PAGE:66==
Figure 4.31: Close-up around the main beam of reconstructed ﬁelds for diﬀerent
plane separations (nearest 6λ). Left E-plane, right H-plane.
(as is most typically the case) it is mostly erroneous beyond that, and nowhere
near as accurate as the results on 4.27 and 4.29. There arises a contradiction
between the seemingly favourable readings of the error metric and the outcomes
of the iterative algorithm in these cases where the far-ﬁeld patters are obviously
far from acceptable. The cause is two-fold and it lies in the error metric and
how it operates.
From equation 3.6 the expression of the Mean Squared Error is recalled.
ϵi =
NP
n=1
(|Ei|−Er)2
NP
n=1
Er2
Firstly, this criterion only enforces convergence on the retrieved module as
reference phase needs to be considered not available. It is then not possible
to assert whether or not convergence of the retrieved phase is underway. As
mentioned in 3.2 this approach relies on the assumption that convergence of the
phase distribution will follow convergence of the modules, but in view of the
results obtained in this section this might not be necessarily true.
Secondly, the previous expression explicitly places more weight on the central
ﬁeld values when squaring the samples, therefore enforcing convergence of the
main beam and more generally of the areas with higher values of measured ﬁeld,
while less critical areas with lesser magnitude have a reduced inﬂuence on the
computed error metric.
For these reasons it should be evaluated whether the chosen error metric is
indeed suﬃcient to prove convergence of the algorithm. Arguably the answer is
negative and it begs the question of what properties a better suited error metric
should possess. A convergence check on the logarithmic scale can be desirable
because it would counter the main ﬂaw of the Mean Squared Error by compar-
ing the relative diﬀerence between levels, instead of its absolute diﬀerence. And
since small computed errors on the near-ﬁeld data usually translate into impor-
tant errors on the far-ﬁeld patterns it should also be beneﬁcial to implement a
convergence criterion on said far-ﬁeld patterns, or alternatively on the spectral
domain.
On the course of this report it has been assumed that phase information of
the measured ﬁelds is not available at all, however this is not usually the case as
measurement facilities produce complex measurements. While the necessity for
62
==PAGE:67==
Figure 4.32: Main cuts of reconstructed electric ﬁeld for diﬀerent as function of
plane separation
Figure 4.33: Main cuts of reconstructed electric ﬁeld for diﬀerent as function of
plane separation
63
==PAGE:68==
Figure 4.34: Equivalent Multipath Level calculated from two far-ﬁeld patterns
phaseless measurements arises on the ﬁrst place due to the growing diﬃculty of
accurately characterize the phase variations of the AUT at higher frequencies,
it might be possible to make use of this phase information in order to obtain
an angular spectrum of the AUT which can be used as the reference data for
a convergence criterion on the far-ﬁeld or the spectral domain. The underlying
assumption is that, although the phase measurement can be unreliable by itself
(and needs to be considered as such), the module of the ﬁeld is not so severely
aﬀected by factors such as cable ﬂexing and such, so the module of a PWS
obtained by Fourier-transforming the measured complex signal can still be a
valid reference for an error metric.
A proposed solution is the calculation of the Equivalent Multipath Error, or
EMPL, which is calculated as
EMPL = 20log10 (|Ei(i, j)| −|Er(i, j)|)
(4.1)
EMPL has a very simple physical meaning as the necessary amplitude to
force the two compared signals to be equal[8], and unlike the MSE which pro-
duces a single result, EMPL is evaluated locally at each point of the ﬁeld pattern.
This requires that the two compared sets have an equal number of samples, and
requires the EMPL to be presented visually. On the other hand, this makes the
technique useful when evaluating the diﬀerence between two far-ﬁeld patterns,
as it is very sensible to amplitude displacements between the two compared
patterns. However, as the intention of this metric is to be calculated on two
far-ﬁeld patterns, it might be in principle unsuitable for phase retrieval as the
lack of phase information for the reference means no far-ﬁeld pattern can be
obtained. Although it might be possible to deploy successfully on two sets of
near-ﬁeld data, it is mostly interesting to employ the Equivalent Multipath Er-
ror technique when evaluating a retrieved ﬁeld against a complex reference, if
it were available, being capable of presenting diverse data about the compared
patterns in a very visual and clear way.
To illustrate this point, the EMPL has been calculated from the reference
ﬁeld at surface z1 = 6λ and the retrieved ﬁeld with z2 = 10λ as its counterpart.
64
==PAGE:69==
It was previously shown that for this particular experiment convergence was
determined after approximately 1500 iterations, but further evaluation of the
radiation patterns showed mixed results. Figure 4.34 shows a plot of the EMPL
along the E-plane of the far-ﬁeld diagram as a function of θ. The image reveals
that the retrieved ﬁeld is obviously narrower than the reference and therefore
the peak values of the side lobes do not correspond with one another. There
are numerous minima of the EMPL at points where the two far-ﬁeld patterns
cross each other, including a mimimum at a direction of θ slightly oﬀ-center
which indicates a displacement of the main beam. Furthermore, the EMPL is
on average lower around the main beam region, indicating better convergence
around the main beam than closer to the limit of the reliable region, where the
level becomes up to 10dB higher. Additionally, the EMPL has a left to right
trend which can indicate asymmetry of the retrieved ﬁeld, although in this case
it might be due to the systematic bias of the ﬁeld measurements.
Finally, ﬁgures 4.32 and 4.33 indicate a progressive worsening of the retrieved
results the further away the measurement planes are from the aperture plane as
the ﬁeld distributions on the scan planes become more and more alike, culmi-
nating with two measurements obtained at far-ﬁeld distances, which would be
exactly the same. Results seem to indicate more optimal retrieval when at least
one of the planes is closer to the aperture, with the single best ﬁt occuring for
the distances of 6 and 8 wavelengths.
4.5
Use of additional information of the AUT
For certain types of antenna, it is possible to take advantage of the geometry of
the AUT and use this a priori information to reduce retrieval error or to achieve
faster convergence. In particular, the iterative process can be extended into
the aperture plane by backprojection of the retrieved ﬁelds on each step of the
iterative algorithm. After performing the module swap between the retrieved
and measured ﬁelds, its PWS is translated into the aperture of the horn. The
AUT aperture ﬁeld can be obtained by Fourier-transforming this PWS into the
spatial domain. It is then assumed that the tangential components of the ﬁelds
are zero outside the aperture of the horn, and all points which do not lie within
the aperture are artiﬁcially set to zero. A ﬂow diagram of the new algorithm is
depicted on 4.35.
The assumption that the ﬁeld vanishes outside of the aperture is not rigor-
ously true in practice, and may introduce an error due to truncation and the
diﬀraction eﬀects caused by it: spatial ﬁltering introduces some non physical
eﬀects on the ﬁeld, as when the it is multiplied by the ﬁltering mask all the
samples outside of the aperture drop abruptly to zero. This eﬀect might be
signiﬁcant, and therefore it is expected that this technique will work most ef-
fectively for a tapered horn where the ﬁelds actually go to zero at the edges
of the aperture. The phase retrieval algorithm is very sensitive to noise and
it has been observed that the output noise becomes considerably noisy after
propagation between the two planes. In this sense, backprojection and spatial
ﬁltering at the aperture plane can be beneﬁcial as it will eliminate most of the
noise while preserving those samples with greater signal to noise ratio, and thus
result in a far less noisy retrieval.
65
==PAGE:70==
Figure 4.35: Complete cycle of expanded iterative algorithm with spatial ﬁlter-
ing at aperture.
To evaluate this technique an experiment is performed with the following
parameters
• Initial guess: horn of constant aperture and phase.
• Measurement planes at distances 6λ and 8λ.
• Size of measurement plane: 60 by 60 samples taken at half wavelength
sampling period, corresponding to a 150mm by 150mm surface.
• Probe correction is applied on the retrieved ﬁeld after phase reconstruc-
tion.
• The aperture has a size of 18 by 14 samples matrix centered on the origin
of coordinates. When the ﬁeld is backprojected to the aperture plane a
mask is applied which cancels out every ﬁeld point outside said aperture.
It has been experimentally found that the level of the error metric never
reaches as low as any of the other examined cases. Instead the MSE stabilizes
at a level of -67dB but it does so after only 300 iterations, which indicates a
radically faster convergence once backprojection is incorporated. It is therefore
not necessary to extend the execution of the algorithm beyond this point.
The phase diagrams in 4.36 appear much cleaner compared to their coun-
terpart retrieved ﬁeld at 4.13 with no spatial ﬁltering.
Likewise, even after
compensating for the probe on the retrieved ﬁeld its phase appears much more
robust against the increase in the noise level which results from probe correc-
tion. Hence, it seems to be clear that ﬁltering out the low level samples outside
of the aperture will result in a drastic reduction of noise as only the central
samples with high SNR are preserved.
Far-ﬁeld plots indicate great accuracy after only 300 iterations, and reduced
noise means that the retrieved ﬁeld now approximates the reference in a greater
angular region than previously. Improvement is particularly apparent on the H-
plane: due to the lower level of sidelobes retrieval on this plane is particularly
66
==PAGE:71==
Figure 4.36: Phase diagrams at z1 = 6λ of retrieved and reference ﬁelds, no
probe correction
Figure 4.37: Phase diagrams at z1 = 6λ of probe corrected retrieved and refer-
ence ﬁelds
67
==PAGE:72==
Figure 4.38: E-plane module cuts of retrieved electric ﬁelds with spatial ﬁltering
vs unﬁltered. Measured reference included.
Figure 4.39: E-plane phase cuts retrieved electric ﬁelds with spatial ﬁltering vs
unﬁltered. Measured reference included.
68
==PAGE:73==
Figure 4.40:
G-plane module cuts of retrieved electric ﬁelds with spatial
ﬁltering vs unﬁltered. Measured reference included.
Figure 4.41: H-plane phase cuts of retrieved electric ﬁelds with spatial ﬁltering
vs unﬁltered. Measured reference included.
69
==PAGE:74==
Figure 4.42: E-plane retrieved electric ﬁelds without spatial ﬁltering vs ﬁltered
after 300 iterations. Measured reference included.
sensitive to noise as the level of the ﬁeld rapidly becomes smaller away from the
main beam. While the retrieved phase tends to drift away from the reference
at around θ = ±25, spatial ﬁltering at the aperture allows to increase this
angular range to about θ = ±30 before the phases start to visibly diﬀer. In
terms of module this corresponds to a ﬁeld level -40dBs below the maximum
level on-axis. On the other hand, the E-plane has an overall higher level of
ﬁeld (owing to a narrower width of the main beam) and is not as sensitive
to noise so retrieval is generally reliable over a wider range. In this case, after
spatial ﬁltering the retrieved phase closely follows the reference up until θ = ±45
without considerably diverging.
Finally, ﬁgure 4.42 compares retrieved modules with and without spatial
ﬁltering after 300 iterations, demonstrating much better agreement for such a
reduced amount of iterations. In this particular case, insuﬃcient iterations can
be deduced by looking at the red plot corresponding with phase retrieval without
ﬁltering. This is evident because the E-plane diagram is narrower than its ana-
logues and the nulls between side lobes are much more pronounced, consistent
with the fact that the chosen initial guess is a uniform aperture. As a uniform
distribution gives sharper nulls and higher directivity (narrower diagram with
higher level of side lobes), a result like this indicates that the phase is slowly
converging but is still more uniform than it should.
4.6
Error study
This section is devoted to summarize some of the possible causes of error on the
measurements, studying a number of errors that have been encountered during
the course of the experimental work of this project and how they translate into
the recovery algorithm. To this end the MATLAB model of the AUT is used
to simulate a series of perturbations, observing the diﬀerent ways in which they
aﬀect radiation patterns once transformed into the far-ﬁeld.
The simulated
results are contrasted with data acquired at the planar scanner in order to
pigeon-hole the causes of the observed anomalies of the measured data.
70
==PAGE:75==
4.6.1
Rotation of the AUT
A rotation represents a turning around the AUT center in one of the two axes
perpendicular to the z-axis, such that the z-directions of the AUT and probe
are no longer parallel. This pointing error can occur if the rail on which the
AUT sits is not perfectly perpendicular to the scan plane and potentially creates
an asymmetry in the AUT pattern due to the diﬀerence in propagation paths
of the diﬀerent points of the rotated aperture. This rotation is simulated by
the addition of a linear amplitude and phase variation on the aperture ﬁeld
of the model.
This linear term represents the shorter transmission paths of
the points of the AUT located in the aperture half which is rotated towards
the scan planes, in relation to the longer paths of the points located in the
other half of the aperture.
Hence, points with shorter paths have a greater
amplitude/negative phase due to a shorter path, and vice-versa.This diﬀerence
increases linearly from zero at the center of the aperture to its maximum at the
edges of the AUT parallel to the axis on which the rotation occurs.
Observable eﬀects of AUT rotation are:
• Progressive left-to-right asymmetry of side lobe levels, which is consistent
with observed error in measured data.
The main factor aﬀecting this
tendency is the maximum amplitude variation of the linear term
• Displacement of the radiation pattern towards the negative θ values. On
the contrary, this eﬀect becomes sharper as the variation of the phase
diﬀerence across the aperture becomes higher.
The observed eﬀects correspond to a variation of the amplitude and phase
along the E-plane, meaning that the horizontally polarized AUT of the scanner
setup is rotated along the x-axis (vertical), and more speciﬁcally when the
amplitude of the right side of the AUT is close to the scan plane, meaning that
the aperture is "facing left" in relation to the probe axis.
Overall the inﬂuence of rotation is more pronounced on the real data than
on the simulations: it is necessary to introduce a 5% diﬀerence in amplitude
between center and edge of the AUT and around 10 degrees on the phase in
order to obtain a comparable diﬀerence in side lobe level between the two.
However, due to the correspondence between these results and the observed
eﬀects on the scanner data it is safe to diagnose a rotation as their cause. As
the newly introduced linear terms are constant on the H-plane, its eﬀect is more
limited on the H-plane diagrams and though an overall increase in side lobe
level is observed, unlike the previous case it seems to be symmetrical across the
whole θ range. Lastly, although not included, it is clear that creating a rotation
of the AUT along the horizontal axis will lead to a similar eﬀect on the H-plane.
4.6.2
Displacement of AUT center
This error arises when the center of the AUT does not coincide with the center
of the measurement plane, and therefore neither with the center of the initial
phase distribution. It is a real possibility that this error has been made as the
planar scanner requires the operator to input an initial position of the probe in
the scanning plane, which has to be as close to the center of the AUT aperture
as possible. This position needs to be inferred visually so the procedure is far
71
==PAGE:76==
Figure 4.43: Model data comparison of E-cuts with and without simulated
rotation error. Measured reference included.
Figure 4.44: Model data comparison of H-cuts with and without simulated
rotation error. Measured reference included.
72
==PAGE:77==
Figure 4.45: Closeup of 4.43 around the main bean region.
from exact and, if not precisely placed, the z−axis of the two antennas will not
coincide on top of each other.
The observable eﬀect of a displacement of the AUT is shown on ﬁgures 4.46
and 4.47. To generate these results the simulated near-ﬁeld matrix has been
shifted by one position along the positive horizontal and vertical direction, after
which the center lies diagonally to its initial position. The plots show no change
on the far-ﬁeld module whatsoever as both simulated patterns, on and oﬀ-center,
lie exactly on top of each other. This is expected because a translation on the
spatial domain represents a multiplication by a complex exponential on the
spectrum, which does not aﬀect the module of the signal’s PWS, and since the
far-ﬁeld module of the antenna ﬁeld depends directly on the angular spectrum
(see [4] eq. 12.111) it follows that the former will be unchanged for as long as
the latter is. On the other hand, the eﬀect on the simulated phase diagrams
are quite dramatic: shifting the center by just one sample along the vertical or
horizontal direction causes a very sharp inclination on the E and H phase cuts
respectively.
A slight displacement such as the one here considered can make phase re-
trieval fail completely.
The example on 4.48 corresponds to a hypothetical
scenario using simulated data on which the measured ﬁeld at surface z = 6λ
has been displaced diagonally as described previously while the complementary
surface at z = 8λ remains unchanged. This is equivalent to performing two
measurements on which the central points of the scan planes are not the same.
Figure 4.49 is a color plot of the retrieved near-ﬁeld phase distribution of said
scenario, depicting a completely erroneous phase retrieval. This eﬀect is greatly
reduced when both modules are displaced by the same amount and therefore
aligned between themselves, so in other words it is crucial that the central point
of the scan plane, which is generally the initial position of the probe, remains
the same for all the measurements.
Although the eﬀect of an axis displacement is extremely apparent and poten-
tially disastrous for phase retrieval it can in some cases be easily compensated
for during data post-processing by simply shifting the matrix elements of the
measured ﬁeld data accordingly to make the center of the aperture (easily iden-
tiﬁable in a graphic representation of the ﬁeld values) correspond with the center
of the matrix. And while a certain asymmetry of the phase diagrams is observed
73
==PAGE:78==
Figure 4.46: Model data comparison of E-cuts for axis displacement error. Mea-
sured reference included.
Figure 4.47: Model data comparison of H-cuts for axis displacement error. Mea-
sured reference included.
74
==PAGE:79==
Figure 4.48: Result of phase retrieval on which one of the scan planes has a
center displacement showing erroneous retrieval.
on all the measured ﬁelds, they do not correspond with the inclination that oc-
curs as a result of axis displacement, instead being more probably caused by
any of the factors described in 4.1.
4.6.3
Inaccuracy in AUT/probe distance
The iterative algorithm relies heavily on the assumption that the z-positions of
the measurement planes are well deﬁned, as the separation between the two sur-
faces (and to the aperture plane, if spatial ﬁltering is considered) is crucial when
the retrieved ﬁeld is propagated between surfaces. An error in the parameter ∆z
means that when propagating from z = z1 to z = z2 the substituted amplitude
will not correspond with that of the plane to which the ﬁeld was propagated,
creating a contradiction between the substituted amplitude and the phase of
the retrieved ﬁeld which will lead to failure of the retrieval.
As can be expected, the result of running the algorithm with a wrongly de-
ﬁned separation becomes further apart from the expected result as the distance
error becomes higher. The incompatibility between a retrieved phase, propa-
gated to a certain distance, and a module corresponding to another distance
which is enforced into the former leads to an increasingly diverging result.
The iterative algorithm proved to be somewhat resilient against a wrong z-
coordinate under certain circumstances, such as relatively low noise level (50dB
below main beam peak value) and only one of the surfaces being wrongly de-
ﬁned. In the real setting, though, perturbations manifest more clearly than in
75
==PAGE:80==
Figure 4.49: Erroneous phase retrieval due to displaced AUT z−axis.
simulations; it can be expected that uncertainty on the position of both planes,
together with additional sources of error such as the above discussed, measure-
ment noise or drift will accumulate with a miscalculation of plane distances.
Although the cumulative eﬀects of these perturbations are not clear, in ﬁgures
4.52 and 4.53 the curve retrieved from real data exhibit a more pronounced di-
vergence that becomes more erratic closer to the limits of the region of validity
of the measurement.
The rail on which the AUT is mounted is ﬁtted with a scale down to the
millimetres, while the instrument used to measure the distance between probe
and AUT is an electronic caliper with a precision of a hundredth of a millimetre.
However, it is diﬃcult to access the space between antennas to take an accurate
measurement of the separation and the rail does not allow for delicate moving
of the AUT frame which needs to be cumbersomely moved by hand,so an error
of at least a few tenths of millimetre is realistically very likely when performing
a measurement on the planar scanner. At a frequency of 60GHz an error of
half a millimetre represents a 10% error that should not be neglected. As image
4.54 shows, an error of half a millimetre in one of the distances results in a
diﬀerence of 0.7dB at the ﬁrst sidelobe peak in relation to an assumed error-
free retrieval, progressively drifting away from the canonical retrieved result.
Due to the diﬀerences in sidelobe level that result from artiﬁcially creating
an inaccuracy on the z−coordinate, and being consistent with the observed
diﬀerence in peak values at the local maxima of the diagrams, it is speculated
that uncertainty of the measured distance between scan planes may play a part
on the asymmetrically distributed far-ﬁeld diagrams obtained throughout the
course of this project.
4.7
Double iteration
This section is dedicated to a further extension of the iterative algorithm, ﬁrst
introduced in 2.9.1, exploring the possibility of taking advantage of a recon-
structed phase distribution in order to perform probe correction for a second
run of the iterative algorithm with probe corrected data. As stated previously,
lack of measured phase information negates the possibility of probe compen-
sation as a previous step to any kind of post-processing, as is the common
procedure, including phase reconstruction. Coupling raw measured data with a
76
==PAGE:81==
Figure 4.50: Model data comparison of E-cuts for increasing ∆z error.
Figure 4.51: Model data comparison of H-cuts for increasing ∆z error.
77
==PAGE:82==
Figure 4.52: Comparison of E-cuts for 1 wavelength error of ∆z, simulated vs
real measured data.
Figure 4.53: Comparison of H-cuts for 1 wavelength error of ∆z, simulated vs
real measured data.
78
==PAGE:83==
Figure 4.54: E and H-cuts of ﬁeld reconstructed from real data, with an intro-
duced 0.5mm error on ∆z. Measured reference included
phase guess has been proven ineﬀective in 4.2.1 due to the contradiction between
real data and guess phase, leading to an incorrect solution of the AUT’s plane
wave expansion. So far, the solution has been to perform phase retrieval using
raw probe signals as input for the iterative algorithm and probe-correcting the
subsequent reconstructed phase, which has proved to achieve notable success in
some of the analysed cases.
It is proposed to use a phase reconstructed from raw signals to create a com-
plex signal together with said signals, and in this case correspondence between
module and phase can be assumed as the retrieval algorithm will create a phase
distribution that is very similar to that of the AUT electric ﬁeld, at least at
a certain area around the aperture. This new complex signal is then probe-
corrected using the probe characteristics of 2.9.2 and the results are used to run
a new instance of the iterative algorithm to reconstruct a new phase in terms
of a pair of true electric ﬁelds. Moreover, the number of iterations needed on
this second round should be much smaller, due to the similarity of the starting
guess to the target solution.
In particular, for the simplest form of the iterative algorithm limited to two
surfaces (without spatial ﬁltering) any changes largely stop after 50 iterations
which is considered the stop point for the second round of phase retrieval.
Compared to the probe corrected result of the ﬁrst round of iterations the
diﬀerence is not signiﬁcant except at certain points around the nulls of the
diagram, and the main observable eﬀect is a general lowering of the level by an
average of 0.3 to 0.5dB in the reliable range of θ, which can be seen as positive
considering that on the side lobes the level of the reconstructed ﬁeld is generally
slightly above the reference.
The procedure was repeated using the extended algorithm with spatial ﬁl-
tering at the aperture with mixed results. In this case, the second run of the
algorithm tends to rapidly decrease the level of side lobes on the E-plane and,
while the H-plane remains mostly unchanged (possibly due to the cosine ampli-
tude taper at this plane), the former quickly deteriorates after a small number of
iterations. It is observed that for a very limited number of iterations, no higher
than 5 and even as few as only 2, the decrease in level is enough to compensate
79
==PAGE:84==
Figure 4.55: E-plane module cuts for double retrieval versus single execution of
iterative algorithm.
Figure 4.56: E-plane phase cuts for double retrieval versus single execution of
iterative algorithm.
80
==PAGE:85==
Figure 4.57: H-plane module cuts for double retrieval versus single execution of
iterative algorithm.
Figure 4.58: H-plane phase cuts for double retrieval versus single execution of
iterative algorithm.
81
==PAGE:86==
Figure 4.59: Closeup of 4.55, 4.57 around the main beam.
the excess level of the regularly reconstructed ﬁeld, although with a tradeoﬀin
the form of a sharp drop of 2dB in the second right side lobe, a change which is
not mirrored on the other side of the pattern. Additionally, for a greater num-
ber of iterations the level of the "double-retrieved" ﬁeld falls below the reference.
After 50/60 iterations the main beam becomes visibly shifted towards negative
θ with progressive iterations.
In sum, two-fold iteration is at best of limited beneﬁt and greatly detrimental
in the worst case so it is considered to be mostly eﬀective if performed over
a few iterations to avoid excessive degradation of the retrieved solution, or
avoided altogether when the diﬀerence is minimal. Finally, in order to ﬁnd the
optimal point and to eliminate the human factor from post-processing it is again
desirable to deploy a more consistent and reliable convergence criterion, which
ideally should be able to stop the second run of iterations before the results
start to become degraded.
4.8
Summary of chapter 4
This extense chapter is devoted to presenting all the experimental results ob-
tained during the project work. First, it is demonstrated that probe signals
can be successfully propagated between surfaces in order to apply the iterative
Fourier technique to retrieved the phase distribution of said measured data.
Probe correction can be applied to the result in order to obtain accurate far-
ﬁeld diagrams of the retrieved ﬁelds. The iterative algorithm has been proven to
be greatly dependant of factors like initial phase guess and plane distances, and
a good choice of said parameters is necessary for good results. It was shown that
an initial guess that better approximates the target phase distribution will lead
to improved results, and that performance tends to deteriorate with larger dis-
tances from AUT to scan planes. A modiﬁcation of the iterative technique using
82
==PAGE:87==
Figure 4.60: E-plane module cuts for double retrieval with spatial ﬁltering. 2
vs 60 rounds on second run of iterative algorithm.
Figure 4.61: E-plane phase cuts for double retrieval with spatial ﬁltering. 2 vs
60 rounds on second run of iterative algorithm.
83
==PAGE:88==
Figure 4.62: H-plane module cuts for double retrieval with spatial ﬁltering. 2
vs 60 rounds on second run of iterative algorithm.
Figure 4.63: H-plane phase cuts for double retrieval with spatial ﬁltering. 2 vs
60 rounds on second run of iterative algorithm.
84
==PAGE:89==
Figure 4.64: Doubly iterated retrieved ﬁeld vs reference ﬁeld, plotted for 2 vs
60 iterations on the second run.
spatial ﬁltering at the aperture of the AUT has been demonstrated to greatly
enhance performance by reducing signal noise. Finally, a small error study has
been conducted in order to diagnose the cause of some of the observed defects
of the measured signals.
85
==PAGE:90==
Chapter 5
Measurements with
dual-polarized probe at
48GHz
On previous chapters, all measurements, simulations and results refer to a sin-
gle, co-polar component of the AUT while the remaining tangential orthogonal
component is ignored. This is possible because the study is limited to the two
main E and H-planes where only the measured component (the x−oriented
ﬁeld) is diﬀerent from zero according to Ludwig’s deﬁnition of the co-polar
component. The cross-polar component can be assumed to be zero owing to the
high polarization purity of the AUT and the single-port operation of the probe.
On this chapter the open-ended conical waveguide is assembled together
with an orthomode transducer and a waveguide switch to be used as a dual-
polarization probe in order to measure both components of the E-ﬁeld , enabling
to measure both tangential components at the same time and cutting measure-
ment time requirements in half.
5.1
Results of probe calibration
In this section the main results from probe calibration of the dual-polarized
circular probe are discussed.
5.1.1
Orthomode transducer
Firstly, the OMT is characterized in terms of its scattering parameters. To this
end, a frequency sweep is performed covering all the band of operation from
40 to 60GHz and the reﬂection coeﬃcients are displayed along with the S21
parameter for the cross-coupling between the ports. This analysis is performed
in the case when the out port is left open and when the circular open-ended
waveguide with a conical horn is attached.
These are shown respectively in
ﬁgures 5.1 and 5.2.
In both cases S11 remains at an average level of -15dB across the band. S22
86
==PAGE:91==
Figure 5.1: S-parameters across the band, open out port.
Figure 5.2: S-parameters across the band, attached circular waveguide.
87
==PAGE:92==
is shown to quickly deteriorate after the cut-oﬀat around the 49GHz frequency.
The OMT is designed to operate at a band of 40 to 50GHz and it is clearly not
suitable for working at higher frequencies. The cross-coupling is kept at a rela-
tively low level of -40dB across the band although there is a very sharp increase
at 46GHz where it rises to -20dB. The cause of this anomalous behaviour is not
clearly established, but it is assumed to be caused by a phenomenon of internal
resonance within the OMT. It is nevertheless extremely undesirable to present
such as coupling peak in the middle of the band of operation. Finally, it can be
observed that attaching the open-ended waveguide to the out port of the OMT
introduces periodical oscillations into the S-parameters but the overall levels
are otherwise largely unchanged, although there is a certain deterioration of S21
around 44GHz, where it increases up to -30dB.
5.1.2
Waveguide switch
This device is essentially an interface with two input waveguide ports and an
output which guides the waves from the selected input port to the output. It
is therefore the mechanism that allows for switching between the horizontally
and vertically polarized ports of the dual probe. The switch is controlled via
a TTL signal which selects one port or the other depending on its high or low
state. In order to characterize the switch two of the three ports are connected
to the VNA while the remaining one is loaded with a matched load to eliminate
reﬂection on that port.
• First the VNA port 1 is connected to the switch input 1 and VNA port
2 to the switch output 1. The switch port 2 is loaded. The transmission
from input to output 1 is then measured when said output is activated
and deactivated. Figure 5.3 shows optimal reﬂection in the central band
of 46 to 56GHz but on the edges it becomes higher and with S11 rising
above -10dB at 42GHz its performance is far from excellent. The reﬂection
on port 1 when the TTL is in high state, S22hi is of approximately -1dB
which indicates the port is almost short-circuited.
In this deactivated
state, the isolation between input and output is greater than 25dB but
lower than 30dB. On the other hand, when the TTL line is grounded and
port 1 is selected, the transmission coeﬃcient S21lo is around -1dB which
agrees with the nominal transmission loss of the switch, which is below
2dB across the whole band.
In this case the reﬂection in port 1 S22lo
becomes roughly the same as S11.
• Secondly the same measure is repeated for the switch output 2. Figure
5.4 shows analogous behaviour to the previous case, although in port 2
the polarity of the TTL line is inverted so a high state indicates that port
2 is selected while low state indicates it is short-circuited.
• Lastly the VNA port 1 is connected to switch output 1 and VNA port 2
to switch output 2 in order to measure isolation between the two outputs.
Figure 5.5 show that the isolation, indicated by S21 is overall below -
30dB in the band below 48GHz. The ﬁgure shows a cut-oﬀfrequency at
around 49GHz where cross-coupling begins to increase above -25dB. This
is considered an excessive level of cross-coupling which causes a high level
of cross-polar component on the measurements.
88
==PAGE:93==
Figure 5.3: S-parameters for transmission from switch input to port 1.
Figure 5.4: S-parameters for transmission from switch input to port 2.
89
==PAGE:94==
Figure 5.5: S-parameters for transmission from switch port 1 to port 2.
5.1.3
Flanged cables
The ﬂanged cables, as mentioned in 2.10 consist of a section of semi-rigid coaxial
cable to which a pair of coaxial-to-waveguide transitions (ﬂanges) are attached.
Two ﬂanged cables of slightly diﬀerent length are employed to connect the out-
put of the switch to the OMT. In order to characterize their electrical properties
in terms of their scattering parameters, a simple frequency sweep s performed
with the two VNA ports connected at each end of the cables. The results are
presented in ﬁgure 5.6, which show very low transmission loss of about 1dB
across the whole 40 to 60GHz band. In comparison, the pair of cables used to
connect the VNA to the AUT and probe have a transmission loss of about 6 and
8dB. The minima of the reﬂections are at around -40dB throughout the band
while the maxima are around -30dB at the lower end of the band, and then rise
and stabilize at -17dB at 50GHz in the case of the cable labelled as 44 while in
the case of the 45 cable the oscillations are more pronounced.
5.1.4
Dual polarized probe pattern
Once the diﬀerent components of the dual-polarized probe have been adequately
characterized, it is possible to assemble it and mount it in the AUT tower to
perform a full-measurement on the spherical range. To this end an auxiliary
antenna (a Standard Gain Horn) is used as a probe. This SGH can be approx-
imated to a Hertzian dipole because at a distance of approximately 6 metres
the antennas are in the far-ﬁeld and the variation of the pattern of the auxiliary
probe within the angular region is so small as to be negligible.
Figure 5.7 introduces the representative cuts of the measured probe pattern.
This pattern is highly symmetric without a signiﬁcant diﬀerence in the co-polar
pattern on the E and H planes and on the φ = 45 diagonal plane. The probe has
a directivity of 10.2dB and in all the previous cuts the main beam falls 30dB
below its peak at around θ = 105.
90
==PAGE:95==
Figure 5.6: S-parameters of ﬂanged cables.
It is important to note the noisiness of the results, the high level of cross-
polar component and specially the presence of signiﬁcant rippling on the co-
polar diagrams. The cross-polar level is close to a less-than-ideal 25dB below
maximum on-axis. Thee ripples have an amplitude of approximately 0.1dB and
are caused by the diﬀraction eﬀect at the edges of the absorbing piece that
is attached at the front of the probe for measuring, and due to the eﬀect of
truncation of the lower-power modes in the spherical wave expansion.
This
truncation error is in principle unavoidable for as long as an inﬁnite number of
spherical modes is not considered, but if the number of terms is high enough
then the subsequent ripples can be neglected. The general rule of truncation
establishes the minimum number of modes as N = kr0 where r0 represents
the radius of the minimum sphere with center in the origin of coordinates which
encloses the whole antenna. If the absorber is considered as part of the antenna,
it results in a very large minimum sphere as this piece has dimensions of the
order of 38λ. Introducing this value at the previous equation then the required
number of modes required for proper sampling is approximately N = 240. The
corresponding angular sampling density would be ∆θ = ∆φ =
2π
2N+1 ≈0.75ž.
At this very small sampling density a full sphere measurement would demand
up to 8 hours so a compromise was made to favour faster measurements in spite
of the truncation error that is introduced.
Furthermore, the axial ratio over frequency, as shown in ﬁgure 5.8 is generally
higher than 25dB across the whole band, with the exception of the resonance
peak at 46GHz. The on-axis value of the axial ratio is 29dB while at some
frequencies it rises to an exceptionally good level of 60dB.
As the ports are orthogonal, the tilt angle of the second port, which corre-
sponds to the low state of the switch, has been shifted by 90 degrees to bring
it close to zero. The tilt angle presents a systematic shift of -2 degrees with a
±1 degree oscillation. This is observable for both states of the switch and it
may be caused by a poorly matched port. During the course of this particular
experiment the switch was found to be not working so all the relevant measure-
ments had to be performed by manually rotating the probe and connecting and
disconnecting the probe ports. If during the course of these process a port was
91
==PAGE:96==
Figure 5.7: Pattern diagrams of the dual probe. Blue, red and green correspond
with E, H and diagonal cuts. Full line represents co-polar and dotted line cross-
polar components.
not conveniently matched, its reﬂected signal and the interference level it gives
rise to can cause a systematic shift such as the one that can be seen in ﬁgure
5.9.
5.1.5
Channel balance
The switch that is used to excite the orthogonal polarization modes of the probe
is not ideal. Internally, it has two diﬀerent transmission lines, one for each port,
which are assumed to be diﬀerent. This diﬀerence in signal path means that
for an identical input signal in both ports, the radiated amplitude and phase
will be diﬀerent on each polarization. Conversely, with the probe as receiver
antenna, for a horizontally polarized incident ﬁeld a measure can be taken with
the probe so that the horizontal port is oriented parallel to the ﬁeld to measure
the co-polar component. If the AUT is subsequently rotated by 90 degrees and
the same measurement is taken on the vertical port and the two measurements
(which are expected to be identical) compared, they will diﬀer.
Channel balance then refers to the operation needed to correct for this im-
perfection of the switch to ensure that both polarizations can be measured at
the correct levels and it consists of obtaining the complex ratio, q, by which
they diﬀer, and multiplying one of the components by it in order to cancel the
eﬀect of the multiple paths. This operation is not crucial for obtaining the main
cuts of the AUT because typically one of the two components is zero on the E
or H planes, but it is required to correctly represent the diagonal cuts of the
antenna. Figure 5.10 presents the calculated q-factor over the working band of
40 to 50GHz.
5.2
Measurements and analysis
This section presents a series of results obtained from applying the procedures
described on the previous chapters to a separate set of measurements taken at
92
==PAGE:97==
Figure 5.8: Axial ratio of the dual polarized probe for high/low states of waveg-
uide switch, represented as a function of working frequency.
Figure 5.9: Tilt angle of the dual polarized probe for high/low states of waveg-
uide switch, represented as a function of working frequency.
93
==PAGE:98==
Figure 5.10: Channel balance factor as a function of frequency over the 40-
50GHz range.
48GHz using a dual-pol probe assembly instead of a single-port probe as was
done until now. As the frequential characterization of the components of the
probe (mainly OMT and switch) revealed, the dual probe has a cut-oﬀfrequency
at around 49GHz which makes 48GHz the highest usable frequency, and makes
measurements at 60GHz not possible.
The iterative algorithm is now tested in both orthogonally polarized mea-
sured components. With two horizontal and vertical components available, it
is also possible to evaluate retrieval on a diagonal plane as well as the two
main cuts. Furthermore, the measured and reconstructed electric ﬁelds are con-
trasted with a supplementary measurement of the AUT obtained at a spherical
near-ﬁeld (SNF) range.
The process by which data is acquired is essentially the same as before,
although lower frequency allows for less dense sampling than at 60GHz. For the
chosen frequency the wavelenght is now 6.25 millimetres but the chosen scan
step is 3 millimetres so the new measurements are actually slightly oversampled
by a factor of 1.04. The scanned surface covers an area of 200mm by 200mm,
or a 67 by 67 points grid.
Firstly, the measured data is presented as two color plots of amplitude and
phase showing the variation of the electric ﬁeld over the scan surface. The co-
polar component is largely identical to the ﬁeld distributions previously studied
while ﬁgure 5.12 introduces for the ﬁrst time a typical cross-polar measurement,
as obtained from the dual-polarized probe set-up. The maximum value of the
y-component is approximately one order of magnitude less than the co-polar,
meaning that the co to cross-polar ratio will be at 20 to 30dB top. Tne near-ﬁeld
pattern of the cross-polar component is, as can be expected, much more noisy
and confused than the co-polar, although certain features around the central
area. This indicates a relatively high level of cross-polar component on-axis,
caused by either a rotation of the AUT on the z−axis by high cross-coupling
between the ports of the probe, although it is not immediately clear which of
the two causes is more relevant.
In ﬁgure 5.13 the measured co-polar cuts of the two main planes and the
94
==PAGE:99==
Figure 5.11: Measured x-component (co-polar) at a distance of 30mm from the
AUT.
Figure 5.12: Measured y-component (cross-polar) at a distance of 30mm from
the AUT.
diagonal φ = 45 are displayed in contrast to spherical near-ﬁeld analogous mea-
surements indicating reasonably good agreement within the region of validity.
No signiﬁcant lateral asymmetry is present on the E-plane, which indicate a bet-
ter axis pointing in this particular measurement. On the contrary, the H-plane
curves tends to narrow compared to the SNF data.
The diagonal cuts which are also shown for the ﬁrst time in the previous
ﬁgure show overall good agreement on the angular range of interest. The shape
of this pattern, as would correspond to the studied AUT is somewhere in between
that of the E-plane and the H-plane. Thus, it is not as directive as the pattern of
a uniform aperture distribution but narrower than a tapered aperture. Likewise,
for a diagonal cut the sidelobe level is expected to be in between the two main
cuts, although for this horn sidelobes are quite low and in fact smaller than on
the H-plane.
For the iterative algorithm the two measurements are picked at distances
of 30mm and 40mm along the z−axis, respectively 4.8λ and 6.4λ, at 1.6 wave-
lenghts of separation from each other. An initial guess is, as previously, a horn
of the same dimensions as the AUT with a constant uniform amplitude and
phase distribution, simulated from the MATLAB AUT model. The maximum
number of iterations is 2000.
The reconstructed patterns are in line with the measured counterparts in
their more symmetrical sidelobes. Although there is a certain amplitude diﬀer-
ence it is only down to 0.24dB for this result. The retrieved pattern, however
is consistently at a higher sidelobe level and also shows a narrower curve on
the E-plane (clearly noticeable at the third nulls which are displaced by 1.5
degrees), both signs of a more uniform source. As the initial guess is a uniform
95
==PAGE:100==
Figure 5.13: E and H plane co-polara nd diagonal cuts of measured far-ﬁeld
patterns obtained at planar scanner vs. spherical range.
Figure 5.14: Close-up of ﬁgure 5.13 around the main beam.
96
==PAGE:101==
Figure 5.15: E-plane co and cross-polar cuts of retrieved ﬁelds vs planar and
spherical measured references.
Figure 5.16: H-plane co and cross-polar cuts of retrieved ﬁelds vs planar and
spherical measured references.
97
==PAGE:102==
Figure 5.17: Diagonal φ = 45 patterns of retrieved ﬁelds vs planar and spherical
measured references.
aperture this indicates that the reconstructed solution is still more uniform than
the real AUT. The retrieval algorithm also tends to smooth out some features
of the patterns, resulting in shallower nulls on the E-plane pattern, and less
pronounced sidelobes on the H and diagonal cuts.
The cross-polar patterns show a rather high on-axis level of -25dB, whereas
measurements from the planar range indicate a level 30dB below the maximum.
As mentioned before, high level of cross-polar can be expected from the use of a
waveguide switch with poor cross-coupling characteristics, and additional cross-
pol level might be given by AUT rotation. These patterns behave somewhat
similar to the co-polar components, with a main-beam on the z−direction (where
the cross-polar component, as deﬁned by Ludwig, should become zero) and
identiﬁable sidelobes at a level of around 40 to 50dB below the maximum on
the two main cuts.
The calculated axial ratio and tilt angle of the measured ﬁelds, obtained
from their complex circular polarization ratio Q are respectively 23.87dB and
0.94 degrees.
5.3
Summary of chapter 5
In this chapter phase retrieval is extended to a set of full measurements of two
orthogonal components of the E-ﬁeld taken with a dual-polarized probe. To
this end, a full frequency characterization of the probe assembly is conducted,
revealing poor suitability for frequencies higher than 49GHz due to excessive
coupling between switch ports and reﬂection on the orthomode transducer. The
obtained results are compared with an accurate spherical NF measurement of
the AUT at 48GHz, revealing satisfactory accuracy of the planar measurements
within the region of validity, albeit with increased cross-polar level due to the
98
==PAGE:103==
aforementioned cross-coupling at the switch, and good phase retrieval within
said angular region in both main cuts and the diagonal plane.
99
==PAGE:104==
Chapter 6
Conclusions
6.1
Summary and conclusions
A method for phase retrieval on planar near-ﬁeld measurements based on iter-
ated propagation between two planes has been developed and extensively evalu-
ated. A horn antenna at 60GHz was used as AUT because of its high directivity
and polarization purity, which makes it suitable for the problem of phase re-
trieval. The algorithm was found to be able to retrieve a phase distribution
from a pair of amplitude measurements from which far-ﬁeld patterns can be
produced that approximate the original ﬁelds with acceptable reliability within
an angular range of ± 30 degrees. Although this reliability is restricted by noise
and limitations of the planar scanner facility, it was found that augmenting the
iterative algorithm with spatial ﬁltering at the aperture of the AUT greatly
reduced the noise level and produced far more accurate results. It is proposed
that an advantageous factor for phase retrieval is relative diﬀerence between the
two scan planes. This is equivalent to saying that distances closer to the AUT
are preferred because ﬁeld variations with distance become smaller the farther
from the AUT the measure is taken. The single best result was obtained from
a pair of measurements taken at distances of 6 and 8 wavelengths at 60GHz
while measurements that resemble each other more closely typically result in
bad phase retrieval.
A study of errors has been conducted in which several of the causes of al-
gorithm failure were identiﬁed and a series of experiments carried in order to
diagnose some of the causes of observed measurement imperfections.
Probe correction was successfully applied on the retrieved signals, and it
has been shown that raw data obtained from the planar scanner in the form of
uncorrected probe signals can be subjected to the iterative algorithm with good
results. It is thought that this holds true as long as separations between scan
planes and AUT are not too large.
In order to reduce the necessary time to produce a complete measurement a
dual-polarized probe was mounted on the planar scanner, capable of measuring
the two orthogonal components of the tangential ﬁelds at once. The components
of the probe were characterized in frequency and found to be unsuitable for
measurements above 49GHz, being primarily limited by the attached waveguide
switch. It was still possible to obtain acceptable measurements using this setup
100
==PAGE:105==
at a reduced working frequency of 48GHz.
6.2
Future work
The planar scanner at the Technical University of Denmark used on this project
is ﬁtted with very precise machinery that allows for accurate and reliable near-
ﬁeld measurements. This accuracy is ultimately hindered by the rather simple
rail used to allow the AUT movement along its z−axis. While the uncertainty
produced by errors derived from this system might not be of great importance
at lower frequencies, at the 40-60GHz band and above it becomes paramount to
rely on a precise mechanism for the AUT in order to minimize errors due to axis
maladjustment, rotations of the AUT and so on, which during the course of this
report have been shown to inﬂuence both measurements and phase retrieval in
a signiﬁcant way.
The problem of a convergence criterion capable of establishing a clear thresh-
old to discriminate between successful and erroneous phase retrieval was not
satisfactorily resolved. It is desirable to develop a more complete criterion that
eliminates the human component on the decision. Two main defects have been
identiﬁed on the mean squared error metric utilized on this report: ﬁrstly that
for a linear comparative of the measured versus reconstructed ﬁeld the computed
error is determined mainly by the central samples of the ﬁeld matrix while the
outside areas have almost no inﬂuence on its outcome due to their low values,
and secondly that convergence can only be evaluated in the ﬁeld module. The
latter is a limitation inherent to the problem of phaseless measurements, while
for the former it is proposed to introduce a logarithmic metric to compute rela-
tive point-to-point error, instead of absolute error. Also, signiﬁcant divergence
of far-ﬁeld patterns can derive from relatively small diﬀerences on the near-ﬁeld
data so for this reason it is proposed to investigate convergence of the far-ﬁeld
modules, or equivalently the module of the measured PWS, making a limited
use of measured phase information from the scanner, as described at the end of
section 4.5.
The concept of including the measured phase into the retrieval algorithm
also comes into play with the problem of probe correction. During the course of
this project it has been demonstrated that probe correction can be successfully
applied to a complex signal reconstructed with the iterative algorithm from two
uncorrected probe signals. Module-only measurements imply the impossibility
of probe-correcting before retrieving a phase, and using the phase guess for this
task was proven to be ineﬀectual. One course of action that was considered but
unexplored due to time constraints was to probe-correct the measured complex
signal by the standard method and then extracting the corrected modules, ap-
plying the initial guess and using those as input for the iterative algorithm. It is
suspected that, because the measured modules are considered to be more robust
against measure uncertainty than phase it could be possible to probe-correct the
measured data on the spectral domain without incurring in excessive error in
the subsequent phase retrieval.
101
==PAGE:106==
Bibliography
[1] Fftw. http://www.ﬀtw.org/. Accessed: 2015-03-10.
[2] Matlab documentation at mathworks. http://se.mathworks.com/help/matlab/ref/ﬀt.htmlbqve9bs-
1/. Accessed: 2015-03-10.
[3] A. P. Anderson and S. Sali.
New possibilities for phaseless microwave
diagnostics. part1: Error reduction techniques. IEE Proceedings H (Mi-
crowaves, Antennas and Propagation), 132, 1985.
[4] Constantine A. Balanis. Antenna Theory: Analysis and Design. Wiley-
Interscience, 2005.
[5] Glenn F. Engen and Cletus A. Hoer. Thru-reﬂect-line: An improved tech-
nique for calibrating the dual six-port automatic network analyzer. IEEE
Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, 27, 1979.
[6] J.R Fienup. Phase retrieval algorithms: a comparison. Applied Optics, 21,
1982.
[7] R. W. Gerchberg and W. O. Saxton. Phase determination from image and
diﬀraction plane pictures in the electron microscope. Optik, 34, 1971.
[8] Stuart Gregson, John McCormick, and Clive Parini. Principles of planar
near-ﬁeld antenna measurements. Institution of Engineering and Technol-
ogy, 2007.
[9] J.E Hansen and Institution of Electrical Engineers.
Spherical near-ﬁeld
antenna measurements. Peregrinus, 1988.
[10] Thorkild Hansen and Arthur D. Yaghjian.
Plane-wave theory of time-
domain ﬁelds : near-ﬁeld scanning applications. IEEE Press, 1999.
[11] Enrica Martini, Olav Breinbjerg, and Stefano Maci. Reduction of trunca-
tion errors in planar near-ﬁeld aperture antenna measurements using the
gerchberg-papoulis algorithm. IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Prop-
agation, 56(11), November 2008.
[12] Paula Irina Popa, Sergey Pivnenko, Jeppe M. Nielsen, and Olav Breinbjerg.
60ghz antenna measurement setup using a vna without external frequency
conversion.
Proceedings of the 36th Annual Symposium of the Antenna
Measurement Techniques Association (amta), 2014.
102
==PAGE:107==
[13] S. Farhad Razavi and Yahya Rahmat-Samii. A new look at phaseless planar
near-ﬁeld measurements: limitations, simulations, measurements, and a
hybrid solution. Antennas and Propagation Magazine, IEEE, 49(2):170 –
178, April 2007.
[14] S. Farhad Razavi and Yahya Rahmat-Samii. On the uniqueness of planar
near-ﬁeld phaseless antenna measurements based on two amplitude-only
measurements.
Antennas and Propagation Society International Sympo-
sium, 2008. AP-S 2008. IEEE, 1–9:1 – 4, 2008.
[15] J.H Seldin and J.R Fienup.
Numerical investigation of the uniqueness
of phase retrieval. Journal of the Optical Society of America. B, Optical
physics, 7, 1990.
[16] Arthur D. Yaghjian.
An overview of near-ﬁeld antenna measurements.
Antennas and Propagation, IEEE Transactions, 34, 1986.
[17] Srinivasa
Rao
Zinka.
On
the
ludwig’s
deﬁnitions
of
cross-
polarization.
https://zinka.ﬁles.wordpress.com/2011/07/my-thoughts-on-
ludwig-polarization-deﬁnitions-i1.pdf. Accessed: 2015-03-19.
103
==PAGE:108==
List of Figures
2.1
Diagram of the planar scanner
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2
Coordinate system in the center point of the AUT, showing di-
rection of x-polarized E-ﬁeld . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.3
Variation of computed error after 200 iterations versus separation
between planes. Each plot corresponds to a diﬀerent distance of
the closest surface to the AUT. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.4
Eﬀect of probe pattern on measured probe signal . . . . . . . . .
22
2.5
Flow diagram of proposed double-iterative method. . . . . . . . .
25
2.6
Spectral receiving characteristics of the open-ended WG probe. .
26
2.7
Possible situation of axis misalignment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.1
Flow diagram of the iterative algorithm. Each diagonal arrow
represents a propagation of the PWS of the ﬁeld to said surface
and Fourier operations are omitted. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.2
MSE vs number of iterations on double logaritmic scale. Case of
most favorable initial guess. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.3
Diﬀerence between computed MSE on two consecutive iterations.
Case of most favorable initial guess.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.4
fftshift on a two-dimensional matrix. ifftshift reverses this
transformation. Picture source: Mathworks. . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.1
Measured magnitude and phase at a separation of 6λ from AUT,
no probe correction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.2
Measured magnitude and phase at a separation of 8λ from AUT
40
4.3
E and H-plane cuts of measured ﬁeld at separation of 6λ from AUT 41
4.4
E and H-plane cuts of measured ﬁeld at separation of 6λ, 8λ, 9λ, 10λ, 11λ
from AUT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.5
E-plane module cut of electric ﬁeld obtained from measurements
at diﬀerent distances from the AUT
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.6
E-plane phase cut of electric ﬁeld obtained from measurements
at diﬀerent distances from the AUT
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.7
H-plane module cut of electric ﬁeld obtained from measurements
at diﬀerent distances from the AUT
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.8
H-plane phase cut of electric ﬁeld obtained from measurements
at diﬀerent distances from the AUT
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.9
Zoom-in of main-beam and sidelobes of E-cuts obtained from
mesurements at diﬀerent distances. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.10 NF E-cut of pre-corrected ﬁeld versus uncorrected probe signal
and simulated electric ﬁeld at z = 6. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
104
==PAGE:109==
4.11 E-plane module cuts of reconstructed ﬁeld obtained from "pre-
corrected" amplitude measurements, plotted against raw and probe-
corrected reference ﬁelds.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.12 H-plane cut of reconstructed ﬁeld obtained from "pre-corrected"
amplitude measurements, plotted against raw and probe-corrected
reference ﬁelds. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.13 Amplitude and phase distributions of retrieved ﬁeld at z1 = 6λ,
no probe correction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.14 Amplitude and phase distributions of probe corrected retrieved
ﬁeld at z1 = 6λ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.15 E-plane module cuts of reconstructed and probe-corrected ﬁeld
obtained from raw probe signals, versus raw and corrected refer-
ence measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.16 E-plane phase cuts of reconstructed and probe-corrected ﬁeld ob-
tained from raw probe signals, versus raw and corrected reference
measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.17 H-plane module cuts of reconstructed and probe-corrected ﬁeld
obtained from raw probe signals, versus raw and corrected refer-
ence measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.18 H-plane phase cuts of reconstructed and probe-corrected ﬁeld ob-
tained from raw probe signals, versus raw and corrected reference
measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.19 Evolution of mean squared error over 2000 iterations for diﬀerent
starting guesses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.20 E-plane cut of electric ﬁeld for diﬀerent initial guesses . . . . . .
54
4.21 H-plane cut of electric ﬁeld for diﬀerent initial guesses . . . . . .
55
4.22 E-plane module cuts of electric ﬁeld for diﬀerent initial guesses .
56
4.23 E-plane phase cuts of electric ﬁeld for diﬀerent initial guesses . .
56
4.24 H-plane module cuts of electric ﬁeld for diﬀerent initial guesses .
57
4.25 H-plane phase cuts of electric ﬁeld for diﬀerent initial guesses . .
57
4.26 MSE versus iterations for diﬀerent distances between measure-
ment planes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
4.27 Reconstructed E-plan module cuts for diﬀerent surface separa-
tions with nearest distance z = 6λ
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
4.28 Reconstructed E-plane phase cuts for diﬀerent surface separations
with nearest distance z = 6λ
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
4.29 Reconstructed H-plane module cuts for diﬀerent surface separa-
tions with nearest distance z = 6λ
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
4.30 Reconstructed H-plane phase cuts for diﬀerent surface separa-
tions with nearest distance z = 6λ
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
4.31 Close-up around the main beam of reconstructed ﬁelds for diﬀer-
ent plane separations (nearest 6λ). Left E-plane, right H-plane. .
62
4.32 Main cuts of reconstructed electric ﬁeld for diﬀerent as function
of plane separation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
4.33 Main cuts of reconstructed electric ﬁeld for diﬀerent as function
of plane separation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
4.34 Equivalent Multipath Level calculated from two far-ﬁeld patterns
64
4.35 Complete cycle of expanded iterative algorithm with spatial ﬁl-
tering at aperture.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
105
==PAGE:110==
4.36 Phase diagrams at z1 = 6λ of retrieved and reference ﬁelds, no
probe correction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
4.37 Phase diagrams at z1 = 6λ of probe corrected retrieved and ref-
erence ﬁelds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
4.38 E-plane module cuts of retrieved electric ﬁelds with spatial ﬁlter-
ing vs unﬁltered. Measured reference included.
. . . . . . . . . .
68
4.39 E-plane phase cuts retrieved electric ﬁelds with spatial ﬁltering
vs unﬁltered. Measured reference included.
. . . . . . . . . . . .
68
69
69
4.42 E-plane retrieved electric ﬁelds without spatial ﬁltering vs ﬁltered
after 300 iterations. Measured reference included. . . . . . . . . .
70
4.43 Model data comparison of E-cuts with and without simulated
rotation error. Measured reference included. . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
4.44 Model data comparison of H-cuts with and without simulated
rotation error. Measured reference included. . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
4.45 Closeup of 4.43 around the main bean region. . . . . . . . . . . .
73
4.46 Model data comparison of E-cuts for axis displacement error.
Measured reference included.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
4.47 Model data comparison of H-cuts for axis displacement error.
Measured reference included.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
4.48 Result of phase retrieval on which one of the scan planes has a
center displacement showing erroneous retrieval.
. . . . . . . . .
75
4.49 Erroneous phase retrieval due to displaced AUT z−axis. . . . . .
76
4.50 Model data comparison of E-cuts for increasing ∆z error.
. . . .
77
4.51 Model data comparison of H-cuts for increasing ∆z error. . . . .
77
4.52 Comparison of E-cuts for 1 wavelength error of ∆z, simulated vs
real measured data. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
4.53 Comparison of H-cuts for 1 wavelength error of ∆z, simulated vs
real measured data. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
4.54 E and H-cuts of ﬁeld reconstructed from real data, with an in-
troduced 0.5mm error on ∆z. Measured reference included
. . .
79
4.55 E-plane module cuts for double retrieval versus single execution
of iterative algorithm.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
4.56 E-plane phase cuts for double retrieval versus single execution of
iterative algorithm. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
4.57 H-plane module cuts for double retrieval versus single execution
of iterative algorithm.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
4.58 H-plane phase cuts for double retrieval versus single execution of
iterative algorithm. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
4.59 Closeup of 4.55, 4.57 around the main beam.
. . . . . . . . . . .
82
4.60 E-plane module cuts for double retrieval with spatial ﬁltering. 2
vs 60 rounds on second run of iterative algorithm.
. . . . . . . .
83
4.61 E-plane phase cuts for double retrieval with spatial ﬁltering. 2
vs 60 rounds on second run of iterative algorithm.
. . . . . . . .
83
4.62 H-plane module cuts for double retrieval with spatial ﬁltering. 2
vs 60 rounds on second run of iterative algorithm.
. . . . . . . .
84
4.63 H-plane phase cuts for double retrieval with spatial ﬁltering. 2
vs 60 rounds on second run of iterative algorithm.
. . . . . . . .
84
106
==PAGE:111==
4.64 Doubly iterated retrieved ﬁeld vs reference ﬁeld, plotted for 2 vs
60 iterations on the second run. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
5.1
S-parameters across the band, open out port. . . . . . . . . . . .
87
5.2
S-parameters across the band, attached circular waveguide.
. . .
87
5.3
S-parameters for transmission from switch input to port 1. . . . .
89
5.4
S-parameters for transmission from switch input to port 2. . . . .
89
5.5
S-parameters for transmission from switch port 1 to port 2. . . .
90
5.6
S-parameters of ﬂanged cables. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
5.7
Pattern diagrams of the dual probe. Blue, red and green corre-
spond with E, H and diagonal cuts. Full line represents co-polar
and dotted line cross-polar components. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
5.8
Axial ratio of the dual polarized probe for high/low states of
waveguide switch, represented as a function of working frequency.
93
5.9
Tilt angle of the dual polarized probe for high/low states of
waveguide switch, represented as a function of working frequency.
93
5.10 Channel balance factor as a function of frequency over the 40-
50GHz range. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
5.11 Measured x-component (co-polar) at a distance of 30mm from
the AUT.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
5.12 Measured y-component (cross-polar) at a distance of 30mm from
the AUT.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
5.13 E and H plane co-polara nd diagonal cuts of measured far-ﬁeld
patterns obtained at planar scanner vs. spherical range. . . . . .
96
5.14 Close-up of ﬁgure 5.13 around the main beam.
. . . . . . . . . .
96
5.15 E-plane co and cross-polar cuts of retrieved ﬁelds vs planar and
spherical measured references. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
5.16 H-plane co and cross-polar cuts of retrieved ﬁelds vs planar and
spherical measured references. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
5.17 Diagonal φ = 45 patterns of retrieved ﬁelds vs planar and spher-
ical measured references. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
107
==PAGE:112==
Appendix A
The Fourier Transform and
MATLAB’s Discrete
Fourier Transform
A.1
One-dimensional FT
In section 3.4 the particularities of MATLAB’s Fast Fourier Transform (FFT)
are explored, with special regard to the size of the input units, and how it can
lead to errors if not properly considered.
It is still not clearly stablished in this report what the relationship between the
discrete FFT and the continuous Fourier Transform (FT) is, so the purpose of
this appendix is to express the latter in terms of the former.
The classical FT of a continuous f(x) signal is deﬁned as
FT(k) =
∞
Z
−∞
f(x)e−jkxdx
(A.1)
Meanwhile, the Discrete Fourier Transform is implemented in MATLAB’s
fft as follows
DFT(m) =
N
X
n=1
f(n)e−j2π(m−1)(n−1)/N∆x
(A.2)
In order to write FT(k) in terms of DFT(m) the ﬁrst step is to discretize
x and f(x) in the form of N equidistant samples over the region of [xmin, xmax].
108
==PAGE:113==
f(xn) = f(xmin + (n −1)∆x),
1 ≤n ≤N
(A.3a)
∆x = (xmax −xmin)/(N −1)
(A.3b)
So in the previous, sample n = 1 corresponds to x = xmin and sample n = N
to x = xmax. Substituting in A.1 and moving the constant terms outside of the
summation it becomes as follows
FT(k) =
N
X
n=1
f(xn)e−jkxn∆xFT(k) = ∆xejkxmin
N
X
n=1
f(xn)e−jk(n−1)∆x
(A.4)
Secondly, k and FT(k) are discretized in the form of M equidistant samples
over the region of [kmin, kmax].
FT(km) = FT(kmin + (n −1)∆h),
1≤m ≤M
(A.5a)
∆k = (kmax −kmin)/(M −1)
(A.5b)
Again, sample m = 1 corresponds to k = kmin and sample m = M to
k = kmax. Substituting in A.1 and moving the constant terms outside of the
summation it becomes as follows
FT(km) = ∆xejkmxmin
N
X
n=1
f(xn)e−jkmin(n−1)∆xe−j(m−1)∆k(n−1)∆x
(A.6)
1 ≤m ≤M
Third, the discretization of x in A.3 means that FT(k) has become a periodic
function with period 2π/∆x (since a change of k by 2π/∆x makes the exponent
change by (n −1)2π and the exponential function and thus the entire term
remains unchanged. Hence, FT(k) in A.1 is only valid for a range of 2π/∆x,
and the M values of k must be distributed over a range of 2π/∆x−∆k, in order
to avoid that FT(kmin) = FT(kmax) due to the periodicity.
109
==PAGE:114==
∆k(M −1) = 2π/∆x −∆k
←→
∆k∆x = 2π
M
(A.7)
Next, A.1 is substituted into A.1.
FT(km) = ∆xejkmxmin
N
X
n=1
f(xn)e−jkmin(n−1)∆xe−j2π(m−1)(n−1)/M
(A.8a)
And if M is chosen so that M = N then the above becomes
FT(km) = ∆xejkmxmin
N
X
n=1
f(xn)e−jkmin(n−1)∆xe−j2π(m−1)(n−1)/N
(A.8b)
1 ≤m ≤N
Finally because FT(km) is periodic, the range can be chose so it begins at
kmin = 0, which makes the ﬁrst exponential from
FT(km) = ∆xejkmxmin
N
X
n=1
f(xn)e−j2π(m−1)(n−1)/N
(A.9)
1 ≤m ≤N
If the values of f(xn) are stored in an N-point vector f with index n and
the same is done for FT(km) in vector FT with index m then A.1 becomes
FT(m) = ∆xejkmxmin
N
X
n=1
f(n)e−j2π(m−1)(n−1)/N,
1 ≤m ≤N
(A.10)
If the above is compared with A.1 then it becomes clear that
FT(m) = ∆xejkmxminDFT(m),
1 ≤m ≤N
(A.11)
• The sampling density in the frequency domain is determined by the range
in the spatial domain: N∆x.
• The range in the frequency domain kmax −kmin = kmax is determined by
the sampling density on the spatial domain. Thus, in order to calculate a
given range in the frequency domain a suﬃciently small spatial sampling
density in the spatial domain is required. This is the so-called sampling
criterion.
110
==PAGE:115==
• Zero-padding (which can be performed by MATLAB’s fft is the process
of adding zeroes to f(x) with the sampling density ∆x in order to reduce
∆k leaving kmax practically unaltered, providing more spectral resolution
in the frequency domain.
In order to move the DC component of the Fourier Transform to the center
of the vector (it is otherwise the ﬁrst element of FT(m) as the result of A.1) it
is possible to use MATLAB’s fftshift to swap the left and right halves of the
vector. The inverse operation is provided by ifftshift.
A.2
Generalization of the previous result
In the previous section an expression is derived to express the continuous Fourier
Transform in terms of the fft provided by MATLAB. This is the case for the
one-dimensional FT but the same result can be easily generalized to an p-
dimensional FT.
The p-dimensional FT is deﬁned
FT(k1 . . . kp) =
Z
ℜp
f(x1 . . . xp)e
−j
PP
p=1
kpxp
dx1 . . . dxp
(A.12)
While the p-dimensional DFT is
DFTp(m1 . . . mp) =
N1
X
n1=1
. . .
Np
X
np=1
f(n1 . . . np)e−j2π((m1−1)(n1−1)/N1+...+(mp−1)(np−1)/Np) =
X
p
f(n1, . . . np)e
−j2π
PP
p=1
(mp−1)(np−1)/Np
(A.13)
1 ≤np ≤Np,
1 ≤mp ≤Mp
The P concecutive summations in A.2 have been hereby condensed into P
p
for abbreviation and readability.
The same steps as before are taken in order to derive the general expression.
Firstly the x variables and f(x1 . . . xp) function are discretized in a similar
fashion as in the one-dimensional case and the resulting are inserted into A.2.
f(xn1 . . . xnp) = f(x1min, +(n1 −1)∆x1, . . . xpmin + (np −1)∆xp, )
1 ≤np ≤Np(A.14a)
111
==PAGE:116==
∆xp = (xpmax −xpmin)/(Np −1)
(A.14b)
FT(k1 . . . kp) =
 P
Y
p=1
∆xp e−jkpxpmin
! X
p
f(xn1, . . . xnp)e
−j
PP
p=1
kp(np−1)∆xp
(A.15)
The expressions inside the product operation on A.2 are constant and there-
fore they are moved outside of their respective summations. This product of
constants is obviously also a constant, hereby abbreviated as C.
In second place, the spectral variables and FT(k1 . . . kp) are likewise dis-
cretized and the discrete results are introduced in A.2.
FT(km1, . . . kmp) = FT(k1min, +(m1−1)∆k1, . . . kpmin+(mp−1)∆kp),
1 ≤mp ≤Mp
(A.16a)
∆kp = (kpmax −kpmin)/(Mp −1)
(A.16b)
FT(km1, . . . kmp) = C
X
p
f(xn1, . . . xnp)
e
−j
PP
p=1
kpmin(np−1)∆xp
e
−j
PP
p=1
(mp−1)∆kp(np−1)∆xp
1 ≤mp ≤Mp
(A.16c)
Third the kp variables are distributed over the corresponding 2π/∆xp−∆kp
range. Thus,
∆kp(Mp −1) = 2π/∆xp −∆kp
←→
∆kp∆xp = 2π
Mp
(A.17)
These previous expressions are inserted in A.16. Furthermore the dimensions
of the problem are chosen so that Mp = Np, ∀p and the spectral range is chosen
so that kpmin = 0, ∀p. In this case, A.16 reduces to
112
==PAGE:117==
FT(km1, . . . kmp) = C
X
p
f(xn1, . . . xnp)e
−j2π
PP
p=1
(mp−1)(np−1)/Np
(A.18)
1 ≤mp ≤Np
At this point, the p-dimensional DFT expression from A.2 is already present
in A.2. As the ﬁnishing steps, the values from f(xn1, . . . xnp) are stored in a
p-dimensional array f with indexes (n1, . . . np) and the values FT(km1, . . . kmp)
in a similar structure FT with indexes (m1, . . . mp). It can ﬁnally be seen that
FT(m1, . . . mp) =
 P
Y
p=1
∆xp e−jkpxpmin
!
DFTp(m)
1≤mp ≤Np
(A.19)
113
==PAGE:118==
Appendix B
Polarization calibration as a
three antenna measurement
The three antenna measurement for polarization calibration of the dual-polarized
circular waveguide probe involves the calculation of the following parameters:
• Port 1 co-polar E-pattern K1
θ(θ, φ = 0).
• Port 2 co-polar E-pattern K2
θ(θ, φ = 270) = K1
θ(θ, 0) because the rota-
tional symmetry of the circular probe.
• Port 1 co-polar H-pattern K1
φ(θ, 90).
• Port 2 co-polar H-pattern K2
φ(θ, 0) = K1
θ(θ, 90).
• Port 1 polarization ratio p1 or Q1.
• Port 2 polarization ratio p2 or Q2.
The complex excitation ratio and circular polarization ratios are
p = Ky(0, 0)/Kx(0, 0)
(B.1)
Q = (Kx −jKy)/(Kx + jKy)
(B.2)
For an x and y polarized mode, Kx and Ky are
Kx = Kθ(θ, 0)ˆθ cos(φ) + Kφ(θ, 90)ˆφ sin(φ)
(B.3)
Ky = Kθ(θ, 0)ˆθ cos(φ) −Kφ(θ, 90)ˆφ sin(φ)
(B.4)
114
==PAGE:119==
At each of the two orthogonal ports of the probe, the complex excitation
ratio (or circular polarization ratio) is calculated.
At port 1
p1 = K1
y(0, 0)/K1
x(0, 0), Q1 = (K1
x −jK1
y)/(K1
x + jK1
y)
(B.5)
At port 2
p2 = −K2
y(0, 0)/K2
x(0, 0), Q2 = (K2
x −jK2
y)/(K2
x + jK2
y)
(B.6)
The three antennas involved in the measurement are named A, B and C. In
order to determine the polarization characteristics of the probe three diﬀerent
measurements are required.
• SGH A in antenna tower and SGH B in probe tower. This measurement
yields the product of the polarization rations of the two SGHs: QAQB.
• SGH A in antenna tower and probe in probe tower. This measurement
yields the product of the polarization rations of SGH A and probe: QAQC.
• SGH B in antenna tower and probe in probe tower. This measurement
yields the product of the polarization rations of SGH B and probe: QBQC.
From these obtained values, it is possible to individually determine the three
polarization ratios as
QA =
s
(QAQB)(QAQC)
(QBQC)
(B.7)
QB = (QAQB)
(QA)
(B.8)
QC = (QAQC)
(QA)
(B.9)
115
==PAGE:120==
Appendix C
MATLAB source code
This appendix collects the relevant MATLAB code used in this project. Func-
tions used trivial tasks such as plotting data are not included.
C.1
Iterative algorithm
%% Iterative algorithm
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
% Iterative algorithm for phase retrieval
% Inputs:
% - ES: matrix array of modules of measured field at S1, S2
% - ES1: Initial guess matrix
% - Angular variables kx, ky, kz
% - Spatial variables x, y
% - Distances z1, z2
% - ApertureMask: Mask of AUT aperture for spatial filtering
% Outputs:
% - Efinal: Retrieved field matrix
% - ei: computed error metrix vector
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
% Load workspace for required variables
load state60GHz.mat
MAX_ITERATIONS = 2000;
Filtering = 0; % Discriminates between with/without spatial filtering
boolEnd = 0; % bool End = 1 when convergence met
ItNum = 0; % # of iterations performed
ei = []; ei(1) = 0;
kz_p = kz;
for ii = 1:length(ky)
for jj = 1:length(kx)
if (real(kz_p(ii,jj)) == 0)
kz_p(ii,jj) = -kz_p(ii,jj);
end
end
end
116
==PAGE:121==
switch Filtering
case 0 % Considering S1 / S2 ONLY
% Iteration starts here
while boolEnd == 0 && ItNum < MAX_ITERATIONS
if boolEnd == 0 && ItNum < MAX_ITERATIONS
% Step 1: Swap field module with measured at S1
ES1swap = ModuleSwap(ES1, abs(ES(:,:,1)));
TS1swap = DFT2D(ES1swap, y, x);
% Step 2: propagate to S2
TS2 = TS1swap.*exp(-1j.*kz.*(z2-z1));
ES2 = IDFT2D(TS2, y, x);
ItNum = ItNum +1;
[Efinal, boolEnd, ei(ItNum)] = ConvergenceCheck2(ES2, ...
ES_abs(:,:,2), x, y);
% Step 4: Module Swap at S2
if boolEnd == 0
&& ItNum < MAX_ITERATIONS
ES2swap = ModuleSwap(ES2, abs(ES(:,:,2)));
TS2swap = DFT2D(ES2swap, y, x);
% Step 5: backproject from S2 to S1
TS1 = TS2swap.*exp(+1j.*kz_p*(z2-z1));
ES1 = IDFT2D(TS1,y, x);
ItNum = ItNum +1;
if(ItNum > 1)
[Efinal, boolEnd, ei(ItNum)] = ConvergenceCheck2...
(ES1, abs(ES(:,:,1)), ei(ItNum-1), x, y);
end
end % end if
end % end IF
end %end WHILE
case 1 % Considering S0 / S1 / S2 (Spatial filtering)
% Iteration starts here
while boolEnd == 0 && ItNum < MAX_ITERATIONS
% Step 1: Convergence check at S1
ItNum = ItNum +1;
if ItNum > 1
[Efinal, boolEnd, ei(ItNum)] = ConvergenceCheck2(ES1, ...
ES_abs(:,:,1), ApertureMask, x, y);
end
if boolEnd == 0
% Step 2: Swap module with measured at S1
ES1swap = ModuleSwap(ES1, abs(ES(:,:,1)));
TS1swap = DFT2D(ES1swap, y, x);
% Step 3: Backproject ES1 to S0
TS0 = exp(+1j.*kz_p*z1) .* TS1swap;
ES0 = IDFT2D(TS0,ky,kx,y,x);
% Step 4: Apply spatial filtering at aperture
ES0 = ES0.*ApertureMask;
117
==PAGE:122==
% sets filtered samples to exactly zero
ES0 = round(ES0,10,'decimals');
TS0 = DFT2D(ES0,y,x);
% Step 5: Propagate ES0 to S2
TS2 = TS0.*exp(-1j.*kz.*z2);
ES2 = IDFT2D(TS2, ky, kx, y, x);
% Convergence check
ItNum = ItNum +1;
[Efinal, boolEnd, ei(ItNum)] = ConvergenceCheck2(ES2, ...
ES_abs(:,:,2), x, y);
if boolEnd == 0
% Step 6: Swap module with measured at S2
ES2swap = ModuleSwap(ES2, abs(ES(:,:,2)));
TS2swap = DFT2D (ES2swap, y, x);
% Step 7: Backproject ES2 to S0
TS0 = exp(+1j.*kz_p.*z2) .* TS2swap;
ES0 = IDFT2D(TS0,ky,kx,y,x);
% Step 8: Spatial filtering
ES0 = ES0.*ApertureMask;
ES0 = round(ES0,10,'decimals');
TS0 = DFT2D(ES0,y, x);
% Step 9: Propagate ES0 to S1
TS1 = TS0.*exp(-1j.*kz.*z1);
ES1 = IDFT2D(TS1, ky, kx, y, x);
end % enf IF
end % end IF
end % end WHILE
otherwise disp('Wrong scenario')
end % end SWITCH
save('results.mat', 'Efinal', 'ei');
118
==PAGE:123==
C.2
Error metric
function [Efinal, boolEnd, ei] = ConvergenceCheck(Ei, Er, x, y)
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
% Computes the Mean Squared Error of input signals
% Inputs:
% - Ei, Er: field matrices to be compared
% - x, y: spatial variables
% Outputs:
% - Efinal: Reconstructed field
% - boolEnd: Signals end of iterative process
% - ei: Computed MSE at present iteration of the algorithm
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
Threshold = -90;
boolEnd = 0;
Num = sum(sum( abs((abs(Ei)-Er)) .^2 ));
Den = sum(sum(abs(Er).^2));
ei = Num/Den;
if 20*log10(ei) < Threshold
boolEnd = 1;
end
Efinal = Ei;
119
==PAGE:124==
C.3
Plane Wave Expansion
function [T3, k3] = PWS(T1, T2, k1, k2, k0)
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
% Plane wave expansion of spectrum T
% Computes the z-component of PWS T
% Inputs:
% - T1, T2: two orthogonal spectral components
% - k1, k2: angular variables
% - k0: propagation constant
% Outputs:
% - T3, k3: dependent component of the PWS orthogonal to T1, T2
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
k3 = zeros(length(k1), length(k2));
T3 = k3;
for ii = 1:length(k1)
for jj = 1:length(k2)
% Calculation of kz from kx and ky
k3(ii,jj) = sqrt(k0^2-(k1(ii)^2)-(k2(jj)^2));
if (real(k3(ii,jj)) == 0)
% Invert the imaginary part if the real part is zero
k3(ii,jj) = -k3(ii,jj);
end
% Calculation of Tz
T3(ii,jj) = - (k1(ii)*T1(ii,jj)+k2(jj)*T2(ii,jj)) / k3(ii,jj);
end
end
120
==PAGE:125==
C.4
Near-ﬁeld to far-ﬁeld transformation
function [Et, Ep, Eco, Ecx, vthe, vphi] = nf2ff(Ex, Ey, kx, ky, dkx)
s=size(Ex); N=s(1); M=s(2); z0=375;
% definition of a regular kx/ky grid
kx=(-(N-1)/2:(N-1)/2)/(N-1)*2*N*0.0125;
ky = kx;
ky = (-(M-1)/2:(M-1)/2)/(M-1)*2*M*0.0125;
[x_mat,y_mat]=meshgrid(ky,kx);
Fx=fftshift(fft2(ifftshift(Ex)));
Fy=fftshift(fft2(ifftshift(Ey)));
nphi=361; nthe=181;
phi0=0;%90/180*pi;
vphi=pi/180*(0:360/nphi:360-360/nphi);
vthe=pi/180*(0:90/(nthe-1):90);
[the,phi]=meshgrid(vthe,vphi);
xx=sin(the).*cos(phi); % kx = k1
yy=sin(the).*sin(phi); % ky = k2
% interpolation
Fxx=griddata(x_mat,y_mat,Fx,xx,yy,'cubic');
Fyy=griddata(x_mat,y_mat,Fy,xx,yy,'cubic');
Et=Fxx.*cos(phi)+Fyy.*sin(phi);
Ep=(Fyy.*cos(phi)-Fxx.*sin(phi)).*cos(the);
Eco=Et.*cos(phi-phi0) - Ep.*sin(phi-phi0);
Ecx=Et.*sin(phi-phi0) + Ep.*cos(phi-phi0);
C.5
2-dim Fourier Transform
function [T,kx,ky] = DFT2D(E,x,y)
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
% 2-dim discrete Fourier transform of matrix E
% Inputs:
% - E = [MxN] matrix
% - x = [M] vector
% - y = [N] vector
% Outputs:
% - T = [MxN] matrix
% - kx = [M] vector
% - ky = [N] vector
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
dx = x(2)-x(1);
dy = y(2)-y(1);
% Generate kx, ky on positive frequency range
m = 1:length(x);
n = 1:length(y);
kx = (2*pi.*(m-1))/(length(m)*dx);
ky = (2*pi.*(n-1))/(length(n)*dx);
T = fft2(E);
121
==PAGE:126==
for ii = 1:length(kx)
for jj = 1:length(ky)
T(ii,jj) =
T(ii,jj)*(dx*dy)*exp(-1j *(kx(ii)*x(1)+ky(jj)*y(1)) );
end
end
% Shifts Tx for DC-bias on center
T = fftshift(T);
% Generate new kx, ky on positive/negative range
m = -ceil((length(x)-1)/2):floor((length(x)-1)/2);
n = -ceil((length(y)-1)/2):floor((length(y)-1)/2);
kx = (2*pi.*(m-0))/(length(m)*dx);
ky = (2*pi.*(n-0))/(length(n)*dx);
122
==PAGE:127==
C.6
2-dim Inverse Fourier Transform
function [E] = IDFT2D(T,x,y)
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
% 2-dim discrete Fourier transform of matrix E
% Inputs:
%- T = [MxN] matrix
% - x = [M] vector
% - y = [N] vector
% Outputs:
% - E = [MxN] matrix
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
dx = x(2)-x(1);
dy = y(2)-y(1);
% Generate kx, ky on positive frequency range
m = 1:length(x);
n = 1:length(y);
kx = (2*pi.*(m-1))/(length(m)*dx);
ky = (2*pi.*(n-1))/(length(n)*dx);
% Transform T into the positive freq range
T = ifftshift(T);
for ii = 1:length(kx)
for jj = 1:length(ky)
T(ii,jj) =
T(ii,jj)/(dx*dy)*exp(1j *((kx(ii)*x(1))+(ky(jj)*y(1))) );
end
end
E = ifft2(T);
123
==PAGE:128==
C.7
Probe correction
function [ECorr] = ProbeCorrect(E, R, y, x, k)
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
% Probe-corrects input field E using probe receiving characteristics R
% Inputs:
% - E: Electric field to be probe-corrected
% - R: Probe characteristics at working fequency
% - x, y: spatial variables
% - k: propagation constant
% Outputs:
% - Ecorr: Probe-corrected electric field
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
[T, ky, kx] = DFT2D(E, y, x);
R = R./max(max(abs(R)));
TCorr = T./abs(R);
VisibleMask = isfinite(TCorr);
for m = 1:size(VisibleMask, 1)
for n = 1:size(VisibleMask, 2)
if VisibleMask(m, n) == 0
% filters all components outside visible region
TCorr(m, n) = 0;
end
end
end
ECorr = IDFT2D(TCorr, y, x);
124
==PAGE:129==
C.8
Horn AUT model
clear all
close all
clc
%% Given
eps0 = 8.8542e-12;
mu0 = 1.2566e-6;
c = 299792458; % speed of light [m/s]
f = 48e9; %frequency of operation [Hz]
lambda = c/f; % wavelength [m]
k = 2*pi/lambda;
eta = sqrt(mu0/eps0);
I0 = 1;
dl = lambda/100;
%% Horn antenna Field calculations;
% Distances of measurement planes
z1 = 30e-3;
z2 = 36e-3*lambda;
%Oversampling parameter
overSamp = 1;
% Sample period on the aperture
dx = 3e-3;
dy = 3e-3;
%waveguide dimensions
b = 2.4e-3; %[m]
a = 4.8e-3; %[m]
l = 8e-3; %[m]
%aperture dimensions
b1 = 30e-3; %[m] (16 cm)
a1 = 41e-3; %[m] (21.6 cm)
L = 180e-3; %[m] total length of the horn
%calculated dimensions
pe = L - l;
ro_e = sqrt((pe/(b1 - b))^2 + 1/4)*b1;
ro_h = sqrt((pe/(a1 - a))^2 + 1/4)*a1;
ro_2 = sqrt(ro_h^2 - (a1/2)^2);
ro_1 = sqrt(ro_e^2 - (b1/2)^2);
%% Horn model
% Aperture samples
yAp = [-a1/2:dy:0]; yAp = [yAp fliplr(-yAp)];
xAp = [-b1/2:dx:0]; xAp = [xAp fliplr(-xAp)];
% Field in the aperture of the horn (x-polarized)
for ii = 1:length(yAp)
for jj = 1:length(xAp)
%Uniform magnitude/phase
125
==PAGE:130==
%Exu(ii,jj) = I0;
% cosine magnitude /uniform phase
%Exc(ii,jj) = I0 *cos(pi/a1.*yAp(ii));
% cosine magnitude (x and y) / uniform phase
%Ex(ii,jj) = I0 *cos(pi/a1.*yAp(ii))*cos(pi/b1.*xAp(jj));
% --
% uniform amplitude / quadratic phase
%Exc(ii,jj) = I0 *exp(-1j*(k/2)*((yAp(ii).^2./ro_2)+(xAp(jj).^2./ro_1)));
% cosine amplitude / quadratic phase
Exc(ii,jj) = I0 *cos(pi/a1.*yAp(ii)) *exp(-1j*(k/2)*...
((yAp(ii).^2./ro_2)+(xAp(jj).^2./ro_1)));
% cosine amplitude (x and y) / quadratic phase
%Exc(ii,jj) = I0 *cos(pi/a1.*yAp(ii))*cos(pi/b1.*xAp(jj))...
%*exp(-1j*(k/2)*((yAp(ii).^2./ro_2)+(xAp(jj).^2./ro_1)));
end
end
% Values 1 where aperture field != 0, 0 when no aperture field
ApertureMask = ones(length(yAp), length(xAp));
% Size of measurement plane
B = 198e-3;
A = 198e-3;
% Zero-padding outside of the aperture (measurement plane size)
% Extra x points to be added before and after y-vector (2*x_ext new points)
y_ext = floor((A-a1)/(2*dy));
% Extra y points to be added before and after x-vector
x_ext = floor((B-b1)/(2*dx))-1;
% Generate new x and y vectors
y = [flip(yAp(1)-dy: -dy: yAp(length(1))-(y_ext*dy)) yAp yAp...
(length(yAp))+dy: dy: yAp(length(yAp))+(y_ext*dy) ];
x = [flip(xAp(1)-dx: -dx: xAp(length(1))-(x_ext*dx)) xAp xAp...
(length(xAp))+dx: dx: xAp(length(xAp))+(x_ext*dx) ];
Exc = padarray(padarray(Exc', x_ext)', y_ext);
ApertureMask = padarray(padarray(ApertureMask', x_ext)', y_ext);
% Additional zero-padding for increased resolution (optional)
y_ext = 0;
x_ext = 0;
Exc = padarray(padarray(Exc', x_ext)', y_ext);
ApertureMask = padarray(padarray(ApertureMask', x_ext)', y_ext);
%% Region of validity of far-field diagrams
d_x = sqrt((B/2)^2-(b1/2)^2);
d_y = sqrt((A/2)^2-(a1/2)^2);
th_x = atan((B-b1)/(2*d_x));
th_y = atan((A-a1)/(2*d_y));
%% Fourier transform of horn aperture field
[Txc, ky, kx] = DFT2D(Exc, y, x);
% calculation of kz and fz(kx, ky) (plane wave expansion)
[Tzc, kz, mask, kzfl, VisibleMask] = PWS(Txc, Txc.*0, kx, ky, k);
% Propagate the tangential fields to S1 and S2
Txc_S1 = exp(-1j.*kz.*z1) .* Txc;
Txc_S2 = exp(-1j.*kz.*z2) .* Txc;
126
==PAGE:131==
%Inverse transform to obtain space domain fields
Exc_S1 = IDFT2D(Txc_S1, y, x);
Exc_S2 = IDFT2D(Txc_S2, y, x);
C.9
AUT far-ﬁeld model
The Fresnel cosine and sine MATLAB functions were obtained from [?].
clear all;
close all;
%% given
f = 60e9; %frequency of operation [Hz]
c = 299792458; % speed of light [m/s]
lambda = c/f; % wavelength [m]
k = 2*pi/lambda;
E0 = 1;
r = 1000;
eps0 = 8.8542e-12;
mu0 = 1.2566e-6;
eta = sqrt(mu0/eps0);
%% measurements
%waveguide dimensions
b = 2.4e-3; %[m]
a = 4.8e-3; %[m]
l = 8e-3; %[m]
%aperture dimensions
b1 = 30e-3; %[m] (16 cm)
a1 = 41e-3; %[m] (21.6 cm)
L = 180e-3; %[m] total length of the horn
%calculated dimensions
pe = L - l;
ro_e = sqrt((pe/(b1 - b))^2 + 1/4)*b1;
ro_h = sqrt((pe/(a1 - a))^2 + 1/4)*a1;
ro_2 = sqrt(ro_h^2 - (a1/2)^2);
ro_1 = sqrt(ro_e^2 - (b1/2)^2);
%% Calculations
%radiated power
Prad = abs(E0)^2 * a1*b1/(4*eta);
%Prad = 1.0876e-04;
%field pattern
THETA = linspace(0, pi, 181);
PHI = linspace(0, 2*pi, 37);
E_theta = zeros(length(THETA), length(PHI));
E_phi = zeros(length(THETA), length(PHI));
U = zeros(length(THETA), length(PHI));
D = zeros(length(THETA), length(PHI));
for n=1:length(THETA)
for m=1:length(PHI)
t = THETA(n);
127
==PAGE:132==
p = PHI(m);
kx_p = k*sin(t) * cos(p) + pi/a1;
t1_p = sqrt(1/(pi*k*ro_2)) * (-k*a1/2 - kx_p*ro_2);
t2_p = sqrt(1/(pi*k*ro_2)) * (k*a1/2 - kx_p*ro_2);
kx_pp = k*sin(t) * cos(p) - pi/a1;
t1_pp = sqrt(1/(pi*k*ro_2)) * (-k*a1/2 - kx_pp*ro_2);
t2_pp = sqrt(1/(pi*k*ro_2)) * (k*a1/2 - kx_pp*ro_2);
C1 = fresnelC(t2_p) - fresnelC(t1_p);
S1 = fresnelS(t2_p) - fresnelS(t1_p);
eCS1 = exp(1i * (kx_p^2 * ro_2 / (2*k))) * (C1 - 1i*S1);
C2 = fresnelC(t2_pp) - fresnelC(t1_pp);
S2 = fresnelS(t2_pp) - fresnelS(t1_pp);
eCS2 = exp(1i * (kx_pp^2 * ro_2 / (2*k))) * (C2 - 1i*S2);
I1 = 1/2 * sqrt(pi*ro_2/k) * (eCS1 + eCS2);
ky = k*sin(t)*sin(p);
t1 = sqrt(1/(pi*k*ro_1)) * (-k*b1/2 - ky*ro_1);
t2 = sqrt(1/(pi*k*ro_1)) * (k*b1/2 - ky*ro_1);
C3 = fresnelC(t2) - fresnelC(t1);
S3 = fresnelS(t2) - fresnelS(t1);
eCS3 = exp(1i * (ky^2 * ro_1 / (2*k))) * (C3 - 1i*S3);
I2 = sqrt(pi*ro_1/k) * eCS3;
E_theta(n,m) = 1i * k*E0*exp(-1i*k*r)/(4*pi*r) ...
* (sin(p)*(1+cos(t))*I1*I2);
E_phi(n, m) = 1i * k*E0*exp(-1i*k*r)/(4*pi*r) ...
* (cos(p)*(cos(t)+1)*I1*I2);
U(n,m) = r^2/(2*eta) * (abs(E_theta(n,m))^2 + abs(E_phi(n,m))^2);
Uco(n,m) = r^2/(2*eta) * abs(E_theta(n,m))^2;
Ucr(n,m) = r^2/(2*eta) * abs(E_phi(n,m))^2;
D(n,m) = 4*pi*U(n,m)/Prad;
Dco(n,m) = 4*pi*Uco(n,m)/Prad;
Dcr(n,m) = 4*pi*Ucr(n,m)/Prad;
end
end
%% Directivity integration
Ut = zeros(length(PHI), 1);
%integrate over theta
for i=1:length(PHI)
Ut(i) = trapz(THETA, U(:,i).*sin(THETA'));
end
%integrate over phi
Prad_int = trapz(PHI, Ut);
%calculate directivity based on integrated power
D_int = 4*pi*U/Prad_int;
%% plot results
%convert theta to degrees for plotting
THETA_D = rad2deg(THETA);
128
==PAGE:133==
%add negative values of theta to form 360 degree plot
THETA_D = [-fliplr(THETA_D), THETA_D];
%theta with less dense sampling for plotting measured data
THETA_D2 = linspace(-180, 180, 361);
%find index of the phi = 90
p90 = find(PHI == pi);
C.10
Hertzian dipole
function [Ex, Ey, Ez] = HDip(y, x, z, f)
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
% Models the field over surface given by X and Y at distance Z of an
% x-oriented Hertzian dipole at the origin of coordinates at a frequency f
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
%% Given
eps0 = 8.8542e-12;
mu0 = 1.2566e-6;
c = 299792458; % speed of light [m/s]
lambda = c/f; % wavelength [m]
k = 2*pi/lambda;
eta = sqrt(mu0/eps0);
I0 = 1;
dl = lambda/100;
% Distances of measurement planes
z= 8*lambda;
%% E-field of point source
[yy, xx] = meshgrid(y, x);
% Measurement surfaces in Spherical coordinates
r1 = sqrt(xx.^2 + yy.^2 + z.^2);
theta1 = flip(acos(z./(sqrt(xx.^2 + yy.^2 + z.^2))));
phi1 = atan(yy./xx);
E0 = (-1j*k*eta*I0*dl/(4*pi)) .* (exp(-1j*k.*r1)./r1);
Ex = E0.*( (1+((1j*k.*r1).^-1)-((k.*r1).^-2)) - (sin(theta1).^2.* ...
cos(phi1).^2 .* (1+(3*(1j*k.*r1).^-1)-(3*(k.*r1).^-2)) ) );
Ey = -E0.*( (sin(theta1).^2 .* abs(sin(phi1)).*cos(phi1).*...
(1+(3*(1j*k.*r1).^-1)-(3*(k.*r1).^-2)) ) );
Ez = -E0.*( (sin(theta1).*abs(cos(theta1)).*abs(cos(phi1)).*...
(1+(3*(1j*k.*r1).^-1)-(3*(k.*r1).^-2)) ) );
Ex = Ex';
Ey = Ey';
Ez = Ez';
129
