==PAGE:1==
A Typing System for AIF
Set-Based Abstraction
Andrew Habib
Kongens Lyngby 2015
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
Formal methods are of wide use nowadays due to the robustness and strength
of results obtained through them. Communication and cryptographic protocols
are widely and critically used in various forms when interacting and dealing with
software and communication systems. Therefore, veriﬁcation of security proto-
cols is one of the main areas for applying formal techniques to discover errors
and/or prove protocols to be correct. Diﬀerent models have been suggested and
applied to this problem.
Traditional approaches to formal veriﬁcation of security protocols reach a limit
when dealing with complex systems that allow revocation of keys or access
rights for example. This led to a new technique called AIF Set-Based Abstrac-
tion [Möd10] that is capable of verifying such complex systems. However, this
new approach is undecidable and veriﬁcation of a protocol is not guaranteed to
terminate.
The purpose of this masters thesis is to extend the AIF approach wit a type
system to obtain a decidable veriﬁcation problem. We deﬁne our type system
and prove soundness and decidability results of our typed model. Moreover,
we extend the existing AIF translator tool so that it can translate protocol
speciﬁcations under the new typed AIF. Finally, we add an extra feature to the
AIF tool by integrating a ﬁxedpoint module from the Open-Source FixedPoint
Model-Checker (OFMC) [BMV05].
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis is submitted in partial fulﬁllment of the requirements for a M.Sc. in
Engineering, Security and Mobile Computing (NordSecMob Masters Program).
It was prepared at Denmark Technical University Compute Department (DTU
Compute) and it contains work done from February to July 2015. The thesis
has been made solely by the author; most of the text, however, is based on the
research of others and discussions with the supervisor, and we have done our
best to provide references to sources where applicable.
As part of the mobility requirement of the NordSecMob program, I spent my
ﬁrst semester (Fall 2013) at the Norwegian University of Science and Technol-
ogy (NTNU). I studied the rest of my degree at Denmark Technical University
(DTU).
This thesis was supervised by professor Sebastian Mödershiem (DTU) and co-
supervised by professor Peter Herrmann (NTNU).
Lyngby, 16-July-2015
Andrew Habib
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my appreciation and gratitude to my supervisor, professor
Sebastian M. His sound and thoughtful advice along with interesting and mind-
challenging discussions made my masters thesis experience very enjoyable and
helped my develop a mature perspective in research. Working with him was
pleasure and I would do it again.
A special thank you goes to the love my life, Lydia, for her continuous support,
encouragement and endurance of our long-distance relationship. Also, I express
my sincere gratitude to my lovely family and dear friends for the unstoppable
support, unconditional love and their persistent prayers.
Above all, I give all thanks and praise to God for guiding and leading every step
of my life, including my masters degree time and the life yet to come.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background
3
2.1
Protocol Veriﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.1
Standard Model Checking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.2
Over-Approximation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Over-Approximation by Set-Membership . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
AIF
7
3.1
Formal Deﬁnition of AIF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2
Deﬁnition of the Abstraction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2.1
The Abstraction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2.2
Term Implication Rules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2.3
Translation to Abstract Rules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.3
The AIF Language . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4
Typed AIF
13
4.1
Deﬁnition of a Typing System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.2
Deﬁnition of Typed AIF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.3
Intruder Rules
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.3.1
Intruder Composition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.3.2
Intruder Decomposition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
4.4
Soundness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.5
Decidability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5
Implementation
25
5.1
The Type System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.2
Bounded Intruder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.3
Fixedpoint Module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.4
Current Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6
Experimental Results
29
6.1
Results of the Typing System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
7
Conclusion
33
7.1
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
Bibliography
37
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Security protocols are set of steps that describe interaction between two or more
parties to ensure the protection of valuable data in a hostile environment. Pro-
tection of data is multifaceted and spans various aspects such as conﬁdentiality,
authenticity, integrity and others. Because security protocols are ubiquitous:
used everywhere in wireless networks, e-commerce, communication, and others;
ensuring they are well-designed and correctly implemented is very important.
Starting early nineties, veriﬁcation of security protocols has become of increas-
ing importance as history showed that informal arguments of the security of
a protocol speciﬁcation is strongly insuﬃcient. For example, the famous long
thought to be secure Needham-Schroeder Public Key (NSPK) protocol [NS78]
which was proposed in 1978 was discovered to be vulnerable to a man-in-the-
middle attack in 1995 by G. Lowe [Low95].
In fact, verifying security protocols is not easy and indeed notoriously diﬃcult
for various reasons. Usually, security protocols are designed under the strong
assumption that communication takes place in a completely hostile environment
where an adversary has full control over the underlying communication medium.
He can intercept, block, forge, alter or replay messages on their way to the lawful
participants. Moreover, the cryptographic primitives used in security protocols
are subtle and are diﬃcult to implement correctly. Also the fact that security
protocols are executed simultaneously with multiple number of sessions that
involve many players makes it very hard to prove the correctness of the protocols.
==PAGE:12==
2
Introduction
Besides, errors in security protocols cannot be detected by normal "functional"
testing; but rather they are discovered in the presence of an attacker during
actual protocol execution. Finally, the increasing complexity and heterogeneity
of communication systems and web services makes the veriﬁcation of security
protocols more cumbersome and error-prone.
Hence was the need for more formal arguments and techniques to prove the cor-
rectness of security protocols. Over the past 20 years, researchers have focused
on devising techniques and tools for formal veriﬁcation of security protocols.
Theses eﬀorts by the various research communities yielded many breakthroughs
and tangible achievements. [BCM11] provides a survey of some of the state-of-
the-art tools for formally verifying security protocols.
1.1
Motivation
Veriﬁcation of security protocols is an active area of research due to the reasons
mentioned above. Many tools and techniques have proven to be eﬃcient and
correct in diﬀerent real-life scenarios. However, as we discuss in the following
background chapter, there is much room for improvement at various levels;
specially regarding the general problem of undecidability of the security of a
protocol speciﬁcation.
In this work, we explore one of the novel techniques for protocol veriﬁcation:
AIF - Abstraction by Set-Membership [Möd10]. We extend the original AIF
model with a type system. This allows us to reach new decidability and sound-
ness results. We also implement our proposed type system as an extension to
original AIF translator as we explain later. Moreover, we implement a ﬁxed-
point computation module similar to the one in the Open-source Fixed-point
Model Checker for security protocols (OFMC) tool [BMV05] as an add-on ex-
tension so that the AIF tool could be used as a stand-alone veriﬁer; beside being
a translator of abstract model to the syntax of other veriﬁers.
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 2
Background
In this chapter, we brieﬂy introduce the important and relevant parts in the
literature of protocol veriﬁcation. Not only does this motivate our work, but
also it puts our contribution in perspective from other relevant work.
2.1
Protocol Veriﬁcation
The literature of protocol veriﬁcation proposes two main models for verifying
security protocols:
1. The Computational Model
This model is mainly considered by cryptographers and was ﬁrst intro-
duced by Goldwasser, Micali and others early eighties [GM84].
In the
computational model, messages in protocol interactions are bit-strings,
cryptographic primitives are functions from bit-strings to bit-strings and
the attacker is any probabilistic polynomial-time Turing machine. This
model is considered to be closer to actual execution of protocols but au-
tomating veriﬁcation of protocols under this model is quite hard. [Bla08]
discusses some ideas related to proof automation in the computational
model.
==PAGE:14==
4
Background
2. The Symbolic Model
This model is due to Needham and Schroeder in 1978 as well as Dolev and
Yao in 1981 and usually called the Dolev-Yao model [NS78, DY83]. It relies
on the assumption of perfect cryptography where cryptographic primitives
are considered black boxes. Messages are terms over an algebra of symbols
that model the cryptographic primitives. The attacker can indeﬁnitely
compute messages using these primitives and the model permits adding
equations between the primitives. Verifying security protocols under the
symbolic model is more desirable since the abstraction provided by this
model simpliﬁes the veriﬁcation process greatly.
Because the symbolic model is simpler compared to the computational model,
it has been the main focus of research work. In fact, the symbolic model yielded
many successful results in automatic protocol veriﬁcation. This why we focus
our work here on the symbolic model.
The idea of verifying security protocols in the symbolic model is to compute
the set of messages (terms) an attacker may ever know. If a message does not
belong to the set of messages known by the attacker, it is considered to be se-
cret. It is not as easy as it sounds because the adversary can compute messages
unboundedly. In addition, the number of protocol executions (sessions) is inﬁ-
nite. Therefore, the decision problem of whether a message is in the intruder
knowledge or not is in general undecidable. That said, diﬀerent techniques have
been suggested in the literature to tackle this undecidable problem.
2.1.1
Standard Model Checking
Known as ﬁnite-state analysis, model checking in simple terms is: given a model
of a system, automatically and exhaustively check whether this model has some
desired properties (if the model meets some speciﬁcations) [SS98]. Since it is a
"ﬁnite-state" analysis, conventional model checking requires bound on both the
messages size the intruder can compute and the number of sessions. Tools like
FDR and the SATMC backend of AVISPA utilize this approach.
With a bound only on the number of sessions, model checking still works and
the security problem is decidable under reasonable assumptions: [RT01] shows
that protocol insecurity in NP-complete. The main idea used by various tools
is to avoid naive enumeration of the inﬁnite state space and rather use a sym-
bolic constraint-based approach. A novel and successful tool that uses the lazy
intruder model is OFMC [BMV05], which is available as a stand-alone tool and
also as a back-end for AVISPA [ABB+05].
==PAGE:15==
2.1 Protocol Veriﬁcation
5
In general, standard model checking under bounded number of sessions reveals
several attacks on security protocols. However, the absence of attacks does not
necessarily mean the protocol is safe.
2.1.2
Over-Approximation
This technique is used when the veriﬁcation of a security protocol is desired
for unbounded number of sessions.
Over-approximation is very handy when
veriﬁcation (proving the security of a protocol) is preferred over falsiﬁcation
(ﬁnding an attack). However, the security decision problem remains undecidable
in general. Since developing automatic tools that are guaranteed to terminate
for an undecidable problem is not possible, diﬀerent approaches are taken.
• Some tools such as Maude-NPA [EMM09] just allows non termination.
• Other tools relies on user-speciﬁed lemmas to guide the security proof, for
example using the interactive theorem prover Isabelle [Pau94].
• TA4SP [Boi] uses tree-automata and ProVerif [BCAS10] uses Horn clauses
to over-approximate the intruder knowledge but there is no guarantee on
termination.
• A diﬀerent approach proposed by the OFMC Fixedpoint module where
data and control abstractions are used to over-approximate the intruder
knowledge [BMV05]. Moreover, automatic reﬁnement of the abstraction
is done in case of reporting attacks. This method is restricted to protocol
speciﬁcations that do not use negative set conditions.
Though not decidable in general, veriﬁcation for unbounded sessions using
TA4SP, ProVerif or OFMC Fixedpoint could be guaranteed to terminate us-
ing typing or tagging [BP03].
Over-approximations in general do not consider a state transition system, but
rather just the set of state independent derivable facts; for instance: the in-
truder knowledge.
The main advantages of over-approximation models are:
veriﬁcation for unbounded number of sessions and the proof of security of the
over-approximation model guarantees the security of the concrete model. More-
over, since over-approximation abstracts protocols to just set of derivable facts,
the veriﬁcation problem can be encoded into Horn clauses. And hence, general
ﬁrst-order Horn clauses solvers such as SPASS [WDF+09] or Z3 [DMB08] could
be used to solve the veriﬁcation problem.
==PAGE:16==
6
Background
2.2
Over-Approximation by Set-Membership
Over-approximations has two advantages: the ﬁrst one is that the abstractions
yield false positives. This problem is in general solved by either user-assisted
or automatic reﬁnement like the OFMC Fixedpoint [BMV05] discussed above.
The second disadvantage is that such abstraction techniques are not suitable
for the veriﬁcation of complex protocols that involve databases of keys or access
rights where revocation is possible.
Indeed such systems challenge the over-approximation techniques as the set of
derivable true facts does not grow monotonically with the execution of protocols.
For example, in a client-server scenario, the server may revoke a previously
valid key at some agent. Also, access rights for normal systems are granted
and revoked continuously. The notion of revocation is problematic because the
fact of revoking a key for instance, implies that the set of true facts of valid
keys is smaller. This non-monotonic behaviour cannot be modeled in standard
Horn clauses abstraction approaches as deduction is monotonic. In other words,
adding new facts (like key revocation) should never result in fewer true facts.
To solve this problem, a novel technique proposed by Mödersheim in [Möd10]
tackles this issue by a diﬀerent kind of abstraction of fresh data. The method:
AIF Set-Based Abstraction considers a protocol model where participants main-
tain (databases) of fresh data and their corresponding contexts: owners and
status for example. Abstraction of freshly created data is according to their
status and membership in the databases of the diﬀerent participants.
The method follows the usual idea of abstracting the inﬁnite number of fresh
constants created in the concrete model to ﬁnitely many equivalence classes in
the abstract model (under the condition that there is ﬁnitely many participants).
In complex systems with databases, an abstract value - say a key K - may change
its set membership during the protocol execution for instance by being revoked
at some agent. This behaviour is captured by an unusual rule, called term-
implication rule of the form: φ →k →
→k′. This rule indicates that if clauses
in φ holds, then for every context g[·]: g[k] implies g[k′].
This type of rule
is diﬀerent from rewrite rules because g[k] is not replaced by g[k′] but both
g[k] and g[k′] hold. Also it is not similar to algebraic equations like k ≈k′
because g[k′] doesn’t necessarily imply g[k]. The technique shows how this new
term-implication rules could be encoded into standard Horn clauses.
We start by looking into the important details of the AIF Set-Based Abstraction.
This will serve as a stepping-stone in extending the original AIF model with a
type system.
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 3
AIF
In this chapter, we present summary of the original AIF model and its formal
deﬁnition from [Möd10]. We do not claim any contribution in this part; but
rather it serves as the foundation for our modiﬁed AIF.
AIF speciﬁcation of a protocol is a set of state transition rules that describe the
protocol execution steps. A rule consists of a left hand side (LHS) and a right
hand side (RHS). The LHS speciﬁes the preconditions that a state must meet so
that the rule could be applied to a state. Absence of the RHS of a rule indicates
that this rule can be taken at any state because it has no preconditions. The
RHS of a rule describes the eﬀect (change) that result from applying the rule
to a state. The high level form of the AIF transition rules is:
LHS ⇒RHS
where ⇒could take a variant form of =[F]⇒to indicate that the transition rule
creates a new fresh value F. The following formal deﬁnition of AIF gives more
details.
==PAGE:18==
8
AIF
3.1
Formal Deﬁnition of AIF
Definition 3.1 Messages in AIF are terms over a signature Σ ∪A and a
set of variables V where Σ is ﬁnite, V is countable and A is a countable set
of constant symbols. Σ, A and V are non-empty pairwise disjoint. Moreover,
VA ⊂V is a set of variables that can only be substituted by constants from A.
The set TA = A ∪VA is called the set of all abstractable symbols.
Definition 3.2 Σf is a ﬁnite signature of fact (predicate) symbols that is
disjoint from Σ, A and V. A fact is a term that has the form g(t1, . . . , tn) where
g ∈Σf is a fact symbol of arity n and ti are messages.
Definition 3.3 A positive (negative) set condition is of the form t ∈M
(t /∈M) where t ∈TA and M is a set expression: a ground term with no
occurrence of symbols from TA.
Definition 3.4 A state S is a ﬁnite set of facts and positive set conditions.
Definition 3.5 A transition rule r has the form
LF · S+ · S−=[F]⇒RF · RS
where LF and RF are sets of facts, S+ and RS are sets of positive set conditions,
S−is a set of negative set conditions; and F ⊆VA. In addition, a requirement
is enforced by deﬁnition that vars(RF · RS · S−) ⊆F ∪vars(LF · S+) and
vars(S−) ∩F = ∅. Another requirement is that for each t ∈TA that occurs in
S+ or S−it must also occurs in LF; and for for each t ∈TA that occurs in RS
it must also occurs in RF.
The left-hand side of a transition rule describes states to which this rule could
be applied, and the right-hand side of the rule denotes the changes to the state
after applying the transition rule.
Definition 3.6 A transition rule r can be applied to state S to result in
state S′ written as S ⇒r S′ if and only if there exists a grounding substitution
σ (for all variables in r) such that
• (LF · S+)σ ⊆S
• S−σ ∩S = ∅, S′ = (S \ S+σ) ∪RFσ ∪RSσ
• Fσ are fresh constants from A (they do not occur in S or any rule r that
we consider)
==PAGE:19==
3.2 Deﬁnition of the Abstraction
9
Definition 3.7 A state S is reachable using the set of transition rules R if
and only if ∅⇒∗
R S where ∅is the initial state, ⇒R is the union of ⇒r for all
r ∈R; and .∗is the reﬂexive transitive closure.
Now, we can introduce our modiﬁcation on the original AIF speciﬁcation in the
following chapter. For comprehensive details about AIF, we refer the reader to
[Möd10].
3.2
Deﬁnition of the Abstraction
The idea of abstraction by set membership is that fresh data is abstracted
according to its set membership in the used sets. Suppose we have a protocol
speciﬁcation that uses three sets s1, s2 and s3. All elements that are contained
in s1 but not in s2 and s3 could be abstracted by val(1, 0, 0) which represents
the entire equivalence class of those elements.
To capture the non-monotonic behaviour of the set of true facts, the AIF model
introduce the following notion. When the set membership of an element changes
from the abstract value a to a′, then for every derivable fact g[a] also g[a′] is
derivable. This is expressed using the rule: g[a] =⇒g[a′] for every context g[·].
3.2.1
The Abstraction
Take a set of AIF rules that uses the ground terms s1, . . . , sN in set conditions
t ∈si (t /∈si). For a state S, deﬁne the function absS : A →val(BN) such that
absS(c) = val(b1, . . . , bn) where bi is true iﬀ(c ∈si) ∈S. This deﬁnition gives
an equivalence relation (parametrized by S) on A : c ≡S c′ iﬀabsS(c) = absS(c′).
3.2.2
Term Implication Rules
This is the the kind of rule which capture the abstraction of constants that
change their set-membership.
Definition 3.8 A term implication rule has the form
P1 . . . Pn
s →
→t
==PAGE:20==
10
AIF
for facts (predicates) Pi and vars(s) ∪vars(t) ⊆Sn
i=1 vars(Pi).
An implication rule is either a term implication or a Horn clause.
For implication rules, deﬁne a function that, given a set Γ of facts, yields all
derivable facts from Γ by one rule application:
sφ1 . . . φn
φ
{
(Γ) = {φσ | φ1σ ∈Γ ∧· · · ∧φnσ ∈Γ}
sφ1 . . . φn
s →
→t
{
(Γ) = {C[tσ] | C[sσ] ∈Γ ∧φ1σ ∈Γ ∧· · · ∧φnσ ∈Γ}
where C[·] is a context i.e. a "term with a hole". So C[t] means ﬁlling this hole
with the term t. The least ﬁxed-point of a set of implication rules R, denoted
LFP(R) is deﬁned as the smallest (least) set Γ that is closed under JrK for each
r ∈R.
3.2.3
Translation to Abstract Rules
This section briefs on how the model translates standard ’concrete’ transition
rules (written in the AIF language and uses normal ’real’ sets) to implication
rules of the abstract model (which operates on the abstract equivalence classes
of sets).
Definition 3.9 Let the concrete transition rule be
r = LF · S+ · S−=[F]⇒RF · RS
Let TA(r) be the symbols from TA which occur in r. Deﬁne for each t ∈TA and
for each 1 ≤i ≤N:
Li(t) =





1
if t ∈si occurs in S+
0
if t /∈si occurs in S−
Xt,i
otherwise
Ri(t) =





1
if t ∈si occurs in RS
Xt,i
if Li(t) = Xt,i and t /∈F
0
otherwise
Let Xt,i :: B be variables that do not occur in r. Deﬁne:
L(t) = val(L1(t), . . . , LN(t))
R(t) = val(R1(t), . . . , RN(t))
==PAGE:21==
3.3 The AIF Language
11
The abstraction of rule r is:
¯r = LFλ →RFρ · C
for substitutions λ and ρ and term implications C:
• λ = [t →L(t) | t ∈TA(r)]
• ρ = [t →R(t) | t ∈TA(r)]
• C = {tλ →
→tρ | t ∈TA(r) \ F}
Further, the original paper AIF paper shows how the term implication rules
s →
→t can be encoded into Horn clauses. But we opt not to include this part
here. You can check [Möd10] for more details.
3.3
The AIF Language
A protocol speciﬁcation is written in this language before the abstraction could
be created. The AIF language is a variant of the AVISPA Intermediate Format
(AVISPA IF) [ABB+05] with the following modiﬁcations.
AIF allows variables of type untyped. Such variables are used to denote arbitrary
massages. Syntactically, the AIF speciﬁcation language permits these untyped
variables to appear anywhere whether on the LHS or the RHS of any protocol
transition rule. But, they cannot be used in creating fresh constants. In fact,
the original speciﬁcation requires and enforces that fresh variables VA can be
substituted only by constants from the countable set A of fresh constants.
In addition, the AIF language supports enumeration variables which are vari-
ables that range over given sets of constants. For example, one can deﬁne
A, B : {a, b, s, i}
Status : {valid, revoked}
for the set of agents and status of used keys. This declarations means that the
variables A, B and Status could only be instantiated by the set of constants:
{a, b, s, i} and {valid, revoked} respectively. Such variables come handy in many
ways. They could be used to specify sets:
ring(A, Status)
==PAGE:22==
12
AIF
denotes the database (set) of keys that every agent in A maintains for every
corresponding status. This example means that we have 4 ∗2 = 8 sets because
every agent maintains two databases: one for valid keys and one for revoked
keys. Also, enumeration variables could be used with universal quantiﬁcation
in set conditions:
∀A, Status.K /∈ring(B, Status)
which means that K does not occur in any of the sets obtained by expanding
all values of the enumeration variables. Therefore, this set condition expands
to 8 negative set conditions.
Finally, AIF rules could be parametrized over
enumeration variables. For instance, one can write
λA. ⇒iknows(A)
to specify that the intruder knows all agents names. The meaning of λX.r where
X is an enumeration variable and a rule r is that {r[X 7→v] | v ∈V } for V
enumeration values declared for X.
Now, that we have established the necessary background and foundation for our
modiﬁcation, in the following chapter we present our proposed typed AIF.
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 4
Typed AIF
The original AIF model includes an implicit notion of type that is intended for
the set of abstractable symbols TA = A ∪VA of constants and variables. The
speciﬁcation stipulates that variables in VA can only be substituted by constants
from A which are abstracted later.
However, the intruder capabilities given in an AIF speciﬁcation, which is based
on the standard Dolev-Yao attacker model, specify unbounded intruder deduc-
tion rules. For example, an attacker may inﬁnitely concatenate messages from
his knowledge to produce new ones. Now, to bound the intruder knowledge -
which is unbounded due to untyped speciﬁcation in AIF - so as to achieve a
decidable veriﬁcation problem of the security of an AIF speciﬁcation, we need
to modify the AIF speciﬁcation to be able to enforce strong types on messages
and terms that may ever occur in a protocol interaction.
Therefore, we begin this chapter by formally deﬁning a type system that we use
to enforce strong types on AIF speciﬁcation. After that, we discuss how to use
this type system to bound the intruder deduction capabilities which will lead to
a decidable veriﬁcation problem for the security of an AIF protocol speciﬁcation.
==PAGE:24==
14
Typed AIF
4.1
Deﬁnition of a Typing System
To be able to deﬁne a strong type system on all messages and their parts (terms),
we ﬁrst need to deﬁne the subterm relation ⊑.
Definition 4.1 Let TΣ∪A(V) be the set of all possible terms. (⊑, TΣ∪A(V))
is a partial order subterm relation on the set of terms:
For all s, t, u ∈TΣ∪A(V))
• Reﬂexive: t ⊑t
• Transitive: (s ⊑t) ∧(t ⊑u) ⇒s ⊑u
• Anti-symmetric: (s ⊑t) ∧(t ⊑s) ⇒s = t
Moreover, for all function symbols f ∈Σ of arity n, we have ti∈{1,...,n} ⊑
f(t1, . . . , tn).
To enforce strong typing on AIF speciﬁcation, we need to distinguish atomic
types from composed ones.
Atomic types are either atom or untyped while
composed types are obtained by applying function symbols from Σ to terms of
atomic or composed types. Our proposed type system assigns types to all terms
in TΣ∪A(V)) according to the following type function.
Definition 4.2 Let Ψ : TΣ∪A(V) →TΣ∪{atom,untyped} be a total function
that maps all terms in TΣ∪A(V) to types TΣ∪{atom,untyped}. For all abstractable
symbols TA = A ∪VA let Ψ : TA →{atom} and for all variables V let Ψ :
V →{atom, untyped}. Also, for a term t = f(t1, . . . , tn) where f ∈Σn, deﬁne
Ψ(t) = f(Ψ(t1), . . . , Ψ(tn)). We write t : τ to denote that a term t has type τ.
This means that we require all constants and variables in TA to be of type
atom while variables in V could either be of type atom or untyped. And for any
composed term, its type is determined through the types of its subterms. For ex-
ample, if x, y : atom and pair(·, ·) ∈Σ2 then Ψ(pair(x, y)) = pair(atom, atom).
We also deﬁne a subtype relation ≼on the set of possible types in the following
manner.
Definition 4.3 Let TΣ∪{atom,untyped} be the set of all possible types of terms.
(≼, TΣ∪{atom,untyped}) is a partial order subtype relation on the set of types where
≼is the least relation such that
==PAGE:25==
4.2 Deﬁnition of Typed AIF
15
• τ ≼untyped for all τ ∈TΣ∪{atom,untyped}
• For τ1, . . . , τn, τ ′
1, . . . , τ ′
n ∈TΣ∪{atom,untyped} we write
τ1, . . . , τn ≼τ ′
1, . . . , τ ′
n iﬀτi ≼τ ′
i for all i ∈{1, . . . , n}
• For every symbol f ∈Σ of arity n deﬁne
f(τ1, . . . , τn) ≼f(τ ′
1, . . . , τ ′
n) if τ1, . . . , τn ≼τ ′
1, . . . , τ ′
n.
Now, we have established the type system that serves as a ground to introduce
the formal deﬁnition of the typed AIF speciﬁcation.
4.2
Deﬁnition of Typed AIF
A term t ∈TΣ∪A(V) is typed iﬀΨ(t) ∈TΣ∪{atom}. In other words, a term is
typed if it has no subterms (variables) of untyped type. Similarly, a fact g ∈Σn
f
of the form g(t1, . . . , tn) is a typed fact iﬀt1, . . . , tn are all typed terms.
Definition 4.4 A substitution σT is well-typed iﬀ∀x ∈dom(σT ) : Ψ(x) =
Ψ(σT (x)) or Ψ(x) = untyped.
Lemma 4.5 If σT is a well-typed substitution, then Ψ(t) ≽Ψ(tσT ) for all
t ∈TΣ∪A(V).
Proof. By induction on terms.
Additionally, we say that an AIF speciﬁcation is message-bounded if all variables
can be instantiated only with variables of maximum depth.
We now come to the core of the typed AIF speciﬁcation, namely well-typed states
and well-typed transition rules.
Definition 4.6 A state ST (cf. deﬁnition 3.4) is well-typed state if all of its
facts and terms are typed.
Definition 4.7 A transition rule S ⇒rT S′ is well-typed if there exists a
well-typed substitution that satisﬁes deﬁnition 3.6.
Using the set of well-typed transition rules ⇒RT , a well-typed state ST is reach-
able if and only if ∅⇒∗
RTST where ⇒RT is the union of ⇒rT for all rT ∈RT , .∗
is the reﬂexive transitive closure; and ∅is the initial state.
==PAGE:26==
16
Typed AIF
Thus far in our discussion, we have not yet came to the point where we limit
the intruder inﬁnite composition capabilities. If an AIF speciﬁcation makes all
variables untyped (except for VA which must be substituted only by constants
from A as the original AIF speciﬁcation stipulates), then we have no restriction
whatsoever and the typing system we introduced is just an explicit description
of the original AIF. In fact, our model so far is exactly the same as the original
untyped AIF; it is neither a restriction nor an extension in any sense. Therefore,
our proposed typed AIF speciﬁcation still incurs an undecidable veriﬁcation
problem [Möd10].
In the next section we explain how we utilize the aforementioned typed AIF
speciﬁcation to bound the intruder deduction rules.
4.3
Intruder Rules
The original untyped AIF uses an explicit type speciﬁer untyped to denote vari-
ables used in the intruder deduction rules in the standard Dolev-Yao model.
Such untyped variables are utilized to hold arbitrarily complex terms. For ex-
ample, composition and decomposition of arbitrarily terms are given by:
• iknows(M1) · iknows(M2) ⇒iknows(pair(M1, M2))
• iknows(pair(M1, M2)) ⇒iknows(M1) · iknows(M2)
where M1, M2 are untyped variables, pair(·, ·) ∈Σ2 is a two-arity function
symbol and iknows(·) ∈Σ1
f a one-arity fact denoting intruder knowledge of a
speciﬁc message (from now on, we use the fact symbol iknows(·) to refer to the
intruder knowledge).
The problem with untyped composition rules is that they can be inﬁnitely ap-
plied to messages in the current intruder knowledge to produce inﬁnite and arbi-
trarily complex new messages. In other words, the closure of intruder knowledge
under composition is inﬁnite. An attacker who knows - for example - public con-
stant symbols a and b and a fresh value N can indeﬁnitely compose the terms:
pair(a, b)
pair(N, pair(a, b))
pair(N, pair(N, pair(a, b)))
...
==PAGE:27==
4.3 Intruder Rules
17
This results in an inﬁnite set of reachable states (and consequently inﬁnite set
of derivable facts) and hence the undecidability of the security of an AIF speci-
ﬁcation.
4.3.1
Intruder Composition
We begin this section by introducing the notion of term depth.
Definition 4.8 Let t ∈TΣ∪A(V) be some term. Deﬁne term depth of t to
be depth(t) = 1 if t = x or t = c for any variable x or constant c. For any
composite term of the form t = f(t1, . . . , tn) where f ∈Σ is an n-ary function
symbol deﬁne depth(t) = Max {depth(t1), . . . , depth(tn)} + 1
To bound the intruder composition capabilities, we limit the attacker composi-
tion to typed terms of a maximum depth. This maximum depth is the largest
depth of all possible terms in all protocol steps. To construct the well-typed at-
tacker rules, we replace untyped composition rules with a ﬁnite set of well-typed
rules with terms of - at most - the maximum depth.
Informally, we do so by traversing all normal protocol steps (i.e steps that do
not specify the intruder deduction rules) and extract all possible typed terms
that may ever occur in the intruder knowledge.
For each such term, create
a well-typed intruder composition rule that resembles the composition of this
speciﬁc term.
To formulate the procedure of transforming untyped intruder composition rules
to well-typed rules, we deﬁne the set:
Definition 4.9 Let r be a normal transition rule (not intruder deduction
rule). Deﬁne:
P(r) = {s | s ⊑t ∧iknows(t) occurs in r}
the set of all possible terms (message patterns) that may ever occur in the
intruder knowledge in a normal protocol transition rule r.
Moreover, we say that a message m is ill-typed if m /∈P(R) where R is the set
of normal transition rules.
The following procedure utilizes a distinction between two disjoint subsets of
function symbols in Σ where the AIF speciﬁcation allows declaring function
symbols to be either public: ΣP ub or private: ΣP rv where ΣP ub and ΣP rv ⊂Σ.
==PAGE:28==
18
Typed AIF
This distinction is very useful when modelling protocols where a private function
is only accessible to some agent(s). For example, private key of Public-Private
Key Scheme could be speciﬁed as inv(PK) where inv(·) ∈ΣP rv.
The set of well-typed intruder composition rules is constructed by the following
simple algorithm:
Algorithm 1: Construction of bounded intruder composition rules
Data: Protocol Speciﬁcation written in the AIF language and the set of
declared public symbols ΣP ub
Result: Set of well-typed intruder composition rules
begin
for each normal protocol transition rule r do
compute the set P(r) of all possible message patterns;
for each p ∈P(r) do
if p = f(t1, . . . , tn) for f ∈ΣP ub and ti∈{1,...,n} are well-typed
then
add the rule:
iknows(t1) . . . iknows(tn) ⇒iknows(f(t1, ·, tn));
For example, for some protocol speciﬁcation in AIF, let the set of public symbols
be ΣP ub = {pair(·, ·), sign(·, ·)}.
The transition rule:
r = iknows(PK)·PK ∈ring(H) =[NPK]⇒
NPK ∈ring(H) · iknows(sign(inv(PK), pair(H, NPK)))
incurs the following set of message patterns:
P(r) ={PK, sign(inv(PK), pair(H, NPK)), inv(PK), pair(H, NPK)}
If we now apply the above algorithm to this transition rule, it yields the well-
typed composition rules:
• iknows(H) · iknows(NPK) ⇒iknows(pair(H, NPK))
• iknows(inv(PK))·iknows(pair(H, NPK)) ⇒
iknows(sign(inv(PK), pair(H, NPK)))
This restriction on intruder composition capabilities achieves what we call a
message-bounded AIF where all rule variables are restricted to instantiation of
==PAGE:29==
4.3 Intruder Rules
19
a maximum depth. In section 4.4 we show that this bound on substitution is
sound.
4.3.2
Intruder Decomposition
For any intruder decomposition rule that extracts subterm(s) from a message,
we allow it to use untyped variables. This decision does not aﬀect the well-typed
AIF model as in a well-typed state, decomposing typed terms can never result
in untyped terms. Hence, untyped variables could be seen as place holders for
possible typed terms.
In addition, we restrict decomposition rules so that a rule is allowed only to
specify extraction of subterm(s) of depth at most less-by-one than the original
term. In other words, if the term being decomposed has a depth of j, then the
decomposition rule can extract subterm(s) of depth at most j −1. Therefore,
intruder analysis rules take the form:
iknows(f(t1, . . . , tn)) · iknows(s1) · . . . · · · iknows(sn) ⇒iknows(ti∈{1,...,n})
for some n-ary function symbol f ∈Σ.
For example, the rule
iknows(g(x, h(y))) · iknows(x) ⇒iknows(y)
for x, y : untyped and g, h ∈Σ is not allowed according to our restriction.
In fact, this restriction does not aﬀect the expressiveness of the AIF speciﬁcation
language for a large class of protocols. This is true because in most cases, the
Dolev-Yao adversary behaviour could be modeled without the need to use such
unusual form of intruder analysis. Later on, when showing our soundness result,
we will explain the intuition behind this restriction and discuss how it could be
removed.
Now, in the light of this modiﬁcation to the intruder deduction rules, we extend
our deﬁnition in 4.7 of well-typed transition rules to include the well-typed
intruder composition rules.
Definition 4.10 The set of well-typed transition rules RT ′ is the set of well-
typed transition rules RT where untyped intruder composition rules are replaced
with a ﬁnite set of well-typed intruder composition rules (cf. section 4.3.1) and
intruder decomposition rules conform to the restriction in section 4.3.2.
==PAGE:30==
20
Typed AIF
4.4
Soundness
We begin our discussion here by noting that verifying protocol security under
a typed model is not a restriction for a large class of protocols. If there is an
attack in an untyped model, then there is a similar attack in a typed model -
provided that the implementation is reasonable: unambiguous and pairwise dis-
joint formats [MK14]. This result is due to [HLS03] where bounding is justiﬁed
by tagging. In fact, such a restriction without loosing attacks is desirable since
many type-ﬂaw attacks are unrealistic [HLS03].
Moreover, the desirable and crucial property of our proposed type system for
AIF is that the veriﬁcation of the well-typed model with bounded intruder
implies the veriﬁcation of the well-typed model with unbounded intruder. In
other words, if the weakly-typed intruder deduction rules yield an attack, then
so does the well-typed attacker model.
Theorem 4.11 In a typed AIF speciﬁcation, if there is a reachable attack
state using the well-typed rules RT and unbounded intruder rules, then there is
a reachable attack state using the well-typed rules RT ′ with bounded intruder.
Proof.
The idea is that under a typed model, arbitrarily complex terms composed by
an intruder that do not conform to speciﬁc formats do not add to his knowledge
and hence does not increase his power in ﬁnding attacks.
Consider a typed AIF speciﬁcation where the attacker is unbounded.
The intruder indeﬁnitely compose and decompose arbitrary messages from his
knowledge to produce new ones and he can inﬁnitely continue doing so till he
reaches a state S at which there is a derivable attack fact. In such an attack
trace, there are intermediate states where the intruder may have composed ill-
typed messages. Since these malformed messages are rejected by honest agents
- due to typing -, they cannot be used to reach the well-typed attack state. This
means that there must be a well-typed transition rule (or a set of well-typed
transition rules) that take(s) a well-typed state to an attack state; bypassing
any intermediate states with ill-typed messages.
Moreover, inﬁnitely composing and decomposing messages do not add useful
terms to the intruder knowledge in the typed model. In some trace, let the last
term composed by an intruder be ill-typed. Any further composition using this
term will yield an ill-typed message too, which does not help an adversary reach
==PAGE:31==
4.4 Soundness
21
Figure 4.1: Attack trace in a typed model
a well-typed attack state.
Decomposing an ill-typed term can either result in ill-typed terms and/or typed
terms.
If the resultant term is also ill-typed, then it still unuseful.
But, if
the decomposition gives a typed term, then it must have already been in the
attacker knowledge. In fact, this result is due to the restriction we imposed
on the intruder decomposition rules (cf. section 4.3.2). Take for example, the
intruder rules:
• iknows(K) · iknows(h(x)) ⇒iknows(g(k, h(z)))
• iknows(g(M1, h(M2))) · iknows(M1) ⇒iknows(M2)
Where g(·, ·) and h(·) ∈Σ; K is some constant, z is a typed variable and
M1, M2 are untyped variables. Assume that the message g(k, h(z)) is ill-typed
(i.e. never occurs in any of the normal protocol interaction steps). The above
argument would be invalid if we have allowed such decomposition rule where
an intruder can extract a typed term he never knew before (z in our example)
from an ill-typed message: g(k, h(z)). If such a rule was allowed, then one will
not be able to exclude intermediate states with ill-typed messages as indicated
in ﬁgure 4.1 because it would be possible for the intruder to obtain new terms
by decomposing ill-typed messages.
Now, consider a bounded attacker under a typed AIF model.
By bounding the intruder composition to typed terms of maximum depth, the
attacker cannot reach any of the ill-typed states of the unbounded intruder
discussed above.
However, any well-typed reachable state in the unbounded
attacker model is also reachable under the bounded attacker. This is because
we showed that well-typed states in the unbounded model are reachable through
well-typed transition rules and ill-typed states could be skipped without loosing
useful knowledge. So the bounded intruder can reach the same set of well-typed
states that are reachable by an unbounded adversary.
==PAGE:32==
22
Typed AIF
Therefore, in the typed AIF speciﬁcation, an attack state that is reachable under
unbounded intruder is also also reachable under bounded intruder rules.
4.5
Decidability
The decision problem of the security of protocols is undecidable in general
[DLMS99, EG83]. There are three diﬀerent sources for the undecidability of
protocol veriﬁcation: unbounded intruder messages, number of sessions (execu-
tions) and fresh values (constants). In over-approximation techniques like the
AIF set-based abstraction, there is no notion of sessions. This is considered
an advantage of over-approximation methods over conventional model check-
ing which requires bounded number of sessions.
However, in our AIF over-
approximation, transition rules of honest agents interactions which create fresh
constants - excluding attacker analysis rules - can be applied inﬁnitely by honest
participants. This gives a similar notion of unbounded number of sessions in
conventional model checking.
Consider the original untyped AIF. Since the speciﬁcation assumes the un-
bounded attacker of the Dolev-Yao adversary model, the security of an AIF
speciﬁcation is undecidable, even when no fresh values are used.
For exam-
ple, the attacker can inﬁnitely concatenate messages from his knowledge and
produce new ones. [EG83] shows this undecidability result by reduction from
the well-known undecidable Post Correspondence Problem (PCP) [EG83]. This
makes both the concrete and abstract untyped AIF models undecidable as al-
ready noted in [Möd10].
Now, consider a well-typed AIF speciﬁcation (cf. section 4.2) which limits the
intruder deduction capabilities as described in section 4.3 to well-typed terms
of maximum depth. In the concrete model, such restriction is not suﬃcient to
yield a decidable veriﬁcation problem due to the unbounded use of fresh con-
stants. [Möd10] proves the undecidability of the concrete model by showing that
Turing machines can be encoded into depth-bounded AIF. Since reachability of
states for Turing machines is undecidable, the reachability of attack state is also
undecidable in the bounded concrete model.
Before we discuss our decidability result for the bounded abstract AIF model,
we need to deﬁne an abstract state. In the original AIF model, the notion of
abstract state is not deﬁned but rather the set of derivable facts from abstract
states is over-approximated using Horn clauses.
Definition 4.12 An abstract state abs(S) of a state S is the normal state S
==PAGE:33==
4.5 Decidability
23
(cf. deﬁnition 4.6) where all constants values c are replaced with their abstract
counterparts absS(c) using the abstraction function absS : A →val(BN) (cf.
section 3.2.1). This deﬁnition induces an equivalence class on the set of states
where S1 ≡S2 if abs(S1) = abs(S2) and we denote the equivalence class of a
state S by [S]≡.
We can say that [S]≡⇒Abs
r
[S′]≡if S ⇒r S′ where ⇒Abs
r
uses the grounding
substitution as speciﬁed in deﬁnition 3.6 but constants in A are replaced with
their abstractions.
We now show our decidability result for the well-typed abstracted AIF in the
following theorem.
Theorem 4.13 Let −→
S = {S | ∅⇒∗
RT ′S} be the set of reachable states under
message-bounded AIF in the concrete model.
Then in the abstract message-
bounded AIF model, the set −→
SAbs = {abs(S) | S ∈−→
S } of reachable abstract
states is ﬁnite.
Proof.
Recall that messages in AIF are terms over the the signature Σ ∪A and a set of
variables V (cf deﬁnition 3.1). The original speciﬁcation stipulates that the set
of variables VA ⊂V can only be instantiated by constants from the countable
set A of constant "abstractable" symbols.
The ﬁrst thing to note is that constant symbols of A are abstracted according to
their respective set-membership in the used sets in an AIF speciﬁcation which
yields a set of equivalence classes of abstract symbols (cf. section 3.2.1). Since
the number of sets used is ﬁnite - say N -, the number of corresponding equiva-
lence classes is also ﬁnite: 2N. This means that the abstraction eliminates the
inﬁnite fresh constants from an AIF protocol speciﬁcation by mapping the inﬁ-
nite set of constant symbols in the concrete model to ﬁnitely many equivalence
classes in the abstract model. Indeed this means that in the abstract model,
variables in VA are substituted by ﬁnitely many constants.
The second remark is that in a message bounded AIF speciﬁcation, both in
the concrete and abstract models, intruder deduction rules are restricted to
terms of maximum depth (cf. section 4.3.1). This means that rule variables
V are substituted with terms of maximum depth. In other words, the depth
restriction of terms guarantees that the closure of intruder knowledge under
protocol independent intruder deduction rules is ﬁnite.
==PAGE:34==
24
Typed AIF
So in a sense, the abstracted message-bounded AIF model restricts all variables
to instantiation of given depth (whether variables of VA or the rest of rule
variables V). This means that we have ﬁnite number of derivable terms which
is another way of saying that we have ﬁnitely many reachable abstract states
abs(S). It is important here to recall that in the AIF speciﬁcation, a state (cf.
deﬁnition 3.4) is a set of facts. In fact, our theorem here states that the set of
derivable facts is ﬁnite under message-bounded AIF abstraction.)
Worth mentioning is that if we restrict the set of fresh constants to be ﬁnite,
we can reach a similar decidability result in the concrete message-bounded AIF
model as well.
Now, having presented our typing system for the AIF protocol veriﬁcation by
abstraction, we present the implementation of this new typing system for AIF.
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 5
Implementation
The original contribution of the AIF by Mödersheim was accompanied by an
implementation of a translator tool. This translator accepts a protocol speciﬁ-
cation written in a variant of AVISPA IF and translates it into set of ﬁrst-order
Horn clauses as described in chapter 3. The tool supports translation to the
syntax of the automatic theorem prover SPASS [WDF+09] and the automatic
cryptographic protocol veriﬁer ProVerif [BCAS10].
An important decision that guided our entire implementation steps was to pre-
serve the original AIF translator as is. This meant that we keep all features of
the original tool untouched. So one should be able to user the translator with
original untyped AIF speciﬁcations.
5.1
The Type System
Recall that our proposed type system for AIF introduced in chapter 4 dis-
tinguishes between variables of two types only: atom and untyped. Though
untyped variables could be used in any rule variables as discussed above, their
main purpose is to specify the intruder deduction rules. So we can safely assume
that untyped variables appear only in the intruder analysis rules.
==PAGE:36==
26
Implementation
To declare all other variables to be of atom type, we use a new unary fact symbol:
atom(·) (it should not occur in any given protocol speciﬁcation). This predicate
symbol is applied to all variables in all speciﬁcation rules, including the variables
of fresh data VA. We do this in a transparent way: the user speciﬁcation written
in AIF language is the same but before creating the abstract model, if the user
has speciﬁed that he wants his speciﬁcation to be typed, then we insert the
atom predicate for every variable used on the LHS of every transition rule. We
also insert the term atom(c) on the RHS of every rule that creates a new fresh
value c.
We remind the reader that the AIF transition rule has the form:
LF · S+ · S−=[F]⇒RF · RS
where LF and RF are sets of facts, S+ and RS are sets of positive set conditions,
S−is a set of negative set conditions; and F ⊆VA.
We use the following algorithm to enforce the typing system:
Algorithm 2: Construction of typed AIF speciﬁcation
Data: Protocol Speciﬁcation written in the AIF language
Result: Typed AIF protocol speciﬁcation
begin
for each declared enumeration variable V do
Add the rule: λV. ⇒atom(V );
for each normal transition rule (not intruder deduction rules) do
for each used variable V and fresh value variable F do
Add atom(V ) to LF;
Add atom(F) to RF;
5.2
Bounded Intruder
If the user has chosen to translate his protocol speciﬁcation in the typed AIF
model, along with rule typing explained above, we also bound the adversary
capabilities as discussed in section 4.3.
For composition rules, we replace all untyped intruder composition rules with
bounded rules using algorithm 1.
After that, we type those rules using an
algorithm similar to 2 that operates on intruder rules - not normal transition
rules.
==PAGE:37==
5.3 Fixedpoint Module
27
For intruder decomposition rules, these should be the only rules that are per-
mitted to use untyped variables. Moreover, we ensure that decomposition is
restricted to terms of depth at most 1-less than the original term being decom-
posed as discussed in section 4.3.2. We carry out this validation through the
following algorithm:
Algorithm 3: Validation of intruder decomposition rules for typed AIF
Data: Protocol Speciﬁcation written in the AIF language
begin
for each rule that uses untyped variable(s) Y do
if terms(RF) ⊑terms(LF) and
Maxdepth(terms(LF)) - Maxdepth(terms(RH)) = 1 then
Continue;
else
Error: Intruder decomposition cannot be used in typed AIF;
5.3
Fixedpoint Module
We decided to extend the features of the AIF tool so that it is not just a
translator to diﬀerent veriﬁers syntax, but also it could be used for veriﬁcation
of the abstract model on its own. To do so, we adopt the ﬁxedpoint computation
module from the OFMC tool [BMV05] to our AIF tool. This module works in
a similar manner to tools like ProVerif and TA4SP. It computes the smallest
set of facts which is closed under each transition rule. Worth mentioning is
that since we are verifying protocols in an over-approximated abstract model,
reported attacks may be false positives. However, when no attacks are found, we
can safely say that the concrete protocol is secure because we veriﬁed a sound
over-approximation of the actual speciﬁcation.
We do not claim major contribution in this part. Our contribution only inte-
grates the OFMC ﬁxedpoint module into the AIF tool.
5.4
Current Limitations
The original AIF translator tool is very versatile and allows users to specify
protocols with great ﬂexibility. The speciﬁcation language has no special con-
structs and users deﬁne their own enumeration variables, fresh values variables,
==PAGE:38==
28
Implementation
sets, public and private function; as well as fact (predicate) symbols. Even the
predicate symbols iknows(·) and attack do not have special predeﬁned meanings
in AIF. However, the new extensions to the AIF tool assumes the following:
Automatic type enforcement:
• The fact symbol iknows(·) denotes intruder knowledge.
• untyped variables should be used only in intruder deduction rules. Normal
protocol transition rules should not contain variables of type untyped.
Fixedpoint computation:
• The function symbol pair(·, ·) denotes composition by concatenation. Any
message concatenation operation should use pair(·, ·).
It is to be noted that these limitations are due to the scope and time limit of the
project. They do not have any impact on the soundness of the typed model. In
fact, one can opt to write the typed speciﬁcation manually following the same
ideas from our algorithms. We plan to remove these implementation restrictions
in future work.
We implemented the mentioned algorithms on top of the original AIF translator.
The AIF tool now can:
• Generate Horn clauses representation of the abstract model both untyped
and typed in the syntax of SPASS and ProVerif.
• Use a built-in ﬁxedpoint computation module to verify the abstracted
protocol model both typed and untyped.
In the next section we discuss how did we experiment the diﬀerent options of
the new AIF tool on some examples.
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 6
Experimental Results
We tested our modiﬁcations on the AIF tool using the set of protocol examples
originally provided with the translator [Möd10]. We wrote manual speciﬁcation
for the typed model of some protocols where applicable: see section 5.4.
Our main contribution is the typing system for AIF. therefore, the major part
of our experiments was focused on testing untyped versus typed protocol speci-
ﬁcation. It is unfortunate that we could not dedicate much time to experiments
on the new ﬁxedpoint module. However, this is planned and already in progress
for future work.
6.1
Results of the Typing System
During our experiments, we decided to focus on the automatic protocol checker
ProVerif since our initial trials with SPASS showed no major performance dif-
ference between typed and untyped model.
Checking typed models against untyped models of the protocol examples from
the original library provided with the AIF tool yielded the following results:
==PAGE:40==
30
Experimental Results
Protocol
Agents
ProVerif
ProVerif
Result
(untyped)
(typed)
Key-server
a, i, s
0 s
0 s
Veriﬁed
s, b, c, i, s
0 s
0 s
Veriﬁed
TLS (simpliﬁed)
a, i
7 s
8 s
Veriﬁed
a, b, i
0 s
0 s
Veriﬁed
NSPK
a, b, i
0 s
0 s
Attack
NSL
a, b, i
0 s
0 s
Veriﬁed
Though these results are not very interesting since the untyped model already
terminates in no time, they give us an idea about the correctness of our typed
model
However, we obtained more interesting results from two other protocols:
• A system for secure vehicle communication from SEVECOM project [LBH+06].
SEVECOM is a system designed for securing communication with cars for the
purposes of conﬁdentiality, authentication and accountability. Cars are equipped
with tamper-proof hardware security module (HSM) to store necessary keys re-
quired for encryption, decryption and veriﬁcation. There is a certiﬁcate author-
ity (CA) with which HSM keys are registered.
The speciﬁcation of part of SEVECOM is provided with AIF library and it
is explained in details in [MM11].
We picked the trivial scenario where the
system uses two private keys of the HSM and both are leaked to the attacker.
The original untyped model reports the trivial attack only on SPASS, whereas
ProVerif times out. Yet, under the typed model, ProVerif was able to ﬁnd the
attack in 3 minutes for 1 HSM. The veriﬁcation time increases very much with
2 HSM. This is understood because for a model with N sets, the number of
equivalence classes in the abstract model is 2N.
• The contract signing protocol based on Fair Exchange: Asokan Shoup
Waidner (ASW) [ASW00].
This protocol is designed for the purpose of fairly signing a contract between
two parties: either they both get a valid signed contract, or both don not get it.
To achieve this goal, a trusted third party (TTP) must be involved to resolve
disputes on contracts. TTP keeps track of which contracts are valid and which
are invalid by maintaining a database of contracts.
==PAGE:41==
6.1 Results of the Typing System
31
We experiment our typing system on the speciﬁcation of the ASW protocol
provided in the library of the original AIF tool. Unfortunately, the typed model
times out on both ProVerif and SPASS though the untyped model terminates on
both tools. This is currently under investigation. This seems to be attributed
to the speciﬁcation of the ASW protocol as it uses untyped variables in normal
state transition rules (see the speciﬁcation for more details).
==PAGE:42==
32
Experimental Results
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 7
Conclusion
Automatic veriﬁcation of security protocols is an active area of research. There
are two main models for verifying security protocols: the computational model
[GM84] and the symbolic model [NS78, DY83]. Protocol veriﬁcation by over-
approximation and abstraction to set of Horn clauses is a very interesting and
promising technique for proving security of protocols in the symbolic model.
The main advantages of over-approximation techniques are protocol veriﬁcation
with unbounded number of sessions; on the contrary to classic model checking
which requires bounded number of sessions and bounded intruder. Also, proving
an over-approximation is attack-free implies the safety of the concrete protocol.
The novel AIF set-based abstraction technique extends the scope of veriﬁcation
by traditional over-approximation to complex protocols and web services that
maintain databases of keys or status of diﬀerent subjects (access rights for ex-
ample). Traditional approaches cannot handle such systems due to the mono-
tonicity of deduction in contrast with non-monotonicity of facts about these
complex systems because revocation of keys - for example - means that the set
of true facts about the system is smaller. AIF abstractions by set membership
handle this situation in a smart by updating the abstraction, when necessary,
through a new type of rule called term implication rule. The term implication
rule could be encoded in Horn clauses representation. This method was used to
verify diﬀerent protocols and it has proven successful [Möd10].
==PAGE:44==
34
Conclusion
Since protocol veriﬁcation is undecidable in general, the AIF abstraction is no
exception. Termination is not guaranteed and experiments already shows this.
That was the motivation behind our work. We extended the AIF abstraction
by set membership with a type system. We use this type system to bound the
intruder capabilities so that an attacker can formulate messages of a maximum
size. Our theoretical contribution is the typing system for AIF. We also proved
the soundness and decidability of the new typed abstracted AIF model. We
showed how we use this type system to bound the intruder deduction rules
of the Dolev-Yao adversary model.
On the practical side, we extended the
AIF translator tool so that it can translate an untyped AIF speciﬁcation to
typed one before encoding the abstract model into Horn clauses. This gives
us a message-bounded over-approximated representation of the protocol. We
can use tools like SPASS and ProVerif to check the resultant abstract protocol
model. Comparing the veriﬁcation time of typed AIF models versus the untyped
one for some example shows promising results. One of the modeled SEVECOM
scenarios that timeout in the untyped model did terminate in few minutes using
our typed model.
Additionally, we extended the capabilities of the AIF tool so that it becomes a
stand-alone veriﬁer; beside being a translator to diﬀerent back-end tools. We
borrowed the novel ﬁxedpoint computation module from the OFMC tool. Our
contribution is integrating this module into the AIF tool so that users can -
optionally - verify their protocols without the need to use other external tools.
7.1
Future Work
Having obtained promising results, we believe there are still many directions to
improve and extend our work. First, the restriction we enforced on intruder
decomposition as discussed in section 4.3.2 could be removed by extending the
sett of message patterns an intruder may ever know in a speciﬁc way. Second,
we plan to remove the implementation restrictions presented in section 5.4.
We foresee doing so in diﬀerent way. For instance, one can enforce distinction
between intruder deduction rules and normal protocol rules by using diﬀerent
speciﬁers for section names in the AIF speciﬁcation ﬁles. Also, enriching the
syntax of the AIF language by allowing explicit types is very appealing, specially
for the purpose of verifying well-typed protocols models. Another important
expansion to our work is to add more protocol examples to the library of AIF.
This will give us more insights on how rigorous our results is both in typed and
untyped models.
Finally, an important direction for us is to ensure that the integration of the
==PAGE:45==
7.1 Future Work
35
ﬁxedpoint module is independent from our implementation speciﬁc decisions.
For example, it currently depends on the pair(·, ·) function symbol to preform
composition and decomposition of terms. This makes it unable to verify proto-
cols that uses diﬀerent symbols for concatenation of messages. Many of these
diﬀerent direction suggest that it might be handy to incorporate and use a higher
level languages for protocol speciﬁcation - since AIF is a bit low-level. We think
that it is not very straightforward for normal user to be able to write their own
speciﬁcation in the AIF language.
==PAGE:46==
36
Conclusion
==PAGE:47==
Bibliography
[ABB+05] Alessandro Armando, David Basin, Yohan Boichut, Yannick Cheva-
lier, Luca Compagna, Jorge Cuéllar, P Hankes Drielsma, Pierre-
Cyrille Héam, Olga Kouchnarenko, Jacopo Mantovani, et al. The
avispa tool for the automated validation of internet security proto-
cols and applications. In Computer Aided Veriﬁcation, pages 281–
285. Springer, 2005.
[ASW00]
Nadarajah Asokan, Victor Shoup, and Michael Waidner. Optimistic
fair exchange of digital signatures. Selected Areas in Communica-
tions, IEEE Journal on, 18(4):593–610, 2000.
[BCAS10]
Bruno Blanchet, V Cheval, X Allamigeon, and B Smyth. Proverif:
Cryptographic protocol veriﬁer in the formal model, 2010.
[BCM11]
David Basin, Cas Cremers, and Catherine Meadows. Model checking
security protocols. Handbook of Model Checking, 2011.
[Bla08]
Bruno Blanchet. A computationally sound mechanized prover for
security protocols. Dependable and Secure Computing, IEEE Trans-
actions on, 5(4):193–207, 2008.
[BMV05]
David Basin, Sebastian Mödersheim, and Luca Vigano. Ofmc: A
symbolic model checker for security protocols. International Journal
of Information Security, 4(3):181–208, 2005.
[Boi]
Y Boichut. Tree automata for security protocols (ta4sp) tool.
[BP03]
Bruno Blanchet and Andreas Podelski. Veriﬁcation of cryptographic
protocols: Tagging enforces termination. In Foundations of Software
Science and Computation Structures, pages 136–152. Springer, 2003.
==PAGE:48==
38
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[DLMS99] Nancy A Durgin, Patrick D Lincoln, John C Mitchell, and Andre
Scedrov. Undecidability of bounded security protocols. In In Work-
shop on Formal Methods and Security Protocols (FMSP???
99,
1999.
[DMB08]
Leonardo De Moura and Nikolaj Bjørner. Z3: An eﬃcient smt solver.
In Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Sys-
tems, pages 337–340. Springer, 2008.
[DY83]
Danny Dolev and Andrew C Yao. On the security of public key
protocols. Information Theory, IEEE Transactions on, 29(2):198–
208, 1983.
[EG83]
Shimon Even and Oded Goldreich. On the security of multi-party
ping-pong protocols. In Foundations of Computer Science, 1983.,
24th Annual Symposium on, pages 34–39. IEEE, 1983.
[EMM09]
Santiago Escobar, Catherine Meadows, and José Meseguer. Maude-
npa: Cryptographic protocol analysis modulo equational proper-
ties. In Foundations of Security Analysis and Design V, pages 1–50.
Springer, 2009.
[GM84]
ShaﬁGoldwasser and Silvio Micali. Probabilistic encryption. Jour-
nal of computer and system sciences, 28(2):270–299, 1984.
[HLS03]
James Heather, Gavin Lowe, and Steve Schneider. How to prevent
type ﬂaw attacks on security protocols. Journal of Computer Secu-
rity, 11(2):217–244, 2003.
[LBH+06]
Tim Leinmüller, Levente Buttyan, Jean-Pierre Hubaux, Frank
Kargl, Rainer Kroh, Panagiotis Papadimitratos, Maxim Raya, and
Elmar Schoch. Sevecom-secure vehicle communication. In IST Mo-
bile and Wireless Communication Summit, number LCA-POSTER-
2008-005, 2006.
[Low95]
Gavin Lowe. An attack on the needham-schroeder public-key au-
thentication protocol. Inf. Process. Lett., 56(3):131–133, November
1995.
[MK14]
Sebastian Modersheim and Georgios Katsoris. A sound abstraction
of the parsing problem. In Computer Security Foundations Sympo-
sium (CSF), 2014 IEEE 27th, pages 259–273. IEEE, 2014.
[MM11]
Sebastian Mödersheim and Paolo Modesti. Verifying sevecom us-
ing set-based abstraction. In Wireless Communications and Mobile
Computing Conference (IWCMC), 2011 7th International, pages
1164–1169. IEEE, 2011.
==PAGE:49==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
39
[Möd10]
Sebastian Alexander Mödersheim. Abstraction by set-membership:
verifying security protocols and web services with databases.
In
Proceedings of the 17th ACM conference on Computer and commu-
nications security, pages 351–360. ACM, 2010.
[NS78]
Roger M. Needham and Michael D. Schroeder. Using encryption
for authentication in large networks of computers. Commun. ACM,
21(12):993–999, December 1978.
[Pau94]
Lawrence C Paulson. Isabelle: A generic theorem prover, volume
828. Springer Science & Business Media, 1994.
[RT01]
Michaël Rusinowitch and Mathieu Turuani. Protocol insecurity with
ﬁnite number of sessions is np-complete. 2001.
[SS98]
Vitaly Shmatikov and Ulrich Stern. Eﬃcient ﬁnite-state analysis for
large security protocols. In Computer Security Foundations Work-
shop, 1998. Proceedings. 11th IEEE, pages 106–115. IEEE, 1998.
[WDF+09] Christoph Weidenbach, Dilyana Dimova, Arnaud Fietzke, Rohit Ku-
mar, Martin Suda, and Patrick Wischnewski. Spass version 3.5. In
Automated Deduction–CADE-22, pages 140–145. Springer, 2009.
