==PAGE:1==
Dynamics of Pedestrians Flows
Alexandra Rohde O’Sullivan Freltoft
Kongens Lyngby 2015
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The goal of the thesis work is to generate a better understanding of pedestrian
behavior by means of experiments and numerical simulations. Of special interest
is herd behavior that previously has been observed in pedestrian crowds. Herd
behavior is deﬁned as the phenomenon where individuals act collectively without
centralized direction. A real life experiment is performed where students walk
past an obstacle in a corridor. The aim is to measure to what extent pedestrians
follow each other. The experiment is ﬁlmed and the ﬂux on both sides of the
obstacle is measured for diﬀerent positions of the obstacle. The experimental
results are compared with simulations build on an agent based pedestrian model.
The empirically identiﬁed behavior is captured by introducing a negative social
eﬀect in the model, causing the pedestrians to spread out. Through simulations
it is discovered that there are two optimal social stages in pedestrian ﬂows:
(I) Where the pedestrians are repelled by each other, so that they utilize the
available space to ﬁnd a fast route past the obstacle.
(II) Where the pedestrians follow each other to an extent, where they use each
others behavior to ﬁnd the shortest path, but are still able to adapt in
case the scenery around them changes.
The pedestrians in the experiment are found to walk in accordance with so-
cial stage (I). A new model that enables switching between the two optimal
social stages is developed. The new switch-model adapts the social parameter
according to the overall behavioral trend in the ﬂow.
Using the original model, hysteresis in pedestrian behavior is observed to emerge
for ﬂows with high social cohesion. The hysteresis results are reproduced in
==PAGE:4==
ii
simulations based on the switch-model by introducing an initial ﬂow to trigger
herd behavior.
The time it takes before the pedestrians stop following the
initiated tendency is used as a measure of the strength of the herd behavior.
Finally a new experiment set-up is proposed that can quantify herding eﬀects
in pedestrian ﬂows. This new set-up is based on a series of independent one-
minute experiments initiated by a group of actors. These experiments may be
repeated over and over in diﬀerent surroundings to gain statistical signiﬁcance.
The new set-up is more practical than the original one where an experiment
takes 40 minutes and thus is vulnerable to disturbance and ideally requires a
large amount of participants.
The new adaptive switch-model represents a pedestrian behavior closer to real-
ity and allows for comparison with short robust experiments quantifying herd
behavior in pedestrian ﬂows.
==PAGE:5==
Resumé (danish)
Målet med denne afhandling er at opnå en bedre forståelse af fordgængeradfærd
ved hjælp af forsøg og numeriske simuleringer. Specielt ﬂokadfærd i fodgænger-
strømninger er af særlig interesse.
I forbindelse med afhandlingen er et fodgængerforsøg blevet udført. Fodgæn-
gerne passerer en forhindring opstillet i en gang, og hensigten er at registrere
i hvor høj grad fodgængere følger efter hinanden. Forsøget er ﬁlmet og fod-
gængerﬂuxen på hver side af forhindringen er målt for forskellige positioner af
forhindringen. Forsøgsresultaterne sammenlignes med simuleringer, der bygger
på en agentbaseret fodgængermodel. Den empirisk identiﬁcerede adfærd kan in-
tegreres i modellen ved at indføre negativ social adfærd, hvilket resulterer i at
fodgængerne breder sig ud og udnytter hele områdets kapacitet. Simuleringerne
afslører, at der er to optimale sociale stadier for fodgængeradfærd:
(I) Der hvor fodgængerne behersket frastøder hinanden.Dette får fodgængerne
til at brede sig ud og udnytte hele gangens kapacitet og således ﬁnder en
hurtig vej rundt om forhindringen.
(II) Der hvor fodgængerne følger efter hinanden i en sådan grad, at de kan
bruge de foregående fodgængeres adfærd til at ﬁnde den korteste vej, men
samtidig er omstillingsparate nok til at tilpasse sig i fald omgivelserne
ændres.
Fodgængerne i eksperimentet bevæger sig i henhold til social stadie (I). En ny
model, der gør det muligt for fodgængerne at skifte mellem de to stadier, er
==PAGE:6==
iv
udviklet. Denne nye adaptive switch-model tilpasser den sociale parameter ud
fra den generelle adfærdstendens blandt fodgængerne.
Ved brug af den oprindelige model er der observeret hysterese i simuleringer
af fodgængeradfærd, hvor fodgængerne har en stærk social sammenhængskraft.
Dette resultat er reproduceret i en række korte uafhængige simuleringer baseret
på den nye adaptive switch-model. Hver simulering påbegyndes med en kunstig
fodgængerstrøm, der skal foranledige ﬂokmentalitet hos de efterfølgende fod-
gængere. Den tid, det tager før ﬂokeﬀekten bliver brudt, bruges som et mål for
hvor stærk ﬂokadfærden er.
Til slut foreslås en ny type fodgængereksperimenter. Disse er baseret på en række
uafhængige et-minuts-forsøg, som sættes igang af en gruppe skuespillere. Forsø-
gene kan gentages i forskellige omgivelser for at generere statistisk signiﬁkans.
Den nye forsøgstype er mere praktisk end den oprindelige. I den oprindelige for-
søgstype tager hvert eksperiment tager 40 minutter, or er således sårbart over
for forstyrrelser samt ideelt kræver en stor mængde deltagere.
Den nye adaptive switch-model repræsenterer fodgængeradfærd, der er tættere
på virkeligheden, og som gør det muligt at veriﬁcere modellen med korte robuste
forsøg, og dermed kvantiﬁcere ﬂokmentaliteten hos fodgængere.
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fulﬁlment of the requirements for
acquiring an M.Sc. in Engineering. The thesis has been completed in the period
between September 1st 2014 and February 1st 2015 and accounts for 30 ECTS
points. Associate Professor Poul G. Hjorth and Associate Professor Jens Starke
both from DTU Compute have been supervising the thesis work.
The thesis deals with modelling the dynamics of herd behavior in pedestrian
ﬂows.
The thesis presents results from simulations based on an existing model and
from the performance of a real life pedestrian experiment. Finally a new model
and simulations based on it is presented. The work is describe to a level of
detail, making it possible to recreate both the simulation and the experimental
results.
The report reﬂects the chronological proces of the thesis work and may be read
from one end to the other. Figures, tables and equations are enumerated using
the notation "Figure X.Y", which corresponds to the Yth ﬁgure in Chapter X.
Lyngby, 01-February-2015
Alexandra Rohde O’Sullivan Freltoft
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my gratitude to my supervisors Associate Professor Poul
G. Hjorth and Associate Professor Jens Starke for help and guidance whenever
needed.
You have broadened my horizon, but also helped me focus.
Your
patience, inspiration and support have been essential in this period.
Also a special thanks to Professor Vincent Hendricks and Henrik Boensvang
for taking time to meet with me and discuss pedestrian behavior from both a
philosophical and mathematical perspective.
I would like to thank Assistant Professor Frank Schilder and Postdoc Christian
Marschler for assistance with the programming part of the project, and for the
work they have put into creating MatLab toolbox for simulating pedestrians.
A special thanks goes to my friends David Kofoed Wind, Mads Sielemann Jakob-
sen, Søren Føns Vind Nielsen, Jakob Møller Andersen, Sandra Chemnitz and
Christine Lindeblad for helping out setting up and performing the experiment.
The experiment would not have been possible without their help.
I would like to thank all volunteers; students, DTU employees, friends, family
and others who took the time to help out and participated in the experiment.
A big thanks goes to Kristian Berg Thomsen and his father Søren Thomsen,
who spent a Sunday afternoon assembling the obstacle, and Marlene Westmose
Hansen from DTU Byg, who helped us borrow cameras for the experiment.
Finally I would like to thank my parents, without whose limitless love, support
and editing assistance, this thesis would never have been possible.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Abstract
i
Resumé (danish)
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
Modelling Pedestrian Flows
3
2.1
The Mathematical Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Hysteresis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Numerical Simulations
15
3.1
Simulation Composition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2
Hysteresis in Pedestrian Behavior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4
Pedestrian Experiment
25
4.1
The Experiment Design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2
The Experimental Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.3
Comparing Experiment & Simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5
Expanding & Investigating the Model
39
5.1
Introducing Negative p-Values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.2
Investigating the Extended Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.3
Adaptive p-Values
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.4
Simulations Using the Switch Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
==PAGE:12==
x
CONTENTS
6
Conclusion & Outlook
57
6.1
Proposal of Future Experiment Designs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6.2
Further Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
A Videos From Simulations
63
B Material From Experiment
65
C Information Cascades
69
C.1 Model Assumptions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
C.2 Restaurant Example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
C.3 Dynamical Eﬀects
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
Bibliography
75
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Marking a square on a pedestrian street with tape and getting a dozen actors
to walk around it, is all it takes to create a herding eﬀect in pedestrian ﬂows.
That was exactly what a TV crew from Danish Broadcasting Corporation (DR
[DR13]) did as part of a TV show to give an example of human herding behavior.
The pedestrians walking after the actors did not know they were part of an
experiment, but still got out of their way so they too would not step inside the
square created by four pieces of tape on the ground. They avoided the square,
not because they were told to, but because the pedestrians in front of them
avoided it. The regular pedestrians continued to walk around the square until
one person did not care and stepped into the square. The spell was broken and
everyone again walked freely as if the square was not there.
This phenomenon where individuals are acting collectively without centralized
direction is known as herd behavior or information cascades. It has been studied
by economists [Ban92, BHW98] and biologists [ARNF05], and even by philoso-
phers [Kie50, HHR13] throughout time.
The phenomenon can be seen in everyday situations, for example when you are
choosing a book from a bestseller list or choosing the crowded restaurant over
the empty one. And it is because of this phenomenon that the ﬁrst restaurant
guests are always placed by the window, and theatres throughout history have
hired people to initiate applause at the right times.
==PAGE:14==
2
Introduction
Herd behavior in everyday episodes is generally rather innocent. But in evacua-
tion scenarios herding mentality can have fatal consequences. There are exam-
ples of escape panics where large groups of people all chose the same exit even
though an alternative emergency exit was nearer and stood unused [RTG10].
Another interesting observation from the same incident is that the moment
someone opened an alternative exit, the ﬂow changed and part of the pedestrian
ﬂow used the new exit. The asymmetric behavior in escapes from a room with
two identical exits, has been studied in the animal kingdom and experiments
show that herd behavior is especially strong in panic situations [ARNF05].
Since population densities in cities and in traﬃc are increasing, evacuation sce-
narios in crowded places have become more and more important. Modelling
pedestrian behavior in such scenarios is crucial in the design phase of new build-
ings and facilities. Therefore, fully understanding and being able to model and
quantify the herding eﬀect among humans is of greatest importance.
In other ﬁelds like mechanics and electromagnetism there is a basic set of laws
that deﬁnes the behavior of the systems. However, when working with human
behavior, there is no ﬁrst principle deﬁning the basic behavior. When modelling
pedestrian behavior it is therefore very important to verify the models with real
life experiments to see if it actually captures the behavior of real life pedestrians.
Helbing et al. worked in the ﬁeld of modelling pedestrians in the beginning of
the millennium and created a particle model describing the basic behavior of
pedestrians[HFV00]. In the following decade signiﬁcant research has been done
in the ﬁeld based on the work of Helbing et al. Among the people who are
working in the footsteps of Helbing are Hjort, Starke, Corradi et al. [CHS12,
STSH14] who have introduced and included a lemming eﬀect in the interactions
among pedestrians in the model.
The lemming eﬀect is in [STSH14] deﬁned as the eﬀect where individuals head-
lessly follow other individuals who are walking directly in front of them. This
is a somewhat diﬀerent phenomenon than herd behavior, where the pedestrians
follow the bigger trends in the ﬂow.
The model presented in Chapter 2 is based on a set of diﬀerential equations
modelling the behavior of pedestrians both mechanically and socially. In Chap-
ter 3 a series of simulations of the described mathematical model are presented,
furthermore some behavioral aspects are detected when the lemming eﬀect is
added to the model. A real life experiment has been conducted in the attempt
to recreate the behavioral aspects found in the simulations. Experiment details
and results may be found in Chapter 4. Based on the experimental ﬁndings,
the mathematical model is expanded in Chapter 5 and the concept of adaptive
herding eﬀect is introduced in order to make the model more realistic. Finally in
Chapter 6 thoughts on further work and future experiment set-ups are discussed.
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2
Modelling Pedestrian Flows
»To simulate pedestrian ﬂows, a mathematical model that takes
into account both mechanical and social aspects of pedestrian be-
havior is needed.
In Chapter 2.1 such a model is outlined.
The
model is originally based on the work Helbing did around 2000, but
over the years it has been modiﬁed and the model presented here
is developed by Starke, Hjorth et al. The hysteresis phenomenon is
addressed throughout this thesis and is, therefore, brieﬂy introduced
and described in Chapter 2.2.
Pedestrian behavior is a very complex matter that has caught the attention of
academics in several ﬁelds. There are physical aspects of pedestrian movement
like speed, acceleration and density of crowds, but there is also a psychological
side of pedestrian behavior. How do people interact? Do we just copy each
other’s behavior or do we rather move as independent individuals?
When modelling real world phenomena, compromises are inevitable.
There
will always be a compromise between making the model detailed and true to
the reality and on the other hand simple, understandable and computationally
eﬃcient.
Especially when modelling humans this compromise becomes very
pronounced, since human behavior is quite complex.
==PAGE:16==
4
Modelling Pedestrian Flows
2.1
The Mathematical Model
In 2000 Helbing, Farkas and Vicsek presented a model where pedestrians are
modelled as particles that interact by social forces represented by a large set of
coupled diﬀerential equations [HFV00]. This model serve as a basis for the one
presented below, as it has been widely used to describe mass behavior ever since
its introduction.
The force model consists of three elements; A target force, an interaction force
between pedestrians and a pedestrian-boundary interaction force, see Figure 2.1.
The target force, F0
i , makes pedestrian i strive towards a goal. The pedestrian-
pedestrian interaction force, fij, is a repelling force between pedestrian i and
j, and ﬁnally the pedestrian-boundary interaction force, fiB, is repelling i away
from boundary B. The acceleration ¨xi of pedestrian i is determined as the sum
of the target force and all pedestrian and boundary interaction forces
¨xi = F0
i +
X
j
fij +
X
B
fiB.
(2.1)
This model is the basis of all movement in the simulations in this project, and
in the following sections the character of these three force terms will be treated.
Target
(a) Target force, F0
i
.
(b) Pedestrian-pedestrian
interaction force, fij
Boundary
(c) Pedestrian-boundary
interaction force, fiB
Figure 2.1: The three types of forces are illustrated.
2.1.1
Walking Towards a Target (Target Force)
The pedestrians are modelled as a self-driven many-particle system, where each
of the N pedestrians has a target force. This force is what drives them ahead
==PAGE:17==
2.1 The Mathematical Model
5
and it is assumed that all pedestrians have a goal, it could be a point or line in
space, which they are walking towards. In an undisturbed setting, a pedestrian
would walk with a target velocity v0
i in the direction of her target. The target
is described by a unit vector e0
i in the direction from pedestrian i towards the
goal
F0
i = v0
i e0
i −˙xi
τ
.
(2.2)
Here ˙xi is the velocity of pedestrian i and τ is the reaction time in seconds of
the pedestrians.
2.1.2
Avoiding Collisions (Interaction Forces)
To avoid collisions, both between each other and against the boundary, repelling
interaction forces are introduced. The pedestrian-pedestrian interaction force
fij between two pedestrians i and j is a territorial force that keeps pedestrians
from bumping into each other or simply walking through one another. This
social force is also what gives the pedestrian particles a body-like interaction.
In [HFV00] a decaying exponential function is used to model the interaction
force, but in order to avoid an inﬁnite range of the interaction force, the piecewise
function proposed by Corradi, Hjorth & Starke in [CHS12] is used in this project.
If the distance ||rij|| between pedestrian i and j becomes too small, this repelling
social force will make them move away from each other. Equation (2.3) shows
the function used to model the pedestrian-pedestrian interaction force
fij =
(
−Vij
h
tan

π
2

||rij||
σ
−1

−π
2

||rij||
σ
−1
i
rij
||rij||,
||rij|| ≤σ
0,
||rij|| > σ
(2.3)
where σ ∈R+ is the interaction range and Vij ∈R is the interaction strength
between the two pedestrians i and j. In Figure 2.2 the social force function can
be seen. Note that the force has a ﬁnite range such that the pedestrians are only
aﬀected if the distance between them is less than σ. Also the function is C1 even
though it is piecewise since ˙fij(σ+) = ˙fij(σ−) = 0, where ˙fij (||rij||) = dfij(||rij||)
d||rij||
.
This creates a smooth transition between the two stages of the interaction force.
The boundary interaction force fiB is repelling pedestrian i away from the
boundary B, making sure no pedestrians can walk through walls. It also models
the de-acceleration that happens when you walk straight towards a wall. The
force is modelled like the social force in equation (2.3) with the same smooth
==PAGE:18==
6
Modelling Pedestrian Flows
0
0.5
1
1.5
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
||fij||
||rij||
σ
Figure 2.2: The social force function fij determines the repulsion between pedestrian
i and j. It is modelled as a piecewise C1 function with a limited range
σ. In the simulations Vij = 54.4 m2/s2 and σ = 1 m have been used.
The boundary force fiB repelling pedestrian i from the boundary B is
modelled with a similar function, but in the boundary case, the range is
longer.
ﬁnite range function
fiB =
(
−UiB
h
tan

π
2

||riB||
R
−1

−π
2

||riB||
R
−1
i
riB
||riB||,
||riB|| ≤R
0,
||riB|| > R
(2.4)
where R ∈R+ is the pedestrian-wall interaction range and UiB ∈R is the
interaction strength. riB is the vector from pedestrian i to the boundary B
perpendicular to B. The boundary force is chosen weaker than the social force,
but with a greater range, i.e. R > σ and UiB < Vij.
2.1.3
Modelling the Lemming Eﬀect
Even when pedestrians are walking individually on a street there are clear indi-
cations that their preferred walking directions are inﬂuenced by the pedestrians
around them [HHR13]. The social eﬀect illustrated by the herd behavior exam-
ple in Chapter 1 is implemented in the mathematical model (2.1) by modifying
the personal goal, so that a pedestrian is driven partly by her own individual
goal and partly by the actions of the pedestrians around her. The modiﬁcation
is done in accordance with [Sø14] and [STSH14]. The overall idea is that the
goal direction of pedestrian i, e0
i , is aﬀected by the personal goal ˜e0
i and the
general ﬂow direction eGF
i
in the following way:
e0
i = (1 −p)˜e0
i + peGF
i
(2.5)
==PAGE:19==
2.1 The Mathematical Model
7
The parameter p ∈[0; 1] is a herding parameter, determining the social group
eﬀect of the ﬂow. For p = 0 the pedestrians are aiming their walk individually
without any regards to what the other pedestrians are doing, whereas p = 1
would make the pedestrians follow the general ﬂow blindly.
The general ﬂow direction vector, eGF
i
, can be modelled in several diﬀerent ways.
Two of these are considered in the following models. In the ﬁrst model, denoted
the mass model, pedestrian i walks towards a weighted center of mass, which
results in a ﬂow towards highly populated areas. In this case the general ﬂow
direction vector is given by
em
i =
⟨xj⟩i −xi
||⟨xj⟩i −xi||
(2.6)
where xi is the position vector of pedestrians i and ⟨xj⟩i is the weighted center
of mass of the pedestrians j surrounding pedestrian i, given by
⟨xj⟩i =
P
j κijxj
P
j κij
(2.7)
The weight function κij is based on the distance and angle between pedestrian
i and j and will be discussed in detail in the following section.
The second way of modelling a general ﬂow direction vector eGF
i
is by a weighted
average of the velocity of all pedestrians in the neighbourhood. The weighted
mean ⟨vj⟩i of the velocity vectors vj = ˙xj of the neighbouring pedestrians j,
is used to model the general ﬂow direction vector ev
i as seen in equation (2.8).
This way of modelling the general ﬂow is denoted the velocity model:
ev
i =
⟨vj⟩i
||⟨vj⟩i||
(2.8)
Note that ev
i is a direction unit vector and therefore does not reﬂect the speed
of the surrounding pedestrians. It should be noted though that the pedestrians
walking fast will have a bigger contribution to the direction vector than a slow
pedestrian, due to diﬀerences in the vector lengths. The weighted mean velocity
vector in a neighbourhood around pedestrian i is calculated in the following way:
⟨vj⟩i =
P
j κijvj
P
j κij
(2.9)
The weight function κ is the same as in the mass model and will be discussed
bellow.
Simulations have been performed both using the mass model and the velocity
model in this project as well as in [Sø14]. Of the two models, the velocity model
==PAGE:20==
8
Modelling Pedestrian Flows
appeared most realistic, but they both have their weaknesses when used alone.
Based on an idea from [Sø14] and from simulations in the initial phase of the
project, it has been concluded that a combination of the two models leaves a
much more realistic impression, thus in the rest of the report the general ﬂow
direction eGF
i
will be modelled as a linear combination of the mass and the
velocity model in the following way:
eGF
i
= (1 −q)em
i + qev
i
(2.10)
Here q ∈[0; 1] is the weight between the two models, q = 0 resulting in a pure
mass model and q = 1 meaning a pure velocity model. For the simulations in
Chapter 3 and Chapter 5, q = 0.5 if nothing else is mentioned.
The direction vector is given by combining equation (2.5) and (2.10):
e0
i = (1 −p)˜e0
i + p ((1 −q)em
i + qev
i )
(2.11)
2.1.4
The Weight Function
The weight function κij = κij(||rij||, φ) models the "neighbourhood" of pedes-
trian i in such a way that pedestrians that can be seen by i are weighted high
whereas pedestrians behind or far away from i has weight 0. Here ||rij|| is the
distance between pedestrian i and j, and φ is the angle between the walking
direction of pedestrian i and the vector from pedestrian i to j, see Figure 2.3a.
The weight function is the same asymmetric function that is used in [STSH14]
and analogue to the one in [DK14].
κij(||rij||, φ) =



γ
1+exp(A cos(bφ)) exp

||rij||2
δ2
−1
−1
,
||rij|| < δ
0,
||rij|| ≥δ
(2.12)
The weight function has a ﬁnite range δ ∈R+, and only pedestrians inside this
range from pedestrian i is inﬂuencing the behavior of i. The parameter γ is a
scaling parameter and A and b are scaling angle scaling parameters controlling
the angular view. All parameter values used in the simulations, may be found in
Table 2.1. In Figure 2.3b the weight function centred in a pedestrian is shown.
It has been considered to use the weight function on the pedestrian-pedestrian
interaction force fij and the boundary force fiB as well, but these forces also have
a physical aspect to them. These forces should take into account the physical
displacement and deformation of the body that happens if pedestrians push
each other or a pedestrian is crushed up against a wall no matter what angle
the impact comes from. Therefore the ﬁnite range functions (2.3) and (2.4) are
retained.
==PAGE:21==
2.1 The Mathematical Model
9
i
j
(a) The weight κij of pedestrian j seen
from pedestrian i, is determined by
the distance ||rij|| between them and
the angle φ between the current walk-
ing direction of i and the vector be-
tween i and j.
(b) The weight function κij(||rij||, φ) de-
ﬁned in equation (2.12), describes the
neighbourhood that pedestrian i in
the center is aﬀected by. The param-
eters used can be found in Table 2.1.
Figure 2.3: The weight function κij(||rij||, φ).
2.1.5
Parameters
The parameters used in the model are with a few exceptions based on those in
[CHS12] and [STSH14].All parameter values can be found in Table 2.1.
By studying the dynamics of the model, an unnatural bouncing behavior was
discovered when using the parameters from [CHS12]. This can be seen in the 1D
case illustrated by the two phase portraits in Figure 2.4 (a) and (b). The phase
portrait in (a) shows the path of pedestrian i when walking directly towards
a stationary pedestrian located at x = 0. The situation illustrated in (b) is
quite similar, but here the pedestrian is interacting with a boundary x = 0.
In the phase portraits pedestrian i has initial conditions x0 = −1.5 m and
v0 = ˙x0 = 0 m/s and a preferred walking direction e0
i = 1 (to the right). It can
be seen from the phase portraits that the pedestrian in (a) and (b) walk past the
equilibrium and bounces back and forth before reaching rest at the equilibrium
point. To avoid this unrealistic bouncing back and forth, the parameter τ is
brought down to τ = 0.02 s instead of the original 0.22 s in [CHS12]. This results
in a phase portrait without the bouncing, but with an equilibrium point very
close to the other pedestrian or the wall, see Figure 2.4 (c) and (d). To maintain
a personal sphere the repulsion factor is adjusted such that the pedestrian stops
0.25 m before the wall, which is roughly corresponding to the radius of the body.
==PAGE:22==
10
Modelling Pedestrian Flows
Description of parameter
Symbol
Value
Unit
Preferred walking speed
v0
i
1.34
m/s
Reaction time of pedestrians
τ
0.02
s
Pedestrian-pedestrian repulsion
Vij
54.2
m2/s2
Pedestrian-pedestrian length scale
σ
1
m
Pedestrian-boundary repulsion
UiB
18.3
m2/s2
Pedestrian-boundary length scale
R
2
m
Weight function scaling parameter
γ
exp(1)
-
Weight function angle scale
A
-15
-
Weight function angle scale
b
0.9
-
Lemming eﬀect length scale
δ
5
m
Table 2.1: The parameters used are based on the ones in [CHS12] and [STSH14],
with a few exceptions, namely τ, Vij and UiB.
The phase portraits of the pedestrian interacting with the new parameters can
be seen in Figure 2.4 (c) and (d).
Note that the pedestrian now reaches a
full stop 0.25 m in front of the other pedestrian or wall, respectively, without
bouncing.
The mathematical model described in this section is used in all the simulations
in Chapter 3. It also serves as a basis for the simulations preformed in Chapter 5.
==PAGE:23==
2.1 The Mathematical Model
11
(a) Pedestrian-pedestrian
The parameters are from [CHS12]
and [STSH14], where τ = 0.22 s
and Vij = 15 m2/s2.
(b) Pedestrian-wall
The parameters are from [CHS12]
and [STSH14], where τ = 0.22 s
and UiB = 10 m2/s2.
(c) Pedestrian-pedestrian
The parameters are the ones in Ta-
ble 2.1, where τ
= 0.02 s and
Vij = 54.2 m2/s2.
(d) Pedestrian-wall
The parameters are the ones in
Table 2.1, where τ = 0.02 s and
UiB = 18.3 m2/s2.
Figure 2.4: The phase portraits show the path of a pedestrian moving according to
the diﬀerential equation in (2.1).
The pedestrian is moving in a 1D-
scenario, and in the phase portraits the position x = x(t) is on the x-axis
and the velocity v = ˙x(t) is on the y-axis. In all four cases the pedestrian
has initial conditions x(0) = −1.5 m and v(0) = 0 m/s and a positive
goal-direction e0
i = 1 (walking to the right). In (a) and (c) the pedestrian
is interacting with a stationary pedestrian at position x = 0, whereas in
(b) and (d) the pedestrian is interacting with a wall, also at position
x = 0.
To avoid the bouncing phenomenon seen by the spiral in (a) and (b), τ
is changed from τ = 0.22 to τ = 0.02. To ensure private space around
pedestrian i the repulsion parameters Vij and UiB are scaled such that
the equilibrium is at a distance of 0.25 meters from the center of pedes-
trian i to the other person or wall.
==PAGE:24==
12
Modelling Pedestrian Flows
2.2
Hysteresis
Hysteresis is a phenomenon that occurs when a system not only reacts on its
current state, but also on its history. A system with hysteresis is somewhat con-
servative and possesses an unwillingness to change, creating a diﬀerence between
the path from one state to another and the reverse process. A classical mark of
hysteresis is the loop formed by the output of the system, see Figure 2.5. Here
the blue curve represents the path from the higher state to the lower and the
red curve is the reversed path. Because the system is reluctant to change, there
is a gap between the two curves and the larger the area between the curves, the
more hysteresis a system is said to possess.
Hysteresis is a well-known phenomenon in other ﬁelds such as electromagnetism
and economics. In certain situations with pedestrians it has been found that
hysteresis can occur if the pedestrians act like lemmings. This will be discussed
further in Chapter 3.
Figure 2.5: The hysteresis loop. A system with hysteresis is slightly unwilling to
change, which is why the path from one state to another diﬀer from the
path back to the original state. The area between the two curves reﬂects
the amount of hysteresis in a system.
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Hysteresis
13
»In Chapter 2 a mathematical model describing pedestrian behav-
ior on particle level has been presented.
The mechanical aspects
such as walking speed and avoidance of collisions are modelled by the
three force terms in equation (2.1). The social aspect is included as
a static lemming eﬀect prioritizing to follow fellow pedestrians. This
is done by changing the personal goal direction of each pedestrian
towards the general ﬂow direction, as described in equation (2.11).
Through tests using the model, parameters resulting in "realistic"
pedestrian behavior have been identiﬁed (Table 2.1) Finally, the phe-
nomenon of hysteresis has been presented.
==PAGE:26==
14
Modelling Pedestrian Flows
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 3
Numerical Simulations
»To get acquainted with the mathematical model described in
Chapter 2 and see it in action, a series of numerical simulations
are conducted in Chapter 3.
The simulations work as a window
through which it is possible to visualize and quantify the eﬀect of a
change in the model. In previous studies [Sø14, STSH14] a hystere-
sis eﬀect has been detected to occur in situations where a ﬂow of
pedestrians are passing an obstacle that is slowly sheared from side
to side perpendicular to the direction of the ﬂow. In the studies the
hysteresis eﬀect was found in simulations where the social parameter
p ≥60%. The aim of the simulations in this section are to repro-
duce this result and ﬁnd the best possible set-up for an experiment
to show hysteresis eﬀects.
All simulations have been performed in MatLab using a software package de-
veloped by Frank Schilder and Christian Marschler from DTU Compute, and
adapted by me to ﬁt this exact problem. The numerical integration is done by
a simple forward Euler method, which is pre-implemented in the software.
==PAGE:28==
16
Numerical Simulations
3.1
Simulation Composition
3.1.1
The Corridor
To recreate the hysteresis phenomena, a corridor like the one in [Sø14, STSH14]
is created in the simulations. The corridor seen from above is shown in Fig-
ure 3.1. The pedestrians enter in the narrow starting area in the bottom and
they all have the personal goal to walk straight towards the blue line marked
with an A. Two walls are deﬁning the entry area and another set of walls are
making sure the pedestrians stay inside the walking corridor. The obstacle is
constructed by two walls, but is not ﬁxed during the simulations. The dimen-
sions of the corridor and obstacle can be found in Table 3.1. They are chosen as
close as possible to the ones in the experiment described in Chapter 4, so that
the results from the simulations and the experiment may be directly compared.
The walls are deﬁned as one-sided so that a pedestrian to the left of the ob-
stacle is not inﬂuenced by the right half of the obstacle. When calculating the
boundary force fi,B between pedestrian i and boundary B the distance ||riB||
between the two is needed. This distance is in the simulations measured as the
shortest distance between the center of the pedestrian and the wall.
Diﬀerent entrance and corridor widths have been tested, and the ones used in
this report are the ones ﬁtting the measures of the experiment. In general a wider
entrance generates more noise, since some pedestrians may walk quite isolated.
The social link between the pedestrians might therefore be broken and hence a
stronger group eﬀect is required to get a stable hysteresis eﬀect. Also diﬀerent
obstacle shapes have been tested, and from the ones tested a ﬁxed triangle shape
that is shifted perpendicular to the ﬂow direction gave the strongest hysteresis
in the simulations and was therefore used in the experiment. The dimensions
in the experiment were chosen both to make the hysteresis stronger and for
pragmatic reasons, which are described in Chapter 4.
Description of parameter
Symbol
Value
Unit
Corridor length
Cl
11.07
m
Corridor width
Cw
6
m
Entrance length
El
1.4
m
Entrance width
Ew
1.4
m
Obstacle length
Ol
√
3
m
Obstacle width
Ow
2
m
Table 3.1: Dimensions of the corridor used in the simulations.
==PAGE:29==
3.1 Simulation Composition
17
Ol
Cl
Ow
Cw
Ew
El
Figure 3.1: The pedestrians enter the corridor between the two walls in the bottom
and walk towards the blue goal line marked A. Before they reach the
goal they must pass the obstacle that is slowly shifted from side to side.
3.1.2
Periodic Boundary Conditions
The pedestrians are initially placed randomly inside the start box in the bottom
of Figure 3.1. If a pedestrian is placed too close to another pedestrian (distance
between their centres is less than 1.5 times the pedestrian radius) another posi-
tion inside the box is tried. If a suitable position has not been found within the
ﬁrst 20 tries, the best of the 20 is chosen.
The pedestrians walk towards the goal line marked with A and when it is crossed
the pedestrian is reinserted in the start box. Initially the pedestrians enter in the
bottom at a frequency of 10/N sec−1, N being the total number of pedestrians.
==PAGE:30==
18
Numerical Simulations
Since it takes roughly 10 seconds for a pedestrian to get from the entrance to
the goal line a 10/N seconds time delay in between them will distribute the N
pedestrians evenly throughout the length of the corridor creating a smooth con-
tinuous stream of pedestrians through the corridor. If the ﬂow is not completely
even to begin with, it has a tendency to even out over time.
The reason why the start box not only has a width, but also a length is ﬁrst of
all to create more possibilities in the insertion of the pedestrians. The second
reason is to create a slightly random time-delay from the pedestrian has crossed
the goal-line until it enters the corridor again. This random time-delay helps
smoothing out potential huddles of pedestrians or closing potential gaps between
the pedestrians.
3.1.3
Pedestrian Radius
The pedestrians in the simulations all have a 0.25 m radius. The distance from
pedestrian i to pedestrian j, ||rij|| is in the simulations deﬁned as the distance
from the center of i to the edge of pedestrian j, see Figure 3.2. This decision
was made, since one reacts to the closest body part rather than the center of a
fellow pedestrian.
i
j
Figure 3.2: The distance from pedestrian i to pedestrian j, ||rij|| is in the simulations
deﬁned as the distance from the center of i to the edge of pedestrian j.
This decision was made, since it is not the center of another person one
is reacting to, but rather the closest body part.
3.2
Hysteresis in Pedestrian Behavior
When adding a social aspect to the model, a hysteresis eﬀect arises for certain
values of the lemming parameter p in equation (2.5). The hysteresis occurs dur-
ing right- and left-sweeps of the obstacle. A sweep is here deﬁned as a shift of
the obstacle, a left-sweep is moving the obstacle from right to left, illustrated
by the red arrow in Figure 3.1, whereas a right-sweep is shifting the obstacle
==PAGE:31==
3.2 Hysteresis in Pedestrian Behavior
19
from left to right. The position of the obstacle tip is denoted µ and will be
the parameter deﬁning the position of the obstacle throughout the report. The
value µ = 0 represents the center position of the obstacle and a positive µ-value
represents a shift to the right in meters, whereas negative µ-values represent
shifts to the left of the center position in meters. Throughout a simulation, µ
is changed gradually ﬁrst in a left-sweep and then in a right-sweep, using the
following positions
Left-sweep:
µ = {1, 0.75, 0.5, 0.25, 0.125, 0, −0.125, −0.25, −0.5, −0.75, −1}
Right-sweep:
µ = {−1, −0.75, −0.5, −0.25, −0.125, 0, 0.125, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1}
Each position is held in 30 seconds and right before each simulation the ﬁrst
position is held for 15 seconds to establish a steady initial ﬂow. During the 30
seconds each position is held, roughly 93 pedestrians pass the obstacle, when
the total number of pedestrians in the corridor is N = 30. This roughly corre-
sponds to 3.12 pedestrians per second, the exact numbers will be presented and
discussed further in Chapter 5.2.
3.2.1
Flux Around the Obstacle
During the computer simulations the ﬂux is measured at both sides of the ob-
stacle. Diﬀerent approaches were considered for the computation of the ﬂux. In
[Sø14] every pedestrian is seen as a density distribution Di(x, y) and the ﬂux
over an area Ωis the sum of the densities multiplied by the respective velocities
FΩ= P
i viDi(x, y). In this way the ﬂux can be measured in each iteration
individually. This approach has not been used in this project, since the cor-
respondence between the simulations and the experiment had to be as high as
possible. Since the velocities were not available at the experiment, this ﬂux
measure was not practically a possibility. Therefore, a more simple approach
has been chosen. The ﬂux on the left and right side of the obstacle, FL and FR,
are simply measured as the number of pedestrians passing on each side of the
obstacle during the time the speciﬁc position is held. In other words, FL is the
number of pedestrians passing the obstacle trajectory line on the left side of the
obstacle during the 30 seconds that position is held.
To study the hysteresis eﬀect, the normalized ﬂux diﬀerence F = FL−FR
FL+FR is plot-
ted against the obstacle position µ for diﬀerent lemming parameter values p.
These ﬂux-diagrams can be seen in Figure 3.3 (a)-(d) for p = {0.3, 0.6, 0.7, 0.9}
respectively.
The value F = 1 means that all the pedestrians walked left,
whereas if F = −1, all the pedestrians walked right. F = 0 represents a 50/50
distribution between pedestrians walking left and right around the obstacle. For
p = 0.3 in Figure 3.3 (a), the ﬂux around the obstacle is the same for the left-
==PAGE:32==
20
Numerical Simulations
7
-1
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
F
-1
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
SIMULATION, p = 0.3, q = 0.5 and N = 30
Everyone walks left
Everyone walks right
Left sweep
Right sweep
(a) Simulations with p = 0.3 show no sign
of hysteresis, since there is no area be-
tween the curves.
7
-1
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
F
-1
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
SIMULATION, p = 0.6, q = 0.5 and N = 30
Everyone walks left
Everyone walks right
Left sweep
Right sweep
(b) Simulations with p = 0.6, show hys-
teresis to an extent where there is a
notable area between the curves.
7
-1
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
F
-1
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
SIMULATION, p = 0.7, q = 0.5 and N = 30
Everyone walks left
Everyone walks right
Left sweep
Right sweep
(c) A clear hysteresis eﬀect can be seen
for p = 0.7 where the gap between the
curves is unmistakable.
7
-1
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
F
-1
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
SIMULATION, p = 0.9, q = 0.5 and N = 30
Everyone walks left
Everyone walks right
Left sweep
Right sweep
(d) This simulation with p = 0.9 shows
hysteresis in an extreme form, where
the two branches never get together.
Figure 3.3: The ﬂux-diagrams show the hysteresis eﬀect from the simulations in the
normalized diﬀerence F = FL−FR
FL+FR between the ﬂux on the left side FL
and the right side FR of the triangle. The hysteresis happens as a result
of a left-sweep (the blue line) and a right-sweep (the red line) of the
position µ of the triangle. F = 1 means that all pedestrians walked left
of the triangle, whereas F = −1 means that all pedestrians walked right
of the triangle during the time that position is held. Notice in (a) the
ﬂattening of the curves around µ = 0, which is caused by the pedestrians
walking in lane formation. There is a clear tendency that higher lemming
eﬀect creates more hysteresis.
==PAGE:33==
3.2 Hysteresis in Pedestrian Behavior
21
and right-sweep and there is therefore no hysteresis. For p = 0.6 (b) the ﬂux
around the obstacle stays on one side of the triangle for both sweeps all the way
until the obstacle reaches the center position µ = 0. Around the center position
the ﬂow switches away and shortly after all the pedestrians are walking on the
opposite side of the obstacle. Since the switch happens around the center posi-
tion, the two curves are not very far from each other and the hysteresis is not
very strong. The behavior for p = 0.7 (c) is similar to the one for p = 0.6 except
the ﬂow stays on the original side of the obstacle way past the center position
of the obstacle. The gap between the curves and thus the hysteresis is very
clear for p = 0.7. For p = 0.9 (d) the pedestrians stay on the same side of the
obstacle even when the obstacle is moved to the most extreme position. Here
full hysteresis is observed where the curves do not reach each other throughout
the simulation.
3.2.2
Measuring Hysteresis
From the four examples it is obvious that a higher values of p and thereby
stronger lemming eﬀect creates more hysteresis.
The hysteresis, H, can be
measured as the normalized area between the two curves
H = 1
4
Z 1
−1
Fblue −Fred dµ
(3.1)
With this measurement 3.3 (d) has 100% hysteresis H = 1, whereas a ﬂux-
diagram where the curves are right on top of each other has no hysteresis,
H = 0.
Figure 3.4 shows the hysteresis measured for diﬀerent values of p. It can be
seen that the hysteresis happens in simulations where p ≥0.55, and that the
stronger the lemming eﬀect is, the more hysteresis is found in the simulations.
The curve in Figure 3.4 is very similar to a cumulative Gaussian distribution
function (CDF), and a CDF with mean 0.7 and standard deviation 0.09 ﬁts
the curve with an error of only r2 = 0.007. The mean represents the p-value
corresponding to 50% hysteresis, whereas the standard deviation is a measure
of the steepness of the graph. It could be interesting to study how the mean
and standard deviation are correlated to the geometry of the simulation. The
videos of the simulations for p = {0.3, 0.6, 0.7, 0.9} can be found in Appendix A.
==PAGE:34==
22
Numerical Simulations
p
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
H
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Hysteresis Data from simulations
CDF with mu = 0.7 and sigma = 0.09
Figure 3.4: The hysteresis is measured as the normalized area between the left- and
right-sweep curves in the ﬂux-diagrams. The graph shows that hysteresis
arise for p ≥0.55. It is clear that a stronger lemming eﬀect, i.e. larger
value of p, creates more hysteresis. The path of the hysteresis has a great
resemblance with the Gaussian CDF, which is ﬁtted to the hysteresis data
using a least squares ﬁt.
==PAGE:35==
3.2 Hysteresis in Pedestrian Behavior
23
»In Chapter 3 the hysteresis result from [Sø14, STSH14] has been
reproduced using computer simulations based on the mathematical
model described in Chapter 2. In the simulations a pedestrian ﬂow
is passing an obstacle that is shifted perpendicular to the ﬂow di-
rection, ﬁrst from right to left in a left-sweep and then back again
in a right-sweep. The ﬂux on both sides of the obstacle is measured
and the normalized ﬂux diﬀerence for each obstacle position is plot-
ted in the ﬂux-diagrams, Figure 3.3. The hysteresis is measured as
the area between the curves representing the left- and right-sweep,
respectively. The hysteresis as function of the p-value may be ap-
proximated as a Gaussian CDF with µ = 0.7 and σ = 0.09.
==PAGE:36==
24
Numerical Simulations
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 4
Pedestrian Experiment
»To investigate the quality of the model and get a better under-
standing of the parameters involved, a live experiment is designed
and conducted.
Since there is no ﬁrst principle when modelling
pedestrians, it is important to verify the model in real life experi-
ments to make sure the results found are realistic. The hypothesis to
be investigated is: The herd mentality in pedestrians is suﬃciently
strong to detect hysteresis in a real life pedestrian ﬂow.
4.1
The Experiment Design
The aim of the experiment was to witness the hysteresis in real life, thus the set-
up should support the hysteresis eﬀect as much as possible without inﬂuencing
the pedestrians to create the hysteresis eﬀect through biases.
In Figure 4.1
a sketch of the walking corridor is shown. The pedestrians enter through the
narrow passage in the bottom of the sketch, pass the triangle and walk between
the two red cones. Then they walk back to the entrance along the outside of
the walls.
==PAGE:38==
26
Pedestrian Experiment
2 m
2 m
6 m
1.4 m
10.2 m
1
2
3
5
4
Figure 4.1: A diagram of the walking corridor used in the real life experiment. The
pedestrians enter at the bottom, pass the obstacle and walk through the
two red cones around the walls and back again. The yellow and green
lines on the ﬂoor were used to count the number of pedestrians crossing
on each side of the obstacle. There were cameras placed in ﬁve diﬀerent
positions marked with purple on the sketch.
==PAGE:39==
4.1 The Experiment Design
27
4.1.1
Choosing a Location
The physical conﬁguration of the walking corridor was a compromise between
practicalities in the chosen location and attempting to maximize the lemming
eﬀect. The experiment was conducted in the main hall of building 303A at the
Technical University of Denmark (DTU). This location was chosen since a big
group of ﬁrst-year bachelor students had lectures next door, and it would be
convenient for them to participate in the experiment during their lunch break
after the end of their lecture.
There is a tall art wall dividing the hall, which was used as the left wall in
the experiment. The length of the walking corridor was therefore based on the
length of this art wall. The right wall was constructed by using the back of the
couches that are normally used for group work in the building. Both the art
wall and the couches can be seen in the left photo in Figure 4.4.
It is unfortunate that the two walls are not of the same height and color, since
this might cause a bias in the pedestrian behavior. A bias in the ﬂow towards
the couches on the right could be expected, since these were lower and therefore
less intimidating than the wall. Another bias could be that most of the light in
the building comes from a big set of windows to the right of the walking corridor,
and experiences from other pedestrian experiments shows that this can cause a
bias, since the pedestrians are drawn towards the light.
4.1.2
Dimension Choices
The entrance to the walking corridor was created by six poster boards, two
placed horizontally and one vertically in each side to create the entrance shape
in the sketch in Figure 4.1.
The entrance was made narrow enough for the
pedestrians to always enter in the center of the walking corridor. A too wide
entrance would artiﬁcially amplify the hysteresis eﬀect, since pedestrians who
came from the right side would be biased to enter in the right side and thus walk
right around the obstacle, and vice versa. On the other hand, if the entrance is
too narrow, it will form a bottleneck that will introduce an undesired drop in
pedestrian density in the walking corridor.
The width of the corridor was chosen to be six meters. This allowed the pedes-
trians one meter of passage in the most narrow scenario, which is suﬃcient to
let the pedestrians through, if they walk one-by-one. The corridor was chosen
to be narrow to emphasise that the target direction was straight ahead. Making
the corridor wider might have given the pedestrians an incentive to cut corners
==PAGE:40==
28
Pedestrian Experiment
and walk towards the end corners of the corridor instead of walking straight
past the obstacle. Another disadvantage of making the corridor wider is that
the pedestrians would have to walk further to get around the corridor, when
returning to the entrance, hence more pedestrians would be needed to maintain
the desired density in the corridor.
4.1.3
Obstacle Design
Two triangle designs were considered as an obstacle for the experiment. Trian-
gle type 1 is seen from above an equilateral triangle with side length 2 meter
that is shifted from side to side perpendicular to the ﬂow direction during the
experiment. Triangle type 2 has a ﬁxed base of two meters, but a shifting tip of
the triangle. The two triangles are illustrated in Figure 4.2 with triangle type 1
to the left and triangle type 2 to the right. Simulations with diﬀerent strength of
the lemming eﬀect, p, has been conducted for both triangles and triangle type 1
seamed to encourage a stronger lemming eﬀect than triangle type 2. This is due
to the geometrical diﬀerence and the way the lemming eﬀect is implemented
in the model, as explained in the caption of Figure 4.3. Triangle type 1 was
therefore chosen for the experiment.
2 m
2 m
Figure 4.2: Two diﬀerent types of triangles were considered prior to the experiment.
The left triangle, triangle type 1, has a ﬁxed shape and is shifted from
side to side, while the right triangle, triangle type 2, has a moving tip,
but a ﬁxed baseline. The tip-positions are the same in the two cases.
With help from Kristian Berg Thomsen and Søren Thomsen, an obstacle, as
the one described, was assembled for the experiment.
The obstacle was the
same as the one used in the pedestrian experiment conducted by Kristian Berg
Thomsen described in his bachelor thesis [Tho13], but unfortunately it had
been de-assembled between the two experiments. The obstacle is 2 meters high
and seen from above it is an equilateral triangle with side lengths 2 meters.
Wheels were attached to the obstacle to enable the transitions between obstacle
==PAGE:41==
4.1 The Experiment Design
29
Triangle type 1
Triangle type 2
Figure 4.3: The geometrics of triangle type 1 strengthen the lemming eﬀect. The
ﬁgures illustrate the interaction between a leading pedestrian (gray) and
a following pedestrian (black) around the two triangle types. The strait
blue arrow represents the personal goal direction ˜e0
i and the green ar-
row is the general ﬂow direction eGF
i
. The black arrow is the resulting
goal force e0
i .
The leading pedestrian next to triangle type 1 aﬀects
the following pedestrian in a more outwards direction, whereas the front
pedestrian next to triangle type 2 aﬀects the following pedestrian in a
more forward direction. This little eﬀect can be the tipping point that
determines if the second pedestrian follows the front one past the ob-
stacle or not. Triangle type 1 therefore encourages a stronger lemming
eﬀect than triangle type 2, and is therefore chosen for the experiment.
==PAGE:42==
30
Pedestrian Experiment
Figure 4.4: Photos from the experiment. The obstacle is an equilateral triangle when
seen from above. It can easily be moved from side to side and can contain
three people inside of it.
positions. The obstacle is hollow and can contain up to three people. Figure 4.4
shows two pictures of the obstacle from the experiment.
To examine the hysteresis eﬀect, the obstacle was made to shift from one side
of the corridor to the other and back again. The steps in which it was shifted
had to be small enough not to make a disturbance to the ﬂow, but at the same
time the experiment could not run for more than an hour, and it was desirable
to get as wide a range of positions as possible. The parameter µ denotes the
horizontal position of the tip of the triangle measured in meters, and let µ = 0
be the center position of the obstacle in the corridor, while µ = 1 denotes the
obstacle being shifted 1 meter to the right, seen from the perspective of the
ﬂow. For the experiment, the same positions were chosen as in the simulations,
resulting in the following positions covering a two meter range
µ = {1, 0.75, 0.5, 0.25, 0.125, 0, −0.125, −0.25, −0.5, −0.75, −1}.
(4.1)
All 11 obstacle positions can be seen on the sketch in Figure 4.1. Note that the
interval between the center positions is only half the distance compared with the
outer intervals, which should reduce the disturbance in the most sensitive posi-
tions while still allowing for more extreme positions. In the simulations these
µ-values were suﬃcient to observe the hysteresis eﬀect without too much dis-
turbance. The timetable for the experiment with timestamps for every position
can be found in Appendix B.
4.1.4
Periodic Boundary Conditions
It was desired that the pedestrians walked as straight as possible, so they were
instructed to walk towards the back wall. To avoid that the pedestrians aim for
==PAGE:43==
4.1 The Experiment Design
31
the corners of the walking corridor instead of the back wall, they were asked to
walk in between the red cones after passing the obstacle, see sketch in Figure 4.1.
After passing between the red cones the pedestrians had to return to the en-
trance. To randomize the boundary conditions Associate Professor Poul Hjorth
was instructing the pedestrians arriving at the back wall, to either walk left or
right around the walking corridor and back to the entrance. There was quite a
dense stream of pedestrians walking past the obstacle and it was therefore not
possible to instruct the pedestrians individually, on which way to go. Instead
the choice was randomized by time such that everyone arriving in a certain pe-
riod of time all walked the same way. This could of course create an artiﬁcial
ﬂuctuation, but there has not been detected any such ﬂuctuation, on which
way the pedestrians walk around the obstacle, in the data. It seemed like this
randomization of the boundary conditions shuﬄed the pedestrians suﬃciently.
(a) The participants wore paper hats with
QR codes on top making it easier for
software to track them in the movies.
Daniel and Bernd Pfrommer designed
the paper hats.
(b) Poul Hjorth is instructing the pedes-
trians to walk either left or right
after passing between the red cones.
Figure 4.5: Photos from the experiment.
4.1.5
Capturing the Results on Film
To capture the movement of the pedestrians during the experiment, cameras
were placed in ﬁve positions above the walking corridor. The camera positions
are marked with a purple circle and the camera ID number in the sketch of the
walking corridor in Figure 4.1. The ﬁrst three cameras were attached to the
top of the stationary art wall, number four was hanging from the ceiling while
number ﬁve was attached to the obstacle. All cameras and mounting equipment
==PAGE:44==
32
Pedestrian Experiment
were borrowed from DTU Civil Engineering. The cameras were of the type Drift
Innovation X170 Action Camera, and served the purpose well since they were
easy to mount and had a wide ﬁlming angle. To make the data analysis easier
all pedestrians were asked to wear a paper hat with a QR code on top, to make
it easier for software to track the pedestrians in the movies from the cameras.
The design of the paper hats is by Daniel Pfrommer and Bernd Pfrommer.
4.1.6
Volunteering Participants
To get the same density as in the simulations, approximately 80 participants
were needed. This kept the number of pedestrians from the entrance to the back
line between 25-35 during the sweeps. The density has to be in a certain range
to make sure there will not be any big gaps, since this would break the lemming
eﬀect. At the same time the density should not be too high, since this would
take away the choice from the pedestrians and make them walk like particles
in a ﬂuid. From the simulations it was known that around 30 pedestrians in
the walking corridor at the same time creates a suﬃcient density to observe the
hysteresis eﬀect without any gaps in the ﬂow. 30 was also chosen so that a few
more or less would not aﬀect the hysteresis eﬀect. So in total 80 participants
were desired for the experiment. The number 80 was a rough estimation based
on the assumption that more than half would be walking outside the area of
interest and some might even leave before the experiment was over. The last part
turned out not to be relevant since all participants stayed until the end. With
80 participants the density varied between 25-35 pedestrians in the corridor at
all times, so it worked intentionally.
An experiment like this is dependent on the help from volunteers, and a concern
was that we would not be able to get enough participants in the experiment.
This has been a serious issue in other similar experiments [Tho13, VPAea12].
To comply with this concern several things were done; ﬁrst of all the time
and place of the experiment was carefully chosen to make it as convenient as
possible for the students to participate. Since the experiment was conducted
during the lunch break, all participants were oﬀered a sandwich, water and
coﬀee afterwards. To further motivate the participants to stay for the entire
experiment they all got a scratchcard after the end of the experiment, giving
them the chance to win 100,000 DKK. Last, but not least, ﬂyers were handed
out to the students and a Facebook event was created during the week prior
to the experiment with the purpose of drawing attention to the experiment. In
Appendix B the ﬂyer and a screen shot of the Facebook event can be seen.
==PAGE:45==
4.2 The Experimental Results
33
4.1.7
Legal Issues & Permissions
Regarding legal issues concerning live experiments involving humans Senior Ad-
visor Susanne Schultz from the DTU Oﬃce of Innovation and Sector Services
was contacted. She conﬁrmed that from a juridical perspective there was no
problem in making this type of experiment with pedestrians, since they were
walking in a safe and ﬁre approved environment, as long as it was pointed out
to them that they were being ﬁlmed or that the movies were blurred before po-
tential publication making the participants anonymous. Furthermore, a green
light was given by DTU Campus Service as long as the ﬁre exits along the walls
of the main hall were kept clear of furniture.
4.2
The Experimental Results
In total 80 volunteers participated in the experiment that lasted approximately
an hour. The PR project with ﬂyers and the scratchcards worked really well and
we had to send people away to avoid having a too high density of pedestrians
in the experiment. A too high density could result in destroying the lemming
eﬀect due to lack of space in the walking corridor. To oﬀer food and scratchcards
turned out to be a very eﬀective way to recruit volunteers amongst students.
From the cameras above the walking corridor the ﬂux on each side of the obstacle
could be measured. Ideally this is done automatically by tracking all the white
paper hats and letting a program make a note every time a paper hat crosses
the line on the ﬂoor. Unfortunately the resolution of the cameras was not high
enough to capture the QR codes on top of the hats. This meant that all counting
had to be done manually by pausing the video every time a pedestrian crossed
the line and write down the time stamp. In this way the ﬂux for each obstacle
position could be calculated and the ﬂux-diagram could be computed just like
the simulations.
Possible sources of error in the counting process could be:
• Erroneous counting. This could happen since multiple pedestrians often
crossed the line at the same time. To minimize this type of error the movie
was stopped every time a pedestrian crossed the line.
• Writing down an incorrect time of the passing of the line. All the time
stamps were checked after the counting to ensure that they were all in
chronological order. The crossing was deﬁned as the moment the ﬁrst foot
==PAGE:46==
34
Pedestrian Experiment
was put to the ground on the other side of the line. But sometimes the
pedestrians stepped on the line and sometimes the crossing was right on
the change between two seconds. In those cases subjective judgement of
the situation had to be made.
• Accuracy on the change between two obstacle positions. The transition
between two obstacle positions took about two seconds. There could be
some uncertainty whether a pedestrian crossing the line during the transi-
tion should be considered as part of the ﬁrst or the second position. Again
this was a subjective judgement, and the pedestrians crossing during the
ﬁrst second of the transitions were counted as part of the original group
while the pedestrians crossing during the last second of the transition were
counted in the new group.
Combining these biases, a maximum error of ±10 pedestrians was estimated
during the 90 seconds a position was held.
The ﬂux-diagram based on the raw data from the experiment is shown in Fig-
ure 4.6a. The error bars represent ±10 pedestrians. After the initial test run,
the left sweep was performed (blue curve) starting at µ = 1 and all the way to
µ = −1 using the steps given in (4.1). Between the two sweeps the corridor was
emptied so both rounds would have the same initial conditions. The right sweep
(red curve) was performed identical to the left sweep just in opposite direction
i.e. from µ = −1 to µ = 1. In both sweeps the ﬁrst position was held for 120
seconds instead of the standard 90 seconds, this was done to create a stable
initial ﬂow.
To check for possible biases in the set-up, a test run was performed both before
and after the actual experiment i.e. the left and right sweeps. In the test run
the obstacle was placed in the center position and the pedestrians were asked to
walk through the corridor for two minutes. During the ﬁrst test run there was
a 1.75% bias to the right side whereas the last test run had a bias of 5.76% bias
to the left side. Before the experiment a slight bias to the right was expected
due to the low couches and the windows placed on this side.
Immediately after the experiment, all the distances were measured once more,
and the right of the red cones turned out to be closer to the center than intended.
The cones were taped to the ﬂoor, and there were no signs of them being moved
during the experiment.
The error must therefore have happened before the
start of the experiment when it was taped to the ﬂoor.
The diﬀerence was
not noticeable when looking at the cones, but for a pedestrian walking through
the corridor hundreds of times the slightly shorter route to the left might be
noticeable. This error could possibly have coursed the bias in the last test run
where the pedestrians tended to walk left 5.76% more often than right.
==PAGE:47==
4.3 Comparing Experiment & Simulations
35
The 1.75% bias towards the right side is seen as the pedestrians preferring to
walk towards the couches and the light. This bias would be somewhat aﬀecting
all the results throughout the entire experiment.
In Figure 4.6b the results
have been adjusted such that the 1.75% bias has been compensated for. The
5.76% bias to the left side, which is caused by the misplacement of the cones
would be something that aﬀects the results gradually, since the pedestrians may
unconsciously realize this asymmetry gradually throughout the experiment. The
correction of this bias has been done linearly such that the last results in the
second sweep are adjusted with the full 5.76% whereas the ﬁrst results in the
second sweep were not adjusted at all. The ﬁrst sweep is not adjusted for this at
all, since it would take some experience to notice the asymmetry. The adjusted
results can be seen in Figure 4.6b.
4.3
Comparing Experiment & Simulations
The results seen in Figure 4.6b are clearly diﬀerent from the ones found in
the simulations, Figure 3.3. The ﬁrst thing that is noticed is that there is no
hysteresis. Actually the pedestrians never walked either one way or the other
around the obstacle, they spread out and walked where there was suﬃcient space
throughout the entire experiment.
The behavior of the pedestrians in the experiment is naturally inﬂuenced by the
fact that they know they are part of an experiment and they are aware that their
behavior is being captured on ﬁlm. Furthermore they walk through the same
passage over and over again, which could also create an unnatural behavior,
someone might for example choose a favourite side or intentionally switch side
every time to create balance. It is not easy to check for such biases, but the
last point about creating a behavior pattern did not seem to be a problem.
Actually the pedestrians walked quite rationally according to the position of
the obstacle. When the obstacle was placed in the center of the corridor the
pedestrian ﬂow was divided equally on each side of the obstacle. And when
the tip of the obstacle divided the width of the corridor into a 2/3 part and a
1/3 part, the ﬂow split accordingly. This behavior has been denoted optimal
behavior, since this approach makes use oﬀall available space to get ahead as
fast as possible, and is shown as the black line in Figure 4.6a and 4.6b.
By looking at the videos from the experiment it is quite clear that the pedes-
trians diﬀer from the simulations in a very distinct way. In the simulations the
pedestrians walk straight or directly after the ones in front of them, right from
they enter the walking corridor until they reach the obstacle. When they get
suﬃciently close to the triangle they "make a decision" of either walking right
==PAGE:48==
36
Pedestrian Experiment
7
-1
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
F
-1
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
EXPERIMENT
Optimal behaviour
Everyone walks left
Everyone walks right
Left sweep
Right sweep
(a) The raw unadjusted measurements.
7
-1
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
F
-1
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
EXPERIMENT, results regulated according to bias
Optimal behaviour
Everyone walks left
Everyone walks right
Left sweep
Right sweep
(b) The results adjusted according to the biases found in
the test run before and after the sweeps.
Figure 4.6: The results of the two sweeps in the experiment with and error of ±10
pedestrians per position. The black line represents optimal behavior in
the sense that the pedestrians split up according to the pro rata division
of the corridor made by the tip of the triangle.
==PAGE:49==
4.3 Comparing Experiment & Simulations
37
or left. The pedestrians in the experiment, on the other hand, make up their
mind, and adjust their direction towards the side they want to take, from the
moment they see the obstacle.
»In Chapter 4 the set-up and results from a pedestrian experiment
conducted as part of the thesis work, were presented. The results
of the experiment show that no lemming eﬀect was observed among
the participants. On the contrary, there was a scattering phase after
the pedestrians entered the walking corridor. In this way the entire
width of the corridor came into use in the area around the obstacle.
==PAGE:50==
38
Pedestrian Experiment
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 5
Expanding & Investigating
the Model
»In Chapter 4 it was found that, the pedestrians in the experiment
did not follow each other, but spread out and walked towards empty
spots to ﬁnd the fastest route past the obstacle. This result is far
from what was seen in the simulations. This means that there is a
gap between reality and the mathematical model that needs to be
investigated.
In Chapter 5 an attempt is made to move the model a bit closer
to reality, by getting a better understanding of pedestrian behavior
and by introducing a more adaptable and realistic social eﬀect in the
mathematical model.
5.1
Introducing Negative p-Values
Recall the original social grouping eﬀect incorporated in the target direction in
Chapter 2.1
e0
i = (1 −p)˜e0
i + p ((1 −q)em
i + qev
i )
(5.1)
==PAGE:52==
40
Expanding & Investigating the Model
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
A
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
(a) Only half of the corridor width
is in use, because of the nar-
row entrance and absence of
social eﬀect.
7
-1
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
F
-1
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
SIMULATION, p = 0, q = 0.5 and N = 30
Everyone walks left
Everyone walks right
Left sweep
Right sweep
(b) Because of the unused space in the sides of
the corridor the ﬂux-curves are signiﬁcantly
steeper than the one from the experiment,
see Figure 4.6b.
Figure 5.1: Results from simulation with no social eﬀect p = 0 and N = 30 pedes-
trians in the corridor.
where p ∈[0; 1] is the social parameter, that is p = 0 represents completely
individualistic behavior, whereas p = 1 is 100% group behavior, where everyone
follows the ones in front of them. The direction vector ˜e0
i is leading towards
the personal goal of pedestrian i, the unit vector em
i
is in the direction from
pedestrian i towards the weighted center of mass, and ev
i is the normalized
weighted average velocity of the pedestrians seen by pedestrian i. The three
direction vectors are all deﬁned in detail in Chapter 2.1.
From the results of the experiment it is clear that a model with a strong pos-
itive social eﬀect, high p value, does not ﬁt the reality of the experiment. The
pedestrians did not walk like lemmings in the direction of the previous pedestri-
ans, quite the opposite. To see if no social eﬀect would ﬁt the results from the
experiment better, simulations have been run with zero social eﬀect, p = 0 for
N = 25, N = 30 and N = 35 corresponding to the range of pedestrians actually
being inside the walking corridor throughout the experiment. A screen shot
from the simulations and a resulting ﬂux-diagram from the one with N = 30
can be seen in Figure 5.1.
From the simulations it may be noted that the pedestrians tend to walk in a
quite dense formation in the center of the corridor, see Figure 5.1a. Because
==PAGE:53==
5.1 Introducing Negative p-Values
41
they do not spread out and use the empty space in the corridor, the ﬂux-diagram
shown in Figure 5.1b has a signiﬁcantly steeper curve than the one seen in the
ﬂux-diagrams based on the results from the experiment, see Figure 4.6b. For
a higher number of pedestrians in the corridor, the slope of the curve would
be less steep, since the pedestrians would naturally take up more space. For a
lower number of pedestrians it would be even steeper.
The diﬀerence between the pedestrians in the experiment and in the simulation is
that the ones in the experiment spread out more to avoid walking in high density
areas. This makes sense rationally since they can walk faster and more freely in
the low density areas. Therefore, a change in the model is introduced allowing
for negative p-values. This should result in the pedestrians being deliberately
repelled from each other and thereby spread out more.
In the original mass model e0
i = (1 −p)˜e0
i + pem
i a negative p-value would repel
pedestrian i from the weighted center of mass, creating the desired eﬀect. To
ensure that the numerical weights on the two terms add up to 1, absolute value
of p, |p|, is introduced in the ﬁrst term resulting in the following new mass
model:
e0
i = (1 −|p|)˜e0
i + pem
i
(5.2)
where p can take both negative and positive values. In this way the mass model
stays identical to the original for p ≥0, whereas negative p-values only changes
the sign in the second term.
In the velocity model e0
i = (1 −p)˜e0
i + pev
i a negative p value would not make
that much sense since a negative p-value would make a pedestrian in a spreading
crowd walk towards the center, which would result in an oscillating behavior,
if all pedestrians had negative p-values.
A positive p in the velocity model
reinforces the ongoing trend, both if the ﬂow is gathering or spreading out.
Bearing the two previous points in mind the original social eﬀect is rewritten
slightly, such that it is able to capture the phenomena seen in the experiment
by using negative p-values.
e0
i = (1 −|p|)˜e0
i + p(1 −q)em
i + |p|qev
i
(5.3)
where p ∈[−1; 1]. For positive values of p the model is exactly the same as the
original one in equation (5.1) and for p < 0 the only change is the sign of em
i .
In simulations where p ∈[−1; −0.5[ the personal goal of the pedestrians is
overruled by the urge to walk away from crowds. This has a rather unrealistic
impact on their behavior, and situations occur where pedestrians are practically
unable to exit the start area or they simply walk backwards out of the corridor.
==PAGE:54==
42
Expanding & Investigating the Model
To avoid those situations only p-values in the range p ∈[−0.5; 1] are considered
in the rest of the report.
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
A
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
p
_
(a) The entire width of the cor-
ridor is in use because of the
negative social eﬀect.
7
-1
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
F
-1
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
SIMULATION, p = -0.35, q = 0.5, N = 30
Optimal behaviour
Everyone walks left
Everyone walks right
Left sweep
Right sweep
(b) The ﬂux-diagram with negative social eﬀect is
very similar to the results from the experiment.
Figure 5.2: Results from simulation with negative social eﬀect p = −0.35 and N = 30
pedestrians in the corridor. The resemblance is high between experiment
and the simulation with p = −0.35.
Using this slightly extended model for values of p ∈[−0.5; 0], it is found that
simulations where p = −0.35 and q = 0.5 results in the best ﬁt between the
behavior in the simulations and the experiment. For those values the pedestrians
spread out like in the experiment and the resulting ﬂux-diagram is very similar
to the one seen in the experiment, see Figure 5.2b.
The experimental observations show a very rational crowd mentality that can
be modelled as an anti-group behavior making the crowd spread rather than
gather.
5.2
Investigating the Extended Model
To investigate the eﬀect of the expanded p-range, simulations have been run
with diﬀerent values for p ∈[−0.5; 1]. During the data processing an interesting
result emerged. It turns out that the eﬀective ﬂux past the obstacle is dependent
on the parameter p. The results can be found in Figure 5.3 where the average
==PAGE:55==
5.3 Adaptive p-Values
43
ﬂux [pedestrians/second] is plotted as a function of the p-value. It may be seen
from Figure 5.3 that there are two local ﬂux maxima, one around p = −0.35
and one around p = 0.6.
The low area for negative p (p < −0.4) is a result of the pedestrians avoiding
each other to an extent where it is destructive for the ﬂow past the obstacle.
They simply take too big detours to avoid fellow pedestrians. The local minima
around p ∈[0; 0.3] is happening, because the pedestrians are not socially aware
at all, and therefore the "information" about the obstacle does not travel back
to the new pedestrians through the actions of the front pedestrians. As a result
the pedestrians all end up walking straight into the obstacle before realizing its
existence, and then correct their paths to walk around it. This causes a slight
delay and is the reason for the drop in eﬃciency. A hypothesis for the reason why
p = 0.2 gives a lower ﬂux than p = 0 is that for p = 0.2 the pedestrians gather
and then collectively walk into the obstacle, whereas for p = 0 the pedestrians
walk a bit more spread out and some of them might avoid hitting the obstacle
by chance. The minimum around p = 1 is due to the pedestrians walking like
lemmings in an extreme way, which causes them to squeeze through even the
most narrow passages and walk big detours just to follow the ﬂow.
The maximum around p = −0.35 is due to the pedestrians spreading out and
using as much of the corridor as necessary for them to get past the obstacle
without being in the way of anyone and without taking unnecessary detours
just to avoid other pedestrians. This is exactly the behavior observed in the
experiment. The high area around p ∈[0.4; 0.75] is very interesting. The reason
why this area has a high ﬂux is due to the lemming eﬀect. For these values the
pedestrians follow each other enough to create a ﬂow that avoids the obstacle,
but they do not follow each other if the detour becomes too long. In those cases
the ﬂow switches to the optimal side of the obstacle.
The pedestrians in the experiment walked in a way corresponding to the peak
around p = −0.35, but the fact that there is an alternative behavior, which
is almost equally eﬃcient, suggests why pedestrians in certain situations might
walk with a strong social force. To ﬁnd out what could trigger a behavior like
the one seen in the simulations for p = 0.6, studies of pedestrian behavior from
other ﬁelds have been consulted.
5.3
Adaptive p-Values
In the experiment the pedestrians acted very rationally and spread out using
the entire width of the corridor to the extent needed for optimizing the ﬂux,
==PAGE:56==
44
Expanding & Investigating the Model
p
-0.5
0
0.5
1
Average flux [ped/sec]
3.08
3.09
3.1
3.11
3.12
3.13
3.14
3.15
3.16
3.17
Figure 5.3: The average ﬂux passing the obstacle is dependent on the social eﬀect
p. Local maxima can be seen around p = −0.35 and p = 0.6. The data
has been recorded by averaging the ﬂux observed in 3-5 independent
simulations for each p-value. The peak around p = −0.35 correspond to
the behavior of the pedestrians in the experiment described in Chapter 4
and is caused by the pedestrians spreading out and using both sides of
the obstacle. The maximum around p ∈[0.4; 0.75] is due to the lemming
eﬀect. Here the pedestrians follow each other to an extent where they
avoid the obstacle, but at the same time the pedestrians do not follow
each other, if the detours become too long. Both types of behavior seem
to be almost equally eﬃcient.
==PAGE:57==
5.3 Adaptive p-Values
45
corresponding to a social factor p = −0.35. But pedestrians do not always act
like this, there are also examples from the real world where pedestrians tend to
follow each other. An example could be the one described in the introduction
where a group of actors could trigger an entire pedestrian ﬂow on a busy street
to avoid a square marked on the ground, just by setting an example. Or the ex-
ample from evacuation scenarios where pedestrians tend to only use emergency
exits that are already in use. In those cases a clear positive social parameter
was in eﬀect.
5.3.1
Pedestrian Behavior
To ﬁnd out more about pedestrian behavior the work of Hansen, Hendricks and
Rendsvig [HHR13] has been studied. This research team has extensively studied
human behavior and especially herd behavior. Through a dialogue with Profes-
sor Vincent Hendrics and cand.stud.phil Henrik Boensvang from Copenhagen
University [HB14] important insight was gained. In literature herd behavior is
referred to as information cascades, i.e. information on how to act is travel-
ling like a cascade through people via their actions. In 1992, Bikhchandani et.
al [BHW98] deﬁned a mathematical model where rational agents behaved in a
way that might seem irrational due to an information cascade. This model has
later been investigated by several people including the research team mentioned
above. The model presented in their paper [HHR13] is described in detail in
Appendix C.
There are some points from literature that should be held in mind when mod-
elling pedestrians.
The main points gathered from [HHR13, HB14] are the
following:
1. Information cascades need a basis or trigger, i.e. a group of people who
act in a certain way ﬁrst. This can be more random like in the evacua-
tion example where the ﬁrst pedestrians choose a random exit, and later
pedestrians simply followed the ﬂow. But it can also be purposely created
like in the experiment from the pedestrian street where a group of actors
initiated the herd behavior.
2. Information cascades are fragile. If one pedestrian acts diﬀerently he can
break the information cascade. This was seen in the example from the
pedestrian street, where one person stepping into the square on the street
made the information cascade fall apart. Also in the evacuation scenario it
was seen that if one person opens another emergency exit the pedestrians
will start using it.
==PAGE:58==
46
Expanding & Investigating the Model
3. For an information cascade to arise, the agents must be confronted with a
choice, and their decision must be made under uncertainty. If the pedes-
trians already know what the smartest way to exit a building is, they will
use that exit in case of an emergency. And if the pedestrians know why
the square is marked on the ground, they will not get out of their way to
walk around it.
My experience is that pedestrians behave in a socially aware manner. Not by
acting like lemmings who solely walk according to their immediate surroundings.
But instead pedestrians are socially aware on a higher level and copy the general
tendencies. If the general trend is that pedestrians spread out and walk freely, a
new person entering will follow that tendency. But if all pedestrians are already
walking in a strict lane-formation, a new pedestrian will follow the tendency
of the crowd and join the lane-formation.
I do not believe pedestrians act
like lemmings, but I do believe that they are socially inﬂuenced and follow the
example of others to a certain extent.
To accommodate this, the model should be expanded and made dynamical
enough to adjust the social factor p according to the overall tendency of the
situation. The fragility of the herding eﬀect could also be captured in the math-
ematical model by introducing a more adaptive p-value. The p-value should be
varied depending on the general pattern of the pedestrian positions, and thus p
becomes a function of all pedestrian positions
p = p(x1, x2, ..., xN).
(5.4)
5.3.2
Distinguishing Between Situations
With the ambition to introduce dynamic p-values in the mathematical model,
we are left with the challenge to distinguish between a group trend and an anti-
group trend by simply observing the pedestrians at a given time. The human
mind is very good at distinguishing between scenarios, but it is not trivial to
write software that can generally quantify whether there is a tendency of social
group behavior or not. In our speciﬁc case with pedestrians passing an obstacle
in a corridor, a strong social group behavior will create a more narrow ﬂow
that only passes on one side of the obstacle, whereas a wide pedestrian stream
indicate a negative social grouping behavior.
The strength of the tendency
should also play a role since a tendency followed by many pedestrians should
weigh higher than if only a few pedestrians do the same thing.
==PAGE:59==
5.3 Adaptive p-Values
47
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
A
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
p
_
(a)
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
A
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
(b)
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
A
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
p
(c)
Figure 5.4: The software should be able to distinguish between these three scenarios.
In (a) the pedestrians walk in a clear lane formation, in (b) the tendency
is more vague since there are pedestrians walking on both sides of the
obstacle and in (c) the ﬂow is spread out.
In Figure 5.4 scenarios of possible pedestrian positions are displayed. In (a)
there is a clear lane formation and a newly arrived pedestrian should also have
a strong social group behavior, i.e. positive p-value. In (b) the tendency is more
vague, since pedestrians are walking both left and right around the obstacle. In
(c) there is no established norm telling what way to walk around the obstacle,
hence the social parameter p should be negative in this case.
One way of distinguishing between those situations is to monitor the width of
the ﬂow. If the ﬂow is narrow, there is a strong social group behavior, whereas
a wide ﬂow indicates weak or negative social group behavior.
As a simple function for modelling the pedestrian density, the two-dimensional
normal distribution (5.5) is ﬁtted to the positions of the pedestrians.
This
function can be used as a density measure, since a ﬂow scattered around the
corridor results in a wide and ﬂat normal distribution function, whereas positions
in lane formation will make the density function tall and narrow perpendicular
to the ﬂow direction
fx(x, y) =
1
p
(2π)2|Σ|
exp

−1
2(x −µ)T Σ−1(x −µ)

,
(5.5)
where µ = [µx, µy]T is the mean position, Σ is the symmetric covariance matrix
==PAGE:60==
48
Expanding & Investigating the Model
and |Σ| is the determinant of Σ. The covariance matrix contains the variance
in the x- and y-direction in the diagonal, and information on the correlation
between x and y, and thereby the rotation of the ﬂow, in the remaining matrix.
The eigenvectors of Σ, v1 and v2, represent the direction with the most vari-
ance and the direction perpendicular to the ﬁrst, respectively. The eigenvalue
corresponding to each eigenvector represents the variance in the direction of the
eigenvector. In this situation the width of the ﬂow is of interest and thereby the
eigenvalue corresponding to the eigenvector perpendicular to the ﬂow direction,
λv2 = σ2
v2. Hence, the standard deviation in the desired direction is σv2 =
p
λv2.
This standard deviation σv2 measures the average spread perpendicular to the
ﬂow direction, and can therefore be used to distinguish between the diﬀerent
pedestrian situations in Figure 5.4.
The pedestrian positions in the scenarios in Figure 5.4 have respectively σv2,a =
0.4, σv2,b = 0.6 and σv2,c = 1.1. The scenario in Figure 5.4 (b) is special in
the sense that it is exactly the situation where the ﬂow changes from everyone
walking left around the obstacle to a new situation. The standard deviation
of the positions in the direction perpendicular to the ﬂow in this situation is
denoted the critical standard deviation, σ∗
N. For N = 30 the critical standard
deviation is σ∗
30 = 0.6.
It is preferable that the distinction between a ﬂow with strong social tendencies
and one without is based on the actions of the pedestrians and not the amount of
pedestrians in the corridor. Since the width of the ﬂow inevitably is dependent
on the number of pedestrians in the corridor N, this method of distinguishing
between situations only works when the situations compared have the same
amount of pedestrians. If ﬂows based on diﬀerent number of pedestrians should
be compared, a correction factor dependent on the number of pedestrians N
should be implemented.
Another measure that might be used to distinguish between the scenarios could
be the pair-correlation function or average distance to the nearest neighbours.
This strategy would also have some issues in the sense that the distances would
be dependent on the number of pedestrians in the corridor.
5.3.3
Implementation of a Switch Function
The distinction function has been implemented as a simple switch function where
the p-value switches between a pmax and pmin value depending on the scenario
observed. If the pedestrians are observed to walk in a strict lane formation like
in Figure 5.4 (a), the p-value is set to p = pmax, whereas a scenario like the one
in Figure 5.4 (c) would lead to p = pmin. The (b) scenario where the ﬂow splits
==PAGE:61==
5.3 Adaptive p-Values
49
is when the transition happens between pmax and pmin.
p =
 pmax
for
σv2 > σ∗
N
pmin
for
σv2 ≤σ∗
N
(5.6)
A switch function was chosen over a continuous and smooth function for two
reasons. First of all because it matches the mindset from the model described
in Appendix C of how information cascades can emerge and fall apart based
on the actions of very few people. When p = pmax an information cascade is
taking place, whereas a small perturbation, say one or a few pedestrians acting
diﬀerently, can make p switch to p = pmin and hence break the information
cascade. The other reason is the result found in Chapter 5.2, where two local
maxima were discovered when investigating the ﬂux past the obstacle for diﬀer-
ent values of p ∈[−0.5; 1]. The simulations showed that p = −0.35 was the most
eﬃcient way for the pedestrians to get past the obstacle. But the eﬃciency was
also high for p ∈[0.4; 0.75]. The valley between the two maxima suggest that
there should not be a smooth transition between pmax and pmin. The result in
Figure 5.3 furthermore suggests that pmin = −0.35 and that pmax ∈[0.4; 0.75].
In a more detailed and realistic model, the pedestrians would only be inﬂuenced
by pedestrians within their viewing angle, but several practical reasons ruled
out implementing this option. First of all the large variety of pedestrians in
the cone of vision would make it hard to distinguish between situations. And
secondly, the boundary conditions where pedestrians are reinserted when they
cross the back-line would make the pedestrians in the front "confused", since
the pedestrians they are following suddenly disappear.
A feature that would make the model more realistic would be adding some
randomness in the p-values among the pedestrians. This would not be hard to
implement, but I have chosen to study the model as simple as possible, so that
the results actually reﬂect the dynamics of the model and not just a random
outcome.
In the following section, results from simulations performed with the dynamic
p-values deﬁned in (5.6) are presented. In the simulations pmin = −0.35 and
several diﬀerent pmax values have been tried. The value σ∗
N is dependent of N
and for N = 30 σ∗
N = 0.6 is used.
==PAGE:62==
50
Expanding & Investigating the Model
5.4
Simulations Using the Switch Model
When doing science, one should always strive towards developing models that
can easily be tested by real life experiments. The set-up studied so far has a
couple of disadvantages in this respect. First of all, one sweep of the obstacle
in the corridor takes 15-20 minutes and requires at least one pedestrian walking
through per second. The experiment described in Chapter 4 had on average
2.5 pedestrians walking past the obstacle per second. If the pedestrians cannot
be "reused" each sweep would require at least 3000 pedestrians.
The other
disadvantage is that the herding eﬀect is quite fragile, and if one pedestrian acts
diﬀerently and breaks out of the herd, the entire sweep has to be redone. And
last but not least, it is unlikely that an information cascade will spontaneously
arise in the beginning of the experiment. To solve these issues the set-up needs
to be re-thought.
Probably, a series of small runs would be preferable over
one big sweep. And if every run is initiated by a group of undercover actors
all walking on the same side of the obstacle, an information cascade could be
artiﬁcially initiated in the beginning of each run. These were the main ideas
that lead to the simulations described in the following.
5.4.1
Introducing leaders
A series of simulations have been performed with the new switch function im-
plemented in the model. In each simulation the obstacle is stationary and the
pedestrian ﬂow is initialized by a ﬂow with a strong social dynamic. The initial
ﬂows are taken from a run of the simulation with a high p-value, the high social
factor ensures that the ﬂow is strictly on one side of the obstacle. Pedestrian
positions and velocities that can be used as initial ﬂows, have been saved for
every position of the obstacle and for a ﬂow on both side of the obstacle.
Beginning a simulation with an initiating ﬂow with a strong social dynamic has
some clear advantages. First of all the simulations can be started at any desired
obstacle position. In other words, the obstacle positions do not have to come
in any speciﬁc order. Also, the number of pedestrians in the corridor stays the
same all the way through the simulation, which is an advantage when the switch
function has to be used, as it is dependent on N.
In the simulations where the ﬂow is initiated on the side of the obstacle width
ample space, the pedestrians tend to stay together throughout the duration of
the simulation. On the contrary, if the ﬂow is initiated on the narrow side of
the obstacle, there is a probability of the ﬂow getting divided by the obstacle,
which would trigger the model to switch into the pmin-mode. The time it takes
==PAGE:63==
5.4 Simulations Using the Switch Model
51
from a simulation starts until the ﬂow potentially splits and the model switches
to pmin-mode is denoted the persistence time, Tp. The persistence time is both
depending on the position of the obstacle and on the pmax value used in the
model.
In Figure 5.5 the persistence time is plotted as a function of the obstacle position
for four diﬀerent values of pmax. The blue dots represent the simulations with
an initial ﬂow on the left side of the obstacle, whereas the results from the
simulations with an initial ﬂow to the right of the obstacle is plotted in red. If
the ﬂow does not switch the persistence time is set to 30 seconds, which is the
duration of the simulations. The gray line marks eight seconds, which is roughly
the time it takes for a ﬂow to switch if the ﬂow is unstable to begin with. The
eight seconds can be seen as the time it takes for the artiﬁcial initial ﬂow to
pass the obstacle and it is therefore only interesting to look at the dynamics
happening after those initial eight seconds. A video of the simulations with
pmax = 0.6 and pmin = −0.35 can be seen in Appendix A7.
Some of the same trends as the ones seen in Figure 3.3 can be seen. The con-
nection between these two sets of data will be discussed further in the following
section.
5.4.2
Identifying Hysteresis
The graphs showing the persistence times in Figure 5.5 have some resemblance
with the ﬂux-diagrams shown in Figure 3.3 even though there are two diﬀerent
parameters on the y-axis. Let us compare the ﬂux-diagram generated by the
original model with p = 0.7 and the plot of the persistence times with pmax = 0.7
generated by the new expanded switch model. To ease the comparison they are
placed next to each other in Figure 5.6. The blue curves both begin in the upper
right corner and continue at the maximum value (everyone walks left and the
ﬂow does not fall appart, respectively) until µ = −0.5 where the curve breaks
and drops quite rapidly to the minimum value (everyone walks right and the
ﬂow breaks apart immediately, respectively). The red curve follows the same
trend as the blue just starting at µ = −1 and working its way to µ = 1, but
because of the diﬀerence of the y-axis between the two plots, the red curve is
ﬂipped vertically in the persistence time plot compared to the ﬂux-diagram.
As mentioned earlier, hysteresis occurs when a system carries a history. And
in the simulations using the model with dynamical p-value the history is arti-
ﬁcially created by the initial ﬂow. The hysteresis can therefore still be found
in the results from the simulations with the dynamical p and initial ﬂow. But
since the red curve in the persistence time plots is ﬂipped compared to classical
==PAGE:64==
52
Expanding & Investigating the Model
7
-1
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Persistence time [seconds]
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Flow initiated on the left side
Flow initiated on the right side
(a) pmax = 0.55
7
-1
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Persistence time [seconds]
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Flow initiated on the left side
Flow initiated on the right side
(b) pmax = 0.6
7
-1
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Persistence time [seconds]
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Flow initiated on the left side
Flow initiated on the right side
(c) pmax = 0.65
7
-1
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Persistence time [seconds]
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Flow initiated on the left side
Flow initiated on the right side
(d) pmax = 0.7
Figure 5.5: Each of the four ﬁgures represents a diﬀerent pmax-value. They are all
created by a series of independent simulations with diﬀerent obstacle
positions µ-values and initial ﬂows.The blue data points represent simu-
lations where the ﬂow was initiated on the left side, whereas simulations
with initial ﬂow on the right side of the obstacle are marked with a red
circle. The persistence time, Tp is measured as the time from the sim-
ulation begins until the ﬂow switches from solely being on one side of
the obstacle to walking freely on both sides of the obstacle. If the ﬂow
does not switch, the persistence time is set to 30 seconds, which is the
duration of the simulation.
==PAGE:65==
5.4 Simulations Using the Switch Model
53
mu
-1
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
F
-1
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
SIMULATION, p = 0.7, q = 0.5 and N = 30
Everyone walks left
Everyone walks right
Left sweep
Right sweep
(a) The ﬂux-diagram with p = 0.7 show-
ing a normalized diﬀerence F between
the ﬂux on the left and the right side
of the obstacle.
7
-1
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Persistence time [seconds]
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Flow initiated on the left side
Flow initiated on the right side
(b) The persistence time tp is the time it
takes from the simulation is started
until the ﬂow breaks apart and the
function switches from pmax = 0.7 to
pmin = −0.35.
Figure 5.6: When comparing the ﬂux-diagram and the plot of the persistence times
it is noted that they are quite similar except for the red curve being
ﬂipped vertically.
hysteresis loops, the area determining the strength of the hysteresis is now the
one below both curves. Figure 5.7 shows the classical hysteresis loop (a) where
the hysteresis is measured as the area between the curves and the ﬂipped version
(b) where the same area can be found as the area below both curves.
Since hysteresis still occurs in the simulations with the dynamical p and initial
ﬂow and can be measured as the area below both curves, the hysteresis graph in
Figure 3.4 can be reproduced using the results from the new model. Note that
persistence time based data are obtained from short independent simulations,
while the earlier hysteresis data are based on very long simulations using the
original model. In Figure 5.8 the original hysteresis curve (black) is plotted along
with the new hysteresis data (magenta), and the two are almost identical. The
p-value corresponding to 50% hysteresis is almost identical in the two datasets,
0.7 for the black curve and 0.69 for the magenta. Further more it may be noted
that the hysteresis curve based on the persistence times is steeper than the
original curve. In general the curves are very much alike, which shows that the
persistence times can be used as a substitute to the ﬂux diﬀerence F to measure
hysteresis.
==PAGE:66==
54
Expanding & Investigating the Model
(a) The classic hysteresis loop. The area
between the blue and red curve can be
used as a measurement of the strength
of the hysteresis.
(b) If the red curve from the classic hys-
teresis loop is ﬂipped vertically, the
area underneath both curves measures
the strength of the hysteresis.
Figure 5.7: The classic and a ﬂipped version of the hysteresis loop.
p
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Hysteresis
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Original hysteresis, using flux data
Hysteresis, using persistance times
Figure 5.8: The hysteresis curve for the data from the original model (black) is plot-
ted along with the new hysteresis curve based on the persistence time
data (magenta). The hysteresis curves are very much alike, which shows
that the persistence time Tp can be used as a substitute to the original
ﬂux measurement F when measuring the hysteresis.
==PAGE:67==
5.4 Simulations Using the Switch Model
55
»The pedestrian behavior identiﬁed in Chapter 4 was captured by
introducing negative social eﬀect. For negative p-values the pedes-
trians are slightly repelled from one another, which causes them to
spread out like the pedestrians in the experiment did.
From simulations performed with social values p ∈[−0.5; 1], it was
discovered that there are two optimal types of social behavior max-
imizing the ﬂux passing the obstacle.
In the ﬁrst optimum, the
pedestrians are slightly repelled by each other, which causes them
to utilize the available space and, thereby, ﬁnd a fast route around
the obstacle. This behavior happens around p = −0.35 and corre-
sponds to the behavior seen in the experiment. The second type of
optimal social behavior is caused by pedestrians following each other
and through the actions of the previous pedestrians ﬁnd the shortest
path around the obstacle. This behavior was found for p ∈[0.4; 0.75].
In the real world pedestrians do not show a static social behav-
ior. They adapt according to the actions of their fellow pedestrians.
Therefore, a new model was proposed that enables switching be-
tween the two optimal types of social behavior. From a series of
small independent simulations using the new adaptive switch-model
and an initial ﬂow to trigger the herd behavior, it was possible to
recreate the hysteresis result obtained in the original simulations in
Chapter 3. Instead of using the ﬂux to measure the hysteresis, the
persistence time Tp is used, i.e. the time it takes before the herd
behavior falls apart.
In Chapter 6 an alternative experiment set-up is proposed utilizing
the strengths of the new switch-model.
==PAGE:68==
56
Expanding & Investigating the Model
==PAGE:69==
Chapter 6
Conclusion & Outlook
The mathematical model described in Chapter 2 has been implemented in Mat-
Lab and simulations based on the model have been run.
In Chapter 3 the
results from [Sø14][STSH14] where hysteresis was found in simulations of pedes-
trian ﬂows with high lemming eﬀect (p ≥0.55) were veriﬁed. Unfortunately the
live experiment, described in Chapter 4 showed no lemming eﬀect and thus no
hysteresis. Instead of following each other like lemmings, the pedestrians spread
out and walked in areas with available space. To accommodate this behavior
negative social eﬀect has been introduced in the mathematical model and a
great resemblance between the behavior in the experiment and in simulations
performed with p = −0.35 was discovered.
From studying the data produced by the simulations, it was discovered that
some social parameter values results in a higher ﬂux past the obstacle than
others, i.e. the ﬂow eﬃciency is found to depend on p. It was discovered that
there are two types of optimal social behavior, one around p = −0.35 and one for
p ∈[0.4; 0.75], see Figure 5.3. The ﬁrst optimum is caused by rational pedestrian
behavior, and the pedestrians spreading out to optimally utilize the width of the
corridor. The second optimum is due to a balanced social eﬀect, and pedestrians
with this social behavior are following the ﬂow when advantageous to ﬁnd the
shortest path around the obstacle. It should be noted that if the social cohesion
is too strong, the pedestrians will not be able to adapt to changes in the scenery
and their route will no longer be eﬃcient. In the same way, pedestrians with too
==PAGE:70==
58
Conclusion & Outlook
much negative social eﬀect will take large detours to avoid fellow pedestrians.
The study of human behavior in relation to information cascades gave rise to
the idea of a more adaptive p value. A new model, the switch-model, has been
developed and enables switching between the two optimal social behavior types
found in Figure 5.3. The adaptable p-value takes into account the general ten-
dencies in the pedestrian ﬂow, in such a way that if all pedestrians are following
each other in a lane formation it will cause a strong social eﬀect among the
pedestrians (high p), whereas a freely moving pedestrian crowd will cause new
pedestrians to follow the trend and also walk freely (negative p). The width of
the Gaussian density function ﬁtted to the pedestrian ﬂow is used as a decision
parameter when distinguishing between scenarios. The new model allows for
herd behavior to arise and fall apart, which is the nature of such phenomena
according to [HHR13].
Simulations have been performed using the new switch model. From a series of
short independent simulations using an initial ﬂow to trigger the information
cascade, it is possible to recreate the hysteresis result obtained in the original
simulations in Chapter 3. Instead of using the ﬂux to measure strenth of the herd
behavior, the persistence time Tp, i.e. the time it takes before the information
cascade falls apart, is used. These two ways are equivalent and results in the
same hysteresis result.
The results from the simulations show that information cascades and hysteresis
can be studied by monitoring persistence times in short and more practical,
independent experiments, instead of measuring the ﬂux around an obstacle over
long time periods.
6.1
Proposal of Future Experiment Designs
As mentioned above, the results from Chapter 5 suggest that hysteresis eﬀects
can be found by performing a series of short experiments with an artiﬁcial initial
ﬂow creating a trigger of the herding eﬀect. The experiments do not need to be
longer than one or two minutes and can be repeated over and over again with
diﬀerent people to make the result statistically stronger.
Several things have to be changed in the experiment set-up to accommodate an
information cascade and consequently a hysteresis eﬀect.
1. Creating a basis or trigger for the information cascades. In the experi-
ment described in Chapter 4, no information cascades were observed, and
==PAGE:71==
6.1 Proposal of Future Experiment Designs
59
waiting for it to happen spontaneously in an artiﬁcial setting might be a
very time consuming strategy. In order to study information cascades in
experiments, the eﬀect would need to be introduced artiﬁcially through
the use of actors.
2. Information cascades are fragile. A way of dealing with the fragility of
information cascades is to make a series of short experiments where the
persistence times are measured, instead of one experiment lasting up to an
hour where the ﬂux is measured. In this way the fragility is embraced in
contrast to the original set-up where it could ruin the entire experiment.
Data should then be analysed using persistence times as introduced in
Chapter 5.4.
3. The pedestrians should be confronted by a choice and the decision should
be made under uncertainty. The pedestrians should not know what is on
the other side of the obstacle, since this would eliminate the uncertainty,
which is necessary for the information cascade to arise. This implies that
no pedestrian can walk through the corridor twice, since that person then
would know what the outcome of each option is. To maintain the un-
certainty, a couple of rows of curtains or other opaque material could be
placed immediately after the obstacle. In this way the pedestrians can
walk past the obstacle, but not see past it.
In a future experiment, I would suggest a set-up with only two obstacle positions,
see Figure 6.1. One in the middle at the indicated position a, and one displaced
to the side at position b. A team of 10-20 undercover actors should initiate a
ﬂow on one side of the obstacle simply by all walking that direction. If the real
pedestrians, who do not know what the experiment is about, follow the initiated
ﬂow in scenario (a), there must be some herding eﬀect in the pedestrians. If the
pedestrians follow the actors even through the narrow passage in scenario (b),
hysteresis is observed.
The setting of the experiment should be in a place where there is a natural ﬂow
of pedestrians. Pedestrian experiments have had a tendency to lack pedestrians,
so it is important to perform the experiment in a place where there is a large
natural ﬂow. If the experiment should be performed by DTU, I would suggest
one of the following settings:
• Roskilde Festival would be an ideal setting for pedestrian experiments,
since there are large groups of pedestrian crowds and DTU and Roskilde
Festival already have a close working relationship. Experiments like these
ones will strengthen the knowledge on pedestrian behavior and thereby
also crowd safety, which is a big issue at a large festival like Roskilde
Festival.
==PAGE:72==
60
Conclusion & Outlook
Incoming 
ﬂow
Incoming 
ﬂow
Obstacle 
Curtains
Wall
a
b
Initial ﬂow 
2
Initial ﬂow 
1
Initial ﬂow 
2
Initial ﬂow 
1
Figure 6.1: A new experiment set-up is proposed where the obstacle is not moved
during the experiment, and with actors creating an initial ﬂow for each
experiment. If the real pedestrians follow the initiated ﬂow in (a), it
can be concluded that there is herd behavior among the pedestrians. If
the pedestrians follow the initiated ﬂow through the narrow passage in
(b), hysteresis is observed.
The time it takes before the ﬂow is back
to normal, TP after initiating a strictly right or strictly left ﬂow, is a
measure of the strength of the herding eﬀect in the ﬂow of pedestrians.
==PAGE:73==
6.2 Further Work
61
• At the University after a lecture or a concert. It is easy to get permission
to build walls and set up cameras at the university. The students might
become suspicious, though, if the setting outside the lecture hall changes
dramatically during the lecture.
6.2
Further Work
Several things could be interesting to study in this ﬁeld. First of all it could be
interesting to perform an experiment showing herd behavior. I would recom-
mend performing a series of short experiments where herd behavior is initiated
by a group of actors as discussed in Chapter 6.1.
Also it could be interesting to further develop the adaptive social part of the
model. First of all it would be preferable, if the model was more robust to-
wards diﬀerent ﬂow densities, making it possible to do simulations where the
number of pedestrians N is not ﬁxed throughout the entire simulation. A more
robust model should also be able to work in many diﬀerent scenarios, not just
pedestrians walking past an obstacle, but also in evacuation scenes like the one
mentioned in the introduction. To make the model more realistic, one could
introduce individual p-values for each pedestrian and some of randomness in
their behavior.
A collaboration should be encouraged between DTU and the team behind
[HHR13], who is researching in the ﬁeld of herd behavior at Copenhagen Uni-
versity and Roskilde University. This would help when planning an experiment,
where herd behavior is expected to arise, since they have experience in this
area. Furthermore, the group might have valuable input in relation to further
development of the adaptive social parameter in the model.
It could also be interesting to look into the asymmetric escape behavior found in
ants by [ARNF05]. It might be possible to quantify the herd behavior through
similar experiments, in which the ants should be replaced by human pedestri-
ans. The experiment could be executed in a classroom with two symmetrically
placed doors during an unlisted evacuation rehearsal. If one of the doors is used
signiﬁcantly more than the other, it would be a sign of herding behavior. One
could introduce a bigger urge to leave the room by releasing a smelling, but
non-toxic gas in the room. DTU has three lecture rooms in building 324 that
could be applicable in this context since they all have a pair of symmetrical
exit doors. Usage of lecture rooms also enables three simultaneous repeats of
the experiment. Appropriate ethical considerations should naturally be taken
before the experiments.
==PAGE:74==
62
Conclusion & Outlook
In conclusion there are plenty of opportunities for further research in this ex-
citing and highly relevant ﬁeld. Improving insight into pedestrian behavior will
continue to help achieving higher safety levels in evacuation scenarios and poten-
tially more eﬃcient ﬂows through crowded areas like metro stations and other
busy places.
==PAGE:75==
Appendix A
Videos From Simulations
The videos from the simulations can be found in a dropbox folder by clicking
here. If the link does not work, try copy the following url to your browser:
www.dropbox.com/sh/o6nbm4hv2o90jmm/AAClhLVl7s6pxP7LJOprHQNma?dl=0
In the folder there are seven videos showing diﬀerent simulations. All simu-
lations have N = 30 pedestrians and a equal balance between the mass- and
velocity-model, q = 0.5. They all show an up-sweep and a down-sweep, but
with diﬀerent values of the social parameter p:
A1 Simulation with p = 0.
A2 Simulation with p = 0.3.
A3 Simulation with p = 0.6.
A4 Simulation with p = 0.7.
A5 Simulation with p = 0.9.
A6 Simulation with p = −0.35.
A7 Simulation showing the switch model with pmax = 0.6 and pmin = −0.35.
==PAGE:76==
64
Videos From Simulations
Note that the videos are not played in real time as only every ﬁfth frame has
been saved. In A7 the speed is a bit diﬀerent, since here every second frame has
been saved. The dropbox folder will be available until April 1st 2015.
==PAGE:77==
Appendix B
Material From Experiment
In the planning process prior to the experiment, signiﬁcant amounts of PR
and other material were produced.
In this section a small collection of this
information may be found. In Figure B.1 a screen shot from the facebook event
page is shown. The event was created to draw attention and attract volunteers
for the experiment. In Figure B.2 the design of the ﬂyer is reproduced. The
ﬂyers were handed out to students in the week prior to the experiment. Finally
the timetable for the execution of the experiment is shown in Table B.1.
==PAGE:78==
66
Material From Experiment
Figure B.1: A screen shot from the facebook event created to generate awareness and
attract volunteers for the experiment. Approximately 30-40 participants
were recruited this way.
==PAGE:79==
67
Vi har brug for DIN hjælp. I forbindelse med 
forskning inden for fodgængeradfærd laver DTU 
Compute et stort fodgængerforsøg. Du kan være 
en af de 80 frivillige vi skal bruge i forsøget. Det 
tager en lille time fra kl. 11.30 tirsdag den 11. 
november. 
 
Alle deltagere får efterfølgende en sandwich og 
mulighed for at vinde 100.000 kr*! 
 
Læs mere på facebookeventet  
“Stort fodgængerforsøg på DTU”  
*Som tak for hjælpen modtager alle frivillige et skrabelod, med mulighed for at vinde 100.000 kr. 
Kontakt: Alexandra Freltoft, alexandra@freltoft.dk +45 29403533
Deltag i stort 
fodgænger-
forsøg på 
DTU 
Tirsdag den 
11/11 kl. 11.30 
Bygning 303A
Figure B.2: Flyers were handed out to the students while they were solving exer-
cises on the Friday before the experiment. Many students asked ques-
tions and sounded interested and most of the volunteers were recruited
among these students. Especially the invitation for free sandwiches was
popular.
==PAGE:80==
68
Material From Experiment
Start time
Duration of phase
Description
Duration
µ
11:40
1st phase: 2 min
Control round
2 min
0
11:45
2nd phase: 17 min
Left sweep
2 min
1
1.5 min
0.75
1.5 min
0.5
1.5 min
0.25
1.5 min
0.125
1.5 min
0
1.5 min
-0.125
1.5 min
-0.25
1.5 min
-0.5
1.5 min
-0.75
1.5 min
-1
12:02
3rd phase: 17 min
Right sweep
2 min
-1
1.5 min
-0.75
1.5 min
-0.5
1.5 min
-0.25
1.5 min
-0.125
1.5 min
0
1.5 min
0.125
1.5 min
0.25
1.5 min
0.5
1.5 min
0.75
1.5 min
1
12:22
4th phase: 2 min
Control round
2 min
0
Table B.1: Timetable from the experiment described in Chapter 4. The experiment
was set to start at 11:40 and last 45 minutes. The experiment consisted
of four phases: A control round, a left-sweep, a right-sweep and a ﬁnal
control round at the end. In the control rounds the obstacle was placed in
the center position µ = 0. During the sweeps the obstacle was changing
position and the duration each position was held can be found in the
timetable.
The ﬁrst position in each sweep was held for an extra 30
seconds to create a steady initial ﬂow.
==PAGE:81==
Appendix C
Information Cascades
Back in 1992 Bikhchandani et. al [BHW98] deﬁned a mathematical model where
rational agents behaved what would seem to be irrational due to an information
cascade. This model has since then been investigated by several people including
a research team from Copenhagen University.
The model presented in their
paper [HHR13] is described in detail in the following section.
C.1
Model Assumptions
Escalating social behavior, where people act using other people’s prior actions
to determine their future decision, is in literature often known as information
cascades. Models attempting to describe this have a set of agents confronted
with a choice, and the agents are maximizing their individual expected outcome.
According to [HHR13] the underlying structure that can incite information cas-
cades consists of the following three ingredients:
1. A set of rational agents that act sequentially
2. A set of options, between which the agents must choose
3. A preferred order of the outcome of the options
==PAGE:82==
70
Information Cascades
No agent must know, which action leads to which outcome, and the preferred
order of the outcome must be the same for all agents. The agents base their
decision not only on their private information, but also on the action of those
who act before them. In general the knowledge of the agents is assumed to be
the following:
1. Knowledge about the underlying structure
2. Each agent makes a rational decision based on the information available,
which is:
(a) A private signal; an intuition telling, which action leads to the pre-
ferred outcome.
(b) A public signal; the actions made by the previous agents
3. Knowledge among the agents that their private signals are equally likely
to be correct
4. Knowledge that the other agents act rationally based on their private and
public signals.
Notice in 2b that it is only the actions of the previous agents that is known, not
the signals behind, in other words: As an agent you know what the other people
did, but not why they did it. The model can be used to describe situations where
a sequence of agents have to select one of the available options. In situations
where later agents on a rational basis ignore their private signal and exclusively
act on the public signal available, an information cascade is happening.
C.2
Restaurant Example
To illustrate the model imagine a simpliﬁed example of two equally expensive
restaurants in a tourist area around dinner time. Let us call them restaurant A
and B. Hungry tourists arrive at the restaurants one by one and none of them
have any previous experience with the restaurants, and hence do not know,
which restaurant they would prefer.
It is assumed that the tourists are all
looking for the same outcome: a high quality meal. When arriving the tourists
generate a ﬁrst impression (private signal), of which restaurant they prefer and
through the windows the actions of the previous tourists can be seen (public
signal). This leaves every tourist with a binary choice, restaurant A or B.
==PAGE:83==
C.3 Dynamical Eﬀects
71
The ﬁrst tourist arrives and gets a ﬁrst impression, let us say she prefers restau-
rant A. Given that there is no further information available she will follow her
personal intuition and get a table at restaurant A.
The second tourist now has to make a decision. He knows that the ﬁrst tourist
had a personal signal telling her that restaurant A was best and he too gets a
personal signal. If his instinct tells him that A is better he knows that the two
personal signals have been {A, A}, and hence he too will choose restaurant A. If
he on the other hand feels that restaurant B is more appealing, the restaurants
tie {A, B} and there is no rationally correct action. In this case a tie-breaking
rule must be applied; it could be randomizing, following his private intuition
or something else.
Let us for now assume that the second tourist preferred
restaurant A too and therefore chose to get a table next to the ﬁrst tourist.
When the third tourist arrives she receives the public signal {A, A} and can from
this deduce that the the ﬁrst tourist had a best ﬁrst impression of restaurant A.
Additionally, given information on the tie-breaker rule she might also deduce
that the second tourist personally preferred restaurant A. As it is known from
the assumptions that each private signal is equally likely to be correct, it now
does not matter for her actions, what her personal ﬁrst impression is. If she too
had the best impression of restaurant A, she should join the others, and even if
she had a best ﬁrst impression of restaurant B the information deducted from
the actions of the ﬁrst two tourists would make restaurant A the more rational
choice. She will therefore choose to ignore her own ﬁrst impression and follow
the actions of the previous tourists and will thereby be the ﬁrst person in the
information cascade.
The following tourists will, just like the third tourist, ignore their private in-
tuitions and choose restaurant A. These actions will be based on the same
deductions as tourist three did; namely that the two ﬁrst tourists both had a
best ﬁrst impression about restaurant A. The choice of the fourth or ﬁfth tourist
will, however, not be made on a stronger basis than the one made by tourist
three since her ﬁrst impression did not inﬂuence her choice of restaurant and
her action therefore is uninformative. The following tourists will all be part of
the cascade and hence follow the herd.
C.3
Dynamical Eﬀects
The restaurant example is of course oversimpliﬁed compared to the real world,
but shows that the actions of only a few people can create an information cas-
cade based on the model assumptions earlier described. The decision of two
==PAGE:84==
72
Information Cascades
people might seem like quite a weak basis for an information cascade, and in
the example described it would only take one person to go against the herd to
break the information cascade. To give an example of this, imagine that one
tourist has a strong intuition telling her that restaurant B is preferable and for
some reason ignores the public signal and walks into restaurant B. The next
tourist arriving can now deduce that the ﬁrst two tourists had a personal intu-
ition telling them A was the best restaurant while the person just before had
an intuition about restaurant B was the best. All the tourists in between were
part of the cascade and their action does not give any information about their
personal intuitions. The information available about previous private signals
is therefore {A, A, −, −, ..., −, B}. If the newly arrived tourist has an intuition
that restaurant A is best he would choose A, while if his stomach tells him
that restaurant B is better, the restaurants will tie and he will have to use the
tie-breaking rule. His private signal does therefore matter and he is not part of
the cascade. The cascade can as described emerge and fall apart based on the
actions of quite few people, and is therefore considered a fragile phenomenon.
The relatively small basis that is needed to initiate an information cascade
and the fragility of the phenomena is caused by the assumption that all private
signals are equally likely to be correct. In the real world there might be examples
where the agents weigh their own private signal higher than other pedestrian’s
private signal. In these cases information cascades can still emerge, but need
a stronger basis, e.i. more people have to do the same thing to initiate the
cascade, and consequently more people are needed to go against the herd to
break the information cascade.
C.3.1
Front Movers Can Create Herding Eﬀects
The research group at Copenhagen University behind [HHR13] also conducted
a series of experiments regarding the bystander eﬀect and herding eﬀect on
a pedestrian street in Copenhagen.
The experiment is published in a series
of videos on youtube, the one dealing with herding eﬀect is [BRH14]. In the
experiment an actor "gets sick" in the middle of a busy street and the aim
of the experiment is then to ﬁnd out how the reaction time is dependent on
public signals like clothing, age, sex and objects like a beer can. In one of the
experiments a tour guide looks at the sick actor and walks right passed him, and
the entire group follows his example and walk by. This is a very clear case of
an authority setting the example that the group follows. The mechanism that
many people tend to follow authorities blindly was demonstrated back in 1963
in what has later been known as the Milgram Experiment [Mil63], where test
subjects give what they think is a lethal electrical shock when ordered by an
authority.
==PAGE:85==
C.3 Dynamical Eﬀects
73
Where herding eﬀects are found in human behavior, someone has to act as ﬁrst
movers to initiate the information cascade. In experiments this is often done
using a group of actors as catalysts. They serve as the basis in the information
cascade, and like in the experiment with the square marked on the pedestrians
street, the eﬀect of their actions can be seen even a while after they are gone.
In Chapter 5 elements from this model are implemented into the mathematical
model described in Section 2.1, to create a more adaptive and realistic herding
eﬀect.
==PAGE:86==
74
Information Cascades
==PAGE:87==
Bibliography
[ARNF05] E. Altshuler, O. Ramos, Y. Nunez, and J. Fernandez. Panic induced
symmetry breaking in escaping ants. The American Naturalist, Vol-
ume 166(6):643–649, 2005.
[Ban92]
Abhijit V. Banerjee. A simple model of herd behavior. Quarterly
Journal of Economics, Volume 107(3):797, 1992.
[BHW98]
S. Bikhchandani, D. Hirshleifer, and I. Welch. Learning from the
behavior of others: Conformity, fads, and informational cascades.
Journal of Economic Perspectives, Volume 12(3):151–170, 1998.
[BRH14]
Henrik Boensvang, Rasmus Rendsvig, and Vincent Hendricks. In-
fostorms - lemming eﬀect. http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0S-
mNUWyR-w, January 2014.
[CHS12]
Oliver Corradi, Poul G. Hjorth, and Jens Starke. Equation-free de-
tection and continuation of a hopf bifurcation point in a particle
model of pedestrian ﬂow. SIAM Journal on Applied Dynamical Sys-
tems, Volume 11(3):1007–1032, 2012.
[DK14]
Felix Dietrich and Gerta Koester. Gradient navigation model for
pedestrian dynamics.
Physical Review E - Statistical, Nonlinear,
and Soft Matter Physics, Volume 89(6), 2014.
[DR13]
Danish Radio DR. Kongerigets klogeste. It has not been possible to
get the clip of the experiment from DR, December 2013.
[HB14]
Vincent F. Hendricks and Henrik A. Boensvang. Personal commu-
nication, December 2014.
==PAGE:88==
76
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[HFV00]
Dirk Helbing, Illés Farkas, and Tamás Vicsek. Simulating dynamical
features of escape panic. Nature, Volume 407(6803):487–490, 2000.
[HHR13]
Pelle G. Hansen, Vincent F. Hendricks, and Rasmus K. Rendsvig.
Infostorms. Metaphilosophy, Volume 44(3):301–326, 2013.
[Kie50]
Søren Kierkegaard. The Diary of Søren Kierkegaard. Citadel (De-
cember 1, 2000), 1850.
[Mil63]
Stanley Milgram. Behavioral study of obedience. Journal of Abnor-
mal Psychology, Volume 67(4):371–378, 1963.
[RTG10]
Tuomo Rinne, Kati Tillander, and Peter Grönberg.
Data collec-
tion and analysis of evacuation situations. Vtt Tiedotteita - Valtion
Teknillinen Tutkimuskeskus, Issue 2562:1–145, 2010.
[STSH14]
Jens Starke, Kristian Berg Thomsen, Asger Sorensen, and Poul G.
Hjorth. Nonlinear eﬀects in examples of crowd evacuation scenarios.
Proceedings of the 17th International IEEE Conference on Intelligent
Transportation Systems (ITSC 2014), pages 560–565, 2014.
[Sø14]
Asger Anker Sørensen. Modelling of pedestrian dynamics, a dynam-
ical systems study of the lemming eﬀect, 2014. Bachelor Thesis.
[Tho13]
Kristian Berg Thomsen. Dynamical systems in evacuation scenarios,
2013. Bachelor Thesis.
[VPAea12] Gonçalo Vasconcelos, Marcelo Petry, João Emílio Almeida, and et al.
Using uwb for human trajectory extraction. 24th European Modeling
and Simulation Symposium (EMSS 2012), pages 428–433, 2012.
