==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
3d Topology Optimization of 
Compliant Mechanisms
Daniel Vestergaard Nielsen
February 2015
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Preface
The present work is the culmination of ﬁve months’ work at the Department of
Mechanical Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU. The follow-
ing master thesis accounts for 30 ECTS credits and is part of the requirements for
obtaining a degree as Master of Science, M.Sc, in Mechanical Engineering.
The work is carried out in collaboration with the Top-Opt group at the Department
of Mechanical Engineering, DTU.
Daniel Vestergaard Nielsen, s093247
01/02-2015
Technical University of Denmark
Kgs. Lyngby
Supervisors:
Professor Ole Sigmund
Associate Professor Niels Aage
Researcher Fengwen Wang
i
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
During the following project many people have shown interest and provided their
support for which I am greatly thankful.
First and foremost I would like to thank my three supervisors, Professor Ole Sig-
mund, Associate Professor Niels Aage and Researcher Fengwen Wang. Their help
and guidance through this project has been greatly appreciated, and without it this
project would never have become a reality.
I would like to thank the TopOpt group at DTU for regular meetings and spar-
ing, from which I have gained a lot of knowledge and insight. People are always
helpful when problems arise, which I greatly appreciate.
Furthermore I would like to thank my colleagues at the student’s oﬃce at DTU
where many days (and evenings) have been spend in comfortable surroundings.
Last but not least I would like to thank my family and friends for their caring and
continuous support, especially through hard times of study. Without their support
I would never have been able to accomplish the present work.
iii
==PAGE:6==
Abstract
The following work comprises the development of a topology optimized complaint
mechanism; namely the force inverter. The mechanism will be optimized in 3d by
the use of parallel computing.
The aim is to manufacture the optimized designs by additive manufacturing, and
see how the optimized model compares to its manufactured counterpart. It becomes
clear that several steps have to be taken in order to obtain a manufacturable design.
Well known phenomena within topology optimization are intermediate densities in-
troduced by ﬁltering techniques, and hinge-like structures which is impossible to
manufacture and does not correlate with underlying physics.
A projection method is applied, which shows to project intermediate densities to
solid/void, thus having an almost fully discretized structure.
A robust formulation method is introduced, and turns out to impose a length-scale
in the design, and thereby hinder the formation of hinge-like structures. Further-
more robust formulation ensures robustness towards some varying factors.
It is
experienced that when using a PDE ﬁlter the imposed length scale is diminished in
the vicinity of the boundaries. This is however circumvented by imposing Dirichlet
boundary conditions on the ﬁlter.
A geometric non-linear implementation of the code is conducted in order to ﬁnd the
force/displacement response of the mechanisms.
The designs are manufactured by additive manufacturing for two diﬀerent mate-
rials: PLA and Innoﬂex 45. PLA turns out to produce functional designs, however,
as PLA is a rather stiﬀmaterial the output displacement is limited. Innoﬂex 45 is
a rubber-like material, and produces a mechanism that performs very well, and is
capable of having a large output displacement.
The force displacement relation for the Innoﬂex 45 material is validated by a
simple experimental set-up where load is applied to the mechanism, and the output
displacement is measured. It turns out that there is a good correlation between the
experiment and the simulation.
It is concluded that various steps have to be taken in order to get a manufac-
turable mechanism - however, recent and up-to-date research on the subject provides
a good basis for making the connection between topology optimized structures and
their manufactured counterparts.
iv
==PAGE:7==
Resum´e
Det følgende projekt omhandler udvikingen af en topologi optimeret eftergivelig
mekanisme; kraft inverteren. Mekanisme vil blive optimeret i 3d ved at benytte
parallel computing.
Form˚alet er at fremstille de optimerede designs ved hjælp af additive fremstillingsme-
toder, og se hvordan de optimerede modeller opfører sig i forhold til de fremstillede.
Det bliver klart at ﬂere metoder skal i brug for at en topologi optimeret mekanisme
kan fremstilles.
Et kendt fænomen i topologi optimering er intermediate densiteter som bliver intro-
duceret af ﬁlter metoder, samt hængsel-agtige strukturer som ikke kan produceres
og ikke er fysiske.
En projection metode bliver brugt for at projicere intermediate densiteter til 1/0
elementer, s˚a den optimerede struktur bliver diskret.
En robust formulering er introduceret som viser sig at introducere en længe-skala i
designet, s˚a hængsel-agtige strukturer ikke bliver dannet. Robust formulering sørger
ogs˚a for at gøre designet usensitivt overfor ﬂere varierende faktorer. Det bliver klart
at det PDE ﬁlter der bliver brugt negligere længe-skalaen ved kanterne af design
rummet. Dette er omg˚aet ved at introducere Dirichlet grænsebetingelser p˚a ﬁlteret.
En geometrisk ikke-lineær formulering bliver introduceret i koden for at ﬁnde kraft/
udbøjningen af mekanismen.
Designet bliver fremstillet med additive fremstillingsmetoder for to forskellige
materialer: PLA og Innoﬂex 45. PLA viser sig at lave funktionsdygtige mekanis-
mer, men eftersom PLA er ret stift er udgangs forskydningen lille. Innoﬂex 45 er et
gummi-agtigt materiale som viser sig at skabe en mekanisme med høj funktionalitet
og kan have en stor udbøjning.
Kraft/udbøjning relationen for Innoﬂex 45 materialet bliver valideret med et
simpelt eksperimentelt setup hvor en last er tilføjet og udbøjningen bliver m˚alt. Det
viser sig at der er en god sammenhæng mellem eksperimentet og simuleringen.
Det bliver konkluderet at mange ting skal indroduceres før man kan f˚a en mekanisme
der kan produceres. Det kan dog lade sig gøre med ny forskning p˚a omr˚adet, som
danner en god basis for at skabe sammenhængen mellem topologi optimerede struk-
turer og deres fremstillede modstykke.
v
==PAGE:8==
CONTENTS
Contents
Preface
i
Acknowledgements
iii
Abstract
iv
Resum´e
v
1
Introduction
1
2
Parallel Implementation with PETSc
5
3
Theory
6
3.1
Finite Element Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.2
The Topology Optimization Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2.1
General Formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2.2
Calculation of Sensitivities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.2.3
Checking Sensitivities with the Finite Diﬀerence Method . . .
11
3.2.4
Filtering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2.5
PDE Filtering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2.6
Optimization Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3
Robust Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3.1
Projection Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3.2
Robust Formulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.4
Geometric Non-linearities
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.5
Manufacturing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.5.1
FDM 3d Printing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4
Method
23
4.1
Description of the Code
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2
Implementation of the Force Inverter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.2.1
Modelling One Quarter of the Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2.2
Calculation of Sensitivities for Linear Implementation . . . . .
26
4.2.3
Dirichlet Boundary Conditions on Filter
. . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.3
Implementation of Robust Formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.4
Implementation of Geometric Non-linearities . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.4.1
Calculation of Sensitivities for Non-linear Implementation
. .
28
4.5
Manufacturing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.5.1
Preparation of Prints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.5.2
Generating Support Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.5.3
Experimenting with Soft Material . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
vi
==PAGE:9==
CONTENTS
5
Results and Discussion
33
5.1
Implementation of Force Inverter
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.1.1
Comparison of Full and Quarter Structure . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.1.2
Parameter Continuation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.2
Projection Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.3
Robust Formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.3.1
Robust Formulation without Dirichlet Boundary Conditions
.
44
5.3.2
Robust Formulation with Dirichlet Boundary Conditions . . .
46
5.4
Manufacturing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.4.1
Manufactured PLA Model with the Wanhao printer . . . . . .
49
5.4.2
Performance of the Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.4.3
Further Discussion on the PLA Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.4.4
Manufactured Model with Innoﬂex45 Material . . . . . . . . .
54
5.4.5
Experimental Veriﬁcation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5.5
Estimation of Length Scale in Robust Formulation . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5.6
Improvements to the Robust Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5.7
Experiments with POROLAY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5.8
Suggested Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
6
Conclusion
61
A Additional Theory
65
A.1 Element Stiﬀness Matrix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
A.2 Filtering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
A.2.1
Density Filtering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
A.2.2
Sensitivity Filtering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
A.3 PETSc Example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
A.4 Checking Element Distribution to Cores with Finite Diﬀerence Check
69
B Additional Methods
70
B.1 Modelling One Quarter of the Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
C Additional Results
72
C.1 Continuation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
C.2 Comparing of Sensitivities for Full and Quarter Model
. . . . . . . .
73
C.3 Validation of Geometric Non-linear Implementation . . . . . . . . . .
74
C.4 Preparation and Validation of Prints
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
vii
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
Topology optimization was ﬁrst introduced in [8] and [7] as a new approach for ob-
taining structural stability by cleverly distributing material within a design space.
Since then numerous contributions have been added to the ﬁeld of topology opti-
mization, and a wide range of new applicabilities have been proposed.
However, many things are yet to be explored within the ﬁeld of topology op-
timization. The continuous research within the ﬁeld along with new technologies
opens new doors and interesting new paths to follow.
The present work seeks to utilise new additive manufacturing methods and the
easier access to high computational power to make a connection between 3d topology
optimized structures and their manufactured counterpart. It will be evident that
several steps have to be made in order to ensure manufacturability of the optimized
designs, which will be accomplished by utilising relevant up-to-date research within
the ﬁeld of topology optimization.
Literature Review
The overall aim of topology optimization is to optimize a given objective by dis-
tributing material within a design space, subjected to diﬀerent loads, boundary
conditions and constraints. This is done iteratively by continuously evaluating the
performance of the design and then optimizing the design based on calculated sen-
sitivities. Examples of this could be getting maximum stiﬀness in a structure by
minimizing compliance or getting a speciﬁed output motion in a compliant mecha-
nism.
Along with the introduction of topology optimization came problems with mesh
dependency, that is, a ﬁnal topology that depends on the chosen mesh. This is often
circumvented by ﬁltering techniques (e.g. on densities [10], sensitivities [30], or as
a PDE ﬁlter [18, 19]) that works by altering the design variables to be an average
over the neighbouring elements. This averaging introduces elements of intermediate
densities in the design domain, which is often undesirable, which will be elaborated
later in this project.
This issue has been addressed by projecting the design variables onto a more dis-
cretized design. Such projection methods have been proposed in [16, 31, 37]. The
projection methods result in designs with more ’crisp’ boundaries and clear distinc-
tion between solid and void elements.
Later a robust formulation has been proposed in [35] and [27]. The robust formula-
tion is based on the projection methods, but brings along some advantages regarding
manufacturability, which will be elaborated later in this report.
The following master thesis comprises the development of a compliant mecha-
nism, which was ﬁrst introduced in [30] and [17].
1
==PAGE:12==
1
INTRODUCTION
Motivation
With the continuously increasing focus on sustainability around the globe, topology
optimization have the potential of playing a vital role in the future as products can
be designed with a minimum amount of material while still maintaining functional-
ity. Furthermore, topology optimization can often reduce the complexity of designs
by replacing several connected parts with fewer optimized parts.
Even though topology optimization has been in rapid development the last
decades, many ﬁelds are yet to be explored, and topology optimization is still mainly
prevalent within academia. In the author’s opinion, three of the main reasons for
this are
• Topology optimized structures often consist of ’organic shapes’ rather than
e.g. straight beams, plates, etc. This can be a challenging task when it comes
to manufacturing of the optimized designs.
• Insuﬃcient computational power, especially when doing topology optimization
in 3d.
• Lack of manufacturability for topology optimized designs.
Additive manufacturing methods have been in rapid development during the last
decade, which gives the ability to produce complex geometries inexpensively. It is
the author’s belief that the combination of topology optimized structures and addi-
tive manufacturing can play a large role within production in the future.
Computational power is increasing rapidly year after year, and is today easier
accessible than ever. However, conventional computers still fall short when doing
3d topology optimization of a decent resolution, and parallel computing is almost
inevitable.
Topology optimized structures are often subject to non-physical phenomena, e.g.
intermediate densities, or material connected in inﬁnitesimal points. These phenom-
ena can often be a hindrance when manufacturability is of interest, which will be
further explained in the present work.
The motivation for this project is to circumvent these issues and make a connec-
tion between topology optimization and manufacturing.
The contribution from this work to the ﬁeld of topology will be to combine and
utilise present and up-to-date research within the ﬁeld, and apply it to the devel-
opment of large scale 3d topology optimized structures. The aim is to manufacture
the optimized mechanisms and relate them to the theory, which is still a relatively
unexplored ﬁeld within topology optimization, especially for 3d structures.
2
==PAGE:13==
The Present Work
As mentioned, the present work comprises the development of a compliant mech-
anism. Traditionally, a mechanism consists of two or more rigid bodies connected
in joints or hinges where movement is obtained from translation or rotation of the
rigid bodies.
In contrary, the motion of a compliant mechanism is obtained from elastic strain
of one compliant part. In this case the mechanism of choice is the so called force
inverter ﬁrst introduced in [30]. The mechanism serves the purpose of inverting an
input force, so that an opposite force is present in the opposite end of the mecha-
nism. An optimized design can be seen from ﬁgure 1a where the input and output
forces are shown as well as four ﬁxed constrained corners at x = 0.
The force inverter is not designed for a speciﬁc purpose but is merely a model for
demonstrating various concepts concerning large scale 3d topology optimization.
(a) The force inverter, with input and
output forces. The mechanism has a
ﬁxed constraint at each of the corners
at x = 0
(b) A diagonal cut of the force inverter.
The transition region of intermediate
design variables are present, and two
examples of hinge-like structures are
marked
Figure 1: A topology optimized force inverter
The design shown in ﬁgure 1a consists of 1283 ∼2.1 million elements which
equals ∼6.4 million state degrees of freedom. This is obviously an unrealistic sce-
nario on a conventional PC - thus parallel computing will be an essential part of this
project. The foundation of this will be PETSc [4, 5] which is a framework capable
of solving large scale problems in full parallel. The simulations will be run on one
of DTU’s super computers, ’Jess’, which is capable of running jobs with up to 6400
cores.
The aim is to manufacture the optimized mechanisms by the use of additive
manufacturing. This implies that the optimized designs need to be manufacturable.
3
==PAGE:14==
1
INTRODUCTION
As already mentioned, ﬁltering techniques introduce intermediate densities in the
design, as seen from ﬁgure 1b, which is undesired as they cannot be manufactured.
This will be circumvented by introducing a projection method.
Furthermore, structures are often subject to well-known phenomena such as one-
node or one-edge hinge-like structures. This can be seen from ﬁgure 1b. This means
that parts of the structures are connected by inﬁnitesimal points, which is obviously
a non-physical phenomenon. This will be addressed by introducing so called ’robust
formulation’ which introduces a length-scale so that a desired minimum feature size
can be speciﬁed.
Mechanisms are often subject to large deformations, and hence the initial stiﬀness
conﬁguration will no longer be applicable.
This leads to a geometric non-linear
implementation of the code in order to obtain better comparability between the
optimized design and the manufactured counterpart.
The present work will be documented throughout this report. Section 2 gives a
short introduction to PETSc which is the foundation for the parallel implementation
of the present code. Section 3 presents the reader to some of the theory that forms
the basis for the present work. Section 4 describes some of the implementation of
the various theory, and describes how the optimized designs are manufactured. The
results will be presented and discussed in section 5.
4
==PAGE:15==
2
Parallel Implementation with PETSc
As mentioned, parallel computing is often inevitable when it comes to large scale 3d
topology optimization. This means that an essential part of the present work will
be to make a fully parallel implementation of the code.
The parallel implementation will be based on PETSc [5, 4]. PETSc is an abbrevi-
ation for ’The Portable, Extensible Toolkit for Scientiﬁc Computation’ and provides
a framework for eﬃcient large scale computation of problems involving partial dif-
ferential equations.
The PETSc framework is free and can be downloaded from
http://www.mcs.anl.gov/petsc/ [5].
PETSc consists of numerous ready-to-use libraries for e.g. vector and matrix
operations, linear and non-linear solvers and mesh generation. When PETSc is im-
plemented correctly the partitioning of the problem to the diﬀerent cores are ’hidden’
from the user, thus the user can simply specify the desired number of cores for a
simulation.
The code is developed in C++ on a linux distribution to be fully compatible with
PETSc. The code is a further development of the code called TopOpt In PETSc
which is presented in [1]. The code will be described in section 4.1.
The following report will not comprise an in-depth study of parallel computing,
for this the reader is referred to e.g. [1], [9] and [2]. However, a list of some of the
pros and cons regarding PETSc is provided below.
+ Large scale parallel computing on a large number of cores
+ When the code is implemented correctly PETSc takes care of the partitioning
+ Fully parallel linear and non-linear solvers
+ Flexibility as PETSc can be implemented with C++ or Fortran in an object-
oriented environment
−PETSc has a steep learning curve
−Debugging can be a comprehensive task
−Not possible to visualize the design while optimization is in progress
−Some restrictions with compatibility, e.g. PETSc does not run well in Windows
PETSc comes with the ability to generate a mesh, thus taking care of the par-
titioning of nodes and elements, degrees of freedoms and ghost nodes when the
partitioning is made. An example on how PETSc is used for making global and
local vectors and matrices based on a deﬁned mesh is described in appendix A.3.
5
==PAGE:16==
3
THEORY
3
Theory
The following section presents the reader to some of the theory used throughout this
project. A brief introduction is made to the ﬁnite element method in section 3.1
while general aspects of topology optimization will be presented in section 3.2. Sec-
tion 3.3 and 3.4 describes robust design and geometric non-linearities, respectively.
Finally, section 3.5 describe the manufacturing of the optimized mechanisms.
3.1
Finite Element Method
The ﬁnite element method is the underlying basis for topology optimization and is
used for ﬁnding an approximate solution of the optimized design, in this case the
displacements.
The ﬁnite element equations can be derived from the virtual work principle
(VWP) [14] as seen from equation (1). The VWP states that for any kinematic
admissible displacement or strain, the internal energy (strain energy) equals the
external energy.
Z
V
{δε}{σ}dV
|
{z
}
Internal energy
=
Z
S
{δu}T{F}dS
|
{z
}
Surface traction
+
Z
V
{δu}T{Φ}dV
|
{z
}
V olume force
+
X
i
{δu}T
i {p}i
|
{z
}
Nodal loads
(1)
Throughout this project the only volume force is gravity which, however, is as-
sumed to be small and will be neglected.
The ﬁnite element method is a numerical method for obtaining the state of a
system, e.g. displacements or ﬂow. The ﬁnite element method divides a continuous
domain into discrete ﬁnite elements that are connected in nodes.
Each element
possesses one or more ﬁeld quantities, e.g. strains, while the nodes contain unknowns
to be solved, e.g. displacements. An 8-node brick element, which is the element of
choice throughout this project, can be seen from ﬁgure 2.
Figure 2: An 8-node element. Nodes are visible as the black dots.
6
==PAGE:17==
3.1
Finite Element Method
The relation between ﬁeld- and nodal values are approximated by interpolation
functions. This causes the ﬁnite element method not to give an exact solution, but
nonetheless a good approximation of the solution if an appropriate mesh has been
used.
Stating the interpolation functions in the matrix [N] gives the relation between
element displacements and nodal displacements as can be seen from equation (2).
The dimensions denoted under the vectors and matrices are the dimensions for an
8-node element (that is, e.g., nodal displacement {u} represents the displacement in
three degrees of freedom (d.o.f.) for each of the 8 nodes).
{d}
3×1
= [N]
3×24
{u}
24×1
(2)
The speciﬁc interpolation functions will not be stated here but can be found in
[14]. Taking the partial derivatives of the interpolation functions yields the element
strain and nodal displacement relation, [ ¯B], as shown in equation (3)
{ε}
6×1
= [∂][N]{u} = [ ¯B]
6×24
{u}
24×1
(3)
By using the element strain and nodal displacement relation matrix, the equi-
librium VWP from equation (1) can be used to derive the element stiﬀness matrix.
This can be seen in appendix A.1. From the element stiﬀness matrices the global
stiﬀness matrix [K] can be assembled [14], which leads to the ﬁnal discretized state
problem:
[K]{U} = {P}
(4)
where {P} is the global load vector, and {U} are the global displacements that
can now be solved for.
Equation (4) states a linear formulation where the stiﬀness matrix is independent of
the displacements, while for a geometric non-linear implementation the stiﬀness is
dependent on the displacements, [K] = [K({U})]. This will be elaborated in section
3.4.
7
==PAGE:18==
3
THEORY
3.2
The Topology Optimization Method
The density based topology optimization method [7] for a problem involving linear
elasticity can be generally explained in relatively few steps as seen in the ﬂow chart
from table 1.
Table 1: Flowchart for the topology optimization method
Step 1
Initialize - mesh, loads, boundary conditions and initial guess
for the design variables.
Step 2
Finite element analysis - based on the global stiﬀness matrix
assembled from the design variables.
Step 3
Calculate objective and constraints functions. Minimizing the
objective function is the aim of the optimization subjected to
the constraint functions and boundary conditions.
Step 4
Sensitivity analysis - the partial derivatives of the objective
and constraint functions with respect to the design variables,
normally calculated by the adjoint method.
Step 5
Optimization step. Obtain updated design variables. Nor-
mally done with the Method of Moving Asymptotes.
Step 6
Has the problem converged? If not - return to Step 2.
Step 7
Post process and visualize results.
The ﬂow chart from table 1 solves a topology optimization problem in its most
simple form. Each step will be elaborated in the following section. Furthermore
ﬁltering techniques will be explained, which ensures that the solution will not be
dependent on the chosen mesh.
It will be evident that this is not suﬃcient for creating a model capable of sim-
ulating a manufacturable mechanism that is directly comparable for given material
parameters.
Projection methods and robust formulation are applied in order to
make the mechanisms manufacturable, while a geometric non-linear implementa-
tion is made to allow the mechanisms to undergo larger displacements. These will
be explained in the following section as well.
8
==PAGE:19==
3.2
The Topology Optimization Method
3.2.1
General Formulation
A general formulation of the topology optimization problem can be seen from equa-
tions (5a)-(5d).
min
ρ
:
f0(ρ)
(5a)
s.t. :
fi
i = 1, 2, ..., m
(5b)
K(ρ)u = f
(5c)
0 < ρmin ≤ρj ≤1
j = 1, 2, ..., n
(5d)
where f0(ρ) is the objective function that is to be minimized based on the design
variables, ρ, which is an element based vector taking values between 0 < ρmin ≤
ρj ≤1 where j is the number of elements. The objective function can describe e.g.
compliance in a minimum compliance problem, or displacement in a mechanism
problem.
The functions fi for i = 1, 2, .., m is one or more imposed constraints. A typically
used constraint is on the used material as one of the goals of topology optimization
is to reduce weight and save material.
K(ρ) is the global stiﬀness matrix, u is the global displacement vector and f is the
global load vector, and thus equation (5c) describes the behaviour of a material in
the linear elastic region.
The optimization problem is deﬁned within a design space, normally denoted
Ω∈Rn, in 1, 2 or 3 dimensions. In the density based topology optimization the
design variables ρ are seen as a density distribution. This means that integrating
over design space, Ω, yields the total volume of the structure.
The so called SIMP method (Solid Isotropic Material with Penalization) can be
used for interpolating Young’s modulus for a speciﬁc element based on the design
variables. If the Young’s modulus of a solid material is denoted E1, then the stiﬀness
of a given element can be found as Ej = Emin + ρp
j(E1 −Emin) where p ≥1 is a
penalization factor.
Emin is a small value (e.g. 1e−9) that ensures the Young’s modulus of an element
never becomes zero. As the global stiﬀness matrix K is based on the Young’s modu-
lus it will cause singularities when solving the state problem, as the stiﬀness matrix
will contain zeros. However ensuring that void elements still takes on a small value
circumvents this issue.
In this project the penalization factor is chosen as p = 3. By examining the
penalization factor as can be seen from ﬁgure 3, it is evident that higher value of p
yields lower values of Young’s modulus. This causes more discretized values as it is
less ’favourable’ to use the intermediate values - hence a more well deﬁned structure
with more voids and solids will be present.
9
==PAGE:20==
3
THEORY
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
ρ
E(ρ)
p = 1
p = 2
p = 3
Figure 3: Eﬀect of penalization factor p
3.2.2
Calculation of Sensitivities
The sensitivities are used in the optimization routine and are normally found by the
adjoint method. This will be explained in brief in the following. ψ is introduced as
ψ = f + λT
r
|{z}
=0
(6)
where f can be either the objective function or a constraint function. r is a vector
of residual forces, and under the assumption of equilibrium between internal and
external forces, the residual forces are assumed to be zero. Therefore a vector of
lagrange multipliers, λ, can be chosen freely and multiplied the residual vector.
Taking the derivative with respect to the design variable yields
dψ
dρi
= ∂f
∂ρi
+ ∂f
∂u
∂u
∂ρi
+ λT
 ∂r
∂u
∂u
∂ρi
+ ∂r
∂ρi

(7)
and by rearranging
dψ
dρi
= ∂f
∂ρi
+ λT ∂r
∂ρi
+ ∂u
∂ρi
∂f
∂u + λT ∂r
∂u

(8)
The term ∂u
∂ρi is diﬃcult to solve, so we now require that
∂f
∂u + λT ∂r
∂u = 0
(9)
and now equation (8) reduces to
dψ
dρi
= ∂f
∂ρi
+ λT ∂r
∂ρi
(10)
10
==PAGE:21==
3.2
The Topology Optimization Method
The sensitivities for the linear force inverter will be calculated in section 4.2.2
while sensitivities for the non-linear implementation will be calculated in section
4.4.1.
3.2.3
Checking Sensitivities with the Finite Diﬀerence Method
The computed adjoint sensitivities can be veriﬁed by ﬁnite diﬀerences. The deﬁni-
tion of a diﬀerential quotient can be seen from equation (11)
f ′(a) = lim
h→0
f(a + h) −f(a)
h
(11)
where h is a small perturbation. For ﬁnite h we get
⇒f ′(a) ≈f(a + h) −f(a)
h
(12)
which is a good approximation when h is small.
This means that for any objective or constraint function, f, and corresponding
sensitivity ∂f
∂ρi we have that
∂f
∂ρi
≈f(ρi + h) −f(ρi)
h
(13)
with the corresponding relative error
εi =
f(ρi+h)−f(ρi)
h
−∂f
∂ρi
∂f
∂ρi
(14)
Naturally this implies recalculation of the objective function or the constraint
function for each small perturbation of the design variable. Depending on the speciﬁc
function, this can also involve solving for e.g. new displacements as a consequence
of the perturbation of the design variable.
During the present work the sensitivities have been continuously veriﬁed by the ﬁ-
nite diﬀerence check every time modiﬁcations have been made to the code.
In this speciﬁc case an advantage of the ﬁnite diﬀerence check is to check whether
the elements are distributed correctly to the diﬀerent cores in the parallel implemen-
tation. This is explained in appendix A.4.
3.2.4
Filtering
A well known and thoroughly studied ﬁeld within topology optimization is ﬁltering
techniques that ensures mesh independency, which means that a chosen mesh (type
of elements and resolution) should not change the topology of the optimized struc-
ture. Naturally minor variations will occur when changing the element type, and
ﬁner details and features will be present with increasing mesh resolution. However,
11
==PAGE:22==
3
THEORY
the overall topology of the problem should remain unchanged.
If mesh independency is not ensured a so called checkerboard structure can be
present when using low-order element types, e.g. 4-node plane elements in 2d or
8-node brick elements in 3d, where the latter is used throughout this project. A
checkerboard structure is a phenomena where a pattern of alternating solid and
void elements are present and are resembling the structure of a checkerboard. An
example of this can be seen from ﬁgure 4a for a 2d example. This is a non-physical
phenomenon and is interpreted as artiﬁcially stiﬀin theory as it does not ’see’ the
stress concentrations. Another disadvantage of this checkerboard structure is that
elements are only connected in inﬁnitesimal points (hinge structures) which are nat-
urally non-physical and impossible to manufacture.
Well known methods for avoiding this are ﬁltering techniques where the density
[10] or sensitivity [30] of an element is calculated as an average of the neighbouring
elements, where the area of included elements are speciﬁed by a radius. However, as
the densities or sensitivities are now calculated as an average it implies that more
intermediate values are introduced in the design. This averaging causes a transi-
tion region of intermediate values to be present, as can be seen from ﬁgure 4b. In
many cases these intermediate densities are undesired as they does not correlate
with the underlying physics. Furthermore, and highly relevant in the present case,
these intermediate densities are undesired as they are not possible to manufacture
by conventional methods.
The structures in ﬁgure 4 are 2d simulations of the force inverter, where only the
lower half of the structure is simulated. The input force is applied at the red dot
visible from the ﬁgures, the bottom left corner is ﬁxed, and the right upper corner is
the output of the mechanism. These two examples are done with a MATLAB code
described in [3].
(a) No ﬁltering, where a checkerboard pat-
tern is clearly present
(b) With ﬁltering, where intermediate den-
sities are present as the grey area
Figure 4: A simulation without a ﬁlter compared to a simulation with an imposed
ﬁlter
The two methods of imposing a ﬁlter on either densities or sensitivities are de-
scribed in appendix A.2. PDE ﬁltering, introduced in [19, 18], is the ﬁltering method
of choice throughout this project and will be elaborated brieﬂy in the following sec-
12
==PAGE:23==
3.2
The Topology Optimization Method
tion.
3.2.5
PDE Filtering
In the ﬁltering techniques an average of either densities or sensitivities are taken
over neighbouring elements. This requires information from the neighbouring ele-
ments, which can be computationally expensive as a large quantity of information
about neighbouring cells have to be stored. This also implies that the increased
computational cost is highly dependant on the ﬁlter radius, especially in 3d, where
the neighbouring elements are deﬁned by a sphere.
The PDE ﬁltering technique in the present case is based on the densities (can
also be based on sensitivities [19]). This method uses the solution of a Helmholtz
PDE for imposing the ﬁlter.
In PDE ﬁltering the element wise densities are interpolated to the nodes by the use
of the shape functions from the FE routine. In parallel computing, this implies that
the ﬁltering method inherits the parallel scalability of the state problem.
For further information on the PDE ﬁlter the reader is referred to [18].
3.2.6
Optimization Methods
The optimization is done with the MMA (Method of moving asymptotes) [34]. The
MMA is already implemented in the TopOpt In PETSc code, and will not be elabo-
rated here, but rather used as a tool throughout this project.
13
==PAGE:24==
3
THEORY
3.3
Robust Design
As already mentioned, diﬃculties can arise when the aim is to produce topology
optimized designs. This is mainly due to three things.
1. The ﬁltering techniques that ensure mesh independency cause intermediate
densities in the optimized designs, which cannot be produced by conventional
methods.
2. Hinge-like structures as seen from ﬁgure 1b is often not possible to manufac-
ture. Furthermore one-node or one-edge hinge-like structures can be present,
which is a non-physical phenomenon as material cannot be connected in in-
ﬁnitesimal points.
3. Varying factors mainly introduced in the manufacturing process can inﬂuence
the functionality of the optimized design.
Methods for circumventing these issues will be described in this section.
Section 3.3.1 describe a projection method where intermediate densities are pro-
jected to either solid or voids, thus giving a more discretized design.
Section 3.3.2 describes robust formulation which is a further development of the pro-
jection method, and is used for introducing a length-scale control in the optimized
designs, addressing issues with varying factors mainly introduced in the manufac-
turing process.
3.3.1
Projection Method
As already mentioned, the ﬁltering of the design variables ensures mesh indepen-
dency. However, this causes the design variables to take intermediate values and
causing a transition region (rather than solid or voids) as an eﬀect of the averaging
done over neighbouring elements.
In some cases it is suﬃcient to let values over a speciﬁc threshold take the value
1, while elements under the threshold takes the value 0. This can simply be done
after end optimization, when the result is visualized. This somehow crude method
is suitable for some optimization problems but undesirable for mechanism designs,
as it will have a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the functionality of the mechanism [35].
In the following, the design variables will be denoted ρ, the ﬁltered design vari-
ables will be denoted ˜ρ, and the projected design variables will be the physical
design variables, denoted ¯˜ρ.
The methodology can be seen from equation (15)
ρ
Filtering
−−−−−→
˜ρ
Projection
−−−−−−→
¯˜ρ
(15)
That is, the ﬁltered design variables can now be seen as intermediate design
variables, and the objective and constraint functions will be based on the projected
14
==PAGE:25==
3.3
Robust Design
design variables, ¯˜ρ.
A method introduced in [16] projects the ﬁltered design variables to the physical
design variables by using a so called threshold by Heaviside function. In the projec-
tion by Heaviside function the ﬁltered densities are projected towards 1, either as a
step function or a smoothed function. This will cause a dilated design (thick design
features), as the majority of elements are projected towards 1.
A modiﬁcation to the Heaviside function is introduced in [28] where the ﬁltered
densities are projected towards 0 instead of 1. This will cause an eroded design
(thin design features), as the majority of elements are projected towards 0.
A method based on these two projections have been introduced in [37]. In this
method a parameter η is introduced that controls whether the majority of design
variables are projected towards either solids or voids. This will be the projection
method of choice in the present work.
In the following method the new physical design variables ¯˜ρ, based on the ﬁltered
design variables, can be found from the following equation [35]
¯˜ρ = tanh(βη) + tanh(β(˜ρ −η))
tanh(βη) + tanh(β(1 −η))
(16)
where β and η are two parameters. The value of η determines whether the ma-
jority of design parameters are projected towards solids or voids. This can be seen
from ﬁgure 5 for three diﬀerent values of η.
β initially takes the value 1, but is doubled at every 60-120 iterations until β = 64.
Further continuation for β > 64 will only yield small changes, as visible from ﬁgure
5. The reason for doing continuation on β is that a rapid change in β can cause
ﬂuctuations in the convergence, and thus disturb the convergence path [15].
The majority of the intermediate values introduced by the ﬁlter is now forced
to their extremal values, making up a more discrete structure.
As can be seen
an increasing value of β leads to more discretized design which will be completely
solid/void for β = ∞as the projection method will then resemble a step function.
15
==PAGE:26==
3
THEORY
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Elements
ρ, ˜ρ, ¯˜ρ
ρ
˜ρ
¯˜ρ, β =1
¯˜ρ, β =2
¯˜ρ, β =4
¯˜ρ, β =8
¯˜ρ, β =16
¯˜ρ, β =32
¯˜ρ, β =64
(a) η = 0.4, design variables are more likely to be projected to solids
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Elements
ρ, ˜ρ, ¯˜ρ
ρ
˜ρ
¯˜ρ, β =1
¯˜ρ, β =2
¯˜ρ, β =4
¯˜ρ, β =8
¯˜ρ, β =16
¯˜ρ, β =32
¯˜ρ, β =64
(b) η = 0.5, design variables are projected evenly between solids and
voids
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Elements
ρ, ˜ρ, ¯˜ρ
ρ
˜ρ
¯˜ρ, β =1
¯˜ρ, β =2
¯˜ρ, β =4
¯˜ρ, β =8
¯˜ρ, β =16
¯˜ρ, β =32
¯˜ρ, β =64
(c) η = 0.6, design variables are more likely to be projected to voids
Figure 5: Projection method for diﬀerent values of η. Visible in the plots are the
design variables, the ﬁltered design variables, and the projected design variables for
diﬀerent values of β.
The sensitivity of the objective and constraint functions still have to be found
with respect to the design variable ρ. As ρ is now a function of both ˜ρ and ¯˜ρ the
16
==PAGE:27==
3.3
Robust Design
chain rule has to be applied twice
∂f
∂ρ = ∂f
∂˜ρ
∂˜ρ
∂ρ = ∂f
∂¯˜ρ
∂¯˜ρ
∂˜ρ
∂˜ρ
∂ρ
(17)
where ∂f
∂¯˜ρ is found from the adjoint method described in section 3.2.2, ∂˜ρ
∂ρ can
be found from equation (50) and the physical design variables can be diﬀerentiated
with respect to the ﬁltered ﬁeld as [27]
∂¯˜ρ
∂˜ρ =
β(sech(β(˜ρq −η)))2
tanh(βη) + tanh(β(1 −η))
(18)
In conclusion to this, the projection method ensures that intermediate values are
projected towards either solids or voids, thus making up a more discretized design
that is more suitable for manufacturing. However, the projection method does not
circumvent the problem of one-node or one-edge hinge like structures, as will be
evident from the results section (section 5.2).
3.3.2
Robust Formulation
The robust formulation is mainly introduced for addressing two issues:
1. Introducing length scale control such that one-node or one-edge hinges can be
avoided.
2. Ensuring robustness in the design, that is, ensuring the functionality of the
mechanisms even though varying factors are introduced in the manufacturing
process. For example, this could be an excess or an inadequate amount of
material is being used.
The robust formulation is based on the projection method, where multiple pro-
jections are made. This was introduced in [31] where two design realizations were
made, a so called dilated and an eroded design. The dilated design is a projection
where the majority of ﬁltered design variables are projected towards solids, while in
the eroded structure the majority of design variables are projected towards voids.
This causes the dilated structure to be ’thick’ while the eroded structure is ’thin’.
The method was later modiﬁed in [35] where another projection is introduced, the
so called intermediate design. In the intermediate design an even amount of design
variables are projected towards solids and voids. This method of having both di-
lated, intermediate and eroded designs will be the method of choice in the present
work.
The dilated, intermediate and eroded design variables will be denoted ¯˜ρ
d, ¯˜ρ
i and
¯˜ρ
e. The diﬀerent designs are based on diﬀerent values of η, where ηd < ηi < ηe. The
value for the intermediate design is ηi = 0.5.
As before, the design variables ρ are ﬁltered, thus we have the ﬁltered design vari-
ables denoted ˜ρ. ρ and ˜ρ are still vectors with dimension [n × 1] where n is the
17
==PAGE:28==
3
THEORY
number of elements. Based on this ﬁltered design variable the projection method
from equation (16) is imposed for the diﬀerent values of η and making the multiple
physical design variables ¯˜ρ
d, ¯˜ρ
i and ¯˜ρ
e. The desired number of physical design re-
alizations can vary.
The robust formulation can be expressed as a min-max formulation
min
ρ
: max :
 f0(¯˜ρe(ρ)), f0(¯˜ρi(ρ)), f0(¯˜ρd(ρ))

(19a)
s.t. : K(¯˜ρe)ue = f
(19b)
K(¯˜ρi)ui = f
(19c)
K(¯˜ρd)ud = f
(19d)
fv(ρ) =
P
j ¯˜ρd
jvj
V
≤V ∗
d
(19e)
0 < ρmin ≤ρj ≤1
j = 1, 2, ..., n
(19f)
in this case shown with one set of dilated, intermediate and eroded physical de-
sign realizations. Minimization is performed on the ’worst case’ objective function.
This implies that the objective function is calculated for each physical design real-
ization, and then the optimization is done on the design with the worst performance.
This is done with the min-max formulation.
The method involves solving a state problem for each set of physical design vari-
ables for calculation of their respective objective function. This implies assembling
of the global stiﬀness matrix for each set of physical design variables and then solv-
ing for the global displacements for each design. Naturally, this takes a lot more
computational eﬀort.
The sensitivities are calculated from the chain rule from equation (17) where
∂¯˜ρ
∂˜ρ from equation (18) is based on the diﬀerent values of η. The design variables
are updated by MMA. This is done while doing continuation on β, until a speciﬁed
value of β is reached, normally β = 64.
The volume constraint is imposed on the dilated design [35] where V is the total
volume of the design space and V ∗
d is a speciﬁed volume fraction.
18
==PAGE:29==
3.3
Robust Design
To avoid non-diﬀerentiable equations the method is reformulated into a min-min
formulation, now expressed for a variable number of design realisations
min
ρ
: z
(20a)
s.t. : K(¯˜ρk)uk = f
(20b)
fv(ρ) =
P
j ¯˜ρd
jvj
V
≤V ∗
d
(20c)
f0(¯˜ρk(ρ)) + const. −z ≤0,
k = 1, ..., N
(20d)
0 < ρmin ≤ρj ≤1,
j = 1, ..., n
(20e)
z ≥0
(20f)
where N is the desired number of projections (and thus number of physical design
realisations). Now the diﬀerent objective functions are treated as constraints where z
is the value of the ’worst case’ objective function, and is passed to the MMA routine.
It is required by the MMA that z always takes a positive value. This is ensured
by adding a constant to the constraint functions in equation (20d).
19
==PAGE:30==
3
THEORY
3.4
Geometric Non-linearities
The following section comprise some basis theory on geometric non-linearities.
In the linear implementation of the code the stiﬀness matrix is independent of the
displacements, that is, everything is based on the initial geometry. A linear formu-
lation falls short when larger deformations are introduced as is normally the case
for mechanisms.
In a geometric non-linear implementation the stiﬀness matrix will be dependant on
the displacements. This implies that the global stiﬀness matrix now has to be re-
calculated at each iteration.
However, this causes a problem as now both the stiﬀness matrix and displace-
ment vector are unknowns, and a simple solution of the linear state problem is no
longer applicable.
The approach in a non-linear implementation can be simply stated as a state
equilibrium between external nodal forces and internal nodal forces [6, 23].
By
denoting the residual (k)r we have that
(k)r(u) = (k)fint(u) −(k)fext = 0
(21)
where (k)fext denotes the external nodal loads that is assumed to be independent
on the displacements, and (k)fint denotes the internal nodal forces. In a non-linear
implementation there often exists a path-dependant nature of the loads with respect
to displacement that implies that non-linear problems often have to be calculated
incrementally. This means we introduce the left superscript (k) that states a given
incremental load step, and it is sought to obtain an equilibrium among internal and
external forces for each incremental step. The incremental procedure is normally
done with a Newton-Raphson algorithm. The subscript i in the following denotes
the i’th iteration step in the Newton-Raphson algorithm. The residual at increment
(i + 1) can now be found as a ﬁrst order Taylor expansion
(k)r(ui+1) ≈(k)r(ui) +
(k)∂r(ui)
∂u
∆ui = 0
(22)
We now introduced the tangent stiﬀness matrix KT as
(k)KT =
(k)∂r(ui)
∂u
(23)
and substituting (21) and (23) into (22) yields
(k)fint(u) −(k)fext + (k)KT∆ui = 0
(24)
By solving equation (24) for the displacement increment the new displacements
can now be obtained as
ui+1 = ui + ∆ui
(25)
20
==PAGE:31==
3.4
Geometric Non-linearities
The internal force fint(u) can now be calculated based on the new displacements.
The residual from equation (21) is calculated based on the new internal force, until it
is satisﬁed to some convergence criterion (k)r(u) < ε. If the convergence criterion is
not satisﬁed equation (22)-(25) is calculated again to obtain a better approximation
of the displacements.
This method implies the calculation of the tangent stiﬀness matrix (k)KT, and
the internal nodal load (k)fint.
The tangent stiﬀness matrix (k)KT can be calculated as a contribution from the
initial linear conﬁguration (k)K0, a contribution from the displacements, (k)Kd, and
a contribution from the internal stresses, (k)Kσ. This can be written as
(k)KT =
X
e
(k)Ke
T =
X
e
(k)Ke
0 + (k)Ke
d + (k)Ke
σ
(26)
where all three stiﬀness contributions are approximated by the SIMP method.
The internal nodal load is found from the internal stresses σ and the displace-
ments u [11]
(k)fint =
Z
V
¯BTσdV =
Z
V
¯BTC ¯BudV
(27)
where C is the constitutive matrix and ¯B is the strain displacement matrix also
stated in equation (3). However, now besides the initial geometry the strain dis-
placement matrix now consists of a non-linear contribution from the displacements.
This can be written as
¯B = B0 + BNL(u)
(28)
where B0 is equal to the strain displacement matrix from the linear case and
BNL is the non-linear contribution dependent on the displacements [32, 33].
The derivations of the diﬀerent stiﬀness contributions and the internal nodal
loads will not be elaborated here, but the reader is referred to [6, 32, 33, 23].
21
==PAGE:32==
3
THEORY
3.5
Manufacturing
One of the aims of this project is to manufacture the optimized designs, which will be
done by additive manufacturing. Additive manufacturing methods are characterized
as methods that ’add material’ rather than ’remove material’ as is the case for most
conventional methods, e.g. milling or turning processes. In the present case the
method of choice is the so called FDM process, which will be explained in brief in
the following.
3.5.1
FDM 3d Printing
FDM is an abbreviation for ’fused deposition modelling’ and is a relatively simple
process where the model is build up layer by layer by extruding a heated polymer,
e.g. PLA. This is visualized in ﬁgure 6. The extruder and the building plate can
move relative to each other in all three dimensions. Whenever a layer is completed
the building plate (or the extruder) moves one step in the height, so that the next
layer is printed on top.
This method is widely used due to its simplicity and ’hobby printers’ using this
technology can be purchased from ∼3.000dkk and up.
Figure 6: FDM process where a model is built by extruding a heated polymer and
thus building the model layer by layer. (1) is the extruder, (2) is the deposited
polymer and (3) is the building plate.
source: http://www.shining3dscanner.com/en-us/FDM.html
Care has to be taken in the pre-processing phase when a model is to be manu-
factured in order to get a model of a decent print quality. This will be elaborated
in section 4.5.
22
==PAGE:33==
4
Method
The present section will describe some of the implementations made throughout this
project. Throughout this project the following is added to TopOpt In PETSc code.
• Implementation of the force inverter problem.
This involves changing the
objective function, constraint functions, loads and boundaries
• Modiﬁcation of the code to only solve one quarter of the structure to lower
computational time
• Finite diﬀerence check to check the correctness of the sensitivities
• Implementation of Dirichlet boundary conditions on the ﬁlter
• Implementation of the projection method
• Implementation of robust formulation
• Implementation of geometric non-linearities
Some of the implementations will be further elaborated through section 4.1-4.4,
while section 4.5 describes the additive manufacturing process.
4.1
Description of the Code
The basis for this project is the TopOpt In PETSc code which is described in [1].
The code is a C++ implementation based on the PETSc framework. The code in its
original form solves the well-known minimum compliance problem of a cantilever
beam by using 8-node linear brick elements. The code includes density, sensitivity
and PDE ﬁltering, MMA and a routine for visualizing the results in ParaView.
The code is run on the DTU supercomputer called ’Jess’ that has the PETSc
framework installed. Editing, testing an debugging of the code is done in a linux
terminal through an SSH to ’Jess’.
A simulation for testing and debugging can be run e.g. with the command
mpirun -np 12 ./topopt -filter 2 -volfrac 0.1 -rmin 0.1 -nx 65 -ny 65
-nz -65
which is a job run on 12 cores, with PDE ﬁltering (ﬁlter 2), a volume fraction of
0.1, ﬁlter radius of 0.1, and on a mesh consisting of 653 nodes.
Larger jobs are run on the supercomputer Jess with a small python script, where
the desired number of cores can be speciﬁed.
23
==PAGE:34==
4
METHOD
4.2
Implementation of the Force Inverter
The ﬁrst step in the present work has been to implement the force inverter problem
instead of the minimum compliance problem. This involves changing the objective
function as well as loads and boundary conditions. The problem can now be written
as [29]
min
ρ
:
c(ρ) = uout
(29a)
subject to :
g(ρ) = vT
j ¯˜ρj ≤V ∗
(29b)
:
Ku = f
(29c)
:
0 < ρmin ≤ρj ≤1,
j = 1, ..., n
(29d)
where n is the number of elements. The objective function that is to be minimized
is the output displacement as illustrated on ﬁgure 7 at lout. The objective function
can be stated as
c(ρ) = lT
outu
(30)
where u is the displacement vector and lout is a vector taking the values 0 at
all entities except at the output nodes where it takes on the value 1. The output
displacement can either consist of a single node, or an area of nodes, where the latter
is the case in the present work.
Applying a load on the area lin will naturally cause a positive displacement at
lout. However, minimizing this output displacement will lower it, and eventually it
will become negative, hence creating the force inverter. The input load works on the
same area as lin, however in the load vector the edge nodes takes 1/2 the value and
corner nodes takes 1/4 the value. This is in order to avoid abrupt change from the
fully loaded area and the unloaded area. The load vector can be seen from ﬁgure
42a in appendix B.1.
Springs are added to input and output nodes, as seen in ﬁgure 7 as kin and kout.
This is in order to simulate a physical problem where the input load is normally
constrained e.g. by displacement. By adding these springs the input and output
displacement of the mechanisms can be controlled.
An alternative to the springs is to implement a constraint on the input displacement
[23]. The mechanism is ﬁxed at the four corners at x = 0 as visible from the ﬁgure.
24
==PAGE:35==
4.2
Implementation of the Force Inverter
lout
kin
x
z
y
lin
kout
Figure 7: Loads, springs and boundaries for the force inverter
4.2.1
Modelling One Quarter of the Structure
It can be seen from ﬁgure 7 that the force inverter problem is symmetric two times
normal to the y and z axis. This implies that it is only necessary to model one
quarter of the structure, which would be beneﬁcial regarding computational time.
An illustration of the quarter structure can be seen from ﬁgure 8.
kin
lin
lout
kout
x
z
y
Figure 8: Loads and boundaries for one quarter of the structure
The area for the input and output nodes are now one quarter the size compared
to the full model. Constraints are also imposed on the displacement normal to the
symmetry planes.
Naturally it takes less computational eﬀort, as the quarter structure contains
only 1/4 the elements, and approximately 1/4 of the nodes (a little more due to
25
==PAGE:36==
4
METHOD
shared nodes). Adjustments have to be made to the loads, boundaries and the lin
and lout vectors to get identical problems. For example, loads at the boundary of
the symmetry line are now only 1/2 of the original load, as it has ’one less element’
to absorb the load. This can be seen in appendix B.1.
4.2.2
Calculation of Sensitivities for Linear Implementation
In the following section the sensitivities will be calculated for the linear imple-
mentation of the force inverter. Calculation of the sensitivities for the non-linear
implementation will be done in 4.4.1.
In the linear formulation it is possible to state the residual as Ku −f = 0, and
from equation (10) we now have
dψ
dρi
= ∂f
∂ρi
+ λT ∂r
∂ρi
= ∂f
∂ρi
+ λT ∂K
∂ρi
u
(31)
as the external loads f are independent on the densities.
Equation (9) now yields
∂f
∂u + λT ∂r
∂u = ∂f
∂u + λT K = 0
(32)
By substituting the objective function from equation (30) into equation (31) we
have that
∂c
∂ρi = 0 and thus it simpliﬁes to
∂c
∂ρi
= λT
∂K
∂ρi
u

(33)
λ can now be determined from equation (32) by substituting the objective func-
tion which yields
lT
out + λTK ⇒KTλ = lout ⇒Kλ = lout
(34)
as K is symmetric, and thus solving this linear system yields λ.
For the volume constraint function from equation (29b) we have that ∂g
∂ρi =
vi
V ∗≤
0, and equation (31) yields
∂g
∂ρi
= vi
V ∗+ λT
∂K
∂ρi
u

(35)
Substituting the constraint function into equation (32) gives ∂g
∂u = 0 and equation
(35) simpliﬁes to
∂g
∂ρi
= vi
V ∗
(36)
26
==PAGE:37==
4.2
Implementation of the Force Inverter
4.2.3
Dirichlet Boundary Conditions on Filter
It will be evident later in the results section (section 5) that there is a tendency
that the optimized design ’sticks’ to the edges of the design space. This causes
completely ’ﬂat surfaces’ and sharp 90◦corners, which is also visible from ﬁgure
1a. This phenomena comes from the ﬁlter process where an average is taken across
neighbouring nodes. Naturally, in the vicinity of the boundaries the average cannot
be taken beyond the boundaries, which causes a higher stiﬀness and thus making it
more ’favourable’ to place material at the boundaries.
The ’sticking’ to the boundaries can also cause problems in the robust formulation,
which will be evident in the results section (section 5.3).
By imposing Dirichlet boundary conditions on the ﬁlter this ’sticking’ to the
edges can be omitted. This is done by introducing two vectors, g and n. The two
vectors are visualised in ParaView, which can be seen on ﬁgure 9.
The g vector takes the value 1 where the densities should be held constant at 1,
and otherwise it takes the value 0. In this way it is imposed that the constrained
corners and the input and output nodes now always have a density of 1.
The n vector have zeros where no changes in the densities are allowed, and oth-
erwise 1, if changes are allowed. This implies that at the constrained corners and
input and output nodes, the n vectors takes a value of 0 in order for these elements
to remain solid. Furthermore the outermost row of elements takes the value 0, so
material are not placed in the vicinity of the boundary. Changes are allowed in an
area around the constrained corners and input and output nodes, in order to avoid
an abrupt change between solid and void elements.
The ﬁgures are completely discrete (taking values either 0 or 1), and the colour
gradient present are simply due to how ParaView interpolates its colour scheme.
(a) The g vector. Densities of 1 are im-
posed on the input and output nodes, and
on the constrained corners.
(b) The n vector. The ’red side’ is a sym-
metry plane, thus changes in the design
variables are allowed here.
Figure 9: Vectors used for imposing Dirichlet boundary conditions visualized with
ParaView for a quarter structure
27
==PAGE:38==
4
METHOD
4.3
Implementation of Robust Formulation
For the implementation of the robust formulation the ﬁrst step has been to imple-
ment the projection method. The projection method can be switched on by adding
-projection 1 in the run command, and specify the threshold value as -eta[0]
0.5.
Afterwards the robust formulation has been implemented to allow for a freely cho-
sen number of design realizations where the diﬀerent values of η is speciﬁed by the
user.
For example for 3 diﬀerent projections the user can write -nump 3 in the
run command where -eta[0] 0.4 -eta[1] 0.5 -eta[2] 0.6 speciﬁes the diﬀer-
ent threshold values. When the projection method or robust formulation is active
continuation is automatically done on β until β ≥64.
4.4
Implementation of Geometric Non-linearities
The geometric non-linear implementation is based on a PETSc component called
SNES which is an abbreviation for ’scalable non-linear equations solvers’. A Newton-
Raphson solver is being used in the present case.
For using SNES two functions are made, one that returns the tangent stiﬀness
matrix and one that returns the residual.
The load increments from the desired number of load steps are passed to the PETSc
function SNESSolve(); that returns the new displacements when some convergence
criterion is reached.
The geometric non-linear ﬁnite element implementation has been validated by
comparing to a COMSOL example for a buckling problem. This can be seen in
appendix C.3.
Note: Unfortunately, due to time limitations, the implementation for topology
optimizing a force inverter with the non-linear code never run properly. It is un-
til this point unknown what caused the problem, but convergence problems were
encountered when trying to optimize while using the non-linear solver. The sensi-
tivities for non-linear optimization of the force inverter will however still be presented
in the following section.
The non-linear FE implementation runs properly, and non-linear analysis of the
force inverter will be presented in the results section.
4.4.1
Calculation of Sensitivities for Non-linear Implementation
In the geometric non-linear formulation the residual is stated as the internal forces
minus the external forces
r = fint −fext
(37)
and from equation (10) we now have
28
==PAGE:39==
4.5
Manufacturing
dψ
dρi
= ∂f
∂ρi
+ λT ∂r
∂ρi
= ∂f
∂ρi
+ λT ∂fint
∂ρi
(38)
and equation (9) yields
∂f
∂u + λT ∂r
∂u = ∂f
∂u + λT KT = 0
(39)
by using the deﬁnition from equation (23).
Substituting the objective function from equation (30) into equation (38) we have
that
dc
dρi
= λT ∂fint
∂ρi
(40)
where λ can be found by substituting the objective function into equation (39)
lT
out + λTKT ⇒KT
Tλ = lout ⇒KTλ = lout
(41)
and solving for λ.
The sensitivities for the volume constraint are identical to those of the linear
model, which can be seen from equation (36).
4.5
Manufacturing
The following section describes the manufacturing process and how the designs are
prepared for manufacturing.
A mechanism has been manufactured by 3d Printhuset in Copenhagen
(http://3dprinthuset.dk/). This mechanism is made with a material called In-
noﬂex 45, that posses rubber-like material characteristics. This model will be pre-
sented in section 5.4.4.
Several prints have been made on an FDM printer of the type ’Wanhao Dupli-
cator 4s’ [36] that costs $979 (with today’s date, 14/12/14). The printer is placed
at DTU, and several prints and various tests have been conducted. The printer can
be seen from ﬁgure 10. The printer is capable of printing with a layer resolution of
0.1mm.
29
==PAGE:40==
4
METHOD
Figure 10: The Wanhao Duplicator 4s 3d printer used throughout this project
source: http://wanhaousa.com/products/duplicator-4s-steel-exoframe
Two diﬀerent kinds of material have been used in the Wanhao printer. A stan-
dard PLA ﬁlament [24] which is widely used in 3d printing, and an experimental
ﬁlament called POROLAY [25] which is softer than PLA. The POROLAY ﬁlament
will be described in section 4.5.3.
4.5.1
Preparation of Prints
Most 3d-printers, including the Wanhao 3d printer used during this project, uses
the ﬁle type .stl as input ﬁle for the 3d model. After the .stl ﬁle is generated it is
recommended to validate the model, that is, check whether the model is free from
errors. The generation of this .stl ﬁle from the ParaView ﬁle and the validation is
described in Appendix C.4.
4.5.2
Generating Support Structure
Generating a support structure is often an essential part of additive manufacturing.
Naturally an extrusion process cannot place material in free air, thus a critical angle
exists where the model needs a support structure in order to be manufacturable.
However, this critical angle can be diﬃcult to determine as it is inﬂuenced by mul-
tiple parameters, e.g. extrusion temperature, print resolution and type of material.
When the print is done the support material has to be removed e.g. with a utility
knife or a pair of pliers.
A printed model with support structure from the software MakerBot Desktop
[20] can be seen from ﬁgure 11a. The software automatically estimates the needed
support structure and does not allow the user to manually manipulate the amount
or type of support structure. It is evident that the MakerBot Desktop software
estimates that a lot of support structure is needed to build the model. In the au-
thor’s opinion the MakerBot Desktop software seems to overestimate the need for
30
==PAGE:41==
4.5
Manufacturing
support structure, thus leaving a time-consuming post-processing phase of removing
support material from the model. Furthermore the surface can be damaged where
the support has been attached and weaken the model.
Another approach for generating support structure is using the program Mesh-
Mixer [21] from the company Autodesk. MeshMixer makes it possible to manually
deﬁne support structures at critical places. MeshMixer uses a diﬀerent kind of sup-
port made up from slender beams attached to structure. This can be seen from
ﬁgure 11b. Even though this model still requires some work when the support is to
be removed the result turned out to be superior compared to the support generated
with the MakerBot Desktop software.
(a) Support done with Makerbot
Desktop with PLA ﬁlament. Print
time:
7 hours and 20 minutes,
100% inﬁll
(b) Support done with MeshMixer with PLA
ﬁlament. Print time: Print time: 8 hours and
3 minutes, 100% inﬁll
Figure 11: Two diﬀerent kinds of support material with PLA ﬁlament
4.5.3
Experimenting with Soft Material
Standard PLA is rather stiﬀwhich can cause problems due to the nature of compliant
mechanisms as they are normally subject to large elastic deformations. Therefore it
is sought to ﬁnd a method capable of printing soft materials.
A series of materials called POROLAY has recently been introduced to the mar-
ket [25].
The POROLAY materials are still in an experimenting phase and the
manufacturer provides no guarantee for the ﬁnal outcome. The POROLAY materi-
als can be printed on a standard FDM 3d printer as they possesses similar material
properties as standard PLA. However, they distinguish themselves by being ’soften
up’ when the printed model is submerged in water for 1-4 days and afterwards dried.
This combination of being able to be printed on a standard 3d printer and then af-
terwards being ’soften up’ is interesting as this have the potential of being a cheap
way of producing compliant mechanisms.
31
==PAGE:42==
4
METHOD
However, the POROLAY material turned out to be more complicated to print
with compared to the PLA. Even though the POROLAY should posses the same
characteristics in the printing phase as the PLA, it turned out to be less durable.
Figure 12a shows the POROLAY material with the Makerbot Desktop software.
Even though the print ﬁnished, the amount of support material as well as the less
durable material, makes it almost impossible to remove the support without dam-
aging the model.
Figure 12b shows a failed attempt to print with the MeshMixer support. As it can
be seen, it was not possible to print the slender support beams with the POROLAY
material.
(a) Support done with Makerbot
Desktop with POROLAY ﬁlament.
Print time: 7 hours and 11 minutes,
100% inﬁll
(b) Failed attempt of support done with
MeshMixer with POROLAY ﬁlament.
Figure 12: Two diﬀerent kinds of support material with POROLAY ﬁlament
This will be further discussed in section 5.7
32
==PAGE:43==
5
Results and Discussion
The following section comprises the results and the discussion of the present work.
In section 5.1 the implemented force inverter will be shown, and a comparison of
the full structure versus the quarter structure will be made. Section 5.2 presents the
results of the projection method and the eﬀect of the imposed Dirichlet boundary
conditions on the ﬁlter. Section 5.3 shows the results of the implemented robust
formulation for a case with and without Diriclet boundary conditions. Finally, the
manufactured mechanisms are shown in section 5.4.
The parameters used for each simulation will be stated in a box above the visu-
alised designs. All the simulations is done with the PDE ﬁlter.
5.1
Implementation of Force Inverter
The quarter structure has been implemented in order to save computational time,
however, a justiﬁcation on the comparability of the two models is required.
5.1.1
Comparison of Full and Quarter Structure
A visualization of the full structure and quarter structure can be seen from ﬁgure
13. The ﬁlesize of the full model is 312MB while ﬁlesize of the quarter model is
80MB.
Mesh: 1283
Cores: 100
Emin = 10e−3
rmin = 0.1
□Projection
□Robust
□Dirichlet BC
□Non-Linear
fin = 0.1
kspring in = 1.5
kspring out = 1e−5
Design space 1 × 1 × 1
(a) Full structure at iteration 320. Vi-
sualized with a volume threshold value
¯˜ρ = 0.25
(b) Quarter structure at iteration 320.
Visualized with a volume threshold value
¯˜ρ = 0.25, and mirrored two times
Figure 13: Two simulations of the force inverter for the full and quarter model. The
models are almost identical.
33
==PAGE:44==
5
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The two models are almost indistinguishable, however small diﬀerences can be
present. An example of this can be seen on the top ’tap’ of the models, where it is
a bit taller on the full model compared to the quarter model.
None of the two structures are having densities with the value 1, which is an eﬀect
of the ﬁltering. There is a small deviation on the maximum density with ¯˜ρ = 0.964
for the full model and ¯˜ρ = 0.958 for the quarter model.
The small deviations from the two model are believed to be due to accumulated
numerical errors introduced in the iterative solvers. In order to verify this a job has
been run for the full model and the quarter model with the same initial conditions
with the aim of comparing the sensitivities of the two, that are send to the MMA.
By comparing the sensitivities of the quarter model to the corresponding quarter of
the full model, both the numerical and the relative errors has been plotted. This
can be seen in Appendix C.2. It can be seen that only very small deviations are
present, and thus it is concluded that the models are practically identical.
A convergence study of the two models can be seen from ﬁgure 14 with respect to
the number of iterations. It is evident that less iterations are needed for the quarter
model to get a negative objective function and to converge. The reason for this is
however a bit unclear. The two models converge to the same value in the end.
0
100
200
300
400
500
−0.04
−0.02
0
0.02
Iterations
Objective
Quarter model
Full model
Figure 14: Convergence study of the full and quarter model for a 128 × 128 × 128
element full model
The objective value as function of time can be seen from ﬁgure 15.
34
==PAGE:45==
5.1
Implementation of Force Inverter
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
x 10
4
−0.04
−0.02
0
0.02
time[s]
Objective
Quarter model
Full model
Figure 15: Time study of the full and quarter model run on 100 cores
As each iteration takes considerable less time, along with the faster convergence
rate, the quarter model is clearly advantageous when it comes to computational
eﬃciency.
A study has been made for the time consumption of the two models as function
of mesh resolution. This is shown in ﬁgure 16
0
1
2
3
4 x 10
4
643
1283
2563
Number of elements
Time [s]
Full model
Quarter model
Figure 16: Time study of the full and quarter model for diﬀerent mesh resolutions
The ratios of the time consumptions timefull/timequarter are 4.068, 4.2548 and
4.1366 for 643, 1283 and 2563 elements, respectively. Thus the quarter model is
an improvement by a factor of ∼4 compared to the full model. One could expect
a factor a little below 4 as the quarter model contains nodes at symmetry planes
which is shared among the other quarters, thus having to solve for more state dofs
relative to the full structure. This is however not evident from the time study. It is
35
==PAGE:46==
5
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
diﬃcult to ﬁnd the exact origin of this, but can be due to varies inﬂuencing factors
during the iterative processes.
In conclusion to this, it is shown that the quarter model is advantageous when
it comes to computational time, as expected. It is at this point not evident whether
the faster convergence rate for the quarter from ﬁgure 14 is a general tendency, or
if it is just for this speciﬁc case.
All simulations from now on will be done for the quarter model due to the
advantage in time consumption while still maintaining practically identical results
compared to the full structure.
5.1.2
Parameter Continuation
Parameters regarding the physics or the optimization can have a large impact on
the ﬁnal topology of the design. Often a continuation scheme has to be applied in
order to avoid a local optimum.
In the present example seen from ﬁgure 13, a minimum value of Young’s modulus,
Emin = 10−3, has been used. If a smaller value is used the structure tend to ’discon-
nect’, that is, there are no material connecting the ﬁxed corners and the input force.
Naturally this will cause the output displacement to be zero, thus the structure ﬁnd
the local minimum c = 0, but fails to take on a negative objective value. However,
using Emin = 10−3 is not physically correct as void elements have an artiﬁcially large
stiﬀness.
A ﬁlter radius of rmin = 0.1 has been used which means that ﬁltering is done
on an area with a radius of 10% of the structure. This is done for ensuring mesh
independency.
After ﬁnding an outline of the ﬁnal topology, continuation can be done on these
variables until a desired end value. Such a continuation scheme can be seen from
the convergence plot on ﬁgure 17.
36
==PAGE:47==
5.1
Implementation of Force Inverter
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
1100
−0.4
−0.3
−0.2
−0.1
0
0.1
Iterations
Objective
Emin =
1e-03
rmin =
0.1
Emin =
1e-04
rmin =
0.09
Emin =
1e-05
rmin =
0.08
Emin =
1e-06
rmin =
0.07
Emin =
1e-07
rmin =
0.06
Emin =
1e-08
rmin =
0.05
Emin =
1e-09
rmin =
0.04
rmin =
0.03
rmin =
0.02
Figure 17: Convergence study of a continuation scheme. Iteration 0-300 are identical
to the convergence plot from ﬁgure 14 for the quarter model, before continuation
has begun.
The structure can be seen from ﬁgure 18. It is evident that ﬁner details are
present compared to ﬁgure 13 which is mainly due to the reduced ﬁlter radius. The
objective function is signiﬁcantly improved which is mainly due to the lowering of
Emin so the displacement at output nodes are not hindered by voids having an
artiﬁcially high stiﬀness. Furthermore the reduction of the ﬁlter size causes more
hinge-like structures which can be beneﬁcial for the displacement.
It is evident from both ﬁgure 13 and 18 that the majority of the elements con-
sists of intermediate densities rather than solid or voids as an eﬀect of the ﬁltering.
This does not correlate with the underlying physics, and are not manufacturable by
conventional methods.
When visualizing the results in ParaView a volume threshold value has to be chosen
in order to determine which elements to include in the design. By having many
intermediate densities this threshold value will greatly aﬀect the functionality of the
manufactured mechanism.
The structure from ﬁgure 18 is shown for a volume threshold of ¯˜ρ = 0.25, and
already at this threshold level hinge-like structures are present.
Increasing this
threshold will cause the structure to disconnect at the hinges. A better view of the
hinges can be seen from the diagonal cut in ﬁgure 18b. As the hinge-like structures
possesses many intermediate densities they will be more or less pronounced when
changing the volume threshold, which will greatly aﬀect the mechanism.
37
==PAGE:48==
5
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Mesh: 1283
Cores: 100
Emin = 10e−9
rmin = 0.02
□Projection
□Robust
□Dirichlet BC
□Non-Linear
fin = 0.1
kspring in = 1.5
kspring out = 1e−5
Design space 1 × 1 × 1
(a) Force inverter after continuation
(b) Diagonal cut, where hinge-like struc-
tures can be seen
Figure 18: Quarter structure at iteration 1100 after continuation on Emin and rmin,
shown with a threshold value ¯˜ρ = 0.25, and mirrored two times. Having a higher
volume threshold will cause the structure to disconnect at hinges.
A visualisation has been made at the end of each continuation step from ﬁg-
ure 17. This can be seen in appendix C.1. It is evident that the largest changes
happen at the ﬁrst steps of the continuation scheme, which can also be seen from
the convergence study from ﬁgure 17. Hinges are present already after the ﬁrst 300
iterations, however hinges become more pronounced as the ﬁlter radius decreases.
Changes from ﬁgure 44d to 44i are limited.
In conclusion to this, the force inverter has been made and the validity of the
quarter model has been conﬁrmed. Furthermore it has been shown that the code
is capable of running large scale jobs in parallel. As expected, modelling only one
quarter of the structure results in roughly one quarter the time consumption.
However, the simulated designs mainly consists of intermediate densities and thus
making these designs diﬃcult to manufacture, as there is no clear distinction between
solid and void elements. Furthermore these designs contains hinge-like structures.
38
==PAGE:49==
5.2
Projection Method
5.2
Projection Method
Two cases of the projection method has been run, one without Dirichlet boundary
conditions and one with imposed Dirichlet boundary conditions on the ﬁlter. These
can be seen on ﬁgure 19a and 19b.
Mesh: 1283
Cores: 300
Emin = 10e−7
rmin = 0.1
□✓Projection
□Robust
□Non-Linear
fin = 0.1
kspring in = 1.5
kspring out = 1e−5
Design space 1 × 1 × 1
(a) Without Dirichlet boundary conditions
on ﬁlter. Simulation time: 1945 sec
(b) With Dirichlet boundary conditions on
ﬁlter. Simulation time: 2017 sec
Figure 19: Two cases of the projection method with η = 0.5. Volume threshold is
at ¯˜ρ = 0.5.
It is evident that both structures are now signiﬁcantly more discretized, where
the majority of elements are now solid or void, and only few intermediate elements
are present. This is an eﬀect of the projection, where the ﬁltered ﬁeld, ˜ρ, are pro-
jected towards solid/voids to get the physical ﬁeld ¯˜ρ.
This implies that changing the volume threshold will have almost no eﬀect on the
design, as most elements takes on a value of either 0 or 1.
There is a clear diﬀerence between the topologies of the two designs. The structure
from ﬁgure 19a without Dirichlet boundary conditions ’sticks’ to the walls in con-
trary to ﬁgure 19a, as expected. Both designs have hinge-like structures, where the
structure is held together by only a line of elements or nodes. As the designs are now
almost fully discretized the hinge-like structures are now much more pronounced.
In both cases the projection threshold is η = 0.5, and simulations are run for
560 iterations with continuation on β from 1 to 64. β is doubled every 80 iterations,
however β takes the value 1 for the ﬁrst 120 iteration (in order to let the objective
value to be negative before doing continuation).
Furthermore continuation has been done until Emin = 1e −7, as further decrease in
39
==PAGE:50==
5
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
this value only yields small changes, as was revealed from ﬁgure 17.
A convergence study of the two designs can be seen from ﬁgure 20. The con-
vergence study reveals that the structure without Dirichlet boundary conditions on
the ﬁlter slightly outperforms the structure with the imposed Dirichlet boundary
conditions.
In is interesting to see how the objective value ’jumps’ each time a
continuation step is made, as an eﬀect of the change in the topology.
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
−1.2
−1
−0.8
−0.6
−0.4
−0.2
0
0.2
Iterations
Objective
β =2
β =4
β =8
β =16
β =32
β =64
β = 1
Emin = 1e −3
Emin =
Emin =
Emin =
Emin =
1e −4
1e −5
1e −6
1e −7
Dirichlet BC
No Dirichlet BC
Figure 20: Convergence study for projection method with and without Dirichlet
BCs.
Both simulations have been optimized for η = 0.5, which means that the ﬁltered
design variables ˜ρ are projected to solids/voids at each iteration for η = 0.5 to get
the physical design variables ¯˜ρ. Even though the structure is optimized for this value
of η it is interesting to see the ﬁltered design variables projected to solids/voids for
diﬀerent values of η.
This means that the ﬁltered ﬁeld ˜ρ from the last iteration of the simulation is pro-
jected to get the physical ﬁeld, and thereby the optimized design, for various choices
of η.
Such a study is done for the model with the imposed Dirichlet boundary condi-
tions, as can be seen from ﬁgure 21 for various choices of η. It is clear that a lower
value of η cause a more dilated structure while higher value of η causes an eroded
structure. This is as expected, when looking at ﬁgure 5. The blurred edges of ﬁgure
21a can be circumvented if a higher value of β is chosen.
40
==PAGE:51==
5.2
Projection Method
(a) η = 0.0
(b) η = 0.1
(c) η = 0.2
(d) η = 0.3
(e) η = 0.4
(f) η = 0.5
(g) η = 0.6
(h) η = 0.7
(i) η = 0.8
(j) η = 0.9
(k) η = 1.0
Figure 21: Diagonal cut of the structure for diﬀerent values of η
Following the same procedure of generating multiple physical designs from the
ﬁltered ﬁeld of the last iteration, it is possible to calculate the objective value based
on the diﬀerent η values. Such a study is made for a wide range of diﬀerent η values,
as seen from ﬁgure 22.
The curve has a minimum at η = 0.5, as expected, as the structure is optimized
at this value. However, by looking at ﬁgure 21f it can be seen that this design
contains hinge-like structures. This means that this structure will be diﬃcult to
manufacture. Furthermore, if the hinge-like structure are successfully manufactured
they will most likely be subject to too high stresses and strains, thus causing the
design to break.
41
==PAGE:52==
5
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
For η > 0.5 the objective value increases rapidly, and at η ≳0.53 the objective
function becomes zero. This can be explained by looking at ﬁgure 21g where at
η = 0.6 the structure is disconnected, thus not giving a negative objective as the
output displacement will be 0.
Having a more dilated design where η < 0.5 causes thicker design features that
seems to be more suitable for manufacturing. However, ﬁgure 22 reveals that the
objective function increases rapidly when η is lowered as an eﬀect of the more dilated
designs. At η ≲0.18 the objective function becomes positive, as these very dilated
designs as seen from ﬁgure 21a-21b fails to invert the force.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
−1
−0.8
−0.6
−0.4
−0.2
0
Objective Function
η
Figure 22: Objective value for diﬀerent values of η. η = 0.5 is marked with red.
In conclusion to this the projection method produces more ’crisp’ boundaries, as
the designs mainly consists of solid and void elements, and therefore the problem of
having intermediate densities are circumvented.
However, hinge-like structures for the optimized design are still present and are now
more pronounced, as the intermediate densities are no longer present. This is visible
from ﬁgure 21f, which is the optimized structure at η = 0.5.
Making various projections reveals interesting aspects of the projection method.
Figure 22 shows that the optimized structure at η = 0.5 is very sensitive for varying
factors, as a slight change in topology will change the objective value dramatically.
Manufacturability is still not ensured. Diﬃculties will arise when the optimized
structure from ﬁgure 21f is to be produced, due to the hinge like structures and
42
==PAGE:53==
5.2
Projection Method
sensitivity towards varying factors. Manufacturing of a structure with η > 0.5 will
cause a more eroded structure that is likely to disconnect. A structure with a value
of η < 0.5 causes a more dilated design that seems more suitable for manufacturing.
However, the objective value is substantially increased for the dilated designs, as
visible from ﬁgure 22.
So the projection methods ensures solid/voids designs, but fails to produce man-
ufacturable designs as they either contains hinges or are very sensitive to varying
factors.
43
==PAGE:54==
5
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
5.3
Robust Formulation
The robust formulation has been run twice, one without Dirichlet boundary condi-
tions and one with Dirichlet boundary conditions imposed on the ﬁlter.
Note: The iteration history for the two robust formulation simulations are a bit
ineﬃcient as continuation on Emin is done after continuation on β, and the same
results can most likely be obtained with less iterations. However, manufactured
designs have been based on the case with imposed Dirichlet BCs, thus it was decided
to keep these simulations as they are.
5.3.1
Robust Formulation without Dirichlet Boundary Conditions
A simulation with the robust formulation has been run with ηd = 0.4, ηi = 0.5 and
ηe = 0.6, which can be seen from ﬁgure 23.
Mesh: 1283
Cores: 200
Emin = 10e−9
rmin = 0.1
□Projection
□✓Robust
□Non-Linear
□Dirichlet BC
fin = 0.1
kspring in = 1.5
kspring out = 1e−5
Design space 1 × 1 × 1
Figure 23: Intermediate structure for ηd = 0.4, ηi = 0.5, ηe = 0.6 with no Dirichlet
boundary conditions. The structure is shown with a volume threshold at ¯˜ρi = 0.5.
Simulation time: 16723 seconds
Similar to the projection method, the robust formulation yields a structure with
crisp boundaries between solids and voids as an eﬀect of the projections in order to
obtain the physical designs.
However, pronounced hinge-like structures as seen from the projection method are
44
==PAGE:55==
5.3
Robust Formulation
no longer present in the robust formulation for the intermediate design, as seen from
ﬁgure 23.
As there are no Dirichlet boundary conditions imposed on the ﬁlter the structure
’sticks’ to the edges, which can be seen results in a smaller feature size at the edges.
A cross section of the diagonal for the three diﬀerent design realizations can be
seen from ﬁgure 24. The diagonal cut of the intermediate design seen from ﬁgure
24b substantiate that no pronounced hinge-like structures are present in the inter-
mediate design. This indicates that a length scale has been imposed on this design
on both the solid and the void regions (that is, it can be guaranteed that both the
solid and void areas do not have e.g. sharp features etc.). However, it can once
again be seen that the ’sticking’ to the boundaries causes a smaller feature size in
the vicinity of the boundaries. This is an eﬀect of the PDE ﬁltering, where at the
boundaries the length scale is reduced by half. The speciﬁc reason for this will not
be elaborated here, but the reader is reﬀered to [18].
The design follows the expected tendency where a lower value of η causes a more
dilated structure, and a higher value causes a more eroded structure.
(a) Dilated, 0.4
(b) Intermediate, 0.5
(c) Eroded, 0.6
Figure 24: Dilated, intermediate and eroded design. The physical design variables
takes values from 0 to 1 for all three cases.
A convergence study of the objective functions can be seen from ﬁgure 25 for the
dilated, intermediate and eroded design.
It is noteworthy that the intermediate design always outperforms either the dilated
or the eroded design, and in general performs better than the two. The dilated and
eroded design tends to ’follow’ each other in performance, and end up at practically
the same objective value.
In conclusion to this, the robust formulation without Dirichlet boundary condi-
tions produces crisp boundaries between solids and voids, and imposes a length scale
on the intermediate design. However, the length scale is diminished in the vicinity
of the boundaries as an eﬀect of the PDE ﬁltering.
45
==PAGE:56==
5
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
−0.4
−0.3
−0.2
−0.1
0
Iteration no.
Objective function
β =1
β =2
β =4
β =8
β =16
β =32
β =64
Emin =
1e-04
Emin =
1e-05
Emin =
1e-06
Emin =
1e-07
Emin =
1e-08
Emin =
1e-09
ηd = 0.4
ηi = 0.5
ηe = 0.6
Figure 25: Convergence history for the three design realisations.
5.3.2
Robust Formulation with Dirichlet Boundary Conditions
The same simulation has been run, but this time with imposed Dirichlet boundary
conditions on the ﬁlter. The structure can be seen from ﬁgure 26.
Mesh: 1283
Cores: 200
Emin = 10e−9
rmin = 0.1
□Projection
□✓Robust
□Non-Linear
□✓Dirichlet BC
fin = 0.1
kspring in = 1.5
kspring out = 1e−5
Design space 1 × 1 × 1
Figure 26: Intermediate structure for ηd = 0.4, ηi = 0.5, ηe = 0.6 with Dirichlet
boundary conditions on the ﬁlter. The structure is shown with a volume threshold
at ¯˜ρi = 0.5. Simulation time: 15055 seconds
Again a structure with crisp boundaries are shown, without any hinge-like struc-
tures. Furthermore the structure no longer ’sticks’ to the boundaries as an eﬀect of
46
==PAGE:57==
5.3
Robust Formulation
the imposed boundary conditions.
A convergence study can be seen from ﬁgure 27. The same tendency is present
where the intermediate design tends to outperform the dilated and eroded structure.
By comparing the convergence history from ﬁgure 25 and 27 it can be seen that the
structure without Dirichlet boundary conditions performs slightly better than the
design with imposed Dirichlet conditions. This was the same tendency that was
seen for the projection method.
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
−0.3
−0.25
−0.2
−0.15
−0.1
−0.05
0
0.05
Iteration no.
Objective function
β =1
β =2
β =4
β =8
β =16
β =32
β =64
Emin =
1e-04
Emin =
1e-05
Emin =
1e-06
Emin =
1e-07
Emin =
1e-08
Emin =
1e-09
ηd = 0.4
ηi = 0.5
ηe = 0.6
Figure 27: Convergence history for the three design realisations.
A diagonal cut from the three design realisations can be seen from ﬁgure 28. It
can be seen that a minimum length scale seems to be imposed on the intermediate
design on both solid and void regions. Furthermore the structure no longer sticks
to the boundary and thus resulting in a reduced length scale.
(a) Dilated, 0.4
(b) Intermediate, 0.5
(c) Eroded, 0.6
Figure 28: Diagonal cut of the dilated, intermedaite and eroded design
Once again the objective value can be calculated for a wide range of η values,
by projecting the ﬁltered design ﬁeld ˜ρ to get the physical design ﬁeld ¯˜ρ for a wide
range of η values. This is visualized in ﬁgure 29.
47
==PAGE:58==
5
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
−0.4
−0.35
−0.3
−0.25
−0.2
−0.15
−0.1
−0.05
0
Objective Function
η
Figure 29: Objective value for diﬀerent values of η. η equal to 0.4, 0.5 and 0.6 are
marked with red.
When η > 0.6 the objective value goes towards zero rapidly, as the structure
disconnect. By having a value η < 0.4 the objective function decreases, however not
as rapidly as for the projection method. Furthermore it can be seen that even when
having a very dilated design the mechanism will still be able to invert the force until
η ≲0.05.
The interesting thing to see here is the intermediate design at value η = 0.5.
Figure 29 reveals that the intermediate design outperforms both the dilated and
eroded designs. It can be seen that if an excess amount of material is being used
when manufacturing the intermediate design, but without being ’thicker’ than the
dilated design (at η = 0.4), an objective value corresponding to at least the objective
value of the dilated design can still be guaranteed. Furthermore if an inadequate
amount of material is being used in the manufacturing process, but without being
’thinner’ than the eroded design (at η = 0.6), an objective value corresponding to
at least the value of the objective function of the eroded design can be guaranteed.
It is noteworthy by looking at ﬁgure 29 that if a slight inadequate amount of mate-
rial is being used when manufacturing the intermediate design, the mechanism can
actually perform even better than at the nominal value of the intermediate design.
To sum up, the intermediate design in the robust formulation method with im-
posed Dirichlet boundary conditions are:
• Almost fully discretized, as intermediate values have been projected to solid/void
• Have an imposed length scale so no hinge-like structures are present
• Insensitive to varying factors, e.g. introduced in the manufacturing process
Therefore, the intermediate design as seen from ﬁgure 26 will be the design
realization of choice in the following manufacturing.
48
==PAGE:59==
5.4
Manufacturing
5.4
Manufacturing
Two manufactured models will be presented in the following section. Section 5.4.1-
5.4.3 presents a model printed in PLA on the Wanhao printer, while section 5.4.4-
5.4.5 presents a model printed by ’3D Printhuset’ in a material called innoﬂex 45.
Both manufactured models are the design realization from 26, as concluded in
the previous section.
5.4.1
Manufactured PLA Model with the Wanhao printer
A design has been printed with the Wanhao printer, which will be presented in the
following section.
The model is printed in PLA, and the print time is approximately 8 hours for a
model with 100% inﬁll. The model is printed with a volume threshold of ¯˜ρ = 0.81.
The model is printed with the Meshmixer support as seen from ﬁgure 11b.
The model has been placed on a ring to make it easier to use. Figure 30, 31 and
32 shows a comparison between the ParaView model and the manufactured design.
The designs are not ’smoothed’ prior to printing, that is, all the elements are still
visible, which can be (barely) seen on ﬁgure 30 and 31.
Visually, the models printed in PLA are ’nice’ looking and ﬁne details are present.
(a) Manufactured design
(b) ParaView model
Figure 30: Comparison of manufactured model and ParaView model
1It would be more appropriate if a volume threshold of ¯˜ρ = 0.5 were chosen
49
==PAGE:60==
5
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
(a) Manufactured design
(b) ParaView model
Figure 31: Comparison of manufactured model and ParaView model
(a) Manufactured design
(b) ParaView model
Figure 32: Comparison of manufactured model and ParaView model
5.4.2
Performance of the Model
The manufactured mechanisms works as expected. By holding the mechanism in
the ring and pressing at the input area, there is clearly an opposite motion in the
other end. The mechanism has an output displacement which is much larger than
the input displacement.
The force inverter has been optimized with the linear code. After end optimiza-
tion a study has been conducted for ﬁnding the input and output displacement as
function of input force. In this simulation the input and output springs are removed,
and then both a linear and a non-linear FE analysis have been made. This can be
50
==PAGE:61==
5.4
Manufacturing
seen from ﬁgure 33.
Obviously, the force displacement relation is linear in the linear case. For the
non-linear case the force/displacement curve follows the linear for small loads, but
starts to deviate for larger loads, as expected. The non-linear model yields a smaller
displacement for both input and output compared to the linear case.
The FE simulations are run with dimensions 0.07 × 0.07 × 0.07m (size of the
manufactured model) and a Young’s modulus of 2.5GPa2.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
−3
−2.5
−2
−1.5
−1
−0.5
0
0.5
1
Force [N]
Displacement [mm]
Input displacement (linear)
Input displacement (non-linear)
Output displacement (linear)
Output displacement (non-linear)
Figure 33: Comparison study of a linear and a non linear analysis for the input and
output displacement as function of input force
As mentioned in section 4.5 PLA is a rather stiﬀmaterial, which is a bit con-
tradictory to the nature of compliant mechanisms that obtain motion from elastic
strains. This means that the functionality of the mechanism is somehow limited,
which is also evident from ﬁgure 33. For example, ∼8kg of input load is required
for 1mm of output displacement. However, the model shows clear signs of having
the right functionality, even though the displacement is limited.
A visual comparison of the two simulations can be seen from ﬁgure 34. The
diﬀerence in displacement is only slightly visible.
2Young’s modulus for experimental work done in
http://en.wikiversity.org/wiki/MakerBot PLA Material. The work is not scientiﬁcally well
documented, but is however the best estimate of the Young’s modulus for the PLA ﬁlament the
author were able to ﬁnd.
51
==PAGE:62==
5
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
(a) Deformed and undeformed state cal-
culated with the linear FE implementa-
tion
(b) Deformed and undeformed state cal-
culated with the non-linear FE imple-
mentation
Figure 34: The deformation of the two structures. The colour scheme shows the
displacement (blue for negative and red for positive)
In conclusion to this, the models printed in PLA comes out nicely, but posses lim-
ited functionality. Even though, the models shows clear signs of inverting the force,
and have a output displacement that is much larger than the input displacement,
as substantiated by ﬁgure 33.
5.4.3
Further Discussion on the PLA Model
The manufactured model presented in the results section has been printed with a
100% inﬁll structure. This is in contrary to what is normally done in an FDM print-
ing process where a model is build with an outer ’shell’ but the interior is made of
e.g. 10% inﬁll material, as demonstrated in ﬁgure 35a.
Besides saving material, the main reason of printing with an inﬁll structure is to
avoid internal residual stresses. In the printing process the material is printed at an
elevated temperature (230◦C). When the diﬀerent layers cool down at a diﬀerent pace
the layers contract relative to each others, and then internal residual stresses can
occur. This is naturally more prominent for models with large material thickness.
This phenomena is also evident from the surface of the printed models. This is
demonstrated for two models seen on ﬁgure 35b and 35c for 10% and 100% inﬁll,
respectively. For the model with 100% inﬁll it can be seen that the surface is more
rough than for the model with 10% inﬁll.
52
==PAGE:63==
5.4
Manufacturing
(a) Demonstration of 10%
inﬁll structure.
This is a
partly ﬁnished cube (20 ×
20mm) that consists of an
outer shell and then an in-
ﬁll honeycomb structure.
(b) Part of force inverter
printed
with
10%
inﬁll.
Here the surface is smooth.
(c) Part of force inverter
printed
with
100%
inﬁll.
The surface is more rough
than for 10% inﬁll.
Figure 35: Comparison of diﬀerent inﬁll percentages
Printing with an inﬁll structure will naturally alter the functionality of the mech-
anisms if this is not accounted for in the optimization. However, by printing with
100% inﬁll it is unclear to what extent internal residual stresses can aﬀect the func-
tionality of the optimized mechanisms. It is the author’s (subjective) opinion that
the model with 10% inﬁll performs slightly better than a model with 100% inﬁll,
which indicate that having less inﬁll can yield higher elastic strains. However, man-
ufactured models in the present work is printed with 100% inﬁll to be comparable
to the simulation.
Inﬁll structures could be an interesting ﬁeld of study in future work, where
topology optimization could have the potential to utilise an optimized inﬁll structure
as an advantage.
53
==PAGE:64==
5
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
5.4.4
Manufactured Model with Innoﬂex45 Material
The design has also been manufactured by 3D Printhuset (http://3dprinthuset.dk/)
in a material called Innoﬂex 45, which posses rubber-like material characteristics.
The manufactured model can be seen on ﬁgure 36. The model is visually not
’as nice’ as the PLA model, and leftover support material can be seen hanging from
the model. The leftover support material is diﬃcult to remove.
Figure 36: The manufactured model printed with Innoﬂex 45 material
The manufactured model performs very well, and a large output displacement is
visible even for small input loads. This is demonstrated in ﬁgure 37.
54
==PAGE:65==
5.4
Manufacturing
(a) Undeformed
(b) Deformed
Figure 37: The manufactured model printed with Innoﬂex 45 material
5.4.5
Experimental Veriﬁcation
A simple experiment has been conducted to see whether the force displacement
curve of the force inverter can be veriﬁed experimentally. The experiment is a little
’crude’, and the setup can be seen from ﬁgure 38.
The force inverter is placed upside down, and holding its weight on the attached
ring. Pieces of aluminium is one at a time placed on top of the input of the mecha-
nism, thus causing an opposite displacement at the output nodes.
The output displacement is measured by sliding a stack of papers underneath the
mechanism. When no more papers can ﬁt underneath the output of the mechanism,
the height of the stack of papers is measured by a calliper.
It has unfortunately not been possible to get material data such as the Young’s
modulus and Poisson’ ratio of the Innoﬂex 45 material, and ’3D Printhuset’ could
not provide the data.
A Poisson’ ratio of ν = 0.48 has been chosen, which is a typical value for a rubber
material. The Young’s modulus has been ﬁtted in order to correlate the simulation
with the obtained experimental data. A Young’s modulus of E = 0.03GPa has been
used for the simulation. This is within the range of what would be expected, as
rubber normally have a Young’s modulus of 0.01 −0.1GPa.
55
==PAGE:66==
5
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
(a) Unloaded
(b) 0.32 kg
(c) 0.64 kg
Figure 38: Experimental setup at diﬀerent load step. Notice the output part of the
mechanism is moving upwards as load is applied. The orange part (mostly visible
from ﬁgure 38a) is an adapter piece (of negligible mass) such that load can be applied
to the input nodes
The results can be seen from ﬁgure 39. The experiment has been conducted
twice, and the average of the two experiments is shown as well. As the Young’s
modulus from the simulation is ﬁtted in order to correlate with the experiments,
the slope of the curves does not reveal much information (as the slope will change
according to the Young’s modulus). However, it is very interesting to see the non-
linear eﬀect, where it is evident from both the simulation and the experiments that
the force displacement relation is not linear.
56
==PAGE:67==
5.4
Manufacturing
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
−7
−6
−5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
Load [N]
Displacement [mm]
Theoretical
Experiment 1
Experiment 2
Avg. Experimental
Figure 39: Comparison of the experimental data and the simulation
The input displacement is limited compared to the output displacement, and
thus it has not been possible to measure the input displacement experimentally.
However, from the simulation it is found that the output displacement is 3.65-3.8
times larger than the input displacement.
In conclusion to this, the Innoﬂex 45 material signiﬁcantly improved the func-
tionality of the mechanism compared to the PLA model. The experimental setup
provides a force displacement relationship similar to that of the simulation, and
indicates the non-linear relation very well. However, for future studies, it could be
interesting to measure the Young’s modulus experimentally in order to get a more
exact simulation.
57
==PAGE:68==
5
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
5.5
Estimation of Length Scale in Robust Formulation
It is evident that the robust formulation introduces a length scale control on the
intermediate design on both solid and void phases. It is however interesting to deter-
mine the length scale so a mechanism can be manufactured to the capabilities of the
given material and production facilities. Such an estimation based on a numerical
study is presented in [35]. However, when PDE ﬁltering is used small corrections
have to be made to the calculation of the length scale [26, 18].
The estimated length scale is calculated based on η and the ﬁlter radius rmin. The
calculations are simple and will not be elaborated here.
The estimated length for the design from ﬁgure 26 (the manufactured model) is
estimated to be 3.6mm. The manufactured model has been measured with a calliper
at what seems to be the smallest feature sizes, as seen from ﬁgure 40.
Figure 40: Measurements of the manufactured model
This means that there is a diﬀerence in measured and estimated length scale
of ∼0.6mm. However, as mentioned in section 5.4.1, the model has been printed
with a chosen threshold volume of ¯˜ρ = 0.8 where a volume threshold of ¯˜ρ = 0.5
would have been more appropriate. By looking at the diagonal cut from ﬁgure 28b
it is evident that this can cause one (or two) more elements (one element has a side
length of 0.55mm) to present at critical places, thus a larger feature size.
In conclusion to this, it is indicated that length scale can be estimated, which
can be a useful tool when designing new mechanisms.
58
==PAGE:69==
5.6
Improvements to the Robust Design
5.6
Improvements to the Robust Design
The implementation of the robust formulation have produced good results and a
lot of insight, and the intermediate design realization shown in section 5.3.2 turned
out to bring several advantages regarding manufacturability. However, experience
obtained throughout this project reveals that some things can be done to get a more
computationally eﬃcient simulation for the robust formulation, and a more practical
design
• The convergence history seen in ﬁgure 27 reveals that the intermediate design
always outperforms at least either the eroded or the dilated design. As the
optimization is always done on the ’worst case’ design realization, it cause
that optimization is never done on the intermediate design. This means that
the intermediate design can be omitted, resulting in one less state problem
to solve. When the optimization has been run the intermediate design can
simply be generated by projecting the ﬁltered design variables ˜ρ at η = 0.5
in order to get the physical design ﬁeld ¯˜ρ corresponding to the intermediate
design ﬁeld.
• The convergence history from ﬁgure 27 shows that the three design realizations
follows each other closely when β = 1. This means that it is possible only to
make one design realization for as long as β = 1, and then introduce more
design realizations as β increases.
• The continuation scheme done on Emin is cumbersome, and alternative meth-
ods could probably be used to get similar convergence, e.g. an extra constraint
that forces the objective value below zero.
• Figure 28 shows that there is a large margin between the dilated and eroded
design which is optimized for ∆η = 0.2 (diﬀerence between ηe and ηd). Produc-
tion facilities should be capable of manufacturing to much tighter tolerances.
This means that for practical cases ∆η could be lowered, e.g. ∆η = 0.05.
5.7
Experiments with POROLAY
Printing with the experimental soft material POROLAY turned out to be a com-
plicated aﬀair, as demonstrated in section 4.5.3. Further experiments with diﬀerent
kind of support material could probably lead to successfully manufactured designs.
It is however the author’s opinion that the material is less durable compared to PLA
and will break when printing complex structures like the force inverter.
The POROLAY material can have interesting future applications if it is more suc-
cessfully applied, or the POROLAY material is further developed to be easier to
use. As the material can be printed on a standard FDM printer it has the potential
of being a cheap way of producing compliant mechanisms in the future.
59
==PAGE:70==
5
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
5.8
Suggested Future Work
In the present work several issues regarding manufacturability have been circum-
vented and a good correlation between topology optimized structures and their
manufactured counterparts has been made. In the author’s opinion this creates a
solid foundation for future work within the topic, as many things are still yet to be
explored. A list is provided below with some topics that could be interesting for
future work
• Further comparison studies of the functionality of the manufactured models
and what is predicted in the simulations. It could be interesting to see the
functionality of the mechanisms as function of mesh resolution. Furthermore,
in the present work all mechanisms has been printed in their discretized form
(that is, where all elements are still present). An interesting study could be to
see to what extend this aﬀects the design compared to a model that has been
’smoothed’.
• The experimental setup in the present work were rather simple, but still man-
aged to produce interesting results. However, a more thorough investigation
and a more rigid experimental setup could be interesting for future work. Fur-
thermore it would be interesting to have material data for the speciﬁc material.
• Further experiments with the inﬁll structure, and how it aﬀects the generated
designs. A model printed with an inﬁll structure as well as a model printed as
a solid will most likely be anisotropic due to the printing process. This could
also be an interesting aspect for future study.
• Experiments with topology optimized inﬁll structures could be a possibility.
Work has already been done on coated structures [12], which have the potential
of being used in additive manufacturing.
• An interesting study would be to get manufactured designs from a professional
printer where speciﬁc material data and production tolerances are known. In
this way it would be possible to generate a model with the robust formulation
to the speciﬁc tolerances of the 3d printer and the material. A statistical ap-
proach to this could be interesting to see, where several manufactured designs
are compared to each other.
• Even though the mechanisms turned out to be manufacturable after implemen-
tation of the robust formulation, the mechanisms could still break if subjected
to too large stresses or strains. Therefore, it could be interesting to impose a
stress constraint on the optimized designs [15].
60
==PAGE:71==
6
Conclusion
The present work has comprised the successful development of a large scale 3d topol-
ogy optimized force inverter capable of manufacturing.
The aim of the project has been to make a connection between 3d topology op-
timized structures and a corresponding manufactured model. During the project
it has been evident that various steps have been taken in order to obtain a man-
ufacturable design. The projection method turned out to be an eﬀective way of
projecting intermediate densities to solid/void elements, thus obtaining a fully dis-
cretized design. However, the projection method yielded more pronounced hinge-like
structures where material can be connected in inﬁnitesimal points.
The robust formulation imposed a minimum length-scale on the intermediate design
on both solid and voids, thus hindering the formation of hinges. Furthermore the
intermediate design turned out to be insensitive to some constant varying factors,
e.g. introduced in the manufacturing process.
The Dirichlet boundary conditions on the ﬁlter turned out to be a necessity in order
not to diminish the imposed length-scale from the robust formulation. However,
this comes with the cost of a minor decrease in objective value.
The intermediate design from the robust formulation turned out to be manufac-
turable and has been successfully manufactured in PLA and Innoﬂex 45.
The PLA model turned out the be rather stiﬀ, thus having limited functionality.
However, the PLA models show clear signs of inverting the force, as expected.
The model printed with the rubber-like Innoﬂex 45 material performs very well and
have a large output displacement even for small input loads. A simple experiment
were able to reproduce the non-linear nature of the force displacement relation,
which has been related to the non-linear ﬁnite element simulation.
It can be concluded that by combining up-to-date research within the ﬁeld and
applying it to the development of large scale 3d topology optimized structures, it
is possible to make a connection between the optimized designs and their manufac-
tured counterparts.
It is the author’s opinion that the present work, and the TopOpt In PETSc code,
forms a solid foundation for future work on the subject. This has a very interesting
potential for future applications where topology optimization can play a vital role
in the development of products.
61
==PAGE:72==
REFERENCES
References
[1] Niels Aage, Erik Andreassen, and Boyan Stefanov Lazarov.
Topology opti-
mization using PETSc : An easy-to-use , fully parallel , open source topology
optimization framework. Struct Multidisc Optim, 2013.
[2] Niels Aage and Boyan S. Lazarov. Parallel framework for topology optimiza-
tion using the method of moving asymptotes. Structural and Multidisciplinary
Optimization, 47(4):493–505, January 2013.
[3] Erik Andreassen, Anders Clausen, Mattias Schevenels, Boyan S. Lazarov, and
Ole Sigmund. Eﬃcient topology optimization in MATLAB using 88 lines of
code.
Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization, 43(1):1–16, November
2010.
[4] S Balay, S Abhyankar, M Adams, J Brown, P Brune, K Buschelman, V Ei-
jkhout, W Gropp, D Kaushik, M Knepley, L Curfman Mcinnes, K Rupp,
B Smith, and H Zhang. PETSc Users Manual. (June), 2014.
[5] Satish Balay, Shrirang Abhyankar, Mark-F Adams, Jed Brown, Peter Brune,
Kris Buschelman,
Victor Eijkhout,
William-D Gropp,
Dinesh Kaushik,
Mathhew-G Knepley, Curfman Lois McInnes, Karl Rupp, Barry-F Smith, and
Hong Zhang. http://www.mcs.anl.gov/petsc, seen 2/11/2014, 2014.
[6] Klaus-J¨urgen Bathe. Finite Element Procedures. Prentice Hall, ISBN: 0-13-
301458-4, 1996.
[7] Martin Philip Bendsoe. Optimization of Structural Topology, Shape and Mate-
rial. Berlin, 1995.
[8] Martin Philip Bendsoe and Noboru Kikuchi.
GENERATING OPTIMAL
TOPOLOGIES IN STRUCTURAL. Computer Methods in Applied Mechan-
ics and Engineering, 71:197–224, 1988.
[9] Thomas Borrvall and Joakim Petersson. Large-scale topology optimization in
3D using parallel computing. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and
Engineering, 190(46-47):6201–6229, September 2001.
[10] Blaise Bourdin. Filters in topology optimization. International Journal for
Numerical Methods in Engineering, (December 1999):2143–2158, 2001.
[11] T. Buhl, C.B.W. Pedersen, and O. Sigmund. Stiﬀness design of geometrically
nonlinear structures using topology optimization. Structural and Multidisci-
plinary Optimization, 19(2):93–104, February 2014.
[12] Anders Clausen, Niels Aage, and Ole Sigmund.
Topology Optimization of
interface problems and coated structures.
[13] COMSOL. Large Deformation Beam, COMSOL example. pages 1–10, 2012.
62
==PAGE:73==
REFERENCES
[14] Robert D. Cook, David S. Malkus, Michael E. Plesha, and Robert J. Witt.
Concepts and Applications of Finite Element Analysis. Wiley, 4 edition, 2002.
[15] Daniel M. De Leon, Joe Alexandersen, Jun S. O. Fonseca, and Ole Sigmund.
Stress-constrained topology optimization of compliant mechanisms.
[16] J. K. Guest, J. H. Pr´evost, and T. Belytschko. Achieving minimum length scale
in topology optimization using nodal design variables and projection functions.
International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering, 61(2):238–254,
September 2004.
[17] Ulrik Darling Larsen, Ole Sigmund, and Siebe Bouwstra. Design and Fabrica-
tion of Compliant Micromechanisms and Structures with Negative Poisson ’ s
Ratio. Journal of Microelectromechanical Systems, 6(2):99–106, 1997.
[18] B S Lazarov and O Sigmund.
Filters in topology optimization based on
Helmholtz-type diﬀerential equations.
International Journal for Numerical
Methods in Engineering, (December 2010):765–781, 2011.
[19] Boyan Stefanov Lazarov and Ole Sigmund. Sensitivity Filters In Topology Op-
timisation As A Solution To Helmholtz Type Diﬀerential Equation. WCSMO-8
8th World Congress on Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization - 8, 2009,
LNEC, Lisbon, Portugal, 2009.
[20] Makerbot. http://www.makerbot.com/desktop, seen 26/12/2014.
[21] MeshMixer. http://www.meshmixer.com/, seen 26/12/2014.
[22] Netfabb. http://www.netfabb.com/, seen 26/12/2014.
[23] Claus B W Pedersen, Thomas Buhl, and Ole Sigmund. Topology synthesis of
large-displacement compliant mechanisms. International Journal for Numerical
Methods in Engineering, (January 2000):2683–2705, 2001.
[24] PLA. http://wanhaousa.com/collections/pla-1-75mm-ﬁlaments/products/pla-
red-1-75mm-ﬁlament, seen 27/12/2014.
[25] POROLAY. http://www.3d-printshop.biz/POROLAY, seen 27/12/2014.
[26] Xiaoping Qian and Ole Sigmund. Topological design of electromechanical ac-
tuators with robustness toward over- and under-etching. Computer Methods in
Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 253:237–251, January 2013.
[27] M. Schevenels, B.S. Lazarov, and O. Sigmund. Robust topology optimization
accounting for spatially varying manufacturing errors. Comput. Methods Appl.
Mech. Engrg., 200:3613–3627, 2011.
[28] O Sigmund. Morphology-based black and white ﬁlters for topology optimiza-
tion. Struct Multidisc Optim, 33:401–424, 2007.
63
==PAGE:74==
REFERENCES
[29] O Sigmund, Jakob S. Jensen, Anton Evgrafov, and Mathias Stolpe. Exercises
with ’An 88/99 line topology optimization code written in Matlab’. 2013.
[30] Ole Sigmund. On the Design of Compliant Mechanisms Using Topology Op-
timization*. Mechanics of Structures and Machines, 25(4):493–524, January
1997.
[31] Ole Sigmund. Manufacturing tolerant topology optimization. Acta Mechanica
Sinica, 25(2):227–239, March 2009.
[32] Ole Sigmund. Notes on Geometrical Non-Linearity for the Course: FEM-Heavy
(41525), 2011.
[33] Ole Sigmund. Notes and Exercises for the Course: FEM-Heavy (41525). 2013.
[34] Krister Svanberg. METHODS BASED ON CONSERVATIVE CONVEX SEP-
ARABLE. Siam J Optim, 12(2):555–573, 2002.
[35] Fengwen Wang, Boyan Stefanov Lazarov, and Ole Sigmund.
On projection
methods, convergence and robust formulations in topology optimization. Struc-
tural and Multidisciplinary Optimization, 43(6):767–784, December 2010.
[36] Wanhao.
http://wanhaousa.com/products/duplicator-4s-steel-exoframe, seen
26/12/2014.
[37] Shengli Xu, Yuanwu Cai, and Gengdong Cheng. Volume preserving nonlinear
density ﬁlter based on heaviside functions.
Structural and Multidisciplinary
Optimization, 41(4):495–505, December 2009.
64
==PAGE:75==
A
Additional Theory
A.1
Element Stiﬀness Matrix
The variations in strain can be related to the variation in displacements by the strain
displacement matrix [ ¯B]
{δε} = [ ¯B]{δu}
(42)
Substituting equation (42) into equation (1) now yields
X
e
Z
Ve
 [ ¯B]{δu}
T {σ}dV =
X
e
X
i
{δu}T
i {p}i
(43)
The virtual work principle should be satisﬁed for all virtual displacement, thus
equation (43) simpliﬁes to
X
e
Z
Ve
[ ¯B]T{σ}dV =
X
e
X
i
{p}i
(44)
Applying Hooke’s generalized law by using the constitutive matrix {σ} = [C]{ε}
and expressing the nodal displacements instead of the element strains by using
equation (3) equation (44) now yields
X
e
Z
Ve
[ ¯B]T[C][ ¯B]{u}dV =
X
e
X
i
{p}i
(45)
And thus by expressing {u} and {p} as global vectors
X
e
Z
Ve
[ ¯B]T[C][ ¯B]dV
|
{z
}
[ke]
{U} = {P}
(46)
where [ke] is called the element stiﬀness matrix, from which the global stiﬀness
matrix can be assembled.
65
==PAGE:76==
A
ADDITIONAL THEORY
A.2
Filtering
A.2.1
Density Filtering
For the density based approach the value of each design variable ρe, for element e,
is calculated as an average of the neighbouring elements [28]. The neighbourhood
of elements are deﬁned by being within a speciﬁed ﬁlter radius R from element e,
measured from the element centroids. The neighbouring elements are denoted as
Ne, and can mathematically be expressed as
Ne = {i, ||xi −xe|| ≤R}
(47)
meaning that every element ρi that have a distance from element e (measured from
the centres of the elements) less than R are included in the neighbourhood. By
denoting the ﬁltered ﬁeld ˜ρ, it can now be expressed as ˜ρe = ˜ρe(ρi∈Ne).
˜ρe =
P
i∈Ne w(ρi)viρi
P
i∈Ne w(ρi)vi
(48)
where vi is the element volume. w(ρi) is a weighing function, e.g. a linear decaying
function, a Gaussian Bell-shape or simply a constant.
The sensitivity of the objective function can now be found from the chain rule
∂f
∂ρ = ∂f
∂˜ρ
∂˜ρ
∂ρ
(49)
where ∂f
∂˜ρ is found from the adjoint method introduced in section 3.2.2 and
∂˜ρ
∂ρ =
wivi
P
j∈Ne wjvj
(50)
The ﬁltered densities ˜ρ are used in the SIMP method to estimate e.g. stiﬀness.
The ﬁltered densities are also now of interest when visualising the results.
A.2.2
Sensitivity Filtering
The approach of sensitivity ﬁltering resembles density ﬁltering, but instead the av-
eraging is done over sensitivities after modelling and sensitivity analysis. This can
be expressed as
f
∂f
∂ρe
=
P
i∈Ne w(ρi)ρi
∂f
∂ρi
ρe
P
i∈Ne w(ρi)
(51)
The optimization routine will now be based on the ﬁltered sensitivities.
66
==PAGE:77==
A.3
PETSc Example
A.3
PETSc Example
So called DMDA objects in PETSc can be used for generating a mesh [4], for example
consisting of 8-node brick elements, as in the present case [1]. Data can not be stored
directly in the DMDA objects, however DMDA objects hold information for the
parallel routines. This means that vectors and matrices can be based on a speciﬁed
DMDA, thus the DMDA will take care of the distribution of e.g. element or nodal
values to diﬀerent cores, and furthermore distribute the needed ghost information for
the needed processes. A simple example is if one wants to evaluate the function f(x)
in parallel, a processor will need the values of x that it ’owns’, as well as the values
of x in the neighbouring elements. This is illustrated in ﬁgure 41 where processor 6
is outlined along with the neighbouring elements needed for such a calculation.
Thus a DMDA takes care of the data structure, and vectors and matrices can be
based on this DMDA.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
Figure 41: Example of a DMDA object. Each number on the ﬁgure represents a
processor. A box-typed stencil is applied, as visualized for processor 6.
An example of a DMDA used in this code is da nodes that contains the nodes
of the design space, and includes three dofs for each node. This DMDA is the basis
of e.g. the stiﬀness matrix, displacement vector and load vector used in the state
problem. The DMDA da elem contains a layout for element based vectors and ma-
trices, e.g. the design variables.
After a vector or matrix has been created based on a DMDA, it can exist as
either global or local.
If manipulation is to be done on entities in a vector the
function VecGetArray(Vec x,PetscScalar *a) can be used to get a pointer *a to
the local vectors existing on the diﬀerent cores. Naturally the dimension of the local
67
==PAGE:78==
A
ADDITIONAL THEORY
vectors are smaller than the global vector, and for instance if one is to make a loop
over all the entities in the local vectors the dimension can be found by the command
VecGetLocalSize(Vec x,PetscInt *size). Thus operations are taking place in
parallel on the given number of processors. After manipulation of the array it have
to be restored with the command VecRestoreArray(Vec x,PetscScalar *a).
68
==PAGE:79==
A.4
Checking Element Distribution to Cores with Finite Diﬀerence Check
A.4
Checking Element Distribution to Cores with Finite
Diﬀerence Check
Besides checking whether the adjoint sensitivities are computed correctly, another
advantage of the ﬁnite diﬀerence check in this speciﬁc case is checking whether the
program handles the distribution to the multiple processors correct by checking ele-
ments handled by the diﬀerent cores. This is done by initializing two vectors of the
same length, one with element numbers to check, and one vector with the rank of the
cores to check. Thus the maximum element number to check is the number of ele-
ments distributed to each core. The command MPI Comm rank(PETSC COMM WORLD,
&rank) ﬁnds the rank of the diﬀerent processes, and if the rank is equal to the
rank speciﬁed in the vector, the element of the speciﬁc core is checked.
After-
wards the information from the diﬀerent processors can be shared among all the
processes with the following command MPI Allreduce(&array1, &array0, num,
MPIU SCALAR, MPI SUM, PETSC COMM WORLD); where array1 gets the array from
each processor, array0 is the new array where the combined information is stored,
num is the number of entities, MPIU SCALAR deﬁnes that the arrays contains scalar
values, MPI SUM deﬁnes that the array entities are summed and PETSC COMM WORLD
is the communicator.
69
==PAGE:80==
B
ADDITIONAL METHODS
B
Additional Methods
B.1
Modelling One Quarter of the Structure
The load vector for the full and quarter structure can be seen from ﬁgure 42. Loads
at the symmetry line now have less elements to dissipate the load, hence, the load is
lowered either by one half at the symmetry planes or one fourth where the symmetry
planes meet. Naturally the total force applied to the structure is also lowered by
one fourth. Hence, the load for a speciﬁc node for the two cases can be computed
as
fi =
ffull,i
Pk
i=1 ffull,i
ftotal
for full structure
(52)
fi =
fquarter,i
Pk
i=1 fquarter,i
ftotal
4
for quarter structure
(53)
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
4
1
4
1
4
1
4
(a) Full structure
1
2
1
1
2
1
4
1
2
1
4
1
4
1
2
1
4
(b) Quarter structure
Figure 42: Input load vector for the full and quarter structure. This is the y −z
plane at x = 0 with respect to the coordinate system in ﬁgure 7 and ﬁgure 8
The l vectors (lin and lout) are scaled in the same manner as the load vector as
can be seen from ﬁgure 43. As the l vectors are used to measure the input and output
displacement they have to be lowered by one half or one fourth so the displacement
of the shared nodes are not taken into account multiple times.
70
==PAGE:81==
B.1
Modelling One Quarter of the Structure
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
(a) Full structure
1
2
1
1
1
2
1
1
1
4
1
2
1
2
(b) Quarter structure
Figure 43: Input and output vectores for the full and quarter structure This is the
y −z plane at x = 0 and x = 1 (in relative coordinate) for lin and lout, respectively,
with respect to the coordinate system in ﬁgure 7 and ﬁgure 8
As the objective function is the displacement of an area of distributed nodes
deﬁned by the lout vector, it is favourable to deﬁne the objective function as an
average displacement of the nodes.
The sensitivities of the quarter model are divided by four in order to be identical
to the full model. The scaling factor has to be taken into account for the objective
function as well. The objective function can then be deﬁned as
c =
c
Pk
i=1 loutFull,i
for full structure
(54)
c =
c
Pk
i=1 loutQuarter,i
1
4
for quarter structure
(55)
71
==PAGE:82==
C
ADDITIONAL RESULTS
C
Additional Results
C.1
Continuation
(a) Emin = 10−3,
rmin = 0.10, itr 300
(b) Emin = 10−4,
rmin = 0.09, itr 400
(c) Emin = 10−5,
rmin = 0.08, itr 500
(d) Emin = 10−6,
rmin = 0.07, itr 600
(e) Emin = 10−7,
rmin = 0.06, itr 700
(f) Emin = 10−8,
rmin = 0.05, itr 800
(g) Emin = 10−9,
rmin = 0.04, itr 900
(h) Emin = 10−9,
rmin = 0.03, itr 1000
(i) Emin = 10−9,
rmin = 0.02, itr 1100
Figure 44: Diagonal cut of the structure for diﬀerent values of Emin and rmin
72
==PAGE:83==
C.2
Comparing of Sensitivities for Full and Quarter Model
C.2
Comparing of Sensitivities for Full and Quarter Model
The two models shows some deviations after multiple iterations, and a comparison
of the two models are made in order to see whether the origin of these deviations
comes from faulty modelling of the quarter structure, or are simply due to numerical
errors in the MMA routine.
The same job have been run for the full and the quarter model for a mesh of 8×8×8
elements (for the full model) and for 10 iterations.
One quarter of the full model has been extracted, and the numerical deviation,

∂ffull
∂x
−∂fquarter
∂x
, can be seen from ﬁgure 45a. The relative error

∂ffull
∂x
−
∂fquarter
∂x


∂ffull
∂x

can be seen from ﬁgure 45b.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
0
1
2
3
4
x 10
−11
Element number
Diﬀerence
(a) Diﬀerence in sensitivities
0
50
100
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
Element number
Diﬀerence [%]
(b) Relative diﬀerence in sensitivities
Figure 45: Comparison of sensitivities for the full and quarter model after 10 itera-
tions
73
==PAGE:84==
C
ADDITIONAL RESULTS
C.3
Validation of Geometric Non-linear Implementation
The geometric non-linearities are validated by comparing to the following buckling
problem from COMSOL example [13]
(a) Reference result from the COMSOL
example
(b) Result from the PETSc code
Figure 46: Note: The colours from the Comsol example shows the Von Mises’
stresses, while the colours from the PETSc solution shows the horizontal deﬂection
Horizontal displacement
Vertical displacement
PETSc code
-5.11
-1.41
COMSOL reference
-5.04
-1.36
Relative error
1.38%
3.67%
74
==PAGE:85==
C.4
Preparation and Validation of Prints
C.4
Preparation and Validation of Prints
Before printing the generated ParaView model have to be converted to an .stl ﬁle.
An .stl ﬁle only contains information about the surface geometry of the model and
thus no information about the interior of the model. However, the generated Par-
aView ﬁles contains information about all the element densities as well as the nodal
displacements. By using the function ’Extract surfaces’ in ParaView the surface is
extracted from the model, thus neglecting both nodal and element data, and only
leaving a ’shell’ of the model. The ParaView function ’Tessellate’ is used for dividing
the surface into polygons that makes up the .stl ﬁle. Now this ﬁle is ready to be
exported as an .stl ﬁle.
It is recommended to ’validate’ the model, that is, checking whether the .stl ﬁle
is free from errors. These errors could be overlapping polygons or wrongly oriented
surface polygons. Netfabb [22] is a freeware program that corrects these problems
automatically, thus errors can be avoided in the printing phase.
75
