==PAGE:1==
Dennis L. Lorenzen, s092976
Development of dark-ﬁeld
electron holography-tomography:
Towards 3D strain mapping
Master thesis, September 2015
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Dennis L. Lorenzen, s092976
Development of dark-ﬁeld
electron holography-tomography:
Towards 3D strain mapping
Master thesis, September 2015
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Development of dark-ﬁeld electron holography-tomography: Towards 3D strain
mapping,
This report was prepared by
Dennis L. Lorenzen, s092976
Supervisors
Takeshi Kasama
Sadegh Yazdi
Jakob Birkedal Wagner
Due date:
September 13th 2015
Comments:
This report is part of the requirements to achieve the Mas-
ter of Science in Engineering (MS.Eng.) at the Technical
University of Denmark.
This report represents 35 ECTS
points.
Department of Physics
Technical University of Denmark
Lyngby Campus:
DTUï¿½ Cen:
Anker Engelunds Vej 1, Buildings 307-309-311-312
Fysikvej, Building 307,311
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Denmark
Tel:
(+45) 45 25 33 44
E-mail:
info@fysik.dtu.dk
www.fyk.dtu.dk
Tel:
(+45) 45 25 64 74
E-mail:
idj@cen.dtu.dk
www.cen.dtu.dk
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Abstract
In this dissertation, the experimental requirements and current limitation of to-
mographic DFEH for three-dimensional strain mapping has been addressed. Us-
ing FIB preparation techniques, a uniform specimen with almost no bending or
amorphous surface was prepared from a multi layered silicon/germanium quan-
tum dot sample. The sample geometry and composition was characterized with
BF-TEM, HAADF-STEM, STEM-EDS, CBED and HAADF-STEM tomography. The
specimen was subsequently successfully used for DFEH at the Technical Univer-
sity of Denmark - Center for Electron Nanoscopy (DTU CEN). Using a script made
author of this dissertation, the reconstructed phase image was converted to a strain
map, where strain intensities and shapes were conﬁrmed to be in good agreement
to previous literature. Tomographic DFEH was attempted, and a ±60◦tilt series
under two-beam conditions was successfully obtained using a triple-axis holder
(HATA-holder). However due to phase discontinuities in the strain maps at some
angles, a full tomographic reconstruction was not possible within the time-frame
of this project.
i/ix
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Contents
iii
List of Figures
v
List of Tables
ix
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
3
2.1
Electron microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.1
TEM/STEM
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Methods for measuring strain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Quantum dots and the importance of strain . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Dark-ﬁeld Electron Holography for strain mapping
9
3.1
Background
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Setup for DFEH . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.3
Experimental requirements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.4
Hologram reconstruction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.5
Basic reconstruction procedure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4
Electron Tomography
19
4.1
Setup for Electron Tomography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.2
Experimental requirements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5
Specimen preparation
23
5.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
iii/ix
==PAGE:10==
5.2
Specimen requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.2.1
Dark-Field Electron Holography requirements
. . . . . . . .
23
5.2.2
Tomography requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.3
TEM specimen preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.3.1
Focussed ion beam preparation techniques
. . . . . . . . . .
25
5.4
Si/Ge quantum dot sample . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.4.1
Sample 1 - 100219b . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.4.2
Sample 2 - 100219b . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.4.3
Sample 3 - 090930a . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6
Strained germanium quantum dots
35
6.1
Sample characterization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.2
2D-DFEH . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.2.1
Experimental set-up
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.2.2
Strain reconstruction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6.3
3D-DFEH . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
7
Conclusion and outlook
51
Bibliography
53
==PAGE:11==
List of Figures
2.1
Illustrates two materials a0 and a1 with diﬀerent lattice constants, resulting in
dislocations and strain at the interface between the two semiconductors. . . . . .
7
3.1
Figure made by Beche et al.[1]. (a) Illustration of the electron illumination for oﬀ-
axis holography. The reference wave is here acquired from the vacuum, contrarily
to DFEH illumination. (b) Illustration of the electron illumination for DFEH. Here
the reference wave passes through an unstrained region of the sample and inter-
fered with one diﬀracted beam, which is selected by the objective aperture. . . . .
10
4.1
(a)Illustration of the tomography tilt axis inside the TEM column. The sample
is rotated ±α. (b) Illustration of the sample at diﬀerent α angles and the corre-
sponding projection views. Below an illustration of the stacked back-projection
reconstruction.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.1
Illustration of a Cu TEM grid. (a) which is usually preferred shows the placement
of a lamella on the side of a "tooth". (b) shows an alternative placement with two
attached point for better stability. (Illustration made by, FEI) . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.2
Fei Helios SEM images of(a): Sample 090930a, showing QDs with a size of approx-
imately 50 nm (b): Sample 100219b, showing QDs with clear facets and a size of
approximately 100-150 nm. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.3
Fei Helios SEM image showing (top to bottom); 3 µm Pt, 2 µm carbon rich perma-
nent marker and on the bottom the bulk silicon. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.4
FEI QuantaFEG images of (a) marker test after 10 minutes of plasma cleaning and
(b) 40 minutes of plasma cleaning. FEI Helios images of (c) 100 minutes of plasma
cleaning and (b) a close up of the sponge-like residual layer. It is seen how the
marker is etched away with plasma cleaning, and how the Pt has been "lifted" oﬀ. .
30
5.5
Images from the INLO technique.
(a) Top-view of the Pt protection with the
omniprobe attached, the lamella has been cut and is ready to be lifted out. (b)
Side-view showing the lamella attached to the Cu grid. The layered structure of
Pt, marker, Si and Cu is clearly visible. (c) Side-view of the lamella after ﬁnal-
thinning. (d) High magniﬁcation of the Ge-interface, the QDs are clearly visible. .
31
v/ix
==PAGE:12==
5.6
The residual layer after 80 minutes of plasma cleaning. The carbon has a holey
structure. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.7
FEI Helios SEM images of (a) the INLO lamella after attachment to the TEM Cu
grid. The omniprobe is still visible after detachment. (b) Side view of the lamella
after ﬁnal-thinning. The upper bright region is the Pt protective layer. . . . . . .
33
5.8
FEI Helios SEM images of the advanced INLO lamella connection to the Cu grid.
(a) Side-view (b) top-view . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6.1
300 kV images of sample 090930a. (a) BF-TEM image showing the bulk silicon,
layered structure and the platinum protection. Strain contrast is observed over
the QDs. (b) HAADF-STEM image of the layers. Like observed in the SEM the
QDs have a width of ≈50nm the height is found to be ≈5nm. Brighter contrast is
observed in the Ge QDs, due to the higher mean atomic number. . . . . . . . . .
36
6.2
(a) CBED pattern acquired at an acelleration voltage of 120 kV. (b) JEMS simula-
tion showing a calculated CBED pattern for Si with a thickness of 146 nm
. . . .
36
6.3
120 kV HAADF-STEM EDX map of a QD with a dwell time of 4 µs and a pixel size
of 0.15 nm. The ﬁgure is showing an ADF image, a silicon map and a germanium
map. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.4
Tomographic reconstruction of a 120 kV HAADF-STEM tilt series from −66◦to
70◦with a 2◦step size. (a) Shows the reconstruction in the xzy-plane. (b) Shows
the cross-section of the xz-plane, and has been corrected for the missing wedge
elongation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.5
High magniﬁcation TEM images from the Si[110] view direction. In the BF- and
HAADF-STEM images the Si dumbbell atoms with a sepration of 1.36 A are ob-
served: (a) HRTEM image of a QD which appears as dark contrast. (b) The corre-
sponding GPA to the HRTEM image. (c) BF-STEM image of a QD with an insert to
show the higher magniﬁcation image. (d) GPA of the BF-STEM image. (e) HAADF-
STEM image of a QD with an insert to show the higher magniﬁcation image. (f)
GPA of the HAADF-STEM image.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.6
120 kV electron diﬀraction images of the TEM viewing screen (a) zone-axis where
the center spot is centred in the kickuchi coincidence point (b) 2-beam condition,
the sample is slightly tilted to excited the 00¯4 beam. (c) 2-beam condition at 50
degree tilt.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.7
Phase resolution as a function of acquisition time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6.8
Dark ﬁeld electron holography: (a) DFEH (004) image at -32◦tilt(b) the ﬁrst side-
band with a 6th Butterworth ﬁlter with a cut-oﬀfrequency of 1/1.29 nm. (c) The
extracted phase image rotated 84◦so that the QD interface is horizontal. (d) Cal-
culated strain along the x-axis of the phase image. (e) Calculated strain along the
y-axis of the phase image. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.9
a) shows the calculated strain from a (004) DFEH on the zone-axis. (b) shows the
same area tilted 2 degrees with respect to the zone-axis. (c) shows strain from the
(220) in-plane direction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
==PAGE:13==
6.10 (a) DFEH of the (004) plane. (b) Intensity proﬁle over the QD for the DFEH. (c)
GPA of the (004) plane from a HAADF-STEM image (d) Intensity proﬁle over the
QD for the GPA analysis. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.11 2-beam condition by tilting only one axis, about the [001] axis . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.12 Strain maps, HAADF-STEM and the corresponding cross-section of the HAADF-
STEM, tilted to represent the specimen. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6.13 Strain maps, HAADF-STEM and the corresponding cross-section of the HAADF-
STEM, tilted to represent the specimen. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
==PAGE:14==
==PAGE:15==
List of Tables
2.1
Comparison of transmission electron microscopy strain measurement techniques .
6
3.1
FEI Titan 80-300 parameters used to acquire DFEH of Si/Ge QDs. . . . . . . . .
11
5.1
Sample 090930a - Si(100)-p type (B-doped), 0.004-0.007 Ohn*cm, SiMat . . . . .
28
5.2
Sample 100219b - Si(100)-p type (B-doped), 0.004-0.007 Ohn*cm, SiMat . . . . .
28
5.3
Table showing the used sequence of currents, inclination angles (stage tilt) and
indicative leftover foil thicknesses, for the ﬁnal thinning with 30 kV FIB.
. . . .
33
ix/ix
==PAGE:16==
==PAGE:17==
1
Introduction
“...by the help of Microscopes, there is nothing so small, as to escape our in-
quiry; hence there is a new visable World discovered to the understanding..”
“..By this the Earth it self, which lyes so near us, under our feet, shews quite a new thing
to us, and in every little particle of its matter, we now behold almost as great a variety
of Creatures, as we were able before to reckon up in the Whole Universe it self.. ”
– Robert Hooke, Micrographia ,1665 (the ﬁrst "microscope book")
Nanomaterials are, without a doubt, key components in development of new ad-
vanced technologies. There are studies on natural organic nanomaterials such as;
bone [2], teeth [3], milk [4], gecko feet [5] and the application of organic nanoma-
terials in organic solar cells [6], OLEDs [7] etc. Fullerenes like carbon nanotubes
and silicon nanotubes are studied because of their superior mechanical strength
and their electrical properties [8]. Inorganic nanomaterials (e.g. quantum dots,
nanowires and nanoparticles) are studied for their interesting optical and electri-
cal properties and could be used in many optoelectronic applications [9] such as
biomedical applications for drug delivery systems or biosensors[10]. Nanoscience
and nanotechnology has seen a lot of progress in resent years, and much of this can
be contributed to increased availability of sophisticated physical methods to char-
acterize nanomaterials. To tailor nanomaterials for speciﬁc applications it is nec-
essary to acquire detailed information and feedback coming from reliable charac-
terization techniques. The characterization of these nanomaterials includes; size,
shape, atomic structure, electronic structure and several other properties.
Nanostructures are usually too small to be characterized or visualized with con-
ventional optical microscopes.
To adequately characterize the properties of a
nanomaterial it is important to use the correct tool to study in detail at the molec-
ular or atomic level. As everything is getting smaller and smaller a great deal of
eﬀort has been put into the development of tools and techniques to study materi-
als at the nanoscale. This is important for understanding fundamental properties
as well as the functional and technical performance in various applications. There
are now many diﬀerent experimental techniques that can be used to characterize
1/57
==PAGE:18==
Introduction
nanomaterials, either directly or indirectly. The necessary technique varies de-
pending on the material and the desired information.
Strain is one of the key parameters for understanding physical phenomena at the
nanoscale. The mechanical and electronic properties of a material are directly re-
lated to the strain in the material. Therefore the physical response of a material
to an applied strain is fundamental to the engineering of mechanical or electronic
properties of nanomaterials. Due to the many diﬀerent strategies used to engi-
neer strain in nano-devices very complex strain distributions are made. There are
several methods to map strain at the micrometer scale, i.e. raman specstroscopy
and x-ray diﬀractions techniques. These methods however achieve a very low spa-
tial resolution and is therefore not suitable to map strain in nano-devices. Trans-
mission electron microscopy (TEM) allows strain measurement at the nanometre
scale but with a much smaller ﬁeld of view, it is the only tool capable of measur-
ing strain at the nanoscale [11]. Most of the conventional TEM techniques turn a
three-dimensional world into a two-dimensional, but the use of electron tomogra-
phy has opened up the possibility for 3D reconstruction of the nanoscale.
The aim of this project is to use dark-ﬁeld electron holography (DFEH) as a tech-
nique for measuring strain at the nanoscale and establish it as a technique per-
formed at the Center for Electron Nanoscopy (at the Technical University of Den-
mark), where it currently has not been used before. Furthermore the aim is to test
the feasibility of DFEH using tomography to make a reconstruction of a 3D strain
map.
2/57
==PAGE:19==
2
Background
“When you employ the microscope, shake oﬀall prejudice, nor harbor any
favorite opinions; for, if you do, ’tis not unlikely fancy will betray you into
error, and make you see what you wish to see.”
– Henry Baker, "Cautions in viewing Objects" The Microscope Made Easy, 1742
2.1
Electron microscopy
The resolution of conventional optical microscopy is around 1 µm, due to wave-
length limitations of the technique. If higher resolution is required shorter wave-
lengths has to be used. This is possible with electron beams because it is possible
to tune the acceleration voltage and thereby the wavelength of electrons. Through
development of electron microscopy for more than 80 years sub-angstrom resolu-
tion is now routinely achieved at many institutions around the world.
When high energetic electron interacts with a sample a variety of measurable sig-
nals are generated and electrons are being transmitted, backscattered and diﬀracted.
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) mainly uses the transmitted electrons to
form a projected image, while SEM uses backscattered electrons and secondary
electron emitted from the sample. Electrons passing through a sample are mainly
experiencing losses from changes in density and sample thickness, and the 2D
TEM projection is a depiction of these eﬀects. Electrons can also be diﬀracted
when passing through a sample, these electrons contains crystallographic infor-
mation which is the basis for electron diﬀraction. On the contrary scanning elec-
tron microscopy (SEM) uses electrons that collides with the sample atoms and
scatter back, or knock out electrons from these atoms (secondary electrons). Sam-
ples generate more backscattered electrons and secondary electrons as the atomic
number of a material increases. As the electron beam is scanned over a sample
surface the yield of secondary or backscattered electrons is plotted as a function
of position, which generates an image of the sample analyzed.
3/57
==PAGE:20==
2.1. Electron microscopy
Background
2.1.1
TEM/STEM
One of the most signiﬁcant developments made within TEM has enabled the direct
imaging of atomic structures in solids and surfaces. In recent years the many of
applications of TEM has grown increasingly larger. There are new techniques such
as in-situ environmental microscopy, cryo microscopy, EELS and EDS elemental
mapping, electron holographic imaging of electric, magnetic and strain ﬁelds, ul-
tra high resolution imaging and electron tomographic 3D imaging [12]. Newly
developed spherical aberration corrected microscopy allows for studies with sub-
angstroms resolution.
In the TEM a high energetic beam of monochromatic electrons is produce by an
electron gun. Afterwards they are accelerated and focused into a small coherent
beam by condenser lenses. A condenser aperture reduces electron beam by remov-
ing the high angle electrons before they reach the specimen. A series of deﬂector
coils is used to deﬂect the beam and thereby shift the beam as desired. When the
electron beam hits the sample electrons are generated elastically and inelastically
along with unscattered electrons. These electrons, when detected, contains a high
amount of information about the sample. The objective lens is then used to guide
the generated electrons through a series of lenses that focuses the beam of elec-
trons before they reach a detection phosphor screen or camera. The lenses are
used to control the beam in diﬀerent modes such as scanning transmission elec-
tron microscopy (STEM) and electron diﬀraction. There are several modiﬁcation
and additions to this basic set-up, all adding TEM techniques for analysing the
sample and gaining information. An objective lens can be used to drive the micro-
scope in dark-ﬁeld mode, a biprism to do holography, a "selected area" aperture to
do selected area electron diﬀraction and many more.
STEM combines the principles of TEM and SEM, by forming a focused nano-beam
of electrons that is scanned (in a raster pattern) over the the sample while the
desired signal is collected to form an image. The major diﬀerence from SEM is that
thin specimens are used and generally the transmitted electrons are used instead.
Interactions between the beam electrons and sample atoms generate a serial signal
stream, which is correlated with beam position to build a virtual image in which
the signal level at any location in the sample is represented by an intensity at the
corresponding location in the image. In STEM, transmitted electrons that have not
been scattered with a large angle are detected using a high angle annular dark ﬁeld
(HAADF) detector. The inelastically scattered electrons can be detected in the
transmitted beam. A bright ﬁeld (BF) detector includes the transmitted beam and
so the holes appear bright, whereas a dark ﬁeld detector excludes the transmitted
beam and holes appear dark. Electron energy loss spectrometry (EELS) analyzes
this signal and can determine the amount of energy an electron have lost in the
interaction with the sample. This provides information about the sample atoms,
the atomic number and chemical properties. When the focused beam of electrons
interacts with the sample, X-rays whose energy is characteristic of the elemental
composition is also emitted. Using energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectrometry it
is therefore possible to do elemental mapping.
The TEM is such a powerful tool that even the most skilled microscopist are not
able to master every technique.
4/57
==PAGE:21==
2.2. Methods for measuring strain
2.2
Methods for measuring strain
There are four diﬀerent techniques for measuring strain at the nanoscale in the
TEM. There are two categories; the diﬀraction based and the image based meth-
ods. The diﬀraction based method includes convergent-beam electron diﬀraction
(CBED) and nano-beam electron diﬀraction (NBED). The image based method in-
cludes geometric phase analysis (GPA) using high-resolution transmission (scan-
ning) electron microscopy (HR(S)TEM) and DFEH.
CBED
Patterns are obtained by illuminating the sample with a convergent beam
and small probe size. In diﬀraction mode the diﬀraction pattern consists of large
disks, whose size is controlled by adjusting the convergence angle of an electron
beam. Away from the low index zone axis these disks contains sharp lines known
as the high order laue zone (HOLZ) lines. The position of the HOLZ lines is very
sensitve to lattice parameters of the sample and the shift in these can therefore be
used to measure strain with an accuracy of (2 × 104). By scanning the probe over
the sample, a strain map can be obtained.
The high sensitivity of CBED comes at a cost. CBED relies on detailed comparison
between experimental data and simulation and is also very sensitive to sample
thickness or plane bending of the atomic columns. Relaxation and bending will
broaden the recorded HOLZ lines and thereby greatly limits the sensitivity [13].
This puts a very high demand on sample preparation as there can be no thickness
variation or bending of sample/lattice over the region of interest.
NBED
First, a NBED diﬀraction pattern is taken from a reference area of a sam-
ple and the spot positions are determined. A series of diﬀraction patterns are
then subsequently taken from diﬀerent areas and the diﬀraction spot positions
are compared with the reference pattern [14]. For each of the probe positions the
deformation tensor is then determined by using the shift in spot position relative
to the reference.
The technique is conceptually simple and is not aﬀected as much by bending of
the atomic columns as CBED. The challenge with this technique is to form narrow
beams with parallel illumination. The accuracy and precision of the technique
has been reported to be 10−3 strain resolution [15]. This precision is also limited
by the size of the detector used for the experiment. With NBED a strain of 10−3
would give only a shift of 1 pixel if the spots are spaced by 1000 pixels. Many
nanomaterials are so small that sub-pixel precision is required when using NBED,
which is not possible before better CCDs become more available.
HR(S)TEM
Any technique capable of creating images of the atomic lattice can
be used to measure strain by either HRTEM or high-angle annular dark-ﬁeld scan-
ning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM). There are two main tech-
niques to determine the strain from the images. Peak-ﬁnding relies on determin-
ing the positions of the intensity peaks related to the atomic column positions.
Geometric phase analysis (GPA) determines the phase image through Fourier ﬁl-
tering.
5/57
==PAGE:22==
2.3. Quantum dots and the importance of strain
Table 2.1: Comparison of transmission electron microscopy strain measurement
techniques
Mode
Precision
Spatial Resolution
Field of View
CBED
Probe
2x10−4
0.2-2 nm
n.a.
NBED
Probe
10−3
5-10 nm
n.a.
HR(S)TEM
Image
10−3
1-2 nm
150 x 150 nm
DFEH
Image
2x10−4
2-4 nm
1500 x 500 nm
The very ﬁrst method used to study the strain in silicon devices was the HRTEM
method, by analyzing local fast Fourier transformations (FFT). This is very similar
to NBED because power a spectrum, similar to the diﬀraction pattern, is obtained
when doing the FFT. GPA was then subsequently used to map the diﬀerent strain
components of the silicon device [16]. The challenge with HRTEM is that a very
thin foil is needed to get suﬃcient contrast, but to detect strain it is desired that
the sample is not too thin to avoid relaxation. Alternatively, HAADF-STEM can be
used. STEM images suﬀers from distortions from the scanning process, however
thicker specimens can be used. With both HRTEM and HAADF-STEM it can be
diﬃcult to obtain a uniform contrast over a large ﬁeld of view.The ﬁeld of view is
also limited by the size of the detector. This limits the precision to 10−3 and the
ﬁeld of view to 150 x 150 nm.
DFEH
The most recently developed method for measuring strain is DFEH. Which
records the phase of the electron wave directly [17]. The method is able to map
strain with the same precision as CBED and with a larger ﬁeld of view than that
of HRTEM.
The experimental set-up is similar to that of conventional electron holography,
except an unstrained region of the sample is used (instead of vacuum) and the
experiment is carried out in dark-ﬁeld mode. A biprismn is used to interfere two
parts of the beam, one that passes through an unstrained crystalline region and
the other that passes through a region of interest. The phase shift is mainly due to
local lattice strain.
2.3
Quantum dots and the importance of strain
Strained silicon technology is widely used today to boost planer bulk transistor
performance. Thus it is technically important to examine the strain-induced per-
formance enhancement in these thin body transistors, for nanometer scale channel
lengths.
Quantum dots (QDs) are small conﬁned semiconductor objects where quantum
eﬀects are present. In theory QDs can be considered of as a 0-dimensional struc-
ture and is thereby characterized by sharp density of states (DOS) which are pro-
nouncedly discrete. A semiconductor material cluster may be termed a quantum
dot if its characteristic dimensions become close to the exciton Bohr radius 2.1[18].
6/57
==PAGE:23==
2.3. Quantum dots and the importance of strain
rB = ℏ2ϵ
e2
 1
me
+ 1
mh
!
(2.1)
QDs are of great technological importance in many nano-electronic devices and
applications. This includes lighting[19], lasers[20], information storage[21], sensors[22]
and many others. QDs are commonly embedded in another material with a dif-
ferent lattice parameter. Due to the lattice mismatch QDs and the surrounding
material relaxed and/or strained elastically to accommodate for the mismatch 2.1.
To study strain in crystals, classic elastic mechanics can provide some description
of stress and strain in solid matter. An external force applying a load to an object
will cause stress inside the object. This is due to repulsive electromagnetic forces
between ionic cores when atoms deviate from the equilibrium position. The strain
of a system denotes the amount of deformation or relative change in length. The
strain e is therefore related to the displacement u, and length l as expressed by the
following function.
eij = 1
2
 δui
δlj
+
δuj
δli
!
(2.2)
For future development of next generation QD devices, detailed understanding
and precise control of the elastic strain that aﬀects the electronic and optical prop-
erties is of great importance.
Figure 2.1: Illustrates two materials a0 and a1 with diﬀerent lattice constants, re-
sulting in dislocations and strain at the interface between the two semiconductors.
Therefore, it is highly demanded to image the elastic strain distributions within
and around QDs directly and quantitatively, with high spatial resolution [23].
7/57
==PAGE:24==
2.3. Quantum dots and the importance of strain
8/57
==PAGE:25==
3
Dark-ﬁeld Electron Holography
for strain mapping
3.1
Background
The TEM uses a beam of high energy electrons to pass through an ultrathin sam-
ple, where the electrons interact with the sample material. As the sample is thin
enough for the electron to pass through, the interaction will contain information
about the structure and chemistry of the specimen in both the amplitude and the
phase of the excited electron wave. There are only few diﬀerent microscopy tech-
niques are used to extract phase information, focal series and electron holography.
Geometric phase analysis (GPA) of high-resolution transmission electron micro-
scope (HRTEM) images has successfully been used to map strains in nano-sized
areas of various samples [24]. However HRTEM has a very limited ﬁeld of view
compared to size of micro/nanoscale-electronic devices. This cannot be improved
much further due to the need of imaging the atomic lattice. DFEH was developed
to overcome the problem of scale when using high-resolution electron microscopy.
TEM images has a spatial intensity distribution, and therefore most of the infor-
mation from the phase of the beam is lost in conventional TEM images. This is
because recording media only detect the intensity of electrons - the amplitude of
the wave. As the amplitude carries no direct strain information like the phase-
shift of the electrons, it is not possible to directly image the strain unless the
phase information is translated into the amplitude. Electron holography modu-
lates the amplitude in relation to the phase by using a positively charged bi-prism
to phase-shift the electron wave, creating an interferrogram. There are several dif-
ferent modes of electron holography, used to characterize diﬀerent material prop-
erties; the electrostatic potential, the electric ﬁeld, the magnetic induction and
the interplannar strain [25]. From the electron hologram the phase and ampli-
tude information can be recovered and separated from each other using simple
computations.
9/57
==PAGE:26==
3.2. Setup for DFEH
Dark-ﬁeld Electron Holography for strain mapping
3.2
Setup for DFEH
The general setup for DFEH is shown in ﬁgure 3.1 with the conventional setup for
oﬀ-axis electron holography [17]. The condenser lenses are used to form a paral-
lel beam where one part of the beam travels through the region of interest, and
the other through a reference area of the sample. An electrostatic biprism is then
used to interfere the two parts of the diﬀracted wave, which will form interfer-
ence fringes containing the phase diﬀerence between the two waves, when viewed
at the viewing screen. DFEH diﬀers from standard oﬀ-axis electron holography
in two ways. In oﬀ-axis electron holography, the reference wave is a part of the
incident beam that travels in vacuum next to the region of interest. However in
DFEH the reference wave travels through a reference region. This reference region
should be a uniform and unstrained crystalline area close to the region of interest.
The second way is that an objective aperture is introduced to select a diﬀracted
beam from a region of interest and reference area. Using beam-tilt the selected
diﬀraction spot is then brought to the optical-axis, to reduce aberrations. These
diﬀerences to conventional holography aﬀects the hologram so that the "phase
map" will be directly linked to the local variation of the selected diﬀraction plane.
Therefore a hologram acquired, in this way with a diﬀracted spot will give a map
of the interplanar spacing.
Figure 3.1: Figure made by Beche et al.[1]. (a) Illustration of the electron illumina-
tion for oﬀ-axis holography. The reference wave is here acquired from the vacuum,
contrarily to DFEH illumination. (b) Illustration of the electron illumination for DFEH.
Here the reference wave passes through an unstrained region of the sample and
interfered with one diﬀracted beam, which is selected by the objective aperture.
When measuring strain ﬁeld for microelectronic devices, large ﬁeld of views are
often demanded. DFEH with a large ﬁeld of view can be done by switching oﬀthe
objective lens and using a Lorentz-type lens instead. If a large ﬁeld of view is not
10/57
==PAGE:27==
3.3. Experimental requirements
Table 3.1: FEI Titan 80-300 parameters used to acquire DFEH of Si/Ge QDs.
Parameter
FEG Extraction voltage
4500V
Acc. voltage
120 & 300 kV
Gun Lens
921
Spot size
3
C3-lens
Oﬀ
Magniﬁcation mode
Mh
Magniﬁcation
29.5k-48k
Biprism
80-120V
Specimen holder
HATA Tomography
Obj. Aperture
10 µm
Obj. Lens
On
Lorentz lens
Oﬀ
Energy window
10 or 20 eV
GIF CCD
2k x 2k (1x binning)
Acquisition time
10-20 s
required, the technique is also used with the objective lens, which oﬀers a high
spatial resolution (sub-angstrom). Because the biprism is inserted in the selected
area (SA) aperture plane, the microscope should be set in a mode where the SA
apertures are not conjugated with the image plane.
In this work the microscope was operated almost in the same way as described by
Beche et al. [1]. An FEI Titan 80-300 microscope equipped with a ﬁeld emission
gun, a biprism, Gatan imaging ﬁlter (GIF), monochromator and Cs-probe correc-
tor, was used. This microscope is very stable and therefore well suited for long
acquisition times of electron holography. The third condenser lens was turned oﬀ
in order to obtain a large astigmatic probe, to improve spatial coherency perpen-
dicular to the beam. The probe Cs-corrector was optically neutral and not used
for this experiment. Holograms where acquired with both a regular CCD and the
GIF camera CCD. The general parameters used is shown in table: 3.1.
3.3
Experimental requirements
In electron holography it is necessary to have a large spatial coherent beam with a
high current density. Therefore the electron sources with high brightness such as
a cold ﬁeld emission or a Schottky emission are necessary for holography.
The geometric phase is only present in the diﬀracted beams and therefore cannot
be measured by the conventional oﬀ-axis electron holography set-up. To mea-
sure the geometric phase component, the other phase terms must be eliminated.
The crystalline and electrostatic phase change do not depend directly on the lo-
cal strain, therefore if the sample has a uniform thickness, these terms will be
cancelled out with the use of a biprism. So in addition to a FEG source an elec-
trostatic biprism is needed to do electron holography. A conventional biprism
consists of a thin glass ﬁbre coated with gold, placed between two earthed plates.
It is usually mounted in the place of a selected-area aperture, modiﬁed so that the
11/57
==PAGE:28==
3.3. Experimental requirements
biprism can be moved and rotated in the plane. A positive DC voltage supply is
used to charge the biprism with respect to the earthed plates. This creates a elec-
tric ﬁeld around the ﬁlament. Negatively charged electron waves passing close to
the postively charged biprism will be deﬂected towards each other on either side
of the biprism, the deﬂection can be controlled with the DC voltage. The waves
(propagating in diﬀerent directions) interfere with each other and form an oﬀ-axis
hologram.
There are additional requirements for DFEH concerning the specimen and its
crystal orientation in the microscope. The specimen should be oriented into a
speciﬁc diﬀraction condition, for a g-vector interest to obtain the two-beam con-
dition. The objective aperture is used to select the refraction with the g-vector, in
the same way as the conventional dark-ﬁeld imaging. The beam should also be
tilted to a two-beam condition to maximize the intensity in the selected diﬀracted
beam. Furthermore the sample should be rotated a few degrees oﬀthe zone axis;
enough to diﬀraction contrast but not too much to increase the viewing angle. The
aim with the orientation requirements is to obtain a DFEH image with a strong and
uniform contrast over the ﬁeld of view.
There is also the eﬀect of illumination.
As mentioned earlier the interference
only occurs between electrons on either side of the biprism ﬁlament. This means
that high spatial coherency is only needed in the direction perpendicular to the
biprism ﬁlament. Therefore it is possible to use the condenser stigmator to delib-
erately misadjust the beam and form an elliptical beam. This operation improves
the spatial coherency in the direction perpendicular to the biprism length and
obtains suﬃcient electron contrast by squeezing the beam along the biprism ﬁla-
ment.
A set of parameters which aﬀects the fringe visibility, such as acceleration voltage,
biprism voltage, magniﬁcation, sample thickness, exposure time and tilt angle
from the zone axis. These parameters have been studied in detail on a silicon/ger-
manium layered structure by Beche et al. [1]. They found that the sample should
be less than 150 nm thick but not too thin either. As it becomes increasingly diﬃ-
cult to keep parallel sides for thin samples, great care should be taken when doing
sample preparation.
They also found that the dark ﬁeld holograms can be acquired almost on zone
axis (2−4◦oﬀ), which will remove strong diﬀraction contrast and limit projection
eﬀects that occurs when the sample is tilted. If the microscope is very stable, it
allows for longer exposure times and higher biprism voltages to obtain strain maps
with high sensitivity. For their microscope an exposure time of 64 seconds proved
4 times better than that of 4 seconds. Longer exposure times reduces background
noise and thereby increases the sensitivity.
If the biprism tension is increased, the interference width broadens and the fringe
spacing reduces. By reducing the acceleration voltage, the ﬁeld of view increases,
because the electrons have less energy and therefore deﬂect easier. So theoreti-
cally lower acceleration voltages are better, however this also drastically increases
sample electron absorption and therefore even thinner samples are needed. Con-
sidering the ﬁnite number of pixels on a CCD camera, the biprism voltage cannot
be inﬁnitely increased. They found that for their CCD camera at least 6 pixels per
12/57
==PAGE:29==
3.4. Hologram reconstruction
holographic interference fringe which preserves the fringe contrast high enough.
The angular position of the bibrism relative to the strained region can aﬀect the
phase reconstruction. If the biprism is perpendicular to the strained layer, the
center band and side band are very close to each-other in Fourier space. However
by rotating the biprism ≈10◦oﬀthe layer will make it easier to place the mask
in the reconstruction. For very small features rotating the biprism has the added
beneﬁt of increasing the number of interference fringes over the structure.
3.4
Hologram reconstruction
The electron wavefunction in the image plane is given by
Ψ (⃗r) = A(⃗r)expiφ(⃗r)
(3.1)
here A is the amplitude of the wave, φ is the phase and⃗r is a vector in plane of the
sample.
The intensity distribution is then given by the expression
I(⃗r) =
A(⃗r)
2 .
(3.2)
In conventional bright-ﬁeld TEM images all information directly related to phase
is lost.
In conventional oﬀ-axis electron holography, the charged biprism aﬀects the elec-
tron beam. The incoming wave becomes split on the left side and on and the right
side of the biprism. The wave on the left side is named as the reference wave
Ψref = aref eiφref and the right side as the region of interest wave Ψroi = aroieiφroi.
The positively charged biprism aﬀects the electron beam by deﬂecting it with an
angle γ, whose sign is opposite depending if the wave passes on the left side or
on the right side of the biprism. After the biprism the wave propagates with ⃗k =
k0(sinγ,cosγ). Therefore Ψref and Ψroi becomes;
Ψ (⃗r)ref = aref eiφref e2πik0xsinγe2πik0zcosγ
(3.3)
Ψ (⃗r)roi = aroieiφroie−2πik0xsinγe−2πik0zcosγ.
(3.4)
Generally for typical biprism voltages of (10-500 V), γ is small;
sin(x) ≈x,cos(x) ≈(1).
This means there is no deﬂection contribution in the z-direction of the, only per-
pendicular to the beam in the x-direction.
= eixkxγeizkz
13/57
==PAGE:30==
3.4. Hologram reconstruction
The k-vector is given by ⃗k = 2π/λ and |k0| = 1/λ.
Ψ (⃗r)ref = aref eiφref e2πik0xγe2πik0z
(3.5)
Ψ (⃗r)roi = aroieiφroie−2πik0xγe−2πik0z
(3.6)
which generalized to the geometry where the biprism axis is perpendicular to a
unit vector ⃗u, is given by
Ψref (⃗r) = aref ei2πk0γ⃗r·⃗ueiφref
(3.7)
Ψroi(⃗r) = aroie−i2πk0γ⃗r·⃗ueiφroi.
(3.8)
The intensity recorded on the detector, resulting from the interference between
the reference and region of interest wave is then given by the expression
I = |Ψref (⃗r)Ψroi(⃗r)|2
I = a2
ref + a2
roi + 2aref aroicos
h
4πk0γ⃗r ·⃗u + φref −φroi
i
.
(3.9)
In DFEH the objective aperture is used to select a speciﬁc diﬀracted beam g. The
reference and region of interest wave then gains an additional term.
Ψref (⃗r) = aref ei2πk0γ⃗r·⃗uei2πgref ·⃗reiφref
(3.10)
Ψroi(⃗r) = aroie−i2πk0γ⃗r·⃗uei2πgroi·⃗reiφroi
(3.11)
The intensity for DFEH is then given by the expression
I = a2
ref + a2
roi + 2aref aroicos
h
4πk0γ⃗r ·⃗u + 2π(gref −groi) ·⃗r + φref −φroi
i
.
(3.12)
In the Fourier space this intensity distribution deﬁnes two side-bands. To retrieve
only the phase from the hologram, a Fourier transform is applied to the intensity
image and a numerical gaussian mask is applied on the side-band, centered on the
highest frequency. The mask removes everything but the side-band and when the
inverse Fourier transform is done, the resulting image shows directly the phase
term φ, which is given by
φ(⃗r) = 2π

⃗
gref −⃗
groi

·⃗r + φref −φroi.
(3.13)
By taking the gradient of the phase φ along⃗r, it is possible to extract the g vectors
from the phase of the hologram. The gradient describes a local slow variation of
14/57
==PAGE:31==
3.5. Basic reconstruction procedure
groi of the selected diﬀracted beam, when neglecting the slow variations of φref
and φroi.
∇φ(⃗r) = 2π

⃗
gref −⃗
groi

(3.14)
Strain, ε is fundamentally given by, ε = ∆L/L. Which means that the lattice con-
stant d, change to the ﬁrst order can be calculated as
εii =
droi −dref
dref
=
gref −groi
groi
.
(3.15)
To obtain only the strain along the ⃗
gref direction, the analysis is fairly simple. The
strain εgg is then the normalized variation of ⃗
groi along the
⃗
gref direction, using
the vector ⃗
gref as the reference state.
εgg =
⃗
gref
2 −⃗
groi · ⃗
gref
⃗
groi · ⃗
gref
=
∇φ · ⃗
gref
2π ⃗
gref
2 −∇φ ⃗
gref
.
(3.16)
This means that from the dark-ﬁeld hologram the local lattice variation of a se-
lected g vector over the whole image can be mapped.
3.5
Basic reconstruction procedure
In holography ﬁrst the hologram is recorded and then the amplitude and phase is
extracted from the hologram. For this project the commercially available software
Gatan Digital Micrograph was used with the plug-in HoloWorks v3.0. By digital
software processing and numerical reconstruction techniques these programs can
recover the phase and amplitude in the following way.
First step is to perform a Fourier Transform (FT) of the hologram, equation 3.12, to
produce the frequency spectrum. This hologram spectrum contains three bands.
The central band in the spectrum is from the uniform intensity distribution from
the reference wave of equation 3.12. There is no information about phase in this
part of the spectrum. The two side bands will be situated opposite of each other
and correspond to the FT of the desired wavefunction and its complex conjugate.
These complex parts contains information about the amplitude and phase. By
placing a mask around one of these sidebands and applying an inverse FT on the
selected sideband a complex image is obtained. The amplitude A(r) and phase φ
of the complex image wave are calculated by using the expressions [26]
A(r) =
q
ℜ2(r) + ℑ2(r)
(3.17)
φ(r) = tan−1
 ℑ(r)
ℜ(r)
!
(3.18)
15/57
==PAGE:32==
3.5. Basic reconstruction procedure
Where ℜand ℑare the real and the imaginary parts of the complex wave, re-
spectively. Because of the arctangent function to obtain the phase image there can
appear discontinuities at positions where the phase shift exceeds 2π. In some im-
ages it is therefore not possible to distinguish phases of φ and φ+2π. Holoworks 3
can apply an algorithm called phase unwrapping to resolve phase discontinuities
and convert the image into a continuous image.
Lateral displacements can occur as artefacts in the interference fringes, from long-
range phase modulations arising from inhomogeneities due to charging eﬀects, lo-
cal thickness variation of the biprism and lens distortions. It is possible to correct
for these eﬀects by obtaining a reference hologram from a vacuum region. The
image will contain only fresnel fringes and any displacement here will be an arte-
fact. By complex division of the specimen hologram and the reference hologram,
a distortion-free phase image of the image wave can be obtained.
To obtain strain along the
⃗
gref direction from the holographic phase map, equa-
tion 3.16 is used. This procedure was scripted and implemented through digital
micrograph, which allows the entire procedure, including data acquisition and
processing, to be done on a microscope pc. First a function to calculate the gradi-
ent along the x-direction of the image was written. Note that gref has to manually
be changed in the code with the correct value of the g-vector.
1
// A function calculating the gradient along x
2
image gradientfilterx(image sourceimg)
3
{
4
// Declare and set up some variables
5
image gradientx, dx, dy
6
number xsize, ysize
7
getsize(sourceimg,xsize,ysize)
8
9
number scalex, scaley
10
string unitstring
11
getscale(sourceimg,scalex, scaley)
12
getunitstring(sourceimg, unitstring)
13
14
// Create images to hold the derivatives - then calculate them
15
gradientx=Exprsize(xsize,ysize,0)
16
dx=Exprsize(xsize,ysize,0)
17
dy=Exprsize(xsize,ysize,0)
18
19
dx = (offset(sourceimg,-1,0) - offset(sourceimg,1,0))/2
20
gradientx = (dx)*g_ref/(2*Pi()*g_ref^2-(dx)*g_ref)
21
setscale(gradientx, scalex, scaley)
22
setunitstring(gradientx, unitstring)
23
return gradientx
24
}
The same was done for the y-direction of the phase image.
1
//A function calculating the gradient along y
2
image gradientfiltery(image sourceimg)
3
{
4
// Declare and set up some variables
5
image gradienty, dx, dy
16/57
==PAGE:33==
3.5. Basic reconstruction procedure
6
number xsize, ysize
7
getsize(sourceimg,xsize,ysize)
8
9
number scalex, scaley
10
string unitstring
11
getscale(sourceimg,scalex, scaley)
12
getunitstring(sourceimg, unitstring)
13
14
// Create images to hold the derivatives - then calculate them
15
gradienty=Exprsize(xsize,ysize,0)
16
dx=Exprsize(xsize,ysize,0)
17
dy=Exprsize(xsize,ysize,0)
18
19
dy = (offset(sourceimg,0,-1) - offset(sourceimg,0,1))/2
20
gradienty = (dy)*g_ref/(2*Pi()*g_ref^2-(dy)*g_ref)
21
setscale(gradienty, scalex, scaley)
22
setunitstring(gradienty, unitstring)
23
return gradienty
24
}
Finally the main script where the images are generated and displayed.
1
// Main script
2
// Source the front-most image or an ROI thereon
3
image front:=getfrontimage()[]
4
string imgname=getname(front)
5
6
// Calculate and display the x-strain image
7
image gradientmagx=gradientfilterx(front)
8
showimage(gradientmagx)
9
imagecopycalibrationfrom(gradientmagx,front)
10
11
setname(gradientmagx,imgname+" (Strain in the x-direction)")
12
setwindowposition(gradientmagx, 142,24)
13
updateimage(gradientmagx)
14
15
16
// Calculate and display the y-strain image
17
image gradientmagy=gradientfiltery(front)
18
showimage(gradientmagy)
19
imagecopycalibrationfrom(gradientmagy,front)
20
21
setname(gradientmagy,imgname+" (Strain in the y-direction)")
22
setwindowposition(gradientmagy, 142,24)
23
updateimage(gradientmagy)
Two images are being outputted. One for strain along the x-direction and one for
the y-direction. As the script does not track the orientation in the image, the image
should be rotated so that either x or y is perpendicular to the gref direction.
17/57
==PAGE:34==
3.5. Basic reconstruction procedure
18/57
==PAGE:35==
4
Electron Tomography
The TEM typically records the projected image plane, as described in the back-
ground chapter. This means that these images contains information from all re-
gions of the specimen, through which the electron beam has travelled, containing
all heights collapsed onto a single plane. Tomography is a technique that uses this
information to back-project the images and reconstruct the 3D specimen.
4.1
Setup for Electron Tomography
Electron tomography is done by recording a series of images in which the speci-
men is tilted relative to the beam to create a series containing all of the information
required for the 3D reconstruction. Because the images are projection images, it
is not possible to directly reconstruct the structure of the object by combining the
tilted images. This is realized when looking at ﬁgure 4.1(b), if the images where
simply stacked the particles would move around. one way of tackling this problem
is by using a back-projection algorithm. This method sequentially back projects
the projected images in a tilt series along the angle of the original projection, crat-
ing a 3D space. Using a suﬃcient number of images/projections, from a series of
tilted angles, the superposition will generate the original object[27].
There are also diﬀerent TEM imaging techniques which can be combined with to-
mography. Bright-ﬁeld TEM tomography can be used for thicker non crystalline
materials, such as biological or cryo samples. It is therefore not suitable for any
crystalline materials.
When doing tomography diﬀraction contrast is in some
cases highly unwanted as this is very dependent on the incident beam angle. Hav-
ing diﬀraction contrast at diﬀerent angles in the tilt-series can lead to big artefacts
in the reconstruction. Therefore the signal seen in STEM using high-angle annular
dark-ﬁeld (HAADF) imaging, oﬀers a good alternative. STEM-HAADF minimizes
the unwanted contrast and delivers an image intensity that changes with thick-
ness, density and composition change. Because HAADF "cuts oﬀ" all the unwanted
bragg diﬀraction, the images allows the possibility to use projections for a tomo-
graphic reconstruction of materials. It is also possible to do electron holographic
19/57
==PAGE:36==
4.2. Experimental requirements
tomography. As mentioned earlier holography is a technique that reconstructs the
phase of the exit wave, and thereby is able to reveal the electrostatic potential,
magnetic ﬁelds and interplannar strain [28].
4.2
Experimental requirements
When doing electron tomography, the number of diﬀerent orientations samples
is determined by the resolution required. The higher the resolution wanted, the
ﬁner the sampling is needed. This is described in a simple equation relating the
number of projection (N), the resolution (d) and the diameter of the reconstruction
volume D.
d = πD
N
(4.1)
This equation assumes that the projections are evenly spread over 180◦, which is
what is required for a full reconstruction. In practice doing tomography in an
electron microscope often induces an upper limit to the tilt angle. This is caused
by either the sample or the sample holder shadowing itself. Without having a
full ±90◦rotation series, it is not possible to do a full reconstruction with the
back-projection method. This leads to a loss of information in the least sampled
direction, which is called "missing wedge". When the data in reconstructed the
missing wedge will show up as an elongation of data in that given axis. As TEM
samples are often lamellas equation 4.1 can be modelled further using a modiﬁed
diameter (D).
D = t cosα
(4.2)
This leads to an improved resolution prediction, taking into account the lamella
thickness (t) and the maximum tilt angle (α). However if high tilt angles are not
possible for the projection series there is an alternative way of reducing the lost
information from the missing wedge. This is by recording a second tilt series about
the perpendicular axis the ﬁrst tilt series. In [27] they suggest that for samples for
which high tilts leads to large projected thickness, recording a dual-axis series
with a smaller maximum tilt may be a better solution. This is due to the fact that
the fraction of missing information from the dual-axis series recorded with ±50◦
tilt ( 20%) is approximately the same as that recorded in a single tilt series with
±70◦tilt.
New ultrahigh-tilt sample holders designed for tomography can also be used.
Some of these samples holders requires a needle-shaped sample (could be fab-
ricated using a focused ion beam) and allows for 360◦rotation with the pole-piece
gap of the objective lens. Thereby removing all missing-wedge errors. Another
type of tomography holder is the HATA-holder. This holder is speciﬁcally de-
signed for tomography of crystalline materials, where image contrast is strongly
dependent on diﬀractions conditions. To maintain a constant diﬀraction condition
20/57
==PAGE:37==
4.2. Experimental requirements
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.1: (a)Illustration of the tomography tilt axis inside the TEM column. The
sample is rotated ±α. (b) Illustration of the sample at diﬀerent α angles and the
corresponding projection views. Below an illustration of the stacked back-projection
reconstruction.
over the whole tilt range, their holder has a third axis of rotation, which allows the
user to trim the specimen tilt to obtain the desired condition[29]. With the use of
this holder it possible to do DF tomographic observations and therefore it is es-
sential for DFEH tomography.
21/57
==PAGE:38==
4.2. Experimental requirements
22/57
==PAGE:39==
5
Specimen preparation
5.1
Introduction
The specimen preparation is always a vital part of any successful electron mi-
croscopy experiment. The quality of the prepared sample will deﬁne how good
the experimental results will be, as the sample is often the limiting factor in elec-
tron microscopy experiments. As for this project there is even more requirements
to the sample preparation than usual; as oﬀ-axis electron holography, dark-ﬁeld
and tomography imposes additional restrictions on the specimen.
5.2
Specimen requirements
5.2.1
Dark-Field Electron Holography requirements
When investigating strain with transmission electron microscopy there is an im-
portant issue with sample preparation, which is called the thin-ﬁlm eﬀect. TEM
foils has to be thin enough to be electron transparent (< 100nm). However thin-
ning down the specimen introduces two free surfaces which are not there in the
bulk sample. These surfaces will relax some of the stresses and strains present in
the original sample, Hytch et al. [17] report that this relaxation is often 10 %, but
never more than 30 %. The relaxation can be estimated by simulating the strain
in a ﬁnite-element software like COMSOL [30]. For DFEH a sample thickness of
100-200 nm is desired.
In DFEH the reference (unstrained) region is very crucial. This region has to be
at least as large as the region of interest and it is important that the reference
region of the sample is as uniform as possible in terms of thickness, composition
and strain. A perfect reference region for DFEH is a single crystal with no defects,
bending or relaxation. In microelectronics silicon is often used and the fabrication
of most of these devices involves epitaxially grown layers on top of the silicon.
Having this defect free uniform crystal underneath makes most microelectronic
23/57
==PAGE:40==
5.2. Specimen requirements
Specimen preparation
devices fabricated on silicon suitable for DFEH.
For dark-ﬁeld it is beneﬁcial to have the crystallographic orientation of the sample
oriented in such a manner that very little specimen tilt is necessary to ﬁnd the de-
sired orientations. This is due to sample geometry. Tilting the specimen to higher
angles increases the electron path through the sample, and therefore decreases
the intensity. Also it should be considered which lattice plane is of interest for the
strain measurement, before preparing the sample. Furthermore it is also impor-
tant to note that the reference region should be correctly oriented with respect to
the region of interest. This is simply a direct cause of how DFEH work and has
been explained in previous chapters. It is therefore one of the main limitations of
the DFEH technique.
5.2.2
Tomography requirements
Transmission Electron Microscopy Tomography (TEMT) is as earlier described a
method to reconstruct a 3-dimensional volume of a thin TEM sample using tilt
series images. Because the images are acquired in a tilt series there are some im-
portant sample requirements to be aware of. When tilting the sample the thick-
ness relative to the incident beam increases with tilt angle. Tilting the sample to
70 deg, will cause the beam to penetrate through about 2.5x the actual ﬁlm thick-
ness. A thicker sample will make focusing increasingly diﬃcult. Having a higher
acceleration voltage is better for tomography, as the mean free path increases and
it is possible to study and observe thicker samples. However it is important to re-
member that in tomography the same area will be exposed to the beam for a long
time, and is therefore more vulnerable to beam damage.
Tomography also sets limitations to the choice of regions of interest. If the sample
is located next to a grid bar, the grid bar itself will cover the sample even at low tilt
angles, which prohibits acquisition. For TEMT it is therefore beneﬁcial to place
the sample on top of a hole or on top of a grid bar, so there will be no shadowing
from the grid. It is also important to chose a region of interest that does not have
internal features which will shadow when tilting. For instance a lamella made by
FIB will often have a Pt protective strip on top of the region of interest. However
if the Pt is too close, slight specimen tilt might completely shadow the region of
interest.
Another thing to consider is the choice of acceleration voltage. This is due to the
fact that when doing a tomography experiment, the region of interest is illumi-
nated by the electron beam for a very long time. A tomography experiment may
take anything from a few hours to a full day. When using delicate or soft materials,
fast acquisition times and low acceleration voltages should be used to minimize
beam damage during the experiment.
Conventional TEM holders have a width at the specimen of 6 mm and the distance
from the specimen to the pole piece of the microscope is conventionally 5.2 mm.
This allows for only 42 degrees of tilt before contact between the objective lens
polepiece and the TEM holder. As described previously, higher tilt angles are
required to reduce blurring and elongation ub tge 3D reconstruction. Specially
designed tomography holders have been designed to reduce this width to 4 mm,
24/57
==PAGE:41==
5.3. TEM specimen preparation
allowing the holder to rotate 360 degrees within the gap. The holders are now
restricted by their thickness which allows for 60-70 degrees before the holder edge
starts shadowing [31].
5.3
TEM specimen preparation
There are several good preparation techniques for TEM, but only a few has the
ability to target a site speciﬁc area of a semiconductor device within one micron.
A speciﬁc orientation cross sectional sample can be made with the three most
common focused ion beam (FIB) sample preparation techniques; The H-bar, the
ex situ lift-out and the in situ lift-out technique.
5.3.1
Focussed ion beam preparation techniques
H-bar technique
The H-bar technique, is a frequently applied method. In this
method, the initial specimen must ﬁrst be thinned mechanically before the sam-
ple is placed in the FIB for milling. Therefore unlike the lift-out methods this
method requires pre-thinning. Usually when using the H-bar method, a thin slab
of material is cut from an area of interest, and then mechanically polished as thin
as possible. The sample material is then mounted on a half-grid and inserted ver-
tically into the FIB chamber. In this way no lift-out is necessary as the sample is
already on a TEM grid. Before thinning, a W or Pt line is usually deposited on the
area of interest to protect and mark the specimen. After milling away two deep
trenches, the ﬁnal lamella will look like crossbar in the letter "H", seen from the
top. This technique is therefore referred to as the H-bar technique.
The H-bar method is however a rough method, and it is hard to be accurately site
speciﬁc. Delicate sample does not have the option of the H-bar because of the me-
chanical pre-thinning. The process of pre-thinning can also introduce chemicals
and mechanical stress to the sample, which also should be considered. Due to
the geometry of the H-bar, it is not suitable for tomography. Tilting the specimen
to higher angles will result in the sides of the H-bar shadowing the specimen. It
would require a very wide H-bar to prevent this, and it would be diﬃcult to avoid
any bending or internal stresses in such a geometry.
Ex-Situ lift-out
In the ex situ lift-out (EXLO) technique, a speciﬁc site is FIB-
milled down to electron transparency (≈100 nm). The thin lamella is then re-
moved from its trench with a micro manipulator under an optical microscope.
The specimen attaches to the micro manipulator tip via electrostatic forces. When
attached to the tip, it can be transferred to holey carbon grids, carbon-coated TEM
grids, directly to the surface of small mesh grids, or other similar grids.
The EXLO method is very fast and often suﬃcient for conventional TEM analysis.
However it is not suitable for this project because it is very diﬃcult to make ultra
ﬁne samples. When the sample is still in the trench, there will be some unavoid-
able redeposition and once it is mounted on a coated grid, it is not possible to do
any further steps to improve the sample. Furthermore the operator of the FIB,
25/57
==PAGE:42==
5.3. TEM specimen preparation
must be careful not to redeposit materials on the EXLO specimen, because ﬁnal
FIB milling is performed while the specimen is still conﬁned within a trench, and
therefore in danger of re-deposition.
In-Situ lift-out
The in situ lift-out technique (INLO), is similar to the EXLO
technique. Both methods consists of extracting a small wedge-shaped or parallel-
sided sample, and transfer it to a grid. The big diﬀerence is that INLO is using an
internal nano manipulator/probe inside the SEM. The in situ process is enabled
by the FIB deposition of a metal layer, with a GIS, to ﬁrst attach the manipulator
probe to the sample and then attach it to the grid. When the sample is attached
to the grid it is thinned down to electron transparency by FIB milling. For really
ﬁne samples it is possible to do both a ﬁnal-thinning and nanomill procedure to
reduce the amount of artefacts and/or defects introduced from the ion-milling.
The INLO method was chosen because of the possibility of making a really ﬁne
sample in a addition to having all of the necessary equipment available at DTU
CEN.
Focussed ion beam damage
Using the FIB, induces a lot of change to a target
material in the form of; sputtering, re-deposition, amorphization , point defects,
surface heating and ion channelling. Because the TEM specimen has to be rep-
resentative of the original bulk strain, modiﬁcations that the specimen might get
during the preparation has to be considered and prevented as much as possible.
Samples prepared by conventional techniques mostly have a severe wedge shape
and often preferential thinning occurs in multicomponent samples. This is due to
the "stopping-power" of the sample material. As the heavy Ga+ ions sputter and
protrude through the sample material, more and more of them will be stopped
or slowed down. This means that the sputtering rate at the bottom of the sample
will be slower than at the top. Due to this phenomenon conventional FIB samples
has a characteristic wedge-shape. Having a uniform thickness is very important
for DFEH and many other TEM studies, therefore it is important to correct this
wedge shape in the sample preparation. This can be done in the ﬁnal-thinning
process of the INLO. During this step, the stage is tilted to diﬀerent inclination
angles when thinning the sample down from the rough lift-out ≈1µm to elec-
tron transparency < 100nm. Inclination angles may slight vary for perfect parallel
sidewalls; in general, the harder the material the more inclination will have to be
corrected. For slower sputtering materials, a 1.2◦incidence angle is often used
[32].
Additionally the heavy Ga+ ions used for thinning may cause another problem for
the sample. It has been reported that by using 30 kV Ga+ ions for thinning the
sample, an amorphous layer may be created at the surface of the sidewalls. For Si,
this layer can be up to 20 nm or more[33] [34]. To remove the damaged amorphous
layers, low kV cleaning can be carried out at 5 kV and 2kV on both sides of the
sample. Using long milling times and low energy ions will gently remove most of
the amorphous layer as reported by Gianuzzi et al [35]
When milling the sample using the FIB, most of the sputtered atoms are pumped
out of the chamber. However if the sputtered atom is close to the surface of the
26/57
==PAGE:43==
5.4. Si/Ge quantum dot sample
lamella there is still a chance that the milled atoms will redeposit onto the surface.
Therefore when using the INLO method, placement of the lamella onto the TEM
grid should be considered. It is possible to mount the sample at the side of a tooth,
which gives the least risk of redeposition in the ﬁnal thinning steps. Alternative it
can be mounted into the inside of a V-shape, for better mechanical stability and to
avoid bending when the sample becomes very thin, see ﬁgure 5.1. For tomography
placing the lamella on top of the Cu grid stub would be optimal, because there
would be no shadowing from the grid when tilting the sample. It is however not
possible to avoid redeposition from the Cu grid if placing the lamella like this.
Figure 5.1: Illustration of a Cu TEM grid. (a) which is usually preferred shows the
placement of a lamella on the side of a "tooth". (b) shows an alternative placement
with two attached point for better stability. (Illustration made by, FEI)
As a step in the conventional FIB preparation methods, a Pt or W protective layer
is deposited on top of the area of interest, in order to protect it from the ion beam
during the lift-out and/or thinning of the lamella. However, the usual ion-beam
platinum deposition can modify the strain at the surface of the sample up top
300 nm deep inside the sample as the step itself uses ions to protect the sur-
face.Modern dual-beam FIB microscopes the protective layer can be deposited
using the electron beam induced deposition (EBID). Kwong et al. [36] took ad-
vantage of this and found that by depositing a protective layer with EBID and
then subsequently using using the ion beam induced deposition (IBID), they were
able to almost fully shield the sample surface from ion beam damage. They found
that a 36 nm protective EBID is enough to protect against the damage caused by
the IBID. It is however not clear if the EBID will aﬀect the strain of the material,
therefore as a protective measure to shield from strain, Beche et al. [1] used an
unconventional way. In order to correctly protect the sample from ion irradiation
they deposit a 300 nm thick layer of photoresist wax, by spin coating, before in-
troducing the sample to the FIB chamber. They deposited a 10 nm thin layer of
carbon on top to reduce charging eﬀects, then proceeded to deposit EBID tungsten
and then IBID tungsten.
An understanding of the fundamental ion-solid interactions that causes artefacts
in the lamella insures the accuracy of the information obtained from an FIB pre-
pared TEM specimen. FIB is a destructive method but by careful consideration of
the diﬀerent steps in the sample preparation it is possible to avoid or control most
of the damage.
5.4
Si/Ge quantum dot sample
In this project, two samples were provided by Dr. Alexander Tonkikh from the
Max Planck Institute of Microsctructure physics, both of them epitaxially grown
Si/Ge quantum dots. The ﬁrst sample is a layered structure as described in table
27/57
==PAGE:44==
5.4. Si/Ge quantum dot sample
Table 5.1: Sample 090930a - Si(100)-p type (B-doped), 0.004-0.007 Ohn*cm, SiMat
Layer number
Material
Thickness
(nm)
1
Substrate
-
2
Si buﬀer
150
3
Ge/Si/Ge control layer
≈2
4
Si
30
5
Ge QDs
1.2
6
Sb
1ML
7
Si
30
8
Ge/Si/Ge control layer
≈2
9
Si cap
10
Table 5.2: Sample 100219b - Si(100)-p type (B-doped), 0.004-0.007 Ohn*cm, SiMat
Layer number
Material
Thickness
(nm)
1
Substrate
-
2
Si buﬀer
150
3
Ge QDs
1.0
4
Si LT cap
10
5.1 and the second sample is QDs with a single capping layer; table 5.2. Inspecting
the two samples in the Fei Helios SEM reveals that Sample 100219b has larger
QD’s than the multi-layered sample as seen from ﬁgure 5.2. The multi-layered
sample has a higher density of QDs and unlike the single layered sample the QDs
show no clear facets. This could be due to the fact that the QDs are buried 40
nm down in the sample. The ﬁrst sample was prepared by two diﬀerent methods,
’marker’ and EBID. The second sample was prepared by EBID with a better and
more advanced connection to a TEM grid, to reduce charging eﬀects.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.2: Fei Helios SEM images of(a): Sample 090930a, showing QDs with a size
of approximately 50 nm (b): Sample 100219b, showing QDs with clear facets and a
size of approximately 100-150 nm.
28/57
==PAGE:45==
5.4. Si/Ge quantum dot sample
As the single layered sample only had 10 nm of silicon on top of the QDs it was
decided to use a permanent marker to protect the surface further from strain in-
duced by Pt deposition. Therefore a test was done to test the use of a permanent
marker as a protective layer. First a STAEDTLER permanent lumoclor black ﬁne
marker was used on a sample Si surface. The pen was very gently pressed against
the surface. Inside the FEI Helios SEM, the area was located and then Pt was de-
posited ﬁrst with EBID and then IBID. The area was lifted out and attacted on top
of a Cu grid stub, as seen from ﬁgure 5.3. Here it is seen than even a very gentle
touch deposits 2 µm of the permanent marker.
Figure 5.3: Fei Helios SEM image showing (top to bottom); 3 µm Pt, 2 µm carbon
rich permanent marker and on the bottom the bulk silicon.
As the permanent marker is made by mostly carbon, a further test was done to see
if it was possible to completely remove the carbon rich layer and thereby "lift-oﬀ"
the Pt layer, much like lithography in clean-room work. The test was carried out
in the plasma cleaner which is used to remove C-based contamination. It uses
a mixture of oxygen and argon to create an energetic plasma that is eﬀective in
breaking most organic carbon bonds. The eﬀect of the plasma cleaner over time
on the marker layer can be seen in ﬁgure 5.5. After 10 minutes it is possible to see
how the marker has been etched very little near the edges in ﬁgure 5.4(a), with an
additional 30 minutes the etching is now clearly visible 5.4(b). After 100 minutes
of plasma cleaning the Pt layer has ﬁnally come oﬀas seen from ﬁgure 5.4(c).
There is however still a residual layer from the permanent marker on some areas
go the sample. In ﬁgure 5.4(d) it is possible to see that the residual layer has a
sponge-like structure which seems hollow. The etching rate of the marker did not
seem constant and in the end it only seemed to shrink instead of etching.
Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) was performed on the residual layer
to reveal the composition and if further etching would be possible. The spectrum
revealed that the layer mostly consists of a C-O residue with a bit of chromium and
aluminium. As the test was done on a lamella before ﬁnal thinning, we decided to
29/57
==PAGE:46==
5.4. Si/Ge quantum dot sample
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.4: FEI QuantaFEG images of (a) marker test after 10 minutes of plasma
cleaning and (b) 40 minutes of plasma cleaning. FEI Helios images of (c) 100 minutes
of plasma cleaning and (b) a close up of the sponge-like residual layer. It is seen how
the marker is etched away with plasma cleaning, and how the Pt has been "lifted" oﬀ.
carry on and use the marker as a protective layer for a TEM specimen from sample
100219b (table: 5.2).
5.4.1
Sample 1 - 100219b
Like in the previous test the provided sample was ﬁrst gently protected with a
STAEDTLER permanent marker. The sample was then mounted on a stub, and
loaded inside the dual-beam SEM. Here EBID Pt was deposited on top of the
marker and oriented parallel to the sample edges which are along the crystal-
lographic planes of Si110. Approximately 20µm x 2µm x 100nm was deposited as
a safety precaution and thereafter 20µm x 2.5µm x 2µm of IBED Pt on top. Using
30 kV Ga ions the surrounding area was then milled away to create a trench that
would allow for the INLO method, see ﬁgure 5.5(a). A side view of the lift-out,
before further thinning, on top of the copper grid is seen in ﬁgure 5.5(b). The
lamella was then progressively thinned down from both side until it reached elec-
30/57
==PAGE:47==
5.4. Si/Ge quantum dot sample
tron transparency, ﬁgure 5.5(c). Quantum dots where clearly visible along the
interface of the sample after the ﬁnal thinning, ﬁgure 5.5(d).
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.5: Images from the INLO technique. (a) Top-view of the Pt protection with
the omniprobe attached, the lamella has been cut and is ready to be lifted out. (b)
Side-view showing the lamella attached to the Cu grid. The layered structure of Pt,
marker, Si and Cu is clearly visible. (c) Side-view of the lamella after ﬁnal-thinning.
(d) High magniﬁcation of the Ge-interface, the QDs are clearly visible.
After the ﬁnal-thinning and low-kV milling the sample was put in the plasma
cleaner for 60 minutes to remove the marker layer and hopefully the Pt. However
a quick look in the microscope revealed that the layer had not been etched away
after 60 minutes, so it was given an additional 20 minutes. 80 minutes of plasma
cleaning was not enough to remove the marker layer and little change was seen
from 60 to 80 minutes. The sample after plasma cleaning can be seen in ﬁgure
5.6. It is seen how the residual layer has the same kind of sponge structure as the
marker test. The layer now looks similar to a carbon supporting ﬁlm of a holey-
carbon grid. Subsequent TEM imaging later on, revealed that this sample had a
huge problem with carbon contamination.
31/57
==PAGE:48==
5.4. Si/Ge quantum dot sample
Figure 5.6: The residual layer after 80 minutes of plasma cleaning. The carbon has
a holey structure.
5.4.2
Sample 2 - 100219b
Because the marker did not work as intended, it was decided to make an additional
lamella from sample 100219b, using the conventional INLO method with a thicker
EBID Pt layer instead of a marker. This was done with the conventional INLO
method, choosing an area of the sample far away from any exposure to the ion
beam. First a 200 nm thick EBID Pt layer was deposited on top of the QDs. After
this the sample was moved away from the Pt protection and the ion beam was
aligned, this was done to keep the exposure of ions to an absolute minimum. The
previous EBID deposition was then moved back into the ﬁeld of view, without
imaging the area with ions. Only a single snapshot was done to ﬁnd the area with
the ion beam, before the 2 µm of IBID Pt was deposited on top. This technique
insures the absolute minimum of ion beam exposure to the area of interest before
Pt protection. The area around the protection was subsequently milled away and
the OMNIPROBE was used to lift-out the lamella, and attach it to the TEM Cu
grid, see ﬁgure 5.7(a).
The 2 µm wide lamella was then thinned down to electron transparency using the
ﬁnal thinning method, as described in table 5.3. Here the 30 kV Ga ions are used
at progressively lower FIB currents and inclination angles, to slice the outer bits of
the sample material. Smaller thinning patterns were used going from one current
to the next, this was done to make it easier to see the eﬀect on the foil. The end of
the sample was made stepwise thinner, and the very tip if of the sample as thin as
possible before it started to bend, see ﬁgure 5.7(b).
In the end low-kV cleaning was used to remove as much of the amorphous layer
as possible. The low-kV cleaning step was performed at 5 kV and 50 pA, ﬁrst on
the back side at a stage tilt of 45 degrees for 2 minutes. Subsequently at the front
side at 59 degrees for 2 minutes. This last step gently "brushes" oﬀthe outermost
layers of the sample, without inducing a lot of damage, insuring a better sample.
It is usually used for ultra thin foils for high resolution TEM or EELS. It is however
also a very important step for any holography sample.
32/57
==PAGE:49==
5.4. Si/Ge quantum dot sample
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.7: FEI Helios SEM images of (a) the INLO lamella after attachment to the
TEM Cu grid. The omniprobe is still visible after detachment. (b) Side view of the
lamella after ﬁnal-thinning. The upper bright region is the Pt protective layer.
Table 5.3: Table showing the used sequence of currents, inclination angles (stage
tilt) and indicative leftover foil thicknesses, for the ﬁnal thinning with 30 kV FIB.
Step number
FIB Current
Milling side
Stage tilt
Thickness after milling
(pA)
(deg)
(nm)
1
260
Front
+1.2
-
2
260
Back
-1.2
1000
3
90
Back
-1.2
-
4
90
Front
+1.2
600
5
46
Back
-1.0
-
6
46
Front
+2.0
200
7
26
Back
-0.5
-
8
26
Front
+0.5
< 100
To further enhance the the FIB prepared sample, Fischiones Nanomill is used to
remove the last few layers of amorphous material. The system uses an Argon
ion source with low acceleration voltages. This allows specimens to be prepared
without amorphization, implantation or redeposition. By using only 0.5 kV and
milling both sides for 10 minutes, approximately 10 nm is removed from both
sides. This should leave only 1-2 nm of amorphous material on top of the sample,
and insure that we have the best possible sample for TEM analysis.
5.4.3
Sample 3 - 090930a
The multilayered 090930a was used to create a 3rd and ﬁnal sample. The INLO
sample was prepared the same way as "Sample 2" INLO was but with a slightly
diﬀerent approach. For this sample an advanced connection was made with the
TEM Cu omnigrid, to increase the conductivity and thereby reduce any potential
charging that might occur when doing TEM. The connection was made by milling
out at U-joint in the Cu grid, and the ﬁtting joint in the lifted-out lamella, to
33/57
==PAGE:50==
5.4. Si/Ge quantum dot sample
ensure a larger contact area. The lifted out lamella and connection can be seen
in ﬁgure 5.8. The sample was then prepared with prepared with, ﬁnal thinning,
low-kV milling and the ﬁshione nanomill.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.8: FEI Helios SEM images of the advanced INLO lamella connection to the
Cu grid. (a) Side-view (b) top-view
34/57
==PAGE:51==
6
Strained germanium quantum
dots
For the experimental work the Fei Titan 80-300, at the Center for Electron Nanoscopy
at The Technical University of Denmark, was used.
6.1
Sample characterization
The multi-layered sample 3 - 090930a was further characterized in the TEM. A low
magniﬁcation image shows the three-layered structure on a bulk silicon substrate,
covered by a Pt deposition layer. As seen from ﬁgure 6.1(a), no bending is observed
over the sample and periodic strain contrast surrounding the QDs is also seen. The
distance between the layers is measured to be 30 nm with a 10 nm capping layer
on top, which is in good correspondence with the expected structure, provided
by Dr. Alexander Tonkikh. With electron diﬀraction the sample orientation was
conﬁrmed to be only few degrees oﬀthe [110] zone axis, as desired. Figure 6.1(b)
is a HAADF-STEM image of the layered structure. The higher contrast from the
QD and control layers clearly show the presence of a material with a higher atomic
number. The QDs were found to be ≈50 nm wide, as observed in with SEM, and
the height ≈5 nm. The QDs are evenly distributed throughout the layer and high
magniﬁcation also clearly revealed crystallographic epitaxial growth between the
layers.
To examine the specimen thickness and its variation, a CBED pattern was obtained
from a few areas around a QD which was examined in DFEH tomography, ﬁgure:
6.2(a). Using JEMS, an electron diﬀraction simulating software, CBED patterns
for a material can be simulated. By simulating electron interaction with silicon,
with the same parameters as used by the TEM to obtain ﬁgure: 6.2(a) over a thick-
ness of 100-150 nm, several CBED patterns, with thickness increments of 2 nm
were simulated, to a total of 25 simulated CBED patterns. Each of the patterns
are diﬀerent, as the CBED contrast changes with the thickness of the sample. By
ﬁnding the simulated CBED pattern that resembles the original one the most, the
thickness is approximated, see ﬁgure: 6.2(b). The simulated pattern is for silicon
35/57
==PAGE:52==
6.1. Sample characterization
Strained germanium quantum dots
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.1: 300 kV images of sample 090930a. (a) BF-TEM image showing the bulk
silicon, layered structure and the platinum protection. Strain contrast is observed
over the QDs. (b) HAADF-STEM image of the layers. Like observed in the SEM the
QDs have a width of ≈50nm the height is found to be ≈5nm. Brighter contrast is
observed in the Ge QDs, due to the higher mean atomic number.
with a thickness of 146 ± 5 nm. Several CBED thickness measurements were done
close to and in between the layered structure, and very little thickness variation
was found.
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.2: (a) CBED pattern acquired at an acelleration voltage of 120 kV. (b) JEMS
simulation showing a calculated CBED pattern for Si with a thickness of 146 nm
As an initial way to locate any local lattice strain, HRTEM and HRSTEM were
performed. Atomic resolution HRTEM, BF-STEM and HAADF-STEM images are
shown in ﬁgure 6.5(a)(c)(e) and the corresponding GPA in ﬁgure 6.5 (b)(d)(f). The
shown uniform contrast in the HRSTEM images shows that there is very little or no
re-deposition and a minmum amount of amorphous material. The GPA was done
with a small mask size, corresponding to a 2 nm resolution and smoothing. For
all of the GPAs it is seen that very little strain is measured. However the HAADF-
36/57
==PAGE:53==
Strained germanium quantum dots
6.1. Sample characterization
STEM GPA does reveal both positive and negative strain as expected around the
interface of the QD. Negative strain means that the local lattice distance is smaller
than that of silicon reference and a positive value the opposite. A similar trend is
seen from the BF-STEM image, although the noise in the GPA image is dominating.
Chemical characterization of a QD was perfomed using energy-dispersive X-ray
spectroscopy (EDX), see ﬁgure 6.3. Here the red image is a silicon map over the
QD. As expected Si is detected over the QD, this is because the 50 nm QD is
embedded in silicon so there is likely Si on the upper and lower sides of it. The
yellow germanium map clearly shows that the QD consists of germanium and
that no germanium is detected in the silicon layers. A point quantitative EDX
measurement was done in the center of the QD, here an atomic weigth of 70%
silicon was detected and 30 % germanium. From the EDX map of germanium it is
also seen how the concentration is higher at the interface close to the silicon, and
then gradually decreases through the epitaxial layer. This is most likely due to the
sphere/pyramid shape of the QD, which means that the thickness is smaller at the
top.
Figure 6.3: 120 kV HAADF-STEM EDX map of a QD with a dwell time of 4 µs and
a pixel size of 0.15 nm. The ﬁgure is showing an ADF image, a silicon map and a
germanium map.
Using STEM-HAADF mode, a tilt series from −66◦to 70◦with a 2◦step size, was
recorded. By inserting in equation (4.1) and (2.2) and assuming the sample thick-
ness is 150 nm, gives us that corresponding resolution will be d = 2.4 nm. Using
FEI’s tomography software the volume was reconstructed using the SIRT back-
projection method. Figure 6.4(a) shows the 3D reconstruction of the multilayered
QD sample the yxz-plane. Figure 6.4(b) shows the cross-sectional view of the QDs
in the the xz-plane and has been corrected for the "missing wedge" elongation ef-
fect [31]. The cross-sectional view of the specimen clearly reveals several QDs
embedded in the 145 nm thick sample. It is seen how depending on the tilt angle
and placement of the beam 2-4 QDs will always overlap each other in projection.
37/57
==PAGE:54==
6.1. Sample characterization
Strained germanium quantum dots
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.4: Tomographic reconstruction of a 120 kV HAADF-STEM tilt series from
−66◦to 70◦with a 2◦step size. (a) Shows the reconstruction in the xzy-plane. (b)
Shows the cross-section of the xz-plane, and has been corrected for the missing
wedge elongation.
38/57
==PAGE:55==
Strained germanium quantum dots
6.1. Sample characterization
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 6.5: High magniﬁcation TEM images from the Si[110] view direction. In the
BF- and HAADF-STEM images the Si dumbbell atoms with a sepration of 1.36 A are
observed: (a) HRTEM image of a QD which appears as dark contrast. (b) The corre-
sponding GPA to the HRTEM image. (c) BF-STEM image of a QD with an insert to show
the higher magniﬁcation image. (d) GPA of the BF-STEM image. (e) HAADF-STEM im-
age of a QD with an insert to show the higher magniﬁcation image. (f) GPA of the
HAADF-STEM image.
39/57
==PAGE:56==
6.2. 2D-DFEH
6.2
2D-DFEH
6.2.1
Experimental set-up
It was decided to use an acceleration voltage of 120 kV for this experiment. This
is to prevent any damage of the silicon or germanium crystal structure, as the
electron beam can destroy the crystallinity during electron beam irradiation. The
amorphization of silicon happens at a threshold voltage of 145 keV [37], called
the knock-on damage where an incident electron interacts with the nucleus of an
atom and the atom gets removed from the specimen. When imaging silicon it is
therefore desired to use an acceleration voltage lover than this threshold voltage.
The sample is then introduced to the microscope column and basic alignments
are done in the TEM with the third condenser lens turned oﬀ(beam pivot points,
rotation center and astigmatism). The region of interest is found and the sample
is oriented to view the direction Si[110], see ﬁgure 6.6(a). While the lens mode is
still in SA-mode, the biprism is introduced, located and oriented slightly parallel
to the Si/Ge layer. The lens mode is subsequently changed to Mh-mode, where
the biprism is not in the image plane. Basic alignments are re-adjusted and the
biprism voltage is turned on. The beam is then made astigmatic to maximize
beam coherency. This is done by using the condenser stigmators to elongate the
beam and create an elliptic shape of the beam. The long axis of the elliptical
beam should be aligned perpendicularly to the biprism wire. This will increase
the coherency of the beam perpendicular to the biprism and increase the number
of electrons by focusing the beam in the perpendicular direction.
The basic conditions for electron holography has now been acquired. To obtain the
conditions for DFEH, a diﬀracted spot in diﬀraction mode has to be selected. The
biprism is removed before going to the diﬀraction mode, to prevent the transmit-
ted beam from damaging the biprism wire. In diﬀraction mode the desired 004
beam is located. To increase the intensity from the desired beam, the sample is
tilted slightly (in the opposite direction of 004) into two-beam conditions, where
the 00¯4 beam is excited and have a higher intensity, see ﬁgure 6.6(b). Note that
in the diﬀraction image a spot is seen between 000 and 00¯4, this is the 00¯2 spot
which is a forbidden reﬂection. However because the orientation is very close to
the zone-axis, the eﬀect of double-diﬀraction makes this diﬀraction spot visible.
By tilting the specimen the spot disappears, see ﬁgure 6.6(c), this conﬁrms that
the selected spot is the 00¯4 beam. The 000 spot is beam shifted to the center of the
viewing screen. Dark-ﬁeld mode is activated, which in diﬀraction mode allows for
beam tilt, and the 004 is moved on axis (the previous location of the 000 orienta-
tion). By switching between BF- and DF-mode the 000 and 004 spot should now
be in the exact same position on the viewing screen. A small objective aperture
≈10 µm is then inserted to select the transmitted 000 beam in the BF mode and
the diﬀracted 004 beam in the DF mode.
Going back to the BF mode the biprism is again inserted. The position, angle and
voltage are adjusted so that the reference area is superimposed to the region of
interest. The microscope is then ready to be switched into the DF mode and a
dark ﬁeld electron hologram can be acquired.
40/57
==PAGE:57==
6.2. 2D-DFEH
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 6.6: 120 kV electron diﬀraction images of the TEM viewing screen (a) zone-
axis where the center spot is centred in the kickuchi coincidence point (b) 2-beam
condition, the sample is slightly tilted to excited the 00¯4 beam. (c) 2-beam condition
at 50 degree tilt.
6.2.1.1
Experimental DFEH parameters
The smallest available objective aperture of 10µm was used for the dark-ﬁeld
mode. The holograms were acquired with the GIF camera and ﬁltered using a
20 eV slit centred on the zero-loss peak. Energy ﬁltering removes background
formed by inelastically-scattered electrons and thereby improves the holographic
fringe visibility. Filtering the zero-loss peak is especially useful for thicker sam-
ple, as thicker sample have more inelastically scattered electrons. The GIF camera
has the advantage of adding an additional 10 times magniﬁcation after the view-
ing screen. This was very helpful for positioning the sample as the viewing screen
have an overview of the sample.
As the biprism tension is increased the interference width broadens and the fringe
spacing is reduced. This means that increasing the biprism voltage increases the
ﬁeld of view and improves the spatial resolution of the holographic fringes. How-
ever as a CCD camera has a limited amount of pixels the maximum number of
fringes is limited by the CCD camera. Even though theoretically only 2-3 pix-
els are needed to sample a fringe, it will loose a lot of phase information. As
mentioned earlier Beche et al. [1] found that, for their 2k CCD camera, 6 pixels
per fringe was the optimal value to keep strain sensitivity. The highest possible
biprism voltage is however not always the best solution. The holographic fringe
visibility decays almost exponential with biprism voltage, which means that with
small fringes longer acquisition times are needed in order to detect the fringes.
In practice longer acquisition times may not be preferable due to drift and vibra-
tions. However to be able to detect small phase changes with good signal-to-noise
ratio at a high spatial resolution, longer acquisition times are needed. The phase
detection limit δφ of an electron hologram can be calculated using the following
expressions
δφ =
√
2
µ
√
N
(6.1)
µ = Imax −Imin
Imax + Imin
(6.2)
41/57
==PAGE:58==
6.2. 2D-DFEH
where µ is the holographic fringe visibility (contrast) of a hologram and N is the
average number of electron counts in each reconstructed pixel [38]. To determine
the detection limit a series of holograms over vacuum with varying acquisition
time were acquired. The phase resolution was subsequently calculated and plotted
in ﬁgure 6.7. It is seen that after 10 seconds there is barely any improvement in the
phase resolution. Therefore it was decided to perform the DFEH at an acquisition
time of 10 seconds.
Figure 6.7: Phase resolution as a function of acquisition time
Therefore to get the highest no. of fringes over the 5 nm QD with a good holo-
graphic fringe visibility, a biprism voltage of 89 V was chosen. With the used
magniﬁcation of 29.5k and an acceleration voltage of 120 kV, this biprism voltage
corresponds to a fringe spacing of 0.174 nm (7 pixels per fringe) with a ﬁeld of
view of 50 x 50 nm. This means that 5 nm QD will have at least 28 fringes over its
height. This should oﬀer suﬃcient spatial resolution 0.78 nm to map the strain of
the QD.
6.2.2
Strain reconstruction
From the recorded holograms of the 004 lattice the phase can be reconstructed.
A DFEH acquired at -32 degrees tilt from the zone axis is seen in ﬁgure 6.8(a).
Using HoloWorks v3.0 in Digital Micrograph v1.85, the phase is recovered using
a reference hologram. The reference hologram is used to correct for any unde-
sired factors that aﬀect the phase shift. Undesired factors stem from distortions in
projection lenses and from the CCD camera, thickness variations in the biprism
ﬁlament along with inhomogeneous charge distributions and electric ﬁelds [39].
By acquiring a reference hologram over a vacuum region and subtracting this from
the phase image, it is in eﬀect corrected for these constant variations. The recon-
struction process generates a fourier transformation and applies a user speciﬁed
mask, at the centre of one of the two side bands. To avoid noise in the phase image
from the centre band the mask size should be less than 1/3 of the distance to the
centre band [39]. For the reconstructions a 6th order butterworth ﬁlter with a cut
oﬀfrequency of 1.29 1/nm was chosen, as seen from ﬁgure 6.8(b). The recovered
phase is then calculated and manually rotated 84◦degrees so that the QD interface
42/57
==PAGE:59==
6.2. 2D-DFEH
is horizontal, as seen from ﬁgure 6.8(c).
By applying the script as described in Chapter 3 to the phase image and using
the g-vector of gref (004) = 0.74 1/nm, strain along the x and y-direction of the im-
age is calculated. This is seen in ﬁgure 6.8(d)(e). Strain is only expected parallel
with the (004) direction which is along the y-axis of the phase image, due to the
(004) plane being selected in the DFEH acquisition. This is conﬁrmed in (e) where
≈−4%...4% strain is detected perpendicular to the QD. The x-axis (d) only shows
strains within the noise level. Positive values corresponds to tensile strain (mean-
ing that the local lattice is expanded compared to the silicon lattice) and negative
values to compressive strain (meaning that the local lattice is compressed com-
pared to the silicon lattice). From ﬁgure 6.5(e) it is seen that there is tensile strain
inside what seems to the QD, which is in good correspondence with the previous
studies ([17][1][23]). Furthermore a bright layer is detected above the the QD.
This is a artefact from the interference and is in fact the Si/Ge control layer 30
nm below the QD. Interference fringes is seen in the top and bottom of the image,
these are Fresnel fringes. These coarse fringes, more visible close to the hologram
borders stems from the edges of the biprism and do not contain any information
about the specimen. It is possible to ﬁlter out these fringes by ﬁltering out the
streak between the central peak and the sideband in ﬁgure 6.8(b).
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 6.8: Dark ﬁeld electron holography: (a) DFEH (004) image at -32◦tilt(b) the
ﬁrst sideband with a 6th Butterworth ﬁlter with a cut-oﬀfrequency of 1/1.29 nm. (c)
The extracted phase image rotated 84◦so that the QD interface is horizontal. (d)
Calculated strain along the x-axis of the phase image. (e) Calculated strain along
the y-axis of the phase image.
43/57
==PAGE:60==
6.2. 2D-DFEH
Close to the zone-axis there is strong diﬀraction contrast, which in theory should
worsen the phase contrast and therefore make phase reconstruction without arte-
facts more diﬃcult. Figure 6.9(a) shows the calculated strain from a 004 two-beam
condition DFEH very close to the [110] zone-axis. (b) shows the same area tilted
2 degrees about the [001] acis with respect to the orientation in (a). The strained
layer is still visible in the image (a), however compared to (b) more artefacts are
visible. There are phase discontinuities throughout the image in the form of black
or white lines, with intensities out of scale. These lines are seems to be originating
from insuﬃcient phase information for the phase unwrapping which results in a
phase discontinuity. Phase discontinuities is also observed in (b) however less sig-
niﬁcant. Close to the zone-axis there is also an enhanced eﬀect of dynamical scat-
tering. From the original DFEH images lower mean intensities was observed close
to the zone-axis, and the left side of the image had a dark streak running through
it with almost no contrast. This dark streak was located where the phase discon-
tinuity is observed in (a). The orientations close to the zone axes were avoided for
the DFEH.
Figure 6.9(c) shows strain (along the y-axis) for the (220) in-plane direction ac-
quired by DFEH. As seen no strain is detected, it suggests that the QDs were grown
epitaxially on the silicon substrate. A similar result for DFEH of GaAs QDs have
previously been reported [23].
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 6.9: a) shows the calculated strain from a (004) DFEH on the zone-axis. (b)
shows the same area tilted 2 degrees with respect to the zone-axis. (c) shows strain
from the (220) in-plane direction
Comparing the DFEH strain-maps with GPA of the HAADF-STEM image, see ﬁg-
ure 6.10, it is clear that the same trend of strain is present, however the magnitude
of strain is much diﬀerent. The lattice mismatch between silicon (001) and germa-
nium (001) is (5.658 −5.431)/5.431 ∗100 = 4.18%, so the scale of the DFEH looks
correct. For a better understanding of expected strain, a ﬁnite-element simulation
of the structure could be done. The line scans in (b) and (d) are done from top to
bottom. When following the scan from bottom to top (right to left in the graphs),
the ﬁrst observed strain is tensile strain. This makes sense as the germanium is
grown epitaxially on top of the silicon, and have the larger crystal lattice. The
strain detected here is 3.1 %, close to the lattice missmatch between silicon and
germanium. As the inter-planner spacing readjusts to an energy favourable lattice
distance, we see the strain go down to 0% which means the lattice distance is now
the same as that of silicon. This is in good correspondence with [1] and [23], where
they detected the same trend of strains. In these samples we do however detect
44/57
==PAGE:61==
6.2. 2D-DFEH
something not reported in the previously studied papers. After the compressive
strain, a layer of tensile strain is detected. As seen in ﬁgure 6.10(b), tensile strain
of 3.8% is detected above the QD. An explanation to this layer could be the 1
monolayer of Antimony on top of the QD layer from the fabrication as described
in table: 5.1. Although the layer has not been detected our TEM observations in-
cluding STEM-EDS and HRSTEM. If the inter-planar spacing is smaller than that
of the silicon crystal, the silicon would re-adjusts and thereby compressive strain
would be formed.
As described earlier the control layer is seen on top of the QD. This proves that
the biprism is making an interference overlap region of at least 30 nm. Due to
this layer being in the reference region, the strain here will have an opposite sign,
so what appears to be compressive strain is in reality tensile strain. The value
detected here is the exact same 1.5% as that reported in[1]. This result conﬁrms
the reproducibility of DFEH and the high strain values measured in the QD.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 6.10: (a) DFEH of the (004) plane. (b) Intensity proﬁle over the QD for the
DFEH. (c) GPA of the (004) plane from a HAADF-STEM image (d) Intensity proﬁle over
the QD for the GPA analysis.
45/57
==PAGE:62==
6.3. 3D-DFEH
6.3
3D-DFEH
DFEH maps strain in crystal lattices under the assumption that the strain is either
uniform over the thickness of the foil, or that the strain measured corresponds
to the average thickness over the sample. However in practice, any samples that
have been prepared for DFEH will have lost its (pristine) bulk properties, due
to the thin ﬁlm eﬀect as mentioned earlier. The two new surfaces which are in-
troduced under sample preparation will have relaxed some of the strain in the
sample. This means that in reality the strain will vary over the viewing direction
and it is therefore vital to know what the measured strain corresponds to exactly.
Electron tomography has routinely been used for obtaining the three dimensional
information on morphology and distribution of nanoparticles and has also been
applied to study 3D electron static potential distribution in holography [40][41].
The tomography of 3D strain ﬁelds has however not been done before, but has
been theorised by several authors[42][43]. The problem is that tomography is a
projection technique and current reconstruction methods do not include dynami-
cal eﬀects. Recently a dynamic scattering theory, where an analytic linear projec-
tion rules for 3D strain ﬁelds, has been developed. The dynamic scattering theory
is used to quantify the inﬂuence of various experimental parameters like strain,
sample thickness, excitation error and surface relaxation [43]. In their work they
found that under exact 2-beam conditions (s=0), there is much less dynamical
scattering. Furthermore by comparing their results with FEM models they found
that the 008 reﬂection contains strain information which is almost exactly aver-
age over the thickness of the sample. They also found that the 004 beam can be
approximated to that of an average, with little dynamical scattering eﬀects.
Therefore to do tomographic DFEH that will give a representative reconstruction
of the 3D-strain ﬁeld, there are two major requirements. First of all a higher-
order lattice plane has to be used, and secondly exact 2-beam conditions has to
be achieved for every image in the tilt series. Conventional single-tilt tomogra-
phy specimen holders are therefore inadequate, because the lack tilt capability in
all three orthogonal axes. This is a necessity to maintain a constant diﬀraction
condition over the whole tilt range of the 004 2-beam condition. A new tomog-
raphy holder that has been developed for dislocation tomography can be used for
this speciﬁc purpose [29]. The high-angle-triple-axis (HATA) tomography speci-
men holder is capable of high-angle tilting for primary horizontal axis, the other
orthogonal horizontal axis is capable of tilting ±7.5◦and the vertical axis can be
rotated ±5◦with an accuracy of 0.29 mrad.
With the use of the HATA specimen holder the sample was aligned so that the two
horizontal axes are parallel to the (110) and (001) planes. In ﬁgure 6.11 a series
of electron diﬀraction patterns can be seen, showing the rotation around the (004)
plane. The sample was tilted about only one-axis, i.e. using a microscope gonio,
proving a very good alignment with almost no deviation (less than 0.5◦) from the
2-beam condition within ±60◦tilt.
During the microscopy experiment it was evident that following the same QD was
very diﬃcult, when tilting the sample. The 150 nm thick sample contains several
QDs within the thickness, and when the sample is tilted the QDs changes positions
46/57
==PAGE:63==
6.3. 3D-DFEH
Figure 6.11: 2-beam condition by tilting only one axis, about the [001] axis
relative to each-other in the projected image. It is therefore very diﬃcult to locate
the same area. An intentional burn marker was therefore created just below the
Pt protection layer. The 120 kV beam was focused to a small spot and left on the
sample for 20 minutes. This created a hole which was used as a landmark to locate
the same area/QD in the DFEH.
A large tilt series was performed which was intended for tomographic reconstruc-
tion. A representation of this tilt series is given in ﬁgure 6.12 and 6.12. The ﬁgures
show the strain map, a HAADF-STEM image and the corresponding cross-section
of the HAADF-STEM tomographic reconstruction. Comparing the strain maps it
is clear that the lower tilt angles have more phase discontinuity than the higher
ones. It is also seen that the they contain what appears to be the strain of several
QDs, or at least the QD layer does not seem uniform. The strain maps from the
higher tilt angles do however show very clear QDs and measure strain proﬁles,
with little or no strain discontinuity. The exact same trends is seen for both the
positive and negative tilt direction. This result suggests that specimen thickness
is of less importance than expected at ﬁrst, as good strain maps where acquired
at 120 kV, high tilt and a specimen thickness of ≈150nm. When comparing the
tilt-series to the tilted tomography image of the lamella, it is clear why the strain
maps for the 35◦and 50◦show a much clearer QD. The QDs are all situated in an
almost symmetrical checkerboard pattern, at these angles the electron beam trav-
els parallel with the QD orientation, which in projection appears like a single QD.
At angles where the beam traverses through several QDs that are not aligned, they
overlap each-other in the projection plane, which gives rise to a very complicated
phase-shift.
By image processing it is possible to improve the strain maps, by removing the
phase discontinuities and fresnel fringes. By applying a gaussian mask it is also
possible to remove some of the background noise. However the electron beam tra-
verses through what seems to be 2-4 QDs depending on the angle, for this sample.
The quality of the existing data is not suﬃcient for tomographic reconstruction,
but with a better data-set reconstruction should be possible. By multiplying the
strain map with thickness it should be possible to use conventional tomographic
reconstruction algorithms.
47/57
==PAGE:64==
6.3. 3D-DFEH
(a) 50◦tilt
(b) 35◦tilt
(c) 15◦tilt
(d) 5◦tilt
Figure 6.12: Strain maps, HAADF-STEM and the corresponding cross-section of the
HAADF-STEM, tilted to represent the specimen.
48/57
==PAGE:65==
6.3. 3D-DFEH
(a) -48◦tilt
(b) -35◦tilt
(c) -14◦tilt
(d) -4◦tilt
Figure 6.13: Strain maps, HAADF-STEM and the corresponding cross-section of the
HAADF-STEM, tilted to represent the specimen.
49/57
==PAGE:66==
6.3. 3D-DFEH
50/57
==PAGE:67==
7
Conclusion and outlook
In this dissertation, the experimental requirements and current limitation of to-
mographic (DFEH for three-dimensional strain mapping has been addressed. Us-
ing FIB preparation techniques, a 145 nm thick uniform specimen with almost
no bending or amorphous surface was prepared. The sample geometry and com-
position was characterized with BF-TEM, HAADF-STEM, STEM-EDS and CBED.
HRTEM techniques was applied for GPA analysis of the strain, which proved in-
suﬃcient for strain analysis, due to the relatively thick sample. HAADF-STEM
tomography was additionally used to generate a cross-sectional analysis of the
specimen.
Conventional DFEH has been successfully carried out at DTU CEN and was used
to generate holographic phase images of the 50 nm x 5 nm large silicon/germa-
nium QDs. A script (for Gatan - Digital Micrograph) has been coded to calculate
the strain map from the holographic phase image, which has been successfully
applied. The strain maps acquired in this project reproduced previously mea-
sured strain intensities of 1.5% in silicon/germanium (004 planes embedded in
silicon [1]. Furthermore the measured strain intensity of 3.1% inside the germa-
nium QDs proved comparable of the 4.18% lattice mismatch between silicon and
germanium (001). For tomographic DFEH the triple-axis HATA holder was used
and two-beam conditions were accurately aligned with almost no deviation (less
than 0.5◦) within ±60◦tilt. Subsequently a strain map tilt series covering ±60◦was
successfully acquired. The strain maps had no discontinuity at angles where the
QDs were aligned behind each other. However at angles where the beam traverses
through several displaced QDs, large strain discontinuity was observed, which ul-
timately prevented tomographic reconstruction for this project. The project has
proved that DFEH can be applied (even at high tilt angles) to "thick" specimens
of 150 nm with an acceleration voltage of 120 kV. To my knowledge it would be
possible to do a 3D reconstruction of the strain ﬁeld for this sample with a better
dataset. However a better specimen preparation would be needed, as a thinner
sample would simplify the structure with less QDs in the beam-direction. This
would ultimately make it easier to track the same QD and minimize the phase
discontinuities from the phase unwrapping.
51/57
==PAGE:68==
Conclusion and outlook
In recent literature it has been proved that kinematical beams such as 008, where
the extinction length is so large that dynamical eﬀects can be ignored, the strain
obtained is averaged over the thickness. When the strain obtained is an average
it is theory possible to obtain the correct strain ﬁeld with tomography by mul-
tiplying with a thickness maps. However for beams closer to the zone-axis, the
dynamical scattering aﬀects the phase. Recent advances in the theory of dynam-
ical scattering, has opened a new route towards the tomography of the complete
reconstruction of the 3D strain ﬁelds [42][43].
52/57
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
[1] A. Béché, J. L. Rouvière, J. P. Barnes, and D. Cooper. Dark ﬁeld electron
holography for strain measurement. Ultramicroscopy, 111:227–238, 2011.
[2] Lijie Zhang and Thomas J. Webster.
Nanotechnology and nanomaterials:
Promises for improved tissue regeneration. Nano Today, 4(1):66–80, 2009.
[3] Thomas J. Webster, Richard W. Siegel, and Rena Bizios. Osteoblast adhesion
on nanophase ceramics. Biomaterials, 20(13):1221–1227, 1999.
[4] L Sø gaard, A Horn, N Nielsen, C Jacobsen, and A Horsewell. Characteriza-
tion of the Microstructure and Lipid Oxidation of Fish Oil Emulsions. Mi-
croscopy and Microanalysis, 17(S2):356–357, 2011.
[5] Zhong Lin Wang. Nanomaterials: Sticky but not messy. Nature nanotechnol-
ogy, 4(7):407–408, 2009.
[6] Harald Hoppe and Niyazi Serdar Sariciftci. Organic solar cells: An overview.
Journal of Materials Research, 19(07):1924–1945, 2004.
[7] Y H Tak, K B Kim, H G Park, K H Lee, and J R Lee.
Criteria for ITO
(indium-tin-oxide) an organic light thin ﬁlm as the bottom electrode of emit-
ting diode. Thin Solid Films, 411(1):12–16, 2002.
[8] Ray H Baughman, Anvar a Zakhidov, and Walt a de Heer. Carbon nanotubes
— the route toward applications. Science, 297(5582):787–92, 2002.
[9] H Yan P. Yang S. Mao, R. Russo, J. Johnson, R. Saykally, N. Morris, J. Pham,
R. He, H.-J. Choi,. Controlled Growth of ZnO Nanowires and Their Optical
Properties. Advanced Functional Materials, 12(5):323–331, 2002.
[10] Bo Tang, Lihua Cao, Kehua Xu, Linhai Zhuo, Jiechao Ge, Qingling Li, and
Lijuan Yu. A new nanobiosensor for glucose with high sensitivity and se-
lectivity in serum based on ﬂuorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET)
between CdTe quantum dots and Au nanoparticles. Chemistry - A European
Journal, 14(12):3637–3644, 2008.
[11] Etienne Snoeck andAlain Claverie Martin Hÿtch, Florent Houdellier, Niko-
lay Cherkashin, Shay ReboH, Elsa Javon, Patrick Benzo, Christophe Gatel.
Dark-Field Electron Holography for Strain Mapping. In Transmission Electron
53/57
==PAGE:70==
Bibliography
Bibliography
Microscopy in Micro-Nanoelectronics, chapter 4, pages 81—-106. John Wiley &
Sons, Inc., 2012.
[12] Zhong Lin Wang. New developments in transmission electron microscopy
for nanotechnology. Advanced Materials, 15(18):1497–1514, 2003.
[13] L. Clément, R. Pantel, L. F Tz Kwakman, and J. L. Rouvière. Strain mea-
surements by convergent-beam electron diﬀraction: The importance of stress
relaxation in lamella preparations. Applied Physics Letters, 85(4):651–653,
2004.
[14] Martin J. Hÿtch and Andrew M. Minor.
Observing and measuring strain
in nanostructures and devices with transmission electron microscopy. MRS
Bulletin, 39:138–146, 2014.
[15] a. Armigliato, S. Frabboni, and G. C. Gazzadi. Electron diﬀraction with ten
nanometer beam size for strain analysis of nanodevices. Applied Physics Let-
ters, 93(16):1–4, 2008.
[16] Florian Hüe, Martin Hÿtch, Hugo Bender, Florent Houdellier, and Alain
Claverie. Direct mapping of strain in a strained silicon transistor by high-
resolution electron microscopy.
Physical Review Letters, 100(April):28–31,
2008.
[17] M J Hÿtch, F. Houdellier, F. Hüe, E. Snoeck, M. J. Hytch, F. Houdellier, F. Hüe,
and E. Snoeck. Dark-ﬁeld electron holography for the measurement of geo-
metric phase. Ultramicroscopy, 111(8):1328–37, July 2011.
[18] M Rieth and W Schommers. Handbook of theoretical and computational nan-
otechnology. 2006.
[19] Ellen R Goldman, Igor L Medintz, Jessica L Whitley, Andrew Hayhurst,
Aaron R Clapp, H Tetsuo Uyeda, Jeﬀrey R Deschamps, Michael E Lassman,
and Hedi Mattoussi. A hybrid quantum dot-antibody fragment ﬂuorescence
resonance energy transfer-based TNT sensor. Journal of the American Chemi-
cal Society, 127(18):6744–51, May 2005.
[20] O. B. Shchekin and D. G. Deppe. 1.3 µm InAs quantum dot laser with T[sub
o]=161 K from 0 to 80 C. Applied Physics Letters, 80(18):3277, April 2002.
[21] J.J. Welser, S. Tiwari, S. Rishton, K.Y. Lee, and Y. Lee. Room temperature oper-
ation of a quantum-dot ﬂash memory. IEEE Electron Device Letters, 18(6):278–
280, June 1997.
[22] Igor L Medintz, H Tetsuo Uyeda, Ellen R Goldman, and Hedi Mattoussi.
Quantum dot bioconjugates for imaging, labelling and sensing. Nature mate-
rials, 4(6):435–46, June 2005.
[23] David Cooper, Jean Luc Rouviere, Armand Béché, Shima Kadkhodazadeh,
Elizaveta S. Semenova, Kresten Yvind, and Rafal Dunin-Borkowski. Quanti-
tative strain mapping of InAs/InP quantum dots with 1 nm spatial resolution
using dark ﬁeld electron holography. Applied Physics Letters, 99(2011), 2011.
54/57
==PAGE:71==
Bibliography
Bibliography
[24] M.J. Hytch, Scanning Microscopy International, Centre National, and
De Recherche Scientiﬁque.
Geometric Phase Analysis of High Resolution
Electron Microscope Images. Scanning Microscopy, 11:53–66, 1997.
[25] J. M. Cowley. Twenty forms of electron holography. Ultramicroscopy, 41:335–
348, 1992.
[26] Takeshi Kasama, Rafal E Dunin-Borkowski, and Marco Beleggia. Electron
Holography of Magnetic Materials. Holography - Diﬀerent Fields of Applica-
tion, pages 53–80, 2011.
[27] Paul a Midgley and Rafal E Dunin-Borkowski.
Electron tomography and
holography in materials science. Nature materials, 8(4):271–280, 2009.
[28] Norio Baba. Electron tomography. Tanpakushitsu kakusan koso. Protein, nu-
cleic acid, enzyme, 49(11 Suppl):1601–1606, 2004.
[29] S. Hata, H. Miyazaki, S. Miyazaki, M. Mitsuhara, M. Tanaka, K. Kaneko,
K. Higashida, K. Ikeda, H. Nakashima, S. Matsumura, J. S. Barnard, J. H.
Sharp, and P. a. Midgley.
High-angle triple-axis specimen holder for
three-dimensional diﬀraction contrast imaging in transmission electron mi-
croscopy. Ultramicroscopy, 111(8):1168–1175, 2011.
[30] Martin Hÿtch, Florent Houdellier, Florian Hüe, and Etienne Snoeck.
Nanoscale holographic interferometry for strain measurements in electronic
devices. Nature, 453(June):1086–1089, 2008.
[31] P. a. Midgley and M. Weyland. 3D electron microscopy in the physical sci-
ences: The development of Z-contrast and EFTEM tomography.
Ultrami-
croscopy, 96(3-4):413–431, 2003.
[32] Sara Bals, Wim Tirry, Remco Geurts, Zhiqing Yang, and Dominique
Schryvers. High-quality sample preparation by low kV FIB thinning for ana-
lytical TEM measurements. Microscopy and microanalysis : the oﬃcial journal
of Microscopy Society of America, Microbeam Analysis Society, Microscopical So-
ciety of Canada, 13(2):80–86, 2007.
[33] O. W. Holland, B. R. Appleton, and J. Narayan. Ion Implantation Damage
and Annealing in Germanium. Journal of Applied Physics, 54(5):2295–2301,
1983.
[34] S. Rubanov and P. R. Munroe. FIB-induced damage in silicon. Journal of
Microscopy, 214(3):213–221, 2004.
[35] L a Giannuzzi, R Geurts, and J Ringnalda.
2 keV Ga+ FIB Milling for
Reducing Amorphous Damage in Silicon.
Microscopy and Microanalysis,
11(S02):2004–2005, 2005.
[36] W.Y. Kwong and W.Y. Zhang. Electron-beam assisted platinum deposition
as a protective layer for FIB and TEM applications. ISSM 2005, IEEE Inter-
national Symposium on Semiconductor Manufacturing, 2005., pages 469–471,
2005.
[37] John C. H. Spence. High-Resolution Electron Microscopy. 2013.
55/57
==PAGE:72==
Bibliography
[38] David Cooper, Robert Truche, Pierrette Rivallin, Jean-Michel Hartmann,
Frederic Laugier, Francois Bertin, Amal Chabli, and Jean-Luc Rouviere.
Medium resolution oﬀ-axis electron holography with millivolt sensitivity.
Applied Physics Letters, 91(14):143501, October 2007.
[39] Sadegh Yazdi. Towards electron holography of working transistors. PhD thesis.
[40] Daniel Wolf, Axel Lubk, Hannes Lichte, and Heiner Friedrich. Towards au-
tomated electron holographic tomography for 3D mapping of electrostatic
potentials. Ultramicroscopy, 110(5):390–399, 2010.
[41] Alison C Twitchett-Harrison, Timothy J V Yates, Rafal E Dunin-Borkowski,
and Paul A Midgley. Quantitative electron holographic tomography for the
3D characterisation of semiconductor device structures.
Ultramicroscopy,
108(11):1401–7, October 2008.
[42] E. Javon, A. Lubk, R. Cours, S. Reboh, N. Cherkashin, F. Houdellier, C. Gatel,
and M. J. Hÿtch.
Dynamical eﬀects in strain measurements by dark-ﬁeld
electron holography. Ultramicroscopy, 147:70–85, 2014.
[43] E Javon, A Lubk, F Houdellier, R Cours, and C Gatel. Dynamical 2-beam
theory for dark-ﬁeld electron holography and the propagation of geometric
phase. pages 3–4.
56/57
==PAGE:73==
==PAGE:74==
Department of Physics
Technical University of Denmark
Lyngby Campus:
DTUï¿½ Cen:
Anker Engelunds Vej 1, Buildings 307-309-311-312
Fysikvej, Building 307,311
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Denmark
Tel:
(+45) 45 25 33 44
E-mail:
info@fysik.dtu.dk
www.fyk.dtu.dk
Tel:
(+45) 45 25 64 74
E-mail:
idj@cen.dtu.dk
www.cen.dtu.dk
